A Tragedy I usher in to day,
All Mirth is banished in this Serious Play;
Yet sad Contentment may She to you bring,
In pleased Expressions of each several thing.
Our Poetress is confident, no Fears,
Though against her Sex the Tragic Buskins wears,
But you will like it, some few hours spent,
She'll know your Censure by your hands what's meant.
Since we are come out of our own Country to travel, we will go into Turkey, if
you will, and see that Country.


With all my heart; but now I think on it better, I will stay here a while
longer for the Curtezans sake; for we shall never get such store, nor such
choice of Mistresses; therefore, though the sober and chaste women are kept up
here in Italy, yet the wild and wanton are let loose to take their liberty: But
in Turkey, that barbarous Country, all are kept close, those that will, as well
as those that will not; but if they had the custom of Italy, to keep up only
their honest women, it were a Charity: for otherwise a man loses his time in
Courting those women that will not accept of his love: for how should a man
know whether women will, or will not, having all sober faces, and demure
countenances, coy carriages, and denying words?


But yet they consent at last: for Importunity and Opportunity, 'tis said, wins
the chastest ^he.


Faith all the flowery Rhetoric, and the most observing times, and fittest
opportunities, and counterfeiting dyings, win nothing upon a cold Icy
Constitution, or an obstinate Morality; 'tis true, it may work some good effect
upon an Icy Conscience.


From whence comes that Letter?.


From France Sir I believe, from your Father.


What News? Hath thy Father sent thee money?


Yes, but it is to return home: for he hath sent me word my Sister is married
to a very rich, honest, and sweet-natur'd man; and that also he would have me
come home to marry a rich Heir, one that is his Neighbours Daughter: for my
Father says he desires to see me settled in the World before he dies, having but
us two, my Sister and I.


Why, is he sick, that he talks of dying?


No, but he is old, and that is more certain of Deaths approach.


But is your sister married, say you?


Yes.


Faith I am sorry for it: for I thought to have married her myself.


Marry she would have had but a wild Husband, if she had married you.


The thoughts of this Rich Heir, make thee speak most precisely, as if thou
were the most temperate man in the world, when there is none so deboist as thou
art.


Prithee hold thy tongue, for I am very discreet.


Yes, to hide thy faults, to dissemble thy passions, and to compass thy
desires; but not to abate any of them: Well, if thy sister had not been
married, I would have praised thee, but now I will rail against thee: for
losers may have leave to talk.


Why, what hopes could you have had to marry her?


Why, I was thy Friend, and that was hope enough. But is thy sister so
handsome as Fame reports her?


I cannot tell; for I never saw her since I was a little boy, and she a very
child, I being kept strictly at School, and from thence to the University: And
when I was to travel, I went home, but then she was at an Ants house a hundred
miles from my Fathers house, so as I saw her not; but I must leave off this
discourse, unless you'll return into France with me.


No faith, thou shalt return without me: for I will not go so soon, unless my
Friends had provided me a rich Heiress to welcome me home; but since they have
not, I mean to stay and entertain my self and time with the plump Venetians.


Fare thee well Friend, and take heed you entertain not a disease.


Thou speak as if thou were a Convertito.


You are always at work, for what use is it? You spend more money in silk,
cruel, thread, and the like, than all your work is worth.


I am now making you bands.


Pray let my bands alone: for I'm sure they will be so ill-favour'd as I cannot
wear them.


Do not condemn them before you have tried them.


You may make them; but I wi'l never wear them.


Well, I will not make them, since you dislike it.


Come, will you go to the Gaming-house?


What to do?


To play at Cards, or the like Games.


I will never play at such Games but with women.


Why so?


Because they are Effeminate Pastimes; and not manly Actions; neither will I
merely rely upon Fortunes favour without merit, as Gamesters do.


Why then will you go to a Tavern?


For what?


To drink.


I am not thirsty.


But I would have you drink until you are thirsty.


That's to drink drunk.


And that's that I desire to be.


What?


Why drunk.


So do not I: for I will not wilfully make my self incapable, as I can neither
be able to serve my King, Country, nor Friend, nor defend my Honour: for when I
am drunk, I can do neither; for a man drunk, I weaker than a child that hath
not strength to go or stand; and is worse than those that are dumb, for the
dumb keep silence, when those that are drunk, do stutter and stammer out
non-sense, and make themselves fools; besides, every Coward will take courage
to beat, at least affront a man that is drunk, when as he dares not look ascue,
or come near him without respect, when he is sober.


Come, come, thou shalt go, if it be but to decide our drunken quarrels, and
allay the wrathful vapour of Bacchus.


No, I will never decide the disputes of Fool, Mad-men, Drunkards, nor Women:
for Fools understand no Reason, Mad-men have lost their Reason, Drunkards will
hear no Reason, and Women are not capable of Reason.


Why are women not capable of Reason?


Because it is thought, or rather believed, that women have no rational souls,
being created out of man, and not from Jove, as man was.


If Jove hath not given them rational fouls, I am sure Nature hath given them
beautiful bodies, with which Jove is enamoured, or else the Poets lye.


Poets describe Jove according to their own passions, and after their own
appetites.


Poets are Ioves Priests.


And Natures Panders.


Well, if you will neither go to the Gaming-house, Tavern, nor Bawdy-house,
will you go and visit the sociable Virgins.


Yes, I like sociable Virginity very well. But pray what are those sociable
Virgins, which you would have me go to see?


Why a company of young Ladies that meet every day to discourse and talk, to
examine, censure, and judge of every body, and of every thing.


'Tis pity, if they have not learned the rules of Logic, if they talk so much,
that they may talk sense.


I will assure you they have voluble Tongues, and quick VVits.


Let us go then.


Lord, how ill-favour'd you are dressed to day!


Why I am cleanly.


You had need be so: for if you were ill-favour'dly dressed and sluttish too, it
were not to be endured.


Well Husband, I will strive to be more fashionably dressed.


Well Son, but that you are as a stranger, having not seen you in a long time,
I would otherwise have chid you for spending so much since you went to travel.


Sir, travelling is chargeable, especially when a man goes to inform himself
of the Fashions, Manners, Customs, and Countries he travels through.


Look you Son, I have increased my Family since you went from home, your
Sisters Beauty hath got me another Son.


And I make no question but my Brothers noble and gallant Actions will get you
another Daughter.


Well Son, I must have you make haste and marry, that you may give me some
Grand-children to uphold my Posterity, for I have but you two; and your sister,
I hope, will bring me a Grand-son soon: for her Maids say she is sick a
mornings, which is a good sign she is breeding, although she will not confess
it: for young married Wives are ashamed to confess when they are with Child,
they keep it as private, as if their Child were unlawfully begotten.


Me thinks my Brother doth something resemble my Wife.


No sure, Brother, so rude a made face as mine, can never resemble so well a
shaped face as my sisters.


I believe the Venetian Ladies had a better opinion of your face and person
than you deliver of your self.


My Brother cannot choose but be weary, coming so long a Journey to day:
wherefore it were fit we should leave him to pull off his boots.


Son, now I think of't, I doubt you are grown so tender since you went into
Italy, as you can hardly endure your boots to be roughly pulled off.


I am very sound Sir, and in very good health.


Art thou so? Come thy ways then.


Wife, I have some occasion to sell some Land, and I have none that is so
convenient to sell as your Jointure.


All my Friends will condemn me for a fool, if I should part with my Jointure.


Why then you will not part with it?


I do not say so: for I think you so honest a man, that if you should die
before me, as Heaven forbid you should.


Nay leave your prayers.


Well Husband; you shall have my Jointure


If I shall, go fetch it.


Surely Husband, I deserve a kiss for it.


I cannot stay to kiss.


Madam, what will you have for your supper: for I hear my Master doth not sup
at home.


Any thing Ione, a little Ponado, or Water-gruel.


Your Ladyships Diet is not costly.


It satisfies Nature as well as costly Olio's or Bisks; and I desire only to
feed my Hunger, not my Gusto: for I am neither gluttonous nor lickerish.

No, I'll be sworn are you not.


Come Ladies, what discourse shall we have to day?


Let us sit and rail against men.


I know young Ladies love men too well to rail against them; besides, men
always praise the Effeminate Sex, and will you rail at those that praise you?


Though men praise us before our faces, they rail at us behind our backs.


That's when you are unkind, or cruel.


No, 'tis when we have been too kind, and they have taken a surfeit of our
company.


Indeed an over-plus of Kindness, will soon surfeit a mans Affection.


Wherefore I hate them, and resolve to live a single life; and so much I hate
men, that if the power of Alexander and Caesar were joined into one Army, and
the courage of Achilles and Hector were joined into one Heart, and the wisdom
of Solomon and Ulysses into one Brain, and the Eloquence of Tully and
Demosthenes into one Tongue, and this all in one man, and had this man the
Beauty of Narcissus, and the youth of Adonis, and would marry me, I would not
marry him.


Lady, let me tell you, the Youth and Beauty would tempt you much.


You are deceived: for if I would marry, I would sooner marry one that were in
years: for it were better to choose grave Age, than fantastical Youth; but
howsoever, I will never marry: for those that are unmaried, appear like birds,
full of life and spirit; but those that are married, appear like beasts, dull
and heavy, especially married men.


Men never appear like beasts, but when women make them so.


They deserve to be made beasts, when they strive to make women fools.


Nay, they rather think us fools, than make us so: for most Husbands think,
when their Wives are good and obedient, that they are simple.


When I am married, I'll never give my Husband cause to think me simple for my
obedience: for I will be crose enough.


That's the best way: for Husbands think a cross and contradicting Wife is
witty; a hold and commanding Wife, of a heroic spirit; a subtle and crafty
Wife to be wise, a prodigal Wife to be generous, a false Wife to be beautiful:
And for those good qualities he loves her best, otherwise he hates her; nay,
the falser she is, the fonder he is of her.


Nay, by your favour, for the most part, Wives are so enslaved, as they dare
not look upon any man but their Husbands.


What better object can a woman have than her Husband?


By your leave, Matron, one object is tiresome to view often, when variety of
objects are very pleasing and delightful: for variety of objects clear the
senses, and refresh the mind, when only one object dulls both sense and mind,
that makes married wives so sad and melancholy, when they keep no other company
but their Husbands; and in truth they have reason: for a Husband is a surfeit to
the Eyes, which causes a loathing dislike unto the mind; and the truth is, that
variety is the life and delight of Natures works, and Women being the only
Daughters of Nature, and not the Sons of Jove, as men are feigned to be, are
more pleased with variety, than men are.


Which is no honour to the Effeminate Sex; but I perceive, Lady, you are a
right begotten daughter of Nature, and will follow the steps of your Mother.


Yes, or else I should be unnatural, which I will never be.


Sir, I wonder, since my sister is so handsome, that you did not marry her more
to her advantage.


Why Son, I think I have married her very well for your advantage: for her
beauty was her only Portion, and she is married to a noble Gentleman who hath a
very great Estate.


But Sir, her beauty doth deserve a King, nay an Emperor, a Caesar of the
World.


O Son, you are young, which makes you partial on your sisters side.


It's a strange forgetfulness not to come near me in two hours, but let me sit
without a fire: if you were my Mistress, I should make a conscience to be more
diligent than you are, if I did take wages for my service as you do.


If you do not like me, take another.


If you be weary of my service, pray change; perchance you may get a better
Mistress, and I hope I shall get as careful a servant.


I would have all women bred to manage Civil Affairs, and men to manage the
Military, both by Sea and Land; also women to follow all Manufactures at home,
and the men all Affairs that are abroad; likewise all Arts of Labour, the men
to be employed in, and for all Arts of Curiosity, the women.


Nay certainly, if women were employed in the Affairs of State, the World would
live more happily.


So they were employed in those things or business that were proper for their
strength and capacity.


Let me tell you, Ladies, women have no more capacity than what is as thin as a
Cobweb-la^n, which every eye may see through, even those that are weak and half
blind.


Why we are not Fools, we are capable of Knowledge, we only want Experience and
Education, to make us as wise as men.


But women are incapable of public Employments.


Some, we will grant are, so are some men: for some are neither made by Heaven,
Nature, nor Education, sit to be States-men.


And Education is the chief: for Lawyers and Divines can never be good
States-men, they are too learned to be wise; they may be good Orators, but
never subtle Counsellors; they are better Disputers than Conuivers; they are
fitter for Faction than Reformation; the one make quarrels, or upholds
quarrels, the other raises doubts: But good States-men are bred in Courts,
Camps, and Cities, and not in Schools and Closets, at Bars and in Pulpits; and
women are bred in Courts and Cities, they only want the Camp to give them the
perfect State-breeding.


Certainly, if we had that breeding, and did govern, we should govern the world
better than it is.


Yes, for it cannot be governed worse than it is: for the whole World is
together by the Ears, all up in Wars and Blood, which shows there is a general
defect in the Rulers and Governors thereof.


Indeed the State-Counsellers in this Age have more Formality than Policy, and
Princes more plausible words, than rewardable deeds; insomuch as they are like
Fiddlers, that play Artificially and Skilfully, yet it is but a sound which they
make and give, and not real presences.


You say true; and as there is no Prince that hath had the like good fortune as
Alexander and Caesar, so none have had the like Generosities as they had, which
shows, as if Fortune (when she dealt in good earnest, and not in mockery)
measured her gifts by the largeness of the Heart, and the liberality of the
hand of those she gave to: And as for the death of those two Worthies, she had
no hand in them, nor was she any way guilty thereof: for the Gods distribute
life and death without the help of Fortune.


'Tis strange, Ladies, to hear how you talk without knowledge, neither is it
fit for such young Ladies as you are to talk of State-matters; leave this
discourse to the Autumnal of your Sex, or old Court-Ladies, who take upon them
to know every thing, although they understand nothing. But your Discourses
should be of Masks, Plays, and Balls, and such like Recreations, fit for your
Youth and Beauties.


What's the reason you turn away Nan?


Why she turns away me: for she is more willing to be gone, than I to have her
go.


It is a strange humour in you, as never to be pleased: for you are always
quarrelling with your servants.


Truly I do not remember that ever I had a dispute or quarrel with any servant
since I was your Wife, before this with your Maid Nan; and to prove it, is,
that I do not speak many words in a whole day.


Those you speak, it seems, are sharp.


Let it be as you say: for I will not contradict you.


Well, then take notice I will not have Nan turned away.


I am glad she pleases you so well, and sorry I can please you no better.


She is very handsome, extreme handsome, beyond all the women that ever Nature
made. O that she were not my sister!


I doubt, Brother, I have surprised you with my sudden coming in, for you
start.


Your Beauty, Sister, will not only surprise, but astonish any man that looks
thereon.


You have used your self so much to dissembling Courtships since you went into
Italy, as you cannot forbear using them to your sister: But pray leave off that
unnecessary civility to me, and let us talk familiarly, as brothers and sisters
use to do.


With all my heart, as familiarly as you please.


Pray Brother tell me; if the women in Italy be handsome, and what Fashions they
have, and how they are behaved.


To tell you in short, they are so Artify'd, as a man cannot tell whether they
are naturally handsome, or not: As for their Behaviour, they are very Modest,
Grave, and Ceremonious, in public and in private, confident, kind, and free,
after an humble and insinuating manner: they are bred to all Virtues,
especially to dance, sing, and play on Musical Instruments: they are naturally
crafty, deceitful, false, covetous, luxurious, and amorous; they love their
pleasures better than Heaven: As for their fashion of garments, they change as
most Nations do, as one while in one, and then in another: As for their Houses,
they are furnished richly, and themselves adorned costly when they keep at home
in their houses: for they dress themselves finest when they entertain strangers
or acquaintance; but this Relation is only of the Curtezans: As for those that
are kept honest, I can give little or no account: for they are so enclosed with
locks and bolts, and only look through a jealousy, so as a stranger cannot
obtain a sight, much less an acquaintance.


Then they have not that liberty we French women have.


O no.


Why, do they fear they would all turn Curtezans if they should be left to
themselves?


The men are jealous, and will not put it to the trial: for though they are all
Merchants, even the Princes themselves, yet they will not venture their wives.


I would not live there for all the World, for to be so restrained: for it is
said, that Italian men are so jealous of their wives, as they are jealous of
their Brothers, Fathers, and Sons.


They are so: for they are wise, and know Nature made all in common, and to a
general use: for particular Laws were made by Men, not by Nature.


They were made by the Gods, Brother.


What Gods Sister, old men with long beards?


Fie, fie, Brother, you are grown so wild in Italy, as France, I doubt, will
hardly reclaim you; but I hope when you are married, you will be reformed, and
grow sober.


Why Sister, are you become more sober or reformed since you are married?


No Brother, I never was wild nor wanton, but always modest and honest.


Faith Sister, me thinks you might have been married more to your advantage
than you are, had not my Father been so hasty, in marrying you so young.


Why do you say so Brother, when the man I'm married to is so worthy a person
as I do not merit him? neither would I change him for all the World.


Nay Sister, be not angry: for 'tis my extreme love, having no more sisters but
you, that makes me speak.


Prithee Brother do not think I am angry: so I believe it proceeds from love,
and that it is your affection that makes you so ambitious for me.


Know Sister, I love you so well, and so much, as 'tis a torment to be out of
your company.


Thank you Brother, and know I desire never to be in any other Company than my
Husband, Father, and Brother, nay any other company is troublesome.


Ladies, how are your wits to day?


Faith my brain is like Salisbury Plain to day, where my thoughts run Races,
having nothing to hinder their way, and my brain, like Salisbury-plain, is so
hard, as my thoughts, like the horses heels, leave no print behind, so as I
have no wit to day: for Wit is the print and mark of thoughts.


And I am sick to day, and sickness breaks the strings of Wit; and when the
strings are broke, no harmony can be made.


It is with Wits as it is with Beauties, they have their good days, as to speak
quick, and to look well, to look cloudy, and to speak dully; and though my
tongue to day is apt to run like an Alarm clock, without any intermission, yet
my mind being out of order, my tongue will go out of time, as either too fast
or too slow, so as none can tell the true time of sense.


For my part I am so dull to day, as my Wit is buried in stupidity, and I would
not willingly speak, unless my speech could work upon every passion in the
heart, and every thought in the head.


For my part, if any can take delight in my unfolded tongue and unpolished
words my discourse is at their service.


Me thinks, Ladies, your Wits run nimbly, fly high, and spread far; wherefore
make a witty match, or a match of Eloquence.


With all my heart: for in the Combat of Eloquence I shall do like to a valiunt
man in a battle; for though he wins not the Victory, yet he proves not a
Coward; so though I should not get the victory of Wit or Eloquence, yet I shall
not prove my self a fool.


I will make no such match: for though I have read some few books, yet I have
not studied Logic nor Rhetoric, to place and set words in order; and though I
have read History, and such like books, yet I have not got their Speeches by
heart, nor parts of them, as the parts of one Oration, and a part of another
Oration, and of three or four to make up an Oration of my own, as all Orators
do now adays; neither have I studied the Morals, or the Fathers, so much as to
have their sayings and sentences to stuff my Discourse as Preachers do, and to
speak a natural way, although extraordinary witty, as to have their Orations as
full of wit as of words, yet it would be condemned if the Speaker is not
learned, or that their Speeches express not learning.


Now you talk of Speeches and Orations, it seems very strange to me to read the
Speeches that Chronologers write down to be truly related, as from the mouths
of those that spoke them, especially such as are spoken ex tempore, and on a
sudden; but more especially those that are spoken in Mutinies, and to a
tumultuous multitude, wherein is nothing but distraction, both in the Speakers
and Hearers, frights and fears in Opposers and Assaulters: As for Example; when
Tacitus set down the Speeches of some persons at such times, when and where,
every one is in such fears and disorders, as there seemed to be not any one
person that could have the leisure, time, rest, or silence, to get those
Speeches by heart, to bear them away in their memory, or had they Place, Time,
Ink, Pen, or Paper, to write them down.


But the Speeches that Thucidides sets down, may be better credited, because
most of them were premeditated, and soberly, orderly, and quietly delivered,
which might more easily be noted, and exactly taken to deliver to posterity.


Another thing is, how Tacitus could come to know the particulars and private
speeches betwixt man and man, as Friend and Friend, Brother and Brother; and
not only the Speeches of the Roman Nations, of which he might be best informed,
but the Speeches of persons of other Nations, whose Language was not easily
understood, or frequent amongst the Romans; nay not only so, but he hath writ
the thoughts of some Commanders and others.


Lady, you must not be so strict in History, as to have every word true: for it
is a good History, if the sense, matter, manner, form, and actions be true: As
for Example; Say a man should be presented all naked, is he less a man for
being naked? or is he more a man for being clothed, or for being clothed
after another Fashion than his own? So a History is not the less true, if the
Actions, Occasions, Forms, and the like be related, although every word be not
expressed as they were; so that Tacitus's Speeches may be true, as to the
sense, although he should express them after his manner, fancy, wit, or
judgment. Thus the body or subject of those Speeches might be true, only the
dress is new.


But by your leave, let me tell you, that Chronologers do not only new dress
truth, but falsify her, as may be seen in our later Chronologers, such Writers
as Camden, and the like: for they have written not only partially, but falsely:
As for particular Families some Camden hath mistaken, and some of Ancient
Descent he hath not mentioned, and some he hath falsely mentioned, to their
prejudice, and some so slightly, as with an undervaluing, as if they were not
worth the mention, which is far worse than if he should rail or disclame
against them: But I suppose he hath done as I have heard a Tale of one of his
like Profession, which was a Schoolmaster, as Camden was, which went to whip
one of his Scholars, and the boy to save himself, promised his Master, that if
he would give him his pardon, that his Mother should give him a fat pig;
whereupon the fury of the Pedant was not only pacified, but the boy was
stroked, and made much of; so it is to be observed, that most Schoolmasters
commend those of their scholars most, as to be the most apt and ingenious to
their learning, although mere dunces, whose Parents and Friends fee or bribe
them most, which causes them both to flatter their scholars and their parents:
So Camden, to follow the practice of his Profession, hath sweetened his pen as
towards his scholars and their families; and 'tis likely most towards those
scholars that were more beneficial to him; but to such persons whose parents
had Tutors for them at home, not suffering them to go to common Schools, he
hath passed over, or lightly mentioned their Families, or hath dipped his pen in
vinegar and gall.


Nay faith is is likelier that he might take some pett at those that did not
entertain him at their Houses when he went his Progress about the Kingdom to
inform him of the several parts of the Country, before he writ of the same.


I observed one Error in his Writing, that is, when he mentions such Places
and Houses, he says, the ancient situation of such a worthy Family, when to my
knowledge, many of those Families he mentions, bought those Houses and Lands,
some one Descent, some two Descents, some three before, which Families came out
of other parts of the Kingdom, or the City, and not to the Ancient and
Inheritary Families; but he leaves those Ancient Families unmentioned.


Perchance he thought it fit, that those Famllies that were so ill Husbands, or
had so ill fortunes, as they were forced to sell their Ancient Inheritance,
their memories should be buried in their ruins.


What say you of the Chronologer of the Gods and gallant Heroes, which was
Homer?


I say he was a better Poet than an Historian.


Why Homers Works are only a Poetical History, which is a Romance: for Romance
Writers heighten natural actions beyond natural power, as to describe by their
wit impossible things, yet to make them sound or seem probable.


Nay faith, impossible can never be described to be probable.


I am sure Homer was our, or else Noble Persons were not so well bred in his
time as they are now in our time; as when he makes them miscall one another,
giving one another ill rames when they me^ to sight, as dog, and the like
names; when in these our days; when Noble persons meet to fight, they bring
Complements in their mouths, and Death in their hands, so as they strive as
much in Civility as Courage; indeed true Valour is Courage.


If you condemn Homer for making men to speak so, you may condemn him much more
for making the Gods to speak after that manner: for he hath made the Gods to
speak so, as to call one another dogs, and the like names.


The truth is, Homer, as excellent a Poet as he is famed to be, yet he hath not
fitted his terms of Language proper to those he makes to speak, or the
behaviour of those persons he presents, proper to their Dignities nor
Qualities: for, as you say, he makes the Gods in their contentions and fights
not only to speak like mortals, but like rude-bred, ill-natur'd Clowns, and to
behave themselves like rude, barbarous, brutish and cruel men, when he should
have made the Gods to have spoken the most Eloquentest of Humane Language, and
after the most El^gant manner, by reason Eloquence hath a Divine Attraction,
and Elegance a Divine Grace.


For my part, I can never read Homer upon a full stomach: for if I do, I am
sick to hear him describe their broiled, roast, and boiled meats.


For my part I can read him at no time: for my stomach is always so weak, or at
least nice, as the discourse of the large Thighs or Chines of Beef and Mutton,
with their larded fat, suffocates my spirits, and makes me ready to swoon: for
the discourse makes me imagine I smell the strong savour of the gross meats,
and the drunken savour of wine.


They had meat fit for soldiers, and not Ladies.


I hope their Concubines, that lay in their Tents, had finer meats, or else
they would appear foul pursy sluts.


Why, if they were, they would be handsome enough to serve those slovenly
Heroes.


Why do you call those great and brave Heroes slovens?


Because they killed and dressed their own meat, and there are no such greasy
fellows as Butchers and Cooks, and therefore must needs stink most horribly.


It was a sign they had excellent stomachs in Homers days.


It was a sign Homer had a good hungry stomach himself, that he could talk so
often and long of meat.


Let me tell you, Ladies, it was a sign those persons in those times were
Hospitable and Noble Entertainers; but in these times the Nobler sort are too
curious and delicate.


I have observed that one pen may blur a Reputation; but one pen will hardly
glorify a Reputation.


No; for to glorify, requires many pens and witnesses, and all little enough.


It is neither here nor there for that: for merit will get truth to speak for
her in Fames Palace; and those that have none, can never get in, or at least to
remain there: For have not some Writers spoke well of Nero, and strived to have
glorify'd him, who was the wickedst of all the Emperors? And have not some
Writers done the like for Claudius, who was the foolishest of all the
Emperors? yet they were never the more esteemed in the House of Fame. And have
not some Writers writ ill, and have endeavoured to blot and blur the Renowns of
Iulius Caesar, and Angustus Caesar, and of Alexander, and yet they are never
the worse esteemed in the House of Fame; but Heroic Actions, and wise
Governors, force pens, although pens cannot force swords.


By your favour, but pens and prints force swords sometimes, nay for the most
part: for do not books of Controversies, or ingraving; or printed Laws, make
Enemies, and such Enemies, as to pursue with fire and sword to death?


Well, for my part I do not believe it was the glory of Victory, and conquering
the most part of the World, which made Alexander and Caesar to be so much
reverenced, admired, and renowned by those following Ages; but that their
Heroic Actions were seconded with their generous deeds, distributing their
good fortune to the most deserving and meritorious persons in their Parties.


You say true; and as there have been none so Heroical since their deaths, so
there have been none so Generous.


Ladies, by your leave you are unlearned, otherwise you would find that there
have been Princes since their times, as Heroical and Generous as they were.


No, no, there have been none that had so noble souls as they had: for Princes
since their days have been ruled, checked and awed by their petty Favourites;
witness many of the Roman Emperors, and others, when they ruled and checked all
the World.


Indeed Princes are not so severe, nor do they carry that State and Majesty as
those in former times: for they neglect that Ceremony now adays, which Ceremony
creates Majesty, and gives them a Divine Splendour: for the truth is, Ceremony
makes them as Gods, when the want thereof makes them appear as ordinary men.


It must needs: for when Princes throw off Ceremony, they throw off Royalty;
for Ceremony makes a King like a God.


Then if I were a King, or had a Royal Power, I would create such Ceremonies,
as I would be Deified, and so worshipped, adored, and prayed to whilst I live.


So would I, rather than to be Sainted or prayed to when I were dead.


Why, Ceremony will make you as a God, both alive and dead, when without
Ceremony you will not be so much as Sainted.


I had as lieve be a Saint as a God: for I shall have as many prayers offered
to me, as if I were made a God.


Come, come, Ladies, you talk like young Ladies, you know not what.


Lord Madam, I wonder at your patience, that you can let Nan, not only be in
the house, and let my Master lie with her, for she is more in my Masters
chamber than in yours, but to let her triumph and domineer, to command all as
chief Mistress, not only the servants, but your self, as you are come to be at
her allowance.


How should I help it?


Why if it were to me, I would ring my Husband such a^peal, as I would make him
weary of his wench, or his life.


Yes, so I may disquiet my self, but not mend my Husband: for men that love
variety, are not to be altered, neither with compliance or crosness.


'Tis true, if he would, or did love variety; but he only loves Nan, a Wench
which hath neither the Wit, Beauty, nor good Nature of your Ladyship.


I thank you Ioan for your commendations.


But many times a good-natur'd Wife will make an ill-natur'd Husband:


That's when men are fools, and want the wit and judgment to value worth and
merit, or not to understand it.


Why then my Master is one; but why will you be so good as to spoil your
Husband? for in my conscience, if you were worse, he would be better.


The reason is, that Self-love hath the first place, and therefore I will not
dishonour my self, to mend or reform my Husband; for every one is only to give
account to Heaven, and to the World, of their own actions, and not of any
others actions, unless it be for a witness.


Then I perceive you will not turn away this Wench.


It is not in my power.


Try whether it be or not.


No, I will not venture at it, lest I and my Maid should be the public
discourse of the Town.


Why, if she should have the better, yet the Town will pity you, and condemn my
Master, and that will be some comfort.


No truly: for I had rather be buried in silent misery, and to be forgotten of
mankind, than to live to be pitied.


Then I would, if I were you, make him a scorn to all the World, by cuckolding
him.


Heaven forbid that I should stain that which gave me a Repution, my Birth, and
Family, or defame my self, or trouble my conscience, by turning a whore for
revenge.


Well, if you saw that which I did see, you would hate him so, as you would
study a revenge.


What was that?


Why, when you came into my Masters Chamber to see him when he was sick of the
French Pox, I think you chanced to taste of his broth that stood upon his
Table; and when you were gone, he commanded Nan to fling that broth out which
you had tasted, and to put in fresh into the porringer to drink.


That's nothing: for many cannot endure to have their pottage blown upon.


It was not so with him: for he, before he drank the fresh broth, Nan blew it,
and blew it, and tasted it again and again, to try the heat, and another time
to try if it were salt enough, and he seemed to like it the better; besides, he
was never quiet whilst you were in the Chamber, until you went out; he snapped
you up at every word; and if you did but touch any thing that was in the
Chamber, he bid you let it alone, and at last he bid you go to your own
Chamber, and seemed well pleased when you were gone.


Alas, those that are sick, are always froward and peevish; but prithee Ioan
have more Charity to judge for the best, and have less passion for me.


Come Ladies, what will you discourse of too day?


Of Nature.


No, that is too vast a Subject to be discoursed of: for the Theme being
infinite, your discourse will have no end.


You are mistaken: for Nature lives in a quiet Mind, feeds in a generous Heart,
dresses in a Poetical Head, and sleeps in a dull Understanding.


Natures Flowers are Poets Fancies, and Natures Gardens are Poetical Heads.


Pray leave her in her Garden, and talk of something else.


Then let us talk of Thoughts: for thoughts are the children of the Mind, begot
betwixt the Soul and Senses.


And Thoughts are several Companions, and like Courtly Servitors, do lead and
usher the Mind into several places.


Pray stay the Discourse of Thoughts^ for it's a dull Discourse.


Then let us talk of Reason.


Why should we talk of Reason, when there are so many seeming reasons, as the
right cannot be known?


Seeming reasons are like seducing flatterers, persuade 'tis truth, when all is
false they say.


Let us talk of Justice.


Justice, to the Generality, hath a broad full face; but to particulars, she
hath but a quarter and half-quarter face; and to some particulars, she veils it
all over: Wherefore to talk of Justice, is to talk blindfold.


Let us talk of Bashfulness.


What, should we talk of our own disgrace?


A Grace you mean, Lady.


No surely, a distempered Countenance, and a distorted Face, can be no grace.


Let us talk of the Passions.


It is easier to talk of them, than to conquer and govern them, although it is
easier to conquer the perturbed passions of the Mind, than the unruly Appetites
of the Body: for as the Body is grosser than the Soul, so the Appetites are
stronger than the Passions.


Let us talk of Gifts.


There are no Gifts worth the talking of, but Natural Gifts, as Beauty, Wit,
good Nature, and the like.


Let us talk of Wit, that is a Natural Gift.


Nature gives true Wit to very few: for many that are accounted Wits, are but
Wit-leeches, that suck and swell with wit of other men, and when they are
over-gorg'd, they spue it out again; besides, there are none but Natural Poets
that have variety of Discourses, all others talk according to their
Professions, Practice, and Studies, when Poets talk of all that Nature makes,
or Art invents, and like as Bees that gather the sweets of every flower, bring
honey to the Hive, which are the Ears of the Hearers, wherein Wit doth swarm:
But since we are not by Nature so endued, Wit is a subject not fit to be
pursued by us.


Let us talk of Beauty.


Those that have it, take greater pleasure in the Fame, than in the Possession:
for they care not so much to talk of it, as to hear the praises of it.


Come Ladies, let us go: for I perceive your Wits can settle upon no one
subject this day.


O how my Spirit moves with a disordered haste! my thoughts tumultuously
together throng, striving to pull down Reason from his throne, and banish
Conscience from the Soul,


What Son, Lover-like already, before you have seen your Mistress? Well, her
Father and I am agreed, there's nothing wanting but the Priest and Ceremony,
and all is done.


Sir, there are our Affections wanting; for we never saw one another: Wherefore
it is not known whether we shall affect or nor.


I hope you are not so disobedient, to dispute your Fathers will.


And I hope, Sir, you will not be so unkind, as to force me to marry one I
cannot love.


Not love? why she is the richest Heiress in the Kingdom.


I am not covetous, Sir, I had rather please my Fancy, than increase my Estate.


Your Fancy? Let me tell you, that your fancy is a fool; and if you do not obey
my will, I will dis-inherit you.


I fear not poverty.


Nor fear you not a Fathers curse?


Yes Sir, that I do.


Why then be sure you shall have it, if you refuse her.


Pray give me some time to consider of't.


Pray do, and consider wisely, you had best.


I doubt my Lady will die.


I fear so: for the Doctor, when he felt her pulse, shook his head, which was
an ill sign.


It is a high Fever she is in.


The Doctor says a high continual Fever.


She's a fine young Lady, 'tis pity she should die.


My Master puts on a sad face; but yet me thinks his sadness doth not appear of
a through-die.


Come Ladies, how will you pass your time to day?


Pray let us sit and Rhyme, and those that are out, shall lose a Collation to
the rest of the Society.


Agree, agreed.


Love is both kind and cruel,
As fire unto fuel;
It doth embrace and burn,
Gives Life, and proves Deaths Urn.

A lowering Sky and Sunny wrays,
Is like a commendation with dispraise;
Or like to Cypress bound to Bays,
Or like to tears on Wedding days.

A flattering Tongue, and a false Heart,
A kind Embrace which makes me start,
A beauteous Form, a Soul that's evil,
Is like an Angel, but a Devil.

A woman old to have an Amorous passion,
A Puritan in a fantastic Fashion,
A formal States-man which dances and skips about,
And a bold fellow which is of countenance out.

A Scholars head with old dead Authors full,
For want of wit is made a very gull.

To laugh and cry, to mingle smiles and tears;
Is like to hopes and doubts, and joys and fears:
As several passions mixes in one mind,
So several postures in one face may find.

To love and hate both at one time,
And in one person both to join,
To love the man, but hate the crime,
Is like to sugar put to brine.

Ladies, you had better tell some Tales to pass your time with: for your Rhymes
are not full of wit enough to be delightfully sociable.


Agreed, let us tell some Tales.


Once upon a time Honour made Love to Virtue, a gallant and Heroic Lord he
was, and she a sweet, modest, and beautiful Lady, and naked Truth was the
Confident to them both, which carried and brought love messages and presents
from and to each other.


Out upon beastly truth: for if she goes naked, I dare say she is a wanton
Wench, and Virtue, I dare swear, is little better than her self, if she keeps
her company, or can behold her without winking; and I shall shrewdly suspect
you, Ladies, to be like her, if you discourse of her; but more, if you have any
acquaintance with her: And since you are so wild and wanton, as to talk of
naked truth, I will leave you to your scurtilous discourse: for I am ashamed to
be in your company, and to hear you speak such Ribauldry: O sie, O sie, naked
Truth! Jove bless me, and keep me from naked Truth, as also from her sly
Companion Virtue, out upon them both.


Now you have seen your Mistress, Brother, tell me how you like her.


It were a rudeness to your Sex, if I should say I dislike any Woman.


Surely Brother you cannot dislike her: for she is handsome, well-behav'd,
well-bred, a great Estate, and of a good Fame and Family.


And may she have a Husband answerable.


Why so she will, when she marries you.


I cannot equal her Virtues, nor merit her Beauty; wherefore I will not injure
her with marriage.


Will you not marry her?


No.


I hope you speak not in Earnest.


In truth Sister I do no not jest.


Prithee Brother do not tell my Father so: for if you do, he will be in such a
fury, as there will be no pacifying him.


If you desire it, I will not.


First reason with your self, and try if you can persuade your Affections.


Affections, Sister, can neither be persuaded either from or to: for if they
could, I would employ all the Rhetoric I have to persuade them. O sister!


Where is your Brother?


He is even now gone from hence.


How chance he is not gone to his Mistress?


I know not Sir; but he looks as if he were not very well.


Not well? he's a foolish young man, and one that hath had his liberty so much,
as he hates to be tied in wedlocks Bonds; but I will go rattle him.


Pray Sir persuade him by degrees, and be not too violent at first with him.


By the Mass Girl thou^ give me good counsel, and I will temper him gently,


O she's dead, she's dead, the sweetest Lady in the World she was.


O she was a sweet-natur'd creature: for she would never speak to any of us
all, although we were her own servants, but with the greatest civility; as pray
do such a thing, or call such a one, or give or fetch me such or such a thing,
as all her servants loved her so well, as they would have laid down their lives
for her sake, unless it were her Maid Nan.


Well, I say no more, but pray God Nan hath not given her a Spanish Fig!


Why, if she did, there is none of us knows so much, as we can come as
Witnesses against her.


It is a strange negligence, that you stand prating here, and do not go to help
to lay my Lady forth.


My Master weeps, I did not think he had loved my Lady so well.


Pish, that's nothing: for most love the dead better than the living; and many
will hate a friend when they are living, and love them when they are dead.


Brother, why weep you?


O Sister, Mortality spouts tears through my eyes, to quench Loves raging fire
that's in my Heart! But 'twill not do, the more I strive, with greater fury
doth it burn.


Dear Brother, if you be in love, she must be a cruel woman that will deny you:
for pure and virtuous love softens the hardest hearts, and melts them into
pity.


Would I were turned to stone, and made a marble Tomb, wherein lies nothing but
cold death, rather than live tormented thus.


Heaven keep my fears from proving true.


Daughter, how do you like Monsieur Frere?


Sir, I like whatsoever you approve of.


But setting aside your dutiful Answer to me, tell me how you affect him?


If I must confess, Sir, I never saw any man I could love but him.


You have reason: for he is a fine Gentleman; and those Marriages most commonly
prove happy, when Children and Parents agree.


But Sir, he doth not appear to fancy me so much, or so well as I fancy him.


It's a sign, Child, thou art in Love, that you begin to have doubts.


No Sir, but if I thought he could not love me, I would take off that Affection
I have placed on him whilst I can master it, lest it should grow so strong as
to become masterless.


Fear not Child.


'Tis said that Malateste is a Widower.


Why then there is a Husband for me.


Why for you? he may choose any of us as soon as you, for any thing you know.


I'm sure we are as fair.


And have as great Portions.


And are as well bred as you are.


Well, I know he is allotted to my share.


Pray do not fall out about him: for surely he will have none of you all, for
'tis said he shall marry his Maid.


Why he is not so mad: for though his Maid served to vex and grieve his wife
into her grave, and also to pass away idle hours with him, yet he will not
marry her, I dare warrant you; for those that are married, must take such as
they can get, having no liberty to choose, but when they are free from wedlocks
bonds, they may have choice.


So Sir, you are welcome, for you can resolve a question that is in dispute
amongst us.


What is it Lady?


The question is, whether you will marry your Maid or not.


No sure, I cannot forget my self, nor my dead wife so much, as to marry my
Maid.


Faith that is some kindness in Husbands, that they will remember their wives
when they are dead, although they forget them whilst they live.


A good wife cannot be forgotten neither dead nor alive.


By your favour, Sir, a bad wife will remain longest in the memory of her
Husband, because she vexed him most.


In my Conscience, Lady, you will make a good wife.


If you think so, you had best try.


Shall I be accepted Lady?


I know no reason I should refuse Sir; for Report says you have a great Estate,
and I see you are a handsome man; and as for your nature and disposition, let
it be as bad as it can be, mine shall match it.


My Nature loves a free spirit.


And mine loves no restraint.


Lady, for this time I shall kiss your hands, and if you will give me leave, I
shall visit you at your lodging.


You shall be welcome Sir.


Ladies, did not I tell you I should have him?


Jesting and Raillery doth not always make up a Match.


Well, well, Ladies, God be with you, for I must go home and provide for my
Wedding: for I perceive it will be done on the sudden; for Widowers are more
hasty to marry, than Bachelors, and Widows, than maids.


Stay Lady, you must first get the good will of your Parents.


All parents good will concerning Marriage, is got before hand, without
speaking; if the Suitor be rich, and if he prove a good Husband, then Parents
brag to their acquaintance, saying, How well they have matched their Child!
making their acquaintance believe it was their prudence and industry that made
the match, when the young couple were agreed before their parents ever knew or
guessed at such a match; but if they prove unhappy, then they complain to their
acquaintance, and shake their heads, crying, it was their own doings, saying
their children were wilful, and would not be ruled, although they forced them
to marry by threatenings and cursings. O the unjust partiality of self-love,
even in parents, which will not allow right to their own own branches! But I
forget my self. Farewell, farewell.


Bid us to your Wedding, bid us to your Wedding.


Why do you follow me, with sighs fetched deep, and groans that seem to rend
your heart in two?


Be not offended: Sisters should not be so unnatural, as to be weary of a
Brothers company, or angry at their grief; but rather strive to ease the sorrow
of their hearts, than load on more with their unkindness.


Heaven knows, Brother, that if my life could ease your grief, I willingly
would yield it up to death.


O Gods, O Gods, you cruel Gods, commanding Nature to give us Appetites, then
starve us with your Laws, decree our ruin and our fall, create us only to be
tormented!


I dare not ask his griefs, or search his heart, for fear that I should find
that which I would not know.


My Master and our new Lady are coming home; wherefore you must get the House
very clean and fine: You Wardropian; you must lay the best Carpets on the
Table, and set out the best Chairs Stools; and in the Chamber wherein my Master
and Lady must lie, you must set up the Cross-stitch bed, and hang up the new
suit of Hangings, wherein is the story of Abraham and Sarah, and Hagar her
Maid. And you Pantlor, must have a care that the glasses be well washed, and
that the Basin and Yewer, Voider and Plates be bright scoured, as also the
silver Cistern, and the silver Flagons standing therein, and to have a care
that the Table-cloaths be smooth, and the Napkins finely knip'd and perfumed,
and that the Limons, Orenges, Bread, Salt, Forks, Knives, and Glasses, be set
and placed after the newest Mode.


O Mistress Nan, you have prevented me: for I was going to seek you out, to let
you know my Master and our new Lady will be here before night; wherefore you
must see that the Linen be fine, and the Sheets be well dried and warmed, and
that there be in my Ladies Chamber all things necessary.


Let her command one of her own maids: for I am none of her servant.


Why, whose servant are you?


My Masters, who hired me, and pays me my wages: I never saw her, nor she me.


But all my Masters servants are my Ladies: for Man and Wife divide not their
servants, as to say, those are mine, these are yours.


Why, I'm sure in my other Ladies time, all the servants were my Masters, and
none my Ladies: for she had not power to take or turn away any one.


The more was the pity; for she was both virtuous and wise: Besides, beautiful
and well-bred, rich and honourably born, and of a sweet disposition. But 'tis
said this Lady hath such a spirit, as she will share in the Rule and
Government.


Yes, yes, for a little time, as long as Honey-moneth lasts: I dare warrant you
she shall reign nor rule no longer.


Come my friends and fellow-servants, let's every one about our several
Affairs.


Dear Brother, why do you kneel and weep to me? Frere My tears, like as
distressed Petitioners, fall to the ground, and at your feet crave mercy: it is
not life they ask, but love that they would have.


Why so you have: for I do vow to Heaven I love you better than ambitious men
love power, or those that are vain-glorious love a Fame, better than the body
loves health, or the life loves peace.


Yet still you love me not as I would have you love.


Why how would you have me love?


As Husbands love their Wives, or Wives their Husbands.


Why so I do.


And will you lie with me?


How! would you have me commit Incest?


Sister, follow not those foolish binding Laws which frozen men have made, but
follow Natures Laws, whose Freedom gives a Liberty to all.


Heaven bless your soul: for sure you are possessed with some strange wicked
spirit, that uses not to wander amongst men.


Sister, be not deceived with empty words, and vainer tales, made only at the
first to keep the ignorant vulgar sort in awe, whose Faith, like to their
greedy Appetites, take whatsoever is offered, be it ne'er so bad or ill to their
stomachs, they never consider, but think all good they can get down; so
whatsoever they hear, they think 'tis true, although they have no reason or
possibility for it.


But learned and knowing men, wise and judicious men, holy and good men, know
this you ask is wicked.


They do not know it, but they believe as they are taught: for what is taught
men in their Childhood, grows strong in their Manhood; and as they grow in
years, so grow they up in Superstition. Thus wise men are deceived and cozened
by length of time, taking an old forgotten deed to be a true sealed bond:
wherefore, dear Sister, your Principles are false, and therefore your Doctrine
cannot be true.


Heaven hath taught that Doctrine; wherefore we cannot err.


Heaven considers us no more than beasts, that freely live together.


O that I should live to know my only Brother turn from man to beast!


I am glad the Ice is broke, and that her fury rages not like fire.


Daughter, I do perceive that Monsieur Frere doth neglect you; besides, he is a
wild debauched young man, and no ways likely to make a good Husband: wherefore
I charge you on my blessing, and the duty you owe me, to draw off those
affections you have placed upon him.


Good Sir do not impose that on my duty which I cannot obey: for I can sooner
draw the light from the Sun, or the World from its Center, or the fixed Stars
from their assigned places, than draw away love from him.


Why, how if he will not have you?


I can only say I shall be unhappy.


I hope you will be wiser than to make your self miserable for one you cannot
have to be your Husband.


Heaven give your Worship joy, and our noble Lady.


What, is this your best House?


Yes, and is it not a good one Sweet?


Fie upon it, I hate such an old-fashiond House; wherefore pray pull it down,
and build another more fashionable, as that there may be a Bell-view and
Pergalus round the outside of the Horse, also Arched Gates, Pillars and
Pilasters, and carved Frontispeeces, with Antic Imagery, also I would have all
the lower rooms vaulted, and the upper rooms flat-roof'd, painted and gilded,
and the Planchers checkered and inlaid with silver, the Stair-cafe to be large
and winding, the steps broad and low, as shallow; then to take in two or three
Fields about your House to make large Gardens, wherein you may plant Groves of
Myrtle; as also to make Walks of green Turf, and those to be hanging and
shelving, as if they hung by Geometry; also Fountains and Water-works, and
those Water-works to imitate those Birds in Winter, that only sing in Summer.


But this will cost a great sum of money Wise.


That's true, Husband; but to what use is money, unless to spend?


But it ought to be spent prudently.


Prudently, say you? why Prudence and Temperance are the Executioners of
Pleasure, and Murderers of Delight: wherefore I hate them, as also this
covetous humour of yours.


I marry Sir, here is a Lady indeed: for she talks of pulling down this House
before she hath thoroughly seen it, and of building up another.


If you will have my opinion, the old servants must go down as well as the old
house.


I believe so: for she looked very scornfully upon us, nor spoke not one word
either good or bad to us.


Well, come let us go about our employments, and please as long as we can, and
when we can please no longer, we must seek other Services.


Do not pursue such horrid Acts, as to Whore your Sister, Cuckold your
Brother-in-Law, dishonour your Father, and brand your life and memory with
black infamy. Good Brother consider what a world of misery you strive to bring
upon your self and me.


Dear Sister pity me, and let a Brothers pleading move your heart, and bury not
my youth in Death before the natural time.


'Tis better you should die, and in the grave be laid, than live to damn your
soul.


To kill my self will be as bad a crime.


O no: for Death any way is more honourable than such a life as you would live.


FRiend, prithee tell me why you do not marry.


Because I can find no woman so exact as I would have a Wife to be: for first I
would not have a very tall woman, for the appears as if her soul and body were
mis-match'd, as to have a pigmy soul, and a gyantly body.


Perchance her soul is answerable to her body.


O no: for it is a question whether women have souls or no; but for certain, if
they have, they are of a dwarfish kind: Neither would I have a wife with a
masculine strength; for it seems pra^posterous to the softness and tenderness
of their Sex: neither would I have lean wife; for she will appear always to me
like the picture of Death, had she but a since and hour-glass in her hand: for
though we are taught to have always Death in our Mind, to remember our End, yet
I would not have Death always before my Eyes, to be afraid of my End: But to
have a very lean wife, were to have Death in my Arms, as much as in my Eyes,
and my Bed would be as my Grave.


Your Bed would be a warm Grave.


Why man, though Death is cold, the Grave is hot: for the Earth hath heat,
though Death hath none.


What say you to a fat woman?


I say a fat woman is a bed-fellow only for the Winter, and not for the Summer;
and I would have such a woman for my Wife, as might be a nightly companion all
the year.


I hope you would not make your Wife such a constant bed-fellow, as to lie
always together in one bed.


Why not?


Because a mans stomach or belly may ache, which will make wind work, and the
rumbling wind may decrease love, and so your wife may dislike you, and dislike
in time may make a Cuckold.


By your favour it increases Matrimonial Love: 'tis true, it may decrease
Amorous Love; and the more Amorous Love increases, the more danger a man is in:
for Amorous Love, even to Husbands, is dangerous; for that kind of Love takes
delight to progress about, when Matrimonial Love is constant, and considers
Nature as it is: Besides, a good Wife will not dislike that in her Husband,
which she is subject to her self; but howsoever I will never marry, unless I
can get such a Wife as is attended by Virtue, directed by Truth, instructed by
Age, on honest grounds, and honourable principles, which Wife will neither
dislike me, nor I her, but the more we are together, the better we shall love,
and live as a married pair ought to live, and not as dissembling Lovers, as most
married couples do.


What think you of choosing a Wife amongst the Sociable Virgins?


No, no, I will choose none of them; for they are too full of discourse: for I
would have a Wife rather to have a listening Ear, than a talking Tongue; for by
the Ear she may receive wise instructions, and so learn to practise that which
is noble and good; also to know my desires, as to obey my will; when by
speaking muck, she may express her self a fool: for great Talkers are not the
wisest Practisers: Besides, her restless Tongue will disturb my Contemplations,
the Tranquillity of my Mind, and the peace, quiet, and rest of my Life.


Are you she that takes upon you to govern, and to be Mistress in this House?


Why I do but that I did in the other Ladies time.


Let me tell you, you shall not do so in my time; nay you shall have no doings,
wherefore get you out of the House.


I will not go.


No? but you shall.

Go you and call one of those servants I brought with me.

Here take this wench, and put her out of the Gates.


You Rogue, touch me and you dare, I shall have one to defend me.


I desie your Champion.


What you Villain, will you force her? set her down.


I did no more than what I was commanded.


Who commanded you?


My Lady, Sir, commanded me to carry her out of the gates.


Pray let her alone until I have spoke with my wife.


I shall Sir.


What's the matter Nan?


Only my Ladies dislikes of my person: for it could not be through any neglect
of my service, or faithful diligence, or humble duty, but through a passionate
humour, because she hath heard you were pleased heretofore to favour me.


But now we are very honest Nan.


Yes, the more unkind man you, to win a young Maid to love, and then to turn
her away in disgrace.


I do not turn you away.


Yes but you do, if you suffer my Lady to turn me away.


How should I help that? for she hath such a strong spirit, as not to be
controlld.


O Sir, if you bridle her, you may guide her as you will.


How should I bridle her?


Why put her to her allowance, and take the government of your Family out of
her hands, as you did to your former Lady.


My other wife was born with a quiet obedient nature, and this with a high and
turbulent nature; and if I should cross her high working spirit, she would grow
mad.


Why then you would have a good excuse to tie her up.


Her Friends would never suffer me; besides, the world would condemn me, and
account me a Tyrant.


Why it is better to be accounted a Tyrant than a Fool.


O no; for men ought to be sweet and gentle-natur'd to the Effeminate Sex.


I see by you; that the worse that men are used, the better Husbands they make:
for you were both unkind and cruel to your other Lady, neither could you find,
or at least would not give such Arguments for her.


Will you rebuke me for that which you persuaded me unto, by dispraising your
Lady unto me?


Alas Sir, I was so fond of your company, that I was jealous even of my Lady,
and love is to be pardoned: wherefore, Dear Sir, turn me not away; for Heaven
knows I desire to live no longer than when I can have your favour, and I wish I
were blind, if I might not be where I may see you, and my heart leaps for joy,
whenever I hear your voice: wherefore good Sir, for loves sake pity me.


Well, I will speak to my wife for you.


Well, if I can but get my Master but dance once, to kiss me again, which I
will be industrious for, I will be revenged of this domineering Lady: I hope I
shall be too crafty for her.


Brother, speak no more upon so bad a subject, for fear I wish you dumb: for
the very breath that's sent forth with your words, will blister both my ears: I
would willingly hide your faults, nay I am ashamed to make them known; but if
you do persist, by Heaven I will discover your wicked desires, both to my
Father and Husband.


Will you so?


Yes that I will.


Well, I will leave you, and try if Reason can conquer your evil desires, or
else I'll die.


Heaven pour some holy Balsom into your festered soul.


Wife, I am come an humble Petitioner to you in the behalf of Nan, she hath
been a servant here ever since I was first married to my other Wife.


No, no, Husband, I will have none of your whores in the house where I live; if
you must have whores, go seek them abroad.


Pray let not your jealous Passion turn away a good servant.


Had you rather please your servant, a whore, or me?


Why you.


Then turn her away.


But surely Wife you will let me have so much power, as to keep an old servant.


No Husband, if your old servant be a young lusty wench.


But I have passed my word that she shall stay.


And I have sworn an Oath that she shall go away.


But my promise must be kept: wherefore she shall not go away.


I say she shall go away; nay more, I will have her whipped at the end of a
Cart, and then sent out of doors.


As I am Master, I will command none shall touch her; and let me see who dares
touch her.


Who dares touch her? why I can hire poor fellows for money, not only to whip
her, but murder you.


Are you so free with my Estate? I will discharge you of that Office of keeping
my money.


If you do, I have Youth and Beauty, that will hite me Revengers, and get me
Champions.


Will you so?


Yes, or any thing rather than want my will; and know, I perfectly hate you,
for taking my Maids part against me.


Nay prithee Wife be not so choleric: for I said all this but to try thee.


You shall prove me, Husband, before I have done.


Shall I divulge my Brothers Crimes, which are such Crimes as will set a mark
of Infamy upon my Family and Race for ever? or shall I let Vice run without
restraint? or shall I prove false to my Husbands bed, to save my brothers life?
or shall I damn my Soul and his, to satisfy his wild desires? O no, we both
will die, to save our Souls, and keep our Honours clear.


The more I struggle with my Affections, the weaker do I grow for to resist. If
Gods had power, they sure would give me strength, or were they just, they would
exact no more than I could pay; and if they cannot help, or will not help me,
Furies rise up from the infernal deep, and give my Actions aid; Devils assist
me, and I will learn you to be more evil than you are; and when my black horrid
designs are fully finished, then take my soul, which is the quintessence of
wickedness, and squeeze some venom forth upon the World, that may infect
mankind with plagues of sins

There multitudes will bury mine,
Or count me as a Saint, and offer at my Shrine.

Nan, you must be contented, for you must be gone: for your Lady will not
suffer you to be in the house.


Will you visit me, if I should live near your House, at the next Town?


No: for that will cause a parting betwixt my Wife and me, which I would not
have for all the World: wherefore Nan, God be with you.


May your House be your Hell, and your Wife be your Devil.


What will your Ladyship have for your Supper?


Whatsoever is rare and costly


Did your Ladyship send for me?


Yes: for you having been an old servant in my Fathers House, will be more
diligent to observe and obey my commands: wherefore go to the Metropolitan
City, and there try all those that trade in vanities, and see if they will give
me credit, in case my Husband should restrain his purse from me, and tell them
that they may may make my Husband pay my debts. The next is, I would have you
take me a fine house in the City: for I intend to live there, and not in this
dull place, where I see no body but my Husband, who spends his time in sneaking
after his Maids tails, having no other employment; besides, solitariness begets
melancholy, and melancholy begets suspicion, and suspicion jealousy; so that
my Husband grows amorous with idleness, and jealous with melancholy. Thus he
hath the pleasure of variety, and I the pain of jealousy: wherefore be you
industrious to obey my command.


I shall Madam.


Good Sir conceal my Passion, left it become a scorn, when once 'tis known: for
all rejected Lovers are despised, and those that have some small returns of
Love; yet do those saint Affections triumph vaingloriously upon those that are
strong, and make them as their slaves.


Surely Child thy Affections shall not be divulged by me, I only wish thy
Passions were as silent in thy breast, as on my tongue, as that he thou love
so much may lie as dead and buried in thy memory.


There's no way to bury Love, unless it buries me.


I hear Wife that you are going to the Metropolitan City.


Yes Husband: for I find my self much troubled with the Spleen, and therefore I
go to try if I can be cured.


Why, will the City cure the Spleen?


Yes, for it is the only remedy: for melancholy must be diverted with
divertisements; besides, there are the best Physicians.


I will send for some of the best and most famous Physicians from thence, if
you will stay.


By mo means: for they will exact so much upon your importance, as they will
cost more money than their journey is worth.


But Wife, it is my delight and profit to live in the Country; besides, I hate
the City.


And I hate the Country.


But every good Wife ought to conform her self to her Husbands humours and
will.


But Husband, I profess my self no good Wife: wherefore I will follow my own
humour.


I find there is no crossing her, she will have her Will.


Wife, I am come to rob your Cabinet of all the Ribands that are in it: for I
have made a running match betwixt Monsieur la Whips Nag, and your Brothers
Barb; and he faith that he shall not run, unless you give him Ribands: for he
is persuaded your Favours will make him win.


Those Ribands I have, you shall have, Husband: But what will my Brother say if
his Barb should lose the match?


I asked him that question, and he answered, that if he lost, he would knock
his Barbs brains out of his head.


Where is my Brother?


Why he is with your Father, and such a good companion he is to day, and so
merry, as your Father is so fond of his company, insomuch as he hangs about his
neck as a new-maried wife: But I conceive the chief reason is, that your
Brother seems to consent to marry the Lady Amor.


I am glad of that with all my soul.


But he says, if he doth marry her, It must be by your perswasons.


He shall not want persuading, if I can persuade him.


Come Wife, will you give me some Ribands?


Yes Husband, I will go fetch them.


Nay Wife, I will go along with you.


Thoughts, cease to move, and let my Soul take rest, or let the damps of grief
quench out lifes flame.


My dear Child, do not pine away for Love: for I will get thee a handsomer man
than Monsieur Frere.


Sir, I am not so much in love with his person, as to dote so sondly thereon.


What makes you so in love with him then? for you have no great acquaintance
with him.


Lovers can seldom give a Reason for their Passion; yet mine grew from your
superlative praises; those praises drew my Soul out at my Ears to entertain his
love: But since my Soul misles of what it seeks, will not return, but leave my
body empty to wander like a ghost, in gloomy sadness, and midnight melancholy.


I did mistake the subject I spoke of, the substance being false, those praises
were not current: wherefore lay them aside, and fling them from thee.


I cannot: for they are minted, and have Loves stamp, and being out, increases
like to Interest-money, and is become so vast a sum, as I believe all praises
past, present, or what's to come, or can be, are too few for his merits, and
too short of his worth.


Rather than praise him, I wish my Tongue had been for ever dumb.


O wish not so, but rather I had been for ever deaf.


My Child is undone.


My Master looks so lean and pale, as I doubt he is in a Consumption.


Faith he takes something to heart, whatsoever it is.


I doubt he is jealous.


He hath reason: for if my Lady doth not cuckold him, yet she gives the World
cause to think she doth: for she is never without her Gallants.


There is a great difference betwixt our Lady that is dead, and this.


Is my Wife come home yet?


No Sir.


I think it be about twelve of the Clock.


It is past one Sir.


If it be so late, I will sit up no longer watching for my Wives coming home,
but I will go to bed; for I am not very well.


You do not look well, Sir.


Indeed I am sick.


Lord Brother, what is the reason you are come back so soon? Hath not your Barb
run the Race?


No.


What makes you here then?


To see you.


To see me? why I shall give you no thanks, because you left my Husband behind
you.


I do not come for your thanks, I come to please my self.


Prithee Brother get thee gone: for thy face doth not appear so honest as it
uses to do.


I do not know how my Face doth appear; but my Heart is as it was, your
faithful Lover.


Heaven forbid you should relapse into your old disease.


Let me tell you, Sister, I am as I was, and was as I am, that is, from the
first time I saw you, since I came from Travel, I have been in love with you,
and must enjoy you; and if you will embrace my love with a free consent, so, if
not, I'll force you to it.


Heaven will never suffer it, but cleave the Earth, and swallow you alive.


I care not, so you be in my Arms; but I will first try Heavens power, and
struggle with the Deities.


Wife, Is this the way to cure melancholy? to sit up all night at Cards, and to
lose five hundred pounds at a sitting? or to stay all night abroad a Dancing
and Revelling.


O yes; for the Doctors say there is nothing better than good company, to
employ the Thoughts with (outward Objects) otherwise the Thoughts feed too much
upon the Body; besides, they say that Exercise is excellent good to open
Obstructions, and to disperse melancholy Vapour; and the Doctors say, there is
no Exercise better than Dancing, because there are a great Company meet
together, which adds Pleasure to the Labour.


My other Wife did not do thus.


Wherefore she died in her youth with melancholy; but I mean to live while I am
old, if mirth and good company will keep me alive; and know I am not so
kind-hearted to kill my self, to spare your Purse, or to please your Humour.


Who will call unto the Gods for aid, since they assist not Innocence, nor give
protection to a Virtuous Life? Is Piery of no use? or is Heaven so obdurate, no
holy prayers can enter Heaven-gates, or penitential tears can move the Gods to
pity? But O my sorrows are too big for words, and all actions too little for
his punishment.


Sister, I must die, wherefore you must not live: for I cannot be without your
company, although in death, and in the silent grave, where no Love's made, nor
Passion known.


It's welcome News: for if death comes not by your hand, my hand shall give a
passage unto life.


There is none so sit to act that part as I, who am so full of sin, want
nothing now but murder to make up measure.


Death, thou are my griefs Reprieve, and wilt unlade my Soul from heavy
thoughts that miserable life throws on, and sinks me to the Earth. Brother
farewell, may all your crimes be buried in my grave, and may my shame and yours
be never known.


Now she is dead, my Mind is at rest, since I know none can enjoy her after me;
but I will follow thee: I come, my Mistress, Wife, and Sister all in one.

You Gods of Love, if any Gods there be, O hear my prayer! And as we came both
from one Womb, so join our Souls in the Elizium, out Bodies in one Tomb.


Wife, you are very unkind, that you will not come to see me now I am sick, nor
so much as send to know how I do.


I am loath to trouble you with unnecessary visits, or impertinent questions.


Is it unnecessary or impertinent to see a Husband when he is sick? or to ask
how he doth?


Yes, when their visits and questions can do them no good: But God be with you,
for I must be gone.


What, already?


Yes; for I doubt I have staid too long: for I have appointed a meeting, and it
will be a dishonour for me to break my word.


But it will be more dishonour to be dancing when your Husband is dying, Lady.


What, will you teach me? go tutor Girls and Boys, and not me.


Let her go, friend: for her anger will disturb me.


I know not what her anger doth you; but her neglect of you doth disturb me:
And for my part, I wonder how you can suffer her.


Alas how shall I help, or remedy it? But Heaven is just, and punishes me for
the neglect I used towards my first Wife, who was virtuous and kind.


She was a sweet Lady indeed.


O she was! But I Devil as I was, to use her as I did, making her a slave unto
my whore and frowns, conjecturing all her Virtues to a contrary sense: for I
mistook her patience for simplicity, her kindness for wantonness, her thrist
for covetousness, her obedience for flattery, her retired life for dull
stupidity; and what with the grief to think how ill I used her, and grieving to
see how ill this Wife uses me, wasting my Honour and Estate, she hath brought
me into a Consumption, as you see: But when I am dead, as I cannot live long, I
desire you, who are my Executor, to let me buried in the same Tomb wherein my
Wife is laid: for it is a joy to me, to think my dust shall be mixed with her
pure ashes: for I had rather be in the grave with my first Wife, than live in a
Throne with my second. But I grow very sick, even to death: wherefore let me be
removed.


Son-in-law, did your Brother say he was very ill?


He said he had such a pain on his left side, as he could not sit on his horse,
but must be forced to return home again.


Heaven bless him: for my heart is so full of fears and doubts, as if it did
Prognosticate some great misfortune to me.


Pray Sir be not so dejected, nor look so pale; I dare warrant you the News
that his Barb hath won the Race, will be a sufficient Cataplasm to take away
his Stitch.


How doth my Son and daughter?


I think they are both well, Sir.


Why, do not you know, and yet dwell in the same House?


No indeed not I: for I only saw my young Master go towards my Ladies lodging,
but I did not follow to inquire of their healths, for feat they should be
angry, and think me bold.


Where is you Lady?


In her Chamber I think, Sir.


Do you but think so? do you not know? 'Tis a sign you wait not very
diligently.


Why Sir, I met my young Master going to his Sisters Chamber, and he sent me on
an Errand, and when I came back, the outward doors were locked, so as I could
not get in any ways.


The doors locked, say you?


Yes Sir.


Let them be broken open.


O my doubts foretell a miserable Tragedy.


Villains let go, she shall not wander in the silent shades without my company;
besides, my soul will crowd through multitudes of souls, that flock to Charons
Boat, to make an easy passage for her pure soul: wherefore let go, I command
you as being your Master, let go.


This is so strange an Accident, that hardly Story can mention the like.


I wonder how they came murdered, the door being locked, and none but
themselves; if it had been thieves, they would have robbed them, as well as
murdered them.


I believe my young Master was the Thief that did both rob and murder.


Well, I could tell a story that I heard, listening one day at my Ladies
Chamber-door; but I will not.


Prithee tell it us.


No, I will not, you shall excuse me for this time.


Daughter, I am come to bring you a Medicine to take out the sting of Love.


What is it Sir?


Why, Monsieur Frere hath most wickedly killed himself.


Although I cannot usher him to the Grave, I'll follow him.


Help, help, for Heavens sake, help.


O my Child is dead! O she is dead, she is dead! Carry her to her Bed.


O my Lady is quite dead, and past all cure, and her Father, I think, will die
also.


I am sure there is a sad, a sad House to day.


IF subtle Air, the Conduit to each ear,
Hearts passion moved to draw a sadder tear
From your squees'd brains, on your pale cheeks to lie,
Distilled from every Fountain of each eye;
Our Poetress hath done her part, and you
To make it sadder, know this Story's true;
A plaudity you'll give, if think it fit,
For none but will say this Play is well writ.

