THE Poetress says, that if the Play be bad,
She's very sorry, and could wish she had
A better plot, more wit and skill to make
A Play that might each several humour take;
But she says, if your humours are not fixed,
Or that they are extravagantly mixed;
Impossible a Play for to present
With such variety, and temperiment;
But some will think it tedious, or find fault,
Say the Design or Language is stark nought;
Besides, the loose unsettled brains, she fears
Sees with squint eyes, and hears with Asses ears;
But she is confident all in this round,
Their understandings clear, and judgements sound;
And if her Play deserves not praise, she knows
They'll neither scoff in words, nor preposterous shows:
Without disturbance, you will let it dye,
And in the Grave of silence let it lye.
Husband, you have a strange nature, that having but one child, and never like
to have more, and this your child a daughter; that you should breed her so
strictly, as to give her no time for recreation, nor no liberty for company,
nor freedom for conversation, but keeps her as a Prisoner, and makes her a
slave to her book, and your tedious moral discourses, when other children have
Play-fellows, and toys to sport and pass their time withal.


Good wife be content, doth not she play when she reads books of Poetry, and
can there be nobler, amiabler, finer, usefuller, and wiser companions than the
Sciences, or pleasanter Play-fellows than the Muses; can she have freer
conversation, than with wit, or more various recreations than Scenes, Sonnets
and Poems; Tragical, Comical, and Musical, and the like; Or have prettier toys
to sport withal, than fancy, and hath not the liberty so many hours in the
day, as children have to play in.


Do you call this playing? which sets her brain a working to find out the
conceits, when perchance there is none to find out, but are cheats, and cozens
the Readers with empty words, at best, it sills her head but with strange
phantasmes, disturbs her sleep with frightful dreams of transformed bodies of
Monsters, and ugly shaped vices of Hells and Furies, and terrifying Gods of
Wars and Battles, of long travels, and dangerous escapes, and the pleasantest
is but dark groves, gloomy fields, and the happiest condition; but to walk idly
about the Elizium fields; and thus you breed your daughter, as if your
Posterity were to be raised from a Poets fantastical brain.


I wish my Posterity may last but as long as Homers lines.


Truly, it will be a fine airey brood! No no, I will have her bred, as to make
a good housewife, as to know how to order her Family, breed her Children, govern
her Servants, entertain her Neighbours, and to fashion herself to all
companies, times and places, and not to be mewed and moped up, as she is from
all the World, insomuch, as she never saw twenty persons in one company in all
her life, unless it be in pictures, which you set her to stare on above an hour
everyday: Besides, what Father doth educate their Daughters, that office
belongs to me; but because you have never a Son to tutor, therefore you will
turn Cotqucan, and teach your daughter, which is my work.


Let me tell you, Wife, that is the reason all women are fools; for women
breeding up women, one fool breeding up another, and as long as that custom
lasts there is no hopes of amendment, and ancient customs being a second
nature, makes folly hereditary in that Sex, by reason their education is
effeminate, and their times spent in pins, points and laces, their study only
vain fashions, which breeds prodigality, pride and envy.


What? would you have women bred up to swear, swagger, gaming, drinking,
Whoring, as most men are?


No, Wife, I would have them bred in learned Schools, to noble Arts and
Sciences, as wise men are.


What Arts? to ride Horses, and fight Dewels.


Yes, if it be to defend their Honour, Country and Religion; For noble Arts
makes not base Vices, nor is the cause of lewd actions, nor is unseemly for any
Sex; but baseness, vice and lewdness, invents unhandsome and undecent Arts,
which dishonours by the practice either Sex.


Come, come, Husband, I will have her bred, as usually our Sex is, and not
after a new fashioned way, created out of a self-opiniated, that you can alter
nature by education: No, no, let me tell you, a woman will be a woman, do what
you can, and you may as soon create a new World, as change a woman's nature and
disposition.


O, Father! I have been in search of you, to ask you a question concerning the
Sun.


What have you to do with the Sun, and lives in the shade of the Worlds
obscurity.


Why, Madam? where would you have me live? can I live in a more serene air,
than in my Fathers house, or in a purer, or clearer light, than in my Parents
eyes, or more splendrous, than in my Parents company.


I would have you live at Court there, to have honour, favour and grace; and
not to lose your time ignorantly, knowing nothing of the World, nor the World
of you.


Can I live with more honour, than with my Father, and You, or have more favour
than your loves; or is there a greater grace, than to be Daughter of virtuous
Parents; can I use, or employ my time better, than to obey my Parents commands?
need I know more than honesty, modesty, civility and duty: As for the World,
mankind is so partial to each self, as they have no faith on the worth of their
Neighbour, neither doth they take notice of a Stranger, but to be taken notice
of.


Yes, yes, your beauty will attract eyes and ears, which are the doors to let
in good opinion, and admiration.


Had I a tongue like a Cerces-wand to charm all ears that heard me, it would
staight transform men from civil Obligers, to spiteful Detractors, or false
Slanderers; my beauty may only serve but as a bribe to tempt men, to entrap my
youth, and to betray my innocence.


To betray a fools-head of your own! Lord! Lord! how the dispositions of Youth
is changed since I was young! for before I came to your Age, I thought my
Parents unnatural, because they did not provide me a Husband.


If all youth were of my humour, their dispositions are changed indeed; for
Heaven knows, it is the only curse I fear, a Husband.


Why? then you think me cursed in Marrying your Father.


No Madam, you are blessed, not only in being a Wife, (a condition you desired)
but being married to such a man that wishes could not hope for.


Why then, my good Fortune may encourage you, and raise a hope to get the like.


O no! It rather drives me to despair, believing there is no second.


Come, come, you are an unnatural Child to flatter your Father so much, and not
me, when I endured great pains to breed, bear, and nurse you up.


I do not flatter, Madam, for I speak nothing but my thoughts, and that which
Love and duty doth allow, and truth approve of.


Come, come Wife, the Jeerals wit will out-argue both ours.


Have I left my Husband, who was rich, and used me well? and all for love of
you! and with you live as a Wanton! by which I have lost my esteem, and my
honest reputation, and now to be forsaken, and cast aside, despised and
scorned! O, most base! for what can be more unworthy, than for a man to profess
friendship to a Lady, and then forsake her?


Madam, you do me wrong, for my heart is as firmly yours, as ever it was, and
burns with as clear a flame, as ever it did.


It is not like it will continue so, since you now are resolved to marry.


The reasons are so powerful, that persuades me, by reason there is none lest
of my Family besides my self; and my Fathers commands so terrifying, and my
vows so binding, as I know not how to avoid it.


But since your Father is dead, what need you fear his commands, and for your
vows, those may be dispensed with, for a sum of money to the Church for the
poor.


But would you have me cut off the line of my Posterity by never marrying?


Perchance, if you marry, you may have no children, or your wife may prove
barren, or if you have children, they may prove fools; for she you are
affianced to, is none of the wisest.


That is none of my fault.


But why will you marry so soon?


I will not marry yet, for my affianced is young, and well may stay two or
three years.


But if you will not marry her this two or three years, why must she come to
live with you in your house.


By reason her Father is newly dead, and hath left her to my protection, as
having right to her, and by her, to her estate.


And when she comes, I must deliver up the rule and government of your house
and Family to her; for I suppose you will make her the Mistress to command,
dispose and order as she pleases.


By no means, for you that are the Mistress of my heart, shall also be Mistress
of my Estate.


Then pray give her to my charge and education; for I hear she is of a high
spirit, and a proud heart, being spoiled with self-will, given her by the
fondness of her Father.


Pray order her as you think good, she shall be your hand-maid.


Here flows a Sea, and there a sire doth flame,
Yet water and fire still is but the same:
Here the sixth earth, and there the air streams out,
All of one matter moving round about;
And thus the earth, and water, sire and air,
Out of each others shapes transformed are.

I am sure you are transformed from what you should be, from a sober, young
maid, to a Stage-player, as to act Parts, speak Speeches, rehearse Verses, sing
Sonnets, and the like,


Why, Madam; Stages and public Theaters, were first ordained and built, for
the education of noble youth, where they might meet to practise how to behave
themselves civilly, modestly, gently, comely, gracefully, manly, and
majestically; to speak properly, timely, fitly, eloquently, elegantly, tunably,
tonably, readily, sagely, wittily. Besides, Theators were not only Schools to
learn or practise in, but public patterns to take example from; Thus Theaters
were profitable, both to the Actors and Spectators; for as these Theaters were
public Schools, where noble principles were taught, so it was the dressing
rooms of virtue, where the Actors, as her Servants did help to set her forth.
Also these Theaters were as Scaffolds, whereon vices were publicly executed;
and, Madam, if you please but to consider, you will perceive, that Thrones are
but glorious Theaters, where Kings and Princes, and their Courtiers acts their
parts; likewise places of Judicature, are but places where Judges and Lawyers
acts their parts; Nay, even Churches are but holy Theaters, where the Priest
and People acts their devout parts. But, Madam, you mistake, making no
difference betwixt the noble and base, the generous and mercenary; for, shall
all noble persons that fights dewels of honour, be called Fencers; or shall a
King, when he runs at the Ring, or Tilt, shall he be called a Jockey, or Post,
when he rides horses of Manage, shall he be a Quirry, or a Rider; or shall
Kings, Princes or noble Persons, that dances, sings, or plays on Music, or
presents themselves in Masks, be thought, or called Dancers, or Fiddlers,
Morris-dancers, Stage-players, or the like, as in their masking attire: No
those are Riders, Fencers, Dancers, Fiddlers, Stage-players, and the like, that
are mercenary, setting Vertuosus to sale, making a mercenary profit, and living
thereof; but if such opinions should be held, then no Vertuosus should be
learned of noble Persons, because there are mercenary Tutors and Teachers, nor
no arts understood, because of Mechanics, nor no Sciences understood, because
of Pedants, nor no manners, nor graceful behaviours practised because of
Players, nor none must write, because of Clerks, nor none must pray because of
beneficed Priests, nor there must none understand the Laws, or plead their own
causes, because of feed Lawyers; if these opinions or rules were followed, all
the nobler and better sort, would be boars, clowns and fools, nor no civility,
good manners, nor virtues would be known amongst them.


Well, well, I will have you show your self, and be known, and I known by you;
for why should not I be as ambitious to be praised in your beauty, as your
Father in your wit; but by that time you have gotten a sufficient stock of wit
to divulge to the World, your beauty will be dead and buried, and so my ruins
will have no restoration, or resurrection.


Madam, I do humbly and dutifully acknowledge, that what beauty or wit I have,
it was derived from my Parents.


Wherefore you ought to do, as your Parents will have you, and I say, I will
have you be a Courtier.


Would you have me go to live at the Court, Madam?


Yes marry would I.


And to do as Courtiers do?


Yes marry would I.


Alas, Madam, I am unpractised in their arts, and shall be lost in their subtle
and strange ways.


Therefore I would have you go to learn them, that you may be as expert as the
best of them, for I would have you shoot such sharp darts thorough your eyes,
as may wound the hardest and obduratest hearts.


Amorous affections, Madam, and wanton glances are strangers to my eyes and
heart; neither can I persuade nor command them to be otherwise than they are.


Why, I would not have you either wanton, or amorous, but to be kind and civil,
to invite a rich, noble Husband.


Why, say I had the power to pick and choose amongst the noblest and the
richest men, a Husband out, you cannot promise me a happy life, fortune may set
a Crown of Diamonds on my head, yet prick my heart with thorns, bind up my
spirits with strong chained fears, my thoughts imprisoned in dark melancholy,
and thus my mind may prove a Hell unto my life, and my Husbands actions devils
to torment it.


No disputing, but let my will be obeyed.


It is fit it should be by me, although it brings my ruin.


Joy gave me wings, and made my spirits fly,
Hope gave me strength to set ambition high;
Fear makes me old, as paulsie shakes each limb,
My body weak, and both my eyes are dimb:
Like to a Ball, which rackets beats about,
So is my heart stricken twixt hope and doubt.

I observe, the Lord de L'amour uses the Lady Innocence with more respect than
he was used to do; and I observe his eyes meets her when she comes in place
where he is, and follows her wheresoever she goes, and when she stands still,
they are sixth upon her.


Truly she hath power, if she will put it in force to command a heart, at least
to persuade a heart to love her; for certainly, she is very beautiful, if it
were not obscured under a sad countenance, as the Sun behind a dark cloud; but
sometimes, do what she can in despite of her sadness, it will keep out, and
the other day when you were gone abroad, I saw her dance, sing and play on a
Gittur^, all at one time.


And how did it become her?


Truly, she sung so sweetly, played so harmoniously, danced so gracefully, and
looked so beautifully, that if I had been a man, I should have been in love
with her.


I charge you break her Gittar, tell her she sings not well, and that her
dancing doth ill-become her.


Perchance she will not believe me.


Oh yes, for youth are credulous, even against themselves.


Ambitious thoughts flies high, yet never tires,
Winged with the swiftest thoughts of desires;
Then thoughts of hopes runs busily about,
Yet oft are stopped with thoughts of fear and doubt,
And thoughts of mirth and melancholy strives,
All thoughts are restless till the body dyes.

My child, it is a sign you are melancholy, that you are in a poetical vain.


Why do you weep?


Melancholy thoughts makes tears to flow thorough my eyes.


Melancholy! why, thou art not come to the years of melancholy; 'tis aged
brows on which sad Saturn sets, and tired thoughts on which he reigns, and on
grieved heart his heavy taxes lays; but those that are young, he leaves to
other powers, neither hath fortune set her turning foot upon thy head, for thou
art in the same worldly condition that thou were born to; wherefore thy mind
may be quiet, and thy thoughts merry and free.


Surely, sir, it is not always age, nor yet cross fortunes that clouds the
mind, for some are old and mean, poor and despised, yet merry, and humours gay,
and some are young and fairer, and rich, and well esteemed, honoured and loved,
and yet their thoughts dejectedly doth move, and humour dull as lead; 'tis
nature makes melancholy, neither age nor evil fortune brings it.


But what makes thee sad, my child?


Ambition, Sir.


What doth your ambition aim at? If it be honour, I have an Estate will buy
thee an honourable Husband; if it be riches, I will be saving, and live
thriftily, if it be gallantry, or bravery, I will maintain thee at the hight of
my fortune, wear Frieze my self, and adorn thee in Diamonds, Silver and Gold.


Heaven forbid! that my vanity should prodigally spend your Estate, or my
covetousness pinch and starve your Life, or that my pride should be matched
with noble honour, which should be as humble as great.


It cannot be for wit and beauty, for, surely nature hath made her self poor,
by giving you so much.


My dear Father, know it is fame I covet, for which were the ambitions of
Alexander and Caesar joined into one mind, mine doth exceed them, as far as
theirs exceeded humble spirits, my mind being restless to get the highest place
in Fames high Tower; and I had rather fall in the adventure, than never try to
climb; wherefore, it is not titled Honour, nor Wealth, nor Bravery, nor Beauty,
nor Wit that I covet, but as they do contribute to adorn merit, which merit is
the only foundation whereon is built a glorious fame, where noble actions is
the architectour thereof, which makes me despairingly melancholy, having not a
sufficient stock of merit, or if I had, yet no ways to advance it; but I must
dye like beasts, forgotten of mankind, and be buried in Oblivions grave.


If it be fame my child covets, it is a noble ambition; and Heaven pardon me,
if I speak vain-gloriously of what is my own, yet I speak but my opinion, when
I say, I do believe there is none so fit to raise a fame, as thou art.


Sir, your love speaks, as willing to encourage me; but know Sir; it is not a
vulgar fame I covet, for those that goes with equal space, and even heights,
are soon lost, as in a crowd or multitude; but when fame is enthroned, all Ages
gazes at it; and being thus supremly placed up high; Like as an Idol, gets
Idolatry: Thus singularity as well as merit, advances fame.


Child, thou speak always reason, and were my life the only singular way to
raise thy fame, thou should have it.


Heaven forbid! For that would raise my infamy, if I should build upon my
Fathers noble life. But, Sir, do you love me?


Yes, above my life! for thou art the life of my life!


Do you love me as well as you think you could your Grand-children?


No comparison can be made, for thou art come immediately from my loins, those
but from the Joins of my Issue, which is estranged from me, and for their
affections, Grand-childrens is but weak, only they keep alive my name, not
love, for that dyes in the second descent, and many times the first.


But, Sir; would not you think me strangely unnatural, and unworthy of your
love, to wish or desire you to break the line of your Posterity, and bury
succession in my grave?


Unnatural! no, for your virtue can ask nothing of me, that my love will think
unreasonable to give, and for my Posterity, I had rather it should end with
merit, than run on in follies; or who knows but their evil or base actions may
blemish all their Predecessors; besides, it is with succession, as with a
married pair; for if the wife be chaste, the World will give the honour only to
the woman, but if she be false, the World will lay the disgrace on the Husband,
and think she sees some defect, which makes her prefer another before him. So
in succession, if their succession proves fools, cowards, avaricious,
treacherous, vicious, or the like, the World straight judges these
imperfections and vices were in hereditarie, and that they were attaint, or
stained from the root or stock, but if they prove wise, valiant, generous,
just, or the like, they think they were particular gifts of nature, or
education, thus the faults of succession many descents after, may darken like
black clouds, the bright light of their Predecessors worth and merit; Besides,
there is no certainty of a continued line, nor doth many children give an
assurance to their Father at the day of his death; for when he dyes, doubts
closes his eyes, and fears blows out lifes fire, therefore I had rather live
in thy fame, than live or dye in an infamous and foolish succession.


Heaven make me thankful that my desires and my fathers approvement agrees.
Sir, you have not only bred me with a tender love, but with a prudent Industry.
And I have followed your instruction with a Religious Ceremony. Kept to your
principles with a pious Conscience, and since nature and education hath joined
together in my tender years, to make my life propitious; If fortune favour me,
and opportunity promote me; but we are to consider which way I shall steer the
course of my life, and if you will please I will tell you how I have designed
my voyage.


Heaven prosper the through it, and send the a safe passage, wheresoever thou
adventurest.


Then first, it is to be considered, I am but a small and weak vessel, and
cannot swim upon the rough and boisterous Seas, which are pitched fields, and
fighting Armies, wherein I shall be shattered in the crowd, and drowned in the
confusion of disorder, wherefore I must swim in the calm rivers of peace where
their is no such storms, nor high billows, only some cross winds may chance to
rise, which may hinder me but not drown me; this calm river is a Theater, and
the rough Sea as I said a pitched field; my self the ship, you the steeradg, and
fame the port, then thus I will relate how I have designed the voyage of my
life; first never to marry, if I may have your consent to live a single life,
for that time which will be lost in a married condition, I will study and work
with my own thoughts, and what new Inventions they can find out, or what
probabilityes they conceive, or fancies they create, I will publish to the
world in print before I make them common by discourse, but if I marry, although
I should have time for my thoughts and contemplations, yet perchance my Husband
will not approve of my works, were they never so worthy, and by no persuasion,
or reason allow of there publishing; as if it were unlawful, or against
nature, for Women to have wit. And strives always if their wives have wit, to
obscure it. And I am of that opinion, that some men are so inconsiderately
wise, gravely foolish and lowly base, as they had rather be thought Cuckolds,
than their wives should be thought wits, for fear the world should think their
wise, the wiser of the two; and that she rules, and governs all the affairs at
home; for most men, rather than they will not show their power, and Authority,
will appear a Quat-queen, that is an effeminate scold. Secondly, I will not
receive, nor give private vissits, or entertainments; but from those, and to
those, that duty, and gratitude and loyalty enjoyns me; for in private visits,
or entertainments, is only so much time stuffed with senseless, vain, idle,
light discourses, or flattering compliments, wherein time and life is
unprofitably lost. Thirdly, I would never speak but in public, for if nature,
and education, have given me wit, I would not willingly bury it in private
discourses; besides, private hearers are secret Thieves, and boldly steals,
having no witnesses, to betray, or reveal the truth, or divuldge their thefts;
and so they will adorn their discourses with my wit, which they steal from me.
Fourthly, I will never speak of any considerable matter, or subject, or of any
new conception; but I will have them ready writ to print them, so soon as my
discourse of them is past, or else print them before I discourse of them; and
afterwards explain them by my tongue, as well as by my pen, least they should
mistake the sense of my works, through Ignorance; for those subject; that are
only discoursed off, in speech, flies away in words; which vanishes as smoke,
or shadows, and the memory or remembrance of the Author, or Orator, melts away
as oil, leaving no sign in present life, or else moulders as dust, leaving no
Monument to after-posterity, to be known or remembered by; when writing, or
printing, fixes it to everlasting time, to the public view of the World;
besides, a passing discourse makes the tongue, but as an Almner, to give wit to
poor Sharks to feed them; which Sharks eats, without giving praise or
thanks, never acknowledging at whose cost they live at: Nay, so unthankful
they are, that they will belly the Authors and themselves; saying, it was their
own; and it is a certain rule, that those Authors they steal most from, they
will dispraise, and rale most at: And some are so foolish, and of such short
memories, that they will repeat the Authors wit, to the Authors self; and as
confident, as it had been created, or invented, out of their own brains.
Fifthly, I will select times, for several discourses and subjects, to discourse
in public, to several Audiences; to which, you may, if you please, invite the
grave and wise, to hear me, and being a woman Orator, the singularity will
advance my fame the more; besides, many accidents may we chance to meet, which
may prove as steps to ascend, or Mount up. Thus Sir, if you please to approve
of my design, I shall follow the means, or ways unto it; if not, I shall
submit to what you shall think will be better for me.


I do approve of your design so well, as I cannot but admire it. And I believe
the best designer that ever was, never cast such a mould, or laid such a plot,
or drew such a draught, to raise a fame on; or to work a fame out.


But Sir, you must arm yourself against all oppositions, and Baracodo your
ears against all cross perswaders; and muster your forces of hopes, drawing
them into a body of confidence, and march with a resolution, either to dye in
the adventure, or to triumph with victory, and to live everlastingly, in a
glorious fame; for Sir, we shall meet wranglers, and jesters, scorners, and
scoffers, disputers, and opposers, contradictors and liars; which envy and
malice will bring against us, but consider Sir, that when the foot of fame hath
trod upon the tongue of envy, it will be silent.


Never fear me child, if thou faintest not.


I fear not my self, for I have an undoubted faith, that the Child of such a
father can neither be a Coward, nor a fool; for from you I receive a value or
prize, although of my self I should be worth nothing; and Parents and Children
may speak freely their thoughts, let them move which way they will, for
Children ought not to conceal them; but if deceit must be used: let it be with
strangers not friends.


O Child! thou hast spoke but what I thought on, and the very same I wished;
finding thy tongue volable, thy voice tuneable, thy speech eloquent, thy wit
quick, thy expressions easy, thy conceits and conceptions new, thy fancies
curious and sine, thy Inventions subtle, thy dispositions sweet and gentle, thy
behaviour graceful, thy countenance modest, thy person beautiful, thy years
young; all this I thought to my self might raise the a Trophy, when a Husband
would bury the in his arms; and so thou to become thy own fames Tomb.


Oh! But how shall we pacify my mother, who is resolved not to be quiet, until
I go to live at the Court; as likewise to marry.


I have thought of that, and you know that your mother is well bred, a tender
mother and a chaste wife; yet she is violent, and is not to be altered from her
opinions, humours, and will, till time wearyes her out of them, wherefore we
must not oppose her; but rather sooth her in her humour, and for marrying, we
will always find some fault in the man, or his Estate, person or breeding, or
his humour; or his wit, prudence, temperance, courage, or conduct, or the like,
which we may truly do without dissembling; for I believe there is no man, but
that some exceptions may be justly found to speak against him; but you and I
will sit in Council about it.


Well met, for if accident had not befriended me, you would not have been so
kind as to have met me; for I perceive you strived to shun me.


The reason is, I was afraid my presence would not be acceptable.


You never stay to try whether it would or not, but surely if your conversation
be answerable to your beauty, your Company cannot but be pleasing.


I doubt I am to young to be handsome, for time hath not shaped me yet into a
perfect form, for nature hath but laid the draught, mixed the colours, for time
to work with, which he as yet hath neither placed, nor drawn them right, so
that beauty in me is not as yet fully finished; and as my beauty, so I doubt my
wit, is imperfect, and the ignorance of youth makes a discord in discourse,
being not so experiencedly learned, nor artificially practised, as to speak
harmoniously, where the want makes my conversation dull with circumspection and
fear; which makes my words flow through my lips, like lead, heavy and slow.


Thy wit sounds as thy beauty appears, the one charms the ears, the other
attracts the eyes.


You have been more bountiful to me in your praises, than Nature in her gifts.


Since I perceive you to be so pleasing, we will be better acquainted.


Come my learned brothers, are we come now to hear a girl to read lectures of
natural Philosophy to teach us? Are all our studies come to this?


Her doting father is to blame, he should be punished for this great affront,
to us that's learned men.


Philosophers should be men of years, with grave and Austere looks, whose
countenances should like rigid laws affright men from vanities; with long wise
beards, sprinkled with gray, that every hair might teach, the bare young Chins
for to obey. And every sentence to be delivered like the Law, in flames and
lightning, and flashes with great thunder, a foolish girl to offer for to
read: O times! O manners!


Beauty and favour and tender years, a female which nature hath denied hair on
her Chin, so smooth her brow, as not to admit one Philosophycall wrinkle, and
she to teach, a Monster tis in Nature; since Nature hath denied that sex that
fortitude of brain.


Counsel her father that her mother may instruct her in high housewifery, as
milking Kine, as making Cheese, Churning Butter, and raising past, and to
preserve consectionary, and to teach her the use of her needle, and to get her
a Husband; and then to practise natural Philosophy without a Lecture.


'Tis a prodigious thing, a girl to read Philosophy; O divine Plato! how thy
Soul will now be troubled, Diogenes repents his Tub, and Seneca will burn his
books in anger. And old Aristotle wish he had never been the master of all
Schools, now to be taught, and by a girl.


Have patience and but hear her, and then we shall have matter store to speak
and write against her, and to pull down her fame; indeed her very lecture will
disgrace her more than we can write, and be revenged thus by her tongue.


Content, let us then go and hear her, for our sport, not being worth our
anger.


By my truth Mistress the Lord de l' Amour is a fine person.


The truth is, that he seems as if Nature had given to time the finest and
richest stuff in her Shop, to make his person off, and time as the Tailor hath
wrought and shaped his person into the most becoming fashion; but yet, if his
Soul be not answerable to his person, he is sine no otherwise; but as a
fashionable and gay suit of Cloth on a deformed body, the Clothes may be fine
and handsome, but the body ill favoured; so the body may be handsome, but the
Soul a foul deformed creature.


But a fine and handsome body may hide a deformed Soul, although a fine suit of
Clothes will not hide a deformed body; for a deformed body will be perceived in
despite of the fine Clothes.


So will a deformed Soul in the despite of a handsome body, for the Soul will
appear in the Actions, as the body in the shape; being as crooked in vice as
the body in Limbs.


What is the actions of the Soul?


The passions and will.


But man obscures the passions and restrains the will.


So man may obscure his body, and bombast his Clothes; but it is as impossible
to restrain an evil will, as to make a crooked body straight.


Gentlemen, pray do not think me rude by drawing you from your serious studies,
by an intruding invitation; to hear a young student discourse.


'Tis true Sir, we should have been glad to have heard you discourse, for you
might instruct us, where as a young student is rather to be instructed; for it
is time that brings knowledge or gets wit, or speaks eloquently.


'Tis true, but yet in some natural ingenuity it is as strong as time, and
produces that which time of it self could not do.


Sir, if your young students wit, be as fine as her standing place, it will be
delightful.


Sir, you have adorned her Theater to enthrone her wit.


Gentlemen. I wish her wit may furnish, and so adorn your understanding, but if
you please to sit, such as it is, shall be presented to you.


Sir, we perceive now, you have invited us to feast our eyes, not our ears.


Gentlemen, if you please to give her so much patience to hear her, then judge,
or censure, as you please.


The Majesty of Age, and sage gravity, are objects able to put unexperienced
and unpracticed youth out of Countenance; and bashfullness is the greatest
enemy to discourse, for it discomposes the Countenance, disturbs the thoughts,
disorders the words, and confounds the sense therein; but youth hath many times
this advantage, that it apprehends not the disgrace, that experienced years and
deeper judgment doth; For the truth is, bashfullness proceeds from too great an
apprehension; but I not apprehending far enough, may commit errors through a
confident ignorance, but if you think my confidence too much, for my youth; yet
pray judge not my modesty to little for my Sex, for speaking belongs as much to
the Female Sex as to the Masculine; so as it be on sober Subjects, and to grave
Fathers, and wise men, or in truth to any degree of Age, or Sex, or Birth; so as
it be timely, suitably, rationably, and modestly delivered; And why may not
women speak in public and to public assemblies, as well as in private visits,
and particular entertainments, and to particular persons and acquaintance? And
in reason it should be more commendable, that women's discourse and actions are
such, as they fear no witness. Nay, they ought never to speak or show
themselves to those persons that are not domestic, without sufficient witness,
for private discourses, which are like whisperings, and secret meetings, and
particular entertainments, are subject to loos customs, rude behaviours, and
lascivious discourses, mischievous designs, and dangerous plots, all which
takes leave without warrant, and assaults without warning; yet it is probable
this Auditory will think my Father is too indulgent to his Child, to let her to
make public Orations, or that he is too vain glorious, as to believe or hope
his Child may get applause, or esteem in the world, by her discourses. But
First, I must remember them, that it is natural for Parents to be fond of
their Children; Secondly, it is no crime nor indiscretion, for a Father to
believe or think his Child may have as much wit as any other mans Child, if he
have given as good education: Thirdly, it is not against nature and reason, but
that women may discourse of several subjects as well as men, and that they may
have as probable opinions, and as profitable inventions, as fresh fancies, as
quick wits, and as easy expressions, as men; if their education be answerable
to their natural capacityes and ingenuityes; As for my self, I must tell this
assembly, I have been bred industriously, for I have been instructed with as
much knowledge as my years was capable to understand; but the truth is, that my
educatours strove to ripen my understanding, before the natural time, like
those that hastens fruit to be ripe, forcing it by artificial means, not
staying for the natural heat of the Sun, so was my understanding, like as the
tree, and my wit as the fruit, by which it wants the Aromaticall, and delicious
relish, that natural time gives; which makes me fear, my wit will relish to
the ears of the hearers, as such forced fruits to the taste of the eaters: I
have only this request, that, though you may dislike it for want of the
natural sweetness; yet pray esteem of it for the rarity, as being not usual
for one of my years and Sex, to speak, argue, and make Orations in a public
assembly; but it is likely, this assembly may think this is a vain glorious
Prologue, to my following discourse; But I must tell this worthy, grave, and
learned, assembly, that I am not bound to follow a vain custom, nay, I may
say, a dishonest one, as when Orators do dissemble, as on my Conscience most
do, self love being natural to all; besides, many times they disgrace their
birth, by a dissembling humbleness, and belly their thoughts, knowledge and
education, when as they say, they are unworthy to speak to such an assembly;
and that they are unlearned, their knowledge is little, their understanding
dull, their judgment weak; their capacity narrow, and that they are
unexperienced and unfurnished of expressions, to deliver the subject, or matter
of their discourse; if this or the like which they say be true, they abuse the
Auditory, and themselves, to invite them or draw them, to hear that, they think
is not worth the listening to, and if they be not so (as they say) they belly
the nature, and education, which heaven forbid I should be so ungrateful to
nature, so base to my birth, so undutiful to my Educator, and so unthankful
to the Gods. No, no, I will not be so, for I will publicly acknowledge natures
favours, who hath given me more wit, than time hath given me years; she hath
furnished me with ingenuity, beyond an ordinary proportion, and hath drawn the
plat form of my mind Mathematically, and pensiled me with her best coullourd
dyes, for which I am bound morally to serve her; As for my birth, as I am of
the same kind of Mankind; I am equal with the rest, let my condition be never
so poor, I have no reason to be ashamed of the Kind; but my birth is Honourable
by length of time, as for my education, it hath been singular, having not been
bred as other Children accustomarilie are, who hath liberty to fling away their
youthful time in idle sports, or useless learnings, and those that they are
taught by, are young and unexperienced Tutors; but I must tell this worthy and
experienced assembly, that I was not bred with powdered Curls, but silver
hairs, Age, I bowed to, and obeyed with duty, Age, I viewed with respects, and
listened to with attention; Age, directed my senses, manured my brain; pulled
up, or out, the roots of ignorance, and weeds of errors, sowed knowledge, and
planted understanding; for, my educator, which was my dear Father, hath been
industrious, careful, prudent, bountiful, and studious, for my improvement;
for which my treble duty doth attend his life, and my prayers supplicates for
to prolong it, which heaven knows, I desire beyond my own; As for the Gods
which gives all good, let those that dare be unthankful, I dare not, such as
Atheists that believes in none; but pardon me for intruding one your patiences,
with a tedious and self discourse, although I could not well avoid it, but now,
with your leave, most Noble Auditors, I shall first treat of Nature, although
Nature is an endless Theme to treat of; for though that the principles of
Nature, or Natures principles may be easily numbered, yet the varietyes which
change doth make on those principles are infinite; for well may Nature, if man
by Art can make infinite varietyes, by change of few principles, as for example
in music, from 8. Notes, by change, infinite Tunes, are, or can be made; from
the figure of 1. to 9. what Multiplication? From 24. letters, how far can the
mind dictate it self in, numerous words, and different languages? Thus Nature
the tutoress to man, and only man, have taught him to imitate her; for, though
she is the Mother to all other Creatures, yet man is her beloved Child; for
she, like as a fond parent, leads and directs man to discoveryes, and as it
were, points and marks out their ways, and as a diligent Tutoress, explains
and expounds her self by her works, and her several works, like as several
books hath several prints, and are bound in several vollums, and are keep^ safe
in several Libraryes, of several Ages, by aged time; but sometimes Nature
behaves her self like a Huntress, and makes Mankind as her Hounds, to hunt out
the hidden effects of unknown causes, leading Mankind by three several strings,
as by the string of observation, the string of conception, and the string of
experience, and as hounds snuffs and snuffels on the Paths they tread, so mans
thoughts, like as hounds noses, are busily employed. And as hounds springs out
upon a following sent, and with open mouth makes a loud cry; so men, when they
make any new discoveryes, divulges it with their voices, or noises of the
tongue and pen; yet man at this hath no reason to take exceptions, because he
gains knowledge thereby, and Nature may use her own as she pleases; but
sometimes Nature is as a Paintress, and the mind of man is as the Copy of
Nature, drawn by her self; for the mind of man is as infinite as Natures
self, having no dimension, nor extension, and the thoughts are the infinite
Creatures therein, and the brain is the ground to paint on, and the motions of
life are the pensills to work, or draw with. And in these Copies Nature views
her self, yet all animal Creatures, especially Mankind, seems of a middle
mixture, as, not so gross as the Earth, nor so pure as the Heavens, which is
the cause man is difficult to some things, and easy to others; as it is easier
for the eyes to look down on the earth, than to stare up to the Heavens, and
for the feet to step down on steps, than to step up on stayres, or for the
whole body to slyde down a hill, than to clamber up a hill, so it is easier for
life to slyde down to vice, than to mount up to virtue, for what is purest is
still placed highest, that is the reason that the Celestial bodies are placed
ove^, as the Terrestrial body under us; and we being mixed, are placed in the
midst: Upon this Text give me leave to treat of the two Globes, the
Celestial, and the Terrestrial, in the Celestial, there are Seven Worlds,
where the Sun is the Center World, which being a flame, streams forth in lines
of light, upon the other Six Worlds; and as those Six Worlds, or the Seventh
World, moves, so have they light or darkness; but the Sun which is the flaming
World, or the World of flame, is fed as a Lamp with an oily substance, from the
other Six Worlds, which oily substance the Sun sucks to him, from thence, by
attracting Motions, these Six Worlds I will similize to Six Udders, paps, or
breasts, from which the Sun, like as a young greedy appetite sucks, and draws
out, each in their turns, and as I said by attraction, this oily moisture,
which oily moisture is as the milk; the Worldly Udders, or Uddery Worlds, doth
as all Udders doth, which as soon as they are drawn dry fills again, and if
they be not sufficiently drawn, their moisture grows thick and gross; like as
crudled milk, which corrupts and becomes Ulcerous, from whence runs venomous
matter, which falling down breeds amongst animals, many diseases as the rot
murring, and the like amongst beasts; And amongst men the Small pox, measels,
and all sorts of fevers, even to the plague, according as the corruptions are,
or runs, the diseases are more dangerous, or less violenter, or weaker, lasts
longer, or ends sooner; and if these Udders be drawn faster than they can be
naturally filed, they become chopped and dry, empty and shrunk, which causes
dearth and famine; And though we cannot see a dearth in the face of the Moon,
and the rest of the Planets, as on the face of the Earth, nor see famine in the
face of the Moon, as in the face of a Man; yet for all we know, there may be
dearths, plagues, and wars in those Planets, as in particular Kingdoms;
although the Planets have no such Intelligences from each other, as particular
Kingdoms hath; yet questionless they have Traffic and Commerce, though mankind
cannot visibly perceive, which way, or by what means. Also the Planet^, by
their circular motions, may draw up vapours from the Sea, and earth, like as
the Wheels of water Mils. As for the Terrestrial globe, it turns upon a Pole,
as a Pig upon a Spit, and the Sun is the fire that rosts it; but when the Sun
is scorching hot, the earth like overroasted meat, it burnt and black, and when
that over cold moist vapors, quenches out the heat of these fiery beams, then is
the earth as raw; but when as equal heat, at equal distance, by equal
Motions, agrees Simpathetically, then is the Terrestrial globe well dressed, and
full of gravy, which causes nurishing health; but to draw to a conclusion of my
Philosophical lecture, I will similize the Celestial, and Terrestrial
globes, which globes, are as Man and Wife; the Celestial as the Husband, the
Terrestrial as the Wife, which breeds and bears, what the Celestial begets,
For the Celestial and the Terrestrial globes are Natures working houses,
where, Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals, are wrought into several figures,
shaped, and formed into divers fashions, like as Smiths makes diverse fashioned
things out of metals, so Nature is as the Smith, the Earth as the mettle, the
Sun as the fire, the Sea as the quenching water, the air as the Bellows, youth
is the Furnace; time is the Forge, and motion is the Hammer, both to shape, and
break asunder; but for fear I should break your patience, I shall desist from
speaking any more at this time.


Now you have heard her, what do you say?


I say let us go home and make a funeral pile of our books,


No, throw them at those foolish men that walk in black, who would be thought
learned by the outside; although they are unlettered.


Take heed of that, for so they may have hopes of a resurrection, and so rise
again in ragged covers, and tattered torn sheets, in old Duck-lane, and quack
their to be bought.


No, no, we will all now send for Barbers, and in our great Philosophies
despair, shave of our reverend beards, as excrements, which once did make us
all esteemed as wife, and stuff boys foot-balls with them.


Nature, thou dost us wrong, and art too prodigal to the effeminate Sex; but I
forgive thee, for thou art a she, dame Nature thou art; but never showed thy
malice until now, what shall we do?


Faith all turn gallants, spend our time in vanity and sin, get Hawks and
Hounds, and running Horses, study the Card and Dye, Rich Clothes and Feathers,
wast our time away with what this man said, or what that man answered, backbite
and rail at all those that are absent, and then renownce it with new Oaths
Alamode.


No, no, honour this Virgin whose wit is supreme, whose judgment is Serene as
is the Sky, whose life is a Law unto her self and us, virtue her handmaid, and
her words so sweet, like to harmonious music in the Air, that charms our
Senses and delights the Soul, and turns all passions in our hearts to love,
teaches the aged, and instructs the youth, no Sophister, but Mistress still of
truth.


I begin to be so fond of your Company, as I cannot be long absent therefrom.


'Tis your favours to me, which favours are above my merits, indeed I have no
merits, but what your favour creates.


You seem so virtuous, and sweetly dispositioned, and are so beautiful and
witty, as I cannot but admire, and love you.


I dare not be so rude, not yet so ungrateful, to speak against my self, now
you have praised me, for your words are like to Kings, which makes all currant
coin they set their stamp on; although the substance should be mean and of no
value.


Thy words are Musical.


I wish I could speak as eloquently upon every subject, as several birds sings
sweety in several Tunes, to please you.


Do you love me so well, as to wish it only for my sake.


Yes, and how should I do otherwise, for my affections to you was ingrafted
into the root of my infancy, by my Fathers instructions and perswasious; which
hath grown up with my Age.


Are you both so serious in discourse, I will break your friendship, or I will
fall to the grave of death in the attempt.


Heaven make you as virtuous as loving, and I shall be happy in a Wife.


Heaven make him as constant, as I virtuous, and I shall be sure of a gallant
man to my Husband.


By my fathers relation to me, I understand, that all this worthy Assembly, are
students in morality; wherefore I shall treat this time of passions, wherein I
make no question, being all sage, that you have not only learnt to distinguish
them, but have practiced, how to temper, and govern them; but perchance you
will say to your selves, what need she speak of that, which have been so often
treated of, only to make repetitions of former Authors; but you all know
without my telling you, that new applications may be made, on often preached
Texts, and new arguments may be drawn from old principles, and new experiences
may be learnt from former follies; but howsoever, my discourse shall not be
very long, least redious impertinencies should make it unpleasant to your
ears, cause too great a loss of time, to your better employments; but my
discourse is, as I said on the passions, which I will first divide, as the
Ancient Philosophers, into two, love, and hate. First, I will treat of pure
love, which is self-love, for love to all other things is but the effects
thereof. And is derived therefrom, self-love is the sole passion of the Soul,
it is a passion pure in it self, being unmixed, although all other passions do
attend it, this passion, called self-love, is the legitimated Child of Nature,
being bred in infinite, and born in eternity; yet this passion of self-love,
being the Mother of all other love is oftentimes mistaken for a fond, or a
facile disposition, bred from a weak constitution of the body, or a strong, or
rather exstravagant appetite of the Senses; or from a gross constitution, or
evil habit, or custom of life, or an ill example of breeding; but these
Childish humours, facile, and easy dispositions, foolish and earnest desires,
gross, and greedy appetites, Inconstant, and evil Natures, these are not pure
love, as the effects of self-love, for it doth it self hurt; but they are the
effects of the body, and nor of the Soul, for some of them proceeds from a
gross strength of body, hot, and active spirits, others from a tenderness, and
weakness of body, and faint spirits; but the true passions of love, which is
self-love, but mistake me not, for when I say self-love, ^, as is appertaining
thereto, as love of honour, love of virtue, humane love, natural love, pious
love, Sympathetical love, which are the true begotten Children of self-love:
This love, hath no other object, but perfection, it hath an absolute command
over life, it conquers death, and triumphs over torments, but every soul hath
not this pure love, for there is a seeming self-love, and a real self-love;
but as I said, every soul hath it not, for it is with souls, and the passions
therein, as with bodies, and the sensual life, some bodies are more
healthful, and strong, others infirm and weak, some are fair, and well
favoured, others foul and ill favoured, some are straight well shaped, others
crooked and deformed, some high, some low, some are of long life, others of
short life, some lifes have more actions than others, some more sensitive
relishes, than others, some good Natures, some bad, and all of that sort of
Animals, we call mankind, and as the body and sensitive Spirits, so for the
Soul and rational Spirits, for some hath (as I may say) more Soul than others,
as some hath larger Souls than others, some purer than others, as being more
Serene; some hath more ingenuity, and understanding than others. So passions,
although one and the same sorts of passions, yet in some Souls, they are more
Serene, and elevated than others; but many times the pure passions of the Soul
is so allied, with the gross humours of the body, as they become base, and of
no good use; but in the passion of pure love, for the most part, dwells
naturally Melancholy: I mean, not that dry, cold, sharp humour, bred in the
body, which makes it Insipid, enclosing the Soul, (as it were,) within Walls of
stone, which causes a dull, heavy, and stupid disposition, as it oppresses,
and lies, like a heavy burden on the Soul, hindering the active effects
thereof; but this natural Melancholy, dwells not in every Soul, but only in
the noblest; for it is the noblest effect, of the noblest passion, in the
noblest Soul. As for the passion of hate, it is not that loathing, or aversion,
which is caused by a full, or sick Stomach, or surfeited Senses, or glutted
Appetites, or cross humours, or an Antipathy of dispositions, or evil
fortunes, or the like; but the true passion of hate, is, in the Soul, not bred
in the body; yet hate is a bastard passion of self-love, begot by opposition,
bred from corruption, and born with disturbance, this hate as it is derived,
from the bowels, and loins of self-love, so it pursues self-loves enemies,
which is suspect falsehood, and neglect: With this passion of hate, anger is a
great Companion; these two passions being seldom asunder; but anger is
oftentimes mistaken, as all the rest of the passions are, but this passion of
anger, is one of the uselest passions of the Soul, and is so far from assisting
forritude, as many think it doth; as it is an opposite enemy to it, for it
cannot suffer patiently, and oftimes knows not what it Acts, or on what it
Acts, or when it Acts; this passion is one of the furies of the Soul, which
oftimes deposes reason; but a Choleric disposition, is sooner to be pardoned,
and less to be feared, being bred in the body, and as the humour ebbes, and
flows, this disposition is less, or more. But to return to the two Principle
passions, which is love, and hate; I will at this time similize them, to two
several Kingdoms, or Regions, love being the largest, for it reaches to the
shades of death, and strongest, for it can endure, and hold out the assaults of
any torment, being entrenched with fidelity, fortified with constancy, imbatled
with courage, victualled with patience, and armed, or manned with resolution;
and were it not for the many labyrinths of feats, running in and out, with
continual doubts, wherein, the content of the mind, is oftentimes lost,
otherwise it would be as pleasant a (...) as it is a strong one, having large
prospects of honour, and Land-Skips of perfection; green Meddows of hopes,
wherein grows sweet Primroses of Joy, and clear springs of desires, runs in
swift streams of industry, by the banks of difficulty, besides this Kingdom is
always serene, for the Sun of Fervency of always shines there: In this
large Kingdom of love, reigns natural Melancolly, who is the Heroic
Royallest, soberest, and wisest Prince born, in the mind, he directs his
Actions with prudence, defends his Kindome with courage, endures misfortunes
with patience, moderates his desires with temperance, guides his Senses with
judgment, orders his Speech with Sense, and governs his thoughts with reason,
he is the commander of the Appetites; living in the Court of imaginations, in
the City of silences, in the Kingdom of love, in the little world called Man;
and the greatest favourite to this Prince, is wit, and the Muses, are his
Mistresses, to whom he applies his Courtship, recreating himself in their
delightful! Company, entertaining himself with Balls, Masks, Pastorills,
Comedyes, Tragedies, and the like, presenting them in the Bowers of fancy,
built in the Gardens of Oratory, wherein grows flowers of Rhetoric; but the
greatest enemies to this Prince, is unseasonable mirth, which oftimes disturbs
his peace, by bringing in an Army of empty words, sounding their loud Trumpets
of laughter, shooting of bald jests, beating the drums of idleness, with the
sticks of ridiculous Actions. But hate, although it be a Kingdom that is very
strong, by reason it hath high mountainous designs, hard Rocks of cruelties,
deep pits of obscurity, many Quagmires of subtilty, by which advantages, this
Kingdom is inpregnable; yet the Kingdom of its self is barren, and Insipid,
bearing nothing but thorny Bushes, of mischief and moss, of ill Nature, no
noble thoughts, or worthy Actions, the climate is various, for the Air of the
mind is gross, having thick mists of envy, which causes several sicknesses of
discontent, other whiles it is very cold and sharp with spite, other times it
is sulphury hot, with malice, which flashes lightning of revenge, which in a
thundery fury breaks out: In this Kingdom of hate, reigns anger, who is a
Tyrant, and strikes at every small offence, and many times on Innocence, and so
unjust, as he seldom takes witnesses, pride, and jealousy, are his favourites,
which governs all with scorn, and executes with fury; he imposes taxes of
slander, and gathers levies of detraction; exception is his secretary, to note
both words and Actions, he accuses the Senses with mistakes, and beheads the
Appetites, on the Scaffolds of dislike, he strangles truth, with the Cords of
Erroneous opinions, and tortures the thoughts one Wheels of foul suspicion,
whipping imagination with disgrace, he confounds the Speech with disordered
hast, that neither Sense, nor words, can take their right places; but anger
dyes as most Tyrants doth, being killed by repentance, and is buried in salt
tears; betwixt these two Kingdoms of love, and hate, runs a salt Sea, of
sorrow, which sometimes breaks into the Kingdom of love, and sometimes into
the Kingdom of hate, from this Sea arises thick vapours of grief, which
gathers into dark Clouds of sadness, which Clouds dissolves into showering
tears, or windy sighs; but if this Sea be rough with the storms of misfortunes,
or fomented with the tempest of impatience, it makes a dolorous noise of
complaints, and laments, roleing with restless bellows of discontent, this is
the Kingdom of love, but when this Sea breaks into the Kingdom of hate, it
makes a hideous noise, a roaring, with exclamations, and cursings. Also from
this Sea flows four rivers, quite through these two Kingdoms; two through the
Kingdom of hate, and two through the Kingdom of love, those two through the
Kingdom of love, are pity, and compassion; which when they meet makes a full
tide, of Charity, and overflows with bounty; but those that runs through the
Kingdom of hate, are the two rivers, of fury, and despair, when these two
rivers meet, they make a full tide of madness, and overflows with mischief;
but fearing I should drown your patience with my overflowing discourse, I shall
desist for this time.


Were all dead Moralls Writers, risen again, and their each several souls
crushed into one, that Soul would languish, till it sted the earth, in deep
despair, to see their glories last, and all their vaster writings, so despised.
Thus by the Music of a Ladies tongue,
Whose Cords, with wit, and judgment, is thus strung.



Pray young Lady stay, and take good Counsel along with you.


Good Counsel is a guest I would willingly entertain, and be glad of his
acquaintance, and endeavour, to make a perfect friendship with, and a constant
Companion.


Then pray Madam have a care of the Lady Incontinent, for she is full of
designs against you, as I perceive by what I hear her say to my Lord.


Your Lord is a person of so much worth, and merit, as he will not yield to
plots of destruction, to destroy the Innocent, he hath more Charity to heal a
wound, than cruelty to make one; his tender Nature, and compassionate
disposition, will strive to dry wet eyes, not force dry eyes to weep.


My Lord, Madam, is a generous, and noble Lord, but she is a dissembling crafty
Lady, and knows how to attract my Lord, and to win him, to be of her belief,
and I give you warning as a faithful Servant, both to my Lord and you.


I thank you friend, for your advertising me of this Lady; but I shall trust my
self to heavens protection, fortunes favour, and your ^ds noble, and just
Nature.


The Lady Sanspareilles wit, is as if it would over-power her brain.


O no, for her brain seems so well tempered, as if there were no conceptions,
which springs therein, or propositions, or knowledge, presented thereunto; but
it doth digest them with great ease, into a distinguishing understanding,
otherwise she could not deliver her mind, and express her conceits, or
opinions, with such method, and facility, as she doth.


She hath a Monstrous wit.


No, her wit is not a Monstrosity, but a generosity of Nature, it is Natures
bounty to her.


Certainly, Nature was never so bountiful, to any of that Sex, as she hath
been to her.


The truth is, she favours the Female Sex, for the most part, more than she
doth the Masculine Sex; because she is of the Female kind herself.


Faith, I could wish that I never wished before.


What wish is that?


Why, I wish, I were a Woman, but such a Woman as the Lady Sanspareille.


Ovid speaks of a Woman, that wished her self a Man, and the Gods granted her
with, and she became a Man; but I never heard of a Man that was changed into a
Woman.


That was, by reason they never wished that change.


That is a sign they thought the change would be far the worse.


Indeed, generally it would be so.


Well, for thy sake, I wish thou had thy wish.


My dear Mistress, what makes you so studious, as you are become pale with
musing?


The reason is, that my Soul is flown out of my body, with the wings of desire,
to seek for love; and my thoughts laboriously wanders after it, leaving my
Senses, to a soiltary life, and my life to a Melancholy musing.


Faith, I had rather be buried under the ruins of hate, than have a Melancholy
life.


And I am Melancholy, for fear I should be so buried.


If you would have love, you must give love.


Indeed love is like a Coy-Duck, it goes out to invite, or draw in others.


Nay faith, a Coy-Woman cannot do so, for the Coyer she is, the fewer Lovers
she will have, for Coins starves Lovers, wherefore, if you would not starve
your beloved, you must be free, and twine about him, as the Ivy doth the Oak.


Modesty forbids, it but were it lawful, and that it did not infring the Laws
of modesty, I could hang about his neck, as the earth to the Center, but I had
rather starve my delights, than do an Act immodest, or sursite his affection.


Noble Gentlemen, you are welcome, and, though I cannot promise to feast your
Ears, with an eloquent Banquet; yet I hope it will prove so, as I hope it will
not cause a dislike; for the several dishes of my discourse shall neither be
bitter with railing, nor sharp with spite, nor salt brined with Satyr, nor
lushious with flattery, and, though it may prove tasteless to the gusto of your
humour, yet it will not be disagreeing to the stomach of your reason, nor
dangerous to the life of your understanding; but, by reason this worthy
Assembly is mixed, as Orators, Poets, young Students, and Soldiers, it will be
hard for me to divide my discourse so, as to give each Company a Civil
entertainment, but howsoever my endeavour shall not be wanting; for that wit I
have, I shall wait upon you, I shall first speak to the young Students,
because youth, and learning, is the beginning of life, and knowledge, and young
brains are like plain paper books, where time as a hand, experience as a pen,
and practice as Ink, writes therein; and these books conteins several and
divers Chapters. The First, is of knowledge. The Second, and Third Chapters,
are of memory and understanding; these Chapters are but short. The Fourth, and
Fifth Chapters, are conceptions and imaginations; this Chapter conteins more
than half the book. The Last Chapter, is remembrance, which is also a very long
Chapter, and the variety of thoughts are the several letters, in which these
Chapters are writ; but they, are not all writ after one kind of writing,
neither are they writ with one, and the same language; For knowledge is writ in
great and plain letters, memory and understanding, in siner, and smaller
letters; Conceptions, and Imaginations, after the manner of way, as like
Hierogyphiks, Remembrance is writ, as after the like way of Characters;
Knowledge is writ, in the Original Language as we may liken to Hebrew; Memory
and Understanding, are writ, in a language derived therefrom: Conception, and
Imagination, are written in heathen Greek; Remembrance is writ in a mixed, or
compounded language, like as English, but yet it is most like, that we call old
English: But the most profitablest School is consideration; And the best Tutor
is reason, and when the mind is distempered, or obstructed with Ignorance,
education is the best Physic which purges it, cleanses and freeth it, from all
gross, and foul, and filthy Errors; but the Educatours, which are the
Physitian^, should be well chosen; for the plain truth is, that youth should be
taught by those that are grave, and sage, that they may learn experience by the
Second hand, otherwise Age only knows, but hath no time to practise in; but if
that youth be taught good principles, their life grows high by Noble deeds,
and broadly spreads with Honours, but when that youth have liberty to sport,
and play, casting their learning time away, they grow like poisonous plants, or
weeds, which makes their life swell big, with venomous passions, and
dispositions, and burst with evil deed, but youth, their understanding is like
their years, and bodies, little and weak, for the Soul is improved by the
Senses, but Educatours, their Physicians presents to their Senses, the most
wholesome, and nurishing meat; for, as the body is nurished and grows strong, by
good digestion, so doth the Soul gain knowledge by information, but, if the
food be unwholesome, or more than the Stomach be able to digest, or that the
body is not fed sufficiently, the body becomes lean, weak, saint, and sick, so
the Soul, or mind; If the senses be imperfect, or the objects more than can be
well disenst, or too many for the temper of the brain, or that the brain be too
cold, or to hot, then the Soul or mind, like the body, decays, for, like as
the bodily senses, so the senses of the Soul decays; for the understanding as
the Spirits, grows saint, the judgment as the liver, wan, and weak, the memory
as the eyes, grows dim and blind, the thoughts as the several limbs, grows
feeble and lazy; but some remedy is for those diseases; for the speculative
notes helps the dull memory, cordial learning, the faint understanding,
purging, and opening, experience, the wan and obstructed judgment, and
necessity exercises the lazy thoughts; but if the brain be defective, or the
Soul imperfect from the birth, there is no remedy, for then the reason proves a
dwarf, and the understanding a fool; but if the Soul be perfect, and the brain
well tempered, then the Soul is like the serene and azure Sky, wherein reason
as the Sun, gives light to all the Animal World, where the thoughts, as several
Creatures, lives therein; some being bred in the deep, and restless Ocean, of
Imagination, others, as from the fixed Earth of knowledge, springs; and, as the
Gods governs the World, and the Creatures therein, so the Soul should govern
the body, and the Appetites thereof; which governing, is to govern still to the
best: As for the continuance of the World, so for the prolonging of the life of
the body, which government I wish to the Soul of every young Student here. In
the next place, I shall speak to Orators, whose study, and practice is
language, and language, although it is not born with man, yet it is bred with
man, or in man, either by their education, or their own Invention; for, if
language had a beginning, it was invented by the Creature, if no beginning, it
was taught them by the Gods; for, though that Nature made such Organs, as was
proper to express language with, yet it seems as if she did not Creat language,
as a principal work, but if she did, then Orators tongues are Natures Musical
instruments; but the best Musical Instruments were better to lye unplaid with,
than to sound out of Tune, or to strike jarring discord, which displeases more
than the harmony can delight, so likewise it were better not to speak, than to
speak to no purpose, or to an evil design, but Oratory, or Rhetoric, is as
all other Music is, which lives more in sound than in substance, it charms the
ear, but it cannot enchant the reason, it may enslave the passions, but not
conquer the understanding, it may obstruct truth, and abuse virtue, but it can
neither destroy the one, nor corrupt the other, it can flatter up hopes, and
raise up doubts, but it cannot delude experience, it can make factions, and
raise tumults; but seldom rectify disorders; for it is to be observed, that in
those States, or Nations, where Oratory, and Rhetoric flourishes most, the
Common-wealth is for the most part distempered, and Justice looses her seat,
and many times the State looses its former Government, Customs and Laws,
witness the Romans, Athens, and Lacedaemonians, and others, that were ruined by
their flourishing Rhetoric, and factious Oratory; but it is thought that the
flowers of Rhetoric is much vaded since the time of the Athens, through the
whole World, and that the lively Colours are quite lost, if it be so, then
surely the deffect is much in the first education, of Children; for in Infancy
is a time, these should take a good print, but their Nurses is their Grammar,
and her tongue is their first Tutor, which most commonly learns them the worst
part of Speech, which parts are Eight; as impertinent questions, cross answers,
broken relations, false reports, rude speeches, mistaking words, misplaccing
words, new words of their own making without a signification: Wherefore,
parents that would bring up their Children elegantly, and eloquently, they must
have a learned Grammar, and a wise Tutor at the first, to teach them, for the
mouth as the Press, Prints the breath as the paper, with words, as the Ink, and
reason, and sense, binds them up into a book, or vollume of discourses; but
certainly the Orators of this Age for eloquence, and elegancy, comes not short
of the eloquent Orators of Athens, or any other State, they only use it to
better designs, than to make Wars on their Neighbours, to banish their
Citizens, or those that ought to be rewarded, to alter their Government, and
ruin their state; no worthy Orators, you use your eloquence for peace, love,
and unity, and not for faction War and ruin; for which, may the Gods of
eloquence assist you. But there is two sorts of Orators, the one bred up in
Schools of Art, to rules, forms and tenses, the other is bred up in the School
of Nature, which only observes her rules, and studies her works; for though all
Orators are not Poets, yet all Poets are natural Orators, and hath a
natural, eloquent, and elegant, and easy expression; for, if a man should have
a Poetical brain, if he had not a full expression to deliver his conceits,
they would be as if they were not, for, as their may be several fancies, and
conceits, raised from one object or subject, so there requires several
significant words, to express them; for, as time is the marks of eternity, so
words are the marks of things, but indeed Poets hath a harder task than
Orators, for Orators builds their discourse upon solid grounds, when Poets
builds their discourse upon airy foundations, but the two principles of Poetry,
is similizing, and distinguishing, which are fancy, and judgment, and some
Poets brains are so happy, that as soon as they have bre, or created any
fancy, the tongue is ready to deliver them; but some brains are a long time in
breeding, and some fancies puts the brain into great pains, and hot, and
painful throws; and some tongues as ill Midwifes, strangles strong fancies in
the birth, but a volable tongue, is like an expert, and understanding Midwife,
which makes easy, safe, and quick dispatch, for wit and judgment, are both the
Children of the brain, begot by Nature; being both Twin Sisters, and so
Ingenious, and Inventive they are, that they build their arguments so
curiously, and compile the sense into so small a compass, that there is no
waste room, nor superfluous words, nor painted phraises, nor useless
parentheses, nor obstructed Sentences, for they build with fancy, and compile
with similizing cut, and carved, with Allegoryes, polished with numbers, and
oftimes adorned with Rhyme, the persons to which wit, and judgment; the
Children of Nature are placed, as Sojourners, or Boorders, are Poets, who are
Natures favourites, and for the education of her Children, she rewards them, by
enriching their minds, though not their purses; for she leaves that to
Fortune, but Fortune through Envy to Nature, is seldom their friend: Also
Nature, gives her Favourite Poets delights; for Poets takes more delight, and
pleasure in their own thoughts and conceptions, than an absolute Monarch in his
power and Supremacy; for like as Birds, that hops from Bough to Bough, whereon
they sit and sing; so Poets thoughts moves, from Theme, to Theme, making sweet
Melody; and as Hens broods Chickens, which Chickens, are not hacht, until they
have strength to pick a passage through their shells, with their Bills, and when
they are sledg'd, flies from their Nest on a high perching branch, so the brain
lays Imaginations, and brood, fancies, and the tongue as a Bil, picks a
passage through the lips, and being feathered with words, winged with verse,
flies up even with numbers, to fames high Tower; but the Muses the Handmaids to
Nature, doth as all other Maidens, loves the Courtship of the Masculine Sex,
which is the cause, or reason they seldom visit their own Sex, but passes
their time in the Company, and Conversation of men; by some men, they are only
admired, and loved, by others, they are saed to, and enjoyed, which happy
Suitors, are Poets; but the Muses, as all other Female takes a delight to enjoy
their Lovers alone, that makes them seperate themselves from other Company; and
Poets as all Lovers, doth love solitude: wherefore, Poets the lovers of the
Muses, and the Muses lovers of the Poets, oftimes chooses a soletary life, as
being a Paradise, for Innocent delight, wherein the Senses lies on soft banks
of repose, the whilst the mind with a sober, and serious peace, wal^es in the
silent shades of contemplation, shunning the hot and burning Sun of high
ambition, and there the active thoughts; the Children of the mind, in harmless
sports, doth with the Muses play, and on their heads Garlands of Fancy wear,
made all of Rhetoricks choicest flowers, whose Colours fresh and gay, thus are
the thoughts adorned and decked, as the fair Month of May; about this paradise,
which paradise is a soletary life, the calm smooth River of safety flows,
which Winds, or Circles in the life, from suffering, or acting injury, or
wrong: And from this River of safety, runs many streams of pleasures, wherein
the mind refreshing Bathes, secure and free, no false witness to accuse their
Innocence; no tempestuous storms, nor dreadful Thunders hard, nor flashing
lightning there appears, all is their Serene and clear, unless sometimes thin
Clouds of Melancholy falls in fresh showering tears, or from the heart arises
some gentle sighs, which breathing out Fans, like to Zephyrus Winds; and in
this solitary life 3. Trees doth grow, Peace, Rest, and Silence, are they
named, the fruits they bare, is plenty, ease, and quite.

On which the mind deliciously cloth seed,
Whose lushious Juice, tranquillity as fat doth breed;
Reason the Nerves, and Grissels of the mind,
Grows strong, and cures the understanding blind;
There's none but Fools, this happy life would shun,
Such as would seek in rugged ways to run:
O Fools! O Fools! to love their torments so,
That they will rather choose to hell, than Heavens go.
But there is no man can enjoy this worldly Paradise, without a defence; for
none can live in peace, that is not prepared as ready for War, for both the
Theological, Civil, Common, and Accustomary Laws, are protected by the Marshall
Law, and the Marshall Power, is the Supreme Authority, placing, and displacing,
and is the Monarchical Power, that doth not only protect all other Laws, but
commands them with threats, and is obeyed with Terror and fear, honoured for
the fame, and hated for the Tyranny; but Soldiery is a painful, careful, and
dangerous, although noble profession, but as I said, tis one of the safest, and
securest protections; for it is protection to the weak, and infirm, to the
decreped, and aged, to the shiftless youth, and to the saint, fearful, and
tender esfeminate Sex, it is a guard unto the Ashes of the dead, to the
Monuments of the Meritorious, and to the Temples of the Gods. And were it not
for Marshall-Discipline, there could be no peace kept, truth and right would be
torn from the Owners, Justice would be pulled out of her Seat, Monarchy thrown
out of his Throne, and though a Soldier may loose his life sooner than Nature
did ordain; yet in recompense, honour buries him, and fame builds him a
glorious Monument over his sleeping Ashes; but by reason that fame is a
Soldiers chief reward, I ought not to pass it by, whithout mentioning it; As
for fame, it is a second life, and as I may say, the Soul of merit; but there
is a difference, betwixt the Records of time, Fame, and Infamy; for there are
many things, that are writ in the Records of time, that is, neither in Fames
Tower, nor Infamies Dungeon, that which is writ in the Records of time, is
strange accidents, unlucky chances; unusual Objects, unexpected preferments,
or advancements, by Fortunes favour, or partial affections, also great ruins,
losses, and crosses, also Plagues, Deaths, Famines, Wars, Earthquakes,
Meteors, Comets, unusual Seasons, extraordinary Storms, Tempests, Floods,
Fires, likewise great strength, very old Age, Beauty, deformities, unnatural
Births, Monsters, and such like, which time Records: But Fame is the Godess, of
eminent, and Meritorious Actions, and her Palace is the Heaven, where the
renowns which are the Souls of such Actions, lives; I say Eminent, and
Meritorious Actions; for all Meritorious Actions, are not Eminent, but those
that transcends an usual degree, as extraordinary valour, Patience, Prudence,
Justice, Temperance, Constancy, Gratitude, Generosity, Magnaminity, Industry,
Fidelity, Loyalty, Piety, also extraordinary Wisdom, Wit, Ingenuities,
Speculations, Conceptions, Learning, Oratory, and the like; but it is not
sufficient to be barely endued with those virtues, and qualities, but these
virtues, and qualities, must be elevated, beyond an ordinary degree, insomuch,
as to produce some extraordinary Actions, so as to be Eminent; for Fame dwells
high, and nothing reaches her, but what is Transcendent, either in worth, or
power; for it is to be observed, that none but Ioves Mansion is purely free,
from deceit, and corruptions, for Nature is artified, and fame is often forced
by fortune, and conquering power, and sometimes bribed by flattery, and
partiality, and in Times Records there is more false reports than true, and in
Infamous Dungeon, which is deep, although not dark, being enlightened by the
eye of knowledge, and the lamp of Memory, or Remembrance, which divulges, and
shows to several, and after Ages, the evil deeds which lies therein, as
Thefts, Murder, Adultery, Sacriledg, Injustice, evil Government, foolish
Counsels, Tyranny, Usurpation, Rapine, Extortion, Treason, broken promises,
Treachery, Ingratitude, Cosening, Cheating, Sherking, Lying, Deluding,
Defrauding, factions, Disobedience, Follies, Errors Vices, Fools, Whores,
Knaves, Sycophants, Sloth, Idleness, Injury, Wrong, and many Hundreds the like;
yet many Innocent virtues, and well deserving deeds, at least good Intentions,
lies in the Dungeon of Infamy, cast therein by false constructions, evil
Events, Malice, Envy, Spite, and the like; Sometimes some gets out by the help
of right interpretation, friendly assistance, or eloquent pleading: but yet
these are very seldom, by reason the Dungeon is so deep, that it almost
requires a supernatural strength, to pull out any dead therein, for therein,
they are oftner buried in Oblivion, than translated by pleading; but as I said,
many Innocents are unjustly cast into Infamies Dungeon, and lies for ever
therein, and many a false report is writ in times Records, and never blotted
thereout: And many vain, and unworthy Actions, feigned virtues, and vicious
qualities, hath got not only into Fames Palace, but are placed high in Fames
Tower; and good successes, although from evil designs, and wicked deeds, doth
many times usurp, the most chiefest, and highest places, as to be set upon the
Pinnacle, for fortune conquering, power and partiality, forces, carries, and
throws more into fames Palace, than honest Industry, leads, or merit advances
therein, or unto which is unjust, yet not to be avoided; for Fortune, and
victory, are powerful, and so powerful, as many times they tred down the
Meritorious, and upon those pure footstool, they raise up the unworthy and
base; thus fames base Born, thrust out the Legitimat heirs, and usurp the
Right, and Lawful Inheritance, of the Right owners of fames Palace: Wherefore
worthy Heroics, you cannot enjoy fame, when you will, nor make her sound out
so loud, as you would, nor so long as you would, nor where you would have her,
unless you force her, which is only to be done by the assistance of time, the
providence of forecast, the diligence of prudence, the Ingenuity of Industry,
the direction of opportunity, the strength of Power, the agility of Action, the
probability of opinion, the verity of truth, the favour of Fortune, the esteem
of Affection, the guilts of Nature, and the breeding of education; besides
that, fame is of several humours, or Natures, and her Palace stands on several
soils, and her Trumpet sounds out several Notes, Aires, Strains, or Dities;
for some Aires, or Strains, are pleasant, and cheerful, others sad and
Melancholy; and sometimes she sounds Marches of War, some to Charge, some to
Retreat; also sometimes her Palace stands on Rocks of adversity, other times on
the flat soils of prosperity, sometimes in the Sun shine of plenty, other
times in the shade of poverty, sometimes in the flowery Gardens of peace, other
times in the bloody fields of War; but this is to be observed, that fame at all
times sounds out a Soldiers Renown louder than any others; for the sound of
Heroic Actions spreads furthest, yet the renown of Poets sounds sweetest; for
fame takes a delight to sound strains of wit, and Aires of Fancies, and time
takes pleasure to record them; but worthy Heroics, give me leave to tell you,
that if time and occasion doth not fit, or meet your Noble ambitions; you must
fashion your Noble ambitions to the times, and take those opportunities that
are offered you; for if you should slip the season of opportunity, wherein you
should so the seeds of Industry, you will loose the harvest of Honourable
deeds, so may starve, wanting the bread of report, which should feed the life
of applause; but noble Heroics, when you adventure, or set forth, for the
purchase of Honour, you must be armed with fortitude, and march along with
prudence, in an united body of patience, than pitch in the field of fidelity,
and fight with the Sword of Justice, to maintain the cause of right, and to
keep the privileges of truth, for which, you will be entailed the Heirs, and
Sons of fame; and my wishes and Prayers shall be, that you may be all Crowned
with Laurel.


Silence all thundering Drums, and Trumpets loud, with glistering Arms, bright
Swords, and waving Plumes.

And the feared Cannon powdered, shall no more,
Force the thin Air with horror for to roar;
Nor the proud sleeds, with hollow hooves to beat
The humble Earth, till Echoes it repeat.
This Lady makes Greek Tactiks to look pale,
And Caesars Comentaries blush for shame.
The Amazonian Dames, shakes at her Name.

The Lady Muses are deposed, unthroned from their high Palace of
Parnassus-Hill.

Where she in glory, with Poetic slames, there sits,
In Triumph, Empress of wits;
Where her bright beams, our Poets doth inspire,
As humble Mortals, from her gentle fire:
She is the only Muses, gives Fancy slore,
Else, all our Poets, they could write no more.

Were the oiled tongue of Tully now alive, and all the rest of glibed tongued
Orators, with their best arguments, to force a truth, or else with subtilty of
slight to avoid it; those tongues with trembling Palsies, would be all struck
dumb, with wonder and amazement, to hear truth Clothed so gently, as to move
all Orators, their passions into love, admired Virgin.



