Sweet-heart, you are a most Heavenly Creature.


Beauty is created and placed oftner in the fancy, than in the face.


'Tis said there is a Sympathy in likeness; if so, you and I should love each
other, for we are both beautiful.


But 'tis a question whether our Souls be answerable to our Persons.


There is no question or doubt to be made, but that loving souls live in
beautiful persons.


And do those loving souls dye, when their beauties are decayed and withered?


The subject pleads it self, without the help of Rhetoric, for Love and Beauty
lives and dies together.


'Tis Amorous Love that dies when Beauty is gone, not Virtuous Love; for as
Amorous Love is bred, born, lives, and dies with the appetite: so Virtuous Love
is Created, and shall live with the Soul forever.


You may call it what love you please.


It is no love, but a disease.


Why did you leave the Lady Amorous company so uncivilly, as to go out of the
room, leaving her all alone?


I heard your Lordship was coming, then I thought it was fit for me to
withdraw; for I have heard Lovers desire to be alone.


Do you desire to be alone with a man?


I am no such Lover, for I am too young as yet, but I know not what I shall or
may be wrought or brought to, but time and good example may instruct and lead
me into the way of amorous love.


May it so?


Why not? for I am docible, and youth is apt to learn.


But before I marry you, I would have you learn to know how to be an obedient
wife, as to be content, and not murmure at my actions, also to please my
humour, but not to imitate my practice.


If I might advise your Lordship, I would advise you to take such a Portion out
of my Estate, as you shall think just or fit, and then quit me, and choose such
a one as you shall like, for I shall never please you; for though I may be apt
to learn what will please my self, yet I am dull and intractable to learn
obedience to another will, nor can I flatter their delights.


I find you have learned, and now begin to practice how to talk; for now your
sober silence seems as dead and buried in the rubbish of follish words; But let
me tell you, a talking wife will never please me; wherefore practise patience,
and keep silence, if you would enjoy the happiness of peace.


There can be no peace, when the mind is discontented.


Why do you follow me so much, as never to let me rest in peace and quiet
alone? Is it that you think I have beauty? and is it that you are in love with?
why, to cure your disease, I will deform it; or do you think I have wit to cure
that Imagination? I will put my tongue to silence. I am sure it cannot be my
Virtue that inflames you to an intemperance; for Virtue is an Antidote against
it: But had you all the beauty in Nature squeezed into your form, and all the
wit in Nature pressed into your brain, and all the prosperities of good fortune
at your command, and all the power of Fate and Destiny at your disposal, you
could not persuade me to yield to your unlawful desires; for know, I am honest
without self-ends; my virtue, like to Time, still running forward, my chastity
six'd as Eternity, without circumferent lines; besides, it is built on the
foundation of Morality, and roof'd and cicl'd with the faith of Religion, and
the materials thereof are Honour, which no subtle Arguments can shake the one,
nor no false Doctrine can corrupt or rot the other; neither is the building
subject to the fire of unlawful love, nor the tempestuous storms of torments,
nor the deluge of poverty, nor the earthquakes of fear, nor the ruins of
death; for so long as my Soul hath a being, my Chastity will live. But were you
as poor as I, even to move pity, or so lowly and meanly born, at might bring
contempt and scorn from the proud, yet if your mind and soul were endued with
noble qualities, and heroical virtues, I should sooner embrace your love, than
to be Mistress of the whole World; for my affection to merit hath been ingrafted
into the root of my Infancy, which hath grown up with my years, so that the
longer I live, the more it increases.


You cannot think I would marry you, although I would lie with you.


I cannot but think it more possible that you should marry me, than I to be
dishonest.


Thou art a mean poor wench, and I nobly descended.


What though I am poor, yet I am honest, and poverty is no crime; nor have my
Ancestors left marks of infamy to shame me to the world.


Thy Ancestors? what were they but poor peasants? wherefore thou wilt dignify
thy Race, by yielding to my love.


Heaven keep them from that dignity that must be gained by my dishonesty: no,
my chastity shall raise a Monumental Tomb over their cold dead ashes.


What pity it is Nature should put so noble a soul into a meanborn body.


Pray go visit the Lady Amorous, and if her husband be absent, deliver her this
letter.


Excuse me my Lord.


Wherefore?


I am no Carrier of Love-letters.


But you shall carry this.


But I will not.


Will you not?


No, I will rather endure all the torments that can be invented.


And you shall; for I will torture you if you do not; for I will have you drawn
up high by the two thumbs, which is a pain will force you to submit.


Do so if you will; nay scrue me up into the middle-Region, there will I take a
Thunderbolt, and strike you dead, and with such strength I'll fling it on you,
as it shall press your soul down to the everlasting shades of death.


Sure you will be more merciful.


No more than Devils are to sinful souls; there will I be your Bawd, to procure
you variety of torments; for I had rather be one in Pluto's black Court, caused
by my own revenge, than to be a Bawd on earth, which is a humane Devil.


You are mad.


Might every word I speak prove like a mad dogs bite, not only to transform
your shape, and turn your speech to barks and howlings, but that your soul may
be no other than the souls of beasts are.


You are transformed from a silent young Maid to a raging Fury.


May all the Furies that Hell inhabits, and those that live on earth, torment
your mind, as racks do torture bodies, and may the venom of all malice,
spleen, and spite, be squeezed into your soul, and poison all content, your
thoughts flame like burning oil, and never quench, but be eternally a siery
Animal; and may the fire feed only on your self, and as it burns, your
torments may increase.


She is mad, very mad, and I have only been the cause.


Fairest, will not you speak?


My words have betrayed my heart, as discovering the secrets therein: wherefore
I will banish them, and shut the doors of my lips against them.


What, for saying you love me. Sweet, why do you weep?


Tears are the best Cordials for a heart oppressed with grief.


I should hate my self, if I could think I were the cause. But pray forbear to
weep.


Pray give my grief a liberty, my tears are no disturbance, they shower down
without a rattling noise, and silent fall without a murmuring voice; but you
disturb me: Wherefore for pity-sake leave me, and I will pray you may enjoy as
much prosperity as good fortune can present you with, and as much health as
Nature can give you, and as much tranquillity as Heaven can infuse into a
mortal creature.


Neither Fortune, Nature, nor Heaven can please me, or make me happy in this
world without you.


O you torment me.


Surely Lady Contemplation your thoughts must needs be very excellent, that
they take no delight but with themselves.


My thoughts, although they are not material, as being profitable, yet they are
innocent, as being harmless.


Yet your thoughts do the world an injury, in burying your words in the grave
of silence.


Let me inform you, that sometimes they creep out of their graves as Ghosts do,
and as Ghosts walk in solitary places, so I speak to my solitary self, which
words offend no ears, because I speak to no ears but my own; and as they have
no flatterers to applaud them, so they have no censurers to condemn them.


But you bury your life, whilst you live retired from company.


O no, for otherwise my life would be buried in company; for my life never
enjoys it self, but when it is alone; and for the most part, all public
societies are like a discord in Music, every one playing several contrary
parts in their actions, speaking in several contrary notes, striking on several
contrary subjects, which makes a confusion; and a confused noise is like a
disordered multitude, only the one offends the ear, as the other offends the
eyes; and there can be no pleasure but in harmony, which harmony is Quantity,
Quality, Symmetry, and Unity; and though quality, quantity, and symmetry are
brought by the Senses, yet Unity is made in the mind. Thus Harmony lives in the
mind; for without the mind, the senses could take no delight.


How do you Lady?


Why very well Doctor, how do you?


Why I was sent, as being believed you are mad.


Troth Doctor that's no wonder; for all the world is mad, more or less.


Do you find any distemper in your head?


My head will ache sometimes.


I mean a distemper in your mind.


My mind is troubled sometimes.


That is not well: let me feel your pulse.


Why Doctor, can you know the temper of my mind, by the feeling of my pulse?


There is a great Sympathy between the Mind and the Body.


But I doubt, Doctor, your learned skill is many times deceived by the pulse;
you will sooner find a mad distemper in the tongue or actions, than in the
wrists.


In troth Lady, you speak reason, which those that are mad do not do.


O yes, Doctor, but they do, as you cure Diseases, by chance.


O Love, dissembling love, that seem to be the best of passions, and yet
torments the soul!


What makes your Lordship so melancholy, as to shun all your friends, to walk
alone?


I am in Love.


There are many remedies for love.


I would you could tell me one.


May I know the Lady you are in love with?


The Lady say you? she is a poor Lady^


Your Lordship is so rich, as you may marry without a portion,


O I could curse my fate, and rail at my destiny.


For what?


To make me fall in love with one I am ashamed to make her known.


Is she so mean, and yet so beautiful?


O she hath all the Beauties and Graces that can attract a soul to love; for
surely Nature sate in Council to make her body, and the Gods sate in Council to
compose her mind.


May not I see her?


Yes.


Where may I find her?


Upon the next Plain, under a bush that bends much like a bower, there she most
commonly sits to watch her sheep; but I will go with you.


Your Lordship is not jealous?


All Lovers think their Beloved is never secure enough.


O my Child, I am told that on a sudden you turned mad!


Surely Nurse your fear, or what else it may be, you seem to me to be more mad
than I can find in my self to be.


That shows you are mad.


If I am mad, I sucked the madness from your breast.


I do confess, Child, I have not had those mad vagaries since I gave suck, as I
had before.


'Tis a sign you are grown old, Nurse.


I confess, Youth is oftner mad than Age; but dear Child tell me, art thou mad?


Prithee Nurse, lest thou should become mad, go sleep to settle thy
thoughts, and quiet thy mind, for I remember a witty Poet, one Doctor Don,
saith,

Sleep is pains easy salve, and doth fulfil
All Offices, unless i^'t^ to kill.

O Heaven, what shall I do, what shall I do!


What is the matter Nurse, what is the matter you shriek out so?


O Doctor, my Child is mad, my Child is mad; for she repeats Verses.


That's an ill sign indeed.


Doctor, did you never repeat Latin Sentences when you have read Lectures, nor
Latin Verses, when you did Dispute in Schools?


Yes, Sweet Lady, a hundred times.


Lord, Doctor, have you been mad a hundred times, and recovered so often!


Those were Latin Verses, those were Latin Verses Child.


Faith Lady you pose me.


Then Doctor go to School again, or at least return again to the University and
study again, and then practise not to be posed.


Nurse, she is not well, she must be put to a diet.


But why, Doctor, should you think me mad? I have done no outrageous action;
and if all those that speak extravagantly should be put to a diet, as being
thought mad, many a fat waste would shrink in the doublet, and many a Poetical
vein would be dried up, and the flame quenched out for want of radical oil to
prolong it; Thus Wit would be starved, for want of vapour to feed it; The truth
is, a spare diet may make room in a Scholars head for old dead Authors to lie
in; for the emptyer their heads are of wit, the fuller they may be filled with
learning; for I do imagine, old dead Authors lie in a Scholars head, as they
say souls do, none knows where, for a million of souls to lie in as small a
compass as the point of a needle.


Her brain is hotly distempered, and moves with an extraordinary quick motion,
as may be perceived by her strange fancy: wherefore Nurse you had best get her
to bed; if you can, and I will prescribe some medicine and rules for her.


Come sweet child, let me put thee to bed.


I will go to bed, if you would have me, but good Nurse believe me, I am not
mad; it's true, the force of my passion hath made my Reason to err; and though
my Reason hath gone astray, yet it is not lost: But consider well Nurse, and
tell me what noble mind can suffer a base servitude without rebellious
passions? But howsoever, since they are of this opinion, I am content to
cherish it, if you approve of it; for if I seem mad, the next of my kindred
will beg the keeping of me for the sake of my Estate; and I had rather lose my
Estate, and be thought mad, than lose my honour in base offices, and my
free-born liberty to be enslaved to whores; and though I do not fear my honest
youth can be corrupted by ill example, yet I will not have my youth a witness
to wicked and base vice.


By no means, I do not approve of these strange ways; besides, you are a Ward
to a gallant man, and may be Marriage will alter his humour; for most commonly
those back-holders that are the greatest Libertines, make the best Husbands.


'Tis true, he is of a noble nature, valiant and generous, prudent, and just,
and temperate in all delights, and free from all other vices but Incontinency,
civil and obliging to all the world, but to me, and I could love him better
than life, could he be constant, and only love me as he ought to do a Wife;
otherwise, Death were more pleasing to me.


You were born to do me a mischief.


Why how?


Why you have routed an Army.


Which way?


I did imagine my self Married, my Husband being a General of an Army, who had
fought many Battles, and had won many Victories, conquered many Nations, at
last an unfortunate day of Battle being fought, my Husband being too active and
venturous, making lanes of slain bodies as he went, and his horse riding thorough
Rivers of blood, those Rivers rising so high, as his horse was forced to swim;
but the blood growing thick to a jelly, obstructed his way, which made his
horse furious, which fury added to his strength, forced a passage over a hill,
or heap of slain bodies; but the horses spirits being spent with fury and
labour, fell strengthless to the ground, with my Husband upon his back; and
being in the midst of his Enemies Army, his Enemies seeing him fall, ran about
him in great numbers, and so took him prisoner: whereupon his Soldiers soon
missing him, thought he was killed; upon which belief, their courages grew
cold, their limbs unactive, and their spirits so benumbed, as they all seemed
like to a number of stone-statues; which unactive dullness gave their Enemies
the Day without any after-blows. I being in the Camp, hearing of my Husbands
misfortunes, ran with a distracted fear towards the Enemies Camp; I being
espied by some of my Husbands scattered Troops, was stopped in the way, and so
brought back to my Tent again; where, when I was there, some of my Husbands
Officers of the Army told me, That though the Day was lost, yet there was a
considerable Body left; which I no sooner heard, but my spirits took new life,
and then excusing my fear, told those Commanders it was not through fear that
made me run out of my Tent; for I did not fly from my Enemies, but to them, and
that I sought death, and not life; and to express my courage, I told them, That
if they would give me leave, I would take my Husbands Office, and lead the
Army: They told me, that if the rest of the Commanders would agree to it, they
were well contented: So when all the Commanders met together, I spake thus unto
them.

Noble Friends, and valiant Soldiers, you may think it a vain ambition for me
to desire to lead your Army, especially against so potent an Enemy, and being a
woman, which female Sex are usually unexperienced in Mar^al Affairs, as also by
nature fearful, which fears may ruin an Army, by giving wrong direction,
causing a confusion through distraction; and truly an Army were not to be
trusted unto a woman; management and ordering, if that Records had not given us
Precedents, which is, that Woman have led Armies, have fought valiantly
themselves, and have had good success, and not so much by fortunes favour, as
by their own wise Conduct: And to show that Pallas is a friend unto her own
Sex, is, that in all History, there are very few women than can be found, that
have lost Battles in the field of Wars, but many that have won Battles; and in
all public Affairs it is to be observed, the Gods do generally assist our Sex,
whereby to show their own power, and to abate the haughty pride of men. But to
induce you more; for men trust not so much unto the Gods, as to their own
strength, is, that you are present in all Councels and Actions, to assist and
direct me; besides, I am Wife unto your General, who was and is an expert
Soldier, and a valiant man, although he now had ill fortune; but ill fortune
neither lessens valour nor experience, but rather increases them. This gallant
and wise man, my Husband and your General, his Discourses have been my Tutors,
and his Example hath and shall be my Guide; and if you dare trust me, I dare
venture; otherwise I shall stay in my Tent, and pray for your good success.
After I had left off speaking, an old Commander which had served long in the
Wars, and was much esteemed, answered me as thus.

Noble Lady, although your youth doth dissuade us, yet your beauty and wit doth
encourage us; for what man, although he were possessed with fear itself, can run
away when a fair Lady sights? for beauty triumphs in all hearts, and commands
the whole world: wherefore that man that shall or will deny to follow your
Command, is of a bastard-kind, although a lawful Issue. With that all the rest
of the Commanders cried or called out, that none was so fit to Lead and Command
them as I. Thus being chosen, I called a general Muster of my Soldiers, and
then gave order that some of the broken Regiments should be mended and made up
with other broken Regiments, also I made new Officers in the room of those that
were slain or taken prisoners, and after, I surveyed my Artillery and
Ammunition; which done, I drew my Army into a Body, and after I had given
Orders and Directions for the Soldiers to march towards the Enemies Camp,
which when the Enemy heard of a new Army coming towards them, they drew out the
Body of their Army in Battle Array: But I shunned to fight so soon as appeared,
by reason my Army was tyred with marching; wherefore I gave order to Entrench:
Besides, I thought it might give my soldiers more courage, when accustomed to
the fight and neighbourhood of the Enemies: But withal, I made some of them
give intelligence to the Enemy that a woman led the Army, by which they might
despise us, and so become more negligent, by which negligence we might have an
advantage: In the mean time I sent to Treat of a Peace, and to have my Husband
set at liberty; but the Enemy was so averse to a peace, as they returned me
both jesting and scornful Answers: So when I saw no peace could be made, I drew
out my Army into Battle Array; which when the Enemy perceived, they did the
like; but it will be too tedious at this time to tell the Form and Figures I
put my Army into, as also what Commanders led, or who ommanded the Horse, or
who commanded the Foot that day; only let me tell you, I led the Van my self,
and was Accoutred after this manner: I had a Masculine Suit, and over that a
cloth of silver Coat, made close to my waste, which reached to the ankles of my
legs; and those Arms I wore being all gilt, were Back, Breast, Gorget, Pot and
Gantlet, all being made light according as my strength would bear: In my hand I
carried my Sword; for being not accustomed, I could not wear a sword by my
side, as men do, but whenever rested, I tied it to my Saddle-bow, and on my
Head-piece I wore a great Plume of Feathers: As for my Horse, he was
cole-black, only a white star on his fore-head, and three white feet; my Saddle
was crimson Velvet, but so imbroidred with silver and gold, as the ground could
not be seen: But when I was mounted, I spoke as following unto the common
soldiers.

Worthy Friends, and laborous, and valiant Soldiers, you may justly wonder to
see a Woman thus Accoutred like a man, and being one of the tender female Sex
to be armed as a soldier, and in a posture to fight a Battle: Also you may
fear the success of my Command, by reason I am young, and unexperienced, as
also unpractised in the Wars: But fear not, the gods are with me, and will
assist me, and have promised to give you victory by my Conduct; for they will
conduct me: But the Gods suffered the other Battle to be lost, because many
Victories had made you proud, and conceited of your selves, and your own
valours, trusting more to your own strength, than to their favours or powers,
whereupon the Gods destroyed many of you; but since they have taken pity of
you, drawn to it by your humility: whereupon the Gods have commanded me to Lead
and Conduct you; and they have also commanded me to tell you, That if you trust
in them, and fight courageously, that you shall have Victory, and rich Spoils;
for I heard the common people, of which common soldiers were of, were apt to
be superstitious, and to believe in any new reports, as also to believe in
Miracles, Prophecies, and the like, and withal, very covetous; all which, made
me feign my self to be commanded immediately from the Gods, and to be sent as
from the Gods to command them, and to declare such promises to them; for all
the common soldiers sight for Spoils, not for Honour.


O but it is not good to dissemble.


Pardon me; for without policy (which is deceit) there can be neither
government in peace or war: wherefore it is a virtue in a States-man, or a
Commander, to be a dissembler, although it be a vice in any other man; but you
have put me out as you always do, and therefore I will tell you no more.


Nay, pray make an end.


I will not; but I could have told you how I killed the General of the Enemy
with my own hand, and how I released my Husband, and of such gallant Acts as
you never heard the like of.


O pray tel me.


Which if I do, let me never contemplate more, which would be worse than death
to me, by reason it is the only pleasure of my life.


O Love, though thou art bred within the Soul, yet by the Senses thou art
begotten, or else by some Opinions; for Virtue is but the Tutor, or Guide, for
to instruct or lead thee in a perfect way^ bur though I lead Love right, yet
may it meet Opposers.


How do you find my Ward?


Truly she is somewhat distempered; for her wit is very quick.


That's it; for she being naturally of a dull disposition, and of a mild
humour, and her brain slow of conceits, as also unpractised in speaking, should
of a sudden fall into high raptures.


You say true, my Lord; and it is to be feared this distemper will increase.


Pray Doctor have a regard and care to her distemper; for I would not willingly
have a Wife that is more mad than natural women are.


She is not here.


O yonder she comes.


She hath a garb not like a Farmers Maid, but rather one that's nobly born, and
her garments, though mean, sit nearly on her body.

Fair Shepherdess, it is a melancholy life you lead.


It is a course of life suits best to my condition.


You may change this condition if you please.


I had rather lie honoured in death, than by dishonour raised to glorious state
of life.


But here you live like a creature not produced by mankind, amongst beasts,
having no conversation by discourse.


Want of Speech makes not beasts beasts, but want of Reason, want of Reason
makes a man a beast; and speech rather disturbs than benefits the life, when
silence and pure thoughts make men like Angels, whereas speech sometimes
expresses men like Devils, blaspheming Heaven and God, fomenting factions
amongst their kind, betraying trust friendship, cozening innocence, slattering
vice, reproaching virtue, and with distractions strives to pull down honour
from its feat; where silence refines the thoughts, elevates the fancy, quickens
wit, strengthens judgment, allays anger, sweetens melancholy, and collects the
Reason.


Thou art a wonder, and for this one Speech I do adores thee.


I should be sorry so worthy a person, and so noble a Gentleman as you seem to
be, should adore my Speech, when it might be chance that did produce it, and
not wit or judgment.


Thy speech is like to Orpheus Harp, it charms all ears that hear it.


I wish my Speech were like a Loadstone, to draw the iron hearts of men to pity
and compassion, to charity and devotion.


Pray stay and choose me for your Love, and let me go along with you.


An Amorous Lovers, as I believe your Lordship is, never walks in sober pace,
nor hath a constant and assured mind; for Amorous Lovers run with might and
main, as if desires were caught with haste.


I perceive Farmers breed pretty Maids, and honest, as well as Lambs and Doves,
and witty and well-behav'd Maids, as well as Courts and Cities do. O that I
were unmatied, that I might wed this Sweet, Fair Country-maid!


But stay, here comes another by my troth, a very pretty Lass, but yet her
garments sit not so neat, nor becoming, nor is her behaviour so graceful as the
other Maids was. Sweet Mistress!


Pray keep your jeers to your self, I am no Mistress.


You may be my Mistress, if you please, and I will be your servant.


What to do?


What you please.


I am seldom pleased, and an idle fellow will anger me more.


I will be very industrious, if you please to set me to work.


You idle slut, do you stand loitering here, when it is more than time the Cows
were milked?


Go milk them your self with a murrain, since you are so light-finger'd.


I will milk your sides first.


I marry Sir, this is right as a Farmers daughter should be; but in my
Conscience the other Maid that was here before her is a bastard, begot by some
Gentleman.


Let me tell you, Sir Iohn Argument, Love delivers up the whole Soul to the
thing beloved; and the truth is, none but one soul can love another.


But Justice, Madam, must be the rule of Love; wherefore those souls which Love
must give the bodies leave to join.


O no; pure souls may converse without gross bodies.


Were it not for the Senses, Madam, souls could have no acquaintance, and
without an acquaintance, there can be no reciprocal affection; and will you
make the Senses, which are the souls chief confidence, to be strangers or
enemies?


I would have them converse, but not interrupt.


The bodies must have mutual friendship and correspondency with each other, or
otherwise they may dissemble, or betray the souls; or abuse the trust, loose
appetites or wandering senses or contrary humours; and what can interrupt Love
more than the disagreement of bodies?


The Senses and Appetites of the Body, are but as subject to the Soul.


But 'tis impossible for Foreign Princes, as I will compare two loving souls
unto, can live in peace and mutual amity, if their subjects disagree.


O Mistress Troublesome, you are welcome; for you shall end the dispute between
Sir Iohn Argument and I.


If you cannot decide the Dispute your selves, I shall never do it. But what is
the Dispute Madam?


Whether there can be a perfect friendship of Souls without a reciprocal and
mutual conversation and conjunctions of Bodies?


Faith, Madam, I think it would be a very faint friendship betwixt the Souls,
without the Bodies.


I perceive Sir Iohn Argument and you would never make Platonic Lovers.


Faith, Madam, I think Platonic is a word without sense.


You say right, Mistress Troublesome, it is an insensible love.


It is the Soul of Love.


What's that, Madam, a Ghost, or Spirit?


Indeed it hath no material body.


No, for it is an incorporal thing.


What is an incorporal thing, Sir Iohn?


Why, nothing.


Pray leave this discourse, or else you will talk nonsense.


That's usual in Conversation.


Setting aside this discourse at Mistress Troublesomes request, Pray tell me how
the Lady Contemplation doth?


Faith Madam, by the course of her life one might think she were an incorporal
thing.


Why?


Because she makes but little use of her Body, living always within her Mind.


Then her Body stands but as a Cipher amongst the Figures of her thoughts.


Just so, by my Troth.


Pray bring me acquainted with the Lady Contemplation.


If it be possible, I will; but the Lady Visitant can do it better than I.


I am resolved I will visit her.


What, is your passion over?


My passion will strive to maintain my honour, and you may take my life; but as
long as I live, my passion will fight in the quarrel. But what man of honour
will make a Bawd of her he intends to make his Wife? and what man of honour
will be cruel to those that are weak, helpless, and shiftless? and what man
of honour will be uncivil to the meanest of our Sex? It is more noble to
flatter us, than to quarrel with us; but that I have heard you are valiant, I
should think you were a base coward, and such a one that would quarrel in a
Brothel-house, rather than fight in a Battle: But I perceive you are one that
loves Pleasure more than Honour, and Life more than Fame; and I hate to be in
that mans company, or to make a Husband, whose courage lies in Volupmousness,
and his life in Infamy: I will sooner marry Death, than such a man.


Her words have shot through my soul, and have made a sensible wound therein.
How wisely she did speak! how beautiful appeared! Her mind is full of honour,
and the actions of her life are built upon noble principles; so young, so wise,
so fair, so chaste, and I to use her so basely as I have done! O how I hate my
self for doing so unworthily!


The more ground is trodden on, the easier the path to walk in.


It seems so, that you visit me so often.


Why, thou art such sweet company, and behav'st thy self so prettily, as I
cannot choose but visit thee.


I would, if I could, behave my self so to the world, as my indiscretion might
not defame me.


Why do you think of a Fame?


Why not? since fame many times arises from poor Cottages, as well as from
great Palaces; witness the Country labouring-man, that was taken from the
plough, and made an Emperor, as being thought sit to rule, both for
Justice and Wisdom, and he was more famous than those that were born of an
Heroic Line, and were of Royal dignity; and David a shepherd, became a King.
'Tis Merit that deserves a fame, not Birth; and sometimes Merit hath its
desert, though but seldom.


Thy discourse would tempt any man.


Mistake not my discourse, it hath no such devilish design; for to tempt, is to
pervert: 'Tis true, my Nature takes delight to delight and please others, and
not to cross or displease any, yet not to tempt, or to delude with counterfeit
demeanours, or fair insinuating words, smooth speech, or oiled tongue, to draw
from Virtues side, but to persuade and plead in Virtues cause.


Thy very looks would gain a cause, before thy tongue could plead.


Alas! mans countenance is like the Sea, which ebbs and flows as passion moves
the mind.


I am sure Love moves my mind, and makes it in a fiery heat.


If it be noble Love, it is like the Sun, which runs about to give both light
and heat to all the world, that else would sit in darkness, and be both cold
and steril; so doth a noble mind run with industry to help those in distress,
his bounty heats, his counsel and advice gives light.


I love you so much, Sweet-heart, that since you will not be my Mistress, you
shall be my Wife.


Indeed I will not.


Will you refuse me?


Yes.


Wherefore?


Because I know, though you may use me well at first, after a time you'll be
divorced.


I will never part from thee.


O yes but you will, for youth and beauty most commonly are inconstant; for
vain ambition, and flattering praises, corrupt that mind that lives therein,
and is pleased therewith.


Well, I will become a new man, and cast off all vanity, and study Moral
Philosophy, to gain this Maid; for then perchance she will love me.


Complements are the worst sort of Conversation, for they are not sociable;
besides, Truth holds no intelligence nor correspondence with them.


Truth is no Complement as flattery, and I speak nothing but what truth hath
dictated to my tongue.


Those praises you gave me were writ by speech, in so fine a style of
Eloquence, with such flourishing Letters of words, as I cannot believe but that
custom of self-conceited wit or passion, hath given the Scribe, which is the
Tongue, a bribe to slatter me.


This is a wonder to see you, Lady Contemplation, abroad, I doubt it doth
Prognosticate some change of Fortune, pray Jove it be good.


All the ill will fall on me, Madam.


Nay, faith Madam, she accounts company a worse fortune than the ruin of a
Kingdom, and you cannot conceive with what difficulty I have got her abroad;
for at first I did persuade her with all the Rhetoric I had, and pleaded with
as powerful arguments as I could find, any promised more than I was able to
perform, and nothing of this could get her forth, until I told her I would
bring your Ladyship to visit her, and that forced her out; for she said, she
would rather trouble you, than you should trouble her.


Faith, Contemplation, thou art only sit to keep beasts company; for what
difference is there betwixt beasts and men, but Conversation.


Indeed beasts want that folly of idle Conversation, and the error of speaking,
as much as the vanity of dressing, and the custom of dissembling; for they
spend their time more prudently, quietly, easily, honestly, so more happily;
and if it were for no other reason than speaking, I had rather be a beast, than
of mankind.


O fie, O fie, you are a beastly Lady.


No, Madam, beasts have no false Titles of Honour, their honour lives in their
natures, not in their names.


Who that may choose, or have their liberty, would spend their time in idle
thoughts?


All that are wise, and would be happy; for should not we think that man were
mad, that leaves a peaceful habitation, and thrusts himself in foreign broils?
or should not we think a King were most unjust, that makes his peaceful and
obedient subjects slaves to strange Princes? The Mind's a Common-wealth, and
the Thoughts are the Citizens therein, and Reason rules as King, or ought to
do: But there is no reason we should vex our Thoughts with outward things, or
make them slaves unto the world.


But thoughts would want employment, were it not for the world, and idleness
were worse than slavish toils.


The thoughts, without the worlds materials, can Create millions of worlds,
only with the help of Imagination.


Then your Mind and the World are mere strangers.


I say not so; for though the World draws not my Mind to wander up and down,
yet my Mind draws the World to it, then pensils out each several part and
piece, and hangs that Landscape in my Brain, on which my thoughts do view with
Judgments eyes. Thus the world is in my Mind; although my Mind is not in the
world.


Then you enchant the world?


I had rather enchant the world, than the world should enchant me.


If the Mind be a Common-wealth, as you said even now it was, Pray tell me of
what degree the Passions are of?


They are the Nobles thereof, and Magistrates therein; each several Passion
still governs in its turn and office.


And what are the Appetites?


The Appetites are none of the Mind's Citizens, but they are an unruly Rout
that dwell in the Senses, which are the Suburbs of the Body: Indeed the
Appetites are the Out-Lawries, and do oft-times much hurt with their
disorders, insomuch as they, many times, disturb the minds tranquillity, and
peace. But, Madam, lest the appetite of talking should disturb the Mind, I
shall kiss your Ladyships hand, and leave you to those that are more delightful
and pleasanter company than I am.


Lady Conversation, I perceive you and Sir Vain Complement are grown dull with
the Lady Contemplations company.


Mercury defend me from her; for I would not keep her company for Ioves
Mansion.


And Cupid defend me from her; for I would not be bound to Court her for the
Favours Venus gives to Mars.


Lord what a dull piece of gravity she is!


She looks as if she conversed with none but Ghosts and Spirits, walking in
Moon-shine, and solitary and dismal places.


Let us talk of her no more; for I am so far from keeping her acquaintance, as
I hate to hear her named.


My Sweet, Fair Maid, I cannot hope thy Pardon, for my crimes are not only
great, but many; for I have not only used you unkindly, uncivilly,
ungentlemanly, which are vices and crimes that Cankerfret the Fame of Honour,
and bury all noble qualities; but I have used you barbarously, cruelly, and
inhumanly, which are sins sufficient to annihilate all the Masculine Race; and
surely, if there be that we call Justice in Nature, it will, unless thy virtue
redeem them, and save them with thy pity: wherefore, for the sake of the
generality, though not for my particular, pardon me. Thus will you become a
Deity to your whole Sex and ours.


I am sure your Lordship is a particular punishment to me, which Heaven send me
quit of.


Lady, you smother your thoughts, and stifle your conception in the close
Closet of Study.


No Sir, I only keep them warm, being tender and weak.


They will grow stronger in the Air of Conversation; but when continually kept
close in the Chamber of Contemplation, they will be apt to fall into many
several diseases, as melancholy Opinions, and extravagant Fancies, which may
over-heat the mind, and sire the thoughts: wherefore Lady let me give you
Counsel.


What Counsel would you give me? as a Lawyer, or Phycian?


As a Physician.


For the Body, or the Mind?


For the Mind.


The Physicians for the Mind are Divine:


No, the best physicians for the Mind are Poets.


How will you prove that?


By Example and Skill; for when the Mind is raging mad; Poets, with gentle
persuasions, in smooth numbers, and soft music, cure it; and when the Mind is
despairing, Poets draw hopes into numbers, which beats out the doubtful Foe:
And for Example.

David with his Poetical Inspirations, and Harpsical harmonious Music, allayed
the ill Spirit, and raging passion of Saul; for Poets take from the sweet
Spring of Nature, an Oil of Love, and from Heaven, the Balsom of Mercy, and
pour them through golden numbers, and pipes of wit, into the festered wounds of
despair, when oft-times Divines, in stead of suppling Oil, pour in corroding
Vitriol, and in stead of healing Balsoms, pour in burning Sulphur, which are
terrifying threats, and fearful menaces: wherefore Lady, let me advise you as a
Poetical Physician, to keep your mind cool, and your thoughts in equal temper;
wherefore in order thereto, when the mind is wrapped in the mantle of
Imagination, if it finds it self very hot therewith, let it lay that mantle by,
and bathe it self in the fresh, clear, pure Rivers of Discourse.


By your favour, Sir, for the most part, the Mind becomes hotter with the
motion of the tongue, than the mantle of Imagination; for when the tongue hath
liberty, it runs wildly about, and draggs the mind after it; and rather than I
will have my minded dragged and hurried about by my unruly tongue, which will
neither endure the bit of Reason, nor the bridle of Discretion, but runs beyond
all sense, I will tie up my tongue with the cords of silence, in the stable of
the mouth, and pull down the Port-cullis of the teeth before it, and shut the
doors of my lips upon it. Thus shall it be treble locked, and kept with the Key
of Judgment, and the Authority of Prudence.


Did you hear him say he had lain with me?


Yes, Madam.


O the wicked, base vain-glory of men, to belly the pure chastity of a woman!
But surely he did not plainly express so much in clear words, as by nods,
winks, shrugs, dark sentences, or broken discourses?


He said plainly, he had lain with you in an unlawful manner.


Fates assist me in revenge; for it is no dishonour to be revenged of a base
person, that hath maliciously slandered me, or vain-gloriously injured me.


Revenge is against the Laws of Honour, Madam.


It may be against the Tenets of some particular Religion, or religious
Opinions. But a noble revenge is the ground or foundation of Heroic Honour.


But what do you call a Noble Revenge?


First, to be an open Enemy, as to declare the enmity; next, to declare their
endeavour to prosecute to the utmost of their power, either their Enemies
Estate, Liberty, and Life; whereas a base Revenger is to dissemble, in
professing they have forgotten and forgiven their injury, and pardoned their
Enemy, yet under-hand and disguisedly endeavour to do their Enemy a mischief.
Not but an honourable Revenger may choose their time for executing their
revenge; but they must declare they will be revenged before they execute their
revenge, and let their Enemies stand upon their Guard.


But a revengeful woman is not good.


Why not, as well as a revengeful man? For why may not a woman revenge her
scandalised honour as well as a man? Is there any reason why it should be a
dishonour for a man to pass by a disgrace, and for a woman to revenge her
disgrace? Is it not as great a blemish to the honour of a woman, to be said to
be unchaste, as for a man to be said to be a Coward? And shall a woman only sit
and weep over her lost honour, whilst a man fights to regain his? And shall it
be thought no dishonour for a man to pistol, or at least bastonade another man
for an injury, or an affront received, and a fault for a woman to do, or cause
to be done the like? Must women only sit down with foolish patience, and endure
wrong, when men may execute revenge with fury? These were both injustice, and
an unjust act of Education to our Sex; as also it would be an unjust sentence,
not only from men, but from the Gods, since neither Gods nor men will suffer
injury, wrong, or dishonour, without revenge: But if Gods, Men, and Education
should be so unjust to our Sex, yet there is no Reason in Nature we should be
so unjust to our selves: But for my part, as I am constant to an honest friend,
and can easily forgive an honourable Enemy, so I can never forgive a malicious
Foe, nor forget a vain-glorious bragging fool, or false slandring knave, but
will persecute them to the utmost of my power, and the weight of my revenge
should be according to the pressure of my injury, or dishonour.


But let me tell you, Madam, those that brag are seldom believed, and there is
none that believe these vain bragging Ranters; for it's well known, that all
Ranters are idle deboyst persons, and do usually belie the most Honourable and
Chaste Ladies, for which all worthy persons hate them, and account them so
base, as they will shun their companies; no man of honour will come near them,
unless it be to beat them. But if you appear to the world as concerned, you may
raise those doubts which would never have been raised, had you took no notice
thereof.


Indeed Disputes raise doubts; wherefore I will not bring it into a Dispute,
but take your Counsel, and take no notice of it.


You will do wisely, Lady.


I wish my tongue as smooth as oil, to make my words as soft as Air, that
they may spread about your heart, there intermixd with your affection.


Words cannot win my love, no more than wealth, nor is my heart subject to
those infections.


I will build thee Palaces of burnished gold, where thou shalt be worshipd
whilst thou livest, and when thou die, I will erect a Monument more famous
than Mausolus's was.


My Virtue shall build me a Monument far richer, and more lasting; for the
materials with which it shall be built, shall be tried Chastity, as pure Gold,
and Innocence, as Marble white, and Constancy, as undissolving Diamonds, and
Modesty, as Rubies red, Love shall the Altar be, and Piety, as Incense sweet,
ascend to Heaven, Truth, as the Oil, shall feed the Lamp of Memory, whereby the
flame of Fame shall never go out.


And is She gone? are Riches of no force? Then I will bury my self within the
bowels of the Earth, so deep, that men shall never reach me, nor Light shall
find me out.


My Lord, my Lady, the Lady Amorous, remembers her Service to you, and sent me
to tell you her Husband is gone out of Town, and She desires to have the
happiness of your company.


Pray present my Service in the humblest manner to your Lady, and pray her to
excuse me; for though I cannot say I am sick, yet I am far from being well.


I shall, my Lord.


My Lord, there is an old man without desires to speak with you.


Direct him hither.


Old man, what have you to say to me?


I am come to desire your Lordship not to persecute a poor young Maid, one that
is friendless, and your Lordship is powerful, and therefore dangerous.


What poor Maid do you mean?


A Maid called Poor Virtue.


Do you know her?


Yes.


Are you her Father?


No, I am her servant, and have been maintained by her Noble Family these
threescore years, and upwards.


Ha, her Noble Family! what, or who is She?


She is a Lady, born from a Noble Stock, and hath been choisely bred, but
ruined by misfortunes, which makes her poorly serve.


Alas he weeps! Who were her Parents?


The Lord Morality, and the Lady Piety.


Sure it cannot be: But why should I doubt? her Beauty, Wit, and sweet
Demeanour, declares her Noble Pedigree: The Lord Morality was a Famous man, and
was a great Commander, and wise in making Laws, and prudent for the Common
Good: He was a Staff and Prop unto the Common-wealth, till Civil Wars did throw
it down, where he fell under it. But honest friend, how shall I know this for a
truth?


Did not your Lordship hear he had a Child?


Yes that I did, an only Daughter.


This is She I mention, and if Times mend, will have her Fathers Estate, as
being her Fathers Heir; but to prove it, and her Birth, I will bring all those
servants that lived with her, and with her Father, and all his Tenants, that
will witness the truth.


When I consider, and bring her and her Actions to my mind, I cannot doubt the
truth, and for the news, thou shalt be my Adopted Father, and my Bosome-friend;
I'll be a staff for thy Old Age to lean upon, my shoulders shall give strength
unto thy feeble limbs, and on my neck shalt lay thy restless head,


Heaven bless you, and I shall serve you as my Old Age will give me leave.


Thou Celestial Creature, do not believe that I am so presumptuous to ask thy
love, I only beg thy pardon, that when my body lies in the silent grave, you
give my restless soul a pass, and leave to walk amongst sad Lovers in dark and
gloomy shades; and though I cannot weep to show my penitence, yet I can bleed.

Here, take this Instrument of Death, for only by your hands I wish to die.

Give me as many Wounds as Pores in skin,
That I may bleed sufficient for my sin.

It seems strange to me, that you, a wise man, or at least accounted so, should
fall into such extremes, as one while to hate me to death, and now to profess
to love me beyond life!


My Debaucheries blinded my Judgment, nor did I know thy worth, or my own
error, until thy wise wit gave the light to my dark understanding, and you
have drawn my bad life, and all my unworthy actions therein, so naturally in
your discourse, as now I view them, I do hate my self as much as you have cause
to hate me.


I only hate your Crimes, but for those excellent Qualities, and true Virtues
that dwell in your Soul, I love and honour; and if you think me worthy to make
me your Wife, and will love me according as my honest life will deserve your
affections, I shall be proud of the Honour, and thank Fortune or Heaven for the
Gift.


Sure you cannot love me, and the World would condemn you if you should, and
all your Sex will hate you.


The World many times condemns even Justice her self, and women, for the most
part, hate that they should love and honour.


But can you love me?


I can, and do love you.


How happy am I, to enjoy a world of Beauty, Wit, Virtue, and sweet Graces.


Honest Roger and Maudlin,


Present me? Bless your Lordship, I should present you with a couple of Capons.


'Tis a salutation when you salute; but how do you then?


Very well, I thank your Honour: How do you?


Well, enough of Complements, I am come with a Petition to you.


What is that, is't please your Honour?


A Suit.


Byrlaken I have need of one, for I have but poor and bare clothing on.


No, Roger, it is a request and desire I have you should grant.


Grant, or to Farm let, no Sir, I will not part with my Lease.


Roger, you understand me not, therefore let me speak with Maudlin your Wife.


There she is Sir, spare her not, for she is good metal I'll warrant your
Honour; wipe your lips Maudlin, and answer him every time that he moves thee,
and give him as good as he brings: Maudlin, were he twenty Lords, hold up your
head, Maudlin, be not hollow.


I'll warrant you Husband, I'll satisfy him.


Honest Maudlin.


That's more than your Lordship knows.


Why then Maudlin.


That's my name indeed.


You have a maid here in your house.


I hope so forsooth; but I will not answer for no Virgin in this wicked world.


Well said Maudlin; Nay your Honour will get nothing of my Maudlin, I'll
warrant you.


Well, this supposed Maid is Poor Virtue, that's her name, I desire you will
let her live with me, this Poor Virtue.


God bless you Honour from her, it is not fit for a Lord, and a great Noble-man
to meddle with Virtue, your Honour should not foul your fingers with her:
Besides, she will never stay in a great mans house, neither is it fit she
should; and your Honours servants will hate her like the Devil, for she will
please no body as she should do, a very peevish, ill-natur'd girl forsooth she
is.


Why how doth she agree then with you?


Alas forsooth, if it please your Honour, Virtue may live in a Cottage, when
she will be whipped out of a Court, or a great Lords Palace; they may talk of
her, but they will never give her leave to live and board with them: It may be
they give their Chaplain leave to talk of her a Sundays, or so forsooth, but
talk's but talk, for they forget her the six days after, and never mind her;
for indeed she is a very peevish girl, and not fit for Gentlefolks company,
that's the truth of it, hardly for poor folks.


Why you agree well with her?


Nay by the faith of my body do I not; for I can hardly go to Market, and be
merry, as I use to be, and all long of her peevishness: nay I cannot go to
order one of our busy Thrashers, but she troubles me; or to speak with the
Carter, but she whip, in presently, or discourse with the Plough-man about his
plough-share, how he should order it for my advantage, but she troubles me; or
about our Husbandman, how and where he should sow his Seed, but she vexes me
still: Such a life, the Gods help me, as I am even weary of my self. Speak
Roger, is it not true?


True Maudlin as steel, I never was merry since she was in my house, the
May-pole is down since she came.


I Roger that 'tis, the more the pity.


And the Towns Green is a Meadow, and the poor Big-pipers cheeks are fallen
into a Consumption, hardly wind to speak withal; the Morris-dancers bells are
silenced, and their cross garters held superstitious, idolatrous, and profane;
the May-Lord and his Lady deposed, and the Hobby-horse is forgotten; nay the
Whitson-Lord and Lady are banished, Merry Wakes abolished, and the poor
Ale-wives beggared,


I, I, and all since this melancholy girl Virtue came into our house.

I cannot choose but cry.


Thou art true Maudlin then.


Yes, with small beer, that's the calamity of it; therefore bless every good
subject from so melancholy a thing as this girl Virtue is: But we have a
Daughter, and it please your Honours worship, that will give you good content,
and please most of your Household; for she is a lusty Wench, though I say it that
should not say it: Did you but see her swim like a Tench on our Town-green,
encircling the May-pole, and at the end of a Horn-pipe, when she is to be
kissed, how modestly the wryes her head away, but so as to be civil; nay she
hath been well Educated, my own natural Daughter, for indeed Roger, I was with
Child with her before you married me.


Peace Maudlin, all Truths are not to be spoken of; for should that be, many a
Worshipful Person would be very angry; but our Vicar made all well betwixt thee
and me, Maudlin: But I beseech your Honour take my Daughter, for you will find
her another manner of woman than Virtue is, for she is not like her in faith, nor
any thing that belongs to her, she is better blessed than so.


No, I will have Poor Virtue, or none.


Faith if you have Virtue, you are sure to have her poor, for I never knew any
of her Family rich, the Gods do not bless them, I think, in this world; but if
you will have her, take her, shall he not, Maudlin?


Yes, Husband, and the house is well rid of her, and let us bless our selves
for it; for now we shall be like our Neighbours again, we will not abate them
an hair, the best in the Parish shall not live merryer than we will now for all
Sports: Why, Vanity and Sin, Husband, is the Liberty of the Subject, and the
seven Deadly Sins are the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, from the greatest
to the least, if poor folks might have their right. Well, your Honour shall
have her, but you will be as weary of her as we have been, the Gods bless your
Honour, but alas you do not know what this Girl Virtue is, Lords have no guess
at her.


Well Maudlin, let me have her, I desire no more.


Nor we neither, if it pleases your Honour, and so the Gods give you good of
her.


Let me speak to his Honour, Maudlin.


Do so Roger.


I give yourdship many thanks.


For what?


For ridding our house of this troublesome Girl.


And I thank you for it too.


When thanks on all sides happen, we are eased.


And I with your Poor Virtue am well pleased.


Mark the end of it, Roger.


Yes Maudlin, the End Crowns the Work.


What always musing? Shall I never find thee in a sociable humour?


I would you had come sooner, or stayed longer away.


Why prithee?


I will tell you: A while since, there came the Muses to visit me, being all
either mad, or drunk, for they tossed and tumbled me, and rumbl'd me about,
from one to the other, as I thought they would a divided me amongst them: At
last came in the Sciences to visit me, with sober Faces, grave Countenances,
stayed and formal Behaviours, and after they had Saluted me, they began to talk
very seriously to me, their Discourse being Rational, Probable, Wise, Learned,
and Experienced; but all the while the Muses would not let me alone, one pulled
me to Dance, another to Sing, another to play on Music, others to recite
Verses, speak Speeches, and Act parts of Plays, and the like^ Whereupon I
gravely turned the incorporal head of my rational Soul, nodding it to them to
be quiet, and let me alone, but still they played with me: At last my Thoughts,
which are the language of the Soul, spoke to them, and prayed them to forbear,
until such time as the Sciences were gone; but they would not be quiet, nor
silent, do what I could, but would interrupt the Sciences in the midst of
their Discourse, with their idle Rimes, light Fancies, and odd Numbers,
insomuch as the Sciences departed: Whereupon the Muses did rejoice, and skip,
and run about, as if they had been wild: And in this jocund humour, in came
the Arts, even a whole Common-wealth; for there were not only Politic Arts,
Civil and Combining Arts, Profitable and necessary Arts, Military Arts, and
Ceremonious Arts; but there were Superstitious Arts, Idolatrous Arts, false,
factious, and mischievous Arts, destructive and wicked Arts, base and mean Art,
foolish, childish, vain, superfluous and unprofitable Arts: Upon all these Arts
the Muses made good sport; for at some they flung jests, scorns, and scoffs,
and some they stripped naked, but to others they were cruel, for some they
stayed their skins off, and others they made very Skeletons of, dissecting them
to the very bones; and the truth is, they spared not the best of them, but they
had one saying or other to them: But when all the Arts departed, they took me,
and carried to the Well of Helicon, and there they threw me in over head and
cares, and said they would Souse me in the Liquor of Poetry; but when I was in
the Well, I thought verily I should have been drowned, for all my outward
Senses were smothered and choked, for the water did blind my eyes, stopped my
ears and nostrils, and filled my mouth so full, as I had not so much space as
to spout it sorth; besides all my body was so numb, as I had no feeling,
insomuch, as when they took me out of this Well of Helicon, into which they had
flung me, I seemed as dead, being quite senseless: Whereupon they all agreed to
take and carry me up on Parnassas Hill, and to lay me on the (...) thereof,
that the Poetical Flame, or Heat therein, might dry and warm me; after which
agreement they took me up, every one bea^ing a part o^ m^, or was industrious
about me, for some carried my Head, others my Legs, some held my Hands, others
embraced my Waste, another oiled my Tongue, and others powered Spirits into my
Mouth, but the worst-natur'd Muse pinched me, to try if I was sensible, or not,
and the sweetest and tenderest natured Muse wept over me, and another was so
kind as to kiss me; but when they had brought me up to the top of the Hill, and
laid me thereupon, I felt such a heat, as if they had laid me on AEtna; but
after I had lain some time, I felt it not so hot, and so less and less, until I
felt it like as my natural heat; just like those that go into a hot Bathe, at
first cry out it is insufferable and scalding hot, yet with a little use will
sinde it cool enough: But whilst I lay on Parnassus Hill, I began to make a
Lyrick Verse, as thus.

Bright, Sparkling hot Poetic sire,
My duller Muse Inspire
Unto thy Sweeter Lyre:
My Fancies like as Notes all sit
To play a Tune of Wit
On well-strung Numbers fit.
But your unfortnnate Visit hath pulled me so hastily down from the Hill, that
the force of the speed hath cracked my Imaginary Fiddle, broke the Strings of
my Wit, blotted the Notes of Numbers, so spoiled my Song.


Prithee, there is none that would have taken the pains to have sung thy Song,
unless some blind Fiddler in an Alehouse, and then not any one would have
listened unto it, for the fume of the drink would stop the sense of their ears:
Besides, Drunkards love not, nor delight in nothing but beastly Nonsense; but
howsoever I had done thee a friendly part, to fetch thee down from off that
monstrous high Hill, whereby the vastness of the height might have made you so
dizzy, as you might have fallen there-from on the sharp stones of Spite, or at
least, on the hard ground of Censure, which might have bruised, if not wounded
the Reputatio of thy Wit.


Let me tell you, you had done me a Courtesy to have let me remained there
some time; for if you had let me alone, I might there have improved the Stature
of my Wit, perfected the Health of my Judgment, and had nourished the Life of
my Muse.


Still I fear my fault is beyond a Pacification, yet the Gods are pacified with
submissive Actions, as bended knees, repentant tear, imploring words, sorrowful
Sighs, and dejected Countenances, all which I gave to thee.


Though there is always in my mind an obedient respect to Merit, yet a scorn
is a sufficient cause to make a rebelling of thoughts, words, and actions; for
though I am poor, yet I am virtuous, and Virtue is to be preferred before
Wealth or Birth, were I meanly born. But howsoever, true Love, like a great and
powerful Monarch, soon disperses those rebellious passions, and quiets those
factious thoughts, and all murmuring speeches, or words, are put to silence,
banishing all frowning Countenance, returning humble looks into the eyes again.


Then you have pardoned me.


Yes.


And do you love me?


As Saints do Heaven.


Your Favours have raised my spirits from the grave of Melancholy, and your
pure Love hath given me a new Life.


So truly I love you, as nothing but death can destroy it; my, I am of that
belief, that were I dead, and turned to ashes, my dust, like firm and lasting
steel, would fly unto you, as to the Loadstone, if you were at such distance as
nothing might oppose.


Thus Souls, as well as Bodies, love.


Since I cannot have the happiness of your Lordships company at my House, I am
come to wait upon you at your House.


Your Ladyship doth me too great an honour.


Your Lordship is grown very Courtly. Pray how comes our familiar friendship so
estranged, and set at distance with Complements?


Madam, my wild manners have been so rude to your Fair Sex, as I am become a
scorn and shame unto my self.


I hate Civility and Manners in a man, it makes him appear sneakingly, poorly,
and effeminate, and not a Cavalier: Bold and free Actions become your Sex.


It doth so in a Camp amongst rude and rough Soldiers, whose Breeding never
knew Civility, nor will obey gentle Commands, submitting only to rigorous
Authority: But to the fair, tender, effeminate Sex, men should offer their
service by their admiring Looks, civil Discourses, and humble Actions, bowing
as to a Deity; and when they are pleased to favour their servants, those
Favours to be accounted beyond the Gifts of Jove.


Have I Cuckolded my Husband, dishonoured my Family, defamed my self for your
sake, and am I thus rewarded and thrown aside with civil Complements? O basest
of men!


I am sorry I have wronged your Husband, but more sorry I have dishonoured you,
and what satisfaction a true repentance can make, I offer upon the Altar of a
Reformed Life.


Do you repent? O false man! May you be cursed of all your Sex, and die the
death of Orpheus.


It is beyond the power of Jove to please the various humours of Woman-kind.


There was never so many Noble Persons Married in one day, in one City, I
think, before those that are to Marry to morrow.


Who are they?


Why, do you not hear?


No.


Surely you have been either dead or deaf.


I have been in the Country.


That is some reason indeed; but the News of the City uses to travel in
Letters on Post-horses into the Country.


No faith, for the most part they come in slow Waggons; but tell me who those
are that are to be Married to morrow?


Why first there is the Lord Title and the Lady Virtue. Secondly, the Lord
Courtship and the Lady VVard. Thirdly, there is Sir Famit Poet and the Lady
Contemplation. Fourthly, the Lady Conversation and Sir Experienced Traveller.
And fifthly, the Lady Visitant and Sir Humphrey Interruption.


I will do my endeavour to see them all; for I will go to each Bridal House.


How will you do so, being all married on a day?


Why I will bid Good-morrow to the one, and I will go to Church with another,
and dine with the third, and dance the afternoon with the fourth, and see the
fifth a bed.


That you may do.


Lord there are so many Weddings to be to morrow, as I know not which to go to!
Besides, I shall displease those I go not to, being invited to them all.


If you would displease neither of them, you must seign your self sick, and go
to none of them.


None of them, say you? that would be a cause to make me die; for I would not
but be a guest to one of them for any thing could be given me: But I am
resolved to go to the Lady Conversation and Sir Experienced Travellers Wedding,
for there there will be the most company, and it is company that I love better
than the Wedding-cheer; for much company is a Feast to me.


Truly Mistress, I wonder you should delight in company, you being in years.


Out you naughty Wench, do you say I am old?


No indeed, I did not name old.


Then let me tell you, that those women that are in years, seek company to
divulge their Wit, as youth to divulge their Beauty; and we Aged Wits may
chance to catch a Lover from a young Beauty: But I should applaud my own wit,
if it could contrive to bring each Bride and Bridegroom into one Assembly,
making Hymen's Monarchy a Republic, where all should be in common.


So Mistress you would prove a Traitor to Hymen, which is a Bawd.


Faith I will turn you away for your boldness.


I am come to tell you, that the five Bridals meet with their Guests and good
Cheer at the City-Hall, and make their several Companies Joining as one, as one
Body, and there will be such Revelling, as the like was never before.


Iuno be thanked, and Venus be praised for it; for I was much perplexed
concerning their Divisions, till you came and brought me this good News of
their Corporation.


Come Old Humanity, and be our Father, to join and give us in the Church; and
then when we are Married, we will live a Country-life, I as a Shepherd, and this
Lady as my Fair Shepherdess.


My dear Child, you appear as a sweet budding Rose this morning.


Roses are beset with thorns, Nurse, I hope I am not so.


By'r Lady your Husband may prove a thorn, if he be not a good man, and a kind
Husband; but Oh my heart doth ache.


Wherefore doth it ache?


Come Sweet, are you ready? for it is time to go to Church, it is almost twelve
a clock.


I am ready, but my Nurse doth affright me, by telling me her heart doth ache,
as if she did fore-know by her experien'd age some ill fortune towards me, or
that I shall be unhappy in my marriage.


Her heart doth not ache for you, but for her self, because she cannot be a
young fair bride, as you are, as being past her youth; so that her heart doth
ache out of a sad remembrance of her self, not for a present, or a future cause
for you.


Well, well, I was young indeed, and a comely bride when I was married, though I
say it, and had a loving bridegroom, Heaven rest his soul.


Come, I have brought all my bridal guests hither to join with yours, for we
will go to Church together: Wherefore prithee come away, our Bridegrooms and
our Guests stay for you.


I will go to them by and by.


Why, I hope you do not stay to muse upon Phantasmes, saith Marriage will banish
them out of your head, you must now employ your time with Realities.


If I thought Marriage would destroy or disturb my Contemplations, I would not
marry, although my Wedding-guests were come, and my Wedding-dinner ready dressed,
and my Wedding-cloaths on; nay, were I at the holy Altar, I would return back.


That would be such an action, as all the Kingdom would say you were mad.


I had rather all the World should not only say I were mad, but think me so,
rather than my self to be unhappy.


Can want of Contemplation make you unhappy?


Yes, as unhappy as a body can be without a soul; for Contemplation is the life
of the soul, and who can be happy that hath a dead soul?


By my troth I had rather be dead, than have such a dull life.


Madam, the Bridegroom is coming hither.


I will prevent him, and meet him.


Come away, come away, they'll be all married before we shall get to Church.


There will be enough Witnesses, we may well be spared; but so I share of the
Feast, I care not whether they be married or not.


The truth is, the benefit to us will be only in eating of their meat, and
drinking of their wine.


And I mean to be drunk, but not for joy of their Marriages, but for pleasure of
my Gusto.


What Lines of Light do from those Torches spin,
Which winds about those Ladies whiter skin?
But from their Eyes more Splend'rous Beams do run,
As bright as those that issue from the Sun.
Wherein the lesser Lights wax dull and dim,
Or like as Minnes in an Ocean swim.

By your good leave Gentlefolks, Sir Golden Riches, who did tempt me with Gold
till he had his desire, you know all what it is, and I like an honest woman, as
it were, kept my word, and performed truly as any woman could do: Speak, can
thou detect me either in word or deed? and like a false and covetous wretch as
thou art, performed nothing with me as thou should have done, I am sure of
that: Is't not a truth? speak coverous wretch, speak.


Why, what did I promise you?


Why thou did promise me an hundred pounds in gold, showed it me, and then
took it away again; nay further, thou said I should be a Lady, and have a
great parimanus Coach gilt, with neighing Horses, and a Coachman, with a
Postilion to ride before: Nay, nay, I remember well enough what you said, you
talkd of Gesemond, Pomatum, and Roman Gunpowder for my hair, and fine gowns and
stockings, and sine laced silk garters, and roses shining like Stars, God bless
us!


Did I, did I?


Yes, that you did, you know what you did, and how you did, and so do I; and
Gentlefolks as I am a true woman, which he knows I am, I never had more than
this white fustion waistcoat, and three pence to buy me three pennyworth of
pins, for he would allow me no incle to tie it withal, and this old stamel
petticoat, that was his great Grandmothers in Eighty eight, I am no two-legged
creature else.


But I bought you velvet to guard it withal.


Yes, that's true, an old black velvet Jerkin without sleeves, that had
belonged to one of Queen Elizabeth her learned Counsel in the Law of blessed
Memory, primo of Her Reign, and you bought it of an old Broker at Nottingham;
and as I am a true Christian woman, if our Neighbour Botcher could almost few
it on, it was so mortified.


I bought you shoes, and ribbons to tie them withal.


Look Gentlefolks, a pair of wet-leather shoes, that have given me a Cold, and
two leather points that he calls ribbons, like a lying false man.


I am sure I bought you stockings and garters.


Old Doncaster-stockins, that I was sain to wash my self with a little borrowed
soap, and they were footed with yellow fustion too, and the garters he talks of
were lists of cloth, which a Taylor gave me for my New-years-gift, and I cannot
choose but grieve to see his unkindness; I gave you satisfaction often, but you
never satisfied me, I will take it upon my death.


Go Gill Flirt, pack away hence.


Nay that puts me in mind of the Peddlers pack you promised me, and I never had
so much bought as that I might whissle for them; but I will follow thee to
Hell, but I will have something more out of thee than I have had, or else I
will make all the Town ring of me.


Here Beadles, take her to the Correction-house, Bridewell, and let her be
punished.


Is it so, thou miscreant? well, I thought to be thy Bride, and not Bridewell, I
never thought it in my conscience.


Pray stay.


Mall, although you deceived me, and broke your promise, you I will not only
save you from the punishment you were to suffer at the Correction-house, but I
will give thee a Husband here, lusty Thom. Purveyor, to whom, for taking thee
to Wife, I will give him a lease of fifty pounds a year. Here Tom, take her and
go marry her.


Heaven bless your Honour.


Come Mall, let us go Wed, for fifty pounds a year is better than thy
Maiden-head.



