Sir Henry, by reason my Lady is gone abroad, I make bold to visit you.


I perceive I am obliged to my Wives absence for your Visit, Madam.


Faith, to tell you the truth, we women had rather visit men when they are
alone, than when they have company.


Then men and women agree better with particular, than with the general.


They do so, yet they love varietyes best.


That's natural, for the Senses to delight in variety.


It is so, and yet our Civil and Divine Laws have forbid the use of Varieties,
which (me thinks) is very unconscionable and unnatural.


But if some of the natural Appetites and Actions were not restrained by Laws,
no Comman-wealth could subsist.


How did the Lacedaemonians subsist? they lived all in common; and had not all
Greece been imbroyl'd with VVars, their Common-wealth might have lasted to this
day.


The Lacedaemonians had stricter Laws than the Common-wealth which we live in,
and are of: for though they gave more liberty and freedom to some Actions than
our Governments do, yet they were stricter in others; and breakers of their
Laws were more severely punished, even in the smallest breach, than the
breakers of our Laws are almost in the greatest breach.


I am sure the Maker of the Lacedemonian Laws was a wise man, and a
kind-hearted man, in Decreeing for the Increase of Mankino, yet by some of his
Laws he seemed but a Sloven: for he banished all curidsity and neatness, and I
believe, many conveniences: Also he seemed to be a man of a weak stomach,


He rather seemed of a strong stomach, and a greedy appetite, by the course
diet he brought men to live with; but (for my part) If I should judge of the
Lacedaemonians Laws, I should judge that they strove to bring men to be like
beasts, rather than to make them like as Gods, which men should strive to be.


By your favour Sir, there can be no Law that can keep men from being horned
beasts.


Whose fault is that, Madam? not men's which make the Laws, but women's that
break the Laws.


It is men's fault, for giving women such liberty: And let me tell you Sir,
women are such subtle creatures, as they strive first to get an honourable
esteem from their Friends and Husbands, and a belief of their Chastity; and
when they have secured men's jealousies, they make their Husbands Cuckolds,
which all their Neighbours perceive, although the Husband is blind and muffled
with affection.


Madam, your Sex deserve a better Character than you give of them: for by your
description there are few chaste.


Every woman knows the humours of her own Sex better than men know the humours
of one another: wherefore let me advise you, Sir Henry Sage, to watch my Lady
your Wife: for many, to my knowledge, seek for to corrupt her.


Madam, although she is one of your Sex, yet she is of an Angelical nature, and
not corruptible.


Sir, I am your humble servant, and I wish your Angel may not fall from Virtue
into Vice.


I have no jealous doubt, Madam.


I wonder at it: for wise men use to doubt.


Wife, I have given you warning twice, beware of the third time, that you
receive no Masculine Visitors: for by Heaven, if you do, I will hang you up in
my garters.


Do if you dare, I will have those that shall cut your throat.


You could not fright me with your Champions, were I a coward: for they are
Carpet-Knights, and dare not fight.


They dare more than you dare.


By Heaven I'll give an Example to all men that love their Honour, and hate to
be Cuckolds.


O Husband, Husband, spare me, spare me.


Wife, you may make me a Fool, but not unman me; you may flatter me, but not
frighten me; you may make me commit an indiscretion, but never to be
Effeminate.


O mercy, mercy, Husband, do but spare me this time, and I will be the best
wife in the World.


Well, I will pardon you this time; and know, Wife, that though I am willing
to part with my Breeches and Doublet to give them you, yet I will never part
with my Sword and my Spurs, which is my Courage and my Management: And I will
give you all liberty in Vanity, but not in Dishonesty; you shall keep the
Purse, but not manage the Horse: Also let me tell you, that it is not enough to
be honest, but you must give no suspicion to the contrary.


Come, Come Madam, are you ready? for Monsieur Amorous hath provided a great
and costly Banquet for you.


I am ready, I did only stay for you to go along with me.


But will not your Husband watch whither we go?


O no: for he believes I am going to the Lady Breeders Upsetting.


That's well be is so credulous to believe so easily whatsoever you would have
him believe, and if he be but as obstinate of belief of that you would not have
him believe you are happy, for let me tell you, that all men hath not that
spiritual gift of Faith, but have strange opinions, and full of doubts, and
suspicions.


Nay, I thank Jove, I have as good a Husband, as any woman whatsoever hath.


Prithee Madam leave some thanks for your loving servant, which loves, and
adores you more than he doth Heaven, and worships you as his only Goddess.


He shall not pray in vain, nor shall I be as an Idol made of Stone, or Brass.


Come your ways then.


O man! O man! inconstant man! false and perjurious man! flattering dissembling
man! and the worst of Mankind is Sir Francis Inconstant! He hath not only
forsaken me, but forgot me, drowning the memory of me in his superfluous Cups.
O Pluto, from whence all wickedness proceeds, make his fair Bride as false to
him, as he hath proved to me, and sill his mind with furious Jealousy.


Who's there?


'Tis I, Husband.


I may bid you welcome, Wife: for you are a stranger here.


Truly Husband, I should not have disturbed you, but that I was afraid you were
not well: for I came two or three times to the door, and heard no noise, which
made me afraid you might be in a swoon, or dead.


I thank you for your loving fear and care of me.


You may think this is an over-fond humour in me; but I have heard of many that
have been found dead in their Beds, and in their Closets, when as their Friends
never mistrusted it, but thought they were asleep, or a^ study, which if they
had been found or known in time, they might have been recovered.


You say true Wife.


But now I know you are well, I will not disturb you any longer.


I will bear your kindness company.


Wife, thou art false.


'Tis strange to hear you say so, when but yesterday you made me such
protestations of your Faith, believing I was Virtuous, Chaste, and full of
Truth, which I did think Time had not power to alter your belief, and such Vows
and Protestations of your Affections to me, as if the fire of Love within your
heart did burn so clear, and flame so high, as nought could quench it out but
Death's cold damps, yet not so much, but still a heat within the ashes would
remain.


I confess, Wife, my doubts of Love did make me to try, at least to say so to
you.


True Love never makes doubts; and though you can dissemble with me, I cannot
dissemble with you, could the Gods command me, as they cannot, things unjust.


I perceive you are angry, Wife.


No truly Husband, I am rather grieved than angry, to think my honest truth
mistrusted: for Doubts are unjust to great Affections, true Love, and good
Intentions; and Examinations are scandalous to a strict chaste life, and makes
it seem as criminal: but could the World lay falsehood to your charge, and
should condemn you, yet my Affections would set you free, and rather tax my
self for want of Merit to deserve your Love, than you want love to give Desert.


Prithee Wife be not grieved nor angry, for 'tis natural for Love to be
suspicious: wherefore pray forgive my doubts.


My nature is to forgive, and not to bear a grudge or spleen in mind.


Then we are friends again.


My love is still the same, not to be altered.


Fool, How many degrees is there in Understanding?


Three.


Distinguish them.


There is a Celestial Understanding, a Terrestrial Understanding, and an
Understanding betwixt both, as an Airestial Understanding: Those that are
Celestial, are wise men; those that are Terrestrial, are fools; and those that
are betwixt both, as Airestial, are half-witted men.


I thought you would have said that those that were Terrestrial, were beasts.


O no: for beasts are one degree above wise men, two degrees above half witted
men, and three degrees above fools.


But how will you make that good, that beasts are wiser than wise men?


By all their actions: for beasts (for the most part) are more industrious,
prudent, temperate, and peaceable, than the best of men; neither do they
trouble their heads, nor break their sleeps, about the trifles of the World,
but govern their Affairs easily, and live orderly, every several kind agreeing
amongst themselves; besides, we are taught to imitate the Serpent and the Dove,
and Examples are Principles, and the Original is to be preferred before the
Copy, the Sample before the Pattern. Thus a Beast is preferred before a Wise
man, by reason all Men must learn of Beasts to be wise, and of Birds to be
virtuously honest, as to be harmless.


Certainly Madam, you will starve your self with eating so little.


Why a little serves Nature.


Yes; but there are great differences betwixt Natures: for mankind requires
more food than some kind of beasts or birds; for a man would be starved, if he
should eat no more than a Dormouse, or a Camelion, or a Sparrow.


But a Sparrow cannot eat so much as an Eagle, nor an Eagle so much as an
Ostrich: Likewise, as it is with Bird-kind, so it is with Mankind, some would
starve with that proportion another would surfeit on.


But surely there are none that could surfeit with your diet, as with Water and
Air, nay (most commonly) nothing but Air, Camelion-like: for you oft times for
a week together neither eat bit, nor drink a drop; and that which makes me
wonder more, is, that you naturally have a very good stomach, and can eat, when
you please, very heartily, and it thrives well with you; but my greater wonder
is, that when you do fast, eating now and then a bit, week after week, nay
month after month, yet you are not so lean, as to appear a Skeleton, nor so
weak, but you can walk two hours without resting, or being very weary.


Oh Custom is a second Nature, Ioan.


I would have your Ladyship accustom your self to live without eating, and
then you will be set in a Chronicle.


Who would strive for that, since most think Chronologers are Artificers, and
that their Chronicles are false.


Why some will believe it; and it were better to live in the memory of a few,
than to die to all memory, and to live by nothing.


I would have my Fame live only by singular and transcending Merits, not by
singular and melancholy Follies. I know my Errors, though I cannot mend my
Faults.


Well Madam, you are to give me thanks for bringing you acquainted with
Monsieur Amorous: for he is as fine a Gentleman as any our Nation hath.


Indeed he is the most obligingst person as ever I met with; but pray Madam,
what said he of me?


O he raves in your praise: He says you are the finest, sweetest, fairest and
kindest Lady that ever was: but did not your Husband examine you when you came
home?


No faith, not much, some slight questions he asked; but come into my Chamber,
and there let us discourse of Monsieur Amorous.


I will make you humbler than to give me such unmannerly words. What had you to
do in my Husbands, your Masters Chamber?


I went to speak with Tom my Masters barber.


What had you to do with your Masters barber? I am sure you had no use for him;
but I will beat you so, as you shall not be able to stir, much less to go
frisking into your Masters Chamber so often as you do.


What a Volley of words their gun-powder breath, and the fire-lock of their
anger hath shot into my Ears, giving me no warning to baracade them up, but
hath surprised my brain by their sudden assault, and hath blown up the
Magazines of my Contemplations; but all creatures love to make a noise, beasts
vocally, men verbally, and some actually in boisterous deeds.


How now Fool, what's the matter?


Why this is the matter fool, thy Sister fool hath beaten her Maid fool, for
kissing her Master fool.


For kissing her Masters fool, say you?


Nay by'r Lady, if she had done so, she had been wise: for if she had kissed
me, she had not been beaten; but she did not kiss me, Ergo she's a fool.


Husband, why seem you so sad?


My love to you makes me sad.


To me? Heaven bless me, what do you see in me to make you sad?


Why for these passions and ^rights that you fall into, like one in an
Epilepsie, and now you look as pale, as if you were ready to fall down dead.


Alas Husband, consider it is a timorous effect of Love, which is to be
pardoned, since it proceeds from the kindness I have to my Friends; it is
honourable to the World, and no dishonour to you, but only troublesome to my
self, and to those I naturally love, as Husband, Children, Father, Mother,
Brothers, and Sisters: And though fond Love and vain Fears may be produced from
the melancholy Spleen, yet those fears that proceed from my firm, true, and
honest Affection, are created in the Soul: for noble, and honourable, and
honest Fears, are the natural Issues of pure Love.


But Reason, the chief Magistrate of the Soul, and Governor of the Passions,
should temper the Excess.


O Husband, when Love comes to be tempered, it loses or quit^ the essential
part, and the vertical strength: for true Love is pure like gold, which is
debased with an allay.


But as Allay makes gold work better for use, so Temperance makes Love Happy
for life.


Well Husband, I will strive to love with Discretion.


Pray do, and go abroad, to divert your melancholy, and eat as others do, that
may have good meat and drink, and not live by the Air, as you do.


I shall obey you.


O Cupid, thou art a cruel Tyrant, making more wounds than remedies! And I am
wounded so, as I am sick with Love, and cannot live unless I am beloved again.

To make my Passions know, is all my care,
Lest he should love me not, is all my fear.

Sir Thomas Cuckold, Monsieur Amorous desires very much to make friendship with
you: for he is so taken with your Civilities, and your courteous Demeanours when
he was to visit you, that he swears you are one of the finest Gentlemen in the
Kingdom: He says you are so gravely wise, so hospitably kind, and so
generously free, as he honours you, and loves you with his soul.


I am his very humble Servant, and shall be glad, nay proud of such a worthy
Friend as Monsieur Amorous.


Have you returned his Visit?


No; but I'll go wait upon him immediately.


Childrens eyes are always flowing,
Women's tongues are always going,
And men's brains are always musing,
And mans natures all abusing,
And mans life is always running,
And mans death is always coming.

Whose death is coming?


Yours for any thing I know: wherefore take heed; for let me tell you; Death is
a rough fellow: for he pulls the soul out of the body, as a Barber-Chirurgeon
doth a tooth, sometimes with less pain, sometimes with more; but many times
Death is forced to tear the body, as a Tooth-drawer tears the jaw-bone, before
he can get it out.


What Instruments doth Death draw out the Soul with?


Sickness, Wounds, Passions, Accidents, and the like.


But how came Death and you so well acquainted?


We are near a Kin: for Death and Ignorance are Cousin-Germans.


Faith thou art rather a Knave than a Fool, and a Knave is nearer a-kin to
Life than Death.


Well, I am resolved to be Divorced from my Husband, for I cannot endure his
tyranny any longer: for he will let me have my will in nothing, crosses and
contradicts me in every thing.


Madam, we are taught to obey and humble our selves to our Superiors, and the
Husband is the Master of his Family, the Governor of his Estate, and Ruler and
Disposer of his Children, the Guide and Protector of his Wife.


Yes, he protects me well indeed, when he breaks my head.


May be your Ladyship doth provoke him with some unkind words.


What unkind words were they? I only said that Goos-quils made the best pens
to write with, and he said no, that Crows-quils were better for that purpose:
'tis true, at last I returned as bad words as he flung at me.


Truly Madam, it is a great grief to your friends and servants, to see yoo live
so disquietous together; besides, you torment your selves with your own anger.


That's the reason I would part: for I will never be a slave to his humour, I
will rather choose to die first.


It were better we were parted, than to live in a perpetual war together.


But Sir, is it not possible to temper your Passion?


No truly: for her words are so sharp, and pierce so deep, that they make me as
furious as a wild Boar that is hurt with a Javelin: And since she cannot
temper her Tongue, nor I temper my Passion, it will be best for us to live
asunder: for absence is the best and most certain remedy I can think of.


Have not you heard that my Master hath had a Quarrel, and is wounded?


Yes; and 'tis said he fought so valiantly, as he beat half a dozen lusty men,
and followed them so close, as they were forced to take shelter; and I have
also heard, that one of them he beat, swears to be revenged.


But if my Lady hears of it, she will run mad, or die.


O no, my Lady ( Ioan says) hath left those follies, and is become discreet.


Discreet? what is that? to be ill-natur'd, as not to care if her Husband or
Friends be killed?


O yes, so much to care, as to pity them, and be sorry, nay sad, if they should
be killed; but not passionately to drown themselves in tears, or to let their
grief feed on their life, and die.


O my sweet Amorous!


O my dear Cuckold, the delight of my Life!


Faith Amorous I have been to seek you all the Town over, and my Lady Procurer
met me, and sent me to the other end of the City, telling me you were at the
Horn-Tavern.


Why do you not know her humour? she will serve you twenty such tricks: for she
is the veriest Wag in all the Town, although she is in years.


Well, if I be not even with her, as very a Wag as she is, let me be condemned
for a fool.


O Madam, my Master is coming home, being wounded in a Duel.


Help, help, my Lady, my Lady.


What's the matter?


My Lady is killed with the report of my Masters being hurt.


It were fit you should be punished for telling her of it.


Take life again: for my Master is not so much hurt, as to be in danger of
Death.


Do you speak this as a known truth, or for to recover me?


As a truth upon my Conscience, Madam.


Then I charge you do not discover my Passion.


We shall not.


Go, and give charge to my Footmen, that none of them run home to tell my Wife
of my hurt, for fear of frighting her: for if she hears I am hurt before she
sees me, she will apprehend me worse than I am, and that may kill her.


Sir, she hath heard of it already.


Rogue that he was that he was that told her: who was it?


It was I Sir, when I went to fetch your Leaguer-cloak to keep you warm.


Villain, I'll run you through.


What you please Sir; but my Lady takes it very patiently: for when she heard
of it, she was playing on the Lute, and did not leave playing at the report.


I am glad she is so discreet.


Truly Sir I think my Lady is now one of the wisest and discreetest Ladies in
the Town.


What, for playing on the Lute?


No Sir; but for being so patient and temperate, as all wise persons are, who
bear afflictions with that Moral Philosophical Carelessness, and (as they call
it) passive Courage, composing their Faces into a Grave, surly Countenance,
fashioning their Behaviour with Formality, walking with a slow and stately
Pace, speaking nothing but Wise Sentences, and Learned Morals.


You are a moral Ass; and although my wounds are but small, yet I grow faint
with standing to hear a fool talk.


Sir, I believe you may wonder, and think it strange, that a woman can love a
stranger so soon and so much.


I do not think it strange in Nature, but I think it strange you should affect
me, a person which is no way worthy of your Favour and your Love, unless you
(like a Deity) humbly descend to mortals, accepting of their Adorations and
Offerings: And, as a mortal to a Deity, I offer up my Heart on the Altar of
your Obligations.


Here I do vow to Venus, not only to offer you my person, and all delights that
it can yield, but I offer you my Honour, my Fathers Honour, my Husbands Honour,
nay their lives, if you require it.


I must confess your Husbands life is dangerous, for we cannot well enjoy our
loves with safety, if that your Husband lives.


Name but the way unto his Death, and I will execute it.


I cannot; for you must do it as you find Fortune gives you opportunity.


Farewell and believe, I shall let no opportunity slip, that might bring my
designs to pass.


My revenge is too big for words, all actions to little for his punishment:
wherefore you furies, I invoke you to assist me, and if Hell gives me not help,
Heaven or Death give me ease.


Now Monsieur Amorous, you and the Lady Wanton shall not need to make so many
excuses to meet, for your going into the Country, with Sir Thomas Cuckold, you
will be always in the House with his Lady.


Faith, I have a great deal of business in the City, which may suffer, if I
should go out of the Town.


Out upon you, make excuses already.


I do not make excuses, I only tell you the truth of my affairs.


Can you have any affairs greater, or of more concernment, than waiting on a
Mistress, and such a Mistress as you were a dying for to enjoy, but a little
time since? well go thy ways Monsieur Amorous, for thou art like a woman that
hath fits of the Mother, often swouning and sick, but never dyes in any of
them.


The Lady Chastity would be like a draught of cold water, to bring me to life
again.


Let me tell thee, as those fits will never kill thee, so all the Chastity in
the Town can never cure thee.


Pray Iuno, my Husband doth not perceive I have cried.


You need not fear it, for the hot Cloth you laid to your eyes hath so^'d out
the redness, and abated the swelling thereof; but I doubt you will cry when you
see him.


I hope I shall be wiser, than to cry; for I would not have my Husband think me
a Fool, or troublesome, for the world.


But surely Madam, you must needs torment your Soul, to strive so much against
nature.


Love had rather torment it self, then torment what it loves.


Your Ladyship will make the old Proverb good, which says, love overcomes all
things, and surely it overcomes all when it overcomes nature it self.


Prethy Fool watch thy Master, and my Maid Nan, and when they are together give
notice, and I will give thee a new Coat.


I shall stand Sentinel, and give the watch-word.


Most Creatures their tails lies in their heads, or their heads lies in their
Neighbours tails, nose to breech; for they are always thinking thereof; which
makes their thoughts as sluts and slovens, their brains like to a heap^-up
Dunghill; but I must watch, my Master and his Maid to catch.


'Tis strange, that Sir Humphrey Disagree, and his Lady, cannot agree, yet they
are both of good natures, and generous Souls; keep a noble House, and are
bountiful to their Servants, kind and courteous to their Friends, and he a
very understanding Gentleman, and a learned Scholar, and an honest Man.


And she is a very Chaste Lady, a good Huswife, and very orderly in her House,
as concerning what she is to take care of, or to direct, and is very pious and
devout, and yet both to be so indiscreet as to fall out about light toys, and
frivolous matters.


'Tis strange, and truly great pity; wherefore, we ought to do our endeavour,
to try if we can make them friends.


Surely that might be easily done; for they are as apt, and as soon friends
when their anger's over, as they are apt to fall out when they are friends, and
I make no doubt to make them friends; but the business is to keep them friends,
and the question is, whether it were not better they should be parted friends,
than present enemies.


Yet we have discharged our parts, if we make or do our endeavour to make them
friends.


Well Sir, persuade the Husband, and I will try to persuade the Wife.


Sir, you do amaze me; for I have not been so long married as to give her time
for Incontinency, nor have I been so ill a Husband as yet, as to create, or
beget her hate towards me.


Sir, if I do not prove it, I shall be content to suffer the heaviest
punishment you can inflict upon me; and because your belief is wavering, I will
place you, where you shall hear her declare her intentions, as towards your
Death.


I long to prove the Truth.


Prethy my Lady Procurer, go into the Country with us, since we shall have such
good Company this Summer, as Monsieur Amorous, we will be so merry, and have
such sports and pastimes, as you shall not repent your journey.


Faith Madam I cannot; besides, you have no use of me now.


I am not as many others are, that when they can make no more use of a friend,
they strive to shun their Company.


Well, if I can go with you I will; but I doubt I cannot, at lest I cannot stay
above a week, or such a time with you.


Nay, if I once get you there, I will make you stay.


What a troublesome life is a Married life, bless me Heaven, who would Marry?


That would you if you could get a Husband; for Maids long to be Wives, and
Wives longs to be Widows, that they might Marry again.


That is, because Maids do not know the vexations of Marriage, which Wives do.


Faith Women take a pleasure in being vexed, crossed, and injured; for then they
have a ground for their anger, and revenge is the sweetest, and dearest
employment they have, or would wish to have; otherwise, they would be dull, and
idle without it; and to prove it, Widows are as ^arae^, and industrious to
Marry as Maids, and all is, because they would be vexed and crossed.


And are not men as desirous, and hasty to Marry as Women?


Yes, those that are Fools.


Why then you should marry, if any Woman would have you.


Such Fools as I, never, or very seldom Marry, for though we are Christened
Fools, we were Born Wise (where other men were Born Fool^, but Christened
Wise) as bearing the name of Wise and understanding Men, so as they have only
the name, but not the wisdom; the Truth is, we Fool, and other men are fooled.


Then Women are Born Wise, for they Fool Men.


Nay saith, poor Souls, they are for the most part double fooled; first,
thinking they fool, and then in being fooled.


Mistress, my Lady is very angry, that you let your Lute-Master stay, whilst
you talk to the fool; she says you will be as much a fool as he, with talking
so often with him.


Tell my Sister, I shall learn more good from the fool, than the sidler.


Mark you that Maid.


I mark that Children and Fools keep company together.


And the Maids and the Master.


Alas my poor Lady looks as if she would drop to the earth, so pale and ill.


How should she be otherwise, for she smothers in her grief, and dares not
discover it; and then she seldom sleeps, or eats, or drinks: and is so
restless, as she cannot sit still, but walks about her Chamber.


O Master Doctor, what do you think of my Husband, I hope he is in no danger,
is he?


I dare assure you Madam, he will be very well again; for he is only weak and
faint with loss of blood: for he taking the wound to be slight, did not take
care to stop it soon enough, whereupon his Spirits with his blood issued out so
much, as makes him so weak, as you see he is forced to keep his Bed.


But Doctor, Spirits is life, and if he wants the one, he must soon lose the
other.


'Tis true, if there were no Spirits left: but let me tell you Madam, there is
more danger when the Body hath too many Spirits, than when there is but a few;
for many Spirits make the Body too hot, by giving the Pulse too quick a motion;
which quick motion, fires the heart so much, as the blood becomes boiling hot;
which Perboyls the Liver, and the rest of the vital parts, and melts the fat,
wastes the flesh, and weakens the Sinnews, or Nerves, as being boiled as to a
soft, tender, quaking Jelly; that is the cause that the Sick is so weak they
cannot stand, having not that tough strength in their Sickness, and some after
their sickness; and shall continue weak, until such time as the Sinnews, and
Nerves grow harder, and tough again; and many times from the boiling blood
there arises such gross, and so many Vapours, which Vapours is Smoke, as they
stif^le the life, or at least disquiet the Brain.


But will you assure me Doctor?


As far as Human skill can assure you I will.


Fair Iuno hear me, send to thy Brother Pluto, to imprison Death in his dark
Vault, or at least for to forbid him to touch my Husband; and fair Goddess,
send health to raise his weary limbs from off his hated Couch, if not, give
order to grim Death to strike me too; for thou hast power on all, as being
chief in power.


Madam, my Master desires you would be pleased to come to him.


I will not only make me a Garland, but a Bower of Willow, where I will sit and
lament all forsaken Lovers; nay, I will sit and Curse so long, till I have laid
those Curses so thick together, as neither sighs, nor tears, nor prayers, shall
dissolve them.


I am come to bring you good news, Monsieur Amorous.


What is that my comfortable Lady?


The Lady Wanton is come to Town.


Pluto.


What do you swear, because she is come to Town?


No I swear, because I must go out of Town.


I hope you will not go out of the Town, now she is come to town.


Alas my occasions are such, as I shall be utterly ruined if I stay.


Then let me tell you, the Lady Chastity begins to listen to your Suit.


And is there hopes I shall enjoy her?


I cannot tell.


Nay Dear Lady, speak some comfort?


It is a solly, if you must go into the Country.


Neptune shall swallow the Country, rather than I will endanger to lose a
Paradise.


But if you stay, you will be ruined.


I rather shall be ruined if I go, for now I have considered it, I find, I have
such potent affairs here in the City, as they will force me to stay.


O Iupiter! how Inconstant is Mankind; for what they have enjoyed they despise,
and what they cannot get, they earnestly desire, and are restless in the
pursuit.


What say you?


I say you are an unthankful Man, and not worthy of a Ladies favour, as to
forsake her that loves you, and seek her that hates you; for know, the Lady
Chastity scorns your Suit, despises your Person, and hates your Humour.


Pluto take all your sex.


If he should, you would whiningly follow them to Hell, rather than miss their
Company, refusing Heaven, for effeminate Society.


They torment men more than Devils do.


Now Sir Humphrey Disagree and his Lady are made good friends, they are become
a loving Couple.


Heaven keep them so.


Truly I begin to believe they will; for they seem very sensible of their
errors, and they laugh at their one follies, to see, what ridiculous,
frivolous, and small matters, their quarrels are built with, and upon.


Look you Wife, here is the Priest that hath new married us, and our friend
that hath joined us in a loving friendship again.


And I will celebrate this Union with a Feast, to which, I will invite my good
friends as to my wedding day.


I perceive we shall be merry, pray let us have Fiddlers, and Dance.


That we will.


Come, come Wife, you are not so kind as you were wont to be; for you did use
to watch my looks, my sleep, and how I fetched my breath in my sleep, and what I
did eat, and how much I did eat, for fear I should be sick, and no help
unsought to cure me: But I perceive you are as all other women are, inconstant;
for now you do neglect me, and seldom come near me but when I send for you.


I dare not, for fear my diligence may prove loves indiscretion, and so my
service become a burdensome trouble.


You Cowardly Rogue, do you take the advantage of sickness to work your
revenge, do you come when my Husband is not able to defend himself?


Killed? if you had a thousand lives, my single life would kill them all,
rather than suffer my Husband to be murdered.


You Company of dull dead statues, move for shame, and bear away this Villain,
this murderous Villain.


Where should we carry him Madam?


Why any where, cast him into a Ditch, there let him lie and rot, like Beasts
without Butiall.


Carry him to a Justice, and bid the Justice dispose of him as he thinks fit,
telling him of his crime.


Let us search him, to see if he hath never another Pistol.


Go you Cowards, and carry him away.

O this effeminate sickness hath disgraced me; O how like a worm a sick man is,
which lies so low, and is so shiftless, that any beast treads out his life?


Why, had you been in health and strength, it would have been no Honour to beat
a Coward.


He seemed not such a Coward, but that he had some courage, or otherwise he
would not have adventured himself alone into a House, wherein were many
persons, which would have been his Enemies; but I am glad that you have the
honour of his wounds, but it is a miracle to me, to see how valiantly you did
behave your self, and yet by nature is so fearful.


Mistake not Love; for true Love is only a afraid when it cannot help, but when
it hath hopes to rescue what it loves, Mars is not More valiant.


Well Wife, I owe my life to your love, and I shall account you as Pallas, that
hath defended me with a prudent courage.


If you think I have done you service worthy a reward, pray give me a request.


That I shall, if it be that life you have defended, what is it?


It is to set love free from the Chains of discretion, and Jailer of
temperance; for it is impossible to confine love, but either it will die, or
break out in revenge.


Well Wife, hereafter I will never oppose loves ways.


Sir, did you hear what your Lady said?


Yes, I heard her say, she would poison me in a mess of broth.


What will you do to prevent it?


Leave that care to me, I shall be my own Sentinel, to discern the aproaching
Poison.


Their Deaths will be my triumph, and my Death a reprieve.


I am come to invite you to a Collation, for the Lady Wanton, for whom you at
first made costly Collations, is forced to invite you now to the like.


Faith Madam, I am so squezy stomached, that the very sight of a Banquet will
put me into an Apoplexy, as with an obstructed Surfit.


If you should deny her, you would lose you reputation amongst our Sex for
ever.


Well I will go, upon condition that you carry a message from me to another
Lady.


Most willingly, so it be not to the Lady Chastity.


Prethy Fool give me advice, as how to choose a Husband.


Faith you are wise to take a Fools Counsel; for Fools have for the most part,
best Fortune, either in their Counsel or Choice.


Why, are Fools Fortunes favourites?


Yes, for by Fools Fortune plainly shows her power, when wise men usurp it,
striving to take her power from her.


Then Fortune direct thee, to direct me.


Fortune is giddy, and directs by chance, which causes so many misfortunes.


Then by your direction, I may be unfortunate; but I will venture, wherefore
tell me how to choose.


Why then, you must choose a Husband by the Ear.


By the Eye you mean.


No faith, those that would be happily matched, must choose a Husband, or Wife
by the Ear, and not by the Eye: for though report is oft-times false, yet it
seldom flatters; nay for the most part, it is so far from giving merit its due
Praises, as it detracts therefrom.


But Fortune carries worthless men upon the tongue of fame.


'Tis true, but Fortune being giddy, is apt to stagger, and so to stumble, and
oft-times flings those worthless men in soul disgrace.


But hopes and fears, bribe or force the World to praise a worthless He, or
She.


'Tis true, hopes of gain are bribes, and fear of punishments are threats, for
to persuade, or force the tongue to flatter; yet none but Gods and Kings, are
subject to this flattery, and you are not to marry, either the one, nor yet the
other; for Gods join not to Mortals, and Kings are far too proud to marry
Subjects; nor were it good for you, if that they would, as that you were matched
to a King: for happiness lives in equality.


Faith thou art too wise to wear a Fools-Coat; wherefore cast it oft.


And faith I should be more Fool than my profession makes me, if I should cast
it off; therefore I will keep it on.


O my Dear love, I have such an opportunity, that Fortune could never have
given me a better; for my Husband is fallen Sick, and if I Poison him now, the
World will say, and think it was his Sickness that killed him, and that will
secure me.


I he be Sick, perchance he may dye, and that will save you the labour, and
hazard of poisoning.


O But if he should recover again, then I were undone; wherefore I will not
venture to rely upon his Sickness.


Use your discretion, but tis not fit we should be seen together; wherefore, I
will kiss your hands, and leave you for a time.


And I hope the next time we meet, we shall be rid of the obstructor of our
loves:


Madam, did you give Monsieur Amorous the present I sent you to give him?


Yes, there was Shirts, Caps, and Handkerchiefs, of each two dozen.


There were so.


They were of the finest Holland, and Flanders Lace, that ever I saw, what
might the present cost you?


Not much above five hundred pounds.


You speak as if it were but a slight present, but if your Husband knew of it,
he would think it were too much by four hundred ninety and nine pound nineteen
shillings eleven pence halfpeny farthing.


But what said Monsieur Amorous, when you presented that present, as from me?


At the first he would not receive the present, saying it was too costly, and
that he could not return enough thanks for it, and so should seem as
ungrateful against his will; but at last upon my persuasion, he took your
present, and to Morrow he will come and give you thanks.


I had rather meet him in some other place, than receive his visit at home,
where my Husband is.


Husband, how shall these Children live?


By Heavens Providence Wife.


I fear they will starve, unless your providence feeds them.


It was imprudently done to get them.


But now they are got, they must be provided for.


Yes, as Beggars provide for their Children, put them to the Parish.


The Parish will not keep them.


Then sell them to Animal Merchants, they will Traffic with them into the
Barbadoes, or Barmudes, or Virginy, or the like places.


And how shall I live?


Why you may go along, and be their Nurse.


And the Merchants Whore.


As you can agree; for he may sell you at as great a prize after, as if you
were honest; besides, your Children will prove you to be fruitful, for which,
they will give a double, or treble price for you; and if you thrive send me
word, and I will come to you, if I cannot live here.


I thank you Husband, for you have made me miserably unhappy, by your
mispendings, yet you would feed upon my good fortune, if it can be called good
fortune, to thrive with dishonesty.


Faith Fortune hath undone me; but may be she will be charitable to you.


I hope so, for Fortune never befriends those whom Vices besots, and though
your deboysteries have undone you, I hope my Virtues will help to save me.


But I never perceived your virtue to do you any good, but for any thing I
perceive to the contrary, you are like to starve, for all your virtues.


I hope when I am parted from you and your wickedness, Heaven will power down
some mercy on me.


Pray Madam inform me where Monsieur Amorous is, for I have sent two or three
times to his Lodging, and my Messenger is answered still he is from home.


He is a wanderer.


I think he is wandered into some other parts of the World, for after he went
from us, I sent a dozen Letters, whilst I staid in the Country, and received
not one answer.


Faith Madam Monsieur Amorous is one of the lasiest of Mankind.


I am resolved when I see him to chide him, for I could not conveniently do it
when he came to give me thanks for my present.


Sir Thomas Cuckold, you are welcome to the Town, for though I have had the
Honour to see your Lady two or three times, yet I could not got a sight of you
never since you came out of the Country.


My Wife did wish for your Company whilst we were in the Country, a hundred
times.


I should be glad to be in any place, to do my Lady Service.


I was abroad even now, where I met Monsicur Amorous, who looked upon me as if
he knew me not, or rather as if he did despise me.


Perchance he did not know you.


His memory must be very short, if he could forget me so soon.


Perchance Husband you looked strangely upon him.


Truly Wife I went to embrace him, as I was used to do, with kind love, and he
crossed the street to shun me.


I dare lay my life it is some mistake Husband.


Friends (Sir Thomas) must never be exceptious.


I am not apt to be exceptious, I will assure you Madam no Man is freer from
that humour than I am.


This feigned Sickness shall serve as a snare, to catch my Wives design.


My dear heart how are you?


Very Sick, so Sick as I fear Heaven doth envy my happiness, and will part us
by Death.


The Gods forbid! I hope you will live so long, as to Crown your Virtuous life
with aged years.


O no, I find my life draws towards an end, and Death will separate us from
each other; but you being young Wife, will soon forget me, placing your love
upon some other Man, in whom, all the remembrance of me will be buried.


Dear Husband speak not so Melancholy; your words strike such terror into my
heart, as I cannot endure to hear them, I had rather Death should strike me,
than you; Dear Husband, cheer up your self, your Disease is only Melancholy;
wherefore take such nurishing things, as may give your Spirits strength and
life; shall I bring you a little Burnt Wine, to comfort your Spirits, or some
Jelly broth to strenghten your Stomach?


If you please Wife.


Now for the poisoned Draught.


Here my dear heart, drink this.


What mean you Husband to lock the Door?


Because none shall enter, until the Broth be drunk Wife.


No Wife, you must not go out, for I mean to nourish you with that Broth that
you would have nourished me with.


Why Husband I am not Sick, I do not require Broth.


O yes Wife, your Soul is Sick, although your Body is well, and this Broth
may perchance cure the one, although it kills the other; wherefore drink it.


I will not.


You shall, and if you drink it not willingly, I will force it down you throat.


Dear Husband spare me.


Why, I give you nothing but that which you prepared for me, and if it were
good for me, it is good for you.


Dear Husband have mercy on me, and I will confess my crimes.


No Wife, no more mercy than you would have had one me, and therefore drink
it:


'Tis Poison Husband.


That is the reason you shall drink it Wife.


Dear Husband, let me live but to repent my sins, which like a black thick
cloud do cover all my Soul.


This will be a sufficient punishment, for if you be punished in this World,
you may escape the punishment of the next.


Good Husband consider youth, that is apt to run into errors, not being guided
with good Counsel, as it ought.


I will consider nothing, and therefore drink it, or by Heaven I will force you
to it, and therefore linger not.


You Gods forgive me my crimes, and let this deadly draught purge clean my Soul
from sin.


Now Wife have you any Amorous desires to Monsieur Disguise.


No, the fire of my unlawful love is quenched.


Ha she is dead, what hath my furious passion done, I was too sudden to crop
her tender life so hastily, without more strict examinations; for it was
likely thus spruse Gallant corrupted her with his alluring looks, and smooth
enticing words, which he knew well how to apply; and youth is credulous, and
women soon persuaded, and being joined in one they easily are overcome. I do
repent.

I will revenge my self of those that were the cause.


Where is Monsieur Amorous that he comes not with you, you said you would bring
him with you?


Faith he desires to be excused, for he saith he is not well.


This is but an excuse, for he hath made an hundred within this week; but since
he doth neglect me, I will have another that shall be more constant.


You are wise Madam: for since men are so various as they are, women would seem
but fools, should they be constant.


Well then Madam, you must do me a favour, for since I became acquainted with
Monsieur Amorous, upon your persuasion, you must contrive a private meeting for
me and another Gentleman, upon my persuasion.


Sweet Lady, you do oblige me to employ me in your Service.


O Ursely, I am glad to see thee with all my heart.


Truly Ioan, so am I to see you.


When did you hear of our good Lady, the Lady Poverty?


It was not long since I saw her.


And how doth she live poor Lady?


Why she lives privately, but is likely to live happy enough; for let friends
have now taken care of her and her Children, upon the condition that she will
receive no visits from her Husband, but banish his Company; left he should
increase their charge with more Children; neither will they allow him any
thing.


By my trath he doth not deserve any maintenance; but I am glad she is provided
for, being a shiftless creature for her self and Children, but where do you
live Ursely?


Why I live with an old Widower.


And I with a grave Matronly Widow, wherefore let us endeavour to make a match
betwixt them, that so we may live once again in a House together; for you and I
were always dear friends you know.


'Tis true Iane, but as you are my friend I must tell you, I should be an ill
friend to my self, if I should persuade my Master to marry.


Nay if it be so Ursely, make the best of him; and if thou wilt show me where
thou dwell, I will come and visit thee when I have leisure.


Come with me, and I will show you where I live.


Wife, where are the Fiddlers that you promised we should have.


I did forbid them to play, until such time as we had half dined, for their
scraping would hinder our eating.


Pray wife let them come in, for I love my meat should dance in my mouth, my
teeth keeping just time to the tune; and the Music will make my meat turn
nimbly in my mouth, and will heat my cast to a high gusto.


The noise that they will make, will take away my Stomach, and will make my
head ache; besides, no body will hear one another speak, neither will our
Servants hear what we call for.


It will make our Servants the more diligent, for Music will revive their
Spirits, and will make them agil; wherefore pray Wife let them come in and
play.


No pray Husband let them alone a little while longer.


If you keep them out until our Stomachs be full, we shall be so dull and
heavy with the vapour of the meat, as it will not be in the power of Music to
move our minds to mirth, or so drunk with Wine, as the Music will make us
mad.


I hope you will not be mad before you are drunk.


No Wife, I will be merry before I am drunk, wherefore Servants call them in.


Let them alone.


I say they shall come and play, and therefore call them in.


I say they shall not come in, nor play, therefore forbid them.


Surely I will be Master, and therefore they shall play.


Surely I will be Mistress of this Feast, and therefore they shall not play.


Call them.


Let them alone.


They shall come and play.


They shall not play.


Lord there is such doings within, as it is wonderful, my Master swears, my
Lady cries, and rails, and rails and cries.


in truth it is a sad Feast, and I was joyed to think how merry we should all
be.


And I pleased my self to think, what good cheer we should have, and what
dainties we should eat.


Why, so you may still.


No Faith in this Hurlyburby every one caught who catch could, that all is
vanished, and purloined away in this disorder.


Come let us go, and see whether they can agree or not.


That they can never do, so long as the sound of their tongues is within the
distance of their Ears; besides nature hath not matched their dispositions, or
humours.


You say right, in truth their Souls are mismatcht, and therefore it is
impossible they should ever agree.


Sir my Wife your Mistress is Dead.


No Sir, my Mistress and your VVhore is Dead.


You are a Villain to corrupt her.


You are a Villain to marry her.


Draw, for either or both of us Villains shall die.


I fear not Death nor you.


Justice defend the wronged, and take my part.


Heaven is just, to punish perjury with violent Death; O my Conscience, how it
stings me at my Death, with the remembrance of the wrongs I did my first love.


Do you know this Face, or have my sorrows disfigured it so much, as you cannot
call it to remembrance?


You powers above, affright not my fleeting Soul with visions, but let it
gently pass, and leave my body to the silent grave.


You Spirit divine, take not revenge; for I am truly sorry for the wrongs I did
thee in thy life.


I forgive you, and know I am no Spirit, and though I cannot say I live,
because I am dying, yet I am not dead, and that Letter I brought you, was to
disguise me the more by a false report; but I have acted the design of my
Travel, which was to end my life with yours, for since I could not enjoy you in
life, I desired to embrace you by Death, and so I shall.


O my Soul make haste and follow hers.



