Two New TRAGEDIES: THE Black Prince, AND TRYPHON: The first Acted at the
THEATRE-ROYAL, BY HIS MAIESTIE's SERVANTS; The Other By his Highness the Duke
of York 's Servants.

Both Written by the RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Earl of Orrery.

LONDON Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blew Anchor, in
the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1669.

IS England's Genius, that Victorious Name,
Which shakes the World and fills the mouth of Fame,
So much forgot, as you mispend your Wit
(which my Great Deeds as Greatly might have Wrote)
To court a Fancy, or improve a Dream,
And seek new Worlds for a less noble Theme?
Can you in Arms conspiring Nations see,
And think on any thing but Fame, and Me?
While the loud Cannon, with prophetic sound,
Foretells our King must be in Paris crowned,
And with such Heat once more invade the French,
As all the Waves between us cannot quench,
To the just fury of whose Fatal Blows
Fleets, Walls, and Armies they in vain oppose;
This Trophy, which so gloriously to yours
Add's a fourth Crown, and those four Crowns secures,
The Belgian Admiral usurping bore,
And I from him and all his Tritons tore.
He to another Element was blown,
Who thought himself Immortal in his own;
For still the Sea his Losses did Repair,
Till our Alcides killed him in the Air.
This Sword, which in French blood so often dyed
Entailed success on the young Edwards side,
Resigned to you shall all those Arts exceed
Which made him Triumph and that Kingdom Bleed.
Their frighted Lillies shall confess their loss,
Wearing the Crimson livery of your Cross;
And all the World shall learn by their Defeat,
Our Charles, not theirs, deserves the name of Great.


BRave Delaware, my Son doth let me know
How much my Empire to thy Sword does owe;
What, generous Youth, could more thy Fame advance
Then with thy hand to take King Iohn of France.

Sir, What you say, more Fame to me does yield
Then I could gain in Peictiers glorious Field;
For 'tis more honour to be prized by You
Then 'tis another Monarch to subdue.

No Subject winning Glory can admit
Such Joy, as does his King rewarding it:
The Chape of that Kings Sword whom thou did take
The Crest for ever of thy Arms shall make;
In that addition to them shall be shown,
While the World lasts, the honour thou hast won:
To thee thy General leaves it to relate
The English Glory and the Frenchmans Fate.

As soon, Sir, as the Prince to Bourdeaux came
(So much doth Glory his great Soul inflame)
He took the Field, and did forthwith regain
All that King Iohn possessed in Aquitaine;
Then with like speed Anjou he did subdue,
And all his Towns, but Poictiers, of P^itou,
That place alone his Forces durst oppose.
Guesclin the Gallantest of all our foes
Poictiers did for their Governor admit,
And he a while bravely defended it,
Yet our Success was but a while denied,
That by a greater it might be supplied;
For Heaven decreed, that Poictiers, Sir, should yield
As deathless Wreaths to you as Cressy Field;
The noblest Wreaths which ever Victor wore
Wreaths which shall last when Time shall be no more.

But tell me how King Iohn employed his time,
While those three Provinces were torn from him.

He, the mean while, raised all the Powers of France,
And to relieve the City did advance.
The Prince had notice of a strength so great,
And timely might have made a fair retreat;
Yet since before the place he once did lie,
He was resolved to take it, or to die:
From this resolve he could not, Sir, be won.

He did therein, but what became my Son;
No humane force could ever yet subdue
An English Prince, and English Army too.

The French appear, and Po^ctiers spacious plain
Was not enough their Army to contain;
The advantages of ground our General takes,
And plants before his Squadrons sharp'ned Stakes;
With the like Art, but yet in thicker Ranks,
He strongly fortified his Rear and Flanks.
The Word was given, and all our Bows were bent,
When a French Herald to the Prince was sent,
Who told him that his King had thought it good,
To avoid the shedding of much Christian blood,
To let him know he could not win the Field,
And all should have fair quarter, would He yield:
The Prince unmoved did instantly reply,
None does deserve to live who fears to die:
Go tell your King, those English I command
The name of Quarter hardly understand;
But that, ere night, he may have cause to know,
What we refuse to take we may bestow.

This answer did the message well befit.

The Herald, Sir, returned amazed at it,
Their odds in number raised them to that height,
They thought they came to take us, not to fight.

How many were the French?

-- -- -- -- -- Themselves confessed,
That eighty Thousand men they were at least.

What was my Son?

-- -- -- -- The truth I do not wrong,
Protesting he was but eight Thousand strong;
But those eight Thousand, Sir, were English men.

And One of those may well be reckoned Ten.

Sir, since your Army by your Son was led,
We all did then believe what now you said;
For in his eyes we our Success did see,
His looks did ante-date our Victory.
His face, that morning, to us all did show
Those Laurels, which that evening Crowned his Brow;
Now all the Drums do beat, the Trumpets sound,
The Soldiers shout the trembling Air does wound,
The flying Arrows such thick clouds had made,
As even the heat of Fight produced a shade:
Our Van brave Oxford and great Talb^t lead,
Whose Swords, that day, did much increase the Dead:
Suffolk and Warwick did command our Rear,
And there deserved those Titles which they bear;
So did Audley, Sir, and Barkley too,
Whom all did imitate but none outdo.

The like at Cressy by those Six was done,
Danger they slight where Glory may be won.

Fortune, a while, did fear to ruin France,
But when the Prince his battle did advance,
He courted her with Valour so Sublime,
As she turned just, and did declare from him;
They in three Armies did divide their Powers,
And every one of them did treble ours;
By which our Prince found, when the day was done,
That he had fought Three battles to gain One:
So many heaps of Frenchmen there were slain,
As into Hills they seemed to change the Plain;
And all those Clouds, their Horses feet had raised,
Were with the Blood of their dead Riders laid:
Two Lords armed like King Iohn were in the Field,
And by our Princes hand they both were killed;
In doing which he did prodigious things,
For though they were Not, yet they fought like Kings,
While in the Field wars bloody Game was plaid;
Guesclin did sally, and was Prisoner made.

In your Relation you omit one thing
I fain would hear, 'tis, how you took the King.

Sir, In the heat of Battle 'twas my chance
To fight with, and to take King Iohn of France;
'Twas Fortune only favoured me in this.

Your Modesty great as your Valour is,
For here my So^ to me at large does write
The Honour which you purchased in the Fight.
And all those brave Attempts which you did make,
Before your Regal Prisoner you did take;
Nothing which you performed from me is hid

He writes what I'd have Done, not what I Did:
When the French King into my power did fall,
I did conduct him to our General,
Who then was giving of Rewards to those
Who took two hundred Colours from your Foes,
Amidst those Glorious Trophies, Sir, he stood,
His Armour covered all with dust and blood;
Those sights afresh the Captive King did wound.

None in a Nobler Posture could be found.

When to the Prince I named King Iohn of France,
He hastily to meet him did advance,
And to his Prisoner did as humbly bow,
As, Sir, he could have done, had it been You.

He did therein what did a Prince befit,
Fierce in the Fight and Humble after it.

The King then said, since Fortune does decree,
I should be taken by my Enemy;
Part of the wounds she gives, she also cures,
Since now I fall into such hands as Yours;
I am your Prisoner, Sir, and come to know
The end you aim at by my being so.
The Prince, in whom all Virtues do reside,
Pitying the Kings misfortune, thus replied;
That, mighty Prince, to which I most pretend
Is, from an Enemy you'll turn a Friend:
And if you'll grant what now is begged by me,
I'll prize it more then this days Victory.
These words the Prince with such an Accent graced,
As by the King he closely was embraced,
Who told him, in this Action you have shown,
You have more ways to Conquer me then one,
And, Sir, to prove this does my Mind subdue;
That which you ask of Me I beg of You.

This last Success transcends the other Three:
'Tis more to Gain then Beat an Enemy.

All things to tell you too much time would take,
But then so strict a Friendship they did make,
As Our Prince vowed he would solicit you
To grant the King a Peace and Freedom too;
Then by a Generosity Sublime,
He did that night at sopper wait on Him:
By which that Vanquished Monarch well might boast,
He there Received more Honour then he Lost.

My Son in this did such High Worth express,
As I more value It then his Sccess.

The List of all ^hose (...) which we took
Are by the Prince presented in this Book;
All things secured which we had won by force,
He with King Iohn, for England steered his course.
The wind so favoured him, as yesterday
He safely landed in Southampton-Bay,
From whence he sent me Post to let you know
They both tomorrow, Sir, will wait on you.

For their Reception every thing prepare
Which may your joys and your Respects declare.
I'll treat this Royal Prisoner at a rate
Proportioned to his Title, not his Fate.
My Actions, not my Words, shall let you see,
How much, brave Youth, You are esteemed by Me.

Ah my dear Friend; it is in vain you strive
To give that Ease which only Death can give.

This is the day you promised I should know
That Fatal Sorrow under which You bow.
I thought the Charms of Music might abate
The Grief which springs from what you will relate.

Too mean a thought you of my Grief admit,
In thinking any thing can Lessen it.
Who would not all delights of Life decline
That had a Soul so out of Tune as Mine?

Do not from such a Friend your self refrain,
My Help may put your Soul in Tune again:
'Tis to your Promise, Madam, that I trust,
Let not your Sorrow make you prove Unjust.
If Grief should make you to such Wrong submit,
You will Deserve as well as Suffer it.

My Fatal Promise why do you pursue;
Though Old Griefs, when related, turn to New,
Yet you no longer shall of me complain,
I'll rather Heighten then Deserve my Pain.
You know, Dear Friend, when to this Court I came,
My Eyes did all our bravest youths Inflame:
And in that happy state I lived a while,
When Fortune did betray me with a smile;
Or rather Love against my Peace did fight;
And, to revenge his Power which I did ssight,
Made Edward our Victorious Monarch be,
One of those Many who did Sigh for Me.
All other Flames but His I did deride,
They rather made my Trouble than my Pride:
But this, when told me, made me quickly know,
Love is a God to which all Hearts must bow.

'Tis certain every Creature that hath Breath
Is no more privileged from Love than Death:
Think you what is your Duty is your Crime,
Or else do you repent you Conquered Him?

Oh had you heard, in what a Mourning way
He the first time his Passion did display,
And had you seen that Grief and matchless Grace
Which did at once Cloud and Adorn his Face;
You had admired such Differing Charms to see,
But more admired had they not Conquered Me.

I was your Confident in that Bright Fire
Which Both did in each others breast Inspire:
A Fire might teach all Lovers how to Burn,
Then sure 'tis something else which makes you Mourn.

Oh if he had been still to that Bright Flame
As Faithful, and as Constant as I am;
Justice her self, no Fire could higher prize,
But that Blessed Fire in which the Martyr Dies.
But he is False --

-- If what you say were true,
Madam, my Friendship must have seen it too;
'Tis Jealousy which has usurped Love's place.

Love has more piercing eyes then Friendship has;
From the Suns sight you may the World remove,
Sooner than hide from Lovers change in Love:
His Glorious Flame from me in Clouds is set,
And he Adores the fair Plantagenet;
To that Bright Widow he his Heart does yield.

Alas since her Brave Lord in France was killed,
She only doth the Power of Grief obey.

How soon does Love wipe sorrows Tears away,
She's Courted by a Monarch whose Renown
Does make him greater much then does his Crown:
To Conquer All he has resistless Powers;
His Sword subdues His Sex, his Virtues Ours.

Then let his Virtue which you so much Prize
Suppress your Jealousy and dry your Eyes;
Virtue so Firm as nothing can Remove,

Virtue is nothing but a Name in Love,
What cannot Love, when he is Victor, do?
Which makes me think their Change their Virtue too.

With equal Flames the King your Flames did meet,
And daily breathed his Passion at your feet:
Myrtles, when given by You, were Dearer held
Than all those Lawrells Vanquished France did yield.
He went with Grief that Empire to subdue,
Hating what ever severed him from You.

I see his Change in spite of all his Art,
He suffers not, but plays the Lovers part.

Let not such Thoughts be entertained by you,
He Courts you now more then he used to do.

This does the Truth of what I said detect,
His Passion now is changed into Respect;
And Love which once was High, and is decayed,
Like the Sun setting, casts the greater shade.
From all his secret Vows he does depart,
'Tis False Love only needs the help of Art.

Such Doubts his Constancy may Over-throw,
Who Thinks him False provokes him to Be so;
Did you to him your cause of Grief unfold?

'Twould not deserve that Name, could it be told;
She meanly Loves who slighted can admit,
Ought but her Love alone can tell her it.

No wonder Grief thus in your Breast does Reign,
When you from your Physician hide your Pain;
Let Him but hear from whence your Sorrow grows.

'Tis Love, and vain to tell him what he knows.

Then I will tell it him, and he will fly
Faster to You, than to a Victory;
And quickly learn to clear his Fancied Fault.

A Perfect Lover needs not to be taught,
And if he were with Lovers t^ue Passion Fired,
He would not need to Learn, he would be Inspired.

At my request ease your distempered Mind,
And on my life you suddenly shall find,
To think him faulty is to think Amiss.

He is too Guilty, since I think he is.

I hoped your absence (now three years complete)
Had cured your Passion for Plantagenet,
And you would Fame to hopeless Love prefer.

I courted Fame but more to merit Her,
Since I durst Love, not having Fame achieved,
Since I Adored her while her Husband lived,
Now that the Noble Kent three years is dead,
Now that with Laurel War has Crowned my Head,
How can you be, dear Sister, so unwise,
To think that Love can fall while Hope does rise?

You know, Dear Brother, only for your sake
That I three years incessant care did take,
To make my self your Conquerours Confident;
But though I have accomplished my Intent,
Yet all I Gained by it, is to believe
She never your Addresses will Receive;
For since she lost her Lord the Noble Kent,
She thinks all time not paid to Grief misspent.

In what you say much cause of Hope I find,
Since Grief t^ unwelcom'st Passion of the Mind
She does admit within her to Reside,
Love the most welcome cannot be Denied.

Do not your Hopes with such wild Fancies feed,
Her's is a Grief which does from Love proceed;
You by your Passion strangely are mis-led.

Is it then possible to Love the Dead?
We but to those Alive can Love express,
For when the Cause does die, the Effect must cease.

Your own strange Fate opposes what you said,
Your Love does Live and yet your hope is Dead.

Since Love has over her Triumphant been,
My Flame is such, to doubt Success were Sin.

Nothing from Sorrow can her Soul remove,
And Grief is still an Enemy to Love;
But were her Grief subdued, yet I must say
A greater hind'rance does obstruct your way;
In the King's Heart a growing Flame does rise,
Which he discovers by his Sighs and Eyes;
He is the greatest Monarch of the Earth,
And greater by his Actions then his Birth.

Had I her heart, his Titles would not sway,
In Loves just balance only Love does weigh.

The Nature of our Sex I'll not disguise,
Our Servants Loves less than their Powers we prise;
For but in Name alone their Hearts are ours,
But we effectually do share their Powers.

Yet Love would tell her, 'tis a greater thing
To Conquer, then it is to be a King.

There's something else which makes my Care more great
Then all which I to you have mentioned yet.
You know the Prince of Wales did once appear
Your Conquerours Lover, and was loved by her,
And he to wed her gained the Kings Consent;
But unexpectedly she married Kent:
I often pressed the Cause she would reveal,
Yet she the secret does from me conceal;
But though she on the Prince does lay the Blame
Yet she will weep when she but hears his Name.
A thousand other Proofs do make me doubt
That Fire is only covered not put out.

Ah Cleorin, there's none but I alive
Of that Strange Marriage an account (...) give:
You know when to the Wars of France I went
I made a Friendship with the Earl of Kent;
Which in short time did grow so strong and high,
As when he found he of his Wounds should die,
He to strict silence first did me Engage,
Then told me how he gained his Marriage,
Which is so strange a story, I dare swear
She never can love him, nor he love her.

I will not beg you then to tell me why,
Since you have tied your self to secrecy:
Brother, I now must leave you, for you know
Our King does on King Iohn a Masque bestow,
To which he did Plantagenet invite,
And thither I must wait on her to night.

Ah since you must be gone, yet e're you go
Let me at least what I may hope for know.

The highest joy to which you can pretend,
Is, that your Mistress you may make your Friend.

If She does Friendship and not Love bestow,
At once she'll make me blessed, and wretched too.

She'll meet your Friendship, but your Love she'll shun,
Despair must do what Reason should have done.

This is a cruelty she should abhor,
She should not do so much, or should do more.

While your Suspicion to such height does rise,
You wrong at once my Passion and your Eyes:
Ah Madam, be no longer so unkind,
Since you to think me False must think me Blind;
How can you doubt of any change in me,
When such fair Eyes are your Security.

Ah do not, Sir, condemn what I have done,
To doubt your Love does more declare my own:
'Tis Love, not Jealousy which I detect,
Then for the causes sake excuse th'effect.

Madam, there is but one degree you know
'Twixt doubting I am false and thinking so.

To you no clearer Proof, Sir, I can give
I think you are not false, then that I live;
For did I doubt you guilty of that wrong
My death should tell it you, and not my tongue.

The power of Kindness, Madam, you confound,
Making your Love the Sword with which you wound;
If from this day my Ruin you will date,
Then by some other Weapon act my fate;
Your Anger Misery enough does prove
Without ascribing of it to your Love.
'Twere better far I fell by your Disdain
Then have your Love my blessing turn to Pain.

What I have said too warmly you pursue.

How can you love him whom you think untrue?
Admire not what you said so much does move,
Since if you think me false I lose your love;
Against such groundless Fear there's no defence.

Love feels no greater Torment then Suspense,
Since she who truly Loves had rather know
Her Lover false, than always think him so;
For 'tis an ill more sensible and high
To Live tormented still, then 'tis to Die:
But you may end those Torments I deplore,
If you will never see my Rival more.

This is a Remedy severe and new,
Rudeness to her must Kindness be to you;
And of my Love can you no proof admit
But what will make me for your Love unfit?

Ah were I Blessed or Cursed to such degree
As that you thought some other loved by Me,
I would for ever from his sight be gone
And would in your contentment find my own;
Were your Affections but for me as great
Then you no more would see Plantagenet.

She is the nearest Kinswoman I have,
Her Lord too in my Service found his Grave;
Nature and Honour these respects approve
And make that Duty which you doubt is Love.

Alas were you not changed, you would not be
Civil to her, rather than kind to me.

Will this your Fatal Jealousy remove?
I swear I never spake to her of Love.

Love is not always by Discourse made known,
It may be spoken in a Look or Groan;
Some in those ways more Passion can dispense
Then others by the Charms of Eloquence;
Your Oath I fear is dictated by Art,
Your Tongue is innocent, but not your Heart.

This, Madam, too much your unkindness shows,
You neither will believe my Love nor Vows.

Do not admire my Doubts and Fears are high
When you that easy cure of them deny;
I saw you gaze on her, much more then you
Did gaze on me when I did know you true;
Which to my Torment, Sir, does let me see
You loved Me not, or loved Her more then Me;
Man's Art to such a height could never rise
As love from a true Lover to disguise;
Oh Sir, it is high time I let you know
Though Love is blind, yet Lovers are not so.

He never yet the height of Love has known
Who only found it in a Look or Groan;
When I to you that Passion did express
Which, Madam, only with my Life shall cease:
Though many Looks and Sighs to you I sent,
Yet by Discourse too I did give it vent;
If through all passages it does not press,
It soon will kill the heart it does possess:
Love is so vast a Passion, as the breast
Is much too small to hold so great a Guest.

Great Love is like great Grief, and all, Sir, hold
That Grief is weak or small which can be told.

Madam, A pressing business calls me now,
Be therefore satisfied with this strict Vow;
My carriage to Plantagenet shall be
Such as shall make you grant you've injured me.

Now my Sevina, think you not that I
Had a sufficient ground for Jealousy.

Madam you had, but give me leave to say
You to suppress it took a hopeless way.

To what way else could I have had recourse.

A Lover never was brought back by force;
But since he raises Jealousy in you,
Madam, resolve to make him Jealous too:
You by a double Right must gain his Heart,
First own it to your Beauty, then your Art:
Love is like Health which all men value most,
Not while it is possessed, but when 'tis lost.

I'll rather bear Misfortunes worst Assault
Then own my blessing to a seeming Fault;
If what you now propose I should approve,
Virtue would blush at my Success in Love;
Honour alone shall guide my Actions still,
Rather than I will do, I'll suffer Ill:
My Rival nor the King shall ever say
To gain my Right I took a guilty way;
She has the Happier, I the Nobler part,
She may Possess, but I Deserve his Heart.

SInce you are Prisoner by the fate of War,
I shall not only make it, Sir, my Care
Your Grief by such diversions to allay,
But quickly too to take their Cause away;
Two powerful Motives me to this persuade,
The Friendship, Sir, you with my Son have made,
And that rare Fortitude which you have shown
In Poictiers Field, and after it was won.

Sir, Of that Fatal place I'll not complain,
Since (...) in it his Friendship did obtain,
Which I so prize as I'd the loss repeat
Rather then miss a happiness so great.

As much as Virtue Fortune does out-shine,
So much your Victory surpasses mine;
A treaty will my bonds on you untie,
But yours on me will last eternally.

That Treaty we to morrow will begin,
And you shall find I'll so proceed therein,
As you and all the world, Sir, shall confess
Justice shall guide me in it, not Success:
Doubt not but what I promise shall be done,
Tis what I ow my Honour and my Son.

Thus using your Success, the world will see
How justly you deserve your Victory;
Force in rough Fetters may the Body bind,
But only Friendship Captivates the Mind.

It is already, Sir, so late I fear
As I no longer will detain you here;
But only for the Ladies sake to ask
If you have been delighted with their Mask.

While they are here, a Sin I should esteem
My being pleased with any thing but them;
To such a height their conquering Beauties rise,
To admire them only I employed my Eyes.

All those who treat of Love are much abused,
If Love be dangerous while 'tis diffused;
To morrow they attend you at the Ball,
Then 'twill perhaps on one contracted fall.

'Tis harder, Sir, as 'tis by trial known,
To resist many then resist but one;
But much more hard when each of them I see
Has Charms enough alone to conquer me.

Stay my Sevina, here from hence you go
I must your Heart as you my Heart shall know;
Me thought I saw King Edward by Surprise
Look on my Rival with a Lovers Eyes;
If while I'm present he does her Adore,
Ah when I'm absent sure he does it more.

Through a false Optic, Madam, still we look,
When Jealousy hath once possession took;
I marked the King, and if His Looks were true
He with Loves eyes did only look on you:
But I am sure the Princes Eyes were set
With so much Passion on Plantagenet,
As all my Skill in Looks I think is vain,
If his old Wound bleeds not afresh again;
And I'll ne'er trust a Woman's Eyes if She
Be not as sick of that Disease as He.

I am amazed at what I hear from you.

Madam, You'll find what I have said is true,
And if the Prince and She each other Love
The Kings Addresses will Successless prove.
Should his imagined Passion be as high
As you can think though thought by Jealousy,
This, Madam, ought your Trouble to suppress.

It does increase rather then make it less,
Ah what Delight or Glory will it be,
To find her Scorn does drive him back to me;
May she still rather of her Conquest boast,
Then I regain so meanly what I lost:
My Lover to my Rival I will loose,
Sooner then Take a King she does Refuse.
Then do not think I'll do so Low a thing:
I'll Nobly Loose or Nobly Keep the King.

My hopes of Serving you I must forsake,
When you a Poison of your Cordial make.

What greater curse in Love can Fortune send
Then make the way unworthy to the end?
For should He from my Rival now refrain,
I must attribute it to her Disdain:
I by my doubt did but the Pain endure,
But what you said cuts off all Hope of Cure.

Pray speak your thoughts since I have told you mine.

Alas dear Friend, they are the same with thine;
But to be used by Him as I have been
Does make me blush at Love as at a Sin.

I oft have begged you, Madam, but in vain,
To tell me why you of the Prince complain.

'Tis that alone from thee I can conceal,
Nay I that Secret would to thee reveal,
Had I not Loved the Prince to such degree,
As I had rather be Condemned then he:
Ah what can my Respect more clearly show,
Then willingly his Guilt to undergo.

I cannot think a Prince of such high Fame,
As all the World does homage to his Name,
To such a horrid Crime can condescend;
As is unfit for you to tell your Friend.

To those bright Stars which guide us 'tis a shame,
That so much Falsehood dwells with so much Flame.

Heaven seldom does that man with Laurels Crown
Who ought by Thunder to be stricken down,
And Crimes which you to me dare not relate
Cannot but Merit, Madam, such a Fate:
I doubt you are betrayed by some abuse.

Oh that his Sin would but admit Excuse;
Which that it cannot doubtless you'll admit,
When I have vowed, 'twas he which told me it.

Madam, You might his words mis-understand.

Alas he writ them me with his own Hand.

Oh in what Throne can Sacred Virtue Reign.
When Such a Prince does Falsehood entertain.

I know not which for wonder is more ^t.
The Offence he did or my out-living it;
But though no usage ever was so ill,
Yet, Cleorin, I fear I Love him still;
For when I saw him at the Mask to night,
From him I could not take away my sight;
Blushes and Sighs each other did pursue,
Too certain Signs that what I Fear is True;
But I'll no more this guilty task prolong,
Who can the Offender Love, deserves the Wrong.

Since all things, Sir, to ease your Grief are done
By the Great Edward and his Greater Son,
Why show you now more Sorrow in your Look
Then when at Poictiers you were Prisoner took.

Ah who could think more could by Fate be done,
Then rob me of my Freedom and my Crown.

You did unworthy of your Fate appear,
So bravely, Sir, those Losses you did bear.
Your Conqueror, for a constancy so high,
Applauded You, and blamed your Destiny.
Heaven did to you your Miseries assign,
Only to make your Virtues brighter shine.

Over my Sorrows I could still command,
Were I but Fortunes malice to withstand;
She could my Hands but as a Prisoner bind,
But now I am a Captive of the Mind;
At Poictiers I by Force did lose the Field
But here alas I willingly do Yield.

I cannot, Sir, believe so ill of you
As that you blame what willingly you do.
How can you bear the worst of Fortunes blows,
Yet sink with what you on your self impose.

This Generous Prince doubly does me subdue,
By force of Arms, and force of Friendship too.
I must lament what he hath done for me,
Since now 'tis Sin to hate my Enemy.

Blame not your Fortune, but your self Com^end,
For making a Brave Foe a Braver Friend.

He by my Ruin makes his Glory rise,
Then by my Friendship from Revenge he ties,
Oh do not blame me if I feel Remorse,
When I'm subdued by Kindness as by Force.

Your Friendship for him, Sir, was never sound,
If such effects of it your Soul does wound;
Ah let him never, Sir, my King subdue
Both by his Fortune and his Virtue too.
Your Honour is so Firm and so sublime,
'Twere Sin to think you Guilty of that Crime:
'Tis something else which does your Grief Inspire,
After what you would hide I'll not inquire.

Ah Friend, I grant 'tis something else indeed,
Yet from his Friendship does my Grief proceed,
For at the Mask King Edward made for me
The Bright Plantagenet I there did see,
And soon my Heart a Passion did admit
Vast as those Beauties which created it:
Such Features, Colours, Motions, and such Eyes,
With the Result which from them all did rise,
My Soul to this belief did quickly win,
That Yielding Duty was, Resistance Sin.

Your Grief from Love not Friendship then does grow.

It springs at once from Love and Friendship too:
For I observed, during the masking Night,
The Prince on her did always fix his Sight,
And often from his breast a Sigh wold steal
Which as his Looks his Passion did reveal;
But that which made my Trouble much more great
Was, when her Sight did with the Prince's meet:
A bright Vermillion in her Face would rise,
Then with a Sigh she would cast down her Eyes;
What stronger Prooff could either of them show,
That he loved her, and that she Loved him too:
Condemn not then my Grief who must contend,
Both with my Conqueror, and with my Friend.

Let that which does your Grief your Glory prove,
Making your Friendship overcome your Love;
'Twill be by all a Greater Action held,
Thus to Decline a Love then Gain a Field;
As much as Virtue above Fortune is
So much your Glory will out-rival his;
For you a Nobler Conquest this secures,
Let Force his Triumph make, but Friendship yours.

Guesclin, Such talk as this you must forbear,
The greatest Glory is her Chains to wear;
In what thou move, thou dost mispend thy breath,
None cures her Beauties Wounds but She or Death.

'Tis strange to be so Vanquished the first hour.

That does not show my Weakness but her Power.
Her Beauty only has the Right and Art,
At the first Sight to Captivate a Heart;
Her Eyes can be no more opposed then Fate,
Others may Raise, but she does Love Create.

I once believed the Empire of your Breast
Could only by Valeria be possessed.

I was my self to that belief confined,
But now Plantagenet has changed my Mind;
She claimed my Heart in such a Charming way,
That to Refuse was worse then to Obey;
Guesclin, She gives, as to my cost I prove,
New Rules in Beauty, and new Laws in Love.

This sudden change I cannot, Sir, but dread;
The News of it will strike Valeria dead.

Who on my Conquerours Beauty does reflect,
Will find the Cause does justify th'Effect.

But why have you your Heart so soon resigned
To Outward Beauties, till you knew the Mind.

Ah when the Mask was done, I quickly found
Her Mind was like her Eyes with Brightness Crowned;
Such heightened Wit did in her Words appear,
As she subdued my Heart too by my Ear:
'Twas vain alas to think of a Defence,
When she had Charmed my Soul in every Sense;
Then do not hope my Passion to remove,
But as thou art my Friend assist my Love.

Though I foresee this Passion many ways
Will to your Fame and Freedom Trouble raise,
And that the Prince's Love obstructs your way,
Yet, Sir, since you Command me I Obey;
I'll make it, Sir, my business now to win
Your Conquerours Confident fair Cleorin:
To Lovers, Sir, the Favourite Women are;
The same as Outworks to a Town of War;
Though to the Town compared but small they look,
Yet those once gained, the Place is sooner took.

Go my dear Guesclin then, and quickly try,
If Friendships Wings as fast as Loves can Fly.

Oh Delaware, mine is so strange a Grief,
As I nor Hope nor Wish to have Relief.

May you not to your Servant, Sir, declare
That Grief in which he begs to have a share?

Ah why should I that Grief to you impart,
Whose Trouble for it will more Wound my Heart;
With my own Sorrows I can scarce contend,
Add not to these the Sorrows of my Friend.

Since you to me so high a Title give,
I humbly beg you by it to believe
Nothing to you so Great a Grief can be
As this denial, Sir, would prove to me;
I, Sir, your Friendship Treats me at this rate,
'Twill make your Kindness wound me like your Hate.
Should I want Power to make your Grief decline,
I'll not increase it by disclosing mine.

That deep Affliction under which I Groan
Cannot alas be eased by being known;
Yet since no proof you'll of my Friendship take,
But what your trouble and my own must make,
Rather then you should fear the Truth of it,
I to that proof which you desire submit;
I doubt not you have heard how heretofore
The Fair Plantagenet I did Adore,
And that I had some ground to think that she
Nor Cruel nor Ungrateful was to me;
Heaven knows I Loved her with so chaste a Flame
As I to Marry her did only aim,
To which at last my Father did consent,
When she next day but one did marry Kent;
And which is worse, if worse then this can be,
She for it ne'er excused her self to me.

To offer at it had increased the abuse,
Who could excuse a fault above excuse?

I who through all Wars dangers oft have past,
I who a thousand times have Death out-fac'd,
In all those Horrors did less Trouble see,
Then in Plantagenets inconstancy.

'Tis she, not you, which should her Change repent,
Since in her Sin she found her Punishment.

Alas to me a sad Revenge it proved,
To see her Ruined whom so much I Loved:
What worse to me could She or Fortune do,
Then make her Punishment my Torment too;
A Torment which all others did out-do,
Since I who felt it cannot tell it you;
But yet at last Honour prevailed so far,
As I forsook Plantagenet for War;
Hoping in War by Death to find Relief,
Or else in time to wast away my Grief.

In her Inconstancy and in that War,
Heaven showed it took of you a double Care;
With deathless Laurels you have Crowned your Head,
And m^st a Wife unworthy of your Bed.

How dare you talk of her at such a rate,
For though her Usage might deserve my Hate,
Yet from her Eyes such conquering Light does break,
As none of her but with Respect should speak.

Forgive me if the sense, Sir, of your Wrong
Did force a Guilty Duty from my Tongue.

To her alone that suit you must prefer,
I dare not pardon an Offence to Her,
The Wrong I told thee of concerns not Thee.

Yes she in Wronging you has injured me.

From such Discourse I charge you to refrain;
Be thought by me t'Endure and not Complain;
If what I said thou dost so much deplore,
What I must say I find will grieve thee more;
For know she does again my Conqueror prove;
I thought her Change had cured my Injured Love;
But when last night I saw her Beauties Shine,
Resentment did to Love the Throne resign;
And that deep Wound closed up by her Disdain
Was opened by one Conquering Look again;
As when the Murth'rer does the Murdered see,
The Corps will bleed afresh immediately.

Oh let it never of my Prince be said,
He yields to one by whom he was Betrayed!

I glory more my Love that Wrong o'recame,
Then I can Grieve that I so Injured am;
What to my Flame a Remedy can grant,
When her Inconstancy that Power does want?
I find, do what she will, in me she'll Reign,
Her Eyes give deeper Wounds then her Disdain.

What her Disdain did want the Power to do,
Let Honours Dictates now persuade you to:
And, Sir, to arm you for this just Assault,
Know she has said her Marriage was your Fault:
Ah 'twas enough the Injury to do,
Without attributing the Guilt to You.
Malice it self at nothing worse could aim,
She kills your Love and then would kill your Fame.
And, Sir, to show her Fault all Faults surpass,
She of the First makes use to act the Last.

Ah do not think this can my Love subdue,
Since what she charged me with I wish were True:
I at my Miseries would scarce repine,
Had I the Power to make her Failings mine.
My Love for her would make me be content,
To have her Guilt and my own Punishment;
Yet I have named but half the Weight I bear:
My Father is in Love with her I hear;
And I am much mistaken if last Night,
She the French King Subdued not at first Sight;
By which I find I must the Field maintain,
Against my King, my Friend, and her Disdain.
But though worse Crosses should my Hopes befall,
My pow'rfull Love would Overcome them all.
Dissuade me not, but try for me to win
The Friendship of thy Sister Cleorin;
She most of all my Conquerours mind does sway,
Reply not if thou Love Me, but Obey.

Some Fatal Planet at my Birth did Reign,
Since all things which should Cure, Augment my pain;
My Sister who at last for me did get
To be the Favourite to Plantagenet,
Which from Despair till now my Soul did free;
My Prince makes use of now to ruin me;
My Love he aims not only to destroy,
But to obtain that End does Me employ.
Not doing it I Disobedience show,
And if I do it, I my Love o'rethrow:
That Secret, dying Kent revealed to me,
Which raised my Hopes, now makes my Misery.
My Mistress I betray while 'tis concealed,
And should betray my Love were it revealed;
What ever happens I must Wretched prove,
For I must Lose, or not Deserve her Love.
Thus from Wars Dangers Crowned with Baize I rise,
Only to fall the greater Sacrifice;
Yet of a Remedy I will not doubt,
Love which has Led me in may Lead me out.

THe fair Valeria has her Brother sent
To attend you, Sir, in your imprisonment;
His Sister from the Duke of Lancaster
Obtained a Pass which brought him safely here;
He is but newly lighted at your Gate
And begs your leave that he on you may walt.

Valeria's Brother sure it cannot be.

Sir, I but say the words he said to me.

Which of her Brothers os't?

-- -- That Brother, Sir;
Who, e're his face was hurt, resembled het.

Call him -- --
How can I on the Brother look,
Whose Sister is by me so soon forsook?
But who the Bright Plantagenet shall see,
Must be unjust or else must pardon me.

You are so like your Sister, I should know
You were her Brother though none told me so:
She may increase my Debt as she thinks ^t,
But nothing can the Sense I have of it.
The Battle I have lost I hope that She
Ascribes to my Ill Fate, and not to Me;
Fortune alas too Tyrannous would prove,
If what has lost my Crown should lose her Love.

Since for your Mistress you of her made Choice,
She at the loss, Sir, does almost rejoice;
For it presents her with a proof that shows,
Her Love is past the reach of Fortunes Blows.
She'll grieve at nothing your ill Fate can do,
Unless at that which fevers her from you.

Never Affection to this height did rise,
It proves her Love is matchless as her Eyes;
And makes me scarce repine at what I bear,
Since it does show how I am loved by her.

She of her Love a higher Proof does show,
In what she has commanded me to do;
For, Sir, She knows that England still affords
Beauties, which are Resistless as her Swords,
And has enjoined me if you here should be
In Love with any one more Fair then She,
I should assist you, Sir, in your Amours,
And Sink her Happiness, to Heighten yours.

She does at once in what she bid you do
Declare her Love, and run no hazard too;
For he, who once is made Valeria's prize,
Is armed against all Wounds from others Eyes.
'Tis with impatience, Guesclin, I have staid
To learn from you the Progress you have made,

In vain I try by Presents, Sir, to win
The Assistance of the Beauteous Cl^in;
She, as I'm told, was preingaged before.

Whoever told you that could tell you more.

By Gifts I won a Lady who of late
The Honour on your Mistress had to wait,
Who told me and assured me it was true,
The Prince of Wales does love your Mistress too.

In this my Cruel Fate on me does send
The greatest curse which I could apprehend,
Must I the Prince or else my Fortune blame,
Who thus does rival me in Love and Fame?

How can you justly, Sir, this News deplore
Since I but tell you what you thought before.
'Tis the least Wonder does in Love befall,
To think a Mistress is Adored by all.
I as a Lover to that Thought was bound,
But now that Thought a Certainty is found,
Which justly in my Soul does grief infuse.

She has acquainted me with stranger News,
She told me, Sir, this is the second time,
The Bright Plantagenet was loved by him.
He by Despair to the French Wars was sent,
She leaving him to wed the Earl of Kent,
But she the cause of it could not relate.

How strange and intricate a Power is Fate,
The Prince of Wales finds in a slighted Flame
The Noblest of all ways to raise his Fame;
Glory does heal what Love made him endure,
And his Despair presents him with his Cure.
He mist her Love a while, that he might be
More worthy of it by his Conquering Me;
A happy Planet at his Birth did Reign;
A seeming Loss brings him a double Gain;
While Fate with me so cruelly does act,
As by one Loss a greater I contract,
Successless Love his way to Fame does prove,
And loss of Fame does make my way to Love.

You wrong your Virtue by this strange Debate;
The Brave are still the makers of their Fate;
'Tis only, Sir, those men whose Souls are low,
Which first made Fate and then to Fate did bow.
Nor War nor Love, Sir, are Resistless Powers,
Both have their Happy as Unhappy Hours;
But he who does for one Mischance Despair,
Can ne'er be prosperous in Love or War.
As I have told you what has raised your Grief,
So now I will present you some Relief;
For my informer, Sir, to me has swore,
That though the Prince your Mistress does Adore,
He hath not yet his Love to her disclosed,
She therefore, Sir, has hopefully proposed.
That you this moment to the Prince would go
And let him from your self this Passion know;
His Friendship for you and so great a Trust
Will make him cease to Love or be Unjust;
If, Sir, he does the first, your End you win,
And by the last make Rivalship no Sin:
This, Sir, which She Proposes I approve.

No Friendship ever yet could conquer Love,
He to that Passion vainly does pretend
Who can resign his Mistress to his Friend;
I scarce can relish what she does advise,
It seems to me nor Generous, nor Wise,
For in vain hopes of what it ne'er will do
I clearer shall the lesser Friendship show;
My Friendship too were guilty of a Crime
Should his do more for me then mine for him.

But e're her Council, Sir, you Disapprove,
Consider if you can forsake your Love.

Sooner then I my Passion will forgo
I will forsake my Crown and Friendship too.

Then pray, Sir, follow what she does Advise,
And you will find 'tis Generous and wise;
If to the Prince you first your Passion own
You first do that which he first should have done,
And lay that Blame on him while this you do,
Which justly else he might have charged on you:
Since you will Court the Mistress of your Friend
This is the fairest way to reach your End.

I will approve that which you last did say,
And to attempt it will not time delay.

In which of both does he not Guilty prove,
In his Dissembling, or his change of Love?
There is but one way left that I can see
To Cure or Punish his Inconstancy. -- -- -- --

Guesclin did show no little Discontent
When I refused the Gifts his King had sent,
Who since this way he does Successless prove
He will himself declare to you his Love;
And, Madam, I believe King Edward too
Will suddenly disclose his Flame to you.

Oh Cleorin how cruel is my Fate
That those should Love me most whom most I Hate,
And he whom most I love in spite of's Fault,
I fear of me scarce does admit a Thought

Excuse me, Madam, if I take this time
To accuse your Beauty of a seeming Crime:
That Friendship which on me you did bestow
Does make it just I should yet call it so.

Madam, I am Surprised at what you say,
For that great Friendship which to you I pay,
Does make me confident I ne'er could do
What may be called a seeming Crime by you.
Let me but know my Charge, and you will see
You are more Faulty in Suspecting me.

From the first hour in which you did descend
To bless me with the Title of your Friend,
I so much valued it as Heaven does know
I strove to Merit what you did bestow,
Which makes what e're I did in serving you
To be at once my Joy and Duty too.
And though your Goodness often would confess
I served you above all you could express,
Yet I was higher Grieved I did no more,
Then I was Pleased with all I did before*

Madam, to prove my Debt you need not strive,
I'll own my self the ungratefull'st Soul alive,
If since our Friendship I did e're admit
A thought which might but seem unfit for it.

Ah, Madam, can you say what now you do,
And have your Face exempt from blushes too?
Or do you think it is a Friendly thing
To rob me of my Lover and my King?
One, who till now preserved so pure a Flame
As made him greater for his Love then Fame,
If this be held a Friendly Act by you,
Pursue such friendly Acts, and Kill me too;
To me a much less Cruelty 'twould prove
To rob me of my Life, than of my Love;
For our past Friendships sake you shou^d no^ give
Wounds worse than Death, and after let me live:
Your Cruelty grants half of my Request,
Then let your Pity, Madam, grant the rest:
Accept this Weapon, and no longer shun
To let your Hand cure what your Eyes have done.

I am amazed at what you say and do,
I'll sooner wound my self with it than you.

Ah, 'tis your kindness to the King I see
Hinders your granting what is begged by me;
His Image, Madam, you but love too well,
You fear to strike the Shrine where it does dwell;
But for that Reason what I ask dispense,
Since only Death can banish it from thence;
Else to you Conquest 'twill some trouble give
To know he in your Rivals heart does live.

Can you believe I'll share that Monarcks Bed
By whose Command my Father lost his Head?
My Father who was Uncle too to him,
And who in Virtue to such height did climb,
As a whole day he on the Scaffold stood,
E're they could find out one would shed his Blood;
King Edwards double Guilt my soul does fright,
First he usurped on his own Fathers right,
Then stained a Scaffold with his Uncles gore
For striving his wronged Brother to restore.

You should not charge your Fathers death on him,
Since 'twas his Power, not he, which did that Crime;
His Chancellours, while he was under age,
Clothed with his name the injustice of their rage;
For which when he had reached his Fourteenth year,
He put to death the Guilty Mortimer,
And to appease you for that Murderers Sin
He now does Court you to become his Queen.

I thought from Nature you had understood
There's no Atonement for a Fathers Blood:
Then do not think I'll ever Condescend
At once to injure Nature and my Friend.

Have you forgot how you were almost won,
Madam, to wed your Father's Murth'rers Son?
If only Love prevailed so far with you,
What cannot Love, and thirst of Empire do.

Into a high Injustice I had run
Had I ascribed the Kings guilt to his Son.

You with a worse Injustice can dispense,
You charge the King with Mortimers Offence;
A Fathers Guilt a Son may undergo,
But Kings partake not Sins which Subjects do.

If on the Prince his Birth a Guilt did lay,
He with his Tears did wash that Guilt away.

The Princes Grief was Weak, the Kings was Strong,
The Prince Deplored, the King Revenged your Wrong;
The King did more if rightly understood,
The Son gave you but Tears, the Father Blood.

'Twill easier to a Cruel Prince appear,
To spill a Subjects Blood, then shed a Tear:
But those true Showers wept by the Prince of Wales
To judge him Innocent with me prevails.

This does but show the King what he should Do,
He need but Weep to be judged Guiltless too;
Or if yet Guilty held, with little Pain
A Lovers Tears will wash off any Stain.

Though your not Crediting what I have spoke
My just Resentment does too much provoke,
Yet that you may my Friendship clearly see,
Ev^n while you show that you have none for me,
Since what I said has not prevailed with you,
I will Convince you by this Solemn Vow:
I swear the King nor any e're to me
Mentioned that Love which makes your Jealousy;
And should he e're for me a Passion have,
Rather than wed the King I'll wed my Grave:
These Vows your Friendship should to me restore.

You cannot Ask, nor can she Promise more.

Such Vows as these should your Belief persuade,
And Friendship thus Renewed is Stronger made.

Ah, Madam, now my Trouble is more high
Then it was lately by my Jealousy;
You could impose no Penance so Sublime,
As thus to Show me and Forgive my Crime.
What ends one Pain a greater does begin,
Since all my Grief for your imagined Sin
Did not so much my wounded Mind Subdue,
As does the Grief of having Injured you:
Yet who can wonder that I Jealous grew
Of so much Beauty and such Virtue too;
The Perfectness of both you now have shown,
The Last has pardoned what the First has done.

If what I did might to Reward pretend
You give the greatest, being still my Friend.

And may I be deprived of Life and Fame,
When e're again I lose that Glorious Name.

To me the assurance she did twice repeat.

What! that my Son Adores Plantagenet?

And with a Passion, Sir, that does appear
More fierce then that which he first paid to her.

Ah can he be so mean to Love again
One who his former Passion did Disdain?
One who was Guilty of so strange a Crime,
As to give Kent that Heart she Promised him?
And that her Scorn she might the more Display,
Wedded a Rival on his wedding day;
At least that day which was for him designed.

Love never was to Reasons Rules confined,
For 'tis a Passion, Sir, which only knows
Such Laws as on it self it will Impose.

But Honour should oblige him to Abhor
One by whose Guilt he was Betrayed before.

A Lover thinks that no Dishonour lies
In twice submitting to his Mistress Eyes.
We soon may Love and Fortune reconcile,
When either of them after Frowning Smile.

Oh Latymer, the News thou dost impart
Does with a Double wound afflict my Heart;
First that my Son by such a Love should dare
To blast those Glories he has won in War;
Then that his Flames should be to her Addressed
Without whose Love I never can be Blessed. -- --
Why dost thou start? is it so strange a thing
That so much Beauty should Subdue thy King?
Rather admire I did not sooner bow
To such Bright Eyes, then that I do it now;
The Greatest Men that e're the World did Grace
Have still allow'd to Love the Highest Place;
Caesar, who gained many a Glorious Field,
Yet did to Cleopatra's Beauties yield.

Had he not won many a Glorious Field,
That Love had been but as his Weakness held;
His Conquests make us think his Soul Sublime,
And many Victories Excuse one Crime.

Whatever in my Love is judged amiss
I'll expiate by Actions Great as his.

But how, Sir, can you well Condemn your Son
For Doing that which by your self is Done,
Since both of you Purpose the same Design.

His Case my Lord does differ much from mine.
For though we both Plantagenet Adore,
Yet he has been Betrayed by her before:
The difference is exceeding great you see
She has Affronted him, but Conquered me;
Love is at worst a Noble Frailty thought,
But Love when Scorned is justly held a Fault.

May I be Pardoned if I speak my heart?

what here you think you freely may impart.

May not the Prince then, Sir, as justly say
You are more faulty to Alizia?
You cease to love her in whose Heart you Reigned,
And he but loves her who his Love disdained;
He with the best of Loves extremes is cursed,
But you seem guilty of the very worst;
His Fault is, Sir, the lesser of the two,
You too Inconstant are, and she too True.

O do not wound me by reminding things
Which rather Trouble than Repentance brings.

The Fault which you Confess will you Pursue?

We should not Sin, and yet we daily do;
I owe Alizia more then you can say,
But what I owe her I want power to pay:
Plantagenet should only Wonders do,
She makes my Fault, and does excuse it too.

Sir, I am come to make you a Request
Which if denied I never can be Blessed;
'Tis a Request I beg you to Admit,
And beg your Pardon too, for making it.

I'll grant what e're you ask though ne'er so great,
If t does not concern Plantagenet.

Sir, It relates to her in some degree,
But it exceeding'y relates to Me.

Then you are come, I doubt, to ask again
My leave that she may twice your Love disdain,
Since there is nothing else I can believe
Unfit for you to Ask, or me to Give,
And yet that Sin Honour should so detest,
As you should never make it your request.

If 'tis a Sin to love her, Sir, I fear
That every Man must Sin that Looks on her.

Loving of her which is her Beauties Due
From any other, is a Sin in you.

How can it, Sir, by you be justly thought
That what is Mandkinds Duty is my Fault.

You know what Scorn she did to you dispense,
And in such ways as Height'ned the Offence;
Without the Blemish of that double Stain,
She had within your Heart deserved to Reign;

But had not I through those Fierce Trials run,
I had not Merited what I had Won.

Too far she in those Guilty Trials went,
When she abandoned you to Marry Kent;

His Fate is Nobler who Deserves, but Fails,
Then his who Merits not, and yet Prevails.

But those Fierce Trials which she used you to
Makes her Incapable to Merit you;
For should she love you now 'twould be too late;
The Wrongs of Honour what can expiate?

Her Love, when e're Conferred, will Overpay
The Affronts of Scorn and Tortures of Delay;
Against her Beauties 'twere the greatest Fault
To think her Love can be too dearly bought.

Rather that cruellest Injury she gave
Should all your Scorn and all your Hatred have;
Then do not Hope I ever will allow
That by my leave she twice should Injure you,
Ask all those Provinces your Sword has Won,
Ask me to share with you the English Crown,
And that true Kindness with does me dispose
Still to deny you Her, would grant you Those.

The Empire of the world I should Disdain,
Unless Plantagenet with me did Reign;
No Charms would in that Throne to me appear,
Without I had your leave to place Her there;
But if you grant me what I now implore,
I cannot Ask nor can you Give me more.

When first her Beauties in your Heart did Reign,
I had designed to Marry you in Spain;
And the consent I of Don Pedro won,
By which you had Succeeded to his Crown;
But by affection for you I was led
To give you leave Plantagenet to Wed.
What Act of greater Kindness could be shown,
Then yield your Love should lose so fair a Throne?
You have lost Spain by your first Fatal Flame,
And by your second you will lose your Fame.
Those Wreaths which Conquered France for you have made
By such a Guilty Fire will quickly fade.

I doubt not, Sir, but by my Sword to gain
As large a Monarchy as that of Spain.
Fortune the Valiant may to Thrones prefer,
But 'tis by Sufferings I must Conquer her.

Ah Prince, since nor your Reason nor your Fame
Can cure you of so Criminal a Flame,
I'll try if my Commands can make you do
What Fame and Reason cannot lead you to;
I here enjoy you, Son, by every thing
Which binds you to your Father and your King,
This sinful Love without delay decline,
Which should your Horror cause as, well as mine,
For if this Passion longer you pursue,
You'll lose your Fame, your King and Father too.

Two Ills he offers, one he bids me choose,
I must my Mistress or my Father Loose;
Why should he strive by Nature to remove
The highest bond of Nature that of Love?
Though Nat'ral 'tis to obey a Fathers call,
Yet to love her is much more Natural;
Since he would have me yield to Natures sway,
Where she most Rules there I should most Obey?

Since She, your King, your Father, and your Friend
Oppose your Love, give to your Love an End;
Any of them the Conquest ought to Win,
Then to Oppose all Four will prove a Sin.

Ah Delaware, the Sin were much more Great
Should I now cease to love Plantagenet,
Then I to kill my self I must needs consent
My Love and Life being of like extent.

Your Passion is Unjust while 'tis so Great,
You pay Loves Score with what is Natures debt;
If in your Love so prodigal you are,
With what, Sir, will you pay your Fathers Care?

Ah 'tis his Love for her, no^ care for me,
Which makes him treat me with such Cruelty;
Against all Rules of Justice he does go,
Making himself both Judge, and Party too;
If to Love her who wronged me be a Crime,
The self-same cause makes Love a Fault in him.

More by a King and Father may be done
Then may be by a Subject, and a Son;
Let calmer Thoughts you to your Duty bring,
Pronounce the names of Father and of King
With that Respect which is to either due,
And yield to those Effects 'twill work in you,
Those Powerful Names will then Victorious be.

I find in either dwells Divinity,
For nothing less of Force enough could prove
To hinder me to speak to her I Love.
This is the very utmost I can do,
And this Heaven knows will prove my Torment too.

Silence, Sir, is but half of what you owe,
You should suppress your Inclination too.

My Inclinations must be let alone,
For though 'tis Mine yet it is not my own.

Only to Lovers this Distinction's known;
How can it, Sir, be yours, and not your own?

Subjects who from their King the Power have g^
Are still his Subjects though he Rules them not.
Oh Friend, in my Condition there appears
Two Motions like to those which Rule the Spears;
My Love the Rapid Motion I may call,
My Duty to my King the Natural,
Which while it does it's Regular Course obey,
Loves Rapid Motion hurries it away.

SIr, 'tis past doubt, the Intelligence is true.

What the French King the Princes Rival too!

And to so great a Height, as I believe
A period to their Friendship it will give;
For never any yet could soar above
The fierce Resentments of a Rivals Love.

Friendship between them two can hardly be
Of so much Strength as Nature is in me;
Since Love in me does Nature's Force subdue,
Doubt not in them 'twill Conquer Friendship too;
'Tis the Prerogative of her Bright Eyes
For Love of them to break all other Ties.

Is it then just you on the Prince should lay
Commands above his Power, Sir, to obey?

Oh Latymer, I grant I am to Blame,
But 'tis not Love alone does me Inflame;
Glory in that I act does bear a part,
Glory does fire my Mind, as Love my Heart;
Nothing for me seems Worthy to Pursue,
But what my Son Attempting Failed to do:
Since he to such an Envied Fame does rise,
Mine will Burn dim if it Outshine not his.

Oh Sir, can you who have such Glory won
Grow Jealous of the Glory of your Son.

He never Glory Loved who could Admit
Of any thing which might Outrival it,
From this Resolve nothing can me remove;
Nature must yield to Glory and to Love.

Sir, I perceive the Prince and the French King,
Something Important does them hither bring,
For they are come alone and lock the gate;
If, Sir, concealed a while you here will wait,
Perhaps you'll learn what in their Loves they'll Do.

That's a discourse deserves my listening to.

'Tis such a Secret as shall clearly show
The perfect Friendship which to you I owe,
Since what to tell my self is scarcely fit
I to your Secrecy shall now commit.

Though nothing can to me more Pleasure give,
Then Proofs, Sir, of your Frienship to receive,
Yet among Friends there may such Secrets be,
As to disclose them were an Injury;
But you too well the Laws of Friendship know,
And are too Generous to use me so.

That Friend must to himself appear Unjust
Who takes as Injuries the Marks of Trust;
Yet tell me, Sir, what can that Secret be
Which to Reveal would be an Injury.

Shoul'd you have bribed your Guards to set you free,
'Twould be an Injury to tell it me;
For I should be, what ever I should do,
False to my King and Father, or to you.

Could I corrupt or else his Guards deceive,
I'd not return to France without his leave,
That Generous Usage he to me does show
Secures me here more then his Guards can do,
And though this Bond do Strong enough appear,
Yet a far stronger does Confine me here.
By your great Friendship, Sir, I here am ty'd^
But tell me freely, is there ought beside
Which by a Friend a Secret may be thought,
Which told a Friend, his Friend may think a Fault?

Yes, Sir, yet I will mention but one more;
Suppose two Friends one Beauty did Adore;
If he, whose Heart her eyes the last over came,
Should to his Rival Friend disclose his Flame,
He well might think the Injury was Great.

I hope you do not love Plantagenet?

Yes, Sir, I do, and with a Love so High
As it can never Cease until I Die.

Ah, Since you Love her and to that Degree,
Why was your Passion not Revealed to me?
Telling you first she does my Conqueror prove.
You make your Friendship Guiltier then my Love.

Why should I tell you what you needs must know,
For whosoever sees must love her too.

Since such high Power does to her Eyes belong,
Think not in loving her I do you Wrong.

To love such Charming Eyes no wrong can be,
But 'tis a Wrong to tell your Love to me.

Since all who Look on her she must Subdue,
Is it a wrong to tell you what you knew?
Because you thought your Love was known to me,
You judged your Silence was no Injury;
But I, as soon as I her Lover grew,
Judged it a Duty, Sir, to Tell it you,
Consider which of us has done the worst.

I who first saw her must have loved her First,
Therefore my Passion must be known to you.

I heard you Loved Her, and she Loved You too,
But afterwards she did Inconstant prove,
And I believed that Wrong had Cured your Love.

Her Beauties were unworthy my Esteem,
If any thing more Powerful were then Them.

Knowing their Powers, admire not if you see
That Love more strong then Friendship is in me.

Yet since I to her Beauties first did bow,
Your Love's a Wrong to me, not mine to you.

Affronts the Ties of Friendship may undo,
Yet you still love her though she injured you;
You clearly have Declared in what you Did,
That her Fair Eyes does Friendships strength exceed;
And she who spite of Wrongs triumphs over you
Triumphs over me in spite of Friendship too.
Since she over you the greatest Power has shown,
Blaming my Passion you more blame your own;
Our Love in both or neither is amiss,
Yours above wrongs, mine above Friendship is.
But the Success of mine I may despair,
Since now I know that you my Rival are;
I with Disgrace am clothed, but you with Fame,
Which makes me merit Pity more then Blame.

How can I, Sir, that Pity give to you,
Which o my own Case is more justly due?
Besides her change for which my Soul does mourn,
Besides my Friend who does my Rival turn,
As high an I ^as both of these I feel.

May you that Secret, Sir, to me Reveal?
To me who though as Rival you may blame,
Yet I your Friend more than your Rival am;
For at this Name I Grieve, at that Rejoice,
This is the Effect of Force, but that of Choice.

Oh I did err, and in a high degree,
Repining that you Rival were to me,
Since 'tis more fit that pain I should abide
Then that her Eyes this Triumph were denied;
As both in Love and Friendship I exceed,
So both Disdain in common paths to tread;
Unjust to Her and Love I should appear,
Would I without a Rival conquer her;

This Declaration I unmoved receive,
Since you to be your Rival give me leave,
But to Plantagenet should prove unkind,
Yet in my Friendship I some ease shall find;
For should the worst of Fortunes be my share,
Your Trophies I should raise in Love as War:
Thus I by Friendships Power shall be supplied
With what to me my Fate and Love denied;
My Friendship for you nothing can impair
Since it stands firm, though you my Rival are;
For I who best her Beauties power do know,
Find your excuse from thence for being so;
And to confirm this Truth, I now will show
That Secret to you, which you asked to know.

Those conquering Beauties which did us subdue
Have made my Father turn my Rival too.

I thought he Loved the Fair Alizia.

And, Sir, I thought you Loved Valeria.

Our Conquerours Eyes must every Heart reduce,
In my own Fate I find the Kings Excuse.

'Tis She alone with the high Power is blessed
Of Captiavating Freedoms prepossessed.

She does in the same Fare, such is her Power,
Involve the Conquered and the Conqueror.

But 'tis not, Sir, at this that I repine,
I know where e're her Beauties please to slime,
They ought to Conquer as their Native Right,
Me by his Rivalship he does not Fright;
For 'tis Her choice alone which can improve
The highest Lover to deserve her Love:
And, Sir, my Flame which brightest shall appear,
Would make it Sin should I a Rival fear;
But that which does my Soul with Grief subdue,
Is his forbidding me to Love her too:
Oh why should the Paternal Right oppose
The nobler Right which Love on her bestows.

Oh Prince your Case is difficult I see,
He should have treated you, as you treat me;
But in the Fatal strait which you are in,
You must against your Love and Nature sin;
What Resolution think you to pursue?

Ah 'tis much easier to Resolve than Do;
For once I thought I could so far Obey,
As silently to Mourn my Life away;
But Love the Monarch Passion of the Soul
That Resolution quickly did control;
Making me find that her Triumphant Eyes
Are much more powerful then all Natures ties:
Yet that no odds of you I may receive
But what my greater Love to me does give,
I let you know on her this night I'll wait,
And from her Sentence I'll receive my Fate:
Sir, if you please, you may there go with me,
And both together learn our Destiny;
I hope, if mine does prove a happy Doom,
My Father by Submission to overcome;
But if a Fatal Doom she does dispense,
That will Revenge my Disobedience.

Since you allow me, I on you will wait
Of that bright Beauty to receive my Fate,
Though I already cannot but foresee
The certain Ruin that must fall on me:
For she must be Unjust as she is Fair,
If of her Love she makes me not Despair;
Or if she should me with her Favour bless,
Your Grief for it will Kill my Happiness;
Fate neither way to me, nor hope allow.

The value of her Love you injure now,
Since whosoe're her Favour does possess
In part, the relish of unhappiness --

If of her Love such Thoughts I do admit,
My height'ned Friendship is the cause of it;
And, Sir, you are obliged by Honours Laws
T'excuse Effects where Friendship is the Cause.

Admire not that my Rival I reprove,
For too much Friendship, and too little Love;
But pardon me, since I therein express
I prize her Right above my Happiness.

Ah generous Prince, such Virtues shine in you,
That you in Love as War must all subdue.

Since, Sir, together we resolve to go,
And from Plantagenet our Fate to know,
'Tis fit that we no longer should defer
To beg her leave this night to wait on her.

But e're we know the Sentence she will give,
Let us from one another, Sir, receive
A mutual Vow that still we Friends will be.

That to our Friendship were an injury;
It is its own Security you know,
And does more strongly bind than any Vow;
Against our Friendship Love in vain contends,
For though we Rivals are, we'll both be Friends;
Yet give your Friend that pity he does seek,
Who to obey Loves Law must Natures break.

Never an Act so Insolent was done,
Affronted by my Prisoner and my Son!
Both know Plantagenet is loved by me,
And yet my Rivals both presume to be;
In my Revenging it I'll lose no Time,
Their Sufferings shall be equal to their Crime;
I'll make them feel that 'tis a dangerous thing
To dare to court the Mistress of a King.

I beg you, not for their sakes but your own,
Let first this storm of Anger be o'reblown,
Here you determine what is fit to do,
Then such Resolves you safely may pursue.
If Patience guide you not, they will esteem,
Your Passion only, Sir, does punish them.

Delay, in the Affront they cast on me,
Would be not Patience, but Stupidity.

Consider, I beseech you, Sir, how they
The ^ow'r of Love not Reasons Power obey.
Such strange Effects that Passion does produce,
As for all ^aults Love is its own Excuse;
Love does our Noblest Faculties control,
'Tis in effect the Fever of the Soul.

My Lord, such talk as this I'll not admit,
Share not their Guilt by thus excusing it,
But follow them and let them understand
They now are both confined by my command:
This night in which their Love they should have shown,
I am determined to declare my own;
Since by their Love my Power they injure so,
I by my Power their Love will punish too.

Those Fires of Love have still most (...) been,
Which though they highly Burned, have Burned unseen,
And under those which I discovered now,
For many years my Conquered Heart did bow;
Admire not yet I could so long disguise
From your own Sight the Acting of your Eyes;
For though the Sun on the Earths face but shines,
Yet by his Influence he does ripen Mines;
Your Eyes, which Shine at least as Bright as He,
Perform like him things which you could not see,
But yet this Breast in which your Beauty Shined
May boast of Love, purer than Gold Refined;
Your Eyes alone perform within may Heart
More then the Sun on Mines though helped by Art.
As it was just my Love I should display,
So 'tis as just your Will I should Obey;
Which I shall do when you but speak the word,
Though 'twere to pierce my Heart with my own Sword,
And nothing in that Action I shall fear
But to offend your Image which is there.

My Lord, I think you from your Sister know
The Friendship which I always had for you,
Yet since your words the occasion does admit,
I will my self give you a Proof of it:
Though your declaring of your Love for me
Is in it self no little Injury,
Yet for my Friendships sake I'll pardon you,
If you the Offence will not again pursue.

Madam, your Justice should this Usage blame,
You cloud your Cruelty with Friendships name,
As Judges to the Tortured Respite give,
To lengthen Pain, but not to make them live;
Such Usage yet were for that Servant sit
Who durst Adore you and not tell you it,
Though 'tis some Guilt to say I Die for you,
Yet is that Guilt, Madam, a Duty too:
Ah Madam, sure you ought not to deny
To take the Debt, or bid the Debtor die;
You Sentence is too Heavy or too Light,
You either should me Kill, or Save me quite.

Since by your self, my Lord, I now am told,
Your Love for me is more refined than Gold,
I'll put it to a Trial but so vast,
As never yet that Courted Metal past;
Know then, my Love for which so much you strive
Is not, alas, in my own Power to give:
The Prince of Wales. -- --

In Pity say no more,
Fate never had a Curse like this in store,
Raised to the Charmingest Hope of all the World,
Into Despair I now from thence am hurled,
You keep that Word to which your self you tied,
And Try me more then ever Gold was Tried;
That Glitterring Earth, when it has passed the Fire,
Is the Refiners Wonder and Desire;
But I, having Loves Fiery Trial past,
Like the Neglected Dross away am cast.

Oh Brother, had not Love your Mind depraved,
You'd think you were not Cast away but Saved;
The Crime you act she calmly does reform.

Ah! such a Calm is worse than any Storm.

How can the Princess more obliging prove,
Than to give Friendship, when she cannot Love.

Oh Sister, he who to her Love aspires,
To nothing less can limit his Desires;
Loves Power must always Friendships power outdo,
For Love at once is Love and Friendship too.

You should with Joy what she bestows receive,
She Gives in Friendship all she has to Give,
And to convince you, hers is Great and True,
She the first hour her Secrets Trusts with you.

Since to Receive my Love she does deny,
She by her Anger ought to make me Die;
That's the best Proof of Friendship she can give,
And therefore that alone I can receive.
He for her Love does grant himself unfit
Who can be won to outlive the loss of it.

What I have yet performed can but pretend
To let you see how much I am your Friend.
But that, my Lord, which now I do Design
Shall let you see how much I think you mine;
For by your Council and Assistance too,
The life of all my Hopes I will pursue.
Admire not Shame thus in my Face prevails,
When I confess I love the Prince of Wales;
For though the Affront which I from you received
Does make me blush that after it I lived,
Yet I, whether by Weakness or by Fate,
Still Love that Prince whom I ought most to Hate;
And how that Love with Honour to pursue,
Is that in which I ask advice of you; -- -- --
For he esteems you in such high Degree,
As you the fittest are to give it me.

Oh Fate! Oh Love! why do you both agree,
To give such Beauty so much Cruelty?
Is't not enough my Flame is scorned by you,
But you would make me help my Rival too?
And my Resentments higher to Inflame,
These Wrongs you do me under Friendships name;
Madam, if this, if this your Friendship be,
Ah give me Proofs then of your Cruelty;
Either bestow on me your Love or Hate
This Tyranny surpasses that of Fate;
Fate only made me Wretched, but 'tis you
Alas would have me make my self so too.
To Love you is a Confidence so high,
As I for it do not refuse to Die:
But do not let your Doom be so severe
As thus to make me my own Murderer;
From those Fair Eyes which did my Love create
I beg I may alone receive my Fate.

Oh why should you be grieved to this Degree?
Love, which does govern you, does govern me;
'Tis Love gives Laws to us, not we to it,
And to his boundless Power we must submit;
Since by its Influence of my Love you miss,
I give you that which of next Value is,
And hope by Friendships Kindness to remove
Your Grief for wanting Power to give you Love.

Ah Madam, How can you that Friendship prize
Which could destroy the Conquest of your Eyes?
And would against its nature make it prove
A Rivals help, and Murderer of Love.
'Tis past the Power of Friendship to bestow
Such Joys as those 'twould ravish from me now,
Yet think not strange that I deny to you
What I denied my Prince and General too;
For your Triumphant Eyes, since his return,
Have made his Fire once quenched more freely Burn;
This Fatal Secret he to me confessed,
And unobey'd made me the like request,
But yet your Cruelty does his Surpass,
He did not know that I his Rival was;
But you who knew it strive to make me do
What known to him Love had not forced him to;
Fortune both ways my Torments does advance,
By Friendships Knowledge and its Ignorance.

Ah! that Blessed Secret which I learn from you
Makes me with Greater Hopes my suit renew;
For 'twere below your Virtue to undo
At once, my Lord, a Friend and Mistress too.
Sure to that man Loves Power was never known
Who valued others Joys above his own.
Consider, since I loved him while I thought
That his Inconstancy did cause his Fault,
If any other Love my Breast can fill,
When from your self I find he loves me still:
Since 'tis my Fate only the Prince to Love,
Since therefore all your Hopes must fruitless prove,
Assist your Prince and Mistress in distress,
And help that Love which nothing can suppress;
Quenching by such a Generous Act you. Flame,
From your Misfortune you'll increase your Fame.
Retire, my Lord, and think on what I said,
I know, when Love does once the Heart invade,
So Pow'rfull is that Passions Influence,
As 'tis not easily removed from thence,
But when alone you weigh what's asked by me,
Reason and Honour must Victorious be.

Oh Madam, though the Trouble be not light
Of being thus commanded from your Sight,
Yet that torments me in a less Degree
Then those Desires which here you lay on me:
Yet e're I go this Sacred Voice receive;
I to Obey you, Madam, will so Strive,
As, If I can, my Flame I will suppress,
And on my Ruin raise my Happiness;
But if I quench not Fires which you create,
Accept the Duty, and deplore the Fate.

Go, my dear Cleorin, and lose no time,
Improve th 'Impression I have made on h^m,
For that Blessed Secret he reveald to me
Shows that on him depends my Destiny.

My Lord, I have been seeking you with News
Which will at once Horror and Grief infuse,
My King and your Great Prince are both confined.

From what Black Coast blows this Tempestuous Wind?

By the Lord Latymer I understand,
They are imprisoned by your Kings command.

The cause of it did he not let you know?

'Tis what he could not, or else would not do;
Let us by several ways employ our care,
First to discover why they Prisoners are,
That known, we may more hopefully apply
To this Misfortune a quick Remedy.

Let's hasten to this Work, for 'twere a Crime
In serving them to lose one moments time.

The Assurance, Madam, which to me you give
With Joys above expression I receive;
'Tis you alone those Blessings can extend
Which both my Merit and my Hopes transcend.

You in such moving words your Love have shown,
As I m Justice could not less have done;
Some Time and Industry it will require
Fairly to reach that End which we desire,
But leave it to my care if you think fit.

She who must make my Fate should govern it;
While 'tis in such fair hands it is secure.

Madam, the King is almost at the door.

The King, Oh strange Misfortune, and so near!

What would he think if he should see me here?
'Twill ruin all which we designed to do.

The King does come the way which he should go.

By what dire Planet is he hither led?
I hear him, hide your self within my Bed.

Since I enjoyed at last this longed for time,
I hope you will not think it is a Crime?
Madam, If I employ it now to say,
An Adoration to your Eyes I pay:
An Adoration Words would ill express,
For could I tell its Greatness, 'twould be less;
So high a Passion ne'er was paid before.
And yet I blush, Madam, that 'tis no more.

Do you consider, Sir, what now you say,
Such Vows you should but to Alizia pay;
Sir, you mistake, to her alone they are meant.

Ah say not I mistake when I repent;
You may believe what I now say is true,
Since of most Love I speak, and speak to you;
To you who have given mine such perfect strength,
As 'tis incapable of more but length;
That Falsehood might Truths piercing sight escape,
It slowly moves, and in a borrowed shape;
But ^uth which only fears to be unknown,
Moves speedily, and no disguise puts on.

'Tis strange this Love should grow so great so soon.

The Dawning of it was a perfect Noon;
For what such Eyes, Madam, as yours create
Must ^each Perfection in their first Estate:
Yet since I did Alizia first Adore,
I grant I merit this neglect and more;
But you the name of Tyranuous will win
Revenging a Misfortune as a Sin;
This usage too will an Injustice be,
You Wrong your Eyes while thus you Punish me.

Were there nought else 'Ide not be false to her.

Beauty should still a Conquest most prefer.

They Tyrants are who to usurp delight.

Who has most B^y has (...) Love most right.

You wrong your Mistress while my Love you seek,
And I my Friend in hearing what you speak.

To Love another after you are seen,
A greater wrong, Madam, in me had been;
I fully know the great debt which is due,
To your fair Eyes and to your V^tues too;
And it had been below them to have gained
A Heart in which no Beauty e're has reigned;
But mine before had yielded to the Powers
Of conquering Charms which none excel but yours:
What greater merit can my Passion show,
Then thus to leave Alizia to love you,
This of its vastness is a proof sublime.

Ah what you call your Merit is your Crime,
Since perfect Love in Justice must excel,
Falsehood and her together cannot dwell.

That perfect Love is just I grant is true,
And I prove mine is Just in Loving you.
Your Eyes which act the Change you so abhor,
Are my security I'll change no more;
Since to the highest Beauty I pretend,
Blame not if by Degrees I reach that end;
And as my Love that blessing does pursue,
So now I find it only shines in you.

This Duty daily must be paid by me,
And though 'tis late -- -- --
Oh Heaven! what is't I see?
Ah! would these Eyes, rather than see this Sight,
Had been closed up by an eternal night.

What is it, Madam, which you thus b^oan?

Can you ask that since you two are alone,
And at an hour, so Guilty as it shows
The Falseness of her Friendship and your Vows!
To me this Sight so vast a Grief does give,
As makes me wish rather to Die than Live.

And, Madam, 'tis some cause of Grief in me
To find in you so strange a Jealousy.

If you who do the Wrong, Sir, can admit
Of Grief; What then must I that Suffer it?
But, Sir, your cause of Grief shall be removed,
My Death shall show you soon how well I loved:
Go treacherous Woman, False as thou art Fair,
Those Hopes you raised on your wronged Friends Despair
Shall soon be blasted, for my injured Ghost
Shall still pursue you for those Joys I lost;
Where e're you go, revenge it shall invoke,
And show you still that Heart your Falsehood broke:
You still shall see it or shall hear it groan,
And it shall haunt you in his Bed and Throne.

Oh go not yet away.

At ^east be pleased to hear what she can say.

Whatever she can tell I do despise,
I'll not believe her Words above mine Eyes;
And I have seen so much, as I ^ow fly
To seek out Death my only Remedy.

So well her height'ned Spirit, Sir, I know,
As what she Threatens she too soon will do;
If by your instant Kindness or my Care
We do not stop the Effects of her Despair,
Forgive me if I leave you to attend
The Debts I owe to a Despairing Friend.

Oh leave not your Adorer to pursue
One who does hate you, and usurped your due;
If to receive my Passion you decline,
Even her Despair will be less great then mine.

Deta^n me not, She'll die through our delay.

And I shall die should you thus go away.

She needs my help.

But does not it implore.

Her Case deserves it.

Mine deserves it more.

Her Grief does wound me.

So my Love should do.

Your Love's her debt.

'Tis only due to you.

That Fatal Skreik must cut off our debate,
For my best speed I fear will come too late.

She's gone and left me in a deeper Grief
Then her's to whom she flies to give Relief;
She does her Hatred to my Love prefer,
To me she's Cruel, but she's Kind to her:
'Tis Fortune only or resistless Fate
Which governs all the World in Love and Hate.

A Man, and here, and at this time of night,
How quickly did He vanish from my sight?
Does she a Visitant like this admit,
Though my bad Angel 'twere I'll speak to it.
Who art thou? and what is it brought thee here?
His Tongue is tied by Guiltiness or Fear;
Prepare for Death, or else resolve my Doubt;
He's silent still, what Ho, who wai^s without?
Since my Commands thy silence cannot break,
I'll find ou^ Tortures which shall make thee speak.
Seize on this Mute, and with him follow me.
Why should the Thrones of Kings so envied be.
When such strange Griefs assault me in one hour,
As make my Sorrows greater than my Power.

I Have in short told you my cause of Grief,
Which is as Just as 'tis above Relief.
Ah! to forsake one in whose heart I Reigned,
To Court another who my Flames disdained,
And such a Lovely Youth thus hid by her,
Are loads too heavy for my Soul to bear.

Though, Sir, the Fair Plantagenet may be
Too justly blamed for one Inconstancy,
Yet in all else her Virtue such hath been,
As to suspect it, Sir, would turn a Sin.

Oh she, who could for Kent my Son forgo,
What is it after, which she might not do?
She must have given that Love for which she pressed,
Were not her Heart by other Fires possessed;
I'll not defame her since she bears my name,
But she for ever has suppressed my Flame.

If with your Love, Sir, for Alizia
You have not thrown your Pity too away,
Be pleased to see where She Despairing lies,
And with your Hand vouchsafe to close her Eyes.

Madam, what is't which her Despair does move.

Oh ask not that when she has lost your Love;
She did a while that Misery suspect,
But when the certainty she did detect,
She had, but that our strength was her Relief,
By one dire blow ended her Life and Grief;
When from her Hand the Weapon we did wrest,
Su^h storms of Sighs did crowed out of her Breast,
And from her Eyes such streams of Tears did flow,
As we repented that we stopped the blow;
For sure the loss of Life is a less Ill
Then that Despair which does possess her still.
But though we did one sort of Death prevent,
Yet she on dying, Sir, is so intent,
As from Plantagenet I now am come,
Who dares not, Sir, one moment leave the room,
To tell you that the Assurance of your Love
Can only these resolves of Death remove;
Despair alas so powerful is in her,
'Twill be too late should you the Cure defer.

Ah lead me then where my Alizia lies,
For in her Sorrow I so Sympathize,
As I alas without disguise may swear,
Her grief wounds Me much more than it does Her.

'Tis a strange Secret which you have revealed,
But why alas was it so long concealed?
Repair that Fatal Sin you did commit,
And fly to tell your Prince and Mistress it.

As all those Sins which for a Crown are done
Heaven does absolve, when Heaven does put it on;
So all those Crimes which are performed in Love
Do lose that name when we successless prove.

But since of yours you cannot hope Relief,
Do not delay to cure your Prince's Grief.

Ah my dear Sister, if my hopes were fled,
You soon should see your wretched Brother dead;
But who in Love does as a Lover strive,
Lives while he Hopes, and Hopes while he does Live.

Ah! to such empty Hopes impose an end,
By making Blessed your Mistress, Prince and Friend;
So losing of your Hopes, you soon will see
A greater blessing then your Hopes can be:
Has Love the Power to sink the Soul so low,
As to deny what Virtue bids you do?
What Nobler Fate can Love give to your pain,
Then to deserve that Love you cannot gain.

Should I this Secret to them both confess.
'Twill rather raise then make their Troubles less,
While under their Delusion they remain,
Their just resentment robs them of their Pain;
But were that happy Fallacy removed,
She with such Passion by the King is loved,
As they can ne'er possess what I shall lose,
And 'twill in them a lesser Grief infuse,
Never a hope of Union to admit,
Then be so near, and after miss of it:
Besides the Kingdom may be plunged in War
When such a Son and Father Rivals a^e.

Ah! you should blush to talk at such a rate,
Make not your Crime an interest of State;
Better that War you dreamed of should ensue,
Then you should shun what Honour bids you do:
Oh 'tis in you too Guilty a Distrust,
When you fear ought more then to be Unjust;
Consider should the Prince or she e're know
That Secret you to me discover now.

I fear not that 'tis, only known to you.

Yes but it is.

-- -- to whom?

-- -- -- You know it too.
Ah! little Honour in your Soul does shine,
Should not your Knowledge fright you more then mine;
To what low State Love does a Lover bring,
Is your own witness then so slight a thing?
Let Virtue and not Fear make you repent,
Guilt is a greater Ill than Punishment;
Have you not found what I have said is true?

My Passion strives my Virtue to subdue,
Pity your Brother whom Love Masters so,
As he does fear what Honour bids him do;
Pity your self, for it is you alone
This hopeless guilty Passion must Dethrone.

To conquer Love there needs but little skill,
Since none can want the Power who has the Will.

There's none does want the Power his Hopes to kill,
But to Destroy them who can have the Will?

Your Care were finished were it but begun.

Ah this is easier said then it is done:
Yet I from you this double good have got,
To know my Debt, and grieve I pay it not.

Who grieves he does not what he can and ought,
Is guilty of his Torment as his Fault.

Ah! you did never yet the Torment prove,
Which springs from Honour that disputes with Love.

The Torment lies in the Dispute alone,
Let Honour Conquer, and the Torment's gone.

But Love assumes over me so strange a right,
As 'tis at once my Torment and Delight.

You'll find, if Virtues Dictates you pursue,
Greater Delights exempt from Torments too;
For though successless Love be no small pain,
Yet Guilt in Love wounds deeper than Disdain.

Oh Cleorin! that which you have now said,
Has in my Soul such an Impression made,
As I perceive Love made me too long stay,
And Honour now would lead me in the way;
To that bright Guide I am inclined to Trust,
I'll rather be Unhappy then Unjust.

Such Charms in following Virtue you will find.

Ah! should you press me more you'd be unkind.
Do not all Honour of my change engross?
Leave me part of it to support my Loss.

'Tis not to Virtue that you now resort,
If it wants strength its own self to support;
'Tis only Sin not suffering that it fears,
It grows the stronger the more weight it bears.

I know in all it's own support 'twill prove,
Unless in quitting such a Charming Love;
Then think it is my Wisdom, not my Fault,
If I seek every help in this Assault.
Sister, Farewell, I will retire a while,
That I may Love and Virtue reconcile;
Consider well what such a Love must be,
As with your Virtue dares to disagree.

Ah, 'tis enough to Die, Sir, by your Hate!
Too much, your Triumph thus to Celebrate;
Yet I repine not, since you come to see
That your Contentment is so dear to me:
As when I found my Life opposed your Love,
I chose by Death that trouble to remove;
And I implore your Pardon since the debt
Is only paying, and not paid you yet.
But, Sir, my Rival can declare for me,
'Tis not my Fau't, though it my Trouble be;
For she, her Cruelty is grown so high,
Makes Death my wish, yet hinders me to die.

Oh I am come to wait upon you now,
That I may be both Just to her and you;
I must countess that her Enchanting Eye;
Did for a while my Guilty Heart Surprise;
But what I now shall tell you is as true,
Madam, 'twas I, not she, was false to you;
Her Friendship for you did the Conquest get,
I did Assault, but could not vanquish it.
Do not believe that what is spoke by me
Is only to suppress your Jealousy,
That I thereby the safer Power may win
To persevere in and repeat my Sin;
Oh no, that Love and Grief which you have shown
Has all the Magic of her Eyes o'rethrown:
On Fancies Wings I my past flight did take,
But 'tis on Trials Wings that I fly back.

Alas! if Words could cure a broken Heart,
Those you've now spoke would have that Power or Art;
They come too late, they should have come before,
Life you can take away, but not restore:
But, Sir, the loss of mine my joy shall be,
If in my Death my matchless Love you see;
For, Sir, to you I me more concerned to give
Proofs of such Love then I'm concerned to Live,
Which justly you might doubt, if after I
Did know I lost your Love I should not die.

Ah the best Proof you of your Love can give,
Is that you'll Pardon me, and that you'll Live;
Has my first Crime made me so black in Sin,
As my Repentance no Relief can win?
Do not believe I did the Sin commit,
Or else believe my Penitence for it.
Let not one Fault which is already past,
Have greater force then Love which still shall last;
Ah! sure you could not thus your Death pursue,
If you believed what I have Vowed is true;
But all those Doubts entirely to o'rethrow,
My Lord I charge you instantly to go -- --
And let at once King Iohn and my Son free
Who were the Prisoners of my Jealousy.

'Tis a Command I joyfully obey.

I Charge you do it and without delay.
That King Madam, may safely court you now,
For I before you and Alizia vow,
My flame for you shall ne'er revive again,
And my Alizia only here shall Reign.

In what, Sir, you have said and vowed, I find,
To me you're Just, and to Alizia Kind.
Nor can your Solemn sacred Vow, Sir, be
More pleasing to my Friend, then 'tis to me.
I hope that name, Madam, I may resume,
And safely keep it for the time to come.

Heaven knows my Sorrows never were more high,
Then when I thought that you had laid it by;
And yet my Joy that you forgive my Sin,
Is no was vast as e're my Griefs have been;
Twice now your Friendship you to me restore,
May you refuse it, if I need it more.

No fear of losing yours I can admit,
Since I will ne'er do that may forfeit it.
Madam, 'tis fit I leave you with the King,
That he your Cure may to perfection bring.

Ah Madam, why in her, should Friendship be
Of greater power, then Love or Grief for me.
Since Friendship her Resentments does subdue,
Let Love for me as Powerful be with you;
Madam, to you my Heart this Suit prefers,
Which needs your Pardon more then you did hers;
To this sad State your King alas is brought.

Sir, I forgave you when you saw your Fault,
And I repine not at my Lingering Death
Which lets me Seal it with my Dying Breath:
No Proof of Love could ever be more high,
Then to forgive the offence which makes one Dye.

If you forgive me, yet your Death pursue,
You will at once Forgive and Kill me too:
Loves Power you wrong while at this rate you grieve,
For Love should heal worse Wounds, then it can give.

I can alas, Sir, but too truly say.
Tis only Love which makes me disobey,
For I should not deserve the Love you give,
If after you recalled it I could Live.

And I of Life should too unworthy be,
If I could Live after you Died for me.
Your Love for me by Living must be shown,
For you to save my Life must keep your own,
And if my Words you give no credit to,
What I have Vowed my Grief will make me Do.

Ah then all thoughts of Dying I'll decline,
Since you have vowed your Life depends on mine,
But if again to her your Love you give,
My just Despair will be above Repreive.

Oh Madam, you will wound my Soul again,
If such a fatal Doubt you entertain;
My Grief for the great Crime I did commit,
Will still preserve me from repeating it;
By all those Vows which bind me most I swear
I'll still love you and never more love her.

OH what has been revealed by Delaware
His Friendship shows, but heightens my Despair.
It makes me Guilty, Sir, to such Degree
As you'd be Guilty should you pardon me,
The Knowledge of my Fault so wounds my Mind,
As only I in Death my Ease can find.

Alas your Grief more cruel is to me,
Then, Madam, your supposed Inconstancy;
For to such Height my Ardent love is grown,
As your Grief wounds me more then does my own,
You'll punish, by a Sorrow so Sublime,
My Innocence more then you did my Crime:
But though the Word of Innocence I named,
Yet only I can be with Justice blamed,
For had I not that Fatal Letter writ --

Oh, Sir, I cannot such Discourse admit,
For while requests I for your Pardon make,
Alas, my Guilt you on your self would take,
When all the Guilt to me alone is due,
Who did believe a Letter more then you.

Alas, have you Designed to let me see,
That every way you mean to ruin me?
For while you did suspect my Innocence,
You to my Rival did your love Dispense:
Ah Madam, now that Heaven has thought it fit,
To make it evident, you punish it;
For by these precious Tears, which now you spill,
You make me wish, I were thought Guilty still.

Oh Sir, what does your Innocence prove,
Makes me too Guilty to deserve your Love.

Ah be not cruel to this strange degree,
Let not my Innocence my Ruin be.
No Reparation could be reckoned more,
Then what the injured person does emplore;
But you will make, if this be your intent,
Your Reparation my worst Punishment,
A Punishment so cruel, and so high,
As it transcends the imagined Injury:
Yet if you think, that you amiss have done,
Let me then name the Reparation.
'TisMadam, that you'll never think so more,
But give me leave your Beauties to Adore.

Heaven, Sir, does know, and so does Cleorin,
That while I thought you guilty of that Sin;
Which only my Misfortune made me do,
I Loved you Sir, and Loved none else but you.

And Heaven does know and so does Delaware,
That while I thought you Guilty as you're Fair
I did not you but my ill Fortune blame,
And still preserved for you a deathless Flame.
My Lord, to her and me, this Justice do,
As to oppose me, if I speak not true.

Sir, you for her did still such Love express,
As Heaven knows too, I grieved it was not less.

Ah if you give belief, to what we say,
Do not refuse the perfect Love I pay.

Alas, a greater Sin I should commit,
Then that I mourn for, by accepting it,
But all the world will know that I repent,
When on my self I lay this Punishment,
Which, Sir, by Justice dictates I have chose,
Since 'tis the highest which I can impose.
Your Glory, Sir, would wither if not dye,
Should you Love one so guilty, Sin, as I.
The penance I designed let me pursue;
Tis what, Sir, on my knees I beg of you.

Ah do not doubly thus my Soul subdue,
By such denials, and submission too;
But to my Suit be pleased to condescend,
Or else my Grief my tortured Life shall end.

Such were the Arts used by the Earl of Kent,
As both seemed Guilty, yet were Innocent.

Madam, while you such scrupulous Virtue show,
The Prince may of your Love suspicious grow;
That moving sorrow, which he does express,
Invites your kindness now to make it cease.

Sooner then you such Grief, Sir, shall admit,
I will obey, what ever you think fit;
I rather, Sir, will an Injustice do
To my own self, then seem unkind to you.

Ah Madam, in those happy words I find,
You are to me at once both Just, and Kind;
No Satisfaction e're was hoped by me,
But that you might that Innocence see
Which Delaware's great Friendship made appear,
Who is thereby for ever settled here,
Where Madam next to you he still shall grow.

Ah could a Prince ought to his Subject owe;
I might then think, to me you are in debt.

To me your Friendship has bin always great,
Yet I must Tax it of a seeming wrong,
Since this blessed Secret, you concealed so long.

What Justice does this seeming wrong excuse,
Shall, Sir, present you with more welcome news;
While your great Father was in Love with her,
He as a Subject, Sir, had cause to fear
A Secret so important to declare,
As might perhaps have caused a Civil War.
But, Sir, now that the King has this blessed day
Resumed his Love for fair Alizia,
And has by Vows, which oft he did repeat,
Renounced his Passion for Plantagenet,
Which from her sef, this very hour we know,
My Brother lost no time, to tell it you.

These charming Words which now from you I hear,
His Justice shows, and ends my greatest Fear;
Nothing from Heaven was left me to implore,
But that my Father Rivalled me no more.

What fitter time can Fortune give to you,
Then thus your Ends in Love still to pursue;
Lose not one Moment of it, for perhaps
Those Conquering Eyes may make him soon relapse.

What you advise your care of me does show,
Forgive me, Madam, If I leave you now;
Since 'tis so vast a Blessing to implore,
As granted I shall never leave you more.

That Grant the noblest Blessing, Sir, would be,
Could it make you as happy as 'twill me.

Stay Sir, I scorn your Goodness to abuse,
Or own your Pardon, to her Feigned Excuse;
Fear made me not the Secret, Sir, conceal,
Nor the King's Change the Secret now reveal;
For those were Motives of such mean degree,
As, Sir, I blush that they were named for me;
Those Reasons, Sir, of which she did make use,
Obtained but did not Merit your Excuse;
My guilty Doubts, a while have kept me Dumb,
But Love and Honour have those doubts o^e'come.

My Cleorin, what will your Brother do,

I am as ignorant of it as you.

Now all the Truth shall be to you revealed,
For 'tis too Glorious, Sir, to be concealed.
Know, Sir, those Beauties which did conquer you,
Became, while Kent did live, my Conquerors too.
At Poitiers they did me to Glory bring,
And made me grace your Triumph with a King;
And though some Honour I acquired that day,
Yet, Sir, that prosperous Action I may say
Did on no score to me so welcome prove,
As making me more fit to Court her Love;
Raised by this thought for England, Sir, I came,
Where soon her Beauties did revive your Flame,
And Fortune against me was so much bent,
As you your Rival made your Confident;
And by a Cruelty unknown to you,
You in your Love my help Commanded too.

I ^m amazed, my Lord, at what you say.

Though that Command I wanted power to Obey,
Yet ^eaven my witness is how much I strove,
To make my Duty overcome my Love;
But when I found, by what I did endure,
That she alone, the Wounds she gave could cure;
I meant the Secret never to disclose;
And when your Father did your Flame oppose,
I tried your Love by reason to subdue,
But that attempt, Sir, proving fruitless too,
Inspired by Love or guided by Despair,
I to her self my Passion did declare.

Of this Discovery I Fear the event.

It merits Wonder and not Punishment.

But when I for her Favour, Sir, did sue,
Alas she said her Love was given to you,
So given as nothing could recall her Grant,
Since your forsakeing her that power did want;
And in her Words and Accents made appear,
Her Flames for you did equal yours for her;
Convinced by this, that following my Design,
Would blast your joys, but not procure memine,
In which I was confirmed by Cleorin,
The Noble Fatal Conquest I did win;
And forc'ed my self that Secret to declare,
Which builds your Blessings on my own Despair.

Yet Glory must on that Despair attend,
In which you served your Mistress, Prince, and Friend.

Though, Sir, twas much your Mistress to adore,
To help you, while your Rival, yet is more;
Now, Sir, my Story to an end is brought:
Or Praise my merit, or condemn my Fault.

Oh you so nobly, have overcome your flame
As your Despair cannot transcend your Fame.
That Heightened Friendship which our Loves secures,
In our Contentment will present you yours;
Your Friendship yet on me such Debts does lay,
As I must too Despair, those Debts to pay;

'Tis Nobler much, if you dare credit me,
To be the Obliger than the Obleig'd to be;
But in that Heart your Prince did first obtain
By Friendship placed, you shall for ever Reign.

If ought could cure the Grief of loosing you,
What you both said, that Miracle would do.

What, as a Lover, could I less have Done,
Hearing what past betwixt you and my Son;
Strange are the Effects which Jealousy produce,
But fully, Sir, to purchase your Excuse,
I come to visit you, and let you know,
That I no more a Rival am to you,
My Anger though 'twere great, yet it was Short.

Sir, I admire no more at your Transport
Over hearing all we in the garden said;
But you have now full Reparation made.

Sir I more Greive I did a Fault Commit,
Then I am Pleased that you have Pardoned it,
But, Sir, I hope that Freedom you'd restore
Is but an Earnest that you'll grant me more;
My Great Request, Sir, is Renewed by me,
Granting me that is more then Liberty;
Such Strange Discoveries I have made this day,
As all the favour for which now I pray
Is, that to let me court her you'll consent,
When you your self have judged her Innocent.

But will you cease to court her when I prove,
You being judge, she Merits not your Love?

This by my Duty, Sir, I promise you.

Then what you begged of me I grant you too,

Be pleased then, Sir, to order Delaware
Without Reserve his Knowledge to Declare,
And what he Says I hope you will Believe.

To what he speaks I still will Credit give.

I should be too Unworthy of this Trust,
Should I abuse a King so Great and Just;
When to the Wars of Aquitaine I went,
I made a Friendship with the Earl of Kent,
Who in a Charge did such deep Wounds receive,
As, finding that he had not long to Live,
A Messenger in hast for me he sent,
As soon as ever I came into his Tent,
He told me Something on his Heart did lye
Which grieved him more then he was Grieved to Dye,
Then in my Hand he did this Letter lay,
And in a Sigh his Soul did fly away.

When you have heard it Read, it will Afford
Proof of her Virtue.

Read it then my Lord.

MY Death forces me to discover by what Arts I obtained, from the Prince of
Wales, the fair Plantagenet. Before He adored her I did; and as soon as he
fell in Love, (not knowing mine) he made me his Confident; but the King, being
against the match, the Prince the better to cloud his real passion for
Plantagenet, seemed to have one for the fair Aurelia; but still trusted me with
the Superscription, Cipher, and Seal, which he used when he writ to my
Plantagenet, and I had the fatal employment of carrying all their Letters.

At length, the Glory the Prince won at Cressy, joined with his grief for the
King's denial, conquered his Father; and the Day was appointed for his marrying
Plantagenet, which, if not prevented, I found would be the Day of my Death.

This I imparted to my Mother, who had no small ascendant over Plantagenet, and
by my Mothers advice, I got the Prince to write a Letter to Aurelia, (whom I
seemed to be passionately in Love with) wherein he begged her pardon, for having
counterfeited a Love to her, when his was otherwise disposed of; but to repair
it, he earnestly recommended me to her affection, as most worthy of it.

This Letter I sealed, and superscribed with the Cipher the Prince always made
use of to Plantagenet, whom my Mother had so warmly alarm'd, with the Prince's
passion for Aurelia, that this letter being delivered to Plantagenet, in a fit
time, all written with the Prince's own hand, sealed and superscribed, as all
his Letters to her were wont to be, made her so abhor the Prince's
inconstancy, that in the dictates of those resentments, she gave her self to
me, whereunto my Mothers Friendship with her, did highly contribute.

The Prince in despair, undertakes the war with France, and, I, soon after,
disguised to all but you, follow'd him, in hope by some great action to wash
off the Guilt my Love forced me to contract; but here I met my Death. Tell them
all this; and that I hope their hatred to me, will be buried in my Grave.


This Letter till this day I have concealed,
For Causes, Sir, unfit to be Revealed.

I hope you find in what he did relate
She was not Guilty but Unfortunate.

I must confess these Arts which Kent did use
Do her forsaking you too much Excuse.

Since this has washed off her imagined Stain,
Give me your leave to love her, Sir, again.

I would not have defamed her, but I see
To cure his Love there's but that Remedy;
No, Prince, the Sin she did last night Commit
Makes her for ever for your Love unfit.

Oh Heaven! must I endure a new Assault?
Tell me I beg you, Sir, this Fancied Fault,
For she is of such an unblemished Fame,
As I can give it well no better Name:
But, Sir, to try me this perhaps is done.

I do not use to trifle with my Son,
And I believe you I credit what I said,
When I my self found hid within her Bed
A Lovely Youth, who since is dumb with Fear:
My Lord, bring instantly that Prisoner here.

Though I my self what you have said should see,
Yet I would think my Eyes were False not She.

Since to your Witness I did credit give,
Methinks what I have said You should Believe.

Forgive me if her Virtue and my Love
Forced me to speak what may your Anger move,
Fate never man to such a straight did bring,
I must offend my Mistress or my King,
Esteem her Guilty, or not Credit you,
That, Sir, I cannot, this I Dare not Do.

Valeria's Brother! Love is just I see,
Since he Revenges my inconstancy,
And makes him punish his fair Sister's wrong.

If still thy Fear has not tied up thy Tongue,
Discover to the King and to my Son,
How thou by Charms Plantagenet hast won,
I found thee in her Bed, there's no Excuse,

Sir, that's a place which few men would refuse.
Shall (not one moment) stay thy Destiny.

The Words and Anger of the King are High:
Alizia, Sir, and I but now did hear,
That with this Gentleman you Angry were,
We come to beg you to forgive his Crime.

Of all the World you should not plead for Him,
For you by it so Great a Guilt do show,
As I had rather but suspect then know.

I know not what you mean by what you said.

You know not too you hid him in your Bed.

Who could to you that Secret, Sir, declare.

Oh Heaven! does she Confess then he was there?

That, Sir, I hope is no Offence to you. [do?

False Youth, to me what worse Wrong could thou

I thought my Sister had your Heart possessed.

But did thou not from her to me protest,
She bid thee help me if I ere should be
In Love with any one more Fair then She?

And do you, Sir, confess that you are so?

Those Charming Eyes must every Heart ore'throw.

This Guilt in you will cause her Death I fear.

Thy Guilt to me is more then mine to her,
What dost thou ail, thou tremble and look pale?

Admire not, Grief does or' my soul prevail,
When to Valeria's self such Words you said,
As, Sir, does make her wish that she were Dead,
But though she's killed by your Inconstancy,
Yet in your Arms she begs your leave to Dye.

She faints;
Ah, Sir, that Guilty Change in you!

Oh Madam, blame not what you made me do.

Sir; 'tis not Just to charge your Fault on me.

Is it Valeria then?

Yes Yes 'tis she,
Her Broth'rs face so much resembles hers,
As I, deluded by the clothes she wears,
Did to her self my Change in Love avow.

The Clouds of my Despair do vanish now,
And Charming Hopes in me begin to Reign.

Give her more Air for now she Breaths again.

Oh I the fair Plantagenet did wrong.

The Proofs that she is Guiltless are so strong,
As I now beg you will no more defer
To give me leave to make my Court to her.

Sir, in the Princes Suit I also Join,

Her Virtue now does with such Lustre Shine,
As to Repair my having Injured it,
I his Addresses to her do permit.

In this more then a Father you appear,
T^s less to Give me Life then Grant me Her;
But, Sir, before this Blessing I pursue,
I must do Justice to my Rival too,
Sir, I did promise you on her to wait,
And from her Sentence to receive my Fate,
This Promise I am ready to Perform.

No Heart did ere endure so Fierce a Storm,
Who can support those burdens which I bear,
My Vows confirm me here, my Passion there;
By leaving her my Noblest Hopes I end,
And by not leaving her I Wrong my Friend,
Some Sacred Power teach me what I should do.

Your Honour ^indes you, Sir, to keep your Vow;
She told me, Sir, that Sacred Oath you Swore
That you no other Beauty would Adore,
And though you often for her Love did press,
Yet still Misfortune brought to you Distress;
She never could, though she did often strive,
Persuade herself his Passion to receive;
But then all Danger, Sir, She did Despise,
And came to Visit you in this Disguise;
But oh what Horror did her Soul invade,
When she over heard what you to Guesclin said,
Of that unhappy Love you had for me;
She for that wound no better Cure could see.
Then to make me her friend and Confident.

Ah what for me could Fortune worse invent?
Love she denied when 'twould have made me Joy,
And only gives it now 'tis to Destroy.

This, Sir, by Vow she tied me to conceal,
Till you to me your Passion should reveal,
Believing that would be the fittest time
To tell you, and Convince you of your Crime,
In which I promised my Assistance too:
All I have told you happened, Sir, when you
Did (unexpected) visit me last night,
Which put us both into so great a fright,
I, least Ill Thoughts in you it might create,
Finding a man (supposed) with me so late,
And she to be discovered did so dread,
As, Sir, I did conceal her in my Bed,
Where I forgot her in my Friends Despair.

Madam, we wait till you your Doom Declare.

Oh let not, Sir, my Sentence make you Do
What Love and Honour now do call you to;
She Merits you, so Bright her Love does Shine,
And, Sir, the Prince of Wales possesses mine;
Behold the fair Valeria does revive,
If you'll Ask Pardon she'll a Pardon Give;
She your past Fault but for a D^eam will take,
If, Sir, she finds you True when she does wake.

I can no more (your Power so high does rise)
Refist your Sentence then I could your Eyes,
And those Commands which now on me you say
I beg you will Assist me to Obey.

You have your King so wounded with your Grief,

That he, as much as you, does need Relief.

With an Afflicted Soul I wait on you,
To my own Fault and beg your Pardon too;
Madam, I hope a Love which ne'er shall Dye
Will expiate one short Inconstancy.

Ah! though I ne'er more Reparation fought
Then, Sir, that you should see and own your Fault,
Yet you my Heart so wounded by your Crime,
As to recover it requires some Time.

Though I this Penance, Madam, must deplore,
Yet I must grant my Fault does merit more.

Now, Sir, to raise our Joys above Increase,
To this great King give Liberty and Peace.

Those Offers which I always did Decline,
To Gratify you both, I now will Sign.

While in this way my Freedom you Restore,
You and the Prince make me your P^s'ner more:
Your former Conquest, Sir, to t^is must Yield,
This wins my Friendship ^t but won the Field.

This is a Conquest we delight to own,
'Tis more to gain your Friendship, then your Throne.
Now all the Alarm's of Love and War shall cease,
And yield their rooms to the soft Joys of Peace.

THe Poet, Sir, has offered to your sight
An English prince, whose Fame appeared so Bright,
As never any since his time was known,
To shine with clearer Lustre, but your Own;
For though Immortal Honour he did gain,
By conquering France, and by restoring Spain,
Yet, Sir, you brought Three Kingdoms to Remorse,
And gained by Virtue more then he by Force;
Which, Sir, on you a greater Name bestows
By conquering Them by whom he conquered Those:
'Tis more by Virtue England to overcome,
Then by the English to beat Christendom.
As when the Universe was to be made,
The Vast Design was on the Waters laid;
So you in Conquering it like Method keep,
Laying your first Foundation in the Deep:
Though the Black Prince, so happy, Sir, did prove,
As to be Crowned with Victory and Love,
Yet Sir, he knows from you he may receive
A Nobler Crown then War or Love can give;
This makes him like the Poet trembling stand,
Till, Sir, that Crown be given him by your Hand.

