WEEP not, Maria, thy Tears afflict me more than all the rest of our
Misfortunes can.


Dear Lucia! Don not Sigh, since 'twas not by our Crimes, but our Dead Fathers
Prodigality, that we are now reduced to this low Condition.


I mourn not for my Self, but for our Family, bred up to all the Pleasures of a
great Estate; but knew not of his Debts, till, at his Death all that he had was
Seized on; Why were we waked out of that Charming Dream?


And you, our dearest Brothers, reduced to wait upon Two Lords, to whom you
were by Birth to be Companions.


Alas, we are not only tied to wait upon their Persons, but their Humours too,
A Servitude which nothing could Engage us in, but to Support you and your
Sisters: But that end makes all ways pleasant which leads to it.


Prithee forbear, our fortunes are so sad, that rather than lament we should
study how to mend them, though Oviedo and Pyrracco have their Defects, yet they
are liberal Masters, and by their Money, we have furnished for your Use, that
fine Apartment you are now to lodge in, by which we have been able to lay a
Design, so likely to succeed, that the Joy it gives me, has suppressed my
Grief.


We do but wear the Names of Servants, and thereby Command their Purses; as we
hope you Two shall soon their Hearts; your Births, your Educations, and your
Beauties, joined with our Contrivances, must restore our withered Fortunes;
Francisco, our Youngest Brother, who was bred up under a great Astrologer, we
have hired a House for, and have already made him famous for Telling Fortunes,
nay for Necromancy; his Conjuring Name you must remember is Alcanzar.


You two must cry him up to all the Ladies, and the Gallants, you converse
with. Our Youngest Sister Iulia, we have placed with Leonora, the Rich Widow,
Mother to the Great Heiresses, Antonia and Pastrana.


These are the Foundations on which we mean to build, you both must live after
the manner which we shall direct. But you must hastily retire, for I see Oviedo
and Pirracco, with their Two Uncles Salazar and Fernando, coming.


Antonia and Pastrana are the most Eminent for Wealth and Beauty; my Brother,
your deceased Father, made it the Business of his Life to Wed you there.


And had, before his Death, so far advanced it, as now it rests on you to
perfect what his Care so well began.


Uncles, the Old are unfit to choose Wives for the Young.


Men should look with Eyes, and not with Spectacles in Affairs of Love.


Nor would I Wed the Empress of the World, though she were the greatest Beauty
of it, in that dull Method of our grave Fore-Fathers; 'Sfoot, they married as
they purchased Lands, agreed upon the Bargain, then entered and took Possession.


They Wedded Wealth to Wealth, when the chief Benefit of Riches is, to make
Election of what most we like.


And if what most you like have Riches too, I hope that makes it not the Worse.


To me it does exceedingly; it gives a Wife too great a Motive to be proud,
when she can upbraid her Husband, that 'twas she (forsooth,) increased his
Fortune, whereas Marrying for Beauty only pleases me, obliges her, and keeps
her humble too.


These are new Maxims Nephew.


And therefore I like them the better; I have seen fo much Mischief happen by
following the Old, that I am resolved to try some fresh Experiments.


'Twould be an Injustice to all Humane Kind, if still the Rich should only Wed
the Rich, the World would then consist only of Usurers and Beggars: But if Rich
Men marry the poor and handsome Women, and the Rich Women the Poor and handsome
Men, the Gifts of Nature, and of Fortune, will be equally distributed; Delight
and Wealth so shared will restore to both the Sexes that Happiness, which the
Old formal Ways of acting have so long deprived them of.


Young and handsome is Portion enough to him that needs not any.


Notwithstanding these fine Axioms, pray visit them, or at least show us better
Reasons why you will not.


Why 'tis Reason enough, that thus you press us to it, I hate Constraint in any
thing, and in Love above all things.


Yes, yes, pretty well, but now Guzman, you have discharged let me march up and
give Fire too.


Pray, Uncles! press us no more! our Father ruled us whilst, he was alive, and
we'll rule our Selves now he is Dead.


Why, this is as bad to us as if he were still living.


Farewell! we pity you


And we our Selves whilst you are with us; But now they are gone; Tell me my
Piracco, why you will not Court Antonia.


I will, so you will tell me, Why you will not Court Pastrana.


Because, I doubt, should I make her an Address, none would dare to be my
Rival; 'tis known I love a Duel more than I love a Mistress, and delight to
make my Conquest over Men, my ways to be Victorious over Woman -- Now your
Reason. --


I will never marry till I can get a Wife by some Stratagem; She, that I can
take when She is at her own dispose, will never attempt to break from one, who,
she has experimented* has the Master-Wit. And should I now Win Antonia, our
Solemn Uncles would brag they and my Father got her for me: I Scorn to build on
others Men's Foundations. But, Did you ever see Pastrana?


No more than you have seen Antonia.


These Resolves are pretty; he that has no Brains will get a Wife by a
Stratagem; and that has no Heart will get his Wife by a Duel.


I doubt they resolve to live Bachelors.


'Tis under that Balcony, you must Play and Sing.


Are you sure it is Antonia and Pastrana's Window?


Are you sure your Name's Guzman, and mine Francisco?


Why, What's the matter?


Do you not see some muffled there?


Pish! those are Gallants who intend to give a Serenade to some Ladies, but yet
I may Mistake, and they may have some design on us.


However, I love to have my Sword in a readiness; when this is in my hand, let
others fear, for I cannot.


Prithee let's be gone, I like not Duels in the Dark.


What afraid, Pirracco?


No, no, only in all things I love Circumspection.


OPEN those Casements which Confine
The Brightest Beauties that do shine;
Beauties which such Strong Beams display
As out of Night can form a Day.
A Day which they have power to Crown
With Joy or with despair;
For as they Smile, or as they frown,
So they can make it foul or fair.
Appear, fair Nymphs! and by the Lustre of your Eyes
Restore us Day before the Sun does rise.
I hope I rehearsed the Distich right; and by Musaeus I'm sure spoke it
Heroically.

Music but to the Ear does Joy dispense,
But your fair Eyes will Ravish every Sense.
Ladies, the Fame of your Triumphant Beauties has made us take this way to


Is your Friend a Carthusian, or else a Stranger that does not understand


No Ladies, I hope ere long to convince you, that I have not forsworn Flesh,
but am studying for the fittest Words to tell you, that I make a Present of my
Heart to you.


To which of us?


Say, To her in the Sky-Colour.


I thank you; as if I could not tell better than you which pleases me; I say, I
love her in the Pink best.


Why, she is my Mistress.


That's pleasant: Since when? Since when? Nay, no studying.


Since I saw her first.


And she is mine just as long a Time: There is not one Moments difference,
between the Births of our two Loves, by Gemini, I think they are Twins.


But mines the Elder, and if you will dispute it, the best Sword shall try the
Title.


Nay, Sir, if you be so hot, know I wear an Iron Toy as well as you.


I'll try if you can use it as well as I can mine.


What? draw before a Woman, you show your Breeding; but if you will be drawing,
let it be Lots rather than Swords to determine whose she shall be.


I scorn to rely on Fortune, when true valour ought to decide it.


You are too hasty, Capt. Hector, since fortune is as blind as Love, she seems
to me the fittest Judge in our Cause; nor will I fight for her, till from her
Self I know she is for me.


The way to make her for thee, is in her Sight bravely to kill me.


And then bravely to be hanged for it, if I were as poor as thou art, I would
not care to suffer Death for any thing, much less for a Mistress, as thou
would order this Intrigue, I must either miss my Love, or not miss the
Gallows.


Will you not fight then?


Not yet, and for to speak the Truth, I like 'em both so well, that which of
them declares for me, I shall love her the best: yet, were I to choose, little
Pink-Colour for my Palate.


Are you yet agreed to which of us you make a Present of your Heart.


Even to which of you will first accept it; for your Beauties are equally so
great, that I know not to which of you to give it. But either of you that have
most mind to it may take it, 'tis at both your Services I assure you.


They are Charming Fair.





Now for a Stratagem, my Pirracco, to get the Pink-Colour Beauty from those two
Rivals.


Here you may meet with what you most desire, Beauty and Rivals, why do you
lose time to make your Conquest over Men, the way to be victorious over Women.


Pause a little I mean to dog these Gallants to their Lodgings, to Night, that
I may see them in the Field to morrow.


We have had as much dispute, who should accept your Heart, as you have had to
which of us you will give it.





I doubt your Courage, Sir, is small, since your Heart can be drawn through so
Strait a Passage.


Do not believe, because my Passions great, my Courage is but small. Loves does
often admirable things. Your Beauties, I confess, are vast, yet, since they
find a Passage through my Eyes into my Heart, why may not my Heart as well find
a Passage through my Eyes to you: Madam, you may as well condemn your own
Charms, as doubt my Valour on the Score you do



How can thou think
That Guzman's Heart is small,
When thou dost see
He dares love thee
And tell it in a Madrigal.

By this Light a Poet, Sister.


He a Poet, alas, good Man! this is only what he has been taught by Rote.


Hold thy Peace, Envy: I say this is a Spanker Madrigal, and newly minted in my
Brain.


And, I say, Sir Poet Fop, If you can make an Extempore Sonnet, choose which of
us you like the best, and she shall be your Mistress.


A Match by Homer. Dear Francisco, thou art a Wit, help me at this Dead lift,
and, by our Mistress 's Virginity, I'll do the as good a Turn.


Thou that hast so strong a fancy, as to Imagine I will help thee to get my
Mistress, hast the best Ingredient of a Poet; but, what the Devil set the thus
a Madrigalling?


Why, thou know I have still had a Twittering to be a Cottager of Parnassus,
besides, I love the Muses, because they are Wenches, and therefore I never have
an Amorous Fit, but at the same time I have a Poetical One.


Then thou art in Love, or need not my Assistance; but in this Case I will
afford the none.


Come, Fumbler, are you ready.


Hang your Assistance, I scorn to be beholding to it. If Madam, my muse cannot
walk on her Feet, Ee'n let her Lady-ship fall.


Is this the Stanza you promise us? It runs as dull as any Prose.


'Slid, she takes what I last spoke to thee for Verses, I see she's not a Wit:
And therefore dost not thou think I may pass any thing upon her for a Madrigal.


Try, try, Any thing that Rhymes may Serve.


Why, there's it; by Cupid, when I would not make Sonnets my fancy will coin
nothing else; and now, that I would make but one, and when my Mistress for that
one does look, I'm duller than a Lover, that's forsook. Why, here's Witch craft
again, Rhyme and Verses when I need it not. But when I most desire in both to
speak
I then find, to my Grief, I am to seek*
Look! by Pegasus, a third effect of Magic.
I am Ovid when I speak to thee, but de Tristibus when I am to speak to her.


Turn thy Face towards her ever the Poetical Rapture's spent, and imagine thou
speak to me; for if thou hast not a stronger Fancy, thou should despair
of being a Poet.


I'll try: Now, Lady, listen to my Extempore Stanza.


We have so long expected it, that we have reason to believe 'tis premeditated.


By Virgil, the Fit is spent, there's no Than I will such Affronts endure,
I will for ever Poetry abjure:
By Lucan's Farsalia I am fascinated, and by thee; I can no sooner turn to
thee, but I spit Verses faster than a fluxed Wencher does his Rheum, But when
towards her I do but turn my Nose,
I cannot speak to her in Verse or Prose.
Again, by Hellicon, 'tis admirable, 'tis prodigious, 'tis amazing; Hast thou
not given me some Spell? Or, Is my Muse the Needle, and thou the North, that I
must still turn towards thee? Prithee, Francisco, do thou stand under the
Balcony, and look this way, and then, if I do not make a Stanza, I'll take my
leave of Poetry and Love.


I'll humour thee, for once, though it be against the Interest of my Love.


Well, Sir, I find you are not an Extempore Poet, or you have with
Premeditation resolved to refuse us.


He a poet! I tell you, Sister, he has an arrant Prose-Look, a Face which seems
to be the Antipodes to Wit; I had rather abjure the Love of all Men, than have
that mawkish Mien haunt me with his: Why, he'll as soon make a handsome Man as a
handsome Stanza; one is now as much an Impossibility in Nature, as the other is
in his Art.


Marry come up, Goody Penthisilea, you hector it with your Tongue, because you
can't do it with your Eyes; and would have me to quarrel with your Usage, when
my Quarrel is to your Face, you did well to prevent me, else I had cried Whore
first: There's an Elegy for your Epigram; and having thus conquered you in
Prose, have at you now in Verse. I Love not you
That go in Blue,
If you will I'll take my Oath on it;
But 'tis your Companion
I love above any one.
And there's an Extempore Sonnet.
I'm sure I have pleased them now, for I have made them laugh.


Yes, but 'twas at thee.


How! Dares any laugh at me.


Yes; any that dares hear thy Verses.


Why, Thou did hear them.


And therefore I could not hold laughing at them.


Here's that shall make thee cry.


Here's that shall secure me from it.


Though I like your Verses ill, yet perhaps I shall like your Fighting worse,
and therefore I'll not see it.


Nay, if you will Duel it, you shall do it without the Seconds.


If you will combat, draw your Sword in a good Cause, you cannot have a worse
than this; yet, if you will be doing, come on, you shall not want Employment.


Stay! I will consult my Honour.


Away, the Beauties are withdrawn, and I see Men with naked Swords coming
towards us; the best Stratagem in this Case is a safe Retreat.


Stay, Pirracco, the Number's equal; but now he's gone, it is not so. Not
Hercules against two.


'Sdeath! What horrid Thrusts


Who is that which makes such hast away?


Some that I frighted with the deadly Thrusts I made. You see, Francisco, I can
Fence, and give the Mortal Touch.


'Tis safer for you to Fence against the Air than against me.


Well! I have considered, and am resolved: It misbecomes a Man of my Estate and
Education to fight by Owl-Light, and in the Streets; we'll defer our Duel to
another time; besides, she before and for whom I would fight has withdrawn her
self; let us put up.


Content: But do you think the Lady in the Blue will ever put up the Words you
gave her.


By Eribus, that's pretty, did she not first begin with me?


Yes; but you should have considered her Sex.


And she should have considered mine; for I'm sure 'tis fitter for a Woman to
bear ill Language than for a Man to do it. I am so tender in point of Honour,
that if mine were offended, though by a Child of four Years old, yet I would
resent it to the last degree; besides, the Feminine Sex is so paltry a Sex, as
I have no reverence for any one of it, that I am not first in Love with: But
prithee help me, 'tis my Custom when I draw my Sword to fling away the
Scabbard, and now I cannot find it.


Was there ever such a vapouring Coward?


Oviedo and I left the place only


How many were there of 'em, Sir?


Just three, that made me call but to you two, for I scorn Odds, now if they
three continue here, our Numbers being alike, we'll make 'em sport; I could not
sleep with any seeming Stain upon my Reputation.


I see them, and I think there are but Two.


There are no more of them now; I wonder where a Duce the Third is fled: Well,
since there are but Two, only you Two shall fall on them; I hate to take
Advantages, no, not by Countenancing my Revenge; if you both return with their
two Swords, as proof of Victory, bring 'em to me, and I'll largely Reward your
Valour and Success. But be sure Oviedo knows nothing of this whole Affair.


Upon my Life there were but Two at first; his Fear made him plot what he says
his Honour makes him do.


No matter, since we must be his Bravoes, let us first make his Enemies pay for
it, and then himself. Ho! What are you? And, What is it you are doing there.


What a quarrelsome Voice that Rogue has?


Are you Mutes?


I'm searching for my Scabbard, I wish you'd help me to find it; I lost it even
now in a Rencounter I had with the fierce Young Guzman.


Your Sword then is the readier to fight with me.


Franeisco, do thou answer him; for I'm so ticklish in Point of Honour, as I
shall make a Quarrel of it.


Who are you that thus unprovok'd come to offend us; if you come to Fight, hold
up but your little Finger, and you shall need no other Provocation.


'Tis the Poverty of the Rogue makes him thus Valiant; he has nothing but a
Life to lose, which every day costs him so much trouble to maintain, that 'tis
more easy to be rid of it.


Sure that's Francisco's Voice.


If 'tis not his, 'tis very like it, Francisco.


Alvares.


Yes.


Speak softly: Who's there besides?


'Tis our Brother Guivarro.


What makes you here, Francisco?


You shall know another time.


Who is that with you?


The Rich Guzman, who maintains me better than all my Astrology can.


O! if it be he, a little Oratory will persuade him to give us up his Sword, we
must have yours too, it shall bring us Gold.


My Sword!


Inquire not, Why we must have it? for the good of the Family.


Well, what must be, must be; but yet I'll seem as if I fought, and call him to
my help, which is the most Compendious Course to make him run; a Bustle will
make him think I fought bravely, which shall add to our common Stock no small
Sum.


I'll stop his Flight, for he has already put on a Running Look.


By Alexander the Magnificent they mean to make a set Business of it; and I
think this long Parley is but to measure their Swords, which, while they are
doing, I'll measure how many of my largest Strides it is from hence to the next
Sanctuary.


I know 'tis me you seek.


Upon my Honour I do not, Sir.


What! leave your Friend engaged, and in your Quarrel; consider, Sir, your
Reputation.


How he mouths that Word; 'tis his own Quarrel upon my Credit, Sir, as he began
it, let him end it too for me.


Help, Friend, I am down.






Courage, Guzman, we shall get Honour here.

No, my Fighting Friend, we will get no Honour here; you shall have it all to
your own self, I will not rob you of any part of it; I see you are strong
enough for both, and do not need my help.


Stand still, or I'll shoot thee dead.


'Slid, 'tis a Blunderbuss; Well,


Son of a Bachelor, do not I see ever, Limb of thee stir?


My Circumference perhaps may trepidate; but as I am a Cavalier, I am not moved
one hairs breadth from the Center I stood in, when you first condemned me to
it.


I doubt thou art a Coward.


Had I your Archebuse, a Croche, and you but my simple Sword, perhaps I should
put you into as bad a fit of the Palsy as you have now surprised me into.


I'll try thee; here, give me thy Sword; and I'll give thee my Gun; if I
tremble when thou dost level it at me, then call me Coward too.


Content. -- Courage Francisco, I am


Present at me now Don Quixote.


By Vulcan tis my own Scabbard; had I known this had bin your only Fire-Arms, I
would have made you as active as you have made me fixed: By Medusa's head I am
cheated.


Nay, rather than you shall complain, we'll Exchange again; I desire but the
Scabbard at any time to get thy Sword from thee -- here.


No Sir, Give a thing and take a thing, I scorn it: Besides, as things now are
handl'd, I am out of a possibility of committing a Murder on you, and I hope
this Charm --


Well Sir, to show you I am liberal too, I present you with any Leather --
Blunderbuss; tis a Modern Invention may be worth all the Money now in your
Purse, and Exchange you know is no Robbery.


Shall I not have my Toledo too?


No Sir, I have most need of it; you have now nothing worth defending: I've
your late Purse to guard. Your Servant Sir, away Friend.


A Scabbard and no Purse! Things are discreetly matched: By Ptolomy, this has
been a damnable Intrigue.


O Guzman! Had thou but played the Man when I had flung down and disarmed my
Antagonist, we had gotten Immortal Fame; but now thou art lost in Infamy: Thy
Sword taken from thee, by him who had only the Scabbard to do it with!


Fie on all Inchanters, say I: I tell thee Francisco, when t'was in his hand
t'was a Fusee, I saw it Cocked, the Muzzel was bigger than any Blunderbuss
which made me mention to thee Assistance and Artillery; but as soon as it came
into my hand it was Metamorphosed into that Rascally Scabbard of mine: I tell
thee all this Night's Adventures have been Magical; Those whom thou took but
for two Men, and seemed to me no more after the day was lost by us, appeared to
me to be the Cavalry of the great Mogul.


Did not thy Fear multiply them?


Fear! Why I tell thee an Alexander might fear to Fight against such an Army as
those were, had they been but Men; but being all Goblins, as I'll be sworn they
were; by Proserpin 'tis happy we came off as we did.


I confess I begin to believe there was some of the black Art in our Disaster;
and I more than doubt the famed Alcanzar has had a hand in it.


Who is this Alcanzar?


The Miracle of this Age: He can tell things to come more perfectly than old
Records declare what's past: He can Enchant, give Charms to make men
Invulnerable, Filters to Engender Love: In a word, what ever he will, he does.


Dost thou know him?


Know him? yes I was bred under him.


By Pluto then he gave thee a Charm this Night, that thou hast escaped
unwounded: Fie on thee, 'twas that made thee so devilish Valiant: But since he
will sell Safety, I am Rich enough and Wise enough to buy it: Prithee hire his
Art for me, I'll pay him liberally.


Come, let's return to your House; and there we will lay some Plot to Act Revenge
and to recover Honour. Cheer up.

The great Alcanzar I'll Engage for you;
And what his Art has done, it shall undo.

I Came just now from Alcanzar, and as an Earnest of your future Liberality,
assured him of 500 Crowns


Five hundred Crowns as Earnest! I thought I might have bought for half that
Sum a Thousand Filters and as many Charms; and yet thou call it but an
Earnest of a Future Liberality.


Nay, if you think the Price too dear, I can yet break off the Bargain: But
then look to your self, for all, which by his Art you might cast upon your
Enemies, they will involve you in; and then in point of Love you will be
rendered so impotent and ridiculous, that Death will be a Happiness, compared to
that dismal Life which you must be condemned to live.


Well, I'll consider --

'Tis a mighty Price: Had not I better sit down with things as they are, than
be at so Immense a Charge? Five hundred Crowns is pleasanter to me than either
Revenge or Love.


Nay, Gentlemen! you shall not force into his House, or if you will, through me
you must make Guzman is a Man of Honour, and at his return I'll engage shall
receive their Lordships Challenges; one after the other I mean.


Two without fay --


Well Sir, we'll take your Word, and will be with you in the Evening.


What's the matter, Francisco? New Enchantments?


No, no, these are sad and real Truths: I told you the Affront you cast upon
the Lady in the Blew would be resented by some of her Friends or Gallants; and
these that would have come in to you now with a Challenge, were a couple of
Gentlemen, who say they come from Oviedo and Piracco; unknown the one unto the
other, and meeting here by Accident, found each of them brought a Challenge
from his Friend to you.


To me? how could they learn 'twas I that affronted the Sky-Colour?


Can you ask that question, and know that the famed Alcanzar lives in the next
Street? I wish whilst you are cheapening the Bargain, that they do not clap it
up. If a couple of certain Duels, and perhaps a hundred more to follow (for
only Fate knows where so brisk a beginning will meet an End) be not worth Five
hundred Crowns to get off with Honour and Victory, let your Parsimony and your
Wisdom consider; but I have decreed to abjure your Company, for nothing less
than Charms can secure you or any one that keeps it.


Who, a duce, are those two Fellows, Oviedo and Piracco?


'Tis a sign you are not of the fighting Crew of the Town, that ask who they
are. Why, they are Men that can hardly Sleep without a Murder: They have spent
half their Estates only in the many Pardons their Valour has forced them to
take out. In one Word, you had better have a Quarrel with all Salamanca than
with them, and you must fight with them both by Six a Clock, or they'll have
killed you before Seven.


But there are Laws to restrain them.


Laws! They no more value Laws than they do their own Souls; one of them sent a
Cartel to a Judge upon a Bench, for not saluting him as he past by, by
accident. Others fear the Laws, but they make the Laws fear them. But having
warned you of your Danger, fare you well.


Nay stay, Francisco; though Money be precious, Honour and Life is more: But how
shall I be sure his Charms will hold? for if I should think my self
Invulnerable, and thereby be engaged to fight, and then should be betrayed,
what would become of Guzman?


Fear not, you shall try the Charms in his Closet, before you prove them in the
Field. But while we are thus talking, I know not if there will be time enough
left for him to prepare for you such efficacious Spells; and if by Six you are
not ready, take what will follow the next Hour. Here's your Ticket to him: Now
go fetch your Crowns, that I may with them, smooth your Way to him.


Well, Honour cannot be too dearly bought by Men of Reputation; when I am
Charmed I'll make those two. Hectors pay for my purchase.


But stay, I will not betray you, your Charms shall not work upon her in the
Pink; her I reserve for my own self.


How Slave! must I give vast Sums and fight Duels, to let others share in my
Amours?


Nay Sir, if you are at this lock, before you are Charmed we'll decide the
Quarrel: 'Twill be too late for me to do it afterwards.


Well, since I'm sure to have such variety, 'twere ungrateful to deny thee one.


This is generous, and now I'll work for you without fear.


And I'll go boldly and bring down my Five hundred Crowns; Meet me at the
Great-Gate.


How does it take?


Even to our wish: This day at Two a Clock I am to Charm him, and at Five each
of you must present your Challenge apart: But I can stay no longer, I am going
to receive my first five hundred Crowns, and to put my self in my Astrological
Clothes and Closet.


Francisco, Francisco!


I come, I come; away, away.


Piracco, Good Morrow, I hope you have not slept to Night.


Why not slept to Night?


I think your Heart is low, if after leaving me engaged as you did, you could
take any rest till your Honour were restored; You made a very quick retreat
Sir.


Me thought Yours was not very slow; I watched you.


'Slight, 'twas time to make a Retreat when you fled from me, and a dozen
Bravoes fell on me.


A dozen Bravoes?


Bravoes did I say? I meant Furies, they laid about them so; especially one
that made Alonges above thirty Foot; I Parried fifty times, and if ever I dealt
like a Cavalier of Honour, 'twas in that Occasion.


Bless me! were you not hurt?


Some Scratches I had, Marks rather of Honour than of Danger; which with my
Sympathetic Powder I have cured this Night: But I have sent a File of them
into the Elizian Shades, and had I not been afraid of drawing more Blood upon
my Soul, I would have dispatched the rest: Fear of doing, not receiving hurt,
made me retire.


Well, though one of your Antagonists made an Along of Thirty Foot with his
Sword; yet you have made a longer with your Tongue; for there were but two in
all, and I have disarmed them by a Stratagem; look, here are both their Swords:
Show me such Trophies of your Valour, as I have showed you my Policy.


Two Swords? by my left Moustache, these two Swords belong unto some of those
Six that I sent Post to Charon. These are but the Gleanings of my Valour's
Harvest.


And by my right Moustache, these are all the Swords were in your dozen Furies
hands, which by my Contrivance I forced from them; talk what you please, this
is the naked Truth.


Nature is yet the strongest, but if thou provoke me farther, the Tie of
Blood shall soon be Sacrificed to the Resentments of my Honour.


No more, I say: But does your Intelligence jump with mine?


As to what?


Why, that the two Beauties we saw last Night, are Pastrana and Antonia, whom
before we slighted.


For certain.


It has raised in me a greater Conflict than that I had last Night with the two
half dozen of Bravoes; for should we make Addresses there, the Grave Solomons,
our Uncles, would so domineer over us, that we had better be Slaves at Tituan,
than endure their Tyranny; and if I make not my Addresses there, I must decline
both what my Honour and my Inclination leads me to, for there I meet with
Charming Beauties, and with certainty of fighting Rivals: Two things my very
Soul is tickled with.


I must confess, she in the Pink Charms me, as much as she in the Blew does
you; but leave it to my Policy to manage our Addresses there, without their
knowledge, for I also fear their insulting more than you.


Well, on things of Valour thou shalt rely on me, as I on things of Policy on
thee; but lose no Opportunity.

Each Minutes loss of Time seems twenty days
To him, who longs for Myrtle and for Bays.

'Tis a strange Fame that runs of this Alcanzar: The secretest Thoughts which
are concealed within the darkest corner of the Heart, they say are visible to
him as Objects are to Sight; I must confess, I could not but employ my Iulia to
him to get a private Audience from him, there to ask a thousand Questions; most
of them concern you, my dearest Daughters:


Me Madam?


Yes, both: For many of our young Gallants solicit my Consent to make you
their Addresses, but I have been longest, and most assiduously courted to admit
Oviedo and Piracco, Men of Noble Births and Fortunes; their Father, when he
lived, half gained my liking; and since his Death Salazar and Fernando have
renewed the Assault: On the other side, Guzman, prodigiously Rich, but neither
over-stout nor wise, as I am informed, has by his Friends this day begged my
Consent, that he my Court you; and from Alcanzar's Art I'll be resolved.


This is not your Guzman, the Poet, I hope.


By the Character it should; for he is Rich, and neither Wise, nor Valiant.


Madam, I have been these four Hours ever I could get Admittance to the Great
Alcanzar; The Chamber before his Astrological Cabinet, is thronged more than a
Hive of Bees. But at last I got Admittance to him, and at Four this Evening


Thank thee, dear Iulia: Since he is so Punctual, 'tis fit I should retire; for
ever I can prepare those Queries, which he must resolve, put on my Disguise and
have gotten thither, the appointed Hour will have stolen on us: Come Daughters,
go along with me, to learn your Fate and mine.


ready.


My Spirits appear: You four, when I strike with my Foot, must enter like
Hob-goblins, making terrible Noises and Hums; and all offering to Seize upon
the Man that I shall set in that Chair, yet touch him not, but in the Way I
have directed; and use all other Arts, which formerly you have practised in the
like Occasion.

O, one of you run, and open the Door, and bring the Person in.


Would Francisco were with me: I Smell so much Salt-Peter, Niter, and
Brimstone, that I must Ave in Latin, no more than in Arabic: Has not the
Rogue, Francisco, sent me hither to destroy me, being his Rival?


Quarter, Quarter, Sir;


Mortal Wight, that had the Heart,
To see the Negromantick Art;
Approach, approach and thou shalt view,
Things so strange, and things so new,
That thy Soul in Rapture shall
Only on Alcanzar call:
Here are Spirits of the Air,
Others of the Stygian-Lake.
Those are Gay and Bright, and Fair;
These than Hell it self more black.

By Statius, a Poetical Conjurer; what would I give to answer him in his own
Dialect? But Fear now, as Love last Night, has levelled my Parnassus as flat as
a Pancake.


Mortal! Why keep thou aloof?
Beat it hither on the Hoof,
Else though thou were twice as Rich,
Fiends would catch thee by the Breech,
And drag thee to Grim Charon's Cave,
Where my Art no power will have;
Thy hasty Motion now begin,
I hear the Furies coming in.

Great Master of the Magic Art, I did not come to speak with thee, but with
the famed Alcanzar, to whom I beg thee now convey me from the Fiends, thou
say, and I too plainly hear, are coming in, for I have gotten such a Surfeit
of the Stanch, which does arise out of the Stygian-Lake, -- As I am able to do
nothing else but quake. Hush! Thou impertinent Muse, is this a time, and be
hanged, for thee to be perking up? By Tasso, he'll think I Mock him, and then
Beelzebub will swallow me quick.


I am Alcanzar, and since thy Fear
Hinders thee to fly
From Sphinx's, that are nigh:
I'll take a Care
To set thee in my Chair.

A thousand Thanks to Great Alcanzar; but you must drag me thither, Sir; for I
have yet such a Load of Sulphur in my Mouth, that my Limbs are not able to bear
me.


While in this Chair, and in this Circle you


Pray, Sir, may I not shake in it without danger?


Yes, but be sure you let not your Teeth Chatter, for that would be Music to
the Fiends, who all would come and Dance about you.


Pray, Sir, a Gag then for fear of the worst, for I have lately had a Quart,
and I'd be loath the Fiends should Dance to the Tune of my Disease, especially
in my sight.


Think not the worse Sir, of your self for this Disorder you are in; I have
seen Noble Souls tremble at what you now must undergo, and yet were ne'er the
worse Men, when my Operation had ended.


I hope so -- Here's Francisco's Ticket, and now you know my Business; I doubt
not he has paid you the Five hundred Crowns.


Yes Sir, I have received those Trifles, I shall deserve five times more ever
yet be long: You desire to be Invulnerable; from what Weapon, Sword or Gun?


Both, I beseech you, Sir.


Why, he has paid me but for one; I received only Five hundred Crowns, and my
lowest Price for one of them is that Sum; nor have I prepared for any more than
one.


'Tis very dear; yet pray, Sir, which would you advise me to?


Why Sir, this Evening, or else my Stars deceive me; (which they seldom do) you
will receive two Cartels: Now in regard I would make your Valour famous, I
would not have you fight the ordinary way with Swords, but Pistols (for they
sending the Challenge, you may choose the Weapon) This they will dread, and
therefore I would have you Shot-free. When you will be made Invulnerable
against the Sword, you know the Price, to which you must add two Hours Warning.


I like the Advice extremely; pray proceed, I will so smoke the Rogues; I'll
teach 'em to send Challenges to Guzman.


Then sit firm, and start not at what ever you see or hear; but beware of
Chattering.


Good, Sir, give me the Gag.


Away, away; I would not have so mean a Thing done by a Gentleman.


However I'll Muzzel my Natural, for fear of the


Ye black and dismal Spirits, which keep
Your Mansions, underneath the Deep,
Delighting most in those Aboads,
Which are assigned to Frogs and Toads:
Appear, and about this Mortal run,
And Charm him from the Shot of Gun;
Let neither Pistol, Musket, Fusee,
Have power to make his Flesh less jucy;
But let his Skin be tuff as Wall,
And Resist the Leaden Ball --

Help, help.


Hold; what's the matter?


The Mortal's Teeth begin to Chatter.


How? does your Teeth Chatter?


No Sir, 'tis my Bones smite one against the other, which makes a Noise
somewhat like it, and that makes their Mistake; I have kept my Teeth as close
as a dead Man's, that has been set a Week: So close, that I fear I shall never
get'em asunder again; me thinks I begin to find them grow together; however,
pray Sir, for fear of the worst, remove this Diabolical Company, as soon as you
can: In Brief, a Man is but a Man, and I find it is, in this Occasion, a harder
thing to Command one's Teeth than one's Tongue.


Infernal Spirits, which delight to Lye,
Be gone, but first your Charm apply.

Our Magic Charm being done,
Mortal! be free from Shot or Gun.

Are they gone?


Yes.


The Devil go with them; for I do not think a Gun, though I were not Charmed,
could fright me half so much as these Incubusses did.


O Sir! A Gun is a terrible Weapon.


Why, I tell you Sir; I had within these twelve Hours a Blunderbuss levelled at
me, laden with Case-shot; and yet my Teeth did not Chatter.


Why then, they chatter'd now.


Give the Devils their due, they were in the right; never did the cold Fit of
an Ague make make a Man's Grinders move nimbler than the fright of those
Succubusses made mine: I was in a devilish Jaw-quake, all the strength of both
my Hands, though supported by the Arms of that Chair, could not gag me: But
Sir, do not you think me a bold Man, that could thus out-face four Belzebubs in
a Lye?


Nay, to do it while your Teeth were Chattering too?


By Hercules, judge what I can do when out of a Fright, that could achieve so
bold a thing, though in one.


Well, now you are Charmed, fight against whom you will, with Fire-Arms; and at
their utmost Peril be it.


But all this while, how do I know I am Shot-free? Though you are a famous Man,
yet I would be loath to take your bare Word for it, when my Life, and what's a
thousand times more precious to me, my Reputation in a Duel is at stake.


If you will not believe me, believe your own


On whom will you make this Experiment?


On you.


On me?


Yes, on you, my Life on it.


Nay, 'twill be my Life on it then.


Why, you know I shall be hanged if I Kill you.


How shall I know that, when I am killed? or if I could, 'twould be but a sorry
Satisfaction: Besides, for ought I know, by your Charms you may make your self
Halter-proof.


Come Sir, do not doubt, I'll soon let you see


Hold, hold, you say you have given me a Charm to make me Shot-free, pray Sir,
cannot you give me another to make me Fear-free? Then I may try without
trouble.


Away with such fond Scruples; here, take you the Pistol, and Shoot it at me; I
Charmed my self before you came with the same Spell.


This is by much the better way of trying; Have at you, Sir.


I stand you firm as a Bastian.


But stay! What if your Charm should not be good, and I should Kill you; that
would be death to me at Second-hand; unless you have a Spell to make me
Law-proof too.


My Death be on my self, if you be questioned, say I was my own Murderer; no
Body can contradict you.


'Tis worth telling a Lye to be satisfied


Here's the Bullet, and I am well.


Oviedo's and Piracco's come by dozens, I scorn them -- For now, who ever my
Fury does provoke,
Shall find his Destiny in Fire and Smoke.



If he were as well Charmed as he is Fooled; he would be Invulnerable indeed.


JUlia has assured me, that Leonora and her two Fair Daughters, the Rich
Heiresses, will be here by Four a Clock; they cannot long be absent; she has
informed me too of all the Secrets of the Family. Maria, you know your Part:
After you and Lucia, with your Maids, have danced, you must mount on yonder
Tripos, and distinctly Pronounce the first Oracle; and perform all those other
things I have already directed.


Well, if ever Delphian Virgin ever declared Oracle with more Authentic
Gravity than I, (bating the Convulsion of the Eyes, and twisting of the Neck)
never take my Word again.


And you, Lucia, must speak the second Oracle, I gave you, with the Gravity of
a Sybil.


If you can give me, Mr. Conjurer, but a Spell to prevent Laughing, doubt not
but they shall take me at least for Sybilla Cumea.


'Slight, if you Laugh, we are all undone.


I hope, I shall have the Retentive Faculty for once, to contain; I must pinch
my self worse than the Fairies do the drowsy Maids.


Iulia has so finely fooled them; that whatever they hear from from me, will be
believed as zealously as an old dying Turk does the Alcoran. I hear them; away,
away --


Madam, I'll be your Guide; this is the Astrological Cabinet; and I see the
Great Alcanzar in his Chair.


Leonora, Mother to the fair Antonia and Pastrana, who attend you now to learn
your Fates, from my all-knowing Skill: Come, Unvail, unvail --


We find, Sir, 'tis in vain to hide ourselves, for you know who we are, and
what we come to learn: But Sir, I beseech you, be not offended at Iulia, she
did but Obey my Orders.


He, who commands the Spirits of the Air, and those black Fiends which dwell in
Flames of Sulphur; must not be trifled with; I never received Affront, but I
re-paid it with a quick Revenge.





Great Alcanzar, I beg you for her.


We both join in the same Request.


For your sakes Ladies, her Penance shall be short and slight, but some she
needs must undergo; my Spirits would rebel should they see a Mortal injure me,
and I not resent it.

Thou dull and drowsy Fiend awake,
Which dwell near the Sulph'rous Lake,
I charge thee by the Stars and Moon,
Assume the shape of a Baboon --

-- What Commands thou'lt on me lay,
Behold I'm ready to Obey.

-- There's a Mortal that did fear
To tell me what I asked of her;
Three Circles round about her make,
Pinch her till her Flesh does ache;
And when with my Foot I stamp,
Strait infect her with the Cramp.

-- I'll teach thee, Mortal, how to Answer,
When thou art questioned by Alcanzar.

O! I dye.


For Heaven's sake pity her, and us, that suffer in her Torments.


Hold Fiend! dost thou not see my Wan I have?

Cramps and Shakings I Command
To vanish where I placed my Hand,
Never more Assault the Maid,
For she has for her Folly paid.
Rise boldly, for all thy Pains are gone.





I am glad you have learnt Wisdom by Experience: 'Tis a Jewel which cannot be
too dearly bought.


Sir, we are all obliged to you, for having shortened your Revenge.


'Twas for your sakes I did it: Now, Madam, while your Daughters, and my late
Patient, entertain themselves at the farther end of this my Magic Cabinet, let
me hear your particular Desires; for though you come in Company, yet I know you
have something to enquire, which you would blush to tell, though but your
Daughters only were the Witnesses.


Truly, you make me blush; I had something to say,


You both deny and answer it at once: But come, have you not had Thoughts of a
second Husband?


The Heavens forbid.


Madam, take heed, run not into a worse Fault, than your Woman was so lately
guilty of; she but refused to tell me the Truth, but you tell me an Untruth: I
know you are on the right-side of Forty, that you are Rich and Fair, and carry
so much


Alas! Sir, 'tis in vain to deny it.


And you now come to know, whom Heaven designs to supply the place of the Dead;
for you are yet not Pre-engag'd.


I see you know my Heart; and I beseech you Sir, let not my Daughters nor Iulia
--


You desire also to know what the Destinies decree for your two Daughters.


O Sir, by any means, for they are Marriageable, and tis good to pluck the
Fruit as soon as 'tis Ripe.


Call 'em then.


Daughters.


Ladies, within this Circle stand, and what e`er you see and hear, on your
Lives, stir not out of it: Your Woman too must enter into this little Circle,
lest some Mischance befall her.


I beseech you, let us learn our Dooms, without seeing fearful Apparitions; the
sight of 'em will make us Die.


Be not afraid, you shall see nothing to Terrify you. What Noise is that? Some
real Devils rise to Revenge I bid you.


What the Devil does this Fop here now?


Great Alcanzar, I'm resolved to fight with Seconds, and my Friend Francisco
shall be mine, for whom I come in haste, to buy the like Charm for him, which I
have purchased for my self; there's your Price.


Curse on the Rogue; what a time has he chosen, and what an Errand is he come
about! But I'll ferret him way.

Mortal, which art grown so Rude,
Without Leave, thus to Intrude;
If one Moment thou delay,
To switch and Spur thy self away,
Such Spirits I'll set upon thy Back,
As shall pinch thee Blew and Black.

What the Devil ayls our Mephestopholous? He's damnably out of Humour; Had
'slid, I see now what the matter is; he has monopolised four Women to himself:
Sure, he must be a devilish Wencher that can entertain so many at one time; I
hope, I may buy a Charm from him, to be four Women proof at once. If I do,
'twill be a better and a rarer thing, than to be Shot-free.


Mortal, since thou dost delay
Alcanzar's Orders to Obey.
I will from the lowest Hell,
Call up Spirits by a Spell;
Which thy Body hence shall throw
Swift as Arrow out of Bow.
Quickly, quickly, void the Room,
Dost thou not hear? They come, they come.

By Heliogabolus, they'are coming; tho I am


Mortal, to me belongs the Purse;
Get thee packing with a Curse:
This Oblation I'll receive,
For thy Entrance without leave.
Thy Pardon for it I will grant,
If thou instantly avaunt.

I see, Conjurers like other Mortals, will not be interrupted in their
Love-divertisements, nor restore what they can keep.

I must needs go


Had not my Sisters Conjured too, I had lost the Purse, and been longer
troubled with that Owl. Now, Ladies, the requisite preliminaries to the knowing
your Fate is over, you may Unvail, and turn your Faces this way again.


O Sir! if we see that horrid Fiend again, we are all Dead.


'Twas well you kept within your Circle when he appeared.


'Twas impossible I could have done otherwise, for I was not able to stir out
of it.


Well Antonia, now I know there is such a thing as a Devil, I will be a better
Christian than ever I intended to be.


One glimpse of this Fury, has more Humbled me, than all the Lents I ever kept.


The worst is past; stand fast within your Circles: And now what Fate decrees
the mildest Spirits shall declare.


A good Husband gracious Fate.


Ye gentle Spirits of the Air,
Which are the Genii of the Fair;
And when good Fate is to ensue,
At once both know and make it too:
By the Power I over you bear,
I charge you instantly appear,
And these Mortals Ears and Sight,
With Dances and with Songs Delight:
Then acquaint those Beauteous three


Do not from Fortune look for good,

For e're long, (if Stars speak true)
Some will attempt to Ravish you;
Yet you may when the ill is near,
Be Rescued by a Cavaleer;
Who if he takes you for his Wife,
You'll thenceforth lead a happy Life.
But if you slight his first Address,
Farewell all your Happiness.

Madam, you are beholding to the Oracle; it foretells you at once, and with
unusual Clearness, of your Danger, of your Deliverance, and of your future
Happiness; did you hear it well?


Truly Sir, I heard it so well, that I can say it as perfectly as my Credo;
and not to Lye to you, I believe it as absolutely. Now, if my Daughters have
the like good Fortune as plainly Foretold them how happy shall we be!


Listen Madam, for the Vestal Virgin is Ascending the Tripos to speak to them.


Two Gentlemen of good degree,
By Fate brought to Distress,
Must by your Daughters Married be,
To make their Happiness:
But nothing them from Ruin can redeem,
If rich Fools, or Cowards Marry them.

Madam, this Oracle is not Obscure, for you see what they must do, and what
they must avoid.


But yet to speak the Truth, I do not like their being confined from Marrying
of Rich Fools; for Sir, to de Born to Petticoats, I speak Sir, what I have
Experienced.


Madam, I see, you are not so well pleased with their Oracle, as with your own;
but let us apart, reason the Point, and I dare say, I shall convince you.


I would you could, Sir.


I think Sister, the Sign is in Gemini, for we are all to be Married.


I confess, I am a little troubled, that my Mother should be threatened to be
Ravished, and not we, who are Eighteen Years younger, and by this Light, at
least Twenty Years Handsomer. Whatever some think of Whining, Sighing and
Weeping, as Evidences of Men's Passions; yet, I believe Tarquin gave greater
proof of his loving Lucretia, than ever Collatin did.


And perhaps she only Killed her self, having found that she had got the least
Amorous Person for her Husband.


Well Sir, your Reasons have half Converted me.


And the decree of Fate will act the other half.


Be pleased Sir, to accept this small Present, as an Earnest of our greater
Acknowledgment.


'Tis not my custom to sell my Art; I am happy that I served you by it


I must not be refused; nor shall I have the confidence to make you a second
Address (if there be cause) unless you will receive this slight acknowledgement
of my Gratitude for the first; 'tis only Sir, 400 Crowns, to buy you Books and
Instruments: I'll leave 'em at your Feet, and beg your Secrecy in all things
past. Come Daughters.





Yes, but their Mony's here, which I make a Present to you both.


We deserve it; for if we had not Conjured for you at a dead lift, Guzman had
spoiled the Farse.


'Tis therefore I reward you; but I could hardly hold Laughing, to see how I
whipped away his Purse, as your little Devil did his Person: However, I'll be
just to him, and for the 500 Crowns he left, I'll Charm Francisco his Second,
as well as I Charmed the Principal.


I understand not this.


Nor I, why you made us deliver such Oracles.


Time shall make you wiser shortly: What a Clock i'st?


'Tis past Five.


Past Five! how the time runs away; farewell, I have many Irons in the Fire,
and I must let none of 'em Cool.


Since you work so well, 'tis pity to disturb you; farewell Brother Conjurer.


Farewell, Sister Sybils.


By Ieronimo, I have been Coursely used; this comes of showing Friendship:
Well, 'tis the first act of it I was ever guilty of; and by Solyman the
Magnificent, it shall be the last. My only comfort is, that if I catch my
Necromancer in a good humour, I may incline him to give me the Quadruple Spell,
in lieu of my Purse he took; and then Women, have at you by double Couples.


Sir, there are two roaring Boys without, that say they will speak to you, they
talk Dagger out of Sheath.


And I'll talk Pistol out of Holster too; Bid 'em advance.

I wonder Francisco is not yet come: This is the hour he promised without fail
to be with me. I cannot choose but Laugh to think how I shall Gun the Oviedo's
and Piracco's


Your Business Blades?


This Letter I present you from Don When de Oviedo.


And this from Don Ibarra de Piracco.


Are you to be their Seconds?


Do you know the Contents of their Letters, ever you read them?


Poor Man, I see you are Ignorant; this is not the hundredth Curtell that I
have received; and we of the Blade, observe one Mode in making up our
invitations to the Field: So that the Learned need but see the out-side, to
know what the inside does contain.


You have Instructed me I confess Sir.


I shall instruct your two Principals also ever long; come, I'll read what they
have presumed to write.

Hum, hum, hum. The Lady in Skie-colour, hum, hum, Satisfaction of a Gentleman,
with your Sword in your Hand, behind the Nunnery this Evening at Seven,

I Kiss your Hands, and Rest, Don When de Oviedo.



I take it for granted, this Sealed Letter is of the same Tenure, and to both
the Premises. I Answer, that I have Vowed to fight but one Duel a day,
especially when the first is to be begun after Seven in the Evening: In brief,
for I long to be at it, I'll give one his Supper, and the other his Break-fast;
and that's fare: But I thought by the fold of their Epistles, they had
understood the Punctillio's of Duels; and yet they are so Ignorant as to send
the Challenge and appoint the Weapons; that belongs to me: Not but that I would
have Named Swords, had they had the Knowledge, or good Manners to have left it
to my Choice: But now I will not so much as have a Sword in the Field, only to
thwart them; I am resolved to fight with any Fire-Arms, from the Pocket Pistol
to the Cannon of Eight: The time I like well, it being in the Cool of the Day;
for I shall make prodigious hot work of it.


With Canons of Eight, Sir?


Yes, Sir, with Canons of Eight, I say.


'Tis a new way of Duelling.


And therefore, Sir, I choose it: A famous Monsieur of Gallia Celtica, brought
up the Mode of fighting Duels with single Rapier, which ever since has borne
his Name, and has been called by the Cartelists a la Bouteville: And I who have
fought ten times more Duels than he, will introduce fighting with great Guns,
which shall hereafter be called Duels a la Guzman; on their battered Carcasses
I'll raise my self a Name.


For all your Rodomontade, our Principals shall fight with you with any Arms,
even from a Pin to one of the largest Basilisquets, that the Mahometans pelted
Scodra with.


I say, the bigger, the better.


But pray, Sir, consider your Duel at these Weapons cannot be fought this
Evening, nor indeed this six Weeks: All Battering-Cannon are the King's, and we
shall scarce borrow


He tells you right.


Well, rather than protract my Sport, (for such Duels are to me) I am content,
for this time, to fight but with a Case of Pistols, and neither Sword nor
Dagger shall be in the Field; when this Evening I have killed Oviedo, (for it
is natural the Eldest Brother to dye first) if to morrow Morning Piracco has a
mind to the like Fate; I shall look to hear from him again: And then let him
expect Leaden-Pill to purge away his Mortality -- You have your Answers.


My Friend shall meet you at the Hour and Place, and only armed with Pistols.


You may assure your Friend he shall have the Honour to be the next killed by my
own hand; for by Tamberlain, I will neither give or take Quarter.


Well, Sir, these Bravadoes are fitter to be answered in the Field, than in
your Chamber, in which we'll leave you to make your Will, and say your Prayers.


Hang Wills and Testaments; and for Praying, let those look to it that are
doomed to dye; go and get Confessors for your Friends, 'tis the last and the
best Office you can do them --


LAdies, we come to offer you our Hearts.


And is your Business Love?


'Tis the Business of the World.


I rather thought by your Wrinkled Faces, your Quadruple Eyes, and your Grizl'd
Heads, that you came to read us a Theological Lecture of Abstinence and
Repentance.


What Saints should we turn, were our Hearts as much mortifi'd as those
December-Lovers-Looks.


Since Love's a Fire, it must sooner burn in the dry Woods than in the Green.


Well, Sister; I shall have a terrible ill Opinion of our Beauties, since they
could make no better Conquests.


You should value them the more, that can turn Ages-Ashes into a Flame.


Hy-da! Why they have got the Young-Men's Dialect, and talk of Fires and
Flames: Pray how many Jubilees are there since you were first in Love?


'Twas Yesterday; for then I first beheld you: Though we have seen a thousand
whom the World calls Beauties, yet till we saw you, we never could learn what
that word did mean.


Alas! Good Gentlemen, you begin to learn somewhat late, yet if you live to it,
you may make pretty Scholars; for I find you have Inclinations. But pray how
did Love enter you?


As a Conqueror, it came not in at the Gate, but threw down the Walls of the
Fortress to have the nobler Passage.


Why then, there's hopes he may soon get out again; the breach being so large.





He uses me like a Tyrant; for he would not let me sleep all last Night.


By my Troth, Sir, and that perhaps has made you a little Lightheaded to day.


By my Troth, Sister, they begin to incline me to try them for a while, that
the World may know what Love


But what is it that you would be at?


Marriage, Madam, Marriage, our Passions have an honourable End.


And a wise Beginning! but what would you do if you were married?


The best we could to please you; we would settle Jointures upon you, give you
fine Clothes, rich Coaches, and Caetera.


Et Caetera! What's that?


'Tis a very Enigmatical Word, and cannot be opened till the Marriage-knot is
tied.


Well, if I were sure that your Et Caetera were as good as what you have
expressed, 'twould operate strangely one me: But would you not grow Melancholy,
and Sighing, say, You had not so much need of a Wife, the day after Wedlock, as
you


I have gained Iulia, who has promised us Admittance; but we must not lose one
Moment of our time.


Now thou deserve the name of a Politician.


'Slid! 'tis our Nephews, I would not


'Tis they, Ladies, we beg your Pardons; but to morrow we'll perfect what this
day we have so happily begun.


Beautiful Lucia! I Kiss your Fair Hands.


What made those two Ghosts vanish so suddenly?


Why, you put them a Question that they could not in Conscience deny, and yet
were ashamed to confess: But I think those two Gentlemen which walked by, did
Alarm them.


What Legs the Old Goats made! Well, I dare Prophecy, without the help of a
Tripos, That I shall live to see them as like those Beasts in their Horns as
they are in their Faces and Beards. But yet we need not wish them a worse
Condition than that they flung themselves into.

For nothing can a greater Torment prove,
Than in Old Age, to endure the Qualms of Love.

THus much of the Honour of the Day is ours already; though we are the
Challenged, yet we are the first in the Field.


By Barbarossa; I think the Rogues dare not come, the Noise of Fighting with
Fire-Arms has terrified them: Let me tell you, Francisco, I my self should be
somewhat Squeamish at a Pistol, were I not Charmed, I say I my own self would
be so; then judge what an ordinary Cavaliero must be; well, 'tis a most
delicious thing to shoot at one's Enemy, and to be Shot-free one's self; 'tis a
kind of Fowling at Men.


And yet you scrupled to give Five hundren Crowns to possess this Noble
Privilege.


Friend mine! I would not for Five thousand Pound but enjoy it; I find it has
given me a new Heart: By Muleasses of Morocco, were I not afraid of the Law, I
could every day commit a Massacre. But take heed they put not slur on me, and
send Counterfeits to fight their Quarrel, for I never saw Oviedo and Piracco,
and therefore know their Faces no more than I know my Catechism: Francisco,
wilt thou keep a Secret if I trust thee with it?


Keep it close as a Confessor.


Know then, that Alcanzar, (I hope none of his Spirits hear me, if they do I
renounce all I say) is a most Avaricious Necromancer: I carried him Five
hundred Crowns to Charm thee too, since thou were it to be my Second, and he
conjured me out of them: were it not that I had some Wenching Ends on him, and
that he is thy Friend, By Prester Iohn I would Pistol him, for now that's my
Weapon of Execution; I confess, I broke in somewhat abruptly on him, when he
was so Solace himself with four Doxies: But why, a Devil, should he therefore
take his Wages, and not do my Work?


I am glad you minded me of this, for he sent for me as soon as you were gone,
and has Charmed me just as you were; which was the Cause I was so long absent
from you.


Oh, has he so! This mitigates the Seething of my Blood: By Rosinante, had he
not done me Right in this, though there had been no more Conjurers in Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America, I would have shot his Soul to his own Hobgoblins.


Now we shall have Sport, I hear them coming -- Prepare, prepare; It must be
they, I see two


Would they were in their Hearts: 'Death my Teeth begin to Chatter again; I
shall not have Strength enough to shoot at him; what a dull Scoundrel was I,
that I did not till now remember to have bought another Spell, to have confined
them to their House?





By Don Quinot's Lance, I feared so; yet you see I was prepared for them; but
since they are not come, I'll uncock my Heart and Pistol, for I had made both
ready to give Fire: Come, let's be gone, 'twill be in vain to expect them
longer.


Be gone! not for the World, let's stay till it be so late that we cannot see
the length of our Pistols, and then we may retreat with Honour.


I understand not but that I have already done what my Reputation calls me to
in the Field; and now I long to do what my Resentment calls me to in the Town,
that is, to Post them up for Cowards: Why, I tell thee, I would not have waited
so long for a Mistress, and yet thou would have me wait longer for an Enemy,
'tis unconscionable; By Albumazar I'll be gone.


Hold, hold; they are coming now in good earnest.


And I, without jesting, will be going: Hang 'em they dare not come; but if
they should, 'tis so late I cannot see to level my Pistol, we must defer it
till to morrow Morning.


Where is Don Guzman?


'Tis they indeed, I would Francisco, and his Punctilio's of Honour were in the
bottom of Mare Caspium; else I had been half way to Salamanca, at least out of
Sight, and then I am sure I would have be out of call too; I was bewitched to
take a Second.


What have you to say to Guzman? there he is.


The Rogue Francisco, has Cat's Eyes: I can scarce see the length of my Nose,
and he can see Ten Yards off; for I am sure I have got so much nearer the Town
than he is.


I have a Message to him from Don Oviedo.


Nay, if it be but a Message, by the Queen of Sheba, I'll boldly face about and
receive it; what Message hast thou for me, my Friend? I am Don Guzman.


Sir, 'twas my Fortune, coming even now from the City, to find a Gentleman
lying in the High-way with his Leg broken, who desired me to come to this
place, and tell Don Guzman his Diaster: he bid me tell you too, That as soon as
he was able he would perform to you what by this Misfortune he was now disabled
to do; he had a Gentleman with him, who went to get a Coach to carry him to
Salamanca. Having now discharged my Engagement to him: I humbly take my leave
of you.


By Otho, Galba and Vitellius, I doubt the Rascal broke his Leg on purpose to
avoid fighting with me: Let's run, Francisco, and Pistol him where he lies; was
this a time, and be hanged to him, to crack his Shankbone in? Death, I hate
such trifling.


Nay, now you Rave; what would you have him do in such a Misfortune more than
he has done?


Rave! do you call it? Why, I tell you what I would have had him done: I would
have had him fought on his stump rather than have disappointed such a Cavaliero
as I am, Men fire Pistols with their Hands, and not with their Legs, and since
the Fighting limb was Sound, he should not have shunned the Duel, because the
Running limb was hurt: The Poltroon shows by this, that he trusted more to his
Feet than to his Hands.


Be patient yet.


Patient! Why, would thou not Rage and Fume and Fret, if in the very moment
thou were it ready to enjoy thy Landa bri-des, thou should be defeated? By
Mount Caucasus this is a Million of times worse to me; why I tell thee, my
Stomach was set to fight.


'Tis but making it wait till to morrow Morning, then you may break your Fast
on Piracco.


What! can thou think, since the elder Brother broke one Leg to avoid
fighting with me, that the Younger will not break both his Arms to shun the
Encounter? Why, I tell thee, that's the lowest Price he can buy his Safety at:
Cowardice runs in a Blood. But though he should challenge me, yet ever I come
into the Field to meet him; I will have a Public Notary to certify he is
there, Sound of Wind and Limb, ever I will vouchsafe to take such another Walk
to kill any of his House: When one of a Family has played me Tricks, I may
justly be jealous of all the rest.


Do not be so Suspicious; I dare say Piracco will meet you here to morrow.


What* with a broken Limb? But to prevent those gross Cheats, do you take Care
to bring him hither in a Litter; and I'll take a Care to send him home in a
Coffin.


Leave the first part to me; but lest we should break our own Limbs let us
return ever it be quite dark; for the Dew already falls.


I am glad it does, for nothing on Earth could quench the heat that I am in:
Besides, I have an Assignment at Eight, where I would not fail for all the
World; but ever I sleep, by Vulcan I'll make Oviedo's Honour lamer than his
pretended Fall has made his Leg.

By Boys he shall be pelted at and hist,
This is decreed by me the Duelled.

ARe they dressed as they should be?


So well, that our Antiquaries Spectacles will not discover the Fallacy: In one
word, our Methusalem Gallants are not liker Coxcombs, than our two Maids are
dressed like us.


But I fear their Discourses will be as dull as the Persons to whom must be
made.


No, Tireletta is a merry Lass, she often reads Comedies; and when she wants
Invention, she will make use of Memory, which is an ordinary thing now a days,
and in Persons of greater Quality.


However, we have given them the Plot, and must trust them to word the Play;
but be sure they keep their Masks on; for though the Dotards Eyes are as old as
their Years; yet by the help of their Multiplying-glasses, they will see less
Ill than they hear.


Now you have given me this Hint, on my Conscience, I begin to think 'twas
those Spectacles made them so in love with us: For since by them a small Print
seems a big one; our Beauties must show the larger through those Optics. And
as the Beauty is magnified, so the Love is; would their Nephews had their
bought Eyes to contemplate us with.


Desires in Young-men, Lucia, are the best Spectacles they can look through on
handsome Women: if we can kindle those in Oviedo and Piracco, I dare undertake,
within one Month after Matrimony, they will be as willing to see their Uncles,
as those Fops are now to see us: But since they will be in the Walk suddenly,
let's employ the little time left us to make our Aunts, that they shall be
perfect in their Parts.


You advise well! Come, let's about our Work.


Madam, I can truly call this Hour, the happiest I ever enjoyed, since in it I
declare my self your Slave.


Happiness and Slavery, Sir, rarely go hand in hand.


That shows your fair Eyes Power the more, which can unite such Contraries:
Yet, Madam, I have cause to repine at my Destiny, that makes me aim at so
glorious and End, and has not strewed my way to it with Rivals; for the Victims
made by Valour, are the fittest Sacrifices to be offered up to Beauty.


Take heed, Sir, perhaps you complain without Cause, for many solicit my
Mother for her leave, to make us Addresses; though you two are the first
admitted.


Since we are the first admitted, that will deter all others from treading on
our steps; next to your Favour, what I am most ambitious, is, That any Man
would dare to visit you as my Rival.


If you are so Jealous Sir, when I am not yours, what would you be if I were?


Madam, while a Client's Cause is in Suspense, he is suspicious of every
Antagonist: But when the Judge has pronounced Sentence for him, all these
Jealousies Vanish.


Iulia, See who's that who Knocks so hard? Sure


Would it might please the Stars this were any Man that durst pretend to you.


Madam, 'tis a Gentleman that looks as if he would eat one up; he has a Tuck
and a Poniard, each a Foot longer than those which usually are worn; and says
he must speak with you, and by your Mother's leave.








My Blood rises, in hope he is a Rival.


I'm troubled any Man so Late, should come to Visit you, and by Leonora's
Permission.


Ladies, I beg your Pardon that I come thus Late; but a Rascally Duel, and
posting up the Cavaleer that did not meet me in the Field, was the cause of it.


A Duel Sir, with whom I pray?


With a huffing Fellow that past for a Hector, till I handled him, and then he
chose to break his Leg rather than Fight with me, and he was Wise in doing So


I beseech you Sir, his Name.


This Morning his Name was Don Oviedo; but having behaved himself so short of
my Expectation, I have therefore thought fit this Evening, to Curtel it, and
call him Don Ove.


This is a new way of Revenge.


And by Presepolis, the fitter, for as he bobbed me, so I have bobbed his Name.


Where does this Don Oviedo Live?


Oviedo said you? 'Death, I tell you his Name is Ove, and by no other Name I'll
have him called. But are your the Domine of the Parish, that you would
Catechise me thus? If these Fair Ladies would know any thing, I am ready to
answer, but for others, thus I reply.


Were it not in our Mistresses Chamber, I'd


Will you for my sake, tell me where this Don Ove Lives?


Don Ove; for till he recovers his long Name in Combat, he shall wear my short
one. By the Great Cham of Tartary he shall. And let me see who dares say me
nay. -- Now Madam, to Answer you; Don Ove is one of the Roaring Boys of
Salamanca; his younger Brother is called Piracco, who was to Fight with me to
Morrow Morning; but I have certain Intelligence he means to break both his Arms
to avoid it: And therefore by way of Prophecy, I have Christened him by the name
of Piracco the SelfMaim'd.


But suppose Piracco should Fight with you to Morrow Morning, what will you
call him then?


I'll call him then what he shall be then, Piracco the Defunct; so bad a Name,
that if he has Discretion, he will rather choose that of the Self-Maim'd. But
Madam, who are those two Fellows that dare stay in this Room, while I come to
Court you in it?


One is called Don Ove, and thee other Don Piracoo, the Self-Maim'd, or the
Defunct that shall be; I wonder you do not know your own God sons.


'Death, I wish this Christening does not cause my Burial.


Methinks Sir, you seem Supriz'd.


By Titus Vespasian, you cannot blame me, to see one that had broken his Leg
but an Hour ago, walk so soundly on it: Is he not a Conjurer?


If he be, he is the Youngest that ever was; why you know he was Christn'd not
a quarter of an hour ago.


Let me consider how this Mystery could be brought about.


I confess, it appears not so thick laid as you desired: But here's no little
Earnest that the Fates will grant your Request in time; methinks you should
Cultivate so hopeful a beginning.


I beseech you Madam, what is the Name of this Brother of yours?


I assure you Sir, he is neither Brother nor Kinsman, nor hardly Acquaintance
of Mine; but his Name is Don Guzman.


Piracco, do but stick to me now, and we'll Recover all again; for this Guzman
is at once the greatest Ranter and the greatest Coward in Nature.


I would I were as certain of the latter as of the former; but I must stick to
thee, 'tis the only way left me.


I took him for a Brother of yours, and therefore I forbore to fall on him; but
now you disown any such Relation, were it not in your Chamber, --


Nay, Sir, my Chamber is no Sanctuary for any Gentleman that affronts another
in it: I give you full Liberty.


Piracco, and the Field is ours yet. Ho! you that break Men's Legs with your
Tongue, and Curtel their Names too; know I am called Don When de Oviedo: I will
not bate thee a Syllable: Nay, I will add five to it to Affront thee, and call
my self by way of addition, Vic-to-rio-so. And as for my Leg, thy Posteriors
shall feel 'tis Sound, by the future Black and Blew, which I will Colour them
with: I shall, I shall, and let me see who dares say me nay?


What a thunderclap is ready to fall on me! Would I were Disentangled from this
Intrigue, only by having my Posteriors clad in that rusul coloured Livery he
mentioned.


By this Light he Trembles! nay, then have at him too; Ho! you Guz. for I'll be
a God-father too in my turn, and retrench half thy Name. Know thou Scoundrel of
Salamanca, that Man shall be no more left in thy Name than 'tis in thy Nature,
as this fatal Steel shall instantly demonstrate.


We'll Drill thee as fast as thou art wont to Lye, and that's Expedition enough
of all Conscience.


In a Lady's Chamber, and two at once; nay then 'tis time to take Sanctuary
against such base Advantages.


Talk thou of Advantages, thou Son of any


Hold! lest our blind Furies may injure our Fair Mistress; let's not use our
Swords; do thou maul him with thy Foot, as I will with both my Fists, to show
him my Arms are not broken, nor thy Leg; the Affront will be the greater.


Content; and as thou gav'st him a short Name, so I will give him a long one,
and call him Don Guz, the Kicked and the Cuffed.


If my Wits assist me not, I'm Lost; help, Pastrana's fallen into a Swoon.


Was there ever such a Triumvirate of Cowards?


Had they been dressed in Red, an ordinary Turky-Cock would have beaten them all
three. I would not for all Salamanca his Person had shook my Heart, as much as
his Fear did my Body. The Oracle begins to work; I am for those Gallants I know
not, for the Servants we know, have turned my Stomach; the smell of a Coward,
is worse than the Snuff of a Tallow-Candle.


'TWs a pleasant Duel indeed.


Had you but seen the Qualms he was in when I told him they were coming; and
his Exultations, when my Messenger brought word of the broken Leg, you would
have said none but a Conjurer could have refrained bursting with Laughter.


The belief that he is Shot-free, and that Oviedo broke his Leg to shun the
Duel, I dare foretell (without the help of your Magic) will cost Guzman some
Bastenado's at least. But to our Business. I wonder Iulia is not yet come; she
promised at this Hour, to assist at this our General Council.


To Morrow early, she and her Lady are to walk in the Nunnery-Grove; you know
your Parts in that Play, and I warrant you, Iulia and I will act ours to the
Life: When I am in possession of the Widow, that and my Oracle to the two
Daughters, shall soon enable me to make your Fortunes too. But, are you not
unconscionable Brothers, to give me, who labour for you all, the worst Wife of
the three?


Prithee no more, a Widow is by destiny, the Portion of the youngest Brother.


She is monstrous Rich, and not Forty; consider how many younger Sons of good
Families would leap to Marry Wealth; tho the Mistress of it were Sixty. Thy
Stars have been kinder to thee by Twenty Years, than they use to be to those of
thy Order: But methinks the unexpected Dotings of our two Sage Senators on
Maria and Lucia, might be improved to the common Benefit.


Leave that to my Management; I have laid so probable a Plot in that Affair,
that if it Succeed not, I will not only call Fortune a Whore, but a Blind one
too.


Hold my Sides, or I shall Split.


Why, what's the matter?


Nay, I have not time to tell you now, for Guzman is Hobbling hither as fast as
a Man can, that had within this quarter of an hour, a Steel Tent in each Haunch,
at least six Inches long.


Methinks thou should pity the poor Man; for ought you know, he may be your
Husband.


My Husband! what Marry a Coward? By this Light, if you do not Conjure for me
better, I'll abjure your Art.


Better why what can be better than to have a Husband of 5000 Pistols Rent, and
to be able to beat him out of Four of it annually when thou wilt?


I beg your Pardon Brother Necromancer; I confess I did not think on that; I
will leave all my Fortune to your Art.


It shall not fail I warrant thee.


'Slid 'tis he; let us retire and hear his own Relation to Francisco; 'twill be
worth the while, or never Credit me.


Who's that Knocks so Rudely?


One that has been rudelier Knocked himself; yet I am Heart-whole still, tho by
Heraclites, Francisco, never poor Mortal met with so doleful an Adventure; my
Curse on the Damned Alcanzar (if he hears me not) that advised me to be
Shot-free, when he should have made me Tuckfree; I have received a couple of
Toledo Glisters here.


Who did Administer them?


By Esculapius, Gallen, and Hypocrates, two of the most Pagan Apothecaries in
all Salamanca: By Van Helmont, I thought since my Skin was Bullet-Proof a
fortiori (as the Learned Phrase it) 'twould have been Tuck-proof.


Where are you hurt?


In each of my Natural Cushions.


Nay then my Wonder ceases, if at least you were Charmed sitting in a Chair, as
I was; for no part was Invulnerable but where the Spirits clapped, and while
you were sitting, they could not clap you there.


Fie on 'em, why did they not tell me so? My Posteriors they know were at their
Services: But I see there is no honesty in the Devil.


Why, who would think, that a Man who was Charmed for a Duel, would ever turn
his Breech upon his Enemies? But who is he thus Larded you?


Why by Ianus's two Faces I'll tell thee, there were too He's, and those
assisted with six Lacais's of Fretum Magelanicum; for by Goliath, they were of
the Gygantick Brood that did it: Could thou think that I would turn my Rump
to any he that Breaths? But that which is most Stupendous is, that one of
these Eight was Oviedo, and with both his Legs as Sound as the great Bell of
Roan: Dost thou not think Alcanzar plays double with us?


In the name of Wonder, how came you into Oviedo's Company since I left you?


The Rage of being disappointed of my Duel, so heated my Blood, that I could
not hold from visiting Antonia and Pastrana; for thou know when our Veins
are warmed, we love to fool a little with our Mistresses, with whom I found
Oviedo and Piracco, whose Faces I no more knew than I do Iudas Iscariot's.


You were well enough served, to visit my Mistress, and by stealth.


By Procris, that's pretty; why, though she were thy Wise, I hope I might visit
her: But to the Point, the Ladies found Anger written in my Looks in Text-hand,
and having pressed me often to know the Cause, I at last told them it, when
suddenly behind my back, Oviedo and Piracco both drew on me, and had not
Antonia's Kindness and Shrieks given me notice of their Treachery, I had been
spitted; but instantly fetching a Pyrowet on my Heel, and whipping out my
Rapier and my Poniard, I did, with them, break both their Thrusts at once.


'Twas brave and quick.


Then I pressed the nearest with my Dagger, and the farthest with my Tuck, so
furiously, that I made the Ladies run Squeaking out of the Chamber, and my two
Antagonists retire toward the Door, through which I forced both of them with a
double Stockada. (An Art I learned of a famed Morisco Fencer, and which, in
Crowds, has often stood me in good stead) But then, By Hannibal of Carthage, I
fell into the Golian Ambush I told thee of.


Bless me! how came you out of it?


As I came out of many the like Dangers formerly, by my mere Valour, Francisco;
there I laid about me like lightning, Cut, Thrust, Slashed, Hacked, Hewed,
Kicked, Bit, Struck, and all at once; and by my Point and Edge, pushed and
hewed my Passage, as the one Eyed African did his way through the Alps; but all
my Agility, Skill and Courage, could not defend my Crupper, which two
Neopolitans of Bergamo made a couple of Breaches in, and so the Battle ended:
But by Sodom and Gomorrah only Revenge shall be the Word, till I have acted it
to the Hilts: I am Plotting of it.


It seems, then 'twas Antonia's Kindness and Shrieks, which saved you first,
was it not?


By Iuno, thou art jealous.


I scorn so low a Passion; no, from this Moment I resign her to thee; the
Honour thou hast achieved in that brave Fight thou made before her, makes
thee best deserve her; besides, I find she likes thee most* and one may as soon
stop the flowing of the Sea, as a Woman's Inclination.


Art thou in Earnest, my Francisco?


In as much Earnest as an Anchorite prays when he is giving up the Ghost.


What! quit thy Mistress, and not do it in a Hirrican?


I must confess I should not do it so calmly, were it not for two Reasons. The
first is, I prepared my self sometime since for this Misfortune, foreseeing
your Merit would carry her, or I must lose your Friendship. The Second is --
But this upon your Life you must keep Secret --


By these Hilts I will.


A Kins-woman of mine, this Evening, brought me to a young Miracle for Beauty,
and a Peru for Wealth, who being by her Father left to the Guardianship of her
Uncle; he, Faithless Man, would have married her to his Son, one more crooked
than old Age; and as Ill-natured as a Storm; she, to avoid this, fled to my
Cozen, who has undertook to get her for me: This living Martyr, is as fair as
Innocence, bright as Light unclouded, sweet as Licence, virtuous as Penelope,
Sings like Philomela: In one word, she her self is not a greater Wonder, than
it would be to see her and not adore her: Alcanzar is my Friend, and my Cozen
has persuaded her to consult his Art alone to morrow about Two in the
Afternoon, and I have some Grounds to hope my Stars will be my Friends; nay,
I'll trust you with her Name too, 'tis Iulia.


Now am I such an Errant Rogue, as on his bear Description of Francisco's: I
may Conjure for my self as well as he hopes Alcanzar will for him.


Methinks you are troubled at my good Fortune.


No, I rejoice monstrously at it, and am as sensible of your Resignation: But
by Saturn all Thoughts that now come into my Heart, except those of Revenge,
are but Usurpers; those only ought to reign: Therefore, dear Francisco, get me
access to Alcanzar to morrow before your Mistress comes, (for by Boreas I dare
not visit his Astrological Cabinet without leave) that I may be made
Tuck-proof: And then I'll invade my Rivals with Fire and Sword: In the mean
time I'll make use of a Manmender; I doubt the Traitors assaulted me with
poisoned Weapons, for by Ixion I am on the rack with Pain, but in a greater
Torment till I be more than quit with them: Remember Revenge is the Word, and
remember too, you get me leave to wait on our Astrologer.


I dare assure you of it --


The Devil a word of all that he has told you, is true; but the whole History
of this Kistril you shall have in Folio at better leisure.


'Death, if this be so our Plot is quite defeated.


Why?


I'll tell you; We knew our two Lords would be beaten by one resolute Pigmy,
and we hoped that Guzman thinking himself Charmed, would have frighted them
away from Pastrana and Antonia, whom they Courted contrary to their own
Resolutions and our Belief, and had they been driven from thence by a Rival
that had affronted them; that had hugely prepared our way, to have inclined
them to make Addresses to Maria and Lucia: 'Twas strangely ill done of you,
Francisco, to leave him.


Hang him, 'twas he left me: and when he did, he swore Top-Gallant High: 'Twas
to post up Oviedo; which had he done, our main Plot could not have failed: we
must quickly cast about, or our Cake will be Dough.


I have a Plot just now come into my head, that may recover all again.


What is it?


Cannot you by your Black Art tell it? Soft, Sir, 'tis yet but newly on the
Anvil, and I will polish it ere I expose it to your view: But this I'll say; if
you trust it to Alvares and me, hang us both if it does not succeed.


Pray Hang him single, if it do not; I'll not bet so deep at a Game I know not.


What ever it is, you must be sure that it be so pat with my Oracle, as if your
Design had been fitted to it.


Else all were spoiled, I know.


Well, I see 'tis a good thing to have Two Conjurers in one Family; but 'tis
almost break of day, so I hasten to attend Leonora to the Nunnery Grove.


Yet we must not sleep till we have our Plot past being disappointed.

The Wise more active grow by being Crossed,
Since Art has oft restored what Fortune lost.

We are bound in Honour and Justice to acquaint Leonora, that our Nephews will
not Court her Daughters.


We are, they may reject many good Husbands, depending upon those who slight
them; and since at our requests all others were forbid, 'tis but fit we should
tell her the naked Truth, that she may otherwise provide for them; but having
thus determined this affair, Now to our greatest Business -- I fear they will
fail to meet us at the place assigned.


True Love is still accompanied with Fear: But yet when I consider, that though
at first they jeered us egregiously, yet at last, when we often vowed to marry
them, they grew more pliant: And in the close appointed us, to meet them them
at a private House, Vowing they would bring a Priest with them; nay, accepted
the Diamond-Rings we gave them. I cannot doubt their good Intentions, and our
blessed Success.


But why would they not unmask, though we so earnestly desired it? I apprehend
they will not grant us the great Request, when they denied us such a Trifle?


That denial pleased me most, for 'twas a Proof they meant to grant us, what
they would blush at when they did it, that they so covered their Faces.
Besides, I have enquired of their Deportments and Quality of some of their
Neighbours, and find their Carriage is most strict and virtuous, and that they
are Daughters to a Gentleman of a good Family, who died a Beggar: So that to
marry Men of our Estates and Degree, is a Happiness they could scarcely hope;
but we are Rich enough, and they are prodigiously Handsome, and their Gay-humor
pleases me as much as their Beauties.


You have satisfied my Scruples, as Lucia, I hope, will my Passion all this
Night.


One hour of it will do that Work, never fear it.


Hugh! Thou dost not know how fierce a Creature an old Bachelor is.


Let me hear you say so, and truly too, to morrow Morning: But then I bar
Cantarrides.


Dost thou not intend to use them that thus suspect me? The Daughter that
was searched for, and found by the Mother in an Oven; from thence concluded she
had first been heated there her self: But we had best sit all things for the
Reception of our Mistresses, as becomes Men of Action.


Come, let's about it then --


BUt what if your designed Wife should deceive us, and be willing to be
Ravished?


For Opportunity has often made a Thief; and many a Discreet Woman that would
scruple to be forced by one, would delight to be it by two: How few are there
that double Wages will not invite to Work?


By this Light, at your Perils, should it prove so; for if you two get my
Mistress, 'tis but equal that I Single should get both yours.


The Widow then would have much the better end of the Staff.


I see them, and they are at hand: Let's away to our several Stations.


I confess to thee my Iulia, since I received the Oracle, it has so employed my
thoughts, that I have never Slept for thinking on it.


I wonder Madam, if you credit what it said, you dare venture in so
Unfrequented a Place, without some Men to defend you, left the Ravishers should
attempt your Person.


If the Oracle speaks truth, I am as certain of my Deliverance, as of my
Danger: Besides, this is my usual Place to walk in, and this Grove is Sacred
too.


So are Women's Chastities; but such as will commit one Sacrilege, will not
scruple to commit another. -- Bless me! I begin to Tremble.


At what?


Do you not see a couple of Ruffian-like Men walk towards us? I have a thousand
times fancied Tarquin in my Dreams; and those Fellows look so like him, Madam,
let's Fly.


By no means, that will make them follow us; rather let's go Undauntedly to
meet them.


Good Morrow Ladies.


What Melancholy thoughts have brought you into these Shades?


We come to enjoy the coolness of the Morning.


That's a sign you are hot, and therefore the fitter for us, and we for you.


Villains! what do you mean?


Thou Lustful Goat, unhand me.


Do not we know that ye are She Merchant-Adventurers, by your Trading where the
He ones Cruise?


Ruffians! do you mean to Ravish us?


'Slid, they are so 'fraid we should forget it, that they mind us of it: A
pretty symptom that they will not Kill themselves after we have done it.


No, I'll Kill my self to prevent it.


Madam, I'll follow such a brave Example.


Come, we'll make you happier than you

At once so Nimble, and so Dull; 'tis Miraculous!


Sir, take Pity on me; spare my Honour, and here solemnly I Vow, I will not only
conceal your attempt, but where you will appoint, I will this day send you 2000
Crowns.


Nay, if you will give me so much not to serve you, you will give me more to do
it, or rather after I have done it.


'Death, I think a Cunny fell to my lot instead of a Wench; she ran so fast at
hand, I have lost sight of her: Hey day! what is the Storm turned to a Siege?
Come, I'll first help you, and then her; since I have lost my Break-fast, I
will take share of yours; there's enough for us both.


Alas! is there then no Pity left?


We'll take more Pity of you, than you would of your self; let's carry her into
that dark Thicket.


Help, help, help!


These Sir, are my Lady's Cry's: You never can employ your Valour in a juster
Cause; Look Sir, I see them Dragging her away.


Villains! unhand the Lady, or you Die.


Fool, go you about your Business, and leave us to ours, or you shall repent
it.


My business is to rescue Innocence.


Propitious Heavens, Guard my Deliverer! O Divine Alcanzar!


I have let out some of your Lustful Blood; but I find, I must take all away to
Cure you fully.


'Death, he's Invulnerable, let's Fly, for 'tis in vain to Fight.


How Cowardly is Guilt!


Sir, I owe you more than I have power I have can show my Gratitude, I shall
esteem my self as happy in that Payment, as in being freed from the Danger
your Generosity has plucked me out of.


To serve a Person of your Quality and Beauty too, is at once my Duty and
Reward.


Madam, in my Flight, by accident I met this Gallant Cavaleer, who as soon as I
had acquainted who you were, and with your Danger, he flew with the Wings of
Honour to your Rescue. Now I


I hope the Villains have not hurt you Sir.


No Madam, 'tis not they have hurt me.


Why do you Sigh then Sir?


Ah Madam, can you ask that question of him who looks on such fair Eyes as
yours?


I see Sir, you would convince me, that you are a Courtier, as well as a
Soldier.


Madam, you need but look in your Glass to convince you of the truth of my
Professions; I am not used to Counterfeit a Flame; for by your self I Swear you
are the first to whom I ever offered up my Heart.


But if you slight his first Address,
Farewell to all your Happiness.



Iulia! I remember them, but methinks 'tis ill to accept him at first word.


But worse to lose your Happiness for ever; be not ashamed of what the Stars
Decree.


But Madam, may I obtain your Pardon, if I ask why you did Sigh? Are you
grieved I make you an Address? If you be, I'll Kill my self to expiate my
Offence: but if you will admit of it, by all that's most Sacred amongst
Virtuous Men, the study of my Life shall be to please you; and that moment that
I entertain a contrary thought, may it be my last.


Madam, tell him the whole truth, and that will save your Blushes.


Sir, if you will walk with me to my House, I'll convince you, that I do not
slight your Love, and show why I have so suddenly accepted it; then you will
perhaps excuse the seeming Immodesty of such a hasty Bargain.


Let me seal my Blessing on that fair Hand: My Joys are like the Luster of your
Eyes,
For neither of them now can higher rise.



MY Mother and Iulia went out betimes this Morning; sure 'twas to perform some
Devotions.


I should think so too, had it not been so early; for most People rise later
when only their Zeals do actuate them: For my part, I believe the Oracle, that
told you of a seeming Rape, and of a real Husband, gives her no rest.


I wonder we have no news of our Husbands, for I am resolved Oviedo and Piracco
are not designed for us; and besides them, and Poet Guzman, we have yet no
Suitors.





I heard your Mother, Madam, was gone Abroad, and lest we should a Second time
be interrupted by her, I am come this Morning to renew my Vows.


The truth is we had been earlier here, but that both of us waited till now, to
know which of us Guzman would send a Challenge to; but he peaceful Don as he
is, has only a mind to Cure the Wounds we gave him.


Be not mistaken, I know him well, and therefore bid you be confident as soon
as he is Cured, he'll play the Devil with you both; I hear he means to figth
with Pistols; for he has heard how Excellent you are at Single-Rapier.


I am famous alike at both, for I have fought as many Duels with the latter, as
with the former.


I believe him.


So he durst fight with me, I desire only a Baton against his Case of
Pistols.


Would we had each of us a generous Rival in this Garden, what Sport we'd make
you!


Ah! especially if it be with a Rival, and a Mistress looking on.


How I hate such Vapouring Puppies.


Who are these?


Some, I hope to afford them the pleasant Pastime they say they are so fond of:
If I can Loo these Strangers on them, on my Maiden head, I'll do it.


Put up Piracco quickly, I don't like these Fellows Looks; they are Bravoes.


My beating Heart seems to tell me, their coming boads us no good.


How now Gentlemen? Drawing on these fair Ladies.


Your Weapons should be to Serve, and not to Fright 'em.


By my troth Sir, we are only a little Airing our Swords this fine Sun-shine
Morning.


And by my troth Gentlemen, they were wishing for two Rivals, that on them they
might show us their Valour: I protest I'll allow you to be so, rather than they
should lose their Longing.


Madam, they are like to have their Wishes, for the truth is, we heard, that
these two Airers of their Swords, did wish for some to Court you with them.


Nay, we were told that they repined against their Fate, that they met with not
resistance in their Loves; as if their Stars had not Smiled enough upon them,
in preferring them to be your Adorers.


Piracco, these are no Guzmans!


The best is, the Garden Door is open, remember


This was the substance of their Discourse I confess, but otherwise Phrased;
for to use their own words, they wished, That their way to us were strewed with
Rivals.





No, but I will set two of 'em a running; and methinks I see them heaving at it
already.


Gentlemen, we'll take a fitter time and Place for our Revenge; but Madam, as
for you who delight to make Quarrels --


What, Reproach me for driving on your Wishes for you?


A fitter time and Place! Why would you wish a fitter by Daylight, in a smooth
Garden, and a Mistress present, before whom, a Coward would forget his Fear?


Antonia shall do you that favour.


In the Garden, said you, and alone?


Stay, stay, Don Guzman, here are some of your Brother Poets to entertain you.


By Mercury, Madam, I beg your Pardon, I mistook my way.


I know you were studying Revenge, that made you mistake.


Yes by Grim Saturn was I, and they shall have it home, but 'tis not ripe yet.


Stay but a while, and you shall see it acted to your Hand.


By Athelanta, you mean to Trepan me: Why what can one do against four?


On my honest Word, I do not; two of them are for you, and have so frighted Don
Ove and Piracco the self-maim'd, that if 'twere not in a Garden, your Nose
might be my Witness.


Nay then, by my Grandam's Ghost I'll add my Auxiliary Arms to theirs, and yet
therein I give them fairer play than they gave me, for two to one is greater
odds than


Come, Gentlemen, draw; and let's show these fair Ladies sport, perhaps they
long for it as much as you.


What if I will not fight for any Bodies pleasure?


What if we make you Air your Swords in Earnest?


Who's that will not fight for any Bodies pleasure? Let my Toledo know him.


What are you, Sir? we do not need your help.


But by your good leaves I need yours, for they two fell both on me at once
last Night, and Coward-like, assaulted me in the Rear; but my Van they durst
not look on.


Gentlemen, this is Love; Three to Two?


By Terra Australis La, not so low as you broached me last Night, you
can Preach Honour: Now 'tis to save your own Skin, but forgot to practise it,
when 'twas to pink mine.


Well! I'll make a fair Proposal, my Brother and I will draw Lots which of us
shall fight single with Don Guz. (for I have sworn never to call him Man) then
when by his Death our Numbers are equal, if the Victor's Wounds do not disable
him, we'll instantly fight with both of you -- How dost thou like this Plot, my
Oviedo?


Rarely well contrived; I like my generous Brother's offer.


'Death! what damnable Stratagem is this against me?


How say you, Sir?


By Hecuba that's fine: I have been Conjunctim affronted by both, and divisim I
must be revenged but on one.


The truth of it is, 'twas an unreasonable Motion, for why should we two stand
idle whilst another less concerned is employed?


We were the first entered the List, our Numbers too are equal; and we hope the
Entreaties of these two Fair Ladies, will a while Muzzel this fierce Cavalier.


Sir, We beseech you, suspend your Revenge.


We beg you do it for our sakes.


How! my Honour will be out of Countenance to be a tame Spectator, while others
fight in my Quarrel. But your Commands, Ladies, shall Charm me for a while.


But how if he should break his Charm while we are in our Duel?


On the Reputation of a Cavalier of Honour, I scorn it; my Word being past, I'm
stronger bound than were I so by Magic; provided, if either of my Foes
survive, I may exchange a Passado with him.


Gentlemen, there's no Excuse now left; Come, let's begin.


Now, my Piracco, for another Stratagem.


Nay, do you find one out; 'tis your turn, I'm sure.


What do you Pause at?


I do not like that Guzman's Frown, he looks as if he would Assault us in our
Rears.


Dastards! do my Looks fright you? By Mars then Judge, what my Toledo would. --



Faith, Gentlemen, you had best confess the Truth; and plainly say you have no
Maw to fight.


If you have not, this way alone is left to save you: Declare before your
Mistresses, that you resign them up to us*


Pray, Madam, get a Clause in this Contract, to save my Right to you.


Resign our Mistresses! we'll sooner much resign our Lives.


Then all thoughts of Peace are vanished.


Since you will not lead, we'll make you drive.


We must yield, at present, to your Numbers.


'Death, ye Hares, and Aspin-Leaves, do you think thus to defraud me of the
Reversion of my Duel? --


What Noise was this, my Daughters?


Madam, you call it right, for 'twas nothing else.


These two brave Strangers have so humbled the Ranting Oviedo and his Brother,
that they are fled before the single Guzman.


Madam, they were unworthy our pursuit, especially when to have followed them
we must so long have lost the Honour of Waiting upon you.


By the Emperor of Trapezond, an Arrow out of a Parthian Bow, was but a Snail
compared to them; yet I broached the Fugitives at the wrong End, and 'twas but
Lex Talionis, both of them had a Fierk at each of my Haunches, and I have had a
Fierk at each of theirs. Ha! are these two Knights of the Sun here Still?
'Slid, and a Third joined with them: Nay then, Ladies, your servant -- These
paltry two legged Race-Horses have so long detained me from My more Important
Affairs --


My generous Friends, how happy am I to hold you in my Arms again? there wanted
this alone to perfect all my Joys.


Brave Francisco! what favourable Planet reigns, that we are now united after a
Twelve-Months Separation?


Ah, dear Friend, we heard you were Cast away as you returned from the Wars of
Flanders; and wept for you more than a Hermit for his Sins.


I have mourned for you no less; for I was assured you both were killed at the
Siege of the Bus.


Pray, my best Friend, who are these two Gentlemen?


Two the bravest Youths that ever were born in Spain; but brought to great
Distress by the ill Fate of their Father, which made them follow the Wars,
where they have got Immortal Fame. Their good Meens you see; I assure you,
Madam, their Valours, Civilities, Friendships and Good-natures, are more than
equal to it.


Now Oracle, or never.


If these be those designed us, I'll believe Alcanzar is a good Angel, not a
Conjurer; these are Men indeed.


Are you acquainted with these Ladies?


No, my worthy Friend, but I am with their Mother, and doubt not soon to be the
like with them.


Iulia shall tell you all has befell me on this happy Day, while I entertain
these Gentlemen.


One of which is your Father-in-law.


Our Father in Law?


Yes, and deserves to be; Alcanzar is a most admirable Man -- I'll tell you
all.


Don Francisco, Gentlemen, he has given me such a high Character of you, that
you may Command my House as freely as my self.


He is still too Partial to his Friends.


He told you, Madam, what he Wishes we were; not what we are.





Let me, Sir, acquaint you with their Oracle apart.











The only Reason that induces me to believe it, is because you say it.


I wonder, Madam, that Piracco, who had the Courage to be your Servant, could
want it so fight for you; would you admit me to that Noble Title, he that took
it from me should take my Life with it.





Sir, I dare take your Word for any thing; but since I am at my Mother's
disposal, I must not admit of any Address but by her Consent.


If I procure it, may my Friend then hope for that Happiness?


I have always been obedient to her.


And I by this Fair-hand will ever be to you.


This Night I beg you there to be my Guests; till then I ask your Pardons.


At Five this Evening I'll bring the Holy Man to Ratify our mutual Vows.


I shall then be ready in my own Chapel to perform my Promise; and I hope by
them to give you Assurances, that your Concernments for your Friends have been
trusted to a Successful Advocate: But 'tis high time I were pleading of their
Causes.


Therefore we'll all retire.


What think you now, Daughters, of Alcanzar's Oracles?


Ours forbid us rich Fools and Cowards; so that Oviedo, Piracco and Guzman, are
quite blotted out of our Calendar.


But if the two generous Strangers be meant by the Oracle, sure you must have
some Inclinations for them at first sight; I am by Nature your Confessor: Come,
tell me.

Nay, I'll ask no more, your Blushes have answered


We cannot better trust them.


I always did what you command me now.


What a Miracle this Alcanzar is?


Dear, Madam, I beg your leave this day to go to him; I confess, at first, I
feared he had been an Impostor, as almost every Conjurer is, but since he has
so admirably told every one of you your Fates, it has raised in me a kind of
Longing (tho I protest I am not with child) to learn from him mine; though, I
doubt, I was born under some niggardly Planet.


Well! Iulia, till Five this Afternoon, I make you Mistress of your self. --
'Tis time for us to walk in. Pastrana, you'll order my Steward to prepare a
Feast.


Madam, I will.


And you, Antonia, must send to have the Music.


I will not fail.







Since Marriage is a Lottery for Life,
H' had better draw a Blank than such a Wife.

THey'll never see us more.


Hang them, if they would, I would never see them again; set Bravoes on us! Yet
nothing vexes me so much, but that under the Countenance of two Men of War,
that Cock-boat* Guz. should offer to board us; had I not thought it had been
the two Frigates which gave us chase, I would have tacked about, and boar'd him
through the Beak, as last Night I did through the Poop.


I could not choose but laugh, maugre our Disaster, to see what a Caracole he
made when you faced about, (which made him do the like) and saw he was not
seconded: For then Ill news never flew so fast as he. But we may with ease
digest the loss of these Mistresses, having seen those fresher Beauties, which
our Faithful Guivarro and Alvares brought us acquainted with.


Yes, my Piracco, those are Miracles of Beauty, and their Humours too are full
as Captivating; besides, they are of Noble Birth and Poor, all the Ingredients
to compose fit Wives for us.


Nay, more! They have promised us to assist in our Revenges on our Uncles.


To that their own Resentments oblige them: For 'tis an Affront to Beauty to
have Age Court it. But this is the Hour and Place our Confidents promised to
bring them out to walk; and that their Sister, Tireletta, should instruct us
how to be prosperous -- Oh, here they come.


Are all things ready?


Yes, Madam, and the Priest too: You never saw so Snug a young Theologian in
your life, I wish they prove not jealous of him.


He has the Matrimonial-Spell by Heart, and is as ready at it as I am for a
good Husband.


You both must then march off: The hour of your assigned Rendezvous draws nigh;
observe punctually all we have ordered you.


We'll but run in, and take our Ghostly Father with us --


They are yours, my Sister Vows, if you pursue your Point immediately, else all
is lost, for the two Rich Husbands I told you of will be offered 'em within
this hour.


Happiest of all News: Madam, here are now before you two, who from your Lips
expect their Lives or Deaths.


Two that take delight to live, but in hopes to be yours.


What can your Ladyships more expect in Husbands than you shall meet with in
these two Lords?


I know my Sister has oft told your Ladyships their Merits, brave Descent, and
mighty Wealth; and now they swear their Loves to you in Looks and Accents above
Art to imitate: What then can make the stop?


But what if they should Love elsewhere? There are such Persons as Pastrana and
Antonia in the World.


Will instant Marriage satisfy you that those Tales are groundless?


Madam, Sure you should believe a Demonstration more than idle Talk.


Now, Madam, if you refuse, it must be from Aversion only.


That I dare abjure, both for my Sister and my self -- But such hasty Marriages
--


Yes, yes; 'tis that which now sticks most with me.


What pretty Nicities does Modesty consist of? Delay, where Love is real, is
the greatest Curse in it.


'Tis for State-marriages to be long in Treaty, where Solemnities are by the
People looked on as Essentials; but the Progress which true Love does make, is
quick and active as his Flames.


Sister! what shall we say to this?


I think, Silence is our best Answer.


And the happiest we can wish for, that's Consent, which thus low we humbly
thank you for.


Now let us Wait on you to your Lodgings, and there put our selves past the
power of Misery.





I will, and when you're Wed, go both with your fair Ladies, and Triumph over
Pastrana and Antonia.


We will; thank you for minding us of it.


We'll attend you there, to prevent what their Anger at it may dictate to them
--


SO, I am glad you have brought the Priest; where have you quartered him?


Even where he desired to be, in your Library of Ribadavia Bottles.


Take heed he does not turn over so many of those Volumes, as may make his Head
giddy when we need him.


No, no, he's a very regular Student, he never dozes himself with that sort of
Reading, until it be Bed-time: But what if Guzman should not come?


No Hawk that's sharp set will be more coming than he, having flung out such a
Lure to him as I have done. --


Great Alcanzar, you little think that I am studying Magic: But by the
Celestial Globe I am; and I can give you pregnant Proofs of it.


Strong Proofs, I believe, you look so like a Conjurer.


Come, come; no dissembling with one of your own Fraternity -- Are not you to
have a very fair and rich young Gentlewoman this day come hither to consult
your Art; The first Letter of whose Name is Iulia?


You amaze me.


No, no, alas! I do not look like a Conjurer -- but to amaze you worse; are not
you to give a favourable Oracle to her, in Francisco's behalf? Ha! what think
you now? Do not I deserve to be your youngest Brother, at least, in the
Black-Art? These Truths make you Speechless.


No; But since Francisco has betrayed himself, and belied me; I'll use him as
he deserves, and prove my self an honest Man: Yes, the Lady you speak of is now
here, but so Fair and Rich, that did my Profession allow of Wedlock, I my self
would marry her; 'tis true, he got her to come hither, and would have bribed me
to have feigned an Oracle to his Advantage: But what my Justice made me Scorn
to do for him, my Revenge provokes me to do for you.


By the Antarctic Pole, you are the best of Conjurers; that you now so worthily
offer me, is, what I came about; though I made that Coxcomb, Francisco, get me
your leave to wait on you, under a Pretence of being made Tuck-proof, as well
as Shot-proof; which latter, (by the way) had I chose at first, these poor
Haunches of mine had not been so miserably carbinado'd as they are.


But we must lose no time, for Francisco will be instantly running hither to
learn the Event of his Hopes: Yet ever I go about acting yours, you shall
faithfully promise before a Priest, That you will settle on her a Thousand
Pistols a Year Jointure, in return of Which, I'll engage after you are Wed, to
get her Friend's Approbation for you.


By Hymen's Saffron-Coat, I will; but where shall I get a Priest to depose me?


I have one, nearer than you imagine; for to conceal nothing from you,
Francisco has sent one hither, that if he meets with Success, he may clap up a
Marriage. You must think so much Beauty and Wealth can't be long hid, nor he be
without Throngs of Rivals.


By the Great Mufty, has the Rogue, Francisco, got a little Sacerdos cut and
dried for his turn? This must be some Hireling Joiner of Hands; and therefore
will serve me for larger pay, which by Midas I'll give him, and so Plow with
his own Ox: But dear Alcanzar give me a Spell to preserve my Sides, when I
shall see how like


This Jest will make him be laughed out of his Country.


By Cabo bona Speranza, I hope so; else I would be loath to play him such a
Slur; for he's a desperate Rogue.


But, Sir, take heed he does not Surprise us ere we have put things beyond his
Recovery: Therefore do you walk there within sight, in the melancholy'st
Postures you can fancy, while I call in the bright She that must make your
Happiness; for whom I will invent an Oracle, for she is a Stranger, and will
take what I shall speak, to be as Authentic, as if it had been pronounced from
the Tripos by the Inspired Virgin. Then when I call you, make your Approaches
and your Compliments to her, and leave me to perfect the rest.


By Venus's blind Son, this shall be worth thee a Thousand Crowns; well, thus I
put my self into my Saturnine March -- Beauteous Maid, which come to hear
What thy Stars decree, appear.



Ah, she makes my Teeth Water as fast as the Thespian Spring: By Gallileus,
were I not afraid of Alcanzar, I would make a Circle about her with these Arms.



'Tis Francisco sure.


Good Alcanzar, hide me in a Cloud till this


What out of your sad Posture already?


I know not what posture I am out of, but I am sure my Heart is in a sad one;
you may feel how the poor thing Labours.


'Slid, if your Mistress see you such a Coward, a true Oracle will not persuade
her to take you; go and Court her, while I endeavour to persuade, or fright
away Francisco: Why do you not go?


I do not find I am in a Courting Humour now; but were Francisco gone --


Go I say, the influence of her Eyes will thaw the Ice about thy Heart.


Think you so? By the Torrid Zone, I'll try then.


Fair Lady, I believe you are come hither to consult the Oracle: I am come on
the same Errand too; but I find you can pronounce a happier one for me than the
Famed Alcanzar can; for would you accept me for your Servant, By Mount Atlas
'twere past the power of Fate to shake me; my Necromancer told me true, my
Qualm is vanished.


Who are you that you so loudly Knock?


I am Francisco, Great Alcanzar, let me in.


'Tis he, and I am Ruined.


What ayls you Sir, you Tremble?


Only the Relics of an Ague Madam, that gives me now and then such Shiverings:
I have sometimes twenty of them in thirty Minutes.


I'm Busy now, but an Hour hence I will admit you; let that suffice.


False Necromancer, thou think I do not know thee; Treachecherous Guzman is
now Courting my Fair Iulia: Let me in, or I'll force my way, and quench my
Anger in his Frozen Blood.


Ah, what a mortal Fit assaults me now!


Help, help, help, he Dies!


Then with this Magic Wan I Charm thee hence. I wish he be not Dead indeed:
Rub his Temples


Is he gone?


Yes yes, I sent him packing with my Magic Wan.


But are you sure of it, and that the Door is well Bolted; I mean triple
Barred?


All is safe as Art can make it.


Proceed Oraculous Alcanzar, taking all that has past, for a Parenthesis.


Was there ever such a Proteus? How oft he changes Shapes, and in a trice?


Sir, a Lady whom I Reverence as my Mother, has sent me to you to learn my
Fate; and I'm engaged by vow, to follow what ever you shall direct me.


This was that Rogue Francisco's Plot for himself, but I'll catch her with his
own Noose.


See thou there that Mortal Wight,
With looks more Sable than the Night;
Those Hands with which his Breast he strikes;
Those Legs which he does Trail like Pikes;
Those Cheeks which so puffed up appear,
As if a German Sigh were stifling there;
That long lean Visage void of Red,
Which shows so like a dead Horse-head?
All these and more than thou dost see
The Effects are of his Love for thee.
Thy Stars do therefore with one Voice,
Appoint thee to make him thy Choice:
Which if this Hour thou dost not do,
Death after will on both ensue.
Madam, nothing can be more clear than this Oracle.


And nothing shall be more punctual than my Obedience to it.


Ah! my pretty Mistress given me by the Planets! how I long --


Soft Sir! you shall not touch her till the promised Jointure be Sworn to
before the Priest and me; and till by Sacred Wedlock he has joined your Hands:
Nor in troth till I have my Bond for my thousand Crowns.


Well since I am restrained a while from doing, I'll ferk it with thinking; but
if the Domne should Stutter and thereby lengthen the words which must unite us,
by Caput Allgol, I'll cut out his Neats Tongue for it.


Come, let's hasten to him, and fear not; for you will find he has a most
compendious way of clapping up Matrimony.








Reverend Sirs --


What, call Bride-grooms Reverend?


Keep Reverend for those of your own Coat.


Forgive me, I pray, I meant not to Offend; 'twas an Appellation I thought
suitable to Men of your ripe Years: But all that I had to say, was to renew my
humble Thanks for the Pardons you gave me, that I staid till it was an hour in
the Night, tho 'twas for two Licenses to Marry you, which I could not get; as
also to remember you, that as it was by your Command that I Married you without
License, so I hope you will keep your words in standing betwixt me and the
Thunder of the Church.


Have we not said we would?


Your Ordinary is a Reverend Friend of ours; and when we assure him 'twas not
done in Contempt, nor Schismatically, we know his goodness will forgive it.


I am sensible 'twas a most irregular Action, and therefore must shelter my
self under your Wings till I have my Absolution.


I am considering which is the shortest cut to our Houses.


'Tis by that Range of the Piazza that Leonora's House stands in, and at least
a quarter of a Mile the nearest way, which this Night 'tis good Husbandry to
save.


Since you are sure of it, pray be our Guide.


Follow me then.


Pray Sir Excuse us from that Visit.


Not for all Salamanca. What have you so soon forgot your Vow in the Chapel,
of Serving and Obeying?


But on the Wedding-day the Husbands should wait.


So we will on you to Leonora's; we would not lose our Triumphs over Pastrana
and Antonia for half our Fortunes; that Affront too, will cure all the Relics
of your Jealousies, if any should be left.


When they see what lovely Wives we have got, 'twill make 'em so pine away with
Envy, that they will lose all their Servants.


Therefore I would not go, I hate to be Malicious.


But you should love to Embrace your Husbands Concernments as your own; and we
owe them an ill Turn for intending to hire Bravo's to Affront us.


And this is the lowest we can pay them for it.


Sister, Let's Struggle then no more, but by our Obedience even on the
Wedding-day, teach Wives new Modes to please their Husbands.


But alas, how many will Curse us for Infringing such old Prerogatives? yet
since you'll go, I'll follow your Example.


Now you Conquer us with Kindness.


While you are putting on your Veils, I'll order your Coaches to be made ready.


I hope by that time we return, our two new Aunts will have plaid the Comedy we
taught 'em.


How I long to be certain of it!


I Protest, my dearest Friend, I'm as much satisfied that I have pleased you in
Marrying my Daughters to your two Noble Friends, as that I have disposed of
them as the Oracle Directed.


Madam, as you give me new causes of Gratitude, would you would give me too new
means to evidence the greatness of mine: But, Madam, now that the Holy Priest
has tied the Sacred Triple Knot, which the hand of Death alone can loose, I
must Conceal nothing from you nor my fair Daughters in Law.


What does our new Father-in-Law mean?


I cannot imagine.


We could tell you as well as he, but we'll not Usurp his Province.


The Truth is Madam, these two Gentlemen you call my Friends, are my two Elder
Brothers.


Your Elder Brothers!


And Iulia, your Favourite-Maid, is our Sister.


Stranger yet!


Nay, you shall have all out; by my troth, Madam, I am Alcanzar.


Alcanzar!


Alcanzar!


Alcanzar!


Yes, and by this Light, a better Conjurer than ever Salamanca bred; none of
those pretend to more than to tell you what is to come; but I told you that,
and acted it too: 'Tis a new Art, and far exceeds all ordinary Magic. The
Vestal Virgins which from the Tripos did Pronounce my Oracles, were my two
Sisters, Maria and Lucia, dressed like good Spirits: The two Ruffians, which made
as if they would have Ravished you, were your two new Sons-in-Law; and the
Knight Errant which so valiantly Rescued the Lady in Distress, is your kind
Husband Francisco.


O Heavens! are we Cheated then?


Finely Cheated, since 'tis into good Husbands: For such by all that's good,
you shall still find us; you wanted Honest Proper Men, and we wanted Rich and
Handsome Wives: Consider then, what in all Conscience could both Parties desire
better than what my Astrology has brought about.


To speak the truth, there's nothing troubles me, but that I should be
defrauded into what I like.


Those Wives are happy that are not Defrauded after they are Married.





Join in it? Yes, my pretty half of my self, and contrived my part of it too.


I thought I had taken him to whom my Stars designed me.


Thou hast done better, pretty Flesh of my Flesh, thou hast taken him that
Heaven designed for thee, for their Marriages thou know are made: Stars, are
wandering things, never mind 'em.


But I hope you are Gentlemen by Birth.


Yes, on my Life, we are.


This revies me to know you are so Nobly Born and Bred; so that I am fully
Satisfied.


And I.


And I.


Nay, if you are satisfied already, judge what you will be by to Morrow
Morning.


But what's become of Iulia? the hour for her return is long since out.


I must beg her Pardon for a while; but I'm sure she'll be here immediately,
and her Husband too.


Her Husband! who's that?


Even Don Guzman his own sweet self; but I was forced to be Alcanzar again, and
Conjure to get her for him: That History is pleasant, but now too long to be
Related; you shall hear it at large in some more seasonable Hour.


We were the two Gentlemen brought to Distress, which were to make your
Happiness; you shall within these few Hours, find the Oracle most True.


We should be the basest Rogues in Nature, if we did not make good our own
Prophecies.


Now we are come hither, keep thy word, and tell me, my pretty little
Conqueress, why thou did tie me to this Visit, for by Aedipus, I cannot of my
self Unriddle it.


Only to bring you Acquainted with your new Kindred; these three Gentlemen are
my Brothers, and these three Ladies are my Sisters in Law.


Hey day! by Hocus pocus, the small Perecranium of my little Spouse, is
Cracked; the joy of being Married to me, has turned topsy turvy all the Pap in
her Skull: Why, by Gog and Magog, these three are Leonora, Pastrana and
Antonia, and those the two St. George's that were my Seconds against Don Edo.
(For since he turned his Breech upon me, I will call him by the Rear of his
Name:) And Don Piracco the Defunct, for so I'll make him: But who this third
Knight of glittering Clothes is, by Sagittarius and Aquarius too, I know not.


Sir, since you call the Lady you Lead, your Wife, you must give me leave to
call you my Brother, for she is my Sister.


By Ursa Major, I begin to imagine this is a Second Astrological Cabinet; your
Name I pray Sir?


My Names are Don Francisco de Alcanzar.


Are you any thing of kin to Alcanzar the Famed Astrologer? Methinks by your
Sir-Name you should be.


So near a-kin as he is to himself, which you would soon acknowledge were this
my Conjuring Perewig on, my Gown girt I made you Shot-free for 500 Crowns, and
my self too for the like Sum, the better to serve you as your Second, against
Don Ove, that broke his Leg, yet an Hour after, out-run you, and Tucked you,
you know where. Do you know me by all these Signs? By the Zodiac, methinks you
should.


By the Bucentaur of Venice, Francisco and Alcanzar are Incorporated; twas not
my small Spouse that was Mad, but I Well, I am Gulled, yet I'll bravely bear
it; by Agamemnon, I will. But Brother Francisco de Alcanzar, I hope your Sister
has been Chaster than she's Rich; that is, that she is a Maid.


I dare swear she is as good a one as your Father and your Mother were ever
they lay together.


Is she not a better? For I know not what Pranks they plaid, ever they Danced
in one pair of Sheets.


Nay, on my Conscience, they were both Maids when they were Married, else they
could not have got so wise a Son: But I beg your Pardon, I must be gone.


Whether in such haste?


I must run to Alcanzar to buy a Spell to keep my Sides together, to see how
like an Ass Guzman will look, when he finds I have Ploughed with his Ox.


Nay, by Caligula, this is down right Tyranny, abuse thy Brother; come give me
a Portion, and by Damian and Pythias, we'll be Friends.


A Portion! why thou hast a double one; Beauty and Maiden-head.


Make me but as sure of the last as I am of the first, and hang Portion, I need
it not.


Alcanzar's Astrological Cabinet, if you doubt my Virginity I'll make Aries and
Capricorn the Ascendant Signs of thy Forehead; by the Great Cham of Tartaria, I
will, and let me see who dares say me nay.


How now my little Amazonian Thelestris, in Arms already? by Semiramis, I have
gotten a Virago in Petticoats.


Now judge if she were like to commit Fornication with any Body, that is so
ready to buffet no less than her Husband but for naming of it.


Come, my Artemizia of Hely-carnassus, by Ioves Lady I'll never be Jealous of
thee.


If you be, I'll Cure you of it, by Taurus.


Since Peace is thus concluded, though I cannot give you a Portion of a
thousand Crowns; yet I forgive you a Debt of that Sum: There's your Bond. --


Content to receive a Thousand Crowns with a Wife, or to be paid a Thousand by
one, is as broad as long.


Why do you start?


Do not you see the two Bravoes there?


No matter, Guivarro and Alvares promised to meet us here, and they never break
their Words: Should our Antagonists begin a Quarrel, we deserved to be beaten,
if we cannot hinder it from Extremity, till our Auxiliaries come, and then we
may safely bear up to 'em -- Ladies we come to bring our Wives to be acquainted
with you.


We wish you Joy of them.


That Wish is needless, their Beauties give us it.


Stick to me bravely, and then by Tomumbeius Egypt, have at them. Will none of
you Assist me? None of you dare Second


What do you mean? Sure you do not know them?


Not know them! By Numa Pompilius, these are my two Back-biters.


I thought how well you knew them, I say they are your Brothers-in-Law.


By Naso's Metamorphosis, this is admirable.


Do you not see your Lady and their two Wives kiss and embrace like Sisters?
Separate your self a little from the Company, and I'll acquaint you with all.


Guiv. and Alva. are married to Pastrana and Antonia? and our two Wives, your
two Sisters?


'Tis most certain!


When we had the good Fortune to save you from the four Bravoes, your
Gratitudes invited us by large Pensions to be your Attendants; and though our
Wants made us comply, yet we are, at least, of equal Birth to yours, though the
Frowns of Chance robbed us of all our Fortunes; but we dare say, bating what
the World calls Portions, you are not unequally married.


The Ambition of being allied to you, engaged us in all those Arts, which we
have practised to attain it.


For my part, I rejoice that we are married to the Sisters of those whose
Brothers saved our lives.


Portions are but the Invention of Gown-men: a mere Trick to enhance the price
of Drawing, and of Engrossing Settlements. I could never see a Reason why a Man
should pay Money to lie with a dishonest Woman, and receive Money to lie with an
honest One.


I would fain hear the most Learned of all the Long-Robe answer what Piracco
now has said.


Believ't, 'tis unanswerable: But, Sir, I have an humble Suit to you; 'tis that
you two and Don Guzman will be friends: there's Reason for it now, since you
are Brothers-in-Law.


How so?


He's married to our younger Sister, Iulia.


Nay, then it must be: For since Women can quench Love, 'tis but just they
should also quench Hate.


Come, they wait for your advance; the'll meet you above half way.


Else, by Lucifer, I will not stir one foot.


You see they are coming.


Nay then, by the Pleiades, I cannot be Ill-natur'd on my Wedding-day. --


In that Embrace, let all past Quarrels be forgiven and forgotten.


Forgiven, If you will; but by Lethe, they cannot be forgotten, till the two
Fontenels they have made me here are siccatriz'd.


What Noise is that?


Oh, Madam, a couple of old Gentlemen with Spectacles on their Noses, leading
home their Daughters and attended only by their Chaplain, are assaulted at the
Door by three drunken Students, and there are none to rescue them. --


Alvares and Francisco, let us three go and help them. 'Tis an affront to the
House to have such Violence offered under the Walls of it.


Away, away; lose no time.





Nay, 'tis three to one they are they, with their two Wives and their Priest.


What does Reverend Age do abroad at this hour of the Night, especially with
Wenches? 'Death, they deserve not to be rescued; for my part, I abjure the
doing of it.


When they come in, let's upbraid them for Whoring.


Content, and let's engage Pastrana, Antonia and Guzman, to reprove them
severely for it; 'twil heighten the Farse.


I'll go and persuade them to second us, and do you make our Wives cover their
Faces, till they have the Watch-word.


Leave me to my part, and go about your own.


Well! we will Vail our selves; if it be


I am glad of it, else, though they had been our Fathers, we should have burst
out a Laughing in their Faces.


The Rascals fled as soon as they but saw our Swords.


Gentlemen, we owe you our Lives, and these Ladies their Honours


By this Light our two Uncles!


Ah, Uncles! I little thought you would turn Wenchers, and be Rambling at this
unseasonable hour of the Night, to follow your Game.


Fie, why should you, to save Charges, be your own Caterers? were you never so
Cock-a-hoop, you might have had an old She Adjutant in a Minute, to have
brought to your own Houses these natural Julips.


By Hymns, this is a strange sinful Age, that old Men, which have each of 'em
one Foot in the Grave, should be running on both Feet, and in Cemerian Darkness
too, after their Fornication; you that by your Age, wrizl'd Faces, and Silver
Hair, should be Solon's and Lycurgus's, to turn Aratin's and Agrepina's; I am
ashamed of it.


Are you all Mad? These two are not our Wenches, but our Wives.


Why do you stare thus?


Alas, Uncles! this way of Lying is worse than to do it with Wenches.


Indeed, Sir, the Excuse is as bad as the Fault: Men of your Years to marry
Girls, it is two to one they give you an incurable Head-Ach.


Married! 'tis impossible? Alas, what have your Nephews done to affront you,
that you should thus choose to disinherit them, only to make your Wives Children
your Heirs?


Married, said you? to whom?


I am to Maria.


And I to Lucia; and this is the holy Priest, that not an hour since did Join
our Hands.


Maria and Lucia! Why, those are the Names of our Wives.


A hundred several Women, may have one Name, but these two are our Wives; nor
are we ashamed to show you their Faces: Pray take off your Masks.


We own them for your Aunts.


What's this? Fernando we are betrayed and cheated.


I am turned a Statue --


In the Name of Wonder, what are ye?


Your Donship's Ladies, as well can testify this faithful little Levite.


Our Names are Tireletta and Tirelesa, we were Maids to Maria and Lucia; but
now for want of better, their Ladyships Aunts.


By Copernicus, Conjuring Names, and Juggling Faces; this comes of making Love
with Spectacles; by Cassandra's Prophesies, considering how Ante-Eagle-Ey'd
these Old Fellows are, 'twas well they light upon two of the right Sex; and not
upon two Patriarchs, with fork'd Swallow-tail'dBeards, that reached to their
Navels; for if they had, this Ambulatory young Elder, would, for double pay,
have married them as cheerfully to those Magi -- and to these two Cockatrices.


Undone for ever, and past hope too, of Redemption.


Ah, Salazar! To live till Eighty, in the repute of wise and honest Men, and
then to act this Folly; I hope the Grief of it will fling me in my Grave.


That's the only hope that's left me too.


By Actaeon, you have reason; for 'tis better to be six Foot lower than the
Surface of the Earth, than six Foot higher than the Crown of your Heads: For so
tall I Prophecy they'll graft your Noddles.


Make room for me, I cannot see two Uncles to my Sisters in such torment, and
not give 'em ease; tell me, Gentlemen! would your being unmarried cure your
Griefs?


O, Sir! Do not you mock us too?


Heap not Scorn on Affliction!


By my Life, I am in earnest. Will you give your present Wives Five hundred
Crowns apiece to get other Husbands with, and their Household Chaplain a Hundred
more, to buy Books, a Cassock, and a Gown, if I make good what I have spoken?


Would we? Yes, as willing as Sick Men would be well.


Alas! you talk of Impossibilities.


Bind your selves by Vow before all this Company, and I'll instantly perform
what I have said.


We Vow it, before all these Witnesses.


Then thus I make your Marriages Null.


I only mumbl'd over some few words, which I made them take for Matrimony.


You have relieved us Sir, from Pains, which would have killed us in two Hours.


Our Debts to them we'll pay to night, as we have promised; but those we owe
you, can never be satisfied.


By Croesus, what a Mass of Money might be raised among the Husbands of a Years
standing, could Francisco enable them to prove, that every one of them had been
so married?


Take heed you do not in six Months wish he could do it for you too.


Since all our storms are thus happily over-blown, 'tis fit we now should rest;
this Night ye are all my Guests.


By Hercules's Labours, who ever but names the world Rest among so many Brides
and Bride-Grooms, Affronts the Company. Why, the two grave Uncles yonder, had
they not been divorced, would by way of Indignation, have spit in the very Face
of that dull Mono-syllable.

Who thinks of Rest the day he Wed's a Wise,
Deserves to be deprived of it for Life.

MY LORD, UPON my Perusal of Guzman in Manuscript, I thought it a piece of
Justice to the World, as well as to the Memory of your Lordships Honourable
Grand-Father, the most Ingenious and Accomplished Earl of Orrery, to see it
Published with the Volume of his other Plays. I was surprised to find, that the
Author of the Black Prince, Harry the Fifth, and Mustapha, should have a Genius
for Comedy, when he condescended to that Task. The Tale of Guzman appears to
have been a Spanish Design, and therefore naturally grave; but the Spirit of my
Lord Orrery's Wit was sufficient to quicken the Mass, to enliven and beautify
it to that degree as renders it an Entertainment for an English Reader. The
Intrigue is carried on with Variety of Accidents and Pleasant Circumstances,
and (which is the Life and Perfection of Comedy,) wound up into a natural and
surprising Conclusion. I have very seldom seen so many Characters of Persons
and separate Interests managed with so much Conduct, as not to perplex the
Tale, but every Thing serviceable to the Progress of the main Design. The
Reputation of Mustapha has been established by the Approbation of all sorts of
Spectators, and will continue a just Model of Tragedy, as long as the Stage
shall last. The Story is magnificent, the Characters and Persons of the Noblest
Rank, which are all maintained to their Dignity, and preserved in their proper
Colours; The Business of greatest Importance; The Expression and Sentiments
Just and Noble; The Passion and Distress wrought up to such a Height, as
commands our Attention and Affections.

The Noble Author of the ensuing Comedy was furnished within himself for any
Performance of Wit, forasmuch as no Man of his Time better understood Men and
Things. He was not only an Example of Ingenuity Himself, but a great Encourager
of it in Others. Indeed there was no sort of Merit that escaped his Patronage.
Poetry was but one of his Accomplishments. As for his other Qualifications,
derived to him from his Predecessors, those he supported in his own Person and
Character, and transmitted them with Advantage to your Lordships Honourable
Father, who has again resigned them as Hereditary to your Lordship. That
Sweetness of Temper, that Principle of Justice and Generosity, which are
already conspicuous in your Lordship, give sure Promises, that you will
maintain the Honour and Reputation of your Predecessors. The World and Time are
yet before you, and you have already obtained so great an Interest in Mankind,
as to have every Body's good Wishes. For my own part I am obliged, not only
upon the promising Hopes I have conceived of your Lordship, but likewise upon
the Alliance you have to our most Honourable English Maecenas, to whom the
Acknowledgments of the Muses are eternally devoted, neither will it ever be
determined, whether he is more a Favorer of them, or their Favourite. I have
already acquainted your Lordship with the Occasion of this Address, and cannot
despair of your Lordship's Acceptance of the following Piece in Print, which (I
question not) will be favorably received by the World. I would only farther beg
leave to say, that I am, with all Respect and Sincerity,

MY LORD, Your LORDSHIPS most Devoted Humble SERVANT N. TATE.
Scene Salamanca.


