Tryphon. A TRAGEDY: As it was Acted By his HIGHNESS THE Duke of YORK 's
SERVANTS.

Written by the RIGHT HONOURABLE THE Earl of Orrery.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the Sign of the Blue Anchor, in
the lower walk of the New Exchange. 1669.

HOld, hold.

Why, Sir?

What is't you mean to say?

I mean to speak the Prologue to the Play.

Therefore to stop you I esteem it fit.

The Poet then will not be thought a Wit.

A wit Forsooth!

Yes, Sir, a wit.

What's that?

A wit is in one word -- I know not what.

Of that kind Title give your Poet Joy.
A wit is then in French, A je no scay quoi.
A modish Name.

Yet, Sir, that Name to gain,
How many of our Writers crack their brain?

That's a mistake, for who'd that Name contract,
Must, e're he Court it, first his brain have cracked.
To be a Wit (believe me, Sir, 'tis true)
Is the worst State a Man can Fall into.
The Wits first vow, is, that they none will spare,
But jeer at every Creature that they dare;
And the No-Wits, these Wits so dis esteem,
That they give Money oft to hiss at them;
'Tis the Wits Nature, or at best their Fate,
Others to scorn, and one another hate.
They would be Sultans if they had their will,
For each of them would all his Brothers kill.

Hold, Sir, the Wits you too severely school.

I say, to be a Wit's to be a Fool;
For who but such a Creature would not grudge,
To have any one for half a Crown his Judge;
Nay, toil, that he such a wise Act may do,
Then lets the Players get the half Crown too.

Why was this Play then by the Author writ?

In fear, 'tis said, of being called a Wit.
And many a Man does doubt that it his Friend,
Ere three hours hence he will have reached his end.

Take heed, if at this rate we gable ^re
Our Poet will attain his end before.

For fear of that 'tis best we should be gone.

What without Prologue?

I'm resolved to have none.
For some on Wit that needless Tax did lay,
Which Poets now are grown too poor to pay.
But yet as mettled School-boyes set to cuff,
Will not confess that they have done enough,
Though dea^ly weary, till spectators do
At once both part and call them good Boys too;
But then these Cussers monstrous joyful are:
Just thus it would with all our Poets fare,
Would you decree (what I for them implore)
Poets with Prologues ne'er should meddle more.
'Tis the best thing you for your selves could do,
For Prologues first tire Poets and then you;
If you'll not do it, while in your power it lies,
They'll do it of themselves, if they be wise:
Our Poets tired and has with Prologues done,
But those which yet are fresh, let them cuff on.

TRyphon, I grant, through Seas of blood has gone
To force his passage to the Sy^ian Throne;
But how men gain their Power the Gods do not
So much regard, as how 'tis used when got.
Our Murdered King Antiochus did own,
That Tryphons Father did restore his Crown,
Which made him trust the Sons ambitious youth
With so much power as did corrupt his truth:
This our dead Prince discovered, but too late,
Which did provoke Tryphon to act his fate:
For Kings should not to too great Subjects show
They mean their ruin, till they act it too;
And he almost deserves to lose his Throne
Who makes a Subject's power exceed his own.

What ever you in his defence have brought,
Rather then lessen doth augment his fault;
For what could show this Tyrant more unjust
Then to abuse such gratitude and trust;
Trust, which the wicked often does reclaim,
This monstr'ous wickedness does more inflame.
That he repents nothing can us persuade,
Since what makes others good has made him bad.

When once Ambition does the mind devour,
Men Sacrifice their Virtue to their Power.
Antiochus had raised him up so high,
As he was either to usurp, or die;
And when he had perceived the Kings distrust,
He made him think, that what was safe was just.

Oh let him not be pleaded for by you,
Who did his King depose and murder too,
Lest on your self the Usurpers blood you bring;

'Tis less to kill, then to arraign a King;
And he who does an Empires loss endure
Cannot think death a punishment, but cure.

But Actions should be taken as they'are meant.

To vindicate him is not my intent;
Since all which can in his excuse be said
Is, that his Pride his Virtue has betrayed.

No glimpse of virtue e're in him could shine
Who killed his King, and all the Royal line.

After he had the chief of it suppressed,
He thought it was unsafe to save the rest.

Ambition made him act the Parricide,
And Cruelty must then preserve his Pride.
By the same rule he ought to shed the blood
Of all his Country-men that dare be good:
Then from the Throne let us the Usurper fling.
To save our selves, and to Revenge the King:
For should we to this Tyranny submit,
We shall deserve as well as suffer it:
And to the virtuous 'twill much more appear
Such a misfortune to deserve then bear.
That Tryphon calls you favourite I know,
But to his Fear alone that name you ow:
Yet though the kindness which he feigns were true,
Even lays the ground of what I call you to;
From you he merits death, since he hath dared
To hope, such Friendship could such Guilt have spared.

Whom Tryphon fears he doth to death pursue,
And if he feared me he might kill me too,
But, that he fears me not, he could not give
A stronger proof then that he lets me live.
Yet do not think his friendship such a charm,
As from revenge it could confine my arm;
But if my patience you a sin esteem,
It springs from Love to Syria, not to him:
For since the Royal line are made away,
Were Tryphon killed, who should the Sceptre sway?
All the Ambitious for the Throne would fight,
For where none has the Title, all have Right.
Thus while we cast a bloody Tyrant down
By Blood, we raise another to the Crown.
'Tis this, 'tis this which chiefly frightens me,
We may change Tyrants, not the Tyranny.
Where Force is Title, Force must make it good,
And who comes in by Arms must reign by Blood.

Banish such groundless fears, for he alone
Who kills the Tyrant should ascend his Throne.
Who from this Tyranny does Syria free,
All will confess, deserves our King to be.
If by your Arm this generous Act is done,
Saving the Kingdom will deserve the Crown.

Oh my Aretus should I yield to this,
'twould then be my Ambition punished his:
And he's unfit a Tyrant to dethrone
Who with his Countries ends dare mix his own;
Since Tryphon is called King, I'll rather bear
His Tyranny then be his Murderer,
That name Aretus is a sacred thing.

But Tryphon's an Usurper, not a King.
Ah shall he keep his blood from being spilt,
By taking off that name which makes his guilt:
If such a principle we should endure,
Then the most guilty would be most secure.

What ever sins to gain a Crown are done,
The God's do pardon when they put it on.
We ought, when Heavens Vicegerent does a Crime,
To leave to Heaven the right to punish him.
Those who for wrongs their Monarchs murder act,
Worse sins then they can punish they contract:
And while his favour I so much possess,
My Power will hinder any new excess.

But from new crimes while Tryphon you withhold,
You bribe our swords from punishing the old.

He that's so bad as to gain power by Blood,
Some reparation makes if he turn good;
And 'tis my hope as much as 'tis my care,
To fill his Court with those who virtuous are.
If Virtue in his Court it self advance,
Vice there will soon grow out of countenance.
That he no more into new crimes may fall,
Hee'll make this day Nicanor General;
And our Seleucus free from Vice as Fear
Shall head the guards --
But Tryphon does appear
Who must not see me since he sent me now
On an affair which you at night shall know.

No, no, Nicanor, I can truly own
My safety made me chiefly take the Crown;
Antiochus had raised me to such height
As I had felt what was an Empire's weight,
And scarce the Ambitious would be brought to reign
If with the Pomps of Power they knew the Pain:
But when false doubts of me his mind did fill,
Then whom he Raised he had designed to Kill:
And though the Father placed him in the Throne,
Yet this return he would have made the Son;
Finding that he or I must be oppressed,
I of two evils did embrace the least;
Since to my Services he was severe,
From him what might not his best Subjects fear;
Which shows, my Countries good in what was done
As much did urge me to it as my own.

Sir, you have known me long, and that my heart
In what I speak disdains the vails of art:
If therefore you would now my silence break,
Be not offended if I freely speak.

Nought you can say, such an offence will be,
As doubting freedom can be so to me.

Then Sir, my mind I'll freely speak to you
Yet with that reverence which to Kings is due.
I know your Fathers Valour, and your own
Did to Antiochus restore his Throne;
Since for your King you did that Service do,
Ah Sir, forget not 'twas your duty too:
Subjects, too oft, whose services are great
Consider that as merit, which is debt;
And have the ruin of their Kings designed,
Judging them cruel when not over-kind:
Those are sad truths which Histories oft show,
Judge Sir if this has been your case, or no.

I need n^ clearer proof to let you see
That once Antiochus was kind to me,
Then, when he altered and my murder meant,
I by his ruin could my own prevent:
To me his kindness he had largely shown,
Trusting me with a Power above his own;
Had he but told me he'd that Power recall,
I at his feet would have resigned it all;
But why because he raised me up so high
Should he conclude I merited to Die?
If he did err, placing me where I stood,
Why must his fault be washed off with my Blood.

Ah Sir, though this had been the state of things,
Yet subjects, Sir, should die to save their Kings;
Much rather they their own death should endure
Then by their King's their Safety's to procure;
And Virtue does oblige us, where 'tis strong,
Rather to suffer then to act a wrong.

But Natures Dictates which no man can wave
Obliges every one his Life to save.

Nature whose Dictates in defence you bring,
Ties subjects ^y their Deaths to save their King,
Nature is Reason, Sir, and that does show
More to our Kings then to ourselves we owe,
Form a subjects Death but one does fall,
But a King's Life contains the Life of All.

Yet though your Safety, Sir, did you Incline
To Kill your King, you might have spared his Line,
Oh, Sir, you needed not their Bloods have spilt.

Their Births to me Seleucus, made their Guilt,
Who his own Murder by his Monarch's Shuns,
Makes it more certain if he spares his Sons.

But though to save the Sons unsafe was held,
Why was Antiochus the grandchild killed?
An Infant who was then not two years old?

Whatever of his Death my Foes have told,
Yet to you both here solemnly I Vow,
That child, for ought I know, is living now,
And one who oft informs me what is True
Tell's me* Nicanor, he's conceall'd by you.

I do not doubt but many there may be,
Too apt to give ill Characters of me,
But, Sir, I think if you reflection make,
With what Affront the King from me did take
The Generals place, you'll scarce believe he durst
To one so wronged commit so great a Trust,
Yet if you think it true -- --

-- -- -- -- -- Nicanor hold,
'Tis not what I believe but what I'm told;
And to convince you what I say is true,
The Generals Office I restore to you;
If I to Syria meant not to be Just,
I would not lodge in you so great a Trust;
A Trust which if I use the Syrians ill,
Gives power to punish me, and Power gives Will!

That Trust which, Sir, you now on me would lay,
Does merit more then I have Power to pay,
But when my King did wrong me, I did swear
No public Office I again would bear,
Forgive me, Sir, since 'tis a Sacred Vow
Makes me decline what you have offered now,
I should for such a Trust appear unfit,
If I forswore my self accepting it.

Take heed, for if this Offer be refused,
I may believe you Justly are accused.

You should methinkss much rather, Sir, from thence
See my Foes Malice and my Innocence;
Were I possessed of the Thrones lawful heir,
Why should I wave a Power might place him there.

But if you would accept what I restore,
That Action would convince me of it more,
For since your Virtue binds you to be just,
'Twould bind you too not to betray your Trust;
Yet I'll believe 'tis nothing but your Vow
Keeps you from taking what I offered now,
You shall therein by me no more be pressed,
And that you may still on my Friendship rest,
Demetrius is this day employed by me
In an Affair shall let Nicanor see,
That I have made it now my chiefest End
To make him by a sacred tie my Friend*
Seleucus, whose High Worth deserves Rewards,
Shall from this day be Captain of my Guards.

This Trust I'll strive to merit by my Care.

Those clearliest show that they your Servants are
Who at your Faults judge it a sin to wink,
And tell you Truths which others scar ce dare think.

Those who their Princes flatter May be thought
Guiltier then those who have against them fought,
Since more by Flattery have been undone
Then have been ruined by Rebellion.

Monarchs those servants highest should esteem
Who, when they err, dare not but tell it them,
And he who does by Force a Throne obtain,
Ought to repair it by a Generous Reign.

This Freedom and the Council which you give
As Proofs of both your Friendships I receive,
And I resolve my Reign shall be so good
As shall outweigh my want of right by Blood.

That sacred Friendship which so firm has stood,
And joins us more than Nature does by Blood,
Makes me not fear, dear Sister, you'll believe,
That 'tis my Envy this advice does give;
Demetrius has but too officious been,
Persuading Tryphon to make you his Queen;
Improve his Error to exalt your Fame,
And scorn both Tryphon's sceptre and his Flame,
You'll merit to a lawful Throne to rise,
If an unlawful one you can despise,
Since greater to the Virtuous twill appear
A Crown to Merit then a Crown to Wear.

Though Tryphon did by Blood the Crown obtain,
Yet a Crown worn doth wash off every Stain.

When Heaven admits a Tyrant to a Throne,
'Tis but from Vaster Heights ^o cast him down,
To do it whilst he's climbing would appear
A less Revenge, then being seated there,
And since such Guilt does most the Gods incense,
The ^unishment should equal the Offence.

Since he, while Wicked, in the Throne has ^ood,
The Gods will not depose him now he's Good,
His past Offences he does much deplore.

Tha^ for their Vengeance ripens him the more,
For men might think, were not quick Justice done,
Repentance Usurpation might atone.

Ah Sister, those to whom the Gods allow
Repentance, with it give their Pardon too.

But those who to destroy their Kings consent,
Heaven lets them never perfectly Repent,
But leaves them quite, when they so Wicked be,
Their Sorrow is but their Hypocrisy.

Let not your Virtue Judge against your Sight,
Nor limit Mercy which is Infinite;
But since a Crown is still the gift of Heaven.
What matter is it by what Hand 'tis given.

When by a Tyrants Hand a Crown is given,
How can you think that Crown the Gift of Heaven.

Since Tryphon's in the Throne, what Syrian dare,
Without a Crime, dispute how he came there.

Rather what Syrian who dares Virtue own,
Thinks not he's bound to cast him from the Throne.
My Father great Nicanor, I dare say,
Thinks this a Duty which he ought to Pay;
You from this Duty may his hand restrain,
If you w^h Tryphon in one Throne should Reign.

Usurpers, who enforced their Crimes forsake,
To^ all past Crimes full sati faction make;
If I by Love continue Tryphon Good,
Nicanor ought not then to shed his Blood;
If he relapse, he by his Death may prove,
His Country he more then his Son does love,
Syria to us, what here Tryphon shall do,
Either his Change or her Revenge shall owe.

Ah think not Love the softest thing that is
Can dwell in such a Cruel Heart as his.

Rather believe since Love has him Inflamed,
His Heart from Cruelty is now reclaimed.

Since by such Guilt he in the Throne does sit,
Rather believe his Virtue Counterfeit.

'Tis the least Miracle which Love can do
To change dissembled Virtue into true.

Ah Cleopatra, this discourse has shown
You'll lose your Happiness to gain his Throne,
For I was now, in brave Aretus name,
To have disclosed to you his hidden Flame,
A Flame so High and so Respectful too,
As it appeared worthy of him and you;
Oh had you seen the Fear in which he spoke,
When he my help did in his Love invoke,
It would have you as well as me it moved,
That Fear had let you see how much he Loved.

Aretus ought to blush that durst appear
At once my Lover and admit a Fear.

He of that Fear, rather then blush, should boast,
Since Flames which highest rise still tremble most.

Sure, my dear Stratonice, this is but said
Me from the Love of Tryphon to dissuade,
For did Aretus Burn to such degree,
He would have first disclosed his flame to me;
Draw not from what his High Respect does prove,
An argument that he is not in Love.

I have observed, so has Irene too,
Of late Aretus often gazed on you,
And when by chance your Eyes on him were turned,
He with a Sigh would seem to say he burned.

I must acknowledge, Madam, I admire,
That you did ne'er take notice of his Fire;
Hermione and I have often said,
Never more Love in any Looks were read.

Tis happy for him that he ne'er did dare
Himself to me his Passion to declare,
For if he had been Guilty of that Crime
'twould have suppressed the Esteem I have for him.

His Virtue the Esteem of all does move,
But is there nothing due unto his Love?

Yes, yes, my Pity while it is concealed,
But hate when 'tis by him to me revealed.

You more then he should this Resolve deplore,

Press me, dear Stratonice, in this no more,
Tryphons Address has so Successful been,
As he has now my Word to be his Queen.

Ah such as have to Thrones of Tyrants rose,
Have bin the more exposed to Fortunes blows.

She does not merit on a Throne to sit,
Who can fear ought more then to miss of it.

BUt for his interrupting of us, you
Had then known all which I have told you now:
Methinks you seem amazed at what I said.

Alas your Words have struck me worse then Dead:
Fortune no Curse so bad as this could send,
Made sharper too, since acted by my Friend.

How could I think that you concerned had been,
In Cleopatra's being Tryphon's Queen.

I am so much concerned in it, that I,
Rather then see her Tryphon's Wife, would Dye.

Do you then love her --

Love's too low a name
For that which does Aretus heart Inflame,
For never any Fire resembled mine
But that Bright Fire which in her Eyes does shine.

Was't fit this Love from me concealed should be?

Alas 'twas till last night unknown to me,
Something I felt of late had Charmed me so,
As did at once Please and Subject me too;
But those Emotions were so far above
All that the world has ever known of Love,
As, that 'twas Love no more by them I knew,
Then I can now describe that Love to you:
'Twas fit that Eyes that shoot unusual Rays
Should kindle Fires too in unusual ways.

I am not Guilty though my self I Blame,
But Sure you might suppress so young a Flame,
Your Friend from no small Trouble it would free.

Ah 'twere not Love, did it depend on me,
Those Guilty Words therefore you should recall,
Love does not take but gives the Law to all.
Would you not think me cruel or unwise
Should I beg you not to love Stratonice?

I durst not ask that you'de your Love decline,
If it had took so deep a root as mine.

Nothing can fix a Love to such degree
As Cleopatra's Eyes have done in me.

You have not yet your Conquerors Favour gained,
But I my Stratonice's have obtained,
That Secret's only trusted to your breast.

And there in silence it shall ever rest:
But o^ in what you say you have not proved
That I love less than you, but less am loved,
Success may raise my Joys but not my Flame,
The World for Love like mine does want a Name.

Ah my Aretus, had I known before,
That you fair Cleopatra (...) Adore,
I had prevented those s^ streights ^e're in,
And hindered Tryphon cou^ting her for Queen;
Now there's no cure for a disease so high.

Yes but there is -- --

-- what is't --

-- -- -- -- -- Tryphon shall dye;
On two accounts his death to him I owe,
For he's my Tyrant and my Rival too;
Yet with the last I merit to be cursed,
Since I to kill him needed but the first.

In killing him your Country you'll expose.

Not killing him I Cleopatra loose,
And he unworthy of her will appear
Who above all things does not value her.

This Truth with greater lustre may be seen,
If you would not oppose her being Queen.

I'll not oppose (by taking Tryphons life)
Her being Queen, but being a Tyrants wife.

Since she would have him as her Choice or Fate,
She'll take su^ proofs of Love as proofs of Hate.

Her Virtue which has still appeared so High
S^ews 'tis a ^arriage of Necessity,
Which hath engaged me by one generous blow
To f^ my Mistress and my Country too.
Farewell I'll go and act what I intend,
And If I ^ll say you have lost a Friend.

^eel'e perish in the attempt -- Aretus stay,
And is th^ (...) your c^e no other way?

In (...) question you mispend your breath,
In (...) Love what Cure is there but Death.

You'^e meet your own* attempting his I fear.

Tis twice a Death to be deprived of her,
Farewell -- wast this for which you called me back.

Stay Friend, for I'm contriving for your sake
That which may ^ach your End a safer way;
Suspend ^h' Attempt the remnant of this day,
Since in your Love you are engaged so far,
To serve you in it I'll employ my care;
You know the Power which I with Tryphon have.

This is but spoke the Usurpers Life to save.

How's this, your self as me you now offend;
Can you suspect me and yet call me Friend?

What I have said in such a Storm of Fate
Dese^ves your pity rather then your Hate,
Do not the Pardon which I beg deny,
Twas my Distraction wronged you and not I.

Alas I see you are or'come with Grief.

Yet to my Sorrows 't would be some Relief,
Would you then Swear if you in your Design
Should fail, you would assist me then in mine.

But will you swear his Death you'll not attempt,
If from his Rivallshipp I you exempt?

In such a vow myself I cannot Trust,
Tis less to be Unhappy then Unjust,
Which I should be if I to you should give
A promise that I'd let the Usurper live.

The Vow which I desire that you would make
Is not for Tryphon's but for Syrias sake.

Poor Syria! since Demetrius thinks it good
To bind me not to shed thy Tyrants Blood,
What greater Curse could Heaven on thee have sent,
Then make thy safety be thy Punishment.

Since 'tis the will of Heaven we must submit
What will you do,

I'll do -- what shall be fit.

But will you then too no more condescend,
To loose a Rival and oblige a Friend.

Would you have me do more then what is fit.

But will you Vow to make me Judge of it?
If By my Power with Tryphon and my Skill
I make him cease to Rival you.

I will --
Oh Cleopatra! never Lover yet
Did of his Passion give a Proof so great,
With such Devotion to your Eyes I bend,
As I pay them what I denied my Friend;
Nay for their sake, and what more could I do,
I spare the Tyrant of my country too;
If I in this Act against Duties Laws,
Let Love forgive the Effect which Love did cause;
Ah Friend! from me you have extorted now
That which I fear may prove a Guilty Vow,
But you are judge of all which gives me Rest.

Can you then doubt what's trusted to my Breast?

You see I do it not, since I decline
Even to inquire what you for me design.

Fear not, I'll ner'e betray a Trust so High.

When you betray me 'tis high time to Dye.

I thought my Sister your consent had got.

So far from getting, that she asked it not;
Hermione to me has been Unjust,
I left my Cleopatra to her Trust,
And know not well which most I should Suspect,
Or her Unfaithfulness or her Neglect:
The Ambition of your Sister, I foresee,
Will make her Wretched and will Hazard me;
For if she marries Tryphon She's undone,
And me hee'le ruin if his Love she shun.

Hermione and I have but one Breast,
And she to me did solemnly protest,
She not, till 'twas too late, the Business knew,
And, Sir, laments for it as much as you.

In such a Fault she'd show herself Unwise,
If she from you did not herself disguise.

Hermione is Innocent therein,
Sir, 'tis my sisters Fate or else her Sin.

You both absolve Hermione from Guilt,
Show me on what your Confidence is built.

The cause of mine to you, Sir, I le relate,
She Loves my sister and does Tryphon Hate;
And would not, Sir, I know, deserve your Frown,
To gain for her own self the Syrian Crown.

I know she does Aretus much esteem,
And thinks your Daughter only merits him;
And to Hermione he told this day
The Love he does to Cleopatra pay;
Besides she vowed to me 'tis her Intent,
In that Address, to be her Confident.

Does then Aretus, Cleopatra love?

And in that height, I fear, his Death 't will prove,
For when he knows she'll be the Usurpers Wife,
He will attempt his own or Tryphon's Life.

That Happiness at which I most did aim
Is now fallen on me,, but is fallen in vain,
That Height'ned Worth Aretus still has shown
Makes me esteem him above Tryphon's Throne.
My Stratonice, Irene, you and I,
Must for this Ill find a quick Remedy;
All must assault her in a several way,
On Cleopatra my Commands I'll lay,
And with Hermione you two must join,
To make your Sister break off her Design.

You may be of our best Endeavour sure,
But, Sir, I fear this Ill is past our Cure.

Those who of Fear in their Attempts admit,
Do take the surest way to fail in it;
Her Resolutions cannot be above
Her Duty, Friendship, and Aretus Love;
But we lose Time while we together stay,
And this Affair admits of no Delay.

Forgive me, Madam, that I thus have pressed
To know the Grief which does invade your Breast,
For though, when you in public do appear,
Your Speech is Cheerful and your Looks are Clear,
Yet they are clouded when you are alone,
And every Word is brought forth with a Groan.

That which you have observed alas is true,
Those various Actings to my Fate are due;
I ought, since Destined to a Tyrants Throne,
Joyful to seem, yet mourn when I'm alone,
Nor know I which my Soul does most subdue,
Feigning false Joys, or hiding Grief that's true.

Rather then Griev me thinks you should Rejoice,
Since Tryphon, Madam, you have made your choice.

Rather then I, Hermione, would have
Tryphon for husband I would wed my Grave.

Why did you his Addresses then receive,
And ne'er so much as ask Nicanor's leave;
Had (...) but to your Father told your mind,
He, to prevent it, Something had designed.

'Tis that which made me do what I have done,
For I more fear his Ruin then my own.
This is my Duty which appears my Crime,
Better he mourned for me then I for him;
But now my Word is given 'tis past recall;
I'll be Unhappy to prevent his Fall;
He gave me Life, and therefore for his sake
The Life he gave me I will Wretched make,
For such 'twill be when I am Tryphon's Wife;
This way alone could Save Nicanor's life,
For by th'Usurpers Fury he had died,
If he to many me had been denied.

Since 'twas your Duty, Madam, as you own,
And not Ambition led you to the Crown,
Why did you not your head and arm employ,
To save your self and Tryphon to destroy?

Ah I was loath to act the Guilty part
Of Owing and not Paying him my Heart.

Do you so hate him as you'll Wretched be,
Rather then yield his Sword should set you Free,
And under Tryphon let your Country bow,
Sooner then let him save both it and you?
Ah, Madam, to my Grief alas I see,
That you would now conceal your self from me.

Think not that I conceal my self from you,
Telling you what my Duty made me do.

Duty might you to marry Tryphon lead.
If that alone could (...) Nicanor's head;
But you a much (...) Easy Way may choose,
To reach that End, and yet that Way refuse,
When, Madam, by pursuing of it, you
Might save at once Your Self and Country too;
For none but brave Aretus, that I see,
The valour has to end this Tyranny;
From which his Love to you will him restrain,
If you with Tryphon as his Queen should Reign.
Alas, what is the poor Aretus Crime,
That rather then you'll be obliged to him,
You'll of your Contry's Tyrant be the Wife,
And which is worse you'll save that Tyrants Life.

Do not I show I think him free from Crime,
That lose my self rather then hazard him?

In that Attempt he'll but some Hazard run,
But i^ you marry Tryphon he's undone;
Thus from the Hazard you Aretus free,
But to destroy him the more certainly;
Ah, Madam, by such reasoning you declare,
That in your Confidence I have no share;
'Tis therefore fit our Friendship here should End,
For who Distrusts, deserves to Lose a Friend.
And since with me so Cruelly you deal,
I'll bid you now eternally farewell.
Would to the Gods this had been done before,
That none might think I Like what I Abhor;
But though from you my self I thus divide,
Yet still I'll pray that Heaven may be your Guide.

Raise not the Sorrows under which I bend,
By threatening to deprive me of my Friend,
This usage so severe I needs must blame.

Why do you thus abuse that Sacred Name?
Alas for me, it is no longer fit,
For your Mistrust, Madam, has canceled it;
Therefore from you for ever will I part.

Oh stay and I'll Disclose to you my Heart,
Yet with so cross a Fortune I contend.
As I'm ashamed to tell it to my Friend.

What ever Sorrows have oppressed your Heart,
Yet since you strove to hide your self by Art
From me whom you call Friend, you ought much more*
That Sin then those Misfortunes to Deplore.

My Grief from you I will no longer hide,
That you may Pity her whom now you Chide;
But let us first, Hermione, remove
To some such Shady Place as yonder Grove,
That when to you my Secret I commit,
You scarce may see how much I blush at it.

Forgive me, Sir, if I presume to say
You have appeared in too much Grief this day,
And all last night you took so little Rest
As if some Sorrow had your Heart oppressed.

Alas, Seleucus, I am under, now,
Sorrows would make the Strongest Soul to Bow,
And I have often for Demetrius sent,
That in his Friendship I might give them vent;
But since he does not come, and since I know
That perfect Friendship which he has for you,
Being with Trouble so much overpressed,
I will commit that Secret to your Breast.

This Favour no addition can admit,
Unless, Sir, I may serve you too in it.

That Friendship for Demetrius which I have;
And which shall never cease but in the Grave,
Made me resolve by his Advice to gain
The Syrians Kindness by a gentle Reign,
And since Nicanor's Virtue most does Shine,
That I without Reserve might make him Mine,
I by Demetrius Council too was led
To raise Nicanor's Daughter to my Bed.

Which of Nicanor's Daughters is it, Sir,
That he would have you to your Crown prefer.

'Tis Cleopatra whose Bright Eyes I own
Makes her deserve to share the Syrian Throne;
You seem to Sigh at what I told you now.

Under your Grief how could I choose but Bow,
But under what Affliction can you bend,
Having a Crown, that Mistress and, that Friend?

Most men with one of those might Happy be,
But I am Wretched though I have all three,
For Heaven decrees, from whence our Law we take,
How much shall every mortal Happy make;
And if he does but fail in one of those
Desires, which must that Happiness compose,
That one Denied, though with all the other Blessed,
Will rob him of the Gust of all the rest:
If I must Love and in Love miss my ends,
Fortune in vain sends me a Crown and Friends.

Does Cleopatra your Addresses slight?

That she'll receive them even my Heart does fright;
I who Undaunted through such Storms did steer,
As the most Brave would tremble but to hear,
I who have Kings deposed, and Battles won,
Andnever any thing like Fear have known,
Am now to see my Dearest Friend afraid,
And of the Yeildings of a Lovely Maid.

To share your Crown can you esteem her fit,
And yet, Sir, fear that she'll accept of it?
Those words appear a Mystery to me.

Seleucus, I'll unvail the mystery;
'Twas yesterday that I Demetrius sent,
My Crown to Cleopatra to present;
But 'twas last night alas that I did see
A Bright* Beauty which has Conquered me,
Whose Eyes are blessed with such a Pow'rfull charm
They Burn those Hearts which others can but warm;
Till I that Beauty saw, I did believe,
A man resolved the Law to Love could give.

Why should you, Sir, appear afflicted now,
Since 'tis to so much Beauty that you Bow;
Love is a Fate which every one must Taste,
Some soon, some late, but all must Burn at last.
Your Fate you rather should Applaud then Blame,
(Since you must Burn) that 'tis in such a Flame.

To wear her Chains, Seleucus, is to Me
A Happiness transcending Liberty,
Then do no longer think it is my Love,
But 'tis my Friendship does my Torment prove,
Since with Demetrius I did once contract,
I never yet, in Thought or Word or Act,
Yielded to what might it in Question call,
But now I fear, Seleucus, that I shall;
For while that he by me employed has been
To Court fair Cleopatra for my Queen,
This other Beauty has so Conquered me,
As without her thy Prince must Wretched be,
Which justly my Demetrius will offend:
Hard choice when I must wrong my Love or Friend.

Is this, Sir, the Misfortune you Lament?

You ask as if Fate could a Worse have sent.

Demetrius would not Merit your Esteem,
If that which makes your Joy should Trouble him.

Yet that I shall offend him I must Grieve.

Such an Offence as this he will soon Forgive.

My Grief, (though he forgave it) would not end,
'Tis sad to need the Pardon of a Friend.

'Tis more when Fortune does a Subject bring
To such a height as to Forgive his King,
That Glory will the heaviest Wrong outweigh.

Through all this Darkness I might see some Day,
If my Demetrius e're in Love had bin,
For then he would judge this Change my Fate not Sin:
Lovers still pay to Love a deep Respect,
And where Love is, Causes excuse the Effect.

At my request, Sir, banish all your Care,
Leave it to me to manage this Affair.

Ah if to this thou give a Happy End,
Thou hast for ever made thy King thy Friend:
'Tis not enough that he forgives my Sin,
He must be still my Friend as he hath been
For know I need, my Sorrows to remove,
As much his Friendship, as my conquerors Love,
Since if to Win the Last I Lose the First,
I shall thereby at once be Blessed and Cursed.

Do not, my Dear Hermione, admire,
That to this Gloomy Grove I did retire,
Since here I thought I could my Heart Reveal,
While the kind Shade my Blushes did Conceal;
But now I find I'm in as High a Fright,
To tell my Fate in Darkness as in Light:
Shame, like the World when it in Chaos lay,
Knows not distinction betwixt Night and Day;
Ah, judge what are my Troubles, since I fear
Their sad Relation from my self to hear.

No such Just cause of Grief your Fate can send
As, Madam, at this rate to use your Friend;
'Tis by that Pow'rfull Name I beg again,
That you'll from me no longer hold your Pain,
Perhaps I may the Cause of it remove.

Oh tell me first, have you been e're in Love.

Why, Madam, do you ask --

-- Because I know
That none can ease my Pain that is not so.

I was, but Love to Friendship did submit.

Ah 'twas not Love, if ought could Conquer it,
You loved not well, or knew his Power but Ill,
That say you were in Love and are not still,
The Name of Love for Love it self you took,
Since Real Love can never be forsook:
Had yours been True, you might as well have swore
You do not Live as that you Love no more.

What you have spoken does, methinks, declare,
You to the Power of Love no stranger are;
But would you thus reproach me if you knew
That what you now condemn I did for you?

Why did you cease to be in Love for me?

By many Proofs I did so clearly see
That such a Pleasing Sadness conquered you,
As I to Love could judge it only due,
And since Your Heart and Mine were still so like,
I feared one Arrow both of us did strike.

Ah say not that your Heart resembles Mine,
Since you once Loved and could your Love decline,
Not can I fancy who this Man can be,
Whom you could leave yet think could Conquer me.

Aretus is --

Aretus did your name?

And at that word your Face is in a Flame,
What Friendship should have done your Blushes do,
They are to me more Kind and Just then you,
Why has Hermione been thus abused?

May not one blush that's wrongfully accused?

But my Belief on a sure ground is built,
I see your Love to him, to me your Guilt,
Madam, a Blush, when Love is in the case,
Is in Effect the Conscience of the Face:
Though in this Secret you my Faith did doubt,
Deny it not now I have found it out.

Too much your Friendship I have Wronged and Tried,
My Blushes tell you what my Words denied;
Alas I fear I for Aretus prove
That Fatal State the World does call in Love;
Yet do not, since I did but Hide my Flame,
Condemn my Friendship but Commend my Shame:
Nor blame me if to you I feared to show
What of my self I am ashamed to know;
But my, Hermione, since you could see
That Pow'rfull Passion which has Conquered me,
Spite of my Care to Cloud it, oh I fear
It may to others as to you appear;
Should that befall me which so much I dread,
Honour and Grief would justly strike me dead.

That Fear you ought not, Madam, to admit.

How did you then come to discover it?

That Grief which when retired, you still expressed,
Made me Suspect what now you have confessed,
For she who Greives while courted by a King,
Shows that such Grief alone from Love can spring;
And when I found you Loved, I quickly knew,
Your Love could be but to Aretus due,
Which since you have acknowledged, give me leave
To ask why Tryphon's Love you did receave;
Was not Ambiton in your soul too strong?

Do not at once my Love and Vi^tue wrong
For if I had Aretus Passion known
I would have valued it above a Throne?

But now tis known, why is it not embraced?

Because my word was first to Tryphon past.

As you my Love, so I your Love must blame,
Since you before your Love prefer your Fame.

I should appear unfit for his Esteem
Did I not value more my Word then Him;
And this great Pleasure, to my Act is due,
That which does lose me him, deserves him too;
Ah why did not Aretus let me see,
That Passion which you say he has for me,
Before my Promise was to Tryphon past?

But why to give it did you make such hast?

I feared that he who did my Heart subdue,
Would, my Hermione, have seen it too,
And I his Love for ever would decline,
Rather then he should first discover mine;
Twas fitter since I owed it to my Fame,
To suffer Ruin then to merit Shame;

But e're you did admit the Kings Address,
Aretus looks did so much Flame express,
As sure you could not but his Passion see.

That's not enough, he should have told it me,
But what soe'r his Proofs of Love have been,
By me, Dear Friend, alas they were not seen,
For I so feared that I might act amiss
In my own Love that I ne'er minded his;
Blushes a Woman's Passion may reveal,
But Men their Passion by their Words should tell.

Could he your Love more Generously seek,
Then to Deserve it and yet Nothing Speak?

Rather what more could he have done amiss,
Then Lose my Love by so Concealing his?
A Love that is at once both Great and Strong,
While it doth Bind the Heart, Sets Free the Tongue;
And lest that mine should make me Faulty prove,
I to my Honour Sacrificed my Love;
So I did fear, his Merit was so Great,
That asking Nothing he might All Things get.

How cruel is your Virtue or your Fate*
Which makes your Love produce the Effects of Hate?

Aretus yet more Cruelty does show,
That durst Love me, yet durst not tell me so.

You do him Double Wrong, since his Respect
You first Mistake, then Punish as Neglect;
Such awful Flames you in his Heart have bred,
As he thinks Silence ought his Love to plead;
He but defers to Speak what he does feel,
Till by his Actions you his Love may tell;
And to declare his Passion does delay,
Only to show it you the Noblest Way.

Fatal Delay, the Fatal'st that could be,
It loses me to him and him to me;
Yet such a High Respect to him I pay,
That on My Self I'll Punish his Delay;
And since my Promise is to Tryphon made,
To Break it Love it self shall not persuade;
That which for me your Friendship made me do,
My Honour makes me now Perform for you;
Your Rival I will never be again.

I for Aretus did a Love but feign,
That in your Blushes, Madam, I might see
What by your Modesty was hid from me;
Yet had I loved, I'd not that Love pursue,
Since you best merit him as he does you;
But how can you so lust to Honour prove,
And yet resolve to be Unjust to Love?
Ah you much more then he have done amiss,
You prize your Word more then your Flame and his,
And by a Sacred Bond your self you Tie
To him you hate, and him you love you Fly.

I owe him less then I do owe my Flame,
And fly not from his Love but from my Shame;
She to her Honour too Unjust does prove
Who dares not value it above her Love;
Press me not then to Do what I should Shun,
Rather then be Unjust I'll be Undone:
Those who are lost while Virtue they pursue
In their Destruction find their Comfort too.

Those were the Words which between us did pass,
Bull I perceive some Sadness in your Face.

My Heart and Face do then but ill agree,
Since nothing could more welcome seem to me.

I cannot guess from whence your Joy should rise,
Since Tryphon told me 'twas by your Advice,
That he did offer her to be his Queen,
And, which is more, that you employed had been,
To Court her to be Consort to his Throne.

All this and more then this I freely own.
For I not only wooed her to be Queen,
But her Consent to be it I did win;
But why at this, Seleucus, do you start?

Alas what you have said has pierced my Heart,
Yet from my Friend I'll not my self disguise;
The Charming Light of Cleopatra's Eyes
Over my Soul the Victory did win,
But to herself this has a Secret been;
For, my Demetrius, I did judge it fit,
Not Words* but Service should discover it;
That High Respect I did resolve was due
To such a Beauty and such a Passion too;
Methinks at this which I have spoke you start,
I think her Beauties too have pierced your Heart.

How can you think for Tryphon I'd appear,
If I my self had been in Love with her?

But why should you such Satisfaction show,
That he declines what you advised him to?
Ah sure your Liberty she did surprise,
Since first to Court her you did him advise;
I see what Beauty has made Tryphon do,
What it has wrought in him it may in you,
And what I said such Change in you did move,
As I have Cause t'impute it to your Love.

If any Change does in my Looks appear,
'Tis not, I vow, that Im in Love with her.

Give me then leave there my Address to make.

That's what I cannot Give but you may Take.

Neither for Tryphon nor your self to woo,
And yet deny me leave to court her too?
I cannot guess what 'tis that you intend.

I were unfit to be Seleucus Friend,
Should I act otherwise ^en now I do,
For he who to one Friend does prove untrue,
That he may gain another Friend's Esteem,
Deserves too justly to lose both of them:
Though I am yours above what I can say,
Yet I must be it too in Honours way;
In Friendship every other Tenure's ill,
By that mine has been held and shall be still,

Fate ore my hopes another Cloud does send,
I'm Rivaled and by one that is your Friend;
But may you not acquaint me with his Name,
Who is my Fellow Martyr in this Flame?

No I'll be just to both, he shall not know
You Rival him or that he Rivals you;
Yet both thus far shall be oblieg'd to me,
From Tryphon's Rivallship I'll set you free:
But did he not acquaint you with her Name
Who in his Heart has lighted such a Flame?

So vast a Cause of Joy to me it proved
That he no longer Cleopatra loved,
As I did not remember to inquire
Who this new Passion did in him inspire.

By what he said could you not gues; at it?

Ah! he who Cleopatra's Love could quit,
The Power of Love forever must forswear,
For could he Love, who should he love but her?
Sure this new Love is but a Love of State,
But he for our return too much may wait.

I long to know to whom he does Submit,
As much as he that I'll consent to it.

Sir that Demetrius may your Pardon win,
That he made Tryphon court her for his Queen,
He bad me tell you every way he will try
To make that Love, which he gave Life to, Die,
And hopes himself this night to let you know
He has performed what he has promised you.

I at this Promise so much Joy admit,
As nought can Heighten but his doing it.

What ever Demetrius hopes yet, Sir, I fear
Tryphon will not decline his Love for her.

Demetrius Power with him you know is Great.

The Power of Beauty, Sir, is Greater yet,
And though th'Usurper were more fierce and strong,
A Family like ours he durst not wrong.

Who dares in Royal Blood his hands imbrue,
What is it, after, which he dares not do?
Nor can ^e think his leaving her a Crime,
Since 'tis what we so much desire of him.

Though 'tis what we most wish yet, Sir, you know
Since none of us will tell him that 'tis so,
'Twill as a Wrong on us to him appear,
And therefore to perform it he will fear,
For though Antiochus's Blood he spilt,
Yet in a Crown he did contract that Guilt,
And by the Wicked nothing can be known
Of too High Price, when 'tis to buy a Throne:
They will Do All, that they in one may Sit,
But Suffer All rather then hazard it.

Yet since Demetrius takes of it the ca^e,
I of a good Event would not despair.

I fear the Usurper will his Suit deny.

Let's not afflict our selves by Prophesy.

The Wrath of Heaven must needs that man pursue
Who tyrannises Men and Beauty too.

But though the Punishments from Heaven we know
Are always Just, yet they are often Slow.

When ever a Subject does Usurp a State,
Any Brave Man has Right to act his Fate:
The Gods make every Man a Judge of him
Who against every Man commits a Crime;
And Heaven permitted him to act this last
To invite us to Revenge all that is past;
What more to merit Death could Tryphon do,
Then to offend the Crown and Beauty too?

He whom the Gods into the Throne do call,
Should therefore only by their Justice fall.

Heaven's Justice Monarchs only should dethrone*
But Tyrants they abandon to our own;
The R^ght they give us we too much abuse,
Hoping they'll Act what we ourselves refuse;
The Powers Divine we injure, while we thus
Remit to them what they have left to us.

Yet he's to blame who does to Death pursue
That Man to whom the Name of King is due.

But him with greater Justice we should blame
Who as his due usurps that Sacred Name;
Since he our lawful Monarch's Blood has spilt,
Who ever revenges not contracts the Guilt.

If Tryphon by a Private Hand does fall,
That Hand wrongs him as much as he wronged all;
The Affronts which are on a whole Nation laid,
By that whole Nation ought to be repaid;
It should not by a Single Hand be done.

What's due from All is due from Every one,
And since the Syrians do decline to Pay
That Righteous Debt, I that am willing may.

Do you their Toughts by Silence understand?

Their Silence in this case is their Command;
Who is it at his Reign does not repine
That to gain Power killed all the Royal Line?
Such Usurpation every one does fright.

Where none can Claim, Possession is a Right.

All have more Right, since he those Crimes has done,
To Tryphon's Life then he has to the Crown:
(...) Cleopatra Danger calls on us
To ^ee her and revenge Antiochus:
'Twere Sin if longer we the Crimes withstood
Of Injured Beauty and of Guiltless Blood.

Suspend this Generous Anger till we know
What in her Cause Demetrius can do.

But if Demetrius, Sir, should not prevail.

I then will find a way which shall not fail.

May you not, Sir, discover it to me;

Not till the Event of this Design I see,
Then I engage, if he successles prove,
I'll free my Daughter from the Usurpers Love;
Be pleased, Sir, to depend on what I say.

What you Command 'tis fit I should Obey.

Though many Proofs you gave that you're my Friend,
Yet this last Proof does all the rest transcend,
For you in this have evidently shown
That you are more my Friend then you're your own;
Never was any Torment yet above
That in which Friendship does contest with Love;
But what you now have done has cured my Pain.

When of your Fate you did to me complain,
I told you from Demetrius you would find*
A Cure for all the Afflictions of your Mind.

You did, I of his Friendship judged amiss,
I feared twas not what now I find it is;
But yet I cannot say that I am more
His Friend since this then I was heretofore,
My Kindness for you to such Height was grown
As it could not admit Accession --

Ah, Sir, those Words which now were spoke by you
Over pay all I have done or e're can do,
Yet I may say, and not Presumptuous be,
Some Reparation, Sir, was due to me,
Since you could doubt I valued any thing
Above the Blessing, Sir, to serve my King.

That Error to repair, I'll now employ
Only your self to place me in my Joy;
By such Fair Eyes my Heart has been surprised,
As I adore that Passion I despised;
I who till now Loves Votaries did blame,
Find him a God I thought was but a Name:
This Heart which has been bred in War and Blood,
And all Death's Horrors dauntlesly withstood,
Charmed by Loves Magic trembles with such Fear,
As I her Conquest dare not tell to her;
Which shows that in her Bright Triumphant Eyes
A Fate more to be feared, then Dying, lies;
Your Help, my Dear Demetrius, I must Seek,
To tell her what to her I dare not speak.

Whatever you Command I must Obey,
Yet pardon me if I presume to say,
How can she think you to her Eyes submit
If you your self, Sir, will not tell her it?

Ah in this answer I your Fear perceive,
That I'll repeat that Fault you did forgive;
No, my first Love was but a Love of State,
But this Love is as much my Choice as Fate;
She with so strange a Fire my Breast does fill,
As I to quench it want the Power and Will.

Permit me then the Employment to decline,
For since her Beauties with such Lustre Shine,
They may wound me, for 'tis a likelier thing
She should subdue a Subject then a King.

I know your Friendship which you have for me
Against her Eyes your Antidote will be.

Yet Vassals, Sir, and Monarchs are alike,
When ever the Dart of Love or Death does strike.

Let not such Fear your Sacred Friendship blot,
Why should you doubt it when I doubt it not?
But to confirm you, know you oft have seen
Her whom I'd have you court to be my Queen;
And since to her Bright Eyes you did not bow
Ere I adored them, you'll not do it now;
For, my Demetrius, tis her Beauties Right,
That who can Love must Love her at first Sight,
Nor shall I think, if you the Employment wave,
You have forgiven me as you said you have.

Ah then, Sir, 'tis unfit I struggle more,
Tell me that Beauties name which you adore,
And all her Charms, to serve you, I'll despise,
This Sir I vow.

Her name is --
Why at that Name Tremble you thus and start?

Oh why am I Condemned to Act this Part?
Alas how can I to that Beauty go,
Whose ^ster you by me have injured so?
Who are to one another too so Kind,
As Friendship them does more then Nature bind:
They are alike concerned in all they do,
And who wrongs one does wrong the other too.

These Words have (...) (...) my (...) (...)
For since their Friendship is so Firm and G^t,
I shall, presenting Stratonice my Crown,
Repair what to her Sister I have done,
Who since the Wrong she did by you Endure,
'Tis just she should from You Receive her Cure.
By this a Treble Gainer you will be,
For you'll obliege Yourself, and Her and Me.

Oh Sir, forgive me if I let you know,
That 'tis your Love not Reason argues so,
For to their Friendship it will give an End,
Should she wed him who has so wronged her Friend;
Honour would make her too the Throne despise
To which she by her Sisters Fall must Rise;
That Family to visit I'm unfit,
Having so much affronted one of it.

I wrong but one while I my Love recall,
But marrying the other I obliege them All;
That Family will with a Fault dispense,
Whose Reparation does exceed the Offence;
'Twas Interest my first Addres did move,
But this Address is the Result of Love;
Whatever Fault True Love does make us do,
Must carry with the Offence the Pardon too:
On this Oblieging Embassy then go,
And let me to my Friend my Mistress owe;
Lay at her Feet at once my Crown and Heart,
My Joy depends on the Acting of your Part.
Then Strive no more, since what I ask you now
Is what you owe My Friendship and Your Vow;
While Stratonice you to my Throne invite,
To Cleopatra my Excuse I'll write.

You in your Looks have so much trouble shown,
As I dare hardly venture you alone;
So great and Moving your Disorders be,
As I partake in Griefs which I but see.

Alas, I have received so strange a Blow,
As I endure more Grief then I can show.

To my unequalled Friendship be so just,
As to commit your Secret to my Trust;
To cure those Sorrows under which you Bend,
Employ the Life and Service of your Friend;
Some ^tall Grief does now your Soul surprise,
Or you are too in Love with Stratonice,
For I perceived, when he pronounced her Name,
You trembled and your Face was in a Flame.

Admire not at those Sorrows which I show,
Since you their Cause at once both ask and know;
On me what sharper Curse could Fortune bring,
Then make my Rival be my Friend and King.

Under the like Misfortune I did Bow,
And Suffered Lately what you Suffer Now;
Since his Inconstancy my Pain has Cured,
Be in my Fortune of your own affur'd.

Who thinks, does know her Beauties Power but ill,
That who once Loved her will not Love her still.

Do not by that Belief your Grief Inflame,
Of Cleopatra's Eyes I thought the same;
His Friendship sure as strong for you will be,
As his Inconstancy has been for me.

Have you forgotten what he lately said,
'Twas a State Love he Cleopatra paid.
But over this Love what can the Conquest get,
Which makes State Interest resign to it?
Than do not think he did your Fear remove
By his Inconstancy but by his Love;
Our Stars on us with different Influence Shine,
What wrought your Cure makes me despair of mine.

Part of your Secrets trusted to my Breast,
To serve you, I now beg to know the Rest;
You told me Stratonice had Conquered you,
Now let me know if she does Love you too.

Ah if I were not in that happy State,
Why should I thus exclaim against my Fate?

I cannot See* since you are sure of her,
Why you the King should as a Rival fear;
Since she does You and Virtue so esteem,
She'll value you more then she'll value him.

Her Love to me and Virtue Shine so clear,
As 'twere a Sin her Rivallship to fear;
No 'tis not that from wh^ce my Sorrows rise,
But I, not dreaming he loved Stratonice,
Am by a Fatal yet a Solemn Vow
Engaged to Court for him my Mistress now;
Should I not do it I my self Forswear,
And doing it I Wrong my Love and her;
Never Misfortune did so cruel prove,
I must betray my Friend or else my Love;
Seleucus, 'tis a Horrid Choice, when I,
Rather then either choose, would choose to Die.

You^ Case is hard, it cannot (...) (...),
Yet Stratonice's Love is on your side;
I against Fortune justlier might repine,
For that Fate you deplore I wish were Mine;
That Cleopatra's Love might be for me,
I would consent he should my Rival be;
(...) since the King your Passion never knew,
(...) since his Friendship is so firm to you,
(...) ^t from him the Pain that you are in;
(...) over Love the Victory may win.

Ah if I told him I his Rival am,
And that his Mistress does approve my Flame,
Alas a much more likely Way 'twil prove,
To Raise his Height then to Suppress his Love;
My Flame must therefore be concealed by you,
Rivals in Love and Friends none ever knew.

My Faith in Such a Secret do not fear,
Tell me the Course that you resolve to Steer,
That I in it may useful be to you.

I am resolved to Do what I did Vow,
For were I Guilty of so Mean a Thing
As to be False both to my Friend and King,
And should thereby my End in Love obtain,
The Joy would scarce be equal to the Pain;
Perhaps she will not be to me Severe,
When Sacred Friendship only made me err,
Methinks it were Injustice to suspect,
When that's the Cause, that shee'll condemn the Effect,

While such an Unexampled Act you do,
She cannot Blame so much as Pity you.

To lose her yet Deserve her is more fit,
Then to Posses her and not Merit it.

SUch are the Sorrows he does now endure,
As, if You be not, Death will be his Cure.

Those Griefs, Demetrius, which in you I see
Contagious prove and have infected me;
You (...) (...) since you the Cause conceal
O^ ^ows whose Effect your Looks reveal.

Madam I hoped you rather would deplor
Those Griefs I fear, then load me thus with more,
Judge with what Malice Fate does me pursue,
Since I'm afraid to tell my Grief to you,
To you who only have the Power to Cure
Those Matchless Miseries which I endure.

Alas what you have told me now, I find,
More then your Silence is to me Unkind,
For you lament, and in a high degree,
Those Griefs whose Cure you say depends on me:
What have I done that you should use me so?

Ah Madam, sure you my Transgression know,
Or your Resentments could not be so High,
As by such Cruel Words to make me Dye,
Which now I humbly beg your leave to do,
Since twice you say I was unkind to you;
But for those Words I never could have thought,
That my Misfortune did Transcend my Fault,
I must Despair your Pardon now to win,
My Grief for needing it being judged my Sin.

You never my Resentments did provoke
But by your Silence and what now you spoke.

Would to the Gods I never had, then I
Should but Unhappy and not Guilty Dye,
But I alas must by a Fatal Oath
Ending my Life contract the Guilt of both,
This is my Fate whatever I shall do.

I fear your Sorrows have Distracted you.

A las Distraction, Madam, would appear
A Happiness compared to what I bear,
For though the Joys I in your Love Receive
Transcend all those which Heaven to me can give,
Yet I those Charming Glories must forego,
And to my self the Sin thereof must owe.

Demetrius, I believed you had a Soul.
Which could the approaches of Despair control.

Condemn not, Madam, the Despair I show,
Since Tryphon is Declared my Rival now.

Since this is the Misfortune you deplore,
I have more cause to Blame you then before,
For could you Grieve at this, did you not fear
I would his Crown above your Love prefer?
By your first Fault you did but wrong my Love,
But this a wrong does to my Virtue prove;
Alas what two worse Actions could you do,
Then thus to doubt my Love and Virtue too.

Ah Madam, if you would have heard me out,
You would have ^ound that I do neither doubt,
For Nothing can to either equal be,
But that Misfortune which has fallen on me;
When I thus grieve he does my Rival prove,
I fear his Cruelty, not doubt your Love;
But though his Fire for you I must Lament,
Yet Fate on you a sharper Curse has sent;
For he not knowing I his Rival am,
Employs me to acquaint yon with his Flame;
To court you for him I am hither sent
And he his Rival makes his Confident.

He has more cause to mourn for this then you.

Yet to a Trust Fidelity is due,
That Man who can be faithless to his Friend,
Though 'tis in Love, deserves to lose his End:
Could I but one Unworthy Action do,
I should by it forfeit my Right in you,
And though you might to Pardon me think fit
Yet to my self I ne'er could Pardon it.

Heaven this strict Virtue does in you Inspire,
Which therefore I Condemn not but Admire;
Then with what you did Promise him Comply,
But what you ask for Him I'll still Deny;
Thus you to Friendship's Duty Just may prove,
And I as Faithful to the Rights of Love.

Oh gods! What is Demetrius's Offence,
That you to him so strange a Fate dispense;
Your Fiercest Anger could not plague him worse,
Then thus to turn his Blessings to his Curse;
Your Love and Vertu^ which should give Relief,
But more contributes to Augment my Grief,
Yes, Madam, your Inconstancy and Hate
Had been to me a less Tormenting Fate,
Less Horror I had felt from Deaths Assault
Caused by my Mistress Justice then my Fault;
I'm as Unfortunate as you are Fair.

Alas what causes in you this Despair?
Since I have let you know how you might be
Just to your Vows, to Tryphon, and to Me.

'Tis more then all the World has Power to do,
I must be False to Him or False to You,
For not believing he Adored your Eyes,
I swore a solemn Oath I would despise
His Conquerors Charms to serve him, thus you see
I must Forsake you or must Perjured be,
I know which of the two I ought to do,
'Tis less to loose then be unfit for you;
Heaven which your Merits and my Faults has known
Calls me to Death, you to the Syrian Throne;
Death is to my Ambitious Passion due
Which from the Throne can only hinder you,
My Fate I therefore shall Undaunted bear,
Since 'tis my Ruin helps to raise you there.

Could I of what you now propose admit,
I of that Throne should judge my self Unfit;
Tryphon, to gain it, has acquired such Hate,
As 'tis scarce strong enough to bear his Weight,
And to his Guilt if I should add my own,
'Twould be a Certain Way to sink the Throne.

If with his Power your Virtue you do mix,
Madam, the Throne you would not Sink but Fix;
Then what he offers you vouchsafe to take,
Both for your own and for your Countries sake.

My Country will deserve those Chains she's in,
Could she consent to Break them by my Sin.

Your Country cannot charge them with a crime,
Since, Madam, I Resign you up to Him.

Resign me up to him! Ah you shall find,
That I to Tryphon will not be Resigned;
Now you Pretend to more then you can Do,
For you'd Forsake me and Bestow me too;
You may, if you think fit, your Love Resign,
But I, Demetrius, ne'er can alter mine.

Ah the more Kindness you to me Express,
You still to it Entitle me the less.

I see 'twas clearly what you told me now,
And mourn your Sin more then the Losing you;
Yet I by Scorning Tryphon will make known,
I Value you more then the Syrian Throne;
If to your Guilt I so Oblieging prove,
Ah judge what I'd have been unto your Love;
Farewell, you are the first the World e're knew
Who Loved his Mistress and Forsook her too.

Thus when the Sun from us withdraws his Light,
He leaves the World to Horror and to Night;
Why to the Throne did Heaven let Tryphon climb
And then Revenge on me my Truth to him?
Prodigious is my Fate, my Death I find
In Friendships being True and Beauty Kind;
Oh Gods! to what must I hereafter Trust?
Since you Destroy me but for being Just;
If you for Virtue only will Admit,
Why am I Ruined for pursuing it?

To Court and gain my leave his Queen to be,
And after dare thus to Abandon me!
The Affront which he therein on me would lay,
Can only by his Blood be washed away.

Why should his leaving you your Anger move,
Since now you may Accept Aretus Love?
That Fatal Promise which eclipsed your Joy
Tryphon's Inconstancy does now Destroy.

I should Aretus Flame too much Abuse,
If I gave him what Tryphon does Refuse.

Sure, Madam, if you argue at this rate,
To lose Aretus is your Choice not Fate.

Madam, I bring before your Justice now
One who has been so Criminal to you,
As he no longer could defer to come,
And beg he may from you Receive his Doom?
He would have freed you from pronouncing it,
But that he did believe it was unfit,
Since against you he did commit the Crime,
That any but your self should Sentence him;
His Sorrow for his Sin must needs be High,
Since he himself makes it his Suit to Dye.

Who e're, Aretus, has Offended me,
And then does Grieve for it to such degree,
As proves it was not his Design but Fate,
Deserves my Pardon rather than my Hate.
And since by me he is exempt from Blame,
You safely may acquaint me with his Name,
And in what 'tis he did so guilty prove.

I am the Offender and the Offence is Love,
By my Respects to you I Guilty am;
'Tis they alas make me miscall my Flame,
For those blessed Fires which on your Altar shine
Are not more Sacred or more Pure than mine,
Judge, Madam, of your Beauties Influence,
Which makes me call such Love as this Offence,
A Love which does produce so bright a Flame,
As nothing can Displease you but the Name.

Aretus, I'm Amazed at what you say.

But yet my Vows to you I durst not pay,
Till you to Tryphon gave that Fatal leave,
Which showed you might a Lovers Vows Receive,
And since you did not his Address decline,
It made me Hope that you might Pardon mine,
For he ne'er did what a Brave Man should do,
Unless it were in Daring to Love you;
I would not therefore make my Passion known,
While he by his might place you on a Throne,
And yet that Throne appeared to you Unfit,
Since such a Tyrant once had sate in it,
But now that he your Service has Forsook,
I come to beg those Chains which he hath Broke;
I would have begged I might Revenge you too,
But he has done it by Forsaking you;
Heaven could on him no Greater Curse have sent
For such a Sin than such a Punishment.

The Affront's too Great which he has laid on me,
To think his Choice his Punishment should be,
But since you say your Love for me is Strong,
Prove what you say by Punishing this Wrong;
The Tyrants Guard will but in vain Withstand,
A rip'ned Vengeance from a Lovers Hand,

Of such a sharp Revenge you well might Boast,
Would you give me that Blessing he has Lost,
'Twill be much Worse for him than to be Dead,
To see me have what he has Forfeited.

Aretus hold, while I my self persuade
Not to Resent what you so boldly said,
And to obtain me, Love would have you do
But what your Country's Wrongs do call you to,
You can against my just Commands contend,
Though Glory be your Way, and Love your End,
'Tis only I who a fit Judge can prove,
In what relates to my Revenge or Love;
'Tis just you knew, since you my Love have sought,
The bravest Price at which it can be bought.

O Love, O Friendship, and O Fatal Vow!
To which shall I pay my Obedience now?
My Friend has done that which he promised me,
And I from Tryphon's Rivalship am free,
By which my Vow and Friendship ties my Hand,
From Acting what my Mistress does command,
In Love for ever I must miss my End,
Or must be false both to my Oath or Friend;
Fortune to me too Tyra^nous does prove,
Opposing thus my Virtue to my Love,
And yet I Merit what I suffer now,
Since I could make so criminal a Vow.
Heaven, my Demetrius, does you hither send,
That you the Torments I am in may end.
What I more wish than Life or Fear than Death
Does now entirely Hang upon your Breath,
For neither those nor ought that I can name
Should come in Balance with my Love or Fame.

If I can ease your Pains, you'll do me Wrong
If you Suspect they shall Afflict you long;
Tell me what Service I must pay you now.

You know you made me make a hasty Vow,
That I the Usurpers Life would not Pursue.

Has he not Done that which I Promised you,
And from your Mistress does his Love recall?

'Tis therefore by my Hands that he must Fall.

Rage over your Reason has the Empire got,
You'll kill him when your Rival and when not.

From this Resolve nothing can me Remove,
His Life does Rival me as did his Love,
For Cleopatra will not mine Admit,
Till Tryphon's Death evince the Truth of it;
'Tis therefore by your Friendship that I now
Beg you to free me from that Guilty Vow.

That Hate which she for Tryphon doth Express
Ought sure to make your Hatred for him Cease,
Since Cleopatra Tryphon does abhor
Only because he Rivals you no more.

I find some Reason in what now you say,
But I find Greater her Command to obey;
Since I'd have killed him while I did but Fear,
That from my Hopes he might have Ravished Her,
How can I now the Usurpers Death delay,
Since to Obtain her 'tis the certain Way?
Heaven which my Sacred Flame for her does know,
And that same chiefly made me take that Vow,
Pitying that on a Love so free from Guilt
The Safety of a Tyrant should be Built,
Does, to Repair that Sin it did contract,
Engage me now by Love his Fate to Act,
'Twas fit, as Love made me the Sin commit,
So it should free me from the Guilt of it;
Since too by Friendship I to it was won,
Let Friendship free me from it as Love has done.

Sure such Discourse as this you'de not approve,
Did you confer your Reason with your Love.

Ah this Reproach you cast upon me now
Would have been Just when I did make the Vow,
A hated Name you for your self will win,
Making the killing of a Tyrant sin;
Can you then more for an Usurper do,
Than for your Friend and for your Country too?

To what you Ask I cannot Condescend,
In Kindness to my Country and my Friend.

Alas you'll show that you abhor them Both,
If you will not absolve me from an Oath,
By which your Friend the happiest Man may be,
And Syria will from Tyranny be free.

To Grant what you Desire would be so far,
From Ending Tyranny, 'twill Raise a War.

Though I consider War as no small Curse,
Yet to be Ruled by an Usurper's worse.

All would, were Tryphon killed, fight for the Throne,
'Tis worse to have Many Tyrants than but One.

If by our Hands they saw this Tyrant fall,
'Twould frighten Usurpation from them all.

The Power so fully Tryphon's Friends engross,
As they on us would soon Revenge his Loss,
And Syria would such ill by War endure,
As the Disease seems easier than the Cure.

Such as to fight for his Revenge would dare,
Are people fit to be destroyed by War.

But by the Power they have so long enjoyed,
They 're likelie^ to destroy then be destroyed.

Ah you your self what now you said must blame,
Or must think Justice but an empty Name;
Who has the Right has on his side the Odds,
Else chance does Rule the World and not the Gods.

The Right Antiochus had on his side,
And yet alas by Tryphon's Sword he died.

You know that hapless Monarch did not dye
By Tryphon's Force but by his Treachery;
Those only then to bear his Yoke are fit
Who can Fear ought more than to suffer it;
Do not a Guilt so great as this pursue.

I have more Cause to be his Foe than you,
For he is fallen in Love with Stratonice,
And me he did into a Vow surprise,
Before to me his Conqueress he did name,
That I would Help and Serve him in his Flame,
By which the Death of Tryphon, you may see,
Cannot more Grateful prove to you than me,
But my concerns from Syria are above
Even those I have for Stratonice's Love;
Then do not Blame me, if I hinder you
From Doing what I think is Sin to Do.

The Justice of the Gods in this you see,
He punishes in you your Guilt to me;
You Cross my Love and bind me to my Oath.
Tryphon alike Revenges me in both;
'Tis Heaven permits him thus to do you Wrong,
Because his Death you have delayed so long.

That Wrong you mention I with Patience take,
Since I'm convinced it is for Syria's sake;
By me be taught to give your Passion Laws,
And B^avely Suffer for your Contry's cause;
Farewell, to Sacred Virtue let us trust;
The Gods would not be Gods were they not Just.

Demetrius stay.

-- Ha! what mean you now?

Since you Deny to free me from my Vow.
By which my Hopes of Cleopatra End,
And Syria must under a Tyrant Bend,
Either of which, too Clearly you must see,
Is worse a thousand times then Death to me,
Thus I cast off that Friendship which does prove
So Fatal to my Country and my Love;
My Death must End the Grief of losing both,
Or yours Absolve me from my Guilty Oath.

Put up your Sword, for when this Storm is Laid,
You'll Curse your self for what you now have said;
Though to your Rage your Friendship you Resign,
Yet you shall see nothing can alter mine.

How dare you mention Friendship's Sacred Name
And yet Oppose my Country, Love, and Fame?
By that Enchanting Word you shall not now
That payment Stop which to these three I Owe.
Draw or I'll kill thee.

-- Hear me but one Word.

I will not hear thee till thou draw thy Sword.

Then thus I draw it, but to Heaven I Vow
I'll sooner Kill my self with it then You.

Thy Guilt to me thy Courage has betrayed,
It makes Demetrius now of Death afraid.

When thou reflect'st the King my Rival is,
How by my Oath I have lost Stratonice,
And how thy self on whom I did rely
Art from my Friend become my Enemy,
It may perhaps to thee a Truth appear,
That Death is what I Wish not what I Fear;
What I have told thee now I thus make good;
Here quench thy Rage in my ^guarded B^ood,
And in such Death no (...) I shall endure,
But that thy Rage not Friendship acts the Cure.
Why dost thou turn away? we are Agreed,
My Death is what thou Seek and what Need.

Oh my Demetrius, that which now you do
Is worse then not to Free me, from my Vow (...)
For Friendship's sake methinks you should not give
Words worse then Death, yet after let me Live.

If this appears a Cruelty to thee,
Then be not Gu^lty of the like to me.

I bu^ provoked you to that High Degree
To get that Death from you you seek, from me.

Such Woun^s from You and Fate I now Receive,
As I much rather Death would Take then Give.

I hoped for me your Friendship was so High,
As, when you found Tryphon o^ I must Dye*
You then to Kill him your Consent would give,
Or let me the Denial not Survive,
But now alas both are refused by you.

Ah do not blame what Honour makes me do,
You know how much Tryphon my Friend has bin.

Call you him Friend who's Guilty of the sin
Of Tying you by Oath from Stratonice?

He does not know that he my Rival is;
But, she whom I acquainted with it now,
And how I was surprised into my Vow,
Does Scorn his Passion and Condemn my Crime
In being False to her and true to him,
For thus she terms what my Oath binds me to,
By which I am under such Torments now,
As if the Gods should but one day deny
The Cure I need, the Grief will make me die;
So long your Aims at Tryphons Death suspend,
'Tis but one day and begged too by your Friend.

So long I'll respite Justice for your sake,
But know, so long I shall be on the Rack.

Heaven Knows, which on us both such Ills has thrown,
That I lament Your Sufferings as my Own.

Yes, in my first Address my chiefest End
Was by Alliance to make you my Friend,
And this Address to the like End does move,
But with the Addition of a Deathless Love;
The Bond between, us nothing can ^doe,
When tied by Love and by Alliance too*

That Honour you to Stratanice design
Deserves her best Acknowledgements and mine.

You then Consent I place her in my Throne.

Sir, it were fit you first Obtained her Own.
For as by Natures Dictates she is led
Not without my Consent her self to Wed,
So 'twould ^n me* Unnatural appear,
Should I without her leave dispose of Her.

'T would much Advance the Union I pursue,
If I could tell her 'tis Approved by you.

Too much to me it like Injustice shows
To Approve that Union till I know she Does,

You'll make me doubt, your Scruples are so nice,
That you on it do set too Low a Price.

No Sir, I do Esteem her (...) I ought,
Call not my Duty to my Child a Fault.

I Know what ever you Please shee'll always Do,
And therefore I'll alike Ascribe to you
Those Charming Joy I^m her Love shall find,
As all my ^orments should she prove Unkind;
To you, Nicanor, I this Ev^ning give,
To engage her, my Addresses to receive,
But if to be Rejected be my Fate,
Know I'll resent it at the Highest Rate.

I'll Rather to a Punishment submit,
Then to the Guilt of what may Merit it.

Though Tryphon does to me much Favour show,
Yet, Madam, the Respect to you I owe
Makes me abhor the Affront he did to you,
And makes me offer to Revenge it too;
All men Condemn that which he now hath Done
More then they do his Usurpation;
Since it in Reason cannot be denied,
But that Inconstancy is worse then Pride;
Pride oft in Heighthned Souls does it self show,
Inconstancy Rules only in the Low,
And since your Sex does your own Hand Confine,
From Acting your Revenge, accept of mine.

That Generous Sense you of my Wrongs do show,
And the Brave Offer which you make me now,
Joined with that Friendship which I always see
You have both for Nicanor and for me,
Makes me believe I should Unjustly do,
If I in ought could hide my Grief from you;
Know then my Wrongs to me so Weighty seem,
As I am Racked till I'm Revenged on him;
And know that no Revenge can Grateful be,
But one as Vast as is the Injury.

Will you not judge that our Deposing him
Is a Revenge proportioned to his Crime?

A^talk not of deposing him, you know
That's less then what you to your Country owe,
For Syria's Wrongs and mine will you pursue
A less Revenge then is to either due?
And for those Sins which he has Done before,
Will you Restrain him but from Doing more?

Tryphon will find, since he in Crimes was bred,
That such Restraint is worse then to be Dead,
To one Deposed what Sentence can you give
So Cruel as Condemning him to Live;
Some Generous men who did that Fate endure,
To shun the shame in Death have Sought the Cure.

A Generous man, Seleucus, I will own,
Finds Death an Ease when he has lost his Throne;
But he whose Soul is Low, and Crimes are High,
Thinks it the Greatest Punishment to Dye;
And that Revenge has still the Sharpest bin,
Which is held such by him who did the Sin.
Ah for my Wrongs there's no Revenge seems Good
That is not written in the Offenders Blood;
In all else you Propose you Lose your Breath,
And to Obliege me you must ask his Death.

If nothing else your Anger can atone,
Madam, depend upon it, it shall be Done;
But 'tis a Deed so Daring and Sublime,
That to Perform it will require some time;
Though I his Guards command, I dare not yet
Trust them with things so Dangerous and Great.

To Dangerous Acts the Brave should always run*
Those must not be Consulted of but Done;
A Tyrants Power still on his Life depends,
Who cuts it off cuts off with it his Friends;
But that you may this Deed the boldlier do,
My Secrets I will now Disclose to you.
Aretus who your Friendship does Possess,
And who is Gallant even to an Excess,
Co^ts my Affection to a High Degree,
And, I must ^ing say is Owned by me;
In my Revenge him I engaged of late,
He shall join with you to Act Tryphons Fate,
Which by the Usurper cannot be declined,
When two such Men his Ruin have designed;
But some ^ders in your Looks I see.

Why have you Trusted any one but Me?
I am perplexed that you Revenge Design,
And yet make use of any Arm but Mine.

Into new Griefs me my Revenge had Thrown,
If I had owed so Great a D^ to one,
I therefore choose to share it betwixt two,
Love does in him what Friendship does in you.

Yes, to Aretus, Madam, I'll be ^ust,
He does Deserve this Honour and this Trust;
We'll both Consult which is the surest Way,
In this Great Work your Orders to Obey.

This Favour no Addition can admit,
But by Celerity in Doing it,
Since while my best Revenge you both defer,
I feel those Pains which Tryphon ought to bear.
O Prodigy of Fate! I hither came
To Acquaint Fair Cleopatra with my Flame,
And scarce could doubt but I should Happy prove,
Since I through her Revenge di^ Court her Love;
But ever my Heart I at her Feet could lay,
She tells me she has given her Own away,
Nay more in her Revenge she would have me Join
With him who most of all does Merit Mine:
Never was any Lovers Fate so hard,
The Danger I must Share, not the Reward;
Was it her Ignorance or else her Art,
Thus to accept my Hand but not my Heart:
Aretus hitherto has been my Friend,
But Love now to that Name does give an End.
And to Obtain her he shall quickly see
He must not only Tryphon Kill but Me.

NIcanor and Demetrius having been
Employed by me to Court you for my Queen
And having found by both that my Address
Has not obtained the much desired Success;
I now am Come, Madam, to wait on you,
To pay that Love which to your Beauty's due.
A Love which 'twere Injustice to despise,
Since 'tis the powerful Influence of your Eyes.

That Love which now is offered me by you
Is, Sir, to Cleopatra only due;
The Injustice then much Greater would appear,
Should I usurp that which belongs to her;
Then do not, Sir, Solicit me to do
A Wrong to Nature and to Justice too;
'twere Sin if such Desires were not denied.

Nature and Justice both are on my side;
Where Nature does most Liberally bestow
The Charms of Beauty, there our Loves we Owe,
And I the Rules of Justice but pursue,
Paying a Debt where Na ur shows 'tis due.

Since your first Love you did to her afford,
Justice oblieges you to keep your Word;
And to my Sister, Sir, I am Confined,
By Natures Law to be both Just and kind.
Thus, Sir, the Right is on my side you see,
Fancy does Govern you but Reason me;

Such Cruel Words ought not from you to fall,
What you term Fancy I must Duty Call;
If you I first had seen, then her Adored,
By you most Justly I had been abhorred,
But you being seen, I should my self abhor,
If after I Your Sister could Adore;
Your Justice into question will be brought,
If my Misfortune should be called my Fault;
Madam, it must be, sure, some other thing
Which makes you at this rate to use your King;
And from his Proffered Throne thus to Retire,
A Glory to which all but you Aspire.

She does not Merit to a Throne to Clime,
Who does acquire that Glory by a Crime;
To be a Quen I would not wound my Name.

Your only Crime is that you slight my Flame,
A Flame which, if by you Contemned it be,
Shall Ruin others as 'twill Ruin me.
Madam, take heed of being thus unkind,
Least you your Judge should in your Lover find.

Nothing can me to Unjust Actions move,
Not will I, Sir, be threatened into Love.
Ah if true Love ever in your Heart had Reigned,
You would have known it could not be Constrained;
Under Heavens Care Love above Life does stand,
Tyrants may Love but cannot Love Command;
Act what you said to me, 'twill easier prove
T'indure your Sentence then endure your Love.

Mistake not what your Scorn forced me to say,
For to your Beauties such Respect I pay,
I'd Kill my self sooner then threaten you,
But with Revenge Nicanor I'll Pursue;
He to my Love, when told him, was unkind,
And then I feared the Effects which now I find.

This Menace is beyond your first severe,
You Threaten now what only I can fear,
But Fear to Love was never yet the Way.

I must not Credit that which now you say,
For of Loves Theory so much you show,
As I believe the Practick too you know;
This is a Truth your blushes now have shown,
Nor could you scorn my Passion and my Throne,
Had not some other prepossessed your Heart;
To find him out I'll use my Power and Art,
And, Madam, then it will perhaps appear,
You can for him as for Nicanor fear;
I am now certain you a Lover have,
Him and my hopes I'll bury in one Grave;
For since you make me Wretched, you shall know
I have the Power to make you Wretched too,
And though my Rival might escape my Hand,
Yet still your Father's Life's at my Command,
Which he shall Lose, if by to morrow night
You value not that Love which now you slight.

Yes, Tyrant, thy Resentments more to move
I will Confess to thee I am in Love.
But yet to thee the Man shall ne'er be known
For whom I scorn thy Passion and thy Throne;
Act then thy Menaces that thou may see,
I too am more in Love with Death then thee;
To those who feel such Cruelties as these
Dying is not a Punishment but ease.

Know that to Morrow Night's the utmost date
Given to Nicanor's Life or to thy Hate.

To Morrow Night In both it shall appear,
Who fears not Death does not a Tyrant fear.

Oh whether by my Passion am I Led?
My Love should die after my Hopes are dead;
She has her self declared to me that she
Has given to him that which is sought by me,
Nor is Aretus guilty of the Crime,
He does to me what I'd have done to him;
Because in Love I cannot reach my End,
Why should Revenge deprive me of my Friend?
Great Gods! how can I grow so Cold and tame,
As on a Rival to bestow that Name?
And while Aretus does my Joys Engross,
Talk my self into Patience for my loss.
Since Friendship thus does plead for my Disgrace,
Revenge do thou ascend and take the place;
Thou more like Virtue dost to me appear
Then Friendship can, in this Affront I bear;
Since to the Brave nothing should be above
Revenge in Wrongs or Constancy in Love;
Therefore thy Death, proud Rival, I'll pursue,
If I must Loose her, thou must Loose her too.

Seleucus, now I feel a Matchless Pain,
My Perfect Love Meets with the like Disdain;
'Twixt what her Beauty and her Scorn does do,
At once I Hate her and Adore her too;
Ah when Provoked by what to me she said
I Menaced her to take Nicanor's Head,
So Bravely she the threatening did Despise,
Her Spirit I Admire above her Eyes:
Thus what I thought the speediest Way might be
To Conquer her, has the more Conquered me;
For to my Bondage Jam now Confined,
Both by the Lustre of her Eyes and Mind,
But that which does my Highest Torment prove
Is, She Confessed to me she was in Love,
And proudly said twas past my Power and Art
To find him out to whom she gave her heart.

This and the scorn which you from her Endure
Should make you to your Reason owe your Cure.

To one in Love do not of Reason speak,
For Love is never strong till Reason's weak;
My Passion is so Pow'rfull and so High,
As if I miss Enjoying her I Die;
But if by thy Assistance she be won,
Thou shalt with her divide my Heart and Crown.

Wealth is a thing I never did regard,
To have your Favour is the best Reward,
Which I'll deserve since, Sir, to reach your Ends
I will expose my Mistress and my Friends;
Yes, Sir, to me alone, you now will know,
That both your Life and Mistress you shall owe,
Then summon all your Fortitude to hear
That which at once will wound your Heart and Ear;
Our Fortunes, Sir, with the like Malice move,
You Love one Sister, I the other Love;
You have a Rival who her Heart has won,
To me my Rival the like. Wrong has done;
But that at which we both should most repine,
Your Friend's your Rival and my Friend is mine,

What Friend of mine can dare affront me thus.

That name you give but to Demetrius.

Oh Gods! what Horrors does my Soul invade?
Scorned by my Mistress, by my Friend betrayed?
This fatal Secret who disclosed to thee?

'Twas he himself that opened it to me.

From me conceal it, and yet tell it you?
Should I believe Demetrius is untrue,
Oh do not take this way to Usurp his Place.

He durst not tell you he your Rival was,
But had you marked those Horrors he was in,
When him you pressed to court her for your Queen,
You would not have been doubtful of his Crime,
Your Eyes had told you what I learned from him.

'Tis true his Troubles as it were above
What any Passion could produce but Love*
My Erro^ and thy Faithfulness I see;
Ah since Demetrius. proves so false to me,
Sure 'tis he too that doth my Life pursue.

No, Sir, that Guilt is to Aretus due,
With ^e he Cleopatra does Adore,
Who does so much your Leaving her Abhor
That she has made my Rival promise her,
Charmed by Loves Power to be your Murderer;
She ^y'd my help in the Design to win,
But, Sir, I did detest so base a Sin.

Thou art my Genius, and I owe to thee
All that I am, and all I hope to be,
Though Cleopatra's Guilt be raised so high
That, as Aretus, she deserves to Dye,
Yet if she'll marry thee I'll pardon her,
But I one hour will not his Death defer.

This favour ties me, while I live, to you,
But, Sir, in your own case what will you do?

In that, Seleucus, I am doubtful yet,
For on each side the difficultie's great;
I look with Horror on Demetrius guilt,
Yet tremble to pluck down what I have built;
Friendship and Love so in my Bosom strive,
As I yet know not which shall there survive;
I now am under an unheard of Fate,
My Friend and Mistress I both Love and Hate;
^h would Aretus all my Blood had spilt,
That against either I might shun the Guilt;
In this sad straight I'd be advised by thee.

The Resolution easy seems to me,
For to your Love if you can give an End,
You ought to pardon and make blessed your Friend;
But if your Being to your Love you tie,
Then there's no doubt Demetrius, Sir, must Dye.

But if my Love while guiltless was denied,
I doubt when in her Lovers Blood tis died,
That Cruelty may more her Hatred move.

Yet 'tis a Crue^y produced by Love;
When by your Power you make her be your Wife,
And when your Mercy spares her Fathers Life,
Both those joined with the Charming Name of Queen
Over her Hate the Victory may win;
But if; when she's you Wife her Hate endures,
The Trouble, Sir, will be more hers then yours.

But since, when but to fright her I did say
That I Nicanor's Life would take away,
She told me to her Death she too would fly;
I fear if I should make her Lover Dye,
She in despair to her own Death would run.

Killing one's self is sooner said then done,
But if to him that Proof of Love she would give,
Think not she'll marry you while he does live.

Ha! what thou say admits of no reply,
And does on Love bestow the Victory:
Those Words have torn Demetrius from my Mind,
And for his Death the Orders they have signed;
He and Aretus instantly shall Dye;
Prepare the Guards with speed and secrecy;
Thy Care of me has made me judge it fit
To thee this Execution to commit.

Yes Sir, I scorned his Love and Anger too,
Till he with speedy Death did threaten you,
My Constancy he then did more than fright,
Yet I concealed my Terrors from his fight;
But, Sir, my Eyes, as soon as he was goue,
Wept as my Heart, while he was here, had done;
For if to morrow night I'm not his Wife,
He has declared hee'll take away your Life.

I'll rather to his Rage submit my Head,
Than yield that you should such a Tyrant wed,
I'll sooner Die then I'll that Union see,
Such Hate I have for him such Love for thee.

From your Fair eyes those Tears you ought to wipe,
This Crime for Heavens Revenge makes Tryphon ripe,
So ripe that through his Guards along I'll go
To pay that Death which to his Guilt we owe;
The Danger does less then the Duty seem,
I'll dry your Tears or strive to merit them.

I thought by Love he would your heart have won,
And therefore I did yield to be undone;
But since to this vile way he hath recourse,
'Tis just to end such Tyranny by Force;
I'll now with much less Gr^f his Death pursue,
Then I resigned to him my claim to you.

Since we to kill the Tyrant are agreed,
I see the Gods his Ruin have decreed.

Though that is just which is designed by you,
Yet Just things we should do as Wise men do;
Seleucus who the Usurpers Guards commands,
When this new Tyranny he understands,
To join with us I hope may soon be won.

I dare assure you 'tis already done.

Already done! by whom?

tis done by me;
His Hate to Tryphon and his Tyranny
Is such, as I am sure in this Design
He will with you, when you desire it, join.

Whoever does ^o Virtue but pretend,
To what we have resolved must be a Friend.

I on your privacies would not int^ude,
Did not my duty force me to be (...).
Some of the Servants from the Garden call,
To tell you many soldiers scale the Wall,
A^n (...) (...) a Fight they every one appear,
And all of them do Iryphon's Livery wear.

Seleucus is into your Palace come,
And does w^ Tryphon's Guards fill every Room.

What may this Mean?

My Eyes are much mistook.
If Rage and Horror dwells not in his Look.

Yield up your Swords, in vain you'll fight or fly.

Betrayed! then let us acting our Revenges die.
Secure the Palace Guards, if you Admit
Any ^escape, your Lives shall pay for it,
These orders read will let you understand,
That what I do is by my Kings command;
You are my Prisoners all, Aretus you
Must bear the Fate which to your Sin is due,
For you the Murder of the King did plot.

I Merit Death because I killed him not.

Demetrius too the like hard Fate must prove;
He does not only Rival Tryphon's Love,
But knew Aretus did his Death intend,
And yet Concealed it to preserve his Friend.

Perfidious man, the Tyrant could not be
Told that he was my Rival but by thee.

Madam, the King in hope that you'll receive
His Love, does yet Nicanor's Life reprieve.

Since these two generous Friends are doomed to Die,
Sparing of me is but his Cruelty.

Who would the loss of so much Wor^h survive,
Or by A Tyrant's Mercy who would Live?
Death is then either Welcomer to me.

Here Prostrate, Madam, at your Feet you see
One who long since has paid to you his Heart,
And who by Love is forced to act this part;
For when I came to tell you of the Fire
Which your Bright Eyes did in my Soul inspire,
And, that it might more acceptable be
Did offer to revenge your injury,
You, ever I could make you my great Request,
Told me Aretus Reigned within your Breast;
Ah! When I found that he was Monarch there,
I did, Compelled by Love and by Despair,
Discover all to Tryphon with Design
Helping his Love to make him further mine;
This, Madam, you may Look on as my Sin,
But what you think my Guilt I Glory in;
For what more fully could my Passion prove
Then sacrificing of my Friends to Love.

Since Love makes no man Cruel or Unjust,
That which thou call thy Love is but thy Lust.

Seleucus, I have Listened unto you
At once with Horror and with Pity too,
Horror that you this Falsehood could Commit,
Pity that Love seduced you into it;
Ah! to my Love what wrong could be so high.
As thinking 'twould be won by Treachery?
No, No, though my affection for you were
Such as for me you would have yours appear,
Yet Honour, which of all things most I rate,
Would by this Falsehood turn that Love to Hare;
And could I be obtained by what you do,
That Crime would soon work the like Change in you;
Oh do not think that Love can ere be built
On such a false foundation as your Guilt.

In my sad loss what could I else have done?
To me you're lost, or this way must be won.

This way be Won! Oh Gods let me not see
That you can have so Low a thought of me;
For then I'll rather my own Death Pursue,
Then owe the saving of our Lives to you;
I would have had you to my Love pretend
By ways which were proportioned to the End,
And would have had you, though your Hopes were Crossed,
Yet to have Merited what you have Lost;
More Grief in such Revenge I might then find,
Then in this mean one you have now designed;
For when true Honour in a Soul does Reign,
To b^ ungrateful is the foulest Stain,
And she must in her Breast feel more Remorse
That is overcome by Merit then by Force.

Merit would have but plaid a Hopeless part,
When he by Inclination had your Heart;
Madam it would have much encreast my woe
To have Deserved you and have Lost you too.

And yet both these had been an Easier Fate
Then not to Merit me and Merit Hate;
Ah! when you thought that he my Heart had won
By that which you call Incination,
You then should by Desert and not Despair
Have cast him thence and fixed Seleucus there,
This might perhaps have been performed by you,
Had you revenged my Wrongs and Syria's too;
And this Perhaps though Late may yet be done.

Ah, Madam, I to your Revenge will run,
If you to me will now a Promise give,
That when 'tis acted you'll my Love receive.

Ah Run not thus into another Fault,
Love would not be what tis could it be bought.

Why Madam should he now rewarded be
For doing that from which he hinders me?
Pay not so high a price for our Repreive.

My Love, Aretus, is my own to give.

Yet to your Love give him not a pretence
By that which cannot wash off his Offence.

Death would to me, Seleucus, happier prove
Then if I made a Bargain for my Love.

Madam, I beg that it your Gift might be.

Doing your Duty you should trust to me.

Alas why should you her Unkindness dread,
When so much Merit on your side shall plead?

Consider, should you run your Fatal way,
The present Times and Times to come will say,
Because Seleucus in his Love had failed,
He on his Country Tyranny ^tayl'd,
A Sin so black 'twere better to submit
To slighted Love, then bear the Guilt of it.

But though to sell my Love I do abhom,
Yet on my knees your Virtue I Implore.
To free your Country and remove our Fears,
And to those Prayers behold I add these Tears,
Since t'was your Love forced you to do these Wrongs.
This Reparation to your Love belongs

Love ^l with a resistless Power appears,
When Beauty Pleads the Cause and speaks in Tears;
The fiercest storms which over Souls has Power
Cannot but be suppressed by such a Shower;
I Can no Longer my hard Temper keep,
'Tis less to Loose you then thus make you weep;
In you and in my Services I'll trust,
They shall be Great, and you I know are Just;
Thus Clouds a while may the Suns Light Confine,
But when they Vanish it does brighter shine.

Now brave Aretus we'll together prove
Who has the Highest Title to her Love.

When of most Merit you can truly boast,
Then I deserve she should to me be Lost.

Madam your Wrongs call me with them to go,
So does the Duty I to Syria Owe.

Then against Tryphon Let us all declare;
The Guards which I have brought my Creatures are,
And I even Long till I his Blood have spilt,
The Victim due both to my Love and Guilt;
We must this Moment kill him by surprise,
Our Safety now in Expedion Lies.

Sure 'tis the Gods that thus their Hearts Incline.

And may the Gods smile too on their design.

You both must to the Tyrants Palace go,
And Let us hourly all that Passes know.

Demetrius Knows here now that tis a thing,
Too bold to be a Rival to a King,
And in his Ruin Stratonice shall see
Nothing is dearer then her Love to me,
Nor dare Nicanor my Address det^st,
Who by such Proof he finds I'm not in Jest;
Aretus still so proud A heart did show,
As I long owed him what I pay him now;
My faithful Freed Man Arcas I have sent,
Sooner to learn of my Revenge the Event.

Sir you are lost.

What makes thee so afraid?

Oh Sir, you by Seleucus are Betrayed.

This News my Soul does with Amazement ^ill.

He's Joined with those whom he was sent to kill?
My hast hath almost robbed me of my Breath,
And, Sir, with them your Guards conspire your Death;
The People too call for your head aloud,
And to those Traitors in whole troops they crowd.

Arcas, who told this fatal news to thee:

Sir what I tell you I my self did see,
And through the streets they Marched at such a rate,
As they must now be near the Palace Gate,
Which is abandoned, Sir, by all the Guards,
Bribed by Seleucus Arts or his Rewards;
If you would fly, you should not loose your time.

Death's but a Punishment, but Flight a Crime,
I'll rather Loose my Life then they shall see
That ought which they can do can frighten me;
The name of King by no base act I'll Blot,
Nor Dying loose the Fame my Life has got.

Were but these Words, Sir, to the Syrians known,
They yet would grant that you deserve the Throne;
To me you seem so Generous and High,
That fighting by your side I mean to Die.

Dost thou then think I will with Traitors fight?

Sir you disdain to save your self by Flight.

But who like me a Kingdom did Command,
Should scorn to Die by any Subjects hand;
No, No, he Merits not to fill a Throne
Who when Fate calls, dares not employ his own;
'Twould be the Traitors Glory as their Guilt,
If they could say that they my Blood had spilt:
Go watch their coming in the outward Room,
And, when they Enter, say aloud they Come;
Mean while for such a Death I will prepare,
As shall Deserve thy kindness and thy care.
Will Arcas then my last Request deny?

Sir I but beg that I with you may Dye.

They will surprise me by this fond delay.

Since you will have it so I must obey.

This turn I owe to Cleopatra's Eyes;
Yet since I am deprived of Stratonice,
My Death which they united do conspire,
Is not my Fear but that which I Desire.
My Hand is yet of this Bright Sceptre sure,
Which for my Sufferings is a Certain Cure:
Thus armed I will my Enemies outbrave,
And, spite of Fate, deserve a Glorious Grave.
Ah Stratonice, if thou my Heart could see,
You would find I only grieve at leaving thee;
Such Charms are in thine Eyes.

They come, they come.

Then I no longer will defer my Doom.
Though of my Death your Treacheries may boast,
The Triumph yet of your Revenge is lost;
Since Heaven designs this my last hour shall be,
Thus I my self act what the Gods decree:
Pleased that my Fate within my own Power lies,
And that in Death I can my foes despise;
I dye content, since my last breath can boast,
That I your Plot of Murth'ring me have crossed.

The Tyrant with himself has been at strife
To make his Death as Guilty as his Life.

'Twas ^ust this Execution he should do,
That as he wronged us he may right us too.

Yet I must Grieve at that which all Rejoice,
Death should have been his Punishment, not Choice.

His thirst of Humane Blood so great was grown,
As he, rather then spare it spilt his own.

Arcas confesses 'twas he cried they come.

I do expect, but do not Fear your Doom.

Let him in safety to his Country go.

For our Revenge this Object is too low.

See how he shakes, Guard let him be unbound.

We should prize Faithfulness where ever 'tis found.

To show I merit what I now enjoy,
The Freedom you bestow I thus employ.
That Death you thought I feared, I run to meet
And dye content since at-my-Masters -- feet

Arcas deserved, who could so bravely Do,
A better Fate and better Master too.

Tryphon deserved his Gratitude to have,
Him he did free and all the rest enslave.

Arcas I wronged thinking he shook for Fear.

The news of Tryphon's Death hath brought us here,
We heard that he by his own Hand did Dye.

See where he now Pale as his Guilt does lye.

This sight at once my Joy and Grief does raise.

'Tis an ignoble Triumph thus to gaze,
Sir, let his Body be from hence conveyed;
He by his Death for all his Crimes has paid.

Since by, the Justice done by Tryphons Hand
The Throne of Syria does now empty stand,
And since the Tyrant; to confirm his sway,
The Royal Line at once did make away,
Princes, 'twere (...) we instantly agreed,
Who is the Worthiest Person to succeed,
And, since his Merit only can pretend,
I judge Nica^ should the Throne ascend.

Seleucus you my motion but prevent.

I to whatboth propose with Joy consent,
To you alone the Syri^ Crown is due.

Excuse me, Sir, it does belong to you.
Admire not that my self I prostrate thus,
Since now I kneel before Antiochus:
Preserved by Heaven from Tryphons bloody Power,
To all the blessings of this glorious Hour;
Your Father, Sir, who found he did design
T'Usurp the Crown and kill the Royal Line,
Sent you that night by a safe hand to me,
Hoping that I shut up in privacy,
(For when the King revoak'd the Generals place
I in Retirement mourned out my Disgrace)
Might best protect you from the Tyrants Rage;
This noble Trust did all my Griefs assuage.

'Twas a high Proof that he your Virtue knew,
Since whilst he Wronged you he did trust you too.

Out of my House but still within my Care
You by the Gods till now protected were,
Under the name of Le^'s son you went,
The Prince by whom you first to me were sent,
Who when your Father and the King was killed,
Overcome by Grief his Life to Death did yield;
In reading this short Letter, Sir, you'll know,
Why what you are till now I durst not show.

SInce Heaven this Ruin throws on us,
I trust you with Antiochus;
Let him by you with Care be bred,
But till you see the Tyrant dead,
(Oh I conjure you grant me this)
Let not himself know who he is,
The Affront my Father cast on you forgive,
And let me still in your Remembrance live.
ANTIOCHUS.

If 'tis the Prince's hand, the hand I know,
It is his writing;

His subscription too.

My Testimony were enough alone,
Since I thereby do gain the Syrian Throne,
To which by all your Votes you would me bring.

We all acknowledge that you are our King.

Though a lost Crown the Gods to me restore,
Two things there are which yet I value more;
Oh would to Heaven, Seleucus, that I knew
How to be just both to my Love and you.

Under such loads of Guilt my self I find,
That I though forced by Love your Death designed,
As I the Greatest Sufferings ought to bear,
And therefore yield to endure the loss of Her;
A hopeless Love to the best End I bring,
Pleasing by it my Mistress and my King;
Blessed if the Sin caused by my Love and Fate
By this Atonement I can expiate.

This Generous Act which now you for me do
Does most obliege me and Amaze me too.

Now, Madam, I dare humbly beg of you
To take that Heart which to your Eyes is due,
They make me know that 'tis a greater thing,
To be their Captive then to be their King;
A King who does as his chief Glory own
The Power of laying at your feet a Crown;
In taking it you'll Raise his Joys above
All things except your Beauty and his Love;
Nicanor who to me does Empire give,
I hope will yield that you should let me Live,
Which I shall not till I your Pleasure know.

The Duty, Sir, she to her King does owe.

That Love for which so Generously you sue,
I give not to your Title but to you.

Though from your Father I receive a Throne,
Yet now you give me more then he has done;
Amidst these Joys which Heaven on me does send,
I dare not be Unmindful of my Friend;
Demetrius, Sir, Adores Fair Stratonice.

Sir, I with Joy consent that she be his.

Madam, so Guilty I have been to you,
That I scarce dare for your Forgiveness Sue,
Mercy it self but rarely does bestow
At the same time Rewards and Pardons too.

Since what you did, Honour did lead you to,
Love shall forgive what Honour made you do;
And since your Guilt I thus have took away,
Tis fit that I Nicanor should Obey.

None by Excess of Joy can Death receive,
Since after this which you have done I live.

Sir, I have now b^t one Request to make,
'Tis that the General's Place you now will take,
This is the Lowest Reparation due,
For that affront the King did cas^on you.

Since I have lived to Place you in the Throne,
The only Duty made me Live is Done.
Besides a Solemn Oath I once did swear,
That I would never Public Office bear;
Think how Seleucus, Sir, Obliged may be,
You have already done too much for me.

Then for Seleucus I that place Design,
To which all Tryphon's Forfeitures I join;
'Tis just since all our Lives to you we owe,
That you should have the Power to guard them too.

These Gifts not for their Greatness I esteem,
But that the Evidence of trust they seem.

Is there then nothing in my Power to do,
Which, Sir, may show my Gratitude to you.

You've given me all the Honour I desired:

You for your self a Nobler have acquired.
The Way in which me to the Throne you bring,
Is Greater then to be your self a King.
Now let us to the Gods Oblations pay,
For all the Blessings of this Glorious day:
To them a Double Debt from me is due,
Much for my Crown I owe them, more for You.

YOur dealing, we confess, is very fair;
You paid your Money ever you saw our Ware,
And if you should dislike it now 'tis seen,
I pray how would you get it back again?
Since never yet at Law an Action lay
For Money paid to see a Cry'd-down-Play;
Then whatsoe'r it be, dispraise it not,
But do as some when they a Clap have got;
Commend the Wench that more to her may go,
Thus if they Jeer you, you may jeer them too;
New Plays, like Wives, are subject to the curse
Of being took for better or for worse.
PAge 1. Line 7. read praised, for prized. l. 16. r. Frenchmens, for
frenchmans. p 3. l. 18. r. for, for from. l. 25. r. made, for railed. l. 42. r.
Royal, for Regal. p. 6. l. 3. r. moving. for mourning. l. 24. r. for, for from.
l. 39. r. men, for me. p. 7. l. 7. r. sacred, for secret. l. 14. r. Ought but
her death should tell her Lover i. l. 18. r. Lowe, (...) Love. p. 10. l. 4. r.
my, for to. p. 11. l. 6. r. told, for ^ound l. 32 r. owe, for own. l. ^6. r.
owe, for own. l. 44. r. I'll, for I p. 13. l. 43. r. taught, for though. p. 15.
l. 11. r. talk, for task. l. 43. r. then me by friendship. p. 18. l. 4^ r.
wear, for wast. p. 19. l. 12. r. taught, for thought. p. 24. l. 21. r. I love,
spite of his fault. p. 25. l. 44. r. Councellors, for Chancellors. p. 27. l.
32. r. with, for may. p. 28. l. 11. r. intend, for purpose. l. 28. r. he, for
she. p. 30. l. 15. r. enjoin, for enjoy. p. 32. l. 19. Garden-dore for
Chamb^r-dore. p. 34. l. 33. r. though, for to. p. 35. l. 22. r. or, for and. l.
35. r. you may go there with me. p. 36. l. 1. r. does, for nor. l. 4. r. is
past, for in part. p. 38 l. 11. r. your sentence. l. 12. r. or, for me. p. 39.
l. 11, r. him, for you. p. 40. l. 6. r. fiercely, for freely. l. 20. r. who
valued not her joys. l. 41. r. vow, for voice. l. 44. r. your, for my. p. 42.
l. 6. r. since I enjoy at last. p. 43. l. 10. r. he, for her. p. 44. l. 3. r.
say, for tell. p. 46. l. 36. r. successful, for successess. p. 47. l. 45. r.
cure for care. p. 48. l. 13. r. that which you now have said. l. 15. r. stray,
for stay. p. 48. l. 21. r. do not all the Honour. p. 49. l. 9. r. Eyes, for
Eye. l. 36. r. belief, for relief. p. 50 l. 1. r. Madam that King may safely.
l. 18. r. what, for that. p. 51. l. 22. r. my love for you is grown. l. 38. r.
and Madam. p. 53. l. 15. r. justly, for justice. p. 55. l. 33. r. you for
you'll. p. 62. l. 12. r. confine, for confirm. l. 20. r. till, for still. p.
63. l. 14. r. to own my fault.

PAge 1. l. 13. r. and he too much deserves. l. 20. r. this Monster's
wickedness. l. 28. r. it, for, he. l. 31. r. guilt, for blood. p. 2. l. 19. r.
worse, for more. l. 24. r. it, for even. p. 3. l. 2. r. you'll, ^r will. p. 7
l. 22. r. his sorrow is but his hypocrisy. l. 43. r* what Tryphon ere shall
do. p. 10. l. 44. r. 'tis worse then death. p. 12. l. 13. r. now, for well. p.
14. l. 15. r. 'tis., for 'tw^. l. 17. r. not Aretus Arm employ. p. 17. l. 32.
r. much, for sad. p. 20. l. 39. r. for, for. so. p. 21. l. 35. r. which did
betwixtus pass. p. 23. l. 40. r. for, for in. p. 24. l. 10. r. hand, for man.
p. 25. l. 1. cries, for crimes. l. 21. r. said, for done. l. 38. r. help. for
self. p 26. l. 21. r the, for your. l. 24. r. or, for e're. p. 29. l. 26. r.
makes, for made. l. 17. r. truth, for faith. l. 31. r. and, for yet. l 38. r.
are, for be. p. 30. l. 4. r. bear, for fear'. l. 29 r. that, for this. p. 31.
l. 8. r. me, for you. p. 32. l. 19. r. you, for them. l 25. r. decline, for
resign. l. 29. r. too, for 'twas. p. 33. l. 1. r. of, for for. l. 8. r.
thereby, for therein. p. 34. l. 11. r. for, for (...). l. 25. r. of a more
sharp revenge. l. 38. r. lowest, for bravest. p. 35. l. 38. r. love, for same.
p. 37. l. 1. r. for, for from. l. 30. r. hate, for curse. p. 38. l. 10. r. my,
for such. l. 18 r. wounds, for words. p. 39. l. 23. r. it, for her. p. 40. l.
42. r. act, for ask. p. 41. l. 16. r. what, for why. p. 41. l. 29. r. just.
for best. p. 43. l. 28. r. tyr^nts may life. l. (...). r. same, for name. l.
16. r. mine, for it. p. 44. l. 21. r. prove, for grow. p. 45. l. 27. r. we
just^y should repine. l. 36. r. can, for should. l. 31. r. could, for would. p.
46. l. 10. r. with, for (...). p. 47. l. 17. r. wept, for went. p. 49. l. 37.
r. Case, for loss. p. 50. l. 1. r. where, for when. p. 52. l 25. r. they, for
you. p. 53. l. 10. r. loosing, for leaving. p. 55. l. ^8. r. Zeno's son, for
Leno's son. p. 56. l. 6. r. loose, for gain. l. 22. r. both, for most. l. 26.
r. (...), for their. l. 34. r. that, for t^.


