WHen first our Author took this Play in hand,
He doubted much and long was at a stand.
He knew the Fame and Memory of Kings
Were to be treated of as Sacred things.
Not as they are represented in this Age,
Where they appear the Lumber of the Stage;
Used only just for reconciling Tools,
Or what is worse, made Villains all, or Fools.
Besides, the Characters he shows to Night,
He found were very difficult to Write:
He found the Fame of France and Spain at stake,
Therefore long paused and feared which part to take;
Till this his judgment safest understood,
To make'em both Heroic as he could.
But now the greatest stop was yet unpass't,
He found himself, Alas! confined too fast.
He is a man of Pleasures, Sirs, like you,
And therefore hardly could to business bow,
Till at the last he did this Conquest get,
To make his pleasure whetstone to his wit,
So sometimes for variety he writ.
But as those Block-heads who discourse by Rote,
Sometimes speak sense although they rarely know it.
So he scarce knew to what his work would grow;
But 'twas a Play because it would be so:
Yet well he knows this is a weak pretence,
For Idleness is the worst want of sense.
Let him not now of carelessness be Taxed,
He'll write in earnest when he writes the next;
Mean while --
Prune his superfluous Branches, never spare;
Yet do it kindly, be not too severe,
He may bear better fruit another year.

HAppy the Monarch on whose Brow no Cares
Add weight to the bright Diadem he wears.
Like me in all that he can wish for, blessed:
Renown, and Love, The Gentlest calms of rest
And peace, adorn my Brow, enrich my Breast.
To me great Nations Tributary are,
Though whilst my Vast Dominions spreads so far,
Where most I Reign, I must pay homage, here.
Approach bright Mistress of my purest vows,
Now show me him that more Religion owes
To Heaven, or to its Altars more Devoutly bows.

So Merchants cast upon some Savage Coast,
Are forced to see their dearest Treasures lost.
Curse! What's obedience? a false Notion made
By Priests, who when they found old Cheats decayed,
By such new Arts kept up declining Trade.
A Father oh! --

-- Why does my Carlos shroud
His Joy, and when all's Sunshine wear a Cloud?
My Son, thus for thy Glory I provide;
From this Fair Charmer, and our Royal Bride
Shall such a Noble Race of Heroe's spring,
As may adorn the Court when thou art King.

A greater Glory I can never know
Then what already I enjoy in you;
The Brightest Ornaments of Crowns and Powers,
I only can admire, as they are yours.

Heaven! How he stands unmoved! not the least show
Of Transport.

-- Not admire your happiness! I do
As much admire it as I reverence you.
Let me express the mighty Joy I feel.
Thus Sir I pay my duty when I kneel.

How hard it is his Passion to Confine:
I'm sure 'tis so, if I may judge by mine:
Alas, my Lord, you're too obsequious now.

Oh might I but Enjoy this pleasure still!
Here would I worship, and for ever kneel.

For Heaven my Lord, you know not what you do.

Still there appears disturbance on his brow:
And in his looks an Earnestness I read,
Which from no Common Causes can proceed:
I'll probe him deep --
-- When when my dearest Joy
Shall I the mighty debt of Love defray.
Hence to Loves secret Temples let's retire,
There on his Altars kindle th'Am'rous fire,
Then Phoenix-like Each in the flame expire.
Still he is fixed --
-- Gomez observe the Prince,
Yet smile on me my charming Excellence.
Virgins should only fears and blushes show,
But you must lay aside that Title now.
The Doctrine which I preach by Heaven is good;
Oh! the Impetuous sallies of my Blood!

To what unwelcome Joys I'm forced to yield,
Now fate her utmost malice has fulfilled.
Carlos farewell: for since I must submit --

Now winged with rapture let us fly my sweet.
My Son all Troubles from thy breast resign,
And let thy Father's happiness be thine.

What King, what God would not his power forgo,
T'enjoy so much Divinity below?
Did st Thou behold her Posa --

Sir I did.

And is she not a sweet one? such a Bride,
Oh Posa once she was Decreed for mine.
Once I had hopes of Bliss; had thou but seen
How blessed, how proud I was, if I could get
But leave to lye a prostrate at her feet.
Even with a look I could my pains beguile,
Nay she in pity too would sometimes smile;
Till at the last my vows successful proved,
And one day sighing she confessed she loved,
Oh! then I found no limits to our joy,
With Eyes thus languishing we looked all day,
So vigorous and strong we darted beams,
Our meeting glances kindled into flames,
Nothing we found that promised not delight,
For when rude shades deprived us of the light,
As we had gazed all day, we dreamt all night;
But after all these Labours undergone,
A cruel Father thus destroys his Son;
In their full height my choicest hopes beguiles,
And robs me of the fruit of all my Toils
My dearest Posa thou were it ever kind,
Bring thy best Counsel and direct my mind.

Still he is here
My Lord.

-- Your business now?

I've with concern beheld your Clouded brow;
Ah! though you've lost a Beauty well might make
Your strictness honour, and your duty shake,
Let not a Fathers ills misguide your mind,
But be Obedient, though he's proved unkind:

Hence Cynic to dull Slaves thy Morals teach,
I have no leisure now to hear thee Preach;
Still you'll usurp a power over my will:

Sir you my Service do interpret ill;
Nor need it be so soon forgot, that I
Have been your Guardian from your Infancy,
When to my charge committed, I alone
Instructed you how to expect a Crown;
Taught you Ambition, and Wars noblest Arts,
How to lead Armies, and to Conquer Hearts.
Whilst though but Young, --
You would with pleasure read of Sieges got,
And smile to hear of bloody Battles fought;
And still, though not control, I may advise,

Alas thy Pride wears a too thin disguise;
Too well I know the Falsehood of thy Soul,
Which to my Father rendered me so foul;
That hardly as his Son, a smile I've known,
But always as a Traitor met his frown;
My forward Honour was Ambition called,
Or if my friends my early Fame extolled,
You damped my Fathers smiles still as they sprung,
Persuading I repined he lived too long;
So all my hopes by you were frustrate made,
And robbed of Sun-shine, withered in the shade.
Whilst my good Patriot ^ you disposed the Crown
Out of my reach, to have it in your own:
But i'll prevent your Policy --

-- My Lord,
This accusation is unjust and hard;
The King your Father would not so upbraid
My age, is all my service thus repaid?
But I will hence and let my Master hear
How generously you reward my care,
Who on my just complaint, I doubt not, will
At last redress the Injuries I feel.

Alas my Lord you too severely urge
Your Fate, his Interest with the King is large;
Besides, you know he has already seen
The Transports of your passion for the Queen;
The use he may of that advantage make,
You ought at least t'avoid, but for her sake.

Ah! my dear friend, you have touched my tend'rest part,
I never yet learnt the dissembling Art;
Go call him back, tell him that I implore
His pardon; and will ne'er offend him more:
The Queen! kind Heaven make her thy nearest care:
Oh! fly, over take him e're he goes too far.
How are we bandied up and down by Fate,
By so much more unhappy as we're great;
A Prince, and heir to Spains great Monarch born,
I'm forced to Court a Slave whom most I scorn;
Who like a Bramble amongst a Cedars boughs,
Vexes his Peace, under whose shade he grows;
Now he returns, assist me Falsehood, -- down
Thou Rebel passion --
Sir I fear I've done
You wrong; but if I have you can forgive.
Heaven! can I do this abject thing and live?

Ah! my good Lord it makes too large amends,
When to his Vassal thus a Prince descends:
Tho it was something rigid, and unkind
T'upbraid your faithful Servant and your friend.

Alas no more: all Jealousies shall cease
Between us two, let there be hence forth Peace;
So may Just Heaven assist me when I sue,
As I to Gomez always will be true:

Stay Sir, and for this mighty favour take
All the return sincerity can make
Blessed in you Fathers love, as I'm in yours,
May not one fear disturb your happy hours;
Crowned with success may all your wishes be,
And you ne'er find worse Enemies than me:
Nor spite of all his greatness shall he need
Of too long date, his ruin is decreed;
Spains early hopes of him have been my fears,
'Twas I the charge had of his tender years,
And read in all the Progress of his growth
An untamed, haughty, hot and furious Youth,
A Will unruly, and a Spirit wild,
At all my precepts still with scorn he smiled;
Or when by th'power I from his Father had,
Any restraint was on his pleasures laid,
Ushered with frowns on me his soul would rise,
And threaten future vengeance from his Eyes:
But now to all my fears I bid adieu,
For Prince I'll humble both your Fate and you;
Here comes the Star by whom my course I steer,
Welcome my Love. --

My Lord why stay you here
Losing the pleasure of this happy night?
When all the Court are melting in delight,
You toil with the dull business of the State.

Only my fair one, how to make thee great:
Thou take up all the business of my heart,
And only to it pleasures can impart:
Say say, my Goddess, when shall I be blessed?
It is an Age since I was happy last.

My Lord I come not hither now to hear
Your love, but offer something to your Ear;
If you have well observed, you must have seen
To day some strange disorders in the Queen.

Yes such as Youthful Brides do still express,
Impatient Longings for the happiness;
Approaching Joys will so disturb the Soul,
As Needles always Tremble near the Pole.

Come, Come, my Lord: seem not so blind: too well
I've seen the Wrongs which you from Carlos feel.
And know your Judgment is too good, to loose
Advantage, where you may so safely choose.
Say now if I inform you, how you may
With full Revenge all your past Wrongs repay.

Blessed Oracle! speak how it may be done,
My will, my life, my hopes are all thy own.

Hence then and with your strictest cunning try
What of the Queen and Prince you can descry.
Watch every look, each quick, and subtle glance,
Then we will from all produce such Circumstance
As shall the King's new Jealousy advance.
Nay Sir, I'll try what mighty Love you show:
If you will make me great, begin it now.
How Sir! do you stand Consid'ring what to do?

No, but methinks I view from hence a King,
A Queen and Prince, three goodly Flowers spring,
Whilst on 'em like a subtle Be I'll prey,
Till to their Strength and Virtue drawn away,
Unable to recover each shall droop,
Grow pale and fading hang his Withered Top,
Then fraught with Thyme Triumphant back I'll come
And unlade all the precious sweets at home.

In thy fond policy Blind fool go on,
And make what hast thou can to be undone,
Whilst I have nobler business of my own.
Was I bred up in Greatness, have I been
Nurtured with glorious hopes to be a Queen?
Made love my study, and with Practiced Charms
Prepared my self to meet a Monarch's Arms?
At last to be Condemned to the Embrace
Of one, whom Nature made to her disgrace?
An old Imperfect feeble dotard, who
Can only tell Alas! what he would do?
On him to throw away my Youth, and Bloom,
As Jewels that are lost, t'enrich a Tomb?
No, though all hopes are in a husband dead,
Another path to happiness I'll tread,
Elsewhere find Joys which I*m in him denied:
Yet while he can let the slave serve my pride.
Still I'll in pleasure live, In Glory shine:
The gallant Youthful Austria shall be mine.
To him with all my force of Charms I'll move;
Let others toil for Greatness: whilst I love.

WHy should dull Law rule Nature, who first made
That Law, by which her self is now betrayed:
E're man's Corruptions made him wretched, he
Was born most noble that was born most free:
Each of himself was Lord; and unconfined
Obeyed the dictates of his Godlike mind.
Law was an Innovation brought in since,
When Fools began to love Obedience,
And called their slavery Safety and defence.
My Glorious Father got me in his heat,
When all he did was eminently great.
When Warlike Belgia felt his Conquering power,
And the proud Germans Owned him Emperor.
Why should it be A Stain upon my Blood
Because I came not in the Common Road,
But Born obscure and so more like a God.
No; Though his Diadem Another wear,
At least to all his Pleasures I'll be Heir.
Here I should meet my Eboli, my fair
She comes: As the Bright Cyprian Goddess moves,
When Loose and In her Chariot drawn by Doves,
She rides to meet the Warlike God she Loves.

Alas, my Lord, you know not with what fear
And Hazard, I am come to meet you here.

O banish it: Lovers like us should fly,
And mounted by their wishes soar on high,
Where softest ecstasies and Transports are,
While fear alone disturbs the Lower Air.

But who is safe when Eyes are Every where?
Or if we could with happiest secrecy
Enjoy these sweets; Oh whither shall we fly
T'Escape that sight whence we can nothing hide!

Alas lay this Religion now Aside,
I'll show thee one more pleasant, that which Jove
Set forth to the old World, when from above
He came himself and taught his Mortals Love.

Will nothing then Quench your unruly flame?
My Lord, you might consider who I am.

I know you're her I love, what should I more
Regard? --

-- By heaven he's brave --
But can so poor
A Thought possess your breast, to think that I
Will brand my name with Lust and Infamy.

Those that are noblest born, should highest prize
Loves sweets; Oh let me fly into those Eyes,
There's something in 'em leads my Soul astray,
As he who in a Negromancer's glass
Beholds his wished for fortune by him past,
Yet still with greedy Eyes --
Pursues the Vision as it glides away.

Protect me Heaven, I dare no longer stay,
Your looks speak danger: I feel something too
That bids me fly, yet will not let me go.

Take Vows and Prayers if ever I prove false,
See at your feet the humble Austria falls.

Rise, Rise
My Lord why would you thus deceive?

How many ways to wound me you contrive;
Speak, would thou have an Empire at thy feet?
Say, would thou rule the world? I'll Conquer it.

No above Empire far I could prize you,
If you would be but --

-- What?

-- For ever true.

That thou may ne'er have cause to fear those harms,
I'll be confined for ever in thy Arms;
Nay, I'll not one short minute from thee stray,
My self I'll on thy tender bosom lay,
Till in its warmth I'm melted all away.

Madam, Your Lord --

-- Oh! fly or I'm undone:

Must I without my blessing then be gone?

Think you that this discretion merits one?

I'm awed --
As a sick wretch that on his death-bed lies
Loath with his friends to part, just as he dies,
Thus sends his Soul in wishes from his eyes.

Oh Heaven! what charms in youth and vigour are?
Yet he in Conquest is not gone too far;
Too easily I'll not my self resign,
E're I am his, I'll make him surely mine;
Draw him by subtle baits into the Trap,
Till he's too far got in to make escape,
About him swiftly the soft snare I'll cast,
And when I have him there I'll hold him fast.

Thus unaccompanied I subtly range
The Solitary paths of dark revenge:
The fearful Deer in herds to Coverts run,
Whilst Beasts of prey affect to Roam alone.

Ah! my dear Lord, how do you spend your hours?
You little think what my poor heart endures;
Whilst with your absence tortured, I in vain
Pant after joys I ne'er can hope to gain.

You cannot my unkindness sure upbraid;
You should forgive those faults your self have made:
Remember you the task you gave? --

-- 'Tis true,
Your pardon, for I do remember now:
If I forgot, 'twas love had all my mind,
And 'tis no sin I hope to be too kind.

How happy am I in a faithful Wife!
Oh! thou most precious blessing of my Life!

Does then success attend upon your toil?
I long to see you Revel in the spoil.

What strictest diligence could do, I've done,
T'incense an angry Father against his Son;
I to advantage told him all that past,
Described with Art, each Amorous glance they cast;
So that this night he shunned the marriage bed,
Which through the Court has various murmurs spread.
See where he comes with fury in his Eyes,
Kind Heaven but grant the storm may higher rise;
If it grow too loud I'll lurk in some dark Cell,
And laugh to hear my Magic work so well.

What's all my Glory? all my Pomp? how poor
Is fading greatness, or how vain is power:
Where all the mighty Conquests I have seen?
I who over Nations have Victorious been,
Now cannot quell one little Foe within.
Cursed Jealousy; that poisons all Loves sweets,
How heavy on my heart th'invader sits:
Oh! Gomez thou hast given my mortal wound:

What is't does so your royal thoughts confound?
A King his power unbounded ought to have,
And ruling all, should not be passions slave.

Thou counsell'st well, but art no stranger sure
To the sad cause of what I now endure.
Know thou what Poison thou did lately give?
And dost not wonder to behold me live?

I only did as by my duty tied,
And never studied any thing beside.

I do not blame thy duty or thy Care;
Quickly what past between 'em more declare.
How greedily my Soul to ruin flies,
As he who in a Fever burning lies,
First of his Friends does for a drop implore,
Which tasted once unable to give 'ore:
Knows 'tis his bane, yet still thirsts after more.
On then --

-- I fear that you'll Interpret wrong!
'Tis true, they gazed, but 'twas not very long.

Lye still my heart; not long was't that you said?

No longer then they in your presence staid.

No longer! why a Soul in less time flies
To Heaven: and they have changed theirs at their Eyes.
Hence abject fears begone: she's all divine:
Speak Friends, can Angels in perfection sin?

Angels that shine above do oft bestow
Their Influence on poor Mortals here below.

But Carlos is my Son, and always near;
Seems to move with me in my glorious Sphere.
True, she may shower promiscuous blessings down
On slaves that gaze for what falls from a Crown.
But when too kindly she his brightness sees,
It robs my Lustre to add more to his:
But oh I dare not think --
That those Eyes should at least so humble be,
To stoop at him when they had vanquished me.

Sir, I*am proud to think I know the Prince,
That he of Virtue has too great a sense
To cherish but a thought beyond the bound
Of strictest duty: He to me has Owned
How much was to his former passion due,
Yet still confessed he above all prizd you.

You better reconcile Sir, then advise;
Be not more Charitable then you're wise:
The King is sick, and we should give him Ease,
But first find out the depth of his Disease:
Too sudden cures have oft pernicious grown,
We must not heal up festered wounds too soon.

By this then you a power would over me gain;
Wounding to let me linger in the pain:
I*m stung, and won't the torture long endure;
Serpents that wound, have blood those wounds to cure.

Good Heaven forbid that I should ever dare
To Question Virtue in a Queen so fair.
Though she her Eyes cast on her Glorious Sun,
Men oft see Treasures and yet covet none.

Think not to blind me with dark Ironies,
The Truth disguised in Obscure Contraries.
No, I will trace his windings, All her dark
And subtlest paths, Each little Action mark:
If she prove false as yet I fear she dyes:
Ha! here! oh let me turn away my Eyes.
For all around she'll her bright beams display:
Should I to gaze on the wild Meteor stay,
'Spight of my self I shall be led astray.

How scornfully he is withdrawn!
Sure e're his Love he would let me know his power:
As Heaven oft Thunders here it send a shower.
This Spanish Gravity is very odd
All things are by severity so Awed,
That little Love dares hardly peep abroad.

Alas, what can you from old age expect,
When frail uneasy men themselves neglect?
Some little warmth perhaps may be behind,
Though such as in extinguished fires you'll find.
Where some remains of heat the ashes hold,
Which (if for more you open) staight are cold.

'Twas Interest and Safety of the State;
Interest that bold Imposer on our fate:
That always to dark Ends misguides our wills,
And with false happiness smooths over our ills.
It was by that unhappy France was led,
When though by Contract I should Carlos wed,
I was an Offering made to Philip's Bed.
Why sigh thou Henrietta?

Who is it can
Know your sad fate and yet from grief refrain?
With pleasure oft I've heard you smiling tell
Of Carlos Love.

-- And did it please you well?
In that brave Prince's Courtship there did meet
All that we could obliging call or sweet.
At every point he with advantage stood:
Fierce as a Lyon if provoked abroad;
Else, soft as Angels, Charming as a God.

One so Accomplished! and who loved you too!
With what resentments must he part with you?
Methinks I pity him. -- But oh in vain!
He's both above my pity and my pain.

What means this strange disorder?

-- Yonder view,
That which I fear will discompose you too.

Alas! the Prince! there to my mind appears
Something that in me moves unusual fears:
Away Henrietta. --

-- Why would you begone?
Is Carlos sight ungrateful to you grown.
If 'tis, speak. In Obedience I'll retire.

No, you may speak, but must advance no nigher.

Must I then at that Awful distance sue,
As our forefathers were Compelled to do
When they petitions made at that great Shrine,
Where none but the High Priest might enter in?
Let me approach; I ve nothing for your Ear,
But what's so pure it might be Offered there.

Too long 'tis dangerous for me here to stay;
If you must speak, proceed: What would you say?
Nay this strange Ceremony pray give ore.

Was I n'er in this posture seen before?
Ah can your cruel heart so soon resign
All sense of these sad sufferings of mine?
To your more just remembrance if you can
Recall how fate seemed kindly to ordain,
That once you should be mine: which I believed,
Though now alas! I find I was deceived.

Then Sir you should your Fate, not me upbraid.

I will not say you've broke the vows you made,
Only implore you would not quite forget
The Wretch ya've oft seen dying at your feet;
And now no other favour begs to have,
Then such Kind pity as becomes your slave.
For amidst your highest Joys, without a Crime
At least you now and then may think of him.

If e're you loved me you would this forbear;
It is a Language which I dare not hear:
My Heart and Faith become your Fathers right,
All other passions I must now forget.

Can then a Crown and Majesty dispense
Upon your heart such mighty Influence,
That I must be for ever banished thence.
Had I been raised to all the heights of power,
In Triumph Crowned the Worlds great Emperor:
Of all its riches, all its State possessed,
Yet you should still have governed in my breast.

In vain on her you obligations lay,
Who wants not will, but power to repay.

Yet had you Henrietta's heart, you would
At least strive to afford him all you could.

Oh say not you want power, you may with one
Kind look, pay doubly all I've undergone.
And knew you but the Innocence I bear,
How pure, how spotless all my wishes are;
You would not scruple to supply my want,
When all I'll ask you may so safely grant.

I know not what to grant, too well I find
That still at least I cannot be unkind.

Afford me then that little which I crave:

You shall not want what I may let you have.

Like one --
That sees a heap of Gems before him cast,
Thence to choose any that may please him best:
From the rich Treasure whilst I choice should make,
Dazzel^d withal I know not where to take*
I would be rich --

-- Nay you too far encroach,
I fear I have already given too much.

Oh take not back again th'appearing bliss;
How difficult's the path to happiness!
Whilst up the Precipice we climb with pain,
One little slip throws us quite down again.
Stay, Madam, though you nothing more can give,
Then just enough to keep a wretch alive;
At least remember how I've loved --

-- I will.

That was so kind, that I must beg more still.
Let me love on, it is a very poor
And easy grant, yet I'll request no more.

Do you believe that you can love retain,
And not expect to be beloved again.

Yes I will love, and think I'm happy too,
So long as I can find that you are so:
All my disquiets banish from my breast;
I will endeavour to do so at least.
Or if I can't my miseries out-wear,
They never more shall come t'offend your Ear.

Love then Brave Prince, whilst I'll thy Love admire
Yet keep the Fame so pure, such chaste desire,
That without spot hereafter we above
May meet when we shall come all soul all love.
Till when -- Oh whither am I run astray!
I grow too weak and must no longer stay:
For should I, the soft charm so strong would grow,
I find that I should want the power to go.

Oh Sweet --
If such transport be in a taste so small,
How blessed must he be that possesses all!
Where am I Posa? Where's the Queen?

-- My Lord,
A while some respite to your heart afford,
The Queen's retired --

-- Retired! and did she then,
Just show me Heaven, to shut it in again?
This little ease augments my pain the more;
For now, I'm more Impatient than before,
And have discovered Riches, make me mad.

But since those Treasures are no^ to be had,
You should correct desires that drive you on,
Beyond that duty which becomes a Son:
No longer let the Tyrant Love Invade,
The Brave may by themselves be happy made.
You to your Father now must all resign.

But e're he robbed me of her she was mine.
To be my Friend is all thou hast to do:
For half my miseries thou can not know:
Make my self happy! bid the damned do so;
Who in sad Flames, must be for ever tossed,
Yet still in view of the loved Hea'vn you have lost.

HOw vainly would dull Moralists Impose
Limits on Love, whose Nature brooks no Laws:
Love is a God, and like a God should be
Inconstant: with unbounded liberty
Rove as he list --
I find it: for even now I've had a Feast,
Of which a God might Covet for a taste.
Methinks I yet --
See with what soft devotion in her eyes,
The tender Lamb came to the Sacrifice.
Oh how her Charms, surprised me as I lay!
Like too near sweets they took my sense away:
And I even lost the power to reach at Joy.
But those cross withcrafts soon unravelled were,
And I was lulled in Trances sweeter far:
As Anchored Vessels in Calm Harbours ride,
Rock't on the swellings of the floating Tide.
How wretched then's the man who though alone
He thinks he's blessed; yet as Confined to one,
Is but at best a prisoner on a Throne.

Ye mighty Powr's! whose substitutes we are,
On whom you've lain of Earth the rule and care:
Why all our Toils do you reward with ill?
And to those Weighty Cares add Greater still?
Or how could I your Deities enrage,
That bles't my youth, thus to afflict my age!
A Queen and a Son's Incest! dismal Thought!

What is't so soon his Majesty has brought
From the soft Arms of his young Bride?

-- Ay true.
Is she not Austria young and Charming too?
Dost thou not think her to a wonder fair?
Tell me. --

-- By Heaven more bright than Planets are;
Her Beauties force might even their power Out-do.

Nay she's as false and as unconstant too.
Oh Austria, that a form so outward bright,
Should be within all dark and ugly night.
For she, to whom I'd dedicated all
My Love, that dearest Jewel of my Soul:
Takes from its shrine the precious Relic down,
To adorn a little Idol of her Own,
My Son! That Rebel both to Heaven and me!
Oh the distracting throws of Jealousy!
But as a drowning wretch just like to sink,
Seeing him that threw him in upon the brink:
At the third plunge lays hold upon his Foe,
And tugs him down into destruction too.
So thou from whom these miseries I've known,
Shall bear me out again, or with me drown.

My Loyalty will teach me how to wait
All the Successes of my Soveraign's fate.
What is't, Great Sir, you would command me!

How! --
-- What is't? -- I know not what I'd have thee do;
Study revenge for me, 'tis that I want.

Alas! what frenzy does your temper haunt!
Revenge! on whom!

On my false Queen and Son.

On them! good heaven what is't that they have done,
Oh had my tongue been cursed e're it had bred
This Jealousy --

-- Then cancel what tha'st said.
Did thou not tell me, that thou saw him stand,
Printing soft vows, in kisses on her hand:
Whilst in requital she such glances gave,
Would quicken a Dead Lover in his Grave.

I did: and what less could the Queen allow
To him, then you to every vassal show:
Th'affording him that little from Loves store,
Implied that she for you reserved much more.

Oh doubtless she must have a woundrous store
Of Love, that sells it at a rate so poor.
Now Thoud'st rebate my passion with advise,
And when thou should be active, would be wise,
No, lead me where I may their Incest see.
Do: or by heaven -- do and I'll worship Thee!
Oh how my Passions drive me to and fro!
Under their heavy weight, I yield and bow.
But I'll regather yet my strength, and stand
Brandishing all my Thunder in my hand.

And may it be sent forth and where it goes,
Light fatally and heavy on your foes.
But let your Loyal Son, and Consort, bear
No ill, since they of any guiltless are.
Here with my Sword defiance I proclaim,
To that bold Traitor, that dares wrong their fame.

I too, dare with my life their Cause make good.

Sure well their Innocence you've understood,
That you so prodigal are of your blood.
Or would thou speak me comfort? I would find
Amongst all my Councellors at least one kind.
Yet any thing like that I must not hear,
(Or so my wrongs I should too tamely bear)
And weakly grow my own fond flatterer.
Posa, withdraw --
My Lords, all this y'have heard.

Yes, I observed it Sir, with strict regard.
The Young Lord's Friendship was too great to hide.

Is he then so to my false Son allied?
I am environed every way, and all
My Eats unhappy Engines plot my fall,
Like Caesar in the Senate, thus I stand,
Whilst ruin threatened him on every hand.
From each side he had warning he must dye;
Yet still he braved his Fate, and so will I.
To strive for ease would but add more to pain,
As streams that beat against their banks in vain
Retreating swell into a Flood again.
No, I'll do things the World shall quake to hear,
My just revenge so true a stamp shall bear.
As henceforth Heaven it self shall emulate,
And copy all its vengeance out by that.
All but Rui-Gomez I must have withdrawn,
I've something to discourse with him alone.
Now Gomez on thy truth depends thy fate,
Thou'st wrought my sense of Wrong to such a height:
Within my breast it will no longer stay,
But grows each minute till it force its way.
I would not find my self at last deceived.

Nor would I against your reason be believed;
Think Sir your Jealousy to be but fear
Of loosing treasures which you hold so dear:
Your Queen and Son may yet be innocent,
I know but what they did, not what they meant.

Meant? what should looks and sighs and pressings mean?
No, no: I need not hear it over again.
No repetitions -- something must be done.
Now there's no ill I know that I would shun.
I'll fly till them I've in their Incest found
Full charged with rage and with my vengeance hot,
Like a Granado from a Cannon shot,
Which lights at last upon the Enemies ground,
Then breaking deals destruction all around.

So! now his Jealousy is at the Top;
Each little blast will serve to keep it up.
But stay; there's something I've omitted yet,
Posa's my Enemy: and true he's great.
Alas! I'm armed against all that he can do;
For my snare's large enough to hold him too.
Yet, I'll disguise that purpose for a while:
But when he with the rest is caught in the Toil,
I'll boldly out and wanton in the spoil.

My Lord Rui-Gomez! and the King not here!
You who so eminent a Favourite are.
In a King's Eye, should ne'er be absent thence.

No Sir! 'tis you that by a rising Prince
Are cherished, and so tread a safer way:
Rich in that bliss the World waits to enjoy.

Since what may bless the World we ought to prize,
I wish there were no public enemies.
No lurking Serpents poison to dispense,
Nor Wolves to prey on noble Innocence.
No flatterers that with Royal goodness sport,
Those stinking weeds that over-run a Court.

Nay; if good wishes any thing could do;
I have as earnest wishes Sir as you.
That though perhaps our King enjoys the best
Of power, yet may he still be doubly blessed.
May lie --

Nay Gomez you shall ne'er out-do me there;
Since for Great Philip's good I would you were
(If possible) more honest then you are.

Why Posa; what defect can you discern?

Nay half your mysteries I'm yet to learn:
Though this I'll boldly justify to all,
That you contrive a generous Prince's fall.
Nay think not by your smiles, and careless port,
To laugh it off: I come not here to sport.
I do not Sir.

Young Lord! what meaning has
This heat?

To let you see I know you're base.

Nay then I pardon ask that I did smile,
By heaven I thought, you'd jested all this while.
Base! --

Yes! more base then impotent or old,
All virtue in thee, like thy blood, runs cold;
Thy rotten putrid Carcase is less full,
Of Rancor and Contagion then thy Soul.
Even now, before the King I saw it plain,
But duty to that Presence awed me then;
Yet there I dared thy Treason with my Sword,
But still --
Thy Villainy talked all; Courage had not a word.
True thou art old; yet if thou hast a Friend,
To whom thy Cursed Cause thou dare commend;
Against him in public I'll the Innocence
Maintain, of the fair Queen, and injured Prince.

Farewell bold Champion --
Learn better how your passions to disguise,
Appear less Choleric, and be more wise.

How frail is all the glory we design?
Whilst such as these have power to undermine.
Unhappy Prince who might have safely stood,
If thou had been less great, or not so good.
Why the vile Monster's blood did I not shed,
And all the vengeance draw on my own head?
My honour so, had had this just defence.
That I preserved my Patron and my Prince.
Brave Carlos! ha! he's here! O Sir take heed.
By an unlucky Fate your Love is led;
The King, the King your Father's jealous grown,
Forgetting her, his Queen, or you his Son,
Calls all his vengeance up, against you both.

Has then the false Rui-Gomez broke his Oath?
And after all, my Innocence betrayed?

Yes? all his subtlest snares are for you laid,
The King within this minute will be here,
And you are ruined if but seen with her;
Retire my Lord. --

How! is he jealous grown!
I thought my Virtue he had better known.
His unjust doubts have soon found out the way,
To make their entry on our Marriage day:
For yet he has not with me known a night;
Perhaps his Tyranny is his delight.
And to such height his Cruelty is grown,
He'd Exercise it on his Queen and Son.
But since my Lord, this time we must obey,
Our Interest; I beg you would not stay.
Not seeing you he may to me be just.

Should I then leave you, Madam?

Yes! you must.

Not then, when storms against your Virtue rise!
No, since to lose you, wretched Carlos dies,
He'll have the honour of it, in your Cause.
This is the noblest thing that Fate could do,
She thus abates the rigour of her Laws.
Since 'tis some pleasure but to dye for you.

Talk not of death, for that even Cowards dare,
When their base fears compel em to despair.
Hope's the far nobler passion of the Mind,
Fortune's a Mistress that's with Caution kind,
Knows that the constant merit her alone;
They, who though she seem froward, yet court on.

To wretched minds thus still some comfort gleams,
And Angels ease our griefs though but with dreams:
I have too oft already been de^eiv'd,
And the Cheats grown too plain to be believed*
You Madam, bid me go.

You must.

You shall;
Alas I love you, would not see you fall:
And yet may find some way t'evade it all.

Thou Posa ever wert' my truest Friend,
I almost wish thou were not now so kind;
Thou, of a thing that's lost take too much care;
And you fair Angel too indulgent are.
Great my despair; yet still my Love is higher --
Well -- in obedience to you I'll retire.
Though during all the Storm I will be nigh,
Where if I see the danger grow too high,
To save you Madam, I'll come forth and and dye.

Who would have guess't that this had ever been?
Distraction! where shall my revenge begin?
Why he's the very Bawd to all their sin?
And to disguise it put's on Friendships mask,
But his Dispatch, Rui-Gomez is thy task;
With him pretend some private conference,
And under that disguise seduce him hence;
Then in some place fit for the Deed impart
The business by a Poniard to his Heart.

'Tis done.

So Madam! --

-- By the fury in your eyes,
I understand you come to tyrannize.
I hear you are already Jealous grown,
And dare suspect my Virtue with your Son.

Oh Woman-kind! thy Myst'ries! who can scan
Too deep for easy weak believing man!
Hold! let me look! indeed you're wondrous fair,
So on the out-side Sodoms Apples were.
And yet within, when opened to the view,
Not half so dangerous, or so foul, as you.

Unhappy Wretched Woman that I am,
And you unworthy of a Husband's name?
Do you not blush? --

Yes Madam for your shame.
Blush too my Judgment e're should prove so faint,
To let me choose a Devil for a Saint.
When first I saw, and loved, that tempting eye,
The Fiend within the flame I did not spy;
But still ran on and Cherished my desires:
For heavenly Beams mistook Infernal fires.
Such raging fires, as you have since thought fit
Alone my Son, my Son's hot Youth, should meet.
Oh Vengeance, Vengeance! --

-- Poor Ungenerous King!
How mean's the Soul from which such thoughts must spring!
Was it for this I did so late submit,
To let you whine and languish at my feet?
When with false Oaths you did my heart beguile,
And proffered all your Empire for a smile.
Then, then, my freedom 'twas I did resign,
Though you still swore you would preserve it mine.
And still it shall be so: For from this hour
I vow to hate, and never see you more.
Nay frown not Philip, for you soon shall know
I can resent and rage as well as you.

By Hell her pride's as Raging as her lust:
A Guard there -- Seize the Queen --

-- Hold Sir be Just.
First look on me whom once You called your Son.
A Title I was always proud to own.

Good Hea'vn to merit this what have I done?
That he too dares before my sight appear.

Why Sir, where is the Cause that I should fear?
Bold in my Innocence, I come to know
The reason, why you use this Princess so.

Sure I shall find some way to raise this siege:
He talks as if 'twere for his Privilege.
Foul ravisher of all my Honour hence:
But stay: Guards with the Queen secure the Prince.
Wherefore in my Revenge should I be slow?
Now in my reach, I'll dash 'em at a Blow.

I come Great Sir, with wonder here, to see
Your rage grown up to this Extremity
Against your beauteous Queen, and Loyal Son.
What is't that they to merit Chains have done?
Or is't your own wild Jealousy alone?

Oh Austria thy vain Enquiry Cease,
If thou hast any value for thy peace;
My mighty Wrongs so loud an accent bear;
'Twould make thee miserable but to hear.

Father, if I may dare to call you so,
Since now I doubt if I'm your Son or no:
As you have sealed my doom I may Complain.

Will then that Monster dare to speak again?

Yes: dying men should not their thoughts disguise;
And since You take such Joy in Cruelties;
E're of my death the new delight begin,
Be pleased to hear how cruel You have been.
Time was that we were smiled on by our fate,
You not Unjust, nor I unfortunate.
Then, then, I was your Son, and you were glad
To hear my early praise was talked abroad.
Then Loves dear sweets you to me would display,
Told me where this rich Beauteous Treasure lay,
And how to gain't instructed me the way.
I came, and saw, and loved, and blessed you for it.
But then when Love had sealed her to my heart,
You Violently tore her from my side:
And because my Bleeding Wound I could not hide,
But still some pleasure to behold her took;
You now will have my life but for a look.
Wholly forgetting all the pains I bore,
Your heart with envious Jealousy boils ore,
Because I can love no less, and you no more.

Alas! how can you hear his soft Complaint,
And not your hardened stubborn heart relent?
Turn Sir, survey that comely awful man,
And to my Prayers be cruel if you can.

Away deluder: who taught thee to sue?

Loving the Queen what is't she less can do,
Then lend her aid against the dreadful storm?

Why can the Devil dwell too in that form?
This is their little Engine by the by,
A Scout to watch, and tell when danger's nigh.
Come pretty sinner Thou'st inform me all,
How, where, and when, nay do not fear -- you shall

Ah Sir Unkind! --

-- Now hold thy Sirens Tongue.
Who would have thought there were a Witch so young?

Can you to suing Beauty stop your Ears?
Hea'vn lays its Thunder by, and gladly hears
When Angels are become petitioners.

Ha! what makes Austria so officious there!
That glance seems as it sent his heart to her.

A Banquet then of blood since you design,
Yet you may satisfy your self with mine.
I love the Queen, I have confessed 'tis true:
Proud too to think I love her more than you;
Though she by Heaven is clear -- but I indeed
Have been unjust, and do deserve to bleed.
There were no lawless thoughts that I did want,
Which Love had power to ask, or Beauty grant.
Though I ne'er yet found hopes to raise 'em on,
For she did still preserve her Honours Throne:
And dashed the bold aspiring Devil's down.
If to her Cause you do not credit give
Fondly against your happiness you'll strive,
As some loose Heaven because they won't believe.

Whilst Prince, my preservation you design,
Blot not your Virtue to add more to mine.
The clearness of my truth I'd not have shown,
By any other light besides its Own,
No Sir, he through despair all this has said,
And owns Offences which he never made.
Why should you think that I would do you wrong?
Must I needs be Unchaste because I'm young?

Unconstant Wav'ring heart why heav'st thou so?
I shiver all, and know not what I do.
I who e're now have Armies led to fight,
Thought War a Sport, and danger a delight*
Whole Winter nights stood under Heavens wide roof
Daring my foes: now am not Beauty proof.
Oh turn away those Basilisks thy Eyes,
Th'Infection's fatal, and who sees 'em, dyes.

Oh do not fly me; I have no design
Upon your life, for You may yet save mine.
Or if at last I must my Breath submit,
Here take it, 'tis an off'ring at your feet.
Will you not look on me my dearest Lord?

Why would Thou live! --

Yes, if You'll say the Word.

Oh Heav^n! how Coldly, and unmoved, he sees
A praying Beauty prostrate on her knees!
Rise Madam --

-- Bold Encroacher touch her not:
Into my breast her glances thick are shot.
Not true? -- stay let me see, -- By Heaven Thou art
-- A false Vile Woman -- Oh my foolish heart!
I give thee life -- But from this time refrain,
And never come into my sight again:
Be banished ever. --

-- This you must not do,
At least till I've convinced you I am true.
Grant me but so much time, and when that's done,
If you think sit, for ever I'll be gone.

I've all this while been angry but in vain;
She heats me first, then strokes me tame again.
Oh were thou true how happy should I be!
Think Thou that I have Joy to part with thee?
No, all my Kingdom for the bliss I'd give:
Nay though it were not so but to believe.
Come, for I can't avoid it, Cheat me quite.

I would not Sir deceive you if I might,
But if you'll take my Oaths; by all above
'Tis you, and only you that I will love.

Thus as a Mariner that sails along,
With pleasure hears th'enticing Sirens Song,
Unable quite his strong desires to bound,
Boldly leaps in though certain to be drowned.
Come to my bosom then; make no delay:
My rage is hushed, and I have room for Joy.

Again, you'll think that I unjust will prove?

No Thou art all over truth, and I all love.
Oh that we might for ever thus remain
In folded Arms, and never part again!

Command me any thing, and try your power.

Then from this minute ne'er see Carlos more.
Thou slave that dare do ill with such a port,
For ever here I banish thee my Court.
Within some Cloister lead a private life:
That I may love and rule without this strife.
Here Eboli receive her to thy Charge.
The Treasure's precious, and the trust is large,
Whilst I retiring hence, my self make fit
To wait for Joys, which are too sierce to meet.

My Exile from his presence I can hear
With pleasure; But no more to look on her!
Oh 'tis a dreadful Curse I cannot bear!
No Madam, all his power shall nothing do:
I'll stay, and take my Banishment from you.
Do you Command me, see how far I'll fly.

Will Carlos be at last my Enemy?
Consider this submission I have shown;
More to preserve your safety then my own?
Ungratefully you needless ways devise
To loose a life, which I so dearly prize.

So; now her fortune's made: and I am left
Alone, a naked wanderer to shift:
Madam you might have spared the Cruelty;
Blessed with your sight I was prepared to die:
But now to loose it drives me to despair;
Making me wish to die, and yet not dare.
Well, to some solitary shore I'll roam,
And never more into your presence come:
Since I already find I'm Troublesome.

Stay, Sir, Yet stay: -- You shall not leave me so.

Ha! --

-- I must talk with you before you go.
Oh Carlos how unhappy is our state?
How foul a game was played us by our Fate!
Who promised fair when we did first Begin,
'Till Envying to see us like to Win:
Straight Fell to Cheat, and threw the false Lot in.
My Vows to You I now remember all.

Oh Madam, I can hear no more. --

-- You shall. --
For I can't choose but let you know, that I
If you'll resolve on it Yet will with you die.

Sure nobler gallantry was never known
Good Heaven! this Blessing is too much for one
No, 'tis enough for me to die alone.
My Father, all my foes I now forgive.

Nay Sir by all our Loves I charge You live;
But to what Country, Wheresoever You go,
Forget not me, for I'll remember You.

Shall I such Virtue, and such Charms forget?
No, never --

-- Oh that we had never met.
But in our distant Clymates still been free!
I might have heard of you, and you of me:
So towards happiness more safely moved;
And never been thus wretched, Yet have loved.
What makes you look so wildly? -- why do you start?

A faint cold damp is Thick'ning round my heart.

What shall we do? --

-- Do any thing but part.
Or stay so long till my poor Soul expires:
In View of all the Glory it admires.

In such a Lover how might I be bles't!
Oh were I of that noble Heart possessed,
How soft, how easy would I make his bands!
But Madam, You forgot the King's Commands:
Longer to stay your dangers You'll Renew.

Ah Princess! Lovers pains you never knew;
Or what it is to part as we must do.
Part too for ever! --
After one Minute, never more to stand
Fixed on those Eyes, or pressing this soft hand;
'Twere but enough to feed on, and not starve:
Yet that is more than I did e're deserve.
Though fate to us is niggardly and poor;
That from Eternity can't spare one hour.

If it were had, that hour would soon be gone,
And we should wish to draw another on.
No, Rigorous necessity has made
Us both his slaves; and now will be obeyed.
Come let us try the parting blow to bear.
Adieu. --

Farewell.
-- I'm fixed and rooted here,
I cannot stir --

Shall I the way then show?
Now, hold my heart! --
-- Nay Sir, why don't you go?

Why do you stay? --

I won't. --

-- You shall a while
With one look more my Miseries beguile,
That may support my heart 'till you are gone.

Oh Eboli thy help or I'm undone!
Here take it then, and with it too my life.

My Courage with my Tortures is at strife:
Since my griefs Cowards are, and dare not kill,
I'll try to vanquish, and out-toyl the ill.
Well Madam, now I'm something hardier grown;
Since I at last perceive you must be gone:
To venture the Encounter I'll be bold,
For Certainly my heart will so long hold.
Farewell -- be happy as y are fair and true.

And all Heavens kindest Angels wait on You.

Thus long I wandered in Loves crooked way,
By hope's deluding Meteor, led astray:
For e're I've half the dang^rous desert crossed,
The glimmering light's gone out, and I am lost.

THe next is the Apartment of the Queen;
In vain I try, I must not venture in.
Thus is it with the Souls of murdered men;
Who to their Bodies would again repair,
But finding that they cannot enter there,
Mourning and groaning wander in the Air.
Robbed of my Love, and as unjustly thrown
From all those hopes that promised me a Crown,
My heart, with the Dishonour's to me done,
Is poisoned, swells too mighty for my breast;
But it will break, and I shall be at rest.
No: Dull despair this Soul shall never Load,
Though Patience be the Virtue of a God:
Gods never feel the ills that govern here,
Or are above the Injuries we bear.
Father! and King! both names bear mighty sense:
Yet sure there's something too in Son, and Prince.
I was born high, and will not fall less great,
Since Triumph Crowned my Birth! I'll have my Fate,
As Glorious and Magestick too, as that.
To Flanders Posa, strait my Letters send,
Tell 'em the injured Carlos is their Friend.
And that to head their Forces I design,
So vindicate their Cause, if they dare mine.

To th'Rebels! --

No they are Friends, their Cause is just,
Or when I make it mine, at least, it must;
Let th'Common Rout like Beasts Love to be Dull,
Whilst sordidly they live at ease and full!
Senseless what Honour or Ambition means,
And ignorantly dragg their Load of Chains.
I am a Prince have had a Crown in view,
And cannot brook to loose the prospect now;
If you are my Friend, do not my will delay.

I'll do it. --

My Lord!

Who calls me?

You must stay.

What news of fresh affliction can you bear?

Suppose it were the Queen, you'd stay for her?

For Her! Yes, stay an Age, for ever stay.
Stay even till time it self should pass away!
Fix here a Statue never to remove,
An everlasting Monument of Love.
Though, may a thing so wretched as I am,
But the least place in her remembrance claim?

Yes, if you dare believe me Sir you do;
We both can talk of nothing else but you:
Whilst from the theme even Emulation springs,
Each striving who shall say the kindest things.

But from that Charity I poorly live,
Which only pities and can nothing give.

Nothing! propose! what 'tis you claim, and I,
For ought you know may be security.

No Madam! what's my due none e're can pay,
There stands that Angel Honour in the way
Watching his Charge with never sleeping eyes,
And stops my Entrance into Paradise.

What Paradise! what Pleasures can you know
Which are not in my power to bestow?

Love! Love! and all those eager melting charms,
The Queen must yield when in my Father's arms.
That Queen so excellently richly fair,
Jove could he come again a Lover here
Would Court Mortality to die for her.
Oh Madam! take not pleasure to renew
Those pains which if you felt you would not do.

Unkindly urged: think you no sense I have
Of what you feel? Now you may take your Leave;
Something I had to say, but let it die.

Why Madam, who has injured you? not I.

Nay Sir! your presence I would not Detain!
Alas! you do not hear that I complain!
Though could you half of my Misfortunes see,
Methinks you should incline to pity me.

I cannot guess what mournful tale you'd tell;
But I am certain you prepare me well.
Speak Madam! --

Say I loved, and with a flame
Which even melts my tender heart to name;
Loved too a man! I will not say ingrate,
Because he's far above my Birth or Fate.
Yet so far He at least does cruel prove,
He prosecutes a dead and hopeless Love.
Starves on a barren Rock, and won't be blessed,
Though I invite him kindly to a Feast.

What stupid Animal could senseless lye,
Quickened by beams from that Illustrious eye!

Nay to increase your wonder you shall know
That I, alas! am forced to tell him too:
Till even I blush as now I tell it you.

You neither shall have cause of shame or fear,
Whose Secrets safe within my Bosom are.

Then farther I the riddle may explain,
Survey that Face, and blame me if you can!

Distraction on my eyes what have they seen!
'Tis my own Picture which I sent the Queen.
When to her Fame I paid Devotion first,
Expecting bliss but lost it I am curs't.
Cursed too in thee, who from my Saint dare steal
The only Relic left her of my Zeal!
And with the Sacriledg attempt my heart,
Were it thou more charming than thou think thou art!
Almighty Love preserves the Fort for her,
And bids defiance to thy Entrance there.

Neglected! scorned! by Father and by Son;
What a malicious course my Stars have run?
But since I meet with such unlucky Fate
In love; I'll try how I can thrive in hate.
My own dull Husband may assist in that:
To his revenge I*le give him fresh alarms,
And with the gray old Wizard muster charms
I hav't: Thanks, thanks Revenge: Prince 'tis thy bane!
Can you forgive me Sir? I hope you can,
I'll try to recompense the wrongs I've done,
And better finish what is ill begun.

Madam! you at so strange a rate proceed,
I shall begin to think you Loved indeed.

No matter! be but to my Honour true,
As you shall ever find I'll be to you.
The Queens my charge, and you may on that score,
Presume that you shall see her yet once more.
I'll lead you to those so much worshipped charms;
And yield you to my happy Rivals arms.

In what a mighty Sum shall I be bound,
I did not think such Virtue could be found.
Thou Mistress of all best perfections stay?
Fain I in gratitude would something say!
But am too far in Debt for thanks to pay.

Where is that Prince, He whose afflictions speak,
So loud as all Hearts but his own might break!

My Lord! what Fate has left me I am here
Mere man; of all my comforts strip't, and bare:
Once like a Vine I flourish't, and was young,
Rich in my ripening hopes that spoke me strong.
But now a dry and withered stock am grown:
And all my Clusters and my Branches gone.

Amongst those numbers which your wrongs deplore,
Then me, there's none that can resent em more.
I feel a generous grudging in my breast,
To see such honour and such hopes oppressed.
The King your Father is my Brother, true,
But I see more that's like my self in you.
Freeborn I am, and not on him depend:
Obliged to none but whom I call my Friend.
And if that Title you think fit to bear,
Accept the Confirmation of it here.

From you, to whom I'm by such Kindness tied,
The secrets of my Soul I will not hide.
This generous Princess has her promise given,
I once more shall be brought in sight of Heaven.
To the fair Queen my last Devotion pay,
And then for Flanders I intend my way.
Where to th'insulting Rebels I'll give Law,
To keep my self from wrongs, and them in awe.

Prosperity to the Design, 'Tis good;
Both worthy of your Honour and your Blood.

My Lord, your spreading Glories flourish high,
Above the reach or shock of Destiny;
Mine early nip't like Buds untimely dye.

My Lord! I grieve to tell what you must hear,
They are unwelcome Orders which I bear,
Which are to guard you as a Prisoner.

A prisoner! what new game of Fate's begun?
Henceforth be ever curs't the name of Son:
Since I must be a Slave because I'm one.
Duty! to whom? He's not my Father: no:
Back with your Orders to the Tyrant go,
Tell him his Fury drives too much one way;
I'm weary on it, and can no more obey.

If asked by whose Commands you did decline
Your Orders, Tell my Brother, 'Twas by mine.

Now were I certain it would sink me quite;
I'd see the Queen once more Though but in spite.
Though He wish all his fury were in place,
I would caress and court her to his face.
Oh that I could this minute die, if so
What he had lost he might too lately know,
Cursing himself to think what he has done:
For I was ever an obedient Son.
With pleasure all his glories saw when young,
Looked and with pride consid'ring whence I sprung.
Joyfully under him and free I played
Baskt in his shine and wantoned in his shade --
But now --
Cancelling all what e're he then conferred
He thrusts me out among the common Herd.
Nor quietly will there permit my stay
But drives and hunts me like a Beast of prey,
Affliction! Oh affliction! 'tis too great,
Nor have I ever learnt to suffer yet.
Though ruin at me from each side take aim,
And I stand thus encompas'd round with flame*
Though the devouring fire approaches fast,
Yet; will I try to plunge: if power wast,
I can at worst but sink and burn at last.

Go on! pursue thy fortune while 'tis hot,
I long for work where Honour's to be got.
But, Madam, to this Prince, you're wondrous kind.

You are not less to Henriet. I find.

Why, she's a Beauty, tender, young, and fair.

I thought I might in charms have equalled her.
You told me once my Beauty was not less,
Is this your faith? are these your promises?

You would seem jealous, but are crafty grown.
Tax me of falsehood to conceal your own.
Go, You're a woman --

Yes. I know I am.
And by my weakness do deserve that name.
When heart and Honour I to you resigned.
Would I were not a woman or less kind!

Think you your falsehood was not plainly seen,
When to your Charge my Brother gave the Queen.
Too well I saw it: how did you dispense,
In looks your pity to the afflicted Prince.
Whilst I my duty paid the King: your time
You watched, and fixed your melting eyes on him,
Admired him --

Yes Sir, for his constancy --
But 'twas with pain to think you false to me,
When to another eyes you homage paid,
And my true love wronged and neglected laid.
Wronged too so far as nothing can restore.

Nay, then let's part and think of love no more.
Farewell --

Farewell, if you're resolved to go.
Inhumane Austria can you leave me so?
Enough my Soul is by your falsehood rack't.
Add not to your inconstancy neglect.
Methinks you so far might have grateful proved,
Not to have quite forgotten that I loved.

If e're you loved, 'tis you not I forget.
For a Remove 'tis here too deeply set.
Firm rooted and for ever must remain.
Why thus unkind? --

Why are you jealous then?

Come, let it be no more! I'm husht and still!
Will you forgive?

How can you doubt my will!
I do:

Then send me not away unblest.

Till your return I will not think of rest.
Carlos will hither suddenly repair.
The next Apartment's mine; I'll wait you there.
Farewell.

O do not let me see a Tear.
It quenches Joy and stifles appetite.
Like Wars fierce God upon my bliss I'd prey;
Who from the furious Toils of Arms all day:
Returning home to Loves fair Queen at night,
Comes riotous and hot with full delight --

H'has reaped his Joys, and now he would be free,
And to effect it puts on Jealousy.
But I'm as much a Libertine as He.
As fierce my will as furious my desires,
Yet will I hold him; Though enjoyment tyres,
Though Love and Appetite be at the best;
He'll serve as common meats fill up a Feast;
And look like plenty though we never taste.
Old Lord! I bring thee News will make thee young.

Speak, there was always Musique in thy Tongue.

Thy Foes are tottering, and the Day's thy own,
Give 'em but one lift now and they go down.
Quickly to the King and all his Doubts renew,
Appear disturbed as If you something knew,
Too difficult, and dangerous to relate.
Then bring him hither labouring with the weight*
I will take care that Carlos shall be here,
So for his jealous eyes a sight prepare:
Shall prove more fatal than Medusa's head,
And he more Monster seem than she e're made

Still how this Tyrant Doubt torments my Breast!
When shall I get th'Usurper dispossessed?
My thoughts like Birds when frighted from their rest,
Around the place where all was husht before,
Flutter and hardly settle any more --
Ha! Gomez! What art thou thus musing on?

I'm thinking what it is to have a Son.
What mighty cares and what tempestuous strife
Attend on an unhappy Fathers life?
How Children Blessings seem, but Torments are,
When young our folly, and when old our fear.

Why dost thou bring these odd reflections here?
Thou enviest sure the quiet which I bear.

No Sir: I joy in the ease which you possess.
And wish you never may have cause for less.

Have cause for less! come nearer, Thou art sad,
And look as thou would tell me that I had:
Now, now, I feel it rising up again --
Speak quickly, where is Carlos, where the Queen?
What not a word? have my wrongs struck thee dumb?
Or art thou swoln and labouring with my doom?
Yet dare not let the fatal secret come?

Heaven great infirmities to age allots:
I'm old and have a thousand doting Thoughts:
Seek not to know 'em Sir.

By Heaven I must.

Nay, I would not be by compulsion just.

Yet; if without it you refuse, you shall.

Grant me then one request, I'll tell you all.

Name thy Petition, and conclude it done.

It is that you would here for give your Son,
For all his past offences to this hour.

The hast almost asked a thing beyond my power,
But so much goodness in the request I find,
Spite of my self I'll for thy sake be kind;
His Pardon's sealed: The secret now declare.

Alas! 'tis only that I saw him here. --

Where with the Queen? Yes, yes, 'tis so I'm sure.
Never were wrongs so great as I endure.
So great, that they are grown beyond Complaint,
For half my patience might have made a Saint.
O Woman! Monstrous Woman!
Did I for this into my breast receive,
The promising repenting Fugitive?
But Gomez, I will throw her back again,
And thou shalt see me smile, and tear her then:
I'll crush her heart, where all the poison lies:
Till when the Venom's out, the Viper dies.

They the best method of revenge pursue,
Who so contrive that it may Justice show:
Stay till their wrongs appear at such a head,
That Innocence may have no room to plead.
Your fury, Sir, at least a while delay,
I guess the Prince may come again this way:
Here I'll withdraw and watch his privacy.

And when he's fixed, be sure bring word to me.
Till then, I'll bridle vengeance, and retire,
Within my breast suppress this angry sire:
Till to my eyes my wrongs themselves display,
Then like a Falcon, gently cut my way;
And with my pounces seize th'unwary prey.

I've overheard the business with delight,
And find revenge will have a Feast to night.
Though thy declining years are in their wane,
I can perceive there's youth still in thy brain.
Away. The Queen is coming hither.

Now
To all felicity a long adieu!
Where are you Eboli?

Madam, I'm here.

Oh how fresh fears assault me every where!
I hear that Carlos is a prisoner made.

No, Madam, he the Orders disobeyed;
And boldly owns for Flanders he intends,
To head the Rebels, whom he stiles his friends.
But e're he goes, by me does humbly sue,
That he may take his last farewell of you.

Will he then force his Destiny at last?
Hence quickly to him, Eboli, make haste:
Tell him, I beg his purpose he'd delay:
Or if that can't his resolution stay,
Say I have sworn not to survive the hour,
In which I hear that he has left this shore.
Tell him, I've gained his pardon of the King.
Tell him -- to stay him -- tell him any thing. --

One word from you his Duty would restore,
And though you promised ne'er to see him more,
Methinks you might upon so just a score.
But see he's here --

Run out of breath by Fate,
And persecuted by a Fathers hate,
Weari'd with all, I panting hither fly,
To lay my self down at your feet and die.

Oh too unhappy Carlos! yet unkind!
Against you what harms have ever I designed,
That you should with such violence decree;
Ungratefully at last to murder me?

Pour all thy Curses, Heaven! upon this head.
For I've the worst of vengeance merited;
That yet I impudently live to hear,
My self upbraided of a wrong to her.
Say, has your Honour been by me betrayed?
Or have I snares to entrap your virtue laid?
Tell me: if not, why do you then upbraid?

You will not know the afflictions which you give,
Was't not my last request that you would live?
I by our Vows conjured it; but I see,
Forgetting them; unmindful too of me;
Regardless your own ruin you design;
Though you are sure to purchase it with mine.

I as you bad me 'ive, obeyed with pride.
Though it was harder far than to have died.
But loss of Liberty my life disdains.
These Limbs were never made to suffer Chains.
My Father should have singled out some Crown,
And bidden me go conquer't for my own:
He should have seen what Carlos would have done.
But to proscribe my freedom, sink me low,
To base confinement where no comforts flow:
But black Despair that foul Tormentor lies:
With all my present load of Miseries,
Was to my Soul too violent a smart,
And roused the sleeping Lion in my heart.

Yet then be kind; your angry Father's rage,
I know the least submission will assuage.
You're hot with Youth, He's choleric with Age.
To him: and put a true obedience on;
Be humble, and express your self a Son.
Carlos! I beg it of you: Will you not?

Methinks 'tis very hard; but yet I'll do it.
I must obey whatever you prefer;
Knowing you're all Divine, and cannot err.
For if my Doom's unalt'rable, I shall
This way at least with less Dishonour fall.
And Princes less my tameness thus condemn,
When I for you shall suffer, though by him.

In my Apartment farther we'll debate
Of this; and for a happy issue wait.
Your presence there he cannot disapprove,
When it shall speak your Duty and my Love.

Now Gomez triumph. All is ripe. The Toil
Has caught 'em, and Fate saw it with a smile.
Thus far the Work of Destiny was mine;
But I'm content the Master-piece be thine.
Away to the King; prepare his Soul for Blood;
A Mystery thou well hast understood:
Whilst I go rest within a Lovers arms,
And to my Austria lay out all my charms.

Fate open now thy Book, and set 'em down,
I have already marked 'em for thy own.
My Lord the King.

Gomez!

The same.

Hast seen
The Prince?

I have.

Where is he?

With the Queen.

Now ye that dwell in everlasting slame,
And keep Records of all ye mean to damn,
Show me, if amongst your Presidents there e're
Was seen a Son like him, or wife like her!
Hark Gomez! did not hear th'Infernals groan?
Hush Hell a little, and they are thy own.

Who should these be? the King and Gomez sure:
Methinks, I wish that Carlos were secure.
For Flanders his Dispatches I've prepared.

Who's there? 'Tis Posa Pander to their Lust.
Now Gomez to his heart thy Dagger Thrust;
In the pursuit of vengeance drive it-far,
Strike deep, and if thou can wound Carlos there.

I'll do it as close as happy Lovers kiss;
May he strike mine if of his heart I miss.
Thus Sir --

Ha Gomez! Villain! thou hast done
Thy worst! but yet I would not die alone:
Here Dog --

So brisk! then take it once again,
'Twas only Sir to put you out of pain.

My Lord! the King! but life too far is gone,
I faint! be mindful of your Queen and Son.

The Slave in death repents and warnes me, Yes
I shall be very mindful: What are These?
For Flanders! with the Prince's Signet sealed?
Here's Villainy has yet been unrevealed.
See Gomez! practices against my Crown:
Treason and Lust have Joined to pull me down.
Yet still I stand like a firm sturdy Rock,
Whilst they but split themselves with their own shock.
But I too long delay, give word I come.

What hoa! within: the King is nigh, make room.

Now let me if I can to fury add,
That when I thunder, I may strike em dead.
Ha! -- Gomez! on this Truth depends thy Life,
Why that's our Brother Austria!

And my Wife!
Embracing close; Whilst I was busy grown
In others ruins, here I've met my own.
Oh! had I perished e're 'twas understood.

This is the Nest, where Lust and falsehood brood.
Is it not admirable? --

O Sir yes!
Ten thousand Devils tear the Sorceress --

But they are gone, and my Dishonour's near.
Look my incestuous Son and Wife appear!
See Gomez, how she Languishes and dyes,
'S'death! There are very pulses in her eyes.

In peace, Heav'^ ever guard the King from harms,
In War Success and Triumph crown his Arms:
Till all the Nations of the World shall be
Humbled and prostrate at his feet like me.
I hear your fury has my Death designed;
Though I've deserved the worst, you may be kind:
Behold me as your poor unhappy Son,
And do not spill that blood which is your own.

Yes! when my blood grows tainted I ne'er doubt
But for my health, 'tis good to let it out:
But thine's a stranger like thy soul to me,
Or else be curs't thy Mothers memory:
And doubly cursed be that unhappy night,
In which I purchased torment with delight.

Thus then I lay aside all rights of blood,
My Mother cursed! she was all Just and good.
Tyrant! too good to stay with thee below,
And therefore's blessed, and raigns above thee now.
Submission, which way got it entrance here!

Perhaps it came e're Treason was aware,
Thy traitorous designs now come to Light,
Too great, and horrid to be hid in night:
See here my Honour and thy Duties stains;
I've paid your Secretary for his pains.
He waits you there, to Council with him, go
Ask what Intelligence from Flanders now.

My Friend here slain, my faithful Posa, 'tis;
Good Heaven! what have I done to merit this?
What Temples sack't? what Desolations made,
To pull down such a vengeance on my head?
This Villain, was thy work; what Friend of thine
Did I e're wrong, that thou should murder mine?
But I le take care it shall not want reward --

Courage, my Gomez! since thy King's thy Guard.
Come Rebel, and thy Villainies fulfil.

No: Though unjust, you are my Father still.
And from that Title must your safety own:
'Tis that which awes my hand, and not your Crown.
'Tis true all there contained I had designed;
To such a height your Jealousy was grown,
It was the only way that I could find
To work your peace, and to procure my own.

Thinking my Youth and Vigour to decrease,
You'd ease me of my Crown to give me peace.

Alas! you fetch your misconstructions far,
The injuries to Me, and wrongs to her,
Were much too great for Empire to repair:
When you forgot a Father's Love, and quite
Deprived me of a Sons and Princes right:
Branded my Honour, and pursued my Life,
My Duty Long with Nature was at strife:
Not that I feared my Memory or Name,
Could suffer by the voice of common Fame.
A thing I still esteemed beneath my pride;
For though condemned by all the world beside,
Had you but thought me just, I could have died.
At last this only way I found, to fly
Your anger, and divert you Jealousy --
To go for Flanders, and be so removed
From all, I ever honoured, ever Loved.
There in your right hoping I might complete,
'Spight of my wrongs some Action truly great.
Thus by my Faith and Sufferings to out-wear
Your hate, and shun that storm which threatened here.

And can this merit hate! he would forgo
The joys and charms of Courts to purchase you:
Banish himself, and stem the dangerous Tide
Of Lawless outrage, and rebellious pride.

How evenly she pleads in his defence!
So blind is guilt when it would seem Innocence.
She thinks her softness may my rage Disarm;
No, Sorceress! You're mistaken in your charm.
And whilst you sooth, do but assist the storm.
Do, take full view of your tall able slave,
Look hard; it is the last you're like to have.

My Life or Death are in your power to give.

Yes, and thou dy'st!

Not till she give me leave;
She is the Star that rules my Destiny.
And whilst her Aspect's kind, I cannot die.

No Prince, for ever live, be ever blessed.

Yes, I will send him to 's eternal rest!
Oh! had I took the Journey long ago,
I ne'er had known the pains that rack me now.

What pains? what racks?

Avoid and touch me not.
I see thee foul all one incestuous blot:
Thy broken Vows are in thy guilty face.

Have I then in your pity left no place?

Oh thus it was you drew me in before,
With promises you ne'er would see him more.
But now your subtlest Wiles too weak are grown,
I've gotten freedom and I'll keep't my own.

May you be ever free, but can your Mind.
Conceive that any ill was here designed?
He hither came only that he might show
Obedience, and be reconciled to you.
You saw his humble Dutiful address.

But you before-hand signed the happy Peace.
Oh Princess thank you for the Care you take!
Tell me! how got this Monster entrance? speak.

Heaven witness, 'twas without my knowledge done.

No, she had other business of her own.
Oh Blood and Murder --

All are false! A Guard.
Seize on that Traitor. --

Welcome: I am prepared.

Stay Sir! let me die too, I can obey.

No, Thou shalt live.
By heaven but not a Day;
I a revenge so exquisite have framed,
She unrepenting dies, and so she's damned.

If ever pity could your heart engage,
If e're you hope for blessings on your Age,
Incline your ears to a poor Virgins prayer.

I dare not venture thee, thou art too fair.
What would thou say?

Destroy not in one man
More Virtue than the World can boast again.
View him the eldest pledge of your first Love,
Your Virgin Joys! that may some pity move --

No: for the wrongs I suffer weigh it down,
I'd now not spare his life to save my own.
Away by thy soft Tongue, I'll not be caught.

By all that hopes can frame I beg, if not;
May you by some base hand unpitied dye;
And childless Mothers curse your Memory.
By Honour; Love; by Life! --

Fond Girl away.
By heaven I'll kill thee else! still dare thou stay*
Cannot Death terrify Thee?

-- No, for I,
If you refuse me, am resolved to die.

Kind fair one do not wast your sorrows here
On me, too wretched, and not worth a tear.
There yet for you are mighty Joys in store
When I in dust am laid, and seen no more.
Oh Madam! --

Oh my Carlos! must you dye
For me? no mercy in a Father's eye.

Hide, Hide your Tears, into my Soul they dart
A tenderness that misbecomes my heart:
For since I must, I like a Prince would fall,
And to my aid my Manly spirits call.

You like a man as roughly as you will
May die, but let me be a woman still.

You are Woman, a true Copy of the first,
In whom the race of all Mankind was cursed.
Your Sex by Beauty was to Heaven allied;
But your great Lord the Devil taught you pride.
He too an Angel till he durst rebel;
And you are sure the Stars that with him fell.
Weep on, a stock of tears like Vows you have,
And always ready when you would deceive.

Cruel Inhumane! Oh my heart! why should
I throw away a Title that's so good,
On one a stranger to what e're was so:
Alas I'm torn, and know not what to do.
The Just resentment of my wrong's so great,
My spirits sink beneath the heavy weight.
Tyrant! stand off. I hate thee! and will try
If I have scorn enough to make me dye.

Blessed Angel stay --

Carlos! the sole Embrace
You ever took, you have before his face.

No wealthy Monarch of the plenteous East,
In all the Glories of his Empire dressed,
Was ever half so rich, or half so blessed!
But from such bliss how wretched is the fall;
They too like we must die, and leave it all.

All this before my face! what Soul could bear't.
Go force her from him.

-- Slave 'twill cost thy heart:
Th'adst better meet a Lyon on his way,
And from his hungry Jaws reprize the prey:
She's Mistress of my Soul, and to prepare
My self for death, I must consult with her.

Have pity --

Hence! How wretchedly he rules,
That's served by Cowards, and advised by fools.
Oh Torture! --

-- Rouse my Soul, Consider now,
That to thy blissful Mansion thou must go.
But I so mighty Joys have tasted here,
I hardly shall have sense of any there.
Oh soft as Blossoms! and yet sweeter far:
Sweeter than Incense which to Heaven ascends,
Though 'tis presented there by Angels hands.

Still in his Arms! Cowards go tear her forth.

You'll sooner from its Center shake the Earth.
I'll hold her fast till my last hour is nigh;
Then I'll bequeath her to you when I die.

Cut off his hold or any thing. --

-- Ay Come.
Here kill, and bear me hence into my Tomb:
I'd have my Monument erected Here,
With broken mangled Limbs still clasping her.

Hold and I'll quit his Arms --

Now bear him hence.

Oh horrid Tyrant!
Stay Unhappy Prince. --
Turn, turn oh Torment! must I leave you so?
No stay and take me with you where you go.

Hark slaves, my Goddess summons me to stay.
Dogs! have you eyes, and can you disobey?
See her! Oh let me but just touch my bliss.

By Hell he shall not, slaves are ye mine or his.

My life!

-- My Soul Farewell --

-- He's gone, he's gone.
Now Tyrant to thy rage I'm left alone.
Give me my death that hate both life and thee.

I know thou dost, yet live.

-- Oh misery!
Why was I born to be thus cursed? or why
Should life be forced, when 'tis so sweet to die?

Thou woman hast been false: but to renew
Thy Credit in my heart, assist me now:
Prepare a draught of poison, such as will
Act slow, and by degrees of Torment kill.
Give it the Queen, and to prevent all sense
Of dying, tell her I've released the Prince,
And that e're Morning he'll attend her: I
In a disguise his presence will supply:
So Glut my rage, and smiling see her dye.

Your Majesty shall be obeyed --.

Do, work thy mischiefs to their last degree,
And when they are in their height I'll murder-thee.

Now Gomez ply my rage and keep it hot;
Over Love and Nature I've the Conquest got:
Still charming Beauty triumphs in her eyes,
Yet for my honour, and my rest she dies.
But oh what Ease can I expect to get,
When I must purchase at so dear a rate.

'TIs night: the season when the happy take
Repose, and only wretches are awake:
Now discontented Ghosts begin their rounds,
Haunt ruined Buildings and unwholesome Grounds:
Or at the Curtains of the restless wait,
To frighten 'em with some sad sale of fate.
When I would rest, I can no rest obtain;
The ills I've born even over my slumbers reign,
And in sad Dreams torment me over again.
The fatal business is e're this begun:
I'm shock't, and start to think what I have done.
But I forget how I that Phillip am
So much for Constancy renowned by fame:
Who through the Progress of my life, was ne'er
By hopes transported, or depressed by fear.
No, it is gone too far to be recalled,
And stedfastness will make the Act extolled.
Who! Eboli?

My Lord.

Is the Deed done?

'Tis! and the Queen to seek repose is gone.

Can she expect it? who allow'd me none!
No Eboli; her Dreams must be as full
Of horror, and as Hellish as her Soul;
Does she believe the Prince has freedom gained?

She does.

How were the tidings entertained?

Over all her Face young wandering blushes were,
Such as speak hopes too weak to conquer fear. --
But when confirmed no Lover e're so kind,
She clasped me fast, caress't, and called me Friend:
Which Opportunity I took to give
The Poison; and till Day she cannot live.

Quickly then to her: say that Carlos here
Waits to confirm his happiness with her.
Go: that my vengeance I may finish quite,
'Twould be imperfect should I lose the sight.
But to contrive that I may not be known,
And she may still mistake me for my Son:
Remove all Lights but that which may suffice
To let her see me scorn her when she dies.

You'll find her all in ruful sables clad,
With one dim Lamp that yields imperfect light,
Such as in Vaults assist the ghastly shade,
Where wretched Widows come to weep at Night:
Thus she resolves to die, or living mourn,
Till Carlos shall with Liberty return.

Oh steadfast Sin! incorrigible Lust!
Not damned! it is impossible she must.
How do I long to see her in her pains,
The poys'nous Sulphur rolling through her Veins.
Who's there? my Brother!

Yes Sir, and your Friend!
What can your Presence here so late intend?

Oh Austria! Fate's at work; a Deed's in hand
Will put thy Youthful Courage to a stand.
Survey me: Do I look as heretofore?

You look like King of Spain, and Lord of Power:
Like one who still seeks Glory on the Wing;
You look as I would do, were I a King.

A King! why I am more, I'm all that can
Be counted miserable in a man:
But thou shalt see how calm anon I'll grow,
I'll be as happy and as gay as Thou.

No Sir! my happiness you cannot have!
Whilst to your abject passions thus a slave.
To know my ease you thoughts like mine must bring,
Be something less a man, and more a King.

I'm growing so: 'Tis true that long I strove
With pleading Nature, combated with Love.
Those Witchcrafts that had bound my Soul so fast,
But now the Date of the Enchantment'ts past:
Before my rage like ruins down they fall,
And I mount up true Monarch over em all.

I know your Queen and Son y'have doomed to die,
And fear by this the fatal hour is nigh.
Why would you cut a sure Succession off,
At which your Friends must grieve, and Foes will laugh.
As if since Age has from you took away
Increase, you'd grow malicious and destroy.

Doubt it not Austria: Thou my Brother art,
And in my blood I'm certain hast a part.
Only the Justice of my Vengeance own,
You are Heir of Spain, and my adopted Son.

I must confess there in a Crown are charms,
Which I would Court in bloody Fields and Arms;
But in my Nephew's wrong I must decline,
Since he must be extinguished e're I shine.
To mount a Throne over Battlements I'd climb,
Where Death should wait on Me, not I on him.
Did you e're Love, or have you ever known
The mighty Value of so brave a Son?

I guessed I should be treated thus before;
I know it is thy Kindness, but no more:
Thou living free, alas, art easy grown,
And think all hearts as honest as thy own.

Not Sir so easy! as I must be bold,
And speak what you perhaps would have untold;
That you're a slave to th'vilest that obey,
Such as Disgrace on Royal Favour lay:
And blindly follow as they lead astray.
Voracious Varlets, sordid Hangers on,
Best by familiarity They are known,
Yet shrink at frowns, but when you smile they fawn.
They are these have wronged you and abused your Ears,
Possessed your Mind with false mis-grounded fears.

Mis-grounded fears! why is there any Truth
In Women's Vows, or Disobedient Youth!
I sooner would believe this World were Heaven;
Where I have nought but Toils and Torment met,
And never comfort yet to man was given:
But thou shalt see how my revenge I'll treat.
Look where she sits as quite and serene,
As if she never had a Thought of sin.
In mourning her wronged Innocence to show;
Sh'has sworn't so oft that she believes it true.
O'rewhelm^d with sorrow she'll in darkness dwell,
So we have heard of Witches in a Cell,
Treating with Fiends and making Leagues with Hell.

My Lord! Prince Carlos? may it be believed!
Are my eyes blessed? and am I not deceived?

My Queen! My Love I'm here --

My Lord! the King!
This is surprising Kindness, which you bring!
Can you believe me Innocent at last?
Methinks my griefs are half already past!

O Tongue in nothing practised, but deceit;
Too well she knew him not to find the cheat:
Yes vile Incestuous Woman! it is I
The King! Look on me well, despair and die.

Why had you not pronounced my doom before,
Since to affliction you could add no more:
Methinks Death is less welcome when I find,
You could but Counterfeit a look that's kind.

No, now you are fit for Death, had I believed
Thou could have been more wicked, thou had lived.
Lived and gone on in lust and riot still,
But I perceived thee early ripe for Hell:
And that of the reward thou might not miss,
This night you have drank thy bane, you are poisoned: Yes
Thou art --

-- Then welcome everlasting bliss.
But e're I die, let me here make a Vow.
By Heaven, and all I hope for there I'm true.

Vows you had always ready when you spoke,
How many of 'em have you made and broke?
Yet there's a power that does your falsehood hear,
A Just one too, and lets thee live to swear.
How comes it that above such mercy dwells,
To permit Sin, and make us Infidels?

You have been ever so to all that's good,
My Innocence had else been understood.
At first your love was nothing but your pride;
When I arrived to be the Prince's Bride,
You then a Kind Indulgent Father were:
But finding me Unfortunately fair,
Thought me a prize too rich to be possessed
By him, and forced your self into my breast;
Where you maintained an Unresisted power:
Not your own Daughter could have loved you more:
Till Conscious of your Age my faith was blamed,
And I a lewd Adulteress proclaimed;
Accused of foulest Incest with your Son:
What more could my worst Enemy have done?

Nothing I hope, I would not have it said,
That in my Vengeance any fault I made.
Love me! oh low pretence! too feebly built:
But 'tis the Constant fault of dying guilt,
Even to the last to cry they are Innocent;
When their despair's so great, they can't repent.

Thus having Urged your Malice to the head,
You spitefully are Come to rail me dead.
Had I been man and had an impious Wife,
With speedy sury I'd have snatched her life:
Torn a broad passage open to her heart,
And there have ransacked each polluted part:
Triumphed and laughed to have seen the Iss'uing flood,
And Want only have bathed my hands in blood.
That had out-done the low revenge You bring,
Much fitter for a Woman then a King.

I'm glad I know what death you'd wish to have,
You would go down in silence to your grave:
Remove from future fame, as present times,
And bury with you if you could your Crimes.
No, I will have my Justice understood:
Proclaim thy falsehood, and thy Just aloud,

About it then, the noble work begin,
Be proud and boast how cruel you have been.
Oh how a Monarch's glory 'twill advance!
Do, quickly let it reach the ears of France;
I've there a Royal Brother that is Young,
Who'l certainly revenge his Sisters Wrong:
Into thy Spain a mighty Army bring,
Tumble thee from thy Throne, a wretched thing,
And make it quite forgot thou e're were King.

I ne'er had pleasure with her till this Night:
The Viper finds she's crush't, and fain would bite.
Oh were he here and durst maintain that word,
I'd like an Eagle seize the Callow Bird,
And gripe him till the dastard Craven Cried;
Then throw him panting by his Sisters side.

Alas! I faint and sink, my Lord your hand,
My spirits fail, and I want strength to stand.

O Jealousy.
A Curse which none but he that bears it knows;
So rich a Treasure who would live to loose.

The poison works, heaven grant there were enough:
She is so foul, she may be poison proof.
Now, my false fair one --

Tyrant hence be gone,
This hour's my last, and let it be my own.
Away, away, I would not leave the light,
With such a hated Object in my sight.

No, I will stay and even thy prayr's prevent,
I would not give thee leisure to repent:
But let thy sins all in one Throng Combine
To plague thy Soul, as thou hast Tortured mine.

Glut then your Eyes, your Tyrant Fury feed,
And Triumph; But remember when I'm dead,
Hereafter on your dying pillows, you
May feel those Tortures, which you give me now.
Go on, your worst reproaches I can bear,
And with 'em all, you shall not force a Tear.

Thus Austria my lost freedom I obtain,
And once more shall appear my self again.
Love held me fast whilst like a foolish Boy
I of the thing was fond because 'twas gay,
But now I've thrown the gaudy Toy away.

Help, Murder, help. --

-- See Austria whence that Cry,
Call up our Guards, there may be danger nigh.

Oh Guard me from that Cruel Murderer!
But 'tis in vain, the steel has gone too far:
Turn Wretched King, I've something to unfold,
Nor can I die till the sad Secret's Told.

The Woman's mad! to some Apartment by
Remove her, where she may grow tame and dye.
Fate came abroad to night resolved to range;
I Love a kind Companion in revenge.

If in your heart truth any favour wins;
If e're you would repent of secret sins,
Here me a word.

-- What would thou say? be brief.

Do what you can to save that precious life:
Try every art that may her death prevent;
You are abused, and she is innocent.
When I perceived my hopes of you were vain,
Led by my lust I practised all my Charms,
To gain the Prince Don Carlos to my Arms:
But there too cross^t, I did the purpose change,
And pride made him my Engine for Revenge:
Taught him to raise your growing Jealousy,
Then my wild passion at this Prince did fly,
And that was done for which I now must die.

Ha Gomez, speak and Quickly, is it so?

I^m sorry you should doubt if it be or no:
She by whose lust my honour was betrayed,
Cannot want malice now to take my head,
And therefore does this penitence pretend.

Oh Austria take away that Ugly Fiend,
He smiles and mocks me, waiting for my Soul:
See how his glaring fiery Eye-balls roll.

Thus is her fancy tortured by her guilt;
But since you'll have my blood, let it be spilt.

No more --
Speak on I charge thee by the rest
Thou hope'st the truth, and as thou shalt be blessed.

As what I've said is so:
There may I find, where I must answer all,
What most I need, heavens mercy on my Soul.

Heaven! she was sensible that she should dye,
And durst not in the minute tell a lye.

His guilt's too plain, see his wild staring Eye.
By unconcern he would show innocence,
But Hardened Guilt ne'er wanted the pretence
Of great submission when't had no defence.
Thus whilst of life you show this little Care,
You seem not guiltless, but betray despair.

His life! what satisfaction can that give?
But oh in doubt I must for ever live,
And loose my peace -- Yet I the truth will find:
I'll rack him for it; go in this minute bind
Him to the wheel --

How have I this deserved,
Who only your Commands obeyed and served?
What would you have me do?

-- I'd have thee tell
The truth; do Gomez, all shall then be well.

Alas! like you Sir, in a Cloud I'm lost,
And can but tell you what I think at most:
You set me as a Spy upon the Prince,
And I still brought the best Intelligence
I could, till finding him too much aware
Of me, I nearer measures took by her:
Which if I after a false Copy drew,
'Tis I have been Unfortunate as you.

And this is all thou hast for life to show?

Dear Sir your pardon, it is all I know.

Then Villain I am damned as well as thou.
Heaven where is now thy sleeping providence,
That took so little ^are of Innocence?
Oh Austria, had I to thy truth inclind:
Had I been half so good as thou were it kind.
But I'm too tame, secure that Traitor; Oh
Earth open to thy Center, let me Go
And there for ever hide my Impious head.
Thou fairest purest Creature Heaven e're made,
Thy Injured truth too late I've understood:
Yet live and be Immortal as You are good.

Can you to think me Innocent incline
On her bare word, and would not Credit mine:
The poison's very busy at my heart,
Methinks I see Death shake his Threatening dart:
Why are you kind and make it hard to die?
Persist, Continue on the Injury.
Call me still vile, incestuous, all that's foul.

Oh pity, pity my despairing Soul;
Sink it not quite. Raise my Physicians strait;
Hasten 'em quickly e're it be too late.
Propose rewards may set their skill at strife,
I'll give my Crown to him that saves her life.
Cursed Dog! --

Vile prostitute!

-- Revengeful Fiend!
But Iv'e forgotten half, to Carlos send;
Prevent what his despair may make him do;

Oh Horror, Horror, everlasting Woe.
The Prince, the Prince!

Hah! speak. --

-- He dyes, he dyes.
Within upon his Couch he bleeding lies:
Just taken from a Bath, his Veins all Cut,
From which the springing blood flows swiftly out.
He threatens death on all that shall oppose
His fate, to save that life which he will loose.

Dear Austria hasten, all thy interest use.
Tell him it is to Friendship an Offence,
And let him know his Father's penitence:
Beg him to live. --

Since yo've decreed my death, know 'twill be hard,
The Bath by me was poisoned when prepared.
I Owed him that for his late pride and scorn:

There never was so curs't a Villain born.
But by revenge such pains he shall go through,
As even Religious Cruelty ne'er knew.
Rack him! I'll broil him, burn him by degrees;
Fresh Torments for him every hour devise,
Till he Curse heaven, and then the Caitiff dies.

My faithful Henrietta art thou come
To wait th'unhappy Mistress to her Tomb?
I brought thee hither from thy Parents young,
And now must leave thee, to heaven knows what wrong.
But Heaven to its protection will receive
Such goodness, let it then thy Queen forgive.

How much I loved you, Madam, none can tell;
For 'tis Unspeakable, I loved so well.
A proof of it the World shall quickly find:
For when You dye, I'll scorn to stay behind.

See Sir, your Son.

My Son! but oh how dare
I use that name when this sad Object's near.
See Injured Prince who 'tis thy pardon Craves;
No more thy Father, but the worst of slaves:
Behold the tears that from these fountains flow.

I come to take my farewell, e're I go
To that bright dwelling, where there is no room
For Blood, and where the Cruel never Come.

I know there is not; therefore must despair:
Oh heaven his Cruelty I cannot bear.
Dost thou not hear thy wretched Father sue?

My Father, speak the word once more, is't you?
And may I think the dear Conversion true?
Oh that I could!

By heaven thou must -- it is.
Let me Embrace and kiss thy Trembling knees.
Why wilt thou dye? no, live my Carlos live,
And all the wrongs that I have done, forgive.

Life was my Curse, and given me sure in spite:
Oh had I perished when I first saw light,
I never then these miseries had brought
On you, nor by you had been Guilty thought.
Prop me: apace I feel my life decay.
The little time on Earth I have to stay,
Grant I without Offence may here bestow:
You cannot certainly be Jealous now.

Break, break my heart --

You've thus more kindness shown,
Then if y'ad Crowned and placed me on your Throne.
Methinks so highly happy I appear,
That I could pity you, to see You there:
Take me away again, You are too good.

Carlos is't you? Oh stop that Royal flood;
Live, and possess your Father's Throne, when I
In dark and gloomy Shades forgotten lie.

Crowns are beneath me, I have higher pride
Thus on you fixed, and dying by your side,
How much a Life and Empire I disdain;
No, we will together mount, where both shall reign
Above all Wrongs, and never more Complain.

Oh matchless Youth! oh Constancy Divine!
Sure there was never Love that Equalled thine;
Nor any so Unfortunate as mine. --
Henceforth forsaken Virgins shall in Songs,
When they would ease their own, repeat thy wrongs:
And in remembrance of thee, for thy sake,
A solemn Annual Procession make:
In Chaste devotion as fair Pilgrims Come,
With Hyacinths, and Lillies, deck thy Tomb.
But one thing more, and then Vain World adieu!
It is to reconcile my Lord, and You.

He has done no wrong to me, I am possessed
Of all, beyond my expectation blessed.
But yet methinks there's something in my heart,
Tells me I must not too Unkindly part:
Father draw nearer, raise me with your hand,
Before I dye, what is't you would Command?

The Grant thoul't find too difficult a Task;
I want forgiveness if I durst but ask.
How Curs't! and yet how might I have been blessed!

Oh all my wrongs and my misfortunes past,
As they ne'er were let your Remembrance shun,
And quite forget em all as I have done.
Alas! 'tis fate has been too blame, not You,
Who only Honours dictates did pursue.
I was a wicked Son, Indeed I was;
Rebel to Yours as well as Duties Laws.
By head-strong will too proud to be confined;
Scorned your Commands, and at your Joys repined.
When to my love your Royal Claim was laid,
I should have born my Inj'ries and obeyed;
But I was hot, and would my right maintain,
Which you forgave; yet I rebelled again,
And nought but death can now wash off the stain.

Why were thou made so excellently good;
And why was it no sooner Understood?
But I was Curs't, and blindly led astray;
Oh for thy Father, for thy Father pray.
Thou may ask that which I'm too vile to dare;
And leave me not tormented by despair.

Thus then with the remains of life we kneel,
May you be ever free from all that's ill.

And everlasting peace upon you dwell.

No more; this Virtue's too divinely bright,
My Darkened Soul too Conversant with Night,
Grows blind, and Overcome with too much light.
Here raise em up: Gently ye slaves, down, down,
Ye Glorious Toils a Sceptre and a Crown
For ever be forgotten, in your stead
Only Eternal darkness wrap my head.

Where are you? oh Farewell, I must be gone.

Blessed happy Soul, take not thy flight so soon:
Stay till I dye, then bear mine with thee too,
And Guard it up, which else must sink below.

From all my Injuries and all my fears;
From Jealousy Love's bane; the worst of Cares,
Thus I remove to find that stranger rest,
Carlos thy hand receive me on thy breast,
Within this minute how shall we be blessed.

Oh far above
What ever wishes framed, or hopes designed;
Thus where we go we shall the Angels find,
For ever pressing, and for ever kind.

Make hast, in the first Sphere I'll for you stay;
Thence we will rise both to Everlasting day.
Farewell --

I follow you, now Close my eyes;
Thus all over bliss the Happy Carlos dyes.

They are gone, they are gone, where I must ne'er aspire,
Run, sally out, and set the World on fire.
Alarm Nature, let loose all the winds;
Set free those spirits whom strong Magic binds.
Let the Earth open all her Sulph'rous Veins,
The Fiends start from their Hell and shake their Chains,
Till all things from their Harmony decline,
And the Confusion be as great as mine.
Here I'll lye down, and never more arise;
Howl out my life, and rend the Air with Cries.

Hold Sir! afford your labouring heart some ease.

Oh name it not! there's no such thing as Peace.
From these warm Lips, yet one soft kiss I'll take:
How my heart beats! why won't the Rebel break?
My Love, my Carlos, I'm thy Father, speak.
Oh he regards not now my miseries!
But deaf to my Complaint, as I have been to his.
Oh now I think on it better, all is well;
Here's one that's just descending into Hell:
How comes it that he's not already gone?
The Sluggard's Lazy, but I'll spur him on.
Hey! how he flies.

'Twas aimed well at my heart
That I had strength enough but to retort:
Dull Life so tamely must I from thee part!
Curses and plagues; Revenge where art thou now?
Meet, meet me at thy own dark house below.

He's gone, and now there's not so vile a thing
As I.

Remember Sir, You are a King.

A King! it is too little; I'll be more
I tell thee: Nero was an Emperor,
He killed his Mother; but I've that out-done,
Murdered a Loyal Wife, and Guiltless Son.
Yet Au'stria, why should I grow mad for that?
Is it my fault I was unfortunate?

Collect your Spirits Sir, and calm your Mind?

Look too't! strange things I tell thee are designed.
Thou Austria shall it grow old, and in thy age
Dote, Dote, my Hero! oh a long gray Beard,
With Eyes distiling Rheum, and hollow Cheeks,
Will be such charms thou can not want success:
But above all beware of Jealousy.
It was the dreadful Curse that ruined me.

Dread Sir. no more.

Oh Heart! Oh Heaven! but stay,
Named I not heaven? I did, and at the word
(Methought I saw't) the Azure fabric stirred.
Oh for my Queen and Son the Saints prepare!
But I le pursue and Overtake em there.
Whirl, stop the Sun, arrest his Charioteer;
I'^e ride in that away, pull, pull him down:
Oh how I"le hurl the Wild-fire as I run.
Now, now I mount --

Look to the King.
See of this fair one too strict care be had.
Despair! how vast a Triumph hast thou made?
No more in Loves Enervate charms I'll lie,
Shaking off softness, to the Camp I'll fly;
Where Thirst of Fame the Active Hero warms,
And what I've lost in Peace, regain in Arms.

THere is lately Published the Art of making Love, or Rules for the Conduct of
Ladies and Gallants in their Amours. In Twelves, Price bound 1 s. Printed for
R. Tonson at Grays-Inn-Gate in Grays-Inn-Lane.

NOw what do ye think my Message hither means?
Yonder's the Poet sick behind the Scenes:
He told me there was pity in my face,
And therefore sent me here to make his peace.
Let me for once persuade ye to be kind;
For he has promised me to stand by Friend.
And if this time I can your kindness move,
He'll write for me, he swears by all above,
When I am big enough to be in love.
Now won't you be good natured, ye fine men?
Indeed I'll grow as fast as e're I can,
And try if to his promise he'll be true:
Think on it, when that time comes; you do not know,
But I may grow in love with some of you:
Or at the worst I'm certain I shall see
Amongst you those who'l swear they're so with me.
But now, if by my Suit you^l not be won,
You know what your unkindness oft has done;
I'll even forsake the Play-House, and turn Nun.

