THough Plays and Prologues never did more abound,
Never were good Prologues harder to be found.
To me the Cause seems eas'ly understood:
For there are Poets prove not very good,
Who, like base Sign-Post Daubers, wanting Skill,
Steal from Great Masters Hands, and Copy ill.
Thus, if by chance, before a Noble Feast
Of Generous Wit, to whet and fit your Taste,
Some poignant Satyr in a Prologue rise,
And growing Vices handsomely chastise;
Each Poetaster thence presumes on Rules,
And ever after calls ye downright Fools.
These Marks describe him. --
Writing by rote; Small Wit, or none to spare;
Jangle and Chime's his Study, Toil, and Care:
He always in One Line upbraids the Age;
And a good Reason why; it Rymes to Stage.
With Wit and Pit he keeps a hideous pother;
Sure to be damned by One, for want of The other:
But if, by chance, he get the French Word Raillery,
Lord, how he fegues the Vizor-Masques with Gallery!
'Tis said, Astrologers strange Wonders find
To come, in two great Planets lately joined.
From our Two Houses joining, most will hold,
Vast Deluges of Dullness were foretold.
Poor Holborn Ballads now being born away
By Tides of duller Madrigals than they;
Jockeys and Jennyes set to Northern Airs,
While Lousy Thespis chants at Country Fairs
Politic Ditties, full of Sage Debate,
And Merry Catches, how to Rule the State.
Vicars n^gl^ct their Flocks, to turn Translators,
And Barley-water Whey-fac'd Beau's write Satyrs;
Though none can guess to which most Praise belongs,
To the Learned Versions, Scandals, or the Songs.
For all things now by Contraries succeed;
Of Wit or Virtue there's no longer need:
Beauty submits to him who loudliest rails;
She fears the saucy Fop, and he prevails.
Who for his best Preferment would devise,
Let him renounce all Honesty, and rise.
Villains and Parasites Success will gain;
But in the Court of Wit, shall Dullness Reign?
No: Let the angry Esquire give his Iambics over,
Twirl Crevat-strings, but write Lampoons no more;
Rhymesters get Wit, ever they pretend to show it,
Nor think a Game at Cramboe makes a Poet:
Else is our Author hopeless of Success,
But then his Study shall be next time less:
He'll find out Ways to your Applause, more easy;
That is, write worse and worse, till he can please ye.

SIR, I say, and say again, No Matrimony; I'll not be noosed. Why, I beseech
you, Sir, tell me Plainly and fairly, What have I done, that I deserve to be
married!


Why, Sauce-box, I, your old Father, was married before you were born.


Ay, Sir; and I thank you, the next thing you did, was, you begot me; the
Consequence of which was as follows: As soon as I was born, you sent me to
Nurse, where I sucked two years at the dirty Dugs of a foul-feeding Witch, that
lived in a thatched Sty upon the neighbouring Common; as soon as I was big
enough, that you might be rid of me, you sent me to a Place called a School, to
be slash't and box't by a thick-fisted Blockhead, that could not read himself;
where I learnt no Letters, nor got no Meat, but such as the old Succubus his
Wife bought at a stinking Price, so over-run with Vermin, that it used to crawl
home after her.


Sirrah, it was the more nourishing, and made such young, idle Whoresons as you
fat, fat, you Rogue. I remember the young Dog at twelve years old had a broad,
shining, puffed, Bacon-face, like a Cherubim; and now he won't marry.


My next Removal was home again; and then you did not know what to do with me
farther, till after Twelve-months Deliberation, out of abundance of Fatherly
Affection and Care of your Posterity, you very civilly and fairly turned me out
of your Doors.


The impudent, termagant, unruly Varlet rebelled with too much Plenty, and took
up Arms against my Concubine. Turned you out of my Doors!


Yes, turned me out of Doors, Sir.


Had I not reason, Master Hector?


As I had then, so have I now too, Sir, more Manners than to dispute the
Pleasure of a Father.


Nay, the Rogue has Breeding, that's the truth on it; the Dog would be a very
pretty Fellow, if I could but persuade him to marry.


Turned out of Doors as I was, you may remember, Sir, you gave me not ^
Shilling; my Industry and my Virtue was all I had to trust to.


Bless us all! Industry and Virtue, quoth a! Nay, I have a very virtuous Son
and Heir of him, that's the truth on it.


Till at last a good Uncle, who now, Peace be with his Soul, sleeps with his
Fathers, bestowed a Portion of Two hundred pounds upon me, with which I took
Shipping, and set Sail for the Coast of Fortune.


That is to say, You went to the Wars, to learn the Liberal Arts of Murder,
Whoredom, Burning, Ravishing, and a few other necessary Accomplishments for a
young Gentleman to set up a Livelihood withal, in this Civil Government, where,
Heaven be praised, none of those Virtues need grow rusty.


Sir, I hope I have brought you no Dishonour home with me.


Nay, the Scanderbeg-Monkey has not behaved himself unhandsomly, that's the
truth of the Business; but the Varlet won't marry: the Dog has got Two thousand
pound a year left him by an old curmudgeonly moldy Uncle, and I can't persuade
him to marry.


Sir, that curmudgeonly moldy Uncle you speak of, was your Elder Brother, and
never married in all his Life: He, dying, bequeaths me Two thousand pound a
year: You, Sir, the younger Brother, and my honoured Father, have been married,
and are not able, for ought I can perceive, to leave me a bent Ninepence: So,
Sir, I wish you a great deal of Health, Long life, and merry as it has been
hitherto; but for Marriage, it has thriven so very ill with my Family already,
that I am resolved to have nothing to do with it.


Here's a Rogue! Here's a Villain! Why, Sirrah, you have lost all Grace; you
have no Duty left; you are a Rebel: I shall see you hanged, Sirrah. Come, come,
let me examine you a little, while I think on it: What Religion are you of? --
hah? --


Sir, I hope you took care, after I was born, to see me Christened.


Oh Lord! Christened! Here's an Atheistical Rogue, thinks he has Religion
enough, if he can but call himself a Christian!


Why, Sir, would you have me disown my Baptism?


No, Sirrah: but I would have you own what sort of Christian you are though


What sort, Sir?


Ay, Sir; what sort, Sir.


Why, of the honestest sort.


As if there were not Knaves of all sorts!


Why then, Sir, if that will satisfy you, I am of your sort.


And that, for ought you know, may be of no sort at all.


But, Sir, to make short of the matter, I am of the Religion of my Country,
hate Persecution and Penance, love Conformity, which is going to Church once a
Month, well enough; resolve to make this transitory Life as pleasant and
delightful as I can; and ^or some sober Reasons best known to my self, resolve
never to marry.


Look me in the Face; stand still, and look me in the Face. So; you won't
marry? --


No, Sir.


Oh Lord!


But I'll do something that shall be more for your good, and perhaps may please
you as well. Knowing Fortune of late has not been altogeter so good-natur'd as
she might have been, and that your Revenues are something anticipated, be
pleased, Sir, to go home as well satisfied as you can, and my Servant shall not
fail to meet you at your Lodgings, with a Hundred smiling Smock-fac't Guinea's,
within this half-hour: Now who the Devil would marry?


No Body that has half an ounce of Brains in his Noddle: The ungodly
good-natur'd Rogue is in the right on it; damnably, damnably in the right on it.


So, here's your Father for you now!


But look you Jack now, little Jack, Two thousand pounds a year! Why thou wilt
be a damnable rich Rogue now, if thou dost not marry; though I know thou wilt
live bravely and deliciously, eat and drink nobly, have always half a dozen
honest, jolly, true-spirited, sprightly Friends about thee, and so forth, hah!
Th^n for Marriage, to speak the truth on it, it is at the best but a chargeable,
vexatious, uneasy sort of Life; it ruined me, Jack, utterly ruined thy poor
old Father, Jack. Thou wilt be sure to remember the Hundred pound, Iackie-boy,
hah?


Most punctually, Sir.


Thou shalt always, ever now and then, that is, lend thy old Father a Hundred
pound, or so, upon a good occasion, Jack, after this manner, in a Friendly way:
You must make much of your old Daddy, Jack: But if thou hast no mind to it, the
truth on it is, I would never have thee marry.


Not marry, Sir?


No.


No?


No. A Hundred Pound, Jack, is a pretty little round Sum.


I'll not fail of sending it.


Then, Jack, it will do as well to let thy Man come to me to Harry the Eighth's
Head in the Back Street, behind my Lodgings: There's a Cup of smart Racy
Canary, Jack, will make an old Fellow's Heart as light as a Feather. Ah, little
Iackie-rogue, it Glorisies through the Glass, and the Nits dance about in it
like Atoms in the Sun-shine, you young Dog.


Do you intend to Dine there, Sir?


Ay, Man; I have two or three bonny old Tilbury Roysterers, with delicate red
Faces, and bald Crowns, that have obliged me to meet 'em there; they helped me
to spend my Estate when I was young, and the Rogues are grateful, and do not
forsake me now I am grown poorish and old, --. Almost Twelve a clock, Jack.


I'll be sure to remember, Sir.


And thou wilt never marry!


Never, I hope, Sir.


Ah, you wicked-hearted Rogue, I know what you will do then, that will be
worse, though, I think, not much worse neither. Would I were a young Fellow
again, but to keep him Company for one Week or a Fortnight. A hundred Guinea's!
eeee! Db'ny Jack. You'll remember? See thee again to morrow, Jack. -- Poor Jack!
Dainty Canary -- and a delicate Black-ey'd Wench at the Bar! Db'uy Jack.


Adieu, Father. -- Fourbine.


Did your Honour call?


Take a hundred Guinea's out of the Cabinet, and carry 'em after the Old
Gentleman to his Place of Rendezvous. This Father of mine (Heaven be thanked)
is a very ungodly Father* He was in his* Youth just such another wicked Fellow
as his Son Iohn here; but he had no Estate, there I have the better of him: for
out of mere Opinion of my Good-husbandry, my Uncle thought fit to disinherit
the extravagant Old Gentleman, and leave all to me. Then he was married, there
I had the better of him again; yet he married a Fortune of Ten thou^d pound,
and befo^e I was Seven years old, had broke my Mothers Heart, and spent three
parts of her Portion: Afterwards he was pleased to retain a certain Familiar
Domestic, called a House-keeper, which I one day, to show my Breeding, called
Whore, and was fairly turned a starving for it. Now he has no way to squeeze me
out of Contribution, but by taking up his Fatherly Authority, and offering to
put the Penal Law called Marriage in execution. I must even get him a
Governor, and send him with a Pension into the Country: Ay, it must be so;
For, Wedlock, I deny thee; Father, I'll supply thee; and, Pleasure, I will have
thee. Who's there?


Oh, Sir, the most fortunate Tidings!


What's the matter?


Captain Courtine, your old Acquaintance, Friend, and Comrade, is just arrived
out of the Country, and desires to see you, Sir.


Courtine! Wait on him up, you Dog, with Reverence and Honour.


Dear Beaugard!


Ah, Friend! -- from the very tenderest part of my Heart I was just now wishing
for thee. Why thou look as like a Married-man already, with as grave a
Fatherly Famelick Counte^ance, as ever I saw.


Ay, Beaugard, I am married, that's my Comfort: But you, I hear, have had worse
Luck of late; an old Uncle dropped into the Grave, and Two thousand pound a year
into your Pocket, Beaugard.


A small Convenience, Ned, to make my Happiness hereafter a little more of a
piece than it has been hitherto, in the Enjoyment of such hearty, sincere,
honest Friends, and good-natur'd Fellows, as thou art.


Sincere, honest Friends! Have a care there, Beaugard. -- I am, since I saw
thee, in a few words, grown an errant Raskal; and for Goodnature, it is the
very thing I have solemnly forsworn: no, I am married, Jack, in the Devil's
name, I am married.


Married! That is, thou call a Woman thou likest by the name of Wife: Wife
and the other thing begin with a Letter. Thou lie with her when thy Appetite
calls thee, keep the Children thou begettest of her Body; allowest her Meat,
Drink, and Garments, fit for her Quality, and thy Fortune; and when she grows
heavy upon thy Hands, what a' Pox, 'tis but a Separate-maintenance, kiss and
part, and there is an end of the Business.


Alas, Beaugard, thou art utterly mistaken; Heaven knows it is quite on the
contrary: For I am forced to call a Woman I do not like, by the name of Wife;
and lie with her, for the most part, with no Appetite at all; must keep the
Children that, for ought I know, any Body else may beget of her Body; and for
Food and Raiment, by her good will she would have them both Fr^sh three times a
day: Then for Kiss and part, I may kiss and kiss my Heart out, but the Devil a
bit shall I ever get rid of her.


Alas, poor Husband! But art thou really in this miserable Condition?


Ten times worse, if possible: By the virtue of Matrimony, and long
Cohabitation, we are grown so really One Flesh, that I have no more Inclination
to hers, than to eat a piece of my own. Then her Ladyship is so Jealous, that
she does me the Honour to make me Stalion-general to the whole Parish, from the
Parson's Importance in Paragon, to the Cobler's scolding Wife, that drinks
Brandy, and smokes loathsome Tobacco. In short, Jack, she has so ordered the
Business, that I am half weary of the World, wish all Mankind hanged, and have
not laughed these Six months.


Ha, ha, ha!


Why, thou can laugh, I see, though.


Ay, Ned, I have Two thousand pound per Annum, Ned, old Rents, and well
Tenanted; have no Wife, nor ever will have any, Ned; resolve to make my Days of
Mortality all Joyful, and Nights Pleasurable, with some dear, lovesom, young,
beautiful, kind, generous She, that every Night shall bring me all the Joys of
a New Bride, and none of the Vexations of a worn-out, insipid, troublesome,
jealous Wife, Wife, Ned.


But where lies this Treasure? Where is there such a Jewel to be found?


Ah, Rogue! Do you despise your own Manna indeed, and long after Quails? Why,
thou unconscionable Hobnail, thou Country Cowlstaff, thou absolute Piece of thy
own dried Dirt, would thou have the Impudence, with that hideous Beard, and
grisly Countenance, to make thy Appearance before the Footstool of a Bona Roba
that I delight in? For shame get off that Smithfield Horsecoursers Equipage;
Appear once more like Courtine the Gay, the Wit^y, and Unbounded, with Joy in
thy Face, and Love in thy Blood, Money in thy Pockets, and good Clothes on thy
Back; and then I'll try to give thee a Recipe that may purge away those foul
Humours Matrimony has bred in thee, and fit thee to relish the Sins of thy
Youth again. Bless us! What a Beard's there? It puts me in mind of the Blazing
Star.


Beard, Beaugard! Why, I wear it on purpose, Man; I have wished it a Furze-bush
a thousand times, when I have been kissing my --


Whom? --


Wife. -- Let me never live to bury her, if the word Wife does not stick in my
Throat.


Then this Peruque! Why, it makes thee show like the Sign of a Head looking out
at a Barbers Window.


No more, no more; all shall be rectified: For, to deal with thee as honestly
as a Fellow in my damned Condition can do, ever I resolved absolutely to hang
my self, I thought there might be some Remedy left; and that was this dear
Town, and thy dear Friendship: So that, in short, I am very fairly run away;
pretended a short Journey to visit a Friend, but came to London; and, if it be
possible, will not see Country, Wife, nor Children again these seven years.
Therefore, prithee, for my better Encouragement, tell me a little what Sins are
stirring in this Noble Metropolis, that I may know my Business the better, and
fall to it as fast as I can.


Why, faith, Ned, considering the Plot, the Danger of the Times, and some
other Obstructions of Trade and Commerce, Iniquity in the general has not lost
much Ground. There's Cheating and Hypocrisy still in the City; Riot and Murder
in the Suburbs; Grinning, Lying, Fawning, Flattery, and False-promising at
Court; Assignations at Coventgarden Church; Cuckolds, Whores, Pimps, Panders,
Bawds, and their Diseases, all over the Town.


But what Choice Spirits, what Extraordinary Rascals may a Man oblige his
Curiosity withal?


I'll tell thee: In the first place, we are over-run with a Race of Vermin they
call Wits, a Generation of Insects that are always making a Noise, and buzzing
about your Ears, concerning Poets, Plays, Lampoons, Libels, Songs, Tunes, Soft
Scenes, Love, Ladies, Peruques, and Crevatstrings, Fre^ch Conquests, Duels,
Religion, Snuff-boxes, Points, Garnitures, Milled Stockings, Foubert's Academy,
Politics, Parliament-Speeches, and every thing else which they do not
understand, or would have the World think they did.


And are all these Wits?


Yes, and be hanged to 'em, these are the Wits.


I never knew one of these Wits in my Life, that did not deserve to be
Pilloried; twenty to one if half of 'em can read, and yet they will venture at
Learning as familiarly, as if they had been bred in the Vatican. One of 'em
told me one day, he thought Plutarch well done would make the b^st English
Heroic Poem in the World. Besides, they will rail, cavil, censure, and, what
is worst of all, make Jests; the dull Rogues will Jest, though they do it as
awkerdly as a Tarpaulin would ride the Great Horse. I hate a pert, dull,
Jesting Rogue from the bottom of my Heart.


But above all, the most abominable is your Witty Squire, your young Heir that
is very Witty; who having newly been discharged from the Discretion of a
Governor, and come to keep his own Money, gets into a Cabal of Coxcombs of the
Third Form, who will be sure to cry him up for a Fine Person, that he may think
all them so.


Oh, your Asses know one another Nature exactly, and are always ready to
nabble, because it is the certain way to be nabbled again: But above all the
rest, what think you of the Atheist?


By this good Light, thou hast prevented me: I have one for thee of that Kind,
the most unimitable Varlet, and th^ most insufferable Stinkard living; one that
has Doubts enough to turn to all Religions, and yet would fain pretend to be of
none: In short, a Cheat, that would have you of opinion that he believes
neither Heaven nor Hell, and yet never feels so much as an Ague-sit, but he's
afraid of being damned.


That must be a very Noble Champion, and certainly an Original.


The Villain has less Sincerity than a Bawd, less Courage than a Hector, less
Good-nature than a Hangman, and lest Charity than a Phanatique; talks of
Religion and Church-Worship as familiarly as a little Courtier does of the
Maids of Honour; and swears the King deserves to be Chan'd out of the City, for
suffering Zealous Fools to build Paul's again, when it would make so proper a
Place for a Citadel.


A very worthy Member of a Christian Commonwealth, that is the truth on it.


I am intimately acquainted with him.


I honour you for it, with all my Heart, Sir.


After all, the Rogue has some other little tiny Vices, that are not very
ungrateful.


Very probable.


He makes a very good odd Man at Ballum-rancum, or so; that is, when the rest
of the Company is coupled, will take care to see there's good Attendance paid;
and when we have a mind to make a Ballum of it indeed, there is no Lewdness so
scandalous that he will not be very proud to have the Honour to be put upon.


A very necessary Instrument of Damnation, truly.


Besides, to give the Devil his due, he is seldom Impertinent; but, barring his
Darling-Topick, Blasphemy, a Companion pleasant enough. Shall I recommend him
to thy Service? I'll enter into Bonds of Five hundred pounds, that he teaches
thee as good a way to get rid of that Whip and a Bell, called thy Wife, as thy
Heart would wish sor.


And that is no small Temptation, I assure you.


Sir!


My Child!


A Pimp, for a Guiny, he speaks so gently to him.


Tell her, she has undone me, she has chosen the only way to enslave me
utterly; tell her, my Soul, my Life, my future Happiness, and present Fortune,
are only what she'll make'em.


At Seven, Sir.


Most infallibly.


Ay, ay, 'tis so: Now what a damned Country-Itch have I, to dive into the
Secret! Beaugard, Beaugard, are all things in a readiness? the Husband out of
the way, the Family disposed of? Come, come, come, no trisling; be free-hearted
and friendly.


You are married, Ned, you are married; that's all I have to say: you are
married.


Let a Man do a foolish thing once in his Life-time, and he shall always hear
of it. -- Married, quoth'a! Prithee be patient: I was married about a
Twelvemonth ago, but that's past and forgotten. Come, come, communicare,
communicate, if thou art a Friend, communicate.


Not a Tittle. I have Conscience, Ned, Conscience; tho I must confess 'tis not
altogether so Gentleman-like a Companion: But what a Scandal would it be upon a
Man of my sober Demeanour and Character, to have the unmerciful Tongue of thy
Legitimate Spouse roaring against me, for Debauching her Natural Husband!


It has been otherwise, Sir.


Ay, ay, the time has been, Courtine, when thou were in possession of thy
Natural Freedom, and might be trusted with a Secret of this dear nature;
when I might have opened this Billet, and showed thee this bewitching Name at
the bottom: But wo and alas! O Matrimony, Matrimony! what a Blot art thou in an
honest Fellows Scutcheon!


No more to be said; I'll into the Country again, like any discontented
Statesman, get drunk every Night with an adjacent Schoolmaster, beat my Wife to
a downright Housekeeper, get all my Maidservants every Year with Bastards, till
I can command a Seraglio five Miles round my own Palace, and be beholden to no
Man of Two thousand pound a year for a Whore, when I want one.


Good words, Ned, good words, let me advise you; none of your Mariage-qualities
of Scolding and Railing, now you are got out of the turbulent Element. Come
hither, come; but first let us capitulate: Will you promise me, upon your
Conjugal Credit, to be very governable, and very civil?


As any made Spaniel, or hang me up for a Cur.


Then this Note, this very Billet, Ned, comes from a Woman, who, when I was
strolling very pensively last Sunday to Church, watched her Opportunity, and
poach'd me up for the Service of Satan.


Is she very handsome, Beaugard?


These Country Squires, when they get up to Town, are as termagant after a
Wench, as a ty'd-up hungry Cur, got loose from Kennel, is after Crusts. Very
handsome, said you? Let me see: No, not very handsome neither; but she'll pass,
Ned, she'll pass.


Young?


About Eighteen.


Oh Lord!


Her Complexion fair, with a glowing Blush always ready in her Cheeks, that
looks as Nature were watching every Opportunity to seize and run away with her.


Oh the Devil, the Devil! This is intolerable.


Her Eyes black, sparkling, spriteful, hot, and piercing.


The very Description of her shoots me through my Liver.


Her Hair of a delicate light Amber-brown, curling in huge Rings, and of a
great Quantity.


So.


Her Forehead large, Majestic, and generous.


Very well.


Her Nose neat, and well-fashioned.


Good.


With a delicious, little, pretty, smiling Mouth.


Oh!


Plump, red, blub Lips.


Ah h --


Teeth whiter than so many little Pearls; a bewitching Neck, and tempting,
rising, swelling Breasts.


Ah h h h h --


Then such a Proportion, such a Shape, such a Waste --


Hold: Go no lower, if thou love me.


But, by your leave, Friend, I hope to go something lower, if she loves me.


But art thou certain, Beaugard, she is all this thou hast told me? So fair, so
tempting, so lovely, so bewitching?


No; for, you must know, I never saw her Face in my Life: But I love my own
Pleasure so well, that I'll imagine all this, and ten times more, if it be
possible.


Where lives she?


That I know not ne^ther; but my Orders are to meet her fairly and squarely
this Evening by Seven, at a certain Civil Persons Shop in the Upper Walk, at
the New Exchange, where she promises to be very good natured, and let me know
more of her Mind.


I'll even go home, like a miserable Blockhead as I am, to my Lodging, and
sleep.


No, Ned: Thou know my good Chances have always been lucky to thee: Who can
tell but this Lady^ errant that has seized upon my Person, may have a straggling
Companion, or so, not unworthy my Friend's.


'Tis impossible.


Not at all; for, to deal heartily with thee in this Business, tho I never saw
her Face, or know who she is, yet thus far I am satis^ied, she is a Woman very
witty, very well bred, of a pleasant Conversation, with a generous Disposition,
and, what is better than all, if I am not extremely misinformed, of Noble
Quality, and damnably Rich. Such a one cannot want good, pretty, little,
Under-sinners, Ned, that a Man may fool away an Hour or two withal very
comfortably.


Why then I'll be a Man again. Wife, avaunt, and come not near my Memory;
Impotence attends the very Thoughts of thee. At Seven, you say, this Evening?


Precisely.


And shall I go along with thee, for a small Venture in this Love-Voyage?


With all my Heart.


But how shall we dispose of the burdensom Time, till the happy Minute smile
upon us?


With Love's best Friend, and our own honest old Acquaintance, edifying
Champagn, Ned; and for good Company, tho it be a Rarity, I'll carry thee to
dine with the best I can meet with, where we'll warm our Blood and Thoughts
with generous Glasses, and free-hearted Converse, till we forget the World, and
think of nothing but Immortal Beauties, and Eternal Loving.


Then here I strike the League with thee: And now
M^thinks we're both upon the Wing together,
Bound for new Realms of Joy, and Lands of Pleasure;
Where Men were never yet enslaved by Wiving,
But all their Cares are handsomely contriving
T'improve the Noble Arts of Perfect Living.

BUt was that thy Father?


Yes, that civil, sober, old Gentleman, Courtine, is my Father: And, to tell
thee the truth, as Wicked and as Poor as ever his Son was. I sent him a Cordial
of a hundred (...) this Morning, which he will be sure to lose all before to
morrow Morning, and not have a Shilling to help himself.


Methoughts, as I looked into the Room, he rattled the Box with a great deal of
Grace, and swore half a dozen Rappers very youthfully.


Prithee no more on it, tis an irreverent Theme; and next to Atheism, I hate
making merry with the Frailties of my Father.


But then as to the Lady, Beaugard.


'Tis near the Hour appointed, and that's the Shop we meet at; the Mistress of
it, Courtine, is a hearty Well-wisher to the Mathematics, and her Influence, I
hope, may have no ill Effect over my Adventure.


Methinks this Place looks as it were made for Loving: The Lights on each hand
of the Walk look stately; and then the Rustling of Silk Petticoats, the Din and
the Chatter of the pretty little party-colour'd Parrots, that hop and flutter
from one side to the other, puts every Sense upon its proper Office, and sets the
Wheels of Nature finely moving.


Would the Lady of my Motion would make haste, and be punctual; the Wheels of
my Nature move so fast else, that the Weight will be down before she comes.


Gloves or Ribbands, Sir? Very good Gloves or Ribbands, Choice of fine
Essences. Captain Beaugard, shall I fell you nothing to day?


Truly, Mistress Furnish, I am come to lay out a Heart at your Shop this
Evening, if my pretty Merchant-Adventurer don't fail to meet me here.


What she that spoiled your Devotion of Sunday last, Captain?


Dost thou know her, my little Furnish?


There is a certain Lady in the World, Sir, that has done me the Honour to let
me see her at my poor Shop sometimes.


And is she very lovely?


What think you, Sir?


Faith, charitably enough.


I'll swear she is obliged to you.


And I would very fain be obliged to her too, if 'twere possible. Will she be
here to night?


Yes marry will she, Captain.


Are you there indeed, my little Picaroon? What, attaque a Man of War of my
Burden in the Stern, Pirate!


Lord, how like a Soldier you are pleased to express your self now! I warrant
you, to carry on the Metaphor, you have forty more merry-things to say to me
upon this Occasion; as, plying your Chase-guns, laying your self athwart my
Harser, boarding me upon the Forecastle, clapping all under Hatches, carrying
of the Prize to the next Port of Security, and there rummaging and risling her.
Alas, poor Captain!


Poor, Madam! He has Two thousand a year, and nothing but an old Father to
provide for.


Sir, is this fine, sober, brown-bearded Gentleman to be your Steward, he
understands your Affairs so well already?


The truth on it is, Madam, he does wait for an Office under me, and may in
time, if he behave himself handsomely, come to Preferment.


This I have got by my Beard already. If she should but know me now.


Well, Madam, are your Commands ready? May I know the Task I am to undertake,
before I lay claim to the Happiness of seeing that handsome, homely, fair,
black, young, ancient, tempting or frightful Face, which you conceal so
maliciously? For hang me, as I have deserved long ago, if I know what to make
of this extraordinary Proceeding of yours.


In the first place, Captain, this Face of mine, be it what it will, if you
behave your self as you should do, shall never put you out of Countenance.


In troth, and that's said kindly.


For I am young, Captain.


I am glad on it with all my Heart.


And, if the World speaks truth, not very ugly.


So much the better still.


Next, I'm no Hypocrite.


Hah!


But love my Pleasures, and will hold my Liberty.


Noble.


I am rich too.


Better and better.


But what's worst of all --


Out with it.


I doubt I am sillily in Love.


With whom, dear Miracle?


Not with a Married-man, sweet Monsieur Courtine.


Confound her, but she knows me. -- Why, good Madam --


Nay, Friend, no ruffling; keep your Articles, and keep your Distance.


Have you then made your Escape, Sir, from your dear Wife, the Lady-Tyrant of
your Enchanted Castle in the Country, to run a wandering after new Adventures
here? Oh all the Windmills about London, beware!


Ay, and the Watermills too, Madam. In the Devil's name, what will become of
me!


For the Quixote of the Country is abroad; Murder by his Side, Enterprises in
his Head, and Horror in his Face.


Oh Lord!


Do you know this Friend of mine then, Madam?


I have heard of such a Hero, that was very famous about two years since, for
selling himself to a Plantation, the Country, for Five thousand pound: Was not
that the Price, Sir?


Your Ladyship is pleased to be very free, Madam; that's all.


So were you at that time, Sir, or you had never parted with your dear Liberty
on such reasonable Terms surely. Bless us! Had you but looked about you a
little, what a Market might have been made of that tall, proper, promising
Person of yours! that --


Hell confound thee, heartily, heartily.


That Face, which now, o're-grown with ruful Beard, looks as you had stole it
from the Retinue of a Russian Embassy! Fough! I fancy all Fellows that are
married smell of Train-oyl and Garlic.


And yet, twenty to one, that is a stinking Condition you'll have a design to
seduce some poor doting Monster or another into, one day.


Never, by that Badge of Slavery, his Beard ther^.


How that dear Protestation has charmed me!


O'my Conscience I my self could be half reconciled to her again too.


In short, to give you one infallible Argument, that I never will marry, I have
been married already, that is, sold: for being the Daughter of a very rich
Merchant, who dying left me the only Heiress of an immense Fortune, it was my
ill luck to fall into the Hands of Guardians, that, to speak properly, were
Raskals; for in a short time they conspired amongst themselves, and for base
Bribes, betrayed, sold, and married me to a -- Husband, that's all.


In troth, and that's enough of all conscience: But where is this Husband?


Heaven be thanked, dead and buried, Captain.


Amen, with all my Heart.


A Widow, by my Manhood, a downright Bawdy Widow.


What would your Cream-pot in the Country give for that Title, think you?


Not more than I would, that thy Husband were alive again, to revenge my Quarrel
on thee.


And what's to be done, thou dear One?


Look upon me as a Lady in distress, Captain; and by the Honour of a Soldier
consider on some way for my Deliverance.


From what? Where is the Danger?


Every way it threatens me: For into the very Hands my ill Fortune threw me
before, has it betrayed me again, Friend.


Hah!


The Principal is an Uncle, old, jealous, tyrannical, and covetous.


Hell confound him for it.


My Fortune lying most in his Hands, obliged me upon my Widowhood to give up my
self again there too, where he has secured and confined me with more Tyranny,
than if I had been a Prisoner for Murder; guards me Day and Night with
ill-lookt Rogues, that wear long, broad, terrible Swords, and stand Sentinel up
and down the House with Musquetoons and Blunderbusses.


So, here's like to be some Mischief going forward, that's one Comfort.


Murder and Marriage are the two dreadful things I seem to be threatened with!
Now guess what pity it is that ever either of those Mischiefs should fall upon
me.


By the gallant Spirit that's in thee, I'll fairly be Gibetted first.


No need of that, Captain, neither: for, to show you I deserve your Protection,
I have had the Courage to break Gaol, run away, and make my Escape hither,
purely to keep my Word with you. Deal like a Man of Honour by me; and when the
Storm that will follow is a little blown over, here's a white Hand upon it, I'll
not be ungrateful.


And in token I believe thee, I'll kiss it most Religiously.


Why the Devil did I marry? Madam, one word with you: Have you never a married
Lady of your Acquaintance, that's as good-natur'd as you, and would fain be a
Widow as you are, too.


Why do you ask, Sir?


Because I would cut her Husband's Throat, and make her one for my own proper
use.


I'll ask your own Lady, Sir, that Question next time I see her, if you please.


Why, dost thou know her then?


Yes.


Then I may chance shortly to have a fine time on it* I have made a pretty
Evenings Work of this, Heavens be praised.


Run away lewdly! Damnation!


Look!


By Heaven, it must be she.


The Men are well Armed?


No matter; we must carry her, or all's lost else.


I'll not shrink from you.


That's well said. Sir, if you please, a Word with you.


With me, Sir?


Yes.


Courtine, be civil a little.


Sir, it is my Misfortune to be concerned for the Honour of a Lady that has not
been altogether so careful of it her self as she ought to have been.


I am sorry for it, Sir.


You being a Gentleman whose Character I have had an advantageous Account of, I
would make it my Petition to you, if she be of your Acquaintance, not to engage
your self in any thing that may give me occasion to b^ your Enemy.


Sir, I should be highly glad of any brave Man's Friendship, and should be
troubled if I appear concerned in any thing that may hazard the loss of yours.


That Lady, Sir, you talked withal's --


My Mistress, Sir.


Mistress!


Yes, Mistress, Sir: I love her, dote on her, am damnably in love with her; she
is under my Protection too, and when ever there's occasion, as far as this
sinful Body of mine will bear me out in it, I'll defend her.


Do you know her?


Not so well as I would do, Sir.


What's her Name?


A Secret.


She must along with me, Sir.


No, that must not be, Sir.


This Lady, Sir --


You lie, Sir -- Hah! -- Beaugard!


Stand fast, Ned.


Hold thy dead-doing Hand,
Thou Son of Slaughter.

Sir, there may come a time --


When you'll learn Manners.


And teach 'em you too.


We are well known.


And shall not be forgotten.
Come, Friend.

Confound 'em! This must be a Brother, a Kinsman, or a Rival, he plied me so
warmly.


'Tis a hard case, that a Man cannot hold Civil Correspondence with a
good-natur'd Female, but presently some hot-headed Fellow of the Family or
other runs horn-mad with Jealousy, and fancies his Blood smarts as often as
the Woman's itches.


This Heroic Person's Sister, Kinswoman, his Mistress, or whatever she be, is
like to get much Reputation by his Hectoring and Quarrelling for her; and he as
much Honour, by being beaten for her.


Nay, when Cuckolds or Brothers fight for the Reputation of a back-sliding Wife
or Sister, it is a very pretty Undertaking, doubtless. As for example; I am a
Cuckold now.


All in good time, Ned; do not be too hasty.


And being much troubled in Spirit, meeting with the Spark that has done me the
Honour, with a great deal of respect I make my Address, -- as thus, -- Most
Noble Sir, you have done me the Favour to lie with my Wife.


Very well.


All I beg of you, is, that you would do your best endeavour to run me through
the Guts to morrow morning, and it will be the greatest Satisfaction in the
World.


Which the good-natur'd Whoremaster does very decently; so down falls the
Cuckold at Barn-elms, and rises again next day at Hol^orn in a Ballad. But all
this while, what is become of the Widow, Ned?


Faith she has even done very wisely, I think, as soon as she had set us
together by the Ears, she very fairly ran for it.


A very noble Account of our first Evenings Enterprise! But a Pox on it, take
Courage; and since we have lost this Quarry, let us even beat about a little,
and see what other Game we can meet with.


Sir, Sir! Captain!


With you again, Beaugard. Agare ho!


With me, my Mistress?


Yes, with you, my Master.


I wonder when, of the Devil's name, it will come to my turn.


Being a particular Friend of yours, Captain, I am come to tell you, the World
begins to talk very scandalously of you, Captain.


Look thee, Sweetheart, the World's an Ass, and Common Fame a Common Strumpet:
so long as such pretty good-natur'd Creatures as thou seem to be, think but
well of me, let the World be hanged, as it was once drowned, if it will.


I must let you know too, Captain, that your Love-Intrigues are not so closely
managed, but that they will shortly grow the Subject of all the Satyr and
Contempt in Town: Your holding Conversation with a draggle-tail'd Masque, in
the Church-Cloysters, on Sunday; your meeting with the very Scandal here again,
this Evening; suffering your self to be imposed upon, and Jilted by her; and at
last running the hazard of a damnable Beating, by a couple of plausible
Hectors, that made you believe your Mistress had Honour enough to be concerned
for.


Really, my little Wolf in a Sheeps Fleece, this sounds like very good
Doctrine; but what Use must I make of it, Child?


Methinks, Captain, that should not be so hard to find out; my setting upon you
in a Masque my self, and railing at the last Woman that did so before me, might
easily inform you, I have a certain Design of trying whose Heart's hardest,
yours or mine.


Then, my little Mischief, you should not enter the Lists upon unequal Terms,
with that Black Armour upon your Face, that makes you look as dreadfully as the
Black Knight in a Romance.


Good Captain, what's that sober Gentleman's name? For certainly I have seen
him before now.


His name in the Flesh, my pretty one, is Courtine; a very honest Fellow,
good-natur'd, and wicked enough for thy purpose of all conscience.


Courtine! Bless us for ever! What, the Man that's married!


The Man that's married! Yes, the Man that's married. 'Sdeath, though I be
weary on it, I am not ashamed of my Condition. Why the Devil did thou tell her
my name? I shall never thrive with any Woman that knows me. The Man that's
married! 'Zounes, I am as scandalous as the Man that's to be hanged.


But you'll never be thought so handsome. To make few words with you, Sir, I am
one that mean you fairer play than such an inconstant, sickle, false-hearted
Wanderer as you deserve.


Then why dost thou conceal thy self? Those whose Designs are fair and noble,
scorn to hide their Faces: Therefore give me leave to tell thee, Lady, if thou
think to make ^se of me only to create some Jealousy in another Woman, I am
no Instrument to be that way managed; no, I am constant, I -- but if thou
love me --


Have you any more Doubts that trouble you?


None, by this sweet Body of thine.


Know then, Sir, it has been my Misfortune to watch you, haunt you, and dog you
these six Months; being, to my eternal torment, jealous of that ravenous Kite
your Widow, your Widow, Captain: nay, since I have confessed my Weakness, know
from this hour I'll defeat all her Ambushes, all the false Baits she lays to
ensnare your Heart, till I obtain the Victory of it my self, much more my due,
in that I'm not beneath her in Beauty, Birth, or Fortune, or indeed any thing
but her years, Captain; therefore if you have that Merit the World reports of
you, make the best use of this present Advice; and so farewell, till you hear
from me further.


Now may I do by my Mistresses as the Boys do by their Farthings, hustle 'em in
a Hat together, and go to Heads or Tails for 'em. -- Hah! Let me never see day
again, if yonder be not coming towards us the very Rascal I told thee of this
Morning, our faux Atheist; now will I show thee as notable a Spirit as ever
past upon the ignorant World for a fine Person, and a Philosopher. Daredevil, a
good Evening to thee: Why, where hast thou been, old Blasphemy, these Forty
Hours? I shall never be converted from Christianity, if thou dost not mind thy
Business better.


Been, quoth a! I have been where I have half lost my honest Senses, Man: Would
any body that knows me, believe it? Let me be buried alive, if the Rogues of
the Parish I live in have not Indicted me for a Papist.


The Devil! a Papist!


Pox on 'em, a Papist! When the impudent Villains know, as well as I do, that I
have no Religion at all.


No Religion, Sir? Are you of no Religion?


Is he an honest Fellow, Beaugard?


Oh, a very honest Fellow; thou may trust him with thy Damnation, I'll
warrant thee: Answer him, answer him.


I never go to Church, Sir.


But what Religion are you of?


Of the Religion of the Inner-Temple, the Common-Law Religion; I believe in the
Law, trust in the Law, enjoy what I have by the Law: For if such a Religious
Gentleman as you are get Fifty pounds into my Debt, I may go to Church and pray
till my Heart aches, but the Law must make you pay me at last.


'Tis certainly the fear of Hell, and hopes of Happiness, that makes People
live in Honesty, Peace, and Union one towards another.


Fear of Hell! Hark thee, Beaugard; this Companion of thine, as I apprehend,
is but a sort of a shallow Monster. Fear of Hell! No, Sir, 'tis fear of
Hanging. Who would not steal, or do murder, every time his Fingers itch't at
it, were it not for fear of the Gallows? Do not you, with all your Religion,
swear almost as often as you speak? break and profane the Sabbath? lie with
your Neighbours Wives? and covet their Estates, if they be better than your
own? Yet those things are forbid by Religion, as well as Stealing and Cutting
of* Throats are. No, had every Commandment but a Gibbet belonging to it, I
should not have had Four Kings Evidences to day swore impudently I was a
Papist, when I was never at Mass yet since I was born, nor indeed at any other
Worship these Twenty years.


Why then, Sir, between Man and Man, you are really of no Religion?


May be I am, Sir; may be I am not, Sir: When you come to know me better,
twenty to one but you'll be better satisfied.


Does your Honour think there may be a Devil?


I never saw him, Sir.


Have you a mind to see him?


I'd go Fifty miles barefoot to see but a Fiend that belonged to his Family.


That's a damned Lie, to my Knowledge: For I saw the Rogue so scared, that his
Hair stood upright, but at the sight of a poor Black, Water-Spaniel, that met
him in the dark once.


What think you of Conscience?


I do not think of it at all, Sir; it never troubles me.


Did you ever do a Murder?


I won't tell you.


Thou art the honester Fellow for it; I love a friendly Rogue, that can keep
such a Secret at my Heart.


Do you?


Ay.


So, that's well said; now we'll to work with him presently. Dost thou hear,
Daredevil, this honest Friend of mine is something troubled in Spirit, and
wants a little of thy Ghostly Advice in a Point of Difficulty.


Well, and what is't? I shall be civil, and do him all the good I can.


In few words, he's married; plagued, troubled, and Hag-ridden by the
eternally-tormenting Witchcraft of a vexatious, jealous Familiar, called a
Wife.


A Wife! That ever any Fellow that has but two Grains of Brains in his Scull,
should give himself the trouble to complain of a Wife, so long as there is
Arsenick in the World!


Nay, it is a mere shame, a scandalous shame, when it is so cheap too.


Would you have me poison her?


Poison her! Ay, what would you with her else, if you are weary of her?


But if I should be called to a terrible account for such a thing hereafter!


Hereafter! -- Cross my Hand with a piece of Silver, -- that is to say, -- give
me Three pence, -- Three pence, my Dearest --


Well, and what then?


Why, for that considerable Sum I'll be security for thee, and bear thee
harmless for Hereafter; that's all.


Faith, and cheap enough of all Conscience.


This is the honestest Acquaintance I ever met withal, Beaugard.


Oh, a very honest Fellow, very honest.


Prithee then, Daredevil, if that be thy Title, since we have so happily met
this Evening, let us grow more intimate, and eat and drink together.


Faith and troth, with all my Heart: Pox on me, Boy, but I love Drinking
mightily; and to tell ye the truth on it, I am never so well satisfied in my
out-of-the-way Principles, as when I am drunk, very drunk. Drunkenness is a
great Quietter of the Mind, a great Soother of the Spirit.


And shall we be very free, my little Atheistical disbelieving Dog? Wilt thou
open thy Heart, and speak very frankly of Matters that shall be nameless?


Much may be done; I seldom hide my Talent, I am no Niggar^ of my Parts that
way.


To tell thee a Secret, then, Daredevil, we two are this Night, for some
weighty Considerations, to give a Treat to the People of the Duke's Theatre,
after the Play's done, upon their Stage; we are to have the Music too, and the
Ladies, 'tis hoped, will not deny us the Favour of their fair Company. Now, my
dear Iniquity, shall we not, think thou, if we give our Minds to it, pass an
Evening pleasantly enough?


Rot me, with all my Heart: I love the Project of Treating upon the Stage
extremely too. But will there, will there be none of the Poets there? Some of
the Poets are pretty Fellows, very pretty Fellows; they are most of 'em my
Disciples in their Hearts, and now and then stand up for the Truth manfully.


Much may happen: But in the next place, after Supper we have resolved to storm
a certain Enchanted Castle, where I apprehend a fair Lady newly entered into
League with an honest Friend of thine, called my self, is kept a Prisoner, by
an old, ill-natur'd, snarling Dog in a Manger, her Guardian. Thou wilt make one
at it, wilt thou not, my little Daredevil?


Dam' me, we'll burn the House.


Dam' me, Sir? Do you know what you say? You believe no such thing.


Words of course, Child, mere Words of course: We use a hundred of 'em in
Conversation, which are indeed but in the nature of Expletives, and signify
nothing: as, Dam' me, Sir; Rot me, Sir; Confound me, Sir; which purport no more
than So, Sir; And, Sir; or Then, Sir, at the worst: For my part, I always speak
what I think; no Man can help thinking what he does think: So if I speak not
well, the fault's not mine.


Distinguished like a Learned School-Divine.


When meet we at the Play-house then?


Before the Clock strike Nine.


Where we'll have Music, Women, Mirth.


And very much good Wine.


IS not this Living now? Who that knew the Sweets of Liberty, the uncontrolled
Delights the Free-man tastes of, Lord of his, own Hours, King of his own
Pleasures, just as Nature meant him first;

Courted each Minute by all his Appetites,
Which he indulges, like a bounteous Master,
That's still supplied with various full Enjoyments;
And no intruding Cares make one Thought bitter.

Very well this; this is all but very well.

Nay, not one Rub, to interrupt the Course
Of a long, rolling, gay, and wanton Life.
Methinks the Image of it is like a Lane
In a rich flowery Vale, its Measure long,
Beauteous its Prospect, and at the End
A shady peaceful Glade; where, when the pleasant Race is over,
We glide away, and are at rest for ever.

Who, that knew this, would let himself be a Slave
To the vile Customs that the World's debauched in?
Who'd interrupt his needful Hours of Rest, to rise and yawn in a Shop upon
Cornhill? Or, what's as bad, make a sneaking Figure in a Great Man's Chamber,
at his Rising in a Morning? Who would play the Rogue, Cheat, Lie, Flatter,
Bribe, or Pimp, to raise an Estate for a Blockhead of his own begetting, as he
thinks, that shall waste it as scandalously as his Father got it? Or who,
Courtine, would marry, to beget such a Blockhead?


No body but such a Blockhead as my self, Beaugard, that's certain; but I will,
if possible atone for that Sin of mine in the future Course of my Life, and
grow as zealous a Libertine as thou would wish thy Friend to be.


These are Rogues that pretend to be a Religion now! Well, all that I say is,
Honest Atheism for my Money.


No, grant me while I live the easy Being I am at present possessed of; a kind,
fair She, to cool my Blood, and pamper my Imagination withal; an honest Friend
or two, like thee, Courtine, that I dare trust my Thoughts to; generous Wine,
Health, Liberty, and no Dishonour; and when I ask more of Fortune, let her even
make a Beggar of me. What say thou to this, Daredevil? Is not this coming as
near thy Doctrine as a young Sinner can conveniently?


Nay, I have very great Hopes of you, that's my Comfort.


But why did we part with the Women so soon?


Oh, Courtine, Reputation, Reputation! I am a young Spark, and must stand upon
my Credit, Friend; the Rogues that cheat all the Week, and go to Church in
clean Bands of Sunday, will advance no necessary Sums upon my Revenues else,
when there may be an Occasion: Besides, I have a Father in Town, a grave,
sober, serious old Gentleman, called a Father.


One that will Drink, Rant, Whore, and Game, and is as full of Religion as his
Worshipful Son here.


Hah! --


Very well, very noble, truly, Son! This is the Care you are pleased to take of
my Family! Sit up all Night, Drink, Whore, spend your Estate, and give your
Soul to the Devil! A very fine -- Hickup -- This Aquamirabilis and the Old Hock
does not agree with my Stomach.


Daredevil, stick to me now, and help me out at a dead lift, or I am lost for
ever. -- Sir, I hope my being here, has not done you, nor any Friend of yours,
an Injury.


Injury! No, Sir, 'tis no Injury for you to take your swill in Plenty and
Voluptuousness -- Hickup -- while your poor Father, Sirrah, must be contented
to drink paltry Sack, with dry-bon'd, old, battered Rogues, and be thankful.
You must have your fine, jolly, young Fellow, and bonny, buxom, brawny-bum'd
Whores, you Dog, to revel with, and be hanged to you, must you? Sirrah, you
Rogue, I have lost all my Money.


I am sorry for it, Sir.


Sorry for it, Sir! -- Hickup -- Is that all?


If thou art very poor, old Fellow, take a swinging Dose of Opium, and sleep
upon it; 'tis the best thing in the World for old Gentlemen that have no Money.
Or wilt thou be good Company? wilt thou sit down and crack a Bottle, old Boy?
Hah?


Heh! crack a Bottle!


Ay, crack a Bottle: What say thou to that comfortable Proposition?


Come, Sir, here's your good Health, and to your better Fortune.


A very honest Fellow, Jack: These are very honest Fellows, What is your name,
Friend?


My name is Daredevil, Friend; of the ancient Family of the Daredevils in the
North, that have not had a Church in their Parish, Chaplain in their House,
Prayers Public or Private, or Graces at Meals, since the Conquest.


Sir, I have heard much of your Family; it is a very ancient Honourable Family:
and I am glad to find my Son has made choice of such Noble Acquaintance. --
Sir, my Service to you. -- I protest, a Cup of pretty Clarret, very pr^tty
Clarret.


And he has top't it off as prettily, I'll say that for him.


Jack, I have lost all my Money, Jack.


Have you been robbed, Sir?


Robbed, Sir! No, Mr. Saucy-face, I have not been robbed, Sir: but I have been
nicked, Sir, and that's as bad, Sir. You are a worthy Person, and I'll make you
my Judge.


Come along then.


The Main was Seven, and the Chance Four; I had just Thirty pound upon it, and
my last Stake: The Caster threw, nothing came of it; I changed his Dice; he
threw again, to as little purpose as before.


Very strange, truly.


I changed his Dice again, he threw again: So he threw, and I changed; and I
changed, and he threw, for at least half an Hour; till at last -- Do you mark
me? -- the Dice powd'ring out of the Box --


That's plain.


One of 'em trips against the Foot of a Candlestick, and up comes two Deuces,
two Deuces, Sir, do you hear? And so I lost my Money. No, Sir, I was not
robbed, Sir; but I lost it upon two Deuces: and that was so hard Fortune, that
I'll hold you, or any Man living, Fifty pound to Ten, that he does not throw
two Deuces before Seven again.


Two Deuces before Seven! Two Deuces are not to be thrown, Sir, not to be
thrown.


I am glad to hear you are so rich, Sir.


Rich, quoth he! Prithee be quiet, I am not worth a Shilling, Man. But, Sir,
here you are a Lord at large, enjoy your Drink and your Drabs, sit up all Night
in the fulness of Iniquity, with worthy Esquire Daredevil of the North here,
with a Pox to you; whilst I must be kept without a Shilling in my Pocket. --
But, Sir, --


Sir, I sent you a Hundred pound yesterday Morning.


Well, Sirrah, and I have had ill Luck, and lost it all: What then?


Sir, to avoid Dispute, shall I make one Proposition to you?


Heh! With all my Heart. Look you, Iackie-boy, I am not against thy taking thy
moderate Diversions, so long as I see thou keep good Company, neither. But
-- sneak what Ready-money thou hast into my Hand, and send me the rest of
the other Hundred to my Lodging.


Do you think it reasonable, that as often as two Deuces are thrown before
Seven, I must advance a Hundred pound to make the Devil's Bones rattle, Sir?


Sirrah, you are a Rebel; and I could find in my Heart to cut your Throat. Sir,
have you ever a Father?


No, Sir.


No, Sir?


No, Sir; I broke his Heart long ago, before I came to be at years of
Discretion: I hate all Fathers, and always did.


Oh Lord! Hark you, Sir, What's that Fellow's Profession?


Oh, an Atheist, Sir; he believes neither God nor the Devil.


'Sbud, I'll brustle up to him: Are you an Atheist, Fellow? ho?


Yes, Sir, I am an Atheist.


And what think you will become of you when you die? ho?


I shall be buried six Foot under Ground, to prevent stinking, and there grow
rotten.


Oh Lord!


If I chance to be hanged, being a lusty Sinewy Fellow, the Corporation of
Barber-Chirurgeons, may be, beg me for an Anatomy, to set up in their Hall. I
don't take much care of my self while I am living; and when I am dead, whatever
happens to me will never trouble me.


No more to be said; my Son's in a very hopeful way to be damned, that's one
Comfort. Impudent Rogue! You keep Company with the Devil's Resident! You
converse with Foreign Ministers, and deny your Father a little dirty Money!
Faugh, Poltroon!


This is very hard, Sir: But if Ten Guinea's will do you any Service --


Ten Guinea's? Let me see; Ten Guinea's are a pretty little piddling Sum, that's
the truth on it: But what will it do, Iackie-boy? Serve, may be, to play at
Tick-tack in an Afternoon, three Hits up for a Piece, or so; but when will that
recover my Hundred again? Ten Guinea's! Pox of thy Ten Guinea's. -- Well, let me
see the Ten Guinea's though, -- let me see 'em a little. -- Iackie-boy, Iackle,
Jack, -- You have drunk damnable hard to night, you rogue; you are a drunken
Dog, I believe -- Han'^ you had a Whore too, Iackie? -- eee -- You'll get the
Pox, Sirrah, and then -- But if thou dost, I know a very able Fellow, an old
Acquaintance of mine -- Ten Guinea's, Iackie!


There they are, Sir; and long may they last you.


Make 'em Twenty, Iackie-rogue; -- you Plump-cheekt, Merryey'd Rogue, make 'em
Twenty, -- Make 'em Fifteen then, -- Iackie-boy, Iackie, Jack, -- Do faith.


Upon my Duty, you have stripped me, Sir.


Then do you hear, Friend, you Atheist, that are so free of your Soul? let us
see if you dare venture a little of your Money now -- Come.


At him, Daredevil; Beggar him once more, and then we shall be rid of him.


Done, Sir, done; down with your Money.


Here, you Blasphemous Dog. -- Dost thou love Hazard?


Dearly, from the bottom of my Heart, Sir.


I love thee the better for it: Come along. -- Seven. --


Right.


Seven.


Two Deuces! -- You have lost, Sir.


Dam' me, Sir, lay your Hand upon my Money!


Dam' me, Sir, 'tis my Money; I won it fairly.


Now, Courtine, now --


Now look to it, Atheist.


Son of a Whore, you lie. Thus to my Hat I sweep the yellow Scoundrels, and
draw my Sword in witness they are my own.


Nay then I'll --


Hold, Sirs, no drawing Swords, no Quarrelling.


I am glad on it, with all my Heart; for though I am not much afraid of the
Devil, I hate a drawn Sword mortally.


Good Sir --


Stand off. -- Dogs, Atheists win my Money! -- Rascal, -- Good morrow.


Till next time two Deuces come before Seven, and then I am sure to see or hear
from you again infallibly.


How dost thou intend to dispose of this wild, extravagant, old Father of
thine, Beaugard?


I hope to find him run so far in Debt within this Fortnight, that to avoid the
Calamity, he shall be forced to compound with me for his Freedom, and be
contented with a comfortable Annuity in the Country; that's all my hopes of
him.


Which he'll sell in one Quarter of a Year, and return to old London again, for
the other Game at Hazard.


No, like a wise Guardian, I'll take care of the contrary, lay it too far out
of his reach, and tie it too fast for him. Why how now, Daredevil? What in the
dumps? 'Tis an unruly old Gentleman, but yet he has some Religion in him,
Daredevil.


Yes, Pox on him, to cheat me of my Money. 'Tis well he was your Father, Sir.


Why?


Had he been my own, by these Hilts I would have sawed his old Windpipe asunder
upon the Spot. Rob me of my Right!


Does he love Fighting so well then? I thought most of your Atheists had not
much cared for that impertinent Exercise.


'Tis a little impertinent, that I'll grant you, for honest Fellows to fall
out, squabble, and cut one another Throats, to spoil good Company: But when my
Honour's injured --


Then, I know, thou art implacable. But for a foolish trifling Sum of Money --


Trash, trash, Dunghill, and Filthiness! I give it away to my Wenches and my
Servants; we part with it to every Body, upon all Occasions. He that values
Money, deserves never to have the Benefit of it.


A very noble Fragment of Philosophy. But, Courtine, the Morning is new risen
again, and I have received Intelligence this Night, by a certain Minister I
keep for such Offices, where my poor distressed Widow is held in Durance: If
thou think there may be any Hopes for thee upon the Coast I am bound for,
let us embarque together, and good Luck attend us.


No, I have other Projects of foot: Marriage has cracked my Credit so, that no
body that knows my Condition cares to deal with me: Therefore I am resolved to
set out for New Discoveries, and try how ^ can thrive where my Name's a
Stranger.


What, this Morning!


This very Morning: Fortified with Bordeaux, as I am, will I issue forth; and
let all straggling Wives, Widows, and Virgins have a care of their Cargo's.


Nobly resolved, and good Fortune guide thee. Thou, Daredevil, wilt not part
with me; thou art more a Friend than to leave thy Disciple, when there is good
substantial Sinning like to go forward. May be we may do a Murder before we
part; something that is very wicked we'll not fail of.


With all my Heart; let us fire a House or two, poison a Constable and all his
Watch, ravish six Cinder-women, and kill a Beadle.


Shall we do all this?


Do it! I'll do it my self.


Thou art the very Spirit of Iniquity.


Sir, Captain Beaugard.


With me, Friend?


Sir, there is a Masked Lady, in a Chair, at the Corner of the Street, desires
a Word with you instantly.


Tell her, I'm her Vassal, and will wait on her this Moment. Courtine, good
morrow.


Gone, already?


Trading comes in, Friend, and I must mind my Calling, that's all. Allons,
Daredevil.


Friend, farewell to thee; if either of us are run through the Lungs, or shot
in the Head, before we meet again, let us hear from one another out of the
Lower World, how matters go there, and what Entertainment they give us.


You shall find me a very civil Correspondent, Sir.


Farewell.


The same good Wish to you, Sir. Now will I out into the middle of the Street,
play at Blind-mans-buff by my self, turn three times round, and catch who I
can.


This should be the Place, and yet I see no Chair.


Then let us fall to Mischief.


Prithee a little Patience, tho it be a Virtue, dear Temptation.


Sir, is your name Captain Beaugard?


Yes, my dear Mercury, I am the happy Man.


Then, Sir, this Letter is for you.


Stay till I read it, Friend.


Sir, it requires no Answer.


What Jilts Trick now! -- Sir, -- to meet us with your Swords in your Hands
this Morning, behind the Corner House of -- By my Stars, a Challenge from the
termagant Sparks that fell upon us last Night. Why, what a deal of Love and
Honour have I upon my Hands now? Daredevil, thou can fight?


Why, is there any occasion?


Only a Challenge, Daredevil, that's all: See, there's a Breakfast for thee, if
thou hast any Stomach to it.


Idle Rogues, Rascals, Hectors! Never mind 'em; hang 'em, these are some hungry
Varlets that want Dinners; let us break the next Windows, and never think on it.


These are our Quarry; be sure we seize 'em both. Is the Coach ready?


At the next Corner.


Fall on then. Sir, you are our Prisoner.


Villains! Rogues! Thieves! Murder! Thieves! Rascals, you'll not murder me?


Nay, Sir, no noise, no struggling, as you tender your Safety.


Daredevil, Dog, Coward, draw thy Sword and rescue me.


I am terrified, amazed; some Judgment for my Sins is fallen upon me; alas, I
am in Bonds too! Have mercy on my Soul, and don't slay me, Gentlemen.


Damnation! Blinded! Rascals, Villains, Ruffians! Murder!


Oh Daredevil, Daredevil, what will become of thee!


This Generosity makes good thy Character,
That thou art the bravest Man, and truest Friend.
How shall I deserve this from thee?

I should be unjust, both to my self, and the dear Mem'ry of thy Noble Brother,
whose Friendship was so dear to me, should my true Sword be idle in thy Cause.
Besides, the Love which I profess to Porcia, tells me a Rival must not tamely
carry her.


She is thy Right: My dying Brother, her soon-forgotten Husband,
But thy remembered Friend, with his last Breath thus told me;
I have a Friend, Gratian, the Man my Heart
Has cherished most; we from our Youth were Rivals
For my dear Porica: tell him, if I die,
I left her to him, as the dearest Legacy
I ^ould bequeath: Bid him be tender of her,
For she'll deserve it from him. -- Would she did.

Heaven knows, it is my Curse, spite of her Scorn, to love her even to Madness;
nor shall this Man of War, this French-bred Hero, win her with nothing but his
Cap and Feather: I wonder he's not come yet.


I have heard the Man is Gallant; but in honesty,
As thou art my Friend, I wish thou would hear good Counsel*

Thine must be Noble.

I'd have thee think no more of this proud Woman.

I wish 'twere possible.

Their Sex is one gross Cheat; their only Study
How to deceive, betray, and ruin Man:
They have it by Tradition from their Mothers,
Which they improve each day, and grow more exquisite.
Their Painting, Patching, all their Chamber-arts,
And Public Affectations, are but Tricks
To draw fond Men into that Snare, their Love.

Would this could cure mine.

When we're caught fast, 'tis then they show their Natures,
Grow haughty, proud, to vex the Wretch you have conquered;
Tho the same Hour they glance abroad for new ones.
Let but a Woman know you're once her Slave,
Give her once Testimony that you love her,
She'll always be thy Torment, Jilt, design,
And practice Ends upon thy honest Nature,
So strong is their Antipathy to Truth.

But let a Fool --

Oh give 'em but a Fool,
A senseless, noise, gay, bold, bristling Blockhead,
A Rascal with a Feather, and Cravat-string,
No Brains in's Head; a vain, pert, empty Rogue,
That can prune, dance, lisp, or lie very much,
They are lost for ever: They'll give all they have
To Fools, or for 'em. --

But, my Friend, this granted,
Grant Porica this, and more, as she's the Relic
Of thy dear Brother, and my valued Friend,
The Injury she brings upon thy Honour
Must not be slighted; and that's my Cause now.

There thou o'recom'st me: Still our Men of Mettle
Delay their Time; the Day grows late; let's walk
Down by yon' Wall; may be they have mist the Place:
Besides, I fancy Company is coming this way, and we may be prevented.
Methinks I would not lose so fine a Morning, and do nothing.

Nor I.

Oh Lucrece, 'twas the Pangs of Jealousy, cursed Jealousy, that brought me
hither.


Where lodged you then last Night?


Here, in this House, my Cousin Porcia's House: I met her late last Night, just
as I alighted, harassed with my Journey, and the Cause of it: Had she not took
pity of me, Heaven knows how my Perplexities would have disposed me!


What, in this House?


Here, in this very House.


I'm glad I know it; I'll take such care, it shall not be long a Secret.


The Garden opening thus upon the Fields, invited me to take the Morning-air
here; for Sleep's a Guest that stays but little with me. Why sighest thou,
Lucrece?


I'm thinking why my Cousin Porcia should choose this Residence.


'Tis for a Lover, Lucrece; Beaugard courts her, a Friend and lewd Companion of
my false Husband's.


I know him but too well.


Why, dost thou love him?


So much, that I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep in peace, for the tormenting
Thoughts of him.


By Heavens, I pity thee. Oh have a care of Marriage, Lucrece, Marriage; 'twill
be thy Bane, and ruin thee for ever. Marriage spoils Faces; How I look with
Marriage!


I see no change.


No change! I have not slept six Nights in peace since the cursed Day I wedded.


Will then a Husband spoil ones Sleep so sadly?


A Husband's, Lucrece, like his Wedding-Clothes,
Worn gay a Week, but then he throws 'em off,
And with 'em too the Lover: Then his Days
Grow gay abroad, and his Nights dull at home:
He lies whole Months by thy poor longing Side
Heavy and useless, comes faint and loath to Bed,
Turns him about, grunts, snores: and that's a Husband.

Is Courtine such a one?


'Tis pain to tell thee the Life I (...) with him.

He's colder to me, than Adamant to Fire; but let him loose amongst my
Kitchen-Furniture, my Maids, never was seen so termagant a Towzer: He loves a
nasty, foul-fed, fulsome Drab, and scorns the tender Joys my Arms invite him to.
To be despised at that rate, so dishonoured, makes me even curse the Chance
that made me Woman: Would I had been any Creature else. -- See yonder, yonder
he comes: Thy Masque, thy Masque, dear Lucrece.


Farewell; I'll away, and leave ye fairly both together.


What, fly thy ground, faint Soldier! How, another! Nay then 'twas nobly done,
two to one had been odds else: Had it not pretty one?


Why, who are you, Sir.


Even a wandering Knight, that have forsaken my Castle in the Country, and am
come up to Town for Preferment truly.


And one would think so proper, lusty, a well-made Fellow as you are should not
be long out of Employment.


Dost thou know me, my Dearest?


No.


Then I am sure thou can have no Exception against me.


But suppose I had a mind to a little farther Acquaintance with you; what then,
Sir?


Why, then thou may reasonably suppose that I'll make no evil Use of thy
good Inclinations; Faith there are very pretty Gardens hereabouts, let us
commit a Trespass for once, break into one of 'em, and ^oll a Camomile-walk
together this Morning.


Oh Lord, Sir!


She's coming already.


If I should let you make advantage of my Weakness now, you would be false
afterwards, forsake me, and break my heart.


Pretty fool! What innocent scruples she makes!


Have you no other Mistress already? have you no Engagements that will return
hereafter upon your heart to my prejudice?


Shall I swear?


But have not you truly?


If I have, may that blew Mountain over our heads there, fall down and crush me
like a pelted Toad.


To show you then that I desere your Faith --


What wilt thou show me?


A Face which I am not ashamed of, though you'll perhaps be scandalised when you
see it.


The Devil take me if I am though, so it prove not very horrible indeed.


What think you then, Sir, is it such a one as you looked for?


My own Wife!


Yes, thy unhappy Wife,
Thou false, deceitful, perjured, shamles Wretch:
Have I deserved this from thee?

Pox confound her. --

Is this the recompense of all my love?
Did I bestow my Fortune on thy* Wants,
Humble my self to be thy Dove-like Wife?
And is this all I'm worth? --

Wealth is a great
Provocative to amorous heat
For what is worth in any thing,
But so much Money as 'twill bring?
Hudibras, Part the 2d, Canto the First.

Patience direct me! have I wrought my Nature
To utmost sufferance, and most low contentment,
Set my poor heart to cares! have I been blessed
With Children by thee, to be left with scorn,
Cast off, neglected, and abandoned vilely?
Speak, is not this hard usage? --

Umph!

Umph! what's Umph!

Umph, that's I, Child; Umph is I, I, I, my Dear.

Death! death and torments! Cut my wretched Throat, don't treat me thus: By
Heaven I'll bear't no longer.


No more.


I have done, Sir.


What do you at London!


Is it a fault to follow what I'm fond of!


Can't I enjoy my pleasures, take my freedoms, but you must come, and spoil the
high seasoned dish with your insipid whining senseless Jealousy?


Prithee forgive me. --


Where did you lodge last Night?


Here with a Kinswoman,
May be you know her not, her name is Porcia.

Death! Beaugard's Widow! now I am finely fitted.
What at this House?

This very House, that Door
Opens into the Garden, let us walk there,
Won't you go with me Courtine?

No.

Prithee do, Love.
Don't be thus cruel to me.

Then promise one thing,
And may be my good nature shall be wrought upon.

I'll grant thee any thing; speak, try m'Obedience.

then promise me, that during our abode
In this sweet Town, which I love very dearly,
That let me ramble, steer what course I will,
Keep what late hours, and as I please employ 'em,
That you'll be still, an humble, civil Doxy,
And pry into no secret to disturb me.

Well, 'tis all granted.

On then, I'll be dutiful.

Enter you first.

No. --

Oh, then you'll forsake me;
You seek but opportunity again to leave me.

Well, since I am trapt thus,
Like a poor Beast that wanted better pasture,
There is no Replevin, and I must to Pound.

What in this House?

Here in this very House,
My Cousin Sylvia, Courtine's Jealous Wife,
Coming to Town, Lodged with her here last Night.

No more, I guess the cause we're disappointed.
Do thou go Gratian, Muster what Friends 'tis possible;
I'll try my Interest too; we'll storm your Fortress,
Enchanted Lady, though your Giant guard it.

Dogs! Rascals! Villains! how do you intend to deal with us?


Much better than your language has deserved, Sir.


Sirs for this noble usage, had I a Sword or Pistol about me, I would reward ye
most amply.


Where are we quotha! why, we are in a Palace Man, prithee look about thee a
little.


By Heaven here's a Paradise; hark Daredevil! Music too!


I'll be hanged if 'tis not a bawdy Dancing-School, some better Whores than
ordinary designing a private Ballum rancum, have pitched upon our two proper
persons for the business; we are like to have a swinging time on it, Beaugard.


A plague of your Cowardice! you were whining and praying just now, and be
hanged to you.


I praying! prithee be quiet Man, I never prayed in my life, nor ever will
pray: Praying quotha! that's a merry jest with all my Heart.


Impudent Poltroon! he said two dozen of Pater-Nosters within this half hour,
and every jolt the Coach gave was afraid the Devil would have torn him to
pieces.


Odd I like this contrivance very well: Look, Beaugard, what comes yonder?
'sheart two Devils in Petticoats, how my Guts shrink together!


Heyday! Lady Blackamoors! nay then we are certainly enchanted. What are you
two, Maids of Honour to the Queen of Pomonkey? and i^ this one of her Palaces?
Not a Word! --


How I long now to be familiar with one of those Sooty-fac'd Harlots! I would
beget a chopping Black Son of a Whore upon her, in defiance to the Prince of
Darkness.


What another too of the same Complexion? this must be her Majesties Page.


A Pimp, I'll warrant him; he's so very little, pert, and dapper, the Rogue
looks as if he could im^ate himself through a Key-hole.


Welcome thou best-lov'd Man of the fair World.


Well, Sir, and what's the Service you have in order to Command me?


My Orders are to lead you to repose in a Rich Bed prepared for Rest and Love.


I said it was a Pimp, what a smooth-tongu'd little Rascal 'tis?


A very pretty sort of an Amusement this: But prithee young Domine, why to Bed?
'tis but now Day, and the Sun newly risen; for I have not been a Bed all Night,
my little Monster; I know how the time goes, Child.


Such are the Orders of the Power I serve.
For you are come a long unmeasurable Journey.

Hah!


Drawn by winged Horses through the untract Air.


A Pox upon thee for a little black lying well-instructed Rascal, but since it
is the Custom of the place, and my last Night Fatigue requires it, I'll accept
of the offer, and dispense with an hour or two of sleep to fit me for better
exercise when I wake again.


Drawn by Winged Horses through the Air, said he! if this should be true now,
what would become of us! Methought indeed the Coach whew'd it away a little
faster than ordinary.


A very notable Entertainment truly, and your little Black Lady-ships have
tripped it most featly. -- Daredevil farewell to thee; but that I am in hopes of a
better, I'd invite thee for a Bedfellow.


Bedfellow, quotha! would I were a Bed with any Bedfellow that I was sure had
but flesh and bones about him.


Come, Sir, you are my charge.


I hope your little Impship will be civil to me: pray, Sir, what place is this?


A Crystal Castle built by Enchantment in a Land unknown to any but the fair
one that Commands it: The Spirits of the Air keep guard about it, and all obey
her Charms.


Oh Lord! and what Religion is the Lady off?


That's a secret, you'll know more hereafter.


Lead on then: Now in the lower World whence I come lately, were this but
known,

How would the fate in Ballad be lamented,
Of Daredevil ^e Atheist that's Enchanted.

THese are your Men of Honour now: I never knew a blustering, roaring, swashing
Spark, that, at the bottom, was good for any thing.


Your faux Braves always put on a show of more Courage than ordinary; as your
beggarly half-Gentlemen always wear tawdry finer Clothes than their Fortune
will afford 'em.


But, to lye concealed in private in the House with her!


Dam' her, she's a Prostitute; has given her self already to his Arms.


Yet, I'll warrant you, she has an excuse for that too, if it be so; as, Alas!
you know, Woman is but a weak Vessel.


A Pox of the weakness of her Vessel! Dam' her! Would my Sword were in her
Throat! But will our Friends be ready?


Most punctually. It was an odd old Fellow, that, which we met with. Was he
certainly Beaugard's Father?


No body can swear that, for his Mother was a Woman; but that merry conceited
old Gentleman has the honour of it: he has the Title, but whose was the
Property, that I dare not determine.


I hope he'll be as good as his word with us.


It will not be amiss if it prove so. See, here he comes too.


You lie, you Dog; you Scanderbeg Varlet, you lie. Do not I know that he sate
up all Night with a Consort of Whore-masters and Harlots; and have you the
impudence to tell me he is not at home? Do not I know, you Villain, that, after
a Debauch, he will out-snore a Fleet-street-Cons^able and all his Watch, for
six hours; and dare you tell me, he is not at home, you Caterpillar?


Upon the word of a true Valet de Chambre, Sir, I deal sincer^ly and honestly
with you.


No more to be said: But, Sirrah, do you take notice in his behalf, and tell
him, he shall pay for this; pay for it, do you hear you Mongril? Fob me off
with ten stinking Guinnies, when I had lost a hundred! Fiends and Furies, I'll
not bear it. Good morrow my little Thunder-bolts! What say you, my tiny brace
of Blunderbusses? can I be serviceable? shall we about the business while it is
practicable? hah? --


Have you considered of it thoroughly, Sir?


Trouble thy head no farther; I'll do it, my Darling.


Have you considered, Sir, that she is your Son's Mistress?


So much the better still; I'll swinge her the stoutlier, for allenating his
Affections from his natural Father.


But suppose you should meet him too there in her defence, Sir?


Still better and better, and better for that very reason; for I would swinge
him too with much fatherly Discipline, and teach him the duty which a Son, with
a great deal of Money, owes an honest old Daddy, that has none.


Very piously resolved, this; that's the truth on it. But, Sir, I would have you
satisfied, into the bargain, that this will be no trifling matter. No Boys
Play, old Tilbury.


Boys Play, Sir; Sir, I can sight, Sir: though I am an old fellow, I have a Fox
by my side here, that will snarl upon occasion. Boys Play! I don't understand
your Boys Play, Sir --


I would not have you take my plainness ill, Sir: I only hinted it, to deal
with you according to an old fashion of sincerity which I profess, Sir. I hope
you are not offended at it.


Then, to rectify all mistakes, let us fairly have a Breakfast, hoc Momento. I
have a sort of gnawing Courage, that when it is provoked, always gives me a
Stomach to a savoury Bit, and a cheerful Bottle. I hate to be run through the
Guts, with nothing in 'em to keep the Wind out.


Very well proposed, I think; for we have more Fiends to meet us at a Tavern
hard by here, where we Intend to wish our Enterprise well in a bonny Bottle or
two, and then about it as cheerfully as we can.


Very well said, that: This is a pretty fellow, I'll warrant him. Now, if my
Rebel be run through the Midriff in this business, I am the next Heir at Law,
and the two thousand Pounds a year is my own, declaro. Come along my little
Spit-^res. Nous allons.
Brave strippons.
Sans scavoir on Nous allons.
Six Bumpers in a hand to him that drills the first Whore-Master through the
small Guts.


We'll pledge it heartily, Sir.


You are both my honest Boys, my best Children: march along then, bravely and
boldly. -- I must borrow Money of these Fellows before I part with 'em. Nous
allons, Brave strippons,


Oh the unconscionable Importunity of an unsavoury, plegmatick, cold, insipid
Wife! By this good day, she has kissed me till I am downright sick; I have had
so much of her, that I shall have no stomach to the Sex again this fortnight.


My Dearest, pray ^y Dearest, don't thus leave me: by this kind kiss I beg is.


Oh, the Devil!


Look kindly on me; speak to me. --


Plague intolerable! --


Indeed, my Dear, I love you with such fondness! Pray speak.


I cannot.


Why? an't you well?


Oh, there's a sudden faintness comes over my Spirits! Oh, I'm very sick! Leave
me, if thou love me, stand off, and give me Air; I die else. Ohh! --


I'll kiss thee then to life again.


Stand off, I say; I'll not be stifled! Murder! Help! Murder! Help!


Ill natured Tyrant!


Good natured Devils! Kiss, in the Devil's name! --


Come near me, Husband.


Come not near me, Wife. How am I tortured! --


You must be kind; indeed, my dear, you must.


Indeed, my Dear, by your good leave, I sha' not, -- Damnation!


You long to be rid of me again.


That I do most mightily; but how to bring it about, if I know, I am a Rascal.
Oh! Oh!


What's the matter, Deary?


Oh, I am sick again of the sudden! Give me the Chair there: Oh! my Heart
beats, and my Head swims! Oh! oh!


Alas, I fear you're very sick indeed! if my poor Lovee should die, what would
become of me!


A Plague of your whining! Would I were well out of the House once!


Shall I fetch thee some Cordial, my dearest Love, my Joy? Speak to me; shall
I? --


Ay if thou wilt, my Jewel. Jewel quotha! -- what a plagu's this: Hush, is she
gone? -- Now for a convenient Balcone to venture the breaking of a Neck at. --


Sir, Sir, a word with you.


With me, Sweetheart; thy business?


A Lady, Sir, that dogged you hither this Morning --


A Lady! --


Yes, a Lady, Sir.


Hist: Get you in, you little Monkey; skip, skulk, or you'll spoil all else. --
Here's the blessed comfort of a Wife again now: -- Oh, oh! --


How is't, my Blessing? Here, take this: Heaven guard thee.!


Fr^m thy confo^nded troubl^some Company, if it be possible.


How is't, my Deary?


If I had a little more on it, Deary.


I'll see what's left, my Joy.


Do, prithee do, my Joy then. Joy in the Devil's name.


Is your Lady gone, Sir?


Yes: But what News of the other Lady, my trusty Mercury?


She's now below, Sir; and desires to see you.


Is she young? handsome?


I can't tell that, Sir; but she's rare and fine.


Are her Clothes rich?


Oh Sir, all Gold and Silver; with a deep Point Thingum Thangum over her
Shoulders: and then she smells as sweet as my Ladies Dressing-Box.


Fly little Spright, and tell her, I'm impatient: tell her, I'll wait on her
within a moment: tell her --


But Sir --


Be gone, be gone, you Knave, or you'll be caught else. Oh!


Here's all that's left, my Heart.


I am sorry for it, it is very comfortable. [Drinks.] Oh, oh, oh!


What ails my Life?


Oh, I have a horrid ^emor upon my Heart! 'tis the old Palpitation I used to be
troubled with, returned again. Oh, if I were but --


Where, Love?


Oh! but in a condition to go abroad, there is an able Fellow of my
Acquaintance, that always used to relieve me in this extremity.


Where does he live? I'll take a Coach my self, and go to him.


The Devil take me if I know. -- Oh! 'tis a vast way off. -- Oh! now it kills
me again.


I shall not think it so, when it is my duty.


That's but too kind, my Sweetest; though, if I had but one Bottle of his
Elixir. --


How is it called?


Specimen Vitae.


Specimen Vitae?


Ay, Specimen Vitae: 'tis a damned hard name, but it is very good.


Where is't he lives then? Prithee let me go thither.


Oh, 'tis a horrid way off! Besides, it would trouble me now, in this
condition, to be so long without thee.


Prithee let me go.


Why, 'tis as far as Grubb-street Child, as Grubb-street?


I'll be back again instantly.


I had rather, indeed, thou should go thy self, than send a Messenger,
because the business will be done more carefully.


How's the Direction then?


In Grubb-street Child, at the Sign of the Sun and Phaenix, I think it is,
there lives a Chemist; ask for him, and in my name desire a Bottle of his
Specimen Vitae. Oh!


Specimen Vitae?


Ay, Specimen Vitae -- I'll try in the mean time if I can walk about the Room,
and divert the terror of my Fits.


Heavens bless my dearest Deary.


Thank you, my only Joy. -- Would in the Devil's Name she were gone once, and
had her Guts full of that Quack's Specimen Vitae.


You'll be careful of your self, Child?


As careful as I can, Child.


Good b'w'y Courtee.


B'w'y my Sylvee. -- Oh, oh!
Is she gone?

Yes, Sir.


Where's the Lady?


Here; just entering up the back Stairs.


Madam, this Honour done your worthless Servant --


Oh, my dear Heart, I had forgot my Wages. Pray Courtee, kiss me before I go.


Confound her, Come again! Oh, my Love! I have made hard shift to crawl to the
Door here.


Who's that behind you?


Nothing but a Page, come to know if I wanted any thing. A Plague of her Hawks
eyes! --


Good b'w'y my dearest Love.


Good b'w'y my Joy.


Nay, give me another. B'w'y Courtee.


B'w'y Sylvee. -- So, is she gone again? -- The Devil take me, if thou
interruptest me any more.


Is that your Lady, Sir?


Yes; but I hope you'll not think the worse of me, pretty One, for keeping a
Wife Company now and then, for want of better.


Can you be so kind, Sir, not to forget me? Do you remember me still, Captain?


Remember thee, Child! Is it possible for that Face to be ever blotted out of
my Memory! -- Though, the Devil eat me, if ever I saw it before, to the best of
my knowledge.


Where is your Lady gone Sir?


To Grubb-street, Jewel, for some Specimen Vitae.


Specimen Vitae, Sir! Oh dear, what's that?


Oh, come but quietly into the next Room, and I will show thee what Specimen
vitae is presently.


You may, perhaps think ^ range of this freedom I take with you, Sir.


Not in the least, Child; it shows thy Generosity. -- I love her now, for
understanding her business, and coming close to the matter quickly.


But, Sir, presuming on your Quondam Favours to me, I am come to beg your
Advice in a matter of Law, which I am at present involved in: and if you please
--


To retire a little in private? -- Oh, thou could not have picked out such
another Man for thy purpose: I am, may be, the best Lawyer in the World for
Chamber-practice. And if I do not find out the Merits of thy Cause as soon as
--


Really, you are so good natured --


Grubb-street and Specimen Vitae, quotha! He that has the Palpitation of the
Heart, and an Armful of this won't cure him, let him die upon a Dung-hill, and
be buried in a Ditch, I say. -- This is the rarest Adventure.


Heigho! Heigho! Boy, Imp, where art thou?


Here: Your pleasure? What's your pleasure, Sir?


What is't o'Clock, Boy?


Sir, in your World, by Computation, I guess it may be Afternoon.


A very pretty little Rascal, this; and a very extraordinary way of Proceeding,
I am treated withal here: I have been abed, 'tis true, but the Devil a wink of
sound Rest came near my Senses all the while; but broken Slumbers, Dreams,
Starts, and sprawling from one side to the other, in hopes the fair Unknown
that keeps this Castle might have been so good natured to have given a Stranger
a Visi^. This can be no less than some Romantic design of the little Fairy,
that threatened she would cheat the Widow of me: -- Now will I, for once, if she
does attempt me, put on that monstrous Virtue, called Selfdenial, and be
damnably constant. -- What, Music again! This is a merry Region, I'll say that
for it, where ever it be, Boy!


Did you call, Sir?


My Clothes, Monster; my Vestments: I hate a Dis-habiliee mortally: I long to
be rigged, that I may be fit for Action, if Occasion should present it self.


Welcome Mortal to this place,
Where smiling Fate did send thee:
Snatch thy happy Minutes, as they pass;
Who knows how few attend thee!
Floods of Joy about thee roll,
And flow in endless measure.
Dip thy Wishes deep, and fill thy Soul
With Draughts of every Pleasure.
Feast thy Heart with Love's Desire,
Thy Eyes with Beauties Charms:
With Imaginations fan the Fire.
Then stifle it in thy Arms.
For, since Life's a slippery Guest,
Whose Flight can't be prevented;
Treat it, whilst it stays here, with the best,
And then 'twill go contented.
Come you that attend on our Goddesses Will,
And sprinkle the Ground
With Perfumes around;
Show him your Duty, and show us your Skill.
Circle him with Charms,
And raise in his Heart
Such Alarms,
As Cupid never wrought by the Power of his Dart.
Fill all his Veins with a tender desire,
And then show a Beauty to set 'em a fire;
Till kind panting Breasts to his Wound she apply,
Then on those white Pillows of Love let him die.
Faith, and with all my heart; for I am weary of the lingering Disease, and long
to taste my Mortality most mightily. Hah! A Banquet too, ushered in by a couple
of Cupids! Pretty innocent Contrivance! Well, here's no fear of starving,
that's one comfort. Dardevill, Dardevill! How I want thee to help me out in
this Case of Conscience a little!


Beaugard, Where art thou?


Ah dear Damnation! I was just now heartily wishing for thee.


Such News! Such Tidings! Such a Discovery!


Hah! What's the matter, Man? --


Only six and fifty Virgins apiece for us, that's all; pretty little blushing
opening Buds, you Rogue, that never had so much as a blast of Masculine Breath
upon them yet. -- What's here? A Banquet ready^ Nay, then I am satisfied. Never
were Heroes so enchanted as we are.


But where are the Virgins, Dardevill? the Virgins!


There's only one of'em, Child ^ only one; -- but such a one, my Soldier. --


Is there but one then?


That's no matter, Man; I'll be contented till thou hast done with her: I hate
a new Convenience that was never practised upon; 'tis like a new Shoe that was
never worn, wrings and hurts ones Foot basely and scurvily. I love my ease, I.


But is she very Lovely?


Such a Swinger, you Dog! she'll make thy Heart bound like a Tennis Ball, at
the sight of her: with a Majestic stately Shape and Motion.


Well.


A Lovely, Angelical, Commanding Face.


By Heavens.


With two Triumphant, Rolling, Murdering Eyes, that swear at you every time you
look upon her.


Stand off, stand off, I say; she's mine this Minute. But then again, my Widow!
-- Hah! -- Masked too; when the Devil shall I see a Woman with her own natural
Face again? Madam --


Be pleased, Sir, to repose your self a little; there is a small Account, Sir,
to be adjusted betwixt you and I. Where are my Servants? Who is it waits there?


What the Devil can be the meaning of this now? I am not to be murdered, I
hope, after all this Ceremony and Preparation.


Murdered, in the Devil's Name? Here is great fear of being murdered, truly.


Come Sir, sit down Sir.


Madam, I'll obey you.


I doubt not, Sir, but, since your coming hither,
You are much surprised, and wonder at your Treatment.

So, now the Fardle's opened, we shall see what is in it.

Madam, 'thas been so very highly generous.

That you are prepared with Complements to pay me for it.
But, Sir, such Coyn's Adulterate and Base:
I must have honest Dealing from your Heart.

Swear to her, swear to her a little, Man; pour out a Bushel of Oaths upon her
instantly: Swear, swear, if thou wilt do any good upon her.


I know my Rival.


Ay, 'tis so, just so, just as I thought, my poor widow will run a damnable
hazard of losing this sweet Person of mine, if I do not take abundance of care
in the business. Here are Rogues on each hand, with Blunderbusses too: I shall
be ravished.


She, by her Arts,
And the good fortune to have first attempted it,
I know, 's possessed already of your Heart.
But know too, I'm a Woman loath Refusal.
Scornful Refusal --

Swear to her, I tell thee: That ever a Fellow should lose all this time for an
insignificant Oath or two!


Or, if my Fortune,
Which is not despicable, prove too weak
An Argument to tell you I deserve you;
Yet I have this to boast, I never concealed my self,
Either for Shame or Ends; but rather chose
To run the Risque of being denied your Love,
Than win it by base Artifice and Practices.
What think you, Sir? --

Hah! --
That, Madam, I'm most miserable,
Unless --

Your Widow Porcia, Sir, your Widow.

Madam, I must confess --

Well:

That I love her, and will for ever. --

Death! Do you confess it too?
See you not here yourself within my power,
And dare you still confess you love that Creature?
Thus far I've kept my Word, I've crossed her Stratagems.
You are here my Prisoner, and by what is past,
You ought to think me capable of more.

If this Fellow would but swear a little, all this might be rectifi'd.
Madam, to my own knowledge --

Fool, stand off.
I'm sensible that you are the loveliest Creature
My Eyes ever gazed on; but --

But what? --

I'm sure
You'd yourself scorn, nor think me worth your Heart,
Could I be faithless, could I be unconstant.
Pity me, fair One; yet, methinks this Hand --

Should send a Dagger to thy ungrateful Heart.
fly Heaven, I'll never bear it --

Madam!

Madam,
Could you but throw some favour on your Servant.

By all the fury in a Woman's Heart,
I'll be revenged on his. Make ready, Slaves,
To do your Office --

Madam --

Look you, Madam, your Ladyship may do your pleasure; you may command half a
dozen of Bullets through my Pericranium, if you have a mind to have your Beauty
spoke well of by the Critics of Holborn, that once a Month swarm at their
Windows to spy handsome Faces: Upon that consideration you may murder a poor
constant Monster if you please, Madam.


Still am I scorned then.

Would you kill me barbarously?
Sure those sweet Eyes could not see such a Sight.

No, take your Life, and with it this satisfaction;
Porcia scorns you, as much as you do me:
And, till thou suest upon thy humble Knees
To me for Pity, Porcia shall despise thee.

Madam, I swear!

No more.

By all t^ose Beauties.

Be gon^, for ever fly this. Ah h! --

Death, Damnation, Devils! How came I hither? Beaugard!

F^iend Courtine! Speak Man: What's the matter?

Damnation! Jilted, cho^s'd, betrayed! --

A Midwife! Run for a Midwife, run for some good Woman.
Oh Madam, an Accident.

A Midwife!

Heavens! a Midwife!

Yes, Friend, a Midwife. I am sweetly managed, I -- I thought I had been in
private here, in this House, with a civil Person of good Reputation, and it
proves a damned trappanning Strumpet. Just in the middle of all our good
Understanding together, she fetches a great Shreik, and roars out for a
Midwife: The Drab is full gone with Bastard, and swears I am the Father of it.


A very great happiness, take my Word for it, Friend; Children bring a great
Honour with them, Courtine: It may grow up to be a Comfort to thee in thy old
Age, Man.


Oh, Your Olive Branches are unspeakable Blessings, the Gift of Heaven. I love
to see Posterity go forward, and Families increase, with all my heart.


Let me be hanged and quartered, Gentlemen, if ever I set Eyes on the Harlot in
my life before. My sweet Wife, with a Pox to her brought me hither.


Why, Is thy Wife in London?


Yes, Hell confound her! she has hunted me full Cry up to Town; s^i^'d upon me
this Morning, and brought me hither, where it seems she lay all the last night.


Why then, for ought I know, we may be still enchanted.


I am glad to h^ar that, with all my heart. Is she in the House?


No; I was forced to c^unterfeit sickness, 'till I was ^'^n sick indeed, to get
rid of her, upon pretence of going to my Physician, in the Devil's name, that
this confounded Bulker, with her G^s full of Bastard, and I might console
together for half an hour; and I am sweetly fitted with a Concubin^ that's the
truth on it.


This comes of your Whoring, Courtine; if you had kept me company, and lived
virtuously, none of this had happened to you now. But you must be wandering: No
reasonable iniquity will serve your turn.


Ha, ha, ha! Well, I'll swear, Captain Courtine, you are the happiest
Gentleman! Yonder's the finest chopping Boy for you. Why, it will be able to
carry a Musket in your Company within this Fortnight. And then, I am so
obliged to you for bringing the Lady to lye in at my House, that if your Wife
will do me the honour, I'll take it for a favour to stand for Godmother with
her.


And, Madam, to return your Complement, I wish with all my heart you were
pregnant with a Litter of nine such chopping Boys, upon condition that I were
bound to be Godfather to the whole Kennel. -- Confound your being witty, with a
Plague to you.


That's something course though, Friend, to a Lady that's so civil to you.


See Ienny, Yon's the Man; that, that's the Father.


I'll swear it is a proper person.


Oh Sir, Heavens bless you, you're the happiest Man! Here is my young Master,
as like you as if you had bore it your self.


What a pretty little Nose it has!


And just its Father's Eyes for all the World.


It would never grieve a Body to have a Child by such a handsome Gentleman.


Ye Whores! ye Drabs! ye fulsome, slinking Whores! Clusters of Poxes on ye, and
no Hospitals pity ye! -- Confound ye, leave me.


Fie upon it, Courtine; fie for shame: give something to the Nurse, Man; that's
but civil.


A Bastard! Death, a Bastard! Under my Nose too! Where's the vile hateful
Monster?


Have patience, Lady. --


False, loathsome Traitor.


Now my Joy's completed.


Let me come at him, let me go. --


Hold her fast, Friend, if thou love me.


Thou Devil! -- Thou treach'rous, faithless, perjured Wretch^ Thou Husband!
Look in my Face.


Well. --


Did I ever deserve this?
Degenerate Brute! Thou, only in Falsehood, Man.
Thou rampant Goat abroad, and Drone at home.




Thou perfect Yoke-fellow! Thou heavy Ox,
That want a Goad to make thee know thy strength!
Death, Fiends and Torments! I could dig those Eyes out!
I'll bear't no longer: Bedla^! Bedlam! Bedlam!

No more! I'll stay no more to be his Triumph.
Be warned by me, ye Virgins that are blessed
With your first native Freedom; let no Oaths
Of perjured Mankind woo ye to your Ruin.
But when a creeping, fawning, weeping Crocodile
Moans at your feet, remember then my Fall:
And when for pity most his Tears implore,
Like me, your Virtue to your Hearts recall;
Resolve to seorn, and never see him more.

With all my heart, thou dear, dear Wife and Plague.


Methinks a very pitiful Case, this, Madam.


If your Widow were but here, Sir, now, she might fairly see what she is like
to trust to.


Oh Madam, Madam! What will become of us all?


Become of us, Woman! Prithee, what's the matter? are we in any danger?


Only your Brother in Law, Madam, and his Friend, with about a dozen Armed Men
more, Madam; that's all the matter, Madam.


My Brother in Law!


Yes, your Brother in Law, Lady, if your Name be Porcia: such a one they ask
for.


Porcia!


Yes, Porcia: I could have told you she was Porcia before.


'Tis but too true, Sir; my unhappy Name is Porcia.


Porcia, my Widow! my dear lovely Widow! What an ill natured trick was this
Concealment!


Though, Sir, you never saw my Face before,
If now you think it worth your least Regard,
Protect me; for I dread my Brother's Fury,
Even worse than Matrimony. Here, Sir, I yield my self*
Up yours for ever.

And shall I claim thee?

From this Hour, for ever.

And, by this happy Hour, I'll keep thee mine then.
Secure thy self in the next private Closet.
Peace to thy Heart, poor Widow.
Give us but Arms! --

Those I've provided for you.

I found our Swords in a certain private Corner that shall be nameless, where I
was proposing some civil Familiarities to the Lady Governess of the Family,
just as the Blusterers entered.


Are they in the House, then?


Yes, and have bound the Servants too; the hungry Rogues were all surprised at
Dinner; you'll hear more of them presently, I'll warrant you.


Stand to your Arms, Beaugard; the Enemy's upon us.


We have had a Succession of very pretty Adventures here; first we are
enchanted, then we are fiddled to sleep, then we are fiddled up again: Then
here's a Discovery of a very fair Lady followed by another, of a bouncing brown
Bastard; and when we might have thought all Fortunes Tricks had been over, we
are in a very fair way at last of having our Throats cut: But I'll secure one
life that shall be my care. --


Dog, stay and fight, or, by Heaven, I'll rip your Heart out.


Well then, if I must fight I must: What a Pox, I have two good Seconds of my
side; and that has saved many a Cowards Credit before now.


Break open the Door there, force the Passage, down with it.


Well Gentlemen, what farther? What means this Violence here?


I hope, Sir, that's no Secret, when you see who we are.


We come, Sir, to demand a Lady, Sir; one Porcia.


How's that, my Father!


Father me no Fathers: I am none of thy Father, Fellow; but I am these
Gentlemen's Friend here. -- Now, Atheist, will I murder thee.


Oh Lawed!


Jack, Jack, Jack! Come hither Jack; a word with thee, Jack: Give me a hundred
Pieces now, and I'll be of thy side Jack; and help thee to beat off these
impudent Fellows. Gentlemen, I cannot but own to you that this is my Son. --


Sir, were you nicked to your Shirt, I would not part with a single Shilling,
Sir.


Though, if he were my Son ten thousand times, in such a Cause as yours, I'd
draw my Sword against him.


You may remember, Gentlemen, a Challenge.


Which you forgot, Sir.


Hah! A Challenge, Beaugard?


I'll tell thee more hereafter. To show you I have not forgot it, the Lady you
thus persecute is now under my Protection, and with my Sword I'll keep her so.


If we don't, may my Wi^e get the better of me, and wear mine for a Bodkin.


Come on then, Sir.


For the Lady.


For my Honour.


And for my Friend, Sir.


Old Brimstone-Beard, have at thee.


Base Traitors! Odds!


Confound 'em, thrust.


Oh, I am slain! My Maw runs out: What will become of me! Oh!


Secure that Passage now: -- How fares my Friend?


I'm wounded: send for a Chyrurgion quickly, for I bleed much.


Look to your Master, Sirrah; and you, Fellow, be careful of this Beast here.


Oh, a Parson! a Parson! dear Sir, a Parson! Some pious good Divine, if you
have any Charity.


Here, here she is: I have got her for you; let me alone for ferreting a
Female's Quarters out.


I'd have you, Sir, take care for your Security: There's mischief done, Sir.


The more mischief the better; thou shalt find me no Flincher, Boy: here, here;
make sure of her.


Inhumane Tyrant! Why am I abused thus? Help! Murder! Help!


None of your Tricks; no Cries, no Shrieks for Succour:
By Hell, here's that shall silence you for ever.
Thou Woman! Thou young, itching, wanton Devil!
Fly to base Cells of Lust! Give up thy Virtue,
Disgrace thy Name, and triumph even in Infamy.
On what a tottering Point his Honour stands,
That trusts the Treasure in such lavish hands.

FRom this gay minute farewell Love and Doting: I have shook the lazy,
stretching, wishing Folly out of my Blood, and now my wandering Heart is at home
again. Let me see; I have a hundred and a hundred times wished my self a Man;
and now, in outward appearance, I am a very Fellow; nay, a very pretty Fellow:
for, methinks Foppery, Impertinence, Self-conceit, and other Masculine
Qualities grow upon me strangely. -- Oh, Mischief, Mischief, Mischief! thou art
a very sweet-Employment: -- But Opportunity! Bewitching, Lovely, Omnipotent
Opportunity! How shall I come at thee? Chloris! --


Madam.


Give me my Sword.


Here Madam: Bless us, What will your Ladyship do with your self in this
Equipage!


Ladyship, Hussy! take notice from this important Moment, I am no more your
Mistress; but that Imperial Creature, your Master: and therefore know too, I
will have my Foeminine Habiliments burnt instantly, and an Operator sent for to
make me a Beard grow. I will learn to Ride, Fence, Vault, and make
Fortifications in Dirt-Pyes: Nay, if the humour hold, I'll go Volunteer into
Germany against the Turk.


But what will be the end of all this, Madam?


Why, if I go into the War, I shall have the privilege, when I return home, to
talk of Marches, Battles and Sieges, which I never was at, nor understand any
more than the Fools I tell my story to. If I stay at home, with the privilege
of good Clothes, Pertness and much Simplicity, will I set up for a Spark, grow
familiar at White-Hall, and impudent with some great Man there or another; run
in Debt with a high Hand, be terrible in eating Houses, and noisy all over the
Town.


A very hopeful Resolution.


As thus: When I and another Spark meet; Dam me, Jack, says I* What Times are
there stirring? What ready to be had? What Caravans have you met with, or what
Loose lately managed? You Rogue, you look very high upon the Huckle.


Well Madam; But what will all this Gibberish signify?


Signify, you Fool! why what it signifies already; Wit, Courage, Martial
Discipline, Interest at Court, Pretence to Preferment, Free Quart^r^ in my
Lodgings, and Free Booty in every Cuckold's Shop, who shall trust me against
his palpable knowledge, that I'm not worth a Groat; and never have the
Impudence to hope to be paid.


And must your Honour have a Mistress too?


Yes Hussy, and you shall be serviceable to me in the matter: I'll have a Doxy
this very Night; I have singled her out already; Courtin's Wife, that jealous,
raging, insatiable Help-meet of the Captains shall be my Ducinea del Toboso.
She's in Love with me already, that's my comfort: as I passed through the Hall
just now, she coming into the House to pay a Visit to the Widow Porcia, (who,
by the way, is as wicked as my self, and my great Councellor in this noble
Project) we met: I, you must know, bowed very respectfully; she ^aking me for a
Stranger, Curt 'sy'd as low; and viewing me strictly leered at me, as if that
Minute she took Aim at my Heart, and designed me for her Quarry.


But, Madam, she knows, and must discover you.


Thou art a fool: she never saw me till yesterday in her life-time, then too
disguised: So that if I do not practise on her frailty, and by that means find
a way to revenge my self on that Vizard-monger Beaugard, may I be condemned to
wear Breeches as long as I live, and never know more than the present use I
make of them.


Hist Madam, she's returning.


Hush then: now my Cause is coming* on, and have at her.


Sweet-heart, pray oblige me so far to show me the way to the Gardens; I come
to pay a Visit to Madam Porcia, and am informed she's gone there for the Air.
-- A very handsome Youth --


Madam, this young Gentleman here is com^ hither on the same kind Errand with
your Ladyship, and waits till her Return.


But, Madam, the good fortune of seeing you is a happiness would recompense the
being disappointed of all the Conversation of your Sex besides.


Indeed, Sir!


Yes indeed, Madam.


Are you a Relation to this Family, Sir?


Madam, the greatest Advantage I hope from the Family is, henceforth to have
oftner the Honour of kissing your fair Hands here: It is an Opportunity I
should make no Ungentlemanly use of.


Opportunity, Sir?


Yes, Opportunity Madam: I am not ashamed to mention so honest a Friend as
Opportunity, to one that, by her Years and Beauty, should not, methinks, be a
mortal Foe to Opportunity.


Do you know me, Sir?


Why, Madam; do I treat you like a Stranger? Know you, by this good Hour, there
has not been a Day or Night since I first saw you, that I have thought or
dreamt of any thing else. Are no^ you the Wi^e of a certain swaggering Squire
about this Town, who calls himself Captain Courtine?


Yes Sir; such a Friend in a Corner I have, Sir; and what have you to say to
him, Sir? I'll swear, a very handsome Youth still. --


What, Madam! what I have to say to you, rather than lose you, I would say to
him: which is, that I like you, love you, languish for you; and would, with all
my Heart, Blood, Spirit and Flesh, ^ --


I'll swear, Sir, I am mightily obliged to you, and so is Mr. Courtine; ha, ha,
ha! --


Mr. Courtine! Take notice, Madam, I receive that Expression as kindly as if
you had called him what I wish him: for, pretty one, if my Intelligence be
true, he lives with your Ladyship as much like Mr. Courtine, as much like a
Gentleman --


Sir!


Madam!


Oh Gaud! he's very handsome.


Shall we walk in these Gardens anon, for I have the priv^lege of a Key that
opens into the Fields: The Moon shines too.


Between Ten and Eleven does the Moon shine?


As bright as any thing but your self.


But you'll tell, young Gentleman.


Only you how I love you.


Eleven's a late Hour.


Not too late.


Indeed!


Take this, and my Word for it.


Fie, how you use me, when you mean to forget me.


Hush, no more; Company's coming. Eleven.


Ten if you are kind enough.


Well said, my chaste Sex.


Oh Cousin, art thou come! Thou art the welcomest Creature on the Earth; I have
expected thee almost to despair for these three Hours. Oh, Sir! your Servant.


I am here, Madam, in order to your Commands.


Her Commands!


Oh, Cousin, the prettiest best natured Youth! He is something related to us a
great way off; and by that means has the privilege of Visiting, without offence
to my jealous Brother in Law, and Tyrannical Guardian. Have you contrived that
business?


Madam, it is done.


Business! What Business, Cousin?
Lord, Cousin, you seem concerned at it.

I'll tell thee: Seeing my self here consigned to the Rules and Limits of a very
Prison, I have resolved to put as good a face upon the matter as it will bear,
and make my misfortune as easy as I can. Wherefore, for a little present
diversion, I have contrived a Letter in an unknown name, by this young Agent
here, and conveyed it to thy lewd Husband, with another in my own to Beaugard;
and sent for thee, my Dear, to share in the pleasure of the Consequence.


Ha, ha ha! But what will be this Consequence, Cousin?


Twenty to one but it occasions some new Alarm, and Divertisement to my
Jaylours; who are so very capricious, they would fancy a Rat behind the
Hangings for a concealed Lover. It may too, by chance, produce me some lucky
opportunity once more to make my Escape out of their merciless Power. Nay, they
are already half disposed to run away themselves; for by my Woman's interest in
the Surgeon, who has care of the swearing Atheistical Fellow, yesterday hurt
in the scuffle, and afterwards conveyed hither, he gives it out, that he fears
his Wounds may be mortal. Upon which, my Lover Gratian sighs, and turns up his
Eyes like a Godly Brother at Exercise. My Brother Theodoret puffs, swells,
grinds his Teeth, and stamps as if he would brain himself against the next
Wall; while poor Beaugard's never be good Father has, with pure fear, lost a
red Nose that has been his fast Friend for these 40 years; and every time he
sees his Face in a Glass, fancies every Wrinkle there has the shape of a
Gibbet.


Oh, my dear, dear Lady, what will become of us! the most unhappy Accident!


Hah!


Indeed Madam, I could not possibly help it: I have lost it.


Lost it, lost what? What hast thou lost? Would thou had lost thy self; lost
a Leg or an Arm, or any thing, rather than have put me in this fright. Speak,
what is the matter?


Oh, Madam, the Billet; Madam, the Billet.


How's this?


What, the Note I sent to Beaugard?


As I hope to see you happy, Madam, I put it as fast here between these two
poor naked Breasts here, as ever it could stick, so I did, when, just as I was
going forth, who should meet me but the old, wicked, ranting, roaring Gentleman
that lies hid here for fear of hanging, would he had been well hanged a
Twelvemonth since; and there he fell a towzing, and a mowzing, and a meddling
with me; I was never so afraid of being ravished in my life, Gad he knows: So
in the struggle, I guess the Note was lost truly; though, in my heart, I wish I
had been ravished six times over, rather than such a misfortune had happened.
Nevertheless, I have done your business for you, so I have.


Business! what Business? Ugliness and ill Reputation light on thee. Thou hast
undone and ruined me for ever.


Why, I have met with the Captain, and told him the whole matter, as well as if
he had read it in the Letter himself. He's but too kind a Man to you, and I too
faithful a Servant, so I am, to be thus reviled and cursed by you, for all
this.


What then did he say? Fool, Beast and Blockhead; tell me.


Why, he said, he'd die a thousand and a thousand times for you, were it
possible, so he did; and that that he will not eat, drink or sleep^till he has
set you at liberty, so he wo'not; and that he will be in the Garden before Ten.


What's in this Case to be done, Madam?


O dearest Cousin, retire if you love me; for, should the Lords of my Liberty
get any notice of this Billet, and find a Man here, notwithstanding your
Relation, who knows what ill usage it may aggravate! -- To thy Chamber, dear
Lucrece, ever the Storm comes upon us,


I am all Obedience. Sweet Creature, you'll remember!


It is not possible to forget you, surely.


Blessings on you for this Goodness.


Double Bar up all the Doors and Windows: Load all the Arms in the House, and
be ready for Execution instantly, all of ye. By those Devils that dance in your
gogling Eyes, Madam, I'll try if you have given, your self over to Hell so far,
that you can out at a Key-hole.


What means the great He Brute?


To cut off your Intelligence, Lady, and make thee, ever I have done, to curse
thy Father and Mother, that let thee learn to write. See thou this! thou
irreclamable profligate Wretch! Faugh! Send you the draggle-tail'd Minister of
thy lewd Affairs a hunting, full cry about the Town, upon the rank Scent of a
Brawny-back'd Hector! By Heavens! the thought of it makes me loath the House,
and fancy it stinks of the ^oul Sins thou hast imagined in it.


Thou barbarous, ill mannered, worse than Beast! Why am I abused thus? Why made
a Prisoner too, at your ^awcy Will? Fettered up, and barred all Liberty and
Converse?


For the same reason other too hot blooded Females are; because, if possible, I
would not have a good Breed spoiled.


What a Load of Dirt is the Thick-Skull crammed withal, if the Tongue were able
to throw it out!


Filthy, filthy, fulsome filthy! What, be a Doll-Common, follow the Camp! How
lovelily would your fair Ladyship look, mounted upon a Baggage-Cart, presiding
over the rest of the Captain's dirty Equipage!


If any thing in the World would make me follow a Camp, it would be a very
strong fancy I have, that I should never see you in one, Sir.


Your Ladyship has reason to defend the Soldiers Cause: You have married one,
as I take it, Madam. Ha, ha, ha.


He in a Camp! He has not Courage enough to animate half a Taylor, no^ good
Nature enough to make a Spaniel of, or Sense enough, if he were that Animal, to
learn to fetch and carry.


This will open no Locks, Lady.


But there are Instruments to be had, that will break open Locks, Sir.


Will you please to retire, and consider farther of that in your Chamber.


No, I'll not stir, Sir.


Nay, by Heaven, but you shall, Madam.


Nay, by Heaven, but she shall not, Sir.


How!


By Jove, and that's well said, I'll s^and still a little, and see what's the
matter.


Do not drive me to use Violence.


How! Violence to a fair Lady! That's not so well, neither.


Hark you, Sir; my Jailer, or my Hang-man; for which of the two your Office
will end in, by your proceedings I cannot imagine: do but touch me, or offer
the least force to compel me to a closer Confinement; by this injured Heart,
I'll fire the House about your Asses Ears: I'll sooner burn with you, to be
revenged, than endure such Insolence and Torment any longer.


Very well.


I Gad, a brave Girl, a delicate Wench! How my Fingers itch to take her part
now! I have a Months mind to espouse her Quarrel, and make Friends with poor
Iacky again. Honest Iacky! 'tis the best natured Boy in the World, though I was
such a Beast to fall out with him.


Inhumane, cruel Theodoret! Why do you afflict me thus? Why do you force the
Tears from my poor Eyes, and wrack a tender Heart that never wronged you? --


For your Souls Health, Lady; and the Welfare of your wasting Reputation. A Pox
o'your Whining! Come, to your Chamber, to your Prayer-Book and Repentance:
Fasting and Humiliation will be good for you. To your Chamber.


To my Grave first.


Nay then -- When, hoa!


Stand off! Murder! Cramps, Rheums and Palsies, wither thy unmanly Hands.


By Heaven!


You dare not do it.


Hah!


No Sir, you dare not do it, you dare not.


Avaunt Pass! Confound me, but I shall be scratched here presently for my
patience.


What an ill bred Camel 'tis!


Nay, and what's more; you shall not do it, you shall not; Sir Ho! Is this the
Issue of your honourable Pretensions?


Et tu Brute!


Brute, Brute! Brute me no Brutes Friend: Oonds I am a Man, Fellow; Battoons
and Bilboes! Brut^! a Gentleman!


Your Pardon, Sir!


Don't pardon him, Sir.


Oh, Friend!


Poor Gratian.


If ever we ought to do any thing for our Safety, let us now prepare, and look
about us: I have made hard shift to hobble hither, my Wound's grown very
troublesome* -- We are all lost.


I can fear nothing when my Friend's so near me.


Now Cousin rebel, and force your Freedom nobly.


Iacky, I hope. Iacky at the Head of Mirmidons, and declaring for his Property.
Look you, Gentlemen; I must confess, I have Remorse of Conscience, and am
sensible I have been a Rebel: wherefore, if my Liege Son and Heir have
recruited his Power, and be once more up in Arms, Loyalty and Natural
Affection, Friends, will work, I must pronounce for Prince Iacky; and here I
resolve to defend his Territories.


If Prince Iacky have Interest enough to get your Pardon for Murder, Sir, it
will be your best way to close with him; for, in short, the Atheist Dardevill,
your Antagonist, is dead Sir.


Hah! Dead!


Dead!


Yes dead, Sir.


So much the better. Porcia, let us run up to the Leads, and cry out Murder to
the Streets this Moment.


Then I find that I am but a short lived Sinner; farewell for ever old Hock,
Sherry, Nutmeg and Sugar, Seven and Eleven; Sink-Tray, and the Doublets! Never
comes better of rebleting against one's natural born Children. I shall be
hanged one of these Sun-shiny Mornings, and a Ballad come out in the Afternoon
to a lamentable Eighty eight Tune of the careful Son, and prodigal Father. Dead
said you, Sir.


Or, at least, cannot survive half an Hour; therefore it is my Opinion that we
instantly quit the House, and provide all for our Safety.


Confusion, Devils!


Nay, Sir; stand fast! dare but to open a Door, Sir; by Heaven, that Moment
I'll alarm the Town: you shall not think to escape, reeking with a poor Man's
Blood, shed in defence of me.


Lady, no fooling.


No Sir, no fooling: but now, Sir, do you to your Chamber, Sir, to your
Chamber; to your Prayer-Book and Repentance; Fasting and Humiliation will be
good for you: To your Chamber, Sir; as you tender your Neck, Sir.


Damnation! Unhand me!


I'll dye ever I'll unhold you. Think you so barb'rously to leave me here in
the House with a dead Wretch, and have the Punishment of his horrid Murder
light on my innocent Head.


What do you resolve to do, Sir?


Do, Sir! What can I resolve to do, Sir? I have no means to hope to escape,
Sir: for, in the first place, I have no Money; and a Man that kills another,
without Money in his pocket, is in a very hopeful condition. In the next place,
for a disguise, I have no Clothes but these you see on my Back; with this
Tripe-Buff Belt here, which there is not a Constable in the whole City but
knows, and has had in his Custody, Sword and all. Look you, Gentlemen, I have
civilly killed a Man for your Service; if you will resolve, fairly and
squarely, to hang like Friends together, so: If not, I mutiny; and the word is,
Discover the Plot, the old Boy must impeach.


Oh, Sir! where are you?


Well, Rosard; what's the News now?


The Gentleman, Heaven be thanked, is revived again, Sir; though the Doctors
say, such another Fit will certainly carry him off. The poor Creature is very
weak, but very penitent.


In troth, and that's a very ill Symptom; therefore my Opinion is still -- I am
for hanging all together.


Hark you, old Rust; you say you have no Money, wherefore, during the present
Interval, in the first place, because I will have no Mutiny upon this occasion;
in order to your Escape, there's Money for you: in the next place, as you want
Change of Raiment, here is the Key of a small Wardrobe, at the lower end of the
Gallery above, you'll find the Door to it: Equip your self, and provide for
your Security, as your best Discretion shall direct you.


Look you, Friend, the sooner the better; for, to tell you the truth, else I
shall make but a scurvy matter of it at Tyburn Cross; with a whining, snivling
Account of breaking the Sabbath, and keeping ill Company. Wherefore, not being
good at making Speeches, I will leave the Opportunity to you, of showing your
politer Rhetoric, and save a Member of the Commonwealth -- There's no great
harm in Murder, when it brings a Man Money.


And now, my Tyrant Brother, I hope we stand on even Terms.


No, Lady, not yet: There's Life returned, and therefore hopes still, though,
at present, in some measure to comply with you, and ease your Apprehensions,
within the Limits of the House and Gardens you are at your Liberty, but no
farther this Night: And, for your ampler satisfaction, if I have any Midnight
Alarms from your Correspondent abroad, there's Entertainment ready for him,
which he may not be very fond of; so Good Night, it is almost Ten. Who waits?
What hoa, be ready there. Come Gratian, I'll see you to your Repose, and then
to my Post of Guard.


Ten! That was the Hour, Phillis, Beaugard mentioned; was it not?


It was, Madam.


Be ready then, all ye propitious Powers, that smile on faithful Love; Wait,
like kind Angels, on him; Establish Conquest in his able Hand, and Kindness in
his Heart. Oh, Sylvia*


You are transported, Cousin!


With hopes of Liberty I am indeed: it is an English Woman's natural Right. Do
not our Fathers, Brothers and Kinsmen often, upon pretence of it, bid fair for
Rebellion against their Sovereign; And why ought not we, by their Example, to
rebel as plausibly against them?


Most edifying Doctrine this is, truly.


The Sign! Hark, the Sign! Phillis, heard you nothing? Sylvia, let us retire
our selves; you know your old Apartment, for precious mischief will be soon on
foot; and Action worthy Love's great Cause. Thy Husband too, may chance to have
his share in the business; and, as I have ordered Matters, meet something in
the Adventure, to mortify his roving Humour, and reconcile him to his Duty and
Allegiance. -- Hark: Beaugard's besieging of the Widow.

Which, as 'tis laid sure, with Success must end,
Since Justice does his Enterprise attend
Without, and powerful Love within's his Friend.

Hold, stand fast; I have just now received Intelligence over the Garden-Wall,
that our design has taken air, and there will be no easy Entrance.


Ah Captain; the time has been, when, under your Command, we should have had no
need of a Council of War for the attacking such a Fortification as this is.


Peace Plunder, Peace you Rogue; no Moroding now: we'll burn, rob, demolish and
murder another time together: This is a Business must be done with Decency. --
Hark.


Some Company coming, Sir, from the Back-Street Ward.


Hold then, Plunder: Do you, with your flying Party, hover at a distance about
the Fields; while I, with the rest of the Body, post my self as advantageously
as I can, to watch the Enemies Motions. --


This way the noise was: Be sure keep safe the Garden Gate, and follow me
carefully.


So, here I am; and now for my Instructions. Let me see. Pray come disguised,
that if the Design should miscarry, your Retreat may be the easier. Your
unknown blushing Servant -- Humph! Blushing Servant! Passingly modest, I'll
warrant you! Pray come disguised! So I am, or the Devil's in it; for I look more
like a Cut-throat, than any thing else. Let me see; Upon this very Spot, the
last time I was here, did I meet my damned Wife: Avert the Omen, sweet Heaven,
I beseech thee. And now, as I am considering, where can my Friend Beaugard be
at present too? With a Whore. There's that Question answered. Wherefore, would
but my unknown blushing Servant appear, or give me a kind Sign; would but my
little Partridge call, methinks I could so shuckle, and run, and Bill, and clap
my Wings about her. Hah!


Stand: Who goes there?


What's the matter now?


Stand, Sir: What are you, Sir?


What am, I, Sir! A Man, Sir.


A Man, Sir, we see you are: But what Man are you, Friend?


A Gentleman, Friend; and you had best use me so. -- By Heaven, Theodoret; and
if I am but discovered!


Hands off, unloose him. You are not him we look for, Sir.


I am glad of that with all my Heart.


And therefore I ask your Pardon. But, if you are a Gentleman, you will assist
one in me, that have been injured. I have reason to believe, my House is now
beset by Villains, who have base designs upon the Honour of my Family.
Wherefore, if you are what you pretend, you'll draw your Sword to do a good
Cause Justice.


Sir, I wear it for no other end; and you shall command it. -- Ay, 'tis so
Beaugard; upon new Exploits for the Recovery of his Widow. Nothing but
Knight-Errantry stirring this Moon.


Please you then, Sir, to stay here with my Servants, while I walk to the
Corner of yon Wall, and try what I can discover.


You may trust me, Sir. Now will I show my self a true Renegade; take
Entertainment in Christian Service, to betray 'em to my Brother Turk, upon the
first opportunity. And so, my blushing Unknown, you may even stay your Stomach
with your Sheets for this Night.


They are here, stand fast; be resolute, and be rewarded.


Now, for a convenient Opportunity to do a mischief: Beaugard, I find, is come,
and my kind Mistress punctual to Appointment in the Garden. Now, could I but
order the Affair so, as to slur Beaugard upon her, instead of my self; and her
upon him, instead of Porcia, my Conscience would be satisfied; and he, Mr.
Courtine, my Rival Widow, and the Wi^e served all in their kind.


Hold, Sir; What are you?


Ay; Now, now.


No matter, Sir; this is not a time of Night to answer Questions.


Nay, then. --


Nay, now Sir; and when else you think fitting, Sir: I am the Man you look for;
and you are him I wished to meet here.


Now how the Devil I shall do to tilt Booty; Hang me like a Dog if I can
imagine.


Come on there.


You pass upon your death.


I have learnt to scorn death more since first you threatened it*
I see your Numbers too, and come prepared,
Porcia's my Claim, and here I'll win or lose her.

Then take thy due; and dye like a midnight Thief. Fall on.


He runs, he runs; the Half-bred Hector runs. False Cards and Diee, and
Quart-pot Brothel-Brawles, were ^itter for his Management, than honourable
Difference: Hark, Clashing of Swords still, by Heaven I miss our Friend the
honourable Stranger, that so generously took our Party; if it (...) him, let's
out, and give him succour.


Base Rascal! Coward fly! --


No, Sir, I stand ^ock still, and won't stir an Inch; but since you are so
uncivil, resolve not to ^ight a stroke more: So there's my Sword, and here's
your humble Servant.


Courtine!


The same.


And thou my Enemy too^


No, Sir, your Friend, had you been wise enough to have found it; I came hither
disguised, for a Reason you shall know hereafter; But falling into the hands of
the Enemy, was forced to take Party against you, for fear of being beaten for
you: Yet with a design of revolting would you have given me leave; but you,
when you should have kept at the head of your Friends* took a particular fancy
to be tickling my small guts, and now you s^e what you have got by it.


Then farewell for ever poor Widow. -- But stay, it were base and unmanly to
give it over so -- Let me see -- Lend me thy Disguise, Quickly, quickly,
quickly, my Imagination's warm.


Ay, with all my heart, and glad to be rid of it so --


Take this, and rally my scattered Forces,


Well, with all my heart for once, here is a new design in Embryo now, though I
fancy when we have got her, we shall never make of this Widow what she has co^t
us.


No more; I hear Company* Vanish. --


This way I think I heard it: Look, Is not that he! Oh my dean ge^nerous
Friend, let me embrace you: I hope you are come off well.


Very well, Sir, I thank you, if I were but well off from this place; I fear
the man I had to deal withal is fallen, for I left him stagg'ring. Security
were best for us all, Sir.


My house shall be your Sanctuary, and I'll dye with you but I'll protect you.


I gad, and that's kindly said, as things stand between us, and if he knew all.


Open the Garden-gate there: You shall rest your self in an Arbor, while I
dispose of the gross of my Family, and prepare an Apartment for your privacy.


If I had died in your Quarrel, Sir, a Generosity like this had over-rewarded
it.


Stand still ye beaten scattered Scoundrels, I think that's he, follow me but
at a distance.


Open the Gate I say there, come Sir --


The Stratagem succeeds, and Troy at last is taken.


Oh dear Sir, are not you Captain Beaugard?


The same, my dear Child, the same; Hast thou any good tidings for me?


The private door of the Garden on the other side is opened, and you may enter
Sir. My poor Lady is dying almost with despair, that she shall never see you
more: Could you now tell me news of Captain Courtine?


Hah! Does then my Blushing unknown belong to these Territories? It must be so,
Captain Courtine is just gone in before Sweet-heart, therefore if thou art a
true Friend to Love, quickly conduct me.


I'll show you, Sir, into the door where you may conceal your self in one of
the Arbors till I go through the House, and bring you farther intelligence.


And if my Adventure happen really to be at the end of this business, my Friend
and I shall not, I fancy, pass our time very uncomfortably.


So, so, thus far I am undiscovered; it is as dark, as if the Devil himself
were abroad a solacing amongst a Company of Northern Witches to Nigh^: if (...)
be but entered with my Mermidons, the Widow's in^allibly all my own. (...)! Who
comes here?


Sir, Sir, where are you?


Here, here, my Friend, I wait you.


Friend! Is not your Name? --


My Name, what! what can this mean? --


Beaugard, Come, come, I know you: You need not distrust your self, my design
is to do you service; your Porcia knows you are here, and expects you with her
Arms open, follow me.


Be thou my good or bad Angel, at the charm of that name I must follow thee,
though thou lead me to Perdition.


Softly, no noise, this way, give me your hand.


Hold, let me see; Ay, there I think is an Arbor where I will creep in, and lie
as close, as a Coward in the Hold at a Sea-fight.


Hereabouts it was I left him, it is wonderfully dark: Friend! Friend! Where
are you?


Hah! that's another sort of Voice than the Youngsters I depend on: By Heaven,
Theodoret!


Friend, Friend, I say, where are you?


Ay, but the Devil a word you get of me.


Why, Sir Friend, do not you hear me?


No.


I am sure this must be the Arbor; I'll run and call a Flamb^aux.


That may not be so well neither, my affairs will not agree with the light as I
take it.


May be he's fallen asleep, let me see.
'Tis even so: What hoa, Sir! --
Friend, Friend, awake, your Chamber's ready, and I stay for you.

Who's there? What are you?


Hush, make no noise; but come away.


Is it you, Sir? -- He mistakes me for Beaugard, I hope.


The same: I wait upon you, follow me.


If he discover me, all again is ruined; but Darkness, I hope, and Impudence,
will befriend a good Cause.


Oh! oh! oh! my Wounds and my Sins! Conscience, Conscience, Conscience, how
shall I quiet thee!


This cowardly Chicken-hearted Rascal will dye, and be damned at last. How do
you do Sir? How do you find your self?


Oh very ill, Heaven knows! within few hours of a Grave, and without great
mercy of a deeper place: Who ever you are, if you have any Charity, procure me
some Conscientious Godly Divine to unburden my self of my iniquity to.


This puling, whining, repining Rogue, within these two days was blaspheming:
Ought I to be hanged now for such a Varlet! Shall I send you a Divine, said you
Sir?


It would be a great Favour, and a Comfort to me, Sir.


I'll try what I can do for you, since I see your condition so dangerous, a Pox
o'yr Queasy Conscience: There is no safety for me in staying here, that's one
thing, the House being certainly beset for the apprehending some body: For
looking out at the Wardrobe Window as I was dressing my self, I observed six or
seven armed Rogues with hangmanly Faces, sneaking and skulking about the
Garden, that's another thing; wherefore I will hasten and finish my disguise,
and if there come an Alarm, take the fairest opportunity to get off in it, and
that for me will be the best thing.


To what an insignificant purpose have I taken all this pains to night, here
have I been put into a Room with a Bed in it, with pray, Sir, will you be
pleased to take your rest in the Devil's Name; when my design has not been to
take my rest, but my Recreation: I fancy I heard a kind, small complaining
Voice this way too, and must at present confess my self in a very good natured
humour, very much inclined to succour any distressed Damsel that wants a
Companion to pass away a tedious Night withal.


Oh! oh! Would but this dear Man come now!


Hah! hark! That must certainly be me she means; nay, I am sure on it: I'll on
a little farther.


Oh h h!


Where art thou, thou poor Creature? I am come to comfort thee.


I wish you had come a little sooner, I am very ill.


Alas, kind So^, she's sick with passionate expectation: This must be my
blushing, unknown Servant at the least.


Whereabouts are you? Give me your hand hither, will you?


Here, here it is, and my heart too, thou hast 'em both: I'll swear she has a
well grown palm, by the Rule of proportion I'll warrant her a Swinger: -- but
no matter 'tis in the dark.


Heart, said you Sir? Alas! my poor heart's breaking.


Breaking, dear Soul! No, no, never fear it, I'll give thee a Re^pe to keep it
whole. I'll warrant thee: This is the most Romantic Adventure.


Has then Beaugard gotten entrance art thou sure?


Hah!


Madam so sure; that his Valet Fourbine is here in the House, and told me so
himself.


What's that?


Then now my part begins: Was there ever such inhumane Cruelty committed, a
Wretch barbar^usly murdered and exposed, without comfort or succour?


Murder, said they? What, Manslaying! when all my thoughts were upon nothing
but Manmaking. I gad then 'tis time that I take care for one, and till a better
convenience offer it self, here's my Borough, murder in the Devil's name. What
do they say now?


No, no, my Conscience will not bear it, I must proclaim it to the World: What
hoa there, Murder, Murder, Murder.


Oh Lord, here's a comfortable Condition that I am got into.


But does the Surgeon say there is certainly no danger?


Only a thin skin Wound on the outside of his Belly; but that the force of Fear
in the Cowardly-hearted Fellow, will let him think of nothing but a Grave and
Damnation.


The present advantage of it then must be improved: wherefore I say the
stinging of my Conscience will not let me rest, I dare not conceal this Murder.
Murder, Murder, Murder! Cry Murder you Witch, and alarm the House.


Here is somebody coming already, Madam.


Stand still, and observe then.


I think it was this way, but no matter, for I am sure I reign Lord P^amount of
this Castle now: The ang^ jealous Brother is gone to Bed, and all his wa^ like
Family, where he lies as (...), and snores and gapes so wide, one might steal
the Widow out of his mouth if she were there: Now could I but find the way to
her Ladiship's Chamber, while Plunder is according to Orders, with his Crew
binding the drowsy Rogues of the Family in their Beds! What an opportunity
would that be! For there is but one way of making a slippery Widow sure to you.


No matter, happen how it will, I say again it is a Crying Sin, it is an
Abomination, 'tis a -- Ah!


Hah! What do Ghosts walk here at this time o'Night, and in Petticoats too;
Nay, then have at you: Ye Airy Forms.


Yes, verily, and indeed it is an Abomination, a burning Shame, and a lewd
Abomination.


Hell and the Devil! My Spirit in Petticoats that squeak'd Abomination in Ela,
converted to the fleshly ^imilitude of a Holy Brother, that Cants it in Gamut
-- Ho! Speak, what art thou?


A Minister of Peace to wounded Consciences; I come here by appointment with an
Olive Branch in my mouth, to visit a mortal Ark tossed and floating in floods
of its own Tears, for its own Frailties.


And are you really, Sir, a Man? Really the Godly Implement you appear to be,
for the scouring of foul Consciences.


Ha! ha! ha! Godly Implement, it has almost made me laugh; that's a merry
Gentleman, I'll warrant him: Oh h h!


I am, Friend, I tell thee, an instructor of the Chosen: Thou favour'st of the
old Man, stand off, and do not pollute me with too near communication: I come
to convert a Sinner to the Truth, it was I that converted -- as some say no
body; and expounded the groans of the Protestant Board. How fares our Brother?


Alas, Sir, very weak; upon the point of Dissolution, and tormented with the
stings of a terrified Conscience.


Lay then one hand upon thy heart.


I do so.


Lend me the other; that in the pouring forth thy sins, thy right hand may not
know what thy left hand doth.


A very material Point that is truly.


Thou hast lived in Wickedness long.


From Sixteen to Eight and Forty, without the least Repentance, or a thought of
it.


A very dangerous state; but for thy darling Sins, Imprimis, what?


Drunkenness.


A very pernicious sin, and of the Devil's own institution; for it sets our
Souls a fire: Nay, it sets our Noses o'fire, and sets Houses o'fire.
Drunken^ss! -- Did you ever burn any Houses?


Never but three, and they Houses of pollution too: Bawdy-houses, Sir.


So much the worse: For if Bawdy-houses be burnt, what civil Family in this
City sleeps safe? I never burnt a Bawdy-house in my life, that's my comfort.
Item.


Whoredom, Adultery!


For Adultery, I mean corrupting of other men's Wives, let me tell you it is a
crying Sin, and a very loud one too; but do you repent?


From the Bottom of my heart.


So, Heaven be thanked, there's no harm in plain Whoredom.


No more to be said then; be comforted, and I'll absolve thee: But with whom
was this Wickedness committed last?


With my Bosom Friend's Wife, and one that deserved much better of me.


And that was very friendly done of thee truly.


Impudent Rogue! But was she very young?


Ay, now the feeling, circumstantial Questions are starting.


About Eighteen; and not yet wedded a full year.


Voluptuous Dog! But handsome too? Was she very handsome?


Too beautiful, to have had so little Virtue.


Her Name, her Name! Tell me her Name. Quickly, I say unto thee, let me know
her Name.


Well said, well said there, old Fornication!


That I have promised shall for ever be a Secret, Sir.


Then thou art damned, and I do not absolve thee. I must know this precious
young Harlot.


But I have sworn, Sir; you'd not have me be forsworn?


A mortal Sin in it self: Swearing is another Sin. Farewell, I'll have no more
to do with thee: Thy Sins are of too deep a Dye, and Satan be upon thee, a
damned Rogue not to tell me her Name.


Oh! oh! dear Sir, come back again, and leave me not in this desperate,
desponding, sad condition.


Oh, Sir, I am glad I have met with you, a word with you in private, turn, turn
this way into the next Room quickly, Porcia, Porcia, your Widow Porcia, Sir.


Hah! speak, where is she, thou pretty, smiling Mercury!


I am to bring her to you this moment: No more words, but in Sir, in, if you'll
be happy.


Porcia, Porcia, said he? Then I am sure it must be Beaugard, a pretty Pimp
that I'll warrant him.


And shall I trust thee?


Why should I deceive you?


Be sure thou dost not, as thou love the welfare of this soft, tender
outside; adi^u for a minute.


That minute gives her to your possession, Sir -- Hist, Madam, Hist! The Coast
is now clear.


Where are you ill nature?


Here, tortured with my Longings: Where are you? come, come.


Why do you make me do this?


Is that a Question now? Turn, turn into the dark Chamber: I'll but secure this
Door, and then the Night's our own.


Don't stay too long.


How afraid she is, le^t he should come again too soon!


Be satisfied, I'll fly -- that is from you as fast as I can, for I hope I have
fitted you.


Nay, faith, if this be the Custom of the House, I'll lu^k here no longer: The
Devil again!


Trouble me no more, I say I will not be persuaded, I will know the Adultresses
Name, that I may admonish her; for it has been of ancient practice in these our
pious Offices, to make our Converts conf^ss not only all they know, but all
that we have a mind to know.


Not Sir, I hope, if it be improper.


No matter for that, proper or improper, right or wrong true or false, if it be
for our use, it must be confessed. Therefore I say, and say again, I do not
absolve thee, thou art in the state of Perdition still; tell me her Name, or
for thy Drunkenness, and burning of Houses; Thy Whoredoms, and Adulteries;
Blasphemy, and Profaneness; Thy Swearing, and Forswearing; Thy rubbing out
Milk-scores, and lamb-blacking of Signs in Covent-Garden; Thy breaking of
Windows, killing Constables and Watchmen, Beadles, Taylors, Hackney-Coachmen
and Link-Boys: for all these --


Nay, Madam, if you squeak, and think to alarm the House, I do not behave my
self like a true Friend to Love, I am mistaken, and so here I am posted, and
thus will maintain the Pass.





Come forth thou Strumpet.


Nay, cruel Theodoret, do not, do not kill me: here on my knees.


How's this? Porcia taken there, and my Friend here in private with Porcia too!


By Heaven thou dy'st this moment.


By Hell though but she shall not, Sir.


Nay, Madam, then! how's this? My Widow split in twain! My Porcia there, and
Porcia here too? Con^ound me Courtine's Wife* I have done finely.


You'll justify this usage?


You see, Sir, I am r^sponsible.


By Heaven unhand her, or -- Nay, look Sir well, you'll know me.


My faithful Soldier!


My victorious Widow!


Call up my Servants there, raise all the Household.


I'll do it Sir --


And I will find'em service that shall warm'em.


Now, I fancy, by this Lady's concealing her self, she may be a discovery worth
the making. Madam, you see here my Friend is unconstant, but truly nothing
could ever wean him from this Widow here -- Sylvia! My Wife! my rigid virtuous
Wife! my damned, confounded, jealous Wife!


Now here are very hopeful matters towards.


It was very courteously done of me, Beaugard, was it not, to keep the door for
you, with my own Wife, Sir?


Nay, let us not quarrel Ned: I'll give thee a friendly account of this matter
to morrow between our selves, in the mean time be satisfied, I have not wronged
thee.


Will you never leave this Foraging into other Folks Quarters, Captain?


I am afraid, Widow of mine, you had a finger in the Plot, though --


Indeed, my dearest.


Your humble Servant, my Dearest! I am only glad of this fair opportunity, to
be rid of you, my Dearest: henceforth, my Dearest, I shall drink my drink, my
Dearest, I shall whore my Dearest; and so long as I can pimp so handsomely for
you, my Dearest, I hope if ever we return into the Country, you'll wink at a
small Fault now and then with the Dairy-Wench, or Chamber-Maid, my Dearest.


I always was a Burden to your sight, and you shall be this time eased on it.


With all my heart! Heaven grant it would last for ever.


My Doors locked up! My Servants gaged and bound! I am betrayed, undone, and
I'll not live to bear it.


Nay, hold, Sir, none of that neither: This Design was not laid for a Tragedy.


How do you intend to deal with me?


Like a Gentleman, Sir, though you hardly deserve it of me: In short, this Lady
is in my Charge now, and you in my power, and by her Authority, this being her
own House, I have made thus bold with it, and will take care to dispose
hereafter out of the reach of your merciless Tyranny, nay, if this reverend
person will do us the friendly Office, though I have often renounc't it, am
ready to do it one way this moment. Dardevil, wilt thou lend me thy Chaplain?


Heh!


Rise, Sir! Won't you rise? If your old Friend and I make a match on it, I hope
you'll be so kind to dance at the Wedding.


Dance, Madam! I am dying.


That's false, to my knowledge, Madam: for the Surgeon told me last dressing,
it was so slight a Wound, he had much ado to keep it from healing.


Yes, by the same token when he had done with me, he began with you, forsooth,
and said he would show you a little of his operation, for handling and
tampering with his Box of Instruments, and there's the truth-out now.


Ha! ha! ha! ha!


Why Gentlemen, Ladies, Friends, Acquaintance, Am not I dying? Am not I
wounded? Is not there a Hole in my belly, that you may turn a Coach and six in?


No, no: Prithee leave raving, and get up for shame, man: Thou an Atheist, thou
believe neither a God nor a Devil, and be afraid of a hurt no bigger than a
Pin-hole! Courtine, lend us thy hand to raise up our old Friend here: Well, how
is't now?


Hah! Faith and Troth, I fancy, not so bad as I thought it was. Methinks I
begin to find my self pretty hearty; I can stand, I can walk too, I have no
pain at all. How dost thou do,


Ah! but you repented, Dardevill; thou did repent, Friend: I am sorry to hear
of it with all my heart, it will be a soul blot in thy Escutcheon: But thou
did repent.


A Pox on the Block-head, now I shall be known


Repent! Prithee be quiet, Man: Repent, quotha! Why, dost thou think I did not
know my old Customer for two Deuces here, old Anti-Abraham, the Father of
Unbelievers?


My Iacky! my little Rogue! my dainty Boy! Thou Son of thy nown Father, I can
hold no longer; and I must kiss thee, and I will kiss thee, (...) you Dog, you
Dog, you Dog, you little dear damned Dog. Huzza, the Widow's our own: There lie
Divinity.


A very Cutter, as I live, had he but a Tabith^, a perfect Cutter.


Now, Iacky Boy; Iacky, you Rogue, shall not I have a little spill out of this
Portion now, hah? The jolly Worms that have fatten'd so long in this Malmsey
Nose of mine with the Fumes of Sack will die, and drop out of their Sockets
else. Could thou have the Heart to see this illuminated Nose of mine look
like an empty Honey-Comb; Could thou be so hard hearted?


Faith, Captain, be mollified; the old Gentleman, methinks, proposes very
moderately.


It shall be so: She shall be my Daughter in Law, though I invert the Order of
Duty, and ask her Blessing.


Look you, Sir: Though you have been a very ungratious Father, upon condition
that you'll promise to leave off Gaming, and stick to your Who^ing and
Drinking, I will treat with you.


The truth on it is, I have been too blame, Jack! But thou shalt find me
hereafter very obedient; that is, provided I have my Terms: which are these.


Come on, then.


Three Bottles of Sack, Jack, per diem, without Deduction, or false Measure:
Two Pound of Tobacco per Month; and that of the best too.


Truly this is but reasonable.


Buttock-Beef and March-Beer at Dinner, you Rogue: A young Wench of my own
choosing, to wait on no body but me always: Money in my Pocket: An old Pacing
Horse, and an Elbow-Chair.


Agreed. You see, Sir, already, I am beginning to settle my Family; and all
this comes by the Dominion Chance has over us. By Chance you took the Charge of
an old Father off from my Hands and made a Chaplain of him. By the same sort of
Chance I have taken this Lady off from your Hands, and intend to make her
another sort of Domestic. What say you, Sir? Are you contented?


I cannot tell whether I am or no.


Then you are not so wife a Man as I took you for. In the mean time; for your
Liberty, you must dispense with the want of it, till I have this Night secured
the Safety of my Widow. Your Friend Gratian, because of his Wounds, is only
locked in his Chamber, and may take his Rest as otherwise. For the other part
of the Family, I care not to make Excuses.

Thus still, with Power in hand, we treat of Peace;
But when 'tis ratified, Suspicions cease:
The Conquered to recruiting Labours move.
Like me, the Victor, Cro^ns his Ease with Love.


