(...)


WHat mean these shouts?

-- Oh all your hopes are crossed,
The Gallant Alcibiades is lost.

Hah! --

-- When last Night the Youth of Athens late
Rose up the Orgies to Celebrate
The Bacchanals all hot and Drunk with Wine,
He led to the Almighty Thund'rers shrine,
And there his Image seated on a Throne
They violently took and tumbled down:
This opportunity Theramnes got,
To supplant him, and his own ends promote;
For by the Senate he was doomed to bleed,
And that his Rival should in all succeed;
But he the threatening danger to evade,
Is to the Spartan Camp for Refuge fled:
And now by order from the Senate, all
With shouts proclaim Theramnes General.

But is he fled? has he so meanly done,
To leave me to be wretched here alone.
Is this thy plighted Faith, is this thy Truth?
Oh too unkind, false and unconstant Youth!

Madam, believe not but my Brothers just,
You wrong his honour by this mean distrust;
Think you that distance can his Love rebate.

Thy young Experience never felt the weight
Of Lovers fears; if Just, he'll easily
Excuse that Love that breeds this Jealousy.

But Madam, for these doubts no grounds you have.

Alas! go ask of Mad-men why they Rave.
What more could Fate do to Augment my Woe?
I Love, am Mad, and know not what I do.
I, who before had nothing in my Eyes,
But Glory and Love growing to delight,
Like Chemists waiting for their labours prize;
My hopes are dash't and ruined in their height.

Alas, we but with weak intelligence
Read Heaven's decrees, They are writ in Mystic s^nce;
For were they open laid to Mortal Eyes,
Men would be Gods, or they no Deities.
Perhaps the wiser powers thought fit this way
To give your growing happiness allay,
Lest should it in its high perfection come,
Your soul for the Reception might want room.

Thy Reasons kind Draxilla, weakly move,
What Woman e're complained of too much Love?
No, had I naked to the World been left,
Of Honour, and its gaudy Plumes berest:
Yet all these I with gladness could resign,
So Alcibiades had still been mine;
But he removed, what can they give alone?
What is the casket when the Jewel's gone?

Madam, if he be gone, 'tis to obtain
A nobler lustre, and return again:
Think you his great soul could with patience see,
His rifled Honours heaped on's Enemy;
And not his Rage have grown to that excess,
As must have ruined all your happiness.
But he withdrew, and like a Zealous Hermit did forgo
Those little Toys, to gain a Heaven in you.

That Zeal must needs be very weak and faint,
That lets the Votary forsake his Saint;
No, he is happy in some other flame,
And from his breast has blotted out my name:
So that there nothing more remains for me,
But a kind Death, or a long Misery.
But Death alone's th'unhappy Lovers ease,
That Seals up to us an Eternal Peace*
By that our souls to endless pleasures move,
And we enjoy an Everlasting Love.
Yet e're I dye, as dye I feel I must,
To Alcibiades I would be just;
Fain would I let him know how I resign
All in him, that his past Vows had made mine;
Then to its seat in peace my soul should fly,
And calmly at my Lovers feet I'd dye.
Draxilla, for thy Friend, what could thou do?

Madam, I could do any thing for you;
I know not what you'd ask me I'd deny,
Except that cruel thing, to see you dye.

Some safe disguises for us then provide,
From watchful eyes our sudden flight to hide;
Hence to the Spartan Camp I'll forthwith move,
Born on the wings of Jealousy and Love;
For I'm resolved to know the worst of Fate*
I would be blessed; can be unfortunate;
Since 'tis the only thing of Heaven I crave,
To meet a faithful Lover, or a Grave.

-- Stay kind Polyndus here
Whilst I go pay my just devotion there:
See fairest Queen of Love and Beauty here,
Your faithfullest humblest Worshipper.
(...) (...) Distance adds to their Loves a Violence;
And their souls hold from far Intelligence.
Thus my mistaking Policy out-run
My Fate; and I'm by my own Plots undone.

Why do you let your soul be so oppressed?
'Tis Patience best befits a gallant Breast.

Patience! Whats that? The Mistress of tame Fools,
That can in nothing else employ their souls;
No, since Timandra thou can disapprove,
My just flame for an absent Rivals Love,
I'll find that Rival out, and snatch his breath,
Though every step I tread, encounter Death.

Now Sir you're brave --
Already you've disarmed Timandra's charms,
Me-thinks I see you Rev'ling in her Arms;
Let's then of the Wings of Love and honour fly
To the Field, and meet the insulting Enemy:
Where through the paths of death and blood, we will go
To meet your Rival, and his Countries Foe:
There the remembrance of Timandra's charms,
Shall add fresh courage to your Conq'ring Arms.
But if Fate the success so order shall,
That by your Rivals Sword you chance to fall:
I then (as honour justly will command,)
Inspired by Friendship and Timandra's Name,
Will bravely stem him, and with this bold hand
Revenge, or fall a Victim to your flame.

Oh noble generous Youth! whose tender years,
Such gallant courage and such honour wear!
How can my aims but in my wishes end,
That have so worthy and so brave a Friend?
Come my Polyndus. --

-- On my Friend I'll wait,
Through all the Labarinths of Love and Fate.

Now must proud Athens lay her Triumphs down,
And pay her Glorys Tribute to my Crown;
No more shall stupid Greece her Fetters wear,
Nor make disadvantageous peace for fear;
But she her self must in subjection come,
And humbly at my feet expect her doom.

Yes Sir; all Glorys must when Yours break forth,
Go out, and lose their Beauty, and their Worth;
And like false Angels Vanish and be gone,
Dreading those shapes they durst before put on.

Athens, the Worlds great Mistress will not be
Courted with low and vulgar Gallantry.
Her Glory aims at higher Characters,
Then heavy Gown-men clad in formal Furs:
Who wins her deeds 'bove common Fate must do,
And so she's only Mistress fit for you.

Yes, and I only will enjoy her too.
But noble generous Youth, thou has alone
Things Worthy the Athenian honour done:
Thou like a towering Eagle soard'st above
That lower Orb in which they faintly move;
A flight too high for their dull souls to use,
Which prompted 'em that honour to abuse:
Thinking their baseness they might palliate,
With the dark Cloud of Policy and State.
But let them that black mystery pursue,
By worth and honour Empires greatest grow;
Which when abused, their glory does suppress,
As reversed prospects make the object less.

Yours Sir, like Heavens great soul is General;
Dispensing its kind influence on all.
This makes success and Victory repair,
To move with you as in their proper Sphere;
As fragrant dews leave the corrupter earth,
Exhail'd by th'Sun from whom they had their Birth.

The truth of that we by your Laurels know,
Conquest your Arms, Triumph still waits your brow;
By your success the Athenian greatness rose,
Your courage scattered their insulting Foes;
And from that height to which by you they are grown,
'Tis your success alone must throw 'em down*
Thus have we made you General of ou^ Force;
And all those honours you were robbed off there,
We'll make our study to redouble here.

And I, (if that my Malice tell me true,)
As diligently shall his Plagues pursue.

Of all my Courage or my Sword shall do,
I the success must to your Virtue owe:
The honour and the justice of your cause,
So glorious are, Fate must from them take Laws:
So You over Athens this advantage have,
You Fortune rule, to whom she's but a Slave.

Enjoy my Tissaphernes now thy ease,
And plant ^resh Laurels in the shades of Peace.
The glorys thou hast won, so numerous are,
They seem as many as thy age can bear.
But if thy spacious soul thou can confine,
Within this narrow Mansion of mine:
Be this the utmost of thy wishes bound,
Possess his grateful heart, whose head you have Crowned.

Heaven knows my Age does feel no sharper sting,
Then to want power to serve so good a King.
But since time tells me that my glass is run,
Setting me backward where I first begun;
Since no way else they can their duty show,
I'll only employ my hands to Heaven for you:
And what my Sword can't, may devotion do.

How truly he a glorious Monarch is
That's Crowned with blessings so sublime as these!
How can I but in all things happy be,
Propped by such Courage and such Piety?
To me with Gods similitude is given:
'Tis power and virtue that supports their Heaven.
Our Royal Standard to the City bear,
T'Alarm it to Obedience, or to War;
To Morrow must decide the Athenian Fate,
This day to joy and ease we will Consecrate.

Ungrateful King! thy shallow aims pursue,
But my brisk Up-start Favourite, have at you.
Was it for this my active Youth I spent
In War? and knew no dwelling but a Tent!
Have I for this through Envious Mountains passed?
Demolish't Cities, and laid Kingdoms wast*
Still in his Cause unwearied courage shown?
And almost hid his head in Crowns I won!
Upon my Breast received so many Scars,
They seem a War described in Characters!
And must the harvest of my toil and blood,
Upon a fawning Rebel be bestowed?
Who having false to his own Country been,
Comes here to play his Treasons over again?
Must he at last tumble my Trophies down,
And Revel in the Glorys I have won?
Whilst from my Honours, they me disengage
With a dull Complement to feeble Age.
What ails this hardy hand, that yet it should
Tremble at death, or start at reeking blood?
Me thinks this Dagger I as firmly hold,
And with a strength as resolute and bold,
As he who kindly would its point impart,
A present to an envied Favourites heart;
And I fond Youth will try to work thy fall,
Though with my own I Crown thy Funeral.
Envy and Malice from your Mansions fly,
Resign your horror and your Snakes to me;
For I'll act mischiefs yet to you unknown;
Nay, you shall all be Saints when I come down.

WHat uncouth Roads Afflicted Lovers pass!
How strange preposterous steps their Sorrows trace!
Oh Alcibiades, if thou art just,
Forgive th'excess of Love that bred distrust.
Driven by that, disguised I hither came,
Yet here and every where my grief's the same.
But kind Draxilla's Friendship can dispel,
The thickest Clouds that on sad Bosoms dwell,
That does alleviate my griefs, and give
My wearied soul a soft and k^nd Reprieve;
Which ever to forget, would be as hard,
And as impossible, as to Reward.

The serving you, my happiness secures*
I'm only something by my being yours;
Since equally with yours, my hopes were crossed,
When in your Lover I a Brother lost;
Then like an Orphan destitute and bare
Of all but Misery and sad despair,
Your Kindness gave my yielding spirits rest,
And raised me to a dwelling in your breast:
Then ought I not in all my soul resign,
To ease her griefs that kindly pitied mine?

In that I did what honour urged me to.

And honour tells me Gratitude is due.

But how grows Gratitude to that degree,
To be afflicted thus, and weep for me.

Alas, that is the least that I could do,
To our worst Enemies our Tears we owe.
Friendship to such a noble height should rise,
As their devotion does in Sacrifice;
Who think they show a zeal remiss and small,
Except themselves as nobler Victims fall.
With as great courage could I for you dye,
And my Triumphant Soul to Heaven should fly;
There I again my Friendship would renew,
And lay up chiefest joys in store for you.

What vast and boundless flights does Friendship take!
Beyond what search can see, or fancy track!
'Tis the improvement of the part divine,
When souls in their Seraphic transports join;
In souls united, so we friendship see,
As many glorys make a Deity.

Madam, yonder he comes who must retrieve
Your drooping hopes, and your faint joys revive.

My Alcibiades! how I begin
To think my misplaced jealousy did sin!
Go meet him, seem all troubled, and in tears,
And with the tale I taught thee wound his ears:
Mean while I will with-draw my self this way,
Nor would my swelling passion let me stay.

What airy Visions over my eyes there move,
Like the good genius of an absent Love!
Where e're I turn me, I me-thinks espy,
Timandra's Image softly gliding by.
Such fond Ambition, Love his Slaves does teach,
To make 'em fancy what they cannot reach.
For oh Divine One! --
How sickly joys, honour and greatness grant,
When thee the glory of my soul I want!

My Lord! --

-- Guard me, ye powers Draxilla here,
And weeping too! Oh my Prophetic fear!
What is't your coming here would seem to tell?
Relate, oh quickly, is my Princess well?

Oh Sir! In that unhappy fatal Night,
When to the Spartan Camp you took your flight,
When by the cruel Sena^e you were drove,
Both to forsake your Country and your Love,
Timandra, and my self, and we were sate
In her Apartment, grieving for your fate:
No sooner with sad Jealousies oppressed,
Her wearied soul in sleep sought after rest,
But grief new Scenes of misery brought in,
And plaid in Dreams its horrors over again:
Sometimes her tender Arms she'd forward stretch,
Then fiercely at the empty air would catch:
Wearied with grief, she then would milder be,
And in a hallow sigh send out, Ah Me!
At last she rose, and about the Chamber walked;
Sometimes she started, then stood still and talked:
Anon, repeat some short and pithy prayer;
Again grow wild, and tear her precious hair;
Till having so wrought sorrow to that height.
That her soul grew too tender for the weight:
E're I my courage could collect to go,
And give a hindrance to the fatal blow,
She with her Dagger stabbed her self, and said,
Thus died Timandra that unhappy Maid.

Ye Gods! Is't thus your Justice you dispense*
To lay th'reward of Guilt on Innocence?
What though these Sacrilegious hands have thrown
Your Images, those Pageant Glorys down!
Must you revenge on her I loved transfer?
You might have plagued me, so y'ad pitied her.
But thus I'll send my soul, where it may tell
She loved too rashly, but not loved too well;
Oh Sister! do not hinder me my death;
Sighs are the only use I've left of breath:
One blow will put an end to grief and Me.

That Sir you must not do, nor must I see.
Why fly you back? nay, if you shun me now,
I shall grow apt to think my fears too true.

Oh Heavens! does then my dear Timandra live!
The Joy's too mighty for me to receive;
This was the greatest bliss Heaven had to give.
How rashly did my impious rage profane
Your Goodness! oh but wash away that stain,
Then I with Victims will your Altars load,
And have a Sacrifice for every God.
Till by those holy fires, this black offence
Be purged and purified to Innocence.
But dearest, how could you so cruel be,
To let such bliss be dressed in misery?
To tell me you were dead!
How could you think but th'horror of that breath,
Must damp my Soul, and chill me into death.

Alas, my fears could find out no relief,
But thus t'assault you in the garb of grief;
This trial of your Faith my Joy secures,
As Thunders usher in refreshing showers.

Let us no longer then to doubts give way,
But hast to th'Consummation of our Joy,
So with our bright united flames, dispel
Those anxious mists that on our bosoms dwell,
Being of no other Jealousy possess,
But which shall kindest prove, and love the best.

And when our faithful happy hearts shall be*
Firmier united by that sacred tie,
How in an endless Road of bliss we^l move,
Steering our motions by our perfect Love!
There we with pleasure will recount each woe
Which we have passed, and others undergo.
There we'll reflect of the various hopes and fears,
The mournful^sighs and the impatient tears
Of distressed Lovers, whilst we'll kindly thence,
Through a strange mystical Intelligence,
Give 'em Redresses by our influence:
Till so by ours, --
Their full-grown Joys receive a happy birth,
As Planets in their kind Conjunctions bless the Earth.

Then my Timandra to our Bliss let's fly,
There's but one minute more to Ecstasy.

Oh my Ardella, whither shall I turn?
I'm all over ^lame, in every part I burn.

Your Majesty --

-- Fool, Majesty! what's that?
The Ill-natur'd pageant mockery of fate;
When her ungrateful sportive power she'd show,
Raising us high --
To barr us of the benefits below.
But I'll her servile Policy despise,
And make her stoop to Loves great Victories.
The Almighty Power of Heaven came down from thence,
To taste the sweets of Amorous Excellence:
Why then should Princes that are Gods below,
Think that a sin which Heaven is proud to do?

But Madam, is it not a cruel thing,
T'abuse a Loving Husband and kind King?

Dull Girl, thou know no^ what a Husband is.
Alas, they never reach the height of bliss,
But ignorantly with Loves Magic play,
Till they raise Spirits they want power to lay.
In that brave Alcibiades there swarm,
So many graces, he's all over charm;
Such killing Airs in each part of him move,
His Brow darts Majesty, and his Eye Love:
Oh my Ardella, I am lost in thought!
I fain would have thee -- yet 'tis false, I'd not.

Madam, your Royal pleasure but relate,
I'll be as faithful, and as firm as Fate.

Art thou then skilful in Loves subtle arts,
Cunningly to lay Ambuscades for hearts?
Can thou express a melting kind desire,
And give a feeling draught of Loves soft fire?

Madam, so subt'ly I'll his heart betray,
As one, who by some great Magicians power,
Is hurried through the Regions in an hour,
And for return again, can find no way.

My better Angel! fly then swift as time,
Or thought; thou against a Queen in gaining him.
But use such secrecy as stolen Loves should have,
Be dark as the hushed silence of the Grave.

Madam, distrust not but that I shall do,
Both what is to your Love and Honour due.

Honour! a very word; an empty name:
How dully wretched is the Slave to Fame!
Give me the Soul that's large and unconfined;
Free as the Air, and boundless as the Wind:
Nature was then in her first excellence,
When undisturbed with puny Conscience,
Mans Sacrifice was pleasure, his God, sense.

Madam by th'Kings command I'm to you* sent,
Wh'attends your Royal presence in his Tent.

I go. --

-- Now all is Ripe, me-thinks I see
Treason walk hand in hand with Destiny,
And both in a kind Aspect smile on me.
Now the whole Court proceeds to solemnize
The Nuptials of proud* Alcibiades.
Where every thing does as I'd wish combine,
To give a happy end to my design.
It is the custom at a Marriage Feast,
The Bridegroom --
With a full Bowl presents his chiefest guest.
The Cup's by my great secrecy and care,
With strongest potion all infected are:
Which when our Alcibiades shall bring,
And offer as his duty to the King,
The Poison and his sudden death will seem,
Fully a Traitorous design in him.
Then must the Crown descend on me, and so
I feast my Rage, and my Ambition too.
Let Cowards spirits start at Cruelty,
Remorse has still a stranger been to me.
I can look on their pains with the same eyes,
As Priests behold the falling Sacrifice,
Whilst they yell out the horror of their moans,
My heart shall dance to th'Musick of their groans.

Look that your care and diligence be great,
See the Guards doubled, and each Cent'nal set.

Each day brings some surprise of pleasure, here
Love vyes his Triumphs with the God of War.

Distracting Jealousies and fears,
Heart-breaking sobs and restless tears
Fly to the breasts that are
Wrack't with despair
In this,
Or this.

No tears but those of Joy, no paintings but of bliss.

Yes, yes, by Love alone we se^
On Earth the glorys of a Deity:
For 'tis the greatest work above,
To be innocent and Love.
Those then that flame so nobly here,
What Ravishing delights must they have there!

Who on Earth to their honour are just, and their Love
Must reap the chief blessings above.

Let's then proceed, and Hymens aid implore,
To join those hands whose hearts were linked before.

Agreed.

Agreed.

Agreed.

Agreed.

Hymen, Oh Hymen, come away,
Crown the wishes of th^s day.
See, see these pure refined desires,
Wait at thy Torch, wait at thy Torch to improve their fires.

To show how strict a Reverence I have
For every thing that Loyal is, and brave,
This signal honour only due to me,
Thus Tissaphernes, I confer on thee.
Thus Tissaphernes I confer on thee.

Confusion! what means this?

-- Nay, do not start,
It is the offering of a grateful heart:
Come drink to such a depth as may express
Thy wishes for their Joy, and Sparta's happiness.

I must obey your Majesty --

Alas my Father!

-- How fares our worthy Friend?
Hence quickly for our chief Physicians fend.
So much this Aged Hero I esteem,
I rather could part with my Crown than him.

My health Sir needs no other help than this,
That you will pardon its Infirmities.
The Wine was of so strong an Excellence,
Its Spirits proved too mighty for my sense.

Dread Sir, your Camp the Athenian Force Alarm's:
Without the City Gates th'appear in Arms.
And with a numerous and Warlike train,
Begin their March upon the Neighbouring Plain.
Their bloody Ensigns all displayed appear,
And hold an amorous Combat with the Air:
Loosely they fly, and with a Wanton play,
Seem to sal^e the Sun-beams in their way:
Whilst their shrill Trumpets rattle in the sky,
As if with Music they'd charm Victory.
And this Triumphant Pride does higher grow,
That they may make a Conquest fit for You.

'Tis well, every Battalia Re-inforce
With my late fresh supplies of Persian Horse:
Their Fate no longer will delay endure;
Prepare to fight 'em in this very hour.
I'd have this day hereafter famous be,
For the Renown of Love and Victory.

The Enemy Sir does on the Plain appear,
And with Re-ecchoing shoutings pierce the Air.

So Beasts decreed for slaughter e're they fall,
With their own Bell'wings ring their Funeral.

CUrse on my niggard Sta^rs, they were so poor,
That my Revenge proved greater than their power,
My fury had begot so vast a Birth,
Fate wanted strength enough to bring it forth.
That sprightly sound darts fiercely through my soul,
Oh that I might one minute fate Control;
Could but command one happy fatal Dart,
To send it self into (...) Gen'rals heart.

Thus must proud States submit when Monarchs claim:
They govern in a rude disordered frame,
As Stars in a dim Senate rule the Night,
But Vanquish at the Suns more Potent light.
Athens now feels the fury of my heat:
A power like theirs, divided, can't be great:
It may tumultious and numerous show,
But ne'er contract to give a steady blow.

In States those monstrous many-headed powers
Of private interest public good devours.
'Tis true, when in their hands a rule they gain,
They know to use that power, not maintain,
Like Pirates in a Fleet, a while they may
Seem dreadful; but when by some juster force
Opposed --
Each his own safety seeks, and shrinks away.

You Sir have Vanquished Emp'rours, Fettered Kings:
States are such mean and despicable things,
Compared with other glorys you've subdued,
Their Conquest seems but a soft Interlude.

This minute Sir, your Glorys are complete,
The routed Enemy makes a faint Retreat:
Victory blushing, they no more could do,
With a full wing directs her flight to You.

Thus De^damia are our wishes Crowned,
Love and Renown in the same Sphere go round:
Our lasting Loves draw lasting Victories,
Whilst Courage takes his flame from Beauties eyes.

Thus hourly Sir, fresh glorys you receive,
Athens no more's your Enemy, but Slave^
Like the sad Ruins of a Hurricane,
Their tottered Troops are scattered over the Plain,
And in disordered Parties make away.

Relate, how went the business of the Day?

Brave Alcibiades has wonders done.
Ne'er greater Courage was in Sparta shown.
Troops were not able to withstand his shock,
Like thunder from a Cloud his fury broke
On all his Enemies, and like that too,
Death and Amazement did attend each blow.
Long doubtful Fortune dallied on her Wheel,
And neither seemed to move it, nor stand still,
Till at the last the brave Polyndus fell.
His loss did so amaze the Enemy,
That in disorder they began to fly.
Yet brave Theramnes Rallied in their head,
Though to their fate was but a while delayed,
For by our General he was Captive made.
And which again they did their flight renew,
With numbers too so tottered and so few,
It had been Barbarism to pursue.
Thus fair Timandra, who from far had been
An anxious looker on this Tragic Scene,
With all the hast Joy could, or love afford,
^lies to congratulate her Conquering Lord;
Now both in solemn Triumph this way move,
To Crown your Glorys as you Crowned their Love.

Sir, of your brav'ry I've already heard,
So much above the power of Reward;
It were but just that I should homage do,
And offer up acknowledgments to you.
Rise Sir, and give this Ceremony over,
The posture ill becomes a Conqueror.

Conqu'rours that are Triumphant in the Field,
Must at their Monarchs feet their Trophies yield;
For all those glorys which their Conquests claim,
They only have subordinate from them.
Thus, though my Sword this Captive has overcome,
It is from You he must expect his Doom.

Yes, and in this you have overcome him too,
He cannot talk Sir half so fast as you.
Curse, though I am your Prisoner, I hate
To hear your pride upbraid me with my Fate.

Why Sir, was't not my favour that you live?

No; for I hate that Life your hand did give.
Know, had your Fate been mine --
I should have urged kind destiny more home,
And there have Revelled Rival in your room.

Sir, for your Love, you show but weak pretence,
When all your Arguments is Insolence.
Whence does it spring?

-- From whence your bliss you draw,
Love, that ne'er clogged his Proselytes with Law.
I loved this fair one first, and you must know
I'll love her still; And what's all that to you?

This Rudeness Sir, my fury can't Engage,
You are ill-manner'd, and beneath my Rage.

But know, I'll follow still my hate to thee;
Nor shall my Chains obstruct thy destiny:
Thou did supplant me in Timandra's Love,
For which I gave thy glorys a remove;
And on thy Ruins made my self more great:
But since my wishes Fate would not complete,
My Fury with my Fortune shall not decrea^e,
I'll still pursue thy Life and happiness:
By all despairs dark arts thy fall design,
Till in thy blood I write Timandra mine.

Rave on; know of your threats no sense I feel,
I'd laugh at 'em, were it not to loose a smile.

But I'll take care that he shall better know,
What 'tis a Captive for his life does owe,
How dare you offer here these Injuries?
Know you how much this gallant man I prize?
Guards, to Confinement the Offender bear,
Be his Bounds narrow, and restraint severe,
Since in your breast such a hot frenzy reigns,
We will try how you can brave it in your Chains.

So King, as Thou shalt envy what Th'as done,
I have a soul can smile when Thou dost frown.
Whilst I Timandras fair Idea wear,
I can't want freedom, for I'll think of her.

Thus Madam, to your Eyes must Conquest bow,
Who are your Slaves no other Fetters know.

If any charms in me there can appear,
They only are confined and bounded there:
No greater aims, nor more Ambition know,
Thou how Sir to obliege him that serves you.

Your generous pity to our faithful flames,
That power which it gave 'em justly claims.
Thus happy by your great indulgence made,
In Joys so perfect, nothing can Remove,
Your spreading glories ne'er shall shrink or fade;
Till you forget to aspire, and we to love.
But how dare I Usurp the least pretence,
Who only borrow all my Lawrells hence!
This is that noble Youth, who, when I stood
Beset on every side with death and blood:
To my relief such generous succour brought,
And things so much above even wonder wrought.

You, Sir, that taught me friendship, taught me too,
How much is to that Sacred title due.
No Sir, if your Life at hazard lye,
Though thousand deaths should dare me on I'll fly,
And Conquer all, or bravely with you dye.

In gallant^y you are so absolute,
That I grow faint, and flag in the pursuit.
Yet that return accept in silence here,
Which is so great 'twill no expression bear,

Hell! Sure my blood is grown degenerate.
Can this my Son Embrace the man I hate?

How Tissaphernes, is thy good age blessed
In such a Son, of such a friend possessed?
Thus from thy Reverend Trunk fresh glories spread,
And with their pious Laurels shade thy head.

In this warm Comfort patiently I'll sit,
Till Fate shall come and claim her latest debt.
Sometimes my Youths past Triumphs I'll review,
And please my self they are approved by you:
Alas I've nothing else left now to do.
Oh my dear Boy! Sir, be my Joy thus shown,
Possess the Father as you've gained the Son.

Monarchs thus propped, the shocks of Fate defy,
No bonds so firm as those which Friendship tie.

Now noblest Sister, how shall be repayd
Those large endearments which your love has made.
Our happiness will but Imperfect prove,
If midst the growing pleasures of our love,
We nothing else ingratitude can do,
Then only with a happiness to you.

What I have done Sir, never had regard,
To that Sinister thing we call Reward.
Good deeds their worth and value have from hence,
They their own Glory are and Recompense.

But Sister, if I might one Question move;

Your pleasure Sir? --

-- Could you not Madam -- Love?
The Friend in whom I'm happy since I came,
In honour's as renowned as in his name.
He, when I to him often would Relate
The sad adventures of my love and fate;
So much your gallant Friendship did admire:
That with your Character he grew on fire;
And bears a flame so noble and sublime,
As not to love again would be a crime.

Sir, that's a thing I cannot now discourse;
Love rarely Conquers with a sudden force.
Nor must I that acknowledge as my due,
Which was perhaps a Complement to you:
If any thing in me he can approve,
I may believe it gallantry, not Love.

I shall no more your modesty offend.
Pardon a forward Zeal to serve my Friend.
But if ought add a blessing, 'twill to see
You made as happy as you have made me.

Do you understand, Patroclus, what you've done?
Have you considered that you are my Son?

Sir, 'tis a title I am proud of. --

How can you then descend to things so base,
That blot my Glory, and my Name deface?
Whilst thus your blinded folly so adores,
The only Traitor that my soul abhors?

How Sir, I dote upon the man you hate!
No, I had never thoughts so impious yet,
By all my hopes, if any wretch there be
S^unhappy to be held your enemy,
Rather then in my Breast his image bear,
I'd raze it from my heart, or stab it there.

Stay least you should pronounce too rash a doom:
Believe it is a blow will wound you home.
But I will try --
What generous resolution you express,
Know then you must hate Alcibiades.

Protect me heaven! can you command that^
Should break that knot you did so lately tie!
Was't not your love that did our friendship join?
Did not your kind embraces second mine?

Embraces! Love! and kindness! what are these?
The outward varnish that our hearts disguise.
Hast thou so long with Courts conversant been,
The various turns of power and greatness seen,
And hast thou not this mystery yet found,
Always to smile in's face we mean to wound?
Come you must hate him, nay and kill him too.

Oh let me rather beg my death from you.
Can you command me Sir to wound a heart,
Whereof I do profess so great a part?
In that I should prove a self-murderer:
Piercing his Breast I stab my own image there.

Come lay these idle boyish scruples down,
Do as becomes your Virtue and my Son.
Can you behold him rev'ling in my place,
And turning all my honours to disgrace.
And can you of so little value prize
The honour of your blood, not to shed his?

Oh Sir, no farther urge this horrid Theme,
'Twill blast your glories and your wreathes defame.
Do but look on that li^e you would destroy,
See if it be not as spotless and ^erene
As that which in their heaven blessed Saints enjoy,
Pure and untouch't but with a thought of sin.
By all the endearments of a filial love,
And if that charm cannot your pity move,
By my dear Mothers ghost, whose dying pray^r
Bequeathed me her chief treasure to your care,
This unjust cruel enmity lay down,
And do not in his friend destroy your Son.
On the past brav'ry of your youth look back,
There the bright paths of all your Triumphs track:
Think what 'twill be those glories to exchange,
For a base brutal infamous revenge.
Oh Sir recall, recall the dire decree,
Tis such a deed as fate will shrink to see.

Then 'tis the ^itter to be done by me.
Give this unmanly Childish pity over,
Or ne'er presume to call me Father more.

Then see how I resign that interest here:
Thus all the bonds of duty canceled are.
Whilst such black horrour^ in your soul I see,
You're not my Father, but my enemy.
Now against me let all your vengeance come,
Thus thus my breast for your revenge has room.
Brave Alcibiades. --
No, since such barbarous mischiefs you dare do,
I'll dye for him, but scorn to live for you.
Why don't you strike Sir? is your rage grown faint?

I fear I've too much trifled with this boy;
Curse on his honour, 'twill my hopes destroy.
But I'll smooth all in time. Oh my dear Son,
Now art thou worthy to be called my own.
None but a heart that's truly noble could
Ever deserve a Title to my blood.
No, may ye both in your brave friendship be
As truly happy, as I am in thee.
That's cursed. --

Is then my father kind? can he approve
Our friendship? does he once more crown our love?
Oh Sir, let thus my acknowledgment be given,
As we for blessings offer thanks to heaven.

Rise, rise thou comfort of my Age, I now
Have understood all I could wish to know.
Alas, in this disguise I did but try
The strength and virtue of thy constancy.
'Tis a refreshment to this heavy head,
To prove that virtue which my self have bred.
Thus blessed in peace I'll to my Grave descend.
As the declining Sun goes down at night,
Pleased with the rising of an off-spring light.

Such mystic ways fate does our loves confirm,
As rooted Trees stand faster by a storm.
After this shock our friendship's more secure,
As Gold tried in the fire comes forth more pure.

There's some foundation yet for my design;
The Captiv's brave, I'll try to make him mine.
Unwearied I will let my fury range,
And leave no heart unsearched to find revenge.

How sweet a quietude's in fetters found!
That it seems almost freedom to be bound.
Though thus confined, my agile thoughts may fly
Through all the Region of variety.
Here in a trice I can the World run over,
And finish whole years labours in an hour.
But oh my Mistress! my Timandra lost!
That is the only bitterness I taste.
This outward fetter but my Body chains,
But that the freedom of my Soul detains.
Why by my Rivals Sword did I not fall;
So bravely have embraced one death for all?
Yet why should I court such an abject ^ate?
Courage is the supporter of the great.
Methinks I've something yet to do, might prove
Becoming both my courage and my love.
I'll -- hah this does my busy thoughts prevent.
Is that old friend for a Tormenter sent?
Good Sir, upon what message are your come?
Am I then destined to some harder doom?

No, I am come to give your sorrows ease:
I know you hate Sir Alcibiades:
Nay and I know you love Timandra too.

Well Sir, all this I know as well as you.

Come if you dare be brave, be it on this theme:
Dare you Sir ravish her and murder him?

For what dark ends do you this question bring?
Dare! 'sdeath, old Sir, I dare do any thing.

That word then all my former doubts secures,
Be only res'lute, and Timandra's yours.
My stratagems so subtly I will lay,
That to your arms your Mistress I'll betray.
Thus then, as the first step to our design,
Your guards I'll with adulterated wine
Secure; so they Charmed in a Lethargy,
I'll from your bonds and prison set you free.
Then when some happy moment shall present
Timandra left ungarded in her tent,
Both of us thither in disguise will move,
To end your rival and complete your love.
For when your ^ill of bliss you have enjoyed,
And your full pleasures with themselves are cloyed:
I thither will alar'm our enemy,
Where by both Swords he shall be sure to dye.
And the next night (the watch-word given by me)
You may, escape through the Guards to liberty.

Revenge! my love enjoyed, and freedom too!
Then in the name of Pluto be it so.
What stupid ignorance the World possessed,
That only fury placed in the youthful breast!
No 'tis in age alone great Spirits are young:
The Soul's but infant when the Body's strong.
These hoary heads like grisly Comets are,
Which always threaten ruin death and war.

Alas such ^ame Souls know but half a growth,
I'll make my age a step to a new youth:
Such murders and such cruelties maintain,
I'll from the blood I shed grow young again.

Let's in the name of horror then go on;
Methinks I long to have the business done:
Something like Conscience else may all defeat,
You know Sir I'm but a raw villain yet.

Conscience! a trick of State, found out by those
That wanted power to support their Laws;
A bug-bear name to startle fools, but we
That know the weakness of the fallacy,
Know better how to use what nature gave.
That Soul's no Soul which to it self's a slave.
Who any thing for Conscience sake deny,
Do nothing else but give themselves the lye.

Why Madam do you fly a lovers prayer?
Is cruelty the privilege o'th fair?

You cannot Sir in the Camp be beauties slave,
Where honour's the only. Mistress of the brave.

But 'tis a rugged honour got in Arms,
When not made soft by beauties sweeter charms.
That melts our rage into a kind desire,
Wh^lst love re^ines it in his purer fire.

Lovers whose flights so sublime pitches choose,
Oft soar too high, and so their quarry loose.
But you Sir know to moderate your height,
Missing your game can eas'ly slack the flight.

Such faint essays may* fit a common flame,
But my desires have a far nobler Aim,
Religious honour, and a zeal that's true,
Raised by that Deity to which I sue.

Those who to deities their offerings pay,
Make their addresses in an humbler way.
Not in a confidence of what they give,
But modest hopes of what they shall receive.

I in my offerings no assurance have,
Though an ambition to become your slave.

Yes, but when once admitted to that place,
You'll still be looking for some acts of grace.

Some little favours pity can't deny,
You are too noble to use cruelty.

See Sir the Queen, I beg you Sir forbear.

Madam this way --

Did he then suffer no surprise (...) show
Of alteration? let's the progress know.

In order Madam t'your command I went,
And met him coming from the Royal Tent:
Where after the usual Ceremonies past,
E're I would feast I gave him first a taste,
Told him how much his courage you approved,
That he in no mean path of glory moved,
Who in his Arms had so successful been,
T'engage a Monarch and oblige a Queen.
Then nearer came, and whispered something more,
Began to intimate loves mighty power.
He briskly took the hint, and readily
Began to urge some pretty things to me.
By which encouraged I to the business drew,
Told him in fine it only was his due
To be admired by all, and loved by you.

And did not then his altered looks betray
Some ecstasy? some marks of lively joy?

No Madam, he knew better policy,
Talked of your honour, and his loyalty,
Fine smoothing terms to cloak a passion in.
But if your Majesty --

-- What? --

-- Had but seen
How much his carriage did his words deceive,
When with a gentle sigh he took his leave,
As if he languished till the minute came.

Dost thou then think he entertains my flame?
Lets to my Tent and wait his coming there,
Such swarms of love within my Breast there are,
The heat's too furious for my Soul to bear.
What would I give but for a taste of bliss!
Oh the choice sweets of a stolen happiness?

UNder what fatal Planet was I born!
Sure at my birth the Heavens themselves did mourn.
Disjointed nature did her course forbear,
And held within her Womb a civil War.
I who but now did fame and Conquest bring,
And added to the glories of ^ King,
Must see my Trophies all thrown down again,
By the base passions of a lustful Queen.
Why was I not born to a common fate,
Free from the glorious troubles of the great,
So in some humble Cell my years have spent,
Blessed with a private peaceable content.
The vulgar mortal feels not fortunes harms,
The highest structures still are shook with storms.
See too she's here; what shall I do or speak?
Fate has beset me, and I've no way to take.

My Lord you something discomposed appear,
Surely there's nothing that can fright you here.

Majesty Madam is a thing divine.

If that disturb you Sir, I'll lay by mine.
Methinks I apprehend a greater pride,
To view the man whose glories spread so wide.

Madam you on 'em set too high a price.

Perhaps I see not Sir with common eyes.
They best of honour judge that honour have.
I find a secret in me says you're brave.
You need not Sir unfold it, you can guess,

How craftily she would her lust express,
And set her ills off with a winning dress.
What's to be done, which way shall I conclude?
I must abuse my King, or must be rude.
I cannot speak --

-- My Lord! let's sit a while,
Won't you vouchsafe your visitant a smile?

Smiles Madam were too insolent a joy.

Fie! put these formal complements away,
Ardella sing that Song I heard to day.

The brightest Goddess of the Sky,
How did she panting sighing lye,
And languishing desire to dye*
For the Triumphant God of war,
Amidst his Trophies did appear,
As charming rough as she was fair.
Their loves were blessed, they had a Son,
The little Cupid, who has shown
More conquest then his Sire e're won.
He grew the mightiest God above,
By which we him a Rebel prove
To heaven, that dares be so to Love.
How soft the delights, and how charming the joy,
Where love and enjoyment each other support!
Let the Cynical fool call pleasure a toy,
Who ne'er fame in the Camp had, nor love in the Court:
O so kindly the Combats each other succeed,
Where 'tis Triumph to dye, and a Pleasure to bleed.
The Air is charming. --

-- Retire.
No lively Symptoms of a growing ^ire!
I'll urge him further --
My Lord, your ^
You're ill; Cold drops upon your brows appear;
I'll wipe 'em off, come Sir, your fears remove,
You need not blush to tell me (...) you love.
I'll do it for you, nay I (...) will do,
Blush for my self ^ for you.
Sure this will take* ^ wonder mean,
Is love so strange? --

-- Oh name that again,
Could you such wrong to royal (...) do?
Think what's to heaven and to your virtue due.

Must I be hated then? and Sir by you?
Pish, why do you talk of heaven and (...) now?

Not new-made mothers to their infants bear
A firmer passion, or a tenderer care*
Show me yours or your honours enemy,
See with what vigour t'your revenge I'll fly.
For you with life I willingly could part,
But whilst that lasts, Timandra has my heart.

The heavy pleasures of the marriage Bed,
Dull repetition soon will (...) dead*
Taste fresher joys, and when they ^,
Then the old pleasures may seem ^.

Could I expect to have such language heard,
Where beauty and such innocence appeared?

Can you my ^,
And is't so difficult a ^?

Love Madam! only ^
As you are fair, ^,
I'll love you as the ^.

A Sister ^,
So little we can hardly name what 'tis.
Where is the transport, ^
^ to a sharp appetite.

I know you're ^
Your beams the lustre of a King adorn,
That King whose piety me happy made,
And can I in return profane his bed?
Though Madam I've lived free, and never se^
Limits to any thing we call delight,
Yet raise not new rebellions in blood:
Beauty hath darts too keen to be withstood.

Yet all its power has no force over you,
Your cruel heart's immovable, but know
'Twill to your honour be but ill applied,
That for your love a Queen, neglected, died.

What is't you majesty would have me do?

Are you so ignorant that you don't know!

Death, not to have some sense were to unman
My self; but I'll be conqu'rour if I can.
Should I be made a captive to her charms,
Ever I am warm in my Timandra's arms?
One stratagem I'll for my freedom try,
Madam no longer I'll your power deny.
For if these eyes had ne'er Timandra known,
You only might have called my heart your own.
But whilst with her I enjoy love, and life,
And you remain the mighty Agis wife;
Know this is all I can in justice do,
I'm ready on your least commands, to show
I live for her; but yet could dye for you.

Must I then only border upon bliss?
Rest on the confines of my happiness?
As Souls that are excluded heaven for sin,
See all its glories, but can't enter in.

No Madam; free from the dull clog^ of sense,
We will reap delights of nobler excellence.
Our entwined Souls each other shall enjoy,
Tread virtues paths, and never loose their way.
But if one in his motion chance to err,
Strait regulate it by the other's sphere:
-- Till at the last,
When the short Zodiac of this life w'ave past;
With new imp't Zeal beyond the Stars we'll fly,
There meet, and mingle to a Deity.

Then to all hopes of happiness adieu,
Since my chief bliss I've lost in loosing you.
Oh the Tyrannic cruelty of fate,
That lets us know our happiness too late.
Yet why should I to fears and sorrows bend,
If only on their fate my hopes my depend?
A Rival, and a King, I may remove:
There's nothing difficult to them that love.

She's gone. --
Greatness, thou gaudy torment of our Souls,
The wise mans fetter, and the range of fools!
Who is't would court thee if he knew thy ills?
He who the greatest heap of Honour piles,
Does nothing else but build a dangerous shelf,
Or ^rect Mountains to o'rewhelm himself.

Now Sir you're free, and prosperously move,
To reap the long wished harvest of your love.
One minute and you're in Timandra's arms,
New fettered in the power of her Charms:
Methinks the thought even my old blood Alarms.

His rage sure works him to an ecstasy:
How the old Monster hugs his villainy!
Good Sir dispatch, I cannot brook delay;
I wast in expectation of my joy.
But hear^, did you not hear a murmuring talk?

Perhaps 'tis she come in this Grove to walk:
Stay here they are, by heaven the same, 'tis she.
Retreat a while; blessed opportunity.

Methinks Draxilla when Atlanta ran,
And slaughter was the only prize she wan;
Her power a too cruel rigour bore,
To kill those she had wounded so before.

Then Madam be not guilty of her ill:
Me the poor wretch you've wounded do not kill.
Ah in your heart, if such a sense there be
Of the injustice of her cruelty;
How much more pity from your breast is due
To him, who every minute dyes for you!

My Lord Theramnes! by what lucky hap
Have you from guards and prison made escape?

Who wears your sacred image in your breast,
Is of such pure Divinity possessed,
And from ignoble bondage so secure,
That feeble chains fall off, and loose their power.

Then Sir in your intended flight make haste,
Least by some fatal chance you're once more lost.

No, I enjoy a nobler safety here;
No danger dares approach when you are near.
These Groves to lovers bliss are dedicate,
Free from the uncivil outrages of fate.
Co^e, let's to something like delight draw nigh,
And loose our selves a while in ecstasy.

Guard me ye powers! Draxilla help* my Lord!

Good gentle Madam, if you please one word.

I cannot see my Rival blessed alone;
Must he reap all the sweets, and I have none?

This outrage on my knees I beg forbear:
See Sir it is Timandra sheds a tear.
Her whom you vowed you loved with noble flame,
Oh do'nt by savage lust profane that name!
If 'tis the envy of your Rivals joy,
Remove, remove the offence some other way:
Save but my honour, and my life destroy.

Such tenderness might cool another blood;
But I am too unhappy to be good.
Let virtue to dull Anchorites repair,
Who ne'er had Soul enough to know despair.
I'll banish the encroacher from my breast,
And shake him off e're he take hold too fast.
Come let's retire within this covert by;
I am impatient, and my blood boils high.

I will not go, I'll dye a Martyr here.

Then I must drag you.

-- Barb'rous Ravisher!
Oh! Oh! --

-- Did I not hear a tender cry!
Oh Heavens! turn base hell-hound, turn and dye.

That Sir will thus be better understood.

You've undertook Sir more then you'll make good.

How's this; assaulted! and by such base odds!
Courage my friend! --

-- To the accursed abodes
Of tortured Souls that in dark horror dwell,
Thus fly, and to thy fellow Devils tell,
It was my Sword that sent thy soul to hell.

Hold Sir, enough, I must your victim fall,
Though an atonement for my sin too small.
My hasty Soul can make no longer stay,
Death touls his leaden Bell, and calls away.
And now, like some sad traveler, taking view
Of the long Journey that I have to go,
Whilst I my thoughts to heavens sweet mansions bend,
Without your mercy no admittance find.
Oh but one word of pardon e're I dye,
Secure of that, my Souls dares boldly fly.
Absolved by you, it must have welcome there,
As incense that is offered up with prayer.

My pardon and my prayers too receive,
More then your guilt could ask me I could give.
Be happy as your penitence is true;
And may kind heaven forgive you as I do:

Ah! can your piety vouchsafe a tear
Of pity, on an impious Ravisher!
My Soul will leave me in an ecstasy:
And I shall want the sense to know I dye.
Thus, pure Divinity, at your feet I bow,
Here 'tis my Soul would make her latest stay:
Nor can she --
Beginning hence her journey miss the way.
But I'd forgot; beware of --

-- Who can fear
That is secured by charms so powerful here?
Within these spears my Guardian Angels move;
These are my seats of safety, as of love.

They weakly others guard, that can't defend
Themselves; I fear more mischief may depend
On this disaster. --

So when a storm's blown over,
And a calm Breeze has smoothed the rugged deep,
The joyful Mariners can fear no more:
But thus embrace and full their cares asleep
Welcome my lifes Protector and only friend.
Hah! what does that sad look, and sigh intend?
Are you Sir wounded? --

Yes too deep I fear.

Forbid it Heaven; where is't?

-- Oh here Sir, here,
My Soul is pierced, I'm tortured every where,
Your friend! ah let that Title be no more,
Behold me as a wretch forlorn, and poor.
Imagine every form of misery;
And when you've summed up all, then look on me.

Now some blessed Angel to my Soul reveal
This doubt; can he be wronged, and I not feel?
Ah kind Patroclus this sad silence break.

Oh Sir you must not hear, nor must I speak.
Paint out black horror in its deepest dread,
And troops of Murders hovering over your head,
And when that hideous Masque of Hell you see,
Think if you can that they came all from me.

Confusion! how my thoughts begin to start!
A new unwonted heat has seized my heart,
Something unruly, that would fain get place,
But I'll subdu't, -- be free, kind friend, alas!
Force me not wrong our friendship and your worth.

That charm's resistless, and I feel it will forth.
But oh it must not, duty does forbid:
Yet what's my duty if my honour bleed?
Know then, -- now that this stubborn heart would break!
My cruel Father -- oh I dare not speak.

Hah!

-- Led by some blind mistaking jealousy,
Heaps treasons upon you and shame on me.
It was by him Theramnes made escape,
And 'twas he backed him in this impious rape.
But oh no more, shame does my words suppress,
Yet think what he will do that durst do this.
I'll go and try if I his rage can stay:
I may divert the stream another way.

Kind youth; I cannot fear thy Fathers hate:
He sells his honour at too cheap a rate.
What have I done that could be called a wrong?
No I've a guard of innocence too strong;
Whilst I unspotted that and friendship bear,
No danger is so great that I need fear.

Yet be not Sir regardless of my fears;
Some pity have of these sad sighs, and tears.
Whither oh whither, would your rashness lead;
To urge a ruin levelled at your head?
Let us --
To some recess that's safe and humble go,
Timandra can bear any thing with you.
Let interest the unfixed and wav'ring sway,
With us --
Love shall supply what fortune takes away.

Sure 'tis not my Timandra's voice I hear,
She ne'er had cause to think that I could fear.
Have I so many dangers over-past,
Poorly to shrink from villainy at last?
No, with my innocence ^'le brave his hate,
And meet it in a free undaunted state;
See all with smiles, as fearless, and as gay,
As Infants unconcerned at dangers, play.

Then I'll perform what to my love is due;
Unsteady doubts be gone, blind fears adieu.
I were unworthy of the heart you gave,
Were I then you less faithful, or less brave.
And of my courage too this proof I'll give,
When you dare meet a death, I'll scorn to live,
Nor longer be a vassal to my fear;
We'll in each others chance a portion bear:
So fate has thus at least some kindness shown,
Neither can wretches be, nor blessed alone.

Is't done? --

Sir to a point your will's fulfil'd;
Theramne's guards as they lay drunk we killed.
Draxilla too, by the ambush you had laid
For your retreat, was on her flight betrayed.

Next, as from me, be there a message sem,
To bid my Son attend me in my Tent;
In's passage thither you may seize him, so
Convey him to the Cave --

-- My Lord, we go.

Ye are the best of Rogues; but disappear:
You know your business: So the King is here.

Lead to the Grove --

Oh Sir, there's Treason in the Camp, retreat,
But now the Guards I in confusion met,
Who led me where Theramnes I beheld,
The late Athenian Captive General killed.
That little breath he had left h'employ'd to show
His honour, and his Gallantry to you:
Treasons so strange and horrid did relate,
As would seem almost Treason to repeat.
But Sir you have no longer safety here:
Secure yourself, and leave all to my care.

No more, you know not what you urge me to:
Secure my self! am I a King, or no?
That Monarch who when danger's near, sits down,
Shows but a feeble Title to a Throne.
The best securities in courage are,
We but subscribe to Treasons which we fear.
Be free, and let me the bold Traitor know,
To stem the torrent I my self will go:
In state I'll meet the fond Cap^ic^ous wretch,
And dare him with that Crown which he would snatch.

Alas dread Sir, force me not to declare
The name, would wound your sacred breast to hear.
I in reviling honour should offend:
He once was noble Sir, and called me friend.

How Sir your friend! and Traitor to my Crown!
Reveal him, or his Treasons are your own.

Alas, but must I! -- 'tis so foul a deed,
I (...) speak.

Hell Sir; do ye play? proceed.

Then to be short, he you so lately strove
T'engage in all the firmest ties of love,
He whom you almost had from nothing raised,
And on the highest seats of honour placed;
Has thence this use of all your favours shown,
To make 'em steps to mount into your Throne.

Defend me! what do I hear! --
Sir you have raised a tumult in my breast,
Which will not be so suddenly appeased:
By Heavens see all that you inform be true,
Or may all torments which to th'damn'd are due
Light on me, if inflicted not on you.
The brave Athenian false! it cannot be:
His Soul ne'er dreamt of such impiety.

Sir you're unkind if you suspect me false,
I never yet abused your ears with tales.
Had I such mystic Policy pursued,
Perhaps I'd now been kindlier understood.

Alas dear friend misconstrue not my Zeal,
Weigh not my Passions in nice Reasons Scale.
Who would believe a King should blindly place
His love so firmly, for returns so base?
Wrack me no more, but the dark scruple clear:
My Souls in a Convulsion till I hear.

Yes Sir, 'tis he, and thus his Plots were laid.
The account I from the dying Captive had;
Whom he with liberty had bribed, to join
With him in this his Treacherous design,
This night wi'th' enemy your Camp t'envade,
On promise it should be by him betrayed.
Which when the Gallant Captive did disdain,
He was to Combat dared, and by him slain.
If you insist on farther evidence,
Theramne's murdered Guards enough convince:
Hence you may farther confirmation have.

Be bold; speak what thou know. --

-- When to relieve
The Captives Guards, I by command was sent,
I found em murdered at the door o'th^ Tent.
In one of em some life did yet remain,
Who told me they were by our General slain,
Because they Theramnes freedom had denied.
More he had said, but at these words he died.

It was enough. Treason, how dark art thou?
In shapes more various then ever Proteus knew.
By Heaven I'll make him base, despised, and poor,
More wretched then e're Monster was before.
Naked, and stripped of all his dignities,
I'll lay his odious Crimes before his eyes.
Then when his mind is labouring with regret,
To make his infamy the more complete,
Some common slave shall on him justice do,
And send his Soul among the damned below.
Guard wait on him --
Go ere' my love return, and I repent,
And seize upon the Traitor in his Tent.
A speedy vengeance best befits this wrong,
'Twere too much mercy to delay it long.

This way's the King?

He's here* leapt into the net.
Thus Sir the King salutes you.

Slaves retreat.

Alas my Lord!

-- Sir 'tis the command.
The least of 'em I never durst withstand,

But Sir what meaning can this usage bear?

The King Sir quickly all your doubts will clear.

Away with him, thou Poison to my eyes.

The basest wretch not unconvicted dyes.
Sir, let me know what 'tis that I have done,
Unworthy of my honour or your Crown.
If in your cause who'd spend his dearest blood,
As is to be your meanest Vassal, proud,
No greater welfare then in yours does know,
If he be an offender, I am so.

How cunningly he would seem innocent,
And guild with flattery his foul intent!
Thus Traitors in their fall are like the Sun,
Who still looks fairest at his going down.
'Sdeath Sir, do you believe me Child, or fool,
Whom every fawning word, or ^oy can rule?
By Heaven I'll let you see Sir your mistake;
Hence with the Traitor quickly to the wrack.

Sir, hear me speak. --

What is't that you can say,
Who would my Crown and your own trust betray?
When you from Prison set the Capti^e free,
Basely to win him to four Treachery:
Whom, when on him your plots could nothing do,
You killed, because he more honour had then you.

By all above Sir I am innocent;
I ne'er knew what the thought of Treason meant.
But know from whence this jealousy you drew,
From him that hates me, and abuses you:
Theramnes had his liberty from hence;
And for designs so base. --

-- Oh impudence!
To what prodigious height will treason climb!
Dare you Sir charge me with your heavy crime?
Old as I am, my Sword should do me right.
But --

-- Monster hence, and them that fear thee fright.
Think thou to play with the black deeds you have done?
Were I but free, though naked and alone,
Thou too defended by a desperate crew,
And all indeed more near being damned then thou;
This single Arm should prove my cause is good,
And Chronicle my honour in their blood.

I'st thus Sir you would plead your innocence?
Think you t'outbrave us with your impudence?
Once more the Traitor to his tortures bear.

But Sir your justice now is too severe.
'Twere an ill Triumph after victories,
To make the Conqueror the Sacrifice;
That Gallantry some privilege may plead.

His treasons are too plain and open laid,
And all his merits weighed against them light.

Should we him guilty of worse crimes admit,
And that in's death you'd worthiest justice show,
Yet to forgive's the nobler of the two.

When Deida^a pleads I can't deny,
His doom's this time recal'd, he shall not dye;
But (robbed of all his joys) let him be sent
To a perpetual imprisonment;
His treasures rifled, and his Wife a slave.

Here on my knees let me one favour crave.
Whatever fate you have designed for me,
It is embraced, but Sir let her be free;
Let all the weight of the alleged offence
Light upon me; wrong not her innocence.

How mean and abject is your courage now!
Think you that I dare suffer less then you?
No Sir; in this he has no right to plead;
What e're you think either has merited,
Let equally justice on us both be shown;
And as we are, so let our fates be one.

Thou wonder of thy Sex! --

I'll hear no more:
How dare you tempt an angry Monarchs power?
But since his fate so grateful you esteem:
Let her be Prisoner too, but far from him.
He must not be so happy to have her,
For fetters would be blessings were she there.
Go see you execute our orders strait.

Thus we with smiles will entertain our fate.
My dearest Lord farewell, let not a sigh
Or tear proclaim we greive our parting's nigh.
Were it to quit our happiness a pain,
Joy were not then a blessing, but a chain.
No, let us part, as dying Martyrs do,
Who leave this life only to gain a new.
Grief equally ignoble were as vain,
Since we at least in Heaven shall meet again.

So from their Oracles the Deities
Instruct the ignorant World in Mysteries.
But, part! that word would make a Saint despair.
Obedience cannot be a virtue here.
If so ye Gods ye have such precepts given,
That an example would confound your Heaven*
You duties beyond your own omnipotence enjoin;
Can you forsake your Heaven, or I leave mine?
Till when thus King I'm fixed beyond remove,
With all the Cements of an endless love.
Kill me, thou yet shalt of thy ends despair,
My Soul shall wait upon her every where,
Nay I'd not fly to Heaven till she came there!

Shall I thus see my self out-^rav'd? away,
He is a Traitor that but seems to stay.

Now I am armed, death to that wretch that stirs.

Sir, do you think to look us into fears?
Disarm him Guards, or kill him.

Push home ye Dog --

-- Sordid slaves.
Thus every Ass the helpless Lyon braves.
Adieu divinest of thy Sex, adieu!
I never thought that I could part till now.
Now I deserve the worst fate has in store,
That in so brave a cause should do no more.
Yet stay one look. Thus does the needle steer
To his loved North, and fain would come more near:
When in the eager prospect of his joy,
He is by some rude artist snatched away.
Farewell, --

Farewell, and if your memory
E're trouble you with such a thing as I,
Let not a sigh come from you, but believe
I'd rather be forgot, then you should grieve.

Such worth shall in each Temple have a shrine;
What, to regain her, would I not resign?
But she's too heavenly to be longer mine.

She's gon, but oh what mighty charms there lye
Couched in the narrow circle of an eye!
Had she but stayed another minute here,
I had worn chains, and been her Prisoner:
And still I fear my heart is not my own;
For if so bright when to a Dungeon gone,
How would she shine Triumphant on a Throne!

So now or never must my love succeed,
Vainly weak King hast thou his doom decreed.
In this beginning of his fall you have shown
But the imperfect figure of thy own.
Few hours remain 'twixt thee and destiny,
Till when grow dull in thy security.
Timandra's and thy death is one design;
Then if a Crown can tempt him, he is mine.

NOW like a Lyon on my prey I'll feast.
Revenge! thou solace to a troubled breast.
Could but Theramnes in Elizium know,
How would his Chost rejoice at what I do!

Oh no --

Death, what is that I hear and see?
Begone dull Ghost; if thou art damned, what's that to me?

From deepest horror of eternal night,
Where Souls in everlasting torments groan,
Where howling fiends be chained, and where's no light,
But thickest darkness covers every one,
I come to warn thee mortal of thy sin;
Short time is here left for thee to remain.
'Twere fit that thy repentance soon begin,
For think what 'tis to live in endless pain.
Farewell --

-- 'Twas an odd speech, but be it so:
Pish; Hell it self trembles at what I do;
And it's ^ubmission better to express,
Sends this Ambassador to make it's peace.
Let idle fears the superstitions awe;
With me my resolution is a law.
Repentance now would be too late begun:
Ages can't expiate what I have done.
And if below for Souls such torments are,
Methinks there's yet some brav'ry in despair.
The easy King looks little in his State,
His Crown is for his Head too great a weight:
But I will ease him, and adorn this brow.
Thus to my aims no limits I'll allow.
Revenge, Ambition, all that's ill, shall be
My business; so I'll baffle desti^ie.
Hell! no, --
I'll act such things whilst here I have abode,
Till my own Trophies raise me to a God.

Now such an Engine is it I would have,
I know he is a Traitor, and is brave.
I'll bait him with ambition that may move;
Then if complacent to my ends he prove,
In seeming to comply with his design,
I'll make him but an instrument to mine:
For when success me to my wishes calls,
I'll shake him off, and then unpropped he falls.
My Lord! --

Madam!

My Father loved you well,
I've heard him oft of your achievements tell*
When in his Camp such gallant deeds you wroughe,
And always victory and triumph brought:

Madam, your Father was all good and just.

Be could, why may not I your honour trust?

You wrong it (...); your Father lives in you*
As I was his, I am your Champion too.
Though old, against your Foes this Sword shall (...)
Your right; name but your Traitor, and he's dead.

Nay Sir, the Traytor's not alone my Foe,
His injuries extended are to you,
To you to whom he owes all he enjoy*
Yet basely him that gave him growth destroys;
Whilst for his ills he would his kindness plead,
To heap your honours on your Rivals head.
Rally your Courage up, if you are brave,
And at once mine, and your own honour save.

Your Majesty would mean the King. D^ ye try
My resolution, or my Loyalty?

Your Courage Sir is known, your Loyalty,
If you have any, you'll find due to me.
Through me these honours you in Sparta bore,
And 'twas my Father made you great before.
Now know it is the King, whose perjur^d Soul
Has done me injuries so base and foul,
That all that's good will blush at; his vows past
To me all in another love are lost.
Nay, with my honour too my life must bleed,
He, with the General's, has my fall decreed,
To take the fair Timandra to his bed.
Let's go surprise him now he's full of Wine,
Revenge me on his life, his Crown is thine.

Madam, indeed the injuries you feel
Cry loud; nor do I tamely see my ill.
But you must swear to me you will be true,

By all that's holy I'll be so to you.

I'll do it, but Madam know I undertake
To hazard life and honour for your sake,
Should you betray me: --

Nay now you are unkinder then before.
To my first Oath I'll add a million more.

And you will still be mindful of the Crown?

Had he ten Thousand, they were all your own.

This then's his fate; pity a Crime were here:
He shall not have time enough to make a prayer.

Be bold; and prosper in thy brave design,
And when his death's performed, the next is thine.

This trap was dang'rously and subtly laid,
But I am not so easily betrayed.
Her love to Alcibiades I know,
Her Woman for me did that kindness do.
And since she is so good at the design,
I'll to oblige her give her one of mine.
My zealous urging of her Oath was done,
Not to prevent her plots, but hide my own.
I'll cherish her in all that she pretends,
So make her aims but covers to my ends.
For when I'm seated on the Spartan Throne,
Both her and all her Treasons I'll disown:
Prove both her judge and her accuser too,
And on her my first act of justice do.
So all my doubts and fears will be o're-past,
And by her fall I fix my self more fast.

My Lords, no more, w'ave drank too deep; I'd now
A while be private.

-- Royal Sir, we go.

Boy take thy Lute, and with a pleasing air
Appease my sorrows, and delude my care.

Princes that Rule and Empires Sway,
How tran^itory is their State!
Sorrows thee glories do allay,
And richest Crowns have greatest weight.
The mightiest Monarch treason fears,
Ambitious thoughts within him rave;
His life all discontent and cares;
And he at best is but a Slave.
Vainly we think with^ fond delight,
To ease the burden of our cares.
Lach grief a Second does invite,
And sorrows are each others heirs.
For me my honour I'll maintain,
Be gallant generous and brave;
And when I Quietude would gain,
At least I find it in the grave.
He sleeps; now let the fatal deed be done.
Hah! what are these, the Sceptre and the Crown!
So did the drowsy Dragon sleep, when he
Lost the rich fruits of the Hesperian Tree.
First we will secure his Crown, and then he dyes.
Thus I'm discharged of all my promises.
Take this, and if I claim your promise too,
You're King, and justice is your duty now.
Come by his fall --
This your first step to glory solemnize,
I make you King, make him my Sacrifice.

I'll do it, but stay --

-- Nay, quickly to him go,
Sir he expects no Ceremony now.

Thus then I -- hah! how altered am I grown!
I stand amazed, and dare not venture on.
There is in Majesty a secret charm,
That puts a fetter on a Traitors arm;
I cannot do it --

Then look on her that dares.
How despicable is the man that fears!
Give me the fatal Instrument of death;
My self will in his heart that dagger sheath;
Then blush to think, if e're the World should know,
That a frail Woman durst do more then you.
Courage -- he smiles, --
Some pleasing dreams his fancy entertain;
Oh it were pity he should wake again.
Thus King, thy life and Empire I command:
Accept this from thy Deidamia's hand.

Hah murdered! Deidamia, and by you!
What is't that faithless Woman will not do*
Henceforth all Loyalty and love farewell.
When after ages shall this story tell,
'Twill be a truth too sad to be received;
Nor shall the World be by it self believed.
Did I for this even Crown and Empire quit,
To lay all my Ambition at your feet?
When at the Altars strictest vows I paid,
Nor were they with less zeal performed then made!
I loved you far above that life you've spilt,
Till even my passion was become my guilt:
I for your sake deprived heaven of its due,
Took adoration thence to pay it you.
And must this be the reward for all I've done?
Yet I shall have this comfort when I'm gone,
That I no longer shall with thee remain*
But dye in hopes we ne'er shall meet again.

He's gon, and now my Lord, --

-- Oh what is't you have done?
A while lay your unruly passions down.
View but the sweet Composure of that face,
Where grandeur sat attended by each grace:
Now there grim death his gashly Revels keeps,
And pallid horror over each feature creeps.
Weep Madam, weep, to think your rage has given
That blow, which robs the World to enrich heaven.
Oh my dear Lord, that ever I lived to know
This day! Madam I can't conceal it.

-- Say you so?
But Sir I Scorn to be betrayed by you.
Treason, Treason, Treason, c. --.
Is't not enough you've shed my Husbands blood?

The Devil! --

And robbed the World of all that's great and good,
But you must seek my life? On pity take,
If not for mine, at least for virtues sake!

Hell and Plagues! --

But why do I name that? for all that e're
The World had left of it, lies murdered there.

Very fine.

Yet though you've robbed him of his life, save mine:
I'll live to ask heaven pardon for your sin.

So now I'll stop your mouth.

Help, murder, Treason, help.

How, Tissaphernes armed against the Queen!
What means this posture Sir? --

-- Oh noble Lord,
If e're your pity could a tear afford,
Weep down an Ocean there; behold the spring
Of Sparta's hopes lies murdered in her King.
And had not I the traitors rage withstood,
He with my Husbands too had mixed my blood.
See where he guilty stands.

-- Great Agis slain!
By Tissaphernes too!

Yes, he to gain
The Spartan Crown, this bloody deed ha^ done,
See he already has usurped the Crown;
His hot Ambition could not bear del^ys,
But on the Royal spoils thus (...) preys;
Insults in's treason.

-- I am now run (...)
So far that all hopes ^*
But Madam, can you dare to lay this guilt
On me? was't not by you his blood was spilt?

By me! base wretch, would thy impiety
Lay this inhumane regicide on me?
I wound this breast? ah dearest Saint, too well
I knew thy worth!

Death, she'll be Queen of Hell:
Pluto will grow in love with her for this.

My Lord, treason's above all pardon.

-- 'tis.

Then Sir to justice.

No, thus I deny.
I lived not by it, nor will by it dye.
Was it for this my stratagems I laid
To ruin her, to be by her betrayed?
Curse on my narrow fate, but yet to show
That I love murder too as well as you,
Thus perjured Queen.

See how he'd still pursue
His Treason! hence to justice with him go:
Hourly let on the Rack his pains increase,
Till he the horror of his guilt confess.

That shall not need. I'll own the deed as mine,
But glory in it, it was a brave design.
The King killed! and I ruined! to complete
Thy lust, all by (...) stratagem! was great:
So great, that for its sake
I can with satisfaction y^ild my breath,
Else I should take no plea^re in my death.
But e're I go, be pleased to e^ertain
The last kind precepts of a dying man.
Be bloody, false, revengeful, lust^
That can be found recorded on Hells (...)
Embrace, where-e're you rising virtue see,
Down with it, and set up impiety.
Make that your theme, leave nothing ill undone,
So copy Tissaphernes when he's gon:
Who leaves this counsel as a Legacy,
'Tis my Religion, and I'll in it dye.

Hence with the wretch --
Mean while to my dead Lord I'll sorrows pay,
And after his sigh my own life away.
So now they are gon -- hah who comes there?

-- 'Tis I.

Ardella, on that thing cast back an eye;
'Twas once a King, but thank these hands now none:
Nay start not, Tissaphernes too is gon;
His treasures all are thine as a reward.

You are too kind --

See strait a draught prepared,
And Murderers, Timandra next must fall,
You know our will, let it be done.

-- It shall.

Come my Salla, come away,
Thy Merli calls.



Hither, w'ave no business to day,
And where innocence sleeps we securely may play.

I come.

So welcome my dear,
But first let's disperse the black Clouds that are here.

Round about this place we range,
And it's gloomy darkness change,
To a bright delightful Grove,
A proper Scene for happy love.

Next to divert this fair one, all
Our winged Companions we will call,
And the Air for music charm
Whilst they their measures here perform.

Come all you bright forms that inhabit the Air,
And ease with your pleasures the cares of the fair,
Here frolic (...), oh no longer delay!
But let each clap his wings and away.

Now let us discover the mansions of rest,
Where lovers with eternal joys are blessed.
See fair one, see, not long e're you
To those glorious seats shall go.

The lustful Queen thirsts for your blood,
And you are for the World too good.

Nor shall you come alone, your lovers too
Must meet a Fate the same with you.

But here your troubles all shall cease,
'Tis the Seat of endless bliss.

Here in endless pleasures they
Keep eternal Holiday.
Here they Revel, Sport, and are
Crowned with joys still new and rare,
Their pleasures too can never dye,
But like themselves have Immortality.

See the kind Spirits smile, and now
They'll bless her with a nearer view.

Descend oh ye glories descend!
Who with blessings eternal are crowned;
To this Nymph your kind influence lend:
Whilst all the Spears with harmony resound.

She wakes, let the apparition go,
By the damp upon my wings I know
Something ill is drawing near,
Come Salla, come away, Oh come away my dear.

I've had a dream might make a lover blessed,
Oh the sweet delights of everlasting rest!
How this the Queen? what can her coming mean?

Ardella with the Ruffians here remain;
I'll in, and with soft words her temper try,
If without him she'll live, she shall not dye.
Madam! --

-- Your pleasure!

Oft I've heard you're brave,
But the best proof of gallantry you gave,
When of your noble Lord you were bereft,
And such a bliss with so rare patience left.

Madam, our flames a nobler passion rules
Then fondness, th'idle guilt of wav'ring fools:
Our loves knew a far higher excellence,
Then the half pleasures of a minutes sense.

Then you may love since you can with him part,
He has made a conquest over my tender heart:
Love governs here, and since my Husband's dead,
Fate and my choicest wishes have decreed,
He should both in his love and throne succeed.

Do you believe Empires or Crowns can make
Him his Timandra and his faith forsake?
Or think you I an Attome will resign
Of that heart, which by holy vows is mine?
No I will keep him maugre cruelty.

But Madam do you know what 'tis to dye?

Yes, 'tis to lay these clogs our bodies by,
And be removed to blessed eternity.
By death relief from all our griefs we gain,
And by one, put an end to years of pain;
By that we in one minute find out more,
Then all the busy gown men study for;
Who after in dull search you have ages spent,
Learn nothing but to know they are ignorant.
Death is a blessing, and a thing so far
Above that worst of all our frailties fear;
It claims our joy, since by it we put on
The top of happiness, perfection.
Quit him! no never whilst I here have breath;
He's mine in spite of cruelty or death.

Then enter ye grim Ministers of fate,
Does not your stubborn courage now abate?

No, my resolves more fixed and firm are grown,
Bring dreadfull'st racks and tortures yet unknown,
Provide one for each sense, and then do thou
Tempt me my love and interest to forgo,
Midst of my pains I'll smile, and tell thee no.

But minion, soon your insolence shall cease.
Come, since such resolution you express,
Take this, demur not, do it, --

And is this all?
I thought t'ave had a more Heroic fall,
Expected to have noblest tortures met,
Not by dull poison to have found my fate.
But any way I can thy power defy,
'Tis for my Alcibiades I dye:

Yet yield, and live, --

-- Live! what have I to do
With life, when given by one so base as you?
Thus I despise it, --

What dismal tortures strait will on her seize!
So 'twas a health to Alcibiades.

Now blush at what thy impious rage has done,
My Alcibiades is still my own.
And if thou him embrace when I am gon,
Each night thy bed I'll haunt, and challenge there
Those joys, of which thou hast bereft me here.
Anxious shall be each day, disturbed each night,
A restless shade I'll still be in thy sight;
And thee in the height of all thy pleasures fright.
Heaven what do I feel! --

Oh does the draught succeed!

Madam, great Alcibiades is freed,
And just is entering --

-- Strait with straightest care
Convey her in, and wait my pleasure there.
Sweet Murder! oh no Physic is so good
For the hopeless lover as a bath of blood.
But here he comes --
-- Now to my greifs again.

It makes we wonder how I freedom gain,
All things confused, and in disorder are.
How's this in mourning weeds? unveil my fair.
Hah not Timandra! --

-- No Sir, though 'tis one
That loves as nobly as Timandra can,
Or could, did she yet live, but she is dead.

How dead! --

Yes, Tissaphernes that black deed did do*
Prompted by his ignoble hate to you.
But you will wonder more, when I shall tell,
That by his hand the mighty Agis fell.
The King is slain: both I, and Sparta, now
Have no hopes left, but what remain in you.

In me! alas! I am a wretch too poor;
Timandra dead! ^urst ever be the hour
Wherein so fair an innocence was lost.
Heaven justly now may of its glories boast;
For the most bright, and precious Saint that e're
The World enjoyed, is fled, and seated there.

Why do you let your greifs distract your Soul?
Call up your reason, and let passion cool.
See here a Queen, that cour^s you with the charms
Of Love, a Crown, and Empire, to her Arms:
No longer for Timandra sorrow wear,
I will supply all you have lost in her:
I'll love you as she did.

-- Oh Madam, no
To love like her's a tas'k too hard for you;
Love me as she did? why each thought she had
Of me, was such, might make an Angel glad:
For Crowns; though Emp'rour of the World I were,
I'd turn a beggar to recover her.
Oh Madam tempt no further, all's but vain,
I ne'er can have a thought of love again.

Never! --

No never, --

-- Can you then so soon
Forget your promise? or will you disown
That ere, if you Timandra should survive,
You vowed you only for my sake would live?
You see how Heaven has decreed, --

-- Alas!
I then the blessing knew, but not the loss,
Besides I now must dye --

How Sir is't thus, my proffered love you prize?

I do not hate you, may not that suffice?

Ungrateful, no, but I'll reward thy pride,
Draw back: --
-- Go dotard, in, enjoy thy bride;
And know by me thy loved Timandra died:
Yes cruel man by me --

-- No Queen, she lives,
And still to all thy rage des^ance give's.
Do I behold my dearest Lord so nigh!
Shall I again see him before I dye!

Best hopes and comfort of my life! I'm here,
How fares my love? --

Oh come not, come not near,
My blood's all fire, infection's in each vein,
And tyrant death in every part does reign;
But I for you could suffer much more pain.

Kind heaven! let all her pangs upon me fall,
And add ten thousand more, I'll bear 'em all,
Do but restore her back; Oh cursed Queen!
What Devil armed thee to so damned a sin?
Could thou be guilty of so foul a deed?

Yes I did do it, by me the King too bled,
Unworthy wretch! and all for love of you:
But had I power I now would kill thee too.

Oh do it; I'll blot out all you have done before,
And never call thee base, nor cruel more.
Here is my breast; soon the kind work begin,
Advance thy Poniard, send it boldly in.

No, thou shalt live for harder destiny,
But first shalt see thy dear Timandra dye.

Oh misery beyond the damned beneath!
Must I not happy be in life nor death?

Alas! cease your unnecessary moan,
I find my torments quickly will be gon.
Though I could wish they might to years renew,
So I might still be blessed with fee^ng you.
Now the black storms of fate are all blown over,
And we shall meet, and ne'er be parted more.
But oh farewell --

-- My dear Timandra stay!
Ah precious Soul, fly not so soon away!
But one look more; will death have no remorse?
See, 'tis thy Alcibiades implores.
But oh she's gon, seize there that Murd'ress.

-- No:
Seize me! 'tis more then all your Camp can do:
Who e're comes, here's my guard: Alas mean fool,
My fate's a thing too great for thee to rule;
There lies your constancy:

Infernal hag!
Whose every breath infects, each look's a plague!
Could not thy fury on my bosom rest*
But thou must wreak thy vengeance on this breast?
To murder her! -- curse on me that I stand
Thus Idle; now thy heart:
-- But oh 'twould brand
My Trophies with eternal infamy,
If by my hand so base a thing should dye:
Her ills so many, and so odious are,
They would disgrace an executioner.
Yet I'd do something, oh I hav't, I'll tear
Her peicemeal: -- but Timandra's gone too far:
Yonder she Mounts, triumphant Spirit stay:
See where the Angels bear her Soul away!
Now all the Gods will grow in love with her:
And I shall meet fresh troops of Rivals there.
But thus In l haste and follow, --
-- Devil there, --
Dye if thou hast courage enough to dare.
But oh! --
A heavy faintness does each sense surprise:
Yet e're I close up these unhappy eyes,,
Here their last duteous sorrows they shall pay
And at this object melt in tears away.
Blessed center of my hopes! in whom I placed
Too choice, too pure a happiness to last,
I any lossless then thy death had grieved;
How well could I have died, so thou had lived!
Damned fiend! --
But oh why do I rave at her?
That have so little time to tarry here;
One parting kiss, and then in peace I'll dye:
Now farewell world, welcome eternity.

Horror of horrors! this was a dismal chance,
Alas my friend!

-- Thy useless grief refrain,
Farewell; we shall hereafter meet again.

Guards seize the Queen --

-- Seize me rude Slaves? forbear.

You shall in short your accusation hear,
To kill the King, my Father, first you made
Your property; then basely him betrayed.
Your Woman all confes't, and by the Guard
Is now secured to a more just reward.
And (though too late) this black design I knew:
Yet all your stratagems are useless now*
Hence with the Murd'ress, to Justice.

-- Hah!
Think you that I will dye by formal law?
No, when I'm dead be thus my ^ame suppl^'d:
She lived a murd'ress, and a murd'ress died.
Justice would but my happiness retard:
Thus I descend below to a reward.
I shall be Queen of fate: the furies there
For me a glorious Crown of Snakes prepare.
I long to be in state; my Lords farewell:
Now noble Charon! hoise up Sail for Hell.

Her Soul is fled, --

-- With her for ever dye,
Her treasons, and her odious memory.
But whither is the fair Draxilla gone?

Distracted at the mi^chiefs that are done,
She's fled; but whither is to all unknown.

Quickly let after her be made pursuit:
I'll ransack all the World to find her out.
Propitious Heaven will sure to her be kind.

My Lord we in our votes have all combined
To make you King, the Camp with shouts, and cries
Of joy, send their loud wishes to the Skies.

Go bid 'em their unwelcome noise forbear:
Turn all their shouts to sighs of sorrow here.
They are gone; and with em all I wished to keep.
Now could I almost turn a boy, and weep.
My Friends! my Mistress! and my Father lost!
Never were growing hope^ more sadly crossed.
Now fortune has her utmost malice shown,
She'd court me with the flatt'ry of a Crown:
A thing so far beneath those joys I miss,
'Tis but the shadow of a happiness.
For how uneasily on Thrones they sit,
That must like me be wretched to be great!

NOW who says Poets don't in blood delight?
'Tis true the varlets care not much to fight;
But faith, they claw it off when e're they write:
Are bully Rocks not of the common size;
Kill ye men faster then Domitian flye^.
Ours made such Havoc, that the silly Rogue
Was forced to make me rise for the Epilogue.
The fop damned me, but e're to hell I go,
I'd very fain be satisfied, if you
Think it not just that he were served so too.
As he hath yours, do you his hopes beguile:
You'^e been in Purgatory all this while.
Then damn him down to Hell, and never spare,
Perhaps he'll find more favour there then here.
Nay of the two may choose the much less evil,
If you're but good when pleased, even so's the Devil.
IN the Epistle P. 1. l. 14. for look to, r. take. P. ^: l. 3. for should be
concerned, r. should I be concerned. P. ibid. l. 17. for with all my best
endeavours, r. with it all my best endeavours. P. 7. l. 4. for disadvantageous,
r. disadvantageous. P. ib. l. 35. for exhaild, r. exhaled. P. 8. l. 13: for
virtue, r. influence. P. 12. l. 13. for hallow, r. hallow. P. ib. l. 29. for
plagued, r. damned. P. 13. l. 4. for oh Heavens! r. ye Gods! P. ib. l. 29. for
firmier, r. (...). P. 14. l. ult. for Brows dart Majesty, r. Brow darts
Majesty. P. 16. l. 2. for the custom, r. our custom. P. 19. l. 16. for
van^uish, r. vanish. P. ib. l. 19. for Tumultions, r. Tumultu^s. P. 21. l. 4.
for to their ^ate, r. so their fate. P. ib. l. 9. for thus fair, r. then fair.
P. 23. l. 32. for are approved, r. were approved. P. 27. l. 12. for heavy head,
r. hoary head. P. 28. l. 10. for courage, r. glory. P. ib. l. 12. for friend r.
fiend P. 42. l. 32. for reviling, r. revealing. P. 49. l. 10. for be Chained.
r. lye Chained. P. 53. l. 17. for that Dagger, r. this Dagger.


