FOrsaken Dames with less concern reflect
On their inconstant Hero's cold neglects,
Than we (provoked by this Ungrateful Age,)
Bear the hard Fate of our abandoned Stage;
With grief we see you ravished from our Arms,
And Curse the Feeble Virtue of our Charms:
Curse your false hearts, for none so false as they,
And curse the Eyes that stole those hearts away.
Remember Faithless Friends there was a time,
(But oh the sad remembrance of our Prime!)
When to our Arms with eager Joys ye flew,
And we believed your treach'rous Hearts as true
As e're was Nymph of ours to one of you:
But a more powerful
Fraught with sweet sins and absolutions too:
To her are all your pious Vows addressed,
She's both your Loves, and your Religion's Test,
The fairest Prelate of her time and best.
We own her more deserving far then we,
A just excuse for your inconstancy.
Yet 'twas unkindly done to leave us so:
First to betray with Love, and then undo,
A horrid Crime you're all addicted to.
Too soon, alas, your Appetites are cloyed,
And Phillis rules no more, when once enjoyed:
But all rash Oaths of Love and constancy,
With the too short forgotten Pleasures dye,
Whilst she, poor Soul, robbed of her dearest ease,
Still drudges on, with vain desire to please;
And restless follows you from place to place,
For Tributes due to her Autumnal Face:
Deserted thus by such ungrateful men,
How can we hope you'll e're return again?
Here's no new Charm to tempt ye as before,
Wit now's our only Treasure left in store,
And that's a Coin will pass with you no more*
You who such dreadful Bullies would appear,
(True Bullyes! quiet when there's danger near)
Show your great Souls in damning Poets here.

APox of Fortune! Thou art always teasing me about Fortune: Thou risest in a
Morning with ill luck in thy Mouth; Nay, never eatest a Dinner, but thou
sighest two hours after it, with thinking where to get the next. Fortune be
damned, since the worlds so wide.


As wide as it is; 'tis so thro^g'd, and crammed with Knaves and Fools, that an
honest man can hardly get a living in it.


Do, rail, Courtine, do, it may get thee employment.


At you I ought to rail* 'twas your fault we left our Employments abroad to
come home, and be Loyal, and now we as Loyally starve for it.


Did not thy Ancestors do it before thee, man? I tell thee, Loyalty and
Starving are all one: The old Cavaliers got such a trick of it in the Kings
Exile, that their posterity could never thrive since.


'Tis a fine Equipage I am like to be reduced to: I shall be e're long as
greasy as an Al^ati^ Bully; this a flopping Hat, pined up on one side, with a
sandy weather-beaten Perruque, dirty Linned, and to complete the Figure, a long
s^ndalous Iron Sword jarring at my Heels, like a --


Snarling thou meanest like it's Master.


My Companion's the worthy Knight of the most Noble Order of the Post: Your
Peripatetrick Philosophers of the Temple walks, Rogues in Rags, and yet not
honest: Villains that undervalue Damnation, will forswear themselves for a
Dinner, and hang their Fathers For half a Crown.


I am ashamed to hear a Soldier talk of starving.


Why, what shall I do? I can't steal! --


Though thou can not steal, thou hast other vices enough for any Industrious
young fellow to live comfortably upon.


What would thou have me turn Rascal, and run cheating up and down the Town
for a livelihood? I would no more keep a Blockhead company, and endure his
Nauseous non-sense in hopes to get him, then I would be a drug to an old
Woman, with Rheumatic Eyes, hollow Teeth, and stinking breath for a pensioa:
Of all Rogues I would not be a Foolmonger.


How well this niceness becomes thee! I'd fain see thee ee'n turn Parson in a
pet, o'purpose to rail at all those vices which I know thou naturally art fond
of: Why surely an Old Ladies pension need not be so despicable i^ the eyes of a
disbanded Officer, as times go Friend.


I am glad, Beaugard you think so.


Why thou shalt think so too man; be ruled by me, and I'll bring thee into good
company, Families, Courtine, Families, and such ^amilies, where formality's a
scandel and pleasure is the bus'^ess, where the Women are all Wanton, and the
Men all Witty, you Rogue.


What, some of your Worships Wapping acq^intance that you made last time you
came over for recruits, and Spirited away your Landladies Daughter, a
Volunteering with you into France.


I'll bring thee, (...), where Cuckoldom^ in credit, and lewdness laudable,
where thou shalt wallow in pleasures and preferments, r^v^l all day, and every
Night lye in the Arms of melting beauty, sweet as Roses, and as Springs
refreshing.


^ thou would tell me where new Levies are to be raised; a Pox of Who^e^
when a man has not Money to mak'e^ Comfortable.


That shall shower upon us in abundance, and for instance, know to thy
eve^lasting amazement all this dropped ou^ of the Clouds so day.


Hah! Gold by this light! --


Out of the Clouds! --


Ay ^old! does it not smell of the sweet hand than (...), smell -- smell you
dog --


Truly, Sir, of Heavenly sweetness: and ^


Dear, (...) if thou hast* any good Nature (...) thee; if thou would not have
me hang my self before my time, tell me where the Devil (...) that helped thee
to this, that I may go make a bargain with him presently: Speak, speak, or I am
a lost Man.


Why thou must know this Devil which I have given my Soul too already, and
must, I suppose have my Body very speedily lives I know not where, and may for
ought I know be a real Devil; but if it be 'tis the best natured Devil under
Beelzebubs dominion that I'll swear too.


But how came the gold then?


To deal freely with my Friend, I am lately happened into the acqaintance of a
very Reverend pimp, as fine a discreet sober gray bearded old Gentleman as one
would wish; as good a natured public spirited Person as the Nation holds; one
that is never so happy as when he is bringing good people together, and
promoting civil understanding betwixt the sexes: Nay, rather then want
employment, he will go from one end of the Town to the other to procure my Lords
little Dog to be civil to my Ladies little languishing Bitch.


A very worthy Member of the Common-Wealth!


This noble Person one day -- but Fourbin can give you a more particular
account of the matter; sweet Sir, if you please tell us the story of the first
encounter betwixt you and Sir Jolly Iumble, you must know that's his Title.


Sir, it shall be done -- walking one day upon the Piazza about three of the
Clock in the after Noon, to get me a Stomach to my din^er, I chance to encounter
a Person of goodly presence, and worthy appearance, his Beard and Hair white,
grave and comely, his countenance ruddy Plump smooth and cheerful; who
perceiving me also equipped as I am with a men and Air which might well inform
him, I was a Person of no inconsiderable quality, came very respectfully up to
me, and, after the usual ceremonies between Persons of parts and breeding had
past, very humbly enquired of me what is it a Clock -- I presently understand
by the question, that he was a man of parts and business, told him, I did
presume it was at most but nicely turned of three --


Very Court-like, civil, quaint, and new I think.


The freedom of commerce increasing after some little inconsiderable questions
pour po^er^le temps and so he was pleased to offer me the courtesle of a glass
of Wine: I told him I very seldom drank, but if he so pleased, I would do my
self the honour to present him with a dish of meat at an eating House hard by,
where I had an interest.


Very well: I think this Squire of thine, Beauggard, is as accomplished a Person
as any of the employment I ever saw.


Let the Rogue go on.


In short we agreed and went together as soon as we entered the Room* I am your
most humble Servant, Sir, says he -- I am the meanest of your Vassals, Sir,
said I -- I am very happy in lighting into the acqaintance of so worthy a
Gentleman as you appear to be, Sir, said he again -- worthy, Sir Jolly, then
came I upon h^m again of the other side (for you must know by that time I had
gropt out his Title) I kiss your hands from the bottom of my heart, which I
shall be always ready to lay at your Feet.


Well, Fourbin, and what replied the Knight then?


Nothing, he had nothing to say, his sense was transported with admiration of
my parts, so we sat down, and after some pause, he desired to know by what
title he was to distinguish the person that had so highly honoured him --


That is as much as to say* Sir, whose Rascal you were.


Sir, you may make as hold with your poor Slave as you please -- I told him
those that knew me well were pleased to call me the Chevalier Fourbin, that I
was a Cadel of the Ancient Family of the Fourbinois and that I had had the
honour of serving the great Monarch of France in his Wars in Flanders, where I
contracted great Familiarity, and Intimacy with a gallant Officer of the
English, Troops in that service one Captain Beaugard.


Oh, Sir, you did me too much honour, what a true bred Rogue's this! --


Well but the Money, Fourbin, the Money.


Beaugard, (...) Beaugard, says he ^ -- ay it must be so, -- a black man, is he
not? -- (...), says I, blackish -- a dark brown -- full Faced -- yes, -- a sly
subtle observing eye? -- the same -- a strong built well made man? -- right --
a devellish fellow for a Wench, a devilish fellow for a Wench, I warrant him; a
thundering Rogue upon occasion, Beaugard! a Thundering fellow for a Wench, I
must be acquainted with him.


But to the money, the money man, that's the thing I would be acquainted
withal.


This civil Gentleman of the Chevaliers acquaintance comes yesterday morning to
my Lodging, and seeing my Picture in Minature upon the Toilet, told me with the
greatest ecstasy in the World, that was the thing he came to me about: He told
me there was a Lady of his acquaintance had some favourable thoughts of me and
I gad, says he, she's a hummer, such a bona Roba ah-h-h. So without more ado
begs me to lend it him till dinner (for we concluded to eat together) so away
he scuttled with as great joy as if he had found the Philosophers stone.


Very well.


At Lockets we met again: where after a thousand grimaces to show how much he
was pleased, instead of my Picture, presents me with the contents aforesaid;
and told me the Lady desired me to accept of 'em for the Picture which she was
much transported withal, as well as with the Original.


Hah! --


Now, whereabouts this taking quality lies in me, the Devil take me Ned if I
know: But the Fates Ned, the Fates!


A Curse on the Fates! Of all Strumpets Fortunes the basest, 'twas Fortune made
me a Soldier, a Rogue in Red, the gri^vance of the Nation, Fortune made the
peace just when we were upon the brink of a War; then Fortune disbanded us, and
lost us two Months pay: Fortune gave us Debentures instead of ready Money, and
by very good Fortune I sold mine, and lost heartily by it, in hopes the
grinding ill natured dog that bought it will never get a sh^lling for it --


Leave off thy railing for shame, it looks like a Cur that barks for want of
bones; come times may mend, and an honest Soldier be in fashion again --


These greasy fat unwieldy wheeting Rogues that live at home and brood over
their bags, when a fit of fear's upon 'em then if one of us pass but by, all
the Family is ready at the door to cry, Heaven's bless you, Sir, the Lord go
along with you.


Ah good men, what pity 'tis such proper Gentlemen should ever be out of
Employment.


But when the business is over, then every Parish Bawd that goes but to a
Conventicle twice a Week, and pays but scot and lot to the Parish, shall roar
out faugh, ye Lowsy Red-coat rake hells* hout ye Caterpillars, ye Locusts of the
Nation, you are the Dogs that would enslave us all, plunder our Shops, and
ravish our Daughters, ye Scoundrels.


I must confess ravishing ought to be regulated, it would destroy commerce, and
many a good Sober Matron about this Town might loose the selling of her
Daughters Maiden-Head, which were a great grieyance to the people, and a
particular Branch of property lost, Fourbin.


Your Worships pleasure.


Run like a Rogue as you are, and try to find Sir Jolly, and desire him to meet
me at the blew Posts in the Hay-market about 12, we'll Dine together; I must
inquire farther into yesterdays adventure, in the mean time, Ned, here's half
the prize to be doing withal, old friends must preserve Correspondence, we
have shared good Fortune together and had shall never part us.


Well, thou wilt certainly die in a Ditch for this, hast thou no more grace
then, to be a true Friend, nay, to part with thy money to thy Friend; I grant
you a Gentleman may swear and lye for his Friend, pimp for his Friend, hang for
his Friend, and so forth: but to part with ready money is the devil.


Stand aside either I am mistaken, or yonder's Sir Jolly coming; now Courtine,
will I show thee the Flower of Knighthood* Ah, Sir Jolly.


My Hero! my darling! my Ganimede! how dost thou? Strong! wanton! lusty!
rampant! hah, ah, ah! She's thine Boy* odd she's thine, plump, soft, smooth,
wanton! hah, ah, ah! Ah Rogue, ah Rogue! here's shouldiers, here's shape!
there's a Foot and Leg, here's a Leg, here's a Leg -- Quaa-a-a-a.


What an old Goat's this.


Child, Child, Child, who's that? A friend of thine! a friend o'thine? A pretty
fellow, odd a very pretty fellow, and a strong dog I'll warrant him, how dost do
dear heart? prithee let me kiss thee, I'll swear and vow I will kiss thee, ha,
ha, he, he, he, he, a Toad, A Toad, ah Toa-a-a-ad --


Sir, I am your humble Servant.


But the Lady, Sir Jolly, the Lady, how does the Lady, what says the Lady, Sir
Jolly?


What says the Lady! why she says -- she says -- odd she has a delicate Lip,
such a Lip, so red, so hard, so plump, so blub* I fancy I am eating Cherries
every time I think on it -- and for her Neck and Breasts and her -- odds life;
I'll say no more, not a word more, but I know, I know --


I am sorry for that with all my Heart; do you know, say you, Sir, and would
you put off your mubled orts, your offall upon me --


Hush, hush, hush! have a care, as I live and breathe, not I; alack and well a
day I am a poor old fellow decayed and done: Alls gone with me Gentlemen, but
my good Nature, odd I love to know how matters go, though now and then to see a
pretty Wench, and a young Fellow Towze and Rowze and Frouze and Mowze; odd I
love a young fellow dearly, faith dearly --


This is the most extraordinary rogue, I ever met withal.


But Sir Jolly, in the first place, you must know, I have sworn never to marry.


I would not have thee man, I am a Bachelor my self, and been a whore Master
all my life, besides she's married already man, her Husband's an old greasy,
untoward, ill natured, slovenly, Tobacco taking Cuckold, but plaguy ^ealous.


Already a Cuckold, Sir Jolly.


No that shall be my Boy, thou shalt make him one, and I'll pimp for thee dear
heart, and shall not I hold the door, shall not I peep hah, shall not I you devil, you
little dog shall not I? --


What is it, I'd not grant to oblige my Patron.


And then dost hear, I have a lodging for thee in my own house; dost hear old
Soul, in my own house: She lives the very next door man, there's but a Wall to
part her Chamber and thine, and then for a peep hole, odds fish I have a peep
hole for thee; sbud I'll show thee, I'll show thee --


But when, Sir Jolly, I am in haste, impatient.


Why this very night man; poor Rogue's in haste, poor Rogue; but hear you --


The matter?


Shall not we dine together?


With all my heart.


The Maw begins to empty, get you before and bespeak Dinner at the blew posts;
while I stay behind and gather up a dish of Whores for a desert.


Be sure that they be lewd drunken stripping Whores, Sir Jolly, that won't be
affectedly squeamish and troublesome.


I warrant you.


I love a well disciplined Whore, that shows all the tricks of her profession
with a wink; like an old Soldier that understands all his exercise by beat of
Drum.


A Thief, say thou so! I must be better acquainted with that fellow; he has
a notable Nose; a hard brawny Carl -- true and trusty, and mettle I'll warrant
him.


Well, Sir Jolly, you'll not fail us? --


Fail ye! am I a Knight? hark ye Boys. I'll muster this evening, such a Regiment
of Rampant. Roaring, Roysterous Whores, that shall make more noise than if all
the Cats in the Hay market were in Conjunction: Whores ye Rogues, that shall
swear with you, drink with you, talk Bawdy with you, fight with you, scratch
with you, lye with you, and go to the Devil with you, shall not we be very merry,
hah! --


As merry as Wine, Women and Wickedness can make us.


Odd that's well said again, very well said, as merry as Wine, Women and
wickedness can make us: I love a fellow that is very wicked dearly; methinks
there's a spirit in him, there's a sort of a tantara, rara, tantara, ra ra, ah
ah h h well, and won't ye, when the Women come, won't ye, and shall I not see a
little sport amongst you; well get ye gone; ah Rogues, ah Rogues, da da, I'll
be with you, da da --


In the name of Satan what Whores are those in their Copper (...), yonder?


Well I'll swear, Madam, 'tis the finest Evening: I love thee, Mall, mightily.


Let's huzza the Bulkers.


Really, and so do I, because there's always good company, and one meets with
such Civilities from every body.


Damned Whores, hout ye filthies.


Ay, and then I love extremely to show my self here, when I am very fine, to
vex those poor Devils that call themselves Virtues, and are very scandalous and
Crapish, I'll swear; O Crimine, who's yonder! Sir Jolly Iumble, I vow.


Faugh! Let's leave the nasty Sows to Fools, and Diseases.


Oh Papa, Papa! where have you been these two days, Papa?


You are a precious Father indeed, to take no more care of your Children: We
might be dead for all you, you naughty Dady, you.


Dead, my poor Fubses! odd I had rather all the Relations I have were dead, a
dad I had: Get you gone you little Devils Bubbies; oh Law there's Bubbies! odd
I'll bite 'em, odd I will.


Nay, fie, Papa; I swear you'll make me angry, except you carry us, and treat us
to Night, you have promised me a treat this Week, wont you Papa.


Ay, wont you Dad.


Odds so, odds so, well remembered! get you go^, don't stay talking; get you
gone, yonders, a great Lord, the Lord Beaugard, and his Couzin the Baron, the
Count, the Marquis, the Lord knows what, Monsieur Courtine newly come to Town,
odds so.


Oh Law, where Dady where? Oh dear, a Lord.


Well, you are the Purest Papa; but when be they mun, Papa --


I won't tell you, you Jipsies, So I wont -- except you tickle me -- 'sbud they
are brave fellows all Tall, and not a bit small, odd one of 'em has a devilish
deal of Money.


Oh dear, but which is he, Papa.


Shall not I be in Love with him, Dady.


What no body tickle me! no body tickle me? -- not yet, tickle me a little
Mally -- tickle me a little Ienny -- do He he he he he he --


What, what will you do trow? --


Come along with me, come along with me, sneak after me at a distance, that no
body take notice, Swinging fellows Mally -- Swinging fellows Ienny, a
Devilish deal of Money, get you before me then, you little d^ppappers, ye
Wasps, ye wagtails, get youg on, I say, swinging fellows --


Dye a Maid, Sylvia! sie for shame! what a scandalous resolution's that; five
thousand Pounds to your Portion and leave it all to Hospitals, for the innocent
recreation hereafter of leading Apes in Hell, fie for shame!


Indeed such another charming Animal as your Consort, Sir David, might do much
with me; 'tis an unspeakable blessing to lye all night by a Horse-load of
diseases; a beastly, unsayory, old, groaning, grunting, wheazing Wretch, that
smells of the Grave he's going to already, from such a curse and Hair-Cloath
next my skin good Heaven deliver me!


Thou mistake the use of a Husband, Silvia. They are not meant for
Bedfellows, heretofore indeed 'twas a fulsome fashion, to lie o'nights with a
Husband; but the worlds improved and Customs altered.


Pray instruct then what the use of a Husband is.


Instead of a Gentleman-Usher for Ceremonies sake to be in waiting on set days,
and particular occasions; but the Friend Cozen is the Jewel unvaluable.


But, Sir David, Madam will be difficult to be so Governed; I am mistaken, if
his Nature is not too Jealous to be blinded.


So much the better, of all, the jealous Fool is easiest to be deceived: For
observe, where there's jealousy there's always fondness; which if a Woman, as
she ought to do, will make the right use of the Husband's fears shall not so
awake him on one side as his dotage shall blind him on the other.


Is your Piece of mortality such a do^eing Doodle, is he so very fond of you.


No, but he has the vanity to think that I am very fond of him, and if he be
jealous, 'tis not so much for fear I do abuse, as that in time I may, and
therefore imposes this confinement on me though he has other divertisments that
take him off from my enjoyment; which make him so loathsome no Woman but must
hate him.


His private divertisements I am a stranger to.


Then for his Person 'tis incomparably odious, he has such-a breath, one kiss
of him were enough to cure the fits of the Mother, 'tis worse then Asa foetida.


Oh hideous!


Every thing that's nasty he affects, clean Linen he says is unwholesome, and
to make him more charming he's continually eating of Garlic and chewing
Tob^cco.


Faugh! this is love! this is the blessing of Matrimony.


Rail not so unreasonably against love, Silvia; As I have dealt freely and
acknowledged to thee the passion I have for Beaugard; so methinks, Silvia need
not conceal her good thoughts of her Friend; do not I know Cour^ne sticks in
your stomach?


If he does, I'll assure you he shall never get to my heart, but can you have
the Conscience to love another man now you are married? what do you think will
become of you.?


I ^ell thee, Sylvia, I never was married to that Engine we have been talking
of, my parents indeed made me say something to him after a Priest once, but my
heart went not along with my tongue, I minded not what it was for my thoughts,
Sylvia, for these seve^ years have been much better employed -- Beaugard! Ah
curse on the day that first sent him into France!


Why so I beseech you?


Had he stayed here, I had not been sacrificed to the Arms of this monument of
Man, for the bed of death could not be more cold, then his has been, he would
have delivered me from the Monster, for even then I loved him, and was apt to
think my kindness not neglected.


I find indeed your Ladyship had good thoughts of him.


Surely 'tis impossible to think too well of him, for he has wit ^nough to call
his good nature in question, and yet good nature enough to make his wit be
suspected.


But how do you hope ever to get sight of him, Sir David's watchfulness is
invincible. I dare swear he would smell out a Rival if he were in the house
only by natural instinct, as some that always sweat when a Cat's in the Room,
then again, Beaugard's a Soldiers and that's a thing the old Gentleman you
know loves dearly.


There lies the greatest comfort of my uneasy life he is one of those Fools
forsooth, that are led by the Nose by Knaves to rail against the King and the
Government, and is mightily fond of being thought of a party, I have had hopes
this twelve month to have heard of his being in the Gate-House for Treason.


But I find only your self the Prisoner all this while.


At present indeed I am so, but Fortune I hope will smile, would thou but be
my Friend, Sylvia.


In any mischievous design withal my heart.


The conclusion, Madam, may turn to your satisfaction, but you have no thoughts
of Courtine.


Not I, I'll assure you Cozen.


You don't think him well shaped, straight and proportionable.


Considering he eats but once a Week, the man is well enough.


And then wears his Clothes you know ^ilthily and like a horrid Sloven.


Filthily enough of all Conscience, with a thread bare Red-Coat, which his
Taylor ^ns him for to this day, over which a great broad greasy bu^ Belt,
enough to turn any ones Stomach but a disbanded Soldier; a Perruquety'd up in
a knot to excuse its want of combing, and then because he has been a Man a
Arms, he must wear two Tussles of a Beard forsooth, to lodge a dunghill of
snuff upon, to keep his Nose in good humour.


Nay, now I am suro that thou love him.


So far from it, that I protest eternally against the whole sex.


That time will best demonstrate, in the mean while to our business.


As how, Madam.


To night must I see Beaugard, they are this minute at Dinner in the
hay-market; now to make my evil genius, that haunts me every where, my thing
called a Husband, himself to assist his poor Wife, at a dead lift, I think
would not be unpleasant.


But 'twill be impossible


I am apt to be persuaded rather very easy, you know our good and friendly
Neighbour, Sir Jolly.


Out on him beast, he's always talking silthily to a body, If he sits but at
the table with one, he'll be making nasty figures in the Napkins.


He and my sweet yoke fellow are the most intimate friends in the world, so
that partly out of neighbourly kindness, as well as the great delight he takes
to be meddling in matters of this nature, with a great deal of pains and
industry procured me Beaugards picture, and given him to understand how well a
Friend of his in Petticoats, called my self, wishes him.


But what's all this to the making the Husband instrumental, for I must confess
of all creatures a Husbands the thing that's odious to me.


That must be done this night: I'll in^stantly to my chamber take my bed in a
pet and send for Sir David.


But which way then must the Lover come?


Nay, I'll betray Beaugard to him, show him the picture he sent me, and beg of
him as he tenders his own honour, and my quiet, to take some course to secure
me from the scandalous solicitations of that innocent Fellow.


And so make him the property, the go-between, to bring the affair to an issue
the more decently.


Right, Sylvia, 'tis the best office a Husband can do a Wife; I mean an old
husband; bless us to be yoked in Wedlock with a paralitick, coughing, decrepit
Dotrell, to be a dry Nurse all ones life time to an old Child of sixty five, to
lye by the Image of Death a whole night, a dull immovable, that has no sense
of life, but through it's pains, the Pigeons as happy that's laid to a sick
mans feet, when the world has given him over; for my part this shall henceforth
be my prayer,

Cursed be the memory; nay, double cursed,
Of her that wedded Age for interest first;
Though worn with years, with fruitless wishes full,
'Tis all day troublesome, and all night dull,
Who wed with Fools indeed lead happy lives,
Fools are the fittest finest things for Wives;
Yet old men Profit bring as Fools bring ease,
And both make Youth and Wit much better please.

SIR Jolly is the glory of the Age.


Nay now, Sir, you honour me too far.


He's the delight of the young, and wonder of the old.


I swear Gentlemen you make me blush.


He deserves a Statue in Gold, at the charge of the Kingdom.


Out upon it, fie for shame: I protest I'll leave your comcompany if you talk
so; but faith they were pure Whores, daintily dutiful Strumpets, ha! udds-bud,
they'd -- have stripped for the other Bottle.


Truly, Sir Jolly, you are a man of very extraordinary discipline, I never saw
Whores under better command in my life.


Pish, that's nothing man, nothing, I can send for forty better when I please,
Doxies that will skip, strip, leap, trip, and do any thing in the world, any
thing old Soul.


Dear, dear Sir Jolly, where and when?


Odd as simply as I stand here her Father was a Knight.


Indeed Sir Jolly, a Knight say you?


Ay, but a little decayed, I'll assure you she's a very good Gentlewoman born.


Ay, and a very good Gentlewoman bred too.


Ay, and so she is.


But Sir Jolly, how goes my business forward, when shall I have a view of the
quarry I am to fly at?


Alas a day, not so hasty, soft and fair I beseech you, ah my little Son of
thunder, if thou had her in thy arms now between a pair of sheets, and I
under the Bed to see fair play Boy, gemini! what would become of me? What would
become of me? there would be doings, oh Lawd, I under the bed!


Or behind the hangings, Sir Jolly, would not that do as well.


Ah no, under the bed against the world, and then it would be very dark, hah!


Dark to choose.


No, but a little light would do well, a small glimmering Lamp, just enough for
me to steel a peep by; oh lamentable! oh lamentable, I won't speak a word more,
there would be a trick! oh rare you friend, oh rare! odds so not a word more,
odds so yonder comes the Monster that must be the Cuckold Elect, step step
aside and observe him, if I should be seen in your company, 'twoud spoil all.


For my part I'll stand the meeting of him, one way to promote a good
understanding with a Wife, is first to get acquainted with her Husband.


Well of all blessings, a discreet Wife is the greatest that can light upon a
man of years: had I been married to any thing but an^ Angel now, what a Beast
had I been by this time, well I am the happiest old Fool! 'tis an horrid Age
that we live in, so that an honest man can keep nothing to himself; if you have
a good estate, every cove^ous Rogue'ls longing for (...) (truly I love a good
estate dearly my self;) if you have a handsome Wife, every smooth^ac'd Coxcomb
will be combing and cocking at her, flesh-^lies are not so troublesome to the
shambles, as those sort of Insects are to the Boxes in the Play-house: But
virtue is a great blessing, an unvaluable treasure, to tell me her self that a
Villain had tempted her, and give me the very Picture, the enchantment that he
sent to bewitch her, it strikes me dumb with admiration; here's the Villain in
effigy. [ Pulls out the Picture] Odd a very handsome fellow, a dangerous Rogue
I'll warrant him, such fellows as these now should be fettered like unruly
Colts, that they might not leap into other men's pastures; here's a Nose now, I
could find in my heart to cut it off, damned Dog, to dare to presume to make a
Cuckold of a Knight! bless us what will this world come to! well poor Sir David
down, down, on thy knees and thank thy stars for this deliverance.


'Sdeath what's that I see? Sure 'tis the very Picture which I sent by Sir
Jolly, if so, by this light, I am damnably Jilted.


But now if. --


Surely he does not see us yet.


See you, Sir, why he has but one eye, and we are on his blind side; I'll dumb
found him.


Who the Devils this? Sir, Sir, Sir, who are you Sir?


Ay, ay, 'tis the same, now a pox of all amorous adventures, 'sdeath I'll go
beat the impertinent pimp that drew me into this fooling.


Sir, methinks you are very curious.


Sir, perhaps I have an extraordinary reason to be so.


And perhaps, Sir, I care not for you, nor your Reasons neither.


Sir, if you are at leisure, I would beg the Honour to speak with you.


With me, Sir? What's your business with me?


I would not willingly be troublesome; though it may be I am so at this time.


It may be so too, Sir.


But to be known to so worthy a Person as you are, would be so great an honour,
so extraordinary a happiness, that I could not avoid taking this opportunity of
tend'ring you my Service.


Smooth Rogue, who the Divel is this fellow? speed you can to know your
business, Sir, that I may go about my business.


Sir, if I might with good manners, I should be glad to inform my self, whose
picture that is which you have in your hand, methinks it is very fine painting.


Picture, Friend, picture! Sir, 'tis the resemblance of a very impudent fellow,
they call him Captain Beaugard forsooth, but he is in short a rakehell, a poor
louzy beggarly disbanded devil, do you know him friend? --


I think I have heard of such a vagabond, the truth on it is he is a very
impudent fellow.


Ay, a damned Rogue.


Oh a notorious scoundrel!


I expect to hear he's hanged by next Sessions.


The truth on it is, he has deserved it long ago; but did you ever see him, Sir
David.


Sir -- does he know me?


Because I fancy that Miniature is very like him, pray Sir, whence had it you?
--


Had it, Friend? had it! whence had it I -- bless us* what have I done now this
the very Traitor himself, if he should be desperate now, and put his sword in
my guts! -- s^itting my nose will be as bad as that, I have but one eye left
neither, and may be -- oh but this is the Kings Court, odd tha's well
remembered he dares not but be ^ivil here; I'll try to out-huff him, whence had
it you?


Ay, Sir, whence had it you? that's English in my Country, Sir.


Go, Sir, you are a Rascal.


How!


Sir, I say, you are a Rascal, a very impudent Rascal, nay, I'll prove you to
be a Rascal, if you go to that --


Sir, I am a Gentleman and a Soldier.


So much the worse, Soldiers have been Cuckold makers from the beginning; Sir,
I care not what you are; for ought I know you may be a -- come Sir, did I never
see you? answer me to that did I never see you? for ought I know you may be a
Jesuit; there were more in the last army beside you.


Of your acquaintance, and be hanged!


Yes to my knowledge, there were several at Hounslow Heath disguised in dirty
Petticoats, and cried Brandy, I knew a Sergeant of foot that was familiar with
one of them all night in a Ditch, and fancied him a woman, but the Devil is
powerful.


In short, you worthy Villain of Worship, that picture is mine, and I must have
it, or I shall take an opp^rtunity to kick your Worship most inhumanly.


Kick Sir,


Ay, Sir, kick, 'tis a recreation I can show you.


Sir, I am a free born Subject of England, and there are Laws, look you, there
are Laws; so I say you are a Rascal again, and now how will you help your self?
poor Fool!


Hark you Friend, have not you a Wife?


I have a Lady, Sir -- oh and she's mightily taken with this Picture of yours,
she was so mightily proud of it, she could not forbear showing it me, and
telling too who 'twas sent it her.


And has she bin long a Gilt? has she practised the Trade for any time?


Trade! humph, what Trade! what Trade? Friend?


Why the Trade of Whore and no Wh^re, Caterwauling in jest, putting out
Christian Colours, when she's a Turk under Deck: A curse upon all honest women
in the flesh, that are Whores in the Spirit.


Poor Devil, how he rails, ha, ha, ha, look you sweet Soul, as I told you
before, there are laws, there are laws, but those are things not worthy your
consideration: Beauty's your business; but dear vagabond trouble thy self no
further about my Spouse, let my Doxy rest in peace, she's meat for thy Master,
old boy; I have my belly full of her every Night.


Sir, I wish all your noble Family hanged from the bottom of my heart.


Moreover Captain Swash I must tell you my Wife is an honest Woman, of a
virtuous disposition, one that I have loved from her ^nfancy, and she deserves
it by her faithful dealing in this affair, for that she has discovered loyally
to me the treacherous designs laid against her Chastity, and my Honour.


By this light the Beast weeps.


Truly I cannot but weep for Joy; to think how happy I am in a sincere faithful
and loving Yoke-fellow, she charged me too to tell you into the bargain, that
she is sufficiently satisfied of the most secret wishes of your heart.


I am glad on it.


And that 'tis her desire, that you would trouble your self no more about the
matter.


With all my heart.


But henceforward behave your self with such discretion as becomes a Gentleman.


Oh to be sure most exactly!


And let her alone to make the best use of those innocent Freedoms I allow her
without putting her reputation in hazard.


As how I beseech you --


By your impertinent and unseasonable address.


And this news you bring me by a particular commission from your sweet Lady.


Yea Friend I do, and she hopes you'll be sensible, Dear heart, of her good
meaning by it: these were her very words, I neither add nor diminish, for plain
d^aling is my Mistresses Friend.


Then all the Curses I shall think on this twelve-month light on her, and as
many more on the next Fool that gives credit to the Sex.


Well, certainly I am the happiest Toad; how melancholy the Munkey stands now?
Poor Pug hast thou lost her?


To be so sordid a Jilt, to betray me to such a Beast as that, can she have any
good thoughts of such a Swine? Dam her, had she abused me handsomely it had
never ^ext me.


Now Sir with your permission I'll take my leave.


Sir, If you were gon to the Devil, I should think you very well disposed of.


If you have any Letter, or other commendation to the Lady that was so charmed
with your Resemblance there, it shall be very faithfully conveyed by --


Fool.


Your humble Servant Sir, I'm gon, I shall disturb you no further, your most
humble Servant Sir.


Now Poverty, Plague, Pox and Prison fall thick upon the head of thee Fourbin.


Sir! --


Thou hast been an extraordinary Rogue in thy time.


I hope I have lost nothing in your Honours service Sir.


Find cut some way to revenge me on this old Rascal, and if I do not make thee
a Gentleman. --


That you have been pleased to do long ago, I thank you; for I am sure you have
not left me one shilling in my pocket these two Months.


Here, here's for thee to Revel withal.


Will your Honour please to have his Throat cut?


With all my heart.


Or would you have him decently hanged at his own door, and then give out to
the World he did it himself?


That would do very well.


Or I think [to proceed with more safety] a good stale Jakes were a very pretty
expedient.


Excellent, excellent Fourbin.


Leave matters to my discretion, and if I do not --


I know thou wilt, go, go about it, prosper and be famous: now e're I dare
venture to meet Courtin again. will I go by my self, rail for an hour or two,
and then be good company.


Take my word Sir, you had better give this business over, I tell you there's
nothing in the World turns my Stomach so much as the man, that man that makes
Love to me. I never saw one of your Sex in my life make love, but he looked so
like an Ass all the while, that I blushed for him.


I am afraid your Ladyship then is one of those dangerous Creatures they call
She-wits, who are always so mightily taken with admiring themselves: that
nothing else is worth their notice.


Oh! who can be so dull not to be ravished with that roysterous mean of yours?
that russling Air in your gate, that seems to cry where e're you go, make room,
here comes the Captain: that Face the which bids defiance to the Weather; bless
us! if I were a poor Farmers wife in the Country now, and you wanted Quarters,
how would it fright me? But as I am young, not very ugly, and one you never saw
before, how lovingly it looks upon me.


Who can forbear to sigh, look pale and languish, where Beauty and wit unite
both their forces to enslave a heart so tractable as mine is. First, for that
modish swim of your Body, the victorious motion of your Arms and Head, the toss
of your Fan, the glancing of the Eyes, bless us! If I were a dainty fine dressed
Coxcomb with a great Estate and a little or no wit, vanity in abundance, and
good for nothing, how would they m^lt and soften me? but as I am a scandalous
honest Rascal, not Fool enough to be your sport, nor rich enough to be your
prey, how glotingly they look upon me! --


Alas, alas! What pity 'tis your honesty should ever do you hurt, or your wit
spoil your preferment.


Just as much fair Lady, as that your Beauty should make you be envi^d at, or
your Virtue provoke scandal.


Well the more I look, the more I'm in love with you.


The more I look, the more I am out of Love with you.


How my heart swells when I see you!


How my Stomach rises when I'm near you!


Nay, then let's bargain.


With all my heart, what?


Not to fall in love with each other, I assure you Monsiour Captain.


But to hate one another constantly and cordially.


Always when you are drunk, I desire you to talk scandalously of me.


Ay, and when I am sober too, in return whereof when e're you see a coquette of
your acquaintance, and I chance to be named, be sure you spit at the ^ilthy
remembrance, and rail at me as if you loved me.


In the next place, when e're we meet in the Mall, I desire you to humph, put
out your Tongue, make ugly mouths, laugh aloud, and look back at me.


Which if I chance to do, be sure at next turning to pick up some tawdry
sluttering Fop or another.


That I made acquaintance with all at the Musique-meeting.


Right, Just such another Spark to saunter by your side with his Hat under his
Arm.


Harkening to all the bitter things I can say to be revenged:


Whilst the dull Rogue dare not so much as grin to oblige you, for fear of
being beaten for it, when he is out of his waiting.


Counterfeit your Letters from me.


And you to be even with me for the scandal, publish to all the World I offered
to marry you.


Oh hideous marriage'


Horrid, horrid marriage!


Name, name no more of it.


At that sad word let's part.


Let's wish all men decrepit, dull and sill^y


And every woman old and ugly.


Adieu! --


Farewell! --


Ah me, Mr. Frisk.!


sincerely as I hope to be saved, the Devil take me, Dam me Madam, who's that?


Ha, ha, ha, hey.


True to thy failings always Woman, how naturally is the Sex fond of a Rogue!
What a Monster was that for a Woman to delight in, now must I love her still,
tho I know I am a Blockhead for it, and she'll use me like a block-head too, if I
don't prevent her: what's to be done? I'll have three Whores a day, to keep Love
out of my head. Beaugard will met again, how go matters? Handsomely!


Oh very handsomely! had you but seen how hadsomly I was used just now, you
would swear so, I have heard thee rail in my time, would thou would exercise
thy talent a little at present.


At what?


Why can thou over want a subject! rail at thy self, rail at me, I deserve to
be raild at, see there, what think thou of that Engine, that moving lump of
filthiness miscalled a Man.


Curse on him for a Rogue, I know him.


So*


The Rascal was a Retailer of Ale but yesterday, and now he is an Officer and
be hanged; 'tis a dainty sight in a morning to see him with his Toes turned in,
drawing his Legs after him, at the head of a hundred lusty Fellows, some
honest Gentleman or other stays ^ow, because that Dog had money to bribe some
corrupt Colonel withal.


There, there's another of my acquaintance, he was my Fathers Footman not long
since, and has pimpt for me oftner than he prayed for himself; that good
quality recommended him to a noble mans service, which together with
^lattering, fawning, lying, spying and informing, has raised him to an
employment of trust and reputation, though the Rogue can't write his ^ame, nor
read his neck Verse, if he had occasion.


'Tis as unreasonable to expect a man of Sense should be preferred, as 'tis to
think a Hector can be stout, a Priest religious, a fair Woman chaste, or a
pardoned Rebel loyal.


That's seasonably thought on, look there, observe but that Fellow on the right
hand, the Rogue with the busiest Face of the two, I'll tell thee his History.


I hope hanging will be the end of his History, so well I like him at the first
sight.


He was born a Vagabond, and no Parish owned him, his Father was as obscure as
his Mother public, every body knew her, and no body could guess at him.


He comes of a very good Family, heaven be praised.


The first thing he chose to rise by, was Rebellion, so a Rebel he grew, and
^ourisht a Rebel, fought against his King, and helped to bring him to the Block:


And was he not Religious too?


Most devoutly! He could pray till he cried, and preach till he foamed, which
excellent Talent made him popular, and at last preferred him to be a worthy
Member of that never to be forgotten Rump Parliament.


Tray Sir be uncovered at that, and remember it with Reverence.


In short, he was Committee man, Sequestrator and persecutor General of a whole
County, by which he got enough at the Kings Return to secure himself in the
general Pardon.


Naufeous Vermin: That such a Swine with the mark of Rebellion in his Forehead,
should wallow in his Luxury whilst honest men are ^orgotten!


Thus forgiven, thus raised, and made thus happy, the ungrateful Slave disowns
the hand that healed him, cherishes Factions to affront his Master, and once
more would Rebel against the Head, which so lately saved his from a Pole.


What a dreadful Beard and swinging Sword he wears*


'Tis to keep his Cowardice in countenance, the Rascal will endure kicking most
temperately for all that, I know five or six more of the same stamp; that never
came abroad without terrible long Spits by their sides, with which they will
let you bore their own Noses if you please, but let the Villain be forgotten.


His Co-Rogue I have some knowledge of, he's a tatt^r'd worm-eaten Case-putter,
some call him Lawyer, one that takes it very ill he is not made a Judge.


Yes, and is always repining that men of parts are not regarded.


He has been a great noise-maker in factious Clubs these seven years, and now I
suppose is courting that Worshipful Rascal to make him Recorder of some
factious Town.


To teach Tallow-chandlers and Chees-mongers how far they may rebel against
their King by virtue of Magna Chart^


But friend Beaugard methinks thou art very spleenatick of a sudden, how goes
the affair of Love foreward, prosperously hah!


Oh I assure you most Triumphantly, Just now you must know I am parted with the
sweet civil enchanted Ladies Husband.


Well and what says the Cuckold is he very kind and good natured as Cuckolds
use to be?


Why he says, Courtine in short, that I am a very silly fellow, (and truly I am
very apt to believe him) and that I have been Jilted in this affair most
unconscionably, a Plague on all P^mps, say, a mans business never thrives so
well, as when he is his own Solicitor.


Hist* hist. Capt. Capt. Capt. Boy.


Sir.


Run and get two Chairs presently, besure you get two Chairs, Sirrah, do you
here? here's luck, here's luck, now or never Capt. never if not now Captain!
here's luck.


Sir Jolly, no more adventures sweet Sir Jolly, I am like to have a very sine
time o^'t truly.


The best in the World dear Dog, the very best in the World,'s bud she's here
hard by man, stays on purpose for thee finely disguised, the Cuckold has lost
her too; and no body knows any thing of the matter but I, no body but I, and I
you must know, I am I, hah! and I you little Toad, hah!


You are a very fine Gentleman.


The best natured Fellow in the World I believe of my years! now does my heart
so thump for fear this business should miscarry; why I'll warrant thee, the Lady
is here man, she's all thy own, 'tis thy own fault if thou art not in terra
la within this half hour: come along prithee come along, fie for shame,
what make a Lady loose her longing, come along I say, you -- out upon it.


Sir your humble, I shall not stir.


What? not go!


No Sir, no Lady for me.


Not go! I should laugh at that Faith.


No, I will assure you, not go Sir.


Away you Wag, you jest, you jest you wag; not go quotha?


No Sir, not go I tell you, what the Devil would you have more.


Nothing, nothing Sir, but I am a Gentleman.


With all my heart.


And do you think then that I'll be used thus.


Sir!


Take away my Reputation and take away my Life; I shall be disgrac't for ever.


I have not wronged you Sir Jolly.


Not wronged me! But you shall find you have wronged me, and wronged a sweet
Lady, and a fine Lady: -- I shall never be trusted again! never have employment
more! I shall dye of the Spleen -- prithee now be good natured, prithee be
persuaded, od I'll give thee this Ring, I'll give thee this Watch, 'tis Gold, I'll
give thee any thing in the World, go.


Not one Foot Sir.


Now that I durst but murder him -- well, shall I fetch her to thee? What shall
I do for thee?

'Ods fish here she comes her self, now you ill natured Chunl, now you Devil,
look upon her, do but look upon her, what shall I say to her?


Even what you please Sir Jolly.


'tis a very strange Monster this -- Madam this is the Gentleman, that's he,
though (as one may say) he's something bashful, but I'll tell him who you are If
thou art not more cruel then Leopards, Lyone, Tigers, Wolves, or Tarters don't
break my Heart, don't kill me, this unkindness of thine goes to the Soul of me.


Madam, he says, he's so amazed at your Triumphant Beauty, that he dares not
approach the excellence that shines from you.


What can be the meaning of all this?


Art thou then resolved to be remorseless? can thou be insensible, hast thou
Eyes? hast thou a Heart? hast thou any thing thou should have? cdd I'll
tickle thee, get you to her you Fool, get you to her, to her; to her, to her,
ha, ha, ha.


Have you forgot me Beaugard?


So now to her again I say, to her, to her and be hanged, Ah Rogue! Ah Rogue!
now, now, have at her, now have at her, there it goes, their it goes, Hey --
Boys! --


Methinks this Face should not so much be altered, as to be nothing like what
once I thought it, the object of your Pleasure and subject of your Praises.


Cunning Toad! Wheedling Jade! you shall see now how by degrees she'll draw him
into the Whirl pool of Love, now he leers upon her, now he deers upon her, Oh
law! there's Eyes! there's your Eyes! I must pinch him by the Calf of the Leg.


Madam, I must confess I do remember, that I had once acquaintance with a Face,
whose Air and Beauty much resembled yours, and if I may trust my Heart, you are
called Clarianda.


Clarinda. I was called till my ill Fortune Wedded me, now you may have heard
of me by another Title, your friend there I suppose, has made nothing a secret
to you.


And are you then that kind enchanted fair one who was so passionately in Love
with my Picture, that you could not forbear betraying me to the Beast your
Husband, and wrong the Passion of a Gentleman that languished for you, only to
make your Monster merry, hark you Madam, had your fool bin worth it, I had
beaten him, and have a Months mind to be exercising my parts that way upon your
go between, your Male-Bawd there.


Ah Lord! Ah Lord! All's spoiled again, all's ruined. I shall be undone for
ever, why what a Devil is the matter now? what have I done? what sins have I
committed.


And are you that passionate Adorer of our Sex? who cannot Live a Week in
London without Loving, are you the Spark that send y^u Picture up and down to
longing Ladies, longing for a pattern of your Person.


Yes Madam when I receive so good H^stages as these are


A lack a day!


Could you pitch upon no Body but that wretched Woman, that has loved you too
well to abuse you thus?


Thatever I was Born!


Here, here Madam, I'll return you your dirt, I scorn your Wages, as I do your
Service.


Fie for shame what refund? That is not like a Soldier to refund, keep, keep
it to pay your Sempstress withal.


His Sempstress, who the Devil is his Sempstress? Odd what would I give to know
that now!


There was a Ring too, which I sent you this Afternoon, if that fit not your
Finger, you may dispose of it some other way, where it may give no occasion of
Scandal, and you'll do well.


A Ring Madam!


A small triffl^, I suppose Sir David delivered it to you when he returned you
your Miniature.


I beseech you Madam!


Farewell you Traitor.


As I hope to be saved, and upon the word of a Gentleman.


Go you are a falfe ungrateful Brute, and trouble me no more.


Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly.


Ah thou Rebel!


Some advice, some advice, dear Friend e're I'm ruined.


Even two pennyworth of Hemp for your Honours supper that's all the remedy that
I know.


But pri^hee hear a little reason.


No Sir I have done, no more to be said, I have done, I am ashamed of you, I'll
have no more to say to you, I'll never see your Face again, good b'w'y.


Death and the Devil, what have my Stars been doing to day! a Ring! --
delivered by Sir David! -- what can that mean? -- Pox on her for a Jilt, she
lies, and has a mind to amuse and laugh at me a day or two longer, hist* here
comes her Beast once more; I'I use him Civilly, and try what Discovery I can
make.


Ha, ha, ha! here's the Captains Jewel, very well: In troth I had like to have
forgotten it, Ha, ha, ha, -- how damnable Mad he'll be now, when I shall deliver
him his Ring again, ha ha! -- Poor Dog he'll hang himself at least, ha, ha, ha,
-- Faith, 'tis a very pretty Stone, and finely set: Humph! if I should keep it
now! -- I'll say I have lost it, no I'll give it him again, of purpose to vex
him, ha, ha, ha.


Sir David, I am heartily sorry.


Oh Sir, 'tis you I was seeking for, ha, ha, ha, what shall I say to him now to
terrify him?


Me, Sir! --


Ay, you Sir, if your name be Captain Beaugard: how like a Fool he looks
already? --


What you please, Sir.


Sir, I should speak a word with you, if you think fit, what shall I do now to
keep my countenance.


Can I be so happy, Sir, as to be able to serve you in any thing.


No Sir, ha, ha, ha, I have commands of service to you Sir, oh Lord! ha, ha,
ha.


Me, Sir.


Ay Sir, you Sir, but put on your hat, Friend, put on your hat, be covered.


Sir, will you please to sit down on this bank?


No, no, there's no need, no need, for all I have a young Wife I can stand upon
my legs, Sweet-heart.


Sir, I beseech you!


By no means, I think friend, we had some hard words just now, 'twas about a
paltry baggage, but she's a pretty baggage and a witty baggage, and a baggage
that --


Sir, I am heartily ashamed of all misdemeanour on my side.


You do well, though are not you a damned Whore-master, a devilish
Cuckold-making fellow? here, here, do you see this? here's the Ring you sent a
Roguing; Sir, do you think my Wife wants any thing that you can help her too?
-- Why I'll warrant this Ring cost fifty pound: What a prodigal Fellow are you
to throw a way so much money; or did thou steal it old Boy? I believe thou
may be poor I'll lend thee money upon it, if thou think fit at thirty in the
hundred, because I love thee, ha, ha, ha.


Sir, your humble Servant, I am sorry 'twas not worth your Ladies acceptance,
now what a dog am I!


I should have given it thee before, but faith I forgot it, though it was not
my Wives fault in the least, for she says as thou likest this usage, she hopes
to have thy custom again Child; ha, ha, ha.


Then Sir, I beseech you tell her, that you have made a Convert on me, and that
I am so sensible of my insolent behaviour towards her --


Very well, I shall do it.


That 'tis impossible I shall ever be at peace with my self till I find some
way how I may make her reparation.


Very good, ha, ha, ha.


And that if ever she find me guilty of the like offence again.


No Sir, you had not best, proceed, ha, ha, ha.


Let her banish all good opinion of me for ever.


No more to be said, your Servant, good b'w'y.


One word more, I beseech you, Sir Davy.


What's that?


I beg you tell her that the generous reproof she has given me has so wrought
upon me --


Well, I will:


That I esteem this Jewel, not only as a wreck redeemed from my folly, but that
for her sake I will preserve it to the utmost moment of my life.


With all my heart, I vow and swear.


And that I long to convince her I am not the Brute she might mistake me for.


Right; well, this will make the purest sport,


I do so, Sir.


And that you shall never be at rest, till you have satisfied my Lady.


Right, Sir.


Satisfied her, very good, ha, ha, ha, and that you will never play the fool
any more, be sure you keep your word, Friend.


Never, Sir.


And that you will keep that Ring for her sake, as long as you live, hah! --


To the day of my death, I'll assure you.


I protest that will be very kindly done -- and that you long mightily, long,
to let her understand that you are another guess Fellow than she may take you
for.


Exactly Sir, that is the sum and end of my desires.


Well, I'll take care of your business, I'll do your business, I'll warrant
you, this will make the purest sport when I come home, no,


So, now I find a Husband is a delicate instrument rightly made use of; -- To
make her old jealous Coxcomb pimp for me himself, I think 'tis as worthy an
employment as such a noble Consort can be put to.

Ah were ye all such Husbands and such Wives,
We younger Brothers should lead better lives.

TO fall in love, and to fall in love with a Soldier! nay, a disbandded
Soldier too, a fellow with the mark of Cain upon him, which every body knows
him by, and is ready to throw stones at him for.


Dam her, I shall never enjoy her without ravishing; if she, were but very rich
and very ugly, I would marry her: Ay, 'tis she, I know her mischievous look too
well to be mistaken in it, -- Madam! --


Sir.


'Tis a very hard Case, that you have resolved not to let me be quiet.


'Tis very unreasonably done of you, Sir, to haunt me up and down every where
at this scandalous rate, the world will think we are acquainted shortly.


But, Madam, I shall fairly take more care of my Reputation, on, and from this
time forward shun and avoid you most watchfully.


Have you not haunted this place these two hours.


'Twas because I knew it to be your Ladyships home then, and therefore might
reasonably be the place you least of all frequented, one would imagine you were
gone a Coxcomb-hunting by this time, to some place of public appearance or
other, 'tis pretty near the hour, twill be twilight presently, and then the
Owls come all abroad.


What need I take the trouble to go so far a fowling when there's game enough
at our own doors.


What game for your Net, fair Lady.


Yes, or any woman's Net else, that will spread it.


To show you how despicablie I think of the business, I will here leave you
presently, though I lose the pleasure of railing at you.


Do so I would advise you; your raillery betrays your wit, as bad as your
clumsy civility does your breeding.


Adieu! --


Farewell! --


Why do not you go about your business?


B^cause I would be sure to be rid of you first, that you might not dog me.


Were it but possible that you could answer me one question truly, and then I
should be satisfied.


Any thing for composition to be rid of you handsomely.


Are you really very honest? Look in my Face and tell me that.


Look in your Face and tell you, for what? To spoil my Stomach to my Supper.


No, but to get thee a Stomach to thy Bed, Sweet-heart, I would if possible be
better acquainted with thee because thou art very ill-natur'd.


Your only way to bring that business about effectually, is to be more
troublesome, and if you think it worth your while to be abused substantially;
you may make your personal appearance this Night.


How? where? and when? and what hour I beseech thee?


Under the Window, between the hours of eleven and twelve exactly.


Where shall these lovely Eyes, and Ears hear my Plaints and see my Tears.


At that kind hour thy griefs shall end if thou can know thy Foe from thy
Friend.


Here's another trick of the Devil now, under that Window between the hours of
eleven and twelve exactly, I am a damned Fool, and must go, let me see, suppose
I meet with a lusty beating! pish, that's nothing for a man that's in love, or
suppose she contrive some way to make a public Coxcomb of me, and expose me to
the scorn of the World, for an example to all amorous Block-heads hereafter?
why, if she do, I'll swear I have lain with her, beat her Relations, if they
pretend to Vindicate her, and so there's one love intrigue pretty well over.


Go get you in to your Lady now, and tell her, I am coming.


Her Ladyship, Right-worshipful is pleased not to be at home.


How's that? my Lady not at home! run, run in and ask when she went forth,
whether she is gone, and who is with her, run and ask, Vermin.


She went out in her Chair presently after you this After-noon.


Then I may be a Cuckold still for ought I know, what will be comeof me? I have
surely lost, and ne'er shall find her more, she promised me strictly to stay at
home, till I came back again; for ought I know she may be up three pair of
stairs in the Temple now.


Is her Ladyship in Law then, Sir.


Or it may be taking the Air as far as Knights-bridge with some smooth faced
Rogue or another: 'tis a damned house, that Swan, that Swan at Knights-bridge
is a confounded house, Vermin.


Do you think she is there then? --


No, I do not think she is there neither; but such a thing may be, you know;
would that Barn-Elms was under water too, there's a 1000 Cuckolds a Year made
at Barn-Elms, by Rosamonds ponds, the devil if she should be there this
evening, my heart's broke.


That must be Sir Davy; Ay, that's he, that's he, ha, ha, ha, was ever the like
heard of? was ever any thing so pleasant?


I'll lock her up three days, and three nights, without meat, drink or light,
I'll humble her in the Devils name.


Well, could I but meet my Friend, Sir Davy, it would be the joyfullest news
for him --


Who's there that has any thing to say to me.


Ah my Friends, of Friends, such news, such tidings.


I have lost my Wife Man.


Lost her! She's not dead I hope.


Yes, Alas, she's dead, irrecoverably lost.


Why I parted with her within this half hour.


Did you so, are you sure it was she? where was it? I'll have my
Lord-Chief-Justices Warrant and a Constable presently.


And she made the purest sport now, with a Young Fellow, Man, that she met
withal accidentally.


Oh Lord! that's worse and worse, a Young fellow! -- my Wife making sport with
a young fellow! oh Lord! here are doings! here are vagaries! I'll run mad, I'll
climb Bow Steeple presently, bestride the Dragon, and preach Cuckoldom to the
whole City.


The best of all was too, that it happened to be an Idle Coxcomb that pretended
to be in lover with her Neighbour.


Indeed! in love with her! who was it? what's his Name* I warrant you won't
tell a Body, -- I'll indite him in the Crown Office; no I'll ^ssue Warrants to
apprehend him for Treason upon the Statue of Edw. 19th. won't you tell me what
young Fellow it was, was it a very handsome young Fellow, hah --


Handsome? yes hang him the fellow's handsome enough; he is not very handsome
neither, but he has a devilish leering black-eye.


Oh Lord?


His face to is a good riding Face,'tis no foft effeminate complexion indee^,
but his count^nance is ruddy, sanguine and cheerful, a devilish fellow in a
Corner, I'll warrant him.


Bless us! what will become of me, why the devil did I marry a young Wife? Is
he very well shaped too, tall, straight, and proportionable, hah! --


Tall? No, he's not very tall neither, yet he is tall enough too, he's none of
your overgrown lubberly Flanders Jades, but more of the true English breed,
well knit, able, and fit for service old Boy; the Fellow is well shaped truly,
very well proportioned, strong, and active; I have seen the Rogue leap like a
Buck.


Who can this be? Well, and what think you, Friend, has he been there? Come,
come, I'm sensible she's a young Woman, and I am an old Fellow, troth a very
old Fellow, I signify little or nothing now, but do you think he has
prevailed? am I Cuckold, Neighbour.


Cuckold! what! a Cuckold in Covent-garden? No I'll assure you, I believe her
to be the most virtuous Woman in the World; but if you had but seen! --


Ay, would I had, what was it?


How like a Rogue she used him: First of all comes me up the Spark to her,
Madam, says he -- and then he bows down, thus -- how now, says she, what would
the impertient Fellow have.


Humph! ha! well, and what then?


Madam, says he again (bowing as he did before) my heart is so entirely yours,
that except you take pity of my sufferings I must here die at your Feet.


So, and what said she again, Neighbour? ha!


Go, you are a Fop.


Ha, ha, ha, did she indeed? Did she say so indeed? I am glad on 't, troth I am
very glad on it; well, and what next? And how, and well, and what? ha! --


Madam, says he, this won't do; I am your humble Servant, for all this, you may
pretend to be as ill-natur'd as you please, but I shall make bold.


Was there ever such an impudent Fellow?


With that, Sirrah, says she, you are a sawsi^ Jackanapes and I'll have you
kicked.


Ha, ha, ha! Well I would not be unmarri'd agam to be an Angel.


But the best Jest of all was, who this should be at last.


Ay, who indeed! I'll warrant you some silly Fellow or other; poor Fool!


Even a scandalous Rake hell, that li^gers up and down the Town by the Name of
Captain Beaugard* but he has been a bloody Cuckold-making Scoundrel in his
time.


Hang him Sot, is it he? I don't value him thus, not a wet finger Man, to my
knowledge she hates him, she scorns him Neighbour, I know it, I am very well
satisfied in the point, besides I have seen him since that, and out-hector'd
him: I am to tell her from his own mouth, that he promises never to affront her
more.


Indeed.


Ay, Ay --


God bless you, Madam, thank your Honour.


Hush, hush, there's my Lady, I'll be gone, I'll not be seen, your humble
Servant, God b'w'y.


No faith, Sir Jolly, even go into my house now, and stay Supper with me, we
have not supped together a great while.


Hah! say you so, I don't care if I do, faith withal my heart; this may give
me an opportunity to set all things right again.


My Dear!


Sir!


You have been abroad, my Dear, Isee!


Only for a little Air, truly I was almost stiffled within doors, I hope you
will not be angry, Sir David, will you?


Angry Child! no Child, not I; what should I be angry for!


I wonder Sir David, you will serve me at this rate. Did you not promise me to
go in my behalf to Beaugard and correct him according to my instructions for
his insolence.


So I did, Child; I have been with him, Sweet-heart, I have told him all to a
tittle, I gave him back again the Picture too, but as the Devil would have it,
I forgot the Ring, faith I did.


Did you purpose, Sir Sodom, to render me ridiculous to the man I abominate,
what scandalous interpretation think you must he make of my retaining any
trifle of his sent me on so dishonourable terms.


Really, my Lamb, thou art in the right, yet I went back afterwards,
Dear-heart, and did the business to some purpose.


I am glad that you did with all my heart.


I gave him his lesson, I'll warrant him.


Lesson! what lesson had you to give him?


Why I told him as he liked that usage he might come again ha, ha, ha.


Ay, and so let him.


With all my heart, I'll give him free leave or hang me: though thou would
not imagine how the poor Devil's altered. La you there now, but as certainly as
I stand here, that man is troubled that he swears he shall not rest day nor
night till he has satisfied thee; prithee be satisfied with him if 'tis
possible, my Dear, prithee do, I promised him before I left him to tell thee as
much, for the poor wretch looks so simply, I could not choose but pity him I vow
and swear, ha, ha, ha,.


Now, now, you little Witch, now you Chitsface, odd I could find in my heart to
put my little Finger in your Bubbies.


Sir Da. I must tell you, that I cannot but resent your so soon reconcilement
with a man that I hate worse then death, and that if you loved me with half
that tenderness which you profess, you would not forget an affront so palpably,
and so basely offered me.


Why Chicken where's the remedy? what's to be done? how would thou have me
deal with him?


Cut his throat.


Bless us for ever? cut his throat? what do murder?


Murder, yes, any thing to such an incorrigible Enemy of your honour, one that
has resolved to persist in abusing of you, see here this letter this I received
since I last parted with you just now it was thrown into my Chair by an
impudent Lackey of his, kept of purpose for such employments.


Let me see: A Letter indeed! -- for the Lady Dunce -- damned Rogue,
treacherous dog, what can he say in the inside now, here's a Villain.


Yes, you had best break it open, you had so, 'tis like the rest of your
discretion.


Lady, if I have an enemy it is best for me to know what mischief he intends
me, therefore, with your leave I will break it open.


Do, do, to have him believe that I was pleased enough with it to do it my
self, if you have the Spirit of a Gentleman in you, cary it back, and dash it
as it is in the face of that audacious Fellow.


What can be the meaning of this now?


A Gentleman, yes, Madam, I am a Gentleman, and the world shall find that I am
a Gentleman -- I have certainly the best Woman in the World.


What do you think must be the end of all this? I have no refuge in the world,
but your kindness, had I a Jealous Husband now, how miserable must my life be!


Ah Rogues. Nose ah Devil! ah Toad! cunning Thief, wheed ling Slut, I'll bite
lier by and by.


Poor Fool! no Dear, I am not Jealous, nor never will ^ of thee: Do what thou
wilt thou shalt not make me Jealo^ (...) love thee too well to suspect thee.


Ah but how long will you do so?


How long! as long as I live I warrant thee, I -- don't talk to a bod^ so: I
cannot hold out if thou dost, my eyes will run over, poor (...), poor
Birdsnies! poor Lambki^.


But will you be so kind to me to answer my desires, will you once more
endeavour to make that Traitor sensible that I have too just an esteem of you,
not to value his addresses as they deserve.


Ay, Ay, I will.


But don't stay away too long Dear, make what haste you can I shall be in pain
till I see you again.


My hear, my Love, my Babby, I'll be with thee in a moment, how happy am I
above the rest of men: Neighbour, dear Neighbour, walk in with my Wife, and
keep her company, till I return again, Child don't be troubled, prithee don't
be troubled, was there ever such a Wife, well da, da, da, don't be troubled,
prithee, don't be troubled, prithee don't be troubled, Da, da,


Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly.


Don't be troubled, prithee don't be trouled, da, da.


But Sir Jolly, can you guess whereabout my wandering Officer may be probably
found now?


Found Lady? he is to be found, Madam, he is to be at my house presently
Lady, he's certainly one of the (...) Fellows in the World.


You speak like a Friend, Sir Jolly.


His Friend, Lady; no Madam his Foe, his utter Enemy, I shall be his ruin, I
shall undo him.


You may, if you please, then come both and play at Dards this evening with me
for an hour or two, for I have contrived it so that Sir David is to be abroad
at Supper to night, he cannot possibly avoid it; I long to win some of the
Captains Money strangely.


Do you so, my Gamester? Well, I'll besure to bring him, and for what he
carries about him I'll warrant you -- odd he's a pretty Fellow, a very pretty
Fellow, he has only one fault.


And what is that I beseech you Sir?


Only too Loving, too good Natured, that's all; 'tis certainly the best natured
Fool breathing, that's all his fault.


Hist, hist, I think I see company coming, if you please, Sir Jolly we'll go
in.


Mum, mum, mum, 'tis he himself the very same; odds so Sir Davy after him too,
hush, hush, hush, let us be gone, let us re^ire, do but look upon him now, mind
him a little, there's a (...)* there's an Air, there's a motion! Ah Rogue, ah
Devil, get you in, get you in, I say there's a shape for you.


What the Divel shall I do to recover this days loss again, my honourable Pimp
too, my Pander Knight has forsaken me, methinks I am quandari'd like one going
with a party to discover the Enemies Camp; but had lost his guide upon the
mountains: Curse on him, old Angus is here again, there can be no good Fortune
towards me when he's at my he^ls


Sir, Sir, Sir, one word with you Sir! Captain, Captain, noble Captain,
oneword, I beseech you.


With me Friend?


Yes with you, my no Friend.


Sir David my intimate my Bosom Physician --


Ah Rogue! damned Rogue!


My Confessor, my dearest Friend, I ever had --


Dainty Wheadle, here's a Fellow for ye.


One that has taught me to be in love with Virtue and shown me the ugly inside
of my Follies.


Sir, your humble Servant.


Is that all? if you are as cold in your Love as you are in your Friendship,
Sir Davy, your Lady has the worst time o'nt of any one in Christendom.


So she has, Sir, when she cannot be free from the insolent solicitations of
such Fellows as you are, Sir.


As me, Sir? why who am I, good Sir Domine Doddle-pate?


So take notice he threatens me, I'll have him bound to the peace instantly,
will you never have remorse of Conscience Friend? have you banished all shame
from your Soul? Do you consider my name is Sir Davy Dunce? that I have the most
virtuous Wife living: Do you consider that? Now, how like a Rogue he looks
again; what a hang-dog leer was that?


Your virtuous Wife, Sir, you are always harping upon that string Sir Davy.


No 'tis you would be harping upon that string, Sir, see you this? cast your
eyes upon this, this Letter Sir, did not you promise this very day, to abandon
all manner of proceedings of this Nature tending to the dishonour of me and my
Family?


Letter, Sir? what the divel does he mean now? Let me see, For the Lady Dunce,
this is no scrawl of mine, I'll be Sworn by Jove her own hand! What a Dog was
I! forty to one but I had played the Fool, and spoiled all again; was there
ever so Charming a Creature breathing -- did your Lady deliver this to your
hands Sir.


Even her own self in person, Sir, and bad me tell you Sir, that she has too
just an esteem of me Sir, not to value such a Fellow as you are as you
deserve.


Very good: I doubt not but this Letter will surprise you -- (in troth, and so
it does extremely) but reflect upon the manner of conveighing it to your hand
as kindly as you can.


Ay a damned Thief to have it thrown into the Chair by a Footman.


Davy were but half so kind to you as I am.


Say you so you insinuating Knave.


But he I am satisfied is so severely Jealous, that except you contrive some
way to let me see you this evening: I fear all will be hopeless


Impudent Traitor I might have been a Monster yet before I had got my Supper in
my Belly.


In order to which either appear your self, or some body for you, half an hour
hence in the Piazza, where more may be considered of, adieu.


Thanks to you noble Sir, with all my heart, you are come I see accordingly,
but as a Friend I am bound in Conscience to tell the business won't do, the
trick won't pass Friend, you may put up your Pipes, and march off! Oh Lord! he
lye with my Wife, Pug^ he make Sir Davy Dunce a Cuckold, poor wretch, ha, ha,
ha.


Hist, hist, hist.


That's he, there he is! succeed and be rewarded.


Other people may think what they please; but in my own opinion, I am a very
pretty Fellow now, if my design but succeed upon this old Baboon, I'll be
canonised Sir, Sir, Sir.


Friend! with me? Would you speak with me, Friend.


Sir, my commands were to attend your Worship.


Beaugard, Beaugard, hist, hist, here here, quickly hist.


Where do you live, Sweet-heart, and who do you belong too?


Sir I am a small Instrument of the City, I serve the Lord Mayor in his Office
there.


How the Lord Mayor!


Yes, Sir, who desires you by all means to do him the Honour of your company at
supper this evening.


It will be the greatest honour I ever received in my Life, what my Lord Mayor
Invite me to supper? I am his Lordships most humble servant.


Yes, Sir, if your name be Sir Davy Dunce, as I have the honour to be informed
it is, he desires you moreover to make what haste you can, for that he has some
matters of importance to communicate to your honour which may take up some
time.


I hope it will succeed.


Communicate with me, he does me too noble a favour, (...) upon the wings of
Ambition to say my self at his Footstool; My Lord-Mayor sends himself to invite
me to Supper, to confer with me too: I shall certainly be a great Man.


What Answer will your Worship charge me back withal?


Let his Lordship know that I am amazed, and confounded, at his generosity, and
that I am so transported with the honour he does me, that I will not fail to
wait on him in the roasting of an Egg.


I am your Worships lowly Slave.


Vermin, go get the Coach ready, get me the Gold Medal too and Chain which I
took from the Roman Catholik Officer for a Popish Relic; I'll be fine, I'll
shine and drink Wine that's Divine, My Lord-Mayor invite me to Supper!


My Dearest, I'm glad to see thee returned in safety from the bottom of my
heart, hast thou seen the Traitor?


Seen him? hang him, I have seen him, Pox on him, seen him.


Well, and what is become of him! Where is he?


Why dost thou ask me where he is? what a Pox care I what becomes of him,
prithee don't trouble me with thy impertinence, I am busy.


You are not Angry, my Dear, are you?


No, but I am pleased, and that's all one, very much pleased let me tell you,
but that I am only to Sup with my Lord-Mayor, that's all, nothing else in the
World, only the business of the Nation calls upon me, that's all, therefore
once more I say don't be troublesome, but stand off.


You always think my company troublesome, you never stay at home to comfort me,
what think you I shall do alone by my self all this Evening? moping in my
Chamber, pray my Joy stay with me for once; I hope he won't take me at my word.


I say again and again, Tempter stand off, I will not lose my preferment for my
pleasure, Honour is towards me, and slesh and blood are my Averllon.


But how long will you stay then?


I don't know, may be not an hour, may be all night, as his Lordship and I
think fit, what's that to any body.


You are very cruel to me*


I can't help it, go get you in and pass away the time with your Neighbour, I'll
be back again before I die, in the mean time be humble and conformable, go: is
the Coach ready?


Yes Sir.


Well, your Servant, what nothing to my Lady Mayoress! you have a great deal of
Breeding indeed, a great deal, nothing to my Lady Mayoress?


My service to her, if you please.


Well, Da, da, the poor fool cries of my conscience! Adieu, do you hear,
farewell.


As well as what I love can make me.


Madam, is he gone.


In post haste I assure.


In troth and joy go with him.


Do you then, Sir Jolly, conduct the Captain hither, whilst I go and dispose of
the Family that we may be private.


Troth I had forgot my Medal and Chain, quite and clean, forgot my Relic, I
was forced to come up these back stairs, for fear of meeting my Wife again, it
is the troublesom'st loving Fool, I must into my ^loset and write a short
Letter too, 'tis Post night, I had forg^t that* well, I would not have my Wife
catch me for a Guinny.


Are you very certain, Madam, no body is this way? I fan^y as we ^nter'd I saw
the glimpse of something more than ordinary.


Is it your care of me? or your personal fears, that make you so supsitious,
whereabouts was the Apparition?


There, there, just at the very door.


Fie for shame, that's Sir Davy's Closet, and he I am satisfied is far enough
off by this time, I'm sure I heard the Coach drive him away. But to convince
you, you shall see now; Sir Davy, Sir Davy, Sir Davy,


And what shall we play for pretty One!


Ee'n what you think best, Sir.


Silver Kisses or Golden Joys! come let us make Stakes a little.


Ah Rogue, ah Rogue! are you there? have I caught you in Faith now, now, now!


And who shall keep them?


You, till Sir Davy, returns from Supper.


That may be long enough, for our Engine Fourbin has Orders not to give him
over suddenly I assure you.


And is't to your self then I'm obliged for this blessed opportunity? Let us
improve it to Love's best advantage.


Ah, h, h, h! Ah, h, h, h!


Let's vow eternal, and raise our thoughts, to 'expectation of immortal
pleasures, in one another eyes let's read our joys till we've no longer power
over our desires, drunk with this dissolving, oh! --


Ah!


By this light the Cuckold, Presto. nay then Hello.


Oh Lord, a Man! a Man in my Wife's Chamber; Murder, Murder, Thieves, Thieves,
shut up my Doors! Madam! Madam! Madam!


Ay, Ay, Thieves, Thieves, urder, Murder, where Neighbour, where, where?


Pierce, pierce this wretched Heart hard to the Hilts, dye this in deepest
crimson of my Blood, spare not a miserable Woman's life, whom Heaven designed to
be the unhappy object of the most horrid usage Man ever acted.


What in the name of Satan does she mean now?


Curse on my fatal beauty! blasted ever be these two baneful eyes, that could
inspire a barbarous Villain to attempt such crimes as all my blood's too little
to atone for: Nay, you shall hear me. --


Hear you, Madam? No, I have seen too much I thank you heartily, hear you
Quotha! --


Yes, and before I die too I'll be justified.


Justifi'd, oh Lord, justifi'd! --


Notice being given me of your return, I came with speed to this unhappy place,
where I have oft been blessed with your Embraces, when from behind the Arras out
starts Beaugard; how he came there heaven knows.


I'll have him hanged for Burglary, he has broken my House, and broke the Peace
upon my Wife, very good!


Straigh^ in his Arms he grasped me fast, with much ado I, plunged and got my
freedom, ran to your Closet door, knock^ and implored your aid, called on your
name, but all in vain --


Hah!


Soon again he seized me, stopped my mouth, and with a Conquerors fury --


Oh Lord! oh Lord! no more, no more, I beseech thee, I shall grow mad, I will
grow mad, and very mad, I'll plough up Rocks and Adamantine Iron bars, I'll crack
the frame of nature, sally out like Tamberlain upon the Trojan Horse, and drive
the Pigmies all like Geese before me; Oh Lord stop her mouth! well* and how?
and what then I stopped thy mouth! well! hah!


No, though unfortunate I still am innocent, his oursed purpose could not be
accomplished, but who will live so injured? No I'll die to be revenged on my
self, I ne'er can hope that I may see his streaming


Ha! what would thou do my love, prithee don't break my heart,? If thou wilt
kill, kill me; I know thou art innocent, I see thou art; though I had rather be
a Cuckold a thousand times than loose thee, poor Love, poor Deary, poor Baby.


Ala^k a day --


Ah me! --


Ah, prithee be comforted now, prithee do, why I'll love thee the better for
this, for all this Mun, why should he troubled for another Ill doings! I
know it was no fault of thine.


No, no more it was not I dare swear.


See, see, my Neighbour weeps too, he's troubled to see thee thus.


Oh, but revenge!


Why thou shalt have revenge, I'll have him murderd, I'll have his throat cut
before to morrow morning Child, rise now, prithee rise.


Ay do Madam, and smile upon Sir Davy.


But will you love me then as well as e're you did?


Ay, and the longest day I live too.


And shall I have Justice done me on that prodigious Monster?


Why, he shall be Crows meat by to morrow night, I tell thee he shall be Crows
meat by midnight Chicken.


Then I will live, since so 'tis something pleasant. When I in Peace may lead a
happy Life, With such a Husband --


I with such a Wife.


WElcome Gentlemen, very welcome Sir: will you please to walk up one pair of
stairs.


Get the great Room ready presently, carry up too a good stock of Bottles
before hand, with Ice to cool our Wine, and Water to refresh our Glasses.


It shall be done Sir; Coming, coming there, Coming: speak up in the Dolphin
some body.


Ah Courtine, must we be always idle I must we never see our glorious days
again? when shall we be rolling in the Lands of Milk and Honey* incampt in
large luxuriant Vineyards, where the loadded Vines Cluster about our Tents,
drink the rich Juice, just pressed from the plump Grape, feeding on all the
fragrant golden Fruit that grow in fertile Climes, and ripened by the earliest
vigour of the Sun.


Ah Beaugard! those days have been, but now we must resolve to content our
selves at an humble rate: methinks it is not unpleasant to consider how I have
seen thee in a large Pavillion; drowning the heat of the day in Campaign Wines,
sparkling sweet as those charming Beauties, whose dear remembrance every glass
recorded, with half a dozen honest Fellows more, Friends Beaugard, faithful
hearty Friends, things as hard to meet with as preferment here: Fellows that
would speak truth boldly, and were proud on it, that scorned flattery, love'd
honesty; for 'twas their portion, and never yet learned the Trade of case and
lying, but now. --


Ay, now we are at home in our natural Hives, and sleep like Drones; but
there's a Gentleman on the other side the Water, that may make work for us all
one day.


But in the mean while --


In the mean while patience, Courtine, that is the English mans Virtue: Go to
the man that owes you money, and tell him your are necessitated, his answer
shall be, a little patience I beseech you, Sir: Ask a Cowardly Rascal
satisfaction for a sordid injury done you, he shall cry, alas a day, Sir, you
are the strangest Man living, you won't have patience to hear one speak: Co^
(...) to a great Man that you want preferment, that you have forsa^ ^siderable
advantages abroad, in obedience to public (...) all you shall get of him is
this, you must have patience, Sir.


But will patience feed me, or cloth me, or kee^ (...)


Prithee no more hints of Poverty: 'tis scandalous,'s Death I would as soon
choose to hear a Soldier brag as complain, dost thou want any Money?


True indeed I want no necessaries to keep me alive; but I do not enjoy my self
with that freedom I would do, there is no more pleasure in living at stint,
then there is in living alone. I would have it in my power (when he needed me)
to serve and assist my Friend, I would to my Ability deal handsomely too be the
Woman that pleased me.


Oh ^fy for shame! you would be a VVhoremaster, Friend, go, go, I'll have no
more to do with you.


I would not be forced neither at any time to avoid a Gentleman that had
obliged me, for want of Money to pay him a debt contracted in our old
acquaintance, it turns my Stomach to wheadle with the Rogue I scorn when he
uses me Scurvily, because he has my Name in his Shop-Book.


As for example, to endure the familiaritys of a Rogue, that shall cock his
greasy Hat in my Face, when he duns me, and at the same time vail it to an
overgrown Deputy of the VVard, though a ^rowzy Fellmonger.


To be forced to concur with his Non-sence too, and laugh at his Parish Jests.


To use respects and ceremonies to the Milch-Cow his Wife, and praise her
pretty Children, though they stink of their Mother, and are uglier than the
issue of a Baboon, yet all this must be endured.


Must it Beaugard.


And since 'tis so let's think of a Bottle.


With all my Heart, for railing and drinking do much better together then by
themselves; a private room, a trusty Friend or two, good Wine and bold Truths,
are my happiness; but where's our dear Friend and intimate, Sir Jolly, this
Evening.


To deal like a friend Courtine, I parted with him but just now, he's gone to
contrive me a meeting is possible this ^ight with the Woman my Soul is most
fond of: I was this Evening just entering upon the Palace of all Joy, when I
met with so damnably a disappointment -- in short, that Plague to all Well
meaning Women, the Husband came unseasonably and sorc't a poor Lover to this
Heels that was fairly making his progress another way Courtine, the Story thou
shalt here more at large hereafter.


A Plague on him, why did thou not Murder the presumptuous Cuckold? saucy
intruding Clown? to dare to disturb a Gentleman's privacies, I would have
beaten him into Sense of his trangression; enjoyed his Wife before his Face,
and a taught the Dog his Duty.


Look you Courtine, you think you are dealing with the Landlord of your Winter
Quarters in Alsatia now? friend, friend, there is a difference between a
freeborn English Cuckold, and a sheaking Wittal of a Conquered Province.


Oh by all means! there ought to be a difference observed between your
arbitr^ry Whoring and your limited Fornication.


And but reason: for though we may make bold with another mans Wife in a
friendly way: yet nothing upon compulsion Dearheart.


And now Sir Jolly, I hope is to be the instrument of some immortal Plot, some
contrivance for the good of thy body, and the old fellows soul Beaugard, for
all Cuckolds go to Heaven, that's most certain.


Sir Jolly! Why on my Conscience he thinks it as much his undoubted Right to be
Pimp Master-General to London and Middlesex, as the Estate he possesses is, by
my consent his worship should, even have a Patent for it.


He is certainly the fittest for the employment in Christendom; he knows more
Families by their Names and Titles, than all the Bellmen within and without the
walls.


Nay he keeps a Catalogue of the choicest Beauties about Town, illustrated with
a particular account of their Age, Shape, proportion, colour of Hair and Eyes,
degrees of Complexion, Gunpowder Spots and Moles.


I wish the old Pander were bound to satisfy my experience; what marks of good
nature my Sylvia has about her.


My Captains! my Sons of Mars, and Imps of Venus! well encountered, what shall
we have a sparkling Bottle or two, and use Fortune like a Jade? Beaugard you
are a Rogue, you are a Dog, I hate you, get you gon, go.


But Sir Jolly, what news from Paradise Sir Jolly? Is there any hopes I shall
come there too Night!


May be there is, may be there is not; I say let us have a Bottle, and I will
say nothing else without a Bottle, after a Glass or two my Heart may open.


Why then we will have a Bottle Sir Jolly.


Will? we will have dozens* and drink till we'r wise, and speak well of no body,
till we are lewder than midnight-whores, and out-rail disbanded Officers.


Only one thing more my noble Knight, and then we are entirely at thy disposal.


Well and what's that? what's the business?


This Friend of mine here stands in need of thy Assistance, he's damnably in
Love Sir Jolly.


In love is h^ so! in Love! 'ods my Life! is she! what's her Name? where does
she live? I warrant you I know her, she's in my Table-Book I'll warrant you:
Virgin, Wise, or Widow!


In troth Sir Jolly, that's something a difficult question, but as Virgins go
now, she may pass for one of them.


Virgin very good: let me see; Virgin: Virgin, Virgin, oh here are the Virgins,
truly I meet with the sewest of this sort of any, well and the first Letter of
her Name now! for a wager I guess her.


Then you must know Sir Jolly, that I love my Love with an S.


S. S. S. Oh here are the Esses, let me consider now -- Sappho.


No sir.


Selinda.


Neither.


Sophronia.


You must guess again I assure you.


Silvia.


Ay, Ay, Sir Jolly, that's the fatal Name, Silvia the fair, the witty, the
ill-natured, do you know her my Friend?


Know her? Why she is my Daughter, and I have adopted her these seven years:
Silvia, let me look; Light Brown Hair, her Face Oval and Roman, quick sparkling
Eyes, plump pregnant Ruby Lips, with a Mole on her Breast, and the perfect
likeness of a Heart-Cherry on her left Knee; Ah Villain! Ah sly Cap! have I
caught you; are you there i'faith? well and what says she? is she coming? do
her Eyes betray her? does her Heart beat, and her Bubbies rise, when you talk
to her, hah? --


Look you sir Jolly, all things considered, it may make a shift to come to a
Marriage in time. --


I'll have nothing to do in it, I won't be seen in the business of Matrimony;
make me a Match-maker? a filthy Marriage Broker, Sir I scorn, I know better
things; look you Friend, to carry her a Letter from you or so, upon good Terms,
though it be in a Church I'll deliver it, or when the business is come to an
issue, if I may bring you handsomely together, and so forth; I'll serve thee
with all my Soul; and thank thee into the bargain: thank thee heartily dear
Rogue, I will you little Cock-sparrow, faith and troth I will; but no Matrimony
Friend, I'll have nothing to do with Matrimony; 'tis damned invention worse than
a Monopoly, and a destroyer of civil correspondence.


Gentlemen your room is ready, your Wine and I^e upon the Table, will your
Ho^ours please to walk in?


Ay wine, wine, give us wine, a pox on Matrimony, Matrimony in the Devils name.


But if an honest Harlot or two chance to enquire for us Friend.


Right Sirrah, if Whores come never so many, give 'em reverence, and reception,
but nothing else, let nothing but Whores and Bottles come near us, as you
tender your Ears.


Why there's, there's the land of Canaan now in little, hark you, Drawer, Dog,
shut, shut the Door Syrrah, do you hear, shut it so close, that neither cares,
nor necessitys may peep in upon us.


Bloody-bones be you sure to behave your self handsomely and like your
profession, show your self a Cut-Throat of parts, and we'll fleece him.


My Lady says, We must be expeditious, Sir Jolly has given notice to the Capt.
by this time, so that nothing is wanting but the management of this oven-grown
Gull to make us Hectors at large, and keep the Whore Fortune under.


Welcome Gentlemen, very welcome Sir, will it please you to walk into a Room? or
shall I wait upon your Honours pleasure here.


Sweet heart let us be private, and bring us Wine hither, so -- Beaugard. you
can cut a Throat upon occasion you say Friend.


Sir cutting of Throats is my Hereditary vocation, my Father was hanged for
cutting of Throats before me, and my Mother for cutting of Purses.


No* more to be said, my Courage is mounted like a little French-man upon a
great Horse; and I'll have him murdered.


Sir, Murdered you say Sir?


Ay Murdered I say Sir, his Face slay'd off, and nailed to a post in my great
Hall in the Country, amongst all the other Trophies of wild Beasts slain by
our Family since the Conquest: there's never a Whore-Masters head there yet.


Sir for that let me recommend this worthy Friend of mine to your Service, he's
an industrious Gentleman and one that will deserve your Favour.


He looks but something ruggedly though methinks.


But Sir his Parts will atone for his Person: forms and fashions are the least
of his study: he affects a sort of Phylosophical negligence indeed, but Sir
make trial of him, and you'll find him a Person fit for the work of this World.


What trade are you Friend?


No trade at all Friend, I profess Murder: Rascally Butchers make a trade on it,
tis a Gentleman's Divertisement.


Do you profess Murder.


Yes sir, 'tis my Livelihood: I keep a Wife and six Children by it.


Then Sir here's to you withal my Heart; would I had done with these Fellows.


Well Sir if you have any Service for us; I desire we may receive your Gold and
your instructions so soon as is possible.


Soft and fair Sweetheart, I love to see a little how I lay out my Money: have
you very good trading now a days in your way Friend?


In peaceable times a man may eat and drink comfortably upon it, a private
Murder done handsomely is worth Money: but now that the Nation's unsettled
there are so many general undertakers* that 'tis grown almost a Monopoly, you
may have a man Murdered almost for little or nothing and no Lady ever know who
did it neither.


Pray what Country man are you? where were you born most Noble Sir?


Indeed my Country is Foreign, I was Born in Argier; my Mother was an Apostate
Greek my Father a Ranegado English Man, who by oppressing of Chistian Slaves
grew Rich; for which when he lay sick, I Murdered him one day in his Bed: made
my escape to Maltha, where embracing the Faith I had the Honour given me to
command a thousand Horse aboard the Galleys of that State.


Oh Lord Sir! my humble Service to you again.


He tells you Sir but the naked Truth.


I doubt it not in the least most worthy Sir: these are devilish ^ellows I'll
warrant 'em


War Friend, and shining Honour has bin our Province, till rusty peace* reduced
us to this base obscurity, Ah Bloody Bones! Ah when thou and I commanded that
party as the Seige of Philipsburgh! where in the Face of the Army we took the
impenetrable half Moon.


Half Moon Sir! by your Favour 'twas a whole Moon.


Brother thou art in the right, 'twas a full Moon, and such a Moon Sir! --


I doubt it not in the least Gentlemen, but in the meanwhile to our business.


With all my Heart so soon as you please.


Do you know this Beaugard, he's a devlish fellow I can tell you but that, he's
a Captain.


Has he a Heart think you Sir?


Oh like a Lion! he fears neither God, Man, nor Devil.


I'll bring it you for your Breakfast to Morrow, did you never eat a Mans Heart
Sir?


Eat a Mans Heart Friend!


Ah, Ay, a Mans Heart Sir, it makes absolutely the best Raggoust in the World:
I have eaten forty of 'em in my time without Bread.


Oh Lord! a Mans Heart! my humble service to you Both Gentlemen.


Why your Algerine Pirates eat nothing else at sea, they have them always
potted up like Venison, your well-grown Dutchmans Heart makes an excellent Dish
with Oil and Pepper.


Oh Lord! oh Lord! Friend, Friend, a word with you: how much must you and your
Companion have to do this business?


What and bring you the Heart home to your house?


No, no, keeping the Heart for your own eating, I'll be rid of 'em as soon as
possible I can.


You say Sir he's a Gentleman? --


Ay such a sort of Gentleman as are about this Town: the Fellow has a pretty
handsome outside, but I believe little or no money in his Pockets.


Therefore we are like to have the honour to receive the more from your
Worships bounty.


For my part I care for no mans bounty: I expect to have my bargain perform'ed,
and I'll make as good a one as I can.


Look you Friend,: don't you be angry Friend, don't be angry Friend before you
have occasion: you say you'll have -- let's see how much will you have now -- I
warrant the Devil and all by your good will.


Truly Sir David if as you say, the Man must be well murdered without any
remorse or mercy, betwixt Turk and Jew it is honestly worth two hundred pounds.


Two hundred pounds! Why I'll have a Physician shall kill a whole Family for
half the money.


Damme Sir, how do yemean?


Damme Sir how do I mean? Damme Sir not to part with my money.


Not part Brother!


Brother the Wight is improvable, and this must not be born withal.


Have I for this dissolved Cir^ean Charms? broke Iron durance: whilst from
these firm Legs the well filled useless Fetters dropped away, and left me Master
of my native freedom.


What, what does he mean now?


Truly Sir I am sorry to see it with all my heart, 'tis a distraction that
frequently seizes him, though I am sorry it should happen so unluckily at this
time.


Distracted say you! is he so apt to be distracted?


Oh Sir raging mad: we that live by Murder are all so: Guilt will never let us
sleep. I beseech you Sir stand clear of him, he's apt to be very mischievous at
these unfortunate hours.


Have I been drunk with tender Infants blood? and ripped up teeming Wombs? Have
these bold hands ransacked the Temples of the Gods, and stabbed the Priests
before their Altars? Have I done this? hah!


No Sir, not that I know Sir, I would not say any such thing for all the World
Sir, worthy Gentleman, I beseech you Sir, you seem to be a civil person: I
beseech you Sir to mitigate his passion, I'll do any thing in the World, you
shall command my whole Estate.


Nay after all Sir, if you have not a ming to have him quite murdered, if a
swinging drubbing to bed-rid him or, so, will serve your turn, you may have it
at a cheaper rate a great deal.


Truly Sir, with all my heart, for methinks now I consider matters better, I
would not by any means be guilty of another mans blood.


Why then let me consider -- to have him beaten substantially, a beating that
will stick by him, will cost you -- half the money.


What one hundred pounds! Sure the Devil's in you, or you would not be so
unconscionable.


The Devil! where? where is the Devil? show me; I'll tell thee Belz^bub thou
hast broke thy Covenant, did thou not promise me eternal plenty, when I
resigned my Soul to thy allurements'


Ah Lord!


Touch me not yet: I've yet ten thousand Murders to Act before I'm thine: with
all those sins I'll come with full damnation to thy Caverns of endless pain and
howl with thee for ever.


Bless us! what will become of this mortal Body of mine? Where am I? Is this a
house? do I live? am I Flesh and Blood?


There, there's the Fiend again! don't chatter so, and grin at me, if thou must
needs have prey, take here, take him, this Tempter that would bribe me with
shining Gold, to stain my hands with new iniquity.


Stand off I charge thee Stain, wheresoe'r thou art, thou hast no right nor
claim to me, I'll have thee bound in Necromantick Charms. Hark you Friend, has
the Gentleman given Soul to the Devil?


Only pawned it a little: that's all.


Let me beseech you Sir to dispatch, and get rid of him as soon as you can. I
would gladly drink a Bottle with you Sir, but I hate the Devils Company
mortally, as for the hundred pound here, here it is ready, no more words, I'll
submit to your good nature and d^scretion.


Then Wretch take this and make thy peace with the infernal King, he loves
Riches, sacrifice and be at rest.


'Tis done: I'll follow thee, lead on, nay if thou smile, I more defy thee* Eee,
Fa, Fum.


'Tis very odd this.


Very odd indeed I'm glad he's gone though.


Now Sir, if you please we will refresh our selves with a cheerful glass, and so
Chaque un chez lui -- I would fain make the Gull drunk a little to put a little
mettle into him*


With all my heart Sir, but no more words of the Devil, if you love me.


The Devil's an Ass Sir, and here's a Health to all those that defy the Devil


With all my heart, and all his works too.


Nay Sir, you must do me right I assure you.


Not so full, I not so full, that's too much of all Conscience: in (...) Friend
these are sad times, very sad times: but here's to you.


Po^ of the times, the times are well enough so long as a man has money in his
Pocket.


'Tis true, here I have been bargaining with you about a Murder, but never
consider that Idolatry is coming in full speed upon the Nation, pray what
Religion are you of Friend?


What Religion am I of sir? Sir your humble Servant.


Truly a good Conscience is a great happiness; and so I'll pledge you, hemph,
hemph, but shall not the Dog be Murdered this Night.


My Brother Rogue is gon by this time to set him, and the business shall be
done effectually I'll warrant you, here's rest his soul.


With all my Heart Faith, I hate to be uncharitable.


Look you 'tis a very impudent thing not to be drunk by this time, shall Rogues
stay in Taverns to sip Pints, and be Sober, when honest Gentlemen are drunk by
Gallons, I'll have none on it.


Oh Lord, whose's there?


I beseech your Honour, our house will be utterly ruined by this means.


Damn your house, your Wife and Children, and all your Family, you Dog!


Sir, who are you.


Who am I Sir? what's that to you, Sir? will you tickle my Foot you Rouge!


I'll tickle your Guts you Paultroon presently.


Tickle my guts you Mad-Cap, I'll tickle your Toby if you do.


What with that circumsis'd Band? That grave hypocrytital Beard of the
reformation Cut? Old Fellow, I believe your a Rogue.


Sirrah you are a Whore, an errant Bitch-Whore, I'll use you like a Whore, I'll
kiss you, you Jade, I'll Ravish you, you Buttuck, I am a Justice of the Peace,
Sirrah, and that's worse.


Dam you, Sir, I care not if you were a Constable and all his Watch; what, such
a Rogue as you send honest Fellows to prison, and countenance Whores in your
Jurisdiction for bribery, you Mongrel, I'll beat you, Sirrah, I'll brain you,
I'll murder you, you Moon-Calf.


Sir, Sir, Sir, Constable, Watch, stokes, stokes, stokes, murder --


Huzza, Beaugard!


Well, Sir, the busiuefs is done, we have bargained to Murder you.


Murdered! whose to be murdered? ha, Fourbin!


You are to be murdered, Friend, you shall be murdered, Friend.


But how am I to be murdered? Who's to murder me, I beseech you?


Your humble Servant, Fourbin, I am the man with your worships leave, Sir
David, has given me this gold to do it handsomely.


Sir David! uncharitable Cur, what Murder an honest Fellow for being Civil to
his Family? What can this mean Gentlemen?


No 'tis for not being Civil to his Family, that it means Gentleman, therefore
are yo^ to be murdered to Night, and buried a Bed with my Lady, you Jack Straw,
you.


I understand you Friends, the old Gentleman has designed to have me butchered
and you have kindly contrived to turn it to my advantage in the affair of Love,
I am to be murdered but as it were Gentlemen, hah!


Your Honour has a piercing Judgment: Sir, Captain Courtines gone.


No matter let him go, he has a design to put in practice this Night too, and
would perhaps but spoil ours; but when, Sir Jolly, is this business to be
brought about.


Presently, 'tis more then time 'twere done already, go, get you gone I say*
hold, hold, let's see your left Ear first, hum -- ha -- you are a Rogue, you're
a Rogue, get you gone, get you gone, go.


But why Madam, will you use him so inhumanly? I'm confident he loves you.


Oh! a true Lover is to be found out like a true Saint, by the Trial of his
patience; have you the Cords ready.


Here they are, Madam.


Letv 'em down, and be sure what it comes to Trial, to pull lustily; is Will.
the Footman ready.


At your Ladyships command, Madam.


I wonder he should stay so long, the Clock has struck twelve.


And was she not frank and free*
And was she not kind to me.
To lock up her Cat in her Cupboard,
And give her key to me, to me:
To lock up her Cat in her Cupboard,
And give her key to me.

This must be he: Ay 'tis he, and as I am a Virgin roaring drunk; but if I find
not a way to make him sober --


Here, here's the Window: Ay, that's Hell-door, and my damnation's in the
inside: Sylvia, Sylvia, Sylvia: Dear Imp of Satan appear to thy Servant.


Who calls on Sylvia in this dead of night, when rest is wanting to her longing
eyes.


'Tis a poor wretch can hardly stand upright drunk with thy Love, and if he
falls he lies.


Courtine, is't you?


Yes, Sweet-Heart 'tis I, art thou ready for me?


Fasten your self to that Cord there; there, there it is.


Cord! where? Oh, oh, here, here, so now to Heaven in a string.


Have you done.


Yes, I have done Child, and would sain be doing too Hussy.


Then pull away, hoa up, hoa up, hoa up, so avast there, Sir.


Madam.


Are you very much in Love, Sir?


Oh damnably Child, damnably.


I'm sorry for it with all my heart, good Night Captain.


Ha gone, what left in Erasinus Paradise between Heaven and Hell? If the
Constable should take me now for a straggling Monkey hung by the Loins, and hunt
me with his cry of Watchmen! Ah Woman, Woman, Woman, well a merry Life, and a
short, that's all.


God prosper long our Noble King,
Our Lives and Safeties all.
I am mighty loyal to Night.
Murder, Murder, Murder! help, help, Murder.


Nay, if there be murder stirring, 'tis high time to shift formy self.





Yonder, yonder he comes murder, murder, murder.


'Tis very Late; but Murder is a melancholy business, and Night is fit for it,
I'll go home.


Who's there?


Whose there? open the door you Whelp of Babylon.


Oh Sir, you're Welcome home; but here is the saddest news! here has been murder
committed, Sir.


Hold your Tongue you Fool, and go to sleep, get you in do you hear, you talk
of Murder you Rogue? you meddle with State-Affairs? Get you in.


Lie still, lie still you Knave, close, close when I bid you, you had best quest,
and spoil the sport, you had!


But pray how long must I lye thus?


I'll warrant you, you'll think the time mighty tedious.


Sweet Creature, who can counterfeit Death when you are near him?


You shall Sirrah, if a body desires you a little, so you shall, we shall spoil
all else, all will be spoiled else Man, if you do not: Stretch out longer,
longer yet, as long as ever you can, so so, hold your breath, hold your breath,
very well.


Madam, here comes Sir David.


Odds so, now close again as I told you, close you Divel, now stir if you dare;
stir but any part about you if you dare now; odd I hit you such a rap if you
do, lye still, lye you still.


My Dear, how dost thou do, my Dear? I am come.


Ah Sir! what is't you've done? You've ruined me, your Family, your Fortune, all
is ruined, where shall we go, or whither shall we fly?


Where shall we go, why we'll go to bed you little Jackadandy, why you are not
a Wench you Rogue, you are a Bo^, a very Boy, and I love you the bet^er for it,
Sirrah hei! --


Ah Sir, see there.


Bless us, a man! and bloody! what upon my Hall Table!


Two Ruffians brought him in just now pronouncing the inhumane deed, was done
by your command, Sir Jolly came in the distracting Minu^e, or sure I had died
with my distracting Fears, how could you think on a revenge so horrid?


As I hope to be saved Neighbour I only bargained with 'em ^o Bastinado him in
a way, or so, as one Friend might do another, but do you say that he is dead?


Dead, dead as Clay; stark stiff and useless all, nothing about him stirring,
but all's cold and still, I knew him a lusty Fellow once, a very metteled
Fellow, 'tis a thousand pities.


What shall I do? I'll throw my self upon him, kiss his wide wounds and weep
till blind as Buzzard.


Oh come not near him, there's such horrid Antipathy follows all murders, his
wounds would stream afresh should you but touch him.


Dear Neighbour, Dearest Neighbour, Friend, Sir Jolly as you love Charity pity
my wretched Case, and give me Counsel, I'll give my Wife and all my Estate to
have him live again, or shall I bury him in the Arbour at the upper end of the
Garden.


Alas a day Neighbour, never think on it, never think on it, the dogs will find
him there, as they scrape holes to bury bones in, there is but one way that I
know of.


What is it dear Neighbour, what is it? you see I am upon my knees to you, take
all I have and ease me of my fears.


Truly the best thing that I can think of, is putting of him to bed, putting
him into a warm bed, and try to fetch him to life again, a warm bed is the best
thing in the World, my Lady may do much too, she's a good Woman, and as Iv'e
been told, understands a green wound well.


My dear, my dear, my dear!


Bear me away, oh send me hence far off, where my unhappy name may be a
stranger; and this sad accident no more remembered to my dishonour.


Ah but my Love! my Joy! are there no bowels in thee.


What would you have me do?


Prithee do so much as try thy skill, there may be one drachma of life left in
him yet, take him up to thy Chamber, put him into thy own bed, and try what
thou can do with him; prithee do, if thou can but find motion in him, all
may be well yet, I'll go up to my Closet in the Garret, and say my prayers in
the mean while.


Will ye then leave this ruin on my hands.


Pray, pray my Dear, I beseech you Neighbour help to persuade her if it be
possible.


Faith Madam do, try what you can do, I have a great fancy you may do him
good: who can tell but you may have the gift of stroking; pray Madam be
persuaded.


I'll do what e'r's your pleasure.


That's my best Dea^: I'll go to my Closet and pray for thee heartily, Alas,
alas, that ever this should happen --


So, is he gone, Madam my Angel!


What no thanks, no reward for old Jolly now? Come hither Hussy, you little
Canary -bird, you little Hop of my thumb come hither: make me a Curtsy, and
give me a kiss now, hah! give me a kiss I say, odd I will have a kiss, so I
will, I will have a kiss if I set on it; shoogh, shoogh, shoogh, get you into a
corner when I bid you, shoogh, shoogh, shoogh, what there already?


And will you save the life of him you've wounded?


Dare you trust your self to my skill for a cure?


Hist! hist! close, close, I say again, yonder's Sir Davy, odds so!


My dear, my dear! my dear! --


Whose that calls? my Love, is't you.


Ah some comfort, or my heart's broke* is there any hopes yet? I've tried to
say my Prayers and cannot: if he be quite dead* I shall never pray again;
Neighbour, no hopes?


Truly little or none, some small pulse I think there is left, very little,
there's nothing to be done if you don't pray, get you to prayers, what ever you
do, get you gone, nay don't stay now, shut the Window I tell you.


Well this is a great trouble to me, but good night.


Good night to you dear Neighbour. Get ye up Davy's Lodgings, that he may be
safe, and he with you in a twinkle, Ah, h, h, h! so now for the door, very
well, Friend you are fast.


Bonney Lass began thou were mine,
And twonty thoosand poonds aboot thee, c.
HEigho! heigho! ha! where am I? was I drunk or no last night? something
leaning that way. But where the Devil am I? sincerely in a Bawdy-House: Faugh!
what a smell of sin is here! let me look about; if there be ever a G^neva Bible
or a Practice of Piety in the room. I am sure I have guest right, what's the
matter now! tied fast! bound too! what tricks have I played to come into this
condition! I have lighted into the Territories of some merrily disposed Chamber
maid or other, and she in a witty sit forsooth hath trust me up thus, has she
pinned no rags to my tail, or chalkt me upon the back trow? would I had her
Mistress here at a venture:


What would you do with her my enchanted Knight if you had her, you are too
sober for her by this time, next time you get drunk you may perhaps venture to
scale her Balcany like a valiant Captain as you are.


Hast thou done this my dear destruction ^ and am I in thy limbo? I must
confess when I am in my Beer, my Courage does (...) away with me now and then:
but let me loose and thou shalt see what a gentle humble Animal thou hast made
me. Fie upon it, what tie me up like an ungovernable cur to the frame of a
table, let, let thy poor dog loose that he may fawn and make much of thee a
little.


What with those Paws which you have been ferreting Moorfields withal, and are
very dirty still? after you have been daggling your self abroad for prey, and
can meet with none, you come sneaking hither for a crust, do you?


Shall I fetch the Whip and the Bell, Madam? and flash him for his roguery
soundly?


Indeed, indeed! do you long to be forking of man's flesh, Madam Flea-trap?
does the Chaplain of the Family use you to the exercise, that you are so ready
for it?


If you should be let loose and taken into favour now; you would be for
rambling again so soon as you had got your liberty?


Do but try me, and if ever I prove recreant more, let me be beaten and used
like a dog in good earnest.


Promise to grant me but one request, and it shall be done


Hear me but Swear.


That any body may do ten thousand times a day.


Upon the word of a Gentleman, nay as I hope to get Money in my Pocket.


There I believe him l^lye, you'll keep your Word you say.


If I don't, hang me up in that Wenches old Garters.


See Sir, you have your freedom.


Well now name the price; what must I pay for it?


You know Sir, considering our small acquaintance, you have been pleased to
talk to me very freely of love matters.


I must confess, I have been something to blame that way, but if ever thou
hear more of it from my mouth after this nights adventure, would I were well
out of the House!


Have a care of swearing, I beseech you, for you must understand, that spite
of my teeth, I am at last fallen in love most unmercifully.


And dost thou imagine I am so hard-hearted a Villain as to have no compassion
of thee.


No, for I hope he's a man you can have no exceptions against.


Yes, yes, the man is a man, I'll assure you, that's one comfort


Who do you think it may be now? try if you can guess him.


Whoever he is, he's an honest fellow I'll warrant him, and I believe will not
think himself very unhappy neither.


If a Fortune of 5000 pounds, pleasant nights, and quiet days can make him
happy, I assure you he may be so, but try once to guess at him.


But if I should be mistaken.


Why who is it you would wish me to?


You have 5000 pound you say?


Yes.


Faith Child to deal honestly I know well enough who tis I wish for, but
Sweet-heart, before I tell you my inclinations, it were but reasonable that I
knew yours.


Well Sir, because I am confident you will stand my friend in the business, I'll
make a discovery, and to hold you in suspense no longer, you must know I have a
months-mind to an Arm full of your dearly beloved friend and brother Captain,
what say you to it?


Madam your humble Servant, good buy, that's all.


What thus cruelly leave a Lady that so kindly took you in in your last nights
pickle into her Lodging, whither would you rove now, my Wanderer?


Faith Madam, you have dealt so gallantly in trusting me with your passion,
that I cannot stay here without telling you, that I am three times as much in
love with an acquaintance of yours, as you can be with any friend of mine.


Not with my waiting Woman I hope, Sir.


No, but it is with a certain Kinswoman of thine Child, they call her my Lady
Dunce, and I think this is her House too, they say she will be civil upon a
good occasion, therefore prithee be charitable, and show me the way to her
Chamber a little.


What commit Adultery Captain, fie upon it! What hazard your soul!


No, no, only venture my body a little, that's all; look you, you know the
secret, and may imagine my desires, therefore as you would have me assist your
inclinations, pray be civil and help me to mine, look you, no demurring upon
the matter, no qualms, but show me the way, or you Hussy, you shall do it, any
^awd will serve at present, for I will go.


But you shall not go, Sir.


Shall not go, Lady?


No, shall not go, Sir* did I not tell you when once you had got your liberty,
that you would be rambling again.


Why Child, would thou be so uncharitable to tie up a poor Jade to an empty
Rack in thy Stable, when he knows where to go elsewhere and get Provender
enough.


Any musty Provender, I find, will serve your turn, so you have it but cheap,
or at another mans charges.


No Child, I had rather my Ox should graze in a Field of my own, than live
hide-bound upon the Common, or run the hazard of being Pounded every day for
^respasse^.


Truly all things considered, 'tis great pity so good a Husband man as you
should want a Farm to cultivate.


Would thou be but kind, and let me have a ^argain in a Tenement of thine,
to try how it would agree with me.


And would you be contented to take a Lease for your Life.


So pretty a Lady of the Manor and a moderate Rent.


Which you'll be sure to pay very punctually.


If thou doubt my honesty, faith even take a little earnest before hand.


Not so hasty neither, good Tenant; Imprimis, You shall oblige your self to a
constant residence, and not by leaving the House uninhabited, let it run to
repairs.


Agreed.


Item, For your own sake you shall promise to keep the Estate wel^ (...), and
enclosed least sometime or other your Neighbours Cattle break in and spoil the
crop on the Ground Friend.


Very just and reasonable, provided I don't find it lie too much to Common
already.


Item, You shall enter into strict Covenant, not to take any other Farm upon
your hands, without my consent and approbation, or if you do, that then it
shall be lawful for me to get me another Tenant, how and where I think sit.


Faith that's something hard though, let me tell you but that Landlady.


Upon these terms we will draw Articles.


And when shall we Sign 'em.


Why this morning as soon as the ten a Clock Office in Covent-garden is open.


A bargain, but how will you answer your entertainment of a drunken Red-coat in
your Lodgings at these unseasonable hours.


That's a secret you will be hereafter obliged to keep for your own sake, and
for the Family, your Friend Beaugard shall answer for us there.


Indeed I fancied the Rogue had mischief in his head, he behaved himself so
soberly last night, has he taken a Farm lately too.


A trespasser, I believe, if the truth were known upon the Provender you would
fain have been biting at just now.


Madam, Madam, have a care of your self; I see Lights in the great Hall,
whatever is the matter, Sir Davy and all the Family are up.


I hope they'll come and catch me here: Well, now you have brought me into this
condition, what will you do with me, hah!


You won't be contented for a while to be tied up like a ^ade to an empty Rack
without Hay, will you?


Faith even take me, and put my mark upon me quickly, that if I light into
strange hands they may know me for a Sheep of thine.


What by your wanting a Fleece do you mean? If it must be so come follow your
Sheperdess B a a a.


I cannot sleep, I shall never sleep again, I have prayed too so long, that
were I to be hanged presently, I have never a prayer left to help my self, I
was no sooner lain down upon the Bed just now, and fallen into a slumber, but
methought the Devil was carrying me down Ludgate-hill a Gallop, six puny Fiends
with flaming Fire-forks running before him like Link boys, to throw me headlong
into Fleet^ch, which seemed to be turned into a lake of Fire and Brimstone;
would it were Morning.


Truly, Sir, it has been a very dismal night.


But did thou meet never a white thing upon the stairs.


No, Sir, not I, but methoughts I saw our great Dog Touzer, with his brass
Collar on, stand at the Cellar-door as I came along the old Entry.


It could never be, Touzer has a Chain, had this thing a Chain on?


No Sir, no Chain but it had Touzers eyes for all the World.


What ugly great frightful eyes?


Ay, Ay, huge sauser eyes, but mightily like Touzers.


Oh Lord! oh Lord! hark! hark!


What! what I beseech you Sir!


What's that upon the stairs? did thou hear nothing? hist, hark, pat, pat,
pat, hark, heih!


Hear nothing! where Sir.


Look! look! what's that! what's that! in the corner there?


Where?


There.


What upon the Iron ^h^st?


No, the long black thing up by the old Clock-case, see! see! now it stirs, and
is coming this way.


Alas, Sir, speak to it, you are a Justice 'o peace, I beseech you, I dare not
stay in the House: I'll call the Watch and tell' em Hell's broke loose, what
shall I do? oh!


Oh Vermin, if thou art a true Servant have pity on thy Master, and do not
forsake me in this distressed condition, Satan ^e gone, I defy thee, I'll
repent and be saved, I'll say my prayers, I'll go to Church; help! help! help!
was there any thing, or no, in what hole shall I hide my self.


That should be Sir Davy's voice, the waiting Woman indeed told me he was
afraid and could not sleep, pretty Fellows, pretty Fellows both you've done your
business handsomely, what I'll warrant you have been a Whoring together now hah!
You do well, you do dwell, I like you the better for it, what's a Clock?


Near four, Sir, 'twill not be day yet these two hours.


Very well, but how got ye into the House?


A ragged retainer of the Family, Vermin I think they call him, let us in as
Physicians sent for by your Order.


Excellent Rogues! and then I hope all things are ready as I gave Directions.


To a tittle, Sir, there shall not be a more critical Observer of your Worships
pleasure than your humble Servant the Chevalier Fourbin.


Get you gone you Rogue, You have a sharp Nose, and are a nimble Fellow; I have
no more to say to you, stand aside* and be ready when I call, here he comes,
hist, hem, hem, hem.


Hah! what art thou? approach thou like the rugged Bank-side Bear, the
Eastcheap-bull, or Monster shown in Fair, take any shape but that, and I'll
confront thee.


Alas unhappy Man! I am thy Friend.


Thou caust not be my Friend for I defy thee, Sir Jolly! Neighbour! hah! is it
you? are you sure it is you, are you? Your self? if you be give me your hand,
Alas a day I have seen the Devil.


The Devil Neighbour!


Ay, Ay, there's no help for it, at first I fancied it was a young white Bears
Cub dancing in the shadow of my Candle, then ^ was turned to a pair of blew
Breaches with wooden legs on, stamped about the room as if all the Cripples in
Town had kept their Rendezvous there, when all of a sudden it appeared like a
leathern Serpent, and with a dreadful clap of Thunder flew out of the Window.


Thunder! Why I heard no Thunder.


That may be too, what were you asleep?


A sleep quotha, no, no, no sleeping this Night for me I assure you.


Well what's the best news then? How does the Man?


Even as he did before he was born, nothing at all, he's Dead.


Dead! what quite dead!


As good as dead, if not quite dead, 'twas a horrid Murder, and then the
terror of Conscience, Neighbour.


And truly I have a very terrified one, Friend, though I never found I had any
Conscience at all till now, pray where about was his death's wound?


Just here, just under his left Pap, a dreadful gash.


So very wide!


Oh, as wide as my Hat, you might have seen his Lungs, Liver and Heart, as
perfectly, as if you had been in his Belly.


Is there no way to have him privately Buried and conceal this Murder, must I
needs be hanged by the neck like a Dog, Neighbour; do I look as if I would be
hanged?


Truly, Sir Davy, I must deal faithfully with you, you do look a little
suspitiously at present; but have you seen the Devil, say you?


Ay surely, it was the Devil, nothing else could have frighted me so.


Bless us and guard us all the Angels, what's that?


Potestati sempiternaec ujus benevolentia servantur gentes, cujus m^sericordia.


Neighbour, where are you, Friend, Sir Davy.


Ah, what ever you do, be sure to stand close to me, where, where is it?


Just, just there, in the shape of a Coach and six Horses against the wall.


Deliver us all, he won't carry me away in that Coach and six will he?


Do you see it?


See it! plain, plain, dear Friend advise me what I shall do? Sir Jolly, Sir
Jolly, do you hear nothing? Sir Jolly, Hah! has he left me alone! Vermin.


Sir.


Am I alive? dost thou know me again? Am I thy Quondam Master, Sir Davy Dunce?


I hope I shall never forget you, Sir.


Did thou see nothing?


Yes, Sir, methought the House was all of fire as it were.


Did thou not see how the Devils grinned and gnasht their teeth at me
Vermin?


Alas, Sir, I was afraid one of 'em would have bit off my Nose, as he vanished
out of the door.


Lead me away, I'll go to my Wise, I'll die by my own dear Wife; run away to the
Temple and call Councellor my Lawyer, I'll make over my Estate presently, I
shall not live till noon, I'll give all I have to my Wife, Hah Vermin!


Truly, Sir, she's a very good Lady.


Ah much, much too good for me Vermin, thou can not imagine what she has
done for me Man, she would break her heart if I should give any thing away from
her, she loves me so dearly: Yet if I do die, thou shalt have all my old Shoes.


I hope to see you live Many a fair day yet though.


Ah, my Wife, my poor Wife, lead me to my poor Wife.


What think you now of a cold wet March over the Mountains, Your men tired,
your Baggage not come up, but at night a dirty watery Plain to Encamp upon, and
nothing to shelter you, but an old Leaguer Cloak as tattered as your Colours? is
not this much better now than lying wet and getting the Sciatica?


The hopes of this made all Fatigue easy to me, the thoughts of Clarinda have
a thousand times ^ me in my solitude, when e're I Marched, I fancied still it
was to my Clarinda! when I fought, I imagined it was for my Clarinda! but when
I came home, and found Clarinda lost! -- how could you think of wasting but a
night in the rank surfeiting arms of this foul feeding Monster? this rotten
trunk of a Man* that lays claim to you.


The persuasion of Friends and the Authority of Parents!


And had you no more Grace, than to be ruled by a Father and Mother?


When you were gone, that should have given me better Counsel, how could I help
my self?


Methinks then you might have found out some cleanlier shift to have thrown
away your self upon, than nauseous old age and unwholesome deformity.


What upon some overgrown full fed Country Fool, with a Horse Face, a great
ugly Head, and a great fine Estate, one that should have been drained and
squeezed, and jolted up and down the Town in (...) with Cheats and Hectors, and
so sent home at three of Clock every Morning like a lolling Booby stinking,
with a belly full of s^mm'd Wine, and nothing in's Pockets.


You might have made a tractable Beast of such a one, he would have been young
^nough for Training.


Is youth then so gentle if age be stubborn? Young men like Springs wrought by
a subttle work man, easily ply to what their wishes press 'em, but the desire
once gone that kept 'em down, they soon start straight again, and no signs left
which way they bent before.


So, so, who says I see any thing now? I see nothing not I, I don't see, I
don't see, I don't look, not so much as look not I.


I will have my Wife, carry me to my Wife, let me go to my Wife, I'll live and
die with my Wife, let the Devil do his worst; Ah, my Wife, my Wife, my Wife! --



Alas, alas, we are ruined, shift for your self, counterfeit the dead ^ more,
or any thing.


Hah! what foe're thou art, thou can not eat me, speak to me, who has done
this? thou can not say I did it.


Did it, did what? here's no body says you did any thing that I know,
Neighbour, what's the matter with you? what ails you? whither do you go?
whither do you (...)? I tell you here's no ^ody says a word to you.


Did you not see the Ghost just now?


Ghost! prithee now here's no Ghost, whither* would you go? I tell you, you
shall not stir one foot farther Man, the Devil take me if you do; Ghost,
prithee here's no Ghost at all, a little flesh and blood indeed there is, some
old, some young, some alive, some dead, and so forth, but Ghost! Pish, here's
no Ghost.


But, Sir, If I say I did see a Ghost, I did see a Ghost, and you go to that,
why sure I know a Ghost when I see one: Ah my Dear, if thou had but seen the
Divel half so often as I have seen him.


Alas, Sir Davy, if you ever loved me, come not, oh come not near me* I have
resolved to waste the short remainder of my Life in Penitence, and taste of
Joys no more.


Alas my poor Child, but do you think then there was no Ghost indeed.


Ghost! Alas a day, what should a Ghost do here?


And is the man dead?


Dead, Ay, ay, stark dead, he's stiff by this time.


Here you may see the horrid ghastly Speetacle the sad effects of my too rigid
Virtue, and your too ^ierce resentment --


Do you see there?


Ay, ay, I do see, would I had never seen him, wou^ld he had lain with my Wife
in every House between Charen-Cross and Ald-Gate, so this had never happened.


In Troth, and would he had, but we are all mortal Neighbour, all mortal, to
day we are here, to morrow gone, like the shadow that vanishes, like the Grass
that withers, or like the Flower that ^adeth, or indeed like any thing, or
rather like nothing: but we are all mortal.


Heigh! --


Down, down that trap door, it goes into a bathing-Room, for the rest, leave it
to my Conduct.


'Tis very unfortunate that you should run your self into this praemunire, Sir
David.


Indeed, and so it is.


For a Gentleman, a man in Authority, a person in years, one that used to go to
Church with his Neighbours.


Every Sundy, truly, Sir Jolly.


Pay Scot and Lot to the Parish.


Six pounds a year to the very Poor without abatement or deduction, 'tis very
hard, if so good a common-Wealths-man should be brought to ride in a Cart at
last, and be hanged in a Sun-shiny morning, to make Butchers and suburd
Apprentices a Holiday; I'll even run away.


Run away! why then your estate will be forseited, you'll loose your Estate man.


Truly, you say right, Friend, and a Man had better be half hanged then loose
his Estate, you know.


Hanged! no, no, I think there's no great fear of Hanging neither; what, the
Fellow was but a sort of an unaccountable Fellow as I heard you say.


Ay, ay, a (...) on him, he was a Soldierly sort of a Vagabond, he had little
or nothing but his sins to live upon* If I could have had but Patience, he
would have been hanged within these two Months, and all this mischief saved.


Ah Lord! the Devil, the Devil, the Devil.


Why, Sir Davy, Sir Davy, what ails you? What's the matter with you?


Let me alone, let me lie still, I will not look up to see an Angel, O h h h.


My Dear, why do you do these cruel things to affright me? Pray rise and speak
to me.


I dare dot stir, I saw the Ghost again just now.


Ghost again! what Ghost? Where?


Why, there, there.


Here has been no Ghost.


Why did you see nothing then?


See nothing! no, nothing but one another.


Then I am enchanted, or my end near at hand, Neighbour, for Heavens sake
Neighbour advise me what I shall do to be at rest.


Do! why what think you if the Body were removed?


Removed! I'd give a hundred pound the Body were out of my House; may be then
the Divel would not be so impudeut.


I have discovered a door place in the Wall, betwixt my Ladies Chamber and one
that belongs to me, if you think fit, we'll beat it down and remove this
trouble some lump of Earth to my House.


But will ye be so kind!


If you think it may by any means be serviceable to you.


Truly if the Body were removed, and disposed of privately that no more might
be heard of the matter -- I hope he'll be as good as his word.


Fear nothing I'll warrant you, but in troth, I had utterly forgot one thing,
utterly forgot it.


What's that's?


Why it will be absolutely necessary that my Lady staid with me at my House for
one day till things were better settelled.


Ah, Sir Jolly! whatever you think fit: any thing of mine that you have a mind
to; pray take ^er, pray take her, you shall be very welcome; hear you my
dearest, there is but one way for us to get rid of this untoward business, and
Sir Jolly has found it out, therefore by all means go along with him, and be
ruled by him, and whatev^r Sir Jolly would have thee do, even do it, so heaven
prosper ye, good b'w'y, good b'w'y till I see you again.


This is certainly, the civillest Cuckold in City, Town or Country.


Is he gone?


Yes, and has left poor me here.


In troth, Madam, 'tis barbarously done of him, to commi a horrid murder on the
Body of an innocent poor Fellow, and then leave you to stem the danger of it.


Odd an I were as thee Sweetheart I'd be revenged on him for it, so I would: Go
get ye together, steal out of the house as softly as you can, I'll meet ye in
the Piazza presently, go, be sure ye steal out of the House, and don't let Sir
Davy see you.

Bloody-bones.


I am here, Sir.


Go you and Fourbine to my House presently, bid Monsieur Fourbin remember that
all things be ordered according to my directions, tell my Maids too I am coming
home in a trice, bid 'em get the great Chamber, and the Banquet I spoke for
ready presently, and do ye hear carry the minstrells with ye too, for I'm
resolved to rejoice this morning, let me see -- Sir Davy.


Ay Neighbour, 'tis I; is the business done? I cannot be satisfied till I am
sure, have you removed the body, is it gone?


Yes, yes, my Servants conveyed it out of the House just now; well Sir Davy, a
good morning to you: I wish you your health with all my Heart Sir Davy, the
first thing you do though, I'd have you say your prayers by all means if you
can.


If I can possibly, I will.


Well God b'w'y.


God b'w'y heartily good Neighbour -- Vermin, Vermin.


Did your Honour call?


Go, run, run, presently over the square, and call the Constable presently,
tell him here's murder committed, and that I must speak with him instantly --
I'll even carry him to my Neighbours, that he may find the dead body there, and
so let my Neighbour be very fairly hanged in my stead, hah! a very good jest as
I hope to live, ha, ha, ha* hey, what's that?

Almost 4 a Clock and a dark cloudy morning, good morrow my Masters all, good
morrow.


How's this! a door open, come in Gentlemen, -- ah, Sir Davy, your honours
humble servant! I and my Watch going my morning Rounds, and finding your door
open made bold to enter to see there were no danger, your Worship will excuse
our care, a good morning to you, Sir.


Oh Mr. Constable, I'm glad you're here, I sent my man just now to call you, I
have sad news to tell you, Mr. Constable.


I am sorry for that, Sir, sad news!


Oh ay, sad news, very sad news truly: here has been murder committed.


Murder; if that's all we are your humble servants, Sir, we'll bid you good
morrow, murders nothing at this time of night in Covent-Garden.


Oh but this is a horrid bloody murder, done under my Nose, I cannot bu^ take
notice of it; though I am sorry to tell you the Authors of it, very sorry
truly.


Was it committed here near hand?


Oh at the very next door, a sad murder indeed; after they had done they
carried the body privately into my Neighbour Iollies House here, I am sorry to
tell it you Mr. Constable, for I am afraid it will look but scurvily on his
side; though I am a Justice o'Peace Gentlemen, and am bound by my Oath to take
notice of it, I can't help it.


I never liked that Sir Jolly.


He threatened me the other day, for carrying a little dirty draggle-tail'd Whore
to Bridewell, and said she was his Cousin, Sir if your Worship thinks sit,
we'll go search his house.


Oh by all means, Gentlemen it must be so, Justice must have it's course, the
Kings liege subjects must not be destroyed, Vermin, carry Mr. Constable and his
Dragons into the Cellar, and make (...) drink, I'll but step into my study, put
on my Face of Authority, and call upon ye instantly.


We thank your honour.


So, are ye come? I am glad on it, odd you're welcome, very welcome, odd ye are,
here's a small Banquet, but I hope 'twill please you, sit ye down, sit ye down,
both together, nay, both together: A Pox o'him that parts ye, I say.


Sir Jolly, this might be an entertainment for Anthony and Cleopatra, were they
living.


Pish! A Pox of Anthony and Cleopatra, they are dead and rotten long ago, come,
come, time's but short, time's but short, and must be made the best use of; for
Youth's a flower that soon does fade,
And life is but a span,
Man was for the Woman made,
And Woman made for Man.
Why now we can be bold, and make merry, and frisk, and be brisk, rejoice and
make a noise, and -- odd, I am pleased, mightily pleased, odd I am.


Really, Sir Jolly, you are more a Philosopher then I thought you were.


Philosopher, Madam! Yes, Madam, I have read Books in my times; odd Aristotle,
in some things, had very pretty notions, he was an understanding Fellow. Why
don't ye eat odd and ye don't eat, -- here Child, here's some Ringoes, help,
help your Neighbour a little, odd they are very good, very comfortable, very
cordial.


Sir Jolly, your Health.


With all my heart, old Boy.


Dear Sir Jolly what are these? I never tasted of these before.


That! eat it, eat it, eat it when I bid you; odd 'tis the root Satyrion, a
very precious plant, I gather 'em every May my self, odd they'll make an old
Fellow of sixty-five cut a Caper like a Dancing Master; give me some Wine:
Madam, here's a health, here's a health Madam, here's a health to honest Sir
Davy, faith and troth, ha, ha, ha.


Sir, Sir, Sir! What will you do? yonder's the Constable and all his Watch at
the Door, and threatens demollishment, if not admitted presently.


Odds so! odds so! the Constable and his Watch! what's to be done now? get ye
both into the Alcove there, get ye gone quickly, quickly, no noise, no noise,
do ye hear the Constable and his Watch! A Pox on the Constable and his Watch,
what the Devil have the Constable and his Watch to do here?


This way, this way, Gentlemen, stay one of ye at the door, and let no body
pass, do you hear? Sir Jolly, your servant.


What this outrage, this disturbance committed upon my House and Family; Sir,
Sir, Sir* What do you mean by these doings sweet Sir? h^h! --


Sir having received information that the body of a murdered Man is concealed
in your House, I am come, according to my duty, to make search and discover the
truth, -- stand to my assistance, Gentlem^n.


A murdered man, Sir*


Yes a murdered Man Sir, Sir Jolly, Sir Jolly, I am sorry to see a person of
your Character and Figure in the Parish concerned in Murder I say.


Here's a Dog! here's a Rogue for you, here's a Villain, here's a Cockoldly Son
of his Mother, I never knew a Cuckold in my life, that was not a false Rogue in
his heart, there are no honest Fellows living but Whore-masters; hark you,
Sir, what a Pox do you mean* you had best play the fool and spoil all, you had,
what's all this for*


When your Worship's come to be hanged you'll find the meaning on it, Sir* I say
once more, search the House.


It shall be done, Sir, come-a-long Friends.


Search my House, oh Lord, search my House, what will become of me? I shall
lose my reputation with Man and Woman, and no body will ever trust me again: Oh
Lord, search my House, all will be discovered do what I can; I'll sing a Song
like a dying Swan, and try to give 'em warning.

Go from the Window, my Love, my Love, my Love,
Go from the Window, my Dear.
The Wind and the Rain
Has brought 'em back again,
And thou can have no L^dging here.
Oh Lord, search my House!


Break down that door, I'll have that Door broke open, break down that door, I
say.


Very well done, break down my doors! break down my walls, Gentlemen! plunder
my House! ravish my Maids! Ah cursed be Cuckolds, Cuckolds, Constables and
Cockolds.


Stand off, by heaven the first that comes here comes upon his death.


Sir, your humble servant, I am glad to see you are alive again with all my
heart; Gentlemen, here's no harm done Gentlemen, here's no body murdered
Gentlemen, the Man's alive again Gentlemen, but here's my Wife Gentlemen, and a
fine Gentleman with her, Gentlemen and Mr. Constable, I hope you'll bear me
witness Mr. Constable.


That he's a Cuckold, Mr. Constable.


Hark ye, ye Currs, keep off from snapping at my heels, or I shall so feague
ye.


Get ye gone ye Dogs, ye Rogues, ye night Toads of the Parish Dungeon, disturb
my House at these unseasonable hours, get ye out of my doors, get ye gone, or
I'll brain ye, Dogs, Rogues, Villains.


And next, for you Sir Coxcomb, you see I am not murdered though you paid well
for the performance; what think you of bribing my own Man to Butcher me.


Will your Worship please to have one for your Breakfast this morning?


with all my heart, Sweet-heart, any thing in the World faith and troth, ha,
ha, ha, this is the purest sport, ha ha ha.


Oh, Sir, the most unhappy and most unfortunate news! There has been a
Gentleman in Madam Sylvia's Chamber all this night, who just as you went out of
doors, carried her away, and whither they are gone, no body knows.


With all my heart, I am glad on it Child, I would not care if he had carried
away my House and all, Man; unhappy news quotha! poor Fool, he does not know I
am a Cuckold, and that any body may make bold with what belongs to me, ha, ha,
ha; I am so pleased, ha, ha, ha. I think I was never so pleased in all my life
before, ha, ha, ha.


Nay, Sir, I have a hanck upon you, there are Laws for Cut-throats, Sir, and as
you tender your future credit, take this wronged Lady home, and use her
handsomely, use her like my Mistress, Sir, do you mark me, that when we think
fit to meet again, I hear no complaint of you, this must be done Friend.


In troth, and it is but reasonable, very reasonable in troth.


Can you, my Dear, forgive me one misfortune.


Madam, in one word, I am thy Lady-ships most humble Servant and Cuckold, Sir
Davy Dunce Knight. Living in Covent-Garden, ha, ha, ha, well this is mighty pretty,
ha, ha, ha.


Sir Jolly, ah, Sir Jolly, protect me or I'm ruined.


My little Minikin, is it thy squeek?


My dear Courtine, welcome.


Well Child, and what would that wicked Fellow do to thee Child? hah Child,
Child, what would he do to thee?


Oh, Sir, he has most inhumanely seduced me out of my Uncle's House, and
threatens to marry me.


Nay, Sir, and she having no more Grace before her eyes neither, has even taken
me at my word.


In troth, and that's very uncivilly done* I don't like these Marriages, I'll
have no Marriages in my House, and there's an end on it.


And do you intend to marry my Niece, Friend?


Yes, Sir, and never ask your consent neither.


In troth, and that's very well said, I am glad on it with all my heart, Man,
because she has five thousand pound to her Portion, and my Estate's bound to
pay it; well, this is the happiest day, ha, ha, ha.

Here, take thy Bride, like Man and Wife agree,
And may she prove as true -- as mine to me.
Ha, ha, ha.

Courtine, I wish thee Joy, thou art come opportunely to be a Witness of a
perfect Reconcilement between me and that worthy Knight, Sir Davy Dunce, which
to preserve inviolate, you must, Sir, before we part enter into such Covenants
for performance as I shall think sit.


No more to be said, it shall be done Sweet-heart, but don't be too hard upon
me, use me Gently as thou did my Wife, Gently, ha, ha, ha; a very good
Jest, I faith, ha, ha, ha, or if he should be cruel to me, Gentlemen, and
take this advantage over a poor Cornuto, to lay me in a Prison, or throw me in
a Dungeon, at least

I hope Amongst all you, Sirs, I shall not fail
To find one Brother-Cuckold out for Bail.

WIth the discharge of Passions much oppressed,
Disturbed in Brain, and pensive in his Breast,
Full of those thoughts which make the unhappy sad,
And by Imagination half grown mad,
The Poet led abroad his Mourning Muse,
And let her range, to see what sport she'd choose,
Strait like a Bird got loose, and on the Wing,
Pleased with her freedom, she began to Sing;
Each Note was Echoed all the Vale along*
And this was what she uttered in her Song.
Wretch, write no more for an uncertain fame,
Nor call thy Muse, when thou art dull, to blame:
Consider with thy self how you are Unfit
To make that Monster of Mankind, a Wit:
A Wit's a Toad, who swelled with silly pride,
Full of himself, scorns all the World beside;
Civil would seem, though he good manners lacks.
Smiles on all faces, rails behind all backs:
If e're good natured, nought to Ridicule,
Good nature melts a Wit into a Fool;
Placed high, like some Iack-Pudding in a Hall
At Christmas Revels he makes sport for all.
So much in little praises he delights,
But when he's angry draws his Pen and Writes:
A Wit to no man will his dues allow,
Wits will not part with a good Word that's due:
So who e're Ventures on the Ragged Coast
Of starving Poets, certainly is lost,
They rail like Porters at the Penny-Post.
At a new Author's Play see one but sit
Making his snarling froward face of Wit,
The Merit he allows, and Praise he grants,
Comes like a Tax from a poor Wretch that wants.
O Poets, have a care of one another,
There's hardly one amongst ye true to to'ther:
Like Trincalo's and Stephano's ye Play,
The lewdest tricks each other to betray.
Like Foes detract, yet flattering friendlike smile,
And all is one another to beguile
Of Praise, the Monster of your Barren Isle:
Enjoy the prostitute ye so admire
Enjoy her to the full of your desire,
Whilst this poor Sribler wishes to retire,
Where he may ne'er repeat his Follies more,
But Curse the Fate that wracked him on your Shore.
Now you, who this day as his Judges sit,
After you've heard what he has said of Wit,
Ought for your own sakes not to be severe
But show so much to think he meant none here.

