APproach, approach fair Sisters, cross the Main,
To come and taste my Sweets, ye Tyber, and Sein.
Every thing here doth seem to smile!
Cupid himself reigns in this Isle:
Ever since, Venus resolved to quit
Her Native Throne, to come and dwell in it.
Fair Albiou now will new Cytber a prove,
And must be called, The sweet Island of Love.

Fairest Thamis, thou Famous Flood,
Whose Monarch ever Great and Good,
By Wholesome, Just, and gentle Laws,
In calm his Restored Empire awes;
Whilst his Dreadful Navies, control
And rule both Seas, from Pole to Pole;
Making Commerce and Arts flourish at home,
As in my Caesars times they did in Rome.
To Him, and thee I come this day,
My Homages and Tribute pay.

Fairest of Floods, How glorious is thy Fate!
The World and I, have seen thy Sons of late,
As invincible as thy Victorious Fleet,
The very Ocean with thy Foes submit,
Whilst on the Land, a Warlike Duke of thine,
Whose Lofty Men speaks him of Royal Line,
In Lewis's sight, his valiant hand imbrues
In Belgian-blood, and Maestrickt- Walls subdues.

If from my Shores, such valiant Heroes spring
As could New-Worlds under my Power bring:
Thousands of Beauties on the same are found,
Far greater than you'll find, search the World round.

Such Prudent-SPEAKERs thy happy Albion bears,
As its great State secures from storms and fears.

The god of Valour sure governs thy Soil!

If Valour rules, Themis does share the Toil.

Valour and Justice both may act their parts,
But Love. makes Charles to Rule his Peoples hearts.

To Him therefore and Thee, I come this day,
My Tributes and my Homages to pay.

I, from my smiling Shores new Pastimes bring,
New Airs, new Dances, to please thy great King.

O let our Voices and our Concerts move,
These Royal Ears to mind our tender Love.
May heaven-kind ever and ever smile,
And Blessings pour upon this happy Isle.

Hail Queen of Floods! Thou Silver Thamis!
Who in that Pitch of highest Bliss,
Thy Glorious King thy state has raised,
Above all other Floods art praised:
Suffer this happy Day, that I
May through thy Crystal Waves draw nigh,
And my Princess divine,
To thy great Hero join.
I Through the fierce Billows have past,
Of two Seas deep and vast,
By Rocks and Mountains ran,
To Mortal-men unknown:
Leaving my fertile Plains, and Shores, to bring
A Royal Sister to thy Greatest King.

Sweet Nymph, thy friendly care and pain,
Of this Great King, their just reward obtain:
And thou may see his People now,
To thy Princess, both love and honour show:
This Bliss, thou ow'st to her alone, whose Charm,
In 'spight of Fate, all resistance disarm:
And makes Envy it self t'adore
Her now, whom it opposed before:

O Let our Voices and our Concerts move
These Royal Ears to mind our tender love;
May heaven-kind, c.

HE's now returned! the World's
Great Conqueror,
Valiant Bacchus, who filled the
Earth with terror!
The god of Wine; and tired with Warlick-toil,
Seeks Peace and Ease in this most happy Soil.
With Wreaths of Ivy then, your Foreheads Crown,
And pay your Vows to him whose Pow'r's known:
Sing, Dance and Leap his Alters round;
And worship him as you are bound.

Leave, leave your smoky Cells, ye Bacchants all!
In careless-dress let your hairs fall;
And with your dreadful voices make
These Rocks, these Woods and hollow Valeys shake!

Sing, Dance and Leap his Altars round.
And pay to him your Vows as ye are bound.

Sing, Dance, and Leap his Altars, c.

How prudent was that mighty god of Wine,
Who first planted the blessed Vine,
When he, Heaven forsook to dwell on Earth!
Here, the sweet clash of pots and cups rise mirth.
Above, loud storms of winds and tempests crack,
And Olimpus's lofty-head shake and wrack,
While we Mortals below drink Wine in Bowl,
And let great Jove above his thunder roll!

All the Indian Gold he got, who dare
To that Liquor divine compare!
Lets therefore neither faint nor shrink:
But thousand thousand brimmers drink.

Let's thousand thousand brimmers drink.

Let's drink his health in that Liquor divine.

Who first planted the precious Vine.

Come down, come down long wisht-for Peace,
Come dwell on Earth! let War for ever cease.
And ye Mortals, unto Our Altars bow:
For such a Bliss, each ought to offer a vow:

Bacchus ye see, resolves to Court no more
The god of Arms, as he has done before.

In Love he'll find far sweeter charms,
Than in the toil of War, and noise of Arms.

He leaves War, that with delight
He may drink both day and night.

His greatest glory is to love.

Wine will his highest triumph prove.

In serving us his chiefest honour lays.

True honour stands in drinking nights and days.

How highly blessed must that Conqueror be,
Whose valour crowned with Palms of Victory,
And satisfied with his acquired Fame,
His Mind at last to calm and Peace can frame.
Who resting from all Warlike trouble and toil,
In love and quiet governs his Native Soil.

And yet how happier far is he,
Who from Love's Passion being free,
Can a less-cruel Object find,
To fix his thoughts and please his mind.
My Liberty I count the highest Bliss,
I'll flee from love, and all his charms I'll miss;
Thus over my self, as ore the World I'll reign,
And of my heart prove the true Sovereign.

Shall haughty Bacchus now,
To Love's Altars refuse to bow?
And he alone, persist
Our Sovereign Power to resist!
No no, the god must yield,
And to my son resign the Field.
I'll make a mortal-beauty wound him so,
That Cupid's power and mine he'll quickly know

He'll find all resistance proves vain,
When once Love dooms a heart to bear his chain.
And if that heart will not submit
To obey his Law, he can compel him to it.

No no, the Conqueror must yield,
And to the god of Love resign the Field.

Ho! ho! it's true, he will resign,
But to the sweet Juice of the Vine.
Fond Love at best proves but a Toy,
It's Wine he'll make his chiefest Joy.

Why! should India's Great Conqueror now
To childish- Cupid's Empire bow!

Should Bacchus burn with any other Flame
Than that of Wine he'd lose his glorious Fame.

The god of Mirth and Liberty,
Can't yield to Love's captivity.

Should he that wisdom does inspire
Endure the smart of Cupid's fire!

Follow, follow-we Champions brave,
That Noble Pattern which he gave.
Let's flee from Love as well's from Arms,
In Wine we will find far sweeter Charms.
The Wounds of Mars, and those of Love
Equally-mortal often prove.
We may seem fierce and gallant: but the way
To live at ease, is to feast night and day,
Until we die, then make our Grave,
In the bottom of some cool Wine-Cave.

Help Sister help! and let weak Mortals now
Thy dreadful rage and matchless-vallor know!

What Mortal! nay, What god is it, that dare
Provoke to wrath the mighty god of war!

The Scithian-Monarch raises arms amain,
And with his numerous Force does fill the Plain.

O Mighty Jove! Why proves thy wrath thus slow?
Why dost not thou thy fiery vengeance show!
And by thy Power, these mortal-rebels grind,
As small as dust that's driven by the wind.

Sister, let's fill the World with thousand harms,
Let nothing escape the fury of our Arms!
Lets gods and men to our assistance call,
And in our quarrel, let them stand or fall.

Break loose, break loose, ye grim Furies of Hell!
Come to our aid, leave your Infernal Cel,
And to amaze our most audacious foe,
Bring Envy, Death, and horror from below:

Victorious Bacchus will no longer fight,
But's now resolved to taste Peace and Delight
Of his great Soul, let's interrupt the calm
With noise of Arms, and hope of some new palm.

Ha! ha! ha! ha! let Great Mars know,
Bacchus is far better employed now.
All the War he's resolved to make,
And sweetest pleasures he will take,
Is not to fight your bloody Battles,
But to encounter with Cups and Bottels.

It's you! it's you Infernal Crew,
That his Great Soul to Vice subdue:
Flee! flee! be gon! approach the god no more,

COme little Fishes, come to me.
Catch at my bait: it's fair you see,
You'll find it sweet if you'll draw near.
Yet if that pleasure costs you dear,
Your Life I mean, O let not me
Be blamed for too much cruelty.
My Shepherd thus I did inthral,
When he into my snares did fall:
And ever since that fatal day,
For what his Love could plead or say,
All the kindness he could ever obtain
Of love and me, hath proved torment and pain.

Come ye little Birds of the sky
Into my Cage. Why don't you fly!
Come little fools, you may trust me:
Your loss will be but small,
You'll feel no hurt at all,
But lose your liberty.

A kind Mistress I'll prove!
I'm wholly made of Love!
A kind Mistress I'll prove!
My heart is young, and knows no cruelty!
Your loss will be but small!
You'll feel no hurt at all,
But lose your Liberty!

How kind! how blessed would prove my Fate,
If after all thy cruel hate,
I like these happy Birds, could die
Thy Prisoner to end my misery!

Hope Shepherd, hope for better days!
Thy torments sure, won't last always!

Ha! Cloris, thou may end my grief!

My rigour should methinks, prove thy relief.
Thy patience will be tired, and that will cure*
The pain, and smart thou dost endure!

Faithful to thee Cruel, I'll live and die,
In spite of thy severity!

Thy own reason sure will one day,
The ardor of thy passion lay.

No no! be thou n'er so unkind,
Constant to thee Death shall me find!

Prithee Shepherd, be gon!
Thy Presence, and thy moan
Do scare the Fish away!
Pray thee go: do not stay!
Whether thy love be true, or feigned,
My heart by thee's not to be gained!

He's gon alas! the Traytor's leaves me here
In this Desert, possessed with grief and fear:
His cruel soul could not in pity be
Moved to resent my pain and misery!
He's gone he's gone! and would not alas stay
To bid me adieu, before he sailed away!
Here I am left; on a most dreadful shore,
Where horror dwells, and Bears and Lions roar,
Both help and honorless! Where shall I find
Any succours!

In this Juice sweet and kind,
This precious Balm, which heals the greatest pain,
When all remedies else prove vain.
It's Wine, it's Wine that cures all grief,
And can alone give thee relief!

Ye dull and senseless gods! How could you see
This cruel wrong the Traitor hath done me:
And not on him a severe vengeance take!
Ah! ye're unjust unless you quickly make
These Rocks, these Sands, and these merciless Waves,
To prove at once, his hangmen and his Graves!
And ye fierce Tigers, far more kind than he,
It's you that now must end my misery!
Come, rend my heart, and from these purple Veins,
Suck with my Blood, my Soul and all my Pains.

Fairest of Princesses, thy Blood
Was not made to be Tigers food!
Such dainty flesh deserves to be
From VVolves and Dogs fierce hunger free.

But why should I, alas! compassion crave
Of Gods and Monsters who no pity have;
No more than Power to give me 'ny relief!
No no! my Rage alone must end my Grief!
But! hold! heaven, methinks, hath heard my moan!
'T hath so! my spirits fail! one sigh! one groan!
Then Death! welcome! my Soul now steals away.

Despair and grief prevail. Unhappy day.

She swouns! help, help!

Alas!

She's dead!

She's gon^

If thou can drink one drop, the cure is done.

But, I do live alas! my hopes are vain:
I see these Rocks, these Woods, these Hills again!
I see the Sea, and with prosperous Gales,
My Ravisher, o'r the fierce Billow's sails.
My wretched eyes must still with horror see
That dreadful Object, caused my misery!
That Monster of men! O grief! O rage! O pain!

O! What a Power do sighs and tears obtain
Over a tender Heart! A weeping Eye
Can soon disarm the greatest cruelty.
Poor Ariadne! alas! thy fatal love,
Does in my soul a secret feeling move,
Far above reach of common pity now!
If it be'nt Love, what else, I do not know!

What say thou pretty Shepherdess
To this fine thing called tenderness:

To that and all Love does, I say
None but weak souls will by it be led away.

Love's Power alas! Who can resist!

That Mind whom reason does assist.

Tell true, Shepherdess: Is thine so?

I cannot tell; but this I know,
If mine is not from Passion free,
Yet over tender it 'l never be.

To win thee then, What must be done?

That's a secret needs not be known.
That's a secret.

Oh! Heavens! What a dreadful sight,
Is this godess of War and Fight,
With her Internal Sister Fury!
Oh! dearest Philis, let us flee!

Victorious godess, When wilt thou
Command, and I shall overthrow
These Hills, these Rocks, these Trees, these Plains!
I'll make the Devils break their Chains!
I'll sow Discord and War among Mortals;
And fill the World with bloody Funerals!

No, no! it's neither blood nor slaughter I ask!
My valiant Arm, shall undertake that task!
Conque'ring Bacchus slights our Powers above,
And for Ariadne, burns with profane love!
Of his new flame thou must the progress stop,
If thou can not, destroy his groundless hope
Of gaining hers! Let all that deadly hate
That she for Theseus hath, become his Fate!

WHat is thy thought, alas! my Heart?
What do we seek, in this dreadful Desert!
And what reward can our fond load obtain,
From one of sense bereft! ourhopes are vain.
In the same soul, Who is't could ever see
The greatest hate, with greatest love agrree.

Ye cruel thoughts of Anger, and of Love,
(That I may breathe a little) O remove.

Fairest Princess, it's time to dry those tears!
He that creates your grief minds not your fears.
For a Perfidious man, O sigh no more!

I sigh for him whom my soul does abhor.

Heaven from thee with justice parts,
One that ne'er knew thy high Deserts.

Alas! alas!

If thou wilt ease thy Pains,
Change change thy Love.

After I've broke his chains!
Him for whose love alas! I did betray
My dearest Friends! my Honour! my Country!
Him for whose sake I'ndure such cruel smart!

Banish, banish that Tyrant from thy heart.

O Heaven! where does thy loud thunder lay?

Love, love the gods! it's far the safer way.

Sure! faith and truth are from all mortals flown!

Seek them on heaven then: there they are gon.

If ever I yield to foolish Love again,
May heaven Just.....

Fairest Princess, refrain.

May heaven's severe vengeance on me fall!

Change, change thy mind.

My mind! I never shall!
My Torment's great! yet it doth still increase?

And shall those tears, Ariadne, never cease!

No! thus I'll weep and sigh, until I die;
Since death alone can end my misery!

He sighs at last. Our great subdu'r of Kings,
And to Loves throne, his vows and homage brings.

Invincible Bacchus is over-matcht!

His stubborn heart in fine, by Love is caught.
Let's load him still with heavier Chains!
He deserves that, and greater pains.
And let the World by his example know,
Both gods and men must to our Empire bow.

I yield! I yield! Cupid must have the Crown.
He is Conqueror, I do my defeat own.
But, hold! thy Victory's imperfect still,
Until th'hast made Ariadne thy strokes feel.

She will in time help thee to bear the smart.

How can that be, if rage possess her heart!

Love over the greatest griefs gets victory;
And she that once did love, love can't deny.

Against Love's power, what can all powers do?
Force, Valour, Courage, all must to him bow.
The most Valiant with greatest passion loves!
He that's most free, the greatest Captive proves.
The stoutest hearts alas! in vain persist
Victorious Cupid to resist.

Sound ye Trumpets, ye Drums and Timbals beat,
To War, to Arms, let not our Foes retreat,
But 'stroy them all.

Raise, raise, infernal Bands,
Charge, charge them through, it's mighty Mars commands.

Help, Sister, help! Alecton Thesyphone,
Follow the god of War! follow Bellone.

To arms, to arms, let's all to th'Onset go!
This is the day we must confound our Foe!

Ye valiant Twins, who from great Jove are sprung!
Who to revenge your thundering Father's wrong,
The daring Giants, with your arrows slew,
Come to our aid and your great valour show.

And thou, whose mortal darts once purged the Earth
Of dreadful Monsters, come and show thy wrath.

To war! to arms!

To war! to arms all!

Under our strokes let's make our En'mies fall.

March valiant God! march, march, we'll all follow.

To our just wrath let's sacrifice them now.

Let's drench the Earth with streams of tears and blood,
As once Deucalion did by's watery flood.

To fight! to fight! to battle! to arms!
Let's fill the World with thousand harms!

Invincible Hero! great Bacchus! thou
Whose valiant Sword whole crops of Palms did mow,
Who over the World such mighty Conquests made;
Wilt thou alone refuse to give us aid?
O heavens! what d'I hear! help, I'm amazed!
To quench his Love they have his valor raised!
Poor Ariadne! alas! what is thy Fate!

Alas!

She'll die! she'll die! help e're it be too late!
She's gone, she's gone alas!

Wilt thou forsake --

My soul alas! which party can thou take!
Shall Valour still, or must the god of Love
Over my heart this day, triumphant prove!
Love, I confess, you are sweet! but Glory's strong!

Follow Glory! Love's Charms will lead thee wrong.

Love proves a guide more sweet, more sure by far;

Honour and Triumph are the fruits of War.

O! follow, follow Love!

O follow me!

I'll take thy counsel, I'll to glory flee.
What dost thou mean! shall she perish alone,
Whom Heaven kind designed to be thy own!
It's done, it's done! Cupid has got the day!
Let's to her aid! Euphrosyne lead the way.

Well! since Bacchus will love, let'm please his mind.

More noble pleasures we will find.
To war! to war! arm! arm! let's go!
Let's extermine our daring Foe!

Alas! alas! my chiefest joy!
My Foster-child! my dearest Boy!
Must Love prevail then! can thou quit
The sweet juice of the Grape to follow it?
What will become of thee, dear Vine,
Now Bacchus for Love forsakes Wine!
And thou Bottle, my secret friend,
Thy Pomp, thy Glory's at an end!
Bid adieu to all mirth and sport,
What man hereafter will thee court?
Since Bacchus for Cupid leaves Wine,
Thy Doom's now come as well as mine.
Ye Satyrs, Fathers of the Grape,
Weep with me for this fatal Rape,
Bacchus alas! is stolen away!
Come, let's in Earth poor Bottle lay.
Let's mourn, let's sigh, let's grieve and pine,
Since our god, for Love forsakes Wine.

Farewell perfidious Love, my flame is gone,
Thy cruel power I will for ever shun.
That Soul who lives under thy Tyranny,
Lives not alas! but dies continually.
Too long! too long! I've proved a slave to thee,
Reason alone methinks should make me free.
But yet alas! who can those wounds e're cure
Thy Arrows make! or liberty procure
To hearts by thee subdued! or loose those chains
Thou fastnest once! No, no! I'll bear thy pains!
And should my Fate always thus cruel prove,
Yet I'm resolved to live and die in Love.

For one single pleasure, a thousand pains,
A silly Shepherdess obtains;
When she to Courtship gives her mind:
And then alas! if she proves kind,
The silly Shepherdess obtains
For that single pleasure, a thousand pains.

For one short grief a thousand joys
A discreet Shepherdess enjoys.
If she to Amoret does yield;
After sh'as once resigned the field,
A discreet Shepherdess enjoys
For that one grief, a thousand joys.

Griefs and pleasures, joys and pains
Are the sure portions of Love:
Whatever heart bears its chains,
Will at length certainly prove,
That the sure portions of Love
Are griefs, pleasures, joys, and pains.

Am I designed alas! the only wretch,
Whose Martyrdom eternity must reach!

Change, Shepherd, change, thy affections remove.

Thou wrongest me, cruel, thy Martyr I'll prove.

Yield Shepherd, yield, there's no revenge
Does taste so sweet as that of a Love-change.

Shepherd thou wrong'st me much, I'll constant be.

By often change, thou'lt find one may love thee.

Weep, weep, my wretched eyes, weep your selves blind!

Love, love a god most charming and most kind.

'Twas Love alas! that made my cruel pain,
I'll suffer death, rather than love again.

When a Shepherd proves unkind,
He must be served in his kind:
When a Shepherd proves unkind,
I'd do so, if th'case was mine.
I declare I'm one of those,
Who could ten false Lovers lose,
And yet never grieve nor pine.

From the Goddess of Love this gift receive,
It hath a power to charm the greatest grief.
It can inspire a heart with mirth and love!

That very name, my soul to wrath does move.

Fear thou nothing Ariadne, this new fire
Shall in thy soul nothing but joy inspire.

Who can, who shall alas! my faith secure,
That though a god, his flame will still endure?

Conjugal vows, he's now ready to give,
As soon as he thy consent shall receive.

Fairest Goddess who can inspire
With thine own charms, the hottest fire;
What need hast thou t'use other ties,
Than the sweet glances of thine eyes?

Good gods! what blessed change is this I find!
What sudden joy d'I feel possesses my mind!
Transports of bliss! you do by far exceed
Those cruel ones of grief ye did preceed!
Thou charming God! the more I think on thee,
The more I love! But Heavens! this is he.
I blush --

O cruel Ariadne, who is't you love!

My mortal hate for one, I'll ne'er remove.
My heart, my soul shall ever him abhor.

And yet, you love!

That's little! I do adore!

Who then alas! can this blist Lover be!

The best of gods! the most charming! that's thee.

Cruel Princess! ye're vexed that you must own
My faithful passion is to your heart known.

My looks, my words will soon my soul betray.

What bliss is mine!

What honour!

Happy day!

O blessed change!

How can't possible be --

So great a god should give himself to me!

Can I believe my bliss is true!

Dare I hope mine shall continue!

Hail! happy pair of Lovers hail!
May your ardent Love never fail!
Long may you live under this sacred tie,
Till by Hymen you do each other enjoy.

Alas! alas!

What grief does thee possess?

Prithee Venus, thou can my grief redress,
If you would restore my Foster-Son again.

I will do so. Pray Graces ease his pain.

He's shrewdly hurt, can he be kindlier used!

How can he be by Love amused,
And court his dearest Bottle too!

Love well, and drink well both, Bacchus he may do.

Good Father Silene, let's all agree.

So he drinks brimmer still, I'll yield to thee.

His glory thus we will share, in Wine's delights
He'll spend the days, in those of Love, the nights.

In Wine's delights
He'll spend the days; in those of Love, all nights.

COme, come, see the new Bride. Away!
Our god's Minion, this is her day.
Blessed be brave Theseus for his pain,
Who brought her hither. Again! again!

He leaves the Earth, and with his Love
Goes to live with the gods above.
O let's all we, his warlike Band,
Follow him thither glass in hand.

Let 'em drink Nectar and Ambrosie!
Their bliss I never shall envy,
Provided they send me good Wine,
Sweet Malvezy, and Muscadine.

Hold! is it day! or is it night!
Every thing's dark! no! e're thing's light!
It is day sure! I hear the Swallows prattle!
It's night! I see a thousand Candles sparkle.
With over thinking, my thoughts distracted be!
My ears do tingle and buzz! what's that I see!
What be these! beasts or men! here we may find
Nymphs of all sorts and sizes, some too kind,
Other too rough, yet I'm afraid
Mong so many, one scarce should find a Maid!

O sweetest pleasures! blessed change
From sighs and moans of madness and revenge,
To sighs and tears of greatest joy and bliss.

My dearest god! what happy change is this!

My fairest goddess, let's now and ever live
Under Love's Law, and bliss on bliss receive.
My faith I pledge thee now! here take my hand.

For pledge of mine, both life and soul command.

Gather your Roses, fair Nymphs, do
Gather Roses and Lillies too.
Bring whole heaps of Flowers newly born,
And strew the ways, this glittering morn.
Let's to our divinities pay
Our joyful vows this happy day.

Leave, leave your Cells, ye Sylvan gods,
With your shrill voices fill these woods.
With love, with mirth, and joy let's all
Celebrate this high Festival.

For an Offering, here I have brought
This fine Nosegay with my hands wrought,
Of Orange-flowers and Jasmies;
All I beg of your deities,
Is to keep me from hurtful fall,
From Wolves, from Thieves, and Love that's worse than all.

Fair Shepherdess, I do kindly receive
Thy sweetest gift, and in return I give
This curious Gem to thee.

And as for me,
I give my Nurse, my chiefest joy,
My kindest Miss, my pretty Toy,
The object of my tenderest love,
Who did always my pain remove.
My Minion, my sweet delight,
Whom I hugged both day and night.

Please your godships divine,
These good Neighbours of mine
Are come now
To pay their vow.

What can alas! a Shepherd to gods give,
Whose wretched heart does always pine and grieve!
What can a Lover full of trouble and fears,
Offer this day, but only sighs and tears!

Cease, Shepherd, cease to trouble our joy,
Thou shalt e're long thy Love enjoy!
Heaven hath heard thy plaint, and thou shalt see
This joyful day, thy Cloris kind to thee.
Every thing here both gods and mortals too
Laughs, loves, and strives each other to outdo.

How! does my Shepherdess
From her levity cease!

This day, this day of love,
Shall a day of wonders prove.

Thy cruelty is gone!

Sing, sing, thy work is done.

This is the day, this day of Love,
This day of love
Will a day of great wonders prove.

Bacchus at last yields to our Arms!
A Beauty, by her powerful Charms
With my help, makes his heart her own;
Little Cupids therefore, give her the Crown.

Fly, fly to this great Festival,
Ye little Loves, fly thither all.
Ye were the Authors of her desires,
Put on her, your richest Attires.
Place on her head that glittering Crown,
She has deserved it! it's her own.

Hail, Hail, new goddess, hail.

Hail for ever, fair Princess, hail!

O may we like them, spend our days!
Free from trouble and pain always!

In midst of loves, and smiles, and sports.

In all pleasures the Table affords.
Let's drink.

Let's love.

O let us love, and drink, and sing,
And let the Echo's ring.

For ever hail our new goddess.

For ever live our most lovely Princess!

Let's drink, let's love, and sing all day,
Let Love and Bacchus live always.


