AS a Pale Virgin coyly does refuse,
To grant the Favour which she longs to lose;
Faintly contending, that she may remove
The actual Consummation of her Love;
Fain would she have her Dreams unriddled to her,
Yet bashfully resists him, that would show her:
Seems to desire no farther Prosecution,
Yet wishes for the Hour of Execution;
At length she understands the full Intent,
Partly by Rape, and partly by Consent.
So this Day's Author between Hope and Fear,
Hopes to succeed, yet trembles to appear.
He struggled long against his Muse's force,
(Jades are more headstrong, than a Well-bred Horse)
His Phillis first, by Songs, he tried to move,
Two cursed Diseases, Poetry and Love!
And having once given loose to her dull Rage,
She now has Impudence to mount the Stage.
Just so the Nymph, no more by Honour awed,
She turns Pit-Whore, then Gallery, then Bawd.
Too like are Poets to a common Whore,
As being much despised, and very Poor.
No better Evidence can I'm sure be found,
Where there are some kind Masks, where Wits abound.
How happy were it would both leave off in time!
Scribbling and Loving quit, while in their Prime.
But being pleased at first, they still go on,
And never leave, till they are both undone.
Till one is swinged, and till the other's damned.
Oh Jove avert from both what I have named!

HOW has Longinus dared to offer this Affront?
Have I, by any Action of my Life,
Done ought, which should encourage him to this?
Ha'nt I, by Deeds surpassing all Belief,
By steadfast Honour, and by noble Daring
Purchased a Crown, and many Victories?
And shall I, for a haughty, bloodless Summons,
Shamefully sully, poorly abandon all?

Think not, that in contempt of you, I'm sent;
All own you brave; Longinus knows you so:
And in Regard to that, would not your Ruin.
For can your single Valour, or your Arms
Prevail against the dreaded Roman Power?
Besides the Offers I have brought are such,
That any other gladly would accept.

Accept! Look here, my worthy Soldier,
Who in the Heat of Battle can advise;
Who wisely acts, when Fear, as well as Death,
Prevents the trembling Coward's shameful Flight,
And roots him to the Earth.
My temperate, bold Friend, learn thou his Errand,
Then judge, if I should tamely hearken to it.

Sure Alboino so well is known, that none
Dare rashly strive to injure his Renown.

Yes, spite of my Fame, Virtue, Glory, all,
Spite of the Conquests which these Arms have won;
Though this Place (impregnable of it self)
Is by an Army backed, flushed with Success,
And headed by the Man, whom Victory
Attends, whom Fortune follows as his Slave;
Yet rash Longinus, the Roman Viceroy,
Sends here his Envoy to demand this Town,
And by Recital of his Master's Titles,
Thinks to awe me to a tame Surrender.
Gods! that the Man, who singly in the Field
Shuns me, as the dared Lark, the towering Hawk,
Should yet nourish such presumptuous Hopes;
Because he has a mighty Crowd of Slaves,
Who thrust themselves between cold Death and Him.
While He, ghastly and pale behind his Troops,
Shrinks at my Blows, he at a Distance sees.

Since you refuse to hearken to our Terms,
A little time will show, how much you wrong
Not brave Longinus only, but your self.
Since we by friendly Offers can't prevail,
We must use Force, and that can hardly fail.

'Tis Force indeed must make Alboino stoop.
Not Jove's Command, without his Thunder too
Should bend my stubborn Mind from this Resolve;
That to the utmost I'll defend this Crown,
Which by my single Valour I have gained.

Caesar secure in Africa may Command
His Soldiers on such desperate Attempts.
The Blows we give can't reach so far; he's safe;
And therefore slights how many Thousands fall
Only to glut his mad, ambitious Mind.

Princes should scorn to owe the Crowns which they possess
To any other Merit but their own.
And not, when Glory calls them to the Field,
Commit their Armies to another Charge,
And only serve to be his Councellor.

It is Unjust thus to degrade --

No more.
'Tis in requital of your Thoughts of us.
Go, tell Longinus, that this happy Day
I Yearly Celebrate, in Memory
That on this Day, I fought, and won this Crown.
Nor shall his vain Attempts obstruct our Mirth.
While he for Business and for War takes Care,
I, straight for splendid Triumphs will prepare.

Well Desiderio, how relish you this?
You hear we shall have Business now again.
This base corrupting Peace is at an End,
War, and it's chief God our Prince, now once more
Summon us out to Glory and to Arms.

I thought to my General I had been known
So well, it might have spared that Question.

Mistake me not, my Gallant Friend, I know
There is so much Fire lodged within thy Breast,
That it requires an Alloy of Years
To temper thy youthful, boiling Spirit.
But Peace has spread its ill Effects on you;
And though she cannot win thee to her Side,
She would rebate thy eagerness to War;
And makes a Woman Pimp to her Designs,
Thou art a Soldier, but a Lover too.

'Tis true, Cupid has shot a sharp and bearded Dart
Into my Breast fixed and rooted here't lies.
We Soldiers are not moved with every Face,
Like the vain, giddy Courtiers of the Age.
'Tis hard to make a Conquest over our Hearts,
But that once gained, 'tis easily preserved.
As Metals which require the longest time
To melt them down, remain the longest warm.

How comes this God never had a Dart for me?
Have War and Business frighted him away?
Till thou, my Friend, were it grown his Votary
I own, I always looked on Love to be
The Effect of Idleness and pampered Luxury.

Have you forgot, when from the War returned,
That tedious Bloody War, which won this Crown.
Your Spirits were by Famine almost sunk:
Your Blood was so exhausted by your Wounds,
That you had scarce enough to nourish Life.
Yet those few Drops by Rosamunda warmed,
New Life and Vigour spread over all your Limbs.
I marked you when the Beauteous Queen arrived
In Mournful, Solemn Pomp, to ask her Life,
And for a Father and a Kingdom's Loss
Dissolved in Tears; 'twas then, what Blood you had
Sprung to your Cheeks, and strait retreated thence:
Your Eye-Balls fixed, and tremblingly you moved;
'Twas then, your altered Looks declared you loved,

Some odd Distemper seized me, I confess;
Some short, unusual Qualm came like a Flash
Of Lightning, and as soon it disappeared:
'Twas not Love; a Face alone never moves me,

A Face alone!
Now by my Life, in forming her, Nature
Has been profuse, and shown her utmost Art:
For her she has been at such a vast Expense,
Futurity can never hope to see
Another perfect Beauty; in every
Motion, what wondrous Majesty appears,
Her Shape is Graceful, and her Looks Divine.

It may be that the gods were so intent
Upon her Form, that they forgot her Mind.
And while they admired the Creature they had made,
Some sooty Angel stole into the crowd,
And shuffled in a Soul of his own stamp.

You're too severe.

I know to whom I speak.
Pride and Revenge rule chiefly in her Breast;
There's not a Vice so foul she'd not commit,
Where either might be fully gratified.
She is so fired, upon the least distaste,
Hell's not so hot, and might be sooner cooled.
Pray Heaven her Passions may not work our Ruin.

We may fear so furious a Temper
Will not long agree with Alboino's;
Who is himself ungovernably fierce.
His Virtues too have a Compound of Faults;
He's rigorously Just, brave to Rashness;
So Generous, he would bestow his Crown,
Rather than Merit should not meet Reward.
But he delights too much in Death and Blood;
Vast Destruction still attends his Conquests --

No more; this is no place for such discourse;
For though we both mean well, yet should some Sly,
Insinuating Courtier over-hear,
This to our Ruin would be soon improved.
And look yonder comes one, who would rejoice
To have all worthy Men destroyed.

My Rival, Almachild, with Flora, Odoacre's Daughter.

Yes, and every Man's as well as thine,
Who has a handsome Wife or Mistress.

He courts each Woman that he sees, and few
In vain, for he's a successful Lover.
Has all the Arts, and Charms which please that Sex:
Young, Handsome, Rich, an exact Dissembler,
Has Wit, and Prodigal of Pains and Wealth.

To corrupt Virtue, or to reward Vice;
To bribe a Pimp, or to procure a Whore,
Lavishly he'd give an Hundred Talents:
But to assist the Brave, the Worthy Man,
To save from Ruin his King and Country,
He would not part with one single Drachma.
He has that Tinsil Wit which Women like,
Can Fool and Toy, and idly prate with them,
For it is Words, not Reason, they regard.
For's Cowardice he'll be the more approved,
'Tis so agreeable to their Nature.

I would Angellina were to see
How busily he Courts another Face.

Nay, fear not her, she'll not be won with Noise
And Equipage, what ever her Father may.

However,
Let us retire, here let him freely Love;
All his Intrigues, but one, I would emprove.

Who are those?


Aistolfus the General, and his Friend Desiderio.


They might have paid more Respect to a Lady; but Rudeness is so Natural to a
Soldier.


They fancy they express their Courage by that, and their Wit by Fighting. 'Tis
their way to hector the Women into a Compliance, and think to win their
Mistresses, as they do Towns, by rudely Storming them.


For my part, I prefer you Men of Breeding to all others; who know when to
express your Courage and Civility; and I think exceed Soldiers in all places;
for they are neither so Brave as you are in Courts, nor so Civil in Camps.


Rudeness is not their only Vice; they are subject to a much worse, want of
Money.


But yet they have the confidence to address themselves to us; though a poor
Lover is as ridiculous a Creature as an Eunuch Lover; and I'd almost be courted
as soon by the one, as the other. They are both odious to a Lady of Quality
especially.


Were I a Woman, I should be apt to suspect want of Wit, or want of Truth in
that Lover, where there was want of Wealth. For, supposing me in his
circumstances, what greater Madness can there be, than for Poverty to Court
Beggary: To have a whining Couple sigh out their Necessities, instead of Love:
And had I Riches, I should conclude, he courted my Person only to be Master of
them.


Well, your Lordship has all the necessary Qualifications of a Lover, as
Generous, as Rich; and truly, I think, there can be no greater Proof given of
Love, than Generosity. And I should never think my self Mistress of any one's
Heart, till I were of his wealth.


You know you command mine, and I hope the small Present I made you Yesterday,
was some demonstration of it. You received it --


I vow you make me blush; it was great and noble: but I could not better
discover my Esteem for you, than by my acceptance of it; for my Reputation runs
a great Hazard, should it be known. But if I could get a few more such, he
would be glad to marry me, to recover them again.


Secrecy is my greatest Virtue. You have promised to trust both your Reputation
and Person to that -- when must I receive the Reward of all my Services -- my
Love, will admit no more delays, and my Passion no more disappointments -- is
not this the promised day -- and is not Opportunity favourable --


But could you find in your heart to Ruin the Woman you love?


But can you count it Ruin, to taste the Joys, and have the Wealth, which I
can give? I'll fly into thy Arms all Gold, Jove rained not half so much in
Danaes lap, as I will into thine.


Nay, 'tis Love alone can Conquer me: and if you love as you pretend, why do
you refuse the last great Proof, Marriage?


'Tis the last indeed, for Men seldom give any after. Marriage is no more a
Proof of Love, than a Security of Constancy. Do not I daily vow Fidelity; the
rest is no more but Ceremony, and whatever consists so wholly of that, be
assured has little truth in it. Besides, you'll lose the greatest Tie upon my
Vows, my Honour, which a Lover may forfeit by Inconstancy, but a Husband never
does.


But still my Reputation.


Nay, now you suspect my Honour again: But though it should be known, I'll place
you above Censure; fear not that, while I'm your Lover. Poverty and Disrepute
are always joined, the Rich are never scandalised. And Wives now a-days run a
greater Hazard of being kept Poor, than Mistresses, and consequently are more
contemptible.


You have my heart, methinks that should content you.


The best Answer I can give to that, is the Song I made on you.


You will oblige me, by letting me hear it again.


No more, Aminta, say you love,
Or I'm the object of your mind;
While still you fear, and disapprove
To do, what will declare you kind.
Filled with suspicious thoughts, my heart must be,
Till with your words, I find your Acts agree.
Ah! Can you hear me thus complain,
And see me racked with fierce desires,
Yet will do nought to ease my pain,
Nor will fulfil what Love requires?
If Truth you spoke, you'd not thus Cruel prove,
You may pretend, but cannot hide your love.
For we Men never believe Women give their Hearts, till they do their Persons.
And as you think Generosity, so I think Enjoyment the only infallible sign of
Love; and I can no more credit yours, while you deny your Person, than you
would mine, should I with-hold my money.


And the only way to have our hearts esteemed, is to refuse you our Persons.
For should I yield, Contempt will as certainly follow on your side, as
Repentance on mine. The greatest Blessings are disesteemed by long Possession;
nothing makes us put so true a Value on them as misfortunes.


They render not Life a greater Torment, than Despair does Love; and no brave
Man should live Unhappy, nor wise One Love without Hopes. You have given me so
much, that your Reputation will be in greater danger, by denying me, than
granting. Come, 'tis too late to Capitulate for the Fort, after a Promise of
Surrender -- let us retire -- Such things are so oft Practised in Court, 'twill
be regardless.


Well -- since you will have it so, I'll meet you an Hour hence --


The Old Reply, and I shall find the same Usage, why not now?


Oh! Heaven! my Father! I must begone e're he sees me.
He's ignorant in Love, who hopes to find
That Gifts, which I have got, will make me kind;
'Tis those which are to come, must bend my mind.

Farewell, thou Mercenary, Jilting, Errant Woman; I never was so Fooled by any
in my life, she has cost me more Money and Pains than any of her Sex; and yet I
believe she has no more Virtue; for I never knew one who was a Jilt to many,
but was a Whore to some body. Her continual Disappointments have vexed me, but
I'm resolved I'll have her; for she shall not have it to boast, I courted her
in vain.

The Nymph seems coy, in hopes to raise our Fire;
Too long delays do rather cool Desire.
And we pursue, not out of Love, but Pride,
Scorning to have it said, we were denied.

So thoughtful, my Lord, you whose Perfections make you the Men's Envy, and the
Women's Admiration. You should leave melancholy Reslections to the Unfortunate,
as I am.


Your Daughter's unkindness only has Power to discompose me.


I do not find her averse to Marriage, and I suppose you do not intend to
disgrace our Family by any other Design.


By no means: But --


Nay, my Lord, there can be no Objection but her want of Fortune; 'tis true,
our Family has proved more durable than our Estate; for Fate has maliciously
increased the one, and impaired the other.


She has made you amends, by so beautiful a Daughter.


Handsome Daughters seldom prove Blessings to their Parents. I am so used to
Curses, that I suspect every thing. Fortune uses me, as Rooks do their Cullies,
if ever she suffers me to be a seeming Winner, 'tis only by my credulity to
make Ruin surer.


Your Misfortunes are wholly owing to your Fancy, as 'tis to that I owe my
Joys. Scarce any thing has truly in it self Pain or Pleasure, it only bears the
Image our wild Fancy stamps upon it. At least, hope for better Fortune.


I can no more hope for future Good, than fancy I now have any; neither the
Expectation of what's to come, nor the Reflection on what's past, can please
me. I'm weary of the Drudgery and dull Repetitions of Life. If e're to Morrow
comes, to Morrow will tediously be consumed just as to Day; to Day will be as
Yesterday, and Yesterday has been as Ages past. And were not you more obliged
to your Youth and Wealth, than to your Fancy, you would think as I do. But
since you have so vigorous a Fancy, you need not my Daughter, to complete your
Happiness.


The Hopes of having her mine, gives me Pleasure; but it cannot be complete,
till she is so.


It must be then in the way I have mentioned. In short, my Lord, Marry her, or
quit your Pretensions to her. And the next time you Visit, bring a Priest with
you; or you shall find colder Treatment from your Mistress, and rougher from a
suspicious Father, than possibly you expect: And so I leave you to reflect upon
it.


This would discourage any Man, who had such an aversion for a Wife, as I have;
and did not know Woman so well as I do.

He thinks his Daughter, by his Care, secure;
I know, no Woman will Restraint endure:
To shun Confinement, they from Fathers fly;
And Cuckolds make themselves, by Jealousy.
That others they'll obey, why should I fear;
Since sure to do, what they themselves forswear.

WEll, I shall see most of my Mistresses here to day; they'll all come to this
Entertainment. I am the most indifferent to Angellina, because that is a dull,
Matrimonial Love; yet I must marry her, since she will be very rich, and her
Fortune will enable me to debauch other Women. For Cleanthe, my Court Mistress,
I think her pretty secure, notwithstanding her affected Coyness. But I must use
dispatch with Flora, or that Old, Treacherous Father of hers will spoil my
Design: If I could but meet her singly now, I have got that here will tempt
her;


Ah, my Lord! I know not how you entertained my Father, but he came home in a
strange Humour; he says you only design to ruin me, and vows this shall be my
last day of liberty.


Then let us use it with the best advantage. Gratify me to day in my
Pleasures, and to morrow I will you, with your Freedom. You shall not owe your
Support to your Father; then why should you be confined by him. For most
Children obey their Parents, as Most Statesmen do their Monarchs, only out of
Interest.


Oh, I abhor the very Name of Interest! I would no more pay Obedience, than I
would give my Love, for so base a Reason.


Yield to my Embraces, I'll not ask the reason; and will neither suspect your
Love, nor --


Nor value it; 'twill soon be contemned: therefore mention it no more, I will
not so much as hear of it.


How, Madam!


I confess I made some return to your Love, while I thought you would have been
my Husband; but since you deny that, I must all Favours.


Then I am not to hope for --


Any thing but what I can lawfully grant. Oh, Heaven! that ever I should hear
an unlawful, dishonourable Passion professed to me.


Very fine: And you are resolved to recall your Love, though you have confessed
it; and will not yield, though you promised it.


I know not what I have said; I made those Promises inconsiderately, and
therefore they are not binding.


'Tis very well, Madam: Your Servant; I have no more to say. I shall quickly
find out a Mistress who will make me a more grateful Return to my Services; and
who will gladly accept this Jewel, designed for you.


How's this! Nay then I must alter my Carriage. East, were an Empire proffered
me, I could contemn them all. But alas! who can be insensible to your Love? You
have won my Heart, and I fear will make me grant too much.


You cannot give too much to Love, to Truth like mine.


I confess you have given me great Demonstrations of them.


They are but Trifles, to what I design you after --


Ay, but should you forsake me after -- and should expose me to Infamy and
Want. We Women run mighty Hazards, when our Reputation must depend on our
Lovers Discretion, and our Support, on his Generosity.


I have not opportunity now to make a Settlement: however, this shall be yours,
and but retire a moment into my Apartment here.


Nay, not for that neither. But why so hasty?


I fear we may be interrupted again; and there comes old Avaro, I would not
have him see you here.


Nor I, for the World.
I have not promised that I will comply;
But to conceal my self, I'll thither fly.

In vain you fly from me, in vain you hide;
I may be sure to find, since Love's my Guide.

Well, Daughter, to please you, I have brought you to Court; and to secure you,
I am come along with you: where you will meet a great many Admirers, and I a
great many Debtors: But if they are no better Paymasters of Love, than they are
of Money, the Devil may have their Custom for me.


Yet you'd have me marry a Courtier, who is --


No Debtor. You shall not have one, who only makes the Court his Sanctuary; one
who mortgages his Estate to every crediting Banker, and his Heart to every
handsome Women.


Had Almachild as little Wealth, as he has Truth, you'd dislike him as much as
I.


If you get his Person and Estate in possession, no matter for his Truth. But I
know for whom you dislike him. 'Tis true, were Almachild's Dependence wholly on
the Court, as Desiderio's is on the Army, I should value neither: But you shall
no more have one who lives by his Sword, than one who lives upon
Court-Promises, nay, than one who lives by his Wits.


Marry a Coward!


He'll live the longer. A Pox of those fighting Madmen; there's some hopes of
recovering one's Money from a peaceable, quiet, passive Man: But a Soldier,
forsooth, runs into your Debt, and then into the Army; there gets an unlucky
Blow, which chops off his Head, and cancels his Bonds; and has no way of
getting our of our Books, but by getting out of the World.


Ay, Do, Father, make her marry Almachild, and then the less Portion will
serve.


Clefi says true, therefore dispose your self to it.


You will not force my Inclinations.


Force my Inclinations. Why there's it now: A pretty Excuse for Disobedience.
Death! that we should beget their Persons, and cannot their Inclinations. Pray,
from whence had you any Inclinations? I declare them illegitimate, and will
your Person, if you obey not my Will.


Nay, if Money will not bribe her, she's not your Daughter, and I disown her to
be my Sister; and yet 'tis very advantageous to have a Handsome Sister. See what
it has got me this Morning: Almachild give me, only to speak in his behalf. I
wonder when your Hero will make me such a Present: Perhaps, after the next
Battle, he'll send you a Load of shattered Legs and Arms, and broken Skulls;
though one would think they were cracked before they went to fight, or else they
would never be so mad to go.


He scorns as much to give, as take a Bribe; his Worth and Honour plead for
him.


His Worth and Honour! Ha, ha, ha: Where do they lie? in his Sword, or in his
ghastly Scars? Better he could prove his Honour by the depth of his Pocket,
than by the depth of his Wounds. His Honour is more likely to send him
handsomely out of the World, than maintain you so in it. And I'll justify, that
though there were a Standing Army, this Purse has more Honour, and more Worth in
it; and shall procure much more Respect, than all the Swords in the Army.


'Tis a powerful Purse indeed; let me see, and a very weighty one too. This is
it that makes the Fool pass for a Wit; the Ugly, handsome; Cowards, brave; this
sets Nation against Nation, and Family against Family; makes Friends
treacherous, and Lovers false; makes Guardians betray their Charge, and Parents
and Children rob each other. I will not rob thee, Boy; but since it is so
dangerous a thing, I must secure you from its Effects, by keeping it my self.


Why, what do you mean? why sure you won't take it from me, will you? Was the
Devil in me, to show it him!


Take it: no, no; I'll only put it to Use for you, that's all.


Ay, but look you, Sir; if it makes Parents rob their Children, Adad, it may
make Children quarrel with their Parents.


Why Sirrah, why you Villain, you Unnatural Rogue, what you won't Murder me,
ha!


No, no, I am no Killing Man; but I would not be cheated of my Money.


How cheated! What Sirrah, dare you call me Cheat? here's an Impudent Varlet.
Hark ye, Angellina, now I think better of it, I do not care for forcing your
Inclinations. Though Desiderio has not so great an Estate as Almachild, yet he is
in great Favour with the King, and has good Employments; and if I settle all my
Fortune upon you, you may live pretty Comfortably.


I make a freer Confession to you, than ever I have to him, by owning I should
think my self happy in him, with your Consent.


Hey brave! here's like to be fine doings.


Keep it; yes, so firmly, that no Entreaties, no Persuasions, no Submission
shall ever alter it.


Heaven continue him in that resolution.


How much such another Purse may mollisie me, I can't tell.


So I find 'tis who bids most, will have me. Hard Fate of Children! to be not
only cruelly debarred, perhaps a worthy Choice, but in Obedience forced to
throw themselves away on some inglorious Wretch.


Let me see, who are those? a whole Cluster of my Debtors: here I have their
Names. Clefi, do not leave your Sister; and remember, I have hinted to you, how
I may be pacified.


Ay, ay, I am likely to obey you indeed, when you take my Money from me. What
will you give me now, and I'll leave you to your own Management.


You may stay, if you please, I have no private Business.


No, I'll be gone however to look out Almachild, acquaint him with your being
here, and get somewhat for my Intelligence.


Angellina here and alone! I am almost as much surprised as pleased, to find
you at Court.


'Tis the Novelty of it, may do both.


Always indifferent. Whatever satisfaction I may receive by your Sight, I am
not likely to have much from your Words.


Suppose you had, you'd hardly stop there; they would encourage you to ask for
something more, and I will never give such a Proof of Love, as Disobedience.


I fear you pay this great Obedience, not only out of Duty to a Father's Will,
but out of dislike to me.


You have no reason to imagine that. But you cannot wonder if I am cautious in
the disposal of my Heart; for when e're I give it, it shall be for ever. I can
no more love twice, than die twice.


Be not cruel too; let Pity to the Torments I endure, let Gratitude to so
sincere a Flame prevail.


Gratitude, whoever loves may plead the same; am I obliged to love, because I
am beloved? were that a Plea, you had put in yours too late.


I confess, I have no Right, no Merit to offer but my Truth.


That too is a general Pretence; how shall I distinguish it from Affectation.


I never could dissemble. I could no more affect, than I can conceal my Love.
But if I can love with so much Zeal, when my Breast is filled with as much
Despair, as yours is with Indifference; how should I love, how dote, how be
transported, would you afford me some Return!


Then you would triumph in my weakness; and scorn to keep your Conquest over my
Heart, though you would take Pride to win it.


The Pride of winning it, would not be so great, as the Pleasure of preserving
it, to a grateful, generous Mind.


All Arguments are as weak where we dislike, as our Defences are, where we
love. I am unwilling to avow either; an Indifference to you, or a Regard for my
self, silences me.


Either is Unkind, I dare not say Unjust: But since you do not declare a
Hatred, may I not hope.


To bid you hope, were to declare I love; Yet something may be granted to so
much seeming Truth. I do not bid you hope, nor would you should despair. But
see the Court begins to fill. I am so much a Stranger, I shall want a Guide to
the Presence Chamber.


May not I be honoured with the Employment.


Since my Father has not stayed to be my Guardian, I may be allow'd to choose
one.


Oh, I shall never have the Confidence to look my Friends in the Face again!
you have ruined me, and all the World will see it in me.


Fear not; keep but your own Counsel, and you are safe; betray not your self by
your Words, and none will discover it in your Face.


I can never appear Innocent there, while I have so much Guilt in my Breast.


You'll find no such great difficulty in dissembling.


I shall do it so awkerdly, so faintly, that the Cheat will be obvious to all.


Rather, have a Care of over acting; for Women render their Virtue suspected,
as Men do their Courage, when they pretend to it, too much.


No, 'tis you alone have Power to preserve me from the Censure of the World,
and distracting Thoughts.


Pho, Pow, she begins to grow troublesome now; how shall I get rid of her.


And will not Love prevail with you to do that for me, when it has made me
grant so much?


What would she be at now?


Any thing, my Dear, to satisfy you.

Pish! this is so nauseous.

Then you may easily do that, only by marrying me.


O fie, my Dear! that you should expect that after Possession, when I refused
it before.


But I am more sensible now, that it is necessary to preserve my Reputation.


A Husband, indeed, is a pretty necessary Instrument to botch up a Reputation;
and under that Disguise, Women are allow'd to take many Liberties. But never
let that Man be a Repairer of your Honour, who has robbed you of it; you'll lose
a fond Lover, and only gain a jealous Husband.


But I must never expect one, if you refuse it.


Yes, yes; there are Fools enough designed by Nature for that Employment. See,
the Queen moves this Way to the Presence-Chamber, there is one follows her,
Clefi, Avaro's Son, who is as we could wish; he's rich, and I have an Ascendant
over him; what think you of him?


Can he be acceptable to my Arms after you, or can I be to yours after him?


Ay, ay, we shall relish each other the better. Come retire awhile* and leave
him to my Management.


You know you can persuade me to any thing.
This is the Fate which over Women rules,
We yield to Men of Wit, then catch at Fools.

If I can work him to it now, I think I shall behave my self like a Man of
Honour and Prudence, to provide a rich foolish Husband for a cast Mistress.


Go tell the King, that I attend him here.
Why should dull Custom thus impose on us
Slavish, uneasy Duty to a Man?
He has a Mind to revel, and rejoice --
That on this day he won some Victory;
That he has butchered Crowds of harmless Men;
Triumphs in Blood and Ruin, and I must join,
Must listen to his Vanity and Boasts,
Seem pleased and flatter him.
How the Court thickens! what Swarms of Gazers!
Are you, my Lord, too fond of Pageantry?
You who inhabit sure come not to look;
Monarchs grow cheap, by being often seen.

Monarchs, for being so, we must admire;
But when they are adorned with such a Form,
When so much Beauty's joined to Majesty,
We would for ever gaze, and still be pleased.

Monarchs and Women are used to flatt'ry;
Nor can our Vanity distinguish Truth:
Nay, though we know we're flattered, we are pleased.

Your Crown not more exceeds a Peasant's State,
Than your Triumphant Beauty the whole Sex.
The most admired She, when you're in View,
Like Pebbles placed by shining Diamonds seem.

What means that secret Conference with Him!
By Heaven she smiles upon the worthless Wretch,
And now he bows, and seems to give her Thanks
That Starting and Confusion fit thee now,
Well may thou blush to be so entertained.
Hast thou culled out the Man I most despise,
To grace him with thy Smiles, and private Talk?
But I disdain to be disturbed by him;
Jealousy would but disgrace my self.
Shall I, whose Actions have exceeded Faith,
And by my Deeds am ranked in Honor's Form
With Alexander, or the first Caesar?
Shall I, who oft have triumphed over Kings,
And been the Theme of Envy and of Praise?
Shall I, seem jealous of a reptile Slave?

I started at your Frowns, not at my Words;
I must confess I'm pleased with his Discourse,
You were the Subject, he was praising you,
Not Men; nay, not gods could be more extolled.
What could I else have listened too from Him?
What but your Praises could oblige a Smile?

I want not Praises, my Fame's established.
But yet, if that were all, excuse my Thoughts.
Now move we forward to our Room of State,
Where Wine and Music, Pleasures shall create.
There we'll enjoy the soft Delights of Peace,
And all Domestic private Jars shall cease.

Clefi, A word; Have you persuaded your Father to let your Sister come here to
day?

I have; and came to find you out, and acquaint you, she is already here.


I am obliged to you, and you shall find me grateful.


Well, I am a faithful Solicitor; I have said more sine, moving things to her,
on your account, than ever I could say to any Woman, for my self; and the truth
on it is, I believe, should prevail sooner for you, than for my self.


That's only because you think it not worth your while: Women are Trifles
beneath your Consideration.


Why that's true too; Ha, ha, ha! I do contemn them indeed: though If I could
find one, who had Wit enough to value me as I deserve, I should not be
ungrateful. But I hate to speak witty things to a Fool. I reserve my self, till
I meet with a Person of equal Endowments.


Then you should be always silent.


And that is the reason the Women think me dull: Now I am a Person the farthest
from that in the World; for how can any one be accounted dull, ho is always
laughing and talking?


It may be they are angry, you entrench so much on their Privileges.


Ay, they are envious of me, without doubt, because I say so many more witty
things than they: And therefore let me break never so many Jests, they do not
so much as smile; nay, though I give them an Example they won't, and show them
when they should, by laughing my self, and treading on their toes, nay, if I
repeat it fifty times, they never mind it.


I perceive the Fool is acquainted with Women of Sense.


So that since I cannot bridle my Native Heat so much, as to be altogether
silent, I suit my Discourse to their Capacities, and can now talk a whole day
together, and yet not say one word to the purpose.


That's no great Constraint:


What, of me? Ha!


I ought not divulge a Lady's Secrets: but -- you are my Friend, and her, I
honour; and it may be a kindness to both, to acquaint you with her Thoughts.


Ay, Come, Prithee do, out of pity to the Lady. Adad, I'm strangely pleased at
this.


She says you have so much Grandeur in your Countenance, one would judge you
born a Monarch; yet you have so much Sweetness there, and of so delicate a
Complexion, you might be suspected to be a disguised Woman. S'Death, can he be
such a Fool to believe this?


I am amazed, I am transported, I am confounded, I am extasy'd, I am, I am --


That you are of an easy Shape; graceful and free in all your Motions; that --



Hold, Hold; I cannot contain my Joy; I am convinced she loves me; there can be
no doubt of it; nay, I have been told such things before now; but then it has
always cost me so much Money: Out of pure Gratitude, I have been forced to
reward them so highly.


This is a Lady of Quality.


Lady of Quality. Adad all the difference between Ladies of Quality and other
Women, is, that they set a greater Price upon their Favours; and by their
Titles, often make false Jewels pass for true ones. But who is this enamoured
Lady, for amongst her other good Qualities, you have forgot the chief, is she
very wealthy? what is her Name?


I am obliged to name her now, to justify her; it is the chaste, the beauteous
Flora, Odoacre's Daughter.


Hum -- Odoacre's Daughter. I was afraid, indeed, it was one, who admired my
Money, as well as my Person.


Oh! you wrong the Lady. I must confess, the World frowns a little on her
Father; but his Fortune is not contemptible: and Flora, by her good management,
has gathered considerable Riches, and has Jewels inestimable (to my Cost I'm
sure.)


Say you so; But how shall I be assured of this?


Dare you take my Word?


Ay, ay, your Word is sufficient.


Then you have it, that she is very Wealthy. I saw her pass but this Way now,
follow her and make your Addresses; she cannot resist one so accomplished as
your self.


Nay, if it be so, I'll marry her instantly; and if I do once set about it,
there is no Woman can resist me, though I say it. Though may be I shall find it
difficult to persuade her to marry me at first sight.


Try; I'll accompany and assist you. If she seems coy, I'll own I have
discovered her Love.


Ah my dear Lord! how shall I be able to requite this Favour! I, on her Wealth
and Virtue may depend; Since I'm assured of both by such a Friend:


THus we possess in War, the Joys of Peace;
And scorn the vain Efforts of Roman Arms.
And while our Foes prepare for rash Attempts,
In Pleasure waste your time, secure by me.

We do not fear Success where you command;
But yet when we reflect upon the Toils
Of War, and various Deaths all aimed at you;
I tremble at your approaching Danger.
The Brave, no more than Cowards, are exempt from Death;
Else both your Life and Conquest were secure.

I scorn the utmost of my feeble Foes:
They dare not hope Success, where I Command*
For if, when by Ambition urged alone,
I have surpassed Belief, and the Reports
Of Fame; what mighty Wonders shall I act,
Both to preserve a Crown, and her I love!

I have a Soul which scorns Danger; 'tis not
For my self I fear: Would my Sex permit,
Fearless I would into the Battle rush,
And share your Hazards, Though I can't prevent.

Your Merit, Rosamund, shall wing Conquest:
I'll haste to conquer, sooner to return,
That I may place fresh Laurels on my Brow,
And on your Head fix a more splendid Crown.
There's he who taught me first the Art of War.
Where hast thou been loit'ring, my old Friend,
While we were drinking to our Arms, Success?
Come, Retrieve your lost Time; Fill me a Bowl,
And give my General one, to pledge me.

I'm not good at this; 'tis out of my road:
I'm as awkward a Drinker, as Lover;
They both are Foes to Business, and to War:
But in Obedience --

I know it well, War is thy whole Delight:
But on a Day so memorably Great,
A Day of Triumph and of Joy, whereon
I fought, and won a Battle, Queen, and Crown,
We may exceed the strict Bounds of Temp'rance,
And gives our self a Loose: Fill me again;
Then let the Music that's prepared, begin.

TO Arms, the God of War commands to Arms:
Hark how the lofty Noise of Battle charms!
Fearless, into the thickest Hazards run:
Death's to be sought, where Glory's to be won.
Who's he, has Courage to express his Fear,
Or dare a Coward seem, when I appear:
While such I fright to Danger's disregard,
Honour's the Brave Man's Motive and Reward.
See how we appear at thy dread Voice,
Prepared to conquer, or to die:
In Victory we do rejoice,
Or pleased in Honour's Bed to lie.
Vnmov'd, our Army bears the Foes Attack;
See with what Vigour now, they force them back:
The Brave, like the Innocent, no Danger dread;
Follow resolved, where Fame and Virtue lead.
Timorous Wretches meanly do survive;
In Horror, and in fear of Death, they live:
While the Bold Man freely resigns his Breath;
Undaunted dies, without the fear of Death.

Now, now we triumph over the Plain,
Joy, our Hearts so much distends:
We've not leisure to mourn the Slain,
The Living grow much dearer Friends.
Do not your Youth thus Misemploy;
Let me possess your vigorous Prime:
For Youth alone can give me Joy,;
You're fit for War, though old as Time.
If Death you seek, then let me reign,
To be alone Votaries:
For he who Loves, thinks Life a Pain,
And with Excess of Pleasure dies.
No more of War, or whining Love;
I come, your Empires to remove:
To me, your boasted Palms resign,
To me, the mighty God of Wine.
THE Toil of Life will soon be done;
Perhaps, before next Rising Sun:
Though it, by chance, should longer last,
It will with Sorrows be overcast:
Life is uncertain, Ills are sure,
They will come, should that endure;
But Drinking, all our Griefs will cure.
Then let this Glass end all our fruitless Care*
We'll Drink, till there's no room left for Despair.
It's not Time, that gives the Blessing,
But 'tis wisely Time possessing;
Therefore nought past, shall torment us;
Whate're's to come, shall content us:
Nay, it the present Bliss destroys,
Should we reflect on absent Joys;
'Tis this alone our Thoughts employs.
We slight the Bottle, whilst in Caella's Arms;
But when we Drink, Caelia has then no Charms.
So, 'tis enough; Be gone, and leave us now.

I hate these low effeminating Sounds;
Such Music which softens while it pleases:
I'd hear none but the lofty Phrygian Airs;
Timotheus alone should play to me,
Who might Inspire me, like Alexander,
With so much transporting Warmth and Courage
Could force me, think,
Though over my Cups, I were at the Army's Head,
And from the Table leap, to shake my Spear.

Twas Wine inspired the Hero, not his Notes;
And we will try, how that will work on us.
Another Bowl -- Not that we want an Edge,
To go where Glory calls.

He warms apace;
Would he could be persuaded to forbear.

I can be no Assistant to this Sport:
I'll retire.

Stay; I will have none depart.
What, does my Mirth prove tedious to you?
Thanks to the Wine, it has refreshed my Thoughts;
Awakened Jealousy, that seemed to sleep:
It may be, she'd retire, to talk to him.
S'Death! how that Thought has stung me to the quick!
But I will first discover that, which shall
As much disquiet her.
Wait a moment,
I'll bring a Bowl shall tempt you too to drink.

I have not known him so much moved with Wine.
By Nature he's too fierce; and heated thus,
I dread some Inconvenience may attend.

I prize this Goblet far above my Crown;
'Tis the Trophy of my noblest Conquest.
Dangers and Death I seemed to court, yet scorned
And triumphed over both, to purchase this:
And when my ambitious Aim I'd won,
Victory and Empire attended it.

Some Magic Cup, which you may well admire,
Since it portended so much good to you.
For me, I have an aversion for it;
If I but look on'it, I faint away,
Tho'I'm not able to ascribe the Cause.

There's Mystery in my Discourse: Some Wine;
Pledge me, then I will unfold the Riddle.
Come Rosamund, Here's to the Memory
Of that Bloody Day whereon I won this.

What can the meaning of this be?

I would be excused -- But since 'tis your Will --
An unusual Horror seizes on my Mind;
My Blood runs cold, and stagnates in my Veins.
I tremble too, as if I saw a Ghost.
If I must drink, give me some other Bowl.

Nay, drink out of that.

You must be obeyed.

For 'tis but fit, that on a Day of Mirth,
So happy, memorably great as this,
That you should drink one Cup with your Father.

With my Father! I understand you not.

I'll explain my meaning to you. Know then,
That on this very Day, which now I celebrate,
Your Father fought a Battle, and with it
Lost his Life.

Dismal Day! I know, indeed,
My Father fell in Battle; but by whom
He lost his Life, I never yet could learn:
The Day too was concealed when he was slain;
I judged some nobler Cause, why this was kept.

Now, on my aged, faithful Knees, I beg
You would not own by whom her Father fell;
But rather lay the fault on me, or him;
Say any other did it, but your self.

What, would thou deprive me of my Glory?
By Heaven, I'll own and boast a Deed so great.
Away; Disturb me not.

I've seen the Day,
When your Renown, your Empire, and your Life,
Have in one dreadful Battle all been staked,
All had been forfeited by one false Step;
Then I have been listened too.

To the Camp,
Retire; There Preach where Sense is drowned by Noise*
An honest Man should never do an Act
He is ashamed to own.
Had I been of that bold Gigantic Race,
Who durst aspire to storm even Heaven,
Though Lightning blazed, and Thunder roared around
My Head; I'd own the brave, though rash Attempt.

Lives he yet, who robbed me of my Father!

The Sun had scarcely Crimsoned over the Morn,
When the two eager Armies in the Field
Appeared; One was by your Father headed,
The other was by me.
Raised by my Merit to so great Command;
Not by a lucky accidental Birth,
Or by blind Fortune's Power. Each quickly saw
Success depended on the other's Death.
Like Lions fighting for their Prey, we met;
Each Army paused to see our mightier Blows;
Long he resisted my impetuous Force:
Till summoning my whole Power in one stroke,
I sent his Body headless to the Earth.

What was't from you my Father had his Death?
And do you own the cruel, bloody Deed?

Own it; I boast it; I've not yet owned half.
Shall I disown what purchased me a Crown?
His Crown and you, were by the Conquest mine.
And that an Act so fortunately great,
Might never wither in my Memory,
I straight alight, and seized upon his Head,
And of his Skull I made that Drinking Cup.

Oh Horror!
Oh Barbarian! Unnatural Tyrant!
What, of my Father's Skull to make a Cup
To assist your beastly, drunken Frolics.
Give me the Sacred, the Profaned Relic,
Let me adore the dear, much wronged Remains;
Let me weep in it, till t'deluge with my Tears,
Till it be purged from such vile Pollution.

Take her away, This suits not with our Mirth.

I'll take my self for ever from your sight.
Rather than you, I would a Tiger meet,
Robbed of her Young, or hunting for her Prey:
Thy barb'rous Temper cancels all my Love,
And fills me with a nobler flame, Revenge.
Come then the haggard Furies, start from Hell,
Lodge all your Venom in my Breast, here dwell;
With Spite and Rage distend my swelling Heart,
Through every Vein your snaky Tresses dart.
Statesmen disgraced, and tender Maids betrayed,
All Womankind, I summon to my Aid.
If all too weak; urged by my self, such things I'll do;
That for Revenge, to me, the injured World shall sue.

Revenge, but ill becomes a Woman's Mouth;
Revenge, though 'tis Heaven's chief attribute
In Mortals is a Vice;
But 'tis a noble one; 'tis boldly to retort
An Injury, and can they dare to do
An Ill, who have not Courage to do well?
Who threats, but feebly does intend an Harm,
His Enemies does with Precaution arm.
While vainly, Ill to us, our Foes intend,
In Sports as we've begun the Day, we'll end.

This is, as I could wish; I'm never pleased,
But when the World's discontented, like me;
The Queen's dissatisfied, and vows Revenge;
A Powerful Army is at our Gates;
May not some Mischief be collected hence?
I've turned with every Change of Government,
Not out of Love to another, but Hate to the present;
But never yet could meet destined Reward;
And till I do, I'll still turn, and Plot on.
Here comes the Queen, and seems as much disturbed
As I could wish; I'll make bold to observe.

Revenge I vowed, and I will keep my Vow:
But the means; can Woman's malicious Wit
Be at a Loss, to give Destruction?
I must have help, yet know not whom to trust,
The surly old General never was my Friend,
Desiderio's his, and both love the King,
They're brave and honest, not for my Purpose;
Odoacre wears Villain in his Face,
And such, are seldom honest in their Hearts;
Treachery shall be his Business:
Officious Hell has sent him to my Mind.
Odoacre come near; I've long observed
Your Discontent; your Looks, your Speech, your Gate,
Do all betray some inward weight of Grief.
It ought to be a Monarch's greatest Care
To relieve, and to redress;
Impart your Griefs to me, and you will find
Speedier Relief than from Alboino.

My whole Life has been consumed in Sorrows;
But now my face bears double Marks of Grief:
The Injury has been offered you this day,
Sits heavier on me, than my private Ills.

Is 't possible, art thou so much my Friend?

I know, he meant it to disquiet you,
Why should he else expose the barb'rous Deed?
Nor can you more resent your Father's Wrongs,
Than I do yours.
The Affront which warmed but you, set me on Fire.

Then sure you'd Join in my designed Revenge.

Join! my Head to counsel, my Hands to act;
Not Thunder flies more swiftly from Jove's Arm,
Than I, to execute what you command.
Name your Design, think it already done.

I dare believe you true, and will reward
Your Services, beyond Ambition's Hope.
But as thou'st edged my Rage, tell me, how
Shall we proceed to make his Ruin sure?
'Tis hard, for by the Army he's adored?

I know it; the desperate thoughtless Madmen
Love him, because he leads them into Danger.
However 'tis an easy Task, by one Blow
To end his Pride, and his Ambitious Thoughts.
And to secure the Deed, let the Romans
Who lie encamped, near the Ravenna Gate,
Be privately admitted in the Night.

Thou speak my Thoughts, but who is 't I dare trust
With such a Secret, but your faithful self.
Send to invite 'em strait, and be it your Care
To betray the Gate to 'em this very Night:
In the mean time, I'll Plot the Tyrant's Death.

I go to execute what you command;
Secure,
That our Designs not only will succeed,
But you'll remember who advised the Deed.

So, here's one noble Mischief well contrived.
And now, Murder must next employ my Thoughts,
For nothing less will satiate my Revenge.
More Company!
'Tis strange I have not time to think on Ill.
I must listen too; how conscious is Guilt?
How curious am I, since my designed Plot?
If I but see two whisper, 'tis of me
I think they talk.

Your disbelief of my Passion, my Cleanthe, afflicts me as much, a your Refusal
to gratify it. It argues a meaner Opinion of me. Have I declared my Love so
long, and vowed its Truth so often, yet without making any impression on your
Mind, or gaining any Credit?


You are but too sensible you have done both. And I fear this is your universal
way of Entertainment; you think you cannot be complaisant, without making Love.


I have rallied sometimes, fooled away an Hour; but never loved before. 'Tis
not a greater Wrong to my Love, than to your own Beauty, to suspect me; let
that confirm the truth of what I say. Every Part, every Motion charms and
surprises; there's not a Feature in that Angellick Face, but would adorn
Deformity, and render it agreeable.


I must confess, I should be pleased you had such Thoughts; but why do you take
such Pains to persuade me to be so opinionated of my self?


Because you will then the more readily credit my Love? for how can you know,
you possess so much Beauty, and believe me insensible?


Injustly you tax me with Indifference, you know I am not so; but you are
obstinately Blind, and will not see my Love, till I have given too much.


Did you love, your self would think you cannot give too much; nor do they
love, who think they love enough. I long have thought my Passion was so great,
it could admit of no Increase; but each succeeding Minute heightens so much my
Flame, I think I did not love before; and can you refuse Love so great, ever
Young and always Growing.


I should not stay to listen to your Arguments.
Who hears her Lover, is more than half won,
Let me be gone, before I'm quite undone.

Not till you have promised to meet me in my Apartment here, an hour hence.
Come the Back-way, 'tis most private.


You appoint Time and Place, as if I had already promised.


Your Looks discover your Consent.


What, meet you in the Dark -- I must not, dare not --


It shall be Dark too, my Life; I will not see your Blushes.


I shall disappoint you. --


You will not sure --


Indeed I fear I shall not -- but be gon now, for Sir the Queen if she has
overheard me I am undone.


Yes I have heard your dishonourable intent, how did thou dare to entertain
such thoughts, and yet attend my Person?


I only seemed to yield, to get free of his importunity I did not design it.


'Tis false, your Eyes did then declare you spoke a Truth,
And now a lye. Be gone, out of my sight -- yet stay I'll
Secure you first and spoil your Assignation.
A sudden, huddle, indigested thought
Rolls in my Brain -- 'tis the safest Method --
But is't not base and wicked -- no matter,
I'll stop at nothing that is base or ill,
So I the hated Tyrants Blood may spill.

NAy this is unkind my Dr. Cleanthe,
Why is that beauteous face hid now, why veiled?
Thou hast deprived me of half my pleasure,
By covering the face I so admire,
That face to which I am so much obliged.

Y' are more obliged to me, than you conceive;
More than to Cleanthe, for 'tis not she,
You'll scarce believe who 'tis, when you have seen.

The Queen! incredible indeed! 'tis well
I knew not, that from you I had the joy;
The mighty pleasure sure would then have killed.
Oh! let me throw my self beneath your Feet,
Let me adore such Love! that has prevailed
With you, to yield thus freely to my Arms.

Love, no I scorn the foolish, childish Flame.
Know, 'twas a nobler cause prevailed on me.

Not Love!

You've heard Alboino boast to day,
'Twas by his salvage hands my Father fell;
And by his barb'rous Temper urged
Made of his sacred Skull a drinking Cup.
For this I would Revenge, and thus far I've proceeded.

'Tis a pretty step towards it truly, can she go any farther?
I have happiness beyond addition
To have assisted you in this Revenge.
If you propose some other, I'd be proud to serve.

Thou shall it.
For I've resolved the haughty Tyrants Death.
And tis by you, that he must lose his Life.

By me! what, kill the King! I dare not do it.

Hast not Courage to murder in the dark?
A Coward Villains fittest to murder.
But if thy fear delays my just Revenge
One short moment, I'll strait to Alboino,
And with my deepest dissimulation
I'll weep, I'll vow thou forced me to thy lust.
Think how his boundless Rage will use thee then,
A Death so lingering, painful he'll inflict,
The Torments of the damned will come far short of thine.

Hold Madam, allow me a Moments thought.

But if thou dare perform, what I command,
Rewards, great as his punnishments, are thine.
Think when thou strik'st the Tyrant to the Heart
The lucky blow gives thee his Crown and Queen.

Now you've named the most prevailing motive,
Unmoved thus Paris heard the Rival Goddesses
But when the Queen of Love proffered herself
She quickly won the Hero to her side:

Lose no time then, 'tis now the dead of night,
The prop'rest Season to commit such deeds.
The Town will to the Romans be betrayed,
But Alboino must be dispatch'd before,
See where his ill stars send him to his Death,
Undressed, unarmed; blessed opportunity!
I leave you to the Execution.
You'll sure strike home, since you already know
The great rewards that will attend the Blow.

Yesterday's Riot sits heavy on me;
My Fancy, Spirits are so much oppressed.
By the dregs of Wine, I cannot freely think.

Now is my time, while his back is to me -- but
Then 'tis too sure a way, I must by one stroke secure his death

Business and action must employ this day.
The Romans shall repent their daring soon;
And where they hoped submission, find their Death.
I'll strait give orders that my Army moves,
And at the approaching of day, I'll fight them.

First let me warn you of impending Ills.
Before you do a Foreign foe attack,
From a domestic one secure your self,
A black Conspiracy against you's formed;
By discontented Slaves, and seeming Friends.

Lives there the Wretch who dares attempt my Life?
Who can complain of Wrong, since I was King?
Some Men may tax me with severity;
But 'tis the height of Justice to reward
Virtue, and rigorously punish Crimes.
None wish my Death, who would be safe themselves.

Were your whole Court composed of honest Men,
Would Heaven grant their Prayers alone, you'd be
Immortal, and would reign secure as Jove.
But even Heaven has not been free from Vice;
Pride and Ambition boldly entered there,
And even there conspiracies were hatched.
Jove hurled from thence those Vices to the Earth,
But still permitted such to swarm in Courts.

This from thee! this speaks thee brave and honest.
Thy Character was misrepresented;
Thou hast been wronged, and I imposed upon.
But Monarchs are the last who hear the Truth:
If thou are half so honest, as thou seem,
Relate this black design against my Life.

Were I less honest silence were more safe;
Mine is a dangerous piece of Loyalty,
Who rashly against Favourites informs,
Gains with his Prince unwilling slow belief,
Where he expects Rewards, meets with Contempt,
And by their greater interest, is crushed.

Doubt not severest Justice on my Foes;
I'll punish them, and thee I will reward.
Let this Embolden thee to utter Truth,
Be thus near me ever.

Then I impart
The secret thus.

Oh treacherous Villain!
Oh barbarous, inhumane, bloody Slave!
That I could reach thee, with my dying gasps,
I'd force thee with me to my Grave.

Now I can safely hear thee threat and rail,
And that the thoughts may give the paineful Death,
Kow that I passed last night with Rosamund.
To murder thee was the reward she asked,
And by this deed, she and thy Crown are mine:
Dye with that Thought. I'd stay to plague thee more,
But I must haste away to seize on both.

'Tis a tormenting, dismal thought indeed.
Which racks me worse, than even the Pangs of Death,
Woman! Woman! how endless are thy ills!
They know not when to leave, when they have once
Begun, but boundless in all their Passions.
Was't not enough to wrong the Marriage Bed,
But must my death complete thy Crimes.
Shall my Crown, the Crown which I have purchased
At the expense of so much Toil and Blood,
Be the Reward of Murderers and Whores?
Ebb faster out ye dull remains of Life,
That death may free me from such tortering thoughts.

Can it be certain that the Towns betrayed,
Can there be a Villain so besotted,
So blindly led by Passion or disgust,
Who would betray his Country and his King
To Foreign Power to gratify himself?

What urged the Traitors to an act so vile
I know not; but one of my Officers
Who was posted at the Ravenna Gate,
Came to inform me of the Treason, and by
His Wounds confirmed the Truth of his Report.
Let's lose no time then, but haste to the King:
Try if his presence can reedeem the Town.

Ha! is not that the King, stretched on the Ground?
What can that sad dejected posture mean?

Shall I thus tamely, thus poorly perish,
And is there none, who will revenge this Murder?

What! murdered! Ha! Oh cursed nefarious deed!

Murdered! nay then our Ruin is complete.
But what is Life or Power when you are gone!

Surely ye two are honest, and my Friends,
And for numberless Villains may atone.
Else Heaven may blush at Monsters it has formed,
Disown creative Power, and lay the work on Chance.

The infernal God of Malice and Revenge
Contrived this horrid Act, and watched his. Time
To rob us of you, when your unhappy,
Your betrayed Kingdom did most require.
For tho no ills like this, this is not all;
The Romans have by treachery got the Town,
Already they are masters of the Gates,
And now pour in unresisted Forces.

Oh for a moments strength! that my weak Limbs
Could bear me, only to my Armies Head!
That like a King and Soldier I might fall;
And some brave Foe might glory in my Death.
But I sink, and have only strength to wish.

Oh tell us first, e're you leave us ever,
Who was the Wretch, who impiously durst strike
The Man who represents his God on Earth,
But who would kill his King, difowns the Gods.

My Wound gapes wider with the racking Thought,
And my blood faster gushes out, that I
Who have so oft braved Death, bred in Battles,
Inur'd to dangers, and have still overcome;
Should by a Cowards stroke thus meanly fall.
For Almachild by Rosamunda urged,
Bribed with the enjoyment of the Prostitute,
Seemed my Friend to be the blacker Villain;
And while I took the Viper in my arms,
He basely plunged his Dagger in my breast.
I would not live so long to think this over,
Farewell -- Revenge my Death, and wear my Crown.

Ah! what's thy Crown now its support is lost
Or what thy Kingdom since its Soul is gone?
Tis now an headless, dull, unactive Lump.
But to revenge is nobler than bewail;
'Twas thy Command, and thou shall it be obeyed,
Or may I have the Plagues of Regicides,
To live despairing and dye presumptuous.

Monsters! 'tis they then have betrayed the Town.
Oh fatal proof of Anger and Revenge!
Passion works strongest still in weakest minds.
What's to be done to satiate our Revenge?
The Queen has many Friends,
Gained by affected low humility;
For proudest Minds are the most abject too.
And backed by Rome, she may maintain a War
Which will protract, perhaps evade our just intent.

We'll try to effect it then by other means.

Hark they come triumphant in their baseness.
Longinus has a noble generous Soul,
Which must abhor this black, tho gainful deed,
By honourable peaceful Terms I'll work my end,
For force should always be attempted last.
And if I can revenge my Masters Death,
Twill please me more than to possess his Crown.
But let us have his body first removed
Dead Kings should not be seen by vulgar Eyes,
For Monarchs we ought never to despise.
But the dull Rabble ignorant, and bold,
Think him no King, who was born of common Mold.
When I contrived barbarous Alboino's Death,
Twas not Revenge alone that moved me to it.
I knew the World of right belonged to Rome.
Justice prevailed with me to kill the King,
And lay my Crown at brave Longinus Feet.

The generous Gift does more secure your Crown,
Then vain Alboino's best Resistance could.
Tho by our Arms, it had been forced from him,
Your conquering eyes had won his Kingdom back;
For Heaven designed you Mistress of the Earth,
And made you Queen of beauty, and the World.
Such wondrous beauty gilds over all her faults.
None can see that and yet reflect on them.

But by me alone the War's not ended,
He too deserves a share in the applause.
Who boldly from a Tyrant set me free,
And Rome from an invet'rate Enemy.
Nor could I less, than bestow my Person,
As some Reward for services so great.

'Tis a reward as far above desert,
As your Heavenly Form's above description.
No Tongue can give to that sufficient Praise,
No Service can presume to merit you.
'Tis reward so vast, that should Justinus
Lay the whole Roman Empire at his Feet,
He might contemn the mean, the worthless Gift.

Words have not Force to say how well I love,
And Gratitude's as hard to be expressed,
My future Acts will best discover both.
But their remains some yet to be dispatch'd,
To make us more securely blessed and great,
Old Aistolfus and Desiderio.

He counsels well, my Lord; were they remvo'd,
Their Army then would moulder and disperse.

They both are worthy and experienced men;
'Twere well that we could win them to our side.
However they may be still within the Town.
Let us then haste and issue orders out
To have each Gate secured, and stop their flight.

And is my hoped Reward then come to this?
Am I thus slighted, after what I've done?
No thanks paid, no notice taken of me.
Death and Hell! have I betrayed my Country,
Lost my Honour, and Peace of Mind for this?
God nothing but a distracted Conscience?
And stripped of all my hopes by Almachild,
Because he has acted a greater ill.
Interest made me plot before, now Revenge:
I'll either work his Ruin or my own.
And by Longinus amorous looks, I guess
And Praises of Rosamunda's Beauty,
He'll join with me in my design.
Soft Love will urge as far, as fierce Revenge.
My Daughter here! Flora, what business brings you to Court?

I came to find you out, and on my Knees to ask you forgiveness.

You could not have taken a worse time; I was
Meditating on Revenge, and am but in an ill humour
To forgive. But what is your offence?

Tho you might have consented, had I acquainted
You with it; yet concealment is a Crime.

Well, what is it?

For nothing can excuse my disposal of my self without Your knowledge.

Disposal! what is't you mean, I say?

I am privately married.

Married! promised I suppose you mean. For Almachild is otherwise engaged.

'Tis not to him, tho 'twas by his advice I married Clefi, Alvaro's Son.

Ay his advice! why should he advise her? -- he has
Enjoyed her first himself, then thrown her on that
Fool. I'll know the bottom.
Base and unworthy! you ask forgiveness, not that you repent your
Crimes; an unfeigned sorrow would acknowledge all; but you
Confess a fault, you know you can't conceal.

Acknowledge all! I won't invent to try your Goodness,
'Tis well if I am pardoned this.

To try your Hypocrisy, I have thus long pretended
Ignorance; but I can bear no more, and your denial
Will be vain, after Almachild has openly told all.

Told it! oh ungrateful, perfidious Man! What Has he told!


So, now 'tis plain, but I'll smother my resentment of her baseness, to be the
surer revenged on him, and now I have a double cause.


What! already declare my weakness, has he taken so much Pains, been at so
great expense of Time and Wealth only for the pleasure of talking? can Men
delight so much in publishing their Vices and Women's Follies? but I have not
more reason to be enraged against him, than you against me, What must I do to
pacify you, and be revenged on him?


Could I undo him with the Queen, 'twere noble mischief, I have it, make her
jealous -- right -- that can't fail.


Instruct me how; I'll hasten with a more eager joy, than I did first to his
Embraces.


Being a Man of great quality and wealth, he has been allowed an apartment in
Court, I think that door leads to it; I suppose you are well acquainted with
it; contrive to get admittance there, and be ready to answer when I call; leave
the rest to my management.


I have still the fatal Key he gave me, which opens a private back-door.


That's lucky; convey yourself into it; I'll acquaint you farther with my
design as we walk.

Successful Ruin will attend my Plot,
Since I've the assistance of a Woman got.

Hmd we to your Army designed to fly,
We have convinced you how secure it would be.
But we intend not to prolong the War,
Let Alboine's Murderers be punished,
And of his Crown dispose as you think fit.

Our zealous duty to our dead Master
Is not more concerned in it, than your Glory.
To protect such Wretches, approves their Crimes;
Think how they'll be abhorred by honest men;
How black they'll seem to all posterity;
And would you with such Miscreants be ranked?

I'm not biased by the gainful Treason,
Nor so much blinded by Rosamund's Face;
As to approve or justify the Deed.
But since they've thrown themselves on me for aid,
It were meanly done, should I desert them.

Heaven winks at Crimes for reasons it best knows.
And by a long sorbearance oft seems pleased,
Nor with injustice must we tax the Gods
Tho Vice thrives, and Virtue is afflicted,
Unsearchable, yet just, are their Decrees.
But Man is judged by outward, present acts,
Our Fame is irrecoverably lost,
Should we seem vicious, for a real Good;
W' are branded with Hypocrisy at least.

Then let the Guilt be wholly Almachild's,
Let him be punished, and excuse the Queen.
Perhaps to remove the Odium from her self,
I may prevail with her, to give Consent,

Impartial Justice will pardon neither,
Shall he suffer for the Murder only,
And shall she escape who urged him to it?
There can be no sufficient Tortures found
To rack the impious, sacrilegious slave
Who durst imbrue his Hands in Royal blood.
But she had a double Tie of Duty,
And sacred each, her Husband, and her King.

And one she owed her Life and Freedom to,
When he had conquered by a lawful War
Her Fathers Kingdom, he shared it with her,
And from a Captive raised her to a Crown.

That matchless beauty, which moved Alboino,
Now strongly pleads in her behalf with me.
Who ever looks on her must be her slave.
'Twere arrogance in me to censure her;
Whatever she does I cannot think a fault,
The Property of Vice by her is changed;
She stamps a beauteous form on all her acts,
And makes destructive Mischief pleasing seem.

So Men
Do fatally in Calentures mistake,
And for firm Ground the liquid Waters take.
Or tho she's varnish'd over with what men Beauty call,
Yet look within you'll find her black as Hell.
No Sirens voice has more enticing Charms,
Nor gives more certain Ruin than her Face.

Be not so violent in your Revenge,
Let Almachild first fall your Sacrifice.
Have Charity for her, as she's Woman,
And give her leisure to repent her faults.

'Twere rather Charity in killing her,
Let her not live to taste such Misery,
To endure the Tortures of such fierce Despair,
As must gnaw her Soul, when she sees her Crimes.

Reason and Justice strengthen all you say.
I'll strive to conquer this impetuous God,
That would control my Honour, and corrupt my Sense.
An hour hence expect me in that Room,
Where one at least shall fall your Sacrifice.

Oh my Lord, luckily encountered, I have often
Forbore Court, to avoid you, now I am come purposely
To find you. But my Rage at present overcomes my
Intended Kindness. Do you see that sheepish Rogue there,
Look on him, do you not perceive what he has done?

Nay, the truth on it is, I must confess that --

Confess, no, no, you need not, you need not confess;
Whoever looks on you may see it. Come, come hither
I'll refer it now to all this company, if without
Thy Confession, they would not know thee, by that
Miserable, simple, mortisy'd Countenance, to be Married.

Come Sir, let us mediate in his behalf: Pray be
Pacified; if he is married, I'll undertake he is
Sufficiently wretched, without your anger.

Why he has married a Beggar; would you have
An hungry man filled without Victuals, would you have
Me pacified without Money; he may be filled with
Wind indeed, and I with Rage, but never satisfied.

I did not think but --

Few in thy condition ever thought; nor did I when
I begot thee. No, I dare swear thou did not think;
Why I can see that too in thy countenance; truly thou
Hast a very foretelling Face. Come, I'll read thy
Destiny in it. First, there's Matrimony; no, first
There's Cuckoldom, for thou were it a Cuckold before
Thou were it married; next there's Poverty, next
Repentance, next Despair, then Death and the Devil.

Lord, Lord, you are so choleric, you won't hear a
Body speak. I would no more have married her, than
You would, if I had not been persuaded she was
Rich, and I though that so good an excuse, that you
Would even be pleased with me, for my disobedience.

If she had been so, I had never enquired how she
Became so: but do you think I will pardon you,
Since you were deceived. Go, begone out of my sight,
Try how Matrimony and Poverty will agree. Go, see,
Now you are poor, whether people will mistake your
Laughing for good humour, and your much talking for Wit.

A little of your kindness will make 'em happy,
And agreeable to each other: for fools are generally
Fonder of each other, than wits.

Ah, my Lord, I know you speak only out of good
Nature; but I believe 'twill please you more to
Bestow my Daughter on Desiderio. What say you, Sir,
Will you pardon all my former denials, if I now give
You my consent?

Most readily; I could pardon thee had thou been
One of Alboino's Murderers, to purchase her.
But tho I am so desirous to have her mine, I would
Not owe it wholly to her obedience; rather let Love
Prevail with her, let her give one proof of that, she
Has many of Duty to you.

I have already confessed my Love to my Father, tho
Perhaps I never should to you, without his consent.
Believe not my Love to be the less, or that I shall make
The worse Wife for my Obedience. For who pays it
Not to a Parent, never will to a Husband.

Be mine at any rate, I must be happy.

Well, take her, take her, and with her you shall have
All my Wealth; but then you must stay till I am
Dead, I cannot for the blood of me part with it,
And live.

I never required that, nor do I want it to increase
My happiness. And you, Sir, [ To Clefi.] tho
You have not been my friend, yet since you are
Angellina's Brother, I will provide for you.

Ah, ten thousand thanks upon my knees; well I am not the
First man has raised his fortunes by a handsome Sister.

Well, Desiderio, I have had patience thus long,
To see your happiness confirmed.
And now Alboino's blood calls for Vengeance.
I will delay no longer my Revenge.
If Longinus consents not, I'll force him.
But be not vain, because she says she loves.
Believe me friend, 'tis owing all to fate,
'Tis not for Merit that we love or hate.

All my designs are baffled by her eyes;
I am so much her Beauty's slave,
So awed, I dare not have the man destroyed
Upon whose ruin depends my happiness;
For fear it should offend, and raise a frown.

Is then Alboino so much lamented?
Could such invet'rate cruelty and pride,
Gain him a lasting popular applause?

When Monarchs fall by an untimely death,
The people colour commonly their faults;
Their virtues then are only named and praised.
Cruelty is called impartial Justice,
And pride, a noble carriage fit for regal state.

He tells you true.
Never was man so pitied and beloved.
The people mourn his loss in louder cries,
Than Soldiers Io's for their victories.
Their loss of liberty and life they slight,
His death alone engrosses all their Grief.

Let the unthinking Rabble bellow on,
I scorn their censures, they're ne'er in the right.
They hate one day what they'll adore the next.
Colour the most abominable wrong.
With Liberty's deceitful specious name,
And you may gain them to what ill you please.

That way I tried, almost to my ruin.
The Mob attended calmly my discourse,
While I harranguld in praise of Liberty;
But when I said, by Alboino's death 'twas purchased,
Had I pronounced their deaths, they had raged less;
Down with him, flea him, burn him, was the cry;
And then they hurled against me Stones, Forks, Staves,
And all the Rabbles instruments of War.
And had the Guards not quickly interposed,
I soon had been devoured by their rage.

Nor can I awe them to more mild resolves,
Than punishing the murderers with death,
So they call them.

What, am I not secure
By my own Guards, and by the Roman power?
In my own Palace shall I dread the crowd?
I slight the weak many headed Monster,
Nay Life I scorn rather than owe it them.

They're of themselves giddy and impotent,
Yet they are oft employed, as great Men's Tools,
Who work their ends by their impetuous Force,
Secure and secret they increase the Flame,
And loo them on to desperate mischief.

Their number gives them courage to attempt.
They rashly enterprise what they resolve,
Before they've leisure to reflect on fear.
Nor from their fury can you long be safe
But by deliv'ring to them Almachild;
Which may divert their charge of guilt from you.

'Tis thou should be delivered to their Rage,
Who prompt'st me thus, to such ingratitude.
Would have me so unworthily desert
The Man, whose act obedience was to me?

I must advise the same, but I am moved
To wish his Death, by those enticing Eyes,
I burst with Envy at the joys he reaps,
And yet those awful Eyes secure his Life;
Did I not dread their Frowns, his Rivals Sword
Should soon remove the bar to all my hopes.

And yet 'tis strange, that such Victorious Eyes
So used to Conquests and preserve them too;
Should be so suddenly contemned by him.
That such refreshing charming Sweets should cloy
The stupid Animal in one short Hour.

Take heed, mock not me, nor vilify him*
My anger will prove as dangerous to you,
As my enraged jealousy would to him.

He was my Friend, and still he should be so,
Had I not seen his perfidy to you.
And proof of that within this Hour I had,
If sighs and vows to others may be Proofs,
And if embraces and appointments are.

'Tis only Pride with hinders jealousy;
Meanly we think of others, of our selves too well
But proceed.

A Vail concealed the Lady he admired,
But in this Room I overheard the Intrigue.
He pressed her hands, and on it swore his truth;
My Life! he cried, in an Hour I'll return,
I'll but pay the Queen a formal Visit,
And haste to thee, my Soul; here take this Key
And wait so long in my apartment there.

I disdain to show how much I'm enraged,
I'll keep my fury collected within,
Till at once I pour it all on him.
Perhaps she still is there, force open the door,
I'll see this powerful Beauty.

Best stay, I'll knock and counterfeit his Voice,
My Love! my dear! here is your Almachild.
She speaks as she opens the Door, and runs to him.

Where hast thou been loit'ring so long, my Life?
Seeing them, she pretends to shriek and run back.

[ holding her.] Nay Madam, do not believe you shall retreat
We've discovered the amour, and must your Face.

Approach nearer thou presumptuous Fool,
Unvail thy self, that I may see that Face
Which dare admit his Love, whose Heart's my due.

Where shall I fly, who will protect me now?
What can I hope from an offended Queen?
And Death I dread from an enraged Father:

Damnation, what do I see! my Daughter!
On unworthy, infamous Prostitute!
Have I thus laboured to prove him Villain
But to publish my Families disgrace,
But with my Sword I'll wipe the stain out, thus --

[ holding him.] Hold, moderate your Passion, pity her,
And show more respect in the Queen's presence.

Dost thou pretend to rage? 'tis I that ought:
What's scandal or disgrace, to jealousy?
But furious words are Cowards Resentments,
And weak Women's, who cannot right themselves.
Monarchs in acts not words should show their Wrath.
And by one blow thus I procure Revenge.

[ kneeling.] Ah do not kill me! and I'll confess all.

Confess! interpose or we are ruined.

Confess! dost thou think that will excuse thee.
Dost believe I'll listen, till thou repeatst
The Arts he used, the Vows he made to win thee;
That will increase my painful Rage too much,
Delay thy death, and my Revenge too long.

Give me leave to intercede for her Life;
Forgive her for her faithful Fathers sake;
Tho now he'd join with you in your Revenge,
Nature will soon move him to pardon her,
And wish to have her stained, rather than Dead.

To his services let her own her Life;
But, hence, I can no longer bear her Sight.
Why, this exceeds Alboino's Crime! I burst with rage.
Tho 'tis not that I love the fickle wretch,
For Wives are jealous, tho they do not love.

I beg I may obtain one favour more,
That I may punish him, for both our wrongs.
Then if I may advise, take Longinus,
A worthier choice, and which secures your Crown.

Merits like his may hope for any thing.
But I'll please my self in the Traitors Death,
Ha! behold he comes to his appointment!
How every circumstance agrees!
Retire, and leave his Punishment to me.
Now let me play the Woman to deceive:

Was it a dream? have Dreams such wondrous power*
Vast Prerogative of Sleep,
Thus to insult our thoughts when we're awake.
Other Men sleep, and so forget their Pain,
But one Hours sleep robs me for ever of my rest,
The Murder was as great, the Sin as great before;
Yet was I easy in my Mind, calm and at peace.
Do Sense and Judgment clearer work in Sleep?
Business and noise diverted them before;
Sleep has awakened them to my eternal Plague.

What mean those Sighs, har'd Looks, and heavy Gate.

Oh my Rosamund! I have been seeking you,
To try to ease my Griefs b'imparting them:
For oh! I bear a load within my Breast
Enough to sink me to the lowest Hell.
But I'm so filled, so choked with black despair,
I well may burst, but have not breath to speak.

What can this mean? sure 'tis to colour his design.
Alike we should relate our joys and griefs,
'Twill improve the one, and lessen the other.
As Winds imprisoned in the Earths Caverns
Then rage and storm with greatest Violence,
And seem to shake the basis of the World,
But when they've forced a Vent, they quickly waste.
So sorrow stifled in our breasts racks most.
But why dost thou complain of Griefs and Pain,
Cannot a Crown and Queen complete thy Joys?

Are you to ask the Cause of my despair?
You who compelled me to the cruel deed.
Art thou so hardened in impenitence,
Or dost thou only ignorance affect?
Think on Alboino, my murdered Master.
Think on thy wronged Husband, think on our King,
And then be happy; doest not stattle thee?
Does not despair and horror seize thy Soul?

Nay then 'tis time to kill the Tender Fool,
And end his idle superstitious Fears,
Else such disquiet Thoughts he'll raise in me.

Confess the gnawing fortunes of thy Mind,
And with severest words accuse thy self,
That I may have a clearer Idea
Of my Sin, fill me with raging despair
Till it distracts my distempered senses.
Oh wretched State! oh tormenting Crime! When I
From Madness only can expect a Cure.

Some melancholy dream has raised these thoughts.
Thou feest I am quiet and undisturbed,
Nor can repent what Justice moved me to.

See where the Royal, sacred Ghost appears,
See where he stands, and bodes me certain Hell.
And look this cursed Hand is stained with Blood.

You but create this anguish to your self,
There's no such thing, these are idle fancies.

My Conscience sees him plain; and tho he's gone,
His dreadful Image is fixed ever here.
Break, burst my Heart, why should thou thus endure
Such cruel Torments, as admit no Cure?
From time it self, thou can not hope for ease,
No action past, none to come can please.
Friendless without, distraction all within,
Obdurate made* as Punishment for Sin.

These sad thoughts, Music and Love shall banish,
Retire with me to my Alcove, and try their Force.

Lead on, and dispose of me as you please,
But much I fear, there can no Art be found
To heal my Minds envenomed desperate Wound.

OH Love how mighty are thy Joys!
Who can bear the Ecstasy,
Joy so great my Life destroys,
In Rapture now I dye.
But that I ever might partake
Of such transporting Bliss,
I would in t'ether World awake,
As I expire in this.
Here's what will end his care; 'tis a Poison
Of such force, three drops destroys him in a moment.
Still you appear disturbed, my Almachild;
Have my tender Embraces no effect?
Shall all my Arts and Love be tried in vain,
Will nought dispel your melancholy thoughts?

Nothing can ease me while my Mem'ry lasts.
Music heightens and improves our passions;
It increases, but never changes them.
The pleasant it transports with Mirth and Joy,
But fills the sad with a more fierce Despair.

If Love and Music can't prevail, try this.
Here I've prepared a Cordial for my Love.

Wine for the present may allay our Griefs,
But they'll return, and rack with double Force.
However give it me, I'd leave nought untried.
A Cordial is it? 'tis strangely nauseous.
I cannot force my Stomach, to receive
One drop more -- what means this sudden coldness
Near my Heart, and this swimming in my Head?

I find it begins to work already,
Half he has drank, will send him strait to Hell.

Now 'tis plain, by all my fears 'tis Poison,
But she shall not triumph in my Death too.
Here my Rosamund, I find its Virtues
To be so excellent, that you must pledge me.

I need it not, I have my health entire.

Oh thou bloody Monster! worse than Woman!
How have I deserved this barbarity.
Thy refusal, as well as my Torments,
Discovers thy baseness But I'll not fall alone.
Here drink this, while I have strength to force thee.

Help! Murder! help! where are my Guards? Murder!

Thy resistance is vain, here take thy choice,
Drink or I'll strike this Dagger to thy Heart.
Nay delay not one Moment, if thou dost --

Hold, give it me, Death looks less dreadful here.

So, now let them come to her assistance.
I dye pleased, since time was for this deed given,
And by this Justice I may merit Heaven.

What does this mean?
Whence proceeds his Death and your fainting Looks?

Ah! you are come too late, he has forced me
To share the Poison, I prepared for him.
Odoacre there! then dread thy Fate next.
Justice has overtaken the Murder
I contrived, and will soon thy Treachery.
To Enemies your Country you betrayed,
While I a Plot to kill Alboino laid.
No Art can thee from divine Justice guard.
And I in Death and Hell shall meet Reward.

Were it thou the Villain, who betrayed the Town,
Thus Traitor I'll fulfil her Prophecy.

Hold, part them.

I have deserved this end, and should rejoice.
I've lived long in misery, my Conscience
Plagued me so much, I could no more bear Life.
My Fate is just and kind, I'll not complain,
And Death may end, but can't increase my Pain.

I will not blame what Justice bid thee do,
Nor for interest will protect Villains.
But her I must lament, not all her Crimes,
Not death can deprive her of her beauty.

Be pleased, and thankful for Heaven's Justice,
Which has wisely freed you from the Love,
Which would else have sullied all your Renown.

Time may persuade me to mind your advice.
But that I may pay the Regard that's due
To the noble Alboino's Memory;
Wear the Crown* which he bequeathed you; and be
Assured, Justinus will confirm the gift.
But only promise to remain his friend,
And quit all pretensions to Verona.

I'll readily agree to any terms,
So I may preserve Longinus friendship.
The greatest businss of my life is over,
Alboino's death is now fully revenged.
Yet for his fall, grief still my breast distends,
Crowns cannot recompense the loss of Friends.

OF all the Actors you have seen this day,
Our Scribbler culls out me, to excuse his Play,
I cried I was too young; be said, he knew
The likeliest way to please, was to be new.
I could not choose but laugh, to find the Fool
Should think Ine're was tried, bred in this School:
And therefore, to remove his gross mistake,
I told I'd been used before to speak.
But since I was't address to you, he swore,
It was no fault, to have been used, Before.
Tho he has taken after all wrong measure,
Either to give the Men, or Ladies Pleasure.
Gladly he would divert yon beauteous Row;
In vain he strives, for by my self I know,
They hate, what they admired an hour ago.
Yet, since they are not always of one mind,
Some, at some minutes, may perhaps be kind.
One tender look from them will please him more
Than when the Pit applauds, or Gall'ries roar.
And for the Men, I m told there was a time,
When nothing moved like Virgins in their Prime.
But Time alas is changed; now 'tis not so,
Nothing will please the Beaux now, but a Beau.
They come not now with Masks to keep a pother,
But from Side-boxes ogle one another.
But I forget for what I am come here.
Well, 'tis not yet too late, because I hear,
For all your forward boasts, you love the Rear.
I come, to beg for Mercy for the Play,
Yet do not think, I'll for your Judgment stay.
No, I'll be gone, because such generous Youths,
When my Back's turned, will speak the kindest Truths.

