HOw hard's the Fate which Poetry attends,
When every Man to be its Judge Pretends.
Not so in other Arts, Painters best tell
Which Colour, Shade, or Posture does excel.
Doctor's a Right to Kill or Save obtain;
And Lawyers only do the Law Explain.
But every Fool fancies induigent Heaven
And equal Share of Wit to him has given.
And talks of Time, Place, Action, and the Plot,
Words, like a Parrot, he by rote has got.
Hither such come to Censure, not to Hear,
And whisper dull Remarks in's Neighbour's Ear.
Chat the whole Play, then, Judgment give at Guess,
And damn the Poet for the Actor's dress.
Strut in the Pit, Survey the Gallery,
In hopes to be lured up by some kind She.
Humours still opposite to ours they have,
Laugh when we weep; and when we laugh look grave.
Our Author hopes none such are here to Day,
For they'll ne'er relish this Dull, Sober Play.
Where there's not one Immodest Word to move
In the Box Blushes, or a Laugh above.
But for their Comfort, tho the Scene be here,
The Characters of Vice he takes elsewhere.
If any to themselves Reflections take,
They are to Blame who Applications make.

WELL, well, Aemilia, You may pretend what you please; But I am sure, You go to
Church thus constantly, only to Pray for an Easterly Wind.


Truly Marina, if my Love has made me Devout, yours has made you very Lazy; for
ever since you saw Bellmine, you are grown as fond of your Bed, as a young Poet
is of his first Works.


And is not that a properer place to think of one's Lover, than the Church? I
am as much teased with your Devotion, as a Rake is with Dunns, or as a Mask in
the Play-House is, with that Rake.


Love that sweetens all Tempers, has sowr'd thine.


Pray let me hear no more of it then.


And yet if I should Talk of any thing else, you would no more mind me, than
our Gallery does the Parson. What! Last Packet brought you no Letters? Why,
he's Coming


So is Freelove; That makes you so Gay. But Dear Aemilia, now I have mentioned
him, inform me better of his Character, and tell me how you came acquainted
with him, for he must be an Extraordinary Person that could please you.


While I waited for a Wind at Chester, he chanced to come thither. He saw me,
and it seems I displeased him not. He quickly found an opportunity to be
acquainted, since I did not shun it; for I own at first view I liked him.


How, at first View! What! You that such Numbers have sighed for, and have been
insensible to all; Like at sight!


'Twere a Wrong to Friendship, and Beneath me, to dissemble with you. His
Person pleased me; but when he talked, his Discourse appeared so Soft, so
Natural; his Wit so Lively and so Unconstrained; That, though I ever Dreaded the
Inconveniences of Love, I struggled harder to conceal my Flame, than to
restrain my Heart; for having Seen and Heard, 'twas mine no more.


Mere Rapture! But what Reputation has he in the World? For I regard that more
than his Person or Wit.


As I, so he, was to most a Stranger. All agreed he had no Estate, but a Fine
Gentleman.


How's that! No Estate, and a Fine Gentleman! Advise him to keep where he is,
if he would preserve that Character. I assure you, 'tis as Difficult to be
thought so here, without an Estate; as it is to be thought Honest and Get one.


All are not of that Opinion, for if Bellmine had no Fortune, I suppose you
would think him a Fine Gentleman.


I thank Heaven he has a very good one, and really Cousin, I find it much for
his Interest in my Heart, that I never Considered him without One.


You are Mercenary.


Not wholly so; perhaps I should not esteem an acquaintance the worse; But I
think a Good Estate is one of the prettiest Qualifications a Husband can have;
my Love may decay, but an Estate is a certain Good. Oh, 'tis such a Comfort!
When my Husband is in a Dogged Humour, to call for my Glass Chariot, take the
Air on the Strand, and make half a score pleasant Visits, and as many
Conquests.


Conquests! I hope you would not receive Addresses if you were Married?


Not Bare-fac'd Love, not Plain so; but certainly nothing pleases us more, than
to be Admired; pleases us! pleases every Thing; What thing is not pleased to be
Liked? Then 'tis a certain Cure for the Spleen. Can any thing be more Diverting
than to have a Man who has ten times more Wit than I have, fall at my Feet, and
Adore mine.


Can you think so, and not conclude it Flattery?


Flattery! What then? Is not my Power still the Greater, to force him to say,
what he does not think? Then I make my Husband Jealous by it.


Is that an Advantage?


Oh a Great One! I have known it sharpen many a Stomach that was Cloyed before.
At Least, if Jealousy will not make him Kind, 'twill make him Civil, out of
fear of what I may do; Nay, I think it should make him Proud too.


There is indeed a secret pleasure in having our Choice approved of; and I
never knew a Man fond of his Wife, when she was slighted by others. He will no
more boast of his Choice then, than she with Reason will boast of her Virtue.
And it seems then, you do not doubt being Admired.


Truly Aemilia, I fancy this Face, Bad as it is, with the advantage of Gay
Clothes, Coach and Equipage, will draw Admirers, when there are so many Stait
Fellows in Red out of Employment.


Fie, fie, You begin to talk madly; come, let's haste to Church, and drive away
these Thoughts; I believe they have almost done.


Well, Thou art the strangest Creature; You are always interrupting my Mirth
with Church, and at Church I am sure you are thinking of something else. --
Come prithee, Let us take the other Turn -- What you will go -- Well I follow.


We have had a pleasant Quick Passage. Would there were no more Shelves, nor
Quicksands, no more Difficulties in my Voyage of Love, and that it might be as
soon finished.


I am sure I have been aboard long enough to smell like one of the Cabin Boys;
I fancy I totter still; the Ground seems to rise in Waves before me, and when I
walk, I lift my Feet and Paw like a Horse who has just lost his sight.





St. Stephen's-Green.


I like the Air. -- I am glad your House has the benefit of it. Here Sirrah --
what, you are Surveying where you shall get Drunk to Night; this Rogue looks
out for a Brandy Shop with more Earnestness and Joy, than a Privateer for a
Merchant Man. I wonder Bellmine you dare trust this Drunken Rogue with so many
weighty Affairs.


Alas Sir, Your Worship knows, I am the soberest Man alive: But if ever I do
drink, 'tis always after I have dispatch'd my Business, I divide my time well.


Oh yes! Exceeding well! Between Drinking for your Diversion, and Pimping for
his. But while you are Sober, and before he has any New Honourable Employment
for you, go see that our Things are brought from Ship-board. We shall walk here
till you return.


If all my Old Friends have not forgot me, I hope to employ him.


I thought this last Amour would have made a Convert of thee, and Cured thee of
all Extravagancies.


This last Amour has Quite spoiled thee; thou were it once one of the prettiest
Fellows about the Town; thy Advice assisted me in Love, thy Wit promoted
Drinking, thy Example Encouraged both; But now thou art Grown a Downright
Damned, Sober, Dull, Virtuous Fellow.


Well, You are upon the Brink of Matrimony; if it does not Cure thee, 'twill at
least tame thee.


Oh for Heaven's sake Name it not! I dread it as much as our Farmers do the
Wool-Bill.


If you have such terrible apprehensions of it; How came you to think on it?


Think on it! Why I don't think on it; norever will think on it. If I Repent,
which 'tis a thousand to one but I shall, I am Resolved to have that Excuse,
that I Married inconsiderately.


'Tis as extravagant and unaccountable for a Man of your Sentiments, and loose
Life, to Marry, as for a Coward with a good Estate to turn Soldier; Yet I have
seen both; and as in an Engagement, they VVink and Dye, so you'll VVink and
Marry.


I beseech you, no more of it. I hate the word, Marriage, as much as a Mariner
does whistling at Sea; and for the same Reason, I fancy it will raise Stormy
Weather. 'Tis a hard Case that we must submit to the thing we Hate, before we
can have the Woman we Love.


The Ladies have a much harder Case with Men of your Extravagant Principles:
You are always Teasing 'em with Love; if they Return it, you Insult; if they
Refuse it, you Rail; if they Marry you, you grow weary of them; if they Comply
without it, you Contemn them.


Aemilia has made you a Rare Advocate for the Sex; I have known the time, when
you would no more allow Virtue in VVomankind, than Honesty in a Jesuit, or
Sincerity in a Courtier.


VVhenever you hear any Man talk so, take it for Granted, that he has lately
met with some Disappointment; or that he is more Conversant with the Bottle
than with them; and 'tis then we chiefly deny them to be Virtuous, when we find
they are so: For some of you prudent Sparks, never Commend a Woman, but to
Conceal an Intrigue with her; and the readiest way to ruin their Reputation, is
for such to give her a good Character.


I confess I have more Charity for them since I knew Marqia, than formerly; and
you are giving a sufficient Proof of your good Opinion of the Sex, and of the
Violence of your Love, that have come from London hither, to Marry a Lady
without a Fortune.


And would think my Travel round the Earth Rewarded with a Look.


I know I please you, by daily asking her Character.


My Heart is never Easy, while my Tongue is employed about any other Subject.
She has Goodness without Folly or Easiness; Wit and Virtue without ill Nature
or Vanity; Beauty without Art or Affectation: She is so Excellent, that even
her own Sex Admires her, for those very Charms which Create their Envy.


Young, I don't doubt.


She is so Young, she would not take it Ill, to be called Old.


But has she such an entire Possession of your Heart, that you can make Love to
no other?


I could not even Affect it.


I can, as you shall see immediately; for I perceive some Ladies coming this
way Masked.


Well, I'll give you an Opportunity and Leave you.


No, to give me an Opportunity, you must stay; Engage one, while I talk to the
other.


You must Excuse me.


Away; Thou art Grown as Surly, as if thou were already Married; Come, no
Denial, walk on a little, well take a short Turn and Meet them.


Now as I live Cousin our Prayers are heard; Yonder is certainly my Spark
Bellmine.


And with him Freelove! How my Heart beats and labours in my Breast! And now my
Blood has taken the Alarm, flies to its Spring to be Assistant there, forsakes
its Channels, and leaves each distant part Pale and Faint.


Pale and Faint! That is pleasant! Now am I ten times more Lively than I was;
my Heart is a little Unruly too; But that is only, because it is weary of this
Old Dull Prison, and has a mind to exchange Quarters with that Gentleman's.
Prithee don't stand Trembling here, but let us walk towards 'em.


Marina, Hold! I must be recovered a little before I own my self: But what say
you, if we should keep on our Masks, and see if they will Attack us; we shall
try their Constancy by it.


Nay, as for Constancy, I am not so Unreasonableas to expect that yet. 'Twill
be very well, if my Spark leaves Rambling to a half Crown Ordinary abroad, when
he has a plentiful Feast provided for him at home. However, I like the
Proposal, I shall try his Wit, and Rally him by it: And Nothing pleases me more
than making an Ass of a Man of Wit; and a Mask is a Rare Opportunity, it
Conceals who we are, and Encourages us to be Bold, while our Sex Protects us.


Ladies your Servant! We think our selves very Fortunate, That the first we see
have so fine a Mien and Shape, and I am confident your Faces are answerable:
Will not you have the good Nature as to Unmask, and prove me in the Right?


A good reasonable Request truly in your first Speech: Are the Ladies of your
Acquaintance so very Coming? But you are as much Strangers to us in Expecting
it, as you are to the place by Demanding it.


You like us the worse it may be for being so?


That supposition shows you are Strangers, or you would know, that to be so, is
a recommendation here.


Does that humour reign here? I hope it does in you too; then I may succeed;
for I assure you I am but this moment arrived; and to make me still the more
acceptable to thee, my Pretty Dear Creature; know, that I have brought over
some New Fashions, New Tunes, and New Plays; I can tell you which House has the
best Audience, which Player is most Applauded; who the Celebrated Beauty of the
Town, who keeps the best Equipage; I can tell you who Loves who, and who does
worse; what Duels have been lately Fought; who Killed, who Hanged, who Jilted,
who Married, who --


And so Convince me, you go abroad for the same wise Intent, most of our young
Sparks do. But you may as soon Borrow Money of a grave Citizen, by this
Character of your self, as expect any Favour from me by it.


Will not this please you? why then I can give you an account of the Court; I
can tell you which Lord has the greatest Levy; I can tell you of great
Favourites, who scarce could Breathe for Crowds of servile Sycophants, and in a
days time as lonely as if it had been Writ over their Doors, This House is
Infected with the Plague I can tell you of the Advancement of Fools and Knaves,
and the Disgrace of Men of Se^e Worth, I can --


Hold, hold, you will only persuade me you have met with some Disappointment
there, for few rail at the Court for any other Reason.


Let me but have one stroke at Rogues in Power --;


Not a Syllable, or I shall believe you are vexed, because you cannot be one in
your turn.


Will not this do? why then have at the Parliament --


Worse and worse.


Nay then, I find no subject will please you but Love, and the tender soft
Things I have to say on that, must be whispered.


A pretty New Way your Ladyship has of Rallying truly. You think Flattery too
great a Good to be enjoyed by Men only, and I'll lay my Life if once you aim at
it, you will be too hard for us, 'tis said we cannot keep pace with you in
Virtue, I am sure you outstrip us in Vice, when once you set your selves to it.


'Twere very unhappy a Man of your Wit and Judgment should have a mean Opinion
of us.


My Wit and Judgment! very pretty. Take my Advice, never Admire a Man for
those Qualifications, which I assure you are the greatest Enemies imaginable to
your Sex. Wit and Judgment! why a Man must prove he has neither, before you'll
allow him to be in Love.


You harbour severe Thoughts of us, and Love.


I seldom speak my Thoughts to a Mask; But for once, to Convince you I have
Charitable Thoughts of both; I'll venture to tell you I am in Love.


I fancy then your Mistress treats you with severity, or requires unreasonable
things of you.


There is nothing she requires I can think so.


If she be unkind, try another; I am confident so fine a Gentleman must
succeed.


You are so very lavish in your Praises, that I know you expect I should
proffer you a Bottle of Wine and a cold Chicken.


My Praises at least deserve a civiller Reply.


Nay if you knew with what indifference I proffer it; you would have more
reason to affect an angry Tone; for if you should comply, I assure you my usage
should be much Civiller than possibly you expect.


Come, this ill Nature is mere affectation in you; you have so good an
Appearance, I am resolved to esteem you, spite of your indifference.


I am sorry, Madam, my indifference has not the same effect on you, that your
forwardness has on me. Here Belmine, prithee relieve me; I am the dullest
Fellow at this Common-place Chat.


You have done very Charitably, Sir, to call to your Friend; Poor Gentleman! he
has ran himself clear out of Breath by Protesting his Passion for me.


Who I, Madam? alas, I have said nothing yet; why Madam, if I do not admire
your Wit, your Shape, your Mien, the colour of your Hair, your Fancy in your
Dress, more than --


Have a Care what you say, Sir; pray let your Simile be short, for I fancy you
are so very Fickle, that before you have made an end of it, your mind may
change.


Well, we will give the Gentleman leisure to reflect till Evening, and perhaps
by that time his Friend may be in a better Humour.


Dear, Kind, Obliging Creature, we will certainly attend ye.

Why, what a damned unlucky Rogue was I now? that I did not attack her: she
seems to be half won already, and I'll engage you did not say one kind
passionate thing to her.


Not a Syllable truly.


And she was very Compliant?


So she seemed.


Why there's it now. Oh Fortune, Fortune! how dost thou shower Wealth upon
the Rich?


You have great reason to complain of Fortune indeed, because you have not
succeeded with such as these.


Such as these! why, who do you take 'em for, pray?


For Women of the Town.


Women of the Town! why, thou dost not know where thou art. Women of the Town!
why, there are no such things in this Town.


No! then I have found the Reason you spend so little time in your own,
Country.


Freelove, not a word more of my Extravagancies as you tender my Pleasures; I
am not so much Reformed yet, but I have a Mind to enjoy them a little farther,
and I cannot do that here, but under the Disguise of a Sober, Discreet Person.


And so you would be thought Virtuous, that you may be the more Conveniently
Wicked.


Even so Faith.


A very pious Design truly! yet I have known you affect a quite contrary
Reputation, and were industrious to be thought a very Lewd Fellow; Nay, and I
have known such a Character do a Man effectual Service with Women.


Ay, where Opportunities were easily met with; Women's Inclinations are alike in
all places, but all Places are not alike. In London, tis difficult to be known;
here, impossible to be concealed. Such a Character may do one Service with the
Woman, but not with her Relations. There, you may make a thousand Cuckolds, yet
they never hear of your, Name: Here, you cannot make one without being Intimate
with him; and I'll undertake you shall not be three days in Town, but every
Body in Town will know you; nay, and know, whence you came, how long you stay,
what's your Business, and if you have none, they will feign enough for you; for
I could name you such a Set, so Inquisitive, such Detractors -- But hold,
yonder comes one will spare my pains.


Who, that Old Fellow?


He's their President: One who never spoke Commendably of any Mortal. There are
no Degrees of Good with him, only some are less Bad than others; and indeed he
has reason to talk, for he has been a Bubble to Man and Woman from his
Infancy.


Methinks his ill Nature should prevent him from that.


His ill Nature prevents him from designing to oblige any one, but he has so
good an Opinion of his own Wisdom, that any one may make an Ass of him.
Scurrility with him, is giving an Impartial Character, and that you may think
he speaks Truth, he rails most at those of his own temper.


Enough of him; Pray let me avoid being known to him.


Impossible; I'll undertake, though we have not been Landed these two hours, he
has had an account of it already; and comes to Congratulate our Arrival, for he
will be tolerably civil to the present Company, either out of fear, or design
to gather something he may rail at.


Mr. Bellmine, Your humble Servant.


Your Servant, Mr. Wormwood.


I am glad to see you in your own Country again; I heard you were come.


Freelove, do ye hear?


I was told too there is an English Gentleman, your Friend, accompanied you
hither: I suppose that may be he. Prithee what may be his Business? they say he
is come to --


What, know his Business already! Come, I'll present you to him, and you may
know it from himself Mr. Freelove be pleased to know this Gentleman, he is a
plain Impartial Historian of the Times, and a very proper Acquaintance for a
Stranger; for he knows the whole Town, and gives every one their just
Character.


Why truly, Sir, as this Gentleman says, I do speak my Mind; I think no Body
can tax me with Flattery.


You should bid him have a care of Detraction too.


You'll spoil all, if he hears you


You are in the right, Sir, and that I would do, tho it were of a Judge, and I
had a Suit depending. I would sooner loose my Cause, than my honest way of
Speaking.


I believe you will be more Entertaining to this Gentleman, if you will tell
him who are the Beauties of the Town.


If you will rely on the Ladies Characters of one another, there are none: For
they are so Envious here (for which you must know I hate 'em) that each thinks
the Commendation of another is a wrong done to her self, and that you deprive
her of that Beauty you approve of in another.


I have heard there were many fine Women in this Town.


It may be so; But you who are a young Gentleman, and I suppose would be
acceptable to them, must have a care of saying so.


Why so?


Because you must make your Court to the present, by railing at the absent.


That is a New Way indeed.


An infallible Way to succeed. 'Tis what they practice to one another. I can
name you some Women who visit and are visited by half the Town, are civilly
treated, and have no Merit but Impudence and Scurrility. As for Example --


Have a care of Names.


I'll venture at hers. My Lady Volant. --


How, my Lady Volant! I never saw her, but have heard abundance of her. And is
she in Being still: why what a bottomless sink of Malice is her Breast, that is
not yet exhausted?


'Tis a Corrupted one, and taints every thing comes within it. She hates every
Body, yet is the civilest Person in the whole World, when she would dive into
your Affairs.


Or would borrow a Guinea. However she is a good Manager; for her Lodging and
Diet cost her Nothing; she Bilks one, and Spunges for the other.


I see you can Rail too.


Oh she's a public Pest. She has done more harm to deserving young Ladies
Reputations, than the Small Pox has to their Faces.


No more of her, I beseech you. But is there no Body Merits a Good Character?


You that are a Stranger may think there is. But those who deserve to be
Laughed at next, are that young, Pert, Conceited Fool Vainly, who construes
every Abuse a Complement, and that old Lewd, Fat, Doting Feignyouth, who are
both bewitched by her Ladyship.


How, Sir Francis Feignyouth.


The same. He fancies her Virtuous and Rich, though she has so very little of
either, she would renounce her Virtue to borrow a Crown. And because she is
reserved to him, he concludes she is is so every Body else.


This is Incredible. Is it possible he can be ignorant of her Character? he has
Friends enough to inform him.


If you went about to inform him, you would find it a hard Matter to convince
him of your Friendship; For he believes whoever speaks against her, has some
design on her himself. As for Vainly, I think no Body values him enough to
advise him.


What if I should advise Sir Francis; he cannot believe I have a design on
her.


But he knows you have one on his Daughter Marina, and he'll imagine you advise
out of Interest.


Well, Sir, I thank you for your Information, it may be of use to me. Will
you please to Dine with us at the Globe: and let us know more of the Affairs of
the Town. Come Freelove, I see your Man yonder, I suppose he has taken care of
our Things; we'll Dine and change our Clothes, and then take another Turn here.


I suppose your Design is to meet your Masks again;
But have a care, this unknown Face may prove
Of Force, to overcome your former Love.
You wear a brittle and an easy Chain,
Who can to other Objects Passion Feign.

No, I can Feign, and yet my Heart defend.


You're lost if on your own Strength you depend.
The Straragems and Force of Women's Eyes
Subdue the Strong, Ensnare, and Fool the Wise.

POx on this troublesome Coxcomb, he follows me again, there is no getting from
him. If I abuse him, he thinks 'tis either Raillery, or like a Friend to tell
him of his Faults.


I ask your Pardon, Sir, for staying behind you, but I could not help it. You
saw the Occasion.


Not I, Sir, I did not mind it.


No! why some Ladies stopped their Coach, and desired to speak with me.


It may be so.


Well, certainly there is not so true a Friend, nor one so fit for a Confident
as you are. You'll never seem to know any thing of your Friend's secrets. I do
not believe if you saw me in bed with one of those Ladies, you would take any
Notice of it; at least, I am sure you would not speak of it.


I am sure if I did, I should not be believed.


What! -- You think I soar higher. No Faith, a Man in this Town must sometimes
stoop below Title.


I'll say that for thee Vainly, thou hast Assurance and Pride enough to aim at
an Empress.


I vow your Complements make me blush, 'tis true, though I have just Pride enough
to keep the Best Company, and Assurance to make use of an Opportunity.


Mistake me not, you have however Humility to dispense with a Kitchen Wench.


Thou art the most agreeable Man upon Earth; you say as obliging things to me,
as I could to my Mistress. But dear Wormwood, dost thou really think that I can
Suit my self so handsomely to my Company? am I so very obliging, so wondrous
Civil?


The Civilest Person alive, for you never contradicted any Man, though he abused
thee, nor ever made any Return to it but Thanks.


Why could any thing but so good a Friend, put the Construction of Civility
upon such things, if I were Guilty of them.


There is no freeing my self from him, but by beating him.


Why, as you say, a professing Friend is to be suspected; we that are so
Intimate, need not tell each other that we are so.


We Intimate! Leave abusing me. Dost think I would be Intimate with thee? for
what? for that abundance of Powder in thy Periwig? or for neatly Twisting that
great Slabbering Bib? or for the nice Roll of your Stockings? or for your
Muff-String and the Buckle?


Better and better. Why then you do think I dress well; I confess all the
Ladies in Town are of that Opinion.


Abominable Rogue! Paris, but do it as awkwardly as one of our Attorneys
Clerks, or a young Collegian, who has just thrown off his Gown. Thou would be
thought Brave by that Long Sword, but would fly the sight of a Bodkin. In
short, thou art in nothing what thou would be thought, but art in every thing
what thou seem.


Well, such a Friend is an inestimable Jewel. I now pronounce my self a happy
Man in having so sincere a Friend, so plain dealing an Acquaintance.


Again Friend; abuse me so again, and I'll spit thee with thy own Sword.


Why thou hast as much Modesty as good Nature.


Death, I have neither.


Who can deal thus honestly by me; and cannot hear your self commended with the
Title of my Friend.


The Title of thy Friend a Commendation: why this is past all Sufferance. Look
ye, Sir, since I cannot persuade you to understand me by Words, I'll try to
make you understand me by my Sword. Come, Draw Sir.


Draw Sir!


Ay, draw Sir, so I say, no Repetition.


What a Plague will you Fight a Man, because he calls you his Friend?


Friend again! that word has winged thy Destiny, as the Poets have it. I see
the Rogue dare not Fight, I may push this matter home.


But Good Mr. VVormwood. --


Death, Sir, Draw I say, I shall make you Dance to a New Tune.


Oh Lard, Sir, is that all! how dull was I that I did not understand you! I
protest, dear Sir, you had reason to take it ill, that I should be so tedious
in Gratifying you. I learned a New Minuet yesterday; and though the place be not
so proper, yet to show how earnest I am to oblige you. La, La, La, La.


Nay, then I think I may venture to put up my Sword, and beat Time with my Feet
on your Buttocks thus and thus --


What, Quarrelling Gentlemen! hold, hold.


Oh no, Sir, by no means; you do not know Mr. Wormwood, he's a facetious
Person, and had a Mind we should practice a New Dance.


An Antic, I suppose.


Right, Sir, 'tis even so: if we can but get a Set, you shall see what Sport
we'll make at the next Ball.


That, I hope, will be difficult.


Gentlemen, a word -- I would not have you seen in that little thing's Company;
you see he has no Sense nor Courage, and it may make the Wise and Brave reflect
on you.


We thank you for your Caution, Sir.


Mr. Bellmine, you know I always had a value for you; your Friend too seems a
fine Gentleman, and I suppose is of your temper; would be acceptable to the
Ladies; but nothing can be so destructive to that, as being seen with that old
snarling ill bred Fellow; hang him, despise him, leave him.


Indeed to leave him to himself, is the surest way to Plague him, for ill
Nature is its own Greatest Torment.


You are most Ingenious. Dear Mr. Bellmine, you and I will be wondrous great.
Call your Friend away, and come with me. By your absence for some time, you may
be out of Acquaintance. Come, I'll show you every Body. I'll make you
acquainted with the whole Town this Afternoon. I have access every where. You
know the Ladies were always Fond of me.


I desire not to intermeddle between such Ladies and you; therefore pray Excuse
me.


Extremely obliging, kind to the last Degree; to deny your self so great a
Pleasure, for fear of Rivalling me. But I will not suffer that so much Goodness
should prejudice you. Come, we are hard by Sir Francis Feignyouth's, I'll carry
you thither.


Are you acquainted there?


Goodness that you should not know that! most intimately, Sir. Truth is, they
would be much fonder of me, but I'am often troubled with the Spleen,
exceedingly troubled with the Spleen, Mr. Bellmine, and they poor Creatures do
so Sympathize with me, that I never go there but I give it to them.


Faith thou art enough to give any one the Spleen.


Oh Good Sir, be not concerned; I would not for the world infect you; 'tis too
much to be so nearly concerned for me: Besides there is no Danger of having it
in your Ingenious Company; and that is the reason I go there so often to divert
it, for Sir Francis's Daughter Mrs. Marina has a world of Wit, and her Cousin
Aemilia is nothing short of her, they have both vast Sense, vast Sense they
have indeed; and you know you may depend on my Judgment. Then they Write so
Charmingly.


Have you any of their Letters?


Oh Goodness, Sir, what a Question is there?


A Question! why dost thou dare to say it?


Not a word you say, but gives me a proof how infinitely you value me. No 'tis
base to boast of a Ladies Favour, that is the truth on it. I take your Caution
extreme kindly Mr. Bellmine.


Death and Hell dare not to think it, not to hope it, nay, not to wish it.


Oh Enough, enough, a Word to the Wise; I will be more discreet for the future.


Discreet! Insolent Wretch -- Death, thou deserve to be beaten.


Bellmine so loud! Dost thou not know that next to the Disgrace of being
Beaten, is that, of Beating those we know will bear it.


For thee even to name the Woman I admire, is almost enough to lessen my Good
Opinion of her, did I not know you both.


Away, mind him not.


Od's my Life, is one of them his Mistress? I thought there was something
extraordinary it makes him so Choleric; he is Jealous and takes me for his
Rival; nothing less could make him angry with me; But we that are admired by
the Women, must expect to be envied by the Men. Pox take 'em, I could bear
their Envy, but I don't relish this Quarrelling and Striking, and Hurting and
Fighting, and Wounding and Dying, and the Devil and all. Where is the sense of
it? I am sure every Body is so fond of me, that if they did but know how little
I care for such things, there is not one would offer it to me, not one, I'm
confident: Least these Strangers should mistake my humour, I'll march off; and
there is a rare Opportunity, a Hackney Coach coming this way with two Masks;
I'll pretend they called me. Heigh! you Rascal! Coach-man, don't you hear the
Ladies cry hold? Dear Gentlemen, you see the Reason of my leaving you, there
are some Ladies in the Coach call me; therefore I hope you will pardon the
abrupt Departure of your most obedient faithful Servant.


There's a Dog now, there's a Rogue. Why, would you prevent my Drubbing him? I
would have kick't him into Jelly.


If you had persevered, you had quickly made his feeling as dull as his
understanding.


I attacked his most sensible part.


And yet I have known some as Contemptible as he, boast of their success in
Intrigues; nay, and boast with truth too, though one should imagine that Vice
alone should destroy their future Success; since it is as imprudent in Women to
put it in such Men's power to boast, as it is in the Men base to be Guilty of
it.


There is none so Despicable, but have some Quality to recommend them to some
Body. Nay, it oft happens that a Man is admired by some, for that very Quality,
for which others despise him: And Vainly has one Qualification will make many
Men, and most Women value him.


What is that?


A Good Estate.


Those who want one, and imagine it to be a much greater Blessing than it is
found to be by you, or any who possess it.


For my Part, I cannot help fretting that such dull Rogues as that, should have
one. 'Tis a Gift of Fortune, as much missapply'd, as to confer swiftness on the
Blind; for he can make no use of it; and that is all my Comfort. He Squanders
it all away in Sword, Knots, Perrewigs, Essence, Powder, and such material
Things.


Oh Sir, Let every Man dispose of his Money as he pleases, so he is inoffensive
to others. We have all different Appetites; his satisfaction lies in Gay
Clothes, your pleasure lies in not being pleased. One Man loves Drinking,
another Intreagueing, Bellmine both; being a Man of an universal Genius.


Your Servant, Good Sir, you needed not have Travelled so far for an Example.
But yonder, I think, comes my old Dad that must be, who will exceed both you
and I in those.


Yes, yes, 'tis all about the Town already that you are to marry his Daughter.
But let me advise you one thing; Break off the Match between Sir Francis and my
Lady Volant, or you will have but a slender Fortune with your Spouse.


But can it be possible that thou should give this Advice, purely out of
good Nature?


No, I do not; mind it not; 'twill Gratify my ill Nature, that thou should
not follow good Counsel. Forward the Match, and then Marry the Daughter for
pure Love. But if I were you, I would choose to Marry his Niece Aemilia, that I
might be sure not to have a Groat with her.


And is not she a Fortune without Money?


Ha! ha! ha! the Man's mad. Why, what the Devil is Fortune but Money, or what
is Woman or Honour or any thing else without it?


Has she not Virtue, Sense, and Beauty?


The Woman is not ugly, that's the Truth on it. But where hast thou been
Educated? where hast thou spent thy time? what hast thou convers't with?
Nothing but old Fables and Romances, with your Lucretia's and Sempronia's, with
your Cassandra's and Clelia's, and such stuff. In this Age talk of Virtue and
Sense! why I tell thee --


Wormwood have a care, he's the Sex's Knight Errant.


Is he? why then let him suffer as much as any of those fancied ones to get his
Mistress, (and she prove to be a VVhore)


I am much mistaken if this Fellow would not stand Kick and Cuff as heroically
as the other.


Altogether as rank a Poltroon; they only differ in the manner, not in the
thing. But here is one will please us better,


Mr. Bellmine, how I rejoice to see you again in Ireland! Well, and what price
bear Wine and Women now in London? hah! does the Mall swarm with Masks, and is
French Wine admitted yet?


Before we talk of such weighty Affairs, let me desire you would know my Friend
here.


Mr. Bellmine, Sir, has given you a Character will introduce you into the good
opinion of all this Town.


If it can purchase me yours, 'twill be the greatest Service it can ever do me.


Oh Sir, your own Merit will always give you an absolute sway over, Sir, your
most faithful humble Servant.


My Merit, Sir, will make but a slender Figure in the presence of so
accomplished a Person as Sir Francis Feignyouth.


I protest, Sir, you make me blush -- Nay no more I beseech you, my modesty
will not suffer you to proceed. (an exceeding well-bred ingenious Person!)


So, he has won his heart already.


Mr. Bellmine, no one has a better taste of Man than you. You have done your
Country Service by bringing so fine a Gentleman to it. May I crave your Name,
Sir?


Freelove, at your Service, Sir.


I have known several of that Name in England, fine Gentlemen all. Well, Sir,
for your comfort, you will find Women here that are not Despicable; I know
'tis the greatest Commendation of any place to you young Gentlemen; But then
Opportunities are scarce, there's no getting at 'em.


I hope that is no Fault to you who have a Family, Sir Francis?


No, no, I speak in reference to you Gentlemen; I am past such things my self.


Past it, Sir! a Man of your Make, your Health and Sanguine Constitution, past
it! no Sir, you are as Vigorous as ever.


Think you so, Mr. Freelove? Do I seem very Strong, very Sanguine, very
Vigorous? hah!


As Five and Twenty, Sir.


You Flatter me; I should find it hard to persuade the Women to that Belief.


No Woman that has Eyes in her Head will doubt it; if she does, you can
convince her another way.


Ods me, I'll go see my Mistress incontinently: I am not so decayed as I
thought. Well, Mr. Freelove, I am much obliged to you for your Complements; if
you will meet me at the Coffee-House this Evening, I'll carry you to see my
Mistress, to receive your Sentiments of her. I have a great Reliance on your
Judgment; so much, that since you think me fit for it, I am resolved to be
Married to Morrow.


How Sir! to be Married.


Ay, to be Married, Sir, what have you to say against that Holy State? you will
not declaim against Marriage before me, I hope?


By no means, Sir, since I admire your Daughter, you may be sure it is that I
covet.


Do you so, then why do you not Marry, if you like one another?


I can promise for my self, and I hope there is no Aversion on her side. But
there is something else to be Considered.


What than Love! Do you pretend to Love, and Consider any thing else but Love?
Consider! pish, that word agrees as ill with Love, as with one of thy age.
Why, when I was a young Fellow, I never considered any thing but how to get a
Mistress, and then how to get rid of her.


But you know, Sir Francis, in Matrimonial Cases, we are to consider how to
maintain Children, and House-keeping, and a Wife will expect a Coach, and a
fine Equipage, and Gay Clothes, and --


And the Devil and all, I know it Sir, I know it.


Now Sir, though I have a tolerable Estate, yet the better to support your
Daughter's Grandeur --


You would have me starve my self.


No, no, I shall be very Moderate.


Phoo, trust to my Fatherly Love Boy, trust to that. If not, yonder she goes,
look upon her, and Consider if you can.


Is that she Sir? Freelove, the very Two we have been talking with this
Morning! what a couple of Dull Rogues were we?


Is that she? you a Lover, and can't distinguish your Mistress in a Mask! Yes,
'tis she, and my fine Niece Aemilia. Talk of Portions! Look on 'em I say;
there's a Motion, there's an Air, there's an Air: See, see, how firm they
tread, hah? and then see their Hips, how they jut, how they roll. Go, get ye
gone, ye lazy Fellows, get ye gone. Ods me, don't stand staring after them, but
follow them, and try how our Ladies can talk. Go, get ye gone.


Well Sir, I'll meet you at the Coffee-House.


Very well, away, away.

These young Fellows now adays are perfectly of the Women's temper, must be
forced to do what they Languish for, or they keep themselves so low, they must
take time to be mis'd; I believe I am brisker than any of them -- How the Jades
have fired me. VVou'd I could meet with any thing that were not my own Flesh
and Blood now -- Any thing though she were in a Stuff Riding-hood.

We that have Vigour, and our Stomachs keen,

Can eat of any Dish, that's sound and clean.


Now am I resolved, for once, to give her a small proof of my unshaken
Fidelity.


Now cannot I find in my heart to discover my self, though I long he should know
me. I see, to Deceive is a greater Pleasure to our Sex, than to Love.


I perceive you are a Woman of Honour, by being so punctual to your
assignation; but I am sorry so much Kindness as well as Justice, is thrown away
on a Man, who is not inclinable to make use of either.


So indifferent, Sir! you talked in another strain this Morning.


Then I had some Reasons.


Why do you not still?


The Cause is removed.


What was that?


To give my Friend an Opportunity to talk to yours.


Why do you follow me now?


To contradict what I then said.


Truly, Sir, 'tis a very needless Trouble you give your self, for be assured, I
as little valued, as I credited what you said.


You see however, I am a Man of Conscience, and could not rest satisfied, till
I endeavoured to convince you --


How little you value me.


That I value you -- as much as a prudent Man ought to do a Mask. But that the
Fates have otherwise disposed of my Heart.


Oh Ridiculous: is the Creature in Love!


Ridiculous:


Do not you know that every particular Woman despises a Man for Loving any
thing but her dear Self? and will you be contemned by the whole Sex, to be
esteemed by one?


I very well know, Madam, Love is a Passion despised by all over whom it has
not a present Sway; not only by those who never yet Loved, but even by those
who have Loved. But I never make other Men's sentiments a standard for my
Pleasures.


And will you be laughed at by your own Sex, and despised by ours? and all
perhaps for one who Loves some body else; Nay, 'tis very likely for one of so
little Wit, that you will be laughed at more for your choice than passion.


Nothing can justify the Excess of my Passion, but the Excellence of the
Object.


I have known some dote even on Deformity, and say the same thing; have fancied
Beauties where there was nothing but Faults. But for my part, I should think it
a scurvy Complement to have my Lover say, his Passion and my Beauties, were
owing to his Fancy.


And yet the most perfect owe their Conquests to that, or we should all Love
the same Person.


I doubt not but your Fancy is unrivalled. Some Nauseous thing.


I tell thee perverse Woman, she is the most excellent of her kind; she is
beyond my description; not only beyond your belief, but imagination.


Fulsome.


Thou dost almost provoke me to treat thee roughly; but that I perceive
something in thy Air and Shape, not much different from hers, and for which I
honour you.


Alas poor Dissembler! I thought I should Discover whence this uncommon
Fidelity of yours proceeded. You very well knew to whom you professed it, and
to whom you addressed these Commendations. I do not doubt but the old Gentleman
I saw you talk to, discovered to you, who your humble Servant was.


Bless me, Madam, is it you!

How could you have the Conscience to tempt Humane Frailty thus? and would you
have blamed me, if I had been false to you, when tempted by you?


As if you did not know me!


Know you^ impossible. Come, indeed I should chide you, as well for trying my
Faith, as for concealing your self so long, when you know the Business of my
coming here was to see you, and the Business of my Life to serve you. When I am
sensible of no pleasure without you, and have no wish beyond you.


Hold, hold, or I shall believe you imagine I have my Mask on still; when
nothing will pass for good Sense that is not strained beyond it; nor for a
Complement under Profaneness; nor for Love that is not ridiculously affected.


You must allow a little heat at first sight, after so tedious an Absence.


That shall not excuse you, if I find you knew me, for I cannot endure to be
undermined.


What will convince you that I did not? shall I have recourse to Swearing? and
--


And Dissembling. No, those are too oft practised to gain Credit with me. But
come, I'll refer it to your Friend that is walking before us; I hear he's a Man
of Sincerity: And if you have fooled me, by talking thus, when you all the time
knew me, expect nothing but Frowns from me these three Days.


I will still pretend I know her not, that I may see how she will resent my
Passion for another.

Believe me, Madam, when I protest it was an affected, and own it was a brutal
Entertainment you received from me this Morning. But I come now full of
Repentance, and full of Hopes you entertain the same favourable Thoughts of me,
you then seemed to have.


There has no alteration happened in my Mind since, but there seems to be in
yours.


A Reflection on your Goodness, Wit, Shape, and Air, was able to soften a heart
more hard than mine; But a second View and farther Proofs, have confirmed it to
you.


Should he say this and not know me? I'm lost.


It must be bad indeed, if so many other Charms cannot atone for it. Be what
it will, I admire it.


You prove your Generosity in giving your heart to a Stranger; but that makes
me doubt your Constancy; a Virtue in a Lover, which every Woman has the Vanity
to expect, though so few deserve it.


You want no assurances of my future Constancy, if you believe I now Love you;
for no one ever Loved, who did not conclude he should always Love the same.


I must conclude you very Rash and Imprudent, to profess such Love to you know
not whom.


The more I show my Imprudence, the fiercer I prove my flame; trust me, it is a
Dull and Languid Passion, which can be checked by any Consideration. Shall I,
to be thought prudent by a World, where some will hate me for being so, and the
rest do me no good, debar my self of real Pleasures? No, no, Prudence must
submit to pleasure, with me.


What! have you no regard to Reputation?


As much as any Man. But whatever we pretend 'tis pleasure rules us. We do not
this, nor forbear that, for the real good of the thing, but that it pleases us.
The Woman that is Chaste, is not so for the sake of that Virtue, but the Fame
of being so, delights her more, than the Joys she receives by being otherwise.
When any Woman refuses what I request, and Love prompts; I conclude, 'tis
because she values something more than Love and me; and she who suffers any
thing to come in Competition with her Love, Loves not.


You have given me great Advantage over you; for since I have not professed a
Passion for you, I am not obliged to any of these Extravagancies, but you are.


I own it. There is nothing I will refuse, that Love and you require.


And you profess this mighty Passion to me only?


Witness it Heaven and Earth, to you only.


Ungrateful Fickle Mah! Look here, behold this Face, and be as much confounded
to behold who 'tis, as grieved 'tis not a Stranger to your Baseness. -- Oh that
Submission well becomes thee now, but dost thou think I am that tame forgiving
Fool, a Bow can Reconcile me to thee, make me forget thy inconsiderate Rash
Temper? when e're I do, I shall forget thee too; remembering one, I shall
remember both, and both despise.


'Tis as I wished.


What's as you wished? that I have found thee false; art thou come here only to
publish it? 'tis well thou can not publish too, that I ever made thee a
Return to thy feigned Passion; that would indeed increase thy Pride.


You never have till now.


Till now! unheard of Impudence! what! when I tell how I disdain a Vice, must
you misconstrue it for Love?


Yet, am I pleased, o'rejoy'd at all this Wrath, which shows your Jealousy; the
greatest sign I e're could yet receive, that I am not indifferent to you; to
have this proof it was, that I disguised my knowledge who you were.


Oh Hypocrite! Artful Dissembler! how quick to catch at an Excuse! this shows
thy Cunning, not thy Innocence, while I supposed thee Honest, 'twas easy to
delude me, and gain a Credit in every thing. Now thou art known, I doubt each
word, Even known Truths uttered by thee, would be suspected.


Do not Persist in this; why will you dash my rising Joy, my first and only
hour of Bliss? I sought to know if you valued me enough to be Jealous, and
would be happy in the search, could I now remove your Doubts -- for I Love --


No doubt, you Love; Love every thing you meet; and therefore 'tis I'll none of
it. Therefore I'll leave you to gratify your Roving Humour. Run, Fawn, Caress
each Common Thing you meet; give them thy heart, a present only fit for such;
try which can affect a Passion most, and which can first Deceive. While such as
I, look with disdain on thee, and pity upon them.


Oh Confusion! what have I done? searching to discover her Love, my only
Happiness, I have forfeited it. Curse on my impertinent Curiosity.

Curse on my dull Designs! my Concern too hindered my telling her, her Uncle
could witness I knew her. Before she's undeceived, she may take some resolution
for ever Fatal to my Love and Quiet. Nay, I have given her a Moments disquiet;
were I an Age upon a Rack, 'twere but a poor Atonement. Oh, I could tear this
prating Tongue out by the Roots, beat out these stupid Brains; and only spare
my heart, because 'tis hers.


What's the meaning of all this? here's some Mischief towards. I met your
Mistress frowning, and find you ranting. What Quarrel already! this Matrimony
runs so in, your head, it has quite spoiled your Humour; stay till the
Comfortable indissolvable Knot is tied, and then I shall not wonder. You Jar like
Man and Wife already.


Oh Bellmine! I have done the most imprudent thing -- You need not wonder at my
Rage, since you beheld her frowns. I am the Ridiculous Cause of Both. I must be
making Experiments.


Why, I have been about some such matter too, which had like to have happened
ill. But thanks to a little decent Assurance, and some few necessary Oaths,
all's well again. My fair Lady having no great reason to think me the most
constant of Lovers, I was resolved to let her see, I was not to be tempted, and
pretended not to know her.


Did you leave her in that Opinion?


Or I would ne'er have left her. I were a hopeful Fellow indeed; and had
improved my Time well in the world, if I could not persuade and swear my
Mistress to any Opinion.


You swore it too, you did not know her?


Swore it! ay lustily: what dost think I would scruple an Oath to put a Lady in
a good Humour?


What unlucky Stars were they which brought us together, and what an unnatural
Conjunction; that ever I should enter into strict Friendship with one who is my
perfect Reverse!


What art thou mad?


I Dreaded I had ruined my self, and you have Conscientiously by your Genteel
Qualities of Lying and Swearing confirmed it. I am undone, if Aemilia believes
I did not know her, and Marina will confirm her in that belief, thanks to your
Industry and Conscience.


Pish is that all? why, I'll forswear it again, Man, to do you Service.


If you could but prevail with your self to speak truth, there would be no
occasion for this Complaisance.


Speak truth to a Woman! why you see what comes of it. I tell thee the Sex bear
such a Detestation to it, that no man ever succeeded with them that practised
it. But come, Sir Francis Feignyouth expects us by this time to carry us a
visiting; I have a mind to see whither her Ladyship be improved in Scandal;
what new Reputations she has sacrificed to her Malice.


I am in no humour to be delighted with such things.


I never knew any Man so easily dejected in Love Affairs. I have already
advised you always to dissemble in Relation to Women. I will give you one
Caution more, in relation to all matters as well as to that.

Ne'er let your mind be with Despair o'recast;

But always hope, you will Succeed at last.

'Tis better far to hope, although those hopes deceive,

Than to despair of Bliss, and yet the Bliss receive.


DOn't you think, Madam, that I'll bear this Life any longer, I will not endure
to be used thus; nor must you think to talk to me at this Rate.


Not suffer me to talk! you saucy Fellow; do you know who I am?


A very needless Question to be put to me by my Lady Volant, considering the
Familiarities that have past between us; your Pride, your Malice, your
Inquisitiveness, your Detraction, are known to all the Town; and your Ladyships
Chastity and Wealth in a more particular manner to your pretended Steward,
Timothy Tellpenny.


And do you upbraid me for having these Qualities so agreeable to your self;
and for the want of those you have ruined? Did I take you up half Starved, and
in Rags, Fed you like an Epicure, and Clothed you like a Gentleman, till you
are as overgrown in Bulk, as with Pride? maintained you so well, made you live
in so much Plenty and Ease, that there is as great an alteration in your Person
as Circumstances; so great, that you neither are known by others nor by you
self: And is this the Reward I have?


No, you have been rewarded to the full, my Good Lady. That you nourished my
Person, was for your own sake; if I had not been of more than Herculean
strength, you had reduced me to a Shadow e're this, to ashes. And has not the
Credit of my being your Steward gained you so much? Have not I managed and
spared prudently, and borrowed for you profusely? Have not I by my Art imposed
you on the Town for a great Fortune, when you know you were never able to give
me a Guinea, that I did not first borrow for you?


But who must pay those Debts?


Who? my Wit must; your Jointure never will. Have not I wrought Sir Francis
Feignyouth to Love you? Have not I persuaded him to a Belief, that your ill
Nature is Wit, and that your Pride is Virtue; that the decay of your Person
proceeds from a neglect of your self, and not from Age; though you know you are
equally industrious to be thought handsome your self, as that no body else may
be thought so. And have not I made your Poverty pass upon him for good
Management? and least we should be disappointed of him, have I not used the
same Arts to Vainly?


You have taken Pains to get me a Husband, that I must own.


As much as ever a young sanguine Wife did, to get an Heir to a Rich feeble
Husband; gone to as many places, and tried as many Men.


But to what purpose have you succeeded yet?


Ay, to be sure 'tis the Man is always blameable. I had succeeded long since,
if you would be pleased to govern that unruly Member, your Tongue; which is
ever employed in Flattering the present, and Railing at the absent; so
disoblige both, for so you do but rail, you no more consider to whom, than of
whom you speak.


Nay, Good Tim, I relent, thy words pierce my heart.


You will exclaim against a standing Army before a broken Officer, and praise
one before a politic Senator; you are never of the same Religion with those
you are in Company with, but change it with every Visitor: A Fanatic before
Papists, and with Fanatics for Jure divino; you commend Ireland when out of
it, and abominate it now you are here; you condemn Plays before Poets, and
adore Sermons before Atheists; you rail at Ladies before their Lovers; and at
Husbands before their Wives; but that I think is not much minded, you have not
got many Enemies by that.


I beseech you, do not treat me thus.


Is there one Person in Town you have not vilified? and to make the Scandal
bring more certain Ruin with it, have you not aspersed other people with your
own actions? Do I not know all your Faults, and have not I carefully concealed
all for above these three years, that I have known you?


Thou hast, I own it, I was to blame to deny thee.


And after all I have done, and all I expect to do, refuse me a Guinea, and
when I carried the Plate to pawn too.


There, there's a couple for you, though you know dear Tim, how very few more I
have left.


Pretty Rogues! Comfortable Rogues! how they mollify me! how they smile on me!
you know Madam, is to entry on your Projects, alas, what occasion should I have
for Money, but to do you Service! what have I almost forgot! Mr. Bellmine, who
they say is to Marry Sir Francis's Daughter, is Landed this Morning; now you
must use all your Art to delay this Marriage, till your own be perfected, and
till you have got the Knights Money in your own hands; for Mr. Bellmine, having
a good Estate, will require a great Portion, which will disable Sir Francis
from paying your Debts, and spoil our Projects on him, for his Estate being
Entailed, he cannot raise much, and the moment he is Married, I will arrest him
for Four or Five thousand Pounds you must pretend to owe me.


Four or Five thousand! Ten or Twelve.


Ever insariable. No, no, such a Debt and the Bondage of Matrimony together,
will break his heart.


Well, I leave all to your Management.


Is not that a Coach stopped? 'tis some visitor, I will usher them up.


How insolent the Rogue is grown! Thus we are ever used by such Fellows, when
we put our selves in their Power; and we never treat them better than they
deserve, but they treat us as we deserve; I am glad however he knows not my
Grand Secret; that would make him Ten times more saucy. I have concealed it
above these five years, not only from him, but from the whole Town, and with
much ado, heaven knows, considering how much depends on it, the place, and my
Female Frailties, for I have observed that Secrets of the greatest Consequence,
are preserved with the greatest pain. That we could but keep a Secret with as
much ease, as we can dissemble! but the Reason's plain, the one gives us
trouble, the other pleasure, as for Example.

Mr. Vainly, your most humble Servant.


Your most Obedient Vassal, Dear Madam.


Your Company, Mr. Vainly, is so coveted by every one, that it is impossible
you should make any particular person happy with it, often or long. You are
grown a Stranger here.


I protest Madam, ever since I was here last night, I have been so tormented
with the Spleen.


Alas Sir, that is a cruel Distemper truly. But it is a Fine you must pay for
Wit. You Wits are all subject to that.


We are so indeed, Madam; and really I believe I have it to a more violent
degree than anyone. I swear Madam, it has such an effect on me sometimes, that
I do not put above half a pound of Powder in my Periwig for a whole day, and
Discomposes my Face so violently, that I cannot bear even the sight of a
Looking-Glass, and I hurry abroad without the Garniture of a Patch, or a
Sword-knot.


Is't possible! nay, if it makes you neglect your self, your Friends must
expect to be served so too.


Every thing is disagreeable to me then, but your Ladyship. That I think was
Nice.


Oh Lard, Sir!


Nay, I swear 'tis truth. Alas Madam, 'tis scarce a Complement in this dull
Town.


Do you think it so too, Mr. Vainly?


Oh Madam, I cannot bear it.


Nay solemnly, Sir, it was a great while before I could; it agreed as ill with
my Constitution, as it doth with my Inclinations; but, thank my Stars, I have
done tolerably well, since my being Naturalised. How fortunate am I to have my
Opinion strengthened by one of your Judgment! 'tis a horrid place, and I vow.
(as you say Mr. Vainly) I do not see a pretty Woman in it.


Not one but your Ladyship; nor is there an agreeable Man here.


Only Mr. Vainly. The Women are so affected.


And the Men so Proud.


So Censorious --


And so selfish -- and when a parcel of 'em are met together, so talkative.


They make as much Noise as a Crowd of Apprentices at a Bonfire.


But now we talk of such People; Mr. Bellmine is Landed this Morning, who is to
Marry Mrs. Marina; and with him there is come a Gentleman who has the same
design on Aemilia.


No doubt they'll succeed; since one is as little admired for her Wit and
Beauty, as the other is for her Fortune.


Ha, ha, ha, Your Ladyship has the neatest Way of Raillery, I have had some
Encouragements there; and I do nor doubt but Mr. Freelove (for that's his Name)
will desist as I did, when she hears he is a Beggar, and when he has seen your
Ladyship.


You are so obliging -- But pray what sort of a Man is he? he must needs be an
extraordinary Person who has so particular a Fancy.


He was very fond of me, till he began to suspect me for his Rival, so was
Bellmine too. The best I know of him is, he is just come from dear England, and
has been lately in much dearer France The worst I know of him, or indeed can
know is, that tho he wears fine Clothes, he has no more Money than his
Mistress.


Oh hideous!


The best Jest is (for all the Town know it already) though they are acquainted
with each other's Condition, they are in Love with each other, and are resolved
to Marry.


And Starve. Oh Matrimony and Poverty joined, are Comfortable Things! Sure his
Head is as empty as his Pocket.


That I suppose, you will soon be convinced of; for I saw him with Sir Francis
Feiguyouth, who I do not Question will bring him here this Evening.


Alas, Mr. Vainly, you know I cannot be so rude to refuse a Visit, or I would
never suffer that Ridiculous Fellow to come within my Doors; but Civility often
constrains us to do what we hate. -- I think I hear some Body coming -- You'll
pardon me if I retire, it would not bear the appearance of Decency to be found
Entertaining you alone; I assure you my Woman would not behave her self thus,
were any other here but you. You'll Excuse me Sir --


Oh Dear Madam, this Confidence in me, is the greatest Honour that can be
conferred on, Madam, your most Obedient Servant.

She is fond of me to a violent Degree, that's plain; the next time I come, I
will propose Marriage to her; I fear no Rival, especially that Old Fop.


Come Gentlemen, come, you shall see now, if I have not made a Good Choice, you
shall. -- Ha! how! what! Vainly here! Pray Sir, if I may be so bold, what is
your Business here?


My Business, Sir!


Ay Sir, your Business, Sir; I think I speak very plain, Sir?


Oh Dear Sir Francis! Plain Dealing is a Jewel, you cannot oblige me more, than
to deal plainly and freely by me. I take it for a signal proof of your
Kindness.


Here's a shifting young Rogue; who would have thought it had so much Cunning.
But answer me to the purpose, or I shall try how you can evade a Pass of this.
What is your Business here?


The Business of all the World, Sir; to wait on my Lady Volant.


Is it so? And have you seen her?


Have I seen her! Oh Goodness, what a Question there is? Pray Sir, do my Visits
use to be refused, Sir?


There are indeed some Ladies, who treat all Men alike, the Impertinent with
the same Regard they do the Man of Sense, the Little, Fiddling, Prating Fop like
the Man of Honour and Discretion; But my Lady Volant is no such, she can
distinguish, she can Sir --


Ay, I know it Sir, I know it; and you will find so in a little time.


Why ye Little, Young Pert, Prating, Fiddling Boaster, do you hope to Succeed,
where I have Pretensions? Don't you know that I can Fight? ha --


Not with this Gentleman I hope, Sir Francis. Methinks you mistake the right
use of him; he is properer for your Diversion than your Anger.


Ay Sir, 'tis very true. I have fought, Sir, several times, but in my Opinion,
Laughing and Talking is better Sport by the half.


Especially to one whom it becomes so well as you.


Your most humble Servant, Sir: I am glad we have Gentlemen come to us now that
understand Breeding and Conversation; 'Tis not to be had here. I protest, Sir,
I am forced to go to England once a year, to refine my understanding.


What need you put your self to that Trouble? Cannot you keep a Correspondence
with your Taylor?


With my Taylor, Sir!


Yes; For all you Learn by your Journey, is a New Fashion; and all you
understand is, whither your Clothes be well made.


You are so obliging, Sir. Truly I think this Coat is very well Cut, sits with
a Good Air. I had it sent me by an Express from London; for I cannot bear any
thing but what comes from thence. Oh 'tis a happy Place! and in a blessed
Country, where there are all things necessary, where there are such pleasures,
and such Conveniences to enjoy them!


I have been told you have all those here.


Oh not one, Sir, not one.


You have good Wine?


Yes, yes, that's true, I had forgot that.


Plenty of all sorts of Fish and Flesh.


Phoo, they are perfect Drugs. Plenty of Meat and Drink; but nothing else.


The People are Civil and Obliging.


Especially to Strangers.


And Hospitable.


To a Fault, Sir.


The Air is Good, a temperate Climate.


Much the same as in England.


The Soil is Rich.


Oh 'tis too Rank.


What necessaries then, or what pleasures do you want? You have fine Women.


They are kind I am sure.


To you chiefly I suppose.


Shall I make a Confession then among my Friends? I do not believe ever any Man
has been so successful. I do not know that ever I asked in vain.


I can hold no longer. Why thou little worthless Contemptible Wretch! Do you
entertain Strangers with your aversion for your Country, without being able to
give one Reason for it; and can you give but one Reason for liking it, which if
it were true, would make all others abhor it. The Women fond of thee! Why the
Common Hackneys who live by thee, Contemn thee. But such as he think if he is
not affronted, he is beloved.


You must know, Sir,


Your Servant Sir. This Spark takes leave, I perceive, always alike, I suppose
too of every Body alike, and in the same Stile as he concludes his dull Insipid
Billet-doux.


Ay, hang him, hang him, he is always dully Brisk and Impertinent. But here she
comes who is all perfection.

Madam, Your Ladyships Slave. Be pleased to know these Two Gentlemen; this is
Mr. Freelove, and this is Mr. Bellmine. You see, Madam, how Communicative I am
to you of every thing that is Good; you shall share all my Goods.


This is a signal Proof indeed.


This Gentleman is in Love with my Niece, and this with my Daughter. What say
you, Madam, shall we be Married all together? keep time, odd, I believe I could
-- make it a day of Revelling, and a night of Loving, Feast all day and Kiss
all night.


Sir Francis, I have all the Respect and Friendship for you, that a Man of your
Excellent Parts can require with Modesty, but I must desire you not to talk so
loosely before me. Marriage is a sacred thing, Sir Francis, a very sacred thing;
yet it is a thing, Sir Francis, that may be abused, and may be perverted to
raise indecent and unruly Cogitations.


I told you how reserved she was.


I presume you found Mr. Vainly here. I assure you, Sir Francis, I left the
Room because he tacitly implied the thing Marriage, though on his knees, and with
all the Chastity and Modesty imaginable.


There she has given the Reason.


Can he mistake this for Virtue? I would as soon take a Bully's Rant for true
Courage, or a Cringing Designing Courtiers low bow for true Humility. This
Ridiculous Cant, this affected Squeamishness is as nauseous to me, as open
Lewdness, and I am sure as certain a sign, and a greater Crime, for she adds
Hypocrisy.


I am so far of your Opinion, that if you will take him aside, I am resolved to
make Love to her.


What at first! and to what end?


I have just now a Project conceived in my head, but I have not time now to
impart it.


Son Bellmine, you must try to prevail with my Lady here, and as you succeed
with her for me, so you must expect to succeed with me for my Daughter.


Oh for some Art to Charm him from Marina; or at least delay the Match; for I
must dally no longer with my old Gentleman.


This is a severe Task, Madam, that Sir Francis has imposed upon me: To require
me to make Love to you, and not for my self.


He is very sensible, Sir, that his Daughter has Charms to secure you from one
much more engaging.


Fathers are as Blind as Lovers. And give me leave to think he is a much more
indulgent Father, than passionate Lover, or he would dread your greater Power
would make me false both to my Love and Friendship: And should Marina make the
same Trial of my Constancy, she would convince me she exceeds you as much in
Vanity, as she is inferior to you in every Charm.


Truly, Sir, if Sir Francis had such a Talent of Elocution, I believe he might
have succeeded long since. And for his Daughter, I conjecture I am not much
inferior to her in the superlative Charm, Fortune.


That never was a Charm to me; though I could wish it were one to you, since I
can at least equal Sir Francis's.


Sure, Sir, you can have no other design in this, but to try with what temper I
can support such Complements.


That is not my design, I assure you.


Is it not indeed, Sir? on your Veracity.


No, on my Honour, Madam; nor can you suppose it is. Methinks a Lady of your
piercing Wit, should in a Moment read ones thoughts, as in a Moment so much
Beauty Conquers.


'Tis as dangerous to believe one of you young Gentlemen, as it is difficult to
deny so fine a Person.


Convince me, you think me the latter, by allowing me a Moments Free
Conversation.


Alas Sir, even to talk thus is a Liberty I never permitted to any before; and
I am sure you cannot in reason ask more.


Lovers are always thought Extravagant in their Demands, by the indifferent.
Therefore I fear to ask what I would give the World for, that you would let me
see you this Evening in St. Stephen's- Green.


Oh me Sir, what would the World say! or what I value more, what would you
think?


The World shall never know it, and for me --


What say you Sir, have you no Estate?


Not an Acre, Sir.


Nor Money?


Not a Penny.


A strange dull Fellow this! so hope to make your Fortune by her: But I can
assure you, she is in the same Circumstances as you are, not worth a Penny.


I knew it when first I saw her, yet my Love received not the least Check by
that; I hope she will prove as Generous.


Generous do you call it? Death! you make me mad. What a Pox is there no way to
be thought Generous, but by becoming Mad and Begging. And pray Sir, if I may
ask you a Civil Question, if she were Generous enough, as you call it, and mad
enough, as I call it, to Marry you, how would you Maintain her, Sir?


Oh, trust to our Stars for that.


I hope she will have more Grace. Trust to your Stars for that! I would as soon
trust you for ten Thousand Pounds. I have not heard a Fellow talk so Sillily in
all my life.


And I assure you Sir, were our Circumstances changed, you should command that
Sum from me. I have so great an Honour for you, and so high an Opinion of your
Worth and Integrity.


Strangely Impertinent!


I hope, Sir, I shall not find you my Enemy in this matter however.


No, no Sir, you need no other Enemy than your self, and those Stars you were
talking of. Your Servant Sir, I must mind my own Affairs now. What a confounded
Friend has Bellmine chosen out? no doubt a Sharper, and lives upon him. But
I'll quickly part 'em, when he is Married to my Daughter.


'Tis well my Breach with Aemilia is repaired; by his owning he told me who she
was, or he would never do me that Justice now; for I perceive by this
Declaration of mine, I have forfeited his good Opinion. He cannot relish even
Flattery from the mouth of a Man he thinks is in want.


And she has listened to your Arguments, you say, and seems Compliant?


Yes Sir, she has promised to comply with what I desired.

Madam, here are some Ladies come to wait on you.


Oh me! I would not for a Kingdom be found alone Entertaining Men. This is a
Censorious Town, and I would not give them an Advantage over my Bright
Reputation.


I believe it may be my Niece and Daughter, I ordered them to attend your
Ladyship this Evening. Ay, 'tis so, 'tis so. Observe now, Sir, if she has not
too much Wit, to be so Generous as to Marry you for Love only, and to trust to
your Stars.


I am sure if she Marries for any other Reason, it shall not be me.


I protest Ladies, were it any but you, who surprised me in this indecent
Criminal Converse, I should never have the assurance to obtrude my self upon
Company again.


I assure your Ladyship, we have not perceived any thing Criminal; and if you
please to keep your own Council, we are not at all Curious.


Ay, but Madam, to be entertaining men alone, that's the thing grieves me.


No, 'tis because that you have not a Man alone, that's the thing Grieves you.


For they are so Censorious here, that really I do not in all the Sphere of my
Memory recollect one Woman whose Reputation is not Contaminated.


I am sorry to hear that.


Your Ladyships excepted. Truth on it is, they make themselves obnoxious to such
Calumnies by their Imprudent Behaviour. For was not my Lady Courtly seen twice
in one week at the Play? and was not my Lady Blameless in a Mask in the
Gallery? and was not Mrs. Wellbred heard most Impiously and Obscenely to wish
it were the Custom in this Town, for Women to sit in the Pit? and is not Mrs.
Winlove seen to walk often in St. Stephen's- Green.


I beseech you, Madam, do not Censure Ladies for this, for I have been Guilty
of all these things several times.


What! and do you own it?


Certainly own it; for if there be a Fault in it, it is only when it is made a
secret.


Sir Francis, I protest you must pardon me, if I Conjecture these Ladies have
strange Crude Notions of Honour.

Well Ladies, you may do what you please, but I would no more be Guilty of
these things, than I would sit at a Play in the second Row, which I think very
improper for one of my Quality.


And Beauty, Madam.


Oh Sir! why really I think it a Disgrace to both. But I hope you do not
approve the Behaviour of some, who are remarked for daily admitting the visits
of Men.


I must Confess, Madam, I seldom refuse their visits whose Conversation I like.


Oh hideous! what can you regard in Men's Conversation, that is Divertive? they
are all Insidious, you may believe me. They are always pestring a Woman with
their Love, then they beg Liberty to repeat their Visits, and implore a
reciprocal Passion; and not contented with that, they desire to wait on her
abroad, nay, to meet 'em abroad alone, and Masked, and when they have procured
our Consent so far, then they imprudently proceed to --


Good Madam, do not you proceed farther at this time.


I was only going to Caution you of the Danger, and warn you to keep them at a
distance, a vast distance, for some of 'em are so forward, that if we permit
'em to squeeze our Hand, they will incontinently Write to us, and the first
Opportunity that offers, will force a Kiss, and they have no sooner ravished
that, but --


Indeed, Madam, we want no Caution to avoid all this, nor should I think any
Man Impudent, who attempted all these things, if I granted him any one of them.


'Tis my great Concern for you, that's all; for I would have every ones
Reputation as unsullied as my own.


What a damned Malicious Jade it is?


No Niece, you want no Caution in this matter; but you do in another as
Material as your Reputation; your Fortune, I mean. For indeed who can preserve
a Reputation without Money, or if one should, who regards it?


So, now for a Lash at me.


Look here, Niece, here is a Gentleman has given himself the trouble to come
hither to make Love to you, without having Money enough to pay for a License,
or the VVedding Dinner.


Madam, I own. --


Ay, ay, he owns it, what would you have more; a very honest undesigning
Gentleman as ever I saw.


I have no hopes you should ever have a favourable thought for me, if it is to
be purchased with Wealth. But if the sincerest Passion, the humblest Adoration,
a Heart immov'd by any thing but you, can atone for the want of Wealth --


Satisfy your self, Sir, they will not. Nor your fine Person, nor your Wit,
nor your Courage, nor your Stars, nor a thousand things more. To convince you
how small I think their Power, I will leave you in my Mistress's Lodgings. Come
Girls, come away. Madam, as soon as I have disposed of my Daughter, I will beg
to be made happy.


Your Ladyships Servant.


Your most humble Servant. Nay, I will wait on you down. Do you think I would
be left alone with Men?


So you have very industriously ruined your self with the old Gentleman. But
let us be gone before her Ladyship returns.


Yes, he will avoid me as carefully as we would an old cast Mistress.


But where is the necessity of persuading him you have no Estate?


That Aemilia may be the more convinced it is so.


Would you have her Love a Man because he is poor?


No, but I would not have her for bear it for that Reason.


He will make use of all his Power to oppose you.


The better still; I shall make the stronger trial of her Love.
When Love's sincere, no Enterprise is hard;
And Wealth and Titles then bear no Regard.

SUre I should know that Face. My old Acquaintance Timothy in Being!


What, my dear Rakehell alive still!


Nor Time nor thy Disguise can hide thee from me.


I think indeed it is five years since we have seen each other; but what
Disguife prithee?


Why that bloated Belly, and those bladder Cheeks, that Crimson Hue, and those
huge Pillars which support thee. Thou were it as VVan and Thin when last I saw
thee, as if you were just escaped from the Galleys.


Ease and Plenty have made this Alteration, Eating well, and Lying soft. Thank
my Stars, I thrive very well in this Country.


Then I suppose you Despise it.


That's but an odd Reason.


A very common one, for I have observed that none Despise Ireland so much as
those who thrive best in it. And none are so severe in their Reflections upon
it, as those who owe their Birth and Fortune to it; I have known many of 'em,
when they come first to London, think there is no way so ready to purchase the
Title of a Wit, as to Ridicule their own Country.

But tell me, hast thou thrust thy self into any Business? Hast thou got any
Employment?


Yes, a very pleasant one, I am in keeping.


In keeping!


Ay, I am kept.


Kept!


Kept! ay kept; so I say, don't you hear.


But not understand. Kept! for what in the name of Venus? to roll on some
Body's Bowling Green?


Well, Sir, you may be as merry as you please with my Shape, but I have other
secret Charms, Sir, I have. For know that I have been in keeping these three
years, and by a fine Lady; A Witty Lady.


And a Rich one?


Not altogether so Rich, as when I knew her first, but she has somewhat left
still.


Then I suppose as her Fortune declines, so does your Passion. And so you are
now about quitting her.


But like a Man of Honour, not till I have first provided for her; I am about
Marrying her to a considerable Man.


O Rare Tim! now her Name?


I know thou art a Trusty Dog, or I had not told you so much; but in a little
time you shall know all. And now pray give me an account of your Affairs, for I
think you seem to be much in the same Circumstances as formerly.


I do but seem to be so. You must know I'm Married.


See the difference of our Cases, how I thrive upon one, more than you on the
other. But pray let me know farther.


You remember about five years ago, I waited on Colonel Worthy; I attended him
to Flanders, where he was killed, but before he died, for some secret services,
he gave me all his Clothes and Linning and Fifty Guineas.


Lucky Rogue! sure you fancied your self a Colonel then?


No, I had the humility to dispense with the Title of Captain, which I assumed
immediately after my Arrival in London; 'tis true I pretended to an Estate too,
and so went a Fortune hunting.


Very prudently done.


In short, I met with a Lady who was on the same scent; and we Believed,
Cheated, and Married each other.


The common Fate of Fortune-hunters. But what is become of your Spouse?


I can no more give you a particular account of her, than how I spent my fifty
Guineas. She first apprehended the Cheat, and taking the opportunity of my
being Drunk one Night, marched off, and I never heard of her since. In a little
time after having lost my Wife, pawned my Clothes, and spent all my Money; I
returned to my old way of Living, and have got into a good Service again.


So 'tis but the Right about as you were.


I wish I could find her out tho, not out of the least Passion for her Person,
but for her Fortune, for she has some. Here comes the Gentleman I now serve, an
Admirable Man.


I saw him to day. But they say he is poor.


You must know that --


Come hither, Good Sir.


VVe'll talk another time.


Well, well, Adieu.


With your Master's Leave, I have an Affair, which I can only trust a Man of
your Diligence and Art with.


Your most humble Servant, Sir, I will discharge it accordingly.


You see that Gentleman that comes this way.


Him with the Two Ladies?


The same. That is Sir Francis Feignyouth; go to him directly, he does not know
you, and with all the Cunning you have persuade him there is a Lady desperately
in Love with him.


With an old Man, Sir!


Have a little patience. First fire him with a description of her, and when you
find him eager; seem to have taken him for me all the while, that will vex him.
Then advise him to come disguised, and pass for me, and assure him she shall
meet him here this Evening, and let him know he may be very free with her.


It shall be done, Sir.


Well, walk on a little, that you may not be seen talking to us.


And so you design he shall meet my Lady Volant in your place. What will be
the effect of that?


He will discover that she had an Appointment with me, and if he is not stark
mad, it will Convince him what a Creature she is.


But is this very Honourable in you to deceive a poor Lady thus?


It would be much less Honourable to suffer him to Marry her; for he will not
be persuaded but she is very Rich.


He mistakes her for a Woman of Wit too; But I fancy except Virtue, that is the
greatest want she has.


She has some Wit when she talks to Inferior People; but when in Conversation
with those of Fashion and of Sense, she endeavours to elevate her Thoughts, (as
she calls it) and refine her Language, and makes both unintelligible, so is
affectedly Ridiculous, To be Witty she spoils her Language, and her Language
confounds even what is Wit.


'Tis strange he should be blind to so many Faults, but you are in the right to
prevent his Ruin, since you hope to Marry his Daughter. Do you start at the
Word.


The nearer the Precipice, the more it dazzles my sight and understanding. Why
you used to dislike the thing as much as I, till you saw this Aemilia; and
remember if e're I am weary of the Bondage, 'twas by your Example I submitted
to it. Though I expect to be thought the more prudent Person, who have my fancy
for the Lady backed with a good Fortune.


You deserved to be ill used for your suspicions; and may be no greater a
Gainer than I am; for (as the World goes) whatever Fortune the Lover gains by
his Mistress, 'tis ten to one but the Husband will repay with Interest, to get
rid of his Wife. I hope we shall succeed, and shall have no reason to Repent. I
am impatient to know my Fate; Let us lose no time; your Emissary's Discourse
with Sir Francis may give us an Opportunity to speak to the Ladies; I see them
coming, let us walk on.


Sir, will you be pleased to favour me with a Minuits Audience?


What's thy Business?


I would wish you were alone, Sir. I have something to deliver to you from a
fair Lady.


Em -- walk on, I'll overtake you, this is my Lawyers Servant about an
Extraordinary Affair. And what Commands pray has this same fair Lady for me?


Commands! alack, alack, poor Soul she has no Commands, no Sir, her Empire's at
an end, and conferred on you. Don Cupid has taken stand on your shoulders, and
with all his might has shot her through and through.


Hark ye Friend, if you would have me believe you are in earnest, speak sense,
speak sense do ye see, and don't prate to me of Empires, and Don Cupids, and
Darts, and such stuff, but tell me plainly, and in short, what it is you would
be at.


Well then, Sir, since you will have it without any Decoration or Preamble, you
shall; and truly Sir, I do not wonder you are impatient to know, that the
prettiest Woman, the sweetest Woman, the wittiest Woman, and till she saw you,
the modestest Woman even in her heart, should slight all the Men in Town, and
fall desperately in Love with you, only upon seeing you.


Do not you banter now my Friend? hah! do not you banter.


To Convince you I do not, Sir, I will tell you where you shall see her, and I
will not take one Penny for my pains.


Two of the best Proofs a Man would desire. But to raise my Spirits a little,
pray tell me what sort of a Woman is she?


Why Sir, in the first place then, she is of a considerable Family.


Phoo, Pox of her Family.


And of a most accomplished Education --


A Pox of her Education too; that may render all her other Beauties useless.


I mean, Sir, she Sings, Dances, Plays on several Instruments, speaks French,
and the like, Sir.


Ay, now thou say something. But her Person, let me hear somewhat of that.
She is not little?


Of middle Stature.


That's well; I hate a Dwarf and a Maypole. A little Frisking, Jumping,
tumbling Ball; and a Long, Thin, Scraggy, ungainly Lath. Her Complexion next.


Like her Stature, between Extremes; Neither White nor Brown; Sanguine, but no
fixed Red, except upon her Lips, a faint Blush seems always rising in her Face,
but clearest on her Cheoks.


Admirable, admirable! not Lean you say.


No Grape that's kindly Ripe, can be
So Round, so Plump, so Soft as she.
You know the Song.


I am all on Fire. Deiicate Creature! I have done with my Lady Volant, that's
certain. I do not want Money, why then should I be a Slave for it? Now her
Eyes, her Eyes, if they prove right!


Of a sprightly Blew.


That's not so well. I could wish 'em Languishing, and of a Glossy Black.


See them, see them, Sir, and dislike 'em if you can. But her Temper is so
Gentle, so Meek --


Oh I abhor a Termagant; I hate a Mistress that a Man must go to Cuffs with. I
would have her just such a Woman as you Describe her, Soft, and Compliant; only
her Eyes, I could wish her Eyes were Black.


Ne'er mind the Colour, Sir, 'tis not the Colour makes the Eye beautiful, 'tis
the shape of it, the Lustre.


Well, well, go on with her Description.


Her Teeth are small, even, white and clean; smooth, and look as if just
polished.


If she answers this Description, I will make thy Fortune, thou hast made me
already fancy my self Happy, I am in Raptures. But go on, go on, be never
silent in her praise. I am sorry her Eyes a'n't. Black though.


'Twere endless, to recount all her Perfections; but to conclude, Sir, to prove
how large a share she has of Wit and Judgment, this delicate Creature, with
thousand other Charms, all in their Bloom, offers her Heart to you.


Patience, Patience! I am Five and twenty again, Eighteen, and shall I have the
riffling of all these Charms say thou?


For my part, I believe she will deny you nothing No one that Loves so much
can. In sleep she dreams of you, and all her waking hours are spent in sighs
and wishes for her admired Charming Bellmine.


The Devil! for whom?


For her dear Lovely Bellmine.


For the Devil.


What mean you, Sir?


For Bellmine! ah Plague is all this meant to him!


Meant to him! why are not you Mr. Bellmine? did she not point you to me this
very day as you walked here with three or four more?


No Sir, I am not Mr. Bellmine, nor have I been like him these Twenty years. A
Curse on your mistake! that has kindled all this Fuel within me for nothing. I
am struck cold already. I fancy my self Fourscore. But Sirrah, I'll be revenged
on you for giving me these hopes to no purpose. I would not have been balked
thus for a Thousand Pound.


I am sure Sir, if it be not you, that she Loves, I could wish it were you. I
have a greater Inclination for your Service than for his.


What good, will your Inclinations or Wishes do me?


Why, a great deal Sir; since I have committed this mistake, I will persevere
in it.


How, how!


I have already betrayed the poor Lady's Secrets, and to make you amends for
this Disturbance, I will order matters so, that you shall be the happy Man.


I burn again. Let me Embrace thee. But the Way, the Way, the Method, my dear
Rogue!


You shall meet her, and act like him.


That will be somewhat difficult, I fear me, for an old Man.


For once, Sir, you may do well enough. I will persuade her to meet you here
this Evening as soon as it is growing dark; she shall come in a Mask, and do
you come muffled in a Cloak; she is so excessively Fond of Mr. Bellmine, that I
am sure, she will comply with my Proposal, and with his Desires; therefore you
may be very Free with her, hurry her immediately into a Coach; and Fear will
make her yield to you, as Love would to him.


Excellent, Excellent! I shall not contain my self till the happy hour. But
will not you play the Rogue, and deceive me?


Upon my Honour, Sir, it shall be as I say.


Enough. The Honour of a Pimp is sacred. The next thing dear to him is Gold;
here are five Guineas for you before hand, that thy Honour may be more sacred;
(and pray consider how Guineas are raised) and if I find every thing answerable
to what you have said, I will Love her, and Reward thee immoderately. I will go
and prepare my self, and be sure you be punctual.


How sweet the Profit, how deserved the Gain,
Which we as a Reward t'our Wit obtain.
Now to give an account of my Negotiation.

At least Madam, you must acknowledge I am industrious for the good of your
Family.


And I suppose, I must be Claimed as a Reward for your good Service to my
Father.


For my part, I doubt the success of your Design; for I have so good an Opinion
of my Uncle, that I do not think he will be persuaded to meet a Mask. I am sure
he rails against such People more than any Man.


Railing is no more a sign of Virtue, than of Wit. In this age People are
seldom what they seem; there are some go to Church without Devotion. We have
Critics without Wit or Judgment; and some Fight without Courage; and there are
Women very precise without Virtue. And I equally suspect the Woman who Boasts
her Virtue, and the Man who Boasts his Valour; and it generally has the same
effect, we are picked at it, and provoked to destroy their Reputation.


To Convince you, Madam, we make a right Judgment of Sir Francis; Come hither
Trickwell, and give an Account how you have succeeded.


I have succeeded as much to your Desires, Sir, as for my own Profit. Witness
this Gold, Sir. Thus has he Rewarded me for Obeying you.


What do you think now, Madam? You behaved your self very Cunningly to get
Money from him. Yet I have often known Men Starve their Family, and Feast their
Mistress.


I remember, Sir, I heard you give a Description of one of your Mistresses, and
I entertained him with that, which agreed almost perfectly with what he
Admires. He is gone in Raptures, to prepare himself for the wished for hour.


And you depend on my Lady Volant's coming.


I have Enticed her by the hopes both of Love and Profit; which will make her
as punctual to me, as a Sharper would be to a young Rich Cully he had Set. She
will no more fail meeting me, than Mrs. Flippant, with her new Equipage, would
miss the Strand on a Sunday.


If she be such a Woman, 'twill be Charity to prevent the Match. But I fancy,
Mr. Bellmine, you have some self Interest in this Matter: You expect my
Cousin's Fortune should be increased by this, to make you digest Matrimony the
better, for I hear you have dreadful apprehensions of it, and are resolved to
have a great Fortune.


Both Reports of me have been truth, I must confess, Madam; but the more I see
this Lady, the more my Aversion for the one, and my Regard for the other, are
lessened.


If you Marry for Money, you must expect to be severely Censured by one who has
none.


But Madam, you will not have favourable Thoughts for one who knows that, and
yet dies for you. Who would sacrifice his Life to be in that state which he
there dreads.


But have you Considered all the Inconveniences of Marrying a Woman without a
Fortune?


All, all Madam; and would undergo a thousand more for you.


And how you will be laughed at by the World.


I'll pity their Ignorance. I have Considered all Madam, all the Hazards, all
the Inconveniences; how difficult to have a Man's Behaviour approved by all,
that it is impossible to be thought a Kind Husband by the Women, and a prudent
one by the Men. But you shall ever Rule your Conduct and my Heart. I give my
Heart without Reserve, had I the World, I would bestow it so. I will be still
your Slave, still gaze upon those Eyes, and every look shall make me more your
Slave. Oh I want words to tell how truly I adore you! or had I words that were
Expressive, my Passion is too fierce to utter them.


If you declare your real Thoughts, your Passion cannot be greater than your
Generosity; and may be easier Feigned. You see I listen to your Love, because I
believe it disinterested; if I thought it were not, not all your Art should
gain a Moments Audience. I hear you talk of Love, though I were silent, to hear,
gives hopes.


Let me for ever talk, and only talk of Love. To Love be all the Business of my
Life; it were abuse of Life to Live to any other End, be every Moment so
employed; I talk, but it is Faint and Mean; my Heart now swells, and seems to
heave and rage, that I no better can describe its Passion. It bids me say,
amongst a thousand things that crowd upon my Tongue, I cannot Love you more, I
ne'er will Love you less.


It would be a damned unconscionable thing now in her, to remember all this
after Marriage; for 'tis as unreasonable for Women to expect Love after
enjoyment, as for a Man who had spent his Fortune, to expect as much Credit as
when he had it in possession.


What is that you mutter of unconscionable?


Why, I say it is an unconscionable thing of you both, to keep us in pain
thus, when you may so easily remove it. And to seem to doubt our Passion, when
we offer so fair to prove it.


And what is that, Good Sir?


What I could never bear the sound of, till those bewitching Eyes of yours
sweetened it; Marriage.


Why do you expect that I should disobey my Father?


Why do you suppose that I expect you will be obedient to him?


Nay Cousin, you need not fear he will oppose you; but I owe some Obedience to
an Uncle too, and I am very sure, I never shall have his Consent. But we'll
talk no farther of this Matter, till we see what becomes of his Intrigue.


I think the Hour of the Lovers Meeting is almost come. I suppose you will
hover hereabout, to see what will be the Issue of it.


It may be some diversion to you Ladies to be Witness to it.


No, that will not be so proper; we shall be satisfied to receive an account of
it from you. Till when your Servant.


Though grieved to part, I ought not to Complain, since you have bid me hope.


Prithee Aemilia, why would you put this Constraint upon your Inclinations? I
am sure you had rather he had stayed, I read it in your looks; I found your
Eyes had almost betrayed your Heart.


I found so too. That made me more desirous he should be gone. I have Confessed
enough for this time.


Yes truly, so you have, since you design to Marry him. For Men's Importunity
and our Shyness have the same end.

Their subtle Sex is violent to Gain,

And we Deny, more surely to Obtain.


YOnder she comes; now if I can Disguise my self till I get her to a Coach,
she's my own. Would it were a little darker however.


Who is there? Mr. Bellmine.


The same.


You see, Dear Sir, what an excessive Sovereignty you have over me, to compel
me to meet you. But you have an irresistible way with you; and all the World
extols you for a Man of Honour, and I hope you will behave your self like one
to me.


Methinks I should know that Voice.

I, I, my Dear, I will; I'll make your Fortune.


Your obedient Servant, Dear Sir; indeed it is as uncommon to meet with a
Generous Lover in this profligate Age, as with a Secret or a Constant one. But
I Conjecture you to have all these Virtues, or I had not consented to meet you
at first Request.


First Request! What a Pox does she mean? I'm certain I know her voice.


Pray Heaven, I be not mistaken in my Man.


By all that's Virtuous, my Lady Volant! Is she the amorous Lady! This was a
lucky Discovery; I'll try her farther.

Come my dear, I am impatient till we are more private, I have a Coach waiting
at the end of the Green.


I'll wait on you immediately. Oh Heavens! how near was I to be ruined! This is
Sir Francis! what can this mean? ha! I have it now. A Trick of that Villain
Bellmine's to prevent our Marriage; but I'll be even with him.


Come, are you ready?


Ungrateful Worthless Fellow!

Not only base thy self, but would have me too, share thy Guilt: how can thou
be that Mercenary Wretch, to Abuse thy Noble Friend Sir Francis Feignyouth, to
deceive his Virtuous Beautiful Daughter, forsake and leave her when the Match
is concluded on, and Marry me, because I am Wealthier? But though thou would be
so Base, think you I am so? Do you imagine I would be unjust to him, a Man of
that Worth, that Honour, so fine a Gentleman, because you proffered me a larger
Settlement? No, coud'st thou give me this Island, I would refuse it, and rather
starve with him.


Now, let me never drink Claret more, if I can tell what it is you mean by all
this.


Who do I see? Sir Francis! It seems then you came with a Design to meet some
Lewd Woman; oh me unfortunate! is there nothing but Treachery and Inconstancy
in the Sex? Have I refused so many great Matches, and at last Consented to be
yours, and is this my Reward?


Why, as I take it, my Good Lady, you came with a Design to meet some Body too.


If my Trouble would give me leave to speak! That Traitor Bellmine, whom you
entrusted to plead for you, offered to forsake your Daughter, and Marry me
himself --


And so you met him to that purpose.


Have not I already told you how I resented his Baseness, when I thought you were
he. 'Tis true I consented to meet him, in hopes to persuade him to a more
Virtuous and Just Proceeding. I would have concealed his Crime from you, being
always inclined to do Good!


Oh the damned young Rogue, I'll be so Revenged on him --


And thus while I endeavoured to do your Family Service, even at the hazard of
my Reputation; you suspect me. This is a plain Conspiracy between you both to
ruin me; is this like a Man of Honour? this the Behaviour I hoped for from the
worthy Sir Francis! I am ruined, undone, betrayed; what will become of me?


Nay hear me, Good Lady, do but hear me.


No, I will never hearken to Man more. I will retire from the World, and leave
my Wealth to erect Hospitals to maintain Mad men and Fools; rather than enrich
the unjust


Hear me but speak.


That Sir Francis Feignyouth should suspect me! the only Person in the World I
ever gave the least Encouragement to; I easily could revenge my self, by
marrying Bellmine, and deprive you both of my Fortune, and of your Son-in-Law;
had I not still a zeal for your interests, and an Abhorrence for his Treachery.


Come, I'll tell you how we shall be both revenged on this Insinuating,
VVheedling, Deceitful young Dog. I'll Marry you instantly, and will not give
him the value of a Rapparce Farthing with my Daughter.


Why verily Sir Francis, you speak like a Man of Honour; indeed to Marry an
injured Woman, is the only way to do her Right. But I can hardly Reinstate you
in my good Opinion, sufficiently to Consent to that yet.


Nay, I will not delay it a moment; I have a Chaplain ready at my House, and we
will spend the Night in Embraces, and Laughing at this Impudent Cozening Knave.
-- See where he comes, if I were not about taking a surer and sweeter Revenge,
I would cut his Throat directly.


For Virtues sake, let us be gone, I have that Detestation for a Cheat, that I
cannot brook his appearance.


We may venture to approach them now; we shall confound her more, though I
suppose he is already sufficiently convinced what a Virtuous Lady she is.


Your Servant, your Servant, Sir, my Honest, Faithful, Plotting, Undermining,
Dear, Half witted Rival and Son-in-Law! This was a rare Design of yours, an
admirable Design.


Sir!


A curious Design, a deep Design! Oh these young Fellows are subtle Dogs at a
Plot!


What would you be at, Sir?


What would you be at, Sir, this Lady, Sir. But I shall prevent you, Sir, for
I am going to be Married to her instantly, Sir.


You are not serious sure? why Sir, I'll convince you that --


Oh I cannot bear that Traitors sight, let us be gone, I shall faint, if I stay
a moment longer. He will have the impudence to deny he made Love to me, and
desired a Meeting.


I own I did, Sir, but --


Oh! Did you so? truth will out.


And I designed --


To Marry her your self -- Not a word more, Sir, nor a step farther -- In half
an hours time, I'll admit you to wish me Joy. And so your Servant.


Your Servant Good Mr. Little-plot. Ha, ha.


What is the meaning of all this? I cannot understand it.


To me the matter is very plain. She has out-witted you; and made him believe
you would have Married her; this you see has enraged him against you; and being
Mad enough to think her Rich, and to be Revenged on you, he is gone to Marry
her.


He will be Ruined, Undone, Beggard.


And Marina the less Fortune. That Consideration is of no small moment to you.


Your Example is of so much greater weight with me, that it has not only
reconciled me to Marriage, but I think in my Conscience, I could Marry Marina
without a Fortune. But it mads me that she should have such a Mother in Law.


She will not be much improved by her Example.


As much as a Man may improve himself in Conversation, by Drinking with the
silent Club here.


'Tis such an improvement as Expert Musicians receive by hearing Bunglers, she
may learn what to avoid.


But is there no way to prevent it.


None, that I know of, unless you had some fresh Matter to urge against her.
And here comes the likeliest Man to assist you, to furnish you with Scandal.


This will be Joyful News to him. Oh he is so facetious when any one has been
Guilty of an indiscretion, and has so many smart Jokes upon the Unfortunate?


Your Servant Gentlemen. My Spleen has been so tickled just now, at the most
diverting sight. Ha, ha.


What, has any one broke his Neck? or has some young Lady run away with her
Brothers Footman? or is the hopeful Son expelled the College? or has there
been a Fire lately in Town? or any Merchants broke?


Almost as Comical as any of these. I just now met Sir Francis Feignyouth
handing my Lady Volant into his House, he told me he was that Moment going to
be Married, and bid me come to you to be Confirmed of the Truth. Ha, ha.


And is this so great a Jest?


Ay, is it not? to have an old Fellow, who is so fond of Whoring and Freedom
and Money, make himself a Slave to Marry a Beggar; that she is one I am now
convinced Come, will you along with me, I have a Cordial for him that will
spoil the effects of Sack-Posset. I suppose the Business is finished by this
time, he shall not know it before. 'Tis such a Jest!


No, no, I am Melancholy enough already, and thy Jests always give me the
Spleen.


Well, I'll go alone then, for I long to plague him.


That a Fellows whole Delight should be the Torment of others.


Sir, Sir, I have rare News for you. I have found out that will break off Sir
Francis's Match.


Be quick in telling it.


Hearing you in great concern to day for his Design to Marry my Lady Volant, I
went immediately to her pretended Steward, who you must know, Sir, is my old
Acquaintance.


The properest Person to detect her.


And wheedled him into a Confession that she has kept him two or three years.


Kept him! To what End?


Why, faith Sir, I believe to much the same End, that you kept the Fine Lady
that Lodged in Convent-Garden.


This indeed may do, if the Intelligence comes not too late; but can you
produce him that we may Confront her with him.


He is waiting for me at the end of the Walk.


Hast to him then, and pretend his Lady wants him; send him to us at Sir
Francis Feignyouth's, and wait you below till I call.


It shall be done, Sir.


Excellent Fellow! For thy Reward, if thy hopeful Spouse be in this Country,
I'll find her out for you; But away.

Come Freelove, you will go with me, you may have an opportunity to see your
Aemilia.


That Consideration will carry me any where.


COme, Lady, now you are mine in spite of all my Rivals. I'll have them all to
Supper, to Triumph over them. We will have nothing but Revelling, Feasting and
Kissing, for our first Month at least. But we'll go to Bed soon, because the
Drums and Trumpets will Disturb us early.


You will find some Duns in the Morning will disturb your Rest much more than
they.


What says Your Ladyship?


Only contemplating on my Good Fortune.


I'll give you no leisure to contemplate; you shall be busied with Action. I
have sent to invite my Rivals from Bellmine down to Vainly; I'd not give a
Farthing for a Jewel I must always keep locked up in my Cabinet. I Love to
publish my Happiness. But where are these Girls run? -- This Marriage has set
them a Madding now to be at it too -- Here Niece, Daughter, where are you?

I am sorry, Niece, your Admirer has no Estate, that you might not lye alone to
Night.


If I like his other Qualifications well enough to Marry him, that shall be no
Objection.


She is stark Mad; I must Marry my Daughter as soon as I can, or she may
Debauch her to the same Design.

But I am resolved nothing shall Discompose me to Night. I have sent for some
Music to Entertain you; Desire them to walk in, and show their Art.


YOU Bellamira we Admire,
Which pleases you, though ill you use us;
You would taste Joys, which we desire,
And Punish both, when you refuse us.

Those Joys I'd keep as well as taste,
But both by yielding are destroyed;
For Men are ever in such haste,
E're we have tasted, they are cloyed.

All Humane Things their Crisis have,
To which arrived, they fade away;
So long for Love you make us crave,
E're you Consent, our flames decay.

On what strange Diet Lovers Live;
On hopes the Fair may be enjoyed;
Love even can Despair survive,
But is by nourishment destroyed.

Insatiate! I'd my Love repeat,
Only to breathing time agree;
Because I cannot always Eat,
Will you both Starve your self and me.

I grieve Philander to deny,
And yet I loose you if I grant;
Not I alone can Satisfy,
Without Variety you want.

Each Part Variety affords,
Your Hand, your Eyes, your Lips, your Breast;
Believe this Kiss, if not my Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.

Believe this Kiss, if not my Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.

That I'll believe, though not your Words,
For Love by Action's best expressed.



Why, it is impossible, Mr. Wormwood, that she could be false to me; I will not
believe she is Married.


No, if thou were Married to her, you would not believe your self a Cuckold,
though you saw her a Bed with another Man.


You are welcome, Gentlemen. Mr. Vainly, our Quarrels are at an end now.


Then you are Married. Ha, ha, ha --


Why, that is kind to rejoice at your Friends good Fortune.


But, Madam, is it your way to receive Presents from one Man, and Marry
another?


How Presents!


If one should give attention to what every Fop says --


Nay, Sir Francis, be not angry at that. 'Twere happy for you, if she had
received Presents enough to pay her Debts.


Oh are you there! That's well. Hark ye Slave have you not often swore to me,
that my Lady Volant here was worth --


Not one shilling, Sir, that I know of.


Andam I Cheated, Choosed, Fooled, Abused, Ruined, Confounded, hah?


Somewhat like it, truly Sir.


I'll have her burnt for a Witch, and I'll have you fleaed you Dog. I'll do it
my self.


Ay, 'tis plain her tenderness of me, would not let her Ruin me.


Hold, hold Sir, you have not yet heard the worst.


Can any thing be worse? what! Can any thing be worse than Poverty?


You shall hear. Come Sirrah, make me a full Confession of all the
Familiarities that have passed between you two.


Alas Sir, would you have me so ungenerous to Betray a Lady's Secrets?


Why this is Admirable, this is better sport than I expected.


No delay, or I'll saw you Windpipe this moment; Be quick, and let me not wast
Breath on thee.


And before mine is gone.


Why then, Sir, if I must tell -- But really 'tis not like a Man of Honour in
Me.


'Tis no matter, Timothy; your Confession comes too late now to save him:
'Twill signify no more than a Pardon after Execution. The more he knows the
more he will give to be freed from me, and then I'll leave this hideous Country
for ever.


What, are you already Married? Have you made such hast to be undone.


Ay, ay, the Knot is tied; But come, go on, go on with your Confession.


Then Sir, since I may speak, I have for about these three years lived with my
Honoured Lady there, as her Steward in Public, and as her Husband in Private.


Oh I faint! I dye, I dye! I'm a dead Man, I'm stone dead!


I think I had best sneak off before he comes to himself, least I should be
made to verify the Proverb, Confess and be Hanged.


Good Sir, be pacified.


Be pacified! Be damned; I'm in a fairer way for that. But I'll do one
Meritorious Act first, I'll pluck her Heart out -- Let me at her.


At your Peril touch me; here are Witnesses enough, should you offer me any
Violence.


Yes, yes Madam, I am bound in Conscience to be a Witness for you, because you
Loved me too well to Marry me.


Fear him not, Madam; we will stand by you: Faith I Love thee better then ever,
for the mischief thou hast done.


Dost thou so, Tormentor? I'll have you two swinged before I dye, that you may
be Laughed at too. Here, where are my Servants?


Come Vainly, we'll spare him the Trouble; let us to the Coffee-House, I burst
till I publish this.


Ay, pray let us go. Give ye Joy, Sir, Give ye Joy.


What had I to do with a Wife, what had I to do with a Wife! Had I not Ease
enough, had I not Freedom enough, had I not Wealth enough! I had every thing
but Wit enough. -- Oh! I am a Jest to the World, a Scandal to my Name, a
Curse to my Family, and a Hell to my self.


You afflict your self too much.


Impossible! Had she Virtue, that were some atonement for her Poverty. Or had
she been a Miss to some Favourite, and begged an Estate of Forfeited Lands, that
had been some Comfort. But to be a Strumpet, and a poor Strumpet! --


'Tis but giving her separate Maintenance at worst.


No, no, I am resolved on it, I'll separate my self from the World. I am just
going, just expiring, Mr. Bellmine, I am wondrous faint on the sudden; all in
a cold sweat. But before I dye, let me dispose of my Family; here Mr. Bellmine,
take my Daughter, and all I have; you deserve it for the Good you designed me.
But be sure to Plague that Viper with Law, before she gets any thing.


I despise your Malice, I'll have a share of your Fortune spite of you all.


I hope, Madam, you will not oppose Sir Francis's. Design to make me the
happiest of Men.


Since my Father has disposed of me, I own it is according to my Inclinations.


Sir, Sir, have you no more to do with Timothy, I saw him steal away.


Nothing more. He has Confessed all he told you concerning that Lady.


Hah! What do I see?


Trickwell there! Oh I am lost for ever.


A Judgment, a Judgment from Heaven! she dyes and I live.


Let her alone, I'll bring her to herself again.


What, are you another of her Lovers?


No, no, Sir, I am none of her Lovers, for I am her Husband.

Omnes, How her Husband!


Unlucky VVretch! What Devil sent thee here to my Undoing.


I think thou were the Spark that bantered me this Evening so smartly. But no
more fooling; I am in no Jesting humour.


Really Sir, I am so well acquainted with her Ladyship, that it is an Honour I
should not assume to my self, if it were not Truth.


Fool, Thoughtless Sot! It were for thy Interest, as well as mine, to conceal
this now; till I had got a Sum of Money to quit him. For know prating Brute, I
have just Married him.


Oh. VVonderful!


Oh wonderful Deliverance! Oh Blessing unthought of* I find my strength
return; I shall live for ever. I am light as Air. I am in as much danger now of
running Mad for Joy, as before for Grief. But take her to thee, go take her,
and much good may she do ye.


Oh by no means Ssr, after you is good manners, Sir, she is at your Service
with all my heart and soul. Indeed Sir, she is.


Be dumb for ever. Or talk his equal now, thou can do me no farther Mischief,
nor can I longer bear thy sight. Farewell, and may each of you find his Wife,
what you have taken such pains to prove me.


Truly, I needed not have taken such pains to have known Timothy's secrets.


We need not wonder at her Rage. But Trickwell, is this the very Lady you
Married in London for a Fortune.


The very Numerical she, Sir; only she has changed her Name.


Thou hast made such a happy Change in my Fortune, that I will make thine; I
will reward thee most profusely for this.


Shall I be the only Man, who shall complain of Fortune.

Shall Love so pure as mine meet no Reward?


Disinterested, Faithful Love, deserves a higher Reward than I can give.


You are Reward above Man's Merit. Heaven can give no greater upon Earth.


And will you Marry a Woman that has nothing.


Do not torture me with such Questions. I would, I would, 'tis all I ask of
Heaven.


Remember I have told you all the Inconveniences.


None, none, there can be none. 'Twere Luxury to starve with you. Pleasure and
Freedom in a Goal.


Then take this earnest of a Heart,


You give me endless, endless Joys.


How, how, Niece, will you throw your self away thus? Marry a Man without a
Fortune!


Even so, Sir. Nor shall I think my self thrown away on him. Remember how
lately you had been almost Ruined by Marrying for one.


Well, do what you please. I shall never be angry again. A pretty Present this,
Sir, she has made you. A fine Woman, and to my knowledge Twenty thousand Pounds
ready Money.


Had you the Indies, I could not Love you more, but this is very surprising.


It was an Uncle's Gift I had in England; and I have industriously thus long
concealed it, that I might not be pestered by Forutne-hunters, and might be
assured that he who Married me, had no other Motive but Love. And I am happy
that he proved so Generous, I Liked so well.


Nay then, Madam, I think I may Discover his secret now. Fate designed you for
each other. He too has had the same Design, you are not more alike in Tempers
than in Fortune. For I can assure you this Gentleman, who has given himself the
Repute of being worth Nothing, has an Estate in England of Three thousand
Pounds a Year.


Admirable! Excellent! Nay; I always thought he deserved one. A most complete
Gentleman.


Let Misers be Enslaved, and Drudge for Gain,
Their Joys are False, though they their Wish Obtain.
While no base Interest, Generous Souls regard,
And Love and Peaceful Minds be their Reward.


