I'M hither sent, but Heaven knows what to say,
Or how to excuse a dull Heroic Play;
Here's nor poignant Repartee, nor taking Raillery,
No Feast for Critic Pit, or Graduate Gallery.
No Beau, who in his very affected Dress,
Does all the Nonsense of his Character express;
This Play on solid History depends,
Old fashioned stuff, true Love, and faithful Friends.
The Pit our Author dreads as too sev^re,
The ablest Writers scar^e find Mercy there;
Her only hopes in yonder brightness lies,
If we read praise in those Commanding Eyes:
What ^ude Blustering Critique then will dare
To find a fault, or contradict the Fair?
The humble Offering at your Feet she lays,
Nor wishes she to live without your Praise:
Strict Rules of Honour still she kept in view,
And always when she wrote, she thought on you.
Then Ladies own it, let not Detracters say,
You'll not protect one harmless, modest Play.
The Hero to our Sex is still inclined,
Securing you, we're sure of all Mankind.
If in that charming Circle you will oft appear,
An Empty House we shall not have cause to fear.

HAste each Attendant to perform his several charge
With strictest diligence, and most observant care;
Burn the Sabaean Gums, and all those rich Perfumes
Where our great Master passes, till every Room
Smell sweet as Altars laden with Incense
To the Heathen Gods, spread the gay Persian Carpets
For his Royal Feet, and you to the Apartments fly
Of those Incloister'd Virgin Roses, the select and chosen
Beauties of the habitable World, bid 'em prepare,
Quick let 'em in all their brightest glories be arrayed,
For their Sun, the Mighty Ibrahim approaches.

Now, by our Prophet, what's all this but gaudy Pageantry,
Ill acted Scenes of Pomp and show, instead of real greatness:
O my Friend it was not thus of old,
The great Forefathers of this degenerate Man,
Instead of treading on Persian Carpets,
Trod upon the Necks of Persian Kings:
Whilst now (cursed reverse of time) softness and ease,
Flatterers and Women, fill alone our Monarch's Heart;
Women enough to undo the Universal World
Are here maintained, whole useless hundreds,
And with such a train of Pride and Luxury,
That Eyes before never saw, nor can endless words describe:
Would you believe it? the Vultures decked in Painted Plumes,
So eager are for their vain trappings,
That soon as a Merchant Ship salutes the Port,
His Goods are seized, and brought to the Seraglio
Without Account, Value, or Justice, yet at this
The Pander Vizier winks, whilst the poor Owner
Waits in vain for Answer or Redress.

Most just Observer, as well as Teacher of our Laws,
By me in Friendship like a Brother loved,
In counsel like a Father honoured,
That what you have said is most undoubted truth,
The Impartial World must own. But these complaints
Alas, avail not, our Lord hates us his faithful Servants,
And whatever we should offer, would certainly despise.

You are too good, my Must. to be a Favourite here,
Though so long Married to the Royal Sister of our Emperor;
Nay, in this base Court, your Son, the God-like Amurat,
But coldly is received, because his wondrous Youth
Has so far out-strip'd their slothful Age --
O! Pity! that the fairest branch of all the Ottoman Race,
^prung from a Female Root; yet I swear
Were he Lord of all that our Tyrannic Master holds,
I could not esteem him more, or love him better.
Few Kings his Courage ever obtained, or Virtues;
O 'tis Nobler far a Crown to Merit, than a Crown
To wear.

Happy's my Son in such a Patron,
Who never ceases to oblige; I know your kind Attendance
Now is on his behalf, to speak his Actions
In the Sultans Ear, so as may obtain his Royal favour.

It is indeed my chief design --
But oh! Manly Virtue, Courage unequalled,
Fortitude, and all those Graces that adorn
The glorious Amurat, are truths displeasing
To our Ibrahim, whose soft Soul destructive
Beauty charms into a sleep too sound
For the Report of Noble Deeds to wake.

The Vizier is the Minion
Hangs the darling of his heart,
And with ill Counsel poisons
Every design that tends towards Virtue.

Then that vile Woman, to whom
He hath given the sweet Name
Of Sheker Para, she, with the Vizier,
Joins to ruin Ibrahim --

Whilst he, contrary to our Countries Laws,
Exposes her to public view, lets her converse
With Vizier, Bashaws, or whom she pleases.

But that I have a Daughter,
Whose early Virtue and sincere Obedience,
Ties my Soul to dote upon:
I for my Countries sake would Curse the Sex.

That Daughter --

No more, the Emperors Guards appear,
And see the Vizier, and the Woman at his Elbow.

I say the Bashaw's Treason is plain,
Therefore Morat, attend him with the Bow-string,
And my fatal Order -- that without a murmur
He surrender Life for his Ill-gotten Wealth.
'Tis thine, my faithful, vigilant Azema.

O sacred Sir, whose Justice is Divine,
And 'twould be Impious to affirm
The Bashaw of Damascus hath one Grain of Innocence;
Yet let me beg you would hold that bounteous hand,
The only Wealth I covet is to be my Sultans Slave.
Besides, I have many Enemies, and these high favours
Will I fear create me more.

Who dares to be thy Enemy? No, Vizier,
Whilst I protect thee, Kings shall for thy Friendship sue;
And let thy Foes remember what I commanded last.

O let me throw my self beneath your Royal Feet,
And kissing your honoured Robes, disclose
The Adoration that my heart is full of.

Fawning Sycophant!

Rise, good Azema! no more!

Great Sir, I have a Suit to you.

What is't, my Religious Councellor?

Not for my self, but one much more deserving,
Your Godlike General Amurat, who brings
Your Conquering Forces back from vanquished Babylon,
Now lies Incamp'd near this Imperial City:
Next Spring, by your Commands, and his desires,
He goes to Candia, to punish that stubborn Town,
Which dares resist the Ottoman Armies that are Invincible.
By me he humbly prays your Royal License,
That this Winter he may remain
At his own Palace here in Constantinople.

I'll consider his desires -- but at this time
Let all, except my Eunuchs, and my Sheker Para,
Leave me --
Come, my loved Sheker, what hast thou prepared
To calm and tune my Soul, which these affairs
Have ruffled from its own Sphere of
Ease and Pleasure --

To charm my Monarch is the only study and
Business of your Slave, and to that end,
Twenty fair Virgins, whom yet your Eyes never saw,
I have picked and chosen from a thousand,
And set in order for your view.

Thanks my good Girl, 'tis by these obliging turns
That thou secur'st the heart of Ibrahim.
Give me that grateful Mistress,
Who when her Lover, sated with that high
Luscious Feast, Enjoyment, she for his
Sickly Appetite
Generously prepares fresh Viands;
I but taste of them, my solid part,
My Friendship that remains with thee.

Now let each Ambitious Maid disclose the Gifts
Of Art and Nature, whether in Voice, or
Tuneful Motion the taking beauty lies;
With Emulation let it be practised over
To charm the Worlds great Lord.

How different, Achmet, is this from the European stories;
I have read there, twenty Heroes for the Ladies
Burn and die, here twenty Ladies for the Hero.

It shows that Mankind maintains his Charter
Better here, yet loses sure the sweetness
Of submissive love; see, he seems sixth.

No -- the Handkerchief is not dropped yet,
And she's left to use her own.

Now 'tis resolved --

Oh Achmet! O my faithful Slave!
If ever thou love thy generous Mistress
Who has from nothing raised thee
And pla^'d thee in the highest Orb that thou can move
For wanting Manhood, though thy Soul's all God-like,
Yet thou can not rise to greater honours,
Help me now; thou know my raging fires
How Passion like a Vulture preys upon my heart,
And the hot flames of love drink up my Spirits,
All this, I say, thou know, and yet bring No
Remedy.

True, when these Convulsive Fits are on ye,
I from your ravings learn you love the General Amurat,
Nor have I been unmindful, even of those --
Imperfect hints;
But the Physician that pretends to administer a Cure,
Must each particular of the Distemper know.

O! I have told thee, over and over.
Repetition wrecks my Soul --
Yet thou shalt hear't again,
Full well thou know the Sultan gives me greater Privilege
Than ever Woman had in the Ottoman Court;
That has undone me, for there I have seen
This Robber of my rest, this cruel charming Amurat.

Knows he his Happiness?

Yes, Yes, for I have stole a thousand burning Glances,
And sent them to his heart
Besides sweet herbs, and Amorous Flowers
(Those Hieroglyphics, and Emblems of our Countries love)
In Boxes wrought with gold and set in Jewels
Of unequalled value, he hath oft received;
Yet still he Ignorance pretends, nor meets my Eyes
But turns his own another way --
Or else looks guilty down.

What stoic virtue rules in his cold Icy Veins,
And gives him power to resist those Eyes?
Or has another gained his heart?

Could I find out that, revenge would take the place
Of Injured Love, and I should weep no more;
Revenge, sweet Revenge, Injuries, Antidote,
Wronged Women's darling Joy --
The Emperor thinks perhaps,
Because I share him with a hundred Rivals
My Nature's tame. No, No!
We easily give what we despise
But should another be adored by my Amurat
Whilst neglected I despair,
How would I wrack her, how glut me
With the ruin of their Loves, and them!

This I have observed, that since his Incamping near
He often in disguise repairs to this great Town;
But whether Ambition or Love bring him, I know
Not, for I could never learn his Counsels.

That, de^.. Achmet, be thy future care,
And name thy own reward. But how can thou effect it,
Hath thy prolific brain yet laid a form?

Yes, thus --
You know our Princes for State
Are still attended by their Mutes, who
Follow into all their Privacies
As being unable to divulge them; one of these
Is near my Stature.
Him will I draw aside, knock out his brains,
And in his habit watch the Princes Motions.

Now! Amurat -- Excellent!
The time draws near to quench these raging fires,
In full possession of my fierce desires;
Or else the ungrateful object I'll destroy,
Which robbed my Nights of rest, my Days of Joy.

THis is not sure that Amurat
Who foremost scaled the Walls of Babylon,
And cried aloud, Come on, who fears to die,
Deserves it -- yet at a Lettet now pauses,
Stops, turns pale, and seems to grow upon the
Earth he treads.

Thou art no judge, my Friend, you never loved,
Nor sure none ever loved like me,
If I acquired glory, 'twas for Morena's sake
That she might not despise me --
Nor have I more to do if she is lost.

You terrify your self with groundless fears,
Nor can I from the Mufti's Letter
Discern a danger threatening towards your love

Oh Solyman! forgive the frailty of your Friend,
Forgive the follies that Imperious love creates,
Here the Mufti writes, that on earnest business
He craves my presence, if he hath discovered
The Adoration that I pay his beauteous Daughter,
And then forbid it, how lost a thing is Amurat,
For I know well, though her poor Slave should suffer
A thousand wracks, she'd tread the rigid paths of Duty,
And let me die, rather than forfeit her obedience.

The Guard our Country lays on that fair charming Sex
Causes my wonder, how you have loved thus long concealed.

Kind Heaven who saw my faithful suffering heart,
In pity thus disposed it, a trusty Slave at the
Transporting hours of silent Night still gave
Me admittance
To a Garden, which her Apartment overlooked,
There, at that awful distance, did I Kneel,
Sent up my Vows with such an ardent zeal
Till at length I melted the heart of my fair
Listening Goddess;
And she from thence, as from an upper Orb of bliss
Sent down sweet words, and answering sighs,
The long expected Manna, for which with such
An Eagerness,
I had prayed -- Ah Soldier! could I impart
But one grain of this fierce passion which invades
My Soul, to thee; you no more would wonder
If I almost Conquered Impossibilities to see Morena
Mark, how the flushing joy leaps to my Cheeks,
Oh! if her very name causes such boundings in my blood,
What would her sight, what to press her in my Arms,
And taste her rosy Lips! excess of Joy would work
The Effects of grief; and I should fall a Victim
At her feet.

Where Heaven gives the greatest hearts
We still the greatest Passions find,
And 'tis the brave alone love most and best.

My Dear Indulgent Friend, farewell,
At the usual Rendezvous I'll be
Within few hours; and we'll return
Together to the Camp.

Prosperity attend your Wishes.

Welcome Noble Youth, you're most welcome here,
Nor is your request forgot, though not obtained,
For your appearing publicly.

Where shall I pay my duty first?
Or which way Kneel? each is a Father,
And each too good for Amurat.

Most sure my Son, you never can
Enough acknowledge the bounties
Of this Reverend Man; whose early care
Sheltered thy tender youth --
From the rough Blasts of Tyranny
And Faction, and by his Eloquence
Still rendered thee as now thou stand,
Favourite to the Prince, and People.

My Friends, ye over-rate my Endeavours
To serve, and kindly take the will where power is wanting.
No, 'tis not I, 'tis our great Master, to whom
Half the Earth bows down their servile Necks:
Who, with one Almighty nod, can give a little World
Away, 'tis he should Amurat reward, and bestow
A Kingdom, as his Valour due; yet lovely
Royal Warrior, if I have rightly found
The secret of thy heart, there is a present
In my power, which equal to a Crown you'll prize.

Ha! --

Come forth, Morena, my Ages Darling,
And my hearts delight; Joy of my Eyes,
Loved object of all my Earthly hopes,
Lend me thy hand, and smile upon thy Father
When he gives thee to thy Wishes.

Where am I?
Thou transporting Image that dances thus
Before my dazzled Eyes, art thou real?
Oh! that at the emptying half my Veins,
I were convinced this is no Dream.

I saw your secret Love, watched the kindling fires,
And blessed 'em as they sprang. Had I disapproved
They had been prevented ever risen to a mutual flame,
But take her, Son, and Eternal Blessings Crown ye both.

He is already blessed, what Monarch would not forego
An universal sway for such a charming Maid?

Speak Goddess, speak! Angel, speak!
Let your sweet Voice confirm my Happiness,
That my beating heart may force its passage
Through my Breast, and fly to yours!

O Amurat! spare my Tongue and Cheeks
The shame of owning what my Soul is full of;
And by my past Love, judge my present Joy!

Thy future Misery I can read.

'Tis so, and I am blessed above all humane kind:
Reign, reign, ye unenvied Monarchs!
Fight for this Dunghill Earth, and let
The blood of thousand thousand Wretches,
Whom daily your Ambition Sacrifices,
Lie he^vy on your guilty heads,
Whil^t I, blessed with this fair Heaven of Innocence,
This matchless, lovely, charming Creature,
More Worth than Indies joined to Indies;
Than all the Sun ever sees: am Happier
Than a fancied God.

Cease these transports, my loved Lord,
Least fate grow angry at our Joys Excess,
And Dash them with Eternal Woes.

Make hast, my Son, in your return
To the Camp, for fear the Emperor
Should Discover our private meeting.
Within few days,
You will return with his Permission,
And from my Arms, receive the loved Morena
Into yours!

Oh Morena! my Morena, Now
Permit me to approach, and swear
Upon thy snowy bosom, how much
I love thee, (...) with wa^m sighs
I've thawed thy Virgin Icy Heart,
And made it burn like mine.

What Maid can hear, and be unmoved,
The M^n she loves talk at this charming rate;
But Oh! I've read, that Men are all by Nature
False; and this dear pleasing tale of love,
To which (...) with such rapture,
Will hereafter be, perhaps, Word for Word
Repeated to another.

Never, Morena, never.
No, here kneeling in the Face of Heaven
I swear, that though our Law allows Plurality of Wives
And Mistresses, yet I will never practise it;
May Dishonour wrap my head with shame
Instead of Laurels; may I be beaten
Through the Army I command, and branded for a Coward,
When I admit another Love i to my Bed or Bosom;
Let our great Master be Spectator of my Infamy,
And after that let me live.

Hold, my dear Lord, sain would I say something too
To answer all this wondrous love,
Were there a Man Valiant, good like my Amurat,
And greater (...) our mighty Sultan, yet would I
Be (...) ^nd pieces, rather than
Break (...) ^ted Faith.

(...) ^ore my Life, what need of Oaths
When (...) Cements our Hearts,
O! let me taste a parting Kiss,
The sweet memory of which
Win wing my (...) return.

What ^ean these tremblings here?
Why come these sighs uncalled?
I know -- I think I know
You wonnot break your Vow.

Shall I swear again,
Never yet closer to thy heart.
By all these Virgin favours, never.
Here I set up my rest, and plant my Endless Joys
On this fair work of Nature;
When thou was't formed, curious Heaven
Smiled at the Exact Creation,
And every power was pleased. Oh! I am fixed
For ever, till glory force me from thy Arms,
Then in all the Hazards of tempestuous War,
Thou, the Auspicious Star that I'll invoke,
Morena's Name shall guide my Sword to Conquest,
And after those Laborious Toils, eager and longing
For my bliss, the Laurels I have gained,
At thy feet I'll lay, Crowned with thy love
And reigning in thy heart;
Such Raptures my transported Soul will seize,
I here shall find our Mahomet's Paradise.

Now is fate at work for me:
Achmet the busy Engine, that darling useful Eunuch,
Close as his genius traces my Hero's secret steps,
And on his Discovery my tortured Life depends.
If Amurat's aspiring Soul is only full of Plots
To raise him higher, sixth above the Visiers Power,
And faster in our Empires Honours, I am happy,
For I can further his Ambition; and he in gratitude
Must pay me back with Love, but Oh! I fear
The Victorious Prince full of charms, and blooming youth,
Is rather on the chase of Beauty, then he ^btains
The glorious quarry, for though cast in a Celestial Mould
How could a Nymph Divine resist him?

Madam whilst you talk as if in dreams
Of Heavenly, and Imaginary Beauty,
You forget your own; the Prince I dare
Presume to a^irm, fears to offer, doubting,
What he wishes, your Encouragement, and
Dreading our Sultan. You, Madam, know
'Tis safer far Razing Imperial Cities
Than aiming at a Mistress possessed,
And valued by the mighty Ibrahim.

True, Mirva, I have charmed the wandering God
More variable than the Heathens Jove,
He darts but like a falling Star upon
The yielding fair, dissolves, and then
To her is seen no more; yet his Soul
Is rivetted to mine, hangs on the Music
Of my tongue, nay late at my request
For the first blossoms of the early year, he gave
The obliging donor, the rich Kingdom of Natolia:
I look down on the Sultana Queens, despise
Their Pregnancy, and want of power.

The Astonished World sees your amazing height,
And justly pays to you their Adoration.

Ah Flatterer, to what hast thou betrayed me,
Whilst my boasting tongue swells with this
Vain story; my trembling foolish loving heart
Beats a sad Alarm, and presages all my hopes destroyed.
Ha! Achmet, thy dress, thy looks, thy hast,
Discover thy Faith and Diligence -- Oh
Quickly ease my tortured Soul!

Madam, your last and Chief desire was
To see the Prince: if that's Effected
You must not stay to hear what I have learnt;
He passes this moment through the remotest Gallery
That leads towards the Bosphorus, there
I suppose his Galley waits him, this Key
Shortens your walk, and you may
Meet him in the open space.

Fly Achmet, to my Cabinet, and shift thee there
Then wait till my return --
I dare not ask thee -- is he a Lover?

Madam, he is; if you stay to hear more
You cannot see him.

Yes, I will see him; though ten thousand's ruin
Hung upon the fatal Interview!

to one Attend. See here abouts for Solyman.
Cursed accident -- how shall I avoid her.

Ha! Mirva? is not that our Coelebrated General?

Doubtless, Madam, his very motion shows him
He cannot shroud his Glories.

Excuse me Ladies; a business
Relating only to my self, called me for some
Moments hither, without our Lords Permission.

And is this the way we receive our Conquerours?
Old Rome granted Ovations Triumphs
To such exalted Virtue, drawn in the gaudy Chariot
The Noble warriors marched a long, kindling
In the bright gazing Virgins loves soft fires,
And in the wandering youths Wars sierce
Martial Heats, if through our crowded streets
Mounted high on Persian ruins,
Successful Amurat were to pass (Pardon
My blushes) when I say I think not Rome's
Famed Caesar, or her darling Pompey, could
Be more admired, esteemed, or loved.

When a Lady praises, I am Dumb.
Should a Man say this, I must call it
Flattery, and I'll resent it.

Fames Trumpet blows aloud, I
Catch but the Echo, and repeat it faintly,
Yet I could wish my self an Emulator
In your glory, a Man, your Companion
In the War, for something I would do
To gain your Friendship; prevent
The lifted Arm of fate, and in my Breast
Receive some wound designed for you.

War, with its rough Idea, ought not Madam,
To Disturb your gentler mind, by varying
Nature ordered the sweet mansion of love
And soft desires.

But Almighty Nature sometimes sills
Our Souls with both: as I Ambitious
Look up to War, so you methinks,
Too Godlike Hero, might look down to love.

'Tis looking upwards, Madam, surely
When we think of love; for beauty
The resemblance bears of Heaven,
Love is a pleasing Theme, but I must
Indulge my Ears no longer, least
I forget my Duty, which in my swift
Return's expressed.

Fly not with such unwelcome hast.
If you are pleased with any thing
That I can say, I'll take care for
Your excuse, or stay.

Madam, I have left the Army without
Their necessary Orders, I cannot now
Accept your offered favour.

Let Confusion be Instead of Order
If your heart's like mine; for mine is all
Tumultuous, Oh General!
A we me not with thy blushes,
For I have loved thee long -- You
Perhaps despise the Jewel, because 'tis offered,
But know Vizier Bashaws, the greatest
Of our Port, in vain have begged a smile.

To the greatest in the Port, and World;
Your smiles are due, and I injure him
When I hear this. Farewell.

Gone! O Devil!
Keep down, thou swelling Heart!
Or higher rise, that I may tear
Thee with my teeth! Mirva!
Break all the flattering Mirrors!
Let me never behold this rejected Face again!
Have I seen Sceptred Slaves kneeling
At my feet, forgetting they were Kings,
Forgetful of their Gods, calling alone on me;
Passing whole days and hours as if measured
With a Moments Sand, and now refused
By a Cursed Beardless Boy! my Arms too
Opened, all my Charms laid forth! (for
The Joys of Love are double, when our
Sex desires) heedless and cold he flew
From my Embrace; swift as I will do
To form his ruin -- Achmet! I come!
'Tis he must raise this raging Tempest higher,
Though cold to me, his Bosom's sure on fire.

ENough, Oh Achmet! -- Hold! for I can bear no more,
And yet the Inquisitive Soul, set on mischief,
And bent for ruin, hangs on the fatal story,
Though every Period gives me Death.
-- Was my Cursed Rival Fair?
For of her Beauty, you have nothing said;
Or else I left that part unheeded.

Fair! -- not opening Flowers,
Not the first streaks of rising Day,
Not Painted Angels are half so Charming!
Eternal smiles still Grace her Cheeks,
And Majesty her Eyes; a Thrilling Music
Is in her Voice; which touches every vital,
And teaches hearts to dance.

I have it now! Her Beauty then be her destruction;
But -- Creat Talkers seldom Act, and mighty words
Are mighty nothings; like the Crackling Thunder,
Which makes Women fear but seldom harms:
'Tis the thinking Mind that in her own dark Cell
Revolves, and then performs --
Where's the Sultan and the Vizier?

The Sultan's retired to his Repose;
The Vizier in his Apartment alone.

Faithful Achmet! take this Jewel --
And think thy wretched Mistress loves thee,
Though her thoughts are now too full
To Express it --
Thrown, like a neglected Flower from the Bosom,
Where I would have flourished,
How quickly shall I fade! Yet --
With the First Angels Expelled I'll try
To draw Morena down, that Saint above,
To my black Region of Despair!

Though she has Charms, would stop the fury
Of our Barbarous Troops, when they take
A Christian Town; yet I could flea her lovely Face
With my Keen Dagger; extinguish those
Shining Lights, her Eyes, to Revenge my Patroness!

Yes, Rival! --
Of thy Vowed Constancy, I'll trial make;
And thou shalt suffer, for thy Lovers sake!
If Amurat Thou Love to that degree,
My sweet Revenge will then completed be;
For I'll take care to spoil the Worshipped Shrine,
And tear Thy Heart, as thou hast tortured mine!

What is't to amass these mighty sums of Wealth,
To be daily crowded with presents from European Kings,
To Command on Land, and Sea, next to our Lord,
Whilst yet I stand unsafe between these Rocks
Of Regulating the People, and a Tyrant Prince!
All those bitter curses which they dare not shoot
At Ibrahim, fall thick on me, the Mufti,
And Mustapha, that Aga of the Janissaries,
Are two I hate, the first, because
Like other Churchmen, instead of Prayers,
He studies Politics; in vain they Preach
Humility, and teach us to look up for Crowns above:
When we behold them fixed on these below,
And more ambitious than the Kings that wear 'em.
The Aga's Son, that hot-brain'd Youth, Amurat,
Who dares fight, and therefore scorns to bow,
Or seek my favour: These have censured me,
And on these I'll be revenged --

On whom is't thou art studying revenge,
Old Statesman! would thou have it bitter,
Deep and secure; take a Woman with thee!
-- Or Bloody, as thy remorseless Heart can frame,
Still take a Woman's Counsel! But --
Say, Azem, who is marked for Vengeance?

To you, I think, I may disclose -- For
All your Foes are mine, and mine are yours --
The Mufti and Mustapha look awry on our Actions,
Sowing Sedition instead of wholesome Doctrine.

By Heaven! The very same these are,
Those I would destroy -- And for that purpose
Sought you now -- I've laid a Train --
Which wants but your assistance to overthrow 'em all.

Name it, fair Charmer, quickly!

This old Crafty Priest conceals a Daughter,
Whose Beauty, I am told, without the help of Flattery,
(Excels her Sex) to Ibrahim.
The Charming wonders I'll relate!
And set his Amorous Soul on Fire.

Hold Madam! have you considered what you say?
-- Is this the vowed Revenge -- to make
His Daughter a Sultana Queen?

Short Sighted Politician! --
Had he designed her for our Lord, why was she
Thus close concealed? Besides; I know
The Mufti hates our Licentious Emperor; his late
Attempt upon the Relic of Morat;
His despising all his Queens when once enjoyed;
Three Sons already bless the Imperial Line,
And make succession sure. Therefore
Should her Womb prove fertile; the Royal Innocents
Are only Born for Sacrifice -- these Reasons
Weighed as soon he'd give his Daughter
To a Brothel, as the Sultans Arms.

I yield. -- Let it but provoke him, or his Friends
To Murmur, and I'll strangle Rebellion in their Throats.

Come with me, and attend the Sultan;
As we go, I'll instruct you, how
This Contrivance reaches the Aga, and his Son,
Breaking all their Measures.

I wait upon you.

From troubled Dreams my tortured Fancy Starts:
Sleep, meant nature's refreshing Friend, sits heavy
On my Soul, as Death her most inveterate Foe.
Achmet! my faithful Boy! art thou there!

Dread Sir the Music waits without!
Prepared by the Italian Masters -- Their Melody
May Chase these Melancholy Fumes away.

Admit 'em.

IMperial Sultan, Hail,
To whom Great Kingdoms bow,
Whose Vast Dominion shall prevail Over all below,
Commanding Woman here
An Humble Vassal shall appear,
No thunder in her Voice we prize,
Or Lightning in her Eyes,
When our T^rrestrial God draws near.
Under our Prophets Influ'nce Live,
While wondering Nations view
The deeds your Conquering Armies do
And Christians to be made your subjects strive.
FLY from my Sight, fly far away;
My Scorn thou'lt only purchase by thy Stay,
Away, Fond Fool, ^way

Dear Angel no, -- no no no no,
Here on this Place I'll rooted grow.
Those Pretty Eyes have Charmed me so:
I cannot Stir, I cannot go.

Thou Silly Creature, be advised
And do not stay to be despised,
By all my Actions thou may see
My Heart can spare no room for thee.

Why dost thou hate me, Ah confess:
Thou sweet d^poser poser of my Joys?

The Reason is, I only guess,
By something in thy Face and Voice,
That thou art not made like other Boys.

Why, I can Kiss, and i can Play,
And tell a Thousand Pretty Tales;
And I can Sing the livelong Day;
If any other Talent fai s.

Boast not thy Music, for I fear
That Singing Gift has cost thee dear,
Each warbling Linnet on the Tree
Has far a Better Fate than thee,
For they Lifes happy pleasures prove,
As they can Sing, so they can Love.

Why so can I:

No no, poor Boy.

And taste Love's Joy.

No no, poor Boy.

Why cannot I?

Pish pish -- Oh Fie!

Pray do but try?

No no, not 1.

I know, I know, no reason why?

You know, you know, you know You lye.

-- Health to the Ruler of the World;
Success attend his Armies: whilst
His own happy Hours, with surprising Joys
Are ever Crowned; and long Life proves
A Seraphic Cordial, without Alloy or Dregs.

May all the mighty ^brahims, and
Our Prophet's Foes fall b^neath his Feet;
And every Slave bear a Heart --
Obedient and Fond as mine

As Heaven hath given me a Despotic
And unbounded Power: so shall my Pleasures be.
But oh! the Earth's too little; and its Pleasures
Too few! I cannot keep my mind
In a continued Frame of Joy; though the Slaves
That serve me, vie with the stars for number!
Nay, though you, my Charming Mistress,
Whose very conceptions, like your Wit, Divine,
And like your Beauty pleasing: though you, I say,
Set your Invention (...) the Wrack, for my Diversion;
Yet still, to day's like yesterday: tomorrow like to day.
And though my Paths lie all through Paradise:
Yet being still the self same Road, I grow uneasy.

Alas! Dread Sir! we've been mistaken;
In vain we've searched Persia, and
Armenia, and Ransacked Greece in vain;
Whilst ^ithin your own Royal Gates
Of this Seraglio lives a Helene, whose.
Lovely Face strikes Envy dumb.
Late I saw her at the Baths;
But, Heavens, such a Creature
My astonished Eyes ne'er viewed before.
A Skin clear as the upper Region.
Where Thickening Clouds can never mount:
And strewn with Blushes, like the glorious space
Of Summer's setting Suns.
Her large Black Eyes shot Rays intermingled
With becoming Pride, and taking Sweetness.

-- Here in our Palace -- impossible
-- Of what Name? what Quality? --

Morena, only Daughter to the Musti -- But
For what cause concealed I am ignorant.

Had I Daughter, or Wife, whose Attractions
Could draw the Sultan's Eyes; how quickly should she be offered!

By Heaven! I'll see her, see her this very moment;
And if she answers your Description,
She's mine; first with Prayers, and Mildness
We'll proceed; but, if the surly Fool denies;
He soon shall find that Prayers are
Needless, when Power is Infinite.

I humbly beg to be excused, because
The Mufti bears me mortal bate.

Come thou, my Shekar, Para,
Thy Eloquence may be useful,
Though few persuasions sure will
Prevail, to make a Woman Reign.

Oh! Sir -- I saw the Sultan pass the Long Gallery.
That parts the Old Seraglio from the New;
And bend his steps directly hither -- He's 'een at my Heels!

What can this visit mean?
But I am armed with Innocence
And therefore know no fear.

Sacred Sir! I am amazed --
At these unwonted Honours; and if I fail
In the expressions of my Joy; let my
Confusion plead my excuse.

'Tis all well, and the visit meant in kindness:
I think when last I saw you,
You asked for Amurat's appearance at our Port --
Selim go thou to the Imperial Camp
And tell the Youth he shall be Welcome
There as soon as he pleases.

Let me kiss your Sacred Robe,
In thankfulness. -- Oh! mighty Sultan,
Who daigns thus to oblige his Vassals.

Mufti -- I hear thou hast a Daughter --
Why dost thou start, Old Man? --
If Fame may be believed thou need not shame
To own the Beauteous Maid --
Send for her hither, for I will see her.

Oh! Pardon me Emperor, the Girl is most unfit
For you to see, Bred up in Cells, and Grotto's:
Tho so near a Court, wholly unacquainted with its Glories.
Heaven not Blessing me with a Male, I have tried
To mend the Sex; and she, instead of (coining looks)
And learning little Arts to please, hath Read
Philosophy, History, those rough Studies:
And will appear like a neglected Villager
To those bright Beauties that attend the happy Port.

Ha! Is this our entertainment -- to be denied
What we desire! go some of you and fetch the Maid.

Though you are Lord of all, and may without control
Command, yet Emperor, Remember,
My Daughter is no Slave, and our holy Law
Forbids that you should force the free,
Therefore if the unhappy Girl should please,
And then refuse the offered Greatness; our Prophets Curse
Falls heavy, if you proceed to Violation.

Kneel Daughter, to the Commander of the World.

Take off her Veil -- by Heavens --
A charming Creature!
Raise thee from the Earth, and lift thy eyes to Glory,
A Crown will well become that Brow; Destiny
Hath marked thee for Command -- I see
Prevailing modesty is in her eyes;
The shining springs are full of tears --
I'll urge to farther now; but leave my
Sheker Para, to prepare for the Excelling honours
I de^n her; Mufti, come you with me, and let us
F^rther consult of this Important business.

Hail! Happy Maid! whom Fate has blessed;
Whose Illustrious Eyes have caught
The Monarch of the Earth, Ibrahim!
Companion to the Sun, and Brother to the Stars!
His Sacred presence strikes an universal awe;
And next to the Immortals he is worshipped here.
What a long Train of glory is opening to your view,
Mounting on shining Thrones your beauties Merit!
Whilst thousand ready slaves stand watching
The Motions of your eyes, and e're you form
Your breath into command, 'tis done.

Cease Madam, you use your Eloquence in vain,
Menaces, Prayers, and Promises are lost on me.
Already I have Slaves, who wait on my desires,
And fulfil whatever I command: more is but super^uous;
No Crown I covet, but that which honour gives;
And my Ambition terminates in the contented paths
Of virtue. All your Efforts to alter me,
Like waves against a R^k, will dash themselves,
But ^ir not my Foundation.

Why do ye view me with that haughty
Regarole^s Air, as if I were your Enemy?
When I (...) long! (...) your Friend.

Oh! mistake me not, -- If my looks
Carry a disdain, 'tis on the Crowns you (...);
Not on you, Al^! you only can be my Friend;
And divert the Emperor from the pursuit
Of this short (...); you do not know
The (...) cause that will, I am sure,
Inspire me (...) to dye than yield.

(aside) Too well I know it!
-- If I could (...), though your desires are strange,
Yet, you have something so engaging,
If I could, I (...), I would.

Oh! 'tis greatly in your power --
Tell the Sultan you have discovered,
As you easily may a thousand Imperfections
That I am sickly, peevish, ill Bred, and
Of a hateful disposition. --

I cannot so deny your Excellencies;
But I will do my best, that you shall hear of this no more.

And now, fair Oratrix,
Who plead'st too well for such a cause;
Apply thy Rhetoric to Ibrahim;
And defend Morena's Life and Honour.

Rest secured, I am wholly yours,
Retire fair Innocence, for I see
This surprise has discomposed ye.
The Lively Red forsakes the charming Circle
Of your cheeks, and fainting paleness takes its place:
Retire, and let this Rancontre never trouble your repose.
Poor easy Fool! blush Amurat
At thy ill choice! -- take me
For her Friend! yes to her destruction
I'll prove a constant one.
Achmet! --

Madam.

I go to seek the Sultan, choose some
Of the Eunuchs you command, and fetch
Morena to him, if you meet resistance,
Bring her by force: I saw Ibrahim
Fasten his Eyes upon her, and I know
The present will be welcome, now if delay
The roving desires of that unstedfast Prince
May fix elsewhere, and my designs be lost;
Make haste, her Father is not yet returned,
And you may do it with much ease

It shall be done e're you have time to think the consequence.

Revenge! how quick and lively are thy Joys?
Love is a sweetness, that but tasted cloys;
Love (...) be fondled with a gentle hand
Revenge is God like all, and shows command.

(...) thou believe it Azema --
This crabbed Priest does in ^ffect
Deny his Daughter; curses he denounces
If I compel her will, and seems
To know (...) prove un villing.

In this his disloyalty too plain appears
What other Grandee of the happy Port
But with open arms would embrace the honour
And lay his Daughter prostrate at your Royal feet.

True, therefore we'll on and fathom
His Designs, the Maidens Beauty
Has inflamed me -- who dares oppose
When I resolve Enjoyment?
What News, my Sheker, hast thou brought her?

O no! with Roman Courage, and most
Unequalled Resolution she repulsed
Whatever I could offer, nor would a Diadem,
Or the Crown Imperial tempt her.

How comes the lovely Maid to bear a Heart
Thus stubborn! and look so sweetly mild?

'Tis her Father who has transferred
His own traitorous Principles to her,
Taught her early Disobedience
(That I live to speak it!)
Taught her to abhor your Royal Person.

But your Majesty now may mould her as you please,
Within a moment she'll be here;
I took the opportunity of her Fathers absence,
And ordered Achmet, with his Fellows, to bring
Her hither.

You have done well,
Shall my almighty Will
Which half the Universe obeys,
Without dispute be contradicted
By a Woman?

I hear 'em coming

Whither? Ah! Whither?
Do ye drag me, Audacious Slaves
Am I to be thus used?

Madam, silence and awe best becomes
This place which the dread Majesty of all the World contains,
Nay our Law's so strict
That an outrageous Noise near the Sacred presence
Is punished with immediate Death.

Death I despise as I do thee,
Who art not worth my answering,
But to mine and my Countries Lord
I cast me with an obedient heart:
Daign Mighty Sultan to hear with Mercy
What your weeping Slave can say!
Far be it from your humble Handmaid
To refuse the vast Honour of your offered Love
Through pride -- Oh! no!
Holy binding vows are past already
And horrid imprecations, which if I break,
Distraction despair eternal ruin
Straight will seize me -- I know
Your royal heart is full of soft humanity
And God like Justice; you cannot take
Another right -- a thousand willing beau ties
Will with Joy, Embrace those favours
I must ever fly --

If thou hast vowed, I cancel it,
My Subjects are my slaves, who ever
Pretends a right to what I desire
Is a Traitor, and shall so be punished
If thus perverse you must be forced
To your own happiness --
-- Achmet --

O spare me Emperor! spare me!
And all my future life I'll spend
In prayers for Ibrahim!
Each morning as I bless the rising day
I'll cry aloud, this id'e seen no more,
Had not my God like Master heard:
I'll never eat, nor sleep, nor
Ought of life enjoy, before I have prayed for
And after praised our Lord!

Achmet -- bear her to the royal bed.

Hold! yet a moment -- hold!
I have one thing more to say
As I have often heard my wretched Father tell
-- When sierce Morat, your Predecessor
Doomed his brothers, even all the young Princes
Of the Imperial race, to sudden death,
They dyed: my Father begged for you:
Begged till he prevail`d: Oh! if this merit ought
Punish my disobedience with Wracks with Gibbets,
With any thing but loss of honour!
Tear out my eyes, stab, mangle my face;
Till it grow horrible to Nature
And the amazed world gaze with terror,
Not delight: burn me! heap torture
Upon torture! and if I murmur a complaint
Fulfil the bitterst curse -- Release,
And bear me to your bed!

Speak Vizier, he stands confounded.

Dread Sir, what stops your wishes?
This is nothing but a gust of Passion,
Plain Woman, her will is crossed,
And so she raves! e're while you mourned
Your pleasures were too much alike;
Fate hath now obliged ye:
This beauteous Maid resists: and all
You ever had before, were willing.

And there may be a new unknown delight
To conquer all these strugglings,
Something Poignant, that will relish Luxury --
Do as I Commanded --
Wou`d our worshipped Lord free this
Mourning Fair; Id'e search the
Earth's bounds, to find another,
That might please as well.

Taught by my Slave!
Take that, presuming fool.

Murder, and Rapine!
What a horrid place is here!
My turn is next --

Let go rash Maid, --
Or I shall hurt thee.

Never, never, I'll leap, and
Fix it to my breast, while some kind God
That sees the anguish of my Soul
Shall help my weakness, and send it to my heart!

Some of you unlose her hold --

Then thus I quit it.
See Emperor, see, are these hands
Fit to clasp thee? judge by this,
My resolution -- death hath a
Thousand doors; Sure Morena, cursed Morena
May find out one --

Slaves, why dally ye thus?
By Heaven rage is mixed with love,
And I am all on fire!
Drag her to yond Apartments!

Do Tyrant! but 'tis thy last of mischiefs
If thou dost not kill me --
With dishevelled hair, torn Robes, and
These bloody hands, I'll run through all thy Guards
And! Camp, whilst my just complaints, compel rebellion!

Yet here! force her way!

I will not stir, sixth upon Earth,
I'll rend obdurate Heaven with piercing
Cries; till I have forced their mercy!
Help! help! open thou Earth to hide me!
Have my woes not weight enough to sink me
To the Center? -- at length 'tis come;
My spirits are decayed, Oh Amurat!
Where art thou? and where (alas) am I?

She faints, convey her quickly in,
Your Majesty has
Will soon revive her.

Threatening Danger shall never bar my way,
I'll rush through all, and seize the trembling prey:
Risle her sweets, till sense is fully cloyed;
Then take my turn to scorn what I've enjoyed.

IN vain you sooth me with these promises,
I'll tear my sacred Vestments; make bare
My hoary head, and of these Janissaries
My self beg present Aid, -- was there but one
In all this mighty Empire, chaste, and must
The Licentious Tyrant seize her?

I have not flattered ye -- the Janissaries
As one man, are bent to right your wrongs
A moment's patience -- before to morrow's Sun
The Seraglio's forced -- the Villain Vizier
Torn, limb from limb, and the fair unfortunate restored
-- Ha -- see where the lovely Mourner comes.

The Emperor hath sent your Daughter back,
You must tutor her better, teach her
A more complying Nature, then
Perhaps he may again receive her.

I lence Pandar! accursed by Heaven,
Hence! left (though (...)) with
My hands I throttle thee ^ell
Thy ungrateful Master the saving
Of his life, is well rewarded --
-- Tell him -- I thank him
And he shall hear it l^ud!

Oh Sir! --

My poor Girl! --

Cease Daughter, cease to mourn!
Here are your Friends -- Friends
That will revenge ye --

O violated Honour!
Ruin, Despair, and Death's my Lot,

No Morena, No, thy Fame's secured!
And succeeding Ages shall as a Miracle
Relate thy Constancy, -- yes, injured fair,
To the last Periods of recording Time,
Thy fragrant Name will bless the World!
Thou, the brightest Star, that
Ever graced the East!

Answer me Prophet, Author of our Law,
What have I done, what horrid crimes committed,
That my aching Eyes are punishd
With this doleful sight!

The Grave will hide me, Sir!
Then you shall see this Wretch no more!

Live my beloved unfortunate!
Let death and ruin fall upon
Those Fiends that thus have wronged thee.

The Vizier, (my Father)
The Devil-Visier -- when my piercing prayers,
Seemed to stop the lustful Sultan:
He blew again the hellish fire --
And with his poisonous breath
Urged the satal act. --

We'll drag the Infernal Dog through the City
While, in Howling, he surrender his hated life,
Amidst the Injuries and Curses of the People.
-- Dear Friend, haste and encourage
Thy willing Janissaries! lead 'em
To force the Palace
For this accursed; I Authorised
By Heaven will send a Summons to the cruel Emperor;
That he appear before our great Divan
And give account for this unexampled
Breach of our holy Law, the forcing of my Daughter.
Amurat, I know will instantly be here --
Come in, my Dear, and I will instruct
Thee to receive him --

Oh! --

Why dost thou sigh? my Son knows
The Heroic virtue of thy spotless Soul,
And will, I'm sure, to death adore thee.

Lend me your hands, for I am weak
And want support: let me look up
And thank remorseless Heaven
That I again behold the face of
Reverend goodness! for I,
(Alas) have been in Hell!

A Bridegroom's haste is in your steps,
And in your Eyes a Bridegroom's joy.
Now -- we've reached the happy place!

The Sultan received me with a Noble
Condescension, yet Skeker Para
That wretch, unworthy of her Sex,
Cast a malicious smile, and perplexed me
With words I cannot comprehend,
But why do I employ a thought on the
Vile Creature, when I am so near
My own Heaven of Perfection?
Behold the blessed Parent of my Love!
At length my Wishes are complete,
I come, dear Sir, to pay my thankful
Vows, and receive the only valued Treasure
That the Earth contains --
How fares my Goddess?

Oh! wondrous well!
-- Young man -- I think th'Ambition
That fills thy veins, is only
How to serve thy Master well,
Nor would offered Crowns tempt thee
To a Disloyal act --

My Father! to merit this discourse,
What have I done? by all my hopes
I swear -- should Sultan Ibrahim
Send the Bow-string, Now, Now, when
Pleasure beats thick upon my heart,
And the transporting Joys of yielding Love
Are in my view; yet on my obedient knees
I'd fall; and whilst my breath could form
It self to words; Dying bless the Emperor,
Oh! I know not whether I, the Sultan
Most Revere, or my Morena Love?

'Tis well: -- suppose then
This loved Morena ^orn from her
Helpless aged Father's Arms -- dragged to
The presence of your honoured Emperor,
Whilst his Cheeks glow with Lust --
His fiery Eyes dart on the frighted Maid,
His fatal resolution -- suppose
Her prayers, her tears her cries,
Her wounding supplications all in vain,
Her dear hands in the Conflict cut and mangled,
Dying her white Arms in Crimson Gore,
The savage Ravisher twisling his
In the lovely Tresses of her hair,
Tearing it by the smarting Root,
Fixing her, by that upon the ground:
Then -- (horror on horror!)
On her breathless body perpetrate the fact.

What alteration's here?
Chilling Tremblings seize throughout,
And leave my heart as cold as Death:
Oh! Sir! why have you spoke this
Horrid supposition, with such an Emphasis?
-- Suppose it true --
Not burning Bulls, not breaking Wheels,
Not all the Cruelties, Witty Tormentors
Could practise with Fire, Water, Steel, or
Poison, would equal half my Wracks.

Cast thy Eyes that way, and there behold
Thy wretched Fate and mine!

Oh! Friend! Is this the sight
I promised -- are these my
Expected Joys -- my Eyes!
Fix on the Object you have loved
Thus tenderly, and weep till you are blind!
Oh! cruel Emperor! have I for this
Thought toil a pleasure? watching
A delight? Held it a crime to groan
When hundred Aching Wounds were dressed,
Because I had 'em in thy service?
-- And am I thus rewarded? --

At this Scene the Soldier leaves my heart
And I feel the Woman in my Eyes!

Compassion is a grief of little note,
But I have Woes that tear my Lion heart,
And drink the gushing Blood!
-- Speak lovely Mourner, speak --
To thy kneeling Slave; Hath Nature
Formed a Monster, who durst with violence
Approach thy Snowy virtue? which
I with a Devotion pure as that we pay
To Heaven, have ever worshipped?

Oh Prince! No Tongue, no Language,
Not severest sorrow, whose broken accents
Were all made up of sighs, that rend the trembling
Heart which formed 'em, can express Morena's sufferings,
Forced from my Heaven of Peace and Innocence,
Through what various Scenes of Woe I have passed?
Raging Seas, devouring Flames, and Pestilential Fires,
May be the work of chance; and Nobly born:
But mine's a Fate strips me of all Patience,
Even of the last, and dearest Comfort, Hope.
Oh! 'tis my Curse that sense remains,
The Dire Vision is ever present with me
On this side ghastly Murder, on that
Rapine dressed in Pomp, and Power,
Ruinous resistless Power! my head
Grows giddy with the Loathed Reflection,
Lead me, my Zaida, to Darkness, solid,
Thick, substantial Darkness, where
Not one Ray of the all-cheering Light
May peep upon me, prepare an Opiate Draught
To lull my sorrows, or some desperate compound
That may turn my brain --

Heaven calm these sad disquiets, and ^ve
The Best of Women Peace --

Your Pardon, Reverend Sir, and thine I ask
Thou illustrious Figure of unseign'd Despair,
I am not used to rage, my Nature ever gentle
At but the reading of a dismal story,
My Eyes would flow, my Heart would rise,
And sympathetic sorrow reign.
But now I am by wrongs, a Fury grown
Holy Prophet, is it a sin to heave these
Bleeding bands to thee, and Amurat, for Justice?
Yes, yes, it is, for Justice leads to sharp revenge
That to horrid Mischiefs -- away -- away --
Give me Death, Distraction, any thing, but Thought.

Revenge thee! yes -- we'll set
This Royal City in a blaze, till its bright
Flames mount high as thy Chastity,
And reach at Heaven! -- tear up
The Foundation of this Imperial Nest
Of Luxury; and in its Ruins overwhelm
The World I -- wilt
Thou not assui^e, Friend?

Whi^ I wear this -- Nor
Shall I fear to purge the contagious
Veins of Majesty in such a cause.

'Tis not by Raving we accomplish
Our Designs; if, for my constant
Friendship, I have ought deserved,
In our honourable proceedings you will join:
Come with me to your Father who is now consulting
With the Officers -- there I'll inform ye
Who were the hateful Wretches, that set
The Sultan on to do this fatal mischief.

I go -- Solyman, fly to the Camp,
And bring from thence my select Troops,
I'll take care at Night to give you safe admittance;
Oh World! uncertain always, false, and vain,
Through mighty Toils our wishes we obtain.
And hard we struggle for the expected gain:
But when in view of the end of all our care,
Some awkward Fate hurls back to deep Despair.
Thus to the Abyss, in sight of Heaven, I fall.
And lose my Love, my Honour, Life and all.

He threatened me with Death,
And said, he'd tell his Wrongs aloud,
Till Neighbouring Nations heard 'em.

Saucy -- and Arrogant!

How long shall the Imperial Race,
Whilst the mistaken World deems them
Absolute, be subject to the crafty
Pri^sthood? -- Do at once,
A just bold act, and set by
Your Example the great Successors free,
Send the Executing Mutes, and
Strangle this Ambitious Mufti.

Strangle the Mufti! Oh horror!

Why thou Viper, whom my breast
Has fostered, till the rank poison --
Hath made me all Infectious --
Was it not you that urged
The cruel Rape I last committed?
By Heaven! The only deed that
Ever moved my Soul to a Repentance!
And dost thou now shrink back?
Thou whose face is stamped so plain
With Villain, every child may read it,
Can thou draw thy Distorted features,
Into a look of pity? and, as if Murder
Were News, cry out, Oh Horror!
I tell thee, Vizier, and mark it well,
Watch the first rising of Rebellion,
For should it grow too high; thou art
The fittest Sacrifice to atone the Popular Fury.

Sacred Sir, you cannot mean the
Cruel thing you say -- must
My Life pay for my sincere Obedience
To your Royal Will?

A Messenger from the Divan
Rudely presses to your Presence.

Admit him --

Sultan! -- the Mufti and the
Whole Divan Assembled, have sent me
To thee with the Mufti's Fatfa.
That you instantly appear to answer
The breach our Holy Law has suffered,
In violating Morena, A Free-born Maid.

Is then the Mufti the Dervish, and
All the canting Tribe together met
Hatching Treason, and brooding in
Their loved Element Rebellion?
Now every petty Priest struts,
Looks big; tells a long tale
Of grievances, Models Governments,
and Censures Kings -- let your
Ring leader know, that I despise
His Traitorous Summons, and
Trample it beneath my feet --
Yet, Hold -- thou art not fit
To bear a Message back from --
Ibrahim, who dare to bring him
Such a one; take hence the Villain,
And strange him immediately.

Oh! Mercy! Mercy!

Away with him! --
Vizier, Double our Guards, and
From the Army draw all, whose Loyalty
You think untained -- be Vigilant --
For on thy Life depends thy care --
Weep not, my Sheker Para --
We yet shall brave this S^orm --
By Heaven! --
I to the Last my glory will maintain,
Or, absolute I'll be, or, cease to Reig^
That easy King, whose People gives him Law,
Flatters himself with Majesty and awe;
The Royal Slave the daring rout commands,
And force his Sceptre from his feeble Hands.

WHY Coward dost thou creep thus near me,
Still leaving my Orders (...)

Oh! Sacred Sir! The Mutinous (...)
Bar each Gate of the Palace, nor can I
Pass with Life!

Our woes redouble with the coming Night,
The Impe^us (...) p^ur on us
Like a devouring Flood, whilst your
Faint-he^ted Guards s^rce dare Resist,
Aloud they curse the ^fter, and
Unanimously swear his ruin. --

Poor trembling Wizard -- if thou hast
Raised a Storm (...) thy Magic Po^er
To lay, it must over^ thee --
Here -- thr^w to th^ Ravenous Hunters
The Baited Prey; and let 'em gorge
Their revengeful (...)

Hah!

Stop his mouth, and bear him off.

Sultan, Ibrahim --
Cruel Lord! Wilt thou not hear me!

I, stand next the mark of fate!
Evil Councellors the plausible pretence
Of Rebels, colours their Treason --
But -- 'tis at Sovereign power they aim,
Nor will they cease, till they have bathed
In Royal Gore; the Victim's seized --
Hark how the Bloodhounds ring his Death!

Oh! That I were a Man to face
These Devils, and save my Lord!

Retire Dear Sir, to some more remote
Apartment, whilst I together draw
Your Eunuchs; all whom Prayers
Or Promises can engage, to save
Your precious Life, though I loose my own.

Faithful Achmet! I, who
But yesterday commanded Armies,
Whose numbers outstripped Arithmetic,
And left them unaccountable:
Have now but one poor trusty slave
An Eunuch, who for his unhappy
Lord, will venture Life! --

Where is this Barbarous Prince --
I warrant Fellow-Souldiers; -- Hid
The cruel are still Effeminate:
There's scarce a Man left, that
Asserts his cause, -- I'll search him out,
And whilst my injured friend's preventing
The plunder of the City; do a deed,
At which his nicer virtue shrinks.

Flatterers, that curse of Courts have
Ruined me! -- through their false
Optics, I viewed my greatness --
And when I thought my self a God;
Am more wretched than my meanest Slave:
Unregarded Now's the Frown, that
Marked my foe for Slaughter; or the
Gracious smile which gave my kneeling
Supplicant, a Kingdom --
Dis^bey'd, forsaken, friendless, and alone!
Yet the inborn greatness of my Soul remains!
And I will dye with all my Majesty about me,
-- Go wretched Woman -- Herd amongst
Thy Sex, and let that protect thee!

I will a while retire; watch this feared event,
And if you fall; -- boldly come forth and dye.

Eunuch! Pander! dare thou stop my way?
That for thy impudence -- that for the poor Morena!

O Sultan! our Prophet guard thee,
I can no more

What bold slave art thou, who
Throwing off the Sacred ties of Duty,
Allegiance, dare with offensive
Arms approach thy lawful Prince!

My Prince! --
Id'e sooner serve a Russian Bear,
Whose inhuman paw, when I was
Most Assiduous, marked me still
With Indignation -- such a Monster
So unaccountable art thou!
Oh! Ibrahim! Did thou but hear.
Thy long injured, and at length revolting
People, how they curse thee, -- what
A dire Catalogue of crimes repeat:
Had thou left one grain of Honour,
Thou would turn thy wounded ears away!
And beg me use my Sword; but talk no more.

Traitors are ever loud --
And to colour their own detested sin
Rebellion; with impudence, and calumnies
Bespatter the Throne, they dare attack.

Was there a Slave throughout thy wide
Dominions, whom blind fate had cursed
With Wealth: His forfeit -- Head
Paid for his crime: Whilst his extorted
Treasure sill'd thy coffers, and supplied
New Luxury. Did virtue Reign in
Any Man, a life Austere; or active Valour
Like our great Progenitors: Strait you,
And your Minious thought, this looked
With a Reflecting Eye on your Debauches:
Dispatch'd the pious Wretch, and sent him
To his Friends above; then Women
You monopolised -- let her be Wife
Or Virgin, fair as Heaven, or monstrous as Hell:
Witness your Armenian Mistress; all served
As fuel to that consuming fire your Lust;
Nay, even the Relic of our late glorious
Emperor, was not free from your Attempt,
But that her Lion Resolution made your
Coward Heart shrink back.

What! -- ho! --
Is there none to secure this Traitor?

I tell thee, Lost degenerate King,
There's not a Soul will move a Tongue
Or Finger, in thy Defence; thou standst
Forsook by Heaven, and Human Aid --
Think now upon the fair Morena!
And if thy heart of Adamant unmoved
Could hear an Angel pray; if the angry Powers
So ^unish'd her spotless Innocence: What
Horrors must remain for thee; who bend'st
Beneath the weight of thousand thousand Ills?

Come on, thou Rebel! --
No Soldier sure thou art!
Thy Tongue's thy sharpest Weapon -- yet
If thou were it; and did thy acts excel the
Foremost of my Royal Race; thy Ignoble
Tomb must blush to hold thee, the name of Rebel
Would blot out the H^ro, and leave thy Fame
Detest'd, to the honest World; as thou
Hast Represented mine!

My injured Friend, and that unhappy Beauty
Whom thy Lust hast ruined, gives Justice to
My Javelin's point, and sends it to thy heart!

'T has reached it too, nor am I far from thine.

Oh feeble Arm! Oh Amurat!
Could I do no more for the^

I am no longer now the sport of Fate,
This Atom which our unseen Rulers
Thus alternately have tossed, now will rest
For ever; my first best part of Life,
Even all my Youth, to D^geons, Dark
And Loathsome as my Grave, a jealous
Brother close confined: then slatter'd
A while with Empire, Commer like,
I made a glorious dreadful blaze;
Yet thanks to my Niggard Stars, I Pressed
The golden fruit of Power, and Drank
The very Quintessence, the Vision
Was too full of Rapture long to last:
In a moment the g^y Scene is vanished,
And to my endless Prison, I in haste return.

Sheath all your Swords, here
Let Murder cease; and whilst in sad complainings
I move my Royal Master's heart --
Let no rude breath offend him --
Ha! stretched on the sloor! --
My Friend! hast thou done this?

To higher Judges I am summoned to appeal,
Where I reward or punishment shall find
For this act; which excessive friendship forced:
If thou in honour, as in valour still excell'st,
Forgive thy over-loving Friend: and with a sigh
Remember all my faults, and Death.

Ye inauspicious Planets! which at my birth.
Shot your intermingled Rays; and on my Infant
Head, dropped the poisonous Influence:
Oh! that I could curse ye from your Malignant
Spheres! Was ever such a Wretch as Amurat?
My Mistress Ravished, -- the cruel Ravisher
My Emperour's dead,
My Friend, the Author; and punished too with death!

See Fathers, see the fatal end of
Our Commotions!
'I was Heavens will, and therefore grieve no more;

All Eyes are sixth on you, nor doth the
Empire yield an hon^ur, which you may not claim.

Oh! mistake not the heart of Amurat!
Think not Ambition led me on! no;
Had not Love forced my backward Hand,
This Breast had been a Rampart to Guard.
The Life of Ibrahim; and my Sword
De^roy'd even you, my Father, had.
Ye a^empted it! -- On the
Illustrious Head of the young M^homet
Let's six the Imperial Crown^ May
It be larger, and happier than his
Departed Fathers! and with Hearts,
From whence this Voice proceeds, Ring out
The Acclamation -- Long live Mahomet
The Fourth! Emperor of the true Believers!

Long live Mahomet the Fourth, c.
Amurat our great Deliverer!

Bear the Body to the Royal Mosque, whilst I,
With Mustapha, wait on the Sultana Queens;
Dispel their fears, and cause the perturbed State
To reassume a Face serene.

Turn, Traitor, Turn! and here behold
Thy Fate! -- 'Twas J disclosed the
Cloistered Maid, and forced her on the King
Th^t good Turn I owed for your Disdain.
Then -- If you loved Morena, wreak
On me your Vengeance; and strike
Your Poniard to my Heart!

There are things, which by Antipathy
We hate; and such were ever thou.
The contaminated Blood shall never
Stain the Sword of Amurat.
Live! Detested Creature! Loaded
With Shame and Infamy! Be it
Thy Curse to live! whilst
Pointing Fingers, and busy Tongues
Proclaim thee, if thou appear'st, hunted
Through the City like a Beast of prey;
And shunned by all, whoever heard
The Name of Goodness!

Look back! and see! how vain thy Curses are!
Thus! -- I defy thy Malice!
Oh! Ibrahim! if in the other World
The faithful Sheker can be useful:
Lo she comes -- Disdaining Life
When thou art gone!

Bear the polluted Wretch away,
Whist I seek my afflicted Fair:
And recount the Wonders Revenge has done.

Dressed in these Robes of Innocence,
Fain would I believe my Virgin Purity remains;
But oh! Memory the wretched'st Plague,
Still goads me with the bated Image of my wrong.
My Soul grows weary of its polluted Cage,
And longs to wing the upper Air, where
Uncorrupted Pureness dw^lls.
Come near, my Zayda, why dost thou
Tremble so? Oh! had thou known
The Horrors, thy poor Mistress has,
Thou would h^e left to fear!

Who (...) express the Terrors of this dismal Night!
The mad (...) aniz^ up, and raging for Revenge,
Put private Broils upon the public score,
Murder and Rapine, with ^ury uncontrolled
Rang through the City, and make the Devastation
Horrible, the mangled Vizier they have
Piece-meal torn; nor has their Vengeance
Stopped here: The Life of the Empire, the Man
We worshipped like a God, for whom
We still were taught to pray; even
The mighty Ibrahim is no more!

Is Ibrahim dead? -- Oh Amurat!
I fear thou hast gone too far; and lest
Our Prophet, should punish thy Disloyalty;
I will, of my self, an Offering make!
Morena, the unhappy cause of all these Woes;
Morena the Atonement --
Go to my Closet; bring from thence
The Golden Bowl -- This News
Has much ^der'd me --
There is in that a sovereign Cordial!
Look down ye Roman Ladies
Whose tracks of Virtue I with care,
Have followed -- Behold! a
T^kish Maid -- who to the last,
Your great Example imitates:
Scorts to survive when Honour's lost!
I know my avenging Friends will instantly
Be here gay in their Purple Ruins, thinking to glad
My Soul with the fatal story; but like a sad Wrecth,
Whose loss is inepp^ble, I must never aim
At comfort more! Deeply I'll taste this precious Juice,
And seek that sound long sleep, where sorrow,
Tormenting care those restles^ Anxieties
That keep in Dreams the mind awake, approach no more!

Hail my beloved and charming fair!
Oh! I have bin, where Blood and Desolation Reigned,
Where horror in a thousand shapes appeared:
But 'tis past: And I am arrived at the desired Land
Of Peace -- Thou the Dove-like Emblem, whose
Longed for sight Calms the rough Tempests
Of my Soul, and tunes my Heart to Joy!

That thou had stayed, some moments longer.

Why! My loved dear one!

I shame to cast my eyes towards thine
Wherewith such pleasure I was wont to steal
A glance, my Revenge is now complete;
I know it, and am yet alive --
Lucretia died before!

Inhuman fair!
Death in the Person of my Friend!
Hath touched my heart too near;
And now, to crown my misery,
Cruelly you talk of yours!

The wrongs that Tyrrannick Ibrahim
Had heaped on the Sultana Queens
Causes 'em jointly to rejoice;
They call you their preserver,
And send by me the Empire's Seal
With the Title of Prime Vizier:
Begging you would protect the Infant
King, whom you have so justly Raised.

All Honours, Titles, Glories, at the Feet
Of my Adored I lay, if she will bless me
With the sweets of Love, I am, what
They please, else nothing.

Can the great Amurat submit so low,
To talk of Fruition when 'tis past,
Or to his Arms receive pollution?

Name it no more! The Royal Blood
Of the ossender hath cleansed and washed out
Thy H^nours Stains, and white as thy
Robes, thy Innocence appears.
Shall I forsake the Crystal Fountain,
Because a Rough-hewn Satyr there
Has quenched his Thirst? No! The
Spring, thy Virgin Mind was pure!

Talk on, methinks I taste of Heaven,
To hear thee! Let thy kind Breath
Proceed: Waft me from one Paradise
To another!

Distraction seize me! Either
My sight deceives me; or my Love
Looks exceeding pale; she Staggers too!
Help! Help! Remorseless Powers drive not
The Wretch you formed to the Blasphemous
Sins Despair a^ utter!

My Daughter! what hast thou done!

Oh! my unhappy Mistress!
I fear th^t fatal Cordial!

Invetera^e Stars! Now ye've stretched
Your power to the last degree, and
Ye can curse no more!
Oh! Morena! more savage --
Than our Lord! for ever thou
Hast Robbed my Life of Joy, deprived
My Eyes of Happiness; which, till
They close, must gaze on Thee!
What hath my Love deserved for such
A punishment? Morena! unkind!
Cruel! unkind!

My Father! draw near; forgive this
First last act of Disobedience!
You taught me. Sir, that Life no longer
Was a good, then a clear Frame attended it;
My Dishonour Rings through the Universe --
Pardon my quitting it! --
Now Amurat! To thee -- Here will I
Lean a Moment, where I thought to Reign
A whole contented Age -- I fear the Cordial
Will prove too strong! Antidote the Poison,
And let me live!

Thou shalt live! since this Barbarous
Climate has wronged such worth;
I'll Raise another Empire large as this,
And fix thee there! --

Fix me in thy Heart! more dear to me
Than gaudielt Thrones! Be that
The sacred Urn, where thy Morena rests;
Nor ever let the Face of newer brighter
Beauty drive her thence! --
Oh! Farewell! --

Oh! speak! speak once again! --
Open those rosy Doors! Dart from
The fairest Eyes that ever blessed the World,
One Ray though 'tis a dying one! --
Oh! 'Tis impossible! Is there
A Dungeon, Galley, Bedlam, can
Produce ought so miserable as Amurat!

Dead, my loved Daughter! --
Angry Prophet! when will thy vengeance cease!

Oh! never let it! now let
Earthquakes shake the Basis of this Foundation,
And whirlwinds drive us like dust about!

Have Patience, Son! Honour was
The Mistress of thy Youth! Fair
Morena hath formed the bright Idea
To the Life, Copy her, and court only Glory.
Now let the great Business of the Empire
Divert thy Sorrow? --

Ye say I am Vizier, Guardian to the
Infant King; with Power unlimited
Command a World, almost as large as
Alexander's -- Oh! Morena! once my
Living Mistress, now my dead Saint,
My Ever Worshipped Dear: I do remember
What I promised: no Crowns, Laurels, nor
The greatest height Ambition raises,
Should ever mount me above thy Slave --
Thus -- thus I keep my word --
Slighting all offers here I prostrately;
No life so happy, as with thee to die!

Oh! fatal deed!

Rash Act!

Where shall I hide me from
This Scene of Woe! -- No sorrow
Equals that which to the Dead we pay!
Because there's no Room left for
Hope of Friend!

Let's not through grief neglect the public care
Since in the change we had so large a share;
On the Empires charge let's our sad thoughts employ,
There must be room for that, though none for Joy.

THE Play is past, the danger is to come,
Critics, in pity give a gentle doom.
To Conquer those who can their Cause maintain
Is Glorious; here the labour would be vain:
By the great Rules of Honour all Men know
They must not Arm on a Defenceless Foe.
The Author on her weakness, not her strength relies,
And from your Justice to your Mercy slies.
THE Inhuman Cardinal, or, Innocence betrayed. A Novel, 12. Written by Mrs.
Pix. Printed for John Harding and Richard Wilkin.


