WHat Cheer, my Lads? Igad, I'm ^ome to say,
I^ll press to Sea all those who Damn this Play:
Lord^ how our Ship might here be Mann'^ to day!
Sea-fights, 'tis thought, won't much ^gr^e with those
Whom they call Wits, and less with Mealy Beaus.
Mayhap it would make them stink; for, every Year,
We don't go to drink Punch, and take French Air.
But sure, the Gentlewomen are at rest,
None of them are afraid of being Pressed.
Well, how^s the Wind here? Still that's veering round,
Like your Church-Weathercocks, on English Ground,
Then hiss it goes; Oh, that's a plaguy Sound:
Igad, 'tis worse to every Actor's Ear,
Than Frets of Wind to your huge Mops of Hair^
For thus your Cri -- Critics serve Nine Plays in Ten,
Worse than Jack Frenchman does our Merchant-men.
Like Pirates too, while honest men they're breaking,
The damned Fresh-water Sharks are n't worth the taking:
Yet long to maul these ^ame New Plays as much
As we, when Homeward bound, to take a Touch;
Or, as Dubart, to snap his Brother Dutch.
Yet why should they Hiss Plays not worth regarding?
Do we Bombard a Town not worth Bombarding?
Drolls shortly will amuse ye at the Fair:
To like This, think your selves already there,
As for you Spruce Gallants, pray be n't too nice,
But show you can Oblige a Woman twice.
The First Time she was grave, as well she might,
For Women will be damned sullen the first Night;
But faith, they'll quickly mend, so be n't uneasy:
To Night she's brisk, and tries New Tricks to please ye.

PRithee, my Lord Marquess, don't trouble me with thy Jealous Whims: You say,
there was Masqueraders last Night under the Windows, -- why there let 'em be a
God's Name! I am sorry 'twas such a cold raw Night for the honest Lads. By the
Honour of Spain, if I had heard 'em, I would have sent the Rogues a Glass of
Malaga to warm 'em.


O Lard! O Lard! I shall run mad! Sure, my Lord Governor, your Horns will
exceed the largest in the Palace-Hall. -- Oh! that my Wife were out of your
House, and Barcellona! Methinks I am not secure, though she's under eleven Locks.


By my Holy Dame, I am of your Mind: I don't think you are secure.


How! Do you know any thing to the contrary?


Why, by the Mass, this I believe: her Head's at work;
And I dare say, she has made ye a Cuckold,
In Imagination, with every Don she has through
Any Peep-hole seen, since your first Marriage.

Oh! dam' her! dam' her!

You'll never take my Advice.
-- Give but a Woman her Freedom still,
Then she'll never act what's ill:
'Tis crossing her, makes her have the Will.
-- ^hough! I have been in England --
There they are the happiest Husbands --
If a Man does happen to be a Cuckold,
Which, by the way, is almost as rare as in Spain:
But, I say, if it does fall out, all his Wife's Friends
Are his; and he's caressed, -- nay, Godszooks, many times
Rises to his Preferment by it.

Oh, insufferable! I am not able to bear your Discourse.
-- A Man coming from my Wife's Apartments!
-- Oh, the Devil! the Devil!

I see no cloven Foot he has.

No; but he is one of his Imps; a Letter-Carrier.
I read it in his Face.

Oh! I begin to perceive it now, -- here's the
Superscription writ in his Forehead: -- To the
Beauteous Donna Elenora, Marchioness
Of, c. Ay, 'tis very plain.

Well, Governor, these Jeers won't be put up so.

What a wannion ails ye, trow? What do ye mean by Letters? Ich am no Scholar;
my Calling is to zell Fruit; and zum of the Meads of this House (Meads Ich
think 'em) beckoned me in; -- I zould 'em zum; and that's all I know.

Ay, honest Fellow, I dare swear 'tis: -- why, if thou were a Monkey, he'd be
Jealous on thee.

You may think what you please, but I fear other things.
Therefore, if, as a Guest, you will let me have
The Freedom of your House, I'll take
This Fellow in, and search him.

Ay, with all my Heart. -- Oh these Jealous Fools!

Come along, sirrah; I'll look as much as in thy Mouth.

Ay, for fear there should be a Note in a hollow Tooth.

Why, -- de ye see, as for matter of that, --
ye ma' look in my A --

Hold, Beast, 'tis a Man of Quality you speak to.

Zooks, I think 'tis a Mad-man.

Come your ways, Impudence!

But, Sir, Sir, -- must the Meads zerch me, or the Men?

I'll tell you presently, ye wanton Rogue.

How now, Tittup?

Morrow, Deary.

Why, Tittup, here the Marquess has been fretting,
Fuming, swearing, raging: he is just Horn-mad --
Hark ye, Tittup, did you hear any Serenading last night?

Yes, Deary; 'twas the English Colonel to me; --
You are not angry, Deary.

Not I.
He that has a handsome buxom Wife,
Must surely be always pleased;
Blessed with a pleasant quiet life,
And never, never teased.
But hark ye, Tittup, that English Colonel
Has such a Lear, such a Tongue, such a Nose,
Such a -- have a care on him, Tittup.

I warrant ye, Deary, the honest Freedom you allow
Is sufficient: ^'ll never go farther.
You know, he dines here to day, and brings
His Music to entertain us in the Afternoon.

Yes, yes; I must dispatch some business,
To be ready to receive him, -- B'w'ye Tittup!

B'w'ye, Deary: Buss, before ye go. --



'Tis my Colonel, my Peregrine, sets my Heart on fire;
And gives that warmth my old Husband found
Upon my Lips -- But then such a Husband, --
So good, so honest, preventing every Wish. --
-- Then such a Colonel, so handsome, so young.
So charming, -- Where's the Harm to give a Worthy
Begging Stranger a little Charity from a Love's Store,
When the kind old Governor can never never miss it?

Well, my Lord! now we are come to Barcellona, I fear this Devil of a Marquess
will be too hard for us.


How, Father Andrew, desponding! -- 'Twas but this Morning, over your Malaga,
you swore by the Eleven Thousand Virgins, and all your Catalogue of Saints,
you'd bring my Elenora to my Arms.


And by Fifty Thousand more, so I will, if it be possible: If not, my Oath is
void: You know the Marquess hates me heartily, as I do him, because once he
caught me carrying your Letter to his Wife.


For the good Office, I think, used ye most scurvily.


Scurvily! basely, barbarously; without respect to these sacred Robes; tossed
me in a Blanket; covered me with Filth and Dust; and so sent me by force to our
Covent. For which, and my natural Inclination to Cuckoldom, I have joined in
your Attempts, and waited on you to Barcellona, to be revenged.


You know there's Justice in my Cause. --
Elenora was, by Contract, mine, at Rome;
Before this old Marquess had her. And could I again
Recover her: I don't question but to get Leave of his Holiness
For a Divorce, and marry her my self.

Nay, that's as you please; when she's in your possession, marry, or not, 'tis
all one to Father Andrew; it never shall trouble my Conscience. I must own,
were I in your Condition, I should not marry; because daily Experience shows, a
Wife's a Cloy, and a Mistress a Pleasure.


Well, we'll discourse that when we have the Lady; and in the mean time, good
Father, be diligent.


I think I am diligent; I am sure, I am worn to mere Skin and Bone in your
service. This morning I found for ye a Mercury, a Letter-Carrier, that can slip
through a Keyhole, to deliver a Billetdoux to a fair Lady,


I wish he were returned; I f^ar some Misfortune has befallen him.


O! here he comes, sound Wind and Limb!
-- So, my dear Tool of Gallantry! how hast thou sped?

Gad, the hardest Task I ever undertook. -- Sir, you gave me five Ducats, -- as
I hope for Preferment, and to be made Pimp-master general, it deserves double
th^ Sum.


Nor shalt thou fall of it, Boy, if thou hast succeeded.


First then, the damned old jealous Marquess caught me, and notwithstanding my
counterfeit Speech and Simplicity, had me amongst his Varlets, to be searched.
They knew his Custom, and no sooner entered, but they flew upon me like so many
Furies: I feared it had been to tear me Limb from Limb; but it proved only to
tear my Clothes off; which was done in a twinkling, and I left as naked as my
Mother bore me; whilst the old Marques^, grovel'd all over my habiliments, and
run Pins in 'em, so thick, that a poor Louse would not have escaped spitting.
The only thing which pleased me, was to observe a Peep-hole the Maids (knowing
this to be their Master's Searching-room) had made; and sometimes one Eye,
sometimes another, viewing my Proportions.


But had you any Letter? was that safe?
Satisfy me there.

Pray let me take my own method. --
Nothing being found, they gave me again my Clothes,
And the Marquess a Ducat for my Trouble:
Yet I had a Letter --

Which thou ingeniously swallow'dst.

No; which I more ingeniously brought.

What, in thy Hat?

My Hat had the same severe Trial.

Thy Shoes --

They passed the same Scrutiny, -- impossible in any of them to hide a Scrip,
the least shread of Paper.

How then?

My Lord, do ye observe this Stick?


I see no more in it.

Dominick, here's neither Paper nor Writing upon it.

Give it me.

Thou dear Abstract of Invention, let me kiss thee.

Excellent H^dewell! if thou wilt stay with me, whilst
I am in Barcellona, I'll satisfy thy utmost Wishes.

Most willingly.

Here Father, here dear Confident! Orada writes^
That the tormented Marquess has remo^'d her
From those Apartments that were next the Streets,
To some that overlook the Gardens, -- thither,
She says, my Elenora would have me come this night;
And if they can find a place to escape at,
Before the Lodgings are better secured, they will:
If not, we shall hear of them, -- a gentle Whistle
Is the Sign. -- Hidewell, you shall not appear in this,
Because if seen, you'd be known again.

Pray let me go: Gad, if the Business should be done
Without my Help, I should take it very ill.

Well, well, we will in, and consider on it.
ALas! when Charming Sylvia's gone,
I sigh, and think my self undone:
But when the lovely Nymph is here,
I'm pleased, yet grieve and hope, yet fear^
Thoughtless of all but her I rove;
Ah! tell me, is not this to love?
Ah me! what Power can move me so?
I dye with Grief when she must go;
But I revive at her return;
I smile, I freeze, I pant, I burn:
Transports so sweet, so strong, so new,
Say, Can they be to Friendship due?
Ah! no, 'tis Love, 'tis now too plain,
I feel, I feel the pleasing Pain:
For, who ever saw bright Sylvia's Eyes,
But wished, and longed, and was her Prize?
Gods^ if the Truest must be blessed,
Oh! let her be by me possessed.
Ha boy, Tittup!
Well done, Tittup!
Ha boy, Tittup!

The Dance done, he goes to her, -- You are hot, you are hot Child.

A little warm.

Well, Tittup, do but carry thy Body swimmingly,
Without tripping, and we will begin a Reformation
In Barcellona, shall thou go through Spain, --
The Ladies shall live like Cherubims, --
But have a care, Tittup, have a care of a faux pas.

Fear not, Deary.

Come, now let's sit down, and see the rest perform --
Let me have some lively Songs --
-- Hold, Friend, hold! I have not learnt so much
Of your English Fashion yet, to let another man
Sit by my Wife, and I decently keep at a distance.

I beg your Pardon, Sir.

Nay, -- no harm; --
If an old man has a beauteous Treasure,
Let her sing, and dance, and laugh without measure,
And then she'll think of no other Pleasure.

Your own, Sir?

Ay, ay Boy; I have a Thousand of 'em
In a day, ex tempore.

Is't possible?

Come, now I have done, do you strike up. --

My Lord, there is to wait on your Honour, --
His Excellency the Duke Gonsalvo de Medina, de Sidoni, de --

Hold, hold, enough, enough, -- Where is he?

In the Hall of Ceremonies.

Gadso! I must go to him, sit you merry,
I'll be with you presently.

Spywell, stand at yonder Door, and give me information, as soon as ever my
Lord comes up the great Stairs.

I will, Madam.

My Angel! by Heaven I am raging mad;
Burnt up with violent Love. -- Thy Shape --
Thy every Motion fires me, -- but thy Eyes --
They set me in a Blaze -- Oh! I must dye,
Unless the Cordial of returning Kindness save me!

Can you be so Ungenerous to wrong this noble Governor, who is so fond of you,
and even dotes on me?

He wronged thee more, when he condemned thy lovely
Youth to withered Sapless Arms. -- Can little foolish Tricks
Of fondness make amends for Ecstasies, Pantings,
The Joys unutterable of vigorous Love?

I must not hear ye.

You must, you must -- I'll, kneeling, fix Ten thousand
Burning Kisses on thy Beauteous Hand;
And the little wanton God swims and revels in thy sprightly Ey^s.

Why am I fastened here! -- too Rigorous Heaven!
Take from this wondrous Stranger his Conquering Charms,
Or give me more Insensibility!

Madam, my Lord's upon the Stairs.

Away, away; mark what I say, and keep up the Discourse.

This is but living upon the Rack;
You might contrive a better Opportunity.

Peace, and observe. -- But are your Ladies then so free
And yet so innocent in England? --



-- Chaster in their Thoughts than your Nuns, yet merrier: more frollicksome
than your Carnavals.


Very pleasant! just so I would live, -- yet
If a bold encouraged Wretch once offered at my Honour,
I would not stay to use my Husband's Sword, -- but
With my own Hands stab the vile Presumer.

You need not, Madam, talk of Weapons; your Eyes,
Though they roll in Fire, yet shoot chaste Beams,
And show your Heart as cold as Ice.

So, so; very, very well, by the Mass!
How is't my Ganymede of the War, who look
Fitter to storm Hearts than Towns. -- Yet, igad, you English Boys
Fear not their pretty Faces, but Fight like rugged Romans,
Or the old rough Gauls.

You compliment us, my Lord.

No faith, I hate 'em. -- Well, Tittup, are ye almost ready for your Dinner?

When you please, Deary.

I warrant the Marquess would not let his Wife dine with us for the King of
Spain's next Plate-Fleet.

He has let me see her but once; -- when I offered it again, he plainly told
me, my Company was unfit for her: -- rude Brute!

To us who have been bred otherwise it seems a Miracle,
That men can be so barbarous to the Fair Sex.

But I'll set 'em an Example, if Tittup holds her Ground.
-- Come along --
Merrily, merrily let's pass our Time,
In Freedom, Joy and Plenty:
At Sixty appear but in our Prime,
Whilst the Thinking Sot is old at Twenty.

Dost think the Messenger got off, Orada?

Faith I know not, Madam, -- I thought I heard the Marquess's Voice as he went
out. -- The Fellow seemed very cunning. --

All his Policy but little would avail him,
If my Husband met him, -- by Heaven
'Tis kindly done of Count Camillus, to leave his Wealth,
His Palaces, and all the Pleasures of delightful Rome,
To follow wretched me to Barcellona.
I am a thing accursed by cruel Guardians,
For my Parents died when I was young; they would not else
Sure have forced me, condemned to an old jealous
Madman. -- I saw his Follies and his Humours, and I begged,
Like a poor Slave, who views the Rack before him, --
All in vain; they were inexorable. -- so may just Heaven
Prove to them in their greatest need!

This is a melancholy Thought, Complaints won't break Locks; we must set our
Wits at work to free our selves. I have searched the Lodgings round, but
there's no Passage; an imprisoned Mouse could scarce escape.


But prithee, dear Orada, how got you in favour with my Lord? He used to hate
ye abominably.


True; and whilst he did so, it was impossible for me To serve you^ Ladyship.
-- So I wheeled about, --

Railed at you and all your Ways most heartily,
And immediately obtained his Grace.

Would that do?


Yes, with a bantering Letter I showed him, pretending I had got it from you;
and a long Harangue how Wives ought to hear with their Husbands Ears, see with
their Eyes, and make use of no sense without Permission. In fine, I ravished
him with my Discourse, till he threw those withered Sticks, his Arms, about me,
and swore I should remain his Heart's Joy.


^Tis a great Point gained, you must wheedle him this Night with some Story,
and keep him in the Closet -- whilst I watch for Camillus, or his Agent.


I warrant you, Madam.


Orada, get me the Song I love, the succeeding tedious;
Imprisoned Wretches thus count the succeeding Hours,
And groan the melancholy Time away.
BE gone, be gone, thou Hag despair;
Be gone, back to thy Native Hell:
Leave the Bosom of the Fair,
Where only Joy should dwell.
Or else, with Misers, willing Revels keep;
And stretch thy wretched Lids from Sleep.
But hence be gone, and in thy hated room
Let Hope, with all its gentle Blessings, come.
-- So! now my Jailer comes.

Then I'll observe my Cue. -- Come, come Madam,
You must not complain. -- Suppose your Husband
Kept you in an Oven, or a Cellar, you ought to be content --
I say, -- Wives must submit.

Hold thy Tongue, Impertinence! --
When you were good for any thing, my Husband
Would not let ye come at me: now he has brought you
To his turn, I must be perpetually plagued with you.

You are a perpetual Plague to me, I'm sure --
You hate every body that tells you your Duty.

Inhuman Spaniard! -- what would thou have?
-- Am I not immured, buried alive?

Yes, yes; I have your Body, but your Heart is with the young Count Camillus.
Do ye blush, ye Strumpet, in Imagination^ -- Ye Eve! Dalilan Devil! I'll let out
that bounding Blood. -- Orada -- get a Surgeon to take away fifty ounces.


My Lord, you are not mad! What! have a Surgeon quiddling her white Arm, and
looking Babies in her Eyes!


Monster! be thy self the Butcher, and let my Heart's Blood out: That Gentleman
you named has Honour, Truth, and Virtue.


Thou lie, false Women! he's a Rake, a Hellhound, and wallowing now in Rome's
Brothels.


I could contradict him if I durst.





Do ye fleer, poisonous Witch? I am going to dispatch the ^ast Business that
brought me to Barcellona. Then, Minion, thou shalt be immured in a remote
Castle, where thou shall it not see the Face of Human-kind, except thy Women, and
when I design to visit thee.


Know this, and let it gnaw thy Jealous Heart:
Thy Visits will be my severest Punishment.

Watch her, Orada; preach those Maxims thy Zeal for me suggests; let her not
have Liberty to think.

Fear not; let me alone to tease her.

Ay, -- make all fast --
Insufferable Tyrant! -- Come Orada,
Let's go view the dear place, which at
Wish'd^for Night brings my dear Camillus to me.

Where's this plaguy Governor? I must have him with me, because 'tis about the
King's Business; though I hate him for breaking^ our Spanish Customs, in letting
his Jilting Wife have such Liberty. -- Ha! here she comes, -- and a Spark with
her; -- I'll abscond, and see how virtuously she carries her self.


I dare not stay, -- my Husband thinks I am gone into my Chamber; if by any
chance he should come this way, all our Hopes are ruined.


Were he by, I'd seal my Vows upon thy melting Lips -- Oh! receive my Heart; it
flutters near thee, and struggles for passage.


I am covered over with Blushes!





My Life! can't ye contrive some way to bless me? Your Sex were ever most
ingenious lucky at Invention.


Suppose you pretended a Quarrel in England, -- for which you were pursued, and
begged Leave to hide here. -- If you were in the House, I might get an
Opportunity to visit ye, -- But sure you would not be such a naughty man to
ruin me, if I did.


Not for the World!


I would fain love ye, and preserve my Honour.


That is preserved whilst 'tis concealed: The Roses in your Cheeks will only
wear a fresher Die, -- and those dear Eyes are no Tell-tales, Love will make
'em shine and sparkle more. -- I'll put your Advice in execution.


I must not venture on another moment. -- Farewell.


Farewell, my Blessing.


Oh Women! Women! Women! -- They are Crocodiles, they are painted Serpents,
gilded Toys, disguised Fiends, -- But why name I these? They are Women -- Just
such another is my Damsel of Darkness; if Fortune would but throw a handsome
Fellow in her way. -- Here comes the Governor, singing, I warrant ye, -- poor
Credulous Fool, -- I cannot but laugh -- ha, ha, he!

-- Hey da! I am glad to find you so merry. 'Tis as great a wonder to see you
laugh, as it would be to see me cry -- And that I have not done these Fifty Years,
old Boy.


My Lord, which is best, for a mans Wife to Cuckold him in Imagination or
Reality?


Lord! Lord! your Head is always upon Cuckolding, All the Cuckolds may be
hanged, for what I care.


Oh fie, no! Hanging would be a scurvy Death for a man of your Quality.


Why -- what do ye mean by that, now, ha? -- Don't provoke me, I say -- do not
-- I shall make old Toledo walk if you do, for all 'tis in my own House.


I must not tell him now, -- It will put him so out of Humour, he won't go with
me, -- 'Twas only a Jest, my Lord, -- I would beg the Honour of your Company to
the Duke of Sidonia's.


With all my Heart -- come, come:

Tormented still's the Jealous Fool,
Himself, nor Bosom Wife can never rest:
Yet he often proves the Woman's Tool,
Whilst the Contented Man is ever blessed.

So, Hidewell! Hast thou got the Ladder of Ropes?


Yes, my Lord, here's all the Tackling.


Is it strong? -- for I am something weighty.


How, Father! just now you said you were worn to Skin and Bone.


Ay, my Lord; but you know Bones ill covered will soonest be broken.


True; take care of your self besure. -- Hidewell, I have altered my Mind, --
Thou shall it along with us; watch on the outside the Wall, and give us notice
when the Coast is clear.


With all my Heart.


Let me see, have I got my Holy Water about me?


Holy Water! for what?


Oh! I always love to say my Prayers, and have those Trinkets, when I undertake
a dangerous Design.


Don't be so profane, Domine, -- you'll never thrive, -- yet, if your
Devotion's strong, you've time enough -- We shall not go this Hour or two.


Nay, I won't hinder ye, -- an Ejaculation as I go along does the Business.


My Lord, the English Colonel, that lodges in the House, sends to know if you
are at leisure.


Tell him, I am, -- and long to kiss his Hands. -- I like that Gentleman, he
appears brave

And bold -- should our Designs grow desperate:
I dare believe he would not scruple his Assistance.

Faith and troth I like him too, -- he treats like an Emperor; I dined with him
to day, -- and he so gently, so agreeably forced Flesh upon me, that by St.
Dominick, I could not refu^e him; though 'tis a strict Fast, a horrible strict
Fast, as I hope to be an Abbot. -- Then the obliging Toad has such a Waggish
Eye, I'll pawn my ^eads, a plaguy Dog for the Women, and they are ever
good-natur'd: -- By his Holiness's Toe, I love the Sex my self, -- for all this
dangling Robe, and my foolish Vow of Chastity.


'Tis pity you were not a Knight-Errant, -- the Church has robbed the Ladies of
a famous Adorer.


No, faith, my Lord, I do 'em more Service in these Weeds: I have saved many a
desperate Soul.


How!


Thus: in procuring them the full Possession of their Desires; and that su^ely
brought 'em to Repentance; and you know, what Repentance brings 'em to.


Truly, Father, I shall grow angry with you; for if once the Priests take up
the Office of Procuring, there will be no Business for a Lay-Pimp.


Peace, -- the Colonel comes.


-- I am your Lordship's humble Servant, -- I have just had some Music to
complement me, -- I am a great Lover of it, -- if your Lordship is so, we will
have the Entertainment there.


Nothing can oblige me more. -- Some Chairs there!


If your Lordship pleases, being in this Dress, I will aim at a Jig, I danced
thus once in a Masquerade.


Prithee do.


He. FAirest Nymph that ever blessed our Shore,
Let me those charming Eyes adore,
And fly no more, and fly no more.
She. Spaniard, thy Suit is all in vain;
I was born where Women reign,
And cannot brook the Laws of Spain.
He. For thee my Native Customs I'll forgo,
Cut my black Locks, and turn a Beau.
She. E're I submit to be your Wife,
Listen to an English Husband's life;
With Sparks abroad I'm every day,
Gracing the Gardens, Park, or Play,
Hearing all the pretty things they say;
Give and take Presents, and when that's done,
You thank the Beaux when I come home.
He. Oh! I now my Temper fear.
She. Oh! sigh not yet, there's more to hear:
At my Levy crowding Adorers stand,
Fixed on my Eyes, and grasping my white Hand;
All their Conrts and Oglings bent on me,
Not one regardful Look towards thee:
At this thou must be pleased, or else not see.
He. Then we must part, and I must die.
She. If thou art such a Fool, what care I?
He. I cannot share thee, so I am undone.
She. A wiser will supply thy Room.
Chorus. Then we must part, c.
If thou art such a Fool, c.
I cannot share thee, c.
A wiser will supply, c.



The oddness of our Adventures surprise me: -- Both our Mistresses in the same
House! -- I hope 'twill further our Designs.


It must. -- My Lord, I have a Favour to beg; That you would lend me one of
your Implements to morrow, to manage a Plot I have in agitation.


Most willingly take your Choice.


I am at your Service.


You are so forward, -- Canonical Fornication-Broker, -- I believe I am fittest
for the Gentleman's Service.


Goodlack, Upstart! I helped ye to my Lord, -- and now ye are for engrossing
all Business to your self.


Nay, -- I must have the most expert, because the Case is difficult.


Well! I'll not say much! -- But here stands little Andrew, who has undertook
to bring a Smock-fac'd Cardinal to a Maddona, secured with a Guard more
num^rous than Argus's Eyes, and more dreadful than the Dragon you wot of -- yet
spite of massy Doors, impenetrable Bolts, and Italian Padlocks, ^ffect^d it.


Phough! what's that! I have carried on an Amour for the Queen of Spain, --
conveyed her Letters made up in Wax-Candles; Love-Complaints writ in the inside
of her Glove; besides a Thousand other Contrivances you never dreamt of. --
'Tis true, at last the Fate of all Court-Pimps was mine: I fell into Disgrace;
as that had raised me, so it ruined me; I lost a Coach and Six by my
Profession, -- And shall you pretend to Rival me?


You lost! why, Sirrah, Sirrah! I tell thee, if I had employed my Parts in
Church-Politicks, in Tricks of Priestcraft, by this time I had been Pope. --
But the bringing kind loving things together, was dearer to me than the Triple
Crown, -- And shall a Varlet contend with me?


Gentlemen! dispute no more; I find either of you is qualified for my purpose.
-- My Noble Lord, good Night, -- if you want me, on the least notice, I am
ready.


I thank you, dear Neighbor, good Night. -- Hidewell, take up the Ropes, and
come away.


Along, Blunderbuss.


I hope, Father Peremptory, before to morrow Morning, you'll stand in need of my
Cunning, to deliver that loved Carcass from some imminent Danger.


I defy thee, and all thy shallow Imaginations.


Leave jangling, and make haste.


-- My Lord, I have a Thousand things of greater consequence to say. -- Pray
return.


Dear Orada, by and by; I must see where my Devil of a Wife is.


You know she cannot pass the Lodgings, perhaps she's at her Devotions.


No, she's too foul to Pray.








There's no keeping this mad Fool out of his Wife's sight; -- They must even to
Bed, whilst I parle with the Lover.


-- So, Gentlewoman! I have caught ye! -- How? With your Head out at Window,
making your amorous Complaints!


I was almost stifled for want of her. -- Sure you are not Jealous of the Trees
and Stars, -- They were my only Objects.


Oh Impudence! did I not hear you say, When will he come; my Light, my Life,
break through this Veil of Darkness, and shoot with Rays of Comfort on me?





I knew you behind me, and therefore did it to torment ye.


It may be so; but I shall not trust ye -- Come, into the Bedchamber. -- Orada,
do you School her, -- I'll wat^h for your Light and Life my self.


My Lord, you had better go to Bed with her, and then you'll be secure.


No, no; in, in.


-- So! -- We are got well in; Heaven send us safe out again!


Father, Father! don't trouble Heaven in this Affair, you'll never prosper.


Bless me, my Lord! Prayers are natural to me: if you are so wicked to neglect
'em, I can't help that.


Come, mind your Business: where's the Whistle?


Here, here, -- now for a delicious Vision, Of a peeping Angel!


The Signal's given, and here's the Answer.


We are discovered; and if I stay, all other Opportunities are left for ever.
--

-- Why Friar! Friar! Father! You are not hurt, the Bullets went over our
Heads.


Are ye sure I am not hurt? -- I did conceive I was killed.


No, no; but I know not what you may be if you stay -- Follow me, with speed.


Oh Pox! the Devil of all ill Luck! ruined, hanged,


Search well, Boys! leave not a Shrub or Tuft of Grass unexamined -- Five
Pistols to him who finds One.


I warrant ye, my Lord! let us alone for ferreting 'em! -- Soho! what have we
here -- A Pox, 'tis a Stub of a dead Tree -- 'thas broke my Nose.


Oh Rogue! Are ye there? I'll be with ye presently.


-- Make haste, unlucky Devil! -- 'Twas I cried Fire! opened the Door for your
deliverance -- Fly, and own me for the Master of your Art for ever.


I cannot stay to thank ye, -- But -- I yield, I yield.


Benedicta Maria! What! Fire, Murder, and Treason all abroach at once! -- a
horrible Plot! -- By the Honour of Spain, a terrible one, as I hope to be a
Grandee!


S^ywell, what can be the meaning of this? My Colonel would not come in such a
way. -- My Lord! my Deary! the Matter, -- the Cause of this Disturbance!


Here, Sirrah! raise all the Guards: Oh Titt^p! we're like to be murdered, --
drowned, and blown up, no body knows how, nor which way: A damnable Plot! by
his Majesty's Mustach^es I swear!


Sure 'tis a false Alarm, -- The House has been searched by so^e Servants
discreerer than the rest, -- and they find nothing.


Villains! Dogs! under the notion of the Devil,
These Sheep-lookt Rogues, these Dastard Whelps,
Have let the Robber of my Honour escape; whilst I
But just examined if my Wife was safe, the Wolf, the Goat is gone.

Hey da! my Lord Marquess, Are we then alarm'd only with a jealous Whim of
yours? By the Peace and Pleasure of my Life, I'll suffer it no longer. -- Any
other of my Palaces are at your Service; but such a Wasp shall molest my
Honey-hive no more.


Uncivil Lord! thy Palaces, nor all thy Wealth should bribe my stay, -- To
morrow I've resolved for my departure, -- in the interm, I desire an hours
Conference.


Soon as you please, I am free.


My Lord, here we've found a man that (...) body knows.


Ha! who are ye, Sirrah? Your Name? From whence do ye come? Whither do ye go?
What's your Business? -- Answer me all at once.


I daut I caunt, -- but I'll do no more than monny a Mon; I will tell ye the
truth: Coming to Morket with my Fruit, do ye see, Ich heard the noise of Fire,
Fire! Thieves, and such-like, -- so che thought good Crabtree-stick might walk
amongst the Rogues; so Ich have left the Fruit with our Margery, and come with
main Vorce to help ye, do ye see.


An honest Lad! and, do ye hear, you may sell your Fruit to my Family.


O Lard, O Lard! Ch'am a made Mon, and my Wife and Children: what! zell my
Fruit to my Lord Governor -- made for ever! henceforth I'll scorn my Neighbours,
and despise my Betters.


I like this Fellow, because I searched him thoroughly, and found him no
Go-between. -- Here, Sirrah! there's something for ye, -- and were I to stay,
ye should ha^ my Custom.


I thank your Honours.





Youll remember to morrow morning early.


Most certainly.





Farewell; go thy ways, for a troublesome, maggot-pated, jealous-crown^d
Simpleton, as thou art: -- Hey boy, Tittup! how is^t Tittup? how shall you and
I get to sleep again Tittup? ha!


I know not.


What, moody, Tittup!

I'll rouse ye, and mouse ye, and touse ye as long as I can,
Till squeaking I make ye confess:
There's Heat in a vigorous Old Man,
When he loves to excess, when he loves to excess.

Cursed be my disappointing Stars, that thus have crossed me! whilst I but aim
at Elenora's Freedom; she, for my Attempts, suffers from her Tyrant-Husband
worse usage.


You may curse your Stars, if you please; but for my part, I bless the pretty
twinkling Gentlemen, -- that is, if they had an hand in my Deliverance. -- I am
sure, if I had been caught, my Usage would have been bad enough. -- I long to
know what is become of that Hangdog Hidewell. -- Oh! -- talk of the Devil, and
he appears.


-- Down on your Marrow-bones, Domine, and thank my Ingenuity, else your
brittle Thread had been cut; and you left in a dark way by this time.


Come, come; don't be so triumphant: -- for had not my own roaring Preaching
Voice --


Ay, ay; much used to Preaching, I believe, -- unless it was Indulgence to a
yielding Female.


Well, as I was saying, had not my own Almighty Voice struck Terror through 'em,
I had been in Limbo, long before your Ingenuity came to my Assistance. -- Not
but you did me a Kindness, -- and I acknowledge it, -- That's enough for a man
of my Qualifications.


Oh Hidewell! -- all my Hopes are ruined, and poor Elenora must remain a Slave
for ^ver.


My Lord, you are mistaken, -- our Expectations now stand fairer; the Governor
and Marquess both take me for a very silly honest Fellow, -- and have ordered I
shall have full and free access; -- then let me alone for a Contrivance. --
I'll get the Lady for you, and the Woman for my self; following the Example of
all noble Knights, and trusty Squires.


I find you are providing for your selves: But what must I have for my
Pains-taking in this Affair?


You know, you cannot marry; -- I'll give you leave
To tempt my Damsel, when I have her: Do ye conceive
-- If she loves Spiritual Food, I'll not be your hind'rance.

Dear Hidewell! thou shall it go immediately; learn when they remove; ^athom their
Designs; I'll force her ^rom him on the public Road. -- He ^orc'd her from her
plighted Faith, her Vows, and all her Wishes: My Force is just.


Trust to me, my Lord, and fear not.


My Lord! your humble Servant! I had not rested to night, since I heard of your
Disappointment, reflecting how my own Affair may prove.


Ah Colonel! our Cases are very different, -- You hunt but for Enjoyment, the
huddl'd Raptures of a few tumultuous moments: -- But I am in quest of
Virgin-Beauty, made mine by Holy Vows; constrained by Fiends, instead of
Friends, to break the sacred Contract, and follow the Capricio of a mad Old
Man. -- Virgin did I call her? -- By Heaven, I dare bel^eve she is one, at
least her Mind is such; -- and were she in my power, I'd soon convince the
World of the Justice of my Cause.


My Lord! you shall command my Sword and Interest in Barcellona, -- yet you
must give me leave to mind my own Affairs. -- I grant your Passion more
Heroic; -- for I should scarce accept the Governor's Wi^e for mine, if he
would give her: -- but I am amorous and eager, as Love and Beauty can inspire
hot and vigorous Youth.


By St. Dominick, well said, old Boy: I'll stick to thee. I hate these whining
Romantic Lovers. Nor would I have trudged to Barcellona, had I thought the
Count only fixed on Honora, -- ^sha, I can get it out, -- Honourable Love.


Since you are so willing, Sir, -- I have Employment for you. -- Can you play
the Hector well, pursue with a fiery Countenance, swear without intermission,
make noise enough, no matter what you say?


I'll try, I'll try, -- hum! hum! -- by St. Dominick, by St. Patrick, St. --


Hold! hold! what do ye mean? You must swear by Iupiter, Radamanthus, Mars, and
those blustering Sparks; not such puny passive Saints.


Well, Sir, -- I shall be soon instructed: -- But what must I swear all this
for? or like the Bullies of the Age, must it be all for nothing?


No, no, there is a Cause; -- Come along with me -- and I'll give ye Clothes,
and full Directions.


If I might advise ye, Sir, he should not undertake it; he has something in
that unlucky Phy's shows him unfi^, though coveting Intrigues: plaguy unfortunate
Lines, I swear.


Peace En^y^ Scrietchowl! Raven! Bat! Devil! When did I ever fail before that
Night? nor then neither, sirrah, ha!


Rage on, Spite! I say but this. -- Have a care, when in all your Gallantry,
you don't forget, and make a Friar-like ^alutation.


Pox take ye for putting me in mind on it -- for, I always do a thing I am
forbid.


Please your Honour, a Lady desires to speak with you.


I'll wait on her.


I'll leave you this Apartment free, my Lord^ my Business being in haste. --
Come, Father!


Farewell: may your Desires be fulfilled, or you cur^d of 'em.


Your Servant.


B'w'ye Hidewell! I don't question but to top you in my Performance when we
meet next.


Heaven help the weak, I say.


Ha, my dear Orada! What Miracle got thee this liberty?


My Lady was so thoroughly frighted at the noise of the Pistols, and the
Confusion she heard, (for you, I suppose) that she has since been ill. -- The
jealous Marquess could not find in's Heart to trust a Doctor with her, but sent
me for a Cordial.


I hope her Sickness has no Danger in it.


No, no; 'tis over now, -- scarce enough left for a Pretext for, my coming.


But, what Hopes? What shall be our next Design? Speak Comfort, my best Friend!


Faith, I know not well: -- Suppose the Marquess were some way informed, you
are in Barcellona, -- it would ^right him out of his Wits; -- I'd back it, and
persuade him to send Elenora in the night privately, lest you attempt her on
the Road, -- then you may seize the unguarded Fair. -- Methinks something like
this might be done.


We will in, and consider farther on it.


Hark ye, Donna, if your Lady falls to my Lord, you prove my natural
Perquisite, by the Example of a Thousand Years.


What means the Fellow?


Despise him not, Orada; he has prodigious Parts under that Russet Coat.


I care not for him, nor his Parts, I shall ne'er examine 'em.


You and I shall be better acquainted for all this.


Away, Bumpkin!


I tell ye he's a Beau in Disguise.


I believe so.


Come to this inner Room, Orada, lest we are interrupted.


A-pox, a-pox! Was this your Conference^ -- If I had guessed at it, the Devil
should have conferred with ye for me.


I would have thanked a Friend that sorewarn'd me, of an approaching Evil.


Evil! What Evil? The Evil is my knowing it; if I had not, 't had been none. --
Yet how am I convinced you have not abused my Tittup: -- By the Honour of
Spain, I'll Fight for Tittup: Guilty or not Guilty. -- My Lord! -- what you
have said is a scandalous, contagious, outrageous, --


Hold, -- if you say one word more, I draw.


Well, well! -- I will have Patience, -- but if this Colonel doth not come with
the ^ham-plot you have buzzed into my Head, by King Philip's Beard, --


Threaten not; Ill meet you when and where you please, ill-manner'd Fool!


Diego! I have born up, -- yet, Igad, to own the Truth, I am damnably afraid --
there's something in it. -- That English Colonel is a plaguy Dog; he looks as
if he were made to enter all Breaches, conquer every way. -- I'll try if I can
sing after this News.

Lock up a Woman, or let her alone;
Keep her in private, or let her be known:
'Tis all one, 'tis even all one.
-- A scurvy Tune, as I hope to be a Grandee. -- Nay, if my Voice is broke, my
Heart will quickly follow^ -- Diego!


My Lord!


I ever found thee faithful; -- if the Spark does come, follow exactly my
Directions, and all shall be well yet.


Fear not me, my Lord, I'd lose a Leg or an Arm at any time in your Honour's
Service, and never cry, Oh! for it.


Hark, hark! I think I hear a Noise.


Oh, my Noble Lord! I'm ruined, unless your Pity save me: in England I, in a
Duel, killed a Gentleman, and his Friends have pursued me hither, setting upon
me, Four at once.


Alas and welladay! 'tis sad indeed! and you, I warrant, are wounded
desperately.


I fear, to death, -- oh! oh!


Ah, the dissembling Rogue! it grieves me almost to disappoint him, the
Smock-fac'd Dog does it so cunningly. Diego!


Sir.


Diego, get one of my able Surgeons to search the Wound.


I thank you, my Lord; my own Servant has great Skill in Surgery, I'll trust
him.


Diego! carry this Gentleman to an Apartment near the Garden, free from Noise,
-- I'll send Tittup to visit ye by and by.


Your Lordship's all Goodness.


And thou all Treachery, -- Oh! the English whining Dog -- how shall I punish
him? By the honour of Spain, he deserves to be utterly disabled, -- rendered
wholly incapable. -- But I'll have Mercy in my Anger: hanged -- I have loved
the handsome Whipster, and he shall find it.

-- So, -- have ye disposed of him as I ordered?


Yes, my Lord; and whilst I was in the Chamber, he groaned as if his Heart were
breaking, -- But I had the Curiosity to stay a little at the Door, and heard
both laugh ready to burst, ^'t please your Honour.


Please me! not much, in faith, Diego; but -- let me tell 'em, had they fell
into the hands of any other of our Nation, their Mirth would quickly have been
spoiled, and their Whoring too adod.


My Lord, we have took the Ringleader, that pursued the Noble English Colonel.


Good Boys! Good Boys! -- Well, Sir, -- And what are you?


If you are a man of Authority, as by your House and Port I guess you are, I
charge you, do me Justice; for by yonder blew Firmament, and all those hated
Stars, that twinkl'd at my Brother's Murder, I'll flea that cursed Colonel.


Thou Hangdog, begot in Lewdness, and born in some Sink of Sin, -- Son of a
thousand Fathers, and Maker and Contriver of Cuckolds without number; I know
thee for a Pimp: Here, Diego! fasten upon one Whisker, whilst I take the other;
if they are fast, I may alter my Opinion^ -- They are reverend Whiskers, I
confess, -- if not, I proclaim thee a Pimp.


Oh, mercy! mercy! I do own my Profession; but good my Lord, forgive me.


Ay, that I will, but I'll punish thee first, -- here, -- carry him to the red
Tower, and let him have Two hundred Lashes, till all Thoughts of Concupiscence,
either for himself or others, be thoroughly mortified.


Hear me, my Lord!


No, away with him.


You must hear me; I am a Priest, I excommunicate ye else.


A Priest, and a Pimp! Oh Lord!


Why? is that such a Wonder?


Look, my Lord! here hang his Beads under h^s Clothes.


Now, my Lord, you are satisfied the Secular Arm can't punish me; pray give me
a Release.


Hold, hold, not so fast. -- Take him, and carry him to the next Abbey just as
he is, and tell the Fathers what ye know.


'Tis well 'tis no worse, -- to deal with the Tribe, let me alone, they'll judge
my Frailties by their own.


Say ye so, Beelzebub, in his own Clothing! but I'll be a Thorn in thy side,
I'll warrant thee, old Father Iniquity.


My Lord, w^'ll set the Mob upon him, that's worse than all the Justices in
Quorum.


I'll Curse, Excommunicate, Purgatory ye, Hang ye, Damn ye.


My ^eary, Spywell tells me our dear Colonel's wounded.


Oh, most dangerously, Tittup; he has as many holes through him as a Jew's Cake.


Alas, then I fear he's dead.


No, no; Nature has framed his Body for the purpose; a Sword passes and
repasses like a Jugler's Ball, and no harm done.


Cruel Deary! you make a Jest ^n't, but I'll visit and comfort him.


Hold, hold; his Wounds are dressing: You would see him naked, would ye?


Oh Gad! not for the World.


Retire to your Chamber, I'll send for you when 'tis convenient.


I will, Dear; but pray take care of him.


Yes; there shall be Care taken of him, I promise ye. -- A hopeful young
Gentleman, by the Honour of Spain. -- Diego! follow to my Closet, there I'll
make thee sensible of my Design.


Dear Orada! bring thou Comfort, or must I remove from Barcellona to Wilds
and unfrequented Deserts, impenetrable Castles, and all the melancholy
Mischiefs sprightly Youth can fear?


I hope not, Madam; the Lord Camillus employs his Brain and all his busy
Instruments, for your deliverance.


Give me the Scheme of his Design, that I may guess at the Success.


Madam, -- my Lord. --


Take that -- thou impudent Performer of my Tyrant's Will,


My Lord, you see what I suffer for your Service.


But we'll be so revenged, Orada; when we ha^ her wholly to our selves, by
Heaven, I'll bring that pampered Carcass down: The Roses shall wither in her
wanton Cheeks; her Eyes, whose hot Beams dart Fire, grow dull and languid: --
By all my Pangs of Jealousy, I'd rather clasp a Fiend, than Doubting Sleep by
such an Angel.


And 'tis thy Doubts, Old Man, not I, torment thee -- Our Sex, like Water,
glides along pleasant and useful; but if grasped by a too violent Hand, unseen
they slip away, and prove the fruitless Labour vain.


To Waters, Waves, and Rocks most justly may you be campar'd; -- but I want
time to hold an Argument. -- Prepare this Night for your remove, -- I am fixed,
-- your Jewels, Equipage and all put up.


Let my Slaves take care of that, -- What need have I of Jewels, Ornaments, or
Dress, condemned to Cells and everlasting Solitudes?


My Lord, a Country Fellow is very importunate to speak with you.


Bring him in, -- Mistress, you to your Chamber. You hear the man's Business is
with me.


May it prove a vexatious one, I beseech Heaven.


-- Oh, my honest Fruiterer, what brought you hither?


Why, an't shall please ye, -- a marvellous thing has hapt since I see ye last,
-- a parlous Contrivance, by th'Mess, -- as I hope for Margery, I ne'er see the
like.


The matter, Friend!


Nay, Gadsores, '^is so strange, I can't tell whether I was asleep or dreamt,
or no.


Prithee tell me quickly; what Wonder hast thou m^t with, Fellow?


Zir, I'm but a poor Fellow; but, as Neighbour Touch has it, I can see into a
Millstone, as var as another man.


Talk to the purpose, or I shall grow tired: -- is it any thing concerning me
or my Honour?


Ay, ay, Zir, you don't know the bottom of this Plot.


Nor the top on it neither, -- dall^ing Fool, proceed.


Nay, you'll know it soon enough: -- Ha^'t you a very handsome Wife, buxom and
free, as the Saying is?


Oh the Devil, lies it there? Well! what follows?


I^ags, Cuckoldom, ch'am afraid, Zir, -- for coming out of this House, there
meets me a waundy handsome Fellow, ^adsores, -- he had the swinginst -- what
do ye call it. --


Perruque, do ye mean?


Ay, u^slid! our biggest Bushel, that's kept on purpose for the Maste^s of the
Measures to see, would not, -- no, ^ sacks, ch'um sure -- it would not cover
it.


Did he enquire after my Wife?


By my troth he did. -- Friend, says he, do you go often to that House? --
Mahap I do, -- mahap I do not, said I, what's that to you? Nay, -- no harm,
quoth he; and thereupon slipped a piece of Gold into my Hand. -- I must confess
that softened me, -- and he went on, -- D^st thou not know an old jealous,
freakish, confounded Marquess lives there? Pray ye now dan't be angry, Sir, --
I use but his own words.


No, no, go on.


And has he not, quoth he, a young lovely Wise? --. And then he run on with
hard words, I could not conceive for above a quart^r of an hour, tho I was wise
enough to pick it out, that he was Amour'd on her.


Confound him, confound him!


Quo^h he, -- Can thou convey a Letter to her? -- Why how now mon, zed I, who
dost take me for, a Pimp? No, no, ch'am no Pimp, -- an I war chou'd have better
Cloas of my Back, -- ^y the Mess, chall do none of your Bawdy M^ssages, not I;
Do it your self, an you will, for Tim. With that he drew his Sword, and I very
vairly took up Heels, and run away, for ch'am very veard of a naked Sword.


Could thou not discover his Name?


His Ze^vants called him -- Count -- a -- Cam -- Cam -- Cam -- ch'am sure 'twas
zummot about Cam.


Camillus!


Ay, ay, that's it, that's it, in tro^h.


Oh, I am ru^n'd, blown up, undone! Camillus has his Pockets crammed with Gold;
-- he'll bribe the World to take his part: -- Then that Contract -- so firm and
sure, -- I lose her, and what I value more, h^r large Fortune. -- Orada, what
shall I do?


Suppose ye remove my Lady in a Litter, without any of your own Attendance, --
for indeed I fear he'll way-lay all the Roads. -- My Lord, she may be got many
Leagues this night, and when in safety, you may send back for your Equipage.


M^ny Leagues! we'^l go a Thousand, -- for I'll be with her, and force her
speed.





Zir, Zir, here che may serve ye, for I keep a Litter, as well as zell Fruit.


Oh! you're an honest Fellow; and, fear not, you shall be rewarded beyond your
Wishes: -- Come in, -- I'll give thee an Order for one of my best Horses,
because my Servants shall not suspect 'tis for my self. Orada! get your Lady
r^ady, -- '^is now near Night, and it shall be done with speed.


Be sure you lame the Horse now; for as soon as the Litter has lost sight of
the Marquess, we return into the City, and towards the Morning escape in a
Felucca already ordered, -- whilst the disappointed Marquess is ^unting the
Roads in vain.


Madam, I desire none of your Directions, I am perfect Master of my Trade. -- I
cannot but think how bravely I shall maintain thee. Girl; for Money comes
rolling in.


Mind your Business, and think of Fooling afterwards.


I begin to grow damnable weary of nursing up this no Wound; I wish the dear
Angel would but come, and heal the real Wound my Heart endures.


Truly S^r, I should have but l^ttle Stomach to a Mist^ess, if I were in your
circumstances: -- What^ attempt to Cuckold a Spanish Governor in his own House!


Peace Coward, and see who's coming.


Sir, Sir, 'tis my Lord Governor.


Well, well -- Oh! oh! oh!


Diego! unobserved secure that Sword, Hat, and Perruque, -- I shall have use
for it.


Yes, my Lord.


Oh, oh, oh!


How do ye, Sir?


Oh, very bad, -- just, just fainting.


Please ye to have some Cordial, Sir?


A little, if ye will.


And are not you a damned dissembling handsome Toad -- Answer me that now, --
answer me that. What^ corrupt the Wife of my Bosom, my Darling Tittup! break
the Laws of Hospitality! Well, -- you're a desperate Fellow, I protest; --
design to Cuckold one that hopes to be a Grandee of Spain! -- Abominable, by
St. Iaques! Come, come, get up; your Wound's not mortal, I'll engage.


I'm so confounded, I know not what to say.


Ay, I thought it would come to this, -- Now shall I be tossed in a Blanket,
burnt, drowned, hanged!


Be quiet, Rascal, and be damned!

What, you're out of humour, Sir! I must confess, 'tis a plaguy disappointment.
Come, in short, I'll use ye much better than you ought to expect. Go with haste
and privacy to your Lodgings, and the Town shall know nothing of the matter: --
Your Wig and other Accoutrements shall be sent after ye; but I must use 'em
first.


My Lord, I beg your Pardon for this Attempt; you know '^ has been no more.


Your Goodwill was not wanting, thanks to your whoring Stars.


Though unarmed, I will not stir from hence, if you practise a thousand Cruelties
upon me, unless I have your Promise, that you will not hurt your Wife. -- I
have Honour, though the Rules are now transgressed. Nor can I leave a Lady (whom
my Love has enticed) to the Resentments of a Spanish Husband.


An Honourable Dog, as I hope to be saved! by all that's sacred, I ^ill not
hurt her; only she must remain deprived of that Liberty, which, against our
Country's Custom, I had given her.


That I'm sorry for; but cannot ask more.


But I shall ask you to be gone. -- Diego -- get one of my closest Chairs, and
let him be conveyed home, as sick.


Oh, I could tear my Flesh.


No, no, fast and mortify it.


I own you generous, but have not the Heart to thank you.


I tell ye once again -- your Absence will best express your Acknowledgment.


Your Servant.


Oh, your very humble Servant, sweet Friend in a corner! -- Now, Diego! help to
equip me.


My Lord!


The Perruque, the Perruque block -- oh, how the amorous Rogue has perfumed it,
-- the Pulvil, Essence, and Powder o'ercomes me.


My Lord, may I presume to tell ye, -- your black Beard, and that white
Perruque look very disagreeable.


No matter, the Curtains will hide that. -- Now go to my Wife, and tell her, I
am gone to the Castle, to see the Guards relieved, and shall sup there. -- Tell
her also, I desire she would visit the wounded Colonel in my absence. -- Tittup
knew the bottom on it, and were consenting to this Roguery.


Oh, we are happy beyond what we could expect; my Husband sups at the Castle to
night, -- yet I tremble every Limb of me: -- I swear I love this old Governor,
and nothing but this charming Englishman could have tempted me to break my
Vows.


Madam, you walk and talk, you know not where -- you are in his Chamber.


-- My Love, my Life, wilt thou not meet me? there is no further need of
Counterfeiting.


Ungrateful Tittup!
His Lady.

How could thou serve me so?


Phogh, I knew 'twas you, and did it on purpose to make you jealous.


A pies, a pies, no, no, you did not know 'twas I: -- I would be deceived, but
cannot.


Oh, what must I expect?


Diego! -- first turn this Baggage out of doors, -- and do ye hear Mistress, --
if ye tattle of these Affairs, I'll have ye poisoned, -- else ye are free and
safe.


Madam, farewell; I can't excuse my self.


Now my Turn's a coming.


Ah Tittup! whither, whither art thou fallen?


Deary, not fallen, I was but staggering -- and you caught me Deary.


For which I humbly conceive, you wish me hanged, Deary.


Indeed, indeed D^ary, I'm glad my Honour's safe; -- I never had an Inclination
before, and never will again, if you forgive me.


I'll take care you shall never have another Opportunity; your back Apartments
must be your Prison, and an old Dovegna your Companion, till Tim^ and Age have
wrought off your loose Desires. No more ^oity toity, -- no more appearing at
Windows, -- dining at Deary's Table, and dancing after it for Diges^ion. -- I
say, Tittup, all these Vanities must be forgotten.


Oh! stab me first! Let me not be a May-game to all my Servants, who by my
Confinement would guess at my Disgrace. You used to swear you loved your Tittup
-- I never did a Fault before, but what a Frown might punish -- Now let me
experience your boas^ed Fondness; and take me to your Heart, with kind
relenting smiles -- else leave me distracted on the Earth in endless fears
bemoaning my Indiscretion, and your Cruelty.




Tittup, Tittup! Thou h^t been a Baggage! a very Baggage -- by the Honour of
Spain!


I confess I have been frail -- But I will be forgiven, so I will -- I'll hang
about thy Neck; nor leave the dear Place 'till my Pardon's signed.


What! Give you again your Freedom to see another Colonel, and be again
betrayed?


No; there is not such another Colonel.


How, Tittup!


Not such a Tempter; such a Seducer, I meant.


Thou pretty Epitome of Woman's weakness -- I dare not trust thee -- Tittup --
you must retire.


Do, lock me up; and next moment you are gone, I'll hang my self in my own
Garters, so I will. -- Can you behold your Tittup hanged? her Eyes gogling, her
Mouth, you have buss'd so often, gaping; and her Legs dangling three Yards
above Ground? -- This is the Sight you must expect.


Oh! I can't bear the thoughts on it -- Stand farther off -- farther yet -- that
I may rush upon thee with all the vigour of Sixteen, and clasp thee from such a
Danger -- Thou resistless Ruler of a doting, fond, old Fool! -- Here -- I
forgive thee -- but if after this, I catch ye staggering, expect no Mercy.


By the new Joys, your returning Kindness brings me, I'll die first!


The World may blame my Conduct; but then -- they know not Tittup's Charms; the
Power of her Eyes, and Pleasure of her Arms. -- I cannot raise my Voice to
sing, yet -- hum! -- No; Gad, zooks, 'twon't do.


Henceforth

Good Humour shall supply thy want of Youth,
You shall be always kind, I full of Truth.

Do we succeed, my dear Orada?


Beyond expectation, Madam -- within some moments, you are in Camillus's Arms.
-- Hidewell is gone for a well-appointed Litter, which wheels but round, whilst
Hidewell plays Tricks with my Lord; and then carries you to the English
Embassador's.


Now my Desires are so near fulfilling, I begin to fear 'em -- yet I know
Camillus is Honourable.


All's Honourable. T^e House is Honourable, the Lady Honourable: Fear nothing,
but in, and Pray for our Success -- I think I hear my Lord -- You must be sure
to seem very unwilling.


I'll warrant ye.


Is your Lady ready?


Yes, my Lord. But, good Lord! what a life have I had with her -- I believe she
has thrown Fifty things at my Head -- She swears she won't go like a Thief in
the Night.


Oh! when the Litter comes, we'll do well enough for that -- I'll make her go,
or leave her dead upon the place. -- Dost thou think none of the Servants
perceive our Preparations at this Back-door?


My Lord, there's no Danger -- 'tis so far through the Gardens; and now we have
these Apartments, their People never come at 'em.


Here comes my trusty Fellow well! hast go a Litter?


Ay; and by the M^ss, an able one too -- I worn ye Mon, before day, we be past
whistling after.


Friend, you never talked to a Lord in your life, I suppose.


Pho, pho! 'tis all well -- Is the Horse for me ready too?


Just by the Litter, my Lord! -- my Lord -- i ^ackens it saunds rarely.


Call Elenora.


I will vent^re -- but Heavens! how I shall be used!


A vine Dame, by the Mess!


Commanded by my Slave! Monster! whither dost thou intend to have me at this
dead hour of Night? to Death, I hope.


To Death, if you resist -- Orada, hall her along.


I think I do pull her -- I believe her Arm will come off.


Why law ye, Mistress -- dan't be so veard -- Ye shall come to no hort -- I
have had vine Vokes in my Litter 'vore naw.


Away, Fool! leave halling me -- I will go -- thou cr^el Devil!


Come, I'll see her in the Litter; and then take Horse.


Sirrah! Sirrah! where's my Horse?


My Lord! m^ Lord!


Sot! Dunce! my Horse!


Why a -- why a -- I tied him to the Pales -- and tis so waundy dark without, I
cannot find him.


Fly and search! Bid the Litter go softly: I'll oretake 'em.


I'm gone, I'm gone --


Eternal Fool! Call to me, and I'll come out.


This Fellow will make me mad -- Beast! will ye stir!


Ch'ave heard Vokes talk of Ghosts, so I have, about the Park Pales.


^ascal! I'll make a Ghost of thee; if thou dost not go, or direct me, where my
Horse is.


I run, I run!


I'll lead him a Dance -- Here, here!


A Pox, where? Orada, observed my Directions for the Road -- The Pass I gave
'em, lets 'em through the City Gates: If this Fool would come once, I should
soon overtake 'em. -- Numps, Fool! Are ye coming?





What's the matter?


Oh! Oh! Oh!


What ails the Fellow? Where's my Horse?


A Mur^ain, a Pla^ue take your Horse -- ch'am maimed for ever -- For getting up
to make haste, he has thrown me, and broke my Leg. Oh, my poor Wife and
Children! they must to the Parish -- Then Margery -- how she'll take on! for,
to say truth, I loved her better than my Wife -- Oh! Oh! Oh!


The Devil take thee, and all thy Family, for an unlucky Dog! I see, I must
call up my Servants at last.





Pedro! Olonzo! Valasco!


Did you call, my Lord?


Yes. A Fellow has broke his Leg -- You must wake Monsier Cureclap, my F^ench
Surgeon -- and, Olonzo, give Orders to my Grooms this moment, to prepare two
Horses; Valasco shall go with me.


My Lord! what Fellow? Where is he? Why, here's no body!





So! the Cry's up again -- but Heaven be thanked, 'tis almost over now -- What's
the matter, my Lord Marquess?


Ruined, undone for ever! My Wife's Run away!


How! Run away! That's worse than I, Deary.


I know not: 'Tis according as you prove, Tittup -- A^ bad Wife's better lost
than found.


Unkind Deary.


My Lord, burying all Animosities, I beg you would assist me now. I shall run
mad -- my Wife, nay more, a great Estate, lost! lost!


My Lord, you must be pacified -- I've ill News to tell you -- there's a Letter
sent me from Rome, by the Cardinal Patron of Spain; that you stole a Young
Lady, firmly contracted to a Noble Roman Count: Also His Majesty's Order to put
the Lady in a Monastery, till your Cause is tried.


I'll Hang my self! I'll Drown my self! I'll Bury my self alive! Dogs,! Whelps!
get me Cords, Knives, Poison, Sword, and Fire.


The Man's distracted -- Diego, after; and persuade him.


'Tis a just Judgment on him, Deary, for being so Jealous.


Ay, Tittup; when Women never give any cause, you know, Tittup.


Hump!


Sir, my Lord Camillus^ sends to give you an Account, that he expects the Lady
Elenora at the English Embassador's. He hears, by an Express, your Honour has
Orders from the King relating to her; to which he willingly submits.


An honest Lad, by the Honour of Spain -- Tell him, Friend, I'll wait on him
immediately at the Embassador's.


Deary.


What now! That begging look's put on for something.


Let me go with you, and see the Embassador's Lady, and the Marchioness, and --



-- And the English Colonel. Ha! why, Tittup, can thou look me in the Face,
and ask this? -- By the Honour of Spain, I believe this Hoity, Toity will
desire me to admit him for her Gallant.


Truly, Deary, if the Colonel is there, you shall hear me charge him, never to
see me more.


A new way, Tittup! to go into a man's Company, to forbid him your sight! Come
-- thou shall it along! and --

If with Horns my Kindness thou dost repay,
I^ll Punish thee some unknown, uncommon way,
Nor hear whatever thy Charming Tongue can say,

My Elenora! art thou here! do I hold thee fast, thou choicest Blessing of my
Youth!


Witness my Heart, which strongly beats, how much I'm pleased in my Camillus's
Arms! But, Oh! I blush, when I remember I am another Wife.


No more o'that; the Cardinal's my Friend, and has promis^d a Divorce
immediately -- Therefore Crown my Joys with Smiles, and forget past Dangers.


I can say only this: I love ye --


And not descending Angels, with all their Heavenly Tunes, could Charm like
that dear sound! -- safe in a Monastery thou shalt remain, till the Dispute is
ended. And then -- Oh! thou blessed Charmer -- then all my Sufferings shall be
liberally paid; and longing Love Revel in Feasts of unutterable Delight. -- Nor
art thou forgot, dear Orada, but, whilst I have Life, shall it be us^d like a
Friend, and Mistress of my Fortunes.


I humbly thank your Honour, and heartily rejoice at my good Lady's Happiness.


Poor Hidewell! -- I hope he is in safety. --


-- Yes; and here, at your Honour's service, -- though I have had a broken Leg,
and two or three other Misfortunes, -- but all^s well now, and I can dance for
Joy.


Thou art a witty Rogue, -- and henceforward shall it have no occasion to expose
thy self, ^ I'll provide for thee like a Gentleman.


I'm your ready Slave, -- D' ye h^r that, Mrs. Scornful?


Troth I've seen so much between my Lady and the Count, that my Mouth almost
waters.


We shall soon agree, I find.


My de^r Elenora, the Ambassador's Lady sends


To morrow I'll wait on her.


Oh, my dear Friend! here's the lovely Prize, which so well deserves the Pains
I have taken.


A charming Lady! -- My Lord, you are a happy man.


How goes your affair, and what's become of the obliging Friar?


Nay, Heaven knows! the Story is too long to tell; only this: I found the old
Lord generous, and resolve to attempt his Wife no more.


I'm glad on it -- in your Age you never will repent an uncommitted Sin.


That Governor^s Lady seem^d a pretty good-humour'd Creature; therefore, my
Tyrant, let me see her but once


Who have we here! Oh Heavens! Father Andrew!


What! my Hector thus us^d!


What has befallen thee, oh thou weak Brother?


Andrew's Assistance again.


Look, forward Undertaker and wretched Performer, there the Lady stands,
delivered by me!


My Lord, is not this the Friar brought your first Le^ter, after I was married,
whom the Marquess caught and abused?


The same, Madam


I said he had unfortunate lines, but he would take no warning.


Not to encourage any thing that's ill, but because you have suffered in my
Cause, there's a Cordial will revive the Heart, and wash out all Stains.


For me you have suffered too; and I beg you would accept of this.


Spite of Vows, in this Necessity there's no refusing such a Favour.


Come, Father, cheer up your self, have recourse to your old Friend Malaga, --
I'll provide for ye, that you shall go thro^ no more Dangers.


By St. Dominick, I had not need; for I have almost lost my Life in this.


Sir, the Governor of Barcellona is come to wait on ye.


Gods me -- in, Father! you would not see him, I suppose.


See him! I'd sooner see the Devil: -- Well, I'll get a pretty Wench to wash me
without, and good store of Malaga within, and try to forget past Sorrows.


My Lord, your Servant.


Yours in all Obedience.


Camillus, before I talk to you, pray give me leave for some few words with
that Gentleman.


With all my Heart.


Sir!


My Lord!


Nay, of the the other side, if you please, -- Now, Tittup, speak what you
promised.


Colonel Peregrine, my Lord has been so good to forgive me what is past; and I
desire, for the future, as you are a Gentleman, you would, after this night,
never see me more.


Madam, I obey.


And do ye hear, -- if ye prove a Man of Honour, about Threescore Years hence I
may leave ye Tittup for a Legacy, and abundance of Wealth, a World of Wealth,
by the Honour of Spain. -- Nay, 'tis worth staying for.


Threescore years hence, quotha!


Now, my Lord Camillus, to you and the Lady.


I wish we had some Music, -- since our Success, I can't keep my Heels on the
Ground.


If the Company agree to it, I can procure my Lord Ambassador's, and send for
my own.


I'll motion it presently.


I freely submit, and will retire to what Monastery you appoint. I hope my
future Conduct will satisfy the World of my Innocence.


And mine, of my Faith and Constancy.


What say ye now to Music and Dancing?


With all my Soul, this is a Jubilee, which I'll keep whilst I've life.


But are we secure?


Fear not, Madam; my Guards surround the House, -- and am not I here?


Greatness was the Attendant of my Birth;
But Love gives me Heaven upon Earth^
These Comforts my Elenor^ does impart:
^oy to my Eyes, sweet Raptures to my Heart.

Like you, here stands a happy Man;
And I'll keep my Tittup, -- that is, if I can.


