IN Plays, it has been a long Practised Cheat,
To make large Bills of Fare, t'aslender Treat.
So have You seen, a Huge Large Sheet appear
In Praise of the Beauty of Miss-Non-so-Fair:
But We more Modestly intend to abuse You;
We'll tell You before-hand how ill We'll use You.
Expect to see a Wondrous Sight, as rare
As Indian Elephant, or Norwich-Bear.
Expect grave Strut, big Looks, and thundering Speeches,
From Hero, made up by the Force of Breeches.
Aye, and a good Sbift too: For, under the Rose,
Whilst we look big by Virtue of Our Clothes,
And, Hero like, talk what We cannot do,
We're much such Blusterers as some of You.
Besides Our Men Players are out of Heart
Of being seen in an Heroic Part:
What, with Prince Nick, and the other House Gallants,
They have run Hero's out of Countenance?
We for Heroick's then. 'Tis Our last Plot;
And Gentlemen, like Us, or like Us not;
All's one; For Gallants, We have tried all Arts,
From a Sir Martin to a Man of Parts,
And all won't do; therefore We are so hardened
By the Critiques Rage, that past all hopes of Pardon.
Do well or ill, We are resolved to tease You,
And 'tis high time when all Our Tricks can't please You.

TAke the Wench
I showed thee now, or else go seek some other.
What, can your Choler no way be allayed,
But with Imperial Titles:

Great are thy Fortunes Nero, great thy Power:
Thy Empire Limited with Natures bounds;
Upon thy Ground the Sun doth Set, and Rise:
The Day, and Night are thine:
Nor can the Planets wander where they will:
See that Proud Earth, that fears not Casars Name;
Yet nothing of all this I envy thee;
But her to whom the World unforc't Obeys;
Whose Eye's more Worth, than all it looks upon,
That are through the Wide Earth, or Heaven disposed.

Indeed, she steals and robs each part oth'World,
With borrowed Beauties, to inflame the Eye;
The Sea, to fetch her Pearl, is dived into;
The Diamond Rocks are cut to make her shine:
To Plume her Pride, the Birds do naked sing,
When my Euanthe, in a Homely Gown --

Homely, I Faith.

I, Homely, in her Gown;
But look upon her Face, and that's set out
With no small Grace, no veiled Shadow's there.

Great Queen, whom Nature made to be her Glory,
Fortune got Eyes, and came to be thy Servant.
Honour is Proud to be thy Title, though
Thy Beauties do draw up my Soul; Yet still,
So Bright, so Glorious is thy Majesty,
That it beats down again my Climbing Thoughts.

That's true;
But give me a Wench, that will be easily had,
Not Woed with Cost; And being sent for, comes:
And when I have her folded in my Arms,
Then Cleop^tra she, or Lucrecis:
I'll give her any Title.

Yet not so much her Greatness and Estate.
My Hopes dishearten, as her Chastity.

Chastity! Fool, a word not known in Courts:
Well may it lodge in Mean, and Country Homes,
Where Poverty, short Sleep, and Labour keeps'em down,
But never comes to Great Men's Palaces,
Where Ease, and Riches, stirring Thoughts beget;
Provoking Meats, and Surseit Wines, inflame:
Where all their setting forth's, but to be Weed;
And Woed they would not be, but to be won.
Will one Man serve Poppea? Nay, thou shalt
Make her as soon Contented with an Eye.

Whilst Nero, in the Streets his Pageants shows,
I am sent for to his Fair Wife's Chamber:
You Gracious Stars that smiled upon my Birth;
And thou Bright Star, more Powerful than them all,
Whose Favouring Smiles have made me what I am,

How Saucily you Fellow
Enters the Empress Chamber 1

I, and her too. Antonius, know thou him:

What! know the only Favourite of the Court!
Indeed, not many days ago, thou might
Have not unlawfully Asked that Question.

Why: Is he Raised;

That I have sought in him;
But never Piece of Good Desert could find:
He is Nimphidia's Son, the Freed Woman,
Which baseness to shake off he nothing has,
But his own Pride.

You remember, when Gallus, Celsus,
And others too, though now forgotten, were
Great in Poppea's Eyes.

I do, and did interpret it in them
An Honourable Favour she bore to Virtue,
Or Parts like Virtue.

Faith,
'Tis my Opinion then the Fault was their's,
That their better Qualities were ne'er understood:
I once was great in wavering Smiles of Court;
I fell, because I knew: since I have given
My time to my own Pleasures, and would now
Advise thee too to mean and safe Delight's.
The Skin's as soft which the Sheep's Back covers,
As that with Crimson, and with Gold Adorned:
Yet because I see, that thy Restrained Desires,
Cannot their own Way choose; along with me,
And by my President, Converted be.

Whither go You? all's done I'th'Capitol;
And Nero, having there his Tables hung,
And Garlands up, is to the Palace gon.
'Twas beyond Wonder! I shall never see,
Nay, I never Look to see the like again;
Eighteen Hund'red and Eight Crowns,
For several Victories, and the Place set down,
Where, and in What, and Whom he Over came.

That was set down I'th'Tables, that were born
Upon the Soldiers Spear's.

The Romans were once used for other Ends.
But did he Win them all with Singing?

Faith, all with Singing, and with Stage-Playing.

So many Crowns got with a Song!

Had you been there, you had seen the Greek Musicians*
Behind the Chariot, Hanging down their Heads;
Shamed, and o're-come in their Professions:
O! Rome was never Honoured so before!

But what was he that Rode I'th'Chariot with him?

That was Diodorus the Minstrel, that he favours.

Was there ever such a Prince?

O Nero Augustus, the true Augustus!

Nay, had you seen him as he Rode along,
With an Olympic Crown upon his Head,
And with a Pythian on his Arm; You would have thought,
Looking on one, he had Apollo seemed:
On the other, Hercules,

I have heard my Father ost repeat the Triumphs,
Which in Augustus Caesar's tlmes were shown
Upon his Victory over the Illirians;
But it seems it was not like to this.

Push, it could nor be like this.

O Nero Apollo, Nero Hercules!

Whether Augustus Triumph Greater was
I cannot tell; his Triumph's Cause I know
Was Greater far, and sar more Honourable.
What are we People, or our Flattering Voices,
That always Shame and Foolish things Applau'd,
Having no Spark of Soul? all Ears and Eyes,
Pleased with Vain Shows, Deluded by our Senses.

Now Fair Poppea, see thy Nero shine
In Bright Achaias Spoils, and Rome in him.
The Capitol hath other Trophies seen,
Than it was wont; not Spoils with Blood bedewed,
Or the Unhappy Obsequies of Death.

And in this Strise, the Glory's all your own;
Your Tribunes cannot share this Praise with you;
Here your Centurions have no part at all.
Bootless your Armies, and your Eagles were:
No Navies helped to bring away this Conquest.

Even Fortunes self, Fortune the Queen of Kingdoms.
(That Wars Grim Valour graces with her Deeds)
Will claim no Portion in this Victory.

Not Bacchus drawn from Nisa down with Tigers
So struck the amazed Indian's with wonder,
As Nero's Glories did the Greekish Towns
Elis and Pisa; and the Rich Micaena,
Argos, and Corinth, Proud of her too Sea's;
All which over come, did yield to me their Praise,
And Prises of their Games.

Yet, in your Greekish Journey, we do hear
Sparla, and Athens, the two Eyes of Greece,
Neither beheld your Person, nor your Skill:
Whether, because they did afford no Games,
Or for their too much Gravity.

Why? what,
Should I have seen in them? but in the One
Hunger and Poverty?
And what in the other, but Old Fools, Long Beards;
Much Wrangling in things Needless to be known:
Wisdom in Words, and only Austere faces?
Nero was there, where he might Honour Win.
And Honour he has Won, and brought from Greece
Those Spoils, which never Roman could obtain:
Spoils won by Wit, and Trophies of his Skill.

What a thing he makes it to be a Minstril

I praise your Wit, my Lord, that Chose such safe
Honours, safe Spoils, won without Dust or Blood.

What, do you Mock us Poppea?

No, my good Lord, I speak in earnest,
I hate that hardy, and Adventurous Crew,
That go to Lose their own, to Purchase but
The Breath of others, and the Common Voice;
Them that will Lose their hearing for a Sound;
That by Death only seek to get a Living,
Make Skarrs their Beauty, and count Loss of Limbs
The Commendation of a proper man;
And so go Halting to Immortality:
Such Fools I Love worse than they do their Lives.

But now, Poppea, having laid apart
Our boasted Spoils, and Ornaments of Triumph,
Come we like Jove to Court thee,
But thou (then wrangling Juno) far more fair,
Staining the Evening Beauty of the Sky,
Or the Days Brightness; shalt make glad thy Casar,
Shalt make him Proud such Beauties to enjoy.

Such Beauties to inj^y were Happiness,
And a Reward sufficient in it self,
Although no other End, or Hopes were aimed at:
But I have other; 'Tis not Poppea's Arms,
Nor the short Pleasures of a Wanton Bed,
That can Extinguish my Aspiring Thirst
To Nero's Crown; by her Love I must Climb;
Her Bed is but a step unto his Throne.
Already, Wise men Laugh at him, and Hate him;
The People, though his Music Pleases 'em,
They fear his Cruelty, Hate his Exactions,
Which his Need, still, must force him to Increase:
The Multitude, which cannot one thing long
Like, or Dislike, being cloyed with Vanity,
Will Hate their own Delights: though Wisdom do not;
Even Weariness, at Length, will give them Eyes.
Thus I; by Nero's and Poppea's Favour
Raised to the Envious Height of Second Place,
May gain the First: Hate must strike Nero down.
Love make Nimphidius Way unto a Crown.

His First beginning was his Father's Death,
His Brother's Poisoning; and his Wife's Bloody End
Came next; his Mother's Murder closed up all:
Yet hitherto he was but Wicked, when
The Guilt of Greater Evils took away the Shame
Of Lesser, and did Head-long thrust him forth
To be the Scorn, and Laughter to the World:
Then first an Emperor came upon the Stage,
And Sung to please the Mean and Senseless Rabble;
And Learned to Act, to Dance, to be a Fencer.
And in Despite of the Majesty of Princes,
He fell to Wrestling, and was soyl'd with Dust,
And tumbled on the Earth with Service Hands.

He sometimes was trained up in better Studies,
And had a Child-Hood promised other hopes;
High Fortunes, like Strong VVinds, do try their Vessels*
Was not the Race, and Theatre big enough
To have enclosed thy Follies here at Home?
O! Could not Rome, and Italy contain
Thy Shame, But thou must Cross the Sea's to show it?

And make them, that had wont to see our Consuls
With Conquering Eagles waving in the Field,
Instead of that, behold an Emperor Dancing,
Playing on the Stage; and what else but to Name
Were Infamy.

O Mummius, O Flaminius;
You, whom your Virtues have not made more Famous,
Than Nero's Vices; You went to Greece,
But to other Wars, and brought Home other Conquests.
You, Corinth and Micana overthrew;
And Perseus self, the Great Achilles Race
O'^e-came; having Minervas stained Temples,
And your Slain Ancestor's of Troy Revenged.

They strove with Kings, and kind-like Adversaries,
Were even in their Enemies made happy.
The Macedonian Courage tried of Old,
And the New Greatness of the Syrian Power:
But he for Philip and Antiochus
Hath found more Easy Enemies to deal with,
Turpuus, Pammenes, and a Rout of Fiddlers.

Why all the begging Minstrills by the way
He took along with him, and forced to Play,
That he might over come; Imagining
Himself Immortal by such Victories.

The Men he carried over were enough
To have put the Parthian to his Second Flight:
Or the Proud Indian taught the Roman Yoke.

But they were Nero's Men, like Nero Armed
With Lutes, and Harps, and Pipes, and Fiddle-Cases;
Soldiers to the Shadow trained, and not the Field.

Therefore they brought home Spoils fit for such Soldiers.

But to throw down the Walls and Gates of Rome,
To make an Entrance for an Hobby-Horse;
To vaunt to th'People his Ridiculous Spoils;
To come with Laurel, and with Olives Crowned,
For having been the Worst of all the Singers,
Is beyond Patience!

I, and Anger too;
Had you but seen him in his Chariot ride.
That Chariot in which Augustus late
His Triumphs over so many Nations showed,
And with him in the same a Minstrel played;
The whilst the People running by his side,
Hail thou Olympic Conqueror did cry,
O hail thou Pythian, and so filled the Sky
With Shame, and Voices, Heaven would not have heard.

I saw't, but turned away my Eyes and Ears,
Angry they should be privy to such Objects:
Why do I stand relating of the Story,
Which in the doing had enough to grieve me?
Tell on, and end the Tale, you whom it pleases;
Me, my own Sorrow stops from further speaking.
Nero, my Love doth make thy Fault, and my Grief greater.

I do Commend thy Passion, Seneca;
And yet methinks our Countrie's Miseries,
Do at our Hands crave some what more than Tears.

Let Children Weep, and Men seek Remedy.

Stoutly spoke, and like a Soldier, Luc^n.
Yet to seek Remedy t'a Princes ill,
Seldom, but it doth the Physician kill.

And if it do, Scevinus, it shall take
But a Devoted Soul from Lucan;
Which to my Country, and the Gods of Rome,
Already sacred is, and given away:
Death is no Stranger to me, I have
The doubtful hazard in Twelve Battles thrown,
My Chance was Life.

Nothing is hard to them that dare to die.
This Noble Resolution in you, Lords,
Heartens me to disclose some Thoughts that I --
The Matter is of Weight and Dangerous.

I see you fear us Scevinus.

No, no, although the thing be full of Fear. --

Tell it to Faithful Ears, what ever it be.

Faith, let it go, it will but trouble us,
Be hurtful to the Speaker, and the Hearer.

If our Long Friendship, or the Opinion --

Why should I fear to tell them?
Why, is he not a Parricide, a Player?
Nay, Lucan, is he not thine Enemy?
And You, O Righteous God's,
Whithersoe'r you now are fled, and will
No more look down upon th'Oppressed Earth:
O Severe Anger of the Highest God's;
And you Stern Powers, to whom the Greek's assign
Scourges, and Swords to punish Proud Men's Wrongs,
If you be more than Names found out to Awe us;
And that we do not vainly build you Altars:
Aid that just Arm that's bent to Execute
What you should do.

Stay, you are carrried too much away, Scevinus.

Why, Lucan, what will you say for him? has he not
Sought to surpress your Poem? to bereave
That Honour, Every Tongue in Duty paid it?
Nay, has he not --
Stabbed his own Wife's (a Chaste Wife's) Breast, and torn
With Scythian Hands his Mother's Bowels up?
The Inhospitable Caucasus is mild:
The Moor, that in the boiling Desert seeks
With Blood of Strangers to Imbrue his Jaws,
Upbraids the Roman now with barbarousness.

You are too Earnest,
I neither can, nor will I speak for him:
And though he sought to wrong my Learned Pains,
I hate him not for that: my Verse shall live,
When Nero's Body shall be thrown in Tiber;
I hate him that he is Rome's Enemy,
An Enemy to Virtue; sits on high
To shame the Seat: And in that hate, my Life
And Blood I'll mingle on the Earth with yours.

My Deeds Scevinus shall speak my Consent.

'Tis answered, as I looked for, Noble Poet,
Worthy the double Laurel, Lucan.
Good Luck, I see, does Virtuous Meanings aid:
And therefore have the Heavens for-born their Duty,
To Grace our Swords with Glorious Blood of Tyrants.

HEre waits Poppea he Nimphidius coming,
And hath this Garden, and these Walls chose out,
To bless her with more Pleasures than their own:
Not only Arras Hangings, and Silk-Beds
Are guilty of the Faults we blame them for;
Some-what these Arbots, and these Trees do know,
VVhil'st their kind shades you to these Night-Sports show.
Night-Sports, Faith, they are done in open Day,
And the Sun see'th, and envies at their Play.
Hither have I Love sick Antonius brought:
And thrust him on Occasion so long sought:
Showed him the Empress in a thicket by,
Her Love's approach waiting with greedy Ey;
And told him, If he ever meant to prove
The Doubtful issue of his Hopeless Love
This is the place: but see they're coming;
How they agree, here will I stand and hearken.

Seek not to grieve that Heart which is thy own^
In Love's sweet Fires let Heat of Rage burn out.
These Brows could never yet to wrinkle Learn,
Nor Anger out of such Fair Eyes proceed.

You may solicit your presumptuous Suits
You Duty may and Shame too lay aside,
Disturb my Privacies, and I, good Sir,
Must be afeared even to be angry at you.

What Shame is't to be mast'red by such Beauties?
Who but to serve you comes, how wants he Duty?
Or if it be a Shame, the Shame is yours,
The Fault is only in your Eyes, they drew me:
Cause you were Lovely, therefore did I Love.
Oh! if to love you anger you so much,
You should not have such Cheeks, nor Lips to touch;
You should not have your Snow nor (...):
If you but look on us, in vain you chide:
We must not see your Face, nor hear your Speech:
Now Whilst you love forbid; you Love do teach.

He does better, than I thought he would.

I will not learn my Beauties-worth of you;
I know you neither are the First, nor Greatest,
Whom it hath moved: He, whom the World obeys,
Is feared with anger of my Threatening Eyes:
It is sor you a far off to adore it,
And not to reach at it with saucy Hands:
Fear is the Love that's due to Gods and Princes.

All this is but to Edge his Appetite.

O do not see thy Face in that False Glass
Os outward Difference: Look into my Heart,
There shalt thou see thy self sitting Enthroned
In greater Majesty, than all the Pomp
of Rome, or Nero; 'Tis not the Crouching Awe,
And Ceremony, with which we flatter P^inces,
That can to Love's true Duties be compared.

Sir, let me go, or I'll make known your Love
To them that shall requite it.

On, on thou hast the Goal, the Fo^t is beaten.
Women are won, when they begin to threaten.

Your Nobleness does warrant me for that;
Nor need you others help to punish me:
For by your Frowns I am condemned, or freed.
They, that to be revenged do bend their mind,
Seek always Recompense in that same kind
The wrong was done em: Love was my Offence,
In that Revenge; in that seek Recompense.

To answer further, will still cause Replies,
And those as ill do please me as your self:
If you'll an Answer take, that's brief and true,
I hate my self for being loved by you.

What gone! but she will come again sure: No;
It passes clean my Cunning, all my Rules;
For Women's Wantonness there is no Rule,
To take her in the Height of her Desires:
A Young and Brisk and Impudent Gallant too,
To miss the Mark! hard Fates, 'tis very Cruel.

O Unhappy Man!
What Comfort have I now Petronius?

Counsel your self, I'll Teach no more, but Learn.

This Comfort yet, he shall not so escape,
Who causes this contempt, Nimphidius;
Whom had I here, -- well, 'tis for his sake,
I see, she hates me; and shall I love one
That hates me, and bestows what I deserve.
Upon my Rival? no, fare-well, Poppea,
Fare-well, and fare-well to all Love:
Yet, thus much shall it still prevail in me,
That I will hate Nimphidius for thee.

Fare-well to her, to my Euanthe well-come,
Who, now, will to my burning Kisses stoop;
Now, with an Easy Cruelty deny,
That, which she, rather than the Asker, would
Have forced from her, then begins her self.
Their Loves, that list, upon great Ladies set;
I still will love the Cheapest I can get.

Tigellinus, said the Villain Proculus
I was thrown down in running?

My Lord, he said, that you were Crowned for that
You could not do.

For that I could not do?
Why? Elis saw me do it, and do it with Wonder
Of all the Judges and the Lookers on;
And yet to see a Villain; Could not do it!
Who did it better? I warrant you he said,
I from the Chariot fell against my will.

He said my Lord, you were thrown out of it,
All crush't and maimed, and almost bruised to Death.

Malicious Rogue, when I fell willingly,
To show of Purpose, with what little Hurt
Might a Good Rider bear a forced Fall:
How say thou, Tigellinus? I am sure
Thou hast in Driving as much skill as he?

My Lord, you greater Cunning showed in falling,
Than had you sate.

I know I'did; Bruised in my Fall?
Hurt! I protest, I felt it not.
Go, Tigellinus, fetch me the Villain's Head;
This makes me see his Heart in other things.
Fetch me his Head, he ne'er shall speak again:
What do we Princes differ srom the Dust,
And baseness of the Common Multitude,
If we are subject to the Scorn
Of each Malicious Tongue? say, That I had no skill!
When all that saw me gazed with Admiration:
The People follow'd with their Eyes and Voice.
And now the Wind does see it self out-run,
And the Clouds wonder to be left behind;
Whilst the Void Air is filled with noise,
And Nero's Name sounds to the Sky:
Jupiter envying, loath to hear my Praise:
Then their Green Bows, and Crowns of Olive. VVreath's
The Conquerout's Praise, they give me as my due,
And Yet this Rogue say's, no, we have no skill.

My Lord, the Stage and all the Furniture --

I have no skill to drive a Chariot:
Had he but robbed me, broke my Treasury:
The Red-Sea's mine, mine are the Indian Stones,
The World's mine own, then cannot I be robbed:
But spitefully to undermine my Fame,
To take away my Art: He would my Life
As well, no doubt, could he told how.

My Lord,
Tigellinus is come with Proculus Head.

Give him Five Hund'red Sesterces for amends.
Hast 'brought him, Tigellinus?

Here's his Head, my Lord.

His Tongue had been enough.

I did as you commanded me, my Lord.

Now are you quiet?
This 'tis to be Commander of the World:
Let them extol weak Pity that do need it.
Let Men cry to have Law and Justice done,
And tell their Griefs to Heaven, that hear's them not.
Kings must upon their headless Peoples Graves
Walk to Security, and Ease of Mind.
Why, what have we to do with the Airy Names
(That Old Age, and Philosophers found out)
Of Justice and of Equity?
The God's Revenge themselves, and so will we.
Where Right is scand, Authority is over-thrown:
We have a High Prerogative above it.
Slaves may do what is Just, We what we please.
The People will repine, and think it ill;
But they must bear, and praise too what we will.

My Lord, Cornutus, whom you sent for's, come.

Well-come good Cornutus,
Are all things ready for the Stage,
As I gave Order?

They only stay your Coming.

Cornutus, I must Act to day Orestes.

You have done that already; and too truly.

And when our Scene is done, I mean besides,
To Read some Compositions of my own:
Which for the Great Opinion of my self,
And Rome in General, of my Judgment has,
Before I publish them I'll shew'em thee.

My Lord, my Disabilities --

I know thy Modesty;
I'll only show thee now my Works beginning:
Go see, Epaphroditus,
The Music be ready, I will Sing to Day.
Cornutus, I pray thee come near,
And let me hear thy Judgment in my Pains:
I would have thee more familiar, good Cornutus:
Nero does prize Desert, and more esteems
Them, that in Knowledge second him, than Power.
Mark, with what Stile, and State, my Work begin's?

Might not my Interruption offend,
What's your Work's name, my Lord? what write you of?

I mean to write the Deed's of all the Romans.

Of all the Romans? a huge Argument!

I have not yet bethought me of a Title.
You Ethereal Power's, which the wide Fortunes doom
Of Empire Crowned, Seven. Mountain-seated Rome,
Full blown Inspire me with Machilaean Rage,
That I may bellow out Romes Prentisage.
And when the Menades do fill their Drums,
And Crooked Horns with Mimalonean Humms,
And Ennion do Ingeminate a round,
Which Reparable Echo do resound.
How dost'thou like our Muse's pains, C^tus

The Verses have more in'em, than I see:
Your Work, my Lord, I fear will be too long.

Too long?

Too long?

I, if you write the Deeds of all the Roman's
How many Books think you t'include it in?

I think to write about Four Hund'red Books.

Four Hund'red! why, my Lord, they'll ne'er be read.

Ha!

Why, he whom you esteem so much, Crisippus,
Wrote many more.

But they were profitable to Common Life,
And taught Men Honesty, and Wisdom.

Tigellinus.

See with what Earnestness he craved my Judgment,
And now he freely has it, how it likes him.

The Prince is angry, and his Fall is near:
I'll begone, least I partake his Ruins.

What should I do at Court? I cannot lie.
Why did thou call me, Nero, from my Book?
Did thou for Flattery of Cornutus look?
No, let those Purple Fellows that stand by thee
(That admire Show, and things that thou can give,)
Leave to please Truth, and Virtue, to please thee.
Nero, there's nothing in thy Power Cornutus
Does wish or fear.

'Tis Nero's Pleasure, that you straight depart
To Giara, and there remain Confined:
Thus he, out of his Princely Clemency,
Hath Death, your due, turned but to Banishment.

Why Tigellinus?

I have done, upon you Peril go, or stay.

And why should Death, or Banishment be due
For speaking Truth, or that which was required, my Thought?
O why do Princes love to be deceived?
And do even force Abuses on themselves?
Their Ears are so with pleasing Speech beguiled,
That Truth they Malice, Flattery Truth account;
And their own Soul, and Understanding's lost.
Alas, weak Prince, how hast thou punish't me,
To Banish me from thee? O let me go
And dwell in Taurus, dwell in Ethiope,
So that I do not dwell at Rome with thee.
The further still I go from hence, I know
Thee farther I leave shall, and Vice behind.
Where can I go, but I shall see the Sun?
And Heaven will be as near me still as here.
Can they so far a Knowing Soul Exile,
That her own Roof, she see not over her Head?

Noble Gentlemen, what Thanks, what Recompense
Shall he give you, that gives to him the World?
One Life to them, that must so many venture;
And that, the worst of all, is too Mean Pay:
Yet can I give no more: Take that, bestow it
Upon your Service.

O Piso, that vouchsafe
To grace our Headless Party with thy Name,
Whom having our Conductor, we need not
Fear to go against the wel-try'd Valour
Of Julius, or Stayedness of Augustus;
Much less the Shame, and Woman-hood of Nero.

We are contented with the Galling Yoke,
If he will only leave us Necks to bear it.
We seek no longer Freedom, we seek Life;
At least not to be Murdered: Let us die
On Enemies Swords. Shall We, whom neither
The Median Bow, nor Macedonian Spear,
Nor the Fierce Gaul nor Painted Briton could
Subdue, lay down our Necks to Tyrant's Axe?
Why do we talk of Virtue, that obey
Weakness, and Vice?

Have Patience, good Scevinus.

Weakness and Servile, Government we've hithert^
Obeyed: which that we may no longer,
We have our Lives and Fortunes now set up,
And have our Cause with Piso's Credit strengthened;
Which makes it doubtful, whether Love to him,
Or Nero's Hatred hath drawn more to us.

I see the Good Thoughts you have of me, Lords;
Let's now proceed to the purpose of our Meeting:
I pray you take your Places.
Let's have some Paper brought.

Who's within there?

My Lord.

Some Ink and Paper.

Who's that, Scevinus?

It is my Freed-Man Milichus.

Is he trusty?

I for greater Matters, than we are about

And those are great Ones.

I ask not that we mean to need his Trust:
Gain hath great Sovereignty over Servile Minds.

O but my Benefits have bound him to me.
I from a Bond-man have his State not only
Advanced to Freedom, but to Wealth and Credit.

Melichus, wait in the next Chamber till we call.
The thing Determined on our Meeting now
Is of the Means and Place due Circumstance;
So done it names the Action.

I wonder,
What makes this New Resort to haunt our House.
When wonted Seneca, Piso to come hither?
Or Lucan when so ost, as now of late?

And since the Field and open show of Arms
Dislike you; and that for the General Good
You mean to end all Stirs in end of him:
That, as the Ground, must first be thought upon.

Besides, this coming cannot be for Form,
Or Visitation; they go aside --
And have long Conferences by themselves.

Riso, his coming to your House at Baia,
To Bath, and Banquet, will fit means afford
Amidst his Cups to end his Hated Life.
Let him die Drunk, that ne'er lived soberly.

O be it far, that I should stain my Table,
And Gods of Hospitality with Blood:
Let not our Cause (now Innocent) be soyl'd
With such a Blot, nor Piso's Name made hateful.
What Place can better fit our Action,
Than his own House, That boundless envied heap,
Built with the Spoils and Blood of Citizens:

But 'twill be hard to do it in his House,
And hard to escape, being done.

Not so,
Rufus, the Captain of his Guard's with us;
And divers others of the Pretorian Band
Already's our's: Many, though unacquainted
With our intents, have had Disgrace and Wrongs,
Which grieve them still: Most will be glad of,
And even they that loved him best, when once changed
They see him gone, will smile of the Coming Times,
Let go things past, and look to their own Safety.
Besides the Astonishment and Fear will be
So great, so sudden, that 'twill hinder them
from doing any thing.

No Private Business can concern them All.

Their Countenances are troubled, and look sad;
Doubt and Importance in their Face is read.

Yet still I think it were
Safer t'attempt him Private and alone.

But 'twill not carry that Opinion with it;
'Twill seem more soul, and come from Private Malice.
Brutus and his Confederates to right the Common
Cause
Did choose a public Place.

Our Deed is honest; why should it seek Corners?
'Tis for the People done, let them behold it:
Let me have them a Witness of my Truth;
'Tis love to the Common-Wealth: the Danger's great;
So is the Glory. Why should our Pale Counsels
Tend whither Fear, rather than Virtue call's 'em?
I do not like these cold Considerings.
First let our Thought lookup to what is honest;
Next what is safe: If Danger may deter us;
Nothing that's great or good shall ever be done.
And when we first gave hands upon this Deed
To the Commons Safety, we our own gave up.
Let no Man venture on a Prince's Death,
How bad soever, with belief to escape:
Despair must be our Hope, Fame our Reward:
To make the general Liking to concur
With others, were even to strike him in his Shame,
Or (as he thinks) his Glory on the Stage;
And so too truly maked a Tragedy;
When all the People cannot choose but clap
So sweet a Close: and 'twill not Casar be,
That shall be killed, a Roman Prince:
'Twill be (...), or blind Oedipus.

And if it be of Public Matters, 'tis not
Like to be talk, or idle Fault-finding,
On which the Coward only spends his Wisdom:
These are all Men of Action, and of Spirit,

And dare perform, what they determine on.

What think you of Poppea, Tigellinus,
And the other odious Instruments of Court?
Were it not best at once to rid them all?

I, Casars Ruin, Anthony was spared.
Let's not our Cause with Needless Blood distain;
One only moved, the Change will not appear,
When too much License given to the Sword,
Though against ill, will make even good men fear:
Besides, things settled, you at pleasure may
By Law and Public Judgment have'em tried.

And if it be but talk of State, 'tis Treason;
Like it they cannot, that they cannot do:
If seek to mend it, and remove the Prince,
That's highest Treason: Change his Counsellors,
That's Alteration of the Government,
The Common Cloak that Treason's muffled in:
If laying Force aside, to seek by Suit
And fair Petition to have the State Reformed,
That's Tutoring of the Prince, and takes away
Th'one his Person, the other his Sovereignty:
Barely to talk in Private shew's Dislike
Of what is done; therefore the Action
Mislikes you, because the Doer likes you not.
Men are not fit to live in the State they hate.

Though we would all have that employment,
Yet since your worthy Forwardness, Scevinus,
Prevent's us, and so nobly begs for Danger:
Be yours the Chosen Hand to do the Deed;
The Fortune of the Empire speed your Sword.

Virtue, and Heaven speed it. O you Home-born
Of our Country, Romulus, and Vesta,
That Thuscan, Tiber, and Rome's Tower defend,
Forbid not yet at length a happy End
To Former Evils: Let this Hand Revenge
The Injured World: Enough we now have suffered.

Tush, all this long Consulting's more
Than words,
It ends not there; they've some Attempt, some Plot,
Against the State. Well, I'll observe it farther,
And, if I find it, m^ke my Profit of it.

I Looked Nimphidius would have come ere this:
Makes he no greater haste to our Embraces?
Or does the Easiness abate his Edge?
Or seem we not as Fair still as we did?
Or is he so with Nero's Playing won,
That he before Poppea does preser it?
Or does he think to have Occasion still?
To have time to wait on our stolen Meetings?
But ^ee, his Presence now does end those Doubts.
What is't Nimphidius has so long detained you?

Faith Madam, Causes strong enough;
High Wall's, bard Doors, and Guards of armed Men.

Were you Imprisoned then as you were going
To the Theatre?

Not in my going, Madam,
But, in the Theatre I was Imprisoned:
For, after he was once upon the Stage,
The Gates were more severely looked unto,
Then at a Town besieged: No Man, no Cause
Was Currant; no, nor passant; at other Sights
The Strife is only to get in, but here
The Strife was all in getting out again:
Had we not been kept to it so, I think,
'Twould not have been so tedious; though I know,
Twas hard to judge, whether his doing of it
were more absurd, than 'twas for time to do it.
But when we once were forced to be Spectators,
Compelled to that which should have been a Pleasure,
We could no longer bear the Wearisomeness.
No Pain so irksome, as a forced Delight:
Some fell down Dead, or seemed at least to do so,
Under that Colour to be carried forth.

If 'twere so straightly kept, how got you forth?

Faith Madam, I came pretending Haste
In Face and Countenance; told'em I was sent
For things by th'Prince forgot about the Scene;
Which both my Credit made'em to believe,
And Nero newly whispered me before.
Thus did I pass the Gates; the danger, Madam,
I have not yet escaped.

What Danger mean you?

The Danger of his Anger, when he knows
How I thus shrunk away; for there stood Knaves,
That put down in their Tables all that stirred,
And marked in each their Cheerfulness, or Sadness.

I warrant, I'll excuse you: but I Pray,
Let's be a little better for your Sight:
How did our Princely Husband act Orestes?
Did he not wish again his Mother living?
Her Death would add great Life unto his part.
But come I pray, the Story of your Sight.

O do not drive me to those hateful Pains:
Madam; I was too much in seeing vexed:
Let it not be redoubled with the telling:
I now am well, and hear, my Ears set free:
O be merciful, do not bring me back
Unto my Prison, at least free your self;
It will not pass away, but stay the time,
Rack out the Hours in length: Oh, give me leave,
As one that wearied with the toil at Sea,
And now on wished sor Shore hath fixed his Foot:
He looks about, pleases his Thoughts, and Eyes,
With sight of the Green-Cloath'd Ground, and Levy Trees,
Of Flowers, that beg more than the looking on;
And likes these Narrow Shores much better:
So let me lay my weariness in these Arms;
My Thoughts be compassed in those Circl'd Eyes;
And bless my hands with touch of those round Breasts,
Whiter and softer than the Down of Swans.
Let me of thee, and of thy Glorious Beauty,
Tell endless Stories; but never wearied be,

Come Sirs, I Faith, how did you like my Acting?
What? was't not as you looked for?

Yes, my Lord, and much beyond.

Did not I do it to the Life?

The very doing never was so lively,
As now this Counterfeiting.

And when I came
To the Point of Agrippa Clitemnestra's Death,
Did it not move the feeling Auditory?

They had been Stones, whom that could not have moved,

Did not my Voice hold out well to the end?
And served me afterwards afresh to Sing with?

We know Apollo cannot match your Voice.

By Jove, I think you are the God himself
Come from above to show your hidden Arts,
And fill us men with wonder of your skill.

Nay, Faith, speak truly, do not flatter me;
I know you need not: Flattery's but where
Desert is mean.

I swear by thee, O C^sar,
Than whom no Power of Heaven I honour more,
No Mortal Voice can pass, or equal thine.

They tell of Orpheus, when he took his Lute,
Hebrus stood still, Pangea bowed his Head;
Ofsa then first shook off his Snow, and came
To listen to the movings of his Song:
The Gentle Popler took the Oak along,
And called the Pine down from his mountain-Seat;
The Virgin Bay, although the Arts she hates
Of the Delphic God, was with his Voice o'r-come:
He his twice-dead Euridice bewails;
His lost Love's name then Water, Air, and Ground,
Euridice, Euridice resound.
These are bold Tales, of which the Greeks have store:
But if he could from Hell once more return,
And would compare his Hand and Voice with mine;
I, though himself were Judge, he then should see,
How much the Latin stains the Thracian Lyre.
I oft have walked by Tyber's flowing Banks,
And heard the Swan sing her own Epitaph,
When she heard me, she held her peace and dyed.
Let others raise from Earthly things their Praise.
Heaven has stood still to hear my happy Airs,
And ceased th'Eternal Music of the Spheres
To mark my Voice, and mend their Tunes by mine.

O Divine Voice!

Happy are they that hear it.

But here comes Tigellinus, come, thy Bill.
Are there so many? I see we have Enemies, Tigellinus.

Have you put Cajus in? I saw him frown.

And in the mid^st of the Emperor's Action
Gallus Laughed out, and, as I think, in Scorn.

Vespatian too asleep* was he so drowsy?
Well, he shall sleep the Iron Sleep of Death.
And did Thrasea look so sourly on us?

He never smiled, my Lord, nor would vouchsafe
With one Applause to grace your Action.

Our Action needed not be graced by him;
He's our Old Enemy, and still hates us:
'Twill have an end, nay, it shall have an end.
Why, I have been too pitiful, too remiss,
My Easiness is laughed at and contemned;
But I will change it; not as heretofore,
By singling out 'em one by one to death.
Each common Man can such Revenges have:
A Prince's Anger must lay desolate
Cities, Kingdoms consume, root up Mankind.
O could I live to see the General end,
Behold the World wrapped in one Funeral Flame;
When as the Sun shall lend his Beams to burn
What he before brought forth, and Water serve
Not to extinguish, but to nurse the Fire:
Then, like the Salamander, bathing me
In the last Ashes of all Mortal things,
Let me give up this Breath: Prium was happy,
Happy indeed: he saw his Troy burnt,
And Ilion lie on heaps; w^st' thy Streams
(Divine Scamander) did run Rhrygian Blood;
And heard the pleasant Cries of Trojan Mothers.
Could I see Rome so!

Your Majesty may easily
Without this Trouble to your ^acred Mind

What may I easily do? kill thee, or him?
How may I rid you all? where is the man,
That will all others end, and last himself?
O that I had thy Thunder in my Hand,
Thou idle Rover, I'll non shoot at Trees,
And spend in Woods my unregarded Vengeance?
I'll shiver them down upon their guilty Rooss,
And fill the Streets with Bloody Funerals,
But 'tis not Heaven can give me what I seek,
To you, you hated Kingdoms of the Night,
You Severe Powers, that no like those above,
Will with fair words, or Children's cries be won,
But in Destruction, Power, and Terror show,
To you I fly for succour: You, whose Dwellings
For Torments are belied, must give me Ease:
Furies, lend me your Fires; no, they are here;
They must be other Fires, Material Brands,
That must the burning of my Heat allay.
I bring to you no rude unpractised Hands,
Already do they reek with Mothers Blood:
Tush, that's but Innocent, to what now I mean;
Alas, what evil could these Years commit?
The World in this shall see my settled Wit.

Piso, were you at the Theatre?

Seneca, I was, and saw your Kingly Pupil
In Minstrel's Habit stand before the Judges,
Bowing those Hands, which the World's Sceptre hold,
And with great Awe and Reverence beseeching
Indifferent Hearing, and an equal Doom:
Mean time, how would he eye his Adversaries;
How he would seek to have all they did disgrac't,
Traduce'em privately, openly railat'em:
And them he could not conquer so, he would
Corrupt with Money, to do worse than he.
This was his Singing Part: His Acting now.

Nay even end here, for I have heard enough;
Let me not
See him a Player, nor the fearful Voice
Of Rome's great Monarch now Command in jest,
Our Prince be Agamemnon in a Play.

Why Seneca? 'tis better in a Play
Be Agamemnon, than himself indeed:
How does it stir this Airy part of us,
To hear our Poets tell Imagined Fights,
And the strange Blows, that feigned Courage gives?
When on the Stage I Heard Achilles
Speak Honour, and the Greatness of his Soul;
Methinks we too could on a Phrygian Spear
Run bol^ly, and make Tales for after times:
But when we come to Act it in the Deed,
Death mat's this Bravery, and the ugly Fears
Osth'other World sit on the Proudest Brow,

Fire, Fire, help, we burn.

Fire, fire, help, fire.

Fire, where?

Where? What Fire?

O round about, here, there, on every side
Compass the City.

How came this F^re? by whom?

Was't Chance, or Purpose?

Why is't not quenched?

Alas there are many there with Weapons;
And whether it be for Prey, or by Command,
They hinder: Nay, they throw on Fire-brands.

The Fire increases, and will not be staid,
But like a Stream that tumbling from a Hill,
O'r-whelms the Fields, o'r-whelms the hopeful Toil
O'th'Husband-man, and headlong bears the Woods;
The weary Shepherd on a Rock a far,
Amazed hears the fearful Noise, so here
Danger and Terror strive which shall exceed:
some cry, and yet are well, some are killed silent,
Some kindly run to help their Neighbour's House,
The whilst their own's a fire: Some save their Goods,
And leave their dearer Pledges in the Flame.

What, are the Gauls returned?
Does (...) brandish Fire-brands once again?

What can Heaven now unto our Sufferings add?

O all goes down, Rome falls from the Roof.
The Wind's aloft, the Conquering Flame turns all
Into it's self; nor do the Gods escape;
Pleiades burns, Jupiter, Saturn burns.
The Altar now is made a Sacrifice:
And Vesta mourns to see her Virgin Fires
Mingle with Profane Ashes.

Heaven, hast thou set this end to Roman greatness?
Were the World's Spoils for this to Rome divided,
To make but our Fires bigger?
You Gods, whose Anger made us great, grant yet
Some Change in Misery; we beg not now,
To have our Consuls tread on Asian Kings,
Or spurn the quivered Susa at their Feet:
This we have had before: we beg to live,
At least not thus to die: Let Cannons come:
Let Allius Water turn again to Blood.
To these will any Miseries be light.

Why with false Auguries have we bin deceived?
Why was our Empire told us should endure
With Sun and Moon in time? in Brightness pass'em?
And that our End should be o'th'VVorld and it?
What, can Celestial God-heads speak doubly too?

O Rome, the Envy late,
But now the Pity of the World:
The Men of Cholcos at thy Sufferings grieve;
The Shaggy Dweller in the Scythian Rocks,
The most Condemned to Perpetual Snow,
That never wept at Kindreds Funerals,
Suffers with thee, and feels his Heart to soften.
O should the Parthian hear these Miseries,
He would (his low and native Hate apart)
Sit down with us, and lend an Enemie's tear,
To grace the Funeral Fires of ending Rome.

I, now my Troy looks beauteous in her Flames;
The Tyrrhene Seas are bright with Roman Fires,
Whilst the amazed Mariner afar,
Gazing on th'unknown Light, wonders what Star
Heaven hath begot to ease the Aged Moon.
When Pirrhus, striding over the Cinders, stood
On Ground, where Troy late was, and with his Eye
Measured the height of what he had thrown down,
A City great in People, and in Power,
Walls built with th'Hands of Gods, he now forgave
The Ten Years Wars, and thinks his wounds well healed,
Bathed in the Blood of Priam's fifty Sons.
Yet am not I appeased, I must see more
Than Towers, and Columns tumble to the Ground:
'Twas not the High built Walls, and Guiltless Stones,
That Nero did provoke: Themselves must be the Wood
To feed this Fire, or quench it with their Blood.
Within. Fire, Fire, Fire.
Within. Gods, if you be not fled from Heaven, help us.

I like this Music well, they like not mine.
Let Heaven do what it will, this have I done
Already: Do you feel my Furies weight?
Rome is become a Grave of her late Greatness:
Her Clouds of Smoke have ta'n away the Day;
Her Flames the Night.
Now unbelieving Eyes, what would you more?

O save your self (my Lord) your Palace burns.

My Palace? How? what Traitorous Hand?

Enter Tigellinus.

O fly my Lord, and save your self betimes,
The Wind does beat the Fire upon your house,
The Eating Flame devours your Double Gates,
Your Pillars sall, your Golden Rooss do melt,
Your Antic Tables, and Greek Imagery
The Fire besets, and the Smoke you see
Does choke my Speech: O fly and save your
Life.

Heaven, thou dost strive I see for Victory.

See how Fates work unto their purposed end;
And without all Self-Industry will raise,
Whom they determine to make great and happy.
Nero throws down himself, I stir him not:
He runs unto Destruction, studies ways
To compass Danger, and attain the Hate
Of all: Be his own Wishes on his Head,
Nor Rome with Fire, more than Revenges, burn.
Let me stand still, or lie, or sleep; I rise.
Poppea a some new Favour will seek our,
My wakings to salute; I cannot stir,
But Messengers of new Preferment meet me.
Now she has made me Captain of the Guard;
So well I bear me in these Night-Alarms,
That she imagined I was made for Arms:
I now command the Castle, he the City.
If any Chance do turn the Prince aside, l
(As many Hat'reds, Mischiess threaten him:)
Our's is his Wise; his Seat and Throne is ours:
He's next in right that has the strongest Powers.

O Tray, and O ye Souls of our Fore-Fathers,
Which in your Countries Fires were offered up,
How near your Nephe^s to your Fortunes come:
Yet they were Greclau Hands began your Flame:
Not Pirrhus, nor Hannibal, art Author.
Sad Rome is ruined by a Roman Hand.

My Master has Sealed up his Testament;
Those Bond-Men, which he likes best, set free,
Given money, and more liberally than he used:
And now, as if a Fare-well to the World
Were meant, a sumptuous Banquet has he made;
Yet not with Countenance that Feasters use;
But Cheers his Friends, the whilst himself looks
Sad.

I have from Fortune's Temple ta'n this Sword.
may it be Fortunate, and now at least,
Since it could not prevent, punish the Evil:
To Rome it had been better done before;
but though less helping now, they'll praise it more:
Great Sovereign of all Mortal Actions,
Whom only Wretched Men, and Poets blame,
Speed thou the Weapon, which I have from thee;
'Twas not amidst thy Temple Monuments
In vain reposed, somewhat I know it has done:
O with new Honours let it be laid up.
Strike boldly Arm; so many powerful Prayers
Of Dead and Living hover over thee.

And though sometimes with talk Impertinent,
And Idle Fancies, he would feign a Mirth;
Yet it is easy seen, some-what is here,
The which he dares not let his Face make show of.

See, Melichus, this Weapon's better Edged:
Long want of use has made it dull and blunt.

Sharpening of Swords, when must we then have
Or means my Master Cato-like to exempt (blows:
Himself from Power of Fates, and cloyed with Life,
Give the Gods back their unregarded Gist:
But he hath neither Cato's Mind, nor Cause:
A Man given over to Pleasures, and Soft Ease;
Which makes me still to doubt how in Affairs,
Of Princes he dares meddle or desire.

We shall have Blows on both sides, Melichus:
What and't be Heart for Heart: Death is the worst.
Provide me store of Clothes to bind up Wounds:
This World I see has no Felicity;
I'll try the other.

Nero's Life is sought,
The Sword's prepared against another Breast,
The help for this. It can be no Private Foe;
For then 'twere best to make it known, and call
Troupes of Bond, and Freed-Men to his Aid:
Besides his Counsellors, Seneca,
And Lucan, are no Managers of Quarrels.

Me-thinks, I see him struggling on the ground,
Hear his unmanly out-Crles, and lost Prayers
Made to the Gods, which turn their Heads away.
Nero, this Day must end the World's Desires,
And Headlong send thee down to Endless Fires.

Why do I further idly stand debating?
My Proofs are but too many, and too pregnant,
And Princes Ears still to Suspicions open:
For States are wise, and cut of Ills that may be:
Mean Men must die, that others may sleep sound.

THis Kiss, sweet Love, ^le sorce from thee, and this*
And of such Spoils, and Victories be Prouder*
Than if I had the Fierce (...),
Or Valiant German, Ten times over-come.
Let Juli^ go and Fightat the end o'th'World.
And Conquer from the Wild Inhabitants
Their Cold and Poverty; whilst Nero here
Makes other Wars, Wars where the Conquered Gains.
Where to o'r-come, is to be Prisoner*
O willingly I give up my Freedom,
And put on my own Chains,
And am in Love with my Captivity:
Such Ven^ is, when on the Sandy Shore
Of Xanth^, or on Ida's Pleasant Gree^,
She leads the Dance.
If Bacchus could his Straggling Minion
Grace with a Glorious Wreath of Shining St^*
Why should not Heaven my Poppea Crown:
The Northern Teem shall move into a round:
New Constellations rise to honour thee:
The Earth shall woe thy Favo^rs, and the Sea
Lay his Rich Shells, and Tre^sures (...) thy Fee^:
For thee Hidaspis shall throw up his Gold:
Panchaia breath the Rich Delightful Smells;
The Seres, and the Feathered Man of India,
Shall their Fine Arts and (...) Labours bring*
And where the Sun's not known, Poppea's Name
Shall midst their Feasts and Barbarous Pomp
Be sung.
What's he?

One that it seems, my Lord, does come in haste.

Yet in his Face he sends his Tale before him.
Bad News thou tell.

Tis bad I tell, but good that I can tell it;
Therefore your Majesty will pardon me,
If I offend your Ears to save your Life.

Why, is my Life endangered?
How ends this Circumstance? thou rack'st
My Thoughts.

My Lord, your Life is conspired against.

By whom?

I must be of the World excused in this,
If the great Duty to your Majesty
Makes me all other lesser to neglect.

Thou art a tedious Fellow, speak, by whom?

By my Master.

who's thy Master?

Scevinus.

Scevinus? why should he Conspire?
Unless he think that Likeness in Conditions
May make him too worthy o'th'Empire thought.

Who are else in it?

I think, Natalia, Subius, Flavius,
Lucan, Seneca, and Lucius, Piso,
Asper, and Qui^.

Ha done,
Thou'lt reckon all Rome anon, and so thou may;
They're Villains all, I'll not trust one of'em.
O that the Romans had but all one Neck.

Piso's sly creeping into Men's Affections,
And Popular Arts, have given long Cause of
Doubt:
And the other's late observed Discontents,
Risen from Misinterpreted Disgraces,
May make us credit this Relation.

Where are they? come they not upon us yet?
See the Guard doubled, see the Gates shut up:
Why, they'll surprise us in our Court anon.

Not so, my Lord, they are at Piso's House,
And think themselves safe, and undescried.

Let's thither then,
And take'em in this False Security.

'Twere better first publish'em Traitors.

That were to make'em so;
And force'em all upon their Enemies:
Now without stir, or hazard they'll be ^a'n,
And boldly Trial dare, and Law demand:
Besides this Accusation may be forged
By malice or mistaking.

What likes you, do Nimphidius out of hand;
Two may distract, when either would prevail:
If they suspecting but this Fellow's absence,
Should try the City, and attempt their Friends,
How dangerous might Piso's Favour be?

I to himself would make the matter clear,
Which now upon one Servant's Credit stands.
The City's Favour keeps within the Bounds
Of Profit, they'll love none to hurt themselves:
Honour and Friendship they hear others name,
Themselves do neither feel; nor know the same.
To put'em yet (though needless) insome fear,
We will keep their Streets with Armed Companies;
Then if they stir, they see their Wives and Houses
Prepared a Prey to the Greedy Soldier.

Let's be quick then, you to Piso's House,
While I, and Tigellin^s further sift
This Fellow's Knowledge.

Look to the Gates and Walls o'th'City, look
The River be well kept; have Watches set
In every Passage, and in every Way:
But who shall watch these Watches? what if
They
Begin to play the Traitors first? O where shall I
Seek Faith, or them that I may wisely trust?
The City favours the Conspirators:
The Senate in disgrace, and fear has lived:
The Camp, why, most are Soldiers that he Named.
Besides, he knows not all, and like a Fool
I interrupted him, else had he named
Those that stood by me. O Security!
Which we so much seek after, yet are still
To court, like a Stranger, and dost rather choose
The Smoky Reeds, and Sedgy Cottages,
Than the Proud Roofs, and wanton cost of Kings.
O sweet despised Joys of Poverty!
A Happiness unknown unto the Gods:
Would I had been a Ragged Magistrate,
Sate as a Judge of Measures, and of Corn,
Than the Adored Monarch of the World.
Mother, thou dy'dst deservedly for this,
That from a Private and Sure State did Raise
My Fortunes to this Slippery Hill of Greatness,
Where I can neither Stand, nor Fall with
Life.

But since we are discovered, what remains,
But put our Lives upon our Hands? our Swords
Shall try us Traitors or true Romans.
And what should make this Hazard doubt success?
It is not now
Augustus Gravity, nor Tiberius Craft,
But Tigellinus and Crisogerus,
Eunuchs, and Women that we go against.

Why should we keep so many vowed Swords
From such a Hated Throat?
Or shall we fear
To trust unto the Gods so good a Cause?

By this we may our selves Heaven's Favour promise;
Because all Nobleness, and Worth on Earth,
We see's on our side; here's the Faby's Son;
Here the Corvini are take's our Parts:
And so their Noble Fathers would, if now they Lived.
There's not a Soul that claims Nobility
Either by his, or his Fore-Father's merit,
But is with us: with us the Gallant Youth,
Whom passed Dangers, or hot Blood makes bold.
Stayed Men suspect their Wisdom, or their Faith,
To whom our Counsels we have not revealed;
And while (our Party seeking to disgrace)
They Traitors calls us, each man Treason praise,
And hate that thing called Faith, when Piso
Is a Traitor.

O Piso,
Think on that day, when in the Parthian Fields
Thou cryedst to the Flying Legions, turn,
And looked Death in the Face, he was not Grim
But Fair and Lovely: when he came in Arms,
O why there died we not on Syrian Swords?
Were we reserved to Prison's, and to Chains?
Must Piso's Head be fixed upon a Tower?
Those Members torn, rather than Roman-like,
With Weapon in our Hands
Fighting in Throngs of Enemies to die?

You see the Court and City's Armed,
Why should we move desperate and hopeless Courses,
And vainly spill that Noble Blood, that should
The Median Fields,
Not Tiber Colour? And the more you show
Your readiness to lose your Lives,
The unwillinger I am to adventure'em:
Yet I am proud you would have died for me:
But live and keep your selves to worthier Ends;
No Mother but my own shall weep my Death.
Disgrace my Roman Courage cannot bear,
Nor have I the Vanity to think we can Subdue
With so few Swords.
O Friends, I would not die
When I can live no longer; 'tis my Glory,
That free and willingly I give up this Breath,
Leaving such Courages as yours untried.
But, to be long in talk of Dying would
Show a Relenting, and a Doubtful Mind;
Since Fate would not with Fame our Cause reward:
This is from Infamy a Roman's Guard.

O that this Noble Courage had been shown
Rather on Enemies Breasts, than on thy own.

Nay, other end your grievous Crimes await,
Ends which the Law and your Deserts exact.

What have we deserved?

That Punishment, that Traitors unto Princes,
And Enemies unto the State they live in, merit.

If by the State this Government you mean,
I justly am an Enemy unto it;
That's but to Nero, You, and Tigellinus:
That Glorious World, that even beguiles the Wise
Being looked into, includes but Three or Four
Corrupted Men, which were they all removed,
'Twould please the State, and ease the Groaning World.

Away with'em, be carried before the Emperor.

What could cause thee
Forgetful of my Benefits, and thy Oath,
To seek my Life?

Ner^, I hated thee;
Nor was there any of thy Soldiers
More Faithful, whilst thou Faith deserv'dst, Than I;
Together did I leave to be a Subject,
And thou a Prince: Casar was now become
A Player on the Stage,
A Burner of our Houses, and of us;
A Paricide of Wife and Mother.

Villain, dost'know Where and of Whom
Thou speak?

Have you but one Death for him? Let it be
A Feeling one (Tigellinus) Be it
Thy Charge, and let me see thee witty In it.

Come Sirrah,
We will see how stoutly you'll stretch out your Neck.

Would thou durst strike as boldly.

And what's
He there?

One that in whispering was o'r heard to say,
What pity 'twas, my Lord, that Piso died?

And why was't pity, Sirrah, Piso died?

My Lord, 'twas pity he deserved to die.

How much this Youth my Oth^ does resemble?
Otho, my first, my best Love, who is now
(Under pretext of Governing) Exll'd
To Lusitania, Honourably Banished.

Well, if you be so Passionate,
I'll make you spend your Pity on your Prince,
And good Men, not on Traitors.

The God's forbid my Prince should pity need:
Some-what the sad Remembrance did me stir
Of frail and weak Condition of our Kind:
Some-what his Greatness, than whom Yesterday
The World, but Caesar, could show nothing Higher.
Besides, some Virtues, and some Worth he had,
That might excuse my Pity to an End
so Cruel, and Unripe.

I know not, but this Youth does strangely move My mind;
His Face, me-thinks, is more Angelical, Than Earthly.
Oh! his words invade
My weakened Senses, and o'r-come my Heart.

Your Pity shows your favour, and your will,
Which side you are inclined to, had you Power:
Your Ill Affection then shall punished be.
Take him to Execution, he shall die.

This Benefit at least
Sad Death shall give, to free me from the Power
Of such a Government; and if I die
For pitying Humane Chance, and Piso's End,
There will be some too, that will pity me.

O what a Dauntless Look! what sparkling Eyes,
Threatening his Suffering! sure some Noble Blood
Is hid in Rags; Fear argues a base Spirit:
In him what Courage, and Contempt of Death*
And shall I suffer ohe I Love to dye?
He shall not die: Take off your hands; away
Nero, thou shalt not kill this Guiltless Youth.

He Guil^less?
By Heaven, she is in love with this smooth-fac'd Boy:
Take him away.

I beg, my Lord, to spare his Lise;
Alas, what Treason can such tender Years commit?

How dare you with your Fate, and God Contend?
But the Bold Impie^y shall end.
How impotent would Nero's God-head be,
Could Mortal stand betwixt my Rage and thee?

Alas, my Lord, you have killed her.

Help, help, she dyes.

Poppea, Poppea, speak, I am not angry,
I did not mean to hurt thee; speak, sweet
Love.

She's dead, my Lord.

Fetch her again, she shall not die.
I'll open the Iron Gates of Hell,
And break the Imprisoned Shadows of the Deep,
And force from Death this far too worthy Prey.
She is not dead;
The Crimson Red for-sakes not yet her Cheeks:
Her Breath
Yet moves her Lips; those quick and piercing Eyes,
That did in Beauty challenge Heaven,
Yet shine, as they were wont: O no, they do not;
See how they grow Obscure: O see they close,
And cease to take or give light to the World.
What Stars soe'r you are, assured to grace
The Firmament (sor how the Twinkling Fires
Together throng, and that clear Milky space,
Prepares your Room!) do not with wry aspect
Look on your Nero, who in Blood shall mourn
Your Luckless Fate: and many a Breathing Soul
Send after you, to wait upon their Queen.

What means your Mourning, this ung^ful Sorrow?
Where are your Precepts of Philosophy?
Where are your Prepared Resolutions,
So many Years fore-studied against Dangers?
To whom is Nero's Cruelty unknown?
Or what remained after his Mother's Blood,
But his Instructer's Death: Leave, leave these Tears.
Death from me nothing takes, but what's a Burden,
A Clog to that free Spark of Heavenly Fire:
But that in Seneca, the which you loved,
Which you admired, does, and shall still remain
Secure of Death, untouch't of the Grave.

We will not belly our Tears, we wail not thee;
It is our selves, and our own Loss we grieve:
To thee what loss in such a Change can be?
Virtue is paid her due by Death alone.
To our own Losses do we give these Tears,
That lose thy Love, thy boundless Knowledge Lose,
Lose the unpattern'd Sample of thy Virtue,
Lose whatsoe'r may Praise, or Sorrow Move;
In all these Losses yet of this we Glory,
That 'tis thy H^ppiness that makes us sorry.

If there be any Place for Ghosts of Good Men;
If (as we have bin told) Great Men's Souls
Consume not with their Bodies, thou shalt see,
Looking from out the Dwellings of Air,
True Duties to thy Memory performed,
Not in the outward Pomp of F^neral,
But in Remembrance of thy Deeds and Words,
The oft Recalling of thy many Virtues;
The Tomb, that shall the Eternal
Relics keep
Of Seneca, shall be his Hearers Hearts.

Be not afraid, my Soul, go cheerfully
To thy own Heaven, from whence it
Had its Being.
Now lifted up thou ravished shalt behold
The Truth of things, at which we wonder here,
And Foolishly do wrangle on beneath;
And like a God shalt walk the Spacious Air,
And see what even to Conceit's denied.
Great Soul o'th'World, that through the Parts
Diffused of this Vast-all guid'st what thou dost
Inform;
You Blessed Minds, that from the Spheres
You move
Look on Men's Actions not with Idle Eyes,
And Gods we go to, Aid me in this Strise,
And Combat of my Flesh, that ending I
May still show Seneca, and my self die.

Enough is wept, Poppea, for thy Death,
Enough is Bled; so many Tears of others
Wailing their Losses have wiped mine away.
Who in the Common Funeral of the world
Can mourn one Death?

Besides, your Majesty this Benefit
In their deserved Punishment shall reap,
From all Attempts hereafter to be freed:
Conspiracy is now for ever dashed;
Tumult suppressed, Rebe^ion out of heart:
In Piso's Death Danger it self did die.

Piso, that thought to climb by bowing down,
By giving a way to Thrive, and Raising others,
To become great himself, hath now by Death
Given quiet to your Thoughts, and Fear to theirs,
That shall from Treason their Advancement plot:
Those Dangerous Heads, that his Ambition leaned on,
And they by it crept up, and from their meanness
Thought in this Stir to rise aloft, are off.
Now Peace, and Safety wait upon your Throne:
Security hath walled your Seat about:
There is no place for Fear lest.

Why, I never sear'd'em.

That was your Fault.
Your Majesty must give us leave to blame
Your Dangerous Courage, and that noble Soul
Too Prodigal of it self.

A Prince's Mind knows neither Fear nor Hope:
The Beams of Royal Majesty are such,
As all Eyes are with it amazed ^nd weakened,
But it with nothing. I at first contemned
Their weak Devices, and saint Enterprise.
Why, thought they against him to have prevailed,
Whose Child-hood was from Messallina's Spite,
By Dragons (that the Earth gave up) preserved?
Such Guard my Cradle had, for Fate had then
Pointed me out to be what now I am.
Should all the Legions, and the Provinces,
In one united, against me Conspire,
I could disperse 'em with one Angry Eye.
My Brow's an Host of Men. Come, Tigellinus,
Let's turn this Bloody Banquet, Piso meant us,
Unto a Merry Feast: we will Drink and challenge
Fortune. Who's that, Neophilus?

A Currier from beyond the Alps, my Lord.

News of some German Victory belike,
Or Britton overthrow.

The Letters come from France.

Why smiles your Majesty?

So I smile, I should be afraid, there's one
In Arms, Neophilus.

What Armed against your Majesty?

Our Lieutenant of the Province, Julius Vindex.

Who? that Giddy French man?

His Province is disarmed, my Lord, he hath
No Legion, not a Soldier under him.

One that by Blood, and Rapine would repair
His State consumed in V^nities, and Lust,

He would not find out three to follow him,

More News, my Lord.

Is it of Vindex, that thou hast to say:

Vi^dex is up, and with him F^ce in Arms;
The Noble Men and People throng to th'Cause;
M^ny and Armour Cities do conser;
The Country does send in Provision;
Young Men bring Bodies, Old Men lead 'em forth;
Ladies do Coin their Jewels into Pay;
The Sickle now is framed into a Sword;
France nothing does, but War and Fury breath.

All this Fierce Talk's but Vindex does Rebel,
And I will hang him.

How long came you forth after the Former
Messenger?

Four days, but by the Benefit of Sea,
And Weather, am ariv'd with him.

How strong was Vindex at your coming forth?

He was esteemed a Hund'red Thousand Strong.

Men enough.

And Soldiers few enough.
Tumultuary Troops, Undisciplined,
Untrain'd in Service, to waste Good Victuals:
But when they come to look on Wa^'s black
Wounds,
And but afar off see the Face of Death.

It falls out for my Empty Coffers well,
The Spoil of such a Large and Goodly Province,
En^ich'd with Trade, and long enjoyed Peace.

What Order will your Majesty have taken,
For Levying Forces to Suppress this Stir?

What Order should we take? We will Laugh and Drink;
Think thou it fits my Pleasures to be disturbed,
When any French-Man list to break his Neck?
They have not heard of Piso's Fortun^ yet;
Let that Tale f^ight'em.

What Order needs? Your Majesty shall find
Th^s French heat quickly of it self grow Cold.

Come away,
Nothing shall come, that this Night's Sport
Shall stay.

I wonder what makes him so confident,
In this Revolt, now grown unto a War,
And Ensigns in the Field; when in the other,
Being but a Plot of a Conspiracy,
He showed himself so wretchedly dism^i'd!

Faith, the right Nature of a Coward, to set light,
Dangers, that seem far off: Piso was here,
Ready to enter at the Presence Door,
And drag him out of his Abused Chair;
And then he Trembled. Vindex, is in France,
And many Woods, and Seas, and Hill's between.

'Twas strange, that Piso was so soon suppressed.

Strange! strange indeed, for had he but come up,
And taken the Court in that strange Fright, and
Stir,
While unresolved, for whom or what to do,
And each had Jealousy on the other,
He would have hazarded the Royal Seat.

Nay had it without Hazard: All the Court
Had been sot him, and those disclosed their Love,
And Favour in the Cause which now to hide,
And colour, the Good Meaning's ready were,
To show their Forwardness against it most.

But for a Stranger, with a Na^ed P^ovince,
Without Allies, or Friends in the State, to Challenge
A Prince, upheld with Thirty Legions,
Rooted in Four Descents of Ancestors;
And Fourteen Yeats Continuance of Reign:
Why it is --

Galba, and Spain? What, Spain and Galba too?

I pray thee, Tig^llinus, What Fury's this?
What strange Event? what Accident, hath thus
O'r-cast you^ Countenances?

Down we were sate at Table, and began
With Sparkling Bowls to chase our Fear away,
And Mirth and Pleasure looked out of our Eyes,
When straight a Breathless Messenger comes in,
And tells how Vindex, and the Power of France,
Have Chosen Sergius Galba Emperor:
With what Applause the Legions him Receive;
That Spain's revolted, Portugal hath joined;
As much suspected is of Germany:
But Nero, not abiding out the end,
O'r-threw the Tables, d^sh'd against the Ground,
The Cup which h^ so much, you know, esteemed:
Tearing his Hair, and with incensed Rage
Curses false me, and Gods, the Lookers on.

His Rage we saw was Wild and Desperate.

O you unsearched VVisdoms, which do Laugh
At our Security, and Feats, alike!
And plain, to show our VVeakness, and your Power,
Make us Contemn the Harms which surest strike:
When you (...) Glo^ie's, and our Pride ^ndo,
Our Overthrow, you make Ridiculous too.

Slow, making Counsels, and the Sliding Year,
Have brought me to the Long fore-seen Destruction
Of this mis-led Young Man: His State is shaken,
And I will push it on. Revolted France,
Nor the Conjured Provinces of Spain,
Nor his own Guilt, shall like to me, oppress him:
I to his Easy yielding Fears proclaim
New Germ^ Mutinies, and all the World
Rowzing it self in hate of Nero's Name.
I his Distracted Counsels do disperse,
With Fresh Despairs: I animate the Senate,
And the People, to ^ngage them past Recall,
In Prejudice of Nero: and in brief,
Perish he must; the Fates, and I, resolve it;
Which to effect, I presently will go
Proclaim a Donative in G^lba's Name.

Yonder, Nimphidius, our Commander: now
I with Respect must speak, and smooth my Brow.
Captain, All Hail.

Antonius, well met;
Your Place of Tribune in this Anarchy.

This Anarchy, my Lord? is Nero dead?

This Anarchy, this unstyl'd time,
While Galba is unceas'd of the Empire,
Which Nero has forsook?

Has Nero then Resigned the Empire?

In Effect he has, for he's fled to Egypt.

My Lord, you tell strange News to me.

But nothing strange to me,
Who every moment knew of his Despairs:
The Curriers came so fast with Fresh Alarms
Of New Revolts, that he unable quite
To bear his Fears, which he had long Concealed,
Is now Revolted from himself, and ^ed.

Thrust with Reports and Rumours, from his Seat.
My Lord, you know the Camp depends on you,
As you Determine.

There it lies ^nius;
What should we do (...) it boot's not to rely
On Nero's sinking Fortunes, and to sit
Securely looking on, were to receive
An Emperor from Spain; which how disgraceful
It were to us, who, if we weigh our selves,
The most Material Accessions are
Of all the Roman Empire; which Disgrace
To Cover, we must join our selves betimes,
And thereby seem to have Created Galba;
Therefore I'll straight Proclaim a Donative
Of Thirty Thousand Sisterses a Man.

I think so great a Gift was never heard of, Galba, they say, is frugally
inclined;
Will he avow so great a Gift as this:

Howe'r he like of it, he must avow it,
If by our Promise he be once engaged.
And since the Soldiers Care belongs to me,
I will have care of them, and of their Good.
Let 'em thank me, if I, Through this Occasion,
Procure for them so great a Donative.

So you be thanked, it Skill's who prevails:
Galba, or Nero, Traitor to'em both.
You give it out that Nero's fled to Egypt,
Who with the Frights of your Reports, amazed,
By our Device, does lurk for better News.
Whilst you inevitably do betray him.
Works he all this for Galba then (...) Not so,
I have long seen his Climbing to the Empire,
By Secret Practises of Gracious Women,
And other Instruments of the Late Court,
That was his Love to her that me resus'd;
And now by this he would give the Soldiers Favour.
Now is the time to quit Poppea's Scorn,
And Revenge my self upon my Rival:
I'll straight Reveal
His Treacheries, to Galba's Agents here.

You see what Issue things are come too;
Yet may we hope not only Impunity,
But with our Fellows, part of the Guilt proclaimed.

Whither go you? Stay my Friends.
'Tis Caesar calls; stay my Loving Friends.

We were his Slaves, his Foot-stool, and must C^ouch,
But now with such Observance to his Feet:
It is his Misery that he calls us Friends.

And moves you not the Misery of a Prince?
O stay my Friends! stay and hearken to the Voice
Which once you knew.

Hark to the People's Cries;
Hark to the Streets, that Galba, Galba, rings!

The People may sorsake me without Blame;
I did 'em wrong to make you Rich and Great;
I took their Houses to bestow on you.
Treason in them has name of Liberty.
Your Fault has no Excuse, you are my Fault,
And the Excuse of other's Treachery.

Shall we with staying seem to uphold his Tyrannies,
As if we were in Love with them? Come let's away.

O now I see the Vizard from my Face,
So lovely and so fearful is fallen off.
That Vizard, Shadow, nothing (Majesty)
Which like a Child acquainted with his Fears.
But now Men tremble at, and now contemn.
Nero forsaken is of all the World;
The World of truth: O sall some Vengeance
Down,
Equal unto their Falsh-hoods, and my Wrongs,
Might I accept the Chariot of the Sun,
And like another Phaeton Consume
In Flames of all the World: a Pile of Death,
Worthy the State and Greatness I have lost.
Or were I now but Lord of my own Fires,
Where in False Rome, yet once again might
Smoke,
And Perish all unpityed of the Gods:
That all things in their Last Destruction
Might
Perform a Funeral Honour to their Lord.
O Jove, Dissolve with Caesar, Caesar's World.

Though other's bound with greater Benefits,
Have left your Altered Fortunes, and do run
Whither new Hopes do call'em; yet come we. --

O welcome! Come you to Adversity?
Welcome true Friends; why, there is Faith on Earth;
Of Thousand Servants, Friends, and Followers,
Yet two are left: Your Countenance, me-thinks,
Gives Comfort, and new Hopes.

Do not deceive your Thoughts,
My Lord, we bring no Comfort. Would we could.
But the Last Duty to perform, and best
We ever shall, a free Death to persuade,
To cut off Hopes of Fiercer Cruelty,
And Scorn more Cruel, to a Worthy Soul.

The Senate has decreed your Punishment,
After the Fashion of our Ancestors;
Which is, your Neck being locked in a Fork,
You must be Whipped, and Scourged to Death.

The Senate thus decreed? They that so oft
My Virtues flattered have, and Gifts of mine;
My Government preferred to Ancient Times,
And challenge Numa to compare with me:
Have they so Horrible an End sought out?
No, here I bear --
That which shall prevent such Shame:
This hand shall yet from that deliver me:
And Faithful be alone unto it's Lord.
Alas, how sharp, and terrible is Death:
O must I die, must now my Senses close?
For ever die, and ne'er return again?
Never more see the Sun, nor Heaven, nor Earth?
Whither go I? What shall I be anon?
What Horrid Journey wand'rest thou, my Soul,
Under the Earth, in Dark, Damp, Dusky Vaults?
Or shall I now to nothing be dissolved?
My Fear's become my Hopes; O would I might.
Me thinks I see the Boiling Phlegeton,
The Dread and Terror of the Gods themselves,
The Furies armed with Lincks, with Whips, with Snakes,
And my own Furies, far more mad than they:
My Mother, and those Troops of Slaughtered Friends;
And now the Judge is brought unto the Throne,
That will not lean unto Authority,
Nor favour the Oppressions of the Great.

They are at hand: Hark you may hear the
Noise. --

O Rome, fare-well; Fare-well you Theaters,
Where I so oft with Popular Applause,
Have won that Glory, which must shine no more.

Thus die all Tyrants. Let the News be Carried
To my Great Master: And the Tyrant's Body
Thrown into Tyber; Let th'Aspiring Traitor,
Nimphidius, straight to Galba be conveyed,
To undergo the Vengeance due to Rebels.
Nero, the Nobler Criminal, has the Nobler Destiny.
Tyrants by Conquest have their Fall Decreed;
But Traitors should by Execution Bleed.

IT is a Trick of late grown much in Vogue,
When all are Killed, to raise an Epilogue.
This, some Pert Rymer wittily contrived
For a Surprise, whilst the Arch Wag believed;
'Twould please You to see Pretty Miss revived.
But, Gentlemen, the Case is altered new,
We may be Dead, -- and Damned too for all You:
And therefore, just as my Poor Ghost came down,
All the Elizian Shades began to frown;
Told me, that I must there expect no Grace,
Till I returned to You, and made my Peace.
Faith, it is very hard, you cannot be
Content to vex our frail Mortality:
Damn all Our Plays, call Us Dull Jades, and Fools.
That might content You: -- Would You Damn Our Souls?
I Gad, we will ne'er endur't, I'll tell You that;
To be thus used at this ill natured Rate.
Nay, ne'er begin to bite your Lips and Fume;
Not one of Us, but may be found at Home.
If You'll have Satisfaction, when We're there,
We are Ready for You; and come, faith, if You dare,

