Deceived Deceiver, and Impostor (...)!
An Audience and the ^!
All trick and cheat! Pshaw, 'tis the D^vil ^nd all,
I'll warr'nt ye we shall now have Cups and Ball;
No, Gallants, we those tricks don't understand;
'Tis the other House best shows the slight of hand:
Hey Iingo, Sirs, what's this! their Come^y?
Presto be gone, 'tis now our Farce you see.
By neat conveyance you have seen and know it
They can transform an Actor to a Poet.
With empty Dishes tho^'ll set out a Treat,
Whole Seas of Broth, but a small Isle of Meat:
With Powderle-Pimp of Dance, Machine and Song,
They'll spin^ye out short Nonsense four hours long:
With Fountains, Groves, Bombast and airy Fancies
Larded with Cynthias, little Loves and Dances:
Which put together, makes it hard to say,
If Poet, Painter, or Fiddler made the Play.
But hold, my business lies another way.
Not to bespeak your praise by kind persuasions,
But to desire the favour of your patience.
Our Case is thus:
Our Authoress, like true Women, showed her Play
To some, who, like true Wits, stole't half away.
We've Fee'd no Council yet, tho some advise us
To indite the Plagiaries at Apollo's Sizes?
But ah, how they'd out face a Damsel civil:
Who've impudence enough to out face the Devil:
Besides, should they be cast by prosecution,
'Tis now too late to think of restitution;
And faith, I hear, that some do shrewdly opine
They Trade with other Muses than the nine.
I name no names, but you may easily guess,
They that can cheat the Devil can cheat the Flesh.
Therefore to you kind Sirs, as to the Laws
Of Justice she submits her s^lf and Cause,
For to whom else should a wronged Poet sue.
There's no appeal to any Court but you.

LEad me to my Chair, then send Gervatio hither.


Yes, my Lord.


This Morning I've out-^isen the Sun, to scourge that Dog whose cursed
Contrivance brought the Mischiefs which destroy my Sleep: Oh! here he comes,
the Coast is clear, and I'll secure it so.


Good morrow to your Lordship; what does your Lordship mean?


What did you mean, Rascal, to make me mad, horn mad, with this counterfeiting
Blindness? but I can see your Plots, you Pander, and you shall feel my Rage.


Thus faithful service ever is rewarded; Will ye but hear me?


No, I've seen too much; you'll make me deaf next, I suppose, sirrah, and then
set the World upon abusing me that way, Villain.


Hold and hear what I can urge, or I'll raise all the House, and lay the
Imposture open.


Well, I will hold, not out of any kindness, but that I'm out of breath.


If I am not revenged on ye, ye old Don, I'll be hanged.


Well, what have you to say, Sir?


Look ye, my Lord, in the first place I'll go close to the Door, and if your
Lordship offers to move or stir your Cane, I'll fly out, and this minute
proclaim in Venice, that --


Hold, I am quiet.


Then how have you the face to use me thus? Am I not privy to all your
Extortions and Briberies? Have I not carried the tempting (...) that corrupted
Knaves, and excused your self from greater? Have you not (...) a taxing power,
though for the good of the Commonweal, was worse than a luxurious Tyrant, wh^
thought of nothing but his Pleasures? Nay more, if the Grand (...) would let
you enjoy your Wealth, you had as live have him for your Head as his Holiness.


Well, good Gervatio, thou dost know my Failings, but 'tis ^he ill consequence
of this blindness puts me in all these passions.


Does not your Conscience (but I have forgot, you have ^one, ^ would) fly in
your Face, for abusing me on that account? Did not you, when the old President
of Dalmatia died, come to me, Oh! dear ^rvatio, ^'m undone! my turn is next to
that chargeable Post, I shall lavish all the Wealth my whole ^ife has been
scraping together! Then you coaxed me, Thou art ingenious, think some way I may
be mist, and I'll make thy Fortunes.


Nay, this is true.


Is it so? I almost lost my Eyes in reality in poring over old musty Stat^tes;
there I found nothing but some natural Incapacity could exempt the rich Nobles
in their turns: Accordingly I advised you to counterfeit Blindness; you did it;
succeeded, Ma^ti^o Cornaro is chose in your place, and I am cudgeled for my
(...).


Ah Gervatio, thou hast told the Sweets and Profits of the story, but left the
bitt^r sting out. Whilst the Duke and Senate believed my Blindness, and I
escaped that hateful Office, my Wife and Daughter do so too at home, my Wi^e
with ogling Eyes just at my Nose, ^iews her Gallant, and the young Gypsy lets
that Bankrupt's Son, Count Fidelio, steal her Hand: This makes me mad, and wish
I were blind indeed.


For this I also provide a Remedy: You know by my care the Ladies are almost
always with you else; I watch 'em, let 'em look on, squeeze Hands, they'll
^arce venture to make you a Cuckold or a Grandfather. Beside, my Diligence goes
farther; this day the Girdle of St. Sylvester comes your tutelar Saint, for you
will ha^e a Saint too, though to my knowledge all your Religion lies in filling
your Bags. But, as I said before, to day the wonderful Gir^le comes, and will
get credit, for I dare swear you see immediately after the operation.


Well, thou art a Wag; co^, take care of my Wife and Daughter till I dare own I
perceive 'em again, and I'll make amends for my Blows; faith Gervatio *twas
hard last night to see a Man kiss my Wife half an hour together before my Face,
and when I called, the Baggage would take off her Lips and cry, How dost my
D^r? Then my Daughter, you know, I design for my Lord Insuls, Son to the rich
French Merchant Monsieur Opulant, who by his Industry has purchased three (...)
^udding ^rench Beaux Estates.


For a Son that as like a Jack Pudding Beau will spend it, to my knowledge.


Here, here, to my Chair, quick, quick, open the Door.


A happy Morning to my Lord.


(...) Voice, I think; Gervatio, conduct me to salute him.


By no means, my Lord, your condition excuses Ceremony, at all times (...); the
Duke comme^ds him to you, he with much pains has got a famous (...).


The Devil he has.


Now I thank thee Fortune, thou hast revenged me.


Unwilling to lose the Advice of such a Pillar of the State, has took true
p^ins ^ expe^ienc'd Man.


I am much beholden to his Princely Care; but, my Lord, I look on this
Affliction (...) from He^ven as a Judgment, and hope by Penitence to obtain
from thence a Rem^dy: You must^know, my Lord, I beyond measure coveted the
Presi^ent of Dalm^i^'s place, nothing but that would suffice my Ambition; nay,
Heaven forgive me, I often wished his death.


Oh, mercy upon me, was there ever such a Dissembler!


Now ma^ the end: Just as the old President died this Darkness fell upon me; I
have no Hopes in human Aid, but my own dear St. Silves^er methoughts, in a
Dream, expressed, his sacred Girdle might do me good.


The Dream is not to be neglected, nor the Duke's Goodwill to regain the loss
or precious sight, both may be tried, in the Afternoon I'll wait upon you^with
the famous man, in the mean time I am your Lordship's servant.


So Gervatio, what think you of your project now? I shall have a pragmatical
fellow poke my Eyes out indeed.


Fear nothing, my Lord, I'll do well enough with him. If I don't sit you
Seignior for your drubbing, you shall call me Iohn a Styles.


Gervatio, lead me into the green Room, and see if my Wife and Daughter are up,
send 'em to me.


It shall be done, my Lord.


Oh this damned O^nlist, Gervatio!


Pho, pho, I'll banter him out of his senses.


Give me thy Hand, lest any of the Family should see us.


Have done trifling, I'm well enough.


You are indeed charmingly pretty, Madam.


How nauseous 'tis, and yet how natural 'tis to have our Women slatter us. Well
Beatrice, here's a wonderful alteration since my Father's Blindness, I can put
on a new suit every day, and my Jewels, laid up only for the Festival of St.
Mark, may be worn now without a chiding.


These are great privileges, Madam, yet 'tis a sad thing to think how suddenly
my Lord was struck blind.


I swear so it is; but then remember, Beatrice, how he forbad Count Fidelio to
think on me, though his Father was of Birth noble as mine, despised that Dross my
Father makes his God, and left his Son only a liberal Education and innate
Courage, which appears unknown to most of our Venetians.


My Lord dares not deny him the House, because he is of the ancient Nobility,
and he has been an hour walking in the Garden, waiting your coming down, and
then, I suppose, gives my Lord the good morrow.


Well, 'tis a mischievous Rogue, he has so many Tricks before my Father, yet
can't I forbear joining, nor scarce keep the Laug^ in.


Confess Madam, are you really sorry at the Darkness has overtaken your Father?


Why truly, Beatrice, I always say my Prayers for his Eyes restor^tion the last
thing I do, that is, just when I am falling asleep.


Madam, my Lady sent me to tell you, your Father expects you with her
presently.


I'll wait upon her, Silvia.

That Mother-in-law of mine is a hopeful young Gentlewoman too; she takes
Opportunity by the Forelock, and makes all the haste she conveniently can to
give my old Dad Horns instead of Eyes: Am not I a wicked Jade to wink at this?
Why, I don't know, if I should betray her, she'd serve me the same sauce;
besides, my Father married the young Creature the perfect Venetian way, only
for her Portion, never saw one-another beforehand: I can't but think what a
fright she was in, to behold an old Man with a grizled Beard instead of a brisk
young fellow. Well, I hope Heaven makes Allowances for such a case, and my
Guilt won't be great for guessing at it.


Your Ladyship considers what may befall your self another day, Madam.


God forbid Wench, I hope to marry my dear Fidelio, and that Woman that takes a
Man for Love deserves to be disgraced here, and damned hereafter, if but her
Inclinations wayer, and she in Thought abuses him.


Ay, but Madam, if your Father's choice, my Lord Insuls should be forced upon
you.


Hang him, per^um'd Poltoon, I hate him worse than a Nunnery, where they wear
Hair Smocks.


He comes this Afternoon to make his second visit; my Lady Temptyouth says he's
a fine Gentleman.


He is indeed fit for her use: Well, 'tis a strange thing a Lady of her quality
should give her self the trouble, now she has passed the beaten Road of
Wickedness her self, to draw others in. My Mother has a good Friend of her; I
know my Father hates her, but his dear Interest prevails, she helps him to the
purchase of many a Prodigal's Estate.


Madam, you forget my Lady stays.


She's here.


How does my pretty Daughter to day? But why do I ask? you look fresh and fair
as the new-blown Rose.


When your Ladyship consults your Glass you'll find a brighter, Madam.


Fie upon you for a little Flatterer, what your Mother!


'Tis true, the Law calls you my Mother, but the World must be blind as my
father, if they did not take us for Sisters.


Well, your Father's Blindness is a dreadful thing, Ariana; why, he'll never
suffer us to be out of the Room.


There is no Convenience but has its Inconveniency, Madam.


That's true; come, we must to him.


I have a fine melancholy Life on it, thank my Stars; but should I discover my
self before this arch Rogue has brought matters about, I must be the
laughing-stock of Venice, besides paying a swinging Fine for deceiving the
Duke and Senate in putting off the Government. -- Boy.


My Lord.


Are not the Women ready?


My Lord, they are entering.


Your Blessing, Sir.


Formality, I believe you mind your topping more than my Blessings, or Heavens
either.


How are your Eyes, my Lord?


Not clear enough to see into your Heart, my Lady.


Still angry!


Truly I hope purging my Father's Choler does him good, else surely he would
never practice it so often, but that he finds benefit by it.


Baggage!


Nay, I am out of the reach of your Cane, Sir; come, I would ^ain say something
to divert ye, the Spleen is very hurtful to your Eyes.


Madam, my Lady Temptyouth is coming up.


That everlasting Tattler, I would retire and shun the noise, only my being
here perhaps may in part hinder your luscious Imagination from being tickled
with all the Intrigues of the City.


Good morrow, my Lord; good morrow my sweet Buds of Beauty.


Pray, my Lady Temptyouth, don't put my Wife in amongst your Buds of Beauty; if
she is not five and twenty, she ought to appear like fifty, that's sit for
her, and would please me best.


Lord, you're so captious: Well, I swear your Wife looks very handsome, 'tis for
your sake she dresses, 'tis to look amiable in your Eyes.


Ay, now you've hit it.


Pox on him, I had forgot his blindness. Ariana appears as she had not looked
in a Glass to day.


Bare two hours I assure you, Madam.


Well said Pride, I have a good mind to have all the Glasses in the House
broke; no, sold I meant.


My Lord, my Actions never disobey you, pray allow me a little freedom in
speech.


She that's so free of her Tongue, commonly is as free (...)


Oh hold, my Lord, an immodest word, nay, any hint, though never so darkly,
tending that way, drives me out of ^he Room.


Your Ladyship has then a quick apprehension.


Yes, I vow, my Lord, at a Play, when no Woman of Quality else has found out a
^eastly wrapt-up thing, I have not showed my Face in a quarter of an hour.


Oh wondrous modesty!


My Lord, Count Dresswell has a Bank Note of Five hundred pound, he can't stay
till the Bank pays, and would part with it for two hundred and fifty ready
Money; will your Lordship meddle with it?


Let him send it to Gervatio, and he shall have his Money.


I am always studying for your good; Lord, your Lady stands like any Statue, I
beg your pardon, I must rouse her* My Dear, Count Andrea dies for you; I swear
^e was in s^ch a condition, I could not forbear bringing this Letter from him.
But may your Laughter be trusted?


With my Life, or what's dearer, my Honour.


Well, I swear he talks so passionately of ye, says such warm extravagant
things, he sets my old Blood a glowing like dying Coals blowed by a strong pair
of Bellows.


What's this long whisper, m^ Lady?


Only a Receipt for your Eyes, my Lord.


Then why may not I hear i^?


There's something so nauseous 'twill set you against using it. Read your
Letter, Child.


What paper is't that ru^els.?


Why, the Receipt, Simpleton: This man is so mistrustful. Well, but Child, I
can^t let this precious Receipt go out of my Hands for a thousand Worlds.


I beg your pardon, Madam, then I'll copy it; nothing shall be neglected by me
that will help my Lord. A Pen and Ink there.


A ^e^ter from her G^llant, and she^s a going to answer it; Hell and Fury! I
can't hear it, nor can have remedy.


Heavens! what's the matter?


My Eyes smart intolerably.


Fretting, fretting; Lord, you must be p^tient. Madam, I beg you^d be as quick
as you can, for I'm in haste.


Your Ladyship sees I'm about it.


Ah the Devil, and I see it too, and be hanged to ye.
When you have done, Gervatio shall read it to me.

Gervatio is my mortal Enemy, what shall I do now, Madam?


Pho, pho, write a scrip of paper good for the sight, put in Eyebright,
White-Rose-water, and whatever comes in your Head.


Here's mighty Consultation about this damned Receipt.


I tell you, my Lord, if you fret thus you'll never see again.


No matter, wo^d I could see what I wish.


What's that?


The conflagration fall upon the Women first, and leave the Men by themselves
an Age longer.


Then they would be the nastiest, most helpless Creatures; ha, ha, ha.


Count Fidelio to wait upon your Honour.


Count Fiddlestick; Why did you not say I was busy?


Well, I vow, my Lord, if you are thus froppish, all your Friends will forsake
ye, a dark Room will be sit for you.


Friendship, there's no such thing, Nature laid the Ground work of Enmity i^
every Mortal; indeed in some 'tis spiced over with Dissimulation; I hate this
man, and yet must speak him fair.


Why do ye hate him?


That's a Secret.


Which I can guess at.

Now my turn's a coming.


Your Lordship's humble Servant; how does your Lordship to day?


Well in health, my Mind is like my Sight, oppressed.


I am sorry for it.


Madam, there's your Receipt with Thanks.


I wish it may do him good.


Yes, yes, I shall feel good on it, methinks my Horns are sprouting already.


Madam, can't you engage my Father in a little Discourse, whilst I talk with --



That young handsome fellow, thou art a Rogue; I'll do it, I warrant ye. Well,
you say you'll have the Bank Bill, my Lord.


I told you so once already.


Lord, you are so short one can't speak to ye, Dresswels Estate too, you may
make a good hole in it if you will.


His Villa is very pretty, upon that he may have what Money he pleases.
Damnation!


What's the matter with the man? I swear you made me start, why you turn your
Head about as if your Eyes were of use.


I shall be discovered strait, was ever punishment like mine?


You are very uneasy, my Lord, can I do any thing for you?


Yes, make me worse, I seldom ever knew a Wife bring Quiet or Content to her
Husband.


This is my usage ever.


I wonder you are not ashamed, for a surly Devil; see, pish, you can't see how
the poor Lady weeps.


Ay, he is blind, and I believe he designs to make me cry my Eyes out to be
like him.


Oh the Devil! at this very minute she can scarce hold laughing.


I only dropped my Fan, Sir.


My Lord Fidelio, how went the Votes in the Senate yesterday concerning the new
Levies?


Fidelio! why he is gone, my Lord, he only gave you the good morrow, and passed
through the Room.


That's well enough, I'll swear.


This is abominable, but I must endure it.


Thou art a dear Angel; but, my Lady, could not you contrive to get my Father
away? this Gentleman hath earnest business with me.


Well, well, I'll try at that too; but which way? Gad, I've got a Bottle of
Orange-water in my Pocket, I'll make the old fool believe 'tis something good
for the Eyes, 'twill do him no hurt, only make 'em smart a little, that perhaps
will induce him to lye down.

My Lo^d, can you forgive me when I own I am the greatest Beast in the World?


I always thought you so.


Here's a Bottle of precious Water, given me by the Duchess, to be applied at
all times, and I quite forgot it, I swear; I have such a respect for (...),
that at every place I am picking up something.


Yes, Gallants for my Wife.

Madam, I'll have none of your old Women's Medicines.


By your leave, my Lord, but you shall, I know the goodness on it.


I tell you I will n^t.


Pray, my Lord, be ruled.


True Wife, though she cares not if I was deaf as well as blind, yet be sure to
be for any thing I am against.


Come, come, don't tell me, I swear you shall wash your Eyes with it.


I swear I won't.


By Heavens you shall, now I've sworn again, I'll see who'll be master.


A Pox take ye; Gervatio to watch 'em, that Woman will be the death of me.


Ha, ha, ha. So Ladies, what do ye think of me now?


Oh, you are the best of Women.


Heavens! yonder's Gervatio a coming, he is our mortal Foe, my Father has sent
him, he had as good have staid himself.


Let me alone, I'll send him away, I'll lay a Wager.


Fidelio, step behind the Screen, whilst my Lady tries her Power, he^l tell my
Father you are with us.


I will, Madam; dear Lady Temptyouth, if thou can effect this, I'll have thy
Statue made in Brass.


Brazen-face! could you think of no other Metal? go, be gone.

Your Servant, good Don Gervatio, you are come luckily to receive my
Instructions, you must immediately carry to my Lord Dresswell Two hundred and
fifty pounds, and take his Bank Note for ^ive hundred.


Your pardon, Madam, my Lord sent me to stay here.


And your pardon too, Sir; I am sure your Lord would not lose such a Bargain;
and he must have the Money presently, or he'll sell it to some-body else.


Indeed I heard your Master say he would have it.


He's a Prodigal, and may give me something out on it: here's no Men, what
should I stay for?


Presently, nay, you must go now, this very Instant, now.


What, does your Ladyship intend to ravish me?


When I thrust thee from me, Fool. Come, good Gervatio, make haste, because I
undertook my Lord's business, and I love to go through stitch with any thing I
meddle with: Be speedy, come, I may do ye a Kindness another day.


I must be gone, there's no disputing with her.


Appear absconding Knight, appear.


Be gad, my Lady Temptyouth, you have charmed me so, you shall have a Kiss with
as much Ardour as if you were but sixteen.


O sweet young Gentleman, Heavens bless him! You are happy, Madam: Come, I must
do more for you yet, Time's precious; my Lady Olivia Bondi, let you and I go
into the Garden, and consult about that Receipt.


You'll find what I have done in it is to your satisfaction. Daughter, your
Servant, I'll keep your Father from sending for you as long as I can.


Madam, I am yours and my Lady Temptyouth's most humble.


I am her Slave.


Well, you are a couple of dear Kittens, bless you both.


My Lord, you have talked of Flames and Fires, and Darts, and the Devil and
all, but how shall I be convinced 'tis not the Hundred thousand pound I am like
to be worth kindles these Fires and Passions?


Why faith, Madam this way; let's marry without your Father's Consent, and he'll
turn us out of doors, then I'll beg for ye, fight for ye, starve for ye, dye
for ye.


Thou art an honest Lad, but I don't like starving, 'twill be apt to take away
all your Appetites, and you won't care for me.


Oh no, my Love to thee is implanted in my Soul, and were my youthful Arms
reduced to very Bones with the worn Skeleton, I should hug thee to my Heart, as
my chiefest Blessing and divinest Treasure.


'Tis pretty to hear a young fellow one loves talk thus, but this wont do, Love
and Plenty crown the circling Year with Pleasure, but where either's wanting,
Content scarce ever appears. Is it impossible to get Gervatio to our party? He
is cunning, and can rule my Father.


I'll try; but, Oh! --


You want a Bribe; come, be not ashamed of your poverty, since your noble
Father wasted his Fortunes in being always in Arms for the defence of his
Country against our common Enemy the Turks, the ungrateful Senate ought to have
took you to their care; but since neglected, accept of this without a blush.


Bound by innumerable Charms, by Obligations unaccountable, when I cease to
love thee, may Heaven and all my Peace of Mind forsake me.


Try Gervatio, tell him that I'll for ever be his Friend.


Madam, I will with joy, and urge whatever eager love can to my Soul suggest.


Madam, my Master raves for you like one mad.


Then I must go.


My Lord Insulls, that Rival; but why name I him? I know your noble Soul
despises him.


Rest in that secure, I loath the man, my Father's power shall force my Death
sooner than Consent: farewell.


'Tis Death to part, though but for a moment; Is there a time, is there that
white day in Fate when I shall call thee Wife? let others scoff, think the
Matrimonial Bonds uneasy, term it

A Hell, a Pit, an endless painful Snare,
The Heaven I covet is to wed my Fair.

WEll, your Importunity and the Count's has prevailed, I'll vow I blush to
think on it, through a back-door into the Garden, the hour that my Husband
sleeps, a young Gentleman; faith, Madam, 'tis very scandalous.


Fiddle f^ddle, scandalous! if you have the Pleasure, much good may do the
World with the Scandal.


You'll stay with me, Madam.


Yes, yes, Madam; I left my poor Girl at home not well on purpose to come.


What kin is that young Lady to you, Madam?


Her Mother was my Friend, to tell ye the truth, she is a Bastard, I have bred
up several, and helped 'em all to good Husband, or Gallants, which is better.


A charitable Lady you are. Hark! I hear a noise, 'tis he, I swear I shall ^sh
to death.


I never heard of any-body died of that Disease; here's the man, look what a
well-built person 'tis.


Ladies, your Servant.


Did you come in (...) observed, my Lord?


Yes, Madam; but ^ve had a little misfortune, I've broke the Key in the Door,
and know not how I shall get out again.


Here's a Fool now is taking care to get out before he is well in, mind your
business, I'll get ye out, I warrant ye.


Pardon me, Madam, 'tis my dear Olivia's Honour I am careful of; for my self,
I'd wade ten thousand Dangers only to touch this beauteous Hand.


Why that's well said, kiss it now, or else you do nothing.


A thousand and a thousand times.


Well, I'll in, and watch the old man's motions.


You won't leave me, Madam.


Indeed but I will, I cannot stay a moment longer.


Shall we waste the time in talk, Olivia? Need I tell thee how much I love
thee? Wast thou not torn from my longing Arms by an inhuman Father, and given
to the withered ones of richer Bondi? Yet though I am denied whole Draughts of
Love, I'll snatch the precious Cordial when the blessed minute gives it, and
devour it eagerly.


Away, my Lord, think whose I am, think of my sacred Vow, I dare not break it.


Your Vows first were made to me, no matter whose you are, this hour is mine,
and shall be spent in richest Love, Love that has so well revenged my Cause,
and as your cruel Lord snatched her from these ^ond Eyes, so Fate has now
deprived him of his own, he only cannot view your unequal Charms, which dart on
every wishing gazer Joy.


If Judgments do hang upon my wretched Lord, shall I by Falsehood wound deeper
than his Fate?


Who ever cries out of pain they neither feel nor apprehend? Think Olivia, my
Olivia, for I will please my self, and call thee mine; think the vast Charity,
the mighty Kindness, that saves my Life, and hurts not Bondi.


The Man is mad, to b^d a Woman think; no, talking Deluder, when we think we
never yield. Now I have thought on the fatal consequence, and resolved from
this minute to grow wise; that I have took the opportunity of my Husband's
blindness, and seen you often, was due to your injurious Wrongs; for witness
those Stars that smiled not on our plighted Faiths, I ever ^ound you constant,
and I loved you for it.


Oh sweet Confession! and if you love me, will you not bless me too? the Argus
Eyes of Jealousy are useless, the watchful Dragon that should guard the golden
Fruit now sleeps for ever.


But Angel, Honour is still awake, that secures my beating Heart, yet I will
fly the charming sounds that are familiar there, but do not follow me, I charge
ye, do not, lest ye meet the everlasting Anger of my Eyes.


Not follow thee, when my Veins are all on fire! yes,

Through every Path of this delightful Grove,
Till my warm Sighs her Honour shall remove,
And fill her panting Breast with yielding Love.

Seignior Gonsalvo sends word, the Oculist is sick, and cannot come till to
morrow.


Hum, -- then my Revenge is lost, for the Girdle comes before that time. Did
not I see Actwell cross the Court just now into the Kitchen?


Yes, Sir.


Call him to me.

That fellow that plays tricks for his Victuals, perhaps, for a Pistol, may do
my business; my Lord knows him not.

Leave us.


What's to be done now? What am I sent for to Master Steward?


Actwell, my Lord, was to have a famous Oculist come to day, and he just sent
word, he cannot; 'twill put my Lord so damnably out of humour, there will be no
enduring it; cannot you pretend to be the Oculist, get a Launcet, look into his
Eyes, talk Nonsense, make him believe you'll do Wonders, but when it comes to
the upshot, I'll enter, and prevent your touching him? You must say you came
from the Duke and Gonsalvo; I'll give thee a Pistol.


I thank you, Sir, I am daily obliged here, I believe I could do it well
enough, only I don't understand those damned cramp words those Quacks have.


O say any thing; half an hour hence come to the Wardrobe, I'll give you an
old-fashion'd Cloak, that you may look like an experienced man full of Years.


I will, Sir; the Film, the Tenders, the Devil, I'll look into a Book of
Anatomy, and get some terms from thence; I will be sure to wait upon you, Sir.
This was happy for poor Actwell.


To fright him, is that all for such an intolerable caring? Gad, if the Devil
was not wanting in a Temptation, I could do him a greater Mischief.


Your Servant, Don Gervatio.


Sir* my Lord's asleep.


'Tis you, not your Lord; I am come to -- but e're I tell my Suit, receive this
Purse, a young Lady's present.


You banter me.


Indeed I don't Gervatio, you can see, though Melito Bondi's blind and might have
seen, I live but for Ariana's sake, the kind Maid meets my Flames, and
generously returns 'em; my wretched Fortune hinders me from following the way
my Love proposes, taking her my only Blessing from her Father; 'tis in your
power, Gervatio, to assist us in making up, if but a moderate fortune, you can
persuade, decoy, do any thing with the old man,


The Temptation I wished for is come.


Are you real?


By all that's good I am, my Master has beat me into a right understanding.


What shall we do with this Lord Insuls, Gervatio?


Why, as he's made of Cork, we will set him a floating, and return him to the rest
of the mercurial Gentlemen in his own Country. Well, my Lord, leave your
Affairs to me, and if I don't bring Ariana to your Arms, and more Bags than
three Men can carry, my Ears shall be at your mercy.


Well, thou art a dear Rogue, and shall command my Fortunes.


My Master rings; trust to me, and be happy.


Your Servant.


Yours.


Where's my Wife and Daughter?


Here, here, my Lord. Well, I believe your Wife is the best of Women, we three
have been all at work in the outer Room, and I'll swear poor Olivia (...) in
upon you twenty times, she is so fond, for all you are a naughty man, and use
her so barbarously.


Well said Telltruth.


Here's a Tale of a Tub indeed, where is she now?


I fancy gone to take a turn in the Garden.


Boy, go call her.


What's the Boy a Fool? 'Tis not convenient for him to go, he shall not go.


Heyday! my Lady Temptyouth, are you to order every thing in my House?


I will order things when Decency requires; look, to end Disputes, here the
good Lady comes.


I heard the Bell had rung, and hastened to my Dear.


My Devil.


Such Answess would make a Woman mad.


You have got a pure colour, Olivia.


Pho, walking apace.

But, my Lady, how shall I get him out, there's no opening that Door, and the
other way lies through this Room?


Why, what's he afraid on, isn't my Lord blind, where is the Fool?


Speak softly, walking at the Door.


Let me come by; Who have we here? my French Taylor has follow'd me hither
about the Girl's Stays; Oh the Impudence of these Country-men! Monsieur, go to
my House again, I'll come home presently.


Pardon a moy, Madam.


Pardon a moy kether, rude ^rute! I'm sure I am not like most Quality, I owe
him nothing.


Count Andrea, my Wife's first Love! Oh, the Garden, the Devil! cursed, cursed
Gervatio.


What mean these starts of Passion? do you want Gervatio?


I want a Halter.


Would you had one then, you're cross enough to deserve it.


Some-body, I'm sure, does.


M^ Lord Insuls is just arrived.


Let me desire all this Company, except my Daughter, to retire, I've made up
the business with my Lord's Father, there wants nothing but a Visit or two,
which formality requires: Come, Mrs. Crooked-rib, will you walk into the next
Room?


I'm ready to wait on you.


Oh, my Lady Temptyouth, now my Plague's a coming.


Have Patience, Child, and I'll send Fidelio to thy aid.


Do ye hear, Mistress, receive this Lord as the man I have unalterably resolved
shall be your Husband.


Yes, Sir.


yes, Sir; what a tone's that in! I think you're but too well, an Estate, a
Title, and an handsome fellow.


Pray add an empty Pate.


Goodlack, Mrs. Flippant, any other Woman would have leapt at him; upon my
Blessing use him as he deserves. Come, my Lady Temptyouth.


As he deserves, that is to be cudgeled. Now I had rather have the Visits of
fifty Gossips from a drunken Christening, than the Plague of this Prince of
Fops: Hang it, I'll bridle my Inclination, let him run on with his Vanity, then
burst my Sides with laughing at him.


This is prodigiously opportune, by the Muses, to find your Ladyship alone,
Powderwell, adjust my Garnature, I beg your Ladyships Pardon, that I do any
thing of this kind before your Ladyship; but there was an uncivil Wind, as I
passed the great Court, has blown me into the very disabilee of the vile Mob.


I can't perceive an Error in your Lordships Dress.


Your Ladyships very humble Servant, by the Muses, I am all in confusion; I beg
your Ladyships Pardon


What a nauseous Fool 'tis.

My Lord, methinks you're very well.


'Tis your goodness, Madam, poison me if I don't look like a Carrman; I look
most abominably, by the Muses: Was your Ladyship never in France, Madam?


No, my Lord.


There a Man will keep his Chamber three days, if his Complexion is out of
order; they are not arrived to that nicety of Perfection here.


'Tis pity your Lordship does not instruct our young Nobility.


I am not sparing of my Advice, Madam; some I find very tractable, there's my
Lord Dresswell has consulted my Judgment in laying out above a brace of
thousand pounds in Clothes, I believe the World, especially the Ladies, will
own 'tis to his advantage.


Yes, and a good help towards spending his Estate, which, I'm informed, will be
gone before he's five and twenty.


But of all the moving lumps of Earth, commend me to the English, those awkward
Imitators, by the Muses, Madam, there's scarce one in ten understands the
Dress, the Dancing, the Singing, those chief parts of a Man of Quality; the
Duce take me if I was not afraid they had infected me, and when I returned into
France, lived a whole month retired, had all my Masters, practised every Coupee
before I durst appear among the Ladies; yet, by the Muses, I know not how long
I shunned my self; methought I had the Brutal Plague upon me. I beg your
Ladyships Pardon for troubling you with a description of the dull Northern
fellows.


Every thing your Lordship says is agreeable, I observe very pretty
Asseveration you have, by the Muses.


Does your Ladyship like it? Indeed I think it sounds better in the mouth of a
Man of Quality than Damn me, Rot me, and such Porter-like Expressions.


Oh, better much, my Lord; I have a shrewd suspicion you that me^tion the Muses
so often have a familiar acquaintance with 'em, and write.


I write like a man of Quality, to please my self.


I dare swear 'twill never please any-body else.


By no means, I beg your Ladiship's Pardon, 'twill sp^il Conversation, I can
send your Ladyship several gilt Quires scribbl'd over, if your Ladiship's a
lover on it; most of what I write is Satyr ^pon ill dressed fell^ws, and then, by
the Muses, the nauseous Subject makes me so sick, I cannot forl^r being
spiteful too, and criticise upon what others write.


That's the fault of all great Wits, methinks their good Nature should balance
their Judgment.


Good Nature, Madam, why that's only the civiler word for a Fool: If your
Ladyship did but see in France how the poor Poets at a new Play sneak, and
would cr^ep into an Augur-hole; when I come in, by the Muses, I have often
wished my my self a Woman, that I might have gone in a Mask, and not frighten
the little Dogs (that write for Bread) out of their Wits.


D^es your Lordship never write Plays?


Yes, often, but I could never get either of the Houses to play one.


What's the reason of that?


Can't y^ur Ladyship guess?


No, I protest.


It will favour too much of Vanity to tell yo^.


Pray, my Lord, you have set me a longing.


I must run the risque of every thing, rather than deny a Lady: Then truly,
Madam, I believe they think, and that wisely, should they once play a Play of
mine no other would ever be received afterwards, and, you know, a man of
Quality can't be their Drudge.


Very true, that is a substantial Reason.


But, Madam, I know not how you hav^ betrayed me into these things, when I
designed to have employed my minutes much more agreeably, in telling your
Ladyship, I adore you to an infinite degree.


His Courtship will be worse than all the rest of his Nonsense, Heaven send me
a deliverance.


Oh ^ie, Madam, this is Blasphemy, they are both Rivals in your Perfections.
But were it what you say, which I positively deny, by the Muses, when I have
the Honour to call you mine, I say, if you did want Instructions, the rectitude
of your Dress should be my care.


Rude Fool, I have no patience.


Madam, you seem uneasy.


It's want of Breeding then.


Gad, I believe so too, for I never saw a Woman in my company so before. Madam,
you I break your Fann.


No matter, 'tis paid for.

I can act the dissembling part no longer.


She's strangely altered, jealous she can't keep me to her self, her Fancy's at
work; there's nothing out of order in my Wig sure.


Oh Fidelio, do something, do any thing to that Animal, and let me be gone, for
I am teased to death.


Gad, I know not what to do but affront him; flatter him I can't, 'tis not in
my Nature.


Every Hair, I protest, is in as perfect Symmetry as my Features, as I was
saying, Madam.


As I was going to say, Sir.


Sir! hey, what rude Brute have we here?


There let 'em be damned both; no, 'tis you, Essence and no Brains, I speak to;
Shadow of a Man, vainer than Woman, emptier than the Plumes thou wear. Thou
thing, dost thou pretend to court that Lady which went out just now?


If the Lady went away, I suppose she kn^w you better than I, and avoided so
rough a fellow.


Insolent!


Something near my Name, though still without my Title.


Well, Sir.


Barbarous!


Did you not receive a Letter signed Fidelio, which told you my Birth was noble
as the first Ven^tians, though my sunk Fortunes were now my ^oe, yet Arian^, that
all-generous Maid, through my dejected Poverty smiled on my const^nt Love, and
gave me Hopes* I begged ye to desist, else let you know, that my Life must first
be had before the glorious Pri^e; read you not that Letter?


Something I do remember of such a Paper, but I saw it was a Man's Hand, and
gave it my Val^t to peruse, and asking him if there was any thing in it to
divert me, he said, No; so I never thought on it more.


Now you have heard the Contents, pray dismiss your numerous Attendants, and
meet or go with me to the Field that lies behind the Lemon-Grove, where this
Dispute shall instantly be ended.


What's the man mad? wo^'d ye have me ^ight in this Wig?


Why not?


Oh Heavens! any thing towards a violent motion would raise such a D^st out
on it, I should be killed in a mist.


Pho, pho, we'll call at my Lodgings, and you shall put on one of mine.


Poison me if ever I heard the like, prithee where dost think I was bred? wear
another man's Wig, when the best Barber in Venice knows, that after he has
altered, amended, reformed, and modelled a new Wig for me half a Year, it is
with much persuasion I try it.


Here's a deal of Nonsense, come, what a pox must we do then, for ^ight you I
am resolved, or kick and post you through the Streets of Venice.


By the Muses, I know not what to say; in France I have a Campaign for the
bloody purpose, 'tis so necessary, yet so becoming, several Mars^als of (...)
have been ready to pull me to pieces for it; there I have also sighting Shoes,
sighting Gloves, sighting Sword, c. and, in ^ine, can in a moment be equipped
(...) Travelling now like a Man of Quality, and to obtain my (...), I le^t my
Warlike Habiliments behind; if you'll have Patience, I'll send post for 'em.


Incorrigible Fool! No, Sir, I give you but till to morrow to a^swer me, and
that you may be sure not to forget the Affront, there's a Reme^brance upon your
Nose,


Well Tarpaulin, Monster, half Fish half Man, I'll be revenged, I will Villain,
there's those shall punish ye; hey my Attendants.


Now this fellow goes directly to my Ariana's Father; sure her Love will
inspire me to counterplot one Rival-fool.

By Force or Wit his Claim he shall decline;
If Heaven is just, the Virgin must be mine.

HUmph, my Father here already! I did not think he had been come into this
Room; he can't see me, and I will steal softly through, he ^han't hear me
neither.


Who's there?


What shall I do now? I'll counterfeit Madge the Dairy-maid's Voice, for if he
knows me, I shall not get from him the Lord knows when.

'Tis I, my Lord, I did not think any of the Gentry had been come into this
Parlour, so I went this way to serve my Pullein; Ise warrant Ise come no more
here.


Oh, dissembling Baggage! Are all blind men served thus? Two such Women as my
Wife and Daughter are enough to make twenty Men mad.


My Lord, some Company from the Duke, and with them the famous Oculist Gonsalvo
spoke of.


So, now my greatest Misfortune is falling upon me. Gervatio, bid him, as he
values his Life, consider what I said to him, and hasten to me. Venice; then,
to have an unskilful Man put me to intolerable pain, perhaps real Blindness,

I know not a Face of those, sure my Friends are afraid to come, the Operation
is so dangerous.


How do ye, my Dear, were you in a passion just now?


I found by Instinct you were near me, and that made me Horn mad.


Humph, I am a Fool to speak to you at all.


You are a Fool, a gross one, because you dissemble poorly; but, blind as I am,
I can see through it.


What does he mean? he can't be jealous of Count Andrea, because he never saw
him.


Peace, Scriech-owl, I am in pain enough already.


I hope he will give you ease, my Lord.

Sir, please to look into my Husband's Eyes.


Fear not, my Lord, putting your self into my Hands, should I, or some of those
Gentlemen that have travelled with me, recount the Wonders I have done, you
would rejoice at your good Fortune in meeting with me. There's the Emperor of
Germany's Aunt, threescore and ten, was led about stone blind twenty Years; I
came, and in a few weeks time made so perfect a Cure, that she has since worked
her Nephew a Point Cravat. I take out Specks where no body else can see 'em.


That will be my Case.


Oh, the sweet Duke of Tuseany! what a Film did I clear his Eyes of! the Good
of Mankind prevailed with me, or else 'twas hard to get from him.


Mr. Doctor, I don't doubt your Skill, but I had rather wait the Will of Heaven
for the restoring my Sight.


By your Leave, my Lord, I am Heaven's Instrument, and here's the Duke's
Command to do my best for you. Gentlemen, draw near, and hold him in the Chair,
while I look in his Eyes.


I shall be murdered here.


Pray, my Dear, be ruled.


Iezabel!


Ay, ay, here it is, a huge Speck, just growing on the Ball of his Sight, the
worst of black Catarachs, but I shall out with him: let's see, how is the other
Eye? Oh Lord, further gone! Well, you may bless your Stars that you met with me
as you did, or else you had never seen in this World again.


I am contented with my present condition, and desire to speak with the Duke
before you meddle with me.


My Lord, your condition is a desperate condition, and the Duke shall see some
of my Art before you speak with him.


Oh the Devil! I shall be ruined, where's this Dog Gervatio?


When I have couched your Eyes, my Lord, you must lye upon your Back for six
weeks, and b^ fed with nothing but a Feather.


Oh!


Why you used him most inhumanly, I fear he'll complain to the old Gentleman.
Heyday, what have we here, my Father in the hands of the Philistins? Stay,
don't you speak till some time after me. What's the matter, Sir?


So, here's another of my Comforts, with her Beggar at her Tail.


Can I serve you, Sir?


Yes, if you I beat that fellow.


How! beat me, that have the Badges of all the Princes of Europe, Asia, Africa,
and America! Come, come, I find my Lord's mad; pray, Gentlemen, help me to bind
him in his Chair.


Murder, murder! then, to tell you the truth, I am not blind.


Nay, then 'tis time for me to appear.


I tell you I am not blind.


Pho, pho, this is only his fear.


Nothing else, you may assure your selves.


Well s^id, M^ther, I think you may be pretty confident on it, for no man that
could have seen would have had Patience to have born what you have acted ^efore
his Face.


Make way there, let me come at my dear-lov'd Master, the sacred Girdle of St.
Silvester, brought by two holy Men, is just arrived; a new unusual Light struck
through the Hall, and I could see as if I had ten pair of Eyes, so light, so
glorious was the place; 'tis lodged i'th'Chappel, whither the Priests desire
you all to repair, and invoke the power of the Saint.


A Pox of those Miracles; do ye hear, if your Saint does you no good, don't send
for me, for, by Beelzebub, I'll not come at ye.


R^ely performed, I'll speak with ye by and by.


Thy Hand, Gervatio, I tremble every Joint of me; thou art a Rogue, but I
forgive thee. Come, Gentlewomen, though I believe your Prayers signify but
little.


Madam, what think you of this miraculous Girdle?


I don't use to have a great Opinion of those things, but we shall see what
Wonders this will do.


I think the whole Story is all a Wonder.


When your Father cried out, he was not blind, I was terribly frighted.


I believe you was, Madam.


I'll try to engage Gervatio farther in our Interest, then we shall know all.


Come, come, if we stay longer, I'm sure we shall be missed.


How is it, my Blossom? Let me see, has not sitting up at the Ball last night
spoiled thy Complexion? No, not a bit: Oh, I could kiss thy pretty Eyes out.


How can your Ladyship tell my Complexion is not spoiled? I have got both my
white and red on, Madam.


Oh, that's nothing Chicken, there's a Vivacity strikes through, and thy pretty
Eyes are as sprightly, as if thou had drank Nectar this Morning. Come, what
Conquests did you make last night? You know there lies my Pleasure, to hear of
your Victories.


There was my Lord Dresswell said a thousand foolish things to me.


Pho, hang him, he's going down the World, he's neither ^it for Husband nor
Cully; think not of him, I charge thee, Lucinda.


I shall never think of any without your Ladyships directions.


That's my good Girl; well, but was there none else?


Yes, there was the Duke's second Son, he only blushed when he came near me,
trembled when he touched my Hand, danced with such concern, that I thought he
would have fallen.


Ha, ha, ha, the Fool's in love, I'll put him down in my Table-book, he may
prove considerable.


As for the rest, some swore they hated me, others I was not pretty; so through a
Medley of Confusion every one endeavoured to express their Admiration.


Thou art a dear, dear Charmer; well, I swear I love thee better than any of
the little Creatures I ever brought up before.


I thank my best Mother.


Nay, thy own Mother was a pure good Woman, only her barbarous Friends turned
her out of Doors for having such a pretty Rogue as thee: I kept her, poor Lady,
till she died.


My Lady Olivia Bondi sends to tell your Honour, That St. (...) wonderful
Girdle has restored my Lord Bondi's Sight, for which, at present, they are
paying their Devotions this Afternoon, the Duke's Music, Balls, and all
Divertisements (...) will af^ord, (...) my Lord Bondi's House; the Ladies
desire your Honour's company, and the (...) Lucinda's.


We^l wait upon them, our Service to the Ladies. Olivia, her (...) Husband's
seeing will be but bad for her and Count Andrea: ^ang't, 'tis setting our
Inventions a little more upon the stretch, and we shall outwit him still. Ha! I
have a Thought come into my Head for thy advantage, Lucinda. Here, (...), bring
my Girl's best Head, and all her Jewels. Oh, Lucinda, if thou can play one
part to a Masterpiece, I don't doubt making thy Fortunes for ever.

Ah, Tifflewell now show thy utmost Art, and make thy Mistress charming as an
Ang^.


I warrant ye, Madam, such a piece of Youth and Beauty to work upon, and fine
Clothes, let me alone to make an Angel of her.


If thou can but humour it.


Give me Instructions, Madam, I am not accounted backward.


No, no, you're a dear forward Girl as Heart can wish; this would oblige our
Friends* prove an everlasting Provision for your self, and ravish me with Joy.


But yet you won't tell me what it is.


Dear Tifflewell, put another Jewel here.


Pray your Honour let me have my own Fancy first.


Lucinda shall sing, and Lucinda shall dance, and if they two, both in
perfection, won't charm him, the Devil's in it.


Sing and dance, is that all? I have done that often enough to no purpose
already.


Yes, yes, thou shalt do more than that, my dear Chicken, can't you put on a
world of Affectation?


With all the ^ase in the World: Alas, Madam, It was born with me, and I have
as much ado in some measure to overcome it, as I have my Inclinations towards
the eating green Fruit.


Affectation is a mighty Art, my Dear, and those pretty Eyes must be managed a
thousand several ways, severe, languishant, ogling, darting their Beams, cast
around, and i^ they chance to meet, a Lover's thrown with wondrous haste and
modesty into your snowy Bosom.


My Eyes, dear Mother, ever were at my Command, but never let Fools in them
read my Heart: Thus I have looked upon the man I scorned, thus on him I would
not have believe my Love impossible, though hard, to gain; kind and coming Looks
I seldom use, I'm not arrived at that Age yet.


Dear Girl, your Aptness prevents the Care I would have undergone in your
Directions, but you must be very sure to rail, commend neither Man nor Woman,
^ither in their Persons or Dress, except my Lord, to whom you are all the while
addressing.


I am glad 'tis a Lord, for I hate to take pains about a fellow that has no
Title.


He has not only a Title, but an Estate, and every thing I could wish for thee;
Are you quite ready?


Yes, Madam, do I look killing?


Like a Cherubim; come along.


Oh my Olivia! Bondi's Sight restored deprives me ever of the Light of those
dear Eyes: I never believed those Miracles told by canting Priests, now Heaven,
to punish my Incredulity, has sent one that robs me of all my Bliss, and
nothing but the crowd, the noise of this wondrous Girdle brought, could have
gained my Admittance now.


My Lady Temptyouth is our Friend; beside, these warm Desires will soon grow
cool, and then you will be glad of an Excuse.


Never, Olivia, never; my Youth, my Life, my Fortunes, all are dedicated to
thee.








Oh Heavens, my Husband! what shall we do?


I'll get into the Closet.


Alas, he has the Master-key.





Good my Lord, under my Toilet, quick, quick.


And what would you see now, your good Lady all alone, returning Heaven Thanks,
I dare swear, for the wondrous Blessing you have received.


I'm sure I saw the glimpse of a Man follow her to her Chamber.


A Man with me!


Pho, Child, 'tis Jealousy, he takes thy Shadow for a Man.


I'll look into this Closet, but not enter it, lest you juggle him from under
your Petticoats.


Come, is your Maggot over? will you down into the Dining-room, hear the
practice of Music, and my Lucinda shall give you a Dance.


Dancing be damned, I'd as live see a Monkey leap from Tree to Tree.


Not even his Eyes again will put this man into a good Humour. Well, I hope we
have a noble Entertainment, according to the old Proverb, a Miser's Feast is
always the best; will ye go down, or no?


No, I'll dine here.


Seem willing, madam, 'tis the only way to prevent him.


With all my Heart, for I hate much Company: Here Diego, and your fellow, carry
this Table to the Dressing-room-door, a-top of the back Stairs, there Sylvia
can thrust it in, and bring the Side-board hither.


Ha^e a care you drop nothing.


^.


You are wondrous forward, perhaps I won't dine here when all is d^ne.


^ the old Gentleman does not know his own mind.


^, are you settled in yours?


If I am not, my Lord, my Years excuse it.


One of your bringing up, my Lady Temptyouth, I suppose, because she is so
brisk.


I'm not ashamed to own her; yes, 'tis my dear Girl.


An^t ^lease your Honour, my Lord I^sulls desi^es to speak with you, on very
earnest business.


I believe I may dare venture to go, for my Gipsi^ would never have been
so-willing I should have di^ed here, if the Coast had not been clear.


So, he is gone, I hope the Count is safe.


Yes, yes, I saw him slip down the back-stairs as soon as ever the Men were out
of sight.


How do you do, pretty Lady, I scarce dare speak to you before my Husband, he's
so peevish.


Peevish, indeed I never saw such a cross old man in all my life.


What would you do, my Dear, if your pretty Youth was confined to such an one.


O, I'd quickly send him to Heaven in a String; I'd have half a score Gallants;
Madam, if I did not ^eaze him to that degree, that in a months time he went to
sleep with his Fathers, hang me for a Fool.


Thou art a Mad-cap.


Let us go down, for I have a Design upon that Lord Insulls, which I'll tell
you as we walk.


I am ready to wait upon you.


Was ever such Impudence, such Disobedience practised under one's own Roof?
Mercy on me! what will this World come to? A wanton Wife and an undutiful
Daughter! the Plagues of Egypt were mere ^lea-bitings to them.


Nay, I thought your Lordship was not privy to the Aff^ont, because I knew your
Lordship first proposed the Match; indeed never man of Quality was so abused; I
would have fought the fellow, but that I feared, by his Carriage, he was a
Scoundrel, and would disgrace my Sword.


Oh, 'tis a vile Wretch, but I'll be so revenged on him. My Lord, if yet you
think my Daughter worthy, the Ball just ended, a Priest shall make her yours
for ever, though indeed she ought to expect your Scorn and Hatred.


My Education taught me never to bear Displeasure against the fair Ladies, I
shall wait with much Impatience and Joy till you summon me to the fair one.


My Lord, I beg you would go to the Company, whilst I send for my Daughter, and
give her a Lesson, for I fear she was at the bottom on it. Call Ariana.


I will leave ye pray be not too severe upon the Lady, I have a great respect
for her; but for that rude fellow, by the Muses, he deserves kicking and
pumping.


Did you send for me, Sir?


Yes, Mrs. Manybetters, and none worse; how you are tricked up! the Dancing,
not your Father's Sight restored, is your Joy: Are not you a Cockatrice? dare
you look me in the Face after what you have done?


Done, my Lord!


Yes done, Minx, you and your beggarly Bravo abuse a man of Quality, Fortune
and Honour.


Has the Baby been to tell its Tale then?


Do ye make a Jest on it Huswife? Hear what I say, and mark it: This night thou
shalt be my Lord Insulls Wife, or else, by Heaven, I'll turn thee loose into
the wide Streets of Venice, stripped of all Means, all Comforts, there to get thy
Bread amongst thy fellow-prostitutes, but never own thee for my Daughter more.


These are cruel sounds, they strike through my soul, and dead my sense. Oh,
Sir, hear your only Child; you used to say you loved me, if I have lost that
Blessing, let Compassion plead, heap on me all punishments, spare me but in
this; let not my Youth be condemned to what I loath, to such a Fool, a
Blockhead, Coward.


Rebellious Witch!


Consider, Sir, you force me on the Road to Hell, for my strong Aversion needs
must lead me on to Murders, Adulteries, or such horrid Crimes that will surely
plunge me there.


Let go, stand off, for as I have a Soul, this night you are married, or ten
thousand real Mischiefs shall befall thee.


Mischief is already on me, lasting Mischief, fixed for Life, a Hus^and whom I
shall ever hate and all the World will still despise, all my ch^erful hours are
for ever fled, Fate has not one in store: Then let their Revels shake the House
with noisy pleasure, fixed on this wretched Earth, so stupefied I'll grow,
till I can work my melancholy Thought to fancy I'm a piece on it.


What's here, my charming young Mistress on the Ground, she that used to
enliven all the World, now, when there reigns a general Joy, sunk in Sorrow?
^ise, d^ar Madam, rise.


Neve^.


I^ll try that; come Madam, what's the cause of this dejection? did I not
receive from you a noble Present? Come, pray believe me yours, and tell me
what's the matter.


If I durst trust thee, but 'tis no Secret; my Father has sworn I this night
shall wed Insulls.


And you had rather have Fidlio.


Rather, oh, there is no comparison


Smile then and you shall; but, (...), I'll do nothing without you are merry.


Were I rid of the fear of Insulls, I could leap over the Moon.


Let me see, does not this Lord Insulls pretend to Poetry?


Most intolerably.


And is he not vain upon it?


As all Wou'd-^e-wits are.


Then, dear madam, let your Troubles end, and be as brisk as your sweet natural
Temper incites, I warrant your Lumber of a Lover safe enough from disturbing
you when the Ball's done.


O that I could believe thee*


You'll believe me when by my sole contrivance the Parson hath conjured you
between a pair of sheets in Fidelio's Arms; ah! methinks I see you laid on the
delicious Scene.


Go, you are a Talker: Then I am to know nothing of your plot.


Not till you hear of the success to the Company, sweet madam. Yonder the
Hall's as full as it can hold, the Musick's a thrumming, the Gallants are
ogling, my Lady Temptyouth as busy as a Be, there wants nothing but you to
crown the Assembly.


I'm gone; remember, if you ^ail my Heart's broke.


Let your Heart be as light as your Heels, and fear nothing, fair Lady.


Take this and be careful.


I would not be old Bondi's faithful Fool again for the World, there's some
delig^ a Gus^o in serving these young generous souls: Well, Brains, if ever
you'd do (...) service, let it be now, help me to ba^lk this foolish Lord.

Fix soft Ariana where her Wishes tend,
So she secures a Lover, I a Friend.

COunt Andrea is your Guest, I suppose.


My Lord!


No, he is my Guest, sure for the many Estates I have helped you to for half
the worth of 'em, you may allow me to bring one Friend.


Your Ladiship's always my Friend, I thank you. Come, why don't this Dancing
go on? if your Heels would wag, 'tis to be hoped you would be tired and have
done once.


Versailles, it would be impertinence to the highest degree to ask if your
Ladyship was not bred in France.


Oh, the Paradise of the World bred there, my Lord: Yes, my Mother was so nice
she had me nursed in France; I warrant she would not a let me sucked any other
than French Milk for a Principality.


A witty Woman, by the Muses, and charmingly pretty: Then your Ladyship
understands the French Freedom and Gallantry? According to those Rules, pray
Madam, number me amongst your humblest Servants.


With all my Heart, there's a Favour to distinguish you.


Well done, my Lucinda, she's at him, i'faith, my Maidenhead to an Eggshell
he's her own. To Ol^v.) This is dull doings, Madam, I wish I could part the
Company, send those Gravities to top their Noses, and get our selves a little
freedom.


I wish you could, Madam; poor Ariana has not spoke a word since she came into
the Hall.


I'll try: Well, now I vote that the Gentlemen and Ladies that have danced
retire into the drawing Room, and recruit with Sweetmeats and cool Wines, and
the old Do^s take up their Smoaking-room, and drink lusty Chiaux, Bagrag, and
the warmest Wines my Lord Melito Bondi's Cellar affords.


Spoke like an Oracle.


Spoke like a Devil, putting all the young ones together; but this is the last
day of her Reign, for I'll forbid her my House, though I lose Ten thousand Crowns
a Year by it.


I like the motion well, for, by my holy Dame, I am tired with seeing nothing
but hip hop, hip hop.


Come, come, you as becomes you, your Age and Quality first.


The Devil take thee.


Now pair all, and follow your Leader.


I'^e let A^iana see I stomach the Affront.


Madam, may I crave the honour of your Hand?


Yes Gallant, 'tis at your service.


Did you see my Fool strut by with Lucinda? Now he is vain enough to fancy I
will be jealous.


He is not worth a Thought.


Alas, you know not how formidable he is; my Father, with the dismallest Threats
that Man could utter, has sworn to marry me to him this very Evening, as soon
as the Ball is over.


Hell and Furies! I^ll cut his Throat immediately.


Hold, hold, Gervatio with much assurance promised me a deliverance, have a
little patience, such desperate Attempts will ruin all.


Dost think I'll stand by and see thee lost?


Nor will I tamely yield; but now let's be calm, and the Company, methinks I
have great Faith in Gervatio's Promises.


And I have Faith in thee; but, oh, if power should overcome madness, Despair
and Death would seize me.


Where are you, Chickens? Come hither, or spite of me, the old man will ro^ze
ye.


We come.


Mr. Stretchwell, and Mr. Heardouble, you understand your business.


Ay sure, or else we spent our Lives to very little purpose.


Well, here I plant ye, and bring the Lord Insu^ls; if he owns he made the
Libel called The present state of Venice, you know what you have to do.


Yes, yes, truss him up for Treason.


Hurry him away to Prison without Bail or Mainprise.


Right, behind those Hangings conceal your selves, I'll bring him as soon as
possible.


His business shall be done I'll warrant thee, old boy.


And you rewarded.


Well, Brother, we are a great Prop to this State, Verice had long ago
mouldered into its watery Foundation, if we Informers had not supported it from
ten thousand Treasons.


Dost think think this Lord Insulls is guilty or not?


What matter is't? he's rich* and we will fleece him.


I hate a poor Dog, that pretends to be in a Plot.


Impudent Varlets! when they have not Money enough to pay their Fees, they'll
undertake to turn Governments upside down.


Hark, I hear a noise, to our Posts.


My Lord, I humbly ask your pardon, for drawing your Honour from the bright
Assembly, but I understand you are in a fair way to be Heir-apparent to all my
old Master's Wealth: I have been a long and faithful Servant here, and may
prevail with old Bondi to drop more Bags than he designed.


Honest Gervatio, thou art kind, but the young Lady uses me most scurvily, by
the Muses, she must expect, wh^m I am her Husband, that in return of her scorn
I treat her with Indifference.


She deserves it; good Heavens! slight such Worth as yours!


Nay, by the Muses, Gervatio, without boasting, I may say, all the Courts in
Christendom have admir^d my Person, Parts, and Dress.


No doubt, my Lord, your Lordship has such an Oath, sets my mouth all on Water,
by the Muses: Oh, I had a devilish smatt'ring at 'em in my Youth, but hard Fate
threw me upon Units, Tens, and the Gargon of Accounts, when I longed to have
been rhyming: I am sure your Honour writes, O that I could be so happy to
peruse some of your incomparable lines.


What I write is all light Satyr, if your Fancy's that way, I can send you
Reams of covered Paper.


Is it so light Satyr, ^'^aith? ha, ha, ha, nay, then I smell a Rat indeed,
they sed 'twas a ^.


What ^


As i^ you did not know, that exquisite, elaborate, most ingenious piece, (...)
7. ^ of (...), wherein the Satyr is so winning, so instructive, so reforming,
as I may say, that the Duke is pleas^d with it to that degree, he has promised
his ^air Daughter's Pict^e-set round with Diamonds, in a Gold Chain that g^s
fifteen times about the Neck to the Man that will own himself the Author.


He, he, he, does that Trifle make such a noise? Alas, I have writ Five hundred
better than that.


Impossible, b^t we owe this to your Lords^p, I'm sure.


Yes, the Lines are mine, but I ca^e not to expose my Name, I want not the
Duke's Present, Gervatio


No, my Lord!


What's the matter, Gentlemen?


Hold your Tongue, Sirrah, make no noise nor resistance, if you do, one of
these sends your Poetical ^ains into the Air immediately.


Here's a Rogue for ye, Brother! he ^ed he had made Five thousand Libels on the
Duke and Senate.


Ay, ay, he shall have his Reward, a Halter instead of a Gold Chain.


Why Gentlemen, to tell you the truth, I did not write the Verses.


Every Malefactor can deny his Crime.


Oh (...)! what's the meaning of all this?


Heavens! my Lord, I am as much amazed as you, these fellows have betrayed me,
they told me the Poetry was adored by the Duke and Senate, and I should have a
swinging Reward if I could discover the Author; my business was always to ^et
Money, my Lord, and I hoped to have done my self a Kindness and your Lord^hip an
Honour.


Yes, you have honoured me, I t^ank ye, put me in a fair way to be hanged: Good
Ge^tlemen, remove these horrid Instruments of Death a little further, they put
my P^ruke quite out of the curl* and my Body in such violent sweats, I ^han't
be able to come near the Ladies again this ^ortnight.


Oh, there's no Ladies where you are a going, come along.


Fe^r not, my Lord, I'll get you Bail.


How, going to whisper the Prisoner! here's anoth^r Fiddle will make ye dance
farther off.


O ^ord, O ^ord, I never could endure the Nose of Beelzebub ag^st my pre^ious
pe^son.


Come, let's have him the back way, le^t he alarm the (...).


Shall we put him in the D^ngeon?


Good Gentlemen, consider my Ball-clothes.


Here's a Fellow taking care of his Clothes when his Life is in danger.


Well, Brother, according as his pockets are lined, he shall be used.


Ay, ay, away with him.


Pray leave haling me, I'll go quietly.


You'd best.


Madam, shall not we beg a Song of the charming Lucinda?


Not till my Lord comes, I have told ye my design.


And I like it extremely.


Heavens! look Fidelio, what^s that stalks behind my Father, a Priest?


The Devil it is.


I fear there's mischief's toward.


As the day has passed in Joy, so, I hope, 'twill have a joyful end, for I
design before all these Witnesses to marry my Daughter, the young Lord Insulls
is the Bridegroom, his Father and I long ago concluded it, only my Infirmity
deferred the matter.


Ay, let's have a Wedding, the thoughts on it makes my old Blood dance.


Rather the strong Wines work upon your weak Brain.


The Devil! all my design's ruined, and poor Ariana's Heart broke: fiddle
faddle, my Lord Bondi, this is nothing but thriftiness, now the Fragments of
the days Revels must serve for the Wedding Supper; no, no, old Gentleman, don't
mistake your self, we^l have another Festival for dear Ariana'^ Marriage.


My Lady, you have a large rule in my Family, but in this Affair, upon my word,
I'll be Master.


My Veins with kindling Ruge are all on fire, what shall I do, my Ariana? I'll
meet and stab him as he enters.


Have a moments patience, he appears not yet.


What, must I lose my new Servant, Madam?


So it seems, Child.


A welladay! but hanged, while Fifteen has not overtaken me, I^ll never spoil
my Face with grieving.


If I have any power, my Lord, I beg you would oblige your weeping Daughter, in
delaying this unwelcome Match.


Rest assured you have no power with me, and all you say against it hastens my
Resolves; use your Prayers and your Commands where you bestow your Charms, I am
cold, as I have ever found your Love.


This should be Jealousy, but what can give him Ground for a Suspicion?


O, where's my Lord?


Here; what's the matter?


Oh, my Lord, the worst News, the saddest Accident! Oh! my Heart will break for
the poor Gentleman.


What Gentleman? explain thy self.


Gentleman did I say? no, no, not a Gentleman neither, 'tis a Lord.


My Heart bodes Comfort.


Torture me no longer, dear Gervatio.


That hopeful Sprig, oh! I can't get it out, my Lord Insulls.


What of him?


Alas, the overflowings of his Wit has undone him: In short, my Lord, some base
Trappanners, Informers, of which this State swarms, sent for him from this
Company, and got out of him, that he made that cursed Libel, The present state
of Venice, which has so exasperated the Duke and Senate, that they have
resolved to hang the Author.


Hang him!


Ay, hang him, Sir; my Bowels earn for the young Bud of Quality.


What a Devil had he to do with Poetry, that Leprosy of lazy Minds, that Weed
of Nature? Had he not Estate and Title? must he covet the Begger's Entail,
Parnass^s Lands, and be damned to him? Plague consume all the rhyming Fops in
Christendom.


What, your worthy Son-in-law!


He makes me mad.


I could worship thee, Gervatio.


I must be rude, and desire the Company to break up, whilst I go and try my
Interest to release this jingling Coxcomb.


My Lord, we are all your humble Servants.


You two go round, and you will find the back-door of the Garden open; when my
Master's gone I'l^ call ye.


We will be ready.





So Ladies, how do ye like my Contrivance? Bondi may stir, but the duce a bit
will he get his Lordship released to night, and to morrow I have another Plot,
which I hope makes my fair Mistress happy.


Thou art my better Angel.


But my Ariana, won't you give me leave to free my Lord, provided I take care
he never troubles you with love again?


Ay, get him into the Bonds of Matrimony with Lucinda, and free him from his
Prison as soon as you please.


Methinks 'tis pity the pretty Creature should be condemned to such a Fop.


Oh, a rich Fool was alwa^es my desire, that I might show my Discretion in
managing him and his Estate.


Nay, if you are pleased I am.


Come Child, we have many Irons in the Fire, there's not a Senator but I have
done a good turn for some time or other, and therefore I fear not succeeding.


Your Servant, Ladies.


Yours.


Come in Gentlemen, the old Enemy's gone.


Let me embrace thee, thou Soul of Ingenuity and Goodness.


Indeed Gervatio has proved just contrary to my Expectations; I hope as he has
freed Ariana, if I crave his Friendship, I may obtain it; I am sure you know
what moves my Lord to use me so intolerably, that I can never meet a civil
Answer.


I own I know the Cause, but dare not tell ye, lest it startle ye too much.


No, Gervatio, prithee speak, for his brutal Carriage is past enduring.


Then, Madam, my Master was never blind, pretended it, only to avoid the being
President of Dalmatia; consider if you have urged him.


Not blind!


Then I am lost.


Look up, Olivia, Danger shall never reach thee whilst this Arm can wield a
Sword.


Madam, your Apprehension is too timorous.


All here are your ready Friends.


Oh, 'tis impossible, my Ruin is inevitable, the innocent Freedom I have given
this young Lord, my Virgin Love, before my Husband Bondi, will be punished with
nothing less than Death, Italy produces no milder Vengeance for suspected
Wives.


Harbour not a Thought so terrible; rather than be punished guiltless, fly.
Venice with your faithful Slave; to break forced Vows Heaven can never hold a
Crime, my Life, and whatsoever I am Master of, is yours.


Alas, how wild you talk! five noble Brothers adorn my Family, who would p^sue
my guilty Steps, and piecemeal on this wretched Body hew out my Honours Stains
and their Revenge.


Faith Invention pours on me like a Deluge, for your Protection and endless
Favour, I'll undertake to bring ye both off.


Impossible.


W^at a mad Risque o^r Sex runs when we plunge in real Guilt! what Pangs, what
Agonies, what Terrors are the fatal Consequence!


Hast thou Re^son, Gervatio, for what thou say?


I'll serve you all, and, I do not doubt, successfully.


Which Room is the Family in?


I tremble, there's my Lord.


Away, Gentlemen, into the Garden again, stay in the Grotto, I'll be with ye
presently, and tell ye all my Designs.


We'll wait you there.


Good Ladies, to your Closets, I would talk with my Lord alone.


Come, dear Ariana, thou art happy in prospect of thy love; if mine had been my
Lot, these Mischiefs never had happened.


I wish your mind at peace.


God I have undertook Hercules's labour, but the greator the Undertaking, the
greater the Glory in the performance.


Oh Gervatio! there's no freeing of this Fool to night; where's my damned, Wife
and Daughter?


Gone to undress themselves.


There's no body with 'em.


None but their Utensils, their Chambermaids.


Gervatio, I hitherto have trusted thee with all the Secrets of my life, shrink
not back when I disclose the greatest: My Wife has certainly abused me, her
Relations are so numerous, that to expose her I should run ten thousand hazards
^herefore I have resolved silently and secretly to take her off by Poison, to
stop my Shame and her future Sins.


If it be so, my assistance shall not be wanting, but, Sir, the Case is weighty,
the Breath of life blown out, Repentance cannot kindle the dead Coal again.


That's true, but I am by all her wanton Carriages convinced, besides a
thousand Circumstances, she's guilty.


Well, more to confirm your Suspicion, I must confess I heard 'em appoint a
meeting in the Garden about some three hours hence.


Oh, damn 'em, damn 'em.


From the Balcony we may overhear and discovet new Cause for your Revenge, or
else find her innocent.


Innocence! 'tis not in the Sex, Eve lost it when she lewdly listened to the
Fiend, and entailed her guilt on her Posterity.


Have patience, and your own Ears shall either acquit or condemn her.


Nay, my Eyes have seen enough already. Well, Gervatio, I trust to thee, and
will be ready when you call me.


Your Lordship ever found me faithful.

If I do deliver these Ladies from all their Fears, I ought at least to be
esteemed a Knight Errant, and have it inscribed upon my Tomb; Here lies a most
puissant Hero: ^ox on it, what will rhyme to Hero? No, it shall be thus: The
generous Gervatio here lies dead,
To whom for Aid distressed Damsels fled.
Ay, ay, that will do: Now for my Garden-Sparks, my Instruments are Lords.


THey are not come yet, but I'm sure they will, for my Tormentor seemed very
uneasy, and full of ^hought.


See, my Lord, they both appear.


Contagion seize 'em, Mildews and Blasts destroy her Beauty, stamp her Face as
deformed as her Soul, for, a Plague on her, she's too handsome now.


^ay, my Lord, if you are thus passionate, they'll hear us.


Hist, I have done.


Madam, I come to wait on your Commands, which, how strange soever, blindly I
obey.


A Pox of your Complaisance.


Pray, my Lord, be silent.


I am, I am.


When your Duty to your Father took you from my Wishes, and gave you to the
noble Bed of Bondi, great were my pangs; I struggled hard to conquer Love's
fierce Fires, and turn 'em into Friendship's lambent Flames; strong was the
Contest, yet I overcame, and now can boast a Friendship to you and your Lord.


Pho, this is Dissimulation.


Hear 'em out, I am sure they see not us.


I knew your Friendship pure, else I had never trusted you so far; but my
Designs are ended now, and my Lord grows very peevish; lest your coming should
offend him, I beg you would forbear the House, or any Opportunity of speaking
to me.


Madam, I will even in this fulfil your pleasure; but you was pleased to
promise, when you made that odd Request, I would in appearance seem your
Gallant, that you would some time tell me the reason of that innocent Dece^t.


How's this?


I did, but 'tis a Secret, and I must have your Word and Honour, that neithe^
Friend nor Fo^ extort it from you.


I give you both, nay, upon my Soul I will not utter it.


Then know my Lord was never blind.


How!


Ha, Gervatio?


Sure she's a Witch.


What is hid from loving Eyes? though all the world believed it, I perceived the
contrary, and often urged my Husband, though not plainly contradicting what he
said, yet round about he might perceive I guessed at it.


Did my Lady ever hint she thought you not blind?


At first she was damned inquisitive, which I still thought she did for her
security in sinning.


It sounds like truth: But hush, they go on.


Methought I had no Comfort of my Life, whilst my dear Lord but seemed under
that Affliction; besides, Heaven knows, I feared a real Judgment might befall
him for his Counterfeiting, and so I plaid a thousand tricks with you, thinking
his Love so strong that he could not bear to see, and pretend not to see
another invade his right in me? This is the story, and this was my design, but
my Lord by his own Contrivance now is himself again, and I renew my request to
see you no more, for considering past Actions, your sight makes my Husband
uneasy. When I find him in a good humour I will acquaint him with my guiltless
project.


And if he is not displeased I may hope to continue in the Enjoyment of your
Friendship.


Of that hereafter, but my Lady Temptyouth I resolve to avoid, because she knew
not the bottom of my design, yet was so free to forward it, my Lord your
Servant.


Madam, yours; on this fair hand let me wish you everlasting Happiness.


Remember 'tis your parting kiss, and this indeed your eternal leave.


My Love must mitigate that rigour, besides, our Friend Gervatio has Employment
for me in the House.


By all my dangers (which I hope are past) I will no more endeavour or consent
to see you. Farewell.


What think ye now, my Lord?


Faith, I know not what to think, were I fare you have not betrayed me, there
may be some truth in it.


Who I, my Lord? Upon my life not I, why your Lordship knows I never could
abide the Ladies; how many times have I made you angry with 'em. I'm sure they
hate me.


That's true; if she forbears his sight I'll forbear my revenge, though the
Letters and the Ki^es grumble in my Gizard still.


Pshaw, only to carry on her Plot.


Well, I'll believe it if I can, 'twill be most for my ease I am sure -- Come
let's in, I'll write to the Duke for this Scribbling Lord, though in troth I am
almost ashamed to appear in it.


Go thy ways Don (...); my drubbing will be revenged at last.


You see my Authority.


Yes, and obey it; the Prisoner is at your Service.


My Lord, your Lordship's humble Servant.


O Heavens! your Ladyship and that brightness see me in this vile Condition, I
don't believe I have a Grain of Powder in my Wig, the Villains that took away
my Papers took my Mirror also, because 'twas set in Gold, now I could wish my
self in the darkest Dungeon rather than appear such a Brute before those
resistless Eyes.


Alas, poor Girl, I am sure she never did any thing of this Nature before, but
she received such a vast respect for your Lordship; your behaviour carries in
it a shining Complaisance so much above our dull Venetians, that no wonder it
touched a tender Breast.


I would serve the French if I met with any of the Nation in the Person of a
Labourer or Beggar, and sure when a Cavalier is in Affliction, who may justly
beast of all the Accomplishments of mankind, 'twill excuse my breaking the
strict rules of Decency in giving him a visit.


I am Transported, such sounds are only fit for Angels to hear, Mortals cannot
bear the Joy.


Nay, she has brought you a Present too, and I hope a welcome one, your
Liberty.


No, the Lady has brought me everlasting Chains, by the Muses (Confound the
Oath, I cannot leave it) I'd not leave 'em to be free as Air.


What means your Lordship, I am sure I begged your Freedom heartily of my
Uncle, the Duke.


But your Eyes teach my Heart the pleasing Bondage, which I desire to Triumph
for ever. G^d I say abundance of fine things.


Your Lordship forgets, 'tis not Ariana you are talking to.


No, if it were, every word should stick in my Throat, she a dull Insensible,
no Mean, no Air, no Song, no Dance, nothing agreeable.


Oh, the abominable Fool! how he describes the prettiest Creature Nature ever
made.


Your Lordship cannot be in earnest.


By the Inferna^s, (Ay, they'll do me less harm than the Muses) But vast
Fortune if I had married her, which now I never will: 'Twas for her that my
Equipage might have been the finest at the Court of Versailles: My Coach drawn
by six Barbs, six Blacks to every Horse. The poor Creature my Wife I'd have
confined to the Country with a pair of broken winded Jades and an old Fashioned
Chariot.


I don't like your usage of a Wife my Lord.


She has used me ill and deserves such a return, but if your Ladyship would
think me worthy, Heavens! you should shine the Glory of Versailles; The Barbs
be yours, and I the humblest of your Slaves.

How fine is that, the Prison sure inspires me.


Nay, I can't excuse Ariana, for I doubt she had more than a Finger in this
troublesome business, but my Girl's too young to think of Love, though I wish she
had never seen your Lordship; I know not what time may produce.


Pardon my Presumption; I had not broke upon the Lady so abruptly, but I am
pressed upon by Fate, my Father to morrow arrives at Venice expecting me to marry
Ariana? Could I have hoped such Happiness as to have changed my Destiny and
fixed here where all my wishes tend, my Father might storm, but it would not be
in his power to alter it.


Oh Heavens, such a concern ventured on so suddenly would kill me with the
Apprehension.


Come, let's leave this detested place and go to my House, there we'll consider
further.


I wait on you, Madam, with unexpressible thanks for this Favour: I hope I
shall hear of my people, that I may once again appear like a Man of Quality;
not like a Rat shut up in a hole. I profess I am scarce fit to touch that fair
hand.


But indeed you are, my Lord! Lucinda.


My Mothers Commands, my Lord.


This to the Duke, this to Gonsalvo, I hope they'll consider my Lord's a Fool,
and release him: He make the Libel! I found by his discourse he made it no more
than I did.


Oh, Sir!


O^, my dear!


What's the matter with the Women?


Alas, do ye hear no noise in the House?


Noise, what noise, not I.


Why all your Movables are seizing: Two Priests with Officers walk over the
House, nor will they be controlled, proudly they march along and break open all
the Locks, set down your Plate, your rich Hangings, and every thing of Value,
my dressing Plate that was my Maiden Treasure, that's down too; Oh, oh.


Nay, as much as my ^old Bodkins, and all the Jewels I have on: I shall be a
(...) Luss now! Oh, Heavens.


Ye amaze me, what can be the meaning on it?


They' ll tell no body, but seem to have great Authority.


I am at my Wits end. Where's G^rvatio?


Here comes the sorrowful Man.


Oh, that ever I should live to see this day! such Havoc, such Waste there
will be of my dear Masters Goods, would I were dead out of the sight on it.


Why Gervatio, is all the World mad? What is the reason of all this Outrage?


I know not, but your Enemies are at my heels, I suppose they'll acquaint you:
Here they come, my Lord.


Has Heaven nothing but Afflictions for this aged Head! Reverend Fathers what
have I done to deserve such Usage.


Offi^ers give us the Inventory and retire: We will yet, respecting his grey
Hairs, conceal his sh^me and crimes as much as possible: Brother will you lay
the Enormous fa^it open before his hardened Soul.


Your Eloquence will do it more ^eelingly Brother.


Excuse me, indeed your Capacity is largest.


Pardo^ me, I am weak, very weak, compared to you.


Ah, the Devil take ye both and your Ci^ilities.


Then according to my poor Ability.


How I am tortured.


Melito Bondi, Thou stand accused before the Duke and Senate, and his
Holinesses Nuncio, for such a grand Deceit, for a Crime of such a Nature, so
black in it's Root, so wide in i^s Branches, the Parent a lie, the Daughter's
Hypocrisy, Dissimulation to the highest degree even to Pe^jury: Brother be
pleased to discuss.


What will become of me.


Well, may thou tremble, old man, who durst affront Heaven in Counterfeiting
blindness.


Ah, Lord!


Ah, we are all undone.


But as one Crime seldom fails to pull a greater on, in thee, lost man, we find
the dire proof of all that's ill; to restore this sight which Heaven knows was
never lost, Silvester's Sacred Girdle must be fetched, and a Miracle pretended;
but know the Saint needs not by your studied lies, addition to his well
established Glory, since the cursed falsity has been broached, he has roused him
in his Peaceful shrine and waked the Convent with his cries, Bondi's a
dissembler, Bondi has done me wrong, Bondi must be punished.


Worthy Fathers, behold at your Feet a Penitent, have pity on my lost Estate.


Rise, and hear us out? Brother, proceed.


For this Crime the Senate have decreed, the Nu^cio too concurring, that thou
Melito Bondi be straight Divested of thy Lands and rich Possession, thy
Movables, thy Debts, and whatsoever's thine Con^iscated to the State, thy self
still to remain a Prisoner for life.


The doom is mild and merciful, if thou had fallen where the Inquisition
Reigns, through what variety of Torments must you have past, and for
conclusion, died: Brother, will you urge any thing further.


Good Reverendissimo's, let me beg you cease, see my poor Master is just
expiring under the severity of your censure: your selves, I am sure, want
refreshing too.


Truly my Spirits are exhausted.


I do perceive mine evaporate.


Within I have prepared something to sustain nature.


Let me entreat ye Fathers to accept it.


Shall we venture to eat the Viands of the Hypocrite.


For that matter I'll be your taster, pray walk in.


My Stomach calls upon me to venture: Old Gentleman, we shall quickly return
and examine your Papers.


What you please, I am humbled to any thing.


( Complementing about the way) Nay Brother, that will not do.


Upon my Veracity you shall.


By my order I won't.


That's Sacred; then I must.


How have you come off, my Lord.


^'en stripped of all, naked in my old age, as when I first peeped in this wic^d
world.


Ah me, Unfortunate.


Unfortunate indeed, bred high and not worth a Drachma, I doubt that handsome
Face will tempt you to make the best on it Ariana, and rather than live poorly
Sacrifice thy virtue.


Think better of me, I'll die first.


Why, that's well said, as for my Wife, she I fear, has learnt her Trade
already.


Why must I suffer all these unkind suspicions?


Nay, I forgive thee, be it how it will, and thou shall not hear of it any more
from me.


Shall we go and intercede with these cruel Men.


I kneel, and beg, and pray as long as I can speak for my poor Father.


Ay, you are wondrous kind.


Come, let us try our power.


Hold, ye Fools, did ye ever know or hear of an Italian Priest let go his prey;
no, no, my long hoarded Wealth is got into Hucksters hands, I may even bid
farewell to all my possessions.


Oh, Gervatio, my Fo^s I know are still innexorable, and my ruin resolved.

Yonder they are Knuckle deep in Sweet-meats, and have the best Wines the world
affords before 'em, yet I perceive no signs of mollifying: My Lord, I would in
private tell your Lordship what I have thought on.


If you please, Madam, we'll in and do all we can wish for my ^a^her's
deliverance.


Ay, most heartily.


Ah, Gervatio.


Alas, my Lord.


But who may I thank for all this, who was at the bottom of the blind
Contrivance that has ^uined me.


And pray who would have thought a dead Saint would have distur^ himself with
telling tales.


Ah, I rather fear 'twas living Devils, 'tis no matter, I have resolved in
(...) Afflictions to submit to every thing, and neither quarrel nor complain,
^hough I discover thee and the Wife of my Bosom, two Serpents.


A resigning Will is a great blessing; for my own part, I am sure the Innocence
of a Dove is upon me, towards your Honour, even at this time, when you are
suspecting me, my poor Brain is in Labour for your good.


There's neither help nor hope remain.


Yet we may make the best of a bad Market.


My folly appears so plain, I am ashamed to apply my self to the Duke (...)
Senate.


I meant not so, that must be done he rea^ter, but you know my Lord, these
Harpies have not yet examined your Papers, I am sure they are tied^ by the
Teeth for stirring one while: now if you dare trust me I can take out Bonds and
Mortgages, to the Sum of fifty thousand Crowns, get it settled first upon my
young Lady Ariana, yet not let her know it, then it can give her no
encouragement for disobedience.


I thank thy care, Gervatio, and will instantly put them into thy hands, but,
dost hear, let the Lawyer put in some doubtful Clause, that if I should by any
means escape, I may re-asume my Right and Title to it again.


I warrant you, my Lord, though her name secures it from the Law, she shall be
never the better for it.


Come, make haste.


My Lord, that way you'll meet the Mo^bi^es.





So, Gervatio has worked him to his Ends, 'tis a lucky fellow I protest, I hope
Heaven will forgive me for consenting these tricks should be plaid with my old
Father, since my end is honest and for the sake of my Fidelio, who merits more
than I can obtain for him.


Why, the Sparks did it rarely, but I am sorry Count Andrea has an opportunity
of seeing me again.


Pho, there's no harm in his sight, you should not fall too hastily from one
degree to another.


Here comes the Reverendissimo's, as Gervatio called them: Does the Wheel of
Affairs run smooth.

Upon Carpet ground my life, Gervatio has picked all the best of the Bonds,
Mortgages, c. and is gone to an Eminent Lawyer with 'em.


What have ye done with my Father.


Made bold to imprison him in his own Closet, where he must remain during our
Royal Pleasure, and now, Madam, it rests wholly in your generous breast to
complete my Happiness; Gervatio has secured the Chaplain ours, if you consent
not to what indeed makes me giddy with the vast Joy, giving me your Beauteous
self, this very moment some sinister accident in all probability will ruin our
designs.


Nay my dear Ariana you have gone too far now to shrink back, come we'll be
witnesses.


Well, Fidelio, I will venture on this B^g-bear-Marriage, but if thou should
prove ungrateful after all my obligations, what punishment dost thou deserve.


To be despised by the World, proclaimed a Coward; and what's yet greater be
hated by yo^.


Whilst I behold another Happiness, my wretched self am banished for ever
from what my soul admires.


How do ye know 'tis for ever young Gentleman? I may out live my Lord, then a
brisk Widow weighed down with Bags, oh, 'tis an excellent Cordial for the
younger branch of a Family.


Ay there is comfort in that thought, if you would in the mean time allow me to
see you; nothing less will preserve my life till the rich Cordial (...).


To preserve my own I must deny that, for Gervatio tells me, my Lord was
growing up to great extremities; your forbearance of any sort of address, ^
shall esteem as a proof of your affection, but whilst we are idly talking here,
Fidelio views us with impatient Eyes, and longs to have his Joys secu^ed; the
Marriage over, I must beg your Lordship to retire, I would not have my Husband
see you for the world.


However unwilling, those commanding Eyes tell me I must obey.


Come, Ariana,

The Priest our hands, but Heaven our hearts shall join,
And endless raptures Crown me when I call thee mine.

Well I never thought any Mortal could have prevailed with me to have parted
with this dear Girl at so short warning, and without more consideration, but
your Lordships merit is irresistible.


I am blessed in possessing her, punish me with the beastly Garb of the Vulgar,
if I would be unmarried to be an Emperor. This visit is in Triumph to let
proud Ariana see what an excelling Beauty has made me happy. O my dear
Cherubin, I can't but think how the Court of France will admire my choice.


Shall you like that.


Covet it; I hope, Madam, you will rob the Ladies of all their Sparks, and the
whole Gallantry of the Court be made to you.


Nay, if your Lordship Glories in my Conquests, fear not, they shall be
numerous, I never failed when I endeavoured it.


That's tr^e, for my hearts your prize, which, by the Muses, is a Trophy not to
be despised.


Gervatio, where's the Ladies.


Faith, Madam, my young Lady is commiting Matrimony, I believe, that sweet meat
that's commonly attended with sour sauce.


Is she so, much Joy I wish her.


I must to my old Master, get him to set his hand to these, and then I think
this head has brought wonders to pass.


Who is my Rival, some ill-drest Fellow I^ll lay my life on it.


Even that robust piece of rudeness that accosted your Lordship so oddly, Count
Fidelio.


He, he, he, they are well matched, by the Muses, I believe neither of 'em
understand the French way of dressing so well as the Groom of my Horses, he,
he, he.


Ariana always ridiculed it, which has often broke Friendship between us.


Heavens, if I had married her, what a world of labour would it have cost me to
have modelled her for the drawing room at Versailles, whilst you, my dear, at
first sight will appear the abstract of Perfection.


My Lord, you make me blush, but I shall now take unusual care in my dress,
that your Lordship may think me agreeable.


Happy man, happy man, as ever put on the yoke of Matrimony.


Ha, my Lord Insulls, your very humble Servant, this is too transporting an
hour to remember anger, now the dear Ariana's mine, our Quarrel dies.


I wish you Joy with her, I am provided as much to my satisfaction, be pleased
to know the Duke's Niece for my Wife.


Lucinda, the Dukes Niece.


Ariana, spoil not this day's Mirth with a discovery, he'll know it soon
enough; besides, I'll make thee, poor Girl, worth more than that Fool deserve.


I beg your Pardon, I am dumb.

Madam, we must humour the greatness it seems.


With all my Heart.


This is their Venetian breeding to whisper half an hour: Poison me, my dear,
if the very sight on it is not enough to spoil a Man.


Joy to your honour, I thought you would not have ventured to have changed your
condition so suddenly.


Your Ladyship might consider the Man, and that would take your Wonder off.


Was ever any such Vanity.


Then you say you've obtained I may walk about my House till further order.


Yes, my Lord.


(^ees the Company) Heyday, who h^ve we here, nothing but meeting and
revelling, this is a time indeed for Mirth!


Old Gentleman, I am married, but not to thy Daughter, and for that r^a^on w^ll
be merry in spire of thy b^d.


(Ariana kneeling) And I am married to her, and for that happiness shall be for
ever jo^full.


Tri^k'd, Ruined, Und^ne; hold, not ruined neither, he has ^e'er a (...), nor
none he shall have.


Then I must interpose; if you have no Bowels for such a sweet young Couple, I
have had; my Lord Fideli^, here's the value of fifty thousand Crowns, come,
that will make a shift till the old man pops aside, or something better
happens.


Betrayed by (...), I will run mad, I will grow distracted quickly.


My Lord, if you did but see how ill such starts of passion suit your age, sure
you wouldn't forbear.


Think, my Lord, my want of fortune may be made up in tenderness towards your
Da^ghter, and duty towards your self.


Come, come, my Lord, the Senate, no doubt, when they see him married to
Arian^, will honour him with places of trust and profit, a rising Man seldom
wants a ^and to help him higher.


Let me consider, all in this room have been my Foes, I think, every individual
Person, for what cause, even because I have been a cross stingy old Captious
fellow, but henceforth I'll throw it away as fast as the best of ^e; Alas, I
had forgot, I have nothing but Misfortunes, and am a wretched Prisoner
Cond^m^ed to Shame and Poverty.


All those afflictions I'll take off upon condition you'll forgive your worthy
Son and Daughter.


Do this, ^nd we all are Friends.


Then my ^ord, be satisfied, the Duke nor Senate know nothing of your deceit,
'twas only a Contrivance of your humble Servant to oblige this young Lord and
my Charming Mistress.


Well, thou hast proved a great Rogue, but I'll keep my word.


Then I hope we shall not kneel again in vain.


No, take my Blessing, and as you prove, an Addition to her Fortune.


I have all my heart (...).


And my future life shall make amends for venturing once to disobey my Father.


Now all's well, I hope the Music I ordered will come that we may conclude our
Joys with a Dance.


By all means, let us have Music that I may have the pleasure to see my
Lucinda trip like a Fairy.


My Lord, as this is a general Jubilee, I hope I shall partake it, and heart
burnings being laid aside we henceforth may live more quietly.


Yes, yes, according to your deportment, thou hast been! Uh, uh, but I have
promised to say no more.


Gervatio, I will always call thee Friend, and serve thee with my Life and
Fortunes.


Nor will I forget to esteem and reward thee.


I hope you will say I have proved a well-meaning man to all, and my old Master
forgive me.


Aye, aye, that I will for fear thou should play me any more tricks.


Here's the Music.


Now let's in and taste a Glass of Wine, I want some comfort after all my
frights.

And may my Fate to each a warning give,
How they ever love or practice to deceive;
For though they prosper and their Cheat's believed
With ease you see deceivers are deceived,

I'm sent a small Embassadress for Grace,
If there was power in such a Childish face:
Who knows but artless innocence may move,
And looks unpracticed sometimes catch your Love.
Suppose it so, 'tis now, alas, too late,
Your liking me wards not the blow of fate.
A begging Epilogue's a despairing Case;
'Tis asking mercy when the doom is past.
Part of this Play though stolen was lately shown,
And what was once exposed to this Lewd Town
Tho 'twere improved with you 'twill scarce go down.
^et 'twould ^e nob^er not to be sever^,
And what has been unjustly rifled spare;
For my sake use h^r kindly once again,
Pray do, you good natured, ^ine, pretty Men,
Come, I shall grow a Woman e'er't be long,
'Tis but a little while we are too young;
And if Heaven on my youth does Charms bestow,
I'll layout all the s^ck in pleasing you.
Let our wronged Author in your Favour shine,
And when you wish it, you shall not ^ail of mine.
NOw Britain's raging Wars are at an end,
Caesar adorns the Throne he did defend;
Eternal Peace is fixed, and all things smile,
To Crown the happy blessings of our Isle:
From hence, we have encouragement to expect,
The Stage with nobler off'rings shall be decked;
For in past Ages Peace did Wit create,
And Poets flourished equal to the state.
'Twas when the great Augustus ruled in Peace
And all mankind from him enjoined sweet ease:
Ovid's soft genius first began to please.
'Twas then the Lyrick Horace, Son of Fame,
Compiled his works, immortal as his Name,
Soft ^ase and quiet fancy did in^use,
And Rome's blessed state gave Birth to Virgil's Muse.
Oh, may our state like that produce such Men,
That from the crop of their luxuriant Pe^,
Succeeding Ages may for ever glean.
Critics their nature then shall alter quite
And what they fain would damn shall praise in spite.
Poets no more in humble lines shall sue
And creep and cringe to steal applause from you,
Nor beg for Favour where no Favour's due:
No more shall sense in fus^ian lines be lost,
Nor dullness flourish at the Actor's cost.
Authors shall write with fancy unconfined
To Copy Nature and reform Mankind,
Then Wit and sense shall here for ^ver dwell,
A^d Britain's Stage shall Athen's far excel

