EPIDICUS.

SCENE, Athens, in the Street. On one Side of the Stage, stands Periphanes' s
and Apecides' s Houses; on the other, Cheribulus' s House.

TIME, About Five or Six Hours, beginning at Six or Seven a Clock in the
Morning.

STay, young Man.


Who's that pulls me by the Cloak, when I'm in such haste.


A Friend.


So it seems. But you're a plaguy impertinent one.


Open your Eyes, Thesprion.


Bless me! Epidicus, is't you?


You may trust your Eyes for once.


O, good morrow t'ye.


And a good Day to you. Well-come home with all my Heart.


Well, and what next?


Why next, Boy, I'll present ye with a Treat, according to th'usual Custom.


Upon Honour then --


What?


-- I'll accept of't, if you do.


Well but how do ye? How fares your Corps?


My Face is a Sample o'that.


Now I have ye, rare Rogue! you're got to be fatter, and in better plight than
ever.


Ay, Thanks to this thriving Hand --


-- Which ought t'ha' been cut off long since.


Pshaw, I'm grown more honest than formerly.


How so?


Because I steal more openly.


A duce on ye, for setting such plaguy large Strides. As soon as I laid Eye on
ye at the Port, I ran like a Race-Horse, but could n't come up wi'ye for my
Guts, till now.


Po, you're a puny Town-Chitterlin.


You're a hectoring Camp-Bully, I know.


'Tis a little scurrilous, but speak your Pleasure.


Ha'ye been well e're since you went, what say ye?


Off and on --


-- The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate that damned Variety most mortally.


Why, I told ye nothing but Truth.


Come, answer me me sincerely. -- What's become of our Master's Son? How does
he do?


Lusty, and strong as Hercules.


Now you've told me the joyfullest News in the World: But where is he?


He came along wi'me.


How so? unless you brought him home i'your Knapsack, or else in your Pocket.


O hang ye.


Or you: -- I must examine you; hear me, and you shall be heard i'your turn.


The very Words of a Judge, in truth.


It becomes my Gravity.


You don't pretend to be Lord Chief Justice, do ye?


Why, do ye know a more honourable Person in Town than I?


But, Old Boy, you want one Accoutrement to your Office.


Prithee what's that?


Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honour's Pate.


You're a damned Rogue. -- But what's your Answer?


To what Question, pray?


What's become o'my Master Stratippocles's Arms?


Faith, fallen into the Enemy's Hands.


His Arms?


They went away with a Whip.


Don't ye banter now?


Troth, I'm in earnest. They have 'em in possession.


Mary, 'twas a plaguy Business.


Po, Achilles, and others ha'done the same before him. I'll warrant ye 'twill
redound to his Honour.


As how, I beseech ye?


For following such noble Examples.


Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him; they were so plaguy quick in
going over to th'Enemy. If our Son o'Thetis has lost his, the kind Nereads will
bring him more. But then he must be sure to supply th'Armorers wi'Stuff and
Materials, if ever he hopes to be plundered every Campaign.


Come, adone wi'this Discourse.


That's as your Worship pleases.


Leave impertinant Questions.


But tell me, where's my Master Stratippocles?


There's a certain reason why he daren't come wi'me.


Prithee what is't?


He has no desire to be seen of his Father.


Why so?


I'll tell ye. -- He has brought out of the Plunder, a young Captive Lass, fair
and sprightly, who seems of a good Family.


What's this I hear?


The same that comes from my Mouth,


What did he buy her for?


Because he had a mind to her.


And how many Minds has this Creature got? I'm sure, before he went to the
Campaign, he left me in charge to buy him a Musick-Girl, he loved, of a certain
Slave-Merchant, and I've executed his Orders. --


Just as the Wind blows, my Friend, so you must furl your Sails.


Alas! I'm broke all in pieces!


How; why so?


But -- what did this Lass cost?


Little enough.


That's none o'my Question.


What then?


How many Pounds?


So many


What, a hundred Pounds?


Which he took up of a Banker at Thebes, and gives him above a Groat in the
Pound Interest for every Day he has it.


Lamentable!


The Banker's come over with him, and demands the Money.


Bless me? I'm ruined to the Devil and all.


How so? What's the matter, my Friend?


He has lost me.


Who has.


The Gentleman who lost his Arms.


But why so?


Why, he was continually dunning me with Letters from th'Army, to --


Troth, I can't imagine why you tremble so. Poor Epidicus, you're in a sad
pickle: guilty of some damnable business i'my Absence, and thy very looks
betray thee.


Prithee, don't tease me so.


I'll be gone then.


Stay, you shall not go yet.


Why, not yet?


But is he really in love with the Girl he bought?


A pretty Question! -- up to the Ears, Man.


Then my poor Back must smart for it.


He loves her better than ever he did you.


And let the Devil love you.


Prithee leave that subject, -- He charged me not to go home to his Fathers,
but directly to Cherib^lus's here, till he came there himself.


Why so?


Because he would n't so much as meet, or see his Father, till he had cleared
all with his Banker.


This is Hell upon Earth!


Now let me go and meet him.


What will th'old Man say, when he comes to know o'this? However, let's fall
nobly, with our Swords in our Hands.


Fall how you please, what's that to me?


I'll not fall singly; I shall desire the same Civility o'you too, as one
Friend would of another.


Would Old Nick had you and your Projects too.


Go then, if you be in such plaguy haste.


If it be so, I ne'er met with a more easy parting.


He's gone, and now you're alone: thou see in what a sweet Condition you're
in, Mr. Epidicus; and without speedy Relief, you're undoubtedly blown up. So
many tottering Ruins, and such vast Loads of Mischiefs come tumbling upon my
^ead, that 'tis impossible to subsist without a thousand Props. And yet I can't
find one to help to sustain this confounded Shock. -- What a Rogue was I
t'impose upo'th' Old Man wi'my damned Tricks, and make him believe he had
redeemed his Daughter, when 'twas only a Musick-Girl, his Son's Miss, whom he
ordered to buy when he went to the Camp. But now my Gentleman, to please his
Humour, has picked up another there, and my Skin must pay the purchase: For
when our old Fox comes once to smell out the Roguery, I shall be fleaed alive.
Therefore have all your Wits about ye. -- Projecting's to no purpose; for my
Brains are all Confusion. -- Epidicus, you're an errant Ass. -- But why so
scurrilous, my Friend! -- Because, Fool, thou'st left thy self to the wide
Word. -- Why, what would y' have me do? -- Why that Question to me? -- Because
formerly y' use to be so plaguy cunning at advising. -- What? -- What, I say?
-- I must to work upon something. -- But I'm too backward in meeting my
Gentleman, to know how matters stand. -- Cheribulus. -- I'll move on one side,
to hear their Discourse wi'more ease.


Thus I've told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given ye a full Account of
my Troubles and Love.


Sure, Stratippocles, thour't very childish for one of thy Age and Courage.
What, ashamed of thy Bargan, Man, when she's one of a good Family? Who a duce
can blame thee for this?


All those who envied me, have declared themselves my Enemies upon this Account;
though truly to her Chastity, I ne'er offered the least Violence or Incivility.


This is a Virtue, in my Opinion, a degree above any common moderation in Love.


Po, Words will give no ease to a Man in pain: He's the Friend, whose Actions
supply one in a puzling Case, and at a pinch.


How would y' have me help ye?


By lending me a hundred Pounds, to pay off the Banker I had it of.


Really if I had it, you shou'dn't ask me twice.


What am I the better, when your Liberality lies wholly in Words, and nothing
at all in Deed^.


Why, Faith, every day I'm teased, and worried to death with a parcel of Duns.


I'd sooner see such Friends starve in Prison than live in a Palace. -- Well,
I must borrow Epidicus's help, though I pay dearly for the use of 't; but I shall
send him to Bridewell with his Skin stripped over his Ears, if he doesn't procure
the hundred Pounds as soon as the last Word's pronounced.


I'm in a hopeful Condition: He promises well, and I don't question his
performance in the least. So then, my Back shall be nobly treated, and all at
free Cost. -- I'll even board 'em. -- Epidicus.


Where's he?


Here, Sir -- I'm glad to see you well in Town again.


I don't question but you're, as much as my self.


Have ye been well all this time, Sir.


In Body, but not in Mind.


Why, Sir, I performed my Duty, and observed your Commands, to a tittle. I've
bought up the Girl you sent so many Letters about.


You've lost your Labour in that.


Lost, how, Sir?


Because at present, she neither charms, nor pleases me.


Then what occasion was there for so many repeated Commands, and Letters?


I loved her then, but now my Heart's otherwise engaged.


Faith 'tis very hard, to have one's Services so ill rewarded. My best
Endeavours are turned against me, by the fickleness of your Passion.


I wasn't Compose mentis, when I writ those Letters.


Must I atone for your crazy Tricks; and my Back pay the price of your
Indiscretion?


What's all this prating? I've occasion for a hundred Pounds down of the Nail,
which must be paid to the Banker with all Expedition.


Pray, where shall I have it? Of what Banker should I take it up?


Where you please. But if I had not the Money before Sunset, ne'er expect to see
home again, but strait to Bridewell you go.


You, Sir, can talk of these things unmoved, without dread or danger. I'm right
sensible of my Executioners, and the pain of a good Beating.


How then? Would you see your Master make way with himself?


Not so neither. -- I'll first run the hazard, as bold as it is.


Now I like ye: Thour't a brave Fellow in truth.


I'm resolved to undergo what you'd have me.


What will ye do with the Musick-Girl you bought then?


I'll warrant ye, I'll have some Invention, some Expedient, or some Trick to
save all at last.


Faith thous't a fruitful Noddle, to my Knowledge.


I know a rich Euboan Captain, with Money at Command, who when he comes to know
of your buying of this, and your bringing home the other, he'll earn estly be
at ye, to take her off your Hands. -- But where's the Girl you brought wi'ye.


She shall be forth-coming.


What stay we here for?


Let's to yours, and there make a jolly Day on it.


Go in. The mean time, in these Brains must I have a Committee of the whole
House, to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to carry on
this vigorous War. -- Well, Friend Epidicus, look well to thy hits; for this is
a plaguy sudden Business. The De'el a bit of time's here for dozing, or
delaying; for a swinging Battery must be raised against the old Mans Pockets.
-- In then, Epidicus, and keep thy young Master from straggling here, least his
old Father should chance to snap him up.


TIs a common failing in most People, to use Modesty when there's no occasion
for it; and when there's most of all, they lay it aside. What need ye be ashamed
of marrying one of a good Family, though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you
believe, you had your Daughter by, that's now at home?


I dread my Son's Reproaches.


Edod, I thought the Remembrance of your last Wife, had frighted you from
Matrimony; for you ne'er can look upon her Grave, but y' offer Thanks for her
Departure: And truly you've reason, since y' had the good luck t'out-live that
cross Piece.


O, I was a second Hercules in the time of her Reign. His Combat with the
Amazonian Queen, was nothing to what I endured.


Troth, the Money did well however.


Ay marry, if I could have had it alone.


St' St'! Silence! Courage, my Lads. Nothing but signs of good luck. Then I've
a plaguy sharp Lancet to breath the best Vein in the old Man's Purse. --
Apecides's Door. Now will I turn Horse-leech, and suck out the Hearts Blood of
these old Fools, who pass for the prime Pillars of the State.


Marry him as soon as you can.


I like your Advice.


I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I can't tell.


Ay, that goes to the Heart of me.


In good Faith, I've the Assistance, Bounty and Love of all the Gods. For the
old Men have now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make Incursions, and snub 'em
of their Money. -- About it then, Friend Epidicus, wrap thy short Cloak about
thee, and pretend t'ha' been looking the whole Town for the old Man: Do all
with a jerk. -- Peraphanes at home. I'm tired off my Legs, with searching all
the Town over for him, at the Surgeons, the Barbers, the Race-Ground, the
Market, the Perfumers, the Armourers, and all the Bankers in the Town. -- I'm
quite hoarse with asking, and was nigh breaking my Neck a hundred times for
haste.


Epidicus!


Who calls Epidicus?


I'm Periphanes.


And I, Apecides.


And, troth, I'm Epidicus. -- O, Sir, I've met ye both in the best time in the
World.


What's the matter?


Hold. -- Pray give me a little time to breath in --


Well, take time then.


O my Heart! -- Let me take breath --


Come, rest your self.


Now observe. -- All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are discharged,
and sent home. --


Who told you so?


I affirm it to be true.


On your own Knowledge?


Yes, Sir.


How came you to know it?


Because I saw the Streets as full of Soldiers as they could pack, with all the
Arms, and Horses. --


This is extreordinary indeed.


Then they had a mort of Prisoners, with Boys and Girls, some two, some three,
and others five a piece. The People they all came thronging about 'em; every
Body crowding to see their own Sons.


I faith, nothing could be better.


Then I believe the whole Corporation of Courtesans in the City came in all in
their Finery, to meet their Gallants, and charm 'em with their presence: And,
what was most observable, a great many of 'em wore Nets under their Scarfs.
When I had got to the Haven, there I found her, attended by four several
Musicians playing --


Who, Epidicus?


She who your Son so many Years loved, and died for; and is in a fair way to
ruin his Riches and Reputation, his own self, and your Worship's self. She
stood waiting for him at the Haven.


Damned Jilt!


She was richly dressed in her gold Lace, so neatly! so trimly! so modish!


How a duce was she dressed then? With a Cloak, or a Robe, or had she a
Milliner's Shop upon her back? There's variety enough.


A Woman carry a whole Shop upon her back?


Where's the Wonder? You may daily meet these Creatures in the Streets with
Houses and Lands upon their backs. When their Sparks are assess'd for the
Taxes, they've no Money; but freely pay their Contributions when they're taxed
by their Whores. What a confounded Jargon of names do these Jades rake up every
Year for their Habits? There's your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown,
your Loose-Gown, your Night-Gown, your Riding-Gown, your Embroidered, and
Speckl'd Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs,
Tours and Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colours of the
Rainbow, and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and
Monsters, in the Universe. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys.


What are those, Sir?


Your damned Night-Rails. -- This plaguy Catalogue of Names, often make their
poor Cullies Pockets smoke for it. -- But on with your Story.


There stood two Women behind me, discoursing to themselves; upon which, I gave
way a little, and made as though I took no notice of what they said. I could not
hear every word perfectly, yet I'm sure I can't be mistaken in the main.


I'd fain know what it was.


Said one of these Women to the other, --


What?


Patience, Sir, and you'll hear all. -- After they had cast their Eyes upon
your Son's Mistress. Good now, said one, What strange luck has this Creature,
to have her Gallant immediately pay her Ransom? Her Gallant, said the other, why
who's he? At that she named young Stratippocles. rich Periphanes's Son.


As I live, I must run my Country. --


Nothing but the truth, Sir. -- Upon hearing of this Discourse, I began to
creep nigher, and nigher to 'em, by degrees, as though I had been forced that way
by the crowd.


Very well.


But, said the other again, how know ye this? Who told ye so? Why, said she,
there came a Letter to day from Stratippocles to her, to let her know he had
taken up the Money of a Banker at Thebes, had it in his Hands, and was bringing
it home for that purpose.


So then. -- All's lost.


She said, she had it from her own Mouth, and saw the Letter.


How shall I do in this case? I must have your advice, Neighbour.


We must find out some effectual, and cunning Expedient; for, troth, I verily
believe, he'll be here shortly, if he be not already.


Might I presume, to instruct ye, I'd show ye such a clever way as you'd both
approve of, or I'm much mistaken. --


And what's that, honest Epidicus!


And you'll say 'tis pat for the purpose.


Why do ye keep us in suspense then?


Because you, who are wisest, ought to be heard first; I, afterwards.


Po, let's hear't.


No, you'll laugh at me.


Faith, but we won't.


If ye like this Project, you may follow't; if not, another may be sought for.
For my part, I'm neither Inventor, nor Promoter of't, any further than to serve
you.


I thank ye for that -- Prithee let's hear your Contrivance.


'Tis to choose a Wife for your Son immediately, and take a swinging Revenge
upon this Musick-Wench he's now upon freeing, and so strangely debauches him:
Then to order Matters so as to make her a Slave as long as he lives.


That's right as can be.


I'd do any thing to have it speedily brought about.


Why, truly, now's the time to do it, before he comes home: 'Twill be to Morrow
before he comes to Town, and not to day.


How know ye that?


Very well, Sir. I saw one that came from him, who said he would be here to
Morrow Morning.


Well, but go on: What must we do next?


This is my Opinion; that you ransom this Musick-Girl, as though you had a mind
to her, and was mightily stricken with her your self.


And what of all that?


What? You may buy her out of your Son's Hands, before he returns, and pretend
'tis to give her her Freedom.


Well, I understand ye.


When you've once got her into your Hands, you may remove her to any by Place
from the City, if you think it so convenient.


I'm clearly of that mind.


What say you, Sir!


What should I? 'Tis a notable cunning Contrivance, I think.


By this means, you'll cut off all your Sons hopes of marrying her; and bring
him to compliance at pleasure.


Thour't a cunning Rogue, and please me strangely.


Sir, what you're about, requires expedition.


Very true, indeed.


I've a Trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.


Let's hear't.


So you shall. -- Observe.


This is the craftiest Son of a Whore.


I'm afraid we shall want one to pay the Money for this Wench. For 'twon't be
so convenient for you to go your self.


Why so?


Lest the Merchant suspect you buy her upon your Sons account, --


Very right.


-- To hinder him of his Mistress; and so his Suspicions may chance to cross
your Designs.


Where shall we find one proper to manage this Business?


This Gentleman is the fittest in the World. He understands a Bargain to a
Tittle, and has the Law at his Fingers ends.


Epidicus, I give ye Thanks.


And I'll endeavour to deserve 'em: I'll find out the Master of the
Musick-Girl, carry the Money with the Gentleman, and bring her to ye.


What's the lowest price of her?


The lowest price? Perhaps you may get her for a hundred Pounds. But if you
send too much, it shall be returned faithfully. There can be no Cheat in it; and
your Money won't lye dead ten days, I'm sure.


How so?


Because there's another young Spark has a Months mind to this Wench, a Rhodian
Captain, vastly rich, a stout Soldier, a terrible Fellow, and a grand
Braggadocio. He'll certainly take her off your Hands, and pay ye ready Money
with all his Heart. Do but venture upon her, and you may gain the Lord knows
what by the Bargain.


Heavens grant I may.


Don't question it.


Will you go in, Sir, and bring out the Money? I'll away to the Piazza; and be
sure, Epidicus, do you meet me there.


Don't ye go from thence, before I come.


I'll stay for ye there.


Come in, Epidicus.


Go in, Sir, and draw over your Money, I shall not make 'ye stay.


Hang me, if I believe there's ever a piece of Ground in all our Country yields
half so well as this old Fellows Bags. For though they be ne'er so well secured
and sealed up, sweep says my Worship with as much Money as he pleases. But,
Faith, I've a plaguy Scruple that the old Man should find out the Roguery on it,
and stick as close to my Back as an old Rook to a rich Cully. One thing puts me
to my last Trumps; that is, to know which Musick-Girl I had best show Apecides.
-- O I have it in my Head. -- The old Man ordered me this Morning to find up a
Musick-Girl to sing for him at his Sacrifice. I'll soon produce one, and teach
her her Lesson, how to carry on the Cheat handsomely to our old Gentleman. --
Now I'll in, and receive the Money of this old silly Put.


S Death, I'm torn asunder, and eaten up with th'Expectation of all Epidicus's
fine Promises. -- It torments me strangely; and I'd give the World to know
whether there be any Hopes or not.


For all Epidicus's great Helps, y'ought to seek out elsewhere: For I could have
told ye before-hand, you weren't to expect any thing from his Brain.


I'm a miserable Man, in earnest.


'Tis childish i'you, to vex your self so.


As I'm a living Soul, if I once lay hands on him, 'tshall ne'er be said that a
pitiful Slave abused his Master without Punishment. -- But what would ye have
him do, who has no Money; when you, who has so much at command, won't part with
a Penny, to keep a Friend from sinking?


Upon my Word, if I had it, I would with all my Heart. However you needn't
fear, but you'll meet with something, by some ways, some means, from some Place,
or from some Body; and you've still some hopes o'sharing i'my good Fortune,
when I meet with it my self.


Po, hang such sneaking Fellows.


What's your Fancy in giving me this Language?


Because your Tongue ran all upon your silly somethings, your some means, your
some Places, and your some Bodies, which are all nothing to the purpose. I'll
not weary out m'ears any longer wi'this Stuff; nor expect any more Help from
ye, than from one that's ne'er thought of.


Well, Sir, you've performed your Part; now must I mine. After this care's
over, you may set your Heart at rest. -- Cheribulus. -- Well, what now? --
Here, Sir, take it, if you like it.


How much is there?


Enough, and more than enough; something over-plus. I've got above twenty
Guinea's more than you owe to your Banker. You see, Sir, as long as I can
please, and oblige you, I'm sufficiently prodigal of m'own Back.


Your Back, why so?


By making your Father guilty o'Bag-slaughter.


What a duce is that?


Nay, I don't mind your old and common Phrase, Hold up his Hand at the Bar, but
I make him hold up his Hand at the Bags. For I've already paid off the
Slave-Merchant, with my own Hands, for that Girl who goes for your Sister, Now
I've hit upon a way, to put another Trick upon your Father, and do you a good
turn into the Bargain. I had this Discourse wi^th' old Man, and persuaded him
all I could, to hinder you from getting this Musick-Girl, when you came home, *
by buying her himself, before-hand; and so to remove her to some by-place. Now
will I top another upon him, that shall do his business as well every jot. *


Rare Rogue!


She shall be here in a Moment, and pass for your Mistress.


I understand ye.


Your Father has commissioned Apecides to act in this Business, to see the
Bargain be secure. He now stays for me at the Piazza.


Well enough.


Now you see, the Wit's out-witted; for your Father has trusted his Money to my
Discretion. He's making Preparations for your Wedding, as soon as you come
home.


Nothing can persuade me to that, but the Death of the dear Creature I brought
wi'me.


I've another piece of Policy on foot too. -- I'll to the Slave-Merchant's
privately, and desire him, if any Enquiry be made whether he had received the
Money for a Musick-Girl, to say, Yes; and, instead of the threescore and fifteen
Pounds, to name six score Guineas: For the first Sum I had, but three days
before, paid him with m'own Hands for that Girl who goes for your Sister. Then
will this old Rogue ignorantly swear that he received the Money for the same
Girl who came along with you.


Y'out-do Matchivel, for Policy.


I'll go get some plaguy cunning Baggage, and grease her well in the Fist; she
shall pretend to be the same Party that's bought, and so make admirable Sport
with both th'old Fools. Apecides himself shall conduct her to your Father.


Excellently contrived.


Well, I'll teach her how t'act her Part to a tittle, and send her full-fraight
wi'my Tricks -- Hold I'm a little too tardy; y' have made me lose Time. Ye both
know the Management of the business; now I'll be marching.


Good luck attend ye.


'Tis a plaguy Dog at doing Mischief.


I'm sure his Contrivances have brought me off at a deadly Pinch.


Now let's go in again.


Ay, and with a much lighter Heart than I came out. By the Courage and Conduct
of Epidicus, I'm safely arrived at the Camp wi'this rich Booty.


THere's no such need for a Man to have a Glass to see the Features of his Face
in, as t'observe the very depth of his Discretion, and the Passions of his
Mind. The well viewing o'these, will bring him to reflect how he passed away
his Time in his young Days. My self experience it, by this fretting for my Son,
as though his Crimes were so heinous, and not the Sin o'my Youth as great. Faith,
we old Men do dote sometimes; and certainly this Mirror would be of excellent
use. -- But here comes my Friend Apecides, with my Son's Prize.


O, welcome home with your Merchandise. -- How is't?


You see the Heavens smile on ye.


They've a promising Countenance.


Ay, all things promise well, and succeed too. -- Y' had best order some Body
to carry her in.


So ho! within there. --


Conduct this Woman in. --


What's your Pleasure, Sir?


Have a special care she be not coupled wi'my Daughter, nor let her be seen by
her. Do ye mind me? I'll have her into that little Room by her self. -- There's
vast difference between th'Education of a young Maid, and a Courtesan.


Spoken like a Man of Skill and Prudence. One can't be too careful of his
Daughter's Honesty. -- Faith, we nicked the time for snapping this Girl out of
your Son's Clutches.


Why so?


Because I heard one say, he saw him but just now.


I dare swear, he was just ready for his Bargain.


Ay, Faith, sure enough. -- Without doubt you've an admitable Servant, of great
Value, and worth his weight in Gold. The poor Musick-Wench ne'er so much as
dreamt of being sold to you, he carried off the business wi'so much Mirth and
Gaiety.


I wonder i'my Heart how he did it.


He flamm'd her off with a pretence o'your making a Sacrifice for your Son's
safe arrival.


That was well carried on.


He made her believe he brought her only to serve at th'Office, you was to have
at home. All the while, I did as though I was a silly Clod-pated Ass, that
could not say By to a Goose.


You could do no otherwise.


I've a business of Importance at the Court: I must go and assist a Friend
there.


Prithee, let's ha'your Company as soon as you're at leisure.


I shall be back in a little Time.


There's nothing like a good Friend always at ones Elbow. Then all your
business is done for ye, with holding up your Finger. Now had I trusted the
management of this business to a Man o'less skill, and fewer Brains, I should
ha'been finely bobbed, and my Son might well ha'made me his laughing Diversion.
--


Have a care, Sirrah, you don't slip one House without enquiring for Periphanes
the Platean; and presume not to come i'my presence before you've sped.


Suppose, Spark, I show you the Person you want, what Thanks shall I deserve at
your Hands?


I've achieved that by my great and mighty Valour, that all Mankind ought to
gi'me Thanks.


But, young Soldier, this is no proper place to publish your Achievements in,
as you intend. For when a Man comes to brag of his Exploits before his Betters,
they make but a poor shabby Figure. -- But if you want Periphanes the Platean,
I'm he.


What he, so famed in his Youth at Kings Courts, who purchased an Estate with
his single Sword?


The same, the bare naming of whose Exploits, would make you take ye to your
Heels, and run like a Devil.


By Hercules, I more want a Man to relate mine to, than one to tell me his.


I tell ye, Spark, this is no fit Place; therefore you'd best pitch upon
another Man, to pack off your Trumpery to.


By your leave then; to let you know what I come for, I understand you've
bought my Mistress.


Ho, ho! Now I know my Gentleman; the very Captain Epidicus told m'of. --


Then I've a Word or two to say t'ye, if it be no trouble t'ye.


Faith, I can't tell that, till I hear what 'tis.


Then 'tis to let me have her, and I'll pay ye honestly for her.


A Bargain.


But why should I mince the matter? I intend to give her her Freedom, and make
her Partner i'my Bed.


I'll make but two Words wi'ye. She cost me above sixscore Pounds, and for an
hundred and fifty, you shall have her, and do what you please with her;
provided you'll take her away wi ye, and rid the Country of her.


Will ye sign, in good earnest?


To those Articles, I will.


You've made an excellent Campaign on it.


So ho, there! bring out this last Musick-Girl. -- You shall have all her
instruments into the Bargain.


Here, Sir, take her, if you please.


What a strange Frolic is this? Why these under hand Tricks tho? Why don't
y'order the Musick-Girl to be brought out?


Why, this is she; i've no other.


Po, you can't put Tricks upon Travellers. Why don't ye produce her that's
called Acropolistis?


I profess, this is she.


But I profess, 'tis not: P'shaw, do ye think I don't know m'own Mistress?


I declare this is the very same that my Son was so much stricken with.


But it is not the same.


How! not the same?


No.


Where a Devil did she come from then? As I hope to live, 'tis the same I
bought and paid for.


'Twas foolishly bestowed, and a plaguy blunder this.


Certainly it must be she; for I sent m'own Servant to buy her, one who's
acquainted wi'my Son's Amours.


Hah! then, Old Gentleman, your own Servant has bubl'd ye confoundedly.


What! bubl'd me?


Nothing, but only a suspicion. I see this Musick-girl is topped upon ye for
the other. Poor Old Fellow, you're notoriously and damnably gulled.


I'll find her out where ere she be. -- Farewell Bluff.


So, so! thour't a brave Fellow, Epidicus, a brave Fellow, in troth; and hast
got the day. Thour't a Man every inch of thee; and hast led me by the Nose, as
if I had been the merest Nincompoop in the World. -- Apecides buy ye to day, of
the Slave-Merchant?


I ne'er heard of the Man till now; besides, I'm past being sold, and have had
my Freedom above this five Years.


Why came ye hither then?


I'll tell ye, Sir. -- I was brought hither to sing at a Sacrifice, an old
Gentleman was to offer.


I must own my self the poorest Sot in all the Town and Country. --
Acropolistis, the Musick-Girl?


As well as my self.


Where dwells she?


I can't tell at present, since she had her Freedom given her.


How, her Freedom? Who gav't her? I'd fain know that, if you could tell me.


Sir, what I know my self, I'll tell ye. -- I heard young Stratippocles, rich
Periphanes's Son, took care to get her freed in his absence.


'Sdeath, I must run my Country if all this be true. -- 'Tis notorious now,
that Epidicus has squeas'd my Pockets most intolerably.


This is what I was told. -- Please ye to command me any further?


Yes, to get ye to the Devil as fast as you can, or out of my sight.


You'll give me my Instrument first?


No, neither your Fiddle nor Bagpipes neither. --


Well, I'll go; but I'll make the Devil to do, when I come back.


What's to be done now? Shall I who have signed so many Warrants and Edicts,
suffer this Rascal to go unpunished? Were I to lose as much more, I'd sooner
do it than pardon this palpable Affront, and notorious Villainy. They've exposed
me t'all the World. -- But I was a Fool to think my self inferior to Apecides,
who bares the reputation of inventing of Laws, and settling of Rights. He highly
applauds his own Discretion; but without doubt the Axe must be preferred to the
handle.


Sure there's no sort of Affliction, or Misery in this World, but what I've
undergone; so many Troubles fall upon me at once, which overwhelm, and tear me
all in pieces. Poverty, and Fears possess my Soul, and I've no ground for
hopes. -- My poor Girl's fallen into the Enemies Hands; and I can hear no tale
or tidings of her.


What Stranger can that be, who's so mightily full of Fears, and heavy
Complaints?


They said, Periphanes dwelt somewhere hereabouts.


She talks of me: I fancy she wants Lodgings.


I'd willingly hire a Porter, to show me either the Man or his House.


Certainly I must know her. I've seen that Face before, but I can't tell where.
-- Is't she, that I imagine or no?


Bless me! I must have seen that Man before now.


Sure enough 'tis the poor Woman of Epidaurus, I had formerly to do with, --


The Case is plain, 'tis he that first enjoyed me at Epidaurus.


-- And there had that Daughter by her, who's now at home with me.


What if I go up to him?


I don't well know whether I had best go see if it be she or no.


If it shou'dn't be he, as so many Years make me suspect, --


Length of time makes me doubt of the Person, and fills my Head with Scruples.
For fear it should prove otherwise, I must go cunningly to work.


-- Then I must use all a Woman's Shifts.


I'll even up to her.


I'll fall into Discourse with him.


Good morrow to ye, Mistress.


I thank ye, Sir, both for me and mine.


How then, Mistress?


A good day to you, Sir. There's your Compliment returned, you entrusted me
withal.


I don't blame your Fidelity. Or indeed have I any Acquaintance with ye?


If I be not mistaken in the Person, Sir, I can rub up your memory of former
Acquaintance.


Where did I ever see you?


That's an unreasonable Question.


Why so, Mistress?


Because you'd have me put a Gloss upon your Memory.


You're very sharp.


No wonder for a Woman.


I dad, better and better? -- D' ye remember me?


Very well.


In Epidaurus, --


Ah, that Word has brought me to life again.


-- In your young days, how I relieved yours and your Mother's Wants.


Are you he, whose Love brought me so much Sorrow?


I am. -- How dost thou do?


Very well, and the better to see you so.


Your Hand, my dear.


Take it; and with it, the most sorrowful, and miserable Woman alive.


What makes ye so sad?


My poor Daughter, I had by you, --


What of her?


-- -- -- Since she's grown up, is lost: Fallen into the Enemies Hands.


Cheer up and be satisfied, I have her at home, safe and sound. As soon as my
Servant told me she was taken Prisoner, I immediately produced the Money, and
redeemed her. He acquitted himself well and wisely i'this business; though he's a
damnable Rogue in other things.


Pray let me have a sight of her, if you'd ha'me live.


Ho Canthara! Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out; for here's her Mother.


Now my Spirits begin to revive.


Why did you send for me out, Sir Father?


To see thy nown Mother, Child. -- Go and meet her, and give her a Kiss.


What Mother?


She there, that's ready to dye for want of ye.


Who's that you'd ha'me kiss?


Your Daughter.


What this?


Yes.


What kiss this Creature?


Why not, since she's your own Daughter?


Sure you've lost your Senses.


I?


Yes you, Sir.


Why so?


Because I neither know this Creature, have had any Acquaintance, or so much as
laid Eye on her till now.


I know whence comes your Mistake; she has got other Clothes and Dresses, since
you had her.


All Creatures ha'their several ways of knowing their Young. But I declare I
never knew this.


Heavens bless us all! What strange thing is this? Have I made my House a
Bawdy-house? have I brought Strangers into it, who have sucked up my Mon^? --
Pray why did you kiss me, and call me Father? Why stand ye like a Mum-chance?
What are ye tonguety'd?


What would y' have me say?


She declares she's none o'your Mother.


If she won't, she may let it alone. By Iago, I'll be my Mother's Daughter in
spite of her Teeth. 'Tis n't fair Play to force her to be my Mother, whether
she will or no.


But why a plague did ye call me Father?


That's your Fault, not mine. Did I ever call you Father, till you called me
Daughter? And if she called me Daughter, I'd give her the Title of Mother: But
she disowns me for a Daughter, and I'll cast her off for a Mother. In short,
I'm not to blame; I've only said as my Master Epidicus taught me.


Undone! I've pulled an old House upon my Head.


Have I offended ye in any thing?


By Cocks nowns, call me Father again, and I'll break your Neck, you damned
Bitch Whore.


I'll obey ye, Sir. When ever you've a Mind to be my Father, you may; if not, do
as you please.


What? Did you buy her, thinking she had been your Daughter? What tokens had
you for it?


None.


What made ye believe her to be our Child?


I had it from my Rogue Epidicus.


Tho your Servant has been mistaken, I hope you know her again.


Know her, how should I? when I ne'er saw her but once since she came into the
World.


I'm in a wretched condition


Prithee, Woman, leave weeping; go in and cheer up. I'll warrant ye find her
out somewhere or other.


'Twas a young Athenian Gentleman that bought her.


I'll find him out: Be satisfied. Go in, and guard this young Shipton, the
Devil's Grand-child. -- I'll leave all Works to go hunt out this Dog Epidicus.
If I catch him, I'll put him past playing any more Rogues Tricks.


THis Banker vexes me strangely, that he dosn't come for his Money, nor bring the
Girl I bought at the Army. -- But hold, yonder comes Epidicus. What's the
matter with him, that he looks so damnable sowrly on it?


If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods together, they could n't save
poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot. I saw my old Master, at a distance, buying
some Manicles, and Apecides with him. Now I more than Fancy, that these Fellows
are searching for my Rogueship. They've certainly smelt out the business, and
discovered all my damned Tricks.


How dost thou, m'old Implement?


Wretchedly, Jove knows.


What's befallen ye?


Prithee, gi'me something, and equip me for a March, before I be snapped up. For
the two old Cullies are just at my heels, with their swinging great Kill-Devils
for Execution.


Pshaw, ne'er flinch, Man.


Troth, no more I should n't, had I any hopes of relief.


I'll secure thee, my Lad.


Faith, these old Dogs will secure me better by half, if they catch me. -- But
what young Lass comes yonder, with that reverend old Gentleman?


'Tis the Banker, wi'the Girl I bought at the Army.


Is yon she?


Is n't she just as I told ye? Mind her.


Is't indeed?


View her well, Epidicus: Nothing but Charms from Top to Toe. -- Is n't she?
Observe, look: There's a delicate piece of Painting for ye.


You foretell as delicate a Piece upon my Back; which old Apelles and Zeuxes
will both draw with their birching Pencils.


Strange! I admire at your coming so slowly: a Fellow wi'wooden Legs would
ha'been here in half the Time.


Why, truly, I staid all this Time for her.


Nay, if 'twas her Pleasure, you came fast enough of Conscience.


Come, come; dispatch me, and tell my out the Money, that I may not make my
Company stay for me.


'Tis told already.


Take this Bag, and put it in


Wisely contrived! Stay a Minute, and I'll bring y' out the Money.


Pray be quick.


'Tis within here.


Do my Eyes fail me, or not? Isn't this Thelestis, Periphanes's and Philippa's
Daughter, begot at Epidaurus, and brought up at Thebes?


over-hearing him] Who can this be, that knows mine and my Parents Name?


Don't ye know me?


Not for the present.


Can ye call to mind, how one Birth-day o'yours, I brought ye some Golden
Bracelets?


I do, Friend.


Besides, a Crescent, and a Gold Ring?


Art thou he?


Yes indeed; and yon Gentleman's your Brother, by the same Father, tho by
another Mother.


Pray, is my Father alive?


Yes, and now you may set your Heart at rest.


If all this be true, the Gods have done for me beyond m'Expectation.


Nay, 'tis no advantage for me to deceive ye.


Here's your Money, Mr. Banker: Just an hundred Pounds. If you find any bad Money
in it, I'll change it.


Very well, Sir. -- Your Servant, Sir.


Now, my Dear, you're mine.


Thy Sister, on good troth, as you'll soon find -- Brother you're happily met.


Has she lost her Senses?


Not for calling you Brother.


What a shame, am I transformed into a Brother, the Time I could go and come
back?


Be thankful, and receive your good Fortune without any Noise.


O Sister, you've lost me as soon as found me.


Hold your Tongue, Child. By my Art, I've secured your Mistress, the
Musick-Girl, for ye at home; and by the same Art and Contrivance, have ransomed
your Sister.


'Tis true, Epidicus.


Go in then, and order a Bath to be got ready. I'll tell ye the whole Story at
more leisure.


Come this way, Sister.


I'll send Thesprion over t'ye. -- But pray remember, if th'old Man be in
wrath, for you and your Sister to be of my Side, and sweeten him up all what
you're able.


That will be easy to do.


Good Thesprion, get the back way to our House, and help to plead for me. 'Tis
a plaguy Business, tho I'm less afraid of the Old Fellows than before. --
Stratippocles all I know o'this business. I'll not flee for the matter, but am
resolved to stay at home. The Old Man shall ne'er say, I had th'impudence to
challenge my Master at running. -- I'll enter then; I've stayed too long
already.


-- Has n't this Rascal damnably imposed upon us, for Men of our gravity?


'Sbudikins, you've almost walked me off my Legs tho.


'St, silence! Let me alone to catch the Rogue.


I tell ye, Neighbour, you'd ten times better pitch upon another to go wi'ye,
instead o'me: For by hobbling after ye so long, I've got such horrible Swellings
o'my Knees that I'm quite foundered.


What a devilish Company of Tricks has this Rogue plaid us to day? I'm sure he
has squeas'd out the Heart, Blood, and Guts of my Purse.


A Curse on him, for me; troth, I believe he's the Devil's Match-Lighter, who
burns all that touch him, and Scorches all that come nigh him.


Pshaw, I've a dozen Gods at command more than Heaven will afford one, to stand
up, and fight for me. I've got my Guards and Supplies within doors, for all my
Rogueries. I laugh at m'Enemies Preparations.


Where, a Duce, shall I find this Rascal?


Excuse my Attenda^e, and seek him in the bottom of the Sea, for me.


Why do ye look for me, Sir? Why all these Pains? or why should ye weary the
Gentleman? Here I am. Do ye think I was running away; leaving the House; or so
much as avoiding your presence? I don't beg ye to spare me. Would ye fetter me?
I'm ready for ye. You've got your Instruments; I saw ye buy 'em. What stay ye
for? About it, Sir.


Strange! the Fellow calls for Punishment first.


Why don't ye bind me, Sir?


Faith, this is the most inveterate Rogue!


Truly, good Mr. Apecides, I don't desire you to intercede for me; you needn't
trouble your self.


That's easily granted, Mr. Epidicus.


Why stay ye, Sir?


For your advice, good Sir.


'Tis my advice, not yours, that you bind me presently.


That's not my desire.


No, Sir? -- Bind me.


I'd rather examine ye without it.


You'll get nothing out of me.


The Dog is preparing some back stroke for ye: What new Engine he has set a
going I can't tell.


Po, you lose Time, as long as I'm at Liberty. Tie me up, I say, and bind me as
hard as you can.


I tell ye, I'd rather examine ye as you are.


And I tell ye, you'll get nothing out o'me.


What shall I do wi'this Fellow?


What should ye? Humour him for once.


You're a rare Man, Mr. Apecides.


Let's see your Hands


Ay, with all my Heart. -- Come, bind 'em strait; and don't spare me a


Now judge ye, if they be not done well.


Very well. -- Now, Sir, examine me. Ask me what Questions you please.


Imprimis, Rogue, upon what Assurance did you say that Slave was my Daughter,
that was bought three Days ago?


My Pleasure, Sir: that Assurance.


How? upon your Pleasure, Sirrah?


Yes; and I'll lay any Wager wi'ye that she is --


My Daughter, when her Mother disowns her?


If you be sure she's none of her Mother's Daughter, lay your Guinea against my
Penny.


That's all Trick. -- But who is this same Woman?


Not to mince the matter, she's your Son's Mistress.


Didn't I gi'ye threescore and fifteen Pounds, to redeem my Daughter?


I own it, Sir; and wi'that Money I bought this Musick-girl, your Son's
Mistress, instead of her. -- In that Business, I fingered away threescore and
fifteen Pounds.


But what made ye top this last Musick-girl upon me?


Truly, Sir, I confess it; and found it proper for my Design.


Then what's become of the Money I delivered t'ye?


I'll tell ye, Sir, -- I gav't neither to a Miser, nor a Prodigal, but even to
your own Son Stratippocles.


How dare ye do that?


'Twas my pleasure, Sir.


What a cursed impudent Dog is this?


You insult over me as though I were your Slave.


I shall be glad when y' have got your Freedom.


And I deserve it now.


You deserve it, sirrah?


Go in, and see; I'll soon convince ye that I do.


What's the meaning o'this?


You'll see in a Minute: do but go in.


Hah! Here must be something more than ordinary. -- Good Neighbour have an Eye
to the Rogue.


Prithee, Epidicus, what's this business?


Faith 'tis a damned unreasonable thing that I should stand bound, for helping
of him to a lost Daughter.


Ha'ye found his Daughter, say ye?


Yes indeed, and she's within too. How plaguy hard 'tis t'ha' my good Services
so ill rewarded:


We have been seeking ye all the Town over, till we're as weary as Dogs.


Faith, I'm as weary wi'your finding, as you with your seeking.


You need n't beg so heartily: I'm satisfied of his Innocence, that he deserves
to be let go. --


Let my alone.


Let him unbind ye.


No.


That's not fair.


Faith, I'll not suffer't, till you've given me satisfaction.


That's nothing but just and reasonable. -- Come, I'll give ye a new pair
o'Shoes, a good Coat, and a Cloak.


What else?


Your Freedom.


But after that; when a Man's Time's just out, he ought to have some good thing
to be nibbling on.


You shall. -- I'll provide a supper.


Troth, if you won't ask me forgiveness, I'll not agree.


Well, I do, honest Epidicus, and beg your pardon, if any of my foolish
Mistakes have done y' an Injury. But in recompense, here take your Freedom.


Troth, I'm loath to pardon ye; but I cannot tell how to help it. -- Come, undo
my Hands, as soon as you please.


Here's a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by his Cunning. Up
with your Clo^ks, Gallants, and vail your Caps;
Farewell: We beg your Favour, and your Claps.



THis Play, Plautus was always very fond of, and reckons it his best; but as
for the general Deserts of it, I shall determine nothing. The Subject of it, is
the Discovery of Thelestis, and all the Lines of the Play tend to that Centre,
tho there is no manner of appearance of it till the Fifth Act, which makes the
Poet's Art the more fine and excellent. Tho the Subject is not perfectly
single, for Stratippocles loses a Mistress as he finds a Sister, yet there is
perfectly an Unity of Action, and, like the rest of his Plays, without any
Under-Plots. This Play is very short, yet there is great Variety in the Plot
and Incidents, and an excellent Management through the whole: So close it is,
tho perfectly clear, that it requires some Attention to comprehend all exactly,
at the first Reading. Besides this, it is very remarkable, That Plautus has
truly drawn the People of his Age, as the Distrust of Old Men, the Eagerness of
Young, the Vanity of Soldiers, the Impudence of Courtesans, and the Treachery
of Slaves.

THis First Scene explains the very same to the Audience, that Plautus's
Prologues generally used to do, which is far more natural than to do it in a
Prologue. This Scene, in the Original, is also very remarkable for an unusual
Air of Wit and Sharpness; and there are not many Scenes in this Author that
come up to it in its Fineness and Neatness of Raillery.

Page. 84. l. 11. You're a puny Town-Chitterlin] Scurra es. The Word, Scurra,
signifies properly, a Buffoon, or Parisite; but since these sort of People for
the most part seek after the softness and Luxury of Courts and Cities, and
abhor the Hardships of Camps, it here signifies, Urbanus, and is opposed to
Militaris; so that this Translation is the true sense, tho it may appear
otherwise at the first sight.

Ibid. l. 17, c. Off and on -- Epi. The Wooden Horse, you mean. O, I hate that
damned Variety most mortally.] Vary. Ep. Qui vary valent, caprigenam hominem
non placet mihi, neque pantherinum genus. That Word, Varius, was often used by
the Slaves of those Times in a jocose sense, to signify the streaks of ones
Back, after he was whipped, which was of Various Colours, as in the first Act
of Pseudolus, Ita ego la latera loris faciam ut valide varia sint.
Thesprion, by Vary, meant nothing but, Sometimes well and sometimes ill, or,
Off and on, as I have translated it; but Epidicus took it in this last sense,
and takes an occasion presently to call those who vary valent, those Laced
People, Caprigenam, ac pantherinum genus, that is, of the Race of Wild Beasts,
such as, Goats, and Panthers, whose Skins were of various Colours. A close
Translation here, would have lost much of the Beauty of the Original; therefore
I have taken a little more Liberty, and by that means, the Force of the
Repartee, is in a great Measure preserved.

Ibid. l. 30, c. Hear me, and you shall be heard i'your turn. These. The very
Words of a Judge, in truth.] Operam da: opera redibitur tibi. Th. Ius dicis.
The Phrases, Operam da, and, Opera redibitur, are proper Terms used in their
Courts by their Judges upon all occasions; and this made Thesprion answer him,
Ius dicis. If the Beauty of it be any ways lost in our Tongue, it is more
because it will not be so readily perceived, than for any other Reason I can
assign.

Page. 85. l. 4. Your Beadles, with their Staffs for your Honour's Pate.]
Lictores duo, duo viminei fasces virgarum. It (...) customary for the Pretors
(which were much the same with our Lord Chief-Iustices) to have Rods carried
before them, and upon this Custom consists all the sharpness of the Jest, these
Rods being the most usual Punishment for Slaves. This is much lost in our
Tongue.

Ibid. l. 9. What's become of my Master Stratippocles' s Arms.] This Question
would have been impertinent upon our Stage; but Thesprion being Stratippocles's
Armour-Bearer, who ought to have had 'em with him at that Time, the Question
was very proper.

Ibid. l. 22. Troth, I believe Vulcan made his Arms for him, c.] This, and a
good deal more, is an allusion to the Story of Achilles, and the sharpness of
it appeared more among the Romans, than it does to us; because they were far
better acquainted with this Story than we are.

Ibid. l. 31. Where's my Master Stratippocles? c] Here begins a Narration of
what passed before the opening of the Stage. It is very short, and extreme
lively; and the Poet most ingeniously manages it by the Mouths of two several
Persons, who both have a part in it; and this still makes it more diverting,
and more natural. But nothing can seem with less Design or Affectation than
Epidicus's part of it.

Page. 88. l. 8, c. What a Rogue was I t'impose upon the Old Man, c.] Here
Epidicus goes on with the Narration of what happened before the Action began upon
the Stage, and that in so few Words, and so accidentally, that nothing could
appear more proper, and more Natural; and indeed scarce any thing seems more
difficult than making Narrations in Monologues appear necessary, and natural.

Page. 89. l. 1, c. Thus I've told ye the whole Story, Cheribulus; and given ye
a full account of my Troubles and Love.] It is to be supposed that
Stratippocles had told his Friend Cheribulus, all what Thesprion had told
Epidicus in the first Scene. Thus the Poet ingeniously contrives to make
Stratippocles go on just where Thesprion had left off; for if he had told the
whole Story upon the Stage, the Spectators would have been palled and tyred out
with Repetitions.

Ibid. l. 9. Tho truly, to her Chastity, I ne'er offered the least Violence or
Incivility.] This is an extraordinary material Passage, which ought not to be
forgot by the Spectators, especially when they come to know this Woman, he
talks of, to be his Sister. What is still more remarkable, is, the Poet's
finding such an ingenious Pretext for bringing it in.

Ibid. l. 23. I'd sooner see such Friends starve in a Prison than live in a
Palace.] Malim hujusmodi mihi amicos furno mersos, quam foro. This Passage is a
little difficult. Stratippocles's saying, He had rather see such Friends as
Cheribulus, in an Oven rather than the Market, was as much as to say, he had
rather have him dead than alive; or at least, he would have him in a miserable
confined Condition, rather than in a happy and free State; so that the Liberty
I have taken here, is a nigher Imitation of the Latin, than a close Translation
could have been.

Page. 91. l. 26, c. In these Brains must I have a Committee of the whole House,
to consider of Ways and Means for the raising of Supplies to carry on this
vigorous War.] Ego de re argentaria jam Senatum convocabo in corde
consiliarium, cui potissimum judicatur bellum, unde argentum auferam. Here
Epidicus pleasantly alludes to the Senates Custom of raising Money for any Wars,
or the like; therefore I think it most properly translated in the Phrases, and
Terms, generally used in our Parliament-House.

THE first Interval is filled up with Epidicus's Preparations to cheat
Periphanes, and with Stratippocles's waiting at his Friend's House for the
Success of 'em.

Page. 92. l. 8, c. What need ye be ashamed of marrying one of a good Family,
though of mean Fortune; especially one, as you believe, you had your Daughter by,
that's now at home.] This is a very good Preparation for to make way for the
tenth Scene of the fourth Act.

Ibid. l 14, c. For ye ne'er can look upon her Grave, but y'offer Thanks for her
Departure.] Cujus quoties sepulcrum vides, sacrificas illico Orco hostiis. It
was a common Custom in those Days, when a Man has got rid of an ill Wife, that
makes way for another, to offer a Sacrifice to Pluto for his good Fortune. But
this was more than a Translation need to take notice of.

Page. 93. l. 11, c. I heard he was intangl'd with a Musick-Girl, but who I
can't tell. Per. Ay, that goes to the Heart o'me.] This is all designed by the
Poet, to help forward Epidicus's Cheat, and to make it seem more likely, and
probable.

Ibid. l. 15, c. The old Men ha'now opened a Passage for my Tricks to make
Incursions, and snub 'em o'their Money.] Ipsi hi quidem mihi dant viam, quo
pacto ab se argentum auferam. The Original is a Metaphor taken from the
Magistrates, who, when they appear in public, have their Officers to go before
'em to clear the way. The Translation, is a Metaphor taken from the Campaign,
which, in our Language, is more intelligible, and comical, than perhaps the
other would have been.

Page. 94. l. 10, c. All the Troops that were marching to Thebes, are
discharged, and sent home.] Here begins Epidicus's Story, by which he designed
to cheat the Old Man. Though there appears something of Grosness in it, yet it is
very ingeniously, and cunningly managed, and the Discourse very natural and
diverting. The Truth of the Peace, Epidicus's hast, Apecides's surprise, and
Periphanes's concern for his Son, are sufficient Circumstances to have made it
pass with wiser Men. But what is most remarkable, is, the Poet's Design in
helping out the main Incident to it, Thelestis's Discovery, when Epidicus only
thought of obliging his young Master. This the Spectators could never foresee,
and is the chief cunning of a Dramatic Poet.

Ibid. l. 30. There I found her, attended by four several Musicians playing.]
Epidicus said this, to fright Periphanes with the great Pride and Costliness of
his Son's Mistress, and to bring about his cheating Designs the easier.

Ibid. l. antepenult. c. And is in a fair way to ruin his Riches and
Reputation, his own self, and your Worships self.] Ubi fidemque, remque, seque,
teque properat perdere. The Imitations of Rhymes and Gingles, are often
dangerous to Translators; for, besides their being often affected, they as many
times come short of the Original. How far this is applicable to my self in this
Passage, I leave to every one to judge.

Page. 95. l. 4, c. How a duce was she dressed then? with a Cloak or a Robe, or
had she a Milliner's Shop upon her Back? There's variety enough. Epi. A Woman
carry a whole Shop upon her Back? Per. Where's the wonder? You may daily meet
these Creatures in the Sreets with Houses and Lands upon their Backs.] Quid erat
induta? an regillam induculam, an mendiculam, an impluviatam? ut istae faciunt
vestimentis nomina. Ep. Utin' impluvium induta eat! Pe. Quid istuc est
mirabile? quasi non fundis exornatae multae incedant per vias. The Liberty I
have taken in this Passage, was to endeavour to preserve the force of the Jest,
which consists in the playing upon the Word, Impluviatam. To make it clear, the
Word, Impluvium, signifies a^ square open Place, which the Romans often had in
their Houses to let in Rain for their use; or a square Court-yard, that
received the Rain in at four Water Spouts; from whence, a Habit they had which
was made with four sides, or four Pieces, was called Vestimentum impluviatum.
Here Epidicus takes an occasion from this word to admire at a Woman's being able
to wear a Court-yard upon her back: Periphanes, carrying on the Humour, tells
him 'tis no wonder, since they frequently wear whole Houses and Lands, meaning
the value of 'em, which their Prodigal Sparks had bestowed on 'em. As for the
liberty I've taken, where a Jest is lost in the Translation, another ought to
be invented, which comes nighest the Force and Design of the Original.

Ibid. l. 14. c. There's your light Mant plated, your Stiff-bodied-Gown, your
Loose-Gown, your Night-Gown, your Riding-Gown, your Embroidered, and Speckl'd
Gowns, Pane'd Works, and Plumed Works, Petticoats, Hoods, Scarfs, Tours and
Top-knots, Fingle-Fangles, and Gold-Bobs, with all the Colours of the Rainbow,
and Figures of all the Flowers, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Flies, and Monsters in
the Universe.] Tunicam rullam, tunicam spicam, linteolum caesicium, indusiatam,
patagiatam, caltulam, aut crocutulam, supparum, aut subminiam, ricam,
basilicum, aut exoticum, cumatile aut plumatile, cerinum aut melinum. Gerrae
maximae! I have been forced to take a more than ordinary liberty in this
Passage, because we want Words to answer those in the Original, though three or
four of the first may do tolerably well. In such a place as this, if the Humour
and Design of the Raillery be but carried on as in the rest of the Translation,
'tis as much as I aim at. The explanation of these Latin words, can be of
little use in respect of the Beauties of the Play (the main thing which I aim
at in my Remarks) therefore I shall not trouble the Reader, nor my self, so
much as that comes to.

Ibid. l. 22, c. Nay some of their Dresses make 'em look like Monkeys. Epi.
What are those, Sir? Per. Your damned Night-Rails.] Cani quoque etiam ademptum
'st nomen. Ep. Qui? Pe. La Laconicum. The Women, it seems, had a sort of
Dresses called Laconicks, and since many of their Dogs had the very same Name;
Periphanes satirically reprehends the Women of his time, as borrowing their
Dresses Names from Dogs. This is lost in our Language, therefore I have
attempted to preserve the sharpness of it another way, and for that Liberty,
see the last Sentence of the Remark before the last.

Pa. 98. l. 3. I've a trick too, that the Merchant shall not smell your Designs.]
This new Trick was a cunning Contrivance of Epidicus's, to keep Periphanes out
of the way, not doubting but to manage Apecides with ease.

Ibid. l. 23. Epidicus, I give ye Thanks.] Epidice, habeas gratiam. As Madam
Dacier observes, this is spoken by Periphanes, and not by Apecides, as it is in
all the common Books.

Page. 99. l. 18, c. And stick as close to my Back, as an old Rook to a rich
Cully.] No ulmos parasitos faciet, quae usque attondeant. That is, Lest his
Elming Parasites should eat me up, or, devour me to the Bone. This is a
pleasant Thought, but will not do in our Language, to have done it, His Rods
should stick to my Skin, as a Parasite to a Lord's Table, would have been no
more Liberty than was necessary to make the Thought clear in our Tongue.

Ibid. l. 24, c. I'll soon produce one, and teach her her Lesson, how to carry
on the Cheat handsomely to our old Gentleman.] This Trick of Epidicus's, is an
excellent Preparation by the Poet, for what happened in the seventh and eighth
Scenes of the fourth Act; not only for the pleasant Diversion to the
Spectators, but chiefly for the Discovery of Epidicus's Rogueries, and
consequently by bringing about the main Plot more dexterously. This neither
Epidicus or the Spectators could foresee, but the Poet had it in his Eye all
the time.

Ibid. l. ult. Of this old silly Put.] Ab damnoso scene. The word Damnosus, is
an excellent word in this Case, being both Active and Passive, and signifies,
One who has spent much, or, One who has suffered much. We have nothing to
answer it fully in our Tongue, that I know of, except those of Cully, Bubble,
or Put, will; and the true meaning of these, especially the two latter, seem
not yet well fixed.

THE second Interval is filled up with Epidicus's receiving the Money of
Periphanes; and with Stratippocles's waiting for him at Cheribulus's House.

Page. 100. l. 3, c. I'd give the World to know whether there be any Hopes or
not.] It is very remarkable that throughout this Play, Stratippocles never met
with his Father on the Stage; and further, he endeavours to avoid him till the
latter end of the last Act, when Epidicus has brought about his Design,
therefore lies incognito at his Friend Cheribulus's House: Yet notwithstanding
all these Inconveniences which attend Stratippocles, the Poet has ingeniously
found very probable Pretexts for his appearing those four times he does, of
which this is a remarkable one.

Ibid. l. 17, c. You'll meet with something, by some ways, some means, from some
Place, or from some Body, c.] Here Cheribulus is hard put to it by
Stratippocles, therefore he is forced to talk a little obscurely, and with
hesitation; for the more clear discovery of which to the Reader, there ought to
have been Breaks, or Dashes at each Comma, in this Translation, but that defect
I did not discover time enough.

Epidicus came exactly in the right time to make up the breach between the
young Gentlemen; and here Plautus's Conduct is very remarkable in ordering his
Business so within Doors, that is, his receiving the Money and Instructions, so
that he must of necessity come at that time and no other.

Page. 101. l. 20, c. You see, Sir, as long as I can please, and oblige you,
I'm sufficiently prodigal of my own Back.] This is made use of by the Poet as a
fair Pretext for Epidicus's bringing in his new Tricks and Devices without any
affectation, or seeming Design of instructing the Audience; a piece of Art
which few of our Poets seem to observe, but Mr. Dryden. Another thing is very
remarkable, that is, Plautus's excellent Management in relating Epidicus's
Cheats by piece meal, some in this Scene, and others elsewhere, when the
relating all together, would have so much over-charg'd the Audiences Memory, as
to have dulled a great part of their Pleasure, a Fault too common in many of
our Comedies, than which nothing can be more dangerous to the ruining of the
whole Success.

Ibid. l. 24. By making your Father guilty of Bag-slaught^r.] Quia ego tuum
patrem faciam perenticidam. The Joke of this Passage consists in the sound of
the words, Perenticida, a Cut-Purse, and Parenticida, a Paricide; therefore so
nigh as the sound of Bag-slaughter and Manslaughter, is to Perenticida and
Parenticida; and as much as Paricide is greater than Man-slaughter, so much is
the difference between the Original and Translation.

Ibid. l. 26. Hold up his Hand at the Bar, but I make him hold up his Hand at
his Bags.] Peratim ductare: at ego follatim ductitabo. The whole Beauty of this
Passage, I believe, cannot be preserved in our Tongue. Epidicus here carries on
the fancy of Perenticida and Parenticida, and the Poet has luckily hit upon a
Line that exactly agrees with either. For the common punishment of Paricides,
was to put 'em into a Sack, with a Cock, Serpent, and Ape, and then throw 'em
into the River. Now the word, Ductare, signifies equally, To bring a Man to
punishment, or, to cheat him; so that the Phrase, Peratim ductare, agreed with
both cases, because Pera was either the Sack for the Paricide, or the old Mans
Purse. Follatim ductare, is the same thing, only Follis was a much larger Sack
than Pera. So that the natural sense of this, without any quibling, is, I don't
cheat him by dribbling Purses, but by large Bags; but I would not do it that
way, for then I must have lost more of the design of the Original than now I
have. Madam Dacier has made no Translation at all for this and the last
Passage.

Page. 102. l. 4, c. * By buying her himself, beforehand; and so to remove her
to some by-place. Now will I top another upon him, that shall do his Business
as well every jot.] None of this Passage is in the Original; but it is most
certain that there are some Lines lost, by what follows; therefore, I have been
forced to add this to make up the sense. The words are none of my own
Invention, but almost a just Translation of what Madam Dacier had filled up
this Place withal, to wit, Ut enim praestinet la, priusquam veniat filius;
Ubi erit empta, ut aliquo ex urbe amoveat venificam.
Nunc ostendam ei fidicinam aliqua conductitiam.


Ibid. l. 25, c. Instead of the threescore and fifteen Pounds, to name sixscore
Guinea's.] Argenti minas se habere quinquaginta. This Plot was well laid, and
ingeniously contrived, but this Passage has made it so obscure in the Original,
that several Interpreters have quite mistaken the sense; so that I was forced
to add above half a Line in the Translation to clear all.

Ibid. l. 32. Y' out-do Matchiavil for Policy.] Vorsutior es quam rota
figularis. That is, You're more crafty than a Potter's Wheel. But this does
poorly in our Language, therefore I have turned it. If I had translated it,
You've as many turns as a Whirligig, it would have been nigher the Original,
and might have done tolerably enough in the Mouth of Epidicus, but not in
Stratippocles.

Page. 103. l. ult. I'm safely arrived at the Camp with this rich Booty.] Cum
praeda in castras redeo Here ends the the third Act, as plainly appears from
the Cessation of Action upon the Stage, and other Circumstances. The Common
Books are all false in this Point, who make the third Act to end about 140
Verses further, where there is no clearing the Stage, nor no manner of Grounds
for it.

THE third Interval is filled up with Epidicus's going to the Slave-merchants,
and procuring the Musick-woman for Apecides: And also with Cheribulus's waiting
for his Mistress at his Friend's House.

This short Scene is very moral, and very natural for a considering cool-headed
Old Man to speak. It is observable that the Ancients were full of these sort of
grave Passages in their Comedies, as well as Tragedies, and our Author was not
much behind-hand, notwithstanding his Inclination to Merriment upon every
slight and trivial occasion.

Page. 105. l. 7. There's vast difference between the Education of a young Maid,
and a Courtesan.] The ancient Athenians, and Romans were rather more careful of
their Daughters Honesty than we; and to attempt the Chastity of a Virgin, was
no less than a Capital Crime.

Ibid. l. 17, 18. Without doubt you've an admirable Servant, c.] Here begins a
very pleasant short Narration of what was done off the Stage; the very Plot and
Subject makes it so, and not the Stile. But the chief Design of it is for a
Preparation to make the Seventh, but. especially the Eighth Scene of this Act,
more diverting. See more of that Preparation, in the second Remark in the third
Scene of the Second Act.

Page. 106. l. 3, c. All the while, I did as though I was a silly clod-pated Ass,
that could not say By to a Goose. Per. You could do no otherwise.] Ego illic me
autem sic assimulabam quasi stolidum, cum bardum me faeciebam. Per. Imo ita
decet. This, Imo ita decet, is an equivocal Answer to the foregoing Sentence;
as is, You could do no otherwise, the same; it being taken either in a good or
bad Sense. This is very pleasant when rightly apprehended.

Ibid. l. 18, c. What silly Fellow's yon, who comes, tossing and brandishing
his Cloak so?] Sed hic quis est quem advenientem conspicor, suam qui undantem
chlamydem quassando facit? These two Verses are misplaced in all the Editions
of Plautus that I ever saw; they placing them the last in the Scene, whereas
they should go immediately before Atque haec stultitia'st, c. Five Lines
before. And this has made many Interpreters force a Sense out of the Verse,
Atque haec stultitia'st, me illi vitio vortere, which the Author never
intended.

That such a considerable Incident as the Rhodian Captain's coming, might not
seem to be made only to serve the Poet's Design, he has wisely taken care to
prepare it before-hand, in the latter end of the Second Scene of the Second
Act, so that here can be nothing precipitated, or any thing unnatural. This is
a Rule that ought to be carefully observed by all Dramatic Poets.

Page. 107. l. 7, c. I've achieved that by my great and mighty Valour, that all
Mankind ought to gi'me Thanks.] It is observable, that Plautus seldom brings a
Soldier upon the Stage, but he is a blundring, rough-hewn, swaggering Fellow.
Terences's Thraso is just of the same Character, but more moderately drawn than
Plautus's Soldier.

Page. 108. l. 5, c. I intend to give her her Freedom, and make her Partner i'my
Bed.] Here our noble Captain's Character is handsomely carried on, for he does
not only want Politeness and Civility, but you see he wants common Discretion
too,

Page. 110. l. 9, c. I heard young Stratippocles, rich Periphanes' s Son, took
care to get her freed in his absence. Per. 'S death, I must run my Country if
all this be true.] This was Acropolistis the Musick-girl, whom Periphanes
himself had freed, taking her all this while for his Daughter Thelestis, and
knew nothing to the contrary; which much startled him to hear that his Son had
freed, Acropolistis, one he knew nothing of. Periphanes's Complaints, were all
for Epidicus's last Cheats; for as yet he did not so much as suspect the first,
to wit his imposing upon him with Acropolistis instead of his Daughter. So that
here is an excellent Contrivance of the Poet's to raise new Troubles, and add
new Pleasure to the Spectators in the last Scene of this Act, and make it the
most diverting of all, by causing Periphanes Troubles to come one after
another, and such too as he thought himself most secure from.

Ibid. l. 25, c. Shall I, who ha'signed so many Warrants and Edicts, suffer
this Rascal to go unpunished?] Qui in tantis positus sum sententiis, eamne ego
sinam impune? This is a very hard Passage, and Interpreters have explained it a
great many several ways; but here I have follow'd Madam Daciers Explanation,
which seems much more probable, and natural, than any other I have seen.

Page. 111. l. 10, c. My poor Girl's fallen into the Enemies Hands; and I can
hear no Tale or Tidings of her.] Here the Poet gives a very good reason for
Philippa's coming to Athens; so that this Incident is no ways forced or
unnatural. What is remarkable still, is, that though her Daughter had been fallen
into the Enemies Hands a considerable time; yet she, coming from Thebes, could
not arrive before this Time, because the Peace was but just now concluded on
and ratified. For more of the Preparations of this Interview, see the first
Remark in the second Act.

Page. 113. l. 24. Bid my Daughter Thelestis come out.] Iube Acropolistidem
prodire filiam ante aedis meam. This Passage is undoubtedly false in all the
Editions of this Author, and instead of Acropolistidem, it ought to be
Thelestidem; for though her name was really Acropolistis, yet Periphanes took her
for his Daughter Thelestis. I suppose it was altered by some Person not well
acquainted with the Plot.

Page. 114. l. 16. All Creatures have their several ways of knowing their Young.]
Aliter catuli lunge olent, aliter sues, That is to say, Puppies, and Hogs have
better Noses. It is a Proverb taken from nature, but too gross and base for the
refin'dness of our Conversation, therefore I have altered it a little.

Page. 115. l. 1. I've pulled an old House upon my Head.] Plaustrum Perculi.
This is a Proverb borrowed from Husbandmen; who seldom knew a greater
Misfortune than the overthrowing of a Cart after it was well laden. It seems
mo^e expressive in this Place than our English Proverb.

THE Fourth Interval is filled up with Periphanes's searching for Epidicus, to
punish him; and likewise with Stratippocles's waiting for the Banker and his
Mistress.

Page. 116. l. 6, c. If Jove should come down, he and his eleven Gods together,
they could not save poor Pilgarlick from going to Pot.] Here Epidicus was really
in a very sad Condition, and the Stage embarrassed with all the Difficulties
that could be; yet soon after, our Poet finds a way to bring all off, even when
the Spectators were almost brought to Despair. The doing of this well, does not
only show the greatest Art of a Poet, but gives the Spectators the greatest
pleasure too; and this is the most taking part of a Play, and indeed, there is
nothing like Surprises, if they be natural.

Ibid. l. 17. The two old Cullies.] Duo defloccati senes. The word,
Defloccatus, signifies, Worn out, or, Bald; Epidicus called 'em so, because he
had fleeced 'em, and consequently, Cully is the proper Term in our Language.

Page. 117. l. 16. A Fellow with wooden Legs would have been here in half the
time.] Pedibus pulmoneis qul perhibetur, prius venisset, quam tu advenisti
mihi. Madam Dacier says, That this Passage relates to some Man, brought into a
Proverb by reason of his slowness. The word, Pulmoneus, signifies, Soft, or
Swelled, but that would not have done so well in our Language, especially in
this Place.

In this short Scene is the Discovery, or the Unravelling of the Plot, which
seemed to have fallen out purely by accident, and all the Preparations to it
make it appear the most probable in the World. One cunning piece of Art of the
Poet's, is, his adjusting all Circumstances so as she must necessarily come
upon the Stage at this time and no other; and then to make Stratippocles advice
Epidicus to view her well, upon pretence of her Beauty, whereas it was designed
for her Discovery, for there was a necessity for that, since Epidicus had
almost forgot her. Many Observations might be made upon the Preparations to
this Discovery, which I want room to insert.

Page. 120. l. 1. Good Thesprion, get the back way to our House, and help to
plead for me.] It is observable that Thesprion appears but once in the whole
Play, and that in the beginning. But in this case, our modern Poets would not
so soon have lost such a remarkable Character, but have carried it on through
the Play; and this, when it dos not confound the Plot, is an excellency of our
Stage above the Ancients. Plautus is guilty of this Defect in the more
remarkable Character of Artotrogus, in his Miles Gloriosus.

Ibid. l. 12. For Men of our Gravity.] Nos vetulos decrepitos duos. The word,
Decrepo, signifies to be at the, last gasp, and is a Metaphor taken from a
Candle just a going out, which makes some small Creekings; for this reason, old
Men were often called Decrepites, because as long as they had life, they were
in some condition of making a Noise, that is, of doing some good, either by
their Purses, or their Actions. Our word, Decrepit, being usually taken in a
reproachful sense, would not have well answered it, therefore I have
endeavoured to preserve the comical part of the meaning.

Page. 121. l. 7, c. I've got my Guards and Supplies within doors, for all my
Rogueries.] Epidicus's Supplies were Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philappa, and
Thesprion, whom he had got ready to plead for him; and since such a lucky
Discovery had been made, and the Girls Redemption too, both from Slavery and
the danger of Incest, all by his means, he knew they could not fail of
succeeding; and this made him so very insolent to the two old Men, to their
great Surprise, and the Spectators satisfaction.

Ibid l. 9. I laugh at my Enemies Preparations.] Apolactizo inimicos omnes. The
word, (...), is Greek, and signifies Calce summoveo, or Calce repello; but this
was not necessary to be taken notice of in a Translation.

Page 121. l. 15, c. D' ye think I was running away; leaving the House; or so
much as avoiding your presence?] Number te fugi? number ab domo absum? number oculis
concessi tuis? Here are three Sentences signifying almost the same thing; and I
believe many Translators would have contented themselves with doing two, or
perhaps but one of 'em; but I always choose exactness when I can do it without
very much Injury to the English. For this see the second Remark on the second
Scene of the third Act of Amphitryon.

Page. 122. l. 15. Lay your Guinea against my Penny.] In meum nummum, in tuum
talentum pignus da. That is to say, Lay your Talent against my Sesterce, 187
Pounds to nigh two Pence; this was to show the difference between Masters and
Slaves. This Translation keeps to the Design and Pleasantry of Epidicus even as
well as the other.

Page. 124. l. 1. You needn't beg so heartily, c.] Periphanes speaks this to the
Persons within, whom Epidicus had employed to plead for him. If any of our
modern Poets had had the management of this Place, they would undoubtedly have
brought Stratippocles, Thelestis, Philippa, and Thesprion on to the Stage; but
the Ancients had another taste, and were wonderful careful to avoid any thing
that looked like Confusion, sometimes too scrupulously in this case, as ours
too often offend the other way. Therefore a just Medium ought to be exactly
observed.

Page. 125. l. 1. Here's a rare Rogue then, one who has gained his Freedom by
his Cunning.] Hic is homo est, qui libertatem malitia invenit sua.] Here,
perhaps, it may be thought, that Vice appears triumphant. I grant it would upon
our Stage if this were acted; but the Romans were of another Opinion in these
Cases, and they took a peculiar pleasure in seeing a witty Slave cheat a
covetous old Fellow, and the Ingenuity of the Action was often thought
sufficient amends for the Knavery of it.

I shall conclude all with this Remark upon the whole: That the Acts could
never have been more naturally divided. The First, contains the Arrival of
Stratippocles, and the opening of the Subject; the second, Epidicus's
Knaveries; the third, his success in his Knaveries; the fourth, the discovery
of 'em; and the fifth, the knowledge of Thelestis, and his recovery from the
danger of 'em. And in the management of all this, not one Actor appears upon
the Stage without a necessary Pretext of Business there.


