Since 'tis the Women's Play, I hope you will excuse
Whatever we bring, because it comes from us.
Consider what the Stage has done, and Plays,
Of all things, most deserve your love and praise.
And, Gallants, though you are but seldom good,
Yet to us women most of all you should.
No sooner comes a Beauty here in play,
But strait your Coach and six takes her away.
And you who cull the Flock, should be so kind
To comfort the forlorn you leave behind.
Besides, no sooner are your follies known
But Fop on Stage is strait so lively shown,
Nay, and his Picture too so ugly done,
'Twould fright him into sense. Thus Plays are writ
To breed you Mistresses, and teach you Wit:
And, Gallants, 'twere ill-natured, I protest,
To like the Birds, and yet destroy the Nest.
But if in spite you'll still grow worse and worse,
I will even give you this one hearty Curse:
May all the mighty Sums you ever sent
Your Mistresses, be on your Valets spent;
And when at Nine months end the Miss grows sickly,
May none of all the Brats you own be like ye.

WEll, I am resolved to win this pretty Creature, whatever it cost me: I'll
spend the value of half a Spanish Plate-Fleet, but I'll have her.

Dear Sabina, welcome my little Princess; if thy Cargo consists of that dear
treasure Hope, unlade, unlade: what news? no sign, no light, no glimmering?
what hopes? tell me.


Senior Claudio, question not the success of your design; for I have made such
a progress already into it, as will admit of no obstruction.


Fly to the relation of it.


Well, thus it is: Your dear Leonora, and the fool her Husband, takes it for
granted that I am Servant to my Lady Abbess of the Covent of St. Sylvester; and
under that character I have been several times with them for gold-wyre for the
use of the Covent, as I pretend. The advantage they hope from the custom of the
Covent by my means, gains me a very favourable reception.


And the charge of it, Sabina, I will not grudge to bear; thou may command my
whole Estate upon this Errand.


Well then, if I do not deliver this Fort, with all the Outworks belonging to
it into your hands, and before this night be over, may I never bring kind
couple together again, but live as poor and wretched as a Confessor in a
Garrison, and as shabby as a Bawd in a Pillory.


And if thou dost, be consident to be as happy as I can make thee.


Marry, Senior, and my own happiness is so material a thing, that should I omit
any thing that might gain it, I wish all the Curses of an Ash. wednesday may
fall upon me.


I fear, Sabina, you will find it a more difficult piece of service than you
yet apprehend: for she is so tainted with that morose Spanish gravity of ours,
that she put the Slight upon the Charms of Treats and Presents.


Then she's no English woman, I dare swear: for, as I am informed, Treats and
Presents meet with no opposition there. I have wished my self in England many a
time.


Why so, Sabina?


Why, Senior, 'tis the Land of Privilege for women: the very daughter of a
Laundress there, after she bears the honourable title of a Miss, expects, nay
commands Attendance and Equipage suitable to a Duchess. And for the men, they
are such lovers of change of Faces, that 'tis thought if there were a Colony of
Lapland, Witches transported thither, for the sweet sin of Variety, they would
sometime be courted for Beauties. And now I talk of Variety, how do you think,
Senior, I might pass there?


You are pleasant, Sabina; but all this adds nothing to my affairs: therefore
prethy remove the Scene from England into Spain, and tell me, shall my dear
Leonora


Well, Senior, and now you put me in mind of England, I cannot choose but pity
your case, that such a noble young rich Don as you should be put to that toil,
that charge, and that trouble, for the obtaining such a paltry creature as a
Citizens Wife. An Intrigue with a Citizens Wife in England, is as common as a
Frolic at a Carnival here, and has full as little danger in it. There's no
locking up their Wives, nor engaging whole Families to punish their frailties.
If a Gallant be caught in the fact by a Wives Brother, nay, or a Husband
himself, he may as easy come off for Adultery there, as a man may for Murder
here. The Gallant gets but out of the way for sanctuary, and the Wife gets her
Parents to make up the Breach, at worst, but to pay a new Portion, and all is
well. The kind Cit uses his Wife that wrongs him, as he does the man that robs
him; he had rather have his stolen goods quietly again, than to hang the thief
and loose them.


Well, but to my business.


Aye, aye, to your business; you shall have her, you shall have her: I am
already so forward in my projection, that


Kind wench!


She's your own, and so your Servant Sir. Expect to see me come loaded with the
best news you ever heard in your life: Such a Mistress, and such a Plot


Hark you, one word more.


Your Servant, your Servant.


Whirz! -- Well, if her wit be as fleet as her heels, the Devil's in it if I
miscarry. This is the nimblest little Bawd I ever met with: Most of her
profession are such heavy bundles of filth, that the very sight of the
nauseous Caterer is enough to spoil a mans appetite to the Venison.

Sir, there's a Monsieur came from Madrid would speak with you.


Go fetch him in.

You are come in a very fortunate minute.


Why, Senior?


Faith, to give me your approbation of a Monsieur I have sent me from Madrid.


Dam your Monsieurs, I hate 'em.


Faith I am no admirer of 'em my self; but the Ambassadors kindness I could
not refuse.

Well Gentlemen, how do you like my Frenchman?


There's a head of hair like the Forest of Arden.


And a pair of Breeches like the Crim Tarters Pavilion. The French and English
are such Prodigals, that you shall have a French Monsieur, or an English Lord,
bestow more in clothing themselves and Footboys, than would completely robe
all the Infantry belonging to one of our Spanish Armies.


Senior Claudio, if you do not put the change upon his Dress, your whole
Fortune must go to purchase him Ribbon, Pantaloons, and Periwigs.


Fear not that: I intend that one yard of Cloth shall make him a whole Suit,
and one Mode serve him his life.


I would gladly know the reason of the mutability of those people: I have seen
a French Courtier in twelve several Modes in one day.


The reason I'll tell you: They make an advantage by it.


An advantage? prithee how?


They have gained such an influence over the English Fops, that they furnish
them with their French Puppy-dogs for Valet de Chambres.


And I have heard of an English Captain that threw up his Commission because
his Company would not Exercise after the French Discipline. But your opinion of
my Monsieur.


Gad, mine is, that one born and educated in the very bowels of the various
Modes of France, and one that has lived among the Belly-gods of England, can
never make a fit Servant for the gravity and severity of our Spanish Dress and
Diet.


Take the Monsieur in, and let the Taylor and Barber be sent for, and bid 'em
be sure to put him into a right Spanish dress. Here's a Bush sit for a
Signpost, and there's a pair of Breeches so large, that the motion of 'em is
enough to raise a Hurricane. Sirrah, let his Breeches be made straight, and
stuffed with Whalebone, to reduce his Limbs into a Spanish Posture. These
Monsieurs walk and salute as though their Joints went on hinges.


Let me pray give te little more room in te Breek, for te varre good reason.


Your reason.


Fait me have to var sore Breek. Oh te damned Osteler tat sent a me from Madrid
on te damned trotting-horse; and te pocky Spanish Gypsy in te ditch,
Morbleau.


Well, I am satisfied with your reason; your Breeches shall be a little larger.


Me confess te var great Obligation.


Well, I find I shall have a hopeful Servant of this Monsieur; but before I
have done with him, he shall be able to give lessons of Frugality to both the
Courts of England and France.


We are infinitely bound to my Lady Abbess for her good custom.


So are we to her Servant Sabina. Well, that's an innocent virtuous Maiden, on
my Conscience.

Look, Husband, where she comes. Welcome, dear Sabina, how does my Lady Abbess?


She is well, and making heavenly preparation for her self and all her good
friends.


I am glad to hear that; then I hope we shall not be forgot.


Be confident of that.


Then, Wife, we will even leave that tedious troublesome work of heavenly
preparation to that good Lady; for she understands the knack of it better than
we: besides, she has nothing else to do.


Good Husband, talk not so profanely.


Good Wife, by your favour, is it not a little unconscionable for a man to be
put to the Trouble of making provision both for this world and the next too?


Oh fie upon you for a wicked man!


Well, Senior Pedro and Leonora, I have a request to you both, from my Lady
Abbess.


What is it, Sabina? but no matter what it is, for I will grant it before I
know any further: So will you, Wife, will you not?


But however, Sabina, let us know my Ladies commands first: It is not discreet
to subscribe to a blank.


It is to bear my Lady company to morrow, being the Midsummer-feast: And this,
I hope, Leonora, you will not refuse.


I were to blame, if I should.


Nay, thou deserve to be cursed by Bell, Book and Candle, if thou dost. But
have a care, Wife, that you do not return as some Puritan Ladies have done, who
will not admit of carnal converse with their Husbands, because wicked and
profane, and pretend a command from the Spirit for it; which in my conscience,
if there be such a thing as Divinity in Matrimony (and Faith that's a question,
as the world goes now) such a command must come from the Devil.


Do you think, Husband, that my Devotion can ever injure my Love or Obedience?


I hope not, Wife; but you must pardon me if I a little fear it: for I have
observed that those who are so passionately in love with Religion, never love
any thing else: All other duties must be slighted for that. You shall have a
Wife shut her self up for a whole day to prepare for an evenings Vespers, and
then unconscionably deny her Husband a whole nights Benevolence to prepare for
a mornings Lecture. Out upon her!


Well, Husband, if you fear that, I'll stay at home.


No, go, and take my Prayers along with thee, that thou may return so severe
in Sanctity, that thou may be able to work Miracles, whilst I get an Abbots
Estate by showing 'em.


Devotion destroy Obedience, Senior Pedro? in that you are mistaken: I have as
much Zeal as may justly title me Religious, yet it never obstructed my duty to
my Lady, or love to my Friend: A hundred Prayers a day I never omit; and I
think that may be called Zeal.


Yes marry, and the height on it too. Thou exceedest me Ninety eight: two short
Prayers a day I can make a hard shift to run over, and I think that's enough in
Conscience for a man that never designs himself a Factor in Piety. I did at a
high Festival once, but venture at the trouble of Four Avemaries extraordinary,
and it threw me into a Fever of six months after.


But Sir, the Gold Wyre. I shall be chid for staying.


I'll step and fetch it.


I shall think the time long till I see you in the Monastery: You will find a
Reception there you little expect.


Indeed, Sabina, every minute will be an age to me, till I am at that pious
Feast.


You'll meet such warm devotion there, let me tell you, you'll have a heavenly
entertainment.


Here's the Gold Wyre. Was there ever such Obligations thrown upon wretches of
our mean condition? Well, Wife, we are the happiest people in the whole world:
Such a Customer, and such a Lady Abbess -- I can't but think how she'll tickle
thy sweet imagination with her heavenly Company.


Journee Morbleau; oh Diabolo, Diabolo, c.


Prethy Monsieur be patient; look in this Glass, and be so wise as to grant
this dress much better than Pantaloons and Periwigs.


Begar, matter Fashner, te Devil take you for mine Breek; my foy, me must do my
beseness in te Breek.


A pox on you; and be glad you have Breeks to do your business in.


Well, me will make te varre great complaint to Senior Claudio.


If you do, the next Breeches I make you, shall be so straight that they shall
be laced on.


But hark you; what shall we do for Mustachioes?


I have an artificial pair will do as well, till his own grows up.


Te little Wig and te grand Mustach, be var fine tings for te Spanish
Commodity. Begar, var me in London in tis garb on St. Taffies day, me should be
hang on te Signpost for te Jack-a-Lent.


I wish he had been hanged, before he came hither, that it might have stopped his
journey.


Now me be te right Spaniard.


Yes marry are you, and by the virtue of that dress may challenge as much
freedom as any he in Sevil.


Your Moustaches secure you against all affronts.


My foy, var fine; ten tare for your Matter Circumsiser -- and tare for you te
damned Fashner.


What's the matter here?


Begar me be var glad you be come to Fashner and Barber.


What have they done?


My foy, mine Breek be much te straight, and te Mustach so great, tat it much
be trouble to sup the Pottage, Morbleau.


Your Breeches must be straight to put your legs and whole body into a right
order. Come, let us see you walk.


Be not tis var well?


Is not that better than going and saluting as though your body were
dis-joynted, and every limb taking leave of one another? Truro, how do you like
the Monsieur now?


So well, that when I die I'll make him my Executor.


Indeed, Truro, me give te var great thanks for te civility.


You are beholding to Truro, Monsieur; and, Truro, you have a great deal of
reason to esteem the Monsieur, for he is recommended to me for a man of Parts,
and a great Prosicient in the study of Astrology.


Oonds, does he look like a Conjurer?


None my foy, me be no Conjure, but me have te little acquaintance wit te Star.


That is an Art I have a kindness for. I must propose a Question to you; if you
can give me satisfaction in it, you shall command what respect you please.


And begar if me give you not te var great satisfaction, let me ne'er be dressed
A-la-mode again. What be te Question, Senior?


Whether or no I shall gain the thing I hope for? That's all I will say at
present: a dark Question I must confess; but the Resolution of it will gain you
the greater Reputation.


My foy, Senior, tis Question be deman in te hour of Venus, tarefore it must be
for te woman. To morrow me will tell you more.


Well, be sure you do. Be gone, be gone all.

Methinks, Sabina, I read hopes in thy very looks.


Do you so, Senior? That's an argument your eyes are good, that can read at
this distance without Spectacles.


Be quick, and tell me what you have done, Sabina.


Done! I have made Leonora, and her Husband both, believe that my Lady Abbess
expects her company to morrow in the Covent. She has promised to be ready when
I call her; and I will here promise to convey her into what room of your own
house you please to have her. When I have done that, do you manage the rest as
you please.


Dear Sabina, do this, and thou shalt drain me into Gold: do it, and thou shalt
find me as generous as a Miser on his death-bed.


Then fear not commanding what woman you please. Those Ambassadors from Peru
and Mexico negotiate more Love-affairs, than all the Ministers of Cupid put
together. But, Senior, what stranger was that I see in the Family?


That's a French man presented to me by the French Ambassador, and a great
Astrologer.


I must needs see him, and talk with him.


I'll bring you to him.


What te Devil, must me feed on noting but te lang Sleeves, straight Breeks,
and grand Mustach? Begar me do not like te diet var well.


Pox choke you, what would you have? Have you not already eat about three parts
of a Pilchard, besides a dish of Vegetives? when half a one use to serve me
above three days.


Damn te Pilchar, a barrel would be noting in my stomach. Oh te Anglitar, te
boon Anglitar, me never break mine Fass tare, but with half dozen Pigeon, Three
four Chicken, good strong Beer, and half dozen bottle de Wine: Was not tat var
boon, Truro?


Boon? a Devil on you; if all this went to the making of a Breakfast, what the
Devil must your Dinners and Suppers be? That damned English stomach of yours
will never make a fit Soldier for the Low Countries. Thou wilt never be like
the brave Castilian, who can carry as much Provision in his Moustaches as serves
him a Campaign of six months.


Begar, me be so hungry, as tat me will to my Closet and make complain to the
Star, journee.


Thou may gaze at 'em long enough, before thou fill that unmerciful wem of
thine.


Did you see the Monsieur, Truro?


Had you come a little sooner, you had seen a pretty War between him and his
ravenous stomach. He is so hungry, that he's gone to Breakfast with Mars,
Jupiter, and Venus; where his food will be nothing but heads and tails of
Dragons. But if the Celestial Cook dress 'em up in foul dishes, he destroys
his pocky squeazy French stomach.


Where is he gone?


Into his studious Closet to stuff his Lunatic head, since he can get nothing
for his belly.


Pray direct me to him.


Come, follow me then. Well, if there be such a thing as Astrology, a
State-policie amongst the Stars, and this French fool be an Astrologer, the
Celestial government has not over-wise headpieces for Privie-Councellours.


OH, Scintillia, what a part have I to act? To gain that little opportunity we
have, I am forced to appear willing to live and die in a Nunnery, to humour my
Father's covetous resolution of saving a Portion by me. Though I am satisfied,
I cannot live without my dear Dorido.


Madam, Love was never subject to any Law, nor did ever call to its counsel
Duty or Reason; and if so, why should you bring your Obedience to a doting old
Father, in competition with the love and preservation of your self and Dorido?
Let the Sacred Knot be tied, Madam, and then farewell all dispute. Whether would
you sacrifice your self to a peevish old Father, or make your self happy in an
accomplished loving Husband? Come, be ruled by me; steer the nearest course to
your own bliss.


I thank thee, Scintillia, for thy advice, and I will use all the means I can
to follow it. But prithee what's a clock, Girl?


About Ten.


About that hour I expect Dorido. Prithee see if my Father be busy in
discourse with that Gentleman that came to traffic with him for Pieces of
Eight.


I go.


If Dorido come but at this lucky minute, I shall have the opportunity of
letting him into the house; a blessing we rarely meet with. My Father, when
he's within, watches me; when he goes out, locks me up for fear of being
stolen; and when he goes to bed, takes the keys up with him: So that our stolen
interviews are no nearer than from a Balconie, or through a Window; when iron
bars and stone walls maliciously interpose.


Madam, if Dorido comes now, you are secure. Your Father is as safe as if he
were in Heaven: He is within, counting his Bags at a large round Table spread
with Gold.


Then I'm safe: His soul and body are both charmed to that Circle. Oh that
Dorido were but come! Hark, one knocks, that must be he.


Oh, Madam, the house is alarm'd! Your Father is a coming.


Step in here.


Oh, Daughter, did you not hear a noise in the house? I am consident somebody
was attempting to rob us.


Indeed, Sir, I heard no noise that disturbed me, till I heard you.


Why up so late, Girl?


Why, Sir, 'tis but Eleven.


Time for young Girls to be in bed.


Indeed, Father, I fell a reading my Lady Sylvanes account of a Religious life;
and it so pleased me, I had quite forgot my self.


Alas, poor Clor. thou art always thinking of the Monastery. I protest this
Religion does so run in her head! Well, have patience, the time draws nigh.


Yes, to marry Dorido.


Well, good night, Clo. So, so, haste, haste to bed, Girls.


A good night to you, Sir.


I hope he had no mistrust of me.


No, no, this is but th'effect of his Fear, and the product of his Dreams. He
dreamed last night of his being robbed to day; and he's so great an observer of
Dreams, that whatever impression he takes in his sleep, is never to be removed
when he wakes.


Hark, Madam, a fresh alarm. He is returning again.


And if he find you here, we're ruined. Oh, Sir, be gone.


Must I go -- I cannot -- But if I do, spite of the watchful eyes of an
obdurate Father, my soul shall stay behind --


Farewell, my faithful Dorido. Time I hope hereafter will be more kind to us.


Were I not consident of that, I'd stay and dare my fate.


Oh, Sir, make haste!


Once more, and I am satisfied against all affliction.


Why did my fate this pleasing Scene begin?

Just show me bliss, then take it back again!


Look where he sits, like the man in the Moon with his bundle of sticks at his
back, peeping into the Heavens as if he were acquainted there; when, in my
conscience, he is as great a stranger there as I am.


Prithee call him.


'Tis to no purpose: His soul is got into the body and bowels of the Stars.


However call him.


Monsieur, Monsieur, are you at leisure? have you done breakfasting with the
Stars? if you have, this friend of mine would speak with you.


Donna Sabina! Oh my varre good friend, velcome.


I'll even leave you together.


What be your business!


I have a Question to propose.


What be your Question? tis be de var good hour of Luna.


I am concerned in an affair for Senior Claudio, and would gladly know what
success I shall have.


Oh, oh, me will tell you presently.


Dear Monsieur, make what haste you can; for I am to be at Senior Pedro's the
Gold-wire-drawer, about Three a clock: Oh that fair Wife of his! Claudio shall
have her. Good Monsieur dispatch.


Begar, me was so intent on te Figure, tat me forgot Sabina; but now me will
give you var great satisfaction. Tis about te woman, te fair woman.


It is, dear Monsieur, a Beauty.


She be te married woman, and her Husband have te relation to te Gold trade.


He is a Gold-wire-drawer indeed: A blessing on thy prophetic Spirit; this can
be nothing but Divine Revelation. -- But Monsieur, for a confirmation of your
judgement, describe her to me.


I will. Hole -- tis be a woman of te middle size, inclining --


Inclining to tallness.


To tallness: And as for her hair, it be --


Black.


Var black, her visage var --


Round.


Round.


Oh heavenly, this is fine!


Let me see, her nose pretty size; but she have a mark on her --


On her chin. You say right, Monsieur.


On her chin, and a mold on her --


Left cheek. Very right again -- prodigious --


Her left cheek. Shall I proceed, and tell her private marks?


No, no, Monsieur, you have described her as exactly as if you had been married
to her. But to my main business, shall I gain this woman for Senior Claudio?


Me will tell dat var quick. Here be Sol and Luna in Conjunction in te seven
house, var boon; Jupiter and Venus look on te Ascend wit te good grace. Begar,
if he not get her, me will turn eiter te Physician or Divine, rail against te
Star, and all toes tat give te credit to deir prediction.


Well, Monsieur, I know what I know: You must deal with the Devil.


O fee, fee! no Diabolo -- wit te Star, dat be all.


Well, certainly you must have the very soul of Prophecy -- such a man --
Well, you are sure he shall gain her? --


Fait, te more sure of tat ten te Pope be of his salvation.


Nay then I'll never question it. Well, dear Monsieur, adieu. You shall have
more of my Company. This Art is such a bewitching thing; and I do so love a man
of Parts! Well, dear Monsieur, adieu.


Well, well, adieu, adieu.


Will Senior Claudio be here to day?


Yes, Sir, I expect him.


He shall be welcome. I protest I have not seen him since his return from
Flanders.


I suppose you have heard of the worthy deeds he has done in those parts.


Indeed, Son, I have not heard of braver actions done by any man.


Who is this, Sir, that you give such a Character of?


Senior Claudio, Child.

Senior Claudio, welcome. I protest you are so welcome to me --


Senior Avaritio, I have no question of it. The fair Clorinia!

Madam, the world is not so just in that Character it gave of you, though very
honourable. Your Beauty I find is much above what common fame has proclaimed
it.


Senior, you are a Courtier, and therefore have the privilege to flatter
without wounding Reputation or Judgement.


Well, Senior, for all that Beauty you lay to her charge, she's resolved for a
Nunnery.


A Nunnery, Sir!


Resolved upon it to a miracle.


Yes, where my friend Dorido acts the part both of Lady Abbess and Confessor.


But what do you say to this resolution of hers?


Faith, Sir, I say she does well in it; for she is too Divine for any service
but Heaven's.


Now to try my Daughter, I will get Claudio seemingly to persuade her from a
Monastic life.

Good Claudio, see what arguments you can use to her to persuade her from this
Covent-voyage: I would willingly have her marry, that she may make me an aged
Grandfather.


It shall be none of my fault if you be not one.


At your request I'll use my interest.


But I'll watch your -- Now for the trial of my Daughters heavenly
inclinations.


Madam, why so violently bent on a Nunnery! I grant it may correspond with the
Laws of Heaven, but not of Nature: for she undoubtedly designed you for a
Mother of a most glorious Issue, or she would never have robbed both Heaven and
Earth for your composition. Can you imagine, Madam, that so much Beauty was
designed to be concealed like a Taper in a Tomb?


Good, I profess, Don. Now let's hear what she'll say to this.


Senior Claudio, desist -- You must allow, were I Mistress of a far greater
share of Beauty and Parts than those you flatter me with, it were profaneness
in you to say they were ill disposed on a religious life.


Oh my blessed Child! I see thou art not to be shaken.


Come, Madam, I must be plainer with you: I know you love Dorido, and let me
beg you to love him well.


Yes, I will love him, and love him truly, love him as I ought.


What does she say?


I'll pray for him: That is the best and truest love, and that's the only love
that I can pay.


Enough, Clor. enough. Come, Senior, I heard all. Oh my best Girl! Well, this
Religion is a sweet thing.


Why, did you hear us? If you had not interrupted me, I had made astrange
discovery.


As how, Senior?


Only that this very Dorido that has been so long suspected for a Loverof
hers, is so strangely possessed --


With what?


Nay, they may even go together; never were two so well paired.


Paired? how, Sir?


Nay, they hit one another humours so exactly --


Pray, Sir, be plainer, I do not understand you.


Why, do I talk Riddles to you? I warrant you, you have not heard then that
Dorido designs for a Covent?


Lord, Sir, not I, I profess.


Why 'tis all the talk of the Town. Not heard on it!


Not a syllable.


Are you in earnest?


Why, Senior, as I hope to be saved, you are the first man that ever told me
on it.


Alas, Sir, it has been his private design this Seven years, only he durst
not make it public in his Fathers life-time, because his violent Father was so
absolutely against it. But now his Estate is in his own hands, the world shall
not hinder him.


Is't possible, Senior? Nay then I'll give him the greater freedom with my
Daughter. I profess he was the only man I feared.


This news is so stale, that I am half ashamed to tell it. I have 2000 l. of
his in my hands already, for the building of an Hospital. He's not a man for
this world, I can assure you.


Well, Senior, I applaud him; he's a prudent wise ingenious man, take it from
me. This building of Hospitals is a fine thing. Truly I designed to build an
Hospital my self when I was a young man, but my Father, as thou say, was
absolutely bent against it. Building an Hospital! You shall stay and dine with
me for this good news.


A Pox take that nitty confounded French man, he has talked and stargazed
himself into more favour with my Master, than any true-born Castilian can ever
expect to do with all his faithful service. How often has my Master condemned
the English for being such Apes to the French, and now himself becomes guilty
of as great a folly!


I hope not so, Truro.


Do you not see, that nothing is to be done in our Family, before application
be made to the Monsieur for advice and counsel?


Hold, Truro; he shall never command in chief there: I expect a Quarter-masters
place at least.


Still we must be in the damned English fashion, a Whore or a French Rogue must
command the whole Family.


What do you say?


Faith, Dona Sabina, I am glad to hear you are like to have so great a power in
the Family.


Truro, it shall be never the worse for you.


Well, but as I was saying before, you see that the great Wig must be worn
again, in despite of all opposition; the grand Mountach, the grace and beauty
of a right Spanish face, must now, Turk-like, be circumcised. Nay, the gravity
of our Breeches, which for so many ages have scorned all change, must now,
within their own Dominions, be outfaced with profane Pantaloons: and all this,
because my Master is bewitched with his Astrologer.


Senior Claudio, the Monsieur does so stick in Truro's stomach, that except you
command a Peace, Wars will ensue.


The Monsieur merits all the freedom I give him; but did he not, my actions
shall admit of no control.


Sir, I have known you the most violent against the French, of any Don in
Spain; but I see you are resolved to make the world believe the Monsieur is a
Conjurer: for certainly nothing but Magic could make this alteration in you.


No disputes, but call him in. I suppose by this time he is in his A-la-mode
again.


If he be, Sabina, have you a care of him.


Why so, Truro?


The air of his great fluttering Wig, and the waft of his Pantaloons, will blow
your Coats about your ears.


Marry come out, my saucy Companion! I'd have you to know, my Coats are not
blown up so easily.


Stay, Sabina, you shall see him in his French dress. Truro, call him in.


The Devil, if you please; for he's the better Companion of the two.


I see Truro is no lover of the French.


No, he is not. The English Mechanics would throw a whole year into Play-days,
on condition their great men loved the French and their Kickshaws no better.


Are the English Dons such lovers of the French then?


Oh so much, that a French Clap is more welcome at Court than a dull English
Ague. Then their Language they do so dote on, that they have Masters out of
France to teach French to their Magpies, Parrots, and Starlings. And if their
Sauce be not Frenchisied, their Meat is not fit for Dogs.

Now I hope, Monsieur, you are dressed to your own satisfaction.


We, Senior.


This is a very graceful dress, Truro.


Graceful! Pox take him, he raises such a dust with combing his Wig, it's
enough to stifle one.


How do you like that Hat, Truro?


Why should his shallow Coxcomb have so broad a Covering?


Methinks his Breeches are like the Tower of Babel, hung round with Confusion.


In my opinion they are like Bells hung in a Steeple, where his legs serve for
Clappers.


Fie, Senior Claudio, you will destroy the Monsieurs good opinion of his dress.


Noune, my foy, me like it much te better, for te pleasure it give Senior
Claudio.


Go, Monsieur, you may to your study again.


He likes your Spanish diet so ill, that now will he mount himself upon a Cloud
and ride into the Heavens to dine with those false Fotune-tellers the Planets;
a crowd of wandering Gypsies that pick our pockets with a lye, and we are such
silly fools as to believe 'em.


Then, Truro, you have no great opinion of the Stars.


No more than of a pound of Candles lighted at the wrong end: for as sure as I
am here, their influence over us at birth is equal. Nay, for my part I declare,
'tis my opinion, that a Candle lighted in the Room when and where the Child is
born, must needs have a greater power over it, than a Star in the Heavens some
hundred thousand miles from it.


Well, you may say what you will; but I have so great an opinion of Monsieurs
study, though I think he's no great Conjurer, that I intend to be his Scholar.
How like you that?


Shall I be free in my answer?


I'll give you the freedom of a Companion.


Then let me beg you not to concern your self with those Starry studies.


Why, prithee?


Why, would it not be ridiculous for a man of your wisdom and quality to waste
either time, money, or pains in drawing of a Circle, and then dividing of it
into twelve parts, placing a Bull here, a Lion there, a Crab in one corner, and
a Goat in another; and then to fall a cursing that old Dog Saturn, that bloody
Rogue Mars, that jilting Quean Venus, and that sly Cur Mercury, and the rest
of the Gang, for looking askew on your Ascendant: and when all comes to all,
and you come to give a grave judgement upon your Houses with all those
monstrous Cattle in them, faith the conclusion is, Perhaps it may be so, and
perhaps it may be otherwise; and who the devil would give himself such a
trouble about a Perhaps?


And do you think there's no more truth than this in Astrology?


Faith, no more truth in the answers of the Stars, than in a pair of Dice
thrown upon the Wheel of Fortune.


I am glad you are come, Monsieur: Now if you can but say as much for the Stars
as Truro has said against 'em, --


Morbleau, what have Truro said agains te Star?


Only that there's never a word of Truth nor a grain of Sense in Astrology.


Begar, me will let you see tat tare be te much truth in te Star. Had te grand
Julius Caesar take te advice of te Astrologer, my foy, he had no bin butcher in
te Senate-house; nor had Henry te second of France bin kilt riding at te Tilt,
if he had been rule by te Astrologer: And let me tell Truro, if he no be rule
by me, and mend his behaviour, he shall die by te Hangman.


What say you to this? does not the Monsieur speak to the purpose now?


Good Senior give me leave to turn Fortune-teller for once.


With all my heart.


Well then, if the Monsieur do not die of a French Clap, be buried in a House
of Office, and afterwards be sung about the streets for a false Fortune-teller,
let me never feed more of any thing but Radishes.


My foy, Senior Claudio, me see tat te Star be so var anger wit Truro for his
slight 'em, tat me fear for his sake they will throw tar vengeance on te whole
Family.


Truro, be gone; I have some private business with the Monsieur.

Come, Monsieur, your answer to the Question I proposed.


Awe, Senior.

Tis Skeam will tell me all.


Shall I gain this woman?


Hole, hole; here be Mars in Conjunction wit te fair Venus, and Sol look var
well upon Madam Luna: Begar, if you no get her, me will draw te Curtain before
te Heaven, tat te Star shall no more see vat ve do. But te Dragon tail in te
second house make you pay var dear for her.


That I am confident on already. Go thy ways, Monsieur, if thy Prediction comes
to pass, I am resolved to write a book in defence of Astrology. Yet

No matter what those idle Planets prate;

She is the only Star that tells my fate.


Clorinia, I am troubled at a dream I dreamt last night.


Fie, Sir, the prejudice you have received by those false Visions, should, one
would think, make you not regard 'em. What was it, Sir?


You are concerned in it.


I, Sir!


It was, That thou had changed thy Resolution for a Religious life.


That's the greater argument for it: for Dreams are always to be construed
quite contrary to what they seem.


I protest I was mightily troubled at it.


Indeed, Sir, you have paid a dear rate for the experience of the truth of
Dreams. Have you forgot since you untiled your house for a bag of gold you
dreamt was hid in the Roof of it, and when you had done, found nothing but a
Sparrows nest, and some few pieces of old Iron?


And you may remember that another time on the same occasion, you killed a
hundred head of Cattle, by reason you dreamt the Philosophers stone was to be
found in their kidneys.


Away, you waggish girl.

Senior Dorido, welcome. Well, Claudio has told me all your designs.


My designs?


About you know what I mean.


What does he say?


My Father has heard of all your design for Religion, your going into a
Covent. The two thousand pounds you have put into Claudio's hand for the
building an Hospital, is a very pious work.


I understand her.


To him, daughter, to him. Ah, you're well met, I profess.


Your pious care -- to cheat my old Father,

-- to provide for another world, has strangely pleased me.


That's a good Girl. Do you hear, Senior?


Pursue this holy principle, and we shall meet together -- as often as we
please

-- in Heaven.


Hah!


My kind Father, I say, -- will never suspect us,

-- will make me the happiest woman in the world -- in letting me see you
often,

-- in letting me lead a Religious life, and crown my days amongst a Quire of
Cherubims.


Oh, my child, my child! let me embrace thee. This Religion is such a Jewel!
Let your foolish sottish old Fathers breed up their Children in the vanities of
the world, I have a Daughter will make an Angel.


Sir, by your favour let me answer her.


By all means, Sir; your discourse I know will charm her.


Madam, -- Sister I should say, oh that you could but look into my Soul, and
know how much I am transported -- to see you thus kind,

-- to hear you talk so piously.


Good again. Well, such a Daughter, and such a Friend, are not in the world
again!


Your thoughts, divine Sister, are so much mine, such bliss, such charms, and
such raptures there are -- in thy dear Love,

-- in true Devotion, that on my knees I vow to live and die -- my dear
Clorinia's,

-- in a Cloister.


Oh rise, rise, Senior. Well, you are a good man: Oh, Dorido, this is heavenly
music to my Daughter. Come, Dorido, since you are in so good a humour, you
shall go in with me, and we'll discourse further of a Religious life.


Sir, I wait on you. But is it not your pleasure that Clorinia should go with
us? A pious mind cannot be too much strengthened.


Alas, Sir, she has been reading all this afternoon. I protest she's so given
to Books, that I am afraid she'll pore her eyes out upon 'em. No, no, she shall
stay and play a game at Chess with Senior Horatio. You know Devotion must have
a little respit.


Pox on him.


Come, will you play?


If I do, I must be sure to loose. Chess is a game requires more care than a
man of my temper can have in such fair company.


Come, venture that.


Madam, the opportunity's too precious to be so lost.


Ha! what's this?


Only I dare not play with you, you are too much a Conqueror already.


Nay, then I'll call in better company.


Stay, Madam, hear me but one word, and then call in the Company to witness
your Cruelty and my Misery.


Go on, Sir.


The danger of your Father's return, and the peace your Beauty robbed me of,
will not give me time nor thought enough for a studied address; therefore take
it thus:

I love you, Madam.


Are you in earnest?


Are doubts, fears, distractions, jealousies, and all the torments of a
bleeding heart, things to be jested with?


And dare you tell me this?


Bid a wretch on a Wrack in all the agony of his dis-joynted limbs, not dare to
groan, and be as easily obeyed.


And can you be this villain to your friend? Do you not blush? Does not your
guilty blood fly in your Traitors face?


Madam, if I blush, 'tis not my Treason, but my Love that brings that glowing
colour in my face. I can't keep down my boiling blood and carry

Such sire as mine within me. Dear Madam,

Have you no pity for my sighs? Yes, do,

Resolve to see me die.


To see you damned.

Yes, Devil, to thy hell, there thou wilt find

A conversation fit for thy black Soul.

Had you proclaimed defiance to your friend,

Renounced his friendship first, and then invaded

His right, your guilt had been more pardonable:

But the base Hypocrite's a part so abject,

As is below my scorn.


Her scorn!


A Rebel is a glorious Villain, when a Traitor

Is but a despicable slave. But, Sir,

To put an end to your vain hopes, were your Love

As brave and generous as 'tis base and barbarous,

I should abhor the thoughts of him that could

Suspect me guilty of a change so mean:

My constancy's not to be blasted so.


Faith, Madam, now have I only rallied with you all this while, and now must I
expect to find you as furious as an Amazon, for this trick I have put upon
you; never to see your face again is the least Composition I can make.


How, Senior!


'Twas an odd exploit, an Artifice I used to try your Constancy, and my
friends Interest. And now this rage and scorn from you, confirms his happiness
and my hopes.


A Trial of my Constancy call you it? Did not your zeal for your friend atone
for you, I know not how I should bear so bold a piece of curiosity.


Never was an Heretic in an Inquisition so baited as I have been.


Daughter Clo. daughter!


Friend,

I know 'tis towards bed-time with this old fool, and he always takes the Keys
up with him; and I have not said half my mind to my dear Clorinia: Take an
occasion of telling her, I desire a little discourse with her at the
Parlour-window at Eleven; by that time he'll be asleep. She knows the old
sign.


Enough.


Well, Daughter, this Dorido is a fine man I profess; I once designed him for
thy Husband --


How this old Gentleman can dissemble!


But now you have both made a better choice. Senior Dorido,


Enough, I'll steal down to him.


Daughter.

Senior, good night. Well, I protest he is a miracle.


Her Constancy is the Rock on which I split; I must make her hate Dorido;
remove the Giant, and the Maid's my own. I am none of those whining Lovers that
can fall sick and die at the feet of a Denial.

I will go on, and scorn a base retreat;

Despair the Coward only does defeat.


CAn you be nimble and dextrous, Master Engineer?


As a Mercury, Senior.


Then thus: Watch at the turning of this street, and when you see Senior Dorido
come by, put out your Light, and that shall give me notice for my Design. When
he hears the noise I shall raise, I know he will make up hither; then do you
alarm the Watch, and play the part I ordered you.


To a tittle.


To your Post quickly, the minute draws nigh; 'tis near Eleven.

Now must I act the subtlest piece of Treason

That Love, animated

By Jealousy and Revenge, could ever inspire.

I love Clorinia, and consequently hate

Her darling Favourite Dorido;

And what we hate, we're prompted to destroy.

Tis true, I am false to my friend; but what's friendship in one scale, when
Love is in the other? Love is a passion that's taught and rooted in our Souls
by nature, when Friendship is but a humour put off or on at pleasure. Love
comes by force, and Friendship but by choice, and is but generally the Creature
of Fear or Interest.

Ha! he has put out his Light, and Dorido's coming. Now for my sign.


Dorido!


I, dear Madam.


Oh, dear Dorido, my unkind Father is not yet in bed, and I am in such danger
here, that I cannot tell you half the kind things I have to say. Let that
Letter speak for me.


Murder, murder!


So, take that Letter and Dagger, and convey 'em into Dorido's pocket.


Enough.


Death and Confusion! My Clorinia's voice! What infernal sound is this?


Ha, murder! what's the matter?


Oh, Sir, as I was going up to bed, I saw the Parlour-window open, and as I
went to shut it, some wicked villain caught me by the hand and stabbed his
Dagger into my arm.


Lightning blast him for it.


Geraldo, Diego, Sanco, Francisco, rise you rogues. Dorido!


There's no staying till your Servants rise: the villain will be gone beyond
their reach. Do you run and fetch a Surgeon, and let my Sword pursue the
impious Devil.


That's he, seize him.


Bold slaves, what's this for?


Are you the Lady that cried out murder?


Yes, what then?


Oh, Madam, this is the barbarous villain that stabbed you.


Dorido!


I the villain!


Hey day! now has he the impudence to deny it. Did not I see you steal up to
that house, then whistle, and a Lady put her hand out of that window and give
you a Letter; which you received, and returned the Compliment with your Dagger?


Blasphemous dog! Is the Traitor distracted?


I am all amazement!


Do you intend to face me out of my senses? Madam, I thought he had been going
to rob the house, and watched him, and saw him do it.


Hell and Damnation! Traitor, Liar, Hell-hound, what did you see me do?


What I'll justify to be true. Nay, I am sure the Dagger must be about him, or
not far off: for he did not stir one step, Gentlemen, before I called you.


The Dagger about me! search me, Devil.


Search him, Gentlemen.


A bloody Dagger, and a Letter for one Senior Dorido.


Did I not tell you, Gentlemen?


Ha! what enchanting Fiend has conveyed that Dagger into my pocket? Madam, if
there be truth in Heaven, or faith in man, I could no more be guilty of this
Outrage, than I could burn a Church. Some malicious Devil, envying our Loves,
has used this artifice to undo me.


If there be truth in Heaven, or faith in man, this blustering Gentleman is as
truly guilty of this Outrage, as you are the unfortunate Lady that suffered it.


Infamous Varlet! what art thou, that such an Imputation should be believed
from thy mouth?


Gentlemen, convey us both before the next Judge; I am ready to attest by oath
what I have seen and known.


Gentlemen, pray lend me your Prisoner for one minutes discourse. Ungrateful
man!

Is this your best return for all my kindness?


And can you persecute me too? My angry stars

And this false impudent slave, has made me mad.


No, your guilt, not he, has made you so.


Madam, by all that's good, I neither received that Letter nor ever saw that
Dagger, whatever Magic conveyed it into my pocket. I heard you cry out Murder,
ran in to your assistance, saw you bleeding, and my Soul bled for you.

I heard your shrieking voice with so much horror,

That I'd have given my Life, and half my right

To Heaven, to have reached the villains heart for it.

And can this be the man that stabbed Clorinia?


No, Sir, these Evidences are too plain.

Conveyed by Magic thither! If there be such a thing as

Magic, 'tis in impious men's false Oaths and broken Vows,

That can bewitch believing Virgins hearts,

And use 'em as thou dost.


Oh, Madam, as you'd keep me on this side Hell,

And hold my hand from tearing out my heart,

Oh, do not lay this horrid Crime against me:

A Crime so distant from my purer thoughts,

As my heart trembles but to hear.


They that can prove such Traitors as thou art,

Want not pretences to seem innocent.


And can you still suspect such faith as mine?


Did I for this run to the window

With as much haste and zeal to meet you there,

As a departing Saint mounts up to Heaven!

And when, like a poor fond mistaken fool,

My eager hand so kindly gave that Letter,

And in it all the tendrest thoughts that Love

Could ever inspire; this cruel man,

When he received my very Soul,

Could barbarously stab the hand that gave it.


Oh, cruel savage woman!


Take him hence.


Oh, my best Angel, hear me.


Oh, my Devil!

Make haste, take him away: and, perjured man,

Tell the new Mistress, for whose sake you did

This hellish deed, to make your title good,

You sealed your falsehood in Clorinia's blood.


What lazy Rogues are these Physicians! he was in bed, and I was forced to
stay till the reverend fool rise.

Ha! Girl, where's Clo?


Oh, Sir, she's gone in almost distracted.


Oh Heavens, distracted! The loss of blood will put her in a Fever. Dear Sir,
make haste.


I wonder Sabina comes not; it is about the time of her appointment. What a
Petticoat have you got on there, Wife?


'Tis very well, Husband: My Lady Abbess I know hates a gaudy dress.


Nay, a modest garb certainly becomes Devotion best.


I am afraid I have staid to the prejudice of your patience.


No, I have a greater stock than so. But I pray how does my Lady?


Very well. Dear Leonora, she will expect us. Are you ready?


I am ready.


She got no sleep to night for thinking of this Holy voyage.


And Claudio will keep her waking a little longer.

Good woman, her thoughts are on Heaven. Well, I hope the Monastery is not out
of the road to it.


I'll lead you to the door. Well Wife, when you are in your Altitudes, have
some little thought on the good man at home.


Since this Monsieur got into his French dress, he struts it at a wondrous
rate: But I hope once more to uncase him, and bring that rotten Carcase of his
into Spanish fetters again.


Truro, be wise, and te Star will be your good friend.


Oh, plague light upon the nonsensical babbling of your Stars, and all your
French acquaintance with them.


My foy, Truro, you have much te pride, and tat be no boon. Te French man get
var great regard from te English Lord, by tare great submission.


Millia, be sure when you hear any knock at the gate, look out of the window;
if they be women that enquire for Dona Betrix, be you quick in opening the door
and showing 'em a room.


I shall, Senior.


And let not one of you appear besides. Go, be gone every one about his
business.

And now will I to my Chamber and expect my call.


Oh, dear Madam, I had almost forgot Dona Betrix, though I promised to call
her: that's the house; come, Madam, I must beg your pardon for one minute.


I am solely at your service.


Who's there? and who would you speak with?


Is Dona Betrix within?


Yes. I'll come and conduct you to her.


You shall go with me, we sha'nt stay.


Use your pleasure.


Will you be pleased to walk in, and I'll acquaint her.


Will you rest your selves here till I return?


Millia, I'll go along with you. Dear Leonora, assure your self I'll make a
quick dispatch.


O Heavens, my Virtue is betrayed!


My dearest Leonora! welcome. Now, my best life, you're mine. Dear Madam,
surrender, and save the trouble of a storm.


You may thank wretched Sabina for it. Is this the Monastary, thou wicked Hag
-- and are you my Lady Abbess -- How durst you act so villainous a part under so
holy a pretence?


Dear Madam, look but into the Affairs of the world, and you'll discover the
Mask of Religion frequently put upon worse designs than this.

Come, my pretty Saint, this inclination of man to your Sex is so universal, as
renders it not such an offence to Heaven, as men of Holy Orders are pleased to
tell us 'tis: No, no, dear Leonora.


How can you talk so! Were I convinced it were no Crime, yet the blemish it
would throw upon my Reputation, will never suffer me to yield.


Your Reputation, on my life, shall not be wounded.


What! and yield to your base desires?


The Light shall be no witness to what we do; and a thing so concealed can
never call your Honour into question. 'Tis not the doing of a thing, but the
knowledge of it after 'tis done, that gives the fatal blow to Reputation.


However, vile man, 'twill wrong my Husband.


It can be none to him, so long as his ignorance has no other opinion of you
than what's just and honourable. But I delay my joys -- Come, dear Madam --


Oh, Sir, you make me stark mad: What do you mean, you wicked lascivious man
you? --


Nothing, dear Leonora, but all the Kindness, all the Love, and all the
Raptures in the world.


Touch me if you dare! I'll tear your eyes out: If you come but near me, I'll
-- nay I'll --


What will you do?


Why, what will you have me do? Well, this opportunity's a mere Devil!


Consent to make me the happiest man that lives.


Well, Sir, I protest 'tis not in my nature to use so fine a Gentleman
unkindly. Alas, I would submit to any thing, and make you happy, if I durst:
But oh, the sin, the sin! I won't; let me go, you are a villainous man, would
betray my Honour, damn my Soul, and -- I hate you. I'll cry out; help, murder!


Well, dear Leonora, I'll grant you your desire. I will deny my self the
greatest happiness Beauty can give, and man possess, rather than force that
bliss you cannot yield. But, divinest Madam, if you could be kind, what
charming Magic would there be in those dear Arms, what Nectar in those Lips,
and what Elysium on that soft Bosom!


Nay, Sir, go on, you speak so prettily! Though I must never yield to any
wicked thing, yet we may talk as kindly as we please.


And is that all?


No, Sir, were I a single woman, or if you were my Husband, or so, I could deny
you nothing -- But --


Well, I'll send for a Priest, and marry you presently.


Two Husbands! Alas, Sir, I have too much of one already.


Madam, your sweetness has so transported me, that if you cannot yield, I must
force you --


But are you sure you'll force me? for I vow I won't go willingly.


I'm past all patience.


Stay, Sir, if I must go, let us resolve to be as little wicked as we can:
Let's stay and say our Prayers before we go.


Let's love first, and pray afterwards.


But you shall promise me first you will not use me too roughly, for my poor
Husband's sake.


Oh, Madam, I'm a tender-hearted man;

Indeed I'll be as gentle as I can.


WAs ever so much inhumanity!

How are my Thoughts distracted! Well, if this

Perfidious Dorido be what I suspect him,

His Love defaced, and such a Monster made,

No Angel ever fell so soon, or turned

So black as he. The change appears so dreadful,

That I dare scarce believe my Eyes and Senses.

My Father and Horatio! This interview

May give some new discovery. I'll o're-hear 'em.


This Dorido is the wickedst Rogue that ever breathed.


Alas, Sir, he's all wickedness. His very pretences for Religion were all baits
to trapan you.


What's this I hear?


The truth on it is, he loved your Daughter, and designed to steal her.


Steal her!


And all his fair disguises of Devotion were but to gain access to accomplish
it.


Precious Rascal!


I am all astonishment.


And because she refused to break open your house last night, and run away with
him, he stabbed her.


Dainty Rogue!


Death, what a Traytor's here!


Sir, I confess he was my friend, and under that name I long concealed his
crimes; but now they are grown too odious for my friendship to wink at: my zeal
for Justice, and my sense of your Injuries, h^ve waked my sleeping Reason. I
cannot see you cheated and abused.


Then belike all this Monastery-business is laid by.


The devil of any such place did he ever intend to trouble.


And I warrant he'll build no Hospital neither.


An Hospital! a Bawdy-house. He build an Hospital! No, Sir, his hot Spanish
blood will find other uses for his money.


What's become of the two thousand pounds in Senior Claudio's hands?


Called in again, I can assure you: 'twas only laid there for a bait for you.
Sir, to be plainer with you, I do not like your Daughters proceedings.


How, my Daughter!


I say, she's to blame, to have Love in her heart, and Religion in her tongue.


This is beyond all sufferance.


How! is not my Clo for a Nunnery?


She's no more for a Nunnery than you are for an Alms-house.


No Nunnery!


They only masqueraded with you all this while. Their midnight-assignations at
your Parlour-window, have secured her from ever troubling a Monastery.


Monster, Barbarian!


O Rogues, Cheats, Gypsies! Francisco, Diego, Sancho, Geraldo.

Sancho, send for a Mason: I'll have the Parlour-window next the street taken
down, and the wall made up; and, you Rascal, see that no body comes into my
house without my orders. I shall have this Rogue come in disguise into my
house, and some Ganonical Thief steal like a Pimp in after him, and marry them.
But now I think on it, I am a Magistrate, and will give every body their Oaths
that comes within my doors. And, Sirrah, do you see that the Balcone be nailed
up: The Gypsy may drop down Love into the street. Cheat her old Father! And,
you Rascal, take notice these two Rooms are all the walk I allow her.
Assignations! I'll spoil their sport.


Pray, Senior, do me the favour, when you tell whence you had this
intelligence, not to name your Author. I am unwilling to gain a fair Ladies
displeasure.


I profess, Sir, I will not speak a word of you. Cheat her old Father!


Sir, I am afraid I have disturbed you: I'll take my leave of you till some
other time.


I profess you are the best friend I have in the world.


Not one word of me.


Not a syllable.

Run away with a young Rascal! I'll watch your waters, I'll warrant you.


Well, I am the most unfortunate of women!


What's the matter, Sister?


Oh, Brother, had you been here, you had discovered the vilest piece of
Treachery -- That Barbarian Horatio, Dorido's false friend, has disclosed all
our designs, and so incensed my peevish old Father, that these two Rooms are
my Prison, and my Servants my Jaylours.


And can Horatio be so great a Villain!


This is the least of my Misfortunes. I have abused the best of men. Now am I
certain 'twas this villain stabbed me; and I, unhappily deceived by that
mercenary slave the accomplice in his design, have laid the Crime upon the
guiltless Dorido; and to complete my miseries, must never see him more.


Prithee thank thy Master for my admission; but tell him

I have no design upon his Daughter, that he need be so cautious.


Pray, Sir, be not angry with me, I only execute my Commission.


Begar, this Spanish Lady be kep up as close as de Jack in box, Morbleau.


Senior Claudio, you are come to see the unhappiest Maid that Fortune ever
persecuted.


Aye, Madam, with much ado I am come to see you; but your Father keeps a pack
of the most ill-natur'd Rascals about him.


Oh, Sir, they are my Jaylours. That Monster Horatio has discovered all our
plots, and I must never see Dorido again.


Indeed, Madam, I fear you will not.


How, Sir!


His grief and his distractions for your unkind suspicion, have so dejected
him, that you'll either never see him more; or so altered, that you'll scarce
know he was the man that loved you.


Oh, Sir, you stab me to the very heart.


That attempt upon you was so far from being his act, that 'tis impossible but
it must be done by some malicious Rival or Devil.


That Devil is Horatio: And I like an enchanted fool could suspect the innocent
Dorido; and as a just Reward for my suspicion, I am for ever doomed to live
immured within these walls. I've so much injured the unhappy Dorido,

That I can no ways recompense his griefs,

But by some bold adventure for his sake.

What is't I would not do for that brave man?


Sister, let's set some new designs afoot.


Designs! I'll fire the house, and run away with him.

'Tis no mean act can expiate my Crime.

To talk of Monasteries, and delude

A credulous Father, is too mean a service.

I cannot testify that love I bear him,

But by some noble Passage to his Arms.


This kindness, Madam, will revive him. But, Madam, you shall steer a safer
way: I have a new plot.


What is't?


To rob your Father. You know he's covetous, and could we neatly and handsomely
be masters of two or three of his Bags, the fright 'twould put him into to
loose his Money, and the way that I'd propose to find the Thief, shall bring
you into Dorido's very Arms; nay, you shall marry him before your Father's
face.


'Tis a brave Project, if it do but take.


Trust to my Conduct.


But now I think on it, Sir, his Money is all out at use. Yet now I think on it,
I have found a way as well. My Father, about six months since, lent a Spanish
Lord Six hundred Ducatoons upon a Necklace of Pearl. I'll steal that: and as
good luck would have it, he is just now gone into his Closet. I'll after him;
and whilst I hold him in a Tale, I'll steal it: 'tis in a little box, and will
be easily slipped into my pocket. I'll be with you presently.


Good luck attend you.


Truro and Monsieur, my two trusty Servants, shall be in the Plot. This
Monsieur, you know, has set up for an Astrologer: I'll persuade your Father he
is a Conjurer, and can raise the Devil to get his Pearl again: and so we'll
wheedle the old Gentleman, with your Brother and you, to my house, where Dorido
disguised shall attend us; and whilst the Monsieur is charming your Father to
get his Pearl again, a Priest shall be there and conjure you two together.


I like it rarely!


Truro, when Valerio returns, and brings the Pearl, do you slip out and
disguise your self, and come in this Lord's name to demand the Pearl.


I'll do the business. Within three or four doors lives a Barber of my
acquaintance, he shall transform me. But, Sir, the Lord's name.


Oh, Madam, what shall we do for his name?


As I remember I have heard my Father speak of him. His name is Don Antonio Don
Rinaldo du Peralta.


I have it.


Enough.


As I could wish.


I began a very serious discourse with him, and I had scarce spoke ten words,
but he fell so horribly a railing against you as amazed me. And whilst he was
busy in the heat of all his fury, I performed the Operation. But see, he's
here!


Oh, Hussy, are you there? You are an excellent jilting Baggage: Nothing would
serve your turn, but cheating your old Father, would it?


Cheat my old Father! Heaven defend me!


Oh, no, not you. You have done nothing: Only loved Dorido, made
Midnight-Assignations with Dorido, and contrived to run away with Dorido;
that's all.


Who I, Sir!


Oh, do you start! You see I have found you out. These young sluts think they
have all the Wit, and their silly old Fathers want Sense: but, Hussy, you
shall find you are mistaken.


Indeed I never intended any such thing.


Hussy, you lye. I know your haunts, Mistress. My Parlour-window has been
sweetly visited between you; but I'll stop your peep-hole. If I had not
discovered you, I should have been made a Grand-father through the Casement. Is
this your pretence for Religion! You'll make a precious piece of Nuns-flesh.


Come, Senior, you must forgive her; Love is a Passion that can't be resisted.
If she have transgressed a little before-hand, she'll make never the worse Nun
for it afterward.


By your favour, Sir, I'll never forgive her. Forgive the Baggage!


Senior Avaritio.


With me, Senior?


From my worthy Patron Don Antonio Don Rinaldo du Peralta.


I have the honour to keep a Neck-lace of Pearl belonging to his Lordship.


Senior, the Six hundred Ducatoons, with the Interest and Principal, are in Don
Oreate the Goldsmiths hands, whither I am commanded to desire your company;
where, upon returning the Pledge, the Money shall be paid.


I'll fetch it, and wait upon you to his Lordship.


Now, Truro, when he comes back and misses it, bear up briskly to him.


I understand you.


Valerio, Valerio.


It works. To him quickly.


Valerio!


Now, Monsieur, can you bluster out a few hard words, and Hocus pocus him
dexterously?


Let me alone for de sheat: begar, me will represen de Conjure told life.


When we have him at our house, we'll humour it rarely. I have Trap-doors, and
God knows what: and we'll raise Thunder and Lightning, and play the Devil and
all.


Undone, undone, undone!


Heaven forbid!


Oh the Pearl, the Pearl!


What do you say, Sir?


Oh 'tis stolen, lost, gone! I'm betrayed, I'm robbed, I'm ruined!
Unconscionable Rogues, Six hundred Ducatoons at one clap!


Six hundred, Sir! Two thousand, Senior, two thousand: It cost my Lord no less;
and, though I say it, 'twas a penieworth.


Worse and worse! I am blown up! my heart, my life, my blood's all gone!


Truly, Senior, I pity your loss, considering you must pay my Lord the price
on it to buy another.


Pay the price on it!


Why, Sir, do you think my Lord will not have satisfaction?


Satisfaction! Let him stab me, drown me, hang me, send me to th'Gallies; do
any thing with me. Two thousand Ducatoons!


Well, Senior, be not dejected; I have some comfort for you.


What's that?


My good Lord --


Oh, sweet Sir.


My good Lord -- for my sake -- do you mark it --


You are a kind man.


For my sake (take notice) shall bate you (pray observe me) shall bate you (do
you see) Fifty Ducatoons. You shall pay him but Nineteen hundred and fifty.


Plagues and Furies! Had I lost both my Eyes, an Arm, and a Leg, 't had been
nothing; but this affliction is unsufferable.


You may see how Heaven is angry with you, and lays this calamity upon you
for afflicting your poor innocent obedient Daughter; and abusing so honest and
so worthy a Gentleman as Senior Dorido.


He's a Rogue, he's a Villain; 'tis he has stolen my Pearl, he's a Thief: bear
witness, Gentlemen, I say he's a Thief, I say he stole the Pearl; nay, I'll vow
he stole 'em. I'll go instantly to a Judge, have him apprehended and hanged for
stealing 'em, and then beg his Estate to pay for 'em.


Oh fie, Sir, how can you lay so scandalous a Crime to so guiltless a
Gentleman's charge?


Nay, Hussy, I can prove 'twas he that stole 'em, and you were his
Confederate; and I'll have you both hanged.


How, Sir?


Did not he, by the malice and instigation of the Devil, come to you at the
wicked hour of Midnight at my Parlour-window, which you opened to him, and let
him feloniously in at it to rob me?


Oh fie, Sir, 'tis not wide enough for him to put his hand through.


Bear witness, Gentlemen, she confesses he put his hand through; and I'll swear
the Devil stood behind him and thrust his body after it. I say, 'twas he that
robbed me, and I can prove. 'twas he that robbed me; and I'll have him hanged
like a Thief as he is. Two thousand Ducatoons!


Well, Sir, I pity your case, and have bethought a way to get your Pearl again.


The Pearl again!


Nay, 'tis an infallible way: It must do in spite of fate. If I do not bring
'em again, nay, though the Thief had swallowed 'em --


Swallowed 'em! Pox choke him.


Nay, though he had swallowed 'em, I'd make him disgorge 'em, but you should
have 'em again.


Oh, Sir, this is divinely spoken! But how, how, dear Senior?


You must know, this Monsieur is a professed Astrologer, and by the by, to serve
a friend or so, can conjure; that is, can raise the Devil: You understand me.


Raise the Devil!


To raise him in an honest way's nothing. Monsieur, give him a taste of your
skill.


Oh hold, hold, dear Sir, hold, hold.

Oh, Sir, I have not been at Confession these two years; let me but go to
Confession first, and then raise the Devil and welcome.


Your humble Serviture; commanda me, and me will raise de Spirit, de Tunder, de
Lightning, de Cloud, de Find, and de Tempest.


Aye, but are you sure they can raise the Pearl again?


Morbleau, de great Devil not able to raise de little Pearl! fee, fee, Senior.


But are you sure he can get at 'em?


Noting surer, noting surer. Rater den fail, me will send him to Sea to fish
for more.


Well, I profess 'tis a good-natur'd Devil. But hark you, Sir, are you sure
'tis a Devil that you dare trust?


Journee, vit mine whole Estate.


Two thousand Ducatoons is a tempting sum; and if he should keep 'em when he
has got 'em?


Courage, fear noting.


Sir, the place of his Operation is at his Study at my house; we must desire
your company thither.


Well, I'll only order my Servants to have a care of my Daughter, and go along
with you.


Senior, de whole Famile must go along wit you, de young Son and de fair
Daughter; they may be concern in de Robbery. Pardonna me, Madam; my Art spare no
body.


Aye, now I think on it, she shall go with us. If Dorido and she have laid their
heads together, he'll firk it out of her with a vengeance.

Senior, pray beg his Lordships pardon, and tell him his Neck-lace is at
present in Hucksters hands; but we'll firk it out of 'em with a vengeance. Clo,
come along with me.


Thief, steal de Jewel!

De teevish hide of Rogua me will drub,

Journee, by Lucifere and Beelzebub.


Well, Wife, now give us a little of your Entertainment at the Monastery.


Oh, 'tis extreme fine!


Aye, but I would fain have you describe it.


What shall I do?

Oh, 'tis the sweetest, rarest Entertainment in the world!


Aye, but let us hear the particulars. What did you see? what did you hear?
what did you do? what did you say? Come, let's know all.


I shall be undone, if this discourse hold.

What did I see? what did I do? Oh 'tis not to be expressed! In the first place,
I went along with Sabina, and she led me into the most delicious sweet place --
But, Husband, I have News to tell you: I heard just now of a famous Astrologer
newly come to Town.


But you don't tell me your Entertainment.


Oh, you can't imagine it, unless you saw it, so rich, and so divine -- Well,
but this Astrologer is so witty and so ingenious a man, that I long to ask him
a question.


With all my heart. But what did the Nuns do?


Oh, Sir, they knelt, and they prayed, and they sung, and they -- Prithee, my
dear, let us go to him; I have a question to ask him, you little think of.
Guess, my dear, prithee guess -- I am so ashamed -- Well, but for once I'll
tell you: I'd ask him how many Children we shall have; I do so long for a
Child, and I would have it a Boy, that it may be like thee, my dear.


Kind dear Rogue! Well, but you are the strangest woman! I ask you about the
Nuns, and you answer about Boys and Girls. Prithee, dear, I do so long for this
Entertainment.


Well, now I think on it, I'll have my will before yours. You shall go along
with me to this Astrologer's, and then I'll tell you my Entertainment: I vow
and swear I won't tell you else. Now, do, make me forsworn.


Well, thou art so cross!


Besides, this Astrologer lives at Senior Claudio's; and I am sure we shall be
welcome thither.


Senior Claudio's! Boy, your Mistresses Vail, and my Sword and Cloak.


'Tis a very odd place, Senior.


The Spirits he deals with, like it the better.


Velcome into mine Cell. Te Star, and de Constellation --


The wandering Spirits of the Air.


De superlunary and de sublunary Minister --


The Demons and the Cacodemons --


De eterial Peripatetic --


And all the Celestial Outacoustions --


De great Devil and de little Devil, my foy, votre tres humble Serviture.


Pray thank 'em, and tell 'em I am their humble Servant. Dear Sir, stand by me,

I no not like those Outacoustions. But hark you, Sir, if a man may be so bold,
what kind of things are those Demons and Cacodemons?


Demons and Cacodemons? why, they be de Pimp to de great Devil; me send 'em on
de Errand, de Message; they pierce into de Eart, dive into de Sea; fly in de
Air, mount into de Cloud; they raise de Wind, de Lightning, de Tunder; and obey
me in all my command.


Pray desire his Devilship to use no Ceremony with me. Can't I get my Pearl
without all these Demons and Cacodemons?


Oh, no, Senior; it be deir business to serve my friend.


Pray desire his Devilship not to take it ill.


He will no take it ill.


Two thousand Ducatoons is a great loss.


Do not me tell you --


I vow and swear I would not trouble him, if I could possibly help it.


It be no trouble.


I would not gain his anger for twice the sum.


Journee, he will be no anger --


I profess, if I thought he would --


Morbleau, I say he will be no anger. Do you think me lye?


I ha'done, Sir, I ha'done.


Now, Sir, me will proceed to my Operation.


Great Sir, your Art and Experience in this profound study, needs no advice.


Alas, me understand noting. Me have de little civility from de Spirit, de
little command ore de Familiar; dat be all.


I profess he's a modest Gentleman.


Now, Sir, place a de Circle on de right hand, and anoder on de left; var boon.

Now, Sir, set de fair Lady in dat Circle, and me will set de ancient Gentleman
in dis: var boon!


My dear Clorinia!


Now, Dorido, if fortune favour us!


Now, Sir, vatever you see, or vatever you hear, you no speak nor stir: take
care you be safe in dat Circle.


Aye, Sir.


My Leonora here! Senior Pedro, this visit is wondrous kind: What your Lady
too! This favour is extraordinary. What kind Gale has brought such fair
Company to visit my poor house!


My Wife, you must know, has a strange desire to put a Question to the Cunning
man you keep.


With all my heart, Sir.


Well, I hope you'll pardon a bold intruder? But Curiosity's a venial sin in
our Sex. Pray excuse may Blushes when I tell you before my Husband that I have
extremely longed for that satisfaction which can be only had at Senior
Claudio's.


This kindness is beyond expression!


I know you'll call me a confident creature for this: but I vow 'tis a fault I
cannot help.


Was there ever such a witty charming Rogue! She courts me before her
Husband's face.

Well, Madam, the honour you have vouchsafed your humble Servant, has so
obliged me, that if there be any Art or Magic in the world that can please a
fair Lady -- Sir, you'll pardon me -- by this kiss you shall have it.


Aye, good Senior, let her have it: for uds-bodikins if you don't, she'll lead
me so troublesome a life --


Oh, Sir, leave her to my care. Senior,


Senior, me will do it.

Sir,


And can you help him to it again?


Journee, wit as much ease as me drink, or me sleep.


Oh, Wife, this is a fine man indeed!


Me beg your patience.

Remember my council; no speak, no stir from dat Circle.


I warrant you.


Whatever you see or hear, be not afraid, 'tis all but Juggling.


What shall I do! what shall become of me!


Wife, wife, oloh!


Heaven have mercy upon us. Claudio, Valerio, stand by me.


O fee, de coward; fear noting.


Wife, wife, oloh.


O death, hell, what shall I do!


O fee, in de Circle, de Circle.


Oh, Sir, if you have any pity for me, don't fright me at this unmerciful rate.


Morbleau, you be de strange man in de whole world: none but de boy, de shilde,
be frighted at de Tunder: De grave Cavalier, and be afraid!


Oh, Sir, I can't help it, if it would save my life. The next clap of Thunder
strikes me dead.


Aye, Sir, the Gentleman says right; it makes me tremble every joint.


Oloh!


Dear Monsieur, I love thee. Now will I fly into my dear Leonora's arms.


Oh my Wife, my Wife, my Wife!


De grave Gentleman, and cry! For shame, for shame!


You may see what comes of your wicked Conjuring; the Devil has fetched away one
of our company already.


Aye, aye, the Devil has got her. She's gone, and I shall never see her again!


I am afraid the house will fall upon our heads.


Oh my Wife!


Journee, vat be de matter? You shall have your Wife again safe and sound, safe
and sound.


No, no, the Devil has tore her to pieces by this time! I am undone, you wicked
man you! If I had but received all her Portion, and she had gone to the Devil
then, 'twould ne'er ha'vext me: But she's under age, and I have not been
married this half year, and I shall be hanged for bringing her hither. I am
accessory to her Murder. Oh my Wife, my Wife!


Morbleau, you shall be no hang, nor she be no murder: she be alive and var
well; nay, she be in dis room, dis var room still.


In this Room!


Say that again.


Me have only cast a Mist before your eye.


A Mist!


She be in dis Room; only she be invisible.


Invisible!


Dis be noting but de trick of my Skill, my Art: me can make de whole Famile de
whole invisible, si you play, Monsieur.


And are you sure my poor Dear is only invisible?


Noting else. She be in dis Room still. Hist, dare she go.


Where?


Dare, just dare.

O fee, she be too nimble for you, you canno catch her; she serve you de
slippery trick.


Aye, Sir, I am satisfied you can do Miracles, and all that; but dear Sir, help
me to her as soon as possibly you can.


She shall come by degree: De Mist before your eye shall vanish presant.


Sir, Sir, pray make an end of my business, I am not very well, I am all-o're
in a cold sweat; and therefore pray help me to my Pearl again, that I may go
home to bed.


Bring in de Priest.


Priests, Sir, for what?


Because me raise de Spirit, and when de Priest stand by, de Spirit have no
power.


But are you sure they ha'nt? wo'nt he tear me to pieces?


No, no, they be as innocent as de Lamb.


Dear Divinity, stand by me.


Fear nothing, Sir, I am your protector.


The Devil, the Devil, the Devil!


I am dead, dead, stark dead --


Courage, dis be de harmless innocent Spirit; dis Devil hurt no body.


Oh, Sir, the sight of him kills me!


Kill! O fee, he be de good-natur'd Devil; he be so far from killing, dat me
will make him dance to entertain you.


Dance, said you!


Me can command de Music in de Air.


Now kneel, and take her by the hand.


My dear Clorinia, this blessing is so ravishing, that I can scarce contain my
Joys.


Upon thy knees, Clo! that's a good girl; pray for me, pray for me.


Aye, Senior, she be very good Daughter, de pious Lady. But now observe my Art.


Now, Sir, dere be de Jewel; make him a ver low bow, pass him a Compliman, kiss
his hand, and tank him.


Kiss hand, said you?


Vat, will be uncivil to de generous kind Spirit?


Uncivil, with a Pox! I dare not come near him.


Vat will you no take de Jewel?


Let him but lay it down, and stand a little further off, and I dare venture to
take it.


Oh dat be no good fashion. You mus-take it from his own hand. Forward,
forward, courage.

Your Compliman, your Compliman.


Oh, Sir, you kill me, you kill me!


Your tank, your tank.


I shall die, I shall die!


Your tank.


And please -- your Devilship -- I am your Devilships most -- humble Servant --
I kiss your fair hand, and so I take my leave.


Is he gone?


Now vere be you hurt?


Well, I shall never claw off this fright.


My Dear, art thou come again!


Did me no tell you she would come again?


My Dear, where hast thou been?


Oh, I have been the Lord knows where! I have been in a Trance, my Dear.


A Trance!


When I sunk under the ground, a great two-handed Devil got me into his Cell,
and caught me in his arms and held me so close, that he had like to have
stifled me.


Stifled thee, poor Rogue!


And would you think it? he had scarce let me go two minutes, but the furious
Devil caught me so again.


Come, Wife, let us be gone. I have been frighted almost out of my wits.
Senior, your humble Servant.


Are you going, Senior?


Yes, Sir.


I thought to have put a Question --


Oh, no more Questions, no raising of damned Spirits, good Wife.


But some other time will do better. I am very well satisfied at present.


Dear Madam, adieu.


Clo, and Valerio, come, have me home to bed. Oh sick, sick!


Oh no, Sir, your Daughter mus stay, and go to bed wit dat Gentleman.


How! what's this?


Sir, your Son-in-Law, the happy Dorido.


And your dutiful Daughter Clorinia.


Beg your Pardon and your Blessing.


Come, Sir, forgive 'em; they have loved one another, and now have made one
another happy.


Hussy, is all this true?


I can't deny what's made in Heaven. Yes, Sir, he is my Husband.


Cheats, Rogues, Villains, I am betrayed!


Betray! Oh no, your Daughter be only marri'd to dat Gentleman by a trick of
my invention; dat's all.


All, said you? Gypsy, how durst you play the Traitor, and see the Devil so
near you?


'Twas her best policy to avoid him. The Devil could have no power over her
whilst she was at so pious a work.


We, Senior; de Devil have no power to take de fair Lady, especial when she be
taking de fine Gentleman.


Not take her, with a Pox! If he would not take her then, let him take her now:
for she shall never get one Cross from me.


However, let us have your Blessing, if we have nothing else.


Dissembling, cheating, jilting Varlets, go hang your selves.


Gentlemen, I have been seeking for Senior Dorido, and was directed hither.


Sir, I am the man.


An't please you, Sir, your rich Uncle at Madrid, Senior Fabricio, God rest his
Soul, is dead; and dying without Issue, you are left Heir to his Estate. I am
come Post to inform you, and desire you to come to take possession.


Heir to Senior Fabricio's Estate!


Twenty thousand Crowns per annum, is a Blessing comes not every day.


Twenty thousand Crowns per annum!


But is my Uncle dead?


Aye, so the Gentleman says. But be not afflicted; alas, we must all die.


I am not so much afflicted at his death, as at your anger and displeasure for
marrying your Daughter.


Why truly, Senior Dorido, I have been a little angry with you; but I vow my
anger's soon over. And for any ill will I bear you, God knows my Soul --

Fabricio's Estate!

Why really, Sir, I always had a great esteem for your person. Your Father was
my very intimate Acquaintance, a worthy honest Gentleman.


But, Sir, shall we have your Blessing?


Lord, Sir, what do you mean! Rise, rise; my Blessing on you both.


Monsieur, I shall study to requite this kindness.


Sir, it be always de grand business of de French man, to oblige de fair Lady.


But here --

-- I must die a Debtor.


Vell, Sir, now me have done my magic Charm,

Next Circle dat you make be in her arm.

My Conjuring Art can boast var little merit;

'Tis de fair Lady dat can raise de Spirit.


BEgar, de Play be done, and now me guess,
Journee, me Conjure vat be de success.
You think de Play be dull, me think so too:
And, Gallant, am not I a Witch, Morbleau?
Play take, and Author be so grand a fool
To turn de French Nation to ridicule?
Dere's no such ting in nature: No begar,
De French-man be de Wit in Anglitar.
Dough he be fool in France, dat be no matter;
Shange but de Scene, and come but cross de water
In English Air, he strait turn man of part,
Get de Lords money, and de Ladies heart.
And shall
De English Fop abuse him on de Stage?
Journee, all my French blood be in a rage.
Damn d' English Acteur, English Teatre,
Dere's no such ting as Wit nor Acting dere.
De Wit, de Sense, de Fame, and de Renown,
Be in de French Troop at toder end o'Town.
Dere Player be brisk aerie Spark, here Dog
Of Actor, more like heavy English Log.
Beside, de English fool breed Beauties here,
And when gay Miss does on de Stage appear,
Strait keeping Spark, undo de Teatre.
Dere's no such danger among de wiser French,
Dere matron Actress with grave face, fat paunch,
And greasy look, more fit for Bawd den Wench.
Here dull Comedian spend Ten thousand pound,
Build house, and act together seav'n year round.
Begar, dat be no good French fashion; They,
Like true Knight Erran, scorn so long a stay;
Act but a veek or fortnight, and away.
No House, no Beauty, no Estate t'engage;
Journee, dere be no Ruining deir Stage.

