TO this poor Treat, these Honoured Guests t'i^vite,
I come my own Ambassador to Night,
To tell the truth, your Bill of Fare is small,
It is a little Humble Comedy, that's all:
For standard Sense, mine is too course Allay,
Alas, that Talent does not lie my way:
But though this Play in Wit be not so strong,
'Thas that will do as well, it trouls along,
With a whole train of Fiddles, Dance and Song.
And tho to other heights, my Pen can't rise,
What the Dish wants, the Garna^ure supplies;
Then Gentlemen be kind for once at least,
And take the running Banquet for a Feast:
Besides, ill nature now's quite out of door,
The Bloody Flag should now hang out no more:
Critics, their whole Hostilities should cease,
'Twere hard to exclude the Stage out of the Peace:
But if your spite will needs my Fate decree,
And my poor Comedy and I, both damned must be,
I shall not Cheat the Devil, he'll cheat me.

A Very Pleasant place this, Pedro.


Ay, Sir, and a very Pleasant Journey you are undertaking, never a Penny of
Money in your Pocket, and Heaven knows how far you have to Travel.


Nay, the Truth is I am like a single Man, set a float in the bare hulk of a
Vessel; and have no other Pilot than Providence to Guide me.


'Tis a hopeful Condition indeed you have brought your self to, a Plague of the
Dice, I say, here have you cast away 500 l. a Year, only for the foolish
diversion of shaking your Elbow, and putting your self out of Humour every
Night.


What the Devil shall I do now Pedro?


Do! hang your self: For you have made Venice too hot to hold you; I never knew
you rise in a morning of late, but your Levy was more crowded with Dunns than a
rising Favourite's with Solicitors for Preferment.


I would very fain know now, what Course I would not undertake, to Live by
Robbing is quite out of Fashion, for those that are worthy Money now travel
with so little, that the Employment of a Thief here brings as small Gains, as
that of a Clipper does in England.


Good Morrow, Sir.


The like to you, Sir.
What a Pox did he come here Invisible?
I'm sure two minutes ago I saw no body within two Miles of me.

'Tis a Sign he's no Creditor, Sir, If he were you would have spied him sooner.


Pray, Sir, which way do you Travel?


To the Devil for ought I know.


Ay, Sir, If you'll be pleased to bear his Charges, he's in the right road, he
needs no Guide, Sir.


No Faith, I'm in as Direct a way as I could wish, for I have Poverty and
Despair to lead me to his Worship, and in my Opinion they are as sufficient
Guides as any man can desire.


Are you in want, Sir?


Yes, to my certain knowledge, Sir?


What's that to you, Sir.


May be I would assist you, Sir.


Comprehend me in the Treaty, I beseech you, Sir.


Gentlemen, it was always my temper to assist men in Distress, as I suppose you
are.


By my troth your supposition is right, Sir: For my Master has been so very
much obliged to the Bitch Fortune, that out of 500 Pounds a Year, he has not
one poor Groat left.


And yet he seems to have a Noble Spirit.
Why do you not attempt to take Revenge on those that have undone you.

Revenge, O'ons, a fellow without two pence in his Pocket, pretend to take
Revenge of a Lawyer and a Userer.


How can I take Revenge?


You may with Ease.


Impossible.
There are not two such Crafty Villains Living.
I defy the Devil himself to be too hard for 'em.

I would not have you think so, take my Council, you shall your self have Power
to serve your Friends, and plague your Enemies.


Gads-bud, take him at his Word Master, and if he keeps it, we'll Cut out the
Lawyers Tongue, and Plunder the Usurer, that's the best way to be revenged on
them.


Pray Sir, what am I to do to deserve this mighty Favour?


A trifle, if you will consider it.
You shall have Power and Wealth at your Command, the Choicest Beauties shall
obey your Will, fresh Honours every hour shall Rain Down on you: And in return,
I'll ask no more than this, give me your Friendship.


Is that all you ask?


No, one thing more, but mark me ever you grant it, Here is a Paper, it
Contains few Words, sign that, and the Great Duke himself shall be Slave to thy
Command.


S'life, Sign it, Sign it Master, be it what it will, 'tis not the first Bond
you have set your Hand to, that you never designed to Pay.


Let me Consider, I believe I have Guest what his business is. No Money, no
Friends, nor no Credit, nor no way of getting Money, unless it be upon the
High-way, which if I undertake, I may very Decently be taken and Committed
without Ceremony, Tried without Dispute, and Condemned without Favour, Hanged
without Mercy, Die without Repentance, and Damned, without Profit: No Gad,
since my Condition is so, that I must go. to the Devil, I'll get something by it
I'm resolved on it.

Well, Sir, before I enter into my League with you, you shall grant me these
Demands.

First, I will want no Wealth, but lest I should be Questioned how I gather up
my Riches, I will have Power to Cure the Feeble Wretches of all Diseases they
linger under, so by my knowledge in that wondrous Art, none will suspect, nor
envy me my Fortune; Consent to this, and I'll sign my Papers.


I Cannot.


How!


It is not in my Power:
But thus far I'll Comply with your request, tho'we cannot Control the
Destinies, and give those Life who fated are to Die, yet shall your Art extend
thus far, to give immediate Health to those who are to Live.


Hum, why that's something truly, but with your Favour, how shall I know who
is designed for this World, or who must take a Journey into your Large
Dominions.


Search in your Pocket, you will find a Herb, and in your Man's another, by
their Virtue I appear visible to both, but they, who want'em cannot view my
airy form: If at the Bed's head you behold me stand, the Patient Lives; if at
the feet, he Dies.


Hold, Sir, let me have one word with you, I beseech you, since my Master has
packed up in order for the taking of a Journey to Hell, and that I as his
Faithful and Dutiful Servant must needs follow, I think it is but reasonable we
should know what Company we are to keep there, and be acquainted with their
Manners and Religion, that we may avoid the Scandal of having but a short
acquaintance with the Devil.


And withal to satisfy me whether or not you have the Power to make good this
large Agreement.


You shall be satisfied in all your scruples, and think not you will see ought
terrible. You shall have prospect of the Elessan Shades, where you shall view
the Joys of Happy Lovers; The ancient Hero's that disdained to live, after the
loss of Fame; there you shall see mad Lovers, Jealous Husbands, City Wives, the
bawling Lawyer, and the griping Userer, Courtiers, Physicians, such a Tribe of
Knaves, our Consines are scarce large enough to hold'em.


HOW Calm Elisa are these Groves,
How sweet to Entertain our Loves
Free from Sorrow, free from Care.
Jealousies and black Despair,
In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly, we Enjoy our Loves.

In these sweet Elesian Groves,
Calmly we enjoy our Loves.

Here no busy Noise of State,
Comes to Interrupt our Joys,
No Ambition to be Great
Does our Halcyon Peace destroy.

In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly we Enjoy our Loves.

Pray, what were these when living.

Two young Lovers,
Crossed by unnatural Parents in their Wishes,
Who when they found they could not live together,
Took the last Cordial Death, and now are Happy.

But pray, Sir, what is he?

A City Husband,
That broke his Wives Heart with his Causeless Jealousy,
And thinking she'ad too little Plague on Earth,
He followed her to be her Torment here:
See they Come towards us.


That I still must Wretched be?
Must my Torments never Cease?
Can the Grave afford no Peace?
Must I, must I ever be,
Plagued with Causeless Jealousy?
Pray now Husband Pray be gone.

What You'd fain be left alone,
You thought your self safe when you Quitted your Breath,
But Spouse you and I must not part;
As I watched you in Life, I'll watch you in Death,
And keep Horn free in spite of Art.

Pray what have I done?

Nay, that you best know.

I never yet injured you?

But you may do;

Indeed you Provoke me,

Indeed Wife I can't,
Old Men are too Feeble, 'tis young ones you want.

She's a Fool not to make use of 'em then.

I see you intend I never shall have Rest.

I see you intend me two Horns for my Crest.
But faith Wife I won't be made such a Beast.

I will not stay, base Man farewell.

I'll follow thoughthou Lead to Hell,

But Pray, Sir, what is he that Looks so pensive?

His Story, I am sure must move your Pity:
There was a Lady, whom he long had Loved
And she returned it with an equal Ardor:
The Parents were agreed, the Lovers pleased;
But on the very Day they should have joined,
Crossing the River, to her Longing Bridegroom,
Was by an accident over turned and drowned;
Upon the News, his Senses quite forfook him,
And in few days his Life.

Unhappy Pair!

PEace, Peace, no Noise, you'll wake my Love,
Oh! softly, softly, Let us Move.
Yet I'am afraid
The Charming Maid,
Forgets it is her Bridal-Day,
Or sure she'd hast to come Away,
Oh! Sleep, thou Envied Rival hence,
Resign to me this Beauteous Excellence*
Orpheus haste, Employ thy Charms,
Wake her softly to my Arms,
Bring thy Sweetest tenderest Strains,
Love will pay thee for thy Pains.

No more, no more, 'tis all in vain,
For poor Arena ne'er must wake again,
Her pretty Soul is Fled before
On Wings of Angels Moved,
To tell how Sforza did Adore,
And how Arena Loved.
But I in Gloomy Shades alone
Must live, 'till he return:
Yes, yes Arena, since you're gone
Sforza shall ever Mourn,
In Caves filled full of Dead Men's Bones
Henceforth I will remain,
Where I will end my Life in Groans,
For Peace and I must never meet again.
AH! How blessed, how sweet it is,
Thus to Live in Endless Bliss,
Whilst poor Mortals, Sweat and Toil
All our Care's to Love and smile.
Here we rest secure from Fear,
Whilst on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!

Here we Rest secure from Fear,
Whilst on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how Happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!



Now, Sir, what think you? Now?

Why I think 'tis wonderful: And I'm amazed why men should fear to Die, when
after Death they do enjoy such Pleasures.


Hark you, Sir, if you have ever a Blank about you, here's a poor Friend of
yours has another Soul at your Worship's Service.


Well, Sir, some other time I'll talk with you; Now hasten to the City, there
we'll fix the Agreement, and before the set o'th* Sun, Riches shall flow into
you; you need but name the man you would have Sick, and Health shall quickly
leave him: Lets away.


But, Sir, if I should at my Entrance be assaulted with Dunns, I hope you won't
be backward in making Patients of 'em.


Fear not, but follow me.


Now I shall once again appear in Splendour: View the bright dazzling Beauties of
the Court, and laugh at them who made my fall their Sport.


But don't forget to the Devil for it.


TEll me no more there must be something in it, Sirrah, Sirrah, I say you do
Love her, Sigh for her, Whine for her, Pine for her, Die for her, Lye for her,
and all that Sirrah; what a Pox you Rogue, do you think your old Father, that
has been a Whore-master from his Cradle, does not understand the Language of
the Eyes, you Ogling Rogue you.


Well then, suppose I do, sir.


Why then, if I were worth one Groat in the world I'd disinherit you, you Dog^
o^: But you know I'm poor Sirrah, my Poverty and Indulgence is the occasion of
your Saucy Disobedience.


Sir, you ^ my Father, and I know so well, the Reverence I owe your Sacred
Name, That the North Star shall sooner fail the Sailor; The Pelican forget to
feed her young ones, than I forget the Duty of a Son.


Why look you now, Sirrah, you will persuade me after all this, that you are
not in Love; What the Devil, but that Damnable Distemper could have provoked a
Man to the making so many Similes. But Iemmy, prithee Iemmy tell me truth, are
not you Damnably in Love with this Old fellow's Daughter.


Sir, I would Scorn to tell a Lye to any one, much more to my Father, therefore
in few words, I Love her so I cannot live without her.


Well, but you must not Marry her Iemmy.


How, Sir, not Marry her.


No, no, by no means Iemmy, what Marry the Daughter of a Muck-worm, a Rogue
that has ruined your Poor Old Daddy, and swallowed as much Land in a
Twelvemonths time as has kept our Family these 300 Years.


Sir, might I'speak my mind without offence, 'twas not the fault of his
Frugality, but your Extravagance that ruined you.


Why you Cursed Cons med Hellhound, dare you call your own Fathers Management
in Question? But hark Iemmy, suppose I should be such a kind tender hearted
Fool to Comply with you in this business, how are you sure her Father will be
willing?


What need of his Consent, since we're agreed? His rigid Nature can't call for
Duty; by Heaven, the difference 'twixt her Soul, and his, would almost make me
think she's not his Daughter.


Why then thy Mistresses Mother was a Whore Iemmy; Ha! and if the Daughter
provea Chip of the old Block, thou may be a Cuckold, my little Iemmy Boy:
But that's no great matter Child, here are things of more moment to be
considered on, if the old Hedgehog do not consent, how will you come by her
Portion, you little Matrimonial Prig you?


I have her Love, that's all the Wealth I Covet.


Her Love with a Pox, must your Father and your Friend have her Love too
instead of Board-wages, what an ungracious Rogue have I unthinkingly begot
here! Sirrah I Command you upon my Blessing, unless you can get her Money as
well as her Love, never to think of her.


No, Sir.


No, Sir, no, Sir, what a Pox, I'll see who's Father you or I.


Sir, I have been born to many great misfortunes,
But none e're touch^d me like your fall from Virtue.
If Wealth can win you, sir, take all I have,
The little Fortune that my Uncle left me.
Give me but your Consent to Wed Serena;
(For I will Dye rather then Wed without it)
If not I'll wander to some Distant Cli^e,
Where I will Curse my own Unhappy Fate,
But Bless my Mistress, and my Cruel Father.

Hold, hold, come back, Iemmy.
Come back my dear, dear, Iemmy, thou hast melted my stubborn heart; thou hast
thawed these frozen Fountains mine Eyes, and the spring of my Tears shall water
thy youthful Checks, thou ^halt not go, thou staff of my Age, I will lean a
little longer upon thee, thou shalt marry her l. a Year thy Uncle left thee be
all bestowed upon old Iemmy,


With greater Joy than e're I did receive it.


Ah thou tender Lamb, thou shall it have a Wife my Dear Iemmy, so farewell,
farewell, thou Flower of thy Age, thou faithful Lover and obedient Son.

But Iemmy, my poor Boy, my darling Child, what ready Money hast thou about
thee Iemmy.?


Faith, Sir, but very little.


Well said Iemmy, a little with Content is a Feast for thee and me Boy, how
much is't my Precious?


About Ten Pieces, Sir.


Poor little Rogue, and shall we spend it all to day Titte, ^all poor Daddy put
five pieces of it in his Pocket, to make a show with my little Pig^nye.


Ay, Sir, I'm happy you Command me.


Shall my little Iemmy, by my Jewel, thou shall it have her, b^ my Tit-mouse, thou
shall it be married to morrow-day Sirrah, by my Lovee.

Jemmy is a Lad,
My only Joy and Honey,
He Loves his Poor old Dad,
And lets him want no Money.
Toll, Doll, Toll, Doll, c.

Was ever Man so wretched in a Parent, he that should teach me the true Rules
of Honour, and guide my youth in the strict Paths of Virtue holds to my weak
and unexperienced Eyes, the cursed mirror of destroying Vice. Ah! poor Serena,
Partner in Affliction, whose Father's sordidness affects thee more than the
Extravagance of mine does me.

My dear Hernando, I've been seeking thee, they told me at thy Lodging thou
were it gone, with a resolve n^'er to return to Venice.


Why truly my Friend Gusman, I was so determined, but fortune has been pleased
to turn her Wheel once more to my Advantage, and tho I am returned to Venice as
poor as I went out, viz. without one Farthing in my Pocket, yet before many
hours are past, my Gusman, thou shalt behold me in that prosperous Station all
Venice, shall admire and enjoy me.


You may assure your self I'm pleased to hear any thing that relates to your
good Fortune; I will not ask you how your Fortune's changed, but must rejoice
it's turned to your advantage.


Sir, Sir, stand upon your Guard, here's the Usurer with a whole tribe of
Rogues at his Heels; Mercy upon me, if the Devil should fail us, what an
excellent Physician will my Master make cooped up in the Beggars Hospital!


Gone from his Lodging, say you?


Yes, Sir, this morning early, and they told me he took his leave of them, with
a design to return no more to Venice.


Bless me, what an unfortunate Man am I, I tell you what, Mr. Delay, I lent 300
l. upon his bare Bond, besides what I had lent upon his Estate.


Well, Sir, but the Estate no doubt is sufficient to make it up, and leave you
a Considerable Gainer too.


Ay, that's right Mr. Delay, but if I had been so discreet as not to have lent
that 300l there still had been so much more in my Pocket, my Wise Lawyer.


Ah plague of your Conscience, you hear Master?


What think you of this Fellow.


I should think him a Villain, were he not Serena's Father.


Friend, let me beg you'll leave me here a little, I know his meaning, but have
a way to frustrate all his Malice; prithee leave me.


You must excuse me, I'm too well acquainted, with his pernicious Temper to
Expose you to what his Avarice leads him, I will stay with you.


Well, do what you think fit. Save you Mr. Bond.


Ha! Mr. Hernando, bless me what a lying Messenger is this report! why it has
been all the mornings talk on the Rialto, that you had left your native
Country, and wandered to seek your Fortune in foreign Parts.


You have done your best endeavour, Sir, to force me: Thou slave to Muck, thou
sordid ^ump of Earth, thou Cannibal that swallow'st up Mankind, when will the
Widows Cries, and the Orphans Tears, the Mourning Heirs thy villainy has stripped
naked, find softness in thy barbarous Flinty Bosom.


Why how now, how now Mr. Hernando? in my opinion you give your Tongue a
greater privilege than your wants can bear, to justify it in: marry come up,
you have great cause to complain indeed, is this the thanks you render me for
my Civility, in being so long out of my Money to do you service?


To do me Service, no thou Cormorant, it was to Glut thy own in Insatiate Maw:
Thou do a Service! Thou Relieve Mankind! yes thou wilt feed 'em as the Indians
do, to make 'em fatter for thy own devouring.


Be Calm Hernando.


How, be Calm my Friend Gusman; no, while I have a Tongue, I will Employ it, in
Curses on this Mis^reant, this Catiff, Diseases gnaw thee to the very Bones,
Blindness and Lameness, with the want of Hearing, Gout, Stone and Ptissick, all
at once assault thee, and when thy hated Life must have an end; the Gibbet and
Hangman bring it to thee.


What a vain of Cursing my Master's got into, 'tis a sign he has sold his Soul
to the Devil.


Why really, Sir, your Tongue runs on at a wonderful rate, and I can't tell
when that's weary, but your Hands and Feet may be in the same Humour, therefore
it behoves me in what in me lies to prevent it. Officers, do your Duty.


We Arrest you, Sir, at the Suit of Mr. Gabirel Bond.


Why you eternal Bloodhound, won't my Estate make good all that I owe you?


Officers, you know your business, Bail, Jail, or Money, that's all I'll hear
of at present.


Hold, Sir, I'll be his Surety.


With all my Heart, I desire no better, if he wants three Hundred Pound more,
upon your Bond, he shall Command it within this half hour; would I could get
him in my Clutches once, I'd hamper him so fast he should never have power to
Court my Daughter. Well, Sir, you'll pass your word for his Appearance.


I will, Sir.


Well then Officers, you are discharged.

Bless me, what's that Mr. Delay, did you see any one Strike me?


Not I upon my word, Sir.


Mercy on me, I felt something come as cold cross my Stomach, as if Death had
laid his Hand upon me.


So, so, they say the Devil's a Liar, but I find he keeps his word with my
Master.


O help me, help me, Mr. Delay, I faint, my breath's gone, I'm Dying, that
Rogues Curses I'm afraid has had power over me; Mr. Delay, Draw up a Bill of
Indictment against him, and if I do Die, see him hanged I beseech you.


Bless me! what a sudden alteration's here, how do you Mr. Bond? Alas he's
Speechless, pray Gentlemen come hither, sure he's Dying.


Hold, let me look upon him, hold him up, and if 'tis possible to recover him,
spite of the Injur^es he has done me, I'll do tha^ (...) Office.


Now Blessing on you, (...).


Let me see, oh, he's at the Head, all's safe,


How do you Mr. Bond?


Who's there Mr. Delay? O Lord I have been a Dead Man, How in the name of
Goodness came I thus recovered, so well, so lusty.


Really, Sir, you are beholden to Mr. Hernando for it, you were stone Dead till
he with a Rich Cordial he drew out of his Pocket recovered you.


How, Mr. Hernando, forgive me that I should harbour so Inhumane a thought of
him as I did: Dear Seignior Hernando, forgive me I beseech you, and Pray, Sir,
accept of my thanks; you know Money's a scarce Commodity, and I have had many
losses of late, but upon my word I will withdraw my Action, and every Tenant of
mine that salls sick and does not Employ you, I'll seize upon his Goods, and
put you into Possession of 'em.


A very honest and charitable reward, I must needs say.


Sir, I expect not a reward from you, take but this thought with you, and I am
satisfied, think but how poor a benefit is Wealth, a thing most vile and
useless without Health: and by your last misfortune you may find, you toil for
that which you must leave behind.


T^at's right, but by his favour I shall make bold to reap the bene^it of it
while I do stay, and not like such young Prodigals as himself, live to see
other men's Sheep devour my Pasture.


Seignior Gabriel, Save you.


Your Lordships humble Servant, I come this morning on the Rialto, according as
your Lordship ordered by your Messenger, but was not so happy as to see your
Lordship there to receive your Commands.


Sir, I suppose you have heard the Duke's Decree, the Governor of Dalmatia
being Dead, you as the Worthiest for that great Employment, are by the Senate
and the Duke thought fit to take that Trouble upon you.


Trouble, Sir, I should be mighty willing to undertake the trouble, but mercy
on me, does his Grace consider the Charge 'twill put me to, 4000 pounds a year
expense at least; Bless me where does the Duke imagine I shall pick it up.


How Seignior can you call your self of Venice, and stop at any thing to serve
your Country? your great Abilities are too well known to be put off with
frivolous Excuses, here's your Commission, if you dare refuse it, you forfeit
your Estate, that's all the Penalty.


All in the Devil's name, harke'e Lawyer, is there no way to avoid swallowing
this damnable Choke Pear.


You know 'tis impossible, if the Duke and Senate think you sufficient to bear
the Charge of the Employment, you have no Remedy.


Prithee good Mr. Delay, go home, turn over your Law Books, find me out any
Cranny that can afford me room enough to Creep out of this damnable business.


I will do all I can, Sir, but I'm afraid 'tis to bery little purpose.


Why what an unlucky man am I, who the Devil would take pains to get Money,
that must be employed for other peoples uses: but hold, let me Consider, the
Law, if I mistake not, says, the Government of Dalmatia, shall be conferred on
one that has Wealth and Health, but he that is Defective shall be incapable of
bearing that Office.

Defective, O that I had been born without a Leg or an Arm, what a deal of
Money might I have saved: But hold, I have it, I will be Blind, 4000l. a Year
is worth any Man's shutting his Eyes for.

But then, if I should chance to be discovered, my Estates forfeited, but who
the Devil shall discover it, unless I tell tales my self? no, I'll be hanged
first, tho I get by the Government, I'll take care the Government shall never
get by me.

Let others Sweat, and Fret, and take much pains
And Toil for Honour, while I reap the Gains.

WHY faith, new acquaintance, this Employment was worth any ones taking notice
of, I have cured more Patients within this two days, than an English Quack
Kills in a twelvemonth.


Faith, Sir, and that's no inconsiderable quantity, I have known, when I was
there, the Bell tol'd thirty times in three days, for only one man's handiwork.


But, Sir, what Rumour's this, of the Dukes illness?


He's Sick beyond the Po^ of Art to help him, you will be sent for to the Court
with Speed, and great Rewards will be offered you to save him, but 'tis
impossible, his time's expired, and at his Feet you will behold me standing;
you can do nothing but pronounce his Death.


I know my Duty, and I shall observe it.


But, Sir, have you heard the News of Seignior Gabriel Bond?


No Pedro, prithee what is't?


Sir, he has lost his Peepers.


His Peepers, prithee what dost thou mean?


Mean, Sir, why he's taken stone Blind.


How, Blind!


So he reports himself, but 'tis all false, the Government of Dalmatia being
offered him, he takes on that Defect to save his Money: But see here comes the
Messenger from Court.


Seignior Hernando, we have been seeking you, the Duke and all the Court
commend 'em to you. The Duke who stands in need of your Assistance, hearing the
wondrous Cures your skill Performs, does by the advice of the drooping Senate,
Implore your kind ass^stance.


My good Lord, I should be happy if my little Art coa'd serve to help his
Grace; but this I will assure you, if his Distemper will admit of Cure, he
shall not want it long, but if the Fates have Decreed his Death, we must submit
with Patience.


We know we must submit to Destiny, but Art must be applied.


I'll try my utmost.


Come my Child, comfort thy self, don't Weep for what can't be avoided, 'tis a
Great Misfortune 'tis true, to lose that precious Jewel sight, but since
Providence has left Life and Health, time may wear off the other unhappiness:
Here my dear Child go to the Dukes Niece, deliver her this Commissi^n, and beg
her to acquaint her Uncle and Senate, with your Father's sudden misfortune.


I will obey you, Madam.


Well, I am a very wicked Woman, for I cannot avoid rejoicing at this accident,
now shall I have the opportunity of entertaining my dear Monsieur, without the
fear of being seen by that Argus that was. Oh! here he comes, now must I be
teased with his nauseous Company day after day, for I am certain he'll never
let me be from him, but 'tis no matter, since he can't see what I do, I'll take
care his Sense of Learning shall go but a small way towards a discovery of any
of my Actions.


Where is my Wife? pray lead me to my Chicken, the only comfort left me is to
hear her talk, I was once delighted to look on her, but that Blessing's taken
from me, where art thou Honey?


Here my poor unfortunate Love.


Have you sent to the Dukes Niece, as I instructed you.


Yes my Life, your Daughter's gone.


That's well, reach some Chairs Peter, come sit down my dear. Peter.


Sir.


You may go Peter.
Oh my dear Child, this is a great misfortune, but we must bear with patience,
trouble and vexations must be expected while we live in this transitory World.


Indeed my dear, I can't choose but rejoice to see you bear so great an
Affliction with so much Christian Patience: I have sent for a Famous Physician,
and Oculist, that has not been long from France, an Admirable Man, and if there
be any remedy I'm certain he will apply it to you.


Ah Lord Child, Doctors Art will signify Little to me, mine's a just Judgment,
for my wicked Extortions, and Cruelty to the Poor.


But my Dear, we ought to use our utmost endeavour, and not rely all upon
Providence.


Madam, there's a French Gentleman below enquires for you*


Wait on him Peter, come my Dear, comfort your self, I can assure you, he^ a
very able Man.


If he should discover my rognery, I were in a very sine condition: But hanged,
if I swear I can't see, who the Devil can say any thing to the contrary, let
'em guess and be Poxt, I'll be wicked before I'll part with my Money.


Monsieur, you're welcome, Peter go down, and shut the door after you, here's a
cold wind comes in.

Come Monsieur, pray be pleased to sit, I writ you word this morning of my
Husband's misfortune, and hope you will use your utmost endeavour to recover
him.


Madam, you sall command me, hold up your Head Monsieur, Garzoon, he be very
much Blind.


That's a Lye, a Plague of your skill, I find my Wife has a greater need of
this Physician than I have.


Hark ye Madam, you must put him presently to Bed, and me will clap someting to
his Head sall do him ver much good.


Yes, a plague on you, I do believe you will clap something to my Head with a
Vengeance to you, I shall be made a Cuckold before my Face.


You hear Husband what this good man says.


Yes, yes, (and see what he does too, make me thankful, I don't much care, with
the Gentleman's Favour, to tamper much, but as Providence sent it me; even let
Providence take it from me, I'll make use of no other Physician I assure you.


Nay pray, my Lamb, be ruled by the Gentleman, indeed you must, if you know the
Affliction I suffer to see you thus, you would not be so obstinate.


Ah this dissembling Limb of Lucifer, how concerned she is that I won't like a
good natured Husband, give her a private opportunity to make me a Cuckold!


Will you go and lye down my Buddy.


If I do I suppose you won't be long after me Buddy.


What say thou my dear Heart?


Why, I do say I will have nothing to do with your Oculists and your French
Connundrums, I am very well satisfied, no Art can relieve me, and I will not be
at an unnecessary Charge: The Devil set his Foot between you, how the Serpents
twine about one another!


Garzoon vat do see Monsieur a moy, to believe me will take a de muck de money.


I see in you; what the devil can I see in you, that can't see whether it be
day or no.


You must excuse him, his affliction and pain together makes him talk something
extravagantly. Who's within there, Peter?

Bring in a Flask of white Florence, I must beg you to drink one glass to my
poor Husband's recovery before you go.


Madam, vid all mine art, and but dat you are de very good Lady, me would let
him walk vid de Dog and de Bell all his Life time, but for your sake, me will
take care to make him de Grand Cuckold be garr:


Set it down Peter, will you drink a glass my dear, it may perhaps cheer your
Spirits?


Ay, ay, with all my heart, give it me Wife, give it me, since I pay the
Reckoning, 'tis but necessary I should drink in my turn.


Come Monsieur, pray be pleased to pledge my Husband, 'tis right O palatable.


O Lord! O Lord! I shall run mad, I shall forget my self, and discover my
falacy, what an Extravagant Generous Strumpet is this Buxom Wife of mine to her
Stallion, a whole handful of Gold, by the Curses of Matrimony.


Madam, Avousante Monsieur, to your good recovery.


Ah the Devil set his Foot after it, choke him, what a chargeable spiced Cup
has he swallowed for a mornings Draught!


Indeed Monsieur I'm infinitely obliged to you for this Care you take of my
Husband, pray see him often, and try what Art can do to help him.


Oh Death and Furies, I shall be ruined, why this is a very hard case now, that
I must be obliged to be Dumb as well as Blind.

Hark Wife, I think you may as well dispatch the Gentleman, that you and I may
have some discourse in private


I will my dearest: Monsieur you see my Husband is uneasy under his
unhappiness, therefore for this time we'll take our leaves, but pray come and
see how he does in the Evening, I beseech you.


Hell and the Devil! I can't bear it, why at this rate she'll give all I'm
worth in a days time, I had better by half stood Governor of Dalmatia, twou'd
have cost me but sixty thousand Crowns, and I could have cheated the poor of
half the Money, like an unthinking Blockhead as I was. O Blood and Fire! I
cannot, will not bear it, come what will on it.


Bless me, what's the matter Husband?


Oh Wife! I have such a miserable pain about my head, that I am not able to
bear it, lead me in, and lay me down, that I may have nothing to do but die,
and wish you at the Devil.


Well my Dear, I'll go with you; Mo^sieur, your Servant, you'll be sure to give
us the happiness of your Company in the Evening.


Ouy Madam, me sall be sure to wait upon you.


Nay, prithee Wife come away, come away, for this pain is intolerable, I cannot
bear it.


Ah.


Hah! what is the matter Chicken, what dost thou cry out for, has any thing
frighted my Buddy?


O Lord Husband, you have almost knoc'd the poor Monsieur of the Head.


Marry Heaven forbid, oh dear, Sir, excuse me, my miserable pain made me strike
any where, but I hope you'll not take any thing i^l of a poor old Man, who has
neither Sight nor ^ences.


But you have de very good feeling for all dat.


Pray Monsieur excuse this misfortune, and be assured, nothing shall be wanting
on my side to make amends for this accident.


Oh the Devil! why I had better not break his head, since I find I must pay so
much for a Plaster.


Madam, me am your ver humble Servant, and me am satisfied.


A plague confound you, well you may, since you have had such a plentiful
parcel of s^art-money.


So, begar dis be de ver good salve for mine broken Pate, but garzoon's me must
make o my market quick for fear she shange her inclination, therefore if me can
persuade her to Rob her Husband, and entrust me vid de money, Jerny me will ver
fairly make a Journey to France, and leave her and her Cuckold to starve
togedar.


How fairs your Grace?


Near to my Journeys end. Say, is that man of skill yet come to Court.


Not yet my Liege, but we expect him hourly.


It matters not, for Art will prove but in vain, no bars can stop where Death
resolves to enter; I feel him like an honest just Physician, who when he finds
all remedies are useless, he shakes his head over the lingering Patient,
advising him to mind his better part.


See, Sir, your Niece.


Come hither my Marcella, nay, prithee do not weep my deaest Child, death
cannot say he makes a Conquest over me, for he has seized on ^ ^atter'd Fort,
that was at first designed to be his own.


O! can I think what I must lose and live, the careful Guardian of my tender
years, whose Pious Counsels and Indulgent Care instructed me in all the Rules
of Virtue.


Thou need no guide, thou art thy self a Pilot able to steer all our
Venetian Dames through every Coast of Honour.


Look up my Lord, the man of Art is come.


He is most welcome. O, Sir, if your Art can reach so far to this Noble Life,
all Honours that Ambitious minds can covet, and Wealth as much as Greedy Minds
can covet, shall all be yours, with thousand, thousand Prayers for your desired
Success.


Prayers! Oo'ns what a F^e has she found out for a Physician.


Come hither, Sir, I will add one reward, but I unst first ask your Consent
Marcella; say, will you give it?


Tho it were to Die, this moment to Expire before your fee^, I'd fall most
willingly.


My Child, I thank thee, not that I ^ear dying, but for my Countries fake I
fain would live, therefore restore me once more to my Health; and beside all
that Wealth and Honour promised, I give this Jewel to you.


What said he? ay, there's a reward indeed, what Wealth what Honour can he
equal to it? his Dukedom, were the Universe in Balance? By Heaven, Swear her
Beauty would outweigh it.


Good, Sir, speak Comfort to us.


O my Fortune, why is this wondrous blessing offered me, or why have I not
power to make it mine! it is impossible, he's rooted there; Ha! I have found
the means, by Heaven I'll dot: Now Madam, you shall see a poor man's Art, save
the Dukes Life in spite of Destiny.


O happy sound.


Stand all clear from the Bed: no, I am going to pronounce his death,


I swear by -- and all the Destinys, by Earth, by Air, by Water and by Fire, I
will not stir, go boldly speak his doom.


Come hither Pedro.


Ay, Sir.


Take hold here, and when I stamp turn round as quick as thought:


What the Bed, Sir.


Ay, the Bed, Sir.


What the Devil does my Master mean?


Now Pedro.


Night, Earth and Hell, what has the Villain done?


Nay, nay, keep your place friend of mine, you are sworn to it.


By Hell, and all the Fates the Slave has fooled me, and fixed me by an Oath
against my self, to cross the Destinies, and save the Duke: Go doting fool,
thou sha'^ a while keep Life, to end thy aged days in Blood and Sorrow: And
wise Physician look you're Guarded well,

For by Death's sl^shy Scull, and Sable Dert,
When ^e meet next, we never more will part.

So, so, I ^ind my Master's a piece of a Lawyer as well as a Physician, for he
has tricks enough to cheat the Devil.


Fill me a Glass of Wine, here my Liege, take, this drink it off. How fairs
your Grace?


Like one waked from a Trance, I cannot think I'm perfectly a^ake, methinks I
feel new Heal^h and vigorous Strength, my Pulse beats strong, and with a lively
motion; sure I could walk, pray raise me from my Bed: O my Marcella, what a
Change is this, snatched from the Grave to Life and perfect Health.


O! 'tis a happy Change indeed, happy for Venice, but for me, most happy I'm
doubly Blessed, my Souls brim-ful of Joy; O! let this day forever be remembered,
nothing but mirth be seen through all the Court: Rejoice you Senators, your
Duke's restored, the Father of his Country Lives again.


Hold my dear Child, we first must pay our thanks, to this Great Builder, who
repaired the ruins: Here, Sir, receive the Great reward we promised, and with
her all the Wealth you can desire, and all the Honours that the State can give.


O! don't talk of Wealth or Honour, Sir, you have given me all the Riches I
could with for.


To morrow then the Priest shall join your Hands, and Heaven send showers of
Blessings on your Heads, this night shall be devoted all to Mirth, for Sorrow
has too long poss^ss'd the Co^t.

Come my dear Neph^w, none will sure repine
At your Content, since you were cause of mine.

You tell me Wonders, that so suddenly such an affliction should befall your
Father: I have delivered the Commission safe into the Senate, and it is
b^stow'd on Old Corvina, the Rich Florentine.


I thank you, but I have yet another grief, which I must tell you, for alas my
Love, I have no Friend but you I can complain to.


If thou hast anything that troubles thee, it were unkind not to make me thy
Partner: what is't that disturbs my dear Serena?


My Mother!


What of her.


I blush to name her: Takes this advantage of my Father's Blindness, to
entertain a Gaudy Fluttering Frenchman. I formerly knew they had private
meetings, but now she brings him home to her own House; I stood co^ceal'd,
after she had sent me forth, and saw her give before my Father's face so many
kisses, and such Sums of Gold; I thought him happy that he wanted sight, for
had he seen, it would have distracted him.


I knew the Slave in France, he was a Lacky, and forced to fly for robbing his
Master: We must be careful, since this Step-Mother can entertain a wretch so
vile and sordid. I know, my dear, thy Father seeks my Ruin, yet (since 'twas he
gave Life to my Serena) I will not rest till I have preve^ed this.

How now Pedro, where's my Friend thy Master?


My high and Mighty Master is with the High and Mighty Duke, where he is high
and mightily entertained, and I am sent in mighty hast, to desire you to come
to him, for he longs mightily to see you.


Do you know the business Pedro?


Mighty well, it is known to most men, that about some three hours since, the
Duke was in a fair way to be made Worm's meat of, But my Master being a good
Cook, as well as a Physician, has now dressed him up, and made him sit to appear
again at a Court Table.


Is then the Duke recovered, and my Friend the happy man, that wrought the
wondrous Cure?


Look ye, Sir, your Friend with some of my help, has set the Duke upon his Legs
again, let that satisfy you, my Master for his reward, is to Marry the Dukes
Niece, and I have petitioned my gratification may be, to be overseer of the
Kitchen, during the Wedding Festivals.


A very reasonable request I must needs say P^dro.


Truly, Sir, I love to bear a Conscience in all things, but, Sir, my Master
desires you forthwith to come with me to Court, where there is to be such
Singing, Dancing, and then he has such things to say to you, that mercy on me,
if you don't make haste you won't have time to hear the tenth part of 'em.


Well, I'll but wait upon this Lady home, and then go with you (...): Come my
Love, early ^'th' morning I will visit thee, mean time my busy thoughts shall
be employed on methods to prevent thy Father's ruin.

And for reward, from all his mighty store,
Let him but grant me thee, I'll ask no more.

HAST Quickly, take the Wings of Fame,
Through all the Universe Proclaim,
This Happy, happy day,
Which has Restored,
Your drooping Lord,
And filled your hearts with Joy.
Come, Come you Nymphs, come all you Swains,
Leave, leave your Solitary Plains,
Come Damon and Phillis
With Coy Amarellis,
Come Corydon, with thy Brown Dame,
Come Bacchus resort
To this Happy, happy Court
And bring here thy jolly, jolly Train.

WE come old Fame, what news hast thou to tell us,
I'm here with all my Jolly, Jolly Fellows,
Who rise with the Sun, and Ransack the Vine,
And when we no longer can stand Sir,
For fear we profanely should leave any Wine,
We agree to take Six in a hand Sir.

And here's poor Corydon, with Margery and Jone Sir,
With Hobbee Bristleface, to know what you'd have done Sir,
We cannot boast of tippling off good Wine Sir,
Because you know there is but little Coin Sir,
But if this Drunken God will please to pay the Shot Sir,
Here's Hob and Little Corydon, will make him a mere Sot Sir,
And when old Tunbelly lies Snoring in his Bed Sir,
We'll sober be Enough to get a Maiden-head Sir,
And when old Tunbelly, c.

PRithee tell me Amarellis,
Why each night you Sigh and Groan.

If you'd know the Truth my Phillis,
Tis because I Lye alone:
Damon he falls off from Wooing,
And I'm very much afraid
Spite of all we have been doing,
I shall Live and Die a Maid.

My Alexis too grows Cold,
That was once so full of Fire,

Surely Phillis we grow Old
Or they Longer would Admire.

Old Amarellis, pray what do you mean,
You know your own self, I am not Thirteen:
If he looks for a younger Wife, even let him find one,
And if he proves surly, I'll seek out a kind one:
I'll not sigh for Men in a place where there's Plenty,
'Twill be hard if I find not One Lover in Twenty.

'Tis bravely resolved, I'll follow that Rule.
And let silly Damon alone,

Nor shall Coy Alexis find me such a Fool,
To Love when I find he has done,

Therefore we'll Resolve no longer to Pine,

Not I by my troth Amarellis;

If Strephon Loves better then Damon, he's mine;


And he that Loves me shall have Phillis.


HAppy we who Free from Love,
Have no cares to break our Sleep,
Who these Pleasant Meadows rove
Watching our harmless Sheep;
When we feel the Evenings Air,
And the Night invites us home:
To our Cottage we repair,
Where Content delights to come,

HAppy Days, Pleasant Nights,
Wait upon this Royal Train
Endless Joys, and Sweet Delights,
May that Lovely Pair obtain:
Jealousy be far Removed,
Sweet Content rest over there,
May they Love and be Beloved,
And be Happy as they're Fair.



'Tis well performed, now let us to the Banquet, then every one prepare to
think of rest, only the Lovers, Joy will keep them waking, and expectation of a
future Bliss will shut out sleep to night.


My Liege, I beg your Favour, to this Gentleman my Friend.


A Friend of yours need never doubt my Favour:
He that has given me Life must sure receive
All Favour he can ask or I can give.

I Tell you nought but Truth, upon my Honour he's no more Blind than thee or I,
'twas policy to save his money made him turn Imposture.


I'm glad to hear it, and with your assistance I'll make his folly turn to my
advantage, you know the Story of his Amorous Wife; I must prevent the mischiefs
threaten there too; But you must lend me Pedro, he'll be useful.


With all my heart, but you'll excuse me Gusman, I stay too long from my
approaching Bliss: Lovers you know are restless, froward Creatures, when
expectation burns 'em; O! the transports this happy night will yield me! ha,
what's this, a sudden damp struck cold upon my heart: What need I fear, the
Demon has no power over me yet, my time's not yet expired, or if it were,
Repentance may prolong it.

That Sovereign Clam will heal the greatest Sore.
And Cure the Wounds my Crimes had made before.

Well Pedro, as thou hast been an honest and just Servant to thy Master, so I
hope thou'lt prove a trusty Friend to me, and be assured your Service shall not go
unrewarded.


I'll warrant you, Sir, if there be any Pimping in the Case, let me alone, I
had once an excellent hand at it, my Master knows it, but since he turned
Physician, he has been so taken up with Practice another way, that I have
almost lost my abilities, in that honourable, genteel Courtlike Science.


Well Pedro, I shall have no occasion to employ your Talent that way at
present; the occupation you must undertake to serve me, must be that of a
Physician.


A Physician! there you hit me to a Hair, for a neat turn of a Bed let me
alone.


Turn of Bed, what dost mean Pedro?


A Term of Art my Master and I use, when we have a mind to set ^ck people upon
their Legs; the Duke has found the benefit of it.


Well, Sir, I'll not dispute your Terms of Art, only giv you some few
directions, and leave the rest to your own management.


Well, Sir, what you think fit.


I need not tell you, that old Bond only Counterfeits Blindness, for that you
knew before me; but I would have you take on the Grave habit of a Doctor, I
have it already prepared for you, by that means to make him confess himself
really an Imposture.


Let me alone, Sir, I'll make him Confess he can see, or I'll make him Blind in
Earnest.


But hark'e Pedro, 'tis ten to one but you find a French fellow there, that
pretends to be an Oculist, but is indeed a Scoundrel, prithee take care to keep
him in discourse till I come, for I'll be there within less than an hour; and
let it be your care to deliver this Letter to the Daughter.


Why look you now, did not I tell you there would be something of Pimping in
the End of this business: Well, Sir, let me alone for the performance of all.


Go make haste about it then; you'll find your Equipage at my Lodging.


I go, Sir, your humble Servant Pimp and Physician.


Now Fortune, if thou would befriend a Lover, smile on this just design, to
make me happy: Ha! who comes here? by Heaven my Father, there's no avoiding
him, bless me how he reels!


And he, he that is given to dote
On Woman's inconstancy,
I would not be in his Coat
For a great deal of ready Money.
Well said, old Iemmy, merry be thy Heart old Boy, who the Devil can pretend to
be happier than thou art? Now have I a Head as full as any Plotter's and a
Pocket as Empty.


So, so, I'm like to have a very fine time on it, s'life, I must find some way
to get from him, I shall ruin my whole design else.


Who comes there, what are you a Turk or a Christian? are you for Bacchus or
Mahomet, ye Dog you?


I am for any thing that you are for, Sir.


Who's there Iemmy, my nown Boy Iemmy, come hither sirrah.


Yes, Sir.


Look'e, I am your Father, sirrah, and you my Son, sirrah, and when you are
married to old Bond's Daughter, I shall have 300 l. a Year, and you never a
Groat, sirrah.


No faith, nor you neither in half a Year's time, at this rate -- How the Devil
shall I get him home?


O Iemmy, I have been very unfortunate to day, I picked up a couple of Grave
F^iars, thinking to have spent the day so sober, and as Gad shall save me, one
borrowed my Money, and the other left me in pawn for the Reckoning.


Really Sir, I am very sorry for your misfortune, and wish I could persuade you
to go home and sleep.


Sleep! why you Whelp and Bacon, do you take your Father for a Sot, Sirrah? I'd
have you to know Rogue, I understand better things than to go to Bed before the
taste of my Wine be out of my mouth: Besides, who gave you Authority to give me
Rules to walk by, i^ you go to that, Hangdog.


I hope you are not angry, Sir.


You Malapert Rascal, how dare you take the Privilege of hoping any thing: I
say, I am angry, damnable angry, and he that dare say to the contrary, is a Son
of a Whore, though born of my own Mother.


I am very sorry for it, Sir, if you are Angry.


That's as I shall think fit too, Sir, for I will have none sorry when I am
glad, nor no Man glad when, I am Joyful.


Good Sir, go home.


Ay, into your Guts if you pretend to give me Council any longer, Sirrah: Get
you gone out of my sight, you young Phlegmatic ^uppy, get you gone.


I should be loath to disobey you, Sir.


Hold, Jackanapes, come back again, did not I tell you Jackadandy, that I was
left in Pawn at the Tavern, and did not I give you to understand, that I had
not one souse in my Pocket? there's five Crowns to pay, Sirrah, how the Devil
do you think I shall be able to pay it?


How would you have done, Sir, if you had not lit of me?


Why Sirrah, I would have gone back again and drank 'till some Soldier under
Bacchus Banner had come to my relief, you Scoundrel.


Well, Sir, there's ten Crowns, and I hope you'll be so Careful of your
Reputation, as to go back immediately and pay it. I have a little earnest
business, or I would wait upon you thither.


No, no, 'tis no great matter Iemmy, I can go very well my self: Well, I swear
Iemmy, thou win'st my heart more and more every hour: Bu'y Iemmy, go about thy
business Child, be sure don't stay out late, and pray my Child come home sober,
for there's nothing recommends a Man more than a good Reputation among. his
Neighbours.


I shall take care to follow your instructions in that point, I assure you,
Sir.


So, now am I pretty well stocked for to morrow, but how the Devil shall I
dispose of my self, 'tis too soon to go home, and besides, I shall never Sleep
well, if I go to Bed sober: Let me see, I have not done a Pious Charitable act
this great while, I will begin just now, and go visit this blind Puppy that has
lapped up my Estate, if I should chance to find him making his Will, who knows
but -- Lamentable Condition, it may pierce like a Spear through the tough hide
of his Conscience, and make him leave me something to drink to his good
Passage: But for fear the dismal Object should make me Melancholy, I will Sing
all the way, to keep my self in good Humour.


The one Cat she fell in,
But the Cat that sat by,
Wept bitterly
Because that Cat was the the other Cats Cousin Germin.

So Peter, set me down, give me the Keys, you are sure all the Chambers are
locked up.


Yes, Sir, and there are all the Keys except my young Mistresses.


Where is she?


In her Chamber, Sir.


Bid her come down to me.


She can't go out, Sir.


Not out, Sir, why so, Sir?


I can't tell the reason, Sir, but my Lady locked her in, and took the Key with
her while you were asleep, and went out to fetch the French Doctor to you.


What the Devil, have not I Servants enough in the House, but she must needs go
her self?


Sir, she had sent them out of several Errants before, there's none left in the
House but me.


O Lord, O Lord, here's some damned design or other hatching, I shall be
robbed: Peter, take this Key, and bring that Cabinet in that stands in the next
Chamber.


Yes, Sir,


I'll take care to prevent her making you any more Presents, I have sent my
Gold to the Bankers, that's safe enough I'll warrant her; why what a miserable
Condition have I brought my self too, I dare not pretend to see em, for if I
do, they'll discover me to the Duke, and then all I have is forfeited, besides
five Years Imprisonment, and the cunning Devils are so subtle in their
Discourse, that there's nothing to be gathered from that: If it were possible I
could but any ways make an Interest now with Seignior Hernando, my business
were done, but that can never be, for a Pox on him he's my sworn Enemy -- and
then too, he'll expect his own Mortgage back again, which is almost as bad as
t'other^

Who's there, Peter?

Yes, Sir, 'tis I.

Hast thou brought the Casket, Peter?


Yes.


Set it down there then: Well I'm resolved here will I sleep, will I can find
some way or other to secure my self. Peter, Peter, go see who knocks.


'Tis my Lady I suppose, Sir.


Pray go let her Ladyship in then.


Sir, here's one come from the Duke to speak with you.


How, from the Duke, bless me, what can his Message mean.


Save you, Sir.


And you, Sir.


I have something to say to you in private, Sir.


Peter, go down and look after the door.
Now, Sir, your business.

Do you know me, Sir.


Not by your voice, Sir.


Do you know me by sight, Sir.


I Don't know what I might do if I could see, Sir.


See me, Sir, why, what the Devil are you blind?


Blind! why, Sir, are you come of a Message from the Duke, and yet ask that
Question.


Look ye Seignior, I am very well satisfied, that his Grace does believe you
can't see, but then again he has nothing but your bare word for it: I that have
made the business of the Eyes my study, have obtained a Commission from the
Duke, to make an Experiment upon you, and by that means satisfy him whether
you can see or no.


See or no, why, does his Grace imagine I take a Pleasure in walking in the
Dark, when I have had the Blessing of light so many Years?


That you best know, but in the mean time I must follow my Commission.


Why what do you intend to do with me?


I am ordered to take out both Eyes, and dessect'em, if you cannot see they'll
be no loss to you, if you can, you deserve to be so served for offering to
trick the Duke and State.


Bless me, Sir, both my Eyes?


So my Commission runs, but because I'll save you a great deal of pain, and my
self a great deal of trouble, I'll be contented at present with one, only for
an Experiment.


Mercy on me, an Eye.


An Eye, ay, a Nose, if I thought there was any defect in it* Come, Sir, are you
ready?


Ready, Sir, I'll not part with my Eyes as bad as they are, I can't find by
what Law the Duke can send for my Eyes out of my head.


What, Sir, will you dispute the Duke's Commands?


Ay marry will I, in this case, Sir; What a pox, at this rate I shall have the
Duke send for my Teeth out of my Head, and so starve me. French Doctor's an
Angel to this Fellow.


Bless me, Mouns. what shall we do, this Fellow will certainly spoil our
design.


Me will cut his Trote first.


Who have you got with you there Husband?


The Devil I believe, my dear, prithee look if he has not got Cloven Feet and
Saucer Eyes.


The Diable! Hark ye Monsieur, vat are you?


A Physician.


And dat be next kin to de Diable; but come, vat is your businss here vid mine
Patient, Monsieur Diable Physician?


Sir, I am sent from the Duke.


He lies, he lies, don't mind one word he says, he would have cut my Throat and
Robbed me.


O wicked Villain, lay hands on him, Peter.


Lay hands of me, you Scoundrels,


Come, come, bind him fast.


Help, help, murder, murder.


O by gar me will stop your dam bawling presant: Here put dis into his Mout.


Awe, awe, awe.


Awe, awe: The Devil awe you, he's put me into such a trembling, I shall not recover
it this Twelvemonth.


Come, my dear, will you lie down upon the Couch, the Mouns. is come to apply
something to your Eyes?


Prithee my dear, don't talk on it, I have been frighted so terribly with that
damnable Fellow there, that the very naming of Eyes, goes to the Heart of me.


Indeed my dear, it must be done. Peter, go you to the Rialto, tell the Senator
Mountano, I'll wait upon him immediately, and do ye here, stay with him till I
come.


I will, Madam.


What the Devil is my Wife's damnable design in clearing the House at this
rate.


That's the Casket where his Jewels are, there's to the value of 60000 Crowns,
his Gold is all in his Bankers hands, but there's enough to do our business,
while I hold him in discourse, do you slip away with that, I'll meet you in
less than an hour at the Ship, and then hoist Sails to a new Plantation.


Let a me alone, and by gar when we have got from your sight, de gran Daible
take me ven you see me next.


Well, my Chicken, I have persuaded the Mouns. to forbear you till to morrow,
seeing you are not in a Condition to have any thing done to you to day, he's
gone away, but very sullen to see his Art so neglected.


O bless me, deliver me, I can hold no longer, Help, Murder, Murder.


Mercy on me, what's the matter?


Why, Madam, just as I opened the door to go to the Rialto as you had ordered
me, that Drunken Russian rush'd-in, and if I had not been nimbler than he, I
believe he would have stuck me.


But what made you cry out so Husband?


O my dear, I had something of a sudden so offensive to my Eyes, that I was not
able to bear it. Heaven be praised Providence is of my side, and has sent fresh
succour to my relief.


Well, Mr. Royster, what's your business here?



And as sweet as Sugarcandy,
Had I ten thousand pounds a Year,
I'd give her half a Pint of Brandy.

And let me tell you, Madam, King David could not have made a better Present to
the Queen of Barsheba.


'S life, Monsiuer, we must serve him as we have done the the other, or we shall
never accomplish our designs.


Let me alone, Monsieur pray put up your Sword, be gar it be no like the
Cavalier to fright de fair Lady.


Put up my Sword, well, Sir, so I will, what a Pox I hope I understand when to
sheath my Weapon as well as another man, as old as I am. But where's old Cupid,
where is that little notable blind Archer?


That thou dost wear a Bow and go so Armed?

Monsieur, me must beg your Pardon, me must entreat your absence for some time.


You entreat my absence, what are you, you French Puppy you? Sirrah, you are
one of those bloody-minded Rogues, that murder poor Protestants, and put'em
into Powdering tubbs, you Bitch you. But hark'e old Sophister, how the Devil
came you in this pickle, like the Picture of Hom^r.


Ah Seignior, this is barbarous to triumph over my misfortunes.


Why this is all along of your Roguery, if you had not given your mind to
cheating such honest fellows as my self, you might have had the pleasure of
seeing your Money still, for that's all the use you made of it,


Ah, Seignior, I know, I have been to blame, but for pities sake, let me hear
no more of it.


Peter, you may go where I ordered you, I find this old Fellow has more Drink
than Harm in him.


Well old Beetle, I will spare thee, and to show thee that I have a heart full
of Compassion, since thou hast neither Eyes nor Moisture, I will Mourn and Weep
for thee.


Now Monsieur.


Hey day, what's the matter? What the Devil am I enchanted, I came in with two
hands I'm sure, what ever is become of 'em? Well, 'tis no great matter, I'll
even go to sleep, that I main't think of my loss.


Garzoon, now be my very good time.


O Lord, he's going, he's going, I'll hang rather than lose a 100000 Crowns:
Stay thou Villain, thou Miscreant, thou common Highway-robber.


What I find you can see then Husband?


Yes, thou eternal she Devil, I can see, as you shall find to your sorrow.


Alas, I knew it, and made use of this way on purpose to try your Patience.


No, no, thou entire piece of Whores-flesh, that shall not serve your turn; the
Law makes it Death for an intention to Steal, and I'll take care to hang you,
whatever becomes of me.


Nay begar, if you proclaim open War, have at you, garzoon.


O help, help.


Stop his mouth, stop his mouth, Mons.


O dear Wife, save my Life, and take all I have.


Bind him fast Monsieur, bind him fast.


Ah, Jerny, let me alone.


O Madam, undone, undone.


What's the matter?


I had no sooner opened the Door, but there rushed in a Gentleman, with a whole
train of the Dukes Officers, and are just coming up Stairs: See they are here
already.


Seize on 'em Officers.


Oh Monsieur, we're undone.


By gar me have de Halter about my Neck, O Morblew, vat a sad spectacle sal I
make.


Awe, awe, awe.


Bless me, what's here to do, unbind 'em quickly; who's this that sleeps so
sound, by all that's good, my Father, how in the name of Goodness came he here?


Ah you French Dog, let me come at him, let me come at him.


Hold, hold a little Pedro*


A rogue, I'll talk with you presently Sirrah, and here's another old Rascal
too, that pretended himself blind, and can see as well as I can.


How! can you see, Sir?


Yes, that he can, he owned it to us ^ll just now, I'm resolved I will have
some revenge however.


Indeed, Sir, I can't deny but I lost my Eyes to save some Money, and if I had
not found 'em again, I had lost all.


Nay, that you will however, you are not ignorant what punishment the State has
provided for Impostures.


Ay, Sir, I am too sensible of it, but, Sir, pray one word in Private, you have
often pretended Love to my Daughter, and I have as often rejected it; I know
you have an Interest in Seignior Hernando, and he can do what he pleases with
the Duke, do but contrive that I may obtain Pardon for this offence, and I will
not only give you my Daughter, with the Portion her Grandfather left her, but I
will freely surrender back to your Father the Mortgage of his Estate.


I must confess you've touched me now indeed, where is your Daughter.


Peter, run, break open my Daughters Chamber door, bid her come hither
presently.


O my dear Gusman!


My beloved Serena: now, Sir, your promise; give this Jewel to me, and I'll
engage your Pardon from the Duke.


I do it with more pleasure than I shall take to see those two I^satiate Devils
walk to the Gallows together.


My Dear, let me entreat my Mother's Pardon, tho she be ill, she is kin to me.


Can thou ask any thing, and be deny'd^ she shall not suffer, but must be
conte^ted, to end her days in some Religious House.


Where I will spend my time in Cursing you.


But for this fellow, he shall have pleasure, to tug an Oar, the Galleys want
such Vermin, look to him Officers.


Pray, Sir, let me have the Charge of him, I'll hang for him if he escapes me.


Sir, Sir, how can you sleep midst so much Joy, Sir, Sir.


Let me alone, I am resolved never to wake till you give me my Lands again.


You have 'em, Sir, pray wake.


Cud's me, and so I have, who's there Iemmy, prithee how came thou here, and
such a Crowed about thee? Heyday, with thy Mi^ress too, what art thou Married
Iemmy?


We are joined by Heaven, and by her Father, Sir, and now desire your Blessing.


Heaven bless thee: But don't forget the 200 l. a year Iemmy?


You will have no occasion for it, Sir, your own Estate will be surrendered
you.


How! my own Estate, what my 1500 a year?


Ay marry shall it, Sir, here's my hand for it.


Why then Heaven send thee thy Eyes again.


I never was without 'em make me thankful.


Nay, nay, thou were it always a cheating Rogue, that I must needs say for thee.


Come my Serena, now I'm truly Blessed, let's to the Priest, and when our hands
are joined, I'll to my Friend, and get thy Father's Pardon. This is the
happiest day of all my Life.


And mine thank Heaven, for I have lost my Wife.


THe Court is full of Joy, Mirth flows about, Masques are prepared, and every
one seems Happy, but I who ought to have the largest share, sit like a sullen
Fiend amongst Choirs of Angels, as if I envied 'em their vast delight, what can
this mean, my Soul is on the Rack, and yet I cannot give a reason for it. Where
are those mighty pleasures I proposed in the Embraces of the Charming Bride?
they're vanished, I have lost the glittering dream, and walk to Horror and
Eternal Darkness.

Ha! what was that, something went glazing by me, it had the Form of Artan
wrapped in Fire? Oh, that cursed Fiend, 'tis he disturbs my Joys, that fatal
Contract ruins soul and body; what have I done, why, why did I marry, why have
I made the Innocent Mercella a wretched partner in my World of woes? see where
she comes, that pretty blooming Flower, whom I plucked untimely from the stalk,
and now 'twill drop and perish.


My dear Love, why have you le^t the Company so strangely? why when the Court
seems nothing but delight, when every one is wrapped in Joy and Pleasure, do you,
the happy cause of all our Transports, fly thence as if you envied us the
blessing?


Why dost thou wrong me? by my Love I swear, I have no Content, but what is
placed in the^, and sure hereafter I shall find no pleasure greater then I
possess in these dear Arms.


Pray do not flatter me, you cannot Love me and be thus sad upon your Wedding
day; may be you are troubled that you are matched so high, and think perhaps my
birth will make me proud, indeed I'll be a very humble Wife, or if you think I
marry not for Love but only in Obedience to my Uncle, I will convince you by
such tender proofs, you shall acknowledge none can Love beyond me.


Otender Innocence, I do not doubt thee, I know thy Beauty cannot shroud a
falsehood, where is my Royal Uncle?


In the Garden, viewing the Fountains that are newly made, and waits for you to
see 'em.


I'll go with you: O my Marcella, prithee do not chide me. There's something
troubles me, a heavy load lies on my heart, but by thy Charming self, I cannot
guess from whence the cause proceeds, unless the sudden Joy I find in thee, has
overpowered my Spirits.


Why do you start my Love and tremble thus? What is't your Eyes are fixed on?


I had forgot; I cannot go with you, 'tis near the hour I am to make a great
account with Heaven, and solitude is fittest for Devotion, that done, you
shall behold me full of Joy, or everlasting Sorrow, prithee leave me.


I know my duty and I will obey you. But stay not long.


Not long, unless for ever. Tell me thou Gorgeon, that has made me stone,
whence or what art thou?


Artan.


No.


The same.


Why come thou?


To inform thee, this moment is thy last: You must with me.


My time's not yet expired.


Deluded Fool, thou had no time but what was in my Will, I might have cut
thy Brittle-Thread of Life the very moment that this deed was signed; look
there and see what time's allowed thee, and Curse thy self for thy unthinking
folly.


May I believe my Eyes, O wretched Fool, how hast thou plunged thy self into
perdition, this was the fatal blow my heart presaged, and this the wretched end
of all my Joys! O dismal Marriage night! Unhappy Bridegroom! must then thy
Bridal Bed be Sulphurous flames, and Fiends perform thy Hymencial rites?
instead of my Marcella's soft Embraces, must I ashing Furies Clasp me in their
Arms? O thou great injured power I have Offended, strike, strike me to the
Center, and make my Soul as Mortal as my Body.


Leave off your Idle Prayers, or by that power I serve, and you are tied to
Worship, thou shall it not tread the Earth a moment longer.


Fiend thou li'st, thou that not dare to touch me, what power had thou to Buy
or I to Sell, that which was none of my own, I had no Soul at my dispose, for
it was bought before, bought, at a Rate so high, that the whole World weighs
not a Grain of the vast price was paid for it.


This will not save you, since you have free-will, and by that free will thus,
as'twas signed to me. I do expect performance of the Deed.


Shall the bare setting of my name condemn me? how many Wretches, in their Lust
and Riots, have made a gift, sealed firm with Imprications? Wretches for
Perjury, and foul Extoration, make by their Crimes a Deed as strong as mine:
Nay even the murderer, whose purple stains fix to his Soul, and mark it with.
Damnation, and true Penitent Tears, 'tis Cleansed and Whitened for a brighter
Being.


Fool, I'll not give thee Leisure to Repent, nor shall it thou have a moment more
to breath, by all the Ashy Treasuries of death, I have not power to stir, what
can this mean, he bears some holy relic sure about him, or he is fixed on
Consectared ground. Come from that place.


No infernal, never, perhaps the ground is Sacred that I tread on, if so, I
will not stir, but rooted fast, I'll stand a Monument of true Devotion, and
here exprie in prayers.


Slave, I'll blast thee.


Thou art the Slave, not I. A Sacred inspiration fills my Soul, and bids me
dare thy worst, ha! Let me think the very day, on which my Father died, his
Confessor, Physician of his Soul come to me, and delivered me a Paper, which I
have wore ever since next my heart: My Son, said he, take this, and when thou
find thou art upon the very brink of ruin, open that Paper and thou'lt find
enclosed that which will make thy Enemies fly from thee: now is the time, I'm
just upon the Brink, and here before me stands my greatest Enemy; thus then I
break the seal, and thus unfold the Sacred mystery.


Tempest, Lightning, Thunder, Plagues seize thy Marrow, give me back the
Contract.


No, I will tear it to as many pieces as thou hast ruined Souls. Avaunt cursed.
Tempter, hence to thy native Hell, and howl in flames.


Perdition, Furies, why am I thus fooled, I shall be made the sport of every
Fiend, and hooted through each Region, they will make me the very Owl of Hell,
to skulk in Corners, and every meager Ghost will Chatter at me. I cannot bear
the thought, Convulsions gnaw thee,

Aches contract thy Bones, that thou may know
As great a Plegue above as I shall find below.

'Tis done', the Victory's obtained at last, and I will bravely keep the field
I've won, I'll fix to this Sacred standard on my heart, and never fear success
under this Banner.


Nephew, have you got done your Contemplations? you look more Gay and Lively
than you did, I do suppose it was your excess of Joy, that over-power'd your
Spirits.


I confess, my breast is full of Joy; O my Marcella, forgive me that my Soul
could harbour sadness upon this day, but I'll convince my Fair one, that I had
than as great a cause of Sorrow as now I have for Pleasure.


My dear Lord, my Joy or Grief does all depend on you, and when you're Pleased
I'm Happy.


See Nephew, here's more visitors to see you, and one that has but newly found
his Eyes, he took a happy day to make his Peace in thee, which at the entreaty
of your Friend I have Granted.


Your Goodness makes me more your humble debtor; my Friend I wish you Joy, for
I perceive a cheerfulness, that says you have gained your wishes.


I have gained all I wish.


I have got my Estate again, and now I want nothing but a longer Lease of Life,
that I might have time enough to spend it again.


Seignior Bond, I hope you'll live hereafter with more Justice, believe me, 'tis
the surest way to thrive. There's a small reckoning betwixt you and me, but I
forgive you freely.


Sir, I thank, and will make it my whole Life's study to deserve your Favour.


Now for thee, honest Pedro.


Good lack, I was afraid you had forgot me. 'Tis a Plaguy trick you Courtiers
have got never to Remember past services.


Fear not Pedro, I'll see thee preferred.


I thank your Grace.


Come Nephew, seat your self, and you his Friends, the Masque has waited for
us.


We attend your Grace.


COme Shepherds, 'tis Night, and our Flocks are in Fold,
Come Dorus and Damon, we'll haste from the Cold.
To Coridon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.

Stay Menalcas, prithee stay,
Endimion used to come this way,
Let us for Endimion stay,

Let us for Endimion stay,

Endimion's Flocks all go astray,
Their Master strays as much as they,
For you Bright Moon Endimion sights,
For her he fondly pines and dies,
Pity poor Endimion's pain,
Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!

Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!

Why should not a Lover
This Whining give over,
Since nothing but sorrow it yields.

Rich Egon's Brown Daughter,
Has made my Mouth Water,
But by Pan, not for her, but her Flock and her Fields.
See yonder he lies
Sleep closes his Eyes,
I'll wake him --

No Dorus, no, let him alone,
I'll wake him --
No Dorus, no let him Sleep on,
Sleep is the Lovers only Ease,
By Sleep, of quiets he pertakes,
Gay Dreams of Bliss, his Fancy please,
But when they fly, Despair awakes:
To those short Joys the Swain we'll leave,
The only Comfort, we can give.

To Corydon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.
Sleep Shepherd, 'till thou wake in Joy,
I've kindly wounded Cynthia's Heart,
Let coming Bliss thy Thoughts Employ,
She comes to Sooth, thy raging smart,
Sleep Shepherd till thou wake in Joy.

She comes, my Goddess come, -- I dream --
'Tis not forwaking Eyes
To see such wondrous Joys,
Joys like my Mighty Love, extreme,
All Heaven is round me, -- O, I Dream!

Awake Endimion, from above
Thy Cynthia comes to Crown thy Love.

Oh I dream!
Sleep does my wishing Soul deceive,
I would, but dare not Believe.
I Dream!

In thy soft Dreams true Joys appear;
Awake, and see thy Cynthia here.

Here, here, we'll Regin in full Delight,
And thou Swain shalt Rule the Night.

Happy Beings here concea^
All the Pleasures, which they steal,
'Tis the Scandal makes the Fault,
Still she's Chaste who such is thought,
Love's delights are always sweet,
But when Secret, Sweeter yet.
Happy Being, c.

A'Mathematical (...) or the Description and Use of a new filling Rule, by
which many Useful and Necessary Questions in Arithmetic, Military Orders,
Interests, Trigonometry, Planeme^y, Sterenometry, Geography, Astronemy,
Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Dyalling, may be sp^el^y resolved without
the help of Pen or Compares. By William Hunt, Philomath.

A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays: With some
considerations on the Occurrences or Human Life. By Tim Neurse Gent.

Familliar Letters, written by Iohn late Earl of Rochester, to the Honourable
Henry S^vile Esq and other Persons of Quality with Love-Letters, written by the
late Ingenious Mr. Ottway, and several Letters written by Sir George Ethri^ge,
the late Duke of (...) c. in two Volumes, each Vol. may be had singly.

Ovid Trave ^ie: or a Bu^lesque on Ovid's Epistles by Captain Alexander
Radcliff.

The Novels, c. of the late Ingenious Mrs. Behn, Collected into one Vol. viz.
Oroonoko, or the Royal Slave, Fair Jilt, or Prince Tarqui^. A^es de Cast, or
the force of Generous Love. The Love^s Watch, or the Art of Love. The Ladies
Looking-Glass. The Lucky Mistake: And the History or the Nun, or fair
Vow-breaker.

Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning. By William Wotton, B. D.
Chaplain to the Right Honourable the Earl of Nottingham. The Second Edition,
with Large Additions, With a Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris,
^hemistocles, Seriates, Euripides, c. and Aesep's Fables, by Dr. Bentley.

The Family Physician; being a choice Collection of Approved and Experinc'd
Remedies, to cure all Diseases incident to Human Bodies, useful in Families,
and serviceable to Country People, by George (...) Chymi^, Servant to Sir
Kelenin Digby, till he used.

A General Treatise of the Diseases of Infants and Children, Collected from the
most Eminent Practical Authors, by Iohn Pechey, of the College of Physicians.

Contempla^s Moral and Divine, in three parts, Written by the late Lord Chief
Justice Hales, to which is added the Life of the Author, by Gi^bert Lord Bishop
of Sarum, The third part may be had singly.

Cocker's Decimal A^thmetick, the Second Edition, very much enlarged, by Iohn
Hawkins Schoolmaster at Sr. Gorge's Church in (...)

Vade Mecus^, or the necesary Companion, containing Sir Sam. Moreland's
Perpetual Almanac, showing the days of the Month for any year, Past, Present,
or to come; a Table of the Kings Reigns since the Conquest, compare with the
years of Christ. A Table of the Regin, wherein any numbers of Farthings,
Half-pence, Pence and Shillings are ready cast up, or great use to all Trades.
6. The Interest and Rebate of Money, the Forbearance, Discount and purchase of
Anuuities. 7. The Rates of Post-Letters, Inland and Outland. 8. Account of the
Penny-Post. 9. The Principal Roads in England, showing the distance of each
Town from London, also the Market Towns on each Road, with the days of the week
the Markets are kept on; also the Hundred and County each Town stands in. 10.
The names of the Countries, Cities and Burrough-Towns in England and Wales,
with the member of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses chosen therein, to serve in
Parliament. 11. The usual Rates and Fares of Coachmea, Ca^men and Watermen. The
Sixth Edition, much Enlarged.


