May it please this Honourable House,
MY Cornish Client, whose M^se is to be tried,
Begs, what I humbly conceive, ^an't be denied,
That you'll admit me Counsel of his side.
We Claim it by the Act; Pray hear our Reason,
Nonsense is always in this Court held Treason.
Therefore,
I Move, That Silence in this Court be kept,
Whilst we against the Jury do except.
First then,
We Challenge Critics; They don't Act like Christians,
They are Hittites, Gergashites, they are mere Physicians
To us I'm sure, and still will so remain,
Till Sampson like our Locks are grown again:
And next, All those who make a Trade of Writing,
As Fencing-Masters are forbidden Fighting.
We Challenge,
All Quality-Fops, that Whisper Orange-Wenches:
Why are such Locusts suffered on our Benches?
They put off rotten Oranges to a Novice;
Hussy's,
If you'd Thrive, Set up an Insurance Office,
In Cupid's Mansions, Lovers will desire,
That all his Tenants be secured from Fire.
We Challenge with Submission,
All your News Whisperers, who with wise Grimaces,
Carry the Fate of Kingdoms in their Faces;
In Theory of Warfare so well known,
That ere the Siege was laid, they'd taken the Town:
Be all such Coffee Judges banished hence,
Let them to Garraway's, there beat the French.
We Challenge Peremptorily,
All Topping Rakes that Booze till break a day,
Then Stagger to the Chocolate House, thence to the Play,
To Break a poor Fellow's Head would have them pay;
Thirsting for Fame, but Thirsting more for Drink,
How can they Judge that can't pretend to Think:
My Client likes none of those for Iurymen,
No Soldier, nor no Courtier. With Submission, Who then?
Since he scorns Wits, and all Poetic Rules,
We move for a Jury of such the Wits call Fools.
Rich Country-Puts, and Grave Substantial Cits,
Who live on their own Estates, and not like Wits;
Well-meaning Dunces by Predestination,
That Laugh at all your frothy Wit of the Nation.
Who when you Wits Swear Damme! 'Tis all Stuff;
Will cry, No Faith, methinks 'tis well enough.
These are the Men that we expect to Night,
Should do both Visor Mask and Poet right;
Like Hudibras, profound in Analiticks,
Such (...) would save the Play, and Damn the Critic;
W^ (...) such a Jury, our Poet will look as blank,
As he were to receive his Third day from the Bank.

MArried, Sir, and to morrow say you?


And pray, Why not to morrow, as well as to morrow twelvemonth? What have young
Maids to do but to obey their Father's commands? I will defer the matter no
longer.


Will you force Consent, Sir, and Inclination?


Consent, Sir, Cannot her Father tell what is fittest for her to consent to? --
But Sons think it their greatest glory if they can contradict or teach their
Fathers. The one is no wit unless the other be upbraided, and called Fool or
Knave, at least by inference.


Sir, I have done.


As I expected, the Father no sooner speaks, but the Son thinks his breath too
good to be spent in such company.


Would you permit me, Sir, I would declare my mind at large.


Under Articles, -- since it must be so, proceed with your Predicables and
Predicaments, and other Items in abundance.


By Natures dictate, each may choose his Mate,
Man, Beast, and Bird, -- and all that Generate;
Each Male his Female, liberty is Bliss,
And full content's a perf^ct Paradise.

Rhymes, never stir! -- Rhymes! out of the School of Virtue, or some such
precious Author; let the young Girls loose to temptation, they'll soon conceive
the dictates of Nature. I tell you, Friend, I will maintain no Bastards.


My Sister, Sir, I trust is Chaste and Virtuous.


So are all young Women until they are tempted -- a Woman's Chastity is not
from her virtuous will or inclination, but because she hath not the power or
opportunity to be otherwise; give her her wing, fancy will work a pace, and the
first Gay Modish Spark, with long Beau Peruke and gaudy Snuff-box, may manage
her at pleasure.


By Nature all things covet liberty, but you compare your Childrento the
Beasts, and because some of each Sex are brutal, condemn the whole, as if there
were none but a compelled Chastity: You make the Jewel Virtue, a privation; who
e're she grant a Wedlock, first causes a liking, then the noble passion Love,
which once ingrafted in the Soul, the Marriage proves for ever comfortable.


If it be once ingrafted in the Soul, 'twill not be long e're it get into the
Body; Under what circumstances is your Virtue then Boy? Let the most
transported Lover have but one quarter of an hour with the charming Fair, the
Passion is over, and the cracked Venice-Glass returns to its first owner; once
more, I tell you, I will maintain no Bastards.


Remark abroad, what you may dread at home; tell me of one forced Marriage that
was not exemplarily miserable: The Persons are the Figures; the Portion,
Jointure, and the Settlement, are Ciphers; if the first be good, the latter
amplify, or of themselves are nothing. Oh! do not rashly tie the knot which
you'll too late repent! When Bodies join without Affection, despair commences,
and she will hate the Riches for the Owners sake; besides, you know her Promise
made to Manley.


Promises, -- never stir! hast thou lived to this age, and yet ignorant that
Promises are no longer obliging than they serve the interest of him that made
them? Were it an Oath, the dispensing power is in me, and she should break her
Oath for Conscience sake.


My Father takes Oaths like Apothecaries Pills, the less regarded, the better
they settle in a squeazy stomach.


For my dear Mothers sake grant me some respite.


Would thou delay thy happiness? -- thou must and shalt obey.


How now Miser? Still showing new unkindness to thy Children?


Now my daily Ague comes to shake me.


No thy ill Conscience flying in thy face, that never will let thee rest, thy
rusty Soul hath infected thy Body with the Jaundice; thou sordid slave to
Mammon without Wages!


Would thou I spend by thy example, and be poor.


I'm much more rich than thou with all thy Gold, I have supplies which I and
mine do use with full content and satisfaction; I give, I lend, I buy, pay
every man his due without regret; I and my Family freely and proportionably
share the blessings given us, live peaceably and hospitably, give liberablly to
the poor; for which thou call me Prodigal.


Better thou made provision for thy Family, not frolic all away.


Think thou I'll live my days in misery like thee, to die rich, unthank'd,
and unlamented: I would not for thy wealth share thy disquiets, 'tis he is
poor, so anxious is, and careful, that hath not Soul to enjoy what himself
possesses. Clarinda weeps still, Miser! What is the meaning?


For joy to morrow that she shall be Married.


For Joy, wretched Clarinda.


To the discreet and most accomplished Squire Swash.


The same, Sir, I have lived so long in the world to know that a rich Fool is
to be preferred before a wise Beggar; the Wit may give you starving mirth, but
the rich man fills the Belly; mind that Mrs. Minx, better doctrine than your
Brother preaches.


I met this famous Squire even now at yonder Alehouse-door drinking Brandy, and
such an Equipage I feared at first, from whence they came a broken Shopkeeper,
his sycophant and flatterer, the hired Ingineer of his Masters more speedy
destruction; a Huntsman with some twenty couple of Hounds; Six men with Cocks
in bags; one with a Hawk on his fist, leading a pair of Spaniel Dogs in
strings; a Fisher with Fishing-tackle; Fowler with Fowling-piece; the Squire
winds the Horn, the Men Halloo, the Dogs Echo such a prodigious noise as they
call Harmony.


He brings his whole Family with him to save charges at home.


What an extravagant Character is here!


Sports incident to Youth, -- he shall be Married, Madam, and then no danger of
his taking up, -- he comes.


Leave the Dogs without, -- Venus is proud, tie her up till to morrow, Iupiter
and Tarquin must be secured, or they'll rove after the Conies; Little Cupid too
must be narrowly eyed, he'll be shifting in every corner, if the Kitchin-wench
spill any of her hot Liquor upon him he may be spoiled for ever, -- Sharper let
it be your care to morrow when I am in Bed with my Mistress, that all living
Creatures that belong to me be let loose together.


Squire, you are welcome, you continue your innocent diversions.


Ay, Sir, What's a Gentleman without his Recreations? With these we endeavour
to pass away that time which otherwise would lie upon our hands, Hawks, Hounds,
Setting Dogs, and Cocks with their appurtenances, are the true marks of a
well-bred Country Gentleman; and because 'tis ridiculous to be without some, I
have them all, and put them up with me where-ever I go.


You do well, Sir.


I must desire good quarters for my Hounds, they have run hard to day.


You shall, I promise you.


Sir, you forget your Lady.


My Plough wrought hard, 'tis prudence to see my Beasts provided for before I
regard my self.


He cares more for his Hounds than thee, Clarinda.


Would he would take no farther care of me.


Your Huntsmen hath ta^en care of them.


If so, then for the other Game. Is this to be my Spouse?


I know not what my Fates decree -- phoh! how he stinks of Brandy and Tobacco!


The Fates, Madam, are a parcel of old withered Witches, for us they shall spin
Cables; thou shalt be my Diana, I thy Pan; thou shalt dance to my Pipe. --
Sharper, the Hare, Madam, I present the fruits of this days labour to you.


Genteel and Frugal, -- some Prodigals would have bestowed a hundred Guineas in
a Jewel.


With my own hands I took her up before the Hounds, a while she beat her foil,
and once we were at a shrewd fault; I backed it, I put forth, I rounded, I
fresh found her, Halloo! (quoth I) thou art mine own Bird now, and thus I
fairly killed my Hare.


Pray, Sir, What are these?


True Cocks of the Game, -- Let me see the old Cutthroat.


Sir, you neglect your Lady.


I have kissed her, and now I'll show her my best Cock, -- What can I do more
before all this Company? Pray handle him, Madam, Is he not a sprightly Cock?


It may be so, I have no judgment.


In good time, Madam.


'tis a Chargeable Recreation.


That's your mistake, Sir, I make all my Recreations turn to advantage, I hunt
my Hounds for a Treat, no matter whether I win or loose, it answers the end of
drawing of Company; as soon as we are warm with Liquor, I make a match of
Cockfighting, and then a Hundred or Two hundred Pounds are soon won, for I
never fight a Battle under; this Cock first and last hath won me a Thousand
pound, pierced often through the Brain, thrice his Neck was broke, and once his
Head quite cut off, and yet he got the Battle.


You are not always certain of success.


A secret I give my Cock when I throw him into the Pit, he does his work, while
you say what's this; or if we come to put to, I never fear, for we carry a
close heel.


Never stir, I admire when pleasures turn to account, 'tis very commendable;
and for your better instruction in the affairs of the world, mind this
infallible receipt, do no good, take no wrong, keep what you have, catch what
you can, and pay no body.


But where is my Reputation.


A gloss, a varnish, a blind to amuse the unthinking world, a trap for
Woodcocks, necessary sometimes to a declining state, or one turning Bankrupt,
credit for a short time perhaps diverts that storm otherwise inevitably
happening, and helps at last to buoy him on another ruin.


As some Marry to stop a gap, (as we say).


True -- but if men gallop up the hill; Fame is the rich man's shadow, and
follows at your heels whether you will or no.


Indeed.


For instance, people discoursing of me, That miserable old Dog is worth
thousands (say they).


So s^urrilous!


I know it, and am proud of it, for under that creditable Character, my word
will pass for more Money than the most accomplished Coxcomb, or man of Sense,
that comes from Court or City, or from either of the Universities or Inns of
Court, -- but I judge you may be weary, and and Supper is almost ready, I'll
lead the way.


I thank you, Sir, -- Madam your hand; along Boys, Sesse, Sesse.


Where is the Courtship all this while, Peregrine?


Within after Supper, his Love always moults on an empty Stomach.


At whose Suit, pray? -- He is no Creditor, I never saw his face before, -- nor
Bailiff by his Clothes, though he hath a suspicious face.


Mr. Sharper (for so I am told you are called) I am desirous of an intimate
acquaintance with you; I admi^e Virtue and Honesty in every man.


Is the Man Drunk or Mad, I never had a dram of either, they lie not in our
way.


Pity it is such worth should lie buried in obscurity, we should improve our
Talents to the utmost to relieve our needy Brethren in distress.


A Religious preface, -- commonly mischief intended in the Treatise.


My Bowels yearn to see such men in want, -- pray, Sir, accept this Token of my
Friendship.


Ha! Gold, and Twenty pieces! -- How may I deserve this! but 'tis mere folly
for men in adversity to dispute these matters, -- what e're be the event, I
take the press money, -- if Shipwrecked I have but this Hull to lose, and that
is not very stanch, -- Fortune can never make me much less than nothing.


The earnest of Two hundred more forth coming, if thou wilt be my Friend.


Two hundred more! -- 'tis enough to retrieve my Shop and Credit, I find I was
mistaken in the Gentleman, on second thoughts, methinks he hath a very honest
promising Countenance.


Wilt thou be secret?


As your own thoughts, -- by this sacred purse I swear, we that take Bribes,
take examples by our Betters, be true to our Customers for the sake of Trade,
whatever it be, I'll do it as readily as ever Prisoner Perjured himself on the
Ten pound Act; as greedily, and with as much zeal as ever Clergyman Ruined his
Parishioner for a Tithe Pig or Goose.


Wilt thou Betray thy Master to me?


Is this Body mine? My whole shall be your security; come come, the method,
lets about it.


Of that anon, -- in, in, you'll lose your Supper.


This dear restorative will cure all hunger, -- Oh, Gold! dear precious Gold!
thou Liberty and Property, Religion and the Laws; thou every thing to a
despairing Tradesman, welcome: Now by this precious Villainy, and its wages,
I'll suddenly compound with my Creditors, go snips with 'em, and set up for
Honest Tom. Sharper the Shopkeeper again, this may make me Mayor of a
Corporation in a short time, and then I'll pay off the arrearages of my Debts
(if any) out of the public stock.


He is overjoyed.


If want of Money be the Quagmire of the Court, it is certainly the Jakes of
the Country, which makes the poor Creatures so nauseous that they are spued out
of all Company; when I broke -- my Neighbours could not endure me, and no name
was bad enough; when I set up again, they'll flock about me with all the kind
pretensions imaginable. Thy Golden days are coming, Tom, -- blessed reformation!


Mr. Sharper you forget your Supper.


I had almost forgot my self, -- shall I attend you here, or where, Sir?


In the Garden, our discourse may be over-herad here.


Prudent forecast, -- no wonder Men say, Wealth is the wisdom of a Nation, Gold
plentifully got works by sympathy over all the body, and all the words are
Oracles. In the Garden an hour hence, I will wait your commands, and if I do
not prove as honest a Traitor as ever took cause in hand, let me be hanged,
drawn, and quartered.


How suddenly the needy wretch was caught! He swallowed the bait as soon as
offered: Now by the strength of mighty expectation the ungrateful Creature
sells the hand that feeds him; my Nephew Manley, to whom in his Minority I was
a Guardian, lies under as (...) a Contract with the fair Clarinda as (without
the solemnity of Marriage) can be obliging, she may be a great Fortune, he hath
a fair Estate, though not so great as that Fops within, that crammed Son of a
-- miserable Usurer, a working Tinner; with like success Gripe's Son Courts
Manley's Sister* on one th^ed all depends, the part seems difficult, but I must
wade through by seeming and ^landestine means.


Here poor Clarinda comes in Tears. -- I'll try her Constancy -- Clarinda, why
disconsolate so near your Wedding day?

Name not that miserable Day, I much more willingly would court my Death; now
help my Tutelar Angel; now, or never help!


Arise Clarinda, what would have me do?


Beggars must kneel, pity my Misery. -- Must I be ravished from my dear, dear
Manley's Arms. You, Sir, that know the Secrets of our Hearts, the Vows, the
sacred Promises we made each other before your Face, and with your Approbation,
can you be ignorant what I would have you do?


I pity Manley's fate. You have a richer Husband brought you, Madam. Manley,
poor Creature, grieves at his own unworthiness; which takes you from him,
wishing you all happiness, insists not on the Pre-engagement; concludes you act
merely by compliance to your Father.


Nay, then he loves me not; true Affection cannot be limited by Interest or
blind Obedience -- False Manley! treacherous Manley! No, it cannot be, Manley
-- continues just, but thinks me false; thinks all my kindness was a bare
Pretence or Civility. -- A time will come to prove my Constancy. -- I'll to my
Father instantly, -- tell him I'll never marry Swash. Manley! for me thou
languishest with patience; and shall Clarinda basely and unworthily neglect her
plighted Promise to thee? -- No, Manley, it never shall be said, Clarinda's
false.


Clarinda stay, -- one remedy is left; by your assistance I can break the Cloud
hangs over our heads.


Speak on, dear Oracle! I will do any thing to serve my Love.


Give this your Father before he Sleeps.


Ha! will you poison him? and by mine Hand? -- Give it me, if it need blood to
bring it to perfection. -- I offer a Virgin Sacrifice, but ne'er consent to my
dear Father's Murder.


Clarinda, this was but a trial, -- that Fop shall never wed thee. Fear not,
I'll stand 'twixt thee and harm, my dear Clarinda.


Will you kill my Father, Sir?


No, I abhor such hellish Crimes. -- I have the Plot so firmly here projected;
within few days thou shalt be Manley's Bride, and with thy Father Gripe's
consent.


This, tho improbable, I would believe. May you succeed, my Courage now
revives.


What remarks within?


With fears and troubles I was so perplexed, I scarce remember what was said or
done.


How got you from the Squire?


Supper brought in, he quitted his hole, falls to ere any Grace was said,
quarters a Capon, throws it his Dogs; which he called Trey and Cater, crie^, A
wise Man first feeds his Beasts, which he repeats for a witty Saying. Having my
liberty, I hastened to find you, which happily I did, this is what I can say.


And it is time, Clarinda, to adjourn, Sharper expects me in the Garden, be you
as gay and easy as you can; prevent all cause of Jealousy; of what occurs give
full intelligence with all convenience.


I shall, with my utmost care and application.


And for the rest,

Leave it to me, I'll play the Pilots part,
And reach the Port, or perish in the Art.

WHEN Maids live to Thirty, yet never repented;
When all Europe's at Peace, and all England contented;
When no Gamester will swear, and no Bribery thrives,
Young Wives love old Husbands, young Husbands old Wives;
When Landlords love Taxes, and Soldiers love Peace,
And Lawyers forget a rich Client to fleece.
When an old Face shall please as well as a new;
Wives, Husbands, and Lovers, will ever be true.
When Bullies leave buffing, and Cowards their trembling,
And Courtiers, and Women, and Priests their dissembling.
When these shall do nothing against what they teach,
Pluralities hate, and we mind what they preach;
When V^tners leave brewing to draw the Wine pure,
And Quicks by their Medicines kill less than they cure.
When an old Face shall please as well as a new,
Wives, Husbands, and Lovers will ever be true.
Manley rises, Enough, -- This is no cure for my Malady, -- What a miserable
Wretch is Man! -- Condemned to Passions, captivated by 'em -- We are the
Monarchs over all other Creatures, yet Anarchy predominates in us. The Senses
in Confederacy raise Rebellion against reason; there now is a Civil War over
all this Compound Tabernacle. Pride and Desire disturb the Harmony of
Government, endeavouring to undermine the tottering Fabric, and to ^url all
into Chaos and Confusion. -- Such is my case, the Love of a Woman; mine she is
by contract, and I am satisfied she bears me a reciprocal Affection. Shall I
suffer her to be torn from me by that tawdry Bubble? I am in a Labyrinth -- ha!
Freeman come to tease me!

Ned Manley! and alone! throw off this self entertaining humour, let's take a
Bottle, and wash away Clarinda.


Prithee be gone, I'm serious.


Sir, I am glad you are come, -- here is a rich pile of building shaken by a
storm, and like to fall to ruin, wants a Supporter.


Clarinda has her cue, and by this time Sharper is at work, -- now for my other
Patient, --


As well as the Image of a man, a mere Statue, deprived of Sense and Reason,
can be; like a Bird ensnared, the more I strive for liberty, the more I am
entangled.


What means this passion? Are there no more Women?


Would there were none at all!


Nay, Manley, there I am utterly against you, though to have and to, hold till
death us do part, c. goes against the hair, yet for an hour or two they are
very convenient things, and very good Company.


You like not Maraiage, Mr. Freeman.


'Tis a Mortgage for Life, without Equity of Redemption.


Thy wild discourse too much offends me now.


Because thou hast not the Grace to hearken to good edifying doctrine, --
Woman's expelled by Woman; take another, you may have a great pennyworth, if
these Wars hold, they'll speedily be the plentiest Commodity going, they lie
every where upon their Father's hands; if any of 'em catch me in the noose of
Matrimony, they shall assuredly pay for it; but I desy the Devils and all their
works.


Yet Greece and Troy had Ten years War about a Woman.


That was a handsome Whore, Sir, -- it seems in that Golden Age of simplicity
such a dish was reserved for Kings and Princes only, now the times are altered,
the world is more Civilized, and a good natured and honest fellow need not
starve for want of a bit to stay his stomach.


I can no longer listen to this Fop.


Nephew, -- I should be glad if you could fix your thoughts upo^ some other
Beauty.


Impossible -- the more I'm in danger of losing Clarinda, the more I Love her.


You know to morrow she must be another, then of necessity your passion must
divert.


Despair commences, but true and virtuous Love till death I shall have for her.


Can any man but pity him?


How does Clarinda bear this sudden change?


Indeed but heavily, she laments sincerely.


and I as heartily do pity her. Won't the great argument of Wealth convince
her? Marriage is become a way of Purchase, or making Bargains; How many
cautious Parents fondly persuade and force their Children to inconvenient and
unwelcome Nuptials, that they may live miserably Rich, -- Unfortunate Clarinda!
I must pity thee.


With Tears and Sighs she mournfully cried, Must I be Ravished from my dear,
dear Manley's Arms! no, I'm his till death, and ne'er will be another.


Did I not tell you I forgave that Promise.


I told her so; she told me, you Loved her not, but thought her False, then
nobly Vowed she'd die to be believed.


Uncle, you blow the Coals afresh, I'm more a fire than ever.


And can you Love Clarinda heartily?


Is that become a question? You know till death I must.


Love on.


How!


Love on, Clarinda shall be thine, maugre what Gripe, and Swash, and all can
do.


The old Gentleman, I know, hath too great a kindness for him to abuse him, yet
to me this discourse seems as if it would make him fit for Bedlam; 'tis all a
mystery.


Sir, You tell me impossibilities.


It's a certain truth, I'll tell you more anon -- Mr. Freeman you are
Melancholy.


Manley bear up! between an Old Man and a Young Woman, I reckon thou art in the
high road of Madness.


Captain Busy is without, desires admittance.


Wait on him in, -- he pretends Love to my Sister; prithee Tom help me to abuse
him.


Give him free liberty, he'll do it himself sufficiently, -- now for a Lecture
of Discipline; provide for his coming, you'll be both Exercised.


He won't Beat us?


No, no, only teach you the Postures, he carries a book in his Pocket out of
which he is always practising.


Is he a good Soldier?


A Militia Officer, but a great Blunderer; no more, he comes.


Noble Captain you are welcome.


Your Servant Mr. Manley -- though late, I was resolved to call in my way home.


No Complements amongst Friends, good Captain, you are welcome here at any
hour.


I was detained about a troublesome business, I have been sitting upon the
great Rate.


'Tis well known you were ever zealous in public matters, Commissioners ought
to be so.


A Hangman might hope for some end of his business; some Fools make the matter
as intricate, as the Learned Doctors Scriblings are about Religion, no man can
tell what they would be at.


But you brought off all with good success.


Thank Patience and a good Head; one cries the Seas are blocked up and we have
no Trade, therefore we must not be too severe to the Country; another, That
Money is scarce, and other Counties don't come up to our proportion; I told
them plainly, They that were not for giving this King Money, were for bringing
in the other; at last I had my way, and the thing was Signed according to my
mind.


But Captain, here's an old Friend of mine, if you are not provided, you had
best take him for your Lieutenant.


Is he a Soldier?


The best in the Country.


What dost mean? I'll discover my ignorance.


Peace put on an impudent face, thou wilt pass muster. Impudence is as
requisite in a Soldier as in a Lawyer or a Physician, if you have good stock,
you are noted and admired, but want that, want all.


If your Friend will accept of a Lieutenancy of the Militia, I have a blank
Commission; but first I must exercise him.


Captain, I understand no more than a Maypole.


No matter, I'll teach you; one Officer of understanding is enough for one
Company, -- but now I think on it, I have some Neighbours without that wait for
me, I'll call 'em in, you shall see them Exercise.


This is excellent, a man may venture to fight with these Weapons without
danger of death, or breaking of Bones.


To tell you the truth, I don't think the Militia is obliged to fight; they are
intended, I suppose, more for show than service; when the French Burnt
Tinmouth, the Posse led the Van, the Militia the Rear.


Because the Militia is the standing Guard of the Nation.


Methinks, Captain, ^tis reasonable we should earn our Pay: I am for Figh^ing.


The Fellow is the fitter for my service; though Valour in two Officers be too
much for one Company, yet 'tis convenient there should be one such Officer; I
for Conduct, he for Courage -- I defy the whole Regiment to match us. He hopes
for Pay; let him; I could never see any such thing, I believe it may be
converted to other Uses. Eugenia? I must kiss her hand before I sleep.


I had forgot to tell you Captain, that a brisk young Gentleman hath brought
his Forces before the Town, and swears he'll take it by Storm or by Siege.


Dare any person be so Impudent -- Dost thou not feel me yet! not yet!
(Blusters) Though Hills were set on Hills, and Seas met Seas, yet would I reach
thine head, thine head, proud -- Ha!


Now is your time, Captain; for if her flag of Truce be put up, there will be a
speedy end of the Siege.


Madam, your humble Servant -- Now for my great and manly looks to put him out
of countenance.


Dare thou, Thing! ask me such a Question?


Thing -- Dux, ducis, a Duco, a Thing! If I run him through before he turn his
face, I'll venture to fight with him afterwards.


Look to your life, Peregrine.


Behind my back -- Cowards are ever mischievous; now I am ready for you.


Will no body part us;


'Tis with your fear then; I had not time to touch thee: However, I'll make
bold with your Sword to prevent future mischief.


You may rise, Captain, you have no hurt; let me help you.


I'm sure I felt the Sword pass through the Triangle of my Heart -- What, tho
you see no Blood, 'tis a sign of the greatest danger when the Wound bleeds
inwardly.


You have no Wound.


That you saw: I felt it I'm sure, or I was sore mistaken -- Where is this
Lieutenant of mine, that could see his Captain slain before his face, and not
revenge his Blood? I think he'll prove a special Officer.


Man to man -- 'twould have been Cowardice to have interposed.


I must be killed to make you sport -- Here's a Dog deserves to be hanged for
not following the example of his Superior Officer -- It is for thee, dear
S^int, the Love of thee, I suffer all these evils.


For me -- I am not worthy of such respect from a Person of your Quality.


Pretty Creature, thou hast some Compassion.


Though I could pardon your cowardly aiming to take away my life, I cannot allow
such familiarity with my Mistress.


Disarmed and twing'd by the Nose -- Nature was too niggardly to allow me none
but Passive Valour -- Poor Captain Busy Thou must bear thy Crosses with
Patience -- to the right hand about -- England if this be not Arbitrary Power
in the highest degree.


You have not raised the Siege, Captain.


I endeavoured to beat the Enemy out of his Trenches, but the Lieutenant did
not second me with his Body: I threw at all; wiser Commanders without. Disgrace
have been worsted on such terms.


Rally again, Captain; Fortune favours the bold, you may have better succe^s
the second Charge; you scorn to desist on the first Repulse.


I beg your Pardon, Sir, --


My Brother's Fate and mine shall be the same.


Then I have hopes, if he succeed I may be happy.


You know my Resolution.


'Tis so; He hath laid a Train, and is going to spring his Mine; through the
Breach he enters; no relief to be had, she must surrender at Discretion: She's
lost she's gone, since of her self she will not love, nothing can make her; the
Devil take her.


Listening?


I must follow him about some private Business of my own.


Take his Sword with you, and bid him use it more discreetly for the future,
left he meet a Wound in earnest -- Manley, I bring unwelcome News, by my
Father's Commands I am to invite all here to my Sister's Wedding to morrow.


Now, Uncle, Where's your Stratagem?


Fear nothing.


And what is become of your full-blown hopes?


I rest securely in your Promises.


They are Conditional.


Sharper hath private Business with Mr. Trusty -- we must withdraw.


It seems you know it.


So shall you in time convenient -- Now Sharper! How goes Matters on?


With full Sails, Sir. When I left you, I went to Nich. Froth's, the Ale House
yonder, where luckily I found my full Club of Catchpoles sitting at the Receipt
of Custom, cursing some Attorneys that Cheat them of their honest Wages.


Will they Espouse the matter?


Will they Eat when they are Hungry? I no sooner delivered my Message, but off
slew their Caps, and your Worship's Health went round; They'll stand by you
with their Lives and Fortunes; One of them's a broken ^awyer --


Do Lawyers break?


When Vermin breed too fast, they will devour each other: The Priests
monopolize the Parishes, therefore they seldom break; Phyfitians here and there
pick up a Livelihood, though small Apothecaries and Licensed Chi^urgeons, and old
Women discerning States, encroach on that Art and Profession: Shoopkeepers,
like Foxes in their ^les, walk forward and backward, but can prey no further
than their Chain permits 'em; and as a broken Shoemaker makes a good Cobbler,
so a broken Attorney makes the best of Bailiffs.


What said this Bayliff-Lawyer to ye?


First very strange, with open hand he stood, till with a Guinea I shook him by
the Fist: My Darling, he cried, I'll do it effectually; Then taking an old
Warrant out of his Pocket, enters his Name, what Sum, and at whose Suit: Next
week, (said he) if he stand out, we'll send for the Writ; If he comply, we need
not send for any; yet he must pay for that and the Declaration; This is the way
small Fellows get their Bread, the great ones vast Estates: We could not live
should we do all things Just; our Trade is a Mystery, and to keep Clients in
profound Ignorance, our great Arc^num.


They'll do their work to morrow?


Very early: Bailiffs and Woodcocks make their best speed by Twilight. Shall he
be carried to a Tavern, Sir? or where?


To that very Ale-House; He'll find those Charges high enough; Taverns are
places unfit for Bailiffs. Dost think he'll fight his Cocks?


He certainly shall do it, and I'll so order matters, you shall get every
Battle.


Be the whole purchase yours.


Generously said, I expect no more; My little Bayliff-Lawyer hath forged this
Letter to the old Gripe from his Tinn Captain.


Thou hast betraved my Cause thou Villain.


Nay, See if it be not exactly to your Model. Reads,

Sir, Our Tinn-Work proves very poor, 'twill not pay Wages: if it does not
alter within a week. I resolv^ (...) k^ck it off and discharge some of the Men,
unless I have contrdry Orders from you by the Bearer. In Mr Manley' s Bounds
adjoining, there's a rich load cut 6 Foot broad without Water, and perfect
Pryan, each Sack of Work makes his Gallon of Block Tynn: This I thought fit by
Express to warn you of, that it might come before his from his Captain; The
Bearer if examined will inform you farther; I rest in haste, Your Obedient
Servant,

Stephen Spalding.

Now the same Lawyer shall be the Messenger in a Tinner's Disguise.


If he be trusty, it seems feasible.


I'll pawn my life for his Truth and Honesty.


To confirm this, we must contrive another Note for Manley.


Leave it to me -- But Business now grows thick, and waits dispatch, I must go
my Rounds again before I sleep, and give fresh Orders.


Sir, I cannot sleep before you tell me what are the intents of those so secret
Meetings; I fear some ill design that doth relate to me.


Pray, Nephew, whence proceeds this Jealousy? I can swear, and that with
safety, hitherto I have been faithful to my Trust.


Sir! --


I have not as Trustees now too often do, plundered your Fortune to advance my
own, and with bare faced and sinister contrivance in your Minority, with your
Money purchased an Estate in my own Name, to my own Use and Benefit; Such
Trustees (Nephew) are easily found, and such a poor Cullied Heir, when he
arrives to the Age of 21, care being first taken he shall be no Scholar, Seals
a General Release, which with ease is gotten, before Accounts or any thing like
it are past, or perhaps called for; From which time the treacherous Panther
regains the Prize, keeps his still Minor at due distance, takes upon himself
the manage of his Profits, learns him the sweet and tantalizing way of
squeezing Wax; at all times to be his security, and pay the whole Debt himself:
In this poor Creature's Ashes the Salamander thrives and grows fat.


I own, Sir, your Actions and Accounts were ever clear and candid.


Now declare the Design, 'tis time to let him know it.


I will. Observe me then: A forged Letter sent supposed from Spalding, informs
old Gripe of a rich Tinn-Work cut in your Bounds adjoining, and confirmed by
another Letter given you as from your Captain; you may guess the influence on
his wretched Thoughts; mean while the Squire lies under an Arrest, and in that
hurry you privately Espouse Clarinda.


Forgery and Cheating, and I an instrument! The very shadow of one single Crime
suffices to procure a public blame; whereas a thousand Virtues are no more
than necessary to acquire a general Approbation; all Men take notice of few
Faults, but few enquire, or at least take notice, if a Life be led by the
Concatenation of all Moral Virtues,


Good Moral Actions have naturally a right to Felicity, of whi^h those often
fail, who through their own default and infidelity make their first rights
unuseful to themselves, which plainly shows all actions purely performed for
Virtuous Ends, be they particular or general, level and go directly towards
Goodness, although a man dream not of its tendency to that end.


But if these tend to Pleasure, Profit, or Ambition, they are inordinate
Passions and unlawful Objects, and are not able to imprint in moral Acts other
than blind Injustice or Dishonesty; We are told, that we ought to speak what is
true, and do what is honest: Where's there room then for Dissimulation?


Mistake me not; I don't intend to Cheat him of his Gold.


But of his Child you do.


As a Physician cheats his Fevorish Patient of his Blood; I'll put a Blister on
shall drain out all his Covetous Humour; I'll make a Knave an honest Man.
That's as much as an Act of Parliament can do.


Sir, you surprise, stagger me, on each hand I perceive a Precipice; on one
side I'm undone.


To undo ones self on one side, is no less than to be undone on both.


Can you persuade Clarinda?


That's already done.


Proceed! -- Try if you can our Fate retrieve;
What we desire, we easily believe.

COme Boys, along, along, the day begins to appear; 'tis time to be bolting
out of our lurking holes.


A rea, rea, Master, What would you have done? Don't you think we know our own
time? I have served two seven years to the Trade, and am not now to learn, that
to do our business in the night is the way to be taken for House-breakers.


For you know Master, if we disturb Men in bed with their Wives, they'll swear
against us out of revenge.


Every body hates men of our Profession; therefore, good sweet loving Sose, let
us take special care what we do, for as sure's I am here they will do us a
mischief if it lies in their way, for the public good, as they call it, though
they get nothing by it themselves.


Sure and Sure, and so they will; 'tis a dangerous world, people don't care
what they swear.


The Justices of the Peace don't care to meddle with you Lawyers; you all join
to help a distressed Brother out of the Mire.


For every one reckons it possible to be his Lot next.


But Justices and other Gentlemen are weary of prosecuting them, because they
have little redress or encouragement when it comes to the Test.


Sure enough; They'll be sure to be cheated, and all the blame lie on our
backs; therefore good sweet loving Sose, let's take special care what we do.


Impudent Rascals! Who taught you to prate thus? Whom do you get your Bread by?
When you ignorantly run beyond your Warrants, Who brings you off with flying
Colours? How many times have you been catched thieving, plundering, beating,
wounding, and sometimes murthering poor harmless People? Yet, when the worst
hath happened, we have joined forces to make it out that what you did was in
execution of your Office, justly in your own defence; and at last have Bribed
the Petty Jury perhaps to acquit you.


But who puts us upon it? Answer me that Question: We bear all the Backbitings,
Curses, Distraces, Imprisonments, Indictments upon Indict^. B^und over from
(...) to Sessions, from Assize to Assize, (...), and ^k here and there and
every where; sometimes to Prison, (...) to the common Gaol, stand Arraigned,
and sometimes in danger of our li^s; and because you put your helping hands to
get us off, we (...) holding to you; You run away with the Purchase and the
Profit, leave us poor (...) Creatures the blame, the pain, the hazard and the
disgrace; y^u (...) to be thanked and truckled to, as you had done wonders;
very (...) (...)!


Peace, you saucy Dog, or I'll discard thee instantly.


Do; and (...) tell how many Writs thou hast made in an Ale^ or i^ (...) own
Chamber; and how many thou hast caused to be (...) (...) any ^rit: Four honest
Men for Capias, Declarations, c. which (...) ^es co^ thee not one penny, Twenty
Shillings a Man. If it be not (...) the first Term, Signing. Judgment entering
upon the Roll, and other (...), th^ nothing done, Five Pounds a Man; if a Bail,
Bond, and Ex^cution -- Though the Coroner never Signed the Warrant, Twenty Pounds
a Man, if --


Hold, hold, Starter, no more if's, Prithee.


You know very well I can remember the particulars, and a great many others;
you have brought such Fame upon the Law, that for the generality, as th^y had
rather Die than use the second means from the Physician; so they'll rather run
the hazard of losing their Money, than ven^re the Charge of recovering it, for
fear the Remedy prove worse than the Di^e.


C^e, no more, let's be Friends -- I'll step and see if the Door be open. --
Here, Starter, take the Warrant, but stay till. I re^.


Thou were very close with him Ieoffry, I would not have said so much to 'un
for a Hundred good pounds.


Nor I neither.


Because like a parcel of Spaniels you love to be under -- but to our busi^ss.


Ay, by all means let's mind that.


First then this is a common Original Process.


Good sweet now, out of which a Court comes thick a Writ? I never he^d on
before.


You Blunderheads, 'tis only a bare Arrest.


That's well a fine.


(...). Hum -- Hum -- Ieoffry Starter. Here I am in mine own prop^r Person;
Vous avis, Mr. Starter. Alexander Squeeze.


H^re.


V^us ^is; Rowland Spurge.


Here.


Vous avis; Timothy Thoroughstich.


Vous avis vertute brevis Domini Regis -- Hue. Hue. Mando quod capiatis Anthium
Swash Are. Hue. hue. [Hums to himself] -- Ita quod habeam corpus ejus coram
Iustic' dicti Domini Regis apud Westminster, a die Paschae in quindecim dies -- ad
respondend Patricio Gredio Mil' de placito debit. super demand Mill librax --
Et hoc, c. Dat. Sub Sigillo Officii mei, c. very well.


That's more than we know, read loud in English that we may understand it.


I read it as it is; 'Twill puzzle some Attorneys to read in true English.


Away Boys, the Door's open, the old Fox is generally the first that moves,
stay all in the Entry between the Doors till I give you the Sign, for you must
cross the Room where we shall be discoursing.


As soon as you have turned his Back towards the Door, give the Hint, we know
our parts; away before, we follow.


Wait there for the Sign -- Now for Impudence and a good Memory, that I be not
found in a Lye.


He comes -- Pray, Sir, are you Mr. Gripe the rich Merchant?

What would you Friend? -- My name is Gripe.


I have a Letter for you requires haste.


'Tis Spalding's Hand.


It works, his colour comes and goes -- Hist! Hist!


You come from Stephen Spalding.


I did so; and for better dispatch, I have travelled all this night on my bare
Feet, I am all over like toasted Cheese.


But you needed not to have made so much haste, Bad News flies fast enough of
it self.


Captain Spalding told me it required extraordinary speed, and would not suffer
me to stay so long as to put on my best Clathers.


He always was a trusty Servant -- But is the Work so poor as he Writes?


I know not what he Writes, but I'm certain he'll be forced to strike it in the
Head with speed.


So he Writes me -- What store of work have you at Hill? and what at Mill?


What can I tell -- Who thought of this damned Question?


He Writ me lately he had a great quantity at each place.


There is so; but we are forced to put most of our men to Spalding, and to
Buddles.


What store of Tails, Casualties, and Afterwashes have ye?


Heap enough, but how 'twill yield as yet I know not; we employ all the Stamps
and Buddles about the Head-Tinn, we shall have time enough to work the
leavings.


How do you proceed at the Blowing-house?


A Plague of these Questions.


Ha! your Reason for that.


I suppose when things begin to decay they are not so full of Mettle: I have no
other Reason, Sir.


'Tis a sad Truth, I know it by woeful experience -- How far distant is this
rich Mine from ours? can't you sink a Shaft on the edge of our Bounds, and
drive under them? I'd venture my life to have a share in it: May not their Load
incline towards us? It does not run North and South? Mine lies due West as I
take it?


Exactly, Sir, North and South; I went down into their Work, measured with the
Compass, and the Load runs exactly with the Ely.


And so wondrous rich!


They suffered me to break a Stone my self, of part I made a Van, and 'twas all
perfect Tinn -- I think I have a piece in my Pocket -- Sharper stole it out of
his Parlour Window.


Never stir! 'tis very like mine.


But richer: One of the Eastern Triers whispered me, that all the dizzo was
excellent Copper, and that he would give a 1000 l. for what is in sight.


Bless me! and ours worth nothing?


Not one Dram of Mettle left in all your bottoms.


Undone, undone! inevitably ruined! -- I shall want Bread.


Content your self, you have enough, and supposing the worst, you may buy up as
much Black-Tinn as you please, and that commonly turns to a good Account at the
Coinage.


Twenty per Cent. for 3 Months; A Man can't live by it.


Captain Spalding sent me Express, that you might endeavour to get a Dole, or
Set, before Mr. Manley's intelligence comes from Captain Buddle.


Which shall be done (if possible) -- Who comes here --


Rudeness, I come with a Posse Comitatis in my Pocket.


Who do you look for?


One Squire Swash; I have a Privilege Warrant again him.


Then you are mistaken, this is one Mr. Sharper -- Now will I take this
opportunity to Cashier Swash, and Marry her to Manley at last; He is a very
honest Gentleman, that's the truth on it, and I think it is a just Judgment for
designing to cheat him of her; but I'll amend all.


Along with him, roage him along, he shall to prison immediately,


Be more merciful to him, he will answer the Law quietly, Squire I will be your
Guard.


'Tis a very hard Law if it give you Liberty to tear the Flesh from the Bones.


Pray Gentlemen let us discourse the matter fairly, At whose suit do you Arrest
my Master.


Sir Patrick Greedy, 'tis an Action of Scandalum Magnatum for a Thousand Pound
Debt.


And there's a Mandamus, a Capias, and Habeas Corpus in the Warrant, and Law
enough to carry him to the other end of the King's Bench-Rules.


Indeed, Gentlemen, I don't owe that Knight one Farthing.


Then it will be the better for you, Sir, -- You may try it, and the Jury may
acquit you, so you have your remedy; but as the case stands, you must give us
good Bail in 2000 l. as the Law requires, or go to Prison. I am heartily sorry
for your condition, and wish it lay in my power to do you any service, but the
Law is such we can't help it.


We'll give you Bail as the Law requires, this day he is to Marry Mr. Gripe's
Daughter, I suppose the Father and Son will be his Bail.


We will take 'em.


Mr. Sharper, mind your own business, and trouble not your head about other
People, I nor my Son don't intend to be Engaged for any Man; we that take Bonds
don't use to enter into them -- a timely discovery, I had been finely choosed
had he Married my Daughter.


Pray, Gentlemen, let me go, within a little time I shall be going to Church to
be Married, let me have one night's Lodging, to morrow I'll surrender my self;
'twould make a man mad to lose all between the Cup and the Lip.


Trouble not your self for that, Sir, -- I shall provide another Husband for my
Daughter, my Money shall never go to pay Debts.


Away with him, What stand we here for? If you have any Gentleman to send for,
we'l' stay a while at Nich Froths; 'tis pity such a fine Gentleman should be in
trouble, but 'tis no fault of ours.


Carry me where you will, I am careless how the world goes, -- Sharper, Why
dost weep?


To see so good a Master so inhumanly used, 'twill break my heart to see you in
Prison; never had good Gentleman such bad fortune.


Prithe don't weep, thou makes me melancholy to see thee -- poor fellow! he
loves me dearly.


I'll never leave you whilst I have Life or Limb.


Have you any service to command me to Captain Spalding?


These accidents have so disordered me, I know not what to resolve on -- step
in and call my Daughter hither -- but here she comes with her Brother.
Clarinda; how Gay! a Match is no (...) agreed on, and the Wedding appointed,
but the Woman is so taken up with the thoughts of the time to come, that she
never rests till her fancy be fulfilled.


My Father talking thus to himself! I doubt he is not well.


I vow I am very wantonly inclined this morning, and feel a tickling in my
Veins like a Boy of Twenty, -- Hey! sound and hearty yet! oh! for a sprightly
Young Girl to comfort my Old Spirits, I would give her a broad side, and launch
into the deep -- Ha! (never stir)! that word hath put me in mind of my Tinnwork
again, now on a sudden am I become as cold and as dull as a Bridegroom after
the first week, -- therefore exit Love, and enter Business. -- You Fellow
withdraw, I would have some private Conference with my Son and Daughter.


Are you not well, dear Father? You seem much discomposed.


So would thou, had thou a Daughter to dispose of; she must be Married --
and she must not be Married -- she shall be Married, and she shall not be
Married -- I don't know what to do with her.


So unsettled and unresolved, you would make me think you were in a frenzy.


Yes, fellows of your Age always think their Fathers Mad till they are Buried.


Pray, Sir, let me know the disquiets of your mind.


Wilt thou assist me?


Sir, to the hazard of my Life, I will.


I know not how to bestow thy Sister.


Is she not this day to be Married to the Squire Swash? You told her so last
evening.


My Passion, Sir, submitting to my Duty, I am all Obedience to your positive
Commands.


Good! if a man promise these wanton Rogues a Husband, they'll be sure to call
him to an account for a strict performance -- Manley, at last, must Marry thee,
Clarinda.


Then you abuse the Noble Squire.


She pleads for him -- I was to blame to raise her expectation; if they have
sealed the Bargain by an Ante nuptial Fornication, I have finely studied the
Politics, -- Swash is carried away to Prison by Four Bailiffs, therefore he
must not Marry thee.


I am sorry for that, Sir.


What makes thee sorry, ha?


My Charity.


Charity! 'tis thy folly, by some called good nature, which brings folks to
Beggary; no, thou never shalt Marry that Fop as long as I live.


Sir, I heartily thank your Promise, and here I make a solemn Vow, I never will
be his Wife.


Clarinda, you must now renew all your Charms, and strive by Words and Actions
to reclaim Manley: Your attractive faculty hath force enough to reduce him.


With scorns and slights he hath been so provoked, I doubt the task will prove
too difficult for my weak power.


Love abused turns to hatred, Clarinda must walk warily.


Let her alone; dissimulation, especially in love-affairs, is a virtue inherent
to that Sex; I know his T^mper, give him a fair opportunity, and my life he
takes it; therefore omit no artifice that may reclaim him; I would not for the
world lose this happy Match; I am now so far from being jealous of thee, that I
heartily wish you were a Bed together.


And that may be before you are aware.


Oh, my dear Clarinda! little think thou what pains, what fears, what
doubts, what jealousies, we careful Parents labour under, to bestow our
Children well, -- may thy designs and undertakings prosper.


Pray Heaven it end so well!


My Friends and Neighbours, a hearty welcome to you all.


We thank you, Sir. -- Madam, a good day.


The same attend you, Sir.


Well said, Clarinda, thou art my own Flesh and Blood, -- how they stare and
gaze! -- ay, ay, 'tis so, their hearts are renewing acquaintance.


The Bride's prepared for Marriage, Where is the Bridegroom?


Not far, since you are here.


That's my Jewel, -- that was a bold stroke, and home to the purpose, I wonder
the phlegmatic Dog doth not leap at the bait; time was when I would have made
better use of such an opportunity; I fear he has heard the news, and so draws
off.


By your leave Gentlemen, Is one Mr. Manley here?


My Name is Manley.


I have a Letter for you.


'Tis Budele's hand.


It is his intelligence; this is the beginning of my ruin; I have not yet made
my Bargain, and now my Daughter will be left upon my hands.


This for the Postage -- bring confirmation, I ask no more of Fortune, -- Sir,
Will you see it?


Beyond imagination! a rich Load cut but Two days since, and yesterday a
hundred load at Grass! I never heard the like success.


The poor Labourers kill themselves. Oh, pity, pity I


Good news from your Tinn-work, Sir, I joy in the success.


I thank you, Sir, -- but your Father hath ill fortune, for which I am sorry.


I'll in and uncase for fear of a discovery --


I can no longer hear this discourse; here is no Wedding to day, nor like to be
with Squire Swash, which may prove to the advantage of some one present, if he
please to understand it. Clarinda make your Friends welcome, I'll in and cool
my self, and then dispatch my Letters.


You see my Father begins to be reconciled.


I'll after, and invite him to the wedding.


You then destroy your Sister's Match; 'tis dangerous meddling with a Lion till
he be securely chained: You match to day, they stay but one day longer; out of
a vehement desire of revenge he shall divest himself of all to Peregrine.


and my fidelity to the fair Eugenia need not be mistrusted.


Young Men are ever constant till they have a fairer purchase, or a better
opportunity.


Away, you lose time, the Parson is ready to say Grace, -- Mr. Freeman, I must
desire your Company at Nich Froths immediately after Dinner, you may be
serviceable to my Nephew.


I shall not fail, mean while I must to my Captain Busy.


Come, Parson, are you ready?


The Canonical Hour is passed, you must stay till to morrow.


I understand you.


Hum! indeed I was mistaken, -- a Quarter past Eleven; I'll do your business
immediately in the next room.


And may we constant each to other prove, As now Uniting by the power of Love.


COme Boys; we squander the time; the Squire's Health. Ten Pound on your
Worship's Game.


Two for Noddy; that's well.


That turn made your Game. Three to One of the Squire's Game.


Lawk ye! Will you so? The Squire hath three Shows for twelve Holes: Mr.
Sharper must carry Fifteen this time, or he's gone.


As I am a living Man I am but Eight.


I am Six; play away: I have but Six more to go.


I play the Ten of Diamonds.


Now must he have a Knave and a Five in his Hand: If I play my Nine, he'll take
Second's: I'll venture: Twenty and a Pair.


To put it out of dispute, there's a Pair-Royal, and the single Game. Seven for
that. I am out, Sir.


The Devil take the Cards: Who would have thought 'em all out! I had two Tens
and a Nine; that was my Six.


Two Tens and a Five, and a Knave turned, made me Eight. Will you play again,
Sir?


Fortune is against me to day. -- Give me a Glass of Ale.


And the best in the Country. Here's a Tankard of Bottled-Ale out of the Cask.


Thy meaning?


Thus, Sir: First, I Brew mine Ale; then I Wort mine A^e; then I tun mine Ale;
when it is fine, I Bottle mine Ale, closely stopped; after a Fortnight, I take
Bottle after Bottle, and pour it into a fine clean Cask, leaving the Sedement
in every Bottle. This fine Drink I keep for Gentlemen of Quality, and my best
Customers.


He'll make 'em believe the Moon's made of Green Cheese.


If ordinary Fellows will have it, they pay me Six pence the Quart, Gentlemen
Four pence. Let who will be for Gain, I stand on the Credit and Reputation of
my House: I have Six Hogsheads of this fine Liquor in my Cellar.


Give me a Glass: It looks and tastes like Small Beer.


Would you have it like the sedementary Ale, thick, heavy, fulsome, phlegmatic,
nasty stuff, fit only for Hedgers and Threshers? This my Chemical Preparation
is healthy and sound for the Body, the Quintessence of Rarefaction.


But, Landlord, (takes him aside) what Methods do you intend in managing the
Reckoning? We will swear for thee.


Is he well lined?


No doubt on it.


Then, as my Friends, I'll trust you with my Secrets: In the beginning, when
Gentlemen are cool, I always reckon 5 for 4; if caught, I and my Wife fall to
scolding; with a submissive Apology I crave pardon for the Disturbance, and
acknowledge the Mistake: The Gentlemen are appeased, I call for my Quart, drink
their Healths, swear there was never such an Accident in my House before, and
that I'll watch my Maid's Water for the future.


You still hold to the proportion of 5 for 4?


No; as they inflame their Noddles, I the Reckonings; 4 for 3, 3 for 2, and at
last 2 for 1; but I never go beyond, unless they have been entered in my Wife's
Book; and then 3 for 1 is very reasonable.


Suppose such a Trick should be discovered?


When all are drunk, there can be no Mistake; or if such a Discovery were
possible, I was drunk; and paying my Forfeiture next Morning, it passes
current again. These Doctrines I learnt when I was a Drawer up in the City: I
intended to put up a Tavern here in the Country; but finding the Wine-Drinkers
crowding to London; and the others not able to go to the Cost, I set up an
honest Ale-house, as you see.


I did not think there had been so much Art.


Our Profession is a mere Mystery; but above all we need understand Arithmetic
well; for Substraction and Division are as requisite in the Measures, as
Addition and Multiplication in the Reckonings; and all compacted together,
teach you the Golden Rule. -- So, perge Mentiri, let every one follow his own
Trade.


Having Married my lovely Pair, and divided 'em till Night with further
Instructions, now for my Woodcock in his Trap. -- Freeman! well met. -- How
now, Squire! here so late on your Wedding Day? I expected to have seen you at,
I Anthony take thee Clarinda, long e're this.


But Poor Tony's Policy is quite out of doors; to be snatched away in the
Flower of my Youth, in the height of mine Appetite, a delicate fine Dish
prepared and set before me, and not suffered to take one Taste, is a damned,
cursed Misfortune.


You have but raskally Company about you, Sir: What mean these Catchpoles?


Oh, Mr. Trusty, the saddest Story ever was heard! As I was going to be
Married, I was Marred to all intents and purposes; the Devil, in the shape of
Four of his Children, laid violent hands on me, and brought me here in a
Surprise!


On a mere Fob-Action; 'tis a damned Cheat; he doth not owe a Penny to any Man
alive: Would he were hanged that invented such a piece of Roguery against such
a good Gentleman! O damned Villains!


Thou art so moody hearted, thou make me weep for Company -- I believe never
was a Man more happy in a Servant.


To lose so Sweet! so Young! so Beautiful a Mistress! --


And honest Trey and Cater thy Fellow-Servants. --


This looks very suspicious, Gentlemen, have you good Law for what you do?


Yes, you may see if you please.


It grieves me to the heart to see a Gentleman abused. I'll be his Bail.


And I, if the Bailiff will take us.


We will; we are not scrupulous.


I know the Old Gentleman will indemnifie me. -- The Noble Squire shall not to
Prison on such a Fob-Action.


I vow, Gentlemen, this is a great Kindness you do my Master.


Is it? It is; in trouble and thrall, Man; I shall never never make 'em
satisfaction while I live.


No more words; in, in, that we may discharge you: I'll stay but one minute. --
Freeman, put the Glass merrily round; I'll bring a sudden Reprieve. Shuffle,
how go matters now?


Ill enough; all the Design is frustrated: Spalding is returned, and denies the
whole matter; the old Gripe rants like a Mad-man; hath sent an Express to Sir
Patrick Greedy, to know if he will own the Action; swears 'tis all your work to
cheat him of his Child.


Let the procrastinating Fop vex and torment himself to death; spite of his
Care I'll cheat him of both his Children, his Estate and Money too.


Peregrine turns tail, hath ingratiated himself, and his Father will settle all
upon him; which the old Man hath granted, and hath given Orders to have the
Deeds drawn: He vows Clarinda shall not have one Groat, unless she marry Swash
to morrow morning.


This succeeds as I would wish. -- Who draws the Deed?


Peregrine desired me; but I would not promise, without your Consent.


We must trust him --


I'll fetter him; not all the Power of Law shall ever release him: I'll bribe
Cunningame the Attorney to be of our side; he is his Idol; what he says goes
down with him without suspicion. Have you any other Service to command me? I
was told Mr. Freeman hath Business with me.


He's in the next Room; I'll send him out immediately.


Mr. Freeman's Business I guess is of another nature; some Wench with Child to
be provided for; so that I must be Pimp-Broker: This is somewhat scandalous to
the Profession; but there is Money to be got; so that's answered.


Shuffle, I have a little Secret to impart to thee, wherein I want thy
Assistance: Thou shalt be well paid, I promise thee.


And that you know is the Life of all Trades: You are no Stranger, I have had
much of your Money; whatever it be I'll do it, and trust your Generosity. Come,
declare; some common Flesh hath been so long blown upon, that living Creatures
begin to move.


Even so; she at Nich. Froth's, that goes under the Character of a Relation.


She hath been your Hackney long enough; 'tis time to procure a Chapman, and
march her off.


Such a one I have: Captain Busy, thou shalt appear before her as her Steward,
whilst I, under the same Title of a Relation, bring him to over-hear you pass
your Accounts.


Good: Being already trained to his hand, she'll the sooner understand his
Exercise.


I have some Bags of Nails shall lie before you on the Table, with Money in
their mouths. Disguise thy self: I'll leave the rest to thee.


And no longer Shuffle, but Mr. Abraham Rentall, Madam Freeman's Steward, with
some old Bonds and Deeds, will meet you an Hour hence at this place; I suppose
she's sufficiently instructed.


Yes; all things shall be ready.


I question not your care; and I'll perform my part, with assured success and
expedition.

To hide the Shame, and get Estate for Life,
My pregnant Miss must be a Captains's Wife.

Mr. Freeman, a word with you. He is gone to the Company: I thought to have had
him speak one word of Reconcilement for me to my Wife; he can work what he
pleases upon her. When I first set up here in the Country, I Married a handsome
Girl, who according to expectation, proved a complete, tempting, hypocritical
Jilt; I the necessary Perquisite, a good-natur'd Landlord, otherwise called a
sponging, insinuating, contented Cuckold. We are both Cheats; so far 'tis right
and well. According to the Quality of my Function, my Wife takes all upon her.
Any Man would think such Dealings would satisfy her; but I vow she's grown
very obstreperous and ungrateful; for even now going to the Barr to see how the
Reckoning stood, I met our Servant-Maid; the Spirit being willing, the Flesh
and the Devil prevailing, I was very loving; the poor innocent Creature
blushing, cried, Nay, pish! -- Nay, fie! -- Mistress is coming -- I'll vow I'll
cry out! yet all the while kissed as close as any Cockle: In the nick of time
comes the Devil of a Wife, and disturbed us: My little Magpie squeak'd, and
thrust me from her, but whispered I should meet her in the Summer-House at Nine
this Evening; which certainly I'll do, for all your Frumps, Mrs Sus. -- Ay,
there she is coming; I must march, or woe to my Bones!


Anon, Sir; by and by; a coming, Sir.

Why in such haste? there's no body calls.


Indeed, Wife, I thought the Gentlemen had knocked.


You are very nimble with your Attendance; you were not so an Hour since: The
Gentlemen knocked and called, and no Landlord to be found, till uncivilly I was
forced to rise from my Cushion, and leave their Company to fetch Liquor.


What will become of me! -- Indeed, Wife, I did not hear 'em; upon my Word I
did not.


No, you were otherwise employed with your Servant-Maid; you were so.


I was only teaching her her Business, how to cast up the Reckoning.


You were teaching her to be a Strumpet -- There was hugging and kissing, and
other things in hand, had not I timely prevented.


I whispered her, that if she knew the Gentlemen to be Customers to you, she
must reckon three for one.


Consider, Sirrah, who I am, and whence I came; my Father, a good Farmer, bred
me the next Degree to a Gentlewoman, else I could never have made so good a
Landlady: 'Tis for the love of me there's such resort; 'tis I who keep the Door
open, Sirrah! How oft have I been forced to watch whole Nights to give my
Guests content and satisfaction, and all to make thee rich; whilst thou keep
Wenches Company, and cheat me of that Love is only due to me.


Pray, Madam, if I increase in Duty by deputation an hundred-fold, you are no
loser: How many times have I, with the Eye of Judgment, seen things which shall
be nameless, touching my Freehold; yet putting on the Mask of charitable
Unbelief, have quietly sate down in the Chair of Contentment, and said nothing?


Nay, since thou art grown so hardy to justify thy own Actions, and to tax my
courteous and civil Deportment to my Customers, I'll make thee know what 'tis
to abuse one that gives so creditable Entertainment.


How now, Wife! where is your Cherishing and Obedience?


Vanished with your Bodily Worship, Sirrah.


Good, dear Wife, I'll do so no more.


Not till next time; once a Villain, and always so.


Here on my Knees, with lifted Hands, and unfeigned penitential Tears, I offer
up my Vows to the Altar of Love and the Shrine of Matrimony.


I'll sacrifice thee to my Revenge.


Anon, anon, Sir; by and by; coming.


H'ath quite tired me; yet I have paid him sufficiently: An impudent Beast,
that can't show natural Civility to his Wife, yet should think to be modish! By
threats I have made the Wench confess their Appointment; I'll meet him my self,
and try what may be done.


What, my kind Landlady, and armed for Battle!


When Husbands break their Matrimonial Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, they
deserve severe Correction.


Lay no such Fault on thine; he's as quiet and harmless Fellow as lives; I'll
vouch for him.


Because you are so sweet, so civil, so good-natur'd, you think all others so:
Were he a Person of your generous Spirit, I should be the happiest Woman
living; but to be so used by that empty Thing, that mere Shadow of a Husband,
(conceive me, Mr. Freeman) is unsufferable.


What is the matter? And why this Cudgel?


To chastise my Husband: I caught him about an Hour since (conceive me)
debauching my Maid; but I have corrected him, and have another way to lay the
Evil Spirit (conceive me, Mr. Freeman) if he be again possessed.


You will prepare Things for Margaret, as you promised.


She and the Maids are ready dressed, all Things prepared: Can I forget what my
dear Mr. Freeman doth require me!


So, that's well.


Methinks I am always ravished with your Company.


How! ravished?


Charmed! bewitched! -- I know not what to call it! Conceive me; but am never
quiet but in your Company.


So; I have brought my self int^ fine Praemunire! There's another within will
weep, if she have not all the fine Things. Flesh and Blood ^n't hold; I am merely
metamorphis'd already; I must submit to Selfdenial, because I can enjoy the
Pleasures of the World no longer.


I dreamt last night, that Mr. Freeman came to my Bed-side, hugged me, kissed me,
pressed me; so sweet! so delicate! so pleasing! (Conceive me, Mr. Freeman.)


A very comfortable Relation!


'Tis an Age since I saw you last! I can tell you the prettiest Story, -- In
the other Room 'tis warmer (conceive me, Mr. Freeman)


Or we shall make it so. -- Now for some Relief for the Forlorn Hope.


In private with Mr. Freeman! -- What think you of this Landlord?


I dare not tell you, Sir; I am deaf and blind; but I hope 'tis no Treason to
think -- Tho she be rude with me, other People can keep in with her: A time
will come to revenge all these Evils.


Sharper, how goes the Day?


The Clock struck Four, about half an Hour ago.


We'll to the Cock-pit; I'll Fight 'em presently: My Cocks Fight as well by
Candle as Day-light: You know the Wager, Three Battles for 300 Pound.


And shake Bag-Law: We are ready to attend you.


What have we to pay, Landlord?


'Tis my Wife's Element; I keep nothing from her.


Two Pounds Two Shillings and Two pence half-penny to a Farthing.


Here are two Guineas; I take no Change; but first a Song and Dance.


Mr. Freeman, You will go with us?


You must excuse me, Sir; I have somewhat of the like nature on my hands.


Success to both.


The Bailiffs are paid?


Yes, Noble Squire^*


There's to drink my Health.

Sharper hath cunningly my Friends betrayed:
We'll get their Money first, and then the Maid.

A lucky Minute, her Steward is passing his Accounts; let's wait and overhear
'em.


Great and mighty Bags! She must be wondrous rich, if all that be Interest.


And Rents: She hath a great Estate, as well as Money.


A Portly Lady; and a great Beauty.


Item, Your Barton and Manor of Coorrowda, in the County of Carmarthan, given
your Ladyship by the last Will and Testament of Sir Frederick Harding Knight,
Citizen and Merchant of London, your Honours Grand-father, Rents per Annum 200
l. received 150 l. remains in Arrears 50 l.


By stealing of Custom, and a false Oath at the Custom-House, after the end of
every Voyage, and if his Wife were right (as we say) ten to one but some
Court-Blood runs in her Veins.


What mean you, Captain?


From the borrowing Lord there lies an Obligation to the Creditors Wife, she is
Complemented with the Interest to buy Pins, and then she hath the opportunity
to show her Civility, when his Lordship is pleased to honour her with the
particular marks of his Favour.


Item, Your Manor and Barton of in the County of the Gift of your
Brother-in-Law, Doctor Bunting, a Civilian, Rent per Annum 80 l. Received 60 l.
Rests 20 l.


The Common Lawyers devour the Body and Estate, the Spiritual Court the Soul:
Though the Locusts grow fast, but few of them prosper in the Third or Fourth
Generation.


At this rate Captain, you'll abuse the whole Nation.


Who can forbear to make Remarks upon such a Gallimawfxy Family?


Here is a Bond of 1000 l. Principal, due to your Honour from the Executors of
Arthur Hadland Esq Deceased.


Take care the Security be good.


'Tis very good indeed Madam, and the Interest well paid.


I was Acquainted with that Gentleman, a Justice of Peace, but had no more Law
than his Clerk infused.


So much Madam for your Welsh Manors, and Bartons Rents per Annum of the whole
1500 l. in these two Bags 1000 l. remains in Arrear in the Tenants hands 500 l.


See it be well Secured.


They would have paid in the whole, if I would have received Guineas for 23.
but were loath to part with 'em for less. Of your Plantations in America, I
expect an account every Ship, and a Bill of the Free-income from the
Correspondents.


The yearly value?


Communibus Annis 600 l. Received for Interest of 4000 l. at 6 per Cent. 240 l.
in that Bag, the Interest for 2000 l. in the Debtors hand.


See it suddenly paid, or call in the principal, and see the whole be well
secured.


I can no longer forbear, prithee Lieutenant break in upon her out guards, if I
can storm her Trenches, I'll raise a Battery, and force my Entrance, or Bomb
her till I make her surrender Bag and Baggage.


Fear not Captain we'll make her yield, though I assure you, you'll find more in
her than you are aware of, but no matter, 'twill all be discovered in time to
your advantage. -- Niece, I have brought a Gentleman to see you.


Whoever comes with you is doubly welcome.


Nay then, Courage, fall on, -- Madam your Slave -- A brave plump Wench, and
kisses rarely. I'll warrant her a delicate Bedfellow in a Frosty Morning.


I doubt (Niece) we have disturbed you.


No, no dear Sir, my Steward being returned from keeping my Courts, I had a
mind to learn what he had done; I think 'twas almost over, Rent all.


To a small matter.


Leave it to some other opportunity.


To what a Mass of Wealth and Honour am I growing.


This Gentleman, my Worthy, Honourable Friend, is come to kiss your Hand, and
if he Court you, Treat him Civilly; I am desirous he should be your Husband.


Well said Lieutenant, he doth not beat about the Bush, but falls immediately
upon the point, and since 'tis so well begun, now for Lies and Flatteries in
abundance.


The Woodcock comes on apace.


I doubt Sir, you are more in love with what you heard, than what you fee.


She is in the right of it; though I must pretend otherwise. Cap A Pe with
nakedness. -- Though I say it my self, and though it be a damned Lye, 'twas a
lively expression, I Appeal to any Man that understands Courtship and Lying.


I Vow 'tis a pretty Gentleman.


Is he so?


Oh! were it true he says.


True, Madam! Is it the Sun that Rules the Day? The Moon and Stars that Guide
the Night? 'Tis easier to make the high Alps Nav^gable, or stop the raging
motions of the Winds or Seas, than to divert or rather quench my Love. -- Oh my
Dear Saint, did thou but know the secret Flames within my Breast do glow, you
would not be so cruel, so hard hearted. -- She trembles.


Oh! I am lost.


Captain you are fortunate, the Fort is won.


If I had her in private I'd quickly bring her to her right Senses.


She revives again: How do ye Niece?


A Devil Gnaws and Tears my Breast.


'Tis a very good natured Devil, he is pleading my Cause, this is the first
Service he ever did me.


Come, come you can no longer hide it, I see you love the Captain.


I know not; but I find I cannot hate him.


Take her; to Morrow she shall be your Bride.


Which Gift I joyfully receive.


I am all obedient to my Uncles Pleasure, but why so sudden? I have no new
Clothes.


No matter, we put'em all off when we go to Bed.
'Tis better far than seven years a Cooing,
Billing and other formal acts of Wooing;
Blessed is the Match that is not long a doing.

I have locked up my young Rival in her Chamber; there let her wallow on her
Bed in Meditation, whilst I receive my due; a ripe Age this, that a Girl not
past fifteen, should pretend to years of Discretion, and with my Husband too,
what will this World come to? -- Well, I'll go and defeat his expectations. A
Rascal debauch his own Maid.


All lost, all gone; my Mistress, my Money, my Clothes, and Sharper has left
me: No Friend to a Man in Adversity. All my Jewels Sacrificed, Cut-throat,
Fencer, Warrior, Dangerfield, and the rest of their Honourable and Worthy
Brethren, disfigured, and by Treachery, put one against the other, and all in
Battle slain, the whole Generation, Root and Branch, cut off in the prime of
their years; Trey and Cater murdered, I had as good go home and hang all the
Hounds, and make a clear House. -- 'Tis wondrous dark, I must endeavour to find
out my way to some lodging.


Now for my Assignation with my little Harlot, and now Madam Susanna, I stand
in defiance of your Cudgel; if variety be so good, 'tis necessary I sometimes
humour my nice Palate, I will therefore Solace my self in change of Love. --
But hold Nicholas, look before you leap; suppose in the abundance of thy
Affection, she should Conceive, and should have issue by thee? thy Wife Susanna
will Confiscate thee to all Intents and Purposes. -- A bad business I'll go no
further. -- But hold sweet Nicholas, one word more, thy little Damosel of
Delight, now in the Cold expecting thee, should she grow Sick and Die, by this
disappointment -- The case is altered again, therefore I will proceed -- What
though there be a Child or Children, of the Body of the said Nicholas Froth, upon
the Body of his said Servant Maid, begotten or to be begotten. -- She shall
name no Father, and some of my Wives Customers shall pay for the maintenance;
or what if it pass for Nicholas Froth's Child? All these things impartially
considered: a decree passes, that I stand firmly to my first resolutions; may
it therefore please your Ladyship, Mrs. Wife, to excuse my personal attendance
for the present.


Searching my way, and opening a little Door, I entered, and immediately a Woman
with her Arms clapped me about the Neck, I soon found it a Banquet of Love
prepared for another Man, without saying Grace I fell too, to her satisfaction
as well as mine own I hope -- However this is some Comfort in the midst of my
troubles.


Is he gone? He hath cooled my courage, yet I am in a Sweat, he talked,
methoughts, very merrily, therefore I judge he hath been playing the Rogue,
what a brave opportunity have I lost, cursed disappointment!


My Nicholas is a very kind Husband upon occasion; but why he went off so soon,
I cannot imagine: Certainly he could not discover me -- I hear some one one
tread -- Who's there?


Ha! -- Sus! -- Now have I been Cuckolded by the Devil! If she hath conceived,
I hope she'll never bring forth: 'Twill be a sad case if I must Father a young
Beelzebub in mine old Age.


Who's there? Nicholas!


Sus! what makes you here so late?


To keep you honest against your will, Friend, you took me for another in the
Garden-house -- so brisk! so fine! so amorous! I have discovered you now in the
height of your Roguery; you thought, like a filthy Fellow, to have found your
Servant-Maid, but 'twas I that met you there with Chaste Embraces.


By her own Confession she hath been playing the Whore; yet I must bear the
blame: -- Had ever poor Cuckold such Fortune before!

Indeed Wife, I was not there; I suppose you had good Evidence to the contrary.


Is it not enough, thou Villain! that thou art false to my Bed, but thou
would make me belie my own Senses? Dost thou think to brave it thus? I'll
make thee repent, thou Ungrateful! --


Now must I crave pardon for her Offences.

I saw a great and mighty Monster come forth from thence just now, with four
Legs, and one Cloven-foot, and two Horns as long as an Elephants Snout, Eyes
like Barbers Basins, grinned and spit Fire as he past along: I feared he would
have burnt me; the Brimstone is not yet out of my Nose -- Indeed Wife, under
Correction, and the Circumstances considered, the Devil hath been a little to
familiar with you.


Thou would persuade me 'twas the Devil, but I am well satisfied to the
contrary.


Then I hope you are convinced of the Mistake.


This Impudence (my Friend) must not pass unpunished: Were it as thou say,
'twas thine own seeking; a just Reward, and no fault of mine.


No, you Women are never in fault.


To meet my Husband there, was my intent;
And such Adultery was innocent.

WAs it your Project (Mr. Trusty) to cheat me of my Children? -- I wonder what
they have done with the Squire Smash, for I can hear nothing of him? -- They
will not, I suppose, keep him any longer in durance upon this Fob-Action, since
Sir Patrick Greedy knows nothing of the matter. -- Keep your great Tynn-work to
your self, Mr. Manley; I'll not be bubbled thus out of my Daughter; I hope to
bestow her better, though I confess I was almost betrayed.


Fire! Murder! Thieves!


My Bags! my Gold! my Money!


What's the matter? Is the House a-fire?

Worse, Sir, worse!


Am I robbed of my Gold?


Worse, Sir, worse!


What can be worse? Tell me in short.


Oh, Sir! my Mistress! --


Run away with Manley! --


Worse, Sir, worse!


She is not murdered, is she?


Worse, Sir, worse!


Do not dally with me; I'll have it out, or tear it from thee.


You need not be so inquisitive after bad News, that will make every Joint of
you tremble.


I'm become thy Sport and Pastime.


I have done, Sir. --


Oh, Sir! I will.


Tell me immediately, without the least Evasion, or I will throttle thee this
very minute.


Last night when I came from my Mistress's Chamber, I drew the Courtains, and
locked the Door; this morning I tremble to declare what I espied.


Again!


Nothing -- but Mr. Manley in Bed with her.


Hah!


Lovingly clasped in each others Arms asleep.


There may they sleep their last -- Is this the fruit of all my Pain and Care,
to have nurtured a confounded Harlot!


Good Sir, no such hard words: I dare say Mr. Manley is a love^y Bed fellow --
I heartily wished my self in my Mistress's place.


Would any other had been there but she.


I wa7'd 'em, Sir, and then made bold to tell her so: She clapped ^im on the
Cheek, and kissed him; quoth she, I will not part with my dear Manley for all
the World.


An excellent Relation of a lewd, lascivious Whore. -- I curse ^he time that
ever I begot her.


I am confident I locked the Door close; Of my Conscience he is (...) Witch, or
he could never have got in.


Such young Fellows always carry Pick-locks about 'em. -- Go, get you in, I
have no more to say to thee. Bryant, lest he grows mad again or Manley's
Sister; I have given him my Writings, and hope my Friend Cunningame hath drawn
the Settlement.


If I miss of my Eugenia, I am for ever lost; nor must Manley's Marriage be yet
known.


Good morrow, Peregrine; where hast thou been this Morning?


Where I have heard more of Mr. Trusty's Tricks, Sir. -- He and his
Confederates, with Sharper's treacherous Assistance, have rooked the Squire
Swash of all his Money, and turned him to the Country without Clothes: I was
searching to befriend him in his Adversity.


Step softly into thy Sister's Chamber, and steal away Manley's Clothes; he is
this time debauching her,


How, Sir! -- They certainly have both more Virtue in 'em.


They have been all this night in bed together; what precious Acts of Virtue
have been done, you may easily judge.


I'll in immediately and cut his Throat.


Nay, good Son be patient; that's the way to be without thee too. -- One a
Whore, and the other be hanged, is a great Scandal to a Family.


Pray Sir, let me go: Shall any Man dare to abuse our Family, and Peregrine not
revenge it? Such a Disgrace I cannot, will not bear.


But, Son, as I told you before, 'tis a greater Disgrace to be hanged for
killing of a Rogue: When you come upon the Gallows, to be able to cry, Good
People, here I am come to take my last Swing in the World, for cutting the
Throat of one who dishonoured our Family. So being tied up, the Valorous Mr.
Peregrine Gripe and his fine Speech end together.


He hath given her Philters sure, or she would not so basely have yielded to
him.


Give him his due, as far as I can understand she is very well pleased with
him.


Ten thousand Curses on the Prostitute! Will he not Marry her? -- I'll make
him. --


Rather let him pine in hungry Repentance, till Starving bring 'em to their
Senses. Go instantly fetch the Writings hither; I'll forthwith Seal 'em; then
thou may make me happy, at least in one Child.


And tamely thus without Revenge?


The best Revenge can be taken; therefore on my Blessing I enjoin thee to go
without the least Delay, Regret, or Hesitation.


My Duty binds me; I obey.


I begin to have some hopes of this Boy; he is dutiful and respectful to me. --
But I must secure him for fear of a Relapse. -- Oh my Clarinda! my Clarinda!


Manley! thou Villain, what hast thou done?

Keep the Villain to thy self, Old Midas; I was more kindly entertained within
by thy Daughter; she gave a Night's Pleasure and Content; and Luck hath failed,
if there be not a Grandchild in store.


Very joyful News indeed! -- Now you come, I suppose, thinking to hector me
into a Compliance. -- Give a good Fortune, say you, and I'll Marry her.


You are mistaken, Sir; I expect none of your Money; you had better keep it to
maintain her Offspring; while you are upon your Goodbehaviour, I may be now and
then somewhat towards it: So a good morning to you.


As you have taken possession of the Tenement, take it with all its
Encumbrances.


I have had a quiet and peaccable Possession as long as I desired: I found the
Soil barren and unfruitful; I have manured and till'd it up, and at Harvest you
may reasonably expect a good Crop: What could any Man do more.


You had as good take your Bedfellow with you; I'll maintain neither her nor
her Bastard.


Then the Parish must, if she can't work: I'll care for the Child, if she lays
it to me, and leave her to the Law.


Why sure he will not be such an inhumane Monster! A Gentleman, and leave his
Lady of Pleasure to the Law! my Daughter too! 'Tis monstrous!


As you and she behave your selves: I tell you what Provision I'll make for
her; I took her for present Pleasure and Variety; sometimes, because 'tis a
pretty, loving, good-natur'd Thing, and for my Recreation, I may give her the
Honour of a Visit; but never think I'll marry her.


If thou dost, thou shalt not have one Groat with her.


Keep it, Miser, keep it: Dost think I'll ever be confined within the Bonds of
Matrimony, as long as I can have a young, beautiful, goodhumoured and ingenious
Mistress at my Command? Ha, ha, ha! what Years Child do ye take me for of, Dad?
or where was I bred? Once more good-morrow; remember me to your Son.


I wish he may not see thee too soon. -- How the Rogue boasts of his Plunder!
-- What shall I say to Squire Swash! Shall I marry him to Manley's Leavings?
No; he smokes the matter, and comes no nearer; and Manley scorns what he hath
himself debauched. -- She and her Brat will be left on my hands.


Here she comes, now for a complete Excuse; That she was Ravished, and with the
Fear fell into a Swooning, which held her all night, that she could not cry
out.

Did you not see Mr. Manley pass this way just now, Sir?


This is what I little expected. -- No Tear! -- No Blush! -- No Concern! -- Oh
Tempora! Oh Mores! --


I hope, Sir, in time to work him to your Mind; he is much more loving than
ever.


Yes, yes, Sweet work! Beyond the strength of Imagination! You that yesterday
were so brim full of Virtue! Where is it now? A mere sham. As the most zealous
pretender to honesty, only waits an opportunity cunningly to Act the greatest
Villainy, so the most seeming Coy Lady, privately proves the most rampant
Harlot.


What you talk is Mystery to me. Pray, Sir, what is it troubles you?


'Tis the Devil of a Daughter. Infamous Clarinda! What hast thou done?


Nothing but what I ought in obedience to your positive commands, -- did you
not charge me on your Blessing, to use all arts and means, that might reclaim
him.


Thou willingly mistake me, did I Commission thee to be a Whore?


Here comes the cursed Author of my ruin.

Still at thine old Play! Lecturing thy Daughter? As how? What new offence? I
prithee tell me.


The natural effect of thy cursed contrivance: thy Nephew Manley hath
dishonoured my Daughter.


Ha, ha, ha, Have the young People been reciprocally kind? your Family is like
to increase without paying any Portion or Tax for Matrimony.


Though you think you have hit the Mark, I must tell you, you have mist your
Aim, the breach is too wide ever to be reconciled, you have indeed robbed me of
my Child -- Here, take her, lead her to her Gallant, let 'em have cost and care
mixed with their Pleasure; the sour sauce, may quicken the Appetite; or what
think you of sending her to London? she may be very serviceable to the young
Mathematicians, or where you will, she is no longer mine, while I lay up for
one hath better deserved.


I have pursued your positive Commands with some reluctance, Pray, Sir, have
yet some pity on my Sister; forget and forgive; she might be trepanned.


When People have been Whoring after their own Inventions, for a pretence
they'll say they were trepanned, give me the Deeds, who drew 'em?


I drew 'em, Mr. Cuningame perused them.


I carefully weighed each Grant and Covenant exactly to your Model, as sure as
proportion it self, but for your better satisfaction, you had best read it
over.


If he make use of the Complement we are all undone.


Being offered, nothing is suspected.


Perigrine looks strangely upon Manley, his Fingers itch to be at him.


There's a Candle in the next Room. I don't use to go without my Tools.


Here -- Trusty and Mr. Manley be two of the Witnesses.


It lies very hard upon your Daughter Mr. Gripe.


If something else had not been, this might have been prevented.


We have done Sir.


No further occasion for me Sir?


Nor me?


For neither.


Let's be gone before it be discovered, the worst he can say of us we have been
true to our Clients.


And good reason, for we are well paid.


Ha, ha, ha, Mr. Manley will you have a Portion to Marry my Daughter, or a
Settlement? Draw it your self you are a great Scholar, and a Star-Gazer; see if
you can find it in the Milky way, give you joy of your great Bargain.
Perigrine, Now when you please you may Espouse your Widow.


Sir, This my intended Wife, joins with me craving your Blessing.


What dost mean Man, -- 'Tis settled in consideration of a Marriage intended
with the Widow Bryant.


By the name of Eugenia, Daughter of Humphrey Manley Esq Deceased.


Ha! -- Cheated again! I have but two Children in the World, a Rogue and a
Whore: A hopeful pair! (never stir) but where is friend Cuningame now, where is
he?


He and Shuffle, like Physicians to a Languishing Patient, are both slipped
away, before the Death-fit comes.


Friend Cuningame a Knave? Then I think all the World are so.


What more tricks still -- (never stir!) you won't Marry her, will you Mr.
Manley?

That I did yesterday, this honest Parson joined our hands, our Hearts long
since united.


(Never stir!) If it were in Lawful Matrimony 'tis so much the better -- Are
you really a Priest Sir?


At present only a Journey-man of the Church, a Curate of the next Parish, I
hope in time to obtain a Benefice, and then I shall be finisher of the Work.


And grow as Fat and Lazy as the rest of thy Brethren.


I joined their Hands, and tied 'em by the Tongue, and gave 'em a Spiritual
Commission to act other things if they pleased.


A bold venture Mr. Manley; what will become of her Portion now?


I'll make Provision for your Daughter out of my own Estate, as your Son must
for his now Eugenia.


And since thou beginnest to be somewhat reconciled to these Matches, and to
make Manley the more deserving thy Clarinda; I'll immediately settle my Estate
one half to my Nephew in Possession, in Fee simple, and the remainder after my
death.


You were always a Father to me.


I vow I think thou wilt prove an honest fellow at last -- Heavens bless you
all, I am heartily reconciled to ye, I am heartily glad that my Children prove
to be Cheats, convincing Arguments to me, that what ever betides after my
death, they'll be able to shift in the World. Clarinda proves to be honest, I
am now as mad for Joy, as I was some minutes since for Sorrow.


And is not this better than Wedding her to that Weather-cock; one that would
have allow'd her no other Company than her Servants? He is such a Slave to his
Recreations, he hath hardly time to sleep; and all the Satisfaction she should
have, would be to lie by a belching, strong Beer or Brandy-Cask, who no sooner
wakes, but exit, and you hear no more of him, till after midnight again.


I understand you, Sir: I have not paid you my thanks for helping to cheat me;
I am your obliged Friend and humble Servant, Sir. -- Parson, I must have this
other Pair matched too, therefore beware we don't miss the Canonical Hour.


The Canonical Hour shall be at your Service till midnight.


Here come some that have been with me for a Cast of my Office before.

The Captain's married to this Lady.


Yes, Gentlemen; and, Ladies, I am married.


I heartily wish you Joy; she is a great Fortune, and the fittest Wife for you
that I know: She must needs understand her Exercise; she hath been bred under a
good Officer any time these seven years.


What's the meaning of this, Freeman?


Nothing but a Banter; he only envies your Fortune.


I have had but a scurvy Night on it; every one that met me, shunned me for a
Ghost; at last by great difficulty I got into a Hay-loft; poor and cold Lodging
for a Person of my Quality.


How now, Squire! stripped as if you intended for a Race. -- I wish you may make
more speed about your next Mistress; this is married before you come.


I did suppose some such thing by the Arrest.


Every particular, both as to the Arrest and Marriage, were without my Consent
or Knowledge.


Your Daughter married without your Consent?


And bedded too: Between 'em they have cheated me of all.


A blessed deliverance! If she consent to cheat her Father, she will make no
scruple to abuse her Husband; and Marriage at the best is but a bitter Sweet.


thou Villain, art thou there?


Pray, Sir, be not angry; every Age and Country produces Precedents innumerable
for what I have done; it hath been the practise of many ingenious Servants of
all Qualities, to build their Fortunes on the Ruins of their Masters.


I'll home and study the two great Businesses of Mankind, Interest and
Dissimulation: I find 'tis to no purpose to persuade a Woman against her own
Inclinations. -- Madam, I wish you joy.


I heartily thank you, Noble Squire.


In the midst of all my Misfortunes, one very pleasant Accident befell me:
rambling last Evehing in the dark, I crept into a little Door, where I found a
Woman waiting with a Stock of Love for another Man: I quickly reaped the Crop,
rushed from her, satisfied with such a pleasant Plunder --


Do you know the Woman?


No indeed.


I am glad of that however.


Pray Mrs. Wife, with humble submission be it spoken, do you understand the
meaning of this, Did Nicholas Froth Cuckold himself or no?


Peace; what was done, was thine own seeking, and can't now be prevented;
therefore no more words of that matter.


I will declare thy Infamy in the face of the whole Word. -- O yes! --


I must speak him fair, or he will out with it in earnest.

Sweet Nicholas, be silent.


Do you begin to alter your Tone? If I grant Peace, it shall be on very
honourable Conditions. -- Imprimis, will you Cuckold me no more?


No, Nicholas, no.


Nor keep a Conventicle of Whoremasters Sundays Afternoon, about Business, to
the Dishonour of my Person and Profession?


No, Nicholas, no.


Wilt thou henceforth be dutiful and obedient to the just and lawful Commands
of thy Supreme and Sovereign Lord thy Husband?


Yes, Nicholas, yes.


As long as you faithfully keep your Promises, I will be silent; but no longer.


Who is that with the Captain?


His Lady; they were Married this morning.


'Tis our old Dairy-maid Peg; we have been very familiar seven years ago.


Ha! this is very suspicious.


Now all will out; Children and Fools speak Truth.


Freeman hath kept her these two Years to my knowledge.


Is this true, Mr. Freeman?


I cannot deny the matter of Fact; undermining and counterming belonging to the
Art Military I thought fit to practise upon you, that you might instruct me if
I acted amiss.


This Discourse makes you melancholy, Captain.


So it would any Man in my Condition -- This comes of Pride and Covetousness,
the singular Virtues of Mankind: Where are now my Welsh Manors and Bartons,
Plantations, c. Poor Captain Busy! thou were it never beaten at this Weapon
before.


Give me Two hundred pound in hand to maintain the Child, and 40 l. per Annum
to the Wench for Life, for separate maintenance, I'll take 'em off your hands.


Two hundred pound Fine, and 40 l. Rent to be Cuckold for Life! -- If
Whoremasters be Christians, have a little more Conscience in your ways.


I am very indifferent whether you accept the Offer or not; therefore expect no
abatement; hitherto I have born the expense of my Pleasure, I intend now to
share the Profit, and you shall pay for nibbling.


These be your floating Islands and Plantations: I might have considered
foreign Wealth shrinks in Carriage. -- My hand is in the Lion's mouth; I must
agree with him.


Understanding of a Wedding, we come to present you with a Set of Music.


With all my heart; we'll have a Song and a Dance, and then to Church and say
our Prayers very devoutly.


You have had time to consider, Captain, what's your Resolution.


I do comply. -- Come, 'tis a Bargain.


While they go Church, we will go to Nich. Froth's, and confirm it.

We are all Friends; and since the Bargain's made,
From this time forth I will forswear the Trade.

I Have a Secret, I would fain disclose
To the Pretty, Witty Gentlemen called Beaus:
'Tis this;
If you will spare our Poet's Play to night,
(Although at present I can't do ye right)
You shall have my First Fruits when I'm a Woman;
As I hope to be saved I never yet knew no Man:
No, truly now, I'm so ignorant of Sin, or Schism,
I hardly yet can say my Catechism.
I'm mightily given to play, and that's a Fault;
I'll mend a-pace though; I won't be always nought:
I live, you know, where I can't but be well Taught.
I've learned so much already behind the Scenes,
I know what a Billet Doux and Ogling means:
I know what Man keeps Somebody; nay, I know more,
I know she that will Kiss for Money, is a Whore.
Let the Men-Players leave off when they will,
Our Maiden Gentlewomen will scarce lie still.
Nay -- you may laugh at a young Innocent Creature;
But I know more than you think though, of the matter.
I know the World's a Stage, and do not wrong ye;
You're better Actors there, than we're among ye;
Because to act you's not so hard a Task,
As 'tis for you to act a Vizard Mask.
If we give Place to you, 'twill make no strife;
We only Copy, you Draw to the Life.
What is't I don't know, unless it be the THING,
For which the Beggar's equal to the King.
But if that want of Knowledge be a Transgression,
I'll know that too at Years of Discretion.
Mean time if you'll excuse the Errors of this Play,
When I'm Fourteen, it shall be more in your way.
I can't please now, as well as Eight Years hence.
But if you Men of Love are Men of Sense,
As an Old Nurse instructs a Smickering Maid,
When she sits stroking little MARK of Lad,
My Penny'll show ye how a Shilling's made.

