Comodus, What eye did ere till now behold
Folly and madness acted to the life?

I wonder Formidon, the King could bear
Such saucy passion with so clear a brow.

His wisdom knew that Pertenax was far
Too mean a subject for his discontent.
And rather looked upon his crack-brain'd words
With princely eyes of pity then revenge.

Such frantic terms without the privilege
Of fool or mad-man would have easily raised
Billows of fury in the calmest breast,
And heaved a wel-hang'd patience off her hinge.

Nay, to be basely rude in such a place,
Artesio's house, whose roof the King was pleased
To honour with his presence --

Nay worse, at such a time when he was pleased to lend
Free reins to mirth, and to suspend those cares
That claim such interest in the Imperial brow.

Nay, when his fair acceptance crowned the Feast
Of glad Artesio, with his princely thanks;
Nay, when his royal hand had newly laid
The Sword upon his shoulders, and received him
Into the glorious Order of a Knight,
Then to break out into such baseness thus --

What moved him to it?

Nay, he were wise could tell:
I saw no cause at all

Unless it were
Some jealous qualm arising from a kiss
Too hardly printed on Kettreena's lip
By way of welcome to her Ladyship.

That might well be, for 'twas no sooner done
But he (not far to seek for passion
Or terms to vent it) brake into this fury,
And being choked with choler left the room:
Whereat his new-made Lady pale as death
(No stranger to his passion) winck'd me out
To follow him.

I marked that passage well,
And reading the dumb message in her eye
Writ in pale characters, I quit the room
To feel his pulse; whom if I chance to spy
I'll read a lecture to him:

So will I.

Were he as many Kings as he has Subjects to abuse, I'd not endure 't. Come,
the plain truth is, I don't like it, so I don't, nor should I spare him had he
been a King of Gold: What? should I stood like a fool to be his shooing-horne
to draw a pair of horns upon my head, and turn Pander to his lickerish
kisses, while he wipes my mouth with a cod-piece Knighthood? I'll hang first.
Let him bestow his honour with a vengeance upon those that hold it a good
pen'worth on such terms: For my part I like it not. Have I lived these thrice
thirty years, to be caught with Chafe? Kettreena must be a Lady forsooth, to
be more capable of his princely lust. And Pertenax must be dubbed, and gain the
glorious attribute of a right worshipful Cuckold. Come, these are baits to
catch young birds with, and honourable mists to blind ambitious fools with. His
politic Majesty has taken a wrong Sow by th'eare. I'm none of those that for
a smile can play the royal Pander, nor like a temporizing Whittled can help my
wanton Prince into the Saddle, or hold his Stirrup. Did I not mark the lustful
progress of his lascivious glances? And how his ugly rolling eyes shot
fire-brands at Kettreena's face? How every word was garnished with a wanton
smile, and still presented to Kettreena's ear! His antic gestures, croutches,
congees, cringes, complements, and all directed to Kettreena! While she like a
wel-disciplin'd Courtesan could counterfeit a modesty, against her conscience,
to whet his lust into an appetite; and like a coy dissembling Bride, could sit
and mince it, and inwardly rejoice to think of future times. -- But see they
come; I'll stand aside and watch.


Artesio, we shall study to requite
Thy bounteous entertainment, and whilst we
Possess th'Imperiall Crown, be confident
Thou hast a friend at Court. Come Kettreena,
Cheer up: We're pleased to set thy Husbands rudeness
Upon the score of Age the Advocate
Of all infirmity.

Most gracious Prince,
The strength of your known wisdom does appear
More eminent in his weakness.

A courtly Whore!

And his extreme defects
Are by your goodness graciously supplied.

An ignominious Whore!

For which Kettreena,
As duty binds, shall with a grateful heart
Lie prostrate at your feet.

A prostrate Whore!

And always active to discharge that score
Of your high favours.

Hey! an active Whore!

Enough Kettreena; thy fair merits give
Breath to our favours, and make virtue live.

I, let them go: Sister, we are too course
For their respects.

Methinks we merely serve
Like worthless Ciphers to increase a number.

Or like odd money in a Taylors Bill
Only to be abated: Let them go.

But yet methinks 'tis odd, that all the Trumps
Should lie in fair Kettreena's hand, and none
In ours.

Come, kissing goes by favour; Let her go
With her fair Game.

But that which vexed me most,
The foolish King had nothing else to say
But I was like my Father, when he knows
Comparisons are odious.

Nay worse,
His Complement to me was this, That I
Bore my years well; As good h'ad called me old,
A word far more injurious then Whore.
Bear my years well? What is there in this face
To merit such a Complement?

I like my Father? though I say it,
I scorn't:

My brow's not wrinkled.

These my Fathers eyes?

My teeth all sound.

My Fathers lips like these?

Cheeks plump enough.

Is this my Fathers hair?

Eyes quick and clear.

Was h'ever half so fair?

A double chin! What Symptons can he gather
Of Age?

Or what resemblance of my Father?

What secret beauty lurks there in Kettreena
That is ecclip'd in Rosia?

Or Marina?

True, She's snout fair; yet by her favour I
Would scarce turn tables with her, though I say it.

She has a courtly tongue, to breed delight.
She has a Husband too; that is a Knight.

Had he not been the King, he should have known
That I was sensible of his affront.

King, or no King, my ready fingers itched
To scratch revenge on's face: I like my Father!

And yet our valiant Husbands could stand by
And hear all this, and yet make no reply.
When Pertenax impatient of disgrace
Could nose the King, and beard him to his face.

Husbands! Husbands of Clouts.

But, as for mine,
I'll ring his ears a peal of discipline:

I'll act my part; and if Marina fails,
Let me want fingers, or these fingers nails.

Then let everlasting health be entayl'd upon the sons of men, and let the
curse of a strong constitution fall upon man-kind, if I dis-card thee not:
Away, avoid my sight; must I thus squander out my precious hours, and wast my
wakeful night, to turn Baud to a hundred Marks, and connive at these your
avaricious Murders? Away, thine eyes are Basilisks, and dart venom at me too
strong for Antidotes to resist.


'T was but once or twice six months, good Doctor be appeased.


Appeased! My fury hath no ears; my boiling gall breathes up such fumes of
bitterness into my crazy brains, that there is left no place for patience to
repose.


I thought so faithful a servant as I might have deserved one life among so
many Patients, to put me into a new Suit of apparel, against Easter, without so
much ado.


Slave! shall you be first served or I? who gave you leave to send my Patients
to the shades of death without my licence! How durst you be so bold to snatch
my wel-dealt Cards out of my skilful hand, whilst I was studious to contrive
and make the best advantage to my self?


He could not by nature have lived much longer, Sir, I did but save
neighbouring death a labour.


What tell thou me of nature? Is not the Patent mine? Have not I power to
produce the twine of frail mortality, in spite of death, or nature? Cannot I
lengthen out the groaning days of transitory flesh, or cut them short
according to my pleasure and advantage?


Good Sir, All this I know.


Why, varlot, then durst you presume to stop the gainful practises which I
intended? When as the sapless Stock could thrust no further Branches forth,
worthy our notice, you might have then by permission, done your will upon him
for your best advantage: When we had taken the first crop of his exuberous
bags, you might have then made bold to eat the Rowens; Till then your insolence
exceeded our Commission. Had he been born to swim against the stream of
fortune, or tortured in the stubborn schools of daring Resolution: Or had his
hide-bound purse preferred his sacred wealth before the lingering hopes of
costly health -- But thus, to ravish from our thriving hand a man of Fortunes,
one that desired to take up life at Interest, nay to buy his languishment at so
profuse a Rate, denies all thought of Patience. Away, Avaunt, begone,

No more Artesio's Servant now.
Bad be those Drivers that unhorse the Plough.

Is it even so? Quack's thread is fairly spun,
Quack may go home again, his market's done.

Is there never a Statute throughout the Volumes of the Law, that tolerates a
man to hang himself?


If there were, it was repeal'd in the next King's Reign, for a great
inconvenience that grew upon it.


The more's the pity: To my thinking it were a very fine harmless exercise.


Why? there's a custom for it, for those that will seek the Rolls, and have
such Wives as I with Cornelius his motion in her mouth.


Come, you are happy, the disease lies at that end; I would my Baggage would
speak till her heart ache so she did less.


Fie Pertenax, wrong not sweet innocence so much. Had but the Stars been
pleased, would our Wives had been like our Indentures made enterchangeable:
Comodus and I picked out both the vices, and left the virtue for you. Never
could any but Artesio that by art can alter his constitution as he lists, been
Father to three such different Daughters. Marma vents her spirit by the Nails,
my Rosia, hers by Tongue; and Kettreena hers by Tears: which like fluent
Orators, plead a soft heart, a sweet nature, and a high spirit qualified with a
mild discretion, and a harsh Husband.


Every one knows best where his shoe wrings him: She's mild enough, and that
the King knows, I fear to my cost.


And though I say it before thy face, she's fitter for a King then such a testy
fool. But who comes here? Comodus?


Comodus with a night-cap, and a scratched face.

From Harpies nails, from Furies whips,
From all sharp noses, and thin lips;
From two-legged Cats with thrice nine lives,
From scalding woort, from scolding Wives,
From ful-mouth'd blasts, from female blows,
From smooth-fac'd Sluts, from sharp-nail'd Shrowes;
From wounds t'inflict, from plagues t'inflict me,
My Genius bless, my Stars protect me.

Now Comodus, what means this desperation?
What Fury has possessed thee? What strange fit
Usurps thy patience, and beclouds thy brow?
What means this strange Militia in thine eyes?
Who raised this storm? Has Age or Wedlock lent thee
This sickly Night-cap? Tell us what's the cause
Of this dull change?

I have a Reason for'^

I fear, I fear, some Oeconomick fire
Hath late been kindled: Tell us what's the cause
Of these sad looks?

I have a Reason for it.

Disclose it then: Come, if the Bile be ripe
'Tis best to lance it: A revealed grief
Invites to cure, lies open to relief.

He that can still the Thunder, or assuage
The flames of sulphrous Aetna, or command
The hideous powers of infernal Spirits
Resolve for vengeance, he, and only he
Can cure my grief: Marinas louder tongue
Out-rores the Thunder, and her flaming eyes
Out-scorches Aetna: Her impetuous rage
Out-devils the whole Academe of Hell.

Blows the wind there away?
What ails thy face?

'Twas lately harrow'd with her Harpy nailes.

Why did not pare them then?
Why did not stop her viperous mouth?
Why did not drive those troops of Devils
From her stormy tongue?

Bid me go snatch a daring Thunder-bolt,
Or twi-forkt lightning from the hand of Jove:
Bid me go stop the flowing Tides, or stay
A singing Bullet in her middle way:
Bid me go tame a Dragon; or restrain
The Arms of Furies bent to high revenge,
This were an easy task; nay, easier far
To slack Hells flames, then quench Marina's rage.

Nay, then thy case is desperate, farewell.

Who finds a Shrew, need fear no other Hell.

Such Devils (...) be tamed; But when the Ram
Begins to butt, o there's both Devil, and Dam.

But Trippit is this certain?

Yes as sure
Madam, as fame can make it: 'Tis the voice
Of the whole Court, whispered from ear to ear.

Madam, let not your easy faith rely
Too much upon the voice of babbling fame;
The Court is grown so vain, that it beholds
All in extremes, and in owns nothing good
But what it censures evil.

There's no smoke
Without some fire: Report must have some ground.

Nay Madam, it is gone so far, that they
Stick not to stile her by the name of Queen.

That's far enough a conscience, but I hope
The fair Kettreena will be pleased to stay
Till we resign, ordie.

Madam, believe it not,
The Court is too censorious, and will tax
The innocence of a very smile:
They weigh our reputations with the scales
Of their own loose conceits, and our good Names,
Though ne'er so fair, must be allow'd by them,
Or given for light.

But is she stiled Queen?

Yes, by that frantic fool, old Pertenax
Her jealous Husband, whose malignant eye
Reads rank Adultery in a harmless smile,
And construes friendly mirth, and fair deportment
No less then Whoredom, and a crime that's fit
To suffer an Aspect more grim then death.

Such looks as his are sour enough to fright
Diana from her chastity: And who
Ere canonised Kettreena for a Saint?
Or took the King for more then flesh and blood?

There's something in the wind, that here of late
The King is more estranged in his behaviour
Then he was wont; His language more reserved;
His thoughts so various, that an easy eye
May read some alteration in his breast,
I fear, I'm wronged.

Madam, let not such thoughts
Possess your fancy, or disturb your peace:
Evaldus is a Prince too noble, and too just
To be surprised by any eyes, but yours,
The only stars whereby his fortunes fail.

But has he Knighted Pertenax?

Yes Madam,
And whispering joy in his new Ladies ear,
He feal'd it with a kiss, which Pertenax
Could not digest, but straight brake out in flames
At old Artesio's House, where he was late
Received as a self-invited Guest.

'Twas kindly done: Evaldus has his end;
Fire will want heat when beauty lacks a friend.

Let's hear no more on it.
Come, sheath up your swords,
And as ye love my quiet and your own,
Let's hear no more on it. What? have I three sons,
And ne'er a wife one? Ye are both too blame
To raise such Tumults, and to sow these seeds
Of factious discords in our settled State.
Away! Each one to his Command: For you
Bellario, and Palladius, we shall find
A speedy way to let you understand
Whose is the Birth-right; and since the pleased Fates
Have made so little difference betwixt you
By your twin-birth, in your Aspects and marks
Do you the like in your united hearts
Till time and our best care shall bring to light
Our true Successor in our doubtful throne
Stand both contented, And let your contentions
Find out no object, but obedience.
And you Museus, whose unrivalled thoughts
Have pitched their Territories, far more safe
Where you enjoy more happiness, more rest
Then he that wept for want of Worlds to win,
Whose boundless limits, and more vast confines
Extend from the Arctic to the Antarctic Pole,
And in the Closet of thy Contemplation,
Can sit and blow new Worlds like bubbles; then
Demolish and dissolve them at thy pleasure,
Advise thy factious Brothers: Let them know
That Birth-right which they strive for can but make
A king at best, and fill their Arms with Air;
Their Lives with dangers, and their Crown with care.

Sir,
I'll do my best to advise.

And we to obey.

Crowns are too great,

For breath to blow away.

Artesio, say, what discontents have raised
These clouds, that over-cast thy cheerful brow,
And make sad weather in Kettreena's face?

My age, most gracious Sovereign can expect
Small sun-shine in this world: My wasted years
Find little relish in these worldly toys.

Cheer up Artesio, If our favours can
Quicken thy joys, and make thy times more sweet
Thou shalt not want them; We shall bend our care
For thy advancement, and thy Childrens good.
But say, Artesio, what disastrous evil
Hath stamped thy looks with these late sad impressions?
Kettreena, tell me, for thine eye appears
An equal sharer in his silent tears?

Most ex'lent Prince, my Fathers tender care
And dear affection, looking on my merits
With multiplying Glasses, and conceiving
All happiness too little for my heart,
Thinks (though perchance without just ground) that I
Receive not those sweet comforts, that should spring
From the blessed bounty of conjugal love:
But I less conscious of my own deserts.
Complain not of my fortunes; but joy, rather
To find the sweet indulgence of a Father.

O that these cursed fingers had been struck
With a dead Palsy when I tied that knot,
And these gold-blinded eyes when they surveyed
His vast possessions, had been stricken blind:
Poor Girl!

But how can Pertenax devise
To wrong such patience? On what just ground
Can he pretend to build the least distaste?

Upon her noted virtue, by which light
His ugly vices do appear more bright.

Which then reflecting on his conscious soul
Affrights him into madness, who, enraged
Flies in the very face of all desert.

Well, good Artesio, what's not past our help
Shall be redressed, We will paliate the disease
We cannot cure, and with our favours strive
To hide the wrinkles of cursed Fortunes brow.
In which respects, Artesio, we are pleased
To make thee our chief Doctor to attend
On our own person; likewise for the trust
Reposed in thy fidelity, we make,
And choose thee here a Counsellour of State.
Thee Formidon for thy sweet Rosias sake
Artesio's Daughter, we appoint and choose
Attourney-Generall for our Royal Causes:
Thee Comodus the Master of our Mint.

Long live Evaldus our most gracious Lord
And Master.

Go Museus, see them sworn.
Kettreena, stay, we have a word to exchange:
Sit down Kettreena: Here's an empty Chair
Invites thy presence; Come, why come thou not?

Most gracious Sovereign, That's a seat not fit
For Subjects; Sir, be pleased to lay commands
My duty may not blush to-execute.

Lay by your Complements, Kettreena, Come
Repose by us; We will warrant our Commands.

Excuse me Sir, and let this bended knee
(A posture far more fit) attend your pleasure.

Nay, rise Kettreena: Something tells my heart
Thou art too blame: Sit here;
We will have it so.
So, now Kettreena, time and place conspire
To give advantage to my long desire.
Shall I not seem too curious to propound
A harmless question, to thy private ear?

In confidence, your grace will not command
Beyond my power and honour, I obey.

Then tell me sweet Kettreena, and tell true,
Had peevish Pertenax the maiden-head
Of thy Affection; did thy heart ne'er flame
Until his amorous Bellows blue the fire?

Sir, were it not too high presumption to enquire
The cause of your Command --

Nay, blush not Lady. 'Tis nor sin nor shame
To tell the secrets of so sweet a flame.
That blush has half resolved me; what remains
To clear my doubt, let thy fair words produce.

Sir, were it a Sin, my Sin would not despair
That have my Sovereigne to my Confessor:
Sir, I was ne'er so wise above my Sex
To blast Affections blossom in her spring,
Nor yet so nicely foolish to deny
That passion which has conquered more then I.

Lived there a Soul subjected to our Crown,
So blessed in his deservings, as to find
So great a favour at Kettreenas eyes?

Sir, may your Subjects flourish with desert
To merit such a Prince, but --

But? but what? Speak on Kettreena.

Let your Grace
Excuse my blunt abruption.

Come, speak out,
Thy full perfection can no way admit
Imperfect languages. Say on; but what?

But, 'twas no subject, gracious Prince of yours
That first enthralled my heart.

What was he then?
Was he some foreign Prince in a disguise
That came to rob our land of such a prize?
Tell me Ketreena, if thou dare repose
So great a secret in Evaldus breast.
What was he for a man? Of what condition?
From whence? What were his fortunes? his Allies?

Most gracious Sovereign, what, or whence he was
I cannot well relate: So many years
Have passed since then, that my remembrance may
Well plead her frailty: Whatsoere he was,
A Pilgrims weed eclipsed him.

Could thy heart make a sad Pilgrim
The object of thy love?

Sir, I was then but young, and my affection
Could find no Tutor but her own desires
Which curbed my nonag'd reason, with a hand
Too too severe for council to withstand.

I wonder how a Pilgrim durst attempt
So strong a task! upon what hopeful grounds
Could he presume to build his vain desire?

The ground of Love is love: And the direction
Which mere affection takes, is mere affection.

How long Kettreena since thy soft desire
Relented first at thy bold Pilgrims fire?

Fates bless the token: Even that very year
Your highness first set happy footing here
To tie that blessed, that royal knot between
Your sacred self, and our as sacred Queen.

But did that Pilgrim never since appear
Discovered to thine eye?

Great Sir, mine ear
Was never since made happy with the news
That he is living, for whose sake I wear
These weeds of mourning: True, the great desire
Of my well-being urged my Fathers heart
To match me to a wealthy discontent,
But my Obedience thwarted my Affection,
And made me prisoner to a secret vow,
Which I have kept as spotless as my name.

Has not thy Mariage-bed dissolved that vow.

Although I live sad Pertenax his Wife,
Yet shall I prove his Virgin when I die.

Tell me Kettreena, dost thou know this Ring?
Why dost thou start Kettreena? Dost thou know it?
What means these tears?
What means this change of weather?
Tell me, Kettreena, dost thou know this Ring?

Sir, too too well, And in this Ring I read
The secret story of my Pilgrims death:
Heavens rest and all my joys be with him; Sir,
He was too good to live, and wretched I
A slave to life, not good enough to die.

Come, come, Kettreena, let those precious drops
Forbear to trickle: Come, thy Pilgrim lives
And fares no worse then I: I am the man.

Abuse me not great Prince: O punish not
My rude (but yet obedient) boldness thus:
Deride not her whom fortune hath depressed,
And hath a loyal, though a troubled breast.

'Tis I that was that Pilgrim, and disguised
Wandered this land (whose Crown I was fore-told
By our Chaldean Prophet should be set
Upon my Temples) and directed to
Artesio's house; I found that very face
His Glass presented to my wandering eyes
In viewing thee, whom he mistook as Queen,
And read my Regal fortunes in thy love;
Adding this prophecy, as yet untold,
She that gives thee the first Ring
Shall crown thy head, and make thee King.
This is that Ring, which given thou drop'dst a tear,
And whispered'st thus: This Ring is Cupid s Sphere.
'Twas I, to whose safe trust thou did repose
A secret, which this tongue shall ne'er disclose;
These were the lips which gave thee that advise,
My judgment thought most fit, and thine approved.

I am convinced dread Sovereign, and amazed,
My trembling heart's surprised 'twixt joy and fear.

Fear not Kettreena, I am still the same,
And so art thou, excepting this alone:
Thou found a Croffe, and I have gained a Crown,
Which I'll renounce, and call no longer mine
When it shall cease to advance both thee and thine:
And for a Pledge, we tender on our part
Our royal hand; with it a real heart.

Your hand's enough great Prince; as for the rest
I'm not ambitious now.

Be not deceived
My sweet Kettreena, there's no dregs of lust
Defiles that bosom thou so fear to trust:
'Tis fair and spotless, and contrives no end
But what may merit so divine a friend.

I question not; And for that heart, return
A heart (though far unequal, yet) shall burn
With equal fires.

And let Kettreena know
Nor time, nor fortunes shall have power to show
The shadow of a change: And mark how long
Times hower-glasse shall measure out my days.
Till then --
But hold! The Queen prevents the rest.
How now my dear Augusta? Art thou come
To give's a visit? Love, 'tis kindly done.

I fear my Lord the King, my blunt access
Hath given the privacies of your discourse
Too quick a period.

No, no my dear,
At thy approach, all business does appear
Like pale-fac'd stars before the rising Sun.

Madam Kettreena, I must give you joy.

Me joy, most excellent Princess!
Pray, for what?

Nay, never blush: I say, I wish you joy.

I thank your Grace, Be pleased to say, wherein.

Of your new Ladyship: Come, now you know.
What ails my Lord the King? Are you not well?

Why? dear Augusta.

Cause ye look so pale,
Your colour's gone into Kettreenas cheeks;
But are you well indeed? I wish you joy, too.

Thanks sweet Augusta: Tell me dear of what?

Of your new Servants that you made to day.
But I transgress: My Lord, the King, Farewell.

What haste Augusta? We will together hence.

Madam Kettreena --

Lord! what means your Grace?

Excuse me Madam -- pray --

Your Highness now
Make me ridiculous.

You'll wrong your self --





sum. tot.

A pretty Reck'ning!

As I am a virtuous 'Pothecary, I know not how to subsist. Here's all that's
coming to me, and that's not to be expected till Christmas, if paid then.
Gentlemen, I am in a very skirvy case. Artesio has turned me out of his
service, and I must break. What shall I do? I must play the good Fellow
abroad, and then my Wife plays the Devil at home. How can the one be
maintained? or the other endured? I have pawned already her Tuftaffaty Petticoat
and all her Child-bed linen, besides two tiffiny Aprons, and her
bearing-cloth, for which I have had already two curtame Lectures, and a black
and blue eye. But stay! my satin Doublet had yet a good gloss, and her silk
mohaire Petticoat and Wastcote will make a good show in a Country Church. Nay,
my credit will yet pass in Bucklers berry for five pounds worth of Commodity,
which with the help of a gold Night-cap, a few conjuring words and a large
conscience will go far, and set me up in a Market town, where I may pass for
a Padua Doctor: 'Tis but Italianating my name, garb, language, and habit, and
then Seignior Quackquinto may practice as safely, kill as ignorantly and
innocently as Artesio himself, or any Doctor in the King's Dominions. And when
my Name is once but raised upon the wings of popularity, the better sort will
hold it disparagement to their judgments not to magnify Quackquinto, and
rather not be sick at all, then to be counselled by Quackquinto; Every disease
will call upon Quackquinto. If any foolish Lord be sick of a Pleurisy of Gold,
who must be sent for but the Italian Doctor, Seignior Quackquinto? If any
love-sick Lady would take a Pill to purge melancholy, who must be sought to
but the Italian Doctor, Seignior Quackquinto? And then so honourable will the
Name of the Italian Doctor be, that he's not fashionably sick that will not
advise with Seignior Quackquinto. But the way to proceed is not to stay here.


So,
Let their ambitions clime and shake the tree,
When the fruit falls 't may chance to fall to me:
I'll stand below and watch; They seldom fall
That keep their Stations, and not clime at all:
Low fortunes find most rest, abide most sure,
When lofty Cedars shake, Shrubs stand secure:
Bellarmo will be Prince: Palladius, he
Assumes the self-same Title: Both will be
Evaldus Heirs, both Kings; both jointly scorn
The stile of Subject: Both will be first-borne:
I, let them jar; And let the golden Apple
Remain still doubtful; Let them grasp and grapple:
Museus, stand thou Neuter: Oft 'tis known,
When two Dogs fight, the third does catch the bone.

Had I imagined Kettreenas Ladyship had been no worse, I should have made bold
to owe her this visit a day longer.


For any thing I see, she may live till all her friends be weary of her.
Quisquilla, what brought thee thither? Did her Ladyship send for thee to watch?


Truly, I heard she was very ill, and when I came, I found her very ill.


Some Qualm! May be she's breeding of a young Prince.


Or sick of an old Knight: Methought she looked very peevishly: If he'd but drop
out of the way a little, she'd be well enough.


Nay, indeed, they say, if Ladies, be not (as it were) sick once a fortnight,
they forfeit their Honour.


Why, then Quisquilla, thou thinks she's but a little sick of course.


In truth then, our visit is suitable to her disease.


For my part, if her Ladyship had been sick to the heart I should ha visited
her with a better heart; But sirrah, I believe our welcome was as hearty as our
visit.


Truly, I believe you had been more welcome, if you had staid two minutes
longer.


Prithee, why Sirrah?


Nothing, but only her Maid could not find the perfuming Pan, to take away the
smell of the --


Of the what? Prithee Quis. what was the matter? I know by thy simpering, thou
hast some Roguery at thy tongues end.


Prithee Quis. out with it.


Shall I? but as I live, ye must say nothing. When she first heard of your
coming, her Ladyship was heartily tugging a piece of sod Bacon, and fearing ye
would come up a little too soon, as in truth ye did, her Maid for haste hiding
it under the bed, it slipped into the chamber-pot.


The best that ever I heard, She should ha thrown a few oynions after't, and
stewed it for the old Knight,


'T had been good enough for such an old miserable hound, to allow a sick Lady
so course a diet.


Sirah, we have Husbands bad enough, but not so bad.


Gramercy good Wives, that won't be such fools to endure it. Quisquilla, I
think thy Husband is no Saint neither. Is he?


Yes, of the Devils canonizing, Would I had been hanged the first hour he saw
me.


Why? what's the matter, Quis?


What? All that he gets he spends, and all he can find he pawnes: Yesterday, he
broke open my chest and pawned all my child-bed linen, and to day my Taffeta
petticoat, and my best purld Gorget, and to make up the matter, he hath plaid
such pranks that the Doctor has turned him out of his service.


Why dost not discipline him?


Discipline him? If I counsel him, he stands like an Ass and casts up his
ugly gray eyes: If I ring him a peal he slights me with his silence, and that
which vexes me to the heart, stands and whistles. But if I live till to morrow,
for I know he'll come in drunk to night, I'll whistle him, y'faith I will; I'll
make him know what 'tis to whistle a Wife, the longest howre he has to live,
y'faith I will.


A G^rle worth Gold.


Come, lead away, let's go.


She's a mere fool, that sometimes is no Shrow.


As I live and hope to be a Doctor, 'twas for nothing in the universal world
but for killing a rich Patient of his a little before his time.


That was a poor thing to turn away an old Servant for, especially a man of
your profession.


'Twas nothing else as I am virtuous. Nay more, He was a slow Pay-master too,
and took Physic upon the Ticket. Ah Madam, had he connived a little, I had
clearly gained a hundred Marks by his death.


How?


His younger Brother, a fine Gentleman, laid me a hundred Marks he would live
till our Lady-day. Alas! I did no more for a considerable sum then my Doctor
has done a hundred times for nothing; I'm sure I have been a gainful Servant
to him, and that he knows right well. But the truth is, he has no more
conscience with him then the dog has: How often have I left out the chief
Ingredient out of his Receipts to prolong the Cure for his profit? How often
dropped in a Dram of a malignant quality into his Dose to make a Cure for his
gain! Nay, as I am an honest man, out of my rank affection to him, at my own
cost and charges kept a brace of hot Creatures in Ordinary to help young
Gentlemen to their Diseases for his sweet sake: Had I been a knave, his
Daughters had wanted many a satin Petticoat. And thus my honest dealing is
requited: But 'tis no matter, There's more ways to the wood then one. I have
corruption enough in me to make a Country Doctor. And 'tis no new thing to
build up a new Physician upon the ruins of an old broken 'Pothecary.


Quack, you have a voluble tongue, and can easily work upon the ignorant
multitude, I could rather wish you to turn Mountebank, What think thou of
that Quack?


Madam, I doubt not but I could cheat the King's liege people as plausibly as
another, if the King, or any of his mad Sons would give me a License.


As for the King, Artesio is in too great favour with him. But Prince Bellarmo
will do it if you make the means.


Your Ladyships word in my behalf will soon be heard, for which, I shall
present you with a Newyears-gift a hundred Marks thick.


I'll move his Highness in it. Go get a License drawn for him to sign.


I humbly thank your Ladyship.


So they are fat enough, And there let 'em starve and rot, and let their
Children pick their bones. I'll not abate one single penny. Tell me of mercy?
If their Wives breasts want milk, let their Children suck blood. Their Bonds are
forfeit, and I'll have every farthing ere they quit those Grates. Hoe, there
within, Hoe, Kettreena.


Sir, did you call?


O are ye come, Hussif, go fetch my Box of Obligations down, Make haste, away.


O are ye come, give me, give me, quickly, quickly?


O that his virtues were enclosed there,
And that his honour were but half so dear!

Iohn Havelands Bond. 300l to pay 150 the sixth of June next: Good.
What's here? Henry Thrift, 400l to pay 200 the 23 of March next: and Good.
Humphrey Rich his bond to pay the double Interest of 500l for 10 years, and
lose the principal: Good.
Quack's Bill of Sale of a Tuftaffaty Petticoat, and a chest of fine linen, at
6d per Month in the pound, That's as good as mine own already.

Ah poor Quack, Art thou come into his clutches?


O here 'tis, here 'tis, here 'tis, They are both come together. Thomas
Badluck, 10l to pay 5. and George ^aile 6l to pay 3. both forfeit, and fast
enough. There's 16l good besides cost and charges, or there let 'em rot.


Dear Sir, let me be a Suitor for mercy upon these two.


Mercy! then let me never find mercy, if I show 'em any.


I prithee, be good to 'em. They have 15 Children between 'em, and 9 of them
are Motherless. If they remain in prison, they must all starve.


Hey, tittle tattle, tittle tattle, tittle tattle, Pray go to your Favourite the
King; he'll redeem 'em for the the other kiss, or if your kisses are grown cheap,
for a nights lodging. Now your Father's a privy Counsellour you'll have a
glorious Pander.


Sir, you wrong three at once, and your self that's four, and I have a
conscience that's a thousand will justify it: but I forgive ye.


Forgive me, ye Court Munkey! They say you're breeding and keep your Chamber,
and puke a mornings, and eat Caudels and Cordials in a corner to cherish you
after your journey, And my purse must pay for all, But I'll keep you short.


Heaven and my Innocence comfort me: What I breed I fear you'll justly father;
even that Child will make us both happy.


I father your Bastard! you extract of Court Impudence!

O that my hand were turned to Lyons paws that I may tear thee to bits.

Murder, murder, murder!


Sir, let my arm assist ye.


O I am murdered! O my bonds, my bonds, my bonds! O let me once embrace ye
more my dear bonds!

O my dear bonds.


Fear not, My arm shall hold you up.


O my leg, my leg! O my bonds, my bonds, my sweet bonds!


Quack, But I fear 'twill do Artesio wrong.

No wrong at all, my Lord: My practice lies
Among the fools, He deals with none but wise.

I, but you promise cure to their disease.

Their money loads 'em, and we give 'em ease.

Why then you rob them for your own relief.

Who takes what's freely offered, is no Thief.

But they expect Recovery of their health.

And we accept what's much inferior, wealth.

They heal your wants, you fail to help their grief.

'Tis true, our sense exceeds their dull belief.

Can then belief give help to their disease?

Faith in the Doctor gives the Patient, ease.

If these be penny-worths, he's a fool that buys.

If they be fools, our pennyworths make them wise.

But Quack, I know that Mountebanks are bold, ignorant, and covetous; and when
these three qualities meet and present themselves to the vulgar, who are
naturally confident, simple, and admirers of Novelties, like Files, they'll buzz
about the flame till they have burnt their wings, nay sometimes scorch their
bodies too, and that must not be suffered.


My Lord, we Mountebanks are in that kind very circumspect: What we prescribe,
if it do no good, we are confident can do no harm. For most of what we give,
carries the bare name of Physic, but is none.


Why do ye give it then?


To cure our own diseases, and with the help of a little foolish Faith, theirs
too.


But methinks your knavery should quickly be discovered Quack, what do ye
then?


Why, then we flee to the next good Town, and there we meet with fresh fools,
where if one among a hundred hap to be cured, he more cries up our credit, then
the ninety nine can disparage it. Every Prize hath his Trumpet when thousands
of Blanks are swallowed up in silence, that others may be fooled as well as
they. Howsoever, they depart all satisfied, and I dare say, repent no more of
their Sixpences, then they do of their sins.


Well Quack, give me thy paper. Once for old Lactusia's sake, I'll be accessory
to a piece of knavery.


Thanks noble Lord, you're principal in my esteem.
Now Quack, screw up thy brains: Provide thee
A fit Man, and him a fit Habit,
And oil thy tongue; that it may neatly cousin
Poor Country-fools as they draw doves, by th'dozen.
Lactusia, I'd have it made up into a Potion, and so conveyed to her. Canst-a
make a Composition?


An't please your Grace, I'll do my best, but dare not warrant the present
working of it. I have poisoned many a Rat, but my practice lies no further.


Art acquainted with no Pothecary, that will take an Anuity of a hundred Mark
to do the feat?


Now I think on it, I have one fit for the purpose, a man of a desperate
fortune, that will bite at such a Bait. Cornelius Quack, lately Pothecary to
Artesio, who is about to get a License to be a Mountebank.


I'll grant it him, But will he be secret? Where is he?


I met him just now.


Go find him, And if he entertain the motion, bring him hither.


I know no fitter man.


But Trippit, In whose name shall we send it to her?


No better then in her Fathers, He being a Doctor, and the (as I hear) at this
time not well, may send it as Physic to be taken presently.


Had Quack contemned her Fathers Pothecary it would have done well, but having
left his service, it will breed suspicion.


What if it should be sent in a Bottle of Greekwine, as a token from one of her
Sisters?


I believe there's no such correspondency between 'em, And besides, Wine of
that nature will break the Glass; and make discovery. Evaldus, which shall
intimate his notice of her sickness, and that he hath sent her one of his own
Cordials, wishher for his sake; to drink it fasting?


Your Highness has hit it. And he may add, that he hath drunk her health in
the same, which may the better endure her to pledge it. It will be a way beyond
all exception.


Look, here's a Letter pend to the same purpose, read softly.


Madam, teach a Miller to be a Thief; If I do not like a workman, let my wages
be thereafter.


Madam, here's the man I recommended to your Highness.


Bring him near,


Yes an't please your Grace, and am ready to perform it.


Let the Cordial be made of sudden execution, And convey it to her with this
Letter.


Will your Highness be pleased to sign this his License to practice Physic
and Surgery in your Majesties Dominions.


Trippit, keep both the License and the Letter, and put us in mind to sign the
one, and seal the other, Let's away. Fellow, be silent, sudden and
circumspect.


Your Grace will bear me out in it.


Doubt it not.


So, now my License will have Authority enough.
A hundred Marks a year besides, and the Queens Servant?
I'll venture a hanging upon these terms at any time.

Come,
Art thou there? Hah!
Must my fury await your pleasure!
Must my sweet revenge attend your leisure?
Have I nothing else to do, but to fig from place, from Tavern to Tavern,
from corner to corner? Must I be still yawling, and calling, and bawling for
you whilst you're rambling, and roving, and roaming, and potting, and piping,
and drivelling and snivelling! Am I born to trot after you? to wait upon your
tail? or else like a fool, sit moaping at home, with neither clothes to my
back nor meat for my belly, nor a penny in my purse?


So now the Game begins.


Must I be thus slighted, and scorned, and contemned, and undone by a
Runagate, a Sneap-nose, a thin-gut? Must I dance attendance after such a
shotten herring as you? be a slave to such a Sot as you? such a Bul-pated
Milk-sop as you? You a Citizen! you a Trades-man! you a Husband! you a
Companion for Gentlemen! mary, come up! You must be prankt up in your Satin
Doublet, when I have scarce a Smock to my back, nor a Shoe to my foot, nor a
Tatter to my tail, nor a hot bit to put into my belly, from Sunday to Sunday.


Heyday, heyday, heyday!


And heyday, and heyday, and heyday too; Go heyday your base Trulls, your
three-half-peny draggle-tayl'd Queens, that can endure your heydayes, and your
mocks, and your mowes, and your taunts for an ounce of Coventree-blue.


As I went to Walsingham.


Go, ye weasel-snouted, addle-pated, buzzleheaded, splatter-footed Moon-calf.
Go whistle your Dogs, and your flap-mouth'd Whores, that ye carried to the
Tap-house, and then ran away and left them to pay for the Reck'ning, when they
follow'd ye, and rung ye by the ears, till they made ye roar like your Mother,
when she was delivered of such a coxcombly Booby as you.


So, is all out now?


Go, go ye Sycophant, the dregs of the suburbs, that can murder a Patient for
the hopes of a hundred Marks, and then be turned out of service for your
pains. O how my fingers itch, to set their marks upon those meager Cheeks of
thine! But you Sir know, I have all your Villainies upon the score, and at the
next offence,

I'll call ye to Account, and if ye bauke me, then
I ransake ye out, and make ye understand
The sharp-nail'd language of Quisquilla's hand.

It is some comfort yet
I find a warning ere I feel the fit.

I scorn your words, Bellarmo; My spirit flies
As high a pitch as yours, have every whit
As good blood in my veins as you.

Nay good Bellario.

I, to keep for wanton Ladies.

No, to spend in a just cause.

Nay good Palladius.

Come, come, ye dare not.

Provoke me not.

I dare thee to thy face.

Nay, what do ye mean?

Meet me with your Horse and Sword.

I will: To morrow expect to hear from me the time and place.


So, now it works like wax: Whilst they prepare
To beat the bush, my hound may catch the Hare.

THere's old whispering between them. Pray heaven they be not hatching of a
Cockatrices egg. Look where they come.


Where's Phonilla all this day?


Here Madam.


O are ye there? My heart's much oppressed with melancholy! Come Phonilla; Sing
the Song, the King likes so well.


How blessed are they that wast their weary hours
In solemn Groves, and solitary Bowers,
Where neither eye, nor ear,
Can see, or hear,
The frantic mirth,
And false delights of frolic earth;
Where they may sit, and pant,
And breathe their pursy souls,
Where neither Grief consumes, nor griping want
Afflicts, nor sullen Care controlls.
Away false joys, ye murder where ye kiss:
There is no heaven to that; No life to this.
Truth, sweetly sung. Come let's away. Evaldus? So now 'tis out. Hah! does the
Jade begin to tyre? Must her Plummets be wound up? Nay, It shall have my Blessing
too, I had a dose of Arsnick Kettreena, we thank ye, Health and wealth's a
double purchase.


Sir, if mine eyes may not be made partakers of the Kings Message, make my
ears happy with your Relation.


Do ye want Restority? Are the plummets of your soul downer? Does your heart
want mirth? or your bones marrow?


Sir, What mean ye?


Most honourable Lady, to cut your throat: Away ye Strumpet.


Sir, will you be pleased --


To slit your nose; Avoid my sight be thus tormented! What are ye deaf now?
are ye dumb? Take, take away the Witch; she comes, she comes, she comes to
pinch me with hot Irons, fills my veins with boiling lead. O the Witch, the
Witch, the Witch, the Witch.


What? fallen asleep! How miserable is poor Kettreena that has no happiness
but then! How well quietness becomes him! He lies very still; He was wont to
snort, that the whole house was witness of his slumbers, I'm loath to wake
him.

I'm afraid he's dead. Sir, Sir, Sir.


Dear Sister, what's the matter?


O he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!


Nay, sweet Sister, have patience.


Oh, woe is me, that I have lived to see this heavy hour!


Pray Sister be patient, you wrong your self too much.


I care not, so long as I never wronged him. Oh my dear Husband is dead, and I
am undone, undone for ever!


Come, pray Sister leave the room, and take some comfort; Your tears cannot
recall him.


No, no, I'll never leave him, I'll never leave him thus.


Come, come, let me persuade ye. Nay come, good Sister.


Then let me take my last farewell: Deny me not that good Brother.


Conscience! What tell thou me of Conscience? Conscience, and Commodity, are
two several Trades: If thou keep the one, the other will scarce keep thee.
Conscience, quoth her? I cry my stars mercy. There's a word indeed! You a
Mountebanks man! You a hang-man as soon. Tell me of Conscience?


I beseech you, Sir, excuse me. 'Twas but a hasty word let slip, before I was
aware.


He that's my servant must forget to blush,
Must teach his ready lips to mouth an oath,
Must have a daring brow, hatched ore with brass;
Must have a smooth-fac'd tongue, that has the Art
To cloth a naked Lie with robes of Truth;
And learn to work upon the easy faith
Of the believing Multitude: He must be bold
And plausible, and captivate the ear
With lines of wit; And with some bugbear words
Of seeming Art, must fright their understandings
Into an Admiration.
Which, like a nightly Lowbell, may entice
The amazed Plebeans to his Batfoule net.
Quibble, what say to this?

Sir, if you'd be pleased to excuse me a little for swearing, I should do well
enough for lying. For indeed, I must confess, swearing goes a little against my
conscience.


More conscience yet? Come, come, ye must not
Stand upon such Niceties: He that will thrive
Must fear to act no profitable Crime:
Almighty Gold hath power to absolve
The evils of poverty: He may be bold
To sin in want, that may repent in Gold.

Well Sir, I am resolved. Conscience, farewell. And now that Blocks removed,
Quibble shall undertake your fair Instructions, and approve himself a Scholar
worthy of so sage a Master.


But one thing more;
When you shall mount my Stage
Be sure, your lavish tongue reflect upon
The honour of my Name: let all your words
Aim at my merits, and enhance my fame,
Advance my Cures, And let thy tongue relate
The greatness of my Patients, and rewards
Of foreign Princes, and those powers above.
'Tis eafier to believe, then to disprove.

It is enough: If Quibble undertake,
And fail, trust neither fool nor knave for Quibble's fake.

The Queen's extremely discontent, that her designs have fallen so cross.


Who can help it?


This is the fruit of Jealousy; had not that peevish fool been jealous of
Kettreena, My conscience tells me this had never been.


Nay, to see the old fool must needs run upon his own death, and not suffer
her to die, whose death he so desired!


Well, 'twas the first time that I was ere engaged in such a business, and
shall be the last.


Nay, to see the luck on it, The counterfeited Letter was found in Pertenax his
pocket, and may discover all.


But my fear is, that Quack will be examined, and then all will out.


No, Quack did wisely deliver his Message in a disguise; can he but keep his
own counsel, all may be well. In the mean while, I have given out that
Kettreena had a hand in the business, which perchance may prove an after-game,
and strengthened with report may leave her to the Law.


I send a Letter and a Cordial! I'm abused.


It appears, the mischief was meant to Kettreena, Sir.


But heaven protected her: Who brought the Letter and the Potion?


The Messenger was a Stranger, Sir.


How habited?


Sir, like a Cavalier, in a slashed Suit, a black Lock, And a gilt Rapier, down
to his heels.


We will make a strict enquiry; Such murder will not long lie smothered. But how
does poor Kettreena take it?


Exceeding heavily Sir, And the worse, that some base tongues would make her
accessory.


My soul acquits her. Artesio, let her know, we will visit her to morrow. Bid her
from me cheer up; Upon my honour I'll not rest, till she be righted.


Heaven bless your Highness.


'Tis certain, there's a challenge passed betwixt Bellarmo, and Palladius: I
fear the unhappy difference concerning the Birthright, will never be composed
but by the Oracle. On Wednesday is their Birth-day, and most fit for such
solemnity: Formidon, let proclamation be issued forth, that all the Court, upon
the pain of our displeasure that day await the Oracle, where we in person
will attend it. Artesio send you warrant out in our name to the Pythian Priests
to make their Preparations.


So now Museus, If the plot hit right
There's but a hair 'twixt Monarchy and thee:
The Gap stands fair; If thy auspicious stars
Light thee the way, and prosperous Fortune breathe
Success upon thy high contrived designs,
Thy sole-commanding hand, shall grasp and sway
The glorious Sceptre, and thy gracious Brows
Shall be encompassed with the Imperial Crown.
But stay! What if Palladius should advise
With his soft Pillow? what if pleading tears
Softly distilling from the amorous eyes
Of his fair Idol should prevail and turn
His martial flames into a love-sick fire?
What if the blaze of our Bellarmo's rage
(Not having solid Fuel to maintain
The wasteful bounty of his lavish flames)
Should slake and languish, and consume it self
To the warm ashes of a soft accord?
Here, here, Museus, thou must act thy part
With Care and Judgment, and ingenious Art.
Be circumspect; Be studious to increase
Those Fires: Their wars produce thy Peace.
Be thou the Bellows to advance their flame:
And having wisely dealt, play thus thy Game.
First bait thy hook with deep dissembled love,
Keep close thy Serpent, and show them thy Dove:
Seem Friend to both; Who ever failed his End,
That hammered treason with the hands of Friend?
Feel both their pulses: If they chance to beat
Active and sprightly, wish, advise, entreat
To Peace: Persuaded fury, and stopped streams
When most resisted, run to most extremes:
But if their tilted spirits run too low,
Urge Reputation, and the faith they owe
To sacred Honour in a Princes name:
The whet-stone of abated Valour's shame.
But see, how pat Palladius presence gives
A fair advantage to my new desires!
I'll stand aside, until his serious eyes
Have given free welcome to his paper-guests.
I stand betwixt two minds! what's best to do?
This bids me stay; This spurs me on to go.
Once more let our impartial eyes peruse
Both t'one and the other: Both may not prevail.
My Lord, PRize not your honour so much as to disprize her that honours you, in
choosing rather to meet Death in the field, then Pulchrella in her desires.
Give my affection leave once more to dissuade you from trying Conquest with so
unequal a Foe: Or if a Combat must be tried, make a Bed of Roses the Field,
and me your Enemy. The Interest I claim in you is sufficient warrant to my
desires, which according to the place they find in your Respects, confirm me
either the happiest of all Ladies, or make me the most unfortunate of all
women.

PULL CHRELLA.



A Charm too strong for Honour to repress.

A heart too poor for Honour to possess.

Honour must stoop to Vows. But what says this?
My Lord, THe hand that guides this Pen, being guided by the ambition of your
honour, and my own affection, presents you with the wishes of a faithful
servant, who desires not to buy your safety with the hazard of your Reputation.
Go on with courage, and know, Panthea shall partake with you in either
fortune: If conquered, my heart shall be your Monument, to preserve and
glorify your honoured ashes; If a Conqueror, my tongue shall be your Herald
to proclaim you the Champion of our Sex, and the Phoenix of your own, honoured
by all, equalled by few, beloved by none more dearly then

Your own Panthea.



I sail betwixt two Rocks! What shall I do?
What Marble melts not if Pulchrella woo?
Or what hard-hearted ear can be so dead,
As to be deaf, if fair Panthea plead?
Whom shall I please? Or which shall I refuse?
Pulchrella sues, and fair Panthea sues:
Pulchrella melts me with her love-sick tears,
But brave Panthea batters down my ears
With Love's Pettarre: Pulchrellas breast encloses
A soft Affection wrapped in Beds of Roses.
But in the rare Pantheas noble lines,
True Worth and Honour, with Affection joins.
I stand even-balanc'd, doubtfully oppressed,
Beneathe the burden of a bivious breast.
When I peruse my sweet Pulchrellas tears,
My blood grows wanton, and I plunge in fears:
But when I read divine Panthea's charms,
I turn all fiery, and I grasp for arms.
Who ever saw, when a rude blast out-braves,
And thwarts the swelling Tide, how the proud waves
Rock the drenched Pinnace on the Sea-greene breast
Of frowning Ahimptrite, who oppressed
Betwixt two Lords, (not knowing which to obey)
Remains a Neuter in a doubtful way.
So tossed am I, bound to such strair confines,
Betwixt Pulchrella's and Panthea's lines.
Both cannot speed: But one that must prevail.
I stand even poys'd: an Atom turns the scale.

Dare thou be doubtful? Fie, Palladius, fie.

How now? What, is Museus care so nigh!
Lend me thy grave advice: Peruse these lines,
My choice shall fix on what thy judgment fings.
Read both. Compare and judge.

Weigh Heaven with Hell:
Compare harsh Owls to warbling Philomel:
Weigh Froth with Honour, or dejected Shame
With the downe-weight of an illustrious Name.
Pulchrella woos thee with a Sirens song;
But brave Panthea's more Heroic tongue
Chants streynes of honour: False Pulchrella sheds
The tears of Crocodiles: Panthea treads
High steps to triumph, where thy growing Name.
Shall stand recorded in the Rolls of Fame.
But take thy course: Th'advice is only mine:
Thine is the interest, as the choice is thine.
This only know, Bellarmo's tongue proclames
Palladius dares not fight, but with his dames.

The scales are turned. Panthea lodge thou here
Next to my heart, Pulchrella, lie thou there.
Farewell my soft embraces: Sports stand by:
Bellarmo, if Palladius lives, shall die.

So, now it works: If either hap to fall,
I the sole-second to both parties shall
With my breathed sword do justice on the other:
Crowns weigh no friends: Ambition knows no brother.
Then, then, Museus, shall the Imperial Crown
Adorn thy sacred Temples; and the Throne
Of Earth's unrivalled Majesty shall be
Thy purchased Prize, possessed alone by Thee.
Then shall those golden, those forgotten days
Return to earth: Then shall the learned Baize
That wants deservers, in this trifling Age,
Immortalize the Sophoclean Stage:
Unbroken Faith shall then forget to start,
And be entayl'd upon the single heart.
Unblemished Loyalty shall crown the loves
Of twined souls, more innocent then Doves.
But stay, Museus! Thou forgett'st to play
The the other part with thy Bellarm', Away:
Go feel his humour: If his rage be down,
Go switch it up: Thou labour for a Crown.

BE it known to all men by these presents, that I Jeffery Quibble, am the
trusty and right wellbeloved servant and kinsman to the renowned, famous,
skilful, learned, able, admirable, incomparable Master of Phisgigge, Cornelius
Quack, a man of rare Qualcoms, and singular imperfections, who by his studies
abroad, and travels at home, through France, Spain, Italie, Germany, Denmark,
Poland, Finderland, Freezeland, hath marvellously unbefitted himself with all
manner of Oils, Waters, Powders, Drugs, Spirits, Balsomes, Syrops, Salves,
Sere-cloathes; bountifully unstor'd with all sorts of Preservatives,
Conservatives, Restoritives, Antidotes, for all manner of Temperatures,
Constitutions, Complexions; Richly unfurnish with all kind of Prescripts,
Deceits, and all other rare Impediments belonging to a man of his Defunction,
who to the great dimolishment of this Town, and benefice of this Incorruption,
hath redressed himself to you, and here sets up his Bank, offering health to
the imperfermity of your bodies, soundness to the impudency of your limbs,
and present cure to your outward Mallanders, and inward exturbances. And for
your farther sartifaction of his deficiency in this kind, Behold his Licence
under the hands of her most Excellent Majesty, and Bellarmo her illustrious
son; which, when occasion shall require it, shall be shown, to the honour of
my renowned Master, Cornelius Quack, and his pragmaticall servant Jeffery
Quibble.

But to the purpose, Gentlemen: It may be you will think me more knave then
fool, And may be so I am: And now perchance you'll say I'm both by my own
confession: And may be I am so too. Artesio my old Master made me a knave, and
my new Master hath made me a fool: And so he'll do ye all before he has done
with ye. Which that he may the better do, have patience a while.

Gentlemen, Here's that will do the deed. Here's Physic of all kinds, for all
diseases: Salves of all natures for all sores: Medicines of all compositions,
for all constitutions, colours, of all sorts, for all complexions.

The costly Powder in this box
Cures him that's pouder'd with the Pox.
This helps the back, and cures the Reyns;
Makes her weight that wants two grains.
The Ointment that this glass encloses,
Palliats blew cheeks, and purple noses.
This cures the Cholick, Stone, or Wind,
Makes crazed bodies belch behind.
This cures the careful married life
Of that disease men call a Wife.
This clears complexion when it fades;
Cures Falling-sicknesses in maids.
This cures the twattles, and the flouts;
Grumbles, sullens, and the pouts.
This helps all gouts both old and young,
And cures the palsy in the tongue.
This makes night-walkers keep their beds;
Cures heavy hearts, and giddy heads.
If Jack love Jone, and Jone fly back,
This powder will make Jone love Jack.
If Jone love Jack, and Jack will none,
This powder will make Jack love Jone.
This first and last if ye apply,
You'll ne'er be sick but when ye die.
But this rare Quintessence such strength does give,
You'll never die so long as ere ye live.

Gentlemen, This is a rare man, (though I say it) and hath a thousand secrets
more, which next market day you shall have from his own plentiful mouth. He
hath done rare cures by natural Magic, Sympathies, and Antipathies; But this
is Heathen Greek to you: Who would have conceived that Sir Walter Raleighs
blood should have cured Goudomors Fistula in ano? But this is likewise Greek to
you: We'll leave these mysteries to the wise, and tell ye things according to
the measure of our apprehensions.

My Master had for taking a Corn out of the great Mogulls toe, -- 100.1.
sterling. For strengthening the Pr: of Orenge's back, 1000. Guilders. For curing
the Emperor of a Dropsy, 4000. Rx Dollars. For taking a black Cataract out of
his Holiness his left eye, -- 600. Checkeens. For curing Card: Richelieu of
the Kings evil, 800. French Crowns.

Well Gentlemen, to be short, My Master loves money woundly well, and so does
my Masters man. If therefore ye want any thing, grease my fist with a Tester or
two, and ye shall find it in your penny-worths. And why should not I cheat him
with as good a conscience, as he you?

But stay! We must have a parting song, before ye go. Sirrah, Jack, Rogue,
Boy, Hoe Jack!

O are you come, Sirrah! Sing these Gentlemen a song. Come, be nimble, 'Twill
be your own another day.

IS any sick? Is any sore
Oppressed with Qualms and fainting fits?
Or bound behind? Or loose before?
Has any Lover lost his wits?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We'll cure them all from top to toe,
Before, behind, above, below.
Is any heart oppressed with dolor?
Sullen, sad, or melancholy?
Ore-flowne with blood? inflamed with choler?
Or surcharged with Phlegm or folly?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We'll ease ye all, what ere ye feel,
Within, without, from head to heel.
Is any foul that would be fair?
Would Rav'ns appear as white as Lambs?
Has any Courtier lost his hair?
Or finds a crickling in his hams?
Let him draw near,
And make his griefs appear,
We'll cure all their wants throughout,
Above, below, within, without.
Has any Morpheus, Freckles, Staines,
Warts, or Wounds, or Wens, or Scar's?
Blisters, Botches, Biles, or Blanes,
Coughs, Consumptions, Colds, Catarrs?
Let them draw near,
And make their griefs appear,
We'll make them sound from bone to skin,
Above, below, without, within.
Chollicks, Fevers, Palseyes, Flux,
Cancers, Dropsies, nauseous Fumes?
Megrims, Skirvies, Cramps, or Cricks,
Iaundies, Rickets, Piles, or Rhumes?
Let them draw near,
And make their griefs appear,
We'll give them ease, and health restore,
Within, without, behind, before.

Tis a good Boy!


Now Gentlemen, you've heard the truth both sung and said, confirmed by fools
and children, who ye know speak truth. If after all this ye cannot believe, we
have lost our breath, and you the benefit.

But to confirm your Confidence, and to magnific the excellence of our skill,
I will present such visible demonstrations to your eye, that Doubt shall find
no ground to question, and Unbelief shall blush at her own infidelity. And
first,

Here is a Sovereign Balsam, that in the space of one minute and three
quarters, shall cure the deepest wound that dagger can inflict, whereof behold
sufficient proof.

Gentlemen, this wound which I have made, shall by the virtue of this Balsam
be as quickly cured.

So, now the blood retires unto his wonted veins, I feel the Orifice, which
even just now had room enough to lodge my finger, now closed, and smooth, and
flesh delivered from the sense of pain.

Secondly, here is an excellent Antidote, which taken, shall preserve the taker
from the injury of poison, hot or cold. As for example --

This ugly Spider here contains the rankest of all venom.
Now Gentlemen, I take my Antidote.
And now my Spider.
Tis gone! Fight Dog, fight Bear. Hem!
Poison do thy worst. Hah! Dost thou rejounce?
Thy power's curbed, and cannot work her end.
Needs fear no Foe, that hath so true a friend.
Thirdly, here's a sovereign Restoritive which shall correct the deadlyest
poison in the height of operation. See ye this swelling Toad, whose poison
taken shall swell ye till ye burst, And from the very Porch of Death this rare
Preservative shall soon redeem ye. Gentlemen, mark how I squeeze this mortal
bit into this Boule. Now Gallants, a Health to my Mistress.

Now pledge it that dare. Mark the operation, Hem! Hem! Hem! Now it begins to
work, O I am sick, my bowels gripe, I sweat, I burn, I burst --

O what a Julip breathes into my veins!
And how these strong Convulsions of my soul
Begin to loosen! How the loathsome Qualms
Of my obstructed stomach turns to ease
And appetite! O sovereign drop
How, how hast thou restored my dying life
With thy unvalued excellence, and lent
My tongue new power to call thee excellent!
Now, my Masters, you that delight in Chimestry, know also, my Master can show
you many rare Experiments. He says he can make the Philosophers Stone, but
saving his Reverence I think he lies, else he'd be hanged ere he'd thus Quack
for Testers.

But this upon my knowledge: he can bring an Artificial Resurrection, and
Vivification to Mercury, which being mortified into a thousand shapes, assumes
again its own Body, and returns to its numericall self. He can likewise
from the Ashes of a Plant, revive the Plant, and from its Cinders recall it to
the Stalk and Leaves again. Lastly, by the virtue of a thing called Wit, he
can do such wonders at Cribbage, or New-cut, that the experience thereof
shall teach ye more wisdom in an hour, then all the Volume of Thomas Aquinas
can afford you in ten days: Wherein if you please the next market day he shall
give you a plenary satisfaction, if you repair hither with purses to be
handled, and minds to be instructed.

Well Madge, though I pawn my Poppingay Petticoat for it, I'll have some of that
powder next market day.


What powder Cis?


That powder that will make Jack love Ione.


P'sh, I don't think 'twill work any such effect.


Yes Madge, as sure as I live. Doll our Dairy-maid gave some on it to Nick the
Butlers boy, and within an hour after the boy was so mad of her: He would
never let her alone, but dogged her from corner to corner, and would so tumble
her and so touse her: And when company was by her would so gloit and cast
sheeps eyes at her, as past. She could go no where but the boy would make one.
Sometimes he would bring her May-bushes, sometimes mellow-Apples, sometimes a
Busk-point, sometimes a Silk-lace. And if she spake but a kind word to him,
Lord, he would so simper, and so jemper, and so lick his lips, and so scratch
his elboe, as 'twas admirable.


Is't possible?


I tell thee Madge, I saw it with my own eyes, and thought the next time the
Mountebank came I'd buy some on it to see what mettle our Frank the Faulkner
was made on.


Why sirrah, he loves thee well enough without it: Would I know who loved me
half so well.


Yes verily, I confess I think he loves me dearly well, but yet not so dearly
as I'd have him. He's such a maidenly man! --


Why? I'm sure I saw him kiss thee twenty times together, to be sure so often
that my teeth watered soundly.


Twenty times? what's twenty times? what's that? 'Tis done before one can say
What's this? Twenty times? Tis a mighty piece of business. And then forsooth,
he must stroke his Hawke, And then forsooth he must feed his Hawke, and then
forsooth, he must bathe his Hawke, And then forsooth, he must lie down by his
Hawke, and see his Hawke pick her self, and prune her self, and there's such a
deal of fiddling, and such a deal of fadling, And then forsooth, he must go
abroad a hawking, and stay out all day, and then at night come home as weary as
his dogs, and sit without life or soul, That one has as much comfort in him as
comes to nothing.


Well Cis, would some body did but love me half so well, a that condition it
cost me a fall.


Goodly, goodly, would Antony at George were here to draw his name out a your
politic mouth, You are so close, and so wise now.


Why, I am not ashamed to name him, nor he of his name: Well, he has cost me
many a bitter sigh in his days, Yet I dare take my oath he's as honest a
young man as lives by bread.


Why dost thou sigh? He may leave his honesty when he will, and see ne'er a whit
the worse for it.


I care not, so he left it with no body but me; yet in the way of honesty too
(I tell ye but so:) Well, no body knows what I have endured for his sake; But
I may thank my modesty for it, and my Mother for that. She gave my a Rule
forsooth, once, which I have beshrew'd her for a thousand times.


What Rule was that, Madge?


She charged me, that when any sued for my love, I should be coy, and say
Noforsooth, and still Noforsooth, and Noforsooth, which I ha'done so long, that
I have almost Noforsooth'd away all my fortunes. But sirrah, (here's none but
Thee and I) I'll tell thee. This very day two months (well fare all good
tokens) Antony at the George would needs ha'me down into his Wine-celler, and
gave me a Pint of Brown-bastard; and being in a good humour, brake his mind to
me, And taking a glass of Wine, wished it might be his poison if he did not
love me with all his heart.


But did he drink it?


Every drop as I live; Nay more, would may ne'er store, if he offered not (I'll
tell it to thee) to fetch a Licence instantly, and marry me forthwith, if I'd
go with him; But I, like a puppinos'd fool, followed my Mothers directions,
and cried Noforsooth, to make him the more eager, which he taking in earnest,
flung away in a pet, and as I live, took me at my word, and never spake kindly
to me since: And this is the fruits of Noforsooth.


And were thou not served in thy kind, to be such an ass, to refuse a good
thing when 'twas offered?


Nay, Sirrah, See the luck on it; Had he but asked me once more, I had resolved
to ha'taken him at his word: But if he, or any other hereafter take Madge a
crying Noforsooth, I'll give him leave to bite off my tongue, and spit it in my
face, I tell ye but so.


Dost thou think he has forsaken thee upon it?


I can't tell: I ha'made many a frivolous errand to the George since, And when
he sees me, the Gentleman will bite his lip, and put off his hat, but as I
live, neither kiss me, nor nothing else, That I came away with a flea in mine
ear, and in a fustian Fret, and had such Qualms, and such Swamps come over my
stomach all night long --


But art not mightily troubled with him in thy dreams?


O, sirrah, abomination; There's ne'er a night scapes me, on my conscience:
Sometimes, methinks I see him twirling up his pretty little black beard:
sometimes stroking up his fore-top: sometimes singing that heavenly tune of
Walsingham to his Citterne: sometimes crying Anon Anon Sir, and running up
stairs: sometimes Very welcome Gentlemen, Is all paid i'th'Rose? which he
fetches up with such a grace -- As indeed every thing he does becomes him most
sweetly. O how I could curse this peevish tongue of mine for saying that last
Noforsooth. Ah! if he had asked me the Question but once more, verly I had been
to morrow two months gone: But who can help it?


Well Madge, our conditions are much alike: we must even comfort one another as
well as we can.


That's but cold comfort Cis: I but my case is thousand times worse then thine;
Thou may see him thou love every day, and dine together, and sup together,
and sleep together under the same roof; but I a poor forsaken creature must
waste my disconsolate hours in thinking, in sighing, and in [Weeps] sobbing.
Insomuch that I have not eaten a bit of bread that has done me any good these
three days. But yet I can't choose but laugh to think -- Ha, ha, ha, ha, how
Frank the Fawlkner -- Ha, ha, ha, ha, was caught in's Roguery last night, Ha,
ha, ha, ha.


How? Prithee tell me.


I think my heart will burst when I think on it. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Prithee tell me the conceit.


Sirrah, yesternight when thou were gone up with my Lady, Frank and I were
raking Husbands and Wives in the Embers, And Frank hearing the stayres creak,
and thinking thee had been coming down, caught my Lady fast by the -- Ha,
ha, ha, ha, middle; but she lent him such a whirrit upon the ear, that all the
house rung on it: But 'twould make a Horse break his Halter to see how like an
Ass poor Frank looked and sneakt away with his tail clapped between his legs,
Ha, ha, ha, ha, Did he not tell thee on it yet?


No verily, I see him not to day: Huds lifelykins, Alas poor heart, But 'tis
no matter: Let him keep home adays then, that he may see what he does, and
whom he embraces. But sirrah, now I think on it, I ha some a Dolls powder, which
I stole from her, Till we get more, let's try conclusions with that.


With all my heart, let's: But how shall we give it them?


How? Leave that to me: Frank and I will go to the George, and drink a pint
with Antony, and then we'll send for thee, And I warrant thee I'll spice their
Cups, and then

In spite of my mother, my grandam, my aunt,
We'll drink off our cups, and make a night on it.

A match! Come, let's way; we shall be both hanged for staying so long.


Artesio, Can you resolve us yet concerning the death of Pertenax?


Sir, he was opened, and we apparently find that he was poisoned.


Go Artesio, and comfort thy poor afflicted daughter, Let her know, that we
are partners in her forrow, and will be a husband to the widow, and take her
welfare into our protection.


Heaven bless your Highness.


Does there appear any new light by your Examination?


Sir, I find there was such a Letter counterfeited from your Highness, and a
silver Cup was delivered to Kettreena by a stranger, who after the delivery
instantly departed. Likewise I find that Pertenax coming in the nick, snatched
it from Kettreena's unwilling hand, and in a passion retired into a room, not
suffering her to follow him, where he was found dead an hour after.


Another Examinate faith, that he sent for a dram of Arsnick the night
before, but for what purpose the Examinate knows not.

Another Examinate, being one of his fervants, saith, that she harkening at the
door, did hear him say, that he would put in a dose of Arsnick into the Cup
for? Kettreena, which she saw him search in his pockets for; but being suddenly
called away by her Lady, stayed not to see the rest. And indeed it is generally
believed, that he was chief Agent in his own death.

Comodus, what account can you give us of this business?


Sir, we found in his pocket the Cup and the Letter, but no Arsnick: Upon
suspicion I examined Madam Lactusia, and one Cornelius Quack, once servant to
Artesio, who falter something in their examination, but deny any knowledge of
the proceedings: Only they both hear that Pertenax counterfeited the Letter,
to see with what Affection his Lady would receive it.


Even like enough, The just reward of a jealous brain.


But this she added, That when time should serve, she would discover a secret
of another nature, which will make such an alteration in the State, as Time
could not example: whereupon I committed them both to Prison till a farther
Examination.


'Twas wisely done.


See a firm Conveyance made of all Pertenax his Estate to our use, which we
freely give to Kettreena. And you Comodus, take a special care to call in her
debts that are upon Book and Specialties.


THe Devil a bit of meat have I gotten these nine days, but once a lean
scrag end of a Neck of Mutton, which one of my Masters Patients loathed to
eat: Else my whole diet hath been nothing but the overplus of thin
Physick-broth, and my drink, the heartless reversion of dis-curded Posset-Ale:
Insomuch, I had rather be my Masters Hang-man, then his Serving-man; For then
perchance I might get a Caft Suit, and a gratuity for a quick dispatch.


Sir, Is Master Doctor within? I have brought him a Urine.


From whom?


From my Lady Albion.


My Master is very busy, and cannot be spoken with these two hours.


Good Sir, my business is upon life and death: I pray bring me to him, and I
shall be very thankful.


How shall that appear?


By this small carnest of a greater Reward.


Well Sir, I shall make a trial. Albion.


Bring him in. Now friend, what's your business?


Sir, my Lady hath sent you her Urine, and desires your Advice.


Glisterpipe.


Sir.


Go air it.


Now I'd as lief he had bid me gone to supper, but take him in that fault,
hang him.


Has your Lady made no use of any other Doctor formerly?


Yes Sir, she took advice of a Scottish Doctor, but she is not much the better
for him: He drew a great deal of money from her Ladyship, who is now fain to
give him money to be rid on him -- Whisper.


Tis all but Peace, and tis not the first time my Master has had an eye to my
water.


Truly I cannot tel Sir.


This water shows no great defect in her Ladyships stomach.


His Doctorship may swear it.


Her Ladyship accustomes her self to too thin a diet, eats too much broth, and
too many Sillibubs.


Posset-Ale ye mean Sir, a halter stretch ye.


And does not encourage her stomach with good substantial meat.


Thanks to your miserable purse Sir, he would if he could get it.


Her Ladyships body is much out of order, and there's a Malignant
Hypocondriacall Flate within her, which fumes up, and disturbs her Head: Is she
not much troubled with the Head-ache?


Yes Sir, exceedingly: She complains of it every day.


She is likewise much troubled with inflammations, and obstructions in the
liver, which causes an inordinate swimming in the Brain, and giddiness. Is
she not apt now and then to speak idly?


O Sir, when the Fit takes her, she speaks never a word of sense: she talks of
nothing but Bishops, and Petitions, and I can't tell what, and her tongue runs
so wildly, and indeed I think she is scarce sensible sometimes of her own
sickness.


That proceeds altogether from the rude confluence of loose humours. I find by
her water, she is much troubled with wind and choler, which occasions a great
and frequent heart-burning: Is she not much subject to unaccustomed sadness at
times?


Extremely Sir.


I find she has a great imbeeility in her spirits natural, which causes in her
a general faintness, and now and then inclined to the Cardiaca Passio. Is she
not often possessed with sudden frights, and fears, and jealousies, and
mis-understandings?


Exceedingly Sir.


I find likewise, that she is much troubled with the Spleen, which occasions
stupidity, melancholy, and at times distractions? Is she not often in a brown
study?


Very much Sir.


Well, I fear we must be forced to draw some blood from her, which as the case
stands now with her, I should be loath to do. There is some bad blood in her
veins; but if a vein be once opened, the best blood in her body may chance to
pass too, which she can hardly spare, without palpable danger. Until I see
her, I can prescribe little. To morrow I shall wait upon her Ladyship, and what
I shall then find fitting, shall be carefully administered. In the mean while,
let her keep her head warm, and be very careful of her Temples: Let her
forbear Salt and Usquebagh: Let her use Moderation in her Exercises, wherein
she might not be forced to lift her arms too near her head: And for the
relieving of her drooping spirits let her recreate her self now and then with
a game at Irish: Ler her forbear Noddy, and Chess, as Games too serious.
Farewell.


Take this, Glisterpipe, to drink my Ladies health.


How odoriserous is a very stool! how sweet,
When full-cramm'd Purses, and crazed Bodies meet!
What? more Fees yet? Who's at door?

Pray is Mr. Doctor within?


From whom?


From my Lady Temple.


He cannot be spoken with as yet, unless --


I know your mind, Sir, let this quicken you.


Glisterpipe?


Sir.


Who's there?


One that would speak with your Honour from my Lady Temple.


Bring him in: Now friend, what's your business?


Sir, my Lady desires your Advice upon her Urine.


Glisterpipe, go chafe it.


So, there's a shilling more for Glisterpipe.


How long has your Lady been sick?


These three years, Sir: she took a tedious journey to Canterbury, where she
conceives she took a surfeit with too much Duck, which hath lain very heavy
upon her Ladyships stomach ever since.


This water shows a great diftemper in her principal Parts, which indeed sets
her whole Frame out of Order. Has she taken no Advice formerly?


Sir, she has had many Advisers, but men of mean quality, and of no skill at
all.


What were they?


Her poor Neighbours Sir, Cobblers, Weavers, Felt-makers, Coachmen, and Brewers
Clerks, who pretend a great deal of slovenly skill.


In good time! But what Doctors had she?


Some Doctors of very good worth, but this Rabble jeers them, and laughs them
out of doors.


I find by her Water she has a foul Liver, can digest no wholesome food: And
her first digestion being bad, makes her second worse: Is she not apt to
frights?


Sir, her Ladyships stomach was prettily well purged of her Canterbury Duck,
and being finely at ease, and laid to rest, a rude company of cock-brain'd
Rascals in an humour beset her house, and brake down all her Glasse-windowes,
and put her into such a fright, that she has been the worse for it ever since.


I find by her water, there has been too sudden Alterations in her
constitution: Is she not sometimes very hot, and sometimes very cold?


Yes Sir, sometimes as cold as Charity, sometimes as hot as Zeal.


I find obnoxious fumes rising from her stomach, and stupefying her brain: Is
she not at times very drowsy?


Yes Sir, Insomuch that the common people think she is troubled with a
Liturgic.


A Lethargy you mean. It is a Chronicall disease, and time must cure it. But
let her know, that so long as she entertains this rude Rabble of unsanctified
Mechanics, She can never prosper in her health. Till she banish them, there
will be no room for me. Fare ye well.

But hear ye. Let her Fasting be frequent, and her Prayers, Common.


Sir, I shall pray for your Ladies health.


Fast too.


A fair Reward! Tis Supper time: I'll hence. My Pater Nosters shall be like her
Pence.


1. Great Apollo, we adore thee.
2. We importune, we implore thee.
2. Thus we prostrate fall before thee.

1. Sacred Phebus draw thee nigher.
2. Grant the boon that we desire.
3. And resent our. holy Fire.

1. Thou before whose open eye
2. All unshadowed secrets lye,
3. Clear our doubts, and make reply.

1. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Bellarmo wear the Crown?

Apollo lies: This is the Oracle I appeal to.

On pain of death, keep silence there. Proceed.
2. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Palladius were the Crown?

Nay now Apollo's ignorant or unjust.

Silence once more. The next disturberdies. Proceed.
3. When Evaldus shall lay down,
Shall Museus wear the Crown?
1 When Evaldus shall lay down,
2 3 Whose head then shall wear the Crown?

The Babe unborn shall end the strife,
Whose Mother is both Widow, Maid, and Wife.

The Oracle speaks Treason, and Apollo's Priests
Are all Impostors --

Are we all safe? Are we not all consumed?

Bellarmo's stricken dead.

He's in a trance, O chafe his Temples!

Ye stand too close, Bear back, give him air.

Palladius.

Bend him, O bend him forwards.

He's past recovery.

I feel no Pulse.

Her eyes are open.

Methinks I feel some breath.

Stand by.

Are they all dead Artesio?

All three as dead as earth.

O unexampled Justice! Who can stand
Before the power of great Apollo's hand?
Augusta, let's away; Our flight may escape
Approaching after-claps: Augusta, come.
What, fallen asleep?

The Queen is in a Trance.

Augusta.

Heaven bless the Queen.

She stirs not.

She breathes not.

Make room, Stand farther off.

O she is dead, Is any hope of life?

Sir none at all.

Augusta, dear Augusta, speak,
Move but a finger: O she's past all cure!

But where's her Crown?

Look here, upon Kettreena's head.

How came it thither?

Most Royal Sir, How this Crown came here
I cannot tell: Excuse me gracious Prince,
Who humbly lay it at your sacred feet.

Kettreena, keep it for us; keep it safe,
Till we require it, and dispose thereof.
Apollo's will must be, who give us patience
To bear his punishments: Take up the dead,
And let us see them all bestowed, and laid
In the sad Clofets of eternal rest.

Would may never swear if I had not rather ferve the great Turk in his
Galleys, then a Court Lady in her humours.


Sirrah, how the poor wenches trembled when we made them stay the other pint. But
is my Lady so strict Frank?


O she's a pestilent vixen when she's angry, and as proud as Lucifer. She has
been to me knowledge a whole hour by the Houre-glasse making Faces in a
Looking-glasse. Sometimes putting out the nether lip, sometimes bridling in
the chin; sometimes forming of a smile, sometimes figging up her cheeks,
sometimes kissing of her white hand, sometimes practising a new French Curtsy.
And then Cis must be called, and then her Ladyships hair must be crispt, and
then her Ladyships face must be complexioned, and then her Ladyships teeth must
be scaled, and then her Ladyships brows must be mullited, and then her
Ladyships Turkie-egge must be eaten with a good grace. And then her Ladyships
foysting dog must be combed, and then Cis must be sent for this dressing, and
for that petticoat, and Madge must be employed for that plain Hankercher, and
then for that purled Gorget which Cis was filling all last night. Then fault
must be found, then Cis must be chidden, and Madge must be rated: And her
sullen Ladyship must keep her chamber all day, and at night her peevish
Ladyship must be sick and go to rest. Then at Midnight Cis must be called to
kill the Flea that keeps her Ladyship from sleeping forsooth. Then Cis must slip
on her petticoat to see if the Hall-doore be shut, then down again to rate
the dogs, then down again to fetch her Ladyship some Beer. Then Cis must
look under the Bed; after that into the Closer, to see if there be ne'er a Cat
to break her Ladyships Glasses. Insomuch that I hold it the greatest misery
in the world, next being a Lady, to be a Chambermaid. But I must away. Tony,
farewell.


Nay Frank, we'll have one sresh pint to drink Madge and Cis's Healths before
we part.


But Tony, Tony, Tony, let it alone, for tis Hawking time; My Hawk has been
empty pannel'd these three hours.


I come, I come, presently, presently.
Hang Hawks, we'll have one pint.
By and by, By and by, I come I come.

Prithee Tony be nimble then.

Now had I as lief go a hanging as a hawking -- Whatsoere the matter is, I
ha'no mind to that sport. I'd rather have Cis in my arms, then a leash a
Partridges in my poutch: Tis a feat Girl. O that this were my marriage day! on
that condition I went barefoot to bed. Pretty Rogue! Well, I'm resolved, what
ere come on it, I will marry and I must marry, and I will marry ere two days
come to an end. Let my Lady get her a new Fawlconer, or eat Mutton if she
please. O Mutton, Mutton, Mutton! Well, I must marry, and I will marry; To day
I receive my wages, and to morrow I'll buy a Licence, and next day Cis and I'll
clap hands, And hey! then up go we.


Here Frank, a Health to Cis.


Come, I'll pledge't, were it a mile to the bottom. Tony, fill me a cup: A Health
to Madge.


Come away: Madge shall never go unpledg'd whilst I am worth a Pint, nor never
want while I am worth a penny.


Thou art grown wondrous kind to day, Tony.


I think the Moone's in the Hotti-totty, and all the loving Planicles are in
Conjunction. Sirrah, I am so strangely taken within these two hours, that I
ha'much ado to keep my self honest.


Hudds Wookers, I'm in the same Predicature Tony. My Stars lend me honesty
enough to light me to bed, and keep Cis out of my way. But tell me, how likest
thou Cis?


Hougely well I perrest. As I live, tis a dainty Girl: She speaks so wisely
and her words are so well placed, and she lisps so prettily, and so thweetely,
And sirrah they say that lithping wenches are good to kith. Now tell me thy
opinion of Madge.


I tell thee Tony, she's as good a creature as ever lived in a house, and as
well beloved of the servants. Thou shalt have a dainty huswife, and an
excellent Starcher, and one that my Master respects above all the rest. If his
Band be to be pinned, no body can please him but Madge; When his Corns are to
be cut, none must do it but Madge. If his Cuffe-strings are to be tied, none can
tie 'em but Madge. When his Muskadine and Eggs are to be prepared, none can
please him but Madge: When his head aches, Madge must hold it: If his back itch,
Madge must scratch it: And to her credit be it spoken, he swears, for a Foot,
and a Leg, and a dainty black eye, and a white smooth skin, and a --


No more good Frank, thou make me mad. My Stars lend me but honesty enough
till I have opportunity to lose it.


And me but patience till Thursday.


Why Thursday?


If I breathe, Cis and I'll have a marriage day ont.


Say thou me so? Art in carnest? Give me thy hand.


I, as sure as this is flesh, and blood, knuckles.


If Madge and I don't the like (if she be as willing as I) hang Tony. But
shall's marry in our old Clothes?


Huds diggers, I'd not stay till Friday for the Kings Wardrobe.


A match then! Give me thy clutch, Bring them bither a Thursday morning, by
break a day, and we'll dispatch the business before the Crow peace. Now Frank,
here's a Health to the happy day.


Let it come, boy.
Here's another to the happy night.

Come away.
Anon, anon, presently, presently.
Farewell Frank.

Tony farewell, and remember --

Very very welcome, Gentlemen.
A pint a Canary in the Lyon, Skore!

I cannot rest, Artesio, till I purge
This groaning Land of Pertenax his blood.

See, here the Prisoners.

Mercy, O mercy, gracious Prince.

Mercy, dread Sovereign, mercy.

Wretches; The way to Mercy, is Confession.
Speak truth, Are ye guilty of this murder?

Most gracious Prince, I was no Actor in it.

Nor I Contriver, may it please your grace.

No, She contrived, and He acted it.

Speak, is it so? Come speak the truth.

True gracious Sovereign, but we hope for mercy from your gracious hands.


Say, what Confederates had ye?

May it please your Grace, Lactusia set me on.

Trippit first called me in.

She has her punishment: Who writ the Letter?

The Queen, most Royal Sir.

Who promised on her Royal faith to stand 'twixt me and danger. Sir, for her
dear sake be gracious,


O marble hearts, to plot so vile a fact
Against such Dove-like Innocence as this.

Well, take them hence, and see due Justice done
According to our Laws, whereof we charge
A present Execution.
Mercy, O Mercy. Tis the first offence.
Be gracious to us. Mercy, mercy.

Officers, Away with them.

Since Heaven hath pleased to deprive us thus
Of our dear Consort, our beloved Queen,
We think it fit, to let our people know
That we have made a second choice, to cafe
The weighty Burden of our careful Crown.
Kettreena, bring the Crown.
And for thy pains,
We here accept thee for our lawful Spouse,
To be our Consort in Augusta's stead:
In pledge whereof we crown thy Royal head.
Dost thou consent Kettreena?
Be pleased most Royal Sir to Give me leave to disburden my conscience of a
secret that concerns the State.


Speak on.

Sir, Augusta was no lawful Queen.

The woman's mad.

Away with her.

Good Sir be pleased to hear me out.

Speak on, speak on.

Kettreena was the lawful Queen, whom newly borne, I then her Nurse,
exchanged for Augusta your late wife, who was no other but Artesio's daughter.


Enticed by him I did it, unto which
He did corrupt me with a great reward.
That this is truth, I seal it with my blood.
Artesio, is't not so?
Artesio speak. What say to this?

Sir I'm a dying man, if not by Law, by age.
I, whom my frozen blood denies to blush,
Must not be bold to lye.

I'm likely to have a fine pull of this.

Lactusia speaks but truth: The Act's confessed.

Are my hopes come to this?

My life or death lies in Kettreena's breast.

Officers conduct the Prisoners back, and stay
Their execution till you farther hear:
If this be so, Evaldus must resign
Both place and Crown,
And now an humble Subject join

With all the rest, and say, LONG LIVE OUR QUEEN KETTREENA.


And now Museus may go hang himself.

Being thus ordained by heavenly powers to wear
The facred Crown of unexpected Care;
And well advising, what great danger waits
Upon the Scepters of ungoverned States:
Conscious of too much weakness to command
So great a Kingdom with a single hand:
We're pleased to choose a Consort, in whose care
The Realm hath prospered, and to whom we dare
Commit our self and it.
Evaldus, to requite thy charge, we choose
Thee our dear Husband, and with sacred vows
We make thee partner in our unknown bed,
And set this Crown Imperial on thy head.
And let the tongues of our good Subjects ring
Loud peals of joy,

LONG LIVE EVALDUS KING.

Two Crowns have blessed Evaldus in one hour.
This crowns my heart with joy:

This crowns my head with power.
Fair Queen, Artesio's punishment we leave
To thy dispose.
The personal offence we freely pardon;
But for the public wrong, we must confine him.

And left that after-Ages
Should interrupt the right of true succession,
We charge Museus to the self-same place:
Where they shall want for nothing, but enjoy
(Excepting Freedom) their own hearts desires.
Mean while, what Art, and Industry can do
T'expresse our joys, and Subjects full content,
Let not be wanting: Let us bend our care
T'advance a public mirth, and to prepare
Such Triumphs, whose bright Honour might display
A panick joy, and glorify the day
Of Marriage-Royall, solemnised between
New-crown'd Evaldus, and his Royal Queen.


