AS young and spotless Virgins who appear
Cloystred in modesty and clothed with fear:
Who blush at hearing of a Man but named,
And think they're by one wanton word defamed,
The more they curb their blood and check desire,
The more their Veins boil with a secret fire:
Which with such heat does Honours Fort assail,
The Tyrint Nature must at length prevail.
Love does alas! their tender breasts invade,
And by themselves they are themselves betrayed.
Forgetful grewn at once of fear and shame,
Their former coyness do sincrease their blame.
So though our Poet all his powers opposed,
And seemed unwilling to become exposed,
Struggled with doubts, was fearful to be stung
With the lawd touch of every Critic tongue;
Yet the fierce humour did so fast encroach,
He's fallen at last into a French debauch,
Just in the nick of time, when you decry
That Nations Wit, and damn their Poetry.
What may is there now left him to prevent
The smart^st doom your Censures can invent?
He knows too well you can't with Plays dispense
That have no Ornament but plot and Sense;
That every little Scene that is not full
Of G^how looks impotent and dull:
Theref^ (...) all the blame on Frailties score,
Hoping you^ pardon one ne'er sinned before.
And (...) consider, to oblige you to it,
'Twas hopes to please made him turn prostitute.

YOur Griefs with mine such weak resemblance bear,
That they, Albina, scarce deserve a Tear.

You to my sorrows the due sense deny,
If you think yours can be more just or high.

For brave Agrippa, murdered, you may claim
A Sisters grief; I have a Lovers flame.

By my sole Brothers loss my sufferings are
More cruel, that they are without repair.
You to your Mournings justly may give end:
The Prince for you a passion does pretend;
And those bright Eyes make you the Mistress known
Of many Loves. My Brother was but one.

I many had, e're by the Tyrant crossed;
But loved but one Albina, and he's lost. --
-- The King before that he your Brother slew,
Studied to please, and talked of Love to you;
And now your duty does oblige your hate.
A Brothers loss may'nt all your griefs create.

Suspect me not of crimes so poor and base,
That murder, in my heart left him no place;
And sullied with our Blood, he does appear
Too horrible to have Dominion there.
Since now the Tyrant to these Courts returned,
My heart with a renewing rage has burned:
And though just anger may oppress your mind,
Compared with mine, your Troubles are but kind.
Tis now a year since my dear Brother's dead:
You may be comforted, and Custom plead.

Speak for your self: I find a Lovers loss
Is than a Brothers much the weightyer Cross.
The Charms of Love more tender are than those
Which Nature does within our Breasts dispose:
Those Transports of Our blood their Limits have
In grief, which seldom travels past the Grave.
Who has no Brother, can no Sister be;
Nature is stopped, and Reason sets you free:
But Love! which from some heavenly fire takes birth,
Preserves its flame still, though the Lover's Earth.

But to augment, and raise my passion higher,
My Interest with my Nature does conspire.
Alas! My Brother did not only dye,
But all the hopes of Our poor Family:
We from the ancient Alban Kings descend,
Though too far off advantage to pretend;
You touch the Throne, and Fortune once may prove
A Salve to all these Rigours of your Love.

Whilst Love not Fortune triumphs in my Breast,
Crowns will not quiet, but disturb my Rest:
For since all that on Earth I loved lies slain,
Pomp must be grievous, and a Sceptre pain.
After Mezentius, and this Tiberine,
'Tis true, the Crown is by my Birthright mine.
But he who now that high degree makes good,
Sullyes by Crimes his Sceptre, and our Blood;
His faults have all AEneas actions stained,
And lost those glories Alba once had gained.
Agrippa's Murder, who by him did fall,
As 'twas his last, so 'twas his greatest of all:
A Prince of his own blood, in whom there shone
That Loyal Zeal, that did support his Throne;
And yet before his wretched Fathers eyes
Stabbed by that Tyrants hand, this Hero dyes;
Guilty of no Offence, no other Sin,
But that he did too much resemble him.
A Crime so bloody, it has banished quite
All that over me he could pretend of right.
All due respects to him I've from me thrown,
And neither Kindred nor Allegiance own;
And 'tis but just that Murderer should prove
The due resentments of incensed Love.
But who comes there?

Farewell, It is the Prince,
Whose love to you I'm sure will wish me hence.

You see the Fruits of all your cares for me;
When you approach, those I delight in, flee.

If 'twere for me Albina left the place,
I did an object of your sorrows chase.

That Tyrant's Nephew causes all my grief,
Sure then can vainly hope to bring relief.

Princess, you too severely make him bear
The punishment had in the crime no share.
Had I with my own hands your Lover slain,
Could you have treated me with more disdain?

And tell me, how I may be well assured,
Twas not your Jealousy, his death procured.
The King against him had no cause at all;
His Arm might borrowed be to act his fall.
But I must doubt, lest my Agrippa prove
A Sacrifice to yours, his Rivals love.

The King at large too often has declared,
That he the greatness of your Lover feared:
That having raised him to so vast a height,
Might make him crush the Sceptre with his weight,
Before fit time should give him leave to do
What their resemblance well might prompt him to.
He by removing him, pulled out those stings
Which fret and gall the breasts of jealous Kings,
For Nature had their several forms contrived
So exactly like, as cannot be believed:
My near Alliance scarce could make me know
To which of them I did Allegiance owe.

'Tis certain Nature did in them forget
Those different stamps she on her works does set;
For she had formed their bodies so the same,
As if they had been Moulded in one Frame.
But that Distinction which we could not find
In the outward man, was blazon'd in the mind.
And Nature though she had forgetful been
To speak without, had wrote at large within.
Agrippa had a Soul, as great and high
As is the Tyrant's full of Treachery.
And from that dissimilitude was found
In the inward man, my Love received his Wound.

Your Anger's just, and your resentment brave
The King himself appears a sense to have
Of's fault to you: For when we first did meet,
Scarce did he me with due Embraces greet,
But asked for you; and I could scarcely breath
Your ceaseless Sorrows for Agrippa's death,
But his Concern I by his paleness knew.
At last he said, he'd see and comfort you.

Oh Heavens! That is the worst that I could fear.
Dares that Wild Tyrant in my sight appear,
And to those Horrors I conceived before,
Bring his hand purpl'd in that precious Gore?

To gratify your hate in his first fight,
A Fatal Dart upon that hand did light;
By which the Destinies did let him know
What injured you, could not unpunished go.

The Gods, who still revenge the Innocent,
Have That, an earnest of your Vengeance sent:
They pierced his hand, but only made that Dart
Fore-run the Thunder that must pierce his heart;
Even you, who in his barbarous thoughts delight,
Whom Crimes do more to him, than blood unite,
May fear the Gods, lest they in anger do
Extend their Vengeance and their Darts to you.
But faithless man, your glory in your Ill.

If I were faithless, I am not so still;
I am convinced; Your beauties make me know,
That to Divinities we Incense owe:
Your powerful Charms do with such lustre shine,
They force belief there must be powers Divine.
For had I doubted all our Gods were lies,
I had become a Convert from those eyes:
At least, if all the rest I should disown,
Yet love in them, would make his power be known.

You plead in vain, Prince, for Agrippa's slain:
All thoughts of Love will but increase my pain.
Nature in his Composure took such care,
She fixed all could allure or charm me there:
Which Love improving, did create a flame,
To which a constant Votaress I became.
We once owe Love our hearts in Sacrifice,
And 'twould be Tyranny to ask them twice.

Ah Princess! this is too much cruelty.
I cannot doubt your Love to him, whilst I
Am that sad Object of your rigour made,
That from your breast I'm banished by his shade.
Why with my Love, should you increase your hate?

Cease then to Love.

'Tis not within my Fate.
Rather your Indignation still proclaim,
Than once command me to desist my flame.
For though those eyes with death should wound my heart,
They'd yet yield pleasure to exceed the smart.
To different ends we were by Fate designed;
I born to Love, and you to be unkind.
But see, Alas! You from me turn your eyes,
And weary of my sight, my Sighs despise.

Behold the wretched Father of my Love,
Whose steps (as winged with haste or wonder) move!

I beg your pardon Sir, if I seem rude;
Business of weight does make me thus intrude:
I to the Princess fatal Tidings bring,
That instantly she must expect the King.

Now Prince, if of my griefs you have a sense,
Be you against this Torment my defence:
And by some Art endeavour to prevent
That sight will prove so great a punishment.

I know so well what to my Love is due,
That my desires are winged to pleasure you.

The Prince in vain does his Obedience show;
I too well, Madam, do the Tyrant know.
His perverse Soul in its desire persists,
And will grow furious against what resists.
You by retirement better may defend
You from his sight; unless he does intend
A force; which yet I think he dares not do:
He fears the People, whom he knows love you.

But then for you.

Alas! what can I doubt?
The choicest of my blood he has let out.
That which remains is scarcely worth my care:
And I am too unhappy now to fear.
I'd let him know who 'twas he did destroy:
But -- here he comes -- pray Madam now withdraw.

Urge me no more, the Princess I will see.

Go you, take order all things fitted be,
That we may render to the Gods due Grace
For having by my Cares restored our Peace.

All else depart -- Let none come in before
That I return. -- How, have they shut the door?

Yes Sir, and 'tis by my Advice 'tis done.

Father!

I scarcely know thee for my Son:
But we're alone, and may discourse at large;
Seek thou Lavinia against my express Charge?
Received thou not the Sceptre from my hand,
That thou so soon forget my strict Command?
Or dost thou not remember that by me
'Tis thou enjoy'st this Sovereign Dignity?
That I have thee to all this greatness brought?

I have forgot nothing of what I ought;
How (to preserve the Frontier Towns from Wast,)
When Tiberinus to his Camp made hast,
Having but Us, and three more in his Train,
Passing the Albula, then swoln with Rain,
Its Streams did with such fury him invade,
That there he perished, maugre all our aid.
There you that Sceptre gave, which now I hold,
And from our near resemblance, made me bold
To personate the King; and did entice
His Followers to join in our device.
And whilst I under his assumed Name,
With their Aids, Master of the Camp became.
You hither Tidings of my Death did bring,
And with my Murder did accuse the King.

But when to keep this our Contrivance close,
I things in such good order did dispose,
To sum up all, this strict Command I gave,
(Your Empire, your Life, and mine to save)
That you your power should against your passion prove,
And study to forget Lavinia's Love.
And yet no sooner do you here return,
But I behold you with fresh Passions burn;
And for your Love, that desperate hazard run,
It must the ruin of your power become.
For whilst you think to act a Lovers part,
In the Kings face, you'll show Agrippa's Heart.
You on the Throne should strive to quench this Flame,
And in your Soul, should now begin to reign.
Be King indeed, and know how to suppress --

To be a King Sir, must one love the less?
Swaying a Sceptre, must I sense disown?
Or can you think Love mounts not to the Throne?
That Kings unto this God do nothing owe,
Or that all Empires unto him don't bow?

That fondling Love, and its Chimaera's are
Toys fit for breasts exempt from Nobler care.
To supreme power it too much weakness brings;
For greatness should be the sole love of Kings.
Disclaim your Error then, and do, my Son,
What Tiberinus would himself have done.

He loved my Sister; should I do so too,
And an incestuous Marriage-Bed pursue?

No; Other Crimes I should in thee detest,
Only admit Ambition in your breast:
For Scepters good, should be by Great o're-sway'd;
A Crown alone, could make me thus persuade.

Can't this Ambition with my Flame dispense?
Lavinia, Sir, has charmed all my Sense.
Let then my Sceptre to her Love appeal.
What if I should the whole to her reveal?

She's young, a Woman, and her talk may harm.
Trust you to me, all else does me alarm.
And just cause of Suspicion I find,
Both from the Princess Love, and your own Mind.
Lovers are bold, and Love is indiscreet;
Nature's more close, and for these cares more meet.
For though Lavinia silence knew, she may
When she knows you, her Love to you betray.
And then to all the world it would appear,
That you her Lover, not the Tyrant were:
Keep you your Crown then; and let this suffice,
She sells her hatred at so vast a Price.

Alas! the Price in my esteem runs low.
You of a Sceptre don't the troubles know.
For since in these Ambitious ways you lead,
And an unwilling Crown fixed on this head,
I have not found that true Felicity,
Nor those vain sweets wherewith you flattred me.
The Heavens daily threaten, Those that were
Witnesses of his death whose name I bear,
And did assist me in this glorious rise;
In the first Fight did fall before my eyes.
Whose Tragedy whilst pitying, yet I viewed
A Dart in its own blood this hand imbru'd.
As if to it Heaven justly sent that pain,
For the stolen Sceptre, which it durst sustain.

Fear not the Gods, they in your Favour strike:
For whilst to Tiberinus you're so like,
The Gods propitious were in slaying those,
Who only could your borrowed Name disclose.
That wounded hand too, ha's a kindness done;
For by your writing else you had been known.
Those strokes of Heaven therefore favours were;
By them you hold a Kingdom without fear.
And to your Glory Fate adds what remained;
You Victory on Victory have gained.
The War-like Rutuli, with your own hand
You have overcome, and forced a peace demand.
And if you think you do Mezentius wrong,
To whom by Birth the Sceptre does belong;
The same just Heaven, that seats you in the place,
Him from the Throne does for his Vices chase:
Who blackened with a thousand Crimes does dare
Even Heaven it self; nor would his own blood spare,
But had the sum of all Attempts contrived,
And Tiberinus of his Realm deprived,
Had not Lavinia's Beauty gained the Field,
And to his Love made his Ambition yield.
Reign you then so, as to deserve that Crown
From which by Heaven Mezentius is thrown down.
And since that Kings of Gods the Image bear,
Let the resemblance in your Acts appear.

Mezentius may change Manners in the Throne;
Why should we with his Crimes his right disown,
Sullyed with Murder, Blood, and Treachery?
He's of AEneas Race.

And are not We?
That blood of the Gods AEneas to his Race
Transmits, Mezentius does by Crimes efface:
Whilst in our Veins (though not allied so near,)
That heavenly Blood flows in a Stream more clear.
He makes a Mock of Laws and Sacred right,
And Titan-like, against the Gods does fight,
Who thus incensed, have made choice of you,
To snatch from him that Sceptre was his due.
Then since those Powers their Vengeance to extend,
Have thought it fit, that you your Arm should lend:
When they will give, refuse not you a Throne;
But from their Justice your Advancement own.

Accommodate the Sceptre to my Flame;
Let me but love, and I consent to reign.

Loving Lavinia, you your Crown may loose:
If you must love, you may some other choose.

Than her I cannot one more worthy find.

A Crown would be so to a gallant mind.

Whilst I my Love, you your Ambition prize;
We cannot both, Sir, see with the same eyes.
The Sceptre never did me farther please,
Than whilst it to my Jealousy gave ease.
Mezentius Rivals me, and were he King,
I fear his power might his contentment bring.

Let him his Love, do you preserve his Throne.

With the Kings name let me my passion own.

Under that odious Name you'll be despised.

Ah! how such cruelty is to be prized!
Lavinia's Love will best to me appear,
Under that false name of my Murderer.
Her greatest rigour will allay my pain;
And I shall prove his faith by her disdain.
Whilst I my Rival and my Murderer seem,
I all her scorns for favours must esteem:
And whilst this way her kindness I improve,
Her hate will be the touch-stone of her Love.

Flatter your self then with so strange a Fate;
Mourning her Love, rejoice to have her Hate.
Try thus how far for you her heart is moved,
And by her anger prove how you're beloved.
-- I have some Secrets of more weight, but here
Too long discourse 'twixt us suspicious were.
When the Kings Body I drew from the flood,
Alone I laid it on the pile of wood;
And knew so well to weep for you my Son,
That by my misplaced passion overcome,
The Factions of the Kingdom were betrayed,
And me a partner in their plots have made.
That we may meet, feign you will have my head,
And let me prisoner to the Fort be lead;
By which you all suspicions may prevent,
Yet learn the Name of every discontent.
Now let your Anger against me grow high;
Pronounce it me that made the Princess fly;
And in fierce fury charge me that I do
No more approach Lavinia nor you.

Must I this forfeit of my duty make?

I well can brook it when a Crown's at stake;
Nay rather beg so useful a disdain:
'Tis my sole glory, that I see you reign.

THis Palace, Madam, should methinks renew
Those griefs are to your brothers murder due.
Why visit you this object of your wo?

It is to see the Princess that I go.
Julia, We long have been by friendship tied:
But since my brother and her lover died,
Griefs do unite us, and our Mutual care
Finds some refreshments in each others share.
Mezentius presence drove me hence this day;
But chasing me, chased not my griefs away;
Which thousand Accidents now swell so high,
That sinking under them I run to try
If our condoling can some ease procure.
But see, against Custom, they have shut the door.

The King it may be hearing how she mourned,
Is gone to visit her, and not returned.

If so, I'll stay, and with a fury armed
Too strong to be by past endearments charmed.
I will reproach him with my brothers blood,
And in a passion not to be withstood.
I will -- but O Gods! May I tell thee so?

What should you fear? doubt you to let me know
That your just hatred for your brothers fate
Makes you --

I tremble but to think I hate,

And can Agrippa's murderer still find
A calm reception, Madam, in your mind?

I fear it, Julia, and would fain to thee
Disclose my doubts, that thou may counsel me.
-- Oh! -- How that Tyrant once to me was dear!

Consider, now he is a Murderer;
That of a brother he has you deprived.

I, and of more than is by thee believed.
His Tyranny, to act a double part,
Ravished at once my brother and his heart.
For since the date of that foul Cruelty,
He ha's not made the least address to me:
But through our race his rigour to improve,
He with my brother Massacred his Love.

Me thinks all grief's to that brave brother due.

That I esteemed him dear, Heaven knows 'tis true.
Never in any Sisters soul did move
A Purer kindness, or sincerer love;
And that to perfect, Natures self assaid,
When him so like to what I loved she made.
I truly prized him, Julia, and my eyes
Pay to his fall a daily Sacrifice.
But when in his, my Lovers face appears,
I must confess he robs him of some tears.
That Tyrant in my heart bears yet such sway,
Though he exacts not, I am forced to pay;
And with some sighs I to my duty owe,
Let drop some tears I from my passion flow:
Or would I from my soul that false one chase,
For tears of sorrow, tears of spite take place.
Thus Love crept in my heart, like a bold thy f,
With Nature and my Duty shares my grief.

Remember, Madam, to engage your hate;
Those Cruelties your Father does relate.

In vain my Father now my hate would move,
Since 'twas by his Command I first did love:
It takes from it all blemish of a Crime,
Since 'twas his orders did my Love enjoin;
And we more readily our selves dispose
To Loves commands, than those that Love oppose.
Duty and Custom blew in me that fire
Which when it once flames up to a desire,
Julia, we that soft sweetness in it find,
'Tis hardly banished the severest mind.

You shall not from me that complacence win,
To make me flatter you into a sin.
I should betray you, should I sooth your flame.

I asked you counsel, to oppose the same.

To make so Tyrannous a passion bow,
You must --

My Father comes; say no more now.

Gods! against this Tyrant have I no relief?
Come, my Albina, share thy Fathers grief.

Sir, from what cause does this fresh trouble spring?

A new affront received from the King.
But Julia, see there be no spies in place;
Anger won't let me whisper my disgrace:
And when a Tyrant's minded to destroy,
To make just reason death, he'll find a Law.
The Princess did his sight with scorn reject;
And having met me here, he does suspect
That I incensed her to it, and has swore
That I shall die, if ere I se here more.
Thy Brothers blood cannot suffice his rage,
But to his blooming youth he'll add my age.
For to his thirst no blood of ours will bring
Allay, unless he drink it from the Spring.
There are, Alas! in life no charms I prize;
Only in weeping I employ these eyes:
But seeing thee so young, 'tis for thy sake,
If to preserve this life some care I take.

Since he the Princess sight does only bar,
Vouchsafe Sir for your life to take this care:
Or if you see her, you may yet engage
Her to admit the King, to calm his rage:
And lest his fury should on you reflect,
Persuade her flatter him with false respect.

Shall I oblige her then to sooth his flame?

His flame, Sir!

Yes, he now declared the same,
Hoping alone he might the Princess see.
Finding a stop, and there perceiving me,
In height of rage and passion he revealed
He had for her a secret flame concealed;
And that my Son a sacrifice did prove
Not to suspected likeness, but to Love:
That jealousy in state was made the show,
But jealousy in Love did reach the blow.
And would thou have me then with my own breath
Go blow that fire that gave Agrippa death?
Or to preserve my Life so little dear,
Procure his Mistress for his Murderer?

That were an infamy too base for you,
And what I'd sooner have you die than do:
No, rather, Sir, go and incense her more;
Add horror to the hate conceived before.

'Tis that which now I did consult to do.

Her sight, Sir, may prove dangerous to you:
Secure of the Kings threats I may her see.
Leave, if you please, the care of it to me.

Albina go, act, urge, move every hinge
To raise her Soul to hatred and revenge.

My Answer by obedience I return --
Oh, Julia, how with rage my heart does burn!
Amidst these griefs I yet have this delight,
To gratify my Father and my spite,
If now Lavinia will but credit me.
See her door opes. -- Some one comes forth -- 'Tis she.

I was, Albina, coming to see you,
To tell you of a grief as bold as new:
Fierce Tiberinus yet besmeared in blood,
Would have seen me, and scarce would be withstood.
Who all that I thought dear with's own hand slew,
Would expose me to the horror of his view.

His barbarous fury, Madam, higher flies,
Than to present himself before your eyes:
That were but little, durst he do no more?

What can he do?

He does those eyes adore.

Heavens! shall he dare this, and be Thunder-free?

My Father just now, Madam, told it me;
From whom (but that a strict Command has barred
Him from your sight) you might the same have heard.
We to his flame my Brothers Murder owe.

Thy Brother's self did not my passion know:
For whilst he lived, a humour too severe
To let the least complacent thought appear,
My Love to him from all the world concealed.

To such a Rival 'twould be soon revealed:
He through the perspective of passion pried,
Surveyed each look, and so much Love espi'd,
That if my Brother be a wandering shade,
It was your kindness him to Fate betrayed.
This fatal fire which now appears to blaze,
Ha's stopped his breath, and smothered up his days;
And brave Agrippa in a flame did die,
Which unperceived was kindled at your eye.
Here does the Tyrant's cruelty appear;
Part in your Lovers death he'll make you bear:
For offering him unto his jealous rage,
He does your Love with his own crime engage.

You such Impressions on my Soul have laid,
Trembling and Horror every sense invade.
But, bloody Tyrant, thou th'effects shalt find.

Anger well placed does grace a noble mind.
For hate to him can never be severe;
And 'tis but justice to incense you here.
Then since his crime did from his passion spring,
What did the fault, let the chastisement bring.
Whilst you disdain and scorn upon him throw,
You make him wretched, who hath made you so.
Your vengeance within your own power you have,
And as you please may punish him your slave.
For one as cruel as himself he'll find,
Whilst Love does play the Tyrant in his mind.

My just resentments yet must higher fly:
These are too low, Albina; he must die.
The blood he shed requires all his own;
And I do only live to see it done.
Too long since my dear love received his doom,
Have I delayed to wait upon his Tomb:
But I should blush to meet his happy Ghost,
Ere I to it a full revenge could boast.
Too long the Tyrant has his crime survived;
But 'twas his absence me of means deprived.
Now if the Gods will to my vows be good,
His own shall expiate Agrippa's blood.
This day shall terminate his wicked race --
-- What sudden paleness does invade your face?

I fear the dangers into which you run.

Think thou the Tyrant then his fate can shun?
To Love spurred by Despair there's nothing hard:
I'll reach his heart in the midst of all his Guard.
Besides, so many friends with me will join,
As will remove all doubt of the design.
Mezentius shall a party be: for Fate
Will make his love the servant of my hate.
Thou to thy Father go, and bid with speed
His friends be ready against the time of need.
But the King comes.

Let us his sight avoid. --
The false one merits well to be destroyed:
And yet --

To shun him enter at this door.

If I do see him, 'tis t'incense me more.

I must a Hecatomb to Fortune owe
For this blessed interview she does bestow.
Madam, I know I have incurred you hate,
And therefore for this favour thank my Fate.

You may with pleasure, Sir, behold my tears;
In them your joy of seeing me appears:
And in my Brothers blood may be discerned
How much your heart hath been for me concerned.

Justly this Anger you do on me throw;
'Tis what you to your Brothers ashes owe.
But may not there, Madam, some excuse appear,
That our resemblance was so strangely near?
Lest he by error might advantage gain,
Interest of State --

No, no, Sir, cease to feign.
I know what interest was in you most strong;
It was his love, not likeness, did the wrong.
You from his Loyalty had no offence:
Love gave the blow, the State was the pretence.
Your passion for Lavinia armed your hand.

Since you think so, I'll not your thoughts withstand:
But knowing what to such a crime is due,
Believ't a new one to pretend to you.
For all Love has of innocent delight,
In us, would turn to horror, and affright.

I do not wonder your inhumane breast
Disclaims with ease those vows to me addressed.
You in the fatal change a Rival find
To Murder, and 'tis crimes best please your mind.
My Love had been too quiet, and too free,
Too void of Tyrannies and Treachery:
No slaughters need its innocence annoy,
Nor had you found a Rival to destroy.
But to you nothing precious seems, or good,
Save what you buy with Treason and with Blood.
Your wretched Soul is so to mischiefs bent,
You cannot let your Love be innocent.

Do! let my passion for Lavinia be
Accused of Treasons, Blood and Tyranny;
Laden with all you can invent of blame,
I shall not fear to own it without shame.
A fault so glorious will not charge my mind
With those remorses which the guilty find:
For howsoe're with Treacheries defiled,
My Love is to my Reason reconciled.

The Criminal that senseless of remorse,
Does seem in ills to have achieved his course,
For perfect marks he of a miscreant bears,
Whose guilt exceeds his horror or his fears.
Sure after all those crimes your Love has cost,
Your heart should tremble at the peace you boast.
Till from the Soul those inward stings are fled,
All hopes of goodness are not banished:
Even in the heart that's blemished over with stains,
Some little stock of Virtue still remains:
But those extinct, farewell all innocence;
That ill's past cure, that once is past all sense.

If it be your Brothers loss cause all this care,
You having nothing lost, your griefs may spare.
I'll be to you what ere he could have been;
And for my Love, will pay you my esteem.

Me your Esteem? How can I guilty be,
That I should merit such an infamy?
Or since crimes are the pleasures of your breast,
What have I done you might not me detest?
Shall I a villain for my Brother have?

Your fury heightens that esteem I gave:
Whatever indignities from you are thrown,
I shall not as reproach, but kindness own.
Your generous duty does herein appear;
I did but now for you begin to fear:
Methought some motion through your blood did fly,
Which did betray a passion in your eye;
And I observed through all your anger move
Something that spoke an old remain of Love.

Your scorn and your advice, Sir, comes too late:
But if my eyes have made you doubt my hate,
Or with your pride my blood durst take a part,
I do declare them Traitors to my heart;
That heart, which once your Sacrifice became,
But since Agrippa's death abhors that name.
Your murderous hand no sooner cut his thread,
But with his breath, all my desires were fled:
Quenched in a brothers blood those fires did die,
And wronged Nature did the knots untie.
Perhaps surprised at your first sight I may
By my dull eyes, my troubled Soul betray:
But know, that Hatred in its turn does move,
And is extravagant as well as Love.
That Tyrant's presence who my brother slew,
Might of his wounds the memory renew;
And blood offended will by Nature stir
At the approaching of the Murderer.

I beg not that this anger you assuage,
Which blood Commands, and duty does Engage;
And by whose Justice worthy you appear
Of all that could love well, or be held dear.
After the pity I conceive for you,
Let me add something to your glory due.
You ought to hate me, and in doing so,
Pay but what to your brothers dust you owe:
And 'twould grieve me if she whom once I loved,
Were not by duty and by nature moved.
I'll quit you, Madam, lest my presence do
Drive from my heart that hatred is my due;
Lest some alluring charm incite you to
Those smiles for me, will be a shame for you.
I know crimes do souls great like yours incense;
You can't forget so barbarous an offence.
Yet since Love has those subtle secret ways,
And often by the eye the heart betrays;
I by my absence will your fears abate,
And so secure the honour of your hate.

To make me hate thee, Tyrant, take no care;
Thy barbarous Crimes too strong incitements are.
Fear not my Love, but at my Vengeance start:
Believe that still I would possess thy heart;
But 'tis, that I, by tearing it alive,
Might some allay to my just anger give.
Ah Julia! how I feel my Flame expire!
Disdain does in me smother all desire:
And my Resentment taking now its turn,
Does with my Love in equal ardour burn.
The Tyrant favoured me; he did not find
In me those Charms might grace me in his mind.
For now no sighs of his, unless they be
His last, will prove acceptable to me.
Come, Julia, to his death let's lend our Aid;
His punishment appears to me delayed.
Where Love and Nature both receive a wrong,
Revenge, though present, seems to stay too long.

THe Army, Sir, are now so discontent,
They would almost your own desires prevent.
Their hardened limbs unused to slothful ease,
Would hazard any thing to hinder Peace.
Besides those friends that Alba will afford,
Who only wait when you will give the word.
And having all these helps, are those thoughts gone,
Which made you once aspire to the Throne?

Faustus, since I to Love became a prize,
Scarcely for it do all my thoughts suffice:
That cruel passion, by prevailing art,
Has banished all Ambition from my heart.
Before this wound the Princess beauty gave,
I to those viler passions was a slave;
Scorn to obey, and a desire to reign,
Prompted to all attempts a Crown to gain:
I endured nothing did my will control:
And unto Crimes did dedicate my Soul.
But since her eyes gave light unto this flame,
Purged by those fires, my heart more pure became;
And now alone upon those Charms intent,
Dares form no vows but what are innocent.
There is no happiness but in her love:
And could I ever hope her breast to move,
I would not change so blessed an Estate
For all the Crowns can be bestowed by Fate.

The King, Sir, is advancing towards this place.

He stops, and wears some trouble in his face.

Sir, If I may not indiscreet appear,
Why in your looks do you this sadness wear?
Things prosperous beyond your wishes are;
You return victor from a bloody war,
And bring along all that the Great can please;
Honours and pleasures, victory and peace.
Whilst Fate then to your Glory is so kind,
What sad dull humour dares oppress your mind?
Or what disquiet thoughts within your breast,
Whilst you give peace to all, disturbs your rest?

All things indeed appear to flatter me;
And I from war return with victory:
By many happy Fights our peace is wrought,
And all are pleased with this repose I brought:
But I alone this rest cannot enjoy,
Crowns are confined to so severe a law;
And that blessed Calm a happy victor brings,
Is for the Subjects quiet, not the Kings.

Though happiest Kings are not exempt from care,
Fortune so studies to abate your share,
That waiting to prevent you wishes, she
Strives to forget her old inconstancy.

'Tis true, that Fortune so her kindness shows,
As if that Goddess were at my dispose:
But were she truly so, she never can
Feed all the wishes and desires of man.
Under two powers is our life confined,
Cruel alike, as they alike are blind.
And seldom 'tis, that both do kind appear:
Secure of Fortune, yet we Love may fear.

If still you love Albina, I'm surprised;
Her, Sir, whose Brother you have sacrificed?

No, 'Tis another Beauty I adore;
Which when you hear, will yet surprise you more.
My passion for Albina's quite suppressed,
And 'tis Lavinia rules now in my breast.

Lavinia, Sir!

Nay start not at that name:
I thought 't must grieve you when you knew my flame.
For knowing yours, 'twas easily discerned
You must for such a Rival be concerned.
I'm troubled that I do your griefs create;
But Love will be obeyed, as sure as Fate.

Though, Sir, this sudden trouble may appear
Too great for my perplexed Soul to bear,
I'm not so vain to beg my King to be
Subject unto the least constraint for me:
Nor whilst on my own passion I reflect,
Will I a forfeit make of my respect.
Though in this Realm I claim a high degree,
There's distance 'twixt my Sovereign still and me:
And I must pay, though of blood Royal born,
Homage to him by whom the Crown is worn.
For crowned heads, by a becoming pride,
Are only unto Kings and Gods allied:
That blood of theirs we carry in our veins,
Does only bind us in the straighter chains.
But Majesty does soar so vast a flight,
Nature and Blood are subject to its height.
'Tis not then on my own behalf I'll move
You would, great Sir, strive to renounce this love;
Nor is't for mine, but for your quiet sake,
For your repose, that I this boldness take:
Spare to your self the rigour of that Fate,
To see your sighs paid with eternal hate.
The Princess Lover whom your hands have slain,
Makes you the object of her just disdain:
She so much horror has conceived for you,
That your pretentions will its force renew;
And it will be a misery without end,
To excite hatred where you love pretend.
I have of this a sad experience made;
My constancy with scorn she hath repaid:
And you perhaps this fatal fire would fly,
If you had proved this scorn as much as I.

That you from her can no advantage gain,
Adds to my joy, and does relieve my pain.
My bitter passion has this sweetness yet,
I love a heart that won't to yours submit.
For 'tis enough to keep my hopes alive,
That I am certain you in vain must strive.
Whilst she scorns you, she does my flame increase;
And loved she you, my love to her would cease.

Horror and hate together do combine,
To make her hate of you more sure than mine.
And a great King that is by Glory swayed,
Should never be by passion so betrayed,
As to declare his Soul by beauty moved,
Till he be sure to be again beloved.
The honour of his Crown must needs grow less,
When thus his love his greatness does oppress;
And that by sighs which must be spent in vain
His Majesty's exposed to disdain.

Instruct me not, Sir, what I have to do;
I know well what is to my glory due,
And cannot think the honour of my State
Runs so much hazard by Lavinia's hate.
Few hatreds are so stubborn and severe,
But they grow flexible where Thrones appear;
And a bright Crown upon her Temples set,
May make her all her Lovers blood forgot.

Sir, flatter not your self with hopes so vain;
The passions of her Soul too firm remain.
Her love to him, though dead, to you her hate,
Are both too constant, and too obstinate.
You may as well the laws of Fate control,
As think to snatch Agrippa from her Soul;
And you as vainly hope, if you believe
She ought for you but hatred can conceive.
Your Crown, whilst with a blood so precious stained,
Will be with all its Charms by her disdained.
Even at your name her eyes with anger armed
In fury blaze --

Oh! how with this I'm charmed!
How sweet and pleasant 'tis to me to find,
In what I love, such constancy of mind!
Whilst such an object of my flame I have,
The God brings Balsom to the wound he gave.
Prince of a heart so faithful and so true,
The Conquests only to a Sceptre due:
A Soul that is with such endowments blessed
May claim dominion in a lovers breast.

But know, this heart so faithful and so true,
Will never be made subject, Sir, to you:
For she'll increase her hatred with your love.

Sweet Prince! your error does my pity move.
The thoughts she will on me throw all her hate,
Does to your flame some flattering hopes create.
And you presume, if she in anger do
Grow fierce to me, she must grow mild to you.
But, Sir, this path I to my wishes know;
There wants no more, but when I'll have it so.
Such ways I have her favour to procure,
The hate you dream of is not half so sure.
That you may know how weak is your pretence,
My pity hazards, Sir, this confidence.
And for that kind advice g'in me by you,
I thought there something in my turn was due.

Faustus, dost my misfortune comprehend,
And whither the Kings haughty threats may tend?

He has but said too much, to let you know
That with his love he will his power show:
That where he cannot by addresses gain,
His headstrong will does prompt him to constrain.
Where prayers prevail not, he will use command,
And force the Princess to give him her hand.
Thus of your Mistress he will you bereave.
But she comes forth, -- 'tis fit I take my leave.

Sir, have you been of my new Torments told?
To sigh for me the Tyrant's now grown bold:
These wretched eyes bear in my grief two parts,
Yet shame to please the wickedst of all hearts.

Nay, Madam, he to be your spouse pretends;
And flatt'ry failing, to use force intends.

Ah barbarous Traitor! but, Sir, if it be true
That love has g'in me any part in you,
Can you abandon me in this estate,
And leave me to the power of him I hate?

Though that pure flame which me your vassal made
Hath ever been with hate and scorn repaid,
My heart unto its passion is so true,
I'll fly through death it self to succour you.
Try my obedience then by your command.

It is the Tyrant's head that I demand --
Ha! -- start not -- If your help I cannot have,
I shall find ways, Sir, his attempts to brave,
To baffle all the worst of Tyranny.
Know that I am experienced how to die:
And against whatever Tyrants dare assail
Death is a remedy can never fail.

No, rather live, to take from me and Fate
That Tyrant's head exacted by your hate:
At least, instead of his, you shall have mine:
To be gainsaid, Love's power is too divine.
If I did start, that life to sacrifice
Which duty binds me to, and nature ties;
The least I could to blood and duty pay,
Was at the first some trouble to betray.
But to that passion does my heart dispose,
In vain the sacredst rights themselves oppose:
You in my heart do bear the highest sway,
And Loves laws are the first I should obey.

Sir, in this promise of his death I find
Something allays the trouble of my mind:
Though I all service have refused from you,
This I receive with welcomes to it due.
Not for my dangers it may disengage;
I neither fear the Tyrant's love nor rage:
But all herein that precious seems or good,
Is the revenging my Agrippa's blood.
My vows were all accomplished, could I boast
I had this Victim offered to his Ghost.
For midst all ills, a double good 'twould prove,
To slay a Tyrant, and revenge my Love.

Ah, Madam! I perceive by this I must
Be still despised for my Rivals dust:
Whilst to your aid I dedicate this Arm,
You fear lest some weak hopes my Soul should charm.
Well, Cruel, well, I'll hazard your defence
Without exacting any recompense.
Since in my heart your love did get this sway,
'Tis without hopes accustomed to obey.
But you must give me leave to boast this pride,
That your revenge you to my love confide,
And that your heart once felt the tenderness
To offer up some vows to my success:
The worst of Chances cannot then deter,
Whilst to your pleasure I my life prefer:
And should ill fortune my attempts pursue,
I shall be happy when I die for you.
I'll go, and of my friends implore the aid.

Take heed of trusting, lest you be betrayed.
'Bove all, assurance in Tyrhenus have;
He has an interest in the death I crave.
I see him yonder; but I being here,
His head he hazards if he should draw near.
I'll leave you therefore to consult the way
How to make this to all a happy day.

Come, see how in your griefs a part I bear,
And for their ease a remedy prepare.

How, Sir? can you restore my son to breath?

I cannot; but we may revenge his death.
There's nothing should a greater trouble give
To you, than that you see his murderer live.
But now that mine do with your wishes meet,
They'll bring you all that in revenge is sweet.

Can you think this, Sir, against your Sovereign?

To circumvent you, you may think I feign;
But you'll recant your error when you hear
He'd snatch from me all that my Soul holds dear.
And when Love in our hearts has gained command,
We abhor all does its carrier withstand.

Your unjust Rival I with you condemn;
'Tis fit that flame should fatal prove to him:
And yet his blood which through your veins does move,
Might stifle this extravagance of love.

Those flames within our breasts must needs be cold,
Where Nature does with Love proportion hold.
Love does all fetters but it's own disdain;
Kindred and blood against it strive in vain.
When first the Princess me her Champion made,
Some little tremblings did my Soul invade;
But thinking he to her was sacrificed,
They vanished, and all duties I despised:
My heart, that knew it, did depend on her,
Soon those did to all other chains prefer.
When what we love craves to be understood,
In vain we listen to the cries of blood.
The object loved rules in the Lover's breast,
And by its laws all others are suppressed.

The danger, Sir, of such an enterprise,
The fear of a discovery or surprise;
The Kings revenge, who never will forgive,
May yet to your resolves some trouble give.

Think not my Soul can be betrayed by fear,
Love having got such vast dominion there.
In vain those Chills my flames strive to assuage;
I think what object does my Arm engage.
And how should fear gain place within my Soul,
When that God rules there, does all Gods control?

You, Sir, may judge in the assault you make,
What thoughts I ought to have, what part to take:
But since Kings do Gods Image bear, and he
Who them assails fights with the Deity;
Sure that strict awe which to the Heavens we owe,
May stop your hand, ready to give the blow.
Though earthly Terrors you as Bugbears prize,
You can't the Thunder of the Gods despise,
Which does the greatest of Criminals appall.

The guilty do not still by Lightning fall.
When Gods with Thunder would the Earth affright,
The Bolt, alas! does on th'unhappy light:
For when it rends the skies, and roars from thence,
Chance oftner is its guide than Providence.
But for the Crime, if a revenge to take,
The incensed heavens over my head should shake;
If all the Gods against me should conspire,
And anger make them arm their hands with fire;
Yet whilst a beauty that has so much charm
Inspires my blood, and does my courage warm,
Even all those Gods themselves would Bugbears be,
And shaking heaven it self should not shake me.
Only do you the part due to you take,
And show what you dare do for a sons sake.

Oh, Sir, this interest touches me most near:
Knew you but how --

It does too well appear.
Knowing how tender your concernments were,
I thought it just that you should have a share
In this revenge; and did resolve to owe
To your advice the guidance of my blow.

I to your trust do this assurance give,
Your confidence has made my hopes revive;
And I had sure despaired, had you to me
Denied a part in this conspiracy.

I'll leave the choice of time and place to you:
My friends are ready, powerful, and true;
Who on my orders would the world lay wast,

'Bove all, take heed of making too much hast.
The King, Sir, hath his Army hither called;
The Fort is guarded, and the City walled;
So that on failor, or discovery,
There can for us no hopes of safety be.
These dangers amongst our friends may doubts create,
And one mans fear expose us all to fate.
This hindrance cannot last for many days,
For more than ten the Army hardly stays:
And our Conspirators, who then will know
Themselves the stronger, will the bolder grow.
In great designs fit choice of time must sway.

I do with you consent to the delay;
And always shall think your advice the best,
Ruled by experience and by interest.
In the mean time, let us our friends prepare:
I'll send you mine, and judge you what they are.
It is your care that I rely upon.

What e're a Father can do for a son,
You may be sure of; and if Fate prove true,
I shall do things not thought of yet by you.

SIr, what unhappy News is this you tell!
Tyrhenus made a prisoner? --

It may well
Surprise you, Madam, as it has done me;
For with him all our hopes imprisoned be:
In his restraint our chief reliance dies.
He many friends experienced has, and wise;
He my close partners in the plot has seen,
And by his Counsels so gained their esteem,
That as if Courage from his breath distilled,
He all their breasts hath with fresh boldness filled.
But parting from us, Atis, as 'tis said,
Met him, and to the Fort him prisoner led.

How does one crime another still engage!
My Lovers blood whetted the Tyrants rage;
Which from that time so sharp and keen remains,
He'll wreak the rest on it in his fathers veins.
A swift assistance now our hopes must stead.
Go -- let the Tyrant's death secure that head:
And by your blows preventing his design,
Save him the horror of so foul a crime.
He has lived but too long; a Tyrants fate
As always wished for, always seems too late.
Run then, and since your friends wait but your word,
Do not to them a time of doubt afford.
These great attempts do too much hazard run,
When we allow space for reflection.
Think but what fears Tyrhenus death may raise:
Danger and doubt the greatest heart allays.

Madam, I'll fly your pleasure to obey;
Nor will I now dispute for a delay,
But slighting reasons might this hast withstand,
Think it enough that it is your command.
Whilst the King pays his vows to Victory,
He shall himself to you a Victim be:
And by your eyes, those sacred lights, I swear
To bring his head here, or to leave mine there.
But here he comes.

I'll fly.

Constrain your hate:
Now he's so nigh, your flight will be too late.
And thus in your revenge you gain a share,
To stop him here, whilst I his death prepare.

Do I then, Princess, yet those beauties see?
Alas! that my joy should your torment be;
That all my faithful love, and all my pain,
Dare only hope for hatred and disdain!
And yet my flame is grown so bright and high,
In vain I strive to keep it from your eye.
Small ills we may dissemble and conceal;
But that love's weak, does not it self reveal.
I know this rash attempt must draw on me
Hatred, contempt, disdain, and cruelty;
That all your anger you will on me heap:
Yet at that price my love will still be cheap.
Summon your fury then. -- But is it true,
That I see charming Tears distil from you?
My Soul is at this tenderness aghast:
May I believ't?

Yes, cruel one, thou may.
My heart does with its firm resolves dispense:
I thought thy presence would my Soul incense,
And make my breast with horror overflow;
Yet seeing thee, my thoughts do tender grow,
As though all hatred from my mind were fled.

Can then Agrippa thence be banished?
And with your favour can you make me blessed?

Think thou such crimes dare harbour in my breast?
Treason like thine, my love and faith must sway,
When I that generous Hero so betray,
That to his spotless ashes I prefer.
The stained addresses of his Murderer.
But lest thou think my Tears from thence did flow,
I to my love this explanation owe:
My Lover did so much resemble thee,
Thy presence does renew his memory;
Bringing those smiles were once to me so sweet,
Thou did my Tears, instead of anger meet.
That Image did this tenderness create,
Stifled my rage, and did suspend my hate.
My heart that to those Charms engaged would be
In favour of him, almost favoured thee;
And in those features first surprised my mind,
I that assault did from my passion find.
Hatred nor Fury could not gain a part,
But Love alone was ruler in my heart.
But now that love which all my Soul possessed,
Stirs up both hate and fury in my breast;
Which justly blushing to have staid so long,
Are by that short suspension grown more strong.
Thou soon shalt find an anger so severe,
Its great concernment shall in it appear;
And know that fury cannot be withstood,
Which is inspired by a Lover's blood.
My eyes shall dart such vengeance upon you.

Madam, I know this to my crime is due.
But though your eyes with all your hate you arm,
In all their anger I shall find a Charm.
Accuse me, scorn me, I will not complain,
But love you without hopes of love again.
Whilst you impute Agrippa's death to me,
I cannot murmur at your cruelty;
Nor press your heart that passion to remove,
Which as it heightens, does increase my love.

Did not my Tears then to my Griefs suffice,
But thou must yet find Charms in these sad eyes?
Must they behold a Tyrant's Soul inclined
To that bright flame once graced a Heroe's mind?
But ah! how cruel does thy love appear,
Cruel to him that was to me so dear?
Whilst his pure flame did by thy crime become
A fatal Torch to light him to his Tomb.
May yet revenging Heaven make thy love
At least as fatal as Agrippa's prove:
May all the Furies new inventions try
To punish thee; and may the aiding Sky
Mischiefs like rain upon thy head distil,
Till thou become the Quintessence of ill.
I will implore those Gods thy Crimes abuse.

Press not the Gods for what they will refuse.
They know our good, and of us take such care,
Believe me, Madam, you your vows may spare,
Though I with you that generous Faith approve
Appears in this remembrance of your love,
Yet grief perhaps has to your heart denied
The thoughts what glories do in Thrones reside.
Come, you have mourned too much. Try to believe
Those comforts which an offered Crown may give.
Scepters are Charms unto the greatest grief,
And from the Throne all evils seek relief.

Disdained I not a Sceptre in thy hand,
Agrippa's shade does so my Soul command,
I should with more contentment choose to be
His Spouse in death, than set on Thrones with thee.

Am I that object of your hatred made,
That you slight so much glory for a shade?
Rare president! which no Example hath:
To that which is not, you extend your faith.
What heart e're was to grief so given over,
But it forgot a love that was no more?
Cease must the fiercest fire that ever burned,
When that which feeds it is to ashes turned.

Learn then from me, what glory does inspire:
Breasts once inflamed with a just desire,
My Loves cold ashes in their frosty urn
With it's first ardor make my heart still burn,
Forcing my sighs nights silence to invade,
And amongst the Ghosts pay tribute to his shade.
Nothing can a well-kindled flame remove:
Who can desist, sure never well did love.
But, Tyrant, know, my Soul the power hath
To loose it's Lover, yet preserve it's Faith.
In worthy minds, where death an Empire gains,
In vain death strives to break it's firmer chains.
-- Would Heaven Agrippa had but known what now
I do with Tears and Sighs to thee avow.
But ah! the force of an imperious pride
Made me this love too obstinately hide.
Whilst my heart burnt, I studied to disdain,
And knew so well my passion to constrain,
That at his death he did not understand
He over my Soul had gained the least command.
Why did you not, you Gods, this truth unfold?
Make him foresee these tears --

Ah Princess hold! --
So sweet a Charm does set my Soul on fire.
Bring here Tyrhenus, Atis, -- you retire.
No longer now can I my self constrain:
For love will speak, that knows not how to feign.
Charged with such loads, this secret does appear
Too weighty for my feeble heart to bear.
Cease then, of love and faith thou sole delight,
To seek Agrippa in eternal night;
'Twas Tiberinus who alone was drowned,
And you in me that happy love have found.

In you? oh Heavens! how can this be true?
Who can assure it me?

I see you do
Suspect me of Imposture, and you may
Have cause to do it, from my too long delay.
The advice is justly too suspicious grown,
To have you credit it from me alone.
My Father shall the truth of all unfold:
You may give faith to what by him is told.
I will oblige him now to let you know,
I this disguise to his injunctions owe.
Justice will urge him to it, when he finds
Fate cannot part two love-contracted minds.
In the mean time, to know me well, you may
Search your own heart. --

I fear 'twill me betray.
Too weakly does it this surprise bear,
To trust to it --

My Father does appear.
From whom what I am will be better known.

If you would please me, strive to be his Son.

The Princess, Sir, knows now of my disguise;
This action I expect should you surprise.
But you foretold my love would make me known:
The secret for my heart too strong was grown.
Her powerful Charms have on my duty won;
I have told all --

What Sir?

That I'm your Son.

You, Sir, my Son? you're to your self unjust:
My Son is dead; do not disturb his dust.
Alas! 'twas by your hand --

Your cares are vain.
A Secret told, can't be recalled again.
Acknowledge then that in the rapid wave
Unhappy Tiberinus found a grave:
That favoured by our likeness, I grew bold
To assume the Regal power now I hold:
That the Kings body from the floods you drew,
And paid the tears to a Sons ashes due.
In fine, that to avoid suspect, and learn
Such enterprises as might do me harm,
You with my Murder did the King accuse.

I know the forfeit, Sir, if I refuse
This base acknowledgment, and ready stand
To offer up my head at your command.
-- Betray my Sons blood for his Murderers sake?

How, Sir? --

Your anger sha'not make me shake.
You know me ill, in thinking I can be
Guilty of such inhumane Infamy:
The small remain of blood runs in these veins,
Shall ne'er be purchased with such barbarous stains.

Why should you cruelly with cunning strive
This good and faithful Princess to deceive?
Have not her eyes, of tears the current made,
Yet to your Son sufficient tribute paid?

Too well your sense herein to me appears;
You would not let him honour him with tears,
Nor suffer that a heart so generous send
Sighs to the Tomb of her unhappy friend.
Is't not enough you've robbed him of his breath,
But that you must pursue him after death?
Cannot his ashes from your hate be free?
Nor Urns protect him from your cruelty?
Forbear, great Sir, an envy so unjust;
And having had his blood, spare to his dust
This honour, that a heart do it bemoan,
Which Love has destined to those sighs alone.

Let then that generous heart be disabus'd
Which I possess, while 'tis to me refused:
That heart preserves for me so pure a flame,
It disdains Scepters for my only name:
That heart in which does all my bliss consist,
Loves gift; but that my Father does resist
My Father, for whose Son I can't be known.

Why should I for my Son his Murderer own?
His death, alas! Heaven knows to be as true,
As that he did receive that death from you.
I, Sir, a witness was, you know it well,
When stabbed by you into these arms he fell:
His bubbling blood upon his Father flew.
But, Madam, hear a proof of's love to you.
Grieving to loose a Son so dear, I sued
That but one spark of life might be renewed;
But I in vain unto the Fates had prayed,
Till naming you, his wandering Spirits stayed.
And though his eyes, closed for eternal night,
Did seem to take their last adieu of light;
Yet at the sound of that adored name,
Love broke deaths vail, and opened them again.
His blood and life, already slipped away,
Returned, and to his flame the Fates gave way:
And now afresh for you his spirit burned,
And 'twas for you if his own death he mourned.
Until the King, at these last gasps incensed,
With all the laws of Piety dispensed,
And amongst the waves his panting body threw.
-- Ah Princess! pardon tears that are so due.
I can no more -- my heart with grief oppressed,
Only with sighs and sobs must tell the rest.
My moved blood passage to my voice denies,
But silencing my tongue, speaks by my eyes.

Vouchsafe thou then, dear shade, to let me bear
In this thy Fathers grief a Lovers share:
And if thou in those shady walks approve
Of these last tributes both of blood and love,
Pardon, dear Ghost, those troubles which my mind
Did in the addresses of thy Murderer find.
Those sweet transports, those thoughts I did conceive,
When likeness made me him for thee receive.
For now that from thy Fathers mouth I know
To whom my love, to whom my hate I owe;
My revived rage such vengeance shall create,
My error and thy blood to expiate,
That hellish Furies shall amazed stand.
For not the Gods alone shall lend their hand,
But that my hatred may more full appear --
Alas! but, Sir, if still your Son he were.

Disclaim that Error which would you betray.

Ah, Madam! rather hear what Love would say.
Why should the faith of such a Witness be
Suspected only when he speaks for me?
Whilst yet his voice finds favour in your heart.

Doubt still a Witness that has so much art.

Will you such cruel Maxims then pursue,
And not believe?

Alas! what shall I do?

Why can you yet be doubtful in your choice,
When you have heard so much from Nature's voice?
Cannot my troubled Soul your Senses touch?
Have I too little said?

You've said too much:
Your passion does too certainly deprive
Me of that sweetness hope and doubt would give.
Your Son's too surely dead, in vain I raise
These flattering doubts against what Nature says.
Yet are these doubts so sweet, my Love would try,
And, if it durst, to Nature give the lie.

Whatever the King says, be you well assured.

Alas! his presence cannot be endured;
It so resembles that which charmed my Soul,
It does my anger and my hate control.
And though this you on my belief have won,
That he is an Impostor, not your Son;
Yet when I cast my eyes on his, and there
The Charms of my Agrippa do appear,
Spite of my self, you, and his treach'rous wrong,
That aspect is for all belief too strong.

Fly then; and if your reason be too weak --

Ah, Madam! stay, and do but hear me speak.

Whoever thou art, 'tis cruel thus to strive
To all my sorrows an increase to give.

Will you not hear me then?

I dare not stay,
Lest to my eyes my heart should yield the day.

I will not leave you till I make you know.

Stay, and remember the respect you owe.
If you're my Son, your duty pay to me.

And yet you will not, Sir, my Father be.

There too much danger did in it appear:
Not to be so, was to be Father here;
And since kind heavens took the care that none
Can Witness your disguise but me alone,
The Obligation they have on us laid
Is, that we be not by our selves betrayed.
'Tis then much better I my Son disown,
Than knowing him, hazard his Life and Throne,
And I would wish (to banish all our fear)
That as to all, changed to your self you were.
Then for a Crown so fearlessly enjoyed,
My heart could leap, and its device applaud.
Think where your weakness did us now reduce,
You to the Princess should more caution use,
And not your life to so much hazard throw.
You promised it. --

In vain you tell me so.
Who can the passion of his Soul conceal,
When the object loved does mutual love reveal?
Flattering my self, I thought I could abide,
That she her love under her hate should hide.
But I in that mistaken hate did find
Charms yet concealed from the experienced mind;
There I that sweetness found so rare and new,
To be assured of love from one so true;
So true, that death cannot her heart remove,
But to the grave she does extend her love.

This was a bliss that might your thoughts content.

Whilst she enjoyed no share, 'twas punishment.
For when a beauteous object charms a heart,
Can that be bliss in which it bears no part?
Could I behold my Princess troubled mind,
And in her sufferings contentment find?
This were to brand my love with cruelty.
No; Lovers joys must ever mutual be.

I cannot but lament so fair a flame,
Yet for some time you must constrain the same:
For both your safety and my own require
That you should put a check to your desire.
Mezentius is conspiring to deprive
You of your Crown, the Princess, and your life.
To make then this constraint the easier seem,
By it your Crown, Mistress, and life redeem.
With him are joined Seranus, Corineus,
Volcens, Antenor, and young Hioneus;
All discontents, among the people loved,
By several motives to your mine moved.
Thanks to the credit my feigned grief has got,
Mezentius makes me Master of the plot:
He without doubt will speak to you for me,
Dispute not, but to his request agree.
I for six days have the design deferred,
In which let all defences be prepared;
To the Conspirators give such employs
May send them hence with honour and no noise.
Feign some advice to make the Army stay,
And make them sure by giving them their pay;
But treat Mezentius with a high respect,
That your esteem may banish his suspect:
At last let him with silence be confined,
And in some strong place -- what disturbs your mind?

This practice, Sir, a kind of trouble brings.

Trouble should be below the thoughts of Kings.
It is your death Mezentius does design;
Though he mistakes, it lessens not his crime.
For if we judge by what he understands,
In sacred blood he would imbrue his hands.
The heavens do you his punisher ordain,
And think it fit you in his stead should reign:
Let no vain scruples then your Soul affright,
Dive not into their secrets nor your right.
If seated in this high degree you find
Some doubtful crimes perplex your troubled mind,
Sit steady in the Throne, and do not fear
But that the best of Advocates is there.
However we come to mount to this high place,
The rise is just, to fall is the disgrace.
No King is faulty but by base descent;
Who always reigns, is always innocent.
Reign then, -- ah Son! -- did you but understand
The glorious State to be above Command.

Ah Sir! did you but know the sweets of love.

I hear the steps of some that this way move.

Well Sir -- with all my blood content your hate.

All's ready in the Temple, the Priests wait
Only your Highness presence.

Go then see
Your Prisoner back, and in safe custody.

Out Barb'rous Tyrant! --

Oh Sir! don't you fear,]
Lest he should these reproaches over-hear.

Fear cannot gain a place within that breast
That is entirely by despair possessed.

WHat terror, Madam, does your heart surprise
Just in the height of all our enterprise!
The Prince does with amazement understand
He's summoned here by your express command.

Faustus, I sent for him, and 'twas to pray
That he would yet the fatal stroke delay.
I have weighed all the dangers that attend
On rash attempts, and therefore now did send
To escape the hazard in this hast appears.

Madam, the Prince was doubtful of your fears:
But being in the Temple with the King,
By his command I this assurance bring,
That to advance, and make your vengeance sweet,
The Heavens with your intentions seem to meet.
Never had great design a nobler face:
The Prince has brought his followers to the place;
With them Tyrhenus partisans are joined,
And all those friends in your revenge combined,
Who with an eagerness of zeal aspire
By the Tyrants death to accomplish your desire.
Nor can he against their force find a support:
'Tis true, we both the Army and the Fort
Might justly fear; but Tiberinus dead,
Mezentius is of both those powers the head:
The Citizens are to our party sure,
Which does confirm our enterprise secure:
For e're the Camp or Fort advice can gain,
The Tyrant overpowered will be slain;
And he once gone, the Prince assumes the sway,
Whose right the Chieftains trembling will obey.
All smiles on us; and when the King has done,
Our bloodier Sacrifice will be begun.
The streets along are with our forces lined;
But at Tyrhenus Palace 'tis designed
To give the blow, that all may know he falls
A Victim to Agrippa's Funerals.
Who e're observe the freedom which he shows,
Would say he gives himself up to our blows:
Such high respect he shows the Prince, that he
No sooner asked Tyrhenus liberty,
But with a gracious smile the King replied,
What he requested could not be denied.

Tyrhenus being free, we better may
Till we consult him the Assault delay.
All things affright me now, and I can find
Nothing but death in my presaging mind --
-- Ah! if to satisfy my cruel rage --
Go -- let the Prince's love his stay engage.
Make hast --

Madam, at your command I go;
But fear the greatest hast will be too slow:
All's ready now -- and at the Temple-gate
The Ministers of your revenge do wait,
That death so justly merited to give.

Run yet, and for some time his life reprieve.

What strange disorder in your mind appears?
Whence come these troubled interrupted fears?
What can we think of them? unless the King
By some sweet charm --

You may think any thing.
But go, and to your thoughts that trouble save:
I with Tyrhenus must some conference have.

Come, Sir, and if you can, disperse that cloud
Of grief and anguish does my senses shroud:
A secret voice within my breast I find,
That strives to stifle my vindictive mind.
My heart at once raging and calm appears,
And all my thoughts are become Mutineers.
When first 'twas told me that the King did love,
Hate and disdain in every vein did move;
And thus I armed my self -- resolved to be
Mistress of his or my own destiny.
But at his sight, an over-powring charm
Suppressed my rage, and did withhold my arm:
That very object did my hate control,
And all my rage flew trembling from my soul.
My heart respected in that Tyrants face
Those features did my loved Agrippa grace:
A Fathers grief had surely else prevailed,
And checked that tenderness my breast assailed.
But all that you could act or urge, in spite
Of reason, vanished at that charming sight.
Now let his absence that advantage give,
If he be not your Son, my hate revive:
And if he has no interest in you,
Restore that anger to his crime is due.
For so his presence did affect my mind,
Your words were blown away with their own wind.

Madam, I all this trouble did foresee;
Therefore no sooner gained I liberty,
But fearless of the Tyrants threats, I came
To disabuse, and rid you of this pain.
Who sees what sorrow on my soul has don,
Cannot misdoubt the murder of my Son:
Such piercing anguish cannot be constrained,
Nor such o'repressing grief be only feigned.
Contented Nature, did he live and reign,
Could not from the discovery refrain.
For blood, like love, will those transports obey,
Which through all checks must sometime force their way,
But to convince you there does yet remain
An Argument than this more sure and plain,
That ardour wherewith I his death pursue,
Which before him I durst not urge to you,
Mezentius may a witness be, who knows
How I did the Conspirators dispose;
Their breasts with hate and enmity inspire,
And made their thoughts take fuel from my fire.
Your self can tell what ways I did invent
To gain the heart of every discontent;
Joined in their plots; made my self chief of all,
And offered vows he by this hand might fall.
And can you, Madam, when all this is done,
Fondly sermise that he is still my Son,
He whom I have designed a sacrifice?

No, Sir, this to my quiet does suffice.
To assuage my passion, and release my pain,
With joy I this assurance entertain;
And from my Soul, and from my sense I drive
Whatever to it can opposition give.
My heart no more shall listen to deceit,
No more shall love its flattering charms repeat:
For in a Fathers word less cause I find
Of fear or doubt, than in my Love that's blind.
Natures consent does so my thoughts confirm,
The Tyrant seems to live too long a term:
And 'twould my highest satisfaction be,
To take his life, has taken all from me;
That bloody barbarous assassinate.

Would to God, Madam, 'twere thought fit by fate
Propitious to a Fathers vows, that now
We were prepared to have 'gin the blow:
I by such active speed allay should find
To all those torments that afflict my mind.
But haste in such designs too dangerous were.
The Fort's well guarded, and the Army near.
We yet must languish, we must yet delay.

Be comforted, I have made this the day.

How! without farther thoughts?

In fear for you,
I did command they should the plot pursue.
And you unto this happy day will owe
All those delights that vengeance can bestow.

Let's yet the danger of this haste prevent.

In vain to stay it, I already sent.

Did you in time unto the Prince arrive?

To your commands I did obedience give:
But, Madam, you are so obliged to Fate,
That 'twas my happiness to come too late.

Ye Gods! what do I hear --

Oh noble deed!
Relate each circumstance. --

There was no need
I should to the Temple go; that sacred ground
They had already quitted: and I found
The Tyrant nigh unto the fatal place
Which forth' assault before designed was,
Charged by the Prince, hopeless, and out of breath;
But though despairing, yet outfacing death:
Till coming to Tyrhenus Palace near,
Spite of our force he threw himself in there,
And whilst we by his small but valiant train
Were stopped, till over their Corps we made a lane,
Fearful what dangers popular rage might bring,
The gates were strongly barred upon the King,
And he alone --

How! -- escaped?

We all like you,
At that sad instant pale and fearful grew,
Doubtful both of the Army and the Fort:
But speed we knew must be our sole support;
And therefore forcing now our entrance were,
When on the top Albina did appear.
Her countenance did some affright betray,
But with her hand she seemed to bid us stay.
We soon did to her kind request agree,
Respectful of her Sex and her degree;
While to Mezentius she made this address:
I hope this great revenge won't seem the less;
Nor can I think the Princess judge it so,
Because she a part of it to me does owe.
Her generous temper rather will approve
Nature should have a share as well as Love.
Whilst here the King thought to prevent his fate,
He only did his fall precipitate:
For by my orders he received his doom,
And to my brothers Ghost is now become
A sacrifice. 'Tis done -- and he no more.

Oh Gods! --

At this an universal roar
Of strangely-mixed and tumultuous cries
Did with loud Eccho's pierce the yielding Skies.
All do admire Albina, and the Prince
Stay's but to bring the Tyrants head from thence:
You asked it of him, and he thinks it meet
That he alone should lay it at your feet.
Mean while he thought convenient to employ
Me to prepare your heart for so much joy.

So -- now those Gods to whom so oft addressed
Our vows have been, have granted our request.
This day revenges all our former harms,
And in the Tyrants blood we taste those charms. --
-- But what strange trouble does your looks invade?
Where rather grief then joy does sit displayed.

Alas, my fainting spirits are quite gon.

For the Kings death?

No, Madam -- 'twas my Son.

Your Son, Sir? --

Yes, too sure I find it here:
The cries of blood make it too well appear.
Nature forbids more fictions to create;
She speaks her self.

Why does she speak so late?
Is it then true I've lost the thing I love,
And must my self the unhappy agent prove?
Crimes which I would pursue, become my guilt;
And blood I would revenge, my self have spilt.
So oft I urged, so oft his death implored,
Till heaven did with my ardent vows accord,
Until the wearied Gods in anger sent
My own desires, for my own punishment.
Ah! how are their denials useful oft!
And they too cruel when they are too soft!
Their dearest interest mortals thus ensnare,
By tiring Heaven with too tedious prayer.
But if my Lover thus hath murdered bin,
To you alone I must impute the sin:
'Twas his imposed name did me deceive;
Loving him dead, I hated him alive,
And did that life so dearly loved pursue:
But treacherous Father, all proceeds from you.
Of all these wrongs you me an Agent made,
And on the faith of blood was love betrayed.
By your assurance I thus blind became;
You poisoned all the ardour of my flame,
And cruelly, for an unknown design,
Turned purest love into a baneful crime.
What have you, wretched Politician, won
By this ambition has destroyed your Son?
Did not my love to him my Soul command,
I'd carve on you my vengeance with this hand.
But, cruel man, go render the thanks due
To your Sons blood, which I respect in you.

When thus a Father has destroyed his Son,
He has enough affliction of his own,
And needs not your reproach -- Agrippa slain!
There wants no torment to increase my pain.
Alas! poor Son; whatever I did contrive
With hopes to save, is turned against thy life;
And my paternal love by zeal betrayed,
Is of thy murder the Abettor made,
Forcing thy Sister and thy Love to be
Partners at once in the same crime with me.
But be it fault or fortune, thou art gon;
It only rests, I follow thee my Son.

Stay, let us yet this satisfaction have,
To draw Mezentius with us to the grave.
He will deserve his fate, for having bin
The instrument of my mistaken Sin.

Since cruel Fate spared not my hapless boy,
I wish I could with him the world destroy.
'Bove all, my daughter may my anger fear.

Unhappy wretch! how dare thou here appear?

I come to throw my self, Sir, at your feet,
To beg your anger and your fury meet.
Remorse of Conscience will not let me fly.

Know thou the effects then of thy cruelty,
How that by thee we are all wretched made?

Know thou that thou a brother hast betrayed?

Brother and duty both I know have bin
Betrayed by the too great fondness of my sin,
His conquering Murderer. -- but he comes here.

Against him let us all our fury bear.

I small advantage shall by conquest gain,
If you, Sir, and the Princess still remain
My enemies. --

Does my Agrippa live?
From what blessed deity do we receive
This happy grace? --

What God can be so good
As to restore my love?

Instinct of blood
The Guardian-Angel was that did inspire
My Sisters breast, and blew loves secret fire.

Are you my brother then, Sir? --

Yes, blessed Child;
And whilst thou thought thou were it by love beguiled,
Thou art by that which thou a crime dost call,
Become the instrument to save us all.

But yet I cannot banish all my fear,
Until I do the whole relation hear.
His double death has such impressions made,
That still I do believe my Love a shade.

He will himself that satisfaction give,
Which may your hopes from their dark cell reprieve.

Since 'twas your orders armed the Princess hand,
And the assault was made by your command,
I with some trouble, Madam, did dispose
My self at first those orders to oppose.
Even in these broils of death my heart did still
Prompt me to a submission to your will.
But when I thought upon your love, and knew
That 'twas mistake made you my life pursue,
Respect to you determined soon the strife,
And for my love I sought to save my life.
And being to my Fathers Palace near,
I for a refuge cast my self in there;
When fearing dangers that on Tumults wait,
To stop the flood the servants shut the gate,
And made me theirs. My Sister who in me
Believed she did her faithless lover see,
Advanced, as first I thought, in rage. to do
Whatever her error might incline her to.
But Love appearing, spite of her mistake,
Did sleeping Nature in my favour wake:
She thought 'twas Love, but Nature did not shame
To act for me, under Loves bolder name:
And after having a short Combat tried,
Blushing, and with a trembling voice she cried,
Go faithless man, go save thy ^f, and be
Only so kind to own this ^ me.

Blessed be thy ^ Child, whether it did move
By the impulse of ^ of ^

Without ^ first words obey,
And through the ^ effort made way,
Where without opposition I arrived,
And quick assistance from the Guards received.
To these the Army their choice Cohorts led;
And now with numbers strengthened, I made head,
Where the Conspirators still fearless stayed,
Secured by the promise which Albina made. --
Whom my approach did so much terrify,
That having neither power to fight nor fly,
Their Chiefs I seized, and let the others know
They did their lives to my compassion owe.

What in this conflict was Mezentius fate?

He, and he only, did prove obstinate.
For having heard how I had 'gin command
None should offend him, but disarm his hand;
Scorning to be where you ordained the strife,
Indebted to a Rival for his life,
That of his vow he might acquitted be,
He gave himself those wounds designed for me.
Princess, I die for you -- was all he said.
I ran to stay him, but I found him dead:
Yet in that death expressed such love to you,
In spite of joy I almost jealous grew.

I could lament him, if that grief could find
Possessing you a place within my mind.

This by Mezentius death becomes your due.

That I have right to it, I know 'tis true:
But all to it or to my right I owe,
Is, that 'tis in my power to bestow.
Thus then let all the world my faith approve,
And see your Son crowned here by Me and Love.

OUr Poet was even going the old way,
And had contrived how to excuse the Play,
Though well he knew the Critics were so keen
That a submission would but wi^ their spleen.
But in the Action, Sir, he chanced to spy
Something of smile and favour in your eye.
This changed him quite, and in a rage he tore
That Epilogue which he had wrote before:
Bidding me only say, he would not woo
Others to like what had not displeased you.

