YOu teach me language, sir, as one that knows the Debt of Love I owe unto
their Virtues, wherein like a true Courtier I have fed my self with hope of
fair Success, and now attend your wished consent to my long Suit.


Believe me, youthful Lord, time could not give an opportunity more fitting
your desires, always provided my Daughters love be suited with my Grant.


'Tis the condition sir, her Promise sealed.


Is't so, Constantia?


I was content to give him words for oaths, he swore so oft he loved me.


That thou believe him?


He is a man I hope.


That's in the trial Girl.


However I am a woman, sir.


The Law's on thy side then, shall it have a Husband, I, and a worthy one: Take
her brave Cornwall, and make our happiness great as our wishes.


Sir, I thank you.


Double the fortunes of the day, my Lord, and crown my wishes too: I have a son
here, who in my absence would protest no less unto your other Daughter.


Ha Gloster, is it so? what says Lord Edwin? will she protest as much to thee?


Else must she want some of her Sisters faith, Sir.


Of her credulity much rather, Sir: My Lord, you are a Soldier, and methinks
the height of that Profession should diminish all heat of Loves desires, being
so late employed in blood and ruin.


The more my Conscience ties me to repair the worlds losses in a new
succession.


Necessity it seems ties your affections then, and at that rate I would
unwillingly be thrust upon you, a wife is a dish soon cloys, sir.


Weak and diseased appetites it may.


Most of your making have dull stomachs sir.


If that be all Girl, thou shalt quicken him, be kind to him


Noble Edwin, let it suffice what's mine in her, speaks yours;

For her consent, let your fair suit go on,
She is a woman sir, and will be won.

You give me comfort sir.


Now Toclio.


The King, my honoured Lords, requires your presence, and calls a Council for
return of answer unto the parling enemy, whose Ambassadors are on the way to
Court.


So suddenly, Chester it seems has plied them hard at war, they sue so fast for
peace, which by my advice they ne'er shall have, unless they leave the Realm.
Come noble Gloster, let's attend the King, it lies sir in your Son to do me
pleasure, and save the charges of a Wedding Dinner,

If you'll make haste to end your Love affairs,
One cost may give discharge to both my cares.

I'll do my best.


Now Toclio, what stirring news at Court?


Oh my Lord, the Court's all filled with rumour, the City with news, and the
Country with wonder, and all the bells in the Kingdom must proclaim it, we have
a new Holiday a coming.


A holy-day! for whom? for thee?


Me, Madam! 'sfoot I'd be loath that any man should make a holy-day for me
yet: In brief 'tis thus, there's here arrived at Court, sent by the Earl of
Chester to the King, a man of rare esteem for holiness, a reverent Hermit, that
by miracle not only saved our army, but without aid of man o'rethrew the pagan
Host, and with such wonder sir, as might confirm a Kingdom to his faith.


This is strange news indeed, where is he?


In conference with the King that much respects him.


Trust me, I long to see him.


Faith you will find no great pleasure in him, for ought that I can see Lady,
they say he is half a Prophet too, would he could tell me any news of the lost
Prince, there's twenty Talents offered to him that finds him.


Such news was breeding in the morning.


And now it has birth and life sir, if fortune bless me I'll once more search
those woods where then we lost him, I know not yet what fate may follow me.


Fortune go with you sir, come fair Mistress, your Sister and Lord Edwin are in
game, and all their wits at stake to win the Set.


My sister has the hand yet, we had best leave them,

She will be out anon as well as I,
He wants but cunning to put in a Dye.

You are a cunning Gamester, Madam.


It is a desperate Game indeed this Marriage, where there's no winning without
loss to either.


Why, what but your perfection noble Lady, can bar the worthiness of this my
suit? if so you please I count my happiness, from difficult obtaining, you
shall see my duty and observance.


There shall be place to neither, noble sir, I do beseech you let this mild
Reply give answer to your suit, for here I vow if e're I change my Virgin name
by you, it gains or looses.


My wishes have their crown.


Let them confine you then, as to my promise, you give faith and credence?


In your command my willing absence speaks it.


Noble and virtuous: could I dream of Marriage, I should affect thee Edwin: oh
my soul, here's something tells me that these best of creatures, these models
of the world, weak man and woman, should have their souls, their making, life,
and being, to some more excellent use: if what the sense calls pleasure were
our ends, we might justly blame great natures wisdom, who reared a building of
so much art and beauty to entertain a guest so far uncertain, so imperfect: if
only speech distinguish us from beasts, who know no inequality of birth or
place, but still to ^ly from goodness: oh, how base were life at such a rate!
no, no, that power that gave to man his being, speech, and wisdom, gave it for
thankfulness: To him alone that

Made me thus, may I whence truly know,
I'll pay to him, not man, the love I owe.

No tiding of our brother yet? 'Tis strange, so ne'er the Court, and in our own
Land too, and yet no news of him: oh this loss tempers the sweetness of our
happy conquests, with much untimely sorrow.


Royal sir, his safety being unquestioned, should to time leave the redress of
sorrow, were he dead, or taken by the foe, our fatal loss had wanted no quick
Herald to disclose it.


That hope alone sustains me, nor will we be so ungrateful unto heaven to
question what we fear, with what we enjoy. Is answer of our message yet
returned from that religious man, the holy Hermit, sent by the Earl of Chester
to confirm us in that miraculous act? For 'twas no less, our Army being in
rout, nay, quite o'rethrown, as Chester writes; even then this holy man armed
with his cross and staff, went smiling on, and boldly fronts the foe; at sight
of whom the Saxons stood amazed: for to their seeming, above the Hermit head
appeared such brightness, such clear and glorious beams as if our men marched
all in fire, wherewith the Pagans fled, and by our troops were all to death
pursued.


'Tis full of wonder sir.

Oh Gloster, he's a jewelworth a Kingdom: where's Oswold with his answer?


'Tis here my Royal Lord.


In writing, will he not sit with us?


His Orisons performed, he bad me say he would attend with all submission.


Proceed to council then, and let some give order, the Ambassadors being come,
to take our answer, they have admittance. Oswold, Toclio, be it your charge:
and now my Lords, observe the holy council of this reveren'd Hermit: As you
respect your safety, limit not that only power that hath protected you, trust
not an open enemy too far,

He's yet a looser; and knows you have won,
Mischie^s not ended, are but then begun.

Powerful and pithy, which my advice confirms, no man leaves physic when his
sickness slakes, but doubles the ^eceipts: the word of Peace seems fair to
blood-shot eyes; but being applied with such a medicine as blinds all the
sight, argues desire of Cure, but not of Art.


You argue from defects, if both the name, and the condition of the Peace be
one, it is to be preferred, and in the offer made by the Saxon, I see nought
repugnant.


The time of Truce required for thirty days, carries suspicion in it, since
half that space will serve to strength their weakened Regiment.


Who in less time will undertake to free our Country from them.


Leave that unto our fortune.


Is not our bold, and hopeful General still Master of the field, their Legious
fallen, the rest entrenched for fear, half starved, and wounded, and shall we now
give over our fair advantage? force heaven, my Lord, the danger is far more, in
trusting to their words, then to their weapons.


The Ambassadors are come sir.


Conduct them in, we are resolved my Lords, since policy failed in the
beginning, it shall have no hand in the conclusion, that heavenly power that
hath so well begun their fatal overthrow I know can end it, from which fair
hope, my self will give them answer.


What's here, a woman Orator?


Peace Donobert, speak, what are you Lady?


The sister of the Saxon General, warlike Ostorius the East Anglese King, my
name Artesia, who in terms of love brings peace and health to great Aurelius,
wishing she may return as fair a present as she makes tender of.


The fairest present e're mine eyes were blessed with, command a chair there for
this Saxon Beauty: sit Lady, we will confer: your warlike brother sues for a
peace, you say?


With endless love unto your State and Person.


Ha's sent a moving Orator believe me, what think thou Donobert?


Believe me sir, were I but young again this gilded pill might take my stomach
quickly.


True, thou art old, how soon we do forget our own defects. Fair damsel, oh my
tongue turns Traitor, and will betray my heart, sister to our enemy: 's death
her beauty mazes me, I cannot speak if I but lock on her, what's that we did
conclude?


This Royal Lord.


Pish, thou can not utter it: fairest of creatures* tell the King your
Brother that we in love, ha! and honour to our Country, command his Armies to
depart our Realm, but if you please fair soul-Lord Donobert, deliver you our
pleasure.


I shall sir, Lady return, and certify your brother.


Thou art t^o blunt, and rude, return so soon, fie, let her stay, and send some
messenger to certify our pleasure.


What means your Grace?


To give her time of rest to her long Journey, we would not willingly be
thought* uncivil.


Great King of Bri^ain, let (...) not seem strange to embrace the Princely
Offers of a friend,

Whose virtues with thine own, in fairest merit
Both States in Peace and Love may now inherit.

She speaks of Love again, sure 'tis my fear, she knows I do not hate her.


Be then thy self most great Aureliu^, and let not envy, nor a deeper sin in
these thy Councellors, deprive thy goodness of that fair honour, we in seeking
peace, give first to thee, who never use to sue but force our wishes* yet if
this seem light, oh let my sex, though worthless your respect, take the report
of thy humanity,

Whose mild and ver^uous life loud fame displays,
As being overcome by one so worthy praise.

She has an Angels tongue, speak still.

This flattery is gross sir, hear no more on it, Lady, these childish
complements are needless, you have your answer, and believe it, Madam, his
Grace, though young, doth wear within his breast too grave a Councellor to be
seduced by smoothing flattery, or oily words.


I come not sir, to woo him.


'Twere folly if you should, you must not wed him, shame take thy tongue, being
old and weak thy self, thou doat'st, and looking on thine own defects, speak
what thoud'st wish in me, do I command the deeds of others, mine own act not
free?

Be pleased to smile or frown, we respect neither,
My will and rule shall stand and fall together.
Most fair Artesia, see the King descends to give thee welcome with these
warlike Saxons, and now on equal terms both sues and grants, in stead of Truce,
let a perpetual League seal our united bloods in holy marriage, send the East
Angles King this happy news, that thou with me hast made a League for ever, and
added to his state a friend and brother: speak dearest Love, dare you confirm
this Title?


I were no woman to deny a good so high and noble to my fame and Country.


Live then a Queen in Brittain.


He means to marry her.


Death! he shall marry the devil first, marry a Pagan, an Idolater.


He has won her quickly.


She was wooed before she came sure, or came of purpose to conclude the Match.


Who dares oppose our will? my Lord of Gloster, be you Ambassador unto our
Brother, the Brother of our Queen (...), tell him for such our entertainment
looks him, our marriage adding to the happiness,

Of our intended joys, mans good or ill,
In this like waves agree, come double still,
Who's this, the Hermit? Welcome my happiness, our Countries hope, most
reverent holy man, I wanted but thy blessing to make perfect the infinite sum
of my felicity.


Alack sweet Prince, that happiness is yonder,
Felicity and thou art far asunder,
this world can never give it.

Thou art deceived, see here what I have found, Beauty, Alliance, Peace, and
strength of Friends, all in this all exceeding excellence, the League's
confirmed.


With whom, dear Lord?

With the great Brother of this Beauteous woman, the Royal Saxon King.


Oh then I see, and fear thou art too near thy misery, what magic could so
linck thee to this mischief by all the good that thou hast reaped by me, stand
further from destruction.


Speak as a man, and I shall hope to obey thee.

Idolaters get hence, fond King, let go,
Thou hug'st thy ruin, and thy Countries woe.

Well spoke old Father, too him, bait him soundly, now by heavens blessed Lady, I
can scarce keep patience.


What devil is this?


That cursed Christian, by whose hellish charms our army was o'rethrown.


Why do you dally sir? oh tempt not heaven, warm not a serpent in your naked
bosom, discharge them from your Court.


Thou speak like madness, command the frozen shepherd to the shade, when he
sits warm in the Sun, the fever sick to add more heat unto his burning pain,
these may obey, 'tis less extremity then thou enjoynst to me: cast but thine
eye upon this beauty, do it, I'll forgive thee, though jealousy in others
finds no pardon, then say thou dost not love me, I shall then swear you are
immortal, and no earthly man, oh blame then my morta^lity; no^ me.


It is thy weakness brings thy ^ Prince.


Be milder in thy doom.


'Tis you that must endure heavens doom, which fallen, remember's just.


Thou shalt not live to see it: how fares my Lord? (...) my poor presence breed
dislike, great Prince, I am no such neglected soul, will seek to tie you to
your word.


My word dear Love, may my Religion, Crown, State, and Kingdom fail, when I
fail thee, command Earl Chester to break up the camp, without disturbance to
our Saxon friends, send every hour swift posts to hasten on the King her
Brother, to conclude this League, this endless happy Peace of Love and
Marriage, till when provide for Revels, and give charge that nought be wanting,
which make our Triumphs

Sportful and free to all, if such fair blood
Engender ill, man must not look for good.

How much the oft report of this blessed Hermit, hath won on my desires; I must
behold him, and sure this should be he, oh the worlds folly, proud earth and
dust, how low a price bears goodness, all that should make man absolute, shines
in him: much reverent Sir, may I without offence give interruption to your holy
thoughts?


What would you Lady?

That which^till now ne'er found a language in me, I am in love.


In Love, with what?

With virtue?

There's no blame in that.

Nay sir, with you?
With your Religious Life? Your Virtue, Goodness, if there be a name to express
affection greater, that, that would I learn and utter: Reverent Sir, if there
be any thing to bar my suit, be charitable and expose it, your prayers are the
same Orisons, which I will number. Holy Sir, keep not instruction back from
willingness, possess me of that knowledge leads you on to this humility, for
well I know were greatness good, you would not live so low.


Are you a Virgin?

Yes Sir?

Your name?

Modesta?

Your name and virtues meet, a Modest Virgin, live ever in the sanctimonious
way to Heaven and Happiness, there's goodness in you, I must instruct you
further; come look up, behold yon firmament, there sits a power, whose
foot-stool is this earth, oh learn this lesson,

And practise it, he that will climb so high,
Must leave no joy beneath, to move his eye.

I apprehend you sir, on Heaven I fix my love,
Earth gives us grief, our joys are all above,
For this was man in innocence naked born,
To show us wealth hinders our sweet return.

AWay, follow me no further, I am none of thy brother, what with Child, great
with Child, and knows not whose the Father on it, I am ashamed to call thee
Sister.


Believe me Brother, he was a Gentleman.

Nay, I believe that, he gives arms, and legs too, and has made you the Herald
to blaze 'em, but Ioan, Ioan, sister Ioan, can you tell me his name that did
it: how shall we call my Cousin, your bastard, when we have it?


Alas, I know not the Gentleman's name Brother, I met him in these woods, the
last great hunting, he was so kind and proffered me so much, as I had not the
heart to ask him more.


Not his name, why this shows your Country breeding now, had you been brought
up i'th^ City, you'd have got a Father first, and the child afterwards: hast
thou no marks to know him by.


He had most rich Attire, a fair Hat and Feather, a gilt Sword, and most
excellent Hangers.


Pox on his Hangers, would he had bin gelt for his labour.


Had you but heard him swear you would have thought.


I as you did, swearing and lying goes together still, did his Oaths get you
with Child, we shall have a roaring Boy then in faith, well sister, I must leave
you.


Dear Brother stay, help me to find him out, I'll ask no further.


'Sfoot who should I find? who should I ask for?


Alas I know not, he uses in these woods, and these are witness of his oaths
and promise.


We are like to have a hot suit on it, when our best witness's but a Knight 'ath
Post.


Do but enquire this Forest, I'll go with you, some happy fate may guide us
till we meet him.


Meet him, and what name shall we have for h^m, when we weet him? 'Sfoot thou
neither know him, nor can tell what to call him, was ever man tired with
such a business, to have a sister got with child, and know not who did it;
well, you shall see him, I'll do my best for you, I'll make Proclamation, if
these Woods and Trees, as you say, will bear any witness, let them answer; Oh
yes: If there be any man that wants a name, will come in for conscience sake,
and acknowledge himself to be a Whore-Master, he shall have that laid to his
charge in an hour, he shall not be rid on in an age; if he have Lands, he shall
have an heir, if he have patience, he shall have a wife, if he have neither
Lands nor patience, ^e shall have a whore, so ho boy, so ho, so, so.

So, ho, by, so, ho, illo ho, illo ho.


Hark, hark sister, there's one hollows to us, what a wicked world's this, a
man cannot so soon name a whore but a knave comes presently, and see where he
is, stand close a while, sister.


How like a voice that Echo spake, but oh my thoughts are lost for ever in
amazement, could I but meet a man to tell her beauties, these trees would bend
their tops to kiss the air, that from my lips should give her praises up.


He talk's of a woman, sister.


This may be he, brother.

View him well, you see he has a fair Sword, but his Hanger's are fallen.


Here did I see her first, here view her beauty, oh had I known her name, I had
been happy.


Sister this is he sure, he knows not thy name neither, a couple of wise fools
in faith, to get children and know not one another.


You weeping leaves, upon whose tender cheeks doth stand a flood of tears at my
complaint, and heard my vows and oaths.


Law, Law, he has been a great swearer too, 'tis he sister.


For having overtook her, as I have seen a forward blood-hound, strip the
swifter of the cry ready to seize his wished hopes, upon the sudden view struck
with astonishment at his arrived prey, instead of seizure stands at fearful
bay,

Or like to Marius soldiers, who o'retook
The eye sight killing Gorgon at one look,
Made everlasting stand: so feared my power
Whose cloud aspired the Sun, dissolved a shower:
Pigmalion, then I tasted thy sad fate, wh^se Ivory picture, and my fair were
one, our dotage past imagination, I saw and felt desire.


Pox a your fingering, did he feel sister?


But enjoyed now, oh fate, thou had thy days and nights to feed,

Or calm affection, one poor sight was all,
Converts my pleasure to perpetual thrall,
Embracing thine, thou lostest breath and desire,
So I relating mine, will here expire,
For here I vow to you mournful plants
Who were the first made happy by her fame,
Never to part hence, till I know her name.

Give me thy hand sister, The Child has found his Father, this is he sure, as
I am a man, had I been a woman these kind words would have won me, I should
have had a great belly too that's certain; well, I'll speak to him: most honest
and fleshly minded Gentleman, give me your hand sir.


Ha, what art thou, that thus rude and boldly, dare take notice of a wretch
so much allied to misery as I am?


Nay, Sir, for our alliance, I shall be found to be a poor brother in Law of
your worships, the Gentlewoman you spake on, is my sister, you see what a clew
she spreads, her name is Ioan Go-too't, I am her elder, but she has been at it
before me: 'tis a woman's fault, pox a this bashfulness, come forward Jug,
prithee speak to him.


Have you e're seen me Lady?


Seen ye, ha, ha, It seems she has felt you too, here's a young Go-too't a
coming sir, she is my sister, we all love to Go-too't, as well as your worship,
she's a Maid yet, but you may make her a wife, when you please sir.


I am amazed with wonder: Tell me woman, what sin have you committed worthy
this?


Do you not know me sir?


Know thee! as I do thunder, hell, and mischief, witch, stallion, hag.


I see he will marry her, he speaks so like a husband.


Death, I will cut their tongues out for this blasphemy, strumpet, villain,
where have you ever seen me?


Speak for your self with a pox to ye.


Slaves, I'll make you curse your selves for this temptation.


Oh sir, if ever you did speak to me, it was in smoother phrase, in fairer
language.


Lightning consume me, if I ever saw thee, my rage o'reflowes my blood, all
patience flies me.


Hold I beseech you sir, I have nothing to ^ay to you.


Help, help, murder, murder.


Make haste Sir, this way the sound came, it was a wood.


See where she is, and the Prince, the price of all our wishes.


The Prince say ye, ha's made a poor Subject of me I am sure.


Sweet Prince, noble Vter, speak, how fare you sir?


Dear sir, recall your self, your fearful absence hath won too much already on
the grief of our sad King, from whom our laboring search hath had this fair
success in meeting you.


His silence, and his looks argue distraction.


Nay, he's mad sure, he will not acknowledge my sister, nor the child neither.


Let us entreat your Grac^ along with us, your sight will bring new life, to
the King your Brother.


Will you go sir?


Yes, any whether, guide me, all's hell I see,

Man may change air, but not his misery.


Lend me one word with you, sir.


Well said sister, he has a Feather, and fair Hangers too, this may be he.


What would you fair one.


Sure I have seen you in these woods e're this?


Trust me never, I never saw this place, till at this time my friend conducted
me.


The more's my sorrow then.


Would I could comfort you: I am a Bachelor, but it seems you have a husband,
you have been foully o'reshot else.


A woman's fault, we are all subject to go to it, sir.


Oswold away, the Prince will not stir a foot without you.


I am coming, farewell woman.


Prithee make haste.


Good sir, but one word with you e're you leave us.


With me fair soul?


She'll have a fling at him too, the Child must have a Father.


Have you never seen me sir?


Seen thee, 'Sfoot I have seen many fair faces in my time, prithee look up, and
do not weep so, sure pretty wanton, I have seen this face before.


It is enough, though your ne'er see me more.


'Sfoot she's fallen, this place is enchanted sure, look to the woman fellow.


Oh she's dead! she's dead, as you are a man stay and help, sir: Ioan, Ioan,
sister Ioan, why Ioan Go too't I say, will you cast away your self, and your
child, and me too, what do you mean, sister?


Oh give me pardon sir, 'twas too much joy oppressed my loving thoughts, I know
you were too noble to deny me, (...)* Where i^ he?


Who, the Gentleman? he's gone sister.


Oh! I am und one then, run, tell him I did but faint for joy, dear brother
haste, why dost thou stay? oh never cease, till he give answer to thee.


He: which he? what do you call him trow?


Unnatural brother, show me the path he took, why dost thou d^lly? speak, oh,
which way went he?


This way, that way, through the bushes there.


Were it through fire, the Journey's easy, winged with sweet desire.


Hey day, there's some hope of this yet, I'll follow her for kindreds sake, if
she miss of her purpose now, she'll challenge all she finds I see, for if ever
we meet with a two legged creature in the whole Kingdom, the Child shall have a
Father that's certain.


Come Gloster, I do not like this hasty Marriage.


She was quickly wooed and won, not six days since arrived an enemy to sue for
Peace, and now crowned Queen of Brittain, this is strange.


Her brother too made as quick speed in coming, leaving his Saxons, and his
starved Troops, to take the advantage whilst 'twas offered, fore heaven I fear
the King's too ^redulous, our Army is discharged too.


Yes, and our General commanded home, Son Edwin have you seen him since?


He's come to Court, but will not view the presence, nor speak unto the King,
he's so discontent at this so strange alliance with the Saxon, as nothing can
persuade his patience.


You know his humour will endure* no check, no if the King oppose it, all
crosses feeds both his spleen, and his impatience, those affections are in him
like powder, apt to inflame with every little spark, and blow up all his
reason.


Edol of Chester is a noble Soldier.


So is he by the Rood, ever most faithful to the King and Kingdom, how e're his
passions guide him.


See where he comes, my Lord.


Welcome to Court, brave Earl.


Do not deceive me by your flatteries: Is not the Saxon here? the League
confirmed? the Marriage ratified? the Court divided with Pagan Infidels? the
least part Christians, at least in their Commands? Oh the gods! it is a thought
that takes away my sleep, and (...) my senses so I scarcely know you: Prepare
my horses, I'll away to Chester.


What shall we do with our Companies, my Lord?


Keep them at home to increase Cuckolds, and get some C^ses for your
Captainships, smooth up your brows, the wars has spoiled your f^ccs, and few
will now regard you.


Preserve you^ patience, Sir.


Preserve your Honours, Lords, your Countries Safety, your Lives, and Lands from
strangers: what black devil could so bewitch the King, so to discharge a Royal
Army in the height of conquest? nay, even already made victorious, to give such
credit to an enemy, a starved foe, a straggling fugitive, beaten beneath our
feet, so love dejected, so servi^e, and so base, as hope of life had won them
all, to leave the Land for ever?


It was the Kings will.


It was your want of wisdom, that should have laid before his tender youth, the
dangers of a State, where forain Powers bandy for Sovereignty with Lawful
Kings, who be^ng settled once, to assure themselves, will never fail to seek the
blood and life of all competitors.


Your words sound well my Lord, and point at safety, both for the Realm and us,
but why did you within whose power it lay, as General, with full Commission to
dispose the war, lend ear to parley with the weakened foe?


Oh the good Gods!


And on that parley came this Embassy.


You will hear me.


Your letters did declare it to the King, both of the Peace, and all Conditions
brought by this Saxon Lady, whose fond love has thus be witched him.


I will curse you all as black as hell, unless you hear me, your gross mistake
would make wisdom her self run madding through the streets, and quarrel with
her shadow, death! why killed ye not that woman?


Oh my Lord.


The great devil take me quick, had I been by, and all the women of the world
were barren, she should have died e're he had married her on these condi^ions.


It is not reason that directs you thus.


Then have I none, for all I have directs me, never was man so palpably abused,
so basely mar^ed, bought and sold to scorn, my Honour, Fame, and hopef^l
Victories, the loss of Time, Expenses, Blood and Fortunes, all vanished into
nothing.


This rage is vain my Lord, what the King does, nor they, nor you can help.


My Sword must fail me then.


Against whom will you expose it?


What's that to you, against all the devils in hell to guard my country.


These are airy words.


Sir, you ^read too hard upon my patience.


I speak the duty of a Subjects faith, and say again had your been here in
presence,

What the King did, you had not dared to cross it,

I will trample on his Life and Soul that says it.

My Lord.


Come, come.


Now before heaven.


Dear sir.


Not dare? thou lie beneath thy lungs.


No more son Edwin.


I have done sir, I take my leave.


But thou shall not, you shall take no leave of me Sir.


For wisdoms sake my Lord.


Sir, I'll leave him, and you, and all of you, the Court and King, and let my
Sword, and friends, (...) for Edol^ safety: stay you here, and hug the Saxons,
till they cut your throats, or b^ing the Land to servile slavery, such yokes of
baseness, Chester must not suffer,

Go, and repent bet^ mes these foul misdeeds,
For in this League, all our whole Kingdom bleeds,
which I'll preve^t, or perish.

See how his rage transports him!


These passions set apart, a braver soldier breathes not in the world this day.


I wish his own worth do not court his ^ine.

The King must Rule* and we must learn to obey,
True virtue (...) direct the noble way.

Why is the Court so dull? me thinks each room, and angle of our Palace should
appear stuck full of objects fit for (...) and triumphs, to show ou^ high
content. Oswold fill wine, must we begin the Revels? be it so then, reach me
the cup: I'll now begin a Health to our loved Queen, the bright Artesia, the
Royal Saxon King, our warlike brother, go and command all the whole Court to
pledge it, fill to the Hermit there* most reverent Ansel^, we'll do thee Honour
first, to pledge my Queen.


I drink no healths great King, and if I did, I would be loath to part with
health, to those that have no power to give it back again.


Mistake not, it is the argument of Love and Duty to our Queen and us.


But he owes none it seems.


I do to virtue Madam, temperate minds covets that health to drink, which
nature gives in every spring to man, he that doth hold

His body, but a Tenement at will
Bestows no cost, but to repair what's ill,
Ye^ if your healths or heat of Wine, fair Princes,
Could this old frame, or these cras'd limbs restore,
Or keep out death, or sickness, then fill more,
I'll make fresh way for appetite, if no,
On such a prodigal who would wealth bestow?

He speaks not like a guest to grace a wedding.


No sir, but like an envious impostor.


A Christian slave, a Cinick.


What virtue could decline your Kingly spirit, to such respect of him whose
magic spells met with your vanquished Troops, and turned your Arms to that
necessity of fight, which the despair of any hope to stand but by his charms,
had been defeated in a bloody conquest?


'Twas magic, hellbred magic did it sir, and that's a course my Lord, which
we esteem in all our Saxon Wars, unto the last and lowest ebb of servi^e
treachery.


Sure you are deceived, it was the hand of heaven, that in his virtue gave us
victory, is there a power in man that can strike fear thorough a general camp,
or create spirits, in recreant bosoms above present sense?


To blind the sense there may with apparition of well armed troops within
themselves are air, formed into humane shapes, and such that day were by that
Sorcerer raised to cross our fortunes.


There is ^ law tells u^, that words want force to make deeds void, examples
must be shown by instances alike, e're I believe it.


'Tis easily performed, believe me sir, propose your own desires, and give but
way to what our Magic here shall straight perform, and then let his or our
deserts be censured.


We could not wish a greater happiness, then what this satisfaction brings with
it, let him proceed, fair brother.


He shall sir, come learned Proximus, this task be thine, let thy great charms
confound the opinion this Christian by his spells hath falsely won.


Great King, propound your wishes then, wha^ persons, of what State, what
numbers, or how armed, please your own thoughts, they shall appear before you.


Strange art! what think thou reverent Hermit?


Let him go on sir.


Wilt thou behold his cunning?


Right gladly sir, it will be my joy to tell,
That I was here to laugh at him and hell.

I like thy confidence.


His saucy impudence, proceed to'th' trial.


Speak your desires my Lord, and be it placed in any angle underneath the
Moon, the center of the Earth, the Sea, the Air, the region of the fire, nay
hell it self, and I'll present it.


We'll have no sight so fearful, only this, if all thy art can reach it, show
me here the two great Champions of the Trojan War, Achilles and brave Hector,
our grea^ Ancestor, both in their warlike habits, Armour, Shields, and Weapons
then in use for fight.


'Tis done, my Lord, command a halt and silence, as each man will respect his
life or danger.


Quid vis?


Attend me.


The Apparition comes, on our displeasure let all keep place and silence.


What means this stay, bright Arm^, Pl^sg^th? why fear you and fall back? (...)
the Alarms, and enforce the Combat, or hel^ or darkness circles you for ever


We dare not.


Ha!


Our charms are all dissolved, Armel away,
'Tis worse then hell to us, whiles^ here we stay.

What* at a Non-plus fi^? command them back for shame.


What power o're^aws my Spell! return you Hell-hounds* Armel, Plesgeth, double
damnation seize you, by all the Infernal powers, the prince of devils is in
this Hermits habit, what else could force my Spirits quake or tremble thus?


We^k argument to hide you^ want of skill: does the devil fear the devil, or
war with hell? they have not been acquainted long it seems. Know mis-believing
Pagan, even that Power

That overthrew your Fo^ces, still lets you see,
He only can cont^oul both hell and thee.

Di^grace and mischief, I'll enforce new charms, new spells, and spirits raised
from the low Aby^s of hells unbottom'd depths.


We have enough sir, give over your charms, we'll find some other time to
praise your Art. I dare not but acknowledge that heavenly Power my heart stands
witness to: be not dismayed my Lords, at this disast^r, nor thou my fairest
Queen* we will change the Scen^ to some more pleasing spo^ * Lead to your Chamber,

How^ere in this thy plea^ures find a ^ross,
Our joy's too fixed here to ^uffer los^.

Which I shall add to sir, with news I bring: The Prince your Brother, lives.


(...)!


And comes to grace (...) high and heaven-knit Marriage


Why dost thou flatter me, to make me think such happiness attends me?


His presence speaks my truth, sir.


Force me, ^


^


^


^


^


^ saw her, captived my senses, and thus many (...) bared me ^froth^ all
society of men: how came she to this place, brother (...) ^ Speak that Angels
name, her heaven-blest name, oh speak it (...) Sir.


It is Artesia, the Royal Saxon Princes^.


A woman, and no Deity: no feigned shape, to mock the reason of admiring sense,
on whom a hope as low as mine may live, love, and enjoy, dear Brother, may it
not?


She is all the Good, or Virtue thou ca^st name, my Wife, my Queen.


Ha! your wife!


Which you shall find sir, if that time and fortune may make my love but
wor^hy of your trial.


Oh!


What troubles you, dear Brother? Why with so strange and fixed an eye dost thou
behold my Joys?


You are not well, sir.


Yes, yes, oh you immortal powers, why has poor man so many entrances for
sorrow to creep in at, when our sense is much too weak to hold his happiness?
Oh say I was born deaf: and let your silence confirm in me the knowing my
defect, at least be charitable to conceal my sin, for hearing is no less in me,
dear Brother.


No more, I see thou art a Rival in the Joys of my high Bliss. Come my Artesia,

The Day's most praised when 'tis ecclipst by Night,
Great Good must have as great Ill opposite.

Stay, hear but a word; yet now I think on it,

This is your Wedding-night, and were it mine,
I should be angry with least loss of time.

Envy speaks no such words, has no such looks.


Sweet rest unto you both.


Lights to our Nuptial Chamber.


Could you speak so, I would not fear how much my grief did grow.


Lights to our Chamber, on, on, set on.


Could you speak so, I would not fear how much my griefs did grow. Those were
her very words, sure I am waking, she wrung me by the hand, and spake them to
me with a most pas^ionate affection, perhaps she loves, and now repents her
choice, in marriage with my brother; oh fond man, how dare thou trust thy
Traitors thoughts, thus to be^ray thy self? 'twas but a waking dream wherein
thou made thy wishes speak, not her, in which thy foolish hopes strives to
prolong

A wretched being, so sickly children play
With ^ toys, which for a time delay,
But do not ^ure the ^it: be ^hen a man,
Meet that destruction which thou can not fly
From, not to live, make it thy best to die,
And call her now, whom thou did hope to wed,
Thy brothers wife, thou art too ne'er a kin,
And such an act above all name's a sin
Not to be blotted out, heaven pardon me,
She's banished from my bosom now for ever,
To lowest ^bbes, men justly hope a flood,
When vice grows barren, all desires are good.

The noble Prince, I take it sir.


You speak me what I should be, Lady.


Know by that name sir, Queen Artesia greets you.


Alas good virtue, how is she mistaken.


Commending her affection in this Jewel, sir.


She binds my service to her: has a Jewel 'tis a fair one trust me, and
methinks it much resembles something I have seen with her.


It is an artificial crab, Sir.


A creature that goes backward.


True, from the way it looks.


There is no moral in it aludes to her self?


'Tis your construction gives you that sir, she's a woman.


And like this, may use her legs, and eyes two several ways.


Just like the Sea-crab, which on the Mussel prays, whilst he bills at a
stone.


Pretty in troth, prithee tell me, art thou honest?


I hope I seem no other, sir.


And those that seem so, are sometimes bad enough.


If they will accuse themselves for want of witness, let them, I am not so
foolish.


I see you are wise, come speak me truly, what is the greatest sin?


That which man never acted, what has been done Is as the least, common to all
as one.


Dost think thy Lady is of thy opinion?


She's a bad Scholar else, I have brought her up, and she dares owe me still.


I, 'tis a fault in greatness, they dare owe many e're they pay one, but dare
thou ^pose thy scholar to my examining?


Yes in good troth sir, and pray put her to it too, 'tis a hard lesson if she
answer it not.


Thou know the hardest.


As far as a woman may, sir.


I commend thy plainness, when wilt thou bring me to thy Lady?


Next opportunity I attend you, sir.


Thanks, take this, and commend me to her.


Think of your Sea-crab sir, I pray.


Oh by any means, Lady, what should all this tend to? if it be Love or Lust
that thus incites her, the sin is horrid and incestuous; if to betray my life,
what hopes she by it? Yes, it may be a practice 'twixt themselves, to expel the
Brittains and ensure the State through our destructions, all this may be valid
with a deeper reach in villainy, then all my thoughts can guess at, however

I will confer with her, and if I find
Lust hath given Life to Envy in her mind,
I may prevent the danger; so men wise
By the same step by which they fell, may rise.
Vices are Virtues, if so thought and seen,
And Trees with foulest roots, branch soonest green.

COme sister, thou that art all fool, all mad-woman.


Prithee have patience, we are now at Court.


At Court! ha, ha, that proves thy madness, was there ever any woman in thy
taking travelled to Court for a husband? 'slid, 'tis enough for them to get
children, and the City to keep 'em, and the Country to find Nurses: every
thing must be done in his due place, sister.


Be but content a while, for sure I know this Journey will be happy. Oh dear
brother, this night my sweet Friend came to comfort me, I saw him, and embraced
him in mine arms.


Why did you not hold him, and call me to help you?


Alas, I thought I had been with him still, but when I waked!


Ah pox of all Loger-heads, then you were but in a Dream all this while, and we
may still go look him: Well, since we are come to Court, cast your Cats eyes
about you, and either find him out you dreamt on, or some other, for I'll
trouble my self no further.


He much resembles him; but sure my friend, brother, was not so high of
stature.


Oh beast, wast thou got a child with a short thing too?


Come, come, I'll hear no more on it: Go Lord Edwin, tell her this day her sister
shall be married to Cador Earl of Cornwall, so shall she to thee brave Edwin, if
she'll have my blessing.


She is addicted to a single Life, she will not hear of Marriage.


Tush, fear it not: go you from me to her, use your best skill my Lord, and if
you fail, I have a trick shall do it: haste, haste about it.


Sir, I am gone, my hope is in your help more then my own.


And worthy Toclio, to your care I must commend this business, for Lights and
Music, and what else is needful.


I shall my Lord.


We would entreat a word sir, come forward sister.


What lackst thou fellow?


I lack a father for a child, sir.


How! a God-father?


No sir, we mean the own father: it may be you sir, for any thing we know, I
think the child is like you.


Like me! prithee where is it?


Nay, 'tis not born yet sir, 'tis forth coming you see, the child must have a
father: what do you think of my sister?


Why I think if she ne'er had husband she's a whore, and thou a fool, farewell.


I thank you sir: well, pull up thy heart sister, if there be any Law in the
Court this fellow shall father it, because he uses me so scurvily. There's a
great Wedding towards they say, we will amongst them for a husband for thee.

If we miss there, I'll have another bout with him that abused me. Seel look,
there comes another Hat and Feather, this should be a close Lecher, he's
reading of a Love-letter.


Earl Cador's Marriage, and a Masque to grace it, so, so. This night shall make
me famous for Presentiments. How now, what are you?


A couple of Great Brittains, you may see by our bellies, sir.

And what of this sir?

Why thus the matter stands sir: There's one of your Courtiers Hunting Nags has
made a Gap through another mans Enclosure. Now sir, here's the question, who
should be at charge of a Fur-bush to stop it?


Ha, ha, this is out of my element: the Law must end it.


Your Worship says well; for surely I think some Lawyer had a hand in the
business, we have such a troublesome Issue.


But what's thy business with me now?


Nay sir, the business is done already, you may see by my sisters belly.


Oh, now I find thee, this Gentlewoman it seems has been humbled.


As low as the ground would give her leave sir, and your Worship knows this:
though there be many fathers without children, yet to have a child without a
father, were most unnatural.


That's true in faith, I never heard of a child yet that e're begot his father.


Why true, you say wisely sir.


And therefore I conclude, that he that got the child, is without all question
the father of it.


I, now you come to the mat^er sir: and our suit is to your Worship for the
discovery of this father.


Why, lives he in the Court here?


Yes sir, and I desire but Marriage.


And does the knave refuse it? Come, come, be merry wench, he shall marry thee,
and keep the child too, if my Knighthood can do any thing; I am bound by mine
Orders to help distressed Ladies, and can there be a greater injury to a woman
with child, then to lack a father for it? I am ashamed of your simpleness:
Come, come, give me a Courtiers Fee for my pains, and I'll be thy Advocate my
self, and justice shall be found, nay I'll sue the Law for it; but give me my
Fee first.


If all the money I have in the world will do it, you shall have it sir.


An Angel does it.


Nay there's two, for your better eye sight sir.


Why well said: give me thy hand wench, I'll teach thee a trick for all this,
shall get a father for thy child presently, and this it is, mark now: You meet
a man, as you meet me now, thou claim Marriage of me, and lay the child
to my charge, I deny it: push, that's nothing, hold thy Claim fast, thy words
carries it, and no Law can withstand it.


Is't possible?

Past all opposition, her own word carries it, let her challenge any man, the
child shall call him Father; there's a trick for your money now.


Troth Sir, we thank you, we will make use of your trick, and go no further to
seek the child a Father, for we challenge you Sir: sister lay it to him, he
shall marry thee, I shall have a worshipful old man to my brother.


Ha, ha, I like thy pleasantness,.


Nay indeed Sir, I do challenge you.


You think we jest sir.


I by my troth do I, I like thy wit in faith, thou shalt live at Court with me,
did never here of Nicodemus Nothing? I am the man.


Nothing, 'slid we are out again, thou wast never got with child with nothing
sure.


I know not what to say.


Never grieve wench, show me the man and process shall fly out.


'Tis enough for us to find the children, we look that you should find the
Father, and therefore either do us justice, or we will stand to our first
challenge.


Would you have justice without an Adversary, unless you can show me the man, I
can do you no good in it.


Why then I hope you'll do us no harm sir, you'll restore my money.


What, my Fee? marry Law forbid it, find out the party, and you shall have
justice, your fault closed up, and all shall be amended, the Child his Father,
and the Law ended.


Well, he has deserved his Fee indeed, for he has brought our suit to a quick
end, I promise you, and yet the Child has never a Father; nor we have no more
money to seek after him, a shame of all lecherous placcats; now you look like a
Cat had newly kitten'd, what will you do now trow? Follow me no further, lest I
beat your brains out.


Impose upon me any punishment, rather then leave me now.


Well, I think I am bewitch with thee, I cannot find in my heart to forsake
her, there was never sister would have abused a poor brother as thou hast done,
I am even pined away with fretting, there's nothing but flesh and bones about
me, well and I had my money again, it were some comfort, hark sister, Thunder.
does it not thunder?


Oh yes, most fearfully, what shall. we do brother?


Marry e'ene get some shelter e're the storm catch us: away, let's away I
prithee.


Ha, 'tis he, stay brother, dear brother stay.


What's the matter now?


My love, my friend is come, yonder he goes.


Where, where, show me where, I'll stop him if the devil be not in him.


Look there, look yonder, oh dear friend, pity my distress, for heaven and
goodness do but speak to me.


She calls me, and yet drives me headlong from her,
Poor mortal, thou and I are much uneven,
Thou must not speak of goodness nor of heaven,
if I confer with thee: but be of comfort, whilst men do breath, and Britiains
name be known,
The fatal fruit thou bear within thy womb,
Shall here be famous till the day of doom.

'Slid who's that talks so? I can see no body.


Then art thou blind, or mad, see where he goes, and beckons me to come, oh
lead me forth, I'll follow thee in spite of fear or death.


Oh brave, she'll run to the devil for a husband, she's stark mad sure, and
talks to a shadow, for I could see no substance: well, I'll after her, the
child was got by chance, and the father must be found at all adventure.


Oh reverent sir, by you my heart hath reached at the large hopes of holy Piety,
and for this I craved your company, Here in your sight religiouslly to vow,

My chaste thoughts up to heaven, and make you now the witness of my faith.


Angels assist thy hopes.


What means my Love? thou art my promised wife.


To part with willingly what friends and life Can make no good assurance of.


Oh find remorse, fair soul, to love and merit, and yet recant thy vow.


Never: this world and I are parted now for ever.


To find the way to bliss, oh happy woman,
You have learned the hardest Lesson well I see,
Now show thy fortitude and constancy,
Let these thy friends thy sad departure weep,
Thou shalt but loose the wealth thou could not keep,
My contemplation calls me, I must leave ye,

O reverent Sir, persuade not her to leave me,

My Lord I do not, nor to cease to love ye,
I only pray her faith may fixed stand.
Marriage was blessed I know with heavens own hand.

You hear him Lady, 'tis not a virgins state but sanctity of life, must make
you happy.


Good sir, you say you love me, gentle Edwin, even by that love I do beseech
you leave me.


Think of your fathers tears, your weeping friends whom cruel grief makes pale
and bloodless for you.


Would I were dead to all.


Why do you weep?


Oh who would live to see
How men with care and cost, seek misery.

Why do you seek it then? What joy, what pleasure, can give you comfort in a
single life?


The contemplation of a happy death, which is to me so pleasing that I think no
torture could diver me: What's this world wherein you'd have me walk, but a sad
passage to a dread Judgement-Seat, from whence even now we are but bailed, upon
our good abearing, till that great Sessions come, when Death, the Crier, will
surely summon us, and all to appear, to plead us guilty or our bail to clear:
what musick's this?


Oh now resolve and think upon my love, this sounds the Marriage of your
beauteous sister, virtuous Constancia, with the noble Cador, look, and behold
this pleasure.


Cover me with night,
It is a vanity not worth the sight.

See, see, she's yonder, pass on son


Daughter Constancia, I beseech you all unless she first move speech, salute
her not. Edwin what good success?


Nothing as yet, unless this object take her.


See, see, her eye is fixed upon her sister, seem careless all, and take no
notice of her: on before there, come my Constancia.


Not speak to me, nor dain to cast an eye,
To look on my despised poverty?
I must be more charitable, pray stay Lady, are not you she whom I did once
call sister?


I did acknowledge such a name to one whilst she was worthy of it, in whose
folly

Since you neglect your fame and friends together,
In you I drowned a sisters name for ever.

Your looks did speak no less.


It now begins to work, this sight has moved her.


I know this trick would take, or nothing.


Though you disdain in me a sisters name, yet charity me thinks should be so
strong to instruct e're you reject, I am a wretch even follies instance, who
perhaps have er'd, not having known the goodness bears so high and fair a show
in you, which being expressed

I may recant this low despised life,
And please those friends whom I moved to grief.

She is coming in faith, be merry Edwin.


Since you desire instruction you shall have it, what is't should make you thus
desire to live vowed to a single life?


Because I know I cannot fly from death, oh my good sister, I beseech you hear
me;

This world is but a Masque, catching weak eyes,
With what is not our selves but our disguise,
A Vizard that falls off, the Dance being done,
And leaves Deaths Glass for all to look upon,
Our best happiness here, lasts but a night,
Whose burning Tapers makes false Ware seem right;
Who knows not this, and will not now provide
Some better shift before his shame be spied,
And knowing this vain world at last will leave him,
Shake off these robes that help but to deceive him.

Her words are powerful, I am amazed to hear her!

Her soul's enchanted with infected Spells.
Leave her best Girl, for now in thee
I'll seek the fruits of Age, Posterity.
Out o'my sight, sure I was half asleep, or drunk, when I begot thee.

Good sir forbear. What say you to that sister?
The joy of children, a blessed Mothers Name!
Oh who without much grief can loose such Fame?

Who can enjoy it without sorrow rather?
And that most certain where the joy's unsure,
Seeing the fruit that we beget endure
So many miseries, that oft we pray
The Heavens to shut up their afflicted day:
At best we do but bring forth Heirs to die,
And fill the Coffins of our enemy.

Oh my soul.

Hear her no more Constantia, she's sure bewitched with Error, leave her Girl.


Then must I leave all goodness sir: away, stand-off, I say.


How's this?


I have no father, friend, no husband now, all are but borrowed robes, in which
we masque to waste and spend the time, when all our Life is but one good
betwixt two Ague-days, which from the first, e're we have time to praise, a
second Fever takes us: Oh my best sister, my souls eternal friend, forgive the
rashness of my distempered tongue, for how could she knew not her self, know
thy felicity, from which worlds cannot now remove me.


Art thou mad too, fond woman? what's thy meaning?


To seek eter^al happiness in heaven, which all this world affords not.


Think of thy Vow, thou art my promised Wife.


Pray trouble me no further.


Strange alteration!


Why do you stand at gaze, you sacred Priests? you holy men be equal to the
Gods, and consummate my Marriage with this woman.


Her self gives barr my Lord, to your desires, and our performance; 'tis
against the Law and Orders of the Church to force a Marriage.


How am I wronged! was this your trick, my Lord?


I am abused past sufferance; grief and amazement strive which Sense of mine
shall loose her being first; yet let me call thee Daughter.


Me, Wife.


Your words are air, you speak of want, to wealth, And wish her sickness, newly
raised to health.


Bewitched Girls, tempt not an old mans fury, that hath no strength to uphold
his feeble age, but what your sights give life to, oh beware, and do not make
me curse you.

Kneel.


Dear father, here at your feet we kneel, grant us but this, that in your sight
and hearing the good Hermit may plead our Cause; which if it shall not give
such satisfaction as your Age desires, we will submit to you.


You gave us life, save not our bodies, but our souls from death.


This gives some comfort yet: Rise with my blessings. Have patience, noble
Cador, worthy Edwin, send for the Hermit that we may confer, for sure

Religion ties you not to leave
Your careful Father thus; if so it be,
Take you content, and give all grief to me.

Mix light and darkness, earth and heaven dissolve, be of one piece again, and
turn to C^aos, break all your works you powers, and spoil the world, or if you
will maintain earth still, give way and life to this abortive birth now coming,
whose fame shall add unto your Oracles. Lucina, Hecate, dreadful Queen of
Night, bright Proserpine, be pleased for Cerer love, from Stigian darkness,
summon up the Fates,

And in a moment bring them quickly hither,
Lest death do vent her birth and her together,
Assist you spirits of infernal deeps, squint eyed ^ricth^, midinght Incubus.
Rise, rise to aid this birth prodigious. Thanks Hecate, hail sister to the
Gods, there lies your way, haste with the Fates, and help, give quick dispatch
unto her laboring throws, to bring this mixture of infernal seed, to humane
being,

And to beguile her pains, till back you come,
Antics shall dance and Music fill the room.

Thanks Queen of Shades.

Farewell, great servant to th'infernal King,
In honour of this child, the Fates shall bring
All their assisting powers of Knowledge, Arts,
Learning, Wisdom, all the hidden parts
Of all-admiring Prophecy, to fore-see
The event of times to come, his Art shall stand
A wall of brass to guard the Brittain Land,
Even from this minute, all his Arts appears
Manlike in Judgement, Person, State, and years,
Upon his breast the Fates have fixed his name,
And since his birth place war this forest here,
They now have named him Merlin Silvester.

And Merlins name in Brittain shall live,
Whilst men inhabit here, or Fates can give
Power to amazing wonder, envy shall weep,
And mischief sit and shake her ebbone wings,
Whilst all the world of Merlins magic sings.

Well, I wonder how my poor sister does, after all this thundering, I think
she's dead, for I can hear no tidings of her, those woo^s yields small comfort
for her, I could meet nothing but a swinherds wife, keeping hogs by the
Forestside, but neither she nor none of her sows would stir a foot to help us;
indeed I think she durst not trust her self amongst the trees with me, for I
must needs confess I offered some kindness to her; well, I would fain know
what's become of my sister, if she have brought me a young Cousin, his face may
be a picture to find his Father by, so oh, sister Ioan, Ioan Go-too't, where
art thou? Within Ioan. Here, here brother, stay but a while, I come to thee.


O brave, she's alive still, I know her voice, she speaks, and speaks cherfully
methinks, how now, what Moon-calf has she got with her?


Come my dear Merlin, why dost thou six thine eye so deeply on that book?


To sound the depth of Arts, of Learning, Wisdom, Knowledge.


Oh my dear, dear son, those studies fits thee when thou art a man.


Why mother, I can be but half a man at best,
And that is your mortality, the rest
In me is spirit, 'tis not meat, nor time,
That gives this growth and bigness, no, my years
Shall be more strange then yet my birth appears,
Look mother, there's my Uncle.

How doest thou know him son, thou never saw him?


Yet I know him, and know the pains he has taken for ye, to find out my
Father, give me your hand, good Uncle.


Ha, ha, I'd laugh at that in faith, do you know me sir? Merlin, Yes, by the
same token that even now you kissed the swinherds-wife 'ith' woods, and would
have done more, if she would have let you, Uncle.


A witch, a witch, a witch, sister: rid him out of your company, he is either a
witch or a conjurer, he could never have known this else.


Pray love him brother, he is my son.


Ha, ha, this is worse then all the rest in faith, by his beard he is more like
your husband: let me see, is your great belly gone?


Yes, and this the happy fruit.


What, this Hartichoke? A Child born with a beard on his face?


Yes, and strong legs to go, and teeth to eat.


You can nurse up your self then? There's some charges saved for Soap and
Candle, 'slid I have heard of some that has been born with teeth, but never
none with such a talking tongue before?


Come, come, you must use him kindly brother, did you but know his worth, you
would make much of him.


Make much of a Moncky? This is worse then Tom Thumb, that let a fart in his
Mothers belly, a Child to speak, eat, and go the first hour of his birth, nay,
such a Baby as had need of a Barber before he was born too; why sister this is
monstrous, and shames all our kindred.


That thus against nature and our common births, he comes thus furnished to
salute the world, is power of Fates, and gift of his great father.


Why, of what profession is your father sir?


He keeps a Hot-house in the Low Countries, will you see him sir?


See him, why sister has the child found his father?


Yes, and I'll fetch him Uncle.


Do not Uncle me, till I know your kindred, for my conscience some Baboon begot
thee, surely thou art horribly deceived sister, this Urchin cannot be of thy
breeding, I shall be ashamed to call him cousin, though his father be a
Gentleman.


Now my kind Uncle see;
The Child has found his Father, this is he.

The devil it is, ha, ha, is this your sweet-heart sister? have we run through
the Country, haunted the City, and examined the Court to find out a Gallant
with a Hat and Feather, and a silken Sword, and golden Hangers, and do you now
bring me to a Ragamuffin with a face like a Frying-pan?


Fie brother, you mistake, behold him better.


How's this? do you juggle with me, or are mine eyes matches? Hat and Feather,
Sword, and Hangers and all, this is a Gallant indeed sister, this has all the
marks of him we look for.


And you have found him now sir: give me your hand, I now must call you
brother.


Not till you have married my sister, for all this while she's but your whore,
sir.


Thou art too plain, I'll satisfy that wrong to her, and thee, and all, with
liberal hand: come, why art thou fearful?


Nay I am not afraid, and you were the devil, sir.


Thou need not, keep with thy sister still, and I'll supply your wants, you
shall lack nothing that gold and wealth can purchase.


Thank you brother, we have gone many a weary step to find you; you may be a
husband for a Lady, for you are far fetched and dear bought, I assure you: Pray
how should I call your son, my cousin here?


His name is Merlin.


Merlin! Your hand, cousin Merlin, for your fathers sake I accept you to my
kindred: if you grow in all things as your Beard does, you will be talked on. By
your Mothers side cousin, you come of the Go-too'ts, Suffolk bred, but our
standing house is at Hockly^ in the Hole, and Layton-buzzard. For your father, no
doubt you may from him claim Titles of Worship, but I cannot describe it; I
think his Ancestors came first from Hell-bree in Wales, cousin.


No matter whence we do derive our Name,
All Brittany shall ring of Merlin's fame,
And wonder at his acts. Go hence to Wales,
There live a while, there Vortiger the King
Builds Castles and strong Holds, which cannot stand
Unless supported by young Merlins hand.
There shall thy fame begin, Wars are a breeding.
The Saxons practise Treason, yet unseen,
Which shortly shall break out: Fair Love, farewell,
Dear son and brother, here must I leave you all,
Yet still I will be near at Merlins call.

Will you go Uncle?


Yes, I'll follow you, cousin: well, I do most horribly begin to suspect my
kindred; this brother in law of mine is the Devil sure, and though he hide his
horns with his Hat and Feather, I spied his cloven foot for all his cunning.


Come, come, time calls our close Complots to action: go Proximus, with winged
speed fly hence, hye thee to Wales, salute great Vortig^r with these our
Letters, bid the King to arms, tell him we have new friends, more Forces landed
in Norfolk and Northumberland, bid him make haste to meet us; if he keep his
word, we'll part the Realm between us.


Bend all thine Art to quit that late disgrace the Christian Hermit gave thee,
make thy revenge both sure and home.


That thought sir, spurs me on, till I have wrought their swift destruction.


Go then, and prosper. Octa, be vigilant: Speak, are the Forts possessed? the
Guards made sure? Revolve I pray on how large consequence the bare event and
sequel of our hopes jointly consists, that have embark't our lives upon the
hazard of the least miscarriage.


All's sure, the Queen your sister hath contrived the cunning Plot so sure, as
at an instant the Brothers shall be both surprised and taken.


And both shall die, yet one a while must live, till we by him have gathered
strength and power to meet bold Edol their stern General, that now contrary to
the Kings command, hath re-united all his cashiered Troops, and this way beats
his drums to threaten us.


Then our Plot's discovered.


Come, you are a fool, his Army and his life is given unto us: where is the
Queen, my sister?


In conference with the Prince.


Bring the Guards nearer, all is fair and good, Their Conference I hope shall
end in blood.


Come, come, you do but flatter, what you term Love, is but a Dream of blood,
wakes with enjoying, and with open eyes forgot, contemned and lost.


I must be wary, her words are dangerous. True, we will speak of Love no more
then.


Nay, if you will you may,
'Tis but in jest, and yet so children play
With fiery flames, and covet what is bright,
But feeling his effects, abhor the light.
Pleasure is like a Building, the more high,
The narrower still it grows, Cedars do dye
Soonest at top.

How does your instanced suit?

From Art and Nature to make sure the root,
And lay a fast foundation, e're I try
The uncertain Changes of a wavering Sky.
Make your example thus. -- You have a kiss. -- was it not pleasing?


Above all name to express it.


Yet now the pleasure's gone, and you have lost your joys possession.


Yet when you please this flood may ebb again.


But where it never ebbs, there runs the main.


Who can attain such hopes?


I'll show the way to it, give me a taste once more of what you may enjoy.


Impudent whore! I were more false than Atheism can be, Should I not call this
high felicity.


If I should trust your faith, alas I fear you soon would change belief.


I would covet Martyrdom to maked confirmed.


Give me your hand on that, you'll keep your word?


I will.


Enough: Help husband, king Aurelius, help, rescue betrayed Artesia.


Nay then 'tis I that am betrayed I see,
Yet with thy blood I'll end thy Treachery.

How now! what troubles you? Is this you sir, that but even now would suffer
Martyrdom to win your hopes, and is there now such terror in names of men to
fright you? nay then I see what mettle you are made on.


Ha! was it but trial? then I ask your pardon: What a dull slave was I to be so
fearful? I'll trust her now no more, yet try the utmost. I am resolved, no
brother, no man breathing, were he my bloods begetter, should withhold me from
your love, I'd leap into his bosom, and from his breast pull forth that
happiness Heaven had reserved in you for my enjoying.


I now you speak a Lover like a Prince: Treason, treason.


Again.


Help Saxon Princes: Treason.


Rescue the Queen: strike down the Villain.


Call in the Guards: the Prince in danger! Fall back dear Sir, my breast shall
buckler you.


Beat down their weapons.


Slave, were thou made of brass, my sword shall bite thee.


Withdraw on pain of death, where is the Traitor?


Oh save your life, my Lord, let it suffice my beauty forced mine own
captivity.


Who did attempt to wrong thee?


Here me, Sir.


Oh my sad soul! was't thou?


Oh do not stand to speak, one minutes stay, prevents a second speech for ever.


Make our Guards strong: My dear Artesia, let us know thy wrongs, and our own
dangers.


The Prince your brother, with these Brittain Lords, have all agreed to take me
hence by force, and marry me to him.


The Devil shall wed thee first: thy baseness and thy lust confound and rot
thee.


He courted me even now, and in mine car shamed not to plead his most dishonest
love, and their attempts to seize your sacred person, either to shut you up
within some prison, or which is worse, I fear to murder you.


'Tis all as false as hell.


And as foul as she is.


You know me, Sir?


Yes, Deadly Sin, we know you, and shall discover all your villainy.


Chester forbear.


Their treasons sir, are plain: Why are their Soldiers lodged so near the
Court?


Nay, why came he in arms so suddenly?


You fleering Antics, do not wake my fury.


Fury!


Ratsbane, do not urge me.


Good sir, keep farther from them.


Oh my sick heart, she is a witch by nature, devil by art.


Bite thine own slanderous tongue, 'tis thou art false, I have observed your
passions long ere this.


Stand on your guard, my Lord, we are your friends, and all our Force is yours.


To spoil and rob the Kingdom.


Sir, be silent.


Silent! how long? till Doomsday? shall I stand by, and hear mine Honour blasted
with foul Treason, the State half lost, and your life endangered, yet be
silent?


Yes, my blunt Lord, unless you speak you^ Treasons. Sir, let your Guards, as
Traitors, seize them all, and then let tortures and devulsive racks, force a
Confession from them.


Wilde-fire and Brimstone eat thee. Hear me sir.


Sir, I'll not hear you.


But you shall: Not hear me I were the worlds Monarch, Caesar, livi^g, he should
hear me. I tell you Sir, these serpents have betrayed your Life and Kingdom:
does not every day bring tidings of more swarms of lousy slaves, the offal
sugitives of barren Germany, that land upon our Coasts, and by our neglect
settled in Norfolk and Northumberland?


They come as Aids and Safeguards to the King.


Has he not need, when Vortiger's in arms, and you raise Powers, 'tis thought,
to join with him?


Peace, you pernicious Rat.


Prithee forbear.


Away, suffer a gilded rascal, a low-bred despicable creeper, an insulting
Toad, to spit his poisoned venom in my face!


Sir, sir.


Do not reply, you Cur, for by the Gods, though the Kings presence guard thee, I
shall break all patience, and like a Lion roused to spoil, shall run
foul-mouth'd upon thee, and devour thee quick* Speak sir, will you forsake
these scorpions, or stay till they have stung you to the heart?


You're traitors all, this is our wife, our Queen: brother Ostorius, troop your
Saxons up, we will hence to Winchester, raise more powers, to m^n with strength
the Castle Camilot: go hence false men, join you with Vortiger, the murderer of
our brother Constantine: we will hunt both him and you with dreadful vengeance,

Since Brittain fails, we will trust to foreign friends,
And guard our person from your traitorous ends.

He's sure bewitch.


What counsel now for safety?


Only this sir, with all the speed we can, preserve the person of the King and
Kingdom.


Which to effect, tis best march hence to Wales, and set on Vortiger before he
join his Forces with the Saxons,


On then with speed for Wales and Vortiger, that tempest once o'reblown, we
come Ostorius to meet thy traitorous Saxons, thee and them, that with advantage
thus have won the King, to back your factions, and to work our ruins.

This by the Gods and my good Sword, I'll set
In bloody lines upon thy Burgonet.

HOw now Uncle, why do you search your pockets so? do you miss any thing?


Ha, Cousin Merlin, I hope your beard does not overgrow your honesty, I pray
remember you are made up of sisters thread, I am your mothers brother,
whosoever was your father.


Why, wherein can you task my duty, Uncle?


Your self, or your page it must be, I have kept no other company, since your
mother bound your head to my Protectorship, I do feel a fault of one side,
either it was that Sparrowhawk, or a Cast of Merlins, for I find a Covy of
Cardecu's sprung out of my pocket.


Why, do you want any money U^cle? sirrah, had you any from him?


Deny it not, for my pockets are witness against you.


Yes I had, to teach you better wit to look to it.


Pray use your fingers better, and my wit may serve as it is sir.


Well, restore it.


There it is.


I, there's some honestly in this, 'twas a token from your invisible Father
Cousin, which I would not have to go inv^sibly from me again.


Well, you are sure you have it now Uncle?


Yes, and mean to keep it now, from your pages filching fingers too.


If you have it so sure, pray show it me again.


Yes, my little juggler, I dare show it, ha, cleanly conveyance again, ye have
no invisible fingers have ye? 'Tis gone certainly.


Why sir, I touched you not.


Why look you Uncle, I have it now, how ill do you look to it? here keep it
safer.


Ha, ha, this is fine in faith, I must keep some other company if you have these
slights of hand.


Come, come, Uncle, 'tis all my Art which shall not offend you sir, only I
give you a taste of it, to show you sport.


Oh, but 'tls ill jesting with a mans pocket though -- but I am glad to see you
cunning Cousin, for now will I warrant thee a living till thou die. You have
heard the news in Wales here?


Uncle, let me prevent your care and counsel, 'twill give you better knowledge
of my cunning, you would prefer me now in hope of gain, to Vortiger King of the
Welch Brittains, to whom are all the Artists summoned now, that seeks the
secrets of futurity, the Bards, the Druids, Wizards, Conjurers, not an Aurasper
with his

Whisling spells, no Capuomanster with his musty fumes,
No Witch or Juggler, but is thither sent,
To calculate the strange and feared event
Of his prodigious Castle now in building, where all the labours of the painful
day, are ruined still in the night, and to this place you would have me go.


Well, if thy mother were not my sister, I would say she was a witch that begot
this; but this is thy father, not thy mother wit, thou hast taken my tale into
thy mouth, and spake my thoughts before me; therefore away, shuffle thy self
amongst the Conjurers, and be a made man before thou come to age.


Nay, but stay Uncle, you overslip my dangers: the Prophecies and all the
cunning Wizards, have certifi'd the King, that this his Castle can never stand,
till the foundation's laid with Mortar tempered with the fatal blood of such a
child, whose father was no mortal.


What's this to thee? If the devil were thy father, was not thy mother born at
Carmarden? Diggon for that then, and then it must be a childes blood, and who
will take thee for a child with such a beard of thy face? Is there not diggon
for that too Cousin?


I must not go, lend me your ear a while, I'll give you reasons to the
contrary.


Sure this is an endless piece of work the King has sent us about!


Kings may do it, man, the like has been done to find out the Unicorn.


Which will be sooner found I think, then this fien'd begotten child we seek
for.


Pox of those Conjurers that would speak of such a one, and yet all their
cunning could not tell us where to find him.


In Wales they say assuredly he lives, come let's enquire further.


Uncle, your persuasions must not prevail with me, I know mine enemies better
then you do.


I say you are a bastard then if thou disobey thine Uncle, was not Ioan Go-too't
thy mother, my sister? if the devil were thy father, what kin art thou to any
man alive, but Bailys and Brokers? and they are but brothers in Law to thee
neither.


How's this, I think we shall speed here.


I, and unlooked for too, go ne'er and listen to them.


Hast thou a beard to hide it, will it thou show thy self a child, will it thou
have more hair then wit? Will it thou deny thy mother, b^cause no body knows thy
father? Or shall thine Uncle be an ass?


Bless ye friend, pray what call you this small Gentleman's name?


Small, sir, a small man may be a great Gentleman, his father may be of an
ancient house, for ought we know sir.


Why? do you not know his father?


No, nor you neither I think, unless the devil be in ye.


What is his name sir?


His name is my Cousin sir, his education is my sisters son, but his manners are
his own.


Why ask ye Gent^men? my name is Merlin.


Yes, and a Goshawk was his father, for ought we know, for I am sure his mother
was a Wind-^ucker.


He has a mother then?


As sure as I have a sister, sir.


But his father you leave doubtful.


Well Sir, as wise men as you, doubt whether he had a father or no?


Sure this is he we seek for.


I think no less: and sir, we let you know the King hath sent for you.


The more child he, and he had bin ruled by me, he should have gone before he
was sent for.


May we not see his mother?


Yes, and feel her too if you anger her, a devilish thing I can tell ye she has
been, I'll go fetch her to ye.


Sir, it were fit you did resolve for speed, you must unto the King.


My Service sir, shall need no strict command, it shall obey most peaceably,
but needless 'tis to fetch what is brought home, my journey may be staid, the
King is coming hither with the same quest you bore before him, hark, this drum
will tell ye.


This is some cunning indeed ^r.

Still in our eye your message Proximus, we keep to spur our speed: Ostorius,
and Octa, we shall salute with succour against Prince Vter and Aurelius, whom
now we hear incamps at Winchester, there's nothing interrupts our way so much,
as doth the erection of this fatal Castle, that spite of all our Art and daily
labour, the night still ruins.


As erst I did affirm, still I maintain, the fien'd begotten child must be
found out, whose blood gives strength to the foundation, it cannot stand else.


Ha! I'st so? then Proximus by this intelligence he should be found: speak, is
this he you tell of?


Yes Sir, and I his Uncle, and she his mother.


And who is his father?


Why, she his mother can best tell you that, and yet I think the child be wise
enough, for he has found his father.


Woman, is this thy son?


It is, my Lord.


What was his father? Or where lives he?


Mother speak freely and unastonisht,
That which you dared to act, dread not to name.

In which I shall betray my sin and shame,
But since it must be so, then know great King, all that my self yet knows of
him, is this: In pride of blood and beauty I did live, my glass the Altar was,
my face the Idol, such was my peevish love unto my self, that I did hate all
other, such disdain was in my scornful eye, that I supposed no mortal creature
worthy to enjoy me, thus with the Peacock I beheld my train, but never saw the
blackness of my feet, oft have I child the winds for breathing on me, and cursed
the Sun, fearing to blast my beauty, in mid^t of this most leaprous disease, a
seeming fair young man appeared unto me, in all things suiting m^ aspiring
pride, and with him brought along a conquering power, to which my frailty
yielded, from whose embraces this issue came, what more he is, I know not.


Some Incubus, or Spirit of the night begot him then, for sure no mortal did
it.


No matter who my Lo^d, leave further quest, since 'tis as hurtful as
unnecessary more to enquire: Go to the cause my Lord, why you have sought me
thus?


I doubt not but thou know, yet to be plain, I sought thee for thy blood.


By whose direction?


By mine, my Art infalable instructed me, upon thy blood must the foundation
rise of the Kings building, it cannot stand else.


Hast thou such leisure to enquire my Fate, and let thine own hang careless
over thee? Know thou what pendelous mischief roofs thy head, how fatal, and
how sudden?


Pish, bearded abortive, thou foretell my danger my Lord, he trifles to delay
his own.


No, I yield my self: and here before the King, make good thine Augury, as I
shall mine, if thy fate fall not, thou hast spoke all truth, and let my blood
satisfy the Kings desires: if thou thy self wilt write thine Epitaph, dispatch
it quickly, there's not a minutes time 'twixt thee and thy death.


Ha, ha, ha.


I, so, thou may die laughing.


Ha! This is above admiration, look, is he dead?


Yes sir, here's brains to make mortar on, if you'll use them: Cousin Merlin,
there's no more of this stone fruit ready to fall, is there? I pray give your
Uncle a little fair warning.


Remove that shape of death, and now my Lord for clear satisfaction of your
doubts, Merlin will show the fatal cause that keeps your fatal Castle down, and
hinders your proceedings: Stand there, and by an apparition see the labour and
end of all your destiny. Mother and Uncle, you must be absent.


Is your father coming Cousin?


Nay, you must be gone.


Come, you'll offend him brother.


I would fain see my Brother i'law, if you were married I might lawfully call
him so.


What means this stay?


Be not amazed my Lord, for on the victory
Of loss or gain, as these two Champions ends
Your fate, your life, and kingdom all depends,
therefore observe it well.

I shall, heaven be auspicious to us.


The conquest is on the white Dragons part, now Merlin faithfully expound the
meaning.


Your Grace must then not be offended with me.


It is the weakest part I found in thee, to doubt of me so slightly, shall I
blame my prophet that foretells me of my dangers? thy cunning I approve most
excellent.


Then know my Lord, there is a dampish Cave, the nightly habitation of these
Dragons, vaulted beneath where you would build your Castle, whose enmity and
nightly combats there, maintain a constant ruin of your labours: To make it
more plain, the Dragons then your self betoken, and the Saxon King, the
vanquished Red, is sir, your dreadful Emblem.


Oh my fate!


Nay, you must hear with patience Royal sir, you slew the lawful King
Constantius, 'twas a red deed, your Crown his blood did cement, the English
Saxon first brought in by you, for aid against Constantius brethren, is the
white horror who now knit together, have driven and shut you up in these wild
mountains, and though they now seek to unite with friendship, it is to wound
your bosom, not embrace it, and with an utter extirpation to rout the Brittains
out, and plant the English. Seek for your safety Sir, and spend no time to
build the airy Castles, for Prince Vter armed with vengeance for his brothers
blood is hard upon you, if you mistrust me, and to my words craves witness sir,
then know here comes a messenger to tell you so.


My Lord^ Prince Vter^


And who else sir?


Edol, the great General.


The great Devil, they are coming to meet us.


With a full power my Lord.


With a full vengeance they mean to meet us, so we are ready to their confront
as full march double footing, we will loose no ground, nor shall their numbers
fright us,

If it be Fate, it cannot be withstood,
We gotour Crown so, be it lost in blood.

Stay, and advice, hold drum.


Beat slave, why do you pause? why make a stand? where are our enemies? or do
you mean we fight amongst our selves?


Nay, noble Edol, let us here take counsel, it cannot burt, it is the ^urest
Garrison to safety.


Fie on such slow delays! so fearful men that are to pass over a flowing river,
stand on the bank to parley of the danger, till the tide rise and then be
swallowed, is not the King in field?


Proud Vortiger, the Trator is in field.


The Murderer, and Usurper.


Let him be the devil so I may fight with him, for heavens love sir march on,
oh my patience, will you delay until the Saxons come to aid his party? A
Tucket.


There's no such fear, prithee be calm a while, hark, it seems by this, he
comes or sends to us.


If it be for parley, I will drown the summons, if all our drums and hoarseness
choke me me not.


Nay, prithee hear, from whence art thou?


From the King Vortiger.


Traitor, there's none such: Alarm drum, strike slave, or by mine honour I will
break thy head, and beat thy drums heads both about thine ears.


Hold noble Edol, let's hear what Articles he can enforce.


What articles, or what conditions can you expect to value half your wrong,
unless he kill himself by thousand tortures, and send his carcase to appease
your vengeance, for the foul murder of Constantius, and that's not a tenth part
neither. Prince 'Tis true, my brothers blood is crying to me now, I do ap^a^d
thy counsel: hence, be gone.

We will hear no parley now but by our swords.


And those shall speak home in death killing words, Alarm to the fight, sound,
sound the Alarm.


Dost follow me?


Yes, to thy death I will.


Stay, be advised, I would not be the only fall of Princes, I slew thy
brother:


Thou did black Traitor, and in that vengeance I pursue thee.


Take mercy for thy self, and fly my sword, save thine own life as
satisfaction, which here I give thee for thy brothers death.


Give what's thine own: a Traitors heart and head, that's all thou art right
Lord of; the Kingdom which thou usurp, thou most unhappy Tyrant, is leaving
thee, the Saxons which thou broughtst to back thy usurpations, are grown great,
and where they seat themselves, do hourly seek to blot the Records of old Brute
and Brittains, from memory of men, calling themselves Hingest-men, and
Hingest-land, that no more the Brittain name be known; all this by thee, thou
base destroyer of thy Native Country.


What, stand you talking? Fight.


Hold Edol.


Hold out my sword, and listen not to King or Princes word, There's work enough
abroad, this task is mine.


Prosper thy Valour, as thy Virtues shine.


Bright Victory her self fights on our part, and buckled in a golden Beaver,
rides triumphantly before us.


Justice is with her, who ever takes the true and rightful cause, let us not
lag behind them.


Here comes the Prince, how goes our fortunes Sir?


Hopeful, and fair, brave Cador, proud Vortiger beat down by Edols sword, was
rescued by the following multitudes, and now for safety's fled unto a Castle
here standing on the hill: but I have sent a cry of hounds as violent as
hunger, to break his stony walls, or if they fail,

We will send in wild fire to dislodge him thence,
Or burn them all with flaming violence.

Look Edol: still this fiery exalation shoots his frightful horrors on
the amazed world, see in the beam that about his flaming ring, a Dragons head
appears, from out whose mouth two flaming flakes of fire, stretch East and
West.


And see, from forth the body of the Star, seven smaller blazing streams,
directly point on this affrighted kingdom.


'Tis a dreadful Meteor.


And doth portend strange fears.


This is no Crown of Peace, this angry fire hath something more to burn then
Vortiger; if it alone were pointed at his fall; it would pull in his blazing
Piramids, and be appeased, for Vortiger is dead.


These never come without their large effects.


The will of heaven be done, our sorrows this we want, a mistick Pithon to
expound this fiery Oracle.


Oh no my Lord, you have the best that ever Brittain bred, and durst I prophecy
of your Prophet sir, none like him shall succeed him.


You mean Merlin.


True sir, wondrous Merlin, he met us in the way, and did foretell the
fortunes of this day successful to us.


He's sure about the Camp, send for him sir.


He told the bloody Vortiger his fate, and truly too, and if I could give
faith to any Wizards skill, it should be Merlin.


And see my Lord, as if to satisfy your Highness pleasure, Merlin is come.


See, the Comet's in his eye, disturb him nor.


With what a piercing judgement he beholds it!


Whither will Heaven and Fate translate this Kingdom? what revolutions, rise
and fall of Nations

Is figured yonder in that Star, that sings
The change of Brittains State, and death of Kings?
Ha! He's dead already, how swiftly mischief creeps!
Thy fatal end sweet Prince, even Merlin weeps.

He does foresee some evil, his action shows it, for e're he does expound, he
weeps the story.


There's another weeps too. Sirrah dost thou understand what thou lamentst for?


No sir, I am his Uncle, and weep because my Cousin weeps, flesh and blood
cannot forbear.


Gentle Merlin, speak thy prophetic knowledge, in explanation of this fiery
horror, from which we gather from thy mournful tears, much sorrow and disaster
in it.


'Tis true fair Prince, but you must hear the rest with patience.


I vow I will, though it portend my ruin.


There's no such fear, this brought the fiery fall of Vortiger, and yet not him
alone, this day is fallen a King more good, the glory of our Land, the mild, and
gentle, sweet Aurelius.


Our brother!


Forefend it heaven.


He at his Palace Royal sir at Winchester, this day is dead and poisoned.


By whom? Or what means Merlin?


By the Traitorous Saxons.


I ever feared as much: that devil Os^orius, and the damned witch Artesia, sure
has done it.


Poisoned! oh look further gentle Merlin, behold the Star again, and do but
find revenge for me, though it cost thousand lives, and mine the foremost.


Comfort your self, the heavens have given it fully, all the portentious ills
to you is told, now hear a happy story sir from me, to you and to your fair
posterity.


Me thinks I see something like a peeled Oinon, it makes me weep again.


Be silent Uncle, you'll be forced else.


Can you not find in the Star, Cousin, whether I can hold my tongue or no?


Yes, I must cut it out.


Phu, you speak without book sir, my Cousin Merlin knows.


True, I must tie it up, now speak your pleasure Uncle.


Hum, hum, hum, hum.


So, so -- now observe my Lord, and there behold above yo^ flame-hair'd beam
that upward shoots, appears a Dragons head, out of whose mouth two streaming
lights point their flame-feather'd darts contrary ways, yet both shall have
their aims: Again behold from the ignifirent body, seven splendent and
illustrious rays are spread, all speaking Heralds to this Brittain Isle, and
thus they are expounded: The Dragons head is the Herogliphick that figures out
your Princely self, that here must reign a King, those by-form'd fires that
from the Dragons mouth shoot East and West, emblem two Royal babes, which shall
proceed from you, a son and daughter: her pointed constellation Northwest
bending,

Crowns Her a Queen in Ireland, of whom first springs

That Kingdoms Title to the Brittain Kings.


Hum, hum, hum.


But of your Son, thus Fate and Merlin tells, all after times shall fill their
Chronicles with fame of his renown, whose warlike sword shall pass through
fertile France and Germany, nor shall his conjuring foot be forced to stand,
till Romes Imperial Wreath hath crowned his Fame with Monarch of the West, from
whose seven hills with Conquest, and contributory Kings, he back returns to
enlarge the Brittain bounds, his Heraldry adorned with thirteen Crowns.


Hum, hum, hum*


He to the world shall add another Worthy, and as a Loadstone for his prowess,
draw a train of Marshal Lovers to his Court: It shall be then the best of
Knight-hoods honour, at Winchester to fill his Castle Hall, and at his Royal
Table sit and feast in warlike orders, all their arms round hurled, as if they
meant to circumscribe the world.


Hum, hum, hum, oh that I could speak a little.


I know your mind Uncle, again be silent.


Thou speak of wonders Merlin, prithee go on, declare at full this
Constellation.


Those seven beams pointing downward, sir, betoken the troubles of this Land,
which then shall meet with other Fate; War and Dissension strives to make
division, till seven Kings agree to draw this Kingdom to a Hepterchy.


Thine art hath made such proof, that we believe thy words authentical, be ever
near us, my Prophet, and the Guide of all my actions.


My service shall be faithful to your person, and all my studies for my
Countries safety.


Hum, hum, hum.


Come, you are releast, sir.


Cousin, pray help me to my tongue again, you do not mean I shall be dumb still
I hope?


Why, hast thou not thy tongue?


Ha! yes, I feel it now, I was so long dumb, I could not well tell whether I
spake or no.


I'st thy advice we presently pursue the bloody Saxons, that have slain my
brother?


With your best speed, my Lord, Prosperity will keep you company.


Take then your Title with you, Royal Prince, 'twill add unto our strength,
Long live King Uter.


Put the Addition to it that Heaven hath given you: The DRAGON is your Emblem,
bear it bravely, and so long live and ever happy styled Vter-Pendragon, lawful
King of Brittain.


Thanks Edol, we embrace the name and title, and in our Shield and Standard
shall the figure of a Red Dragon still be born before us, to fright the bloody
Saxons. Oh my Aurelius, sweet rest thy soul; let thy disturbed spirit

Expect revenge, think what it would, it hath,
The Dragon's coming in his fiery wrath.

HEnce thou black horror, is thy lustful fire kindled again? not thy loud
throated thunder, nor thy adulterate infernal Music, shall e're bewitch me
more, oh too too much is past already.


Why dost thou fly me? I come a Lover to thee, to embrace, and gently twine thy
body in mine arms.


Out thou Hell-hound.


What hound so e're I be,
Fawning and sporting as I would with thee,
why should I not be stroked and plaid withal, will it thou not thank the Lion
might devour thee, if he shall let thee pass?


Yes, thou art he, free me, and I'll thank thee.


Why, whither would? I am at home with thee, thou art mine own, have we not
charge of family together, where is your son?


Oh darkness cover me.


There is a pride which thou hast won by me, the mother of a fame shall never
die, Kings shall have need of written Chronicles, to keep their names alive,
but Merlin none, ages to ages shall like Sabalists

Report the wonders of his name and glory,
While there are tongues and times to tell his story.

Oh rot my memory before my flesh, let him be called some hell or earth-bred
monster, that ne'er had hapless woman for a mother: sweet death deliver me,
hence from my sight, why should thou now appear? I had no pride nor lustful
thought about me, to conjure and call thee to my ruin, when as at first thy
cursed person became visible.


I am the same I was.


But I am changed.


Again I'll change thee to the same thou were, quench to my lust, come forth by
thunder led, my Coajutors in the spoils of mortals.

Clasp in your Ebon arms that prize of mine, mount her as high as palled
Hecate, and on this rock I'll stand to cast up fumes and darkness over the blew
faced firmament; from Brittain, and from Merlin, I'll remove her, they ne'er
shall meet again.


Help me some saving hand, if not too late, I cry let mercy come.


Stay you black slaves of night, let loose your hold, set her down safe, or by
th'i^fernal Styx, I'll bind you up with exorcisms so strong, that all the black
pentagoron of hell, shall ne'er release you, save you selves and vanish.


Ha! What's he?


The Child has found his Father, do you not know me?


Merlin!


Oh, help me gentle son.


Fear not, they shall not hurt you.


Relievest thou her to disobey thy father?


Obedience is no lesson in your school, nature and kind to her, commands my
duty, the part that you begot was against kind, so all I ow to you is to be
unkind.


I'll blast thee slave to death, and on this rock stick thee an eternal
Monument.


Ha, ha, thy powers too weak, what art thou devil, but an inferior lustful
Incubus, taking advantage of the wanton flesh, wherewith thou dost beguile the
ignorant? put off the form of thy humanity, and cral upon thy speckled belly,
serpent, or I'll unclasp the jaws of Achoron, and fix thee ever in the local
fire.


Traitor to hell; curse that I e're begot thee.


Thou did beget thy scourge, storm not, nor stir, the power of Merlins Art is
all confirmed in the Fates decretals, -- I'll ransack hell, and make thy Tenibr
arum precis, devitiarum, infirorum, Deus, hunc Incubum in ignis eterni abisum,
accipite aut in hoc carcere tenebroso, in sempeternum astringere mando.


Oh now my son is my deliverer, yet I must name him with my deepest sorrow.


Take comfort now, past times are ne'er recal'd, I did foresee your mischief
and prevent it: hark, how the sounds of war now call me hence to aid Pendragon,
that in battle stands against the Saxons, from whose aid Merlin must not be
absent: leave this soil, and I'll conduct you to a place retired, which I by art
have raised, called Merlins Bower, there shall you dwell with solitary sighs,
with groans and passions your companions, to weep away this flesh you have
offended with, and leave all bare unto your aierial soul, and when you die, I
will erect a Monument upon the verdant Plains of Salisbury, no King shall have
so high a sepulchre, with pendulous stones that I will hang by art, where
neither Lime nor Mortar shall be used, a dark Enigma to the memory, for none
shall have the power to number them, a place that I will hollow for your rest,

Where no Night-hag shall walk, nor Ware-wolf tread,
Where Merlins Mother shall be sepulcher'd.

Sincerely Gloster, I have told you all: My Daughters are both vowed to Single
Life, and this day gone unto the Nunnery, though I begot them to another end,
and fairly promised them in Marriage, one to Earl Cador, the other to your son,
my worthy friend, the Earl of Gloster. Those lost, I am lost: they are lost,
all's lost. Answer me this then, Is't a sin to marry?


Oh no, my Lord.


Go to then, I'll go no further with you, I persuade you to no ill, persuade you
then that I persuade you well.


'Twill be a good Office in you, sir.


Which since they thus neglect, my memory shall lose them now for ever. See,
see the Noble Lords, their promised Husbands! had Fate so pleased, you might
have called me Father.


Those hopes are past, my Lord, for even this minute we saw them both enter the
Monastery, secluded from the world and men for ever.


'Tis both our griefs we cannot, Sir: but from the King take you the Times joy
from us; The Saxon King Os^orius slain, and Octa fled, that Woman-fury, Queen
Artesia, is fast in hold, and forced to re-deliver London and Winchester (which
she had fortified) to Princely Vter, lately styled Pendragon, who now
triumphantly is marching hither to be invested with the Brittain Crown.


The joy of this, shall banish from my breast all thought that I was Father to
two Children, two stubborn Daughters, that have left me thus: Let my old arms
embrace, and call you Sons, for by the Honour of my Fathers House, I'll part my
estate most equally betwixt you.


Sir, you're most noble!


Set up our Shield and Standard, noble Soldiers, We have firm hope that though
our Dragon sleep, Merlin will us and our fair Kingdom keep.


As his Uncle lives, I warrant you.


Happy Restorer of the Brittains fame, uprising Sun let us salute thy glory,
ride in a day perpetual about us, and no night be in thy thrones zodiac, why
do we stay to bind those Princely brows with this Imperial Honour?


Stay noble Gloster, that monster first must be expel'd our eye, or we shall
take no joy in it.


If that be hindrance, give her quick Judgement, and send her hence to death,
she has long deserved it.


Let my Sentence stand for all, take her hence, and stake her carcase in the
burning Sun, till it be parcht and dry, and then fley off her wicked skin, and
stuff the pelt with straw to be shown up and down at Fairs and Markets, two
pence a piece to see so foul a Monster, will be a fair Monopoly and worth the
begging.


Ha, ha, ha.


Dost laugh Erictho?


Yes, at thy poor invention, is there no better, torturemonger?


Burn her to dust.


That's a Phaenix death, and glorious.


I, that's to good for her.


Alive she shall be buried circled in a wall, thou murdress of a King, there
starve to death.


Then I'll starve death when he comes for his prey, and in the mean time I'll live
upon your curses.


I, 'tis diet good enough, away with her.


With joy, my best of wishes is before,
Thy brother's poisoned, but I wanted more.

Why does our Prophet Merlin stand apart, sadly observing these our Ceremonies,
and not applaud our joys with thy hid knowledge? Let thy divining Art now
satisfy some part of my desires; for well I know 'tis in thy power to show the
full event, that shall both end our Reign and Chronicle: speak learned Merlin,
and resolve my feats, whether by war we shall expel the Saxons, or govern what
we hold with beauteous peace in Wales and Brittain?


Long happiness attend Pendragons Reign, what Heaven decrees, fate hath no
power to alter: The Saxons, sir, will keep the ground they have, and by
supplying numbers still incease, till Brittain be no more. So please your
Grace, I will in visible apparitions, present you Prophecies which shall
concern

Succeeding Princes, which my Art shall raise,
Till men shall call these times the latter days.

Do it my Merlin, and Crown me with much joy and wonder.


This King, my Lord, presents your Royal Son, who in his prime of years shall
be so fortunate, that thirteen several Princes, shall present their several
Crowns unto him, and all Kings else shall so admire his fame and victories,
that they shall all be glad either through fear or love, to do him homage; But
death (who neither favours the weak nor valiant) in the midst of all his
glories, soon shall seize him, scarcely permitting him to appoint one in all
his purchased Kingdoms to succeed him.


Thanks to our Prophet for this so wished for satisfaction, and hereby now we
learn that always Fate must be observed, what ever that decree,

All future times shall still record this Story,
Of Merlin's learned worth, and Arthur's glory.


