DId any see hereabouts the Horse of the Muses? Just now as I passed by the
Caballin Fountain, the Muses desired me to seek after him, this way am I sent,
and that way the keeper of him.


Boy can thou tell me any tidings of a Horse that's strayed this way.


I hear nothing of him.


It were your best way therefore to cry him.


You say well, O yes, O yes, The Horse of the Muses hath lately strayed away,
by name Davus Dromo, who is half a Man, and all a Horse, a beast with two
Heads, the one a great one, and very bald, with very long and large Ears, a red
Nose, wide Mouth, and blabber Lips, a short discoloured Mayne, Gauled Back, and
running Scratches on his fore-feet, of several Colours, with a round black spot
in the buttock of him; if any man will either return him, or bring tidings of
him, he shall have his thanks for his pains, and as many Mares as he will.


Nay, that is like enough, for the Muses Horse is a lusty and a noted Stallion.



Look -- here he is, with a Pox to him; Good Boy help us to catch him.


How he lays about him with his Heels.


Let us use him gently and drive him softly into yonder corner, Holla, Boy,
Holla, softly to him. Ho, Ho, Ho, Ho, Ho, Ho, Mess, Ho Dave, Ho, Mess, Ho
Dromo, Ho, Mess Dave, Dromo Ho.


Ah wicked beast, what wilt thou run away? thy name shall be no more Davus
Dromo, but Dromedary.


I would he was turning the wheel in a Brewhouse.


What dost thou bite?


And wince, and kick with a bots to you?


He longs to be soundly basted, but I shall tame him by and by, or -- Ha, Ha,
He, as I led him just now to watering to the Muses well, he forcibly brake from
me, and said he would speak the Prologue here; When he was a Man, the bold
knave would be thrusting himself always into the company of the Nobility, and
being now a beast he doth as impudently affect it.


Out upon him Monster.


He was a Man at first but having no more wit in him then a Horse, the angry
Muses being every day vexed with him did transform him into a man Caballin.


You set me forth like an Ass, no matter -- I'll speak the Prologue for all
that.


What you speak the prologue? and a prologue in Latin too?


And why not I, who understand all Languages, the Greek, the Latin, the
French, the Castiliana, the Italiana, the Dutch and the Polack.


He neigheth pretty handsomely, but speaks nothing at all.


Pooh, I have received letters from the Ambassadors of Princes with whom I have
lived in extraordinary familiarity, for though I am a Horse I would have you
know I am a Horse politic.


And sometimes a Horse Ecclesiastical, the Dean of Dunstable.


Yes, and came gratis to that place without Simony; for I would have you know
that I am learned; for once I was shut up all day long being extre^mly hungry
in a library. And being but a Horse, with great appla^se I disputed with Doctor
Horseman in several languages for my degree, and now I hope to be a graduate.


Yes, from a Horse you shall take the degree of an Ass.


Know you not that Caligula did design the Consulship to a Horse, and clothed
him with purple?


That was a swift, gallant mettald Horse, thou art but a dull Jade.


I a dull Jade? who have Galloped through so many Countries, and the most of
them without any baiting at all; why for swiftness, I dare challenge all the
best Race horses of the Noble men here present, either Franklin, or Puppy, or
pepper corn, or Cropears, or Snow-ball, or Saucy Jack, or Bald Tryngham, Mouse,
Freck, Spaniard, Pegge with a Lantern, Strawberies and Cream, or if there be
any other, and at any Race, whither Royston-race, Brackly-race, Gutterly,
Coddington, Sibblecoats or any place whatsoever, and if I bear not the Bell
away, do not only call me curt-tayle but make me too so. And if you have a mind
to any fine feats tricks, or predictions or divinations, I will not refuse any
Horse fatidicall, or magical, for I am a Cabal Cabalistical.


Say you so, then tell me who loves a handsome Wench the best of all this
Company?


That I can do, and wink.


Tell me who then?


The greatest part here present, but they especially that would seem to be the
demurest and smile not at all.


What you, your self have been smitten in love heretofore.


Nay others have been deeply in love with me, many fair Women have desired the
familiarity of my Company.


He speaks the truth, for his mistress heretofore in pure love, did carry his
saddle up and down on her own head, but tell me, will there be any good sport
and laughing in this Comedy.


There will be laughing sure, if there be any laughing.


But will it please?


And if it will please them, it will please.


But what will they say of the play it self?


Why, they will say there are every day better plays to be seen for money at
London, and that the Comedies are here spoiled by the two strict observance of
the laws of Comedy.


What will be their censure of the Actors?


That Academians are pitiful Actors.


But who amongst all the Actors will be most commended?


Who but Davus Dromo the most noble, and most famous Horse in all the Universe.


How can that be?


A good Horse hath always favourers enough to commend him.


This Cabal now thinks himself as witty, as if he were another sextus Caballus.


He that fools himself with a petulant mirth, is not sextius, but caballus.


But will no man buy this ridiculous Horse?


Let me pass my ^udgement on him ( he looks in his Mouth like a Horse courser)
but he is old, he is strong-dockt howsoever and hath a good tail.


My ta^le is large, and spreading enough, I drive away the flies from the Muses
with it.


Thou art but a fly thy self, and uninvited fly to other men's tables.


He is heavy and worth nothing lead him away.

I will speak the prologue first.


No No, it is needless, those who come first upon the stage will open the
Argument themselves.


Pooh, but they will be too serious in it.


After the first scene, which almost contains the sum of the plot, there will
be almost nothing that is serious at all.


The scene is said to be laid in Bordeaux where I my self have been heretofore,
and that you are to act Surda the deaf Dwarf, the Maid of Torcol.


I am so much the happier, for then I shall not hear them, if peradventure they
shall hiss at me.


And that the name of the play is Ignoramus.


Ignoramus, we are like then to have a gallant Comedy when he is to pronounce
his sentence on it, on whose Action alone the whole Fortune of the play
depends?


Let me then be the prologue, for Ignoramus the lawyer and I are near of Kin.


And well you may be, you speak Latin both alike.


But this Horse more barbarously of the two, for the time to come therefore you
shall not be the Muses horse, but the horse of barbarous Ignoramus.


Yours howsoever, but I will speak the prologue come! what will of it.


Oh impudence! you speak the prologue, you a prologue I shall --


I know my own abilities and conceits, I will speak the prologue.


Give him leave then, and if he doth not speak it well, beat him off the stage.


Begin.


Since that, since that --


Since that? most comically spoken, what do you saulter thus in the very first
words, since that.


Since that Comedy is the glass of humane life, and in the comedies of the
Ancients there is much wit, which in me (candid Judges) I acknowledge to be
very little; as -- for example -- watch I call -- Pindarus.


Pindarus* do you thus Pindarize? Mouth of a horse be dumb, what is it you are
now thinking on.


Thinking oftentimes upon the prologue.


Not a word more, I shall make it prove an Epilogue.


Take him hence he is obstinately stubborn, and unruly;


But I shall overcome his stubbornness.


O times, and manners! whither (my Judges) shall I turn me in this cross and
failing Age of prologues.


Are you still muttering, will you never find the way out, Allons.


I have washed my mouth in the Cabal in Fountain, and well can sing a pegaseian
melody, the master of Art and giver of Wit I Davus Dromo.


Davus disturbs all things.


But I shall master him to obedience and silence, boy hold him fast, whiles I


I will be the prologue for all this.


A pure prologue-speaker and of a clean free Nostril.


Well well, if I do not bast your errand to the Muses --


They threatened to day to run you through with their Forks; I will now lead you
whither you are worthy to go, to Ignoramus who always henceforth shall ride on
you.


Da veniam subitis, non displicuisse meretur,
Festinat (Caesar) qui plecuisse tibi.
Pardon (Dread Liege) such sudden things as these,
He merits not t'offend who strives to please.

THe Horn sounds

Trin-tran Bear-back, make way, I am a post dispatch, from London hither to
inform you that Ignoramus neither is, nor can be acted. Stare no more on me, it
is as I tell you; would you know the reason, not one amongst the Lawyers will
accommodate Ignoramus with a Gown to act his part in, so unkind is Ignoramus to
Ignoramus, for by a late order amongst themselves it is provided that the
Lawyers only shall not be brought upon the stage. This dispatch therefore doth
advise you to rise and depart, spectators, here is but a short come-off of this
play, Farewell, and clap your hands.


What is the business? what? is our play already come to a non-suit. Oh Vide^
postam I see the post; post, post, have you brought a Gown with you?


O Dullman! no, no Dullman, a Lawyers Gown cannot be had either for money, or
entreaty.


Why so?


Because, besides the prohibition, innumerable Gowns are now paying their
worship to their great God the Term who gives place to no man.


Hum, Hum, Hum, you have some letters for me, have you not?


These for you and these for Ignoramus.


Hum, hum, hum, here is some News I know. Do you deliver this letter to my
master whiles I peruse my own.


I will.

-- S. P. D. what doth he mean by this S. P. D. Oh, now I understand it, tis
speed, I, right, right, it came by the post, tis speed* If thou ingrossest
instruments, it is well, I also do engross instruments; be it known (uncle
dullman) unto all men that are or shall be, that there is a common report
amongst us, that Ignoramus is a very gross play, and my master saith, that he
hath turned over all his books (for he hath a few) and he hath found ipso
facto, that the play is both routous, and riotous; wherefore those praedicables
who would have gelded Ignoramus, and did bind him with cords and ropes,
Inprimis, Trico, Cupes, and Cola shall be brought into the star-chamber for a
terrible Riot. My master saith also that he hath three Benefices that
heretofore he hath given gratis to these predicables (which nevertheless I do
not believe) but he saith that they who shall have them hereafter shall pay
soundly for them, pro toto in solido. He alleges moreover that there is one
Jeofail in the play to make a common Lawyer, a common Fool, who uses to make
of other men common Fools. And another Jeofail that they made him speak Latin
in Bordeaux which he cannot do either here, or there; but if they Act again
that prohibited play we will make mo^t gallant ^allads of them, and better then
those that have been already made, although they are superfine and stand with
us in the case against Cambridge, nevertheless many say that they are but
foolish Libells and therefore mo^t worthily condemned for heretical in the late
convocation house at Oxford. We^l, well I know what I know; I must conj^r^ you
(my Uncle Dullman) by that d^llmanity that is in you, not to ^quaint any of the
predicables with this which I write.




Not any of them, -- a^d I have now read it before you all; Ah foolish Nephew!
could he not have writ me word of it in the beginning of the letter, but I must
entreat you, ^t omne sit unum that it may be all one, speak nothing of it, I
will read no more of this unto you.


I have delivered the letters to Ignoramus; but what means that great
preparation.


Oh! it is for the examination of two notable knaves before my master
Ignoramus.


Who are they?


One Gasper Schioppius, and one Davus Dromo.


Can Ignoramus pass sentence on them.


He doth not, and yet withstanding he doth, although he is neither Judge nor
Justice of peace, but only deputed to take the Examination.

Oh now they come, master Ignoramus do you come abroad without a Toga vocata a
Gown.


But I will come in chlamyde vocata a Cloak rather then the Law shall not be
currant. Boy, go and command them to bring that vile Schioppius before us
whiles I do examine this fellow.


It shall be done.


Sirrah, Sirrah, what is your true Name, Sirrah, hah?


Davus Dromo.


Alias Mess Davy Sirrah, for when you were Arrested before, you said you were
not davus dromo, but Mess davy, and so you made an escape, Hah? A double Name
a double Knave, dullman read his accusation.


In the first place it is presented, that thou davus dromo being armed in a
warlike manner did assault the spectators of Ignoramus with a terrible
Engine, Anglice called a Hobby Horse, cum kikkis friskis, with Kicks and
Frisks, and with a most horrible noise snip, snap, snip, snap, to the great
terror of the liege people of the King and the death of their Children.


Hah! what say you to this Sirrah?


It was one, I believe very like me, for I was not present at that time when
Ignoramus was acted, it is well known that I was drunk that night.


O ho, you are a drunken knave and a liar to boot, It was you.


It was my self, and it was* not my self.


But sirrah sirrah, at the same time did not you challenge the horse of the
King, tu challengebas equum regis? which is petty treason sirrah


I only challenged the Horses of the Noblemen.


O note it Dullman, A scandal to the horses of the Noblemen, scandalum
magnatum aequorum.


Yes, yes, Scandalum magnorum aequorum.


Sirrah, you are a horse called sa^cy Jack, for heretofore you took the wall of
the Prince.


I do remember it very well, it was opportunely done when I instructed the
Ambassadors to receive him.


Master I think you may have it Br^ve for the examining of an Idiot, for
heretofore he would be Dean of Dunstable. If you will, I know the Law.


What you, Sauce-box, you know the law, and not I; you shall teach me what I am
to say, you are both of you Idiots, but I will proceed in the Examination,
Sirrah, nevertheless you are a great Fool and a proud Fool; what, you dare to
tilt with the Kings Fool?


Equals to Equals.


Mess Davy, you know that it is petty treason Mess Davy.


What is petty Treason Dullman?


But Sirrah, is that true that you wrote in Latin to the Pope to make you
Cardinal?


Yes, I had been a Cardi. if I had wrote true Latin to him.


Note it down Dullman quod coinavit and transportavit trans mare falsum
Intinum, he coined and transported false latin beyond the Sea expressly against
a st^tute in that case provided and published.


His false latin shall therefore, master, be confiscated to our use.


Let me alone I will take an order for that, sirrah, How much have you of it.


A great deal, but not enough to serve both your turns.


Well, I perceive you are a notorius Malefactor, I will return your name to the
Magistrate, and I will write unto him to pass his sentence on you in form and
manner following, First if ever you come to the court again that you be jactus
s^rsum, Anglice tossed in a Blanket; if you ever be in love, you shall have a
thing called Anglice a Codpiece sowed behind you, and so dance as you did
sometimes at Geneva, you shall be moreover a Vagabond, and have never any
Master, or Land, or Bread, or Drink of your own, but as a fly you shall always
live at the Tables of other men, and be repulsed with scourges, c. Now let the
Knave withdraw.


Wo is me! oh that the Excellency of wit so advantageous unto others should be
so destructive unto me.


Who have we here? What! Schioppius ille nebulo in printo. That Knave in print
Schioppius.


The very same, the Fur, Bifur, Furcifer, Trifurcifer, Schioppius is here
before you. Look to your purses Gentlemen, here is Schioppius the grand legate
of Thieves. Antolicus himself had not so foul a hand.


See if he be not burned in the hand?


Oh oftentimes! he is stigmatised all over; see how black and tenacious are his
hands, and with what hooked Nails they are Armed?


Master, Master, his Nose is slit too, and he hath Crop-Ears, by his marks he
should be Gasper Schioppius of Munster.


Gasper of Monster.


Munster Franco was familiar with his Mother and was the known Father, he is a
known Bastard.


O ho! what is he a Bastard? A good Bastard comes by chance, but a bad one by
Nature.


He stole also a Gold-Chain from his Father.


I was then but fourteen years of age, it was a sign of my Wit.


Oh, oh! A Felon from his Cradle.


When he was but a stripling, his Father read his Fortune, and told all his
Friends what a most egregious Knave he would make.


He spake the truth of him.


He played the Merchant too with Giffanius that entertained him, and stole from
him his books and papers.


I confess it; its no Theft for a Lettered man to steal Letters.


Is it not? Oh Impudence! stand further off? I believe he hath stole some of my
papers, I have many wanting.


I steal your papers? -- I have papers enough of my own, witness those many
famous pamphlets I have divulged.


I, I, thou art known to be a famous scribler of Libels.


And being but very young he wrote the most filthy Priapeia.


What is that?


That which honestly cannot be named, much less excused.


For that, I will speak with confidence that all Women are beholding unto me.


For what?


Why, I have restored their muliebria to them by turning L into N.


Mark that Master, L into N, Hic est pecia secretae knaveriae, A piece of
secret Knavery I warrant you.


Take notice also of his most imodest and impure observations, for in one of
his writings he preferred the life of a sparrow above the life of a man; and
this he did most pathetically also because they are more salacious.


I am informed that you are an Apostate also, and a Renegade.


Then he was not only Gaspar, but Caster Schioppius, At Rome indeed being like
to perish for Hunger he wrote a book of his conversion, poor Schioppius coming
out of Germany, and being ready to starve did address himself to Rome.


What of that when I was Hungry, the Kitchen of Cardinal Medruccius was always
open to me.


It is a Proverbial verse. Si canis in Hilla religatur, mordet in illa.
Tie a Dog upon the Hill a
Still he there be biting will a.



Ha, ha, he, Master.


But I upon my Conversion, came presently forth an excellent Divine out of the
Vatican Library.


You could do no less, having not long before most atheistically preferred
Plautus above the Bible, and worshipped Bacchus, Venus and Ceres above all
Deities: from hence it is that he makes War both with God and Man, the
Parasite of Romulus, the Father of Hunger, whose soul is only but a conceit,
and who entertains no conceit of his soul at all; hence, on hills of lies and
perjuries this Earth-worm would climb unto Heaven, the Idol of impudence, the
Hang-mans sacrifice, and Groan of every Gallows; hence it is that this Cerberus
with black teeth and a filthy tongue provokes the Sacred Majesty of Kings,
hence, it is that so odious is the fame of this son of a Prostitute, hence that
this most impudent scribler dares exercise his pen against Ambassadors being
himself one of the greatest Thieves, and Burdelloes in the world.


But I haxe a fly abroad, a legate who peradventure may effect that I may be
Legatus a latere my self.


In the mean time thou shalt not only be ablegated, but ligated as a Thief --
Est not abilissimus ^atro quem unquam vidi in vita mea; the most notable Thief
that I ever saw in my life, well, well, I will inform the Judge of you that he
may punish* you accordingly.


But I am a Baron and must have a noble Trial.


Let him be tried therefore by his Peers, the Barons of the Field of Flora, oh
most egregious Baron!


I know already what sentence the Law will pass upon you* First because you
are a great Liar, your infamous tongue must be bored through with one Red hot
Iron, and because you have a bold brazen face, you must be branded in the fore
head with another.


And why in the fore-head, it is needless, he is so lost a thing, he hath no
front, or heart at all. --


And sirrah because you have a most impure mouth you shall be carried to the
Common shore, as once before you were at Heydelberg where all your mouth shall
be besmeared with merd, and so your polluted soul shall make its exit behind, by
a Husteron Proteron as a Heathen Greek hath it.


What's that, what's that Master?


It is Greek you fool you.


Oh! oh, excuse me, I understand it not, Musaeus must write it down.


You are an Ass -- after that sirrah your Carcass shall be thrown into the
Jakes of an Abbot.


(...) take heed what you do, I cannot be condemned by any law for oftentimes I
am Frantic.


Take the Knave away.


Look to your purses?


Signior we are now provided with a Gown for you.


Where did you find one?


Amongst the stolen goods of Schioppius.


I will go put it on, and then return again.


But signio^ make no delay!


Erit retorna brevis, it shall be a short return, do not fear it.


Dullman will return also, there shall be no Essoyne.


Ignoramus suddenly will return, but that he doth so, is not to be ascribed to
him, but, Caesar, (unto your Clemency) who are the patron of Caesars, and to
your love to this University* Great is the honour of it and so much the
greater, as you your self are a complete University of all Learning; For which,
bold malice her loud throat doth strain, and her black Nails begins to bite
again, Vouchsafe then Caesar she may so relent, so swell with grief that all in
the event, whom Envy rives may be asunder rent.


And wilt thou be obedient then my son?


Sir, you are my Father, what you please command!


Well said my Son, then first know what it is, and of what moment it is that I
would have you do; I do believe you heretofore have heard though but obscurely
how that a London Merchant did buy of me here at Bordeaux great store of good
Wine for a round sum of Money, but payed nothing at the present, he entered into
bonds sealed them, but never did discharge them; trust not at all my Son, it is
a high point of wisdom, I hope you understand me.


Sir, I do, will you be pleased to proceed.


This London Merchant forbearing his bonds the payment, I repaired to London to
demand my Money, where being fed flatterd with delays I grew familiarly
acquainted with a widow of my own Country, whose name is Dorothy; she then did
live in London, and was there Married to a rich Knight and Alderman of that
City, whose name was Mally, no, it was Manley. He not long after his Marriage
did take her with him to his own habitation in London, and falling into an
irrecoverable sickness he made her sole Executress, departed this world. He
had no children by her, but two by a former Wife, and both of them of an
extraordinary beauty, the eldest Daughters name was Katharine, and the youngest
Isabell. These two, with a considerable Dowry for them, he on his Death bed
left to the care and charge of Dorothy (although their step-mother) who was to
provide them Husbands when they arrived to the years of Marriage; they did
exceed in Wealth but excelled more in Virtue and in Beauty, what shall I say, I
loved the Widow well, I loved her entirely, a long time I courted her, a long
time she denied me, at the last I obtained her good will married her: the year
being almost expired she was delivered at one Birth, of two children: you
Anthonio are one of them, Anthonine the other, and both so like, that one could
not be known from the other, neither I, nor your Mother could distinguish
betwixt you, were it not for a little Mole which Anthonine had in his right
Cheek. Six years afterwards returning hither into my own Country I took you
along with me, and left Anthonine with his Mother at London. Since that time
full fifteen years are expired; for as we travelled hither through France, the
War being very hot betwixt the French and English, we were taken by the Enemy,
and but six months are passed since a peace being on both sides concluded we
were permitted to have our liberty; no sooner was I a free Man, but every day I
resolved with my self to go to London to see my Dorothy, but being detained by
wrangling suits of Law, I remain here still whether I will or not, and am still
here likely to remain, O the Lernaean Race of bold Pragmatic men who immortaly
do sow divisions amongst mortality, and perpetually make one suit to beget
another. Wherefore fly suits at Law, a lean Arbitration is b^ter then a fat
Judgement. Remember what I speak unto you.

Sir, I do.


I therefore do much desire, whiles I may, to see your Mother, and your
brother, and his new Wife your Sister.


They say he hath Married Katharine.


'Tis right, for I and my wife had long ago determined to give the two
Daughters of Mr. Manley by his former wife unto you, and to your brother, and
when you were but little ones you were contracted to one another, Katharine to
Anthonine, and Isabell to you; but Isabell poor Girl that was to be Married to
you is lost, she was brought up at Detford near unto the River of (...) where
being but four years of age, whither she was drowned, or whether she and her
Nurse were both carried away by force it is uncertain, but she hath been now
missing these nineteen years.


Father did you ever see the other sister Katharine?


Never, Her Grand-mother brought her up in Devonshire which is distant many
Miles from London; but Son, do you know what it is I would have you do.


No Sir, but if it be that which I suspect I am utterly undone.


It is this, I would have you immediately set sail for London to bring hither
to Bordeaux your Mother, Brother, and the rest of the Family along with you.


I am undone, for in the mean time I shall loose my Love.


Behold this letter, your Mother hath sent me word that she will come over her
self with all the speed she could, and that immediately she would dispatch your
brother Anthonine to me; imagine with your self what a happiness it will be to
you to enjoy the Kiss of your Mother and the Embraces of your Brother. What
ails you? why are your Eyes so sad, and your Brows so full of wrinkles? are
you not well?


To speak the truth Sir -- this tis to love. --


What! are you in love?


With the Land Sir, the rough Sea and I shall never agree, I shall hardly fall
in love with it.


Do you make a sport of my commands, and pretend excuses, I plainly do observe
it; you must and shall be gone immediately.


Immediately Sir.


I Sir immediately, will you not obey me?


It is my duty, but I pray sir give me some little space to consider of it.


This is fine? is it not? when the Father commands, the Son must ask time and
space to consider of it, I am ashamed of you.


Sir I will readily perform your commands -- But --


But what?


I most humbly crave of you that you will vouchsafe me the space of six or
seven days to prepare my self, and to give a farewell to my Friends.


Let not that trouble you, I will do that business for you, and as for your
journey all things are already in a readiness, I have hired a Ship, I have
payed for it there is nothing wanting.


Sir, England ^ying Northwards I shall be wind bound; for the wind being now in
the South blows directly upon the North point.


It is so much the more advantageous to you, and should invite you to make so
much the more hast, for you have a wind according unto wish to conduct you
speedily into England. Have you any thing else to offer to me?


Do you not hear Sir, how the wind is angry with the sea? do you not see how,
the clouded sky doth threaten Tempests?


Are you in your right sense, or do you dream being broad awake? the gentle
southwind blows in a calm and an unclouded air: I know not what you mean, you
do not well to dally with me; you must aboard, and that immediately, I begin to
be very angry with you.


What immediately! ah my dear Rozabella!


What are you weeping? God forbid! what ails the young man?


Why -- Is it such a wonder Sir, if the anger of an indulgent Father hath drawn
fears from a dutiful and an obedient Son.


If it be so, 'tis well; why do you make any further delays?


Sir, I only beseech thus much of you, as to grant me but so little time as to
restore to my friends those things of theirs which for the present are in my
Custody.


So little time, how little do you mean?


Four hours, or more.

'Tis two more then can be granted, the ship is already under sail, and the
sea-men do expect you.


Then g^ve me two hours.


I will grant you two, In the mean time I will go in, and finish, and seal my
letters to be sent to Dorothy, and tell out your money, but you must be a good
husband of it; for the many suits at law have been very chargeable to me. We
must be always giving to these suck-purses the lawyers, always, always; Gold
can do more then Right.


Antonio, Antonio.


Woe is me my Father calls.


Antoni, Antonio.


Sir.


Come hither to me presently.


Fie, Fie; Tanta pressa, tantum Croudum, ut fui pene trusus ad mortem; Here is so
great a press, so great a Crowd, that I am even thrust to death. I will have
an Action of Intrusio ag^inst all and every one of them* Aha Mounsiers, will
you thrust par joinct Tenant. It is a plain Case, Il est point dr^ite de le
bien seance, I sweat extremely; O Hot, hot! precor Deum no mel^avi meum pingue,
pray God I have not melted my fat. Phy, phy: In the Name of God where are my
Clerks? Dullman! Dullman!


Here Master, Here.


Vous auez Dullman, Meltor Dullman meltor rubba me cum Towallio, rubba, O
Dullman, I am melted, Dullman, I am melted, Rub me over with a Towel, rub me
Dullman, where is Pecus.


Here Sir.


Fac ventum, make a wind, Pecus, so, so, where is Fledwit?


He is not inventus.


Put your Cloaks upon me now for fear I take cold. So, so -- Ainsi been faict,
Amongst all my troubles and punishments it doth much rejoice and comfort me at
this present that I have made a good agreament at the law amongst our English
here at Bordeaux; a good agreament, Aggreamentum quasi aggregatio mentium. Well
-- too morrow hoyfabimus vela we will hoise sails, and return to London; It is
high ^ime we came hither Octabis Hilarii, and it is now almost Quindena Pasche.


I Swear unto you Master, this day you have tickled the point of the law to
some tune: titillasti punctum legis Master.


He He, I think I have tickled it; Si le nom del granteur, o^ grant soit raze,
ovinterline, on faict pol, le faict est grandement suspicious.


And then again, non obstant si faict pol; And that, also in Coin.


But that above all, D'vn faict pendu en le smoke, nunquam audivi titillatum
melius, I never heard a Case better tickled.


And what do you say Musaeus?


I understood but little Sir.


You are a Galltierista, vocatus a Coxcomb, Musaeus; I shall never make you a
Lawyer.


Never, never; He was a praedicabile; he, an Universitant.


They are pitiful Cle^ks, and great Idoets these Universitants. I do wonder
quomodo spendisti tempus, how you did spend your time amongst them?


For the most part I studied Logic.


Logic! -- What Village, what Town is this Logic?


It is one of the liberal Arts.


Liberal! So I thought; in the Name of God, study Arts thriving and gainful:
Non est mundus, This is not a world for liberal Arts.


I was addicted also to the love of Philosphy.


Addicted to love! what? Are you pro Strumpotis Baggagiis? Strumpets and
Baggages; if you take bad courses, you are not for me. I will return you back
again unto your parents.


God keep you in that mind.


Quotu est Clocka nunc? what a Clock is it now?


Between eight and nine.


Go therefore to my lodging with your Bags and your Rolls: what is that? let me
see that Instrument; man^ petit, mane -- stay a little, stay I say whiles I put
my spectacles on my nose: Oh ho, ho: now I know it; This Indenture made betwixt
Roger Rattledock of Caxton in the County of Brecknock, O ho: Richard Fen, and
John Den: O ho; proud Buzzard plaintiff against Peagoose defendant. O ho, look
you here? Here is one letter faulty, mend it, mend it; for in law but one Comma
misplaced, overthrows a whole plea. Now go your ways. Do you take this? Do you
engross that, and do you Pecus truss up the Portmanteaus and put all things in
a readiness for our journey. Rosabella, Hey, ho; I am not going now to the
Courts at Westminster but to the joyful Court of Venus held at Torcolls; Cupid
her Sheriff would never let me alone till he found me in her Bailiwick: At the
first time when I loved Rosabella but a little, he sent me a little Capias, and
then a great Capias, and afterwards other Capiasses, and more Capias and
innumerable Capias, till at the last capavit me ut legatum, being bereaved of
all Sense and Reason; so that I am now but just as a Fly without a head; Buzzo
torno, I buzz up and down, and I turn here and I turn there, but I know not
what I do my self. When I am drawing up an Instrument, if a woman be named, I
write Rosabella; For Corpus cum causa, I write Corpus cum cauda; for Nouerint
universi, Am a verint universi; for Habere ad rectum, Habere ad lectum; and so
I spoil the whole Instrument: Hey, ho, ho, hey ho.


Pseca^, See that Corinna doth use this Wash, and Sabina that Vermilion; let
Coelia wear this Dress to day, and Corcas that: when you are ready (Girls)
come hither,; for I will have you sing and play and dance before me, such Arts
make shipwrecks of your Lovers. I have been wracked my self, but not by such
Sirens: Returning once from Fess to Portugall, a shipwreck made me poor, and
did enforce me to such vile Arts as these; therefore with that small stock was
left I hired Wenches from several Countries, and as different in language as in
habits, They are all adorned in their own Countries fashion. The smell of gain
is sweet from any thing; But the spotless Virgin my Cousin Rosabella, I hope
this day to marry happily to Ignoramus, and I am to receive for her six hundred
Crowns in Gold -- But who is this, O Seignior Ignoramus, the most honoured Man
of all men; Are you here Sir, Bazo las manus Seignior, I am the servant of your
servants.


Sure this is the Pope.


What service will you command me my Lord and Master?


Ha, he, he; I will give you a Supersedes for these Complements, I believe you
have put your neck into so wry a form, with your congying and your cringing.


Sir, It was a misfortune I got here at Bordeaux by making once a trial of a
parcel of wives if they were good or not.


Will you not have a Breve de recto for it?


Whether I am straight, or whether I am crooked, I am yours all over Seignior:
where are these Girls? why come they not forth, O Seignior?


Forbear I pray your Cringes and your Cruragies: But what Females are these?
Are they your Goods and Chattels?


Sir, I am both a Merchant and a Musician: I keep here a School for Music.


There is no trusting to a Fiddle-string. Of what Nation are these?


She with a Harp was born in Greece: The other is a German: She with a Timbrel
is an Hebrew: She that stands by her, is an English woman: She with a Flute is
a Spaniard; and those two with Lutes in their hands, the one of them was born
in France, the other in Arcadia; the other four, a Venecian, a Persian, a
Turkish Damosel, and a Moor. Join hand in hands, and lead on the Dance.


They are very pretty Minstrels: Are you their Master?


Well done my Girls, in earnest: Now go in, but first every one of you in an
humble posture salute this Gentleman.


What do you make account to do with me? Habetis warrantum de osculando, Have
you got any warrant to kiss me? what I vi armis too; you are good ones I dare
warrant you: but who is this that cleavs so close to my lip? play at unlawful
games against the Statute?


Believe me Sir, they are unstained, and sealed Virgins.


Sealed! I believe they are sealed with the common Seal. Ha, ha, he.


Neither they nor I admit of any such looseness Seignior: God buy to you.


Nay stay a little! what are you angry! I only frangebam jooum did but break a
jest, which with us in both is instead ought to be done although on a mans
life; and you take it in bono serio, in good earnest, Come -- be merry, And
tell me how doth my Rosabella?


Oh, she Seignior, because she is no Maid is to marry another.


But are you in sobria tristitia; speak you this in sober sadness?


Diable! what Fraud, what Covine, what Deceit is this? was there not an
Indenture made betwixt you and me, that if I gave you six hundred Crowns, I
should marry your Ward Rosabella; and was not this dies appunctatus the
appointed Day for the payment of it? Is not this true?


It is.


Well, do what you will, I have your Indenture and Obligation safe and sound,
signed and dated, and delivered with your own hand? And if you deliver me not
Rosabella, you will forfeit the Obligation which is no less then a thousand
Crowns. What say you now, there is but one Law, and but one King, you will find
no mediety of language to defend you. What say you?

He thinks all things are transacted here as in the Courts of England, but if
you bring me this day the six hundred Crowns I will not alter my resolution.


You do well; it is agreed already, and condescended to; therefore if possibly
I can, I will come my self in my own person this day with the money; if I
cannot, I will send one of my Clerks unto you with it.


But I know none of your Clerks.


And none of my Clerks know you, Sed est totum unum pro eo, It is all one for
that; He shall bring you the six hundred Crowns, and the Instruments, And I
will tell him that the better to know you, you have a crooked neck; Do you fear
any thing?


Yes, I fear Antonio, and the most cunning Trico, who everywhere lie in wait to
take Rosabella from me, I cannot take heed enough, and be so wary of them as I
should be when I am most heedful; It is safest therefore to agree upon some
private token; for to add a Caution unto a Caution is to be doubly cautious.


Although it be needless, yet if my Clerk Dullman shall come unto you from me,
he shall give you this private token. He shall take you thus by the Nose.


Content; Be it so with all my heart, And take heed that you tell no man of it.


What? Do you take me to be an Idiot?


You shall therefore this day have her; she is my Cousin, and, by all that's
chaste, a Virgin.


Ovy dea, Ovy dea; Too morrow I will return to London with her, but I pray you
call her hither a little, that I may have a sight of her; for hoc est longum
breve, It is the long and the short of it, I do lov^ her: Do you enjoin her
therefore that she return unto me the love of avoir dupois, weight for weight,
Do you understand me?


I'll bring her to you presently.


I was never so enamoured before in all my life, I am now bestialiter
inamoratus most beastly enamoured: But Torcol presently will bring unto me
Corpus cum Cauda, cum Causa I would say. Oh that I had one Habeas Corpus now,
Ha, he. Whiles I do think on it I do tread on thorns.


Why do you weep so? you stubborn Minion: Have I brought you up so virtuously
so carefully that you should be so disobedient to me, and stand in your own
light as much as in mine: Either be well content to marry him, or per aquesta
cruz de Dios I will carry you back to F^ss, where I will either sell you, or
prostitute you: I wish you well; what will you have him? Speak.


Uncle you are wise: what seems good unto you shall be as agreeable unto me.


Why, now you speak well, and as it becomes you:


I must dissemble my love I see, for fear it be worse with me: my dear Antony
shall I never --


I have placed this little Dwarf Surda to be as a Spy over her, who although
she hath been deaf these three Months, yet she is faithful, and understands by
signs very exactly.


I understand you well, that I should have a diligent eye over her, and suffer
her not to go far abroad.


'Tis right.


And that I permit not any young man to speak unto her.


Very well.


As soon as Ignoramus hath done speaking with her, that she presently go in
again.


I, with all speed, otherwise I will whip thee unto Death.


What you command shall be performed.


Seignior, my Cousin here doth love you above all creatures in the world; make
trial of her: I have some business that calls me hence, but remember the sign
and the money.


There shall be no default.


Surda be careful of what I told you.


I will not fail in it.


He, ha, he, my Rosabella, hem, hem, hem: Madam and you my Masters of the Jury,
This is an Action on the Case. Fie, Fie, my tongue repeats my old accustomed
words; I think I am pleading with her now.


As far as I can see he's but a Fool.


Madame, pardon me, I was never in love before: But to come to the point, shall
we join issue Madame, will you marry me?


I am not worthy of that honour.


Truly I do love you better Rosabella then I love Rosa solis, I will tell you
what; your love hath made me a legitimate Poet, will you accept of some Verses
I have made?


Hem, hem, legal Verses on Rosabella; hem, hem,
Si possem vellem pour te Rosa ponere p^llem,
Quicquid tu vis crava, habebis singula brava;
Et dabo Fee simple si monstres Loves pretty dimple,
Farthingalos, Biggos, stomacheros, periwigg^s,
Pantaflos, Cussos, Garteros, Spanica Ruffos,
Buskos, Soccos, Tif^nas, Cambrica Smockos,
Pimpillos, Pursos, ad ludos ibis Vrsos.
Are not these good in law?

Excellent.


Thou shalt go to Plays, to the Bulls, and to the Bears; Thou shalt do what
thou wilt, my Girl, only keep thy Court shut unto others; Here take these
Verses, est Bill vera.


I will keep them in my Breast.


Dost thou love me?


Who can choose but love you?


Say thou so? I will make thee a good Jointure, faciam ut ames me plus plus,
I will make thee love me more and more. Hear what a Jointure I will make thee,
and for the better credit of it, it shall run in Latin my Girl: Mark it; Ego
Ambidexter Ignoramus infeosso te uxor^m meam Rosabellam in Tail special de
situ Manerii de Tongwell cum capitali Messuagio; Et d^ tibi omnia singula
messuagia, Toftos, Croftos, Cottagia, Columbaria, Molendia, Fulloni^a,
Aquatica, Venatica, Gardin^s, Tenementa, Boschos, Suboschos. Jumpnos, Brueros,
Moros, moriscos salsos, moriscos frescos, Juncaria, Turbaria, Alneta, Moscheta,
communiam pasture, liberam warrenam, piscariam, faldam, Dec^mas herbarum,
bladorum, granorum, agnellorum, faeni, lini, Cana^is, Tellonium* Stallagium,
pontagium, picagium, esc^eta Catalla Felonum, aviata extra Hara^, wreck maris,


O 'tis too much.


Stay dum capio anhelitum, till I take breath, and I will give thee ten times
as much.


He makes me smile although my heart doth weep.


Is the man in his right wits? he is more prattling then a Chandlers Mag-pie or
a Parrot.


Give me your love now; Quid pro quo is fair play.


You demand what is but right.


Give me a kiss then, prithee do.


What shall I do? O my fine sweet-heart, and my Uncles foul Avarice.


I read fair lines in your face.


Away, away!


I have a quare impodit for you Surda, I will seal and deliver a kiss unto you
Rosabella.


Skat, ah.


Adieu (my dear Rosabella) till by and by. Hoc osculum mihi facit bonum apud
cor, This kiss doth me good to the heart; I could fly on the wings of the
wind: But I will be crafty enough for Torcol; for when I come into England, I
will marry a rich wife, and then I will keep this, only in commendo, for a
Transi-tempus.


I perceive you love him.


I love Death better.


You do well to love him, he will give you --


The POX.


And do you love that Man Antonio?


As I love my own life.


You seem to hate him, you do well in it; Beshrew my Masters jealousies who so
unjustly doth suspect you.


How much am I tormented that Antonio doth not love me? that he makes not so
much as any show of love unto me although it were but mere Dissimulation; But I
for my part must play the counterfeit, that so being free from all eyes of
suspicion, I may then more opportunely fly unto him, ^hen I am to be led a
wretched Bride to Ignoramus Bed. I heard that Antonio was on this day to set
sails for London; How perfidious would he prove if he should forsake me now: He
hath given me his Troth, if he leaves me now I am undone.


If you marry Ignoramus you shall flow in wealth.


Sir, I'll warrant you, Take care for something else; I will not fail in this
service to you.


My Hope is all in thee Trico.


This day with deceits I will overcome Deceit it self: But whom see I yonder?
Master wipe your eyes!


My dear Rosabella! How happy a man am I? And how opportunely now I encounter
you, if that old bitch would give me leave but to speak unto you.


Fear not Master; she hath no teeth, she may bark, but cannot bite.


But she may give her Master notice of us by her barking.


I will give her a Sop for that, by pretending love unto her; she is always
puppying: In the mean time you may hold conference with Rosabella, but let your
gestures express much discontent and choler, that so she believing you to be
at great variance, may permit you to talk more freely.


You say well.


Save you Lady!


Touch me not! what do you mean? Forbear your saucy hands!


So angry Lady!


You hurt my hand! Be gone, and be hanged.


Rosabella threatens Antonio; I like it well.


this Fool loves me: He shows me a Ring too: I will not marry, no not I.


O the sad Fate of Lovers!


He sighs, poor Fool -- I appear beautiful, and that's the reason I am beloved:
I am not so old, as some do take me for.


O the Fate of Lovers!


How thick he draws his breath! poor man, I pity him.


O lips of milk, nose of purple, eyes of a sheep, thigh of an Emmet, feet of a
Calf, Hands of a Mole, Breast of a Grasshopper, pap of all paps, oh neighing
Mare, O gruntling sow! Harrow the Flames that me consume!


He is now praising my Beauty; I apprehend him, I am handsome enough, I thank
my stars for it.


Oh most diminitive of all perfections, deaf and thick, and hopper-ars'd, old,
and hairy, drunken, and apish. Oh my heart, my heart.


He is struck into admiration with my Beauties; Oh that I were not deaf that I
might hear my own praises: I hope they will call me Dwarf no more.


O the pangs of Love!


Alas, Alas he weeps, I am compassionate; He is ready to swoon away, Revive thy
self my servant, I do love thee, I do.


Pretend to be passionately angry with me!


I tell thee I do love thee, take heart of grace, Oh my dear friend and
servant, I will not suf^er any to die for love of me, Charity forbids it.


You are mine then for ever; I hardly am able to forbear from laughter, Ha, ha,
he: O my heart, my heart.


Fear not, I do love thee; wo is me, I must be gone, yonder's Antonio high in
discourse, of whom my Master charged me to beware: well done Rosabella, you
seem to be angry, and incensed against him, Chide him, Chide him, do!


But in earnest I now must chide you Antonio, Have you no remorse to leave me
here in all my sorrows, and by going to London to destroy me? Do you now
retract from all you have done and spoken, and leave your protestations to the
winds and clouds to be dispersed in the Air and lost? Are you so forgetful of
them! But Heaven and Faith will remember them, wo is me, what trust is there in
Men that are composed only of Cruelty and perfidiousness. Oh.


See how he beats his breast; I cannot blame him; monster of impudence!


Oh my dear love!


Oh my love, I am undone, I am fallen in love just like a wasp into a pot of
Honey.


I gave you my faith Rosabella, and striking thus your hand, I now again
confirm it.


How inhumanely he struck that young Lady! were I a man, I would fly in the
very eyes of him: But in true Love there is no Danger; we are more happy, we --



She sighs just like a Sow that hath lost her first litter of Pigs; Oh my dear
heart --!


My sweet Love --!


Pardon me my life, My Father commands me to be gone, neither prayers, nor
tears can prevail upon him, I take Faith her self to witness, I go unwilling
from you.


Unwilling! Love cannot be compelled; but by degrees it may languish into
nothing. You do not love me.


If I love you not most --


No more! I do believe you.


Woe is me; Love like a hot pot doth boil and bubble in my Breast.


She is mine.


He noddeth and winks, How prettily he noddeth and winks; I will nod and
wink on him also.


But why do you not take me, from this impure place; Fie upon it.


Spit on him.


I live here under the Command of a wicked Uncle who hath lost his honesty with
his estate. O beast! why shall I call him a man, who hath nothing of Humanity
in him? O my Fathers Manes to whom did you entrust me: but though you would be
gone Antonio, I will tread in your steps, and follow after you: If I may not
live chastely, I will die chastely.


O virtuous manners and resolutions; my heart with grief doth cleave asunder.


She hath touched him home, he beats his breast, and tears his hair, O
shameless Man!


O the Fire and smart of Love!


Do not sigh so! Dear sweet heart; Just like an Italian Lover, in glancing eyes
he shows his wounded heart: It shows handsome in him, I will return the like
unto him.


Had you but satisfied my Fathers avarice with six hundred Crown^, I had not
now been miserable.


I protest most solemnly unto you, I could no where provide it; my Friends
would not trust me, my Father was inexorable; what should I do?


I know not; but this I am certain of, that my Uncle by writings hath
contracted with Ignoramus for me, who hath promised this day either to bring
the Money himself, or to send it by his servant with a secret token which they
have agreed upon betwixt themselves.


What is this I hear! Do you know what the token is?


That is concealed from me, but here are his dainty Verses.


I shall peradventure extract something out of them.


She hath rejected his Letters: That is well; His eyes are red with choler, he
stamps on the ground, he is mad I think -- O my dear Love Trico I mark you for
all that.


Who can see this? who is able to endure it?


Be of good Courage, I will so far prevail, that you shall not go to sea to
day, nor lose your Love Rosabella.


O that it so may come to pass.


Trust to this head, this day it will do wonders.


Strike not your head so hard! I do love you, indeed I love you, I was afraid,
lest he would have gone near to have swooned away again.


My little tender piece of old, and tough mortality, I am not able to forbear
laughing at you outright.


Ha, ha, he: And I cannot choose but laugh too.


She neigheth I think: But you! it is now high Time. Be gone both of you. This
Creature is my own --


You say well, Let us go.


But she will cry out --


Fool not your selves, but put that to the trial.


What do you give me a Ring too? marry I thank you for it: Now I am yours; do
you wear this handkercher for me.


What do you mean that you are not gone? -- will you marry me presently?


Give me your right hand, and good luck with it.


To be well rid of you.


Let us seal it with a kiss.


O sweet kiss! it makes my mouth to water.


Eh, Eh, I have got a sluttish Cough of late, Eh, Eh.

O Rottenness -- why do you stay there still? be gone I pray -- you will loose
the opportunity.


Come! let us go! O joy incomparable.


Snails as you are, you have your selves undone.


RUn after them, come back you Fugitive baggage, come back. Help me?


I am undone.


Why do you beat me so?


Keep off Antonio? Oh excellent Guardian, he beats her Surda! who shall keep
the Keeper? O thou Witch thou!


Beat not me so, I am not to be beaten by you, I am to be Married anon.


In the mean time you shall be married to this Cudgel.


What do you mean to use me so? I tell you again I am to be married this day,
whither you will, or not; upon my troth I am. Nay, I am even as good as married
already; look on this Ring else.


A Ring -- Oh the tricks of Trico, but I shall --


St! Husband help me? do you hear?


Get you in -- ye pair of strumpets; do you bind them fast in bond^, and keep
them safe till I re^urn.


Kill me rather.


St, St, Trico, Do you so forsake your wife? woe is me.


With what confidence dare you vile Torcol?


Circle me round you Sergeants,


Drag hence my dearest love, I looking on --


Pray Sir Depart* And mind your own business, as I will mine, I have nothing
to say unto you.


Hang-man --


O you are to marry my deaf Dwarf, I shall beware of your tricks Tricol.


I may peradventure be too hard for you anon for all this.


He who threatens his Enemy doth give him a sword to out his own throat.


Come hither?


Stand further off, and speak there, if you have any thing to say.


No, I will speak it softly in your Ear, Torcol you are a vile pan-dare.


A stranger must gently always put up all injuries; Seignior Antonio, I would
not hold any difference with you: I have many other delicate beauties under my
tuition; you may make choice of which you will of them to be your wife.


I am much beholding to you


Seignior, A la buena ventura.


Forbear your Portugall-Flateries?


Servidor, signior, queda con Dios.


Go and be hanged!


This day I have very warily observed him.


O Trico!


Have you but a good courage, and leave the Event to Fortune and my Brain.


I must be gone, my Father expects me.


Go then! I will be ready to observe all opportunities; for cau^elous I must be
that my Master Theodore see me not talking with you: He begins to suspect me
already; look where he comes; I am gone, I am gone.


YOu -- Trico, Trico, whither are you going, I see you well enough, Do not hide
your self. Is it he, or rather a painted sign in the wall? It moweth not, I
will draw near: O Villain! what a face he makes! but look on him.


Truly Master, I was almost quite besides my self, so devoutly I prayed to
Almighty God to prosper your sons voyage by Sea.


You are very pious!


I am not usually so, I tell you the truth Master.


You take the dust from my clothes, but cannot brush away the dusts of
suspicion which cover my doubtful mind? you corrupt my son, sirrah.


Who I Master!


What excuse can you make to help your self, if I do think so?


Truly Master being so honest to you as I am, you would make me do that --


That! what?


That --


Speak out!


That at last I become stark nought, and as naughtily deceive you.


I apprehend you; Get you therefore to my Country House, and work there, but
be sure you return before the Evening.


Will you command me no other service?


Bring my Tenant in the Evening along with you, I will make even some odd
Accounts betwixt us.


I will acquaint him with it. Is that all Sir?


Let us go now to the Ship Antonio; wher's Bannacar to bring the Trunks and
Portmanteaus after us.


Here Sir!


These Letters to Dorothaea, these to Antonine, these to his wife Katharine;
remember my love to them, and to all my friends.


It shall be done. Father farewell.


Cheerfully spoken; I like it well.


I will see thee on ship-board my son; see here one of the Sea-men!


By my faith and troth La, why what do you make account to do my Masters? The
wind and the ship stays for you.


We are going.


But I unto my Death unless Trico --


St, Fear not.


MY Son (God bless him) is gone to Sea, I saw him shipped, and the Ship under
sail and launched forth; I have since dispatched some Affairs in the City,
according to my own mind. Now I go home with an untroubled heart; Bannacar,
thou know how I received thee into my own House, being a poor Vagabond, and
wanting all things, and what is most of all, I made thee a Christian who were
before a Mohammedan.


Sir, I must acknowledge I owe unto you not only my life, but my soul also, I
will persist therefore in the diligent performance of whatsoever service you
shall command me.


Go in! I shall immediadiately find an Employment for you.

He that will thrive must be to work inclined;
For sloth corrupts the body and the mind.

STay a little, whiles I look round about me, Here is no body! Come forth here
is not one stirring, not one as I can see.


The Phrygian Troops I circumspected have.


What say you Master? Am not I Trico the great?


Trico the most wonderful.


When I saw your Father go towards the Ship, I stole privately after you and
followed close, like a sneaking Dog with his Tail between his Legs; As soon as
he was departed, I presently threw my self into the next Boat, and with wind
and sails made up unto you; coming to the Ship I pretended that your Mother
and her Family were newly arrived, and therefore your Father sent for you again
that you might not lose your Journey; Thus in one Boat we both came back. The
ship steered on her course for London. But what saith your Father to his
Neighbours now? My son Anto. is now sailing to London, God speed him well; my
servant Trico, my excellent servant Trico is toiling and sweating poor man at
my Country House? this shall be your Country House that I will be at this day,
Master Theodorus.


As yet, it moves handsomely; but what shall I do now? wherefore have you
brought me back, shall I enjoy Rosabella.


Trico (as I hope shall bring that to pass also.


I would he could.


Did not you see me speak with one just now?


Yes, yonder Hawker, who cries and sells pamphlets up and down the City.


The very same, his name is Cupes, and you hardly will believe it, he is a
greater knave then I am.


No, Torcol is the great knave.


To one great knave, there must be put two half knaves, such as I and Cupes
are. Give him but a little money before hand, and he will do wonders.


Here are ten pieces which my thrifty Father gave me for my journey, I have no
more.


'Tis enough. Give them me; with these will I suborn Cupes, and afterward
discover the whole design unto you; I must now address my self to the Broker
to furnish our selves with Clothes for the play, and this design we will carry
on very handsomely. Do you bestow yourself in some private Friends house hard
by, and there conceal your self that your Father may have no notice of it; As
soon as I can, I will attend you, and laugh at me, if I effect not your
desires.


Say you so, If you make me so happy I will --


No more but be gone.


Let me not live if I fail to --


Why do you stay so long?


I go my Trico.


Cupes this day promised to assist me, I have told him all; see where he comes
with his basket of books in his hand.


BOoks, Books, who buys my books, new books, witty books, witty and new, new
and true, come who buys my books, new books new!


You! books, books!


O Trico, I will come to you presently. As I live, I have most pitiful books
here to day.


Why so?


I cannot sell one of them; prithee stay a little.


Make hast then.


Come! who buys my books, here is the Eel or Grigg of Equivocation, or of the
Art of lying confidently cum privilegio, by the Reverend Father in the Divel
Andraeas Beelzebub, and Johannes Cyd^nius; come who buys my books? who buys
Beelzebub?


No body.


I will sell them to you almost for nothing? for three souse, two souse, one
souse, half a souse, a un-grand Diable.


Have you the Devils club?


The Devils club -- let me see -- there is such a book, but it is prohibited,
what would you do with it?


With that Devils Club I would bea^ out the brains of Andreas Beelzebub the
Divel of Devils.


Tut, you could not hurt him.


Why?


His Head and Face is all of steel; Come who buys my Books; who buys my book
of the way how to hold the Eel of Equivocation by the tail.


By the tail, by the neck as well; I will buy it, by and by.


Come my fine Books. Pellio the Skinner, versipell Pellio or the way of turning
the skin by Pellio himself.


Prithee name that Pellio no more, lest he spoil our Comedy, as heretofore he
did the Comedies of Plautus, It makes my heart ache to think of him.


I am no body to day.


I would I had his skin stuffed with straw.


Straw! Hold thy peace. I tell thee Straws make saints now a days; will you
have the Apology for Garnet: There is a conceited straw for you.


Cupes; There is some hope that you and I may be saints also.


What hope Trico?


Because we are such very reprobates.


Come, my brave books. The Canonizing of Saint Garnet, of Saint James Clement,
of Saint Rauiliac, all three from the Vatican Library; Here is Schioppius, the
Night Owl, Come who buys Schioppius.


Not one buyer all this while -- O wonderful!


The flatterer or Schioppius, the art of flattering; A manuscript.


Let me see that book: Fie upon it! how it smells of the sloven that did
compose it? he wrote it with his own Urine.


Come who buys, who buys it, I am undone.


Enough -- you now have read over all your rank poisons.


Would these pamphlets were all burnt for me, what have I done? what have I
said? that they should undo me with these paltry pamphlets.


Take heed how you trade in them for the time to come; O Wretched writers! O
Generation of Scribblers, Incendiaries, Disturbers of the World, Insuarers of
the People; Destroyers of the Nobility, Murderers of Kings, and Advancers of
the Pope.


Away with them all? the Annalls of Volusius, mais quoy vanno via manniconia;
but I have some books here worth any money; Here is the Prologue Caballin, or
the Metamorphosis of Mess Davy, also his milleloquy at supper. The tilting of
Mess Davy, and his Syn-Coriatical peregrinations.


Both he and his books deserve to be tossed together in a blanket.


But now, behold my books. Cupes of the art of drinking, enlarged, revised and
purged from a hundred faults* together with an Addition to it, and a Commentary
on it. Cupes de cupediis.


Doth so poor a man as you love Delicats?


I hate these gross fed Parasites, when I have money, I feed on nothing but
choice meats, and dainties.


But Cupes, Cupes, long not for Phesants you have scarce two Farthings to buy a
half penny Loaf.


Why, I may have a good mind to them for all that.


And why so Cupes? Are you a Cupedinarian?


I was one heretofore, I have been of a thousand professions; when I was a
young man at Paris I was a player.


Thou hast made me happy then; for this day thou art to act the part of many
persons.


At Venice I served a Confectionary; there I made Wafers, Marchpans, Macaroons,
Suckets, Dry and VVet, and all manner of Sweet-meats.


There you could lick your Fingers.


But that which I most affected was at Toulouse, where being servant to a
Vintner, I fragally sipped every day three or four Gallons only of Wine, till
at the last my master broke; after that I ran away into Holland where I carried
about an Ape with a Gay Coat on his back; at Rome I was leader to a blind man.


He gave you therefore but blind obedience.


At Rome? why? He who is most obedient there, is most blind.


What did you do in England?


O la bonne terre d' Angleterre; I first was there a Sowgelder in the Country;
afterwards I was an under Butler in the Inns of Court amongst the Lawyers.


Were you ever in Spain?


Never.


Why not?


I cannot be contented with three Raisins for my Supper Trico.


'Tis well, but do you remember, what I told you of, even now?


I do, and I promise to perform it, by putting on a disguise to personate one
Torcol.


But with a crooked and a distorted Neck.


Why thus* how do you the posture?


Admirably.


Afterwards I am to counterfeit the servant of a Lawyer.


But if Ignoramus comes himself, be sure you do remember the Horn.


Remember it, I will warrant you; not any one of them knows me.


And thus disguised you will be the more unknown; but you must teach your wife
also how to personate Rosabella, she is apprehensive I know, and will be apt to
follow your instructions.


She is, but I am afraid I shall not be able to persuade her to it, she is so
unreasonably obstinate, and always scolding, nay she will beat me also.


What is she a Fury?


A Fury Trico; she is all the Furies in one.


If I had three such VVives I would give two of them to the Divel upon a
Condition.


What condition Trico?


That he should take away the third.


Let him take her.


But I will give both her and you, that which shall overcome you both, look
you, here is eight pieces in Gold.


Give it me, and I will bring my Dame.


I conjure thee Cupes by thy bowels.


You have conjured me by that which is most dear unto me.


That you will be careful in the performance of this.


It shall be done.


I will go and procure the clothes and properties for you and your wife. Be
you always waiting here to prevent all inconveniences, and to provide a Remedy
upon every Emergency.


I will, but this night we will sup together; it shall be a night of mirth.


Your words are full of Hospitality, may all things prosper with you.


Farewell, I will now call forth my wife and overcome her with gold; for without
that she will do nothing: I know she will scold as her usual manner is; she is
always muttering and murmuring, like a Weesil crushing the bones of a Mouse;
Polla! wife Polla! why Polla I say.


POlla, Polla! what a hooping and a hollaing is here? what are you got drunk
again?


I would I were, my Polla, I have not drank one drop of wine this day?


Why dost thou stand so idle here thou swilling-tub? Hast thou sold any
Pamphlets this day? Hast thou got any money thou drunken Sot, thou?


Not a farthing.


How! I shall --


Would the pamphlets were all burnt, and the writers of them hanged for me.


And thou hanged with them, sometimes thou pawnest my Books, sometimes my
Clothes to the Vintners in their Taverns.


'Tis true my Phillis, I have done it, and thou hast soundly Cudgelled me for
it.


I have, and will soundly Cudgel, and Cudgel thee again. Shall I sit spinning
with an empty belly all day at home, when you in the Taverns are all in a hoyt,
dying the pavements with Claret Wine and Muskadine; but if ever I see you set
but your foot again within a Tavern. --


What? not so much as my foot.


I have said it.


Then kill me without any more ado; But clear thy brow, my Dear, what wilt
thou drink Sweat-heart! ^ell me my Love!


Away with these flatteries; If my Clothes be not redeemed --


Sweet Love, they shall be redeemed, look thee what here is --


What Gold! where did thou get that Gold sweet Man?


Now I am your sweet Man. O Gold what can thou not do? will you have half of
it?


Yes my dear Soul.


Dear Soul! O thou most dissembling Woman! well, you shall have half, if you
will do me one small courtesy.


What is it?


Nothing, but a little to put thy self forth to a Friend of mine to use thee.


O wicked man; what wilt thou put forth thy wife to use, thou thy self knowing
it?


You do not rightly understand me?


What, if I should now make thee a Corn-elius of a Cupes.


I would then make thee again a Corn-eli^ of a Poll^.


Tell me what say thou? had thou rather be Publius Cornelius, or Cornelius
Tacitus?


Oh, Cornelius Tacitus by a great deal, but I think no Man will make a Whore of
such a pitiful Jade as thou art, Ha, Ha* He.


Pitiful Jade; Dost thou laugh at me, thou ugly Tankerd-bearer?


No lovely and fair; I do not laugh at you, you do much mistake me.


What dost thou mean by it, tell me then?


Can thou in another Habit personate another Woman.


Is that all? very easily.


And make a surrender of thy self to one Pecus; he will neither tempt nor force
thy Chastity, never fear him?


Fear him? shall I fear any one Man who have beaten a thousand?


Me, I am sure on it, you have full often.


Well -- give me the Gold, and I will warrant thee my Cupes; Never doubt it?


Look you here then? here are two pieces for you; after you have effected your
business, I will give you two more.


Agreed, but on this condition, that in my absence you bring none of your
Wenches into my House as your usual manner is.


O vainly Jealous! Why I sleep always with you, all night long?


You sleep indeed, I had rather that you should wake by half, but if I take any
of your Wenches in my house; by Earth and Air, and the Heights above, and the
Deeps below --


O swear not downwards.


I will drag them out into the streets by the Hair of their Head* where I will
so belabour them, that they shall not be able to stir a Foot.


You shall never find me with any.


On that condition, I will assist thee according to thy expectation.


Let us go in my Phillis, where I will give thee more full instructions.


THe plot you told me of pleases.


Pyropus, the Broker will be here presently.


But what pawn shall we give him for the clothes we are to have?


You say well.


I have given you all the Money I have.


Have you no Rings, nor Jewels?


None at all.


But Trico, Master, hath a Ring.


A Brass one peradventure.


But double-gilt with a brave stone in it.


Some Counterfeit I believe.


Pure glass Sir, finely cut and painted; it sparkles so, that any may may be
deceived with it.


Trico, Let me see it.


Put it on your finger, and pretend that you value it at a very great rate; It
is ten to one, but he will swallow it: St, no more words* here he comes himself
-- s^ve you Pyropus.


Save you Sir; Come hither Boy, and show the Gentlemen the Clothes you have
brought.


Quickly; for I am in great hast at this present.


Come -- sirrah, dispatch; what a fu^bling do you make; Give them me; Look you
Gentlemen, There is no man in all Bordeaux that can show you better, or hath
more choice.


Master This is a very good suit to travel in.


But observe the fashion, and the workmanship of it.


Cupes shall wear these, and Pollo these; And this shall serve for the other.


I have brought all you told me of.


Well, well, go too -- give us the price?


But only for one days wearing.


Shall I be at a word with you verily.


Dispatch then.


Shall I be at a word, verily shall I be at a word with you?


You kill me with delays.


Well -- Verily and indeed la, you shall give me Forty shillings.


Forty shillings.


You cannot give me less verily.


Verily saith well Master.


Yes verily.


Pray Sir then make short with verily.


Well -- I will give it.


I do value them all at fourscore pound.


The man verily saith well.


If you cannot spare so much money, let me have but a sufficient Mortgage.


And Verily* what needs that, my Master being one of the chiefest Merchants son
in all the City?


What do you doubt me?


No Sir; but the Custom of our trade expects some security.


I have a Ring on my finger which I value at a very high Rate.


What, that Master, with the rich precious stone in it?


The very same.


'Tis worth at least three hundred pound.


Let me have that?


What, a Ring of so great a Value; How shall I be sure to have my Ring again?


I have a shop verily.


He hath verily.


You will not trust me being a Gentleman, why shall I trust you being but an
ordinary Trades-man?


I know not what to say more --; pray give me my Goods again!


Master you may trust him, The Man is an honest Man verily, I have known him
along time.


Do you know me verily?


Yes verily.


Upon your word I will trust him with it.


Verily how it shines, and glisters, and sparkles?


It doth verily flammas{que} imitante Pyropo.


Gentlemen, God be with you?


Let your Boy first convey these things for us into the next Lane, and leave um
--


At what Sign?


At the Sign of the Anchor.


He shall verily.


Farewell my Fine City-wit verily.


I hope now that all things will answer our expectation; But what if Ignoramus
should now come himself --


We will fright him hence; Be you but vigilant and lie close, and we shall do
wel^ enough.


I will be all eyes my Trico.


And ^ and Cupes will lie in Ambush here.


But what if I light upon my Father?


I presently will instrust you how to circumvent him. Go and make your self
ready.


I am gone.


If any thing falls out crosly, you must with patience endure it; for Fortune
sometimes will falter.


Be no bad Prophet Trico.; Fortune I hope will assist us, but make what hast
you can unto me; for without you I am but a blind-man without a Guide.


I will be with you again immediately. Do you hear Cupes, Cupes, Take these
Clothes, and presently attire your selves.


It shall be done in an instant.


But whom see ^ here? my best and familiar Friend Milsalis* He promised to
assist me; I peradventure may drain something from him as often heretofore I
have done.


I Would my parents had broke my neck when they first placed me to this Fool
Ignoramus; Let me say, or do what I can to please him, he is always
exclaiming against me; How ill favouredly doth he carry himself? This is my
fine scholar; he neither knows how to put a Bridle on a Horse, nor to ride
him, being bridled, nor mend a broken Girt; where are your Syllogismes now, you
Vniversity-Coxcomb?


Musaeus how do you?


Well Trico, were it not ill with me in having so bad a Master; I would he had
his due for me.


What is the matter?


He doth so torment and confound me with his babbling.


Why, Is he not fluent, accurate, and eloquent?


There be others indeed that are so, but he is nothing less; he doth all
things so perversely, he puts his Cap on his Feet, and his shoes on his Head.


O most ridiculous!


Trico I will read thee a Riddle, and do you solve it?


Let me hear it.


What is that which lives by Right, and by Wrong, which hath a great Heart and
no Heart, which is both an Ambidexter, and a Bifront, which speaks Much, and
speaks Nothing; which is Jest in Earnest, and Earnest in Jest; which speaks
English, Dutch, French and Latin, yet speaks neither English, nor Dutch, nor
French, nor Latin; which writes Laws that they may be misprisions, and which
writes misprisions that they may be Laws, which makes a Finite Infinite;
Truth, no Truth, and no Truth, Truth.


Which makes Truth no Truth, who should this be, but Beelzebub Cydonius?


It is he, and it is not he.


Who loves to speak in an unknown Tongue -- It is A Popish Priest.


It is something like him, but not the same.


What a Blockhead am I? now I have it.


What, or who is it?


It is your Master Ignoramus.


You are an Oedipus.


Who was Father to this Monster?


Francus Soloicophan^s, his Mothers Name was Barbara Latina.


Where was he born?


In great Puritania.


In what City?


Either Aurelia, or Argentina.


What doth he feed upon?


The Common Law.


Is he not Learned? Doth he not know the seven Liberal Arts?


The Seven Arts! why, I tell you, he knows all letters.


Good God! what all letters?


Why -- There are but four and twenty Letters in all.


He is a Man of a Thousand!


Certainly there are but few such as he is; Every Order nevertheless hath both
good and bad, both wise men and fools; In good corn there are some bad ears,
and in bad some good ones; It were foolish therefore and inhumane (although
many are guilty of it) to inveigh against whole Societies and Orders, and the
studies of many Men for the extravagancies of some few persons; If need were I
could number up many excellent Men of this Order so transcendent for Wisdom,
Learning, and Piety, that they are hardly to be paralleled, who have both
learnedly expounded, and sincerely delivered the Laws of their own Country,
then which there is nothing more just, or righteous: These Men we always
prosecute with deserved honour; for they proceeded from us, and are for us. No
man is an Enemy to Learning but Ignoramus; Let Ignoramus therefore and such as
he are, who desire the Ruin of the Church and Universities --


Be for ever banished.


Nay, let them go into Morbonia.


They will be angry with you.


Ignoramus will, but no man else; but what he thinks or thinks not, is all
one to me.


To bring such a man upon the Stage were dangerous.


Not at a jot, why all the world is but a Stage where every mans a player.


Come Musaeus we grow too serious, Tell me what is thy Master Ignoramus now
about?


He is coming unto Torcol; He hath told the Money just now.


I am undone.


I came on purpose to acquaint you with it*


And why with a pox no sooner? make all the hast you can to Cupes, and bid him
be sure to remember the Horn.


What Horn?


What is that to you; He knows already what is to be done, let him immediately
acquaint Antonio with it, let them be both in a readiness.


I fly, may some evil fall on Ignoramus, I heartily do wish it.


If he comes not immediately away, -- the whole plot is spoiled, Woe is me,
Ignoramus is come already.


HEre is the legem pone, Here are the six hundred Crowns, which just now I
intended with Torcol, for my Sweetheart Rosabella.


He hath brought the Money, I am undone.


If I live, Rosabella my stella* d^nsab^ veteres mensuras, I will Dance my old
measures with thee.


They have watched him well --


This is the Indenture, and the Obligation of Roderigo Torcol, I will go to him
in propria persona.


Out upon it, -- what makes them stay so long? I must detain him with some
discourse or other -- Save you Sir.


Sirrah who are you, Hah.


A poor man Sir,, that hath spent all his Estate in Law.


Oh, oh; In forma pauperis, Abi via, Abi via, Away, Away.


Sir I crave your Counsel.


My Counsel Knave, Legem pone, Legem pone.


We must give a Sop to Cerberus, what shall I do? I have some brass money
about me, I will sling it away on him; Sir I am a very poor man.


A poor man -- That signifies nothing.


But because Sir, you are well versed in Causes, I must beseech you to hear my
Cause, And what Money I have left is here at your service.


Oh well, well, Have you joined Issue?


Issue -- What shall I say now? -- yes Sir, Issue, Issue.


Declare?


My Grandfather Grunnio, the son of Bore, had an Uncle called Hog.


Quondam Uncle.


You say right Sir Quondam Uncle, but the Quondam Uncle of the Sister of my
Quondam Grandmother, who was Cousin German, to the Grandmother of my Quondam
Father.


Well said Quondam; Allo^s.


Did bequeath unto me a black Horse; the truth is, he had but a short come off:
why shall I dissemble? he had no Tail, but what then? should any man put a
Nettle under it?


In Tail special, In good Earnest by Right he could not do it.


He did nevertheless, but he did. VVince and Kick, and fling his legs aloft.


Take heed of that.


And he killed the Deer and Phesants.


O Damage Faisant Here must be a demur.


And certainly the Calendar lied abominably; for I well remember it did Hayle.


A good circumstance, and which makes for you.


Slow man of Bordeaux* what not yet -- Sir? And he not only put a Nettle under
his Tail, but he repleted all his mouth with pepper.


Repleted? a replevit will not serve in this case.


So I thought, but he having before his eyes the Figure or copy of a white
Horse.


O -- What Copses too, it is in tertio Richardi primi potest Copitias Toppare,
Loppare, abscoriare, He may Top them and Lop them, and do what he will with
them.


He did not though -- I lost him that year, who can help it -- what do you
think of it Sir -- Snails! we are undone.


What do I think of it? was not that black Che^all your Chattle personal?


Chattle, yes Chattle indeed, but I am afraid of the pepper Sir.


You say well and there is the point indeed; for this is your case, If John an
Oaks in^eoffat John a Stiles de Black Acre, and John a Stiles capit Black Acre
White Acre, in this case Tout is void, All* All.


I think they are asleep -- But the pepper being snuffed into his Nose did make
him stand an end on his Legs before, and break wind backwards.


Snuffing, and Leaping, and petting is a good Tenor doubt it not.


But I am still afraid of the pepper.


What need you fear. But take out a subpena for him, and if he doth not return
black Cheval, and white Chevil cum costis ad pinguebus dammagis, with costs and
^at damages, say that Ignoramus non habet Lex.


I thank you Sir.


Farewell, For I have some business must be dispatched.


But Sir, For the good Counsel you gave to me, I have some good Counsel, to
requite your love, for your self, And what much concerns you. If you are
Ignoramus, make all the hast you can away, Fly and be gone.


Hah -- Fly wherefore?


You love Rosabella that lives here hard by.


What then?


Antonio also is deeply in love with her, and in my hearing did swear most
seriously that He would dismember Ignoramus wheresoever He could light upon
him.


It was but in Jest.


But do you get you gone in Earnest, and have a care of your self; for that
most dissolute Cutter hath gelded very many that I know of.


You have put me in a bodily fear, and because I am in a strange place, I am in
a greater doubt; look yonder Fabula est in lupus.


He comes at last. --


WHere is that old Whoremaster Ignoramus, who would defraud me of my Love? If I
serve him not as I would a Hee-goat --


Do you hear now?


Doth he use to be as good as his word?


He never breaks it.


He is not Compose mentis, I will have a Breve for him.


I have brought the Sowgelder along with me, he will be here presently.


Client Trico, I am in a great fear Client.


Trin -- Tran*


I hear him now.


Trin -- Tran.


Client Trico, Tremblo, tremblo, I tremble all over, what shall I do?


I hear him.


Trin -- Tran.


Hide your self here behind me, lest they discover you quickly, quickly, and as
covertly as you can, quickly I say.


What do we stay for? I have all things here in a readiness, Look you here
else.


Friend, do you hear? Did you not see a Lawyer hereabout?


Say I am gone to London?


He is gone to London.


I heard he was here but just now.


Say I am gone home -- then.


He is gone home.


He shall no^ so escape I'll warrant him.


Client, go sidelong, that I may make an escape.


Close, close.


Something goes yonder, what is it?


Here he lies, Lawyer! How dare you be so bold?


Show me your Testatum est latitare.


But you shall have but little to show before I have done with you, Let us go
in with him.


Come to the Court Lawyer.


I command you in the Kings Name to keep the peace.


You prattle in vain.


He is my patron, I beseech you Gentlemen.


You pray in vayn.


What do I pray? what will you not look upon the Almanac first?


Why so?


Why? Upon my Honesty you will find the Sign in Scorpio.


'Tis full of Danger then.


Take heed what you do, If I die within a year and a Day --


Your words move us not.


What will you judge me non audita querela?


No, no, you shall be judged by your peers.


I beseech you Gentlemen, I beseech you for him.


If we should let him go, he would presently come sneaking hither again.


Client Balliato me, pray bail me Client.


I will engage for him that he shall come no more.


I swear most solemnly, If ever you find me here again --


What do you run away?


Follow him, follow him, whither runs he*


I am safe and sound now, titillabo vos, monstrabo tricum de leg, I shall
tickle you for this isaith, and show you a trick of the Law; but because I have
sworn, I will not go my self, but send my Clark Dullman for Rosabella.


He is gone, he he.


Ha, he, he.


Ha, he, he.


You are gallant Watchers, How well did you attend his coming?


I was ready, and at hand, and heard all your discourse till I was ready to
burst with laughter.


He is now possessed with such a fear, that he will send his servant, do you
Cupes therefore and your wife attire your selves in such habits, that you may
be taken for Torcol, and he for Rosabella.


I go, it is done me thinks already.


Master, and let us be jogging too, I will tell you in the way the rest of the
fallacy, I must go now to the painter, and take you along with me.


What shall we do with him?


He shall paint a little Mole in your Cheek, Let us go, I will tell you what you
shall do if peradventure you shall meet with your Father in the way.


I Have well instructed my servant Antonio, the Painter is now painting the
Mole upon his Cheek.


I see here no body, but by the Mass I am in a great fear, for there are many
Ins^n^ Pilei, called Madc^ps here in Burd^aux.


What Bird have we here!


My Master Ignoramus swore that they would make a Gelding of him.


He is a st^anger.


A fine Riot, was it not, to take away our instruments.


He holds the writings in his hand.


My Master therefore gave me a letter of Atturny to take s^l^in of a certain
Virgin called Rosabella, whom I never saw.


Certainly this is Ignoramus servant; Cupes, Cupes are you in a readiness?


At hand quoth pickpurse.


Here is the servant of Ignoramus.


Hold your peace.


I see one yonder, I will demand of him, if he knows his message to whom I go;
my Master said he was a Porsugall with a wry Neck, I have no other knowledge of
him, Ho, honest man,


Who would you speak with Friend?


He is a man of a good behaviour, I would speak with one whose name I do not
know, do you know it?


What a Blockhead 'tis? of what Country and complexion is he?


He is a Portugal,


With a wry Neck?


So they say.


Tis ten to one, but tis my master.


It may be so.


Do you remember the first letter of his Name?


Puto, facio, I believe I do.


Doth it begin with a B?


A, B, -- No?


With G?


G -- No.


With R.


R, -- No, No.


With T?


T -- stay ^ yes, T, T.


Torcol.


Torcol, Torcol, A pox on it; I have his name here in black and white; are you
his servant?


Yes Signior,


In bono tempo, what is your Name?


What shall I now say -- Mendoza.


Mendoza; in bono tempo.


And what is your name, I pray you?


Dullman, the Senior Clark to Ignoramus.


Dullman Clark to Ignoramus, in bono tempo, have you brought the Crowns with
you Du^lman?


Six hundred Mendoza, and the Indenture with them.


In bono tempo, Do you know whose hand this is?


I marry do I, It is my Masters hand.


Tis right, he made these verses on our Rosabella.


Pimpillos, pursos, ad ludos ibis ursos; Right, Right, you say very well, they
are his verses indeed, I would I could make such, but I pray you call your
Master hither, to tender a Delivery of Rosabella to me.


He will come presently.


Est hic honestus sodalis warrantizabo* An honest good fellow this I will
warrant him; I would Rosabella would come with him, I seem for the present to
be in a Forest, I do so fear the Tax of Horngelt.


LOs Diablos te gannan picar^, you Rascal have you no more manners in you?


This is the Portugal with the crooked neck; I conceive him to be, but I am
sorry he is so impatient with the poor man his servant.


Sirrah can you not bring the friend of my most honoured Lord (save you
Signior) into my house, you Rascal, that he may taste a cup of Wine after the
English Fashion.


I thank you Sir.


There is no such fashion in our Country.


Trunkan Villaco! what stand you still, and dumb like a dog? where is Diego?
where is Alonzo? where is Piedro? where is Guzman?


I know not Master, I.


You know not Master! just so I thought, but I shall --


Master Torcol I pray, noli chafare propter me: chafe not for me I pray Sir,
your man is a good servant truly.


A good servant with a Halter -- but Signior have you brought -- have you
brought Signior?


Ovy, Ovy dea, yes, yes, Signior, my master hath sent you here six hundred
Crowns.


So he is bound to do, you Sirrah? watch-I-call, you -- Mendoza!


Here Master.


Tell the Money?


Here is your Indenture also, look you Sir, here is your own hand, and your own
Seal to it.


(He looks upon it) Hum -- Roderigo Torcol; it is as you say.


Deliver now Rosabella to me for my Masters use.


Stay a little -- and first tell me what is the private token which was agreed
upon betwixt your Master and my self?


You say well, and that no Breve Erroris be here committed, I am enjoined to
give you a sound tweak by the Nose.


By the Nose Seignior?


Your Nose must come into the Court Nasal, and pay Homage Nasative, come Sir,
ha, ha, he, My Master is such another merry Man, come Sir Here I have it, I
faith now.


I know it was the token, I only had a desire to know, if he had given you any
Item of it, it is the token in earnest.


Yes in Earnest.


I have told the Crowns, but this is a good on?


Current upon my life.


Tis well; Friend what is thy name?


Dullman, And your servant Sir.


Well! Take this for thy pains, and be Dullman still -- Nay take it I say.
Bring me now Rosabella hither, and a Flagon of the most generous Wine; Sirrah
do you hear, bring also some Sack with you.


What would you have Sir?


Sack you Villain, according to the English Fashion; Sack I say, welcome
Signior.


Indeed Sir it is needless, est postremum quod feci; it is the last thing I
did.


Nay what do you mean, mend your draught I pray, you shall you have a cup of
Sack too, my friend Dullman.


Est valde curtesius homo. A Noble, and a courteous Gentleman I'll warrant him.


Desire your Master for my sake to love my Rosabella well, I brought her up for
my own Daughter; my heart doth earn within me to think of her departure from
me, but I am confident he will be very tender over her.


You may assure your self, she shall receive all the courtesies that the
customs and Country of England can afford her; my Master will give her a good
Jointure, I know it well, for I have engrossed it, but I pray deliver me the
counterpane of my Masters Indenture.


On my troth I left it with my Notary, but presently I will either bring it, or
send it to you.


Then give me an acquittance.


Do you hear (sirrah) Bring hither some more Wine and Sack, where is this Knave
now?


Veni presenter post me quaeso; I pray you Sir make hast after me.


I will Dullman.


DO you understand me Polla?


Is it not possible for you to hold your tongue?


But be sure you have tears enough in store.


No more; for on my faith, -- if you provoke me!


You muzzle me to a silence.


Look! Here he comes.


Deliver her unto me.


Rosabella my dear Cousin, nay rather my Daughter, I here deliver thee to this
Man, that he may conduct thee to thy Husband. And must thou now leave me my
Dear? I cannot forbear from Tears for my own part; but do not afflict your
s^lf, if you love me.


My Uncle, nay rather my Father; although I shall be Married to another, and
though it be never so well with me, yet to leave you --


You do increase my Tears.


Oh Dullman, Maudlen Dullman, who can refrain from weeping?


Not I truly.


No more can I Dullman. Well -- you have got a Mistress of a sweet
disposition.


Certe videtur tenera amens pecia, quanquam maskata est; She seems indeed to be
a very loving and tender piece although she is masked.


It is the custom altogether for Virgins in these Countries.


And a good custom it is.


But on better considerations, we should rather rejoice then weep to see her
well Married.


And you say true by the Mass.


Why let us be merry then.


You speak very well Sir.


Shall us laugh?


If you please.


Shall us drink?


If you please.


Wine?


If you please.


And good Sack too, Seignior Dullman.


Even what you please Sir; I am prepared to pledge you.


Well then -- Give us some Sack! Here is to you Seignior Dullman.


I thank you Sir.


Some more Sack, Fill it up according to the English Fashion, Fill up the
Glass I say; 'Tis sweet Sack, my sweet Signior.


So, so; Ad te Magister contra es dispositus, Sir unto you against you are
disposed.


I thank you, you do but sip; drink deeper, where's this Varlet? some more Sack
for my Friend.


I have done very well Sir, I must now take my leave of you.


God, buy good Signior, Good, buy, sweet Cousin; I shall long to hear how you
thrive in the world.


God, buy, God, buy.


God be with you Master Mendoza.


But my dear Signior, take this one Glass before you go.


And with much thankfulness; I will drink your health in England for this.


Farewell.


Farewell, Quam curtesii; How courteous are these Men of Bordeaux.


TAdepole, Farewell.


Farewell, Sacksop, Farewell.


He knows not of what cup he drinks; intemperance hath often disgraced the high
achievements of the English in their wares.


More Sack, more Sack, you Rascal! How sweet it is; Give me leave to kiss thee
my mingle?


No more of these reiterations, I will now go, and put on other clothes, and
counterfeit my self to be Dullman.


O, Sack for Dullman, you know the sign.


If I do not soundly twinge him by the Nose let me --


I will take the Crowns along with me, and this writing.


Writing! Indenture, Trico, I remember that word, and many more ever since I
was an Underbutler in London, I have many of the Lawyers phrases still by
heart.


I am confident, the Pandar Torcol doth not know Dullman very well.


And me much less.


Why, if you are taken, you can tell a handsome lye for your self.


I have learned that out of the books of the Jesuits, and will give place to
none but Beelzebub Cydonius.


My prote^s, we lo^se ourselves in vain discourse; I will immediately address
my self to Torcol, and pretend I come with Counsels and Conditions very
advantageous to him; and as you see occasion, do you intervene?


I will attend the Scene with my best diligence.


We being thus united shall circumvent him with the greater dexterity of
deceit.


I go to attire my self.


And I to Torcol, I am afraid he is not at home. Tick, took, Tick, took, he
knocks at the door.


I am a Prophet; my mind gave me that Trico was here, and here I find him.


Signior I love your Maid Surda, I love her most entirely.


You love Surda, Go, go, I am now awake.


But now Sir I come unto you on business of importance which deeply doth
concern you.


O Signior you cannot deceive me Signior.


I deceive you.


You spoke it this morning.


I spoke it but in Jest.


But I in earnest I will be careful of you, go about your business, go when I
bid you.


I have but three words to say unto you, hear me I pray you.


I can hear nothing, especially of Rosabella.


What hurt did I ever do you?


Nay then? What good did you ever do me; when I see you, I see Damage and the
face of Destruction.


You will believe me by and by, I do assure my self.


Indeed, I shall not.


I come now unto you with a gallant condition.


What have you any gold or silver for me.


Ready coined Signior.


Farewell.


Stay a little! after Antonio understood that Rosabella was to be given to
Ignoramus, being scarce master of himself, he laid throughout the whole City
for money, at the last he borrowed of a Friend a Cabanet full of Gold and
Jewels.


A mere invention.


He will mortgage it unto you.


Trico, what do you make of me? do you think I do not know for what you come?


Do you think, I come to cousin you!


O Trico, you who have Gold, and Jewels, and yet have no Monies; as much Money
as a man hath in his Chest, so much reputation he hath.


What! I come to deceive you Signior;


If you could I believe you would.


Six or seven of the chiefest Merchants in this City shall pass their words
for me.


It is all one; your tricks shall not deceive me Trico, and to be short with
you, I must tell you that Rosabella is married to Ignoramus.


O Man of Men; it is now coming out --


What?


Thou wicked man, thou sink of all Vices.


You prevail nothing: I pray leave me?


Why what's the matter with you?


I pray be gone.


Signior.


It is in vain Signior.


Thou monstrous piece of crookednesse.


Now rail at me.


And if I be not even with you.


What? do you threaten me?


M. be. M. be.


THou are very conceitedly attired Dullman in the habit of an Inkman.


I and you see, I have not forgotten to carry my pen in my ear, look you here,
come, let us go my little Dullman.


May I speak now with Surda Signior.


I am deaf Signior to that proposition; but what man is that yonder?


He hath the face of a stranger.


I would fain understand what Countryman, who he is.


I would beseech you Signior that you would understand what more peculiarly
belongs unto your self.


I see a good observation for a Treveller, and I will write it down.


He is some Traveller (as I conjecture) and observes I know not what my self.


He seems to be a fool. How he gapes, and stares about him, and carries his
pen in his ear.


But where shall I find him; I am so sorry I have lost my direction*


By his speech and habit he should be the servant of Ignoramus; I think he hath
his writing too.


I know not who it is.


Who?


An Englishman living in this City, my Friends Friend; do you go in and I will
accost him.


Trico begins to smell the business, I will now stay.


Hereabouts he said the message was


It is the very same whom I expected, he comes according to my wish.


It is Ignoramus servant, I am undone.


He hath smelt the Game, and lost it.


I am undone.


How pale he looks.


You Sir?


Come hither?


Friend a word with you.


By your leave Sir, I believe I am the man you look for.


Sir, I shall give you better satisfaction.


I presume your business is unto me.


Who is it that you look for, ask of me, and I will resolve you.


Nay rather ask me? let him come to me, why do you hinder him?


Which of you can certify me, where is the message of a certain Portugall


A Portugall said you.


I can certify you, it is not here; the Portugalls dwell a great way from this
place.


Take no notice of what he says, he will deceive you.


Cur me mockatis ita, qui moccat moccabitur, why do you mock me so, he who
mocks shall be mocked again.


Trico, Trico, you cannot be too hard for me; you see this is Ignoramus
servant, and fain you would withdraw him from me; I see it plain enough.


I am undone.


Now he is vexed; I am glad with all my heart it was my fortune to be here.


Estis fl^utatores ambo ego ibam viam, you are both flouters, I will be gone.


Come to me Friend, whom do you look for?


Who does he look for? what's that to you? pray go about your business, I am
able to answer him.


I look for the Portugall Merchant.


He looks for me.


For you? he does not -- Friend.


How gladly would you gloss with him


Follow me, and I will bring you to his house.


What doth this fellow mean?


Ha, ha, he, stay a little.


Follow me I say, and in the way I will give you Wine and Sack, good Sack boy.


What Sack?


Ha, ha, he, Wine, and Sack boy.


By his Physiognomy I perceive, hic est nebulo in grano; this is a Knave in
grain.


You may be sure of it.


A venegance on it, you are the man? how do you Sir; by my troth Sir I scarce
knew you.


This is excellent.


You know me? do you take me to be a noverint universi?


Did you never know me in England, look on me?


I shall look on a Knave then -- Sir I look for such a man as you are with a
wry Neck.


He looks not for you Signior, but for such another man as you are, a friend of
mine, and I will direct him to his house.


This is very likely, ha, ha, he.


You take this man to be Ignoramus servant, he is no such man Torcol.


Who ^ I come from my Master Ignoramus, with an Indenture and six hundred
Crowns; what do you behind me? why do you kick me? cur joggas, n^ddas, why do
you jog, and nod, and wink on me so.


Ha, ha, he, Ho, so.


Do I touch you, do I wink, or nod on you, you Ass you.


I am to crafty an Ass for you.


I would speak with you.


Ha, he, Now he is mad, now he gnasheth his Teeth.


You Ignoramus servant? I know you are not, Come -- lets go to the Tavern.


With a mu^ain to you, what have you to do with me? why do you make signs, and
wink, and nod your head so?


Do I?


All the dumb Rhetoric of your motions will not prevail Trico.


By your Neck and fashion, you should be the man whom I do look for.


Do you know his Name?


It is, it is --


Who is it? --


Now I perceive it is not he, he knows not my name.


But I have it here in the Indenture.


You have -- if I had met him a little sooner, how easily he might have been
prevented.


I have his name here in the Indenture; it is Rodrigo Torcol.


Right.


Are you the Man?


I am so.


He hath swallowed the bait, hook, and all? but what is your name Friend?


Dullman, at your service Sir, I bring you a message from Ignoramus Sir.


Where is the Gold? where are the Writings?


Here is the Indenture, see your hand seal.


This Indenture made the Nineteenth day of April, betwixt Ambidexter Ignoramus
on one side, and Rodrigo Torcol on the other, Hum, Hum, Signed, Delivered, Hum,
Hum -- Rodrigo Torcol, Hum, it is as you say.


I am undone.


Trico is stark mad now; but what private token have you besides? I would have
no man make a mouth at me?


A mouth -- No, it is your Nose that I demand; Let your nasute Nose Nasative,
come into the Court, and pay Nasal Homage; he tweakes him by the Nose.


Oh gently, gently I pray, oh, oh, oh.


Is not this the token? he drags me by the Nose about the stage.


Oh, oh, yes, it is the Token -- Oh what do you mean! Oh, no more I pray.


You thought I did not know it.


But I find to the contrary.


'Twas only for a good Memento.


Do you not perceive, you fool, how he mocks ^ou, and leads you about by the
Nose like a Bear.


No, he who hath no Nose is led about by the Nose; is it not allotted for every
man to have a Nose, I have one Trico.


I see you will be cousened.


Be cousened; you are mistaken, you may see I will not be cousened.


You may remember that I told you this morning.


That you would deceive me, I remember it very well.


You do?


Yes, ha, ha, he.


I do cousin you at this very instant.


At this instant -- sure you don't.


I tell you this man is not Ignoramus servant.


You do not here me say, he is, do you -- Ha, ha, he.


He is a mere Cheat.


Indeed.


And one whom I hired on purpose to deceive you.


Are you su^e on it?


Upon my faith I speak the truth.


You do.


Yes, and you have not the greater care, he will take Rosabella from you too.


Ha, ha, he.


This is strange that you will not believe me, when I Swear unto you.


Swear no more -- I believe you Trico -- I believe you.


This is a good Nose, I will engross it.


Upon my faith, I do cousin you now, now, at this very instant.


You cousin me upon your faith now? -- is not here so much Gold? Are not here
the writings? did he not tell me the very private token we did agree upon? how
am I deceived Trico;


But take heed it be not Aurum Tholosanum.


Upon my credit it is very good Gold, all in Rose Nobles


What? -- am I cousened now?


Yes, and 'tis I have done it.


What will you stand prating with him all day long; deliver R^sabella to me?


It shall be done immediately.


For I have a great deal of business at home to engross Agreements, Quibbles,
Indentures, Pilicocks, and Callimancaes.


But tell me, what was't I pray, that even now you wrote down in your Almanac.


Oh ho, only a travellers observation; I wrote down in my book, that on the
fifteenth of May I saw a Portugall with a wry neck so apparelled, and that he
being a cunning Knave would Cousin you; I will put it in print.


Note it well.


But Signior, with Rosabella you ought to give me the Counterpane of my Masters
Indenture.


You shall have both as soon as I have told the Gold; let us go in.


Are you going you seed of all wickedness, accursed sacrilegious Caytiffe.


I am deceived, Trico, I am deceived.


Trico may be even with you for all this Signior: Remember it?


I will remember it Signior; I am going now to Surda, will you command me any
service to her Signior?


M. be -- Dor, m. be -- he, ha, he, the more caution the cautelous do use, the
more they are deceived; but I must now be gone to observe Ignoramus, least he
comes before Cupes leads away Rosabella; Afterwards I will repair to Antonio.
That Mole on his Cheek doth extremely please me, with one deceit thus I do Coin
another.


HEre is the Counterpane of my Master Ignoramus his Indenture; ha, ha, he, I
have made a pure mouth of him.


But tell me I pray you in earnest; will you be as good as your word, and bring
me to Antonio?


If thou wilt my Girl, I will have thee my self.


Although clouded under many sorrows and misfortunes, I would have you to know
(whosoever you are) that I am not descend of ignoble parentage, And though I
am poor, I have yet a dowry, which is modesty, and ingenuous manners.


What do you boast of modesty in a Bawdy house?


As the beams of the Sun are not defiled on the Dunghill, no more are chaste
minds amongst unchaste persons.


Ha, ha, he, women are like to Venice-glasses; keep um with all the Care that
may be, and lock them up, you cannot keep them from breaking, they are but
brittle ware.


My Father was a personage of Honour, and brought me up accordingly, And this
man my Uncle, although a wicked man, yet he hath not violated my Chastity.


But I cannot bring you to Antonio presently.


Deprive me then of my life, and cut my throat.


I had rather carry you back to Torcol.


O, do not, I beseech you; For he, kept me of late bound with cords, he now
will use me worse; if there be any thing of ingenuity in you, kill me outright,
and I shall take it for a Courtesy.


Be of good courage, I spake all this while but in jest, I will bring you to
Antonio presently.


Mock me not I beseech you.


So God shall help me, I speak the truth unto you he will be at my house
presently.


O Hope unlooked for!


Let us hence least we be taken; Do you go in there?


Deal civilly with me! pray you.


I willing g^od earnest; I will lock the door, and by and by I will return unto
you again; I will now to the Tavern, and refresh my self; This day I will
dedicate to mirth with wine and good cheer, but I will first change my clothes
in the next room.


MMaster, I cannot find Dullman.


No; F^cias tuitissimum, clamerum post eum, Do you hear Sirrah, make a Hue and
Cry after him.


I think he is run away.


Cause him to be attached Pecus?


It shall be done Master.


What a misprision, what a Deceit is this? In the Devils Name who art thou?


I am Rosabella* Seignior.


Rosa-bella, Rosa Diabla; without doubt thou art some Ribalda that lives in
Tiplandis, lupanaris.


I, a Ribald that lives in Tippling houses, and Bawdy houses, I would have you
know I am Rosabella, alias bella Rosa, Seignior.


You, a sweet Flower? you a Rose? you look like an old Cow, your Face I am sure
on it, non concordat cum Recordo.


For all that I am Rosabella, my Seignior.


By your face I should swear that you are a Hag, and a Hobgoblin.


You speak such strange hard words Seignior, I cannot understand them.


Do you not understand them, I tell you then again you are a Sorceress and an
Enchantress.


Ha ha he -- Do you call me Witch and Enchantress?


Do you laugh, I will indite you for a Sorcerss as you are, viz. That you
Spinster (I shall learn your Name) not having the fear of God before your eyes,
but seduced by the Instigation of the Divel, have practised the wicked Arts of
the Divel, vocates Witch-craft and Sorcery, in, upon, and against the person of
Ambidexter Ignoramus. Ponam te super patriam si vivo, As I live I will put you
upon your Country.


What says my Dear?


My Dear -- off with your hands -- you ride in the air super broomas, on brooms
and staves.


My Dear Love -- why are you so angry with Rosabella.


O ho, Are you still Rosabella? I am not compose mentis I; in good Faith I think
I am bewitched in good earnest, Why do you glote so on me? I feel something
within me, I know not what my self. But if I can but first draw blood of her I
do not care, I will adventure it; but I dare not do it: But I dare though:
Putana de Diabolo.


Forbear a little till I put off my Sandalls.


I will scratch thee for a Sorceress as thou art.


What do you threaten me? Nay then have at you, I'll teach you to strike a woman
again, you base hen-hearted fellow!


Oh so* what vi armis, manu forti, some moderate mercy I beseech you, At least
so much fair play as leave to rise again.


I will paint your face, you wizard you.


Keep the peace, Keep the peace? O for a supersedes de non molestando!


Am I not Rosabella now? what say you?


Even who you please -- O Lord, I am maimed, I will to the Office presently and
have an appeal for blows and maims.


The Divel's in you I think.


Well, well -- sum vade brusatus, I am horribly bruised, I will even go home,
and say my prayers, but you shall repent it, you Sorceress.


Do you Chatter you Monkey? Upon my faith I believe he is possessed with a
Divel. He speaks Magic words too; I will be jogging to my own house and desire
my Neighbours to have a Care how they keep him Company; but see my door is
shut, I did ill, that I took not away the Keys with me, but some body
peradventure is within, I will knock, Tic Toc, Tic Toc.


WWho is there? what would you have?


Why -- This is handsome, is it not? A strange Woman demands of the Mistress
of the House who she is, and what she would have? Nay then -- who are you? and
what have you to do in my House with a mischief to you?


The Master of the House will be here presently himself.


This morning I even read my own Fortune, This is my goodly Husbands, goodly
Harlot.


Speak more civilly. I am not I, for that filthy trade of life.


Was this the business that he so suddenly commanded me out of doors to bring
this creature in? What will he keep his Whores here before my own eyes? shall I
live to endure this? -- Thou whore of all whores I shall presently be with
thee.


Speak not so ill of me, I am not that creature which you suppose me to be.


What in my own House? was it not enough for him to wast my portion in Taverns,
but he must whore it away also?


Oh, woe is me, woe is me! To what a man have I entrusted my self?


What? do you weep you Baggage? but I will make you, and them, and all of you
weep, and by and by; O that I could break the doors!


Woe is me -- this woman is mad.


I will go over all the Taverns in Bordeaux, but I will have him; Oh that I
could find a good handsome Broomstaffe to revenge my self upon him; Oh that
these Nails were a little longer.


OH happy Holy day -- Things answering my expectation so successively, I have
bought much good Cheer, I have hired Fiddlers to make me more merry; But why are
they not come yet? O my Priests, these sacrifices you offer, these Wine and
Capons are very acceptable to me your God. O you Capons, Pheasants, and
Partridges, how do I love and honour you? you are of the Nobility of Birds? how
richly, how magnificently are you clothed? how greedily do I wait upon you? as
for Ducks and Geese, and such kind of Fowl they are clownish and rustical I
care not for them.


I have found him at last. Hay day -- what a Banquet hath the Knave prepared for
his Whore, I will here obscure my self, and listen a little to him.


O my Beloved fat Friend, my dear Capon, how fairer art thou then my wife
Polla?


Say you so?


How willingly do I kiss you? what a sweet kiss is this? much sweeter then
the kiss of my wife Polla.


What do you prefer a Capon to me, I shall speedily be with you!


Sure you have some foul slut to your wife Seignior.


And I shall meet with you too.


A foul slut -- there is nothing like her; she is a Goblin, a Gorgon; Styx,
Scilla, a Hydra, a Harpy, a Monster all over.


What shall I do, I am not able to contain my self!


Cupes, Let us sing that song I pray of your wife Polla.


What? that which I made in the Tavern, the other day?


The very same, Let us have it I pray you.


What have they made a Song of me too? wo is me* but -- indeed, woe unto them.


Let us sing it.


But what, if she should over-hear us?


What if she should?


She is a roaring Lioness, I had rather dwell with winter, or the Northern wind
then with her.


You speak truer then you think for, you shall feel me thundering presently
about your ears.


Begin I pray.


I will first look if she be not lurking hereabouts to observe us; I tremble
when I think on her.


St, I will hide my self that they may not see me.


Here is no body; Now my Minstrels, for a sprightful fit of Mirth? let us have
it?


I See! I am become a Song throughout the whole City; but I shall enchant the
Chanters by and by.

May Polla wife to Cupes break
By some happy fall her neck;
And may all wives that like her be
Perish so, as well as she.

Oh for a Thunderbolt to confound them all at once.


Come once more; -- May Polla wife to Cupes break c.


I can forbear no longer, I'll break your neck if I can.


She hath killed me.


What shall become of me? O my head.


Woe is me, O my neck and shoulders.


I am sore all over.


This is a new Song for you Fiddlers.


I am undone, she hath broke all my strings, my livelihood is lost, what shall
become of me?


Why do not you sing now?


Fiddlers sing Lachrymae?


Do I appear so foul a slut unto you? Hagh.


Oh me, Oh me.


Must I be sung about Town by such a Kenn^l of Rascals? Oh that I had a little
more breath, How I would be labour them?


If any man should ask me now, in what place of the world I am, I am not able
to tell him, I am so confounded with amazement. Will you drink any Wine my
Honey?


My Honey, my Gall, will you drink to me, and invite me to Supper with a Company
of Whores?


You have thrown away all our good cheer, have you any Imperial missives that
you act so uncontrolled? if you are a good woman, restore us our Victuals again;
what do you spill the Wine too? I am undone -- At least spare that; -- woe is
me, Look on that Flagon yonder, How it vomits forth its purple soul. Kill me
Polla, that would be pardonable, but it is unpardonable to kill the Wine.


Now go call your Whore to that Supper she is worthy of.


Upon my life, Wife, she is no Mistress of mine.


Give me the Key, Give it me, I say, I will break open the doors else. Here
will I make a way for my fury to enter in.


She is deaf with Ra^e; I forgot to tell her before hand, that I was to bring
Rosabella to my own House.


Whore -- Come out of my House -- Come out of my House you Whore.


Woe is me, whither do you throw me?


Into a Bawdy-house, the only place fit for you.


Good woman I am innocent, and you are much mistaken in me, whither you will
have me go?


To Bridewell you prostitute.


I had rather you should kill me.


Get you gone you whore you, Get you gone?


Woe is me, I go, I hope unto my Grave.


What have you turned her out of doors? you have undone me then; It is
Rosabella, and not any that I make love to.


I shall pluck your fair Rose -- you wish my death you Rogue you.

May Polla wife to Cupes break
By some happy fall her neck.

O my wife -- If you did but know the Cause why I wished your Death, you would
not be so angry.


Say you so; what is the Cause?


It is the fashion now for every man to wish his wife dead.


Do you so purge your self? she beats him again.


O Lord -- O Lord -- what do you make account to do, to lay on so
unmercifully. A right Megaera.


As you like this first course, I will serve in the second.


Thank you sweet Poll; I do not like the first so well.


I have now a little revenged my self.


A little -- say you; If this be your little, what is your Great deal?


I will now step in, and if you follow me not immediately, I shall give you
such another entertainment when ever I have you within doors.


What shall I do now; Let me think a little with my self of this brave Supper
which I have lost, Pheasants -- hum -- Partridges -- hum -- Oh but the Wine --
woe is me.


CVpes but now informed me that Rozabella was safe at his own House, which if
it be so, there can be no man more joyful or more happy then my self; but here
he is, he looks sadly on it, I do not like it.


Oh happy you who have my Supper eat!


Cupes.


Who calls?


Is any within?


I would there were, all is thrown out of doors.


What! is all nought?


Here is nothing but destruction, ejection, and miserable confusion.


Woe is me -- what hath there bin any effusion?


Yes, yes.


What of her blood?


Worse, worse, of blood, gravy and all.


Woe is me.


The flesh and bones, and all, most cruelly dispersed.


O monstrous! How came this to pass?


With hands, and feet, and blows, and boxes*


O my dear Rosabella!


O my wine, O my dear wine!


Without thee I cannot live!


Without thee I cannot drink!


Who hath committed so great a villainy?


My wife Polla.


O wretch -- where?


In this very place look you here*


What is it?


It was wine, But O most unfortunate to say it was!


But I speak of Rosabella!


But I of my wine, and delicate viands.


Away with your wine, and your delicate viands!


Away with your Rosabella and your delicate Loves.


Tell me, you afflicting Knave, where is she now?


I brought her hither, but my wife suspecting her to be my Curtezana, did beat
her out of doors.


O Beast! did she not dread so divine a Beauty?


What she that did not dread so divine Cana^y?


Tell me Villain where is thy wife? I will troun^e her!


She will trounce you; touch her not; no nor so much as provoke her if you be
wise: She will overcome a hundred Antonies and Cleopatraes also.


Which way did Rosabella go?


This way, but whither she is gone I know n^t.


Wretch that I am to commit so great a Treasure to a Drunkard, I will go, and
find her out my self? but which way shall I turn? which path shall I first
tread in? shall I take this way? or that way?


FOrtune is composed of gloss* which when it shines most it is presently
broken; I who, but even now, seemed to touch heaven with my finger, how
suddenly am I thrown headlong down as it were to Hell; where now shall I (...)
Antonio ^ it is uncertain: but certain I am to find, either Death, or him.


With what amazement shall I contemplate on the loss of my Supper? Multa vini
virtus animo, multus{que} rerursat Dentis honos -- haerent caponis pectore
vultus.

The generous virtue of the wine I find
And the tooth's valour running in my mind,
My eyes still dwell upon the capons breast.

I wander from street to street, and enquire if they saw a young Lady go that
way, in such a (...), and such a hair, and complexion, they tell me that but
even now they saw such a one; This way I hope to find her.


Quam sese ore ferens, quam forti pectore alias?
What's this a Foul, O fair, O goodly thing!
How strong a Breast, how full and large a wing?

What shall I do? I cannot find him for my life; but if it be my happiness
once more to see him, I'll never lose him afterwards.


O mihi post nullos perdix memorande sodales!
O well fed Partridge, that art still to be
'Bove all thy Fellows to be prays'd by me.

Heavens grant me the happiness to find him; grant me (I beseech you) the
reward of my Chastity? forsake me not you powers above, I will now try this
way.


It is sure enough that I am evil, I am so, I confess, I am evil, and this
evil is justly come upon me for my Evil. But O Dic quid fecerunt optima vina
mali.
What evil hath been done, or meant,
By Sack so good and Excellent.



Woe is me, I cannot find Her, but if ever again I enjoy the honour of her
company, he that shall take her from me shall take my life along with her, I
will give my self no rest until I have found her out; Heaven send me good
Fortune, I will now down this Lane --


Oh the good Wine that's lost, and the bottles thrown down, and battered.

Convivae fortaesse tui meruere perde,
Sed quid fecerunt optima vina mali.
The drunken Guests perchance deserved to fall,
But th^se so precious Vessels not at all.
Well I will even go to bed, I am afraid I shall not live long*


I Think I was born under the sign of the Cancer, every thing do go so cross
and backward.


What are you come back again? I will see if I can put him into his former
Frights.


I will have a Mittimus for that Sorceress, and another for that Villain
Torman. Torcol but primum parlabo, I will first parley with the knave.


Trin -- Tran -- he sounds his Horn.


What do I hear? Is he horning it here again? upon my Life it is the Sowgelder,
that Riotous knave doth put me into a bodily fear.


Trin -- Tran --


At Lucanus ait cornu tibi cura sinistri; have a care of the left Horn saith
Lucan -- Ignoramus runs away.


Ha, ha, he, he made such hast, he never so much as looked back upon me, He who
runs, runs, but he who flies hath wings; I cannot choose but laugh at it, my
Wife Polla hath told all her Neighbours, that this Ignoramus is for certain
possessed with a Divel; she believes it, and they believe it, from hence (if
need be) an excellent occasion will be given of procuring more mischief to him;
and because it hath not fallen out so well with Rosabella, I will do my best
endeavour to be assistant to Antonio by one way or other, I shall pick up some
moneys again, I am confident, but I will now repair unto my Dragonesse.


ANd I my dear Love do make the same promise unto you that nothing but death
shall part us.


I hope it will fall out happily; because we have met one another so
unexpectedly; but tell me I pray you, How came you by that Mole on the right
side of your Cheek?


You know that at London I have a brother, and that he and I, were Twins.


His name is Antonine.


I heretofore have told you of it.


And so like you, that your parents could not know the one from the other.


Right, were it not for a little Mole on the right Cheek of Antonine that did
distinguish us.


I understand you.


The painter therefore, by Tricoes Council, hath painted this Mole on my Cheek,
that the better I may pretend my self to be my brother Anthonine, and to be
newly come from London from my mother Dorothy.


To what Intent is it?


That by this means we may be the more readily received into my Fathers House.


You peradventure may be entertained, but what, in the mean time shall become
of me?


You shall be entertained as well as my self; Anthonine hath lately Married
Katharine, the other Daughter of Alderman* Manly, you are now to be Her, and my
Wife Katharine.


And you to be my Husband Anthonine.


Excellent!


But did your Father never see that Katharine?


Never, and since my Brother was left at London with my Mother, neither he, nor
I did ever see one another.


How came that to pass?


As we came hither, we were taken by war; as already you know; but what it is I
would have you to do, would you know?


I understand you.


You can speak English also.


Very well; For at Fess I learned it of an English woman that was my servant,
and that I might be the more perfect in it both for my love to you, and to the
Nation, have been much accustomed to speak it with a familiar friend of mine an
Englishman.


And I because I was born in England do always traffic and keep Company with
the English Merchants.


What is it that you desire more of me?


When we meet with my Father we will both of us speak English, and pretend not
to know who he is.


Very well.


I have here Letters, as if they were sent from my Mother Dorothy, Trico
excellently well hath counterfeited her hand; I would have given you some
further Instructions, but see my Father is coming forth. Be you ready to comply
in your discourse with me, and to assist me in what you can*


I will.


In the mean time be silent.


I must go unto my Notary. These Law^suits are full of trouble, endless, and
easlesse; but who is this? my Son Antonio; he looks like him; but it cannot be
he, it is impossible he should return so soon; -- Good God -- it is he.
Antonio! Holla Antonio; He makes no answer; it is not he; but one very like
him! It is he undoubtedy. Antonio, Antonio.


What means the old Gentleman?


Hem -- He speaks English, and hath a Gentlewoman with him. What are you, young
Lady? From when^ come you, I pray? Do you speak English Sir I pray? Do you
understand me?


We both understand your language, Sir, but cannot speak it. Do you speak
English, Sir, I pray?


I understand it only* Antoni^, why do you not answer me? Antonio I say.


Who would you speak withal, Sir?


I would speak with you Disobedient as you are? why do you answer me in
English?


Good words Sir!


You are very uncivil Sir to strangers; An old man too, Fie.


Am I indeed deceived? peradventure it is not Antonio but another; he hath
another habit, and speaks English too, to neither of which he is accustomed
unto, and I am confident cannot well do i^, It is some other m^n certainly*
but his Face i^ just the same, and without any more doubt, it is he.


Good Old Father can you direct me the way to the Palace.


Are not you Antonio?


I am not Antonio, though my name be very near it.


Why do you falter with me, do you deny your self to be Antonio.


Pray God he be well in his Wits.


Sure he is not well.


Do you think I am out of my Wits? no; Although you go about to make me so.


You call me Antonio, and talk as if you knew me.


Either you are Antonio, or I am out of my wits.


Prithee let's be gone?


What shall I say, I saw him shipped, and the ship to steer on her course
towards London, I am confounded with amazement, and know not what to think.


It is well, he begins now to suspect himself.


I will try him further.


Fare you well Sir.


Pray stay a little! what may I call your name?


You are very inquisitive Sir, but my name is Antonine.


Antonine -- what Countryman?


I was born in London, but my parents were of Bordeaux.


Your Fathers Name?


Theodorus.


Your Mothers?


Dorothy; but I pray you Sir, why ask you these particulars.


Hath your Mother any other Children?


One more here in Bordeaux my Twin brother; do you know one Theodore here a
Merchant in this City?


Do you know him, if you see him?


No indeed Sir, though he be my Father I have not seen him these Fifteen years.


But I shall know whither you be Antonine or not, by a little Mole on your
right Cheek, I pray let me see.


He is a curious Examiner.


I behold it, now I know you to be my son, my Anthonine, come my Son into my
Embraces.


What now?


I am your Father Theodorus, before I beheld this Mole upon your cheek, I took
you for my Son Antonio who is very like unto you.


You my Father?


We are now safe.


O my Antonine.


By your pertinent questions Sir I do now believe that you are my Father,
pardon I beseech you my former incivilities.


My Antonine; you are very welcome to me, why came not your Mother Dorothy with
you? How doth she?


She is well Sir, and remembers her best love unto you by me, and by this
Letter.


I will peruse it presently.


You shall there understand the occasion that detaynes her.


But what Gentlewoman is that I pray you.


My Wife Sir, one of Alderman Manlyes Daughters.


Katharine?


The same Sir.


What, Katharine! my most dear Daughter in Law.


My dear good Father.


How happily and how wished for, is Katharine come with you? Trust me I cannot
but weep for joy.


I pray Sir how doth my Brother?


I sent him this day to London to bring you from thence to Bordeaux.


I am sorry I shall not see my self in him so soon as I hoped.


I Have under-hand here listened, and observed all these passages, I will now
appear before my Master, as I came just now sweating from his Country house --
I have so toyld this day, so bestirred my self, I am all in a sweat, Fie, Fie,
how hot am I?


Why came not my Tenant with you, accordingly as I commanded him?


The heavy Lubber is sick; he hath got (one I know not who it is) to give
Physic to him, he will be here to morrow.


That's well.


O Master Antonio God save you, you have made a quick return.


Ha, ha, he, who do you think it is?


Who should it be but your Son Antonio.


It is his Twin-brother Anthonine one that is very like him indeed.


Master, do not mock me? it is Antonio himself I know it.


Hold your peace you fool you.


What Gentlewoman is that?


His Wife Katharine.


His sweet-heart, rather then his wife, why do you mock me master? look upon
him, and see if he doth not smile himself at the mistake.


What bold companion's that?


O Lord! What language is it which he speaks?


It is English.


He pretends it to be English, tis but some Gibberish I believe; but I pray you
master tell me plainly, is this your Son Anthonine?


It is so.


Do you speak Truth?


What -- do you think I lye!


Not lye; but tell an untruth Master.


Ha, ha, he.


You laugh now, but take heed you repent it not hereafter, I only admonish you
master, I do but admonish you; you know I have been at your Country House all
this day, lay not hereafter the fault on me.


I will not, do not doubt it.


I pray remember it.


Come Sirrah; you and I must jest a little together.


Pox on this English which he speaks, I like it not.


Ha ha, he; why are you not merry with him?


Good Sir let him alone, he is not worth your anger.


Master, would you have me to tell a lye too?


Trico, come hither.


Let him be gone then.


Hath my Son Antonio a Mole in his Cheek?


No but I have heard that my young Master Anthonine hath.


Look you here.


In troth Master, I begin now to be of your opinion; were it not for that Mole,
how like is he to my young Master Antonio?


Do you go presently to Peto the Notary, and tell him that to morrow I will not
fail to come unto him.


I go; but I pray master Anthonine, will you be pleased to excuse my rudeness?


Well, be it so.


Daughter-in-Law, I believe you are weary with your long journey.


A little Sir.


Prithee go in -- I will talk here a little with Anthonine concerning the
affairs in England.


At your pleasure Sir.


Do you hear there? -- Go before, and show my Daughter where she may refresh
and warm her self, I will now read my Wives Letters -- O most welcome letter!


O most sweet Deceit! now will I address my self to my Companion Cupes, and
give him instructions what is yet to be done; and to prevent all discoveries we
will here both of us keep a diligent watch. But woe is me, I see Pyropus the
Broker, he is coming this way with all the speed he can.


What shall we do now; here comes the Broker, whose Clothes I have upon my
back, unless Trico helps me at this d^ad lift I am utterly undone.


I Have showed the Ring which Antonio gave me for a pawn to the Gold-Smith who
saith it is but a Brass Ring poorly Gilded over, and the stone in it no
better then coloured glass. How handsomely that cunning Knave his servant gulled
me? when I said Verily how it sparkles? he presently could speak my words after
me, Verily how it sparkles? For a little gain, I then said Verily, but now I
swear plainly we deceive and are deceived our selves; I am afraid I shall
loose my Clothes and all.


I tremble all over me.


This letter indeed is lovingly, and heartily written.


Father I am weary; let us go in, I pray.


Can you speak French, Anthonine?


A word or two Sir, this Broker doth so trouble me, that truly I do quite
forget my self.


Here is Antonio himself, how opportunely do I meet him?


Let us go in.


Sir, doth it become a man of your fashion and quality to serve me so?


Another in the same Error ha-ha-he.


To laugh, is but a little better then to deride.


I am not able to forbear laughter, and that for many causes -- pardon me -- I
am merry to day, and I have great reason so to be.


Another mistake Sir.


Who do you think you speak to?


To the young man Antonio.


I knew you were in an Error, ha, ha, he.


All is well yet.


Sir I say that this young Gentleman Antonio pawned unto me a brass Ring for
Clothes which he had of me.


Sir, this fellow is some Cheater sure?


I am of your mind -- I tell thee honest man my Son Antonio is not now in
Bordeaux* he is gone this day to London.


The more I look upon this fellow, the worse I like him, if you mark him well,
Sir he hath a Knaves look.


I know not what to think of him.


Sir, will you give me leave to beat the knave?


Be not too violent?


He alters now his language, and is all in his English, I know what he goes
about.


How often shall I tell you that this is not Antonio?


Who is it then?


His Brother Anthonine.


In the morning, he was Anthonio, now he is Anthonine; peradventure before
night, he will be Anthoninuline; and so from the diminutives of his Name, there
will be a Diminution of my Vestments.


Ha, ha, he, Tell me, Had that Antonio any Mole in his Cheek?


Not as I observed.


But this hath, Look you here.


What? am I deceived then? I am confident I am not, He hath the clothes I am
sure of it, on his back, which he borrowed of me; there's no addition of any
Mole to them.


Sir, He sees, I am a stranger, and thereupon intends to abuse me.


What should he do with your clothes?


He said he would personate some body in them.


Come hither Sirrah, you Broker?


You would fain cozen me of my clothes in English, but I will make you to
restore them to me in French.


He is obstinate concerning his clothes, I know not well what to think of it.


I am undone; my Father begins to suspect something -- Sir, It may be Anthonio
borrowed some clothes of him.


There is something else in it, whatsoever it is.


NOw speak English Cupes, -- Now bestir thy self, it is high time; now, or
never.


I know what I have to do, -- let me alone, I am an English-Mariner, who this
day brought Anthonine hither from London; if I do not confute this Broker,
never trust Cupes more?


Do it then, and the better to observe you, I will here conceal my self.


Will you have me bring the Sergeants hither to tear my clothes off your back?


I know not what to think of this.


O Master Antonine -- God save you Sir, I come for money Sir, for your passage.


Welcome Mariner.


How doth Mistress Katharine?


She is well within here.


Who is that?


The Masters mate Sir that brought me over.


He is Welcome; did you bring my son from London?


He understands you not Sir, he asks if you brought us from London hither.


Marry did I Sir?


Here is an odd fellow says no*


Doth he in truth?


And says that I am not Antonine.


Very good in faith.


And that I wear his Clothes.


Better and better; but doth he indeed? The Rogue means to cheat me of my hire,
shall I beat the slave?


Forbear a little -- Hark honest Friend; Here is the Mariner that brought my
Son over, what say you now?


I see well enough what your Design is.


This Fellow will not believe you.


Is he an Infidel, Let me come to the Pagan.


He threatens me too -- what a strange thing is this?


By the faith of a Sailor Sir, there be a hundred Mariners can testify I
brought this Gentleman, and Mistress Katharine over in the good Ship, called
the Speed-well.


He saith there are a hundred Mariners now at the Key to testify the truth of
what he speaks.


I see you all conspire to abuse me.


Hang him Swabber! doth he grumble? If you love me, let me give him a Salt-Eel,
whiles I am in heart -- Money Sir for the Passage.


I pray Sir give him his money, I have not enough to pay him.


What doth he demand?


How much would you have?


Six pounds you know, and richly worth it, though I say it, you had as good
biscuit and salt-beef.


Do you hear within -- Richard, bring hither twenty Crowns.


What do you tell me of twenty Crowns; I had as leif you had said nothing --
Give me my Clothes again.


I know he speaks ill of me, I must needs hang him.


Why do you delay me? I cannot stay.


A little longer --


What? Cony-catchers here?


Doth it go so -- well, I will Arrest you all.


Do you mumble still? 'Twas time for you to go isaith -- your son Sir, was
never sick all the way, marry his Man and his Maid were fain to be set on
shore.


I will provide him other servants -- Here is your money Friend.


I marry Sir, I understand this well; Here is a brave wind for us, if it will
hold, This week I am for London again; will you have any thing to your Mother
Master Anthonine?


Command him to remember my love unto your Mother.


Remember my Father's Love, and my Duty.


I will -- adieu.


Come, let us now go in my Son.


My Cupes you have saved me.


Be gone then, lest we be taken here.


O my most dear Decoy, you have now thoroughly satisfied my Father Theodorus.


Yes Trico, and got some good dry silver to boot; good English, very good
English; we now will have another Supper, but Polla shall not cook it.


But what if Ignoramus should come?


Ignoramus I know will come, and trouble us, but I have found a way to make yet
more sport with him, then heretofore have done.


Prithee what is it?


Why, what by his own words, and what by Polla's, it is rumoured here, round
about, that he is possessed with a Divel.


And we must conjure the Divel out of him.


Right, and so I have told Polla before hand.


What are you friends with her again?


Great Friends, and she hath promised to assist me in it, but what shall we do
with Torcol, if he should interrupt us.


Let me alone for that; But who shall conjure the Divel out of Ignoramus?


Who should do it but myself and he who in good time comes here according to
my wish, my Brother Cola, an excellent Boon-Companion, he is come now to have
me with him to the Tavern to sip only a Gallon or two of Wine together; I will
have him to be my Coadjutor above all men in the World.


HA, ha, he, Here is my dear Companion Cupes.


I am so Cola?


Just now I have won at Dice all the Books, and (look here) the Hood of one of
my Brethren. He swears now like a Tinker, and ^urseth me to the Divel; yet for
all that Cupes, I would have (...) sell them outright speedily to supply our
selves with monies for a good Supper, I am weary of eating of Porridge.


O my dear Confessor!


O my more dear Confessor!


My pure spiritual Father --


My Mundan Carnal Brother --


Now for a Cup of brisk wine.


One Cup, nay let's have Nine.


Oh my dear ghostly Father.


'Twill make your tongue to stammer.


But my Brow smooth and cheerly.


O my delicious Brother, come let us laugh, and Embrace. Hang sorrow!


I must now crave your assistance.


In what Cupes?


We must conjure the Divel out of Ignoramus, the Englishman.


What! is he possessed with a Divel?


I a manner, if you will do it, I will tell you the whole story of it.


I will do it most willingly, for although he hath not a Goblin in his belly, I
shall raise unto my self a high same thereby, as others have done before me,
what will they say? our Famous brother Cola, our holy brother Cola doth drive
out devils ha, ha, he.


Look, There is a Hood, there is a Coat for thee, How opportunely it comes?


Let it be sold.


No, not as yet; for your Brother Cupes also will drive out Devils, with this
hood I will attire my self in the Exercism when I am to be an assistant to you.


It will do very well: Ha, ha, he, very well, I will put on with it a most
dreadful countenance.


After the Divel is cast out of him, procure him to be brought to your
Monastery where the other Fryers may detain him also with their Exercisms.


It shall be done, after that my dear brother we will wash our own Tongues.


Not with holy Water, but with blessed Wine.


Ha, ha, he, we will surely Sup* at the sign of the spinning. Cat, O quil y ^
de bon vin la, O what Gallant Wine is there! hei, hei, and there we will sell
these trinke^s.


What! the old Postillers are good for nothing compared to us, Friar Menot and
Friar Maliard are but Dunces compared unto us, ridiculous Dunces.


Make hast I pray, and attire your self.


Brother Cola, do you now go to Saint Severins, and conduct hither the
Solemnity for the Exorcism; as soon as ever I have made my self ready, I will
meet you in yonder street.


I go, and be you sure you say nothing to any man till I return, but be a
faithful Achates.


SToppa Dullman, Stoppa Felonem? stop the Thief Dullman, stop the Felon
Dullman, stop him stop him.


I will make hast unto Antonio, and thoroughly inform him of every thing, and
then as closely as I can I will convey my self to Cupes.


Stoppa Dullman, stoppa? stop that Rogue Dullman, stop him* Ah Vagabond Felon;
Habeo ^e per aures jam, I have you now Sirrah by the Ears, ^udge not.


I pray Good Master!


Ah Fugative, putabas quod non possent gignere te iterum, you thought I could
not get you again you Rogue you, but I would have found you out si^er^ super
faciem terr^* If you were upon the Face of the Earth Sirrah; and therefore why
did you r^in for it?


I ran from you Sir because you were in ta^ peltant a cholera in such a pelting
chafe Sir, for Rosabella that you would not hear me.


Bonus annus d^ ^e A good year on thee? Gentlemen where do you think I found
him* upon my Faith he was got into the common place jaciendum glob^s vulgo
vocati a bowling Alley, where he played at unlawful Games against the Statute,
and there I know it was that sirrah lus^t^ viam meas coronas you plaid away my
Crowns you knave you.


Videbam super tantum, I only looked on.


Oh you are a pure Supervisor, you have been my Clerk now these twenty years,
did you ever see me play at Bowls?


Never I.


Non, Non ego warrantizabo; no, no, I will warrant you; what are you turned a
Gamester, gigne tibi aliam deskam, non scribes plus ad deskam meam; get thee
another Desk, for thou shalt not write on my Desk any more.


Master Si tu p^nis me viam a te, sum disfactus ut Ostera, if you put me away
from you, I am undone as an Oyster.


Wherefore then sirrah did you not bring Rosabella to me?


I brought unto you that Rosabella which Torcol delivered to me.


Funis de to? vis me contrarotulare adhuc. A rope on you -- what will you still
control me, had he a crooked Neck?


I by my Faith had he, and they did so weep at her departure, that they made me
weep also.


Es magnus vitulus, vocatus a great Calf.


And they gave me Wine and Sack also!


Wine and Sack! -- There it is -- I have now found it out, you are a very
Cocks-comb; will you undo your Master pro una pecia de saccharo for a piece of
Sack, Dullman?


He gave me also a piece of Gold.


Where is it? Give it me?


Master, it is mine now.


Es cognoscens latr^, you are a cunning Thief; Sirrah where is my Counterpane?


He said, that he would presently bring it after me.


He said so? Are you such a Lob-cock? you are a true Dullman.


I indeed Master.


Hanga, Hanga, putabam quod Musaeus erat major asinus quam tu, sed tu es major
asinus quam Vniversitans: Hang you, Hang you, I thought Musaeus had bin a
greater Ass then you, but now I find you are a greater Ass then an
Universitant!


Spero non ita, I hope not so Master.


There is not a greater plague in the world then to have bad servants; I have
sent Pecu^ to Torcol for Rosabella, and he is not come neither, I believe that
he is run away also.


Master, pardon but this fault, pugnabo tanquam Diabolus pro te, si venerint
Geldrii, And I will fight like a Divel for you if the Sowgelders come again.


Ph -- you fight -- I will fight my self now, let them come and they dare; sum
been appunctus, I hope I am well appointed for them, see if I am not.


But master, Non est riota portare tres dagarios? Is it not a riot master to
carry three Daggers?


Not se defendendo Dullman; If I kill them, let them take heed of me another
time; for whatsoever I do se defendendo, I do it by order of Law.


Master, I have copied this; see here it is.


Give it me, and I will copy you out another.


I Have served Trico's Sycop (...) very handsomely, who came in by a back way
just now to circumvent me -- who are you? Pecus the servant of Ignoramus --
what would you have -- my Master hath sent me to you for the true Rosabella --
Ha, ha, he, into prison therefore I have cast this Pe^us the cunning knave of
Trico. What? doth Trico think to cheat a Portugall?

Take this, you Ass you, he gives Dullman a ^ox in the Ear) you always write
false Latin, if you cannot write true Latin as I do, cannot you Abbreviate
the words by the middle, cannot you learn scriber cum dash^ you blockhead you?
cannot you write with a dash, as others do, and so you shall make, no error in
the Latin, nor error in the Law.


It is a good Rule.


O seignior Ignoramo comesta vestra merced.


Come esta Villano in grano, how fares the Villain in Grain, the notorious
common pandar; nay I will complement with you too, if you have a mind to
complement.


Ha, ha, he, my merry and most conceited Kinsman, how ^ure^ your Lady
Rosabella, Ha, ha, he.


Number me etiam moccas, What and do you mock me too? at habebo aures tuas si
pileus tuus sit de lana* I will have your ears for it you Villain you, if your
cap be made of wool.


Have you yet filled your self with the love, and with the ^njoyment of your
fair Rosabella, Ha, ha, he.


Do you laugh at me? the Divel break your crooked neck; Putas hoc esse rem
ridentem? do you think this is a laughing matter?


How long shall we jest one with one another, come Ha, ha, he*


Are you laughing again? Laugh on: But if I do not make you howl at the Bar
like an Owl --


You are merry with me, and I am glad of it, Ha, ha, he; But tell me I pray
you, are you in earnest, or in jest?


Do you think it is a Jest to send me an old Hag for Rosabella.


I understand you not, but wonder what you mean.


Do you wonder?


Your servant Dullman brought me the Indenture, and six hundred Crowns, he gave
me also the private token, I therefore delivered Rosabella to him.


Say you so? Veni tu huc, Bonus pro nihil? You good for nothing come hither do
you hear what he says?


I do hear.


Did I deliver any ill favoured Woman to you?


He that I delivered the money to, he delivered her unto me.


Did I deliver her to you?


I know not, but it was such another Torcol.


Hold your peace you Beast you; and do you hold your peace Torcol? Audi
chargeam, Listen to your charge; and answer to that only which I shall demand
of you, was this he?


It was indeed.


Peace, Sirrah peace, Hah? Is this he who? --


It was not I by Heaven.


What a Divel? cannot you hold your peace? answer me when I speak to you.


Master --


Will you still interrupt me, -- Si te capio in manum, If I take you in hand
Sirrah I shall -- but is this the man that gave you the counterfeit Woman?


That Torcol who gave the Woman unto me was upon better observation, not such a
Torcol.


Now do you speak; did you deliver Rosabella to him?


He who I gave her too was not such a Dullman.


To whom therefore did you deliver her, I will know the truth.


To some other who in your name did demand her.


Now do you answer, what manner of man was he who had my Verses?


He was a lean, a pitiful lean spare fellow, and he had a a little black ^eard.


Black?


Yes a black Beard.


Wo is me!


And he had another kind of a crooked Neck.


How did he name himself?


Mendoza.


Have you such a servant, and of that Name? why answer you not? have you such a
servant?


No, no, I have not, It is the deceitful Trico that hath put these tricks upon
me.


You shall therefore forfeit the Thousand Crowns; give um me, give um me, give
um I say, why laugh you not now? why do you not answer now? what not one word?
have you a mind to be pressed to death.


Grief ties my Tongue.


You may have for it thou A^quare impedit, give me my Crowns? give um me for I
will have them.


O Seignior mio multo honorifico, bazo las manus, I kiss your hands my much
honoured signior.


What do you think to pay me with a bazo las manus pay me in good and lawful
money, pay me I say?


What sh^ll become of me this is the second time I have been shipwrecked Woe is
me, Woe is me!


Did not I tell you before, that I would make you hoop like an Owl, I will make
you hoop and scritch too.


Mercy -- my Noble Cavalier.


None at all my notable Villain, my notable Rascal.


Upon my Faith I am not able to pay you.


Will you have me make a distress upon your goods, I will recover my money by
Law si tunica tua est super dorsum tuum, If you have a coat upon your back.


I am afraid to be brought into the Courts of Judicature, Seignior: I will
tell you what is your wiser course; because a knave hath deceived us two honest
men, we two honest men will go and soundly cudgel that knave.


Go your self, if you will, he hath not deceived me but you; I will tell you
debet surgere per tempus qui decipit me. He ought to rise betimes that
deceives Ignoramus.


But it doth most of all afflict me that he hath cheated me, being a Portugal.
Oh Admiral Villayn. Seignior illustrissimo do beseech you to pardon me.


No pardon Torcol, you have forfeited your obligation, causa patet.


Did you send a servant to me, I pray you, whose name is Pecus.


Yes -- where is he?


Pardon me, I have sent him to prison because I conceived him to be Tricoes
Sycophant.


Hay day, what he in the Jail too? Actio pro falso imprisonamento, nisi firko
tu^m curvum collum pro hoc, if I Firk not your crooked Neck for it --


If you please let us both go to Antoni^ who loves Rosabella most entirely, we
will try first if we can get any thing from them by fair means, if not we will
follow them close, at law, at law Seignior.


At law, do not you talk so much of the law, I will have you both in law, you
shall have law enough i'll warrant you.


But first of all I will release Pecus; do you hear within there -- Here take
this Ring, and command that Pecus be brought to my house.


I will have your self in this place ere it be long; Dullman do you go with him
and see him at large, but first c^pe advisamentum, Dullman take my advisement
with you.


DAughter after you have a little refreshed yourself, it will not be unpleasant
to you to sit here in the open Air, and do so I pray you.


I thank you Sir.


Do as I bid you, and think on nothing else.


Here is the house Seignior, I will knock at the door Tuk, Took.


Who knocks at the Door?


Here is Ignoramus, and my Uncle, I am undone for eve^.


What would you have?


I know not, what would you have?


Who are you?


Ask him there if you will.


It is the English Lawyer, Signior, my most excellent Signior, Signior de
la, Signior de --


Are you not made moist with Wine?


Mad-moyst; mad? bear witness? an Action of Defamation.


What a blattering do you keep?


A blattering.


Pray hold your peace.


They say this English man is possessed with a Divel, I do now believe it my
self.


Seignior I understand that this day Antonio hath brought my Cousin Rosabella
into your house.


It is no such thing.


Oh that I now were Dead!


Nay -- and if you make any concealment, I will.


Nay gently and clemently I pray --


Clemently? what have I to do with the Clementines.


Is not your Son Antonio within Signior?


No he is gone to London, but his brother Anthonine, his Twin-brother is this
day come to me with his wife Katharine.


I now smell out the deceit, I pray Sir make us so happy as to see that Lady
Katharine.


I am undone, I am undone.


You are a couple of merry men; why would you see her?


Cause her to come at her and your peril.


Do you know these men daughter Katharine?


Who I? Indeed Sir I know them not.


Por mi sancti -- This is my Cousin Rosabella.


Benedicite -- This is my Cove^t Baron, my own Rosabella.


What Impostures are these?


Being now come from London Sir, How should I know them?


She speaks English now, I know a little of it, having bin sometimes heretofore
at London in the way of merchandise. Are not you my Kinswoman Rosabella?


Do I look like one of your kindred?


Nay I can speak English too; what my own Countrey-woman little pigs ny, my
little Doves egg, thou know me I am sure.


This is a mystery; I would fain understand the meaning of it, Anthonine.


Why, do you not know your Uncle Torcol, Rosabella?


The man in the Moon as well.


I will give thee a good fair Joyncture isaith.


I pray Sir, be wise if you can.


Wise? O me, I am wise for you* and foolish for you, dear Rosabella: pity?
pity? some pity to a bursting spirit; be not so fair and cruel.


Anthonine come forth -- I would fain know the reason of this disturbance.


I see yet I am blind; I freeze, and yet I burn in love; I live not, but I die;
I live to love, to love to live, and live not but in loving; nay, I can sing
and speak songs and sonnets with the best of them.


Sir, This is the possessed man you heard of.


Whatsoever it is, there's something in it; All this cannot be for nothing.


Let me not live, if he hath not stolen my Rosabella from me.


O perjured --


What Deceit can be in this? There is certainly something in it extraordinary.


Shine on me bright Sun; The Sun is no sun, Rosabella, you are the Sun, and the
Moon, and the Stars; And sweeter far then is a Civet-cat.


I would speak a few words in private with you by my self.


Bound I am in Frank, -- A pledge, a mortgage to thee Rosabella, and yet I am in
free soccage, ye goodly tressed Nymphs, and simpering Sirens; O the crimson and
the white* you Roses, Lillies and double Violets, spring of inameld flowers,
and diapered meadows, green shady groves, and chirping birds, the warbling
streams, and whistling winds, and dainty Rosabella; Dixi -- Ha sweet Rose, One
habeas Corpus.


Hold off Coxcomb, or I shall set you further off.


What are you there too? sum appunctus pro te jam, I am now well appointed for
you. Hic me volvit geldare body; Too day you would have gelded me.


What will become of me?


If the Conjurers stay any longer we shall be all undone.


BRother Cupes -- How well that Hood becomes thee* Ha, ha, he.


Make hast, if you love me.


After the Exorcisme is over; we will have a brave Supper.


Pox on you both, Are you talking of a Supper, when mischief and Vengeance are
on foot, and threaten suddenly to overtake us?


Let us go.


In the mean time I will bear a watchful eye, and observe what Pyropus is
doing.


I tell you the Truth indeed, Seignior.


Although it is hardly credible, yet I will consider of it.


Come hither Holy men, Here is that poor wretch I told you of.


What are you come again. Trust me I will have you coram nobis.


Holy Friars; This is the man possessed with the Divel; This other man is his
Companion.


What is the business with these Friars?


Torcol; If there be a Sorceress upon the face of the Earth this is one; sum
in quandario, I am in a great Quandary whether I shall stay or not.


Nay stay what ever become on it.


What is the business I pray, what are you about to do good Friar?


A work of Charity which some good Christians have desired us.


This man is possessed with a Divel. Take heed of him.


I will be gone -- I profess unto you; I did before suspect as much.


La you now, Sir, I told you so.


I professed unto you this Torcol had almost deluded me.


What strange project is this? What do these Friare here?


Hold your peace.


Or we will, -- If you disturb us in the Exorcisme.


We will begin first with Holy water.


In the Devils Name, why do you so often sprinkle your water in my face?


Woe is me, He invokes the Divel.


This is the true Touch-stone, The Divel cannot endure Holy water.


Holy Friars proceed, And do what belongs unto you; he is wonderfully vexed
with the Divel.


How long have you bin so vexed?


What is that to you; I have all this day been terribly tormented.


He confesses it.


In what form appeared the Divel, when he first vexed you?


Sometimes of a man with a crooked neck, as this Torcoline; sometimes in the
form of my servant Dullman, and sometimes like a Sorceress as this woman
Pella, sometimes in the Form of a Sowgelder, as that man; And sometimes in
yonder Angelic shape of Rosa rosae, he hath appeared in diverse Forms --


There are many Devils, I see, do vex him.


Alas poor man.


Do they never fly from you?


Yes, Dullman this day fled from me, but he is now with me again.


Keep of! 'Tis the very same I saw at London.


Away -- Be gone.


And doth no spirit vex you Torcol?


Yes you do all of you torment me; why do you make a sport of us with a
mischief to you? why do you sprinkle Holy waters so often on me?


This man cannot endure Holy water no more then the other, they are both of
them like affected.


They are so -- They look much upon that young Gentlewoman.


Alas, alas, For God's sake let's be gone.


Let all the Hobgoblins in hell come to me if they dare.


By his very look you may see that this man is most strongly possessed.


I am afraid of them, good Sir let's be gone.


Holy Friars, you do well, but I pray, go further from my House? for by my
good will I would neither have Devils nor any possessed with them to be near
unto me; I pray give me one sprinkle of your Holy water.


And me?


And me Sir I pray you.


Make hast now, Away from them?


What are you gone Rosabella? Come back, come back I pray you.


My dear Rosabella Return to me; Do you not hear me Rosabella?


Rosabella.


Why Rosabella I say.


What a noise they make?


These Spirits be Incubi, and near of kin to Astmodeus; I would have all women
to beware of them.


They look for their Succubae.


Let us go.


Rosabella I say, Are you gone? Now a pox go with you.


What wild Heats have bred these Distempers? They are all mad I think.


Take fast hold of this man and bind him.


It is my safest way to be gone, lest they use me as they do him, I perceive
they are bent upon mischief.


See -- one of them hath made an Escape, follow him, follow him.


What is he is gone?


Would I were even gone too; for I believe these two Friars are but a couple of
knaves.


YOu that stand by with palms and holy herbs, tie him fast unto a Chair.


Why do you attach me so violently and bind me with Cords and Ropes?


Hold your peace?


O Dullman, Dullman; you said to day, you would fight like a Divel for me,
Where are you Dullman now?


I do exorcize thee Dullman; Be gone thou cursed Dullman.


He hath been gone once to day already; but if he comes now --


He invokes Dullman; certainly his Name is Dullman.


With a plague t'ye; my Name is Ignoramus.


Be gone Ignoramus -- praesto.


Be you gone like two Knaves as you are, what a foul Riota, what a Rowta do you
make here?


Two Devils, Riota, and Rowta.


Come forth, Thou mo^t wicked Spirit Ignoramus; I do conjure thee Ignoramus,
Thou decliner of Justice, Thou seducer of Men, Thou sower of Discord, thou
disturber of the Peace: It is thou, whom I do exorcise. What is the Name of thy
Master?


I am the Master my self.


Thou art then Beelzebub himself; Be gone thou Beelzebub, I do conjure thee to
come forth, and be gone.


So I will you may be sure as soon as possibly I can from your knaves Fingers.


I conjure thee to declare unto me, For what Cause came this unto thee?


For Rosabella, For her it is, and by her, that I am so tormented.


Be gone Rosabella, Be gone!


Oh the Divel! She is gone already.


I conjure thee to tell me: Did thou ever give up thy soul unto her?


What's that to thee: I have given both Soul, and Body, and all my Goods unto
her*


Oh most wicked wretch!


And besides her Jointure, If she had married me, she had Francum Bancum too.


Be gone Francum Bancum; Separate thy self from her Francum Bancum.


But now she shall not have it, never fear it; had she but set her affections
on me, she should have enjoyed many more privileges, Infang-thief, Outfang
thief. Tac, Toc, Tol, and Tem.

How many there are of them? Be gone all of you Infang-thief, Outfang-thief.
Tac, Toc, Tol, and Tem. I conjure you, all you evil spirits, whether you be in
his round black-cap by day, or in his white cap by night, whether you be in his
double tongue or under his Tongue, whether you be in his beard, or in his Head?


Oh you Asses you; what do you think the Divel holds i^ Capite. No he holds
in Frocks, and socks and in bal^ Crowns, such as yours are, you hooded
Monsters, you brothers of the Divel.


Now he invokes his Brothers the Devils.


Come forth you evil spirits, whether you be in his Doublet, or his Breeches,
or his Coat, or his Cloak, or in his Drawers, or in his Pen, or his Wax, or in
his Seal, or in his Ink-horn.


He was in the Horn too day indeed.


I conjure thee thou most wicked spirit to come out of the Horn.


Pox take you and all the Horns in the world, but the Horn only that sounds to
dinner.


Come forth all of you, you wicked spirits* and be totally explanted whether
you be in his Indentures, or his Parchments, or in his Papers engrossed, or
Papers not engrossed, in words of sense, or words without sense.


Whether in Grayfriars, or in Blackfriars, or in Crutchedfriars.


I conjure you all; Be gone, and fly you evil spirits, Gray-friars,
Black-friars, and Crutched-friars. Fly and be gone, whether you be in his long
Slops, or round Slops, or in his greater Guts, or the less Guts, or in his
^odpiece.


There is the Divel I'll warrant you. I see him there.


I see him there in you; nisi facio te sursum tenere manum ad Barram, If I make
you not hold up your hand at the Bar for it. O you Felons; who hath his hand
now in my pocket? -- you are Backharend and Handabend.


Be gone Backharend, and Handabend.


If they go, it is Felony directly.


Whether you are in his purse, or his pocket, or his Fo^, whether in Gold or in
silver, whether well got, or evil got.


I, that's the Divel you desire, I do know it, Estis robatores, you are very
Robbers all of you.


I adjure you most wicked spirits, whether you are in the thighs, ^r between
the thighs, come out all together out of all the members of this Creature.


Hoc est ^ene, si vult ire sic, Nay, this is well, If it will go so.


And come all into the Toe of his left foot.


There they be, I see them there; I will beat them, and keep them down that
they never rise again.


O you She Divel, O my Corns, my Corns, what do you do? The great Capias of
the great Divel take you all, and every one of you both great and small.


Now he is mad, Brother, give me some exorcised salt, and hall owed fire, that
I may exorcise and fumigate him.


The fire consume you all. Si dagarias capio rumpam calveo coronas vestras; If
I take my Daggers once, I will break both your bald crowns in an instant.


Dagarias, I conjure you to come forth Dagarias.


I would they could se defendendo.


Let us try now, If he be obedient; Repeat now what I whisper to you in your
ear. Buzz, buzz, buzz.


I adjure you to answer to what I demand of you; Mum, mum, mum.


I understand nothing.


Mum, mum.


Why do you keep such a mumming, and mopping, and such a moing like two Jack an
Apes about me.


Do you not perceive the Devils are gone from you.


I perceive that here are three Devils still at the least.


Three yet --


Yes three; I believe I am this day tormented with three Devils in good
earnest; If I am, you Polla the Sorceress, are the first Divel, and you two
are the two other Devils that do assist her.


Brother, I perceive that very much remains yet to be done unto him; If you
think well of it, let him be conve^ed to our Btethren the Friars in the
Monastery.


It shall be done. Some of you take him hence and carry him thither.


In the Devils Name whither do you carry me, you foul porridge-bellyed Friars.
Harroll. Harroll. I know the great Custom of Normandy. Harroll, The Divel take
you all.


As soon as ever I have left him at the Monastery, I will immediately return to
you, In the mean time do you take care that our Supper be in a readiness.


It shall be done.


Ha, ha, he. Excellent sport brother --


It is so, Sister; Let us now to the Tavern, That is my Monastery.


For this conceit Brother Cupes I will go henceforth with you where you please
to command me.


You know my Polla that I do love you; prithee let us love one another. I have
given you some money to day already; If you will be quiet and loving, I will
always be giving to you; and Nothing shall bewanting.


For the time to come I will love you; and go whithersoever you will have me.


OH Trico, but just now I saw Ignoramus carried away to Saint Severi^s
Monastery. What makes you so Melancholy.


There is another Tempest hanging over our heads master.


I am sorry for it, what may it be.


I observed Pyropus to go unto the Judge, who hath assigned him some Hounds to
Hunt us.


Hounds -- what Hounds?


The Sheriffs Hounds, who doth Hunt after you to take you and to throw you into
prison; and then all things will be known to your Father.


Let us contrive some way to preserve our selves.


You see (friends) what you have to do these are they who detain my Clothes
from me; you may spare the young Gentleman for the present, but be sure you
take his servant into your custod^*


I am undone. What would you have with me.


Either go to prison, or restore my Goods unto me; you are now under custody.


There is my master himself, demand them of him; I am but a servant.


What shall I do? I must dissemble.


Will you return my Clothes back unto me, or will you see your servant dragged
to the Jail for them?


Let him go whither he will for me; what have I to do with him? are you not
ashamed to speak with so little respect to a Gentleman of my fashion and a
stranger.


Forbear your English at this present, I pray you master, and give back the
Cloth unto the Broker.


What are you? I know you not, Trico, Excuse me I must now counterfeit as if I
knew thee not?


What will you pretend not to know me.


Hold your peace I pray, and play the Counterfeit a little.


Hold your peace, and play the counterfeit, you have got what you will of me*
and now you will not know me.


Do you not know him?


I know him, no not I; and give me leave I pray not to know you neither.


Do not you fool me? know you not Trico's master*


What Tricks? what Trico?


I would I never had been Trico? will you suffer them to hurry me to Jail?


What have I to do with you, hold your peace I say, and play the counterfe^t.


Do you not hear how he commands me to hold my play and play the counterfeit.


What a lying knave is this, did I say so?


If I should drag him to prison, I should not deal uncivily with him.


What is that to me; do what you will with him; I have no relation to him, I
neither do, nor will know him.


Masters for the most part do so deal with their servants, after they have
got what they will of them, they lay them by, and make use of them no more,
what? Are you ungrateful master? must your counterfeit Rings be given to a
plain dealing, and a down right honest man verily?


What verily again? I will no more be so deluded with verilies, I am now
another man.


Well! I will go about my business, Fare you well. It grieves me thus to leave
him, but what shall I do?


What is he gone? O most unworthy man? but, friend I have all those Clothes in
my own custody which you delivered to me, and if you please I will return them
to you, the rest (as you your self see) are upon my masters own back.


Sergeant! Do some of you go with him,


Look you Sir, here are the Clothes which were in my custody; Am I not an
honest man now verily?


Yes verily and thereupon I give you your liberty; but tell me I pray, is he
who hath the Mole in his face the same Gentleman that came this morning with
you to my shop?


What do you think of him? do you take him to be the same man?


I do indeed, but if I light upon him again, I shall go near to lay him fast
enough, but see where he comes, as if he meant to out-brave me.


It grieves me that I left Trico in such Distress.


Secure him.


What means this?


Your English will not serve your turn now, you shall even go where you
deserve to be.


Trico, I pray you work some trick now that I go not to prison.


Who I! I understand you not.


No? -- Use your invention; find out one Artifice or another to preserve me
from the infamy of the Jail; now stand me instead Trico?


What now I am Trico again; it is not long ago since you did not know me, and
now I will not know you.


Contrive some way I pray you.


Take him away Sergeants.


Even where you will; I know him not ( you counterfeit as if I did not know you)
do you remember it?


What? Do you not know me Trico, then?


St, hold your peace, and play the counterfeit?


Acknowledge me to be thy master, and own me but this once Trico.


Hold your peace I say and play the counterfeit.


Do you hear Friends this man doth know me well enough he is my servant.


Not I, I know him not, suffer me not to know you. Do you remember it Sir.


He can speak now in some other language -- come, let us go.


Trico, what would you have them to drag me hence?


Where they please -- Nay -- in the word ungrateful all vices are comprehended
-- I'll be packing too.


Sergeants have a care of your prisoner, see him in safe custody?


If I go to prison, it is my utter undoing.


What English again?


I'll rather dye -- away Knaves, Villains, I will kill you all, he makes a
flourish with his drawn sword.


O me -- Why Sergeants, Varlets; whither do you run with a mischief to you?
return, and do your duties -- if I complain not to the Sheriff --


I have redeemed my self. But what shall become of me now? Truth the Daughter
of time will bring this, and all my late extravagancies to the light; my Father
(whom I am ashamed to have cajoled with so many Circumventions) will at the
last be informed of them; yet there are many, who I know in love have committed
many grosser mistakes, but suppose it should come to my fathers Ear, he will be
very angry at the first, and fret, and fume; but a Fathers anger cannot
continue long: but come what will come; Rosabella is now my own, and shall be
so, she being safe, all things are safe with me, my Life and Fortunes are Woven
into hers. Howsoever I will repair unto a Friend of mine on these new
expedients to take new Counsels.


HAil to my dear Country, and to my native City of Bordeaux; now after fifteen
melancholy Winters expired in London, I do hope to see my Husband Theodore son
Antonio; For ever since they first were made Prisoners by War, no times were
pleasant to me, but this day will make amends for all; I stay too long; I must
procure a Coach to bring hither my son Anthonine, and my Daughter in law
Katharine, I left them in an Inn near to the place we landed. The Sea hath
made the young woman so sick and faint, Her legs can hardly bear her; I must
send for them both.


Good Madame, speak our language, here's Nell, and I and a great many more
understand not a word what you say: what shall we do in this Country?


Why Vince understand thou nothing yet?


Scarce a word, yet I was in France once before.


Nor you neither little Nell?


No truly, I would I were at home in London again, They speak so finely
forsooth here.


Yes, you understand a few words, I taught you something what's La teste?


A Head forsooth.


Well said Nell, what's La main?


A Hand forsooth.


What is le bras? tell me Nell.


Le bras. --


Nell, Tis a Horse tool.


What is it Vince?


A Horse tool, say.


Shall I forsooth?


Say then; what's le bras?


A Horse tool forsooth!


Fie on thee.


Ha, ha, he.


I, I, Indeed forsooth, Vince told me so*


Vince is an unhappy boy -- well you shall both learn.


I, but it will be such a while first.


Why so boy?


They say that women teach this language best; And it will be six years first
ere I shall get such a sweet Mistress as I would have.


I will be thy, Mistress my self.


I but old women never teach half so well, but pray Madame let me alone with my
Mothers tongue; I love my natural speech, I am a Gentleman.


This is the only tongue that Gentlemen affect.


I know a tongue worth two of it.


What's that Vince?


Marry a Neats tongue with Venison sauce.


Thou art a very wag Vince -- well, I'll go find out thy Master Theodorus house*
they say it is near the Palace. And that is here, I'll knock, and ask: Tic, Toc.
-- Is this the House of Master Theodorus?


Yes, Madame.


Is he within?


Yes -- what would you have with him?


I desire to speak with him.


Come in -- If you please?


Where are these little ones?


Forsooth.


This is your Master Theodorus house; Come in with me.


Yes forsooth.


STay Nell -- stay.


I cannot, O Lord, you are such another Trully I think.


O Lord, you are such another Trull I think.


I tell you, I must wait upon my Lady.


I tell you, you must wait on me.


I will Sir.


How now Maid! what's that your Curtsy? down -- down -- down -- descend --
lower yet -- lower yet -- sweep me the ground with your breech now, and swim
away?


Now I'll go.


Nell, Nell, Did thou ever see the Man in the Moon?


No faith, prithee let me see him?


Look here?


Beshrew your heart blood, you had almost made me bite my tongue in two.


What need ears and tongues in this Country, we are both deaf, and dumb here.


It's a strange Country, All the little Barns can speak French here; and yet
we cannot.


So do the pigs to.


What?


Ovy, Ovy, Ovy, Do they not so?


Here's one thing I shall never endure.


What's that prithee.


They say, we maids must drink nothing but water.


That's true Nell, but 'tis no matter; youl'e make water, though you drink
nothing but wine.


Fie Vince, how you talk?


As though you do not do it? what a simpering is here?


Vince, Vince, they wear fine Clothes here.


I, but terrible soul shirts here; but, Nell, you must be very bold,


Why are their Women so?


Yes all with their blind Bayards.


you are always flouting.


You must learn to mock too, you must frump your own Father here upon occasion.


I have a pretty wit for a Frump, though I say it, but good Vince, if you love
me, take heed of one thing.


What's that?


of eating Grapes, for fear you take a Surfeit.


I love them not, quoth the Fox, I would I could come at them.


Faith -- you'll be sick then?


I, sick? what heart of Oak? body of Brass? I am not such a puler as Mistress
Katharine to be Sea-sick, and have a Coach sent for me, well fare old
Bell-metal.


Hark! -- I think I am called; nay, Fie master Vince, you spoil my Ruff;
Faith I'll give you no more sweet-meats, when I go to my Ladies Closet.


Peace, Nell, I'll hand you in, by the Arm after the French fashion, O my dear
Damosella!


O my Monsieur!


Go apace, yonder comes a mad man.


DIabolus volet viam cum omnibus his frateribus, fraterculis etiam, si haberem
focum puto focarem hoc monasteri um in mente qua nunc sum, sed est felonia,
puto non focarem; At ite mecum vos magni nebulones ab hoc monasterio ad
Westmonasterium si audetis pro ambis auribus, si capio vos ibi --

The Divel fly away with all these Friars, and Friarers also, if I had any
fire, I think in the mind in which I now am, I should fire this Monastery; but
it is Felony, I think I should not fire it now again: but go along with me you
Lubberly knaves from this Minster to Westminster, if you da^e for both your
Ears; if I take you there --


Quid jam? Number est in fumo adhuc? Magister ego deliberavi Pecus, vide.

What? still in a fume? Master I have freed Pecus, see here he is?


Spero trounsalis Torcol pro hoc.

I hope you will ^rounce Torcol for this.


Trounsabis? Ego fui trounsatus h^di^, ut puto nunquam homo fuit in mundo
trounsatus; pro hoc solo, nunquam indurato faciem Fratris, neque cleri^ dum
vivo.

Trounce him! why I have been so trounced to day, as I think never man was
trounced in the World. For this one thing alone, I will never endure the face
of a Friar, or of a Clark as long as I live.


Vbi erant Daggariae tum* se defendendo? Where were your Daggers then Master in
your own defence?


Dagarias me^ ceperunt, asportarum contra pacem Regis coronam dignitutem ejus,
tantu^i reliquerunt tres scaberdas spoliarunt meam ruffam, obligationem, Hic*

Why? they seized upon my Daggers, and carried them away against the Kings
peace, and his Crown, and Dignity, they have only left me the three Scabberds,
and see here they have spoiled my Ruff and my obligation also.


Profecto est cancellata. Oh grievous, it is cancelled indeed Sir.


Volebant etiam facere me mill res, voluit unus me plorare, in despectu nasi
faciebat me plorare, alius mummabat nescio quid, Ex ego repetebam mummans
nescio quid, quicquid dicebam, erat Diabolus cum illis.

They also would make me do a thousand things; One of them would make me to
weep and cry, and in spite of m^ own nose he made me cry; Another would have
me to mutter, and mumble I know not what my self; and I did repeat after them
and mumbled I know not what my self, and every word I spake was a Divel with
them.


Quomodo dicis per illud nunc? in bona veritate hic erat Dies terribilissimus.

How say you by that now? in good earnest Master, this was a most terrible Day.


Dies? Festum omnium sanctorum praeteriit, puto body esse festum omnium
Diabolorum.

A day say you -- The Feast of All Saints is passed. I think this day was the
Feast of All Devils.


Tu convenies cum illis uno die, Sir, you may chance to meet with them one day
or another.


I will have them all in a Praemunire.


Do; And beg the Friary of the King.


But that some English men (amongst whom I had made an agreement) came at that
instant by chance into the Monastery, who all of them knew me, and certified
that I was not possessed with a Divel; per meam fidem puto murder assent me,
Upon my faith I think they would have murdered me.


Quomodo dicis per i^lud nunc? How say you by that now?


Ita super eorum verba sinebant me ire ad largum: And so upon their words they
gave me leave to go at large.


Hic est Casus meus. Haec est villamissima villa.

It is directly my Case. This is a most vile villainous City master.


Bordeaux, Bordeaux, In nomine Diaboli ego abibo cras, si gigno Bordeaux semel
super dorsum meum, si iterum return^ ad Bordeaux dabo illis veniam geldare me.
Ibo nunc ad Torcol nebulonem, nisi ille mibi det coronas meas bonam
satisfactionem capiam illum in manum alio modo.

Bordeaux, Bordeaux, In the Devils Name, I will be gone too morrow, and if I
get Bordeaux once upon my back, if ever I return again to Bordeaux, I will give
them leave to geld me. I will now go to the knave Torcol, and unless he gives
me my crowns and good satisfaction I shall take him in hand another way.


Habes illum super clunem nunc pro falso Imprisonamento.

You have him now upon the buttock for false Imprisonment.


Come, come, let us go all three of us; now sommes trois, we three are three.


Fear not Master; we will advance with one spirit of Revenge. But first Hist --
steal softly off? I see one of them already.


JUst now almost, I encountered with my Master Anthonio who gave me such soft
and fair language that I could not choose but forgive him. But what rare sight
is this? my Master Theodore embracing of a woman, Ha, ha, he, an old man in
love, upon my faith I am glad on it.


I can hardly at the last give any intermission to my kisses, and embraces, I
am transported with so great a joy.


The joy is no less mine, then it is yours my Theodore.


My Theodore, my deer sweet-love -- Ha, ha, he.


At your coming my Dorothy, I do revive, and grow young again.


And at your coming Mistress Dorothy I do perish.


To make your joy yet greater, and more absolute, send your Coach I pray you to
the Havens side, to bring hither your Daughter in law Katharine, and your son
Anthonine.


Anthonine is just now gone into the City, but Katharine is within.


I left them both now at an Inn by the Havens side, and came first of all my
self unto you.


Now Trico go and hang thy self?


I will call her forth that you shall see her.


It cannot be.


I would she had broke her Neck in her journey or drowned her self with
mischief to her.


Let me not live if she be not so sea-sick that she can hardly put one foot
before another.


Ho la -- within there? bid Katharine come hither?


These be your Intrigues Trico? Are you that cunning, that subtle, crafty
Trico? what will you do now? What if you go this way? it will not do. What, if
that way? it will be to no purpose neither. There is not the least hope left.


Ho la! Bid Katharine come hither quickly.


Wo is me, What is to come? is to come, and it cannot be avoided.


Bid Trico come hither also, if he be within.


What? Trico too? Trico is not within to my knowledge, I will here hide my
self, and be as near them, as I can.


WHat's your pleasure Sir?


Look you, Dorothy, this is Katharine.


Where's Katharine?


Do you ask, and see her stand before you?


You are deceived this is not Katharine.


Wo is me, wretch as I am, what shall become of me? whither shall I turn my
self?


What do you say? whither shall you turn your self, Are not you my Daughter in
law.


Good Lord! who are you trow?


Look well upon her I pray you.


Why would you have me look upon her; I know her not, neither did I ever see
her.


Oh that I were dead now! happy is she that dies before she desires and
invoketh death.


Believe me it is not Katharine.


Who are you? why do you not speak?


If she will not be my Mother in law, alas, Sir, can I help it.


Thou art a good one I'll warrant thee.


Who are you? it is impossible for you now to part undiscovered; why do you not
answer me?


Good Sir, I know not what to answer.


Do you still hold your peace? do you think me good for nothing else but to be
abused and affronted by you? impudent prostitute!


Whatsoever I am Sir, I am not dishonest, the respect I bear unto you makes me
forbear to answer these false and foul Terms.


I pray do not dissemble, and I will speak for you.


Shall my house be polluted with your filthiness; shall I be made the subject
of infamy and disgrace for your incontinence; you shall not go unpunished.


O me, I was born in an unfortunate hour.


Confess then I pray you, do?


When no excuse can be found any longer, you presently have recourse unto
Tears, but those counterfeit Tears shall do you no good. Why draw I not my
sword, and expiate this Villainy? will you not confess? will you not tell me
who you are, you strumpet you.


Pardon me Sir, I pray you, and I will confess every thing; I am the unhappy,
but not the unchaste Rosabella.


O! now you are my own Country woman. Now you appear in your own colours.


Who brought you hither? speak the truth?


Antonio.


I am sorry he is such a One.


'Tis so, is it not? he returned from Sea, and counterfeited himself to be
Anthonine, and painted a mole on his cheek, the better to carry on the deceit.


He did so.


O Times, and manners, when Sons thus boldly dare delude their own Fathers, but
it was you, you enchantress, that did enchant him to it; it was by your
Allurements he did do it; you vile strumpet.


I am no strumpet -- pardon me I pray you Sir, I am the Wife of Antonio.


You his Wife? what, you his Wife? take heed what you say, you enticing
baggage least I cut your tongue out of your Head.


What is already done cannot be undone; I must beseech you therefore for your
goodness, and your gentleness to bear it with wisdom and not with passion
inveigh against that which cannot be changed, or helped.


But I will help it in spite of Destiny; and make at once a divorce both of our
Marriage and your life.


Happy is the death which extinguishes the miseries of life.


O my Dorothy, we had almost lost our son Antonio.


I see there is no perfect joy in this life.


Do you believe this bag^age is not to be made exemplary.


She is so, but for my sake, I pray use Clemency.


What Clemency can be showed unto her who hath corrupted our son, for whom I
had prepared a rich wife and of Noble Parentage.


Patience is a remedy for every grief.


Pardon me my Dorothy, if at this present I entertain you not with that
respect, and tenderness of love which is due unto you; my mind is very much
troubled. I know you are weary with your long journey, I pray go in, and
refresh your self, and command Bannacar the Moor to come unto me.


I will do as as you desire me, but I pray be not too passionate, nor leap into
a sanguine rage.


Woe is me, I have lived one day longer then I should but I will remove far
from me the Cause of Grief; she shall not live a day longer.


I perceive what he intends to do with me, but I willingly prepare my self.


COme forth Trico from thy place of subterfuge, like a shade from the gates of
darkness, and obscrue what thy master Theodorus doth above ground.


Would you speak with me master?


With no man sooner my Bannacar, for I have always known thee a faithful
servant to me.


And I have always found you a bountiful Master.


You have been sensible of my bounty heretofore, and now you shall every day
observe it to be more, and more enlarged, if you perform that which I shall
command you to do for me.


Master command me to be killed, I will neither startle at it, nor fly from it.


Command you ( Bannacar) to be killed God forbid; but I would have you to kill
another.


would you have me master to kill any one --


Yes, to kill her who hath defiled my house, and committed a wickedness which
cannot be taken away, unless she be taken away with it; do you therefore with
your hand coloured with the blackness of Night, remove this disgrace from us,
and put her to deserved death.


I will fly to Antonio, and relate this unto him, to preserve, if possible,
both her and my self from this great danger.


Why do you draw back Bannacar? why do you not answer me?


Shall I being made a Christian by your goodness, so transgress against it,
as put any one to death. Master, I have learned better things, of you therefore
I must beseech you to desist from so evil an Act, you will overcome better by
Council then by Passion.


What are you afraid of, I will secure you from all dangers. Do it therefore
my Bannacar; inflict upon her what death you please, you may throw her headlong
into the Sea, or you may immu^e her between two Walls, where she may perish
with Hunger.


Sir, if I needs must dye, I pray let me dye but once, for they who dye of a
lingering death dye often.


I care not what death you dye of, but dye you shall.


Lo here I stand an innocent sacrifice, and I dye willingly, for without
Antonio I can find nothing in this world that may induce me to live. And indeed
so great a grief already doth invade me, I know I shall not live long.


If you hope to live, you do but delude your self. Bannacar why fulfil you not
my Command?


Bannacar, I knew you at Fesse; you were heretofore a servant of my Fathers who
dying made you a Free man; therefore Bannacar be not too barbarous in the
murder of me.


Wo is me, this is Rosabella.


I am as you see, the miserable Rosabella.


This is the Daughter of my excellent master Alp^onsus whose Bond-slave I was
at Fesse; I pray master desist from this so cruel an enterprise.


What, you knave, are you grown so refractory? Either do you kill her, or I
will kill you?


Kill me if you please; for I will not kill her: shall I kill her who was
heretofore my Mistress, and so kind and loving to me: shall I kill her whose
Noble Father, of a bondsman, made me free?


Tell not me these Fables; I will drag her unto death my self, -- never stare
upon me, I will do it.


You shall not need, feel my heart already to cleave a sunder with the excess
of Grief. Farewell Antonio? -- Farewell for ever my dear Antonio.


This your Counterfeiting shall do you no good.


Wo is me she is dead.


She counterfeits, you knave, she counterfeits; and you counterfeit as well as
she, but I shall make her --


I Am undone, I have come to late, she is dead already; see where she lies; Oh
that I could breath my soul into thee; O thee and me unhappy for whose sake
thou innocently hast endured this. Why was not I demanded unto death; she,
alas, deserved nothing, what fault had she done.


What doth he mean to do with himself?


Art thou gone from me my dearest love, my life? Thou art gone but I will
follow thee.


Will he act some cruelty on himself; Beshrew me I suspect him; why Son? Son
Antonio what are you about to do?


Am I a Son, or you a Father that have committed so foul an Act? no matter! you
shall not hinder him from dying, whom you would not suffer to live.


Are you in your right wits?


I am not in my wits, nor can I be; I desire it not, how can I be otherwise
then mad whom you have made so by your own madness.


Certainly you are mad.


I am so; and I should be mad, if I were not mad: Would you not have me to be
mad? would you have me now to be mad? Rosabella the delight of my Eyes, my Joy
and my Safety is killed. Rosabella who while she lived excelled all women;
Certainly, you turned away your Eyes from her when you did it; for had you
beheld her beauty and sweet innocence, I know you had never done it. This only
favour I desire of you that since you would not give us leave being alive to
enjoy one another, you would now suffer us being dead to sleep together, and to
be buried in one grave.


Son; Before you dye, learn what it is to live.


How can I do that, when you have taken away my life.


I pray come hither:


Approach not too near, least my youthful sury act that over again which you in
your old age already have committed.


What do you attempt? are you resolved to dye?


As sure as she is dead.


But live? and I will grant you any thing.


You will give your grant now, when there is nothing to be granted.


^f you will believe me, we have not so much as touched her, let us see if we
can call her back again to life.


Recall her? are you mad. She cannot return, therefore to you I come -- I come
my Rosabella.


O my Son, Forbear I pray you; Look on my gray hairs, and rather kill me; I am
old, and going down the hill, you are in the flower of your Age.


Where am I?


Do you hear her? she is come again to her self, I am heartily glad of it.


Where are you Antonio, Antonio?


O my dear Life; Do you breath again; you have preserved my life.


Do you think Antonio I would have killed her?


I dreamed a very melancholy dream; I thought I was dead, And that there was
one would have killed me.


Fear not?


Do not Fear? you are now safe from danger.


How happy now am I, because I see you alive, I begin again my self to live.


Let me not live, I am glad to see her restored to life.


I am alive now, but by your benefit.


Sir, I beseech you; you see the Destinies are willing to it, let me have but
your good will to make her my wife.


Be quiet a little! peradventure I will.


Peradventure Sir! -- This gives no satisfaction.


The fury of the Son hath overcome the fury of the Father: we are both
violently passionate: my own Son all over -- But tell me what ^owry are you to
have with her?


A great Dowry Father! Birth, and Beauty.


But Son, nothing is bought in the Market with Birth or Beauty; I see she is
beautiful enough; but how shall we know she is of Noble Birth? she seems to be
a stranger, and is utterly unknown to me.


Her manners speak it in my silence; but she can best her self relate it, if
you will give her leave to speak.


I will neither interrupt nor contradict her; speak therefore but speak truly?


If I speak not the Truth, let Bannacar disprove me who was my Fathers servant.


Were you her Fathers servant Bannacar? I think already you have said it.


I have so. I was a servant to her Father at Fesse, before I came unto you: for
her Father being dead I travelled into Portugall to procure some way of
livelihood; but finding none, I wandered up and down in France, and came hither
at last to Bordeaux where you made me at once both your Servant and a
Christian.


'Tis well; If she speaks any thing that is untrue, Do you reprove her?


My Father was a great Soldier, and a gallant Commander in War; his Name
Alphonso, a Noble Man of Portugall.


Bannacar? --


It is so.


From Portugall he travelled to exercise his Arms at Fesse, and dying there, he
committed me to the Care and Trust of his brother Rodrigo Torcol; for so it
fell out that he was then at Fesse in the Condition of a Merchant, and
returning with me from thence into Portugall, he was driven hither by violent
winds, and his ship being made unserviceable, he ever after dwelt in this City.


Is all this true Bannacar?


True, as far as she knows.


Do you know any thing more then she?


I do believe I do, and if you will give me leave I can thoroughly inf^rm you
with it.


You have your own Liberty.


She was not the true Daughter of Alphonsus.


Just now, you said I was. I must now reprove you, Bannacar.


What do you lye, you slave you?


Pray Son, Hold your peace but a little while.


I speak the Truth, and will speak more if you will hear me out.


Proceed!


Before I was Alphonsus servant, I served a Portugall Merchant, who lived in
Mauritania; his Name was Vrtado; he oftentimes sailed with his merchandise to
London, but finding there but bad Markets, he privately would steal all the
English Children he could handsomely meet with, and sell them in Mauritania on
his return. As our ship therefore did ride on the River of Thames not far
from Detford, the Nurse of Rosabella (carrying her in her Arms) walked along
the banks side, Vrtado by chance was there in a boat, and expressing himself in
English to the Nurse in as fair and as flattering words as possibly he could,
he so far prevailed that he enticed the Nurse, with her pretty burden in her
Arms, to come into his ship, which the easy and foolish Woman did accordingly;
she was no sooner in the ship but immediately he Hoised sails, and brought her
into Mauritania with other English Children, where for a round sum of Money he
sold this young Lady, and me with her, at Fesse to Alphonsus, who having no
Children of his own did adopt her being about Four Years of Age for his own
daughter, and laid a great charge on me, being then his servant, not to reveal
it unto any, I therefore did conceal it, and this is the first time I have
seen her since the death of my master Alphonsus.


But what is become of her who you said was her Nurse?


She dyed in the way, and was thrown over board.


Do you know what was her name?


Vrsula.


Vrsula, and Detford? how great is my Hope? but did the Nurse never declare
unto you whose her little nurs^ing was, or to whom she did belong?


Yes, and with much compunction of spirit, she said oftentimes she was the
daughter of an Alderman of London one Mr. Mainly; or Mr. Manly, such a name it
was.


Mr. Manly I believe.


Yes it was so, and that the Name of this young Lady was Isabella.


Good God! what Isabella too?


For it was Alphonsus her supposed Father that did afterwards give her the name
of Rosabella.


Detford -- Vrsula -- Manly and -- Isabella how admirably do these tokens
agree? I can hardly contain my self from embracing of her. But tell me
Bannacar what do you remember more?


Nothing but that the Nurse being dead I took from her a little medail, which I
have still in my purse, I keep it for the rare artifice of it.


Show it me Bannacar?


Sir, here it is.


Come hither my Antonio; you know that Alderman the first wife of my Dorothea
had two Daughters by her, Katharine who is now the wife of Anthonine and
Isabella, whom many years ago we betrothed unto you when you were little ones.
For even then when you could hardly speak plain she would call you Hus-and
band, you called her Wife. When I was married to Dorothea we gave to both of
you Medails in which your pictures were engraven; And this is that which I then
gave to Isabella. See -- here is the Effigies of a Boy and a Girl, this
represents you, and that Isabella. Behold your hands joined as in wedlock,
and your two faces touching one another. See the two birds, that are the
symbols of marriage, and the Inscription of these two Letters, A, and I, that
is Antonio, and Isabella.


I have at home another most like it, with these two letters, I and A.


That is Isabella the wife of Antony. It is the very same which was then given
to you. I am now fully satisfied within my self that this is the same Isabella
that heretofore was betrothed to you.


O wonderful! I am surprised with as much amazement as joy.


O my dear daughter in-law Isabella, give me leave, most unworthy of you, to
embrace you.


Now fortune flatters, and smiles upon me; and by and by it may be froward and
frown again.


Think not so; you have fortune now at your own command.


You who were before my Rosabella, shall be now my deer Isabella. Twice I have
found you, and twice I live anew, and another life.


Embrace you one another, and i'll embrace you both -- my dear son and daughter.
Pardon I pray you, my daughter, what but now I so rashly attempted.


Father, if you have done any thing amiss, I have forgot it; but the good which
you now do I shall always be careful to remember.


Excellently spoken! my Antonio, How happy a man are you?


I do confess it, and Father I must beseech you to forgive those many Untruths
which this day I have spoken before you. For to be wise, and be in love, is
granted scarce to God above.


You are wise, and she is wise, I do pardon you, and do desire you both pardon
me. Tis I only am the fool. O my servant Bannacar, how much are you more wise
then I am: but if I do you not much Good for it, rank me not amongst the number
of men.


And I Bannacar will endeavour to do thee Good also.


But I most of all.


I am glad I have been the Instrument of so much Joy unto you.


Father, I must beseech you that you will be pleased to pardon Trico also.


I pray Sir do! for if he had not bin, I had bin made this day Ignoramus
Concubine^


Both you and he hath deserved, that I should do both this and that, and all
things else which you do desire of me.


HEre from my lurking-h^le, I have und^rstood all, I will now s^ow my face with
confidence; Master, I find that all things fall out happily unto you. Do you
not praise me now? am I not now a good Trico?


A good Trico thou art -- And happy man be thy dole.


Lord, how I hate a liar with my heart; your Trico told neither unto you, nor
unto Torcol any thing but what was the truth this day.


That was true too; what pains you took at my Country House.


So it was Master, with a mental Reservation; my Body was here indeed, but my
mind was at your Country-house.


Ha, ha, he; How learned are you grown?


I Sir; I had it out of Cupes Book; when I am married, there shall be a Comedy
acted: The Name of it shall be Aequivocus.


But Loiola only must Scene a Tragedy. Away with him:


Father, That no discontent may cloud our Marriage; confer I pray six hundred
Crowns on Torcol the supposed Uncle of Isabella for the charges of her
maintenance, he may pay them back again to Ignoramus who bought her this day of
him for so much money.


Willingly, my Son, and much more too. Here Trico take this gold Chain, and
give it to Torcol, and bring Ignoramus hither to me with him. Let that be an
Earnest, that I will give them full Content to their own desires; and do ye hear
-- invite all the Jovial blades and the most apparent of our Neighbours to
supper too morrow night; we will there repeat, and laugh at thy Conceits. No
man shall depart with a sad heart.


Now you are my brave Master in earnest, Now I perceive you will get you a
Name.


Trico, give me thy hand; In good troth I love thee.


Master; and if I love you not twice as much -- well -- you know not what I
think on now; you may go where you will, but if I love you not -- in my hearts
heart Master.


My Trico, and my Bannacar, I will be good unto you.


Master; Bannacar the Moor, and Trico, are your two servants that are worth
their weight in Gold.


You have spoke the Truth; but go now where I commanded you.


On the reputation of this Chain I go now to Torcol, and afterwards I will
address my self to Ignoramus. I will bring them both to you with all the speed
I can.


Sir, my Lady would desire you to come in, to Master Anthonine and Mistress
Katharine, they are new come, in the Coach at the other Gate.


My pretty Boy Donze la main.


La main, that's a hand; Nell can tell you Sir what's Le bras too.


Come my Isabella let us go to Dorothea, that she may participate of this great
joy with us.


I See him again; I will speak to him howsoever; although I must confess I
stand in some fear of him: Heus, Heus, you, you Sir.


Is your Name Heus Sir. Here is one calls Heus, or Hugh.


Who is it?


I pray Sir, restore my Garments to me.


O Pyropus! -- Come in, you shall have them presently.


What Sir, now you are our own Countryman again; Now you are Antonio?


I am so, Come in I pray.


He is more tame, and gentle then he was; I do suspect him so much the more, he
before did beat me in English, peradventure he desires to take me into his
hands again and to beat me now in French.


Nay Friend come along with me! why draw you back so?


He looks very fearfully, and speaks just like one that is going to steal Deer.


Tell me what are you afraid of.


Of some hard dealing from you; upon my troth Sir, I had rather part with half
the Goods you have of mine, then endure to be beaten again by you.


Upon my Reputation I will deal fairly with you.


What Sir? not on the Reputation of this Ring.


No on my own Reputation now; necessity doth sometimes put us upon unhandsome
shifts, but do you excuse me I am now become another man.


Shall I believe your Flatteries again.


Be confident in me.


What a sly Buzzard is this? a man can scarce get a shoot at him with a
stalking-Horse, he hath bin scared sure.


I see no Mole now.


There is none. Be not afraid; Here take this Cloak in the first place, see, I
throw it to you.


Shall Heus have your Cloak Sir? I would he would go to Dice with me for it. I
have high and low men here. O for my little French Pages now, I shall sting
them in faith.


Nay go in? you shall ^up with me; The rest of your Clothes and Monies to boo^
shall honestly be given to you.


I do believe you Sir, I will a^nd upon you.


What sport shall I have now; If it were not too late I would go to Loggets
with the Mariners; well -- I'll go watch the Comers by, and snatch Hats with
the Pages; or else I'll go throw Stones at some or other; O I love that sport
alife: but first I'll go pin this Foxes tail at some bodies back: Oh Fine, and
pat. Here comes Company.


IT is as I say, in faith.


Well, well; Then much good d'it them.


Because we shall have our Monies again I am glad that Rosabella Anotonio's
Love is found to be Isabella; I knew before that she was born in England and
stolen away by Vrtade; and that my Brother Alphonsus did adopt her for his
Daughter, but I carefully did conceal it both from her and others in the hope
of Gain.


If Rosabella before were the Spouse of Antonio and by consequence in Covert
Barn, I am glad I did not marry her, No fuisset maritagium amissum per
defaltam, lest the marriage should be null by default.


Per defaltam -- you say right Patron.


I am contented therefore, my Client, If your Master en ce cas de dissesein
will pay back unto me my six hundred Crowns.


On the reputation of this Chain, he will Content you.


A pox on it, 'Twill not stick; Lend me a great Pin some body; O here's one.


In the mean time, whiles Ignoramus is telling forth the Money, Trico give me
the Chain.


Give it you, nay give it me I say: Give it me, or else I will make Distress.


Here take it Seignior, take it.


But first let us be friends and shake hands; Give me your hand, Seignior
Torcol.


Because thou hast carried thy self so handsomely all along in this business,
Trico here it is.


Patron Ignoramus now give me your hand, and here take this Chain in earnest.


Oh -- well said Client, I'll put it about my neck; now Trico I give you my
hand; and I give it to you Torcol.


O Seignior baso las manas.


I will touch this chain, to see if it be good Gold or not; Oh tis good good; I
will now show my self full of Courtesy till my Crowns be paid back unto me,
afterwards I will do, as I think good my self. Oh my good Client take both my
hands, imbraso te.


Oh my Patron how much am I enamoured on you?


I am full of Courtesy now, and as full of Craft; For all this if I catch them
at Westminster, I will tickle them. Who is there behind them now? Hah!


Oh Sir, I perceive you are my own Countryman; I have a Latin to make, For
Gods sake help me. What's Latin for an Alehouse-keeper?


Tiplator cervisiae Boy.


I thank you Sir; and what's Latin for a Tester?


Sixpence, Anglice a Tester.


Why this is sixpence for a Tester, what have I got got by it? and what's for a
Shoemaker Sir?


In dicto Comitatu Shoemaker.


And what Sir, is a black Velvet Cap upon the hinder part of a red speckled
Hogs-head?


Byr Lady that's hard; It is pileus de nigro velvet super occiput capitis
porci, coloris red speckle.


I can make as good Latin as this in bas and in bus in orum and arum: As thus;
your worshipporum is a noddicockorum in a velvet Capparum.


I'll tell your Master sirrah, of you in faith. I'll bring you to a Noun, your
Hose shall go down.


Nay good Sir, make me one Latin more; what's a Fox-tail pinned at a Fools
back: a fool is hic stultus I know.


Is it even so indeed? a rod, a rod, what's your Masters Name sirrah?


As in praesenti; Sir, you know him well enough.


What? Qui, quae, quod, here in faith? I'll tell your Master. What's that they
look, and laugh at, Dullman? what's behind me there?


It is a Fox-tail indeed Master; Tenes in Foxtayl jam; vis me virgare hunc
puerum, will you have me jerk this boy.


Do, if you can?


Come, come, and if you dare, I have stones here in faith.


Will you, what! will you throw stones?


I that I will.


O my shins!


It was well hit; now I'll away.


Let us go, and receive the Crowns.


I can hardly go, he hath so lamed me.


My Master desires your company to sup with him.


Say you so? Alloons.


Dullman; To make the period more grateful give me your hand also.


Pox on you, you were Mendoza*


Wine, and Sack, Dullman.


Well I forgive you for the Sack.


What? Do you come but now Musaeus, you are your own Man, you have no Master to
serve, Have you! Well; alloons, alloons.


I Have procured you Wenches, but at no easy rate I dare assure you.


Well -- there's the Money I promi^ed you, Let Supper be served in suddenly and
handsomely; In the mean time let these Beauties delight us with some merry and
stirring Song.


What you command shall be suddenly sent in.


Now my sweet Friends, what fine new Songs have you?


Let us hear (...), Dea^ Loves, Be not too modest; I will absolve you every one
of you.


It was told me just now that my husband was here with a Company of Whores. If
I can find him, I'll make him the most miserable Creature living.


I am utterly undone if she discovers me. Confessor, I pray give me leave to
hid^ my self a little while under your Gown till she be gone.


Do, and if she asks me for you, I will say I saw you not.


Oh, Have I found you! you are those bold delicate whores that do so corrupt my
husband. Be gone, you filthy stinking Ware; Be gone.


I will take this Book into my hand, as if I were full of Contemplation.


I see his Companion, he is not far off himself I am confident; Cola! why
Brother Cola, why Cola I say, What are you grown deaf with a pox to you? Lay by
your book, and look on me, and answer me.


Be gone I pray, and interrupt me not, I am now in a deep meditation upon my
Lent-Sermons.


Come hither I pray; I must needs speak with you.


In troth I am not at leisure, I pray excuse me; One of my best Meditations had
almost quite slipped out of my memory.


You shall not stay a jot.


Disturb me not now, I beseech you.


But tell me then, where is my good husband?


He is not here you see, but wheresoever he is, he is religiously covered with
a Friars Hood.


What is he still in a Friars habit exorcising the wives of other men? -- could
I but catch him at it -- but 'tis no matter, I will even let him alone, and pay
him home with the same coin. Brother, if you love me, let us go in together.


I am now extremely busy; but what should I do within?


Why you shall exorcise me in the same manner as he doth exorcise other women;
I desire to be even with him; It will be a sweet Revenge.


O harbour not so evil a thought?


An evil thought! you told me heretofore* It was a Case of Conscience.


Fie! what Case of Conscience? Hold your tongue.


Have you not often told me, that if the Husband lay with another Woman, it was
lawful for his wife to lie with another Man; you give the very same law to
Titius as you did unto Sempronius.


Did I? when?


Why do you dissemble so? the last time you lay with me; you know I speak the
Truth.


Hold your peace for shame, I never lay with you; Oh, oh, oh.


What's the matter?


I know not what a Divel it is. A Flea I think stings me under my Gown.


There is another Flea that stings me under my Coats; prithee let's go in.


Let us go in; Nay stay you impudence; Trojan Horse, Jam capta es Troja Trojae
vastator Achilles, Now thou art taken and fair Troy brought under; and thou
Achilles that brave Troy did plunder.


O strange! How came you hither?


O Polla, O Cola, What do the Fleas sting you? O two most shameless Creatures!


Believe me Husband, All that I said was in Jest.


Yes on my credit, 'twas all in Jest.


Do you so jest with a pox to you? Ah Polla, I did here conceal my self on
purpose to take you.


Nay* being conscious of your own guilt, you here did hide your self; Cupes I
know it very well*


Be it so! let us shake hands then Polla? we are quit.


Cum sitis similes, pares{que} vita,
Vxor pessima, pessimus maritus,
Miror tam male convenire vobis
Since both resemble, and are like in life,
A quicked Husband, and as bad a wife,
'Tis strange, betwixt you should be so much strife.
Or Since like in face, as in your lives you be,
A wicked wife, a husband bad as she,
I wonder much you do no more agree.



But now my Cupes, for the time to come we shfll agree better.


Sai'st thou so? let us seal it with a Kiss.


For the time to come, Live together in Love and Union.


Yes, brother Cola, and without your Benedictions, and Cases of Conscience; In
all other considerations I shall deport my self unto you as a Friend.


My dear Polla go before, I will follow you immediately.


Come! Let us now go to our Wenches.


Husband, I'll go home, unless you have any business for me.


Come Cola, Let us go; Although you are a very Knave, yet I know you love me.


At the very heart of me.


DO you hear Cupes, Cupes?


My dear Companion Trico.


Cupes I have conveyed this away to drink with thee, we do deserve it, and have
carried all things on with delight and mirth. Theodorus hath returned to
Ignoramus his six hundred Crowns, and hath nobly satisfied Torcol. Within there
is nothing but Feasting, Singing, Laughing, Dancing, Sporting, Imbraceing, and
Kisses upon Kisses.


But in earnest Trico I have cause to triumph; for it was brought all about by
my Art and Industry.


By yours, nay by mine Cupes, It was I that brought Antonio from Shipboard.


But it was I who frighted Ignoramus away with the Sowgelders horn.


But Cupes, it was I that propounded the case in law unto him, and did delay
him with it, and after that I brought Dullman unto you.


But Trico* who was it that counterfeited himself to be Torcol, and suborned
Polla for Rosabella? who feigned himself to be Dullman? And who was it that
afterwards conveyed away Rosabella? Was it not Trico?


But Trico* who was the Friar that was the Exorcist, and confirmed Theodorus in
his Error?


But Cupes --


But Trico -- Hold thy peace, Thou shalt never this day overcome me in wit or
waggery.


I must confess indeed we have both of us acted our parts sufficiently, but,
but, who invented --


Invenit Trico, Sculpsit Cupes, Trico invented it, but it was Cupes that did
engrave it.


Well -- let it go so then, but it is the Event, Cupes, that stamps all
things.


Do you misdoubt the Event? There is no cause why you should despair of it, for
the Clemency and the Candour of my Lord the King here present (in whose power
alone the Event consists) doth promise a happy and a successful Issue, and
let us drink a health to the confirmation of it.


Nay, rather let us begin a health and make it sacred to the great Master, and
the Lord of the Event it self; for in his health alone, are all our healths
comprehended --


I take the Omen, Spectators I oblige you that this night, and to morrow, at
the least, you will both consent unto, and be supernaculously punctual on the
solemn observation of it.


And as for those who wilfully will not take it, let them have Wives more
raanting, and clamorous then Polla.


Let them be more stupid then the stupid Dullman, and verier Coxcombs then the
Coxcomb Ignoramus.


And by the help of the Hangman, let them hold their heads more awry, then
Torcol himself.


Let their prayers be like Surdaes, and may they be no more apt to hear them.


May that which they drink never go through them, you therefore who would avoid
so great misfortunes, and do desire that all things may fall out successfully
unto you; pray for the health of our most happy, pious, and most Illustrious
Lord the King, with the same cheerful affection and devotion as our selves, and
celebrate it (as it becomes you all) with your loudest plaudits.


HIst, hist, Servate pacem cum manibus, Vos ridetis, plauditis, sed quid jam
postea fiet de vestro povero Ignoramo? nam nisi habemus Supersedes de non
molestando, fratres mei Ignorami me molestabunt sine moderata misericordia,
vester pouerus Ignoramus est bootatus, spurratus (ut videtis) ire ad Londinum,
sed sine protectione Regali non audet ire ultra Barkeway aut Ware ad plus.
Quare, serenissime Domine, supplico ut concedas per literas tuas patentes
salvum conductum mihi, consortibus meis. Vos Monseiurs huic supplicationi, si
placet, vestras manus apponite.


Hist, Hist, Keep the Kings peace with your hands; You laugh and applaud, but
what shall now become of your poor Ignoramus? for if we procure not a
supersedes de non molestando, the Ignoramuses my brethren, will molest us
without mercy or moderation; and your poor Ignoramus is now booted, and spurred
(as you see) to ride to London, but without the Kings protection he dares go no
further then Barkeway, or Ware at the furthest. Wherefore (most illustrious
Sir) I Petition that by your Letters Patents, you would grant a safe conduct to
me, and my Associates; And do you, Gentlemen, if you please, put your hands to
this Petition.



