SO, I am first at the place appointed. I had lost my honour, if the fair
Inviter, that sent me the challenge, had got into the field before me.


Sir --


Sir -- with your mouth wide open as if you were coming to eat me.


I have more stomach to sleep than to eat.


Sluggish Brute cannot you watch one night without all this yawning and rubbing
your eyes.


These signs are the Language of Nature, by which she declares her wants. Draw
but the Teat from the mouth of a Babe, and still the lips retain a pretty
sucking motion, which tells us with a silent sort of Oratory, that it is still a
hungry. Nature even in the most vile sort of Animals will not without
complaints be denied her due refections. I think Sir, it is as natural to sleep
as to eat.


Yes to such Sots as you it is natural to do nothing else but sleep and eat.
You slept enough, if snoring be a sign of sleeping.


A little towards morning, when I had no more paper left to burn under my Nose.


If your loud snoring had not wakened me your sitting up all night, had been to
much purpose, instead of your calling me, I was fain to call you, half a dozen
kicks could scarcely rouse you.


I think you did ill to treat a servant so, that does your business as well
sleeping as waking. I knew my faculty, and therefore had no scruple of
Conscience to take a nap contrary to your commands.


I have helped you to an excuse for your negligence, but you had best not let me
catch you napping so any more.


The next time you have an occasion to rise early, let me but lie in your
Antechamber upon a pallad Bed, and you will find you have a Servant more
advantageous for the design of waking you, than a Cock, or an Alarum-Clock.


And keep me awake all night with a noise more ungrateful than a Catterwailing:


There's not a man in all Toledo sleeps with the like decorum. I have a clear
Conscience, and my sleeps are harmonious.


Go, leave rubbing your eyes and look about, if you see ever a Lady entering the
Church give me notice.


Of all my Senses that of Seeing at present is most imperfect, I can scarcely
hold my eyes open, they twinkle like a couple of rush lights.


You Snail Beetle mend your pace, How like a Carriers horse you go Nod, Nod
along.


Well if he takes up the trade of being a Lover, I'll lay down that of Valet;
for Lovers are always thus choleric, and I shall have but a Spaniels life
on it, lie down at his Chamber door a nights, and in the morning rise and shake
my ears, and all the day after be set a rangeing, or be bid to fetch and carry;
O the wicked cause of all these evils is at hand. -- Sir, Sir, look to your
self, here comes a couple of dark Lanterns towards us.


Begone, keep your distance.


Iacinta, go and stand Sentry at the Church door, and if you see my Brother
coming give me notice.


The hour of his devotions is not yet come.


I listened at his Chamber, as I came down stairs, and I heard him stirring.


My diligence shall secure you from a surprise.


How excellent is her shape, and her meine how graceful.


Don Gusman, for so I know you are called, tho you are ignorant both of my name
and Quality, tell me with what sentiments do you receive a visit from a Lady,
that thus exposes her honour to your censure.


With all the faith, sense, and honour, that a true Cavileer ought, who is
thought worthy to be trusted, and so highly honoured by a Lady.


Did not the Letter I sent you yesterday with a summons to meet an unknown
person much surprise you?


I was surprised to think, that you would trust your person with me here, that
in your Letter durst not trust me with your name.


Do you think you know me, Sir?


I am sure I do not, for if I did, you would then know me, of which I find the
contrary.


I am sure I do not, for if I did, you would then know me, of which I find the
contrary.


I called you by your name.


But, Madam, did you know me, you would in your Letter have entrusted me with
your name, and here with a sight of your person. Whilst you keep your Vail on,
I am sure you don't know me as you ought.


I confess Sir, what I have done proceeds not from my knowledge, but from my
belief of your gallantry, and you may hope much when my faith is confirmed by
experience.


I hope Love will inspire you with a quick faith, to believe that if you should
discover to me all those glorious charms you are enriched with, that I should
be capable of conserving a sufficient Empire over my self, and to remember what
I am obliged to render to so great a merit as yours.


If I find you as discreet, as I think you gallant, I shall have a very great
inclination to acknowledge the trouble I have given you.


I am resolved, how great so e're my passion is, my respect shall be
inseparable.


Though you wonder, yet blame not my denial. A proceedure so new as this, seems
to have something in it inexcusable, but when you shall learn, what at present
I must not acquaint you with, you will then at least not condemn it: all that I
can now say to you is, That the liberty I take ought not to make you think any
thing to my disadvantage.


I would not press you to enlarge your favours; but that I know the discovery
of your person will give me yet more advantageous thoughts of you.


I am of some Quality, and without vanity I will say, I have attractions enough
to engage you to more than you think, if it were permitted me to show you them.
But I have reasons not to be subverted, that now make me conceal my self from
your sight. Desist from further expectations till time has convinced me, that I
may with assurance trust you with the sight and knowledge of my person.


Will you have the cruelty to raise me to this high expectation, and leave me
here to be tortured by imagination?


I will unvail my self if you have the injustice to demand it, but then I will
for ever withdraw from your sight; this day past you shall never see me more.


Hold, yet now I see your hand uncovered, it appears so fine, I am more
desirous and impatient to behold the rest. By that little pattern I perceive the
whole piece is excellent, Madam I must acknowledge I should be transported to
see you, if you had that indulgent goodness to suffer it. But since you have
reasons to the contrary, I ought to have some too not to desire it, but rather
accommode my self to what is your pleasure to prescribe, than let you grant,
what I had the insolence to press you to.


Madam, Don Ruis is at the further end of the Street, and comes towards the
Church.


Sir, I must leave you at present, but by your respect to me, and the honour of
a Cavileer, I charge you not to follow me one step, nor cause me to be followed
by any, for besides that your curiosity would be vain, I would never more
converse with you.


What assurance do you give me that you ever will again, or how distant is that
happy minute from this hour?


I will half an hour hence meet you in this very place, and tell you when and
where you shall see me next.


In this half hour consider you have drawn me to the rack, and leave me there
upon the full streach, and resolve to have the charity to ease my pain, by the
shortness of your delay, Think, one that has had a glimpse of Heaven how wrapped
he is with desires to have a full view of its glories.


So much as you abound in virtuous sentiments, and so punctual as I find you to
my commands I will endeavour to have thoughts of you, that shall not displease
you, Adieu.


So 'tis even as I thought, one assignation begets another, this night will be
a Vigil too: and so it will go on night after night, till at last I run mad for
want of sleep.


I was thinking, that Lovers are very virtuous people, for they in one months
intrigue keep more Vigils, than are found in the Churches Calendar for a whole
year.


Leave your Meditations, Rascal.


Here comes your Friend and Host Don Ruis.


If she should return sooner than I expect, and find company here, I might lose
the happiness of conversing a second time with a person, whose short absence I
already think too long, and with impatience wish the sight of.


Don Gusman good morrow to you, you are got early to your Devotions -- I was no
sooner up, but I came into your apartment, and knocked at your chamber door,
and my Servants told me you went out at break of day.


I had some thoughts in my mind that broke my repose, and therefore got up
early, that I might be so sleepy at night, that no disquiet of mind, may then
hinder me from taking my rest.


Don Gusman put not on these disguises before your Friend, if it be
inconvenient for me to know your secrets, I will not press you to a discovery,
but your early rising this morning I know was design; for hearing a noise last
night, I rose, and looking into your Anti-chamber, I saw Sanco sit nodding with
his head in the Chimney, and hold smoking paper under his nose to keep him
awake: I doubt not but in order to obey your commands of calling you early this
morning. I then ghess'd at the design, and retired to my bed without taking
further notice, and your early going abroad this morning, has confirmed the
truth of my suspicions.


I must own you were not mistaken, yet in justification of what I told you, I
will acquaint you with the cause whence those thoughts did proceed, which broke
the soundness of my sleep.


If you doubt my friendship, or think I want the faculty to conceal, what you
are about to entrust to my knowledge, yet forbear the discovery: I assure you I
am not at all curious.


Nor do I wrong your friendship with such suspicions. I must draw him from this
ground, and the relati.


I am glad you do not repent your early rising.


As yet I have no cause. -- Sanco be vigilant, and if you discover the veiled
Lady or her attendant coming, step to the Cloister door and beckon me, I'll
have my eye still this way. -- Be sure you let 'em not depart till I have first
spoken with 'em.


If once they come within my Gripe I'll be sure of them.


Except to call me, stir not a foot from this place.


No Sir, I will set my self down at the foot of this Pillar, and be as
immovable till you return. Don Ruis I hold to be a man of much greater
discreetion than my Don Gusman. He never gets up by the same light that he goes
to bed, but is so good a Husband as to save candle in the morning, and let the
Sun light him to find his clothes, and who indeed would spend money to see to
dress himself, when he may have day light for nothing. Well, I will fall to my
devotions to pass away the time*


We'll leave the Church with what speed we can.


Madam, let not fear discompose you, tho Don Ruis and he are walked aside,
their discourse may not be about you.


Yes, yes, I know he is acquainting him with what is passed.


I look on Don Gusman to be more discreet than to trust affairs of this nature
to the knowledge of any.


I believe he would not, if he could reveal to him a Ladies name, but if
relating only the business, my Brothers curiosity should lead him to be an eye
witness of our second interview, and place himself, where, unseen, he may
behold what manner of person I am, he may guess by my motion, or actions, or
stature: I will not expose my self to the danger of being known.


See, yonder sits Sanco devoutly a sleep, wrapped in his Masters cloak, shall I
wake him? you may with him leave directions for an after meeting.


No. I will be gone without saying any thing.


Don Gusman will stay expecting your return.


I will make him wait unprofitably, to punish the indiscreetion, which I know
him guilty of.


It is but your suspicion Madam.


Being my Brothers Guest, I can at any time retrieve this omission, by letting
you in disguise meet him in the Street with directions, as I did yesterday for
this appointment. Come.


Farewell most pious drowsy Sanco.


So, my Friend has left me for his devotions. Where's Sanco. Ha, the Rogue's
fallen fast a sleep with his beads in his hand, and my cloak about his
shoulders, rouse, rouse, Animal.


Au, auh, auh --


Hold your bellowing Beast.


Sir, wont you let a Man alone at his prayers?


At his prayers Rascal, do you say your prayers like English Phanaticks through
the Nose? must the Church be your dormitary, and my cloak your covering? if I
find it any more about your villainous shoulders, I'll pin it to your back with
a Toledo bodkin.


I thought, Sir, a good Christian, tho a poor Devil, was not so despicable, but
that he might serve for a peg to hang your cloak on.


Has the Lady or any from her been here since I went?


No Sir no --


No Sir, I may as well ask the pillars; you was at your devotions in a heavenly
trance.


Ay Sir, but I saw no female visions.


Which way went the Lady? when she parted from us?


Nay Sir, I thought it was forbidden to look after her.


Why did I let her go? why did I not follow her? to be so easily persuaded to
quit her, will make her think I had no value for her, and then she will leave
me to my despair and ignorance.


Did you lend her any money?


Lend her money, Rascal.


Nay if you did not, you'll see her again for certain. I'll pawn my life she
comes again, and lays the foundation of a better acquaintance, by asking to
borrow a purse of gold.


Scoundrel, she is of Quality.


Yes Sir, most women that make assignations, have that good Quality.


Her own tongue declared she was no mean person.


I'll as soon take a Jocky's word of his horse, or a Poet's of his own play, as
a woman's of her self.


Her Garb was rich and Noble.


No question but it was the gift of some such noble person as your self.


Her mean and behaviour showed her of breeding, her shape was Charming, her wit
was great, and no question but what she conceals, is not less beautiful and
surprising; slave, if you had had any wit, or minded your Masters interest, you
might have discoursed the woman whilst I was talking to the Mistress, and have
given her occasion to let fall some word, that might a little have contributed
to the discovery of what I now remain ignorant.


A wise man never makes a puther* when reason tells him tis unnecessary and
surperfluous, no doubt but the Lady you commend, has as many good thoughts of
you; thinks you are as handsome and comely a person as walks the streets of
Toledo, And judges no less by your embroidered suits and change of rich apparel
(which you shift oftener than the Major Domo of his Majesty) that you are too
of Quality, but with more reason; and from thence too imagines, that you treat
nobly all the Amorettos that you keep; and intends, I warrant you, that you
shall be the chief of her Dons.


Hold your poltry tongue, Rogue, if you were worth my trouble of chastiseing I
shoud now give your insolence severe correction, if hereafter you do not speak
with more respect of the most virtuous person in the wor^d, I shall lay a side
all considerations, and put you in a condition of never more sullying a Ladies
reputation with that stinking breath of yours.


I acknowledge I am not worth your trouble of chastiseing, and it is to profane
your noble hand to let it fall on any part of me but you'd let me have the
privilege of speaking two or three words; I would demand, in what particular
you find this person so virtuous; what virtue is there in appointing a Love
embassadress, to stand century, who imagining that she has found her Cully,
gives an assignation by break of day the the next morning; when all the
virtuous people that I know are at that time, as I used to be, fast a sleep.


Yes persons of your sanctity snore out the time that such well disposed
Virgins spend at their devotions, I believe it her practice to be here thus
early, especially on such great holy days as these.


A Very godly practise, to make the Church a place of Rendezvous for Love
affairs.


Did not the place protect thee, these provocations added to thy negligence
would not let my anger be appeased without thy life.


I shall love a Church the better for it as long as I live.


I know by her not coming, that she was here in my absence, when thou wast
sottishly a sleep. I'll search round the Church for her, and then if I find her
not, resolve to leave the place.


You will do more discreetly, Sir, for it is time to go to breakfast.


But I shall do more discreetly, for your sloth and carelessness to turn you
out of my service; give me my cloak: fare you well. unless by some means or
other you can find what is become of the person I have lost the sight of by
your Rascally negligence, never more come near me, unless it be to send your
brutish soul on an Errand to the Devil.


So, this it is to be subservient to a Love Adventurer, if his Mistress
quarrels with him, he quarrels with his man; if she turns off the Master, the
Master turns away his servant. O instability of humane life; well, I'll ferret
every altar in the Church for her, and enquire at every house in Toledo but I'll
find her. And if I meet her, I'll have her to him, tho it be on pick-pack.


Sir, Don Ruis.


Beatrice! is the Adorable Octavia here Beatrice!


Yes Sir, she is at her prayers. I saw you pass by the altar, and stole from
behind her, to tell you so.


I thank thee kind Beatrice, will she be displeased think thou if I approach
her?


Sir! 'twill but insense her, the league was never so strong as now, betwixt my
Mistress and Don Diego. they are now never from one another, they can't say
their prayers asunder, and I believe shortly they won't be able to sleep
asunder.


The last time I saw thee thou told me of their often quarrelling.


Yes Sir, they fall out every day still, and jangle like bells on a holy day;
they are as Jealous of one another, as the old Count her father is of his
honour; they are ever a scanning punctillios, so that the least occasion
begetts a falling out on either side. And now and then I put in an unlucky
word, for your advantage.


Continue thy kindness, were it not for thee, I should quite despair. I made my
applications to Count- de-Benevent her father, and he having first approved of
Don Diego's addresses to the fair Octavia, denies the least overture of mine.
And unless he quite break off, I must languish out my life in the tortures of a
succesless Rival, and a despairing Lover.


The mischief on it is, there is a kind of sympathy, or instinct, or I don't
know what in their love, that like a worm cut asunder, it still joins
together again; but I'll do my best Sir, and when ever their falling out may be
to your advantage, I'll be sure to give you notice, your servant Sir. I dare not
stay any Longer.


I'll follow you at distance. Whilst the fair Octavia pays her devotions to
heaven, I'll pay mine to her, my sighs shall be as fervent as those she sends
up her petitions in: nor shall her eyes look more devoutly upward, than mine
shall do at her.


Hark you, pretty Female.


I don't know you.


Nor I whether you are pretty, but my Master has infected me with his implicit
faith, and because he believes your Mistress handsome, unsight, unseen, I must
of consequence, as I am of his Retinue, vouch the same of you.


What's your business?


Is not your Mistress an unreasonable woman to make a young Gentleman to rise
at break of day to meet her, and then to pop him off with so short a visit; to
leave him without showing him her face: to say she'd come again within half an
hour, and to break her promise and ne'er go near him since? I wonder how she can
go to her prayers in a morning and have no better a Conscience.


My Lady is not a person that makes appointments.


You may well be ashamed on it, and so may she too.


What do you mean?


I would fain know what your Mistress's meaning was, to set you last night at
the corner of a Street, angling for my Master with the enticing bait of an
amorous assignation, and when you might have got him by the gills, forsook the
sport? If she had had a mind to be acquainted with his good parts, it had been
but unvailing, and if he had liked the Frontispiece, he soon would have made
his Entrance into the main building.


Friend, if you are drunk it is not my fault, as for my part I am tired with
your sottish discourse; Stand away.


One word more.


How now Friend! how came you so well acquainted with my Woman?


I am yet no better acquainted with her than my Master is with you: and as he
is desirous of a better correspondence with you, so am I of a little more
intimacy with her.


Friend, you had best leave us, and go about your business.


As a true Servant I must do my Masters business First I am his Ambassador, and
must not depart without you first give me Audience.


Friend, you'll endanger a Bastinade.


That usage to an Ambassador is against the Law of Nations.


But you come more like a Spy, and as a Spy you shall be received, if you have
yet the boldness to proceed in your impertinence, till you arrive at that door
there.


The truth is, not having my Credentials about me, I shall appear rather a Spy
than an Ambassador. I will take their advice, and keep my distance. I have no
great stock of valour to repel dangers; therefore I will make use of my
discretion, and like a wise man keep out of harms way -- Auh, they are gone in,
by their threatenings that must be the place of their abode: and I'll wait here
about awhile to see if they don't take harbour here to shake me off. If that be
their design, they'll come forth again presently.


Ha --! Sure I am not mistaken!


What's he a Spy too? He comes to take a survey of my Body, and as the
Academist said when he hanged the Butchers great Dog, He shall see it in it's
full dimensions.


Ay, 'tis he.


Now, who does he take me for?


Country! How dost do Country?


I know not whether I am your Country or no: but I don't remember I ever saw
you in mine.


O Heavens, I'll not believe you have so disobliging a memory.


It may be it is because I am fasting.


I'll give you a Breakfast for old acquaintance sake.


It may be then I may remember you better. But I can't stir from hence yet.


'Tis so, he's upon design. -- Well, I'll step in here and bid 'em bring us a
Morsel of something. I'll be with you presently.


At least I shall remember him hence forward, that his acquaintance came so
luckily. For I am heartily an hungry. I wish he knows me but well enough to
come again according to his promise.


Come Country, will you sup off a couple of raw Eggs?


That's the Fashion of my Country.


That's lucky. Ay I know it well: here's a piece of good Bread and Garlic too,
and that's the fashion of your Country too, is it not?


O yes! in our Country we are as great lovers of Garlic, as any Country in
Spain.


Come Sir, the Boy is bringing some wine: in the mean time I will sup off an
Egg to your good health.


I thank you Signieur, and I'll pledge you.


Come Country, here's some wine for you, Country.


Gratias Signieur; Now I am sure of the Wine, I'll venture to see if he has
ever been of my acquaintance. Signieur the more I look on you, the less I
remember you.


O, and that be all you'll remember me anon.


Of what Country are you?


Of your Country.


What of Aragonia?


Now 'tis out. Yes, I am an Aragonian.


So far he's right. What may your name be?


Why have you forgotten my name too?


I don't remember I ever knew it.


Bless me what has happened to you! Can you remember your own name?


Yes.


You can't. Let's hear.


Sanco.


Sanco, that's right. I durst have laid a wager that forgetting my name you
could not have remembered your own. But Signieur Sanco I find I was mistaken.
Come my service to you Signieur Sanco.


He knows Argonia is my Country, and my name Sanco, he has formerly known me,
tho I have forgotten him.


Come pledge me, Signior Sanco, then sup off the other egg


Ay, good hearty meat, but it is no great filler of the Belly.


A good preparative for dinner.


This is no more to my belly, than I was to the Church I left just now.


Come Sir, I am glad to see you with all my heart. I am rejoiced I meet you in
a time of leisure, when we are not constrained to salute one another, with a
bare scrape of the leg only. I don't love old Acquaintance should meet and
part with dry lips, and so your good health once more.


You are one of the most hearty and most cordial persons, that I have ever met
with, and your civility will never let me forget you hereafter. And so I drink
off the rest of my Wine, to your good health, and our better acquaintance.


Off with it Sanco tell me, what enchantment confines you to this place. I
find by the glances of your eye upon that part of the Street, you are upon some
design.


It is a matter of no small consequence.


If I can be any thing serviceable to you in the business, let me know it, and
for the honour of our Country, I'll show the best of my skill.


I have been only dogging a Lady, and her Attendant to their home.


And they went into that House I warrant you, which you lear'd at so often
since we have been here.


Very true. And I stand to watch if they come out again.


Umh, have you any Letter or Message to deliver to 'em.


No.


How then?


If they stay long there, then I conclude that is their place of Habitation.


A very rational conclusion. I find you a man of judgment, and very expert in
managing a Love intrigue. Is it not some such business Country: ha! let me by
way of divertisement partake a little more knowledge of the business.


Why, you must know that I am of the retinue to Don Gusman.


So.


A very fine person, tho a little choleric when he is crossed in love.


Is he in love them? with whom?


You shall hear: last night a cunning love factress, that very well understood
her trade, as my Master was coming home to his lodging, meets him at the
turning of a street, pretty near the house of Don Ruis de Moncade, who is Don
Gusmans friend, and whose guest my master is at present.


So.


In this rencounter he received an appointment to meet an unknown Lady, early
this morning, at the Church of St. Dominick.


Very pretty, so.


We obeyed the summons, the Lady came punctually to her assignation, but after
a few Ceremonies, and a little pritle prattle on both sides, the Lady withdrew,
promising to return within half an hour, the time expired, Don Gusman waited
out his patience, the party expected came not again, Don Gusman not knowing her
name, nor where to find her, sent me in quest of her: at last I spied her
coming out of the Church, and have now set her.


And here she housed. So.


Now my next business is to acquaint my Master with my success.


So. I am glad matters succeed so well; and since your affairs require not my
service, I will content my self with the hopes of a future occasion, and at
present detain you no longer in prejudice to Don Gusman, to whom this news must
needs be welcome.


Adios, Signior.


Adieu, Sancho.


Ordgano, well performed.


Could you hear perfectly Sir from your window?


I heard all, and am amazed at her infidelity. Love was never declared in more
kind and obliging expressions, than I received from her last night at parting.
I'll give her a visit whilst my rage is armed with scorn, and upbraid her with
her dissimulation, and ungrateful infidelity.


Sir, my Lady spied you from her window, and sent me to tell you, that she is
coming down into the court to speak to you.


Your Looks Don Diego, tell me my invitation is not pleasing to you, what is
the matter Sir?


Nothing.


If nothing be the matter, you don't do discreetly to come abroad when you are
in such an ill humour as this, and incommode persons who are no ways obliged
to remove it.


I know it very well Madam, I might not it may be have been troublesome to you,
had you not sent me an invitation.


Beatrice, prithee tell him, that the door he came in at is still open.


And let her tell me too, that it was open this morning by break of day to let
you out.


Who are you acquainted with, that could so quickly inform you, that I went out
so early?


So early Madam! You did go out then I perceive, since you demand who could
inform me.


Yes, I did go out, but from hence forward I will not with so great tranquillity
take the pleasure I received this morning. I shall continually imagine I see
you, or some of your Spies set to give you an account of my actions.


No, all that you can do for the future, shall be indifferent to me, I shall
abandon your Empire with a facility, that shall sufficiently discover, your
chains are not so difficult to be broken, as your vanity does make you believe.


I find you very full of temerity in presuming to say you abandon me. You, whom
I have so often ordained never to see me more, but have no sooner banished you
my presence, but I have seen you at my feet, imploring my grace, and making use
of all your entreaties, to incline me to repeal the sentence, and declared that
you could not without death obey: if my chains, as you scornfully say, are so
easy to be broken, why have you not done it twenty times before? either they
are more powerful than your malice will allow, or you are a very weak man, Don
Diego.


You have sometimes driven me from you, but 'twas when you were sure that I
would return again; of which you were glad, as appears by your frequent
revoking those commands.


You are not the first troublesome companion, that has been received out of
respect to good manners, and whom ^ne sees with regret.


But I will no more, Madam, be that troublesome person. I will have the honour
now to quit you, and do let you know, before I take my leave of you, that it is
to be for ever; and that your lingering in the Church longer as you have
formerly done, expecting that I should come and make my addresses to you, will
now signify nothing, and if I go or come by your house, or stand still near
it, it shall not be out of design that you should send Beatrice to invite me
in.


And I would have you know, that I will never go to Church hereafter, but with
my Father, in whose presence you dare not, unless I please, say the least thing
to me; and that you shall, if you have a fancy for it, walk in sight of my
window, a thousand times in a day; and I not take the least notice of you. If I
look out and smile, interpret it not kindness, but in derision of your folly.
And since you are so kind to promise me never to come here again, I will be so
civil to dismiss you now without further ceremony, and deal really with you,
and let you know, I wish with all my heart that you were already gone.


You do assure it me with an indifference too great to make me in the least
doubt of what you say; in what I spake, there was something I know not what of
passionate, which sufficiently discovers, if you had a mind to observe it, that
I love you still, though you deserve it not: But the cruel indifference that
you have now shown, makes it plainly appear, you never had any true love for
me; and so Madam I'll be preparing to take my leave. Beatrice, prithee give me
a glass of your fair water.


Well Sir --


You don't hinder me from going.


Do your pleasure --


You do well, the trouble would be in vain, and to show you it would, I bid you
adieu, and decl^e it not to be as formerly, an adieu Iusqu au revoir, such as I
have taken till this present, but an adieu for ever. Your Servant Madam.


Beatrice he's gone.


Did you observe how he spun out the time, in hopes you would change your mind.


But after all, can my going out to the Bath so early this morning be the only
occasion of this Quarrel? He cannot sure, at a thing so customary, be thus
offended.


See, he is come again --


Beatrice, I had forgotten to take my leave of you. There's some duccates for
you, it may be they may be as lucky to you as Don Ruis's, or those Don Gusman
rewarded you with this morning for your early rising. Adieu.


I find by his last words, there is something which we don't understand, run
Beatrice, and call him back.


If'twas to me, I'd even let him go.


I must clear it, it may be some thing of^ensive to my honour: Run.


within. Odsprecious where are you here, hoy --


Madam, your Father is come in at the back door, I hear him rage.


Oh Heavens! There must be some other ground of this quarrel by his naming of
Don Gusman; what it can be, or who this Don Gusman is I cannot imagine.


You have not leisure now to examine it.


Once again I'll see Don Diego, to convince his mistakes, and rectify his
opinion of my reputation. That done, I'll never see him more.


Ay Sir, we are right, this is their cage, here they hopped in.


The House is very remarkable.


If you have but patience to walk here a little, we shall see the canary Birds
percht up in their window anon.


Here is no glimpse of'em: We will view the windows on this other side of the
house.


We will keep at this distance.


If we stand here we can't lose sight of 'em: here we may see all up that
Street.


The sudden resolution of my Brother was very lucky to our present design; I
should else have been puzzled to have invented a pretence to go abroad just at
this time of the day.


What was his reason at first to conceal you from Don Guzman? and e're since he
came to be his Guest, to confine you to the back apartment of his house, and
tell him you are out of town?


For fear any thing should be discoursed to my prejudice, if it was known that
Don Gusman had a lodging so near me. Have you still sight of 'em Iacinta?


Yes Madam, the House must be hereabouts that they look for, by their hankering
so. But Madam, the same reason continuing still, why does Don Ruis now order
you to go to your Aunts, and to come home to his House in her Coach an hour
hence; as if you were just come out of the Country?


I objected the same, when I received his orders. And he told me that was but a
pretended reason. And that the true ground of my concealment was, that he had
information there would be some Overtures of a marriage with me, made to him by
Don Francisco de Medina; of whose Revenue my Brother is a greater admirer than
ever I shoud have been of his Person. And that some days since he heard his
Applications are elsewhere, and his affections deeply engaged.


That no doubt is the true reason.


And since the, friendship betwixt my Brother and Don Gusman is much increased.
My Brother has acquainted him with the love of Octavia: that Don Diego is his
Rival, and that his pretentions are rewarded with the favours which his
fidelity more justly merits. Don Gusman on the other side has given him a
relation of our assignation, and what passed this morning; of Sanco's success
in pursuit of the veiled Lady; and of his present coming abroad with design to
walk under the window. All this my Brother told me, to let me see the
difference, betwixt my manner of living, and that of many other Ladies, who
hazard the honour of their Families, by the indiscreet liberty they take, and
applauds the Life I lead, ascribing all to his care, and conduct of me.


I wonder who this blundring Sanco has by mistake followed instead of us.


Who e're it be, she lives hereabouts. See, they come this way again.


I believe they are at a loss.


Let us meet 'em Iacinta.


They have sight of us.


See Sanco! we are staring up at the windows, and the persons we look for are
here in the Street.


Ay, here they are. They spied you from their windows, and are come down to
you. So there's the inviting dop for you.

When a Woman likes her man, she has an Eye like a Hawk: She'll spy him twelve
score off. And if she don't care for him, she's so blind, she can't see him,
though his moustaches brush her Nose.


Madam, thus unexpectedly to surprise me with your presence, was the only way
you had to make amends for your breach of promise to me this morning.


Sir, I came not now to make excuses for my self, but to complain of you. If I
have broke my word it is by your example, and my not coming to you was your own
fault.


How Madam, is it possible? That I, who waited with a burning desire of seeing
you again, should be the occasion of your not coming, which is the thing I now
lament of. I am confounded to think how you should be worse than your word by
the example of one, who so exactly kept his.


I have evidence enough to justify my complaint.


If it be not a disparagement to seek a witness in a Servant, Sanco can
testify how diligent I was not to miss your return.


Yes, my Master set a Memorandum on my nose and ears.


I stirred not from the place, but out of design to remove a Friend, whose
presence, I feared, might interrupt your coming. But my Servant I planted there
all the while to give me notice of your first approach. But if your finding him
a sleep, as I did, has been the occasion; I revoke my act of mercy, and declare
his fault unpardonable.


To render my self more intelligible, know that it is not of his neglect of
duty, or your want of diligence that I complain, but of your indiscretion; the
greatest fault a Cavalier can be guilty of, is to publish the favours he
receives from persons of our Sex. I perceive by the colour that now rises in
your face, that you already understand my meaning.


Your Eyes, whose transcendent brightness easily penetrates the thickness of
that vail which covers them, are witnesses too illustrious not to be believed.
I confess I made a Friend my Confident, a Friend that till now I ever found
discreet. but by what you inform me, I discover how much a Captive he is to
you, and that the Empire you have over him has made his love do violence to his
friendship.


You take me then to be the Mistress of your Friend.


Yes Madam, I take you to be Octavia de Pimentel, whom Don Ruis adores. And now
I begin to lose the hopes I had conceived. For how adorable soever you be, love
ought not to make me undertake any thing to the prejudice of my Friend. Rather
than add to the number of his Rivals by offering you my heart, I ought to lend
him the assistance of my Sword to remove them he already has.


I do know Octavia, but I am not her.


If you are not her, I ought then to have a quarrel with Don Ruis; who by
divulging the secret, is guilty of a crime, which nothing, but the interest of
a Mistress could have rendered excusable.


Don Ruis is the best Friend you have. He told this to a person who hath given
him as many proofs of fidelity, as you ever received from him, and intended you
no more harm in communicating it to that party, than you did me, when you
related it to him.


If he has discoursed it to one only, and that person be yourself, I cannot but
be of opinion that you are his Mistress, if you are not her, do me the grace
for one moment, to grant me the sight of those many charms your cruel vail robs
me of. I shall then know if my friendship be inconsistent with the love my
heart is going to be possessed with.


Do you know Octavia?


Don Ruis often has showed me her picture, which out of devotion to her, he
constantly wears about him: do not refuse me the happiness of being in a
capacity to adore you without inquietude.


You desire a thing, that is not fit for me to grant, till I have had a
sufficient proof of your discretion. It may be if I had told you my name
before, or showed you my face, you had then too revealed one, and described the
other. No, my reputation is a thing that well deserves the best of my care with
whom I entrust it. I'll see you again, as soon as I may safely tell you whom I
am.


Leave me not without some further assurances that I shall again be thus blessed,
and that e're long I shall see you in the full lustre of your charms.


Nothing shall hinder it, if to Don Ruis you do not again reveal what is past.


Stay, and I'll make you vows.


If you have any thing more to say, follow me to the Church of that Covent, and
there discourse it.


Sanco there are four pistols;


I'll warrant you, I'll open her mouth with this bunch of golden Keys. Money
will set a woman's clack a going presently. Nay hark you, tho my Master and
your Mistress are gone aside, it is not come to that yet, 'twixt you and I. I
have not made my compliments to you yet.


I doubt your compliments will not be worth staying to hear.


I have a very good one in store for you.


I question it.


But you'll like it.


Don't let it be too long then.


There 'tis for you,


I doubt 'tis a second hand one.


But 'tis ne'er the worse for wearing.


It is a dry compliment.


But such a one as you can't well answer, unless you repeat part of the same to
me again.


I'll assure you I would not have received it, but that the money of Persons of
Quality was always lucky to me, and for lucks sake I'll keep it all.


Then for lucks sake I'll keep the other half.

You see Don Gusman is a man that knows how to return affronts in the best
manner. He had not offended you thus if you had not first affronted me this
morning, by scorning to take notice of me, when I dogged you and your Mistress
home from Church.


I'll pursue the hint, I may learn something to my Mistresses advantage.


I began to think I had been deceived, when she asked me how I came acquainted
with you, and threatened so. She dissembled so cunningly, one would have thought
her really angry.


She did indeed counterfeit rarely well.


Seeing her so very angry, I ghess'd she was near home, and then pressed no
further.


And did you see us go in?


Yes, and went presently and fetched my Master to show him your house; and see
if we could catch you peeping out of your windows.


And which are our windows now, think you?


There's your door, and there's your windows.


O cunning Sanco!


What are you my Country too?


How your Country?


That you know my name so readily. I never told it you.


I know it well enough.


But now, for the two Pistols I have given you, I would have you te'l me one
thing, which I don't as yet know, and that is your Mistress's name.


I must needs beg your pardon. My mouth is sealed up.


But with a Wafer.


So strong, that all your Art can't force it open*


You have very strong jaws, if gold can't open 'em.


Not at this time.


If your legs have the same faculty as your lips, you'll die a Maid, Sweetheart.


That which is in hand has no force with me, it may be the assurance of as much
more to come may prevail.


These Women are devilish pick-pockets. Now must I produce the other two. 'Tis
even true as you said, those pieces will be lucky to you. They already draw as
many more to 'em. Look you here, will you open?


Give 'em me.


Unravel then.


I will not tell you her name, because I am sworn to the contrary, but give 'em
me, and I'll tell you how you shall know it.


There. Now if you'll but return me half of 'em back, I will tell you the names
of all the Kindred my Master has, since his great Grandfather, and the Lord
knows how much further.


Take notice, what I shall tell you is for your sake, and not for the gold.


Then give me that back again.


The kindness I shall do you in giving you an occasion to get into the
affections of your Master, who has set you about this work, will be a
sufficient benefit to you.


Nay I knew that money thrown into the Sea, is as soon to be gotten again, as
when 'tis given to a Woman.


In short Sanco, if you would know her name, go to the neighbours houses, where
you saw her go in, and I warrant you, they'll tell you that, and all else you
have a mind to know.


I might have thought of that my self, and have saved the money.


My Mistress and Don Gusman are come out of the Church, and are just upon
parting; for your ears, and the sake of your dear Moustaches, Sanco, never
discover it was I that put you into the way of coming to the knowledge of us.


No, No.


Adieu.


So, I have handsomely wheadled her, I think.


Well, how have you disposed of my Gold?


I'll assure you, Sir, I gave 'em her every one. You'd a sworn, if you had but
seen how she then carried her self, that I had given her some offence, and had
she not bethought her self that the money of Persons of Quality is very lucky to
her, she'd have done me the affront to have refused 'em.


What have you discovered?


Nothing Sir for sake of your gold, she had sworn secrecy, but for my sake she
told me, if I'd but enquire of the Neighbours, I might know both her and her
Mistress's Christen names, Surnames, Quality, Condition, and what ever, I had a
mind too.


I'll satisfy my curiosity with all expedition.


Here comes one has the countenance of an Informer.


Hark you, Friend.


Your Worships most humble --


Are you an Inhabitant hereabouts?


At your service Sir.


who lives here in this House?


Certainly Sir you are one that has not lived long in Toledo, that you are
ignorant who that house belongs to.


Prithee to* whom does it belong to?


To as worthy and gallant a Person as -- this day is in all Spain, the King
excepted.


I doubt it not.


He is a little hot and hasty, old and testy, but he lives not that has no
fault.


How he racks me with delay. But I ask thee what his name is?


Lord Sir you are much of his temper, you are the most impatient'st Gentleman.
Why Sir, that is the house of the Count de-Benevent!


The Count de-Benevent.


Yes Sir, and to let you see, that I know what I say, his name of baptism is
Alfonso. His surname de Pimentel. Benevent is the name of a Country, that
brings him in twenty seven thousand, nine hundred sixty and fourteen duccates
yearly Revenue. Where he has not only jurisdiction over his Vassals and Tenants
for the preservation and recovery of his Signieural Duties, but has also
arbitrary power in all causes Criminal, except high Treason. As for the
Children he is blessed with, he has only one Daughter, called Octavia, to whom
Don Diego de Stuniga, Grand Alguazil to his Majesty, and Don Ruis de Moncade,
make their Addresses: and Beatrice is the name of her Woman, who is as
inseparable from her, as- as- as Sir any thing you can imagine.


Stop thy Alarm, eternal Babbler.


Lord Sir, if you had but let me have told you that I saw 'em go out early this
morning together, and that they came home together, not half an hour ago, so
closely veiled that the Devil himself would have been plaguily puzl'd to have
known 'em, and- and- and- I had done Sir.


Then begone, Sir.


Your servant, Sir.


The Devil go with you, Sir.


Hark you friend, of what Trade are you?


An Apothecary Signeor.


I thought so, you talked so like a Fool.


All circumstances agree to confirm me this was Octavia* this is her Father's
House, she went out this morning, returned an hour ago, my Servant follow'd
her, and here she went in. I must now in right to friendship, cruelly stifle my
birth of passion, slight her endearments, refuse her appointments, and shun the
Caresses of a person, I find so obliging, and believe so excellent.


Sir, here comes Don Ruis.


Walk this way to avoid giving him suspicion, that I have had any commerce with
Octavia, Sirrah, leave your learing up at those windows.


O Sir, my neck is stiff, I can't so much as turn my head that way,


Don Gusman, which way lies your business at present?


I was going home, in hopes to meet you there.


I'll bear you company, word was brought me just now that my sister Elvira is
come to town.


You tell me surprising news.


I expected her coming, but was not certain this would be the Day of her
arrival.


I have heard she is a great beauty.


Her virtue is greater than her beauty.


She is then an admirable Creature, for I have heard very great commendation of
her beauty.


Ha- Beatrice has given me the sign out of the Window, This is the house of the
Count Benevent. Let me desire you to walk slowly forward, she is coming down to
speak to me. I'll over take you at the end of the street.


I hope she has not sent her maid down to discover what she commanded me to
conceal.


O Sir, I have had a great mind to speak with you. There has been a great
falling out just now betwixt my Mistress and your Rival. They are parted in
anger, never to see one another more; this is the most favourable time that can
be, to insinuate your self into her heart, you are already in her esteem, she
has an opinion of you to be a Gallant man and she is one that cannot be long
without a Gallant, and no doubt will sooner make choice of you than another.
Adieu Sir.


Stay Beatrice, and take my thanks a long with you.


I shall be hanged if I am seen.


How kind was fortune to direct me here to receive this good news.

Lovers whom fate does so severely treat.
When they receive small favours think'em great.

I Hope, Madam, you will be more favourable to a stranger, than to believe all
that Don Ruis has told of me, to be truth.


It is so probable, that I can't in the least doubt it.


Believe it rather his raillery, or that I only entrusted him with an imaginary
secret, to oblige him not to conceal from me all the true adventures that have
happened to him.


No, Don Gusman, she knows my way of raillery with my friends, is to surprise
'em with the discovery of such harmless truths as these.


You are a Cavalier so accomplished, that I question whether there is e're a
considerable fortune in all Toledo that shuns you. And I shoud be more
surprised to hear that you had no Mistress, in this short time you have been
here, than I am now, to understand that you have one.


You may easily imagine what sentiments one can have for an invisible beauty.


I cannot imagine your motive to dissemble it. Since Love is the most innocent
diversion, and the sit employment for so Gallant a person.


It is the policy of a well bred Cavalier, in the presence of a Lady, never to
own his Love to another.


Sir, a Woman in a vail came just now to enquire for you, her earnestness to
speak with you, made me imagine her business of importance, wherefore I brought
her to the gate of the Walks, where she waits to see you.


Don Gusman, I'll wait on you presently.


Is it Sir, as my Brother says, that you disown your Love for this veiled Lady,
out of Gallantry to me, or are you really not in Love.


I believe my self never to have been a Lover? But since I have had the honour
of seeing you.


If I had thought to have procured to my self this declaration, I would not
have complemented you upon the good fortune that has happened to you. Tho you
would not have me believe the last you met with. Yet your answer shows that you
are too gallant not to be very happy.


I must never own a happiness from Love, till you believe your self the author
of that happiness.


I am not so great an Enemy to my own repose to endeavour a conquest, which
will not be in my power long to maintain. And I would little esteem the
submissions of a heart so slippery as yours.


Do you think, Madam, that one can get out of your Chains, as easily as he is
fettered with em? and that it is possible for a heart to resume its Liberty,
after it has given it self up to so great a merit.


You have said as much to the obliging person that charmed you last, and yet
you would be unfaithful to her, if you could but find but any body to bestow
that heart on which you would take away from her.


If she would have unvailed, and I had found her face answerable to her shape,
mean, and wit; this sally of my heart could not have been without injustice,
but now having seen you before her, your charms have not given me the liberty
to wait till she shows me hers, and if now I had the weakness to change, I
shoud not be unfaithful to Her, but to you.


I find, Don Gusman by his Wit has been conversant in all the gallantryes where
ever he came. Tho I had the better cause, yet he still got the advantage on his
side.


I am sorry I missed the pleasure of your discourse, but now Elvira, whilst you
renew your acquaintance with the other Walks of the Garden, which since you
have been absent have received great alterations. I will consult with Don
Gusman in a small affair of my own. Beatrice, from whom I received the good
news I acquainted you with, has been with me again, to tell me what haste then
made her forget. That to morrow is her Mistresses anniversary birth day. And
councels me to make an open profession of my Love to Octavia in the gallantry
of a serenade to night under her Window, according to the custom of Lovers.


I advise you to pursue the hint.


In order to it I entreat from you the composition, of a Song whist I go and
provide for the dance.


It would now be injurious to your affairs to plead insufficiency, I will
rather expose my ignorance than seem to want a will to serve you.


I'll leave you here to the performance of what you undertake.


At your return you shall receive the fruits of my Meditation.


Madam, it is in vain to shun me, where ever you Retire I'll pursue you, speak
to you, and upbraid you.


How Sir! pursue her! speak to her! and upbraid her! In the presence of Don
Gusman de Haro no Lady shall ever receive such affronts. And to this I'll not
permit the thousandth part of that insolence.


Tho she flies to my new Rival for protection, I will even in thy presence tell
her, that she is a faithless woman; and on thee, that art the cause and author
of her Infidelity, I will revenge it.


Iac. Ah, ah, ah


My Friend engaged against my Rival. Hold, hold. Don Gusman you must not take
up my quarrel, it is my right to fight him. He is my Rival.


But in my presence he offered the affront to her, and it is my right.


Hold, if he has affronted her I have a double right, yours is but single,
therefore you must


I'll not quit my claim.


Ha! Ods precious. Ods, ods amongst Cavaliers. Come, here's an old Cock of the
Game at time of need will come in for a sparring blow with ye.


Sir, I except against your sword, in respect of your Age.


And I must not engage mine in your defence that are the Parent of the fair
Octavia, whose beauty renders her the Idol of my soul. Therefore we must defer
our quarrel till some other time.


Don Ruis the word of a Cavalier ought to be inviolate, Ods precious, did I not
promise you, on condition there might arise no quarrels betwixt you and Don
Diego, that if he withdrew his pretentations to my Daughter, I would next
approve of yours, and yet you in prejudice of your word now take up the unjust
quarrel of a Rival.


Sir, the Punctilio of this quarrel is an affront offered my Sister in presence
of my friend. Her outcries called me to her assistance.


He would press on her retirement.


Hau Don Diego, here arises another Punctilio. And you and I shall come roundly
to it anon. Do you, Don Diego, before you have quitted your pretentions to my
Daughter, make addresses to another. Ods precious, Don Diego.


Sir, run not on in this mistake. I thought the person I pursued had been the
fair Octavia, and not his sister.


There's my Punctilio gone again. Ods precious, but how do I know this to be
truth.


Your Daughter and I parted in anger, and having notice given me she was in the
Walks, I resolved to come and make my submissions. When I entered the Garden,
seeing that Lady pull down her Veil and retire from me as I came towards her,
made me think 'twas she, and her haste to shun me confirmed me beyond doubt. I
follow'd her with resolutions not to leave her till she had had heard me speak.
This I hope Sir, makes my peace with you.


Live Don Diego, long grow your M^st^choes. Ods precious, Cavaliers mistakes
are no Punctilioes you must be friends.


Madam, I beg your pardon, and yours Sir, Don Ruis, for this error to the fair
Elvira. But in the concern of Rival, to all I walk upright.


Ods precious, he's in the right, there's the Punctilio on his side.


Sir, I own it as your mistake and forgive it. Don Gusman is so gallant, by
following it to justify my example.


I acknowledge Don Diego brave.


Ods precious, and so he is, and you Don Ruis shall have no farther
resentments.


I have forgotten it already.


By my Grandsire's soul and these Moustaches, thou art a gallant fellow too.
Ods precious, Don Diego, you and I will go together.


I'd be content to have a Rancountre every day for the diversion of so
pleasant a reconciliation.


This Count Benevent is a very worthy person. But the testyest little old
gray-beard in all Spain.


I never met with such a hot spur, his humour is very pleasant.


Brother, I will cross the Walks, and make a visit to some Nuns of my
acquaintance, in the Convent that joins to the Garden.


A Discreet Maid is always Mistress of her self.


And I'll retire to a more private Walk.


You see Sir, how subject we are to mistakes. And one error still begets
another.


But I am not yet convinced that your going out so early was to the bath, or
only thither. For the Valet of Don Gusman, who follow'd you from the Church of
St. Dominic, has discovered an adventure which it may be was not less pleasing
to you than the other.


I heard him babble indeed, and perceived by his discourse that he was run into
a mistake. Which occasioned that in you, which made such a hurly burly in your
brains. And I hate you so much for believing me guilty of what that Sot kept a
prating, that all your endeavours and acknowledgements shall never perfect a
reconciliation.


You ought without difficulty to excuse a jealousy occasioned by such
convincing circumstances.


Convincing! Did he tell you my name? or if he had, I'll own no Lover but him,
that will give the lye to a thousand witnesses, when I am taxed. No Pretender
to me shall dare believe any thing but his own eyes. And not all they inform
him neither.


A Love like mine, cannot but be subject to jealousy. What is so dearly
prized, we are ever in fear to lose. Put your self wholly into my possession,
that I may no longer be tormented with the fears of being deprived of you.


No, Don Diego, now you can no longer boast of your deserting me, I'll depart
with the honour of having left you; and whilst I may, March off with flying
colours.


Yet a few minutes stay.


No, I will not endanger the loss of a triumph, of which I am now certain.


You know not the outrages of despair.


I know my own resolutions.


And I mine,


Adieu Don Diego.

You don't hinder me then from going? You would


Had you been a perfect Lover, you could not have become so absolute a Tyrant.


Come, come, come Octavia, Ods precious to morrow is a new day, fidle, fadle
comes twice in a Moon. To be thus late a broad is no good punctilio in a Woman.
Ods precious it grows late. Don Diego fare you well.


She resolves to maintain her conquest, ^long as I did mine. But I perceive she
durst not stay, fearing (...) hearts revolt, yet e're I sleep, tho night comes
on a pace, I'll make some progress towards a peace.

If e're like mine a Love she entertained.
She already gives the conquest she has gained.

Auh! he's here: That such a gallant Person as my Master should turn Ballad
Maker, and that Don Ruis should have such a crochet in's pate to sing'em! How
strangely we commence our degrees in Love. First it makes us Fools, then
Madmen, then Poets, and our Wives as fast as we marry make us Monsters, and
then, like commencing Doctors, we wear the Badge of our Occupations.


So.


Sir, Don Ruis sent me to you for some Stanza's. I believe he meant a Ballad,
Sir.


Do you think so Sir. There.


Ay Sir.


Sir, Sir.


Sir, I will not fail to meet you to morrow at the same Church, where we made
our first appointment, and at the same hour I will appear unveiled, ambitious
to subdue your heart, that the Glory of so noble a Conquest may add to the
triumphs of my Eyes.

Your Unknown.



I am still of opinion that I receive these invitations from the Mistress of my
Friend: hearing of our quarrel, she had the knowledge of my being here. Since I
have seen the Charms of the Fair Elvira, I can at least with more ease be just
to my Friend. I will return my answer in writing on the other side of the Leaf.


So! Return that to the Lady.


Give it me Iacinta, I have an impatient desire to know his answer.

Madam, my passions are grown so extreme violent, since last I had the honour
to discourse with you, that I find it will not be safe trusting your self with
me. For should you give denial to my request, how extravagant soever, I should
attempt something in prejudice of your honour and my own. Therefore whilst I am
yet capable of respect, I request you not to come in my way. For this reason I
refuse to meet you, and beseech you not to honour me any further than with your
esteem. Adieu.


O Iacinta he knows my heart already. This answer is penned word for word to my
desires. I feared the declaration of his love had been but expressions of
gallantry, but this refusal to meet his veild unknown, gives me at once a proof
both of his love and constancy.


In this trial you dangerously exposed the quiet of your mind, tho not love,
yet curiosity might have led him to a further progress in this adventure.


Great gains are not purchased without great hazards. Come, I can now without
fear let loose my heart, and give it a full range in the walks of love.

'Till we have proof a Lover will be just
Our satisfactions lessened by mistrust.

HE's a phlegmatic Lover
In whom we discover
A temper that never does change,
A Breast that like mine with jealousy burns,
Now Love and now Anger possess it by turns.
With fears I grow wild, and with hopes I grow tame.
That passion is weak, that is always the same.
With fears, c.
That Passion, c.
But the sanguine brisk Lover
Can never give over.
He cannot be dully at rest.
He knows that her charms have conquered yet more,
That many there are, who do sigh and adore.
He trusts not to merit to give him success,
For women love only by fancy and guess.
Or if to desert by great chance they prove kind,
The Fair still are fickle, and oft change their mind.
Oh the starts of a Lover
Do plainly discover
The passion he feels is extreme!
For he that loves well, and does not possess,
Must either be jealous, or else love you less.
Then say not my fears, or my doubts do you wrong,
He cannot be quiet, who's passion is strong.
Small fires but glow, and are always the same,
But the greater will rage, and will scatter their flame.
Hark.


More Music! put out your Lights, and range your selves under the window.


Who goes there?


Who's there?


Pass.


Play music.


Guards.


They have quitted their Station. Who's there?


Oh, Oh.


Sanco.


Don Ruis. O Sir, are you alive?


And so art thou.


Aye Sir, and as whole as a Fish. A pox on it, I could not get my Sword out.


We have made them quit their post.


Ay Sir, We are Masters of the field.


Run after the lights and Music, and bid 'em turn again.


This must be Don Diego, upon the same design.


Here, here, the days our own. Come again Cowards, come again.


Do you see 'em?


They were all yonder in the next Porch, they are coming Sir.


In order-Musick begin.-


AH Celia, what powerful charms have you,
That with a look could so my heart subdue?
And at first sight impose a Law on me;
Against my fundamental liberty?
I looked, and Loved! O! fatal was that day!
I looked, until I looked my heart away.
I looked, and loved, c.
I looked until, c.
And yet upon your brow you wore a frown,
What wou^d sereneness then, and smiles have done?
In vain* in vain, we boast a free born Soul,
When Beauty can so easily control;
When every glance does liberty expose,
And with a look we native freedom lose.
When every, c.
And with, c.
You bid me now resume my liberty,
Alas I cannot, if I would be free:
Should Fate the unwished power bestow, yet still,
Having that power I should want the will.
Where Love so absolute a Monarch reigns,
They court their fetters, and grow proud of Chains.
Since you with scorn and frowns can conquer so,
Ah try what Miracles your smiles would do.
Fall on.


Stand to your Arms.


So we have regained the field.


Ods precious, Don Diego, I approve not these nocturnal follies, why must I be
alarm'd out of my Bed, and the whole neighbourhood be disturbed? Ods precious,
Don Diego.


Pray hear me Sir.


Ods precious, Don Diego, I tell you 'tis no good punctilio to proclaim my
Daughter to the whole town, by your tenebrious exploits. Ods precious, I like
not she should be made the subject of public discourse.


Sir, I beg your pardon that --


Ods precious, pardon's an Ass, and I ride my Mule. Don Diego this punctilio
quadrate's with my judgment, you must pretend no more to my Daughter; ne'er
more come near my House. Ods precious, if I catch you within my Doors 'twill be
an affront to my Moustaches, farewell Sir.


I hope Sir.


What, that I'll tell a Lye: Ods precious such another hope, and you and I will
crack a punctilio together.


Now he's he gone in Madam.


Don Diego, what's the matter?


'Tis no hard thing to guess the matter when Rivals meet.


I hope you have not received harm.


I doubt not but your hopes are as obliging to my new Rival, that gave you this
cerenade. I question not but you'll be glad of so fair a pretence as the
authority of a father to justify your forsaking me.


Well Don Diego --


Well Don Diego. Ods precious but I say 'tis not well


You shall find it ill done Don Diego, ah.

Women in Love count these things peccadilloes;
But, Ods precious I'll make her mind her punctilio's.

SAnco walk in sight of that window, and if you see e're a Woman look out, show
her that Note, and beckon her down to receive it.


How then Sir?


She will return an answer either in writing or by word of mouth: mind what she
says to you, and bring me an exact account.


I know Sir, it is not manners to question our betters. But it is so material,
when one is to deliver an answer, to know where you will be.


You shall find me here in the Church, with your Master and Elvira.


But Sir, not knowing me, suppose she should refuse to come down.


It is because you are not known here that I asked Don Gusman leave to imply
you in this affair. I would otherwise have entrusted it with one of my own
servants.


Sir, I am known here.


Thou known here Sanco? how came your acquaintance and with whom.


I had like to have made a discovery. Why Sir, ever since last night that I was
here with you. No doubt they took notice of me out at Window.


No, 'twas dark, and you had a cloak on, they'll not know you again.


Sir, I must beg leave to be once more unmannerly. Pray Sir, he^ being no
superscription upon this Note, what is the name of the person to whom I am to
deliver it.


Her Name is Beatrice, she is servant to the Lady whom we Cerenaded last Night.


Cerenade ay, you shall Cerenade by your self next time. Love gallanties were
never fortunate to me.


If any one of Count de Benevents house, question you, say you are Kinsman to
Beatrice.


I can tell that lye without scruple, for she and I are brother and sister by
occupation.


Be sure you forget not one syllable of her answer.


Look you Sir, I'll be picking my ears all the while I am here Eves dropping;
that I may the better hear every word she says.


So, now go forward.


Little thinks Don Ruis, how well I am acquainted with Beatrice, if I had
unluckily discovered my Masters mornings ramble, and his Mistress early
devotion, I should have set the devil upon his Gallop indeed. The door opens-
I'll abscond.


Ods precious, Pedro, how thou hast, put my Cloak on.


I'll mend it Sir*


Ods precious, a new Cloak want mending.


Set it right, I meant Sir.


O Sant Iago! Sant Iago! Thou disorderest my Ruff. Ods precious varlet am I to
see the King in a rumpled Ruff.


Sir now it is well.


Ods Precious well, when I say it is ill, art thou upon thy Punctilio's with
me. Dios nos guarda.


What a testy old Wasp was this, I'd sooner be valet to his Mule, and venture
to have my brains courteously knocked out with a compliment, when he's so civil
to make legs backward, than walk behind him, whilst he has that long sting at
his tail. But now the Weezel's gone, methinks the Rabbits should be peeping out
of their boroughs, Auh, I see that which I look for: mumping already, ist- ist-



Ha! There's that Fellow again upon some design. I'll follow him.


Well Sir! what have you to say to me now.


Nothing not I. There


What's this?


Let it speak for himself.


From whom comes it?


Read and learn.


You are very short. --


And you very inquisitive. --


It behoves me to ask.


And me to say nothing.


I'll try to hear their discourse


But I'll first know from whom it comes before I bestow the pains to read it.


I was commanded to deliver it barely and simply to you. And will not go beyond
my order, there if you will take it you may.


If you wont, here's one that will.


He chopped as sure as a Dog at a Shoulder of Mutton.


I'll read it without so much ceremony.


Sir, you are a very courteous Person, and now I have delivered it safe into
your hands, I'll take my leave.


Stay Friend, till I have read it, it may require an answer.

I have followed your counsel and what ever advantage Don Diego pretends to
have had in the Rancountre. Yet be assured, tho overpowered by his numbers, I
retreated more like a respectful Lover, than a cowardly Rival; make haste to
let me profit by his misfortunes, and fail not to acquaint me with what
happened after I withdrew.





Now it will do you no further service, Sir, be pleased to return it to me
again.


No Sir, but I'll be so civil to my Rival to pay Portage.


O hold, hold Sir, hold, hold, I am satisfied.


But I am not satisfied.


Hold Sir, I will give you what satisfaction you please.


Ah you Coward! What do you wear a Sword for?


Hold your tongue Huswife, or I'll, have you up before the Inquisition for
provoking me to wrath.


Away you Sot.


I have been at my Prayers this Morning, I do the work of a good Christian,
bear afflictions patiently; besides I have such a respect for so brave a
Cavalier, that if it be for his satisfaction, he shall beat me twice as much.


I beat you less for your own sake, for undertaking this piece of service, than
out of respect to Don Gusman. Tell him I have sent an answer. Bid him read it
upon your back.


'Tis but a very scurvy Character.


If you think it is not writ plain enough, I'll try to mend it with a second
Impression.


No Sir, It is all plain to be read, as Holy days in the Calender. It's in red
Letters. Your Servant.


Don Diego, I saw you from my window discoursing with Beatrice, and thence did
conclude, that you knew my Father was abroad.


Yes Madam, I met him.


Knowing you have ever been respectful to my Fathers Orders* and therefore
would not transgress them, how severe so ever, and that I could not invite you
in, but with an absolute breach of my duty, I therefore came down to you, to
let you know, that his severity and ill treatment of you, has moved me to much
concern for you; and has revived in my heart the same kind sentiments it had
before your provocations.


Is this to me Madam!


I had not so soon forgiven you, but by my kindness to make satisfaction for
the injuries you received from his ruff retreatment last night.


Pray go on.


I have already endeavoured to appease my fathers displeasure, and doubt not
but e're night do induce him to revoke his prohibition.


Perfidious Woman, how customary is it for you to frame impostures, That are
aforehand thus prepared with such notorious ones.


The strangeness of your reply so much surprises me, I know not what answer to
make on the sudden,


Go ungrateful! Make answer to that Letter, which Don Gusman has sent you, and
which you have not the pleasure to read, but after my perusal.


You amaze me yet more, take it up Beatrice.


Far from the flattering I shall by his receive advantage; since, I escape one
so perfidious, that on the least occasion will sacrifice his interest to
another, as you have done mine to him.


Beatrice, from whom came this note? who received it? and from whom?


Madam, I neither know the Messenger, nor him that sent it, and for that reason
refused to receive it, and if he had not dealt so ill with the Messenger, 'tis
probable he would have given an account from whom he brought it. I denied to
take it, and Don Diego snatched it out of his hand.


Both the Mistress and the Servant act their parts most exactly well. For all
that sereness of your countenance I perceive the disturbance in your mind, that
artificial calm both in your looks and words is too thin a varnish to gloss
over the perfidiousness of your heart.


Tho fierceness is usually inseparable from innocence* yet I will now constrain
my self to wave it. And without passion tell you, that I have no pretenders
besides Don Ruis and your self. This Don Gusman, whom you inform me sent this
note, is a stranger, and one I never spoke to, never have I so much as seen him


Does not this Letter own a commerce betwixt you? does he not say he follow'd
your counsel? That he is your Lover, and my Rival?


Am not I to be credited sooner than a Letter without a name to it?


We may constrain our selves not to believe great presumptions. But not to
credit such convincing proofs is impossible. Therefore keep back the heart you
come to restore, mine from this hour shakes off your bonds, and that you may
not again enslave it, this day I will put it under the protection of one who is
at least as fair as you, But questionless will not be so perfidious.


I doubt not but you may bestow your heart on a fairer person, but with all
your precaution, you cannot make choice of one more faithful. But do not fondly
believe I tell you this ^ecause I fear to lose you. I less concern my self to
regain a place in your heart, than to discover the state of mine, which is well
enough pleased not to descend to a justification.


The mystery of the Cerenade and Letter is not so hard to unridle, as you would
make me believe by an absolute denial of all: if you had said you knew of the
Cerenade, but could not help it, that you received his Love Letters but returned
no answer, that he made himself my Rival but had no encouragement, you had
seemed to disapprove what you had done by being willing to excuse it; but not
to acknowledge any thing is to confess your self criminal in all, and this
assurance which you discover in your obstinate disowning my accusations, shows
the pleasure you have taken to offend me. Thus having made you sensible that I
am not ignorant, nor you innocent, I'll leave you to solace your self in the
repose of your new conquest.


Beatrice I perceive well enough that you hold intelligence with Don Ruis, but
in so critical a conjucture, I forbore to acknowledge it. Follow me up to my
Chamber, and there resolve to make a full discovery or depart from me, and my
eternal hatred be your stipend.


How? In what manner did he beat you?


In the best manner he could, without doubt. The gallant person who diverted
himself at my expense, made a shift to make my back, and his Cane meet some
half a Score times.


You told him you belonged to me, and the offended Don Diego retains a grudge
since our last quarrel, and considered thee accordingly.


No Sir, he told me that I belonged to you, and without any consideration at
all, loaded my back with his salutes, and sent me to you greeting --


Are you sure you understood him right, did he name Don Gusman, and then say
you belonged to him.


Nay Sir, I believe he took me for an arrant blockhead as you do, because he
took such pains to beat it into me. --


By his usage of Sanco and his Message, he takes you for his Rival.


Without doubt he takes him for his Rival, and it is as the most humble Valet
of his Rival, that I have been regaled so plentifully.


When you saw how he would use you, you should have told him from whom the note
had come.


What had I gained by that, for besides that you had forbidden me. I should
only have changed my Master, not the employment, and since I could not escape
beating, what matte^ was it for whose sake I had been beaten.


I will find time, to return Don Diego thanks, for his Message.


Since it was to his Rival that he meant the affront, it is I that am to take
an account of his actions.


I may be his en'my without being his Rival. He not count to declare himself
mine, has by his ill usage of one that he knew belonged to me, has named me for
fear he should doubt it, I stand in honour obliged to take notice of the
affront.


I fear the event of this --


If I had not written the Note, Don Diego and you would in probability never
have had any more concern. Besides Sanco at that time belonged not to you, but
to me, since you were pleased to make me Master of him, and he was employed in
my business. So whether in concern of his Rival, or in consideration of his
Master, he gave Sanco the beating, it is to me only that the affront was done,


It was an affront to both, therefore the best way to revenge it, is for one to
set upon him before, whilst the other attaques him hehind.


In my judgement you are both too nice to interpret an affront from a
gentleman's ill treatment of a Servant, when the Master is not in presence. A
Servants sauciness oftentimes deserves it.


I do not make a positive conclusion that I am obliged to resent it, but only
supposing it an affront, that it concerns not Don Gusman, but me to revenge it.


I hope neither of you will think your selves so far concerned as to heighten
it to a quarrel.


Elvira, let not any such fears disquiet you. Don Gusman, how do you dispose of
your self the rest of this morning?


I am now going to Court.


I'll wait on you thither* After I have conducted Elvira home. --


I will return into the Church, and pray Heaven to avert your minds from such
resolutions


Give me my Vail, now put on your own. Instead of the Church, I will go to Don
Diego's house, and endeavour that way to prevent a quarrel, which else I see
will follow, by my Brothers smoothing over his mind. Go Iacinta -- Ring at his
Door.


Signior, is Don Diego within.


Yes.


I would speak with him, if he be at leisure.


A Cavalier is always at leisure to receive the visits of the fair. Be
pleased to walk in Madam.


False beyond thy Sex! In cunning more artificial than the most practiced of
thy kind in Sin. Gods, shall my revenge pursue her, or her Lover. Where shall
it begin, or beginning, where must it end.


Sir, here is a fair Person come to give you a visit.


If she be fair, she's faithless too.


There, Madam, is my Master.


Don Diego, I desire the liberty to say something to you, that none should be
witness of, but my self.


Ordgano* quit the Room.


Stay, be pleased to command him too, that while I am with you to tell every
body that shall come to visit you, that you are not within; for it much
concerns me not to be surprised with you.


I charge you not to let any one come in, who ever it be: Go.


Sir, the occasion of this visit, is to let you understand, that one action of
yours this morning has procured you two enemies; both which have a design at
your life, and either of them is brave enough to make you stand in need of all
your valour.


I guess the Enemies you mean are Don Ruis and Don Gusman.


The same Sir, tho the fate of arms should give you advantage over one, yet you
are not in safety, whilst the other has his blood to spill; and the second may
do what the first failed in.


I neither doubt their courage nor my own. The most brave is not sure of
success.


To avoid the mischief, absent your self two or three days out of Town. In
which time I will so qualify things, that there shall be no prejudice to your
honour.


Quit the Town Madam for a quarrel! No.


If the Love you have for the fair Octavia makes you find any difficulty in
absence, let your servants only give out you are gone some little journey: But
especially let me beg the favour of you not to be seen to day.


I wish, with a blind obedience, I could acknowledge the honour you do me in
the care you take of my safety. But far from avoiding my enemies, honour
obliges me to prevent their inquiry by my presence.


Yes, had you a single enemy, but you have two?


If Madam, for me you have this fear, I advise you to quit it. For the danger
is not so great as you imagine, tho the odds be so. My enemies being valiant,
they will without doubt be as generous.


If your honour obliges you to accept the combat, the interest of your Mistress
forbids it. Do you think she can approve of divulging so nice a secret, and if
you love her as she deserves, would it not be better to make a sacrifice of
your fame to her, than to have the displeasure of exposing hers?


I should be much troubled, if it should cost me my own reputation to be
sparing of another, whose interest I am no longer obliged to. But if in
obeying you, I should be assured to do you a service; so pleasant a
consideration, might make me forget what I owe my self.


Since neither the care of your self, nor the consideration of a person for
whom you are obliged to have the greatest esteem in the world will induce you
to comply. Know too, you will render me the greatest service imaginable. For as
a secret I tell it you, that one of your two enemies is my Lover, the event of
this quarrel must either way be unfortunate. If you conquer, death deprives me
of him, if he vanquish you, I lose him in his flight.


This is the real cause you require my absence?


It is. Trust me with your honour a few days, and I will render it back bright
as it is, with a full assurance of your safety.


Your Love shall ever be a secret, but as to the rest, it is impossible to give
you an absolute satisfaction. All that I can do to serve you, is to constrain
my resentment to Don Gusman for he (doubtless) is the gallant person, that has
the honour to please you. I must not fly his presence, but at all times that
he shall speak to me as a gallant person ought to do, he shall find, that I
know in what manner to answer him.


Madam, let me first acquaint my Master. I am strictly charged to the contrary.


Whence is't, that Ordgano treats me to day after this strange manner? and that
-- I humbly beg your pardon Madam, I did not know that Don Diego was so
agreeably taken up. I had not quarrelled with his Servant, if I had known the
ground of his Orders. I thought they had proceeded only from the ill humour of
his Master.


Do you Madam by way of reprisal, give me a visit to quarrel with me.


I came to clear your mistakes, and to tell you what I have learned of the
Letter and Serenade. But at present you are not in a condition to hear me, and
though you would be in the humour to afford me your attention, I should not be
so disobliging to interrupt the pleasure you receive with Madam -- whose
conversation questionless will be more charming, than any thing I have to say.


The compliment you make me would be the beginning of a quarrel, if I should
answer it in the same obliging manner. But I deceive my self, or the most
agreeable one I can make you, is to quit the place, where you are not
infinitely pleased to see me, I will Madam, and advise you not to discompose
your Spirits, with imagining I intend to advantage my self by the divorce
betwixt you and your Lover. Madam your Servant. Adieu.


Madam, I'll wait on you down.


Well Madam, what is it you have to acquaint me with?


Nothing! but that you are very disobliging not to let me see the charming
person to whom you have given the heart you found me not worthy of. If not out
of good nature, you should have don't for revenge, if she was fair, and I had
seen that her beauty had justified her revolt, the sight must needs have raised
a secret spite in my heart, I should presently have fallen sick, and in a
short time died with grief for the loss of you. There had your revenge been
completed, Don Diego.


Oh Heavens! Madam, that a person so witty as you believe your self, should
endeavour to get clear of a Treachery whereof you are convicted, by imputing
one to me, of which there is so little appearance. I wish it was as easy for
you to convince me, you never had a kindness for Don Gusman, as it for me to
justify, that I never yet have seen the face of that Lady you talk off.


And Oh Heavens! Sir, for a man so witty as you believe your self too, to think
you can persuade me out of my senses, why was your Sentinel set at door,
contrary to your custom, but for fear of being surprised, which shows you were
afraid of the presence of some body whom you were unwilling should see her. Why
this precaution if the person was unknown to you?


I see, Madam, I was not to blame for asking you when you came in, if you were
not come to quarrel, I find you are glad of any pretence that you make use of
such a slight one.


You would not have foreseen that you shoud have been quarrelled with, if you
had not known your self guilty enough to occasion it. And but for your
mistrustfulness I had not accused you of any thing.


You would not have wanted a pretence, tho you had found none; that came
designedly for that purpose.


I came thinking to do you a kindness. To tell you that Don Gusman was not the
man that gave me the Cerenade. That the Letter, which put you into such a pelt,
came from another. I would have told you likewise the name of your Rival, whose
gallantry last night clash'd with yours, and to have left you no scruple, I'd
have told you too, who has been false to us both; how all this came about, and
last of all, how I came to the discovery. But since you have made a new
conquest, the knowledge of this will be very indifferent to you, and I shall
now spare my self the trouble.


You may spare the labour Madam, if you think, as you your self said just now,
to persuade me out of my senses. Was then the Cerenade last night, the servant
this morning, and the Letter he brought, all but visions? Was you not follow'd
from Church by Don Gusman's servant? Was it not the same person that brought
the Letter? Were not the contents, that he follow'd your Counsel, that he was
my Rival, and conjured you to hasten your promise? After this shall I not
be^ieve Don Gusman is the man? Shall all be Vision both by Night and by Day?


Answer me, Sir, I pray, to find a Lady in your Chamber, to force by a
Sentinel, set to forbid entrance, to see you all confused at the surprise I
gave you by pressing in; to hear your new Mistress talk of a divorce betwixt
you and me, which was a secret, she could not know, but from you alone; and
lastly, to see you rather play the ridiculous person, then let slip any
occasion to offend me, and to conduct a stranger down Stairs in the presence of
one you knew, whom you left without the least civility of excuse.- answer me
you that are so skilful in visions, if this be one, shall I be made believe
that you know not this person, never saw her face, shall this pass for truth,
or shall it all be vision, vision.


I have already told you, that the Lady you ground your anger on is an absolute
stranger, that I have no manner of knowledge either of her name or person, I
neither asked to see one, or hear the other.


I have told you as much of Don Gusman, that I never had seen him, spoken to
him, or received Letters from him, and yet you would not believe me, tho you
never found him in my Chamber. But Don Diego, after such evidences as I have
received (...) befits not a man of good sense so grossly to impose on a person
that hath either eyes or ears. And you'd have done better to have said, that
you could not hinder a Lady so accomplished and beautiful, to have an
inclination for you, that it would not have been like a gallant soul, to deny
her entrance into your house, when she came on purpose, to honour you with her
visits. But that you receive them out of complaisance; that in your passion
some words slipped from you of our falling out. But not to be willing to own any
thing is to acknowledge your self guilty of all, and your obstinate denial of
your crime is a proof that you are not sorry for it. Adieu my Dear Lover, that
has found a new Mistress full as fair, but questionless not half so false as
the old, peaceably enjoy your new conquest and let there be no more Sentinels
at your door, if I am the only person you are afraid off.


So, now has fortune given her the run of the dice, she is marched off as she
thinks victorious, with an absolute belief that she has foiled me with my own
weapon. Now will she conclude that she has all the reason of the World not to
own any thing of her own crimes, unless I will acknowledge my self guilty of
the like. And so stand in as much need of her pardon as she of mine. Thus she
sells me at her pleasure.


Sir, there is a Gentleman without that would not send in his Name desires to
speak with you. But by his attendant it should be Don Gusman, if Sanco belied
not his Masters Name.


Wait him in. I believe the business he comes about, will suit well with my
present temper.


Sir, I come to demand satisfaction for the affronts done me, I need not repeat
more of 'em, then when I tell you, you took a Letter out of my servants hand by
violence, broke it open and read it. Your usage to him and your message to me
you cannot have forgetton.


Enough -- I own every tittle of your accusations! Now? Perfidious Woman wast
thou but present, to hear


If we are seen together it may cause suspicions in some Persons, if they
should meet us. Wherefore that nothing may hinder our design, nominate a place
fit for such a rancountre, and we will part at the door and go several ways.


At the Grove of Pines.


I know it, and will meet you there.


Sanco return to Court, and stand in the Lobby, till you see Don Ruis coming
by, tell him I accidentally lost his company, and urgent affairs pressed me to be
gone without allowing me time to take my leave.


Yes Sir.


What makes thee look so pale and tremble?


I- I- got cold Sir last night with Serenadeing, and have a fit of an Ague, I
think.


Go, go, walk it off.


Ordgano, Stir not from home till you hear from me, be diligent in your duty.


Sir, your Servant.


Country, Country.


Ah Lord let me alone.


What's the matter? you look as if you were not well, Country.


Oh, my heart aches.


You tremble.


Would not any one tremble at the wickedness that your Master and mine are gone
about?


Why! what's the matter?


After my Master went in, I had a Fools curiosity to hearken to their
discourse, I laid my ear close to the door, and heard 'em talk a company of
idle words. As injuries, grievances, affronts, and satisfaction.


They are gone to fight then.


Don Gusman all the way we came muttered the Devils Pater noster to himself.


'Tis so, their parting at door was but cunning.


Ay Lord, to see how cunning men are to go to the Devil.


I'll after 'em, but stay: whither is't they are gone?


'Twas to a Grove.


The Grove of Pines.


Ay, ay, that.


I'll after 'em with all speed, and get some Friends along with me, to prevent
their design.


Ay do, make haste and save a soul.


Ha, Sanco here! then I fear Don Gusman is gotten here before me upon the same
design. Where's your Master?


Oh Sir I am glad you are come, he and Don Diego are gone to destroy both Soul
and Body of one another.


I feared so, when I missed him in the Kings Lodgings, which way went they?


To the Grove of Pines.


I'll endeavour to o'retake 'em.


I pray do Sir, and desire my Master, for the Lords sake, not to be killed, for
if he dies I shall want a service. Methinks he shoud have a little care of
himself for my sake. Well it is a strange thing, that men can't stay till
Nature brings the right Keys, but must wear such cursed Instruments at their
Girdles to pick lock the doors of Mortality, and let Souls out so at random.

Who fight with swords for life sure care but little,
Since 'tis no more than this, in dock out nettle.

WOnder not, Madam, that the relation of this Quarrel gives me no more
disquiet. Don Diego is a man so indifferent to me now, that I have no more than
a common concern for his safety.


Can you then be content to see the life of a Lover remain exposed to the fury
of his enemies?


I could not once have suffered it. But know Elvira, that perfidious man has
had the arrogance to scan even the most innocent actions of my life to find
pretensions to justify his own disloyalty. This day, not two hours since, I
surprised him in his Chamber with a shameless woman, whom he preferred to me.


Time is now too precious to be trifled away in unprofitable grievances. Know,
dear Friend, I was that woman you surprised. I went to acquaint him with the
intentions of his enemies, and to persuade him to that, which I now press you
to undertake, your interruption and his own obstinate gallantry rendered my
endeavours ineffectual.


Have then my suspicions wronged him! And is he faithful still! Oh my friend,
how subject are Lovers to mistakes?


His innocence thus cleared consent to use your interest to persuade him to
grant that to a Mistress he refused to one unknown.


I'll rather let the worst happen fate has in store, than submit to visit him
first. Try your interest, Madam, with Don Gusman.


I confess, Madam, I have some ascendancy over him, and if I desire him to
sacrifice his resentment to me, I believe he will not refuse it. But know my
Brother and he are gone to Court, and tho I have sent Iacinta home with orders
to watch their return, and privately to acquaint Don Gusman, that I am at a
Friends house, where I desire to speak with him, and to conduct him hither, yet
I am afraid least they should attempt to find your Lover before they return
home, to prevent that danger, you must condescend to go immediately to Don
Diego --


To go and visit him after the solemn leave I have taken, O, I cannot think
on it.


Madam, I have brought Don Gusman to the back door, where he waits for
entrance.


Now, Madam, our design may be effected without the visit you are so unwilling
to make.


Oh Heavens! his coming hither is of dangerous consequence. He is the man of
whom Don Diego is become jealous, and if he should know, that I have seen him
here, he would have reason to believe, that I have indeed betrayed him.


To take away your fear, you shall understand how I contrived it. I ordered
Iacinta to conduct him to the back door of your house, without giving him any
account to whom it belonged, tho he should make inquiry. Now let some one go
down, and open the back door, and bring him up the private stair case, into
your apartment, I alone will appear to receive him; thus it will be so far from
coming to the knowledge of Don Diego, that Don Gusman himself will never know
that he has been here in your House.


But if my Father should come whilst you are speaking with Don Gusman, I'll
assure you; and suspect me to be half at least concerned in some amorous
intrigue. I assure you, he is a man the hardest of any in the world to be put
off with excuses.


Let but the back door he enters at still remain unlocked, and if it should so
happen, that your Father returns, he may slip down the back stairs, and go out
unseen.


Go then Iacinta, bid Beatrice unlock the back door, and do you conduct him up
the little stairs. Madam,


After a few minutes discourse, I will release you from your fears.


I will conceal my self in this little withdrawing-Room, during the time of his
stay. I hear him coming.


Don Gusman, I have contrived this meeting to satisfy my self of your
intentions, and if you own that I have any power over you* do not disguise 'em.
Do you still retain your resolution to fight Don Diego.


That is already done: and he is now no more either my enemy or your Brothers.


O Heavens! is he dead?


No Madam, he is not dead.


Is he hurt, or wounded, O my fears!


I will not inquire the cause, Madam, of your concern, but certainly he must be
either a Lover or a B^other, and either of those Titles are sufficient to
justify your exacting from me an account of what is passed.


Quickly Sir let us hear --


Don Diego, and my self, being gotten into the field, we had already our swords
in our hands, and just ready to engage, when Don Ruis, who pursued us with all
speed, interposed and declared to Don Diego that I was not his enemy, but that
he was the only man offended, and was able without my assistance to take his
revenge. Don Diego might perhaps have hearkened to what he said; but I urged
that he could not quit me for another, without confessing himself conquered. He
could not digest so harsh a word, yet the obstinate Don Ruis to prevent our
engagement, put himself again betwixt us.


What will be event of this?


Whilst we were thus contending, some friends, who had likewise heard of our
design, I know not how, came to us, and would know the ground of our quarrel.


This happy circumstance lightens my heart of half it's fears.


Don Diego, forced by their importunity to tell the cause of his resentment,
declared he was jealous of me, charging me of attempts to deprive him of the
affections of a Lady, for whom he had an ardour that was inextinguishable, then
mentioned a Serenade last night, and a Letter that this morning he surprised in
the hands of my servant. But Don Ruis cleared me of these accusations owning
himself the person that gave this Cerenade, and that sent the Letter too, but
not to the Lady, but her servant. Don Diego perceiving his errors, embraced me
in the most obliging manner, and made excuses, which I received with a sincere
affection.


Now my hopes blossom a pace?


Now to adjust matters betwixt him and Don Ruis, their friends affirmed, that
the extroardinary beauty of a Lady might justify both their pretensions to
adore her. That two such Gallant persons, coveting the same object, declared it
to be of a more then common value. And that a Lover without Rivals might
conclude he had a Mistress without merit.


Now Madam, comes the result of all --


By these discreet Mediators they were obliged to conjure the fair person that
charmed them both to decide their right by her choice. And to promise one
another, to look upon him without envy, whom it shoud please her to make happy,
since both of them co^d not be so. Thus Madam, whether I speak to the Sister,
or the Mistress --


O Madam, your Father unluckily is come in at the back door, and finding it
open is so enraged that he has locked it and taken away the Key.


Haste then and conduct this Gentleman down the Fore-Stairs, and let him out at
the great Door, Sir, shall I beg your pardon. --


Madam, 'tis impossible your Father follow's me close and is by this time at
the very Door.


I hear him. --


Run, run in there Sir.


Hey! Where are you, Ods precious no body below, all got to the house top like
Cats in a Moonshiny night. Octavia, where are you? Ods precious Octavia who
unlocked the back door, how comes it open, Ods precious have not I commanded it
should eternally be kept shut.


It was was opened, Sir, but just now. --


Ods precious that now should have been never. How often have you heard me say,
That the back door, lets in the Thief, and lets out the Whore.


Sir, having made a visit just behind your house, and not being willing to come
so near, without giving Madam Octavia an assurance of my respects, I sent to
desire her, that the back door might be opened to save me the trouble of going
round.


Ods precious, Madam Elvira, I beg your pardon most heartily. Ods precious I
thought no more of you than of the Soul of King Philip.


I am much displeased with my self for the liberty I have taken, since it is so
much against your will.


Ods precious talk no more on it, I am extremely glad of he honour you do me in
visiting my daughter.


I hope Sir you will pardon my presumption.


Ods precious Madam, I'd a pulled down one side of my house to have let you
in.


The goodness you have so readily to excuse it --


Ods precious no more words about nothing, I am old and hasty, but true and
hearty, and Alphonso is my name. But Ods precious Octavia, you have been to
blame for entertaining this good Lady here all this while, when you have there
so much a pleasanter and cooler Room. Come, Madam within there are some
Pictures, and other little curiosities to please your Fancy.


Sir, we are but just come out thence, I have taken a full view of all. 'Tis
indeed a very fine place.


But Ods precious whilst you do stay --


I was just taking my leave as you came in.


Ods precious but now I am come you'll stay a little longer.


Sir, I humbly beg your pardon, because I should commit a great incivility to
some Ladies of the Court, who sent to know at what hour I would be at leisure
to receive their visit, and it is now near the time appointed.


Nay, ods precious I have nothing to say against punctilio's; if it be so, do
as like's you, and live the longer. Free-will and hearts ease make a complexion
beyond Red-Wool and Fucus.


Sir, your servant --


Nay, Ods precious, but I'll wait on you home.


By no means Sir, I will not give you that trouble. Madam, your Servant.


O dear Elvira refuse not my Fathers offer,


I denied my self the honour, cautious of being the occasion of too great a
trouble.


Ods precious, Madam, I am not so old yet to think it a trouble to wait upon
Ladies. Mine was not an age of that debauchery to make men old and decrepit at
thirty. I am upwards of threescore, and yet, Ods precious, I am sound of Limb
and cheery of heart. Ha, come Lady.


Your servant. --


Madam, your servant, Beatrice make haste up again. Sir, you may now venture to
come forth again. You narrowly escaped, being discovered.


I heard every word he said, and wondered what prevention you could find.


I was all in a trembling, fear left me no power to speak, I was hasty to say
something, but knew not what?


Madam Elvira brought it off very handsomely.


She was a great presence of wit, and speaks with much assurance. I wonder
Beatrice stays.


May I yet venture down stairs, Madam.


Stay Sir, and I will look out at Window Don Diego below contending with
Beatrice to come in.


Fear nothing, Madam, from him.


Nothing never happened so unluckily. I hear him coming up stairs, he is rushed
in, in spite of her, retire in there again Sir, and shut the door.


Nay Sir, you must not, pray Don Diego retire, My Lady will be angry.


Nay Beatrice, I have proof enough thou art not my friend. Madam, I know you
are already so much offended, that I cannot increase your anger with any new
guilt; therefore I have pressed into your house, but this is the most warrantable
crime man ever committed; since it is to cast my self at your feet and
supplicate your pardon for all my passed offences. I am now convinced of all:
How much I have wronged your Virtue. I bless the day, the hour, that has
rendered you innocent, and me only guilty.


Rise Sir, I pardon you --


Are you so heavenly, have you such a stock of mercy to forgive me?


I do Sir, with all my heart. But now you must be gone. My father has forbidden
you the house, and charged me never to receive you more. He will presently come
in if he finds you here, neither you nor I must hope his pardon.


Whilst I was watching below to be blessed with a sight of you from your Windows,
he came forth in company of a person, whom 'tis probable he will not so soon
leave. If with as much sincerity as speed, you granted my pardon, you will have
time more than necessary to give me farther assurances of it, and I too shall
have enough to return you thanks for your favours.


I have already said it, and confirmed it, and most willingly again repeat it,
I do pardon you, with all my heart I do; but now Sir you must go.


I fear to forgive so many injuries with so much readiness; is less a mark of
your goodness than of your indifference.


Sir, what would you have me say?


I would be assured that I owe my pardon to your bounty and goodness only, and
not to your fears or desires to have me gone.


If you think that you do not deserve the favours I bestow on you, now merit it
by granting that which I demand of you, Not to stay any Longer. Your presence
gives me much disquiet, from which I beg that by your sudden absence you'd
deliver me.


Your earnestness to have me gone, gives me suspicions That you design not my
pardon, but my banishment.


To leave you no reply, know that what ever offence you have been guilty of, to
refuse believing that I now forget it, is to be guilty of a much greater.


But Madam, all that you have done for me is unprofitable, if you do not yet
more. Don Ruis with whom I have been quarrelling in the field, disputes with me
the honour of serving you, and to reconcile us, some friends have prevailed
with us, to submit our selves to your choice; as soon as you have pronounced
it, the unfortunate is to bear his wretchedness without a murmur, and I have so
highly offended you; that I cannot but fear I am the person that must be
miserable.


I will engage my word to prefer you to Don Ruis, you never was so dear to me
as now, therefore, Sir, fear nothing, or only fear, if you depart not now I
desire it, that I'll thrust you out a door.


How mighty pressing you are Madam! You must have an aversion for me that my
presence gives you so great an affliction


O Sir, my Father.


If he shoud come! The back door.


O Sir, he has got the Key of't, be gone, be gone, or all my spite, and malice
will return.


Let but me stay one moment longer, that in your eyes I may once more find the
way to your heart.


Oh Madam, looking out at the window, I saw your Father meet with Don Ruis, and
has delivered Madam Elvira into his hand, and is returned, he is just at the
door.


We are undone --


I'll make sure of my retreat in here?


Hold you must not Sir, my Father will come in there immediately, that being
the coolest Room in the house, he always writes his Letters there, and ordered
when he went out, that Pen, ink, and paper should be carried in ready against
his return.


Lock it and say you have lost the Key, say any thing.


Hold Sir, forbear, there is no lock to the door.


I now discover ungrateful woman, what obliged you to be so earnest with me to
be gone --


What Sir?


Go, look in, and see one at the further end of the Room stand wrapped and twined
in the window Curtain, a pair of large feet are visible, I know 'tis a Lyon by
his Paw. I'll say no more to you now, because I am forced to leave you, but had
I as little honesty as your self, I should now acquaint your Father --


Sir, come this way, go down these little stairs to the back door, and remain
there till I give you notice of an opportunity to make your escape.


Beatrice this is most unfortunate. What shall we do?


I heard my Master unlock his Study door. Madam go down, and pretend something
of business, and all the while you discourse, keep your body betwixt the door
and him, or find some occasion to shut it. I'll place Don Gusman at the top of
the stairs in readiness to slip down at a minutes warning.


Do Beatrice, I'll run down before, for fear he should be coming out, and frame
some pretence to keep him longer there.


Sir, Pray come forth.
O Sir Don Diego saw you for all the Curtain.

Did he know who I was?


No Sir, I believe not, he only discovered by your feet that you were a man,
follow me Sir to the stair head.


Ha, I see no body, all's quiet, I hear no noise in any part of the House, this
was, as I suspected, all but design, they were urgent with me to be gone, for
fear I should make a discovery of the person they concealed, the pretence too
of the old Counts being returned was a false alarm to draw me out of the Room,
till they conveyed the other away. 'Tis so, here's no body now. O my too tender
sense of her honour? O Female subtilty? had I but suspected this before I would
have forced that traitor from his Sanctuary into the open field, and there have
revenged my injuries with my Sword, I hear some body coming up I'll step in
till I know who it is.


Beatrice, I have got the Key of the Back door. My Father had laid it down upon
the little table in his study, run, run down, and let Don Diego out, that I may
carryit again before he misses it. Oh Heavens! She has not yet Don Gusman out,
he is still in the next Room, I saw him put to the door: I thought you had been
gone, for Heavens sake Don Gusman keep close till the jealous Don Diego. --


Well Madam. --


Ah. --


What would you say of the jealous Don Diego? what think you now has not his
suspicions wronged your virtue, has he not been much to blame, for doubting a
fidelity so pure? And you have questionless been very obliging, to have so much
goodness for a man who deserved it so little. O ungrateful, and perfidious!


O he's here!


Speak lower Sir, or you will undo us both. You are again in a mistake --


In a mistake deceitful Woman!


For Heaven sake, Sir, speak lower or my Father. --


Ods precious, who's here?


Ah, Ah.


Ods precious, Don Diego, I thought I had forwarn'd you my house. You Mistress
Minx, Ods precious, was that the design of your coming down to steal away the
Key, to let him out, thy blood shall wash away the stain from thy Family when I
have been revenged of this Traitor, this Thief that steals into my house, and
robs me of my honour. Ods precious, Sir, you are come a visiting. I'll give
you, your entertainment.


Ah, Ah-


Are you got to the door? Pedro, Pedro, shut the door Pedro.


Don Diego has not yet made his escape* I would fain meet him at his coming
out, to search into his temper and resolutions.


Give me my vail Beatrice.


Madam, here's Don Gusman.


O Sir, my Father has surprised Don Diego in the house, we left 'em with their
swords drawn. He threatened to murder me. But I took the opportunity to make my
escape at the back door whilst they quarrelled. Don Diego knows it was you that
were in the closet.


Whither do you fly Madam?


I know not Sir, to Elvira.


She and her Woman passed by just now, and Don Ruis presently after.


I must take shelter quickly, I shall be pursued.


Are you well acquainted with Don Ruis his house?


Very well.


Take this Key then and go into the apartment forwards, whilst I go and see how
the business ends between your Father and your Lover. Of which I'll bring you
word presently.


Pray do Sir, and satisfy 'em both in what you know of the business. Come
Beatrice.


Don Gusman you are the Person of the World I desired to meet. Now at least, I
hope, we may pretend a just ground to quarrel


Hold Sir, when I fight it is in the field.


Lets go then.


Stay Sir and hear me, you will but put your self to an unnecessary trouble.


Don Gusman I expect to find you of a temper not to disown, but justify your
actions.


It is Sir, and I shall both own and justify my being in the House of the
Count de Benevent.


Enough Sir, Come.


Stay Sir, and let me tell you in short, That I was no sooner returned from the
field, but I was informed by the Servant of Elvira, that her Mistress was gone
to a Friends House, and had given her order to bring me to her with all speed,
where she had an opportunity to discourse with me, which the presence of Don
Ruis allow'd her not at home. I went: was conducted in a back way at a private
door: was had up into a fair apartment, where I was received only by the fair
Elvira, her first words demanded if I were resolved to fight with you. I
replied we had already been in the field, and that you was no longer my enemy
or her Brothers. Those doubtful words deceived the understanding of one that
hearkened, for then a Lady bolted out of an inner Room, eagerly demanding if
you was killed! Her passionate enquiries forced from me a speedy relation of
what had passed in the field, which scarce was ended when news was brought that
her Father was come in; that he had locked the back door, which was left open
for my retreat; to avoid his presence, I retired into an inner Room, but he no
sooner entered, but Elvira took her leave to be gone, he offered her his
service home, which she accepted to give me an opportunity to get out of the
house. They were no sooner gone, but your coming up occasioned a second
surprise. I again made my retreat to the same place. What follow'd I need not
tell you. Now Don Diego do you think, you and I have any occasion to go into
the Field.


How maliciously fate contrives to turn the respects and services I pay to that
person I love, into occasions of hatred and displeasure.


Love to your advantage will soon overcome those resentments.


My follies have exposed her to the fury of an enraged Father. All his wild
anger now will flash on her.


She is not in his power: whilst you two were contending she made her escape.
Here I had the fortune to meet her, we but just parted as you came.


And whither is she fled fo^ Refuge?


I have given her the Key of my apartment, where if Elvira is from home she
will do me the honour to stay till my return.


You have removed a world of care and trouble from my heart.


She gave me her commands to make enquiry what has happened to her Father and
you in this quarrel.


I retreated, only defending my self till I reached the stairs, and then I was
too nimble for the old assailant. He pursued me down, with what speed he could,
but I first made sure of the door, and in a minute, when it was just going to
be locked by one of his servants, and so made my escape without doing or
receiving any hurt. Come Don Gusman, let me not delay throwing my self at her
feet, to implore her grace and favour, and from her breast remove the anxiety
of her fears.


Leave that to my care. I counsel you to go directly to some friends that you
know have the greatest influence over her offended Father, and by their
assistance disabuse him if he think any thing has passed betwixt you and
Octavia in prejudice to his honour, and her virtue.


I approve of your advice. During my absence, excuse my extravagancies and
prepare me a kind reception.


I promise you the best of my service.


Friend, if any but your Master come to enquire for me, say I am not here?


If they ask for you, by your name, I may safely say I Don't know where you
are: but if they enquire for one with no name, how then?


Why then say the same --


So I will, if your Lady desires the same.


Do honest friend?


Living in the Service of a Cavalier, you cannot but be so well bred, as to
have at all times an excuse ready to serve a Lady.


Yes, I'll tell a Lye to show my breeding.


Now Beatrice go with all speed to my Aunts house, acquaint her with these
unlucky accidents, and tell her I desire leave to put my self under her
protection, that during the time of my Fathers displeasure, she may be
responsible for my carriage. Say I am at present with Madam, Elvira.


Yes, Madam?


Stay Beatrice, first give me the Key of the door, I'll lock my self in, and
make answer to no body, 'till your return, except Don Gusman; as you go down
charge Sanco to watch his Masters coming, and to bid him speak, when he knocks
at the Door, that I may be sure not to open it to any one but him.


Madam, he is come already --


Go then Beatrice, make haste.


Madam, I bring you the good news that your Father and Lover parted without the
least damage received from eithers Sword. And that Don Diego is gone to get
friends to mitigate his displeasure, by giving him a just account of his being
in the house and --


Hold, hold Madam, I'll first see if my Master says he is within. Sir, here's a
Lady urgent to speak with you.


I'll not be seen --


Step into that Closet, Madam, and shut the door, your imprisonment shall be
but short. Entreat the Lady to walk in.


As far as I see she wants no entreaty, Madam, my Master is within as good luck
will have 't.


I knew that, I almost overtook him at the Door. You see Sir, I am as good as
my word, I told you, you should see me when it was convenient.


How egregiously. I have been mistaken; till now I thought that, Octavia, and
this unknown had been the same person.


Whence is it Sir, you seem amazed?


If Elvira shoud know I converse with this invisible Mistress, she would suspect
me false, and punish the treachery by renouncing my Love.


Does my presence Sir, displease you, that you thus coldly receive this favour,
which I could not grant without giving my self so much confusion.


'Tis true Madam, that you did promise to honour me with your presence, and
when you had the goodness to make it, your words had something in 'em very
harmonious, but now the fear I have, least any shoud surprise you here, lets me
not see you without great reluctance, therefore, if you will sensibly oblige
me, deprive me of the honour I confess my self unworthy of.


How pleased I am to hear this. Don Gusman, I thought the answer you returned
in writing, had been but raillery, or if meant really, that you writ it
injustice to your friend; whose Mistress you suspected me. I came now with
resolutions to convince you of that mistake, by unvailing my self to you. But
since I find how little satisfied you are with my visit, I assure you, I will
never more do you the honour to trouble you. Fare you well Sir.


At what Madam, are you surprised?


Some one is coming up stairs -- Elvira he has seen, that he refuses the
kindness of Elvira veiled. But for her sake that is there concealed.


Madam, I have heard of the misfortunes that happened at Count Benevents; and
came with all possible haste to offer you my service. Were not your interest
concerned, I shoud rejoice at the accident that gives me opportunity to
converse with the person, for whose society alone I would quit the rest of the
World. Why is it Madam, that you fly from me? What do you fear from a Lover
that never opposed your rigour but by a Multitude of respects? And who having
heard of your disasters, does not approach you, but to make an offer of all the
services he is capable to render?


To whom, Don Ruis, do you believe you speak?


To Octavia, who has escaped from her Fathers house, and came to my sister
Elvira, but not finding her within, has given you the honour of her company.


I know not who has so informed you. But the Lady you see is so far from being
Octavia, that she is not in the least known to you.


Don Gusman you are questionless so much my friend, as not to make a mystery of
a thing I know so well; if the fair ungrateful, to whom I could never render my
self considerable enough to be beloved, had not cruelly desired you to do it.
She would not hide her self as she does, if in my place, Don Diego had come and
assured her of his service, and this her refusal to answer, is not the first
injustice she has done me.


Don Ruis to oblige you to retire, I'll confess to you, that this is the
unknown charming person I told you of; therefore let me entreat you not to do
her the affront to endeavour to know her better.


Ah Don Gusman, you interress your self too much to my disadvantage; I know
this to be Octavia, I had a relation of what passed in her fathers house, with
an account of her escape and being here, from Beatrice her own servant, whom I
met as she was going to the Ladies Aunt.


Whatever she told you, yet I assure you, that you are now mistaken: and affirm
that this is not Octavia, but the veiled Lady.


If what you say be true, and that the person I see is not Octavia, let her
tell me so her self, and I'll withdraw; I do not demand the sight of her, since
she is unwilling to be seen, but one word is quickly spoke, and I am resolved
not to retire till from her own mouth. I receive my adieu.


Two or three words Madam, will deliver us from his presence. I do not say in
what a fear I am for you, and for my self, if it should happen that others
should surprise you here: do not stay for the misfortunes which I foresee,
since with one word you may have free passage


See Sir, if I can rescue


Hau! conceal your face again, Madam, and be resolute neither to speak a word,
nor let him see you, I expect Don Diego will come presently and ask for
Octavia, who is in the Closet, into which I will put you as soon as your
Brother is gone out of the Room. Don Ruis I


Sir, Sir, here's Don Diego below, shall I fetch your Pistols out of the
Closet?


Hold Sirrah, what would you have the Pistols for?


O Sir, now 'tis a rare time to be revenged as he comes up stairs, they are
ready charged.


Go and wait on him up --


If I was a person of Quality, and he shoud beat my servant, but half so much
as he did yours, I'd shoot at him tho there were no more men in the World.


Hold your prating, unless you have a mind to be beaten again.


Nay Sir, he has disparaged your Livery enough already with his Cane, I am
almost a shamed to walk after you in it; there remains the print of every blow
he gave me visible to all the world to your disgrace.


If you are my servant, hold your tongue and do your duty.


I know not well whither I am your servant or not. This is your coat, but I
have been looking under't, and there I find I wear the Livery of Don Diego,
black and blew upon Orenge-Tawny. And he takes the liberty to beat me at his
pleasure, as if he was my master.


I'll run my sword in your Guts.


Oh, Don Diego's here Sir.


My obliging enemy, I have staid longer than I expected. Octavia, who makes
your apartment her sanctuary, and who already has so much reason to hate me,
will be offended at it without question But Madam, I hope you will give me your
pardon, when you shall know that I have spent my time wholly in your service,
visiting of friends who have power with your father, to try if they can pacify
his displeasure, and make him favourable to my desires.


Now Don Gusman, will you affirm that this veiled person is not Octavia, how
can you excuse the wrong to friendship, and the injuries done to me?


'Tis I who have reason to be offended, that find you here Don Gusman who gave
me his word to serve me, has not been punctual to his promise, to give you
opportunity in my absence to insinuate into the affections of that beauty who
has charmed us both.


You are much to blame Don Diego, for making any complaints against me; far
from embracing the interest of Don Ruis I have protested to him, e're since he
came, that this Lady was not Octavia, as he believed: but since you are both
present, I am not any longer obliged to deny that it is she her self. If you
are minded to have her away, behold I deliver her into your hand, for I know
from her own mouth, that it was you she resolved to make her choice.


He must take my life that will take her from hence, before she has told me her
self, that it is you whose service she is pleased to accept. Don Gusman whom I
thought my friend, does not give me marks enough of it, to oblige me to rely
upon his word. I will stand to the conditions we have made. I doubt whether
Octavia will be for you, or me, so long as she does not say any thing:


If there wants only my speaking, you shall not be long in doubt.


Ruis. Ha. --


If my esteem can do you any good, that I offer you; but it is impossible for
me ever to give you my Love: bestow your heart on some other person, whose
inclinations may make her worthy of it.


The fatal sentence now is passed, my hopes as the Sun goes down in Clouds, now
set in dark despair. But ne'er like that to rise again.


Endeavour not to take ill what I have said to you, since it was you only
forced me to say to much.


No Madam, now I withdraw all my pretensions; no more do I obstruct your course
of Love. As she and you think fit, dispose of her.


Now Sir, convey me secretly to my Aunts, under whose care and (...) you shall
leave me, till from your friends you have an account of my Fathers temper and
resolutions. I will no longer (...) the return of Beatrice.


Ho?


Run down and get two Chairs ready.


Now friend I find you told me nothing but truth. That Lady is not Octavia,
Madam, I beg your pardon, you see how much it did concern me to enquire.


I find the Ladies and I are of the same constitution, sworn enemi's to drawn
Swords.


The door is shut,


Nay if you are all providing for


Don Diego, you are my prisoner.


Sir I submit.


Ods precious, hold him fast --


Madam, here's your vail.


Come Ods precious, where are you gentlewoman?


Ha Elvira!


Ods precious, that's none of her.


O disgraceful Maid, was it you that kept your self so close in your vail, and
stood so mute, shame to thy sex, and dishonour to thy Family. I'll be revenged.



Hold Don Ruis.


Hold Sir.


Ods precious, she has been playing pranks too? The Moon's in the critical
minute.


I will at present choke my anger, --


By all that's sacred in friendship, I swear that nothing has passed betwixt
your fair sister and (...) the most austere virtue can disapprove --


Ay, ay, no harm, no harm, Ods precious my jewel will be at that too anon.


'Till you pressed her to speak, I did not so much as know the person I had been
conversing with to be Elvira.


Come, come, Ods precious where is her fellow Comrade in mischief? Ods precious
there's never any good towards, when young Girls get together a tattling.


Don Diego by order of Justice you must remain my Prisoner, unless you consent
to marry the Lady. No other Act of yours can vindicate her fame, or restore to
her Family the honour you have taken from it.


Do you, Count Benevent, exact this from me?


Ods precious do I.


You seek to force a blessing on me, which I would have implored from you, and
have already employed my best friends to intercede for.


Ods precious then I am satisfied as to that punctilio: But Ods precious, where
is she? where is she?


I may now venture out, and appear unveild. Sir with my face uncovered, I kneel
before you to let you see I have not a heart conscious of crimes to make me
blush. I know not of any offence I have committed, except my fear of your
displeasure be one. I fled not Sir from you, but from your Anger.


Ods precious that's all one: I'll march you off for all that. There take her:
look to her your self, Ods precious you know her tricks better than I do.


Now Sir, I hope, your anger is appeased, and you are fully satisfied.


Ods precious I have no more to say.


But Don Ruis, I perceive your brow is still contracted. If my acknowledgements
can remove your displeasure, I will confess that no Lover ever sacrificed a
heart in brighter flames, than I do mine to the fair Elvira. Nor is the
offering, I believe, displeasing to her: If, Don Ruis, you hold me worthy of
your sister, and my friendship is as acceptable to you, as my love to her,
promote it's perfection; and let our marriage bind me to you in a stricter
union.


Ods precious even let him have her too. As they have been Rogues together,
even let 'em fare both alike, and now go to be married together. Ods precious,
it is the best way, so a done.


I feel the torments of successless love, and cannot be so cruel to see my
friend in that condition. 'Tis my only happiness at this time, that I can so
well dispose of her. I have a mind at present so disturbed at my own loss, that
I have no conduct over my self, how unfit am I then to have the charge of
another? Here Sir, I resign her to you.


So, Now the danger is passed and the storm is quite over, I'll venture abroad
and bid adieu to my Cover.


I wish, in return, I could settle such a peace in your breast, as you have
done in mine.


Ods precious Cheery, cheery, Don Ruis, Love in the breast is like a bush of
dry Thorns in an oven; it blazes, and crackles, and keeps a sputter for a
while, but presently gives over. Ods precious think no more of her.


Sir the next time you ask my Master leave to send me to be beaten, pray let it
be to gain your Mistress, now he goes away with her, I have been cudgeled to no
purpose.


I cannot soon forget the ruin of my hopes, but I will wear my sorrows with
discretion.

Yet if my griefs by fits you do discover,
Excuse those starts in a rejected Lover.

OUr Play's success we very much do fear,
For we see few, but Wits and Critics here*
We are sure of you at all times of the year.
Our Londoners are gone for recreation
To spend with Country friends the long vacation;
Or else to Epsome for a moneth's purgation.
The Country gallants too, whom suits of Law,
And Four Cart-horses up to Town did draw
In mouldy Couch, filled with their she relations,
Who once a year come up to see the fashions;
When each had bought her a new tawdry Gown,
The Law Suits ended and the terms were done.
They and their Sun burnt Squires hastened down.
How we rejoc'd to see 'em in our pit!
What difference, me thoughts there was,
Betwixt a Country Gallant and a Wit.
When you did order Periwig with Comb,
They only used four fingers and a Thumb.
Whilst you stroked up fringed gloves were elbow deep,
They one glove on, the other off did keep,
Thus twist and twist, and the tand calve-skin gripe,
Till it looked like a Chitterlin or Tripe;
And then to stretch it, thus through hand they'd pull it.
But Lord! the wisp'd Cravat that hung below the gullet!
How pale and white did your complexions show
To their Mary-Gold-Faces, as they sat by you!
But when betwixt the acts they did stand up,
Their swords looked as if they belong to th'County troop*
Huge ones they wore in narrow girdle Belts.
But most I laughed to see their flapping Felts.
They in their greasy waste Belts and great Swords,
Like Yeomen looked, but, you like any Lords.
You had large shoulder Belts with Ribbon tied,
And each a little little spit-frog by his side.
Well as you please you may laugh on and jeer,
But such as these all your Forefathers were.
Tho they perha^ ^n't so much Wit as you,
They've more ^ and more Money too;
But there the (...) does them out do.
Wherefore your Company our stage renounces,
For the kind Country clowns, and the rich City Dunces.

