WHat! will no warning do? -- you're hardened grown,
So often Iilted, yet will be Cully'd on?
'Tis strange -- but your good Natures, Sirs, will sway
Powerful Variety you must obey:
I thought your last bad Treatment was enough,
As you're of Sermons t'ave made ye too Play-proof;
Yet -- maugre all, you will assist the Cheat,
Tho ye see danger, you'll pursue the feat.
Like brisk young Fop that's heated with desire,
When knowing Miss does subtly fan his fire,
Tho sure of Clap -- yet will he not retire.
Then take your Chance, the first time 'twill not be,
If it prove bad, that we have Consend ye;
Yet we applaud your Curiosity.
For Gallants, should ye fatally engage
To keep from hence till Wit returns to the Stage,
I fear but few of ye will see that Age.
Then, since the fault's your own, been it too severe
On us -- your poor and willing Servants here
For Faith -- we treat,
With all the little Wit that you can spare.

FOrtune -- thou hast proved kind in placing me
So near my Rival Theodocia;
And now false Loveall suddenly shall find
A Woman's Honour, nor his Perjuries
Shall rest long unrevenged --
When by his soothing Language, cunning Arts,
With Protestations to be none but mine,
I was betrayed to his unruly flame:
But thus disguised, as Theodocia's Maid,
I've subtly won her Love -- so that when e're he comes
I easily shall frustrate his design. --
Ah my dear Luce --
Were it not for thee, my labouring heart would break:
Thy Friendship eases my disturbed mind,
And I shall ne'er forget that happy hour
In which thy Cousin brought thee -- since thou doest prove
Not only of Servants, but the best of Friends.

Madam, whatever hitherto I've done,
Or shall hereafter do, will prove at last
To be my Duty -- but Madam, your sad looks
And frequent sighs betray an inward grief;
Let me Conjure you, by that Name of Friend,
Which you've been pleased to think me worthy of,
Reveal the cause of this unusual Sadness.

Ah Luce -- a Father's Rigour does disturb my mind
So much, he's blinded with the love of Wealth,
He'd have me Cancel all my former Vows
Which I by his command did make to Courtly,
And place 'em on Loveall, whom I never saw,
But by his Picture, -- so that either way
I must prove perjured or disobedient.

But Madam -- if Courtly's false, your Vows will then
Be canceled, his silence may cause suspicion;
For 'tis at least a month since he left the Town:
And were he constant, as his love seemed true,
He could not have forborne so long a time
From sending kind expressions of his heart,
To oblige a pleasing answer -- but
A constant Lover in this Age is rare;
'Tis gallantry to break the Vows of Love,
And he's the bravest man, who has been most
Perfidious to his Mistress --

Forbear dear Luce such fatal suppositions:
Here I'm inclined to think all that is false*
Dwells in this man -- each feature, all the air
Proclaims a guilt of all things that are ill --
Oh, take that hated object from my sight

Ha! Lovel's Picture! --
My Soul's transported with this gift,
So highly I esteem what she rejects,
That I have been but one continued thought
How to obtain the original.
This present may an happy omen prove,
To my desires -- to enjoy the man I love.

But look on this -- then check thy rash opinion:
Can thou see here e're an inconstant line --
Ah what a pleasing air dwells on this Face!
These eyes display at once --
A charming sweetness, and a noble pride;
Nay, all the Lineaments bespeak him one
So truly brave and noble, that 'twere a crime
Unpardonable but to think him false.

This piece indeed denotes a noble soul:
Yet Madam, pleasing looks have often proved
The cloud and varnish of a Treacherous mind:
Yet since your Love's so great, I cannot blame
Your just resentments of a Father's rigour.

By all that's good I love him -- yet I must -- oh --


Help, help -- some help for Charity.


How now Mrs. Luce, what's the matter!


My Lady is not well --


Is that all? your cry was so loud, I thought of nothing less than a Rape --
poor soul, she's very silent -- that my damned tattling Wife would take example
of this divine silent Creature --


Pray Mrs. Essence hold her till I call more help to carry her in


She's cold -- I'll try if she has life -- Essence of Violets from head to foot
-- what a ravishing lip is here! --


What is't I see, my Husband with a Woman in's Arms -- 'tis so -- he kissing
her -- Oh precious Rogue! must I suffer this! I'll be sooner with you than you
desire y' faith.


Come, come away, 'tis pity such a pretty plump (and I believe sound) thing,
should slip into the other World at an Age, in which she is capable to do good
in this.

Gone! how soon they've quitted the place, as if the Plague were here -- I have
often wondered at his late coldness to me; but now I find he denied me those
refreshing Comforts to bestow them on his new Miss; this is the crying sin of
the Nation, grown common among the Block-headed Husbands, as well as with the
single Libertines, who think every man's Dish ought to be at their command to
carve where they like best; and 'tis grown so modish, that the accomplished
Gallants, as they call themselves, will not Marry unless they may have the
freedom of keeping a Love-toy, as they name those lewd Creatures; for a bare
Wise won't down with 'em -- when Heaven knows they need not ramble, did they
perform their duties at home; but the Wife must starve and languish whilst they
are at their Varieties -- but in Troth it shall not be so with my peirt
Block-head; I'll hold him so strictly to it hereafter, -- that I'll spoil his
gadding I'll warrant him --

Ha! what's here? if this duskey light deceives me not -- tis a rich case --
By're leave, I must see your inside --

Heaven's be praised, 'twas but a swooned -- 'tis a lovely soul, and on my
Conscience not of my old Neighbours Begetting -- Her skin's as white and smooth
as Pomatom -- but mum -- here's my Mortifier --


Venus bless me, 'tis a lovely Picture --


What's that she's so devout at? -- ha! -- Stars shine out --

Gad take me -- gad forgive me, 'tis the Picture of a smooth-fac't Fellow.


What a Surprising look is here! Oh these bewitching Eyes and tempting Lips!

Me-thinks they melt with such a sweetness! I could for ever dwell upon 'em --


S'life, she'll Fornicate with the Picture!


Ah Mrs. Essence, what would become of thee, had thou the addresses made
thee by such a comely Person; that Woman were a Beast that could deny the
kindness he should sue for -- Oh my cursed Fortune! to make one of the Vulgar my
Yoak-fellow, 'twere better to be a Miss to such a one as this, than to be
Coupled as I am -- pretty thing -- but such a Picture of Ill-luck is my
Logger-head, that a Bear to me is the more beautiful Beast of the two, and
would be more pleasing --


A Goat would to satisfy your Appetite --

How now Madam Flippant, have I caught you traducing the Honour of your Lawful
Sovereign, your Husband -- What, what defect have I that should be corrected
and amended; this shape and mean in times of Yore were not contemptible when
Knights Daughters with their Thousands did prostrate themselves to me; and
Maids of Honour, when I carried Gloves and Ribbons to Court to 'em, have sued
for Kindnesses which you have reaped; and I pray, what are you, but an
Oyl-firkin, whose sole composition is Lamp-oyl and Anchovies.


Yes, yes, I know well enough that --


Do you so Iesabel -- and after my rejecting my aforesaid creams of beauty to
the fletton-milk of thy Countenance, am I thus rewarded? You grow so Rampant,
that the plain wholesome dish of a Husband won't down with you, without the
Ragous of a Gallant.


Go to, my special Property, and Cover-lid of Iniquity -- inslame not my
resentments -- but restore my Picture -- and that instantly --


Then this is my kind Journey-man, is it? -- hum, a pretty Rogue to rob, an
honest Citizen of his good name, -- but did I know him, by Finsbury I'd maul
him.


Leave off your idle fantastic fancies, and restore my Picture with those
submissions that become a Husband; and beg pardon for prying into my Secrets,
or I swear I'll act what you may repent you e're provoked me to.


Make my Submissions? break thy Neck thou Traitor to my Honour; Slife stop that
Clack of thine, or upon Rep, I'll quarter thee, and set 'em upon the
Citty-Gates for a terror to all Extravagant Domineering Wives.


And what shall be done to Whoreing disloyal Husbands?


Yet again! -- Stand forth, and make up your mouth as demurely as on the day of
my Tribulation and Bondage, which was my Wedding-day with thee -- so now,
against thy brazen-fac't Lady-ship, thus I draw my Accusation: -- Dorothy
Essence, hold up thy hand, -- hold up I say -- so -- I will show you, to your
cost, what I learnt last Sessions, when I was on the Jury. --

Whereas thou Dorothy Essence, Wife of Thomas Essence, Milliner.


Whereas thou Thomas Essence, Husband of Dorothy Essence Gentle-woman --


Gentle-woman with a Pox -- a Citizens Daughter and a Gentle-woman --

Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes --


Not having Grace or Obedience before your eyes.


But being moved by the Diabolical discourses of lewd wild Gallants.


But being moved by the Diabolical glances of lewd wanton Creatures.


By Amber-greese and Pomander leave off -- or -- Hast Feloniously stolen from
the body of thy said Husband --


Hast Feloniously stolen from the body of thy said Wife.


The inestimable commodity of his Life and Calling, his Reputation.


The inestimable commodity of her Life and Calling, her Reputation.


To his damage, and against the peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, and so
forth.


To her damage --


Cudslid Silence. -- How say thou Dorothy, Guilty or not Guilty?


Thou say thou Thomas, Guilty or not Guilty --


As gad-sa'me, leave off your tricks and plead, or Sentence shall pass upon you
to be Pressed to death.


Not Guilty my Lord --


Say you so? -- How wilt thou be tried then?


By this --


Good -- She's run away with the King's Witness that shall hang her; how-ever,
I'll after her, for fear by tampering she spoil my Evidence.


It's dark -- Art sure you gave Stanly right directions?


Madam I did -- but it is not yet the hour; besides, should he come, he'd go
directly to your Chamber-window, according to your appointment, and the Ladder
is let down.


On better thoughts I came hither to prevent his coming to my Chamber,
therefore prithee step up and see if he be there; if not, here I will expect
him.

That Stanly loves me, is questionless, otherwise so brisk a Town-gallant as he
could ne'er have proved so constant to his Amour, considering the frequent
repulses I have given him; I must reward his Constancy, but not with yielding
to his desires; for tho (by my old Master Sir Timothy Thrivewell's contrivance,
who having been busy with me, and fearing I should prove fruitful to his
disgrace) I am Married to a Superannuated Fool; yet in despite of all
temptations and opportunities, if it be possible that flesh and blood can hold
out, I'll keep those Vows I made to my old Dotard, in hopes that Heaven, to
reward my Loyalty to him, will take compassion on my Youth, and by his death,
make me capable of making a younger Brothers fortune. -- not yet come? -- I'll
take another turn.


Sir, Sir, are you mad? should we be discovered, what can we expect less than a
seizure for suspicion of Felony, Burglary, or what not, and so be worshipfully
hanged for a frolic.


Thou dull insipid Ass, he's no true Lover, who will not run some danger for
the sight of's Mistress; and I swear, e're I sleep, if possible, I'll either
see or discourse with her; that when I am in bed, I may dream my self into a
passion which may enable me more vigorously to express my Love to morrow: for,
if she proves as witty as her Picture describes her fair, I shall be beyond
expression happy --


No question Sir, but you'll be monstrous vigorous to morrow, should you do as
you say -- Dream your self into a passion. -- But Sir, in my opinion your Dream
would prove more pleasant, if you would home to Bed, and fancy her one of those
fine Ladies you've Courted and enjoyed; that is the true Elizium slumber! Hang
these Night-spirits, the damned suspicion of their being either Old or Ugly,
would sooner put me into a Fright, than create Amorous thoughts.


Sarrah, not a word more, and stir not from this place till I come again; nor
breath for your life, lest any one should over-hear you --


I am a Slave Sir -- So, now is he as hot after fresh game, as a new cured
Gallant that runs a Tilt against the next Perticoat he meets, to try his
Doctors skill -- It's not above two months since he swore a Rich Widow into
belief of his Counterfeit Love; for she (good natured soul!) thinking him real,
yielded; but so soon as he had done the feat, he (like the rest of his Brother
strikers) turned tail and sneakt away without taking leave -- ha -- I hear
somebody coming -- now honest Laurence, to save thy Carcase, what would thou
give for Daphne's faculty of being turned into a Tree?


Come my dear Friend --
Let's recreate our selves in these cool shades,
And for a while divert my troubled mind
From wracking thoughts --
For his tormenting silence prompts me to think
That your suspition's just -- Ah! were he here,
A Fathers rigorous power should not prevail.

I wonder Madam that he's not yet come,
Since I writ word of what consequence
His presence would be here -- and used, I thought,
Sufficient motives to have hastened him.

Pray Heaven he's well --

She's very passionate poor Creature! --

Ha! who's there? --


Cudslid I'm discovered, but fie come off. -- I am a Friend and Servant of
your happy Lovers, Madam -- who ^fortunately arrived to ease your griefs:

This must be Mrs. Theodocia --


Is fortune then so kind? -- Say Friend, to whom it is you do belong? --


Belong Madam? to whom should I belong, but to him who admires, dotes, and
thinks of nothing in the world, but of your fair self? My knowledge of the
entreigue of the Picture will convince you who I serve: -- Say Madam, is it not
an excellent Picture, and describes the Original deserving? --


My doubts are cleared, it must be Courtly's man.

Ah tell me if thy Master be in Town --
If he is, fly to him and bring him hither;
Tell him with what impatience here I wait
His coming, to confirm our plighted Loves.

That you may quickly do Madam, for he's in this Garden; and since you are so
impatient, I'll venture a broken Nose to find him out -- Oh Love what power
hast thou, that with a picture can create a flame!


Come Luce, let's hast to meet the man I Love --


He's not yet come Madam --


Art sure the Garden door is open -- see --


This must be She; for by the sudden glimpse of a light from the Houses, I saw
her shape and mean; and both seemed pleasing --


Ha! there's some body; it must be he -- hist, hist.


Who's there? -- Now Love assist me --


Speak softly Friend, for should the old mans spies
(As questionless such Agents he may have
To pry into my Actions) over hear,
Or discover you, I too soon should lose
The good opinion which with care I 've gained
With my old Dotard, and be incapable
To prosecute my intended kindness,
Which for requital of your constant Love
I have designed --
For know, the Assignation which I've made,
Is to propose what may advantageous prove
To you for ever* if you approve of it.

Ha! blessed mistake! this is the old mans Wife
My Uncles once convenient Utensil:
Now for some Love-intreigue; Horns on my life
Are making for the old Fools empty Noddle.

In short 'tis this --
By my contrivance, I have won my Husband
To force his Daughter Theodocia
To break those Vows which formerly she made
To Courtly -- and I, assisted by my old Gallant
(Who made this cursed match for me, and thinks
Me loyal to his Intrigue) have, much ado,
Persuaded my old man to give consent
That Sir Timothy's debauched wild Nephew, Loveall,
Shall marry Theodocia --

Good -- meaning me, kind Devil! --

But I've a plot runs counter to both theirs --
For I've resolved Theodocia shall be yours.

So, -- now must I to exercise with rusty Bilbo;
For since I've Rivals, I may conclude she's handsome;
Which if she proves, I'll do what I before did not design:
I'll marry her -- before my intentions were
Only to have Wheadled her good Nature up to Love,
Then given her strong sufficient proofs of mine;
That done gently, have left her in the fashion.

Why stand you mute? do not six thousand pounds
And a fair Virtuous Lady deserve thanks? -- ha -- Betty? --

Madam, Mr. Stanly is now entered the Garden --

How, Stanly said you! he's here already, wench --

It's impossible, I parted with him but now at the Garden gate.

Now brain assist me to get off -- I have it.
Madam, I must confess I'm not the man
Whose bliss you labour; yet be he whom he will,
I love that Lady with as pure a flame as he;
Yet I confess I find he has the odds
Of me, in having two most powerful Advocates,
Fortune and your Self to plead his cause.

'Tis Courtly sure; but I'll not seem to know him.
Sir, who e're you are, that thus rudely 've entered
This place at so unseasonable a time,
'Twill be the safest way to quit it soon;
But if you obstinately stay, I shall conclude
What now I but suspect: That your design
Is not for Love, but to rob the House.

Of a fair Ladies heart, by Heaven I would:
Could I but seize on Theodocia's Love,
I would submit to the severest sentence
A Fathers rigour could pronounce.

Oh Betty, this can be none but Courtly,
My Daughters Lover, and my design is ruined;
For questionless he will tell my Husband of it -- then, --

Fear nothing Madam, if he proves so base
I'll take it upon my self, as if I did
Personate you; and I thank my Stars,
I have a Confidence can match the boldest blade.

Let's hast then to my Chamber, lest the Servants
Should discover Stanly there.

They are gone -- good --
What have I got now by my Curiosity?
Only the knowledge that I have a Rival,
And consequently blood must ensue.
Well, happen what will, I am resolved to morrow
I'll see her; and if possible, find out
Who this Rival is.

Hist, -- Sir, Sir, it grows damnable dark.


Who's there, Laurence?


The same Sir, honest Laurence; and in despite of the Proverb, no Lazy
Laurence, for I've been active; both Brain and Limb I've ventured to do you
Service, and so successful I have proved, that with the Emperor I may say,
Veni, I came up to her; Vidi, I had a glimpse of her Physiognomy; but Vici, I came
over her: y' faith the Town's your own, impatient ^he is now in quest of you;
in the Garden to find you out, my Nose and Tree have had several encounters;
but that I am honest probatum est, my Nose stands right, and smells your
Mistress near.


My precious Rogue, where is she?


Not far, I'll engage. Poor Soul, I no sooner named the Picture, but she was on
tip toe of desire to speak with you: But she comes -- to her Sir, fear no
colours, for I have broke the Ice.


Sarrah, I hear a Door shut; see if it be the Gardens, and bring me word.


I'll endeavour to find it out Sir, and if I escape this N^ght whole, I'll be
hanged e're I'll venture on such another Romantic project.


Her Love has guided her so fast, I've lost her;
But I'll take the other turn to find her out. Ha!

My Life, my Soul: I want words to express
My joys, for this blessed opportunity
Of making known to you my restless Love.

How's this? 'tis Loveall's Voice, my forsworn Servant.
Too sure 'tis he, for my rebellious heart
Leapt in my breast when he began to speak.

Your beauty by your Picture is displayed;
And if with beauty you have mercy too,
My joys will be complete; for by those Stars
Which borrow lustre from your Eyes, I swear
I am so Fettered with Loves pleasing toils,
That I can sooner dye than cease to love.

Too true, 'tis he; the very words he used
When he betrayed my Honour, Perjured man!

How! dumb, my fair? this shall unlock your lips.

Keep off Sir, and who e're you are, you're rude;
What business have you here? and pray with whom?

I am Loveall, who cannot, will not rest
Till I have heard my Doom.
I know not by what art the Painter drew
That Picture which was sent me by my Uncle:
But sure your beauty 'twas that did inspire him;
For with his Pencil h' has so powerfully drawn
Such killing sweetness, and attractive Charms
That I no sooner saw,
But lost my liberty, and became a Lover.
-- Not speak, my fair?
Torment me not with this your killing silence,
But kindly answer me, and bid me live.

It shall be so.
Sir, your love by your impatience you have shown;
But should I yield ere I have tried or seen
The man that sues for love, what could I expect,
But a just censure of a forward longing
For a Husband; or at least
My discretion might be called in question.
Then Sir, desist at present: fear; yet hope,
For till I've approved your person, tried your flame,
I shall forbear further discoursing with you:
If your Love's true, comply with my desires,
And quit this place; for should we be discovered
By any of the Servants, my Honour would suffer;
Therefore good night, but take this with you Sir --
I long for the approaching day as much as you.

She's gone; happy, happy Loveall;
Her wit, by her discretion, she has shown:
I'm so transported with my happiness,
I know not what to do.
Where is this Rascal now? that I might home,
And in a dream I'll Antedate my bliss.

What should this fellow be? perhaps 'tis one ordered to expect my coming, and
with more safety to conduct me to her.


Is she not a charming Creature? what a Devil should make you quit the
encounter so soon? the Garden door goes with a spring-lock, no fear of being
impounded for this Trespass: Well, had I been half as much in Love as you
pretend to be, I should have given her further proofs of it e're we had parted.
Oh 'tis the fondest Ti^, and talks so prettily of Love! Y're strangely altered
on the sudden; you were not so cold and backward when you attempted and
enjoyed the Frollick-widdow at Stamford.


How's this? Some Villain (on my life) designing force on Theodocia's Virtue,
knowing she uses to walk late at Nights in this Garden; but I'll spoil his
Plot. Sir, discover who that Devil your Master is, or I'll cut your Throat.


Ha! Pox on it, what a damned mistake was this: now some trick to get off;
I'll Huff: How Sir, will you cut my Throat Sir?

Yes Sir, if you defer your answer; therefore be speedy.


So I will y' saith; murder, murder.

The Rogue is gone, and will Alarm the House; what shall I do?


That was my Rascals voice: Hist Laurence: Sirrah, Dog, how you yelp.


Another Villain? Defend your life, who e're you are.


My Rival I hope: Now Luck, if it be thy will, direct my Sword.


What shall I do, there's a whole Regiment coming: Ha! a Ladder; be your leave,
this shall be my way.


Company coming? then 'tis time to Retreat.

From this place the noise came; come along, come along.


Now Wit assist me.


How? the Devil! Heaven have mercy on my soul, what will become of me now?


Thanks good contrivance, this has done me Service, and all is husht again: My
fighting Blade gone too. Now for the soft caresses of my Love, her yielding
kindness will countervail past dangers: I wish all doting Fools had such
obliging Wives as my Miss proves; what a gentile world it would be then? The
Candle's brought.

Thus to my Heaven I mount.

Fortune I thank thee for this discovery and deliverance: Old man, snore hard.


When old Fools Wed, they must with Horns dispense:
Horns are the just rewards for impotence.
YOur reasons Madam have prevailed, and I'm become your Convert; henceforth
I'll curb my loose desires: But which way shall we effect your kind
Contrivance, which you for my advantage have designed? for Theodocia will not
quit her Vows she made to Courtly, and your old man intends she shall be
Loveall's Bride.

Mrs. M. Were you once introduced into the Family, my Daughter-in-Law should be
yours; for I'd so work upon the Old mans temper, that he should believe all I
should say was true: I'd add some Ciphers to your small Estate, to make it
swell above your Rivals; his Covetousness would then be assistant to the Cheat,
and make him embrace you for his Son-in-Law.


What e're we intend to do, must speedily be put in execution; for without
question, the person I encountered in the Garden, was Loveall, her new-arriv'd
Servant.


Oh Madam, my Master's coming up Stairs.


What shall we do, he's as fond as an old Baboon; the Nights I Articled with
him upon Marriage, to lye alone, I designed for the enjoyment of my self; but
he is so soon stirring in the morning, that I am as much plagued, as if I had
lain with him all the Night; but his fondness would soon turn to Jealousy
should he see you here; therefore good Sir, hide your self under the Bed, or
any where.


Madam, fear nothing: Betty, prithee help me on with my Coat: So, so, now I am
prepared to receive him, and both of ye be sure to second what e're I say.


Joy, where art? as I say, my Chick, I've hardly rested for want of thy sweet
Company to Night: Ha! what do I see? a man in my Wives Chamber so early? Bless
me! in the name of goodness, what art thou?


Be not surprised good Sir, I am your Friend and Neighbour.


My Neighbour Sir! as I say, you may be my Neighbour, but not my Friend; I'll
stand to it.


It's Dr. Bleedwell Sir, he lives within three doors of us; my Lady, last
night, finding her self not well, sent me for him.


But I unfortunately was then abroad; so soon as I returned, my man informed me
that your Maid was to enquire for me; I then immediately came to your House,
and finding the Garden-door open, innocently entered; but such dismal shreiks I
heard, and horrid Apparitions came up towards me, that I let the place with
great Confusion.


Apparitions said you Sir? bless us!


Many Sir; one Devil among the rest, was five foot higher than the Dutch-man
that is showed about Town, with a great Beard, flaming Eyes, meager Looks, and
a large pair of Horns on his head; a Citty-Devil on my life, by his Crest.


Sir, your Servant, I'll stand to it, the very Devil by his description, that
Roger told me he saw.


When I was got home, and had recollected my self, I resolved to visit your
Lady early this morning, to know her pleasure; -- And let me tell you Sir --


What, what, will he tell me that he has Cuckold me? as I say, I know not what
to think, he seems a strongchined Knave.


Your Lady's in a desperate condition.


Condition Sir! what condition? ha!


Sownd, Sownd, Madam, (to Mrs. Mon.) See, see, now the Fits upon her; this is a
Disease incident to young Married women, obstructions which often produce
Madness, if not timely remedied.


Oh sick, sick, where is my Master? were it not for his sake, I would resolve
to dye rather than undergo this torment long.


Oh kill me not dear Cock with such fatal words; if all I am worth can purchase
thy health, thou shall it not want it, I'll stand to it. Good kind Sir, have so^e
compassion on a wretched man, find out some speedy way to save my Chickins
life; and as I say, here's your (...) which shall be trebled when the Cure is
perfected; I'll stand to it.


There is a way; -- again the Fit's returned.


In short Sir, Tunbridge-waters are her only remedy.

They are sold in Town, I'll send for some immediately.


In Town? Save your money Sir; those Waters sold in Town, are mere Cheats, they
put a little Salt-Peeter, Brimstone, Rusty ^on to our Conduit-waters to
nauciate the taste, which with the Ignorant, pass currant: but were they right,
they lose their Virtue, once removed from the Spring; besides, the Air as well
as Waters is assisting to the Cure.


To Tunbridge Wells you say Sir; Betty, put up your Mistresses things, and bid
the Fellow get the Coach ready, for we will go part of the way to Night.


Would you go, said you? not for the world Sir.


Why Sir, why may not I go?


I find Sir, you have no insight into our Learning; therefore your Ignorance is
excusable.


What if I had Sir, what then?


You would not then have offered to have gone your self; for as the memorable
Italiano, in his Treatise de Elementis observes; some waters are of strange
natures, and different effects in operation: Particularly he mentions a Spaw
near Room, whose water was excellent for the Cure of Barrenness, if Women went
without their Husbands: And he tells a Story, that some suspicious Husbands
accompanying their Wives to those waters, instead of Curing, they proved
absolute Poison to the women, so that no less than six and forty Marryed-women
lost their lives in one day: but says he, had the Jealous Coxcombs stayed at
home, they had saved their Wives lives, and their Cures had been effected.


Goodness defend me! but Sir, are Tunbridge-waters of that nature?


Of a far stranger; for should any of your Servants go with her, it may
endanger her Life.


Some body must, for fear of further sickness.


Any of her own Relation or Acquaintance may, without danger.


Let me see -- my Daughter cannot, she's to be Married; were that don, The. and
her Husband should have borne her Company -- Oh I have it: my Dear, prithee
send to my Cousin Pride, the Mercer's Wife, she's acquainted with the place,
and found benefit by the Waters; and that very Summer she drank them, soon
after she had a chopping Boy.


What you please Master, but my Maid says, some of her Relations live near the
Wells.


But Duck, our Neighbour Dr. says, none of the Family must go.


Yes, yes Sir, her own Maid may with security, but none that belongs to you.


Let it be so then, and Heaven bless the Remedy, and may the Waters pass.


Hast Betty, and put up my Clothes whilst the old man is in the humour: Oh
sick; good Dr. some speedy Remedy, and commiserate my sad condition.


'Lass poor fool, it grieves my soul, and see, it melts to tears.


Sir Timothy Thrivewell, Sir, and a Gentle-man, are in the Dining Room, and
desires to see you.


My good Friend, and his long expected Nephew I warrant: Wife, I'll see you
again e're you go: Sarrah, bid my Daughter come to me in the Dining-room.


She's there already Sir.


That's well: Sir, I hope you will excuse my abrupt departure.


Your Servant Sir: I'll write (e're I go) a Dyary for your Lady, in what method
she must drink the VVaters; and if they operate as I expect, think of getting a
Boy Mr. Monylove.


Ha, ha, he, kind Sir, your Servant; how, I get a Boy, you jest, you jest, I'll
stand to it.


Indeed Miracles are ceased: What a credulous Ass is an old Dotard. Now Madam I
have thought on a way to perfect your design, and to make me happy with fair
Theodocia.


I have, an Intrigue which certainly must take for introducing you into the
Family; but at your Lodging we will discourse further of it, therefore hast
thither and expect me.


I fly Madam, and shall think the hours, Ages, till I see you there.


False man! he's now repeating what to me he said,
To Theodocia, and should she prove as credulous as I,
My hopes would be blasted: may Heaven direct her,
And make her hate him, which she sure would do,
Were she informed of his Ingratitude.
What shall I do? Although his injuries
To me, have been beyond expression great,
Yet my Rebellious heart pleads for him still,
And will not let entertain a thought
That might persuade to Jealousy.
Now Mrs. Repository of thy Lady's Secrets, since my Master, like the bold
Knight, is encountering your Lady, according to Romantic method, I, the Squire
of his body, should caress thee, the Squiress of her body; and thus I accost my
Damsel, and display affection.


Away, you are too Saucy.


Baulk not a young Lover in his first Address, for by all those fine things my
Hero is saying to thy Lady, thy beauty has so smitten me, that I languish all
night, and sigh all the day, and so forth.


And never saw me before?


Yes, but I have -- thy likeness, but let that pass.


My likeness Sir?


Yes, thine, little wild Cat: Let me see, where was it? -- oh, in my Dream
last night; me-thoughts thou were the kindest, comingst thing -- but a Pox on
these backward Interpretations of Dreams, for I find, That fancy did, what
Phillis will not do.


I hope this Fellow knows me not, I'll try him further, and will seemingly
comply; he may perhaps discover Loveall's intentions to me. Well Sir, I Vow
^blush to find my self so forward; for I must confess the first sight of you
bred an alteration in me, but your gay frolic humour so extremely pleases me,
that if you prove as sincere a passionate Lover as your Master seems to be to
my Mistress, and they make it a match -- here is my hand upon it, I will not be
backward.


If you are, I'll soon man you -- why so, this makes the Proverb good, Happy is
that Wooing which is not long a doing. Hang all Love-speeches, they serve only
to screw a man up to such unreasonable protestations, that of necessity he must
break'em; or keeping them, proclaim himself an easy Fool: But my Master
(Heaven be praised) knows better thing good man -- ha, ha, he -- his Vows will
ne'er trouble him.


Is not your Master real in his Love to my Mistress?


Oh yes, he's as really Passionate as Tarquin in his Addresses to a Woman he
likes; his design is only to stretch a Commandment, or so, with her good
Gentleman.

How now Scoundrel, what come you for?

Here are some Letters for my Master.

Ha! Letters for him?

Give 'em me Sirrah, I'll deliver 'em.

My fancy questionless must take.


Wilt thou? with all my heart; for to say truth, I long to be carousing with my
Companions in the Cellar: I should have spoke with my Master, but the business
requires no hast, another time will serve -- dost hear oh Damsel fair, when I
am full fraught, expect a broad-side from me; for Wine elevates my soul, adds
confidence, and will make me boldly express the violent out-goings I have for
thy sweet self.


I luckily have thought upon a way
Which of necessity must take.
Fortune Revenge, I both your aids implore,
To cure my Honour, and my Love restore;
And both your powers for ever I'll adore.

So, so, I have recovered it at last: I rose early this morning, and picked her
Pocket of it while she was in bed: now I'll take a view of my precious Padder
for hearts.


My soul's alarm'd with that fatal news
Which Theodocia sent in her Letter:
Thou fair example of true Love and Constancy,
I fly to rescue thy unsullied Virtue,
And will redeem it from a Father's power.
Oh Heavens! I either dream, or sure that Fellow
Has my Picture which I gave to Theodocia
When I went out of Town -- I'll go nearer.

I know him not at present -- certainly he was never my Customer:

Wretched Mr. Essence, to what a destiny art thou born, that such a
smooth-fac'd Rascal should tumble thy Wife, and rifle her of thy reputation.


By Heaven, the pledge of my eternal love;
Strange thoughts and jealousies throng in and fill
My troubled breast,
And fatal sears would urge me to suspect
That Theodocia is unconstant grown.

What, what would this Fellow have? -- honest Tom. must thou never go abroad
again, but must expect to be pointed at for a Hen-peckt Fribble; in troth I
pity thee.


Hell and Confusion, 'tis too true the same.


This Fellow's as prying as an Informer: Sir, what are you, who would you speak
with, what's your business, or are you a Counter-Vermin you stick so close? if
you are, you're mistaken in your man: I owe nothing, my Wives Portion paid my
Debts, therefore march off before my Indignation flies about your ears.


You must resolve me one question first Sir.


Must Sir?


Yes, must Sir, and that quickly too.


Before you ask it Sir? The strangest Fellow I e're met with in my life.


Leave off Fooling, and tell me how you came by that Picture?


How I came by this Picture?


The truth you Rogue, or I'll send thy soul to another world.


Rogue? very fine! in short my answer is, what is that to you, how I came by
it.


Sirrah trifle not, but tell me, or by Heaven --


Yes, do kill me, and I'll have thee hanged, if all I am worth can purchase a
Halter. If he be a man of Honour, sure he won't kill me, because I have no
weapons. Thomas take courage Huff him briskly -- ha, ha, Sir, have I found you?
this blustering won't do; what, no one but my Wife to satisfy you Goatish
appetite: Cudslid avaunt, or I'll swinge you.


Oh intolerable impertinence! Rascal, explain thy self, or I'll beat thy
brains out.


If you can Sir, thanks to your Worship, my Noddle's hardened and too well
guarded with your present you have bestowed upon me -- you conceive me.


Still more mysterious; Sirrah, leave off your riddling.


This is one of the impudent'st Whore-masters I ever knew: he is not content to
Cuckold me, but would force me to confess and declare my self one. Had I
courage enough, I would chastise him till he were impotent.


I'm on a wrack -- By all that's good, tell me how you came by that Picture


Well I must tell him; there's no remedy: How I came by it Sir? why I took it
from my Wife; you might have saved me this labour, for you knew it well enough
Sir; but I'll, I'll -- but I say no more.


Damnation! is the your Wife, from whom you had this Picture, said you?


She my Wife Sir? what now? yes Sir, I suppose she is, for I believe I am
married to her; but I'll swear I have lain with her, and so have you to, a pox
on your picture for it.


Thou her Husband! you lye you Dog, it cannot, must not, shall not be.


I wish it could not, then it should not have been: but may that Parson that
Married us, be for ever choosed of his Tyths, his Wife Cuckold him as mine does
me; may the Children be like the Fathers that got 'em, and his House become the
Nursery of Whetstone-Whores, and Speering-Bullies; But for your part, since you
are so brisk Sir, the Court of Arches shall tame both yours and my Wives
courage; for to shame ye both, the world shall know how you have abused an
honest Trades-man, and one that has borne all Offices in his Parish: Bu^ first
I'll to her Relations, and let them know her Virtue; then I'll sue out a
Divorse, turn her out of doors, and after be fashionable, and keep a Miss cum
privilegio.


He's gone; i^ this thing then her Husband?
Is this th'effect of your repeated Love,
When before Heaven you Vowed a Constancy:
Ungrateful Fair! believing I, thought Heaven
Might sooner err than thee.
Cursed be the time I ever saw thy Charms,
And may thy quiet with thy Beauty fade.
What shall I do, and whether shall I go
To ease the tortures of my troubled soul?
-- Ah Theodocia; if thy faithless Tongue
Had never sworn to keep those sacred Vows,
Which (to thy shame) are in Heaven Recorded;
Yet such an abject thing worthy your scorn,
Might have preserved
My Interest and thy Vows entire:
But I too late thy Sexes frailty find
In thee; Your Virtues like your Beauties fade,
And though all Heaven does in your forms appear,
Yet Falsehood, Treachery, and all that's ill,
Dwell in your souls and hearts: Oh --

This peremptory Fellow has plaid me a slippery trick, but if I catch him, I'll
make him an example for domineering Husbands: Ha! bless me! the Gentleman I
think will swooned, he looks so pale.


At length my griefs have gained the Victory,
My spirits yield to the resistless force
Of Injuries undeserved.

Sweet Sir, how do you, you seem not well? (a comely person) pray be pleased to
repose your self in my poor House, both it and Owner are at your Devoire, I
swear.


I'll accept her kindness till I recover.
Madam, I embrace your Charity,
I must confess I'm indisposed at present;
Something I'll do to right my Injuries.
Madam, you will excuse my boldness.

You honour me with your boldness Sir; and I assure you Sir, you cannot be more
bold than welcome to your Servant Sir. Pray give me your hand Sir: Poor heart,
'tis a fit o'th'Spleen without question, 'tis so violent! and he presses my
hand so hard.


Since Madam, my Father has resigned his power to you, I question not your
goodness will command what I shall readily obey.


I cannot blame your hard construction of a Fathers rigour; and now, to be just
to him, I should urge what he already has; (Oh, I faint) but since your
aversion to young Loveal's such, I will not only propound, but effect a match
which may prove beneficial to you, if wisely you comply.


Ha, what means she?


You know the power I have over your Father.


Thanks to his Dotage.


Wisely then embrace the man I offer, 'tis my Brother, to day he will be here;
and did not my indisposition force me out of Town, I should have rejoiced to
have seen him: However, in my absence I'd have you treat him, not as a
Stranger, but as one who is to be your Husband: consider, and let me know what
you resolve.


Fortune! you have made me now completely wretched; if I reject the man my Father
offers, the world will censure me for being disobedient: and if I refuse the
man that she propounds, her interest with my Father, is so great, what is't she
will not do to blast my fame, and to my Father aggravate my fault? and if with
either I comply, my Bliss and Love in Courtly, I must lose: what shall I do?
I'll seemingly consent to what she has proposed, and by that means gain time to
frustrate what they both design. It shall be so; Madam, your kindness has
prevailed; and tho I never saw the person you have named; yet hitherto, so
obliging you have been, that readily I yield to your desires.


'Tis well resolved; and Theo. rest satisfied, he has the accomplishments of a
Gentle-man, his humours gay, but that will be a good mixture with your Gravity.
Daughter, farewell, perform your promise and be happy.


Madam, may your intended Journey prove prosperous, and procure your health.
Yes, I will keep my promise, but it shall be to Courtly; when I prove false to
Love, may all things prosper that may make me wretched.

Not Fathers Threats, nor Mothers subtlest Art,
Shall change my Love, or disengage my heart.

I Have been with her Cousin, and to give the Devil his due, his advice was
none of the worst; 'tis possible I may be in the wrong, and my Wife honest,
notwithstanding what has past; and tho this Picture may startle me, yet it does
not convince me: why then Thomas Mum, least thy Neighbours should conclude what
thou doest but suspect, let me see where am I to go? to my Hum in Pall-mall;
to Madam Hum, one of the Maids of Honour; to Madam -- Hum -- in Covent-Garden.
-- Agad 'tis a plaguey troublesome thing to be handsome and gentile, for the
Women are ready to pull a Man a pieces that is well accomplished. I was forct to
Marry, to be rid of these fond souls; but a pox on it 'twont do, they have the
spawn of the Serpent in 'em, and will be tempting frailties which hitherto I
have resisted: But if my Wife proves a down right Wife, I'll be merciful to my
languishing fits; -- ha -- who comes here? I have, Courting my Wife --
suspicion avaunt -- honest Tom, that thou art a Cuckold is too evident.

If you will go, Sir oblige me; pray do, by accepting this Bottle of water of
my own Distilling, Sir; that if your distemper should return, the cure may be
perfected by my means.


Oh the Impertinence of Women-kind! Madam, your obligations are beyond
expression great.


Ha! She presents him too; now the pox upon him, for the Devil has pleased her.


But should it relapse indeed --


No danger of that I assure you -- Madam, your Servant.


I was yours before Sir; but Sir, you remember how to take the Cordial.


Oh yes Madam, as you applied it to me; your Servant.


A pox of her Application; I fear you have applied something too --


Very right Sir; adieu good Sir, may Heaven restore and preserve your health --
but, a word Sir, when your Bottle is out, pray let me see you Sir, and it shall
be repleted with the same: my name is Dorothy Essence, tis true, my Husband is
somewhat whimsical, but you'll find a civil person of me Sir.


Oh Mrs. Essence, your Servant -- 'tis the conceitest Creature I e're met with.


So, so, they are parted -- he comes this way; I'll look big upon him, perhaps
that may terrify him.


Ha! that cursed Fellow here again? how my heart rises at the sight of him --
what a hard Law is Duty to old Age; he could not sure be of Theodocia's choice;
but she was forced to obey her Fathers power.

Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and beautiful!


Hye day, what means he?


It is he; but why this strangeness, and his returned conceild from me. Ah
Courtly, my excessive Love would promp me to embrace a Jealousy of what I
would not willingly believe, that thou art false.


Oh too, too happy man, to have a Wife so fair and beautiful! what should he
mean by this -- oh too soon I understand the Rogue; now he has Cuckold me, he
basely triumphs.


Perhaps I may learn something of this Fellow, for I hear he is excellent for
intelligence of Love-intriegues, and has brought as many Couples together, as
any Parson about Town, but not so lawfully. -- Mr. Essence, are you acquainted
with the person that but now lest you?


Ah Mrs. Theodocia, I always had a respect for you, and have often commended
you to the high-flown rich Blades with Coaches, that are my Customers, how good
a Wife you'd make; and is this my reward, do you flout me in misery?


Not I; but tell me the cause of your affliction?


Oh the greatest under Heaven, next to bad Trade, but my Wives Occupation is
good, a pox on her Customers, for Mrs. Tho. here stands the model of a complete
wretched Husband -- that Fellow who went from hence but now.


What of him Sir?


What of him Sir? he has Robbed me.


How? that Gentleman?


That Rogue; he has Feloniously stolen the precious Jewel of my life; my Rep,
in fine, he has Cuckold me; now 'tis out, my heart is somewhat eased.


It is impossible; can Courtly be so base?


Oh 'tis too true, these eyes, but now, were witnesses of his and my Wives
familiarity: to conclude, he lies with my Wife; now you have the sorrowful
truth of my Woe.


All my prophetic fears were but too true,
And Courtley's treacheries too evident:
Me-thoughts his looks, as he past by, betrayed
An inward guilt.
If thou art False, where shall I find one Just?
For, with such seeming Honesty, he swore,
And wisht-such Imprecations on himself,
If in the least he Violated Love,
Or broke his Vows; those Vows he made to me,
I durst to have sworn, he really designed
That Constancy he Vowed:
But b'inded by my Love, I find too late,
He's like the rest of the perfidious Race,
And made these Vows t'entrap my Innocence.

Sweet Mrs. Theo. thou Queen of Diamonds, moderate thy passion: Your Charity to
me is too great, and since so cordially you espouse my afflictions, I'm
grieved that you are not a man; if you were, I should have entreated the favour
of you, that you would have cudgeld him for my sake; but seeing that cannot be,
I'll drown my self in Tears, and lay my death to his charge; oh, oh, oh.


Oh that I were a man, I'd soon redress
My wrongs:
His Life should pay the forfeit of his Vows,
And he should fall a Victim to my rage.

Good Saint!


But oh I rave;
For Courtley's generous soul could ne'er admit
A thought so base to harbour in his breast,
Much less would execute so vile an act;
Heaven's! 'tis impossible! Courtly false? it cannot be.

O yes, Madam; yes, too true he's false; but how shall we curb his Lechery?


Ah Traitor! double-hearted faithless man!


Blessed Angel!


Sure Hell it self has not a torment equal to thy Crime.


Sweet soul!


To wrong a person never injured thee --


Never I, I'll take my death on it, not so much as in the sale of a pair of
Jessamy-Gloves, a twelve-penny glass of Essence, or six-penny pot of
Jessamy-butter.


But my complaints are vain;
I'll tear this Viper from my breast, and then
Study a just Revenge to scourge his soul,
For Violations done to sacred Love!

She's gone! Heavens bless her! how cordially she took my part, pretty
Creature! and what she intends to do, Heaven knows, for she talked of Revenge --
Fie Thomas, why so slow to correct this Fellows lewdness towards thee? for
shame do something, let not a Woman out-strip thee in prowess, in thy own cause
too? -- well -- for Whetstone to thy Valour, thou shall it to th'Tavern, one pint
of Sack, used to make thee as huffing as a blustering Bully, half Drunk in an
Ordinary, or as Valiant and quarrelsome as a Constable heroically Drunk,
surrounded with his rusty Bilbo.


This Letter which I have contrived, I hope
Will set a period to base Lovealls Treachery:
If not, I'll let fair Theodocia know
My wrong, and th'important secret of my shame
Declare; then some way we will contrive
To right my Injuries, and redress her own.
Ah Luce, at last I've overcome my Love,
For Courtly is become the worst of men;
Imagine all that's base, the foulest acts,
The thoughts of wicked men could e're invent,
In Courtly they are all comprised;
Such things I've seen would breed astonishment:
That false delewding man is now in Town;
And stead of keeping his past Vows to me,
Rejects and slights'em, wantonly sins
In the embraces of a Treacherous Wife.

You amaze me Madam! Courtly false?


As Hell -- but for Revenge,
I'll to my Father's power resign my self;
And tho I hate the man he has proposed,
Yet I'll comply, and Lovealls flame admit.

Heaven's, but that must not be --
Oh do not rashly give your self away;
For Madam, Marriage is the great concern
Of our whole lives; according as we choose,
We are either blessed or wretched in this World.

But I'm resolved, since Courtly's false,
And tho I look on both with equal hate,
Yet him I will reject whose Love was counterfeit;
But Lovealls passion for me may be true.

Loveall? the giltiest of all man-kind;
Those crimes you'd lay on Courtly, are his due,
And I me no stranger to his Perjuries.

Is he false too? Ah unhappy Maid!
Fortune has destined thee not one true Lover.
Say what thou know, then we will consult some way
How to preserve my Honour and Obedience.

Madam, here comes your Father*


Oh torment of my soul!


Look you Sir, there's my Daughter -- The. receive your Uncle with respect.


As gad sa'me, you're the extravagantst English Beauty I e're met with, the
notoriousest pretty Devil! ha! what charming features! bon mean! surprising
graces, and divine harmony of Limbs are here! By my hands, Old man, thou were
inspired when you Begot her, she's a very Cherubin!


Ha, ha, he; as I say, 'tis the pleasantest Wag, and I'll stand to it, his
Sisters humour right, when she's pleased.


Luce, observe that face, it is extremely like my Mothers, the voice too not
unlike.


Upon my life, it is her self Madam; I'll take the little Attendant aside and
sift him.


And how, and how like you my Garnitire, is it not Jauntee Madam, ha? France's
own Taylor; let me fee e're a Garlick-eating mangy-fisted English Rascal, make
the like: Ah with what an extravagant pleasure and delight does this triming
sit! ah how notoriously excellent is the shape displayed -- this Ribbon -- a
rare dye! French yellow, emblem of Jealousy, and denotes excessive love and
passion; the only colour I value my self on; for Females understand by that my
mind and flame; and dye with desire of my acquaintance; but for variety, I have
a Suit of Sky for Constancy; sometimes Pink for Modesty, to wear in such
Company as I shall visit that day; for by my hands, little Devil, a Suit of
Ribbon well suited with the address we men make to your Sex, is half our
Courtship, which is a secret of my own discovery.


'Tis fit you keep it so Sir, for the rarity -- what a strange thing is a
Travelled Fop?


How now soul! ala mort! come, come, lay aside this reservedness; pox on the
English breeding; by my hands it makes all the Females Fools: Ah, how fort
obliegeant the Madamoisels are a Paris; there, a Married Woman in her Husbands
presence, will clip, embrace, and kiss a man she fancies, the first time she
sees him.


And lye with him behind her Husbands back.


Mortblecu, a damned English censure; by my hands, I believe, that to one
extravagantly honest here, there are twenty at Paris; our London Devils are all
Hypocrites; for at that moment they seem most coy, they privately are
contriving how to enjoy the person they seem to slight -- Brother Tim. if ever
you will have your Daughter respected and celebrated for a modish person, let
her frequent Masquerades, visit Play-houses in cognito, receive Treats,
converse with the refined travelled Wits; make Balls speak French, and be
obliging to the modish Gallants.


Yes, and have her made a Miss, got with Child, and be turned on my hands; no,
good Brother, you must excuse me for that absurd, absurd, I'll stand to it.


Iernee rank English still -- a man cannot make address on Gallantry, nor a
Woman be Complesant, but Impotence will censure -- But little soul, my Sisters
Character of thee has over-come me, and the blind god at last has got the
Conquest -- By my hands I love you, and the rather, because I find 'tis not for
want of wit, but breeding; that makes you defective, when address is made to
you; therefore dear Devil, say, shall I sink or swim?


According to your skill Sir -- but sure so gay, so brisk, refined a Travelled
Wit as you, can ne'er be at leisure to Love, nor so serious as to make
Addresses.


Then you expect I should have Courted you in a Romantic stile; and whine, as
if Sentence of damnation had past upon me; hang that dull, common-place way of
making Love -- but if Swearing will confirm you; by those Twinkling Eyes,
Cherry Lips, Alabaster Neck, Painting Fountains of delight; and by all the
clouded Beauties of your person, which by Imagination I am convinct are
excellent, I swear I never Loved before, but now am desperate; yet if you
slight it, I'll never Love again -- (Sing) Let Fortune and Phillis frown if
they please, I'll no more on their Deities call, and so forth -- Is not this
better than your whining: Oh Love, if e're thou't ease a heart which owns thy
power Divine -- Damn such effiminacy -- then pretty Rogue, be wise, and meet
my Love; by this kiss thou shall it -- (offers to kiss her -- she shoves Mrs. M.
away) oh insupportable English incivility.

Sweet Philida, be not so Coy,
I love not to ravish a Kiss:
Your peevishness will but destroy
The hopes of enjoying true Bliss.
If the Lover you like, does offer
To give you the proofs of his slame,
And you fondly reject his kind prosser,
Too late your own folly you'll blame.
Then yield to what e're he desires,
And slight not his Critical Love;
With your vigorous Lover r^tire,
You'll quickly the pleasure approve.

'Tis a merry Grigg; but Sir, is this his constan^ humour?


Ever Sir; this Gayeity has left many bleeding hearts in France; he ne'er
encountered with a Female yet, but he came off Victorious.


Say you so Sir? a notable Wagg, I'll stand to it.


But your Daughter only, as her Beauties due, has gained the Victory; for ever
since he received your Ladies Letter, he has been Charmed, so that his Nights
have been but one continued Dream of her.


I am sorry I must cross his dream, for my Daughter was promised to another,
before my Wife acquainted me of her Brother's Fortune, by his Uncles death.


How Sir, is she engaged to another?


As I say, she is Sir, to a man of a fair Estate, engenious, and handsome
enough for a Husband.


By all means break it off Sir, or you must expect some fatal consequence, for
he's so truly Valiant, he'll ne'er permit a Rival to enjoy the Beauty he
admires.


I cannot help it Sir, 'tis now too late, for I'll stand to it; the Writings of
Agreement for settlement of Jointure are drawn up, and tomorrow they and my
Daughter are to be Signed, Sealed, and delivered, and so forth.


I'll soon remove that scruple little Rogue. [to The. Doest hear old Oedipus,
Father and Brother together, she questions my Virtue and Modesty; this comes,
old Priam, of bringing up your Daughter in dull Security and Ignorance.


But Sir, you are Virtuous?


And had my Pusillage as they phrase it?


Yes little one.


A Traveller, and bring home his Maiden-head! damned Absurdity? why 'twas the
only Commodity my Father sent me over to Trade with; had I not bartard it away,
it would have grown musty on my hands: no, no, (thank Heaven) this is a more
knowing trading Age, than to keep such druggs on our hands; I exchanged that
thing with the Air: My Callis. Host's Niece had that Foolery, she was pretty
and deserved it: I'll beget no Fool; I, there are too many in the world
already.


But if you are as you say, you may beget Sooterkins or scab'd-Cookcoes, I'll
stand to it.


By my hands, sound as a Bell, both in Purse and Person: See, see, I have
Commendams of both -- Stanly, What think you of my design? --


Well, hitherto; if you are not discovered, as yet I find no signs they know
you.


Hum -- What's here? (he Reads) A particular of Sir Humfry Hordwell's Estate,
late Deceased, and now Descended to his Nephew Christopher Careless, Esq -- the
Sum total 4000 l. per annum -- As I say, a fair Estate, but he's wild, and I
have past my word already, otherwise my Daughter should have had him.


How's this? A particular of all the Claps Squire Careless has had since the
Age of fifteen, and the several places he got them, with the Catalogue of the
Drs. names that Cured him; as likewise an account of all he has lain with to
this present time? This is the newest and impudentest way of Courtship I ever
knew or heard of yet.


What Laugh you at, little Devil? that shows my Constitution true Steel -- by
my hands it does.


Without question Sir, and it would be a rudeness unpardonable, should I suspect
you otherwise, when a whole College of Physicians have certified your health;
yet I should be loath to venture on so desperate a Lover as you pretend to have
been, for fear he should not make the Song good of a Healthful young vigorous
Lover, and so forth.


By my hands, I'll confirm what they have writ --


I'll stand to it, Brother, you're the merryest man -- But come Brother, as I
say, you and your Friend here shall take a hard Lodging with me; I have one Bed
to spare; ye are used to lye together I hope?


Now this Old Fool will force me to Cuckold him, merely out of Covetousness,
that he will not foul a pair of Sheets extraordinary, -- Yes, yes, Brother,
Travellers always snore together.


Please you to walk in to Supper -- and then I'll show you your Chamber --


What an old Dotard's this; now will he be Pimp to his own Wife, for I'll make
good use of my time, and will not be repulsed as before (aside): Madam your
humble Servant.


Little one, give me thy hand; as gad sa'me good flesh, and of a lushious
Constitution: I find I shall be desperately in Love; Adieu, my Soul, Adieu: But
doest hear, be more complesant and agreeable the next time we meet.


Theo. follow us.


What cursed Ascendant had I at my Birth,
That thus I'm teased by th'dross of all Man-kind:
Not one that's generous designed for me;
Heaven! take my Life, or rid me of these Plagues.
Luce, Prithee what news?

Fear nothing Madam, for I have discovered enough to break off this proposal;
for it is, as I suspected, your Mother-in-Law is the brisk travelled Blade; but
what she designs, as yet I cannot learn; but Betty promises a discovery. Madam,
here's a Letter in a Woman's hand, which I found in the Packet that was left
here for Mr. Loveall, perhaps this may confirm what I have formerly told you of
that false man.


Let me see it -- I'll read it.


My Dearest, Your absence, my indisposition, together with the ill news of your
design of Marrying in London, have reduced me to such weakness, I cannot long
expect to live, nor indeed do I wish for life, if maugre all your Protestations
before Heaven, and those fatal pledges of our Loves, our Children, you at last
prove false, yet Heaven one day may revenge my wrongs: I am sure some Friends,
who (did they know the affront) would soon redress me, but I hope there will be
no need of such exstremity; and that your generosity will prompt you to be just
to her, who is in sight of Heaven,

Your Lawful Wife, Stamford. Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall.

Base Villain.


He comes Madam, now let him know your just resentment of his wickedness.


Madam, such strange attractive influences you're Mistress of, I cannot live one
moment from your sight; oh wrack me not with torturing delay, but kindly say
you will comply with Love, and then my happiness will be complete.


Your strain's too Courtly Sir, to gain belief; therefore your pardon, if I
suspend Credit of them for a time -- but Sir, your Man left Letters for you
with my Maid, and I concluding so deserving a Person as your self, must in your
Life, have some Intreigues of Love, opened one Letter writ in a Woman's hand;
you'll pardon Sir the rudeness which was the effect of Jealousy.


That Jealousy was kind, since it often proves th'effect of Love; and I am so
free from base unworthy acts; that what you term a Rudeness, I esteem an
Honour, since I'm assured you will find nothing there which can prove
prejudicial to my Love, or gain your disesteem.


Your Generosity Sir is questionless, and this has so confirmed what in your
praise I've heard, that when you have read it, you soon will understand what I
intend.


What can she mean by this! let me see.


to Lu. Well Mrs. Sweet lips, what comfort do you give a passionate Lover?


The same as formerly, I'll stand to my Agreement; if your Master and my
Mistress make it a Match, I am yours; if not, your Servant.


But suppose a man should be too far gone for ever recovering, what then? I
hope if thou wilt not commit Matrimony, thou'lt show good natured, and be civil
upon occasion?


Yes, with a Cudgel to cool courage, or with a Halter to end your pain.


Pretty Courtship, 'tis by my troth, and you are wondrous civil.


Now Sir, you guess what I design, false and perfididious as you are.

What wickedness there is in man!
To break those Sacred Vows you made to Heaven,
And to betray poor Innocence to misery.
But now thy Treacheries I know, never expect
I shall comply, and so partake the guilt;
No, you shall never see me more.

How, how's this? never see you more: that's fine y'faith! absurd, absurd, I'll
stand to it; but Minks, he shall both see and feel you too e're I have done; are
you again relapst into your former disobedience? I say comply, or --


I must confess, were th'accusation true, and I of what this Lady charges me,
were guilty, her anger then were just, and death my desert: Read Sir the
horridest Villainy that ever was invented, and inconsistent Sir with one that's
tender of his Honour.


Now Squire, what becomes of your Knight Errant, and your hopes?


Why pretty Kins, I'll not break my heart for thee; but if I lose thee, 'tis
but once singing Fortune my Foe, and twice being drunk will set thee a float
out of my heart, and then farewell to your Ladyship.


Reads -- former protestations -- hum, fatal pledges of our Loves -- (a pretty
phrase for Bastards) crimes -- hum -- affront -- hum -- but your generosity --
hum -- Eliz. Manly, otherwise Loveall -- absurd, absurd, I'll stand to it,
should this be true: I'll try him.


Now Sir, is't possible that a man of Honour can be guilty of so vile an Act?


Lay aside your Honour Sir, and give me leave, as I say; as you hope to be
saved, do not you know this Eliz. Manly? Ha! Answer to that, Answer to that.


Not I, by Heaven Sir.


But that's not the question; as you hope to be Saved, have you no Bastards?
Answer to me that Sir.


Not any Sir, upon my Honour -- that you shall know of; for my Widow, for
ought I know, may be forward with my effects of kindness by this time.


Away, away Sir, with these Complements, and prepare to take her for your Wife
-- Theo. rest satisfied that I am convinced 'tis false; some trick on my life
of your old Lovers; but I'll mar his design: Come, ask his Pardon for that
foul suspicion you had of him.


How Sir?


I say, provoke me not, but beg his pardon without more delay.


By no means Sir, her suspicion was kind, and warranted by this, -- and I am
satisfied.


But by your favour Sir, I am not, and I'll have it so -- acknowledge your
fault Baggage, or I'll stand to it: I'll --


I must comply -- Sir, in Obedience to a Father's power, I acknowledge my unjust
suspicion -- (that you were Virtuous) and I shall be careful hereafter how I
credit Reports that may be prejudicial to your Honour -- (to which thou art a
Stranger) -- your Servant Sir, and expect an entertainment suitable (to your
perjuries) -- for here I Vow, henceforth to study a Revenge on the Promoters
(of your Love to me) --


So, so, now 'tis as it should be; be sure Sir to get the Writings ready
against morning; in the interim I'll endeavour to keep her in this humour she
is now in, lest the Weather-cock of her Female-noddle rear to a colder point.


'Tis in the coldest point already, full North to my desires.


Say you so, then I'll after my little Pirate, and try to win her on our side.


That Letter startled me, when I saw 'twas Dated from Stamford; I suspected my
kind Widow had found out my Amour, and had sent this to forbid the Banes -- I
was a Rogue to serve her so, when she out of Charity entertained and Clothed
me when I was stripped and robbed, to top a false contract and name upon her; but
my Love, for variety, must excuse that fault; and I thank Heaven I have
weathered all storms, and doubt not but to attain my ends; for I Love Theodocia
to that excess, enjoy her I must, Married, or Unmarryed.


If fairly with my Love she not complies,
By stratagem her Virtue I'll surprise.
YOur injuries (kind Friend) shall be redressed; my Father shall not force me
to embrace a man that values not his Vows nor Honour.


But Madam, your happiness depends upon Obedience; you for your safety must
comply with a Father's power; yet I could wish (so well I love him) that it
could be some way hindered.


What shall we do? this is the fatal day, and every minute I expect my Father.


Within -- Rise Daughter, rise.


And I already hear his fatal voice.


'Tis well, make hast; I'll stand to it, the Bride-groom will be here before
you're ready -- Ha Youngster, with whom would you speak so early, Ha?


Now Wit assist me -- Theo. does this morning, and presents her with the
effects of his Love, in a Song which he writ last Night before he went to Bed.


He is very quick: I must Marry her off, or this Travell'd-Brother of mine will
show me an Out-landish trick, and Marry her before I have enquir^d of his
Estate.


What an unluckily accident was this, without question Betty comes with
Intelligence.


Hum, pretty Childish silly stuff; -- can you sing it Little one?


Yes Sir, my Master made it to one of the new Tunes he heard in an Opera at
Paris.


Ah Sacred Boy desist, for I
Comply with your resistless Art;
Your Arrows with such vigour fly,
Already they've inflamed my heart.
I will no more despise your power,
But thus submissively obey;
Yes by your favour, 'twas not your,
But Celia's Victory to day.
For had she Valid that charming face,
And you your keenest Dart had shot;
Yours had been the just disgrace,
And I'd obtained the Victors Lot.
Then not your Power, but Chance admire,
In having such a Friend as she,
Who lent you rays t'encrease my fire,
And thus made you a Deity.
Very pretty; and as I say, your Master can be serious for all his jollity,
Young man.


My Master earnestly desires to speak with you Sir.


I am going to him, for I have received a Letter for him from my Wife --
Daughter make hast and put on your Trinkets, for I expect your Bride-groom
every minute.


Thanks to my invention Madam, I have shifted him -- this Song was presented me
by our Butler, who procured it made by a mercenary Scribler of the Town, for a
fit of Drunkenness, gratis.


Betty, have you found out your Mistresses design yet?


I have, -- and Madam, by what I have learnt, I understand your Maiden-head is
short-liv'd, but I having compassion for your Virtue, and finding my Mistress,
your Moter-in-Law none of the Honestest, am resolved, if possible, to rescue
you from ruin -- for the Blade that came with her is the person whom she
designs to be yours; but not only yours I'll assure you, for my Virtuous Lady
lay with him to Night.


Unheard-of wickedness! -- But which way shall we frustrate their design?


Troth Madam, show 'em a fair pair of heels, for she knows you care not for
Loveall, so that they conclude it easy to win the old Man to their side, and
force you to accept of her Love, as she personates her own Brother; and if so
far she prospers, her Gallant is to be shuffled into your hand when the
Marriage is designed, and by that means chose both my old Master and your
self.


Cunningly contrived -- yet, for all this, I doubt not but to counterplot both
her and Loveall too -- but for better security, we must be gone from this
place.


Make hast then and avoid the Net; and that you may have time for your escape,
I'll in, and hold my Mistress in discourse; and let me know where you intend to
be, and I'll send word what passes at home.


We will be at Essence's, I have some interest with his Wife, till we have an
opportunity to perfect your happiness.


Thou best example of true Friendship.


Your Raptures are too violent to last -- and know Sir, I had not yielded now,
had not my Old Man warranted, or rather justified my proceedure; for his
Penuriousness I could no other way requite, and he was instrumental to his
being a Cuckold, for laying two so full of Love together.


'Tis Theodocia, whom I confess next to your self I love, but chiefly for her
money; for Madam, you are the sole Commandress of my heart; and that I may
hereafter be serviceable to both, so warily I will proceed with her, that she
shall only raise an Appetire, which vigorously I'll lay with you.


Soft Sir, you'll find your stock little enough for her; and for my part, if I
cannot hold out, my Dotards Angels shall turn Prourers at my Command; for I
must confess the truth of the Song you gave me, which says --


Who complys with gay Youth, does prudently choose;
She that yields to old Age, does her passion abuse:
She may languish and sigh, but in vain it will prove;
Age, dulls the brisk flames, and slackens hot Love:
He may kindle a fire, but cannot supply;
So, for want of Loves fuel, her passion must dye.
But Youth that's full fraught with Love and desire,
Creates a true flame, and supplys the blessed fire:
He'll rally, renew it, and with vigour maintain
What dotage endeavours to do, but in vain*
Then give me a Gallant; when I'm yoak^ to old Age,
What the gray-head does raise, his Youth shall assuage.
Betty, what news have you learnt this morning?


Madam, my Master is resolved on the Match between Mrs. Theo. and Mr. Loveall,
notwithstanding the Letter Luce discovered yesterday, for he has sent for Mr.
Loveall this morning; but Luce has been before-hand, and sent Mr. Loveall word
that Mrs. Theo. will meet him at Essence the Milliners, on purpose to prevent
his meeting with my Master's message, and so hinder his coming hither.


That was well done -- but upon what account is Luce so Zealous in breaking off
this Match?


I cannot apprehend the meaning; however, if by her means I gain Theodocia, she
shall not want reward.


I must hold this Youngster in talk till my Daughter is Married to Loveall; or
I'll stand to it, this young Snipper-snapper will, I fear, forbid the banes. Ha
-- what do I see? my Wife dressing her self -- 'tis too true -- absurd, I'll
stand to it.


Cuds'lid, my Husband! what shall we do? all our designs are ruined if he
discovers me --


Let me alone, I'll bring you off, ne'er fear it.


Curse on my Dotage; too late I find my folly in Marrying a young Wife, I could
expect no less in reason, than to be a Cuckold --

Wife! what subtle damned Devil was it put you on this design, to make me the
promoter of my own shame? -- but Sir, for your part, I'll stand to it, I'll
swinge you.


(Laughs). But Sir, do you in earnest conclude my Bed-fellow to be your Wife?


A rat on you -- Are my Eyes my own Sir?


No Sir; if you suspect my Friend for a Woman, if he were not, all thy Wealth
should not purchase her from my Embraces -- here is a Face indeed, as charming
as the notedst Female Beauty; but Nature mistook in moulding every part,
forgetting she had made a Venus-face, placed it on an Adam's Body.


As I say, if this be true, 'tis wonderful! and indeed, I have often heard my
Wife say, that she and her Brother were so alike, (being Twins,) that one could
hardly be known from the other.


Brother, I thought I should surprise you; by my hands, thou art the most
credulous man I ever met with -- but to convince thee of thy Error -- Jack,
prithee tell him what sport we have had at Paris in Masquerade.


Yes Faith, my Friend and I have lived at least three months upon the Pistols
he has had clapped in his hand at Carnival-time, when he went disguised in Woman's
Clothes, as Earnest, for ensuing pleasure.


But say old Trojan, am I so like my Sister?


Like quotha? I durst to have sworn you had been she.


To convince you, search me; do, do: but if thou doest not, thy Daughter shall,
for I am desperately in Love with her.


Absurd, I'll stand to it, that I should take him for my Wife -- But soft good
Brother, my business of this early Visit, was partly to deliver a Letter
directed to you from my Wife; and partly to desire you to forbear any further
amorous discourses with my Daughter, sic volo, sic jubio, you understand me* I
have promised her to another, and this I resolve shall be her Wedding day.


How! this day is she to be Married? and will you slight Squire Careless? take
heed Sir what you do.


Why Sir, I hope you wont Hector me? will you?


I have a greater respect for the young Lady then --


You, a respect for the young Lady? what are you Sir, that dare pretend to have
a respect for my Daughter, Ha?


'Tis no harm Sir, to be Civil to a handsome Lady; it's a Devotion we owe to
Beauty.


But as I say Sir, it is harm Sir, and I'll none of it, therefore show you
civility some where else.


Jack, no more -- Brother, rest content, I'll have none of your Daughter; by my
hands not I -- for my reasons, see there --

Stanly, have courage, the Girl's thine own,
Since this last rub we have so smoothly past,
All little Oppositions I despise.

See, see, the Letter works rarely.


It must take, especially as now I have designed to proceed.


I'll stand to it, the kindest Wife man ever had.


Now should you kneel and prostrate, Damsel, at my feet, I would deny her; by
my hands, not once caress her.


How Sir, can you so easily quit a Lady you so entirely Love?


What's that to you Sir: Good Brother rid my House of this Friend of yours, for
I fear he will prove no Friend of min^, should he stay; I like not his
Countenance, he has the looks of a sly Rogue.


Rogue! you are merry Sir --

You Lye, you're a --

What, what Sir?

What Sir? you're a Quodammodo, I'll stand to it.

A Quodammodo?

Yes, a Quodammodo Sir -- bring your Action, I care not.


Such another word, Old man, will make me very Angry and Extravagant.


Extravagant! I believe it; but march off civilly, or as I say, I shall civilly
make you Sir.


Jack, withdraw, and let me alone; I have a Plot which of necessity must be
prosperous.


Sir, on my Friends request I'll leave your House, but look to it -- a Quodammodo
said you!


Adieu, Huffing Sir -- as gad sa'me he has put me into a filthy pet.


Brother, I have a rare fancy sprung, which if you approve of, must procure
your desire.


In what good Brother?


To make your Daughter comply, and marry this Loveall, whom my Sister mentions
in her Letter; for since (as she writes) you have promised Theodocia to
another, I am resolved to fulfil my Sisters request in assisting you in your
intentions -- in pursuance of which, I have thought on a way, -- 'tis this, --
you say I am very like my Sister?


Right -- what then?


How if I, putting on one of my Sisters Gowns, should personate her, and fairly
at first use persuasions to Theodocia; but if they fail, to use a Mothers
Author^ty, and Lock her up till the business is done.


How? you personate my Wife! and Lock her up! -- well thought on -- I'll none
of that good Brother; soft and fair, I smell a Rat; I understand you, and so
you'll debauch her, if not marry her your self.


Who, I? by my hands, all my Courtship was but Raillery a-la-mode.


But I'll stand to it, you may so a-la mode her, as you call it, that may make
her unfit for a Husband.


The insupportable censure of impotence! I tell thee old Blade, I'd sooner
marry an Orange Wench then thy dull Virtuous Daughter; by my hands I would.


A fitter Wife for such wild Gallants, than an honester Woman, I'll stand to it.


Is not my Reputation at stake? a Sisters Conjuration? by my hands you wrong
me, to suspect my Honour.


But (pardon me Sir) should it come to that extremity of Locking her up, will
you neither say, nor do any thing tending to Debauchery, as you hope to be
saved? gad forgive me.


I'll do neither by Heaven.


Good; now if you should, I'll Indict you for Perjury, and I'll stand to it;
you're a witty Blade, the design must take, for thou art so like my Wife, that I
am almost persuaded to kiss thee for her, but that it is so unseemly for one
man to kiss another.


Then it is a Plot.


It is, and we will about it instantly, the Wench shall furnish you with a Gown
-- yet me-thinks I would be by, tho unseen to her, when you persuade her.


To show you how unjust your suspicion is, you shall.


(Laughs). I cannot but Laugh to think how the young Baggage will be cousened;
you, her Mother?


The deceit will be pleasant, what an innocent Cheat it will be? (to both) --
but let us about it.


Well, I find thy soil Tom, will never produce the fruit of Valour, therefore
I have taken up the safer Cudgells of the two; I have entered an Action of
Battery against Courtly for violently assaulting the body of Dorothy Essence,
my Wife; and my Lawyer tells me, I shall have swinging damages for every bout I
can prove he has assaulted her; and to have damage enough, so soon as I have
dispatcht my Customers, I'll to the Temple-walks, and hire two or three Knights
of the Post, who shall Swear to at least three thousand pounds worth of
Trespass, with which I'll buy an Estate, and turn Country Gentleman.

Fair Ladies, what lack ye? delicate Roman, Italiansscented Gloves, good
Essences, Tiberos, Orange Jessamine, Essence d'Espagne, Fanns, Ribbons in every
point francois -- Boy* -- Boy, bring some Essences.

You are the pleasantest Creature Mr. Essence, I cannot live unless I see you
once a week at least; you're the divertingst person in the Town I swear.


Alas Madam, I, I my pretty hearts; you're the Diamond Queen of the Nation; say
no more, say no more, I have a rich Blade in store for thee; another time,
another time. --

Ha! my pretty Cherubins! --


What a conceited impudent Rascal's this! Essence, a word with you --


I wait on you Madam -- Jack, bring those Spirits came in last from the Iews in
the City; Rogue, you never mind, never mind Sirrah.


Let me see'em Mr. Essence --


There are Scents Ladies -- upon Rep -- oh incomparable! I can Dine as heartily
on a good Roman or Italian Scent, as you can on a dish of Meat -- oh lushious!
excellent! rare!


What do you ask for these Gloves?


Try'em on, try 'em on Queen of hearts -- upon Rep, these Gloves are as well
worth two Guynnies as the common Jessamine half a Crown; but you pretty Beauty
shall give me but an Angel; I be-friend you I assure you; say no more.


Are you Married Mr. Essence?


Yes Madam; yes, I thank my Stars, I am married; I was forced to it, for what
with Maids of Honour, and Country Ladies, I was almost teased out of my Life --
see there, -- a Country Knights Daughter; she has for these two years past, all
the time she has been in Town, been as constant every day at my Shop, as a
Bully at the Ordinaries; and she makes Love so passionately, that I was forced
to take the opportunity of her being out of Town when I married, and so choust
her (poor soul) yet she cannot forbear coming still.


You're very hard-hearted, that could refuse so pretty a Lady; how chance it you
did not marry her? had she no fortune?


Yes, Madam, yes, pretty well, some hundreds; but alas, a Country Damsel is not
fit for us Traders in this lewd Town, they'd soon find out the fashionable
Trade, to our costs -- Faelix quem faciunt Madam, I am as to that point wise,
at my Neighbours expense; wag your Honour, wag your Arm a little --

But I fear my Town-Soul has plaid me a prank; but Tom. that secret's for thy
self alone.

-- Ha Madam; how Ceraphically it sits, and for Scent, smell; smell it little
Ceraphim.


What means the Fellow -- You're Saucy --


How? Saucy in commending my Commodities, pretty, pretty -- prithee smell again
--

This, ay this is it y'faith -- -- Cudslid you Whore --


How now Tom, quarrelling with your Customers?


Customers with a pox, -- I have exposed to Air, at least a dozen papers of my
best Roman and Italian Gloves; smell Mr. Loveall -- and the Baggage laid out
nothing but a box o'th'Ear; but I had repartee'd it, had not you staid my hand
-- but Mr. Loveall, I am heartily glad to see you in Town again, the Ladies have
so wanted you at my Shop.


Sirrah, will you never leave your Lying to one that knows you? you were a pure
Rogue to put a common Whore upon me when I was last in Town, for a person of
Quality; but look to it Rascal, for I'll trappan thee into Matrimony for it,
and then Cuckold thee.


Say you so, then hang care, I find 'tis impossible to be a Married man and no
Cuckold, for the Misses who are kept, are more true to their words than the
Wives now a days are to their Oaths they make in the Church -- Loveall, as I
hope to be Alderman, and ride in Scarlet, and have the Blew-coat Boys sing
Iordans Poetry before me to the Spittle, I was credibly informed she was a
Person of Honour.


Yes, of VVhetstones Park, Moseleys Damsels were Nuns to her, and she was so
Pockey, that she embraced the offer of a French Valet to go over into France
to get Cure.


A person of Honour may get a Clap, or so, who can help it -- but is she gone
to Paris? that I had known it sooner.


What would that have advantaged you?


Much, much Sir; for I would have sent a Venture by her for Gloves, Ribbons,
and Essences: Those kind obliging souls buy three to one Cheaper than your Coy
Virtuous Women, I know it by experience; the little Goddesses of Love have the
prettiest Wheadlingst ways, that what I have lost by Selling to them, I have
choust the Honest Women of -- look you -- there goes a Rogue who has at least
three times given me the go-by for several pair of Gloves -- She has called in
a Coach to see some, fitted her self, fallen into a Laugh, pretended business,
and made the Coach-man drive away hastily, sans paying a-gad: But hanged, I
always got up my loss by the next Virtuous Customers have come, which is the
cause of the Report that I sell dear -- but Mr. Loveall, I must live; should I
be reasonable to the Honest, I should lose abominably.


A precious Rascal, to make the sober Ladies of the Town maintain the Misses: On
my Life, this was some thrifty Gallants invention, to mitigate his expense of
Keeping.


Upon Rep Sir, my own Invention, to make the Rich Charitable to the Indigent
members of Venus-encounters -- See, I have a swinging Catalogue of 'em, here,
all Debtors, who are to pay treble for the Commodities they have taken up,
when they come to the Preferment of being kept by Lords or Country Cullyes; so
that in my own defence, I'am forced now and then to top 'em on some shallow*
brained Lord or Knight, to hedge in my Debts.


Laurence, are the Writings finished?


Yes Sir, they are done, but I having had no warrant to pay the Fees, the
Lawyers would not trust.


What's a Clock?


Almost Twelve Sir -- you must make hast, or the Canonical hour will be past;
and if the old Man should be in a pet, he may chance to stop your Marriage till
to morrow.


Fear it not -- for I will not sleep, till it be in Theodocia's Arms; let us
hast to the Temple for the Writings, from thence I'll fly to take possession
of the two great blessings of the World, Wealth and Beauty.


Whose mighty Charms the World could ne'er withstand,
For their joint powers both Age and Youth command.
MY restless soul stung with Theodocia's Falsehood, hurries me head-long to a
wild despair, yet mighty Love controlls my faint Resolves -- but spite of
Love, and all his mistick trifling, no longer I'll sustain my Injuries -- but
stay --

This Husband of mine is possessed, that's certain, and should I be so too, he'd
soon be fashionable, which I am resolved to make him, if he continues longer in
his Whimsies.

-- Ha! here's the fine Gallant again, as pat as may be; well Thomas, look to
thy Head, for if this Blade proves kind, something to your cost may follow. --


Married! and broke her Vows! and still enjoys an undisturbed mind! -- she
shall not long, -- for like her ill-genius, I'll hant her every where with
repetitions of her faithless Acts -- since thou fair faithless Creature hast
robbed me of a constant Love as thou'st made me, thou shall it be wretched too.


Hem -- hem, sweet Sir your Servant --


Oh the disquiets of an Injured soul!


How do you do Sir? -- goodness


What mean you Woman? --

It shall be so, I will revenge my self on all the Sex; first force this Tyrant
from my soul, then practising dissembled Love, like her, I'll win 'em to my
cursed end, and then expose 'em to eternal shame.


Upon my life some Ill-natur'd Creature has denied his request, which makes him
out of humour; but I'll make amends for the rudeness, and will comply if he has
the goodness to ask, let it be what it will, for I find I shall not be able to
refuse him any thing -- Sir, as I was saying -- pray how do you.


Fire and Gun-powder! my Wife and Courtly together again! where be these
Catch-pole Rogues now, they might kill him with Authority, should he resist --
how-ever I'll in, and fetch a Weapon, and by knocking him down, secure him till
they come to Arrest him.


One word for pity Sir -- my heart beats heavily, and I am so concerned for
you, that I Vow I am strangely indisposed -- Oh I am sick --


Ha! the Woman faints --


The Spirit, the Spirit Sir, quick, quick -- rub my Temples Sir, pray do --
what not one kiss --


Damn her, 'tis Counterfeit -- and the whole Sex is a Cheat -- thus Theodocia
seemed, when I took leave of her and left the Town -- but I no sooner gone, but
she resigned my Interest to another --


Hold me a little harder Sir -- squeze me harder yet Sir; fear not, you cannot
hurt me Sir -- the Duce take him, he understands me not sure!


Blood must ensue -- were he at his Prayers, I'd knock him o'th'head --
Cuckold me quotha? a good jest y'saith -- but I'll maule his Mazzard, were he
as stout as Hector or Goliath -- hum -- hum, -- Valour assist me; Tom, stand
to it, and cool his courage in the midst of Courtship -- now Sir, after my
hearty Commendations --


Curse on my Eyes, what do I see? that hated Fop --


Pox on him, his looks make me tremble like an Aspin-leaf: Friend Thomas, thy
disgrace will be insupportable; what, Cuckold and Coward too, thy Father was as
pretty a spark as e're played Trial of Skill at the Bear-Garden.


Sirrah, retire from my sight instantly, or by Heaven I shall grow wild.


This is the Kings High-way Sir --


Do you dispute Sirrah? --


I'm gone, I'm gone Sir -- 'tis a hard case, a man must be forced to leave his
Wife with her Gallant -- but I'll be near to hear and see what you do --


Wherein can I be Serviceable Madam --


Cannot you guess Sir? I am young, have an Ill-natur'd Husband, and I Vow you
are Sir -- but you'll think me a Wagg, should I tell you my mind --


No, no, no, speak, what am I? --


You are Sir -- Lord I blush so -- pray turn your back Sir -- you are -- pray
Sir do --


Torment! -- now Madam speak, you are obeyed --


Upon my Credit Sir, you are the most desirable man I ever saw, and could wish
--


Could wish I would do -- what?


Revenge my quarrel on a necessary, but ill natured Fool, called a Husband --


To Cuckold him or so? --


I Vow you are an Ingenious person, and guess admirably well Sir. --


Oh Theodocia, too late I find the falseness of thy Sex.


Nay Friend of mine, thou can not want a greater Whetstone for thy Valour
than her Impudence.


Rogue, are you here again --


For no harm, no harm I Vow to gad Sir -- I only come to pare away the dirt my
Neighbours have cast at my Door -- Sure my Father begot me in an Alarm, for I
have fear enough to put a whole Town into Confusion.


My Husband just in the nick -- what ill Luck was this.


That Perjured Villain here? how I loath the sight of him.


do you tamely stand, and let that Fellow rob you of your Honour?


Troth Mrs. Theo. I cannot help it, for to say truth, I am a very Giant in
thought, but a Dwarf in action; I understand the Theory of fighting, but the
thoughts of blood and wounds have kept me from the practick part, or by this
time I had peppered him.


So poorly-spirited! you deserve no better Fate --


What means she?


Madam, in vain you Counterfeit a Passion, a second time I will not be
deceived; you're faithless grown, and hast betrayed thy Honour to Eternal
Infamy -- Oh Theodocia, Reproach me not with Vows, which you, as I thought with
as spotless Zeal did echo to -- but now -- thy choice, thy abject choice
declares thy Honour lost, thy former Love Hypocrisy.


Good Heaven! he thinks to palliate his wrongs with a pretended Crime I should
be guilty of -- art thou grown so hardened in thy sin, to prosecute it in the
face of Heaven and all the world, and basely to justify your injuries to
plighted Love, would brand my Honour with Inconstancy.


to Mrs. Essence. Madam, your Charms do so surprise my soul, that without the
blessed enjoyment of your Love, I shall be the wretchedest breathing -- as now by
Heaven I am --


Lard Sir, your Complements are strangely obliging --


Are they so? Very fine y'faith! --


That my Block-head were out of the way now; well I must, I Vow, that's the
short and long on it.


Courtship before my Face I cannot bear -- desist, or thy speedy death shall
justify my Passion, and thou shall it fall a Victim to my tormented soul --


Good kind heart, how Zealous she is in my Cause still; well -- she's an
excellent Friend, and a pretty Creature; and had I been as high-spirited as
she, the man had been knocked o'th'head by this --


Do, take my Life, and glory in the act, and by one fatal blow, cancel those
Vows you made, and which are lodged here in my heart Theodocia, then you may
uncontrolled, possess your worthy choice.


What a Medley is this? it madds me that I am so disappointed --


Don't think that this pretended Anger, for I know not what shall excuse the
affront you have done me; no, no, a Woman's a Woman, and has a Spleen as well
as man, understands points of Honour too; you conceive me -- my Husband should
be my own -- but this lewd Age -- yet I'll say no more --


I understand her not -- I know that thou art false --


Witness Heaven, if I am false, you showed me the way -- but to convince you,
here take my Life -- and by my death I will declare my Innocence.


Innocence!


Innocence! a good jest y'faith -- when you become the blot of my Scutcheon,
and exalt my Horn above my Neighbours; this is Innocence, is it -- but Cudslid
I'll not endure it -- oh good Sir, I forgive Rep I meant no harm; be pleased to
buy any good Gloves or Ribbons, Essences for your Periwig -- pray walk in Sir
-- Pox on him --

Oh are you come, that's well; there's your man, do your Office --


Arrested! what means this Riddle?


Riddle Sir? you are like to unfold it as you have my Wives Riddle, Pox on your
Learning for your pains --


What does my Sot design by this? I'll observe, he's such an impertinent Ass,
that I am ashamed to own him, for fear this Gallant should have the worse
opinion of me for his sake, and disappoint my Expectations --


Rascals, at whose Suit am I Arrested? and for what?


Come, come Sir, I can handle and talk to you too, now you are in the hands of
Justice, as they say; you are Arrested at my Suit Sir --


At yours Villain, Slave, yours?


Even so Sir, at mine and my Wives injuries, great injuries you have done me,
Rep must be satisfied.


What wrongs have I done thee? had thou affronted me, thou art a thing would
more deserve my pity than revenge -- and for thy Wife --


Dishonouring her, is I suppose a trivial thing, but now you'll find the due
reward for Treachery.


Ay, ay, he shall find to his cost, for I can prove three thousand pounds worth
of Assault and Battery Sir, you have committed on my Wife.


I injure her! Villain, thou Lie --


I swear, and so he does, for he has not done me reason yet, as they say; but
if he had, it would have been no Trespass, for I Vow he should have had free
ingress, egress, and regress to do what he pleased -- had you not come as you
did --


Cruel Fair, wherein have I done any thing might merit this ill Usage.

I injure thee! by all that's good, it is as false as thou art to thy former
Vows, -- oh Theodocia --


Hy day, I talk of my Wife, and he addresses himself to Mrs. Theo --


Were not thy perjuries sufficient --


Leave fiddle faddle Sir, and answer to the point -- did you never lye with my
Wife, ha? how say you, ha?


I never had so foul a thought towards Theodocia --


Look you there again now -- tell not me of what you thought of Mr. Theo. but of
my Wife.


Of Theodocia your Wife, I was talking of.


Theodocia my Wife? ha, ha, he; sure the man is mad.


Is not this Lady your Wife?


A Lady might have been my Wife, if I had been kind, but that time is past.


I am amazed! then the Picture I saw in your hand, you had from this Woman?


Even so Sir -- this Whirly-gigg is my Spouse.


He tells you true Sir, and it is as true that I am that Fellow's Wife, a base
Rascal as he is to suspect my Virtue.


Virtue! Au Lord! and have been Courted by a Batchellour-spark of the Town!
that is the common pretence of all the Whores, tho they have lain with half
the Town --


Sirrah, you think by accusing me, to excuse your own base actions; but I'll
not bear it, marry won't I; I brought a good Portion, and will be respected and
humoured, marry will I.


Yes, you shall be respected, but -- with a Cudgel -- if you go on Cuckolding
me, I'll tell you but so.


What an unexpected change is here?


How have I been wandering in a Labyrinth of Errors since I came to Town, and
Theodocia's injured Virtue strikes such a terror through my heart, that I am
all Confusion -- Madam, can you pardon one who basely has suspected Virtue and
Innocence -- some small excuse I have, though not enough to justify my wrongs
to your fair self; for meeting this Fellow with my Picture which I had given
you at my going out of Town, and he affirming he had it from his Wife, and it
being reported in the Country that you were Married, made me conclude this was
your Husband, which made me act deeds I am now ashamed of --


Blessed mistake! since it has tried and proved your generous Constancy, and I
should rather ask your pardon for having been the Original of your past
troubles, tho not wilfully; for Fainting last night at the door, and having
your Picture in my hand, I dropped it; but when I came to my self, in vain I
looked, for I could not find it.


At that very time I saw you in my Husbands Arms; and suspecting him for
Lewdness, I came with a design to surprise ye together, but ye were too quick,
and there I found the Picture.


Au Lord, what will become of me now? the burden of all will light on my
Shoulders.

Yes, yes Sir, 'tis too true what the Woman says -- and here is the Picture.


Woman, you Clownish What-de-lack? no Woman of your making --


Say you so, then it would have been no news if you had Cornuted me -- and I
fear the mistake has gone too far for my Rep, pray Sir speak comfort to a
Jealous mind; did you not revenge the affront I offered you, upon my Wife? --
the truth good Sir, and I heartily forgive you, for I was justly served for
being such a Coxcomb to conclude what I had not thoroughly examined.


Friend, rest satisfied, I have neither injured you or your Wife, but your
Jealousy was enough to have made her extravagant; therefore have a care how
you provoke a Woman hereafter.


Ay Tommy, as this Gentleman says, take heed how you stir up my Granam Eves
curiosity in me any more -- if you do, I shall be for Forbidden fruit -- but I
forgive you this time, as you should me, and cease to be Jealous, or I shall be
sollicitous for you know what -- Madam, I hope you'll pardon my late
miscarriage, I Swear I meant no harm, not I, I Vow.


Sir, upon Rep I am obliged to you, and now -- my dear, let us embrace and sign
peace -- me thinks this looks like our Wedding-day -- if hereafter I break this
League of Amity, I give thee free liberty of Conscience.


Which I shall take, but till then Tommy, give me no cause, and I will be
yours, and only yours, till death, Dorothy Essence.


Well said Chuck -- Enter a Boy, whispers T. Ess, Sir your Servant; Mrs. Theo.
your Slave: Customers are come whom I must wait on -- Mrs. Theo. use my Shop,
and pray do you too Sir; upon Rep, I'll sell cheaper to you two, than to any I
know, for being the instruments of Reconciliation between my Dolly and I.


Dear Friend, what news hast thou learnt in my absence? does my Father cruelly
persist in his design to make me Loveall's Bride.


Madam he does -- but what's the meaning of this? Mr. Courtly here? and
reconciled? by what strange accident were ye made Friends.


Our Stars only tried our passions by some unlucky influences -- but Madam, if
you please, we may frustrate your Father's power if you will vouchsafe to make
me happy with your fair self.


The Proposal's good, embrace it Madam, and put it instantly in execution; for
should either your Father or Mother find you, you'd be in a desperate
condition.


Mrs. Theo. if I can serve you, command me, and Sir, you too may add yours to
hers, and you shall see how cheerfully I will obey.


I am obliged to you Mrs. Essence, -- and Friend, your proposal corresponds
with my wishes, -- yet a Father's anger, which will be inflamed too by a
disappointed Step-Mother, may produce a fatal consequence to all my hopes.


Indeed your Mother is impatient for your coming home, and I have promised to
bring you; but to prevent all danger, I have contrived a way to disappoint your
Mother, and Mrs. Essence may be Serviceable.


Which I willingly would be, if it be an Intrigue; for I love Intreigues with
my heart, and if you please to walk into my house, we will discourse further of it
-- pray walk in Madam -- Sir, I beseech you --


Ah Madam, this happy hour will make full satisfaction for our past
misfortunes.


Now for the rifling of Loves charming spoils -- Laurence, have you the
Licence ready?


Yes, yes Sir, here is the warrant of Condemnation -- and the Writings from
your Lawyer; he Swears he has tied you neck and heels -- look you Sir -- dear
Parchment, to the tune of Twenty Guynnies.


Mr. Loveall, your Servant; my Master is in great expectation of you Sir, pray
make hast to him, for he is so humoursome, that should you be absent any
longer, it may endanger you the losing of my Daughter, and me the Honour of
having so worthy a person for my Son-in-Law -- which I'll prevent, if possible
--


I am obliged to you Madam, and am glad to see your health so soon restored.


Indeed Sir for the present I was Ill, but having taken the Air, and lying out
one Night from this close Town --


In the Arms of your kind Friend Stanly. --


My health returned, and I was loath to put my Master to charges, which made me
put off my intended Journey -- pray walk in Sir --


your Servant Madam --


Here' s Luce with Theodocia, 'twas well I shifted him off before they came --


thy diligence shall be rewarded; Daughter, no words, but along with me --

Now Stanly, I'll perform my promise --


So, this was a luckey Conveyance -- now to prepare for my own affairs --

Loveall, at last I've caught thee in my Net,
In vain you'll strive, for you're past retreat.

Mr. Loveall! in good time Sir, I'll stand to it, I have a quarrel with you;
what, stay till the Canonical hour be past? Absurd, absurd, I begin to suspect
you have no Love for my Daughter; if you had, you would have made more hast --


Not I Love fair Theodocia?


As I say, not Love her, or you would have been here sooner; but now Sir I am
resolved she shall not be Married till to morrow; for my opinion is, that all
Marriages after the Canonical hour are Unlawful; and consequently the Women are
but a kind of Licensed Whores, which my Daughter shall not be, if I may have my
will; I will not bate an Ace of the Canonical hour Sir, I am a Church of
England man Sir, I'll stand to it I am.


But under favour Sir, our Church respects not time, but administration; if it
be by One in Orders, and according to the Ceremony of the Church, let it be at
any time, 'tis good -- but Sir, for fear some scrupulous man should refuse,
what think you of taking a Coach to Pancras-Church, there it will be done
effectually, for that is a place of Privilege and Liberty to Marry without
Lincenses, and at any time --


A place of Privilege and Liberty? a place of Debauchery, I^le stand to it --
what an age is this! that our Mother-Church should have Loop-holes as well as
the Laws! for those places of Liberty, as you stile 'em, serve only to Debauch
our Children from their obedience; for when they have no mind to Marry the
person of their Parents approbation, they run away with some indigent
smooth-tongu'd Fellow to your place of Liberty (as you call it) and Marry him
for Love forsooth, and commonly take their first taste of man in one of the
Bawdy-houses, near that Church, and I'll stand to it; I believe the Beds infect
'em, and make 'em turn Whores, and Cuckold their Husbands, as most do --


Must then my happiness be deferred till to morrow Sir?


Ay, indeed must it Sir, the rather too, because I have not perused the Deeds
of settlement yet.


Here they are Sir, and the License too.


Very good, very good, let me see 'em.


I have performed my promise, your Daughter is within.


Oh Brother -- I am oblig^d to you -- now Mr. Loveall, you have nothing to do,
but to prepare to be Married to morrow -- pray know this Gentleman, 'tis my
Wives Brother, a notable Wagg, I'll stand to 't -- and he disguised himself on
purpose in Petty-coats, to put a trick upon my Daughter, and cousin her into
obedience -- come, come, I know you are surprised, and think it is my Wife, he
is so like her -- embrace I say, embrace him, I'll stand to 't, you shall --


By Heaven his very Wife* for I know no Brothe^ that she has -- however, since
she has brought Theodocia home, I'll favour her design, but I cannot imagine
what will be the end of it -- Sir, I must acknowledge the Obligation you have
done me, in bringing fair Theodocia to be my Bride --


But now I have her in my power Old Sir, I am resolved not to surrender her
till I am assured of her Portion.


Thou art the notablest Lad I e're met with, but to satisfy you, I engage
before ye all, to pay down on my Daughters Wedding day the Sum of Six Thousand
Pounds; besides, it may be, a settlement of my whole Estate upon her and her
Heirs for ever.


Done like a Father of so deserving a Daughter.


And I hope you'll say I do deserve your Daughter, when you shall see with what
obliging kindness I shall use her -- and my Uncle too has made a Settlement of
his whole Estate upon me.


And you are resolved to give this Portion?


As I say, I'll stand to it --


Stanly, bring forth your Bride --


See Sir, as to my own particular, I have kept my word; but my Friend here, has
both won Married your Daughter, and now I hope the Portion will be ready --

How! my Daughter Married to that Hector? Brother --


Mistake not Sir, now my business is done, I resign that Title, and re-assume
that of a dutiful Wife; and to say true, I never had a Brother.


Ha, is this true? -- was it you then that wore the Breeches, and made me a
Cuckold in my own House? you're a Harlot, I'll stand to it, and I'll take a
course with you, for I'll be Divorst if money and Law can do it; but first I'll
cancel the Settlement I made on thee, of my Estate for Life, but it was with
power of Revocation; and next, I'll turn that graceless wretch out of doors --
'tis well you have the modesty to hide that shameless Face --


Theodocia Married!


What will become of thee Laurence? for since thy Master has mist of the
Mistress, thou art in danger of losing the Maid --


Fret on Sir, yet 'twill not do, for your promise is good, the Portion must be
paid, and Divorse when you will, the Prerogative-Court will give me Alimony,
and the Chancery Separation money, enough to maintain a Gallant.


An absurd impudent Strumpet, I'll stand to it -- but I am well enough served
for Marrying when I was past the use of Woman --


Was this the Assignation you made your Gallant, Madam? --


The very same Sir --


Even so will; for when I came, her kindness turned to this, and forced this
Lady into my Arms to Marry, which you may be assured I did very unwillingly;
but as you say -- Persecution is come abroad, and we must suffer patiently --


Villain, thou never shalt enjoy her; thus I'll force a passage to thy soul,
and cancel all those Vows you've newly made to this Lady --


Now I have possession Sir, I shall not easily resign my Interest.


Hold, hold, good Gentle-men, Murder not one another for me --


Mrs. Essence!


Nay, then take heart of grace good Laurence, for there's hope again; what Mrs.
Essence!


The Milliner's Wife in Theodocia's Clothes -- then I must rest content, since
I am out-witted


Cursed Stars, am I Cousen'd then?


Huswife, what have ye done with my Daughter? you have her Clothes --


Be not angry Mr. Monylove, she's gone about a certain Intrigue, and to carry
it on, she desired my assistance: Now I, loving harmless witty Intreigues from
my heart, readily complied, and I was thus disguised, and brought by Mrs. Luce
to be Married to a person in Mrs. Thodocia's name; and I Vow, me-thinks 'tis a
very pleasant Intrigue.


A Devil on your pleasant Intrigue, I am like to lose a fair Fortune by it;
nothing Vexes me now, but that I did not perfect the Marriage, that in revenge,
when the Cheat should be discovered, I might have Hanged thee for having two
Husbands --


I Vow Sir, I admired at your forbearance, am glad you did not urge it on me,
for I fear I should have yielded, you Embraced me so passionately, and Kissed
me so pleasantly!


There's some hopes left, since she has mist of her design --


Joy, joy to you Stanly, you are the happy man to have a Fortune forced into
your arms --

Well, I am Jealous again, what a Devil should my Wife do with Courtly now?
something more is in it than I can at present apprehend -- and what their
business is here, for my blood I cannot guess --


What, what do I see, Mr. Courtly and my Daughter together?


Who desire your Blessing, which is only wanting to complete and crown our Joys
--


Then she's beyond all hopes, e're to be retrieved --


Baggage, out of my sight --


Call my Wife names? that must not be -- Neighbour forbear Ill-language, or
look you, de'fee, the Law shall gag you -- what tho she be somewhat faulty,
yet my Wife's my own Sir, and no one shall Correct her but my self -- Ha, Mrs.
Theo. in my Dolls Pettycoats? --


What ails the Fellow? shall not I Correct my own Daughter? if you want your
Wife Sir, there she is, Married to one of the Town-Hectors, I'll stand to it --


Married! Married! oh insatiable! what, two Husbands! is this true? confess and
be hanged, for so thou shalt, if it be proved --


In vain are all excuses; go, go, I'll never own you more, and your
disobedience will justify my intention, to give my Estate to Mr. Loveall in
satisfaction for the affront you have done him.


First hear what I can say in Vindication of her actions -- she could not
otherwise have done in Honour, her Vows by your command, being given to her now
Husband Mr. Courtly -- but grant she had been free, yet Loveall could not have
Married without the forfeit of his Honour; to prove the truth of which, read
there the Accusation of his intended Perjury --


Ha! this is the Widow -- too true, 'tis she, curse on her ill-tim'd presence
-- had I been sure of Theodocia, I'd have out-fac'd, nay, and out-ly'd the
Devil before I'd have resigned that beauteous Treasure -- but now it is too
late --


Do you not know me Sir? view me well -- not yet know me? -- to convince you, I
am the person you have endeavoured basely to abuse -- see here -- that Ladies
Picture enclosed I basely seek Revenge, thy Life is forfeited -- but Love in
me's more powerful -- therefore to salve my Honour, you must -- Marry me -- if
not --


I am past evading it, nor indeed would I, since I have lost Theodocia, --
She's Rich and Handsome -- Faith Madam I must plead guilty, I have been a very
Villain, -- but then consider Widow, 'twas Love, all powerful Love of your
sweet Self made me act so extravagantly; but if now thou prov'st kind-hearted
and forgiv'st me, I'll proclaim thy mercy to the world, and Seal it in the next
Church we come to --


What's here? a Contract of Marriage between William Lovett and Theodocia
Landwell, of Stamford, Widow; what is this to Mr. Loveall, Luce?


Sir, I confess it my hand, and intended for my name, but that my Uncle had
provided your Daughter for my Wife -- but since that does not succeed, I am
resolved to execute what I then designed only as a Cheat on this Ladies Virtue;
Widow, your pardon; Widow, your pardon.


How! is Luce a Widow?


Yes Sir, this is the Widow who formerly I told you relieve'd me and my Man,
when we were Robbed and Stripped.


What a turn is this! a Rich Widow my The's Maid? a good jest I'll stand to it.


Thus disguised, I gained admittance into this Lady's Service, to prevent my
Disgrace, and her Ruin, as it might have proved; for, by my contrivance, both
yours and your Daughters Honour is unsullied, seeing she has performed her Vows
to Mr. Courtly --


The Widow! what Ill-luck was it that I did not get into my Masters Saddle.


You're a Witty pretty, Pretty witty Widow, I'll stand to it -- Mr. Loveall --
'twas absurd, absurd in you to do so ill an action -- however I'll stand your
Friend to your Uncle, and as I say, Marry her, and I'll justify it --

Mr. Courtly, take my Daughter, and bless ye together, and I hope you'll pardon
my intention of Cousening you; I am Old Sir, 'twas for money, a greater Estate,
a greater Estate; and you know we Old men are as amorous on money as you young
Gallants on fair Maids; I'll stand to it, I am Sir, as I say I am.


My Obedience Sir, for the future, shall show my Forgiveness of your intended
wrong, since I have full possession of my Theodocia.


Pshaw, pshaw Sir, your reasoning is vain, do not I know the tricks of the
Fashionable Wives, they make nothing of marrying their Gallants now a days, but
I'll not allow it; you have m^rry'd her Sir, and shall keep her Sir, for I'll
have nothing more to say to her; a fair riddance of her say I, and if she goes
on marrying at this rate, the Town will be but one great forked head of her own
making, upon Rep.


Essence, you must pardon your Wife, for what she did was at our request, and
innocently done.


Pardon her? not I, therefore take her to you Sir, or I'll have her hanged Sir,
and then I'll have the Five hundred pound Lass, whom I was informed had but
three.


What she did, was at my desire Mr. Essence --


To gain time for our marriage, and to prevent Mrs. Monyloves discovering us
before our Joys were complete.


A Pox upon it, it was too true; you may take your Jessamine butter-pot home,
for any use I have made of her.


I'll stand to it Neighbour Essence, she's a witty discreet Woman, and it will
be absurd if you do not pardon her.


'Twas only a harmless Intrigue, such as my Neighbour Tattle and I used when
we went Maskt to the Galleries at the Play-houses, to hear the fine Gentle-men
talk None-sence, and Swear, to be thought Wits -- and this Gentle-man (if I am
not deceived) used to be one of 'em.


Say you so? then I'm satisfied, since Rep is whole again -- but Doll, provoke
me no more to Jealousy; and doest hear, by way of prevention, go no more to
the Play-Houses maskt; for there is a scurvey Proverb, and you may be caught at
last -- Your Pitcher may be cracked with often use -- yet I will not bar you of
your pleasure, but be contented to go the seldomer, and I'll set you in a Box,
as well as our Neighbours Wives; for the Pit and Galleries are become
down-right Conventicles of Bawdery; one cannot hear a Play in 'em, for the
Chattering of the fluttering Blades to a Company of Pockey-fac'd Creatures in
Vizards, upon Rep -- but Doll --


Use freedom with discretion, and you'll see
Tom Essence understands Civility.
Page 4. 3. Line 20. for Adams Body, read Adonis Body.

NOw I had rather, Sirs, be hanged, than come
To know your Courtesies about our Doom:
You've been applied to, all the several ways
Man's Wit could think of to procure your Praise,
Yet ne'er has any yet successful been,
To gain your Favours, or Applauses win;
When monstrous Fools ye have been made o'th'Stage,
Such provocation justifi'd your Rage.
We've only now an Essence shown -- poor Man,
Whose Jealousy was Author of his pain,
But yet the Fop recovered Rep again.
-- But now me thinks a Cloak-Cabal I see,
Whose Prick-ears glow, whilst they their Jealousy
In Essence find -- but Citty-Sirs, I fear,
Most of You have more cause to be severe:
We yield you are the truest Character.
But Tommy Swears by Rep -- your Whoring lives
Are but too bad examples to your Wives.
If each man to his Dolly would be true,
Then like my self, yours would be honest too:
But, Sirs, I Vow it was with much ado.

