In the latter Age, ere Critics dared to Damn,
Or Censure rashly, what deserved a Name;
When Bully Ben lugged out in Cat'line's Cause,
And huffed his duller Audience to Applause,
Then if the Poet swore 'twas good, each Guest
Believed the Author, and approved the Feast:
But now in humble Prologue, the poor Muse
Implores your favour, and for mercy sues.
To day the ty'rd Satyr takes his rest,
And has at last himself a Fool confessed:
In vain is all his Malice, or his Art,
He jerks, you grin, and damn him when you smart.
This Ag's Crimes are past good Satyrs Cure,
He scarce can lash you more than you'll endure.
The busy States-man, can in a well-writ Scene
See Treason punished, and yet Plots again:
Young Gaming Heirs, who see poor Cully tricked,
Laugh at the Jest, and the same Night are nicked.
The London Cuckold sees his Brother Horned,
Yet is not by the Stage-Example warned.
The high kept Miss can see poor Jiltals fate,
Yet Cuckolds her kind Keeper for a Treat:
Since Headlong Folly then unchecked will reign,
Successful Satyr but Rebels in vain*
Our harmless Author therefore bid me say,
That even Fopp'ry goes untouched to day;
There's scarce a knotted Fringe in all his Play.
The stately Side-Box Beau may cock his Nose,
And Mob'd up Phillis take a Morning Dose
Of fifty Dishes at the Choc'late-House.
And when the Consort's done, the Ladies may
There entertain the Beaux till break of day,
And still pretend they for their Coaches stay.
Men of no business to the Court may come,
And Essenc'd Wigs Perfume the Drawing Room;
Where, on the Window, Fops, their Wit to prove,
Write Petty-Treason to the God of Love.
In short, whatever Crimes o'r run the Town,
Here's none to day that are with Malice shown:
We've Plot and Humour too, but as for Wit,
Let that be judged by the discerning Pit.

MR. Justice, this was kindly done of you, to come and meet us.


Since I knew of your coming into the Country, I could not do less than ride
out a Mile or two, and now, Mr. Alderman, you are welcome to Canterbury.


Sir, I thank you.


What! are not your Daughter and Niece light out of the Coach yet?


I bid 'em stay till we had determined which Inn to lodge at, where is the best
entertainment?


Let me see, there is the Three Kings, and there the Old Kings Head. I protest
this Riding out has got me a Stomach; I'll see which House has the best
provisions, and we'll take up there.


Do so; in the mean time I'll step to the Coachman and pay him.


And order my Man to have my Horse home.


Speak in the Star there, Tapster.


Chamberlain, show up into the Rose, quickly.


Mr. Justice.


Mr. Greedy.


I see, Sir, you have a Coach full of Friends come to Town, please to let 'em
be my guests, they shall have civil entertainment.


Sir, here they may have excellent accommodation.


Mr. Justice.


Sir.


Look you Neighbours, all favour and affection set aside, what have you to Eat
and Drink, what curiosity have you for Supper, there's the point?


For Wine, Sir, I have such a Pipe of Canary pierced but this Morning --


Right Racy Canary.


Three Years old, as full of Nits as the Sun is of Motes, sparkling, as 'twere
the extract of Diamonds.


Say thou.


'Twill make a Cat speak, a Judge deaf and dumb, an old Man get Children, or
bring a Dead Man to life again. 'Tis a ^lower Mr. Justice.


I have such a Butt of Malago, Rich Old Malago.


Old Malago!


And such a Butt of Sherry!


Sherry too, and Old Malago! there's a double blessing; let me taste --


Then if you are for Claret, Sir --


Or for White -- Sir.


I have such --


Not the like in England.


Hold, hold Friends, all this is very well, what have you not that's Eatable.


You may have Mutton --


Or Lamb --


Or Rabbits --


Or Chickens --


Or Pigeons --


Some young Turkeys, Sir, some young Turkeys.


Or a Pig, a Pig, a delicate fat white Sow Pig.


Pig -- Pig -- delicious meat.


Sir, I have three brace of the plumpest young Patridge.


Young Patridge!


And I a brace of the rarest Pheasants.


Mr. Justice, I have such a rarity, such a morsel of Meat.


What's that, what's that?


I had a whole live Calf sent me from Flanders, and within you may see such a
Chine of Gaunt Veal --


Gaunt Veal! O blessing sent from Heaven! let me go --


Mr. Justice.


Let me go, or I'll lay you by the Heels.


'Twere Treason to let you go, without acquainting your worship.


Bear witness, he assaults me in the Highway.


That I have half a dozen of the finest largest Bruges Capons, that were ever
sent a present into England.


Bruges Capons!


They were fed with Marrow, Amber Greece, and blanched Almonds.


Let me down on my knees and give thanks, -- I am in the Land of Canaan. -- O
Bounty, -- bounty, -- bounty. --


Get up Sir.


Which way shall I turn me.


This way Sir.


Here Sir.


This way Sir.


Here Sir.


Here's the Gaunt Veal.


Here the Bruges Capons.


Stand off, let me go, let me go, O Gaunt Veal, Bruges Capons, capon, capon,


What's the matter, what's come to you?


They have undone me, -- I starve in the middle of plenty. I know not which to
choose; A pox on you, join both your Houses together, O Capon! O Veal! -- O
Veal! -- O Capon!


Sir, I have this day come down by the London Coach, a basket of your little
round Marrow puddings.


What, your white puddings, made of Marrow and Almonds?


They'll melt in your Mouth Sir --


London Marrow puddings, -- the scales are turned; and now Mr. Alderman, let's
in and feast like Epicures, Gaunt Veal -- and Marrow puddings.


Come let's have Supper in good time.


You shall Sir.


A pox of those Marrow puddings, I have lost my Guests, but it pleases me to
think how the hungry Justice will scold when he finds none of those danties,
for we both lied abominably.


Sir, I suppose you may be Mr. Alderman Far.


Far is my name, your business friend.


My Master, Sir Barnaby Buffler greets you; he sent me before to wait your
coming, and to let you know, he will in few hours hence be in Town. -- the
farther particulars of his mind you'll understand from this --


I am glad he will be here to night.


Sir, my Master's mightily pleased with the thoughts of Marrying your Daughter;
he talks of nothing but her all day; she'll be very happy if she can but away
with some small faults.


I have taught her Obedience, and she that is so to a Father, will be the same
to a Husband. -- He's Rich.


Right Sir, now I have delivered you your Letter, I'll observe my Orders, and
give this to your Daughter.


I'll send her to you, whilst I read my Letter.


Strange humour in Parents, to enslave their Children for wealth. -- The estate
and not the Man is now regarded.


Pray thee, cousin, leave me not in this extremity.


No, no, come, where is the Esquire to this Knight Errant.


By me, Sir Barnaby Buffler commends this to the fair hands of Madam Jacinta.


Are you his Servant.


I am faithful Servant to your humble Servant, and the Person designed for your
Husband, he desires all things may be in readiness to night, that the Marriage
may be solemnised to Morrow morning.


His message seems to imply a command.


He's a Person not to be thwarted nor instructed, for when he has once said the
word -- hum. --


This Buffler's but a foolish kind of a name, come friend, be frank with us,
and let us know a little more of his humour, -- but first what manner of person
is he?


Auh, a Spark of the times; a brisk blade of a about Fifty five Years of Age,
who to cool the intemperance of his Youth, -- resolves forthwith to take the
Sovereign Remedy, a Wife.


Make hast and let us see the Letter, for if he be a lover of that Age, his
stile must be very amorous and pleasant; for nothing's more ridiculous than an
old Bachelor in Love, or to set up for a Beau.


You'll find it a very extraordinary Letter.


Did he read it to you.


With a very cheerful countenance.


Since he is his Confident, read it out.


MY Child, I have an Estate in two Counties, I am Lord of three Manners, I have
One Thousand Five Hundred Thirty Six Pounds Thirteen Shillings and Four pence
Half penny Rent, besides Pepper Corns; and Esquire Careless, my half and only
Brother, is my next Heir, if I Die without Issue. I am told that in Marrying
you, I may get as many Children as I think good; prepare therefore against to
morrow, in order to the first; as for the rest, we'll think of them at leisure.
Consider you lodge at an Inn, therefore be not seen but in a Masque, that it
may not be said you appeared in pub^ick places amongst strangers, for methinks
already I begin to be concerned for your Honour, and that you ought not to be
seen without my leave.



This Knight must be some strange Monster.


This fellow's of a Complexion to tell all. Well friend, -- you say your Master
is elderly, but as to his Person.


Why, pretty bulky -- but lusty and Heart-whole.


The caution in his Letter, shows him of a Jealous humour.


If he be jealous of his Wife, as he is of his Money, the Devil shall not get her
out of his clutches.


And obstinate.


As a Bitch that has Puppies, When you bid her come off her litter, he'll have
his humour, tho the Devil stood at the door.


And how must a Wife deal with all these good qualities.


To tell you my mind, in short, I even pity you, that so handsome a young Lady
should be Married to a gruf Curmudgeonly old fellow, with whom you can never
enjoy a minutes happiness; in hopes to be left a rich Widow.


You speak honestly.


How miserable shall I be made.


Well, have you done your Message according to order?


I have said my say, and now I'll go acquaint my Master.


The Bells ring to Prayers -- Put your selves in order, and go to the
Cathedral. By that time -- your intended Husband, Sir Barnaby, will be here, at
present he's busy with the


Sure, Sir, if you loved me, you'd not be so hasty to part with me.


'Tis the great care and love I have for you, makes me solicitous to see you
well disposed of: There ends a Father's care, for when he gives a Daughter in
marriage, 'tis supposed he gives her to more than a Father; for such is a
Husband. Husband and Wife are one.


That Rule, Uncle, won't hold in Arithmetic, for according to the first
Principle, one and one, make two.


Mad-Cap Niece, meddle with your own matters -- Let me see --


Nay, Uncle, ne'er put on your Considering-Cap for an Answer; what I say is
true, and I'll give you a farther demonstration that Man and Wife are not one:
For in this Age they are seldom or never together, the Man's in one place and
the Wife in another; as far asunder as ever they can get: And you know 'tis
impossible for one and the same thing, to be at the same time in several
places.


She has a very unhappy Wit; I am glad, Daughter, that you are going from her,
for she's enough to spoil all the young Women she meets with* But I hope she'll
have a Husband will meet with her.


Never of your choosing, Uncle.


Likely so, for you're hair-brain'd enough to do things of your own head.


Do you think, Uncle, I have not as much Wit to choose a Husband as you?


Well, well, follow your own course; but I hope you'll get a Husband one day
will Cudgel your bones for you.


But, Uncle, it is not now as it was in your young days; Women, then, were poor
sneaking Sheepish Creatures, but in this Age we know our own strength, and have
Wit enough to make use of our Talents: If I meet with a Husband makes my Heart
ache, I'll make his Head ache.


I am apt enough to believe, one House will be too hot to hold you long: I
doubt not but your Husband (whoever shall have the ill fortune to be so) will
in a short time be as weary of you as I am.


Should he prove but half so ill natured as you are (which certainly no young
man can) I'd swear my self a Virgin, and consequently sue out a Divorce against
him for impotency.


Come, Niece, leave your unluckiness, and now I have brought you down for
company, don't employ your Wit to teach my Daughter disobedience.


These old Fornicators keep such ado with Obedience --


Go, get you gone to Church --


To Church, or any where, to be rid of an old man.


Go, go, I have other business than to mind your tittle tattle.


Farewell, Nuncle -- Teach my Grannam to -- Spin.


Thou art a mad Wench to talk so.


Pish -- I'd have Women say, and do what they list; Have not we rational Souls
as well as men? What made Women mopes in former Ages, but being ruled by a
company of old Men and Women? Dotage then was counted Wisdom, and Formality
called Gravity and good Behaviour.


What would you advise me to in this extremity? I shall never love this Knight.


Let him know your mind, and if he won't believe you he's an unmannerly Fool;
And there's an end. Come Wench --


O here's my Master: Sir, they are come, I have delivered the Letters.


My Sister and I then will give them a visit presently; whilst she holds the
Old man in discourse, I'll upbraid Jacinta.


'Tis sore against her will -- But you'll have a better opportunity -- for in
my hearing the Alderman bid them go hear Prayers at the great Church, 'twill
not be long ere they come this way.


Haste then to our Inn, acquaint my Sister they are come, and tell her the
occasion of my stay. --


Ha! Is not that my old Friend -- Frank Lovell?


Careless! -- who thought to have met you at Canterbury after eight years
absence. How fares my friend?


Well in health and mind: In Purse too, I hope.


Where have you been all this while? What Country has held you?


All Countries, and sometimes no Country; for I have been most of the time at
Sea.


At Sea!


I'll tell thee in short -- Coming, at the Death of my Father, to a Mortgaged
Estate, and I too extravagant to recover it, went a Volunteer to Sea, aboard
one of the King's Frigates; when our Fleet returned I went aboard the French,
then the Dutch, and so from one Fleet to another, till I touched upon most of
the known Coasts the Christian World Trafficks to. By this time I hope my
Estate is disincumber'd, and I am free in the World.


Prudently done, and now you are grown a stanch sober man.


I have not parted with one grain of my old humour, I am as wild as ever, only
I have learned to Sin at cheaper Rates. But what's more material, let me know
what's become of thy elder Brother -- Is he Dead yet, and you in possession of
the whole Estate?


No, he lives; and what is worse, now in his Old Age is going to marry.


Bring me to him, I'll Drink him Dead.


If the Drink were Poison, it would scarce have time to work. To morrow is the
prefixed day, unless prevented by Stratagem: My Sister and I, by his G^acious
Letters, are invited down to his Wedding.


Lives the Lady here in Canterbury?


At London -- But he durst not venture thither for fear of Expenses -- and that
after Marriage -- his Wife should be buying fine Coaches, Beds, and Furniture.


Prudently considered.


This therefore was the appointed place to meet at; her Father and he have
treated by Letters this Twelve-month, but a Nights Courtship must serve the
Lady: He marries her in the morning, and the next day removes to his Country
House.


Which must be her Monument -- for there she'll be buried alive! -- Is she
likely to have Children?


Young and handsome.


That's bad --


But what's worse, she's the only Woman I ever did, or can love. But my
discourse is unseasonable -- Let me know your Inn, I'll visit you at Night, and
tell you all.


Whither are you now going?


The party I have been speaking of, is going to Church, and I take this
opportunity to discourse her.


'Tis gone too far -- Let thy dull Elder Brother take her, you shall along with
me -- I'll show you a Companion worth forty Mistresses.


What is he?


An honest Tarpaulin -- The Son of an English Renegade: He was born a
Ship-board, and never was ashore beyond a Sea Port Town -- except up in the
Countries amongst Indians and Spaniards, to Ravage, Burn, and Plunder, for he
has been a Buccanier from his Infancy.


His Employment disgraces not his Parentage.


Stout he is and brave -- and that temper has inclined him to leave that
hellish Crew, and employ his Valour in the Service of his Father's Native
Country: He brings with him sixty thousand Crowns, and doubtless will have good
Employment -- for from Captains of Ships, and Governors of Plantations, the
King has heard much of his Valour -- Come, you shall drink a Bottle, or a Bowl
of Punch, with me and the Captain.


Were I going to any one but a Mistress.


Pox o'thy Mistress; if thou were going to a Wench I might excuse you -- but I
should think my self cursed, should I consent thou should solicit any Woman
in the way of Matrimony.


Will you never leave this lewd wild humour?


Not upon the score of Matrimony. Why, Frank, I'll tell thee, I am now like a
Calf in the Fens, that straggles every where, and feeds where I like best; but
should I marry, I should be tethered to one spot of Ground; at best, be
confined to an Enclosure.


The Horse that is loose often falls into a foul Ditch, or is put in the Pound
for straying in his Neighbours Ground: Marriage is honourable and safe.


It would be so if all Wives were honest: I'll undertake a Mistress shall love
thee twice as long as any Wife thou can find. Nothing chokes Love like the
Surety of Possession: Love is an excellent Meat, but Marriage an ill Sauce.
Were I going to Tyburn, I would cry, drive on Carman, and choose to Sing a
Penitential Psalm at the Gallows, rather than return to say, For Better for
Worse.


Atheists in Love, like Zealots in Religion, are not to be reclaimed by
Argument, yet now and then are converted by some lucky accident, you may one
day see a beauty, that like a burning glass shall draw all thy loose flames
within a narrow compass.


Beauty is more brittle than the glass you talk of, and Man's estimation of it
less durable. I may perchance Love only one at once; but not that one always;
and whilst I am in my right wits, I will not leave delightful variety, for the
unsavoury insipid bitts of Constancy.


Well, Jacinta has a Kinswoman for her Companion, so beautiful, her Eyes would
fix your wandering thoughts, and make you abandon all Women for her sake.


So thinks the devout young Novice, newly entered into his Cloisture; he has no
sooner forsaken the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, but imagines he is able to
make the greatest Debauchee, in Love with Mortification.


My mind at present is not composed enough, to return an answer to every thing
you urge; but venture your self with me into her company, and if ever you return
the same Man --


I know my self so well grounded in Sin, and have tasted so much the sweets of
wickedness, that I dare venture my self into any temptation to the contrary; and
to see this miracle, will suffer my self to be seduced into civil company, and
if they do debauch me --


Come then.


Sir, Madam, Jacinta and her Cousin went out the back way, but I believe
Prayers were almost done, -- for they return already. -- See yonder, they come
with their Masks on. I know their Petticoats.


Retire -- whilst I discourse one, do you detain the other, to give me
opportunity; these are they --


Accost thy own natural, and leave me to manage the other impertinent.


My Heart's my guide, -- stay Jacinta, take off your mask, and let me see if
your Face is as much altered as your Heart. Do you fly me, -- but I'll pursue
you, as


If you have lost your Tongue too, ye are a blessed pair, -- so were it not for
your Tongues, you Women would all be Angels*


Da-da -- da --


Nay, nay, you are not to pass so, I am resolved both to hear and see you
first.


Well, what would the Man be at?


The Man's at what he would be, he's at you.


What do you mean?


Faith I can't resolve you till I see your Face; pull off your Mask, and then
I'll tell you what I mean.


Suppose I won't.


Than I shall suppose you very ugly, -- for I never knew a Woman that had a
handsome Face, could endure to hide it.


Yes, if she likes not her Company.


Yet she'd have her company like her; I trust more to a Woman's pride, than her
Love or good Nature; for tho they are ugly, they think themselves handsome, and
would be thought so by others.


Why then do they maintain the humour of Vizard Masks?


Because under them they Sin concealed. I'll avouch, Vizard Masks ruin more
Women's Virtues, than all the Bawds in the Nation.


Your Reason for that, good Mr. Voucher.


Under the vizard, the Wife goes to the Play, Ball, or Masquerade, undiscovered
to her Husband; the Maid unknown to her Mistress; the Daughter or Niece,
unperceived by her Relations; the Mask draws the Gallants, and tho at first you
come but out of curiosity, to hear what Men will say, our quick Repartees, our
gentle Bawdry, and brisk raillery, tickles your Ears; your bodies are Buxom,
your Bloods grow wanton, your fancy strikes firmly on some Man or other, the
Gallant grows importunate, and you are Conquered.


Do you find them so frail?


A Woman's Ear is the Outwork to her Chastity, lodge your self but there, and
the Fort is more than half taken; when once a Woman hearkens to what you say,
she'll soon do what you'd have her.


Then you take a Parley for a Surrender.


No, but after a Parley they soon yield.


Now I have a mind to stay and talk with you, but must be forced to leave you,
to avoid your ill Opinion.


Nay, if you have a mind to it, you'll do it, let me think what I will; and if
you won't pull off your Mask, I'll even begone and leave you -- fare you well.


And fare you well.


Nay, if you look over the Shoulder at me, I'll turn again, for you have no
mind I should begone, I'm sure.


Why did you look back at me?


To see --


If I would look at you, and so we even caught one another; and what can you
say to me, that I can't retort on you again.


But I'll be judged by your self, if I have not more Reason to think you desire
my stay, than I yours; you have a full sight of me, see what I am, and know
whither you like me or not; you are all Vizard, Scarf, and Petticoat; for ought
I know, you may want a Nose, set of Teeth, be Squint-Ey'd, or blobber Lipped.


You'll make me as ugly as the Devil, am I not cloven footed, think you?


I'll tell you that presently.


Nay, --


A handsome Leg and Foot, I'll be sworn; and here's a well shaped Hand and Arm,
and what Breasts are here, how round and plump.


Hands off, your enquiry begins to grow troublesome.


If you have a Face and Features, answerable to your Limbs, you're a prime piece
of Woman's flesh.


Do you think I have?


Gad do I.


Than to keep your good Opinion, I'll be gone, and you shall not see it. Nay, nay,
no attempts -- hands off.


I have sworn to see it.


And I have sworn you shall, but stand at greater distance, farther, farther
yet, see --


Excellent Creature!


Fare you well.


Ha, are you so cunning; she's gone. by her wit I did not think she had had so
good a Face; for wit and beauty seldom go together, in a Woman, she has a large
stock of both, and I could wish my self in Bed with her; but the thoughts of
her are momentary.


False, faithless Woman.


Prithee think no more of her, come now go with me and be merry, we'll have
Women in abundance.


Hang 'em Jilts.


No, such Women as your Mistress is, are more like Jilts, those I mean are good
Conscionable Girls, that will not let you spend your Money for nothing, with
the others you wast your Gold and time, and at last like young Heifers, when
they come to be milked, spurn at you in defiance, and away they frisk.


Ah Jacinta; can a Father's word outweigh a Lover's vows.


Damn this pining, whining, puling, peaking, sneaking, snivelling Love; I'll
carry you where you shall see, merry, gay, jocund, sprightly Love; thou shalt
have it in Armfuls, and dilate thy self in pleasure.


I shall be no company, my Soul is out of tune.


We'll have Music, Wine, and Women, to divert you: yet in spite of all the
Sex,

I'll keep my Soul free, as the Bird that flies in the Air,
And never Love one, till I of all the rest despair.

'TIS a fine Evening, Cousin, and I love to look about me.


Ha! these are they.


Here comes Mr. Lovel's Friend.


We'll stand him bare faced.


Now, which is she that I am in Love with?


He's at a stand.


He'd fain know me again; but prithee take up a brisk humour, and let's try to
puzle him.


No, prithee let's go in.


What are you upon the Wing, or do you come out a grazing like Rabbits, just at
the Burrow's mouth; that as soon as any body comes, you may pop into your holes
again.


We had need be watchful, when such pochers as you are abroad.


Your Watchfulness signifies little; I come now like a Ferret to creep into
your holes, and scare you out of your Burrows.


But if instead of a Burrow, you should run into a Warrenner's trap.


And that you may easily do, for we are no out-lying Conies, we keep within
heart of the Warren.


Ay, but I know your Musees, your inlets and outlets, and wherever the Rabbits
pass, the Ferret or Weasel may venture. You see I come just to the same place;
'twas here you popped in from me before; But now I am got between you and the
hedge.


But how do you know, that we are the same pair?


And which of us is it, that was too nimble for you?


You had best have a care on which you venture, for in such cases, you ought not
to spoil your friend's game.


'Tis one of you.


I see you are no good hound; you can't follow the scent well.


Many a good nosed Dog is at a loss, when the scent is crossed; but if I catch
one, and my friend the other; if we are mistaken, let him say which is his, and
we will make a change.


But which of us two do you think would fall to your share?


Y'Gad I don't know.


Don't you know a Woman's Face, when you see it a second time?


She showed it with such a Legerde-main -- her Mask was no sooner of, then on
again, and she was gone.


Observe us well.


Let me see -- Faith not I, -- if you had your Masks on, I should know her from
a Thousand, at the very sight of her Vizard, my Heart would go pit -- a -- pat.


If you are so in Love with the complexion of Velvet, you should have a Negro
for your Mistress.


There is beauty in black, why else do Ladies put on patches, and some love
black Hair better than light, and why not black Faces as well.


But you'd be for a white one at this time, if you knew which was under the
Vizard you like so well.


I am glad he does not, for than he'd pretend Love to one of us.


Gad but I would not to you, nor ever a Woman in the World.


I dare swear you would.


Perhaps I might make you believe I was in Love with you.


No, that you could never do.


Why, don't you think your selves handsome enough to be loved.


Yes; but we think you have more Wit.


What, than to Love one of you?


Yes, or any body else, that is never like to Love again.


Are you an Enemy to me, or to Love?


To Love; I think it a very foolish thing.


But 'tis Marriage makes it so, give me Love as nature made it, free and
unconfined -- observe but Mistress and Gallant, how brisk, how gay, how fierce
they are in their Amours! whilst Marriage-Love comes like a Slave, laden with
Fetters, dull and out of humour.


For my part, I am rather for a Gallant, than a Husband.


So am I clearly --


'Tis well dissembled on one side; one of you I am sure speaks against her
Conscience; but if you are as you say, you're Girls for me.


What both --


Both, I gad both.


Hold, one's enough, and if you'll be a Gallant to one of us, we expect you
should be constant.


That circumstance makes it too like Marriage.


The constancy is while you pretend; not but that either Mistresses or Gallant
may choose elsewhere, but they must love but one at once


But which of us will you choose?


Faith I'll be for her I talked to in the Mask.


Well Sir, when you find which of us two is she; claim her for your Mistress.


Adieu.


Come Hilaria.


Ha Hilaria! I faith that's she, but they are gone in; Jacinta I remember is
the name of Lovel's Mistress; till now I fanci'd the other was she, because
more brisk and airy. Well I'll find out Lovel, and we'll give 'em a visit.


Sirrah; Dog.


Sir, I beseech you.


Rogue, I'll break your bones.


Mr. Justice, Sir, and please your worship, -- do but hear me.


I cannot hear of Mercy, Hunger cries louder against thee for Vengeance.


Have moderation Sir, in your Anger, -- Justice has a scale for Mercy, as well
as Rigour.


Dost thou see villainous Host, I am so weak and faint for want of Eating, I
can hardly follow thee.


Sir, on my word you shall have an excellent Supper.


But disappointment Sirrah, -- did not thou prate to me of Bruges Capons,
Marrow puddings, and --


That was only and please your Worship to out-lie my Neighbour, he had no Gaunt
Veal, and please your Worship -- nor --


O I shall go into a Consumption, Sirrah! my fancy has mounted Constellation
height, -- I supped Jelly from the Stars in conceit, and now must I be content
with dry Mutton and Rabbit? --


I'll make amends to Morrow, Sir, at the Wedding Dinner, I'll send Man and
Horse round the Country to pick up dainties.


But I have longings, Sirrah, I have longings more dangerous than a Woman's with
Child. O! I have wamblings in my Stomach.


What thinks your Worship of a glass of Canary, -- I have a Flower.


Do, do, bring, or I shall faint.


And to enable you till Supper, a slice of potted Venison.


Ay, ay, for I am like a Mud Wall falling to decay; I want patching up.


Mr. Justice, whilst I have leisure, let me desire the favour of you, to take
the care of providing and ordering a handsome entertainment against to morrow.
Spare for no cost.


That's well, that's well.


Let every thing be in the best manner, I leave it wholly and solely to you.


Both as to quantity, -- quality, -- manner, ordering, dressing, and every
thing?


Every thing! --


Without Molestation, -- Contradiction, -- or control?


Absolutely and entirely.


I love to understand the extent of my Commission, now am I Lord over the
Boiled, -- Baked, and Roast.


Mr. Justice, please you to taste?


Mr. Alderman, my service to you; special


Sir, here's some Gentlemen and a Lady enquire for you.


Oh our Friends are come! Show 'em in, and call down my Daughter.


Sir Barnaby, you are welcome.

I thank you Mr. Alderman, A good welcome is the best Dish at a Feast. This is
my half Brother, and this our Sister.


Sir your Servant -- Madam give me leave --


Your Servant Sir, Sir your Servant, Madam your humble Servant.


Here's my Daughter, Sir Barnaby bids you welcome.


He comes well that comes to a good end, -- Lady, your humble Servant, and
faithful Husband, till death us part.


Your Servant Sir.


And now Father-in-Law -- tho I never saw you before, yet we understand one
another by letters, -- therefore let's fall to the matter, and spare
complements.


Ay, Sir Barnaby, no matter for ceremony amongst Friends.


No, for Ceremony, is the Wiseman's scorn, the Fools delight, and the Idleman's
business.


Ay, Sir Barnaby, I am for down right dealing --


That's best, -- for Full of Curtisy, full of Craft -- and fair words won't
fill a Bushel. Here then is the mark I shoot at, I come to Marry your Daughter.


Right --


You and I understand one the other, and Marriage Articles are agreed on
betwixt us.


Right -- I writ you my mind to every particular.


Now Sir, knowing that Forecast is as good as Work, I have brought the Marriage
writings ready drawn, and my Attorney to see 'em signed and sealed, come hither
Dash --


Here and please your Worship's are the Deeds that concern your Estate, and
here the Marriage, Settlement, and Joynters, and so forth.


Very well Sir Barnaby.


This I did to prevent expenses, for 'tis chargeable lying at Inns -- A penny
saved, is a penny got. And I have brought my Brother and Sister, that being
altogether, we may be so much the cheaper.


They are welcome Guests, -- spare for nothing that the place affords.


I Love to Be merry and wise. Enough's as good as a Feast. And now Sir, whilst
you peruse the Writings, I'll open my mind to your Daughter; we shall soon have
done -- Few words are best amongst Friends.


We'll withdraw into a another Room, and leave you to your selves. Come
Gentlemen.


Look you after Joynters and Settlements -- I'll into my Kingdom, and take
possession of my new Office. I come ye Woodcocks, Pheasants, Patridges, and
Quales: O ye darlings of Nature, ye tempters of the Appetite, I am coming
amongst you, to hug kiss and embrace your beautiful limbs.


Who does he mean?


I could even jump out of my Skin for joy; now will I Eat often, and give
thanks when my Belly's full: For I could never remember to say Grace before
Meat, in my Life.


What say you Sir --


Say -- why I say Sir, Store is no Sore; and that's a better say, than Your
enough's as good as a Feast. Chew upon that Sir Barnaby, till I come again. --


This is some prodigal Glutton, I wonder Mr. Alderman will keep him company --
One scabby Sheep is enough to infect a whole Flock. But not to stand thruming
of Caps, my Wife that is to be -- I am now to tell you, that since your Father
and I are agreed, there only remains, that I open my breast to you in these
particulars. First, as to my Person, you see it well enough, there's nothing to
be disliked; nature has been sufficiently bountiful to me, I am As strait as an
Arrow; as plump as a Patridge; -- and as sound as a Roach. But it may be said,
I am of a full Age; -- the better for you. Better be an Old Man's darling, than
a Young Man's warling. And he that Marries ever he be wise, shall Die ever he
thrive. Now I found in my self an inclination to like you, the first and only
time I saw you -- which was last Year, when you were with your Uncle in our
Country, at the Sheriffs Feast. I don't say you took notice of me.


No indeed Sir --


Hold, I don't ask you questions -- because I would not give you the trouble of
answering. Now as I had a liking to you at first sight -- So I know you must
have some inclination in nature, to think well of me for a Husband. For I
observe your Eye has been upon me ever since I came -- Looking breeds liking;
and Where the Eye fixes, the Heart soon follows. So there's an end of that.
Secondly, I am none of those that mind Fashions -- Wisemen invent Fashions, and
Fools follow 'em. I am rather for saving than spending, ever keeping in mind,
that, To save is Healthful, to get is Comfortable, but to spend is Intolerable.
Now my taking you for a Wife, shows what good Opinion I have of you, and that I
believe you to be prudent enough, to imitate so reasonable a Husband; for
without that and your Father's Three Thousand Pound, (which I would have with
you) I should never have Married you -- nor can I doubt you hereafter, since A
good Jack makes a good Jill. And from the moment I Marry you, I'll make you
Mistress of all I am worth, (upon condition) you lay not any of it out, upon
any occasion whatsoever.


How Sir, not --


Hold again -- Marriage brings the Key that unlocks a Virgin's Mouth. Maids
must be seen, not heard. Lastly, to discover my whole Heart to you, because
Children are certain Cares, but uncertain Comforts; and because they will cost
a great deal bringing up, and moreover for that I love you so tenderly, we will
get but one or two at most, and than I will forbear making you afraid, lest you
should Die in Childbed, For the Pitcher goes not so often to the Well, but it
comes home broken at last. Thus having told you all that's necessary, and
finding you so reasonable, and we both so well agreed. I'll instantly acquaint
your Father, -- put all things in readiness to Night, be Married in the Morning
according to the Old Rule, -- Happy is the Wooing, that is not long a doing.
Adieu Wife.


Two words to a bargain, the Proverb says; but he'll not allow me one.


Cozen, I heard all your Courtship; you have a most Sententious Lover. You'll
be married to the whole Book of Proverbs.


He would not let me speak a word, but is gone away with all the presumption
imaginable that I love him.


'Tis a strange Devil.


Which way shall I divert this ridiculous marriage? My Father will hearken to
nothing I can say.


Here's Mr. Lovell, he's the fittest person for you to consult with -- O
Gallant! who sent for you?


I hope, Madam, you'll allow a man to look after his heart when 'tis gone
astray.


You could not find it when you saw us last.


You conspired to juggle me out on it; but I know well enough which of you had
it.


You are beholden to Mr. Lovell for your knowledge.


No, upon my word, Madam: But he has told me his last Adventure.


Well, Madam, I hope you'll stand to your Bargain.


We are no Flinchers; we'll not be worse than our words.


Then I challenge you for my Mistress; you were the Lady I talked to in the
Mask.


I am not her I assure you.


I am well assured it could be none but you; I knew it when I was here before,
though I did not then own it.


Take my word, Sir.


Lord, that you should think to deceive me! Why, all the while I was last in
your company, my heart beat all on that side you stood, and my cheek next you
burnt and glowed --


Ha, ha; 'slise, he has not found it out yet --


Ha --


No, I'll be sworn Careless have not you.


I'll be sworn, Madam, Hilaria was the person. --


Ha, ha, ha -- but that's my Cozen Jacinta.


No, no, no; did not you call her Hilaria as you went in?


Ha, ha, ha.


I thought how well you knew, and therefore called her by my own Name on
purpose to try you.


Ba! --


Now Careless you are caught --


I must be impudent -- Well, Madam, to let you see that I did, go both of you
out of the Room, and come in Masked; and if I don't choose the right, I'll be
content to resign the hopes of a Mistress.


There is but right and wrong.


To give you a greater proof on it, I'll make my choice blindfold.


'Twill still be an even Wager that you hit on the right.


Careless, you are out-witted i'faith.


Servant, our Covenant is void for Non-performance of the conditions.


But calling me Servant, after the condition is broken, tis a confirmation --
and will make it stand good in Law.


No, Careless, that Quirk won't do.


But, Madam, I hope you'll give a man leave to retract when he finds his Error;
your self occasioned the mistake, 'twas an error of my Hand, not of my Heart,
for at the same time I told you Hilaria was she, and you are Hilaria; therefore
'twas you I meant.


Yes, yes, 'twas me you meant, when your Cheek glowed, and your Heart beat on
the left side.


Ha, ha, ha -- Cozen, you are too great a Tyrant.


You pursue your Victory too severely; 'tis Generous to give the vanquished
Quarter.


I do more, I give him liberty to make his Retreat.


Mr. Lovell, they want your company within -- to witness the Writings.
Daughter, you must go too.


I'll wait on you again presently.


Sir, as you are Mr. Lovell's friend -- please to Sup with us, you shall be
welcome.


Sir, I know not whither you'll tell me so when you know my business.


Pray, what may it be?


It was my fortune this Evening to have a sight of your Niece, as she went
abroad.


What's he going to say?


To whom, Sir, I took so great a liking, that I could not rest satisfied till I
had found who she was; which I had no sooner done by Mr. Lovell, but engaged
him to bring me here to ask your consent to make my addresses to this fair
Lady.


O, I thought he would a been a second Sir Barnaby, and asked no bodies leave
but his.


Pray, who are you, Sir?


Did you not know Colonel Careless?


Very well -- he died some ten years since.


He was my Father.


Indeed! He left, I think, some twelve hundred a year; but encumbered.


He did so.


And have you that Estate still?


Every Acre, Sir -- and the Mortgage paid off.


I heard you were very wild.


I have had my Frolics, but keep my Estate out of the Devil's Clutches.


Nay, if you were as wild as wild could be, you'd meet with your Match there;
My Niece is as wild as you can be, she's vain, idle, careless and talkative.


Uncle, you should do in driving a Bargain for marriage, as in selling of
Horses; tell their good qualities, and leave it to them to find the ill.


These are faults will be discovered in you at first sight.


Sir, I hope you'll like me ne'er the worse for what he says.


Instead of his getting you for a wife, you intend to get him for a Husband.


It is more to the humour of the Age; if you won't commend me, I'll commend my
self: And if I thought but half so well of him, as I do of my self, we'd soon
shake hands, to Have and to Hold, without your leave.


You see her humour, Sir; if after this you dare venture on her, I shall not
Counsel her against you, provided you make out that Estate, for I wish her well
married.


Stay, Uncle: Now I think on it, you may take him with you, marriage is quite
out of fashion, and I hate to be out on it as much as you do to be in it; if he
had ten or twelve thousand a year, would keep me a Coach and Six, and all
things suitable to that Grandeur, I might admit him as a Gallant; and all that.


I'll leave you to her; for at this mad rate she talks all the year round.


Now the jest would be, if you should play such a simple trick to fall in Love
with me indeed, and indeed.


Make your own words true, and accept me for a Gallant, I know not what may
follow --.


I'll push on the frolic at a venture, to see how far 'twill go; there's my
hand to kiss, and I confer on you the Title of Servant.


So, here's one hopeful young man in a fair way to be ruined.


To morrow I shall be unhappy.


I pity your circumstances.


Look you Captain -- there's your friend.


Come, Captain -- how is't*


Why, these Towns are such places, that a man can't tell where he is, though both
his Eyes are open. I can walk so all about my Frigate, Fore and Aft, in my
sleep, between Decks, or above Deck, and return into my Cabin without waking,
but here I am forced to have a Pilot to steer me broad awake.


They want one Witness more, and desire you --


Captain, I leave you in good company; I'll be with you presently.


Who is this?


A brave Sea-Captain -- Stout and Blunt -- he was Born in a Ship, and scarce
knows any thing of Land Affairs.


He looks as ruff as a Storm.


I like him well; he looks as if fighting was his business.


He's not very curious in his Dress.


Captain, how do you like these Ladies?


Three very snug Frigates, well Rigged; 'twere pity too but they were as well
Manned.


Ever you come Aboard one of these -- you must be new Rigged your self; I must
carry you to a Ward-robe.


What place is that, do they fight or Drink there?


'Tis a Storehouse for the Body, you must lay by this Sea habit for a Land
Dress, the Ladies won't like the smell of Pitch and Tar.


Not like it! Which of them won't like it?


He'll beat us anon.


I begin to be afraid.


But what do you with these Ladies here?


Court them, Gallant them.


What's that?


We make love to them: You must have a Mistress now you are come ashore.


Must I? Which of them?


Her you like best, Captain


I like them all; I am for a whole Tier of them.


Every man must have his share -- make choice of her you think handsomest.


But how must a man know a handsome Woman?


Here's a Pattern to choose by -- observe:


That's fine.


A Chin dimpled; in that little Pit a thousand Hearts lye Buried.


They are thrown in then, as fast as we heave Dead men over-board in a Sea
Fight.


Well said, Captain.


A Neck smooth, fat, white, and soft as the down on Swans.


Ay, that --


Breasts hard and round, their motions pant beholders Hearts into an ecstasy;
they rise and fall like Waves blown up by gentle Winds. -- Do but lay your hand
here, Captain.


O, O, feel here!


Ah! your heart beats high, we shall have boisterous weather anon -- I perceive
it coming.


How. is't Captain?


My heart begins to leap and play like a Porpice before a Storm.


Look you here, Captain -- an Arm and Hand small, white and plump, the vaulting
Blood blushing through the fair skin like a Lawn. Veil* spread o'r a Bed of
Roses. Touch her Captain.


Oh, how fine it is to stroke such Limbs.


Beauty, I see, will soften and polish him.


Now tell me Captain, what do you think of me?


As of a Woman.


Is that all?


Why, a Woman's the finest thing I ever saw, except a Cannon Mounted, and a
Ship under Sail.


Now Captain, if you like her, claim her for your Mistress: Love her, Court
her, Gallant her, and do your best. -- Win her and wear her; that's fair play.


Will you give her me?


If you can get her.


Why, I can take her up in my Arms and run away with her.


And whither would you carry me?


Aboard -- and he that dares come to take you from me there, had as good leap
into a Blazing Fireship, or kiss Thundr.


But I am no Lawful Prize, if you take me by force: By the Laws of Love you
must Court me, and win me fairly.


You must get her good Will, Captain.


I thought I had her Will when I had her -- but now I think on it I have been
told, That a Woman's Will shifts more Points than the Wind. But if she Sail any
Point of the Compass, I'll hale her in I warrant you.


Well said Captain.


I'll hold you Chase I warrant you --


Have a care of Storms.


And look you don't slip your Anchor, Captain.


Come, come, here you stand Chit chat, and forget the main business of Life;
Supper's on the Table and half cold. Walk in and line your Christmas Coffers,
come.


Well advised, Mr. Justice, they that won't follow set them in the Stocks. --
This is the Jolliest old Blade for Eating! His Mouth's like a Mill, always
grinding -- Come Servant, Usher me in handsomely.


I'll Eat and Drink to enable my self in your Service.


Captain, you shall be my Guest; you are not arrived to that degree yet to live
by Love.


I'll take in a little Ballast, that I may Sail the Stiffer.


GEntlemen, you are all welcome: Sir Barnaby, my service to you. O, Mr. Dash,
where are you? -- Come, take a Chair and sit down.


O Lord, Sir, I dare not presume --


Come, come, sit down -- sit down.


At your Worship's Table! I have more Breeding; an't please you, I'll Sup with
the Gentlewoman, by her leave, when you have done.


Sir Barnaby, pray speak to him to sit down.


Sit down -- Better be unmannerly than troublesome.


No offence, I hope.


No, no, sit down.


Reach him his Hat there.


Let it lye, Friend.


Reach it him, I say.


I beseech your Worship*


Put it on.


By no means.


Put it on his head.


I beseech your Worship hold me excused: I am a poor Scribe.


Be it better, or be it worse, be ruled by him that bears the Purse.


Your Worships are wiser than I am.


A pure fellow this, he sits as if he were afraid of the Table.


Friend, you can't reach.


Draw your Chair nearer.


I thank your Worship.


Shove it nearer the Table for him.


Very well, I thank you friend.


Nearer yet.


So, very well, very well; so, so, very well, very well.


Friend, My Service to you.


O Lord -- And please your Ladyship, Drink to me!


Keep -- keep your Seat friend.


Madam, your poor Scribe thanks you. --


Drink to me Mr. Dash, I'll pledge you.


Your Ladyship must excuse me; I dare not be so bold. Mistress, my Service to
you.


Thank you Sir.


Look you, Madam, he's a very well-bred man.


Give me a Glass of Wine -- here's ado about nothing -- I am -- almost choked
with all this Ceremony.


Now fall to, Friend.


Thank your Worship, I don't spare*


Unfold your Napkin Mr. Dash.


'Tis very well, I heartily thank your Ladyship.


Spread it before you, you'll grease your Clothes.


I thank you kindly -- I have a Handkerchief for that.


Sir Barnaby, your Ladies health to you.


I thank you, Sir.


You don't Eat heartily Sir Barnaby.


I am no great Supper-man.


Don't you eat Suppers?


Seldom: One Meal a day makes a Man healthy and wealthy.


On one Meal a day we may live, on two we may thrive, but three must make us
fat. And I say, Sir Barnaby -- Eat and be Rich, Fast and dye in a Ditch. Come,
come, Hunger breeds Knaves: A full Belly thinks least harm.


I am for what is wholesome: Light Suppers make clean Sheets.


But my Grannam taught me better -- When the Belly's full the Bones are at
rest: Eat nothing and Dream of the Devil.


Several Men several Minds; I sleep best without. Custom is a second Nature.


Sir Barnaby, Ill Customs are better broken than kept: If I went Supperless to
Bed, my Guts would croak all Night like Frogs in a Fishpond.


Nature is bent to its own Ruin: Gluttony destroys more than the Sword.


Monstrum Horrendum; that men can hold Arguments against their Bellies.


How now Mr. Dash.


I have Supped I thank you -- and now I'll wait upon your Worship.


No, no -- take his Plate and Napkin there --


Let me set it by.


Excuse me there, forsooth, I understand better.


Here are two Women enquire for Mr. Justice Greedy.


For me? I'll not stir from Table for no body: Can't a man eat in quiet? I'll
throw up my Commission.


O Sir, let them come in.


If it be Justice business we may have some sport.


Call them in -- Come forward, what's your business?


We are come and please you, to make Oath against a person that is fled to this
Town to be married, and disowns both us and his Children.


Who is it?


One Sir Barnaby Buffler.


Here he is, speak to his face.


O Sir Barnaby, have we found you!


Were you so cunning, to go so far from home to steal a marriage, that we might
not hear on it? -- But we are here to forbid the Banes.


What mean you Woman?


Ah Gentlemen, wonder not at us, for this wicked Sir Barnaby, five years ago,
tempted my honesty, and with solemn promises of marriage prevailed over my
weakness, and got me with Child.


What! and eat no Suppers.


How's this!


And to increase my sorrow, -- I had two at a birth.


What, and he Eat no Suppers.


O rare Sir Barnaby.


Hold you your Clack Gossip.


An impudent Quean -- I never saw her -- I should not know her if I had met her
in my Dish.


If I had never known you, I had never


Alas poor Woman.


Mind her not, she's a quean; 'Tis no more pity to see her Weep, than to see a
Goose go barefoot.


You'll say you don't know me too, I warrant you.


What has Sir Barnaby been Tenant to your Copy-hold too.


Even so to my sorrow.


What, both!


A Couple of Carryons -- Never a Barrel better Herring.


Come, come, here's matter for me,


Ay Mr. Justice, take 'em Coram nobis.


I'll examine these matters according to Authority.


Tho he won't know us, let's see if he don't know these, come here Children,
kneel Johnny, -- kneel down little Sarah, ask Father blessing, and let's see if
he can be so unnatural to disown his own Flesh and Blood.


And do thou kneel Tommy, ask blessing --


Pray Father -- pray Daddy -- pray Father, pray Daddy.


Pray Father, pray Daddy.
Pray Father, pray Daddy.
You Jackdaw's you, hold your gaping.

Come before Justice -- here you that have not told your story yet. -- But first,
what's your name.


Elizabeth Breeder.


And Yours.


Sarah Daisy, and please you --


And what come you for? what's your complaint?


And please your Worship Mr. Justice.


Speak out --


And please you this Sir Barnaby --


Well, -- but first what are you --


I am a very honest Farmer's Daughter --


I believe it would a been better for you, that you had been a Farmer's honest
Daughter.


I had been so and please you, -- had it not been for Sir Barnaby.


Why, what did he do?


He knows well enough, what was done in the great barn.


What he thrashed you there did he?


Here is the fruit of his labour, hold up thy Head Tommy; look you Gentlewoman,
is he not as like, as if he was spit out of his Mouth?


He has his very Eyes, and the make of his Face.


And see here a pair of pretty Twins, so like the Father.


These have his Nose, his Forehead, and Chin exactly.


It cannot be denied, but they are pretty Children.


Ye all Dream, they are neither like, nor pretty -- nor nothing. These are
impudent queens.


This is an abuse to my Brother, designed to hinder his Marriage.


'Tis combination, Mr. Justice, take care of these baggages: Let 'em kiss the
Whipping-post.


Let me alone. Mrs. Breeder, you say these two Children were begotten on your
natural body, by Sir Barnaby, and born out of lawful Wedlock.


Yes Sir, but not without a Contract.


Well, stand you by -- but hold, hold, -- one question or two more. What were
you when this was done.


A Chambermaid.


And this was your Chamber practice, what, he did not Ravish you, did he?


Not against my Will.


Ha, ha, ha.


They both Lie faster, than a Dog can trot.


Trouble not your self Sir Barnaby, they have both confessed that these are
bastard Children, consequently themselves to be Whores, I'll send 'em to the
house of Correction.


No, I lay claim to him for my Husband.


And so do I.


And the Whipping post lays claim to you both. Come, give me Pen, Ink, and
Paper, I'll make their Mittimus.


Here and please your Worship, I have both.


Now Baggages, present, present --


A word and please your Worship --


Well! --


Here is a Collar of Brawn, which my Father sends you as a token of his
respect, for your prudent moderation in this affair.


Humph -- Brawn -- Brawn! -- I say you are a notorious Baggage. Rare Brawn,
rare Brawn!


'Tis ready sou^'d for your Worships Eating.


Speak softly -- abuse so worthy a Person as Sir Barnaby! rare Brawn, there
will be no living without Justice; delicate Brawn. -- I'll make you an example.
-- Set it behind my Chair, rare Brawn, rare Brawn!


He swallows the bribe.


The Jades act it well.


Mr. Justice.


What, now you'll Sing the second part to the some Tune, will ye.


My Mother has sent your Worship, this couple of fat Capons, for a present.


Dainty Birds, speak for you! hang you. --


She was dairy Maid to your Worship's Mother. --


No, no, Not I -- you are a most impudent strumpet -- dainty birds, dainty
birds.


They are of her own Cramming.


Softly -- abuse such a Person as Sir Barnaby; dainty birds indeed! I'll swinge
you both, -- dainty birds. I am enraged, I shall never be able to do Justice
with moderation. I'll -- I'll -- I'll -- Ah -- dainty birds.


Mr. Justice, being these Women are come a great way, and have small Children
to provide for, were it not better to lend 'em home again, than to keep 'em
here, and put the Town to charge.


Od's life, old Sir, discharge 'em; or let me be their bail.


Truly Sir, my Heart is mollified, I think with you 'twere best to send them
back to their own Country, and Sir Barnaby may do well to give 'em a small Sum
to bear their charges back.


Hang 'em -- Not a Cross to bless themselves with -- even let 'em go Byard on
Ten-toes for me.


Well, here's Angels a piece upon condition, they trouble us no more with this
clammer.


We thank your Worship.


Dainty birds -- dainty birds.


And hereafter, if we find good ground for what you say, I'll prevail with Sir
Barnaby, to allow some thing yearly for maintainnance of your Children.


Dainty Birds --


Thank you Sir, -- thank you.


Go, go, get you gone -- you are beholden to these Friends.


Go Johnny -- go Sarah, you may never see your Father more, therefore ask him
blessing.


Ay, do Tommy, ask Father blessing too.


Pray Father -- pray Father.


Bastards, Whores-birds! the Devil take ye all.


Pray Father -- pray Daddy, c.


Follow him Children, follow him.


Pray Father, -- pray Daddy, --


Ha, ha, ha, --


Poor Infants.


Hark you, hark you, Frailties; the boul of Punch is ready, the Captain and I
will come and be merry with you for an hour --


We'll expect you.


Your Servant Sir.


Madam, my Spark and your Captain, I suspect by that whisper are wickedly bent
-- I over heard a paw word.


Come Gentlemen, let's deliver Sir Barnaby from the Philistines, and bring him
back.


Ay, we'll all help, we'll drive away the Whores, I warra^ you.


Will you so, we'll watch your motions -- come Madam.


'Tis even as you say --


Rare Brawn -- delicate Brawn -- dainty Birds -- dainty Birds --


Mr. Justice -- rare Brawn, delicate Brawn -- rare Birds, dainty Birds --


You are a wag, you are a wag, Mr. Dash, bring the Collar after me.


You see Sir, what a Person you are going to Marry me to.


This is nothing, at best, but a trick of Youth, many a Woman would be glad to
see so good proofs of a Man, that is to be her Husband, mind you his Estate.


What is a Wife better for an Estate, when he's so Covetous.


Thrift will increase it -- 'twill be all your Children's.


He's Jealous too.


You call that Jealousy which is prudence.


And obstinate.


Humour him --


And Conceited.


Say as he says.


And slovenly.


Great Wits are generally so. Do you not observe, that every word he speaks is
a sentence.


His is old fashioned -- Grand-mother Wit -- he is a mere bundle of Proverbs,
-- I shall have him -- nick name'd -- and called my Solomon.


You are a Fool to argue so against your own good*


Besides, Sir, he's Old.


He'll Die the sooner, go -- there's a salve for that sore* Here he comes,
compose your self. --


These Carrions have put me Quite out of my Bias, I can Get into my right
jeers again, on the sudden.


Hang 'em -- think no more on 'em.


Now Father-in-law, to draw to a conclusion in our affair.


The sooner the better.


And to end all in a word, for A word to the Wise is sufficient.


Very good.


The Marriage writings being signed and sealed betwixt us --


They are so --


And I being to Marry your Daughter to Morrow, For delay are dangerous.


True.


Than I may now account her as my Wife.


You may so --


Than there is but one thing more remains necessary to be done to night.


What's that?


Considering that she is as my Wife, -- and that we are lodged here in a
public Inn -- where there are some passengers already, and may yet be many
more -- and that Inns are subject to disturbances at any hour, it will be more
for her safety and my honour, that she be this night put under my guard and
protection. She shall be lodged in the Chamber, betwixt mine and my Brothers,
where we can both of us, hear and be ready if occasion should require. For many
things fall out, betwixt the Cup and the Lip, and That may happen in a Minute,
that does not otherwise fall out in an Age, and It is better to prevent a
mischief, than to remedy it.


It is so. Be it as you please Sir Barnaby.


I do than require, that you now deliver your Daughter to me, with your own
proper hand -- with all your right, title, claim, and interest that you have in



Here Sir --


Observe Gentlemen -- say after me, -- I deliver to you, my Daughter -- c.


I deliver to you my Daughter,


So, I love to do all things with discretion, and to make all things sure, Fast
bind, fast find.


A fine Bargain indeed.


You act very prudently, Sir.


A thing -- once well done, is twice done. And now Sir, you shall see how
punctual I will be to you* Dash give me the little Paper I gave you.


Here and please you.


Reach me the Pen and Ink --


Hum -- m -- m -- hum -- m -- m -- ah --


See Gentlemen, I take off the Seal; here Sir, I deliver you this -- before
Witness.


What is't? --


Read it I pray, I think 'tis right.


I Do acknowledge to have had and received of and from Mr. Benjamin Far,
Alderman and Citizen of London, his sole and only Daughter, called and known by
the Christian name of Jacinta, with all her Conditions and Qualities, be they
good or bad, with all absolute promise, full intent and purpose, on my part, to
make her my true and lawful Wedded Wife, by Ten of the Clock to Morrow-morning,
being the third of May, and the Day following the Date of this present writing
-- In Testimony whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal.

Barnaby Buffler.


So, now do you two Witness it.


Witness.


Was ever the like extravagance.


What can be the meaning of this Receipt, does he think I lend or sell him my
Daughter?


No matter -- 'tis his fancy, -- it does you no hurt.


Now Sir, I'll see my Wife safe up to her Chamber, and bid you all good Night.


For Bed already Sir Barnaby?


Ay, Early to Bed, and early to Rise,
Will make a Man Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise.

Heaven send my Daughter to do well, -- this Receipt won't out of my mind. But
come, she's Married to a good Estate, and that covers a multitude of faults.


Ay, ay, well enough -- dainty Birds -- dainty Birds. --


Come, where's this bowl of Punch?


There Madam --


Tell me Mother, pray now do, c.


She got Money by it, she got Money by it, c.


Merry Girls Captain.


Cheery my Mates, cheery.


Courage Captain -- give me your hand, I love a Tarpaling at my heart.


Come, let's drink about, my service to you.


My service to you! there's a sneaking compliment, you'd have said as much to
an honest Woman.


I can't talk at your rate, but if you are for Ship shape language, downright
drinking, or will come to grappling, I am for you.


Bid the Music come in Ladies, the Captain has brought his Boats crew to
entertain you with a Song and a Dance.


By your leave Gallants, I am come to be merry with you, and have brought a
couple of young Friends with me, they are going to Travel, to Morrow they are
for Dover.


They are welcome into our Cabin, I wish we had better entertainment.


What, are not honest Gentlemen, handsome Girls, a bowl of Punch, and good
Music entertainment!


I fear we shall be uncivil --!


That you can hardly be in our Company.


Lord, these are the two prettiest Youths!


I long for a kiss of 'em.


You may Sing, Drink, Swear, Roar, and Ruffle, and do as you please.


They came of a good kind,


By your leave Ladies.


Come, now ^owze it away.


Every one his Dish. Ladies your Healths.


Your Healths Ladies.


Your Healths Ladies.


Ay, ay, about with it.

I have a thirsty Soul,
Than give me a full Boul,
And let me drink, without Control.
In spite of the Vicar, and his dull teaching.
We'll take of our Liquor, and never mind his preaching;
Let him Damn us to the Pit hole.

There's something in that.


Come, let's have the other dish, Sir, to you.


And to you Captain.


Come, about Ship, all hands aloft.


Now, Sir, pledge me on this Ladies Lips, three go downs upon reputation.


And Captain, pledge me the like here.


Two brisk little Devils.


I told you they were no Mongrels.


Where will you meet us.


Steal to the Inn over the way.


Bid the Chamberlain show you into Justices Chamber.


You'll not fail to follow.


What, whispering! It spoils company.


Mum.


Enough.


I beg your pardon.


Sir, a Messenger has brought you this Letter, and stays for an Answer.


We'll take this opportunity.


Away, away, you luscious Jades to my Chamber, mind your Q. hum -- Captain, my
service to you -- I have a thirsty Soul, c.


What's here, a Billet doux. GAllant, I know not what's the cause, but I am
very Melancholy, pray come and spend an hour or two with me, ever I go to Bed,
for I find I have an inclination to your company, perhaps the sight of you may
cure me. Bring the Captain along with you, to divert his Lady, for she is in
the dumps too.

Hillaria.

This 'tis to have the company of honest Women, they presently grow
troublesome.


Why Sir?


If they be of the dull sober sort, a Man can hardly get acquaintance with
them, but they fall flat in love; if of a sprightly gay humour, they presently
grow impertinent, and will ever be sending such notes as these to a Man, or
running after him.


But is she handsome, that gives you this invitation?


Yes, hang her, she's well enough.


Than you should take it for a kindness.


But I wonder Women have not the Wit to know when a Man cares for their Love, or
their company; for to be sure, when he has a mind to either, he'll be coming or
sending to them.


Won't you make sail towards them?


Do you think I'll leave good sociable company, for a dull honest Wench.


She'll take it ill.


I have a better Opinion of her Wit, than to think she'd desir't, if she knew
how the case stands -- boy bid the Messenger tell her he can't find me; I'll
make such visits, when I have no better company -- but where are our Women.


They went out just as you began to read the Letter.


Hum -- come let's mind our Punch. -- I have a thirsty Soul --


Was this your whispering; young Squire, you don't play me fair play, you ought
not to take up another Man's Dice. -- And Captain, where's your Lady.


What has she set her sails too, and stole away like a Cowardly Enemy in a dark
night.


Go down Boy, we'll pay below.


I do it by way of reprisal, you took one from me, and we have got two from
you.


I take one from you.


Yes, I have had a long Intrigue with a Lady named Hillaria, I have followed
her from London, and here I find you are become her Servant.


I was ignorant of any such pretensions.


I shall spoil your Markets thereto; and tell her that she's impertinent to
send after you -- and all that -- and when you can find no better company,
you'll come to her -- and all that.


Nay, than I'll take another course with you. Come Sir.


Ay, now there's some work towards, I have lost my Pinnace too, which is he that
I am to give a broad side to?


I have a Sword to entertain you, as fierce as you look.


God -- a mercy little Piccaroon, huzza -- away with it.


Keep the peace in the King's name. -- I'll steal after the Women, I am
inflamed with Punch, and they shall lay the fumes.


Surely Sir, you'll not be so Mad to fight for one you don't Love.


Look you Sir, tho I scorn to tell her so, or any of her Sex, yet I do Love
her, will Love her, must Love her, and no body else shall Love her.


But I do, will, and shall Love her better than you.


Come, give me a proof on it then.


Yes, Sir, I will give you a proof on it --


And mine there.


What do you think of me, now my Manhood's off.


And Captain, how do you like a Woman in Breeches?


Hey, how wind you now!


Alas poor Gallant! observe how you are cheated of your Mistresses, -- ha, ha,
-- farewell Gallant.


And Captain stick to your bowl of Punch.


Hark you, stay --


No, Women are so impertinent, Men will come after them, when they Love 'em;
Adieu.


Gad, they are too unconsciable to deprive us of our Women, and than to run
away themselves. And now she knows I love her, she'll insult over me, what
shall's do Captain?


I'll observe what course you steer, I'll sail in your Wake.


And those two Jades, to serve us such a trick! I thought they had some honour
in 'em, but --

I find that Women are by Nature guilty,
For be they Whores, or not Whores, they will gilt ye.

THE truth is, she played the Tyrant with you, but you deserved that, and more.


Were not the use and conversation of Women absolutely necessary for Mankind, I
would forswear the whole Sex.


I know by the Constitution of your body, you'd not be able to keep that Oath
long. Yet I advise you to forswear all but one.


That is, you'd have me Marry.


Yes, you'd find more comfort in a Wife, than in ten Mistresses.


If what you say be true; why do most Husbands in this Age, (which I take to be
wiser than any that's past,) turn away their Wives, and keep Wenches? at least,
those that are so civil to live with a Wise, maintain a Mistress beside.


And if it be not true, why do the great Debauchees at last, forsake all their
Mistresses for a Wife? we find most of 'em Marry at the long run; nay generally
they prove the best Husbands. The Reason is, they have experimented the folly
of that lewd course of Life.


I had never so good an Opinion of Marriage as now, for this Dog trick; these
two jilting Jades showed me, in leaving us so in the lurch, has lessened 'em in
my esteem, to the degree of honest Women, and now the scales are even, the
first of either party that obliges me, draws it down on that side.


Than Hillaria I hope, will turn the balance.


If the Devil is minded to loose a Gamester, let him venture to make her and me
Friends.


And he will, for here she comes to work your Conversion for which end, i'll
leave you together.


How now Gallant?


O Madam! --


You are very merry Gallant.


I have no Reason to be otherwise.


And why do you jostle me?


You walk in my way.


'Tis you walk in mine.


Get farther off.


Go you farther off.


I was here first.


Than you may begone first.


I have business here.


What, to see me?


No, with Mr. Lovell.


Yes in my Conscience, you was coming to see me.


Now I think on it, so I was on purpose, to let you know that I am alive; for I
believe you thought, I had either Hanged my self for the trick you put on me,
or had broke my Heart, with sighing for your absence, with whom I am so
desperate in Love* but believe me, I have not yet broke so much as a button,
and may I break my Neck when I do, either for Love of you, or any Woman living.


Yet Spark you love me.


'Tis true, I love you well enough; because you are unlucky; and was not
honesty in the case, I should love you better, but as it is, you are in a
desperate condition.


Must I than despair?


You are for Matrimony, and that I hate, I can no more endure a Wife, than a
standing Dish of Meat.


You think than I am in Love with you.


Think it! ha, ha, -- as tho I did not know that, by your following me, up and
down, what came you for after me? and for what come you to talk with me now, if
you an't in Love with me? and what made you seduce the Woman from me, but that
you might have me all to your self.


I vow now you put me in mind on it, I may be in Love with you; but you say my
case is desperate, then desperate must be the Cure, and I must even resolve to
be your Mistress, Wench, or what you'll call it.


That's your only Remedy -- I am a Bird of Prey, and fly at all.


Nay than I am a Dead Woman still, for you'll soon take a flight from me to
another.


But when I have caught my prey, I take my Belly full of it; I never leave it
till I am gorged.


And will your Stomach come again.


Yes, sometimes, but generally some ravenous Fowl or another, picks up my
leavings, and flies away with it.


But would you have no more care of me.


My care would signify but little; for a Man seldom finds either Money or a
Woman, in the same place he left 'em


But is it not a point of Honour amongst you Men, not to leave the Women you
debauch, but if they prove Constant, to provide for 'em.


Provide for 'em! is it not enough we teach 'em a Trade, by which they may get
their livings. But you will not want providing for, you have a good Portion,
but if I would, you your self in a short time would be for change.


Well Careless, we'll do nothing rashly, I'll to Bed and consult with my
Pillow, and to morrow tell you more of my mind.


But let me give you this caution, be not deceived with the vain considerations
of Virtue, Modesty, Chastity, Honour, Reputaion, and the like, these are
Bugg-words, that awed Women in former Ages, and still fool a great many in
this. And if once these idle notions get into your thoughts, I shall give you
over for a lost Woman.


The common practice of my Sex, may prevail much; evil example makes twenty
Sinners to the black Gentleman's one. Adieu.


So much for her, Captain, how is't with you, you look as if you were not well.


I am not, I have a wild Fire in my Veins, my blood is a circulating flame, it
spouts against the upper Region of my brain, like a tempestuous Hurricane.


By your description this should be Love; that's the disease torments you; Love
plays mad wreaks, when first it enters a breast and finds resistance.


Love!


Yes, Love like the small Pox, as any seldom escape it, so the more dangerous
it is, when it comes late.


I don't know, but I have had strange turmoils and combustions in my fancy ever
since your friend gave me that description, and showed me the Lady; I have been
looking for her.


See she's under sail, she'll be up with you presently.


Captain, -- what execution have my Eyes done -- are you in Love yet?


You have fired your upper Teer, you have peppered me with small shot.


Yes, Madam, he's furiously infected with Love, but can you tell him how to
cure his Disease.


To cure Love, he must look for Love again.


There's encouragement for you -- bear up close, speak to her Captain.


I could speak better to the great Guns of an Armada, whose Oratory is nothing
but Fire and noise.


Board her to rights, briskly.


If I was but once master of her Forecastle.


That's easy, she's leaky Captain, -- she's leaky.


Than she'll founder anon.


Madam, afford him your hand; so now I have brought you to grappling, I'll vere
off, and give you Sea room, get clear of one another as you can.


Can you Love?


Yes Captain.


Me; by the North Star, say but that word, and this Sword, if you command,
shall Unpeole half the World,


I have no great skill.


Feel, has it not a brave edge, and what a point is here!


'Tis dangerous meddling with edge Tools, pray put it up.


Have you any Enemies? if you have --


No Captain, put it up.


Will you Love me then?


I Love not danger; any thing but killing.


Did you never see one killed?


No.


No! had you but been with me in our last Engagement, you might have seen a
sight, that would have made a Coward in love with Death. There you'd have seen
our Enemies bear up in a half Moon, exposing to our view, the terror of their
wooden Castles, the Mouths of their great Guns, which were made to swallow Iron
Morsels, that might lie heavy upon their Stomachs, till they were disgorged in
our Faces.


Fau -- fau --


We, with Topsails out, Flags and Streamers flourishing in the Wind, and
Trumpets sounding, unite our force; than like Thunder fall in amongst them;
there like the Sons of Terror, we are seen in Clouds of Fire and Smoke, The
Slaughter now begins --


Hold good Captain.


We play at Tennis with Iron balls, and Death comes whisting by our Ears, Heads
take Fire in their Brain pans, and burst in sunder like Grenades, scattering
the wild Fire of their Brains in their fellow Soldiers Faces.


You fright me horribly.


Other Heads, fly from one Ship with the Bullets that saluted them, to visit
their friends in another. Limbs like Langrel-Shot, mount, scattering in the
Air, and hands that could not reach their Enemies before, now fly into distant
Vessels, to give their Foes a box of the Ear; other hands grasping their Swords,
clear a whole Deck in their flight.


What shall I do!


We are now in a confusion, the Fire-ships flame, and their half Moon is
divided -- into blazing Stars.


O quarter, Captain, quarter!


Some burn, the Men leap over board, and drown themselves to save their lives;
other Ships real drunk, with the Sea brine, and at last sink to the bottom, to
follow these brave Men, who fought in 'em, with as much Courage, as they drank.


Have you yet done?


The Flags and Pendants.


Yet more --


That hung wantonly playing in the Air, now on the Decks lie stian'd in blood,
and their tant Masts are brought by the Board, and lie on their Hull 's as in
Coffins. -- how like you it, is't not brave?


I am almost Dead with fear.


I thought you valiant; did not I see you draw your Sword.


In Land matters I am Courageous, but in Sea affairs a mere Coward; their very
terms are Bullets to me, I would not hear such another relation --


Not hear! can you fear when I stand by? my voice is gentle, but I have
something that can speak louder to your Enemies, see --


What's that, a Pistol?


'Tis the spawn of a Cannon, a little spit-Fire Devil.


Pray Conjure him down again.


Frighted at my voice! you shall hear what a brave Language this speaks.


What noise is this?


Ah!


Gon -- I'll after her, and give her the other salute.


Murder -- murder, help.


Oh! Sir, what's the matter?


I am shot, I am shot.


Shot Sir!


I am shot, as sure as a Gun, I am shot.


I don't see you bleed.


It may be the Bullet stops the hole, and won't let the blood come out.


Shall I run for a Surgeon --


But where, All is not in hand, that helps. Look honest Dash, and see what I
ail.


Please your Worship to stand up --


What! before I know whether I am killed or not.


I see no signs on it -- do you feel any hurt, do you think you are killed?


Dash. I think I don't feel any, but Thoughts are deceitful; look, look, The
Stander by sees more than a Gamester.


It has missed you, Sir.


Then a Blot's no Blot till it he hit. I durst have sworn I had been killed,
for he shot me down as flat as a Flounder: But all is not lost that's in
Danger. And give a Man Luck and throw him into the Sea.


Did your Worship see no Body?


Who ever it was, they thought One pair of heel's worth two pair of Hands; they
ran for it, As if the Devil drove 'em.


Will not your Worship follow 'em.


Let 'em go, Make a golden Bridge for a flying Enemy. 'Tis Wisdom to keep out
of harms way. Take the Candle, let's see if all be safe here, and that the
noise has not wakened Jacinta, then we'll to Bed again. -- Ha -- her Door is
open -- what can the meaning be at this time of Night -- Dash, look in and see,
if any body be there, whilst I compose my self -- hum -- hum -- I had like to
have Paid for my peeping.


No Sir -- there's no body.


It's good to be sure, let's us go in then, Seeing is believing.


Surely I heard talking -- but al's whist -- Here, here, you may venture out.


Is any body stirring.


Not a Mouse --


I heard a noise ever since we went to Bed.


So did I.


It may be the Cook is stirring -- I charged him to call me before day, for I
am Overseer general of the Kitchen, besides my Stomachs up, and I can lie a Bed
no longer.


I swear, Mr. Justice, I shall have a better Opinion of a Man that has a good
Stomach, as long as I live, for your sake.


Ay, ay, Good at Meat, good at Work.


You are a brisk old blade, to venture on two at once.


I begin to grow Old, but the time was, when I could have been froliksome with
two and two, my Girls -- but hark, the House is up -- I hear the chopping
Knives at work upon the Dressers -- they'll be coming to call me -- slip down
stairs and get into some by Room, and make your selves ready there.


I see light at the bottom of the stairs, we can't go down yet without being
seen.


Than we'll in here again.


No, no, here, I feel a door open -- this is some room that no body lies in.


Where --


Here -- here -- In -- in -- so -- now I'll into my Chamber, make my self
ready,


Ah Madam Jacinta! is it so, out of your Bed at this time of Night.


O Lord, Sir, there's another random shot.


We'll retire into our Castle then -- Forewarned, Fore-arm'd.


Ah --


Sure she'll love me anon.


I told you Madam, you should see sport.


How you tremble Madam!


O the Captain's in his hot* fit, and I am in my cold?


What has he done to you?


Frighted me horribly; he has not spoke a word, but was as terrible, as the
roaring of Cannon.


The Captain would be a rare Physician to cure Ladies of the Ague -- if
fighting 'em can do it.


What was you doing Captain.


Only saluting his Mistress.


Right, I gave her a Gun, that's Sea Courtship.


Your complement was very loud -- you should first have given her a fair
summons to surrender, and seen if she'd have yielded upon Parley. Did you think
to take her Heart by storm, as Man do Towns?


It was more like a Soldier.


But not like a Lover, Love is a gentle passion -- but Madam, admit him again
into your service -- he will forget he is a Soldier, and turn Courtier for your
sake.


No, let him still retain his valour, but not express his Love, in such
terrible Rhetoric.


I know not how to Court you in a Silken phrase, but if down right reality
will do it, I'll be your friend both board and larboard.


Than Captain, out with all your Sails, top and top-gallant, you shall be my
Lover.


Well performed, Madam.


Whilst I my Heart under your conduct steer,
No Coasting Pirate, Lovers I, nor Rovers fear.

Well, now Lovers I think 'tis time for you all to be at rest, but my Cousin
here, I pity at my Heart, to morrow is her execution day, and I dare swear, she
had rather 'twere for Hanging, than Marrying.


O Hillaria! that word has damped all my mirth, I had else gone to Bed again,
with some pleasure, for the Captains courtship had quite put to morrow out of
my thoughts. But 'tis late -- I'll bury my cares in my Pillow -- and trust all
to providence.


I'll bear you company this Night as a friend does an acquaintance, that's to
be trust up the next morning; and all the time we can't sleep, we'll Sing no
other Letany, than -- From an old overgrown Looby, and from Sir Barnaby Booby
-- goodness deliver thee. Good night Servant --


Good night, unluckiness.


Arabella, I'll see you to your Chamher.


Good night Gentlemen.


Bonos noches, bonos noches. I think it's now time for us to turn in too.


But now I think on it, what's become of our two Whores, must we give 'em over
so.


Ah -- ah --


Your Whores Gentlemen! here are your Whores.


How Sir Barnaby!


Ha, Madam Jacinta -- I find you are a Canarybird -- out of your Nest, at this
time of Night.


Whores, said the Beast.


No better nor no worse, are these trappings fit for a Ladies Chamber? there
has bren Rantum scantum doings within, the Bed's turned Topsy Turvy, Men's
Clothes and Women's, thrown Higeldy Pigeldy; whilst some are at it, Helter
skelter, arsy versy, hand over head, and the Devil and all.


What a Pox is all this -- I am a shark, if I understand one syllable of what
he says.


Sir Barnaby, is this fit language for you to give Ladies, in Gentlemen's
Company?


What does he affront the Ladies -- have at his main-top -- I'll shatter his
Tackling.


Hold Captain --


What's here? Civil Wars, and homebred Combustions -- keep the Peace.


Put up Captain.


Affront the Ladies -- I'll rake him from stem to stern.


Keep the Peace in the King's name.


Forbear --


Sir Barnaby, what's the matter?


The matter is, that Old Birds won't be caught with Chaff. Mr. Alderman, I
thank you for your fine Daughter; but you shall not find, Sir Barnaby, the Man you
take him for, Some wiser than some. Yet: And you Mrs. Jacinta, that looked As
harmless as a Devil of two Years old; and As demure, as if Butter would not
melt in your Mouth, were you to be Married in the Morning, and could not
forbear playing at leap frog over Night. Your servant, your servant --


Hold, Sir Barnaby, a word with you, Sir Barnaby.


If this should fall out so luckily now to


With a little good management it may.


We'll all help it forward.


O -- O --


Whose there -- whose there --


Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby.


Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby.


What's here, new discoveries.


Sir Barnaby, what makes you fly from us.


What made you Sir Barnaby rise so early, and leave us in Bed by our selves?


Rare Whores -- strike that nail home.


Whores -- Jades -- Carrions --


In my Conscience, Sir Barnaby has picked up your two Mistresses.


Gentlemen, You beat the bush, and he caught the birds.


Ladies, you see old Love cannot be soon forgot.


Queens -- Gypses -- Baggages --


Sir Barnaby, Madam, -- had not disowned us last night, but that it was upon
his Marriage, and before you.


Ye Harlots -- ye -- Strumpets -- I'll have you whipped and flayed.


O that's too much Sir Barnaby, -- you have given 'em Correction already.


What, Sir Barnaby, in Bed with two at once -- Higledy Pigledy.


No better, -- nor no worse --


Was this his rantum scantum.


To be Married in the Morning -- Sir Barnaby and play at leap frog over night.


Ha, ha, ha.


Rest you merry, Let them laugh that win. Hey Chamberlain, Chamberlain -- Dash,
call to the Hostler, bid him saddle my Horse, and let the Boot-catcher bring up
my Boots, I'll begone at peep of Day.


Yes, and please your Worship.


Hold Sir Barnaby, be not in such hast.


Let him go -- let him go.


No, that must not be -- his going may spoil a good Dinner, at least, I'll
persuade him not to go till he has Dined.

Well, you luscious Jades you -- I'll remember your Christmas boxes for saving
my credit so handsomely -- get you down into the Larder, I'll give you a rare
Breakfast.


We'll meet you there -- your Servant Ladies.


Your Servant Gentlemen


Look you Madam -- who would not Love such honest wenches -- how ready they
were to do a Man a good turn.


Servant! I'll allow they have a great deal of good nature -- for they are for
doing every Man's turn as well as yours.


That's Malice, and ill nature in you --


I'll grant you any thing at this time, because we'll not loose the opportunity
of doing my Cousin a piece of service.


We'll find out Lovell -- tell him the whole business, and concert with him,
how matters shall be managed.


In the mean time, we'll retire into our Chamber.


Let that be the place of Rendezvouse.


Come Captain.


THen you heard nothing of all these fine doings last Night*


No, Sir.


Nor you did not hear the Pistol go off?


No.


Lady, you slept like a Dormouse, and I wonder that you being so sound a
sleeper -- your Daughter should be so wakeful to leave her Bed at midnight.


But Sir Barnaby, are you not mistaken in what you told me.


Look you Sir, Truth may be blamed, but never shamed. I could give you farther
proof if occasion served. But Truth is not to spoken at all times.


Yet it concerns you to speak, and to prove what you speak, this is no jesting
matter.


Well than, Over shoes, over boots. And In for a Penny, in for a Pound. Whee
-- ho -- Toby.


Here, Sir.


I'll resign my Office, I'll resign my Office.


What now!


I'll resign my Office, if I been it better obeyed.


What, are you frantic?


'Twould make me frantic, and stark mad, were not I a Justice of Peace, and
Coram too, which this rebellious Cook cares not a straw for; there are a dozen
of Woodcocks.


Pray put your self into the number, and make 'em a Baker's dozen.


I am contented, so they may be dressed to my mind; he has found out a new device
for sauce, and won't dress them with Toasts and Butter. I had rather loose my
Commission, than suffer't.


Let 'em be dressed as you will, go in and trouble us no farther.


Well, I'll go, Woodcocks without Toasts and Butter, by the Lord Harry, I'll
never suffer't.


Now Toby, speak neither for favour nor affection, But tell truth, and shame
the Devil, what did you tell me you saw last Night?


Having occasion to rise in the Night, to go down (and please your Worship,) as
I came in again, I perceived two young brisk Sparks Dance up stairs before me,
they parted in the Gallery, and one of 'em went tap, tap, at Mrs. Jacinta's
door, which presently opened, and in he went. Thought I, this is some guest
that has mistaken his Room -- I crept softly, and peeped in -- whip went of his
Hat -- and whip went off his Coat -- thus half undressed threw himself within
the Curtains, and cried, my Dear -- Dear Jacinta; and there they hugged and
kissed, and hugged -- till the Bed shook like an old barn, in a windy day.


Hum!


At length says Mrs. Jacinta (whose voice I knew,) come, come, to Bed my Dear,
and don't get Cold; so I will replied the other, we'll so kiss and hug all this
Night, my Dear, Dear, for you are to be Married to Morrow.


And -- and what followed?


Then the door was locked on the inside. I sat me down, resolved to watch till
Morning -- but before day light, out they came, and surprising me there, took
me for a Spy, and a listner, and discharged a Pistol at me, just as my Master
opened his door it mist me, down stairs I scattered, they after me -- but I ran
into the Orchard, and hid my self in the Pear-tree.


Hang him that has never a shift.


And you both heard and saw a Man in my Daughter's Chamber.


As I told you, upon my Corporal Oath.


But --


Well, never was the like of such a fellow.


Are you interrupting us again!


Mr. Alderman, what do you think?


I think, you'll do very well to be gone.


Nay, but pray hear me --


I will hear nothing.


Well then -- I take your silence for consent, I'll even commit this saucy
Cook. I'll sign a Warrant for him forthwith.


Let me tell you Mr. Justice you do very ill to trouble us, when we are upon
serious business?


Why, Mr. Alderman, there's as lovely a Codds-head, as ever Eyes beheld, and
how do you think this Rogue of a Cook is going to dress it.


As he should do your Head, cleave it, and take out the brains.


What's the matter Mr. Alderman, you are even as Choleric as the Cook? what
say you Sir Barnaby -- will it do well -- a Cods-head without Shrimps.


Sir, We have other Fish to fry at this time. You had as good go from whence
you came, for here you will be but Out of the Frying-pan, into the Fire.


Well, I'll try the other bout with the Cook, and if I can't fadge, I'll
discreetly sit me down and cry for vexation, for my passion must have vent -- a
Cods head without Shrimps, O monstrous!


Friend, what manner of Man was this person, you saw in my Daughter's Chamber.


I did not see his Face -- for his back was to the Door all the while -- but a
brisk youngster i'saith.


Now I have given you sufficient proof, restore my acquittance, and take back
your Daughter -- Even Reckoning, makes long Friends. And so Merry meet, merry
part.


I'll give one Proverb for your two, One tales good, till another is told.
Therefore I'll not close my account with you, till I have spoken with my
Daughter.


You have paid me in my own Coin. Reason is Reason, all the World over. For he
that Judges, must hear both parties. But pray dispatch, for I stand upon
Thorns.


It will be necessary, that you, who are her accusers, should go with me to
her.


A guilty Conscience needs no accuser, however we'll go, tho we Shall be as
welcome, as Water into a Ship, for I know she'll look at us, As the Devil looks
over Lincoln.


No Shrimps! a Cods-head without Shrimps!


Yes, Sir, a Cods head without Shrimps, is as good as a Justices head, without
Brains.


I tell you Cook, you are saucy.


I tell you Mr. Justice, you are Jack in an Office.


I shall lay you by the Heels.


Than, I Jack Sauce, the Cook, will bast your Worship, as I bast my Meat.


To strike a Justice of Peace, is Petty Treason, Edwardi quinto. But for
spoiling of Dinner, I'd send you away presently, and commit you without Bail or
Mainprize.


For all that -- keep out of the Kitchen, which is my Dominion, or I will
scall'd you without measure, and without mercy. Why sure Mr. Justice, I can
dress Dinner without you, hau --


The Rogues as Choleric as a rosting Lobster -- I must give him good words,
or All the fat will be in the Fire. Well honest Jack Sauce, do as thou wilt --
why should old Friends fall out -- give me thy hand.


I Love your Worship with all my Heart.


Dost thou? prithee than let there be Shrimps to the Cods head -- dear Sauce,
honest dear Sauce.


Why* so there is Sir --


Is there -- what made you and I quarrel then?


You would not have patience till it came to the Table.


Thou said true -- come prithee let's go see how matters are in the Kitchen.


Kitchen me no Kitchen, if you can be quiet, things will be done well enough.


Give me thy hand once more -- thou art an honest Fellow, -- thou say there
shall be Shrimps than, ha, shall there?


If you speak Sir, one word more --


I -- a -- done -- I'll bring thee a bottle of Sack into the Kitchen.


And I'll relished with a plate of pickled Mushrooms.


Honest Cook! honest Jack Sauce, no Shrimps! in my Conscience, 'twould have
broke my Heart.


So far all goes well, my Brother resolves to quit the Field -- but now to work
the Alderman -- that he may not suspect a Contrivance, that's the difficulty --
let me see --


Mr. Lovell! yes, 'tis he -- soho -- whose within?


Are you here Captain!


That's a Lovers question right -- even let your


Your friend gave you fair warning not to fall in love.


There's the Devil on it, I know not how it comes about -- well, believe me, tho
Women look like Angels -- there's witchcraft about 'em; for if a Woman does but
fetch the long heave, with lifting up her Head, and bending in her Back, two
little -- round -- white -- plump -- pouting Devils pop up before, which put
such a glowing heat into my veins, that my blood in a moment grows too hot for
it's Channels* and I could overrun a score of 'em.


You are transported at the very thoughts of Women.


I am now in one of my fits -- that I had but half a dozen Ladies in my great
Cabin! how I'd rummage them together, I'd make 'em smoke again.


If you are so hot, take a walk in the open Air to cool you.


That won't do -- if we were going to engage, perhaps the loss of a Leg or an
Arm, might abate my Fever.


Your distemper is so rooted in you, that you must loose a Leg or an Arm for
every handsome Woman you see, or you'll not be thoroughly cured.


Say you so, than I'll endure it still, and try what time and chance will do.


But how go squares 'twixt you and your Mistress?


Well remembered, she sent me this Letter even now by her Maid; I wanted
somebody to read it to me.


Can't you Read?


No, I am a Sea-Captain, the Sea breeds Soldiers, but not Scholars: 'tis out
of my Element.


You shall hear it then.

MY Roaring Boy, I can Love no longer at your fierce rate, my Heart is bound
under another Convoy, give Chase to a fresh Mistress; I am sailing after a new
Rigged Gallant, and now bid you defiance. So a boon Voyage to you Captain, and
farewell.

Arabella.


What, turned Renegate?


Short warning this!


See, she's not out of my Hemisphere. I'll give her Chase.


They tack about to us.


How dejected my Lover looks now I have taken away his Commission.


Captain, what think you of love?


As of folly.


Is't not a fine pastime?


Yes for Fools.


What think you of Women?


As of light Sailors.


Arab. Ha, ha, ha.


That shot Captain, hit 'twixt wind and water.


Or, as of Ships that are crank for want of Ballast, tossed about with every
wave, and cannot be steered in any true course?


Hill. Ha, ha, ha.


Do you play with my Anger; Am I so tame to be laughed at? sure I have seemed
more terrible, when with this Sword, I have lopped off Limbs, strewn Decks with
Carcases, turned Fleets to floating Hospitals, sent Navies to their Ports to
cut down Masts, and hew the Timber of their scattered Vessels into wooden Legs
and Crutches, to under-prop the Cripples they brought home. Love, hast thou
disarmed my looks of Manhood? -- phew -- with that gale begone.


Ha, ha, ha.


Captain, Love is still in Port, he went not out with that strong puff.


No, Love has not yet weighed Anchor.


Captain -- you have a qualm yet in your Stomach, you are either Sea-sick, or
Love-sick still.


But Captain -- if you have really done with Love and Women -- Let us know your
thoughts of both in good earnest, what is Love?


A Sea, a dangerous Sea, where Wind and Tide are still contrary: Men are the
Barks that venture out, whose ruins still its Waves conspire.


And what are Women in this Ocean?


Pirates, that rob us of our hearts, Laplanders that give us a fair wind to
leave safe Harbors, and when we are out at Sea, make it swell to a Tempest to
drown us. I have out-rid the Storm, thanks to my lusty Vessel, and now being
gotten safe in Harbour, can look back and say -- Yonder I had like to have been
wrecked.


Well said, now you have given them a whole Broad-side.


For all that, I see he's but a fresh-water Lover yet: Now you think your self
past danger, you are in greatest peril to be Cast away -- what think you if
that Letter which raised this Tempest, was but a Plot to -- see how my Lover
could bear the loss of his Mistress?


What wind do you call this? -- By what Point of the Compass will you steer
now?


I think I had best make what haste I can to come up with stern of her.


That it was so, here's my hand on it.


'Tis very true, this Plot was but to try your humour.


Why then, we'll put out to Sea once again, and my heart shall run the risque
with yours in all Adventures.


Captain, I strike sail to you.
You now with Triumph in Love's Ocean steer,
Calm is the Sea, and from all Pirates clear.

The Conference is broke up, here comes Careless and my Brother: Get you two in
-- Now Captain, for our management.


Let him come.


You see your Daughter is so confounded at one Evidence, she scarcely had
confidence to deny it; for a guilty Conscience needs no Accuser.


I am sorry you had the trouble to come so far for so little purpose; but
excuse me -- I cannot forbear grieving at a Child's misfortune.


Children are certain Cares, but uncertain Comforts. Now, Sir, remember that
Giff Gaff is an honest man; You have your Daughter, give me my Acquittance. So
the man has his Mare again and no hurt done.


'Tis Locked up in my Chamber, but I'll fetch it you: To commit such
extravagance the very Night before her marriage, what madness possessed her!


Sir Barnaby, you intend then to begone.


As soon as I can get my Boots on.


Without marrying Mrs. Jacinta.


She has spun a fine thread; even let her brew as she baked.


Who do you think shall marry her, now you have defamed her?


He that was with her last Night, if he please: Evening Orts are good Morning
fother: but for my part, I am not so hungry to lick another man's dish.


But Sir Barnaby, you are the man must make her reparation, you have traduced
me and defamed her -- the scandal brings an aspersion on the whole Family that
I seek to contract alliance with, for her Cozen Hilaria is the person I pretend
marriage to; for all offences therefore against her -- her Family and my self
-- from you I challenge satisfaction.


What do you mean by satisfaction?


Here before your Brother and the Captain, I require that you first deny all
you have said against the Lady's Honour. Secondly, that you make it your
request to marry her.


Bate me an Ace of that, quoth Bolton.


You must, Sir.


I have brought an old House upon my head; Eat my words and marry her. Two
words to that bargain.


No, Sir, the last I deny; tho I believe nothing in prejudice of Jacinta's
Honour, how ever unhappy circumstances make him think so, yet till he is
convinced to the contrary, he cannot in Honour, nor must not Marry her.


Must not! -- he must, and shall or --


Must is for the King.


I say must -- unless I spring a Leak, and sink forty Fathom deep under the
Earth.


Who so bold, as a blind Byard.


Captain, forbear.


I have brought my Hogs to a fine Market, this will be The Devil upon Dun.


I am glad you are so far a favourer of our cause, to believe Jacinta innocent.


I do.


But since her Honour and the Family's cannot be held without this Marriage; I
press him to that point, tho at the same time, I direct my Sword against the
Brother of my Friend, and even against my Friends own breast, for I am sure the
Captain won't stand idle.


Tho I am not so skilled in Love, I hope I shall do my part at this sport.


This mends like sower Ale in Summer.


I think we are all ready.


Draw Brother.


Hum -- humh --


Come let's not loose time.


Draw Brother, draw.


Umh, What's worse than ill luck.


What's the matter.


My Sword with riding, is grown rusty in the Scabbard.


Let me see it Sir Barnaby -- I'll warrant you.


Trust my Sword in an Enemies hand! Whose's the fool than.


Cry you mercy.


Ay, Cry you mercy, killed the Cat. -- umh humh.


Let me see it -- Gentlemen with your patience, I'll speak two words aside to my
Brother.


Dispatch, dispatch -- the winds fair.


What a pox -- No such hast, to hang true Folk


Let us not engage in an ill cause, if we can help it.


I am content to let it alone, tell 'em 'Tis good to have Wit i^ ones Anger.


But you must repair the Ladies Honour.


But I'll not take a Lease of her for life, to be bound to repairs, when all
the damage has been done by the Tenant at will.


Upon my Life and Conscience, I think her very innocent and virtuous* Be not
abused by fond suspicions.


One may see light at a little hole.


I am confident -- she'll make a good Wife.


A Vessel will smell of the first Liquor. Once a Whore, and ever a Whore.


I have done -- we must even fight it out,


It's a little Cold this morning methinks.


Cold!


May come it early, come it late, it will make the Cow to quake.


Since you are afraid, rather than your Honour shall be exposed -- I'll make
one Proposal -- and let you see, I persuade you to nothing, that I would not do
my self -- Gentlemen, my Brother cannot Marry the Lady, because his Opinion it
not reconciled to her Honour; but I have other thoughts of the fair Jacinta,
and believe all in her prejudice to be mistakes; therefore if she'll accept me
for a Husband; I am ready to do her Justice.


I confess you being both of a Family, and Sir Barnaby's Brother, your Marriage
gives sufficient Satisfaction.


Ay, Any Tooth good Barber, as the case stands with her.


But your Estate is not half Sir Barnaby's.


There's a spoke put into the Wheel again.


The whole comes to me, if he die without Issue.


There, He has hit the right nail on the head.


He may Marry, and have Children.


That Puts his Nose out of joint again.


Yet I'll undertake, let but Sir Barnaby, add to your Six Hundred a Year, four
more out of his Estate, during life. And Mr. Alderman shall accept the Change.


Come Gentlemen, then let's decide the matter thus: I know my Brother won't be
forced to any thing.


No, All things for Love, nothing by force.


What say you Sir Barnaby?


I say Sir, I won't be forced by any body -- nor to any thing -- I'll sooner
loose a thousand Lives.


Well said, old boy; come bowze it away.


Come then, Sir, you and I --


Nay, Sir, be as angry as you will -- I'll speak what I have to say first, and
I tell it you to your Teeth, I will not be forced, and yet out of Love and
natural affection, to my Brother -- and because he likes the Gentlewoman, his
fancy shall not be balked. Therefore I will give four Hundred a Year upon that
Condition, whether any here will or nill, and let me see who'll say me nay. I
can be as chuff as any of you.


I beg your pardon, Sir Barnaby; then friendly we embrace, and here let all
resentments vanish.


What then, do we strike our Flag --


Dear Brother, this honourable act surprises me.


No Fighting amongst us, Zou^s, aboard a Ship, we had had as many Bullets ever
this, as here has been words.


Captain, You need not be so Crusty, you are not so hard baked.


That's a Land term, now, that I don't understand.


Uncle -- Uncle, have you any work for a Tinker. The Parson has staid this
hour, and has nothing to do -- must he be gone, or will you have him stay to
say Grace at Dinner?


Let him take pains with you, you want Grace.


Right, I am not come to it; Uncle, and you are past it, else you'd not be so
easily seduced to believe Sir Barnaby Beelzebub there.


Sir Barnaby, here's your Acquittance -- I wish the next Lady you Court, may
have better luck.


Mr. Alderman, Sir Barnaby still retains so great a respect for your Daughter,
that if you'll accept Mr. Lovell for her Husband, he offers to settle on him,
four Hundred a Year, additional Estate, out of his own, during Life; and you
have a prospect for it all hereafter.


Will he!


Yes, -- no offence I hope -- I will -- What's freer then gift.


Now do I hope my Uncle will refuse the offer -- and give me all his Money when
he Dies, to vex his Daughter.


Rather then you shall see a Groat on it, I'll give it to Hospitals, which is
the worst use a Man can put his Money too; for the Poor are always cheated
on it. Mr. Lovell, I have all I can desire, which is to see my Daughter well
disposed off; for your sake I'll add some Hundreds to her Portion -- for my
Heart is now so much lighter then it was.


Sir, I'll study to deserve your kindness. And Brother yours --


Lord, Uncle, that you should do all this to spite me.


What you do, do with a Jerk, For I*ll pack up my Aulls and begone.


You'll stay and Dine with us, Sir Barnaby.


Ay, ay, Prayer and Provender, never hinder a Journey. While you order your
matters, Dash. shall draw a short Article for Memorandum.


Then I'll go offer my self at Jacinta's Feet, and ask her consent.


Sir, now I have done you a piece of service


Sir, I must acknowledge your friendship; what is't?


To use your Authority with your Niece, and keep her up; for I can be no where,
either about my business, or taking my recreation, but she presently comes and
disturbs me, she was the occasion of all last Nights bustle.


Nay if there's any mischief towards, she's at the end on it I warrant you


Ay, but hold Sir, I was at the beginning of that, as you'll hear hereafter.


You see how 'tis Sir -- If you don't take some speedy course with her, I must
be forced to leave this Town, to avoid her Company.


Pray take her along with you, and you'll free me of a great trouble, for she
has been my vexation some Years.


'Tis true, that Gentleman and I have been a little troublesome to one another;
you know he came to solicit (...) in the way of Matrimony, which I don't much
approve of; for it makes Folk's fall out. The first Day of Marriage is the last
Day of Love. (...) liked him well enough for a Gallant, and if he would have
accepted of me for a Mistress, or so; we might have fadg'd a while, but he had
a foolish scruple of Conscience, nothing would serve him but Marriage, and so
away came I, this is all Uncle.


I shall never learn to know at Land, whether they are in earnest, either in
talking or fighting.


If you will have my Opinion in the case, you were cut out, one for the other;
and 'tis pity two Houses should part you. Therefore if she'll agree to your
desire, or you conform to her's, 'tis all one to me, you have my consent to
either. All I ask is, that you'll make an end quickly, that I may be clear of
her Company.


Then, Sir, you may either go to London, or stay in the Country, if you please,
without danger of being troubled with me; for I absolutely declare against
Marriage; and if nothing else will serve your turn, you may go when you will,
where you will, and do what you please; I'll have nothing to say to such an
unreasonable Man as you are.


To convince you Mr. Alderman, that what she says is not true, but that on the
contrary, I am for having her for a Mistress, and she is for being my Wife: Mr.
Lovell, and the Captain, and all that know me, can witness, I have continually
railed against Marrying.


Well, I'll leave you to decide the matter betwixt your selves.


Yes, yes, I have heard you forswear Marrying, and drinking too* yet I catch
you dabbling in the Punch bowl next day.


Now Lady, if you are not for what I proposed, you may even live a Maid. and
Die a Fool, or live a Fool, and Die a Maid; your Epitaph shall be the same.


I except against your Sex for Witnesses, as byast. But rather then such a
lyiny Man as you shall have it, my Maidenhead and I will Live and Die together,
be buried both in a Grave, that you may be chief Mourner at my Funeral. So
farewell you Matrimonial Fop.


Pray --


No, there's a Wedding going forward within, and I would not loose the
diversion of that silly sight, to hear all you can say.


Come Captain, we'll go see how scurvily it looks in others, that it may be a
warning for us, to avoid it too. But this I'll say,

If for a Wife my liberty I loose,
This is the Girl must catch me in the noose.

Send away Dinner -- send away Dinner, there a pox upon them all for loitering
Rogues, why don't you send Dinner away, I must even sit me down, for I am
almost spent with running and bawling after one and another.


Lord, Sir, you have no patience, here's a noise, as if the great Bell rung out
for the Towns being on Fire, and your Tongue was the Clapper.


It must Ring out, when my Belly Rings Noon; the baked Meats run out, the
Pottages boil over, and the Roast'd will be dried to Powder.


Who can help it -- Sir Barnaby himself gave order for Dinner to be ready by
Eleven of the Clock, the Clock has made all hast possible. They within are at
better for worse -- the words are not quite out of their Mouths yet: why, your
Worship is a Man of no moderation?


Well, well, they have done by this time, -- good host, see it be sent to
Table, my Spirits are almost spent.


It shall, Sir, it shall.


Bid my Clark be ready to attend me.


Yes, Sir.


Oh, Mr. Dash. -- has the Parson done the job.


Yes, Sir.


What a sudden change of affairs is here, this good Dinner was provided for Sir
Barnaby's Wedding Dinner -- and is now served up for Mr. Lovell's Bride, and
all falls to his share.


Much good do him with her, that has her; I am glad Sir Barnaby mist her.


But what do I prating here, when Dinners going up.


Gemminy Sir, how you are garnished out, as if you were to be served up for a
standing Dish -- more for ornament, than use -- let me help you off with your
Cloak. Some body has pined a dish clout to your back.


Whose Roguery was this, the Cooks or the Boys; I'll have 'em all to the
whipping post, for abusing a public Magistrate.


Look you Sir, they have pined a dish clout to your back, and the Cape is stuck
with staring Feathers -- like a French hen.


Help me -- they'll have dined else before I come.


Sir. Mr. Alderman sent me to acquaint you, that a Lord, and a Coach full of
Ladies -- of his acquaintance, Just now are come into bait, whom he could not
but invite to dine with him -- therefore makes bold with you as his special
good friend, the Table being but little to have a a Cloth laid in another
Room.


How, not dine within, after all my care!


Sir, he desires you to see Dinner sent up in good order, and me to attend at
Table. Your Worship may for once dispense with your Magistracy, and sit with me
and the waiting Gentlewoman; I don't like Dining amongst great Gentry, 'tis
not mannerly to fill one's belly before 'em.


Well, there shall not a Dish escape me -- and now I think on it, I can there
take my own time; and gorge at leisure.


So Sir, you may now put on your Cloak -- only take a view of your Hat, that
Cock's Tail in it makes you look like a City Train-band Captain.


Would I knew whose Roguery it was.


Look you Sir, here's the first Dish come from the Table already.


Prithee go and call my Clerk to me.


To the Kitchen, Sir.


No, no, set it down here -- So --


The Dogs will come to it there.


Go Knave, go, what serve I for?


Indeed, Sir, they will.


No, no.


A Greyhound, as I came a long, chopped a great Mary-bone out of my Dish, and
ran away with it.


Send him to me then: I'll lay the Dog by the heels.


Come Tom.


Let me see; what's here -- O -- the Toasts and Marybones: Marrow's a delicate
food; the very Quintessence of the Ox -- it Oils the Chops rarely -- and makes
Dinner go glibly down.


You Sir, come here -- John, set your Dish down too -- we'll not trust any
thing into the Kitchen till we have Dined, the Rogues there will be Liquorish
and light Fingered.


Your Worship speaks discreetly.


I know the tricks of Servants -- John, where's the Cloak-Bag?


Just here Sir.


Let me see -- that's a Pottage -- this a Dish of Scotch Collops -- this a
Frigacy of Chickens -- well relished on my word; this fellow, Sauce, were an
excellent Cook was he not so cross and choleric. Hold the Bag, John, is there
a clean Napkin in it?


Yes Sir.


'Twill stand us in use now: Let me see, suppose we put in two or three
Marybones -- Ay, they are full -- remove the Dishes into the next Room there,
and as I send the rest into you, put in some of the best of every thing, but
not so as to unfurnish quite the Dishes.


Sir, here's the Venison Pasty scarce touched.


Let me see it -- O rare -- carryit in there. England -- Mr. Dash!


Yes Sir.


John, John, put in a good deal of the Pasty, cut off a lusty corner; take the
fattest of the Venison; and do you hear me, a swinging deal of Pudding Crust.


Sir, must we set these down here too?


Ay, ay, John, John, take in these things here -- Ha! are you at your
Legerdemain? -- Stop Thief, stop Thief.


A Pox of your Clutches.


Hey, another Felon -- Sirrah, Sirrah, come here -- Come here Sirrah*


O murder! murder!


Sirrah let go, 'tis Felony, thou'lt be hanged else: Call in the servants, make
fresh pursuit -- send Hue and Cry after the Rogue.


What's the matter Sir?


O that Villainous Boy has murdered me, he's run away with a Pheasant. John, and
this Leg is all that's left of the Lobster. O never will my Belly forgive my
hands, that could not hold it. -- Here, put this Leg of the Lobster into the
Cloak-Bag -- bring it forth, and let me see how thou hast stored it. -- Oh
these unlucky Bastards, I am almost sweltered --


Some of the Pasty.


Ay, well -- but what hast thou done here?


Yes Sir -- there's a good deal of it in --


Oh Rogue! Villain! put Pottage into my Cloak-bag!


'Tis very good, 'twill do no hurt I warrant you.


O Nonsensical Ass -- thou hast spoiled all: O what do I suffer, the Lobster
broken, the Pheasant gone; how many afflictions befall me in one day. Here, lead
me into the next Room; I'll sit me down and sigh till my heart breaks, for
surely I can never survive all this.


Pray, Sir, have patience.


No, no, my stomach's gone with vexing. I am a dead man, I shall never eat
again. -- There, there -- bring in the Cloak-bag, and my Cloak with it. Oh. --


I am glad our Guests are gone. -- Now, Mr. Lovell, I wish you much joy with my
Daughter -- may you live happy together.


So do I, but marry in haste and repent at leisure.


The marriage seldom knows repentance where both parties are pleased.


All's well that ends well; I say, the proof of the Pudding is in the Eating.
So rest you merry.


Sir Barnaby, two words ere you go; 'tis not convenient you should depart under
the scandal of a Licentious Bastard-getter, therefore that you may go with as
clear a reputation as you came, I declare these two here were set on by some
that I know, to bring you in disrepute with Mr. Alderman and his Daughter. --
Farther they confess, that the old Justice shifted them out of his Room into
yours this morning by accident. So you are cleared from two scandals, and three
Children, at once.


All this we own.


Well said: When the Frier's beaten then comes Jack.


Look you Sir, these are the Clothes you found in my Cozens Chamber, which we
borrowed of those two young Youths that came down with us yesterday in the
other Stage-Coach, and are going into France with their Governor to Travel;
these we put on out of a frolic. I undressed in her Chamber; and I was that
little Fornicator that so kissed and caressed her in her bed. This Uncle, I
hope, will ease your mind, and reconcile Sir Barnaby to the Bride's reputation.


T^ttle Tattle, give the Go^se more Hay.


Nay, Sir, the Captain and I are Witnesses to this matter.


Ask my fellow if I am a Thief.


'Tis like enough, my Niece is seldom without an unlucky frolic.


Then she's like Goodyears Pig, always doing mischief.


We -- we -- we --


Ha, ha, ha --


I shall meet some of you either at Hedge or Stile -- and so let them laugh
that win --


Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Barnaby, Sir Barnaby, remember Waltoms Calfe -- Farewell Frost --


I'll see him mounted for his last kindness.


I must bid him farewell too.


I am glad he missed my Daughter; I like neither his person nor humour. Come,
now I'll lead you the way in -- we'll have the Music and be merry.


Hold, hold, Uncle; you are for rising from Table before Dinner's done --
here's another Course yet to come up: The Parson must say Grace once more.


Lead on, Sir; pray lead on -- here's a Plot upon me.


Come, come, Careless, never halt before a Cripple.


O Madam, you are a dangerous Person, I dare not trust my self with you alone.


Niece, what say you to me?


It comes just now in my mind that I have lost my Bedfellow, and now my Cozen
is married I know not what to do, for I vow I dare not lye alone.


O no, 'tis dangerous; for after seeing marriages, and a new married Couple put
to Bed together, as strange dreams and fancies will be apt to run in your mind,
as after seeing Executions and dead People; and who knows what a taking you may
be in in the Night, and what strange fits you may have.


O Sir, do you begin to come about; would you beat off others that you may be
my Bedfellow your self? I perceive now that you are for having a Wife.


I for a Wife?


Madam, you come just in the nick of time, to see a poor distressed Damesel
throw her self away -- Well Sir, give me your hand, rather than lye alone to
Night I'll do any thing.


I knew it would come to this.


I will be you Wife; and since I cant't have a Gallant before marriage, I'll do
like other Wives, and have one after. And now I think on it too, a Husband's
very necessary to keep off a scandal; and besides, what Children the Gallant
gets, the Husband must keep.


You are like to have a hopeful Wife.


I can be even with her there. -- Look you Madam, you can bring me none to keep
but what are my own; and if you expect I should be a Father to all your
Children, I expect you should be a Nurse to all mine, and I may have 'em
brought home to me on all sides; for I intent to be a great getter, and the
Father of many. Is it a bargain?


It is: Here, lewd Fellow, here's my hand on it, Heaven send thee good luck, for
I shall be a plague to thee as long as I live.


This is fair play on both sides.


This 'tis for folks to meet that understand themselves. Captain, what think
you of this?


He's in a deep Contemplation of Love too.


Yes, and this is the very thing I love.


Let not such idle thoughts trouble your head, I am almost weary on it my self.


Say you so?


Yes, you and I will be friends for all that, such a trifle as love shall break
no squares. So Captain, tack about to the next.


But by your leave, 'tis more honourable to stand into rights than to make a
tack, and say and sing the Devil's head off. I will judge of Love by the Rules
of Honour; therefore sink or swim, I'll bear up close with you.


Well said old Buccanier.


I like a man of resolution well; then here's my hand, my trusty Tarpaulin, you
shall find me no flincher neither. And now Captain, we are sailing out of the
Haven of Love into the Tempestuous Sea of Matrimony.


So, at last I have gotten the Weather-gage of her, and now I'll lay her thwart
the Harser and Board her to rights.


Now Uncle, pray Con over our Agreement, for you are to be Summoned for a
Witness upon occasion.


It is like to be a fine marriage.


Yes, if it go on as you begun.


You shall see our marriage (which you think clapped up out of a frolic) go on
more cheerfully than yours made out of stark Love and desperate Affection; we,
like two Birds, though we Roost together at Night, will have our freedom all day,
and fly chirping about, whilst you, like two Domestic Animals, coupled too
close together, shall still be sharling and biting one at another.


And we have the trouble every now and then to part you. Mark the end on it.


Mrs. Breeder and Mrs. Daisy, your good service shall be rewarded; let none of
your Function think they have lost me because I am married, I am entered into
matrimony but not into bondage.


He has, as it were, but one Mistress the more. -- Lead away Uncle.

Whilst other Wives and Husbands Scold and Rant,
We two will live like Mistress and Gallant.

FRom Elbow Chair in the Pantry I am come,
To see what you are doing here; make room.
So heartily I slept after my Labour,
My Nose did louder Music make than Pipe and Tabor.
My Dreams presented me a Bill of Fare,
Of sumptuous Meat and Dainties that were rare:
I waked with joy, and to my comfort find,
Three Couple here in Bonds of Wedlock joined.
Three days we'll Feast, a day for every Pair,
And each days Management shall be my care:
We'll have our swinge of Mirth, let nothing cross it,
For every Bride I'll provide a good Sack-Posset,
With grated Naples-Bisket made, and yolks
Of new-laid Eggs, Salacious Food for married Folks:
It shall be rich with Ambergreese and Pounded Pearls,
Which shall provoke a Race of lusty Boys and Girls:
A Bridal Cake for each one too to Munch on,
And every Guest shall have a lusty Lunchon.
All that are here for Guests I do invite;
We'l^ treat the first, the second, and third Night;
With all the choicest Dainties I will feed ye:
^

