IS it not strange to see in such an Age
The Pulpit get the better of the Stage?
Not through Rebellion as in former days,
But Zeal for Sermons and neglect for Plays.
Here's as good Ogling vet, and fewer spies.
For Godly Parents watch with whites of Eyes.
Here Gallants do but pay us for your Room,
Bring if you please, your own brisk wit from home.
Proclaim your drunken fray's three benches round
What Claps y'have met with, and what puuks are sound
Who are the Bully-rocks: and who gives ground.
We take all in good part, and never rage:
Tho the shrill Pit be louder than the Stage.
There you must sit demure, without a word:
Nor Perruque combed, nor Pocket tortoise stirred
Here you may give the Lye, or draw your Sword.
Be loud and senseless, huff, dumbfound, and roar;
Till all the Lady's and some gallants scour.
What free born subject, or true English heart,
Would with such Rights and Privileges part?
When our two houses did divide the Town,
Each Faction zealously maintained their own,
We lived on those that came to cry us down.
Our Emulation did improve your sport:
Now you come hither but to make your Court:
Or from adjacent Coffee Houses throng
At our sourth Act for a new Dance or Song.
To set all right we yet could make a shift;
Had we a few good Livings in our gift.
Your hearts are ours, and let whoever preach
The young and fair will practice what we teach.
Our Play old virtuous Rome the Eunuch named
But modest London the lewd title damned.
Our Author tried his own and could not hit:
He now presents you with some Foreign Wit.

I Ever told you, this Woman would be the ruin of you: all must go to make her
fine, and every New Gown you give, gets you a new Rival.


Thou think all Money thrown away, that is not spent in a Tavern: thou hast no
taste of Love, scarce any remains of Lust, or thou would never Rail at so
Divine a Creature as my Bellamira.


You are resolved to go to her again; notwithstanding the damned trick she
served you with the Sea Captain and your noble resolution to the contrary? I'll
see her hanged first! No, tho she beg it a thousand times, and with a thousand
tears, I'll n'e'r go near her!


Did I say such bug-words?


Yes, and a great deal more.


'Twas when I was in my Altitudes, what? Rebel against my Lawful Sovereign
Bellamira! I'll go to her tho, and show her I am not such a Cully as she takes
me for.


Have a care what you do: If you once begin and don't go through with her, you
settle her Empire for ever; and when she finds her own strength, that you are
not able to leave her, she will use it like a Tyrant: And tho you be the
injured party, after six kind words and a false tear or two, you must make your
peace with a Present of China or a French Petticoat.


These are sad Truths; but when my Bell. frowns I had rather be in a Sea-Fight
for the time, I'll say that for her, tho 'tis soon over. I gave her but a dozen
pair of Marshal Gloves, and she was in the purest Humour all day! We took the
Air in the afternoon, Sup't and went to Bed together.


That was a gaudy day indeed, but I fear you'll give so long, till you have
nothing left.


I had rather give a little Money, than Lye, Flatter and Forswear my self as the
Gallants of the Town do: I love to go to Sleep with a good Conscience.


And rise with ne'er a Penny in your Pocket; if she loved you she would not be
so expensive.


'Tis all to please me. Before I knew her she wore a Gown six months; and had
but one poor Point of her own making.


Matters are well mended with her indeed since that time.


I had the most to do to make her accept of an Embroidered Toilet.


How so?


She said 'twas Money thrown away.


And would have it in Guineas, I warrant.


Thou art a Witch, she cares not a Farthing for Fine Clothes; and but for fear
the Women of the Town should get me from her, would not dress her self in a
Month.


You are too indulgent a Keeper: the poor Sinners of the Town complain of you;
you raise the Market upon 'em.


Why what would a man do?


Let one Nail drive out another: Take me a fresh Wench, a Bottle of Wine or
two, and go hear some Scandal at the Rose -- But here she comes, who with one
Look will confound all our Devices.


Oh, my dear Keepwell! I am afraid thou art Jealous of me, because I did not
let thee in sooner; the news of it put me into such Fits, all our Maids were
too few to hold me.


The news of what?


Of a Duel I was told thou had fought: there was no body to run to the Door;
but thou saw there was no man with me.


I saw no man indeed, but am much mistaken if I did not hear one leap out of
your low Window into a Boat.


This Summer one or other is leaping into the River all night long.


Oh, that you loved like me; or I like you!


Why my dear Keepwell?


Why, then you'd never use me thus, or if you did, it would not thus afflict
me: my heart is as full of Jealousy as an Egg full of meat.


I swear by all that's good there is no man on Earth so welcome to these Arms,
as thy dear self.


Why did not you let me in sooner then?


I was just rising out of a Bath, and I will be seen haked by no man Living.


Kind Soul! first she was in Fits for fear you were hurt; but now she was
coming out of a Bath, and could not in modesty let you in.


She fell into Fits just as she came out of her Bath.


I have always your good word: But I had rather you should say any thing of
me, than kill my dear Keepwell with Drinking. But now I'll tell you the
business I came about: Can your Drunken Friend keep a Secret?


If it be a Truth; but it prove a Lye, a Flam, a Wheadle, 'twill out: I shall
tell it the next man I meet.


My Father was a Merchant, and Breaking here in Town, my Mother went to
Jamaica, and took me with her.


This may be kept secret.


There a Person of Quality fell in Love with her, and amongst other Presents,
gave her the finest Girl I ever saw, stolen out of England by some Kidnappers.


What are they?


Rogues that make a Trade of Stealing Children and Selling them.


Was she a Gentlewoman?


She said so, and she seemed so.


Not so pretty as thou art I warrant her.


Her Father and Mother were Dead; her Brothers name she told us; my Mother bred
her as if she had been her own Child, so that most people thought us Sisters; I
came back with a Friend, the only Person I had then a Concern with, who gave me
all I have.


These are two Whiskers!


Why so?


Because you were never true to one Man: nor did he give you all you have; my
Friend here having presented you with two thousand Pound at least.


Will you let me go on with my Story? My Mother left this pretty Creature
Isabella almost grown a Woman, to an Uncle of mine, for some Money that she owed
him, and could not otherwise pay: He thinking she might yield a good Price,
carries her over into Spain, and there Sells her to one Dangerfield, who buys
her and puts her to wait on his Sister: he is now in England, and offers her
me.


Did he know that she was formerly your Companion?


Not in the least; but since hearing of my concern with you, he seeks all the
excuses he can, not to perform his Promise; and says that he knows as soon as I
have, her he shall be slighted, and you received; for he has heard how dearly I
Love thee.


All the Town knows there is no Love lost. Is this all?


No, I have a small request to thee my Dear.


Now for a Coach, new Bed, or the Payment of an old Debt.


You are mistaken Sir; could I help it I would not put my dear Keepwell to the
Charge of one of your Drunken Clubs in a Year.


You spend it him in Coach-hire, Puppy-water and Paint, every day of your Life.


Peace, thou moving Dropsy, that wadlest with Fat, worse than a Goose with Egg


No man that had to do with you, e're lost his Shape; Fluxing and Sweating are
great Preservatives.


This is rudeness and not Wit; come thou art my best Companion and she my
dearest Mistress. As our modern Poet has it; If not in Friendship, live at
least in Peace.


What is it thou would Command?


Command! only a trifling Suit I have.


It must be a strange one if I refuse it; Is it in my power?


It is.


Then speak and be sure to obtain it, as if thou ask'dst it of thy self. I have
not given thee any thing all this day.


'Tis no Money matter: there are many Reasons why I would have this Isabella
from Dangerfield: First because we were bred together, like Sisters, and of all
the World I love her next thy dear self; and if I could restore her to her
Friends, who I hear are very considerable, I doubt not of a good Reward: so
that I shall never need trouble thee for any thing more.


This is a good Wheadle.


But how will you get her? You say Dangerfield repents him of his promise.


'Tis but thy going into the Country for a day or two, and I shall easily
persuade that swaggering Fool out of her. You don't answer me.


What should I answer thee, thou worst of Women?


She would only lie with this roaring Rascal a Night or two, while you are in
the Country: can you have the heart to deny her?


If I deny her, she'll be outrageous; and if I do not, I shall have Elks horns
at my return. I understand you Isabella; and you were bred up like Sisters, you
would restore her to her Friends, and so Dangerfield must be received, and I
banished; and why? but that you love him better than ever you did me, and are
afraid this Young Wench should get the Lusty Stallion from you.


She loves me so, she would not be my Rival, though in thee, young, kind, and
handsome as thou art.


Is this Soldier then the only Man that made a considerable Present? When has
my Bounty failed? Didnot you ask the other Day a Blackamoor, and then an
Eunuch, out of a mere Humour, because Princes use 'em, and straight I pawned a
Ring to buy 'em for you? I should not urge my Bounty, did I not find that you
forget it. There was a Settlement drawing too.


Nay, rather than you shall take it ill, I will Renounce this Isabella, the
dear Companion of my Youth, for ever, and all the World beside.


Did not you say you could renounce this Isabella, and all the World for me?


Yes, rather than lose your Settlement.


I did; and will, my Dear! I can go into a Cloister, since I have lost my power
with you, I care not for the rest, I'll to a Monastery, and there I'll Pray for
you.


I scorn to be out-done in Kindness: I will go into the Country for a day or
two, and let Dangerfield do his worst. Go into a Monastery! I had rather hold
the Door my self.


When she's a Nun I'll be a Fryer: They all say as much.


But, if she should, where should I have such another Dear, Pretty, Sweet
Rogue?


There are hundreds as fine Women to be had, by the day, by the week, or how
you will.


'Tis not the first time she has threatened to go into a Monastery, upon
discontents between us: I was forced to give her a New Bed, the last Summer,
and Plate for her Chamber, or I had lost her.


'Tis but two days, and I am thine for ever.


Hang two days among Friends.


'Tis I shall be the greatest Sufferer, who must endure the Man I loath, and
part with him I love. Besides, this Dangerfield is such a troublesome
quarrelsome Fellow, I should never have one Minutes quiet, if you were in Town
together, for fear of some mischief or other.


Nay, there would be Bloud-shed every hour, that's certain; I never could
endure a Rival in my Life.


I know thou art both brave and jealous, that makes me so afraid for thee: If
he should Kill thee, poor Dear, he has nothing to lose, and would easily get
his Pardon; but should thou Kill him, all the world can't save thee, thou
hast been such a Whig. Besides, I am too honest a Woman to have any interest at
Court.


It shall never come to that, I'll away into the Country, and as it happens
have a little business there; I shall come up so vigorous, and so Loving; we'll
have a Sack-Posset, and go to Bod together, though it be at Noon-day: But see, my
Friend, the Black a more and Eunuch be delivered to Bellamira in my absence.


I will carry them my self, and try what Mettle Bellamira is made of in his
absence: she is the prettiest Wench in the Town, and his Present will make me
welcome.


For two long Days and todious Nights, Farewell.


I fear my Keepwell, thou think me one of those little Creatures of the
Town; but I have told thee nothing but the Truth: nor is there Man on Earth I
would prefer to thee. All I do, is merely in compassion to pretty Isabella, in
hope to restore her to her Brother, whom by some Tokens she gave me, I think I
have found, and am this Night to Treat with.


Farewell, my dearest Bellamira, I am gone.


Well, now I see thou dost deserve my Love.


Yonder's Merryman, Fat, Smooth, and looks Young still; a very Bacchus
incarnate.


I swallow more Wine, than Pills or Dyet-drink, sit up till Three, and drink my
three Bottles.


I met the pretty'st Creature in New Spring-Garden! her Gloves right Marshal,
her Petticoat of the New Rich Indian Stuffs, her Fan Colambor: Angel-water was
the worst Sent about her.

I am sure she was of Quality.


And I warrant, you think she came to meet you there?


Not so: She came to take her Fortune among the Young Fellows of the Town, and
Chance threw her upon me; I have found she lies in the Mall.


There are Whores of all sorts; but if she had lain in an Alley, you might have
more hope of her.


Have not you the best Wine and Tobacco, where you com


Yes, that I have.


Why then should you not think, a Man that makes it his business, as I do, may
have the finest Women?


I pay 'em well, and get custom to Taverns where I go; a Wench may starve that
has had to do with you; no Man will venture upon her, who has any Reverence for
his Nose: Nor have you any thing to give 'em but the Pox.


You can do as little to a Woman as I can give: And for your soundness, if
Palsy, Gout, and Dropsy may be called so, your drunken impotence is the
reason of it.


Will this Quarrel never be at end? Cuningham is the Darling of the Ladies, and
Merriman the delight of all good Fellows. Whats become of our Old Friend
Keepwel?


We have lost him: He was once an honest well humor'd Fellow, though he had never
much Wit, but since his Acquaintance with Bellamira.


What, she that was so well known at Jamaica?


That's true, but he won't believe it: She has persuaded him 'twas an Elder
Sister's she is handsomer, and he more in Love with her than ever. You know how
miserable he was.


He always grudged his Club, if it came to above half a Crown.


How plain he went?


He bought all his Clothes of a Whole sale Man.


Now there's no Taylor curious enough for him.


'Tis a great change, but I cannot blame him; she is a delicate Creature, and I
was one of the first that Debauched her.


I thought you would not have confessed so much Age.


I mean I was one of the first had her, after she came over: she Loved me
dearly, poor Rogue, but I was not able to maintain her.


One man may as well satisfy, as maintain her; she is the most expensive Jade
I ever knew; she has run Keepwell a thousand Pound in Debt within this Twelve
month: I have been at a woeful parting between them.


He has not turned her off I hope? For I go and Sup there sometimes, upon the
old account. She is one of my Piz Allez.


No; she has turned him off for two days: he has left an Eunuch in Town, which
I am to present her for him anon.


I'll tell you a Secret; I had like to have been surprised there by Keepwell
himselfe'ne now; we were just got to Bed together.


And how got you off?


She made him Knock half an hour at the Door, whilst I leapt out of one of her
lower Windows into a Boat that waited for me But Morriman, you must say nothing
upon honour, now you are trusted.


Not I, I have told him of thy lying with her and Forty others, an hundred
times, and he will never believe me; he is the most incorrigible Cully, I begin
to be of her side.


I will drink a Bottle more with thee at Night for that: A Man of honour should
always take the Ladies parts.


What made you run away? I thought you had been allowed to visit.


I am so, but not in my Shirt and Night-Gown, as I was with her. She was just
out of a Bath, the Sweetest, Whitest, Plumpest, Kindest Rogue.


'Twas a Damned disappointment.


Not quite, I took my leave of her like a Gentleman.


I wonder Keepwell continues sound, coming after thee in this manner.


There was a Plague in Sixty Six, but what is that to London now? there was a
Fire too: but it is since new Built, and more beautiful than ever; are not you
Sober now, though you were Drunk last Night?


Not quite.


A Dish of Coffee or two will make you so, and do you think there's no
Redemption in other Cases?

When they were first acquainted, I Writ all his Billet doux for him, for
Keepwell you know has nothing but the Purse and Dotage of a good Lover; he
would give me now and then five Guineas for a Song for her, which Ilet her know
was mine; when I saw her next, we Laughed at the poor Fool together.


I'll say that for him, he is fitted with a Friend and a Mistress.


You know he is but a dull silly Fellow.


And therefore you may very honestly pretend Friendship, borrow his Money and
lye with his Mistress.


A Pious Citizen that goes to Church twice a day, will play the Knave in a
Bargain; a Lawyer take your Fee, and for a good Sum of Money, be absent when
your Cause is tried; a Parson Marry you to a great Fortune without a Licence;
We are all Regues in our way, and I confess Woman is my weak side; And yonder
goes an odd Fellow, with a very pretty Wench: what a Toss she has with her
head, and a jet with her breech?


'Slight, 'tis Smoothly, Dangerfield's man, carrying that pretty Creature to
Bellamira, for a Present from his Master.


She has as good a Face as Bellamira her self.


Smallwit, Wildman, and Lyonel, have sent their excuses, and cannot Dine.


Let's give the House something, and Dine there to Morrow: I am invited to a
Vension-Pasty, and a dozen-bottles among Four.


I have some Ladies to Entertain at Knightsbridge; and hate a nasty Tavern.


Since you are all provided for, I'll shift, for my self.


He's gon, and we are free as Mountain Air.


You have absolute Dominion over him; but to make him accessory to his own
disgrace, was such a Masterpiece!


Now will he entertain a better opinion of me than ever: he will think I do
nothing without his consent, since I once asked him it, and in so nice a Point.


What said Merryman, my sweet Guardian?


All he could, you must take him off for me.


I am but his second Inclination; a Drawer in a good Tavern has more Interest
in him, than I.


But Keepwell is the Loyalest Cully! nothing will make him Mutiny.


Sure you think he can read in no Book but his own, or you durst never use him
so.


There are few of those Clerks now-adays: this is a Learned Age. When saw you
Cuningham?


He comes sometimes and professes his Love and Soundness to me.


Believe him in neither, they say he's a false Fellow.


Theard he was formerly a great Servant of yours.


What a Lying World this is! I never saw him in my Life.


That's strange and live about this Town.


Is he handsome? Black? or Fair?


Between both.


Has he much Wit?


As if you did not know!


I swear, not I.


Jilting Devil! I'd not know him so well for a Thousand Pound: but 'tis the
Trick of most of 'em; tho they own Twenty, they will forswear some one.


Oh, that I had thy Youth, and Beauty!


You have enough of both, considering your Judgment and Experience.


We Women are easiliest deceived, when we are most worth it: Cunning and
Wrinkles come together.


You have no reason to complain; all the young Fellows that come out of France,
pay Tribute to you, as certainly as to the Groom-Porter: I wonder Keepwell is
never told of it.


He has been told it a hundred times: Two or three Stories that the Authors
have not been able to make out, have don me great Service; and so confirmed my
Empire.


But you are in continual fear.


I have broke him of all his Censorious Acquaintance.


That was a great Point gained; but how?


I tell him such a one will Cheat him, another will bring him into Quarrels, a
third speaks ill of him behind his Back, a fourth is obnoxious to the great
ones, and will hinder his Preferment: So that I have scarce left him one Friend
that will tell him a true word.


You are a great Politician.


There goes more to our Trade, than a good Face: I have known many of these
unthinking Butterflies, Debauched, Poxed, and in Goal, the same Summer: Let's
up into my Chamber; I must set my self out for Dangerfield he'll be here anon.


Will you use the Paint was sent in by the French Woman this Morning?


By all means: Lying and Painting are sure Baits to Catch a Fool with.


What sort of Fellow is that Dangerfield?


A Beau Garcon of Fifty, with a Blew Chin, stiff Beard, and soforth. -- Loves
the Old Fashioned Greasy way of giving Treats, will Dance Country Dances till
he Sweat like a Running Foot-man; tires himself first, and then makes Love.


They say he has been Handsome.


'Twas so long ago every Body has forgot it, but himself: He is a pretender to
Wit; but his is worse than none: as a Country Scraper is worse than no Music
at all,


And yet this Fellow for a little Money,


No, for a great deal of Money. I will make the Presents he gives me, my Baits
to Catch others with: fine, Clothes and rich Furniture, are great Provocatives
to those that don't pay for'em, which are the Men for our Turn.


Like the Gentlemen that live in Town, you have your pleasure in one place, and
receive your Rent from an other: 'tis the way to have your I enement thrown
into your Hands.


Keepwell has taken a Lease for Life, and laid out so much in Improvemtnts,
that I am secure of him; and for the rest, they shall pay me as they are Able.


My Guardian and I have now and then a small Quarrel, about my keeping you so
much Company.


What, Merryman? I thought he had made Love to you.


He dos sometimes.


He has then forfeited his Charter and ought to Talk no more like a Guardian.


Perhaps he dos not like it as a Lover.


Does he not see that we Govern the Town? have Power and Plenty follow us? we
Visit, Dance, Play at Cards, go to Hide-Park, St. James's, and Sup together,
and are a World among our Selves.


But like the Inhabitants of the other World, you neither Marry, nor are given
in Marrige; and he would have me fit for a Husband.


Get Money enough and you can never want a Husband. A Husband is a good Bit to
Close ones Stomach with, when Love's Feast is over. Who would begin a Meal with
Cheese? Come into my Chamber, and I will instruct thee farther in these
Mysteries.


WHAT, not gon yet? hovering like a Ghost, about your Treasure?


I stayed to see how my Presents took: you have delivered 'em, I hope, what
says my Bellamira?


The Meat's hardly out of my Mouth, and I am for no Exercise upon a full
Stomach: 'tis too far to walk yet.


Take a Coach,


That's as bad as the Rack, to a Man of my Intemperate, and Voracious Appetite:
I am so full I should spill Terso at every jolt. We drank Gallons a piece.


You are Drunk then.


No, Sober enough to be your Worship's Pimp, and diliver your Humane Gelding to
Bellamira.


But will you go about it Instantly, and make hast?


Survey my Bulk: it was not built for hast;

'Tis the slow product of Tuns of Claret, Chines of Beef, Ven'son-Pastyes, and
so-forth.


Now you are in this humour, you will talk some Wit to her and spoil all.


I'll be there, before you are half a Mile out of Town, and say the sweetest
things of you!


Thou think I cannot leave my Bellamira, now it comes to the Point.


I am somewhat doubtful.


Yes if it were for three days, now I am resolved.


What, a whole three days! Thou hast a Heart of Iron.


Could you be Sober so long?


Yes to save the Nation, or so.


Nothing less serve the turn?


Yes or to oblige Mrs. Thisbe, my Charge.


Thou hast always Wine and Women in thy Head together: a sure sign thou are but
an indifferent Tilter -- Well, I am in hast, be sure you go, and omit nothing
that may endear my small Present to her.


He's gon; but here comes our Rival's Servant, with that Beautiful young
Creature, again: It seems Bellamira was not at home. I'll step aside and
observe her.


There is as much difference between Man and Man, as between Man and Beast:
This Fool my Master gives away this pretty young Creature, to a stale Wench, I
am but a Servant, and must obey; but were I to choose.


Peace, Impudence; were I to choose, I'd choose a Halter before either of you.


I was not always thus a Servant, as you see me, I am a Gentleman, and once had
an Estate, but now 'tis gon, must live on others, as others did on me.


Perhaps so.


I now am fain to Lye, and Flatter for my Bread, shift for my Clothes, and
humour every Idle Coxcomb to get a Piece or two: Does my Patron lose? Fortune
favours Fools: Does he Win? sweet is his hand, and happy are his Servants. Is
he Dwarfish? his Strength is the more compact: Is he Tall? such the first
Monarch's were, when Kingdoms went by Choice: Is he Ugly, and Witty which must
ever be? such Ovid was, whom Julia so prized: Is he Hansom? such was Adonis,
whom fair Venus Loved.


And were you never Cudgeled, for this nauseous Flattery?


There are a sort of Men who think themselves the first in all kinds, and are
the last; these I get acquainted with: nor do I attempt to please'em with my
Wit, but win their hearts an easier way, by Applauding theirs If any of'em tell
an old Tale, that I have Read in Print, straight I never heard any thing so
well, and listen to it as if it were my Fathers last Will and Testament. Does
he offer at a Jest? I dye with Laughing, before his Mouth opens. Does he walk
Home, without taking Cold? he is hardy and fit to be a General.


You are a fine Rogue all this while! And what else?


In short, I say as they say, deny what they deny, like what they like, and if
they dispraise it again, I am ready to do so too; and find my account very well
in it; while those Fops, that are fond of showing their own Wit, are hated by
all my Customers; who are the only Men there's any thing to be gotten by.


This is a notable Fellow; and if he finds Men Fools, is enough to make'em Mad.


Were I a Man, I had rather dye than sell my words, and prostitute my Voice to
every Fool.


Don't Lawyers, Physicians, and Courtiers, when they take Money for a good Turn,
sell their words? There was a blunt Comrade of mine of your mind; but I found
him the other day all in Rags, not a Penny in his Pocket, nor a Friend to help
him: I have nothing, and yet want nothing; strong and able; other Men's Meat,
and Drink, and Wives serve my Turn.


Leave your Prating, and move forward.


Sure you are some disguised Princess, you take upon you so.


What I am I know not, and am only sure I am miserable.


What's here my Rivals Friend Merryman, before Bellanair's Door? I knew him
when I was last in Town. Your most Humble Servant Worthy Sir.


Yours, honest Smoothly.


Will you not go in?


I have no business at present.


You may be welcome, for your Friend Keepwell's sake.

Do you see nothing here you would not see?


Nothing but thy self.


You keep your old blunt way; but, look you what here is! Look you what here
is! What will not Bellamira do for such a Bribe?


Every Dog has his day:


Let me not keep you here, you were going some where else.


Not I.


Pray then, will you Introduce me to Madam Bellamira?


You need not fear admittance, with such a Present.


But perhaps you stand here, to see that no man brings any Message from
Dangerfield.


You are pleasant! but if I did I'd Cudgel you farther off.


He is Angry, and the Fat Fool is Stout: I'll not provoke him.


Yonder's Lionel, Keepwell's younger Brother, he comes in hast, and seem's to
have something in his Head.


I am undone! ruined! I have lost the sight of this Pretty Creature, and shall
never find her more! which way shall I go? whom shall I enquire of? what shall
I do, to have a Glimpse of her? I have only this comfort; where e're she is, she
is too Beautiful to be long Concealed. From henceforth, I blot all former Faces
out of my heart: I am tired with these daily Beauties of the Town, whom we see
Painted and Pateh'd in the Afternoon in the Play house, in the Evening at the
Park, and at Night in the Drawing room; so that we have half enjoyed 'em before
we speak to'em


Lost! Undone! Beautiful! I am sure I heard these words plain: he is in Love,
and after the manner of that sort of Madmen is talking to himself, of his
Mistress; If he be we shall have fine work; there are Ten Keepwells in that
Lionel: he'll commit Rapes, Burglaries, Fire houses, or any thing, but he'll have
her; and for Money, he'll throw it a way like Dirt. I pity his poor Father; but
he Grudged his Money for honest Terse, and so he's right enough served.


Eternal Palsies on that Cuningham's Hands, may he never be able to put his
Dice into the Box; but when he does may he throw out for ever. May he Win of
Beggars and lose to Bullies, and dote on Whores as Rotten as himself. But I was
mad to mind him: how I envy yon' Merryman, whose sluggish Blood moves in an
even stream, and never knows these Storms!


What's the matter? you look as if you were Drunk.


I am worse; I am mad; I am any thing; I am in Love.


How Keepwell will Laugh at you! But with whom?


Not with a stale Wench, like him; nor any of the little Tinsel, short Lived
Beauties of the Town, squeezed into shape by Taylors, and starved into it by
their Mothers.


How then?


A new turn of a Face, unknown till now to Nature's self, in all her Numberless
Varieties.


'Tis wond'erous; you are Mauled; Cupid has shot you with a Blunderbus.


What Eyes! Teeth, white --


As a new Tobacco-pipe


Peace Profane Wretch, thou art not fit to mingle in these Mysteries. Her own
Complexion; her Body solid and full of Juice; the Noblest Fabric of unstinted
Nature!


Her Age?


Seventeen.


I have drunk excellent Hockamore of that Age.


Damn thy dull Hockamore and thy base Jaded Palate, that affects it; Could I
but get this Divine Creature into my hands, by Fraud, Force, Price, Prayer, any
way so that I enjoy her, I care not.


Who is she? she may be a Person of Quality, and you may bring an old house
upon your head


'Tis but a Duel or two that way; and if her Relations be Numerous, we will Fight
Six to Six, and make an end on it.


What Country Woman is she?


I know not.


Where does she live?


I can't tell,


We are upon a very cold Scent: where did you see her?


In the Street; with a Servant behind her.


How come you to lose her?


That's it I was Cursing at, as I met you: Nor do I think there is a Man whom
all the Stars conspire against like me. What Crime have I committed, to be thus
Plagued?


The Stars are Pretty Twinkling Rogues, that light us home, when we are Drunk
sometimes, but neither care for you, nor me, nor any man.


You know Cuningham?


Intimately: a good honest Fellow; a little too much a Servant to the Ladies,
given to Gaming.


Pox of his Character!


The Pox is part of his Character indeed, but I had forgot that.


Will you not let me go on with my Story? This Fellow meets me in the nick of
time, while I was following this Divine Creature, pulls me aside, and tells me I
must be his Second; I go with him, we Fight, Disarm our Men, but when I came
back the Bird was flown. nor could I learn any News of her.


I hat's very unlucky.


'Twas a Disaster never to be recovered, a Total over-throw to all my
happiness: I had not seen him neither these six Months.


Why did you not refuse him?


He's a Malicious Fellow, and would have told the whole Town of it, if I had;
it was Impossible. I lost her in this Street.


Are you sure of that? I'll be Sober a Twelve Month, if this be not the very
young Woman Dangerfield presented this Afternoon, to Belamira, your Brothers
Mistress.


There was a Man follow'd her.


The very same: and that was his Servant Smoothly.


You know her then?


Not I; but I know whither she went


Dost know where she is, my Dear Merryman?


Don't I tell you she was presented to Bellamira by Dangerfield, your Brother's
Rival?


A Mighty Prince this Dangerfield, that is able to make such a Present: My
Brother will have a hard time on it.


You would say so indeed, if you saw his Present.


What is it?


An Eunuch.


What, that Illfavour'd Fellow he bought yesterday, that looks like an old
Woman or a Ginnoy Ape?


The same.


He that earries him will be kicked out of Doors with his Present.


I hope not so; for I have promised to diliver him.


I did not know Bellamira was our Neighbour.


She is lately come hither.


Is she very handsome?


She is well.


Not comparable to mine.


That's your fancy: Of Children Mistresses, and Religions our own are still the
best.


But is there no way to come at her? Thou use to be good at a dead lift: I'll
Fire the house and then at least I shall see her again.


Violent ways are to be used at last: I'll see what I can do for you.


Oh happy Eunuch! that art to live in the same house with this Divine Creature.


Why so? the nearer he is to a fine Woman, the more sensible must he be of his
loss.


But he'll see continually his fair fellow Servant, sit by sometimes and talk
with her, eat with her, and if nothing else, sleep near, and hear her breath.


What if I should make you this happy man?


It is Impossible: but speak; men past recovery are pleased to talk of
Remedies.


I am entrusted to present this Eunuch to Bellamira: what if you put on his
Clothes, and went with me in his room?


I'd gladly change Conditions, Fortunes, and every thing but one with him.


I will present you instead of him; and you shall enjoy those rare Felicities
you reckoned but up now, you shall sit by her, dress and undress her, touch,
play with, and sleep near her; your age and Face will easily pass you for an
Eunuch, and somewhat mend your Brother's ill-favour'd Present.


You say right: I never knew a better design; let's about it instantly, undress
me, dress me, and bring me to her immediately.


You are too hot: I was but in jest all this while.


Cut my Throat, Stab me, if thou wilt not go on with this design.


Let me think a little: Is not this Plot too fine spun to hold? you must be
gelt indeed, or 'twill never pass; you will betray your self.


Never fear it, my Face is not so much as known among 'em, the Plot is
admirable, and cannot fail, what should I do there, if I were gest?


You might look upon, touch, and sleep near your fair Fellow-Servant.


That won't do: I must and will enjoy her; thou'lt hear of me in Bedlam else.


I shall have all the blame: besides, 'tis a dishonest action.


To save a Friend's life, is an honest action: nor can it be any wrong, to
Cozen those that Cozen all the World.


I'll serve you for once; but if any mischief comes on it, thank your self.


I'll dye, and never accuse thee.


You are strangely smitten at the first sight!


No. I saw her once when I was last in Spain, kneeled by her at Mass, and
talked of Love to her; but could not learn her Name or Quality: next day, she
said she was to come for England.

I might have been dressed, and there by this time, le'ts away.


My dearest Isabella! now I have gotten thee here, I could hug thee to pieces.


I am your Slave, your Servant, and all my Hopes the Creatures of your
Goodness.


How did thy Youth and Beauty escape the roaring Dangerfield?


He placed me with his Sister in the house, and she took care of me; but if at
any time he offered to be rude, I held a Dagger to my Breast, and vowed to kill
my self.


How chance he did not take it from thee?


He did, and then I vowed I'd starve my self to Death: he laughed at me a
while; but when he saw me pale, and weak, fully resolved to perish, he gave it
me again: and so I escaped.


My Isabella, tell me truly, were thou ne'er in Love?


What mean you, Madam?


Did thou never find a Man more Charming than the rest, whose every word
reached through thy Ears, thy Heart, whom thou cou'd'st sit and gaze upon all
day, and sigh, and wish for all night?


I have so many defects already, why will you press me to own a weakness,
perhaps you will despise me for?


No, I my self have been in Love, and have had always some one Friend to whom
I would gladly sacrifice what I got from others.


If that be to be in Love, I never was.


That's our way, who know the Perjuries and Vislanies of Men; How they all
begin alike, with Vows, Oaths, and Protestations; and end alike with Slights
and Scorns and Falsehood: some difference there may be for a while, but no great
matter.


And are they all of this deceitful make?


All that ever I met with; What is it a false hearted Man won't swear to such a
pretty young Creature as thou art?


And will they Lye too, when they have Sworn?


Most certainly; but we that have experience, mind words no more than they
themselv's do, and only regard their Presents. Say a kind thing! every pitiful
Fellow can do that: give me a Man that will do a kind thing.


Are you upon that subject? I have a couple of Servants, one is as much too
Lean, as the other is too Fat; I would not lose one of 'em for the World, they
are Admirable in Consort, Grumbling Base, and Squeaking Treble.


What, Merryman your Guardian and Cuningham?


The same; Men of Wit both: one a plain substantial Drunkard, I am sure to hear
of him when he gets a Bottle in his Head, for then he ever thinks of Women; as
Cowards do of Quarrelling, and most commonly I am she.


How does the other behave himself?


He's seldom in a condition to drink Wine; but he will sit a whole Afternoon at
Cards, and say the softest things!


And the sharpest behind your back.


'Tis all one for that, 'tis like I am even with him at the Years End.


But pretty Isabella will not make her Confession to us.


'Tis not worth your hearing. When I was Sold to Dangerfield by your wicked
Uncle, in Spain I saw a man,


That's my dear Girl! Come up with it.


Of the Divinest Form these Eyes had e're beheld.


Ne'er be ashamed: Love, like the Small Pox, since it must be, is best had while
we are young.


He Kneeled by me one day at Mass, and looked, and said, and sighed, the
kindest things! He seemed surprised with me, as I was Charmed with him.


Damned wheedling Rogue! And all this at first sight I warrant.


We never met, but then: next day I came for England: but sure I never shall be
won to love another.


Pretty Innocence! this is a Nation of such men thou talk of; every Street
affords a dozen of 'em. Come, thou shalt Love, and Love, and Love again, never
fear it.


We will show her the Park, the Play-house, and the Drawing-Room.


She needs no Paint, for Complexion, but 'twill not be amiss to to use Juniper
Water, for good Humour, she is so melancholy, and looks as if she would not be
acquainted.


It is fit men make the advance.


Some are such Jades, they must be Spurred up, with a quick Eye, or wanton
Glance.


Madam the Picture drawer stays for you: he says you need not sit above half
an hour.


This is some new Intrigue: Who is this Picture for?


It was begun for Keepwell, but I have promised it to Dangerfield. I hate the
boisterous Fool, he may have that, but never the Original, tho he shall pay for
every Inch on it.


We are Servants and must be diligent in our Calling. I am sorry we are like to
be troubled with this puling Isabella, there's more ado with her, then with my
Mistress herself: she is so proud and Melancholy, one can't get a word from
her in a day.


Who can blame her? she is well Born of a good Family in Devonshire; her Father
and Mother died when she was a Child, she has no friend left but her Brother,
and him she knows not where to find yet, and if she should, 'tis doubtful after
being so long lost, whether he would own her now.


As the World goes 'tis like he may be willing to save her Portion


She has nothing at present to depend upon, but the Friendship of Bellamira:
and if she be virtuous, as I believe she is, what a trouble must that be to
her! Go and see if she wants any thing.


Let's both go I hate a strange Face.


Especially if it be better than your own.


I Fear poor Bellamira will lay it to Heart, I have not seen her yet: how does
she like my Present?


She is Ravished with it: yet seems to Prise the Giver Incomparably beyond the
Gift.


I'll say that for Dangerfield, and a Figue for him, he makes his Presents with
the best Grace of any Man in England, they are always well received.


I have observed it ever. A Beating is better taken from you then any Man
living.


I thank 'em for that; who dares do otherwise?


Hold your Countenance, for yonder's Dangerfield.


Never doubt me: Tho I could laugh heartily, at this Martial Dress, and Furious
Men.


What ever was bravely performed in the Army, I still had the Honour on it; the
General would have it so: to others he was not so Favourable.


He that has your Wit, will make a small Service go a great way; and often Reap
in safety, the Fruit of other Men's dangers


Right: Not but I venture my Body as bravely as the meanest Soldier, when the
General will let me, but, to say the Truth he seldom will, he loves me so
Entirely,


You charge as if you were Shot-free.


'Tis my Comfort, that he that Shoots one Bullet into me, may chance to drive
another out. The General wares me next his Heart, and often Trusts the Army to
my single Conduct.


It shows he is well Skil'd in Men.


And if at any time he's Tired with Impertinence of Suitors; the Noise and
tumults Incident to his great Charge; he steals away with a Friend or two to
me, there he unfolds his Wrinkled-Brows and Steeps his Cares in Wine within my
Tent.


The General, it seems, understands his Pleasure, and knows good Company.


No Man better. The Officers began to Envy me, and Mutter some od things; speak
out the Boldest of'em dare not. How does this Feather become me?


Most Victoriously; You look like the Black Prince when he, had just Plumed the
Prince of Denmark


Thou art a pretty Historian, I have been told I am like him: but I'll tell
thee, a certain young Captain, Bolder then the rest, seeing me Gay and Frolic,
lashing every Body with my Wit, as thou know my way is; Sneered me in the
Face, and asked me, if I would never have Sown my wild Oats? I told him I could
never Sow'em in a better time, than when there was such a Goose as he by to
pick'em up.


Ha, ha, ha! You put the Goose upon him finely there; but what said he?


Nothing: the whole Company Laughed on my side; and he sneaked away like a Dog,
with a Bottle at his Tail.


I'll say that for you, You are the best at Repartees!


This is the most Flalttering Knave, and Dangerfield the greatest Coxcomb, I
ever saw.


He Swallows any thing: they are well met.


Did never hear how I served the Colonel, at Bartholomew-Fair?


(He has told it me Fifty times; but I must prepare to Laugh at it again.)
Never Sir; I long to hear it.


I had a pretty Wench with me; he stared her in the Face somewhat Rudely: at
last I told him, I wondered he that was but but a Hare himself, should have a
mind to a Cony!


That's one of the vilest Quibbles, I ever heard.


Let's hear how that Rogue will Flatter him for it.


Ha, ha, ha! You had as good have called him Coward: a Hare is the fearfullest
of all Beasts. Ha, ha, ha! I could dye with Laughing, methinks I see him poor
Fool!


I meant it so; but he durst not understand me. From that time forward I kept
the whole Town in Awe with my Wit


I would not come under your Lash, for a Thousand Pounds.


No, no, thou art an honest Fellow, and a great Judge of Wit and Parts. Thou
shalt hear me Sing a Song that I made upon a Spanish Princess. When first I
made Love to my Cloris,
Cannon Oaths I brought down
To Batter the Town,
And I find her with Amorous Stories.
Billets Doux like small Shot did ply her,
And sometimes a Song
Went whizizng along,
But still I was never the nigher.
At last she sent Word by a Trumpet,
If I liked that Life
She would be my Wife,
But never be any Man's Strumpet.
I told her that Mars would not Marry,
And Swore by my Sears,
Single Combats, and Wars,
I'd rather Dig Stones in a Quarry.


But is Bellamira satisfied I have no concern for Isabella?


Havo a care of that: on the Contrary do all you can to make her Jealous.
'twill keep her in Awe: and when she Names Keepwel, be sure you to Answer her
with Isabella: If she commend his Dancing, be sure to praise her Singing; if
she speak of his Shape, Extol her Face: give her as good as she brings; 'twill
make her Mad.


Ay, if she Loved me.


How can she Choose? Your Person, your Parts, and your Reputation, are able to
Charm any Woman Living: they all Love Soldiers; and while she expects, and
Loves, what you give, she Loves you, and will fear that the Stream of your
Bounty should turn another way.


Thou say right; I wonder I should not think of it my self.


If you had thought at all, you would certainly; and of a Thousand better
Devices than my poor Brains can furnish you with.


I think I heard the Thundering Voice of my brave Man of War, welcome, my Hero,
my Hercules! what would thy Enemies give that I could hold thee thus for ever?


It would save'em Ten Thousand Men's Lives, besides Castles, Towns, and their
Dependences: but, my Life, my Joy, how dost thou like my Present? Is't not a
fine Girl? I could have had what Money I would of my General abroad, or here;
but, I thought that below a Man of Honour: We had like to have Quarrelled about
her.


This is a Bragging Coward, as sure as a Painted Whore has an ill Complexion of
her own: How bravely he begins with his own Honour, his Courage and his
General!


And how he magnifies his own Present! which, to say truth, another could not
praise too much.


I have a small Present from your banished Servant Keepwell; but you are going
out.


Not yet; but anon I must.


What, do we stay? I am in a Fever; I have not had Woman these two days.


I will but deliver what was committed to my Charge for her and then leave the
Fever you complain of, to her Cure.


Some rare business, I warrant, we know the depth of Keepwel's Purse.


You shall see that, this Girl here is of Ethiopia, of the Royal Blood there. I
le out lye him, if possible.


I bought a better for five Guineas, and gave her this Morning to my Landladi's
Daughter.


She looks like a Warden Roasted in the Embers, or the outside of a Gammon of
Bacon.


Come forward, here's an Eunuch; a rare Jewel, how like you him?


He has a very good Face! How long have you been an Eunuch?


I never remember my self otherwise.


What faies Dangerfield, and Smoothly, ha, what fault do you find? They are
silent, that's praise enough for an Enemy. Try him in Italian, French, Spanish,
Music, Dancing.


If I had this Eunuch alone, he should find I were none.


Go in Pisquil, and look to your Charge.


And yet, Madam, my Friend that sends these Gifts, does not ask that you should
live for him alone. Nor does he tell of his Fights; Battles, Storms, Sieges:
nor does he boast of his Scars as some do; but, when it shall be no trouble to
you and when you please, think it enough if he then be Received.


You are very officious for your Friend Sir.


I shall take a time to tell you, what you are, Sir


Officious for your Friend! Ha, ha, ha! You had as good have called him Pimp.


What dost Laugh at?


At what you said to him even now.


Thou that cast stoop to Flatter him thus, would Eat Fire in a Fair for thy
living, or Rake thy Meat off from a Dunghill


Let's not go together.


I long to play my lower Tire of Guns at thee.


Go before to the Walk you know of by Kensington, and I'll meet you there.


I'll fly thither, as I were to beat up an Enemy's Quarters.


If Eustace comes hither; when I am away, desire him to stay: If not, to come
again: If he cannot, bring him to me; you know where I Sup: Be sure you take
care of Isabella, and let none come to her but the Eunuch.


Why dost gaze and follow me thus, as if thou were my Shadow?


I am the Shadow of a Man indeed.


Leave me; and when I want thy Attendance, I will send for thee.


Bellamira charged me, not to stir from you, it would ill become me to disobey
her first Commands.


Thou art my Jailer then?


Not so; I am your faithful Servant, and hope my Attendance, as it is to me a
Pleasure, is to you no Burden.


Were thou ne'er in Spain?


Why do you ask?


I know not, only a Foolish Curiosity I had: but 'is Impossible. Joy seeks out
Crowds, and Numbers; but Griefs, like mine affect Retirement.


You do Indulge your Melancholy too much; If I may be so Bold, it strik's an
Air of Sadness through the House.


I would not have my Griefs Infectious: Go play among your Fellows.


I have no power to stir.


How so?


I fear you'll do your self some mischief, when I am gon: I dare not trust the
Tempest on your Brow.


It is a harmless Storm, and will fall suddenly in Tears.

The more I look upon this Youth, the more I think on him I loved in Spain:
Those Eyes, that Face, and that bewitching shape!


Pray leave me.

If I have offended, be gracious; and chide me; but do not thrust me from your
presence.


Alas! I find no fault with thee at all; 'Tis Fate and my unhappy Stars, that I
repine at.


Madam, the Bath that was Commanded, is prepared.


There I may steep my Limbs, but not my Grief assuage.


The more I think of Bellamira's sending after me in this manner, the more I am
to seek what she means. When I went first to her, she entertained me with a
deal of Discourse, far fetched, nothing to the purpose: At last she asked me,
how long my Father and Mother had been Dead? I told her, a great while; then if
I had not a Seat in Devonshire, near the Sea? which I have. May be she has a
mind to it, and thinks to get it of me. At last, if I had not lost a young
Sister? who she was with, and what she had about her when she was lost? What
she asked all these Questions for, I cannot guess; unless she would put her
self upon me for that Sister, but if she be alive, she cannot be above
seventeen; and Bellarima is as old as my self. Now she shall speak her mind
ploinly, or trouble me no more. Is your Mistress within.


No; but she desires to speak with you to Morrw, about the old business.


Come hither, let me talk with you a little about the old business.


I'll come no nearer; I know your Tricks well enough.


Will Ten Guineas do you any harm?


Nor Twenty neither; but what shall I tell my Mistress? Will you come?


I go into the Country to Morrow.


Pray come: She say's you'll repent it, if you do not:


I can't possibly.


Will you stay here at our house, till she comes in?


Yes if you'll stay with me.


Not I. You do so touse and tumble one, and keep one so hot.


Thou art a pretty Maid, and may be a Mistress thy self. I have seen worse
Faces in Glass Coaches.


And better in Bridewell. I think I might serve for a Month or two; but what
then?


Nay, if you be so cautious, you'll never have a house in the Mall.


Nor Dye in a Ditch, like Jane Shore.


Pattens, Worsted Stockings, and course Smocks, go with thee for a Fool.


Will you go to my Mistress where she sups anon, and I'll bring you to her?


But come hither, prithee come, you are as skittish, as if you were that same
all over. She is as Nimble as a Squirrel, there's no catching her.


Come, now we are alone, sing me the last New Song. Thyrsis unjustly you
Complain,
And tax my tender heart
With want of pity for your pain,
Or Sense of your desert.
By secret and Mysterious Springs,
Alas! our Passions move;
We Women are Fantastic things,
That like before we love.
You may be handsome, and have Wit,
Be secret and well-bred,
The Person Love must to us fit,
He only can succeed.
Some Dye, yet never are believed;
Others we trust too soon,
Helping our selves to be deceived,
And proud to be undone.



Your humble Servant Madam: I left some Friends of yours at the Rose; Merryman
begun your health in a Bumper. I had much ado to get away; but your Commands --
--


No body here sent for you; and of all Men living, I least expected you


When I received this pretty Billet Doux, my Heart went pit-apat; and knew
'twas yours before I opened it.


'Tis a false Heart, believe it not another time.


If it be false, it was yourBeauty first made it so.


Lightly come, lightly go; and if I lose it, to another.


No Madam, you Conquer like the King of France. Your Subjects for ever after
are at rest.


You said as much to the Flame-colour'd Petticoat in New Spring Garden.


She has Spies upon me; 'tis a good sign! There was a Lady I must confess much
of your hight, your shape and men; at first I thought it was your self, and
therefore I accosted her: And when I was entered into discourse, she plied me so
fast with the Intrigues of the Town, I could not handsomely get off.


I am not jealous of her: You need not take all this pains to clear your self
Was she of Quality?


Yes, sure: She knew me, and desired my Protection against some Bullies that
were there. Your Note here speaks of Company that were to meet at Cards; but
'tis more obliging in you to be thus alone.


Thou incorrigible piece of Vanity! I neither sent for thee to Cards, nor any
thing else. Let's see this Note: 'Tis a Scriv'ner's hand.


I have heard yours commended, and am apt to hope --


The most that ever I knew any man.


Those pretty Lips should be corrected, for their pouting, and pressed with
Kisses into their former Figure.


You should be corrected, and made know your distance.


I am sorry to find you in so ill a humour, but I'll swear, that time at Spring
Garden, we scarce spoke of any thing but your self: She as 'tis the manner of
fine Women one of another, maliciously enough, but I, with all the tenderness
and transport imaginable. I see Merryman coming; I will take some fitter time
for an Ecclaircissement.


This Fellow has Vanity enough to extract Love out of an affront.

and would Kiss the pretty Foot that should Kick him down Stairs: He thinks all
this is mere jealousy.


These are those that can come, come without being sent for.


Or they should not come at all for me.


We have drunk every Letter of your Name twice over; and spelt it with a double
Eat last.


'Twas done like a discret Guardian: You are drunk then.


No; half a score Glasses do but whet Wit and sharpen Appetite: A Bottle is the
Spring-Tide of Love, and dull Sobriety the Lowest Ebb.


I love to see things at the worst, that I may know what to trust to.


You would not be seen so your self: Don't you Ladies Dress, Patch and Curl,
and Paint too, if there be occasion before you come abroad?


That's to please our selv's, and in competition to one another.


And that competition is about us filthy Fellows Was not Cunning ham here?


He's just gone.


I sent him to you: We had a mind to drink a Bottle by our selv's, and could
not get rid of him, till I contrived a Letter in your Name for him. He showed
it us like a vain Fool, immediately


He will tell the whole Town: Pray undeceive him when y ou see him next; for all
I could say could not do it.


Have you any Mirabilis?


I should not see you so often if I had not.


We good Fellows have our Qualms, like Breeding Women.


And your great Bellies too, most of you: Which you go to lay at Epsome, and
Tunbridge Waters.


When we are Married I'll turn over a New Leaf.


Hold, 'tis not come to that yet; you are the envy of your Club Four Hundred
Pounds a Year, and neither Wife nor Child, and spend it all in Drink.


I am very conjugally given: I love of late to drink hand to hand with an old
Friend; have left off supping, and go to Bed at Ten.


These are signs of a Body far spent in the service.


I will leave off drinking, Eat much, and get Children innumerable.


Not till you have been Fluxed: You are an old sinner, and I dare not venture
upon you.


I am as sound as a Bell, Fat, Plump, and Juicy, and have drunk my Gallon a day
these seven Years.


However, 'twill mend your shape.


I have been told, I am as true a shaped Drunkard as heart can wish; Great
Belly, double Chin, thick Legs: You would not have a Pad look like a Racer?


No; but I would have you thought to get your Children, if I Marry you.


I'll Cut any Man's Throat that says the contrary.


But they will whisper and make Libels: Your great Belly will be a continual
jest upon mine.


I will Drink Raking Rhenish, Eat Buttered Wheat, Sweat in the Bagnio, and do
any reasonable thing, to render my Person Gracious.


Every Jockey will do as much, to win a Tankard; but I must have no Morning
Draughts, no Qualms that keep off Dinner till three a Clock, no Tun-belly'd
Rogues, that fright Chair-men from the house, no Noisy Fools to disturb the
whole Street with Loyal Catches, senseless Huzzah's.


I have some Provisoes to offer too, in order to our future Peace and Quiet: I
will have none of your Gaming Ladies to keep you up at Cards till I am ready to
go out in the Morning, so that we have scarce ^ime for the great end of
Matrimony. No meetings at the China-houses; where under pretence of Rafling for
a piece of Plate, or so, you get acquainted with all the Young Fellows in Town;
three such accidental meetings go to visit, and three visits to something that
shall be Nameless. No Epsome nor Tunbridge Waters, where Ladies and Gentlemen
walk and prate up acquaintance, as fast as if it were in a Tavern.


You must either get me with Child the first Year, or give me leave to use the
Lawful Means: I hope I may visit Bellamira.


She is not so handsome as she was, and begins to look something procurish; she
is more dangerous than any Man; one Setter destroys more Patridge than ten
Hawks, when you take me for better for worse, you must forsake her and all her
Works.


When you take me for Rich or for Poor, you shall either leave your Drink or
your Jealousy. I will not be troubled with an Italian and a Dutch Man, bound
up in one Greasy Volume.


'Tis a mad Age, a Man is Laughed at for being a Cuckold, and wondered at if he
take any Care to prevent it; well, I will leave all to thy discretion; and as
thou hast been careful of thy own Credit hitherto, hope thou wilt be as tender
of mine when I am thy Husband.


That's all you have to trust too: Now to show you I will not be out-done in
Generosity, you shall Dine in the City, and get Drunk among your old Companions
sometimes; but I will have no Women brought into the Company, on any pretence
whatever.


My Land-lady, an Oyster-Wench, or so.


Not if she be under Fifty; you may be drunk at home: I will Dine with you, to
keep off Beer Glasses while you Eat.


Content: I have a beastly Bumper at my Meals; we will have two Beds, for I
will not come home drunk and get Girls, without I knew where to get Portions
for them; in this Age they sour and grow stale upon their Parents hands.
Luorece's will scarce off, but to Foreigners.


A young Gentleman in the Street hard by, says he must speak with you
immediately.


'Tis One of your drunken Companions; you had best go to him, we shall have him
come hither else.


I would Kick the best Friend in Christendom down Stairs, should he offer it.
Adieu for a while.


What's you business with me Sir?


If you will walk a little farther into the Square, I'll satisfy you, Sir.

Now we are alone, the time and place convenient, I must tell you; you abused a
person of Quality last Night, forced open her Lodgings, beat her Servants,
broke her Windows, and called her all the Names imaginable.


That may very well be; I went home drunk, and scoured outrageously: But what
of that?


I am her Brother.


And come to swagger in her behalf?


I am come for satisfaction.


Her Name, Sir?


Emilia.


Her Lodging?


The Flower de Luce.


I always took it to be a Baudy-house,


It seems so; but I come to convince you to the contrary.


Sir, I believe you: And if you will bring me to wait on her, I will ask her
Pardon: I am as much ashamed of a rudeness offered to a Person of Quality, when
I am sober, as any Man living.


I thought what a Fellow I should find.


My little Bully, will nothing serve you but Battle, Murder and sudden Death?


I came to fight Sir; not to hear you prate.


Then pluck out, that I may Tap thee presently.


Hold, hold Merryman; dost thou not know me yet?


Bellamira in disguise!


The same.


Why this to me? Faith you shall never find me backward to Man or Woman.


No, thou art a brave Fellow, I have occasion for such a one, and (now I have
tried you, and see you dare fight) all's well,


Am I to be your Ladyships Second?


An easier Business.


As how?


I have appointed Dangerfield to wait for me in the Walk near Kensington, which
I so much delight in: Thus disguised I intend to Rob him, and have chosen thee
for my Fellow-Adventurer. When we have frighted the roaring Fool sufficiently,
we will find some way to give him his Money again.


We may be hanged together very lovingly in earnest, though we Rob in test.


If he should discover, which he never will, I can prevail with him not to
Prosecute; Besides, the Lying Fool will swear for his Credit, we were at least
a dozen; my Heart is set upon this Frolic; don't deny me.


'Tis admirable! 'twill be the best News for my Friend Keepwell.


He shall know it in due time I hate this Danger field, and now I have gotten
Isabella out of his hands, I care not if he were hanged.


And shall we Cudgel his Buff Coat sufficiently?


'Till it be as gentle as a Sheepskin.


Thou art a brave Wench, I Faith, I will drink thy Health hereafter by the Name
of the Pretty Padder. I will borrow a Visor of some over-grown Baud, and about
it instantly. But shall we Sup together in Town afterwards?


Sure you'll not wrong Friend Keepwell so much?


Not for a World, if I thought you would not; but, he is at a distance, the
Temptation present, and not to be resisted by frail Man.


You were always an Enemy of mine; and vet I know not how, I ever liked your
blunt way? and could not hate you heartily for it.


If you will make a Convert of me, this is the time.


You shall then promise me drunk or sober, to speak well of me to Keepwell.


That's too hard, but, if I speak any ill of you, drunk: I will promise to deny
it again when I am sober.


You shall never more tell him I will undo him, nor read him any discreet
Lectures about my extravagance in Clothes, Furniture, Equipage, Hours, or
Company.


I never did sow diffention but with intent you should make your benefit of it;
for I am told after every little Quarrel, he buys his peace with a Coach and
Horses, a Country House, Pearl Necklace, or some such trifle.


He does so; yet, but frequent Disputes may end in a Breach, and there are many
fine Women that lie upon the Catch, to get him from me.


Fear him not, next to you he loves Money, and will never begin such another
Expense in a new place. You have more Plate, than ten Christ'nings, more China,
than many a Shop, more good Clothes than the Play house.


You had like to have undone me for all that, with your Stories; but he told me
all when I had him alone.


I don't doubt it; I see advice is thrown away upon him, and I will trouble him
with no more; but, be thy Servant to all intents and purposes.

Now the Peace is agreed on, we'll Sign and Seal anon.


You'll tell him one time or other when you are drunk together.


He'll not believe me if I should. Well I am a Rogue to betray my Friend thus;
but, who would not be taken off with such a Bribe? Besides, in matter of Women,
we are all in the State of Nature, every man's hand against every man. Whatever
we pretend.


I wonder what's become of Lionel; he has not appeared this day or two. I will
go to Bellamira's and know where she Sups that I may meet her, and know the end
of her affair with me. Who's this walks this way? He is transported, and talks
to himself.


If a man cared to be alone he should be troubled with forty Coxcombs, and ten
times as many impertinent Questions: But now I am ready to burst with Joy, and
Secrets, I can meet no Friend to vent my self to.


This is Lionel, for all his disguise, I know him. How now, Lionel? What's the
meaning of this habit? I never saw a man so overjoyed: are you in your Wits?


Oh, my dear Friend! There is not a man on Earth, to whom I would so gladly
impart my secret Joy, or inward Grief as to thy self.


'Tis the happiness of friendship that the one is improved, the other lessened,
by our doing so: But what means all this?


I am impatient till you know; this is the happiest day of all my Life: And I
could be contented to die this Minute, least some succeeding Misfortunes should
defile this sincere Joy. You know Bellamira, my Brothers Mistress.


I have seen her twice or thrice.


There was this day a young Maid given her by Dangerfield my Brothers Rival,
the finest Creature that ever my Eyes beheld; not above seventeen, a man flying
for his Life would stop to gaze upon her.


I am not of your opinion, but what of her?


Seeing her in the Street, I fell in Love with her. By good fortune, we had an
Eunuch, which my Brother had promised to Bellamira: Nor was he yet dellver'd;
Merriman, who undertook to carry him advised me, seeing me dying for this young
Woman.


What did he advise you?


To change Clothes with this Eunuch, and be presented to Bellamira, in his
stead.


What, for an Eunuch.


I have a pretty Voice, Smooth Chin.


What could you propose to your self?


To see her, and be alone sometimes with the Divine Creature: Do you count all
that nothing? In short, I was presented to Bellamira, and received with great
Joy, and without the least Suspicion, she left me at home, and recommended this
beautiful Creature to my sole care.


'Tis impossible.


She did it.


Most discreetly.


Most fortunately. I'll tell thee more, she commanded no Body should come near
her, but my self; and that I should not stir from her, in the farthest part of
the house. I Blushed, looked down, and modestly said it should be done.


Oh Rogue! thy Discourse has Fingers in it.


Bellamira goes but to Supper; her Servants follow her, except some of the
meanest sort: Presently they prepare a Bath for the fair Stranger; this
beautiful Creature is called to go into the Bath.


What before you?


Yes, before an Eunuch sure. She goes in, returns, the Servants put her to Bed:
I ask if they have any service for me: Pisquil, says one, (for so I was called)
Take this Fan, and cool my Mistress with it, as she lies.


Oh, that I could have seen thee with those gloating Eyes, Fanning a Naked
Woman! an Asinego as thou art.


Presently all the Maids run, some one way, some another, as Servants do when
their Masters are abroad; in the mean time this beautiful Creature falls
asleep: I look about me, to see if all were fast, I Bar the Door,


What then?


What then, my Eustace? Can you ask and know me? Should I have slipped so fair,
so wished, so unexpected an Opportunity, I must have been that Eunuch that I
seemed.


You ravished her then,


What else? I took her by Storm, having no leisure for a Siege; I found her the
same Woman I fell in Love with in Spain.


She we so often talked of?


The same: and which is more, she remembered me again: Never was Man so Happy!
never was Accident so Fortunate!


Did she not Cry out?


There was no Body within hearing.


'Twas something a harsh way.


No Woman ever heartily fell out with a Man about that Business, I'll try to
soften her in my own Person!


Won't you change your Clothes?


How shall I change 'em? Or whither shall I go? I dare not go home, for fear of
my Brother: Then again, if my Father should be come out of the Country!


Come to my house, out of the Street however.


Agreed.


'TIs strange Bellamira appears not, we have been here a great while.


I wonder she mak's no more hast to her own happiness! the Spanish Ladies would
not have served you so.


Nay, I'll speak a bold word; French, Spanish, or Italian; I was ever the
delight of Ladies, I was the Terror of Men.


Perhaps she has been overturned, broke a Wheel, or some such Accident: may be
her sneaking Lover's returned.


Who Keepwell? that fearful Hind, that ran out of Town at the News of my
Arrival, least I should Kick him to Jelly?


'Tis almost Night, what if we should be Robbed here?


What if the Sky should fall? or a Flock of Sheep root a marching Army? If all
these Hedges were lined with Musketeers I would not yield.


If a Hog should start out and rustle, he would run away.


This Fellow is as Cowardly as I am Rash, and Advent'rous, Creep behind me, and
be as safe as in a Brazen Tower, I'll show thee how I killed Don Alonzo in
Spain.


I dare not stand: You'll run such a Fellow as I through with a Scabbardon.


On my Honour, as I love danger, I will not hurt thee. He ran furiously upon
me.


And did you look so terribly, as you do now?


Worse if possible.


He was a brave Man then.


The bravest Fellow I ever had to do with: He had Killed Nine Men in Duel, made
two and twenty Campagns, been in eight Sea-Fights and thirteen pitched Battles.


Here he is Fencing with his Man.


Thieves, Thieves! Murder! Look to your self.


Your Money.


Deliver Sirrah.


Take it you Scoundrels, and thank Heaven I am not in an angry Mood


Will a good Cudgle put you into it?


No: Venus, Venus, rules the day, I am all Peace and Love: My Vigour is
defign'd to other purposes than Fighting with Rascally Fellows.


We must have this Pearl out of your Ear.


'Twas given me for my service at the Siege of Dunkirk, as a Mark of Honour.


Make hast, we shall be forced to Crop you else.


Let's remove 'em a little farther, and tie 'em Back to Back, and leave 'em.


I'll have satisfaction for this Affront, you Rascals, I scorn the slow paced
Revenge of Law, 'tis Blood I'll have.


That you may not forget, I will give you this farther Remembrance.


Come away with the Rascals.


Well, Stripling well, no more to be said.


I'll stay no longer sending up and down: Can you pay the Money?


In a short time I can.


Have you any Friend that will be bound with you?


I have; but I am so unfortunate, they are not within.


Come, come, away to Prison.


If you have the Hearts of Men, take Pity on my Youth. This is all the Money I
owe in the World, and I shall suddenly discharge it; but if you disgrace me
thus, I am undone for ever.


We are Officers, and must obey our Warrant. Come along.


What's here Thisbe in the hands of Bailiffs! I will Kill two Birds with one
Stone at once, I will show my Courage, and my Love in rescuing my Mistress.
Let's never suffer these Rascals to carry her off.


I will not Fight against the Law: A Bailiff and a Hangman are as necessary as
a Lord Chief Justice, in a Government.


I will draw and be Knocked down, in her Quarrel by my self then.


Hold, hold: I will draw my Purse and rescue her a surer way.


Is there no way for my deliverance?


I'll Bail her.


We must have City Security; no Covent G^rden Bully?


What's the Sum?


Two Hundred Pound. What do we stand talking with her? away.


Oh I am Miserable!


Hold, you shall have your choice of six Play Debts: Sir Thomas Whiskin owes me
three hundred pound; will you take that for your Money? or Harry Huthead shall
be your Pay-master.


Nothing but our Money down, or good Security.


Why, Then here's your Money down you Rascals.


Now you say something. Much good may do you: She is very pretty, and as cheap
as Neck-Beef.


This Redemption as I never can deserve, so I cannot too much acknowledge your
surprising Generosity to a Stranger, known to you by nothing but distress.


Preserve your thanks till you find to whom they are due, I am but the
Instrument of your deliverance, and was employed by a Servant of yours, who
could not come himself, for some reasons you shall know hereafter.


May I not know his Name? that I may return him his Money at least.


He charged me to the contrary.


I could almost forswear Play, since my ill Fortune has put me out of condition
of doing this small Service, but I was ready with my Sword.


'Tis much better as it is.


I did not throw one mam in two hours, I lost three sets at Back-Gammon, and a
Tout at Tricktrack, all ready Money; the rude Fellows have frighted the Roses
from your Cheeks.


This Rogue my Taylor that Arrested me, came but three days ago to know if I
had any service to command him: There must be something farther in it.


Perhaps some envious Woman set him on: there is as much malice among the
Beauties as among Wits: Will you give me leave to wait on you home! there are
rude Fellows abroad, and you may meet with some Affront.


Madam we will secure you from that.


Your Servant.


How does my dearest Bellamira? Does she not think I have mortified my self
enough.


You may guess: She is gone out with Dangerfield.


I know it too well


Oh this Villain, Viper, Satyr! where shall I find him? or how torment him when
I have found him? we are all undone, Abused Cheated!


My heart misgives me strangely, and I have scarce Courage to ask what's the
matter. Here have been Scourers, breakers of Windows.


As soon as he had his will of her, to run away, and leave us thus! but if I
light of him, I'll tear his Goatish Eyes out.


Here has been some disorder in my absence: who is't you threaten thus? whom
do you speak of?


As if you did not know, and be hanged with your precious Gifts.


They are such your Mistress would never let me rest till she had 'em: if she
don't like 'em, now, she may thank her self.

But what's the matter?


The Eunuch you gave us made brave work!


Oh, is that all? not work for a Midwife, I am sure.


It may be in time. He has Ravished the young maid Dangerfield gave my
Mistress.


'Tis impossible: he is as innocent as the Child Unborn.


What he is I cannot tell; but by his works, he's no more an Eunuch than your
self: the young Maid is all in Tears: We cannot get a Word from her: Pray
Heaven she does herself no mischief She casts down her Eyes, and sighs as if
her heart would break; The Rascal's no where to be found; 'tis well if he have
not robbed us at parting too.


I am strangely amazed he knows no place in Town no person, and has no where to
go, but to my House.


Let's see if he be there. Our Maids have swam every one to have a Limb of him.


I have heard these Eunuchs have been very amorous; but never heard of such a
Prank: besides this was taken in an Algerine, an Eunuch after the Turkish
manner.


He looked so demurely, I thought Butter would not have melted in his Mouth, I
hope you will make sure work with him before you send him again. But see
Isabella herself.


I'll speak to her, and know the truth.


You had better step aside and observe her: you'll put her out of Countenance.


Torn from my Parents and my Country young;
Then in a Foreign Land exposed to Sale.
After some few removes when but a Child,
I to the hands of Bellamira fell,
Then to rude Dangerfield by Fortunes spite
Strangely betrayed; and now again restored,
I know not how, nor why, nor on what score.
Misfortune sure like mine never was.
In every Change and State I still preserved
My Honour boldly by Contempt of Life,
Vowed the same hour should rob me of 'em both:
The Resolution was so new, it checked his Lust.
But what does it avail to keep from Thieves
That Wealth we must anon to Pirates lose?
No sooner here, but like an Eunuch,
A bold Lover com's and rifles me of all;
Vowed to return, Marry and take me hence;
But Men are False, Women believing Fools:
Yet this is he that Loved me when in Spain,
And my poor heart first kindled at his Fire
Till he returns I will not Cherish Life,
Nor sleep nor nourishment shall prop this Frame:
My Husband he will be or Murderer

Poor Lady! she has dissolved my Eyes. Her Passion's great; but I'll go home
and kill Pisquil: thou shalt go and see the Execution.


We will flay the Lustful Swine.


My dear man of War? bouncing Bully! did thou not begin to despair of me?


When we were tied back to back and thrown into that Ditch, I began to think we
must have lain in the Field all Night, as I have done, for my part, half my
life time.


You have not been robbed I hope?


Yes, faith the Rogues surprised us e're we could get our Swords out


Not of much?


Of a hundred Pieces, and some Medals, given me by Foreign Princes and States,
for my good Service in the Wars.


I am the unhappiest woman in the World! and all this staying for me! how many
were the Rogues?


Half a Foot Company.


Such as we used to Muster in Flanders.


How many is that English?


A dozen Armed with Sword and Pistol.


There were more of 'em not far off if need had been.


The Captain of 'em was such another fat fellow as Merryman: I shall know him
again if I see him; and if I do; I make one entire bruise of him. He laid on me
most unmercifully.


Who unbound you?


An honest Country fellow, who came by, by accident.


I have been overthrown too by a Gentleman's Coachman, who threw us in the dirt;
and I was forced to go home to shift.


Know you the Livery? I will have satisfaction, or make him turn away his saucy
Servant: I am rusty, for want of Fighting.


If I did I wou^d tell you, you are so apt to thrust your self into Quarrels;
'tis a sad thing to love a brave man, a Woman is ever in one fright or other:
if they have the discretion not to be Principals, they must be Seconds in every
idle business.


I never failed but once, of disarming my man.


And then you had the Misfortune to run him clean through the heart.


I fled into France upon it.


What if I help you to your Money and Jewels again?


I'll give you Fifty Pounds. Can you guess who robbed us?


No, but I^ll take you at your word. Stop here at Knightsbridge, there is a
Justice, swear your loss before him since you were robbed between Sun and Sun,
and the Country is obliged to make it good.


Here's Fifty pounds well gotten. This is a Witty Wench, I am half in Love with
her my self.


I had rather lose it all, then swear before one of those Children of the Gown.


Nay you shall do it: 'twill soon be over, and then we'll Sup in Town.


Now must I forswear my self, or lose my Place: Let me see, that I may not be
out: The Robbers were Twelve, the Money lost, a Hundred Pieces, besides Medals
and Rings to the value of as much more.


Come out you Rogue, you Rascal: will nothing go down with you, but,
Maiden-heads?


I beseech you, Sir


How came you hither again? What's the meaning of these Clothes? speak; if we
had stayed never so little longer he had been gone, he was preparing for his
journey, I see.


Where is he? That I may stick my Bodkin in him.


Don't you see him?


No if I did, I'd teach him to come with his edged Tools amongst poor harmless
Maids.


It might have been some of our Cases; and I pity Isabella with all my heart:
But are you sure you have him fast?


Why there he is, just before you.


What that poor Wretch? That swallow face was never within our doors. There's a
Ravisher indeed!


Could you think this was he that we complained of?


I never had any other.


This fellow is no more to our Pisquil, than a Calf is to a Lion.


He you sent us had a sweet Face, delicate Shape, quick Eye, and a promising
Countenance.


Fine Feathers make fine Birds: You see him now in plain Clothes, at his worst.


There's more in it then so: Ours was young, handsome in his prime; this is a
Withered, Worn-out, Weather-beaten, Weasil-fac'd Fellow.


I shall begin to think I dont't know my right hand from my left, if this be
true. Come hither Sirrah, Pisquil, did not I give Fifty pound for you?


You did, Sir.


Now let me ask him a question: Do you know our house.


No, nor you neither.


Merryman brought us a young fellow of Nineteen that would have known us all
over and over, if he had stayed.


How come you by these Clothes? Why don't you answer me, you Rascal?


One Mr. Lionel came.


What, my Brother?


He said so.


When?


To day.


with whom?


With Merryman only.


Did you know he was my Brother?


Mr. Merryman told me so: he gave me these Clothes and took away mine; then
they went both together.


I am undone, Bellamira will never endure this affront, nor ever be persuaded
but I was privy to it.


It may cost you a Weeks Banishment or so; but what think you, am I sober? am I
in my right Wits? No, Ily'd! I was a Fool! the Eunuch was as Innocent as a Lamb
Poor Isabella! Is not she undone, ruined for ever.


No, he shall marry her and make her an honest woman, will not that satisfy?


Alas Sir I have nothing to satisfy a woman with neither by night nor by day,
I am a poor despicable Eunuch. If I Marry your Worship must get my Children and
keep 'em too.


My Mistress will never like that.


The Wench he Ravished is but a Servant Maid, or at most one that has no
friends, I'll give 'em a Farm of twenty pound a year, and make up all that way:


I beseech you Sir Drown or Hang me out of the way, but name not Marriage to a
wretch in my condition.


Sirrah I'll have it so. Will nothing down with you but forbidden fruit? you
have no stomach to a Woman in a lawful way and behanged.


I am your true, your very Eunuch Pisquil! what pranks have been played in my
name I know not; let any of these Maids examine me, alas! I am under no
circumstances of Wedlock.


Out upon him filthy Creature, I would not touch him for a World.


I had rather handle a dead Corps; three such Fellows were enough to breed a
Plague.


I'll take my Corporal Oath this is not he that was at our House.


I never saw two men in my life more unlike than this odious Fellow and our
Pisquil.


I am resolved he shall Marry her though it cost me Forty pound a year;
Bellamira's House must not be thus affronted.


Sir you mistake, Isabella is a Gentlewoman sits at Table with my Mistress, and
would not Marry such a fellow for all you are worth.


What shall we do then?


Let's find out the true Ravisher, if he refuse to marry her, take the Law of
him and Hang him.


Come hither Pisquil: Did Lionel put on thy Clothes and leave thee his?


By all that's good he did.


And put on thine?


Yes in the Room.


He came to us indeed in a strange fashioned habit.


This Lionel is the most wicked, Impudent, and I the most unhappy of mankind! I
have sent a Stone-horse among Mares.


Now don't you think my Mistress has been finely served by you and your lewd
Brother?


I am undone if all this comes to Bellarmira's Ear: she talked of a great Sum
she hoped to get by restoring this young Woman to her Friends: I am afraid 'tis
I must pay it now; No man will own her, having been thus abused. Sirrah deny
all again instantly.


Let me alone, Sir I'll set all right.


I'll get the truth out of thee, or I'll beat thee in a Mortar. When was my
Brother here?


Four days ago.


Never since?


No indeed Sir,


See what a Lying Rogue this is now! I have had him but two days, and he says
my Brother changed his Clothes with him four days ago.


He said quite otherwise but now, and that it was this day.


Damn him Rogue, he faulters in his Evidence, and I would not hang a Dog upon
his Testimony; are not you a fine Rascal to lay this villainy upon my Innocent
Brother?


I do confess; pray Sir pardon me, I was afraid.


Get you out of my sight you lying Rogue.


He is a Lying Rogue now I dare swear.


He dares not stand to his first story: Keepwell has threatened him.


This is all Merryman's contrivance; but if I be not even with him, may I dye a
Maid. Well Dangerfield and my Mistress wore at high words after Supper: She
gave me her Gold and Jewels to carry home; a sure sign she'll not stay long
behind.


I'll go Home.


I'll go to Merryman and learn the bottom of this business, that I may know
what to say to my offended Bellamira.


I will turn Turk but I will avoid Wine hereafter, that Aeternal Foe to better
sport, Can my dear Bellamira forgive her poor entertainment.


Why not, as well as you do a weak Brother who can drink but his Bottle. You
may sit up till morning tho he leave you at Nine, the Application is easy.


I will leave my Mornings draught of Mum and Wormwood, and Breakfast hereafter
upon new laid Eggs, Amber greece and Gravy.


Trouble not your self, I will Breakfast before I come to you, and Sup heartily
before I go to bed.


This Paunch of mine shall down, I will no longer suffer my Virile virtue to be
Eclipsed by this Globe of Earth, Biscuit my Meat, Fennel Water and Vinegar shall
be my Drink this twelve Months.


Your Penance is too severe, merely for a sin of Omission, I like you the
better for it: Your honest nature would not suffer you to wrong your friend too
much, when it came to the point.


My honest over-grown body would not keep pace with lewd Will; for which I am
resolved to mortify it, no more Bumpers, no Dinners that last till Midnight,
no City Feast, no Huzzahs.


You are in Love elsewhere, and keep your self for pretty Mistress. Thisbe.


I never saw Play, but I was willing to throw away what I had about me.


Well I must leave you, Keepwell I fear is in Town.


That word leave you, always puts me into a Cold Sweat, and if a man were
Cocked and Primed, is enough to make a man miss Fire. Can't you stay one
Minute?


To what purpose, I have been here a great while, sure 'tis late, your Company
stay for you, the Bottles are upon the Table by this time.


Would you had never talked of going, I am the worst at paying Money upon a
Pinch, can't you stay one quarter of an hour?


I have appointed business with Eustace and must be gone.


Sir, Keepwell is coming up Stairs, I told him you were asleep, he must needs
speak with you.


Step in there, I'll send him away presently.


Merryman with a Wench, nay then we are all Mortal.


'Tis only a Wine Cooper's Daughter that has brought me some taste of Pontack
out of her Fathers Cellar.


Sings) Her Breasts of Delight, are two Bottles of White, and her Eyes are two
Cups of Canary. I hope we shall have no more Lessons of Thrist, no pious
Exhortations, no Lectures against Love: Why she has as good Clothes as my
Bellamira.


But I don't Pay for'em as you do.


Prithee let me see her, I have trusted thee with my Bell. a hundred times.


You won't like her and then I shall be laughed at, besides this is the first
time, she is a young modest Sinner and I have given her my word.


What, art thou ashamed of her?


Nor proud of her neither, as you are of your Tyrant Bellamira.


Never speak against my Bell. she is the prittiest little pouting tempestuous
Rogue sometimes, but 'tis soon over, and then she is so calm again, the
Halcyon, might breed upon her Lips.


You are grown Poetical since you went into the Country.


Prithee let me see thy Punk, thy Cockatrice, thy Harlot.


Good words, you don't know who you speak off.


I'll set my foot against the door.


You won't be such a Brute.


I am very Rampant.


I have that will take down your Courage. Dangerfield has sent me a Challenge
for delivering your Eunuch and Black in his Presence.


Why did thou do it in his Presence?


'Tis past now, and you must be my Second.


Pox on it I did not mean rampant for Fighting, I meant for the other business, I
have no malice to any man living but am wondrous loving.


We are to meet an hour hence, the time is short, I cannot possible find
another Friend; besides, 'tis partly your own quarrel.


Hang him he makes a Trade of Fighting, and kills men by the year.


We must try, what Mettle he is made off.


Let me alone, I will bring you off with Honour, and without Fighting.


How so?


The Officer of the Guard is my intimate Friend, I will acquaint him with the
Quarrel and get us all secured; I have escaped hitherto by his means, and yet
have sent and received some Challenges in my Life time; he saves more Bloodshed
than all the Parsons in Town with their Sermons against Duelling.


I have no great Lust for Fighting, if you can take it up handsomely, with all
my heart, but you must about it instantly for the time is short.


I am gone out be sure you stay at home.


I knew this was a sure way to be rid of him.


And so must we, the Guard will be here presently else; You could not help
calling me Tyrant to Keepwell tho you knew I was within hearing


I must talk a little after the old rate, 'twill breed suspicion in him should
I change my Note all of a sudden, but I will drink him upevery Night, and send
him to thee so loving.


Drink him down rather, pray, let him alone as he is.


Oh, Sir, how is it between my Mistress and her Man of War?


Not so as it might be between thee and me, if thou would be ruled.


I am rull'd by my Friends and Relations.


They'll undo thee Silence, if thou heark'nest to 'em: thou wilt spend thy
Youth in Service, and in thy Age be eaten up with Children.


Better so than with the Pox: I had rather be a Cobblers Wife, than the best
Man's Whore in the Land.


This is a wicked Principle, and has undone more young Women!


If I must be ruined, I'll be ruined in an honest way.


A Woman ruined in an honest way is the vilest, contemptiblest thing
imaginable: give me a Woman ruined with a Coach and six Horses, a house in the
Mall, fine Equipage! and all this thou might be in a fair way to Compass.


But what of my Mistress and Dangerfield?


They are all to pieces.


About what?


About a young Maid Dangerfield gave her: nothing will serve but he'll have her
again.


She will never meet with such a Loyal, Obedient Lover, as Keepwell.


He is the Top Cully of the Town. But here she comes her self.


I believe he'll come to take her away by force; but let him offer to touch her
with a Finger, I'll pluck his Eyes out. I can bear with his impertinences and
big words, while they are but words; but if he offer violence, I know what he
is at the bottom, and can find those that can Cudgel him.


I have expected you a good while here.


Do you know that Dangerfield's last Quarrel and mine was a Concern of yours?


He was not Jealous of me?


No: but while I endeavoured to restore your lost Sister, to you, as I think in
Conscience I ought; I suffered what you see, and more from him.


You have several times talked to me of a Sister of mine, lost from our house
in Devonshire; but I always looked upon it as a mere Wheadle.


One that has an ill name, is half hanged: but, I assure you, I was in earnest,
as I shall make appear to you by infallible Circumstances.


I lost indeed a Sister, about twelve years since, but where she is, Heaven
only knows.


Yes I know she is at home.


What at your house?


Yes at my house: my Mother bred her, as if she had been her own, you need not
be ashamed to own her.


She bred her up from a Child! I like that well: then this is not she that
Dangerfield gave her yesterday; and that Lionel Ravished.


I doubt not of your Gratitude, when you see her: She's a delicate Creature.


How old is She?


Seventeen.


The very Age that Lionel mentioned: I am undone again!

She had my Father's Picture on, when she was lost.


She has it still and kisses it a hundred times a day.


A bite by a Monky upon her left arm.


She has so. If I show her you with these Tokens will you not thank me, and own
her?


Yes, if you have not taught her your own Trade.


By my Life, she is as innocent, as when you lost her first, we ever kept a
strict hand over her. By good fortune Keepwell gave me a fine Eunuch, to his
care I have instrusted her and charged him not to stir from her.


Hell, and Damnation! The Eunuch was Lionel.


Who could tell you?


I know not: I heard in the Town, you had an Eunuch.


Now let's have a care we don't both lose her, for this is she that Dangerfield
gave and threatens to takeaway again.


It is too apparent, no sooner found, but lost, my Isabella: Lost, to thy Fame
thy Family for ever.


You seem disordered: are you we will?


A little surprised, at the unexpected discovery of my dear Sister. But why did
you not tell me this sooner?


I had her of Dangerfield but yesterday.


Did you not tell me you were bred up together?


Yes, but how we first met, how we parted, how Dangerfield got her, I will tell
you at more leisure, he threatens to take her away by force; you are not afraid
of him?


Of no man-less. I have a sudden Qualm come over me; I have drunk too much
Wine.


Come in I'll give you some Mirabilis.


I'll teach her to provoke a man of Honour, Culverin, Wildfire, and Hackum,
follow your Leader: First I'll pull the house about their Ears.


Spoken like your self.


I'll slit her Nose, then give her the Trant'vne.


It will be a brave revenge, and make you Terrible through the World.


Advance Culverin, with the Link-boyes: Hackum command thou the right Wing; and
thou Wildfire the left.


Here, here, here.


I my self will bring up the Rear, give the Sign for the on-set, and be ready
to assist you with my Conduct, if need be.


What a Jewel is experience in a General!


I learnt this of Mont^li.


What bustle is that about the door?


Oh Mistress the House is beset: we are all undone.


Not with Thieves, I hope.


No, 'tis Dangerfield; fear him not, he dares do nothing: A mere blustering
Coward.


Shall we break the Windows?


Not yet my valiant Friends; I see Bellamira at her Balcony: I'll proffer
Peace; and that refused, make War.


O, the difference between Man and Man! I never hear this Master of mine speak,
but am the wiser for it.


Answer me thou Punk, thou Cockatrice, thou Man-Leech, that suck their
Marrow, and their Money: When I gave thee Isabella, did not thou promise me
two days entirely to my self.


Why you over-grown Booby, gelt with muddy Ale, Brandy, and Tobacco; you had
'em and could make no use of 'em.


Next did not you bring your Stallion there under my Roof, talk with him in
private, and after steal away to him?


I had some business with him, and found you had none with me, but drinking and
making my head-ake.


Oh, Impudence! this to you, that are such a Hercules in Love, and War.


Restore me Isabella or I'll force her from you.


She restore her! Or you touch her! I should laugh at that.


Are you her Hector? I shall spoil your Mirth with a Brick-bat. Come down; I'll
fight thee hand to hand in the head of my Army.


No wise General will forsake his advantages, you shall not expose your self so
rashly.


Peace you Fool: if he comes, we will seize him; then offer him in exchange of
Prisoners, for Isabella. I here's a stratagem: he shall find I am a Soldier.


The greatest I ever read of.


I will not venture my self among your Hell-hounds, but I shall find a time.


You will not deliver Isabella then, by fair means?


Nor by foul neither: She is my Sister, too good to be thy Wise, and shall be
no Man's Servant.


I bought her young of her Friends, in Spain.


They had no right to Sell her; she is a freeborn English Woman, and I will
defend her with my life.


You speak like an honest Gentleman: Bellamira has cheated my Master. Do not
make your self a Party; and consequently this great Man your Enemy.


Persuade that Calf he is a Lion if thou can; I scorn both him, and thee.


Then 'tis no time to talk, salute 'em with a Volley.


Let's give Bellamira a Serenade, as we go by; for old acquaintance sake: she'll
take it kindly.


Dangerfield's there: we will break the Windows, call him Rogue and Rascal, and so
go on with our Music to Thisbe.


I hate these rude Frolics.


The house is beset: What's here, Scourers? Brick-bats mounting, and Pispots
descending?


We will scour 'em for a Company of uncivil. Fellows, thus to disturb Lovers at
their innocent Recreations.


Strike up, we have no Drums and Trumpets, but we will swinge 'em by way of Lute
and Violin.


Fall on: this is our old Master Merryman; we use to light him home drunk three
or four times a week.


If our Soldiers revolt, shift every man for himself: This did Pompey, when
over powered by Julius Caesar, at Pharsalia.


THis drinking does so muddle one's complexion and take of one's mettle, a man
the next day is but the wrong side of himself. I was so dozed I was an hour
about a Billet douz.


We should look gratefully back upon the past pleasure and not peevishly repine
at the present suffering. What think you of a hair of the same Dog?


That saying has killed many an honest fellow, but do you remember we were at
Thisbe's?


Yes, and were let in; but have forgotten most of the rest.


You are a precious Guardian! You must even Marry her your self, you will make
her fit for no body else, with your disorderly Frolics.


That's it I would be at.

But what said she?


She told me, she wond'red to see me in that disorder; squeezed me by the hand,
and bad me take more care of my health hereafter.


Now I remember me, she said you looked lamentably; and that, had you come
alone at that time of the night, she should have taken you for a Ghost; that
you smelt as if you had been buri'd a Fortnight.


She may say her Pleasure; but there are as fine Women as she of another mind:
I knew when she had no better a Complexion than my self.


When was that? Had she ever the Green-sickness or the Yellow Jaundies?


No, before she bought her Paint of the Italian. I look like a Ghost! Why, I am
the same man I was twenty Years ago; as vigorous, as Amorous, and I think as
taking amongst Men and Women. I had three Maiden-heads brought me last Week by
their Parents: I will leap the half Almond with you.


Thou ma'st, well be active, thou hast no more flesh upon thy back, than a
Flea, and thy Bones have as much Quick-silver in 'em, as ten Bales of false
Dice: They will scarce lie still when thou art dead.


Thou art Picqu'd at Thisbe's concern for me: Well thou art an honest Fellow;
we will not dispute about her, tho we Rally one another now and then. I have
ten of as fine Women as she upon my hands at this time; she was but my Pis
allee: What will you say when you see me Married to one of the best Fortures
about the Town?


I shall not wonder; Women have another Green-sickness in their Souls, that
sways 'em to the Trash of Mankind: but here comes Keepwell, his time of
Banishment is expired, as filthily fine as hands can make him.


Sure Jealousy is the greatest Torment in the World, I have had the dismallest
Dreams! Methought I saw Dangerfield Rampant, and Bellamira Couchant all Night
long.


You consented, and can reasonably complain of none but your self.


I consented she should make a Fool of him, and Cozen him of Isabella, but no
farther.


I saw her at Knightsbridge Garden with him; so fine, methought they were the
happiest Couple!


Pox on their happiness.


It may end in that indeed, they say Dangerfield is not very sound.


Women like wanton Whelps, fawn ever on the next that comes in their way, but,
when they see an old acquaintance, they run to him for all that; never be
discouraged.


At once I hate her, and I love her too; The chief thing I begged of her was,
that she would not be seen in public with this Dangerfield: she has no mercy
on my Reputation.


No more than on your Fortune: be wise and take this occasion.


All this makes for you Merryman: there is no such Soaker as a Lover in
affliction.


I had as live drink with a Gibed Cat: they are always Mewing and Wauling
about her Inconstancy, Cruelty, or one silly thing or other.


Dangerfield has a sweet Calech.


There is no talk of any man now but him; the Bravest, the most Generous, the
most accomplished Gentleman!


You will make Keepwell hang himself.


I'll fight him, my Courage is wound up, and I will strike him to the heart.


You'll have an ill time on it; he kills an Humble Be flying with a single
Bullet, rides three managed Horses every morning, Fences two hours after, and
stinks of Gun Powder like the fifth of November.


Then let him be hanged, I'll have nothing to do with him.


'Tis she is to blame, and not he: If a man Robs my Orchard, I shall blame my
Gardiner more than the Thief.


He has done but what the best Lord in the Land would be proud to do: but I
will maul her, break her Chin^, take down her Hangings, leave her no Plate but
the poor Thimble she began the World with.


Spoken like a man of Mettle! and shall we Sup together, and drink till
daylight, as we were wont?


Thou art one of Keepwell's evil Counsellors; and if ever he and Bellamira
piece again, I shall see thee banished his presence for ever.


I will never be sober again, scarce cleanly, take Tobacco and lie in a
Bawdy-house.


Merryman will Compound for Less.


Half drunk every night, and stark drunk once a week, is very fair.


I'll Rout her Instantly.


She has a great many Rich Clothes, let her wear out her Livery at least in
your Service.


That's well thought, let her wear out her Clothes at least in my Service, as
he says.


You have almost worn out your self in her's: you look worse than he, that
begun twenty years before you.


Every man's Constitution will not run out into Fat, 'tis the Commendation of a
Capon: a good Cock is always lean as I am.


A good Coxcomb always thinks well of himself; why thou lean Rascal Deer, thou
visible Pox, thou Common shore of Physic, Reproach of Doctors, and Ruin of
Apothecari's, who Flux'st away thy Flesh as often as the Adder casts his Skin,
and art full as venomous.


I am sure you look like a full Moon or a Fat Bawd swelled with the Tooth Ach.


When I walk the Streets, men say there goes an honest well natured Fat Fellow
to drink a bottle with, and a good Husband I warrant him.


A good Cuckold perhaps: but, the Ladies cry foh, there goes a greasy Sot, a
Chandlers Shop in the shape of a man, a mere Lump, a Sponge full of Terse:
whose mouth stinks worse than the Bung-hole of a Barrel, a Load of manifest
impotency, Guts and Garbage for the Bear-Garden.


Thou mere stake to hang Clothes upon, thou Scarrow, thou piece of Shrivil'd
Parchment, thou walking Skeleton that may be read upon alive, can thou
think any Woman so sharp set as to pick thy rotten Bones, which are but the
leaving of Pox, Mercury and Consumption?


Nay good Gentlemen, no heat, let us debate this matter calmly; will this
Quarrel about Fat and Lean never have an end?


'Tis as irreconsilable as that of the Flesh and Spirit; Merryman will never
let it rest: I am always on the defensive part.


You never consider your poor Friend, tossed as I am between the Billows of
Love and Jealousy.


Well-now I have Tormented you sufficiently, it goes against my honest nature
to conceal your happiness from you any longer, Dangerfield is an ugly niggardly
Rogue, and Bellamira --


Was she never abroad with him in Public.


Nor in Private neither, but once and they fell out; well she loves you most
entirely, I could never have thought it.


She was all in Tears by that time you were on Horse-back: I had the most ado
to Comfort her, and, yet I said a great many pretty things to her; and never
looked better in my Life.


I sat with her two hours and our whole discourse was of you, how much she was
obliged to you, and what a dear man you were.


I ever told you Merryman, you were too hard of belief and that there was such
a thing as true Love, and Constancy too.


I confess my error and shall hereafter think you can never do too much for
her. I will drink her health in a Bumper as long as I live, for her fidelity to
my Friend, and in his absence too.


If ever you leave her she'll make her self away, that's certain, I have heard
her say so a hundred times.


Nay, I always thought so, and durst never Chide, nor deny any thing; she has
such a spirit.


But here comes Silence, who will tell you more.


My Mistress wonders you can be so long in Town and not see her.


What, as a whole hour?


You would not have been so long out of a Tavern.


I hear she is taken up with Dangerfield.


He's a Calf, a Blockhead, and she scorns him.


Do you hear this, Merryman? He's a Calf, a Blockhead, and she scorns him.


Did not I tell you as much: and you know I was of another mind?


My Mistress and Dangerfield, are quite fallen out: he gave her the pretty Maid
she told you of, and came last night with some drunken Bullies, to take her
away by force.


I am a witness of that: Merryman and I drove him away, and raised the Seige.


My Mistress will refer all to Merryman.


Now they are in discourse, I will steal away to Mrs Thisbe, and make my excuse
for last night's disturbance.


Come Merryman, let's see what Bellamira can say for her self.


I'll follow you instantly.

We were fellow Robbers; I must keep fair with Bellamira or she may get her own
Pardon, Peach, and hang me, besides I have received her fee; and am bound to
plead her cause.


I am the happiest man! Whom shall I praise first? Thee that laid'st the
Design; my self that executed it, or Fortune that gave it success?


You have succeeded then?


Beyond expectation.


It was a bold design.


And a fortunate one for me: I must have died, if I had not enjoyed her.


I will not trouble your modesty for particulars, but why in this dress still?
Do you intend to live and die in your new service?


I could live and die with my new fellow Servant, I went to Eustace's, thinking
to have shifted, but the house was full of Company.


Are you not afraid of being known?


No, I met Cuningham and twenty of my acquaintance; they stared at me a little.


Here he is, and Merryman with him, the vile contriver of Isabella's ruin.
Cunningham, I must use your Sword.


'Tis at the service of any Gentleman, much more at yours that are my Friend.
But against whom?


You see the man.


What my old acquaintance Merryman, and that young fellow?


That young fellow is Lionel. When you hear it, you'll say my Quarrel's Just,
the Injury not to be pardoned.


My dearest Eustace! The Man of all the World I wished to meet


And Lionel the Man of all the World I am bound to Curse.


Some Villain has abused me to my Friend: I'll cut his Throat.


That Villain is your self.


Villain! Death, I would have shared my Fortune, my Reputation, my all, but
Isabella, with that Man. and to be thus requited.


That Name has roused up my Revenge; Draw and prepare for thy defence.


What means my Friend is he become my Rival?


That should not make this breach

I'd turn the Boyish Passion out of doors,

And fly to the embraces of my Friend.


Am I reported to have wronged you inmy discourse?


I'd Kick the Liar should tell me so. O that I were so happy as to doubt! You
have accused your self.


Of what?


Of an injury so great, to me, and all our Family --


To you? Whose Injuries I count my own, and should alike resent 'em.


Revenge me then upon Lustful Lionel.


Sure you are mad, for what?


Why, for a Rape upon my Sister.


I know no Sister that you have.


That's our misfortune, that thou knew her not; far had thou wronged me
with thy Will, I could kill thee as men do Wolves and Tigers; but now must pay
a cruel Sacrifice to Honour.


I understand you less and less.


Know then, (for it is just I tell our Quarrel ever we Fight) that Isabella was
my Sister.


What the young Maid at Bellamira's! 'Tis impossible.


By certain Tokens and Circumstances, to me invincible, I know her so.


You amaze me!


Lionel, thou were wrapped in thy Mother's Smock. Thy Isabella, whom thou love
of all the World is found the Sister of thy dearest friend. What then remains,
but that you Marry her?


I know his Honour is too nice: nothing remains but that we Fight.


I love my Isabella above my Life

And all the little niceties of Honour;

And had rather call her mine than be Crowned King of all the habitable World.


Then we are ti'd in stricter Bonds than ever. Oh my best Lionel!


Throw not away the Treasure of thy Love, Upon a Soil so Barren: -- my Father
--


I can easily satisfy all his scruples. She had five Thousand pounds left her
by an Uncle: to which I'll add to make her worthy of my dearest Friend.


I know not how to speak, and yet I must.


Thou found her apt and easy to thy Lust: Ha,


By all that's good, I hold her Innocent, as violated Temples.


Were not thou then a sacrilegious Villain?


It is confessed.


Now you have confessed, it is but doing Penance in a pair of Matrimonial
Sheets, and there's an end on it.


I was to blame, to trifle all this while. Draw.


I must have a thrust at thy fat Guts.


Now are thy Skin and Bones, at my Mercy.


This satisfies my Honour; but my Revenge must find some other time.


What if I were long since contracted to another, and to be disinherited if I
went back.


You might have told me so? Yet what could that have done?


Perhaps you would not have believed me, and it might have looked like Fear,
till we had Fought; but now take the sad truth, and if thou wilt the Life of
Lionel: I have been sometime since contracted to Theodosia, the rich
Gold-smith's Daughter.


If that be all, you are as free as you were born. You are all men of Honour,
and I'll tell you a secret, I have this Morning privately Marri'd that pretty
Creature.


It is impossible I should be so happy.


She heard I know not how, that you ravished a young Maid, and were in Love
elsewhere: I came in the lucky minute, and am now her Husband.


In the unlucky minute to her. How came she to think of thee?


She did not; her Maid that Governs her, was formerly a Servant to a Mistress
of mine, has often tasted of my Bounty and some other civilities have past
between us.


What could she find to say for thee?


She told her Mistress, her Father was one of my Tenants, and that I had a
thousand a year in Northumberland, to her knowledge.


Thou art a lucky Fellow: the Women will venture Body and Soul to do thee
Service any way.


I had missed her for all that, but for a Hundred pound I gave a Nonconformist
Parson for his good word, Could I have thought the news of my Marriage with
Theodosia would have pleased you, you should have heard of it sooner.


Joy, such as thou give me now, be ever with thee.


I was half afraid we must have had a Tilt.


Will you be my Advocate to your offended Sister?


You need none, since your Designs are Honourable.


Let's embrace like Brothers: for the next Priest shall make us so.


Madam, there's the Rogue that has made all this work.


I never liked him, he has a sly look; and a Hawks Eye with him.


'Twas a mercy any of us escaped


Peace you Fools; he is a Gentleman, and may make her Reparation. We are undone
ruined for ever! Your unfortunate Sister whom I undertook to restore you.


What of her?


She has been ravished, and by that Villain you embrace. But now I am asham d
to offer her thus stained and sulli'd; but 'twas no fault of mine.


Oh bring her instantly the Roman Lucrece, was not more virtuous; nor an Estate
to one in Goal for Debt more welcome, than she to Lionel.


Think what you do; Marry a Servant, my Father will be in Town anon.


She is the Sister of my dearest Eustace. And above me in Wealth, as in desert.
He cannot but approve my Choice.


When you are Marri'd I'll take my pleasure like an Italian elder Brother, and
now my dearest Bellamira, we are safe for one seven years.


My Father's appetite of Grand-Children I'll undertake to satisfy, if you'll
pardon my making bold with your house.


I take it the best way, and charge it all on Love, whose power we most of us
have felt. You seem a worthy Gentleman.


A poor younger Brother of your Servant Keepwell's.


How came you to find us here?


We heard that there were Swords drawn; but saw no such matter.


There she is; but so hemmed in with friends and acquaintance, we had best let
her alone.


She is a victorious Beauty, I will go and Surrender my self to her.


Let's make honourable Conditions.


I will vield to mercy, Hercules did so to Omphale.


The Example's great.


What's that thing in Buff.


'Tis Dangerfield: I thought you had known him.


He looks like a Militia Captain upon a Training day.


You had best tell him so.


My heart's too big; I can't endure to speak to him.


Who is that next Merryman?


Your Rival Keepwell.


I can no more endure the sight of a Rival than a fighting Cock can: Hold me,
or I shall fly in his Face.


What would that fellow have?


Your Pardon, for my last-night's rudeness; and my Isabella, the pretty Maid I
gave you, if you please.


Name her no more: I tell thee she is my Sister a free-born Subject of England.


If thou dost but name her tho in thy sleep, I'll cut thy Throat: She is my
Miscress.


Speak to him, Keepwell: we will bring you off.


She is to be my Sister-in-law; and I will flea thee, stuff thy Skin full of
Straw, and Set thee in my Cherry-Garden, if thou depart not.


I am utterly undone; if I find not some way into this Family: the less hope
see, the more I love this Bellamira.


What if I get you received among 'em, according to your desert?


Command me and mine for ever: I'll give thee fifty Guineas hard Money in hand,
and the Sword I twice saved the Nation with.


Retire a little, 'tis not fit you should be by, at your own Commendations.
I'll try what I can do; you have been a good Master to me.

I hope all this good Company believes I follow'd this Fool my Master more for
my own sake than his?


None but himself ever doubted it.


I have thought of it seriously, and find you can't do better than to receive
this Blunderbus, my Master, into your Family.


What? A Rival! I will as soon receive a Roaring Lion.


Yes, such a one as he is: a Fool, a Blockhead, a Coward, a Knave that ne'er
paid.


For his Cowardice I can answer: he stood to be robbed, like a Cow to be
Milked.


He carried me to Supper, and drank himself fast asleep by me.


If he be such a one, what should Ladies do with him?


He loves Play; you may win his Money, and he has abundance: if he refuse to
Play, you may beat him till he will.


I have not heard of a more useful acquaintance, he must not be refused:


You need not fear any Woman should like him he has been impotent these seven
years: when you are weary of him you may Kick him out of doors.


He is a man of a thousand: let me entreat for him.


He shall be admitted, but if he do not prove this Fool, this Coward you speak
of, you had better be hanged.


My life for it. Now, Gentlemen, take me into your Protection, and then Eat,
Drink upon, and Laugh at the Fool my Master.


He deserves it abundantly, for keeping such a Rascal.


Call in Dangerfield, and let him know he is received without a Negative.


Sir you may come in, the whole Company bids you welcome.


Most welcome, noble Dangerfield!


I shall be proud of your farther acquaintance.


I shall be glad to drink a Gallon of Wine with you at the Rose, we will write
you of our Club.


I never knew a Civiller person! I was once abroad with him, and he did not
offer me the least rudeness.


Gentlemen if any of you want a Second, I am at your service: And Ladies, if
any man speaks ill of you, or Lampoon you, I'll cut his throat: Thou hast
charmed 'em; I thought they would have torn me to pieces even now: There are
Fifty Guineas I promised thee.


I hope Sir, you'll find I have deserved 'em; they did not know your worth; but
when I informed 'em of your good Qualities and Parts, I foresaw they could do
no less.


Nay, I never came in any place in my life, but when I was wellknown I got the
Love of Man, Woman, and Child.


Now you see what a fellow this Dangerfield was to be Jealous off.


Where there is no Jealousy, there is no Love.


I have had no other Proof of your Love these two months.


Thou shalt have proofs of all kinds.


So you say always


I have been in the Country, and have brought where with to pay old Scores, and
will deal hereafter with ready Money.


We must have a general Act of Oblivion, now you are one of us no heart
burnings hereafter.


I declare I am in Charity with all the World, but that Fat Thief that laid on
me so unmercifully.


He must be comprehended too.


I cannot in Honour, unless you lay your positive commands:


You shall never question him. at Law, nor otherwise.


By these Hilts, I never will then.


Then here are the six Guineas you swore were a hundred, your false Rings,
silthy Medals, Table book, and other Pocket-Lumber.


And Merryman and I were the whole Dozen of Robbers, you swore against.


What, my valiant Bully, you and your man robbed by two; and one of 'em a
Woman!


As I was going to draw, I heard a voice cry, hold, hold, thy dead doing hand;
strike not: it is thy Mistress, Dangerfield.


You Smoothly, you heard this voice too?


As perfectly as my Master, one might have heard it to Knightsbridge: besides
there is something in a man of Honour that keeps him from striking a Lady.


Can you forgive your Lionel?

He never will commit a second Fault.


Not of the same kind, I'll answer for him.


My heart was yours, when we first met in Spain.

You seized the rest somewhat too rudely here:

But I am your Wife, and now am all obedience.


How shall I thank Heaven, and Bellamira for her care of thee?


My former troubles vanish like a Dream,

And am waked to perfect happiness

By that voice; Oh, my dearest Brother!


I should have known her any where; she is as little altered, as 'tis possible.


Husband and Brother I must yield to them; but the third Joy is mine. My
Isabella was Lionel the man thou saw in Spain? And made that pretty
innocent description of?


The same: I never loved another, and now I never shall.


How many accidents have met, to make this happy day!

The least of which is half a Miracle.


Does not your mouth water, at these Amorous preparations?


Not at a greasy bit of a fat Drunkard. I am not ambitious of holding your
head in a morning, or carrying you to Hampsted, to get you a stomach to a
Drunken Supper.


Your proud heart will come down, when you have fasted from Man a year longer,
and been arrested once or twice more.


I might have gone to Goal for all my worshipful Guardian.


Oh, vanity! vanity! What Knight-Errant, do you think would lay down two
Hundred pound for you.


Eustace knows best, he brought the Money; but whoever he were that sent it, if
he have but so much a year, I'll Marry him before any man in England.


What tho he love Wine, Women, and Tobacco, and were as Fat as I am?


Yes, with all your faults, and as many more of his own.


Then take her Merryman, she is thine, by her Concession: 'Twas his Money that
did satisfy the debt, and I was but employed by him.


We are all Witnesses; there is no going back.


She is proof against all Mankind, for I have Courted her these six Months, yet
never could obtain the least indecent favour.


Since it must be so, I hope you'll prove as indulgent a Husband, as you were a
Guardian.


My little charge, if thou had not taken pity on me I should have killed my
self with Whoring and Drinking; but now I will beget Sons and Daughters till
threescore.


Gentlemen your Company is so good, I had almost forgot I was Married this
Morning. Lionel, I hope we shall have no suit in the Prerogative Court, tho I
have Married your Mistress.


Thou art my Redeemer, and hast broken that Knot I should have been troubled to
untie. Theodosia was my Father's Choice, (her Bags were contracted to his
Acres.) But Isabella's mine.


These Roguish Fiddlers smell a Wedding already; since -- They are come Let's
dance --


My Bell. and I will lead a marri'd Life,

Bating the odious Names of Man and Wife;

In Chains of Love alone we will be tied,

And every Night I'll use her like a Bride.


Wits, Whore-Masters, Gamesters, Drunkards, Bullies, We in our several ways
are all but Cullies.


LIke a young Wench that could not well forbear,
And yet is loath her Lewdness should appear.
Our modest Poet would have made away
In private, this mere l^mp you see to day.
We bid him lay the Bantling at our door
And for th'event concern himself no more.
Poets of late with humane Sacrifice
Have feasted you like Heathen Deities.
In every Play they served you up a man
Nay some at Parties and whole Factions ran?
After such fare, how flat must Terence taste?
Yet his plain Tales have had the luck to last.
While your famed Authors, in their life time wast.
Ye all cry out the art of Writings lost
Yet nicer Judgments in perfection boast.
Strange Stars; malignant to Poetic strains
Yet so productive of Judicious brains.
What if you Judge, as ill as others Write?
And only loath for want of appetite;
No Jew into the Sanhedrim might come
That had no Issue of his own at home.
For barrenness supposes cruelty
No Childless man, might others Children try.
This wholesome Law would save us from the spite
Of all the furious Wits that cannot Write.
And you that do, we should not fear your doom
If you'd Judge here but as you Judge at home;
Now Gallants most of you are so well bred
French has long since chased Latin from your head
And Terence yo have forgot or never read.
Faith spare'um both, lest your chance medley Wit
Miss the Translator and the Author hit.

