AS a brisk Gallant dancing to his Glass,
Does here and there in nimble fleurets pass;
Likes every step, and wishes for a Ball,
Where he at once may show his Parts to all:
So Poets (with the like conceit) undone,
Think that dull Verse which pleased 'em when alone,
Must have the like effect on the whole Town.
Our Poet all such hopes of Praise disclaims,
Like a true Lover of the Sport, he Games,
And to come off a Saver only aims.
Did he affect to be esteemed a Wit,
Like you, he'd take an easier way to it:
Write Songs, and Prologues, show 'em up and down,
And tear applause from every Fool in Town;
Make Love to Vizards in a Wit-like Noise,
Dull in his Sense, yet aerie in his Voice,
Catch at each Line that grates, and keep ten good,
With his damned Noise, from being understood.
'Tis well most Wits have something of the Mad,
Or where should Poets for the Stage be had?
Cripples may judge of Vaulting he well knows,
Cowards of Courage; and of Verse and Prose
They that know neither; yet if too severe
Damning those Gifts of which they have no share,
Their Envy more than Judgment will appear.
He none excepts, no, not his Enemies;
For those he hopes his Friends will counterpoise:
And spite of Faction on both sides he knows,
There is an honest Party in this House.

OUR Arms an easy Victory have found
Over a Foe, in love and pleasure drowned.

I am pleased we have Antonius subdued,
Yet rage to think a Roman was pursued:
Our souls did once our conquered Bodies loath,
And seldom did one World contain 'em both.
Yet now by hopes we're flattered to live on,
And with the Common Herd of Mankind run,
Crouching to Fate, which we by death might shun.

His Army's yet entire, and on the Shore;
No Troops so far the Roman Eagle bore:
Armenian Kings they have in Triumph led,
And Parthian blood in ten set Battles shed:
Their General to the last they will defend.

None can defend those, who themselves betray:
He with his Queen again will run away,
And leave 'em fighting, as he did at Sea.

Remember, Sir, the joy the World expressed,
When threatening Wars and Mischief, you redressed.
With a late Peace, which an Alliance tied,
And your fair Sister made Antonius Bride.
The like again you to the World may give,
If you content with half of it can live.

Against all strokes of Fate who can prepare?
That Match is half the occasion of this War.
To him I did my dear Octavia give,
That Rome in peace, she might in Empire live;
That to one Emperor by blood allied,
And to the other by her Marriage tied,
She might all growing jealousy remove,
And be her self the Bond of lasting love.
But see the unblest event; Antonius slights
That Tie, which even enemies unites;
And more than drunk with Cleopatra's charms,
He scorns both Roman-Love and Roman-Arms.

Love of our Country and our Interest
Is the true passion of a Roman Breast.
All other are Usurpers --

'Tis most true:
Yet this vile Flame he never will subdue,
Which spite of time and of enjoyment lives,
And of it's bane miraculously thrives.
He thinks his life depends upon her eye,
As that of Plants does on the Sun rely.
The ignorant are learned, if she think so,
And Cowards even Hercules out-do.
At her request he Provinces bestows,
And no mans worth but by her stamp he knows.
Whilst my Octavia leads a Stepdames life,
And tends the Children of his former Wife,
Ungrac'd without authority or sway.

The wrongs of that fair Princess, Sir, are great,
And rage in all, but in her self create.
What Hers forgives, our virtue should chastise:
Mortals revenge the blasphemed Deities.
And strait the Impious wretch in pieces tear,
Whom Heaven in clemency would long forbear.
From equal power how can you be secure?
And less Antonius never will endure.

Antonius worsted will no league refuse,
And give in peace what battle could not lose.
He may Octavia receive again,
And in his Bed and Empirie make her reign.

Men leagues and peace in their distress embrace,
But keep 'em only till affairs change face.
Ambition's never safe till power be past,
As men till Impotent are seldom Chaste.
Follow the blow, and doubt not the success;
But Fortune for her utmost favours press.
On petty Kings you trifling Conquests make,
Antonius brings you here an equal stake;
The World to be divided at one blow,
And Fate already has declared for you.

Men that have once an equal power enjoyed,
May see the Balance changed, but not destroyed.
He that is lessened to a Slaves degree,
Still conscious of the first equality,
Must hate the other, and himself much more.
Who ever saw a Captive Emperor?
With honour treat and yield perhaps he may,
But he can never like a Slave obey.

Peace we will offer, that he may refuse,
And the whole World his bloody mind accuse.
Thyreus knows the Queen: Him I will send,
Charge him that strait he in my Tent attend.

Was ever Queen like Cleopatra cursed?
Of Egypt Monsters sure her love's the worst.
Where is that falsehood does the Sex pursue,
Or are they only to their ruin true?
I said Antonius might have laid the Scene
Of War and Rapine further from the Queen,
That our week State should to the Victor bow,
And humbly the Decrees of Fate allow.
She tells it him, and I must be displaced.

'Tis hard men for their love should be disgrac't.

No man may now his bleeding Country mourn,
Romans our Lords, and we their Slaves were born.

The Times our honest Councels cannot bear,
And men their Thoughts must in disguises wear.

Let Women, and Her Parasites seek to please.
Physicians should not flatter the disease.
Her dangerous state 'tis Treason to conceal,
Which nothing but Antonius death can heal.

'Tis a rough Medicine she will never use,
And fatal were the advice should she refuse.
We know his interest does her Council sway.

We this advice must privately convey,
Make her believe Octavius loves her too:
On that she will an easy faith bestow,
And in that hope what ist't she may not do?

'Twere all in vain, and we our lives should lose,
Tamely and vilely laughed at by our Foes:
Be Thieves and Rogues to execution led,
Let us die warm, and at an Army's head.
The Romans will not ever be thus strong;
Thousands as well as we for changes long.

Let's silent wait the opportunity,
And by main force expel their tyranny.

I love my Queen, and to rebel am loath.

I would but free her from Antonius power,
And that once done, lay down my arms next hour.

Let us some plot against his life devise:
He's not our Prince; for public good he dies,
And for our Country falls a Sacrifice.
But see He comes, and for his late disgrace,
His conscious virtue raging in his face.

How slippery is the Top of humane state,
And on exalted Heads what tempests beat?
Whom Jove will ruin he makes deaf and blind,
So that they hug the ill fate he has designed;
I else could never have bold Roman Swords
Crowded and thronged within these floating Boards.
Ships, whom the winds more than their Pilots sway,
Where eager courage for a wave must stay.
The Valiant cannot board, nor Coward fly,
But at the lust of the unconstant sky.
At land my Romans --

Sir they bravely fought;
Tho rude in Ships and Sea affairs untaught.
Six hours they did a doubtful fight maintain,
Deserted by your base Egyptian Train;
And by your self, if I may be so plain.

The just reproach has rows'd my Lyon heart,
Nor am I angry at the friendly smart.
I fled, Canidius, basely run away,
And fought for Empire below those for pay.
Of my new shame too much thou can not say.

They, who by Ships would such a Cause decide,
Did not for conquest, but for flight provide.
Pardon me, Sir, my bluntness must go on;
By barbarous fears and councels you're undone.

We in Neutrality secure might wait,
And calmly expect an Emp'ror from Fate;
But in your quarrel half our Fleet we lost,
Led by that Roman courage which you boast.

Our Ships with a promiscuous crowd were filled,
Neither in Battle, nor in Sailing skilled.
Reapers and Ploughmen half ne'er tugged an Oar,
Nor saw the foaming Sea but from the Shore.
Must we be ruined and despised at last?

Did we by land a victory forego,
That a vain Queen might a rich Galley show?
My Legions --

Canidius no more.
I know they stood impatient on the Shore:
Nineteen such Legions as might fate control,
And fortunes wheel at their own pleasure roll.

A loss at Sea let trading Nations mourn.
Victorious Romans to land Conquest born,
Trophies at Sea as much as gain despise,
Of which an Island is the highest prize.
The trembling world did to the Victor yield,
Crowned with the Laurels of Pharsalia's field.

Since we have lost 'tis well the gain was small,
One lucky blow at Land recovers all.

The Enemy is already at our Walls,
And our distress for sudden Counsel calls.
Our Queen amazed at the Siege appears.

But yet her love is stronger than her fears,
Her Country she has made the Seat of War,
'Tis just her safety be our early'st care:
I will her Guard within these Walls remain;
And against the angry Gods her Cause maintain.
Whilst you Canidius to your Legions hast,
Slight our defeat, their loyal hearts make fast
To our just Cause: our Enemies despise,
And for my absence some excuse devise.

Sir, I am blunt, unknowing to deceive,
I'll say you cannot Cleopatra Leave:
That you in her defence alone can fight,
And blessed in love, the Roman Empire slight.

What shall I do, shall I my Queen forsake,
And not her danger, I create, partake?
Caesar, this night, may Alexandria storm,
And all that lust or rage instruct, perform.
Her beauty may the Conqueror disarm,
And his success and love that beauty charm.
Her Subjects weary of the Wars, may rise
And make her blood their common sacrifice.

They say, their Queen in policy of State,
Should buy her Country's peace at any rate.

They say! who says? Memnon you fain would vent,
In others names, your private discontent.
I see a sullen fierceness in your brow
Which you would put in act, if you knew how.

Sir, I am known to love my Country well.

So they say all that purpose to rebel.

Some with your head would young Octavius greet,
And on those bloody terms a Peace complete:
Under such Politicians Pompey fell
With tumults backed what may they not compel.

How shall they foes, who cannot tumults quell?
The giddy multitude, we must not fear,
But what we once resolve on, make 'em bear.

'Tis ill to discontent whom we must use,
And men fight best when they their party choose.

'Tis chosen for 'em by their Sovereign;
And 'tis sedition in them to complain:
Maxims too popular you still maintain.

Sir, my plain speech does no design contain;
'Tis the mere issue of my heart and brain:
If it offend --

It does, be gone.
Nor will I learn of you what's to be done.
When things go ill, each Fool presumes to advise,
And if more happy, thinks himself more wise.
All wretchedly deplore the present state
And that advice seems best which comes too late.

You loose your self in rage and have forgot:
Amintas, Deotorus -- and the rout
Of vulgar Kings have meanly turned about.

Pelusium by Seleucus is betrayed.
Some say the Q^een did his revolt persuade.

Monster, such horrid blasphemy forbear,
Both were his own, the falsehood and the fear.

Sir, I but speak the language of the World.

Henceforth be ever dumb that World and thou:
It cannot, must not, nor it sha'nt be so.

Nay if it sha'nt, I have no more to say.

Aside all p^ssion and all heat I'll lay,
And coolly argue: what can be her end
There to betray, whom she does here defend.
But see the Queen: Heart! but this once stand fast --
And I'll forgive thee all thy weakness past.
How can your goodness to a wretch extend?
Who all he loved so poorly did defend:

'Twas not your life, but me, you could not loose,
Love turned your back, not Fear upon your Foes.

The timorous Deer, their female standing by,
Each other will to wounds and death defy.
Love gives short courage to the meanest soul,
The creeping things he arms, and winged fowl.
Yet overcharged with love, I lost the day,
And in my Mistress presence ran away.
Covered with shame, I fear to meet those eyes.

To them you never were more dear than now:
A manly look over your sorrows throw.
The Captain of my Galleys I have tried,
And for his cowardice the Villain died.
With him die all remembrance of what's past,
I my Caesarian have toward India sent:
This day Antillus to Armenia went.
What Merchant in one Ship would venture all?
They may survive and so revenge our fall,

'Tis well they're gone, their youth was useless here,
And we for them more than our selves should fear.

See here the false Seleucus only Son,
On whom I beg quick justice may be done.
His fathers Treason might on me reflect
Should I the Son from your revenge protect:
My love and honour, let his death secure,
The shortest doubt they neither can endure.

None dares be impious to that degree,
To lay on you the Villains treachery.
Now my revenge I cannot execute,
Lest I should seem your virtue to dispute.

You doubt me not I know, but others may,
Let his death take their jealousy away.

She safely may the cruel offer make,
Which she well knows Antonius will not take.

He must not die, nor is it true revenge,
When the offenders suffer by exchange.
The youth it seems is not Seleucus care,
Or our resentment thus he would not dare.

Let him at least for an example die,
Princes invite, who pardon treachery.

'Twere cruelty to kill the Innocent
For Crimes they neither knew, nor could prevent:
I beg his life my Queen --

You may command
Or Life, or Death, at Cleopatra's hand.
We who but now might half the World command,
Are overthrown at Sea, besieged at Land:
Each hour the news of some fresh Treason brings,
From Faithless States or from revolted Kings.

Let those Crowned Slaves from out our Party go:
A Treach'rous Friend, will be a Timorous Foe.

The Plains about are covered with our Foes,
Hiding the Earth, as when our Nile o're-flows.
Yet sate I in Antonius Courage rest,
As if that Heart he gave me filled my Breast.

When Brutus this Octavius over-threw,
In a pitched Field I Cassius did subdue.
And turned the Fortune of that fatal day,
Which thus ungrateful Rome and He repay;
But here remaining I those Legions loose,
Which all commands but from my Mouth refuse.

They ever used Canidius to obey;
May he not go, and my Antonius stay?
For you my Peoples love and more I lost,
Must I not keep what has so dearly cost?

Ah Madam, you should take the weakest part,
And help a Lover to defend his Heart.
Tho swooning Men with ease resign their Breath,
Their careful Friends still pull 'm back from Death.
You should my Lethargy of Honour chide,
And drive me tho unwilling, from your side.
Die at your Feet the meanest Lover might,
But in your quarrel the whole World shall fight.

If I am Captive to the Romans made;
Surprised in this weak place, or else betrayed;
Think not I'll live to be redeemed again,
And like a Slave of my proud Lords complain.
At the first Dawn of my ill Fate I'll die.

O name not Death we 'l meet in Triumph here:
I'll raise the Siege e're you have time to fear.

But then your Love, in absence, will it last?
Men think of joys to come, and slight the past.

My Heart shall like those Trees the East does show,
Where Blossoms and ripe Fruit hang on one Bough.
With new desires, soft hopes, at once be pressed;
And all those Riper Joys, Love gives the blessed.
Courage and Love shall sway each in their turn,
I'll fight to conquer, conquer to return.
Seeming Ambitious to the public view,
I'll make my private end and dearer, You.
This Storm once past; in Peace and Love we will Reign,
Like the Immortal Gods, the Giants slain.

Moments to absent Lovers tedious grow;
'Tis not how time, but how the mind does go.
And once Antonius would have thought so too.

Dearer than ever think not that I part,
Without the utmost Torment of my Heart.
Whilst you persuade, your danger chides my stay,
Make me not cast me and your Self away.
How well I loved, you did at Actium see,
When to be near you I left Victory.
And chose to be companion of your flight,
Rather than conquer in a distant Fight.
Press not that heart you know so well, too far,
Our Fortune will no second frailty bear.

The truest Misers choose to sit about,
And tell their wealth: but dare not trust it out.
I know as well as you, 'tis fit you go,
Yet what is best I cannot let you do.

For my attendance I some few will take;
All other Romans of your Guard I make.

If you must go, it quickly shall appear,
My love sought this delay, and not my fear.
When you attaque, we will sally from the Town,
And blood instead of Nile our Plain shall drown.
We will in the midst of Caesar's Army meet,
And like Bellona I my Mars will greet.

VVou'd Goddesses themselves to me endear,
In Cleopatra's shape they must appear.

My heart can danger though not absence bear,
To Love, 'tis VVax, but Adamant to Fear.

Mine has such Courage from your Firmness took,
That I can almost bear a parting look.

Take it; and each unto their charge make haste.

Our hardest victory I hope is past.

EMpire and Glory both farewell: Come shame,
And shed thy Venom on Antonius Name:
VVither the Laurels on his Brows and teach
The World to scorn its most inglorious VVretch.
Forsaken in the choicest hour of time,
My hopes and resolutions in their prime.
Honour, my Queen and I Dictator made,
And all his rough Commands could have obeyed.
Love for a while, we purpose to dethrone,
As Mariners in Storms their Sails take down.
Can Romans thus their General forsake?

They urged want of Provision and of Pay.

Both which had been redressed without delay:
The obliging Queen --

Whom you may thank for this --
Their general Discontent at her was loud:
But Soldiers are a rude uncivil Crowd.
Play'rs and Minstrels, Singers and Buffoons,
Are the great Instruments and Props of Thrones.
I my old Legions to your Aid have brought,
Firm to your Side, not tainted in a Thought --
They say Photinus in the Camp was seen,
And that he was employed there by the Queen.

At a revolt so strange I am surprised.

Pray Heaven it were not in the Town devised.
Your upright Nature stoops not to Descry
The low and subtle ways of Treachery.
Tho you may fail, She can't; Beauty will find,
Victorious and young Monarchs ever kind.

Your honest meaning does your life protect:
Presume no more her virtue to suspect.

May I not say Photinus is a Knave?

Tax not the man, unless good proof you have.

Those two you must destroy, and me disarm.
Ah, Sir, from Murderers defend your Life:
See with my blood, they have begun the Strife.
The Gods a Guard for Virtue still provide:
Courage with Treason seldom doth reside.
The are fled and you unhurt --

I am:
But say, Photinus, whence these Villains came.

Just as I left the Throng --
They set upon me Crying this is He,
That with Octavius lets us not agree,
Antonius Friend, and his own Countries Foe;
And strait that word was followed with this blow.
Some of the popular faction set 'm on,
Who think to govern all if I were gone.

'Tis most unlucky these were Killed out right,
Of their whole Plot we else might gain some light.

Photinus is a Villain....

See their spite....
Even at their Death, which I will thus requite --
Why would you save from my just rage so impudent a Slave?

Photinus set us on:

Unheard of villainy....
My self to Kill, they did conspire with Me!
But great Antonius is himself too just
Me on a Murd'rers malice to distrust.

Slight not too much the words of dying men,
They who hate truth before will speak it then.

My constant zeal and firmness to your side,
So oft in Council and in Action tried,
This accusation cannot but deride.
What is't a Murth'rer missing of his blow,
In his last rage would not both say and do?

Who dares die,
And the just Gods provoke with such a lie?

He that dares basely Kill, what dares he not,
No Crime a Murderer could deeper blot.

Yet to that crime ingratitude may add.

You speak as of my guilt you would be glad.

My friends, let this untimely discord fall.

Although much wronged, at your Command it shall.

I wish, Sir, to my Soldiers you would speak,
And let 'm know how well their loves you take.

I go: their Faith shall so rewarded be --
The rest shall soon repent their treachery.

Had they fought well their danger had been small,
Could they not fear at first or not at all?
Curse on all middle ways: Courage enough
When once engaged, can only bring us off.
But the next blow by fate shall be my own,
And I'll strike home for Iras and a Throne.
My person is ungrateful, I well know
It was contrived for use and not for show.
Besides I 'm old, that too when I am great,
She may have the Ambition to forget.
This gentle Maid all other ways have tried,
Hopeless of Love, I'll now attempt her pride.
But see she comes, and charming as new light,
Appeared to the first Mans amazed sight.
You hear how Drums and Trumpets fill the Air,
And for a Scene of Blood our Minds prepare.

'Tis Love, vile Love whence this Disorder springs.

The tender Parent of the frightful'st Things.
Yet blame not Love, when to it's object fixed;
It only harms when with Ambition mixed.
When raging Winds raise Tempests on the Main,
The gentle Brooks creep mildly through the Plain.
'Tis only to the Great these Storms are known,
Photinus passion fears your scorn alone.

What is this Love, we never can exclude?
But whatsoever we talk of, 'twill intrude.

Of Storms the Seaman tells, of ploughs the Hind;
Lovers in such discourses ease their mind.
'Tis the glad business of young Hearts, the pain,
The old, for their presumption must sustain.

Is't a disease beauties infection spreads?
Pray does it seize you in your hearts or heads?

Sweet Innocence! it enters at the eyes,
And to the heart like subtle lightning flies.
When Lovers meet it is all ecstasy,
And when they part again they more than die.

How chance that I have escaped this mighty ill?
I gaze and stare at every thing my fill.
The Wise, the Handsome, and the Brave, I love,
Yet feel no pain at all when they remove.

Passions lye yet within your tender breast,
Harmless and weak as Eagles in the Nest:
But Love hereafter on your heart will prey.

If ever any one escaped, I may.

'Twere most unfit you should, Nature does still
Provide some sovereign thing for every ill.
For Beauties wounds their kindness is the cure:
Scorpions who could without their oil endure?

If I have hurt you 'twas against my will.

Your Charms not like a Foe, but weapon, kill.

Their farther ill effects I will prevent,
And of what's past, though innocent, repent:
I'll go where you shall never see me more.

That must not be, from you whom I adore.
Absence is raging pain, presence a joy;
Which will at least voluptuously destroy.

Would you not have me go nor stay! what then?
This Love I see makes errant Fools of men.

Stay gentle Iras; learn to love of me,
How easy were it, could I charm like thee.

Does no man else adore me as you do?

None ever did; I'll place you on a Throne,
A Sceptre may for pers'nal wants atone.
Beauty and Youth, your Sexes glories are,
In men they soon decay, or not appear.

I did not know you were a Prince disguised:
At your new Majesty I'm much surprised.

I am no King.

How then shall I be Queen?
O I could strut with Cleopatra's Mean.

The Roman Empire can a Crown bestow.

Such gifts may be Antonius overthrow.

So let 'em be.

But what, he gives you, Rome
Will take away, if Caesar overcome.

My hopes, sweet Innocence, in Caesar lye,
And e're I reign Antonius must dye.

You have but the Reversion of a Crown,
And e're he dies how old you will be grown.

Your youth a while may for such glories wait,
But you may trust my Love to urge his Fate.

Must I then marry you,
or be no Queen?

I'm not so withered, nor are you so green:
Nay Charmion will accept what you refuse,
And when she reigns your peevishness accuse --
It works --

No no! my self I'll have you first --
To see her Queen I should with envy burst.

Will she then promise to love me alone,
When I have placed my Iras on a Throne?

I will do any thing, to be a Queen;
I could love one whom I had never seen.

Madam, the Queen much wonders at your stay.

She's gone, she's gone, and I me-thinks have more
A thousand times to utter than before,
So inexhaustible's a Lovers store.
To her Ambition I her Love must own;
But Fate her youth, my age will have it so.
How false a Joy in that fair Sex he takes,
Whom once the hope of equal love forsakes.

Mecoenas see strict discipline they keep
Through the whole Camp, that neither wine nor sleep
Betray us to surprise: tho peace seem near,
Wise Pilots at the Port a tempest fear.

Great Sir, your Soldiers find they have to do
Not with a rude unarmed and barb'rous Crew,
But Romans like themselves, in Conquest bred,
And next your self, by the best Captain led.
Their jealousy of Fame and Love for you,
Will make 'em any thing forbear or do.

Antonius Legions newly are arrived,
And through the Camp are with loud joy received.
Tired with his impotent and distant sway,
They now, Great Sir, will you alone obey.

Then vanish all his hopes, and all my fears,
In my whole sky of Fate, no Cloud appears:
That one black corner did a tempest threat.

You much are to Photinus care in debt:
Him in the Camp, when I arrived I found.

Ye Gods! why am I to a Villain bound?
Tell my new friends, I their arrears will pay;
A Roman Emperor they still obey.

Antonius now will any Laws receive,
What from weak Foes we do not take, we give.
Demand the Roman Legions yet behind,
And that his power to Asia be confined.

The man was once my Friend, my Brother still:
What are these thoughts that would ambition chill?

Forget that name he has deserved so ill.
The spoil of Egypt will the War defray;
For a mere peace Rome will repine to pay.
Him brother, let Egyptian Princes call,
He has no Interest in your blood at all.
Since the best Tie he slights, and in her place
Does a less fair Egyptian Queen embrace.

Pernicious Counceller that does foment
A War, all but the Parthians would prevent.
My Wrongs shall never thy Ambition hide,
I'll tear the Masque of pity from thy pride.
I thought thee once deserving thy great place,
Of Tuscan Kings sprung from the glorious race.
But thou art false, cruel, and bloody now,
That open hatred thou durst never show.
To my dear Lord, does still in malice lurk,
And on this dire Occasion seeks to work.

Sister, your Husband I would but reclaim,
And make him worthy of your virtuous flame.
His present life does his past glory stain,
He makes a Queen the Partner of his reign.
The Roman Empire he does much deface,
And with the Spoil adorns her foreign race.
Arabia where the Nabatheans live.
And part of Syria he did lately give.
To their new issue one he stiles the Moon:
To name the other, he profanes the Sun.

If he has given much, he conquered more:
His valour, for his bounty, found the store;
And pardon somewhat on a Sisters score.

The names of Emperor and Queen they scorn,
And like immortal Gods themselves adorn.
He does for Bacchus, she for Isis pass,
And in their shapes, the wondering Crowd amaze.

To Gods of their own honour leave the Care,
Since they both Jealous and Almighty are.
I fear so high you'll my concernments press;
You'll break on that you never can redress.

I understand no Riddles, but he shall
Do my Octavia sudden right or fall.
The rest I could with small excuse forgive:
But under this affront I cannot live.

You say his other faults you could forgive.

Empire's our real quarrel, but I must
Her virtuous Mind with no such secret trust.
I could --

Then that pretence I'll thus remove and die:
Still more inhumane must I then remain,
The cover of your Pride and Lust to reign.
Tho I were dead you might your ends pursue,
But let me vanish from the painful view.

Not for the World such virtue should not die,
But be entire translated to the Sky.

I Sister your late rashness can forgive,
So you henceforth will promise me to live.
Mecoenas see removed all means of Death,
Let Nature and not rage conclude her breath.

Peace to the World and my unhappy Lord,
My Brother but for you would soon afford.

Condemn not actions till you know their end,
But mine perhaps will then but more offend.

I know you'll say 'tis brave to rule alone,
That my great Brother would become that Throne.
And raising him you in proportion rise,
But still remember there are Deities
Above you both, just, powerful, and wise.

Ambition never overturned my mind,
I am already more then I designed.

Why do you then the general peace oppose;
'Tis Avarice or Ambition makes Men foes.

I Madam would some marks of courage show,
And what I durst for my great Master do.

Romans of courage need no other proof,
Since to be born a Roman is enough.

'Tis truth, but yet --

Some unjust pique you bear,
My dearest Lord, you cannot well declare,
But good Mecoena's; for such once you were;
To obstruct this Treaty for my sake forbear.

'Tis for your sake alone, it must not be.

If it be good for Rome, regard not Me.

Y' are Sister to my Emperor and Friend,
My utmost care, must your concerns attend:
I do not as you think confusion seek,
Nor keep I to your Lord a secret pique:
But if this Treaty be confirmed to day,
I must at Rome, and you in Asia stay.

It is the part of the whole World I'd choose,
And gaining Him, what is't I care to loose.

Ah Madam, seem less virtuous or less fair,
Who can behold you and not vengeance swear.
Such suffering goodness will mankind engage,
And on Antonius pull their public rage.

This to the Sister of your Emperor;

This to the only Beauty I adore:
Beyond my patience you have racked my Breast,
And my deep guilt at last must be confessed.
I love you, Madam --

My next request you'll then not disallow,

Speak it, and I a blind Obedience vow.

Let me then die for I have lived too long,
And heard of Love in my Antonius wrong.

Not in his wrong! I'll the reversion wait,
And live like Heirs in hope of an Estate.

Your word is past recall. My Death I claim.

From me who both your Guard and Lover am.

I not the stroke, but means of Death require:
By my own hand I noblest shall expire.
Will you then promise to promote the peace.

You offer poison, to my known Disease:
But from those hands I nothing can refuse.
I'll ruin all my hopes, so you will live:

Yes, I will live, but not an hour survive.
My dear Antonius him you must preserve,
If ought you from Octavia would deserve --

Whom, whilst he lives I never can enjoy,
And if he dies she will her self destroy.
I am undone; obey or disobey!
I needs must perish, but may chose my way.

THe Asians now with double Taxes pressed,
His slothful Days and drunken Nights detest;
Buffoons and Players chiefly have his ear:
He dares not the free tongues of Romans hear.
To marry Whores to Fencers is his sport,
And with their Issue throng his loathed Court.
"Now lewd Cytheris has a greater Train,
Than his own Mother or his Wife maintain.
From such a Foe as this what can we fear!
In whom all symptoms of lost power appear.

The flattering Greeks his easy nature praise;
But on the rest he heavy burdens lays.
In drunken Bounty, for a riotous treat,
He gave his Favourite Cook a spacious Street:
Men say no hour dares move without its Feast,
Which is for their fantastic palates dressed.
Now must the rising Sun their Riot view,
Which the next day prevents the Evening dew.
In every draught they some rich Gem consume,
And spend a private Fortune in one Room.

Empire, of pains and virtue, the slow fruit,
How ill dost thou with vice and riot suit?
Cinna was bloody, Marius unjust,
Tarquin and Appius raging in their Lust:
Lucullus was luxurious, loud his ease,
Thus on each man his single vice did seize!
But all these faults are in Antonius met.

His Court with Asian Flatt'rers is filled,
And Lying Greeks the only Servants held.
These serve the turns of riotous delight,
Whilst Romans only are thought fit to fight.

Example is a living Law, whose sway,
Men more than all the written Laws obey.
Princes of all men therefore should take care,
How in their manners they the Crowd ensnare.
But above all his dotage on the Queen
Employs my wonder: was it ever seen
A Woman ruled an Emperor till now?
What Horse the Mare, what Bull obeys the Cow?
Nature that Monster Love does disavow:
In all her kinds only fantastic Man
Finds ways of folly which no other can.

He that will vilify the power of Love,
In the first place let him our Gods reprove,
Who oft their heavenly Mansions have forsook,
And the mean shapes of Birds and Beasts have took,
To pursue Mortals in an amorous way,
And form their glorious Image in our clay.

The God that loved, what Nymph yet ever ruled?
He was again a God, his Lust once cooled:
Had women's will our good or ill procured,
The World had never half so long endured.
The high embrace filled all their spacious thought,
And proofs of kindness were no farther sought.

Th'unable sure, the ugly, or the old,
First in affairs of Love, made use of gold.
Then Princes to out-bid 'em threw in power,
Now heart for heart's the Traffic of the Poor.

Women should ^ like idle Passengers,
While the tall Ship ^ steers.
Wisdom, high Courage^
If over the Wise and brave ^
And this Antonius conduct ha^.

'Tis time the insured World we should redeem
From a mans sway so lost in her esteem.

What is success in Arms if Conquering Rome
By Troops of Asian Vices be overcome.

To set all right I must be absolute;
My least commands None daring to dispute:
Rome's desperate state can never find redress,
But from a power as able to oppress;
Whilst for the public good my power I use,
Seeing my end Men will the means excuse.
The Omnipotence of Gods, who thinks too great,
Since men below they with compassion treat.

But envy does all mortal power attend:
Men fear the Means, and still suspect the end.
He that can hurt, who answers but he will:
Men pass in fear by sleeping Lyons still.
Empire is safest moderately great,
And death unseen does on Ambition wait.

He that can do no ill, can do no good,
And if in one, in both may be withstood.
The actions of a Tyrant I abhor,
But as things stand I cannot want the power.

Our Laws the art of ruling best contain;

Fools find it there, wise Princes in their Brain.

Power long possessed few Princes care to use,
But give it up for others to abuse:
From Phoebus self the World no hazard run,
But could not bear one day his Vent'rous Son:
He through new ways the flaming Chariot drove,
And all was fear below, and fire above.

I to no Phaeton will the reins commit,
Nor in inglorious ease a moment sit:
I'll see the Common-wealth no mischief take,
And do and suffer all things for her sake.

Rome on your virtue leans her aged head,
As old Anchises on Aeneas did,
And thinks she may with ^ you.
Factions at Home, ^.
You, whom the ^oes hold,
Bolder than Youth, and ^ Old.

The name of Co^-wealth is popular,
And every Caesar may his Brutus fear.

Romans that barb'rous Murder so revenged,
It shows the thoughts of a Republic changed.

Men die of Agues, too much heat or cold,
And others grow ridiculous old.
The thoughts of humane chance should make us bold.
I'll seize the Empire, which I'll die or hold.

Born under Kings our Father freedom sought,
And with their blood the Godlike treasure bought,
We their vile issue in our chains delight,
And born to freedom for our Tyrants fight.

For what Sir, must we then prepare?
Thyreus! does he bring us Peace or War?

He offers Peace, but upon terms so high,
At the great rate I'd not an Empire buy:
My former gifts I meanly must resume,
And give accounts of all my act to Rome.
My faithful friends from their Commands remove,
And place such as the Senate shall approve.

True friends displaced will pardon your distress,
And tho your power --

A Pageant power and Empire but in show --
True Empire only those great Souls enjoy,
Who can in what, and whom they please employ,
And without leave from Rome a Crown bestow,
Exalt a Friend, and trample on a Foe:
This by your Love and Arms I once attchiev'd,
Nor will be of it but by Arms deprived.

Ambition is the Dropsey of the Soul,
Whose thirst we must not yield to but control.

Some Drudge of State may a less power esteem,
And ruling many, let a few rule him;
Mean Slave to them, high Tyrant to the rest,
With fear and pride at once defile his breast:
By Hercules I won't, if any here
Think that a Course too desperate I steer,
Let him retire, and his own fears obey.

The Gods well know my fears are all for you,
And your most daring thoughts shall find me true:
It is not Caesar, nor our blow at Sea,
That to these terms incline me to agree;
But 'tis the love of Rome which you have lost,
And that your Riots here and Loves have cost.

Caesar and I you know were never friends,
And only hung together for our ends:
Yet in his Cause this Tongue an Army raised,
And made Rome hate that deed she late had praised.
Brutus and Cassius felt the deadly sting;
And all to make Octavius more than King.
So blindly did I act, so little see,
Into the dark Decrees of Destiny.
The Common-wealth for him I overthrew,
Now in effect he claims my Empire too.

The Shell he leaves, the Kernel takes away,
You, Sir, must him, as others, you obey.

He would a sway pretend over my Love,
And teach my free affections where to move.
To my embrace his Sister I must take,
And my best Queen ingratefully forsake.

That Sister is your Wife.

So let her be
From past engagements, ^sent Love, set free.
Hymen is but the Vulgars Deity...

O my Antonius! how I fear this Peace!
And must I to Octavia yield my place?
I love you so, that very sound would kill,
And leave you free the promise to fulfil.

Were I to gain the Empire of mankind,
And for that power, Eternity assigned:
I could not to the hateful change submit,
Nor my best Queen so barbarously quit.

But your Octavius loving, young, and fair,
And such a Rival! how can I but fear?

Her Hymen never did a Moment please,
The hard Condition of a needful Peace:
From every part I saw the growing storm,
A sudden shelter in her arms I took,
Which when 'twas over I again forsook.

And can you for My sake a War sustain?
Her Brothers friendship and Her Love disdain?

All hearts a like, all faces do not move,
There is a secret Sympathy in Love:
The powerful Loadstone, cannot move a Straw,
No more than Jet, the trembling Needle draw:
Your Beauty only on my Heart can act:
All other ways, it is in vain attaqu'd.

Sure of this War I am the mere pretence,
How can our Love, to Rome give such offence?
She should revenge the Ghost of Crassus slain,
And haughty Babel level with the Plain,
But let in Egypt, Love and pleasure reign.

Rome like her Eagles, did on Rapine thrive,
I am the first that taught her how to Give.

What y' have presented me or placed on Mine,
I to that griping Senate here resign.
I never did the gifts but Giver prize:
Some new pretence of War let 'm devise:
All but your self I for your sake can quit:
For you I did my Crown and Fame forget;
And can you now weigh^ly what it is fit

Turn my best (...), from her charming Tongue,
'Tis hard to think such Beauty in the wrong:
Yet if you don't, we are for ever lost.

I have resolved: to Caesar I will send:
If he his Grace will to the Queen extend,
And let the Crown upon her Sons descend.
I'll kill my self, and rid him of his Foe,
If not, the last extremes I'll undergo.

What Roman will the hateful Message bear?

Let us entreat, we may at Athens live,
And taste what joys a private Life can give:
Leaving our greatness and our pomp behind,
We shall in Love sincerer pleasures find:
But whether am I wrapped? fond thoughts be gone,
And melt some tender Virgin of low race,
You are below a heart that wears a Crown,
Where Life, Love, all must to renown give place.

Soldiers, when old we from the Wars discharge,
But Fate her Drudges never sets at large:
The higher place they fill, the greater Slaves,
Princes have no retirement but their Graves,
My equal power this Caesar cannot bear,
His Soldiers want my Provinces to share:
Unactive Lepidus he laid aside,
And will no longer now the World divide;
Whose doubtful Title must by Arms be tried.
But see Thyreus here....
He has some Message for your private Ear,
Which I without a jealous pang can bear.

She is a woman, Sir, and when y' are gone,
By Caesars Offers may be wrought upon.

Jealous! yet truly honest. 'Tis strange how
In thy plain mind such wild suspition's grow,
I will return before their Conf'rence end,
But on her Love entirely I depend.

Madam! my Master's gracious as he's great,
See's how y' are forced to allow this short Retreat,
To his proud Foe, and does himself excuse,
That Aid perhaps you could not well (...):
The Ruins of a ^ Emperor,
In her own Kingdom may a Queen over power.

I first was summoned in Romes haughty Name,
E're I into Antonius presence came.
Brutus and his I was accused to Aid,
But soon acquitted and her Ally made;
Since in Antonius I have Rome obeyed.

If an Ally of Rome you should disclaim,
The Man, whom she does Foe and Traitor name.

Those very Titles She Great Iulius gave,
And yet anon, obeys him like a Slave.
On the Success of War, her Voice depends,
The distant Foes she stiles the present Friends.
Let others from Antonius fortune fly,
I will support or in their ruin lye.

His Soldiers have another sense declared,
And are to storm this stubborn Town prepared.

Base Mercenary Souls that fight for Pay,
To morrow Kill, whom they defend to day:
But Princes Minds on Springs of Honour move,
And what can they not do, wound up by Love?

If not your Self, your harmless Subjects save,
They neither love so well, nor are so brave.

Despair shall make those heartless Villains bold,
While by worse fears, the fear of Death's controlled.
I'll Rome provoke beyond all hope of grace,
Then in their Arms, they must their safety place.

They'll sooner take those Arms up and Rebel...

Antonius Soldiers will such Tumults quel.
The People ever discontented are;
Their Crowds were made to be the food of War:

Caesar is pleased --
You should keep all the Realms of which you're seized;
Some little to deserve this you must do.

Desert proposed me from a mortal Foe?

Give us but entrance in the dead of night,
We all will spare who are not killed in Fight;
Like Caesar, Cleopatra shall command,
Antonius falls into a Brothers hand.

Who will revenge the scorn his Sister finds;
Are these your deep, your generous Designs?

You but precipitate the event of War,
And by that act a Sea of Blood might spare.
I have a step beyond my Orders made,
Which were but to propose not to persuade.
But who can see such Beauty in distress,
And not the utmost of his thoughts express.

In Fates whole scope I fear but one event,
And that your self with honour may prevent.

What is it, Madam? will you hear me swear,
You trust your secret to a Lovers ear,
One that has long, and privately been so.

Sir to make Peace, you were from Caesar sent,
But make not Love, tho but in Complement.
If Caesar take this Town by Fates decree,
Swear to inform, what he will do with me --

'Tis not resolved, soon as I know I will...

Then sound him daily with your utmost skill.

But is this all? I was in hope to serve,
In some design that might your Love deserve.
This for your meanest Slave I had performed.

'Tis all of which I care to be informed --

My Offers, Madam....

They are such as show,
Romans but ill of the hearts of Monarchs know.
But on your promise may a Queen rely?

You may: but doubt not Caesars Clemency;
Your Crown and Person, tho provoked he 'l spare,
Conquest and Ruin will respect the Fair,
What may n't such Beauty hope, nor is it new,
That he who rules the World should bow to you.

By Heaven, at Complements; I'll pause a while,
And see this subtle Scene of Woman's guile.

My Fates worse Face you will not then disguise,
I can behold it with undaunted Eyes.

And may it prove as charming as your own;

I fear you will forget me, when y' are gone.

I swear upon my Knees and by that Hand:
Whose every touch, my Soul leaps up to meet:
Let me once more the inflaming Bliss repeat.
Like the first drop which Men in Feavours taste,
It to a deeper draught but makes me hast.
Thus starving Men, think every thing a Feast,
Whilst some with tasteless plenty, lie oppressed:
O that I were Antonius but one day! --

Slave from that posture thou shalt never rise,
But be my Wraths immediate sacrifice.

Hold, Sir, your Sword you shall not rashly stain;
What hopes of Peace Ambassadors once slain?

Ambassador of Love the Villain came;
And amongst affairs of State he vents his Flame,
He Kissed her Hand, some charming Message sure,
At least of half my Empire, She's secure.
Which she perhaps must with my Life repay,
These are the Bargains made when I am away:
'Tis more than Madness to believe that you,
False to my Love, are to my Empire true,

I false to you!

By Hercules you are: and had I stayed,
None knows the faithless answer you had made.

What is it that so strange Antonius finds?
He kissed my Hand in taking of his leave,
'Tis a respect that Queens from all receive.

The eager Kiss, no Lover can mistake,
It ecstasy and sudden rapture spake,
Those of respect are of a colder make:
Ye Gods! he swore by it perhaps endless Love,
Or that he would your Mediator prove.

Ask him! His offers I have all refused,
And yet of falsehood live to be accused
By you, for whom I suffer, is this just?
One minute, brings long faith into Distrust.

Minutes may ruin what in Ages rose,
Like Thunder, Love in instants overthrows.
He has disturbed me. And he shall be whipped,
Canidius see he instantly be stripped.

If thus you trample on all Roman Laws,
What Roman is there that will own your Cause?
The Law of Nations too does this withstand,
To any thing that's brave I'll lend my hand,
But stir to no such infamous command:

Seize the bold Traitor.

Will you have him flayed.
Say but the word, this minute he is dead.

There's a true Servant to his Masters will,
Whom I condemn, he questions not to kill,

With this affront if thou dare glut thy hate,
No power on earth can save thy falling state:
Caesar will take revenge --

Away, away....
And my command see strictly you obey.

I do not know that I a smile misplaced.
Frowned where you frowned, and where you liked I graced.
Not Wealth to Misers, Honour to the Brave,
Health to the Sick, or Freedom to the Slave
Could be more welcome than you Love to Me,
Then think how felt, the cruel change must be:

What Change?

How can you ask; while this distrust appears?
Distrust, the first decay of Love in years.
What we desire we easily believe,
Love on the smoother side does still deceive.

Your Lover shall be whipped, and as you bear
That, I shall think you criminal or clear.

Not to the Man, but to his Character,
Such an affront I wish you would forbear.
It is a deed that might amaze the Sun,
And by the rudest People yet undone:
In all the Travels of his fruitful light,
He has not met so barbarous a sight;
Ambassadors are sacred next the Gods,
Above your Axes placed as well as Rods.

Observe how, least I change his punishment,
All ways of my revenge she would prevent,
He may not die....

Nor shall not, unless your hate,
All human Laws resolve to violate.
Then kill me first.

The Cities up, the Soldiers Mutiny,
And all -- long live the good Thyreus cry.

My Romans take and charge 'm instantly.

What they demand, perhaps you'll not refuse.

How 'er their Insolence I'll not excuse.

Good Sir, abroad you know we want no foes,
This inward strife methinks we might compose:
Octavius work our selves, let us not do.

My People Sir, I hope you'll not destroy,
Whose lives I for your service, would employ.
Photinus say their Queen bids 'm begone,
And trust our Love, what's fitting shall be done.

Your Romans, Sir, join with the unruly crowed,
And to defend the Ambassador, have vowed:
They say a Roman never shall be whipped,
While Sword or Spear a Roman arm can lift.

They have by this the Castle Walls broke down,

And set Thyreus safe without the Town.

Draw up my Guards, if I have yet a Friend;
This Tumult shall in death of Thousands end.
What must Octavius conclude of me?
If whom I once imprison, they set free.

They have done right by chance, excuse 'em fort;
Tempests sometimes drives Ships into the Port.

The Rabble is a thing below my hate,
But my own Romans I will decimate.

For what is done, I singly am to blame:
The rest but on my call and credit came.

What moved thee too't: Old Ruffian, thou shalt dye;
In thee I'll punish the whole Mutiny.

I saw my General about to blast,
By one rash act, his life and Glories past.
The unconstant Rabble to my side I gained,
And spite of him, his Honour have maintained.

What art thou?

A Roman.

No more?

In Brutus Camp some small Command I bore:
Subdued by Arms, since by your kindness won,
I am resolved your utmost fate to run.
If my late service grieve you, take my head;
The common path of Love I never tread.
Brutus, to save my self, like him I shaped;
So fell I in your hands, and he escaped.

Lucilius?

The same my Interest command,
Antonius shall both rule my heart and hand.

Discharge the Rabble you have used in this.

They humbly sue you'll pardon what's amiss.
They are returned, and now with shouts of joy;
They beg you would their Swords and Lives employ.

Most willingly, just Heaven, what am I,
Whom the rude People, teach Humanity?

MY Offers scorned! Ambassadors abused!
Yet he of Pride unjustly is accused.

Thyreus was ill chose, he long has been
A secret Servant to the Egyptian Queen.
What if I went with terms more moderate;
I, who am less Obnoxius to his hate.

This Offer now the danger grows so near,
In a man less known, should take for fear.

His Insolence no longer I defend.

See here the Challenge he thinks fit to send.

In single Combat let our Fencers fight:
With Armies, Emperors dispute their right.

Like him, I Roman blood would gladly spare,
And to a Combat would contract the War.
My youth, and unfoil'd strength, may Conquest claim
Over this Shadow of a mighty Name:
Now pressed with Age, and with Debauches worn,
The unequal Combat I not fear, but scorn.

He like an aged Oak in Autumn shows,
From whose dry Arms some Leaves each minute blows;
One King or Ally, still forsake his side,
His Empire ebbs like a declining Tide.
Have patience, Sir, he of himself muk fall,
Who in despair does for the Combat call.

To a brave Death I'll open him the way;
See an Assault be made without delay.
I at my Armies head shall soon appear,
And if he dares, he may engage me there.

O Brother! if that name have yet a Power,
And be not lost in that of Emperor:
Pity my sad estate, since I alone
On both sides mourning, can rejoice on none.
The World divided in their wishes stand;
My self alone stabbed through on every hand.
A Brother here! There must a Husband fall;
On the just Gods I know not how to call!
No chance of War can with my mind comply;
But I must weep at eithers Victory.

If I o'rcome, your Husband I will spare.

He will not spare himself, I more than fear,
Should he prevail, the Egyptian Queen will sway;
Whom you, and I, and he, must all obey.
His amorous heart must execute her will,
And whom she frowns on, in Obedience kill.
You to Ambition must a Victim bleed,
And from my hated Title to his bed,
Must Cleopatra in my Death be freed;
And haughty Rome acknowledge a vain Queen,
Or be of Civil Arms the endless Scene.

He doth all terms of Reconcilement slight:
There nothing now remains but that we fight.
He's now a mere soft Purple Asian Prince;
And Rome his Empire has disowned long since.

Ungrateful Rome! but most ungrateful you!
Can you forget whom Cassius overthrew?
Who first to Rome a Parthian triumph showed,
And the long Pride of that great Empire bowed?
Who the first Caesar made, revenged his death,
And fixed that Empire, which he did bequeath,
On you almost unknown: Where they receive,
Base Natures hate; and Love, but where they give.

Go serve the Egyptian, learn to dress her head;
Your slighted Love, and your neglected Bed
Can you forget; and fulsomely pursue
The Man with kindness, who despises you?
I should my self scorn fawning Beauty too:
'Tis as absurd, as if the Gods should sue.

Wives (like good Subjects, who to Tyrants bow)
To Husbands though unjust, long patience owe:
They were for Freedom made, Obedience We,
Courage their virtue, ours is Chastity.
Reason it self in us must not be bold,
Nor decent Custom be by Wit controlled.
On our own heads we desperately stray,
And are still happiest, the vulgar way.

Who ever did such Moral Nonsense hear?
My Sister sure is turned Philosopher.
But we Antonius Pride will soon pull down;
This hour shall give me his whole lifes renown.
I the long trade of Fame disdain to drive;
But to the Top will at one step arrive.

Since then my prayers and tears can nothing gain,
In the Foes Camp no longer I'll remain.
The Arms I hate, my presence shall not grace;
Antonius Cause I'll openly embrace.
To Rome I'll go, and all thy acts disown;
Make thy Ambition, and thy Falsehood known
To every Roman of the Sword and Gown,
Till the art more hated far than Cateline,
Then Scilla, Marius, or the Tarquins Line.
Some will for Freedom, some Antonius fight,
And against Thee both parties I'll unite;
Amongst thy Foes I like a Spark will fall,
And to a sudden Flame convert 'em all.

You would not sure my Love so ill repay.

Your Love! your Pride and endless Thirst of sway.
To gain my friends, my Quarrel you pretend,
But universal Empire is your end.
Rome's once great Senate now is but a name;
While some with fear, and some with Bribes you tame.
Men learn at Court what they must there repeat,
And for Concurrence, not for Council meet.
At least all such as think of being great,
They blindly labour at their own ill fate,
And dig up by the roots the tottering State.

Against Antonius Riots they declare,
And I at their Command but wage this War.

Dull Long-gown Statesmen you may feel that Sword
Which thus you whet against my injured Lord.
When Caesar wills a Law, for all your rules,
It will be better taught in Camps, than Schools.

Your fears distract you, or you needs must see
Your hopes of happiness depend on me.
'Tis my success must make Antonius find
The dire effect of an unbridled mind.

Who ever did an Emperor reform?
Scarce Heaven it self can that great Task perform.

Heaven chooses me the fittest instrument,
And on that glorious Task I'm wholly bent.

Is't thus Mecoenas, you promote the Peace?
But you ne'er meant, and promise but to please.

All that I durst, I have already said:
I urged him till he thought I was afraid.
But where such Beauty, and such Goodness fail;
What other Intercession can prevail;

Mecoenas, I no Complements expect
From one, who does my first Commands neglect.

Men that like me have given their Passions vent,
Are never after held indifferent.
Hatred, or Love, pursues the bold attempt;
It meets with a return, or with contempt.
I fear the latter is Mecoenas lot.

I charge you, never entertain me more
With that false Love which hath so little power.
Your breach of Word, I easily forgive,
I'm free, and am not now obliged to live:
Nor will I long, the first attacq survive.

A sound like that, what Lover can endure?
I'll move once more, should I his hate procure.
Ah Sir, your weeping Beauteous Sister view;
Then if you can, her Husbands life pursue:
Such softness might an angry God disarm,
And from his hand, the brandished Thunder charm.

What means Mecoenas softened in her tears?
Another Man he to my eyes appears.
Where is that Soul bids me be Absolute,
And the dissenting World with Swords confute.
Move forwards still, and spread my Conquering Arms,
As far as Cynthia lights, or Phoebus warms.

I can no more, you your own Cause must plead;
I would, but can't against my self persuade;
Tho unsuccessful my endeavours were,
It was some Merit to obey so far.

The Enemy preventing our attacq,
Does a fierce Sally on our Forces make.
Our foremost Troops the warm engagement shun,
And to Canidius his Old Soldiers run.

Then be your Tent your Prison for a while.
Now let us seize the Lyon in our Toil. --

Turn back Thyreus; 'tis Antonius calls;
The Queen now sees thee flying from our Walls.
Think on that shame, and it must warm thy heart,
And do not from a single Rival start.

A Thought like that, were all Mankind my Foes,
Would send me headlong amongst all their Blows.

He dies of Mine that dares to interpose.

Of Mine he is my basest Foe that does.
Love, thou at last art just, and having made
My Life a Burden, help me to unlade:
If he overcome, Let Cleopatra know,
She must to Rome in Caesars triumph go.
So now my promise to the Queen is paid,
The first and last Command I ever had.

Then all my Fears were false.

False as my hopes,
Or the short vigour which my Being props.
The Queen was Cruel and thy Sword was Kind.

Thou did attempt her Villain:

Yes, I did,
And with my dying Breath I boast the Deed.

What words fit to appease her shall I find?
Jealousy for ever from my Soul remove,
Thou magnifying Glass to erring Love;
Thou Viper like, dost thy young Teeth employ,
And would that Love, which gave the Birth, destroy.

Charge you Canidius with your Troops, whilst I
Against Antonius self my Fortune try.
Here is the utmost bound of thy success,
The Ocean may as soon his limits pass,
As thou this spot of Earth whereon we stand.

You speak as you had Thunder in your hand,
The Gods! Heaven! Hell and Fate at your command;
Which if thou had I'd not one step retire:
But one by one, their Prodigies would tire.

You must not stay your fortune to pursue,
Agrippa's got between the Town and you;
Which Stratagem when Cleopatra found,
She Sallied out, and is encompassed round.
Photinus stays behind to awe the Town,
And keeps those of the pop'lar Faction down.

My Queen engaged! To her relief lets fly,
Death has more Charms near her, than Victory.
Me in her Cause, the Legions that withstand,
Must fall like Corn, before the Reapers Hand.

Must we again a Victory forgo;
This Queen was born to be our Overthrow.

What is't you mutter? Follow me or die.

My Life you'd sooner want behalf than I:
Take it, for 'tis to me an hourly pain,
Follies of Friends are nothing to the slain.
But whilst I live, methinks you should pursue,
Retiring Foes and Victory in view.

I cannot stoop to argue, but Obey;
And till my Queen be safe, let Conquest stay.

By Hercules she's taken! So have I seen the Dove,
Under the Pounce of eager Falcons move:
O! that I were my self the Dart I throw,
For now, all other Motion seems too slow.
Augures and Entrails, Boys and Quails you lie!
And I henceforth your Omens will defy.
Called by his Name, may such still prosperous be,
While thus the Gods give Victory to Me.

They are engaged by this: now is the Time,
And all things seem propitious to my Crime.
Let Fools the Fame of Loyalty divide;
Wise men and Gods are on the strongest side.
The Town is wholly left to my Command,
To make 'em rise I need but slack my hand:
They are prone to Mutiny. Their Queen they hate,
And show all signs of a distempered State.
But hark already they are up and roar,
Like an high Sea that scorns its wonted Shore.
But see fair Iras whose bright form in Tears,
Like Sun-shine mixed with sudden Rain appears.

Photinus! Oh the Queen! The Queen is gone,
And we that stay behind are all undone.
The Palace flames; Memnon and Chilax rage,
And all the Egyptians on their side engage.

Fear nothing Madam never was a time,
When Innocence and Beauty were a Crime:
Each shout you hear, your Greatness does advance:
Nor is this Mutiny, the effect of Chance.
But my design --
Through Craggy ways we for a while must tread:
But gentle Iras to a Throne they lead:
Ah! Could I make you Kind as well as Great,
Photinus happiness were then complete.

All other Forms I'll study to forget:
And think how much I'm to your Love in Debt:
Antillus is a young gay handsome Man,
Yet to please you, I'll hate him if I can.
He still like you lies squeezing of my hand,
Hangs over my Neck, and from me will not stand.

Ye Gods! She loves and knows not yet disguise!
The happy Name, flashed at her youthful Eyes.

The Manly Gown when he did first put on,
He was more gazed at than Caesarian:
But for all that I will not love him tho,
'Tis so long since I have forgot him now....

Our Serpents though new born are poisonous still,
And Women ne'er so young have Craft and Guile.
She has forgot him! Oh that I could Her!
Too plain, but yet too strong I see the snare.
I got my Rival to Armenia sent,
His Name returns and ruins my content.

You seem disturbed --

False and inhumane....

What are you mad?
What is it I have done! What have I said?

Thou hast for ever robbed me of my rest.

By all my hopes to reign I love you best.

Ay there's your love to me.
But that for him how ill you do contain?

For whom? I understand you not, be plain.

Why for Antillus? Your young Gay Delight.

May I not name, but I must love him straight?

The Works soon done with Wind and Tide they move;
Whom equal Years and Thoughts dispose to love.
And to say truth I stand condemned within,
That I did ever an Address begin
To you, whom Beauty and such Youth adorn:
I pressed with Age, for Toil, not Pleasure born:
And every way the Object of your Scorn.
Go to Antillus! Fly into his Arms,
And meet with equal heat and equal Charms.
Whilst my ambition I henceforth pursue,
And recompense those Joys I lose in you.

He would not have me if I would, I fear,
He's great and may expect a Kingdoms Heir.

She fears he would not have... Oh just Heaven!
I to the last extremity am driven.
She'll ask me sure anon to join their hands.

All thoughts of me your self you have resigned,
And I may now to whom I please be kind.

All thoughts of you! I could resign my breath
With half the pain....

Some other Maid you purpose to make Queen,
And I but flattered, and abused, have been.

My Love, a fierce Convulsion did endure,
And in the pain I talked I know not what;
But rest for ever of that heart secure,
Where too much Love did the short storm create.

The Castle is beset, and all have vowed,
To stain their VVeapons in your treacherous blood.

Step in a while: They that will rise must wait,
And at each Throw assist their labouring fate.
Let 'em all enter, no resistance make,
I can die gladly for my Country's sake.
What is't my honest Countrymen demand?
You need not ask with weapons in your hand.

Thou hast thy Country to a lasting War betrayed --

And therefore for thy death prepare.

Who! I! alas I but my Queen obeyed,
And both were of Antonius power afraid.
Like you I wished an opportunity
When Egypt was from Roman Forces free:
That we might then with Caesar make our peace.

Now Fate presents it, this occasion seize,
In our Queens absence you the Town command;
Egypt requires her Freedom at your hand.

The City Gates against Antonius shut,
So thou wilt put thy meaning out of doubt.

But then our Queen --

She is Antonius Slave,
And merits amongst us nor Throne nor Grave;
This once performed, be thou our General,
If not, like a faint Slave unpitied fall --

I'll do unforc't what ever you require,
But now you bind me to my own desire;
I ever thought Antonius Cause unblest,
I did his Riot loath and Loves detest:
So we did all I think: and 'twere unjust,
We should defend, who still abhorred his lust.
Let Pimps and Parasites his Battles fight,
Buffoons, and loose Companions of the night,
Male-Bawds, and let that goatish drunken Herd
Which made him odious, die, to make him feared.

Antonius now (at Rome) despairs of all,
And seeks to crush our Egypt with his fall;
But he shall find that some of us still wake,
Who nothing fear, and all dare undertake.

Let's man the Town with all the Force we have,
Keep out Antonius, and our Country save:
Caesar will hold us Enemies no more,
But call in Friends and Allies as before.

For us the people do in throngs declare,
Tired with the danger and the charge of War.

I'm braved here by Canidius at each turn,
And with revenge and rage like you I burn:
The mighty Charge I greedily accept;
Your Town shall be with Faith and Courage kept.
In your disgrace, believe I had no part,
But honoured your free Tongue and honest Heart.

How we were all mistaken in this man?

How well my Queen doth this one act reprove
My needless Jealousy, and show your Love?

Her! whom you not esteem, why would you save?
But tho unjust, Antonius still is brave.

I not esteem you! by the Gods I do
As much as Love --

No my Antonius! No!
You think me all that can a Queen disgrace,
Lighter than Woman, and than Man more base.
How could I else forsake you in distress?
Or could Thyreus in a moment please.

It was the raging Fever of my Love,
And strongest Natures, strong Distempers prove:
Forgive it Madam, as my Loves excess.

Had Caesar sued, I had his flame disdained;
And could you think another entertained?
When the whole World shall to his Fortune yield,
My Heart against your Foe shall keep the Field.

On me so thick your obligations fall,
I must subdue that World to pay 'em all,
And make proud Rome acknowledge you her Queen;
Your Glory does demand no less a Scene.

'Tis very fine, here's all the Sense he has!
His Legions, Empire, all are in that face!
I do not think he knows he is besieged,
But quite undone, talks how he is obliged!
Pray, Sir, do you consider where we are,
If we stay long we shall have Caesar here.

Were he in sight I'd not one word forbear
Till I did guiltless to my Queen appear.
Thyreus dying --

Have you killed him then --
I shall be hateful to the Race of men.
To Cleopatra it is death to speak:
On him she loves, she a swift War does call,
And those she looks on, by Antonius fall.

He cleared your Virtue with his dying Breath.

You stained it in the manner of his death.

Lovers like Misers cannot bear the stealth
Of the least trifle from their endless wealth.
I saw him kiss your hand, for that he died:
And should had he Ten Thousand lives beside.
You seem not pleased with my revenge enough.

It was too rash, and for his crime too rough.

To attempt the spotless Honour of my Queen,
Is such a Crime, as it is death to mean.

He should have lived, if that he loved indeed,
My Scorn all other Torments might exceed:
His life had been but one continued pain,
And mine but one long Act of my disdain:
But now all means to clear my self are lost;
You can but think me innocent at most.

I from that Viper such an Oil have wrung,
As heals that Love which he before had stung:
Since from a dying Rival's mouth I hear,
His hope was as ill grounded as my fear:
He called you most Ungrateful as he died;
Confessed his Passion, and accused your Pride:
What stronger demonstration can be thought?

Could nothing I might say, the like have wrought?
Then vain is all I've suffered, and have done:
My slighted Fame, and my endangered Throne,
Can nothing weigh; and 'twas Thyreus grace,
That I was cleared! Antonius held me base.

O say not so! My Love of its own strength
Had overcome that jealousy at length:
To him indeed I owe my speedy Cure.

Are you for ever from relapse secure?

I rather will believe all that is strange,
The whole Sex true, than that my Queen can change.

The Town is lost, your Romans killed or fled,
And false Photinus does the Traitor head:
Memnon and Chilax in bright Arms appear,
And for Octavius Caesar all declare

Treason before, and Enemies behind;
In such a choice 'twere equal to be blind.
I know not which I should attacque the first;
I'm only sure of all: Delay's the worst.
Storm then the Town with all that we can make
E're Caesar see, and this advantage take.
Safe at a distance here my Queen must stay,
While we with blood and slaughter force our way.

It is in vain, these Barb'rous Villains dare
Not hope for the fair Quarter of a War;
And are turned desperate.

We are alike,
Desperate with them,
When for the whole both Parties strike,
Courage must carryit, Charge them once again.

SPare on your Lives the unarmed and meaner sort,
And all who to Our Clemency resort.
This easy entrance to some Friend we owe:
We from within came pouring on the Foe.

They are no Traitors till they kill our men,
And then as vanquished must be spared again.

They're Cleopatra's Subjects: let that be
A full Protection in our Victory.

Health to Antonius, in whose Cause to fight
Is less Lucilius duty than delight.
Take from my hand your treacherous Enemies,
And use 'em as your Safety shall advise.

Traitor's a name my Virtue cannot brook;
How could I break a Trust I never took?

Arms against your Lawful Queen are still unjust,
A Subject born betrays a Native trust.
But thou Photinus beyond Villains base,
Whom with her Trust and Friendship she did grace,
Whom Birth and Fortune both had laid so low,
To raise thee up again she scarce knew how;
Only rash Favour, whose extravagance
Seems yet a blinder Power than that of Chance,
Remained thy Friend --

I do confess, my Queen
From nothing made me all that I have been;
And much I to Antonius favour owe,
Whom then should I depend on but you two?

We two! whom thou did shut the Town against,
And to whom now thou but repentance feign'st.

From this seditious Rout what could I gain?
I might not hope in Cleopatra's reign:
Weigh then my Interest, by that Scale you'll find
My Crime, though great, lay never in my mind:
I should have died, I know, I wish I had,
Rather than seemed to have my Trust betrayed:
I should have chose their Dagger, scorned their side;
It had been past, and I had nobly died.

O that thou had! I would have driven it home,
Till forth with the broad point thy Soul had come.

Death I have often met in open field,
With my Sword sent, repelled him with my Shield:
Surprised, defenceless! I confess I shook,
And could not in cold blood his visage brook
'Twas all my Crime! you Romans only can
Serenely and unshaken, put oft man.
We might have known that Party needs must fall,
Who to his own fear, owe their General.

Kill me! alas! I do not ask to live!
Should you, I never could my self forgive.
Death to my fear is due, why should I plead?
I was no Traitor, I was worse, afraid:
Love, Faith, and Zeal, if Resolution fail,
No more than the faint Glow-worm's Fire avail.
All that I now repent, is that with shame
I lose that Life, I might have lost with Fame.

How came thou to appear in open Arms,
For thy black Soul has Treachery such Charms?

Had I not been their General I had died,
Death turned the Scale, and so I took their side.
Besides, I for your Service thought it best,
I should with them maintain my Interest;
That at some time unlooked for you might see
The good intent of seeming Treachery.
What greater Blessing can your Arms attend,
Than to have your Foes, commanded by your Friend?
I early of Lucilius project knew,
And from the neighbouring parts my Arms withdrew,
That he a Body might of Romans form,
The great exploit securely to perform.

'Tis possible thou may be honest! yet 'twere strange,
Men still were doubted, who but seem to change.
But say! how came this Tumult to begin?

The people long have discontented been,
Cursed me aloud, and murmured at the Queen;
That to your side so firmly we adhered,
And to their Common Peace your Cause preferred;
They said they would not be the Victor's prey;
But whom they must at last, betimes obey:
And ruin all who stopped 'em in their way.

Where were the Soldiers?

When she sallied forth --
None stayed, who loved the Queen or Martial Worth;
But all the Discontents remained behind,
And had effected what they long designed,
Had not those Powers that Treachery prevent,
To your relief the brave Lucilius sent:
He in the Town a Band of Romans got,
And overthrew the Rebels and their Plot.

You then are none of 'em --

I was by force:
But Lucrece ne'er could hate vile Tarquin worse,
Than I these Forcers of my Loyalty --
And like her too (since not believed) I'll dye.

You durst not dye by an Egyptian Sword:
What is 't this sudden Courage does afford?

I was no Villain thought, but now I hate
My Life, and could rush gladly on my fate;
And you repent --

That e're we trusted thee --
Slave! more uncertain than a Winters Sea.

I will believe Death shook thy Loyalty,
And all thou did was Fear, not Treachery:
Photinus rise! thy frailty I forgive.
And if thou can or dare thus branded, live;
But never more a weighty Charge receive.

I would live gladly to redeem my Crime;
'Tis all the benefit I ask of Time.

But you Fierce Lords that dare your Sovereign balm,
And would depose, or govern in Her name,
Shall find what 'tis to play with Royalty;
And fall like Phaeton from the borrowed Sky.

We scorn thy Mercy, and our Country love,
And gladly from her dying Cries remove.

FOrtune's afresh fond of Antonius grown,
And has this Minute her old Love put on;
She calls her wonted Charms into her Face,
And hugs him --
With the fierce ardor of a first embrace.

Of this success, when they at Rome shall hear,
They'll change perhaps their Superstitious fear,
And the ill Omens on my Foe transfer.
His will the Owl bethought, unchas'd away,
Which upon Concord's Temple braves the day.
The Ape in Cere's Temple will be His,
And his defeat the Eight-foot-Dragon hiss.
The blood my Statue shed, will his be thought;
So are weak minds by Superstition wrought.

What we can't shun, 'twere better not to know,
Nor do the Gods maliciously foreshow,
To make us feel our Fate before it come;
But men too nicely pry into their doom.

Let it fall quick whatever they prepare,
It is the Thunders voice, we cannot bear;
Blind to our Fate, let us both hope and fear:
But thou Lucilius, who dost still outrun
All that we can expect or wish were done;
Like some kind God thou leap'st into the Scale
And turn it when all Mortals seem to fail,
Take from my hand this Armour of clear Gold.
Let the best Metal the best man enfold.

Me dead or living you anon shall praise.

With his whole Force Octavius, Sir, moves on;
'Tis thought on every part he'll storm the Town.

His late defeat then stings the restless Boy;
And all at once we shall our Swords employ.
Let us embrace, then each man to his Post:
We will meet no more but Conquerors or Ghosts.
The World's at stake, my Queen, and this short hour
Contains the Fate of all succeeding Power.
If this one day we can our Fate defer,
To morrow's Sun will see Ventidius here:
Victorious Legions to my Aid he brings;
Fleshed all in Parthian Blood and spoils of Kings.

My boding Heart says we shall meet no more,
And sends up thoughts I never knew before.
My Ears with dismal dying cries are filled,
And my Eyes grow with ghastly Visions wild;
Methinks I see Antonius bleeding there,
And all his Soldiers pale with Death or Fear.

Your wounded Fancy does these forms create,
Expect as you deserve, a better Fate.

O that betimes he had my Cause forsook!
Caesar with pity on a Queen must look.
Defenceless too. Winds unopposed give over,
And but amongst Trees and solid Buildings roar.
The Romans against me declared the War,
But caught Antonius Virtue in that snare.

When two fierce Bulls contend, the doubtful Herd
Stand gazing by a while, of both afeared:
But soon as one the fatal strife declines,
The Captive number with the Victor joins.
And so should we --

Yes! if mere Brutes we were --
And knew no Nobler Passion than vile Fear;
Minutes move slowly when such weight they bear,
Each now is more important than a year:
I grow impatient, can bear no delay,
But quickening Fate would through the shell survey.

The strongest place, and nearest is your Tomb;
Hear good news soon, the bad too soon will come.
Be patient Madam --

Who composed can be?
A Tempest heard and their whole Wealth at Sea?
Each Pile that flies may pierce Antonius Heart;
And they in showrs from meeting Romans part.
Let us move on, no matter where you lead
A breaking Heart, and a distempered Head.

Clashing of Arms I heard, and noise of Drums,
Nearer and nearer the fierce Clangor comes.

Gape Hell, and to thy dismal Bottom take
The lost Antonius; this was our last Stake;
Warned by my ruin, let no Roman more
Set Foot on this inhospitable shore.
Cowards and Traitors fill this impious Land;
Faithless and fearful, without Heart or Hand.
Some ran to Caesar like an headlong Tide,
The rest their fear made useless on our side.

Their Fear! their Treachery! we are betrayed:
By Hands we trust the surest Snares are laid.
The Queen, no doubt, does correspondence hold
With Rome and Caesar, and we all are sold.

I had but one glad thought within my breast,
And thou to that one thought, wilt give no rest.
Fortune hath seized my Empire and Renown;
Honest Old Soldier, let my Love alone:
But you my generous Friends to Caesar go,
Too much already to your Love I owe:
Let me now sink alone; enough y' have done:
A falling Tower 'twere madness not to shun.
Your guilt is small, let early penitence,
Your Ties and Love to me plead your defence.

No Sun shall see me living after you;
My Death shall tell you that my Life was true.

For what should I my bending years preserve?
Canidius will no second Master serve.

Your Navy, Sir, is joined with Caesar's Fleet,
And with one voice their Emperor they greet.
Both sides their bloody hatred have laid down,
And in one Body row toward the Town.

Sir, with Egyptians it was chiefly manned,
And is there yet no dealing underhand?
Still does the Queen so innocent appear;
Her people guilty, she alone is clear.

Her peoples Love, her Love to me has lost;
And now her Faith, is by their Treason cros't.
Pity, not blame the Queen, who sinks this hour,
Crush't with the ruins of an Emperor.
By Land and Sea betrayed! what shall we do?

Let's fight and die in Arms upon the Foe.

We of resistance scarce can make a shoe.
Death shuns the naked Throat and proffered Breast;
He flies when called, to be a welcome Guest.
I may be taken alive, and made a scorn,
Where I have oft the highest Honours worn.
Rome never shall my conquered Face behold:
Death I have seized, and will not lose my hold.

Caesar is entered, and we all are lost;
Some Roman Soldiers still make good their Post.

Their number speak.

Two Legions at the most.

Command 'em to yield easy Victory:
Their number is
Too small to conquer, and too great to dye.

What means our Emperor?

To spare your Blood:
Too long you have my angry Fate withstood.
What is Command, for which we so contend?
Danger and Envy the High Charge attend:
A few we please, and Multitudes offend.

Thou art a Coward, fled'st before thy time,
And with pretence of News would hide thy Crime.
'Tis false.

So it were false indeed, I'd gladly die;
But this shall show I did not basely fly.

Horror on horror! Sir, the unhappy Queen
Betrayed by a Report that you were slain!

I understand you, she her self has killed;
And better knew to die, than how to yield.

Alas! she has, I pulled the reeking Steel
From her warm Wound, and with it rush't her life --
Her latest breath was busy with your name,
And the sweet pledges of your mutual flame:
Your Children she embraced, and then she died.

How well had I been with great Iulius slain,
Or by some flying Parthians darted Cane.
Thy gentle Nature, Brutus, how I hate,
Through which I live to taste the dregs of Fate.
Such is the gloomy state of Mortals here;
We knew not what to wish, or what to fear:
My Name in Arms, my Friends and Empire gone,
Yet while she lived, I was not quite undone:
Methought I still had something to do here --

Y'have more than ever, Sir: your Soldiers cheer,
And bid 'em for a bold defence prepare.

Never: let Romans now each other love,
Their tedious quarrel I will soon remove.
Twice has my Sword with Roman Blood been died;
It draws no more, but from Antonius side.
Had the just Gods intended I should live,
To hate my life, such cause they would not give.
They had preserved my Empire and my Queen.
Enough and more, I have both Fortunes seen.
Strike good Lucilius; 'Tis a friendly part:
Let no Foes weapon pierce thy Masters Heart.
The Noblest way: thou show me what to do.
Thou give the Example, and I'll give the blow.

I'll call some help --
But 'twill but increase my pain;
For should thou stir, I'd stab my self again.

Let others sigh and weep, but let us go
And vent our grief, in rage upon the Foe.
From the strange horror of that dismal sight,
Cowards would rush into the midst of fight.

Let Cowards crowd to force resign their breath.
Brave Minds look through it, and make use of Death.
Thou can not now my fatal Journey stay.

Nor would I, Sir, you're fairly on your way.

Death soon will place me out of Fortunes reach;
Why stays my Soul to sally at this breach?

It is not big enough.

Dost mock me now?
Can my few Minutes a new Torture know --

They may, and to provoke thy parting Soul,
Know that the Queen yet lives, thou loving Fool,
And I the Story of her Death contrived,
To make thee kill thy self, which has arrived
Just as I wished; by thy own hand thou dy'st,
And art at once the Victim and the Priest.

Furies and Hell --

Curse on; but Caesar shall
With Egypt Sceptre thank me for thy fall.
Though decently he could not take thy Head,
He'll inwardly rejoice to find thee dead;
And hug the man that eased him from the fear
Of such a Rival, yet his guilt did spare.

Thou make me hate by turns my Life and Death!
O for a moments strength! my Sword to sheath
In thy false Heart --
But 'twill not be, my hand forsakes my Will;
Only himself can poor Antonius kill.

'Coud you have lived, I had seemed honest still,
But now take all; the Queen her self must Bleed;
Iras and I must to her Throne Succeed.
Thy Councils still to Caesar I betrayed,
This last revolt I in thy Navy made.

Triumphant Villain! What provoked thee to it.

Ambition Sir, I had no Armies I;
Nor was I born of Royal Progeny.
No Crown descended on my Lazy Head,
I could no open path to greatness tread:
But none despised that to a Throne did Lead.

All Charmion said of Thee it seems was true;

And all Canidius here suspected too.
I have discharged my Conscience at this Last. --
Die thou. --
Whilst I to Iras and a Throne make hast.

The Queen Entreats --

Does my Queen Live, and may Antonius yet,
Above the Earth his Cleopatra Meet.

She lives, but shut up in her Monument;
Her rolling Thoughts on some dire Mischief bent.
By Isis Temple, Sir, you know it Stands;
The Rarest Fabric made by Mortal hands.
All she holds dear she has thronged there, but you,
And now entreats that you will enter too.

With those we love, a Triumph 'tis to fall;
Most gladly I obey her fatal Call.

Just Heaven's! you faint, what is it you have done,
That with such Streams these Living Fountains run?

It was a sudden qualm: Limbs do but bear
Me to My Queen and I'll dismiss you there:
I cannot die till I have paid that Debt.
Nor have our Souls appointed where to Meet.
Stand off my Fate, and dare not touch me yet.

Secure from Caesar you a while may be,
And there what's fittest to be done Decree.
The place.

The Victory comes on, I hear the Noise,
And of prevailing Foes th'insulting Voice.
Caesar to spare me did strict Order give,
I may be taken and compelled to live;
Move on, all Fates but that I can forgive.

Sir, you're entirely Master of the Town;
All men their Hatred and their Arms lay down,
And the whole World now bends to you alone.

The names of Parties and of Factions cease,
And War has brought forth her fair Daughter Peace.

Command the Soldiers Fury be restrained,
That Rage destroy not what their Virtue gained.
The Egyptians now my Clemency shall share;
I would be loved in Peace, though Feared in War.
In this Confusion wher's the haughty Queen?

Since first we entered, She no more was seen.

Great Caesar at my hands that Sword receive,
Which his Deaths Wound did to Antonius give.

Thou hast not killed him Villain! quickly speak,
Thy Limbs upon a Thousand Racks I'll break,
To find the Truth --

He is not Dead, but long he cannot Live;
And his own Arm the Fatal blow did give.
By my advice indeed --

By thy advice --
Thus Rome by Egypt is defeated twice.
Thou hast the power of pardoning from me taken,
And empty Wishes now alone remain.
Each Man will think what he himself had done,
And my great mind interpret by his own.
Hence from my sight! since blasted is by Thee
The fairest Fruit of all my Victory.

I wish Antonius blood were yet unspilt;
But Yours is the advantage, Mine the guilt.
Empire and Glory can no Partners bear,
Since you forgive your Foes excuse my care.

Where is the Queen?

Fled to the Monument:
Which for her last Retreat she ever meant.
Where she has all the Jewels of the Crown,
And the Chief Wealth of the distracted Town.
There great Antonius Bleeding in her Arms,
Takes his last Leave of her destructive Charms.
Give me Two hundred Men within an hour,
They shall alive or dead be in Your power.

Thou Monster of all Villainy forbear;
Thou would thy Gods from off their Altars tear,
Who would not thy Afflicted Sovereign spare.

Men say she is Generous, if so our Force
Will only drive her on some desperate Course.
If Honourable Terms we should refuse,
We shall her Person and her Treasure lose.
She'll both Convert into one spreading Flame,
And shortening hated Life extend her Fame.

A Roman Mind can only Death command;
Fear no such Courage from a Barbarous Hand!

Octavia, Sir --

Poor Soul! I pity Her,
She ill the news will of Antonius bear.
She's past all human Grief and human Care.

She is not dead.

Yes, in her way to Rome,
Of grief and discontent, as we presume.

Ye joys of Victory a while forbear,
I must on my Octavia drop a tear.
She was the best of Women, Gentlest Wife,
In every part how virtuous was her life!

From out the Crystal Palace of her Breast,
Her clearer Soul is gone to endless rest.
What time, what reason can my loss digest?

Canidius still does an old Fort defend.

On every spark of War we must attend.
True Wisdom will no Enemy despise:
From small beginnings mighty Flames arise.

Thus the last Sword for Liberty I draw,
And whom Despair thrusts on no numbers awe.
Who knows --
But that those nobler Souls of Ancient Rome
May strike with us against slavery to come.

I charge you all the brave Canidius spare,
Let not his Blood now stain the ended War:
His number speaks not terror, but despair.

Fight but one Minute longer, whilst that I
And some few nobler Souls like Romans die.
Then may you all by Caesars mercy live,
Whilst we our Freedom from our Swords receive.

What have I done! that men had rather dye
By their own hand, than trust my Clemency?

Canidius to his Master was most true,
And did for him what I would do for you.

The World does no more Enemies contain,
And Caesar over peaceful Rome may reign.

'Twas I that pulled on you the hate of Rome,
And all your Ills past, present, and to come.
It is not fit nor possible I live,
And my dear Queen, it grows unkind to grieve.

'Twas I that lost you in each Roman mind;
And to your ruin can you still be kind?
How can you bear this Tyranny of Fate,
And not the Cause, your Cleopatra hate.

So Venus looked, when the Italian Bear
The tender side of her Adonis tore:
Nor yields my Queen in Beauty or in grief,
When half the World under my rule was placed
Your Love was all the joy that I could taste,
It was my chief delight, and is my last.
I dye, and have but one short word to say;
But you must swear, my Queen you will obey.

By all our Love I will, my death command,
And see the eager duty of my hand.

Your death! it is the only thing I fear:
And Fate no other way can reach me here.

Down from a Throne to any private State:
It is a dismal Precipice to the Great.
I giddy with the horrid prospect grow;
And shall fall in, unless Death help me now.

Heaven that success does to my Arms deny,
Whispers a Roman Soul, and bids him dye.
Our case is different; to Caesar sue,
Tho me he hate, he needs must pity you.
Your Beauty and my Love were all your Crime,
And you must live my Queen.

When you are dead --
To be despised, reproached, in triumph lead;
A Queen and Slave! who would not life renounce,
Rather than bear those distant names at once.

But you may live a Queen; say you obeyed
Through fear: and were compelled to give me Aid:
That all your Subjects private Orders had
Not to resist him, and my Cause betrayed.
Say, that at last you did my Death procure;
Say any thing that may your Life and Crown secure.

'Twere false and base, it rather shall be said
I killed my self when I beheld you dead.

Me the unhappy cause of all your wo
Your own, and your dear Country's overthrow.
Remember I was jealous, rash, soon moved,
Suspected no less fiercely than I loved:
How I Thyreus killed, your Love accused,
And to your kind defence my faith refused.
From shame and rage I soon shall be at rest,
And Death of thousand ills hath chose the best.

O stay! and take me with you --

Dearest Queen,
Let my Life end before your Death begin.
O Rome! thy freedom does with me expire,
And thou art lost, obtaining thy desire.

He's gone! he's gone! and I for ever lost!
The great Antonius now is but a Ghost:
A wandering shadow on the Stygian Coast.
I'm still a Queen, though by the Fate of War,
Death and these Women all my Subjects are;
And this unhappy Monument is all
Of the whole World, that I my own can call.

O name not Death!
Caesar men say is good, wise, mild and just;
So many Virtues how can you distrust?

Tho his last breath advised me to submit
To Caesar, and his falling Fortunes quit:
When I named Death, speechless my hand he pressed;
And seemed to say that I had chose the best.

He could not be so cruel, you mistook;
Too sharply you apply his dying look.

He does expect it, and I'll keep my word,
If there be Death in Poison, Fire, or Sword.

Fortune with lighter strokes strikes lighter things;
With her whole weight she crushes falling Kings.

We shall in Triumph, Charmion, be led,
Till with our shame Romes Pride be surfeited:
Till every finger Cleopatra find
Pointing at her, who was their Queen designed.

Their Anger they may glut, but not their Pride.
They ne'er had Triumphed if men durst have died.

Beauty, thou art a fair, but fading flower,
The tender prey of every coming hour:
In Youth thou Comet like art gazed upon,
But art portentous to thy self alone.
Unpunish't thou to few were it ever given:
Nor art a Blessing, but a Mark from Heaven.
Greatness most envied, when least understood:
Thou art no real, but a seeming good.
Sick at the Heart! Thou in the Face look well,
And none but such as feel thy pangs can tell.
By thy exalted State we only gain,
To be more wretched than the Vulgar can.

Think how he'll use your Sons when you are dead,
And none their Cause can like a Mother plead.

Perhaps, when I am dead, his hate may cease,
And Pity take declining Rages place.
Sure in the Grave all Enmities take end,
And Love alone can to the Dead extend.
Men say that we to the other World shall bear
The same Desires and Thoughts, employed as here.
The Hero shall in shining Arms delight,
In neighing Steeds, shrill sounds and empty fight:
Poets shall sing, and in soft Dances move,
And Lovers in Eternal Roses Love.
If so, Antonius, we but change the Scene,
And there pursue what we did here begin.

I am prepared to follow or to lead:
Name but the fatal Path that you will tread.

In yonder golden Box three Asps there lie,
Of whose least venomous bite men sleep and die:
Take one and to my naked Breast apply
Its poisonous mouth --

Alone she shall not die.

When Iulius Caesar in the Senate fell,
Where were these thoughts? and yet he loved as well.

He loved me not! he was ambitious he;
And but at looser Times took thought of me.
Glory and Empire filled his restless mind:
He knew not the soft pleasures of the Kind.
Our Joys were frighted still with fresh alarms,
And new Designs still forced him from my Arms.
But my Antonius loved me with his Soul.
No cares of Empire did his Flame control.
I was his Friend, the Partner of his mind;
Our days were joyful, and our nights were kind:
He lived for Me, and I will die for Him.
So, now 'tis past! I feel my eyes grow dim,
I am from triumph and contempt secure,
What all must bear I earlier endure.
To thy cold Arms take thy unhappy Queen,
Who both thy ruin and her own has been:
Other Embrace than this she'll never know,
But a pale Ghost, pursue thy shade below.
Good Asp bite deep and deadly in my Breast,
And give me sudden and Eternal Rest.

Fool, from thy hasty Fate thou can not run

Let it bite you, I'll stay till you have done:
Alas! my life but newly is begun --

No: thou would live to shame thy Family;
But I'll take care that thou shalt Nobly dye.

Good Charmion!

I'll hear no more: faint Hearts that seek delay
Will never want some foolish thing to say.
At our Queens feet let's decently be found,
And Loyal Grief be thought our only Wound.

Yonder's the Monument, that famous Tower;
'Tis weak, and may be ruined in an hour.
Summon the Queen -- 'Tis obstinacy now
Not resolution the lost Queen does show;
Call for a Battering Ram -- now down it goes.

But oh! what horror does that Breach disclose?
The Queen, Antonius, and her Maids lie dead:
From their pale Cheeks the Life but newly fled.

Am I so cruel and relentless held,
That Women dare not to my mercy yield?

The Queen your Roman Triumphs ever feared,
And therefore Poisons of all sorts prepared
To end her life, and to prevent that shame,
When ever the unhappy prospect came.
Some signs of life in that soft Maid remain;
She seems to move her dying lips again.

I'st thus your word you with poor Iras keep --
The Crown of Egypt now you may dispose
On whom you please -- Death soon my Eyes will close;
And Caesar my --

The Crown of Egypt, Slave, disposed by thee?
Her dying words contain some Mystery:

Which I'll take care she never shall explain --
She raves: the Poison has disturbed her brain.

Thou hast not, Slave, the tender Virgin slain?

I loved and could not see her lie in pain.

Villain, thou feard'st that her last breath might say
Something that might thy treacherous heart betray.
Mecoenas, seize on him, see quick Justice done.

Quicker than this, great Caesar, there is none.

Who art thou that dare kill and Caesar by?

I'm Brother to that Maid, resolved to die
By the same hand, if Caesar say the word.

Put up: it was a kind of Virtue in thy Sword.
What could Antonius from a Brother fear,
Who owes him all the Honours he does wear?
Oh! what a God-like pleasure had it been
With thee to have shared the Empire once again?
And to have made a second Sacrifice
To Friendship of each others Enemies.
By thee I am whatever I was made,
But thou art proud, and scorn to be repaid.

The Queens vast Treasure, Sir, I blazing found;
A greater Wealth than ever Thetis drowned.
She her fair Person to a Carcass turned:
And has her Treasure to vile Ashes burned.
Both ways defeating the proud hopes of Rome.

Great minds the Gods alone can overcome --
Let no man with his present Fortune swell
The Fate of growing Empire who can tell?
We stand but on that Greatness whence these fell.

'TWERE Popish folly for the Dead to pray:
By this time you have damned or saved our Play:
But Gentleman, the Poet bad me say,
He claims his Merit on a surer score:
H' has brought you here together, and what more
Could Waters, Court, or Conventicles do?
'Tis not his fault, if things no further go.
The Gravest Cit that hopes to be Lord Mayor
Must come to a New Play with his None Dear;
And the kind Girl engaged another way,
Tells all her Friends she has been at the New Play.
They ask the Tale which she does for 'em get
Between the Acts, from her dear Friend she met.
The Peacock-Beauty here may spread her Train,
And by our gazing Fops be made more vain.
And all kind Lovers that are here to night,
May thank the Poet for each others sight.
Tho all be bad, men blame with an ill grace
The Entertainment of a Meeting Place.
THE Art of making Love, or Rules for the conduct of Ladies and Gallants in
their Amours. Price bound 1 s. Printed for R. Tonson at Grayes-Inne-gate next
Grayes-Inne-lane.

All sold by R. Tonson, at his Shop under Grayes-Inne-gate, next
Grayes-Inne-lane.


