who trust in Thrones, in proud Escurials reign,
Nor fear the
Credulity of a still Prosperous State,
Me let him look on, and Thee Troy! By Fate
A greater Document was never shown
On what a slippery Hight Pride stands! O'rethrown
Is Asia's strong Support, of God-like Hands
The egr^gious Labour; under whose Commands
He who cold seven-mouth'd Tanais drinks, once bore
Confederate Arms; and he who does adore
The Rising Sun, where Tigris warm Streams stain
Their Waters in the Erithraean Main;
And she whose Realms the wandering Scythians bound,
Who beats with widowed Troops the Pontick Ground.
Sp^ild by the Sword, now her own Ruins Weight
Bears Pergamus; Her Towers which glister'd late
With their fired Buildings fallen: All, All's oreturn'd
In Flames; Assaracus his Palace burned.
Nor Flames the Victors greedy Hands prevent,
But while yet burning, Troy's for Pillage rent.
Smoke in Waves rising takes Heaven's Sight away,
And black-burnt Cinders smeer the Face of Day.
Measuring with greedy Eye Troy's long sought spoil
The Victor stands, and now his Ten Years Toil
Forgives; astonished at her Ruins, He yet
Scarce thinks it vincible, though won he see it.
The Dardan Wealth Greek Soldiers bear away;
Nor can, a thousand Ships contain the Prey.
To Witness here I call the Adverse Powr's!
And Phrygian Towers,
Beneath the Ruins of thy Empire laid
My Countries Ashes! and thy
Who standing, Ilium stood. Ye lesser Ghosts,
My Childrens numerous Souls! What ever Cross
Hath fallen, what Ills the inspired Maid foretold,

Saw pregnant Hecuba; nor held my Peace,
Before Cassandra Prophetess.
Not crafty Ithacus, nor Diomed,
Nor treacherous Sinon, through your Buildings Spread
These Flames; These Fires are mine; and with my Brands
You Burn. But why lamenting thus Troy's Ruins, Stands
Too long-liv'd Age? Here Wretch! look here, On These
( Troy's an Old Grief) more fresh Calamities.
I saw (O cruel fact!) the Old King slain;
And, a worse Crime, the sacred Altars stain
Ajax dared. When with Hands wreathed
In's Hair, his Head reversing, Pyrrhus sheathed
In a deep Wound his cursed Blade; which struck
Up to the Hilts, when the King willing took;
Drawn forth, his Aged Throat scarce reek'd with Blood.
Whom not the sense of his extreme Age, could
From so abhorred a Murder once restrain,
Nor present Gods, nor yet Ioves Sacred Fane,
The Glory once of this now levelled State.
He to so many Princes
Now wants a Sepulcher, and Funeral Fire,
His Troy in Flames. Nor can All This Heavens Ire
Appease. To Lords, lo^ Priam's Daughters by
The
Attend? Some one may his Wife Hector's make,
Some Helenus, some may Antenor's take:
Perhaps some one thy Bed, Cassandra, seeks;
I'm only a feared Lot to All the Greeks. Cease you my Captive Troops! Your
Plaints forbear!
Beat with your Hands your Breasts, with Cries the Air,
And Troy's sad Obsequies perform: Now round
Id^, that dire Judge's Fatal Seat, resound.
No rude Crew un-inur'd to Tears
Bid you to mourn: Successive Years
Can witness, this w'have never ceased
To do, since first the Phrygian Guest
Amyclae reached, and Cybels Pine
Did plow blew Neptune's foaming Brine.
Ten times have Snows crowned Ida's Head,
Bared for the Funerals of our Dead.
Ten times the Mower's Hand hath shorn,
With fear, the tufted Fields of Corn,
Yet no Day void of Miseries;
New Matter still new Grief supplies.
On to our Plaints, and as We weep,
Do Thou, O wretched Queen,
With thy advanced Hand: Whilst We,
Skilled in our Parts, do follow Thee.

You faithful Consorts of our Woe
Unbind your Tresses: Let your Hair
About your sad Necks loosely flow,
Powdered with Troy's warm Ashes: Bare
Your Arms; your Vestures, slackly tied
Beneath your naked Bosoms, slide
Down to your Wastes. For whose Bed dressed
Vail'st Thou, O Captive, Shame! thy Breast?
A looser Zone your Garments bind!
Your Cries with frequent strokes be joined!
Hands pressed t'assail! Aye, now you please,
Thus habited! Now Troades
I know you all: Again renew
Your mournful Plaints, and strive t'outdo
Th'Expressions common Sorrows vent,
'Tis Hector whom We now lament!


See! We have all vnfilleted,
And about our shoulders loosely thrown;
Upon our Heads warm

Fill then your Hands; From Troy this yet
We lawfully may take; and let
From your divested Shoulders slide,
Your Garments, down on either side.
Now
Now Sorrow All thy Powr's disclose.
Rhaet^an Shores with Plaints resound,
And Echo the sad Cries rebound:
Nor, as she's wont, ingeminate
The last of Words, but iterate
Troy's Plaints entire; that All the Main
And All the Heavens may ring again.
Now let remorseless Hands infest
With sounding strokes each suffering Breast,
We're not with usual stripes content;
'Tis Hector whom We now lament.

For Thee our Arms We beat, and Blows
On bleeding Shoulders thus impose.
For Thee our Heads these Strokes do bear,
Our nursing Breasts for Thee We tear.
The Wounds which since thy Death remain
Yet green, now freshly bleed again.
Thy Countries strength! Fates Remora!
The tired Phrygians Only stay.
Troy's Rampart! who upheld'st Her Towers
Ten Years against Assailing Powers.
With Thee she fell; One Day
To Hector and his Country gave.

Turn now your Plaints; Let Priam too
Be wept for: Hector hath his Due.

Receive our Tears
Thee Reigning, Fates no Cross did bring
Single on Troy; twice did she feel
Herculean Shafts, twice Grecian Steel.
When after All the Tragic Falls
Of Hecub's Race; and Funerals
Of Princely Sons; thy self in fine
Did close their Tragedies with thine.
And to Jove, a Victim slain,
Troy's shores thy

Your Tears on other Subjects spend,
Ye Ilian Dames, my Priam's End
Is not to be lamented. All
Deceased Priam Happy call.
He to the Infernal Shades went free,
Not thrall'd in Grecian Slavery.
He ne'er the Atrides saw, He never
The false Ulysses knew, nor ever
Shall
In their Triumphed Victories.
Not shall his Hands, which (...) sustained
A (...), be behind Him chained,
Nor in Gold Fetters manacled
Following the Victors Carr, be led
In Pomp through proud Mycenae.

All
Deceased Priam happy call;

With the whole Ruin of his State.
Who now in the Elizian Groves
Delightful shades securely roves,
And among the
For Hector. Happy Priam! "Blessed
"No less is He
"Who e're he be,
"Who falling in Wars bloody strife,
"Sees All things perish with his Life.

HOw Greeks still windbound are!
When War they seek, or for their Homes prepare!

The Cause declare them and their Fleet detains,
What God it is that their Return restrains.

Amazement strikes my Soul; a trembling Cold
Palsies my Joints. Prodigious Truths when told
Are hardly credited; yet these, these Eyes
Were Witnesses: And now the Sun's uprise
New gilt the Mountain Tops, and Eastern Light
Had clearly vanquished the whole Host of Night;
When on a sudden
Breathed from its Center
Woods bowed their Heads, the sacred Groves with loud
Cracks rung, like Thunder breaking through a Cloud;
Stones from cleft Ida's Quarries fell: Nor shook
The Earth alone; The Sea, with Terror struck,
The Approach of her Achilles felt, and laid
Her swelling Waves. The Earth yawning then displayed
Her Immense Caves, and from the Depths of Night
Opened a passage to Ethereal Light:
The Tomb disburd'ning, whence the Ghost arose
Of great Achilles; Such when Thracian Foes
(The Prelude of thy Fates, Troy!) he o'rethrew,
And the white haired Neptunian Cycnus slew.
Or when in Heat of Fight with strenuous Force
Through Troops he charged, and
With slaughterd Carcasses, while Xanthus Tide,
Seeking a Passage through, did slowly glide.
Or such when Victor trailing by the Heels
Hector and Troy, born on Triumphant Wheels.
Then with this voice of Anger fills the Coast:
Go, Go ye lingering Greeks, and rob our Ghost
Of it's due Honours; weigh ungrateful! weigh
Your Anchors, through our Seas to make your Way.
'Twas not with Trifles Greece did satisfy
Achilles Anger, nor a Price less high
Shall she now pay. Polyxena be wed
To our Ashes; and her Blood let Pyrrhus shed.
This said, he shrouds himself in Night, and sinks
To Hell again: the Earth together shrinks,
Closing her gaping Clefts; the quiet Main
Becalmed lies; the Winds their Rage restrain,
The smooth Seas move with gentle Murmurings,
And Triton thence the Hymeneal sings.

when Home you thought to Sail, full Fraught with Joy,
Achilles fell; by whose sole Arm fell Troy.
Whose All-ore-mastering Valour soon repaid
The Loss of that delay which Scyros made,
And Lesbos, that divides the Aegean Flood;
For Troy's Fall doubtful still, he absent, stood.
Should you now haste to satisfy his Will,
Yet were it tardy Satisfaction still.
Now every Chief his proper share hath took;
For less Reward can so much Virtue look?
Merits he Nothing? Who, when (charged to shun
Wars Hazards) his Life's Course he might have run
In peaceful Quiet beyond Nestor's years;
Yet slighting his Disguise and Mother's Fears,
He
When Telephus with barbarous Pride repressed
Our Entrance into Mysia,
Hand in that Prince's Blood he first imbru'd.
Who felt with what a force the Same could wound,
Yet in his Cure, that no less gentle found.
Thebes and Eetion by his Arms pursued,
Both tell; His State and He at once subdued.
The small Lyrnessus Mountain-seated Towers,
He with like Slaughter levelled by his Powers.
Ennobled by fair Briseis Captive made.
He Chryse, cause of Kingly Difference, laid
In her own Ruins. Tenedos renowned
By Fame, and Cilla rich in fertile Ground
To Phoebus sacred, whose fat Pastures fed
Large Thracian Flocks, by him were vanquished.
What? and those Lands through which Caycus flows;
Whose Streams augment by dissolved Vernal Snows.
These so great Slaughters, Nations mighty dread,
Like Whirl winds through
Which might have been another closing Fame,
Were but his
And in so many Glorious Conquests sha^'d
The Spoils of War, while he for War prepared.
Though we His other Merits should refrain;
Were not this One sufficient? Hector slain!
He Ilium conquered; 'twas but sacked by you.
Our Parents Noble Praises We will pursue,
And his brave Acts, for which that Praise is due.
Who knows not Hector, in his Fathers Sight;
In's Uncles, Memnon, fell by him in fight?
Whose Death his Parents Cheeks with sorrow pal'd,
And Morning's rosy Looks in Mourning veiled.
Himself abhorred the fatal Precedent,
And learned, that Sons of Gods were not exempt
From Death. Penthesilea too, of All
Our Fears the last, did by his Valour fall.
A Virgin then might but his Due be thought,
Though even from Argos or Mycenae brought,
Prized you his Merits justly: Can you move
A Doubt yet, or refuse his Will t'approve?
Think you 'tis Cruelty to Peleus Son
To offer Priam's Daughter? when
A Sacrifice to Helena was made?
For what even Precedent allows, We plead.


"Others the Heat of Youth inflames: This Fire
In Pyrrhus is Hereditary. We
Have felt
Of his high Threats have suffered heretofore.
The more thy Power, thy Patience should be more.
Why with the Blood of a Young Virgin slain,
Seek Thou so Great a Leader's Ghost to stain?
"'Tis fit this first We learn to know, what e're
"The Victor ought to do; the Vanquished bear.
"No violent Dominions long endure:
"'Tis Moderation makes a Throne stand sure.
"When Fortune swells our State to an Excess,
"'Tis Wisdom to restrain our Happiness:
"The Turns of Chance, and too propitious Powr's
"Still fearing; Conquest teaching, how few Hours
"Can to subversion bring the Greatest State.
Troy's Fall hath raised our Thoughts to too elate,
Too stern a Pride; In the same Place We stand
From whence she fell. Once with too proud a Hand
I must confess I bare my self, but what
Might have raised others Thoughts, Success; even that
Hath humbled Mine. Thou Priam make me Proud!
Thou bid Me fear. "What but a splendid Shroud
"Of Vanity, may We think Crowns to be,
"Our Brows impaling with false Majesty,
"Which Chance, in one short Hour, may make her spoil,
"Without
"So slow a Fate attends not All. And Greece!
(If with thy leave I may confess it) This
I'll say; I would have Ilium distressed,
Nay more, subdued; her Ruin yet repressed;
But the hot Rage of an incensed Foe,
And Victory, by Night obtained, know
No Curb. What cruel or unworthy Fact
May seem committed, that Revenge did act,
And Darkness, which does Fury forward thrust,
And the Victorious Sword; whose killing Lust
Having once tasted Blood's ne'er satisfied.
If ought of ruined Troy may yet abide
After All This, now let it stand secured:
Enough, more than enough, she hath endured.
That at thy Father's Tomb the Princess should
Be made a Sacrifice, and with her Blood
Sprinkle his Ashes, or that yet so vile
Cruel a Murder We should Nuptials style,
We will ne'er permit: 'tis We must bear the Blame:
"Who ought, yet not forbids Ill, bids the same.

Shall then Achilles Ghost due Honours want?


Dues it shall have, and every Tongue shall chant
His Praise; and Lands unknown resound his Fame,
And celebrate the Glory of his Name.
If yet his Ashes nought but Blood can ease,
Let that of slaughtered Herds his Ghost appease.
But let no Blood be spilt to be bewailed,
By wretched Mothers: How ye Gods prevailed,
Or whence did this inhumane Custom rise
Of making
Think but what Hate would to thy Sire accrue,
Should such dire Rites be to his Honour due.

Thou insolently Haughty in Success,
As fearfully dejected in Distress!
Tyrant over Kings! does new-sprung Love infest
Yet once again with sudden Flames thy Breast?
Does Agamemnon think that he shall still
Thus wrong Achilles? No; know Pyrrhus will,
Or see this Victim offered to his Grave,
Or else a greater, worthier Victim have:
This Sword here thinks it does too long abstain
From Royal Blood, and Priam's Ghost would fain
Have a King's bear it Company.

'Tis true;
The greatest Praise that is to Pyrrhus due,
Is that he murdered Priam, whom his Sire


'Tis Truth entire;
We know it: that They who were my Father's Foes
Were forced to be his Suppliants; you amongst those.
But Priam was the Stouter of the Two,
He came in Person to petition; You
Not yet so Valiant as to supplicate,
Like a tame Coward, chose to delegate
Ajax and Ithacus to make your Prayer,
Whilst you lay skulking, and kept close for fear.

But your brave Father feared not 'tis confessed,
He amongst fired Ships, and slaughtered Greeks could rest
Secure; unmindful of his Charge; and run


Yet was great Hector, who your Arms despised,
At sound but of his Lute with fear surprised.
And in the midst of Terror and dismay
His Navy yet in peaceful Quiet lay.

Yes, the same Navy Priam durst to board.


"'Tis Kingly to a King Life to afford.


Then why a King did you deprive of Breath?


"There's Mercy sometimes shown in giving Death.


So you'd in Mercy Sacrifice a Maid?


And such a Sacrifice can you dissuade,
Who offered your own Child?

"Their Kingdom's Good
"Kings should prefer before their Childrens Blood.

Forbid a Captiv's Death no Law e're did.


"What the Law does not, is by Shame forbid.


"What likes, is lawful, by All Victors thought.


"To whom much is lawful, to like, little ought.


Before these thus vant'st thou, who by Pyrrhus are
Freed from the Bondage of a Ten Years War?

Breeds Scyrus such high Blood?


Scy^us which knows


Which strait'ning Seas enclose.


Yes, Seas that owe us a Relation;
Indeed Thyestes noble House W' have known,
Great Atreus too.

Out thou Girls Bastard Brat,
Got by Achilles, when scarce Man.

Achilles, who to the whole World allied
the Honours of the Deified,
Who can a Claim to Seas by Thetis move,
To Hell by Aeacus, to Heaven by Jove.

Yes, He who fell by Paris feeble Hand.


Whom yet not any of the Gods durst stand
In open fight.

Sir, I could rule your Tongue,
And give your Boldness due Correction;
But that this Sword of Ours, knows how to spare
Even Captives: Let the Gods Interpreter,
Calchas, be called, and what the Fates command
By Him, to that We willingly will stand.

Thou Sacred Minister, who loos'dst the Bar
Which stopped the Grecian Navy, and the War,
Whose Art unlocks the Heavens, expounds their Laws,
And from Beasts Entrails, Thunder, Comets, draws
The sure Presages of ensuing Fate,
Whose Words We purchased at so dear a Rate,
Now here declare what 'tis the Gods intend:
And this our Strife, let thy grave Counsel end.

The usual means, Fates of Return afford
The Greeks. To the Tomb of the Thessalian Lord
The Virgin must be sacrificed; so dressed
As Grecian Brides are at their Nuptial Feast,
And Pyrrhus wedded to thy Sire by Thee,
With these due Rites shall she espoused be.
Yet is not This our Fleets sole Remora.
More Noble Blood than Thine, Polyxena,
The Fates require. Great Hector's only Son
From some high Turret must be headlong thrown;
So have the Gods decreed he should be slain.
Then may your Conquering Navy plough the Main.

IS it a Truth? or Fiction blinds
Our fearful Minds?
That when to Earth We Bodies give,

That when the
The Husbands Eyes,
When the last fatal day of Light
Hath spoiled our Sight,

Our Bones are urn'd;
Souls stand yet in no Need at All
Of Funeral.
But that
They still retain?
Or dye We quite? nor ought We have
Survives the Grave?
When like to Smoke immix'd with Skies,
The Spirit flies.
And
To the naked Side.
What e're Sol's Rising does disclose,
A Setting shows;
What e're the Sea with flowing Waves
Or ebbing laves;
Old Time that moves with winged pace
Doth soon deface.
With the same swiftness the Signs roll
Round, round the Pole,
With the same course Day's Ruler steers
The fleeting Years;
With the same speed th'oblique-pac'd Moon
Does wheeling run:
We all are hurried to our Fates,
Our Lives last Dates;
And when we reach the Stygian Shore,
Are then no more.
As Smoke which springs from Fire is soon
Dispersed and gone;
Or Clouds which we but now beheld,
By Winds dispel'd;
The Spirit which informs this Clay
So fleets away.
Nothing is after Death; and this
Too Nothing is:
The Gaol, or the extremest space
Of a swift Race.
Covetous their Hopes forbear,
Sad their fear.
Ask thou when e're thou come to die,
Where thou shalt lie?

Then Chaos takes us.
Death's Individual; like kind
To Body or Mind.
Taenarus they sing,
And Hell's fierce King,
How Cerberus still guards the Port
Of the Stygian Court,
Are all but idle Rumours found,
And empty Sound;
Like the vain Terrors of the Night,
Or Dreams that fright.

why tear you thus your Hair, and weeping beat
Your wretched Breasts, ye Phrygian Dames? We yet
Suffer but lightly, if we suffer what
Is only to be wept. Troy fell but late
To you, to me long since. When in our view
Cruel Achilles at his Chariot drew
My Hector's Limbs; whilst with a Weight unknown
The trembling Axle-tree did seem to groan.
Then, then was Troy o'rethrown, then Ilium fell;
Sense of that Grief makes me unsensible.
And now by Death freed from Captivity
I'd follow Hector; but this Boy here, he
Withholds me; he (sweet Child) my Will restrains,
And from a much-desired Death detains.
'Tis he that makes me yet the Gods entreat;
He to my Griefs a longer time hath set.
And though my greatest Comfort, took from me
The greatest Comfort in my Misery,
Security from Fear; no place doth rest
For happier Fortune with the worst oppressed
And saddest Miseries: "For to fear still
"When Hope hath left us, is the worst of Ill.

What sudden Fear does thy sad Mind surprise?


From our great Ills still greater Ills arise.
Nor yet can Iliums fatal Woes have end.

What further Miseries does Heaven intend?


Hell's opened; and our Foes, that we might ne'er
Want Terror, rising from their Graves appear.
And can this only to the Greeks befall?
Sure Death is equally the same to all.
That common Fear all Phrygians doth distress;
But my sad Dream doth me alone oppress.

Declare, what did thy dreadful Dream present?


Two parts of quiet Night were almost spent,
And now the Triones had wheeled round
Their glittering Wain, when Rest (a Stranger found
To my afflicted Thoughts) in a short Sleep
Upon my wearied Eyes did gently creep,
(If such Amaze of Mind yet Sleep may be.)
Strait to my thinking I did Hector see.
Not such as when against the Argives bent
On Grecian Ships Idaean Flames he sent;
Nor such when he his Foes with slaughter struck,
And real Spoils from Achilles took.
Nor did his sprightly Eyes with Lightning glance,
But with a sad dejected Countenance
Like mine he stood; his Hair all soiled and wet,
(It joyed me although such to see him yet.)
His Head then shaking thus at length he spake;
Awake, my dear Andromache, awake,
And quickly hence As^yanax convey;
Let him be closely hid, no other way
Is left to save him: thy sad Cries forbear.
Griev'st thou Troy's fallen? would God it wholly were.
Quickly dispatch, and to some secret place
Convey this small last hopes of all our Race.
Sleep from my Senses a cold horror shook,
When staring round with an affrighted look
Wretch, I (my Child forgot) for Hector sought;
But lo the fleeting shadow, whilst I thought
To have embraced it, fled. O my dear
True Blood of thy great Sire, sole Hopes of Troy!
Unhappy Issue of too famed a Race!
Too like thy Father, even such a Face
My Hector had; his Gait such, so he bare
His conquering Arms; so did his curled Hair
Part on his threatening Forehead, from his Head
Covering his Neck, about his tall Shoulders spread.
O Son, too late unto thy Country born,
Too soon unto thy Mother! will that Turn,
That happy Revolution never come,
That I may see thee build up Ilium,
And her fled Citizens reduce once more,
And to their Town and them their Name restore?
But I forget my self, and fondly crave
Too happy things: "Enough poor Captives have
"If they may live. What place, Wretch, can secure
Thy Fears? sweet Child, where shall I hide thee sure?
That late proud Palace, rich in Wealth and Fame,
Built by the Gods, worthy even Envy's Aim,
Is now to a rude Heap of Ashes turned,
All's levelled with the Ground, the whole Town burned
In wastful Flames; nor doth there now abide
So much of Tr^y as may one Infant hide.
What place would fittest serve for my intent?
Hard by's my Husbands stately Monument,
Which even the Enemy doth reverence,
Which with much Cost, nor less Magnificence,
(On his own Sorrows too too prodigal)
Old Priam built; there I may best of all
Entrust him with his Sire. -- A cold Sweat flows
Over all my Limbs, my Mind distracted grows,
And dreads the omen of the dismal place.

"Oft a supposed Destruction (in this case)
"Men from a real Ruin hath preserved.
No other Hope of Safety is reserved.
A great and fatal Weight on him doth lie,
The Greatness of his own Nobility.

Pray Heaven no one discover or betray him.


Let there be none to witness where you lay him.


How if the Enemy demand the Boy?


Say, He was murdered in subverted Troy.


What boot's it to lie hid a while, that past,
To fall into their cruel Hands at last?

Despair not, hope for better Fate: "The first
"Charge of the Victors Fury is the worst.

Alas what should we hope, if he can ne'er
Be kept concealed without apparent Fear?

"Choice of their Safety the Secure may make,
"Those in distress must hold of any take.

What Desert place or unfrequented Land
Will give thee safe Repose? What friendly Hand
Protect us? To our Fears who'll comfort yield?
O thou who always did, thy own now shield,
Great Hector! This dear Treasure from thy Wife
Receive, let thy dead Ashes guard his Life.
Come Child, enter this Tomb; back why dost start?
Scorn thou to lurk in holes? His Fathers Heart
In him I see; he shames to fear. -- Quit, quit
Thy Princely thoughts now, and take such as fit
Thy present state. See all of Ilium
That's left, a Child, a Captive, and a Tomb.
Submit to Heavens Decree, nor fear to enter
Thy Fathers Monument; go boldly, venture.
There, if on Wretches Fates compassion have,
Thou'lt Safety find; if Death they give, a Grave.

He's hid: but lest thy Fears should him betray,
Remove some distance hence another way.

"The nearer that we fear, we fear the less:
But if you please let's withdraw --

Whist, peace:
Madam, your sad Complaints a while suspend,
The Cephalenian Prince this way does bend.

Cleave, Earth! and thou, dear Spouse, rend up the Ground
From lowest Hell, and in that dark Profound
Hide our Loves pledge. He comes, he comes, his Pace
And Looks speak Plots; there's Mischief in his Face.

THe Minister of a severe Decree
I come; yet beg this first, that you would be
So charitable tow'rds me to believe,
(Although they utterance from my mouth receive)
The words I shall deliver are not mine,
But what the Votes of all the Greeks enjoin.
Whose late Return to their loved Homes withstands
Great Hectors Heir: Him Destiny demands.
Still doubtful Hopes of an uncertain Peace,
And fear of Vengeance will the Greeks oppress,
Nor suffer them to lay down Arms so long
As thy Son lives, Andromache.

This Song
Does Calchas your great Prophet sing?

Although
He had said nothing, Hector tells us so.
Whose Stock we dread: "A generous Race aspires
"Unto the Worth and Virtue of their Sires.
So the great Herds small Play-fellow, which now
Sports in the Pastures with scarce budded Brow,
Strait with advanced Crest and armed Head,
Commands the Flock which late his Father led.
And so the tender Sprout of some tall Tree
Late felled, shoots up in a short time to be
Equal to that from whence it sprung, and lends
To Earth a Shade, to Heaven its Boughs extends.
So the small Ashes of a mighty Fire
Carelessly left, into new Flames aspire.
"Grief does indeed matters unjustly state,
"And makes of things but a wrong Estimate.
Yet if our Case you duly shall perpend,
You'll not think strange if after ten Years end,
Th'old Soldier spent with Toil new Wars should fear,
And never enough ruined Troy; for ne'er
Can we enjoy Security of Mind,
Our selves not safe, whilst still we fear to find
Another Hector in Astyanax.
Then rid us of this Terror that thus wracks
Our thoughts. This is the only cause of stay
Unto our Fleet, ready to wing its way.
Nor think me cruel because by Fates compelled
I Hectors Son require; had Heaven so willed,
I had as soon asked Agamemnon's Son,
Then suffer what the Victors self hath done.

Would God, dear Child, I had thee in my Hand,
Or knew thy present Fortune, or what Land
Now harbours thee; though Swords transpierc'd my Breast,
Though galling Chains my captived Hands oppressed,
Or Flames beset me round, they ne'er should move
Me yet to quit a Mothers Faith or Love.
Poor Infant, O where art thou? what strange Fate
Is fallen on thee? wander thou desolate
In untrac'd Fields? or perishedst thou, my Joy,
Amidst the Smoke and Flames of burning Troy?
Or hath the Victor in a wanton Mood
Of Cruelty plaid with thy Childish Blood,
And murdered thee in sport? Or by some Beast
Slain, do thy Limbs Idaean Vultures feast?

Come, come, dissemble not; 'tis hard to cheat
Ulysses: Know we can the
Of Mothers although Goddesses. ^ay
With these vain shifts, and where thy Son is, say.

Where's Hector? Priam? all the Trojans? You
For one ask, I for all.

Torture shall scrue,
Since our Persuasions cannot gain a free,
A forced Confession from thee.

Alas she
Is against the worst of Fate secured still,
That die not only can, but ought, and will.

These Boasts at Deaths approach will quickly fly.


No, Ithacus; if me you would terrify,
Threaten me Life, for Death's my wish.

Fire, Blows,
And Tortures shall enforce thee to disclose
The Secrets of thy Breast. "Oft-times we see
"Severity works more than Lenity.

Doom me to Flames, dissect with Wounds, and try
All torturing Arts that witty Cruelty
Did e're devise; Thirst, Famine, all Plagues, through
My Bowels burning Irons thrust; or mew
Me up in some dark noisome Dungeon: And
(If yet you think not these enough) command
Whatever Cruelties on captived Foes
A haughty barbarous Victor dare impose:
No Tortures e're shall a Confession wrest,
Nor Terrors daunt my stout Maternal Breast.

This obstinate Love thou to thy Child dost bear
Warns all the Greeks to like Parental Care.
After a War so far, so long, loss I
Should fear the Ills Calchas does prophecy,
Feared I but for my self: but 'tis not us
Thou threatst alone, but my Telemachus.

And must I comfort then afford my Foes
Against my will? I must. -- Sorrow disclose
Thy hidden Griefs. Now ye Atrides cheer!
And be thou still to Greeks the Messenger
Of happy News, Great Hector's Son is dead.

Where be the Proofs may make this credited?


So fall on me what e're the Victor's Rage
May threat; so Fates to my maturer Age
An easy close; and where I had my Birth
Afford me Burial: So may the Earth
Lie light on Hector's Bones, as he bereaved
Of Light lies amongst the Dead, and hath received
The dues of Funeral.

Fate's in his Fate
Accomplished, and firm Peace to Greece, then strait
Pronounce, Ulysses. -- Stay, fond Man, what dost?
Shall Grecians thee, and thou a Mother trust?
Perhaps she feigns, nor fears her dreadful Curse.
Fear Imprecations they that fear nought worse.
Sh'as sworn 'tis true; if so, then her Sons loss
What can she fear to her a heavier Cross?
Now ^mmon all thy slights together; be
Wholly Ulysses. Truth's ne'er hid long. We
Must sift her thoroughly. -- See, she weeps, sighs, mourns,
With anxious steps, now this, now that way turns.
And our words catches with a heedful Ear;
We must use Art, she does not grieve, but fear.
That with the sorrows of some Mothers we
Condole 'tis fit, but we must gratulate thee,
Happy in misery and thy Sons loss!
For whom a heavier Death intended was,
Who from that lofty Tower which now alone
Remains of Troy was destined to be thrown.

My Heart faints, Fear shakes all my Joints, a cold
Congealing Frost upon my Blood lays hold.

See, see, she trembles; this must be the way.
Her Fears a Mothers Love in her betray.
I'll fright her further yet. -- Go, search with speed
This Foe, that by his Mothers Fraud is hid,
This only Plague of Greece; find him where e're
He lies. -- So, have y'him? bring him here.
Why look thou back and tremble? -- Now he dies.

Would God this Fear from present grounds did rise;
Alas, 'tis with us habitual. "The Mind
"From what it long hath learnt is late declined.

Since thy Sons better Fate prevented hath
The Lustral Sacrifice, thus Calchas saith,
Our Fleet may hope return if we appease
With Hector's Ashes the incensed Seas,
And raze his Monument unto the Ground.
Now since the Son by death a way hath found
To escape the Justice of his destined doom,
We must exact it from his Father's Tomb.

What shall I do? my Mind a double Fear
Distracts; here my poor Child, the Ashes there
Of my dear Husband. Which shall I first prize?
Bear witness ye relentless Deities,
And thy blessed Manes, real Gods to me!
Nought, Hector, in my Son I pleasing see
But thy self only: Long then may he live
Thy Representative. -- And shall I give
My Husband's Ashes to the Waves? Over vast
Seas suffer that his rifled Bones be cast?
Let the other rather die. -- And can thou be
Spectatress of thy own Child's Tragedy?
See him thrown headlong from the Tower's steep height?
I can and will, rather than Hector yet
Be after death the Victor's Spoil again.
Think yet this lives, hath sense, can feel his pain,
Whilst the other Fates from Ills secured have.
Why staggerest thou? resolve strait which to save.
Ungrateful, doubt thou? there thy Hector is.
Mistaken Wretch, either is Hector: This
Yet young and living, who in time may be
Th'Avenger of his Father's death. -- Still we
Cannot save both. -- Resolve of the two however
To save him yet whom most the Grecians fear.

The Prophet's words shall be fulfilled; the place
I will demolish.

Which ye Sold-


Deface
The Monument.

The Faith of Gods and thee,
Achilles, we appeal to. Pyrrhus, see
Thy Father's Gift made good.

Down it shall go,
And with its Ruins the wide Champain strew.

No Wickedness ye Greeks have you refrained,
But this alone; Temples you have profaned,
And Gods propitious to you; yet ye you spared
The Mansions of the Dead. I amprepar'd
To hinder their intent, and will oppose
With weak unarmed Hands these armed Foes.
Anger and Indignation strengthen me!
Penthesilea like I'll amongst them fly,
Or Agave, that the Woods did trace,
Shaking her Thyrsus with a frantic pace,
Dealing dire Wounds insensibly, and by
Defending bear his Ashes company.

What does a Woman's passion move your hearts,
And vainer Cries? On Slaves, and ply your parts.

First by your bloody hands let me be slain.
Up from Avernus! break thy fatal Chain;
Rise, Hector, rise, Ulysses to subdue,
Thy Ghost alone will be sufficient. View
How Arms he brandishes! how Flames do fly
From his stout Hands! See y'him? Or is it I
That see him only?

Down with it to the Ground.


What dost? wilt see one Ruin then confound
Father and Son* Perhaps my prayers may yet
Appease them; strait resolve, or else the weight
Of the falling Tomb will crush thy Child to death.
First lose he any where his wretched Breath,
Or e're the Father the Son's ruin be,
Or Son the Father's. -- Thus, Ulysses, we

These Hands (which yet no Mans e're touched) submit.
Pity a Mother's woes, with patience hear
Her pious plaints, and lend a gentle Ear.
"And how much higher Heaven hath advanced thy state,
"So much the less depress a Wretches fate.
"When to the Miserable we extend
"Our Charity, we unto Fortune lend.
So to the chaste Embraces of thy Wife
May thou in peace return, and Fates the life
Of old Laertes till that day extend.
So may thy Son, thy Age's hope, transcend
Thy hopes and wishes, live more Years to see
Than hath his Grandsire, wiser prove than thee.
O pity! all my comfort's in this Boy.

Produce him first, then what you ask enjoy.


FOrth from the hollow Entrails of the Tomb
Thou wretched Theft of thy sad Mother come!
The Terror of a thousand Ships here see,
Ulysses, this poor Child! down on thy Knee,
Thy Lord with humble reverence adore,
And Mercy with submissive hands implore.
Nor think it shame for Wretches to submit
To what e're Fortune wills; the thoughts now quit
Of thy great Ancestors, nor Priam call
To mind, nor his great Power; forget it all,
And Hector too: assume a Captives state.
And though unsensible of thy own fate,
Poor Wretch, thou be, yet from our sense of woes
Example take, weep as thy Mother does.
'Tis not the first time Troy hath seen her Prince
Shed tears: so Priam, when a Child long since
The wrath of Alcides pacifi'd;
He who so fierce was, who in strength outvied
Even Monsters, who from Hell's forced Gates could yet
Through ways impervious open a Retreat:
Quelled by the Tears of his small Enemy;
Resume (says he) thy former Royalty,
And in thy Father's Throne and Empire reign.
But Faith more firmly than he did, maintain.
Happy that such a Victor him did seize!
Learn thou the gentle wrath of Hercules.
Or only please his Arms? See before thine eyes
No less a Suppliant than that Suppliant lies;
And begs but only Life, his Crown and State
He leaves to Fortune and the will of Fate.

Trust me the Mothers Sorrow moves me much,
But nearer me the Grecian Mothers touch,
To whose no little Grief this Child aspires.

And shall he then the Ruins which these Fires
Have made, repair? these Hands erect Troy's Fall?
Poor are the hopes she has if these be all.
We Trojans are not so subdued, that yet
We should to any be a Fear: is't Great
Hector in him you look at? think withal,
That Hector yet was dragged about Ilium's Wall.
Nay he himself, did he now live to see
Troy's Fate, would of an humbler Spirit be.
"Great Minds by pressures of great Ills are broke.
Or would you punish? Than a Slavish Yoke
What to free Necks more grievous? let him bring
His Mind to serve. This who'll deny a King?

Not we, but Calchas this denies to thee.


O thou damned Author of all Villainy!
Thou by whose Valour none yet ever died,
Whose Treacheries the Greeks themselves have tried.
The Prophet and th'abused Deities
Dost thou pretend? No, 't's thine own Enterprise,
Thou base Night-Souldier. Thou whose Manhoods proof
The Sun ne'er witnessed; only stout enough
To kill a Child: Now thou may brag and say,
Thou hast dared something yet in open day.

Enough the Greeks, too well the Trojans, know
Ulysses worth; but time we cannot now
Spend in vain talk. The Fleet does Anchor weigh.

Yet so much time afford us, as to pay
A Mother's last dues to my dying Boy;
And by our strict Embraces satisfy
My greedy Sorrows.

Would our power could give
Thy woes relief; yet what we can receive,
As long a time as thou thy self shalt please
To part and weep. "Tears Sorrow's burden ease.

O thou sweet Pledge of all my hopes! the Grace
Of a now ruined, but once glorious Race!
Terror of Greece! the Period of all
Thy Countries Ruins! her last Funeral!
Vain Comfort of thy wretched Mother, who
(Fondly God knows) of Heaven did often sue,
Thou might in war thy Father equallize,
In peace thy Grandsire; but Heaven both denies.
The Ilian Sceptre thou shalt never sway,
Nor shall the Phrygian Realms thy Laws obey,
Nor conquered Nations stoop thy Yoke to bear.
The Greeks thou ne'er shalt foil, nor Pyrrhus e're,
T'avenge thy Sire, at thy proud Chariot trail:
Nor with light brandished Arms wild Beasts assail
In the wide Forests: nor, when e're it falls,
Shalt solemnize Troy's chief of Festivals,
And
Nor about the sacred Altars nimbly tread;
And when exciting Notes shrill Cornets sound,
In Phrygian Temples dance an antic round.
A Death than Death it self more sad, for thee
Remains; and Trojan Walls shall something see
More woeful yet than Hector dragged.

Here close
Thy mournful plaints; immoderate sorrow knows
No bounds.

The time we for our Tears demand
Alas is small; permit yet with this Hand
I close his Eyes in life though not in death.
Dear Child, although so young thou lose thy breath,
Yet thou dy'st feared. Go, thy Troy looks for thee;
Go, and in freedom thy free Trojans see.

O pity, Mother!


Alas, why dost thou wring
My Hand, and to my Side (vain refuge!) cling?
As when a sucking Fawn a Lion spies,
Or roaring hears, strait to the Hind it flies:
Yet the fierce Beast frighting the Dam away,
With murdering Fangs seizes the tender prey.
So from my Bosom will the cruel Foe
Drag thee, poor Child! Yet (Dearest) e're thou go
Take my last Kisses, Tears, and this torn Hair;
Then to thy Father full of me repair.
Tell him, if former passions Ghosts do move,
Nor Funeral Flames extinguish those of Love,
Hector is much to blame, to let his Wife
Enthralled by Greeks, thus lead a Servile Life,
Though he lie still, Achilles yet could rise.
Take from my Head again, and from my Eyes,
These Tears and Tresses; all that now is left
Andromache, of Hector since berest.
These Kisses to thy Father bear from me:
But leave this Robe, that may some Comfort be
(When thou art gone) to thy poor Mother; this
Did thy Sire's Tomb and sacred Ashes kiss:
So shall these Lips, if any Relics here
Of their loved Dust, yet unshook off, appear.

She'll ne'er have done; -- "Grief knows not what is fit.
Bear hence this stop of the Arg^lic Fleet.

WHat Seats shall We poor Captives find?
Where are our new Abodes designed?
Planted in Thessalie,
Or shady Tempe shall we be?
Or sent to Phthia's rugged Fields?
Phthia, which stoutest Soldiers yields.
Or stony Trachy's? fitter Place
For Cattle of a hardy Race.
Shall us Iolchos entertain,
Proud in the Conquest of the Main?
Or Creet, whose spacious Land is round
With
Or barren Tricca? small Gyrton?
Or Modon with light Bents o'regrown?
Or the Oetoean Woods Recess,
Which more than once to Troy's Distress
Shafts Fatal sent? Or must we store
Thin-peopl'd Olenos with more?
Or unto Pleuron shall wego,
Pleuron the Virgin Dians Foe?
Or to fair-harbour'd Traezen get?
Or Pelion, Prothous proud Seat?
Third step to Heaven, where Chiron laid

In the Hills side, oft used to whet
His
By singing to his Harp's tuned strings
Battles and bloody Bickerings?
Or make Caristus, rich in veined
Marble, with various colours stained?
Or Chalcis, placed on a rough Shore,
Where the swift Euripus does roar?
Or shelter in Calydnae find,
Easily reached by any wind?
Or Gonoessa, which ne'er fails
Of stormy Blasts and blustering Gales?
Or to Enispae shall we steer,
Which Boreas angry Breath doth fear?
For Sea-girt Peparethos stand,
Which lies against Acte's pointed Land?
Or seek Eleusis through the Deep,
Where
Or Ajax his Salamine?
Or Calydon, by a wild Swine
His furious Mischiefs famed? Or make
For Bessa and Scarphe, where the Lake-
Like Titaressus with dull Waves
Creeping along, the Valleys laves?
Or shall we at the last set down
In Pylos, Aged Nestor's Town?
Pharis, Iove's Pisa, Elis see,

Let any Winds our Canvas fill,
And bear us to what Lands they will,
So we poor Wretches Sparta miss,
That bred the Bane of Troy and Greece;
So we at least from Argos run,
So we the proud Mycenae shun.
So we in Neritos ne'er plant,
Shorter and narrower the Zant.
So we ne'er reach the treacherous Bay,
And Shoals of Ithaca.
Hecuba can tell thy Fate?
(Of Queens the most unfortunate!)
What servile Hardships shalt thou try?
Where, or in whose Dominions dye?

where ever Hymen is unfortunate,
On whom sighs, mourning, blood, and slaughter wait,
There Helen's a fit Auspex, forced t'extend
The Woes of ruined Troy beyond their End.
False News of Pyrrhus Nuptials I must bear,
Gems, and Greek Habits for his Bride to wear.
Whilst (circumvented by my treacherous Wile)
I Paris Sister of her Life beguile;
And beguiled be she. "'Tis a Courtesy
"Unprepossessed with fear of Death, to dye:
Why doubt Thou to perform thy task? "On thos^
"The Guilt of enforced Crimes lies, who impose.
Thou Female Glory of the Dardan Race!
Heaven now begins to show a friendlier Face
To the Afflicted; does a Mate provide,
Such as not Priam could in all Troy's Pride.
For thee to lawful Hymen's sacred Rites,
The Chief of the Pelasgian Name, invites,
Who rules wide Thessaly: Thee Tethys, all
The Watery Powr's, thee, hers will Thetis call,
The Seas mild Empress! Pyrrhus marry thee,
Thou Niece to Peleus shalt, and Nereus be.
Put off these sad, and Festive Habits take,
Unlearn (...) Captive art, and Captive make.
Thy H^r frightfully staring, recommand
To order, by some curious Dressers Hand.
This chance may raise thee to a better State;
"Captivity hath made some Fortunate.

Was this then only wanting to our Woes?
This? To rejoice, when Troy in Ashes glows?
O time for Nuptials fit! but who denies,
Or doubts to Wed, when Helen does advise?
Helen the Bane, the Ruin, and the Pest
Of either Nation; See these Graves! where rest
Their valiant Chiefs! These Fields! about which are spread
The bared Bones, sad Relics of their Dead.
These, these, thy Marriage scattered, with a flood
Of Europe's best, and Asia's bravest blood:
Whilst thou at ease saw both thy Husbands sight,
Careless on which the Victory should light.
Go then, and for these Wedding Joys prepare!
For Nuptial Lights and Torches never care;
Troy's Flames will those supply. Now Troades
The Marriage Rites of Pyrrhus solemnize
As they deserve; that is, with tears and cries.

Though mighty Grief no curb, no reason knows,
But oft hates those are sharers in its Woes;
Yet before a Partial Judge can I defend
My Cause; who suffer more than you pretend.
Andromache for Hector, Hecuba
For Priam, freely mourns; I closely pay
My concealed Sighs for Paris. 'Tis severe,
Hateful and sad, a servile Yoke to bear.
Yet that have I endured, these ten years past.
Your Household Gods are sacked; Ilium laid wast.
To lose ones native Land, is a sad curse;
To fear, like me, without Relief, yet worse.
A fellow-sufferance does your Woes assuage.
Against me, the Victors both, and vanquished rage.
Whom you must serve, Chance yet hath scarce designed,
I'm sure, without a Lot, a Lord to find.
You'll say I was to Troy the cause of War,
And her sad Ruin. Take what you infer,
To be a Truth; if you can prove that e're
A Spartan Ship me to your Coasts did bear.
But if by Phrygians I a Prize was made,
And to her Judge a Gift by Venus paid,
Excuse then Paris. For our Cause, 'twill come
Before a rough Judge; it waits Atrides Doom.
But now, Andromache, thy Plaints laid by
A while, to bow this resolute Virgin try.
I scarce can hold from Tears. --

The thing is sad
That Helen weeps for; it must needs be bad.
But wherefore weeps she? say! what new Deceit?
What mischief plots Ulysses, that grand Cheat?
Must from Idaean Rocks the Maid be cast?
Or from this Tower, or yond' Cliffs, into vast
Seas hurled? where with his crooked and ragged side
Lofty Sygaeum does imbay the Tide?
Speak! What beneath thy looks sly vail is laid?
No Ill, but's less, than Pyrrhus to be made
To Priam Son in Law, and Hecuba.
What Pains, what Torments, must we suffer? say!
For this from our Woes sum may well be spared;
To be deceived. To dye, we're All prepared.

Would Heaven, the Gods Interpreter had doomed
Me to have died; and at Achilles Tomb
By Pyrrhus furious Hand to have fallen! that I
With thy sad Fate, Polyxena! might vie,
Whom Thetis Son, (t'his Grave first victim made)
Demands for Spouse in the Elysian shade.

See how great joy does her high soul express
At her declared death! Royal Robes and Dress
Now she assumes, now yields to adorn her head;
To dye she Marriage thinks, but Death to Wed.
Her aged Mother yet at the Report,
Is Thunder struck; nor more can Grief support,
With this surcharge oppressed. -- Courage! recall
Your Life and Spirits, Madam? -- On how small
A Thread hers hang! -- how little will suffice
T'ease Hecuba of all her Miseries!
She breaths, and comes t'her self again: -- I find
Death to the Miserable is unkind.

Yet lives Achilles to the Phrygians Woe?
Yet does he plague us? Is he still our Foe?
O Paris feeble Hand! his very Grave
And Ashes thirst our wretched Blood to have.
Once me a happy Troop of Children round
On every side enclosed; enough I found
T'impart to all my Kisses; nor could tell
Among such a fair and numerous Issue, well
How to divide a Mother. Now, there's none
Left me but this, my sole Companion,
My Joy and Comfort in Affliction
This, this poor Girl; The last Remain of all
Hecuba's Race! she only lives to call
Me Mother. -- Leave hard-temper'd Soul my Breast!
And this one Funeral after all the rest
Remit at length to me.
A shower of Tears does her pale Cheeks bedew.
Rejoice dear Child! gladly Andromache,
Gladly Cassandra thus espoused would be.

We, We poor Wretches, Hecuba, are most
To be deplored; who must on Seas be tossed,
Now here, now there, and God knows whither hurried!

In her own native Land.

You'd grieve yet more
Did you but know what Lot's for you in store.

Is of my Woes yet any Part unknown?


The Captives Dooms th'impartial Urn hath shown.


Whose Slave am I? Whom must I Master call?


Unto the Scyrian Youth, by Lot you fall.


Happy Cassandra! whom Prophetic Rage
And Phoebus from the Lot does disengage.

She's Agamemnon's Prize.


Is Hecuba
By any sought for?

You a short-liv'd Prey
Are to Ulysses, against his will, become.

O who could be Dispenser of a Doom
So cruel and tyrannical! that brings
Queens to be Slaves to those that are not Kings?
What God does so unluckily dispose
Poor Captives? What stem Judge, unto our Woes
Weight adding, does so little understand
To choose us Lords? and with a rigorous Hand
Deals such cross Fates to Wretches? What dire Lot
To Achilles Arms does Hector's Mother put?
Given to Ulysses! -- Now indeed distressed
I seem; with all Calamities oppressed.
I shame at such a Lord, not Servitude.
Must he then who Achilles Spoils endued,
Have Hector's too? And must the barren, small,
And Sea-girt Ithaca give me Funeral?
Lead, Lead, Ulysses, when you please; no stay
I'll make, but follow thee, my Lord. And may
My own Fates follow me. No calms assuage
The angry Seas, let them with Tempests rage.
May Wars, Fire, mine, and Priam's Miseries
Pursue you; and 'till those Plagues come, suffice
It, this is sure: You have your Lot; I yet
Have robbed you of all hoped for Benefit.
But see with a precipitated Pace
Where Pyrrhus comes? with fury in his Face.
Pyrrhus, Why stopp'st thou in thy Bloody Race?
Sheath in this Breast thy Sword: Let Death in fine
Achilles Father in Law and Mother join.
Go on thou Murderer of the Aged! On!
This Blood fits thee: To Execution
Drag hence a Captive Wretch: And by so vile
Abhorred a Slaughter, Gods above defile,
And Ghosts below. -- What, shall I pray for you?
Seas to such dismal Sacrifices due.
On your whole Fleet, your thousand Ships, like curse
Fall, I wish that shall carry me, or Worse.

TO those that Mourn, 'tis sweet Relief,
When Nations Sorrows echo to their Grief.
Less felt is that Afflictions Sore
Which numerous Sharer's mutually deplore.
Sorrow is like Infection; loves t'obtrude
It's-self upon a Multitude.
And counts it some content,
Not singly to Lament.
There's none denies to bear that Fate
All suffer under: in a common Woe
None thinks himself unfortunate,
Though he be so.
Take hence the Happy, lay the Rich aside,
Whose Gold, and Fertile Acres is their Pride,
The Poor will raise their drooping Heads. There's none
Miserable, but by Comparison.
To those by great Calamities o'retook,
'Tis sweet to see none wear a cheerful look.
Sadly that Man his Fate bewails,
Private Vessel Sails;
And naked, helpless, and forlorn,
Sinks in the Port to which his Course was born.
Storms and his Fate, he bears with evener Mind,
Wo sees a thousand Ships before him drowned,
And all the Shore scattered with Wrecks does find,
Whilst Waves by Corus dashed against Rocks resound.
Phryxus for Helen's single loss complained,
When Gold-fleec'd Leader of the Flock
They both were took
(Brother and Sister) on his Back.
And she in mid-Seas fell a help-less Wrack.
Deucalion yet and Pyrrha, both refrained
From Tears, when they the swelling Sea beheld,
And nothing but the Sea that swelled:
Of Lost Mankind, all that remained.
But these sad meetings, these our mutual Tears
Spent to deplore our miserable State,
The Fleet, which ready now to sail appears,
Will strait dissolve and dissipate.
Soon as the Trumpets hasty sound shall call
The Mariners aboard, and all
With favouring Gales and Oars for Sea shall stand,
When from our sight shall fly our dear-lov'd Land:
What Fears will then our wretched Thoughts surprise,
To see the Land to sink, and the Sea rise?
When Ida's towering hight
Shall vanish from our sight;
The Child shall then unto its Mother say,
The Mother to her Child, pointing that way
Which tends unto the Phrygian Coast;
Lo! yonders Ilium where you spy
Those Clouds of Smoke to scale the Sky.
By this sad sign, when all marks else are lost,
Trojans their Country shall descry.

O Horrid, cruel, cursed Fates! What Crime
Hath bloody Mars yet seen in Ten Years Time
Like sad or barbarous! where shall I begin?
With your Woes, Madam? Or yours, Aged Queen?

Whose Woes so ever you tell, they're mine; each Breast
Bears its own Griefs, but mine's with all oppressed,
The universal sorrow: None can say
He's wretched, but he's such to Hecuba.

The Virgin's sacrificed; and the Youth cast
From the Towers height: Both brave yet at the last.

Relate the Series of their Deaths: declare
This double Tragedy: I long to hear
The sum of all my Griefs. Speak then, and show
The entire complement of all my Woe.

A Tower yet stands; Troy,
Whence, bearing in his Arms his Ages Joy,
His little Grandson; Priam used to view
His Troops, and order what those Troops should do.
Thence, (when brave Hector in that glorious Fight
What time the routed Greeks he chased in flight
With Sword and Fire) to young Astyanax
The old King showed his Fathers valiant Acts.
This noted Tower, once our Walls chiefest Grace,
(Now a cursed Rock, and a detested Place)
Huge crowds of Soldiers with their Troops surround.
A Sea-man scarce to guard their Fleet is found,
All thither flock: To some a Hill does lend
From far an open Prospect, some ascend
The Rocky Cliffs, and there, eager to see,
On Tiptoes stand. Some climb this neighbouring Tree,
Some that: Th'adjoyning Woods tremble to bear
The numerous Spectators. Some there are
Climb up steep Precipices, some bestride
Ridges of half burnt Houses, others ride
On pieces of the Broken Wall; and some,
To see his Son's Death, get on Hector's Tomb.
Ulysses proudly stalks through all the throng,
As Way was made; leading in's Hand along
The Princely Youth; who makes no sluggish stop
In this sad March; but gaining the Tower's top,
Thence, here and there, with an undaunted Gest,
Casts round his angry Eyes: Of some fierce Beast,
As a young tender Cub, not able yet
To tyrannize with murdering Fangs, does threat
And vainly snarls, and snaps, and swells with rage;
The Princely Captive on this lofty Stage
Like courage shows; and from all hearts does force
Compassion; even Ulysses feels remorse.
He weeps not yet for whom all else shed tears.
Now whilst Ulysses (as
His solemn Speech; and with set Prayers invites
The cruel Gods to those more cruel Rites,
He nimbly of his own accord, leaps down
Amidst the Ruin's of his State and Town.

What Colchian, or what wandering Scythian,
Or Hyrcan, bordering on the Caspian Main,
That knows no Law, would such an Act have dared?
Cruel Busyris butchering Altars, spared
Yet Childrens Blood; nor ever Diomed
His Horses with the flesh of Infants fed.
Who'l take thy Limbs, and give them Funeral?

What Limbs could there be left by such a Fall?
His Bones were crushed to pieces; Nor one Grace,
Or mark was left in Body or in Face
Resembling his Illustrious Father: All
Were utterly defaced by the sad Fall.
His Neck was broken. His Head against a Rock
Encountering, dashed his Brains out with the knock.
Nought but a shapeless Trunk he lay.

Even so
Too like his Father.

From this Scene of Woe
The Greeks next, (weeping yet for what they'd done)
To act another Crime as barbarous, run
In hast to Achilles Tomb; whose farther side
Rhetaean Waves beat with a Gentle Tide.
The Extremes to that opposed, a Champaign Ground
Invests; in the midst of which a Vale is found,
From whose low Edge a hilly Ridge ascends,
And about it like a Theatre extends.
The Shore is covered with the numerous Press.
Some think this done in order to release
Their Navies stop; some look on the Design
As meant t'extirpate all Troy's Hostile Line.
Most of the giddy Vulgar seem to hate
The Act, they come to see and perpetrate.
Trojans attend too; and with fearful Eyes
Expect the last of all Troy's Tragedies.
When strait, as at our solemn Marriage Rites,
In head of all, are born the Nuptial Lights:
Next Helen, as the Brides sad Pronuba
Comes with dejected men; whilst Phrygians pray,
So may Hermione wed; and so may she
Returned with shame to her first Husband be.
Trojans and Greeks are both with Horror struck,
When forth the Princess comes; with submiss Look,
But Cheeks that died in modest Blushes shine,
More Beautiful in this her sad Decline.
As Phoebus seems to cast a sweeter Light
Now near his Set, when the approaching Night
Invades the confines of the doubtful Day.
The vulgar Minds are lost in strange Dismay;
Who (as their Custom is) always commend
Those who are going to their fatal End.
Her Beauty some, others her Youth as much.
Some the sense does of her changed fortune touch.
All her high Spirit praise; that Death dares meet.
Fearless, she outsteps Pyrrhus; whilst to see it,
Some quake, some pity, some admire. Now come
To the Lands Point, Pyrrhus his Fathers Tomb
Ascends; nor does the stout Virago shrink
Or draw one Foot yet back, though at Deaths brink,
But with a stern look, Pyrrhus to provoke,
Turns to receive the Sacrificing Stroke.
Pity at once, and wonder all minds fill,
Seeing her so brave, and Pyrrhus slow to kill.
Soon as his Hand into her tender Breast
Had forced the murthering Steel, a full stream pressed
Of bubbling Gore through the large wound: nor died
Her Courage yet: she fell as though she tried
T'oppress Achilles in his Grave, and force
The Earth to lye yet heavier on his Corse.
Both sides, the Phrygians, and the Greeks lament:
These timerously, their Sighs those louder vent.
This was the Order of the Sacrifice.
Nor on the Grounds hard Surface stagnant lies,
Or floats in streams the sacrificed Blood;
The thirsty Grave soon drunk up all the Flood.

Go, go ye Greeks! now seek your Homes again,
With your winged Fleet securely plough the Main,
The Royal Virgin, and the Youth are slain.
The War's now ended. -- Would my life were so.
Where shall I bear this Burden of my Woe?
How quit my Deaths vivacious Remora?
For whom shall I my Tears sad Tribute pay?
For my Girl? Grand-son? Husband? Country lost?
Or for all these at once? or my self most?
Whose only wish is Death. Cruel! thou hy'st
To murder Infants; to young Virgins fly'st:
Each where make hast to kill: But me alone
Thou fear; and shun'st, though all night called upon
'Mid'st Fire and Sword: -- Nor Rage of hostile Powers,
Nor Flames, nor Ruins of Troy's falling Towers,
One poor old Woman could dispatch. How nigh
To thee, yet ( Priam!) when thou fell, stood I?

Away to Sea, ye Captives! now unmor'd
The Greek Fleet hoises Sail: Hast, hast aboard.

PAge 21. Line 5. read to. p. 27. l. 2. both fell. p. 43. l. 24. By that* p.
49. l. 3. S^l ri^g. I^. l. 4. Or setting. p. 59. l. ult. Let us. p. 78. l. 26.
W^lfgangus. p. 82. l. 11. religi^. p. 87. l. 1. (...) p. 88. l. 27. A^. p. 92.
l. 21.. p. 109. l. 7. Hel^'s.


