1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Bachelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulder, and a White-Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company in
their Hats, Blew and Yellow.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesties, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Blew a Yellow.

8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies
Colours, with others of Their Majesties Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horse-back, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroidered: Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colours of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colours.

11. The Master of Defence with the same Scarf and Colours, Eight Persons of
the same Science to Attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed in carrying of Standards
and Banners.

13. Eighty Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, Yellow Sleeves and Blew Caps, each of
them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is
Painted the Coat-Armour of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, ranked all two by two,
beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them
are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Centre of them fall
two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesties, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen Ushers, follow'd by the Budg-Batchelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Bachelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Guild-Hall, where
the Lord Mayor Elect joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all
of them in this Order march through Kingstreet down to Three Crane-Wharf, there
entering into their several Barges which are gloriously adorned with Flags and
Pendants, His Lordship this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is
conducted to the Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremonial and
Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths to their Majesties, he returns again by
Water to Black-Fryers Stairs, with Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Music
playing, c.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap-side, where
his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant.

ON a large Stage are placed two large Lyons finely Gilded and Polished, being
the Supporters to the Drapers Company. On their backs are seated two Negroes in
their Native Habit, bearing in their Hands two large Banners, the one of the
Cities, the other the Drapers Arms; their Bridles, Trappings, and other
Ornaments all of the Companies Colour.

In the Rear of the Lyons, and adjoining to them, is Erected a Golden Chariot
set with all the richest Embellishments that can be performed by Art.

Supremely elevated and gradually ascending, under a Canopy of Silver tied up,
in a Majestic glory sits a Young and Beautiful Virgin, representing Arachne
the Mistress and Patroness of Arts, Industry, Spinstry, c. A Peruque of Curled
Bright Flaxen Hair flowing from her Shoulders, a Crown of Stars Around her
head, beset with precious Stones, enrobed in a Bass or Tunic of Purple and
Carnation, bearing in her Right hand the Kings Banner, and in her Left a
Cornucopia to signify that Increase is owing to Industry and Art.

On her right hand (on a Descent beneath) sits Diligence, on her Left hand
Industry.

Diligence Arrayed in a Robe of Lemon Coloured Silk, with a mantle of Green
Sarsenet, in short curled hair with a Wreathe of Laurel, a pair of Silver Sheers
in one hand and a Banner of the Cities in the other.

Industry, in a Robe of Crimson Silk Fringed with Silver, a Mantle
Party-Colour'd, Brown Hair, a Garland of Flowers, bearing in one hand a Shield
Vert, a Bee-Hive, and a Swarm, in the other the Lord Mayors Arms.

In the Front of this Chariot are placed three other Figures, richly adorned in
their Proper Habits, Success, Union and Tranquillity, Success beating the Kettle
Drum, and Union and Tranquillity sounding of Trumpets.

HOld, hold my sooty sun burnt Charioteers,
Behold the awful Lord of Power appears:
Bid my Triumphant Driving Chariot stay,
Till to bright HONOUR I my Homage pay.
That Powerful Hand must stop my rolling Wheels,
Whilst to such WORTH even my proud Lyon Kneels.
My Lyons! Yes; at that commanding Word,
They know their Duty and must own their Lord.
If such their Homage, Sir, what must be mine,
I who but only from Your Favour shine?
Though proud Arachne does her self profess,
Of Arts the Mistress, and the Patroness.
Fair Industry and Arts your Hand-Maids stand;
The improving Age and the Enriching Land,
All spin their Thread from Your Encouraging hand.
My Wheel then and my Loom are all Your own,
And tis Your Smiles that mount me to my Throne.
Then from that Throne, my Lord, I bend thus low;
And to Acknowledge the vast Debt I owe,
My Founders Fame in my own Loom enrolled,
For that Rich Web I'll spin a Thread of Gold.
ON a Large Stage is Artfully and Eminently Erected a Lofty Pyramid, whereon
is placed (and Richly Gilded) all manner of Trophies, as Standarts, Ensigns,
Shields, Helmets, Trumpets, and other Military Habiliments, c. On the Pinnacle
of the Pyramid Three Imperial Crowns. Beneath this Stately Pyramid, on each
side the Basis, are seated four Persons, representing Albion, Germania,
Hispania and Batavia, intimating the present CONFEDERACY, Arrayed in this
following Manner.

Albion in a Suit of Silver Armour with a Crimson Scarf, on his Head a Large
Peruke tied back in a bag, his brow encircled with a Gold Laurel, in his right
hand a Golden Truncheon, in his left a Banner of England, his Buskins Crimson,
inlayed with Gold.

Holland in an Orange Coloured Robe, a Silver Head-Piece, a Red Plume of
Feathers, and a Silver Mantle.

Germany in a Purple Robe of Wachet Colour Silk, a Silver Head-Piece and Scarf.

Spain in a Purple Robe, a Gold Mantle, and Gold Head-Piece.

At the 4 Corners of this Stage are placed these four Rivers in Proper Habits,
with their Urns, Rushes Flags and Reeds, c. viz. The Boyne, Shannon, Rhine and
Danube, signifying the present Seats or Scenes of War, and the whole Pageant
the Royal Confederacy of Europe, c.

WHilst Nassaus Trump shall to endless Ages blow,
Far as the Boyne, or Shannons Waters flow:
Third Edward and Fifth Henry's deathless name,
All centring in One Consummating Fame;
Bear up, fair Albion, thy exalted Pride,
Rise high my Monumental Pyramid.
But whilst my Elevated thoughts I raise,
All tuned to the Great WILLIAMS hallowed Praise;
Whilst my Transported Veneration mounts
To that vast Theme, and the Summed Mass recounts:
'Tis just, my Lord, I pay Your Equal due;
You share his Cause, and must his Honour too.
Does the Armed Caesar drive Your Foes before You;
Yes, You, kind Patriot, Plume his Wings for Glory:
Divide between you then your shared Renown,
William that Wears, you that support a Crown.
ON a spacious Stage is Eleborately contrived Erected a stately Amphitheatre of
the Richest Egyptian Marble, curiously wrought and adorned; designed and built
after the Corinthian order, with Columns and Pilasters in a Quadrangular Form,
wherein are seated in four Arches, bearing each the Prospect of an
Amphitheatre, Neptune and Thetis, Mars and Bellona sumptuously Dressed after the
manner of those Heathen Gods and Goddesses.

Neptune in a Robe of Sea-Green, fringed with Gold, a Silver Mantle, on his
head a Coronet of Shells and Coral, his hair and beard Green, in his Right hand
a Silver Trident, in the other a Banner of my Lords, c.

Thetis in an Aurora Coloured Mantua; and Watchet Coloured Bases, a Coronet of
shells and Coral, a Golden Mantle, bearing the Cities Bannar.

Mars in a Roman Body of Gold, A Silver head-piece, a Plume of Red Feathers and
Bases, a Silver Scarf, bearing the Kings Banner.

Bellona in a Carnation Robe fringed with Gold, a silver head-piece, a Plume of
Red and Blew Feathers, a silver Scarf.

On the Cupulo a stately Figure of Fame gilt: among the Ornaments of the
several Columes, are intersprinkled these proper Mottoes.

Victrix Fortuna.

Triumphans Causa.

Over Neptune

Imperium, Oceano, sed Famam terminet Astris.

Over Mars.

Vltricibus Armis

NEptune and Mars (the Spear and Trident joined)
The two great equal Terrors of Mankind,
From all our desolating Vengeance, hurled
Around the Solid and the Floating World,
We come to fill the Triumph of this Day,
And both our Tributary Duties Pay.
To Augusta's great Commanding PRAETOR, you
D^ead Caesars Image, Caesars Vassals bow,
And 'tis but Just that all those aiding Powers
That wait his Triumph, should attend on yours.
Whilst the great NASSAU treads the Worlds fair Stage,
Fills Fames loud Trump, the Hero of the Age;
Though his Illustrious Hand leads to the field,
The Arming World that fights beneath his Shield;
Battles and Arms his Sovereign Right, 'tis true,
But Wealth and Riches, those, my Lord, your due,
The Sinews of proud War belong to you:
And whilst He Marches EUROPES Leading Lord,
'Tis He but Weilds, 'tis you that Edge the Sword.
IN the Front of which is placed the Crest of the Worshipful Company of
Drapers, being a Ram Artfully carved and properly Painted, as big as the Life,
planted for Magnificene on a green Mount, or Hill. On whose back is mounted a
Beautiful Boy with Flaxen Hair, crowned with a Garland of Roses, in a Robe of
white Sarsenet, and a Carnation Mantle fringed with Gold, with white Shepherds
shoes and stockings, playing on delightful Music, bearing the Banner of the
Arms of the Corporation of Drapers.

In the Rear is placed a stately Bower composed after the Tuscan order, well
carved and richly gilded and painted, and adorned with all manner of flowers.

Under this Bower on a Green bank sit Sylvanus and Fauna, the Rural Deitys of
the Groves and Flocks c. to whom the Shepherds and Shepherdesses pay Devotion,
c.

Sylvanus in a Robe of straw colour, Embroider^d with Gold, a sky coloured
mantle Fringed with Silver, a Garland of Flowerson his head, white hair and
beard, Carnation silk hose, gold Buskins, a Shepherds Crook, a Linen Scrip,
and Leather bottle, bearing the Cities Banner.

Fauna Attired in a Purple Robe, Embroider^d with Silver, a Scarlet Mantle
Fringed with Gold, light Flaxen hair, on her head a straw hat adorned with
Flowers, a Sheepcrook, a silver Scrip and Leather Bottle, bearing the Banner of
the Lord Mayors Arms.

In the square of this Plain, planted round with Trees and Bushes, adorned with
Satyrs other Rural Figures, are Shepherds, Shepherdesses and Wood-Nimphs, all
Gaily Attired, with Bags, Bottles, Sheephooks and Streamers Flying, c. with
other Persons concerned in the Woollen Trade at Work, as an Old Woman Spinning
of Yarn, some Carding and Picking of Wool, and all at Intervals, Frolicking,
Pipeing, Dancing and Singing, representing the Pastoral and Rural Innocent
Mirth, as a Compliment to the New Lord Mayor, and a Testimony of their Service
to the Drapers Company.

COme Shepherds and Nymphs a jolly fair Train,
Let's Frolic and Dance it around the Plain,
Round the Plain,
Round the Plain,
Let's Frolic and Dance it around the Plain.
We'll drink my Lord's Health, then Laugh lye down,
And all to the Glory of London Town,
London Town,
London Town,
And all to the Glory of London Town.
what though the whole Alarmed Globe all round,
Their softer Airs in Wars loud Thunder drowned,
The Frighted Swain throws his tuned Reed away:
No sullen Cloud shades Britains halcyon day.
Here Peace does with her Tuneful Measures reign,
And to your Triumph brings this Rural Train.
'Tis true, my Lord, when we approach before ye,
We neither boast of Pomp, nor State, nor Glory.
Yet our Course Bowls as hearty Mirth can hold,
As Theirs that drink your Lordships Health in Gold.
Here the Pageantry concluding, the Painters, George Holmes and Richard Hayes,
bid you good Night; the Lord Mayor and the whole Train moving off to Dinner,
which finishes the Solemnity of the Day.


