1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns Faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Bachelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budge-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulders, and a White Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company in
their Hats, Crimson and White.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
His Majesties, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Crimson and a White.

8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the Companies
Colours, with others of His Majesties Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City Marshals each of them Mounted on Horse-back, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper, all Embroidered; Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend with Scarfs, and Colours of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colours.

11. The Master of Defence, with the same Scarf and Colours, Eight Persons of
the same Science to attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps employed in carrying the Standards
and Banners.

This Ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, and ranked all Two by
Two, beginning with the inferior part of the Standard-Bearers. In the Head of
them are placed Two Drums, One Fife, and One Gentleman bearing the Companies
Arms.

In the Rear of them, Two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
Deceased Benefactors.

In the Center of them, fall Two Drums.

In the Rear of them Three Drums, One Fife, and Two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing Two Banners, One of His Majesties, the Other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen-Ushers, followed by the BudgBatchelors.

The next, Two Gentlemen bearing Two Other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foins Bachelors.

In the Rear fall in Two Drums, and a Fife. Then Two Gentlemen One bearing my
Lord MAYOR's, the Other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen-Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division

The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts his Horse, with the Aldermen Two by Two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of Two and Two the whole Body move toward Skinners-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Elect, attended from his own House, joins with the Old
Lord Mayor and his Retinue; whence all of them, in this Order, March through
King-street down to Three-Grane-Wharfe, there entering into their several
Barges, which are gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship, and
this Gallant Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the
Exchequer-Bar; there having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties,
and taken the Oaths to His Majesty, he returns again by Water to
Black-fryers-Stairs, with Drums Beating, Trumpets Sounding, Music Playing, c.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies Landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap-side, where
his Lordship is Saluted with the First Pageant.

ON a large Stage are Erected Four Antique Pedestals, upon which are planted
Four Urns of Gold, from which issue forth Four Trees sprinkled with
Golden-Nutmegs. In the Center is planted a large Camel of Gold, being the Creft
of the Honourable Company; on which rides a beautiful Figure, richly and
properly Dressed, representing Fame; Below, on each fide of the Stage, are placed
Four Figures more, viz. Justice, Mercy, Equity, and Law.

IF Monarchs in their Sovereign Command,
In no less Post than Heavens Vicegerents stand;
And, in the Second Sphere of Government,
The Magistrate dos the Crown'd-Head Present;
Hayl then, My LORD, to Your Praetorian Seat,
Where both the Caears and Heavens Image meet:
And here 'twixt Justice, Equity, and Law,
So near the Life Your Great Originals draw;
Till Your Augusta's Heart, so all Your Own,
You fix the CHAIR the Copy af the THRONE:
Whilst 'twixt her Echoing Praise and Bended Knee,
You make Your Happy Year a Jubilee,
Thus shall You Eternize Your Hononour'd Name,
And never want the loudest Trump of Fame.
A Large Chariot splendidly Embellished with all manner of Enrichments of
Silver, as Lyons Heads, Large Shields, Noble Festoons, and Embossed Goloss; The
Wheels likewise are Silver. Beneath the Chariot Wheels are Piles of Trophies,
all of Silver, viz, Helmets, Targets, Armoury of all sorts, c. This Chariot is
drawn by Two stately Griffons, the Companies Supporters, on whose Backs are
seated Two Princely Figures, Representing Asia and America; as being those
Parts of the World whence the Spicery and other Grocery are Imported. In this
Chariot fits a Figure Representing Victory, Attended by Six more Figures
Personating Wisdom, Policy, Labour, Industry, Vigour, and Vigilance.

WHilst Victory, with all her echoing Praise,
Dos the Great WILLIAM's Deathless Honour raise,
Is it the Heroe's only Crowned? And grows
The Laurel only for the Warriour's Brows?
No! Peace her Trophies has, as well as War:
Your Lordship with Great Caesar shares thus far;
He in his Martial, You Your Justice Seat;
Whilst He in Foreign Fields in Fame so Great,
His Sword and Shield his Glittering VVreath Secures,
Your Sword and Scales at Home shall Plant You Yours.
This Difference, 'tis true, Your Toils attends;
His Foes He Conquers, You shall win his Friends.
Thus both the Prince and Magistrate shall join,
Both Glories Tune One Harmony Divine:
Your Olive-Garland, with his Bays shall Shine.
IN the Center of a very large Stage is Erected a Magnificent Pile, as the
Shrine of St. Anthony, Patron to the Honourable Company; In this Pile, under
Four Arches fits St. Anthony and Three more Attendants, Representing India,
Persia, and Arabia; The whole is Environed with Twelve Pedestals, bearing as
many Large Golden-Urnes, from whence Issue Cinnamon-Trees, Richly Ornamented
with Flowers, Blossoms, Golden-Fruit, c. Within the Body of this Pageant are
several Persons in Rural Habits, as Negroes, Tauneys, Virginia-Planters, c. All
exercised in Imitation of their several Employments. The whole Pageants all
Adorned with Flags and Streamers.

WHilst Proud St. Anthony, in his Spicy Plains,
The Honourable Grocers Patron Raigns;
'Tis here my Aromatic Odours spring;
And my Rich Fruits their fragrant Harvest bring.
But hold! -- From my poor Throne, I must remove,
'Tis You're the Lord of all my Balmy Grove:
'Tis from Your Smiles alone each kind Perfume,
And all my Oriental Sweets must Bloom.
Sweets did I say! You've Sweets yet more Refined;
Virtue and every Grace that decks Mankind.
Virtue a Plant of Paradise may boast,
The Original Offspring of the Eden Coast:
Nor let the Famous Bird of the Fair East
Vaunt her Proud Urn of that Rich-Mass possessed;
'Tis Virtue only Builds the Spicy Neft.
GRin Malice, burst Envy, cheer Albion, sing Fame.
'Tis all a just Tribute to NASSAU's Great Name;
He comes! And, hark, round
The Hosannas resound.
In his Chariot Triumphant the Hero dos move,
Whilst His own Grateful Thunder salutes our dear JOVE.
The Virgins strew Flowrs, and the Matrons they Pray,
The Nymphs on the Plains, and the Shepherds they Play.
The Groves they all Ring,
Whilst the Nightingales Sing
And the Lark to the Skies the sweet Harmony bears,
Till the Gods join in the Chorus and new Tune their Spears.
He comes, yes he comes, but more strong to Return:
His Friends they Rejoice, but His Foes they must Mourn.
His bold Pen of Steel,
Has yet Volumes to fill;
For the brave British LYON the Lillies must Win.
He began at the Boyne, and shall end at the Seine.

