WHat have we left untried to please this Age,
To bring it more in liking with the Stage?
We sunk to Farce, and rose to Comedy;
Gave you high Rants, and well-writ Tragedy.
Yet Poetry, of the Success afraid,
Called in her Sister Music to her aid.
And, lest the Gallery should Diversion want,
We had Cane-Chairs to Dance 'em a Courant.
But that this Play may in its Pomp appear;
Pray let our Stage from thronging Beaux be clear.
For what e're cost we're at, what e're we do,
In Scenes, Dress, Dances; yet there's many a Beau,
Will think himself a much more taking show.
How often have you cursed these new Beau-skreens,
That stand betwixt the Audience and the Scenes?
I asked one of 'em the other day -- Pray, Sir,
Why do ye the Stage before the Box prefer?
He answered -- Oh! there I Ogle the whole Theatre,
My Wig -- my Shape, my Leg, I there display,
They speak much finer things than I can say.
These are the Reasons why they crowd the Stage;
And make the disappointed Audience rage.
Our Business is, to study how to please,
To Tune the Mind to its expected ease.
And all that we expect, is but to find,
Equal to our Expense, the Audience kind.

NOw, good Egeus, what's the News with thee?

Full of Vexation come I, and Complaint,
Against my Child, my Daughter Hermia.
Stand forth Demetrius, my Gracious Lord,
This Man has my Consent to Marry her.
Stand forth, Lysander; this, most Noble Duke,
This, has Bewitched the Bosom of my Child.
Thou, thou Lysander, thou hast given her Spells,
In Bracelets of thy Hair, Rings, Lockets, Verses.
(Arts that prevail on unexperienced Youth)
With cunning thou hast stolen my Daughter's Heart.
Turned her Obedience (which is due to me)
To Stubbornness: If therefore, (Royal Sir)
My Daughter does not here before your Grace,
Consent to Marry with Demetrius,
Let the stern Law punish her Disobedience,
And Cage her in a Nunnery.

Be advised, Fair Hermia,
To you your Father should be as a God,
The Maker of those Beauties; yes, and one
To whom you are but as a Form in Wax,
By him Imprinted, and within his Power,
To leave the Figure, or to race it out.

O would my Father looked but with my Eyes.

No, no; your Eyes must with his Judgment look.

Let me entreat you, Sir, to Pardon me.
I know not by what Power I am made bold,
Nor how it may concern my Modesty,
In such a Presence to unfold my thoughts.
But I beseech your Grace, that I may know
The worst that may befall me in this case,
If I refuse to Wed Demetrius.

You must Abjure
For ever the Society of Men.
Therefore, Fair Hermia, question your Desires,
Know of your Youth, examine well your Blood,
Whether (if you refuse your Father's Choice)
You can endure the Habit of a Nun,
To be immured for ever in a Cloister.

Is there no Mean? No other Choice, my Lord?

None, Hermia, none.
Therefore prepare to be Obedient,
Or like a Rose to wither on the Tree.
Consider well; take till to morrow Morning,
And give me then your Resolution.

Relent, sweet Hermia; and Lysander yield
Your doubtful Title, to my certain right.

You have her Father's Love, Demetrius,
Let me have Hermia's; Marry, marry him.

Scornful Lysander, true he has my Love.
And what is mine my Love shall render him;
And she is mine, and all my right in her
I give, and settle on Demetrius.

I am, my Lord, as Nobly Born, as he;
My Fortune's every way as great as his.
And (without boast) my Love is more than his.
But what is more than all these boasts can be,
I am Beloved of Beauteous Hermia.
Why should this Faithless Man Invade my Right?
He who solicited Old Nedar's Daughter,
And won her Love; The Beauteous Hellena,
Though she's neglected; she poor Lady dotes
Upon this spotted and inconstant Man.

'Tis true, Lysander, I have heard as much.

resolve to be obedient.
Or, as the Law ordains it, you must take
An everlasting Farewell of the World.
To Morrow in the Morning give your answer: so farewell.

O my true Hermia! I have never found
By Observation, nor by History,
That Lovers run a smooth, and even course:
Either they are unequal in their Birth --

O cross too high to be imposed on Love!

Or if there be a Sympathy in choice,
War, Sickness, or pale Death lay Siege to it,
Making it momentary as a sound,
Swift as the Lightning in the blackest night;
That at one Instant shows both Heaven and Earth.
Yet ever a man can say, behold the Flame,
The jaws of darkness have devoured it up;
So quick even brightest things run to Confusion.

If then true Lovers have been ever crossed,
It stands as a Decree in Destiny.
Then let us teach each other Patience,
Because it is a customary thing.

'Tis well advised, my Hermia,
Pray hear me. I have an Aunt, a Widow,
She has no Child, and is extremely rich;
She chose me, loves me, bred me as her Son,
Has settled all her Fortune upon me.
To her we'll fly; and there, (my sweetest Hermia)
There (if you give consent) I'll marry you.
And thither this Inhuman, Cruel Law
Cannot pursue us. If thou love me then,
Steal from thy Father's House this very night,
And in the Wood, a mile without the Town,
Near the great spreading Oak, I'll stay for thee,
And at some little distance from that place
Have all things ready to convey thee thence.

Oh my Lysander!
I swear to thee by Cupid's strongest Bow,
By his best Arrow with the Golden Head,
By all the Oaths which ever Men have broke,
(In number more than ever Women spoke)
I will, where thou appoint'st, meet my Lysander.

Enough, my Love: look here comes Hellena.

Welcome, fair Hellena.

You mock me, Hermia, when you call me fair;
'Tis you are fair, 'tis you Demetrius loves.
Sickness is catching, oh were Beauty so,
I'd catch your Graces, Hermia, ever I go;
My Ear should catch your Voice, my Eye your Eye,
My Tongue should catch your Tongue's sweet Harmony.
O teach me how you look, and with what art
You charm and govern my Demetrius's Heart?

I frown upon him, yet he loves me still.

Oh that your frowns could teach my smiles such Skill!

I give him Curses, when he gives me Love.

Oh that my Prayers could such Affection move!

His Folly, Hellena, is none of mine.

No, 'tis your Beauty; would that Fault were mine.

Take comfort, he no more shall see my Face.

To you, fair Hellena, we'll disclose our minds.
This very night, when Luna does behold
Her Silver Visage in the Watery Glass,
Decking with liquid-Pearl the bladed-Grass,
(A time propitious to unhappy Lovers)
We from this cursed Town will steal away.

And in the Wood, where often you and I
Upon faint Primrose Beds have laid us down,
Emptying our Bosoms of our secret thoughts.
There my Lysander and my self shall meet
To seek new Friends, new Habitations.

Madam, farewell. O may the Powers above
Make Hellen happy in Demetrius's Love.

Oh why should she be more beloved than I?
My Beauty is as much extolled as hers:
But what of that? Demetrius thinks not so;
He will not see that which all others do.
Love looks not with the Eyes, but with the Mind,
Therefore the God of Love is painted blind.
Love never had of Judgment any Taste;
Wings, and no Eyes, must figure thoughtless Haste.
For the same reason Love is called a Child,
Because so often in his choice beguiled.
As Boys even at their Sports themselves forswear;
So the Boy Love is perjured every where.
Before Demetrius saw fair Hermia's Eyes,
He swore his Heart was made my Beauty's Prize.
But when from Hermia new heat he felt,
His frozen Oaths did in an Instant melt.
I'll to Demetrius, tell him of their flight,
The place they meet at by the Moon's pale light:
Then to the Wood he will pursue the Maid;
And if he thanks me, I am overpaid.

Is all our Company here?


You had best call 'em generally, Man by Man, according to the Scrip.


Here is the Scrowl of every Man's Name, who is thought fit through all the
Town to play in our Enterlude before the Duke, at the Marriage of Lysander and
Hermia, or Demetrius and Hermia, no matter which.


First, Peter Quince, say what the Play treats on; then read the Names of the
Actors, and so go on to appoint the Parts.


Marry, our Play is the most lamentable Comedy, and most cruel Death of Pyramus
and Thisbe.


A very good piece of work, and a merry. Now, good Peter Quince, call forth the
Actors. Masters spread your selves.


Answer as I call you. Nick Bottom the Weaver.


Ready. Name what part I am for, and proceed.


You Nick Bottom, are set down for Pyramus.


What is Pyramus? a Lover, or a Tyrant?


A Lover that kills himself most Gallantly for Love.


That will ask some tears in the true performance of it. If I do it, let the
Ladies look to their Eyes; I will move stones. I will condole in some measure.
[To the rest.] yet my chief humour is for a Tyrant, I could play Ercles rarely,
or a part to make all split. The raging Rocks, and shivering Shocks, shall
break the Locks of Prison-Gates; and Phoebus Carr shall shine from far, and
make and mar the foolish Fates. This was Lofty. Now name the rest of the
Players, This is Ercle 's vain, a Tyrant's vain, a Lover's is more condoling.


Francis Flute the Bellows-mender.


Here, Peter Quince.


You must take Thisbe on you.


What is Thisbe? A wandering Knight?


It is the Lady that Pyramus must love.


Nay faith, let not me play a Woman, I have a beard come.


That's all one, you shall play it in a Mask, and you may speak as small as you
will.


And I may hide my face, let me play Thisbe too; I'll speak in a monstrous
little voice, Thisbe, Thisbe; ah! Pyramus, my Lover dear, and Thisbe dear, and
Lady dear.


No, no, you must play Pyramus, and I'll play Thisbe, and Flute, Thisbe's
Father.


Well, proceed.


Robin Starveling the Taylor.


Here, Peter Quince.


Robin Starveling, you must play Thisbe's Mother. Tom Snout the Tinker.


Here, Peter Quince.


You, Pyramus's Father: Snug the Joiner, you the Lion's part, and I hope there
is a Play fitted.


Have you the Lion's part written? Pray if it be, give it me, for I am slow of
Study.


You may do it extempore, for it is nothing but roaring.


Let me play the Lion too, I will roar that it will do any Man's heart good to
hear me; I will roar, that I will make the Duke say, let him roar again, let
him roar again.


If you should do it too terribly, you would fright the Ladies, and they would
shriek, and that were enough to hang us all.


I, I, that would hang every Mothers Son of us.


I grant you friends, if I should fright the Ladies out of their wits, they
might have no more discretion but to hang us, but I will aggravate my voice so,
that I will roar you as gently as any sucking Dove; I will roar you as 'twere
any Nightingale.


You can play no part but Pyramus; for Pyramus is a sweet faced Youth, as
proper a Man as one shall see in a Summers Day; a most lovely Gentleman-like
man, therefore you must needs play Pyramus.


I will undertake it then. But hark you, Peter Quince.


What say thou, Bully Bottom?


There are things in this Comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe, will never please;
first, Pyramus must draw a Sword to kill himself, which the Ladies cannot
abide. How answer you that?


Berlaken, a parlous fear.


I believe we must leave killing out, when all's done.


Not a whit, I have a device to make all well; write me a Prologue, and let the
Prologue say we will do no harm with our Swords, and that Pyramus is not killed
indeed; and for the better assurance, tell 'em that I Pyramus am not Pyramus,
but Nick Bottom the Weaver, and that will put 'em out of all fear.


Well, we will have such a Prologue.


Will not the Ladies be afraid of the Lion?


I promise you I fear it.


Masters, you ought to consider with your selves. To bring in (God bless us) a
Lion among Ladies, is a most dreadful thing! for there is not a more fearful
Wild-fowl than the Lion living, and we ought to look to it.


Therefore we must have another Prologue to tell 'em he is not a Lion.


Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be seen through the Lion's
neck, and he himself must speak through it, saying thus, or to the same defect;
Ladies, or fair Ladies, I would wish you, or I would request you, or I would
entreat you, nor to fear, nor to tremble, my life for yours: if you think I
come hither as a Lion, it were pity of my life; no, I am no such thing, I am a
Man as other Men are. And there in deed let him Name his Name, and tell 'em
plainly he is Snug the Joiner.


Well, it shall be so. But there are two hard things in our Comedy, to bring
the Moon-shine into a Chamber, for you know Pyramus and Thisbe met by
Moon-light.


Does the Moon shine that Night we play our Play?


A Callender, a Callender. Look in the Almanac; find out Moon-shine, find out
Moon-shine.


Yes, it does Shine that Night.


Why then you may leave a Casement of the great Hall Window (where we play our
Play) open, and the Moon may shine in at the Casement.


Or else, one may come in with a Bush of Thorns, and a Lanthorn, and say he
comes to disfigure, or to present the Person of Moon-shine. Then there is
another thing, we must have a Wall in the great Room; for Pyramus and Thisbe,
(as says the Story) did talk through the chink of a Wall.


You can never bring in a Wall. What say you Bottom?


Some Man or other must present Wall, and let him have some Plaster, and some
Loom, and some rough-cast about him, to signify Wall; and let him hold his
Fingers thus, and through that Cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper.


If that may be, then all's well; here my Masters, here are your Parts; and I
am to entreat you, request you, and desire you, to Con 'em against Night, and
meet in the Palace-Wood, a Mile without the Town, by Moon-light; there we will
Rehearse; for if we meet in the City, we shall be dogged with Company, and our
Devices known; in the mean time, I will get your Properties ready, and all your
Habits, that every Man may Dress, to Act it in Form; and pray fail me not.


We will meet, and there we may Rehearse more obscenely, and courageously. Take
pains, and be perfect. Adieu.


At the Duke's Oak we meet.


Enough, enough.


TEll me Fairy, where's our Queen?
And where have you been wandering?

Over Hill, over Dale, through Bush, through Brier,
Over Park, over Pale, through Flood, through Fire,
I wander swifter than the Moon's bright Sphere.
I serve the Mighty Fairy-Queen,
Sprinkle her Circles on the Green.
The Cowslips tall, her Pensioners be;
Spots in their Gold Coats you see.
Those be Rubies, Fairy-Favours,
In those freckles live their savours;
I must gather Dew-drops here,
And hang a Pearl in every Cowslips Ear.
Farewell Lob-Spirit, I'll be gone,
The Queen and all her Elves come here anon.

The King will keep his Revels here to Night,
Take heed the Queen comes not within his Sight.
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath,
Because that she for her Attendant hath
A Lovely Boy, stolen from an Indian-King,
She never had so fair a Changeling.
The Jealous Oberon would have the Child,
But she perforce with-holds the Lovely Boy.
And now they never meet in Grove, or Green,
By Fountain, or by Star-light, are they seen:
But as they quarrel, all their Elves for fear,
Creep into Acorn-Cups, and hide 'em there.

Either I mistake your shape, and making quite,
Or else you are that shrewd, and Knavish Spright,
Called Robin Good-Fellow; are you not he
Fright Village-Maids and pinch each Sluttish she?
Skim Milk, and sometimes labour in the Quern,
And bootless make the breathless Huswife Chern?
And sometimes make the Drink to bear no Barm?
Mislead Night-wanderers, laughing at their harm?
Those that Hobgoblin call you, and kind Puck,
You sweep their Houses, send 'em all good luck;
Are you not he?

Yes, yes, thou speak aright,
I am that Merry Wanderer of the Night.
I jest to Oberon, and make him smile.
Sometimes I hide me in a Gossips Bowl,
Just in the likeness of a Roasted Crab;
And when she drinks, against her Lips I bob;
And on her withered Dew-lap pour the Ale,
The wisest Wife, telling the saddest Tale.
She for a Three-leg'd Stool mistakes me,
Then slip I from her Bum, down toples she.
Look yonder, Fairy, here comes Oberon!

Titania meets him, would we two were gone.

Now proud Titania I shall find your Haunts.

What, Jealous Oberon! Faries away,
I have forsworn his Bed, and Company.

Tarry, rash Woman, am not I thy Lord?

And am not I your Lady too? Remember
When you did steal away from Fairy-Land,
And in the shape of Corin sat all day
Playing on Oaten-Pipes, and Singing Love
To Amorous Philida. Why are you here
Come from the farthest Verge of India?
But that some Lusty Pair, some Wedding's near,
And you must Sport, and Revel with the Bride,
And give their Bed Joy and Prosperity.

How can thou thus for shame, Titania,
Reflect on my past scapes? when well thou know,
I have pursued you to this very place,
Where you retired, to Wanton with a Boy
You lately stole from a Fair Indian.

These are the Forgeries of Jealousy.
And never since the middle of the Summer,
Met we on Hill, or Dale, Forest, or Mead,
By Streaming Fountain, or by Rushy Brook,
Or on the beached Margent of the Sea,
To Dance in Circles to the Whistling Wind;
But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our Sport.

Do you amend it'then, it lies in you;
Why should Titania cross her Oberon?
I only beg a little Changeling Boy,
Give me him, we are Friends.

Let this suffice,
All Fairy-Land buys not the Child of me:
His Mother was a Votaress of my Order,
And for her sake I breed the pretty Boy,
And for her sake, I will not part with him.

How long within this Wood mean you to stay?

'Till you have Graced your Lover's Nuptial Day.
If you will patiently Dance in our Round,
And see our Midnight Revels, go with us;
If not, avoid my Haunts, as I will yours.

Give me the Boy, and I will go with you.

Not for the Wealth of India, come away.
We chide down-right, if I should longer stay.

Well, go thy ways, thou shalt not from this Grove,
'Till I Torment thee for this Injury.
My gentle Puck come hither, thou remember
Since when I sat upon a Promontory,
And heard a Mearmaid, on a Dolphin's back,
Sing with such Sweet, with such Harmonious breath,
That the Rude Sea grew Civil at her Song,
And Twinkling Stars shot madly from their Spears,
To hear the Sea-Maid's Music.

I well remember it.

That very time I say (thou could not see it)
Flying between the cold Moon, and the Earth,
I saw young Cupid in the Mid-way hanging,
At a Fair Vestal Virgin taking aim;
Let fly his Love-Shaft smartly from his Bow,
As it would pierce a hundred thousand Hearts:
But when it came beneath the watery Moon,
The Chaste Beams of Diana quenched its heat,
And the Imperial Virgin passed on,
In Maiden Meditation, free from harm.

What's this to me?

Observe me, Puck.
I looked, and marked the place where the Bolt fell;
It fell upon a little western Flower,
Before Milk white, now Purple, with Love's wound,
And Maidens call it, Love in Idleness:
Fetch me that Flower, thou know I showed it thee.
The juice of it on Sleeping Eye-lids laid,
Will make a Man or Woman madly Dote
Upon the next Live Creature that it sees.
Fetch me this Herb, go, and be here again,
Ever the Leviathan can swim a League.

I'll compass the whole Earth in forty minutes.

When I have this Juice,
I'll find Titania where she lies asleep,
And drop some of the Liquor in her Eyes.
The next Live Thing she waking looks upon,
(Be it on Lion, Bear, or Wolf, or Bull,
The meddling Monkey, or the busy Ape)
She shall (with all the eagerness of Love)
Pursue; and e're I take the Charm away,
(As I can take it with another Herb)
I'll make her render up her Page to me.
But who comes here? I am invisible;
I'll stay and over-hear their Conference.

Why do you follow him who Loves you not?
Where is Lysander? and Fair Hermia?
You told me they were stolen into this Wood.
I seek, but cannot find her. Hence, be gone.

You draw me, you hard-hearted Adamant;
And yet I am not Iron, yet you draw me.

Do I entice you? do I speak you fair?
I rather tell you an ill-manner'd Truth,
Tell you I do not, nor I cannot love you.

And even for that I love Demetrius more.
Ah! what am I reduced to? like a Spannel,
The more you beat, the more I fawn on you.
Use me most barbarously, strike me, spurn me,
Neglect me, scorn me; only give me leave,
Unworthy as I am, to follow you.

You throw a scandal on your Modesty,
To leave the City, and commit your self
Into the hands of one who loves you not:
To trust the opportunity of Night,
And the ill Counsel of a Desert place,
With the rich purchase of your Virgin Treasure.

Your Virtue is my Guard, Demetrius:
It is not night when I behold that Face,
Nor can this Wood want Worlds of Company,
For you, my Love, are all the World to me,
Then how can I be said to be alone,
When all the World is here to guard my Virtue.

I'll run from thee, and hide me in the Brakes,
And leave thee to the Mercy of Wild Beasts.

The wildest Beast has not a Heart like you:
Run when you will, the Story shall be changed;
Apollo flies, Daphne pursues the God;
The Dove chases the Vulture; the mild Hind
Makes haste to catch the Tiger; prepostrous Chase,
When Cowardice pursues, and Valour flies.

Plague me no more, return ever 'tis too late.
Follow me not, for fear my Rage should tempt me
To some unmanly Act, and mischief thee.

Ay, in the Temple, in the Town, and Field,
You do me mischief every where, Demetrius:
Such Wrongs will be a scandal to your Sex.
I'll follow if he rids me of my Woe,
I'll kiss the hand that gives the fatal blow.

Poor Nymph, farewell. Before he leaves this Grove
Thou shalt fly him, and he shall seek thy Love.
Welcome my Puck; hast thou the Flower?

'Tis here.

Give it me Puck.
I know there is a bank where wild Time blows,
Where Ox-lips, and the nodding Violet grows,
All over Canopied with Woodbine sweet,
Where Eglantine, and where Musk-Roses meet.
There my Titania Sleeps, lulled in Delights,
And tired in Dancing with her Fairy Sprights.
'Tis there the Snake casts her Enammell'd skin,
Too large a Robe to clothe a Fairy in.
There with this wondrous Juice I'll streak her Eyes.
Take some of it; you'll find within this Grove,
A most Unhappy Nymph, who is in Love
With a disdainful Youth; anoint his Eyes;
But do it, that the next thing he espies
May be that Lady; thou shalt know the Man,
By the Embroidered Garment he has on.
Do it, and meet me at the Crystal Lake.

I will; and bring the Nymph when he shall wake.

What different Passions in her Soul will move?
To see his former Hatred, turned to Love.

Take Hands, and trip it in a round,
While I Consecrate the ground.
All shall change at my Command,
All shall turn to Fairy-Land.
Now Fairies search, search every where,
Let no Unclean thing be near.
Nothing Venomous, or Foul,
No Raven, Bat, or hooting Owl.
No Toad, nor Elf, nor Blind-worm's Sting.
No Poisonous Herb in this place Spring.
Have you searched? is no ill near?

Nothing, nothing; all is clear.

Let your Revels now begin,
Some shall Dance, and some shall Sing.
All Delights this place surround,
Every sweet Harmonious Sound,
That e're Charmed a skilful Ear,
Meet, and Entertain us here.
Let Eccho's placed in every Grot,
Catch, and repeat each Dying Note.

COme all ye Songsters of the Sky,
Wake, and Assemble in this Wood;
But no ill-boding Bird be nigh,
None but the Harmless and the Good.
May the God of Wit inspire,
The Sacred Nine to bear a part;
And the Blessed Heavenly Quire,
Show the utmost of their Art.
While Echo shall in sounds remote,
Repeat each Note,
Each Note, each Note.
Chorus.
May the God, c.
Now join your Warbling Voices all,
Sing while we trip it on the Green;
But no ill Vapours rise or fall,
Nothing offend our Fairy Queen.
Chorus.
Come Elves, another Dance, and Fairy Song;
Then hence, and leave me for a while alone.
Some to kill Kankers in the Musk-Rose-Buds;
Some War with Rere-mice for their Leathern Wings,
To make my small Elves Coats. And some keep back
The clamarous Owl, that hoots, and wonders at us.
Each knows her Office. Sing me now to Sleep;
And let the Sentinels their Watches keep.

SEe, even Night her self is here,
To favour your Design;
And all her Peaceful Train is near,
That Men to Sleep incline.
Let Noise and Care,
Doubt and Despair,
Envy and Spite,
(The Fiends delight)
Be ever Banished hence.
Let soft Repose,
Her Eye-lids close;
And murmuring Streams,
Bring pleasing Dreams;
Let nothing stay to give offence.

I am come to look all fast,
Love without me cannot last.
Love, like Counsels of the Wise,
Must be hid from Vulgar Eyes.
'Tis holy, and we must conceal it,
They profane it, who reveal it.

One charming Night
Gives more delight,
Than a hundred lucky Days.
Night and I improve the taste,
Make the pleasure longer last,
A thousand thousand several ways.

Hush, no more, be silent all,
Sweet Repose has closed her Eyes.
Soft as feathered Snow does fall!
Softly, softly, steal from hence.
No noise disturb her sleeping sense.
Rest till the Rosie Morn's uprise.

Hush, no more, c.

What thou see when thou dost wake,
For thy Lover thou must take,
Sigh, and Languish, for his sake.
Be it Ounce, or Wolf, or Bear,
Pard, or Boar with bristel'd Hair,
In thy Eye what first appear,
Make that Beastly thing thy Dear,
Wake, when some vile Creature's near.

You faint, my Sweet, with wandering in the Wood,
I fear, my Hermia, we mistook our way.
Let us lye down, and rest, if you think good,
And tarry for the comfort of the Day.

Let it be so, Lysander,
Go, lay thee down; and so good-night, dear Friend,
Our Loves ne'er alter, till our Lives shall end.

Amen to that sweet Prayer, my Charming Love.
May my Life end, when I inconstant prove.

Through the Forest I have gone,
But a Stranger find I none,
With Embroidered Garment on;
On whose Eyes I might approve,
This Flowr's force in Moving Love.
Night, and silence! who is here?
He does such a Garment wear.
This is he, my Master said,
Scorned and despised the lovely Maid.
Here's the Virgin sleeping sound,
On the Dank, and dewy Ground.
Churl, upon thy Eyes I throw,
All the power this Charm does owe.
At the first Cock wake, and spy,
She who Loves thee very nigh.
Farewell Lovers, I am gone;
I must now to Oberon,

I Am out of breath with following him so fast*
O happy Hermia, wheresoever she is!
How her attractive Eyes still draw him on!
How came her Eyes so bright? not with salt tears;
If so, my eyes are oftner washed than hers.
Ha! who lies here? Lysander on the Ground!
I hope he is not dead! Lysander, speak.

Ha, Helen! fairest of all Womankind!
More lovely than the Grecian Beauty was,
Who drew so many Kings to wed her Cause.
Ah, false Demetrius! when ever we meet,
This Sword shall punish thy Ingratitude.

O say not so, Lysander! though he loves
Your Mistress, kill him not; pray be content,
Be satisfied, your Hermia loves you still.

Content with Hermia! no, I now repent
Each tedious minute I have spent with her.
'Tis Helena, not Hermia, I love:
Who would not change a Raven for a Dove?
No growing things are ripe before their Season;
Time and Experience only ripens Reason.
When I saw Hermia first, I was unripe,
Raw, green, and unacquainted with the World;
But time and you have taught me better Skill,
For now my Reason over-rules my Will.
I find new Charms when on your Eyes I look,
And read Love's Stories in Love's fairest Book.

What spiteful Planet reigned when I was born?
What have I done deserves this Mockery?
But fare you well; I thought you better natured.
Must I, because I am by one refused,
Be by the rest of all Mankind abused!

She sees not Hermia. Sleep, sleep for ever;
Never come nearer to Lysander more.
For as a Surfeit of the sweetest things,
Creates a greater loathing in the Stomach.
Thou art my Surfeit, and I hate thee most:
O may I never, never see thee more;
Helen the Goddess I must now adore.

Help me, Lysander, quickly! help me here,
To pluck this crawling Serpent from my Breast:
Oh all ye Powers! what a Dream had I?
Methought a Serpent eat my Heart away,
And yet sat smiling at his cruel Prey:
Lysander; what, removed? where are you? speak.
No sound! no word! O I shall die with fear!
Who are these coming hither? Let me fly!
My Fears will vanish, if Lysander's nigh.

Are we all met?


All, all, and dressed in the same Habits we intend to act in before the Duke;
and here's a marvellous convenient place for our Rehearsal; this Plat shall be
our Stage; behind these Trees our retiring Room: and we will do it in action,
as we will do it before the whole Court.


What home-spun Fellows have we swagg'ring here,
So near the Grotto of the Fairy-Queen?

Now every Man retire, and enter according to his Cue.
Prologue, stand ready, you begin.

What, a Play toward? I'll be an Auditor;
An Actor too, perhaps, as I see cause.

If we offend, it is with our good Will
That you should think we come not to offend:
But with good will to show our simple Skill,
That is the true beginning of our end.
Consider then we come but in despite;
We do not come as minding to content you.
Our true intent is all for your delight:
We are not here that you should here repent you.
The Actors are at hand, and by their show,
You shall know all that you are like to know.

He has rid his Prologue like a rough Colt, he knows no stop; 'Tis not enough
to speak, but to speak true.


In this same Interlude it doth befall,
That I, Starveling (by name) present a Wall:
And such a Wall as I would have you think,
That had in it a crannied hole or chink.
Through which the Lovers, Pyramus and Thisbe,
Did whisper often very secretly.
This Loam, this Rough-cast, and this Stone doth show,
That I am that same Wall, the Truth is so;
And this the Cranny is, right and sinister,
Through which the fearful Lovers are to whisper.

Who would desire Lime and Hair to speak better? 'Tis the wittiest Partition I
ever saw.


O grim-look'd Night! a Night with hue so black!
O night! which ever art when day is not!
Oh night! oh night! alack! alack! alack!
I fear my Thisbe's Promise is forgot.
And thou, oh Wall; thou sweet and lovely Wall,
That stands between her Father's Ground and mine,
Show me thy Chink to blink through with my eyn.
Thanks, courteous Wall, Jove shield thee well for this.
But what see I? no Thisbe do I see:
O wicked Wall, through whom I see no Bliss!
Cursed be thy Stones for thus deceiving me.

Methinks the Wall being sensible, should curse again.

No, but he should not: Deceiving me is Thisbe's Cue.
Therefore hold your prating there.

O Wall, full often hast thou heard my Moans;
For parting my fair Pyramus and me.

I hear a Voice; now will I to the Chink,
To spy if I can see my Thisbe's Face. Thisbe!

My Love thou art; my Love, I think.

Think what thou wilt, I am thy Lover's Grace;
And like Limander am I trusty still.

And I like Helen, till the Fates me kill.

Not Shafalus to Procrus was so true.

As Shafalus to Procrus, I to you.

O kiss me through the Hole of this vile Wall.

I kiss the Wall's Hole, not thy Lips at all.

Wilt thou at Ninny's Tomb meet me straightway?

Tide Life, tide Death; I come without delay.

Thus have I Wall, my part discharged so,
And being done, thus Wall away does go.

You Ladies, you (whose gentle Hearts do fear
The smallest monstrous Mouse that creeps on Floor)
May now perchance both quake and tremble here.
When Lion rough in wildest Rage doth roar,
Then know that I one Snug the Joiner am;
No Lion fell, nor else no Lion's Dam.
For if I should as Lion, come in strife
Into this place, 'twere pity of my Life.

Upon my word, a very gentle Beast.

This Lanthorn does the horned Moon present,
My self the Man in the Moon do seem to be.

Make an end, good Moon-shine.

All I have to say is to tell you, that the Lanthorn is the Moon, I the Man in
the Moon, this Thorn-bush my Thorn-bush, and this Dog my Dog.


This is old Ninny's Tomb; where is my Love?

Oa, Oa, Oa. [Exit Thisbe running, the Lion after her.

Well roared Lion, and well run Thisbe too.

Sweet Moon, I thank thee for thy Sunny Beams:
I thank thee, Moon, for shining now so bright:
For by thy Gracious, Golden, Glittering Streams,
I trust to taste of truest Thisbe's sight.
But stay. O spite!
But mark; poor Knight!
What dreadful dole is here?
Eyes do not see,
How can it be?
O dainty Duck! O dear!
Thy Mantle slain? what stained with Blood?
Approach, you Furies fell:
O Fates! come, come.
Cut, thread, and thrum,
Quail, crush, conclude, and quell.

If this wont move the Ladies, poor Pyramus will take pains to little purpose.


O wherefore, Nature, did thou Lions frame?
Since Lion vile has here deflowered my Dear.
Which is -- no, no, which was the fairest Dame
That lived, that loved, that liked, that looked with cheer,
Come Tears confound!
Out Sword, and wound
The Pap of Pyramus:
Ay, that left Pap,
Where Heart doth hop,
As Bird doth hop in Cage.
Thus die I, thus, thus, thus.
Now am I dead,
Now am I fled,
My Soul is in the Sky.
Tongue lose thy light,
Eyes take your flight,
Now die, die, die, die.

Asleep, my Love?
What dead, my Dove?
O Pyramus arise!
Speak, speak! quite dumb?
Dead, dead! a Tomb
Must cover my sweet Eyes.
These Lilly-Lips, this Cherry-Nose,
These yellow Cowslip-Cheeks,
Are gone, are gone,
Lovers make moan,
His Eyes are green as Leeks.
Tongue not a word,
Come trusty Sword,
Come Blade, my Breast imbrue.
Now farewell Friends,
Thus Thisbe ends,
Adieu, adieu, adieu.

Come, get up Pyramus and Thisbe, and let me speak the Epilogue.


No, no; I'll be the Epilogue.


O monstrous! we are haunted!
Pray Masters, fly Masters.

Help, help, help!

I'll follow you;
I'll lead you such a round.
Through Bog, through Bush, through Brake, through Brier;
Sometimes a Horse I'll be, sometimes a Hound;
A Hog, a headless Bear; sometimes a Fire.
And neigh, and grunt, and bark, and roar, and burn,
Like Horse, Hog, Hound, Bear, Fire, at every turn.

Why do they run away? This is a piece of Knavery among 'em, to make me afraid.


O Bottom! Thou art changed.
What's that I see on thee?

What do you see?
You see an Ass-head of your own, that you see.

Bless thee, Bottom, bless thee! thou art translated.

I find their Knavery; they would fain make an Ass of me, and fright me if they
could. But I won't stir from this place, do what they can. I will walk up and
down here, and I will sing, that they may hear I am not afraid.


The Woosel-Cock, so black of hue,
With Orange-tawny Bill;
The Thrustle, with his Note so true,
The Wren with little Quill.
What Angel wakes me from my Flowery Bed.

The Finch, the Sparrow, and the Lark,
The One-tun'd Cuckoo gray;
Whose Note most Married Men do mark;
And dare not answer, Nay.
For indeed, who would set his wit to so foolish a Bird? who
would give a Bird the lie, though he cry Cuckoo never so often?

I pray thee, lovely Mortal, sing again:
My Ear is much enamoured with thy Note.
My Eye is fixed on thy Majestic Shape.
Oh, how thy Graces charm me! I am forced,
At the first sight to say, to swear I love thee.

Methinks, Mistress, you should have little Reason for that; and yet to say
Truth, Reason, and Love, keep little Company together now a days; the more the
pity, that some honest Neighbour will not make 'em Friends. Nay I can break a
Jest on occasion.


Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful.


Not so neither; but if I had Wit enough to get out of this Wood, I have enough
to serve my own turn.


Out of this Wood never desire to go;
Here you shall stay whether you will or no.
I'll purge your grossness, you shall never die,
But like an airy Spirit, you shall fly.
Where are my Fairy Spirits?

I am here.

And I. 3 Fa. And I. 4. Fa. And I.

What shall we do?

Attend this Charming Youth.
Dance as he walks, and gambol in his Eye.
Feed him with Apricooks, and Dew-berries;
With purple Grapes, ripe Figs, and Mulberries.
The Hony-Bags steal from the Humble-bees.
For his Night-Tapers crop their waxen thighs,
And light 'em at the fiery Glow-worms Eyes.
And pluck the Wings from painted Butter-flies,
To fan the Moon-beams from his sleeping Eyes.
Bow to him Elves, do Homage to my Love.

Hail, Mortal, hail.

Hail. 3 Fa. Hail. 4 Fa. Hail.

Come, wait upon him, lead him to my Bower.
The Moon, methinks, looks with a watery Eye;
And when she weeps, then every little Flower
Laments for some lost Virgin's Chastity:
Tie up my Love's Tongue; bring him silently.

By this time my Titania should be waked;
I long to know what came first to her Eye.
Here comes my Messenger. Welcome, mad Spright:
What pranks have you been playing in the Grove?

My Lady with a Monster is in love.
I led sweet Pyramus through the Fairy Pass,
And placed him just before the sleeping Queen;
She waked, and saw him, and straight loved the Ass,
His comely Visage, and his graceful Men.

'Tis as I wished (my Puck) but tell me now,
How fares the scornful Youth?

That's finished too.
I found 'em sleeping on a Bed of Brakes;
I streaked his eyes, he sees her when he wakes.

Stand close, they come. Now hate her if you can.

This is the Woman, but not that the Man.

What hast thou done? thou hast mistaken quite,
And laid the Juice on the true Lover's sight.

Then Fate o'er-rules; where one Man keeps his Troth,
A thousand fail, by breaking Oath on Oath.

About the Wood, go swifter than the Wind.
You shall the poor despairing Helen find;
By some Illusion train, and bring her here,
I'll charm his Eyes. And when the Damsel's near,
We'll wake Demetrius.

I go, I go,
Swift as an Arrow from a Tartar's Bow.

Come, lovely Youth, sit on this flowery Bed,
While I thy amiable looks survey;
Garlands of Roses shall adorn thy Head,
A thousand Sweets shall melt themselves away,
To charm my Lover till the break of day.
Shall we have Music sweet?

Yes, if you please.

Away, my Elves; prepare a Fairy Mask
To entertain my Love; and change this place
To my Enchanted Lake.

IF Love's a Sweet Passion, why does it torment?
If a Bitter, oh tell me whence comes my content?
Since I suffer with pleasure, why should I complain,
Or grieve at my Fate, when I know 'tis in vain?
Yet so pleasing the Pain is, so soft is the Dart,
That at once it both wounds me, and tickles my (Heart.
I press her Hand gently, look Languishing down,
And by Passionate Silence I make my Love known.
But oh! how I'm Blessed when so kind she does prove,
By some willing mistake to discover her Love.
When in striving to hide, she reveals all her Flame,
And our Eyes tell each other, what neither dares Name.
Now the Maids and the Men are making of Hay,
We have left the dull Fools, and are stolen away.
Then Mopsa no more
Be Coy as before,
But let us merrily, merrily Play,
And Kiss, and Kiss, the sweet time away.

Why how now, Sir Clown, how came you so bold?
I'd have you to know I'm not made of that mold.
I tell you again,
Maids must Kiss no Men.
No, no; no, no; no Kissing at all;
I'll not Kiss, till I Kiss you for good and all.

No, no.

No, no.

Not Kiss you at all.

Not Kiss, till you Kiss me for good and all.
Not Kiss, c.

Should you give me a score,
'T would not lessen the store,
Then bid me cheerfully, cheerfully Kiss,
And take, and take, my fill of your Bliss.

I'll not trust you so far, I know you too well;
Should I give you an Inch, you'd take a whole Ell.
Then Lordlike you Rule,
And laugh at the Fool.
No, no, c.

When I have often heard young Maids complaining,
That when Men promise most they most deceive,
Then I thought none of them worthy my gaining;
And what they Swore, resolved ne'er to believe.
But when so humbly he made his Addresses,
With Looks so soft, and with Language so kind,
I thought it Sin to refuse his Caresses;
Nature o'recame, and I soon changed my Mind.
Should he employ all his wit in deceiving,
Stretch his Invention, and artfully feign;
I find such Charms, such true Joy in believing,
I'll have the Pleasure, let him have the pain.
If he proves Perjured, I shall not be Cheated,
He may deceive himself, but never me;
'Tis what I look for, and shall not be defeated,
For I'll be as false and inconstant as he.
A Thousand Thousand ways we'll find,
To Entertain the Hours;
No Two shall e're be known so kind,
No Life so Blessed as ours.
Now I will Feast the Palate of my Love,
The Sea, the Air, the Earth I'll ransack for thee.
Name all that Art or Nature e're produced,
My Sprights shall fetch it instantly: O say
What will you have to Eat?

A Peck of Provender, if your Honour please; I could munch some good dry Oats
very heartily; I have a great exposition of Sleep upon me, would some of your
Attendants would show me a necessary place for that same purpose.


I'll lead thee to a Bank strewed over with Violets,
With Jessamine, and cooling Orange Flowers,
There I will fold thee in my tender Arms,
As the sweet Woodbine, of the Female Ivy,
Circles the Barky Body of the Elm.
Well Sport away the remnant of the Night,
And all the World shall envy my Delight.

I Squese this Flower of Purple die,
Hit with Cupid's Archery,
On the Apple of his Eye;
When the mournful Helen's nigh,
She shall shine as gloriously,
As yonder Venus in the Sky.
Thou shalt wake when she is by,
And beg her pardon for thy Cruelty.

Lord of all the Fairy Land,
All is done at thy Command;
Helena is here at hand,
And the Youth mistook by me,
Pleading for a Lover's Fee.
Shall we their fond Pageants see?
Lord, what Fools these Mortals be!

Be careful, or the noise they make
Will cause Demetrius to awake.

Then will two one Damsel court,
That must needs be pleasant sport.
I am always pleased to see
Things fall out prepostrously.

Why should think you that I would woo in scorn?
Scorn and Derision never come in Tears.
How can these watery Eyes seem Scorn to you?
Wearing Love's Livery to prove 'em true.

You but advance your cunning more and more,
When truth kills truth, 'tis the Devil's holy War.
These Vows are Hermia's, they belong to her.

I had no Judgment when to her I swore.

And now much less, if now you give her over.

Demetrius loves her, and loves not you.

Oh Helen! Goddess! Angel! all Divine!
To what shall I compare those charming Eyes?
The Stars are dim, Crystal is muddy too.
How ripe, how tempting ripe those Lips appear!
Those two Twin-Cherries kissing as they grow?
The purest Snow holds no comparison,
With that white lovely Breast. O let me kiss
That hand, that hoard of Sweets, that Seal of Bliss.
I am Love's Convert, Helena; I see,
And I repent my former Heresy.

O! utmost spite! I see you all are bent,
All set against me for your merriment.
Can you not hate me? as I know you do;
Must you contrive, and join to mock me to?
If you are Men? as Men you are in show,
You would not use a harmless Virgin so;
To vow, and swear, and over-praise each part,
When I am sure you hate me in your Heart.
You both are Rivals, both love Hermia,
And now both Rivals to mock Helena.

Dark night that from the Eye distinction takes,
The Ear more quick of apprehension makes.
'Twas my Ear guided me to find you out.
But why, Lisander, did you leave me so?

Impertinent! Love summoned me to go.

What Love could call Lysander from my side?

The Love of Helena, whose brighter Eyes
Darken the Starry Jewels of the Night;
They take from her, not from the Sun their light.

You speak not as you think; it cannot be.

Oh Heaven! she's one of the Confederacy.
Injurious Hermia! ungrateful Maid!
Have you conspired to deride me too?
What though I am not beautiful as you,
Though I am most unhappy in my Love?
You ought to pity, not despise me for it.
But fare you well; I know the fault's my own;
And either Death, or Absence, soon shall end it.

Stay, lovely Maid; by Heaven I swear to thee,
Thou art my Eyes, my Life, my Soul, fair Helen.

I love thee more, much more than he can do.

Words, words: let us withdraw, and prove it too.

Follow me then.

Hold, hold, Lysander; to what tends all this?

Away, you Ethiop.

Ay, ay, seem to break loose.
Struggle as if you meant to follow me,
But come not. You may let the tame Man go.

What can I do? would have me beat her from me?
No; though I hate her, yet I cannot harm her.

How can you do me greater harm than this?
Hate me? wherefore? ah me! my dearest Love!
Am not I Hermia? are not you Lysander?
Or am I altered since you saw me last?
This night you loved me, and this night you fly me.
Have you forsaken me? (oh Heaven forbid)
Come tell me truly; do you hate me now?

Ay, by my Life,
And wish I never may behold thee more.
Let this remove all doubt, for nothing's truer,
Than I hate thee, and love fair Helena.

O then 'tis you, you Juggler, Canker-blossom,
You Thief of Love, you who have come by Night,
And stolen Lysander's Heart.

Indeed 'tis fine.
Have you no Modesty? no touch of Shame?
No Bashfulness? let not this Pygmy tear
Impatient answers from my milder Tongue.

Pygmy! why so? Ay, that way goes the Game.
Now I perceive she has made Comparisons
Between our Statures; she has urged her height,
Her Manly Presence, and tall Personage.
And are you grown so high in his Esteem,
Because I am so Dwarfish, and so low?
How low am I? thou painted May-Pole, speak.
How low am I?

Be not afraid, she shall not hurt thee, Sweet.

No, Sir, she shall not, though you take her part.

When she is angry, she's a very Shrew:
She was a Vixen when she went to School,
And though she is but little, she is fierce.

Little again? nothing but low and little?
'Tis you encourage her to abuse me thus.
Let me come at her?

Away, you Dwarf.

You are too officious.

Now she holds me not.
Now follow if thou dare; and let us try
Which of has most right to Helena.

Follow? nay I'll go with you; yes, before you.

You Mistress; all this stir is about you.
Nay, go not back.

I dare not trust you, Hermia.
Your hands I know, are quicker for a Fray:
My Legs are longer though, to run away.

This is thy negligence; still thou mistake,
Or else commit thy Knaveries willingly.

Believe me, King of Shadows, I mistook.
Did you not tell me I should know the Man,
By the Embroidered Garment he had on?
If he had made to the right Woman court,
We had had no Divertisement, no Sport.

Thou see these Lovers seek a place to fight;
Haste, Robin, haste; and overcast the Night.
These furious Rivals you must lead astray,
Be sure they come not in each others way.
Now like Lysander, now Demetrius,
Call here and there; mis-lead and tire 'em thus.
Till over their Eyes, Death's Counterfeit, sound Sleep,
With Leaden Legs, and Batty Wings shall creep.
Then crush this Herb into Lysander's Eye:
The Liquor has this virtuous property,
It will remove the Errors of this night,
And bring his Eye-Balls to their own true sight.
When next they wake, all that has past shall seem
A mere Illusion, a Fairy Dream.
While I in this Affair do thee employ,
I'll to my Queen, and get her Indian Boy.
Then from the Charm I will her eye release,
Send home the Clown, and all shall be at peace.

This must be done with speed, I must not stay,
For with her Dragons Wings Night flies away:
See yonder shines Aurora's Harbinger,
At whose approach, Ghosts wandering here and there;
Troop home to Churchyards, Damned Spirits all,
That in Cross-ways and Floods have Burial:
Already to their Wormy-Beds are gone,
For fear Bright Day their shames should look upon.
They wilfully Exile themselves from Light,
And must for ever wander in the Night.

But we are Spirits of another sort;
Can any where, at any time resort.
I have more work for thee, make no delay,
We must effect this Business yet e're day.

Up and down, up and down, I will lead 'em up and down. I am feared in Field
and Town; Goblin lead 'em up and down, here comes one.


Where art thou, proud Demetrius? answer where?

Here Villain; drawn, and ready, where art thou?

I shall be with you straight.

Follow me then to evener ground.

He goes before me, and still dares me on,
When I come where he calls me, he is gone.
'Tis very dark, the way uneven too;
I'm tired with running, here I'll lay me down,
And wait with patience the approach of day,
Then if I meet him, we will end our Fray.

Speak Coward, answer me; why come thou not?

Stay Villain, if thou dare.
Thou run'st before me, shifting every place.
Stand, if thou art a Man, and meet me fairly.
Where art thou?

I am here.

I see thee not, answer me where?

Here, here.

Now thou derid'st me, thou shalt buy this dear,
When I thy Coward face by day-light see.
My faintness forces me to rest a while,
To measure out my length on this cold ground,
Thou wilt not with the breaking Day be found.

Oh weary, tedious Night abate thy Hours;
Shine from the East that I may fly to Town,
From those who my poor Company detest.
And sleep that sometimes shuts up Sorrows Eye,
Steal me a while from my own Company.

There's yet but three, come one more;
Two of both kinds make up four.
Here she comes peevish and sad.
Cupid is a Knavish Lad,
Thus to make poor Maidens mad.

Never was Maid so weary, and so wronged,
Wet with cold Dew, and torn with cruel Briars.
I can scarce crawl, I can no farther go;
My Legs can keep no pace with my desires.
Here I will rest the remnant of the Night.
Heaven guard Lysander, if they meet and fight.
Thou hast performed exactly each Command.
Titania too has given me the sweet Boy.
And now I have him, I will straight undo
The hated imperfection of her Eyes.
And gentle Puck, take thou the Asses Head,
From the transformed Clown she doted on.
That he awaking when the others do,
May with his Fellows to their Homes repair.
And think no more of this Night's Accidents,
Than of the fierce vexation of a Dream,
But first, I will release the Fairy Queen.
Be, as thou were wont to be;
See, as thou were wont to see.
Cynthia 's Bud, and Cupid 's Flower,
Has such force, and Blessed Power.
Now my Titania, wake.

My Oberon! What Visions have I seen?
Methought I was enamoured of an Ass.

There lies your Love.

How came these things to pass?
How I detest that hateful Visage now!

take from the Fool the Ass's head.

Hark, thou King of Shadows, hark!
Sure I hear the morning Lark.

Let him warble on, I'll stay,
And bless these Lover's Nuptial Day.
Sleep, happy Lovers, for some Moments, sleep.

So, when thou wake with thy own Fools Eyes, peep.

Titania, call for Music.

Let us have all Variety of Music,
All that should welcome up the rising Sun.

NOW the Night is chased away,
All salute the rising Sun;
'Tis the happy, happy Day,
The Birth-Day of King Oberon.
Let the Fifts, and the Clarions, and shrill Trumpets (sound,
And the Arch of high Heaven the Clangor resound.
When a cruel long Winter has frozen the Earth,
And Nature Imprisoned seeks in vain to be free;
I dart forth my Beams, to give all things a Birth,
Making Spring for the Plants, every flower, and each (Tree.
'Tis I who give Life, Warmth, and Being to all,
Even Love who rules all things in Earth, Air, and (Sea;
Would languish, and fade, and to nothing woul fall,
The World to its Chaos would return, but for me.
Hail! Great Parent of us all,
Light and Comfort of the Earth;
Before thy Shrine the Seasons fall,
Thou who give all Beings Birth.
Thus the ever Grateful Spring,
Does her yearly Tribute bring;
All your Sweets before him lay,
Then round his Altar Sing, and Play.
Here's the Summer, Sprightly, Gay,
Smiling, Wanton, Fresh, and Fair;
Adorned with all the Flowers of May,
Whose various Sweets perfume the Air.
See my many Coloured Fields,
And loaded Trees my Will obey;
All the Fruit that Autumn yields,
I offer to the God of Day.
Now Winter comes Slowly, Pale, Meager, and Old,
First trembling with Age, and then quivering with Cold;
Benumbed with hard Frosts, and with Snow covered over,
Prays the SUN to Restore him, and Sings as before.
Hail Great Parent, c.
Now my Puck this Herb apply
To the Mistaken Lover's Eye;
The powerful Juice will clear his Sight,
Make 'em Friends, and set all right.

Come, my Lord, and tell me how?
How I sleeping here was found,
With these Mortals; on the Ground.

On the Ground, sleeping sound,
I apply to your eye, gentle Lover, Remedy.
When thou wake, then thou take
True Delight in thy former Lady's sight;
And the Country Proverb known,
That every Man should take his own,
In your waking shall be shown.
Jack shall have Gill, nought shall go ill,
The Man shall have his Mare again, and all shall be well.

GO one of you, find out the Forester,
I long to hear the Music of my Hounds,
They shall uncouple in the Western Valley.

I marked it lately, 'twas a gallant chiding,
Beside the Groves, the Hills, and distant Vales,
The Skies, the Fountains, every Region near,
Seemed all one mutual cry. I never heard
So Musical a discord; such sweet Thunder.

My Hounds are bred out of the Spartan kind;
So flew'd, so sanded; and their Heads are hung,
With Ears that sweep away the morning dew!
Crook-kneed, and Dew-lapt, like Thessalian Bulls,
Slow in pursuit, but matched in Mouth like Bells,
Each under each; a cry more tunable,
Was never hollowed too, nor cheered with Horn!
Judge when you hear. But soft, what Nymphs are these?

My Leigh, this is my Daughter here asleep!
And this Lysander; this Demetrius!
This Helena, how came they here together?

No doubt,
They rose to grace our Solemn Hunting here.
But speak, Egeus, is not this the Day,
Hermia should give her answer?

It is my Liege.

Go bid the Huntsmen wake 'em with their Music.
God morrow friends; Saint Vallentines is past,
How came these Wood-birds but to couple now?

Pardon me, gracious Sir.

Stand up, Lysander.
I know you two are Rival Enemies,
How comes this noble Concord in the World?
That hatred is so far from Jealousy,
To sleep by hate?

Sir I shall answer you amazedly,
I do not sleep, yet scarce am half awake,
I do not truly know how I came hither!
But as I think (for I would truly speak)
Yes, now I think I can remember it.
Hither I came with beauteous Hermia,
Our intent was to fly from hence, and so
Evade the danger of your Cruel Law.

Enough (most Noble Duke) he owns enough:
I ask your Justice for this breach of Law.
They would have stolen away; they would Demetrius.
They meant to have defeated you, and me;
You of your Wife, and me of my Consent.

All this fair Helen told me, my good Lord;
And hither I in Fury follow'd 'em;
Hither, the too kind Helen follow'd me:
And here, by some strange power (I know not how)
My Love to Hermia melted like the Snow:
And now she seems but as an idle Toy,
Which in my Infancy I doted on:
And all my Faith, the Virtue of my Heart,
Joy of my Life, and Pleasure of my Eye,
Is only Helena's. I was (my Lord)
Betrothed to her, e're I saw Hermia:
But then, my sickly Palate loathed its Food.
Now I'm in Health, come to my natural taste,
And now I wish, I love, I long for it;
And will be ever true to Helena.

Then we came hither in a happy time:
Egeus, I must over-rule your Will;
For in the Temple, when our Hunting's done,
These Lovers shall eternally be joined.
Egeus, I will be a Father too,
And give fair Helen to Demetrius,
Then feast these Lovers Royally: away.

How have I dreamed, and thought I was awake?
And now I am awake, think I dream still.

I never was so happy when awake:
Nay, pray disturb me not; let me dream on.

These things seem strange, and undistinguishable,
Like Mountains far, far off, turned into Clouds.

Methinks I see 'em with a parted Eye,
Where every thing seems double.

I think so too:
And I have found Demetrius like a Jewel
Long sought for, hardly credited when found.

Pray Heaven we dream not still.
Did you not think the Duke himself was here?

Yes, and my Father.

And bid us follow him.

Ay, to the Temple.

And said, he'd give me to Demetrius.
And feast us Royally.

Nay then we are awake; let's follow him.
And as we go, let us recount our Dreams.

When my Cue comes, call me, and I will answer. My next is -- most fair Pyramus
-- hey, ho! Peter Quince, Snout the Tinker, Starveling? 'Ods my life, stolen
hence, and left me asleep. I have had a most rare Vision. I had a Dream, past
the Wit of Man to say what Dream it was; Man is but an Ass, if he go about to
expound this Dream: Methought I was! no Man can tell what. Methought I was, and
methought I had -- but that Man is an arrant Fool, who will offer to say what
methought I had. I will get Peter Quince to write a Ballad of this Dream; it
shall be called Bottom's Dream, because it has no bottom; And I will sing it my
self, at the latter end of our Play, before the Duke.


I have sought far and near, and cannot find him.

So have I. Out of doubt he is Translated.

If we find him not, our Play is marred; it cannot be done without him: He has
simply the best Wit of any Handicraft Man in the whole Town.


Yes, and the best Person too: then he is a very Raven for a sweet Voice.


O Masters! the Duke's going to the Temple! the Lords and the Ladies are to be
Married this Morning. If our Play had gone forward, we had been all made Men.


Ah sweet Bully Bottom; thou hast lost God knows what. An the Duke had not
given him God knows what for Playing Pyramus, I'll be hanged.


O are you here? my Lads, my hearts of Iron?


He's here! he's here! Bottom's here! O most courageous day! O happy day!


Masters, I am to discourse wonders to you, but ask me not what; for if I tell
you, I am no true man. For I will tell every thing as it fell out.


Let us hear it then, sweet Bottom.


Not a word, all I will tell you is, Get your Apparel together, good strings to
your Beards, new Ribbons, Powder, and Wash, and meet presently at the Palace.
Our Play shall be preferred. Let Thisbe have clean Linen, and let not him that
Plays the Lion, pare his Nails; they shall hang out for the Lion's Claws. And
let no man eat Onions, or Garlic, for we must utter most sweet breath. No more
words; but away.


Are not these Stories strange, my Gracious Lord?


More strange than true. I never could believe,
These Antic Fables, nor these Fairy toys.
Lovers, and Lunatics have pregnant brains.
They in a moment by strong fancy see
More than cool reason over could comprehend.
The Poet, with the mad-man may be joined.
He's of imagination all made up,
And see's more Devils, than all Hell can hold.
Can make a Venus of an Ethiop.
And as imagination rolls about,
He gives the airy Fantasms of his Brain,
A Local habitation, and a name.
And so these Lovers, wandering in the night,
Through unfrequented ways, brim full of fear,
Hoe easy is a Bush supposed a Bear!
I hear strange Music warbling in the Air.

'Tis Fairy Music, sent by me;
To cure your Incredulity.
All was true the Lovers told,
You shall stranger things behold.
Mark the wonders shall appear,
While I feast your eye and ear.

Where am I? does my sense inform me right?
Or is my hearing better than my sight?

When to Parlors we retire,
And Dance before a dying fire.

Or when by night near Woods, or Streams,
We wanton by the Moons pale beams.
Then gross shades, and twinkling light,
Expose our Shapes to mortal sight.
But in the bright and open day,
When in Sol's Glorious beams we play,
Our bodies are, in that fierce light,
Too thin and pure for humane sight.

Sir, then cast your eyes above:
See the Wife of mighty Jove.
Juno appears in a Machine drawn by Peacocks.

Juno, who does still preside,
Over the Sacred Nuptial Bed:
Comes to bless their days and nights,
With all true joys, and chaste delights

THrice happy Lovers, may you be
For ever, ever free,
From that tormenting Devil, Jealousy.
From all that anxious Care and Strife.
That attends a married Life:
Be to one another true,
Kind to her as she to you.
And since the Errors of this Night are past,
May he be ever Constant, she be ever Chaste.
Now my gentle Puck, away,
Haste, and over-cast the Day.
Let thick Darkness all around,
Cover that Spot of Fairy Ground;
That so the gloomy Shades of Night
May usher in a glorious Light.

THus the gloomy World
At first began to shine,
And from the Power Divine
A Glory round it hurled;
Which made it bright,
And gave it Birth in light.
Then were all Minds as pure,
As those Ethereal Streams;
In Innocence secure,
Not Subject to Extremes.
There was no Room for empty Fame,
No cause for Pride, Ambition wanted aim.
THus Happy and Free,
Thus treated are we
With Nature's chiefest Delights.
Thus happy, c.
We never cloy
But renew our Joy,
And one Bliss another Invites.

We never, c.
Thus wildly we live,
Thus freely we give,
What Heaven as freely bestows.

Thus wildly, c.
We were not made
For Labour and Trade,
Which Fools on each other impose.

We were not c.

YES, Xansi, in your Looks I find
The Charms by which my Heart's betrayed;
Then let not your Disdain unbind
The Prisoner that your Eyes have made.
She that in Love makes least Defence,
Wounds ever with the surest Dart;
Beauty may captivate the Sense,
But Kindness only gains the Heart.
Six Monkeys come from between the Trees, and Dance.
HArk how all Things with one Sound rejoice,
And the World seems to have one Voice.

Hark how the Echoing Air a Triumph Sings,
And all around pleased Cupids clap their Wings.

Sure the dull God of Marriage does not hear;
We'll rouse him with a Charm. Hymen appear!

Appear! Hymen appear!

Our Queen of Night commands you not to stay.

Our Queen, c.

See, see, I obey.
My Torch has long been out, I hate
On loose dissembled Vows to wait.
Where hardly Love out-lives the Wedding-Night,
False Flames, Love's Meteors, yield my Torch no Light.

Turn then thy Eyes upon those Glories there,
And Catching Flames will on thy Torch appear.

My Torch, indeed, will from such Brightness shine:
Love never had yet such Altars, so divine.

THey shall be as happy as they're fair;
Love shall fill all the Places of Care:
And every time the Sun shall display
His Rising Light,
It shall be to them a new Wedding-Day;
And when he sets, a new Nuptial-Night.
The Grand Cho. They shall be, c.
At Dead of Night we'll to the Bride-bed come,
And sprinkle hallowed Dew-drops round the Room.

We'll drive the Fume about, about,
To keep all Noxious Spirits out:
That the Issue they create,
May be ever fortunate.

Stay; let us not, like very foolish Elves,
Take care of others, and neglect our selves.
If these should be offended, we are lost;
And all our Hopes, and future Fortunes crossed.

It is below the Fairy-Queen to fear.
Look there: Can there be any Danger near,
When Conquering Beauty fills that Heavenly Sphere

But here are Wits, and Critics* and 'tis said,
Their Adders Tongues can sting, or hit us dead.

Away: Let not the Name of Wits alarm us;
They are so very few, they cannot harm us.

Consider; Sharpers, Beau's, the very Cits,
All either are, or else they would be Wits.

Well, let 'em all be Wits; and if they should
Blast us, or nip us in the very Bud,
The Loss will be their own another Day.
Are we not in a very hopeful Way
To make 'em all amends -- if they will stay.

They are impatient, and their Stomachs keen;
They will not be post pon'd, 'tis you're Fifteen.

Well, If their Appetites so fiercely crave,
We'll give 'em all the Ready that we have.
First, Losing Gamesters, Poets, Railing Wits;
Some Basset-Ladies, and all Broken Cits;
(Who live by what from others they purloin)
We'll lend 'em mighty Sums -- in Fairy-Coin.

Ladies in Dreams shall have their Fortunes told;
The Young shall dream of Husbands, and the Old
Their Youthful Pleasures shall each Night repeat.

Green-Sickness Girls, who nautiate wholesome Meat,
How they their Parents, and themselves may cheat.

Widows, who were by former Husbands vexed,
Shall dream how they may over-reach the next.

Each separate Lady, to supply her Want,
Shall every Night dream of a new Gallant.

Those Beau's, who were, at Nurse, changed by my Elves.

Shall dream of nothing, but their pretty selves.

We'll try a Thousand charming Ways to win ye.

If all this will not do, the Devil's in ye.


