THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in
the Morning at his Lordship's House, viz.

All these Ranked by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's
Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums
and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with
Standards; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six
Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Bachelors concluding the Second Division. Six
Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bearing the City's, the other the Company's Arms.
Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Bachelors make the Third
Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and
then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City
and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, c. Four
Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, four Gentlemen and four
Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear.

In this Order they march from Guild-Hall, his Lordship being accompanied from
thence by the old Lord Mayor, whence the whole Company move through Cheap-side
to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, Livery, and part of the
Gentlemen Ushers, take their Barge for Westminster, whither his Lordship is
attended, with the several Barges of the respective Companies, with Flags,
Streamers, several Pleasure-Boats, with Hautboys, Flutes, Trumpets, and all
manner of Music, c.

His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer,
returns with the same Attendants and Splendour to Dorset Stairs, where, at his
Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Martial Ornaments
in Buff and Silver Head-pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves
forward towards Cheap-side. In his March, he is first entertained with this
Pageant.

ON a stately Pedestal of the Compositive Order is erected the Lyon of England,
Passant Or, being an Honourable Addition to the Arms of the Worshipful
Haberdashers, by the particular Gift of the Crown in Reward of their Great
Services, c. On this Lyon sits a Figure representing TRIUMPH, with the Bannor
of England in his Hand. At the four Angles are erected four flaming Pyramids
filled with the Coats of Arms of all the Worthy Benefactors of the Company
together with the Escutcheons of 20 Lord Mayors, all Members of their Society,
viz. 1. Sir Robert Billisden, Anno. 1434. being in the First Year of Richard
III. 2. Sir Stephen Peacock, Anno 1532. 3. Sir William Foreman, 1538. 4. Sir
George Barns, 1552. 5. Sir William Gerard, 1555. 6. Sir Nicholas Woodhouse,
1579. 7. Sir Thomas Blank, 1582. 8. Sir George Barns, 1586. 9. Sir George
Bond, 1587. 10. Sir William Rider, 1600. 11. Sir John Gerard, 1601. 12. Sir
Thomas Lowe, 1604. 13. Sir Francis Jones, 1620. 14. Sir Hugh Hammersley, 1627.
15. Sir George Whitmore, 1631. 16. Sir Nicholas Raynton, 1632. 17. Sir Richard
Fenn, 1637. 18. Sir Thomas Fowk, 1652. 19. Sir John Lawrence, 1664. 20. The
present Lord Mayor. At the Basis of this Pedastal are seated four Figures,
representing Charity, Liberality, Virtue and Honour.

TRIUMPH thus Addresses his Lordship.

ON my triumphant Golden Lyon crowned,
I view my Pyramids and Trophies round.
These Scutcheons most belong to the Great Dead,
Whose shining Glories, Sir, before You led.
Patrons and Benefactors, whose warm Smiles
Founded their own Rich Monumental Piles;
Structures of Charity whose proud Roofs shall raise
To endless Time the Haberdashers Praise.
To all those Worthies in the Front appear,
Tis You, Illustrious Sir, bring up the Rear.

A Stately Dome erected upon four Columns of the Doric Order; over the
Etableture of which are planted four Pedastals, supporting the proper Insignia
of TIME. The whole Fabric of Egytian Marble adorned with Gold and Precious
Stones; the immediate Attendants are Truth, the Daughter of Time, with this
Motto, Vincit Veritas, Truth overcomes. 2. Humility with this Motto, In terris
Corpus in Caelo cor, The Body on Earth the Heart in Heaven. 3. Constancy with
this Motto, Metam tangenti Corona, The Crown belongs to him that perseveres to
the End. Four more Figures are placed at the Angles, representing Prudence,
Patience, Temperance and Mercy.

TIME thus Salutes his Lordship.

TIme measures out the Globe, Life's fleeting Sands
And the keen Scythe of Fate are in my Hands.
But though so swift my Rapid Minutes drive,
I keep Records that shall to Ages live:
The Memories of the Great, the Good, and Just,
By me enrolled in Fame, by me embalmed their Dust.
If Time is that Historian, I have here
A glorious Theme for my Great Register.
Your fair Memoirs, my Lord, the auspicious Sway
Of your Pretorian Power, and that warm Ray
Your Virtues, Justice, Equity display,
Shall in Times Annals fill the noblest Page;
And one Years Reign find Glory for an Age.

A Magnificent Fabric supported by four Twisted Columns, and as many
Pilasters of Lapis Lazuri richly adorned with Silver and Gold, the whole
Structure Roof'd with several Intricated Angles, all centring and pointing into
an Octagon Form. The principal Figure in this Pageant is the Goddess FLORA,
whose chief Attendants are Ceres, Vertumna and Pomona. To which are added four
more Attendants, expressing Joy, Harmony, Love and Felicity.

FLORA thus Congratulates his Lordship.

FLora, a Goddess of that sovereign sway,
I cheer the Spring, I dress the Fields so gay;
The Winged Choristers all sing to me;
All Nature only wears my Livery.
But though my Hand does that vast Sceptre bear,
I view that Head which I must Homage here.
Here Albion's Metropolis, the Great
Augusta's Lord, fills his more awful Seat.
My pettier Empire reaches but the Plains,
The Groves and Vales; commands poor Nymphs and Swains.
Those Nymphs, my Lord, must your loud Triumphs greet,
And strew their Flowery Garlands at your Feet.
Augusta, 'tis to Thee my Swains must bow,
For Thee they plant the Vineyard, guide the Plough:
In Thee the Hopes of all their sweating Toils.
Tis when the City shines the Country smiles.

A Stately Chariot all enriched with Embossed Work of Silver, driven upon four
golden Katharine-Wheels. In this Chariot is seated St. KATHARINE, the Original
Patroness of the Honourable Company of HABERDASHERS, the Chariot drawn by two
large Indian Goats, Argent, being the Supporters of the Company; with her are
seated two Figures in a Descent beneath her, representing Faith and Piety. On
these Beasts ride two Persons expressing Victory and Peace sounding two
Trumpets, with a Kettle-Drum; the Charioteer representing Conduct, with four
more Attendants on each side the Chariot. St. Katharine speaks as follows.

ST. Katharine did of old this Claim possess,
Was the Honoured Habardashers Patroness.
Though Rome's created Saint, sure I've not lost
All Title to that Honourable Post.
No; my Original Right to reassume,
Henceforth I'll quit my Abdicated Rome.
No more a Roman, but a Britain now,
I'll to a True Great Faith's Defender bow.
This Homage then to Albion's Caesar due;
I owe a Knee to his Vicegerent too.
Hail then Great Deputy to our NASSAU,
Fill your proud Chair, and give Augusta Law.
As Rome does now for Jubilees prepare
This great Revolving Seventeen Hundredth Year.
Why shall we have our Triumphs less than they?
No, Sir, beneath your warm propitious Ray,
Proud London shall those smiling Joys assume:
She'll keep her Jubilee as well as Rome.

ON a very large Stage are planted, almost all round, several Shops, viz.
Milliners, Hosiers, Hatters, Cappers, c. with Indian Planters and Cutters of
Tobacco, c. The whole Pageant in some part Arched over, and in other parts
enriched with a Cornish of Gold over the several Shops; in the Rear of the
Pageant is planted a stately Throne richly gilt and adorned, on which, under a
Noble Canopy, sits a Person representing COMMERCE. During the Movement of this
Pageant, several Papers of Tobacco are given among the People. At his
Lordship's Approach, the Person representing Commerce descends from his Throne
to pay his Homage to his Lordship as follows.

HEre in my Factory of Trade I stand;
Trade that commands the World, You Trade command.
All Heads, all Hands, to dig the Industrious Mine,
The Product of the Earth, Air, Seas, all join,
From Trade's Rich Crop to make whole Nations shine.
Nor shall the Virtues of this Generous
In Fame their just Recorded Glories want:
Yes, thou dear Plant, from the vast Indian Coasts,
The Richest Flower the Royal Garden boasts,
Advance thy Worth, and raise thy Head yet higher,
Till even proud London from thy Growth aspire,
To gain by Smoke what once it lost by Fire.

Here his Lordship moves forward to Guild-hall to Dinner, where he receives the
Honour of Entertaining the Lords of the Council, the Judges, and the Chief of
the Nobility; the whole Magnificence of which splendid Entertainment concludes
the Solemnity of the Day.


