THEY say Young Actors on the Stage appear
At their first Entry, with a trembling Fear.
And yet, methinks, by all that I can find,
The Ladies look so gay, and Men so kind;
That all my trembling Pains are vanished quite;
Are such fine Folks so terrible a Sight?
All that I see do rather please than fright.
Then I'll be bold, and tell you I am sent
To make -- Make what? -- The Poets Compliment.
Not I indeed. -- Let him even sink or swim;
Is't fit I should Excuses find for him?
And be so vain to expect any Grace,
The very first Time that I show my Face?
I must confess I fain his Friend would be,
But I had rather have You Friends to Me.
He has, alas! been used to Fortune's Frown;
But if you treat Me Ill, I am undone.
Alas! I set up with a Stock so small,
The first Miscarriage would quite ruin all.
For if I now should break, where must I run?
Priviledg'd-Places are all quite put down.
But there's a way for You to help me yet,
For if I cannot All Your Favours get;
I hope you'll grant one Thing in my Behalf,
Let me but have Two-Thirds, and I am safe.

WElcome Beauty, all the Charms*
Sparkling in that Orb of Glory;
All to those Protecting Arms,
Thus we Bend and Kneel before Ye.
If the Fates that rule below,
All are smiling Heavens Creation;
We have no kind Stars but You,
All in that fair Constellation.
Smile then with a Beam divine,
We'll be blessed if You but shine;
Happy then our Pains and Toils;
Wit only lives, when Beauty smiles.
Your Graces let the Muses share,
And in return they make this Prayer.
In all your Quiver,
May there never,
Want a Shaft all Hearts to gain;
Whilst all their Duty,
Paid to Beauty,
The Great shall Kneel, and Fair shall Reign.

NAY, fie, dear Aunt, dry up your Eyes, and cheer up your Heart, and once more
let me bid you welcome to London.


London, quotha! Well; I never saw such a strange Place in all my born Days.
Here's a whole thousand of Houses, and not one Barn among them all.


Oh Cousin; 'tis a melancholy Journey that brings me hither; never had poor
Woman such a Loss as I have had. My Eldest, my First-born, my Virginity,
Cousin; cropped in the Flower, in the Bud of Five and twenty: Oh, Cousin, I have
lost such a Boy --


As was not worth keeping.


How, Sirrah!


Why he's dead Mother, he's dead; and what should we do with dead Folks, but
make Crows-meat of them?


Oh thou ungracious Boy! Are these your Tears for your poor Brothers Death,
that dear sweet precious Lamb?


A Word in your Ear.


With me, Cousin!


Between Friends, Cousin Suchee, our Family are none of the wisest.


Nay, why so, Cousin!


All Fools, but my self. Why here's that young Cudden, my Brother, a silly
Block-headed Son of a --, had no more Wit than to play the Fool and die: And
here's that whining, whimpering old Dunce, my Mother, has no more Wit than to
cry for him.


Ay, Cousin, there you are in the Right: She's a little too sorrowful indeed.


In the Right, Cousin; why, I am never in the Wrong.


What's that he prates?


Only telling me, he's the Top-wit of the Family.


Nay, the Child has very good natural Parts: Heaven send him to make good use
of them. Ay, ay, he has Wit enough.


Wit! Ay enough to stock a whole Parish: Enough to give all the young Fellows
their Heads full, and the young Wenches their Bellies full.


Well Son, more of your Manners, and less of your Wit. Pray let's see how
you'll behave your self before the Squire, my Landlord.


Ay, ay, let me alone for Haviours.


That must be his Livery. Pray Sir, if I may be so bold; don't you belong to
Squire Wildblood?


Well, Woman, and what then?


Only I have a little Business with his Worship.


Yonder's his Worship, if you have any thing to say to him.


What a surly Dog's this? Oons Mother, shall I beat him?


Beat him, Rascal?


My Buckingham-Widow! My Country Copy-holder!


Your poor Tenant, Sir.


Sweet Mrs. Susan.


My dear Temple-master.


And prithee, Widow, what Wind blows you to Town?


Truly Squire, I am come Forty long Miles to wait upon your Worship.


And I am come Forty long Miles along with her; that's just Fourscore.


You must pardon him, Sir; 'tis a bold Boy, my Son, an't like ye.


And she's my Mother, for want of a better; an't like ye.


Your Son! How old is he?


A poor Suckling, Sir; just turned of Twenty.


A very hopeful Boy!


So the Girls tell me, Sir.


Ah Squire, I have lost my Eldest Boy: There's one Life in my Copy-hold gone.
But I hope your Worship will be pleased to renew my Lease, and put in this
young Lamb in his Room. I have made a hard Shift to pick up a few Milled Crowns
for You, a very scarce Commodity among us poor Country-Folks. But I hope your
good Worship will use me as kindly as you can.


Ay prithee Frank use her kindly, for her sweet Niece's sake here.


A very pretty Creature! Of your Acquaintance, Ned?


At your Service.


Your Servant, sweet Lady. Ned?


My Temple-Sempstress. Oh Frank, this sweet young Lady has the prettiest
softest Hand at tying a Cravat: As I hope to be a Judge, I had rather dress my
self in those two black Eyes, than in the best Beau Looking-glass in all
Covent-garden.


You must pardon his way of Raillery, Sir. He always makes bold with his poor
Servant.


If he's no more bold than welcome, he's a happy Man, Madam.


Alas, Sir! I make him happy!


Prithee Frank let me recommend you to this Ladies Acquantance. She shines in
the Front of a gay Shop in Fleet-street, and is a fair Dealer in
Linnen-Drapery.


Where this Gentleman shall be welcome.


You could not give me a more acceptable Invitation. I assure you, Madam, as
far as ready Money, or Love will go, I shall be your humble Servant; for I
declare from my Heart, I can't have a higher Ambition than to be taking up
Linen with so pretty a Lady.


The best in my Shop is at your Service.


That in your Bed-chamber will please me much better.


My Bed-chamber, sweet Sir; nay, now you'll make me blush.


Not in the Dark, Madam! I always put out the Candle.


I vow you talk so strangely -- But I beg your Pardon, Sir, I must wait upon my
Aunt: She expects my Attendance, and I dare not forfeit her good Graces.


Then must we lose ye? Here Sirrah, Page, pay your Obedience, and usher that
Lady.


O fie Frank, almost Seven a Clock: The Play's half done by this time.


Time enough for the last Act. Thou know I never take a turn to a Play, but
either just pop in my Head before the Curtain rises, or before it drops again.


Then you peep into a Play house, like a Prentice into a Church: Just hear the
Text, then take a Ramble, and come back to receive the Blessing: He to hand out
his Cheap-side Mistress, and you your Covent-garden Miss.


Nay, there thou hast hit me.


But why are you so unkind to the Play-houses, especially at this Low-water
time with them, to take a turn (as you call it) before the Curtain rises?


Out of pure Charity, Ned. I gallop round the Pit, hear the last Music, pick
up a Mask, and carry her off before the Play; and so save the poor Whore her
Half Crown.


But why can't you sit out the Play?


Oh Intolerable! I could no more endure to sit out a whole Play, than to Ride
out a whole Fox-Chace; especially since I came to my Estate.


And why since you came to your Estate?


Why? Because I so wore out all my Patience in waiting for my Father's Death,
that I have not one single Grain left.


Nay thou had an unreasonable Father, that I'll say for him. He had no more
Conscience than to Live to see his hopeful First-begotten a reverend
Super-annuated old Gentleman of Five and twenty, when thou want to have had
him in Heaven above Seven Years before, to keep a Coach and a Whore at
Eighteen.


A Coach and a Whore, Ned! why 'tis Life and Soul. Punk and Pride, the Flesh
and the Spirit; and a Man's not a Man without 'em.


But why do you tell me you never stay out a Play, when you know I have seen
you perking behind the Scenes, from the first Music to the last Candle, to a
clear Stage; nay, and to a clear Dressing-room, the very last Man bourn.


Behind the Scenes! Ay, there the Case is altered. There, Ned, I have nothing
to say to the Play, but the Players -- Oh! I could dance Attendance, and dangle
at the Train of a High Feather, and a Stage Princess (especially that Phoenix
amongst 'em under the reputation of a Virginity) as contentedly and with as
much mortal Resignation for Three whole Hours together, as I could lye a whole
Night by her.


Then all your Patience is not worn out?


Not in a good Cause, Ned.


Nay, if your Delight lies behind the Scenes, you'll have enough on it to Night;
for, after the Play's done, I hear the Actors have a general Practice of the
Music and Machines of some part of their New Opera.


Their New World in the Moon.


Ay, so, I hear, they call it.


But now thou talk of Plays; prithee, Ned, when did thou see that serious
Tragi-comical Face, that unfashionable Spark, young Palmerin, with the Beard of
Twenty six, and the Sanctity of Nine and sixty.


Nay Truly, he's not altogether in the modern Mode: For he sets up for Virtue.


Ay by St. Lucrece, and for Chastity too. I durst to swear it has it's
Madenhead still, a pure male Virgin. For though the poor Dog has but bare 200 a
Year Annuity, and not Heir to one Groat, (for his prodigal Elder Brother took
care of all Reversions) yet I warrant he'd no more Feed one of the hungry Birds
at the Court-end of Town, though in the Feathers of a Duchess, were it to
plume his own Nest to the Tune of a Coach and Six. I wonder we had not him Star
gazing this way, up to thy Sisters Window yonder; for I understand he's her
sworn Adorer.


Nay, as you say, He is her true Star-gazer indeed. For my cruel Father has so
abdicated the poor Lover, so Banished and Barred all his Approaches, that he
Kneels to my Sister like an Indian to the Sun, almost at the same Distance, and
yet with the same Warmth.


Nay then I find as cloudy as your Father lours upon him, he has some Dawn of
Hopes from her kind Brothers Favour.


Ay faith, Frank, I love the honest Lad so well, that I'd give my Cook upon
Littleton, and all my whole Temple-Library, that my Father loved him but half
so well.


Then if the Old cruel Gentleman once drops off, the kind Young one --

Will give him my Sister, though I give him half my Estate with her.


A very generous Gentleman. But see yonder he comes. My Man of Morals.


My Man of Mode, Your Servant.


Troth Palmerin, we were just Talking of thee. For my part I was down right
pitying of thee.


And why pitying me?


Why, only to consider, how thou had an elder Brother made a shift to live to
melt the last Acre of a 1000 a Year, and yet thou art a greater Prodigal then
He


Nay, Why so, Frank?


I'll tell you why* Your Brother, he lived a Gentleman, and only died a Beggar.
But thou, with that ragged and starving Companion called Conscience at thy
Heels, art resolved both to Live and Dye one! Nay, and of all Mankind too, why
a younger Brother and set up for Virtue?


And why not a younger Brother?


Oh fie! Why should he profess Virtue, that has nothing but Vice to Live upon?
'Tis enough for Your fat rich Drones, that have neither Mercury in their Heads,
nor Warmth in their Veins, for the Diviner Taste of Pleasures, to Dream and
Sleep away a Life in lazy drowsy Morals.


Quite contrary! 'Tis enough for you rich Elder Brothers, that have this World
in a String, never to think of the next; whilst we poor Younger Brothers, that
have so little share of one, should take care for the other.


Do you hear that, Frank? You had best have a care of him, for he'll be too
hard for you else.


Nay he shall never want your good Word at all turns. Oh Palmerin, thou hast a
stanch Champion of Ned here. If all Parties were as well agreed as himself,
thou should Marry his Sister to Morrow.


To her kind Brothers Goodness, I am an eternal Debtor; and only wish I were
more in Debt to Heaven: Blessed with those smiles of Fortune, to deserve her.


Smiles of Fortune! Why, thou dost not want 'em. Prithee make me thy Confessor,
and tell me ingeniously, could not thou be contented to Beg with Jacintha!


And what then, Sir!


And Starve too!


Well, and Starve too.


Then for Jacintha's Love, you durst do --

Any Thing.
Sink, Ruin, Perish: Fate has not that Frown,
Nor Heaven and all its Thunder has that Bolt,
But I could stand 'em all for dear Jacintha.

Here's Raptures for you -- Then Poor and Fortuneless as you are, you love her
so entirely well, that without Consultation of Parents, Obedience, Portion, or
Convenience, you could take her Naked and Friendless to your Arms, and Marry
her to Morrow?


No, not so neither.


How: Beg, Starve and Perish for her Sake; and yet not dare to Marry her.


All this and Ten times more, and yet not dare to Marry her. No, though I have
Love enough to make my self miserable for her sake; I have too much Love to
make her miserable for mine.


Here's your School Distinction in Cupids new Philosophy: But Palmerin,
considering here's a Father in the Case, that by the Constitution of hs Body,
may live these 20 Years; for he has a Son here, of thy own Church; neither in
Fee with his Doctor nor Pothecary: That Tyrant-Father, that whilst his Head's
above Ground, will no more give thee Jacintha, then he will build Hospitals.
Prithee how long then could thou be contented to wait for her!


An Age: A Life Sir.


Why truly that's pretty reasonable Attendance. But how would thou live this
long long Age of Patience!


With Thinking.

I'd remember there's that dear Face in the World: And for want of the
Original, wear her Picture at my Heart: Make that one single Thought my whole
Cordial of Life: Carry her Memory to my Crutch and my Grave, and tell the Fools
of the World, there's one Woman worth dying for.


Here's your Amadis de Gaul; your Lover in Heroics! Oh Palmerin, Palmerin, how
cheaply dost thou furnish out thy Table of Love? Can Feed upon a Thought;
Live upon Hopes; Feast upon a Look; Fatten upon a Smile; and Surfeit and Dye
upon a Kiss! What a Chameleon Lover is a Platonic?


Well Sir, as you have spread my Platonic Table: Shall I spread your Libertine
one?


With all my Heart.


In the first Place, then: A Canine Appetite to prepare your Digestion:
Bawds, Panders and Pimps, your Cooks and your Caterers.
Paint, Patch and Infamy, your whole Bill of Fare:
The Goat and the Satyr, to set out the Feast:
The Surgeon and 'Pothecary, to bring in the D'usert:
And Death and the Devil, to sweep off the Fragments.

Did not I tell you he'd be too hard for you?


Ay, Pox on him. But come -- to the Play Ned, to the Play.


Ay, Sir, we'll follow you. -- Palmerin, I have a little Melancholy News for
you; there's a new Rival setting up: You shall have the whole Story as we walk
to the Play.


More persecuting Stars! more Enemies to Combat!


No Palmerin, more Enemies to Conquer.
Let thy great Cause thy drooping Courage Cheer.
Whilst Love and Truth, thy Champions do appear,
Thy feeble Foes, are all not worth a Fear.

WIthin this happy World above,
The Realms of Innocence and Love,
(Love with his Rosy Chaplets crowned)
Eternal Joy goes round.
Divine Astrea hither flew,
To Cynthia's brighter Throne*
She left the Iron World below,
To bless the Silver Moon.
Divine Astrea --
Sound sound the Trumpets, sound
Fair Cynthia's Name,
Through all the heavenly Round,
So vast her Empire and so loud her Fame,
Sound that proud triumphant Name,
Sound, sound, for ever sound.
Soft Peace on Earth so rarely shows her Head,
Scarce found within the Bridal Bed.
We know no Discords, know no Jars,
Unless the gentle amorous Wars:
We fear no Shafts but those that fly
From Phyllis, or from Celia's Eye;
Nor Death, but when in melting Charms we die.
Whilst thus our calmer Pleasures flow,
What Storms disturb the Globe below?
Tempests rattle,
Blood and Battle,
Fire and Ruin, War and Thunder,
Tear the lower World asunder.
Tempests rattle --

AND has thy cruel Father then designed thee
For the Embraces of Sir Dotttrel Fondlove?

Even so; my Fathers Stars have so decreed me
Sir Dottrel's honourable Bride and Lady.

His Bride! His Sacrifice. Thy Virgin Sweets
A Garland for a Tomb!
Nay, could thy barbarous Father find no Rival
To the lost Palmerin, but that vile Earthmole?
The Tyrant Lord of all my ruined Fortunes,
By the cursed Riots of my Elder Brother,
Swallowed and gorged by that devouring Cormorant!

What frightened at a Shadow, such a Rival,
A despicable Muckworm Wretch, fit only
To affront and loath, and tread beneath my Scorn?

Oh, you're all Angel-Goodness!


No, Palmerin,
Look in my Face, and mark if thou can find
One Spark in these young Eyes, fit for a Taper
To light a grunting doting Fool to Bed!
Plant my young Nectarns at that cold North-wall, Sir Dottrel. No,
I am for the warmer Sunny-side of Love:
One young Palmerin's worth twenty old Sir Dottrel's.

What can I do to merit all this Love?


What have we done to merit this hard Fate?
When all these louring Clouds hang over our Joys?
I dare not take thee to my Arms. To marry
Without my Fathers leave, that were to lay
My ruined Fortunes lower than my Palmerin's;
And turn us naked forth to all the Sufferings
Of bleeding Want and Misery.

Oh Love! to what
Hard Bondage art thou tied? That divine Passion,
The noblest Spark of Heaven, and yet a Slave to Dirt;
When Earth and Muck reign Tyrants over thy Fate.
But if no Weight but that vile worldly Dross
Can only turn thy Balance; why, oh why,
Are all those pouring Showers of smiling Fortune,
The blind Inheritance of Slaves and Villains;
Whilst poor I groan beneath my niggard Stars?

Come Palmerin, ne'er despair; but trust to Wit
And Industry to mend our losing Hand!
Fortune drops down to Fools, but wise Men climb up to Fortune.
But this kind Visit must be short: For if
My Father should return and find you here,
Then I am lost: For Locks and Keys, and Jailours,
Would then be all my Portion!

But, dear Madam,
I have had a lucky Thought. I'll instantly
Transform my self into a Valet de Chambre,
Screw me into Sir Dottrel's Favour; and, if possible,
Get me entertained his Servant.

Excellent!


By this means, thus disguised, and in his Service,
I shall have all the Access to my Jacintha --

And all the Opportunities to join
Our Heads and Plots to blow the doting Fool up.

Madam, your Father, and Sir Dottrel Fondlove --

What says the Girl?


Are both just at the Door.


Make haste and slip out at the back Gate.


The guardian Powers of Truth and Love protect thee.


The Powers of Wit and Woman: I have occasion
For their Protection now.

Well Son (for so I'll call you)
You have my free Consent to wed my Daughter.

I am the happiest Man.


If she can make ye so --
Daughter, you see your Husband.

Bless my Eye-sight.


Once more I bid you think of being a Lady --

To that fusty piece of Knighthood. Honour
And old Bones, a Sackful.

I need say no more.
You know my Pleasure, and your own best Choice:
As you embrace his Love, you shall have mine.

Sir, I was born all yours: My Hand and Heart then
Must be no less than part of my Obedience.

Well; thou say well -- Sir Dottrel, may I venture
To trust my Daughter with you all alone?

By my Virginity, a desperate Venture!
He looks so like a Tarquin.

Venture me! -- Ay Sir, ne'er fear me; I shall be so tender of her;
Use her so very gently.

That I'll swear for thee.


Madam!


Sir!


Your Father gives me leave to tell you --

News Sir?


News, Chicken! Ay, and I hope no unwelcome News,
That the rich Alderman, Sir Dottrel Fondlove,
Is fair Jacintha's passionate humble Servant.
I must confess I am sorry --

That I am his Daughter?


Sorry, you are his Daughter!


Ay, all the Reason in the World. It had been
Much happier for me to have been his great Grand-mother:
To have been so much worthier of such
A reverend humble Servant as Sir Dottrel.

You are pleased to be merry, sweet Lady.


Not over-merry, Sir, in such dull Company.


Nay, Chicken, be not angry at the Matter:
I mean all honourable, to make a Wife of thee.

A Wife! A Crutch, a quilted Cap, and Caudle!


How's this?


Thy mouldy Chops water at Wedlock!
Turn over thy Bills, thy Bonds, and Judgments:
Thy Statutes, and thy Mortgages, old Mammon:
They are better Reading for thy old Spectacles
Than Matrimony. And if 'tis possible for an old Usurer
To hope for Salvation, and sham the Devil,
Build Alms-houses, old Thirty per Cent. and then die,
And sleep with thy Fore-fathers, if ever thou had any:
For by thy Looks, thou might be Adam's Elder Brother.

Oh the Vengeance! What's all this! Why 'tis I, Child:
Sir Dottrel; the Man that must love thee,
And marry thee, and make a Lady of thee.

Yes, thou shalt marry me: But if thou dost;
By this good Light, I'll make a Monster of thee
Thy very Wedding-day; and graft thy Forehead,
With such a pair of terrible Brow-antlers,
That both thy Wedding-sheets shall not be large enough
To make a Night-cap for thee.

Oh my Ears! my Eyes! my Senses!


And then when I have married thee, and reign
The Sovereign Mistress of thy Chests and Coffers,
And keep the Keys of all thy hoarded Muck,
I'll set thy Gold a flying. By this Hand,
I'll put up thy whole Bags to an Inch of Candle;
Theirs and thy Snuff both to drop out together.

Why, thou Termagant,
All this to a Man of Five thousand a Year!

All in dirty Acres! Ay, that I want, Sir.
Do you find Acres, and I'll find you Heirs for 'em:
For if there be
One hungry younger Brother in Three Kingdoms,
One keen stomack'd Captain in the whole Army,
Or one kind Cuckold maker in both the Play-houses;
Thou shalt have Sons and Daughters, Heirs and grand Heirs,
But no more Kin to Thee, then you're to Honesty.

Oh intolerable! This is beyond all mortal Patience.
But dost thou think if I were married to thee,
That I'd live to bear all this?

Live! No; thou would not have the Impudence to think of Living.
Live! why I'd break thy Heart in the first Fortnight.
Thou should not live out half the Honey moon.
Nay, I'd bespeak the very Penny-pot Poets that writ
Thy Epithalamium, for the Rhime-Doggrel for thy Elegy;
And set by the whole Remnants of thy Wedding-dinner,
For Hot suppings at thy Funeral.

Oh the Devil!


Thy old Bones in my young Bonds of Matrimony, and live!
Thou should no more hope to live than a Fish in a Bird-cage.
Nay, if neither hard Meat, cold Comfort, warm Cuckoldom,
Nor nothing else would dispatch thee;
I'd keep open House to all the Beaus in the Town,
And choke thee with Powder and Essences.

Why thou impudent Harlotry young Gypsy, dost thou know
Who I am, and what I am, that thou use me thus unmercifully?

Know who and what thou art! Why, I'll tell thee what thou art.
Thou art a Load of Diseases; as Crazy as thy Understanding;
As Deaf as thy Charity; As blind as thy Ignorance;
As Mouldy as thy Prayer-books, as cold as thy Religion:
As Rusty as thy Coffers, and as Rotten as thy Conscience!
You're a Scarecrow to Flesh and Blood; an Antidote to Love:
Hast been dead to Womankind these Fifty Years,
Buried in Searcloth and Flannel Threescore,
And cheated the Worms and the Devil a whole Hundred.
Does thy Cozening Lawyer want a Memento Mori?
The Scrivener dried Parchment for thy Mortgages?
Thy Surgeon want a Skeleton? thy 'Pothecary a Mummy?
And thy Brother Beelzebub a Broker's Shop?
Thy Lumber-house of Antiquity would furnish 'em all.

I can hold no longer -- Why Sir -- Mr. Deputy -- Where are you -- Come to my
Deliverance -- I shall be Murdered -- I shall be Ravished. I shall be --


Why, what's the Matter here?


The Matter! Never was poor Man so abused as I have been.


Who has abused you?


Who! that young Proserpine, that Satan in High-toppings, that She-Devil in
Petticoats.


Who; my Daughter?


Ay, your Daughter; if she be your Daughter.


If she be my Daughter!


Ay, if she be! For if the great Whore-master General, the old Serpent, did not
wriggle himself to Bed to her Mother; and did not get that She-Cockatrice for
you; but she is your own true natural Flesh and Blood: Then I do tell you that
wicked, that ungodly, that audacious Daughter of yours has used me so
barbarously --


How barbarously?


Why she has fallen upon me as unmercifully, as a whole Army of bloody Pilgrims
and black Bills; has called me as many several old Rogues, as there are hard
Names in a Welch Pedigree: And that if I marry her, she swears, That she'll lie
with all the young Fellows within the Four Seas, by Land and by Water, till she
has grafted me a pair of Horns, udsbud, like the Popes Crown, Three Stories
high.


And has my Daughter say you --

Not one Word of all this -- I was a telling him, how some young Husseys would
use a reverend old Gentleman to their Husband: A parcel of mad wild Gilflirts,
that like nothing but Boys and Beaus, and Powder and Paint, and Fool and
Feather. But for me, I that had been bred up in a sober Family, the Daughter of
a worthy grave Citizen; I was for no Husband but Sir Dottrell; a Person of his
honourable Years and Character: That his Age might be a Guide to my Youth: His
Wisdom to my Folly; his Gravity to my Vanity* I told him, how I should love him
and cherish him; make his Spoon-meats, sugar his Caudles, be his Lady, his
Maid, and his Nurse: Warm his Bed, creep to his Arms, sleep in his Bosom; and
make him the lovingest, the kindest, and the fondest Wife in the whole World.


Oh Impudence! Impudence! Impudence! Why did thou say one word of all this
Gibberish?


No: But I was going to say it all; only you had not the Patience to stay to
hear me.


Patience, in the Devil's Name!


You naughty Man, you! I was just opening my kind Lips with all the sweetest
Breath of Love, to say a thousand tenderest kindest Things -- But yon -- To
stop my Mouth, to shut your Ears, and run away from me! To tell my Father all
this barbarous Tale, of the poor innocent Jacintha!


Avaunt Satan! Take away thy Cloven Foot, and give me Air: Thy Breath's all
Charcoal and Brimstone; and Mercy, Mercy; save me, save me, save me!


Come, my young Gypsy, all this Mask of Innocence shall not serve your turn. I am
afraid --


Of nothing but a Shadow.


How! All this hideous Out-cry but a Shadow?


'Tis all a mere Mistake.


Mistake!


Nothing, but a Mistake. Can I find young Ears to his old Head, or mend his
crazy Intellects?


Come, my young Minx, as you expect my Blessing, or hope t'enjoy one Rag of my
Estate, mend this bad Mornings-work; or --


May I never hope to be a Lady. --
Well, I will blow this Fool up, if my Mines
Do but stand fast. 'Tis true, 'tis not so honourable
To jilt him as I do -- Can I jilt him?
No, 'tis impossible: When old dry Bones
Would match with young warm Veins, I only stand
Upon my lawful Guard; my brisk Nineteen
To jilt his Ninety nine, no Fault can be:
No; 'tis his Ninety nine that would jilt me.

My old Friend Joe!


Noble Count Hayns!


My worthy Patroons.


Well, how goes the World, honest Fortune-teller?


Dully, heavily, Gentlemen! 'Tis a base World, a poor undone World. In short,
betwixt Plots, Wars and Beggary, it has been cramped, plagued and poxed; and is
now going into a high Course of Physic, a General Peace, to Flux, grow sober,
and live honest.


Nay, now thou talk like a Cosmographer.


Look ye, Sir, I treat the World as the World treats me; no Love lost between
us.


Well, Joe, we'll let the great Stage, the World, alone, to rub on; and talk of
the little Stage, the Play-house here: Prithee, when does the, Rehearsal begin?


Oh presently, Gentlemen; presently.


But what's the Reason we do not see thee in thy Pontifical Robes? Hast thou no
Part in this Opera?


I a Part in an Opera! What an Endymion, a Cupid, a King Oberon!
Who have we here? Does he belong to you?

A small Tenant of mine -- Prithee Joe give him a Cast of thy Rhetoric; a
little piece of Banter.


Say you so? -- Illustro, grando Seignioro; most noble Squire, I am your most
humble Servant.


Squire! what does the Man mean? Zooks, do I look like a Squire? why, I am Tom.
Dawkins, the Farmer's Son of Buckingham. The noble Squire, ye Fool, is his
Worship my Landlord.


Cry you Mercy, sweet Sir.


Hark ye, Joe: Prithee manage this Country-blockhead a little. Can not thou
mount him into a Machine, or drop him into a Trap?


Ay, Joe; thou hast had a rare Hand at that sort of Management: Some of thy
Legerdemain would do rarely. A little Farce to your Opera, will make the
Rehearsal better than the Play.


Enough, Gentlemen; I have my Instructions -- But h'st, the Musick's just
beginning.


CCome all you Nymphs of Cynthia's Train,
That tread the Azure Plain,
That melt your Hours,
And tune your Loves,
In rosy Bow'rs,
Immortal Groves:
Come all, come all, come all, and join,
In some new Airs divine.

We come, we come; we need no more.
Then see that ever-soveraign Power,
Our bended Knees adore.

We come, c.


To Cynthia then our Homage pay,
And dedicate the eternal Day:
Her Praises move the heavenly Round,
Her Songs with Jo Paeans crowned,
Up to her Brother's Throne shall sound.

Her Praises, c.


IN all our Cynthia's shining Sphere,
Methinks the fairest Face is here.
Say, lovely Thing, say what art thou?

I came, Sir, from the World below.
I once was mortal Flesh and Blood,
And scarce my Beauties Bloom displayed,
I dropped a tender Virgin-bud,
I played the Fool and died a Maid:
For which the Gods have sent me here,
To shine a Star in Cynthia's Sphere.

So fair a Face,
In a World so base,
Yet die a Maid!

A very, very Maid!


Have a care what you say.


A pure, pure Maid;
A pure, pure Maid.

Are you sure you don't lie?


A pure, pure Maid, and I'll tell you why.
The Truth that I tell will plainly be seen,
For I died so very young, not full Thirteen.
Do you think I would deceive ye?

No, no, I believe ye.
That Wonder in an Age may once be seen;
There may be a Maid not full Thirteen.
But were you to live your Life over again;
Oh what would you do, what would you do then?
I am very much afraid,
You would still die a Maid;
Keep your sweet Virgin-Innocence all unshaken;
I fear you'd die a Maid.

I fear you're mistaken.


How, not die a Maid?


No, no, not I;
Not die a Maid, and I'll tell you why.
These Eyes I am sure were for Love designed,
And these Charms they were lent we to bless Mankind.
Then shall I die a Maid?

Oh no, no, no.
I hope you have more more Wit than so.

I am sure I have more more Wit than so.


Well, Tenant, how dost thou like all this?


Rarely Sir, rarely! Well, I have heard of your Crownations, but never saw one
before.


And now you have seen a Crownation, what do you think on it?


Think! Oh Lord, Sir, I never Thought in my Life; but I pay't off with
Considering. And, let me tell you, as one wise Man may say to another,
Gadsooks, Squire, that Harlotry Countess, that little singing Queen there, were
she but two Heads higher, three Quarters more in the Waist, and but half so
plump as my Mother, to fill an Elbow-Chair, and crack a Down bed; udsbud she'd
make a Wife for a High Constable.


Oh Gentlemen! what have you done?


Why, what's the Matter?


Destroyed and ruined us!


Heaven forbid, Sir!


Brought this young Stranger here, this lovely Stranger; that Face, those Eyes,
to steal our Princess Heart.


Who me!


Oh Gentlemen! our Queen, our poor dear Queen, she sighs, she dies, and all for
this sweet Face.


For Tom. Dawkins?


Ay Sir, who are you? say; what Lord? what Hero? what Prince disguised?


I a Prince! my Mother keeps a Garden, Sir, and sells Carrets.


How Sir! no Prince?


Prince, Sir! why I am a Cow-keeper.


Well, if you are no Prince, I must make you one.


O lo!


But quick; uncase, dismantle; and come Dress, Rig, Robe, Sparkle, Shine, Sir.


All this for me?


Ask no Questions before Supper.
Now, noble Sir, lead on; appear in Glory:
Look like your self; and drive the World before ye*
Bear up your Head; strut, swagger, cock; look high:
For such a Queen --

Oh Landlord! who am I?


CErtainly this young Witch must have some Charm upon me; for now can I no more
forbear running to this fair Destruct^on, than a Squirrel into the Mouth of a
Rattle-snake; for I must see her again. 'Tis true, 'tis a little of the latest
to make Visits at this time of Night; and yet who knows but 'tis the best Hour
of teaching coy Girls to speak Sense, as young Sterlings to talk English, at
sleeping time.


Oh Sir, the rarest Discovery.


Ha! what's the Matter?


Only yonder's your Mistress, all in Darkness, alone in her Closet, upon her
Knees, at Prayers, Sir.


At Pray's! why has she the Confidence to look Heaven in the Face, after this
Mornings wickedness -- But take away the Candle, Sirrah; and slip into the next
Room --


Why what are you going to do? I hope your Worship will not be so rude, as to
disturb her Devotion.


No; but my Worship will be so rude, as to listen to her Devotion. And so get
you gone, you Rascal.


So merry at her Devotion!


I have laughed till my Sides ache! Such an old Fool.


Ha!


Such a Cudden of Fourscore?


Death and Goblins! what's here?


Such a Tool of a Husband!


Such an Animal for a City Monster!


Prayr's! in the Devils Name.


And wilt thou make a reverend Dormouse of him, to sleep, and snort and snore;
whilst we embrace, and sport and toy --


Sleep, while we embrace; sleep! no, he shall wake and see it all. By this good
Night, I'll make him that tame horned Beast, that he shall lock the Door, hold
the Candle, and light us to Bed.


Shall he so, Gypsy?


Such a contented Monster, he shall buy him a new pair of Spectacles to see how
close we Kiss together; nay, hang my whole Bed-chamber like a Beau's
Dressing-room, all round with Looking-glasses, to see how his Horns become him.



Jilts, Traitors -- But I'll contain my self. One Minutes Patience more; and
then, my Brace of Firebrands --


Oh we have melted in ten thousand Raptures, dissolved in Bliss, and surfeited
in Pleasure. But come, my Love, come to my Arms once more. Oh, I'll be kinder
than the Flower of the Sun; throw open all my Bosom and my Charms, to thy warm
Joys.


My Life, my Soul, my Heaven.


Before my Face! nay then -- Whores, Rogues, Witches! have I caught ye?


I am betrayed and ruined -- Fly, my Dear; leap out of the Window, climb up the
Chimney; save, save my Honour: I would not have my Father see you for ten
thousand Worlds.


Help, Murder Treason; stop, stop Thief.


Stop your bawling Throat.


Did you call, Sir?


Call, Rascal! Ay, where were you, you Dog, that you came no sooner?


What's the Noise here?


Oh, Sir, here has been galloping Doings.


What Doings?


What? why, here has been the great Devil, and all the little Devils at
Hot-cockles; and Beelzebub and his Dam at Barly-break.


Hey day, what's all this?


Here has been the whole Tribe and Generation of Whoredom and Roguedom, and
Horndom and Cuckoldom; and so much Impudence, as has almost struck me deaf,
blind and dumb.


What do you mean, Sir?


Mean? why here has been a young Belswagger, a great He-Rogue, with your
Daughter, Sir.


My Daughter!


With me!


With thee -- thou Imp of Satan!


All this to me; to me, thou barbarous Man. Oh Sir, believe him not; all mere
wild Distraction. Alas, Sir, I was on my bended Knees to Heaven!


Heaven! O lo, Heaven!


With all my kindest Prayers, to make me blessed in dear Sir Dottrel's Arms;
beseeching all the Powers of Love to crown our nuptial Joys, with a fair sweet
Fire-side, all pretty Lambs, his own dear Pictures; honourable as their Father,
and virtuous as their Mother.


Ooh --

All the true Patterns of my own sweet Innocence -- And base, false Man, is
this the unkind Return --


Oh Sir, Sir; never was such a hideous Pack of all Romance, Cheats, Villainy; as
I am an Alderman, an honourable Merchant of the City, that never told Lie in my
whole Life (except at the Change or Custom-house;) I tell you, Sir, once more,
here was a Rascal here, a young Rascal, and a Rampant Rascal; I heard him,
caught him, nay and had seized him too, but that young Traitress flew in my
Face, took me by the Throat, stopped my Mouth -- Bid her young Ruffain leap out
of the Window, climb the Chimney --


Oh, my chaste Ears!


Sir Dottrel, I am ashamed of you. Leap out of the Window, climb the Chimney; when
my Windows are locked and bolted, and I have the Keys in my Pocket. My
Chimney's all Iron-grated, scarce room for a Swallow's Nest: My Doors all
barred and chained; and a Man in my House, at this time of Night, without my
Knowledge, when I have ten thousand Pound in Gold and Jewels by me? Oy fie, Sir
Dottrel, fie; you make me blush for you.


Do you all conspire against me? I have Witnesses; I'll prove what I have said.
Here's my Man Shackarel shall swear it all -- Come, Sirrah, upon the Oath you
have taken, do you know the Prisoner at the Bar?


Yes, very well.


Were not you all the while in the next Room by her?


I was, Sir.


And you heard all?


Heard! what Sir?


Heard what Sir? Why her Prayers, (as she calls 'em) her Witches Litany, that
she and her young Mephistophilus were conjuring together.


Conjuring and Mephistophilus! Mercy upon us; what do you mean?


Mean! why did you hear nothing?


Not a Syllable.


How, Sirrah?


I hear! Alas, Sir, what had I to do hear? I was bred more a Gentleman, and
have better Manners than to be an Eves-dropper.


A plague of your Gentility. But Sirrah, Rascal, Hang-dog, where were your
Ears, you Scoundrel? 'Twas impossible but you must hear her --


Not one word, Sir. -- Alas, Sir, I was at my own Prayers; and had more serious
Meditations of my own, than to listen to hers.


Ay, now you see my Innocence appears, when his own Witnesses confront his
Falsehood. Nay, Sir, just such another false Alarm, was his last hideous
Out-cry.


All Distraction: Ay, my dear Child, 'tis now too plain.


Sir, on my Knees I swear, in the great Presence --

Oh, have a care --

All I have said is the Truth, and the whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth;
so help me --


Yet hold, Sir: Do you know the frightful Sin of Perjury -- I would not have
you Forsworn --


Forsworn!


Not for a thousand Kingdoms. -- Oh, Sir Dottrel, though you have used me
barbarously, yet still I love you but too well; have a more tender Kindness for
you, then to let you hazard your sweet precious Soul.


Siren and Crocodile! Madam, a word with you. Are not you a Monster?


No; but I've taken care to make You a Monster.


Do you hear that, Sir; now she confesses all.


Confesses! Alas, poor Gentleman, I pity him. I fear he has sat up too late,
and want of Sleep makes him talk idly. Go, Sir Dottrel, go home to Bed and
Rest. To Morrow Morning you'll come and ask me Pardon for your Folly; and I am
that good-natur'd Thing, I vow, I shall forgive you all.


Forgive him! no; 'tis too much Mercy; more than he has deserved.


Nay, Sir, don't you be angry with him too. It is enough I chide him for his
Faults.


Daughter and Father; Jezabel and Lucifer! Rogues, Whores, and Jilts; and all
your Shams, Plots, Treasons; your Race, your Family, your whole Generation, all
to the Devil; and so good Night to you.


Ay, do you hear him now? Is this a Husband for your Ja^tntha? True, I could
have loved him, had he deserved it: But such hideous Jealousies, such Dreams,
such wild Chimera's; who can bear them?


No more, my Child, I own I've been too blame; I'll be no more a Tyrant, but a
Father.


Nay, then you are all Goodness.


Your Doors are locked, Sir, and we want your Hand.


Yes, honest Shackarel, I'll release your mad Man.


So; I have conjured down the old Haunting-Devil,
And now to raise the younger Sprights of Love!
Some magic Spell to circle in my Palmerin
Safe in my Father's Heart, and in my Arms:
'Tis that last Conjuration crowns my Charms.

I wish you Joy: You are the happy Man.


Ay, Sir, 'tis you that conquer all the Beauties.


And does this little Foppety Queen so love me, say ye?


Love you! Why, she'll make a little Emperor of you.


An Emperor! O lo!


Pshaw nothing Sir, nothing; an Emperor! she'll make you -- let me see what
will she make ye? -- A Great Mogul, a Crim Tartar, a Lord Mufti: Oh the Devil
and all, Sir.


All these great Folks together, and the Devil and all too?


Ay, ay, Sir; all.


Limini! what a swinging great Fellow shall be!


Ay, Sir, you see how Fortune smiles upon ye.


You have the Ladies Hearts.


Squire -- don't be daunted, bear a good Heart. I shall be a Great Gull, a Grum
Cartar, a Lord Monkey, and the Devil and all: But -- you shall find me civil.


Oh Sir, we thank you for this gracious Favour.


We shall be proud to be your humble Servants.


Servants! Now you talk on it, I shall want some such sort of paltry Fellows
about me; and -- let me see -- I'll have -- Squires to my Footmen, and Knights
for my Pages -- And --


What shall we be?


Lords, Gentlemen; Lords. I'll make you two Lords.


This is a Grace too great.


Lords, both Lords. What a swinging great Fellow shall I be?


But see, she comes.


Comes! I gad and so she does.


LOok round, look round, and here behold,
Fair Cynthia's shining Roof of Gold;
Bright as the blushing Morning's Beams,
And spangled like her Heaven with Jems:
So high, its touring Head it shrouds,
Above the Clouds;
And all her glittering Turrets rise,
To kiss the Skies.
And now within her smiling Sphere,
To feast her Eye, and charm her Ear;
We'll call some airy Forms to play,
And dance the jovial Hours away.
If airy Forms can dance the measure,
We have those Delights can please her;
For oh! we'll raise up from below,
That Thing of Air, they call a BEAV.
Then Cynthia's Revels to attend,
Ascend, ye empty Forms, ascend:
Ascend, and dance your airy Round,
Ye Forms made up of Breath and Sound.

Ascend, c.


OH dear, sweet Sir, you look so gay,
So fair; you steal my Heart away:
That Mien, that Shape, that Face, that Air --

What does the Creature say?


In those sweet Eyes such Charms I see,
They wound, they kill; they wound, they slay:

Alas, such little Things as Thee,
I kill a score a Day.

Oh turn but one kind Look on me,
My racking Pains to view;

No foolish, prattling Thing, you see,
I have something else to do.

Then cannot you love?


No, no; not I.


This too unkind Requital:
Ah Cruel! can you see me die?

I care not, stop my Vital.


Nay, if I can't your Love subdue,
But find your Heart so coy;
By Jove, I'll be a Beau, like you,
And make my Glass my Joy.

But Time perhaps --

Nay, now I've done.


These Women act by Spite all;
You should not fly, when I come on:

I care not, stop my Vital.


Gone! Gone! and not said one word!


Oh Lord, Sir, she's only gone to drop off her Company, and will be here again
in the turning of a Pancake, all alone, in your Arms. Sir, your Arms.


Say thou so, old Boy?


Sir, here's his Mother at the Door,


Oh prithee Joe let her in -- Here will be such a comical Greeting betwixt the
Cub and the Dam, to see her Baboon so sparkified.


Oh an excellent Scene, no doubt on it. But our Company will spoil all; and
therefore we'll march off, give him a clear Stage, and so take the pleasure of
peeping behind the Curtain -- Well, noble Prince, our Company will but hinder
your Joys in your dear Princess Arms; and therefore we'll humbly take our
leaves.


Ay, ay, troop Vermin, troop; our Queen and I must be private. A Queen! a
Lady! a Princess! Now shall I be the Devil knows what.


Ha! my Cousin Tommy. What do I see? Ay, ay, 'tis he.


What a swinging great Fellow shall I be?


Oh Aunt, Aunt! the rarest sight: Yonder's my Cousin Tommy as fine as a little
Prince; so gay, so rich, so pretty; I vow and swear it does me almost as much
good as a young Husband, to see him look so sweetly.


Bless me, my Son!


Son! Neighbour! I gad chi may be the Sun in the Firmament, by the shining
on it.


My Boy! 'tis impossible.


Nothing impossible in this Town of Londo^ Why, I was a Princess my self, no
longer ago than last Valentine's Day, in my Lord Prettyman's Chamber.


Son; Son Tommy!


A Great Gull, a Grum Cartar, a Lord Monkey.


What says the Boy?


My Queen, my Princess; come to my Arms, my Arms, my little Gypsy.


Oh Aunt, Aunt, I have found it out. May I never be Kissed between sleeping and
waking, if I don't believe some great Lady is fallen in Love with him.


Lady!


And, Blessing of her Heart, has dressed him thus Fine, to make a Man of him.


Make a Man of my Infant! Mercy upon us; what says the Wench? Ay, ay, 'tis so:
Undone, undone! my Boy, my poor Boy --


Why, what's the matter, Aunt?


Oh Cousin, Cousin; some wicked lewd Jezabel has debauched my Lamb, my Infant,
my Dilling; debauched him, whored him, ravished him: Ay, ay, they have found
him out; but Whores, Jades, Witches, I shall spoil your sport -- Why Sirrah,
Dog, Puppey.


I will so tumble her and rumble her; and rowze her and touse her --

Will you so, Rascal.


O lo!


Why Varlet, Villain, Scoundrel; who the Devil's your Taylor? who made you this
Bully? But I'll thunder you out of your Whore's Livery.


Oh fie, Aunt, do not disparage the Ladies Favours.


Favours! Ay, I'll favour him with a Vengeanee. But come, Neighbour, lend me
your Hand. Come, strip Vermin, strip; uncase Rascal, uncase.


Help, murder; Thieves, Thieves; Help, help.


Ay, roar Bull, roar. Did I pay my Landlord Forty good Pounds for you this
Morning, ye ungrateful Varlet, to set up for a Bully, a Royster, a Rogue, a
Tory! But here's some of my Money again; I'll carry these to the Brokers, and
let your Whores buy you more.


Robbed, killed, murdered! Thieves, Thieves; stop Thieves.


What's the Matter, here?


My Landlord!


Oh, Sir, she has robbed me! Call a Judge, and carry her before a Constable;
I'll have her hanged.


How, hang your Mother?


Ay, hang her, Sir; she's a Thief and a Witch, and a Crocodile; she has robbed
me, and stripped me, and bound me and gaged me, and thrown me into a Ditch: I'll
swear it all point blank against her; and if there be ever a Gallows in Forty
Miles round, I'll hang her my self.


Ay, Sir, do you hear the Rebel? Oh Landlord, never had poor Woman such a
graceless Brat. Look ye, Sir, is this Pound of Whore's Hair, and this Load of
Foppery, a Garb for honest Barnaby Dawkins's Son? Nay, have I bred him up to
his Catechize and Psalter; carried him to Church with me twice a Day, and now
to have him debauched, defiled? Nay, and a young Rogue too, not full One and
twenty. Ah, Sir, had he had the Grace to follow my steps, he would never have
strayed thus wickedly. I am sure his poor Mother was never debauched till many
a fair Day after his Age. To my sorrow, I saw almost full Thirty before I could
say Black's Black. But a young Rogue, to run after Jades, Sluts, Trulls --


Sluts and Trulls! what my Princess! Do you hear that, Sir: Bear witness,
Gentlemen; I'll swear High Treason against her.


Come, no more Noise; all shall be mended.


And. Widow, I'll answer for your Boy, and his Honesty: And so pray give him
his Clothes again: They are only a small Token of my Favour.


Ay, with all my Heart, and Heavens bless your Worship. Here Tommy.


Uh! Thief.


And is my Boy honest? And did your Worship give him all these fine Clothes?
Bless your sweet Eyes fort. Nay, my Boy well dressed and trimmed, and spruced,
has the Countenance of a Gentleman. I assure you, Sir, though I say it, he has
very good Blood in his Veins: For I'll tell you, Sir, your Worship's good
Father (Heaven rest his Soul) lay at my House, that very Day four Months before
I quickened of my Tommy. I remember't to an hour. Ah Squire, he was a good Man,
and such a very kind Landlord --


Death, Frank! she'll claim Kindred with thee, and make her Booby thy Brother
anon.


Gad, I think so too. Well, Widow, if you dare trust me with your Boy; I'll
answer for his good Behaviour.


Trust the noble Squire! Ay, with my Virginity. How sweetly my Blossom, my Bud,
looks: It beeomes him so prettily, that I vow I must kiss my Kid; I can't
forbear.


Kiss! Judas!


Nay, Squire, if you should carry him to a young Girl, of your Worship's
Acquaintance, in a civil way; no Disparagement, my Bird, my Cockarel, he's a
true Game-breed, Sir; will shame neither Father nor Mother; and I'll turn him
loose in any Ground in Christendom. And so Squire, your Servant. Tommy, Day,
day; day, day.


Ay march, troop; show your Shapes.
Oh are you come! well; where's my Princess?

Your Princess --

My dear honey Queen.


Why, she's gone, Sir.


Gone! gone!


Marched, gone, galloped away, as fast as a Coach and six Horses could drive
her.


Nay, I hope you do but tell me so.


Why what should she do here? Here was a roaring Billingsgate, bawling Sow --


My Mother!


So frightened her out of her Princely Wits, that she's gone, clear gone.


Here's fine Work! Do you see now, do you see what you have done? You would not
have her hanged; no, not you. Oh unfortunate, unfortunate! Here should I have
been a Great Gull, and a Lord Monky; and now shall I be nothing but little
sneaking Tom. Dawkins.


Nay, this is a little too hard.


Hard! why 'tis Fire and Gun powder! the Devil and Dr. Foster! Mothers! a
plague of all sucking Bottles, if these be your Mothers. But you would not have
her hanged. Udsooks, had she been hanged seven Years before I was born, it had
been the happiest Day I had ever seen in my Life.


Come, Spark, not quite to break your Heart; your Princess will be here again
to morrow.


Ha: dear honey Boy, to morrow!


You'll be here next Rehearsal, and bring your Fool again?


Ay, ay.


Let me alone to manage him.


But will my little Princess --

Be here again to morrow.


And shall her Great Gull --

Have her in your Arms; sleep with her, wake with her, dream with her, go to
Bed to her; kiss her, love her, lie by her --


How! go to Bed with her?


All in your Arms. The tenderest, softest, kindest, melting --

Hah!


A clear fair Stage, Sir, and from you no Quarter;
And fall aboard her like a --

Great Grum Carter.


AND how do you like your Lodging, noble Prince?


Oh daintily, daintily: But when will she come? when will she come? dear Boy.


Oh in three Minutes: Till then she has commanded me to entertain you with a
Dance.


A pox of Dancing: I want my Queen.


Oh fie, Sir; her Majesty never goes to Bed without a Dance.


Say you so? what a capering young Gypsy shall I have? and how shall we Two
Frisk it together!


O Lord!


Oh the Devil, the Devil, the Devil: Help, Murder, Murder.


Stay Prince, and take your Mistress with you.


Your Queen; your Princess!


Ay, Joe, now thou hast entertained us -- This was a Master-piece.


Nay, as simple as I stand here, this very Machine came over from France.


From France!


Alamode de Paree, I can assure ye. For I'll tell ye; I the Engineer-Royal of
the King's House, and my Brother-Engineers of the Duke's House, went over into
France together; and this Machine, and a few Clouds of Clouts, was all we
brought over for Two Thousand Guineas.


Nay, such an Engineer-General deserves Encouragement. Pray Mr. Hayns, let me
present you with Five Guineas.


And the same Number from me --

Which makes the Sum just Ten,
I have not shared so much the Lord knows when.

YOung Strephon met me to'ther Day,
And courted me to Toy and Play:
He talked of twenty pretty Things,
Of Darts, and Flames, and Cupid's Wings.
What need he tell me over and over,
I had a thousand Charms and more?
My Glass had told me that before.
And then he fell to Sobbing, Sighing,
Cooing, Wooing, Whining, Crying;
All but Dying.
I knew what he meant; I saw't in his Eyes,
'Twas all but a pack of flattering Lies:
'Twas all but a Sham,
All, all that he said;
For Young though I am,
Young, Young as I am;
I am too Old to be betrayed.

Well, Miss, this is a particular Favour; and I am a new Gown in your Debt
for it.


How! marry her!


Ay, marry her; so I say.


I thought Sir, you had utterly renounced her; thrown out the treacherous
Serpent from your Bosom, and weaned your Heart from all your childish Follies.


I thought so too.


And are you then relapst, fallen sick again of your old doting Frenzy? Pray
remember you have forsaken her, left her, scorned her, cursed her: Cursed her and
her whole Race; nay, and her Father --


Is a very honest Gentleman: He and I are such good Friends again.


Friends! 'tis impossible.


Nothing more certain. By the same good Token he has promised me his Daughter;
and I'll marry her.


Do you you know what you do, Sir? Marry a Creature of her Lewdness and Infamy?
A Man of your Years to marry a Girl of Nineteen? Why, 'tis cutting a
New-River-Head; you lay in Pipes for half the Watercocks in the Town, Sir.


Why, truly, that may be. And yet I have considered the whole Business; and for
Thirty three substantial Reasons I am resolved to marry her.


Reasons!


Ay, Reasons: In the first Place, as thou say, a thousand to one but she
makes me a Cuckold; the more Danger the more Honour, Shackarel. -- In the next
Place, I am a very old Fellow, and a very little Love will serve my Turn. And
if she should take a small Snap abroad, to mend her short Com^ns at Home; thou
know Shackarel, that every Thing would live; and I am a Man of more
Conscience than to keep a poor Thing to starve it.


Conscience, with a Vengeance!


And then if I am a Cuckold, I have a number of Brothers at this City end of
the Town: I am but one of the Crowd, and shall have a great deal of good
Company.


And would you go to the Devil for Company?


Go to the Devil! Oh fie no. Cuckolds go to Heaven, Shackarel; -- and Heavens a
sweet Place. And as our Parson told me the other Day, 'tis a very difficult
Matter to get to Heaven, especially with Use upon Use, and Bags upon Bags, with
racked Rents and screwed Tenants, and Widows Sighs and Orphans Tears: And above
all, the lamentable Out-cry of Stock-jobbing and Bank-Bills; Receipts of good
Gold, and Payments of Paper, Shackarel. Then what can I do better, than marry a
young Wife to send me to Heaven, when I shall find it so hard to get thither my
self. And therefore Nolens volens, Nemine contradicent, I'll marry Jacintha.


Well, Sir, if you dare marry her --

Dare! It is decreed, nor shall thy Fate, oh Cuckoldom,
Resist my Vow: Though Horns were set on Horns,
And Brows met Brows to guard me, I would through;
Hard as the Rocks, steep as the Alps in Front,
I'll wave my tall Brow-Antlers in the Clouds,
And yet bear up my Head, my Head, proud Citizen.

Well; if you have the Courage of a second Cataline, and dare play his
desperate Game, and meet his desperate Fate, you shall marry Jacintha; and so
take what follows.


Take what follows! so I will. I'm sure of the first good Night, and to the
Gods belongs to Morrow. And so Shackarel, do thou go to her, tell her a piece
of my Mind; and if thou can get her to take a Walk into my Lord
Squanderland's Garden, where I'll meet her, and prepare her for the Day of
Jubilee: And so speed the Plough.


Speed the Gallows! Thou art full ripe for a Hempen Noose, but too rotten for a
Wedlock one --

Our Plots are all unravelled. This last Dotage
Has baffled all my Hopes, broke all my measures:
What can I do, or think! I'll to Jacintha,
See what new Politics her Brain can form.
I want that lovely Pilot in this storm.
When Man's lost senses, all are run a Drift,
'Tis Woman's Wit must save at a Dead lift.

Now does it puzle my whole City-Politicks to know what to make of this Sir
Dottrell. To be a little doting mad, at reverend Fourscore, is but a natural
Frenzy: But to be high raving mad, to start into Lunatic Fits, and see
Sprights and Goblins, Visions of Whores, and Horns, against all sense and
reason; this warm Dog-star at his Cold Christmas tide is something
unaccountable. But no matter, though he's a little crazed in the Brain, he's
very sound in the Pocket. -- Five thousand a year is worth twice five senses;
He has Money to compound for his Wit, and Acres for his Intellects; and so
nihil obstante he shall marry my Daughter.


Sir, my Young Master is come to wait upon you.


Well Son; what news from your Temple-walks? How do your Rooks and your Lawyers
plume their Nests together? what Music betwixt those Birds of a Feather, this
high Issuable Term with them!


Why faith, Sir, I can't tell what Music our Temple-Rooks make, but your City
Ravens croak but scurvily.


Ravens!


Ay, your old Antiquated Ravens. Fur and Night-cap, Age and Impotence. An old
Fusty City-Alderman that has out-lived the Crow; An Egg in Great Hall's Reign,
Hatched in little Ned's, Feathered in Queen Besses, and Moulted in Old Noll's.


How, Son!


Even so, Sir. And yet this Buzzard, this Craven, this old Bird of Night wants
a young Nest again; To Coo and Bill, and Couple and mate in the Devil's name.
Well, Sir, if his Old Chops must be mumbling again* get him a Beldam; feed him
with his own natural Crows meat, Carrion* not Chicken and Partridge, my Sister,
Sir.


How now; Royster! you are very brisk, Young Sir.


Something younger than Sir Dottrell, my Twenty-two a little short of his
Ninety-two.


Do you know where you are, Sir?


In the presence of a Father.


Then where's your Respect and Duty? --

Paid to your Character and Virtues; not to your Weakness and Injustice. In
short, Sir, this Sir Dottrell --


Is the Man of the World --

Shall never be my Brother-in-law.


He shall not!


No, shall not!


How, Bully, do you come to bid Defiance to me,
To give me Battle? Ha!

If Prayers and Tears
Are Battling Weapons, Sir, I come all armed against you:
I do beseech you, Sir, let Nature, Pity,
Justice, Humanity, all plead against this unequal Match.
Look on my Sisters Youth, her Virgin Bloom,
Worthy a warmer Bed than such a Sepulchre:
Nay, Sir, if I may boast her Charms, her stock
Of Beauty --

Is a Match for Sir Dottrel, Boy;
Beauty to Beauty, Son; his Gold and her Eyes,
They'll sparkle together, Boy: He a fair Estate,
And she the fair Mistress of it: Nothing better matched, Ned.

Matched with a Vengeance! Yes, her Youth, and Sweets, and Charms,
To his Gout, and Cramps, and Palsies! Marry her! Bury her.
Her Bed! Her Grave, Sir.

Hold, Sir, a word with you;
Confess, and tell me true: Is this whole Outcry
Only against Sir Dottrel? Not one Puff
Of all this Storm for your dear Darling Palmarin?

Yes, Sir, if Truth must speak, I am a Champion
For that deserving Youth, that suffering Virtue,
Worthier my Sisters Heart in all his Ruins,
Then his vile Rival in his Chain of Gold.

Ay, now 'tis plain. O thou ungracious Boy!
An Advocate for Rags, and Shame, and Poverty.

For Worth, and Truth, and Honour.


Honour and Beggary! A black Swan and a white Crow.
Such another Word,
And, by all the Vengeance of an Angry Father,
I'll disinherit thee.

As you please, Sir;
Your Son and your Estate are both your own.
But let me tell you, Sir, 'tis not the Inheritance
Of Twenty Patrimonies shall frighten me from Justice*
Or shrink one Nerve in the great Cause of Truth.
Look ye, Sir; I can be a Martyr to Honour, but not a
Cully to Fear.

Well, you're brave my Boy. But come, Ned;
Let you and I make a Drawn Battle between us.
Your Sister and I will even take it by Turns:
I'll dispose of her whilst she's mine, and she shall dispose of her self when
she's her own. I'll marry Jacintha to Old Sir Dottrel, and she shall marry Sir
Dottrel's Widow to young Palmerin. For, look ye, Son; one Month of Matrimony
will wheedle her into his whole Estate; three Months of Family-Duty break the
Old Fellow's Heart; Six Months of Mourning serve for the Widowhood; and so Nine
Months of Patience gets your Young Palmarin a Wife with 5000 l. a Year, to
troll, shine, and roar with, dear Boy; worth twenty blind beggarly Bargains, to
get Brats and starve with.


Nay, fie, this shameful Argument --

I'll hear no more. Get you home to your Temple, read your Littleton, eat your
Mutton, draggle ye^r Goon, and come again (let me see) to morrow Night. By that
time I shall have considered matters, and will give you full Satisfaction in
the Point.


On that Condition, Sir, I'm all Obedience:
I'll take my Leave, and wait your Hour of Grace*

Yes, Son, I'll marry her in the morning, and give thee Satisfaction at Night.

Young Counsellours Old Heads must never sway;
Gold in a Fathers Scales must only weigh;
Let Sons Preach Honour, Interest is our Play*

WEll, Sir Dottrel, here's honest Shackarell has told me your whole Mind; that
you are resolved to marry Jacintha, right or wrong; to take her as blind Men do
Money, false or true, Brass or Silver.


And if thou hast the Conscience to cheat that Blind Man with Adulterate for
Sterling, be the Sin at thy own Door.


And then you dare venture upon me?


Dare! I must dare; for I can't live without thee.


Say you so, my Heart of Steel. Then let not your Noble Courage be cast down:
For to cheer up your Heart, know, to the utter Confusion of Fears and
Jealousies, I am Virtuous.


Virtuous!


And will live and die so;
Nay, all the Affronts and Cheats I've put upon you
Have been only so many Trials of your Patience and your Constancy;
And here, before honest Shakarell, I promise you,
Sir Dottrel is the Man of the whole World
Shall make me the happiest and best Wife in Christendom.

I am transported!


Nay, my whole last Night's Roguery --

Oh! No more of that.


Was all but a Sham-Plot.


How! A Sham-Plot?


Betwixt your Man and me.


My Man Shakarell.


Oh! I'll be kinder than the Flower of the Sun,
Throw open all my Bosom and my Charms
To thy warm Joys.

My Life, my Soul, my Heaven!
What think you now, Sir Dottrell?

and was it you, ye young Rogue!


Even I, Sir.


But had thou the Heart to put thy poor Master into that wicked Fright!


All my young Mistress's Design; she drew me into the Plot, and I had not the
Power to refuse a fair Lady.


No, you young Smirker! Well, I am the happiest old Toast in three Kingdoms:
Such a Wife, and such a Servant; there are not the Fellows of 'em in the whole
Town, from one End to the other; Uds bud, not from Knaves-Acre to
Cuckolds-Point.


And now, to show you, Sir, how much I relish*
The welcome Joys of being a happy Bride,
I have prepared a Bridal Entertainment;
A Marriage-Masque, Sir Dottrell.

How! A Masque!


The Nymphs of the Plain,
And Swains of the Grove
All the whole Noble Train
Of Smiling Love:
A Jolly Jolly Troop in all our Pride,
Our happy Joys we'll summon;
To day we have made a Maid a Bride,
And to Night we shall make a Woman*
Let the Blushing Miss,
That steals to the Bliss,
Take a whole Load of Shame upon her:
All the true Joys of Life
Are in the Arms of a Wife,
In Love's fair Bed of Honour.

All the true Joys, c.


So now we have done the Work of the Day,
For the Work of the Night come all Hands away,
To lay the sweet Bride,
By her Bridegroom's Side:
To Bed, to Bed with the Bride.

Come, come, my dear Love, my Soul's all of fire;
All burning Desire,
In thy Arms to expire;
To drink the sweet Nectar of Gods in Kisses,
And taste their whole Heaven in Blisses.
Then come, come, come away.

Oh, What shall I do!


Come, come, come away.


Oh, How shall I go to a Man, to Bed!
I vow, I shall blush all Scarlet Red.

Prithee, prithee, bush
All Thoughts of a Blush.

Nay, fie, naughty Man; what is't that you want?


All the warm sweet Blessings that Love can grant.
Then come, come, come.

I can't, I can't.


Indeed, but you shall.


I vow, but I shall not.


You must, you shall.


I wont, I can't.


But come, come to Bed.


I shall die with Shame.


Come, come, come away, and cast away Sorrow;
If thou blush to night, thou wilt smile tomorrow.

Oh, let me but lie one Night more alone.


No, no, no.


Not one Night more a Maid!


Not one.


Well, well; if I must, I'll try what I can.
But what shall I do to lie by a Man*
You'll put out the Candle?

Ay, ay, ay, ay.


And shut the Door?


Ay, ay, ay, ay.


And shall no body see?


No, no body see.


And no body hear?


No, none but we.


Well, well; if I must, I'll try what I can.
But, what shall I do to lie by a Man!

All the true Joys of Life, c.

I profess a most delicate Entertainment. But methinks that young Harlotry that
peevish Tit of a Bride was a little too Coy when she should go to Bed. I hope,
my Dear, thou wilt not serve me so.


No, no, no.


Then come along my little Honey-suckle.


Hold, Stay, Sir Dottrell. -- Sir, before I marry, I have a request which you
must not deny me.


Deny thee, Child! I can deny thee nothing.


Then you must know I have made a solemn Vow never to marry that Man but he
that shall steal me.


Steal thee!


Ay, and this, Sir, you must promise me, I must confess 'twas a rash hasty Vow;
but Vows when they are once made, are Sacred Things; and should I break them,
Heaven would never bless me.


But why must I steal thee?


Oh fie, Sir Dottrell, what shrink at so small a piece of Knight Errantry, to
win a Fair Lady.


Besides, Sir Dottrell, I'll make it very easy; you Sir Dottrell, and your Man
Shackarell shall come with a Ladder, to our Back-window, exactly at Twelve a
Clock at Night. I'll steal the Keys of the Window, be ready to receive you, run
into your Arms, trundle down the Ladder with you, knock up the Parson, slip
into the Church, tumble over the Matrimony, troll home to my Father, tell him
the whole story of the Frolic, whilst you sing He smiles, I laugh, and all the
Bells of the Town ring Oh be Joyful.


Huzzah! why I'll do it; say no more, I'll do it. Steal thee! why I'll steal thee
all; steal thy heart, steal to Bed to thee; steal into thy Bosom, steal into
thy -- Oh such Raptures! such Delight! How shall I contain me to the
Wedding-night.


See, Sir Dottrell, see, the Windows unlocked, the Cloud's opening* and your
Dear Angel ready for descending. O you're a happy Man, Sir. But come aloft,
Sir, mount the Walls, and Scale the Battlements.


But I don't like this Night-work. -- But be sure you hold the Ladder fast, for
if it should slip, I should fall very heavy, for five thousand a year's a great
weight, Shackarell!


Pox on you! you are one thousand a year heavier of my Money.





Ay faith; I shall watch you! -- Hst, where are you?


Here, Sir.


All you that on your Beds lye waking,
To keep your Gity-brows from aching.
First watch your Wives, and then your Money;
And drive the Hornets from your Honey.
For fear your Spouse your Crabs inoculate,
Keep her from Beaus and House of Chocolate.
Preserve your Lambs from sly Court Foxes.
From Pagan Vizors, and Side-boxes.
From Hackney Coach with Wooden-windows.
From Love abroad, and none within doors.
Good Morrow my Masters all, Good Morrow: Past Twelve a Clock, and a warm
Frosty Morning. -- Ha! a Ladder at Mr. Deputies Back-window -- Why, Sir, Mr.
Deputy. -- Your House is broken open. Thieves, Thieves, Thieves.


Thieves, Thieves, Thieves!


Why 'tis I Child, Sir Dottrell.


Sir Devil!


Why, Chicken, I am come to Steal thee.


Steal me, Impudence! Thieves, Thieves, Thieves!


Ha! my Window broke open! --

Ay, and your House broke open! your Great Trunk broke open.


My Great Trunk!


And your Cabinet of Diamonds.


My Diamonds!


Why, Madam, what do you mean! What are you going to do! I hope you have more
Conscience than to serve me thus?


Just as you deserve, Mr. Thief -- Here slip this Casket of Diamonds into your
Pocket.


Robbed, ruined, undone! A Casket of Jewels bought of my Lord Squanderland for
6000 Pound, and worth 10000. Lost, undone! ruined.


Ay, Sir, see there the Barbarous Thief.


Sir Dottrell. See there.


Ay, Sir, 'tis I.


You, Sir, Dottrell.


Yes, I Sir? what a Pox is't such a wonderment to see an Old Rat in a young
Mouse-trap.


I can't believe my Eyes.


No, nor your Ears neither, if that young Witch has the handling of'em.


Oh, Sir, Sir, yonder's my Lord Chief Justice come from Council at Whitehall,
just turned the Corner of the Street in his Coach; what if I call him to hear
the whole Business?


My Lord Chief Justice!


Ay, Sir, let him be called, let me have Justice against that Barbarous Riffler
of your House. Now you may see how you've betrayed and ruined me. Made me
dispose my heart to that base Man. That came not hither for the Love of me.
'Twas not the Charms of all my Youth and Beauty; My blooming Virtue, and my
Virgin Innocence.


Oh Woman, woman, woman!


No: 'twas the sparkling Luster of your Jewels that dazzled in his Eyes.


Was ever such a Traitoress! Oh, Sir, believe her not one word; 'tis all Design,
Plot, Treason, upon my Honour and my Life, Sir; and she has no mercy than a
Weaver at an East-India-House. That wheedling dissembling young Imp there told
me she had made a Vow to Marry no Man but he that should steal her; and I like
an old blind dunce --


Steal me! Bless my Ears! what says the Man! Steal me! Oh, Sir, Dottrell, Sir
Dottrell, this is like the rest of all your Barbarous Usage.


Ay, Child, steal thee!


Ay Sir, steal her! I tell you, Sir, once more, that Monster --

Ay, you may tell me what you please: You that can do such wicked things, can
have the confidence to say any thing.


Justice is never troublesome nor unseasonable, we are bound to right the
injured.


Injured! Ay my Lord, I have had l.


Six thousand Pound!


See there the Ladder, and see here the Thief.


Sir Dottrell!


I shall run mad; that's certain.


The Worshipful Sir Dottrell, I am all amazement.


Amazed my Lord, Ay and amazed, and amazed again, when you have heard the whole
Roguery. Your Lordship is a Good Man, and an Honourable man, and will do me
Justice; I desire you to hear me, my Lord; I'll tell you the whole truth from
the Top to the Bottom. I'll confess all my Lord.


Confess! you can't do better Sir Dottrell.


Then in the first place I am a wheizing, grunting, empty-headed old Sot of
Fourscore.


Very good.


In the next place, having no more Grace than Brains, and no more Fear before
my Eyes than to --


Break open a House.


Break open a House! No my Lord, break a fools head of my own, to run my
reverend But-end a tilt at a Gay Petticoat, and play the old Game of hard heads
called Matrimony.


Very well. Go on, Sir.


An old doting fool to have no more sense at these years than to pretend to
make Woman's Meat, when I am more fit for Worms-meat, my Lord. To be hankering
after Young Flesh, when I am going the way of all flesh; and thus by the wicked
instigation of the World, the Devil, and dry Bones, my Lord, with one Leg in my
Grave I had no more Conscience than think of slipping the other to Bed to a
Girl of Nineteen; and to lay my old Frost and Night-cap by her young Fruze and
Top-knot.


And so falling in Love with a young Lady, and having a particular occasion for
a Necklace of Pearl, Locket of Diamonds, and some other Toys, to the Value of
Six Thousand Pounds, for a Present to your Young Mistress, you made bold with
Mr. Deputy.


I know nothing of Mr. Deputy's Lockets and Diamonds. I had no Design but upon
that precious Jewel his Daughter there; that young Fury with her Snakes in
Powder and Curl; that Cloven-foot in Laced Shoes, my Lord.


Ha! What's all this?


A wicked and notorious Jezabel, that has conspired the Ruin, Fall and
Destruction of the Right Worshipful Sir Dottrel.


Yet hold, Sir.


I cannot hold. I must confess my Sins, and repent, my Lord; and tell your
Lordship, I have been galloping Headlong in the fair Road to the Devil, my
Lord. For an Old Coxcomb of Eighty Eight, that has no more Wit than to Marry a
Young Girl of Eighteen, heaps more Coals upon his Head than another City
Conflagration; and ought to be Married on no Day but the Second of September,
my Lord. For when the Firebrands of Whoredom and Cuckoldom are once lighted,
they are unquencheable; and a Young Gypsy that takes Fire in her Pudding-Lane,
is never to be stopped till she burns down to Bridewell, my Lord.


How now! Ill-manner'd, Sir! Do you know where you are? This Insolence before
the Bar of Justice! Ha!


I beg your Lordship's Pardon.


Better Language, and more Civility.


I have done, Sir. I know no Harm of the poor Girl. She is a Good Girl, and an
Honest Girl, and a Religious Girl -- Why, I have heard her at her Prayers, my
Lord.


No more trifling, Sir. If you have any thing to say, speak home to the
purpose. Has this young Lady done you any Wrong any Injustice, Sir?


Wrong! O Lord, no! She has done me a great deal of Right, my Lord. Alas, Sir,
I have been an impertinent Old Fool, and have so tired and teased her, and
haunted her, till the poor Thing, in her own Defence, when I would take no
Warning, and receive no denial, has only drawn me into a Plot, Sir; to see my
Back-side, Sir; to get a fair Riddance of me, by sending me up High Holborn,
and please your Lordship: I vow and swear that's all.


And did she draw you into this Plot?


She, Sir; Ay, ay. Why, I broke open her Father's House by her own Special
Command.


Very pretty! And so in Obedience to a fair Lady --

Ay, Sir.


To rid her of a troublesome old Blockhead.


Right, Sir.


You committed Burglary.


Very true, Sir.


In pure Complaisance to be hanged out of the way.


Why truly, Sir, if that False Peacher can Swear me or Lie me into a Halter, I
shall be hanged and hanged, and double hanged, my Lord.


Oh, I have heard too much a plain Confession: Dead, gone, lost!


Dead, Sir!


The World can't save ye.


How! Not save me!


Impossible! Oh Sir Dottrel, Sir Dottrel! A Man of your Estate, a Person of
your Worth, for you to run yourself into this hideous Sin -- Oh, 'tis
unpardonable! A Common Thief! Poor Rogues, that break a House for want, for
Bread for Hunger, those pitied Wretches might find some Beams of Grace: But
you, Sir Dottrel; Oh, there's no Hopes, no Mercy!


What do you mean, Sir? I hope you don't intend to hang me.


Had you a Thousand Lives, all, all lost.


Oh, my Dear Lord, don't fright me! Hang an Alderman! Hang a Gold Chain! I
shall never be able to bear it. Oh, my dear Lord, upon my Knees I do beseech
you.


Kneel, Sir, to Heaven, not me; make your Peace there, Sir Dottrel.


Oh, don't talk of Heaven! I tremble at the Name on it. And, Madam, dear Madam,
save me, save me. Dear Honey, sweet Devil, speak Truth but this once in thy
whole Life, and tell my Lord the whole Story. Dear Rogue, don't let me be
hanged: Besides, I shall make but a sneaking Dog in a String; and thou'lt get
no Credit by Hanging me.


Nay; why do you trouble me?


I'll never trouble thee again: I'll quit thee, resign thee, renounce thee for
ever. And therefore, sweet little Tigress, speak a good Word to my Lord: Save
but my Life, and I'll give thee half my Estate.


How, Sir!


Half my Estate.


My Lord, do you hear how the poor Man begs for Life? If your Lordship can do
any thing for him --


Do you desire it, Madam?


Ay, she does desire it; she must desire it.


Nay, Madam, your Commands --

O sweet Rogue!


Well, Sir Dottrel, for this fair Lady's sake I'll try what I can do for you.
But fie, Sir Dottrel, half your Estate! That's too much: You shall have Mercy
at a cheaper Price.


Oh, you're a good Man.


But first, Sir Dottrel, have not you an Estate of young Palmerin Worthy's,
bought of his Prodigal Brother.


I have, Sir.


And I warrant you, did not give half the Worth sor't.


Not a Quarter.


Then upon Condition that, before all these Witnesses, you'll give it under
your Hand and Seal, to return that Estate to young Palmerin, I'll promise you
your Life.


With all my Heart, Sir.


Here's my Clark then shall draw up the Agreement.


Ay, my Lord, you shall have it under Hand, Seal, Bill, Bond, Judgment,
Statute; any thing for a sweet Life, my Lord.


Well now, Sir Dottrel, I hope I am not that hard hearted Thing; you see I am
all Tenderness, all melting Pity; so very kind --


Kind! Ay, Pox on thee, you're damnable kind!


How, Sir!


Heavens bless thee, I would say. Kind Chicken! Ay, very kind; a dear sweet
Rogue.


Come, Sir Dottrel, your Hand.


Ay, both my Hands.


You deliver this as your Act and Deed to the Use of Palmerin Worthy.


To the Use of Palmerin Worthy.


So; now to perform my Part. In the first place, Mr. Deputy, to make Peaee with
you, Sir Dottrel heartily begs your Pardon, and by my Hand restores your
Jewels, Shackarell.


Shackarell!


No; no Shackarell neither: For instead of your Man Shakarell, I am your Rival
Palmarin; no more yours, but this Lady's Humble Servant.


Palmerin!


And now, Mr. Deputy --

Palmarin* Worthy!


As kind Fortune has at last removed all Obstacles to my Honourable Pretensions
to the Fair Jacintha; as this kind Knight has given me one Estate, I hope
you'll give me another, your Beautiful Daughter, Sir.


Ay, with all my Heart and Soul. Take her, dear Boy, take her, and Heaven bless
thee with her. Young Palmerin, and a Thousand a Year! Thou art such an
ingenious young Rogue, thou deservd'st a Girl with her Weight in Diamonds.


Here's fine Work.


Go, take her to Church, take her to thy Arms, take her to Bed; and get me
Grandsons and Great Grandsons. How shall I mend my dull City-Breed with such a
Wit for my Son-in-law!


And art not thou a Perjured Devil?


Perjured! No, not at all.


No, young Deceiver? Where's the Promise you made me?


I have performed 'em.
Yes, Sir; I promised ye before this Honest Gentleman.

Honest with a Vengeance!


Sir Dottrel was the Man of the whole World
Should make me the happiest and best Wife in Christendom,
And I have kept that Promise: For Sir Dottrel
Has given my Palmerin an Estate, and that
Estate has given me Palmerin. And thus
(Upon my Knees I thank you.) You have made me
That best, that happiest Wife --

I can bear no longer.


Yet, stay, Sir.


Stay, Tormenter!


Ay, Sir; stay -- I have a Boon to ask you.
That you'd forgive me.
Ay, Sir; forgive me: Do. I beg it of you.
I own my Faults; own I have used you hardly.
And yet I never wronged you.

How! Not wronged me!


No, Sir; not wronged you: I have loved ye more
In cheating you, than marrying you. Consider
What 'twas you asked; and what I have denied.
Marriage, alas! Sir Dottrell, had undone ye:
To take a Wife, were that Rack Rent upon ye*
Your Age could never pay. Let such Grey Hairs
Go not to Church to Wedlock, but to Prayers,
And kneel to Heaven, not Woman, at those years.

In troth, thou art in the right on it. I confess.
In thy soft Arms I should have slept so sweetly --
And Sleeping had been all; nay, and, perhaps, not that too.
I should have spit, and coughed, and wheiz'd, and grunted;
Made but a slovenly Husband for a young Wife.
And therefore, Palmerin, give me thy Hand --
And thine, Jacintha -- Now, if I could but out with it --

Speak boldly.


Resign me nobly.


Do a generous Deed.


And think what Glorious Triumph you will make:
'Tis brave to give, when it is poor to take.

Then take her, and be happy -- But, I vow,
It almost breaks my Heart, that I must lose thee.

Nay, dry your Eyes. I will do more than love ye.
What though I cannot give a Hand, (for that's
My Palmerin's;) I'll give you both my Knees.
I'll pray for you to my last Hour of Life.

And wilt thou pray for me?


More than a Father.
He gave me Birth: But you have given me Palmerin.

Yes, thou shalt pray for me: For I'll do something
As shall deserve thy Prayers. Here, Palmerin;
To thy own Estate, I have given thee, take mine too.
For, since I must not make my dear Jacintha
My Wife, my Heir I'll make thee. No Old Age,
Nor no Young Rival shall debar me that.
My Fortunes, Treasures, Jewels: Five fair Lordships;
Twice five fair Thousand Acres;
And thrice as many Pounds in fairer Gold,
Is all thy own. Give but a poor Old Man
My Length and Breadth in Clay, when I am Dust;
And all the rest, my dear Jacintha, 's thine.

Oh, this amazing Kindness! Let me kneel once more:
Too poor in Thanks to pay this wondrous Goodness.

Too poor, indeed.


Nay, fie; dear Shackarel, rise.
Thou art the happy Lord of fair Jacintha,
And I am thy Servant now -- And rise Jacintha, rise.
Come, Mr. Deputy; we'll both be Fathers now.

Yes, I the happiest, you the kindest Father.


Come, thou sweet Bride that must be, we'll prepare
The Wedding-Dinner: Shall we not?
We'll have the Poets, and the Fiddles too,
And all the Wedding Joys. I shall be pleased
To see young Palmerin the happy Man:
Nay, I'll dance too, as heartily as I can.

COme Strephon, Phyllis come let's troll
A Jovial Hour away.
And whilst the Golden Minutes roll,
We'll Sing and Dance, and Play.

See in the smiling Month of May,
The Songsters of the Grove they play,
Must such a poor young thing as they
A little Bird so very small
That just can tattle, chirp and prattle:
I can but sing, and Oh that's all.
But if I live till past fifteen,
See such fine Sparks as here are seen.
I fear, I fear, you'll teach me then
To perch and plume, and dress and pride,
And more than tattle,
Chirp and prattle,
I then shall sing and love beside.
Let Monarchs boast their High Renown;
A Garland's fairer than a Crown.
Whilst Courts have all the Pomp and noise,
The Groves have all the Sweets and Joys.
Then come kind Damon, come away,
To Cynthia's Bower advance;
The Sylvanes they shall Pipe and Play,
And we'll lead up the Dance.

Hark, hark! To Pleasure and Delight
The Earth, the Seas, and Air invite:
The Winds, they whistle; Woods, they ring;
The Brooks, they murmur; Birds, they sing:
The Turtles coo; and Lambs, they play:
And why not we at blithe as they?
Then, whilst we trip it over over the Plain,
Let Pan and Flora live and reign:
We'll envy not great Jove; and be
As blessed, though not as great as He.
But, see! Our Goddess does appear!
She comes to grace our Rural Choir:
Then let the Muses all inspire
Our Joys to a Sublimer Air.
Let her Great Name go round;
Yet louder let it sound.
Cynthia! a Name so proud,
To chant her endless Song,
Jove's Thunder's not too loud;
Eternity too long.

Let her Great Name, c.

Well, Sir; and what think you of our New World in the Moon?


Why, Faith, Jo, I think, as your Painter has dressed it, 'tis a new World
indeed.


And how do you like it?


As I do a Mistress the better for being a new one.
New Objects still new Appetites must raise,
And an Original Beauty sure may please.

Gallants,
THE Author sends me here, to win your Hearts
With this full VVig, and not his own Deserts;
For he believes, and I suppose you know,
There's nothing pleases more than a young Beau.
But yet the Stage this day has done its best;
For it has furnished out a Miser's Feast:
And if this Charge and Pains should now be lost,
'Twere hard to Shipwreck on a Golden Coast.
But, Gentlemen and Ladies, I must say,
Since I am chose Champion to defend this Play,
I'll do it:
And here, with Sword in Hand, declare
To justify it, against all that dare
Strive to undo the Painter, and the Player.
The Poet, he, alas! only depends
On your Good Nature, to become his Friends.
But now, perhaps, you may believe I fear
To see this naked Weapon. But I swear
I'd fight our Foes, did I not too well know
'Twould spoil my Character of being a Beau.
Therefore, since I'm good natured, be you kind;
For, rat me, Gentlemen, 'twas well designed.
But, Pax upon 'em, 'tis all home-spun Cloth;
All from an English Web, and English Growth.
But if we'd let it make a costly Dance
To Paris, and bring home some Scenes from France,
I'm sure it would take: For you, Gadzooks, are civil;
And wish them well, that wish you at the Devil.


