Between Seven and Eight in the Morning the whole Company designed for the Duty
of the Day, meet at Merchant-Taylors Hall.

1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins, and their
Hoods.

2. The Livery in their Gowns faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Bachelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Sholder, and a White-Staff in his Hand.

6. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs and Colours of the Company in their
Hats, Blew and White.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet, and Twenty Four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesties, the Serjeant-Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs, a Blew and a White.

8. The Drum-Major-general to the King, wearing a Shoulder-Scarf of the
Companies Colours, with others of Their Majesties Household Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them, Mounted on Horseback, with rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroidered: Six Servitors likewise
Mounted to Attend, with Scarfs and Colours of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colours.

11. The Master of Defence with the same Scarf and Colours, Eight Persons of
the same Science to Attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed in carrying of Standards
and Banners.

13. Seventy Pensioners in Blew-Gowns, White-Sleeves and Blew Caps, each of
them carrying a Javeling in one Hand, and a Target in the other, wherein is
Painted the Coat-Armour of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company. All
these are ushered by Twenty personable Figures in Roman Crimson Habits, and
Silver Head-peices with the Arms of the Honourable Company, the City and the
Lord Mayor, Back and Breast, bearing Lictors Staffs, and Silver Axes.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot-Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, ranked all two by two,
beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them
are placed two Drums one Fife, and a Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Centre of them fall
two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesties, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen Ushers, follow'd by the Budg-Batchelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foins Bachelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. Then two Gentlemen, one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the City Banners. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the Principal Aldermen and Sheriffs,
Mounts His Horse, with the Aldermen two by two, the Sheriffs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Grocers-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Elect joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue;
whence all of them in this. Order march through Kingstreet down to
Three-Crane-Wharf, there entering into their several Barges which are
gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants, His Lordship and this Gallant
Company all Landing at Westminster, is conducted to the Exchequer-Bar; there
having performed several Ceremonial and Customary Duties, and taken the Oaths
to their Majesties, he returns again by Water to Black-Friers Stairs, with
Drums beating, Trumpets sounding, Music playing, c.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him towards Cheapside.

UPon a Stage is a stately Pedestal richly ornamented, whereon the Coat of the
Honourable Company, the Silver Lamb is planted. On a Descent beneath on the
four Corners are four Palm-Trees; adorned with Crowns, Coronets and Laurels,
being the emblematical Trophies of the Worthy Predecessors, as Members or
Benefactors of the Honourable Company of Merchant-Taylors. On the four square
sides, Quadranglar ways, are planted four Figures, viz. Peace, Humility,
Patience and Mercy, in their proper Attire and Ornaments, these four being the
requisite Attendance of Innocence, emblemiz'd in the Figure of the Lamb; and
the Palm tree being not only a proper Field for the Lamb, but likewise alluding
to Truth and Virtue, which according to the Motto of the Palm (Crescit sub
ponder Virtus) the more 'tis depressed the higher 'twill rise.

A Lofty Structure is erected, supported upon four noble Pillars or Columns
with all the Etableture according to the Compositive order. Over all is a
stately Domo, completely adjusted in circular Figure, whereon is erected a
Magnificent Cupulo, with a Golden Lyon placed in Chief, carrying a Banner of
the Kings Arms.

Underneath this Dome sit four Figures richly attired in silken Habits, The
first proper to the Hieroglyphich of Harmony; and the other three Theological
Virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity. These three Divine Virtues being not only the
necessary Attendants of Harmony and Union; but likewise very applicacable to
the Honourable Company for their Foundations of Religion, Learning, and
Charity. These three Virtues bear three Scutcheons on which are inscribed their
proper Mottoes.

At the four Corners of this Fabric sit four more Figures properly habited, as
Temperance, Truth, Zeal, and Constancy with silver Banners displayed, with the
Kings, Cities, and Lord Mayors and Companies Arms, in all Respects suited to
the Glory of the Day.

WHen the proud Towers of Concords Temple rise,
Her Basis stands on Earth, and Head in the Skies;
Heavens darling Blessing, and the Worlds fair Soul;
Concord, the mighty Axis turns the Pole.
Till her fair Head above the Waters bore
'Twas Chaos and Confusion all before.
Concord, by whom Truth raigns, and Empires stand,
States flourish, all by her supporting Hand.
As such the Shrine, and such the Deity,
What must the Founder of her Temple be?
That, Sr's, Your Work: Our Concords Walls You build,
Whilst Our Praetorian Chair thus nobly filled,
Such Massy Worth and Morals so refined,
Such leading Virtue with true Honour joined,
Shall stand those fair Examples for mankind;
Till Our blessed Gates with Love and Union filled,
Fair Concords Brightest Wreath Your Brow shall guild.
Nor the Happy London's only shall You bless,
But Your own Merchant-Taylors Walls no less,
With such United Worth enriched and stored,
'Twixt such a Master there, here such a Lord.
UPon a very Large Stage is fixed a Noble Triumphant Chariot, (drawn by two
Golden Camels) richly and curiosly adorned, with all the Glorious Ornaments of
Carved Work as Art can perform, in its gldiing and painting, and all
Illustration enriched with several Delightful Figures, as well Artificial as
Natural lively represented, and properly appertaining to the Solemnity of the
Day. On the most Noble and Greatest Seat of this Structure sits Minerva, the
Goddess in Chief of all the Arts and Sciences, a person of a Majestic Aspect,
attired with long thick bright curled Hair, on her Head a Silver Head-peice,
graced with a high flourishing Plume of Feathers consisting of divers Falls;
she is attired in Rich Robe of Gold surfled with Silver, and over all a Noble
Scarf of Carnation silk fringed with Gold, with a Crimson Mantle laid with
Ermyn. In one Hand she bears a Bannor of the Companies Arms, in the other a
Shield of the Cities Arms. On a Descent beneath her are placed three Graces,
viz. Vigilance, Diligence, and Labour, being expressed by the Kettle Drums and
Trumpets. In the Front of these, remote from the former, sits a Figure
personating Time, who holds the Reins of these two stately Camels excellently
carved and gilded, and painted in equal proportion to the Life, with Trappings
of Crimson and Silver, and Crimson Bridles, as being the supporters of the
Honourable Company of Merchant-Taylors Arms. This Figure of Time is so ordered
to hold the Reins of this Triumphant Chariot, as intimating the Antiquity of
this Honourable Company, the Records of their Magnificence and Glory, having
lasted so many long Ages past, and whose Chariot shall still drive on till Time
it self shall finish. On the Backs of the two Camels are seated, or mounted two
sweat young Yrinces, a Negro and a Pawny, the one an Asian, and the other an
African, in their Richest Robes, attired in the most Princely Dress of those
Countries, with Coronets on their Heads beset with plumes of variety of diverse
coloured Feathers. In their Right Hands they bear two displayed Banners, one the
Cities, the other the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor intimating their Fealty
and Submission to the Heroic Monarch of Great Britain, the sole Sovereign of
the Sea, and so far Lord of the World from Our British Communion and Traffic
in the Richest Asian and African Commerce, c. And likewise implying their
Ambition to hold an amicable Correspondence with this Renowned City. Moreover,
upon this Stage are placed three Figures representing the Seasons of the Day,
viz. Morning, Noon, and Evening; attired in their proper Habits, with gilded
Banners suitable to 'em all, intimating that Vigilence, Diligence and Labour
are the Duties of every Hour of Life: and at each Corner is four Golden Cypress
Trees. His Lordship is saluted by Minerva in this Speech, c.

SIr, in Your bright Inauguration Glory,
Amongst the humble Knees that bend before You,
With the just Tribute of her earlyest Vows
Thus low the dutiful Minerva bows:
Arts and Wits Sacred Goddess, with her fair
Triumphant Chariot, waits Your nobler Chair.
Yes Sir, whilst London Europes proudest Town,
And Albion's fairest Head, Your power must own;
Her Wheel, her Loom, her Industry, are all
But Menials, Sir, to Your commanding Call:
Her Arts encouraging Lord is only You;
Nor is Wits Patron less Your Title too:
Both Atributes so well You have deserved;
Wit, I am sure, ne'er kinder Master served.
Then Sir beneath the influence of Your Reign,
I, and my Muses, all Your Duteous Train,
Shall sing Your praises in that cheerful Chorus,
From this blessed Day smile the whole Year before us.
AS a farther Testimony of their Zeal and Esteem for his Lordship, they present
my Lord with a Ship, named the William and Mary, a Merchant Adventurer. This
Ship is laden with Cloth, Silk and Stuffs of all sorts, as representing the
Traffic in which His Lordship deals into Foreign Countries. This stately
Vessel bears all her Guns, with Ancients and Pendants, Streamers, Flags
Standarts, Tackling, Braces, Bowls, Cables, Anchors, Sails and Cordages, and
all sort of Rigging appertaining to a Merchant-Man of that Burden, being richly
gilded and painted with all her Waste Clothes.

On board this Ship are a Captain and his Mate, a Bosewain and Mariner, each
man at work, some at the main Tack, others at the main Braces, others the
Bowlings, some climbing up to the Maintop, others siting cross the Yard-Arms.
Others with Quarter Cans drinking the King and Queens Health; the Lord Mayors,
and the Honourable Companies, with Guns firing, Shouts, Huzahs and
Acclamations, as the Expressions of their Joy for his Lordship's Inauguration,
and their Dutiful salutes to welcome him to the Chair, with Songs and Trumpets
sounding, proper to the Action and the Honour of the Merchant-Taylors.

The Captain with his Crew placing themselves on the Quarter-Deck, dressed in
Indian silks, with rich Fur Caps, attired like Seafaring men; the Bosewain
having given his signal by a whistle, and commanded silence, the Sirens being
placed in the Sea leave off their melodious Music, and display their Bannors
whilst the Captain accosts his Lordship.

STrike Sailor, strike, Your Homaging Topsayls lower,
And humbly veil to yond commanding Power,
That awful Power that fills our swelling Sail,
And whose kind Smile lends all our prosperous Gale.
Our duteous Tribute, Sir, is all Your Due;
Our Canvass Wings are only plumed for You:
For You alone our Tritons Trumpets sound;
And our pleased Nereids Dance their watery round.
And if, when Your Great Name of Honour calls,
The rattling Music from our wooden Walls
Does with her loudest Mouths of Thunder roar,
'Tis to salute the Lord that rules our Shore.
But what, alas, in the Triumphs of this Day
Can my poor Flags and humble Pinnace Pay,
To You that guide a prouder Helm than Mine;
Glory that does with brighter Streamers shine?
And since our fair Metropolis's Command
Is lodged in such an Honourable Hand,
The safe Augusta shall no Shipwreck fear,
Whilst so much Virtue her great Bark shall steer.
WIthin this large Plain are Eleven or Twelve Figures, all clothed in their
proper Habits, as Nymphs and Shepherds of Arcadia, with gilded Streamers and
Bannors, being the Ensigns of Honour, of the Worthy Members of the Honourable
Company. Amongst these is Industry a Spinning, and several of the
Shepherdesses,; some Carding and some Cutting of Wool, and all Singing and
Dancing, when the Matron or Mistress of the Family calls from Work, they having
all their Scrips and Wallets, Bottles of Leather, and Baskets with Shepherds
Crooks and Straw Hats and Garlands of Flowers round their Heads, the Pageant
being all ornamented suitable to so rural a place, and enlivened with variety
of Pastoral Music accordingly. In the Front of this pleasant Plain is planted
a gilded Lyon, the Plain all strewed with Greens and Flowers, and other
Ornaments befitting the place, and also proper for so Noble an Augmentation
that was given from one of the Kings of England, out of his own Imperial Arms,
in Honour of the Worshipful Company of Merchant-Taylors, for some very
Illustrious Acts of Chivalry performed by the Famous and Noble Sir John
Hawkwood, once a Member of this Royal Society, whereof has been Eleven Kings,
Twenty two Princes and Dukes, Twenty seven Bishops, Forty seven Earls, Seventy
seven Lords and Barons; besides Ninteen Lord Mayors to this present Year, who
all received the Honour of Knighthood.

In the Rear of this Pageant is seated on a Throne, a Soldier under a Royal
Canopy, as the Arms of the Honourable Company attended on each hand by two
Persons in Parliamentary Robes, who addresses his Speech to his Lordship,
himself representing that Famous and Memorable Hawkwood.

BEhold, before me on these Verdant Plains
The Crooks, the Fleece, the Wheel, the Nymphs and Swains,
All Homagers to the Merchant-Taylors Name;
Their Rural Reeds the Trumps of Your fair Fame:
And whilst these Sons of Peace in the Front appear
Your Hawkwood, Son of War, brings up the Rear.
Hawkwood who, that bold Martial Champion stood,
Whose once Illustrious Feats in Fields of Blood,
In Your Rich Scutcheon fixed that fair Renown,
A borrowed Lyon from the British Crown.
But why do we revive old Hawkwood's Name,
When we have a Younger Nobler Heir of Fame;
Your Lordship whose Renown outvies his poorer Story,
Who dare as much for Truth, as Hawkwood durst for Glory.
TO sing the Renown of the brave Merchant-Taylors
Come blow a fresh Gale, Boys, and Hey jolly Sailors.
For weell merrily troll
All around round the Pole;
Weell cut the Sea through;
And bring home the Wealth of the Indian Peru.
For the World has no Lord but the Merchant alone;
And the whole Phoenix Nest, Boys, is all but Your own.
Then in the Triumphs of the Day,
To the Merchants weell pay
Our heartiest Zeal and Devotion:
Weell sing, and weell laugh,
And the Bowls that we quaff
Shall hold a whole Iittle little Ocean.
Weell cut through the Line, Boys; then hey merry Sailors;
From Cancer to Capricorn bold Merchant-Taylors:
'Tis for You the North Swain
Drives the Great Charles his Wain:
The Star at the Pole
For You lends the Needle her whole Life and Soul;
Whilst the Sun in the Skies, and the Stars in their Glory
Are all but Your Linkboys to travel before You.
Then, c.
To the jolly God Cupid do Mortals build Altars;
And sing Loves soft Chorus in sweet Virgin Psalters?
Does the Beauty Divine
In its whole Glory shine?
Though bright as the Morn
'Tis the Merchants rich Wardrobes proud Venus adone.
Her downy foft Sweets all but his rich Perfumes;
And our Mistresses shrine but in his borrowed Plumes.
Then, c.
In City and Country, both Profit and Pleasu^
Come all from the Hoard of the Merchants rich Treasure.
Even the poor Country Cloun,
When he comes up to Town,
No sooner he goes
To buy a new Topknot for Peggy and Rose,
But merrily home again home he trips down,
And thanks the kind Merchant for Jo^ns Wedding Gown.
Then, c.
Do we drink a brisk Health to Great William and Mary
In blushing fair Claret, or smiling Canary?
When the Conduits run Wine,
What's the Nectar Divine
That cheers up our Souls,
But the Merchants rich Juice, Boys, that Sparks in our Bowls?
And the proud Golden Goblet we drink in's no more
Than a Relic a Relic from the Merchants fair Store.
(...) c.
The Pageantry concluding, the Lord Mayor and the whole Train move off to
Dinner, which finishes the Solemnity of the Day.


