THE whole Company selected for the Management of the Triumph, meet at Seven in
the Morning at Goldsmiths Hall, viz.

All these Ranked by the Foot-Marshal, marching Two by Two, the Company's
Ensigns leading; the Pensioners, four Drums, and one Fife, and four more Drums
and Fifes bring up the Rear of this Division. After them the Pensioners with
Standarts; four Trumpets, the Supporters and Crest of the Company, six
Gentlemen Ushers, then the Budge Bachelors concluding the Second Division. Six
Trumpets, two Gentlemen, one bearing the City's, the other the Company's Arms.
Then eight Gentlemen Ushers, and next the Foyn Bachelors make the Third
Division. Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Banners, two more Gentlemen Ushers, and
then the Livery. Next the City Trumpets, then two Gentlemen bearing the City
and Lord Mayors Banner. Then the Gentlemen and Court of Assistants, c. Four
Drums, six Trumpets, two Gentlemen bearing Banners, four Gentlemen and four
Pages, and then the Wardens bring up the Rear.

In this Order they march from Goldsmiths Hall, attending his Lordship, who
joins the old Lord Mayor at Queen-street end, where the whole Company move
through Cheap-side to Three-Crane-Wharf, where the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
Livery, and part of the Gentlemen Ushers take their Barge for Westminster,
whither his Lordship is attended, with the several Barges of the respective
Companies, with Flags, Streamers, several Pleasure-Boats, with Hautboys,
Flutes, Trumpets, and all manner of Music. c.

His Lordship having taken the Oaths before the Barons of the Exchequer,
returns with the same Attendants and Splendour to Dorset Stairs, where, at his
Landing, he is saluted by the Artillery Company, in all their Martial Ornaments
in Buff and Silver Head-Pieces; and thus, with the whole Cavalcade, moves
forward towards Cheap-side. In his March, he is first entertained with this
Pageant.

A Large Fabric, designed after the Corinthian Order, elevated with four
Marble Columns fluited with Gold, and twisted round with Laurels of Flowers.
Above the Etableture of Gold and Silver are erected four Noble Golden Cups,
being part of the Bearing of the Company's Arms. In the middle of all this
Noble Building, on a Quadrangular Seat, sits UNION in Chief; with a Chaplet of
Flowers on a Golden Head-piece, and a Laurel of Oak, signifying Love and
Wisdom. The Attributes or Graces attending on UNION, are three other Persons
richly habited with their proper Ornamento, being Piety, Harmony, and
Diligence, with the Ensigns and Banners of the Company's Arms.

WHen sacred UNION holds her Seat Divine,
The sweetest Harmony of Power is Mine.
By Me is the Great Hinge of Empire moved,
The Magistrate obeyed, and Prince beloved.
But when true UNION joins all Hearts and Hands,
Tis only when some Darling Head commands.
So Rules Great WILLIAM: So, my Lord, shall You;
A Copy from that Great Original so true,
As Caesar to His Throne; You to Your Chair,
Have brought the Universal Darling there.





A Large and Spacious Work-shop of several Artificers, distinct in their proper
Apartments for the several Operators in the Mystery of the Goldsmiths,
containing Forges, Anvils, Hammers, and other Instruments of Art, c. In the
middle of this Laboratory, on a rich Golden Chair of State, is seated St.
Dunstan, the ancient Patron and Guardian of the Company, arrayed in his
Pontifical Ornaments, expressing his Prelatical Dignity, in a Surplice of white
Lawn, over which he wears a large Cope, c. On his Reverend Hoary Head, a Golden
Mitre beset with precious Stones and Pearls of great Value: In his Left Hand he
holds a Golden Crosier; in his Right Hand a Pair of Goldsmiths Tongs, an Emblem
of his Patronage; and under his Feet lies the Devil.

On each side this Noble Seat is placed Apollo and Esculapius his Son, in their
proper Habits, bearing the City's and Company's Banners, and playing on several
Melodious Instruments, as well for his Lordship's Diversion, as to preserve a
Harmony and Decorum among the Artificers.

Beneath the Steps of Ascension to the Canonical Chair, in opposition to the
Patron, is placed a Goldsmiths Forge, with Fire and Crucibles filled with Gold;
a Boy blowing the Bellows. On either Hand, in the Front of this Shop, is set up
a large Press of Gold and Silver Plate, with Counters, c. representing a formal
Shop of Trade: On each side are Jewellers at Work, with Anvils, Hammers,
Stones, Sparks; besides a Planisher, a Raiser, a Drawer and Chacer, c. Several
Artificers beating out Plate, and fashioning several Vessels of Gold and
Silver: Likewise an Essay-Master with his Class, Frame and Balance, for trying
of Gold and Silver by the Standard. In another Apartment is Disgrossing,
Flatting and Drawing of Gold and Silver Wire. In another are included Finers
and Refiners, Melting, Smelting, Fining, Refining and Separating Gold and
Silver, both by Fire and Water; and the Master-Forger and three other Workmen
making a Massy Piece of Plate, Singing and keeping Time on the Anvil.

Here His Lordship is addressed by St. Dunstan.

THE Triumphs of this Day, deserved so well,
When Fame shall in Recorded Story tell,
Those Oracles of Truth --

Can You speak Truth?

Peace, snarling Devil! Thus I'll stop your Mouth.
Down to thy Hell, there croak, thou Fiend accursed,
See this great Day, and swelled with Envy, burst.
In ancient Times when Saints were once adored,
St. Dunstan was the Goldsmiths Patron Lord:
And whilst on this proud glittering Stage I stand,
With all this shining Treasure on each Hand;
What though the World worships the Saint no more,
Still there's whole Thousands that my Shrine adore
A thousand homaging Eyes this Sight behold;
Not me their Idol, but my Shop of Gold.
But let that Superstition end: Here's all
That does a juster Righteous Homage call;
Whilst your Illustrious Triumphs to attend,
Both Shrine and Saint to You, my Lord, must bend.
That Nobler Lustre my pleased Eyes behold,
Your Richer Virtues far out-shine my Gold.

ASTRAEA, the Goddess of Justice, in a long Robe of Silver, a Crimson Mantle
fringed with Silver, a Veil of Silver fringed with Gold; on her Head a Plume of
white Feathers set with precious Stones: In her Right Hand a Touch-stone; in
her Left a Golden Balance with Silver Scales.

At a Descent beneath this Goddess are placed Charity and Concord, as the
necessary Supporters of Justice; and on a Seat remote, sits another Virtue,
called Truth, supporting the Reins, and guiding the Chariot of Justice. This
stately Chariot is drawn by two Unicorns, most exquisitely Carved and Gilded
with equal Proportion to the Life. On the Backs of these two Unicorns are
mounted two Beautiful Young Princes, one a Barbarian, the other an European,
sounding forth the Fame of the Honourable Company of Goldsmiths. At the Feet of
these most Noble Creatures is seated four other Virtues, as Prudence,
Temperance, Courage, and Conduct, all properly attired, each holding a Banner
displayed with the Kings, the Lord Mayors, the City's and Company's Arms.

JUstice of old by long Oppression driven,
Left the Tyrannic World and flew to Heaven.
But when Great NASSAW, Albion's Sceptre bore,
Our Laws and Rights sent kindly to restore,
She visited the Albion World once more.
Thus whilst our Caesar yields a Trust so large,
As proud Augusta to Your Guardian Charge.
As He from Heaven His Sovereign Justice drew;
He's Heavens Vicegerent, His Vicegerent, You.
Astraea then must here her Power resign,
Her brightest Glories in Your Hand shall shine.
You'll best, my Lord, my Righteous Balance hold,
No Poise so even as in the Scales of Gold.


TO THE WORSHIPFUL THE COMPANY OF GOLDSMITHS;

The Prints of these Pageants as a lasting Monument of this year's Triumphs,
are humbly dedicated.



THIS Pageant being the Representation of the true Merit that has raised His
Lordship to that Honourable Dignity; in the chief Seat in Front sits a noble
Figure personating HONOUR, with the Banner of the City's; on his Head a Silver
Head-Piece and a stately Plume of Crimson Feathers, his Vest embroidered with
Gold, Silver, and precious Stones; a Robe of Scarlet enriched with Embroidery
of Tissue, with Buskins, and a Silken Scarf fringed with Gold.

On the same Basis, in three other Seats, are planted Peace, Plenty, and
Liberality, properly dressed, as the suitable Attributes and Attendants on
HONOUR. At the Feet of these are laid the four Principal Rivers of Trade, as
Tiber, Nile, Danube, and Thames, with their several Hieroglyphics, in Rich
Habits, with Garlands of Flowers, and Banners flying, c.

Ths Structure is formed of the Compositive Order, most nobly set forth with
Painting and Carving in Gold and Silver to an infinite Lustre, being made of
that precious Stone called Lapis Lazuli. On the upper part over each Pilaster
are four Pyramids of Trophies of Armour, Bows, Quivers, c. being the ancient
Emblem of Honour, Love and Virtue, and crowned with the Four Imperial Crowns of
England, Scotland, France, and Ireland.

WHilst my best Wreath decks those Deserving Brows,
To her loved Lord the pleased Augusta bows:
Augusta, who Your humble Suppliant, calls
Once more for her old Hospitable Walls:
She wants to see her ancient Greatness reign,
When her proud CHAIR did all that State maintain;
That Visiting Princes filled her PRAETOR's Train.
Why do I court You to perform that Task,
When that's already granted e're I ask?
Doubt not her ancient Grandeur You'll restore,
You'll be Your SELF, and she needs ask no more.
His Lordship here moves to Guild-hall to Dinner, being Graced by the Lords of
the Council, the Judges, and the chief Nobility of England, His Honourable
Guests; where the Solemnity of the Day is concluded with all the Festival
Magnificence and Splendour suitable to so most Noble an Entertainment.

TO Britain's Dread Caesar, we'll tune up our Joy:
To Caesar, and Caesar's Great City-Viceroy:
Tis Caesar has lent him the Scales and the Sword,
And Augusta salutes him her Guardian Lord.
Whilst the World all around her,
'Twixt Envy and Wonder,
Shall see her proud Chair like the Throne shine in Gold.
Of War he has ended the Toil and the Pain;
And WILLIAM's Work now is to Smile and to Reign.
In the soft Sweets of Peace, in one Olive Bower,
The Crown and the Chair, the whole Sceptre of Power,
All blooming like Aaron's old Wand we behold;
Whilst calmly possessing
The Halcyon Blessing,
We'll merrily troll round the Goblets of Gold.
The Ermine and Fir, the Robe and the Gown,
On this side the Chaplet, on that side the Crown,
Together shall taste that General Joy,
Which the whole Power of Hell shall never destroy:
Our Albion thus blessed, this Scene to behold,
The Day shall shine brighter,
The Sun gallop lighter,
And Phoebus new-burnish his Chariot of Gold.

