Gentlemen, IN my Address to the Company of Clothworkers, I am entered within
those Walls that lead me to a very fair Survey of no common Worth and Merit.
For I may justly concede You this Fair Renown, viz. That the whole Grandeur of
England is in a high measure owing to your worthy Society. For as the Gold of
our Fleece, and the Wealth of our LOOM is in a manner our whole English Peru:
And the back of the Sheep, and not the Entrayls of the Earth is our chief Mine
of Riches. The Silkworm is no Spinster of ours; and our Wheel and our Webb,
Gentlemen, are all your own.

Thus as Trade is the life-blood of the English Nation, and indeed the very
Supporter of the Crown; so the greatest Branch of the English Trade lies in the
Clothworkers Hands. Our Floating Castles, I confess, Our Naval Commerce, bring
us in both the Or and the Argent, and indeed the whole wealth of the World:
They bring it in, 'tis true, but when thoroughly examined, 'tis Your CLOTH sends
out to fetch 'em. And thus whilst the Imperial Britannia is so formidable to
her Foes, and so potent to her Friends, her Strength and her Power, when duly
considered, to the Clothworkers Honour I may justly say, 'tis Your Shuttle
nerves her Arm, and Your Woof that enrobes her Glory.

But not to insist upon that single Merit alone, the Extent of Your Trade, and
the Reputation You have acquired, these being no more than the common work of
Your Industry; no, I have a Diviner Theme before me, the Hundreds of Your poor
Pensioners that yearly taste Your Bread, and wear Your Cloth, a Cloth so worn,
possibly the fairest Web in Your whole Loom.

Nor, Gentlemen, is Your Bounteous Goodness bounded here, Your Charity confined
within Your own Gates, Your own Hospitable Roof only: but Your more spreading
Acts of Mercy and Humanity have a yet larger Extent. Those two fair Sisters,
the Universities, both Rivals to Your kind Favours, lay their equal claim to
Your Gracious Smiles, witness your constant and generous Exhibitions, Your
cherishing Hand towards the Nursery of Arts and Sciences.

Thus not only our great Channel of Trade runs through the worthy Clothworkers,
but the two Great Fountains of Learning too must acknowledge You their Patrons
and Benefactors. Nay, Your goodness deseends to cherish Literature, even in
Inferior Schools of Youth, supported and maintained by You; and not only so
but communicates its cherishing warmth to Age and Grey Hairs; when besides Your
Pensioners at home, so many Alms-houses of both Sexes look up to the Honourable
Clothworkers for their feeding Hand.

In recounting the Clothworkers Worth, not to walk further into so spacious a
Field, 'tis sufficient that Your Charity alone displays You truly Honourable.
For Charity as it is the highest Heavenly Virtue, so ir carries likewise the
highest worldly Honour too. For whatever great Names and gay Scutcheons, those
emptier Blazons of Worth and Dignity may pretend; there's no Grandeur nor
Magnificence equals this. For even Statues and Pyramids are but faint
Memorials, and speak but dead Praise; whilst fed Mouths and clothed Nakedness
are the living Monuments of Honour. The cheerful and Thankful Prayers of the
Poor are of all the loudest Trumps of Fame, for their sound reaches Heaven, and
makes the sweetest and most greatful Music there.

And Gentlemen, as those soft Airs create so divine a Harmonies; to increase
that tuneful Quire, may You never want that generous and continued Succession
of Charity, those daily Benefactors with full Hands and open Hearts, who in
pious emulation of the fair Examples before 'em, shall study to copy from such
Illustrious Patterns; so feed the hungry Bellies, so cover the naked Backs, and
so warm the chilling Roofs, till in reward of the drooping Heads they raise
here below, they come to crown their own above; which with last hearty wish

GENTLEMEN, Your most humble Servant. E. SETTLE.
1. THE Master, Wardens, and Assistants, in Gowns faced with Foins.

2. The Livery in their Gowns Faced with Budg, and their Hoods.

3. Forty Foins Bachelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

4. Forty Budg-Batchelors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

5. Forty Gentlemen Ushers in Velvet Coats, each of them a Chain of Gold about
his Shoulder, and a White-staff in his Hand.

7. Several Drums and Fifes with Scarfs, and the Colours of the Company in
their Hats, Black and White.

7. The Sergeant Trumpet and Twenty four Trumpets more, whereof Sixteen are
their Majesties, the Sergeant Trumpet wearing Two Scarfs Black and White.

8. The Drum-Major to the King, wearing a Shoulder Scarf of the Companies
Colours; with others of Their Majesties Drums and Fifes.

9. The Two City-Marshals, each of them Mounted on Horseback, with Rich
Furniture, Hoosings, and Crupper all Embroidered: Six Servants likewise Mounted
to Attend, with Scarfs, and Colours of the Companies.

10. The Foot-Marshal with a Scarf, and Six Attendants in Colours.

11. The Master of Defence with the same Scarf and Colours, Eight Persons of
the same Science to Attend him.

12. Twenty Pensioners with Coats and Caps, employed in carrying of Sandards
and Banners.

13. Seventy two Pensioners in Blew Gowns and White Caps, each of them carrying
a Javelling in one Hand, and a Target in other, wherein is Painted the Coat
Armour of their Founders, and Benefactors of the Company.

Thus ordered, and accommodated, they are committed to the management of the
Foot Marshal, who distributes them in Seven Divisions, ranked all two by two,
beginning with the inferior part of the Standard Bearers. In the head of them
are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman, bearing the Companies Arms.

In the Rear of them, two Gentlemen bearing Banners containing the Arms of the
deceased Benefactors.

After them march the aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall
two Drums.

In the Rear of them three Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush-Coats,
bearing two Banners, one of Their Majesties, the other of the Companies. After
them Six Gentlemen Ushers, followed by the Budg Bachelors.

The next, two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners. After them Six Gentlemen
Ushers, succeeded by the Foyns Bachelors.

In the Rear fall in two Drums, and a Fife. The two Gentlemen, one bearing my
Lord MAYORS, the other the Cities Banner. Then Twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Court of Assistance, which makes the last Division.

The Right Honourable the LORD MAYOR, with the principal Aldermen and Sherifs,
Mounts his Horse, with the the Aldermen two by two, the Sherifs in the Rear.

In this Equipage of two and two, the whole Body move toward Grocers-Hall,
where the Lord Mayor Ellect joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Retinue:
whence all of them in this Order march to Three Crane-Wharf, their entering
into their several Barges which are gloriously adorned with Flags and Pendants,
His Lordship and this Gallant Company Landing at Westminster, He is conducted
to the Exchequer-Bar; their taking the Oaths to their Majesties, he returns
again by Water to Black-Fryars Stairs, with Drums beating, c.

There his Lordship, and the several Companies landing from their Respective
Barges, the rest of the Attendants that went not to Westminster, waiting for
his Reception, the whole Body moves in Order before him to Cheap-side, where
his Lordship is saluted with the First Pageant.

A Stately Pyramid stands erected upon four Rich Columns wreathed round with
Golden Laurel, and other Ornaments. Round this chief Pyramid upon the Corinsh
of the Columns stand four smaller Pyramids, all of them hung with Trophies as
being the Acquisitions of Sovereign Power. In the front of the Pageant, sits
Augusta representing London, with three other Figures, viz. Concord, Prudence,
and Justice. Beneath are planted 4 Figures more, viz. Europe, Asia, Africa, and
America, the other four Thames, Tyber, Nile and Indus. Intimating that the
whole World, by way of Trade and Commerce contributes to the Wealth and
Grandeur of London. The whole Prgeant is duly applied to My Lord, as being the
Representative of Majesty within the City of London.

WHilst proud Augusta, thus Majestic Great,
Circled with Trophies fills her Royal Seat.
Augusta, her just Praises to rehearse,
Of all her Sisters of the Universe,
The fairest noblest Town; My Sovereign Thames
No less a Vassal than the Ocean claims,
Whilst Tributary Worlds their Homage yield:
My Glorious Brow, Wealth, Power, and Honour Guild.
Wealth, Honour, Power, 'tis true, my Pyramids build:
But Virtue and fair Industry alone,
Tis they support my State, and found my Throne.
And that Great Work, my Lord, belongs to You;
Fair Virtues propagation is Your due.
Encouraged Piety, cherished Industry,
Corrected Vice must Your great Province be,
And whilst Your Lordship's Smiling Influence,
To happy London shall it's warmth dispense;
With Rosy Garland I'll adorn my Towrs,
I'll wear them Sir, but You shall plant my Flowers.
ON a large Stage at each end are planted four Flowr potts richly embossed with
Gold, over these arises a Rich Arbour all sumptuously decked with Flowr's and
Fruit of Gold, and out of four less Flower Pots more, above the Arch, these
Pots likewise of Gold, issue fair Trees, adorned with several Fruits and
Flowr's, and over all is hanged a Golden Fleece. Beneath this Arbor sits Jason,
as the Capital Figure with a Dragon in a large Shield, who conquered the Dragon
to obtain the Golden Fleece.

This Pageant is entirely applicable to the Honourable Clothworkers, the Fleece
being a Golden one, Morally so represented by Virtue of the Riches arising from
the Manufacture of the Fleece. That the Dragon being a watchful Creature,
intimates the Caution Industry and Vigilance that ought to secure support and
preserve Trade; whilst Jason that gave the Dragon a sleeping Potion, and so
carried away the Golden Fleece was in reality an Industrous Merchant that
equipped his Ship the Argonant, and by Traffic and commerce carried off the
Golden Flerce viz. the Trade of the World. Jason is attended by 3 other Figures
representing Commerce, Navigation and Industry. (...)

JAson of Old was a bold Youth of Greece,
Subdued a Dragon for a Golden Fleece.
A fairer Wreath Your Lordship's Worth attends,
For here proud London's prostrate Dragon bends.
So just a Hand with Powr's Regalia graced;
Honour and trust were never nobler placed.
And, Sir, if great Examples could but teach,
The imitating World Their heights to reach,
Your Leading Virtue, such deserts to Crown,
From the kind* Heaven's must pull those Blessings down,
Till this Blessed Town shall my Rich Treasures hold,
Reap both my Golden Fruit and Fleece of Gold.
A Very Rich Chariot is drawn by two Golden Griffons the Supporters of the
Honourable Company of Clothworkers; in the Chariot is seated Apollo, who as the
God of Wisdom and also God of the Day, was a Shepherd to King Admetus, and is
properly applied to the Clothworkers as that under his Beams both the Sheep
and the Shepherd are warmed and cherished. Upon the approach of my Lord, when
Apollo arises to address him, a Rich Figure of the Rising Sun of above 10 foot
Diameter, not seen before, appears above his Head out of the back of the
Chariot with all his Beams displayed in Gold* On each Griffon ride two
Triumphant Figures.

RIse Rise my Sun; with Your full Orb ascend*
To Augustas Lord Your Brighest Lustre lend.
Thus the Homaging Apollo bends before ye,
To hail Your fair Inauguration Glory.
Your Reigning Virtue and my smiling Day,
Shall equally their Cherishing Beams display.
Wisdom and Justice are that awful Power,
Commands the Stars: Nor can my Sun do more,
Hail thou Great Sir, to a propitious Year,
Till You Your Orb: as I my glittering Sphere.
Your glorious Chair with my provd Chariot join,
To warm and cheer the World, together shine.
IN this Pageant is the whole Art and Mystery of the Clothworkers expressed, by
all manner of Persons actually concerned in all Branches of the Trade, as
Carding, Combing, Spinning, Rolling, Shearing of Wool, c. The chief Figure is
Jack of Newbury in his proper Habit upon a Rich Seat erected for him. In the
Front of the Pageant is placed the Golden Ram the Crest of the Worshipful
Company, the Pageant a very large one, being filled with several persons in
Rurale and Pastoral Habits Dancing and rejoicing with their Pipes and other
Country Music suitable to their Characters, and also to the Solemn Joys of the
Day.

Amongst Your prouder Train in this great Day,
Here's Jack of Newbury does his hontage pay.
'Tis true, My Lord, I am but a homely Guest,
Plain Jack, an honest Clothier of the West.
But in that Name I more than Titles wore.
My Fleece and Loom that golden Harvest bore
As fed whole Thousands. What can Princes more?
Trade was my Honour; Trade does Riches bring,
And Riches make Companions for a King.
Tho Jack of Newbury so famed in Story,
Was once the Clothworkers Renown and Glory,
My Poorer name Your Lordships shall out shine.
Be You Your Ages Honour, as I mine.
COme all the nine Sisters, that fill the Great Quire,
For here's a Rich Theme must the Muses inspire.
The Clothworkers Glory
So fair lies before ye;
So famous and ancient their Honour begun,
When Adam first delv'd and our Mother Eve spun.
Nor the Gold nor the Pearl old England shall lack.
You send out Your Cloth and the Indies come back.
On your fair Foundation
The Wealth of the Nation,
Our Wool and our Web, the Supporters of Crowns,
'Tis Wooll-Sacks found Bridges, and Fleeces build Towns.
Whilst through twelve Starry Signs, as Astronmers say,
To circle the Year, drives the great God of Day.
Through Aries and Taurus
Triumphant and glorious,
Whilst the Ram in the Heavens does so splendid appear,
'Tis the Clothworkers Crest begins the Fair-Year.
Two Griffons of Gold, your Supporters so fair,
Those compounds of Lyon and Eagle wait there.
The Lyon 'tis true Sirs
In homage to you Sirs,
As Lord of the Land, and the Eagle of the Air,
To the Clothworkers glory their Fealty bear.
The Thistle, the Clothworkers Servant so kind,
Long glit ring in Gold in their Scutheon has shined;
The Thistle 'tis true, Sirs,
To give her her due, Sirs,
With the fair English Rose, both of Royal Renown,
To the Clothworkers Honour, the Thistle and Crown,
Since Fortune's but Whele, and the great Book of Doom.
With Life but a Thread is the work of the Loom,
The Fates those dire Sisters
Our Destiny Twisters;
'Tis Clothworking all. For Living or Dead,
'Tis he's only blessed that spins a fair Thread.

