HOw finely would the Sparks he caught to Day,
Should a Whig-Poet write a Tory-Play?
And you, possessed with Rage before should send
Your random Shot abroad, and maul a Friend:
For you, we find, too often hiss or clap,
Just as you live, speak, think, and fight, by hap.
And Poets, we all know, can change like you,
And are alone to their own Interest true:
Can write against all Sense, nay even their own;
The Vehicle, called Pension makes it down.
No fear of Cudgells where there's hope of Bread:
A well-fill'd Paunch forgets a broken Head.
But our dull Fop on every side is damned:
He has his Play with Love and Honour crammed.
Rot your Old fashioned Hero in Romance,
Who in a Lady's Quarrel breaks a Lance.
Give us the modish Feat of Honour done,
With Eighteen well-chew'd Ballets in one Gun.
Charged but with Eighteen Bullets did I say?
Damn it, if that won't do, we'll bring one day
Queen Besse's Packet Pistol into Play.
Give us Heroic Worthies of Renown,
With a revenging Rival's Mortal Frown,
Not by dividing Oceans kept a sunder,
Whilst angry Spark comes on, like Jove, with Thunder,
Gives out in Harlem Gazette, Blood and Wounds
In Foreign Fray, to skulk on English Ground,
And scorning Duels, a poor Prize at Sharps,
He only fights for Fame in Counterscarps.
Do not you follow his Revenge and Fury,
Be you those tender-hearted things, his Jury.
Give us Old-Baily mercy for our Play:
Ah no! no Prayers nor Bribes your Hearts can sway,
Your cruel Talents lie the other way. Critics
Are Polish Bullies, fire and lightning all,
The Blunderbuss goes off, and where you hit you maul.

OH Rosolin, thou art a subtle Charmer,
To treat thy Princess with the sacred Glories
Of her Victorious Altomar. His Praise
Is so sublime a Theme, that sure 'twas such a Subject
That once inspired the ancient Theban Lyre,
When even the inanimate Woods and Rocks
Felt the enchanting Sounds, and borrowed Ears
To attend the powerful Song.

Madam, Alas!
To sing his Praise is but that humble Tribute
Which the united World should pay; and when
His mighty Triumphs speak so loud, as crack
The very Voice of Fame: can I do less
Than make a part in the Universal Quire?

Ah Rosolin, thou paint'st but half his Conquests.
'Tis not enough that in his floating Walls
He rides triumphant Lord, of the Watery Main;
But after all this gallant God-like Man
Returns a Conqueror, returns to these
Kind Arms, his dearest Artemira's Arms.
Where am I going? I shall talk my Sense away;
Love wraps me up so high, my soaring Soul
Grows giddy with the Airy Maze it treads.

Madam, Lord Meroin desires admittance.

What brings him here? -- Go tell him I am private.
That hated Sight's enough to damp my Joys.
What is his Business?

Madam, the Success
Of your Illustrious Father's Conquering Arms,
Has brought him big with Wonder to repeat
The pleasing Miracle.

Admit him.
I know the Villain hates my Altomar
And me; but my dear Altomar's Applause
Has Music in the Sound, though set by Hell,
And sung by Envy.

Madam, when the Gods
Designed such Beauty for a Kingdoms Heir,
In Justice to your infinite Deserts,
They strew your way with Trophies to a Crown:
Your Royal Father to enlarge his Throne,
Fit for so bright a Form to fill, has Heaven
His Friend, and Fate his Vassal; builds his Glory
High as the Stars, and makes the binding Cement
Of this vast Pile his vanquished Enemies Blood.

Indeed Sir, our late wonderful Success
Over our proud Venetian Enemies,
Shows us no little Favorites of Heaven.

Our wonderful Success! where lies the Wonder?
Could your great Fathers Arms be less victorious,
When led by Altomar, the Valiant Altomar?
Now Flattery, and and all the artful Powers
Of slighted Love assist me: If she loves him,
I have an Art to track her hidden Fires.
I'll tune her Favorite's Praise so high, till I
Have raised such Pleasures in her wanton Eyes,
As shall betray the burning Lake within 'em.

My Lord, you have begun a noble Subject,
And in the Generous Altomar's just Praise
You but express a Kingdom's Obligation.

His Praises just; just! yes from all Mankind.
Such Courage, and such Conduct is a Theme,
As would make Malice court, and Envy flatter.
He managed Ruin with so proud a Port,
His very dying Foes in their last Groans
Could do no less than praise their fatal Conqueror.
By all the Gods a nobler braver Chief
Ne'er graced an Armies Head since that great day,
When th'angry Angels met, and their bright Generals
Led out th'embattell'd Seraphim to fight,
Whilst the vast Storm of War shook down the Stars.

Oh that a Villain should describe a Hero!
What Style has Love, if Hate has so much Rhetoric?

Imagine here the bold Venetians,
Their gaudy Fleet, with all their glittering Flags,
Whilst the humbler Galleys round their taller Galeasses,
Crouching like Porpoises beneath the Whale,
Cut the salt Foam to meet the enraged Altomar.
Suppose on the other side, the fierce
The Fiery Altomar, our Algier Glory,
The God-like Genius of your Fathers Arms,
With his proud Navy, all his moving Castles
Meets the vast Foe.

Oh that a hand so loathed should draw so sweet a Picture,

Imagine now the Warlike Fleets engaged,
Ruin and Death with all their Pomp and Noise,
Alarm the Globe, and frighted Nature shakes:
Whilst Victory, that Eagle Bird of Prey,
Hovers above the floating Massacre.
The trembling Shore around, the reeking Sea
Below, and all the smoking Air above,
Together join, join with his rattling Fires.
All the contending Elements conspire,
To grace their Lord, the Conquering Altomar.

My Lord, I know not from what Mystic Source
All this kind Language flows; but if there's Riddles
In your Applause, there shall be none in mine.
You draw this gallant Prince's shining Picture
Below the bright Original. The highest
Description you can make is but your Duty:
And know, his Virtue, Courage, Loyalty,
And all the Graces that can write man great,
Make his name worthy to be welcome here.

By all the Sulphur in her burning Veins,
My Fears are true; she loves, and has the Pride
To own it, is her own vain boasting Trumpet.

Madam, Prince Altomar --

Returned already?

Hast, and conduct him in.

Cursed be the Name,
And doubly cursed the hour I saw that Face.

My Lord,
The Illustrious Prince's Praise is a large Theme;
And if you have more to say, some other time
You will oblige me with the pleasing Subject.

Death, with what Scorn and Pride she drives me hence,
To make more room for my accursed Rival!
Perdition be his Guide, and Plagues his Ushers,
And burning Irons pave the way that leads him.

He comes, he comes, now breaks my rising day.
In the new Sun shine the kind Cupids play,
Olive and Myrtle show his fragrant way.

Health of my Soul, and Mirror of my Eyes,
Light of my World, and Goddess of my Prayers.
Do I once more embrace thy Sacred Knees?
My Joy's too dazzling for my Soul to bear.
I would gaze on, but you're too killing fair.

Oh rise my Lord, and hear your Artemira:
For she has such Words, such happy Sounds to speak,
As would give Balm to wounds as deep as Graves,
And Life even beyond Death.

Speak then sweet Oracle.
And whilst thy Love breaths raptures in my Ears,
I will look Blessings from thy Eyes.

What a long year have our contracted Souls
Past over with smothered sighs, stolen looks, and silent hopes?
Awed with a harsh, severe, imperious Father,
Whilst the big Name of Heiress to a Crown,
Has kept thy just Ambition from my Arms?
But now our sullen Fears are all blown over,
The Mountain's levelled, and the Prospect's clear.

Be quick dear Heaven, explain this dazzling Vision.

Know then last night, when astonished Fame,
Had brought your Conquests to my Father's Ear,
Charmed with the News, he came to visit me:
Then with such Emphasis, such feeling Pride,
Your Glories, he described and played so well
Your kind just Herald, that my ravished Sense
Could scarce contain my Joys: But to complete
My Ecstasy, at last these words broke out:
Daughter, says he, so much this gallant Soldier
Deserves from Heaven and me, that though I ne'er
Intended less than a Crowned Head for you,
Yet my Ambition now shall yield to Justice.
Daughter, I am resolved I will reward
My Kingdom's Champion with my Kingdoms Heir:
At his Return prepare to make him yours --

What new-created Light surrounds my Soul? --
With such Celestial Harmony
Spoke that commanding Voice that formed the World.
Bid the dark Scene of Night and Chaos vanish,
To show the shining Universal Theatre.

We who so long have kept our Loves so secret,
And with that cautious Fear suppressed our Sighs,
Jealous of the very Air in which we breathed 'em,
Now at one Chance have all our Wishes Crowned:
One happy Minute ends an Ages Pain.

One happy Minute! Yes, the happiest
That time ever numbered since the restless Orbs
Began the Eternal Round. Henceforward Time
Throw by thy common Sand, and let thy Glass
Run Gold, pure sparkling Oar: And ye high Powers,
When you'd record some new-made Saint, Star, Angel,
Or some blessed Martyrs Coronation Day,
Date your immortal Annals from that hour.

All happiness attends my dearest Lord
Thou art Heavens nearest Care, and their best Angels Charge.

Where is this more than King, this God-like Father?
My swelling Veins, like Mines of Incense burn,
And my transported Soul already kneels
Low as my Grave to adore his sacred Feet.

We shall obtain that Blessing instantly,
Each minute I expect him here, and your
Dear Presence I am sure will give him Wings.
And if there's any thing that can detain him,
It is the Ceremony that he pays
To an Imperial Stranger. The Usurper Gayland,
That great Subverter of the Africa Empire
Is now my Father's Guest. In his return
From the reducing some revolted Towns
To their Obedience;
Taking this Kingdom in his March, has made
A visit here.

Madam, the King approaches.

Rise noble Youth, thou Darling of the Stars,
Whilst I have thy Heroic Arm to cut
My way to Fame, and my triumphant Fleet
Has such an Admiral, Neptune's my Slave.
An Arm like thine's
Enough to make the Tributary God,
And all his floating Globe my Vassals.

You raise my little Services too high:
My Wreaths are but the Branches of your Laurel.

Rise my best Friend, and grow within my Arms:
Thy Modesty commends thee and prefers thee;
But my dear Altomar, 'tis not enough
Thy Conquering Arm has made me great abroad,
But Triumphs wait me nearer home; new Trophies
Lie at my Feet, whilst pressing Glories crowd
Under my Battlements. -- The mighty Gayland,
The long-fam'd Terror of our Africa World,
Is Artemira's Slave, has seen, and loves her.

What words are these?

Oh my blasted Ears!

And in his name full of a Fathers Joy,
I come to offer as his Advocate,
The Tribute of a Crown; and call her Empress.
Now my best Friend, since thy Success in Battle,
And the Alliance of his Royal Blood,
Have blessed my Peace and Wars, making my Throne
As bright as my Pavilion: as I praise
Thy Victories, do thou congratulate mine.

What killing Sounds are these!

Oh cruel Sir,
What have you done?

How, Altomar!

Ah Royal Sir, take heed how you resolve
What Heaven and Justice must forbid. Dread Sir,
Forgive me when thus low I fall to tell you,
Fair Artemira's mine.

What do I hear?

Only the unalterable work of Fate,
The tender Story of two meeting Hearts,
Whose Loves your Royal Smiles can only Crown.

Yes, Sacred Sir, your Artemira's Love
Her chaste true Love, her Joys, her only Joys,
Her generous Fathers Smiles can only Crown;
And sure you will not, cannot frown on me.

Fond easy Fool, is thy unprincely Soul
Filled with such flashy Fires? are thy high Blood,
Birth, Beauty, Sex and Pride such empty Names?

Is this your Promise dear inhumane Father?
Did you for this with so much cruel Eloquence
Repeat the Charming Story of his Conquests,
Drawing his Picture so Divine, so Lovely?
And bid me when this gallant Prince returned
A Conqueror, prepare to make him mine?

How's this? Thou easy, cheap, ignoble Fool.
By all that's good, she courted Him; because
Once in a humour I had an humble Thought,
And wrapped up with the News of this Success,
Let slip an idle word; She eager Fondling
Swelled with the wanton Joy, ran int' his arms;
Told him her Father had prepared a Husband,
And came to offer him his humble Bride.
Shame of thy Blood! --

Oh hold Sir,
She run into my Arms! what Blasphemy is this?
Easy and cheap: Now by my Life you wrong her:
I won her nobly, by yon' bright Eternals,
I took her Heart by Storm: Her guarded Breast
Stood my long Siege, with all her Sexes Pride.
By all the Stars, and her own brighter Eyes,
To conquer that inestimable Prize,
I breathed such Sighs as might have melted Rocks,
Offered such Prayers as might have wooed a Deity.
From my drowned Eyes made a long Deluge roll,
And bathed her Feet before I moved her Soul:
And if at last her generous vanquished Pity,
Can entertain a tender wish for me;
It is not with the least ignoble Thought
Below her self the Daughter of a King,
And the most Sovereign Beauty of the World.

Hold -- Be that blasted Tongue for ever dumb.
What do I live to hear? By all that's Sacred,
This is an old Intrigue. The wanton Traitors
Have given and seized, bargained and bartered Hearts,
Changed their fond Eyes, and mixed the engendering Basilisks
Without my Knowledge. That rebellious Siren
Has pawned her Honour, sold my Kingdoms Heir,
Whilst the insignificant deluded Father
Was not thought worthy of the dark Cabal;
But I'm too patient

Is this my King and Father?
Why was I born with Eyes, if this must be their Object?

No Disobedient, thou were born
With those false Lights to find thy way to Ruin;
But I'll put out the infatuating Meteor.
Prepare, fond Girl, to obey thy Father's Will,
To extinguish all thy vaprous wandering Fires,
And gild thy Brows with an Imperial Diadem.
Psepare by the Setting of to morrow's Sun,
To sleep in Gayland's arms, or sleep for ever,

Oh hold, let not the Breath of Majesty
Pronounce those barbarous words as will Un-king you.
Think, think what Cruelty --

Take him away,
Confine him a close Prisoner to his Chamber.
The Charge be yours.

Confusion, to a Jail!

And to remove all Bars to my Ambition
He that amongst you (mark me) dares but breath
One Syllable of this bold Traytor's Love,
By Alla, the Villain dies. And you Morat,
Perform your Charge: If you but let him stir,
Or in revenge of his defeated Arrogance,
By Letters, or by Messages attempt
Ought that may block her way to Gayland's Arms,
(Observe me well) you're Food for Dogs and Vultures.

Is this a Father's Voice, ye Gods, I die.

Oh raise thy drooping head, look up fair injured Sweetness,
And hear those Sounds shall strike Dishonour dead.
Ungrateful King, is this the black Reward,
Which you return your Conquering Soldiers Toils?
Have I for this, from all the Ports of Fame,
Past all the Storms of Fate to make you glorious?
All dyed your Ocean with the Christian Purple?
And (since you make me vain) sent down such Crowds
Of your slain Foes to the Infernal Shades --

Vain-glorious Fool!
What if you conquered, was it not by me?
Was't not my Fleet, my Arms, my Thunder killed,
And I the mighty Genius that inspired 'em.
Take the vain Boaster hence.

Yet stay.
Inspired by thee thy barbarous Genius! No.
If I subdued 'twas Artemira conquered:
For her I fought, for her I vanquished; filled
With her great Love, and her immortal Charms,
I struck my Javelin in the Gates of Death,
And all the crowding Fates pressed out in Arms,
To aid thy Cause. At her dread Name,
Strength of my arm, and Goddess of my Wars,
Destruction, Conquest, Ruin hung round my Shield.
My Cause, Life, Courage, Glory,
And Guardian Angels all were Artemira's.

Proud insolent Boy, to make her Vanity
As great as thine. Her Cause, Life, Glory,
Is Gayland's Heart.
Beneath her Feet a King and Empire lie,
And 'tis a Prize she must accept or die.

Oh I am lost.

Hear me but one word:
If you're resolved I shall be false, false to
This gallant man, the Lord of all my Vows;
My Loss will break his Heart, and I shall be his Murderer.
You'll make me crueller than your Venetian Enemies;
When in a base Return to all his Conquests
Your Daughters Scorn must kill your Kingdoms Champion,
And stab that Heart your Foes could never reach.

Great Gods, he sees that kneeling Deity
Unmoved with all her Prayers. Inverted Nature,
Can man be deaf when Heaven is a Petitioner?

Ah Sir, if ever my gentle Mother pleased you,
If the only Relics of her Royal Blood
Can move you to Compassion, show it now.
'Tis true, dread Si^, I know you'd make me great;
But what's Ambition where there's Love above it?
You'd fix me high on an Imperial Seat:
But if you do, you kill me. No my Lord,
My Paradise in him, him only lies,
And Love's a Flower which once transplanted dies.

And this is all the Excuse thy Disobedience
Can frame for all thy humble abject Folly?

Ah Sir, though you have no Remorse for Me,
Look on that Face, that Angel-Beauty weeps:
The precious Dew falls from those Suns above.
O see; a Chain of Pearl hangs on those Lids,
Enough to bribe an angry God to Mercy.
And have her Tears no Power?

Yes Ravisher,
To the disgrace of her degenerate Soul,
I see that base born Issue of her Eyes;
But know, fond Girl, I'll drain the muddy Stream.

Yes when you've broke that Heart from whence it flows.
Oh my loved Lord.

Their very Looks are hatching Treasons:
Take them away, and part the brooding Monsters.

Oh hold. Gods, have those dying drowning Eyes
No Power? One Look from those fair Lights
Is worth ten thousand Gaylands Souls.

Dull Slaves!

Lord of my Life.

My Saint, my Heaven Farewell.
What's Conquest, Fame, and all the flattering Hopes
Of towering Love in their Meridian Light?
Poor airy Bubbles which the Breath of Power,
Bursts with a Blast, and they are seen no more.
Ye bright Dispensers of our Humane Fate,
Bring me but back to those clear Streams of Bliss,
Which I enjoyed but one half hour ago;
And I'd not change my State of Happiness
For all that Vanity your Sun looks round,
And all those worlds your great first Mover rolls.

My Lord, I hope you'll pardon that harsh Office
Which I with horror bear. Believe me Sir,
My very Soul deplores your rigid Fate.

I thank thee kind Morat; but be not troubled:
Alas I'm fallen and lost, ordained for Ruin;
A miserable thing not worth thy Pity.
'Tis true
Once my blessed Hopes stood fair, the Candidates
Of Glory; but alas those Guardian Angels
That then smiled on me, bore me on their Wings,
And nursed me as the Child and Heir of Fortune,
Now see my sinking State, and like false Friends desert me.

Your Fate draws Tears even from a Soldiers Eyes.

And can Man pity me when Heaven forsakes me?
For me, no matter if my impurer Blood
Were set afloat, my drossy worthless Ashes,
Trod by the Tyrants meanest Slaves to Dirt:
But oh that Tyrant strikes at Artemira,
His Savage Fury breaks her tender Heart.
Take heed, ye cruel Powers, her Fate, ye Gods, prevent,
Or all your Heaven, too late, will the dire deed repent.
At her black Doom I shall not sigh alone;
Your shaking World at her last Pangs will groan.
The waning Lamps of your pale trembling Skies,
At her closed Lights will shut their aching Eyes.
By Heavens, not your own God-heads shall go free,
You too shall all my Fellow-mourners be,
And hang your sad and drooping Heads like me.

THE Cause of all her Pride and Scorn is plain,
By all the Witchcrafts of the Sex 'tis plain.
'Tis Altomar's the Man. No wonder she has
Been Deaf to all my Prayers: all her warm Gales
Were the happy Altomars; whilst nothing but
Her Winter Stormy Northern Blasts were mine.

Were it my Cause my Lord,
I would nor curse, nor fret my Spleen in vain;
Return her Scorn with Scorn.
Beauty's a Flower, that whilst 'tis kind, is fragrant;
But when Disdain has cankered all its Sweets,
'Tis a rank weed.

A rank one 'tis indeed;
And if that poisonous weed, the Bane of all
My Peace must root in my cursed Rival's Arms,
Lend him my Hand, ye Gods, to plant it there.
Oh Ishmael, I could make the rarest Bawd:
I'd stuff her Pillows with the Stings of Scorpions:
Oh how 'tvvould make her mount into his Arms.
Act the soft Dalliance with that Heat, that Fire --
Then to complete the wanton Game, I'd mix
Her amorous Potions with the Blood of Aspicks:
Whilst he, like Jove, came on in Thunder, she
Should meet him like the burning Semele.

Why all this Storm against the poor lost Altomar?
Sir, you forget that all his hopes are vanished,
And 'tis the mighty Gayland must enjoy her.

You talk like a ravv Lover: He enjoy her? --
And must I tamely live to see the Cause,
The cursed Source of all my endless pains,
Shine the Bright Empress of our Southern World,
And rise in Glory whilst I set in Ruin?
No, Ishmael, there's a Spark in all great Souls
Men call Revenge, supplies the dying Fire
Of injured Love. To gratify that last
Dear pleasure, know this Sorceress must die.

My Lord, your high Resentments are but just;
But should you perish in the Attempt. --

No matter:
For I've at once out-lived my Peace and Glory,
For twelve long years I was the Algerine
Victorious Admiral,
Till all my Services, my Toils and Wounds
Forgotten, my ungrateful barb'rous King
Could cloud me in the Noon of all my Glories,
And give my Laurels to the cursed Altomar.
My Love destroyed,
And Honour lost, think Ishmael, with what small
Delight I wear this Load of Flesh and Blood.

You have but too much reason to complain.

Give me kind Stars that favourable Minute,
When I may stab this pair of Royal Monsters,
Punish her Scorn, and his Ingratitude,
Though the next hour you made the Vultures Gorge
My Sepulchre.

But Sir -- You've served the Father, and adored the Daughter,
And can your Wrongs engender so much Rage?

Yes Ishmael, yes, does not the thirsty Traveller
Loath the dear Spring when once the Fountain's poisoned?
Ishmael, I know thee faithful, and dare trust thee;
Know then, I have here that working Vengeance, like
Wit's Goddess teeming in the Thund'rers Brain;
But something ominous foretells, my Life
Is short, though it will make my Fame immortal:
Yet ever I die, I have a hoarded Mass
Of Infinite Wealth, which dead, I'll make thee Lord of:
But if I'scape with Life, I have a Vessel
Ready in the Port to fly to Alexandria,
Where thou my Friend, shalt share my Fortunes with me.

Sir, to reward you for this Princely Bounty,
I have that Story for your Ears, shall wing
Your inspired Vengeance.

Speak my better Genius.

Know then, this Altomar, your hated Rival,
Is the true Heir to the Empire of Morocco.

Ha!

You know the Story of that Bloody Empress,
Whose murdered Son, and poisoned Husband, cleared
Her Favorit's Passage to the Imperial Seat.

Go on.

That Empress, to secure his Title,
And leave no Branch of the Imperial Stock
That might in time grow up to overshade his Lustre,
Designed to sacrifice the only Relics
Of the Royal Blood, the murdered Muly Labasses
Two Infant Sons. My self and Lord Abdalla
(Now Gayland's General) were then
Two Favorites in the Morocco Court,
And the Empress Confidents: And to our Care
She trusted the dispatch of the dire deed.
But we in pity to the Royal Infants,
And partly for the Hopes of a Reward,
Conveyed 'em to their Uncle Amurath,
Cayliff of Egypt.

Very well, proceed.

But to avoid all Dangers of the Storm,
That the revengeful Empress would have raised,
If ever she knew we had repealed their Doom,
Ever we disclosed what our rich Present was,
We swore him first by Alla, never to breath
Their Story, Quality, or their true Names
To ought in this lower World. That done, we left 'em;
Where, as his own adopted Sons he bred 'em,
In that dark Mist, even to themselves disguised;
And in pursuit of his Religious Vow,
Some twelve years since the old pious Dotard died,
And left 'em in that Cloud in which he nursed 'em.

Oh Ishmael, thou hast fired my very Soul;
But art thou sure this mighty Secret's safe?

Fear not, 'tis only lodged in our two Breasts;
And for my part, I hate him worse than you:
For he has done me Wrongs unpardonable.
For know, my Lord, at the great Siege of Candy,
Under the Sultan's Banners, I had the Honour
To head a Troop of Horse, and by ill Fate
I had this very Altomar my Colonel:
Where, for I knew not what, only a certain
Antipathy he bore me, by his Influence
With the Grand Vizier, unprovoked, uninjured,
He both cashiered and banished me; for which
I owe him Ruin, and would pawn my Soul to pay't him.

Now thou art brave.

And for Abdalla's talking,
His Tongue is Sealed with stronger Bonds than mine:
For should the furious Gayland ever know
There lives an Heir of the Imperial Line,
And by Abdalla saved, his Head would pay for it.

Oh Ishmael, guard thy Tongue, lock up this Secret
Close as thy Heart, and dearer than thy Life.

Your Favours would secure a greater Trust.

For should it reach the Ears of Abuzelden,
No doubt 'twould soften him to that degree,
That I should see the cruel Artemira
Lodged in my hated prosperous Rival's Arms:
A Sight would blast me.
I must make haste, my Vengeance is too tardy;
The Saturnine dull Planet moves too slow,
But into Deeds I'll put my faint Desire,
Drive and spur on my sluggish Orb of Fire.

Ah Royal Sir, as you would reign immortal,
Have Angels ever guard you, Heaven love you,
Men fear you, and Virgins pray for you,
Pity my Pains, and this dire Doom recall.

Kind Meroin, my Friend and Councellor,
Instruct me how to chide this stubborn Girl;
Now by my Life I offer her a Diadem,
An Emperor's Heart, with all that dazzling Splendour,
That would both Crown her Youth, and bless my Days;
And would you think it, the mean Spirited Wretch,
Deaf to the Acceptance of a Courting God-head,
Starts from a Throne, and shrinks into a Shade.

Consider Sir, what 'tis you would command;
You give what 'tis impossible to take.
Ah Sir, I love the Noble Altomar,
And with a Faith so true.

By Hell she braves me,
Triumphant in the incorrigible Shame.

Ah Madam, were I worthy to advise,
Your Royal Father pleads with so much Reason --

Peace saucy Monster, am I fallen so low?
Because my angry Father is my Torturer?
Dare thou presume to talk, thou black Incendiary?
But to confute all thou dare say or think,
Know the least Thought of Altomar I value
'Bove Gayland's Crown, and all his Africa World.
Nay his least Look is worth whole Millions
Of such base Lives as this bold Slave's that hates him.

Now all the Poison of a bloated Toad
Blister that Face, and purple Plagues new paint it.

Ah Sir, what is't you'd have me do? If I
Love Altomaer, can I love Gayland too?
Love is the very Soul of the Creation,
And Constancy the Soul of Love: And then
Can I love twice? She whose divided Heart
Admits more Loves than one, does but like her
That breaks a precious Diamond into Sparks,
And makes that worthless, was before inestimable.

Alas, I do not court thee to be false:
'Tis then you're false when thou love Altomar;
False to thy Blood, thy Honour, and to me,
To love below the Daughter of a King;
But fix thy Eyes on an Imperial Head,
And then you're truly Just. Thou can not guess
The Charms of Love within a Monarch's Arms:
Thy Beauty on a Throne shall not shine only
For thy long Youth, but be even in thy Age triumphant,
Whilst to pursue the Trophies thou hast won,
Thy young Heroic Sons shall conquer Kingdoms,
And their fair Sisters Kings.

Oh misery!

Nor is this all; to embrace the Crown I offer,
Consider, thou wilt make thy Father great:
All my Ambition bounds in this Alliance.
In this blessed Marriage from my Blood will spring
That Race shall fill the Africa Throne for ever.

Oh Ruin!

Your Gracious Father --

Dares that Villain speak?
Remove that hated Monster from my Sight.

And that proud Devil from the World.

Alas, what is that gay vain thing called Empire,
You'd have me lose my Peace and Heaven to purchase?
When from this Heart, my Altomar's dear Throne,
Its Lord I banish, 'tis a pain so great,
Horror and Hell will fill the empty Seat.

A Daughter! Death! why was she born to plague me?
Ye Gods, what ways ye find to make Man wretched!
Our very Heirs, the Branches of our selves
Are not our own: The Gallant and the Great
Mix active Fires to mould their Likenesses,
Whilst some malignant Planet sheds his Venom,
Clubs in his Dross, to bastardize their Souls,
And grafts a Fool upon a Royal Stock.

My Lord, the Emperor --

Now Rebel Daughter,
I must be short: prepare to entertain
This mighty man with all your kindest Looks;
Breath one harsh Note, to show your Soul's untuned;
Ruffle that Face but with one angry Blast,
And the next hour your Darling breathes his last.
Obey me, or expect the Traytor's Head.

Nursed in a Palace, and a King my Parent,
And yet thus wretched! would I had met my Altomar
In some more hospitable Desert born:
What though we lived with Brutes and Savages,
They would be kinder than inhumane Fathers.

Great Sir, I leave you to your Fate, Success
And Victory, your long-known Slaves attend you.

Majestic Excellence, I come to lay
A Monarch at thy Feet.
So Lov's soft Goddess War's fierce God disarms,
Melts down his Native Fury in her Arms;
Softens the Influence of his angry Fires,
And blunts the Edge of Fate.

Excellent Vanity!

Madam, I never was truly great till now.
What are the Courts of Kings if Love's not there?
What's the unpolished slaughtering Warrior, but
A nobler Savage, till by Love refined?
War, Victory and Crowns,
But the rude Oar, and the rough Minerals bring,
Whilst 'tis Love melts, and Beauty stamps the King.

In what big Tone this gilded Organ speaks!
But now to answer him, Oh Love assist me!
Great Sir --

Speak, fair Divinity --

Methinks
You magnify Love's little God too much,
And add too glittering Plumes to the blind Boy.
Alas, his unfledged Wings soar not so high.
Does not the exploding World at best call Beauty,
A short-liv'd Bloom, Love Man's Effeminacy,
And Woman only Natures fair Defect?

Hold beauteous Brightness, Artemira's Eyes
Shall make a Convert of that senseless World:
Ascend my dazzling Thron, and then see what
The Tributary World shall pay to Beauty?
Thus Crowned, thou shalt not only be adored
By prostrate Nations, but those Nations Lord.
Thus the Imperial Monarch of the Skies,
Melts his Eternal Day in Juno's Eyes.
So shalt thou reign like her, but blessed above
Her humbler Joys in a more faithful Jove.

Insufferable Vanity; Oh Love, how vast
A difference is betwixt the God-like Altomar,
And this poor Image of a King?

By Heavens,
So glorious shall my Artemira shine,
That Humane Eyes shall not dare look up so high;
But blinded stand with thy overflowing Light.

Great Sir, your Bounty promises such Wonders,
That to experience your prodigious Favours,
I have a Boon to beg.

Speak and command it.

It will offend you.

By my Crown it shall not.

Have I your Promise?

Upon the word of Majesty --

I'm satisfied, and now dare freely speak.
Great Sir, no common Pride ought to embrace
Those Glories you intend for me; but Sir,
Suppose I loved before, and love an Object
Below your Royal Greatness: For alas,
All Beauties are not born to conquer Kings;
Yet may be happy far below a Crown;
And though the mighty Gayland only ought
To storm and conquer; yet I hope you'll promise me
You'll win me bravely, and not seek to force
My Heart till you have nobly conquered it.

By these white Charms I swear
By Alla, and my own Imperial Honour,
I'll never wear this Jewel till I've won it.

Keep your Disguise, or we are lost for ever.

Her yielding Hand snatched to his greedy Lips,
Seized and devoured by that invading Tyrant.

Then I've my Wish, now my loved Altomar,
I've cut off all his Hopes to invade thy Right;
He'll never wear thy Jewel till he has won it;
And that is never: For this Heart's invincible;
And if there's Strength in Vows, or Oaths, or Honour,
I'll make him know he's perjured but t'attempt it.

What riotous pleasures revel in her Eyes?
By Hell he has talked her to an Ecstasy.

A favored Rival! the only thing I wanted.
By Heavens she's now a Conquest fit for me.
Who ever thou art, poor Wretch love on, court on,
Guard all the Forts of her encompast Heart,
That when I storm I may have the Charm to try
How at my Sun such poor thin Shadows fly.

Now Royal Sir, your Gallantry --

Oh horror!

Your matchless Gallantry has so much Honour,
And so much Charm, that it has given me all
My utmost wish could ask.

She's gon! She's gon!

Oh my fair Saint, what infinite Mass of Glory
Do my vast Hopes embrace!
Come bright illustrious fair, let Fools and Cowards
Invoke the help of the kind Powers above,
Call on each Star to aid their dastard Love.
On my own Strength my Tug of Fate shall lie,
And let the gazing Gods stand Neuter by.

Oh I am lost! not the dark Womb of Earth,
That teems with tortured Ghosts in the black Realms
Of Vengeance, has a Soul so lost as mine.

Suppress your Rage, perhaps you are mistaken;
What though she gazed upon that painted Plume,
And her kind Tongue caressed the vain proud Fool,
How do you know but this fond Apparition
May be Design and Artifice, not Love?

Design! Ah no, Her Heart, her Soul's a going.
I saw her, heard her false, beheld those Eyes,
Those once unerring Lights, enchanted with
That shining Comet Power: Saw those bright Suns
Leave their long Tracks of Truth, Faith, Honour, Love,
Whilst a new Phaeton usurped the Throne,
To set that World of Excellence on Fire.

How has your Curiosity undone you?
Why did you woo me from your milder Gaol,
And beg this short Enlargement on your Knees,
To meet this Sight, and be your own Tormenter?

What though I'd known I should have found her false?
Not see her! Ah, who could forbear to see her?
Those dear fair Eyes have Charms even when they kill.
So in a Plague, when the angry Gods send out
Some bright Commissioned Angel to destroy;
Could we but see the Divine Arm that strikes,
We should behold unutterable Glory.
'Tis not the Vengeance that it pours, can lessen
The Majesty of a destroying Deity.

I have not gone thus far, ventured my Head
To unloose your Chains, brought you thus far to ruin,
And leave you thus. No, I'll go on, through Fate
And Death; but I will give your Torments Ease.

Dear generous, kind Morat.

By Heavens I'll carry
This Faithless Woman all your Sighs, your Wrongs,
Your just Resentments of her Infidelity:
If she has Honour, Sense or Shame --

Alas,
Though thou could lay my dying Groans before her,
What would that move, if she's resolved to kill?

My Lord, I pity you.

Indeed I want it.

Now upon second thoughts, you your own self
Shall tell her your Resentments.

How?

Prepare
This Night to visit her.

My Tutelar Angel!

Thus then -- By th'help of Night,
I will convey you safe to the Seraglio.

Go on.

Kind Rosolin your faithful Confident,
I'm certain will admit you:
And to secure you from all dangerous Eyes,
Remove the Princess's watchful Slaves: And though
The cruel Artemira would deny you,
It would be then too late: Her very dread of the Outrage,
To which her harsh Denials may transport you,
Will make your way: For since she's sensible,
That to discover you would give you Death,
For your past Loves
She will not be your Murderer. Now try
Your Fortune, and unriddle all your Fears.

Now art thou kinder than my Prayers could ask.

Alas, my Lord,
I cannot see your Soul thus Tempest-shaken,
But I must either calm the Storm, or drown in it.

Thou best of Friends!

But, Sir, I must conjure you,
Whatever Aspect or Disdain you meet,
Let not your Wrongs rise high, nor yet talk loud,
Lest your wild Rage should be your own destroyer.

No, dear Morat, Suppose the worst: Imagine
She meets me with a Look all cold, and bleak
As Winter Stars: Nay, to complete my misery,
Suppose her fallen to that Apostasy,
That she dares boldly tell me, that she loves him:
Suppose all this, and words ten times more cruel,
Which 'tis even Blasphemy to think; yet still
I have loved so well, I shall not with the least
Outrageous word upbraid her with my Fate;
But falling prostrate at her Feet, and kneeling
To the adored Heaven, from whence that Thunder came,
My breaking Heart shall just keep Life enough,
To bear me back into my Gaol, and die.

Look up, and hope a better Fate.

Good Heaven,
If possible, dissolve this dreadful Vision;
But if I'm doomed to see her broken Vows,
Not Comets with their bearded Majesty,
Those blazing Deputies of the angry Gods,
Hang over the World with half that mortal Influence,
As threats this miserable Head. Comets!
Why do I name those Infant Rods of Fate?
If Artemira's Cruelty ordeins,
Her wretched Slave in black despair shall die,
Within the Sphere of that destroying Eye
Hang all the bloody Banners of the Sky.

STop your insipid croaking Throats, and practise
Your little Arts on little Objects: Lull
Some peevish Girl, or froward Boy asleep;
And do not hope to calm a restless King.
I'm stung with a Tarantula too strong
For such mean Airs to cure. What has my vast
Ambition formed to make a Daughter great,
And Father blessed? But the resisting Fool
Destroys the Sacred Work. Heavens! I was raising her
A Pile of Majesty, so high, so losty,
On whose Imperial Towers she might shake hands
With Gods: But angry Love, that envious Deity,
Confounds the Languages of Power and Glory,
And stops the rising Fabric.

Stop it? Death!
What should oppose your Will? She knows your Pleasure,
And dares she disobey?

True Meroin.
I can command her Eye, her Hand, her Tongue;
But they are all Hypocrites, all base Dissemblers:
Her hidden Thoughts, her Heart's all Altomar's.
Kings are not Gods: Our Power extends o'r all but Souls.
They like unbridled unsubjected Devils,
Soar in that Air of which themselves are Princes.

Hold Royal Sir, let not your Majesty
So much mistake, thus cheated with a Bubble.
What is that noisy thing we call a Soul?
What's all its Faculties and Passions, but
The Impression of our Sense, our Flesh and Blood?
Or the Effects of Chance or Education?
Pampered we're wanton, Great we're proud, Did ress'd
We're Pious, and in Love we're mad; and Sir,
Is Madness a Disease incurable?
No; were she mine, 'tis not a hundred Altomars
Should keep her from a Throne and Gayland's Arms;
And to perform the mighty Operation,
I'd keep her waking with the Name of Gayland,
Prevent her Morning Prayers with Gayland, Gayland.
She should scarce hear one word but Kings, Crowns, Empires.
Then would I make her Servants, nay, her very Priests
My Instruments: They should preach her into Love:
Tell her, her way to Heavens through Gayland's Arms.
Ah Sir, Religion does the rarest Feats
in Love; makes a coy Girl so kind, so pliant.
Then would I keep her caged, watched like a Bird,
Till she'd forgot her own wild barbarous Notes,
And learnt my nobler Airs.

Thou hast inspired me,
And I'll pursue the Sacred Path thou'st laid me.
I'll instantly t'her Chamber, and begin
The mighty Work: I'll show her Greatness Empire.
So bright, as shall uncloud her wandering Senses:
High as a Beacon fix the blazing Light,
To guide her through the Labyrinths of Night.

As I could wish. Gon to the Princess Chamber,
Unarmed, unguarded! Now for my Revenge:
Oh 'tis the best, the rarest luckiest hour,
That Night, the Bawd to murder
Could ever have picked me out. And thou proud scornful Siren,
Now to my Vengeance thy false Heart stands fair,
There is no surer Blood-hound than Despair.

Kind Heaven he comes

Know, 'tis with wondrous danger;
But greater Kindness that my Royal Mistress
Admits you at this Hour.

My generous Guide,
May Heaven and Love requite thee for this Favour;
Those Powr's which are my Enemies reward thee.

Approach my Altomar: This awful Distance
Befits a Courting, not a Conquering Lover;
But say my Altomar, what pitying Angel
Has broke thy Chains to bless thy Artemira?

Still the same Sweetness! If the Flower's so fragrant,
Can the dear Root be poisoned?

Why, are you silent Sir, now by my Life
Your crowding Joys to see your kind dear Princess,
Have locked your Tongue, pent up the narrow Vent
For words, and made your swelling Raptures dumb:
Nay then I will increase your Ecstasy.
Know, I've been stormed by your proud haughty Rival,
The vainest thing that ever Fortune raised,
For Fools to obey, or Beauty to despise:
But by my kind Compliance with his Pride,
I have so pleased his Vanity, so wrought
The Royal Pageant up, till he has sworn
By Alla, and his own Imperial Honour,
Hee'll never marry me, till he has conquered me.
Now when I meet the shining Meteor next,
I'll own our Loves, and tell him I'm invincible.

Is this the Virtue, Gods, I have profaned!
And this that Truth my frantic Fears could doubt?

Then if he has the least Spark of Majesty,
And still dares tire me with his nauseous Love,
I'll Thunder in his Ears his Royal Promise,
His blasted Honour, and his broken Vows,
Till I have shamed him from his hopeless Suit,
Made him take all his gaudy Streamers in,
And shrink like blushing Cowards from a Siege.

Oh was there ever Constancy like thine;
Or jealous impious Infidel like me?

And does your Artemira's Kindness please you?

Please me?
Not a blessed Soul at the last Trumpets Sound
Can hear his Call to Everlasting Glory
With greater Ecstasy --

Madam, the King your Father --

Ha! what say thou?

Is coming hither, just now entering,
And I've out-run the Danger to alarm you.

Confusion!

Fly fly my Altomar -- But hold, to move
That way, would be to meet him in the Face,
And to stay here is Death.

What shall I do?

Retire into my Closet.

Oh unhappy Chance!

Husht as your Grave your silent Station keep:
For if you stir my Altomar must die.

You seem disturbed; is it the Father's Presence,
Or Daughters Guilt that makes this Ague Fit?

Dread Sir, a Visit at this hour of Night,
Even from a Father cannot but surprise me.

Suppress your Fear, draw nigh, I come to talk with you.

Speak with the voice of Mercy, Royal Sir,
And whilst the Breath of Majesty delivers
The charming Oracles, thus low I'll fall
To embrace the Feet of the inspired God that utters 'em.

Well, I will speak with Mercy.

Yes Royal Sir, if you but knew what Love meant,
Then you would speak with Mercy, then you'd pity
My bleeding Heart, not bid me poorly sell
My solid Peace for the empty name of Empress.
Alas, I would obey you if I could;
But the Command's impossible.
I have loved once, and never can love again.
True Love's
A Bird of Paradise, when once on Wing,
It keeps the Airy Region, where it flies,
And never lights before it falls and dies.

Tortures and Furies, how she frets my Soul!
Turns all my Blood to Gall.

And mine to Poison.

How Meroin?

I come to tell thee King,
That I have chased a hunted Tyrant, and
This fair false Crocodile into the Toil,
And on this Spot they die.

How Saucy Traitor!
What means this unexampled Insolence?

Why Sir, I'll tell you, call to your Remembrance
The many Wounds I have received for you:
Have I not been your Conquering Admiral
For almost twice seven Years; my Loyalty
Untainted, and my Courage undisputed?
But thy Ingratitude, Barbarian King,
Could lay me like a rusty Armour by;
Nor has she played the Tyrant less than thou:
Her cruelty and her proud haughty Scorn
To all my slighted Sighs, has light that Brand
Which nothing but her Hearts last Blood can quench.
But I lose time.

Hold, Impious Slave, yet hold; if thou can think,
Much less dare put in Action, what thou threaten'st,
Can thou ever hope thy Royal Master's Murder
Will go unpunisht?

Yes, you would frighten me with Stakes or Gibbets,
Wracks, or Wild Horses, or some such foolish thing;
But know, mistaken King, I came not hither
With such a faint Design. I and my Injuries
Are more resolved than so.

Hold Traitor.

Ha!

Thou Monster more than damned.

Curses and Plagues, what Fury brought him hither

Triumphant Infidel, durst thy black Soul
But think to kill thy King!
What Lunacy inspired thy Frantic Rage,
With the least Hope to effect the Savage Deed?
Dog, did thou see you Azure Roof all Blaze
With unknown Fires? The groaning World beset
With Comets, Earthquakes, Plagues and Deluges?
These are the Prologues to a murdered King.
But do I talk? Thy Crimes, and this just Arm
Fall on thee, Traitor.
Take thy just Reward.
Go sink, and howl in everlasting Flames.

Thou'st killed me, and Perdition seize the Murderer.

Thus low, great Sir, I bend my prostrate Soul,
O'er-whelm'd with Glory, and o'er-charg'd with Bliss:
For I have saved the Royal Albuzeiden,
And the fair Artemira lives by me.

Rise Altomar, for I have much to say,
And thou to hear. True, thou hast saved our Lives --

With greater Joy, with greater Piety
Than ever the Trojan Youth his aged Sire
Over the rolling Conflagration bore,
And stemmed a Tide of Fire. To save my King --

Hold your Carieer, and do not vainly sing
Your ill tuned Triumph: Yes, you've saved our Lives.
Your fatal Kindness like the circling Adder
Kills when't embraces. Speak thou dreadful Gorgon,
That turn me into Stone, how came thou hither?

Stop but your Rage, and let me tell you how.
Oh Sir, look up, and see yon shining Empire,
Where the Universal Monarch sits, whose Angels
Stand Sentinels around the Lives of Kings:
Hither by that fore-seeing Providence
Was the happy Altomar sent by Commission,
To save my Royal Father's Life --

Peace Scriech-Owl.
How artfully the fond Enchantress pleads!
What fatal Planet led me to this place,
To see the Ruins of my Royal Name?
So close, alone, at this dark hour of night,
Hid in her Closet like a lustful Satyr?

What words are these I hear?

Truth Ravisher; sounds that will sink thy Soul,
When thy hot burning Lust shall plunge below
In the black Lake quenched like a hissing Firebrand.

Oh speak once more: For though my shivering Nerves
Shake like an Ague, they're such dreadful Accents,
I scarce dare trust my Ears, nor can I think
'Tis Artemira's Royal Father speaks.

Triumphant Villainy! he likes the Music,
And fain would hear the pleasing Notes repeated.
Is't not enough that thou hast broke thy Chains,
Loosed like a Tiger for thy Mid-nights Prey,
And stand all reeking with her tainted Blood --

Her tainted Blood!

Silence, that Ravens Croak.
Is this a Place, an Hour, a Scene for Innocence?
Gods!
Why is the Race of Kings, the Lines of Heroes,
With all those mighty Names,
Descent, Nobility, Birthright and Power
Entrusted to the Truth of that frail Sex?
Why did you give our undeserving World
That Image of your own great God-heads, Honour,
And lodge it in that brittle Creature Woman?

How can you wander in this Mist of Hell?
Can you believe (Perdition) can you think
That I came hither on that black Design?
Behold that Face, and know mistaken King,
He that dares look upon that awful Virtue,
Must gaze with Eyes pure as translated Saints:
His Soul an Altar, and each thought an Offering,
Each Groan a Martyr, and each Sigh a Prayer,
And every burning Wish a Vestal Fire.
Whilst swacy Flesh and Blood, gross brutal Sense,
Those heavier baser sordid Elements,
Are beaten to their Earthy Center down,
And blasted with that dazzling Presence die.

Bold Slave, I'll hear no more.
Hope not to wash
Thy Sooty Soul, nor paint thy blackness white.

Yet hear me King, could my rebellious heart
But entertain one thought to her Dishonour,
I'd pluck the envenomed Traitor up by the Roots,
Burst all the Channels, all the Veins of Life
Torn up like Conduits in a flaming City,
To quench my impious and internal Fire.

Oh artful Hypocrite! shall I permit
Such Impudence to talk and live? Where are you Slaves?

Gods, that the very best of Men and Kings
Should cast a Stain on that Imperial Beauty,
And meanly think that Crystal Fountain poisoned!

Slaves, Traitors!

Is this the Charge her Guardian Angels keep?
Or are the unthinking drowsy Gods asleep?
If this Eclipse on her bright Fame can lie,
Ye Gods, why burn the Tapers of your Sky?
Since Nature's brightest Stamp is thus disgraced,
Why are not all her baser Moulds defaced?
Let all things in one joint confusion lie;
Mourn Heaven, end World, and bleeding Nature die.
Leave not one Star of that enammell'd ^ight,
But shroud your Heads in everlasting Night.
Instead of all
Those shining Orbs which your Creation crowned,
May nought but Death in the void space be found;
Goblins and Specters walk the eternal Round.

Where are you Villains, tardy Slaves, where are you?
You dull unsinew'd Vassals: Eunuchs, damn 'em.
Are these the Effeminate Guards to a Ladies Honour?
Those spiteful Dogs, who when we blot out Man,
Write Bawd and Pander in revenge. Speak Monsters,
How got that Traitor Entrance?

Altomar!
My Lord, we know not.

No; you were removed:
The amorous Play admitted no Spectators;
And to execute her Honor's tragic Doom,
The Stage was cleared for the infernal Scene.
Go, seize that impious --

Take me Slaves,

But one poor Heart, and all these Stabs to break it.

And now behold your dire Commands obeyed.
Send me to Death, and Sir, to banish all
Idea's of Remorse, if the least Service
Of Altomar's whole Life rise to disturb you,
Stifle the strangled Rebel in its Birth,
And blot remembrance from your Soul: Now kill me,
Rend my disjointed Bones, and make each part
A several Martyr, every scattered Limb
A Stranger to the Branch on which it grew.
Do this, and all your utmost Rage can frame,
So you'll be kind, and right her injured Fame.

Take him away.

Yet stay, stay cruel Judge,
Since I am doomed to dye, even condemned Murderers
Have leave to speak before their Execution.

Well, you have leave to speak, talk to the Winds.

If I had been that Villain which you think me,
And durst attempt to blast her sacred Fame,
After that Crime what is't I durst not do?
I might have let that Traitor cut your Throat;
And when I'd seen you grovelling on the Floor,
Have then stepped out and saved my Royal Mistress.
That done,
Her Father dead, her Crown and Heart her own,
Without Control I might have seized my Prey;
Have feared no Rival Emperors, but revelled
In her soft Arms, and triumphed on her Throne.
All this I might have done were I a Villain:
But know, mistaken Prince, I've not commanded
Your Navy, fought your Battles, propped your Throne
To see my Sovereign die, that Sacred Lord,
That awful Man that gave my Princess Life,
Must never die whilst I've a Sword to save him.

Oh Miracle of Virtue!

How he tires me!

Nay, were it to do again, I'd save your Life,
Though the same hour you doomed my Death,
And dragged my Princess to my Rival's Bed,
I could not see you bleed: I'd meet a hundred Swords,
And in my King's Defence stand like a Battery,
To block their Passage to your precious Life;
And when they'd hewed me like a shatterd Rampart down,
Each mangled Limb should kiss your Sacred Feet,
Proud that they'd saved the cruel Albuzeiden:
For still you're Artemira's Royal Father.

For these kind words, to take off all Aspersion
Of my Ingratitude, I'll own you've saved
Our Lives, and in return I give you yours.
Mirvan, your Charge does not extend to Blood,
Only confine him to a stronger Gaol,
And send a Bow string to the false Morat.

Oh save the poor Morat: If he has sinned,
The Crime was mine, be mine the Punishment.

For mine then, and my Daughters Life, I give
You yours and his; and now you're amply paid.
Not one word more; for if you speak he dies.
Now Rebel Daughter, to atone your Sins,
Assume Obedience for your Sacrifice.
Prepare to morrow to be Gayland's Bride.

Oh my hard Fate!

Ah Sir, but think, think what dire doom you've given me.
Could I consent, and at you dread Commands
Give him my Hand without my Heart, and force
My faltering Tongue to speak the binding Words,
The very Breath that utters 'em will blast me;
And the accusing conscious God of Marriage
Will be so far from aiding at the Ceremony,
That the very Tapers on the Sacred Altar
Will strike those deadly Flashes in my Eyes,
I shall fall blind at his Imperial Feet;
And when I'm dragged into that dismal Scene
The Nuptial Bed, instead of Bridal Blushes,
He'll find a trembling Wretch beset with Horrors,
All pale as Death, and ghastly as the Grave.
Is this a Wife fit for a Monarchs Bosom?
Or this the Doom of your poor Artemira?

Leave these vain Tears, fantastic weeping Fool,
Those Glories I've designed thee, will dispel
These Vapors, and un-seal thy blinded Eyes.
Now if you're honest, (as pray Heaven thou art)
Lustre and Fame be thy immortal Prize.
If not, if thou hast plaid the treacherous Wanton,
And when I give thee to the Emperor's Arms,
He finds thee false, thy Virgin Honour lost,
Thy Hearts rank Blood appease his Wrongs and mine,
Lie down his Bride, and rise his Sacrifice.

Oh my too rigid Fate! the merciless Soldier
That flies with Fire and Sword through a stormed City,
Is gentler than a Father:
He tender Hearted Man,
Melted and pierced with ravished Virgins Shrieks,
Strikes his kind Javelin through their throbbing Hearts,
And ends their pains, their groans, and shame together:
But this mild Doom would much too gentle be,
More lingering Torments are reserved for me.

Away with her, dull Slaves.

Dear Altomar farewell.

Yes angry Powers, my Destiny rides Post;
I hear the Mandrake groan, and I am lost.
Eternal Darkness wraps my Soul all over,
And long's his Night whose Sun must rise no more.

OH now the Mist is cleared, degenerate Princess!
Fantastic Beauty, can this fair Apostate
Dote on an abject despicable Slave!
What is't you call the Vassal?

Altomar.

Now could I laugh at that fair Folly Woman:
No doubt some little Wretch her Smiles have raised,
And puffed the bolstered Pigmy up with Pride;
And now he stalks and struts.

Great Sir,

Did you command his Jailer
In our Imperial Name to come before us?

Great Sir, he waits without.

I come, Great Sir, to know your high Commands.

Art thou the Keeper of this Altomar?

Yes, Sir, that Princely Mourner is my Charge.

That Princely Mourner! Death, the Slave is Elegant.
Where is that Princely Mourner?

Great Sir,
That Chamber is his homely Palace, that
Course Cabinet enshrines his drooping Glory.

His drooping Glory! Eloquent Villain,
Conduct me to this drooping Glory.
By Jove, I'll face this little daring Rival,
This animated Clod of Earth and Ashes,
And look the audacious proud Aspirer dead.

How Sir!
Will your Imperial Majesty descend
To make a Visit to a Slave in Chains?

Yes, I'll be kind, and put him out of Pain.
But stay -- Retire, I'll talk with him alone:
For should I come thus followed, thus attended,
He'll say I proudly take the Advantage
Of Crowds and Pomp to brave him. Leave me.

When I shall tell thee what Imperial Head,
The Terror of the World, and Lord of Kingdoms
These humble Walls enclose. It is a Name
Will make thy chilling Blood shrink to thy Heart.

Why, what art thou, my haughty noisy Blusterer?

Bold Sir, men call me Gayland.

Gayland! wondrous well.

Ha! is this all?

Why Gayland, if Men call you Gayland,
What would you more?

Thou unfledged Hero, know,
That conquering Prince to whose triumphant Chariot
Proud Nations, and their Lords in Chains fall prostrate,
Comes here to ask thee with what Insolence --

Insolence!

Yes, with what Insolence thou dare look up
To that bright Saint that I vouchsafe to adore?

Know then,
Thou Conquering Prince to whose Triumphant Chariot
Proud Nations and their Lords in Chains fall prostrate,
To that bright Saint, that Goddess of my Soul,
I dare look up with the same Courage
As she looks down on Gayland.

Arrogant Slave!
Now by my Imperial Honour,
I could grow angry with this crawling Insect,
And crush the hissing feeble stingless Worm;
But Kings are Gods, and I will calm my Thunder:
My Lightning is too proud to blast a Shrub.

Then merciful good natured Thunderer,
You use me kindly.

Rude Slave!

Rude King, that dare invade my Right,
My Artemira's Heart: But know she hates thee;
And had those Nations thou hast vanquished been
But half so much invincible, thy Empire
Would not have reached so far as does thy Shadow:
Nor had thy Sword ever won more Ground, than just
Thy Length in Earth, to lay thy Bones in Dust.

Patience kind Heaven, by all the Fires that animate
Those ever-burning Globes, I shall grow mad.

Mad! How it would please me
To see the Fierce Numidian Lion foam,
Tear up the Ground, and lash his angry Sides,
Whilst I, like Hercules, in State stand by,
Behold thy Lunatic full Tide swell over,
Then smile to hear the Royal Savage roar.

Now by my Life, the Soul of Empire
Bold Traitor take --
Where am I going? Gods,
I thank you, I'm once more my Passions Lord;
And Slave, I'll find a nobler way to punish thee:
Attend and listen to thy Doom.
To morrow I will marry Artemira.

Marry her! thou dare not.

Saucy Mortal, dare not!
Yes, and to augment thy Plagues, thou shalt in Chains
Stand by to aid the Ceremony.

So Sir.

In thy right Hand the Bridal Taper hold;
Then to the Temple shalt my Triumphs light,

Most excellent!

And when she takes her highest step
To Glory, know thy bended Neck's her Foot-stool,
Into my Throne she mounts upon thy Head.

My Head!

Thy Head, proud Traitor; and to sum all,
When in her Arms our Worlds great Lord shall lie,
Live to despair, then stab thy self and die.

Thou marry her! by the All-seing Gods
That know this Heart, there's something in this Breast
So dear, so great, so far beyond thy Dross,
Thy baser Mould, that I'm as far above thee
In Artemira's Eyes, as Jove from Pluto.
There's something sacred that informs my Soul
I'm so much more a King than thou, that werenot
My shortened Talons cut, and my Wings pinioned,
My Eagle Rage should soar above thy Head,
And strike thee like a croaking Raven dead.

Down to thy Grave, profane rude Monster down.
Disarmed, Oh shame, and by a naked Slave!
But thus I'll send the Dog to Cerberus.

Coward, come on.

Death and Perdition greet thee.

My brittle Glass burst by a Vassal's Hand!
My Life and Glories ravished by a Slave!
Burn burn your Looms, cursed Hags, ye Hell-born Sisters,
If you can twist the Threads of Kings no stronger.

Oh my headlong
Ruin! From what a Precipice am I fallen!
Is this a Daughter's Coronation Day?
My very Crown, my tottering Kingdom
Shakes at this Blow! Does not the Imperial Army
Of fifty thousand Men lie at my Gates,
A Force too strong for my weak Power to grapple with?
Who in revenge of their dear murdered Emperor,
Will raze my City, lay my Kingdom waste,
All buried in one heap of Desolation.

Revenge their Tyrant Emperor!
Yes Sir, I killed him, and so killed him, that
The applauding World must justify the Blow.
An Emperor! like a mean-spirited Slave
He came, and poorly braved me in my Chains.
Then in the basest most unmanly fury,
He struck his Dagger at my naked Breast;
But from his hand unarmed I snatched the Poniard,
And in a brave Defence thus stained, thus goar'd,
Tripped up the Heels of the Gigantic Coward,
And with his weight I made his Grave shake under him.

Hold Brutish Impudence, can thou plead excuse
For this infernal Deed?
Better a thousand low-born Souls like thine
Should float in Shoals through Tides and Seas of Blood,
Than the least Vein of Majesty should bleed,
Or a Crowned Head but ache.

A Crowned Head! so at that rate a Villain
May be an Emperor at his Coronation.
Murder and Hell held up the Canopy,
Whilst Blood and Treason dyed his Royal Purple.
No Voice of Majesty, no Sound of Glory;
But Massacre, Rebellion, Desolation.

Silence, this Blasphemy, What profane Breath
Has Treason in Despair? What if his Dagger
Aimed at thy naked Breast: So angry Gods
Strike impious Men. Does Thunder aim at Thunder?
Or should an injured Monarch play the Dueller?
Thy Pride I'm sure provoked his sacred Rage,
And 'twas but just thy forfeit Life should pay for it.

But bold Assassinate, thy impious Fury
Could lift thy Hand against the Life of Majesty.
The best of men thou hast traitorously killed,
And like a Traitor thou shalt die.

A Traitor!

Die! Oh my startled Soul.

No cruel Lord,
I killed him nobly, bravely killed him, King.
No grappling Roman in Romes Amphitheater
Took an encountering Lion by the Throat,
And tore his Heart out with a Rage more manly.

Oh Giant Insolence!
But I lose Breath: he dies, and instantly.
His Execution, Achmat, be thy Charge.
First publish him a Traitor to the State;
Then build a Scaffold in the open Forum;
A Wrack and Torturers prepared be ready.
To appease the Blood of this great murdered Monarch;
By all my Hopes the Assassinate shall die,
With the same solemn Form of Death, our Law
And Custom dooms a Traitor to our Crown.

Ah Sir, you never was barbarous till this Hour.
Die for an honourable piece of Justice
Done in my own Defence; and like a Traitor!
Proclaimed a Traitor! branded and exposed
To a traitorous public Shame! My Death I scorn to fear;
But to die infamous is more than dying.
Shame is the only Wound great Souls can feel.

Oh hear me Sir, whilst I have Life to speak:
Look on that Gallant Youth, that Mine of Honour,
Faith, Truth and Love, the very Soul of Angels,
And Model of a God.

Oh matchless Sweetness!

And must that Throne, that bright Celestial Temple
Be rased by sacrilegious impious Hands.
Inhumane King -- but Oh I can no more

No Traitoress, thou hast done too much;
Thy Eyes, young Witch, light this dire Conflagration,
And only blaze t'a King and Kingdoms Ruin.

Ah my dear Lord -- I'm going -- unkind heart
To break so soon, and not to stay for Altomar.

She faints, she faints, that injured Beauty dies:
Look up my Star, shine out dear clouded Brightness.
Now King you're more than exquisitely cruel:
For if your Tyranny must break that Heart,
My Wrongs are Pageants to this last dire Blow.

Why Villain, let her faint and die, what then?
Sleep on, thou Scandal of my Blood, sleep on
For ever, whilst I never sleep again.

Divine sweet Excellence, look up and live:
'Tis thy kind Altomar that bids thee live.

From Deaths cold Sleep what voice of Pity wakes me?
Ah my dear Lord, is't you? What a blessed Change
Is here? Did not my cruel Father
Fright my poor Soul away with the Ghastly Vision
Of my dear murdered Lord?
And do I wake in Altomar's kind Arms!

Yes, Royal Sweetness, thy Tyrannic Father,
Though he has decreed thy Altomar must die --

Nay then, why were my closing Eyes
Torn open to behold this hated Light,
More terrible than Death's eternal Night?

Let not the Torrent of thy Sorrow swell
Too high: Thy Altomar is not so lost.
He has Glories, Pleasures, Joys; and thy kind Father
Has through his burning Rage some Sparks of Pity:
He has left this Treasure in my dying Arms,
And kindly crowns the Victim ever it bleeds.

And must you die? I cannot, will not bear it.
Ye angry Gods, if this be the Reward
Of Truth and Love, and unkind Providence
Ordains two faithful Hearts a Fate so dismal,
Poor Love, I fear, has but few Friends in Heaven.

Indeed, my sweetest Saint, 'tis very hard,
That I must gaze on those bright Eyes no more.
Grasp thy dear Knees, lie at thy Feet no more,
Till we shall meet again above the Stars.
A very sad long Journey for a Lover;
But we shall meet again, and what, though 'tis
Beyond the Grave? To win this glorious Prize
The Race can never be too long,
The way too craggy, nor the Goal too far:
No, my best Life, the Stars are not so distant;
Nor are the Battlements of Heaven too high
To scale for so much Beauty.

Oh my Altomar.
How sad a Story shall we leave behind us?
Henceforward when some melancholy Virgin
Looks out a lonely Cell to mourn and die,
She'll read no more the tender mournful Tales
Of ravished Philomel, or bleeding Lucrece;
But turning over our more unhappy Loves,
Read, till she has sight her dying Taper out,
And drowned her Eyes in Artemira's Woe.
Oh let me sigh my Soul into thy Arms,
And power a flowing Deluge on thy Bosom.

Best of thy Sex, thou softest Virgin Sweetness,
Who would not die thus mourned, thus loved, thus pitied,
With thy kind tender Sighs, and melting Eyes,
Such gentle Showers, and fragrant Gales around him?
When the luxurious Anthony
In dissolved Pearl drank Kingdoms at a Draught,
He lived not with that Pleasure that I die:
I in this Nectar taste Eternity.

My Lord, I come to make a harsh Divorce.

Oh bloody Tyrant Father!

Hold, yet stay.

My Lord, our Haste --

Black Instrument of Hell,
May I not stay to take my last Farewell?
My only Life, a long and last Adieu.
But he that goes to die, sure ought to take
His leave upon his Knees.
So have I seen
The Beauteous Image of the Queen of Love
Adorned with all her Graces, her fair Hand,
Her blushing Cheeks, and murmuring Lips all Sweetness:
And at the Feet of the Celestial Form,
Her humble Cupid hanging round her Knees.
Oh Love let me make up that pious Figure.
Low at the Feet of my dear Goddess bow,
And mourn and weep till I'm as blind as thou.

Sir, our Commission brooks no more delay.

Merciless Slaves --

My dearest Altomar
Farewell; and in thy dying Groans remember
Thy Artemira hovers round thy Head.
Like thy best Genius, waits thee to thy Heaven.
My mounting Soul with thy last breath shall fly,
If I can hold so long before I die.

She's gone.
The Lees and Out-cast of the whole Creation
Are Princes to the wretched Altomar.
Galleys and Dungeons hold not such a Slave:
A Slave so lost as Altomar.
Now Gentlemen, you whose Commission 'tis
To attend a dying Martyr to a Stake;
There was a time, my valiant Fellow-Souldiers,
We marched together in a Cause more glorious.

Yes, injured Prince there was: when our great General
The Conquering Altomar led us to Victory.

Name it no more: that day is quite forgotten,
My Honor's laid in Dust as I must be:
But now with my last Breath I must conjure you;
Let not my ghastly Fortune fright you from
Your dearest Loyalty. Fight on my Soldiers;
Fight for your Royal Lord; go on till you
Have won him Trophies numberless as Stars,
And Glory dazzling as the Sun: And then expect
The brave Reward of all your Noble Toils:
For he's a King so just, a King so generous,
A King so merciful -- he can be cruel
To nothing but to Altomar; unkind
To nought but Altomar.

How bright a Mind
Is lodged within this clouded Pile of Honour!

Lead on; yet stay -- When you shall see me bleed,
Though through a hundred Gates my Life shall sally out,
Let not my Blood force an unmanly Tear;
For 'tis a Soldier dies, and Death's our Game:
And where we have no Stake but Life to lose,
The Pain's not worth a Sigh: But when you think
With what an ignominious Doom I fall,
All blasted with the leprous Name of Traitor,
That only Torture, Shame, dire killing Shame,
Then power your pity through your bursting Eyes.
To think how my poor gasping Honour dies.

Never was Fate so sad.

But Oh my Princess!
What Plagues, what Hells my black despair would find,
Were not the charming Antemira kind?
But now, ye Gods, in spite of Tyranny,
Ingratitude, Death, Tortures, Infamy;
Though all the Artillery of Fate,
And all your Thunder level at my Head.
Fate only can my Earthy Out-works win;
But she makes Safety, Strength and Peace within.
Amidst the threatening Storms that round me roll;
Love's kind white Flag hangs out to calm my Soul.

Mirvan, thy Looks speak Horror; if you're come
From the Imperial Army, and dost bring
Ought terrible give it a Tongue. No Voice
But that of Ruin sure should speak to day.

Yes Sir, I come from the Imperial Camp,
To tell you that Distraction and Confusion,
Lie like a brooding Plague around our Walls.
No Mutiny was ever half so loud.
The Soldiers in a hundred different Shapes
Of Outrage crowd about their Generals Tent.
And where the Fury of this Storm will fall,
Whether their Clamours be their pious Rage
For their lost Emp'ror, or a kindling Fire
In Vengeance to his Blood, Heaven only knows.

Alas! Those little Horrors are not half
So dismal, as our Tragic Scene within.
Oh Mirvan, Mirvan, that Illustrious Youth,
The gallant conquering Altomar, at whose
Adored dear Name our Nations Genius bows.
He who has propped our sinking Kingdoms Glory
Is basely murdered, like a Traitor dies,
And by a Death so infamous, so inhumane.

Oh never, never was a Sight so horrid.

Ah Madam, if your Eyes have felt so much
Fly from this Ground; For I am repeating that
Will wound your Ears, and act new Murders there.

No, kind Morat, if thou can breath that Story
Whose Repetition is enough to kill,
Live thou to tell it whilst I die to hear it.

What Hearts of Flesh, with Eyes of Sense and Pity
Could stand to see that God-like Martyr stretched
Upon a Wrack, fixed on a public Scaffold;
And then behold from all his tortured Limbs,
His manly Flesh torn off with burning Pincers.
Oh more than barbarous King: the sooty Cyclops,
Who sweating at the Anvil, points the lightning,
And moulds the Bolts of the angry Thunderer
Never shaped a Mettle for a work so dismal.

Oh matchless Cruelty!

Nor is this all to drown his dying Groans,
The Drums and Trumpets, all those martial Organs,
Which once were tuned to nobler Airs, when Altomar
Filled their shrill Throats with sounds of Victory,
Are now employed to ring his Funeral Peal.
Methinks I fancy how in times first Non-age,
The frighted World beheld the dark'ning Moon;
Then joined with discord dinns of rattling Brass,
Cries, Yells, and Shouts to aid the laboring Planet.
So sing the Dirges of the dying Altomar,
No Sounds too harsh for such eclipsing Glory.

What could provoke the best of Kings to act
A Deed below the worst of Savages?

That Canker of Great Souls; those only Actors
In all great Massacres Fear and Revenge.
He fears the Out-rage of the mutinous Soldiers,
And thinks his threatened Kingdom lies at Stake.
And for the ignoble Cowards Maxim, Safety,
In hopes to mitigate their Rage, he prosecutes
This more than common Vengeance for their King.

What could the wretched Altomar ever do,
To harden the obdurate Gods against him?

Why nothing,
Only he loved the Daughter of his King;
And as that criminal doomed for robbing Heaven,
In Tortures like the poor Prometheus dies,
For stealing Fire from Artemira's Eyes.

Oh Sir, you leave the saddest part untold:
'Tis not enough this injured Hero dies;
But to make revenge astonishingly cruel,
The mourning Princess in more exquisite Torments
For her forbidden Love to her dear Altomar,
By her own Slaves, her new-made Jailers haled,
Stands by to view the Bloody Execution,
And see her dying Lover's Heart-strings crack.
The mourning Niobe for her slaughtered Sons,
Congealed with Horror to a weeping Marble;
Her griefs were calm to Artemira's Woes.

Inhumane, bloody, Savage, Tyrant, Father,
Oh let me die, Dogs, Slaves, infernal Torturers,
Lend me a Javelin, Sword, Cords, Daggers, Poison.
No Fiend below, no pitying God above;
Nor one kind Bolt in Heaven to strike me dead?

Oh stop that Sacred Flood, my Royal Heaven,
Weep not for me; for I'm above all pity.
But some few Minutes more, and I shall mount
On Angels Wings to that immortal Throne,
Where dying Lovers Groans are heard no more;
Nor their warm purple stains the reeking Floor.

Let go your Hold, Tormentors, let me go.
Oh see proud Slaves, your humble Princess kneels;
And can she be denied?
-- Oh my dear murdered Lord,

Ah rise, fair royal Angel mourner, rise.

Oh never, never, on my Knees I'll grow,
Fix and root here, till some relenting God
Has laid me in thy Grave.

My better Self,
These Griefs are kind; but let 'em flow more mildly.
I feel no pains, but through my Princess Heart.

If you want pains
I'll find 'em for you; call to your remembrance
Your black Ingratitude to your kind King,
For all the numerous Honours I had given you;
That glorious Structure my vast Hopes had raised
Thou hast at one blast blown up;
And the only Remnant of my Royal Blood
Thou hast made for ever wretched.

Wretched! can my Altomar's
Dear Love make Artemira wretched! No,
Mistaken King, I've loved so well that know,
To die for Altomar has more of Heaven in it,
Than Ages on the World's Imperial Throne.

Take Hence the Siren.
Oh Love, thou unextinguishable Brand
Of Vengeance, take her from his Sight; be gone.
She from this Minute never shall see him more.

Stay merciless Villains, savage Blood-hounds stay.

And art thou gone?
Snatched from my panting Side?
Remorseless King, how can you be so cruel
To a poor dying Wretch at his last Gasp,
To tear that Beauty from my bleeding Arms?
Through all the Graves my gaping Wounds can show,
You never stabbed me till this killing Blow.

What Sounds are these?

An Envoy from the Army.

Great Sir, I come from the Imperial Camp,
To tell you that the mutinous Soldiers, tired
With an Usurper's Yoke, demand a Successor
From the true Royal Line: And by their Threats
And Clamours to the General Abdalla,
Have forced him to discover that Prince Altomar,
A noble Youth residing in your Court,
But Stranger to his own great Quality,
Is the true Heir to the Empire of Morocco.
And in the united Peoples Voice I come
To call him to a Throne.

How Sir! is Altomar
The Royal Heir to the Empire of Morocco?

Yes Sir, the Blood of their last murdered Monarch
Muly Labas runs in his Veins; his true Name
Muly-Mesude; but by a borrowed Title,
Preserved an Infant in the Court of Egypt,
To escape the mortal Rage of the old Bloody Empress.

What Words are these?

But all his Injuries
Are cancelled in his Coronation day.
From his long Night, like a gay Bridal Sun,
He to his new wedded World sets out in Glory.

Oh never, never will that morning rise;
See there that Glorious Sun is set for ever.
Haste; take that Sacred Martyr from the Wrack:
Be quick ye Slaves.

What have ye done?

Yes, Fates, what have I done?
A deed for which the Furies want a Name:
Martyred a Monarch on a Gibbet!
Damnation shape me such a Deed in Hell.
In Vengeance to a base Usurper's Blood,
Like an infatuated Savage Indian,
I've built an Altar to a worshipped Devil,
And sacrifie'd a King to a Rebell's Ghost.

And was I born an Empire's Heir for this?

Oh Altomar, most sacred injured Lord,
What dismal Wrongs does Heaven ordain for thee?
What Plagues, what Hells for me?
The only man of all Heavens whole Creation,
That could have made me great, my Daughter blessed,
Her Love immortal, and my Name eternal,
I have most barbarously massacred,
The noblest Blood that Royal Veins ever held,
I have let out to drown the sinking World.

Ah Sir, did you not name your beauteous Daughter!
For sure methought I felt new Life shoot through me.

Fly, bring that mourning Sweetness to his Arms;
Tell her her Royal Altomar's hard Fate,
And her repenting Father's killing Horrors.

There's something in that Breath so kind, so wondrous kind,
Had I more Lives to lose I could forgive 'em all.

Oh my dear dying Lord!

Oh name not dying:
For you're my Bride, and this our Nuptial Day.
And now let Death and Ruin do their worst;
One minute in my Artemira's Arms,
Has all the Raptures of Eternity.

Yes, my loved Lord, in spite of Fate, this day's,
At once our Nuptial and our Coronation.
And sure if Love can Crown us in the Stars,
We shall shine there the brightest Pair in Heaven.

Oh Love, what is thy Power?

Now cruel Father,
Killed by my dear Lord's Wounds, I'll save you all
The Expense of Steel or Poison for my Fall.

No live, you best of Lovers, live for ever.
Oh that I could supply from my own Veins
That Blood I've robbed from thine; from my torn Limbs,
With my own Flesh new cloth thy naked Bones.
Ye Gods, why are your Miracles all ceased?
No Art in Heaven to save his precious Life?

Sir, your untimely Kindness comes too late:
But to acknowledge these last Sparks of Pity,
You Sir, that come to invite me to a Throne,
Bear back my dying Sighs to my kind Subjects:
Tell 'em I have a Brother called Cialto,
A Soldier in the Persian Sophy's Camp.
Let him be called to fill my empty Throne.
But let him know ever the Imperial Diadem
Circles his radiant Brow, that 'tis the last
Request of his expiring Brother, that
The Wrongs of Altomar be never remembered.
No Schriech-owl Fame dare croak my dying Wounds;
But let him cherish this dear Sacred Prince:
For he's the Father to my Royal Bride;
And his kind Hand has given me Artemira.

Bright Miracle! prodigious Goodness! Gods,
Must so much Worth, and so much Honour die?

Oh stop your violent Griefs. Alas, great Sir,
I am your Son, we're both your Children now,
And cannot bear our drooping Father's Woe.

Oh cruel Sir, why are you kind too late?
Why was not I my dear Lord's Bride till now?
Why did not your poor Artemira
In these dear Arms, these circling Glories shine?
Could nothing but an Empire make him mine?
Oh the ill judging World!

Poor injured Girl!

Has he more Love, more Charms, more Hearts to give me,
Because he's Heir to a Crown. Ah no, he was
To me my King, my World, my Heaven before,
And Crowns and Empires could not make him more.

Oh Artemira, take me on thy Breast.
My Royal Saint, what Heavn of Bliss
Should we possess if I had Life to love thee.
But Oh a Cloud o'ercasts my Rising Sun:
Just when my Joys begin, my Life is done.

He's gon, he's gon, and do I stay behind?

Farewell dear martyred Saint;
That parting Sigh that breaks thy Heart stabs mine.

Oh Murder, Ruin, Horror and Despair,
That ghastly Scene of Blood! -- Blood did I say!
Fie! these are Ruby Bracelets on his Arms,
Those Scarlet Love-Knots my kind Father tied,
To bind two dying bleeding Hearts together.

Poor injured Innocence, look up and live.

Live cruel Father! love like me and live!
Not to be Empress of a thousand Worlds.
A Love like mine. Oh Father, Love's a God-head --
Yes a blind God, his Lights all drowned like mine.
And is he blind indeed! how came he blind?
Say, did he weep his Eyes out for my Altomar?
Oh my sick Soul!

Speak to thy wretched Father.

Ha! is't my Love that calls me? See
His mounting Chariot hastens me away.
I come my Altomar, my Life I come.
Oh see the Gods our Nuptials do prepare.
See Altomar, see Artemira there.
The Feasting Gods with Bridal Chaplets crowned,
Whilst to the Poles the jocund Orbs resound,
And all the Nectar of their Heaven goes round.
In thy chaste Arms thy glittering Bride enfold:
Her Palace arched with Gems, and paved with Gold.

Was ever wretched Father damned as I am?
But I am safe, his dying Breath forgave me.
No, generous Prince, thy Mercy soared too high:
Thou may forgive thy Murder, but not I.

Why this rash Deed?

No, 'tis a Noble Deed.
Should Guilt and Shame survive when Virtue bleeds?
I'm but the meanest Wretch this Storm has wracked.
That pair of faithful Lovers died before me.
When Natures Wealth, all her rich Fraught sinks down,
Surely the Lumber of the World may drown.
Morat, as ever thou love thy dying King,
See my Bones lodged in that wronged Prince's Grave;
But let me humbly his blessed Relics meet;
Lay my Head low beneath his Royal Feet.

See here the dire Effects of unkind Parents;
Our whole World bleeds for their unhappy Loves.
How calm a Stream is Love when unopposed:
But stopped, the impetuous Torrent does o'erturne
Whole sinking Kingdoms, and makes Empires mourn.

LAdies, the Poet knew no better way,
Than to send me to prattle for his Play;
I am y^ur Cupid, and you cannot sure
Drive such a small young Beggar from your Door:
Do you be but as kind as you are fair,
And by my Quiver, Bow and Darts, I swear,
The little Tiny God, whose help you want,
Shall hear your Prayers, and all your wishes grant:
The Country Lady shall come up to Town,
And shine in her old Coach, and her new Gown;
The City Wife shall leave her poor Tom Farthing,
And take a harmless Walk to Covent Garden;
Those very Eyes shall still look young and gay,
That Conquered on the Coronation-day;
But you, the brighter Beauties of the Court,
You who the World undo, but Stage support,
You shall subdue all Hearts, while I sit still;
I'll break my Bow, and leave your Eyes to kill;
Nay the Court-Star, your Beauties to advance,
Has left her Dazzling Sphere to set in France.

