LOrd! how the Poets in these times will pine,
For solid Dullness they must all design,
When Wit won't sell, and they shall lose French Wine.
And what can Players hope for in these days,
When ever the Idle Youth forsake our Plays.
The empty Head, that never thought before
But on New fashions, or a fresh new Whore:
Who, without us, no Afternoon could spend,
Nor show Himself, nor meet a secret Friend,
Whom mounting from the Pit we use to see
(For dangerous Intrigues) to'th' Gallery.
Where stead of Maidenheads 'tis oft his hap
By bold advent'ring to at^hieve a Clap,
Or down he comes, and lolls in the Orange-wenches lap.
For News he now walks gravely up and down,
And every Fop's a Politician grown,
Instead of --
Pox here's no Company, let's to White-hall,
Or to the Park, or where is there a Ball?
What News! ha'ye been at Westminster to day?
How move the French? what do the great Ones say?
Things go not well, we wish we know not what;
But there are some can tell, we're sure of that:
With Politic shrug, and notable wise Look,
They censure Councels, who ne'er read a Book.
The Citt, who with his Wife and hopeful Son
Would come to a merry Play, now all does shun,
And on the Guard learns to let off a Gun.
Others their Shops and precious Wares neglect,
With their wise Heads the Nation to protect:
Even Bulks all day of Tenants are bereft;
For News stitching, and singing Psalms are left.
Each Coffee-house is fill d with subtle folk,
Who wisely talk, and politically smoke.
To them whose Right it is, leave Government*
And come to us, we'll give you all content:
Full Theatres, (...) overflowing Nil^,
Show Peace and Plenty in this happy Is^e.
The Nation's weather-glass a Play-house is,
And when we thrive, you never do amiss.
Fear not that we'll offend you with much wit,
This day we promise you shall quiet sit,
And have a Play for men of business fit:
And though you cruelly should Damn that Play,
I'll hang, if I don't make you laugh to day.

GOod your Worship! Turn us not away. I lived with my old Master Thirty years
and upwards.


And I fifty.


Yes! he loved an old-fashion'd block-headed greasy Serving-man, whose Clothes
were died with Drippings of March Beer, and whose Beards stunk of Beef and
Brewis, and his Breath like the fume of an Alms-Tub.


We are all old, and have lived a long time here.


Ye have the more reason to go away now, you are pursy, lazy, clumsy Rogues;
The time my Father's will required you to be here is out. This is my happy Day
of four and twenty, till which long time my Father's Will kept me from my
Estate. I now discard ye all; now I'll be Master, I have provided a set of
French* fellows to serve me; they are fit for Service.


They are for Slavery, They are born and bred to it: But it was never good time
since English Fools were served by French Rogues.


Hey! Dubois! give 'em 40 s. a piece to drink, and send 'em packing.


Good my Lord, We beseech your Lordship. --


Wait without!


How now, why stays that Fool?


Because that Fool has more wit than to go away.


Sirrah! begone! I will not keep you. --


Some body I see has used wicked Court Policy to supplant me in my employment.


I^ll keep no Fool, tis out of fashion for great Men to keep Fools.


B^cause now adays they are their own Fools, and so save Charges: But for all
that they delight in Fools out of Livery. When do you see any of em favour a
Wit?


I^ll have none, 'tis exploded even upon the Stage.


But for all that Shakespear's Fools had more Wit than any of the Wits and
Critics now adays: Well, if the History of Fools were written, the whole
Kingdom would not contain the Library; yet a vast number of ^ools have been in
Print, and written their own Histories.


You are a Satirical Fool, and will give offence.


Indeed this Age is not able to bear Satyr; and yet 'tis a very laughing
jeeri^g age: all Fools laugh at one another, and scarce any one i^ such a Fool,
but he has a sub-Fool that he can laugh at --


Begone Sirrah! I'll have no fooling.


Good Sir Humphrey, I will be a fashionable Fool, and learn ^o lisp, speak
French, and be very much aff^cted. I will be a well^red Fool, a Flatterer, or a
Pimp, if you please, you may turn away a K^ve or a Chap^in for me.


Who waits there! take away the Fool!

Well, Mr. Steward, upon condition you will leave off your miserable (...) and
follow my Instructions, I receive you again*


Since it must be* I'll endeavour to obey you in all.


Put some Pulv^lio into my Peruke! give me some Tuberose. You old Fool reach
some Orange^Flower water for my Handkerchief, how do you like this!


I dare not tell you*


I'll give you leave*


Methinks! it is unmanly to keep such a stir about ones Body, I'd rather be
embalmed, like an Egyptian body, once for all, and make no more trouble of it.


Thou dost not consider what a stinking Animal man is, exceeding all Beasts in
stinking, and would thou not have one mollify these Natural imperfections --



I would have you cleanly, and serve God as my old Mr. did; sure your Worship
does not consider --


Yes fool -- I do nothing but consider how I m^y please every sense, I have.
They were not given me in vain. No -- all my study shall be bent to find
variety of Delights, and when my own too barren fancy stops, I'll have a
Council wittier than Nero's, to invent new Pleasures.


Good morrow to my Lord of Land and Timber! long may thou live and flourish
in thy pleasures. The happy day is now arrived that makes thee Master of thy
Acres, and thy self.


A Thousand Joys fall on you. The Slavery you did endur^ under your wretched
Father, will make you relish the Liberty you now arrive at.


And I will use it to the full! nor Land nor Sea shall bound my pleasures --
what e^r the Globe affords I'll have to satisf^e my Luxury.


Virtuously resolved.


Joy of my heart: go on.


I Married one young fond fool, and broke her heart already; But now I keep a
Whore, or Whores.


Yes, all the Parish from fifteen to five and thirty.


Virtuous still.


Excellent Councellors for the speedy confounding of an Estate.


You that were my Father's good old Steward, and are my formal Coxcomb: I have
taken a new course, and so must you: I'll not be served so nastily as in my
days of Nonage, or as my Father was; as if his Meat had been dressed at
Pye-Corner, by greasy S^ullions there. His boiled meat, a little Mutton with a
sprig of Rosemary, and a vast deal of lean Oatmeal Pottage.


And Mutton roasted as if it were prescribed for the Pox, and of huge
Leicestershire pease-fed Sheep, as rank as old He-Goat^, and the Poultry died
all of Hectic Fevers.


And Sallets withered, the fruit Crab apples, Sweetings and Horse Plumbs; and
for Confections, a few Carraways in a small Saucer, as if his Worship's House
had been a Lousy Inn.


Then three or four monstrous Olives, with a spoonsul or two of damnable sharp
Capers, and Suffolk Cheese.


These things my good old Master was pleased with, or he had not so increased
his Wealth.


He did well: and I will revel now with what he le^t. Choke not me with your
Providence with a Pox to you --


Would you feed my Lord like a Country Justice of 300 l. a year, that has no
gusto? --


Or like a Lawyer in Ram-Alley, or Attorneys joining their 6 d. a piece at a
greasy Cooks.


That for their Suppers score their pennyworth of Tallow-cheese at a Chandlers,
with every one his Jug and Pipe of Mundungus. --


Be pleased to instruct me, and I shall obey.


My chief Cook has a Book drawn up by these Gentlemen, and my self: Read and be
learned. -- There you shall find what is in season still -- the youngest Meat
always most nourishing. -- The new fallen Lamb. The tender Kid, and young fat
Pigs. Veals fed with Milk, Whitebread, and new-laid Eggs, with young fat Beefs,
and smallest Forest Mutton, fat Bucks for Summer, Barren Does for Winter.


Fawns out of their Dams Bellies ripped, Gelt Goats, Bruised Venison, Su^king
Rabbits, Leverets, Dousets, White Haws, Velvet Head and Ears, Shoulders of
Venison in the Kell with blood.


Turkeys, Pea^Hens, Pullets, Capons, Ducks, with Geese so cramb'd as to be
drowned in fat; squab Pigeons, Chickens in the Grease, fat Swans, and
Barn-dore Hens -- with cluster'd Eggs, that are provocative. --


The young plump Partridge, with the tender Powt; The Pheasant and the Quail,
the Rail and Plover, roasted with the blood in 'em.


The mounting Lark, the Messenger of Day, the long bill'd Cock, that Winter
brings in Mists-with Snipe, Duck, Teal, the Curlew and the Wild^goose, the
Brant-goose, Solon-goose and Puffi^.


Young Rooks, and new hatched Martins, the Black-bird, Felfare, Thru^h and
Wheat-Ear, which far excels the Roman Beca fica.


Lincolnshire Fowl that's fatted with sweet Curds; as Pewits, Dottrils, Gulls,
Knats, Ruffs and Reeves. All these I have had, and you must now provide.


All this shall be done, and your Worship undone. --


And then for Fish what the vast Seas afford, Ponds, Immense Lakes and Rivers
too! Brett, Mullet, Turbet, Smelt, Plaice, Seat, Cod-whiting, and the old
Organ Ling with gold Flakes, with ^eightning Sturgeon to stir up my blood*
provoking Oysters, and the lusty Lobster: Crabs, ^hrimps, Crafish Pottage,
Muscles and Cookles, and dissolved Pearl and Amber in my sauce*


The Luscio, Eel, the Trout, Char Tench, Per^h, calverd Salmon* And from the
Ponds, over grown Pikes, Carps, Breams, Torecells. The German Fish as fat as
Bucks in August.


And when I would cocker up my self, Rams-Cods, Lambstones, Bucks, Dowsets,
Sparrows, Brains, the spawn of Fish, flakes of piled buttered Eggs with
Ambergreece; and when my taste grows Wanton, I will feed on Mushroons, and on
Frogs, and have a race of large Italian Snails, young Tortoises dressed costly in
their shells, and Squirrels flesh, which is dissolved Nuts, and the Indian
BirdsNest mollified in Broth.


Then Virmicelti, Potato and Tartonphily, and slatulent Roots to stir up and to
enable Appetite.


I should have taken these hard Words for conjuring, bu^ why must your Worship
have French Cooks. Methinks my Masters old English Cookmaid, with good store of
Parsley and Butter, did very well.


Away you Coxcomb: Let it be your care to keep my Cellar always full as it is
now.


I am acquainted with my old Master's Merchant, h^ used to let him have very
good Langoon and Bordeaux.


Porters and Carriers shall drink that; I'll have Vin d' aye, high Country
Wine, Frontiniac; all the delicious Wines of Italy and Spain; the richer Wines
of Greece and Sicily.


And Celery, Champaign and Burgundy, with Vin de Bon, Vin Celestine, and
Hermitage, and all the Wines upon the fruitful Rhine.


When I debauch, the Yeoman of my Wine cellar, dre'st like God Bacchus,
squeezes his twined Wreaths of Grapes upon us -- And we have floods of this
Poetic Juice.: But do you hear, Steward, I must have Whores in abundance; see
you provide a world of Strumpets.


Does not your Worship mistake me? I am your Steward.


Yes, to provide me all things necessary; and are any things so necessary as
Whores. I say, let me have Whores innumerable, and let it be your special care
-- That every Gentleman that comes within these Walls may h^ve his Cher entire*


Your Worship has a Mistress, I dare not call her Whore --


I keep one high, because it is the fashion; But for my use I'll have as many
Whores as mortal man can turn himself to.


Live, live! my Noble Knigh^, and be Immortal --


Push Nature on, my Friend, and live apace.


He will soon be at his Journeys end; But the chief Material is wanting ready
Money, I understand the Cash your Father left is flown, to pay in part your
Debts.


Go to Gripe, my foolish Kinsman the Usurer. That is such an Ass to deny all
hi^ Senses, to live miserably to dye rich: Take 10000 l. and let him have a
Mortgage till I cut down Timber to redeem my dirt -- begone --


This damned Usurer has a pretty Wife, I have a devilish mind to her; but
she's kept so close, though I have gone to b^rrow Money when I have had no need
on it, I cannot get access to her; the Rogue suspects every Male, from a Prince
to a Kitchen* Boy.


She's so pretty on my Conscience, none would refuse her; I have set snares for
her, she can never be seen but out of a Window, which is no bigger than the
hole of a Pillory.


He locks her up, and always carries the Key about him.


Nay, at Night he sows his Shirt and her Smock together, that upon any violent
motion the twitch may wake him: There's a Horn-preventing Design.


Faith, that shall not do, his jealousy shall pimp for me. Let us but wait
upon you in a visit to him, and let us alone.


An't please your Honour, yonder is a reverend fat old Gentlewoman desires to
be admitted.


Bring her in: a Bawd I warrant you.

Oh honest Bawd! How dost thou do?


Do! why I am even worn out in your Worships Service; I have gotten a hoarseness
will never leave me, with rising a Nights, to let in your Worship, and your
unseasonable Company to save my Windows: Well, I cannot live long.


Thou wilt dye nobly then, in the Service of thy Country.


Nay, Heaven be praised, I have been diligent in my Calling, very diligent to
supply the Necessities of young Gentlemen.


What a despicable thing a Bawd is! I hate 'em with my Heart, filthy Creatures.


They are something filthy; -- But they are necessary, very necessary.


Poor Bawds are carted, while great Men's Pimps are Company for Lords!


I have no less than three Maiden-heads upon my hands, I have agreed with their
Mothers, who ^ruly are careful honest Parents, and love to provide for their
Children with a Motherly affection. I shall have 'em cheap, considering the
^arity of Maiden-heads in this Town. I thought to give your Worship notice, if
you have use for one of 'em.


For one! Ownds! I'll hav^ 'em all. I'll spare no Money. Let me have 'em to
Morrow, or to Night; for fear they should not keep.


I cannot have 'em till to Morrow, I fear.


If so -- then let us have a Bevy of Whores for a rank Ball, for we intend to
be luxurious to Night.


It shall be done: But I am almost faint with running up and down, and taking
pains. --


Let her be taken in and rubbed and cawdled, as the Good Wives use the Phanatick
Labourers in the Gospel; and let the Bawd have Sack enough.


It shall be done: yonder are Milliners, Periwigg-men and Perfumers, and
Tradesmen of all sorts waiting without.


Bid my Steward and Valet de Chambre dispatch 'em; I hate Business: Now let us
revel, this Day I dedicate to all my Senses; I'il Feast 'em all after we have
Dln'd with all the Luxury Wit^an invent, with choicest Music, and the best of
Women --


Whores, you mean.


Ay, ay! What use can we make of honest Women?


None: They are as bad as Drones in a Hive.


Whores I do mean: With whom after we have Danced and Toyed -- I'll have my
Baths prepared full of most fragrant Scents. Where we will play and wanton with
our Concubines; there we ll lye soaking till we be refreshed. Then we'll come
out, be rubbed, and be anointed with precious Oils and Essences; and then we'll
roll our selves in Beds of Orange-Flowers.


How I dissolve at the Description.


I am all Ecstasy already.


Oh, here's my Mistress.


We come to wi^ you Joy, my dear Lord, of this happy Day.


Ye bring it with you! Gentlemen, salute these fair Ladies.


Are these Friends of your Mistress, Whores?


If they be, as a hundred to one they are, They are glorious ones!


Fie, fie, Whores! That's a naughty word. They are Ladies; there are no Whores
but such as are poor and beat Hemp, and Whipped by Rogues in Blew Coats.


They are brave Magistrates to commit Adultery themselves, and whip poor
Wenches for simple Fornication.


There's no Law to whip but that of Vagrants, and when a poor Wench has
laboured in her Calling seven years in the same Parish; These Fellows will whip
her for a Vagrant.


These old Fellows, that love it themselves, think the Wenches do so too,
perhaps.


You are the pattern of all Knights; you keep your Mistress so fine; I'll swear
'tis very commendable --


Oh 'tis admirable! all the Town admires you: You win the Hearts of all the
Ladies with it, I vow.


No! we must all yield to your Friend Sir Nicholas Peakgoose: He is the most
liberal and most obsequious Keeper, and ^tarves his Wife and Children for you.


I must confess he does pretty well. --


Why did you not bring him hither?


I should be willing enough; but if I use him to it, he'll be always going
abroad in my Coach with me: No! that must not be.


She has a rare hand over him; if I could govern my Gallant so, I were a
Princess.


I desire not to govern, my Dear; if I have but thy Love, Child, I wish for
nothing else -- But thy Money.


No more! No more! Call in my Music, and let 'em Sing and Play -- Come in.


LOve thee till there shall be an end of matter,
So long, till Courtiers leave in Courts to flatter;
While empty Courtlings shall laugh, jeer, and jibe,
Or till an old lean* Judge refuse a Bribe.
Till Young'men Women bate, I will love thee;
Till greedy Lawyers shall renounce a Fee,
And till Decrepit Misers Money hate,
Or Statesmen leave to juggle in a State.
While Priests Ambition troubles Commonwealths,
Till Whores grow chaste and Thieves forsake their Stealths;
Till Tradesmen leave to Cozen and to Lye,
Till there's a Worthy Flatt'rer, or Brave Spy.
Till Honest Valiant Men can be afraid,
Till Kings by Favourites are not betrayed;
Till all Impossibles do meet in one,
I'll love thee Phillis, and love thee alone.
Now let us retire and take the Pleasure of our Gardens: Music follow us --


Come Richard, because thou art but new come, I must instruct thee -- Thou
see my whole Design is to be Rich.


Yes, and to keep your Servants Poor.


And to that end, I deny and keep my ba^e unruly Senses under: for if any one
sense get the better of a man; he'll ne'er be rich.


I am sure I have not pleased one since I came.


That's well: Let me have three Ribs of Mutton boiled in a Pipkin for our
Dinners; go, buy me a lean Breast -- lean meat is wholsomest.


If I could light of a Sheep that died in a Ditch.


Ay, that should be cheap -- besides, I like a Natural Death better than
Murder. To Morrow is Holy day -- I will have four Ribs, and some Cabbage.


This is feasting, b^t our ordinary Diet of Oatmeal and Water --


'Tis very wholesome and cleansing --


'Tis the Scotch-Diet, very good for Mangy Hounds; What Sauce will you have for
your Mutton?


A Pox on Sauce! it spoils the Natural appetite; yet some Onion or Garlic you
may get: I have some Ferkin'Butter and Suffolk Cheese, fine lean Cheese, twill
go so far --


Sir, I have a great Inclination to a (...)* May I not get one? 'tis cheap --


Not so cheap, yet next Holy-day I will buy one for my Family: But Ox Livers
and the Entrails o^ (...), are very nourishing.


He cannot b^ content to ^ob and oppress men with his Extortion, but he must
rob the D^gs of their diet; you (...) Kids and Lambs of your own, if it please
your Worship.


It does not please my Worship, sure you have lived with some Epicure: No, sell
'em to Luxurious fools, that will die Beggars.


I hear Sir Humphrey Scattergood intends to send a Buck.


I'll sell it then; 'twill cost more the Baking than 'tis worth -- we kill our
selves in England with filthy pampering.


I can go a Fowling with my Peace, and catch Wild-fowl for your Worship.


By my troth but your Worship shall not; you will spend more in Powder and Shot
than your Bodie's worth; Besides, a waterSpaniel with his ravenous gut will ^at
me out of house and home: Wild-fowl? They are fit for Lucullus or Apiciu^.


Sir, we can steal Coneys, if it please you --


No Sir! I must find you Butter. What damned Luxurious Fellow hast thou lived
with?


Sir, I beseech you be pleased to let us have some Wheat Bread, for I have
gotten the Griping, and the Iliaca Pas^io, with Rye and Barley Bread.


Peace Fool! I am not so Prodigal, thank Heaven.


Must we never have any Wine or Strong -- Beer --


Why! you Impudent fellow, would you have us dye of F^avers? To drink Wine
shall be Treason, and strong Beer Felony without Clergy: I have wholesome very,
very small Beer, so clear, so fine, the Malt not to be tasted in it -- The
Patriarchs drank nothing but Water.


That I deny, ask Lot else*


Go -- Unlock my Wife's Chamber, and bid h^r come to me* This damned pampering
Rogue would ruin me with his Gut.


Will this Tyra^nie never be at an end? must I be always thus abridged of
Liberty? a ^am*d Fowl ha^ a better tim^ on it, for that's fed well; but I am
cooped up and starv^* ^ay have no Necessary of life, that's fit for a young
Woman --


Come Love, you have very good wholesome food, 'tis fit a young Woman should
mortify and keep down her Lusts.


Especially when she marries an old Man, he will fast her down to his own
appetite --


Nay, in the Winter I am kept without Fire or Candle. I have neither Natural or
Artificial heat from --


'Tis to preserve thy life, my Love. Did thou ever see Cooks or Glassmen long
lived? Fire destroys the Natural heat, they live longest in cold Countries.


Yet Meat is always raw for want of fire.


I will save fire, and have it roasted by Burning* Glasses; and instead of
Candles (and by the way the Grand Signior, suffers none of his Wives to have
any,) I will have Glow-worms, rotten Wood and fish Bones -- Fire suffocates
Natural heat.


I have heard your Servants in Winter wi^h for the Plague or any hot Disease;
and I for my part could be contented with a Fever.


Can you not use Exercise to stir up your Natural heat.


You let me have Exercise little enough! Heaven knows.


Can you not play at Shuttlecock, or carry a Handful upon occasion?


I will play at Stool-ball with the Maids, and that will stir up Natural heat.


No -- I have endured your cruel Tyranny too long; but above all, your
Jealousy is most provoking.


'Tis nothing but my love, my great love. Dost thou think I do not love my
Money -- why I am Jealous of that, and lock it up as I do thee -- I know what a
Treasure thou ar^*


Give me leave to know my own value too: And that I deserve not to be used so,
I will have the liberty of a She-Subject of England.


What a Pox! The liberty of Cuckolding your Husband, for that it comes to, to
receive Visits, and skulk about in Chairs in Vizors, to meet damned Roguy
Whoremasters, which they call Admirers with a Pox to 'em.


Thou deserve to be used so. When you are at home I am never out of my
Prison, but in your presence, my cruel Jailor; and when you are abroad, I am
fed at a Grate like the Lyons in the Tower (if I may call it feeding.) If there
be any means under the Sun to get ^y liberty, I will attempt it.


Nay then I will use my Conjugal authority.


Sir Humphrey Sca^ergood's Steward is come ^o ^peak with you.


Go into your Chamber! go, I say.


Well Tyrant, I shall be quit with you.


No, you shall not; I'll take care not to be a Cuckold.


Your humble Servant.


Sir, I am your Friend and Serva^t to command. Mr. Gripe, Good Morrow to your
Worship.


Mr. Steward, What brings you hither.


My Master's Command.


What can his Worship honour me withal?


It is to borrow Money on a Mortgage.


Look you Richard, this is an Ass that will please all his Senses, and he must
borrow* Oh damned Senses! Well, the Money's ready, 10000 l. we treated for.


E're long we shall have occasion to trouble you for more, as Sir Humph^ey goes
on.


See what becomes of foolish Sense-pleasers! Poor Puppies! Miserable* Fools! I
pity 'em: I'll not please one, not ^* Richard: Come, let's about this Business,
and get my Lord to Seal.


Well said, old Chaucer, say I. --

'Twould make one*scratch where it does not i^ch,
To see Fools live poor to dye rich.

CAll in my Music! I'll consecrate my Birth-Day to all my Senses: He is a
narrow-hearted Ass that pleases one at once; I'll please as many as I can
together.


It is Ingenious Luxury!


I hate a mere Glutton, a mere Drunkard, or a mere Wencher; They are as bad as
mere Scholars or mere Lawyers, good for nothing else: That man is happiest that
takes delight in most things: There's not a Virtue or a Vice I'll leave untried
for Pleasure or for Curiosity.


There spoke a Cherub; Fill up the Bowl then, fill it high; fill all the
Glasses up; for why, here's our noble Friend's, Sir Humphrey's Health.


Give me a Brimmer to celebrate his Birth-day. Ladies, There's no scaping this
Health. Men of Rosin and Cats-guts, strike up.


Strike up! D' hear Rascals! Let me have costlier Scents, and fume the Room; my
Nostrils are not pleased enough.


Are all ready? a Thousand years to you.


And all the while the joy of Wine, Youth, and Beauty with you.


Thy everlasting Health, my Dear!


My Lord, Mr. Gripe has drawn Bills; they are accepted, and he is come to have
you Sign and Seal --


Kick that old Fool out, is he come to interupt my pleasure with damned
confounded Business? which always must with me give way to my delight.


How this must rejoice my old Master's Ghost, could he but see it!


Good! How fast his Worships Land will m^lt into my Coffers; these are foolish
Sense-pleasers, Richard.


Sit down and eat with us, Mr. Gripe.


I will not eat luxurious Meats: I love no Surfeits.


Give him a Beer Glass to Sir Humphrey's Health.


I have renounced Wine, I do not care for Fevers, nor will I please one Sense
I have.


Out on him! Filthy fellow* will he not please his Senses?


Methinks a Fever should be a very pleasant Disease for an old Man.


Are you mad Sir! why 'twill cost you nothing; at least give me leave to snap
at a little Meat and Wine.


You Rascal! will you Disgrace my House-keeping. They'll think you're
Hungerstarv'd --


They'll not think much amiss.


Peace you damned Epigram! contain your self, or I will maul your Pate for you:
Laugh at these Sense* pleasers; They will dye in Ditches, fool.


Better dye than live in Ditches, and we live worse -- for Frogs have a better
life than we.


Let us not mind this Brute. But let your Servants Dance their Entry you
promised --


Let 'em begin!

Does not this please you?


What is the worth of any thing, but so much Money as 'twill bring: He was a
brave Poet that wrote that.


But here are fine Ladies! here's a sight for you, and to enjoy 'em in
Dalliance, were pleasure infinite --


A huge Trunk-full of Bonds and Mortgages, and another great Coffer-full of
Money to roll and wanton in; There's a sight! there's rapture for you --


Yes, for Fools that make Money the end of their wishes, and not the means to
other things. Come on! Sing the Song I love so well --


Pox on Songs! give me the Jingling of Money-bags.


LEt some great joys pret^nd to find
In empty Whim^ies of the mind;
And nothing to the Soul can come,
Till the ushering Senses make it roo^.
Nor can the Mind be ever at ease,
Unless you first the Body please.
Lif^ is, what ^'re (...) M^n m^y doub^,
But taking in and putting out.
Since Life's but a Span,
Live as much as you can:
Let none of it pass without Pleasure;
But push on your Strength
Of what Life wants in length:
In the Br^adth you must make up the Measure.
All solid Pleasures, Fo^s lay by;
And seek they know not what, nor why:
Imperfect Images the enjoy,
Which Fancy makes, and can deftroy.
Wh' in immaterial things delight,
Dream in the Day as well as Night:
In that how can they Pleasure take,
Of which no Image Thought can make.
Since Life's, c.
In vain no moment then be spent,
Fill up the little Life that's lent;
Feasts, Music, Wine the Day possess;
The Night, Lov^, Youth and Beauty bless.
The Senses now in parcels treat,
Then all together by the great;
No empty space in Life be found,
But one continued Joy go round.
Since Life's, c.
Very fine, I vow --


Upon my word 'tis delicate!


Well, Sir Humphrey's a sweet man.


How do you like this, Mr. Gripe?


'Tis abominable, profane, scandalous, and scurvy.


I'll try to please you; you shall hear an Italian Eunuch.


I had as lieve hear a Grey-hound with Trillo's and long Graces, sing a Love
Song to the Moon; But much rather hear my Mastiff ^eaching my Neighbour's Hog
his Gamut, when he comes into my Ground.


What think you of a broken Con^ort of Violins and Theorbo's joined (...)
Italian Voices. I'll have that for you. --


I had rather hear a Broken Consort in my Hogyard: My Bores and Sows grunt out
Harmonious Bases, my Hogs sing out their Brisker Countenours, my swee^ voiced
Pigs squeak out Melodious Trebles. --


What think you of a Consort of Cathedral Voices.


I had rather h^ar sweet Frogs chant out their Anthems against Rain, joined
with the passionate voices of old Toads. And for my more sprightly Music --
Schreech Owls, and a Consort of Cats run mad for Love, with the Harmonious
braying of some Asses; joined to these a Paper-Mill for an Organ, a Pewterer,
Silver-Smith, Trunk-Maker, with Tinkers playing thorough Bases upon Kettles.
Tell not me of Music; dispatch my Business.


Come I will withdraw with you, and Sign and Seal.


Ladies, I will wait on you again instantly.


Survey my youth, and reslect upon your own Beauty, and imagine whether it be
possible to forbear thinking or talking of Love when we meet --


Neither thinking nor talking of Love will do the business, I am engaged to Sir
Nicholas Peakegoose, and would not be false for the whole world, I swear --


True to him, 'tis impossible; you cannot love him, he's ugly and foolish --


Oh, but he's very good natured, and admires me extremely -- you that call your
selves witty men, have some Love indeed; but 'tis like French Courage, hot in
the Onset, and as swift in the retreat --


True to a keeper, sure you will not be a thing so out of fashion --


Oh Lord, I would not be false to Sir Chri^topher Smash for all this earthly
good: 'Tis a shame Women should be so false to their Intrigues, as some are; I
wonder at their Consciences. What do they think will become of their Souls
another day?


Love heartily, as I do, and 'twill take away that scruple; let me tell you,
(...) a great Sin, and I wonder you can have the Conscience not to pity ^e: For
you have struck me to the hea^ --


You are pleased to say so.


Will you hear me swear bloodily? by --


Hold! hold! have you no Religion in you? Lord, how I tremble for fear of an
Oath!


'Tis true, he pays for your Body; but 'tis not fit he should have your mind:
let me but have that --


That will not serve your turn.


No, -- But if I have the Mind once, I am sure the Body is not far off, which
would be ne'er the worse for Sir Nicholas should I leave it, which I never would
--


Shall it ever be said that I am false to my Keeper? --


No, it shall never be told; and if it were, he would ne'er believe it, who is so
conceited of himself, that he thinks you love him.


We of our Profession must be as careful of our Credit as Merchants and Bankers
should be; if we break with one, we shall ne'er be trusted by another.


Care to conceal is good; but barren Truth is good for nothing: The falsest
Women like the greatest Knaves, thrive most.


I should love at another rate than your Friend Swash; I should not leave you
for the love of Bottles and the Company of Bullies, to roar, and scour, and
break Windows.


Indeed he is a little too wild, but he has the prettiest merry humours with
him --


I desire but to visit you, while Drink makes him unfit for you; I am sure you
do not love him.


No, why he's the prettiest wittiest wild Gentleman about the Town: He says the
Wits love him dearly.


All Love is in equality. I am sure you cannot love him whom you keep under
like a Spaniel.


Indeed I keep him in Discipline; do not Fathers love their Children, yet keep
'em at a distance.


LEt's Drink, let's Drink all Day and Night Give each a lusty Bowl:
This is the ravishing Delight Of every Thirsty Soul;
Let others soak all Night in Beds And live but half their time,
The Wine that's always in our Heads Shall still preserve us in ou^ prime,
Shall still, c.
The Devil take me Blunderbus and Heild^brand, if we be nt very mad Fellows.


This is Sir Christopher Swash, and his two Bullies.


Ounds! what Prigg is yon talking with your Natural --


Shall I pluck out Porker, and lay him on thick?


No, he's my friend, an honest fellow, and as mad a fellow as the best of us.
Honest Wildman Oily, how dost thou do? How dost Prigg Bellamy? Gad we have had
a rare Night on it, we have roared, and sung and ranted; kick't all Males,
kissed all Females, swinged Constables and Watches, trounced Bailiffs, broke
Windows and stormed Bawdy-houses, and committed other outrages to the confusion
of much people --


Oh, fie my Dear; why would thou venture thy Person, when thou know how I
love thee? get thee gon, Thou art such a wild thing.


Peace, my Buttock, no harm done; we have not been in Bed these four and twenty
hours.

Let others soak all Night in Beds, c.
And live but half their time, c.
On my Conscience and Soul we broke Fourscore pounds worth of Windows.


Is not this a pretty Gentleman to be in Love with?


Pray, know my Friends, Blunderbus and Heildebrand: They are as honest fellows
as ever drank Beer-glass, and as brave as ever stood Cannon-bullet -- But
where's Sir Humphrey? hey -- hey --

The Wine that's always in our Heads
Shall still preserve us in our prime.
Am not I a very mad fellow, Ha, Sir Humphrey -- Hey boys! let* me kiss thee,
Oyl^e --


Sir Christopher Swash, your Servant.


Let me present these Gentlemen to you they are of good Families; Their Name
Blunderbus and Heildebrand.


They are great Names indeed; but they are something negligently dressed --


That's all one, they are as brave as Lightning; and will kick ^ailiffs like
Thunder, and faith they'll scour and roar like Cannon. They are the best Company
in the world, and are my Lifeguard against Bailiffs.


They look dreadfully --


Dreadfully! so they do; why each of 'em has killed his man. But as they are
very brave, so they are very ingenious, and rare Company -- Here's Heildebrand
has a number of the purest Bawdy Songs, and will Sing and Play a thorough* base
with his fingers rubbing too and fro upon a Table thus, most incomparably; and
then Blunderbus will hoop, hollow, and hunt over a Bottle with any man in
Europe, and they are the bravest Catch-singers both of 'em --


Nay, gad Sir Nicholas, you make me blush.


Upon my honour, you Compliment!


Because they say so now, you shall hear 'em sing -- a Boat, a Boat.


Come on.


To please you --

A Boat, a Boat, haste to the Ferry, c.


Are not we mad Fellows? Faith we can be merry and we set on it; we have roared
and scoured, and kept Covent-garden waking all last Night.


On my Conscience we beat Threescore people.


Ay, Fourscore, Men, Women, and Children -- ha, was not that well?


Oh very well! Hark you Gentlemen, a Design comes into my Head of carrying this
roaring Company, the Women and the Fiddles to that wretch Gripe's House --


That will be very well -- 'Twill fright him out of his Wits, and perhaps free
his Wife into the Bargain --


Whose Caravan is that other which yon spruce Prigg talks with --


A Coxcomb's, one Sir Nicholas Peak-goose. --


Does yon fellow manage her?


No, she's kept I tell you: Do you think a Woman that's kept would lye with
another?


We shall certainly have very good sport.


'Tis resolved, Sir Christopher -- we have resolved that all this Company, and
my Fiddles, shall forthwith go to the wretch Gripe's House, and Rant and Sing,
Dance and Roar, and play pranks there --


Hey Boys! Hey! a most admirable Design -- We'll tear the ground, and roar, and
make more noise than a Sea-Fight.

Good store of brisk Claret supplies, c.
And the Man that is Drunk is as great as a King.

Well said, Sir Christopher, do ye hear Steward, bid all my Coaches be brought
to the Gate; and provide a Collation fit for us, as you tender your Ears; and
send all my Fiddles and Voices to Gripe's with the Collation --


Come! let's march on, Blunderbus and Heildebrand; we will break Windows all
the way we go, Kick every Male from a Link-boy to a Lord upwards; Kiss every
Female, from the Simpering Lady to the Widemouth Jade that cries Sprats; Swinge
Bum-bailiffs excessively, and commit filthy outrage, to the astonishment of the
Mobile: Come along.


Where have you been roguing Sirrah, that you did not wait on me home?


I stayed to do a thing I am not used to, fill my Belly, enjoy my Friends, and
be Merry.


Oh Devil -- I think the Rogue stinks of Strong-Beer, foh -- *


That's a lye. 'Tis Wine! Cry you mercy Sir, is that a stink? here's Sir
Humphrey's good Health -- He's a Noble person, will you pledge me, Sir --


Heaven and Earth! the Impudent Rogue's Drunk --


I have Drank and Victual'd at Sir Humphrey's for a Months Famine I am to
endure here -- I am hung round with Bottles and stuffed full of Provision; will
you eat a Pullet?


Oh impudent Villain! bring Drunkenness into my House --


Ay, or else I ne'er should have found it here --


Audacious Villain! Thou stay not in my House -- I will turn thee away
presently --


The best News I have heard these ten days --


Say thou so Rogue, no, I will have thee whipped soundly* And in the mean time
I will beat thee damnably, to tame thy damned unrul^ Senses. Thou base, filthy
Swine --


Here's Twelve Go-downs more upon Reputation, to Sir Hump^rey's Health --


I'll health you Rogue! take that -- I'll maul your Rogue^hip --


'Twas base to take advantage of my Drinking. Stand off, I say; for if you
strike once more, take notice good Claret has taken away the relation betwixt
us, and I shall grow damnably passionate --


Ha! the Rogue may kill me in his Drink, and for ought I know rob me, which is
worse. Go, and bid the Maid set on the Pipkin with the black Pudding for your
Mistresse's Supper and mine.


A Pox on Pipkins -- I have brought my Mistress some crammed Chickens,
Westphalia Bacon, Neats Tongues, and some^hing else in my Breeches -- I have an
honour for my Mistress, and should be loath to see her want.


Thy Back shall be mauled for this at Bridewell to Morrow; Rogue, Dog, Son of a
Whore: Richard, sell that Wine and Provision, and I will put the Money out for
thee. 'Twill come to a pretty Sum in a year --


I scorn Usury: Do you think I'll be cursed as you are?


As I am! Rogue --


Good words, I say, -- for I am in an ill h^mour, and shall be suddenly
provoked; but to show I am in perfect Charity with you, here's to my
Mistresse's health, I honour her most immaculately --


Go, go -- out, and sleep and be sober --


Well, farewell; I'll not keep such base sober Company --


To morrow shall thy Carcass suffer, and thy Senses be tamed. Here Mally! where
art thou? Come we will walk and take the Air, that thou may get a Stomach to
thy Supper.


'Twere well if I could get a good Supper to my Stomach.


I keep a temperate Diet to preserve us. Do not they that fare hardest live
longest?


I can endure your dissembling no longer. 'Tis for the love of vile Money, and
not care of my Health. I have born thy Tyranny too long.


I Save* to make thee a rich Widow -- I think the Woman begins to be peevi^h.
Come, I will kiss thee, and put thee in good ^umour, feth I will.


Kiss a Death's head! a Coffin! my Mother betrayed me in my Youth to the
slavery of thy Age. Thou did promise to be a Father to me; thou can not be
a Husband, and wilt not be a Father -- but a cruel Tyrant.


Be not perverse; for by Cock and Bottle, Heaven forgive me for Swearing -- I
will give thee Conjugal Chastisement --


Sheart! talk no more to me of that, you have worn out all my patience; and I
henceforward will be a Tigress to thee.


Audacious!


I have a Brother, who comes this Night to Town, he loves me, we were Twins,
he'll right me; Thou never saw him, but shortly to thy cost thou shalt --
His Sergeant spoke to me out at my Prison Window, he is beating up Drums for a
supply for Flanders. There is not a fiercer young Officer in the Army: He'll
cut thy Throat if thou abuse me so.


Death, is that Hectorly Fellow come, you use to threaten me with? Oh
Impudence! my Family is turned Topsy-turvy --


I will have the same Christian Liberty that others of my quality have, I will
visit and be visited --


Visits with a Pox; ay, that way come Messages, Tokens, Letters and Bawding for
one another, and the Frolic goes round.


I will have Money enough to venture 50 l. in a Night at Ombre.


Ounds 50 l. she makes me tremble!


I'll make you know the right of an English Woman before I have done.


Prodigious and amazing! the right of an English Woman to cheat and cuckold her
Husband! in into your Chamber! go in, I say!


Peace, old Fool. I say not in.


Nay then Correction will ensue*


Yes! that it shall old Tyrant --


What noise is that?


Sir, My Master is just entering with a great Train of Gentlemen and Ladies, and
has sent a Collation and Bottles of Wine, that you may not be at Charges.


Confound him and his Train. D'e hear Mrs. go into your Chamber.


I will stay to entertain the Ladies.


Ladies! Whores* a Plague on 'em all! in, in, or this knife shall be embrued in
thy Blood.


Help! help! I will not go in.


What's the matter! at wars with your Wife?


My dear Wife! No -- She is not well, she will endanger her health; which is
very dear to me.


I am well -- I shall not endanger my health, nor is it dear to him. Ladies,
your humble Servant, I am proud of the honour of this visit.


Ounds! she can Compliment. Death they kiss too most Lasciviously --


How dost thou do, old Boy! we are come to Drink, Sing, Roar, and be merry with
thee,

The Kings mo^t faithful Subjects ^e
In's Service are not Dull,
We drink to show our Loyalty
And make his Coffers full.
Would all his Subjects dr^nk like us,
We'd make him richer far,
More Powerful and more Prosp'rou^*
Then all the Eastern Monarchs are,
Then all, c.

Madam! I come to endeavour your release, and therefore be ready at the first
opportunity.


You oblige me.


Have you any private business with my Wife?


What a Pox, do you interrupt a Gentleman, that's talking to your Wife -- hah!


He deserves Chastisement, you uncivil old Prigg.


If he had offered that to me, I would have blow^ him into Atoms.


Shall I beat him, and kick him damnably, and break his Windows, Sir Humphrey,
ha!


Not yet! Come Ladies, I have brought my Fiddles. Let's have a Dance in the
first place.


With all my heart.


What will becom^ of me! Hell is broke loose. Huswife, remember this.


Come Mr. Gripe, will you join with us?


No Sir, I thank you Richard; raise the Constable and a strong Watch against
these outrageous Rascals.


Sir, I will not for the world; Sir Humphrey is my Friend, and I love and
honour him; and here'^ another Rous to his health.


Hell and Confusion! Damned Rogue! I'll murder thee.


You shall not starve me as long as Sir Humphrey lives, i'gad.


Ounds! She dances, a very damned confounded TownJade.

Hell and Devils! what trick's this -- oh my Wife, my Wife, come in you
Baggage.


Are you mad? 'Tis part of the Dance.


You shall lead her no such Dan^e. Here Huswife, get you into your Chamber. --


What do you interrupt the Dan^e? Earthquakes, Inundations, roaring Seas and
Thunder, I'll maul ye.


There's rare taming of you^ Senses for you.


Excellent -- I'll not take 200 l. for this beating.


Break all the Windows -- Heildebrand ^d Blunderbus --


Hold, hold! what do you mean?


Good again, very good.


At your Command much may be done, Madam.


Sirrah! Fill every one a Brimmer to Mrs. Gripe's health. Give Gripe one.


Take it, and drink it to your Lady's health; or by the Soul of Scanderbeg I
will carbonado thy old musty Body.


Pl^gues! and Curses! well, there's no remedy.


Down on your Knees all. Strike up Fiddles, an Alarm, Fire all -- Hey Boys --

Good store of brisk Claret s^pplies every t^ing,
And the Man, c.
Am not I a very mad fellow, Sir Humphrey?


Did you ever see such an odious old fellow?


Women, I see can lye by any na^useous Ras^als, if they'll marry them or keep
'em -- I am sure you cannot nor shall not love Sir Nichol^


Prithee! think no more of that Roister.


Really ^e's a pretty witty wild Creature.


Gentlemen, what have I done to deserve these Outrages?


Done! Damm'e you are a Rogue, and an Usurer, Sirrah!


Done! filthy fellow to shut up your Wife against the Law of Nature.


We come to oblige you, to visit and be merry with you and your Lady --


Hands all around* We'll Dan^e ab^ut him, till you run away with his Wife. Play
Fiddles -- fa, la, la, la, la.


Come Madam, -- break off --


Come back Whoremaster! have I caught you, Strumpet? remember there is Law Sir.
Remember that --


What does the Scoundrel talk of Law?


Beat his Brains out.


Now Gentlemen, you must give me leave to say you do not well to triumph over
an old Man. He is my Husband, and I must love him; though he uses me
tyrannically, and shuts me up in Prison --


How, shut up your Wife!


How, shut up your Wife!


How, shut up your Wife!


Oh thou old Do^rd. Thou shame of Mankind!


Woman was meant to go at large: Thou filthy Creature.


Shall Woman, that's wild by Nature, be tamed by thee base Fellow?


He invades the right of Whoremasters, and 'tis not to be born; we have the
right of Commonage, and he impales.


Heaven protect me but this once, I seldom trouble it.


I am resolved to escape, but not in such lewd Company. Richard, Do you stand
here whatever happens till I come to you, and do as I direct you, and I'll
reward you --


Any thing; for I love and honour you, and scorn and hat^ my Master.


Yet I say, Mally, good Mally go into my Chamber.


I perceive their intentions are base -- I will my dear, instantly* Sir, put
out all the Candles, and I'll secure my Escape.


With all my heart, Gentlemen, assist me in this Design.


The Candles are out -- murder, murder, help, help. I am cuckolded, robbed,
undone. Murder! Villains, Thieves, Murderers, Whoremasters, Sons of Whores,
Rascals, Strumpets --


Where art thou, my Dear? I will go in with thee, I am convinced I was in the
wrong.


Come my Dear, give me thy hand, my good Dear; I'll maul thee with a Plague to
thee for this -- anon --


Now -- farewell old Tyrant, and all the rest of ye; if I had escaped by
violence, I had had a hue and cry after me, and been stopped presently --


Gad! its dark -- have at these Women -- Ounds you Son of a Whore.


Lightning and Thunder! what Rascal cufft me? have at somebody.


What's the Matter! Flamboyes come in.


I'll stand up against the Wall. Fight on my merry men all --


Oh for some Murder among themselves.


What's the matter here?


I was boxt!


I was cufft!


Come brave Boys: 'twas in the dark, and 'tis no dishonour, ne'er mind it.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares handsomely do,
Is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.

Some other time let this be examined --


Now you'll be gon; She you came for is safe! all your force cannot break open
that Door. There lies your way --


He is mistaken, the Lady took one of the Coaches by your order, she said, and
is gon --


Let's be gon and look after the Ladies.


I shall make some smoke.


Blood shall ensue --


I will arrest every man, ^nd when I have recovered Damages, indict 'em for a
Riot, poor Fools! This was a lucky adventure, since I have saved my Wife. They
have left their Banquet and Wine, I will make Money of it. Let me go fasten my
Doors.


SO! I have laid up their Provisions, and shall make Money of 'em, as I intend
to do of my beating I have had, and the Riot they have committed; I have taken
order my drunken Rogue shall be apprehended. But now to my Wife! per^idious
Jade! I shall keep her Prisoner during life, for all her Hectorly Brother --


within. I think this disguise will fright him, and secure me from a good
substantial beating into the bargain: If I can get once out of the Chamber -- I
am sure I will face him down I ne'er was in it --


Here! where is this vile (...) of Woman-kind? Dost thou hide thy self -- hah!
Mercy upon me! who's here, the Devil! the Devil! --


I thought my Face was pretty well before; but I see I could make it uglier;
Art may improve Nature much. Now will I shift for my self --


Help, help! the Devil! the Devil!


What's the matter Sir?


Oh! the Devil! the Devil in my Chamber!


Where! where! Let's see. I have lighted the Candle again!


Oh Rogue! art thou here! I think thou art the Devil, how could thou get in
else? I locked all my doors and searched every Room in the house, and thou
were it not in any of 'em --


Sir, I was grown a little soberer with the fright of the Swords drawn, and
sensible of my fault, I hid my self from your Indignation under my Flock-bed,
where I have lain and sweat and trembled, till I heard you cry out, and I could
not but come to your assistance:


That makes some amends. Let's into my Wife's Chamber and see what's the
matter, may be 'twas a trick of the lewd Woman's to fright me, I am sure I put
her in there -- I led her by the hand my self --


Be not afraid, Sir, sure 'twas no Devil you saw! have you not some guilt upon
your Conscience?


Saw^y Rogue, I guilt -- I have none -- I am as innocent as the Child new born.
Come -- let's in Rasoal. Oh Heaven! what noise is that, Richard? I say,
Richard, keep close to me Sirrah, close --


Here's no body in the Chamber --


What do you say, no body? Look about the Bed, and in and under it quickly --


Here is no body: Did you lead any body in here?


Yes, yes, I did -- I had her by the hand I thought. And she spoke to me as she
went in.


Without doubt it was the Devil, and he is vanished --


Hell and Confusion!


Now I think on it, when I ran out at the quarrel, I thought I saw my Mrs. go
out hastily, take one of Sir Humprey's Coaches, and hurry away with it.


Oh horror! oh infamous Strumpet! I am robbed, cuckold'd, abused; oh villainous
quean, she is now in the filthy act of cuckolding me. Hell and Devils! give me
my broad Sword.


Good Sir, call upon no Devils; we shall be torn in pieces.


I care not what becomes of me; give me my broad Sword, I'll fetch a Warrant to
search that Rogue Scattergood's house, apprehend the Strumpet, bring her home,
and murder her; seize upon his Estate, sue him to Outlaries innumerable, indict
him and all the Rogues for Riots, c. give me my broad Sword. Come along with
me:


I dare not.


I'll cut you off in the middle if you do not; get you before, I'll lock the
doors: Oh whore, whore, whore!


Hey Boys, bravely done! scour on! break those Windows, 'tis Normandy Glass,
scour, scour.


Have at 'em.


Fall on, fall on.


'Tis enough, march on; My Blunderbus and Heildebrand, we will over-run the
Town, as easily as Alexander did Asia.


A Prize! a Prize!


Lay her aboard.


She's my Wife, Gentlemen, what would you have?


All kiss her -- fall to, Boys.


Help, help! Watch, Watch!


Murder, murder! help, help.


Ounds you Rogue do ye call the Watch! Swinge him. There's for you Sirrah!


Does she cry out? lay her on.


'Gad we are very mad fellows, Are not we? my Bullies.


Damme as ever wore Swords. I take it.


More game, more game; have at 'em perverse Whores, a Pox on 'em, they are past
squeaking in private, though they do it in public.


Who are these? Curse on 'em, they are old and ugly --


Herb-women, going to Market.


Let 'em be what they will, I spare no Sex nor Age. Beldams, you must be kissed
for being women, and kicked for being ugly. The Devil take me if the Town can
match us for tearing Blades now.


Stand! who are these? Rascals without Swords, Apprentices? must such Rogues as
you usurp the privilege of Gentlemen? such Scoundrels as you scour? lay 'em on
thick. let's swinge 'em --


Help, help! Watch, Watch! Murder.


Death! Shall such pitiful fellows think to do like us?


Who's here? stand.


Stand Rogues: ha! they are Fiddlers.


We are going to Play under a window for a Wedding.


We'll stop your Journey, Rascal; strike up, and play to us while we break
windows.


Good Gentlemen! we shall lose our Wedding; there are other Companies out that
will be there before us.


We will cut and hack you first, and then your Fiddles.


Hold, hold Gentlemen! we will Play --


Now let's break Windows to this Music. 'Tis good for nothing else. Pull down
all the Knockers, and wipe out the Milk scores: will this Rogue my Footman
never come with Lamb-black, and a Brush that we may blot out the signs.


These are the Rogues that set upon me and my Wife.


Rogues! Sir Christopher Swash, and his Friends; They use to give us Money
every night Neighbours.


Ay, ay, very honest Gentlemen.


You are a saucy fellow.


Oh, Mr. Constable, let me kiss you; There's half a piece for your Watch to
drink.


Thanks, noble Sir Christopher. Who are you Sir? I must have an account of you.


Ay, what are you?


I am an honest Man, and pay Scot and Lot in my Parish, and these Fellows set
upon my Wife and me.


Stay Fiddlers* whither are you sneaking?


This fellow is a Rogue, and picked up a Whore, and called her his Wife.


Away with him to the Gatehouse --


Very fine. --


Now honest Constable we are well met. And I have Fiddles, 'G^d you shall Dance
to 'em.


Any thing Master that you please.


When that's done, go into your Huts, drink Brandy like Dutch Skippers, and
smoke like double Chimneys for the good and security of the Nation! while we
scour afresh.


Come fellows, strike up --


Very well -- I vow.


Good morrow to your Worship.


Good morrow!


We are undone, yonder's the High Constable going the Rounds to Night! haste
every one to his Post --


Who's here, Sir Nicholas Peakgoose! i'faith thou shalt roar and sing, and
break Windows --


Not for the world, Gentlemen; I am going to fetch my Celia from Sir Humphrey's
house, if she find me in drink, she'll be outrageous.


Gad you shall: hang sneaking after a Whore; Keep her under.


Pray Sir excuse me.


Gad do as I bid you, or fight.


Fight! oh Lord, fight! what would she say to me, if I should venture my self
to fight?


Prithee don't stand prating, but roar and break Windows, or draw.


I am resolved, I'll not draw: What will you have me do? what will become of
me?


Follow us --

Diseases and Troubles are ne'er to be found,
But in the damned place where the Glass goes not round.
Sing with a Pox to you.


Well, well -- Diseases and Troubles, c.


These are the Bullies that made the Havoc last Night in Covent-Garden, and
this Night hereabouts; fall on, knock 'em down.


How now! we must to Battle --


Come Sirrah! have we taken ye? we see where the others are gotten in.


Gentlemen, as I hope to be saved I was none of their Company; but they set
upon me, and threatened to kill me if I went from 'em. I will be a witness
against them.


'Tis Sir Nicholas Peakgoose; a very civil Gentleman.


I know him! you will be forth coming in the Morning to witness against 'em --


I will.


Go! good night. Beset Sir Humphrey Scattergood's house, we'll have 'em and
they be alive.


Good night Gentlemen: Oh my Head and Shoulders! a deuce take their scouring,
for me --


Heaven how he melts his Time and Land away in Luxury and Sloth, and I by
force must be an Instrument in his wickedness; now must I keep the Door, while
he, his Friends and Whores are lolling in their Baths, prepared with cost
befitting Emperors; nay, They're perhaps revelling in the height of Sin -- but
I will pray and read these godly Meditations by my self --


Hear you old formal Steward, where is your Master?


Bless me, what ails you all? are your Brains beaten out?


No, we have had a Battle with the Myrmidons of St. Martins, we have swinged,
and are swinged --


I am sure my Porker is embrued in Blood.


And mine is stained in gore of filthy Peasant.


Bless us! Heaven! Have you committed Murder?


Prithee leave prating, and open the door; we heard the Music this way, thy
Master's there.


You must not pass; my Master and his Friends are all in Baths.


And where are the Women, the Cockatrices?


The Cockatrices are bathing too.


What mine?


Yes, yours.


What a Pox, does he manage the Body of your Caravan?


Peace Oily -- his own Convenient's there, we will all run roaring in.


You cannot pass; there is a Blunderbuss within charged with 15 Bullets, in the
hands of a damned desperate Rogue.


Pox on it -- I know my Buttock's honest; but I care not, for the Devil take me,
I drink too much to be a man at Arms. Gad! I only keep her ^or the lewdness of
the matter.


Halloo -- Here's Peakgoose. Now you shall drink --


'Gad -- ^e have caught you; you shall drink like a Devil.


Ay 'gad shall you -- and roar and have the other Battle too, Boy --

The Stars which you see,
In the Hemisphear be
But the st^ds in your faces with Drinking, c.

Good Gentlemen, Pardon me. I must go to my Dear. Where is Madam Chloris,
Friend?


You cannot come at her: the Ladies are in one Bathing Room, and the G^ntlemen
in another just by 'em.


Sir Humphrey will swinge your Buttock away --


Yes, He or some of'em will manage your Natural gallantly.


Who! my Birds n'eyes. I am sure she would not do such a thing, as I may say,
for the world.


Pish! Pox of Whores. Let's go drink 'em out of our heads. Where's the Yeoman
of the Cellar?


Why he, or his Servant is nev^r out on it! 'Twill come to a fine pass.


Come along to the Cellar.


Excuse me, I will not go -- what to make a Beast of my self?


If you will not go, Draw! for 'foregod you shall fight.


What will become of me? with these roaring Fellows I must go.


The Sun's gone to Tipple all Night in the Sea Boys,
To morrow he will rise, and be paler than we Boys;
Give us Wine, give him Water, 'tis Sack makes us The Boys.

With what variety of pleasure you melt away your hours.


There's need of Fancy and Invention for such Luxury.


It is beyond the sense of Fops; a Fool has not wit enough to be pleased, he
but seems merry, when he's sad at heart. Is not this better than venturing life
for Ambition, being perpetually anxious for a Blew-Ribbon, or a white-Staff, to
have a crowd of Clients sneaking two hours in my Anti*Chamber, who crouch like
Slaves when I appear; yet hate and scorn me for my Pride the while?


These are the irregular appetites of Men, whose Minds are Sick. The vigorous
Body and the healthful mind can find no pleasure but in Sense.


Fools are led away by shadows, and let the substance go; while the rash,
giddy, and magnanimous Fool runs abroad, is delicately lousy, and kills men
for Honour, who never angered him: We stay at home and get 'em.


Which I take it, is the more honourable employment of the Two. Another Fop
breaks his Brains with Metaphysical Nonsense, a Mathematical Coxcomb besots
himself with a, b, c, Superficies, Lines and Angles; our Virtuoso contemplates
Lice in Microscopes; your Orator studies to show his parts in
Whipt-Creamspeeches; your Schoolman wastes his time in Bulls and Nonsensical
Distinctions to make the same thing differ from it self; and your politi^k. Owl
drudges and makes a business of what is none --


And all the while the Senses are neglected.


Your drudging Millhorse Block-head, is useful for Government, while we most
wisely find out Pleasures for every Sense; we are Lords of the world, and enjoy
all in it, while they are Slaves --


Twas not our fault, we did not please every Sense even now. These pretty
Whores are skittish.


We could do nothing with 'em but put them to the squeak a little.


Some of these kept-Ladies, will no more treat you with Love, than Taverns will
with Wine; 'tis against their Trade: But I have had 'em all for Money. I
cannot, like the grand Signior, make a Wench come when I give my Handkerchief:
But if I see a pretty Whore I like, I send her 50 l. and to that Lure she
stoops, and strait I Truss her: if not, a 100 l. brings her down: my Money is
less precious than my Time.


Faith, you are in the right: I see what 'twill come to -- for I have a
damnable mind to that pretty Jade Celia.


And I must have my Chloris, whatever becomes of me.


Sir Humphrey! Your humble Servant.


Sir Nicholas Peakgoose! your Servant.


Where is my Mistress, poor Rogue?


Within, with her Companions.


I long to see her, pretty Rogue. I have not seen her these six hours, and
yonder's Sir Christopher Swash -- and his Hectorly Companions will kill me with
drinking Bumpers, as they call 'em, if you protect me not; they draw and
threaten to fight with me, if I do not drink; I have been knocked down by the
Watch, for being taken for one of his lewd Company already. Hide me -- hide me.


Where is this Scoundrel, that basely flies from a Bumper? Draw! I will have
satisfaction. I will Tap him, and let out the Claret he has drank already.


Good Sir Christopher, spare his life for my sake.


For your sake he lives; but upon condition, he shall come down and drink
lustily --


What makes you bloody?


We have had a Skirmish, faith. Would you had been with us, I never saw better
scouring days of my life; but now we are here, let's all down and drink
bloodily.


There's no life to drinking, roaring, and lying rough.


There's no pleasure in a single Drunkenness. But Sir Nicholas and we lead a
life, we!


Let us borrow Sir Nicholas a quarter of an hour, till he sees his Mistress,
and then we'll restore him --


Do ye hear Nick? Be sure you come, or by Heaven I'll run you through the Lungs
next time I meet you --

March on bravely! forward let us go,
Tara ra rant tan tant, tan tan tan ta ra ra
rant tan tan! The Trumpets they do blow.

Oh Lord have have mercy upon me! what shall I do? I^ll swear the Peace against
him, if I live and breath.

Oh my Dear! Art thou there?


Yes, you Fop; But what do you do here?


Prithee be not angry Miss. I come to wait on Thee home --


I^ll not go -- Go home by your self! go I say, go quickly --


Good, dear Madam, let me stay.


I shall have people think you are jealous of me! How dare you come after me
thus?


I jealous! I'd have 'em to know I scorn their words.


Go home then! get you gone! Why do you stay, when I bid you go? Must you come
sneaking after me? Do you think you are fit to be seen in good Company, because
I am so?


I know I am not; but good, sweet Madam, let me stay here: I beg^ it on my
knees.


Nay, nay, now you are too Cruel: let me intercede for him.


Ay!


Madam! Pray let me beg for him.


Look you there.


He shall not stay. Ladies, you don't know what you do, If I should suffer him,
he'd always be peaking after me -- Go, I say, I will be obeyed --


I'll give thee all the Money I have about me, if thou'lt go home with me.


Come, give it me.


There.


Well, I will go home, but go you out and wait an hour, till I come.


Well, my Dear, what you will. Good, Sir Humphrey, let your Servants guard me
from these Roarers.


Well, poor Rogue, I'll stay. Go! thou art a pretty one.


Sir, the fat Gentlewoman is come with three young Girls.


There's a Collation waits you; will you come in to it, my Dearest?


Go! we will follow you --

Now Gentlemen, a consultation: Here are Maiden-heads coming, we'll divide 'em
equally. Steward, send her in, and convey her Attendants the back way into my
Apartment. And let 'em be bathed, new rigged with Linen.


It goes against my Conscience, and is below my Dignity.


Sirrah! Begone! obey me, or you have no Tips of Ears to Morrow --


Well, I have taken such pains for you, I am ready to expire -- I had gotten my
house full of handsome Wenches for your Worships use: But I thought the
Maiden-heads I spoke of would be more fit, and I have brought 'em all three
with much ado.


And will you warrant 'em Maids?


That I will upon my sincerity; did I ever deceive you? I have more Conscience
than to be corrupt in my Calling, not for this Earth I would not -- But these
are dearer than I thought. They are 50 l. a piece, if you have 'em: I never
higgle or make words with you.


Talk not of Price! it is my Birth-Night. Gentlemen, I'll treat you like a man
of Honour. We'll cast Lots for 'em.


You are too obliging.


I have conducted the Gentlewomen -- Whores in.


Prithee honest Bawd, go and bring all the Whores in at my back-gate. Do you
hear, old Fool? see you entertain 'em well: and let every Stranger and Servant
in my House have his Cher entire. I'll not have a Man-servant idle, nor a
Maid-servant honest: Chastity shall be Felony, and Sobriety High-Treason.


Well Sir, I'll fetch 'em all.


Good Sir, will you whip me, hang me, or --


Peace, thou hypocritical old Sot; do you hear, be you Drunk soundly, and Whore
lustily, or Wars will ensue between us --


Whore! oh Lord! I whore? What will become of me?


Come on my Friends, Let's in and survey my Markettings --


Lead on, my noble Prince of Pleasure; and we'll follow --


To the Devil all! and thither I shall follow, unless I suddenly get loose from
these clutches.


Are you so nimble i'faith! we have catched you again!


You have made me drunk with these Bumpers. What will you murder me? have some
pity on me, on my Knees I beg you'll let me drink no more; what will my Mrs.
say?


You are in a good posture. Kneel all! Fill us the other Bumper. 'Death! Drink
it, I say. Drink it, or Blood will ensue --


What will become of poor Sir Nicholas? --


All together clash.


Well, I must do it.


The other round.


Mercy upon me! I am dead! I am killed! I'll lay my death to your charge -- no
more to be said.


Ah Rascal, Do you spill your Drink! 'Ownds! fling the rest of the Bumpers in's
face.


Murder! Help, -- help. I am slain.


Open the Door! we'll break it open --


What's the matter? Now draw the Fool away; he's dead drunk.


How now! What's the m^tter without?


Sir! The High Constable with a huge Guard, and Mr. Gripe in the head of 'em is
come with a Warrant to search the house. --


Call up my Servants! fetch my Guns.


Hey Boys! we shall have more scouring!


Now we shall show our valour.


What means this violence?


We have a Warrant to search for Mrs. Gripe. --


Fall on! fall on. We are victorious, and have taken Prisoners.


What will become of us! we shall be Murdered.


Lock 'em up, Safe! and guard my house with Guns and Muskets! unseasonable
Rascals to interrupt our pleasure.


Shall we plunder, strip, and take the spoil of the Field?


No* we'll call 'em to a Council of War, and condemn 'em; away with 'em.


O mercy, mercy!


What is Sir Nicholas killed in the fray?


No -- in our fray; Dead drunk. This was a brave Battle!


Now all to bed: Carry Sir Nicholas to bed.


Not we! we'll go drink and lie rough! fare you well upon those terms. Come
Bullies, I think we have behaved our selves like Emperors!


Am I completely set out like a young Officer? Do my Brother's Accoutrements
sit well upon me?


They become you admirably; you are as brisk, as fierce an Officer as the best
of 'em; and so like your Brother, 'tis amazing, had not I been privy to your
Design and his, I should have sworn you were my Captain.


That likeness between us will further my design. My Husband knows nothing of
my Brother, but that he has heard we are so like, that upon an Experiment I
dressed my self in man's clothes once, and we were not known from one another.
But do I strut, cock, and look fierce enough?


To a Miracle! But since you have this design upon your Husband to fright and
make him yield to good terms, why would you not let your Brother carry it on?


He resents so much the base usage of me, that I know not what his passion
might have provoked him to: Besides, it seems to be the right of an English
Woman to Hector her own Husband; and faith, I'll have him under my Command now,
or press him for Flanders.


Bravely resolved.


I'll teach Husbands to provoke their own Flesh.


That is out of his power or yours to do to him --


I'll make him such an example. I'll make all Husbands have a care, how by
Injuries they sower their Wive's love into revenge, or their meekness into
rage. I know he's a Coward, as all Tyrants are; and I'll make him e're I have
done, as dearly as he loves his Money, part with a good Sum for fear of his
lif^ --


Methinks they that live so miserably, should not fear to dye --


Oh yes! They are such ^ools to choose the worst part of life, and are yet
greater Fools, and prefer it to Death, which is far better: to be dead, is to
be insensible; but to have senses and deny 'em all, is worse. Do you find him
out, and get him to a private place, and let me alone.


I will, Madam! 'Sheart I shall forget to call you Captain.


Well, I shall strut, look big, and huff enough for a Captain, I warrant you*
by your leave Modesty for a while. A desperate ill, must have a desperate cure:
But these words of Command stick in my Throat, and I cannot swear worth a
farthing.


Oh use, use! 'tis nothing but use --


But why must we use French Discipline? we did not so when Henry the Fifth beat
'em.


Why, by plaguing the world this Ten years, they have found a better way than
we have.


Well, I'll try! Let me con -- Even your Ranks. Straiten your Files. Shoulder
all. Rest your Arms. To the right, to the right, to the right. To the left, to
the left, to the left. Dam'me what awkward Rogue is this?


O brave Captain! well done! But 'twas a little o'th hardest.


I'll warrant you -- I'll lay it on -- let me alone for Discipline -- allons.


PRay Gentlemen, let me give over play. You have gotten my Gold Watch, and
Diamond Ring, and 20 l. upon Tick.


Nay, 'gad you shall play the other 20 l.


Lord! what would you have of a man? I cannot abide play: I hate it mortally,
so I do.


What a Pox! you don't take us for Cheats, do you?


Who I? Not I Gentlemen, for the world! yet I doubt they are little better!


Dam'me! 'Tis not your best course.


You shall find us Gentlemen: That scorn to do or suffer an ill Thing.
Therefore play on.


Heaven deliver me from these dreadful Bullies: They will get all my Money, or
quarrel with me.


What a Devil do you mean? will you play, or no?


Pray Gentlemen don't be angry, I will then double, or quit. I'll set you the
20 l. because I will make an end, Mr. Heildebrand; but I vow and swear, I'll
play no more after that.


Are you sure the Doctors are in, Blunderbus?


Yes, I am sure! at it Man!


Come then! here'sat it, ^7.


12! 'tis out! quit.


I Nicked you! ask Blunderbus.


Nay, then I'll never play more* 12* Nick 7. Do what you will with me, I'll not
throw a Die more. What a Pox* Do you think I am a Fool?


If you do this Heildebrand, you will lose him for ever; a Plague of ill luck
--


Was it 12?


Ay marry was it! ask Mr. Blunderbus else.


Yes it was: Sir Nicholas is in the right, look you ther^ now.


Look you there now.


No more to be said.


Well, Good morrow, Gentleme^, your humble Servant. Now we are quit I'll play
no more really.


Nay, you shall not go* the Devil take me if you don't play one 20 l. more.


Never speak on it, you shall play for one 20 l. more, if you were my Father.
Zounds! you don't take us for Snaps, do you?


I will not play, I will not! I will not! what will you do with me? Help, help.


Run Blunderbus, we shall lose our Bubble.


I see already that this is a fine civil well-govern'd Family. You must guard
me.


I warrant you, Captain. Where are the Serv^ts? they have been all drunk, and
roaring all night, and I believe are all asleep.

Oh! here's one.


I must needs speak with Sir H^ Sc^ttergood. Pray let him know I wait for him.
My Business is earnest.


I shall Sir --


You are sure my Husband is here?


Yes, one of the Wat^h told me, That when they were beaten Sir Humphrey took
him Prisoner.

This is Sir Humphrey.


Sir, your most humbl^ S^rvant. I hope you will excuse this Disturbanc^, when
you s^all know my Busmess.


A Gentleman's Commands can never disturb me.


Sir, I am Brother to the unfortunate Mrs. Gripe, the Wife of a wretche^
Usure^; who, I am informed is in your House.


He is Sir, but I should have taken you for her, Her self in man's habit.


A Woman! He has been my Captain abroad these four years; if you had seen what
brave Actions he has performed in the midst of fire and smoke, you would not
have taken him for a Woman.


I should not wonder much at your mistake; for just before I went out of
England, she was dress*d in man's habit; and we were so like, we could not be
known asunder.


Indeed I have heard there was a s^range likeness betwixt you; the very Look
and Voice! hah!


But Sir, if I be informed right, you cannot mistake; for she is in your House.


She is not, upon my Honour. This is most amazing. I ^ever saw such likeness --
They speak so like too --


If he be here, I beg you will deliver him over to me to used as he deserves;
for the Barbarity he has practised on my Sister.


With all my heart Sir! use him at your discretion. My house is free for you,
and do you hear, Steward, Bid all my Servants be at the Captain's Command -- I
should almost have sworn it had been s^e.


I give you many thanks for this favour, and should be glad to serve you with
my Sword.


You honour me, Sir* Fetch down Gripe and his Man: Sir, I will go in and dress
me, and then wait on you; and I beg you will make use of my house, and accept
of what ever it affords for your Entertainment.


You are very generous a^d obliging. So, thus far I have ac^ed ^ (...) well
(...)*


Oh, here are the R^scals, Captain.


Which is Gripe?


That old Fellow!


Look Ri^hard, was ever any one so like my (...) Wife? Oh Lord, it is her
Brother sure, by the description I have ^eard.


Is your name Gripe?


Her very Voice too, Richard.


Speak, you Rascal, are you that damned fellow Gripe, that Married my Sister --
my name is Bevil.


I did M^rry one Bevil, and if I did not see you in this Accoutrement, I should
take you for her.


Her! had you done me one such Injury as she has suffer*d Thousands from you, I
would have cut your Throat long since: But you know, old villainous Murderer, I
am not she: I have been at her house, she's missing, and I doubt not but you
have killed her; for she is no where to be found, and I am resolved to have
your Blood for it.


Ha! hum -- It must be he! I murder her! Heav*n fo^bid! she is run away from
me, and I believe she is in the house playing the Whore here with Sir Humphrey.


Villain! Thou lie --

I know her virtue; all thy damned Generation put together, have not half her
Honesty.


What will become of me! I tremble all over. *Tis he, I heard his Drums beat up
yesterday.


I see your Conscience strikes you! had she not been murdered, she would have
come to some of her Relations. Prepare, old Viper* and pray; for thou hast not
a quarter of an hour to live* upon my Honour.


Good Sir -- Let me go! if she be killed, Heaven knows I had no hand in her
Murder.


Sirrah* stay, or I'll knock your Brains out.


I see it is her Brother; she had a great respect for me, and would not have
used me so. *Tis he by his hard blows.


Kneel and Pray, or by Heaven I'll kill you before you prepare --


I cannot Pray, I cannot prepare -- what have I done?


I have lost a Sister* and if she be not murdered, she has been so abused by
you, that nothing but your life shall satisfy, and I shall do my Country good
Service in ridding it of such a Monster.


Take your course -- if he were dead, I sho^ld eat ^gain.


I'll stay no longer -- have at you --


Hold, hold! sweet Sir! good Brother Captain! d^ but adjourn the Execution till
I go home and settle my affairs, and I'll wait on you again.


No Villain, thou shalt die now, at ye --


O Heaven* I cannot endure it. I cannot pray, do not murder my Soul. I confess
I have been a great Sinner: I have wronged many young Orphans, and Comfortless
Widows --


And starved your Servants --


Besides, upon the words of a dying man, your Sister run away from me. I locked
her up indeed to save the Honour of your Family; for she is a most salacious
Woman --


He angers me to the quick with that -- Thou ly'^t old Dotard, Thou dy'st for
that --


Oh hold! hold! Let me but live to repent awhile; I do confess I have wronged
her --


Hold Sir! Spare his life --


Thank you, good Sir --


Dissuade me not!


Hold! hold! here's my Man can tell you she ran away from me.


Indeed Captain she did go away, as she had reason; and I helped her to escape.


Are you such a Rascal to lye for him? No, he dies.


Hear me, good Captain, your Recruits are not yet full: He seems to be a lusty
old Fellow, and can carry Arms yet.


Say you so?


What a Devil does he say, Arms? that's as bad!


If you think so -- take him to your Custody. When he is in Flanders, if I hear
not of my Sister in a reasonable time I'll kill him. In the mean while I'll put
him into the Van on all occa^ions --


Sir, Sir! why Captain, Noble Captain, I am a most hideous Coward, I shall run
away, and spoil all your Men.


If you do, I will hang you. No resisting, here take a Shilling.


I must confess I have a great respect for a Shilling, and never could refuse
one in my life*


Enrol his name, and put his Coat on.


Now I hope you'll let me go upon Parol to furnish my self with Necessaries --


No: We'll furnish you with them --


Now Sirrah, you are listed; if you run from your Colours, I can hang you by
Law --


Heaven! what am I condemned to?


Here put on your Coat.


Kill him if he resist --


There is Law, and I have Friends --


You lye Sirrah, you have no Friends; and for Law, I'll make you know that
Inter arma silent Leges. Put his Man a Coat on, and List him. There's a
Shilling --


What shall I do -- I am a vile Coward! I am as much afraid of Guns, as Indians
or Wild-Beasts are --


Come sirrah, put it on -- What's your Name?


My Name is Richard ^rubb --


Carry them into the Court, and teach 'em the use of their Arms: But do ye hear
Sergeant, be not (...) of my whistle --


Come! Hon^st Comrade Gripe, give me thy hand.


Pox on your Comradeship; I desire no such base Company: Did ever I think to be
Comrade to such a fellow?


Now must I learn to lye rough, filch Linen, steal Poultry, lye with a
Sutler's Wife, and be Lousy. Now Master give me your hand, we are Comrades too
--


Rogue! I shall live to remember you. What shall I do? All my Writings will be
embezz'^ed, I shall be utterly ruined, my Mortgages lost, my Money concealed --



Fear not, Sir, you'll live better with 8 d. a day, than ever you did. I make
no doubt but you will save Money at the years end to put out to use -- For my
part, I am glad that I shall wear Clothes, and eat.


Now (...), your Captain is gone in; honest Comrade, 'tis in your power to
oblige your self and me very much: I*ll*give you Ten Shillings, and your own
again, if you will let me escape.


How the Rogue values his Liberty.

No, good Sir, get you out. I'll borrow two of Sir Humphrey's Muskets, and
Exercise you --


I'll give, a 11.


No, -- go out, I say.


Good Comrade -- I'll give you 12.


Get you out --


Hold -- 13.


No -- I'll not be cashiered for you --


Cashier me; I'll give 14.


No -- I tell you --


15.


No.


16.


Out I s^y --


17.


Out, or I*ll send you out.


18.


Go.


19.


I'll knock you down.


20. Have you no mercy in you?


The Rogue bids for his Liberty, as if it were a stock at 12 d. Gleek.


Was there ever such likeness between two, as betwixt this Captain and his
Sister*


It is Prodigious -- I never heard her speak but once, and methinks their
Voices have some likeness.


They have so -- This is a very Effeminate man to look at, yet they report him
to be a brave Fellow.


You oblige me beyond return.


I have often heard of your worth, and think my self happy in this opportunit^
of knowing you -- My house is a house of freedom, Command it. If you have a
mind to a fresh hansom Wench, as that's no g^eat question to a young Officer,
you shall have her --


To us that have been in the Camp, That's no ill Propo^al; and faith Gentlemen,
you shall find me a Man at Arms in all points --


In the mean time here is my Mistress, I bar her -- But the other two, if you
can win 'em, do --


And faith I ll try 'em. I am resolved to carry on this frolic as far as
'twill go.


This is the Captain that's so like his Sister


Ther^ is a strange resemblan^ betwixt 'em --


I never saw one so like another days of my breath.


He is a mighty pretty Man.


A fine Gentleman as e're I saw --


He is a very sweet Person indeed.


Ha! I'like not th^se proceedings. This Beardless Officer will be too hard for
us.


Oh these Wenches love a fellow with a Scarf, or an Ar^e Belt mightily.


My Dear, I have a Lawyer and Writings ready for that Settlement thou were
pleased to promis^ me, if thou wilt dispatch it now, ^ot that I desire it; but
in case of Mortality: for while thou livest I desire nothing but thee, and when
thou art dead twill do, me little good -- for I shall scarce out-live thee. So
I am very indifferent, do* what thou wilt.


No -- come my Dear, I'll dispatch it now. Sir your pardon for a moment.


Prithee* let's withdraw and observe 'em a little.


Sir, He'll wait on you suddenly, in the mean time we leave the Ladies with you
--


Your Servant: These I humbly conceive are Whores, or they would not be here;
how the Devil shall I talk to 'em both?


Well -- he's the prettiest Man that e're was b^rn --


You cannot have been long a Soldier, you are so young and smooth-fac'd --


I have no youth, -- but what's at the Lady's Service --


Pray what manner of Ladies have you beyond Sea?


Not half so pretty as the E^glish Ladies.


How do they make love there?


Faith Madam thus -- we fall of board as fast as we can, thus, and thus --

and thus and thus --


Hold, hold Sir, you are very brisk.


Well -- he is a pretty good natured thing, I warrant him --


Have you been in many Battles? I see you are a valiant Man.


Ye^, many -- I have been used to Fire, Smoke, and Cannon; Yells of Matrons,
and groans of dying men, and cannot Boggle at a Lady; as for example --


He is a gallant Officer, no doubt --


You are a rare man* you think to storm a Lady, and carry her by Fire and
Sword.

My time is but ^ort, and I wish I were rid of her, that I might tell you how
much I am taken with you; and if you would not believe my words, to show it by
my actions --


You flatter me. I am infinitely pleased with this Captain.


Captain, one word with you --


Dear pretty Creature -- how you transport me; if yon Lady (...) absent. I have
such a passion to disclose to you.


A most admirable man -- Sir, I should be loath to be esteemed ungrateful.


What a condition we are in! S'heart -- They'll ravish him.


These Wenches are stark mad after smooth-faced fighting fellows, let 'em be
never such Puppies.


Dear pretty Rogue, you're the sweetest Creature I ever saw, and she is
disagreeable -- oh that I had thee alone.


You Compliment me, he's a fine bred man; what a mean he has?


By your leave. Sweet Captain, I believe you met with little resistance from
the Ladies in Flanders.


I should be overjoyed to meet none from thee, My dear pretty one, would yon
Creature were away. I do not like her at all -- I have that to tell you --


Are we not uncivil, both us to leave Madam Phillis -- (...) you will go to
her, I'll come presently.


I am not to be taught Civility from you, good Madam, go you --


Nor am I to be taught by you, and you go to th^t.


Very fine, they'll fight for him by and by.


But Captain.


I'll tell you Captain.


'Ti^ not good breeding, Madam, to interrupt one in speaking.


Tell me of breeding. There has been some difference in our breeding.


That there has to my advantage: 'Slife your breeding.


We are like to have very constant Mistresses, if we get 'em.


So -- I am a very pretty fellow: I have got the hearts of both of 'em, and now
I am afraid I shall find it hard to get rid of 'em.


I wonder at your Impertinence.


My Impertinence: You are a confident Creature.


Thou art below my anger.


Am I so? well -- I know what you are*


Why! what am I Mrs. Minx?


N^y, good Ladies hold. Let this go no farther; for as I am an Officer, I am
bound to secure you, faith --


At your Command, good Captain -- I shall desist --


If it were not for your presence, sweet Captain, I should say more --


'Tis time to appear. This young

fellow will have 'em both else.


What at Wars, Lady? You are a happy Man, C^ptain.


And a brisk one at Women, I see that.


So, so: We ^hat come from the Camp are pretty well set, and are seldom
over-bashful --


I see, Madam, you can be gracious to the Captain, though you are cruel to me.


What because I show a little outward Civility. Though really, he is the
prettiest Gentleman I ever saw. But Captain, as we were saying --


Very fine.


I see you are most infinitely taken with the Captain: But I cannot get a good
look of you --


Lord! that you should say so: Would not you have one wellbred to a stranger?
But Captain, you were saying something to me even now --


This is excellent -- I see we must rout the Captain, or lose the Wenches.


Pox on all these whiffling young Officers! all the Whor^ run mad after 'em;
and a good ^ubstantial solid Whoremaster cannot keep one in quiet for 'em*


Captain, your humble Servant -- There's a Collation, and some Bottles w^iting
for you, and my Friends, and I beg your Company --


I will but see how my two new Soldiers are disposed of, and I'll wait on you.
Do not stay for me, I beseech you --


Ladies! do you retire; there will be Drinking.


Your Servant, sweet Captain.


Your humble Servant, good Captain --


What shall I do amongst 'em; I cannot drink: yet I have a great Curiosity to
see what it is that charm^ men to s^t up whole Nights at eating Houses and
Taverns.


Sweet Captain, I have no time to stay, nor dare I be seen alone with you; but
That will tell you something, which I might blush to speak -- Farewell --


Most excellent Women! what's this, another Conquest? hah --

Th^t I was extremely surprised at the sight of you, This Paper will
sufficiently prove; for could I have resisted your Charms, you had never seen
it: But now I am afraid you have the power to make me entirely Yours, Phillis.

What a F^rce will this be when I am discov^r'd? Poor Wenches, how miserably I
shall disappoint 'em --


Come on, Sir Christopher! are you ready for a Bottle?


Ready! I warrant you! I have lain rough and recruited. I need less baiting for
the Journey than a Carrier's Horse. Give me a Glass in my right hand.


Sit all --


Come faith, let's be all very merry, and roar extremely.


Take your course; Captain, your most humble Servant. Sir Christopher, this is
the Captain you heard of.


I honour him, and here's his Health in a Bumper --


Sir Humphrey, I must desire my Liberty. Wine doe^ not agree with me, I never
drink hard.


Every Gentleman is free in my Hous^.


Hey! we shall have fine work inde^d. What a Devil, a Captain, and cannot
Drink? Can you Whore?


So, so -- well enough for a young Beginner.


No^ Drink! 'Sheart! a man is not fit for a Captain that cannot Drink. Shall I
ask you a question?


Yes.


Can you Fight?


Hold, good Sir Christopher, no Bullying here --


You had best try, if you dare: Death! what a question was that! What Scou^drel
art thou that ask such a question? This Company preserves thy life.


I have done, I have do^: (...), H^! he's damned stout, I believe.


I could tell Thee Actions I have been in, would freeze thy blood to hear of!
Fight -- quoth a! Can thou fight up to the knees in blood? and at Midnight
with no light ^ut what Guns make, with Shot like hail about thy ears, clamber
over mountains of dead Bodies, and fight thy way to a General's Tent, and bring
the General Prisoner through all his Mir^idons? hah --


Sir, I beg your Pardon, I believe it. He's a plaguy stout fellow.


'Tis not your best way to question it. Can you lead your Soldiers up to a
wall, and scale it, when Bullets, melted Pitch and Sulphur rain upon you?
Fight! the man ne'er lived that asked me yet that question!


'Sheart, he will cut my Throat -- Sir, I beg your Pardon, I say --


Come Captain, 'Tis enough: fall on upon this Collation, and we'll have a
Ch^son a boire to compose the matter.


With all my heart.


Some Music! Sing me a Song --


LEt the daring Adven^rers be tossed on the Main,
And for Riches no dangers decline;
Though with hazard the spoils of both Indies they gain,
They (...) bring us no Treasure like Wine.
Enough of such Wealth would a Beggar enrich,
And supply greater wants in a King;
'Twould sooth all the Griefs in a comfortless Wretc^,
And inspire we^ping Captives to Sing.
There is none that groans under a burdensom life,
If this sovereign Balsom he gains*
This will make a man bear all the Plag^s of a Wife,
And of Rags, and Diseases in Chains.
It swells all our Veins with a kind purple flood,
And puts Love and great Thoughts in the mind:
There's no Peasant so rank, but it fills with good blood,
And to gallantry makes hi^ inclined.
There's nothing our Hearts with such Joy can bewitch,
For on Earth 'tis a Power that*s Divine;
Without it, we're wretched though never so Rich,
Nor is any man Poor tha^ has Wine.
Pox! This is a pretty Musical business; but this will not make a man merry --
I'll sing you a Song: Fill the Glasses first. Come on. When I sing Down, down,
Then you must all drink --

I Love some body, I love no body,
Some body, no body dearly:
I love some body, c.
Be she black, or be she brown,
She's the best in all the Town,
So she keep her Belly down.
Down, down, down down:
There's no fault to be found,
So she keep her Belly down.
Hah! I think this is well, hah!


A very merry fellow -- Give me thy hand.


I am your most humble Servant to comman^ -- I love a brave fellow with my
heart.


Come on, I have provided some Entertainment instead of a Dance -- you shall
see my two new Soldiers Exercised -- fetch'em in Sergeant --


You have found out an admirable way to plague an old cowardly Usurer, to make
a Soldier of him --


I warrant I shall plague him e're I have done with him.


This is an excellent Trick found out for 'em.


Well, There's Law, Sir -- yet -- I say.


'Sheart, does he talk of Law again? Knock him o'th'head.


Hold, hold, I say no more --


Next Tide he takes Boat, and away for Flanders.


Oh! honest Gripe! Art thou turned Soldier? Thou art a good hopeful Musketeer
of thy age.


A very pretty old Fellow, and stands lustily under a Musket.


A brave old Soldier, i'faith! Can thou stare a Cann^n in the face?


What's that to you, you Coxcombs -- Well, I shall out-live this, Rogues; and
all this may turn to my profit in the end.


Order your Arms --

Did you ever see such dull Rascals? order your arms thus, set 'em down -- Take
that to make you remember another time


I must suff^r! there's no re^edy.


Poise your Muskets.


What a Devil must we do now?


Poise your Muskets thus, you Rascals -- Pox on you for dull Rogues.


Well, so we do: What a Devil would you have?


What with both hands?


In one hand, thus.


Well, thus then?


Shoulder.


That's the wrong shoulder --


On the other shoulder! ye Blockheads, you have less sense than Statues --


Ay -- I am so dull, you had better let me go --


I'll make you do it -- Shoulder, I say. March.


I thank you Sir, -- with all my heart -- that -- we will march --


We'll march well enough, I warrant you.


Is that your marching? Take up your Arms, Rogues, I'll run you through else --
take 'em up I say --


Well -- well -- what a Devil would you have? Did you not bid us march?


I'll make you march against the mouth of a Cannon, before I have done.


O damned T^rant, I must try to compound with him.


This is admirable Discipline indeed, Captain.


Sir Christopher, Mr. Bl^nderbus and Heildebrand, take car^, and shift for your
selves. There are Threescore Bailiffs waiting for you in the Street, and they
have beset the House round, that there is no possibility of escaping --


O Heaven! what shall I do? if I be once carried to Goal, I shall lye and rot
there. Hold, let me see --


We shall starve if we go to Prison --


Let us think of some way, They are too many for us to beat.


Captain, if you would but do us the favour to send for three Red Coats, and
own us to be your Soldiers, we may escape.


A rare way.


An excellent way; good Captain favour us.


My Footmen have a Bundle of red Coats here; but I cannot in Honour pass you
for my Soldiers, unless you be so -- if you will take each a Shilling of me
and be listed, you may* otherwise I can do you no good.


With all our hearts.


With all our hearts.


With all our hearts.


There's 12 d. a peace, Serje^nt take their Names -- I shall order them too --
I'll teach 'em to roar and bully up and down the Town. Get their Coats and
Bandeleers on.


Come on Comrades, fellow Soldiers, give me your hands all -- The more the
merrier*


How now saucy Rogue -- Do you long very much for a broken -- head --


You may command all my House, and I beg of you to make it your own while you
stay in England.


I give you humble thanks.


So -- how do these Accoutrements become us?


Oh rarely -- you are the feirce^t Soldiers I have seen*


Now, noble Captain, we'll march under your Command.


A Soldier must I be? Here's company for the Devil.


Come! we'll go into the Court-yard* There I'll exercise ye, and send for the
Head-Bailiff, and let him know ye are my Soldiers.


Very well, I vow, that will do rarely --


Come Gentlemen, in the mean time, we'll to the Women; your Servant, Captain.


Your Servant* Was ever design so well begun, and so hopefully carried on? They
all take me for my Twin*Brother.


I that know you both, don't wonder at it.


Come Soldiers March -- March, I say --


PRithee, Sir Humphrey, let*s not leave off our Dehau^h* but drink on: we have
just wound our selves up, and tun'^ our Instruments, and now we give over
playing.


'Tis unreasonable -- I would as soon turn my back upon a Woman I was in love
with, just as I had gotten her consent, or run away when a Battle were first
joined, as leave my Bottle now.


I do confess I am an Epicurean in this, and in every thing. I'd go no further
than the pleasing of my Senses: I would have just so much Wine, as would give
me an Appetite to Woman, and just so much Woman, as would give me a desire to
Wine.


After a Bottle and a half, the man that says Consider, is my Foe.


This has but raised me --

You only Court, and keep a pother
To make me Gamesome for another*

Faith Gentlemen*We have had the best of our selves; we have drawn off the
Spirit, and nothing but the Lees remain.


We have but just kindled the fire and you would put it out.


Rather than that should put me out --


No; 'twill make our Souls burn clearer. Do but consider, that none but Fools
are merry without Wine, such unthinking Coxcombs as ^re extremely pleased with
their own foolish persons.


But the thinking man comes to good (...), and that pulls him back in the
height of his Career, (...) makes us think what frail Engines we are: But Wine
makes us (...) with the Coxcombs, merry and pleased with our selves.


A man of sense is (...), because he must make the best* I (...) Market; but
Fool^ are never truly pleased, they find themselves despised by those they
really admire; for Wit is ^n Idol of all; and Fools only hate witty men, as ^
poor ma^ does a rich one.


I know not whether they're pleased; but they laugh and make a noise, as if
they were merry.


So Children that ar^ afraid of Spirits sing and make a noise in the dark, but
are devillishly afraid for all that; and Coxcombs are damnably dull and sad for
all their laughing; and eve^ when they drink, They have the Pain, but never the
pleasure of Drunkenness.


A man would think Coxcombs the serenest Animals breathing; yet sure if they be
happy, they are so for ought they know --


Pox on 'em, let 'em be what they will: but nothing but Wine can make us merry;
and therefore to our Celery again.


We Northern people that want the Sun without, ought indeed to put good store
of Wine, and create a Sun within us.


That's right, to our Celery again, I say,


'Tis pleasant while it is Flood within us; but we shall Ebb, and grow dull
standing Water after a little while.


Prithee don't think to similize us out of our Bottles --


Nay, if you be resolved, you shall find me Coy no longer --


I knew he would* come to it at last: But thou art such a Jilting Drunkard --


Let's in then, if you will not, let me take the air a little.


Air! Open the Window* and take it that way --


I bring you News that will stop you in your Career of mirth -- I can scarce
tell it you for weeping.


What means the fellow --


I little thought to live to see this day --


Pox o* your Formality! out with your dismal News --


All your Land in Essex is extended by your Creditors. And your Furniture the
richest in the County all seized upon.


What says th^ (...)? --


Would you had tak^ the Fool's counsel, it had not been so. I remember when my
old Master purchased it, and little thought I should have seen it go out of the
Family; and now ther^ (...) ^o remedy* for all the Land you had free, you have
this day (...) our Mistress -- Whore.


*Sdeath is this true thou tell me?


Too true, would Heaven it were not; your Bailiff who is turned out of
Possession, is come up with the News: And all this Money is run out to Rogues,
from whom you have take^ up Commodities upon Judgments; most of which you sold
again for half value --


This is surprising News! what a damp it has struck upon me -- I begin to come
to my self now.


Many a good Christmas has my old Master kept there, and must it now be parted
from his Family --


Gentlemen, my Friends -- if you would oblige me so much as to be bound with me
for a Sum of Money to stop these ravenous Creditors mouths for the present, I
will sell my Timber, and redeem my House and Land afterwards, and secure you in
the mean time.


How Sir! be Bound -- hum -- your Steward says, you have no Land to give
Counter-Security with -- I should be glad to serve you --


I'll venture my life for you, whenever you command me; but for being Bound you
must excuse me. I have taken an Oath against that: besides, if I would, you
cannot give CounterSecurity --


So! This is the world, I find; yet I could not have believed the Companions of
all my Pleasures and Extravagancies could have thus deserted me -- I thank you
Gentlemen, for clearing my Understanding. 'Tis time to be Sober now: Well -- I
will try some sudden way; A desperate ill, must have a desperate cure --
Farewell.


So -- What is become now of my Employment? 'tis not worth above six hours
purchase. That I should live till now. --


So here ends all our Revelling in this House: This is a sudden turn.


Beyond my expectation! what a Coxcomb he was to run out thus!


Indeed, I never thought he had much in him; he had but ordinary Sense at the
best; but this was such a Folly, I am ashamed of him.


We must even leave his Company; but this Wench Celia runs in my mind. I must
have her at any rate: though I keep --


I am in the same condition; and if we do keep- we must watch 'em from young
Officers; or they'll run devillishly astray else.


Whatever these Officers do abroad -- I am sure they are always invading the
Territories of the Keepers at home --


Though they are in a friends Country, they will make Excursions for forage of
that kind -- But let us seek out these pretty Whores --


'Slife! what shall I do? these Wenches will overrun me.


Dear Captain, I must confess for all my Modesty, that I am transported at the
Assurance which you give me of having your Love -- I am not ashamed to say, You
are the first that ever won my heart, and shall be the last to whom I ever will
give it.


And 'tis a Treasure I will never part with: Come seal the Promise with a kiss.


O! thou sweet Creature. I can deny thee nothing.


We are so vexed with that troublesome Creature, Chloris, who watches us.


This House is large, and in the Evening! if you'll meet in the farther end of
the long Gallery. There is a Room where we may discourse further of our Love.


Discourse! I hate Discourse, I am too vigorous for that -- I shall so -- kiss
thee there --


Well! Thou art a pretty Rogue, I vow --


How, kissing her!


Yonder's that envious Creature: Farewell, at Eight in the Gallery --


Oh my dear sweet one, now that malicious Woman's gone, I can tell thee how I
love thee.


Me! what did you kiss her for then?


The poor thing is so fond, she would kiss me; but I ^hall make such an Ass of
her.


Nay! will you though, dear Captain?


Will I? why, I hate her Person and Conditions: Methinks she's ugly.


Indeed, I think she is not handsome, that's the short and the long on it.


Handsome! Thou art an Angel to her! Oh how I love thy Beauty and thy Shape --


Nay! be quiet now -- I vow you make me blush --


Oh dear Rogue! That I were in bed with Thee and the Cand^es out, and blush
what thou could.


Well, I cannot help telling of you, you are the prettiest Man I ever saw.


Thou know not half that's in me! we are watched now -- But meet me at the
farther end of the long Gallery this Night at Eight, and you shall find me a
Lion --


And you would have me your Lamb then. Well, I'll meet and venture -- Here
comes Madam Phillis -- Farewell.


Here's another! No Mortal Captain could tell what to do with these Three: (As
gad save me) 'tis unreasonable.


Sweet Captain, I have blu^h't sufficiently at the little Billet I gave you; I
scarce have Confidence enough to see you after it.


Dear fair one, If you had not resolved to see me, your Letter had been in
vain; if I could tell you my Transport at the reading of it, I should be more
Eloquent than Sir Formal himself*


Can you forgive my Confidence?


I am sure 'tis so much to my advantage, that I should never have forgiven your
Bashful^ulness.


This is excess of Generosity.


Bashfulness in Love! you prevented me, or you should have seen I was not
bashful.


But that I feared your sudden Departure for Fla^ders, you should have learned
my Love from other Signs --


Depart for Flanders! while my dear Mrs. is here! It cannot be; I'll this Night
give up my Commission.


My Dear! you are not sure in earnest?


Upon my Honour, Madam -- I am. Sir Humphrey has made me promise him to lye
here this Night: My Chamber is at the farther end of the Gallery, at Eight if
you'll meet me there, I'll show you I am in earnest; by this Kiss I will!


Sure there's Wi^chcraft in you, that you should charm me thus.


I confess 'tis ungrateful, Sir Humphrey has so obliged me --


Ne'er think on that; who shall tell him? I fear we are watched -- Farewell -- at
Eight --


Good constant Turtles these kept Ladies are, I*ll say that for 'em: And good
charitable public spirited men the Keepers to maintain women, as they wear
Perfumes for the use of others --

Oh Sergeant! what effect of your Negotiation with my Husband?


Very little; for when I told him my Captain's Proposals to have the 3000 l.
his Sister brought, paid back, or 400 l. a year seperate maintenance, be
started, stamped and stared like a man distracted: He bid me knock him on the
head, shoot him -- cut his Throat, or what I would -- I had better do it, then
give him such Words --


Indeed that was very ill language to give him.


I told him at last, there was no other Composition to be made, but he must
this Tide for Flanders; and you would take all the care that could be to put
him upon such desperate Actions as might bring him to be knocked of the head,
and that if he did not meet death that way, he should be sure to have it from
my Captain's hand, for the Injuries he had done his Sister: I left him Cursing,
and in Despair.


'Tis a great question whether he had rather dye, or part with the Money: But
I'll try one Experiment more, and if I cannot get it by Stratagem, away he goes
with my Brother to Flanders: And my last refuge shall be open Force, I'll even
take possession of his Writings, and rob him: I'll exercise him first, and
swinge my Bullies too. Have you a File of Musketeers ready in case of
Resistance?


I have.


Come on --


I have found you out, to confer with you about something that concerns our
Honour, and our Love.


And I am to tell you of something that concerns my Honour, and your want of
Love.


How Madam?


Do you think I am to be valued at the rate of the ordinary ill-bred kept
things of the Town.


I have not valued you so! What does she mean?


You must know Sir -- I look upon my self to be in a manner your Lady --


Very well -- I have been a fine Coxcomb.


And do you imagine that I, who am in a manner your Lady will suffer such
Debauchery and Wickedness in my House?


How long has it been your House?


Since yesterday; and 'tis as much mine, as if it had descended from my
Ancestors these 500 years.


To whose bounty do you owe it?


To no bounty; I owe it to my own Beauty, and those Charms that made you settle
it on me, and my Faith and Constancy has deserved it fully --


Most exc^llent!


Shall I throw away the flower of all my youth, and re^ist all the temptations
of the fine Gentlemen about the Town, without those usual Settlements which
Ladies of my Condition have: In short, I am to let you know 'tis my House, and
I will have no Abominations ^ommitted here! it goes against my Conscience.


So -- I have parted with most part of my Estate, and Liberty to boot! Oh
negligence, and want of thinking.


To have you and your lewd Companions Sotting and Drinking, and using all
Licentiousness. But above all, to have Whores brought into my House too! such
filthy Creatures, whom you know I hate with all my heart* it melts me into
tears to think on it --


^e mollified, good Madam; I hope the Sin you speak of is not so great; for
your sake --


Do you think I will dishonour my self any longer, to suffer those little
ill-bred Kept-things, Celia and Chloris, to come to my House? No! your Sisters
and your Mother shall be welcome to me; provided they give me that respect which
is due to me: I intend to visit and keep Company with none but Persons of
Quality --


Pray Madam, who is it that has kept you?


My Beauty, and my Merit; not your Bounty --


And are not you a Tailor's Daughter?


My Fortune makes me of a good Family, and you must know, Sir -- I have been
kept so long, that I look upon my self as your Lady now.


See the damned Insolence and Unreasonableness of these Creatures called
Whores; if a man keeps 'em from starving one year, they'd plague a man ever
after. If I mistake not, you have told me that you loved me.


Yes, till your wicked Courses have provoked me beyond all measure! and
therefore pray consider of it, and give me an answer, if you resolve to persist
-- pray quit my House. Farewell --


O damned Whore! I have a way to circumvent thee though: I must plague my self
to punish Thee --


Come! Where are my Soldiers? I must lose no time, but exercise you often; for
we shall enter upon Action as soon as we come in Flanders --


I am not for Flanders, nor any Action; but Actions upon the Case.


Heart! does he mutter? Tie him neck and heels quickly --


Hold, hold -- you'll stifle me. I am so stiff I cannot bend. Hold, I say, I
will obey.


Come Captain, you have done enough with us; now you have owned us before the
Bailiffs. Let us go, we'll go to the Temple or Alsacia for refuge till the
Business be over.


Good Bully Captain, you over-acted your Part, and laid on too hard before the
Bailiffs though -- let me tell you that.


You broke my head; I do not use to put it up, but upon this occasion.


I must keep strict Discipline amongst my Soldiers, you shall find that was
nothing.


'Tis no matter, let that pass; but now Captain, let's be in earnest, and go
you along and sup with us in White-Fryers, we'll have Fiddles and Whores to
entertain you, and roar like Dragons, and be as merry and as mad as Lightning.

Be she black* or be she brown,
She's the best in all the Town.
How now, old Fool? How do you like a Souldier's life?


Come Gentlemen, no fooling; you have received the King's Money, and his
Clothes, and I will make you know you are my Souldier^ -- Stand to your Arms
all!


Hah -- What a Devil does he say?


Handle your Arms, all: Dam'me! what am I disobeyed?


'Sheart! my Head and Shoulders! prithee Captain leave fooling. What a Devil,
are you mad?


Death! Handle your Arms all -- I'll make you know your Officer.


Ounds! if you strike again, I'll draw --


Out comes Porker, if you strike once more.


Prithee Captain leave off, you have carried o^ the Frolic long enough.


Nay then have at you! Musketeers make ready.


Make ready? ha! what a D^vil do you mean?


Present.


Hold! hold! I'll obey.


Hold, hold -- we'll obey.


Hold, hold -- we'll obey.


'Sdeath you Dogs* no trifling with me! shall such Rascals as you think it
enough to be Drunk, and Swagger, beat B^wds, kick Drawers, squabble with
Constables and Watches, break Windows, and triumph in Drunken Brawls and
Street-quarrels, and never serve your Country? -- If you have Valour, I ll
make you turn it that way.


Good Captain, we did not think you would have used us thus! we did not intend
to be Soldiers; we only desired to be protected by you -- for this present
Occasion --


What ever you intended, my Company is not complete, and I'll make you know you
are the King's Soldiers now -- I shall protect no Rascally Poultroons -- if any
thing can do it -- do brav^ly, and your valour may defend you; Death! shall such
idle lazy Scoundrels bully, and roar and boast of drunken bloodless quarrels
here at Home -- While we lye hard, suffer weary marches, and fight all in
blood, for our Country abroad, hah! --


Very fine! we have brought our selves into a pretty Condition.


Pox on your Project, we had as good have been in the Bailiffs hands.


This damned C^ptain -- has ten Bullies in him --


Who the Devil -- would have thought it? a little pitisul^ fellow -- I thought
I could have beaten two of him --


Ground your Arms.


Thank you, good Captain, with all my heart; shaw! Pox I knew he did this but
to try us. Come, all's well now --


Tie 'em neck and heels in^tantly.


Nay, prithee Captain don't fool with us any more now.


Sergeant, see it done.


You shall find 'tis no fooling --


Why Captain, what a Devil?


What a Pox!


Is the Devil in you?


This is for example: Next mutiny I'll hang ye!


Now Rogues and Bulli^s, why don't you sing and roar now? How do you like
Soldiers lives now?


Why look you, Comrades, This 'tis to want experience in your Duty! you must
learn to ride the wooden*Horse, once or twice a day too.


Why Captain -- good Captain.


Captain, Zounds, Captain.


Why Captain -- Death and Heart --


No remorse yet! What you old Villain, you are resolved not to do my Sister
Right, and return her Portion, or settle her Jointure on her presently --


Ounds! part with 3000 l. I had rather dye.


And that by Heaven thou shalt do; nay more, she shall take possession of thy
Writings, thy Money, and thy Pawns; and satisfy her self.


How's that? That's worst of all --


Oh Gentlemen! where are you? you are turned Soldiers, I hear: you have almost
killed me amongst you, and won my Money, a deuce take ye! My Celia will be
dreadful angry, I am afraid.


Rogue! we shall meet you.


I am glad to see you in this Condition, now one may safely keep you Company.


How now Sirrah! who are you? a Soldier in no condition is to be laughed at, by
such an Insect, a Maggot as thou art.


A Maggot! an Insect -- I am a Knight, Sir.


You are a Rascal, Sir! take that --


Nay! I have done, Captain, -- if you be angry, I beg your Pardon, I am going
to find out my Mistress, Farewell, Sir -- I am sure they have made me cruel
Sick, a poise take 'em.


Good Captain, let us be untied! we'll obey --


Good Captain, let us be untied! we'll obey --


Prithee dear Captain do -- I will be correspondent to command, and be a gentle
Spirit.


Untie 'em --

This is call*d a Receipt to tame a Bully -- I shall show you there's more than
roaring goes to true Valour: Come, Handle your Arms --

Poise your Mus^ets -- awk^d Rascals!

Shoulder all -- Now, Puppy, the wrong shoulder, Sot. [ To Sir Chr. Rest your
Arms.

To the Right -- Now old fool, can you not tell your right hand from your left
yet?


What will become of me? I cannot bear this! Heaven deliver me from this damned
Tyrant; my Wife will rob me too, that's worst of all --


You are the strangestawkard old Fellow, Comrade, that ever I saw -- learn of
me --


To the right! to the right! now Rascal you are to the left.


Well, well -- what a Devil would you have?


To the left, to the left! so, so -- Now march -- very well -- you will come on
I see in time -- Sergeant, March 'em to their Quarters here in this House; and
set a Sentinel over every one of'em.


I will Captain. Come march --


I do not find that this old Fellow mollifies at all; yet I'll try one
Experiment more upon him, and if he relents not, my Brother carries him in
earnest.


'Tis Eight a clock, sure the Captain's come by this time! I hope I have not
made him stay -- 'Tis very dark --


It has struck Eight, where is this dear, sweet Captain -- I hope he is
punctual to his assignation --


Ha -- I hear a noise of some body -- who's there?


'Tis I, my Dear!


Where are you?


Here! Give me yourhand --


Oh my sweet Captain. Both together.


Dear, dear Captain. Both together.


Ha! who's this, a Woman?


Heaven what's this, a Gown and Petticoat?


Mercy upon me, who are you?


What's that to you, I will not'tell you, a malicious Slut, to watch me and
spoil my Assignation --


Oh! Thou poor envious Fool, Thou expect to meet the Captain, I know thee --
Vengeance on this Fool --


Yes! and so do I you; and wonder you should be such a Fool to expect the
Captain: He meet such a one as Thee?


This is the place and time of meeting, now for my pretty dear Captain.


Thee! poor inconsiderable Creature! He laughs at Thee to my knowledge.


Did he tell you so?


Yes, he did -- he scorns Thee for thy Folly, and loathes Thee for thy Person.


Thou bely'st him! He scorns thy words! my Person! 'tis an other -- guess
Person than thine: I'd have thee to know I am sure he hates Thee.


'Slife I have escaped a fine discovery of my self to these two Wenches. They
are my Rivals, and are quarrelling for the Captain here.


I wonder at thy Confidence, to think the Captain should meet thee! He
appointed me to meet him at this time here, about a little Business --


A little Business -- I know your Business -- but he has no such Intention --
prithee Impudence begone, he appointed me to meet him here, where I was to
confer with him, without being troubled with Thee --


You confer!


What say They -- This must be false -- They are conceited! Vain Sluts! I am
sure he would meet none but me -- I'll rout 'em out of my House, I am sure --


If I could see thee, I'd pull thy eyes out --


Fool begone -- I laugh at Thee.


How shall I send 'em away, and get the Captain to my Self?


I hear some body! Who's there -- Captain -- my Dear!


Thy Dear -- here am I, Captain.


I am the Devil come to meet you both --


Oh Lord.


Help --


How now! what's the matter here?


Oh unlucky time! must he come too! Nothing my Dear, but I played the Rogue,
and frighted these two in the dark.


Am I discovered to her -- oh mischief --


Must she over-hear me. I could have born the other down, if she had Spoken of
it --


Since you are grown so pious -- I have brought a Lea^ned Churchman to confer
with you about a Case of Conscience, I have been in every Room in the House to
find you out, pray come along with me --


I obey.


Oh Heaven and Ear^h! is the perfidious Jade my Wife here? were ever two so
like in Face and Nature, as these accursed Twins --


My Dear, look not so strangely on me -- for I am sadly sensible of my own
rashness, and your great Injuries from my cruel Brother.


What's the meaning of this -- I will, if possible, make use of her to get my
liberty, and if I can get her home to me, I'll murder her --


I am come full of Sorrow and Repentance, having been at my Brother's Lodging
ever since the moment of my Escape; and not hearing of your usage till now --
if you will pardon me, I will propound some means for your Liberty, and go home
and submit wholly to your pleasure --


My dearest Wife! now thou art thy self again -- I shall be transported to
receive thee into my Arms.

I think strangling will be a very good Death -- for her as can be --


Can thou forgive me, Dearest?


O yes, my Dear, and love thee as well as ever I did -- Or if I should run her
through with my Sword, and say she killed her self --


I would go for my Lord Chief Justices Warrant, and raise the Town, but I'd
release Th^e; but my rash Brother knowing what my Conjugal affections would
prompt me to, when I came to solicit for your Liberty, he put me under the
hands of his Sergeant, and I am as much confined as you: The time grows short,
and we must think of some sudden way to prevent your Voyage --


Dear heart! I can never reward thee enough for thy kindness to me -- if we get
home again together, thou shalt be as free as thou can wish to be --

Let me see, a small knitting Needle under her left Arm when she's asleep* will
do the business rarely --

What can thou propound for me to do? my dearest Heart.


There's no way left, but to seem to comply with him; for he is re^olutely bent
--


Comply! what to go for Flanders?


No -- in that ^ettlement he proposes for me.


Mercy on me! What 3000 l. or 400 l. a year separate Maintenance! oh -- I shall
^aint! y have struck me dead. 'Sheart! what a Sum is that?


I have a small Brandy-Bottle, '^is Soldier-like, and very Comfortable.


'Tis nothing in thy Wealth.


Nothing! Damnation! knock me o'th head, or cut my Throat -- If I should
smother her with a Bolster, and give out she died of an Apoplexj! that's the
most secret way I have thought on yet.

If you love me, why d^d you not refuse that settlement?


I did, and told him I would not accept on it! at which he was enraged, and told
me, though I was a Fool for my self, he would not be so for me; he was resolved
you should do it, or suffer the last extremity; and he's so inflamed, he may
for ought I know throw thee overboard in the Voyage, if thou refuse.


Let him do it: Ounds, 3000 l. or 400 l. a year! let him do it, let him do it, let
him do it, I say.


Why my Dear! if thou sign'st that Deed, I'll return it thee again. And be thy
most obedient Wife.


Poor Rogue! wilt thou? that's kind indeed; prithee kiss me, my pretty Dear:
Thou overjoy'st me with thy Love!

Hah -- I have thought on the be^t way, if I can get her home with me, I'll
give her Opium in her drink, and that ne'er a Doctor or Surgeon on 'em all
can discover, when they open her. Ay, it shall be so! --


The least thing I could hear him propound, was to seize upon thy Jewels and
thy Deeds, and secure 'em in a Friend's hands of his, till he had reduced you
to comply.


O Devil! that's worst of all.


Trust me, we are one flesh, our interests are one: I shall restore Thy Deed,
and be subject; for my Conscience will not let me part from Thee, though the
rashness of my passion made ^e fly.


Poor Lamb! if I had thee sase at home, I'd ne'er give thee Occasion more:
prithee go to thy damned Brother, and try to mollify ^im f^rther, while I
retire and consider of this.


I will, my Dear -- one kiss first.


Oh! 'tis a Dear Soul!

Well, she takes Opium, that's certain; for while she lives, I shall never be
at rest from this Devilish Rascal her Brother.


Go into your Quarter! come Madam --


If you don't sind me as obsequious, and as kind a Keeper as the best of 'em --



I must confess you speak reasonably, and like a Gentleman. But I shall break
Sir (...)'s heart --


You have broken his Fortune, and when that's gone, 'tis no matter for his
heart.


That indeed is undeniable, and I can no longer resist those Charm^ which
before subdued me.


I must confess you speak so like a worthy person, and show such signs of Love
to me, that I cannot but think you the finest person in the world; but Sir
Christopher will kill me if I should le^ve him.


Let me alone to defend the heart I gain: Besides, he's undone! a beggarly
fellow, and is going a Redcoat into Fland^rs.


Indeed he has been extravagant, and run out a great part of his Estate; and I
hate a man that has run out his Fortune: I vow I do, with my heart.


Ah my Dear, art thou there? I am come at last to thee, pretty one.


Get you gon, you drunken Sot; you were drunk with Bulli^s, and lost your Watch
and Ring.


Why look you there, I thought what 'twould come to: As I hope to be saved I
could not help it; They wo^ld have killed me if I had not drank and played with
them, and I knew you would have been very angry, if I had been killed.


Get you gone, you impertinent Coxcomb! must you come and interrupt me, when I
am talking with a Gentleman; have you no breeding?


Well, well, say no more. I'll stand by* and wait till you have done.


Call in all my Servan^s. Now all this Company take notice, I am married to
this Lady -- Here's the Canonical Officer that executed us.


I did Marry 'em as the Church appoints.


How Married!


To his Wench?


Gentlemen, you seem to wonder at my proceeding! I found my self involved on a
sudden, beyond any other redemption, and therefore chose this, which I hope
will set me free. This shepyrat had robbed me of what my extravagance had left
free, and I have taken Letters of Reprisal, and have gotten my own again.


I wish you Joy.


Much happiness to you.


She is the greatest Fortune I could have gotten, nor do I know why a Man
should not fit a Woman that perhaps may last him his life time, and yet draw on
a Shoe that he is to wear but two days before he take it.


I wish your Ladyship much Joy; 'tis a great honour to our Function to have one
of it so advanced.


I wish your Ladyship much Happiness -- but there's no Wife lives like one of
us -- let me tell her that.


Sir Humphrey, I have sudden Orders from the General to Embark this Tide with
my Soldiers; I came hearing of your Marriage, to wish you joy, and take my
leave of you --


Sir, I humbly thank you, and wish you a good Voyage.


Now I desire all this good Company to be Witnesses to the Agreement made
between me, and this Lady.


What a Pox does he say?


It is agreed by and between the Parties above mentioned, that I am to have the
sole use of this Ladies Person, to my own proper behoof, paying the Sum of 400
l. a year, and buying a pretty convenient Coach and Horses: what say you?


It is a bargain.


Oh damned confounded Jade, wilt t^ou leave me?


Good words Red-Coat, or I'll cut your Throat.


You are going for a Soldier, and leaving me.


Ay! you are going for a Soldier! what would you have her do? I warrant you
won't take my Celia at this; I'll trust her pretty Rogue --


You damned Impudent Rascal! must you prate? Sirrah! take that.


Ay! 'tis no matter, I have not lost my Mistress.


Now hear us a little: Item, It is articled and agreed between this Lady and
me, that I am to use, possess and enjoy the Tenement of of her Person without
any let, hinderance, or molestation whatsoever, buying a Coach and Horses, as
aforesaid; and paying the annual Rent of 400 l. per annum, of lawful Money of
England; half yearly by true and equal portions* The first payment to be made
at the Temple-Hall, at the Feast of the Annun^iation, and the next at the Feast
of St. Michael.


Hold Sir! not so fast, I forbid the Banes! she's mine! why I have spent half
my Estate upon her.


Stand away, poor Coxcomb! what say you Madam.


It is a Match.


O Lord! Oh Lord! will you serve me so? what will become of me?


Go! get you home, and live civilly with your Wife; and look after your
Children as an honest man should. 'Tis time.


Ay -- It may thank you that I did not do it before, that it may -- I will go
hide my head in a hole, and ne'er be seen again.


Come Sergeant! get the Barge ready.


What a Devil shall I do? If I Seal that Deed, and ever get her into my
Custody, I'll have it again, and her life to boot.


Gentlemen and Ladies, your humble Servant.


Hold, hold -- If there be no remedy, I will Seal that Deed --


Come on then! do it, and I'll release you.


I deliver this as my Act and Deed.


Now Gentlemen, be pleased to witness it --


With all my heart --


So! Now there remains another thing! you must release these Gentlemen for
their Riot at your H^use, or go still.


Well -- I do release 'em.


Good Sir! do not release me; for I must go home and starve with him -- I had
better go and be killed with you.


No -- I retain you as my Servant. And now good Mr. Gripe, your much abused
Wife is free, and thanks you for her Liberty.


O Devil! Is it she all this while?


A Woman!


Yes Ladies, I am; but wish my self a Man, for your sakes, and my own.


How this Mistake was carried?


I'll bring my Brother to thank* you for your favours to me, and then you'll
Mistake as much.


Am I thus Cozened -- I'll go home, and starve to Death. The Devil take you all
-- and so farewell --


Cudgeled and beaten thus damnably by a Woman! I hope She Captain, you will
release us now --


Yes go -- I'll have no Bullies in my Company now.


'Sheart! were ever men so dishonoured as we!


Beaten and bruised by a Woman!


As for that damned Jade, I will s^owr and break her Windows every night in the
year.


Now all ye Husbands, let me Warn ye!

If you'd preserve your Honours, or your Lives;
Ne'er dare be Tyrants over your Lawful Wives.

WHo dares deny the Poet his applause
When I am Champion, and assert his cause?
Let him be Bully, ne'er so stout and tall,
'Sdeath I'll not fear the briskest of ye all:
No, though ye Rant and Roar, and sometimes Fight,
I've that which never fails to do me right.
Your would-be Wits love what is slight and bright
In Tinsel-wit, just like their own delight,
And Plays like Birth-day Suits, made for a Night,
These are o'rejoy'd to have a jest at hand
That costs but little Wit to understand.
Good sense, like solid Meat to sickly Men,
As soon as swallowed, is thrown up again;
And for strong Meats, but few of ye are fit,
Who to meet Wit, should come with equal Wit,
And faith of late, that's but thin sown in the Pit.
He found by*s last, you would not like what's good,
Though it was praised by all that understood.
Remembering how you used that last he writ,
He made this Low, so to your Level sit;
Plenty of Noise, and scarcity of Wit --
The Devil's in you all, if this don't hit:
Yet after all, if any one there be
So careless of his Life to anger me,
In daring to dispraise the Play, or Action,
There take my Glove, for I ll have Satisfaction.

