OUR Poet never doubts the good success
Of Farce that's in half French, half English dress:
And this was made with little pains and wit,
As any cobbling Poet e're wrote yet,
And therefore he's resolved not to submit.
The Fortune of his Fellows he has seen,
Who in dull Farce have so successful been,
That could he write true wit, he is in doubt
Whether you would endure to sit it out.
But though he has no wit, he has some shame,
And stealing from the French conceals his name.
French Plays, in which true wit's as rarely found
As Mines of Silver are in English ground;
A foolish Marquess, or his knavish man,
Or some poor Pudding fool's the best they can. --
But stay, I've been to bold; methinks I see
The English Monsieurs rise in mutiny,
Crying confound him, does he damn French Plays,
The only Pieces that deserve the Baize:
France that on fashions does strict Laws impose,
The Universal Monarchy for Clothes,
That rules our most important part, our dress,
Should rule our wit, which is a thing much less.
But Messieurs he says, farther to provoke ye,
He would as soon be Author of Tu Quoque,
As any Farce that e're from France was sent,
And all considered 'tis a complement,
And yet he hopes the advantages they gain,
That he may please ye with small stock of brain:
For our good natured Nation thinks it fit,
To count French Toys, good Wares; French nonsense, wit.

WHat a devil makes thee in so musty a humour? Thou art as dull and dump^ as a
fellow that had been drunk over night with Ale, and had done no^ng but drunk
Coffee, talked Politics, and read Gazettes all this morning.


Hast lost thy money, or thy wench?


Nay faith Hazard, if he has lost his money, I am sure he has lost his wench,
in spite of the noble virtue of constancy.


Come Theodore a lucky hand or two at the Groom Porters, will get thee as good
a Mistress as any about the Town.


No pox on it they are kept so high by foolish elder Brothers, that poor younger
Brothers must despair of 'em.


No Rant, thou art mistaken, the Elder Brothers are so kind to keep 'em for the
younger, that can not do it for themselves; they are civil to the one for love,
and the other for money.


I am not of your opinion, there was never so much ready money and so little
love stirring, as at this time.


Faith then we (that have but shallow purses) must three or four club for one,
she'll serve us all, considering how we drink. Come Theodore be not melancholy,
if thou hast lost thy Mistress, I'll club with thee for another.


So Gentlemen, ^his Dialogue run^ off very smartly; you had rehearsed it
before, but I find you have the effects of last nights debauch upon you, and
are hot headed this morning, what else should make you think me melancholy?


Come faith, thou art.


I must confess Gentlemen I am not in so brisk a humour as to leap over
Joynt-stooles, or come over a stick for the King, or any of those pretty
frolics; but I have no trouble, unless you will create me one.


I am so far from that, that I'll tell thee news that will rejoice the heart of
thee, if thou were as dumpish as a young Spark that is newly denied to be
trusted for a white Periwig.


Prithee what's that?


That which I am sure you'll bite at.


There is the most delicate, charming creature, come to lye over against us in
Bow-street! Oh tis a melting Girl, she looks as if she would dissolve like an
Anchovee in Claret.


She would relish better (when a man has the hot fit upon him) than small Beer
in a Fever.


Than small Beer a pox on it, she would be more welcome to thee than a Reprieve
would, if thou were just now trolling out Hopkins and Sternhold upon a Ladder.


You are mighty witty, and, full of similes; but who the Devil is this
incomparable Lady?


Pox on it, thou art as testy as an old Lean Judge fasting, upon the Bench,
between eleven and twelve.


I'll put him into a better humour; with this young Lady, is Mrs* Cheatly,
party per pale Match-maker, and Baud, got acquainted, and has promised to bring
her to a Ball at the Bear at Charing-Cross, where you know there is a very
convenient Couch.


Oh she's a delicate bit for him that can get her, she's fit for one of us
honest Fellows to debauch, and for a dull rich Fellow (born to the drudgery of
Plowing Land and getting Heirs) to Marry.


But (if you be not too much transported to tell me) Pray who is this young
Lady?


Why, 'tis one Isabella that lies over against our Lodging at the Blew
Balcone.


'Sdeath what said he?


How now, are you nettled? Gad I'll lay my life this Rogue has been before-hand
with us.


No faith Gentlemen, but this Lady I have seen, and know she has some qualities
very unfit for your Company.


What are those Man?


Damned unfashionable qualities, called virtue, and modesty.


Pish, but if she be not too much seasoned with virtue in this warm age, she
cannot keep long.


Indeed but she will, in spite of that Villainous Seducer Cheatly, whose
Clutches scarce any young Lady can escape.


Prithee speak not against thy Mother-in-Law, thou had the debauching of her
Daughter Lattice.


I the debauching of her; she was debauched from her Mothers Womb, she has it
ex Traduce.


I'll hold thee ten pound Cheatly brings this Lady to Supper, for all her
virtue, and modesty.


'Sdeath Sir, I know she cannot, shall not do it.


On my Conscience he's in downright abominable love with this Lady.


Well, because you are a couple of good honest Fellows, that is, as far as
those that use Cater-deuce-azes, and smooth Boxes, and Cheat at Dice, can be.


Cheat? we do play a little upon advantage I confess, (as many people of
Quality and most Gentlemen that are Gamesters do.)


Indeed false Boxes, and Dice are an advantage, but to let that pass: I will
prevent your Error, with this Isabella I am unreasonably and desperately in
Love.


But its in an honourable way, I hope, not at all inclining to wedlock.


Yes faith, I am in Love, even to Matrimony.


Pox on thee for an unseasonable Fellow, to think of Matrimony in this age,
when an honest Woman is almost ashamed to show her Face, she finds triumphant
Punk so much preferred before her.


If we, honest Fellows of the Town, go on as we begin, honest Women will come
to be Stoned in the Streets.


What, thou art turned a public spirited Fellow, I warrant, and wisely
consider, that people are wanting in England, and that more frequent
Marriage would be a means of Propagation.


And I believe thou hast subtly found out that whoreing, and Monasteries, are
as great causes of their wanting people in Spain, as their West Indian
Colonies.


None of these politic considerations I assure you; and yet ever since I saw
Isabella I care less for a Whore, than you do for an honest Woman: Yet you
shall find I am not wholly unfit for your Company, I have not given over all
sins at once, for if you'll go before and bespeak, Dinner at Shatolins you shall
see how I'll sowce you in Burgundy.


Well, we'll go and hope, by the help of Burgundy, to recover your Senses
again.


Have a care of loosing your own.


That we may have no advantage over you, we'll each of us drink 2 or 3
Beer-glasses, before you come.


Adieu.


How now Bellamour, where's my Father.


Sir, he's busy upon a question in Arithmetic, to see how much 15 l. comes to
in seven years, with use upon use.


What use his fifty in the hundred, that he takes of Herb-women and
Oyster-women? For which they Pawn, their dear Rings, and Wedding Petticoats.


Sir, he's willing to make the most of his money.


Has he taken account what Dripping has been sold this week to the
Kitchen-stuff Women? Has he weighed the ends of Candle, and Suet, to change for
Candles of 20 in the pound?


All this Sir, and he has been haggling with a Fellow, above half an hour this
morning, about 5 Coney-Skins he sold him; nay, Good man, he's very careful, and
all for you.


For me, ^ Sdeath I expect he should live fifty years longer, unless the
Parliament would bring down money to four in the hundred; and faith I thought
the report of that last Sessions, would have done an honest Filius ante Diem
some kindness, but a pox ont he's recovered, but no more of him, prithee send
in my man to me.


I will Sir Robin.


What say you Sir?


Go in to your Master Theodora, I see you now this morning, with as much Joy,
as the Persians do the Rising Sun, that gives em all their Comfort.


For all your complements Bellamour, I find little prospect of comfort for
either of us.


My dearest Theodora, I have observed much dejection in your Countenance, ever
since the obliging assurances you have given me of your faith; do you repent of
that engagement? then I am miserable.


No Bellamour, I cannot repent of any thing I do for you; you have too great a
power overme, to suffer such resentments in my mind.


What then can be the reason, that in the miest of all my Joys, I see you
grieve.


The thousand difficulties we are to undergo.


Ah Madam, do but Love enough, and there are none.


There is an impossibility of getting my Fathers consent, though it would be so
much to my advantage: His covetous Shagrin Humour makes him hate a Gentleman.


I have gained so much upon him, that I do not despair of it; But since I have
your consent, I have too much happiness for one man.


I must confess, my Bellamour, I could justify my Love to you to all the
world, but to my Father; I have to defend me your Person, and your Merit: I can
never repay the obligations I have received from you, that after seven years
Travel, you can be content to stay from your Country, your Friends, and
Kindred, and conceal your self from all the world but me: But above all, to put
your self for my sake, in so base a condition, as to serve my Father, which is
worse than Rowing in Galleys, this Testimony of your Love can never be
forgotten.


Ah Madam! one kind look from you will overweigh a thousand such small
Services: I must confess, serving your Father is the severest Task I have, to
minister to his wretched Avarice, and endure the curses of all whom his
extortion grieves. Pardon me, dear Theodora, that I take this liberty before
you: This is a Subject, you know I can speak little good of.


I am too sensible of it, but I am extremely glad to see you gain so much upon
him by your Artifices.


You see Madam, Love is able to turn a man into all Shapes, nay into the
worst, a Flatterer, to a Covetous man: But by the sordid applauding of what he
does, and observing all his Rules and Maxims, I have gained this point; That
he will hear or believe no man so soon as me.


But why do you not discover this to my Brother, and procure his assistance in
it?


Your Father's and Brother's tempers are so opposite, that it is impossible to
accommodate my self to both of 'em, but do you please to manage our interests
with your Brother, he Loves you extremely, and will hear you; I hear him
coming, I'll away.


Robin go stay within till I call you.


I will Sir.


Dear Theodora I am glad you are here, I have a secret of the greatest
concernment in the world to me, to discover to you.


I shall be glad to hear't, and (if I can) to serve you in it; what have you to
say?


A thousand things, in one little word, Love.


How Brother are you in Love, I'll tell you --


Hold Sister, I know as well as you that I depend


But Brother --


And that I ought not to engage my heart without the consent of him who gave me
breath.


Do you hear --


And that Heaven has made our Parents disposers of our wills, and that they are
in a condition to see more and be less deceived than we.


Hold a little.


And that we ought to trust the Eyes of their wisdom before the blindness of
our own passion.


Are you mad --


And that the heat of our youth misleads, and betrays us often to dangerous
precipices.


Not one of these wise things would I have said to you, but tell me, are you
engaged to her you Love?


No, but resolved, in spite of all opposition, and I conjure you, give me no
reasons.


Why do you believe I will?


You are no Lover, and faith I am damnably afraid of your wisdom.


You know not my condition Brother; but pray who is it that has Charmed you
thus?


A young Lady that Lies near this place, of so excellent a Beauty, so delicate
a creature, I cannot think of her without an ecstasy.


Pray save your oratory, and in short, tell me who she is.


Her name is Isabella; but that which is my extremest trouble, I have
discovered under hand, that she is the Daughter of a sickly Widow, and of a
small Fortune: You know the abominable humour of my Father (whose damned
covetousness, if I had not n^w and then a Lucky hand at play, would make me
forget all use of money) so that I have scarce any possibility of giving this
Lady the least proof of my affection; and if I find not some means to do it, I
am lost.


It is an inhumane thing of him to put us both to our Shifts, thus, to get but
ordinary Cloths.


Prithee Sister, lets Join in our Complaints to him; and if he opposes us, we
will quit our selves of his insupportable Tyranny, and seek our Fortunes
together.


I hear him coming, he's enraged at something, pray let us retire and consult
what to say to him, here he comes, step in.


Come on.


Out of my house you Dog, begone, make no replies, you Rascal, that are a Sworn
Thief; the Gallows groans for you.


Well, there was never any thing so wicked as this


What's that you mutter between your Teeth Sarrah?


Why do you hunt me up and down thus?


Out you Hang-Dog, must you ask questions? Out of my Doors, or I'll knock you
down.


A pox on this damned flea-flint


Dispute no more, begone.


My Master gave me order to stay here for him.


Get you gone and wait in the Street, you Rascal, must you stand here like a
Sentinel, and (with your damned watchful Eyes) be a Spy upon my actions, to
devour what I have, (...) to ferret up and down to see what there is to Steal.


What a Devil do you think I should steal, unless I should steal you?


You Dog must I be daily in danger to be Robbed by you?


You are not a man to be Robbed, all you have is uner Lock and Key; besides you
profess your self to be in great dant.


a Tin Candlestick, a Pair of Brass Snuffers, a Nutmeg-Grater, Bellows, and a
Darnock Carpet.


I scorn 'em all.


Come Sirrah, you are one of the Rogues that reported that I have money hid.


How, have you money hid say you?


No no you Dog, I don't say so, I have no money hid you Villain you.


Why what is't to me whether you have or have not.


What are you arguing? I'll beat your foolish reasons out of your head, once
more, begone.


Well, I go.


Stay, have you taken nothing with you?


You had best search me.


Show me your hands.


There.


The other -- Both together -- Stay have you put nothing here.


What a Devil should I put there?


Let me see here.


Such a man as you deserves to be Robbed.


What say you?


I say I think you'll grope me all over.


So I will Sirrah.


A Plague on all covetousness, and covetous men.


What's that?


I say, a Plague upon all covetousness, and covetous men.


Of whom do you speak Sirrah?


Of covetous men.


What are those covetous men?


Rogues, Villans, Dogs, Caterpillars, Horse-Leeches, Vipers, Thieves, Robbers,
Sons of Whores.


How now you Rascal.


Why do you trouble your self Sir, you are none of those; may not I curse
covetous Rogues?


Sirrah, to whom did you speak thus? tell me.


I spoke it -- I spoke it -- to that Rogue Dives in the Picture there.


And I speak to your fools head there, Sirrah take that, do you feel me Rogue?


Ay, pox on you, against my will.


Again Sirrah, out of my doors, I say, you insolent Villain.


A curse on him, he has broken my bones.


Oh the pains, the Jealousies, and fears a man must suffer that has great
sums of money to guard; I cannot find one place safe enough about the house;
Coffers and Trunks Thieves can never escape. Let me see this particular.
Imprimis, a thousand Pound, for which I have Pawnes worth two, at above fifty
per Cent. Item in the City five thousand Pound, for which I have ten per Cent,
and the best security in England. Item in Mortgages of Land from young Gay
Sparks 6000l. Oh but that dear sum of six thousand broad pieces in my Garden,
that transports me.


No Sir, but now come.


What do ye stand listening?


Not we, I assure ye.


Come come ye did: if they over-heard me, I shall hang my self --


Not we, I assure you Sir.


I was saying to my self, how happy should I be if I had but six thousand Pound
in the world.


You need not wish that.


'Tis false, 'tis false, Oh would to heaven I had! Oh how happy should I be, I
should never complain then, that the times are hard, not I.


This is all but Raillery Sir.


You have more than five times as much.


'Sdeath, what says he? Oh thou Villain, thou Viper thou, have I bred thee up
to destroy me? are my Children become my greatest enemies?


Are those your enemies that say you are rich?


Oh it is the vilest injury you can do me, such discourses as these will make
my throat be cut, Thieves will believe I am all made up of Gold; your
extravagant expenses too, will make 'em think so.


I know none I am guilty of, unless keeping my self clean be so.


Oh your Periwigs, your Ribbands, your Laces, you are as much a Spark as any of
those that go fine, keep Whores, and pay no debts, about the Town; and if the
truth were known, you, and your Sister, here, must Rob me to do it.


He will have good luck that Robs you: Aunt,) and (for me) I am sometimes lucky
at play, and I eat and drink, and keep my self handsomely dressed with it.


Handsomely, foolishly; to what end are these multitudes of Ribbands, this
Flaxen Mop of Whores Hair, and this Flanders Lace upon the Shirt; I warrant
this Habit cost thirty Pound: now if you do win money, put it to other uses
(you foolish young Knave) 30 l. comes to six and thirty shillings a year,
according to Statutable use; But thou might make twenty Pound a year on it,
if thou had any brains, and (with such use upon use) what would 30 l. come
to in seven years!


But Sir, my Brother and I came to talk with you of other business.


Well, and I have something to say to you, of other business.


Tis concerning Marriage, Sir.


And I intended to speak to you, concerning Marriage.


Ah Father!


Ah Father! what's that for? what? what? you would be at it already, would you?
soft and fair young Gentlewoman.


No Sir, my Sister is afraid that your opinion of Marriage will not agree with
ours.


Fear not, you shall have no cause of complaint, I shall do well for you both;
and (first of all) have you Theodore, seen one Isabella, that lies near this
place?


O yes Sir, several times, in her Balcony.


And you?


I have heard of her, Sir.


Well Son, and how do you find that Lady?


She's admirably handsome, I have never seen her equal.


Her face, ha?


Beyond what e're a Lover fancied of his Mistress.


Her shape, is it not well?


Not only faultless, but excellent to a miracle.


Her men, ha --


Graceful, and admirable.


Her air, and her manner --


The most charming in the world; her air so full of modesty and wit, her
carriage so allureing and gentle, I have never seen the like.


Oh oh, would not this Lady make a pleasant bed-fellow?


It were a happiness beyond all expression, such as 'twere not safe to think
on it.


But there is one point to be considered, her Portion.


Oh Sir, that (with so fine a Lady) is not considerable, not to be mentioned.


Besides Sir, I have heard she has a tolerable fortune.


Never think of that.


Well, I am glad we agree so well in our opinions of this Lady; for (by these
charming qualities) she has so won upon me, that I am resolved forthwith to
marry her.


Oh heaven!


What say you?


Are you resolved say you --


Yes, to marry Isabella.


Who you? you?


Yes I, I, I, why, what do you make of me, young Cox-comb?


'Sdeath this has struck me to the heart.


Who cares, go get some Aqua-Vitae, I hope this young Prodigal Ass will hang
himself at the news of a young Mother-in-Law -- This Daughter, is that which I
resolve for my self: now for him, I have provided a grave Matron of about 50,
with a great deal of money; and you, I intend to marry to Timothy Squeeze, the
rich Scriveners Son, a very thrifty young man.


Heaven, what do I hear!


He's a very pretty young man, and knows how to make sixty per Cent of his
money.


Sir, if you please, I will not marry.


Madam, if you please you shall marry.


Pray pardon me Sir.


Pray pardon me Madam.


You may command me in any thing, but this.


I will command you in this, and to night too.


To night, that shall not be.


That shall be.


No Sir.


Yes Sir.


I'll kill my self, before I marry him.


You shall not kill your self, and you shall marry him; but did ever Father
endure such insolence from a Daughter?


Was ever Daughter so severely used by a Father?


All the world will allow of my choice.


No man of sense will.


Here comes Bellamour, will you be judged by him.


With all my heart.
This is lucky enough.

Look you Bellamour, my Daughter disputes with me, which do you think has
reason, she or I?


Oh Sir, you without question.


Do you know what we were talking of?


No Sir, but you cannot be in the wrong.


Look you, you are to be Judge, I would marry her to Timothy Squeeze, the rich
Scriveners Son this night; and the baggage despises him.


And am I to be Judge?


Ay of this.


Oh heaven!


What say you?


I am of your opinion Sir, in the main, but your Daughter is not wholly in the
wrong.


Why, why is Mr Timothy's Person, or Fortune, to be rejected? where can she
have a better?


That's true Sir, but she may say, 'tis too rash to resolve to do it so
suddenly; and that she ought to have some time to accommodate her inclinations
to him.


Time, come I must take occasion by the fore-lock; his Father (that is very
rich, but of mean extraction) will (for the sake of good Alliance) let his Son
marry her without a Portion.


Nay then, I must say no more, that is a convincing reason, she must submit to
that.


What means Bellamour?


I know not what 'tis to her, I am sure 'tis the most confiderable reason in
the world to me.


Without doubt Sir, no man can contradict that, but your Daughter may answer
you, that Marriage is the most solemn thing in the world, and that which must
make her always either happy, or miserable.


Without Portion! mark that --


You have reason Sir, that decides all. But Sir, people will tell you, that the
inclination of your Daughter, ought to be a little regarded; and that forcing
affections has often ruined the best of Families.


What without Portion?


Nay, there can be no reply to that: 'tis true, there are a great many Fathers
that prize the satisfaction of their Daughters, and would never Sacrifice them
to interest, but would consult their affections.


But again I say, without Portion.


'Tis true, without Portion is an answer to every thing; and who can resist
such reason as vours.





Bellamour you are in the wrong, to talk thus with him.


If I should oppose him Madam, I should ruin our design, and you will do
better to feign a consent to what he commands.


But for this sudden Marriage, to night.


We'll find means to break it, and make him consent to it.


What can you invent?


Feign some sickness, and desire him to delay't for that.


Physicians will find out that deceit.


Madam, he would scarce be at the charge of one to save his own life, much less
yours.


But he has Kindred, that will give him their advice for nothing.


Madam do you believe in Doctors? do you think they know more than
Nurs-keepers? I warrant you Madam, counterfeit what distemper you please,
they'll find reasons enough to tell you from whence it comes.


Heaven be praised, all's well, there was no body.


Besides Madam, our last recourse shall be to discover our selves, and our
affections, and if you can be constant, as I doubt not --


Well said Bellamour.


Sir, I ask you pardon, that I make so bold with your Daughter.


I am orejoy'd at it, you have done exceeding well.


Sir, I will never fail to urge her with arguments, and especially, that
undeniable one, of without Portion.


'Tis very well.


Oh Sir, there's nothing (in this world) so precious as money, not Honour,
Birth, Education, Wit, Courage, Virtue, Wisdom, Religion, Loyalty --


Oh there spoke an Oracle! dear Bellamour I could hug thee for this, thou shalt
follow, and advise her. But first, give me some little account of this days
business, has Sarah the Orange-Wench redeemed her Thumb-Ring, that I lent her
ten shillings upon last week?


No Sir.


'Tis forfeited then, it weighs two and twenty. Has the fellow that cries old
Cloths, redeemed the new Velvit Coat (which I believe he Stole) or the
Oyster-Woman her Red Petticoat with Silver Lace on it? or has the Cobbler
redeemed his Pewter that he Pawned for money to buy Soles? or has the Country
Gentlewoman (that lost her money at play) taken out her Watch, for which she is
feign to make excuses to her Husband, and say 'tis a mending?


None of these.


Has the Whetston Whore redeemed her Mantoplicee, and her Silk-dy'd Petticoat,
with Gold and Silver Lace?


No poor soul, she has had ill trading of late.


There is a Bawds Silver Aqua-Vitae Bottie, a Midwife's hackny Satin Mantle,
with old fashioned Gold Lace; a Herald Painter's Hears-Cloth, and Velvit Pall;
besides (let me see) an Attorneys Clerk Pawned a Beaver of his Masters in the
Country; there is too, a Porters and a Water-mans Silver Badge, the Fidler's
Violin, the Hackny Trumpeter's Brass Trumpet, the Barber's inlayd Razor Case,
with Silver heads to his Instruments, are any of these redeemed to day?


None of 'em Sir.


They are forfeited, to Hell with them, ab inferis nulla redemption, this has
been a happy week Bellamour: two young Sparks have forfeited Mortgages this
week: they are the sweetest people to deal with, they seldom fail of forfeiting
them, and I never fail to take 'em, but prithee go to my Daughter, and advise
her.


I will Sir,
Better then you think.

How happy am I in this servant! well, (if this trade holds) I shall tumble in
money; and next to that.

The greatest pleasure I can have of life,
Is in cold age, to have a warm young wife.

IS Mr. Goldingham at home?


He is in the Garden (where he always is) I'll tell him you are here.


Come Timothy, Cheer up, has't not thou forgot to put on thy little Cuffs, to
Comb thy head, and get thy hair powdered.


No no, I have my best Clothes on too, just as I used to go to Church; but de'
hear Sir, I shall be ashamed when Theodora comes, de' see, for (on my
conscience and soul) I shall never learn how to Suitour a woman.


Take my directions, and I warrant thee.


How did you go to work to Suitor my Mother?


Why, I'll tell thee, when I was a young man, (Oh the happy days we lived in
then) I could woe a young Gentlewoman, with as much dexterity, as the Sprucest
Gallant on 'em all.


I long to hear, before Mrs. Theodora comes.


Why look you, suppose thou were thy Mother, stand there (and I'll tell you she
was as fine a young Lass, as any Aldermans Daughter, (though she was but a
Button-makers Daughter) and as well bred too; I am sure it cost her Father ten
shillings a month for her learning to Dance, and she played most violently upon
the Cittern too But stand still, thus I begun.


I vow this is very well, de' conceive me?


Then thus I went on; pray give me leave to kiss your hand.


O Lord Sir!


I protest and vow, I have a very great affection for you; the very thoughts of
you, has often broke my sleep; and made me fetch many a sigh.


Ha, ha, ha, very well I vow.


For you are very handsome (as I am an honest man, and I cannot but love you, an
I were to be hanged for it.


'Tis your goodness more than my desert.


Good lack, to see the luck on it, she made that very answer, I protest.


Oh Gemini, why did she?


Yes, but to go on, said I, I am come to see if you can love such a one as I
am, (and I was then as pretty a young Fellow as any in the City) and if you
can, said I, I shall be very well content to make you my wife.


Ay but Mrs. Theodora, they say, is most pestilent Coy.


'Tis no matter, be thou bold, and she'll not deny thee.


Ay and I will now you bid me, though I venture my life for it, de' understand
me?


Do, stand up to her man, and kiss her, she'll not deny thee, for thou art a
very pretty Fellow, though I say it; stand up, let me see, turn thee about, well
made too, well thou take just like me, I was just such another when I was
young.


Mr. Squeeze you are welcome.


Thank you good Sir.


And you Mr. Timothy.


Thank you good Sir, (as my Father said before me.)


This is the young man I bring to your Daughter.


Ay Sir, I make bold to come a wooing to Mrs. Theodora, de' conceive me, if your
worship please.


With all my heart.


An excellent choice, an accomplished, Rival have I: I should sooner be jealous
of a Ballad-singer, or a Pick-pocket.


Bellamour, go call my Daughter.


I will Sir, A curse on him, must she be baited by this Bandog.


While the young people are together, we'll drink a Cup; I would send for a
Pint of white Wine, or half a Pint of Sack for you, but the Vintners do play
the Rogues so, and put Horse-flesh, dead Dogs, men's bones, Molossus, Lime,
Brimstone, Stumme, Allom, Sloes, and Arsnick into their Wine -- but I'll send
for a Cup of wholesome Ale for you.


With all my heart.


There's the sweet youth, he has provided for you.


Now Father stand by me.


This Daughter, is the pretty young man I told you of.


He looks more like a Corn-Cutter than a Lover.


Your servant young Gentlewoman.


Your servant forsooth, I make bold to Salute you, de' see: I vow 'tis the
sweetest kiss that ever I had in all my life; you kiss very well Mrs. Theodora,
pray let me have another.


Hold Sir, not too fast.


Why look you Father, did I not tell you how 'twould be?


You were a little too forward Son.


Come let's leave the young people, they'll do best together.


Ay I warrant you, they had rather be alone.


D'y' hear Theodora, be civil to him Bellamour!


So now we are alone Mrs Thea, I call you Thea for shortness, de' see? will you
please to sit down?

I'll try now if I can out-do my Father.


To wait upon you I will Sir.
What a ridiculous Lover have I?

Come Mrs. Thea, I profess my Legs are very weary, I have been all this morning
dunning for money, at this end of the Town; and I promise you I mind my
business as well as e're a young man in the City that wears a head,, but (a
deus take 'em) they do so fob me off with Protections hereabouts.


They do ill, to disappoint so fine a Person.


Ah forsooth, you are pleased to say so, but come (now I think on it) pray
where's your Maid?


Why do you ask?


If you please to send her to some Tavern, where you have Credit, I'd make
bold to send for a Pint of Sack for you, (there I out-do my Father a whole half
Pint.)


Oh admirable breeding.
By no means I don't love it, I assure you.

Then I'll send for a Bottle of white Wine; I have Sugar in my pocket, the
Rogues at Tavern's make us pay three pence a paper for it.


A thrifty consideration, but I drink no Wine.


Nay peuh Mrs Thea, you say this now to save me Charges, de' see; but alas I
care no more for money than I do for the dirt under my foot, d' you understand
me? if I had you at the Pope's Head, I'd give you half a peck of Oysters, I
have as good Credit there as ere an Alderman's Son of 'em all, no dispraise:
but faith I will send for White-Wine now, you shall not say me nay.


Oh intolerable! I will have none sent for.


Sir, your Father bids me tell you he is sent for to Chatolins, to some young
Blades, whom he is to take up


'Tis very well. Come Mrs Thea, pray be not angry, but let us to our business.


Have you any with me?


Yes that I have, and very earnest business too, I'll tell you that.


What is it?


Look you Mrs. Thea, pauca verba, the short and the loug on it is, I have had a
very great affection for you, any time these two months, ever since I saw you
at Covengarden Church, de' conceive me?


Oh wonderful!


As I am an honest man, you have stuck as close to my heart (all the time,) as
a Burr (de' understand me) nay I have scarce slept a quiet night, all that
time, for dreaming on you.


'Tis impossible.


Nay feck now 'tis true, whereupon my Father seeing me in this condition,
advised me to come to you for cure, de' hear me?


Oh Sir, doubt not but you may command me.


No forsooth pardon me, I shall entreat you.


To do what?


Feck only to love me a little, that's all.


No more but that! how can I choose?


Ay but will you have me for a husband, de' see? that's the business I come
about: if you will, I shall for my part, be very glad to make you my
Bed-Fellow, as the saying is.


Oh Sir, you deserve one of a greater Beauty and Fortune than I am.


Pshaw what's matter for that, 'tis all one as long as my Father bid me ask you
Mrs. Thea, de' conceive me?


Sure this Holiday Fool, ha's never been bred to any thing but throwing at
Cocks, or demolishing evil houses on Shrove-Tuesday; or may be, he ha's Rid on
a Pageant for a Neptune, or a Sea-god, or perhaps waited at my Lord Mayor's
Table upon a Feast day.


What say you to the proposition, ha?


Did you see your Brother Madam?


He's gone out.


A deus take this Fellow for interrupting us.





Hark, I am called, farewell.


Nay an I leave you, the King shall know it.


Oh dear Robin, art thou here?


Mrs. Cheatly, what makes you here for heavens sake?


That which makes me go every where; I love to be serviceable to the Nation, in
my faculty, I bring people together, and make work for the Parsons, and the
Wid-wifes. But where's Mr. Goldingham.


What business can you have with him? of all mankind.


That which I hope to get by; you know I have no Rents, Industry, and Intrigue
must maintain me; but thou art sure not to lose by it, my dear Robin.


And you not to get by it here, I assure you.


You don't know, there are some things within my power, that may touch very
nearly.


Why thou may sooner hope to get by thy Trade in a Town three years besieged,
and almost famished.


I warrant you, I have a way of tickling of 'em as they do Trouts out of their
senses, but I must work upon him by degrees.


Why he would not give a shilling to save thy soul, nor eighteen pence for his
own; I have heard him wish that that word Give, were blotted out of the English
Tongue: you'll put him into Fits, if you but propound it to him. 'Slife here he
comes, I must be gone I am sure.


Ah dear Sir, how briskly you look to day, good lack! If I had not been in your
house, I protest I should not have known you.


I look well, alas, alas!


I never saw any creature so changed in my life, sure you drink nothing but
Viper Wine.


Nay you wheadle.


Upon my life, you amaze me, you look so delicately, so fresh, and gay.


Nay but do I? hah.


Sir, you were never so young in your life, I have seen men of five and twenty
in white Periwigs, have less youth about them.


But (for all that) I am above six and fifty.


Six and fifty! alas that's nothing, that's the season of a perfect man, you
are now in the flower of your Age -- it was the time when the Patriarchs you
know began to get Children.


That's true, but if I were twenty years younger, 'twould do me no hurt.


You jest Sir, you need no youth, I'll lay my life you will live till you are a
hundred years old.


No no, but do you think so really?


Most certainly Sir, you have all the marks of long life; let me see, hold a
little: Oh what a sign of life there is upon your forehead! I am sure you'll have
four wives more.


-- I care not how many wives I have, I love to bury wives much.


Ay as much as e're an Almanac-maker, or Cunning-man of 'em all; let me see
your hand, Heaven! what a Line of life is here.


How, let me see.


Do you not see how far that Line goes?


Yes, but what does that import?


A hundred did I say? if you don't live to sixscore, I'll be content to be
hanged, when I am so old my self.


'Tis impossible.


You will live to bury all your Children, Grand-Children, Great-grand-children,
and Posterity, to the fifth and sixth Generation.


The more I bury, the better; what care I for Posterity, I would be my self the
last man of my family.


Yes Sir, as you are the first.


But pray Mrs. Cheatly, how goes our affair?


If it did not go extremely well, you would not have me in so good a humour.
Well on my conscience no woman in England ha's that faculty in Match-making,
that I have: there are no two persons, so opposite, that I cannot bring
together: (if I had lived in that time) I would have been hanged if I had not
Married the Pope to Queen Elizabeth.


But I would not have had that done, that might have spoiled the reformation:
but tell me? --


Why Sir? I acquainted the Mother with your proposition, and brought Isabella
to the window (as you appointed,) where she surveyed your person, your age,
your youth, I mean, your men and all your motions.


And how liked she, ha?


She likes your person infinitely, and her Mother, and she entertained the
proposal with a great deal of joy; and Isabella says you are the most Reverend
charming old young Gentleman, in all Covengarden.


'Tis her goodness, but in troth that was a little too much: but have you spoke
with her Mother about Portion?


Oh she'll be a vast Fortune, she will be worth above two thousand Pound a year
to you (besides her Beauty) which if you would, you might make as much more of,
if she would consent.


And (if I can make so much more of her) I am sure I'll make her consent, or
I'll strangle her.


Why first, she ha's the most thrifty Stomach of any woman in Europe; she loves
nothing but Salads, Milk, Cheese, Butter, and Apples, nor does she ever desire
sweet meats above Almonds, and Raysins, you need not keep a table furnished
with varieties, or delicacies for her: Wine she drinks none, this will be worth
a thousand Pound a year; then she hates all finery, Lace she detests out of
hatred to the French.


She does well, it was a Roguish invention, and he that first invented it, is
damned.


She hates rich Cabinets, Pictures, rich furnished Clos^ets, and costly
furniture extremely, this (with her own thrift in Habits) will amount to above
six thousand Pounds; then she has a horrible aversion for Gaming, then Plays
she detests.


This is admirable, I am each minute more in love with her.


Then she never gives a farthing to the poor, though she sees 'em starving.


How admirably shall we agree, for I hate the poor as much as she can do.


Then she abominates Singing-Masters, French-Masters, Dancing-Masters,
Harpsical-Masters, above measure; now to sum up all these things they will
amount to 2450 l. a year, for her life, there's four hundred and fifty Pound
above your sum.


Mrs. Cheatly, these things are very good, but they are not real goods, I would
have something that I might give an Acquittance for, and say, I say Received
per me Humphrey Goldingham.


Are not all these excellent qualities real Goods? and I assure you, you may
receive them when you please.


These are not Goods and Chattels Mrs. Cheatly; I must touch something.


Touch! why, you shall touch her, and touch her all over, and as much as you
please, there's a delicate creature to touch, there's a touch for you.


Ay, but I must touch money; there's a delicate thing to touch, there's a touch
for you.


Money you shall have too, they have a good Estate in the North, which I have
heard them speak of --


That must be seen: But there's one difficulty more; she is young, and I fear
will not be brought to love an old man.


Cods me I had like to have forgot that quality of hers, she has the most
unconquerable aversion, in the world, for all young men; she was to have been
Married the other day, and broke off the match, because she found the man was not
above fifty.


It cannot be, sure.


Upon my word 'tis true, she says the young men of this age, are nothing but
brisk, airy, conceited, gay, proud, ignorant, foolish, singing, dancing,
Baboons in huge Periwigs, not fit for wives.


It is impossible.


If you did but see her Seals, and the few Pictures she ha's, not of Adonis,
Paris, Apollo, Narcissus, or any young Figures, but of Saturne, King Priam,
Anchises, Nestor, Methusalem, and some of the old Partiarchs, Iohn of the
times, and old Parre.


This is incomparable indeed, if I were a young woman I should never endure
young Fellows; for my part I wonder what they can see in them, to love 'em so.


Ay I wonder what pleasure they can take in 'em, Oh your fine old man for my
money, he's the civilest, quietest Bed-fellow; worth a thousand of these young
Fops, that are ever upon the spur, like a Citizen on a Journey.


'Tis your goodness: But can thou not bring this Isabella to Supper, to
night, to my house? I am to give Mr. Squeeze, and his Son a Supper; who shall
marry my Daughter immediately, and (if you can bring this Lady) I would kill
two Birds with one stone, as that excellent thrifty Proverb says.


Ne'er doubt it Sir, I'll bring her after Dinner to see your Daughter, and they
may take the air in your Coach together, and so come back to Supper.


Prithee go about it instantly.


But Sir --


Nay prithee Mrs. Cheatly go about it, make no delays, prithee go now --


One word more.


No more for heaven sake, go now.


I must speak to you.


By no means, go just now about it, now, go quickly.


Well, there is nothing to be done with this old Fellow now.


This Cheatly is a rare woman, but I was plaguily afraid she would have asked
to borrow money of me, after she had done her story. 'Sdeath what do I hear!
the Garden door opens, she's gone in there; I must watch her, and my dear dear
money.


What, makes my Father in such hast? I believe he is gone into the Garden;
where he goes a hundred times a day: But pray Bellamour, is your man returned,
you sent into the North to enquire of your Father?


Madam I expect him to night. But my dearest Theodora, since I have your heart,
there's nothing else I have within my eye, or thought! let us not think of
business, but employ this happy minute in talking of love.


Here's my Father, to your advice again.


So all's safe in the Garden.


Madam you must obey, and marry him to night, your Father will not delay the
making of you happy.


To night, is too sudden Bellamour.


'Tis never too soon to obey your Father Madam.


Admirably well said, dear Bellamour, never was man so happy in a servant! Come
into the next Room Daughter; I warrant you, my man and I will soon convince
you.


Let me beg you will defer it Sir.


I will have it despatch'd to night, come along.


That Theodore should be such a Villain, to disappoint us.


I wonder he should have no more care of his own soul, than to break his word
with honest Fellows.


I believe he knows of my being here; and has not the face to see me (after
some inconstancy, I have taken him in lately.)


That she should pretend to an interest in him, Mr. Rant! but if every body
that has injoyd her should be constant to her, (as she calls it) she would have
an Army of Lovers.


God-a-mercy Mrs. Joyce, I'll drink thy health for that; here boy give me a
Glass. Nonconforming Parson drinks in, after labouring at a Conventicle; as big
as King Iohns Cup at Lyn, or Iohn Calvins at Geneva: That is fit for nothing
but to wear in a mans Bandstring (as your Citizens do Rings.)


Here's one will fit you Sir.


Fill it, and strike it.


Here's thy health in a brimmer, Hazard have at thee.


I'll do thee reason, dear Rogue, an 'twere a Pulpit full of Burgundy; I love
such honest Fellows, that let drinking and wenching go hand in hand.


Faith they are such sweet sociable sins, 'tis pity they should ever be
parted.


Come boy, my Glass.


But where's the Fiddlers you promised us?


Here's Captain Theodore.
They cannot be far off.

How now Gentlemen, what so forward already? Ladies your servant.


You see Theodore we are not wanting, we provide you good Company; but I am
sorry you came not to Dinner.


You see Mr. Theodore what I venture for your company; to undergo the Scandal
of these Gentlemen.


No Scandal I hope Mrs. Lattice! for women of your Tribe (like Fanatics) are
above Ordinances.


Mr. Theodore, you are very unkind of late, one can never see you: But you see
I can venture to be ruined with my Alderman to see you; but not a word of this.


Fear it not, I am as much afraid of the Scandal as you are.


Come Theodore, thou want two or three Beer-Glasses; Is it not better to
drink, and be free with these glorious Harlots, than to crouch to a foolish
simpering Lady that's honest?


Thou art like a dry-foot-Dog, that (out of a whole Heard of Deer) singles out
one, whose sent he only follows, and tires himself to catch that, when he
might have twenty in the mean time.


Gentlemen! the Devil is much obliged to you, you are his great Champions; and
defend Whoreing with as good arguments as any of his controversial Divines
about the Town: But all this will not make me think ill of an honest woman.


I tell you there is not a woman in the world, that's honest at all times, and
upon all occasions.


What not thy Mother, or thy Sister?


No gad, if they were, I would disown them, they had none of my blood in 'em.


Theodore let me advise thee not to speak contemptibly of Sons of Punks, for
(if thou dost) Gad thou wilt raise a world of enemies.


I'll assure you, I have a better opinion of the Sex than what ill company, and
your lewd lives, have given you.


Ay pox on it, thou art not compose mentis, thou art in love; but here's a couple
of remedies for that Disease; which (if thou dost not nip in the bud) will
prove more dangerous than three Claps.


I hope it's nothing but some fumes of the Spleen, that make him base company
(for the present:) I hope (with these Ladies assistance) and a Bottle or two of
Burgundy, to set them right yet.


I am Mr. Theodore's humble servant, he shall want no assistance I can give
him.


Nor will I be deficient in any thing to serve him.


Alas Madam, he does not ask your service, nor would it do him much good.


Goodlack Mrs. Lattice, you are so exalted by the bounty of Mr. Squeeze the
Scrivener, and twenty or thirty more, that (unknown to him) Club with him.


Twenty or thirty, thou insolent creature; did you learn no better manners of
your Alderman?


Hold Ladies, here are the Fiddlers.


Come Gentlemen you shall not be merry without me, I will participate.


Who is this thou hast brought with thee Mrs. Cheatly?


A pretty young Girl, which I am to marry to an old Prebend; but mum for that.


Boy give me a mighty Glass of Burgundy: Theodore here's thy Mistress's health;
Hazard, to you, Fiddlers play a health.


You are very brisk, but I shall tame you, I warrant you.


Come Ladies, faith you shall not escape, we'll warm ye first with Wine, and
then with a Dance; Mrs. Cheatly.


I'll pledge you Sir, but with allowance


With all my heart, take your liberty.


Mrs. Joyce, Mr. Theodore's Mistress.


With all my heart Madam Cheatly.


For all that you know Mrs. Joyce, I vow Mr. Theodore, her confidence makes me
ashamed of her.


Alas poor modesty, fa la la.


If you will have any singing, I'll sing you a little Country Song shall stir
up these Girls more than your Fiddles and Voices can do.


Prithee do Cheatly.


AS I walked in the woods one evening of late,
A Lass was deploring her hapless estate,
She sighed, and she sobbed, Ah wretched she said;
Will no youth come succour a languishing Maid?
Shall I still sigh and cry, and look pale and wan,
And languish for ever for want of a man?
At first when I saw a young man in the place,
My colour would fade, and then flush in my face,
My breath would grow short, and I shivered all over;
I thought 'twas an Ague, but Alas it was more,
For e're since I've sighed, and do what I can,
I find I must languish for want of a man.
When in bed all the night I weep on my Pillow,
To see others happy, while I wear the Willow;
I revenge my self on the innocent sheet,
Where in rage I have oftentimes made my Teeth meet:
But all this won't serve, let me do what I can,
I find I must languish for want of a man.
Now all my fresh colour deserted my face,
And let a pale greenness succeed in the place,
I pine and grow faint, and refuse all my meat,
And nothing but Chalk, Lime, or Oatmeal, can eat:
But in my despair I'll die if I can,
And languish no longer for want of a man.
Really Madam Cheatly 'tis a pretty Song.


'Tis a little too wanton, that's the fault on it.


Nay, it cannot be too much of that; how dost like it Theodore?


Pox on it, there's no Wit in it.


Don't all your greatest Wits make Songs without any Wit at all in 'em, that
take extremely?


Come Theodore take out they woman; we'll bounce their bodies in a Dance.


Is Robin here? he Dances well, (with his Master's leave) he shall be my
partner.


With all my heart, but what news Robin?


Mr. Squeeze the Scrivener Sir will come to you, and bring the Gentleman that
will lend the money.


Squeeze does not know me.


No Sir, I told him it was a young Gentleman in whom he must be satisfied, when
he knew his name.


Come Theodore, I bar all business now.


Come Gentlemen I'll be as Idle for a while as the best of you, strike up.


Gentlemen by your leave, is my Father here among ye?


Pox of this Rascal, knock him on the head.


Hold Rant, who is your Father?


Mr. Squeeze the Scrivener, de' understand me? Lord! that Gentleman needed not
have been so angry, my Father is a Livery-man, de' see, I am no such
contemptible person, I promise you.


Be civil to him, he has the Countenance of an excellent Bubble.


I warrant thee, I'll make much of him; Sir I hope you'll forgive my ignorance
of your person; had I known you, I should not have been so unmannerly.


Nay, alas I'll be friends with you, for my part with all my heart; but my
Father was sent for to this house, to some Gallants that wanted money: and by
the noise and Ranting you kept here, de' understand me, I thought you had been
the men.


We expect him here every minute.


Now will you brace of Knaves Cheat this fool.


If he scapes us one way or other, I'll forswear Caterdeus-ace, and smooth Box,
as long as I live.


Heaven! if Mr. Squeeze finds me here I shall be ruined for ever.


Pray lets withdraw into another Room more private.


Go all into another Room, and I'll come to you suddenly; I will but speak one
word with my man.


Come on Ladies: Come Sir we must engage you till your Father comes.


Sir your servant, I don't care if I spend my Pint with you; and it be a Quart,
I have money enough, de' see?


And shall have little enough, de' see, before we leave you.


Come Robin, is there any hopes of procuring the three hundred Pound?


Yes Sir, you may have the money upon some few conditions; and I (seeing you
could not have it upon other terms) told him you must have the money upon any
condition.


So I must, but what are they?


I'll read 'em to you Sir, I have 'em here in writing; first, you must engage
some reversion of Land for security.


That's reasonable.


Item Mr. Squeeze will have 30 l. for Broakerage, for he but procures it.


Oh damned Jew!


Have patience Sir, you shall hear more: Item the Gentleman that Lends it, will
not in conscience take above 6 in the hundred; but he will have a Present of 30
l. for a pair of Candlesticks.


What cursed exaction's this!


Item he will have you take the greatest part of it in Goods.


A curse on him, what Moor or wild Arab is this?


Hold Sir, Imprimis a fine new Razor-Case, with Razors, and every thing
suitable; the Case in-layd with Silver, and all the Instruments with Silver
Heads, very fit for your man to learn to shave by.


Death and Hell! what's this?


Item A Bolonia Lute, a Roman-Arch Lute, 2 Gittars, a Cremona Violin, 1 Lyra
Viol, 1 Viol de Gambo and a Trump-Marin, very fit for you, if you be a lover of
Music; Item a very neat Chess-Board, and a pair of Tables, very good to pass
away the time with.


What abominable Villains are these?


Item 15 large Pewter Dishes, 2 Dozen of Pewter Plates, two Brass Pots and a
Kettle, very useful for you against you keep house. Item a Furnace of Brick,
with the Cornues, and Recipients, very fit for you, if you be curious in
Distilling. Item 1 Scru'd Pistol, 3 Muskets, 1 Back, Breast, Head-Piece and
Gauntlet, and 5 Swords; these things are valued at 160 l.


What Inhuman bloody Rogues are these? I should not have above 80 l. of all
this money: Heaven what shall I do! money I must, and will have; though by all
the extremities in the world.


But do you think there is no danger?


None at all, he says his Father is so well known, that no man will question
him: Besides he is so pressed for money, that he will undergo what ever you can
put upon him.


That's very well.


Besides, he will go to the ensurance Office, and ensure his own life and his
Fathers death, as you know they will ensure any thing.


That's well again.


'Sdeath who's here, my Father? I am betrayed by this Rogue.


Oh Sir, your servant, this is the young Gentleman Mr. Goldingham that wants
the money.


Oh Heaven, my Son! I am amazed.


Is it his Son? this is lucky, above my wishes,


You Rascal, did you betray me? I'll cut your throat you Dog.


I betray you! heaven forbid it.


Oh you Villain, is it you that abandon your self to these wicked extremities?


Is it you Sir that are guilty of these abominable extortions?


Is it you that would ruin your self by your debauchery? and borrow money upon
such conditions?


Is it you Sir that seek to enrich your self by the Ruin of people, in lending
money upon such shameful conditions?


Dare you appear before me after this?


Dare you appear before the world after this?


Have you no shame in you, you debauched Villain! to spend thus impiously, what
I have sweat for; to make away the reversion of your Estate, upon such
dishonourable conditions?


Do not you blush to dishonour your Name, and Family, by the most cruel
exaction, and unheard of subtleties, that the most infamous of Usurers, nay
Iews themselves could ne'er invent.


Are you such a borrower?


Are you such a lender?


Come along Mr. Squeeze, I cannot endure the sight of this Villain any longer.


So, my affairs are in a very good posture, I am disappointed of money, and
undone with my Father, if I cannot find out a way to bring my self off.


Make him believe, that it was for another you inquired for the money; and
knowing that Squeeze dealt with your Father (which I am sure you ne'er
suspected till now) that you intended it for your Father's advantage.


We'll think on it, and for Squeeze, I hope my friends in the next Room will
Revenge me to the full upon his Son; I'll into 'em, and set them on'.


Do Sir, and at misfortunes ne'er repine,
While there are handsome Women and good Wine.

SIR, I have at length broke loose by force from my Company, to wait on you; my
Sister has told the honour you have done her, and me.


Sir I humbly beg your pardon for not first making my address to you: My long
absence had made me a stranger to all the Town, and by that means to your
Character; had I known you to be a man of that honour I find you, I should not
have gone so indirect a way.


Sir I am happy that (any way) this favour can be conferred by a person of your
worth upon my Sister; and so much honour on my self; and therefore 'tis my
interest, as well as inclination, to desire of you that all Names may be laid
by between us too, but that of Brother.


It is a Name that since you are pleased to honour me with it, shall not be
forgotten, or ungratefully owned while I live.


Dear Brother, let me embrace you.


Let this eternally bind us, my dearest Brother.


I am extremely glad you have prevailed so upon my Fathers opinion, since it
may be of great use, as well to your own affairs, as to mine.


Do not distinguish our interests, for yours is now become mine.


I am extremely obliged to you for your kindness, and I have now occasion to
use you in a business of my own; I know you will excuse my freedom.


There's nothing you can ever do to me, can need an excuse; nor is there any
thing you can ask of me, which I can deny.


I doubt not but my Father has e're this told you of his anger against me.


He has, and I am very sorry for it, but I hope to serve you in this affair.


I can put you in a way to do it, as thus, I'll tell you immediately.


Oh Mr. Theodore, your friends are very angry with you for leaving of 'em; but
you Coxcomb young Squeeze is as drunk as a Bully, and so sweet upon Mrs. Joyce
(who is the only woman I have left with them) that there is no staving him off
her: She persuaded him to play with Hazard at Backgammon, and he ha's already
lost his Edward shillings that he kept for Shovel-board, and was pulling out
broad pieces (that have not seen the Sun these many years) when I came away.


I am heartily glad on it, I am sure the Rogues have no more mercy than a
Bailiff with an execution in his pocket; but prithee what brings you hither?
does my Father go astray towards the flesh?


No no, I come to borrow money of him upon Security; good enough, as you shall
find to your cost.


I'll send him to you, come my dear Brother.


I wait on you.


If I be not revenged of Theodore, for using my Daughter unkindly, I have lost
my cunning; I am sure there can be no Instrument of it so certain, as a
Mother-in-Law.


-- Dear Mrs. Cheatly! were not you discouraged enough last time, but you must
venture again hither?


I'll never give him over till I prevail upon him.


It is impossible, you'll sooner persuade a professed Jew to Swines flesh and
Images, than him to parting with money.


Distrust not my art.


I heartily wish it might prevail, though I despair on it, for (to say truth)
Mrs. Cheatly I have need at present for a great deal of love, not forgetting a
little money, from you.


Thou shalt want neither, as long as I can help thee; here's something, come to
my house at night, and thou shalt have more.


Thank you dear Mistress, it comes seasonably -- Though loving such a one as
she deserves very well; yet this is the freest Titt that ever had inclination
to mankind.


S'death you Rogue, are you about my house? begone Rascal.


Call me Rascal before my Mistress? I could find in my honour to beat him for
an old Sink-cater.


Why do you use Robin so unkindly? he's a pretty ingenious young man.


Hang him Rascal! But prithee how goes our business on?


As you can wish: she says she sawy ou even now walk under her Window, and made
me the pleasantest description, and is so taken with you! She says you are of a
fit Age and Beard for her, and infinitely admires the Gravity and Decency of
your Habit


Does she like me, say you?


To admiration: Pray Sir turn you; just that delicate shape, that convenient
height that she described! Pray let me see you walk: just that free and jaunty
men, that very easy and unconstrained motion which she described.


It is strange she should take so much notice of me in so short a time, hah.


She says you look as if you had no kind of infirmity.


I have none very great, (thank heaven) I have only a defluction that troubles
me sometimes.


Oh you are ne'er the worse for that Rheum; you have an admirable grace, a
good air and men in Coughing; it becomes no man in Europe so well as you.


No no, you jest, you are a wag; but will Isabella come to see my Daughter?


Yes Sir, I am to go and wait on her hither immediately.


Dear Mrs. Cheatly you oblige me infinitely.


I oblige her of all things in the world.


What the Devil says she?


I am just now at the point of being cast in a Suit, for want of a little money
to Fee my Lawyers with; you may if you please easily supply me, you cannot


Me, alas! alas!


Upon my word Sir, this Suit is of that consequence to me, that I shall be
ruined, if I lose it; shined through her eyes, when I repeated your excellent
qualities to her: in fine, I have made her very impatient till this Marriage be
concluded.


You have done me the greatest pleasure imaginable, and I owe all the kindness
in the world to you.


Sir since it is so, I beg of you that you will afford me the small supply
which I demand.


Well, adieu, I'll go see all things prepared for her reception in time.


I assure you, you could never supply me in so great an exigence.


Well, I'll see my Coach and Horses put in order, for ye to take the air.


I should not importune you, if I had not the greatest necessity in the world.


Let me know what she and you love best, that I may bespeak it to Supper.


I beg of you, do not refuse me; you cannot imagine the pleasure a little sum
of money would do me.


Well, I must go see that Supper be ready in good time, for fear ye should be
sick, if ye eat too late.


Pray consider my condition --


I warrant ye you shall have Supper ready early enough, I'll bespeak it
instantly: Farewell.


This is the most obdurate, inhuman old Fellow; that are yet ventured a soul to
the Devil for money.


What, you have succeeded just as I expected.


A curse on him, he was prepared and fortified against all my Attaques


I tell you, you will sooner persuade Quakers to conform, and wear the
Surplice; or Bawds to become Nuns; than him to part with any money.


I'll bait him once with the sight of this Lady here; and if that does not
mollify him, I can soon bring her over to another that shall bid high enough
for her.


This Trafficking for Maiden-Heads is an exc^llent Profession; but they are
very dear, for their Rarity.


But I think I must wholly leave of Trading about Marriages, the Market runs
higher at present the other way.


Faith then, its the wisest course.


I'll consider on it, but come you shall usher me to the Lady I speak of.


Allons.


On my conscience and soul you Cog, de' see? look on the Motto of the Tables,
Play fair and swear not, de' hear me?


On my honour Sir.


A Devil take your honour for me, de' see? that's all your word at this end of
the Town; de' conceive me? but for all that, one can't trust a man of ye: Here
it goes Size-ace, Hazard hold out.


Did ever man see the like! on my conscience and soul you deal with the Devil,
de' mark me? Mrs. Joyce, let me have but one kiss, de' conceive me, and I shall
win the Game fack.


Nay fie Mr. Timothy.


Nay ne'er offer to resist, de' see? for would I might ne'er stir if I have not
it, if I set upon it; Come Come.


You are but a rude person, let me tell you that.


I told you I'd have it, I faith; now Sir I am for you.


Prithee Joyce be not so coy to this young Fool, he may be of great advantage
to us all, and especially to thee.


I hope he might use more Courtship to a person of my quality, there is some
difference sure.


Prithee let there be none, I am sure you will not repent it. Mr. Timothy,
here's the Ladies health in a brimmer.


I'll pledge you an't were a Peck (six and three) for would I might ne'er go
home alive if she be not one of the Prettiest Gentlewomen I ever saw in my life
(Sink-Duce) Come drink it off.


'Tis off, and there's a brimmer for you.


Where are the Fiddles? I'll vow and swear I will not drink without Fiddles.


They are drinking in the next Room, Boy, call 'em in.


Twelve, there's, a Back-Gammon, the Gold is my own.


A duce tak't, I have lost all, as I am an honest man, on my conscience you
have made a League; I make no more of Mr. Selware's Journey-man next Door to
us, I give him one in five.


If you want any money, you shall have what you will of me; but drink the
health first.


Come on, Musicianers, strike up, Hey: Here forsooth, here's your health; and
would I might ne'er go out of this place, if I would not drink it sooner than
my Sisters, or my Mothers, if she were alive: Ha ha, Joyce, with your Cozens
leave, I make bold to love you with all my heart.


I am obliged to you really, but I know not how to return it.


O your love! I warrant you, you know well enough if you would; well to morrow
we show at Hide-Park, and (if I know your Lodging) I'll give you a Gun as I
come back, and steal a Bottle of Sack, and the Tip of a Neats-Tongue, and bring
you, I tell you that.


Nay prithee Hazard give an honest account, don't sink for shame.


Upon my honour; he lost no more, what dost take me for a Cheat?


Come Gentlemen you don't drink, give me a Glass, here's my Mistriss's health;
I make bold to call you so, de' see?


O your servant.


Come Gentlemen, an't I pure Company now? strike up Musicianers, Hey; Gad you
think we Citizens are a Boat, a Boat, or herer's a health to his Majesty, with
a fa la la la lero; and Roar gallantly Mrs. Joyce.


Methinks you are as Pretty a Spark as any about the Town.


I think so fack, I'll scorn any of 'em should out-do me if I set upon it. Hey!


What, have you hurt your self?


'Pshaw, not at all, fa la la lero, come Joyce, we'll have a Song faik now;
Violin men, (I dare not call 'em Fiddlers, for fear they should be angry) sing
us a Catch; Oh I have seen one of these Act the Country man, and Simkin in the
Chest rarely; and you may talk of your Plays, but give me such Pretty harmless
Drolls for my money.


Well, you are a merry man.


I'll be as merry as the best, hang losses, Hey, Hey, strike up, fa la la la la
lero.


Let me embrace you, dear Mr. Timothy; well he's admirable company Mrs. Joyce.


Oh! am I so? Sing a Catch you Rogues, or I'll break your heads; give me a
Glass; here Adversary, here's to you.


A pox on him, he will be too drunk.


Come lay by your cares, and hang up your sorrow,
Drink on, he's a Sot, that ever thinks on to morrow;
Good store of good Claret supplies every thing,
And the man that is drunk, is as great as a King.
Let none at misfortunes, or losses repine,
But take a full Dose of the juice of the Vine;
Diseases and troubles are ne'er to be found,
But in the damned place, where the Glass goes not round.
An admirable Song Mrs. Joyce, thank you honest friends: I have heard these men
sing gallantly before my Lord Mayor; Diseases and Troubles are ne'er, c.


Come will you take Revenge on Hazard, here's twenty Pound if you will.


Hang revenge fack, he's a very honest Gentlemen; besides I have in my Fob 20.
l. in broad Gold, I did not tell you of.


Is not that good news Hazard?


Come Mrs. Joyce lets sing and be merry a bit; Diseases and Troubles, c. Hey.
Joyce come to Bed: Come I say quickly, I am in hast, come away.


So now you have done well, this Rogue has 20. l. about him; and you have made
him so drunk, he cannot lose it to us.


Lets carry him into another Room to sleep, and pick his Pocket; gad it's all
one.


No pox, our way is a little more honourable.


I have had excellent company of you to day Gentlemen.


I know thou hast goodness enough to pardon it; but if my design succeeds, you
shall have cause to thank me; I will watch this Fellow, as Bacon did his Brazen
Head; and (if I do not marry him to thee) I'll be bound never to Cheat the Son
of a Citizen again.


Flatter not your self, 'tis impossible.


Ne'er doubt him, you know not his Art; but whilst he watches him, I'll wait
on you to my Lodging; whither he shall bring Timothy as soon as he wakes.


Come on, your servant Mr. Rant.


Your servant sweet Mrs. Joyce. Mr. Timothy wake a little.


I'll not wake for my Lord Mayor, the Aldermen, and all the Common Council, de'
see?


Here waiter, help to carry him into the next Room.


But it is really, as Bellamour tells me, that you would procure the money for
another?


Upon my word Sir, the young Gentleman will give you a meeting to morrow
morning.


'Tis somewhat better, but why did you keep such scurvy Prodigal company?


I did it only to draw him in, and get money of him.


That's very well. Now Son I have something else to say to you; the Lady which
I intend for your Mother-in-Law, will be here instantly; and I charge you
betray not the least dislike of any thing in your Countenance, but use her with
all the respect imaginable.


I can't promise you to be glad of the coming of a Mother-in-Law; but I am sure
I will not mislike her you have Chosen.


Nor you Daughter


I have never given you occasion to suspect so ill a thing of me.


'Sdeath! what Instrument of the Devil has he made use of, to seduce Isabella
hither?


Leave me now, and send in all my servants.


Hey, what's to do now?


You Roger take all the Bottles and Glasses, and rince them; and take Charge of
'em, if there be one lost or broke, I'll bate it out of your Wages, Sirrah.


That I am sure of.


Then do you William fill the drink; but, never but when they are dry, and let
'em call sor't twice, or thrice, pretend to be a little thick of Hearing; here
are a company of Roguish Lackey's about the Town, that are always offering the
Glass, and provoking people to drink, and kill themselves, I will have no such
Rogues about me.


I warrant you Sir, I'll look to the Drink.


Then look you have your best Cloathe's on when the people come.


I have my best, and all I have on, but they are so horribly greasy before,
that they are fit for nothing but to give to a Soapboyler, or
Kitchin-stuff-woman.


And mine are so full of holes behind, as if I had a Volley of Musket-Bullets
in my Posteriors.


You foolish Knaves, cannot you Sirrah take your Hat, and hold it before you to
hide the Grease? And do you Sirrah turn your Face always to the people, to hide
those holes behind; and when you are sent for any thing, go backward, thus you
Rascal. Now to you Iames.


Would you speak to me as your Cook, or Coachman? for you know I serve in both
Offices.


As my Cook.


Good Sir hold a little.


What a Devil is this Ceremony for? you Rascal.


Good Sir have a little patience: Now speak, I am ready.


Oh Bellamour come and assist me; Iames, I am to give a Supper to night.


The most miraculous thing I ever heard of!


Can you make us good Cheer?


Yes, if you will let me have a great deal of money.


Money! you Rascal you, have ye nothing to say but money; nothing in your mouth
but money, money, money?


I never heard so impertinent an answer, every fool can do that; but you must
make a good entertainment with a little money.


Good Mr. Steward, I would you would teach me that secret.


Peace Sirrah, and tell me what we must have.


There's your Fac-totum, let him till you.


Answer me, or I'll break your head.


Hold Sir, I will, how many will there be?


Ten in all, but provide enough but for eight.


Why you must have, first, two great Soupes made of Veal, Ducks, Chickens,
Coxcombs, Sweet-Breads, Mushromes, Palates, Forced-meat, Artichoak-bottoms. --


'Sdeath you Rogue, you would Feast all the Town.


Then Fricassees, Ragousts, a huge Dish (with all sorts of Fowls) as Duck, Teal
--


Hold your Tongue you Rogue, you would undo me.


Then Plover, Dotril --


Hold you Rogue.


Snipes, Ruffs, Woodcocks.


Hold you Dog, he puts me into a cold sweat.


Partridges, Gnats, Godwits.


Will the Rogue never have done?


Pheasants, Heath-Pouts, Black-Cocks, Quails, Rails, Larks, c.


What do you intend to cram all the Town? my Master does not invite people, to
Murder 'em with eating.


But he would not starve 'em sure.


People should eat to live, not live to eat; as the Proverb says.


O dear Bellamour, let me Embrace thee for that word, he was a great man that
said that; I will have that Sentence Engraven in Great Letters over my Hall
Chimney.


Ne'er trouble him Sir, I'll take care of the Supper.


Pray do Sir, with a little money, we shall see what 'twill be.


But now for my Coach.


Hold good Sir, good Sir hold a little: Now Sir, what were you saying of your
Coach?


Let it be cleaned, and the Horses Harnessed.


Horses Sir, why they are in that poor Condition, that a man must stretch
devillishly to call 'em Horses; they are but the Shadows or Ghosts of Horses.


Can they be sick and do nothing?


Yes Sir, you make 'em keep such severe Lents, they eat no more than
Chamelions; I look every day when they should depart this life: For my part, it
grieves my heart, for I have a tender love and respect for my Horses; and
indeed a man should not be so hard hearted, or unnatural, not to pity his
Neighbour in distress.


The Journey will not be far.


I have not the Courage to put 'em in; how can they draw the Coach, that cannot
draw their Legs after them.


Sir, I'll engage one to drive 'em.


I had rather they should die under any bodies hands than mine; but you have a
mighty necessary man here to your Superintendent.


Peace you unmannerly Rascal.


I'll about these things instantly.


Do good Bellamour.


Sir, I cannot endure these Flatterers, and Pickthanks, I speak my mind
plainly; and it made me mad to hear him say things to your Face, of you, that
none of all mankind besides will say.


Why, what does the world say of me?


Pardon me Sir, you'll be angry if I tell you.


On the contrary, it will please me infinitely to see that plain dealing in
you, let the world say what they will.


Truly I must deal plainly with one I love, and (next to my Horses) you are the
person in the world, that I have the greatest respect for.


Come speak.


Why Sir, in plain honest sincerity of heart, I tell you in short, no man gives
one good word of you; one says you never fail to pick Quarrels with your
Servants at Quarter day, that you may turn 'em away without their Wages, that
you have been taken Robbing of your own Horses of their Provender: That (when
you go by water to your house at Putney) you take a Sculler, and make him bate
half his Fair, for your helping him to Row; in short, you would Rob, Pick,
Pockets, Murder, betray your Country, and do any Villainy in the world for
money; your Name is never used without Cursing, and calling you Villain,
Wretch, Knave, common Barreter, Oppressor, Horse-Leech.


You are a Rogue, a Son of a Whore, a Dog, a Rascal.


I was afraid this would be the end on it, a pox on plain dealing for me; did
you not command me to tell you?


I'll teach you how to speak Rogue another time.


Well, I see it is not safe for any man to be honest in this Age.


How now Mr. Iames, your plain dealing is rewarded very ill.


'Sdeath do you make sport at my beating? Laugh at your own, when you have one.


Nay prithee be not passionate.


He entreats me, I'll huff a little and try


Nay softly Iames, if you please.


No Sir, it does not please me.


Nay good Iames.


You are a very impertinent Fellow.


Have patience a little.


I will have none; if I take a Cudgel, I will so Chastise you.


How Rascal a Cudgel, did you say a Cudgel?


No no no Sir, alas I have no occasion for one, not I.


Do you think I am to be beaten Sirrah?


Alas Sir not I, I have better thoughts of you.


Are you not a Son of a Whore?


Yes Sir, any thing in the world, what you please, I am a Son of a Whore Sir, a
Son of a damned Whore.


Do you know me Rascal?


O Lord Sir, I honour you abundantly.


Did you say you would Cudgel me?


I was in jesting, I did but Droll upon my honour.


And I shall beat you in jesting.


Hold, hold, for heaven's sake.


Remember Sirrah, against another time, you are a very scurvy Railleur.


A pox on all sincerity, and plain dealing for me, I have had a couple of good
substantial beatings; but if I be not revenged on this domineering Fellow, I
will give Dogs leave to piss upon me.


Do you know whether your Master be within?


A pox on it, I know but too well.


Pray tell him, we are here.


But (that I am bound to obey my Mother) you should never have made me run my
self into the danger of seeing this old man, for (though his Daughter, whom I
come to wait on, I hear is an excellent person, yet) I strangely apprehend the
trouble of seeing him.


Consult your Interest Madam, he's very rich, and very old, and will leave you
a great deal of money, that may qualify you to marry any young Gentleman you
please, hereafter.


But I have a natural antipathy to old men, as some have to Cats.


This old man will not have the Impudence to trouble your Ladyship above a
year, after you are Married to him.


I shall never wait for that time, to make my self happy; one year of such
punishment would out-weigh all the pleasure, I could have all my life after.


I find the young Brisk Gentlemen you spoke of yesterday is still in your head.


He is I confess, and in my heart too, and I think nothing will e're get him
out; he keep's such a stir there, he will never let me rest a minute.


Do you know who 'tis Madam?


No, but I have often seen him walking by my Lodging, and perpetually looking
up at the Balcony, either upon me when I was there, or watching for my coming
thither; and by his look, and air, I guess all is not well with him neither; I
hope he's in the same condition with my self.


Here comes the old Gentleman.


What Spectacle's that?


God save you Lady, I am obliged to you for the honour you do my poor house,
which (if you can love an old man,) know Lady I am above six and fifty, and it
shall be yours: What a devil Mrs. Cheatly! she answers nothing, nor shows any
kind of pleasure at the sight of me.


O Sir! she's surprised extremely; besides, Maids endeavour what they can to
hide their affections; she is so full of joy, she cannot speak to you.


That's something indeed.


What a prodigious, ridiculous old Fellow is this?


What says my fair one?


That you are a most admirable person.


Fair Lady, you do me too much honour.


What an abominable, odious old Fellow's this!


I am infinitely obliged Madam, for your good opinion of me: Here's my Daughter
Madam.


Madam, I have too long delayed waiting on you, but I hope you will pardon it.


Madam, you do what I ought to have done; 'Twas on my part, to have prevented
you.


Here's my Son comes to kiss your hand.


Oh Mrs. Cheatly! what accident's this? This is the young Gentleman I spoke of.


This is wonderful.


I see you are a little amazed to see me have such lusty Children, but I will
soon be rid of them both.


Madam, this is an adventure which I did not expect; nor was I ever in my life
so surprised, as when my Father told me his design.


Sir, I am not less surprised then you, I assure you, I was not at all prepared
for what I see now.


'Tis true, Madam, my Father cannot in the world make so fair a Choice, and I
am infinitely happy to see you here; but you are the person in the world, I
would not have my Mother-in-Law; that would break my heart: Madam, I know you
have apprehension enough to take what I say in the right sense, and not be
offended at it.


You coxcomb, what an impertinent, silly complement is this! you must be making
confessions, must you?


Sir, we are so much upon even terms, that you are the man in the world, whom I
would not have my Son-in-Law; and (if I were not brought here by an absolute
power,) I should have given you no shadow of suspicion.


She is in the right, your complement deserves no better return; I know you
would anger her: I beg you Madam to forgive my Son's impertinence, he's a young
Sot, that does not understand himself.


What he said, was so far from offending me, that it pleased me extremely to
hear him so frankly declare his opinion, and (if he had spoke in any other
manner) I should have esteemed him less.


You have a great deal of goodness to forgive his faults; in time he will be
wiser, and change his opinion.


Sir, I can never be capable of changing, and Madam, I beg of you to believe
me.


'Sdeath what extravagance is this?


Brother, you will provoke him too much.


'Sdeath Sir, would you have me lye?


Again, I say change the discourse, you Sot.


Well Sir, since you command me to speak in another fashion, give me leave
Madam to put my self in my Fathers place; and now Madam, I protest to you I
never yet saw so charming a creature: This is the happiest minute of my life,
indeed my life began but from the time I saw you; the Name of your husband, is
an honour, which I would prefer to the Titles of all the Princes upon Earth;
and there is nothing which I would not dare to do, for so glorious a conquest.


Softly, hold a little.


'Tis a complement I make for you to this Lady.


I have a Tongue to express my self, I need no advocate.


I am not so dull of apprehension not to know for whom that complement was
intended, and am glad to find it.


Sir, if you please let us take the air, I hear your Coach at the door.


Oh is it? but I am sorry you will make such hast, I have not time to prepare
you a Collation before you go.


Sir, I foresaw that, and provided beforehand upon your account, a great Dish
of China Oranges, Cittrons, all sorts of Sweet-meats, Limonades, Sherbets, and
all sorts of Wines.





Pardon me Sir, if there be not enough, I know this Lady has goodness enough to
excuse it; besides I can soon have more.


Is the Sot mad?


Madam did you ever see a finer Stone, than that Diamond upon my Father's
finger?


It sparkles delicately.


With your leave Sir.
Madam be pleased to look on it nearer.

What means the Rascal.


It is a delicate clear Stone indeed.


No Madam, no returning of it, it is in too fair hands already, it is a
Present, my Father makes to you Madam.


Who I?


Is it not true, that you would have this Lady keep the Ring?


What do you mean you Villain, are you mad?


Madam, he desires you, by me, that you would please to accept of it.


The fear, she will take it, distracts me.


Pardon me Sir, I use not to receive Presents.


Madam, I am sure my Father will never receive it.


Oh this lying Rascal! you are mistaken.


Look you Madam, your Refusal has made him stark distracted.


O this damned Villain!


Do you not see how he frets, and fumes? for heaven's sake Madam receive it.


Well Sir, (rather than offend you Father,) I will keep it.


'Sdeath I am undone, but there is no remedy. Madam, I thank you for the favour
you do me. But would they were all hanged, and I had my Ring again.


Sir, there's one to speak with you.


I am engaged, I cannot come.


He has brought you money.


Oh has he, I ask your Pardon Madam: Remember to go backward Will.


You have infinitely provoked my Father, and yet I could not but be pleased
with it.


I had a violent temptation upon me, that I could not resist Madan; will you do
us the honour to take part of this Collation.


Your humble servant Sir.


Come Madam.


I attend your Ladyship.


MAdam, you are one of the most hard hearted Ladies that ever triumphed over
man.


And you the most violent Lover, that ever attaqued a woman; but this storm of
love, is too great to last.


Never blame this violence, 'tis the best quality a Lover can have, to my
knowledge.


Madam, my Brother has made me his confident in this affair, and I can answer
for his truth; do not think me partial, for I assure you, I will value your
interest equal with his, or with my own.


You extremely oblige me with your kindness; and your friendship will be able
to sweeten all misfortunes that can happen to me.


You Lovers had need have something to sweeten, for ye are an unlucky fort of
people.


Love, when inclinations meet, is the only condition to be enjoyed. Love! there
is no life without it; we do but sleep, and dream we live, when we are not in
love; and pray Madam will you be pleased to wake out of this dream, and think a
little of one that loves you so, that his life or death depends upon your
breath.


You let me take no breath Sir.


A good Soldier, when he has made a breach, assaults it presently; and never
gives time to repair, and fortify.


But extemporary love, is most commonly as Hypocritical, as extemporary prayer:
But if not dissembled, 'tis seldom constant.


Let me beg to know your resolutions, must I live or die?


Come Madam, be merciful, and reprieve the Gentleman, that may be otherwise so
far given over as to hang himself for your Ladyships love.


Let me beg you will please to encourage my Brothers affection, which I am sure
is true, and honourable.


Madam, think your self in my place, and imagine whether I have not given too
much encouragement for the first time; and whether it becomes my honour to give
more.


Pox of this canting word Honour, it never did good yet, it is often the
occasion of Killing men, and prevents the getting of 'em.


You give me no time to think of love.


I that have so little time, ought to make what use I can of this; if my Father
perceives this, he will with all the malice that can be, seek to prevent me.


But Sir, I have a Mother (whom yet I never disobeyed,) that hath engaged her
self to your Father; and though I confess, I can never think of marrying him,
yet I must think of no other, without her consent.


This is you that made that engagement, I thank you, a Plague of all
Matchmakers; but I must make Isabella in the Character of her.


Sir, I did not know you had a passion here, but I will make you amends: if I
can marry her to Theodore Iews, and, which is more, of ten London Brokers in
him.


Madam, let me have but some assurance, not to to have your unkindness, and all
other oppositions in the world are trifles.


Come Mrs. Isabella, hold off no longer; in short, you told me you loved this
Gentleman violently, and wished he were captivated with you; you did not wish
it, that you might use him ill; therefore, since 'tis your inclination,
dissemble no longer: Here's the Gentleman, take him by the hand, he is your own
ipso facto, he's a proper Gentleman, make much of him; here he is for you, and
there's the short and the long on it. Now Mr. Theodore I think I have made you
amends.


Can I believe so great a happiness, I am so transported Madam, you must expect
no sense from me.


Sir, since she has betrayed my weakness, which she for her Sex sake ought to
have concealed, and I ought in modesty not to have told you, pardon my
easiness, and think me not guilty of levity, if you do, you will be very unjust
to censure one that esteems you so well.


I should as soon censure heaven for granting my prayers; I have not words
enough to tell you how welcome this minute is to me.


Now I hope you will do me the honour to let me call you Sister.


I shall be proud to be called so by you, but I cannot be so till my Mother
consents.


Shall I have your leave Madam, to use all the means I can to procure her
consent?


I freely give you leave to do and say what ever you can to obtain it; but I
believe you will find it hard to break off her engagement with your Father.


Now comes my part, to set my brains on work, I'll show you the mastery of my
Art, and make your Father break off first.


It is impossible he should be such a wretch as as willingly to quit so great a
Prize.


I warrant you, trust me, there is one of my acquaintance who I will persuade
him is worth 500. l. more than this Lady; and though Madam he loves you very
much, yet he loves a little money much more: This friend of mine is but a
Taylors Daughter, but I will make her Act a Countess with some odd Title; and
she can behave her self as proudly and statelily, as the best of 'em, I will
make him believe that she has a very great mind to marry him for his care and
thrift, c. This may make him release my Lady of her engagement.


I think you have reason.


Reason ay, I think so; if I have not, who should have it? alas I have done things
that shall be nameless, that no woman of intrigue but my self has been capable
of, though I say it; and if I do not bring this about, I will never pretend to
an intrigue again.


You will infinitely oblige me.


Madam, my Lady your Mother desires your company instantly.


I wait on her. Madam, if possible I will wait on you at Supper.


I hope your affairs will permit you to do us that honour.


Let me have the honour to wait upon you to your Mother; and be pleased to make
me so happy as to assist me in persuading her to break off the Engagement with
my Father.


A man of your deserts needs no advocate with me, I am sure. Madam, your humble
servant: your servant Mrs. Cheatly.


Now Madam I have something to impart to your Ladyship's privacy.


To me, what is it?


Your Ladyship is very young, and mighty Pretty, really I have never seen so
charming an eye, so delicate an air in any Face, so excellent, such pleasant
motion, and so bewitching a way --


Pray Madam don't raily me at this rate --


I protest Madam I speak my opinion. Now Madam there is an acquaintance of mine
is extremely taken with your Ladyship; he is one of the hansomest and most
accomplished Sparks in Town: He has fifteen hundred Pound a year, and his love
is honourable too; now if your Ladyship will be pleased to walk in Grays-Inn
walks with me, I will design it so that you shall see him, and he shall never
know on it.


I ask your pardon, I have no thoughts of putting my self off to Sale; but when
I have, that Mart is too scandalous.


In the Mulbery-Garden, then Madam, he shall never know of it; I vow the poor
Gentleman is ready to die for your Ladyship.


You must excuse me.


In Covengarden Church, will you see him? I'll order it so with him that keeps
the Gallery, that you shall both set together there.


I assure you, I carry no such thoughts about me to Church.


Mrs. Cheatly, your Daughter ha's urgent business with you, and desires you to
come home immediately; I find Mr. Squeeze is there privately.


I thank you dear Robin. Madam, I hope to convince you next time I see you; in
the interim I kiss your Ladyships hand.


Your servant.


Oh Madam I have been seeking you at the Park, and the Mulbery-Garden; and
thought it an Age till I saw you.


What's the matter? you look as if you had some ill news for me.


I am sorry I must tell you, that which we must speedily provide against. Your
Father has prepared an entertainment, and will have a Hackney Parson ready,
that will venture all his Perferment, and go against the Canonical Hour, to
marry you this night to that Rascal Timothy: and in spite of all my
persuasion, your Father is resolved on it.


How sudden are these resolutions? I shall not need to counterfeit sickness, I
shall have enough when I see him.


Be pleased suddenly to make use of that Artifice; and if that prevent not, I
hope you will give me leave to own my person, and my love.


What disease must I make choice of now?


Here's one comes to help you to one.



But in the damned place where the Glass goes not round.

This is lucky, above my wishes; he is very drunk, and that will certainly
defeat your Fathers intention; this night, if you dare trust your self with
him, I'll bring your Father to see him in this condition.


Pray do, it will do very well.


Oh dear Mistress, have I found you! let me Salute you, de' see?


Hold Sir.


Nay prithee Mrs. Thea don't be so coy, look what I have brought you here;
here's a Bottle of Campaign, I think they call it, and almost a whole
Neats-Tongue, and a power of Sweet-Meats, for you dear Mrs. Thea, there they
are.


This Fellow has that advantage by nature, that not drunkenness, nor any
condition can make him worse.


Well Mrs. Thea, I have been with the finest Ladies, and the merriest
Gentlemen; we did rant, and roar, and sing, and tear, Hey, Diseases and
Troubles are, c. Faith I am as drunk as a Drum, or as the driven Snow, or as
Davids Sow, as the saying is, de' see? Hey, fa la la la, prithee dear Mrs. Thea
let me kiss thee now, nay prithee do, nay shaw poise on it.


Be not so passionate good Sir.


Nay peuh, I can't abide this, you might have given one a fall now, would I
might ne'er stir; but 'tis no matter for that, I'll drink six go-downs upon
reputation in Campaign to your health, de' see? I can be merry when I set
on it: in faith here's your health upon my knees, de' understand me? Oh if I had
but Fiddles to play a health now!


Do you see Sir how abominably drunk he is?


He is a little in Beer, he is; he is disguised, that's the truth on it.


There Mrs. Thea I have done it, faith you shall pledge me by word of mouth;
de' see, nay fack I am sound, you may drink after me, de' conceive me?


You see Sir he is too drunk to be married to night.


Come come, he's the fitter for it, for being drunk, if he be sober, he may
repent him, and ask a Portion: stay here, I will fetch a Parson immediately.


This is worse and worse, Madam did you hear him?


Yes to my grief, I must into my Chamber, and be very sick.


Nay, if you stir I am a Rogue, a very Rogue, de' see? we'll be very merry,
Diseases and Troubles, c.


Who taught you this insolence? unhand her.


Why you saucy Fellow you, what's to do with you? Ha, you are so purdy.


Where's Mr. Timothy Squeeze?


'Slife, what makes this Rascal here? if I do not carry him off, I lose the
hopefullest Bubble in Christendom.


Where's Mrs. Thea, Mrs. Thea?


Mr. Timothy come along with me, Mrs. Joyce is impatient till she see's you.


I'll not stir till I see Mrs. Thea, where's Mrs. Thea? Hey, Hey.


She says you are a drunken Rascal, and she will have you kicked out.


Does she so? would I might ne'er stir if I do not do her errand to her Father.


Come away and leave her: Mrs. Joyce is a person of Quality, and Fortune, and
will use you with more civility.


I know she's a fine person, and I'll wait on her, but I am resolved to stay
till Mr. Goldingham comes, that I may tell him of this Gilflirt his Daughter.


Nay then, I must to my last shift; Bailiffs come in.


I Arrest you, at the Suit of Humphrey Nit a Barber.


Sirrah, you lie like a Rogue, I owe him not a farthing.


No Sir, but you did vi et armis break, or cause to be broken a very large
Window, where he used to expose his Flaxen Periwigs.


Is that all? I'll Bail him for that --


Will you? nay then I'll break 'em again, I'll break Windows with e're a
Gentleman that wears a head.


Come come and talk of these things in another place.


Ay with all my heart, Diseases and Troubles, c. What a pox care I, come.


This is a lucky Fellow that came in to our rescue.


Dear brother, I am glad I have found you, I have a design, and upon my Father
too, in which I am confident you will join.


-- You may be sure to command me in any thing.


I know some may blame me, but love excuses all.


Love, like the Crown, takes away all Attainders.


My design is to work so upon my Fathers covetousness, as to draw him into a
Plot against the Government; and he is you know, a mighty well wisher to the
damned good old Cause, yet.


This will be dangerous tampering with; how can you draw him into one, without
being guilty your self?


It shall be but a seeming Plot, you may be sure; I would not engage my self in
a real one; 'tis only a design to invert the order of nature for a while, and
keep my Father in awe.


How can you contrive it?


I have several great Chests almost full of Lumber, but covered on the top with
a great many fine Arms, here he comes, I have not time to tell you the rest;
but pray second me, in what I shall say to him.


I'll not examine your design, but serve you.


Have you the confidence to appear before me, after your giving my Ring away,
and sending for those mountains of Sweet-Meats, and that Ocean of Wine and
Limonades?


I humbly beg your pardon; but I thought I had done well, since you commanded
me to show all the respect imaginable to my intended Mother-in-Law.


Respect with a pox, de' call it?


I beseech you be not angry, I'll get your Ring again for you, and put you in a
way to get forty Guinnes this night, but I must be very private in it.


How! can you do that? then I will forgive all your extravagance; but how is
it? speak, you may trust Bellamour.


Sir, there is one that was my Shcool-fellow, that I am very well acquainted
with, that is called a Phanatick according to the flesh, he (after he had made
me take an Oath of Secrecy, told me of a design his Brethren had, who (out of
pure Zeal against Surplice and Common Prayer Book) were resolved upon an
insurrection, and to seize in one night upon Whitehal, and the Exchequer.


What say you?


They have accordingly provided Arms and Ammunition, which they dispose of in
packs of goods; to their secret friends, and well wishers, for which they
reward them liberally.


What can this come to?


He remembering that (when we were Boys together) I had shown him a secret Vault
in the Garden, that is known but to few, propounded to me the concealing six
Chests of Armour there, and promised forty Guinnes, and an Oath of Secrecy;
this Sir you may choose, whether you will accept of or no, but I thought I was
obliged in duty to tell you, knowing you take all occasions whatsoever for the
getting of money.


I got a good part of my Estate by Rebellion (as many other Estates were
raised) but I would be loath to lose it by Rebellion again.


There is no danger, we will all take Oaths of Secrecy.


Ready money Sir is not to be despised, 'tis a precious thing.


There spoke an Angel.


Besides Sir, if the Chest should be discovered, (which will be almost
impossible) some of your Swcarers in Ordinary shall testify you took 'em in
Pawn.


The money is sweet, but the attempt is Theodore. Now Sir, I am glad you have
put me in a way to be revenged of you for all your Villainies; I will
immediately acquaint the King with your Treason, and you shall be hanged.


For heaven's sake, betray not your own Son.


My Loyalty is dearer to me than Son and Daughter, and all the Relations in the
world; I will hang him, I'll to the King immediately.


I am at your disposal Sir, but be pleased to remember I did this for your
advantage, and out of love and duty to you.


No Sir, I will hang you, never speak on it; farewell, shall I betray my
Country?


Hold Sir, for Heaven's sake conceal it, I will return the twenty Guinnes he
gave in earnest; here they are, I will go and give 'em him immediately.


Did he give you twenty Guinnes, hum?


Yes Sir, and promised twenty more at the delivery of the Chests.


Forty Guinnes is a most delicious Sum, where are they? let me see them.


Here they are Sir, but I beseech you be not angry; I will carry them
immediately.


Hold, it may be there's no necessity of that -- I would hang this Rogue; but
forty Guinnes, dear forty Guinnes.


He comes on a pace.


Sir, I will by no means offend you with the sight of 'em, I am gone.


Stay I say, and let me see them.


I am afraid it will provoke you to talk any more of this business* do not be
offended, I will return them instantly.


'Sdeath Sir, I will see them.


There they are Sir.


Oh Sir, how I could hug that Gold.


Ay Bellamour, does it not look beautifully? they talk of the beauty of women;
but give me the beauty of Gold, Oh dear, dear, sweet Gold.


Shall I return 'em Sir?


No Sir, you shall not: Oh dear, dear Guinnes, are we all secret?


We are.


Swear never to reveal this.


We do Swear.


Well Son, your importunity at last has overcome me, when shall these Arms be
delivered?


This night at ten a Clock.


Do you Bellamonr see it done, and take his Oath of Secrecy. But I had forgot,
where is Mr. Timothy? the Parson is ready in the Parlour.


He was Arrested here by Bailiffs, for breaking Windows when he was drunk, who
have hurried him I know not whither.


'Sdeath how unlucky is this! send immediately to all the Bailiffs hereabouts,
to find him out; go Bellamour.


Pox on it, I might have saved money, he would have consented to have betrayed
his Country for half the Sum; and so will any covetous man, that can do it
safely.


Sir, I am very glad I have taken you alone; I have a secret to impart to you.


'Sdeath she's come to borrow money of me.


Though it may be to no purpose, I think it my duty to acquaint you, that I
have since I parted with you discovered a Countess that is not above thirty,
that is extremely in love with you for your person, besides your care and
thrift, which she says to me, would be very useful to her in the management
and improving of her Fortune, she has five hundred Pounds more than Isabella.


What you are merry, Mrs. Cheatly?


Nay Sir, if you distrust me, there's no hurt done; I did not think you would
embrace the offer; but I thought my self bound to discharge my trust, for the
truth is, she engaged me (though something unwilling) to use my care in this
business.


Why, sure thou art not in earnest?


If ever you were (when you said your prayers) I am.


There must be something in this, Cheatly.


You may choose whether you will believe me or no, for my part I don't desire
you should change; for I think if there be any difference, Mrs. Isabella is
something more desirable.


Good faith, but if this be true, she is not more desirable, fifty Pounds is a
noble Sum, and more than any woman's person is worth: for my part fifty Pounds
with me would turn the balance, were there ne'er so much difference in their
persons. But who is this?


You must not know, till you see her.


Can all this be true thou tell me?


If I make it not good, I'll forfeit my life; but I'll take my leave now, I
have done my errand; but truly Sir, I think you ought not in honour to quit
Isabella.


In good faith but I ought, I take it; Honour! quoth she; lose five hundred
Pounds in honour! what a pox care I for their persons in comparison with money?


I am a little in hast, but I beseech you let not Mrs. Isabella know of this,
she will be distracted.


Hold a little, it was unlucky we did not know of this before you brought
Isabella acquainted with my Daughter, I shall be troubled with her: but can
thou oblige me to contrive an interview between the Countess and me?


Ay and a Marriage too, if I would; but really I think you are too far engaged
to Isabella.


Engaged, I am not engaged, I will have nothing to do with her; I will forbid
her my house.


Is Mrs. Theodora here?


What would you have with her?


Mrs. Isabella presents her service to her, and says she cannot possibly wait
on her at Supper.


'Tis very well, 'tis no matter whether she does or no, go get thee about thy
business Lad; go go. This is very lucky: Mrs. Cheatly you'll Sup here.


Sir, I must go home first. Your Servant. This will be joyful news for the two
Lovers.


Sir here's a Porter come from Mr. Squeeze, who says he is engaged upon
extraordinary business, and cannot Sup here to night.


The Devil take thee for thy news.


Mr. Timothy was at the Rose Sir, under an Arrest, but was Bailed by Mr. Rant
and Mr. Hazard; and is gone along with them we know not whither.


All my designs are crossed this night, here's my Supper lost, and I have not
given one this dozen years before, but I'll make these Rogues fast this month
for it; begone Rogues, and call my Son: Oh here he is. Isabella? (setting aside
the name of a Mother-in-Law.)


I like her, what does he mean?


Yes, her Air! her Shape! her Beauty! her Wit.


Faith Sir (to speak the truth) she is not what she appeared to me, she has no
Air or Spirit in her Face, her Shape's very indifferent, her Motion awkward,
and her Wit little or none, but I like her well enough for a Mother-in-Law.


You talked at another rate to her to day.


I only made some few complements to her in your name, I meant not one of 'em*
I assure you.


Do you think you could have no kind of inclination for such a kind of woman?


No not I Sir, if there were none but such women, I should be out of danger of
Gun Shot.


I am sorry to find this, because it breaks a resolution I had made: I had
reflected with my self upon Isabella's youth and my age; which are so
disproportionable, that I have made choice of another, a Countess too of about
thirty years old, that's worth five hundred Pounds more than she.


How has Cheatly wheadled him already! I'll try him further: Sure Sir you
cannot be in earnest.


By Heaven I am, and (but for this aversion I find in you) I would have Married
Isabella to you.


To me Sir?


Yes, to you.


'Tis a thing I must confe^s I have no inclination in the world to; but I will
obey your commands in any thing.


No no, mistake me not, I'll not force your inclination.


Sir, I am easily inclined to any thing you please to impose upon me.


No Sir, I will impose nothing; those Marriages can never be happy where
affections do not meet.


I'll sacrifice my affection to interest, and your commands.


No no, if you had loved her, you should have Married her in my stead; but
(since you have such an aversion,) I'll follow my first design, and marry her
my self.


Then Sir I must speak freely to you, I love her infinitely, and designed to
ask your consent at the same time you declared your intention to marry her your
self, and you might easily have perceived how that declaration surprised me.


'Tis very well, did you ever reveal your love to her?


I have Sir, and she received it very kindly; and her Mother too, if you will
quit her of her engagement, will freely dispose of her to me.


And has the Daughter consented to this, say you?


She has Sir, and I am extremely happy that you are pleased to give your
consent; nothing else could be wanting to complete my happiness.


I will give you my consent to hang your self, but not to marry her, I assure
you.


How's this?


'Slife I had been finely served, to have been bobbed of my Mistress, for a
story of a Countess of I know not what, this was a fine conspiracy.


Sir, You are very mystical, pray let me understand you.


I speak plainly: Do not dare once to think of loving this Lady: Have you the
impudence to pretend to one whom I reserve for my self?


This makes me mad. Sir, Since you provoke me thus, I do pretend to her, and
will never quit those pretensions but with my life.


Impudent villain! to speak thus to your Father.


In other things I respect you as my Father, but love knows no body.


I will make you know me, or I'll cut your throat.


A lover, and afraid of threats?


And shall I that am a love endure this insolence?


I will not make use of my plot yet, things are not ripe.


Out of my doors you Rascal.


Fare you well Sir,


This design was well escaped; but'le watch your waters I warrant you.


My dear, I doubt not thy constancy, so pretty a creature cannot be false to
one that loves her as I do.


Indeed I can think of no body but you; the thoughts of you are the last that
leave me at night, and the first that salute me in the morning.


I am sure I am sufficiently troubled with her, she talks and thinks of
nothing but you; if I ask her a question about business, she answers me
something about you, and is so out of humour when you are absent.

I hear some body knock.

Alas poor thing! my dear pretty Lattice!


My dear Mr. Squeeze, I can find no satisfaction but in thy conversation, 'tis
so charming and pleasant.


Thou art the rarest woman upon earth. Let me kiss thy hand upon my knees;


Alas how can I deserve it? I can return nothing but my thanks, nor can I
desire any thing from you but your constancy.


I will be as constant to thee, as the Sun and Moon are to their courses.


But I shall have you get a young Wife, and forget me.


If I should marry, my Dear, it should be for money, that I might spare the
more for thee: besides what married man Loves not his Mistress better than if
he were single? a Wife is but a foil to a Mistress.


'Tis true, this is the fashionable opinion, but you would be of another mind I
fear.


Prithee believe me if I had a Wife, thou should have power to turn her out
of doors at thy pleasure, thou should ride in myglass Coach when she took a
hackney; thou should have my purse, my heart, and every thing: are Wives to
be compared to Mistresses, that would be a fine age in faith.


This is extreme kind, you are a good Man: I could never endure that a Wife
should share affection with me, especially from thee my Dear.


Nay, prithee my dear, do not stroke my head, 'tis bald, but 'tis not with age,
for I am not above eight and thirty, but the hair came off with a sickness.


'Tis no matter, I like it, I hate them that wear much hair upon their heads,
'tis greasy, and smells ill; but this is so sweet, and clean, and pretty, I
could kiss it now.


Oh Daughter, here has been the young Knight you know of; he was so importunate
to see you, I thought I should never have got rid of him.


What's that, pray let me know?


Nothing Sir,


Prithee my Dear tell me.


Pray Sir do not ask, it signifies nothing.


I shall take it unkindly if you do not tell me.


Nay there is nothing I can keep from you: the truth is, my Taylor came to Dun
me, but the Rascal shall stay I warrant him.


How much is the debt?


Twenty pounds.


As I am an honest man, but he shall not stay, here's the money, give it him
immediately.


Sir Ieffery Smelsmock is coming up to see Mistress Lattice; she was denied
below, but he would not be answered.


Oh heaven, we are undone, if I stop him not.


What's the matter, is it another Dun? prithee have comfort I'll send thee 50
l. to morrow morning to discharge all little driblets.


I could not expect this from you.


Ieffery much ado. Well this Mercer's saucy fellow, here's a stir for a little
money indeed.


Hang him rascal, he shall not have it these six Months for his insolence, and
I'll have him kicked besides.





Hold your tongue you insolent rascal! I'll break open Lattice, where is your
Ladyship? let me in, or by Heaven I'll break the door.


For heavens sake Sir get into the Closet till I get rid of this roaring
fellow, I know not who it is.


Ay with all my heart, where is it? I tremble every joint of me.


What Madam, your Ladyship


Oh defend me heaven from this roaring Bully, he puts me in a cold sweat.


Let me beg of you to go into another Room, and I'll satisfy you.


Come on, now you are civil.


Would this Bully were hanged, he'll ruin my daughter. Come Mr. Squeeze, all's
clear, come out.


Is he gone, he has put me in a dreadful fright; this was a Dragon of a Bully*


You see Sir what she suffers for your sake, because she will not yield to the
temptations of men.


Ay poor heart, but whither is she gone? Pray heaven she be true to me.


She must give him fair words till she gets him out, and then she'll wait on
you.


Oh me, where is she, she stays long, pray heaven all be well.


What is this Girl doing?


Gad forgive me, will she never come, what is the matter? I am afraid the
Bully is not gone.


Why Lattice, will you never come?


I hope in Gad she's honest, but I do not like this.


Oh fie upon you, you have been naughtwith this Bully, look how you are
Ruffled.


Mum, not a word, I have sent him away much ado, I'll have him clapped by the
heals if he comes to affront me again like an insolent fellow as he is.


Heaven, what noise is that there? Bullies abroad. Let us retire quickly to
bed, and bolt the door upon our selves, my dear Lattice; quickly Mistress
Cheatly bar the doors of the house.


Hey let's break windows in abundance.


Ah brave Timothy, thou art as gallant a Bully as a man shall see in a summers
day.


Here's the Constable, don't you use to beat him always when you see him?


Yes, and will now.


Stand in the Kings name.


I can stand in ne'er a Kings name in Christendom but we will beat you in the
Kings name very exceedingly.


Knock *em down, fall on Fellows of the watch.


Have at you Rogues that disturb the Kings Peace, and will not let honest
fellows give serenades, and break windows in quiet, have at ye.


Hey, have we conquered you ye Rogues? lay down your arms.


Lay down your weapons, or we'll cut your throats.


Well sir, 'tis done.


Do you mutiny ye Rogues, against Bully Rocks, your Commanders?


Are you offended at the noise of fiddles? strike up, and sound an alarm in
the ears of 'em.


Come Rogues here are just eight


Ha ha, come fellows of the watch, we'll please them for once, they are very
merry Gentlemen I fack,


'Tis very well done, there's a crown to drink for you: I, like Iulius Caesar,
am generous to foes over come.


Here's another for you to make ye as drunk as we are.


And I'll be outdone by no man, there's a broad piece for you, now I have
beaten you.


He's plaguy liberal of our Money. Stay watch and be our guard.


We thank ye Gentlemen, and will live and die with ye.


Strike up here, faith we'll see Lattice before we have done: Cheatly open the
door.





Bounce at the door, break the windows, hey.


Heart! if I be discovered in this condition I am ruined for ever, my credit in
the City will be quite lost: Heaven they have almost broke the door, I must
venture to escape at this window.


How now, what noise is that?


Some body leaped out of a window: lets see what old Rogue's this.


Ay, what old Rogues this, ha?


I was frightened out of my Lodging by these Roaring Blades, and I thought to
have escaped out of a window.


Speak to me, I represent the King's person, who are you? what make you here?


Hang him, take him away to the Round house.


My Son here drunk with Bullies! then all my shame comes together.


What's here, he has been in bed with a woman, and for hast has mistaken a red
silk stocking of hers for his own.


'Tis true, away with him an old whoring Rogue.


Ay away with him, an old Rogue, in bed with a whore! away with him, away with
him.


We must secure the woman to.


We'll secure her, carry him away.


What a dreadful mistake was this, I am for ever undone, I am for ever ruined,
what shall I do?


If you will Rant, let's first give Isabella a serenade, and then come hither
again. It will be time too, to bring our bubble to Mistress Joyce again.


Come along Fiddles, strike up.


Rank your selves here, strike up, and put out the lights that we may not be
discovered.


Fair Isabella, sweet Isabella! look out and shine upon your servants.


How now, what Rascals are these: Robin fall on.


Are you so brisk?


This must be Theodore and his man that are engaged, I parted from 'em but just
now.


Fly, shift for your selves, the day is lost.


Who's this that is so kind to draw his sword for us? my dear Brother, is it
you? a thousand thanks to you.


No words, but lets pursue the Rogues.


I Wonder who those Fellows were we rancounter'd last night.


Very active nimble youths, they ran like Irish Foot-men.


If we had caught 'em, we would have paid 'em for scouring under that Window:
But now I can think of nothing else but love. Revenge has given place to that.
Yesternight I got a promise from my Mistress, and am within this hour to meet
her, and marry her privately in the City; this day will make me richer than the
Indies can.


I congratulate your good Fortune, but cannot envy any man, since I am happy in
my Theodora's love.


Here's a Letter Mr. Bellamour came by the Post for you.


For me!


What is it that disturbs you?


News that nothing could make tolerable to me, but that it puts me into a
condition of serving my Theodora better then I could before.


How's that?


My Father has been dead these nine months, and died without a Will; my younger
Brother is at present possessed of the Estate, and has inhumanly put my Mother
and Sister out of the house, who live privately in this Town, somewhere about
Covengarden. This account I have received from my man, who is hasting up to
Town to me.


In good faith such news would break a mans heart; but pray bear it with a
manly fortitude; if my Father should knock off, I could have no other remedy.


I have now no time to railly with you, I'll to my dear Theodora, and hope to
get her into so good a humour, that we shall not be long after you in Marriage:
adieu.


What ever you are in that, I am sure you are before hand with me in the death
of a Father. How now Bullies, are you up so early? sure you have lain rough, or
have not slept to night.


How now Lover that are, and Whore-Master that was, you are full of your bobs.


What I warrant you, you are got up early to Write a fashionable Sonnet,
without sense, upon the Divine Isabella.


How many Stars, Moons, Suns, Alabasters, Roses, Pearls, and Rubies, have you
made use of for similes?


Come prithee communicate, let's see the labour of thy Muse.


As I live, drunk still: but Gentlemen I hate the name of a Muse, as I do that
of a Baud; were I a Poet I would invoke Creswell or Gifford before any Muse in
Christendom.


Faith thou art in the right, for they tw^ can supply our necessities better
than all the nine Muses.


But this is not our business, here is a young Gentleman at the door called Mr.
Timothy Squeeze, that comes to wait on you.


Hang him Rascal, keep him to your selves, he's fitter for your purpose; have
you fleeced him soundly?


Very sufficiently I assure you, but he is come upon a pleasant occasion; he
says he has done you, and your Family such an injury.


Pox on him, I will forgive him any but the trouble of his company.


Thou shalt see him, and when he tells thee his condition, thou wilt find we
have Revenged thee to the full; I'll fetch him in.


How have you used the Rogue? you have won all his money.


That's not all, but I'll not forstall you, you shall be surprised into your
pleasure; he begged of us to make him friends with you for fear you should kill
him, he fears not your Father.


Are you sure he will do me no hurt?


I am, speak to him.


Sir, your Servant.


Sir, Yours.


I beg your pardon from the bottom of my heart, for an injury I have done you,
and your Family.


What's that?


Pray Sir be not in passion, and I'll tell you, you know Sir I should have have
been your Brother-in-Law Sir; and lastnight it seems I was overtaken in
Campaign, and as these Gentlemen tell me (for I vow I remember not a word
on it) I married one Mrs. Joyce, Mr. Hazards Cousin Sir: But your Sister sent me
word she would have me kicked out of the house Sir lastnight, or I should not
have done it on my cnoscience Sir; I find I did it in passion really.


Oh brave Bullies, now you have Revenged me sufficiently.


Now Sir, I hope in God you will please to forgive me since I married in drink;
and I vow to God Sir, as I am an honest man, I meant no more hurt in it Sir,
than I do at this present; for I waked this morning Sir, and found my self in
Bed with the said Mrs. Joyce, de' understand me, (and I vow she's a pure
Bed-fellow that's the truth on it) but at first I was frighted, and wondr'd what
a dickens was the matter, when these Gentlemen came up with a Caudle to me, and
faced me down I was married Sir, and at last showed me the Ring, the Licence,
and the Parsons Certificate Sir.


No more Sir, I forgive you freely Sir.


Sir I am beholding to you; but if there be an offence you must blame those
Gentlemen; for I protest and vow I intended to marry Mrs. Thea, or would I
might ne'er stir out of this place alive. But I tell you in private, if I had
not married the aforesaid Mrs. Joyce, I believe they would have forced me to
it: for my part Sir, I don't like 'em; for between you and I, they won above
forty Pound on me. But to give the Devil his due, the Gentlewoman is a Pretty
Gentlewoman, and they say has a good Portion.





This was all we had to say to you. Fare you well.


Tim come along, dear soul.


Ay come Cousin


Sir, I have a Present for you, but let us begone Sir, and take it in another
place; pray follow me, I am weary with carrying it.


What means the fellow?


Here is a Chest of money of your Fathers that was hid in the Garden.


Of my Fathers! how came thou by it?


Not very honestly Sir, but this is no place to ask questions in, now I am
Revenged on him for calling me thief; follow me Sir.


This is a lucky supply.


Is Madam Theodora within?


She is gone out with Mr. Bellamour.


Is not your Master within?


We expect him every minute Madam.


Now Mrs. Bridget, can you represent a Stately Countess.


Never fear me; Page hold up my Train Sirrah, I can bear my head as high as
any Lady in Christendom.


Remember when any body Salutes you, to turn your Cheek to him, as great
Ladies use; that's very convenient too, for concealing a tainted breath.


Mine is not so, but I'll not forget it.


But thou hast so used to offer thy mouth, that thou wilt forget it.


Oh Sir, your Servant, the Countess of Puddle Dock is come to see Mrs.
Theodora.


Puddle-Dock! I never heard of that Title, it may be 'tis some Scotch or Irish
Title.


Madam I kiss your Honour's hand: where is my Daughter that she comes not to
wait on her Honour.


Not within. This is the Countess I spoke of


Let me see; if this be a Countess, and has such a Fortune, no more then of
Isabella; but I must into the Garden to my dear Gold. Madam I'll wait on your
Honour presently.


Is not this an amiable old Gentleman?


As bad as he is, I am not so nice, but I could make shift with him.





What's the meaning of this, is the man mad.


Thieves, thieves, murder, murder, death, devils, damnation, Hell and furies,
thieves, thieves, I am undone, undone, they have cut my throat, they have
murdered me, they have stole my money, where is it? what's become on it? where
are the Thieves? where have they hid themselves? whither shall I go to find'em?
what shall I do? shall I run? shall I stay? are they here? are they there?
where are they?


What is it transports you thus?


Oh are you here, give me my money,


Help, help, will you murder me?


Are you Mad, 'tis Mrs. Cheatly.


Another, is there more of your number, I will hang ye all, where is my money,
Money, Money?


What's the Matter Sir,


Come Countess, 'tis time to shift for our selves.





He raves help to hold him.


I have lost my money, my life, my blood, my entrails, my heart, my vitals, I
dye, I am dead, I am buried, will no body save my life, and help me to it, oh I
am mad, what say you, will you, hum; alas I am mad, there's no body: Oh my
money, my soul, Justice, Justice, I will hang all the Town, if Isabella has a
hand in it I will hang her, I will beg the help of Constables, Beadles,
Churchwardens, Baylies, Sergeants, Justices, Aldermen, Judge, Gibbet, Gallows,
and Hangmen: I will hang my son and daughter if they be guilty: and if I find
not my Money I will hang my self.


My master Sir is Mad, be pleased to command him in his Majesties name to keep
his worships wits.


Oh neighbour Justice, you are come in season, I am robbed undone, make me a
Mittimus.


For whom neighbour Goldingham.


For all Covengarden, I will hang every body, oh my Gold.


You'll spoil all, if you be thus outrageous, we must examine such things
privately, or you will never have notice of your Money.


Oh my money, I cannot contain my self, but if you will assist me, I'll
endeavour.


Ha, is my Master Robbed? now I may be fully revenged of our dominus factotum
for my beating, and other things.


Speak what can you say, if you do not discover it, I will hang you.


I do certainly believe that Mr Bellamour has it.


What he that appeared so true, and faithful to me?


The same Sir, I believe 'tis he that has robbed you.


Pray Sir make his Mittimus, I'll hang him if there were no more of the race of
all mankind.


But why do you believe it Sir!


Why do I believe it Sir?


Yes.


Why, why, why, because I do believe it.


But I must have some proofs.


Did you see him dig where my money was hidden?


Oh yes Sir, why should I say so else? Where did you lay your money?


In the Garden.


Ay there I saw him digging: What was your money in?


In a Chest.


Why there's the business, now I saw him have a Chest, and the very same Chest
you mean.


What manner of Chest is it?


What manner of one: 'Sdeath I shall be snapped!


How is it made?


Why 'tis made -- 'tis made very like a kind of a Chest, extraordinary like a
Chest.


But how?


Why 'tis a great Chest.


Mine is a little one. Oh my Gold!


Ay so was this in it self, but for what it contained it was a great one, and
was so heavy that I am sure it made him puff and blow to carry it.


It must be the same, mine is very heavy.


Hold a little pray, what Colour is it of?


Of what Colour.


Yes.


Why it is of a colour, a certain Colour, I know not what a deus they call it,
but really it is very pretty Colour, for a chest, that's the truth on it.


Was it not a red?


No, no, mine's a green one.


Lord, you are so hasty, a reddish green I was going to say.


The same Sir; pray make his mittimus, and let him be hanged.


Here he comes, let him not discover this of me; perhaps he will confess it.


Come you Villain, come near and confess your wickedness, your abominable
action.


What do you mean Sir?


Oh horrid traitor, do you not blush?


Has he heard any thing of his daughter and me; for what should I blush Sir?


Oh impudence, as if he knew not what I meant; but all your villainy is
discovered: oh wretch, to come into my house to betray me, and abuse my
goodness with so infamous an action!


Sir, since you have discovered me, I'll make no more excuses.


That I should guess so right when I swear at a venture: I told you Sir, he would
confess.


He ha's confessed in part, but we must have more yet*


It was my design to tell you of this, but I stayed for a happier opportunity,
and I beseech you be not angry' till I give my reasons.


Oh abominable insolence, he would be giving me reasons for his infamous theft,
like an impudent Thief.


These Titles are none of mine, and you'll find, if you examine it, that my
crime is pardonable.


Oh devil, pardonable, to take away my soul, my life, my blood!


I am in a condition to do your blood no wrong, and to make full reparation for
this pretended injury.


Oh you overjoy me, will you make restitution.


Your honour shall be fully satisfied.


Pox on my honour, I don't talk of my honour. But what could incite you to such
action?


Love.


A pox on your love, admirable love indeed, love of my broad pieces.


No sir, it is not your Gold that I care for, let me but enjoy what I have
already, and I care for nothing in the world beside.


Oh intolerable insolence, he justifies his theft, and would keep what he has
stolen. He distracts me, Sir you shall be hanged, drawn and quartered, before
you shall keep the least part of it.


No Sir, you must not keep what you have got, by your favour.


With your favour Sir, but I must; we have mutually engaged our faiths, and are
now married, and nothing but death shall part us.


Engaged his faith, and married to my Chest:


Here is some mystery: where is this Treasure you have taken?


Here in the house.


Have you not broke it up?


Broke her up; better words Sir, or I shall forget my respect to you; I assure
you she's too honest.


How my Chest of money too honest.


Her fair eyes have inspired in me a more refined passion.


The Fair eyes of my chest.


I see Sir 'tis in vain to conceal the truth any longer. 'Tis not a quarter
of an Hour since your daughter, and I were married in Covengarden; and without
a Portion.


Oh devil, is that affront added to my loss?


Without portion, consider that Sir.


Make his Mitt^mus, you shall be hanged you Villain, send him to the Gatehouse
quickly.


How be hanged! I assure you, though I stole your daughter, 'twas with her own
consent.


But you have confessed a more capital theft; or if you had not, 'tis sworn
against you, and I must send you to the Gaol.


Oh Heaven! what do I hear? S^r, ^veou had any affection for me, hear me now;
this Gentleman is a man of Quality and Fortune.


A curse on him, he has raised his Fortune on my ruins, and for his Quality
'twill bring him to the Gallows.


For Heaven's sake Sir use no extremity on him, I consented to all he did; if
there be a fault committed against you, I am equally guilty, and will suffer
with him.


Heaven! my own Daughter guilty of such an action, she shall be hanged, send
her to the Gaol immediately; no less then six thousand broad pieces at a time.


Sir, I underotand you not.


Oh cunning Baggage! look you Mr. Justice, she understands me not; I'll have
her hanged, my own Daughter Rob me.


Rob you! I am amazed.


Sure Sir, you are not compose mentis.


I am sorry to find ye guilty of so great a Felony, I must send ye both to the
Goal without Bail or Mainprize.


Brother, I heard you were in this condition, and came to rescue you.


Oh Villain! are you come to heighten my affliction with the sight of you?


Sir, I come about a little business that concerns you.


Business with me? you insolent Rebel, what can that be.


Sir, the money is right.


What money you impertinent Ass?


The broad pieces that were in the Garden, they are just six thousand; and I'll
give you an acquittance under my hand for them.


O Devil, had you them?


They were received by my order, to my own proper use and behoo^e; I say
Received per me Theodore.





Nay, good Neighbour keep the peace.


I cannot keep the peace, I will not keep the peace* let the peace keep its
self; 'tis impossible to keep the peace.


By your leave Sir, you must keep the peace, and not be Judge in your own case.


Send him to Gaol then presently.


Be patient, and I will.


Why would you have the Conscience to hang your Son?


Give me my Gold, and I'll spare your life.


No Sir, your Gold is in sure hands, 'tis held in Mortmain.


Then I will hang you Rogue, make his Mittimus.


You may please to remember, that there is a College Lease of 4 hundred Pounds
a year, that you hold only by my life; you will lose that (if you hang me)
besides your broad pieces, of which you shall never have one by Heaven.


Nay then, I cannot be in a worse condition than I am; make hast Sir with his
Mittimus.


'Tis a making.


Hold Sir, you must not make it, I did not St^al the Gold; I did but Seize
upon it for the Kings use.


By Heaven, I owe the King not a farthing, I paid the last assessment, it went
to my heart I am sure; and yet, to say truth, the Assessors have stretched
their consciences against the King all over England, God bless them: Have you
the impudence to say I owe the King money?


Assist me Brother.


Treason.


There are Arms and Ammunition in the Vault Sir, if you be pleased to remember.


Have a care what you do Sir, Treason will fall heavy upon a rich man; you will
be an excellent morsel for a Courtier.


Have ye the impudence to speak of a Plot ye drew me into, ye brace of Traitors
and Villains?


Sir I know nothing of a Plot, not I, but my Brother and I can swear we saw
Arms and Ammunition put in a Vault; and we know from whom they were Received,
and the consideration too. We shall find friends Sir.


Sir Release the Gold, and make no more ado; if it should be found out that we
know of the Plot, we should be pardoned, for bringing in so rich and Capital an
offender; but you would find no more mercy, than ever you showed to one that
forfeited a Mortgage.


A curse on these Villains, I am caught in my own snare; they are in the right,
I shall be sure to be hanged, but if I were sure they were to be hanged with
me, it were no matter: But Son, are you in earnest? will you not give me some
of my Gold again?


Not one piece by heaven, and pray Sir believe I deal fairly with you, that I
ask no more; you know, I have not had a shilling of you these dozen years, 'tis
time now to gather my Arrears.


What will become of me? I must either lose my money or my life, I know not
which is best; I think I must go hang my self, for fear of being hanged.


What shall I send him to Goal?


No, let it alone, I must forgive the Rogue for this time.


And do you release me of the money, before all these witnesses?


Yes yes, but you cursed Villain I will be revenged on you, I'll marry
Isabella, get Children and disinherit you of all the rest of my Estate.


Now since you have Releast me, look in your Chests in the Vault, and you will
find nothing but Lumber.


And was it no Plot you drew me into?


No by heaven, I but pretended it, and your hard usage forced me to these
extremities.


Oh unheard of Villain, I will go marry Isabella instantly, and I hope you will
hang your self.


Stay Sir, I have one thing more to ask of you. This Lady and I are Married;
and beg your pardon, and your blessing.


Sir I beg your blessing and your pardon: Heaven would have it thus, and I
could not help it.


'Sdeath and Hell! Married! you two Married!


'Tis now too late to perplex your self.


Oh Treacherous wretches! Oh this Engine of the Devil, Cheatly with her damned
Countess of Puddle-Dock.


Will you give us your blessing Sir? we kneel for it.


Yes, I will give you my blessing.


I shall receive it joyfully.


May all the curses e're attended Marriage fall on you.


Oh impious wish.


We are obliged to you Sir.


May invincible impotence possess you, raging Lust her, and tormenting
jealousy both of ye.


For shame Neighbour be not so wicked.


May the perpetual spirit of contention wait on ye, may ye never in your lives
agree in one thing; may the name of quiet ne'er be heard betwixt ye; and to
complete all, may ye never be asunder: and so Farewell.


I'll after him, and try if I can mollify him.


Dear Sister, I am infinitely happy in my relation to you.





Dear Isabella, here is a worthy. Gentleman you must call Brother.


I have a nearer Title to her than what you can give me, she's my own Sister
Isabella.


This is wonderful.


Indeed I had an Elder Brother beyond Sea, but we (having not seen him in nine
years, nor heard from him these fifteen months) concluded him dead.


(To his great grief) my younger Brother will find it otherwise.


But is it possible! are you my Brother? indeed you have some resemblance of my
Father, when he was living.


If you be Sir William Rains his Daughter of the North (as I am sure you are)
I am your Brother; but thou were too young when I left England; to have any
impressions left of me now.


My dear Brother, I am convinced, this is a happy hour, this will revive my
dear Mother, who has kept her Chamber ever since my Fathers death.


My dear Brother, now you are doubly so, but friendship yet shall be the
stricter tie.


This is a wonderful and happy union of our Families.


To show you more clearly I am your Brother, (though my Father died without a
Will) I know it was his intention to give you five thousand Pounds, which upon
my honour you shall have.


This is generosity in the highest point; but I was rich in the possession of
my Isabella, beyond the thoughts of Dowry; but if I live to have my Fathers
Estate, faith I'll be even with you.


This noble offer confirms me, you are my Brother; but why did you so long
conceal your self?


That my dear Theodora can best tell you. But let us hast to see my afflicted
Mother.


They say the Justices Worship is here Gentlemen.


The Constable with Squeeze! pray lets stay a moment after our Comedy, that
ends so pleasantly, in hopes to see a Farse.


Heaven! what confusion am I in, and besides my bones are all loose with the
fall last night.


What's the matter Mr Constable?


Why Sir, this old Gentleman (not having the fear of God before his eyes) by
the malice and instigation of the Devil, did yesternight vi armis, contrary to
the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity; commit carnal
copulation with one Mris Lattice.


The Stile of an Indictment.


How now Mr. Squeeze, is the snare fallen upon you? can you help a man to three
or four hundred Pound at fifty in the hundred, with good security?


You are very merry Sir, 'tis well if you have cause. Oh! Mrs. Cheatly what
shall I do? my reputation is ruined, I am undone for ever.


Oh Sir, there is more affliction for you yet, your Son lost fifty Pound last
night, and Married a wench, one Mrs. Joyce, that was kept by Alderman
Do-Little.


Oh Heaven! all my misfortunes come together; this added to the other, will
distract me.


This is for your damned Brokeage and Use.


Could you not have bribed the Constable?


He durst not let me go for fear of the Bullies? what shall I do; what shall I
do?


I would be loath to put you to inconvenience, but if you would own my Daughter
for your wife, it would soon preserve or at least repair your credit.


She says true.


And if you would really make her your wife, you would be fully revenged on
your Son for his rash Marriage.


Ha, that's true again directly.


If you do it not, the poor Girl will be ruined for ever in her reputation;
which you know is her support at present.


She is in the right, there is no way to save my reputation but this; if my
disgrace should be published, no Godly Citizen will trust me; old men in this
Town had as good marry their wenches, for they stand 'em in more money, and
they keep 'em as long as if they were their wives.


Mr. Squeeze. here's your Lady, pray restore her Red Stocking, and take your
own Black one; Oh Theodore, thou art gone the way of all flesh, I hear thou't
Married.


I am Sir, for all your instructions to the contrary.


Then thou art a lost man; yet faith 'tis as Pretty a Girl for a fortnights,
use or so, as a man could wish.


I find this Bully has the common place wit of all the young Fops in this Town;
in Railing against Marriage.


Now art thou, Theodore, for a year condemned to eat and drink, go to Plays,
to Church, and lie with thy own wife most unreasonable; But 'tis but having a
little patience, and we shall have you amongst us again, as honest a sinner as
the best of us.


O Lord, here's my Father, I am so afraid of him.


Bear up to him, you say you have two hundred Pound a year left by an Aunt,
which he can't touch.


Ay, I have so.


Stand up and own your wife to him; then besides 'twill vex the heart of
Theodora to see how you have bobbed her.


Ay, I think so, (do you understand me?) I hope 'twill break her heart, de'
see?


Sir, here's your Son and his Lady, come to ask your blessing.


Oh you infinite Rascal!


Rascal Sir, I am the Son of a Scrivener, and they say I take mightily like my
Father too.


Oh Villain! marry a Whore, out of my sight.


A Whore Sir, I vow to God I scorn your words, do you mark me, she's as Pretty
a civil young Lady, and I am sure I had her Maiden-Head, had I not my dear?


Yes indeed my dear, the best I had for you.


Oh infamous Villain! marry a Strumpet?


Sir, I'd have you kicked if you were not my Father-in-Law.


Dare to speak one ill word more of my Cousin, and I'll cut your Throat, old
Sot.


I am horrible afraid of this Hector; but I will be Revenged of the Rogue my
Son.


Now Madam Lattice I hope you'll own me to be equal at least with your Ladyship,
Mr. Tim. has made me an honest woman; there's more that you are.


Farewell Theodore, thou art no more a man of this world; Marriage alters some
men, and makes them forget their friends, as much as Perferment does


But I hope he has more grace.


No more of your senseless Railing against Marriage, 'tis dull and common.


There is no mollifying of your Father, he's run out in a rage; he has shut
himself in his Closet, and will not be spoke to; Constable what makes you
here?


Sir we have brought an old Gentleman here before you, upon suspicion of
Fornication, an please your Worship.


Whom, Mr. Squeeze! can a man of your years be guilty of Fornication?


Sir, we took him leaping out of a Window half undressed, and for haste he had
puton a Red Silk-stocking of the Gentlewoman's from whom he rose:


Is this true?


'Tis true, I was in bed with this Gentlewoman, but she's my wife; and I hope
that's no offence.


Your wife.


Yes, and before all this company I a vow her to be so.


O fie for shame Sir, marry a Strumpet


Peace you insolent Rascal.


Lattice, I wish thee joy of thy old Rascal.


I thank you Mr. Theodore. Now Mrs. Joyce I hope you think not your self my
equal: Down on your knees huswife and ask me blessing.


I scorn your words, I shall never endure to call you Mother-in-Law while I
live.


Madam Isabella, I wish you much joy with this Gentleman, and he is young
enough, and handsome enough to give you good store on it.


Mrs. Cheatly, to show my gratitude to you, I have a hundred pieces ready for
you; and Robin, you I will make my particular care.


Sir, to show you that I have taken some care of you, I have provided Fiddles
for you.


Let 'em enter, we'll borrow my Fathers house for a Dance; for perhaps we shall
never come in it again.


What say you Mrs. Cheatly, shall you and I marry, or continue to love on as we
did?


I am very indifferent Robin, take thy own choice.


Why then as you were.


Content.


Strike up.


Now we have done, I must confess I have transgressed in my duty to my Father,
which I could not help; unless I would have neglected a greater, which I ought
to your Beauty my dear Isabella, and my Love; and I hope

My passion will a just excuse be thought:
What is urged on by love, can be no fault.

WHen Sieges now by Poets are prepared,
And Love and War against Nations is declared;
When Africa and Asia are not spared,
By some who in Rime will all the World o'rerun,
Who in their Conquests will no Country shun,
Not scaping the Mogul, nor Prester Iohn,
No American Prince is in his Throne secure,
Not Totty Potty Moy himself is sure:
But may the fury of their Rime endure,
Nay in time each Prince in Guinny will be sought,
And under these Poetic Fetters brought;
And we shall see how the black Rogues loved and fought.
When such great things are for the Stage designed,
We fear this trifle will no favour find.
But as a fop that's dressed in Masquerade,
Will any place with impudence invade,
And little rambling Punks dare be so rude,
Among the best of Ladies to intrude:
So Poets sure, though ill, may be allow'd
Among the best in Masquerade to crowd.
Our Poet who wrote this Incognito,
Does boldly claim this privilege as his due;
He presses in, and will not be kept out,
Though he deserves to stand amongst the rout,
Those fifteen hundred Poets who have writ,
And never could have one Play acted yet.
But now he's in, pray use him civilly,
Let him, what e're* he says, unquestioned be,
According to the Laws of Masquerade,
Those sacred Laws by dancing Nations made,
Which the young Gallants sure will ne'er invade.
If ye resolve that yee'l be angry now,
Ye vent your spleen upon an unknown Foe;
Or if he be not, yet yee'l make him so:
But if a kindness to him ye intend,
And though 't deserves it not, the Play commend:
Each man for ought he knows is kind to's friend.

