HOw have we in the space of one poor Age,
Beheld the Rise and Downfall of the Stage!
When, with our King restored, it first arose,
They did each day some good old Play expose;
And then it flourished: Till, with Manna tired,
For wholesome Food ye nauseous Trash desired.
Then rose the whiffling Scribblers of those days,
Who since have lived to bury all their Plays;
And had their issue full as numerous been
As Priams, they the Fate of all had seen.
With what prodigious scarcity of Wit
Did the new Authors starve the hungry Pit?
Infected by the French, you must have Rhyme,
Which long, to please the Ladies ears, did chime.
Soon after this came Ranting Fustian in,
And none but Plays upon the fret were seen:
Such Roaring Bombast stuff, which Fops would praise,
Tore our best Actors Lungs, cut short their days.
Some in small time did this distemper kill,
And had the savage Authors gone on still,
Fustian had been a new Disease in the Bill.
When Time, which all things tries, had laid Rhyme dead,
The vile Usurper Farce reigned in its stead.
Then came Machines, brought from a Neighbour Nation,
Oh how we suffered under Decoration.
If all this stuff has not quite spoiled your taste,
Pray let a Comedy once more be graced:
Which does not Monsters represent, but Men,
Conforming to the Rules of Master Ben.
Our Author, ever having him in view,
At humble distance would ^his steps pursue.
He to correct, and to inform did write:
If Poets aim at nought but to delight,
Fiddlers have to the Bays an equal right.
Our Poet found your gentle Fathers kind,
And now some of his works your favour find.
He'll treat you still with somewhat that is new,
But whether good or bad, he leaves to you.
Bawdy the nicest Ladies need not fear,
The quickest fancy shall extract none here.
We will not make 'em blush, by which is shown
How much their bought Red differs from their own.
No Fop no Beau shall just exceptions make,
None but abandoned Knaves offence shall take:
Such Knaves as he industriously offends,
And should be very loath to have his Friends.
For you who bring good humour to the Play,
We'll do our best to make you laugh to day.

COusin Shamwell well met; Good morrow to you.


Cousin Belfond your humble Servant: What makes you abroad so early? 'Tis not
much past seven.


You know we were Bowsy last night: I am a little hot-headed this morning: And
come to take the fresh Air here in the Temple-walks.


Well: And what do you think of our way of living here? Is not rich generous
Wine better than your poor Hedg-Wine stum'd, or dull March-Beer? Are not
delicate well-bred, well-dress'd Women better than Dairy-Maids, Tenants
Daughters, or Barefoot Strumpets? Streets full of fine Coaches, better than a
yard full of Dung-Carts? A Magnificent Tavern, than a Thatched Ale-house? Or the
society of brave honest, witty, merry Fellows, than the Conversation of
unthinking Hunting, Hawking Block-heads, or High-shoo'd Peasants and their
wiser Cattle?


O yes, a world adad. Ne'er stir, I could never have thought there had been
such a gallant place as London: Here I can be drunk over night, and well next
morning: Can ride in a Coach for a shilling as good as a Deputy Lieutenants;
and such merry Waggs, and ingenious Companions. -- Well, I vow and swear, I am
mightily beholding to you, Dear Cousin Shamwell: Then for the Women! Mercy upon
us, so civil and well bred. And I'll swear upon a Bible, finer all of them than
Knight Baronets Wives with us.


And so kind and pleasant!


Ay, I vow pretty Rogues! No pride in them in the World; but so courteous and
familiar, as I am an honest man, they'll do whatever one would have 'em
presently; Ah sweet Rogues: While in the Country, a pies take 'em, there's such
a stir with pish, fie, nay Mr. Timothy, what do you do? I vow I'll squeak, never
stir I'll call out, ah hah --


And if one of 'em happen to be with Child: There's strait an uproar in the
Country, as if the Hundred were sued for a Robbery!


Ay so there is: And I am in that fear of my Father besides adad, he'd knock me
in the Head, if he should hear of such a thing: To say truth, he's so terrible
to me I can never enjoy my self for him: Lord! What will he say when he comes
to know I am at London? Which he in all his life-time would never suffer me to
see, for fear I should be debauched forsooth; And allows me little or no money
at home neither.


What matter what He says? Is not every Foot of the Estate entailed upon you?


Well, I'll endur't no longer! If I can but raise Money; I'll teach him to use
his Son like a Dog, I'll warrant him.


You can ne'er want that: Take up on the Reversion: 'Tis a lusty one; And
Cheatly will help you to the Ready: And Thou shalt shine and be as gay as any
Spruce Prigg that ever walked the Street.


Well: adad, you are pleasant men: And have the neatest sayings with you:
Ready, and Spruce Prigg, and abundance of the prettiest witty words. -- But
sure that Mr. Cheatly is as fine a Gentleman as any wears Head: And as
ingenious; ne'er stir I believe he would run down the best Scholar in Oxford,
and put 'em in a Mouse-hole with his Wit.


In Oxford! Ay, and in London too.


Goodsookers Cozen! I always thought they had been wittiest in the
Universities.


O fie Cozen: A Company of Putts! mere Putts!


Putts, mere Putts: very good I'll swear, ha ha ha.


They are all Scholar Boys, and nothing else, as long as they live there: And
yet they are as confident as if they knew every thing; when they understand no
more beyond Magdalen-Bridge than mere Indians. But Cheatly is a rare fellow:
I'll speak a bold word, He shall Cut a Sham or Banter with the best Wit or Poet
of 'em all.


Good again! Cut a Sham, or Banter! I shall remember all these quaint words in
time: But Mr. Cheatly's a prodigy that's certain.


He is so; and a worthy brave fellow, and the best friend where he takes, and
the most sincere of any man breathing.


Nay, I must needs say, I have found him very frank, and very much a Gentleman,
and am most extremely obliged to him and you for your great kindness.


This morning your Clothes and Liveries will come home, and thou shalt appear
rich and splendid like thy self, and the Mobile shall worship thee.


The Mobile! That's pretty. Cheatly, my best friend, let me embrace thee.


My sprightly Son of Timber and of Acres: My noble Heir I salute thee: The Cole
is coming, and shall be brought in this morning.


Cole? Why 'tis Summer, I need no firing now. Besides I intend to burn Billets.


My lusty Rustic, learn and be instructed. Cole is in the language of the
Witty, Money. The Ready, the Rhino; thou shalt be Rhinocerical, my Lad, thou
shalt.


Admirable I swear! Cole! Ready! Rhino! Rhinocerical! Lord, how long may a man
live in ignorance in the Country?


Ay: But what Asses you'll make of the Country Gentlemen when you go amongst
them. 'Tis a Providence your are fallen into so good hands.


'Tis a mercy indeed. How much Cole, Ready, and Rhino shall I have?


Enough to set thee up to Spark it in thy Brothers face: And e're thou shalt
want the Ready, the Darby, Thou shalt make thy fruitful Acres in Reversion to
fly, And all thy sturdy Oaks to bend like Switches! But thou must squeeze my
Lad: Squeeze hard, and Seal my Bully. Shamwell and I are to be bound with thee.


I am mightily beholding to you both I vow and swear; my Uncle Sir Edward took
my Brother when he was a Child, and Adopted him: Would it had been my Lot.


He is a noble Gentleman, and maintains him in Coach and Equipage fit for him.


Thou shalt not see the Prigg thy Brother till thou shalt out-jingle him in
Ready, out-shine him in thy Ornaments of Body, out-spark him thy Coach and
Liveries; and shalt be so Equipped, that thou shalt dazzle the whole Town with thy
Outrageous Splendour.


I vow his Tongue is rarely hung!


Thy Brothers heart shall break with Envy at thy Gallantry: The Fops and Beaux
shall be astonished at thy brightness. What Ogling there will be between thee
and the Blowings: Old staring at thy Equipage. And every Buttock shall fall
down before thee.


Ha ha ha! I vow you are the pleasant'st man I ever met with, and I'll swear
the best friend I ever had in my life; that I must needs say. I was resolved
not to let my Brother see me till I was in Circumstances dee see: And for my
Father he's in Holland. My Mothers Brother died and left him sole Executor.
He'll not be here these six Weeks.


Well, when you see your Brother he'll envy you, and rail at those who made you
flourish so. We shall be cast off.


Gudzookers Cousin! I take it very unkindly that you should say so. I'll cast
off all the Relations in the World before I'll part with such true, such loving
Friends, adad. Hackum, your Servant; Servant Captain.


Your humble Trout, good noble Squire, you were brave and bowzy last night;
i'saith you were.


Yes really, I was Clear: For I do not remember what I did, or where I was:
Clear, Clear; is not that right?


Ay ay! Why, you broke Windows: scoured, broke open a House in Dorset Court,
and took a pretty Wench, a Gentleman's Natural, away by force.


Very true: And this Magnanimous Spark, This Thunder-bolt of War, Captain
Hackum, laid about him like a Hero, as did some other of your friends, or else
the Watch had mauled us: But we made them scour.


Nay of my Conscience, the Captain's mighty Valiant; there's Terror in that
Countenance and Whiskers: He's a very Scanderberg incarnate. And now you put me
in mind, I recollect somewhat of this matter: My Shoulders are plaguy sore, and
my Arms black and blue; but where's the Wench, the Natural, ha Captain?


Ah Squire, I led her off. I have her safe for you.


But does not the Gallant thunder and roar for her?


The Scoundrel dares not: He knows me, who never knew fear in my life; For my
part, I love Magnanimity and Honour, and those things; And fighting is one of
my Recreations.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,
Is a Herald to himself, and a Godfather too.

O brave Captain.


The Prigster lugged out in defence of his Natural; the Captain whipped his
Porker out, and away rubbed Prigster and called the Watch.


Prigster, lugged out, Natural, Porker, rubbed, admirable! This is very
ingenious Conversation: You're the purest Company; Who would not keep Company
with the Wits; Pox of the Country I say.


But Squire, I had damned ill luck afterwards: I went up the Gaming Ordinary,
and lost all my Ready; they lest me not a Rag or Sock: Pox of the Tatts for me:
I believe they put the Doctor upon me.


Tatts, and Doctor! what's that?


The Tools of Sharpers, false Dice.


Hark you, prithee Noble Squire, Equipp me with a Couple of Meggs, or two
Couple of Smelts.


Smelts! What shall we bespeak another Dish of Fish for our Dinner?


No no, Meggs are Guineas, Smelts are Half Guineas: He would borrow a Couple of
Guineas.


Meggs, Smelts! Ha ha ha. Very pretty by my troth. And so thou shalt, Dear
Captain: There are two Meggs; and I vow and swear I am glad I have 'em to
pleasure you, adad I am.


You are so honest a Gentleman, Quarrel every day and I'll be your Second; once
a day at least: And I'll say this for you, There's not a finer Gentleman this
day walks the Fryers; no dispraise to any man, let him be what he will.


Adad you make me proud Sir. Lolpoop, where have you been all this morning
Sirrah?


Why 'tis but rear marry, 'tis meet a bit past Eight: By'r Lady yeow were so
fow drunken last neeght I had thoughten yeow wouden ha leen a bed awe the morn:
Well, mine eyne ache a gazing up and down on awe the fine sights; but for awe that
send me North to my own Caunty again.


O silly Rogue: You are only fit for Cattle. Gentlemen, you must excuse him, he
knows no better.


Marry, better quoth a! By the Mess, this is a life for the Deel: To be drunken
each night, break Windows, Roar, Sing and Swear in the Streets; go to
Loggerheads with the Constable and the Watch, han Harlots in Gold and Silver
Lace: Hea'n bless us, and send me a whom again.


Peace, you saucy Scoundrel, or I'll Cudgel you to Pap: Sirrah do not provoke
me, I say do not.


Ods flesh, where's Money for awe this? Yeowst be run agraunt soon and you
takken this caurse, Ise tell a that.


Take that Sirrah: I'll teach you to mutter: What my Man become my Master?


Waunds! give me ten times more and send me whom again at after. What will old
Maaster say to this? I mun ne'er see the Face of him I wot.


Hang him Rogue. Toss him in a Blanket.


Let me talk with him a little. Come on Fellow.


Talk! Well, what sen ye?


Your Master being in this matter, to deport his Countenance somewhat
obliquely, to some principles, which others but out of a Mature Gravity may
have weighed, and think too heavy to be undertaken; what does it avail if you
shall precipitate or plunge your self into affairs, as unsuitable to your
Physiognomy as they are to your Complexion.


Hah, what sen you? yeow mistaken me: I am not Book-learn'd: I understand a
not.


No, 'tis the strangest thing! Why, put the Case you are indebted to me 20 l.
upon a Scire facias: I extend this up to an Outlawry, upon Affidavit upon the
Nisi prius: I plead to all this matter Non est inventus upon the Panel; what
is there to be done more in this Case, as it lies before the Bench, but to
award out Execution upon the Posse Comitatus, who are presently to issue out a
Certiorari.


I understand a little of Sizes, Nisi prizes, Affidavi, Sussurari! But by the
Mess I cannot tell what to mack of awe this together not I.


Ha ha. Puppy! Owl! Loggerhead! O silly Country Put! Here's a Prigg indeed:
He'll ne'er find out what 'tis to Cut a Sham or Banter: Well, I swear Sir you
do it the best of any man in the World.


No no, I swear not I.


I protest Sir you do it Incomparably.


Nay, now you Complement: Faith you make me blush.


Sham and Banter are Heathen Greek to me: But yeow have cut out fine wark for
your sell last Neeght: I went to see the House yeow had Brocken, awe the Windows
are pood dawn. I asked what was the matter, and by the Mass they haw learnt
your Nam too; they saiden Squire Belfond had done it, and Ravished a Wench: and
that they hadden gotten the Lord Chief Justice Warren for you, and wooden bring
a pawr of Actions against yeow.


Is this true?


Ay by the Mass.


No matter; we'll bring you off with a wet finger* trust me for that.


Dear Friend, I rely upon you for every thing.


We value not twenty such things of a rush.


If any of their Officers dare invade our Privileges, we'll send em to Hell
without Bail or Mainprize.


But I can tella a worcester news than awe this; I ne'er saw flesh alive, and I saw not
your Fathers man Roger come out oath Temple-yate even now. Your Father's in Town
that's certain.


How! my Father say you? 'Tis impossible.


Courage my Heir in Tail: Thy Father's a poor sneaking Tenant for Life; thou
shalt live better than he can: And if we do contract a Debt upon thy dirty
Acres in the North, I have designed for you a fine young Lady with a swinging
Fortune to redeem all; And 'tis impossible my Lad to miss her.


Sir, let me embrace you, and love you* Never man embraced a better Friend!
Amicus Certus in re incerta Cernitur, as the saying is.


Sir, Sir, let me speak one word with you; Ods-flesh, I'll dye the Death of a
Dog, and awe these yeow seen here, be not Rogues, Cheats, and Pick-pockets.


Peace, you Rascal; Adad I would not have any of em hear for five hundred
pounds; you were a dead man.


What is the reason they dare not stir out of this privileged place, but on
Sabbath-days.


You Blockhead, Mr. Cheatly had an Aldermans young Wife run away with him, is
sued for it, and is in fear of a substantial Jury of City Cuckolds. Shamwells
unnatural Father lays wait for him, to apprehend him and run him into the
Country. The Brave and Valiant Gentleman, Captain Hackum, who is as stout as a
Lyon, beat a Judges Son the other day. And now your questions are fully answered,
you Put you.


Honest Shamwell, thou art a rare fellow: Thy Cozen here is the wealthiest
Caravan we have met with a long time; the hopefullest Sealer that ever yet
touched Wax among us: But we must take off that evil Counsellor of His.


I warrant you.


All your movables together; go into your Lodging and sit them: your new
Footmen, and your French Valet de Chambre are there, I'll wait on you there
presently.


Odsflesh, here's whaint wark: By'r Lady this is fine! whaw whaw!


Get you in, you Rogue: An you mutter one word more, adad I'll mince you,
Sirrah: Well, go in all of you. Gentlemen, I shall see you presently.


Immediately: Let us hug our selves, my dear Rascal, in this adventure you
have done very well to engage him last night in an Out-rage; and we must take
care to put him upon all the expense we can: We must reduce him to have as much
need of us as possible.


Thou art in the right: But Captain, where's the Convenient, the Natural?


Why at my House: my Wife has wrought her into a good humour: She is very
pretty; and is now pleased to think the Squire will be a better Keeper than her
former; for he was but a Sharper, a Tatmonger, and when he wanted Money would
kick and beat her most immoderately.


Well: I'll say that for the Captains Wife, she's as good an able Discreet
Woman to carry on an Intrigue, as e're a Woman in the Fryers! Nay better.


Your Servant good Mr. Shamwell; she's a very good Woman thanks be to Heaven, I
have great comfort in her; she has a Cup of the best Cherry-Brandy in the
Friars.


George, to season the Squire in his new Equipage.


Well, well, it shall be done.


You'll find this Fellow a necessary Tool in Consort with his Wife, who is,
indeed, a Bawd of parts: He is a good Ruffian enough: For tho he be not stout,
he's impudent, and will roar and keep a filthy pother, which is enough to make
Fools believe he's stout.


Let him, and the small Fry pick up the Squires loose Crumbs, While we share in
the lusty Sums. Scrapeall with all his Zeal; our godly Accomplice in all
designs; leave him to me. Scrapeall! Have you brought the money for the Squire?


I come to tell you that my man approaches with the Money and the Goods for
your Squire.


I hope you have not burdened him with too many Goods at first?


No: But a fourth part: 'Tis true the Goods are somewhat stale, but I will take
them off at small under rates: You know I am not seen in furnishing of the
Goods and Money, but only in the buying of the Goods. My Lawyer accompanies my
Man to testify the Writings.


'Tis as it should be: He is a fat Squire; the Estate in Tail is full 3000 l. a
year. He will yield well.


l. out of her Fortune; and the Squires Lewdness and Prodigality will soon let
me deep into his Reversion. Besides his lighting into these hands, will make
his Father, when he finds it, hasten to agree with me for his Redemption; I
like the business well. I am going to the man you call Crump, who helps
Solicitors to Affidavit-men, and Swearers, and Bail.


His Office is next door; his Wardrobe for Bail and Witnesses. Here he comes;
let's meet him.


Sure I should know the Face of that Fellow, that's going there into
White-Friers.


'Tis a most Notorious one; you have seen him often, this that most audacious
Rogue, Cheatly; who has drawn in so many young Heirs, and undone so many
Sealers: He is a Bolter of White-Friers.


It is that Villain!


I am very glad Sir, you have dispatcht your business so soon in Holland.


I had great success, and finished all six Weeks at least e're I expected; and
had time to come by the way of Flanders, and see that Country which I desired:
And from Newport I came to Dover; and riding Post from thence, I took a Boat at
Southwark, and landed just now here at the Temple: But I am troubled you had
sent my Packet to Holland e're I came.


I received none from you of late: No Packet has arrived this Fortnight from
Holland.


Have you heard no News from my Son, nor my Steward in the Country?


None these ten or twelve days.


That Son is all the joy of my life; for him I hurry up and down, take pains,
spare and live hard to raise his Fortune.


Indeed, I hear he's a fine Gentleman, and understands his Country affairs as
well as e're a Farmer of them all.


I must confess he proves after my own Heart: He's a solid Young man, a Dutiful
Child as ever man had, and I think I have done well for him in providing him a
Wife with such a Fortune, which he yet knows nothing of. But will not this
Godly Man, this Mr. Scrapeall, take a Farthing less say you for his Niece?


Not a sowce: I have higgled with him as if I were to buy of a Horse-courser,
and he will not take a farthing less than 5000 l. for his Niece.


He's a strange Mixture, a perpetual Sermon-hunter, repeats and sings Psalms
continually, and prays so loud and vehemently, that he is a Disturbance to his
Neighbours; he is so Heavenward Pious, and seems a very Saint of a Scrivener.


He finds the sweet of that, it gets him many a good Trust and Executorship.


Pox on him for a Damned godly knave, forsooth, cannot he be contented to sell
her, whom his own Brother committed to his Charge; but he must extort so much
for her? well I must agree with him: I know she has full 20000 l. left her: And
has bin brought up as strictly as my Son: Get writings ready: I'll send Post
for my Son Timothy this Day.


They are ready; you may Seal in the afternoon if you please.


And I will then. I'll detain you no longer: get my Writings ready: I am
resolved to settle my other Boy well: But my Town Son afflicts me when e're I
hear him named.


Your humble Servant Sir Will. Belfond.


Sir, I have been at your Brothers house, and they say he is come to some
Lawyers Chamber in the Kings-Bench-buildings.


That's lucky enough: I'll walk here then, and do you watch. White-Fryers; some
Bullies of Alsatia.


I was plaguy Bowsy last night with Squire Belfond: We had Fiddles, Whores,
Scoured, broke Windows, beat Watches, and roared like Thunder.


Ay, I heard you?


What says he?


He Drinks, Whores, Swears, Sings, Roars, Rants and Scours with the best of us.


Sir, with your favour, are you acquainted with young Belfond?


Yes, that I am. What Country Putt's this?


What Country-man is he Sir?


Prithee, old Prigster, why dost ask? He is a Northern man: He has a damned
Rustic, miserable Rascal to his Father, who lives a nasty brutal life in the
Country like a Swine: But the Squire will be even with him I warrant him.


I have something to say to him if I could see him.


You, you old Prigg, you damned Country Putt: You have somewhat to say to him!
I am ready to give you satisfaction: Lugg out; come you Putt: I'll make you
Scamper.


Dee hear Bully Rascal, put up and walk your way, or by Heaven I'll beat you as
long as you are able to be beaten.


I'll stand by you: You may easily beat this old fellow.


No man e're gave me such words, but forfeited his life; I could whip thee
through the Lungs immediately: But I'll desist at present. Who the Devil would
have thought this Putt durst have drawn a Sword? Well Sir we shall take a time
Sir, another time Sir.


You lye, you Rascal; you will take no time. Here's a fine Companion of my
Sons!


Who's this I see? my Brother! Sir William Belfond! Your humble Servant. You
are welcome into England. I looked not for you these six weeks.


I landed at the Temple-stairs even now: My man has been at your House, and he
heard there you were here.


I hope you have done your business.


Beyond my Expectation.


Has your Wives Brother done by you in his Will, as you would have had him.


Truly yes: He has made me sole Executor, and left my two Sons 5000 l. apiece,
to be paid at each of their days of Marriage, or at my Death.


Well Brother, you are a happy man; for Wealth flows in upon you on every side,
and Riches you account the greatest happiness.


I find that Wealth alone will not make happy. Ah Brother, I must confess it
was a kindness in you, when Heaven had blessed you with a great Estate by
Merchandise, to adopt my Younger Son, and take him and breed him from his
Childhood: But you have been so gentle to him, he is run into all manner of
Vice and Riot; no bounds can hold him; no shame can stop him; no Laws nor
Customs can restrain him.


I am confident you are mistaken: He has as fair a Reputation as any Gentleman
about London: 'Tis true, he's a good fellow, but no Sot; he loves mirth and
society, without Drunkenness: He is, as all young Fellows I believe are, given
to Women; but 'tis in private; and he is particular: no Common Whore-master:
and in short, keeps as good Company as any man in England.


Your over-weening makes you look through a false Glass upon him. Company! why
he keeps Company for the Devil: Had you come a minute sooner, you might have
seen two of his Companions; they were praising him for Roaring, Swearing,
Ranting, Scouring, Whoring, beating Watches, breaking Windows: I but asked one
of em if he knew him, and said I had somewhat to say to him; the Rogue, the
most seeming terrible of the two, told me, If I had any thing to say to Squire
Belfond, he would give me satisfaction.


What kind of fellow?


He came out of White-Fryers: He's some Alsatian Bully.


'Tis impossible; he never keeps such Company.


The Rogue drew upon me: bid me Lugg out, called me Old Prigg, Country Put; and
spoke a particular Language which such Rogues have made to themselves, called
Canting, as Beggars, Gipsies, Thieves and Jayl-Birds do: But I made his Bullies
go away very tamely at the sight of my drawn Sword.


I am sure he keeps no such Company: it must be some other of his Name.


You make me mad to excuse him thus: The Town rings of him; You have ruined him
by your Indulgence: Besides, he throws away Money like Dirt; his Infamy is
notorious.


Infamy: Nay there you wrong him; he does no ungentleman-like things: Prithee
consider Youth a little: What if he does Wench a little; and now and then is
somewhat extravagant in Wine? Where's the great Crime? All young fellows that
have mettle in em will do the first; and if they have wit and good humour in
em, in this drinking Country, they will sometimes be forced upon the latter:
And he must be a very dull phlegmatic Lump, whom Wine will not elevate to some
Extravagance now and then.


Will you distract me? What are Drinking and Whoring no faults? His courses
will break my heart; they bring Tears into my Eyes so often.


One would think you had been Drinking and were maudlin: Think what we our
selves did when we were young fellows: You were a Spark, would Drink, Scour and
Wench with the best of the Town.


Ay, but I soon repented, married and settled.


And turned as much to the other extreme: And now perhaps I mislike these
faults, caused by his heat of Youth. But how do you know he may not be
reclaimed suddenly?


Reclaimed? How can he be reclaimed without severity? You should Cudgel him,
and allow him no Money: make him not dare to offend you thus. Well, I have a
Son whom by my strictness I have formed according to my heart: He never puts on
his Hat in my presence; Rises at second Course, takes away his Plate; says
Grace, and saves me the Charge of a Chaplain. When ever he committed a fault, I
mauled him with Correction: I'd fain see him once dare to be extravagant: No,
he's a good Youth, the Comfort of my Age; I weep for joy to think of him. Good
Sir, learn to be a Father of him that is one: I have a Natural Care of him.


You are his Father by Nature, I by Choice: I took him when he was a Child, and
bred him up with gentleness, and that kind of Conversation that has made him my
friend: He conceals nothing from me, or denies nothing to me. Rigour makes
nothing but Hypocrites.


Perhaps when you begin late; but you should have been severe to him in his
Childhood: abridged him of Liberty and Money: and have had him soundly whipped
often: he would have blessed you for it afterwards.


Too much straightness in the minds of Youths, like too much lacing the Body,
will make em grow Crooked.


But no lacing at all, will make them swell and grow Monsters.


I must govern by Love. I had as leive govern a Dog as a Man if it must be by
fear: This I take to be the difference between a good Father to Children, and a
harsh Master over Slaves.


Yes, and see what your government is come to; his Vice and Prodigality will
distract me.


Why should you be so concerned? He is mine, is he not?


Yes, by Adoption, but he is mine by Nature.


'Tis all but Custom.


Mine is a tender Care.


Your passion blinds you: I have as tender care as you can have: I have been
ever delighted with him from his Childhood: He is endeared to me by long custom
and familiarity. I have had all the pleasure of a Father, without the drudgery
of getting a Son upon a damned Wife, whom perhaps I should wish hanged.


And will you let him run on in his Lewdness and Prodigality?


He is mine: If he offends, 'tis me: If he squanders away Money, 'tis mine; and
what need you care? Pray take care of your own: If you will take care of this
too, what do you but take him from me?


This you come to always! I take him from you: No, I'd not be troubled with
him. Well, let him run on, and be ruined, hanged and and damned -- I'll never
speak word more about him. Let him go on.


This heat of youth will be allayed e're long I warrant you.


No, no, let him go on, let him go on; I'll take care of my own at home: and
happy were this Rake-hell if he would take Example by his Brother: But I say no
more; I ha done; let him go on.


Now you are angry, your passion runs away with you.


No no, I have done; what would you have more?


Let us go and see him: I'll lay my life you'll find him perusing some good
Author; he ever spends his whole morning in study.


I must into the City, the first thing I do, and get my Bills accepted; and
then if you will we'll see him: and no doubt but we shall find him perusing of
some Whore or other, instead of a Book.


I am not of your Opinion: I at I'll carry you in my Coach into the City, and
then bring you back to him: He is of so good a disposition: So much a
Gentleman: And has such worth and honour, that if you knew him as well as I,
you'd love him as well as I do.


Well, well, I hear you Sir: I must send for my Son Post: I'll show you a Son.
Well, Heaven bless him, I should be weary of this wicked World: but for the
Comforts I find in him: Come along, I'll show you a Son.


WHY dost thou sigh? and show such sadness in thy looks? My pretty Miss.


Have I not reason?


Dost thou mislike thy entertainment?


Ah Cruel Belfond, thou hast undone me.


My pretty little Rogue, I sooner would undo my self a thousand times.


How I tremble to think what I ha done! I have made my self for ever miserable.


Oh say not so, dear Child: I'll kiss those tears from off thy Beauteous Eyes.
But I shall wrong thy Cheeks, on which they fall like precious drops of dew on
flowers.


Heaven! what have I done?


No more than what thy Mother did before thee: No more than thy whole Sex is
born to do.


Oh had I thought you would have been so Cruel, I never would have seen your
face; I swear I would not.


I swear thou would, I know thou woul'dst: Cruel! no Billing Turtle e're was
kinder to his tender Mate; in Billing, Cooing, and in gentle Murmurs, we
expressed our kindness; and Cooed and Murmured and Loved on.


The more unhappy Fool was I: go go, I hate you now.


Oh my sweet little one; thou can not sure be so unkind: Those pretty
Tell-tales of thy heart, thy Eyes, say better things.


Do they so? I'll be revenged on em for it: For they shall never see you more.


Ah say not so; I had rather much the Sun should never shine on me; than thou
be hidden from my sight: thou art not sure in earnest?


Yes sure, I think I am.


No, my sweet Love, I think thou art not.


Oh Lord, how shall I look! How shall I bear my self! if any of my Friends
shall fix their Eyes upon me, I shall look down and blush, and think they know
all.


How many fair ones daily do the same, and look demurely as any Saints?


They are Confident things I warrant em.


Let Love be made familiar to thee, and thou wilt bear it better: Thou must see
me every day. Can thou be so hard-hearted to forbear the sight of me?


Perhaps I may desire now and then a look, a sight of thee at some distance:
But I will never venture to come near thee more I vow.


Let me kiss that Vow from off thy lips, while 'tis warm there. I have it here:
'Tis gone. Thou wilt not kill me sure? Did thou not say thou lov'dst me?


Yes, I loved too much; or this had never happened: I could not else have been
undone.


Undone; thou art made: Woman is but half a Creature, till she be joined to
man; now thou art whole and perfect.


Wicked man! Can I be so confident once to come near thee more?


Should thou but fail one day, I never should survive it; and then my Ghost
will haunt thee. Can thou look on me, pretty Creature, and talk thus?


Well, go thy ways; that flattering Tongue, and those Bewitching Eyes were made
to ruin Womankind.


Could I but think thou were in earnest, these Arms should clasp thee ever
here: I'd never part with thee.


No no, now I must be gone: I shall be mist: How shall I get home and not be
known? Sure every body will discover me?


Thy Mask will cover all: There is a Chair below in the Entry to carry thee,
and set thee down where thou wilt.


Farewell, Dear Cruel man! And must I come to morrow morning say you? No no.


Yes yes; to morrow and to morrow, and every morning of our lives; I dye else.


Sir your Singing-Master is coming.


My Singing Master, Mr. Solfa is coming.


O Lord hide me! He is my Master, he'll know me! I shall not be able to go by
him for trembling.


Pretty Miss, into the Closet: I'll dispatch him soon.


Come Betty. Please to put in a Flute Sir.


Come on.


Still wilt thou sigh, and still in vain
A cold neglectful Nymph adore;
No longer fruitlessly complain,
But to thy self thy self restore.
In Youth thou caught'st this fond disease,
And should abandon it in age;
Some other Nymph as well may please,
Absence or business disengage.
On tender hearts the wounds of Love,
Like those imprinted on young Trees,
Or kill at first, or else they prove
Larger be insensible degrees.
Business I tried, she filled my mind;
On others Lips my Dear I kissed;
But never solid Joy could find,
Where I my charming Sylvia mist.
Long Absence, like a Greenland night,
Made me but wish for Sun the more;
And that inimitable light,
She, none but she, could e're restore.
She never once regards thy Fire,
Nor ever vents one sigh for thee.
I must the Glorious Sun admire,
Though he can never look on me.
Look well, you'll sind she's not so rare,
Much of her former Beauty's gone;
My Love her Shadow larger far
Is made by her declining Sun.
What if her Glories faded be,
My former wounds I must endure;
For should the Bow unbended be,
Yet that can never help the Cure.
'Tis very easy and natural: Your Daughter sings delicately.


Belfond, good morrow to thee: I see thou still take care to melt away thy
hours in soft delights.


Honest Truman! All the pleasures and diversions we can invent, are little
enough to make the Farce of Life go down.


And yet what a Coil they keep: How busy and industrious are those who are
reckoned grave and wise, about this Life, as if there were something in it.


Those Fools are in earnest, and very solid; they think there's something in it,
while Wise men know there's nothing to be done here but to make the best of a
bad Market.


You are mighty Philosophical this morning. But shall I not hear one Song as
well as you?


Have you set that Ode in Horace?


I have.


Then I hope you will be encouraged to set more of em; we then shall be sure of
Wit and Music together: While you great Musicians do often take most pains
about the silliest words. Prithee Truman sing it.


c. Hor. Ode 22. l. 1.

Very well; you have obliged me: Please to accept of this. And Madam, you shall
give me leave to show my gratitude by a small Present.


Your Servant Sir.


You are so immoderately given to Music; methinks it should justle Love out of
your thoughts.


Oh no! Remember Shakespeare; If Music be the Food of Love, Play on -- There's
nothing nourishes that soft passion l^ke it, it imps his Wings, and makes him
fly a higher pitch. But prithee tell me what news of our dear Mistresses? I
never yet was so sincerely in Love as with my pretty Hypocrite; There is Fire
in those Eyes that strikes like Lightning: What a constant Church-man she has
made of me?


And mine has made an entire Conquest of me: 'Tis the most charming pretty
Creature, that e're my Eyes beheld.


Let us not fall out, like the Heroes in the Rehearsal, for not being in Love
with the same Woman.


Nothing could be so fortunate as our difference in this case: The only one we
disagree in.


Thou art in the right: Mine has so charmed me, I am content to abandon all
other pleasures, and live alone for her; she has subdued me even to Marriage.


Mine has no less vanquished me; I'll render upon discretion. Ah Rogue Belfond,
I see by your Bed, for all your Constant Love, you have had a Wench this night.


Peace peace, man: 'Tis dangerous to fast too long, for fearing of losing an
appetite quite.


You are a sincere honest Lover indeed.


Faith Truman, we may talk of mighty matters; of our Honesty and Moraility; but
a young Fellow carries that about him that will make him a Knave now and then
in spite of his Teeth. Besides, I am afraid 'tis impossible for us profane
fellows to succeed in that Sanctified Family.


You will not say so, when you know what progress I have made in our affairs
already.


Thou reviv'st my drooping hopes: Tell me, are we like to succeed! Oh if I can
but prevail upon my little pretty Church-woman, I am resolved to conform to her
for ever.


Look under my Coat: Am I not well habited? with a plain Band, Bob Peruke, and
no Cuffs.


Verily, like one of the pure ones.


Yea; and our frequenting of Sermons and Lectures, (which Heaven knows we did
out of no good, but for the sake of these little ones) has used me to their
stile: Thus qualified, I got access into the House, having found that their
Governante is Sister to a Weaver in the West, whom I know; I pretended to be
her Cousin, and to bring a Token sent to her by her Brother, and was very
welcome to her.


Most fortunate: Why does he keep em so strictly? Never to see the face of Man?


Be not troubled at that, 'twill forward our design; they'll be the more
earnest to be delivered. But no Italian Women are so closely confined; the pure
Knave intends to sell em: Even his Daughter, who has a good Fortune left her by
a Widow, that was her Aunt: And for his Niece, he has as good as agreed already
with your Father for 5000 l. to marry her to your Brother in the Country: Her
Uncle gave her 20000 l. and this is the reason of Confining em; for fear of
losing the Money.


With my Father say ye?


Most certain: This I learnt out of Madam Governante, at the first interview.


This is a very odd Accident: 'Twill make my difficulty greater.


Not at all: As Liars are always readiest to believe Lies, I never knew an
Hypocrite but might easily be cozened by another Hypocrite. I have made my way,
and I warrant thee a good event. I intend to grow great with the Father.


Thy Sanguine temper makes thee always hope in every Enterprise.


You might observe, whenever we stared upon em, they would steal a look at us;
by stealth have often twisted Eye-beams with us.


The sour and devout look indeed seems but put on: There is pretty warmth and
tenderness in their Eyes, that now and then gilds over the godly look; like the
Suns light, when breaking through a Cloud, it swiftly glides upon a Field of
Corn.


The Air of their Faces plainly show they have Wit, that must despise those
trifling forms; their precise looks most surely are constrained.


How, Madam Termagant here! then we shall have fine work. What wind blows you
hither.


How dare you think that I of all womankind should be used thus?


You mean not used; that's your Grievance.


Good Mr. Disdain; I shall spoil your scoffing: Has my Love deserved to be thus
slighted? I that have refused Princes for your sake? Did not all the Town court
me? And must I choose such an ungrateful Wretch?


When you were first in season, you were a little courted by some of Quality:
Mistresses, like Green Peas, at first coming are only had by the Rich, but
afterwards they come to every Body.


Curse on your saucy similes: Was not I yours, and only yours.


I had not faith enough for that; but if you were, I never had any that was
mine and only mine, but I made em all mankinds before I had done.


Ah Traitor! And you must pick me out to make this base Example of: Must I be
left?


Left! Yes sure, Left! Why you were not married to me: I took no Lease of your
frail Tenement: I was but Tenant at my own will.


Insolent! How dare you thus provoke my Fury? Was ever Woman's Love like mine to
thee? Persidious man!


So: after the Thunder, thus the heat drops fall.


No; I scorn that thou should bring Tears into my Eyes.


Why do you come to trouble me?


Since I can please no longer, I'll come to plague thee; and if I dye before
thee, my Ghost shall haunt thee.


Indeed your Love was most particular with spitting and scratching, like
Caterwauling: And in the best of humours you were ever murmuring and
complaining: Oh my Head aches: I am so sick: And Jealous to madness too.


Oh Devil incarnate!


Belfond, thou art the most ungentle Knight alive.


Methinks the pretty Child I have had by you should make you less inhumane.


Let me have it; I'll breed it up.


No, thou shalt never have it while thou livest. I'll pull it Limb from Limb
e're thou shalt have it.


This is so unnatural, that you will make me so far from thinking it mine, that
I shall not believe it yours: But that you have put a false Child upon me.


Unworthy Wretch.


When thou art old enough, thy malice and ill humour will qualify thee for a
Witch; but thou had never Douceurs enough in thy Youth to fit thee for a
Mistress.


How dare you provoke me thus? For what little Dirty Wench am I thus used? If
she be above ground I'll find her, and tear her Eyes out. Hah -- By the Bed I
see the Devil has been here to night -- Oh oh, I cannot bear it.


Belfond, help the Lady for shame; lay hold on her.


No no, let her alone; she will not hurt herself I warrant thee: She is a rare
Actor: She acts a fit of the Mother the best of any one in England. Ha ha ha.


How can thou be so cruel?


What a Devil should I do? if a man lies once with a Woman, is he bound to do
it for ever?


Oh oh.


Very well saith: Admirably well acted.


Is it so? Devil, Devil: i'll spoil your Point de Venice for you.


Will you force me to make my Footman turn you out?


Sir, Your Father and your Uncle are coming hither.


Sdeath my Father! 'Tis impossible.


By Heaven 'tis true; they are coming up by this time.


Look you Madam, you may if you will ruin me; and put me out of all means of
doing for you or your Child: Try me once more, and get into the Bed and cover
your self with the Quilt, or I am undone.


Villain, you deserve to be ruined: But I love my Child too well.


For Heavens sake hide your self in the Bed quickly.


No no, I'll run into the Closet.


Death and Hell! I am ruined: There's a young Girl there; she'll make yet a
worse uproar.


Peace, let me alone. Madam, whatever happens, ruin not your self and Child
inevitably.


Ned, good morrow to thee.


Your Blessing Sir.


Heaven bless thee. Here's one unexpected.


My Father! I beg your Blessing Sir.


Heaven mend you: it can never bless you in the lewd course you are in.


You are misinformed Sir; my courses are not so lewd as you imagine.


Do you see; I am misinformed: He'll give me the lye.


I would first bite my Tongue in pieces, and spit it at you: Whatever little
heats of Youth I have been guilty of, I doubt not but in a short time to please
you fully.


Well said Ned: I dare swear thou wilt.


Good Brother Credulous: I thank Heaven I am not so. You were not drunk last
night with Bullies, and roared and ranted, scoured, broke Windows, beat the
Watch, broke open a House, and forced away a Wench in Salisbury-Court. This is
a fine life. These he calls heats of Youth.


I was at home by Eight a Clock last night, and supped at home; and never keep
such Company.


No no; you are not called Squire Belfond by the Scoundrels your Companions?
'Twas not you: No no.


Not I upon my faith; I never keep such Company or do such actions: If any one
should call me Squire I'd break his Head: Some Rascal has usurped my Name.


Look you Brother, what would you have? This must be some mistake.


What a Devil! You believe this too? Ounds! you make me mad! Is there any of
our Name in England but our selves? Does he think to flam me with a Lye?


I scorn a Lye, 'tis the basest thing a Gentleman can be guilty of: All my
Servants can testify I stirred not out last night.


I assure you Sir, he was not abroad last night.


You assure me! Who are you? one of his hopeful Companions! No, your Clothes
are not good enough, you may be his Pimp.


You are the Father of my Friend, an old Gentleman, and a little mad.


Old! Walk down; I'll try your youth: I'll fight with the bravest Ruffian he
keeps company with.


Brother! Are you mad? Has the Country robbed you of all good manners, and
common sense?


I had a Bout with two of your Bullies in the Temple-walks.


Whom does he mean? This is a Gentleman of Estate and Quality; He has above
2000 l. a year.


You are a mad man: I am ashamed of you. Sir, I beseech you pardon my Brothers
Passion, which transports him beyond Civility.


I know you will for my sake.


He is the Father of my dearest Friend; I shall be glad to serve him.


Will you never be of age of Discretion? For shame use me, your Son, and every
Body better.


Well, I must be run down like a tame Puppy.





Oh this damned She Devil.


I'll make you an Example: Will you see him whether I will or no, you young
Whore!


Here's a Son! Here's a fine Son! Here's your breeding! Here's a pretty Son!
Here's a delicate Son! Here's a dainty Son!


If he be mad, will you be madder?


Turn out this She Bear; turn her out to the Rabble!


Revenge, you Villain, Revenge.


Dear Friend, prithee see this innocent Girl safe in the Chair, from that
outrageous Strumpets fury.


Here's a Son, here's a Son! Very well; make much of him: Here's the effect of
Whoring.


No Sir, 'tis the effect of not Whoring: This Rage is because I have cast her
off.


Yes yes, for a younger; a sweet Reformation! Let me not see your Face, nor
hear you speak; you will break my heart.


Sir, the young Girl was never here before; she brought me Linen from the
Exchange.


A fine Bawd her Mistress in the mean time.


This furious Wench coming in to rail at me for my leaving her, I was forced to
put the other into that Closet, and at your coming up, against my will, this
run into the same Closet.


Sirrah, most audacious Rogue, do you sham me? Do you think you have your Uncle
to deal with? Avoid my presence Sirrah: Get you out Sirrah.


I am sorry I offended: I obey.


I could have found in my heart to have Cudgell'd him.


Shame of our Family; you behave your self so like a Mad-man and a Fool, you
will be begged: These fits are more extravagant than any thing he can be guilty
of. Do you give your Son the words of Command you use to Dogs?


Justify him, do! He's an excellent Son! a very pretty Son! a delicate Son! a
virtuous Son! a discreet Son! he is.


Pray use me better, or I'll assure you, we must never see one another.
Besides, I shall entail my Estate for want of Issue by this Son here, upon
another Family, if you will treat me thus.


What says he?


Let us calmly reason: What has your breeding made of him (with your Patience)
but a Blockhead?


A Blockhead! When he comes the World shall judge which of us has been the
wiser in the Education of a Son: A Blockhead? Why he knows a sample of any
Grain as well as e're a fellow in the North: Can handle a Sheep or Bullock as
well as any one: Knows his seasons of Plowing, Sowing, Harr^wing, laying
fallow: Understands all sorts of Manure: And ne'er a one that wears a Head can
wrong him in a Bargain.


A very pretty fellow, for a Gentleman's Bailey.


For his own Bailey, and to be a rich --


Swine, and live as nastily; and keep worse Company than Beasts in a Forest.


He knows no Vice, poor Boy.


He will have his turn to know it then; as sure as he will have the Small Pox;
and then he'll be fond on it, when his Brother has lest it.


I defy the Omen: he never Whores, nor Drinks hard* but upon design, as driving
a Bargain, or so; and that I allow him.


So: Knavish and designing Drunkenness you allow; but not good fellowship for
mirth and conversation.


Now Brother, pray what have you made your Son good for, with your breeding you
so much boast of? Let's hear that now: Come on, let's hear.


First, I bred him at Westminster-School, till he was Master of the Greek and
Latin Tongues; then I kept him at the University, where I instructed him to
read the Noble Greek and Roman Authors.


Well, and what use can he make of the Noble Greek and Latin, but to prate like
a Pedant, and show his parts over a Bottle?


To make a man fit for the Conversation of Learned Gentlemen is one noble end
of Study: But those Authors make him wiser and honester, Sir, to boot.


Wiser! Will he ever get Six-pence, or improve or keep his Estate by em?


Mean Notions: I made him weil versed in History.


That's a pretty study indeed: How can there be a true History, when we see no
man living is able to write truly the History of the last week?


He by the way read Natural Philosophy, and had insight enough in the
Mathematics.


Natural Philosophy! knows nothing: Nor would I give a sart for any
Mathematician, but a Carpenter, Bricklayer, Measurer of Land, or Sailor.


Some moderate skill in it will use a man to reason closely.


Very pretty: Reason! Can he Reason himself into six Shillings by all this?


He needs it not: But to go on; after three years I removed him from the
University (lest he should have too strong a tincture of it) to the Temple;
there I got a modest learned Lawyer, of little practice, for want of Impudence;
and there are several such that want, while empty impudent fellows thrive and
swagger at the Bar: This man I got to instruct my Son in some old Common Law
Books, the Statutes, and the best Pleas of the Crown, and the Constitution of
the old true English Government.


Does he get a Shilling by all this? But what a Devil made you send him into
France, to make an arrant vain Coxcomb of him?


There he did all his manly Exercises; saw two Campaigns; studied History;
Civil Laws, and Laws of Commerce; the Language he spoke well e're he went. He
made the Tour of Italy, and saw Germany, and the Low Countries, and returned
well skilled in Foreign Affairs, and a Complete accomplished English Gentleman.


And to know nothing of his own Estate, but how to spend it: my poor Boy has
travelled to better purpose: for he has travelled all about my Lands, and knows
every Acre and Nook, and the value of it: There's travel for you! Poor Boy.


And he enjoys so little of that Estate he sees, as to be impatient for your
Death: I dare swear mine wishes my Life, next to his own. I have made him a
Complete Gentleman, fit to serve his Country in any Capacity.


Serve his Country! Pox on his Country: 'Tis a Country of such Knaves, 'tis not
worth the serving: All those who pretend to serve it, mean nothing but
themselves. But amongst all things, how came you to make him a Fiddler, always
Fluting or Scraping? I had as leive hear a Jews-Harp.


I love Music: Besides I would have young Gentlemen have as many helps to
spend their time alone as can be; most of our Youth are ruined by having Time
lye heavy on their hands, which makes them run into any base Company to shun
themselves.


And all this Gentleman's Education is come to Drinking, Whoring and Debauchery.



Sir, Mr. Scrapeall is at your Attorneys Chamber in the Temple, and desires to
discourse you.


Brother, I must go: I shall tell you when I see you next, what is my Business
with him.


Be sure to Dine with me.


I will --


Now thou look like an Heir indeed, my Lad: when thou came up thou had
the Scurvy Phiz of a mere Country Put -- He did thee a kindness that took thee
for a Chief Constable.


Now thou shine, Cousin, like a true Belfond! What 3000 l. a year entailed,
and live like a Butcher, or Grazier, in the Country?


Give you joy, noble Sir, now you look like a true Gallant Squire.


Like a Squire, like a Puppy by the Mass: Odsflesh, what will the old man say;
he'll be stark wood.


Well, I was the fortunat'st man to light upon such true, such real Friends: I
had never known any Breeding or Gentility without you.


You buried all your good parts in a sordid Swinish life in the North.


My Father kept me in ignorance, and would have made a very silly Blockheadly
Put of me: Why, I never heard a Gentleman Banter, or cut a Sham in my life
before I saw you, nor ever heard such ingenious Discourse.


Nay, the World knows Mr. Cheatly, and Mr. Shamwell, are as Complete Gentlemen
as ever came within the Fryers: And yet we have as fine Gentlemen as any in
England; we have those here who have broke for a 100000 l.


Well, I protest and vow, I am so very fine, I do not know where to look upon
my self first: I don't think my Lord Mayor's Son is finer.


He is a Scoundrel compared to thee: There's ne'er a Prigg at Court out-shines
thee. Thou shalt strut in the Park, where Countesses shall be enamoured on
thee.


I am overjoyed: I can stand no ground: My dear friend Cheatly! My sweet Cousin
Shamwell! Let me embrace such dear, such loving friends: I could grow to you,
methinks, and stick here for ever.


Ah! Dear loving Dogs! They love him by'r Lady, as a Cat loves a Mause.


What's that you mutter, Sir? Come hither, Sir! you are finer than any
Squire in the Country.


Pox of finery, I say; yeow maken a mere Ass, an Owl of me: Here are Sleeves
sit for nought but a Miller to steule with when he takes Told: and damned Cuffs
here, one cannot dip ones Meat ith Sauce for them: Odsflesh, give me my old
Cloths again; would I were a whom in my Frock, dressing of my Geldings; poor
Titts, they wanten me dearly, I warrant a.


Well, there's no making a Whistle of a Pigs Tail; This Puppy will never learn
any breeding. Sirrah, behold me: here's Rigging for you; Here's a Nabb: you
never saw such a one in your life.


A rum Nab: it is a Beaver of 5 l.


Look you there Blockhead.


Look yeow there Blockhead I say.


Let me see your Porker: Here's a Porker; here's a Tilter: Hah ha. Oh how I
could whip a Prigster through the Lungs! Ha ha.


It cost sixteen Louydors in Paris.


Ha, ha.


Hawd you, hawd you: And I take kibbo, I'st raddle the Bones of thee; Ise tell a
that: for awe you are a Captain mun.


Look Sirrah, here's a show you Rogue: Here's a sight of Cole, Darby, the
Ready, and the Rhino, you Rascal, you understand me not; you Loggerhead, you
silly Put, you understand me not: Here are Meggs and Smelts: I ne'er had such a
sight of my own in my life. Here are more Meggs and Smelts, you Rogue; you
understand me not.


By'r Lady not I: I understand not this South-Country speech not I.


Ah methinks I could tumble in em. But dee hear Putt, Putt, Putt, Sirrah.
Here's a Scout: What's a Clock? what's a Clock Sirrah. Here's a Tatler; Gold,
all Gold, you Rogue. Look on my finger Sirrah, look here: Here's a Famble,
Putt, Putt: You don't know what a Famble, a Scout or a Tatler is, you Putt.


Fine sights for my old Master! Marry would I were sent from Constable to
Constable, and whipped whom again by'r Lady,


Let's whett: bring some Wine. Come on: I love a Whett: Pray let's huzza: I
love huzzahing mightily: But where's your Lady, Captain, and the Blowing, that
is to be my Natural* my Convenient, my Pure.


They are just coming in. Come Betty.


Come in Mrs. Margaret, come.


I am so ashamed.


Madam, your Servant; I am very much obliged to your favours.


I shall be proud to do a Gentleman, like you, any service that lies in my
power, as a Gentlewoman.


Oh Lord, Madam, your most humble Servant to Command: My pretty Blowing let me
kiss thee: Thou shalt be my Natural: I must manage thee. She is a Pure Blowing.
My pretty Rogue -- how happy shall I be? Pox of the Country I say. Madam
Hackum, to testify my gratitude, I make bold to Equip you with some Meggs,
Smelts, Decus's and Georges.


I am your faithful Servant, and I shall be glad of any occasion, whereby to
express how ready I am to serve any Gentleman, or person of Quality, as becomes
a Gentlewoman; and upon honour Sir, you shall never find me tardy.


Come on Sir, fill up all the Glasses; a Health to this pretty Lady.


Ay, and i'faith I'll drink it, pretty Rogue.


Let them be Facers.


Facers! What are those? Nay, give the Lady and the Captains Lady too.


No, I cannot drink, I am not dry.


Give it me.


There's a Facer for you.


Excellent adad! Come to our Facers. Facers. manage my pretty Natural, my pure
Blowing here. Huzza: My dear Friends, Shamwell and Cheatly, I am transported!
My pretty Natural: Kiss me, kiss me. Huzza.


Nay puh, you do so ruffle one things.


I'll ruffle thee more, my little Rogue, before I have done with thee. Well, I
shall never make you amends, my dear Friends. Sirrah, Lolpoop, is not this
better than the Country, Sirrah? Give the Rogue a Facer to my Mistress. Come,
fill about the Fucers. Come on, my Lads, stand to it. Huzza. I vow 'tis the
prettiest way of Drinking, never stir!


So here's the Prog, here's the Dinner coming up; the Cloath's laid in the next
room: Here's a noble Dinner.


Ha Boys, we'll sing and roar, and Huzza, like Devils.

Ounds! Who's here? my Father! Lolpoop, Lolpoop, hide me: give me my Ioseph.
Let's sneak into the next Room.


Death! What shall we do? This is the Bully's Father.


Let me alone: I warrant you.


This is the old Fellow I had like to have had a Rubbers with in the morning.


Is he fallen into these hands? Nay, then he's utterly lost: His Estate is
spent before he has it.


How now Prigg, what makes you come into our Room?


I would speak with Squire Belfond.


Here's no such man.


Oh Bully, are you there? and my ungracious kinsman too? would you bring my Son
to the Gallows! you most notorious seducer of young heirs, I know you too. I
warrant you I'll keep my dear Boy in the Country far enough from your Clutches.
In short, I would speak with my Rebellious Town-Son, who is here, and bespoke
this great Dinner.





What stuff's this? Where's my Son?


Your question consists of two terms: the one ubi, where: But of that I shall
say nothing, because here is no Son, nor any thing belonging to you, to be the
subject matter of debate, at this time; forasmuch as --


Do you hear me Sir, let me see my Son; and offer to Banter me, or Sham me once
more, and I will cut your Throat, and Cudgel your brace of Cowards.


Nay, then 'tis time to take a course with you. Help, help; an Arrest, an
arrest; a Bailey, a Bailey.


An Arrest, an Arrest.


You Dogs? Am I a Bailey?


You shall be used like one, you old Prigg. An Arrest.


Impudent Dogs! I must run, or I shall be pulled in pieces. Help, help, an
Arrest, an Arrest.


AS I told you, I have had a Child by him; he is my Husband by Contract; and
casts me off: Has dishonoured me, and made me infamous. Shall you think to Game
and Bully about the Town, and not vindicate the honour of your Family?


No man shall dare to dishonour our Family.


If you do not cut his Throat, you'll be kicked up and down for a Damned Coward:
And besides you shall never see a penny of mine more.


I'll fight him an be above ground.


There, there's the Traitor, walking before his Uncles door: Be sure dispatch
him: on, I'll withdraw.


Do you hear Sir, do you know Mrs. Termagant?


What makes you ask such a familiar question Sir?


I am her Brother.


Perhaps so: Well, I do? What then Sir?


Ours is as ancient a Family as any in England, tho perhaps unfortunate at
present: The Termagants came in with the Conqueror.


It may be so: I am no Herald.


And do you think you shall dishonour this Family, and debauch my Sister
unchastiz'd? you are contracted to her, and have lain with her.


Look you Sir, I see what you would be at: She's mad, and puts you upon this:
Let me advise you, 'tis a foolish quarrel.


You debauched her, and have ruined her.


'Tis false; the silliest Coxcombly Beau in Town had the first of her.


You have had a Child by her.


Then I have added one to your Ancient Family that came in with the Normans:
Prithee do not provoke me to take away one from it.


You are contracted to her; and if you will marry her I will save your life.


'Tis a Lye; I am not contracted to her: Be gone, urge me no more.


Draw.


Have at you.


Hold, hold: Oh my Son, my Son! What's the matter? my dear Son, art thou not
hurt? let me see.


No Sir, not at all, dear Sir. Here take your Sword, and be gone: Next time you
come to trouble me, I'll cut your throat.


What's the matter, dear Ned? This is about some Wench I warrant.


'Tis a Brother of that furious Wench you saw Sir; her violent Love is
converted into hatred.


You young fellows will never get Knowledge but at your own cost; the Precepts
of the old weigh nothing with you.


Your precepts have been ever sacred to me; and so shall your example be
henceforward: You are the best of men; the best of Fathers: I have as much
honour for you as I can have for humane Nature: And I love you ten thousand
times above my life.


Dear Ned, thou art the greatest joy I have: And believe thy Father, and thy
Friend, there's nothing but Anxiety in Vice: I am not straight Laced; but when
I was young, I ne'er knew any thing gotten by Wenching, but Duels, Claps, and
Bastards: And every drunken fit is a short madness, that cuts off a good part
of Life.


You have Reason Sir, and shall ever be my Oracle hereafter.


'Tis time now to take up, and think of being something in the World: See then,
my Son, tho thou should not be over busy, to side with Parties and with
Factions, yet that thou take a care to make some figure in the World, and to
sustain that part thy Fortune, Nature, and thy Education fit thee for.


Your wise advice I'll strive to follow: But I must confess, I am most
passionately in Love, and am with your consent, resolved to Marry: Though I will
perish ever I do it without it.


Be sure to know the humour of the Woman; you run a mighty hazard: But if you
be valiant enough to venture, (which, I must confess, I never was.) I'll leave
it to your own choice: I know you have so much honour, you will do nothing
below your self.


I doubt not of your Approbation; but till I can be sure of obtaining her:
Pardon me if I conceal her Name.


Your Father comes, retire a little within hearing, till I soften him somewhat:
He is much moved, as he always is, I think.


Now Brother, as I was saying, I can convince you, your Son, your Darling, whom
you long have fostered in his Wickedness, is become the most profligate of all
Rascals.


Still upon this Subject.


Tis very well; my Mouth must be stopped, and your Ears: 'Tis wondrous well. But
I have had much ado to escape with life, from him, and his Notorious fellow
Rogues: As I told you when I had found that the Rogue was with his Wicked
Associates, at the George in White-Fryers; when they saw I was resolved to see
my Son, and was rough with 'em, Cheatly and his Rogues set up a Cry against me:
An Arrest! A Bailey: An Arrest: The Mobile, and all the Rakehells in the House,
and thereabout the Streets assembled: I run, and they had a fair Course after
me into Fleetstreet, thanks to the Vigour I have left, my Heels have saved my
Life: Your Infamous Rogue would have suffered me to have been Sacrificed to the
Rabble.


Ha ha ha, very pretty i'faith; it runs very well: Can you tell it over again
think you?


Ounds! Am I become your Scorn? Your Laughter?


Ned, You hear all this?


Yes; and am distracted to know the meaning of it.


Vile Parricide! Are you gotten here before me? You are monstrous nimble Sir.


By all the Powers of Heaven! I never was at the George in my Life.


Oh then they stay for you, you have not yet been there; you'll loose your
Dinner, 'tis served up -- Vile Wretch.


All this is Cross purposes to me: I came to my Unkle's House from my own
Lodgings immediately; when you were pleased to banish me your presence, and
here have been ever since.


Nay, he that will be a through Villain, must be a complete Liar: Were not you
even now with your Associate Rascals at the George?


No, by Heaven! Nor was I ever in the Company of any of that Gang: I know their
Infamy too well, to be acquainted with their Persons.


I am not Drunk, nor Mad; but you will make me one of 'em.


These Rascals have gotten some body to Personate me; and are undoubtedly,
carrying on some Cheat in my Name.


Brother it must be.


Yes, yes, no doubt it must be so: And I must be in a Dream all this while, I
must!


You say your self, you did not see my Son there?


No, he was too nimble for me, and got out some back way, to be here before me;
so to face down the truth.


I'll instantly go thither, and discover this Imposture, that I may suffer no
longer for the faults of others.


Dine first: My Dinners ready.


Your pardon Sir, I will go instantly: I cannot rest till I have done my self
right.


Let's in, and discourse of this matter: Brother, I must say this, I never took
him in a Lye since he could speak.


Took him: No, nor ever will take him in any thing.


Let's in -- and send your own Man with him.


It shall be so, though I am convinced already. Is there any of the Name but you,
and I, and my two Sons in England?


Be pleased to send my Footmen out to me, Sir.


Have a care of a Quarrel, and bringing the Alsatians about your Ears. Come
Brother.


Help, help, help.


Now I have found you, you little Whore -- I'll make you an Example.


Oh Lord! Are you here! Save me, Save me, this Barbarous Woman threatens to
murder me for your sake.


Save thee, Dear Miss: That I would at the peril of my Life: No danger should
make me quit thee, Cannons, nor Bombs.


Damned false Fellow: I'll take a time to slit her Nose.


Oh Heaven! She'll kill me.


Thou Devil! In thy properest shape of Furious, and Malicious Woman: Resolve to
leave off this Course this moment, or by Heaven I'll lay thee fast in Bedlam:
Had thou fifty Brothers, I'd fight 'em all, in defence of this dear pretty
Miss.


Dear kind Creature! This sweet Love of thine, methinks does make me valiant,
and I fear her not so much.


Dear pretty Miss: I'll be thy safeguard.


Thou Falsest, Basest of thy Sex: Look to see thy Child sent thee in pieces,
Baked in a Pie, for so I will.


Though thou hat'st every thing living besides thy self; yet thou hast too much
tenderness for thy own person to bring it to the Gallows: Offer to follow us
one step, and I'll set the Rabble upon thee: Come my dear Child.


Thou shalt be dogged; and I'll know who she is: Oh Revenge! Revenge! if thou
dost not exceed, thou equall'st all the Ecstasies of Love.


Thus far our Matters go swimmingly: Our Squire is as Debauched, and Prodigal,
as we can wish.


I told you, all England could not afford an Heir like this for our purpose,
but we must keep him always hot.


That will be easy; we made him so Devilish Drunk the first two or three days,
the least Bumper will warm his addle Head afresh at any time: He paid a great
Fine; and may sit at a little Rent: I must be gone for a moment; our Suffolk
Heir is Nabbed, for a small Business; and I must find him some Sham-Bail: See
the Captain performs his Charge.


Here he comes. See, Captain, you make that Blockhead Drunk, and do as we
directed.


He's almost Drunk, and we are in readiness for him; the Squire is retired with
his Natural, so fond.


'Tis well; about your business: I'll be with you soon.


Come on, Mr. Lolpoop: You and I'll be merry by our selves.


I must needs say Captain, yeow are a Civil Gentleman, but yeow han given me so
many Bumpers: I am meet Drunken already.


Come on, I warrant you: Here's a Bumper to the Squire's Lady.


With all my Heart.


Oh Mrs. Betty, art thou come? I sent for this pretty Rogue to keep you
Company: She's as pretty a Company-keeper as any's in the Friars.


Ods-flesh, what should I do in Company with Gentlewomen: 'Tis not for such
Fellee's as I.


Have Courage Man: You shall have her; and never want such a one while I am
your Friend.


O Lord I! Don yeow know what yeow saen.


A Proper, Handsome Gentleman, I swear.


Who I, no, no: What done yeow mean forsooth?


I vow, I have not seen a handsomer: So proper, so well shaped!


Oh Lord, I! I! Yeow jeern me naw.


Why don't you salute her, Man?


Who I? By the Mass, I dare not be so bold: What I kiss such a fine
Gentlewoman?


Kiss, Kiss her Man: This Town affords us such every where? You'll hate the
Country when you see a little more: Kiss her I say.


I am so ha la: I am ashamed.


What must I do it to you then?


Oh rare! Byth' Mass! Whoo Kisses daintily: And whoo has a Breath like a Caw.


Come, the other Bumper: To her Health let this be Here's to you.


Thanka forsooth and yeow pleasen.


Yes, any thing that you do, will please me.


Capt. Capt. What done yeow leave me?


What are you afraid of me?


Nay, By'r Lady: I am ashamed, who's farinely a pratty Lass! Marry.


A Handsome Man, and ashamed!


Who I, a Handsome Mon! Nay, Nay.


A Lovely Man, I vow: I cannot forbear Kissing you.


O dear: 'tis your goodness: Ods-flesh, whoo Loves me! who'll make me stark
wood even naw: An yeow kissen me, By'r Lady, I's kiss yeow.


What care I?


Looka there naw! Waunds, whoo's a Dainty Lass, pure white and red: And most of
the London Lasses are pure white and red: Welly awe alike; and I had her in some
Nook. Ods-flesh, I say no more.


I'll stay no longer, farewell.


Nay, I's not leave a so: Marry whoo's a Gallant Lass.


So, he's caught: this will take him off from teasing his Master with his
damned good Counsel.


I have sent our Alsatian Attorney, and as Substantial Bail as can be wis^'d for
the Redemption of our Suffolk Caravan; he's ripe for another Judgment, he
begins to want the Ready much.


Scrapeall is provided for him: How now Captain, what's become of your
Blockhead?


He's nibbling at the Bait: He'll swallow presently.


But hark you, Shamwell! I have chosen the subtlest and handsomest Wench about
this Town for the great Fortune I intend to bestow this hopeful Kinsman of
yours upon: 'Tis Mrs. Termagant, his Brothers Cast Mistress, who resents her
being lest to that degree, that though she meditates all the revenge, besides,
that Woman's Nature is capable of against him: Yet her Heart leapt for joy at
this design of Marrying his Elder Brother: If it were for nothing but to plague
the younger, and take place of his Wife.


I have seen her: She will personate a Town Lady of Quality admirably, and be
as Haughty and Impertinent as the best of 'em: Is the Lodging, and Plate, and
things ready for her?


It is, she comes there this Afternoon; she's set her Hand to a good swinging
Judgment; and thou and I will divide my Lad: And now, all we have to do, is to
preserve him to our selves from any other Correspondence, and at down-right
Enmity with his Father, and Brother: And we must keep him continually hot, as
they do a Glass-House, or our work will go backward.


Oh my dear Friend and Cousin; tread upon my Neck: Make me your Footstool, you
have made me a happy Man to know Plenty and Pleasure, good Company, good Wine,
Music, Fine Women: Mrs. Hackum and I have been at Bumpers hand to fist: Here's
my pretty Natural, my dear pretty Rogue: Adad, she's a Rare Creature, a
Delicious Creature! And between you and I, dear Friend, she has all her Goings
as well as ever a Blowing in Christendom: Dear Madam Hackum, I am infinitely
obliged to you.


I am glad, Sir, she gives your Worship content, Sir.


Content: Ah my pretty Rogue! Pox of the Country, I say, Capt. Capt. here: Let
me Equip you with a Quid.


Noble Squire: I am your Spaniel-Dog.


'Pox of the Country, I say: The best Team of Horses my Father has, shall not
draw me thither again.


Be firm to your Resolution, and thou'lt be happy.


If you meet either your Father, or Brother, or any from those Prigsters, stick
up thy Countenance, or thou art ruined, my Son of Promise, my brisk Lad in
remainder, when one of 'em approaches thee, we'll all pull down our Hats, and
cry bow wow.


I warrant you; I am hardened, I knew my Brother in the Country, but they shant
sham me, they shall find me a smoky Thief: I vow 'twill be a very pretty way:
Bow wow. I warrant thee I'll do it.


Who the Devil's here! Your Brother, Courage.


Courage, be rough and haughty my Bumpkin.


Hey, where are all my Servants. Call 'em in.


Who is that in this House here, who usurps my Name, and is called Squire
Belfond?


One who is called so without usurping. Bow wow.


Brother, Death do I dream! Can I trust my Senses! Is this my Brother?


Ay, ay, I know I am Transmography'd: But I am your very Brother* Ned.


Could you be so unkind, to come to Town, and not see your nearest Kindred,
your Uncle, and my self?


I would not come to disgrace you, till my Equipage was all ready. Hey, La
Mar, is my Coach at the Gate next to the Green-Dragon?


Ouy Monsieur.


But I was resolved to give you a Visit to Morrow Morning.


I should have been glad to have seen you any where but here.


But here! Why 'tis as good a Tavern, as any's in Town. Sirrah, fill some
Bumpers: Here Brother, here's a Facer to you: We'll Huzza, Call in the Fiddlers.


I am struck with Astonishment: Not all Ovid's Metamorphosis can show such a
one as this.


I see you wonder at my Change: What would you never have a Man learn breeding
Adad? Should I always be kept a Country Bubble, a Caravan, a Mere Putt. I am
brave and bowsy.


S'life! He has got the Cant too.


I shall be clear by and by: The other Bumper, Brother.


No: I'll drink no more: I hate drinking between meals.


Oh Lord! Oh Lord! hate drinking between meals! What Company do you keep? But
'tis all one. Here Brother, pray salute this pretty Rogue: I manage her, she
is my Natural, my pure Blowing: I am resolved to be like a Gentleman and keep,
Brother.


A thorough-pac'd White-Friers man!
I never refuse to kiss a pretty Woman.

This is Mrs. Hackum: I am much obliged to her: Pray salute her.


What a Pox! Will he make me kiss the Bawd too.


Brother, now pray know these Gentlemen here; they are the prettiest Wits that
are in Town: And between you and I Brother, brave gallant fellows, and the best
friends I ever had in my life: This is Mr. Cheatly, and this my Cousin
Shamwell.


I know em, and am acquainted with their worth.


Your humble Servant, sweet Sir.


Your Servant Cousin.


And this is my dear Friend Captain Hackum: There is not a braver fellow under
the Sun.


By Heaven, a down-right Alsatian!


Come Musicians, strike up; and sing the Catch the Captain gave you, and we'll
all join In faith. We can be merry Brother, and we can roar.


'Tis a very pretty magnanimous military business upon the Victory in Hungary.


Hark, how the Duke of Lorrain comes,
The brave Victorious Soul of War;
With Trumpets and with Kettle Drums,
Like Thunder rolling from afar.
On the Left Wing the conquering Horse
The brave Bavarian Duke does lead;
These Heroes with united force,
Fill all the Turkish Host with dread.
Their bright Caparisons behold;
Rich Habits, Streamers, Shining Arms,
The glittering Steel and burnished Gold;
The pomp of War with all its Charms.
With solemn March, and fatal pace,
They bravely on the Foe press on;
The Cannons roar, the Shot takes place,
Whilst Smoke and Dust obscure the Sun.
The Horses Neigh, the Soldiers shout,
And now the furious Bodies join,
The slaughter rages all about,
And men in groans their Blood resign.
The Weapons Clash, the Roaring Drum,
With Clanger of the Trumpets sound,
The bowls and yells of men overcome,
And from the Neighbouring Hills rebound.
Now, now the Infidels give place,
Then all in Routs they headlong fly,
Heroes in Dust pursue the Chase,
While deafening Clamours rend the Sky.
You see Brother, what Company I keep: What's the matter you are melancholy.


I am not a little troubled Brother, to find you in such cursed company.


Hold Brother, if you love your life: They are all stout; but that same Captain
has killed his five men.


Stout say you? This fellow Cheatly is the most notorious Rascal and Cheat that
ever was out of a Dungeon: This Kinsman a most silly Bubble first, and
afterwards a betrayer of young Heirs, of which they have not ruined less than
two hundred, and made em run out their Estates before they came to em.


Brother, do you love your Life? the Captain's a Lyon!


An Ass is he not? He is a Ruffian, and Cock-bawd to that Hen.


If you were not the Brother to my dearest Friend, I know what my Honour would
prompt me to.


My dear Cousin, thou shalt now find how entirely I am thine: My Honour will
not let me strike thy Brother.


But that the punctilio's of Honour are sacred to me; which tell me nothing can
provoke me against the Brother of my noble friend, I had whipped him through the
Lungs e're this.


Well, never man met with such true, such loving Friends.


Look you Brother, will this convince you, that you are fallen into the hands
of Fools, Knaves, Scoundrels and Cowards.


Fools! nay there I am sure you are out: They are all deep, they are very deep
and sharp; sharp as Needles, adad; the wittiest men in England. Here's Mr.
Cheatly in the first place shall Sham and Bantor with you, or any one you will
bring for 500 l. of my Money.


Rascally stuff; fit for no places but Ram-alley, or Pie corner.


Persuade me to that: They are the merriest Companions, and the truest Friends
to me: 'Tis well for you adad, that they are so; for they are all of em as
stout as Hector.


This is most amazing.


Did I not tell you he would envy your condition; and be very angry with us
that put you into it.


He must needs be a kind Brother: We prove our selves your true Friends; and
have that respect for your blood, that we will let none of it out, where-e're
we meet it upon any cause.


You see Brother, how their Love prevails over their Valour.


Their Valour! look you Brother,


I understand Honour and Breeding, besides I have been let blood to day.


Nothing shall make me transgress the rules of Honour I say.


Here! Where are you? Sirrah; Kill-Cow.


'Tis no matter; I know Honour: I know punctilio's to a hair. You owe your life
to your Brother: besides, I am to be second to a dear Friend, and preserve my
vigour for his service: but for all that, were he not your brother


Will not this convince you, brother, of their Cowardice?


No, I think not; for I am sure they are Valiant; this convinces me of their
respect and friendship to me: My best Friends, let me embrace you: a thousand
thanks to you.


I will redeem him yet from these Rascals if I can: You are upon the brink of
ruin, if you go not off with me, and reconcile your self to my Father; I'll
undertake it upon good terms.


No, I thank you; I'll see no Father; he shall use me no more like a Dog: he
shall put upon me no longer. Look you Sir, I have Ready, Rhino, Cole, Darby;
look here Sir!


Dear brother, let me persuade you to go along with me.


You love me! and use my best Friends thus? ne'er stir, I desire none of your
Company: I'll stick to my friends: I look upon what you have done as an affront
to me.


No doubt it is so.


That's most certain; you are in the right, Cousin.


We love you but too well, that angers him.


Well, I shall take my leave: You are in your Cups: You will wish you had heard
me. Rogues, I shall take a course with you.


Rogues! They scorn your words.


Fare you well.


Fare you well Sir, and you be at that sport.


Roger, do not discover him to my Father yet; I'll talk with him cool in a
morning first; perhaps I may redeem him.


I'll do as you'll have me.


So now we are free. Dear Friends, I never can be grateful enough: But 'tis
late, I must show my new Coach: Come Ladies.


How now, Daughter Lucia, where hast thou been?


I have been at Evening Prayers at St. Brides, and am going home through the
Temple.


Thou art my good Girl.


Oh Heaven! Who's here!


What's the matter?


I am taken ill on the sudden: I'll run home.


Stay, stay; thou wicked Author of my misfortune.


How's this? Stay Lucia! What mean you Madam The Girl's strangely disordered.


Oh Heaven! I am utterly ruined, beyond redemption.


Is she your Daughter Sir.


She is.


Then hear my story: I am contracted with all the solemnity that can be to Mr.
Belfond, the Merchants Son; and for this wicked Girl he has lately cast me off:
And this morning I went to his Lodging, to enquire a reason of his late
Carriage to me, I found there in his Closet this young shameless Creature, who
had been in Bed with him.


Oh Heaven and Earth! Is this true, Huswife?


Oh Lord I: I never saw the Gentleman nor her in my life: Oh she's a Confident
thing!


May all the Judgments due to Perjury fall on me, if this be not true: I tore
her by the hair, and pomell'd her to some tune; till that inhumane Wretch
Belfond turned me out of doors, and sent her away in Chair.


O wicked Creature! Are you not afraid the Earth should open, and swallow you
up? As I hope to be saved I never saw her?


Tho young in years, yet old in Impudence; did I not pursue thee since in the
street, till you run into Belfonds Arms just before his Fathers House? Or I had
marked thee for a young Whore.


As I hope to live Sir, 'tis all false: Every Word and Tittle of it: I know not
what she means.


Have I bestowed so much, and taken so much care in thy Education, to have no
other Fruit but this?


Oh Lord Sir! Why will you believe this wicked Woman?


No young Impudence! I believe you: What made you ready to Swoon at the sight
of this Lady, but your Guilt.


She mistakes me for some other, as she did to day when she pursued me to have
killed me; which made me tremble at the sight of her now.


And yet you never saw her before* I am convinced: Go, wicked Wretch, go home:
This News will kill thy Mother: I'll to my Chamber, and follow thee.


But if I ever see her, or you either, to be locked from my Dear ^e^fond: I
shall deserve whatever you can do to me.


Madam, I beseech you make as few words as you can of this.


I had much rather for my own honour have concealed it. But I shall say no
more, provided you will keep her from him.


I warrant you Madam, I'll take a Course with her. Your Servant.


Madam, your most humble Servant: You see I am punctual to my Word.


You are Sir.


Come Madam, your Lodging, Furniture, and every thing are ready, let's loose no
time: I'll wait on you thither, where we will Consult about our Affairs.


Come on: It is a rare design; and if it succeeds, I shall sufficiently be
revenged on my Ungrateful Devil.


I'll warrant the Success.


We must be very careful of this Book: My Uncle, or our Dame Governante will
burn it if they find it.


We cannot have a pleasant, or a Witty Book, but they serve it so: My Father
loads us with Books, such as the Trial of Man, in the Isle of Man, or
Man-Shire: A Treatise on Sabbath-Breakers: And Health out-drinking, or Life
out-healthing Wretches: A Caustic, or Corrosive, for a Seared Conscience.


A Sovereign Ointment for a Wounded Soul: A Cordial for a sick Sinner: The
Nothingness of good Works: Waxed Boot Grace, for the Sussex ways of Affliction;
and a deal of such stuff: But all Novels, Romances, or Poetry, except Quarles
and Withers, are an Abomination. Well, this is a Jewel, if we can keep it.

Anger in hasty Words or Blows,
It self discharges on our Foes;
And Sorrow too, finds some relief
In Tears, which wait upon our grief:
Thus every Passion, but fond Love,
Unto its own Redress does move.

'Tis sweet Poerry: There is a pleasing Charm in all he writes.


Yea, there is a Charm of Satan's in it: 'Tis Vanity and Darkness, this Book
hates, and is contrary to the Light: and ye hate the light.


That's much: And this Evening a little before Night, thou blamedst us for
looking out of the Window, and threatened to shut the Painted Shashes.


Now if thou shut'st those: Thou hate the Light, and not we.


Look thee Teresia: Thou art wonton, and so is thy Cousin Isabella: Ye seek
Temptation: You look out of the Casement to pick and cull young Men; whereby to
feed the Lust of the Eye: Ye may not do it. And look thee Isbel and Teresia, if
you open the Casements once more, I will place ye in the back Rooms, and lock
the Fore Rooms up.


We will obey thee, Ruth.


We will not resist thy power: But prithee leave us that Book.


No, it is wanton and treats of Love: I will instantly commit it to the
Flames.


Shame on this old Wall-ey'd Hypocrite: She is the strictest sort of Jailer.


We are as narrowly looked to, as if we had been clapped up for Treason, we are
kept from Books, Pen, Ink, and Paper.


Well, it is a most painful life to dissemble constantly.


'Tis well we are often alone, to unbend to one another, one had as good be a
Player, and Act continually else.


I can never persuade my self, that Religion can consist in Scurvy out of
fashion Clothes, stiff constrained Behaviour, and Sour Countenances.


A tristful Aspect, looking always upon ones Nose, with a Face full of
Spiritual Pride.


And when one walks abroad, not to turn ones Head to the right or left, but
hold it strait forward, like an Old blind Mare.


True Religion must make one cheerful, and affect one with the most ravishing
Joy which must appear in the Face too.


My good Mother had the Government, and brought me up to better things, as thy
good Aunt did thee.


But we can make no use of our Education under this Tyranny.


If we should Sing or Dance, 'twere worse than Murder.


But of all things: Why do they make such a stir to keep us from the
Conversation of Mankind: Sure there must be more in it, then we can imagine;
and that makes one have more mind to try.


Thou hast been so unquiet in thy sleep of late, and so given to sigh, and get
alone when thou art awake: I fancy thou dost imagine somewhat of it.


Ah Rogue, and I have observed the same in thee: Can thou not guess at Love:
Come, confess, and I'll tell all.


Sometimes in my Dreams, methinks I am in Love, then a certain Youth comes to
me; and I grow chill, and pant, and feel a little pain: But 'tis the prettiest
thing methinks: And then I wake and blush, and am afraid.


Very pretty: And when I am awake, when I see one Gentleman, methinks I could
look through him: And my Heart beats, beats like the Drums in the Camp.


I dare not ask who 'tis, for fear it should be my Man; for there are two come
often to our Church, that stare at us continually, and one of them is he.


I have observed 'em: One, who sate by us at Church, knew 'em by their Names: I
am for one of 'em too.


I will remember it.


If it be any Man thou lik'st, I'll kill thee.


And if thou love my Man, we must not live together.


Name him.


Do thou name first.


Let's write their Names.


Agree: We each have a Black-Lead Pen.


Truman, Mercy on me!


Belfond, Oh Heaven's!


What's this I see! Would I were blind.


Oh my Teresia!


Get thee from me.


'Tis as it should be; I wrote the wrong Name, on purpose to discover who was
your Man more clearly; the other's my Beloved. Belfond's my Hearts delight.


Say thou so my Girl! good Wits-jump. I had the same thought with thee. Now
'tis out, Truman for me; and methinks they keep such a staring at us, if we
contrive to meet 'em, we need not despair.


Nay, they come not for Devotion, that's certain; I see that in their Eyes. Oh
that they were ordained to free us from this odious Jail.


Go into your Chamber; here is a Man comes about business: Ye may not see him.


We go: Come Cousin.


Come Friend: Let us retire also.


I Never more must see the Face of a Relation.


I warrant thee, my pretty Rogue, I'll put thee into that condition the best of
all thy kindred shall visit thee, and make their court to thee; thou shalt
spark it in the Boxes, shine at the Park, and make all the young fellows in the
Town run mad for thee: Thou shalt never want, while I have any thing.


I could abandon all the World for thee; if I could think that thou would
love me always.


Thou hast so kindly obliged me, I shall never cease to love thee.


Pray Heaven I do not repent of it: You were kind to Mrs. Termagant; and sure
it must be some barbarous usage, which thus provokes her now to all this
malice.


She was debauched by the most nauseous Coxcomb, the most silly Beau and Shape
about the Town; and had Cuckolded him with several before I had her: She was
indeed handsome, but the most froward, ill-natur'd Creature; always murmuring
or scolding, perpetually jealous and exceptious, ever thinking to work her ends
by Hectoring and Daring.


Indeed! Was she such a one? I am sure, you were the first that ever had my
Heart, and you shall be the last.


My Dear, I know I had thy Virgin Heart, and I'll preserve it. But for her, her
most diverting minutes were unpleasant: Yet for all her Malice which you see, I
still maintain her.


Ungrateful Creature! She is indeed a Fury. Should thou once take thy Love
from me, I never should use such ways: I silently should mourn and pine away;
but never think of once offending thee.


Thou art the prettiest, sweetest, softest Creature! And all the tenderest Joys
that wait on Love, are ever with thee.


Oh, this is Charming kindness! May all the joys on Earth be still with thee.





Oh Lord! Who's here?


My Dear, go to the Lodging I have prepared for thee; thou wilt be safe, and
I'll wait on thee soon. Who's there?


Thou art a pretty fellow, Belfond, to take thy pleasure thus, and put thy
Friend upon the damnedst drudgery.


What drudgery? a little dissembling.


Why that were bad enough, to dissemble my self an Ass; but to dissemble Love,
nay Lust, is the most irksome task a man can undergo.


But prithee come to the point: in short, have we any hopes?


'Tis done; the business is done: Whip on your habit; make no words.


I'll put it on in my Dressing-room. This News transports me.


If you had undergone what I have done, 'twould have humbled you: I have
enjoyed a Lady; but I had as lieve have had a Lancashire Witch, just after she
had alighted from a Broomstaff: I have been uncivil, and enjoyed the Governante
in most lewd dalliance.


Thou art a brave fellow, and make nothing of it.


Nothing? Sdeath, I had rather have stormed a Half-Moon: I had more pleasure at
the Battle of Mons.


But hast thou done our work as well as hers?


I have: For after the enjoyment of her person had led me into some familiarity
with her. I proposed, she accepted, for she is Covetous as well as Amorous: and
she has so far wrought for us, that we shall have an Interview with our
Mistresses; whom, she says, we shall find very inclinable; and she has promised
this night to deliver 'em into our hands.


Thou art a rare Friend to me, and to thy self. Now, Farewell all the vanity of
this lewd Town, at once I quit you all. Dear Rogue, let's in.


Come in, in, and dress in your Habit.


Look ye Sir William, I am glad you like my Niece: and I hope also, that she
may look lovely in your Sons Eyes.


No doubt but he will be extremely taken with her: Indeed both she and your
Daughter are very Beautiful.


He like her! What's matter whether he like her, or n^ Is it not enough for
him, that I do? Is a Son, a Boy, a Jackanapes, to have a will of his own? That
were to have him be the Father, and I the Son. But indeed they are both very
handsome.


Let me tell you both, Sir William, and Sir Edward, Beauty is but Vanity, a
mere nothing; but they have that which will not fade; they have Grace.


They look like pretty spirited witty Girls.


I am sorry I must leave thee so soon: I thought to have bidden face to dinner,
but I am to pay down a sum of Money upon a Mortgage this afternoon: Farewell.


Farewell Mr. Scrapeall.


Pray meet my Brother at my House at Dinner.


Thank you Sir Edward, I know not but I may.


The person of this Girl is well chosen for your Son, if she were not so
precise and pure.


Prithee, what matter what she is, has not she Fifteen Thousand Pounds clear?


For a Husband to differ in Religion from a Wise.


What, with Fifteen Thousand Pound?


A precise Wise will think her self so pure, she will be apt to contemn her
Husband.


Ay, but Fifteen Thousand Pound, brother.


You know how intractable misguided Zeal and Spiritual Pride are.


What with Fifteen Thousand Pound!


I would not willingly my Son should have her.


Not with Fifteen Thousand Pound?


I see there's no Answer to be given to Fifteen Thousand Pound.


A Pox of this Godly-knave, it should have been Twenty.


Nor would I buy a Wife for my Son.


Not if you could have her a good pennyworth: Your Son, quoth ye? He is like to
make a fine Husband. For all your precious Son --


Again, Brother?


Look you, Brother, you fly out so: Pray, Brother, be not passionate; passion
drowns ones parts; let us calmly reason: I have fresh matter; have but
patience, and hear me speak.


Well, Brother, go on; for I see I might as soon stop a Tide.


To be calm and patient; your Jewel, tho he denied that outrage in
Dorset-Court, yet he committed it, and was last night hurried before the Lord
Chief Justice for it.


It cannot be, on my certain knowledge. I could convice him, but it is not
time.


What a Devil, are all the World mistaken, but you?


He was with me all the Evening.


Why, he got Bail immediately, and came to you. Ounds, I never saw such a man
in my life!


I am assured of the contrary.


Death and Hell, you make me stark mad! You will send me to Bedlam: You will
not believe your own senses: I'll hold you a Thousand pound.


Brother, remember passion drowns ones parts.


Well, I am tame, I am cool.


I'll hold you a hundred; which is enough for one Brother to win of another.


Done.


Why, I saw your man Roger, and he says, your Son found there a Rascal, that
went by his Name.


Oh, Sir William, I am undone, ruined, made a miserable man!


What's the matter, man?


Tho you have been an exceeding good Client to me, I have reason to Curse one
of your Family that has ruined mine.


Pray explain your self.


Oh, Sir, your Wicked Son, your most Libidinous Son.


Look you, Brother, Do ye hear? Do ye hear? Do you Answer?


He's Corrupted, Debauched my only Daughter, whom I had brought up with all the
care and charge I could, who was the Hopes, the Joy of all our Family.


Here's a Son! Here's a rare Son! Here's a hopeful Son! And he were mine, I'd
lash him with a Dog-Whip: I'd cool his Courage.


How do you know it is he?


I have a Witness of it, that saw her rise from his Bed the other Day Morning;
and last Night she ran away to him, and they have lain at a private Lodging.


Be well assured, ever you conclude; for there is a Rascal that has taken my
Son's Name, and has swagger'd in and about White-Fryars, with Cheatly, and that
Gang of Rogues, whom my Son will take a Course with.


Oh, Sir, I am too well assured: My Wife tears her Hair; and I, for my part
shall run distracted.


Oh, Wicked Rascal! Oh, my poor Tim! My dear Boy Tim! I think each Day a Year,
till I see thee.


Sir, I am extremely sorry for this, if it be so; but let me beg of you, play
the part of a Wise Man; blaze not this Dishonour abroad, and you shall have all
the Reparation the case is capable of.


Reparation, for making his Daughter a Whore! What, a Pox, can he give her her
Maiden-head again?


Money, which shall not be wanting, will stop that Witnesses Mouth: and I will
give your Daughter such a Fortune, that were what you believe true and
publicly known, she should live above Contempt, as the World goes now.


You speak like the worthy Gentleman the World thinks you; but there can be no
Salve for this Sore.


Why, you are enough to damn Forty Sons, if you had 'em; you encourage 'em to
Whore: You are fit to breed up youth!


You are mad: But pray Sir, let me entreat you to go home, and I will come and
wait upon you; and we will consult how to make the best of this misfortune, in
which I assure you, I have a great share.


I will submit to your Wise Advice, Sir: My grief had had made me forget; here
is a Letter comes out of the Country for you.


For me! 'Tis welcome: Now for News from my dear Boy! Now you shall hear,
Brother: He is a Son indeed.


Yes, a very hopeful one: I will not undeceive him, till Ned has tried once
more to recover him.


Lolpoop; and notwithstanding all the search and enquiry we can make (Oh
Heaven) he cannot be found or heard of.


How's this?


Oh, my poor Boy! He is Robbed and Murdered, and buried in some Ditch, or flung
into some Pond. Oh, I shall never see thee more, dear Tim! The Joy, and the
Support of all my life! The only Comfort which I had on Earth:


Have patience Brother; 'tis nothing but a little Ramble in your Absence.


Oh, no; he durst not Ramble: He was the dutifullest Child! I shall never see
his face again: Look you, he goes on. We have searched and made enquiry in
three Adjacent Countries, and no Tidings can be heard of him. What have I done,
that Heaven should thus afflict me?


What, if after all, this Son should be he that has made all this noise in
White-Friers, for which mine has been so blamed*


My Son, my Son play such Pranks? that's likely! One so strictly, so soberly
Educated! One that's Educated your way cannot do otherwise.


Sir, Sir, Sir, mercy upon me, here's my young Masters Man Lolpoop, coming
along in the Streets with a Wench.


Oh Heaven! What say you?


Now it works: Ha ha ha.


How now! What have


Sirrah, Rogue, Dog, Villain! Whore! and you Rogue, Rogue! Confound the World!
Oh that the World were all on fire!


Brother, for shame be more temperate: Are you a mad man?


Plague of your dull Philosophy.


The Rabble are gathered together about you.


Villain, Rogue, Dog, Toad, Serpent! Where's my Son? Sirrah, you have Robbed
him, and murdered him.


Hold, hold; your Son is alive, and alive like: He's in London.


What say you, Sirrah? In London? and is he well? Thanks be to Heaven for that:
Where is he Sirrah?


He is in White-Fryers, with Mr. Cheatly, his Cousin Shamwell, and Captain
Hackum.


And you Rogue, you damned Dog, would you suffer him to keep such Company, and
commit such villainous Actions?


Hold, hold* hold, I pray you, Sir: I am but a Servant, how could I help it,
marry?


You could not help being with a Whore your self; Sirrah, Sirrah, Sirrah. Here
honest Mob, course this Whore to some purpose. A Whore, a Whore, a Whore.


This is wisely done! If they murder her, you'll be hanged: I am in Commission
for Middlesex; I must see to appease them.


Sirrah, Rogue, bring me to my Son instantly, or I'll cut your Throat.


Dear Ruth, thou dost for ever oblige us.


And so much, that none but our own Mothers could ever do it more.


Oblige your selves, and be not silly, coy, and (...)* Strike me when the
Iron's hot, I say. They have great Est^, and are both Friends, I know both
their Families and Conditions.


How dost thou?


These are the Damsels, I will retire, and watch, lest the Old Man surprise us.



Look thee, Isabella, I come to confer with thee, in a matter which concerns
us both, if thou be free.


Friend, 'tis like I am.


And mine with thee is of the same nature.


Proceed.


Something within me whispers, that we were made as helps for one another.


They Act very well, Cousin.


For young beginners. Come, leave off your Canaanitish Dialect, and talk like
the Inhabiters of this World.


We are as errant Hypocrites as the best of you.


We were bred otherwise than you see, and are able to hear you talk like
Gentlemen.


You come to our Meeting like Sparks and Beaux, and I never could perceive much
Devotion in you.


'Tis such a pain to dissemble, that I am resolved I'll never do it, but when I
must.


Dear Madam, I could wish all forms were laid aside betwixt us: But in short, I
am most infinitely in love with you, and must be for ever miserable if I go
without you.


A frank and hearty Declaration, which you make with so much confidence, I
warrant you have been used to it.


There is not a difficulty in the World which I would stop at to obtain your
Love, the only thing on Earth could make me happy.


And you are as much in earnest now, as you were when you came first to us even
now.


That's well urged: Cannot you Gentlemen counterfeit Love, as well as Religion?


Love is so natural, it cannot be affected.


To show you mine is so, take me at my word: I am ready to render on
discretion.


And was this the reason you frequented our Parish-Church?


Could you think our business was to hear your Teacher spin out an hour, over a
Velvet Cushion?


Profane men! I warrant they came to Ogle.


Even so: Our Eyes might tell you what we came for.


In short, dear Madam, our opportunities are like to be so few, your
confinement being so close, that 'tis fit to make use of this; 'tis not your
Fortune which I aim at, my Uncle will make a settlement equal to it, were it
more; but 'tis your Charming person.


And you would have me a fine forward Lady, to love Extempore.


Madam, you have but few minutes to make use of, and therefore should improve
those few: Your Uncle has sold you for 5000 l. and for ought I know, you have
not this night good for your deliverance.


Consider, Ladies, if you had not better trust a couple of honest Gentlemen,
than an Old Man, that makes his market of you: For I can tell you, you tho his
own Daughter, are to be sold too.


But for all that, our consents are to be had.


You can look for nothing, but a more strict confinement, which must follow
your Refusal: Now, if you have the Courage to venture an Escape, we are the
Knights that will relieve you.


I have an Estate Madam, equal to your Fortune: But I have nothing can deserve
your Love: But I'll procure your freedom, then use it as you please.


If you are unwilling to trust us, you can trust your Governess, whom you shall
have with you.


And what would you and the World say of us for this?


We should Adore you: And I am apt to think the World would not condemn your
choice.


But I am sure, all the World will condemn your delay, in the condition you are
in.


I see Mr. Scrapeall coming at the end of the Street: Begone, I'll bring them to
your Chamber in the Temple, this Evening. Hast, hast out at the Back-door.


This is most unfortunate.


Dear Madam, let me Seal my Vows.


Go, go: begone, begone, Friends.


You see, Brother, we have dogged Belfond, till we saw him enter the House of
this Scrivener with his Friend Truman, both in disguises; which, with what we
have heard even now, at the neighbouring Alehouse, convinces me, that 'tis he
is to marry the rich Niece.


They say she is to be Married to the Son of Sir William Belfond, and that Sir
William gives a great sum of Money to her Uncle for her; by this it should seem
to be the Elder Son, and not our Enemy, who is disguised for her.


If so, the Villain would not at full day go thither.


But 'tis in a disguise.


With that, I suppose the Son pretends to be a Puritan too, or she would not
have him; it must be he. And if you will do as I directed you, I warrant I'll
break off his Match; and by that work an Exquisite piece of Revenge.


I am wholly at your dispose.


Now is the time, the Door opens; pursue me with a drawn Dagger, with all the
seeming Fury imaginable, now as the Old Man comes out.


Where is the Jade? Deliver her to me, I'll cut her in piece meal: Deliver her,
I say. Well, you will not deliver her: I shall watch her.


Oh, Oh! Where is the Murderer? Where is he? I die with fear, I die.


Prithee, Woman, Comfort thy self, no Man shall hurt thee here. Take a Sup of
this Bottle.


Thou art safe.


We will defend thee here, as in a Castle. But what is the occasion of this
Man's fury?


You are so generous, in giving me this Succour, and promising my defence, that
I am resolved not to conceal it from you: Though I must confess, I have no reason
to boast of it; but I hope your Charity will Interpret it as well as you can on
my side.


Go on: Thou need not fear.


Know then, I am a Gentlewoman, whose Parents dying when I was sixteen, left me
a moderate Fortune, yet able to maintain me like their Daughter. I chose an
Aunt my Guardian, one of those Jolly Widows who love Gaming, and have great
resort in the Evenings at their Houses.


Good: Proceed.


There it was my misfortune to be acquainted with a young Gentleman, whose
Face, Air, Mean, Shape, Wit, and Breeding not I alone, but the whole Town
Admires.


Very good.


By ^ll his Looks, his Gestures, and Addresses, he seemed in Love with me: The
Joy that I conceived at this, I wanted Cunning to conceal, but he must needs
perceive it flash in my Eyes, and kindle in my Face; he soon began to court me
in such sweet, such Charming Words, as would betray a more experienced Heart
than mine.


Humh: Very well; she speaks notably.


There was but little left for him to do, for I had done it all before for him:
He had a Friend within too ready to give up the Fort; yet I held out as long as
I could make defence.


Good lack a day! Some Men have strange Charms, it is confessed.


Yet I was safe by Solemn mutual Oaths, in private we were contracted: He would
have it private, because he feared to offend an Uncle, from whom he had great
expectance; but now came all my Misery.


Alack, alack, I warrant he was false.


False as a Crocodile: He watched the fatal Minute, and he found it, and
greedily seized upon me, when I trusted to his Honour and his Oaths; he still
swore on, that he would Marry me, and I Sinned on: In short, I had a Daughter
by him, now three years old, as true a Copy as ever Nature drew, Beauteous, and
Witty to a Miracle.


Nay, Men are faithless, I can speak it.


Poor Lady; I am strangely concerned for her.


She was a Fool, to be caught in so common a Snare.


From time to time he swore he would Marry me; though I must think I am his
Wife as much as any Priest can make me; but still he found Excuses about his
Uncle. I would have patiently waited till his Unkle's death, had he been true;
but he has thrown me off, abandoned me, without so much as a pretended Crime.


Alack, and well-a-day! It makes me weep.


But 'tis for an Attorney's Daughter, whom he keeps, and now is fond of; while
he treats me with all contempt and hatred.


Though she was a Fool, yet he's a base inhuman Fellow.


To scorn and hate her, for her Love to him.


By this means, my Dishonour, which had been yet concealed, became so public,
my Brother coming from the Wars of Hungary, has heard all, has this day fought
with the Author of my Misery, but was disarmed; and now by Accident he spied me
by your House, I having fled the place where I had lodged, for fear of him; and
here the Bloody Man would have killed me, for the dishonour done to his Family,
which never yet was blemished


Get the Chief Justices Warrant, and bind him to the Peace.


She tells her story well.


'Tis a very odd one; but she expresses it so sensibly, I cannot but believe
her.


If they do not ask me who this is, I have told my Tale in vain. Now, Ladies, I
hope you have charity enough, to pardon the weakness of a poor Young Woman, who
suffers shame enough within.


We shall be glad to do you what kindness we can.


Oh, had you seen this most bewitching person, so Beautiful, Witty, and well
bred, and full of most Gentleman-like Qualities, you would be the readier to
have Compassion on me.


Pray, who is it?


Alas, 'tis no secret, it is Belfond, who calls Sir Edward Belfond Father, but
is his Nephew.


What do I hear? Was ever Woman so unfortunate as I, in her first Love.


'Tis most unlucky.


That is the Niece: I see 'twas he who was to Marry her.


But I am glad I have thus early heard it: I'll never see his face more.


All this is false: He is a Pious man, and true Professor. This vile Woman will
break the Match off, and undo my hopes.


'Tis as I thought. He is a Ranting Blade, a Royster of the Town.


Come you are an idle Woman, and belie him; begone out of the doors; there's the
back-way, you need not pretend fear of your Brother.


I am obliged enough in the present defence you gave me: I intended not to
trouble you long; but Heaven can witness what I say is true.


Do you hear Cousin? 'tis most certain, I'll never see him.


Go, wicked Woman, go, what evil Spirit sent thee hither? I say begone.


I go. I care not what she says, it works where I would have it. Your Servant
Ladies.


Go, go, thou wicked Slanderer.


See him but once, to hear what he can say in his Defence.


Yes, to hear him lye, as all the Sex will: Persuade me not; I am fixed.


Look thee, Isabella.


I am resolved.


Dear Ruth, thou dearest Friend, whom once we took for our most cruel Gaolor,
let's follow, and help me to convince her of her Error; but I am resolved, if
she be stubborn, t^ undo her self, she shall not ruin me: I will escape.


Let us persuade her.


Captain, call all my Servants, why don't they wait?


How dost thou, my Dear?


I have brought you a Caudle here; there's Amber-greese in it, 'tis a rare
refreshing, strengthening thing.


What, adad, you take me for a Bride-groom; I scorn a Caudle, give me some
Cherry brandy, I'll drink her Health in a Bumper: Do thee eat this, Child.


I have that at hand -- here, Sir.


Come, my dear Natural, here's a Bumper of Cherry-brandy to thy Health; but
first let me kiss thee, my dear Rogue.


Some Thunderbolt light on my Head; what's this I see?


My Father!


Hey, here's the whole Kennel of Hell-hounds.


Bear up to him, bow, wow.


Do not flinch, bow, wow.


Bow, wow, Bow, wow.


Most impudent abandoned Rascal; let me go, Let me come at him; audacious
Varlet, how durst thou look on me?


Go strike your Dogs, and call them names, you have nothing to do with me, I am
of full Age; and I thank Heaven, am gotten loose from your Yoke, don't think to
put upon me, I'll be kept no longer like a Prigster, a silly Country Put, fit
for nothing but to be a Bubble, a Caravan, or so.


A most perfect downright Canting Rogue; am I not your Father, Sirrah? Sirrah,
am I not?


Yes, and Tenant for Life to my Estate in Tail, and I'^ look to you, that you
commit no waste; what-a-Pox, did you think to Nose me for ever, as the Saying
is? I am not so dark (...), I am sharp, sharp as a Needle, I can smoke now, as
soon as another.


Let me come at him.


So long as you forbear all Violence you are safe; but if you strike here, we
command the Fryers, and we will raise the P^sse.


O Villain! thou notorious undoer of young Heirs: And thou pernicious Wretch,
thou art no part of me; have I from thy first swaddling nourished thee and bred
thee up with Care.


Yes, with care to keep your Money from me, and breed me in the greatest
Ignorance, sit for your Slave, and not your Son; I had been finely dark if I
had staid at home.


Were you not Educated like a Gentleman?


No like a Grasier or a Butcher; if I had staid in the Country, I had never
seen such a Nab, a rum Nab, such a Modish Porker, such spruce and neat
Accoutrements; here is a Tatle? here's a Famble, and here's the Cole, the
Ready, the Rhino, the Darby; I have a lusty Cod Old Prigg, I'd have thee know,
and am very Rhinocerical, here are Meggs and Smelts good store, Decus^s and
Georges, the Land is Entailed, and I will have my Snack of it while I am young,
adad, I will. Hah!


Some Mountain cover me, and hide my Shame for ever from the World; did I not
beget thee, Rogue?


What know I whether you did or not? but 'twas not to use me like a Slave, but
I am sharp and smoky, I had been purely Bred, had I been Ruled by you, I
should never have known these Worthy Ingenious Gentlemen, my dear Friends, all
this fine Language had been Heathen Greek to me, and I had ne'er been able to
have cut a Sham or Banter while I had lived, a Dad; Odsookers, I know my self,
and will have nothing to do with you.


I am astonished!


Shall my younger Brother keep his Coach and Equipage, and shine like a Spruce
Prigg, and I be your Bailey in the Country? Hi, La Mar; bid my Coach be ready at
the Door; I'll make him know I am elder Brother, and I will have the better
Liveries, and I am resolved to manage my Natural, my pure Blowing, my
Convenient, my Peculiar, my Tackle, my Purest Pure, as the rest of the young
Gentlemen of the Town do.


A most confirmed Alsatian Rogue!


Very likely, that you, who have cudgeled me from my Cradle, and made me your
Slave, and grutch'd me a Crown in my Pocket, should do all this.


Believe him not; there's not one Word of Truth in it.


This is a Trick to get you in his Power.


The Writings are all at my Attorney's in the Temple; you may go with me, and
see'm all; and, if you will comply, I'll pardon what is past and marry you.


No, no, I am sharp, as I told you, and smoky; you shall not put upon me, I
understand your Shams; but to talk fairly, in all occurrences of this nature,
which either may, or may not be, according to the different accidents which
often intervene upon several opportunities, from whence we may collect either
Good or Bad, according to the nature of the things themselves; and forasmuch as
whether they be Good or Bad ^ only the Understanding, so far ^orth as it
employs ^Now since all this is premised, Let us come to the ^


Prodigious Impudence! O Devil! I'll to my (...) Chief Justice, and with his
Tipstaff I'll do your Business, Rogues Dogs and Villains, I will.


This was bravely carried on.


Most admirably.


Ai, was't not? Don't I begin to Banter pretty well? ha!


Rarely: But a Word in Private, my r^splendent (...)* You see your Father
resolves to put some Trick upon you; be before-hand with him, and marry this
Fortune I have prepared; loose not Time but see her, and treat with her, if you
like her, as soon as you can.


You are in the right; let not my Blowing hear a Word; I'll to her instantly.


Shamwel and I'll go and prepare her for a Visit; you know the place.


I do, come along. --


Madam, you must carry your self somewhat Stately, but Courteously, to the
Bubble.


Somewhat reserv'dly, and yet so as to give him hopes.


I warrant you, let me alone; and if I effect this business, you are the best
Friends; such Friends as I could never yet expect: 'Twill be an exquisite
Revenge.


He comes! come Noble Esquire.


Yes, Madam, as Mr. Cheatly says, I am ambitious of Kissing your Hand, and your
Lip too, Madam; for I vow to gad, Madam, there is not a Person in the World,
Madam, has a greater honour for your Person: And, Madam, I assure you I am a
Person --


My good Friend, Mr. Cheatly, with whom I entrust the Management of my small
Fortune --


Small Fortune! nay it is a large one --


He's told me of your Family and Character: To your Name I am no Stranger, nor
to your Estate, though this is the first time I have had the honour to see your
Person.


Hold, good Madam, the Honour lies on my side; she's a rare Lady, ten times
handsomer than my Blowing: (And here's a Lodging and Furniture for a Queen!)
Madam, if your Ladyship please to accept of my Affection in an Honourable way,
you shall find I am no Putt, no Country Prigster, nor shall ever want the
Meggs, the Smelts, Decuses and Georges, the Ready, and the Rhino: I am
Rhinocerical.


I want nothing Sir, Heaven be thanked.


Her worst Servants eat in Plate; and her Maids have all Silver Chamber-pots.


Madam, I beg your pardon, I am somewhat Bowsie; I have been drinking Bumpers
and Facers till I am almost Clear: I have 3000 l. a year, and 2000
pounds-worth of Wood, which I can turn into Cole and Ready, and my Estate never
the worse; there's only the Encumbrance of an Old Fellow upon it, and I shall
break his heart suddenly.


This is a weighty matter, and requires advice: nor is it a sudden work to
persuade my heart to Love. I have my Choice of Fortunes.


Very like Madam: But Mr. Cheatly and my Cousin Shamwell can tell you that my
Occasions require hast, dee see! and therefore I desire you to resolve as soon
as conveniently you can.


What's this I hear?


They are up in the Friars: Pray Heaven the Sheriffs Officers be not come.


'Slife, 'tis so; shift for your selves; Squire let me conduct you -- This is
your wicked Father with Officers.


Are you mad to resist the Tip-staff, the King's Authority?


We are too strong for 'em: Stand our ground.


We demand that same Squire, Cheatly, Shamwell, and Bully Hackum: Deliver them
up, and all the rest of you are safe.


Not a Man.


Nay then, have at you.


I charge you, in the


Fall on.


Come on thou wicked Author of this Broil. You are our Prisoner.


Let me go, Rogue.


Now we have you in the Temple, we'll show you the ^ump first.


Dogs, Rogues, Villains.


To the Pump, to the Pump.


Pump him, Pump him.


Ay, Pump him, Pump him, Old Prigg.


Pump, Pump, to the Pump; Huzza!


What's the matter here?


The Rabble have caught a Bailiff.


Death and Hell, 'tis my Father; 'tis a Gentleman, my Father. Gentlemen, I
beseech you lend me your hands to his Rescue.


Come on, Rascals: Have


Here! where are the Officers of the Temple? Porter, do you shut the Gates into
White Friars.


I will, Sir.


Here's a Guinea among ye. See these three Rogues well Pumped, and let 'em
gothrough the whole Course.


Hold, hold, I am a Gentleman.


I am your Cousin.


Hold, hold, Scoundrels, I am a Captain.


Away with 'em.


Away with 'em. Dear Son, I am infinitely obliged to you; I ask your Pardon for
all that I have said against you: I have wronged you.


Good Sir, reflect not on that; I am resolved, ^'er I have done, to deserve
your good Word.


'Twas ill Fortune, we have missed my most ungracious Rebel, that Monster of
Villainy.


Let me alone with him Sir, upon my Honour I will deliver him safe this Night.
But now let us see the Execution.


Dear N^d, you bring Tears into my Eyes. Let me Embrace thee, my only Comfort
now.


Good Sir, let's on and see the Justice of this place.


O Unmerciful Dogs! Were ever Gentlemen used thus before? I am drenched into a
Quart Ague.


My Limbs are stiff and numbed all over: But where I am beaten and bruised,
there I have some Sense left.


Dry Blows I could have borne magnanimously; but to be made such a Sop of --
Besides, I have had the worst of it, by wearing my own Hair; to be Shaved all
on one side, and with a Lather made of Channel-dirt, instead of a Wash-ball: I
have lost half the best Head of Hair in the Friars; and a Whisker, worth Fifty
Pound in its Intrinsic Value to a Commander.


Indeed your Magnanimous Phyz is somewhat disfigured by it, Captain.


Your Military Countenance has lost much of its Ornament.


I am as diconsolate as a Be that has lost his Sting; the other Moity of
Whisker must follow: Then all the terror of my Face is gone; that Face that
used to fright young Priggs into Submission. I shall now look but like an
Ordinary Man.


We'll swinge those Rogues with Indictments for a Riot, and with Actions Sans
Nombre.


What Reparation will that be? I am a Gentleman, and can never show my face
amongst my Kindred more.


We that can show our Faces after what we have done, may well show 'em after
what we have suffered. Great Souls are above Ordinances, and never can be
Slaves to Fame.


My Honour is tender, and this one Affront will cost me at least five Murders.


Let's not prate and shiver in cold Fits here, but call your Wife with the
Cherry-Brandy, and let's ask after the Squire* If they have taken him, 'tis the
worst part of the Story.


No, I saw the Squire run into the Friars at first. But I'll go fetch some
Cherry-Brandy,

Here's the Bottle, lets drink by Word of Mouth.


Your Cherry-Brandy is most sovereingn


Most exceeding comfortable after Temple Pickling.


A Fish has a damned life on it: I shall have that Aversion to Water, after this
-- that I shall scarce ever be cleanly enough to wash my Face again.


Well! I'll to the Barbers and get my self Shaved; then go to the Squire and be
new Accoutred.


Dear Shamwell, we must not for a little Affliction, forget our main Business;
our Caravan must be well manag,d: He is now drunk, and when he wakes, will be
very fit to be Married. Mrs. Termagant has given us a Judgment of 2000 l. upon
that condition.


The sooner we dispose of him, the better; for All his Kindred are bent to
retrieve him; and the Temple joining in the War against us, will go near to be
too hard for us; so that we must make what we can of him immediately.


If he should be once Cool, or Irresolute, we have lost him, and all our hopes;
but when we have sufficiently dipped him, as we shall by this Marriage and her
Judgment, he is our own for ever.


But what shall we do for our White-Friers Chaplain, our Alsatian Divine? I was
in search of him before our late Misfortune, and the Rogue is holed somewhere,
I could not find him, and we are undone without him.


'Tis true; pray go instantly and find him out; he dares not stir out of this
Covert; beat it well all over for him, you'll (...) him tappes'd in some
Ale-house, Bawdy-house, or (...) shop.


He's a brave swinging Orthodox, and will Marry any (...) at any time; he
desies License, and Canonical Hours, and all those foolish Ceremonies.


Pr^ithe look after him, while I go to prepare the Lady.


You Rogue, Cheatly, you have a loving Design upon her; you will go to twelve
with the Squire: If you do, will have my snack.


Go, go, you are a wag.


She told her Tale so passionately, that Isabella believes every word of it;
and is resolved, as she says, never to see thee more.


Oh, this most malicious, and most infamous of her Sex; there is not the least
truth in her Accusation.


That to my knowledge, he is not a Man of those Principles.


I will send them to you, if I can; and in the mean time, be upon the Watch.


Take this Writing with thee; which is a Bond from us, to make good our
Agreement with thee.


'Tis well, and still I doubt not to perform my part.


Was ever man plagued with a Wench like me? Well, say what they will, the life
of a Whore-Master is a foolish, restless, anxious life; and there's an end of
it. What can be done with this malicious Devil? A Man cannot offer violence to
a Woman.


Steal away her Child, and then you may awe her.


I have Emissaries abroad, to find out the Child; but she'll Sacrifice that,
and all the World, to her Revenge.


You must Arrest her upon a Swinging Action, which she cannot get Bail for, and
keep her till she's humbled.


You have done well, Mr. Belfond: Here has been a Lady, whom you have had a
Child by, were Contracted to, and have deserted, for an Attorny's Daughter
which you keep; my Cousin says she will never see you more.


If this be true, Madam, I deserve never to see her more; which would be worse
than Death to me.


I have prevailed with her once more to see you, and hear what you can say to
this: Come, come, Cousin. Belfond denies all this matter.


I never doubted that: but certainly it is impossible to counterfeit so lively
as she did.


Heaven is my Witness that her Accusation is false: I never was yet contracted
to any Woman, nor made the least promise, or gave any one the least hope of it;
and if I do not demonstrate my innocence to you, I will be content for ever to
be debarred the sight of you, more prized by me than Liberty, or Life.


And yet perhaps these very words were said to her.


Madam, you have not time, if you value your own Liberty; to Argue any longer:
We will carry you to Sir Edward Belfonds, his Sister is his House-keeper, and
there you may be entertained with safety of your Honour.


He is esteemed a Worthy Gentleman; nor could we choose a better Guardian.


At least, how could you use a Woman ill, you had a Child by.


Not all the malice of Mankind can equal hers. I have been frail, I must
confess, as others; and though I have provided for her and her Child, yet every
day she does me all the most outrageous mischief she can possibly conceive; but
this has touched me in the tender point.


'Twould be much for my honour, to put myself into the hands of a known
Wencher.


Into the hands of one, who has abandoned all the thoughts of Vice and Folly
for you.


Besides, Madam, you neither of you trust us; your Governess is with you, and
yet we are ready to make good our words by the Assistance of a Parson.


That's another point: But I am sure, Cousin, there is no dallying about our
Liberty: If you be in Love with your Jail, stay; I, for my part, am resolved to
go.


My Unkle's a virtuous honourable Man; my Aunt, his Sister, a Lady of great
Piety: think if you will not be safer there, than with your Uncle, by whom you
are sold for 5000 l. to my knowledge, to one who is the most debauched
dissolute Fellow this day in London.


Liberty, liberty, I say; I'll trust my self, and my Governess.


Haste, and agree: Your Father has sent to have Supper ready in less than half
an hour.


Away, away; I am ready; Cousin, farewell.


For Heavens sake, Madam, on my knees I beg you to make use of this occasion,
or you have lost your self; and I too shall for ever lose you for Marriage;
which alone can keep me from being the most miserable: you may advise, and all
things shall be cleared up to your wish.


Fare^el, Dear Cousin: let's kiss at parting.


Sure thou hast not the Conscience; thou wilt not leave me*


By my troth but I will.


By my troth but you shall not; for I'll go with thee.


May all the joys of Life for ever wait on you.


Haste! haste! begone --


That I should live to this unhappy Age! to see the fruit of all my hopes thus
blasted: How long, like Chemists have I watched and toiled; and in the minute
when I expected to have seen Projection, all is slown up in Fumo.

Brother! I am ashamed to look on you, my disappointment is so great. Oh this
most wicked Recreant! this perverse and infamous Son.


Brother, a Wise man is never disappointed. Mans life is like a Game at Tables;
if at any time the Cast you most shall need does not come up: let that which
comes instead of it be mended by your play.


How different have been our Fates? I left the pleasures of the Town, to Marry,
which was no small Bondage, had Children, which brought more care upon me: For
their sakes I lived a rustic, painful, hard, severe, and melancholy Life:
Morose, Inhospitable, sparing even Necessaries; Tenaceous, even to griping, for
their good: My Neighbours shunned me, my Friends neglected me, my Children hate
me, and wish my Death: Nay, this wicked Son in whom I had set up my rest, and
principally for whose good I thus had lived, has now defeated all my hopes.


'Twas your own choice: you would not learn from others.


You have lived ever at ease, indulged all Pleasures, and melted down your time
in daily Feasts, and in continual Revels: Gentle, Complaisant, Assable, and
Liberal, at great expense: The World speaks well of you; Mankind embrace you;
your Son Loves you, and wishes your Life as much as he can do his own. But I'll
perplex my self no more: I Look upon this Rascal as an Excrement, a Wen, or
Grangren'd Limb, lopped off.


Rather look on him as a Dislocated one, and get him Set again: By this time
you see, Severity will do nothing, entice him back to you by Love. In short,
give him his Liberty, and a good allowance: There now remains no other way to
reclaim him; for like a Stone-horse broke in among the Mares, no Fence
hereafter will contain him.


Brother, I look upon you as a true Friend, that would not insult upon my Folly
and Presumption, and confess you are nearer to the right than I: Your Son I
hope will be a Comfort to me.


I doubt it not; but consider, if you do not reconcile your self, and reclaim
yours, as I tell you, you Lop off the Paternal Estate, which is all Entailed
forever from your Family: For, in the Course he is, the Reversion will be gone
in your Life time.


Here are my Father and my Uncle: Mask your selves, Ladies; you must not yet
discover who you are.


Yonder's Ned, and his Friend, with Ladies Masked: Who should they be.


Whores, Whores, what should they be else? Here's a Comfortable sight again! He
is incorrigible.


'Tis you that are incorrigible: How ready are you with your Censures!


Sir, pardon the freedom I use with you; I humbly desire protection for these
Ladies in your House: They are Women of Honour, I do assure you, and desire to
be Concealed for some small time; an Hour hence I will discover all to you, and
you will than approve of what I do.


Dear Ned, I will trust thy Honour; and without any Examination, do as you
would have me.


Why, Brother, what a Pox, will you Pimp for your Son? What a Devil, will you
make your House a Bawdy House?


What, will the Must never be gotten out of your old Vessel? Ladies, be pleased
to Honour my House; and be assured, that while you are there, 'tis yours.


Sir, my Friend and I are just now going to do you Service: I'll pawn my Life
to you, Sir, I will retrieve your Rebel Son, and immediately restore him to
you, and bring him, as he ought to come, on's Knees, with a full Submission.


You will oblige me: Thou gain'st upon me hourly, and I begin to love thee more
and more.


There's nothing in the World I aim at now but your Love; and I will be bold to
say, I shortly will deserve it: But this Business requires haste, for I have
laid every thing ^ady; 'tis almost Bed time; come Friend.


Well, I'll say that for him, he is a good Natured Boy; it makes me weep, to
think how harsh I have been to him. I'll in to my Brother, and expect the
Event.


I value not misfortune, so as I have my dear Friend still within my Arms.


My dear, dear Cousin! I will hug thee close to me; I feared to have lost thee.


How happy am I in the truest, the dearest Friends that ever Man enjoyed! Well,
I was so afflicted for you, I was forced to make my self Devilish Bowsie to
comfort me.


Your Brother has heard of this great Match you are towards: She has to my
knowledge, (for I do all her Law-Business for her) 1500 l. a year Jointure, and
Ten Thousand pound in Plate, Money, and Jewels; and this damned Envious Brother
of yours will break it off, if you make not haste and prevent him.


My dear Friends, you are in the right: Never Man met with such before. I'll
disappoint the Rogue my Brother, and the old Prig my Father; adad, Ill do it
instantly.


Come, Squire, haste: Captain, do you follow us.


Madam, the time admits of no longer deliberation* If you take not this
opportunity, my Friend here will be ravished from us.


Ay, Madam, if you take me not now, you will lose me Madam, you will consider
what you do.


Well, Mr. Cheatly, you dispose of me as you please: I have ever been guided by
your wise advice.


Come, Parson, do your Office; have you your Book about ye?


What, do you think I am without the Tools of my Trade?


Can't you come presently to the joining of hands, and leave out the rest of
the Formalities.


Ay, ay: Come, stand forth.


Here they are: Seize them all.


Hell and Damnation! We are all undone.


Hands off; let me alone: I am going to be Married. You envious Rascal to come
just in the nick.


Brother, be satisfied, there's nothing but Honour meant to you: 'tis for your
Service.


Oh this accursed Wretch, to come in this unlucky minute, and ruin all my
Fortune.


She has fifteen hundred a year Jointure, and ten thousand pound in Money, c.
and I had been Married to her in 3 minutes.


You have escaped the worst of Ruins: Resist not, for if you do, you shall be
carried by Head and Heels. Your Father will receive you, and be kind, and give
you as good an Allowance as ever I had.


Where's your Warrant?


'Tis here, from my Lord Chief Justice.


Let me see your Bride that was to be. Oh Mrs. Termagant! Oh Horror! Horror!
What a ruin have you escaped? This was my Mistress, and still maintained by me:
I have a Child by her 3 years old.


Impudent Villain! How dare you lye so basely?


By Heaven 'tis true.


I never saw him in my life before.


Yes, often, to my Plague. Brother, if I do not prove this, to you, believe me
not in ought I e're shall say.


Belfond, look to your self.


Ha! Disarm her. This is another show of her good Nature. Brother, give me your
hand, I'll wait on you; and you will thank me for your deliverance.


I am assured you will: You are delivered from the most infamous, and
destructive Villains, that ever yet took Sanctuary here.


And from two mischiefs you must have for ever sunk under, Incest and Beggary.
Those three are only in the Warrant with my Brother; him I'll wait upon, bring
you the Rest. Hey! the cry is up; but we are provided.


Undone, undone, all's lost!


Ruined; for ever lost!


I am surprised, and cannot sight my way through.


What, are all these Rogues? and that a Whore^ and am I cheated!


Even so; come along; make ready Musketeers.


Do you take care of my Brother, and conduct him with the rest to my Uncles
House: I must go before, and carry my little Mistress, to make up the business
with her Father.


I'll do it, I warrant you.


We are ready.


Oh Vile Misfortune! had he but staid six minutes, I had Crowned all my Revenge
with one brave Act, in Marrying of his Brother. Well, I have one piece of
Vengeance, which I will Execute, or perish: Besides I'll have his Blood, and
then I'll dye contented.


What do all these Rabble here?


Fire amongst 'em.


Present.


Hey how they run!


This is the time I appointed my Son to bring your Daughter hither: The Witness
is a most malicious lying Wench, and can never have credit. Besides, you know
an Action will sufficiently stop her Mouth; for, were it true, she can never
prove what she says.


You say right, Sir: next to her being innocent, is the concealing of her
shame.


And can I live to hear my fatal Sentence of parting with you? Hold Heart a
little.


It is with some Convulsions I am torn from you; but I must Marry, I cannot
help it.


And must I never see you more?


As a Lover, never; but your Friend I'll be while I have Breath.





Sir, I beg a thousand pardons, that I should attempt to injure your Family,
for it has gone no farther yet: For any Fact, she's innocent; but 'twas no
thanks to me, I am not so. (If a Lie be ever lawful, 'tis in this case.)


Come, pretty Lady, let me present you to your Father: Though as my Son says,
she's innocent; yet, because his Love had gone so far, I present her with 1500
l. my Son and you shall be Trustees for her: To Morrow you shall have the
Money.


You are the best of all Mankind.


All the World speaks your Praises justly.


A thousand Thanks, Sir, for your Bounty: And if my Father please to pardon me
this slip, in which I was so far from fact, that I had scarce intention: I will
hereafter outlive the strictest Nun.


Rise: I do pardon you.


That's well: And if they be not kind to you, appeal to me. It will be fit for
you to go from hence with the least notice that can be: To Morrow I'll bring
the Money. Who are the Ladies you have entrusted me with, Ned?


Scrapealls Niece and Daughter! The Niece my Father, was to give 5000 l. for,
for his Son: If you will give me leave, I shall Marry her for nothing; and the
other will take my Friend --


How Ned! She's a Puritan?


No more than you, Sir: She was bred otherwise, but was fain to comply for
peace; she is Beautiful, and Witty to a Miracle; and I beg your consent, for I
will die before I Marry without it.


Dear Ned, thou hast it; but what hast thou done with the Alsatians?


I have the Rogues in Custody, and my Brother too; whom I Rescued in the very
Minute he was going to be Married to a Whore, to my Whore who plagues me
continually. I see my Father coming, pray prepare him, while I prepare my
Brother for a meeting with him; he shall not see me.


Your Servant Brother: No News of Ned yet?


Oh, yes; he has your Son, and the three Rogues in Custody, and will bring 'em
hither: Brother, pray resolve not to lose a Son* but use him kindly, and
forgive him.


I will, Brother: And let him spend what he will, I'll come up to London Feast
and Revel, and never take a Minutes care while breath again.


Sir, a young Gentleman would speak with you.


Bid him come in.


If you be Sir Edward Belfond, I come to tell you, what concerns your Honour,
and my Love.


I am he.


Know then, Sir, I am informed your Brother, Sir William Belfond's Son, is to
Marry Isabella the Niece of Mr. Scrapeall.


What then Sir?


Then he invades my right, I have been many Months Contracted to her, and as
you are a Man of Honour, I must tell you, we have sealed that Contract with
Mutual Enjoyments.


How! What was my Son to Marry a Whore? I'll to this Damned Fellow instantly,
and make him give up my Articles.


Have patience; be not too rash.


Patience! What, to have my Son Marry a Whore.


Look you Brother, you must stay a moment.


Oh, Ned, your Brother has escaped a fine Match: This same Isabella is
Contracted to, and has been Enjoyed, by this Gentleman, as he calls it: He had
like to have Married a Whore.


Yes, that he had; but I will cut the Throat of him that affirms that of
Isabella.


Sir, I demand the protection of your House.


Hold, Son.


What Devil sent him hither at this time?


I'll bring 'em to Confront this Rogue, what a Devil's this? Have we another
Brother of that Devil Termagant's here?


This is a very odd Story.


Let me go, Brother; 'tis true enough. But what makes Ned concerned?


Let us examine yet farther.


Look, here they are all: How the Devil comes this about?


O Madam, are you here! I claim your Contract, which I suppose, will not offend
you.


What means this Impudent Fellow? I never saw his Face before.


Yes Madam, you have seen, and more than seen me often since we were
Contracted.


What Instrument of Villainy is this?


Nay, if you deny: Friends come in.


Yes, she is Mr. Scrapeall's Niece.


We were both Witnesses to a Contract of Marriage between you too.


Oh Impious Wretches! What Conspiracy is this!


Can any thing be more plain? They seem Civil, Grave, Substantial Men.


Hold, hold, have I found ye? 'Tis she, it could be no other Devil but her
self.


A Woman!


Secure those Witnesses.


A Woman! No: She has out-sinn'd her Sex, and is a Devil. Oh Devil, most
complete Devil! This is the Lady I have been so much of late obliged to.


This is she that told us the fine Story to day.


I know her Face again: Most Infamous Lying Creature!


I am become desperate: Have at thee.


Thank you Madam: Are not you a Devil? 'Twas laden, 'twas well meant truly.


Lay hold on her: I'll send her to a place where she shall be tamed, I never
yet heard of such malice:


Dear Ned, thou hast so obliged me; thou melt'st my Heart: That thou should
steal away those Ladies, and save me 5000 l. Now, I hope, Madam, my Son Tim
shall be your Husband without Bargain and Sale.


No: I can assure you, Sir, I would never have performed that Bargain of my
Uncles: We had determined to dispose of our selves before that; and now are
more resolved.


We have broken Prison, by the help of these Gentlemen, and I think we must
even take the Authors of our Liberty.


Will not that be a little hard, Cousin, to take their Liberty from them, who
have given it to us?


Well, I am disappointed; but cannot blame thee, Ned.


Your Son: Pray use him kindly.


I have been Betrayed, Cheated, and Abused: Upon my Knees I beg your Pardon,
and never will offend you more; adad, I will not: I thought they had been the
honestest, the Finest Gentlemen in England; and it seems they are Rogues,
Cheats, and Blockheads.


Rise Tim, I prosess thou make me weep, thou has subdued me; I forgive thee,
I see all Human Care is vain, I will allow thee 500 l. a year, and come, and
live with Ease and Pleasure here: I'll Feast, and Revel, and wear my self with
pain and care no more.


A thousand Thanks: I'll never displease you while I live again; adad I wont.
Here's an Alteration: I never had good word from him before.


I would have Married you to that pretty Lady: But your Brother has been too
hard for you.


She's very pretty: But 'tis no matter. I am in no such haste, but I can stay
and see the World first.


Welcome dear Nephew, to my House and me: And now my dear Son be free, and
before all this Company let me know all the Encumbrances you have upon you.


That good natured Lady is the only one that's heavy upon me, I have her Child
in my possession, which she says, is mine.


Has he my Child; then I am undone for ever -- Oh cursed misfortune!


Look you Madam, I will settle an Annuity of 100 l. a year, upon you so long as
you shall not disturb my Son: And for your Child I'll breed her up and provide
for her like a Gentlewoman: But if you are not quiet you shall never see her
more.


You speak like a Noble Gentleman: I'll strive to compose my self. I am at last
subdued, but will not stay to see the Triumphs --


Well, dear Ned, dost owe any Money?


No, my dear Father, no: You have been too bountiful for that: I have five
hundred Guineas in my Cabinet.


Now Madam, if you please to accept him for a Husband, I will settle Fifteen
Hundred Pound a Year on him in present, which shall be your Jointure. Besides
that, your own money shall be laid out in Land and settled on you too. And at my
Death the rest of my Estate.


You do me too much Honour, you much out-bid my Value.


You best of Fathers, and of all Mankind, I throw my self thus at your Feet;
let me embrace your knees, and kiss those hands.


Come rise, and kiss these hands.


A long farewell to all the Vanity and Lewdness of Youth: I offer my self at
your feet as a Sacrifice without a blemish now!


Rise, I beseech you, rise.


Your offers, Sir, are better much than I could expect or can deserve.


That's impossible: the Wealth of both the Indies could not buy you from me I
am sure


Come, come, I have been Governess, I know their minds. Come give your hands
where you have given your hearts. Here Friend Truman: first take this.


My Governess will have it so.


Joy Sir, be ever with you: Please to make my House your own.


How can I be secure you will not fall to your old courses again?


I have been so sincere in my Confessions, you may trust me; but I call Heaven
to witness, I will hereafter be entirely yours. I look on Marriage as the most
solemn Vow a man can make; and 'tis by consequence, the basest Perjury to break
it.


Come, come, I know your mind too: take him, take him.


If Fate will have it so.


Let me receive this blessing on my knees.


You are very devout of late.


A thousand blessings on you both.


Perpetual happiness attend you both.


Brother and Madam! I wish you Joy from my heart, adad I do: Though between you
and I Brother, I intend to have my swing at Whoring, and Drinking, as you had,
before I come to it tho.


Here! bring in these Rogues!


We have substantial Bail.


I'll see it shall be substantial Bail: it is my Lord Chief Justices Warrant,
returnable to none but him: but I will prosecute you, I assure you.


Squire, dear Squire.


Good noble Squire speak for us.


Dear Cousin!


Oh Rogues! Cousin, you have Cozened me: you made a Putt, a Caravan, a Bubble
of me: I gave a Judgment for 1600 l. and had but 250. but there's some Goods
they talk of; but if e're I be caught again I'll be hanged.


Unconscionable Villains! the Chancery shall relieve us.


I'll Rout this knot of most pernicious Knaves, for all the Privilege of your
Place. Was ever such impudence suffered in a Government? Ireland's Conquered:
Wales Subdued: Scotland United: But there are some few spots of Ground in
London, just in the face of the Government, unconquered yet, that hold in
Rebellion still. Methinks 'tis strange, that places so near the Kings Palace
should be no parts of his Dominions: 'Tis a shame to the Societies of Law to
Countenance such Practices: Should any place be shut against the Kings Writ or
Posse Comitatus? Take them away and those two Witnesses.


Away with em, Rogues! Rascals, damned Priggs.


Come Ladies, I have sent for some Neighbours to rejoice with us. We have
Fiddles: Let's dance a brisk round or two, and then we'll make a Collation.


Oh Sir William, I am undone ruined: The Birds are flown. Read the Note they
left behind 'em.


Peace, they are Dancing, they have disposed of themselves.


Oh Seed of Serpents! Am I cheated then? I'll try a Trick of Law, you Frogs of
the bottomless Pit, I will and instantly -- What Dancing too? then they are
fallen indeed.


Come Brother, now who has been in the right, you or I?


You have: Prithee do not triumph.


Farewell for ever all the Vices of the Age:
There is no peace but in a Virtuous Life,
Nor lasting Joy but in a tender, Wife.

You, that would breed your Children well, by Kindness and Liberality endear em
to you: And teach em by Example.

Severity spoils ten, for one it mends:
If you'd not have your Sons desire your ends,
By Gentleness and Bounty make those Sons your Friends.

YE mighty scowrers of these narrow Seas,
Who suffer not a Bark to sail in peace,
But with your Tire of Culverins ye roar,
Bring 'em by the Lee, and Rummidge all their store;
Our Poet ducked, and looked as if half dead,
At every Shot that whistled over his Head.
Frequent Engagements ne'er could make him bold,
He sneaked into a corner of the Hold.
Since he submits, pray ease him of his fear,
And with a joint Applause bid him appear,
Good Critics don't insult and domineer.
He fears not Sparks, who with brisk dress and men,
Come not to hear or see, but to be seen.
Each prunes himself, and with a languishing Eye,
Designs to kill a Lady by the by.
Let each fantastic ugly Beau and Shape,
Little of Man, and very much of Ape,
Admire himself, and let the Poet escape.
Ladies, Your Anger most he apprehends,
And is grown past the Age of making Friends
Of any of the Sex whom he offends.
No Princess frowns, no Hero rants and whines,
Nor is weak Sense embroidered with strong lines:
No Battles, Trumpets, Drums, not any dye;
No Mortal Wounds, to please your Cruelty;
Who like not any thing but Tragedy.
With fond, unnatural extravagancies,
Stolen from the silly Authors of Romances.
Let such the Chamber-maids diversion be,
Pray be you reconciled to Comedy.
For when we make you merry, you must own
You are much prettier than when you frown.
With charming smiles you use to conquer still,
The melancholy look's not apt to kill.
Our Poet begs you who adorn this Sphere,
This Shining Circle, will not be severe.
Here no Chit chat, here no Tea Tables are.
The Cant he hopes will not be long unknown,
'Tis almost grown the language of the Town.
For Fops, who feel a wretched want of Wit,
Still set up something that may pass for it.
He begs that you will often grace his Play,
And lets you know Munday's his visiting day.

