HOw popular are Poets now a days?
Who can more Men at their first summons rais^,
Then many a wealthy home-bred Gentleman,
By all his interest in his Country can.
They raise their friends, but in one day arise
Against one poor Poet, all these Enemies:
F^r so he has observed you always are,
And against all that write maintain a War.
What shall he give you composition now?
Alas, he knows not what you will allow.
He has no cautionary-Song, nor Dance,
That might the Treaty of his Peace advance.
No kind Romantic Lovers in his Play,
To sigh and whine out passion, su^ as may
Charm Waitingwomen with Heroic Chime,
And still resolve to live and die in Rhyme;
Such as your E^res with Love, and Honour feast,
And play at Crambo for three hours at least:
That Fight, and woo in Verse in the same breath,
And make Similitudes, and Love in Death:
-- But if you love a fool, he bid me say,
He has great choice to show you in his Play;
(To do^ you service) I am one to day.
Well Gallants, 'tis his first, Faith, let it go,
Just as old Gamesters by young Bubbles do:
This first and smaller Stake let him but win,
And for a greater Sum you'll draw him in,
Or use our Poet, as you would a Hare,
Which when she's hunted down, for Sport you spare.
At length take up, and, damn no more for shame,
For if you only at the Qu^rrey aim,
This Critic poaching, will destroy your Game.

IN what Unlucky Minute was I born,
To be tormented thus where e're I go?
What an Impertinent age is this we live in
When all the World is grown so troublesome,
That I should envy him that spends his days
In some remote* and unfrequented Place,
With none but Bears and Wolves for his Companions,
And never see's the folly of Mankind.

Good Sir be patient, let it not disturb you,

Patient --
Thou may as well teach patience to a man
That has a fit of the Colic or the Stone,

What in a fit again Stanford? now art
Thou as moody as a Poet after his Play is Damned.

Oh Lovel,
I am tormented so beyond my patience
I am resolved to quit the World, and find
Some Uninhabited place far from Converse,
Where I may live as free as Nature made me.

Why this is down right Madness,
Prithee send for a Surgeon and open a Vein,
Try what that will do; for thou wilt be as
Ripe for Bedlum else as a Fanatic.

What would you have me do?
Where e're I turn me I am baited still
By some importunate Foole's that use me Worse,
Then Boys do Cocks upon Shrove-Tuesday;
This makes my life so tedious and unpleasant,
That rather then endure it longer I'll find out
Some place in the West-Indies, where I may
See a Man no oftner then a Blazing-Star.

Why thou wilt come to be bound in thy Bed Stanford:
'Thank Heaven I find nothing makes me Weary of
My life, thou art scandalous; Why dost thou abuse
This Age so? me thinks, it's as pretty an Honest
Drinking-VVhoring Age as a man would wish to
Live in.

Sure, Lovel, thou were it born without a Gaul,
Or bear thy anger like a Useless thing,
That can endure to live among such Fools,
As we are every Day Condemned to see.

VVhere's the trouble?

Sure thou art Insensible, or thou would not ask me,
I am more restless then the Man that has
A Raging Feavor on him; and like him,
I change my place, thinking to ease my self; But find
That which should lessen does increase my pain.

As how Sir?

C^uld any man have borne but yesterdays impertinence?

What was that, for I have not seen you since.

In the morning,
Coming abroad to find you out, (the only Friend
With whom I can enjoy my self) comes in a brisk
Gay Coxcomb of the Town -- O Lord, Sir, (says he)
I am glad I've taken you within, I came on purpose
To tell you the news, do ye hear it? then might I
Reasonably expect to hear of some great Intrigue or
Other; At the least that the Kings of France and Spain
Were agreed -- Then after he had bid me guess
Four or five times, with a great deal of amazement
Says he: Jack-Scatterbrain comes in with ten Guinny's
Last night into the Groom-porters, and
Carried away 200, and then Teased me
Half an Hour, to tell me all his Throws.

Now, should I have been pleased with this.

You make me Mad to hear you say so.

If you are VVeary of one Company, why don't
You try another? and vary your Companions as often
As your Young-Gallants do their Mistresses, or
The VVell-bred-Ladies their Servants.

Where e're I go I meet the same affliction: If I go
Into the City, there I find a Company of Fellows
Selling of their Souls for Two-pence in the Shilling
Profit.

You are too Satirical. --

Besides, I find the very fools I avoid at this
End of the Town, come thither, some to take
Up Money at Ten in the hundred, what with
Interest and Brokage, as they call it; others to take
Up Commodities upon Tick, which they sell at half
Value for ready Money, and these Inhumane Raskals
In the very midst of all their business will fix upon
Me, and I am more Barbarously used by em, then a
New-Poet by a Knot of Critics.

So Sir! go on with your Relation.

The other day, being tired almo^ to death with the
Impertinence of Fopps that importuned me;
For Variety, I ventured into a Coffee-house;
There I found a Company of formal Starch'd-Fellows
Talking Gravely, Wisely, and nothing to the purpose;
And with undaunted Impudence discoursing of the
Right of Empires; the Management of Peace and War;
And the great Intrigues of Councils; when o'my
Conscience you would have sooner took em for
Tooth-Drawers then Privy-Counsellors.

But why don't you make this
Pleasant to your self, and Laugh at em as I do?

Faith Sir, I cannot find the Jest on it.

Yet methinks however this should not make me
Uneasy to my self.

Sure, Lovell, you have patience more then ever Stoic had; This damned
Impertinence makes me resolved to fly my Country; I can never find one hours
refreshment in a Year: If I go to the Theatre, where all People hope to please
themselves;either I find an Insupportable Play; or If a good one, ill acted; or
which is worse, so many troublesome Wits buzzing about my Ears, that I am
driven from thence too.


If this torments you so, then change the Scene, and
Go to Court, where Conversation is refined.

Why so I do; but there I find a company of gaudy nothings.
That feign would be Courtiers; that think they are
Hardly dealt withal not to have Employment too:
Besides, when after all my persecutions, I think
To ease my self at night by sleep, as last night
About eleven or twelve of Clock; at a solemn
Funeral the Bells set out: That Men should be
Such Owls to keep five thousand
People awake, with Ringing a Peal to him that does not hear it.

But 'tis Generously done, especially since in my
Conscience they expect no thanks for their Labour,
Neither from their Dead Friend, nor any one else.

A Curse upon em, this was no sooner past, but
About two in the Morning comes the Bell-man,
And in a dismal Tone repeats Worse Rhymes
Then a Cast Poet of the Nursery can make; after
Him, come those Rogues that wake People with their
Barbarous tunes, and upon their Toting
Instruments make a more Hellish-Noise then they
Do at a Play-house, When they flourish for the
Entrance of Witches.

All this disturbs not me: but if you are troubled
With this Noise, Why don't you live in the Country,
There you may be free.

Free! Yes to be drunk with March-Beer, and Wine, worse then ever was served in
at Pye-corner at the eating of Pigs; and hear no other Discourse, but of
Horses, Dogs, and Hawks.


I would not be of your uneasy disposition for
The World: but granting all this: Cannot the
Women of the Town please you? methinks
The pretty Devils have Charms enough to keep me
In the World still without the Danger of being
Felo-de-se.

Women! O! name em not: They are impertinence
It self, I can scarce endure the sight of em.

Why thou art stark-mad; faith for my part I
Ne'er met with any of the Sex that was kind and
Pretty, but I could bear with her Impertinence.

It cannot be.

No! would thoud'st try me: And bring
Me to a New Woman that's handsome; if I
Boggl'd at her Impertinence, may I never have
Other to help me at my Necessity, then an Oyster
Wife, or one that cries Ends of Gold and Silver:
Methinks Beauty and Impertinence do well enough
Together.

Sure you railly with me all this while, you cannot
Be so stupid to think I have not reason in my
Opinion, but nothing I have ever told you yet
Has equalled the persecution of this Day.

I know whom that concerns -- prithee let me
Hear't, that I may laugh a little at those
Monkeys; The Variety of their folly always
Affords new mat^*

That it does, to my sad experience; This morning, just as I was coming to look
for you, Sir Positive At-all, that Fool; that will let no Man understand any
thing in his Company, Arrests me with his Impertinence; says, he, with a great
deal of Gravity, perhaps I am the Man of the World that have found out two
Plays, that betwixt you and I have a great deal of Wit in em; Those are, the
Silent Woman, and the Scornful Lady -- And if I understand any thing in the
World, there's Wit enough, in both tho^e, to make one good Play, if I had the
management of em: for you must know, this is a thing I have thought upon and
considered.


This is the pleasant'st thing I ever heard.

May you have enough on it then if you think so:
But this was not all, for notwithstanding I
Granted his Opinion, he forced me to stay an
Hour to hear his Impertinent Reasons for it;
But no sooner, by some happy Accident or
Other, had I got rid of him, but in comes
That familiar Loving Puppy Woodcock, that admires
Fools for Wits, and Torments me with a damned
Coranto, as he calls it, upon his Violin, which he used
So Barbarously, I was ready to take it for a
Bag-pipe.

This would have made me broke my Spleen with
Laughter.

I must be stung with a Tarrantula, before I could laugh at it: but here my
persecution did not end; For after I had got loose from the other two, whom
should I see as I came along, but that infinite Coxcomb Poet- Ninny: who by
force of Arms hales me into his Lodging, and Reads me there a Confounded Scene
in Heroic Verse: so that, what with Sir Positive's Orations, Woodcocks
squeaking Fiddle, and Poet Ninny's Heroic Fustian, I have a greater VVind-mill
in my brain then a New-Polititian with his head full of Reformation, but as
Fate would have it, in came a Dunn and out got I; and for fear of further
Interruption, came back to my Lodging.


O Sir! here's Poet Ninny --

I have but named the Devil, and see I have raised him.

Mr. Lovel, Your humble Servant.

Sweet Mr. Ninny, I am yours.

But dear Mr. Stanford, I am infinitely troubled
That that unmannerly Raskal should come and disturb
Us just now: but you know, Sir, we cannot help the
Impertinence of foolish Idle Fellows.

No, no! you have convinced me sufficiently of that.
How the Devil could he follow me? I think the
Raskal ha's as good a Nose as a Blood-Ho^nd.

I have a Copy of heroick-Verses will fit him
I warrant you.

Read em to him, he's a great Judge I can assure you.

Sir, I am happy to meet with one that is so great
A Judge of Poetry as you are, for it is a miserable
Thing for an Author to expose his things to empty
Giddy-fellowes: and let me tell you, between you and
I, there are seven thousand Fools to seven Wise Men.

That so great a Truth should be spoken by one
That I'll swear is none of the seven.

Now do you judge Lovel:
'Slife, another Teaser here! Woodcock?

Dear Ninny, Ah dear Lovel: Ah my dear Iack-Stanford, I am the happiest Man in
thy Friendship of any Jack, I have the greatest value for thee in the World;
'prethee Kiss me again dear Heart.


Now Lovel, Have I reason or not?

That you have to Laugh; This is my recreation.

Well! if I do not leave the World within these three days; May I be eternally
baited by Sir Positive, Ninny, and Woodcock, which is a Curse worse then the
worst of my Enemies Wishes.


Hey! Art thou resolved to give over the World too
Dear Heart; There's a Lady that came to Town
Yesterday that is of the same mind; she told me
So, but I hope she will not, for the truth on it is
Jack, I am in Love with her.

Are you so? but I hope I shall catch her from you for all that.


She says she's so troubled with Impertinent People, which between you and I
Jack, are so numerous in this Town, that a Man cannot live in quiet for em,
that she's resolved to leave the World to be quit of em.


Yes, Faith she told me so last night as I was reading
A Scene of my Play to her.

No doubt she had reason.

'Tis your Acquaintance Ned Lovel, Carolina's Sister,
Emilia.

Now Stanford I'll oblige you, and bring you
Acquainted with this Lady; Certainly her humour
Will please you.

My Friend torment me too! Have I not impertinent
Acquaintance enough already; but you must endeavour
To trouble me with more.

Well! that's an Excellent Copy of
Verses of thine: Dear Ninny. Come on Jack,
Thou shalt hear em.

Hell and Damnation!

Hold, hold; You shall hear
Your sad indifference (Look you Sir, 'tis upon a
Lady, that is indifferent in her Carriage towered me)
Your sad indifference -- (I am confident this
Will please you, here are many thoughts I was happy in,
And the Choice of Words not unpleasant, which you
Know is the greatest matter of all) -- Your sad indifference
So wounds -- (Look you, you shall find as much
Soul and Force, and Spirit, and Flame in this, as ever you
Saw in your Life.

Come Jack hear't, it is a most admirable piece.

Now, Lovel, What think you.
Gentlemen, I have Extraordinary business,
I must leave you.

No, no, hold! Faith thou shalt stay and hear
His Verses, they are as good as ever were read;
Come Ninny --

O Devil! What have I deserved to have this
Inflicted upon me.


At once, I hope, and do at once despair.
How do you like that, ha? --
You do at once both hate and kindness show;
And are at once both Kind and Cruel two.

O! Very fine! Is't not Ned?

O! Extreme fine.

What the Devil makes you commend these sottish
Verses, that are nothing but a Iingling of Words?
Let's go.


At once my hopes you nourish, and destroy
My only grief, and yet my only Joy.
Mark that?

O Devil!


Your Inclinations are, and are not mine.

O Admirable! Did ever hear any thing so
Fine in thy life Dear Heart?


At once a storm and calm I do espy,
And do at once a smile and frown descry.
At once you kindle and put out my flame:
I cold, as Ice, as hot as Charcoal am.
Mark that Mr. Stanford, I was very happy in that
Thought, as I hope to breath.

Upon my Word, Jack, that's a great flight of his.

Sir, methinks there's as pretty a Soul in it, as a Man shall see in a Summers
Day.


What am I condemned to?

Why do you torment your self thus, methinks nothing can be pleasanter.


Gentlemen, detain me not, I'll stay no longer.

Dear Mr. Stanford, I have just done, if you have any respect in the World for
me, stay and hear the end on it.


Nay, Faith Jack thou shalt stay.

What's this I endure?


You will not show your hate, nor Love decl^re:
Such safety and such dangers in your eye,
That I resolve at once to live and die.
There's, Body and Soul, in that Couplet.

Hey; riddle me riddle me this, but this is the
Fashionable way of writing.

What say you, Sir? Are they not well? You are a great
Judge.

Pray Sir let me go, I am no Judge at all, let me go,
I will not stay.
Sir Posi^ive, here! I had rather
Go against an Insurrection of 'Prentices, then
Encounter him.

Ah Dear Jack! Have I found thee? I would not but have seen you for twenty
pound: I have made this morning a glorious Corrant, an immortal Corrant, a
Corrant with a Soul in it; I'll defy all Eur^pe to make such another: You may
talk of your Baptists, your Locks, and your Banisters; let me see em Mend
this: Why here's at least 25 Notes Compass, Fa la, la, c. You shall hear.


Come, Sir Positive, lets hear't.

With all my heart: Fa, la, la.

Oh Heaven! Sir Positive, though I love Music,
Yet at present I must tell you,
I am out of Tune.

Out of Tune, Ha, ha, ha, -- Now have you said the
Best thing in the World, and do not know it.

Sir Positive, I must take my leave of you, I must not lose my Business for a
little Music.


Hold, now you talk of Music! --

'Slife, Sir, I talk of my Business.

But for Music, if any Man in England gives you a better account to that then
I do, I will give all mankind leave to spit upon me: You must know it's a thing
I have thought upon and considered, and made it my business from my Cradle;
besides, I am so naturally a Musician, that Gamut, A re, Bem^, were the first
words I could learn to speak: Do you like Baptist's way of Composing?


No doubt, Sir, he's a great Master.

As ever was born, take that from me.

Upon my Word, Stanford, I will make all my Tunes like his -- You shall hear
his Vein in this Corra^ now.


One trouble upon the neck of another -- Whe^
I shall be delivered from these Fools?

Do but ask Ninny ther^?

Yes doubtless, Sir Positive has a great Soul of Music in him; he has great
power In Corranto's and Jiggs, and composes all the Music to my Plays he ha's
great power.


As any man that ever was born, Dear Heart.

Come, you shall hear't --

Sir, I beg your pardon; I'll hear it some other time.

Pish, pish, Upon my Hononr thou shalt stay,
And hear it now.

Come, Dear Sir Positive, Make us happy.

Observe! here's Flame in this Corrant -- Fa, la, la.
There's a delicate Note in B, Fa Bemi in Alt,
And observe now how it falls down to C. Sol. Fa. Ut.
Fa, la, la -- There's Mastery for you.

I do not like that part of your Corrant.

It is a prodigious thing, thou should ever be in my Company, and understand
Music no better; thou hast found fault with the best part of the Corrant, ask
Woodcock else?


By the Lord Harry, there is a great deal of
Glory in that part of the Corrant.

Observe here how cunningly it falls out of the Key,
And now at last it ends quite out of the Key.

Well, well! it's an Excellent Corrant; What the Devil
Will you have more? -- Fare you well.

No, no; Stay but one Minute and you shall hear it
All together. Ninny, Do you beat Time --

Well thought on, do, and I'll Dance
To it Dear Hearts.

Now, Lovel, What think you, this Torture's worse then any the Dutch invented
at Amboyna.


Here's a Corrant for you, ha! Sta^ford,
What think of this?

Think quoth a', I think I danced it as well
As any Man in England, Bully-Rock.

Certainly, Sir Positive, he Dances very finely.

As any man that ever was born upon two Legs*
I defy any Man in the World that out-does him;
For betwixt you and I, I taught him every step he has.

Upon my Word, Woodcock, you have as much power
In Dancing, as any Man in England.

Dear Heart let me Kiss thee; Gad thou art a great
Judge -- Here, drink my Health.

Ah! Dear Flattery, How convenient a sin art thou?

Come, Mr. Woodcock, you shall go to the reading of my Play.


Ay! Come on, Bully-Rock --

Come, I'll take pity on you, Stanford, and go before, and prepare some place
or other, where we may enjoy our selves, and you be free. I'll take your Man
along with me, and send him back again in haste for you; by that means you may
get loose. --


For Heavens sake make hast, you'll oblige me for ever.
Sir Positive! I am sorry I must leave you now;
I must go speak with a Gentleman that came
From Flanders last night.

Flanders! If any Man gives you that account of Flanders that I do, I'll suffer
Death; You must know I have thought of their Affairs, I have ^onsider'd the
thing thoroughly, never speak on it more, name it no more, let it not enter into
your Thoughts; 'tis a lost Nation, absolutely undone, lost for ever, take that
from me: and yet were I with Castle Rodrigo but one quarter of an hour, I'd
put him in a way to save all yet.


This is beyond all sufferance. -- Sir Positive, I am
So much in haste, that none but your self should
Have staid me of all Mankind.

Mankind! Dost thou know what thou say now? Dost thou talk of Mankind? I am
confident thou never so much as though of Mankind in thy life: I'll tell
thee, I will give Dogs leave to piss upon me, if any man understands Mankind
better then my self, now you talk of that. I have considered all Mankind, I
have thought upon nothing else but Mankind this Month; and I find you may be a
Poet, a Musician, a Painter, a Divine, a Mathematician, a S^ates-man; but
betwixt you and I, let me tell you, we are all Mortal.


Well, they may talk of the Pox, want of Money, and a Scolding Wife, but they
are Heaven to my afflictions.


Sir Positive, my Lady Vain desires you would come And look upon her Picture
that's come this Morning from Master Lilly's.


Why there 'tis now Stanford, that people should have no more Judgement, she
had as good have thrown her Money into the Dirt; 'tis true, I could have made
him have made a good picture on it, if I had drawn the Lines for him, but I was
not thought worthy, and now you talk of Painting, either I am the greatest Fop
in Nature, or if I do not understand that, I understand nothing in the World:
why I will paint with Lilly, and draw in little with Cooper for 5000 l*


O! intolerable Impertinence! I am afraid he will not go now his Mistress
sends for him.


Dear Stanford! I must beg thy Excuse --

A Curse on him, that's easily granted.

Come Mistress Bridget I'll go along with you. -- Dear Stanford take it not
unkindly, for I would not leave thee but upon this occasion.


A thousand Thanks to the occasion.

But you know a man must not disoblige his Mistress Jack?


Oh no, by no means.

Adieu. --

So! this Trouble is over.
O Fate! how little care you took of me,
By these Misfortunes I too plainly see.

I Long to bring 'em together, they will be well Matched; but we must stay
awhile, for she ha's been so teased this morning, she ha's locked her self up
in her Chamber.


Stanford was ready to fall out with me, when I named a new acquaintance to
him, and will not be persuaded there is such a Creature as a Woman:

That is not Impertinent.

Emilia is as Cautious as he can be, and would be ready To swooned at the sight
of a new face, for she will not believe but all mank^nd are Coxcombs: for
Heavens sake Lovell let's surprise them into one another Company, we shall
have admirable sport.


We'll do it; but Madam, why should we mind their business that have enough of
our own: what if you and I should play the fools once in our Lives, and enter
into the bonds of Wedlock together.


Fie, fie, 'tis such a Constant condition of life, that a Woman had as good be
professed in a Nunnery, for she can no sooner get out of one then the other.


But with your pardon, Madam, this is somewhat The pleasanter Condition of the
Two.


That's according as they use both Conditions, but
Pray Master Lovell bring not this villainous Matrimony
Into dispute any more, lest that may make us desire
It, I have known some men by maintaining a
Heresy in Jest become of that opinion in good Ea^nest.
But do you know that my Lady Vain was here this Morning?

No Madam; but what of that?

She told me that of you will make your Ears tingle.

Of me, Madam, what was't?

She says you are the most inconstant man, the most perfidious Wretch that
e're had breath, and bid me fly you as I would infection.


What the Devil did she mean by that?

Come, let me know what's betwixt you, or I'll
Rack you but I'll know it.

This Jealousy makes me believe you love me.
That she should be prating her self,
How many Women would be thought honest, if
They could hold their own Tongues.

I am like to have a fine servant of you: but a Lady would have a fine time
on it that were to marry you, to stake all the treasures of her Youth and
Virginity, which have been preserved with so much Care, and Heaven knows some
trouble too against nothing.


Faith Madam, I have even as much as I had before, but if you'll be kind, I'll
take that Care off your hands, and soon rid you of that trouble.


No, no, go to my Lady Vain, give her your Heart poor Lady she wants it too
but for me, I can keep my affliction to my self.


Dear Carolina! name her no more, if you do, I will get drunk immediately. And
then I shall have Courage enough to fall aboard her.


Lord! what a loss shall I have: Heaven send me patience, or I shall ne'er
out-live it, to loose so proper a Gentleman, but why should I think to rob her
of her due, no, no, now I think on it to her again, go, go.


For Heavens sake Carolina do not Tyrannize thus, why I had rather be kept
waking at an ill Play then endure her Company.


Thus are we poor Women despised when we give away our Hearts to ungrateful
men, but Heaven will punish you.


Dear Carolina, let's leave fooling, and be in down-right Earnest.


I hope, Sir, your Intentions are honourable.

Madam, why should you once doubt it?
My Love to you is as pure as the flame that burns upon an Altar:
You are too unjust if you suspect my honour.

Now will you leave fooling; on my Conscience
He is in Earnest.

As much as the severest Anchorite can be at his Devotions.


O! are you so, its a hard Case, but pray you, Sir, leave off, I had rather
hear a silenced Parson preach sedition then you talk seriously of Love, would
you could see how it becomes you; why you look more Comically then an old
fashioned fellow singing of Robin Hood or Chevy Chase.

My Love to you's as pure as the flame that burns upon a^ Altar! how scurvily
it sounds.


You are the Cruellest Tyrant alive: Let us be serious a little, I have rallied
my self into a passion will ruin my else.


Come, in what posture must I stand to hear you talk formally.


On my Conscience 'tis easier to fix quick-silver than your humour, Madam, but
if you would enter into Wedlock I can assure you that will bring you to
gravity.


Let me but once more hear you name Marriage, and I protest I'll send for my
Lady Vain to you. I tell you again I will not marry. I love your Conversation,
and your humour of all things in the World.

But for Marriage 'tis good for nothing, but to make Friends fall out.


Nay, faith if you be at that I can do you the same Civility without the
Ceremony, as you say it is a kind of formal Thing.


No! I shall take Example by my Lady Vain, poor Lady, she little thought to be
unkindly used, I warrant you.


Again that name.

Besides, if we were Married you might say; faith Carolina is a pretty Woman,
and has humour good enough, but a pox on it she's my wife; no, no, I'll have
none of that.


Do you still distrust my Honour, 'tis unkindly done, but --


Hold, hold, her door opens, step you in there, and you may hear how she
entertains the motion.


The Wisdom of this Charles the fifth was
Wonderful;
Who amidst of all his Triumphs and his Greatness,
When he had done what glory had obliged him to,
Seeing the Vanity of Mankind did quit
The pleasures that attend a Monarchs state;
Nay more, the most bewitching thing called power,
And left the World to live an humble life,
Free from the Importunity of Fools, was't not
Wisely done Sister?

Yes, no doubt on it, as wisely done to go to a Monastery to shun fools, as to
keep Company with Us^rers and Brokers to avoid Knaves.


Thou art a Foolish Girl, I am tormented
With The Impertinence of both Sexes so,
I am resolved I'll not stay one VVeek out of a Nunnery.

Of my Conscience thou art stark out of thy Wits with r^ading of Burton's
Melancholy; To a Nunnery to avoid Impertinence? where can thou think to meet
with more then there?


Now you are too Censorious.

You should like me the better.
But you must needs find relief there? Do you
Think any Women that have sense, or Warmth
Of blood, as we have, would go into a Nunnery?

If I should meet with Fops there too,
I should be irreparably lost: Oh Heaven! what
Shall I do to ease my self? rather then
Endure the persecution of those fools that haunt
Us here. I will go where neither Man nor Woman
ever came.

O Rare! Stanford, here's just thy Counterpart (


Since thou art resolved to sequester thy self from Company, I'll buy thee a
Cage and hang thee up by the Parrot over the way, and thou shalt converse with
none but him: I hope he's not Impertinent too?


Must you torment me too? fie Sister.
What would you have me do? my Patience
Is not great enough to endure longer, to see
The folly of this age; Do you judge, after I had been
Suffi^iently worry'd by the Lady Vain this Morning,
Whom I was forced to get rid of, by Telling her, her
Lover my Cozen Positive was at her lodging, which
You know is as far as the Pall-mall.

That Vertuosa as she calls her self, is the pleasantest Creature I ever saw:
but prithee Sister, let me hear none of your fantastic Stories, methinks you
are as Impertinent as any body.


It distracts me to see this folly in things that are intended for reasonable
Creatures.


O Stanford! If this Lady does not match thee the devils in it.


These Fools you talk of afford me so much recreation,
That I do not know how I should laugh without em.

Thou hast no sense, they make me weary of the World!
Heaven! what shall I do?

I tell you: Stanford hea^ing of your humour, and Admiring it ha's a great
desire to see you, before you resolve to leave the world, try how he will
please you.


What a ridiculous thing it is of you to wish me to new Acquaintance, when I am
leaving the old? I am sure He's Impertinent, for all mankind I have met are ^o


Hist Lovell!

Your humble Servant Lady's --.

Is this he? then farewell.

Madam! pray stay, and give me the honour of one word with you.


I knew what he was: my Lady Vain here?

Master Lovell! your most humble servant.

Your Ladyships humble servant* how I hate the sight of her in presence of my
Mistress.


Lovell! for shame be civil to your Mistress: L^'s hear you make Love a little.


Madam upon my Reputation there was no such thing, Sir Positive was never
there, sure some Dirty fellow or other brought a false Message on purpose to
rob me of the pleasure of your Ladyships sweet Company: would he were hanged
for his pains, he passion he has put me in, has put me out of Breath.


Lord! how soon she's put in and put out!

But, Madam, as soon as ever I found he was not there I made all possible haste
to wait upon you again, for fear your Ladyship should resent my too abrupt
departure.


O Heavens! take pity of my afflictions, Madam --

But the truth on it is I designed to spend this day with you, since I can be no
where so well satisfied as with your Ladyships Converse, a person who is
Mistress of so much virtue and honour, which are Treasures I value above the
World.


Why, Madam --

For the truth is so few Ladies have either, that they are things to be valued
for their rarity.


Oh Impertinence! whither will this Eternal tongue of hers carry her.


This is very pleasant for her to name Virtue and Honour In my Company.


Madam! for Heavens sake --

For the truth on it is, Madam, a Lady without Virtue and Honour is altogether
as detestable as a Gentleman without Wit or Courage.


Madam! I am sorry I cannot wait on you longer,
I am engaged to dine abroad.

Where is't Madam, for I am resolved to go along with you.


Why, Madam, you do not know the persons.

That's all one for that, let me alone to make my Apology.


This is beyond all suff'rance.

I hope she will not leave her off so.

No: if she does, I am mistaken.

Come, Madam; Lets go.

But Madam, I must call at the Exchange first,
To buy some trifles there.

O Madam! I'll bring you to my Milliner, that
Calls himself the Italian Milliner, or the Little
Exchange; he's better provided then any one
In the Exchange.

I am on the sudden taken ill, and must retire.

Madam, do ye think, I that am a Virtuosa understand no better, then to leave
you now you are not well; What's your Distemper? no Woman in England was more
serviceable among her Neighbours then I with my Flos Unguentorum, Paracelsian
and Green-salve.


And your Album Graecum I warrant you*

That Album Graecum was a Salve of my Invention:
But a propos, perhaps it may be a fit of the Mother,
If it be, we must burn some Bl^w-Inckle, and Partridge
Feathers under your Nose; or she must smell to Asra foetida,
And have some Cold Water with a little Flower to drink:
Ay, ay, 'twill be so; pray Mr. Lovel come and help to hold her.

No, no, Madam; there's no such thing I'll assure you:
I must beg leave to go to my Chamber.

Come, Madam, I'll conduct you, and be as careful of you
As if you were my Sister a thousand times.

Madam! with your pardon, I desire to be alone, and
Try to rest.

Alone! by no means in the World, Madam, it may
Be very dangerous; I would not for all the World
Madam, you should be alone; suppose you should
Fall into a Fit alone, I can speak it by Experience;
'Tis Dangerous for a Lady to fall into a Fit without
An Able Body by her. Come, Madam, I'll conduct you in.

How shall I get rid of her*

Let's in and see when the Fury of this Dol Common will be at an End.


Come, come, we shall have the pleasure of seeing my
Sister Worry'd almost to Death

I wonder my Man returns not yet.
I thought to have found Mr. Lovel here, but
Here's one will do my business.

Oh Mr. Stanford! Have I found you?

Oh Heaven's! Will my punishment never end?

I am the most unfortunate Man that ever was born.

Why do you trouble me with this? Am I the
Cause on it?

No! but I'll tell you, upon my Reputation, I have been Nicked out of twenty
pound Just now at Spiering's, and lost seven to four, for my last Stake.


What the Devill's this to me? let me go.

But, Sir, I'll tell you a thing that very nearly concerns you.


Some other time; 'Slife do not disturb me now.

For Heaven's sake hear me, you'll repent it else.

Make haste then, keep me in pain no longer.

Why, I have found out the finest plump fresh Gi^le, newly come out of the
Country.


Hell and Damnation! Why do you trouble me with such trifles.


Trifles, Does he call 'em? Well! I see this won't do:
But, Sir, I'll tell you somewhat concerns you more*
Nearly; Sir, it concerns your Honour.

My Honour! Why, who dares call it in question?

Not so, Sir; but, Do you love Generosity and Honour?

Why do you ask the question?

Why then I'll put you in a way to do a very Generous* And Honourable thing.


What do you mean by this Impertinence?

If you will relieve an Honest Gentleman in distress,
Lend me two Pieces, you shall have em again within
Four and twenty hours, or may I perish.

'Pox on you for an Owl: There, take em; I would
I could get rid of all my Impertinents at as cheap
A rate.

I give you a thousand thanks.

'Slife! trouble me no more, be gone!

Sir, It were a very ungrateful thing not to
Acknowledge the favour.

Away, away, and let your gratitude alone,

D'hear, Mr. Stanford! upon mine honour I'll
Return em tomorrow night without fail.

Curse on you for a Rascal
So, here's one trouble over!
Well! What's the News?

Do you earnestly desire to know, Sir?

Must I have Impertinence in my own Family too?

O! I am so out of breath, I am not able to speak one word; but if I had never
so much breath, I could tell you nothing but what you'd be glad to hear: If I
had the wind of an Irish Foot-man, nay, of a Non-conforming Parson -- or.


Or, with a Pox to you, one Similitude more, and I'll
Break that Fools head of yours.

Well, Sir, since you are in haste, I'll be brief as a Fiddler, after he's paid
for scraping, for I love to be so in Cases of this Importance, for I have heard
--


Out you Dog, a Sentence after your Similitude;
You are as impertinent as a Country Witness.

I have done, Sir, and now I'll tell you in one Word:
Hold Sir! here's a Spider in your Periwig.

Death, you Rascal! I'll ram it down your Throat.

Be patient, Sir: Seneca advises to moderate our passions.

Hang ye' Rascal! Seneca is an Ass in your mouth.
Tell me quickly, Or --

Why, Sir, you are so impatient you will not hear me?

Faith but I will speak.

Not to boast of my diligence, which, though I say it, is as much --


You Dog tell me quickly, or I'll cut your Ears off.


Why Mr. Lovel, would have you come to him; What would you have?


If I were not in haste, Sirrah; I'd teach you to know your Man, and who you
may put your Tricks on, you impudent Raskal.


Death! That I should find impertinence in others, and not see it in my self.


Dear Jack, thy humble Servant: How dost do? My Footman told me, he saw thy
Man come in here, which made me believe I should find thee here; and I had not
power to stay from thee, my Dear Bully-Rock, for I can enjoy my self no where
so well as in thy Company: Let me kiss thee Dear Heart; 'Gad I had rather kiss
thee then any Woman.


This is beyond all Example: Oh horrid! his kindness is a greater persecution
then the Injuries of others.


I'll tell thee, Dear Heart, I love thee with all my heart: thou art a man of
Sense, Dear Rogue, I am infinitely happy in thy Friendship; for I meet with so
many impertinent silly Fellows every day, that a man cannot live in quite for
em: Dear Heart. For between you and I, this Town is more pestered with idle
Fellows, that thrust themselves into Company, then the Country is with
Attorny's; Is it not Jack?


Yes! I have too much reason to believe you, a Curse on you. --


Ay, Did not I tell you so, Jack! ha? but this is not my business* Dear Rascal
kiss me, I have a secret to impart to thee, but if it take the least Air, I am
undone: I have a project in my head shall raise me 20000 l. I know you will
promise secrecy, dear heart.


Don't trouble me with it.

No, it concerns thee Man: why, thou shalt go halfes with me, Dear Heart.


For Heaven's sake, Sir, don't trust it with me, I have a f^culty of telling
all I know: I cannot help it.


Oh! Dear Bully-Rock, that Wheadle won't pass. Don't I know thou art a Man of
Honour; and besides, so reserved, that thou wilt scarce tell a secret to thy
Friend.


Sir, I am unhappy in your good opinion, this is beyond all suff'rance.


No, Faith, Dear Jack, thou deserve it; but my project is this, d'yee see.


Well! I am so tormented with Impertinent Fellows, that I see there is no
remedy.


As I hope to Live, Jack, I am of thy Opinion: the 'truth on it is, 'tis
intolerable, for a man can never be free from these Fools in this Town; I
like thy resolution so well, that I am a Son of a Whore if I don't go along
with thee! Ah how we shall enjoy our selves when we are both together, how we
shall despise the rest of the World: Dear Heart.


O, Mr. VVoodcock! Poet Ninny is gone to the Rose Tavern, and bid me tell you,
he has extraordinary business with you, and begs you would make all possible
hast to him.


O Dear Rascal, kiss me! thou art the honestest Fellow in the World: Dear Jack,
I must beg thy pardon for a few minutes, but I hope thou'lt not take it ill;
why 'tis about business Dear Heart, you know we must not neglect that.


O no Sir, by no means.

Nay, Dear Rogue, be not angry, prithee kiss me; as I hope to live, I'll return
immediately; Dear Jack, thy humble Servant --


This is a lucky Accident.

Sir, I was fain to sin a little for you, and get rid of him by this lie.


Well! this shall excuse all your former Errors, I'll away, for fear some other
fools should find me out.


Does she not Tease her bravely Lovel?

Admirably! Oh that Stanford were here! if it were for nothing but to see a
fellow-sufferer.


Then Madam, will your Ladyship be pleased to let me wait on you to a Play,
there are two admirable Plays at both Houses; and let me tell you, Madam, Sir
Positive, that understands those things as well as any man in England, says, I
am a great Judge.


Madam, I beseech you ask me no more questions; I tell you, I had as live stand
among the rabble, to see a Jack-pudding eat a Custard, as trouble my self to
see a Play.


O Fie Madam! a young Lady and hate Plays; why I'll tell you, Madam, at one
House there is a huge Two handed Devil, and as brave a Fat Fryer as one would
wish to see in a Summers-Day; and a delicate Machine, as they call it, where one
sits and sings as fine a Song: And then at the other house there's a rare Play,
with a Jig in it, would do your heart good to see it; but if there were nothing
else in it, you might have your four Shillings out in Thunder and Lightning; and
let me tell you, 'tis as well worth it as one Penny's worth another.


What have I done?


Am I trepanned into Women's Company?


Hold, hold, hold, Madam, here's Mr. Stanford desires to kiss your hands.


I am in that disorder that never Woman was.

O Mr. Lovel! she's falling into a fit of an Epilepsy: help all to hold her,
lend me a Knife to cut her Lace.


This is worse then all the rest.



Sir, your most obedient servant: I shall be glad of any occasion to retire
with one, for whom I have so great an affection.





I find you are an Errant Hippocrite, but I'll take you at your word for once.


I am the greatest object of pity that was ever seen: I am never free from
these Importunate Fools.


I am not less afflicted, and have as much need of pity too.


I find no possibility of relief, but by leaving the World that is so full of
folly.


Who would live in an age, when Fools are Reverenced, and Impudence Esteemed.


To see a Fellow but the other day content with humble Linsey Woolsey, now have
variety of Ve^ts, Perriwiggs and Laced Linen.


One, that but the other day, could eat but one meal a day, and that at a
three-penny Ordinar^; now struts in State, and talks of nothing but Shattellins
and Lefronds.


In so corrupt an Age, when all mankind flatter the greatest, and oppress the
least; when to be just is to be out of fashion, and to betray a friend is
lawful Cunning.


This is pleasant for her to speak against these


Now has this Fellow a design to have me think


Now the illiterate fool despises Learning


Nay, among the learned themselves, we find many that are great Schollers by
Art, are most abominable Fools by Nature.


This shall not persuade me to believe she is not Impertinent.


Now the qualifications of a fine Gentleman are to Eat A-la-mode, drink
Champaign, Dance Jiggs, and play at Tennis.


To love Dogs, Horses, Hawks, Dice and Wenches, scorn Wit, break Windows,
beat a Constable, lie with his Sempstress, and undo his Taylor, it distracts me
to think on it.


Now does he desire to be taken for a discreet fellow, but this will not do.


What relief can I expect in this age* when men take as much pains to make
themselves fools, as others have done to get wisdom.


Nay folly is become as natural to all mankind as lust.


What shall I do? Whither shall I turn me to avoid these Fools.


Now let's slip em

We shall have a very fair Course.

O Heaven's! Are they here?

What will become of me?

Stanford pray hear once.
'Tis such a thing as never was in the World.

Ay, pray Sir hear him, he's as pretty a Wit as any man in this Town, except
Sir Positive I assure you.


What are we condemned to?

To a worse condition then Gally-slaves.

I was with my Bookseller, Madam, with that Heroic Poem, which I presented to
your Ladyship, as an earnest of the honour I have for you; But by the way, he's
an ignorant ungrateful Fellow, for betwixt you and I he has got some hundreds
of pounds by some Plays and Poems of mine which he has Printed. And let me tell
you, some under the Names of Beaumont, and Fletcher, and Ben. Iohnson too: but
what do you think, Madam I asked the Son of a Who^e for this Poem?


O Insufferable!

What think you Stanford?

Let me go; I have no Judgment in these things.

But I'll you; There are not above 10, or 12000 Lines in all the Poem: and as I
hope to be saved, I asked him but twelve pence a line one line with another.


And really, Sir, that's as reasonable as he can possibly afford em, take that
from me?


O Devil! this is worse then a Sheerness Ague: that will give a Man some respit
between the Fits.


By my Soul, Madam, if he had been my Brother I would not have abated him one
penny; for you must know, there are many hundreds of Lines, that in their
Intrinsic value, are worth ten shillings a Line between Father and Son; and
the greatest part of em are worth five shillings a line: but before George
very few or none but are worth three shillings a line to the veriest Jew in
Christendom; they have that salt, thought, imagination, power, spirit, soul,
and flame in em -- ha!


What does this concern me?


No, but I'll tell you, Stanford, prithee hear, as I hope for mercy this
Impudent Rogue told me, he would not give me two shillings for the whole Poem;
an ignorant Puppy, a fellow of all the World I designed to make, for he might
have sold these Books for three shillings apiece, and I would have helped off
with 10000 of em, to ten thousand of my particular intimate Friends; besides,
every one that had but heard of my name, which are almost all the Kings
Subjects, would have bought some; so that I should not have got above six or
seven hundred pound, and in a fortnights time have made this fellow an
Alderman: That such ignorant Rascals should be Judges of Wit or Sense.


Well Sir, we shall never have good World unless the State Reformes these
abuses.


'Tis very true, Madam, for this is a thing is of Consequence to the whole
Nation, Stanford.


What the Devil would you have? Am I the cause of this?


No! Heaven forbid I should say so: but Madam, I had forgot another Advantage
he had had by this.


Heaven defend me! this puts me beyond all patience.


I'll tell you, Stanford, prithee mind me a little.


Oh now I am undone, ruined for ever, Sir Positive's here.


O intolerable!



Oh Stanford, art thou here? well, how dost Cozin?
I am glad I have found you all together, I came to
Present my Lady Vain with a musique I have made
Which his that Invention in it, I say no more but
I have been this Month of making it,
And you must know musique is a thing I value my
Self upon, 'tis a thing I have thought on, and considered,
And made my business from my Cradle.

Come Madam, now they are settled in their business, let's
Leave em.

With all my heart.

Come! you shall see it.

Cozen! Pray let it be another time.

Nay, nay, never talk of that, you shall see it now,
And let me tell you I have as much power of Invention
In musique as any man in England: Come in,

O Heaven, when shall we be delivered from these fools?


How do you like it Stanford, is it not well! what say you Cozin, ha?


Indeed Sir Positive, it's very agreeable.

Upon my honour this honest fellow plaid it with a great deal of glo^y, he is a
most incomparable Bower, he has the most luscious, the most luxurious bow-hand
of any man in Europe, take that from me, and let me tell you, if any man gives
you a better account of the Intrigue of the Violin, then I do, I am a^ Owl, a
Puppy, a Coxcomb, a Logger-head, or what you will.


Sure there is Magic in this? never to be free?


Magic? why do you understand Magic?


No, no, no, not I Cozen* O intolerable!


I do; if you please talk of something else, leave that to me, why I will
discover lost Spoons and Linen, resolve all horary questions, nay raise a
Devil with Doctor Faustus himself, if he were alive.





Whose that speaks of pimping there: well! though I say it no man pretends to
less then I do; but I cannot pass this by without manifest Injury to my self.


This Puppy rather then not be in at all will declare himself a pimp.


But Sir, are you such a manner of man?


Why Madam? did you never hear of me for this?


No Sir! if I had --


If I had -- ha, ha, ha -- why Madam, where have you lived all this while.


O ^y upon him, Madam, I shall lose my reputation if I be seen in his Company.


Well! the pimps in this Town are a Company of empty idle fellows, they have no
design in 'em.


Sir, I am sorry you are such a kind of Man, but --


Sorry! well! if I would bend my self to it I would starve all these Pimps, they
should not eat bread, but I am not thought fit.


Sure you railly all this while.


Railly! ha, ha, ha. Why there is not a Lady of Pleasure from Blackwall to
Tuttle-Fields that I am not intimately acquainted with, nay that I do not know
the state of her Body from her first Entering into the Calling.


O Madam! I am undone, ruined for ever by being in his Company.


Besides for debauching of Women, Madam, I am the greatest son of a Whore in
the World if any one comes near me.


Out upon you, if you be such a man I will have nothing to do with you, see me
no more, I must look to my Honour, my Reputation is dearer to me then all the
World. I would not have a blemish in my Honour for all the riches of the
Earth, this makes me so covetous of your Ladyships Company, a person of so much
Virtue and Honour, but for Sir Positive I defy him; forbear my presence, you
will undo my Honour for ever.


Oh what have I done?


O horrid Impertinence!


Nay, nay, Dear Cozen stay, and see us friends first, Madam, I beg a thousand
pardons: 'Tis true, I said no man in England understood pimping better then my
self, but I meant the speculative not the practical part of pimping.


O that's something, I assure you, if you had not brought your self off well
with your Speculation, I would never have suffered you to have Practised upon
me, for no Woman in England values her Honour more then I do.


Oh Madam, we must go to the Setting Dog and Partridge to supper to night,
Master Whiskin came to invite us, there will be the Blades, and we shall have a
Ball.


Will there be none but our own Company?


No Madam.


Well! I am resolved not to fail if I can by any means get rid of Sir
Positive, for I love meat and drink and fiddles, and such merry Gentlemen with
all my heart.


Your servant Dear Hearts; Madam, Emilia I kiss your hand: Dear Jack.


Nay, now it is time to shift for our selves.


My Dear Bully-Rock can I serve thee in any thing?


Nay, then fare you well. --


NAy then Cozen, I am an Ass, an Idiot, a Blockhead and a Rascal, if I don't
understand Drammatique Poetry of all things in the World; why this is the only
thing I am esteemed for in England.


I can hold no longer.


Ha, ha, ha: Coz, thou railliest well; 'Tis true, Woodcock and Ninny will be a
little troublesome sometimes; but 'ifaith they are very Honest fellows 'Give
em their due.


Oh abominable! Worse and worse.





What a Devil ails he? he's mad; who does he mean by this?


Nay faith I don't know, I am sure he does not mean me, Dear Heart.


Nor me neither; Take that from me.


Jack if thou wilt leave the World, I'll go along with thee as I told thee,
Dear Heart; but who is't troubles thee now Bully-Rock?


All of ye; ye are a pack of the most insupportable fools That e're had breath,
I had rather be at a Bear-Garden Then be in your Company.


Ha, ha, ha: This is very pleasant in faith: Call the greatest VVits and Authors
of the Nation fools, Ha, ha, ha. That's good in faith.


Nay, perhaps the greatest men of the Age: you are a great Judge indeed, c.


Nay Sir Positive even leave her (don't be troublesome) since she desires you:
Come Madam, I'll wait upon you, whither you please: we'll enjoy our selves in
private.


This is worst of all; Do you think I can suffer the Noise of your Tongue
forever with patience?


O'my Conscience Sir Positive she's distracted.


Yes Madam, if I be a judge she is, and I defy any one to deceive me in this.


It must be so, for she has a vast deal of wit, and great wits you know have
always a Mixture of Madness.


Well Madam! I found that by my self, for I was about three years ago as mad as
ever man was; I escaped Bedlam very narrowly, 'tis not above a twelve-moneth
since my brains were settled again: But come, Madam, I'll wait on your
Ladyship, for she does not deserve the honour of such Company.


What shall I do? to get rid of him, I shall miss my assignation, if I do not.


Come, Madam --
Fare you well! since you are no better Company --

So, so, now we shall be a little at rest: for let me tell you Madam, though
Sir Positive be a rare man, yet my Lady Vain is a little too talkative, and
there can be no greater Trouble to one of sense then that.


You are the most impertinent of all Mankind.


Oh Madam! you are pleased to say so --


You are a most abominable fool, and the worst Poet in Christendom: I had
rather read the History of Tom Thumb then the best of your Poems.


Oh Madam! you are pleasant, but this won't pass,


Such ridiculous insipid Rhymes are you Author of, That I am confident you are
that incorrigible scribbler that furnishes the Bell-man of this Ward.


Ha, ha, ha, c. Madam: as I hope to breath you droll very well, this is the
pretty'st humour in the World.


O Heaven! what will become of me?


Is not this extremely pleasant?


There was never any thing equal to it.


Your Verses are such as School-boyes ought to be whipped for.


This will not stir me; Madam, I know you are not in Earnest.


And your Plays are below the Dignity of a Mountebanks stage. Salvator Winter
would have refused them.


Nay, Madam, never talk of that, I'll show you a Play I have about me: Come,
Madam, we'll read it, here's the most glorious conceits, the most powerful
touches, in a word, 'tis a Play that shall Read and Act with any Play that ever
was born, I mean, conce^ved.


Come on Jack!


Ah! Dear Lovell! use some means for my delivery, or I am ruined for ever: for
if I should go they would not leave me, they are so barbarously cruel in their
persecutions.


Nay, never speak of that Madam, before George you will bring your Judgement in
question if you condemn Ninny's Plays Dear Heart.


Away you Coxcomb, you are ten times a more Ridiculous' Squire then he's a
Poet.


Ha, ha, ha. By the Lord Harry this is a strange humour of hers as ever I saw
in my life: Well Madam you will have your frolic, but come Ninny, we'll even
take our leaves.


Ay, ay, come, your humble servants.


Your servant, Dear Hearts, this is the pleasant'st humour in the World.


Ay, is't not? ha, ha, ha --


O Friend, I have been more inhumanely used then ever Bawd was by the fury of
the 'Prent^ces.


Still I say laugh at 'em as I do.


Let's leave 'em Lovell, for they are in such humours, they are only fit for
one another Company.


With all my heart, Madam --


Well! I will leave the World immediately.


Which way do you intend to go?


Why do you ask?


That I may be sure to take another way.


Nothing could so soon persuade me to tell you as that.


What are they gone? they have locked the door too!


I wonder what they leave us alone for.


Heaven knows, unless it be to be troublesome to one another as they have been
to us.


I am sure I have most reason to fear it.


You most reason? when did you see a man so foolish as a Woman?


When I see you.


No, no, none of our sex will dispute folly with yours.


That's hard, I find nothing but Owls among the best of you; your young men are
all positive, forward, conceited Coxcombs, and your old men all formal
nothings, that would have their sullen gravi^y mistaken for wisdom.


This is not altogether so much Impertinence as I expected from one of your
sex, but let me tell you, I have too often suffered by Women, not to fear the
best of 'em, there being nothing to be found in most of the sex, but vanity,
pride, envy and hypocrisy, uncertainty and giddiness of humour, the furious
desires of the young make 'em fit to be seduced by the flesh, as the envy and
malice of the old prepare 'em to be led away by the Devil.


I must confess I don't perceive yet that you are altogether so ridiculous as
the rest of Mankind, but let me tell you, I have Reason to fear you will be so,
perhaps your impertinence is an Ag^e that ha^nts you by fits.


That disease in the best of Women is quotidi^n, and if you be not infected,
you must be the most Extraordinary Woman in the World.


I would give Money to see a man that is not so as the Rabble do, to see a
Monster since all men I have ever seen are most intolerable Fops, would it not
distract one to see Gentlemen of 5000 l. a year write Plays, and as Poets
venture their Reputations against a sum of Money, they venture theirs against
Nothing, others learn Ten years to play of the Fiddle and to Paint, and at last
an Ordinary Fiddler or Sign-Painter that makes it his business shall out-do 'em
all.


This looks like sense, I find she does understand something.


Others after twenty or thirty years study in Philosophy arrive no further then
at the Weighing of Carps, the Invention of a travailling Wheel, or the
poisoning a Cat with the oil of Tobacco, these are your Wits and Vertuoso's.


I must confess this is not so ill as I expected from you; but it does not less
distract me to see a young Lady fall in Love with a vain empty fellow not worth
a Groat, perhaps for dancing of a Jigge, or singing of a Stanza of fashionable
Non-sence, another on the contrary so insatiably covetous, for money, to marry
old age, infirmity, and diseases, and the same bait that persuades 'em to
Matrimony shall entice 'em into Adultery.


This is not so foppish as I believed, yet though this be a great Truth, 'tis a
very impertinent thing of you to tell me what I know already.


How the D^vil should I know that, I am sure not many of your sex are guilty of
so much discretion as to discern these things.


I am sure you have not much that cannot distinguish between those that have
and have not.


I must confess I am a little surprised to find a Woman have so little vanity,
I could never endure the Society of any of the sex better then yours.


To be plain with you, you are not so troublesome ^ ^op as I have seen.


What the Devil makes me think this Woman not impertinent? and yet I cannot
help it, what an Owl am I?


I have been so cruelly tormented, and without intermission too, that this
seems some Refreshment to me.


Why should I be caught thus, but I'll keep my folly to my self* -- I can bear
this with a little more patience; but if you


Pray Heaven you don't give me the first occasion


How like a Woodcock am I ins^ar'd; a Lovel for leaving me alone with her.


What do they intend to keep us prisoners forever.


I care not how long;


That would be longer then the Seige of Tr^y (...).


This is not half so bad though as our late persecutions, That's one Comfort.


It fares with me like one upon a R^ck, that is a little loossen'd from his
pains; 'tis pleasure to him when he compares his torments, though those he has
left may be intolerable too.


In this we agree, though in nothing else.


I would to Heaven we did in all things; I am Stanford.


How now! she smiled, and suddenly checked the Liberty she took.


O Heaven! I fear he has discovered something.


There must be something in it, I like her very well, but am resolved not to
disclose it what e're comes on it; for, that will make her vain, though she be
not already.


Why don't you break open the door, Sir,


I don't find much reason for it yet.


I could find in my heart to give you enough.


Nay, I doubt not but 'tis in your Nature. What can the meaning of this be? Is
there nothing but Riddle in Woman?


Hold, hold, Mr. Huff: my Master charged me of all men living to keep you out
of his sight.


Prithee stand by you saucy Coxcomb.


Nay, Sir, be not so boisterous; upon my word you pass no further.


Prithee (dear Roger) do'nt put this upon me.


My Master says it costs him two pieces a time to be rid of you.


Prithee let me go, and you shall go my halfes.


Are you in earnest?


Yes upon my Honour.


Nay then speed ye, but be sure you sink nothing.


I warrant you.


Is he here! hold, hold, hold, here's your two pieces, don't trouble me now.


Your humble Servant, I'll return em again to morrow without fail: Ha! Do
they come so easily; there are more from whence these came: O Sir, I'll tell
you, I have had the severest fortune that ever man had.


Away, away.


For Heaven's sake hear, it's the most prodigious thing you ever heard.


What will this World come to?


I was playing at Back-Gammon for my Dinner, which I won; and from thence we
came to five up for half a piece; of the first set I had three for love and
lost it* of the second I Gammon'd him, and threw Doublets at last, which you
know made fou^, and lost that too; of the third I won never a Game.


O Devil! Is this the Miraculous thing you would tell me, Fare-well.


Hold, hold, Sir! you don't hear the end on it.


Nor do I desire it, Sir.


I'll tell you, Sir, of the fourth set I was four to two, and for the last game
my Tables were filled up, and I had born my thr^e odd men, so that you know I
had two upon every point.


O insufferable! though I feel enough my self, yet I cannot but pity Stanford.


O Damned Impertinence! Sir, I tell you, I don't understand Back-Gamon.


Not understand Back-Gamon: Sir, that you may understand well what I say, I'll
tell you what Back-Gamon is.


This is worse then the other: sure Stanford has some Charm about him, that I
can suffer this rather then leave him.


I desire none of your Instructions.


Well: then as I was a saying, I had just two upon every point, and he had two
Men to enter; and as the Devil would have it, my next throw was Size-Ace; he
entered one of his Men a Size; then Mr. Stanford, to see the Damned luck on it,
I threw Size-Sinke next, and the very next throw he entered upon a Sink, and
having his Game very backward, won the Game, and afterwards he Set so, that I
lost every penny.


This will distract me; What the Devill's this to me?


No: but did you ever hear the like in your life?


This puts me beyond all patience.


But this was not all; for just in the Nick came she that Nursed my three last
Children that were born without Wedlock, and threatened to turn em upon my
hands if I did not pay her. -- Faith Mr. Stanford three Pieces more will do my
business; upon my Honour I'll pay you to morrow: Come will you Communicate?


Yes that, that's fitter for you --


What is that Dear Heart?


'Tis that Sir* --


That Sir, I don't understand you; if you go to that Sir: There's a business
indeed. What do you mean by this? What would you make a quarrel, Sir? You'll
never leave th^se tricks: I have told you of em often enough. What the Devil
do you mean by that?


Let this expound my meaning. --


'Slife, Sir, I don't understand you: and ye talk of these things, and these
businesses, Sir, I'd have you know, I scorn to be kicked as much as any man
breathing, Sir; and you be that Sport, your Servant, your Servant, Sir.


Come Mr. Huff, Divide.


Divide! There's one for you, for two of em was all I got.


This you might have kept to your self if you had pleased, but, Do ye think I'll
be served thus?


Let me go.


I'll not leave you so. --


Why do'nt you go? the Doors open now, Sir.


I am afraid I shall light into worse Company.


O Sir, that's impossible!


How vain this is of you; now would you give me a fair occasion to flatter you,
but I can assure you, you shall miss of your design.


Well, this is an extraordinary man; I love the


What an Owl am I to like this Woman! sure I am bewitched.





You'd even as good stay, Madam, while you are well: you may perhaps if you go,
encounter some of your Persecutors.


I'd rather stay here then venture that; my trouble is not here so
insupportable.


She must be a rare Woman!


This is a most excellent person.


Dear Emilia. O Heaven! Is he here?


Jack; Hark ye.


For Heaven's sake! I have business.


'Tis all one for that, Sir; Why I'll tell you.


Another time; I beseech you don't interrupt me now.


Faith but I must interrupt you.


What can be the matter he listens to him.


'Slife, Why should you put this upon me now.


If you refuse me, I'll blast your Reputation.


What shall I do? though this be a Coxcombly-Knight, yet the Puppies stout; are
you so cunning in


What can this mean?


Come, Sir, I'll follow you, but a Curse upon you for finding me out: Madam,
as soon as I have dispatch'd this business, 'tis possible I may see you again.


But 'tis not, I'll assure you; I'll never see the Face of one, that has so
little sense to be seduced by such an Idiot as that is.


How ridiculous is this of you, to Judge of a thing before you know the Bottom
on it.


Come, Stanford, 'prethee come away


Have I found you? this Fellows as bad as any, and without doubt did but
Counterfeit his humour, to insinuate himself into my good opinion. What lucky
Accident is this has undeceived me? I felt a passion growing in me might else
have proved dangerous -- Luce --


Madam.


Fetch my Hoods and Scarfes, I'll take a walk in the Fields.


How Sister! What have you lost your Gallant:


O Sister, I thank you for locking me up with that Fellow; well, the time may
come when I may be quit with you.


I wonder how the Door came open; I believe there has been hard bickering
betwixt em: but, I find my Sister is Conqueror, and your Friend is fled for
the same.


Fare well he, let us mind our selves. Come, Faith Madam, Why should you and I
hover so long about this Matrimony; Like a Cast of Falcons about a Hern that
dare not stoop.


O Sir, the Quarry does not Countervail the Danger.


I'll warrant you, Madam; but let's railly no longer, there is a Parson at
Knights-bridge that yokes all stray People together, we'll to him, he'll
dispatch us presently, and send us away as lovingly as any two Fools that ever
yet were condemned to Marriage.


I should be inclinable enough to cast my self upon you; but I am afraid you
are gone so far with my Lady Vain, you can never come off with Honour:
Besides, I am sure, what e're you say, you cannot so soon forget your kindness
to her; and if after we are yoked, as you call it, you should draw that way, I
should draw another; and then our Yoke would go near to Throttle us.


Faith some would think it much the easier if 'twere wide enough to draw both
ways: But Madam, Will you never be serious with me?


I know you cannot love me, she's your delight.


Yes, yes, I delight in her as I do in the Tooch-Ache; I love her immoderately,
as an English Taylor loves a French Taylor that's set up the next door to him.


Sir, to keep you no longer in suspense, I am resolved never to Marry without
my Fathers Consent.


Madam, I'll not despair of obtaining that.


He has Vowed never to Marry me till he has disposed of my Elder Sister.


Will you assure me to make me happy when that's done?


I think I may safely promise any thing against that time; for, as long as my
Sister has these Mellanchollick-Humors, she's far enough from that danger.


I'll warrant you I'll make a Match yet between Stanford and her.


That's impossible, unless you can alter their Natures* for though neither
finds Impertinence in themselves, they I find it in one another: besides, their
very Principles are against all Society.


Well, Madam, I have a way to make em stark mad in love with one another; or
at least fetch em out of their Sullenness: We will perpetually bait em with
our Fools, and by that we shall either plague em out of their humour, or at
least make their fellow-sufferings be a means to endear em one to another.


Now will I firk my two Clerks.


But, Sir, before we engage, I would satisfy my Conscience whether the Cause
be just or no?


Hang the Cause, we come to fight.


Why, I'll tell you the Cause, Sir.


By no means, Sir Positive, we come to fight here, not to tell stories.


We'll fight too; but by your leave I'll tell the Cause first, and you were my
Father.


Hold, Sir, think upon your Honour, this is no place for Words; Let your Sword
speak your Mind.


Sir, by your Pardon, I am resolved to satisfy em; no man in England knows
how to manage these things better then my self, take that from me.


O horrid Impertinence, I fear these Fools Tongues more then I can their
Swords.


Sir, no man in E^gland would put up this aff^ont; Why look you, Sir, for him
to sit in the Eighteen Pence Gallery, pray mark me, and rail at my Play aloud
the first day, and did all that lay in his power to damn it: And let me tell
you, Sir, if in any Drammatick Poem there has been such breaks, such
Characters, such Figures, such Images, such Heroic Patterns, such Heights,
such Flights, such Intrigues, such Surprises, such Fire, Salt, and Flame, then
I am no Judge: I understand nothing in this World.


What a Cause his Valour has found out; and how he Cants too; What an Owl was
I to come along with him; Sir Positive dispatch. Come, come, Gentlemen.


Hold a little --


Why look you Mr. Timothy, this is a very honest and in enious Gentleman for
ought I see.


'Tis true, I sate in the Eighteen Pence Gallery, but I was so far from
Railling against your Play, that I cried it up as high as I could.


How high did you cry it up?


Why as high as the upper Gallery, I am sure of that.


O Cowardly Currs! Will they never fight: Y'e lie, y'e did Rail at his Play.


Sir, I'll hold you twenty pound I don't lie; Sir, Were you there? Did you hear
me? This is the strangest thing in the Wo^ld.


Will nothing make these Rogues fight? You are both Rascally Cowards.


'Tis strange you should say so, you are very uncharitable; Do you know either
of us?


Oh insufferable! What Sons of VVhores has he picked up, and what an occasion
too?


Why do you say, you did not Rail; Did not I sit just under you in the Pit?


Lord! Who would expect to see a Poet in the Pitt at his own Play?


Did not you say, Fie upon it, that shall not pass!


Gentlemen! either Fight quickly. --


Hold hold, let him speak; What can you say? Do Gentlemen Write to oblige the
World, and do such as you traduce em -- ha --


Sir, I'll tell you, you had made a Lady in your Play so unkind to her Lover
(who methought was a very honest well-meaning-Gentleman) to command him to hang
himself; Said I then that shall not pass, thinking indeed the Gentleman would
not have done it, but he indeed did it, then said I fie upon it that he should be
so much over-taken.


Overtaken! that's good 'ifaith, why you had as good call the Gentleman fool:
and 'tis the best Character in all my Play. De'think I'll put that up.


Not I Sir as I hope to live; I would not call the Gentleman Fool for all the
World, but 'tis strange a man must pay eighteen pence, and must not speak a
word for it.


Not when Gentlemen write; take that from me.


No, I would they would let it alone then.


But Stanford it would make an Author mad to see the Invincible Ignorance of
this age, now for him to hang himself at the Command of his Mistress there's
the surprise, and I'll be content to hang my self, if ever that was shown upon
a stage before, besides 'twas an Heroic Cato-like Action, and there's great
Love and Honour to be shown in a mans hanging himself for his Mistress, take
that from me.


O horrid! this Magisterial Coxcomb will defend any thing.


What do you think Stanford, you are a great Judge?


I think a Halter is not so honourable as a Poniard, and therefore not so fit
to express Love and Honour with.


Ha, h^, ha To see your mistake now that's the only thing in the Play I took
pains for, I could have made it otherwise with ease, but I will give you
seventeen reasons why a Halter's better then a Poniard. First, I'll show you
the posture of hanging, look, do ye mind me, it is the posture of a Pensive
dejected Lover with his hands before him, and his head aside thus.


I would you had a Halter you would demonstrate it more clearly.


Faith, and w^ld I had, I'd show it you to the life -- but secondly --


Hold Sir -- I am convinced, to our fighting business again; but they have given
you full satisfaction,

Let's away --


No, no, hold a little.


A Curse on him! did I leave Emilia for this?


Sir, if you'll see your hand to this Certificate (...) satisfied, otherwise you
must take what follows.


Sir! with all my heart, I'll do any thing to serve you.


I had this ready on purpose, for I was resolved if we had fought, and I had
disarmed him, I'd have made him do it before I'd have given him his l^fe, how
do you write your self?


Timothy Scribble a Justice of Peace his Clerk.


Here read it, and set your hand to it.


Sir Positive Att-all Knight, called the Lady in the Lobster, notwithstanding
it was damned by the Malice of the Age, shall not only read, but it shall Act
with any of Ben. Iohnsons and B^aumont's and Fletcher's Plays.


Hold, hold! I'll have Shakespeares in, 'slife I had like to have forgot that.



I do likewise hereby at^est that he is no Purloiner of other men's Works, the
general fame and opinion notwithstanding, and that he is a Poet, Mathematician,
Divine, Statesman, Lawyer, Physician, Geographer, Musician, and indeed a Unus
in Omnibus through all Arts and Sciences, and hereunto I have set my hand the
day of


With all my heart.


Come Sir, do you Witness it.


Ay Sir.


In presence of Iacob Dash.


Look you Sir I write an indifferent good hand, if you have any occasion to
command me, inquire at the Stationers at F^rnivals Inn. --


Why you Impudent Rascals! how dare you; offers to come into the Field? must I
be diver^ thus long by kick 'em. you?


Hold Sta^ford! I cannot in honour suffer that now they are my Friends, and
after this satisfaction I am bound in honour to defend 'em to the last drop of
blood.


O intolerable!


Sir! I pray be not angry! we did not come into the (...) to fight, but Ma^er
Dash and I came to play a match at Trap-ball for a Dish of Steakes at
Gloster-hall, and here you found us.


Have you the Confidence to talk of Trap-ball before me, nay, now you are my
Enemies again: hark you Stanford I'll play with 'em both for 5 cool. why I was
so eminent at it when I was a School-boy, that I was called Trap Positive all
over the School.


Then farewell good Sir Positive Trap.


Dear Stanford stay but one quarter of an hour, and you shall see how I'll
dishonour 'em both at Trap-ball -- They talk of Trap-ball, ha, ha, ha.


Slife what will become of me: out of the field you inconsiderable Rascals.
Must I be diverted thus by you --


I thought we might have been free here: and here are these Puppy's.


Let's aboard of 'em, who e're they are, fa, la, la, how now Dear Hearts? by
the L. Harry its pity you should walk without a Couple of Servants, here's a
Couple of Bully-Rocks will serve your turn, as well as Two of Buckram, Dear
Hearts.


O Heaven! --


Gentlemen this is very rude! we shall have them come shall thank you for it.


As I hope to breath Ladies you look the pretty'st in Vizard Masks of any
Ladies in England.


And now you talk of Masks, I'll show you an admirable Song upon a Vizard Mask,
Dear Hearts, of Poet Ninny's making.


Oh abominable Impudence!


But I must beg your pardon that I cannot sing it, for I am hoarse already with
singing it to the Maids of Honour.


You sing it to the Maids of Honour?


But if I had a Violin here, no man in England can express any thing more
lusciously upon that then my self, ask Ninny else.


Yes Ladies! he has great power upon the Violin, he has the best double Relish
in Gam-ut of any man in England, but for the little finger on the left hand no
man in Europe outdoes him.


You may believe him, Dear Hearts, for he's a great Judge of Music, and as
pretty a Poet as ever writ Couplet.


O horrid! what's this? there's no way to escape, but to discover our selves.


Emilia! what shall I do? I am undone, she'll never own me again.


Farewell you Baboons, and learn better manners.


'Slife she'll take me for a Whore-master, I am nipped in the very blossom of my
hopes.


For Heavens sake, pardon me Madam.


Let me go.


No Madam, we'll wait on your Ladyship home.


This is worse and worse.


Heart! if I put up this, I'll give him leave to use me worse then a Bailey
that arrests in the Inns of Court.


Why! what's the matter?


'Slife kick a man of honour as I am, I'll pistol him pissing against a Wall.


Ay then or never to my knowledge.


What's the business Dear Heart, hah?


Sir, I'll tell you.


This is a lucky Occasion.


Are you gone, I'll follow you.


I had occasion for four or five Pieces to make up a Sum with, ^nd went to
borrow it of him, and he like an uncivil fellow as he was --


What did he?


Why I did but turn my back, and he like an ill-bred sot, gives me a kick or
two of the breech, I'll cut his throat if I should meet him in a Church.


This will be an ill business; I am sorry for my Friend Jack Stanford. -- for
Master Huffes honour


If he be above ground I'll cutt's throat for it, I'll teach him to use a man of
honour thus, if he had pleased he might have dealt with me at another rate, as
I hope to live I had a fighting Sword by my side near six foot long at that
very time, and he to kick a man, P'shaw He does not understand his business,
but I shall find him presently.


Pox on it Woo^cock she would not let me go with her.


Prithee, Dear Heart, see if thou can find I^ck Stanford in the Fields, while
I go and ^eel if I can find him in the Town.


What's the matter?


'Tis a business concerns his life, Dear He^t, ask no questions, but if you
find him, bring him to the Sun.


What can this be?


But I'll go see if I can find him out,
So to be sure of what I 'me now in doubt*
COme Madam, I am not so blind, but I have discovered something.


What have you discovered Madam?


Let me tell you, Madam, 'tis not for your honour to give meetings privately to
Master Lovell.


Why Madam, if I should, are you concerned in it?


Yes, Madam, first in my good Wishes to your Ladyship, I would not have the
World blame your Conduct, not that you should have the least blemish in your
honour, but that your Fame and Virtue should continue unspotted and undefiled
as your Ladyships Beauty is.


Fear not, Madam, I'll warrant you I'll secure my honour without your
Instructions.


But, Madam, let me tell you again, no Woman has really that right in Master
Lovell that I have: but he's false Wretch Madam, he has no Religion in him, if
he had any Conscience, or had used to have heard Sermons, he would never have
been so wicked and per^idious to a poor Innocent Woman as I am.


This is very fine i'faith --


Madam, he protested all the honourable kindness in the World to me, and has
received Favours from me, I shall not mention at this time, and now he has
raised the siege from before me, and laid it to your Ladyship.


I cannot imagine what you mean by this?


And Madam to confess my Weakness to you, I must needs say, I love him of all
men in the World.


Well, Madam, since you do, I'll resign my Interest in the Gentleman you speak
of, here he is.


Oh Heaven! am I betrayed? well, Madam, I shall acquaint your father with your
Amour.


Hold, Madam, if you do perhaps I may whisper something in Sir Positive's ear.


Sir! you will not be so ungenerous to boast of a Ladies kindness: if he should
say the least thing in the World after my unhansome leaving of him just now, it
would incense him past reconciliation, what a confusion am I in?


Is not this very pleasant Madam?


I wonder, Sir, after what has now past you have the confidence to look me in
the face.


I like this raillery very well, Madam.


I can assure you, you shall have no reason to think I railly with you.


Certainly you cannot be in Earnest.


Upon my word you shall find I am, I will have nothing to do with any man
that's engaged already.


You amaze me, Madam.


I'll never see you more --


O friend! I'm glad I've found you.


I shall have no opportunity to appease my Mistress* if I do not get rid of
him, but I have a trick for him.


Would this woman were away, that I might acquaint you with the greatest
concernment I ever had.


Step into that Chamber quickly, and I'll get rid of her, and come to you. --


With all my heart --


Certainly, Madam, you cannot know this Woman so little as to give her Credit?
I'll tell you what she is.


I am very glad I know you so well: do you think I'll be put off with a Remnant
of your Love?


O! Master Lovell! is my Master here? I have lost him these two hours.


Ay, ay, but Madam, for Heavens sake hear me!


Trouble me no more.


Where is this Master of mine: I have been seeking him these two hours, and
cannot light of him.


Oh Roger! where's your Master?


O Sir! you shall excuse me for that.


Prithee dear Rogue tell me, 'twill be better for thee.


No, no, that won't do, you were not so just to me last time.


Upon my honour I was: Why should thou distrust thy friend?


Come Sir, don't think to Wheadle me at this rate!


I am a son of a Whore if I was not just to you: but prithee bring me to him
once more: I am sure to get money of him, and may I perish if I do not give you
your share to a farthing.


Well! I'll trust you once more: go, and stay for me in the Hall, and I'll come
to you when I have found my Master, who is somewhere in this house.


Well! I'll wait for you --


My comfort is, if he gets money I may have my share, if not he ventures a
kicking again, and I venture nothing.


Oh Sir! I have been seeking you these two hours, and here's Master Lovell in
the house.


You Rascal, must you trouble me too? --


He does not trouble you more then you do me.


Now are you like a young hound that runs away with a ^alse scent.


For Heaven's sake leave me.


Nay! This is like a Woman, to condemn a man unheard.


Must I be for ever pestered with Impertinent people?


If you were not so your self, you would not think me so; but she that has the
Yellow Jaundies thinks every thing yellow which she sees.


Is it possible you can have the impudence to endeavour to justify your folly.


Not that I care much for satisfying you, but to vindicate myself from the
unjust aspersion: know it was my honour obliged 'me to go along with that
Fool.


Out of my sight; Are you one of those Fopps that talk of honour?


Is that a thing so despicable with you? he asked me to be his second, which I
could not in honour refuse.


Granting that barbarous custom of Duels; Can any thing be so ridiculous, as
to venture your life for another mans quarrel, right or wrong?


I like this Woman more and more, like a sott as I am* sure there is
VVitch-craft in it. --


But to do the greatest Act of Friendship in the World for the greatest Owl in
Nature.


Oh Mr* Stanford, I have a business to impart to you.


O insufferable! Have you the Impudence to trouble me again.


I know not what's the matter, but I cannot but have some inclination to this
fellow yet.


I am going into the City, where I shall have the rarest Bubble that ever man
had; he was set me by a Renegado-Linnen-Draper, that failed last year in his
Credit, and has now no other trade but to start the Game, whilst we pursue the
Chase. This is one of these fellows that draw in the Youth of the City into
our Decoy, and perpetually walk up and down seeking for Prey.


Be gone! and leave me.


But you know a man must have a little Gold to show, to bait the Rogues
withal.


Out, you unseasonable Rascal, I'll send you hence.


Nay, 'tis not that Sir can fright me, but that I would not disturb the Lady,
I'd make you know.


You impudent Villain, I'll send you further.


Nay, Sir, your humble Servant and you go to that, Sir; I care as little for a
Sword, Sir, as any man upon Earth: I fear your Sword? Who dares say it? your
Servant, your Servant. --


This is not altogether so foolish as fighting in Sir Positive's Quarrel.


Sir Positives quarrel! 'twas in effect my own; for I was sure to meet with
some impertinent Fellow or other for my Enemy, and was glad of this opportunity
to vent my indignation upon one of those many that have tormented me; I had
rather fight with them all, then converse with them.


But you may choose whether you will do either.


Yes, as much as choose whether I'll breathe or no.


But how could you be sure to meet with such an one.


What Question is that? Is it not above 5000 to one odds?





Now Madam, who is impertinent, you or I?


You are to say the same thing twice to me.


Well! this is a rare Woman: what a quick apprehension she has. I love her
strangely, the more Coxcomb I, that I should be drawn in of all men living.


O Dear heart, have I met with thee; I have been seeking thee all the Town
over.


Heart, What's this? I was going in great haste just as you came, adieu.


Ah dear Jack, I have not so little honour as to leave thee in this condition.


Good Sir! What condition? I am not Drunk, am I?


No, Ga'd, would it were no worse, Dear heart.


It cannot be worse, do not trouble me.


No, I'll tell thee Jack; Huff threatens


For Heaven's sake put not this upon me; Do you think he that would be kicked
without resistance, dares do any thing?


But look you, Dear Heart, Lord this is the strangest thing in the World, you
had Ladies with you, and you know it had been an uncivil thing to have turned
again then Jack: but now he's resolved to have satisfaction, he told me so; And
if I can see as far into a Millstone as another, he's no Bully Sandy.


Trouble me no more: be gone --


Ay, ay, thou dost this now to try whether I have so little honour as to quit
thee, but it won't pass, my dear Rascal; kiss me, I'll live and dye with thee.


Sir, let me tell you, this is very rude: and upon my word I have no quarrel
unless you'll force one upon me.


Still do I like this man better and better. --


Nay, then I smell a Rat -- Farewell Jack -- Servant, Dear Hearts.


But, are you sure my Lady Vain is such a one.


Yes, that I am, my little peevish Jealous Mistress.


Yes, yes, I have reason to be jealous of such a Treasure as you are: But pray,
to satisfy a little scruple I have, see her no more.


We had best change the Scene, I think, what if you should walk out a little.


I care not much if I do.


I could find in my heart to go along with you.


Yes, and leave me again for your Honour forsooth.


How Devillishly impertinent is this for you to harp upon one string still.


Let's pursue our design.


Agreed: and to our wish here comes my Cozin Positive.


Oh! Have I found you: I'll tell you the pleasant'st thing in the World.


Sir, I am just now going to a Lawyer of the Temple to ask his Council.


P'shaw, p'shaw; save thy Money, what need thou do that, I'll do it for you;
why I have more Law, then ever Cooke upon Littleton had; you must know, I am so
eminent at that, that the greatest Lawyers in England come to me for advice in
matters of difficulty: Come, state your Case, let's hear't, Come. -- Hold, hold
Cozen, Whither


Let me go, I am going in haste to bespeak a Seal.


A Seal; Why dost thou know what thou dost now? To go about that without my
advice: Well, I have given Symons and all of em such Lessons, as I have made
em stand in admiration of my Judgment: Do you know that I'll cut a Seal with
any man in England for a thousand Pound.


I have my Lesson, I'll warrant you I'll do it.


O Heaven!
I must go now to bespeak it; I am to send it immediately to my Sister at the
English Nunnery in Bruges.


Bruges! ah dear Bruges; now you talk of Bruges, I am writing this night to
Castle Rodrigo, you must know I have thought of their Affairs, and considered
em thoroughly; and just this very After-noon I have found out such a way for
em to preserve Flanders from the French, I defy all Mankind for such an
Invention; and I think I offer him very fair, if he will let me divide the
Government with him, I'll do it; otherwise if Flanders be lost, 'tis none of my
fault.


What is your Design Sir Positive?


That thou should be so very foppish to ask questions?


I'll tell you, I will this year; pray mark me, I will bring 100000 Men into
the Field, do ye see.


But, Where will you have these Men, Cozen?


Have em P'shaw, p'shaw, let me alone for that; I tell thee Stanford, I will
bring 100000 men into the Field, 60000 in one Complete body, and 40000 for a
flying Army, with which I will enter into the very Body of all France.


O Devil! I had rather Flanders should be lost, then hear any more on it.


But this would signify nothing, unless it were done by one that understands
the conduct of an Army, which if I do not, let the World Judge: but to satisfy
you, I'll tell you what I'll do, pray mark me, I will take threescore thousand
Spanish Soldiers, and fight with 60000 French, and cut em off every M^n: pray
observe one, this is demonstration; then will I take those very numericall
Individual Frenchmen I spoke of.


What, after you have cut em off every man.


Pish; What doest talk Man? What's matter whether it be before or after, that's
not to the point? P'shaw, prithee don't thee trouble thy self for that, I'll
do it man; I will take those very 60000 French and fight with a Spanish Army of
100000, and by my extraordina^y Conduct destroy em all, this is demonstration,
nothing can be plainer then this; by this you may guess whether I may not be a
considerable Man to that N^tion or no. -- Nay, more then that, I'll undertake
if I were in Candia, the Grand Vizier would sooner expose himself to the fury
of the Ianizaries, then besiege the Town while I were in it.


I cannot tell whether I am more tormented with Sir Positive, or pleased with
Stanford, he is an extraordinary man.


But as I was saying, Cozen Emilia; I will have 100000 men in the Field, and I
will man the Garrisons to the full: besides pray observe, I will have an
infinite store of Provision every where, and pay all my Soldiers to a penny
duly.


But where's the Money to do this Cozen?


What shall I do? Whether shall I turn me?


Ah Dear Emilia!


VVhere's the Money, that's good one Faith! -- Prithee dear Cozen do thou mind
thy Guitar; thou dost not understand these things.


I am sure I understand you to be the greatest Coxcomb in Nature.


Then I will make you me a League Offensive and Defensive with the King of
England, the Emperor and Princes of Germany, the King's of Sweden and Denmark,
the Kings of Portugal and Poland, Prester Iohn, and the Great Cham, the States
of Holland, the Grand Duke of Muscovy, the Great Turk, with two or three
Christian Princes more, that shall be nameless; and if with that Army,
Provision and Alliance, I do not do the business, I am no Judge, I understand
nothing in the World.


O Sir Positive! my Lady Vain would speak with you at your Lodging
immediately.


Cods my life-kins, Stanford, I am heartily sorry I must leave you.


So am not I.


I beg your pardon a thousand times. I vow^t Gad I would not leave you but upon
this occasion.


How glad am I of the occasion!





O yes! we do believe it.


But hark you Cozen, and Stanford, you must promise me not to take it ill, as I
hope to breathe I mean no incivility in the World.


Oh no, no, by no means.


Your Servant. --


Come, Lovel, let's follow him, and either prepare him, or find out some others
for a fresh encounter.


Allon's, but be sure, Roger, you forget not what I said to you. --


I will not, Sir.


How Courteously he excused himself, for not tormenting us more.


This is the first good turn my Lady Vain e're did me.


No, Madam, this was my ingenuity; I ne'er saw my Lady Vain, not do I know
where she is.


Cozen and Mr. Stanford, I have considered on it, and I vow to Gad I am so
afraid you'll take it ill, that rather then disoblige you, I'll put it off.


O no Sir, by no means; 'twould be the rudest thing in the World to disobey
your Mistress.


Nay, Faith I see thou art angry now, 'prethee don't trouble thy self, I'll
stay with thee.


Hell and Damnation! this is beyond all sufferance.


Let me advise you by all means to go to your Mistress.


Well! if you won't take it ill, I'll go; adieu.


That's he, seize him.


Sir, by your leave, you must go to the Captain of the Guard.


O! into^lerable! What's the matter now?


I do not know, but I guess 'tis upon a quarrel betwixt you and one Lieu^enant
Huff.


Was ever any thing so unfortunate as this? Can't you defer't an hour?


I am commanded by my Officer and dare not disobey.


How loath am I to leave this Woman; there is something extraordinary in this
-- Madam; I am willing enough to stay with you, but you see I am forced away:
-- stay you here Roger. --


What an unlucky accident is this? but my misfortunes never fail me. --


So, he's safe, and I have done what I in honour ought to do; and now honest
Roger, my dear Bully-Rock, I'll stay with thee, prithee kiss me, thou art the
honestest Fellow in the World.


Sir, I am glad I can Repay your Commendations; I have the best news for y'e
that ever you heard in your life.


Me! What is't Dear Heart?


Why, I'll tell you, the Lady Emilia is in love with you.


In love with me, fie, fie, Pox on it what a VVheadling Rogue art thou now? Why
should thou put this upon thy Friend now?


Sir, this suspicion of yours is very injurious: Let me tell you, that I am
sure I have not deserved it from you Sir.


Nay, I must confess, I have always found thee an honest Fellow, Dear Heart;
but a Pox on it, she can't love me: P'shaw, me? What, what can she see in me to
love me for? no, no.


Sir! upon my life, it's true.


Ha, ha, Dear Rascal, kiss me, the truth on it is, I have thought some such
thing a pretty while, but how the Devil come thou to find it out, on my
Conscience thou art a Witch.


O Sir! I am great with her Maid Luce, and she told me her Lady fell in love
with you for singing, she says you have the sweetest Voice, and the delicatest
Method in singing of any man in England.


As Gad shall sa'me, she is a very ingenious Woman; Dear Dog, Honest Rascal
here, here's for thy News, I'll go in and give her a song immediately --


How greedily he swallows the bait: but 'these selfconceited Idiots can never
know when they are wheadl'd.


P'shaw, p'shaw, ad'au'tre, ad'au'tre, I can't abide you should put your tricks
upon me.


Come, Ninny, leave Fooling, you know I scorn it, I have always dealt faithful
with you.





I shall be angry Sir, if you distrust me longer.
You may neglect this opportunity of raising your self,
Do, but perhaps you may never have such another.

Nay* but dear Sir, speak! are you in Earnest?


Do you intend to affront me, you had as good give me the lye.


No, dear Sir, I beg your pardon for that, I believe you, But how came you to
know it?


Her Sister Carolina told me so, and that she fell in love with you for reading
a Copy of your own Verses: she says you read Heroic Verse with the best Grace
of any man in England.


Before George she's in the right of that, but Sir --


'Slife ask no more questions, but to her and strike while the Irons hot: have
you done you business Roger?


Most dexterously Sir.


Let's away --


Love me? I am o'rejoy'd, I am sure I have loved her a great while.


Fa, la, la, la, c.


Heaven! this will distract me, what a vile noise he makes worse then the
Creaking of a Barn door, or a Coach wheel ungreas'd.


This is damned unlucky that he should be here to hinder my design.


What a pox makes him here, but I'll on in my business Madam, I'll speak you a
Copy of Verses of my own that have a great deal of mettle and soul, and flame
in'em.


But I will not hear'em, Sir.


Alas poor fool he hopes to please her, but it won't do, ha, ha, ha.


What the devil can she mean by this, sure she can't be in Earnest: No, I have
found it; Ay, ay, it must be so, she would not have me speak before him,
because she would not have him take notice of her passion, but what care I --


Prithee Ninny don't trouble the Lady with your Verses.


Well, well! Can't you let one alone --


Fa, la, la, la, c.


What horrid Noise is this you make in my Ears? shall I never be free?


Alas! poor Coxcomb he hopes to please her with his Voice: No, no, he may spare
his pains -- I am the man.


What a pox ails she? She's damnably out of humour what e'res the matter, I am
sure Roger would not deceive me of all men? what an ass am I, that I should not
find it, she's afraid my singing will encourage him to trouble her; or else
she would not have him perceive her kindness --


Sure all the world conspires against me this day?


Fa, la, la, la, c.




'Tis worthy of my heart and of your Eyes:
First of my heart, which being subdued by you,
Must for that Reason be both strong and true;
Then of your Eyes, which Conquerours must subdue:
And make 'em be both slaves and freemen too;
Your Eyes which do both dazzle, and delight,
And are at once the Joy, and grief of sight.
Love that is worthy of your face and fame
May be a glory, but can be no shame:
My heart by being overcome does stronger prove,
Strength makes us yield unto your Eyes and Love.
In this my heart is strong, because 'tis weak,
This, though I hold my peace, my Love will speak,
Silence can do more then e're speech did do,
For humble silence does do more then woo;
Under the Rose, which being the sweetest flower
Shows silence in us has then speech more power.

Why, what a damned Noise does he make; pox take me Madam, if one can be heard
for him* Can't you let one alone with one's Verses trow.


Poor fellow! alas! he little thinks why I sing now?


If he thought how pleasant my rehearsing were to her, sure he would not be so
rude, but Mum for that.


O Madam! your fathers come to Town, and has brought a Country Gentleman to
come a wooing to you: he sent his man before hand to know if you were within,
and one of the servants unluckily informed him before I could see him: he says
he's the most down-right plodding Gentleman the Country can afford.


What will become of me? is there no mercy in store for me?


Is he coming -- nay then -- hem --


I'll make haste before he comes to hinder me.


For Heavens sake let me go.


Sing Repeat


Oh, hold, hold, hold. I faint if you give not over.


What a Devil does she mean by this, I am sure she loves me; but perhaps rather
then endure the trouble of his Noise, she's willing to dispense with the
pleasure of my Voice.


A poise take this VVoodcock that he should anger this Lady, as I hope to live
he's a very impertinent fellow, for though she was troubled at him, I perceived
she was transported with me.


It must be so, I must do ill that good may come on it: This Countrey-fellow
will be the worst plague of all, since he has my fathers Authority to back him,
I must be forced to subdue my own Nature, and flatter these Coxcombs to get rid
of him, for they are so impudent they'll drive him from hence --


Madam, let me ask you in private, how did you like my song, speak boldly
Madam, Ninny does not hear, Dear Heart?


I must needs like it, Sir, or betray my own Judgement.


Ah, Dear Roger! thou art a made man for ever. I am the man --


What's this I hear?


How did you like my Verses, Madam?


So well Sir, that I hope you will let me hear 'em often. What am I reduced to?


Oh Devil whats this?


How happy shall I be? the truth is I did perceive you were troubled at
VVoodcocks senseless Songe, how we would enjoy our selves if he were gone?


Is it possible I should be deceived so much?


I'll tell thee Dear Heart, if thou be troubled at Ninny's Rimes, upon my
honour I'll beat the Rogue.


This is she, Sir.


Your servant, Madam.


'Death she is a very Gossip, and Converses with all sort of fools, not only
with patience, but with pleasure too, how civilly she entertains them? That I
should be such an Owl to think there could be a woman not impertinent, I have
not patience to look upon her longer. --


It won't do Ninny, her father little thinks she's engaged Dear Heart.


No, no, her father little thinks she's engaged, Woodcock.


He may go down Ninny like an Ass as he came, she'll send him down with a flea
in's ear take that from me.


What a poise! he does not know she loves me! does he?


Poor fool! I pity him: ha, ha, ha.


So do I, alack, alack.


Madam, I am but just now come to Town, you see my Boots are dirty still, but I
make bold as the saying is.


More bold then welcome, I assure you Sir.


Thank you good sweet Madam; this is the most obliging Gentlewoman that ever
was --


By this he shows the Impatience of his Love (Daughter.)


Madam, I am a son of a Whore, if I have not the best song upon that subject,
that ever you heard in your life.


Before George Madam, I'll repeat you Copy of Verses of my own ten times better
then his song.


You are an impudent Coxcomb to say so, Dear Heart, And ye lye, and I am
satisfied.


Do I so, Madam, do but you judge.


What can this mean? they are both mad.


I am so impatient for to go to
my Dear,
That I run headlong without
wit or fear.

What an impertinent fellow are you,
Woodcock cannot you let one alone.
So great the power of our love is now,
We can't persuade it reason for to allow.
Strange Miracle of Cytherea's force,
For to transform a man into a horse.

My love is Cruel grown,
For to leave me all alone,
Thus for to sigh, and moan.
Ah woe is me!
Peace, Coxcomb, peace.
But I'll strive for to find
My love, though she's unkind,
So for to ease my mind.
Oh woe is me!
Hey ho, hey ho, my love,
Who is so Cruel as Jenny to me.

Hold, hold, are you both mad, is the Devil in you, if he be, I shall have them
will conjure him out of you. Come out you Coxcombs, or I^le drive you out. --


These Gentlemen are as mad as March-Hares, Madam, as the saying is, but to our
business, I had not the power as I was a saying, to keep from you longer, Lady,
not so much as a pissing while, do ye see! for Cat will to kind as the saying
is.


Oh, Sir, you complement, you are an absolute Country Courtier.


Who I, alas not I, in sober sadness, we that live in the Country are right
down d'e see, we call a spade a spade, as the saying is for our part.


You do well Sir, for hypocrisy is an abominable vice.


'Tis indeed to be a Pharisy, and carry two faces in a hood, as the saying is.


Now I wish my to'ther two fools would come back and drive away this.


I perceive you are very good at Proverbs, Sir don't you use to play at that
sport with the Country Gentlewomen.


O yes, I am old dog at that, I am too hard for 'em all at it, d'e see.


O rarely! I can't choose, to fill ones belly with Curds and Cream, and stewed
Prunes, to eat Honey-comb, and Rashers of Bacon at poor neighbours houses, and
Rise by five a clock in the Morning to look to my dayry.


O rare how we shall cotton together, as the saying is, I love a good huswife
with all my hea^t, but Madam, I have a cast of Hawks, and five couples of
Spaniels too, oh Madam, if you saw my beloved Bitch Venus, you would be in love
with her, she's the best at a Retrieve of any Bitch in England d'e see.


Is he here? this is Heaven to me to see him after my late afflictions.





I will forsooth, I'll go see my horses fed the while.


This is a modester fool then the others I am troubled with, but if my father
had been here I should not so easily have got rid of him -- What are you come
again?


Ay, ay, too soon I am sure.


Are you not very foppish that you did not stay longer then?


This accusation becomes you well indeed.


Why not Sir?


Alas, you are not impertinent, no, no, not you!


I am sure you are: what can this mean?


You were never pleased with Woodcocks damned voice yet, not Ninny's ridiculous
Poetry, not you?


Not more, than your self.


No, no, you were not pleased with them you did not praise 'em, nor entertain
the other Two Fools with kindness, no not you?


What a ridiculous thing 'twas of you not to tell me this in one word.

Oh Heaven! are they here!


How soon you can counterfeit the humour.


You see, I am as good as my word Stanford.


You See, Madam, how ready I am to wait on your Ladyship.


Ay, to my cost I thank you.


She thinks I am so easily bit as to take this for a satisfaction, but I am too
old to be deceived again.


Now Madam to our business, if we don't put'em out of this humour, 'tis
strange.


However let's use our lawful Endeavours towards it.


Sing Repeat.


'Slife Sir, I'll teach you to trouble this Lady with your pitiful ^imes.


You teach me, nay, if you provoke me before Company you shall find me a Lion.
--


Have at y'e, Dear Heart.


Hold Woodcock! why should you disparage Poet Ninny, He's a man of admirable
parts, and as cunning a fellow between you and I Stanford, I believe he's a
Jesuite, but I am sure he's a jansenist.


He a Jesuite, that understands neither Greek nor Latin.


Now he talks of that, Stanford, I'll tell thee what a Master I am of those
Languages; I have found out in the Progress of my Study, I must confess with
some diligence, four and twenty Greek and Latin words for Black Puddens
Sausages.


Think to huff me? I could show you a matter of 200 wounds I got when I was a
Volunteer aboard the Cambridge, Dear Heart, would make you swooned to look upon
'em.


Cambridge, well that Cambridge is a good ship, and do you know, Stanford, that
I understand a Ship better then any thing in the World.


Do you speak, Madam, you are pleased with this --


Methinks you are as troublesome as he.


You may talk of your Petts and your Deanes, ^le build a Ship with any of em
for 10000. pound.


What will become of me, for if I should go, they would follow me.


This is extremely well Painted. --


Painted? Why? Do you understand Painting?


Not I Sir.


I do; if you please leave that to me: 'Tis true, Michael Angelo, Titian,
Raphael, Tintaret, and Iulio Romano, and Paulo Veronese were very pretty
hopeful Men; but I would you saw a Peace of mine, I showed you my Magdalen,
Emilia, and I protest I drew that in half an hour.


O! What shall I do to get rid of all these Tormentors.


I cannot but like this Woman, yet what ere's the matter; and yet I am sure she
is impertinent.


Let me see. H. H. -- Oh Dear! Hans Holbin, here are Strokes, here's Mastery;
well, no man in England shall deceive me in Hans Holbins hand, take that from
me.





In good earnest, L^vel, that's very pleasant Han's Holbin; why 'tis a new Sign
for my Landlord, finished but yesterday, that cost him a Noble the Painting,
done by a Fellow that Paints Posts, and Rails, one Humphrey Hobson, and he
calls him Hans-Holbin.


Indeed Mr. Woodcock, fifty miles in a day was well run.


'I faith was't Dear Heart.


Run; why, Why will you pretend to running in my Company; you run, why I have
run sixty miles in a day by a Ladies Coach, that I fell in Love withal in the
streets, just as she was going out of Town, Stanford; and yet I vow to thee I
was not breathed at all that time.





Positive and Poet Ninny are excellent men, and brave Bully-Rocks; But they
must grant, that neither of em understand Mathematics but my self.


Mathematics; why, Whose that talks of Mathematics, let em alone, let em
alone: Now you shall see Stanford.


Why, 'twas I Dear Heart.


I dear heart, quoth he; I don't think you understand the principles on it; 'o
my Conscience you are scarce come so far yet as the squaring of the Circle, or
finding out the Longitude Mathematics: Why this is the only thing I value my
self upon in the World Cozen Emilia.


Heaven! deliver me.


Curse on em all. -- Well, there must be something more in this Woman then I
imagine.


England plays better upon the Cittern then I do, ask George my Barber else,
Madam, he's a great Judge.


Cittern, Cittern! Who named a Cittern there? Who was't* Who was't?


Now am I afraid to speak to him, he does so snub one: ^Twas I and please you
Sir Positive


You talk of a Cittern before me? when I invented the Instrument.


-- Stand up to him in Mathematics; To him.


Say you so, well then, By the Lord Harry, Sir Positive, I do understand
Mathematics better then you; and I lye over against the Rose-Taverne in
Coven-Garden, Deart Heart.


I will justify with my Sword that you understand nothing at all on it -- Draw.


Nay, hold, hold, I have done Bully-Rock, if you be so angry; but it's a hard
case you won't give a man leave to understand a little Mathematics in your
Company, Dear Heart.


Pox on it, I have told thee often enough of this, thou wilt still be putting
thy self forward to things thou dost not understand.


This Impudence is beyond all example, and there is no possibility of getting
from em.


I'll tell you one thing, Cozen, you cannot understand.


I'll be hanged then.


You cannot Cheat at Dice.


Ha, ha; Why you don't know me sure, you never heard of me.


Metaphysics.


Faith, well thought on, Lovel, prithee put me in mind of that presently, if I
don't give you that account of Metaphisicks shall make you stare again, cut my
throat: But, as I hope to live, Stanford, 'tis a strange thing Carolina should
be so near a Kin to me and not know me! False Dice, I have spent my time very
well indeed, if any man out-does me in that; for your Goades, your High
Fullams, and Low Fullams, your Cater Deuse Ace, and your Size Cater-Deuse, your
sink Trey Ace, your Barr Cater-Trey, your Barr-Sink-Deuse, your Barr-Sise-Ace,
and all that, when I have studied em these sixteen years -- Cozen Emilia, you
know this, don't you?


Oh horrid! What will become of me?


Sure I was mistaken, for this must be a Woman of sense, I love her extremely,
I would I did not.


But what was that, Lovel, I desired you to put me in mind of?


Ledger, De-Maine.


Good, there 'tis now; I had thought I had kept that quality to my self of all
things in the World: sure the Devil must help thee, Lovel, How coud'st thou
come to know that I understood Leger-de-maine else? why, I'll perform all
Tricks of Leger-de maine with any man in England, let him be what he will; For
the Cups and Balls, Iack-in-a-Pulpit, St. Andrewes-Cross.


Undoubtedly, Lovel, Cardinal Mazarine was a great States-man.


States-man do you say? Cardinal Mazarine a States-man? well, I will say
nothing of my self for that; no, I am no States-man: But, you may please to
remember, who was bobbed at Ostend, ha, ha, What say you Stanford?


O Heaven! Can you contrive no way of escaping?


Let's even try what we can do, for we had better be with one another then with
these Fools.


Betwixt you and I, was the man that managed all that business against him.


Good lack a day, Madam, this Gentleman has a bottomless understanding.


He's a very rare man, and has great power and imagination.


As any man in Europe, dear heart.


This very thing has made me so famous all over Europe, that I may be at this
instant Chief Minister of State in Russia, but the truth on it is, Stanford, I
expect that nearer home.


Iacob Halls a most admirable Rope-Dancer, Mr. Woodcock.


Honest Roger! How the Devil coud'st thou find me out in that, Iacob Hall has
told thee, has he not? I thought he would have kept that to himself; but I
taught him, nay, I taught the Turk himself.


Hey, from a States-man to a Rope-Dancer, What a leap was there?


My Maid is excellent at Pastry.


Ha, why there tis* now upon my Honour I understand this ten times better then
any thing I have spoke off yet, Pastery, why, the Devil take me if I would not
be content never to eat pie but of my own making as long as I live; I'll tell
you, when I was but four years old, I had so rich a fancy, and made such
extraordinary dirt pies, that the most eminent Cooks in all London, would come
and observe me, to steal from me.


I beseech you, Madam Emilia, take notice of Sir Positive, he is a Prodigy of
understanding.


Ah Madam, 'tis your pleasure to say so; but 'twas this made me skilful in the
art of Building, which is the only Art I am proud of in the World; I^le tell
you, Stanford, I have seventeen Modells of the City of London of my own making
(...) the worst of em makes London an other-guess London then (...) like to
be; but no man in England has those Modells of Houses that I have.


This affliction is beyond all example; why the Devil dost thou provoke him to
this?


Were it not a ridiculous thing of me not to please my self?


That's true; but, What will become of us in the mean time?


Heaven knows this door's locked, and there's no escaping at the other.


I'll tell you, Madam, the other day a damned old Rat eat me up a Dining-roome
and Withdrawing-Chamber worth Fifty pound.


A Rat eat up a Dining-Roome and Withdrawing-Room, How could that be?


O fie, Sister, it's no matter how; why, Will you ask him?


Why, I make all my Modells of Houses in Paste; I vow to Gad I am ashamed to
tell you how much it costs me in a year in Milk, Meal, Eggs and Butter.


Dear Sir Positive, I think you understand more the^ ever Solamon did.


No, no, Madam, alas not I, I understand little, but I'll tell you, Madam,
what was said of me the other day, by some great persons that shall be
nameless.


What was that, Sir?


That I was a man of the most universal knowledge of any man in England; but
without comparison the best Poet in Europe.


-- Now Lovel to your post.


Navigation.


Navigation do ye talk of?


Geography.


Geography do ye talk of?


Astronomy.


Astronomy do ye talk of?


Palmestry.


Physic.


Divinity.


Surgery.


Arithmetic.


Logic.


Cookery.


Magic.


Hold, hold, hold, hold!

Navigation, Geography, Astronomy, Palmestry, Physic, Divinity, Surgery,
Arithmetic, Logic, Cookery and Magic: I'll speak to every one of these in
their order; if I don't understand em every one in perfection, nay, if I don't
Fence, Dance, Ride, Sing, Fight a Duel, speak French, Command an Army, play on
the Violin, Bag-pipe, Organ, Harp, Hoboy, Sackbut, and double Curtal, speak
Spanish, Italian, Greek, Hebrew, Dutch, Welch and Irish, Dance a Jig, throw
the Barr, Swear, Drink, Swagger, VVhore, Quarrel, Cuffe, break Windows, manage
Affairs of State, Hunt, Hawke, Shoot, Angle, play at Catt, Stoolball,
Scotch-hopp and Trap-ball, Preach, Dispute, make Speeches. -- Roger.


Hell and Fu^ies.


Oh, oh, --


Nay, hold, I have not told you half, if I don't do all these, and fifty times
mo^e, I am the greatest Owl, Pimp, Monkey, Jack-a-napes, Baboon, Rascal, O^fe,
Ignoramus, Loggerhead, ^ur-dog, Block-head, Buffoone, Jack-pudden, Tony, or
what you will; spit upon me, kick me, cuff me, lugg me by the ears, pull me by
the Nose, tread upon me, and despise me more then the World now values me. --


IF you be my Friend, as you profess to be, you will not deny me this.


I am your Friend, and would not have you perplex your self with what you see
there's no end of; Can this frowardness relieve you?


Good sir, none of your Grave advice, I am resolved to relieve my self, by
abandoning all conversation.


How can you brook Emilia's company?


Pish! she's not altogether so troublesome: ask me no more Questions.


Hah! Does he like her? Thus far my Design thrives: Well! I'll keep em from
you a while: but the Hounds are so eager, they'll never endure pole-hunting
Long. --


You hear, Madam, we are not like to be long free from these inhumane
persecutors.


Why will you call em so? you know I am pleased with em: They are my
Recreation as you were pleased to say.


No, no; you have convinced me of the Contrary: but, How can you blame me for
so easy a Mistake?


You are a very fit Man to despise impertinent people: you are!


'Till be very wisely done to stand muttering here, till the Fools in the next
Room-break-in upon you.


Perhaps as wisely done, as to trust my self with you, as you have behaved
your self.


If you have no more sense then to stay longer: I shall be assured of what I
was but jealous of before.


What would your wisdom have me do now?


The Worst of them would not have asked such a Question: who but you would be
in doubt, or would not fly as a Thief does from a Hue and Cry.


There's no hope of escaping.


Now will you in despair of avoiding them, stay here, and keep em company.


'Twere vain presumption to hope for Liberty by Miracle; they will no more
lose us, then an Attorney will a young Squire that's newly waded into Law; who
will be sure never to leave him till he has brought him out of his depth.


By this rule you should not resist a Man that comes to Ravish you, because
he's like to be too strong for you; but if you did not use the means, your
honesty would be no more admired is that, then your Wisdom in this.





I would run into a fire to be quit of em.


Well! I am content to go along with you, not for your sake, but my own.


Perhaps my inclinations are not much ^like yours.


O Stanford, I can no longer keep them from you, 'tis as easy to stop a
Spring-Tide.


Now, Whose fault was this? a Curse upon your delaying, now 'tis too late to
fly.


Dost talk of flying, Jack; I'll teach thee to do that with the greatest ease
in the World: 'tis true, I heard of a Coxcomb that broke his neck with the
Experiment, but if I had been by him, I would have taught him to have flown
with the best Goss-Hawke in the World.


O! Impudence!


And for my own part for one flight or so, for I will not strain my self for
any mans pleasure; I do it but for my Recreation: I am not mercenary. I will fly
at a Herne with the ^est Jer-Faulcon that ever flew; that's fair.


O very Fair! as can be, by all means Sir learn of him he will do it.


Do it Madam, I think so: I tell you all Elements are alike to me, I could live
in any one of 'em as well as the Earth: 'Tis nothing but a sordid Earthy Nature
in us makes us love the Earth better then any other Element.


I see it is in vain to torment our selves without endeavouring our Liberty.


That's cunningly found out.


Sir, if you can find a way to be rid of Sir Positive, and my Lady Vain, I'll
tell you how to quit your selves of the other.


We may set 'em one upon another, and by that we may either get rid or (at
least) be a little revenged of 'em.


That may make some amends for your last neglect.


Now they are settled in their business, I'll leave 'em and go to my Tyrewoman
in Coven-Garden, who has some Excellent new Patterns of Lace for me, will you
please to Squire me along.


I hope you have no design upon me: are your Intentions honourable?


Yes indeed are they, I intend no rape upon you.


Nor any other unlawful way of love.


Leave fooling, and let's away -- Ex. Lov. Car.


Jack Stanford when I swam over again.


'Sdeath I would you were under water one half hour in the mean time.


Faith I would I were Jack, thou would admire to see what pleasure I take in
lying under Water an hour or two, especially if the Water be warm!


Yes, yes, and you can eat fire too? can't ye?


P'shaw! you admire a man that eats fire among you, one that has a depraved
palate, and is not able to taste an Ash from an Oak-Coal, which I can
distinguish as well as I can a pickled Herring from a Muscle.


Eat fire it is Impossible?


You are a Fop, I pity your ignorance, eat fire? Why I'll eat Fire and
Brimstone with the Devil himself man, what dost talk of that?


Sir Positive.


What am I forced to? Master Ninny, you have often professed some kindness to me.


And Madam may I never make Couplet again if I don't love you better then I do
Music or Poetry.


And understand me as little --
I shall soon make trial of you.

And before George if I do not serve you! --


Then be sure the next thing Sir Positive pretends to: Contradict him in, and
be as Positive as he is, and by this perhaps, you may deserve my kindness.


But suppose, Madam, he should draw upon me, and do me a Mischief.


Master Stanford and his man will bail you from that.


In confidence of this I shall be glad to serve you.


I wonder, dear Sir, a man of your incomparable Ability's should want
preferment.


Modesty! modesty! we that are modest men get nothing in this age.


Perhaps the World does not know of these things!


Not know! why I was never in Company with any man in my life; but I told him
all.


And no man ever believed you, Dear Heart.


As I hope to breath, Jack this fellow's mad.


Ne'er tell me, Dear Heart, I know you understand nothing of all you have
pretended to in comparison of me, Dear Heart.


Is not this very pleasant, Madam, ha, ha.


Nay, nay, never laugh for the matter, and think to bear up against all the
World, do you think I don't think my self a better Poet then you.


And I a better Musician;


You Impudent Baboons!


Let him alone, let him alone Woodcock.


Ay, ay, alas I laugh at him: ha, ha, ha.


Madam, the party has stayed for you a good while at the setting Dog and
Partridge.


Come, while they dispute, let's go --


Nay, Madam, if you don't stay to prevent Mischief, I have done: for I find I
begin to grow furious, and dare not trust my own temper.


Have you the Impudence to say you are a better Poet, and you a better Musician
than I am?


Ay, ay, and not only so, but a better Divine, Astrologer, Mathematician,
Geographer, Seaman --


A better Physician, Lawyer, States-man, Almanac-maker.


Ay, and what shall break your heart, a better Trap-ball-player too, take
notice of that --


In one word, I understand every thing that is or is not to be understood
better then you do: take that from me.


And let me tell you, Sir Positive, 'tis a very confident thing in you to
pretend to understand any thing as well as I do.


O Impudence!


You understand! how should you come by understanding. Where had you you^
Knowledge, Dear Heart? P'shaw.


What will this age come to?


You Insolence makes me blush, as I hope to breath, for such an empty fellow to
talk of wit or sense; p'shaw, prithee hold thy Tongue.


I am amazed!


I tell thee, dear Soul, I love thee so well, I would not have thee pretend to
these things thou dost not understand.


Especially before such men as we that do understand.


I can hold no longer, ye eternal Dogs, ye Currs, ye Ignorant Whelps: I'll
sacrifice ye, let me go: if there be no more sons of Whores in England, I'll
murder 'em.


Bear up to him, I'll prevent all Injuries.


Nay then Sir; never fret and fume for the matter: look you Sir, pray what can
you do better then I?


Or I either: let's hear't, Dear Heart.


Hear it you Rascals, I'll rout an Army with my single valour: I'll burn a
whole fleet at three Leagues distance; I'll make ship^ go all over the world
without sails: I'll plow up rocks steep as the Alps in dust, and lave the
Tyrrhene Waters into Clouds (as my friend Cateline says.)


P'shaw! you! I'll pluck bright honour from the pale faced Moon (as my friend
Hot-spur says) what do you talk of that?


Certainly, he's distracted! this is some revenge.


This single head of mine shall be the balance of Christendom: and by the
strength of this I'll undermine all Common wealths, destroy all Monarchies, and
write Heroic Plays: ye dogs let me see either of you do that.


This is raving madness.


Would I were well ^id of him, I tremble every joint of me.


With this right hand I'll pluck up Kingdoms by the roots, depopulate whole
Nations, burn Cities, murder Mat^ons, and ravish sucking Infants, your Currs
can you do this?


But Sir in the midst of your fury my Lady Vain is gone away with a Gentleman.


Ah dear Roger which way did she go? show me quickly I'll bring her back and
she shall see me take satisfaction of these Rascals. --


I'm glad you are gone, Sir, my heart was at my mouth, did I not do the
business rarely, my pretty Rogue? How can thou reward me for this? hah?


Unfortunate Woman! what am I reduced to? if you will go immediately to Oxford
Kates, and stay for me in the great Room there, I will not fail to come to you
in a little time. And let you know how sensible I am of this favour; go, go
instantly and make no words on it.


I fly, Madam, O dear Roger: I have caught her, O Rogue! I'll provide a parson
immediately: dear son of Whore let me kiss thee. --


I shall have a better opinion of her Wit then ever I had, if she gets rid of
this brace of Iack-Puddens.


Ay Madam, you see what danger I have undergone: I am only unhappy I have lost
no blood in the service: for as a Noble Author says, -- It would have been to
me both loss and gain. But shall I hope for any favour from you.


Let not Stanford perceive any thing; go and stay for me at Oxford Kates in the
great Room, and there we may freely speak our Minds.


And will you not fail to come?


No, no, but what ever happens remove not till I come to you: away, away, we
are observed.


O admirable Fortune! sure I was born with a Caul on my Head, and Wrapped in my
Mothers Smock, the Ladies do so love me.


I would these Two fools were obliged to stay there till I came to 'em.


Now I hope you will take Warning, and stay here no longer, where they may find
you out, unless you take pleasure in 'em.


Where can I find a place of safe retreat?


I have a sister lives in Coven-garden a Tyre-woman, where at this time of
night you may be private: if you please command the house.


Make haste then! O Heaven is he returned?


Pox on it I can't find my Mistress; where are these Rogues?


My Lady Vain is returned, and Ninny and Woodcock are with her in the next
room.


Say you so? I'll in and first make the Puppy's recant their errors, and then
murder 'em in presence of my Mistress.


So! you are fast.


Come away, away!


Stanford open the door, are you mad? hey Stanford! Cozen Emilia! open the
door.


What is the house empty? -- 'Twas an unlucky thing That the Gentlemen should
go before we came.


That may thank Sir Positive; would he were far enough for me for keeping your
Ladyship so long.


Stanford: Emilia! open the door! there! help, help! help.


That's his voice! what can be the matter? the Key is in the door, I'll in and
see --


O Madam! your humble servant! If I don't murder Stanford may I never have any
share in your Ladyships favour.


Did he lock you in?


Yes, Madam, for which with this blade that is inur'd to slaughter, will I
slice him into Atoms.


No sweet Sir Positive restrain your passion, such a fellow (...) he deserves
to be tossed in a blanket.


No, no, never talk of that Madam! Such a Revenge is below me, but I have a Pen
that will bite and I'll do it vigorously. And yet the Rogue has done me a
kindness: for if he had not locked me up, I had missed of your Ladyship.


Sir, upon my honour, I intended not to have stayed from you!


But Madam, the loss of you has put me into that fright that I desire to make
sure of you.


As how, good Sir?


To marry you this Night!


That's short Wa^ning.


But Madam, I have had your promise these three days And that's long enough to
expect performance.


Madam! even take him at his Word.


But how shall I answer that to my friend in the Country?


Ne'er trouble your self for that Madam, 'tis fashionable to have a servant as
well as a husband, and besides the pleasure of a Gallant, there will be
another, which is no small one to some women, of deceiving your husband.


Thou art in the right Wench: besides the failing of this assignation has set
me so a Gogg I would very unwillingly lye alone to night.


Come Madam, I see you are consulting: I'll send for a Parson shall soon finish
the debate.


Well Sir! Your Intentions are so honourable, I submit to you.


O intolerable happiness: Let's dispatch it immediately in this house.


No Sir! I'll carry you to a more private place.


Come Madam, I'll wait on you. --


Now I have dispatch'd this important business of woman-kind, which is making
themselves fine, we may return


To the place from whence we came, and from thence to the place of Execution;
if you please: I'll have a Levi^e ready.


No Sir, I know you are too true a Son of the Church to venture that after the
Canonical hour.


I am not so formal to observe a Method in any thing besides Marriage, being at
best unseasonable, can never be less then now.


To speak gravely; let us first take the advice of our pillows: since sleep
being a great settler of the brain may be an Enemy to Marriage, for one would
think that few in their right Wits would undertake so unseasonable an action:
as you call it.


Must people then be tamed into Marriage? as they man Hawks with watching.


What's here? my Sister with Stanford?


How unlucky is this, my Sister and an idle fellow with her.


Ne'er trouble your self if your Sister be not a Fop: He's none I'll assure
you.


You are a very Competent Judge indeed.


How now Sister can you with all your gravity steal away by night with a
Gentleman?


Come Stanford: there's Love betwixt you for nothing else can make men and
women so shame faced as to seek out private places.


Come Sister if it be so: ne'er mince the matter, 'tis the way of all flesh.


And we are so far onward on that way that if you don't make haste you will
scarce overtake us.


Come confess Emilia what brought you hither?


I came to fly from Impertinence, and I have found it here.


That will not bring you off Sister: for if you did not like this Gentleman
very well, you would fly from him as soon as any man.


For my part I only came to defend her from Assaults at this time of night.


If you had not an Extraordinary value for her you would not play the
Knight-Errant to my Knowledge; Is not this dissimulation of yours very
ridiculous.


I must needs confess I never saw any Woman I disliked less.


And, What say you Sister of this Gentleman?


To give the Devil his due, I have met with less affliction from him then from
other men.


Nay, then in good earnest it must be a match.


That's wisely proposed of you to me, that am immediately leaving the World.





If you neglect this opportunity, Sister, you'll ne'er be so well matched again.


'Twill not be so pleasant to go alone as you imagine.


No, no, take hands and march along I say.


That would be much to the advantage of my honour.


I'll send for one shall satisfy that scruple, Madam.


The remedy is almost as bad as the Disease.


Perhaps if you consider, it 'twill be your VVisest^ course.


No doubt I should have an admirable Companion of you, as you think.


I find you have so great a passion for the Country Gentleman my Father has
provided for you, you will never be persuaded to be false to him.


He will be the greatest plague of all: What shall I do to be rid of him?


There is but one way Sister; Even dispose of your self to that honest
Gentleman to have and to hold.


'Twill be very discreetly done, not to qu^t your self of this Country Fellow,
and the rest of your Fools, now it is in your power.


Faith, Madam, be persuaded and join hands.


The truth is, I think we cannot do better then to leave the World together:
'twill be very uncomfortable wandering in deserts for you alone.


If I should be so mad as to Join hands with you, 'twould not be so much an
Argument of Kindness to you, as Love to my self; since at best I am forced to
choose the least of two great Evils, either to be quite alone, or to have ill
Company.


This will end in Marriage I see.


O no! I dare not think of that, if he should grow troublesome, then it would be
out of my power to cast him off.


Why there's no necessity we should be such Puppies as the rest of Men and
Wives are, if we fall out, to live together, and quarrel on.


The Conditions of VVedlock are the same to all.


VVhatsoever the Public Conditions are, our private ones shall be, if either
grows a Fop, the other shall have liberty to part.


I must confess that's reasonable.


Away Roger, and fetch a Canonical Gentleman.


I will Sir.


Faith, Madam, you have taken great pains, Was't for your self or me you did
it?


You have a very civil opinion of your self I see.


O Sir! yonder's Sir Positive and my Lady Vain just alighted at the Door, with
the man you sent for.


O undone! ruined for ever!


Slife you Rascal, did not you tell me I might be private here?


Pray Sir do not fret, but make your escape out at the back door.


Away, away! quickly for Heavens ^ake!


Come, Madam! let's follow em. --


Will you never leave ones room a little; I tell you I am busy.


So am I, and 'tis my room dear heart, let me tell you that.


Before George, Woodcock, 'tis very Impertinent to trouble one thus.


So 'tis, Ninny, I wonder you'll do it; for my part, a man that had the least
Soul of Poetry in him, would scorn to do this.


What! Do you say I have not a Soul of Poetry in me? I don't love to commend my
self Woodcock; but, now I am forced to it: I must tell you, I have six times as
much power in me, as you have.


You lye dear heart!


Why, you lie then, to tell me that I lye, so you do.


You are a Son of a Whore, dear heart, to tell me I lye.


You are a Son of a VVhore as well as my self, to tell me so, and you go to
that.


I, I, you may say your pleasure; but have a care Bully-Rock, for if you give
me the least affront, I'll break your Pate, take that from me.


I'll take it from no man: if you do; I'll bre^k yours again man, for all you
are so brief: 'Slife, one shall not speak to you one of these days, you are
grown so purdy.


Well! well! Dear Heart!


Well well too! and you go to that: if you be so fierce: But, I'd fain know
what occasion there is for you and I to quarrel now?


Ay, what indeed dear heart; Therefore, prithee Dear Soul Kiss me, Dear Rogue,
if thou love me, go out of my Room.


No, good sweet Woodcock now, go thee, I'll do as much for thee another time,
as I hope to Live.


Dear Cut I love thee; but prithee excuse me, I have a Mistress to meet in
this very Room; Therefore dear pretty Ninzy leave me.


Cods my Life kins to see the luck on it: may I never versify again if I am not
here upon the same occasion: I'll give thee five Guynny's if thou'lt leave me:
I shall spare em well enough when I have got her.


I'd have you know, Ninny, I scorn your Guinny's, alas, poor Fool, he little
thinks I shall be in a better Condition to spare fifty then he can five: Why
then, in short, let me tell you I am to be mar^y'd within this half hour, in
this very Room, dear heart.


This is prodigious! may I never have Play take again if I am not to be married
here within this half hour, and to a very great Fortune too.


So is mine, Bully-Rock!


Dear VVoodcock, let's reconcile this business here; I have two Dice, he that
throws most stays: then am I sure to be too hard for him that way, for I can
nap a Six a-yard.


No, not I: by the Lord Harry, I'll not trust a business of that Concernment to
Fortune.


Nay, then Sir, I will keep my Room, I was first in it.


By that rule you should go first out.


'Tis not you can turn me out.


Say you so: I'll try that!


At your own peril!


Can't you stand a little? Why do you go back so dear heart?


Let me alone, I know what I do in going back, I have the Law on my side, and
if I kill you, it will be found se defendendo.


Ay, ay, Have you murderous Intentions dear heart? If you do kill me, I will
declare upon my Death-bed, That you had Malice in your heart, dear heart.


Who I? as I hope to be saved I scorn your Words: I Malice; do your worst: I am
better known then so: I am not so outrageous: pray hear me a Word: You know we
Authors and Ingenious Men have a great many Enemies.


We have so.


At this rate we may kill one another: and a Pox on em they'd be glad on it;
and for my part I would not dye to please any of em.


Nor I neither; therefore prithee leave me my Room, to prevent danger.


I am not so base: but, if you will, let us lay down these dangerous Engines of
Blood, and Contend a safer way, by the way of Cuffe and Kick.


Ay, ay, with all my heart; what a Pox care I: come, come, you shall see I dare
do any thing, since you are resolved to try me.


Here we are in as much danger as ever: Could any thing be so foppish as
returning to the place from whence we fled.


'Tis a sweet time of night to go upon the Ramble.


We are safe enough from any body but my Father; and we cannot be troubled with
him long: 'tis his hour of going to Bed.


How shall we dispose of the Country Fellow, if he should return.


Let me alone; I'll find a Trick for him: I lived in the same Town with him,
and know him to be a down-right credulous man, that will swallow any thing.


Now see what you have brought your self to?


Come Daughter, What think you of my choice of a Husband, He's extreme rich;
and, Is he not a very accomplished Gentleman, hah?


There's a Fellow indeed, why he has not Soul enough for a Cock-Chicken.


You are a foolish froward Girl thus to despise your happiness; I'll tell you,
either resolve to Marry him to morrow morning --


Hark you Sir! if you will take my advice, be not so hasty: you know young
Ladies are always Coy, and out of their little knowledge of the World, are apt
to refuse that which may prove their greatest happiness.


What would you have me do with one that is so obstinate?


If you please, take some milder way: let us withdraw, and we'll all help to
persuade her: you know it is not proper to be done before him.


I'll be ^ul'd in this: but if persuasions will not do, force shall.


Be sure you seem pliant to his Commands, it may advance our design.


Sir, we'll wait on you again presently.


Your Servant Sir! -- honest Roger in s^ber sadness I am glad to see you well;
I had almost forgot you.


And, How does your sweet Sister Madam Dorothy?


O brave and lusty, as sound as a Roach, as they say.


I heard your Worship was Knighted.


No* not I Roger: I am not ambitious of that: As that excellent Proverb says;
Honour will buy no Beife.


Now we are alone, Sir, I am obliged to tell you; I am sorry to* see one, whom
I so much honoured, so ill used.


Pish! its no matter man! I care not for Knighthood one pin of my slieve, as
the saying is.


Sir, I mean something concerns your Worship nearer.


Nearer! What can that be?


I must beg your Pardon for that; I may be ruined for my ^deavours to serve
you.


What, Would any of your Town-Gallants bob me of my Mistress?


That were too good news for you to be true?


Thank you for nothing: Is this the honour you have for me, to wish me the loss
of a Mistress worth 10000. l. do ye see; udds nigs that's a good one indeed.


10000. l. Ha, ha, ha; would she had it for her own sake and yours too?


Faith are you there with your Bears? nay then I have brought my Hogs to a
fair Market.


If she had had one of those thousands my Master would have Married her long
e're this; Sir, I have always honoured you, and could not in Conscience but
tell you this, and now it is in your power to ruin me.


Nay, I'll be as silent as a Dormous, but is it possible? --


Nay, do not believe me if you please; but I have discharged my duty: and, if
you Marry her, the Inconvenience will be yours, not mine: Besides, if she had
that Fortune you speak of, which she has as much as I have; What good would it
do you in the end? She'll ner be persuaded to live in the Country, you must keep
her in Town, with her Coach and six Horses, Pages and Lackeys: and she must
visit the Plays, the Park, and the Mulberry-Garden.


O Lamen-table! this were the way to get a pair of Horns bigger then the
Stags head in My-Hall has: but, if I were Married to her, I^d get her into the
Country as sure as a Gun.


If you should, you'd have every week this Earl, that Lord; this Knight, and
that Gentleman of her kindred come to take the fresh Air; and to Hunt and
Hawke with you in time of year.


Why they would eat me out of House and Home, as the saying is.


They would despise your Beife and Mutton: you must keep a Couple of
French-Cookes; and eat nothing but Potages, Fricasces, and Ragusts, your
Champinions, Coxcombs and Palates, your Andoilles, your Langue de porcean,
your Bisks and your Olio's.


What are all these, several sorts of Sweet-Meats.


O no Sir! these must be your constant food, and every Dish will cost you a
Piece; and, Will this be done with a small Portion of a Thousand Pound.


I should soon bring a Noble to Nine-pence then as they say.


Then you must have your Quails, Ruffs, Gnatts, Godwitts, Plover, Dotrills,
Wheat-Eare, Cock of the Wood, and a hundred sorts of Fowls: besides, they
would scorn your Ale and Cider, and March-Beer: you must have your Cellar full
of Champaign, Chablee, Burgundy, and Remedy Wines; But Mum Sir, if you love me.


Come, Sir, I have brought my Daughter to be obedient to my Commands, and I
would have you prepare to be Married to morrow morning,


I shall fail you do ye see.


What is't you say?


I shall not be so civil, as the saying is.


This is madness.


No Sir, no; There's no catching old Birds with Chafe, Fare-you-well.


D'hear Sir!


No, Sir, fare ye well -- I am no Bubble, as they say.


I am amazed! I'll after him; and inquire into the business, I must not lose
this Son-in-Law.


The Rogue has done it dexterously.


Come Sir, here's a Parson in the next Room, dispatch, while the old
Gentleman's out of the House.


'Slife, Wo^dcock's here! I'll cut his Throat.


Pray none of your Hectoring here, to Alarm the House.


How now, Dear Heart! Why did not you come to me as you promised.


For Heavens sake go up into the Room two pair of Stairs, and I'll steal from
hence, and give you an Account: make haste.


Come let's in before we be interrupted again.


Hi'st Madam; before George 'twas unkindly done, not to remember your
assignation just now.


You'll spoil all: I could not get loose; run into the garden there's a back
door: I'll come to you immediately, make haste, we are observed.


O ho! this is something.


This woman has a soul. --


I have pursued him into this house, that has abused me so basely behind my
back, and by this Whiniard, and by the spirit of Gun-powder: I'll sacrifice him
to my fury: Come out you son of a Whore.


That this Puppy should provoke me to draw upon him, that is so drunk he cannot
stand.


That's a mistake, not so drunk yet, but if I had stood soberly to it, I should
have been run through the Lungs before this.


Is there no end of our affliction?


Dear Cozen and Jack Stanford, give me Joy, I am married to a Lady that is the
greatest Pattern of Wit: and the greatest Example of Virtue that this age hath
produced, and for her face look upon it, took upon it I say! she's a beauty take
that from me, what say you Stanford?


Yes, yes, she's cursedly handsome.


If my glass does not flatter me: you are not deceived in your Judgment, dear
Sir.


Here I have brought Fiddles to rejoice with you Jack and Cousin, since I know
you love mirth as well as I do.


I had waited for thee my dear Miss if this unexpected Music had not brought
me hither.


How now? what Fiddles are these?


You dogs are you here? now Madam you shall see how I'll chastise these fellows
that would be Wits.


Hold dear Rogue! why should thou be angry? upon my honour I did but droll
with thee, for by the Lord Harry I take thee to be one of the pillars of the
Nation Dear Heart?


Of do you so?


Dear Sir Positive, I beg your pardon a thousand times, For my part I believe
there never was a man of that prodigious understanding that you have.


Do you so? I knew it was impossible they should be in Earnest, but do you
hear? have a Care of being Positive another time, a man would think you might
learn more Modesty of me.


Come Dear Heart, art thou here: prithee kiss me, and let's be friends for all
our late Cuffing: what need we care for a douce or two of the Chops Bully Rock.


Nay for my part I value it as little as you do, and you go to that.


What Riots this in my house? at this time of night?


Riot! do you understand what a Riot is in Law: I'll tell you: for no man in
this Nation has committed more then I have.


Tell me not of Law Sir? what mean these Fiddles I say at this time of night?


Uncle they are mine: I am married to this Lady, and resolve to be merry in
your house before we go to Bed.


Is that it? give you Joy, your Cozin Emilia and this Gentleman will not be
long after ye.


Sir, you are mistaken, your daughter has disposed her self in another place.


How the devil did he know that Ninny?


He little thinks where she has bestowed her self, ha, ha, ha.


No, no, nor thee neither, dear Rogue, ha, ha, ha.


Well! honest VVoodcock, I think I may trust thee, thou art my Friend; I am the
man she has made choice of, and thou shalt be my Bride man.


Ha, ha, ha, poor whelp! how he will find himself bobbed immediately: that this
Coxcomb should not find all this while that I am the man.


It cannot be what without my Knowledge or Consent?


Ay, ay, she's disposed on; Dear Heart.


Ay, Ay, she's disposed on.


To whom?


To me.


To me.


To me.


How now to all three?


Sir, she has taken Master Stanford, and I Master Lovell as sure as a Parson
can make us.


What do I hear?


Sir, I beseech you be not offended, their Births and Fortunes are not unequal
to ours, and if they were, 'twere too late for it to be redressed.


Is this true?


Yes Sir, perhaps too true.


Am I fooled after all this? well I say no more, Dear Hearts.


Well let the Nation sink or swim an'it will for me: henceforward instead of
Heroic Verse, hereafter I will show all my power, and soul and flame, and
mettle in Lampoon, I durst have sworn she had loved me.


Well! Heaven bless you together since you have don't.


So Sir, I see my Cakes dough, as they say; but I hope you'll pay the Charges of
my Journey do ye see.


Well Cozins I am glad of your good Fortunes, and for my own part, if I
understand any thing in the world I am happy in this Lady.


Sir! you are pleased to Complement.


Sir Positive here's a Letter was left for you, it comes out of the Country.


SIr Positive I am informed, but know not how to believe it, that you intend to
marry one that calls her self my Lady Vain: The respect* I have for your
family urges me to tell you she is a Counterfeit Lady, and is at present my
Mistress, by whom I have had one child, and I believe she's half gone of
another, all the Fortune she has is what I allow her.

I have seen enough, how am I perplexed? read Lovell.

Come Master Woodcock! and Master Ninny notwithstanding you are displeased
let's have your Company a little longer.


Nay for my part, Dear Heart, I do not care what becomes of me?


Nor I neither as little as any man.


Don't betray your self to the Company.


Well! this is the first thing in the World that I have met with which I did
not understand: but I am resolved, I'll not acknowledge that: Master Lovell I
knew well enough what I did when I married her, He's a wise man that marry's a
harlot, he's on the surest side, who butan Ass would marry at uncertainty.


What will not a Positive Coxcomb defend?


Since we are all agreed: in stead of a grand Dance according to the laudable
Custom of Weddings, I have found out a little Comical Gentleman to entertain
you with.


No Wedding day was ever so troublesome as this has been to me.


Make haste and quit the Trouble.
Now to some distant desert let's repair:
And there put off all ^ur unhappy Care,
There certainly that freedom we must find,
Which is denied to us among Mankind.

Physicians tell us, that in every age
Some one particular Disease does rage,
The Scurvy once, and what you call the Gout,
But Heaven be praised their Reign is almost out;
Yet a worse malady then both is bred,
For Poetry now reigns in their stead:
The Itch of writing Plays, the more's the pity,
At once has seized the Town, the Court, and City.
Amongst the rest the Poet of this day*
By mere infection has produced a Play.
Once his hot fit was strong when he was bold
To write, but while you judge he's in the Cold,
Yet pray consider, few of you but may
Be given up so far to write a Play:
If not for his, for your own sakes be kind,
And give that mercy which you hope to find.

