OUr Author sent me hither for a Scout,
To spy what bloody Critics were come out;
Those Piccaroons in Wit, wh'infest this Road,
And snap both Friend and Foe that come abroad.
This savage Party crueller appears,
Than in the Channel Ostend Privateers.
You in this Road, or sink or plunder all,
Remorsle^s as a Storm on us you fall:
But as a Merchant, when by storms distressed,
Flings out his bulkey Goods to save the rest,
Hoping a Calm may come, he keeps the best.
In this black Tempest which o'r us impends,
Near Rocks and Quick sands, and no Ports of Friends,
Our Poet gives this over to your rage,
The most irregular Play upon the Stage,
As wild and as extravagant as the Age.
Now, angry men, to all your splenes give vent;
When all your fury has on this been spent,
Else-where you with much worse shall be content.
The Poet has no hopes you'll be appeased,
Who come on purpose but to be displeased.
Such corrupt Judges should excepted be,
Who can condemn before they hear or see.
Ne'er were such bloody Critics yet in fashion;
You damn by absolute Predestination.
But why so many to run one man down?
It were a mighty triumph when y'have done.
Our scarcity of Plays you should not (...),
When by foul (...) (...) d^siroy the Game.
Let him but have fair play, and he may then
Write himself into favour once again.
If after this your anger you'll reveal,
To Caesar he must make his just appeal;
There Mercy and Judgment equally do m^et,
To pardon Faults, and to encourage Wit.

T

Hus far without a bound we have enjoyed
Our prosperous pleasures, which dull Fools call
[Sins;
Laughed at old feeble Judges, and weak Laws;
And at the fond fantastic thing, called Conscience,
Which serves for nothing but to make men Cowards;
An idle fear of future misery;
And is yet worse than all that we can fear.

Conscience made up of dark and horrid thoughts,
Raised from the fumes of a distempered Spleen.

A senseless fear, would make us contradict
The only certain Guide, Infallible Nature;
And at the call of Melancholy Fools,
(Who stile all actions which they like not, Sins)
To silence all our Natural appetites.

Yet those conscientious Fools, that would persuade us
To I know not what, which they call Piety,
Have in reserve private delicious sins,
Great as the happy Libertine enjoys,
With which, in corners, wantonly they roll.

Don John, thou art our Oracle; thou hast
Dispelled the fumes which once clouded our brains.

By thee, we have got loose from Education,
And the dull slavery of Pupillage,
Recovered all the liberty of Nature,
Ou^ own strong Reason now can go alone,
Wi^out the feeble props of splenetic Fools,
Who contradict our common Mother, Nature.

Nature gave us our Senses, which we please:
Nor do^ our Reason War against our Sense.
(...) Natur^s order Sense should guide our Reason,
(...) to the mind all objects Sense conveys.
(...) ^ools for shadows lose substantial pleasures,
^or idle ^ales abandon ^rue d^light,
And solid joys of day, for empty dreams at night.
Away, thou foolish thing, thou colic of the mind,
Thou Worm by ill-digesting stom^chs bred:
In spite of thee, well surfeit in delights,
And never think ought can be ill that's pleasant.

A most excellent Sermon, and no doubt, Gentlemen, you have edisi'd much by it.


Away! thou formal phlegmatic Coxcomb, thou
Hast neither courage nor yet wit enough
To sin thus. Thou art my dull conscientious Pimp.
And when I am wanton with my Whore within,
Thou, with thy Beads and Pray'r-book, keep the door.

Sir, I find your Worship is no more afraid to be damned, than other
fashionable Gentlemen of the Age: but, me-thinks, Halters and Axes should
terrisie you. With reverence to your Worships, I've seen civiller men hanged,
and men of as pretty parts too. There's scarce a City in Spain but is too hot
for you, you have committed such outrages wheresoe'r you come.


Come, for diversion, pray let's hear your Fool preach a little.


For my part, I cannot but be troubled, that I shall lose my honour by you,
Sir; for people will be apt to say, Like Master, like Man.


Your honour, Rascal, a Sow-gelder may better pretend to it.


But I have another scruple, Sir.


What's that?


I fear I shall be hanged in your company.


That's an honour you will ne'er have courage to deserve.


It is an honour I am not ambitious of.


Why does the Fool talk of hanging? we scorn all Laws.


It seems so* or you would not have cut your Elder Brother's throat. Don Lopez.


Why, you Coxcomb, he kept a good Estate from me* and I could not Whore and
Revel fufficiently without it.


Look you, Jacomo, had he not reason?


Yes, Antonio, so had you to get both your Sisters with Child; 'twas very
civil, I take it.


Yes, you Fool, they were lusty young handsome Wenches, and pleased my
appetite. Besides, I saved the Honour of the Family by it* for if I had not,
some body else would.


O horrid villainy!
But you are both Saints to my hopeful Master*
I'll turu him loose to Beelzebub himself,
He shall out-do him at his own Weapons.

I, you Rascal.


Oh no, Sir, you are as innocent. To cause your good old Father to be killed
was nothing.


It was something, and a good thing too, Sir: his whole design was to debar
me of my pleasures: he kept his purse from me, and could not be content with
that, but still would preach his senseless Morals to me, his old dull foolish
stuff against my pleasure. I caused him to be sent I know not whether. But he
believed he was to go to Heaven; I care not where he is, since I am rid of him.


Cutting his throat was a very good return for his begetting of you.


That was before he was aware on it, 'twas for his own sake, he ne'er thought of
me in the business.


Heaven bless us!


You Dog, I shall beat out your brains, if you dar^ be so impudent as to pray
in my company.


^ood Sir, I have done, I have done --


Prithee let the insipid Fool go on.


Let's hear the Coxcomb number up your crimes,
The patterns we intend to imitate.

Sir, let me lay your horrid crimes before you:
The unhappy minute may perhaps arrive,
When the sense of 'em may make you penitent.

'Twere better thou were it hanged.


Repent! Cowards and Fools do that.


Your valiant well-bred Gentlemen never repent:
But what should I repent of?

After the murder of your Father, the brave Don Pedro, ^overnour of Sevil, for
whom the Town are still in grief, was, in his own house, barb'rously killed by
you.


Barbarously, you lie, you Rascal, 'twas finely done; I run him through the
Lungs as handsomely, and killed him as decently, and as like a Gentleman as
could be. The jealous Coxcomb deserved death, he kept his Sister from me; her
eyes would have killed me if I had not enjoyed her, which I could not do
without killing him: Besides, I was alone, and killed him hand to fist.


I never knew you go to Church but to take Sanctuary for a Murder, or to rob
Churches of their Plate.


Heaven needs not be served in Plate, but I had use on it.


How often have you scaled the Walls of Monasteries? Two Nuns, I know, you
ravished, and a third you dangerously wounded for her violent resistance.


The perverse Jades were uncivil, and deserved such usage.


Some thirty Murders, Rapes innumerable, frequent Sacrilege, Parricide; in
short, not one in all the Catalogue of Sins have escaped you.


My business is my pleasure, that end I will always compass, without scrupling
the means; there is no right or wrong, but what conduces to, or hinders
pleasure. But, you tedious insipid Rascal, if I hear more of your Morality, I
will Carbonado you.


We live the life of Sense, which no fantastic thing, called Reason, shall
control.


My reason tells me, I must please my Sense.


My appetites are all I'm sure I have from Heaven, since they are Natural, and
them I always will obey.


I doubt it not, Sir, therefore I desire to shake hands and part.


Do ye hear, Dog, talk once more of parting, and I will saw your Wind-pipe. I
could find in my heart to cut your Rascal's Nose off, and save the Pox a
labour: I'll do it, Sir, have at you.


Good Sir, be not so transported; I will live, Sir* and will serve you in any
thing; I'll fetch a Wench, or any thing in the world Sir. O how I tremble at
this Tyrant's rage.


Come, 'tis night, we lose time to our adventures.


I have bespoke Music for our Serenading.


Let's on, and live the noble life of Sense.
To all the powers of Love and mighty Lust,
In spite of formal Fops I will be just.
What ways soe'r conduce to my delight,
My Sense instructs me, I must think 'em right.
On, on, my Soul, and make no stop in pleasure,
They're dull insipid Fools that live by measure.

What will become of me? if I should leave him, he's so revengeful, he would
travel o'r all Spain to find me out, and cut my throat. I cannot live long with
him neither: I shall be hanged, or knocked of the head, or share some dreadful
Fate or other with him. 'Tis just between him and me, as between the Devil and
the Witch, Who repents her bargain, and would be free from future ills, but for
the fear of present durst not venture.

Here comes Leonora, one of those multitudes of Ladies, he has sworn, li'd to,
and betrayed.


Jacomo, where is Don John? I could not live to endure a longer absence from
him. I have sighed and wept my self away I (...) but ^ve no lif^ le^ in me. His
coldness and his absence (...) gi^en me fearful and killing (...). Where is my
Dear?


Your Dear, Madam! he's yours no more.


Heaven! what do I hear? Speak, is he dead?


To you he is.


Ah me, has he forgot his Vows and Oaths?
Ha^ ^e no Conscience, Faith, or Honour left?

Le^, Madam, he ne'er had any.


It is impossible, you speak this out of malice sure.


There's no man knows him better than I do. I have a greater respect for you,
than for any he has betrayed, and will undeceive you: he is the most perfidious
Wretch alive.


Has he forgot the Sacred Contract, which was made privately betwixt us, and
confirmed before the altar, during the time of holy Mass?


All times and places are alike to him.


Oh how assiduous was he in his passion! how many thousand vows and sighs he
breathed! what tears he wept, seeming to suffer all the cruel pangs which
Lovers ever endured! how eloquent were all his words and actions!


His person and his parts are excellent, but his base vices are beyond all
measure: why would you believe him?


My own love bribed me to believe him: I saw the man I loved more than the
world. Oft on his knees, with his eyes up to Heaven, kissing my hand with such
an amorous heat, and with such ardor, breathing fervent vows of loyal Love, and
venting sad complaints of extreme sufferings. I poor easy Soul, flattering my
(...) to think he meant as I did, lost all my Sexes faculty, Di^embling; and in
a month must I be thus betrayed?


Poor Lady! I cannot but have bowels for you; your sad Narration makes me weep
in sadness: but you are better (...) than others. I ne'er knew him constant a
fortnight before.


Then, then he promised he would marry me.


If he were to live here one month longer, he would marry half the Town, ugly
and handsome, old and young: nothing that's Female comes amiss to him --


Does he not fear a thunde^ bolt from Heaven.


No, nor a D^vil from ^ll. He owns no Deity but his voluptuous appetite, whose
satisfaction he will compass by Murders, Rapes, Treasons, or ought else. But
pray let me ask you one civil question, Did you not give him earnest of your
Body, Madam.


Mock not my misery.

Oh! that confounds me. Ah! I thought him true, and loved him so, I could deny
him nothing.


Why, there 'tis; I fear you have, or else he would have marri'd you: he has
marri'd six within this month, and promised fifteen more, all whom he has
enjoyed, and left, and is this night gone on some new adventure, some Rape or
Murder, some such petty thing.


Oh Monster of impiety!
Oh false Don John! wonder of cruelty!

What a pox does she swooned at the news! Alas! poor Soul, she has moved me now
to pity, as she did to love. Ha! the place is private -- If I should make use
of a Natural Receipt to refresh her, and bring her to life again, 'twould be a
great pleasure to me, and no trouble to her. Hum! 'tis very private, and I dare
sin in private. A deuce take her, she revives, and prevents me.


Where is the cruel Tyrant! inhumane Monster! but I will strive to fortify my
self. But Oh my misfortune! Oh my misery! Under what strange Enchantments am I
bound? Could he be yet a thousa^d times more impious, I could not choose but
love his person still.


Be not so passionate; if you could be (...), a^d love your self, I'd put you
in a way to ease your gri^f now, and all your cares hereafter.


If you can now ease an afflicted Woman, who ^lse must shortly rid her self of
life, employ your charity; 'twas never placed yet on a Wretchneeded it more
than I.


If Loyalty in a Lover be a Jewel! say no more, I can tell you where you may
have it --


Speak not of truth in man, it is impossible.


Pardon me, I speak on my own knowledge.


Is your Master true then? and have you happily deceived me? Speak.


As true as all the power of Hell can make him.


If he be false, let all the world be so.


There's another-guess man than he, Madam.


Another! who can that be?
No, no, there's no truth found in the Sex.

He is a civil virtuous and discreet sober person.


Can there be such a man? what does he mean?


There is, Madam, a man of goodly presence too --
Something inclining to be fat, of a round plump face, with quick and sparkling
eyes, and mouth of cheerful overture --
His nose, which is the only fault, is somewhat short, but that's no matter;
his hair and eye-brows black, and so forth.

How! he may perhaps be bribed by some other man, and what he said of his
Master may be false.


How she surveys me! Fa-la-la


Who is this you speak of?


A man, who, envy must confess, has excellent parts, but those are gifts, gifts
-- mere gifts -- thanks be to Heaven for them.


But shall I never know his name?


He's one, whom many Ladies have honoured with their affection; but no more of
that. They have met disdain, and so forth. But he'll be content to marry you.
Fa-la-la-la


Again I ask you who he is?


Lord, how inapprehensive she is? Can you not guess?


No.


Your humble Servant, Madam.


Yours, Sir.


It is my s^lf in person; and upon my honour, I will be true and constant to
you.


Insolent Varlet! am I fallen so low to be thy scorn?


Scorn! as I am a Christian Soul, I am in earnest.


Audacious Villain! Impudence it self!


Ah, Madam* your Servant, your true Lover must endure a thousand such bobs from
his M^stris; I can bear, Madam, I can.


Because thy Master has betrayed me, am I become so infamous?


'Tis something hard, Madam, to preserve a good reputation in his company; I
can scarce do it my self.


Am I so miserable to descend to his man?


Descend, say you: Ha, ha, ha!


Now I perceive all's false which you have said of him. Farewell, you base
ing^ateful Fellow.


Hold, Madam, come in the morning and I will place you in the next room, where
you shall over-hear our discourse. You'll soon discover the mistake, and find
who 'tis that loves you. Retire, Madam, I hear some body coming.


Let me see, here lives a Lady: I have seen Don Octavio haunting about this
house, and making private signs to her. I never saw her face, but am resolved
to enjoy her, because he likes her; besides, she's another Woman.

Antonio, welcome to our place of rendezvous. Well, what game! what adventure!

Come, dear Lopez.


I have had a rare adventure.


What, dear Antonio?


I saw at a Vill^ not far off, a grave mighty bearded Fool, drinking Lemonado
with his Mistress; I mislik'd his face, plucked him by the Whiskers, pulled all
one side of his Beard off, fought with him, run him through the thigh, carried
away his Mistress, served her in her kind, and then let her go.


Gallantly performed, like a brave Soldier in an Enemies Country: When they
will not pay Contribution, you fight for Forage.


Pox on it, I have been damnably unfortunate; I have neither beat man, nor lain
with Woman to night, but fallen in love most furiously: I dogged my new Mistress
to her Lodging; she's Don B^rnardo's Sister, and shall be my Punk.


I could meet with no willing Dame, but was fain to commit a Rape to pass away
the time.


Oh! a Rape is the joy of my heart; I love a Rape, upon my Clavis, exceedingly.


But mine, my Lads, was such a Rape, it ought to be Registered; a noble and
heroic Rape.


Ah! dear Don John!


How was it?


'Twas in a Church, Boys.


Ah! Gallant Leader!


Renowned Don John!


Come, let's retire, you have done enough for once.


Not yet, Antonio, I have an Intrigue here.

Here are my Fiddlers. Rank your selves close under this Window, and sing the
Song I prepared.


THou joy of all hearts, and delight of all eyes,
Nature's chief Treasure, and Beauty's chief Prize,
Look down, you'll discover,
Here's a faithful young vigorous Lover;
With a heart full as true,
As ever languished for you;
Here's a faithful young vigorous Lover.
The Heart that was once a Monarch in's breast,
Is now your poor Captive, and can have no rest;
'Twill never give over,
But about your sweet bosom will hover.
Dear Miss, let it in,
By Heaven 'tis no sin;
Here's a faithful young vigorous vigorous Lover.
Now Fiddlers, be gone.


Retire, my Dear Octavia; read that Note. Adieu.


Good, she takes me for Octavio. I warrant you, Boys, I shall succeed in this
adventure. Now my false Light assist me.

Go from this Window, within eight minutes you shall be admitted to the Garden
door. You know the Sign.

Ha! the Sign, Gad she lies, I know not the Sign.


What will you do? you know not the Sign. Let's away, and be contented this
night.


My friends, if you love me, retire. I'll venture, though Thunderbolts should
fall upon my head.


Are you mad? as soon as she discovers the deceit, she'll raise the house upon
you, and you'll be murdered.


She'll not raise the house for her own sake, but rather grant me all I ask to
keep her counsel.


'Tis very dangerous: be care^al of your self.


The more danger, the more delight: I hate the common road of pleasure. What!
can I fear at such a time as this! The cowardly Deer are valiant in their
Rutting time. I say, Be gone --


We'll not dispute your commands. Good luck to you.


How shall I know this devilish* Sign?

Ha! whom have we hear? some Serenading Coxcomb. Now shall we have some damned
Song or other, a Cloris, or a Phillis at least.


^hen you disperse your influence,
Your dazzling Beams are quick and clear,
You so surprise and wound the sense,
So bright a Miracle y'appear.
Admiring Mort^ls you asto^ish so,
No other Deity they know,
But think that all Divinity's be low --
One charming look from your illustrious Face,
Were able to subdue Mankind,
So sweet, so powerful a Grace
Makes all men Lovers but the blind:
Nor can they freedom by resistance gain,
For each embraces the soft Chain,
And never struggles with the pleasant pain.

Be gone! be gone! the Window opens.


'Sdeath! this is Octavio. I must dispatch him, or he'll spoil all; but I would
fain hear the Sign first.


What strange mistake is this? Sure he did not receive* my Note, and then I am
ruined.


She expects the Sign. Where's my Whistle? O here.


I have found it, that must be the Sign --


I dare not speak aloud, go to the Garden door.


'Sdeath, what Ruffian's this?


One that will be sure to cut your throat.


Make not a promise to your self of what you cannot perfo^m.


I warrant you. Have at you.


O Heaven! Octavio's fighting. Oh my heart!


Oh! I am slain --


I knew I should b^ as good as my word. I think you have it, Sir -- Ha! (...)
he's dying -- Now for the Lady -- I'll draw him further off, that his groans
may not disturb our pleasure -- Stay -- by your leave, Sir, I'll change Hat and
Cloak with you, it may help me in my design.


O barbarous Villain!


They have done fighting, and I hear no noise. Oh unfortunate Woman! my dear
Octavio's killed --


Perhaps, Madam, he has killed the other. I'll down to the Garden door; if he
be well, he'll come ^hither, as well to satisfy his appointment, as to take
refuge. Your Brother's safe, he may come in securely --


Haste! haste! Fly! fly! Oh Octavio. I'll follow her.


Now for the Garden door. This Whistle will do me excellent service. Now good
luck --


Octavio?


The same.


Heaven be praised, my Lady thought you had been killed.


I am unhurt: let's quickly to her.


Oh! he'll be over-joy'd to see you alive.


I'll make her more over-joy'd before I have don^ with ^er. This is a rare
adventure!


Here's your Jewel, Madam, speak softly.


O my dear Octavio! have I got you within these arms?


Ay, my Dear, unpierc'd by any thing but by your eyes.


Those will do you no hurt. But are you sure you are not wounded?


I am. Let me embrace my pretty Dear; and yet she may be a Blackamoor for ought
I know --


We'll reti^e to my Chamber. Flora, go out, and prepare us a Collation.


O admirable adventure! Come, my Delight.


Where's my pious Master?


We left him hereabouts. I wonder what he has done in his adventure: I believe
he has had ^ome bustle.


I thought I heard fighting hereabout.


Gad forgive me! fighting! where! where!


O thou incorrigible Coward!


See, here's some of his handy-wor^* here's a man killed*


Another murder. Heaven, what wi^ become of me? ^ shall be hanged, yet dare not
^un away ^om h^m.


Stand! who are there?


We do stand, Rascal, we never use to run.


Now shall I be taken and hanged for my Master's murder.


Stand, you Dog! offer once more to run, and I'll put Bilbow in your guts.


Gad forgive me! what will become of me?


What's here? a man murdered? yield, you are my prisoners.


With all my heart! but as I hope to be saved, we did not kill him, Sir


These must be the murderers, disarm 'em.


How now, Rascal! disarm us!


We are not used to part with our Swords.


I care not a farthing for my Sword, 'tis at your service.


Do you hear, Rascal; keep it, and fight, or I'll swear the murder against you.


Offer to flinch, and I'll run you through.


Take their Swords, or knock 'em down.


A pox on it, I had as good fight and die, as be taken and be hanged.


Are you gone, you Dogs? I have pinck'd some of you.


Ah Rogues! Villains! I have met with you.


O brave Jacomo! you fought like an imprisoned Rat: The Rogue had concealed
Courage, and did not know it.


O Cowards! Rascals! a man can get no honour by fighting with such Poletroons!
but for all that, I will prudently withdraw, this place will suddenly be too
hot for us.


Once in your life you ar^ in the right, Jacomo.


O good Sir, there is as much to be ascribed to Conduct, as to Courage, I
assure you.


Speak softly, my Dear; should my Brother hear us, we are ruined.


Though I can scarce contain my joy, I will. O she's a rare Creature in the
dark, pray Heaven she be so in the light.


O Heaven! I am ruined and betrayed.


He has Octavio's clothes on.


O he has murdered him. My Brother shall revenge it.


I will cut his throat if he offers it.


Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves!


Thieves! Murder! Murder! Thieves!


I will stop your shrill wind-pipes.


'Sdeath! a man in my Sister's Chamber! Have at you, Villain.


Come on, Villain.


Murder! Murder!


O Villain, thou hast killed my Brother, and dishonoured me.

O your Master's murdered!


So many of you; 'tis no matter: your Hero's in Plays beat five times as many.
Have at you, Rogues.

Now give me the Key of the Garden, or I'll murder thee.


Murder! Murder! There, take it --


So, thus far it is well; this was a brave adventure. Amongst all the Joys
which in the world are sought, None are so great as those by dangers bought.


WHat will this lewd Master of mine do? this Town of Se^il will not much care
for his company after his last (...) Achievements: He must now either fly, or
hang for it. Ha! me-thinks my blood grows chill at the naming of that d^eadful
word, Hang What will become of me? I dare not leave him, and yet I fear that I
shall perish with him. He's certainly the first that ever set up a Religion to
the Devil.


I come to claim your promise; is Don John within?


No, Madam, but I expect him every minute. You see, Madam, what honour I have
for you, for I venture my ears to do this.


You oblige me extremely; so great is the present pain of doubt, that we desire
to lose it: though in exchange of certainty, that must afflict us more.


I hear him coming, withdraw quickly.


How now, Sir, what wise thoughts have you in your Noddle?


Why, Sir, I was considering how well I could endure to be hanged.


And why so, Buffle?


Why you will force me to wait upon you in all your fortunes, and you are
making what haste you can to the Gallows --


Again at your reproofs. You insipid Rascal; I shall cut your ears off, Dog --


Good Sir, I have done; yet I cannot but admire, since you are resolved to go
to the Devil, that you cannot be content with the common way of travelling, but
must ride post to him.


Leave off your idle tales, found out by Priests to keep the Rabble in awe.


Oh horrid wickedness! If I may be bold to ask, what noble exploits did your
Chivalry perform last night?


Why, Sir, I committed a Rape upon my Father's Monument.


Oh horror!


Do you start, you Villain? Hah!


I, Sir, who I, Sir? not I, Sir.


D'hear, Rascal, let me not see a frown upon your face; if I do, I will cut
your throat, you Rogue.


No, Sir, no, Sir, I warrant you; I am in a very good humour, I assure you --
Heaven deliver me!


Now listen and learn. I killed a Lady's Lover, and supplied his place, by
stratagem enjoyed her: In came her foolish Brother and surprised me, but
perished by mv hand; and I doub^ not but I maul d three or four of his
Servants.


Oh horrid fact!


Again, Villain, are you frowning?


No, Sir, no, Sir; don't think so ill of me, Sir. Heaven send me from this
wicked Wretch! What will become of us, Sir? we shall be apprehended.


Can you fear your Rascally Carcase, when I venture mine? I observe always,
those that have the most despicable persons, are most careful to preserve 'em.


Sir, I beg your pardon; but I have an odd humour, makes me something unsit for
your Worship's service.


What's that, Sir?


'Tis a very odd one, I am almost ashamed to tell it to you.


Out with it, Fool --


Why Sir, I cannot tell what is the reason, but I have a most unconquerable
antipathy to Hemp. I could never endure a Bell-rope. Hanging is a kind of death
I cannot abide, I am not able to endure it.


I have taken care to avoid that; my friends are gone to hire a Vessel, and
we'll to Sea together to seek a refuge, and a new Scene of pleasure.


All three, Sir?


Yes, Sir. --


Three as civil dis^reet sober persons, as a man would wish to drink with.


I can hold no longer!


'Sdeath, you Dog, how came she here?


I don't know, Sir, she stole in --


What Witchcraft do I suffer under? that when I abhor his vices, I still love
his person. Ah, Don John! have I deserved that you should fly me? are all your
Oaths and Vows forgotten by you?


No, no; in these cases I always remember my Oaths, and never forget to break
them.


Oh impiety!

Did I, for this, yield up my Honour to you? after you had sighed and
languished many months, and showed all signs of a sincere affection, I trusted
in your truth and constancy, without the Bond of Marriage, yielded up a
Virgin's Treasure, all my Innocence, believed your solemn Contract, when you
invoked all the Powers above to testify your Vows.


They think much of us, why don't they witness 'em for you -- Pish, 'tis
nothing but a way of speaking, which young amorous Fellows have gotten --


Did you not love me then? What injury had I ever done you, that you should
feign affection to betray me?


Yes faith, I did love you, and showed you as frequent and as hearty signs of
it as I could; and i'gad you're an ungrateful Woman if you say the contrary.


O heaven! Did you, and do not now? What crime have I committed, that could
make you break your Vows and Oaths, and banish all your passion? Ah! with what
tenderness have I received your feigned affection, and ne'er thought I lived but
in your presence; my love was too fervent to be counterf^it --


That I know not, for since your Sex are such dissemblers, they can hold out
against, and seem to hate the men they love; why may they not seem to love the
men they hate?


O cruel man! could I dissemble? had I a thousand lives, I ventured all each
time I saw your face; nay, were I now discovered, I should instantly be
sacrifi^'d to my raging Brother's fury; and can I dissemble?


I do not know whether you do or no; you see I don't, I am something free with
you.


And do you not love me then?


Faith, Madam, I loved you as long as I could for the heart and blood of me,
and there's an end of it; what a Devil would you have more?


O cruel man! how miserable have you made me!


Miserable! use variety as I do, and you'll not be (...). Ah! there's nothing
so sweet to frail humane flesh (...) variety.


^nhumane Creature! what have I been guilty of, that ^hou should thus remove
thy (...) from me?


Guilty, no: but I have had enough of you, and I have done what I can for you,
and there's no more to be said.


Tigers would have more pity than thou hast.


Unreasonable Woman! would you have a man love (...) ^njoyment? I think the
Devil's in you --


Do you upbraid me with the rash effects of Love, which you caused in me? and
do you hate me for what you ought to love me for? were you not many months
with Vows and Oaths betraying me to that weakness? Ungrateful Monster!


Why the Devil did you not yield before? you Women always rook in Love; you'll
never play upon the square with us..


False man! I yielded but too soon. Unfortunate Woman!


Your dissembling Arts and jilting tricks, taught you by your Mothers, and the
phlegmatic coldness of your constitutions, make you so long in yielding; that
we love out almost all our love before you begin, and yet you would have our
love last as long as yours. I got the start of you a long way, and have reason
to reach the Goal before you.


Did you not swear you would for ever love me?


Why there 'tis; why did you put me to the trouble to swear it? If you Women
would be honest, and follow the Dictates of Sense and Nature, we should agree
about the business presently, and never be forsworn for the matter.


Are Oaths so slighted by you? perfidious man!


Oaths! Snares to catch conceited Women with; I would have sworn all the Oaths
under the Sun; why I would have committed Treason for you, and yet I knew I
should be weary of you --


I thought such love as mine might have deserved your constancy, false and
ungrateful man!


Thus your own vanity, not we betray you. Each woman thinks, though men are
false to others, that she is so fine a person, none can be so to her. You
should not take our words of course in earnest.


Thus Devils do in Hell, who cruelly upbraid whom they hav^ tempted thither.


In short, my constitution will not let me love you longe^: and what ever some
(...) pretend, all mankind obey their constitutions, and cannot do otherwise --



Heaven, sure, will punish this vile treachery.


Do you then leave it to Heaven, and trouble your self no farther about it.


Ye Sacred Powers, who take care of injured innocence, assist me.


Sir, Sir! stand upon your guard.


How now! what's the matter?


Here's a whole Batalion of courageous Women come to charge you.


Keep '^m out, you Villain.


I cannot, they over-run me.


What an inundation of Strumpets is here?


O Heaven! I can stay no longer to be a witness of his falsehood --


My Dear, I desire a word in private with you.


Faith, my Dear, I am something busy, but I love thee dearly.


Don John, a word: 'tis time now we should declare our marriage; 'tis now above
three weeks.


Ay, we will do it suddenly --


Prithee, Honey, what business can these idle Women have* send them packing,
that we may confer about our (...).


Lord! how am I amazed at the confidence of some Women! who are these that will
not let one converse with one's own Husband? By your leave, Ladies.


Now it works! tease him, Ladies, worry him soundly --


Nay, by your leave, good Madam; if you go to that.


Ladies, by all your leaves; sure none of you will have the considence to
pretend an interest in this Gentleman --


I shall be torn in pieces: Jacomo, stand by me.


Lord, Madam, what's your meaning? none ought to claim a right to another
Woman's Husband, let me tell you that.


You are in the right, Madam. Therefore prithee, Dear, let's withdraw, and
leave them; I do not like their compan^.


Ay, presently, my Dear. What an excellent thing is a Woman before enjoyment,
and how insipid after it!


Come, prithee, put these Women out of doubt, and let them know our Marriage.


Tomorrow we'll declare and celebrate our Nuptials.


Ladies, the short and the long on it is, you are very uncivil to press upon
this Gentleman. Come, Love, even tell 'em the truth of the story --


Uncivil, Madam, pardon me; one cannot be so in sp^aking to one's own.


That's true; she little thinks who that is.


To their own! Ha, ha, ha, that's true -- Come, Honey, keep 'em no longer in
ignorance.


Come, Ladies, I will undeceive you all; think no further of this Gentleman, I
say, think no further of him --


What can this mean?


Hold, for Heav'n's sake; you know not what you do.


Yes, yes, I do; it shall all out: I'll send 'em away with Fleas in their Ears.
Poor silly Creatures!


Now will Civil Wars arise --


Trouble your selves no longer about Don John, he is mine -- he is mine, Ladies
--


Yours! --


^ox on it, I must set a good face upon the business; I see murder will out --


Yours! that's pleasant; he's mine --


I have been too long patient; he is my Husband.


Yours, how can that be? I am sure I am his Wife.


Are you not (...), Ladies, to claim my Husband?


Are you all mad? I am sure I am marri'd to him.


You!


Look you, Ladies, a Man's but a Man; here's my Body, tak't among you as far as
'twill go. The Devil cannot please you all --


Pray, Ladies, will you dispatch; for there are a matter of fifteen more that
are ready to put in their claims, and must be heard in their order --


How now, Rogne? this is your fault, Sir.


My fault, Sir, no; the Ladies shall see I am no Traitor. Look you, Ladies --


Peace, Villain, or I will cut your throat. Well, Ladies, know then, I am
marri'd to one in this company; and to morrow morning, if you will repair to
this place, I will declare my Marriage, which now, for some secret Reasons, I
am obliged to conceal -- Now will each Strumpet think 'tis her I mean.


That's well enough.


I knew he would own me at last.


Now they will soon see their errors.

5. Now we'll conceal it no longer, Dearest.


No, no, I warrant you --


Lord how blank these Ladies will look.


Poor Ladies --


Ladies, pray let me ask a question, which of you is really marri'd to him?


I, I, I --


'Sdeath, you Son of a Baboon. Come, Pox on it, why should ^ dally any longer!
why should I conc^al my good actions! in one word, I am married to every one of
you, and have above fourscore more; nor will I ever give over, till I have as
many Wives and Concubines as the Grand Seignior.


A very modest civil person truly --


O horrid Villain!


Perfidious Monster!


How now, Don John; Hah! you are a rav'nous Bird of prey indeed; do you fly at
no less than a whole Covee of Whores at once? you scorn a single Strumpet for
your Quarry.


What, in tears too! Fie, Don John; thou art the most ungentle Knight alive:
use your Ladies civilly for shame.


Ay, before the Victory, I grant you; but after it, they should wear Chains,
and follow the Conqueror's Chariot.


Alas, poor Harlots!


Peace, peace, good words; these are certain Animals called Wives, and all of
'em are my Wives: Do you call a man of Honour's Wives, Harlots? out, on it.


Per^idious Monster!


Excellent!


Come on, you are come very opportunely, to help to celebrate my several and
respective Weddings. Come, my Dears; faith we will have a Ballad at our
Weddings. Where are my Fiddlers?


O salvage Beast!


Inhumane Villain! revenge shall follow.


Pox on revenge. Call in my Ministrils.

Come, sing my Epithalamium.


SInce Liberty, Nature for all has designed,
Apox on the Fool who to one is con^in'd.
All Creatures besides,
When they please change their Brides.
All Females they get when they can,
Whilst they nothing but Nature obey,
How happy, how happy are they?
But the silly fond Animal, Man,
Makes Laws against himself, which his Appetites sway;
Poor Fools, how unhappy are they?
Since Liberty, Nature for all has designed,
Apox on the Fool who to one is confined.

At the first going down, a Woman is good,
But when ever she comes up, I'll ne'er chew the Cud,
But out she shall go,
And I'll serve 'em all so.
When with one my stomach is cloyed,
Another shall soon be enjoyed.
Then how h^ppy, how happy are we?
Let the Coxcomb, when weary, drudge on,
And foolishly stay when he would fain ^e gone.
Poor Fool! how unhappy is ^e?
At the first going down, c.


Let the Rabble obey, I'll live like a Man,
Who, by Nature, is free to enjoy a^l he can:
Wise Nature does teach
More truth than Fools preach;
They bindus, but she gives us ease.
I'll revel and love where I please.
She, she's my infallible Guide.
But were the blessed freedom d^ni'd
Of variety in the things we love best,
Dull Man were the slavishest Beast.
Let the Rabble obey, c.


Come, how do you like this? let's be merry, my Brides.


O monstrous Traitor! do you mock our misery?


Good Spouse, be not passionate -- faith we'll have a Dance. Strike up --


Be comforted, good Ladies; you have Companions in ^our misfortunes --


He has been marri'd in all the Cities of Spain; what a breed of Don Johns
shall we have?


Come, Sweethearts; you must be civil to these Gentlemen; they are my Friends,
and men of Honour*


Men of Honour! they are Devils if they be your* Friends.


I hate unreasonable, unconscionable fellows, who when they are weary of their
Wives, will still keep 'em from other men. Gentlemen, ye shall command mine.


Think thou I will out-live this affront?


I'll trust you for that, there's ne'er a Lu^rece now adays, the Sex has learnt
more wit since. Let me see, Antonia, thou shalt have for thy present use, let
me see, my sixth Wife -- *faith she's a pretty buxom Wench, and deserves hearty
usage from thee.


Traitor! I'll be revenged on all thy treachery.


A mettel'd Girl, I like her well: she'll endure a Rape gallantly. I love
resistance, it endears the pleasure.


And, Lopez, thou shalt have, let me see, ay, my fourth Spous^, she's a brave
Virago; and Gad if I had not been something familiar with her already, I would
venture my life for her.


Vile Wretch! think thou I will out-live this affront? Impious Villain!
though thou hast no sense of Virtue or Honour left, thou shalt find I have.


Virtue and Honour! There's nothing good or ill, but as it seems to each man's
natural appetite, if they will consent freely. You must ravish friends: that's
all I know, you must ravish.


Unheard of Villainy! Fly from this Hellish place.


Ladies, you shall fly, but we must ravish first.


Yes, I assure you we must ravish --


No, Monster, I'll pr^vent you.


'Sdeath, she's as good as her word.
The first time I ever knew a Woman so.

Pox on it, she has prevented me; she's dead.


Say you so? well, go thy ways, thou were it a Girl of pretty parts, that's the
truth on it; but I ne'er thought this had been in thee.


These, sure, are Devils in the shape of men.


Now see my providence, if I had been marri'd to none but her, I had been a
Widower.


O horror! horror! fly! fly!


No, I'll be revenged first on this barbarous Wretch.


Why look you, here's a Wench of mettle for you; go ravish quickly --


Let's fly, and call for help, some in the street may help us *


Let 'em go, they are confined, they cannot get out.


It shall ne'er be said that a Woman went out of this house Reinfecta; but after
that, 'twill be time for us to fly.


We have hired a Vessel, the Master is a brave Rogue of my acquaintance; he has
been a Bandit.


A brave honest wicked Fellow as heart can wish, I have ravished, robbed, and
murdered with him.


That's well. Hey, where are my Rogues? Hey!

Here, Sir, do you send my Goods on Board.


My Man will direct you.


Come, Sir, do you remove this Body to another Room --


O horrid fact! what, another Murder! what shall I do?


Leave your complaints, you Dog; I'll send you after her.


Oh! I shall be hanged, I shall be hanged.


Take her up, Rascal; or I'll cut your throat.


I will, Sir. Oh mercy upon me! I shall be hanged --


Now, Sir, do you run into the stre^ts, and force in the next Woman you meet,
or I'll cut your Wind-pipe; and let nobody out --


What hellish fact will he now commit?


Take her up, you Hen-hearted compassionate Rascal.


Heaven! what will become of me? Oh! Oh --


Now, Gentlemen, you shall see I'll be civil to you, you shall not ravish
alone: indeed I am loath to meddle with mine old acquaintance, but if my Man
can meet with a Woman I have not lain withal, I'll keep you company; let her
be old or young, ugly or handsome, no matter.


Faith I will eversay, you are a well bred man.


A very civil person, a man of Honour.


This unlucky Rogue has made but a scurvy choice, but I'll keep my word. Come,
Bawd, you must be ravished, Bawd.


O murder! murder! help! help! I was never ravished in my life.


That I dare swear; but to show I am a very vigorous man, I'll begin with you.
But, you Rascal, Jaccall, I'll make you Cater better next time.


Indeed, Sir, this was the first I met.


Come on, Beldam, thy face shall not protect thee.


Oh my Honour! my Honour! help, help, my Honour!


Come to our business.


O Sir* (...)! shift for your self; we shall all be hanged: (...) house is
(...). Oh what shall we do?


Away, Coward: were the King of Spain's Army beleagu'ring us, it should not
divert me from this Exploit.


Nor me.


Nor me: let's on.


Keep the doors fast, Sir. Come on.


Oh what will become of me! Oh Heaven! mercy on me! Oh! Oh!


Thus I have abandoned all my Fortune, and laid by
My Sex. Revenge for thee. Assist me now,
You Instruments of Blood, for my dear Brothers,
And for my much more dear Octavio's sake.
Where are my B^avo's? --

They have beset the Villains House,
And he shall ne'er come out alive. --

O let 'em show no more remorse,
Than hungry Lions o'r their prey will.
How miserable am I made by that
Inhumane Monster! No savage Beast,
Wild Deserts ever brought forth, provoked
By all its hunger, and its natural rage,
Could yet have been so cruel.
Oh my Octavio! whether art thou fled,
From the most loving and most wretched
Creature of her Sex? What Ages of delight
Each hour with thee brought forth!
How much, when I had thee, was all the world
Unenvi'd by me! Nay, I piti'd all my Sex,
That could have nothing worth their care,
Since all the treasure of Mankind was mine.
Methought I could look down on Queens, when he
Was with me: but now, compared to me,
How happy is the Wretched, whose sinews
Crack upon the merciless Engine
Of his torture? I live with greater torments then he di^.

Leave your complaints. Tears are no Sacri^ice for blood.


Now my just grief to just revenge give place.
I am ashamed of these soft Tears, till I've
Revenged thy horrid Murder. Oh that I could
Make the Villain linger out an Age in
Torments! But I will revel in his blood: Oh
I could suck the last drop that warms the
Monster's heart, that might inspire me with
Such cruelty, as vile Man, with all his horrid
Arts of power, is yet a stranger to;
Then I might root out all his cursed Race.

I'll follow all your Fortunes, my dear Lady;
Had (...) thousand lives, in this cause I'd
Venture one by one to my last stake.

Thou art my dear and faithful Creature;
Let not thy Fortunes thus be wracked with mine.
Be gone, and leave thy most unhappy Mistress;
One that has miseries enough to sink the Sex.

I will not leave you, till death takes me from you.


O that I had been some poor lost Mountain Girl,
Nursed up by Goats, or suckl'd by wild Beasts,
Exposed to all the rage of heats and killing colds.
I ne'er could have been aband on'd to such fury.
More savage cruelty reigns in Cities,
Than ever yet in Deserts among the
Most venomous Serpents, and remorseless
Ravenous Beasts, could once be found.
So much has barb'rous Art debauched
Man's innocent Nature.

Lay by your tears, till your revenge be finished;
Then, then you may have leisure to complain.

I will: 'tis blood I now must spill, or
Lose my own in th'attempt. But if I can
Have the fortune, with my own hand, to reach
The Dogs vile heart: I then shall die
Cont^nted, and in the other World I'll
(...) him so, Devils shall learn of me to
^lse the Damned.

Let's to our Sacred Instruments of revenge.


Come on: so just a cause would turn the
Vilest Ru^ian to a Saint.

Come, friends, let once a Woman preach courage
To you, inspired by my just rage this Arm
Shall teach you wonders. I'll show you now
What Love with just Revenge can do.

We are so practised in the trade of death,
We need no teaching.

There's Gold good store; if you dispatch the Dog,
I'll give you yet much more; if not,
If all the wealth I have can buy your lives,
I'll have 'em in stead of his.

For half the Sum, I'd kill a Bishop at the Altar.


Now we have finished our design; let's make a Sally, and raise the Siege.


Jacomo, do you lead the Van.


Lead on, Jacomo, or we are sure to lose you; you are not good at bringing up
the Rear.


Nay, good Gentlemen, I know my self better than to take place of Men of
Quality, especially upon this occasion.


Sir, go on: I'll prick him forward. Remember, if you do not fight, I am
behind you.


Oh Heaven! Oh Jacomo! what will become of thy dear person? Is this your
Courage to put me forward, to what you dare not meet your selves?


No words, Rogue, on, on, I ^ay --


O I shall be murdered! murdered! Oh! Oh! --


On, on, you Dog.


Inhumane Master! It must be so! Heaven have mercy on my better part.


Fall on, fall on, that's the Villain! Have at you, Dog*


Courage, Jacomo.


Oh! Oh!


Oh cowardly Villains! the Traitor will escape their hands. Oh Dogs! more
feeble than the feeblest of our Sex Let's after him, and try our strength.

He is returned -- fall on.


Ha! must I encounter Boys?


Oh I am slain --


At thy heart, base Villain.


There, take your Sword; I'll not nip Roguery in the bud; thou may live to
be as wicked as my self.


Poor Flora! But, Dog, I'll be revenged on thee yet ere I die.


What! no thanks! no reward!


What's the matter, Sir?


What, no acknowledgment? you are but an ungrateful man, let me tell you that,
to treat a man of my prowess thus.


What has your valour done?


Nothing, nothing; saved your life only, that's all: but men of valour are
nothing now adays. 'Tis an ungrateful Age. I fought like a Hero


Called a Stag at Bay.


You can fight, when there's no way of escape, without it.


Oh! what's here! another murder! fly, fly; we shall be hanged.


Come on! let's now to Sea to try our fortunes.


Ay, make haste; I've laid Horses, and will shift by Land. Farewell, Sir; a
good Voyage -- --


I will murder you, if you refuse to go to Sea --


O, good Sir, consider, do but consider; I am so Sea-sick always: that wicked
Element does not agree with me.


Dare you dispute! go on, I say.


O, good Sir, think, think a little; the merciless Waves will never consider a
man of parts: besides, Sir, I can swim no more than I can fly.


I'll leave you dead upon the place, if you refuse.


O Sir, on my knees I beg you'll let me stay. I am the last of all my Family;
my Race will fail, if I should fail.


Damn your Race *


Do not we venture with you?


You have nothing but your lives to venture, but I have a whole Family to save;
I think upon Posterity. Besides, Gentlemen, I can look for no safety in such
wicked company.


I'll kill the Villain. His fear will else betray us.


O hold! hold! for Heavens sake hold *


Hold! hold!


Ay, hold, hold. Oh Heaven! your Father's Ghost; a Ghost! a Ghost! Oh! Oh!


'Sdeath! what's here? my Father alive!


No, no; inhumaue Murderer, I am dead.


That's well; I was afraid the old Gentleman had come for his Estate again; if
you would have that, 'tis too late; 'tis spent --


Monster! ^ehold these wounds.


I do; they were well meant, and well performed, I see.


This is strange! how I am amazed!


Unheard of Wonder! --


Repent, repent of all thy villainies;
My clamorous blood to Heaven for vengeance cries.
Heaven will pour out his judgments on you all;
Hell gapes for you, for you each Fiend does call,
And hourly waits your unrepenting fall.
You with eternal horrors they'll torment,
Except of all your crimes you suddenly repent.

Oh! Oh! Heaven deliver me from these Monsters.


Farewell, thou art a foolish Ghost; Repent, quoth he! what could this mean?
our senses are all in a mi^t sure.


They are not, 'twas a Ghost.


I ne'er believed those foolish Tales before.


Come, 'tis no matter; let it be what it will, it must be natural --


And Nature is unalterable in us too.


'Tis true, the nature of a Ghost cannot change ours.


It was a silly Ghost, and I'll no sooner take his word than a Whores.


Thou art in the right. Come, Fool, Fool, rise; the Ghost is gone.


Oh! I die, I die; pray let me die in quiet.


Oh! if he be dying* take him up; we'll give him burial in the Sea. Come on.


Hold, hold, Gentlemen; bury me not till I am dead, I beseech you --


If you be not, Sir, I'll run you through.


Hold, hold, Sir, I'll go, I'll go --


Let's on.


Let's on.


Should all the Bugbears Cowards feign appear, I would urge on without one
thought of fear.


And I.


And I. --


MErcy upon us! what sudden dreadful storm is this? we are all lost; we shall
split upon the Rocks. Aloof, aloof --


Oh! Oh! Mercy! Oh I was afraid of this! See what your wickedness has brought
me to? Mercy! mercy!


Takeaway thy Cowardly face, it offends me, Rascal.


Such dreadful claps of Thunder I never yet remembered.


Let the Clouds roar on, and vomit all their Sulphur out, they ne'er shall
fright me. --


These are the Squibs and Crackers of the Sky.


Fire on, fire on; we are unmoved.


The Heavens are all on sire; these unheard of Prodigies amaze me.


Can you, that have stood so many Cannons, be frighted at the farting and the
b^lching of a Cloud?


Bless me, Captain! six of our Foremast men are even now struck dead with
Lightning.


O that clap has rent our Masts in sunder.


O we are lost! You can swim, Sir; pray save me, Sir, for my own and Family's
sake. --


Toss these cowardly Rogues over-board. Captain, Courage! let the Heavens do
their worst, 'tis but drowning at laft.


But -- in the name of Heaven, but drowning, quoth he; your drowning will
prepare you for burning, though Oh, Oh, Oh --


Captain, Captain, the Ship's on ^ire in the Forecastle --


All hands to work upon the Forecastle. Heaven! how it blazes already! --


Oh! Oh! we burn, we drown, we sink, Oh! we peri^h, we are lost, we are lost.
Oh, Oh, Oh --


O horrid Apparitions! Devils stand and guard the fire, and will not suffer us
to quench it. We are lost.


In all the dangers I have been, such horrors I never knew; I am quite
unmanned.


A man and fear: 'tis but dying at last.


I never y^t could know what that foolish thing Fear is.


Help, help, the fire increases. What horrid sights are these? where ever I turn
me, fearful Spirits appear.


Let's into the Boat, and with our Swords ke^p out all others.


While they are busy about the sire we may escape.


If we get from hence, we certainly shall perish on the Rocks --


I warrant you --


O good Gentlemen, let us shift for our selves, and let the rest burn, or
drown, and be damned and they will.


No, you have been often leaving me: now shall be the time we'll part.
Farewell.


Oh! I'll stand by you while I live. Oh the Devil, the Devil! What horrors do I
feel? Oh I am killed, I am dead!


'Sdeath! why this to me? you paltry foolish bugbear Thunder, am I the mark of
your senseless rage?


Nothing but accident. Let's leap into the Boat.


The Sailors all make towards us; they'll in and sink it.


Sir, if you come on, you run upon my Sword.


O cruel Tyrant! I burn, I drown, I sink! Oh I die, I am lost.


All shift aboard; we perish, we are lost.


All lost, all lost.


This forty years I've lived in this neighbouring Cave, and srom these
dreadful Cliffs which are always beaten by the foami^g Surges of the Sea;
beheld the Ocean in its wildestrage, and ne'er yet saw a storm so dreadful: such
horrid flashes of lightning, and such claps of thunder, never were in my
remembrance. Yon Ship is all on fire, and the poor miserable Wretches must all
perish. The dreadful object melts my heart, and brings a flood of tears into my
eyes: It is prodigious, for on the sudden, all the Heavens are clear again, and
the enraged Sea is become more pati^nt.


Oh Father, have you not been frighted at this prodigious storm, and at yon
dreadful spectacle?


No man that has an apprehension, but would have been moved wi^h horror.


'^was the most violent Tempest I ever saw. Hold, yonder are some coming in a
small Ves^l, and must necessarily split upon the Rock; I'll go and help to
succour 'em.


He^e are some this way, just come in a small Boat:
Go you to those, and these I will assist --

I'll haste to their relief --


Hah! these are come safe to Land, three men, goodly men they seem to be; I am
bound in charity to serve them: they come towards me.


Much ado we are safe, but my Man's lost; pox on him, I shall miss the Fool, it
was a necessary Blockhead.


But you have lost your Goods, which were more necessary.


Our Jewels and Money we have all about us.


It makes m^ laugh to think, how the Fools we left behind were puzzled which
death to choose, burning or drowning --


But how shall we dispose of our selves, we are plaguy wet and cold. Hah! what
old Fool is that?


It is an Hermit, a fellow of mighty Beard and Sanctity.


I know not what Sanctity he may have, but he has Beard enough to make an Owl's
Nest, or stuff a Saddle with.


Gentlemen, I see you are shipwrecked, and in distress; and my Function obliges
me in charity to succour you in what I may.


Alas! what can thou help us to? dost thou know of ever a house near hand,
where we may be furnished with some necessaries?


On the other side of this vast Rock, there is a fertile and a pleasant Valley,
where one Don Francisco, a rich and hospitable man, has a sweet Dwelling; he
will entertain you nobly: He's gone to assist some shipwrecked persons, and
will be here presently. In the mean time, what my poor Cave can afford, you
shall be welcome to.


What can that afford? you oblige your self to fasting and abstinence *


I have studi'd Physic for the relief of needy people, and I have some
Cordials which will refresh you; I'll bring one to you --


A good civ^l old Hipocrite: but this is a pleasant kind of Religion, that
obliges 'em to nastiness and want of meat. I'll have none on it. --


No, nor of any other, to my knowledge.


Gentlemen, pray taste of this Vial, it will comfort your cold stomachs.


Ha! 'tis excellent faith. Let it go round.


Heav*n bless it to you.


Ha! it wa^ms.


Thank thee, thou art a very honest old fellow i'faith.


I see thou art very civil; but you must suppl^ us with one necessary more; a
very neces^ary thing, and very refreshing.


What's that, Sir?


It is a Whore, a fine young buxom Whore.


A Whore, Old man, a Whore.


A Whore, Old man, a Whore.


Bless me, are you Men or Devils? --


Men, men, and men of lust and vigour. Prithee, old Sot, leave thy prating,
and help me to a Strumpet, a fine salacious Strump^t; I know you Zealots have
enough of 'em. Women love your godly Whore-masters.


O Monsters of impiety! are you so lately escaped the wrath of Heaven, thus to
provoke it?


How! by following the Dictates of Nature, who can do otherwise?


All our actions are necessitated, none command their own wills.


Oh horrid blasphemy! would you lay your dreadful and unheard of Vices upon
Heaven? No, ill men, that has given you free-will to good.


I find thou retir'st here, and never readst or think.
Can that blind faculty the Will be free,
When it depends upon the Understanding?
Which argues first before the Will can choose;
And the last Dictate of the Judgment sways
The Will, as in a Balance, the last Weight
Put in the Scale, lifts up the other end,
And with the same Necessity.

But foolish men and sinners act against
Their Understandings, which inform 'em better.

None willingly do any thing against the last
Dictates of their Judgments, whatsoe'r men do,
Their present opinions lead 'em to.

As fools that are afraid of sin, are by the thought
Of present pleasure, or some other reason,
Neces^arily biased to pursue
The opinion they are of at that moment.

The Understanding yet is free, and might persuade 'em better.


The Understanding never can be free;
For what we und^stand, spite of our selves we do:
All objects are ready formed and placed
To our hands; and these the Senses to the Mind convey,
And as those rep^esent them, this must judge:
How can the Will be free, when the Understanding,
On which the Will depends, cannot be so.

Lay by your devilish Philosophy, and change the dangerous and destructive
course of your lewd lives.


Change our natures? Go bid a Blackamoor be white, we follow our Constitutions,
which we did not give our selves.


What we are, we are by Nature, our reason tells us we must follow that.


Our Constitutions tell us one thing, and yours another; and which must we
obey? If we be bad, 'tis Nature's fault that made us so.


Farewell. I dare no longer hear your impious discourse. Such hardened Wretches
I ne'er heard of yet.


Farewell, old Fool.


Thus Sots condemn what they can never answer.

This I believe is Francisco, whom he spoke of; if he has but a handsome Wife,
or Daughters, we are happy.


Sir, we are shipwrecked men, and if you can direct us to a place, where we may
be furnished with some necessaries, you will oblige us --


Gentlemen, I have a House hard by, you shall be welcome to it: I even now
endeavoured to succour a Youth and beauteous Woman, who, with two Sailors, in a
Boat, were driven towards these Rocks, but were forced back again, and, I fear,
are lost by this time. I desire nothing more, than to assist men in extremes,
and am o'rjoy'd at the opportunity of serving you.


We thank you.


You shall command my House as long as you please: I see you are Cavaliers, and
hope you will bear with some inconvenience. I have two young, and, though I say
it, handsome Daughters, who are, to morrow morning to be marri'd; the Solemnity
will bring much company together, which, I fear, may incommode my house and you
--


You pose us with this kindness.


What ever pleases you, cannot be inconvenient to us.


On the contrary, we shall be glad to assist you at the Ceremony, and help to
make up the joyful Chorus.


You shall command my house and me; I'll show you the way to it*


Your humble Servant. We'll follow you.

This is an admirable adventure.
He has Daughters, Boys, and to be marri'd too:
If they have been so foolish, to preserve those
Toys, they call Maidenheads; their senseless
Husbands shall not be troubled with them:
I'll ease them of those. Pox, what should those dull
Drudging Animals, called Husbands, do with such Treasures:
No, they are for honest Whore-masters, Boys.

Well said, Don; we will not be wanting in our endeavours to succeed you.


To you alone we must give place. Allons.


Heaven be praised, you are safely now on Land.


We thank you, reverend Father, for your assistance.


We never shall forget the obligation.


I am happy to be so good an Instrument.


We follow'd a Vessel, which we saw fired with Lightning, and we fear that none
of 'em escaped.


I hope the Villain I pursue has escaped. I would not be revenged by Heaven, but
my own hand; or, if not by that, by the Hangman's.


Did any come to ^and? for I most nearly am concerned or one; the grief for
whom, if he belost, will soon, I fear, destroy me.


Here were three of that company came safe to Land; but such impious Wretches,
as did not deserve to escape, and such as no virtuous person can be concerned
for, sure; I was stiff with fear and horror when I heard 'em talk.


Three, say you?


By this sad description it must be Don John, and his two wicked Associates; I
am ashamed to confess the tenderness I have for him. Why should I love that
Wretch? Oh my too violent passion hurries me I know not whether! into what
fearful dangerous Labyrinths of misery will it conduct me?


Were they Gentlemen?


By their out-sides they seemed so, but their in-sides declared them Devils.


Heaven! it must be the Villain and his barbarous
Companions. They are reserved ^or my revenge:
Assist me, Heaven, in that just cause.
Oh, Villain, Villain! inhumane Villain!
Each minute is, me-thinks, a tedious Age,
Till I have dipped my hands in thy hearts blood.

You seem o'r-joy'd at the news of their safe arrival: Can any have a kindness
for such dissolute abandoned Atheists?


No; 'tis revenge that I pursue against the basest of all Villains.


Have a care; Revenge is Heavens, and must not be usurped by Mortals.


Mine is revenge for Rapes and cruel murders, and those Heaven leaves to Earth
to punish.


They are horrid crimes, but Magistrates must punish them.


What do I hear? were he the basest of all men, my love is so head-strong and
so wild within me, I must endeavour to preserve him, or destroy my self: to
what deplorable condition am I fallen? what Chains are these that hold me? Oh
that I could break them! and yet I would not if I could; Oh my heart!


They are gon to one Don Francisco's house, that Road will bring you to it;
'tis on the other side of this Rock, in a pleasant Valley. I have not stirred
these forty years from these small bounds, or I would give him notice what
Devils he harbours in his house. You will do well to do it.


(within) Help, help, murder! I am drowned, I am dead; Help, help!


Hah! what voice is that? I must assist him --


Father, farewell. Come, Madam, will you go to this house? Now, Monster, for my
revenge.


I will; but for different ends we go;
'Tis Love conducts me, but Revenge brings you.

Oh help, help! I sink, I sink!


Poor man, sure he is almost drowned.


No, not yet; I have only drunk something too much of a scurvy unpleasant
Liquor.


Reach me your hand --


Ay, and my heart too; Oh! Oh!

Sir, a thousand thanks to you: I vow to Gad, you're a very civil person, and,
as I am an honest man, have done me the greatest kindness in the world, next to
the piece of the Mast which I floated upon, which I must ever love and honour;
I am sorry it swam away, I would have preserved it, and hung it up in the Se^t
of our ancient Family.


Thank Heaven for your deliverance, and leave such vain thoughts.


I do with all my heart; but I am not settled enough to say my prayers yet:
pray, Father, do you for me; 'tis nothing with you, you are used to it, it is
your Trade.


Away, vain man; you speak as if you had drunk too deeply of another Liquor
than Sea-water.


No, I have not, but I would fain: Where may a man light of a good Glass of
Wine? I would gladly have an Antidot^ to my Poison. Methinks, Pah! these Fishes
have but a scurvy time; I am sure they have very ill drinking.


Farewell, and learn more devotion and thankfulness to Heaven --


Ha! 'tis uncivilly done to leave a man in a strange Country. But these Hermits
have no breeding. Poor Jacomo, Dear Jacomo, how I love thy person, how glad am
I to see thee safe? for I swear, I think thou art as honest a fellow as ever I
met with. Well, farewell, thou wicked Element; if ever I trust thee again --
Well, Haddocks, I desie you, you shall have none of me, no, not a Collop; no,
no, I will be eaten by Worms, as all my Ancestors have been. If Heaven will but
preserve me from the Monsters of the Land, my Master and his two Companions
(who, I hope, are drowned) I'll preserve my self from those of the Sea. Let me
see, here is a path -- this must lead to some house. I'll go, for I am plaguy
sick with this Salt-water. P^h --


Oh, Flavia, this will be our last happy night, to morrow is our Execution day;
we must marry.


Ay, Clara, we are ^ondemn'd without reprieve. 'Tis better to live as we have
done, kept from all men, than for each to be confined to one, whom yet we never
saw, and a thousand to one shall never like.


Out on it, a Spanish Wife has a worse life than a cooped Chicken.


A singing Bird in a Cage is a Princely creature, compared to that poor Animal,
called a Wife, here.


Birds are made tame by being cag'd, but Women grow wild by confinement, and
that, I fear, my Husband will find to his cost.


None live pleasantly here, but those who should be miserable, Strumpets: They
can choose their Mates, but we must be like Slaves condemned to the Galleys; we
have not liberty to sell our Selves, or venture one throw for our freedom.


O that we were in England! there, they say, a Lady may choose a Footman, and
run away with him, if she likes him, and no dishonour to the Family.


That's because the Families are so very Honourable, that nothing can touch
them: there Wives run and ramble whither ^nd with whom they please, and defy
all censure.


Ay, and a jealous Husband is a more monstrou^ Cr^ture there, than a Withal
here, and would be more pointed at: They say, if a man be jealous there, the
women will all join and pull him to pieces.


Oh happy Country! we ne'er tou^h money, there the Wives can spend their
Husbands Estates for 'em. Oh b^ess'd Country!


Ay, there, they say, the Husbands are the prettiest civil easy good natured
indi^erent persons in the whole world; they ne'er mind what their Wives do, not
they.


Nay, they say, they love those men best tha^ are kindest to their Wives. Good
men! poor hearts. And here, if an honest Gentleman offers a Wife a civility by
the By, our bloody butcherly Husbands are cutting of throats presently --


Oh that we had those frank civil English-men, instead of our grave dull surly
Spanish Blockheads, whose greatest honour lies, in preserving their Beards and
Foreheads inviolable.


In England, if a Husband and Wife like not one another, they draw two several
ways, and make no bones on it, while the Husband treats his Mistress openly in
his Glass-Coach; the Wife, for decency's sake, puts on her Vizar, and whips
away in a Hackney with a Gallant, and no harm done.


Though, of late, 'tis as unfashionable for a Husband to love his Wife there,
as 'tis here, yet 'tis fashionable for her to love some body else, and that's
something.


Nay, they say, Gentlemen will keep company with a Cuckold there, as soon as
another man, and ne'er wonder at him.


Oh happy Country! there a Woman may choose for her self, and none will into
the Trap of Ma^imony, unless she likes the Bait; but here we are tumbled
headlong and blindfold into it.


We are used as they use Hawks, never unhooded, or whistled off, till they are
just upon the Quarry.


And 'tis for others, not our selves, we fly too.


No more, this does but put us in mind of our misery.


It does so: but prithee let's be merry one night, to morrow is our last.
Farewell all happiness.


O that this happy day would last our lives-time. But prithee, my Dear, let's
have thy Song, and divert our s^lves as well as we can in the mean time.


'Tis a little too wanton.


Pr^thee let's be a little wanton this evening, to morrow we must take our
leaves on it.


Come on then; our Maids shall join in the Chorus: Here they are.


WOman who is by N^ture wild,
Dull be^rded men encloses;
Of N^ture's freedom we're beg^il'd
By Laws which man impo^es:
Who still himself continues sree,
Yet we poor Slaves must fettered be.
A s^ame on the Curse
Of, For better sor worse;
'Tis a vile imposition on Nature:
For Women should change,
And have freedom to range,
Like to every other wild Creature.
So gay a thing was ne'er designed.
To be restrained from roving;
Heaven meant so changeable a mind
Should have its change in loving.
By cunning we could make men smart,
But they by strength o'rcome our Art.

A shame on the Curse
Of, For, c.
How happy is the ^illage Maid,
Whom only Love can f^tter;
By foolish Honour ne'er betrayed,
She serves a Power much greater:
That lawful Prince the wisest rules,
Th* Usurper Honour rules but Fools.

A shame on the Curse
Of, For, c.
Let us resume our ancient right,
Make man at distance wonder;
Though he victorious be in sight,
In love we'll keep him under.
W^ and Ambition hence be hurled,
Let Love and Beauty rule the World.

A shame on the Curse
Of, For better, c.

Oh, dear Clara, that this were true! But now let's home, our Father will miss
us.


No, he's walked abroad with the three Shipwrecked Gentlemen.


They're proper handsome Gentlemen; but the chief, whom they call Don John,
exceeds the rest.


I never saw a finer person; pray Heaven either of our Husbands prove as good.


Do not name 'em. Let the Maids go home, and if my Father be there, let him
know we are here.


In the mean time, if he be thereabouts, do you go down that Walk, and I'll go
this way, and perhaps one of us shall light on him.


Agreed.


Where have you left the Old man, Don Francisco?


He's very busy at home, seeing all things prepared for his Daughters Weddings
to moriow.


His Daughters are gone this way: if you have any friendship for me, go and
watch the Old man; and if he offers to come towards us, divert him, that I may
have freedom to attack his Daughters.


You may be sure of us, that have served you with our lives; besides, the
justice of this cause will make us serve you. Adieu.


Now for my Virgins. A^sist me, Love. Fools, you shall have no Maiden-heads to
morrow-night. Husbands have Maiden-heads! no, no -- poor sneaking Fools.


I have lost my way, I think I shall never find this house: But I shall never
think my self out of my way, unless I meet my impious Master; Heaven grant he
be drowned.


How now, Rascal, are you alive?


Oh Heaven! he's here. Why was this lewd Creature saved? I am in a wo^se
condition than ever; now I have escaped drowning, he brings hanging fresh into
my memory.


What mute, Sir?


Sir, I am no more your Servant, you parted with me, I thank you, Sir, I am
beholding to you: Farewell, good Sir, I am my own man now --


No: though you are a Rogue, you are a necessary Rogue, and I'll not part with
you.


I must be gone, I dare not venture further with you.


Sir, do you know me, and dare you say this to me? have at your Guts, I will
rip you from the Navel to the Chin.


O good Sir, hold, hold. He has got me in his clutches, I shall never get loose
-- Oh! Oh! --


Come, Dog, follow me close, stinking Rascal.


I am too well pickled in the Salt-water to stink, I thank you, I shall keep a
great while. But you were a very generous man, to leave a Gentleman, your
Friend, in danger, as you did me. I have reason to follow you: but if I serve
you not in your kind, then am I a sows'd Sturgeon.


Follow me, Sir; I see a Lady.


Are you so fierce already?


Ha! this is the Stranger;
What makes him here?

A delicate Creature. Ha! this is the Lady. How happy am I to meet you here --


What mean you, Sir?


I was undone enough before, with seeing your Picture in the Gallery; but I see
you have more Excellencies than Beauty, your Voice needed not have conspired
with that to ruin me.


Have you seen my Picture?


And loved it above all things I ever saw, but the Original. I am lost beyond
redemption, unless you can pity me.


He has been lost a hundred times, but he always sinds himself again -- and me
too; a pox on him.


When Love had taken too fast hold on me, ever to let me go, I too late found
you were to morrow to be marri'd.


Yes, I am condemned to one I never saw, and you are come to railly me and my
misfortunes.


Ah, Madam, say not so, my Master is always in earnest.


So much I am in earnest now, that if you have no way to break this marriage
off, and pity me, I soon shall repent I ever came to Land; I shall suffer a
worse wrack upon the Shore, here I shall linger out my life in the worst of
pains, despairing Love; there, I should have perished quickly --


Ah poor man! he's in a desperate condition, I pity him with all my heart --


Peace, Rascal. Madam, this is the only opportunity I am like to have; Give me
leave to improve it.


Sure, Sir, you cannot be in earnest.


If all the Oaths under the Sun can convince you, Madam, I swear --


O Sir, Sir, have a care of swearing, for fear you should, once in your life,
be forsworn --


Peace, Dog, or I shall slit your Wind-pipe.


Nay, I know if he be forsworn, 'tis the first time, that's certain.


But, Sir, if you be in earnest, and I had an inclination, Tis impossible to
bring it about, my Father has disposed of me.


Dispose of your self, I'll do well enough with him, and my Fortune and Quality
are too great for him, for whom you are intended, to dispute with me.


If this be true, would you win a Woman at first sight?


Madam, this is like to be the ^irst and last; to morrow is the fatal day that
will undo me.


Courage, Don, matters go well.


Nay, I had rather have a Peasant of my own choosing, than an Emperor of
another. He is a handsome Gentleman, and seems to be of quality: Oh that he
could rid me of my intended slavery.

Sir, talk not of impossible things; for could I wish this, my Father's Honour
will not suffer him to dispense wtih his promise.


I'll carry you beyond his power, and your intended Husband's too.


It cannot be; but I must leave you, I dare not be seen with you --


Remember the short time you have to think on this: will you let me perish
without relief? if you will have pity on a wretched man, I have a Priest in my
company, I'll marry you, and we'll find means to fly early in the morning,
before the house are stirring.


I confess I am to be condemned to a Slavery, that nothing can be worse; yet
this were a rash attempt.


If you will not consent to my just desires, I am resolved to kill my self, and
fall a Sacrifice to your disdain. Speak, speak my doom --


Hold, hold --


Ay, hold, hold: poor foolish Woman, she should not need to bid him hold.


I'll find a means this night to speak with you alone; but I fear this is but
for your diversion.


Yes, 'tis for diversion indeed; the common diversion of all the world.


By all that's great and good, my intentions are honourable.


Farewell, Sir, I dare not stay longer.


Will you keep your word, Madam?


You'll keep yours, no doubt --


I will, any thing rather than marry one I cannot love, as I can no man of
another choosing.


Remember, Madam, I perish if you do not; I have only one thing to say, Keep
this Secret from your Sister, till we have effected it; I'll give you
sufficient reason for what I say.

Victoria, Victoria; I have her fast, she's my own.


You are a hopeful man, you may come to good in time.


Here is the other Sister; have at her.


Why, Sir, Sir; have you no conscience? Will not one at once serve your turn?


Stand by, Fool. Let me see, you are the Lady.


What say you, Sir?


You have lately taken up a stray heart of mine, I hope you do not intend to
detain it, without giving me your own in exchange.


I a heart of yours? since when, good Sir? you were but this day shipwrecked on
this Coast, and never saw my face before*


I saw your Picture, and I saw your motion, both so charming, I could not
resist them; but now I have a nearer view, I see plainly I am lost.


A goodly handsome man! but what can this mean?


Such killing Beauties I ne'er saw before; my heart is irrevocably gone.


Whether is it gone, Sir? I assure you I have no su^ thing about me, that I
know of.


Ah, Madam, if you would give me leave to search you, I should find it in some
little corner about you, that shall be nameless.


It cannot be about me, I have none but my own (...) that I must part with to
morrow to I know not whom.


If the most violent love that man ever knew can ever deserve that treasure, it
is mine; if you give that away, you lose the truest Lover that ever languished
yet.


What can be the end of this? Sure Blood* must follow this dishonour of the
Family* and I unfortunate, shall have my throat cut for company.


Do you know where you are?


Yes, Madam, in Spain, where opportunities are very (...), and those that are
wise make use of 'em as soon as they have 'em.


You have a mind* to divert your self; but I must leave you, I am disposed to
be more serious.


Madam, I swear by all --


Hold, hold; will you be forsworn again?


Peace, Villain, I shall cut that tongue out.


Farewell, I cannot stay.


I'll not leave her; I'll thaw her, if she were Ice, before I have done with
her.


There is no end of this lewdness. Well, I must be killed or hanged once for
all, and there's an end on it.


I am faint with what I suffered at Sea, and with my wandering since; let us
repose a little, we shall not find this house to night.


I ne'er shall rest till I have found Don Francisco's house; but I'll sit down a
while.


I hope he will not find it, till I have found means to give Don John warning
of his cruel intentions: I would save his life, who, I fear, would not do that
for me. But in the miserable ^ase that I am in, if he d^ies his love, death
would be the welcom'st thing on earth to me.


Oh my Octavio* how does the loss of thee perplex me with despair! the honour
of Mankind is gone with thee. Why do I whine? grief shall no longer usurp the
place of my revenge. How could I gnaw the Monster's heart, Villain! I'll be
with you. When I have revenged my dear Octavio's loss, I then shall d^
contented.


Th'old man's safe; I long to know Don John's success.


He's engaged upon a noble cause: if he succeeds, 'twill be a victory worth the
owning.


Hah! whom have we here? a young man well habited, with a Lady too; they seem
to be strangers.


A mischief comes into my head, that's worth the doing.


What's that, dear Antonio?


We are in a strange Country, and may want money: I would rob that young
Fellow. We have not robbed a good while; me-thinks 'tis a new wickedness to me.


Thou art in the right. I hate to commit the same dull sin over and over again,
as if I were marri'd to it: variety makes all things pleasant.


But there's one thing we'll ne'er omit. When we have robbed the Man, we'll
ravish the Woman.


Agreed; let's to it, man. Come on, young Gentleman, we must see what riches you
have about you.


O Villains! Thieves! Thieves! these are the inhumane Companions of that blou^y
Monster.


Have pity on poor miserable Strangers.


Peace; we'll use you kindly, very kindly.


Do you carry that young Gentleman, bind him to a Tree, and bring the money,
while I wait upon the Lady.


Will you play me no foul play in the mean time then? For we must cast Lots
about the business you wot of.


No, upon my honour.


Honour, you Villain?


Come, young Gentleman, I'll tame you.


Help! help --


Have you no humanity in you? Take our money, but leave us liberty; be not so
barb'rously cruel.


Come, I have made haste with him; now let us draw ^uts who enjoys the Lady
first.


O heaven assist me! what do I hear? help! help!


Fell. What, two men a robbing of a Lady! Be gone, and let her alone, or we have
sower Cudgels shall wasler your bones, I tell you that.


How now, Rogues?


Thanks to Heaven. I fly! I fly! where shall I hide my self? --


I shall conquer'em both. Now, Sir, what think you?


Why I think you manage your business as discreetly, and take as much pains to
have your throat cut, as any man in Spain.


Your fear o'r-rules your sense, mine is a life Monarchs might envy. --


'Tis like to be a very short one at this rate.


Away, Fool, 'tis dark, I must be gone; I shall scarce find the way home --


Heaven guard me from these wicked Wretches. Help! help! they are here.


How now, Madam? what* afraid of a Man!


Don John, no, not of you; you are the man in the world I would have met.


Leonora, you are the woman i'th'world I would have avoided. 'Sdeath! she will
spoil my new designs; but I have a trick for her. What miracle brought you
hither?


Love, that works the greatest miracles, made me follow you; and the same Storm
drove me on this shore, on which you were thrown, and thus far I've wandered
till I have found you.


This is the most unreasonable unsatiable loving Lady* that ever was abused by
man; she has a kind of Spaniel love, the worse you use her, the more loving she
is. Pox on her, I mu^ be rid of her.


I am very faint and weary, yet I was resolv*d not to rest till I had found
you.


Your unweari'd love has o'rcome and convinced me, there is not such a Woman
breathing.


This is a Sovereign Medicine for all my sorrows, I now, methinks, am happier
than ever: but I am faint and ill.


Here, Madam, I have an excellent Cordial, 'twill refresh you; and I'll conduct
you where you shall never be unhappy more.


From that dear hand 'tis welcome --
To your health.

And to your own destruction; you have drunk your last.


What means my Love?


Y'have drunk the subtlest poison that Art ever yet invented.


O murder! murder! what have you done?


Peace, Villain, leave your unseasonable pity -- You cannot live two minutes.


O ungrateful Tyrant! thou hast murdered the only Creature living that could
love thee. Heaven will revenge it, though to me 'tis kindness. Here all my
sorrows shall for ever cease.


Why would you persecute me with your love?


I could not help it. I came to preserve you, and am destroyed for it.


Oh horrid fact!


To preserve me! I wear my safety by my side.


Oh I faint! Guard your self. There's a young
Gentleman pursues your life. Have a Care --
I came to tell you this, and thus I am rewarded.
Heaven pardon you. Farewell. I can no more.

This object sure will strike your heart! Tigers would melt at this. Oh the
Earth will open and swallow you up, and me for company. There's no end of your
murders --


This is the first time I ever knew compassion.
Poor Fool, I pity her, but 'tis too late --
Farewell all senseless thoughts of a remorse,
I would remove what ever would stop my course.

THis nights success exceeded all my hopes. I had admittance to their several
Chambers, and I have been contracted to both the Sisters, and this day resolve
to marry 'em, and at several time^ enjoy them; and, in my opinion, I shall have
a brace of as pretty Wives, as any man in Spain.


Brave Don John, you are Master of your Art, not a Woman in Spain can stand
before you.


We can but envy you, and at a distance imitate; But both their Maids shall to
pot, I assure you.


How far will the Devil hurry you?


'Tis not the Devil, 'tis the Flesh, Fool.


Here will be fine cutting of throats. Poor Jacomo, must thou be cut off in the
flower of thy Age?


Gentlemen, your Servant; I hope you rested well this night.


We thank you, Sir; never better.


We never shall requite this o^ligation.


I warrant you my Master will; he's a very grateful civil person indeed.


The favour is too great to be suddenly requited; but I shall study to deserve
it.


Good man, you will deserve it.


Gentlemen, you are come, you are early.


This joyful occasion made us think it late.


The expectation of so great a blessing as we this day hope to enjoy, would let
us have but little rest last night.


And the fruition will afford us less to night.


Poor Fools! you shall be bobbed. How it tickles my Spleen to think on it.


These are to be my Sons in Law.


And my Cuckolds before-hand.


Pray know 'em, Gentlemen; they are men of Honour.


I shall be glad to serve them;

But first I'll serve their Ladies.


Come, Gentlemen, I'll now conduct you to my Daughters; and beg your pardon for
a moment, I'll wait on you again.


These Fools will spoil your design.


No, poor Sots; I have persuaded the Ladies to feign sickness, and put off
their marriage till to morrow morning, to gain time; in the mean while I have
'em safe, Boys.


But will not the Sisters betray you to one another?


No, I have wheedled each into a jealousy of the other, and each believes,
that if the other knows it, she, in honour, will reveal it to the Father.


Sir, if you be so very weary of your life, why don't you make use of a
convenient Beam? 'tis the easier way; so you may die without the filthy pother
you keep about it.


Away, Coward; 'tis a sign I am not weary of my life, that I make so much use
on it.


Oh Jacomo! thou art lost; 'tis pity a Fellow of thy neat spruce parts should
be destroyed.


Come, Gentlemen, will you not refresh your selves with some cool Wines this
morning?


We thank you, Sir, we have already.


Sir, here's a young Gentleman, a Stranger, desires to speak with you.


Admit him.

Your humble Servant.


Sir, when I ve told you what I come for, I doubt not but I shall deserve your
thanks. I come to do you service.


You have'em, Sir, alread^ --


You have lodg^d within your house some shipwrecked men, who are greater
Villains than the Earth ever bore; I come to give you warning of 'em, and to beg
your power to revenge such horrid actions, as heart could never yet conceive,
or tongue could utter. Ha! they are these -- Revenge, revenge cruel, unnatural
Rapes and Murders. They are Devils in the shapes of men.


What say you, Sir?


Now the snare is fallen upon me; me-thinks I feel cold Steel already in my body.
Too well I know that face.


I know that face. Now, Impudence, assist me. What mad young man is that?


These, by their habits and their meens, are Gentlemen, and seem to be men of
Honour.


By these two, last night, I was robbed, and bound to a Tree, and there have
been all night, and but this morning was relieved by Peasants -- I had a Lady
with me, whom they said they would ravish, and t^ morning I saw her dead; they
must have murdered her.


Heaven! what do I hear?


Oh! I am noosed already, I feel the knot, methinks, under my left ear.


The youth raves; we never saw his face, we never stirred from the bounds of
this house since we came hither.


'Sdeath, let me kill the Villain; shall he thus affront men of our quality and
honour?


Hold, consider I am a Magistrate.


The Youth was robbed, and with the fright has lost his wits. Poor Fool! let
him be bound in's bed.


Do not persist in this, but have a care: These injuries to men of Honour shall
not go unpunished.


Whither shall injured Innocence fly for succour, if you so soon can be
corrupted? Monster, I'll revenge my self; have at thy heart.


What means the Youth? put up your Sword.


We told you, Sir, he was mad.


Oh impudent Villains! I ask your pardon, Sir: My griefs and injuries tr^nsport
me so, I scarce can utter them. That Villain is Don John, who basely murdered
the Governor of Sevil in his house, and then dishonoured his fair Sister.


Death and Hell! this injury is beyond all sufferance.


Hold, Sir, think in whose house you are.


O Lord! what will this come to? Ah Jacomo! thy line of life is short.


This is the Villain, who killed the Lover of Antonio's Sister, deflow'rd her,
and murdered her Brother in his own house.


I'll have no longer ^ience.


Such a Villain should have his throat cut, though in a Church.


No man of honour will protect those, who offer such injuries.


Have at you, Villain.


Nay then; Within there: Ho! I will protect him, or perish with him.


What's the matter?


This rashness will spoil my design upon the Daughters; if I had perfected
that, I would have owned all this for half a Duccatoon --

I ask your pardon fo^ my ill manners; I was provoked too far: indeed the
accusations are so extravagant and odd, I rather should have laughed at 'em.
Let the young Fool have a vein opened, he's stark staring mad.


A foolish Impostor. We ne'er saw Sevil till last night.


Oh Impudence!


No, not we; we never were there till yesterday. Pray, Sir, lay that young
Fellow by the heels, for lying on us, men of Honour.


What is the matter, Friend, you tremble so?


'Sdeath, the Dog's fear will betray us.


I tremble, Sir? no, no, Sir: I tremble -- Though it would make any one tremble
to hear one lie, as that young Gentleman does. Have you no conscience in you?


Heaven can witness for me, I speak not false. Octavio, my dear Octavio, being
dearest to me of all the world, I would in Sevil have revenged his murder; but
the Villain there escaped me: I follow'd him to Sea, and in the same Storm in
which their Ship perished, I was thrown on shore. Oh my Octavio! if this foul
unnatural murder be not revenged, there is no Justice left among mankind. His
Ghost, and all the rest whom he has barbarously murdered, will interrupt your
quiet; they'll haunt you in your sleep. Revenge, revenge!


This is wonderful.


There must be something in this; his passion cannot be counterfeited, nor your
man's fear.


My fear? I scorn your words; I fear nothing under the Sun. I fear? Ha, ha, ha
--


Will you believe this one false Villain against three, who are Gentlemen, and
men of honour?


Nay, against four, who are Gentlemen, and men of honour?


O Villain, that I had my Sword imbru'd in thy hearts blood. Oh my dear
Octavio! Do Justice, Sir, or Heaven will punish you.


Gentlemen, he is too earnest, in his grief and anger, to be what you would
have him, an Impostor. My house has been your Sanctuary, and I am obliged in
honour not to act as a Magistrate, but your Host, no violence shall here be
offered to you; but you must instantly leave this house, and if you would have
safety, find it somewhere else. Be gone.


This is very well.


Oh! will you let 'em go unpunished?
Whither shall I ^lie for vengeance?

Pray leave this place immediately.


Ah, good Sir, let's be gone -- Sir, your most humble Servant.


Oh, Sir, consider what you do; do not banish Don John from hence.


Ha! what means she?


What say you?


Oh, Sir, he is my Husband, we were last night contracted.


Oh Heaven! what do I hear?


I am dishonoured, abused. Villain, thou die^t.


Villain, you lie; I will cut your throat first.


Hey, where are my people here.


Oh, Sir, hold; if you banish Don John, I am lost for ever.


Oh Devil! what do I hear?


He is my Husband, Sir, we were last night contracted.


Your Husband! Heaven! what's this?


Hell and Damnation!


Oh! I have lost my senses.


Oh Monster! now am I to be believed?


Oh spare my life! I am innocent as I hope to live and breath.


Dog, you shall fight for your life, if you have it.


First, I'll revenge my self on these.


Hold, hold, they are both my Wives, and I will have them.


Oh Devil! fall on --


Fall on, I will assist you.


Now we've done their business.
Ah, cowardly Rogue! are not you a Son of a Whore?

Ay, Sir, what you please: A man had better be a living
Son of a Whore, than a dead Hero, by your favour.

I could find in my heart to kill the Rascal; his fear, some time or other,
will undo us.


Hold, Sir; I went, Sir, to provide for your escape. Let's take Horses out of
the Stable, and fly; abundance of C^pany are coming, expecting the Wedding,
and we are i^parably lost if we take not this time. I think my fear will now
preserve you.


I think he counsels well. Let's fly to a new place of pleasure.


But I shall leave my business undone with the two Women.


'Tis now scarce feizible. Let's sly; you'll light on others as handsome, where
we come next.


Well, dispose of me as you please; and yet it troubl^s me.


Haste, haste, or we shall be apprehended.


O that I ever lived to see this day!
This fatal day! 'Twas our vile disobedience
Caused our poor Father's death, which Heaven
Will revenge on us. So lewd a Villain
As Don John was never heard of yet.

That we should be so credulous! Oh dreadful
Accident! Dear Father, what Expiation can
We make? our crime's too foul for
Tears to wash away, and all our liv^s will
B^ too short, to spend in penitence for this
Our levity and disobedience. He was the
Best of Fathers, and of Men.

What will become of us, poor miserable Maids,
Lost in our Fortunes and our Reputations?
Our intended Husbands, if they recover of their
Wounds, will murder us; and 'tis but Justice:
Our li^es too now cannot be worth the keeping.
(...) Devils in the shapes of men are fled.

Let us not waste our time in fruitless grief;
L^t us employ some to pursue the murderers.
And for our selves, let's to the next Monastery,
And there spend all our weary life in penitence.

Let's fly to our last Sanctuary in this world,
And try, by a R^ligious life, to expiate this Crime:
There is no safety, or no hope but there.
Let's go, and bid a long farewell to all the
World; a thing too vain, and little worth our care.

Agreed; farewell to all the vanity on Earth,
Where wretched Mortals, tossed 'twixt hope and fear,
Must of all fixed and solid joy despair.

Come Nymphs and Shepherds, haste away
To t^appy Sports within these shady Groves,
In pleasant lives time slides away apace,
But with the wretched seems to creep too slow.

Our happy leisure we employ in joys,
As innocent as they are pleasant. We,
Strangers to strife, and to tumultuous noise,
To baneful envy, and to wretched cares,
In rural pleasures spend our happy days,
And our soft nights in calm and quiet sleeps.

No rude Ambition interrupts our rest,
Nor base and guilty thoughts how to be great.

In humble Cottages we have such contents,
As uncorrupted Nature does afford,
Which the great, that surfeit under gilded Roofs,
And wanton in Down Beds, can never know.

Nature is here not yet debauched by Art,
'Tis as it was in Saturn's happy days:
Minds are not here by Luxury invaded;
A homely Plenty, with sharp Appetite,
Does lightsome health, and vigorous strength impart.

A chast-cold Spring does here refresh our thirst,
Which by no feavourish surfeit is increased;
Our food is such as Nature meant for Men,
Ere with the Vicious, Eating was an Art.

In noisy Cities riot is pursued,
And lewd luxurious living softens men,
Effeminates Fools in Body and in Mind,
Weakens their Appetites, and decays their Nerves.

With ^ilthy steams from their excess of Mea^,
And cloudy vapours raised from dang^rous Wine;
Their heads are never clear or free to think,
They waste their lives in a continual mist.

Some subtle and ill men choose Temperance,
Not as a Virtue, but a Bawd to Vice,
And vigilantly wait to ruin those,
Whom Luxury and Ease have lulled asleep.

Yes, in the clamorous Courts of tedious Law,
Where what is meant for a relief's a gievance;
Or in Kings Palaces, where Cunning strives,
Not ^o advance King's Interests, but its own.

There they in a continual hurry live,
And seldom can, for all their subtle Arts,
Lay their foundations sure; but some
Are undermined, others blown down by storms.

Their subtilty is but a common Road
Of flattering great men, and oppressing little,
Smiling on all they meet, and loving none.

In populous Cities, life is all a storm;
But we enjoy a sweet perpetual calm:
Here our own Flocks we keep, and here
I and my Phillis can embrace unenvi'd.

And I and Caelia without jealousy.
But hark, the Pipes begin; now for our sports.
Nymphs and Shepherds come away,
In these Groves let's sport and play;
Where each day is a Holy-day,
Sacred to Ease and happy Love.
To Dancing, Music, Poetry:
Your Flocks may n^w securely rov^.
Whilst you express your jollity.
We come, we come, no joy like this.
Now let us sing, rejoice, and kiss.
The Great can never know such bliss

As this.


As this.


As this.


As this.

The Great can never know such bliss


All the Inhabitants o'th'Wood,
Now celebrate the Spring,
That gives fresh vigour to the blood
Of every living thing.

The Birds have been singing and billing before us,
And all the sweet Choristers join in the Chorus.

The Nightingales with ^ging throats,
Warble out their pre^ Notes,
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet:
And thus our Loves and Pleasures greet.

Then let our Pipes sound, let us d^nce, let us sing,
Till the murmuring Groves with loud Eccho's shall ring.

How happy are we,
From all jealousy free;
No dangers or cares can annoy us:
We toy and we kiss,
And Love's our chief bliss;
A pleasure that never can cloy us.

Our days we consume in unenvi'd delights,
And in love and soft rest our happy long nights.

Each Nymph does impart
Her love without Art,
To her Swain, who thinks that his chief Treasure.
No envy is feared,
No sighs are ever heard,
But those which are caused by our pleasure.

When we feel the blessed Raptures of innocent Love,
No joys exceed ours but the pleasures above.

In these delightful fragrant Groves,
Let's celebrate our happy Loves.
Let's pipe, and dance, and laugh, and sing;
Thus every happy living thing,
Revels in the cheerful Spring.

So, thus far we are fafe, we have almost killed our Horses with riding cross
out of all Roads.


Nay, you have had as little mercy on them, as if they had been Men or Women:
But ^et we are not safe, let us fly farther.


The house I lighted at was mine during my life, which I sold to that fellow;
he, since he holds by that tenure, will carefully conceal us.


*Tis a Tenure I will not give him two months purchase for.


Besides, our Swords are used to conquest.


At worst, there is a Chur^h hard by; we'll put it to its proper use, take
refuge in it.


Look here, here are Shepherds, and young pretty Wenches; shall we be idle,
Don?


By no means; 'tis a long time, methinks, since we were vicious.


We'll serve 'em as the Romans did the Sabines, we'll rob 'em of their Women;
only we'll return the Punks again, when we have used them.


For Heavens sake hold.


Sir, no more; do as we do, ravish, Rascal, or, by my Sword, I'll cut thee
into so many pieces, it shall pose an Arithmetician to sum up the frac^ions of
thy body.


I ravish! Oh, good Sir! my courage lies not that way; alas, I, I am almost
famished, I have not eat to day.


Sir, by Heaven do as I bid thee, or thou shalt never eat again. Shall I keep
a Rascal for a Cipher?


Oh! what will become of me? I must do it.


Come on, Rogue, fall on.


Which a^e you for?


'Tis all one, I am not in Love but in Lust, and to such a one a Belly-full's a
Belly-full, and there's an end on it.


What means this violence?


Oh! Heaven protect us.


Well, I must have one too; if I be hanged, I had as good be hanged for
something.


Rogues, come not on; we'll be in your guts.


Help, help.


What Devils are these?


Here's one Rogue. Have we caught you, Sir? we'll cool your courage.


Am I taken prisoner? I shall be kept as an honourable Hostage, at least --


Whe^e are the^e Villains, these Ravishers?


Why you need not keep such a stir, ^entlemen, you will have all your Women
again, and no harm done. Let me go, I'll fetch 'em to you.


No, you libidinous Swine; we'll revenge the Rapes on you.


Good kind civil people pass this by: 'Tis true, my Master's a very Tarquin;
but I ne'er attempted to ravish before.


I'll secure you from ever doing of it again. Where'^ your Knife?


Heaven! what do you mean? Oh spare me! I am unprepared; let me be confessed.


We will not kill you, we'll but geld you: Are you so ho^, Sir?


Oh bloody Villains! have a care, 'tis not a season for that, the Sign's in
Scorpio.


Down with him --


O help, help! murder, murder! Have a care what you do, I am the last of all my
Race -- Will you destroy a whole Sto^k, and take away my Representers of my
Family? --


There shall be no more of the Breed of you -- *


I am of an ancient Family; will you cut off all hopes of a Son and Heir? Help!
help! Master, Don John? Oh! Oh! Oh!


How now, Rogues? do you abuse my Man?


O Sir, this is the first good thing you ever did: if you had not come just in
the Nick, I had lost my Manhood.


'Tis no matter for the use you make on it.


But come, let's now to Supper.


Come on, I am almost starved.


Let's not complain, but Dog the Rogues, and when we have Housed 'em, we will
to the next Magistrate, and beg his power to apprehend 'em.


Let's in, and see this Church.


Is this a time to see Churches? But let me see whose Statue's this? Oh Heaven!
this is Don Pedro's, whom you murdered at Sevil.


Say you so? Read the Inscription.


Here lies Don Pedro, Governor of Sevil, barbarously murdered by that impious
Villain, Don John, against whom his innocent blood cries still for vengeance.


Let it cry on. Art thou there i'faith? *Yes, I killed thee, and would do it
again upon the same occasion. Jacomo -- invite him to Supper.


What, a Statue! invite a Statue to Supper? Ha, ha -- can Marble eat?


I say, Rascal, tell him I would have him Sup with me.


Ha, ha, ha! who the Devil put this * whimsy into your head? Ha, ha, ha!
invite a Statue to Supper?


I shall spoil your mirth, Sirr^; I will have it done.


Why, 'tis impossible; would you have me such a Coxcomb, invite Ma^ble to eat?
Ha, ha, ha.

Good Mr. Statue, if it shall please your Worship, my Master desires you to
make Collation with him presently --

Oh I am dead! Oh, Oh, Oh.


The Statue nods its head; 'tis odd --


'Tis wonderful.


^ am amazed.


Oh I cannot stir! Help, help.


Well, Governor, come, take part of a Collation with me, 'tis by this time
ready; make haste, 'tis I invite you.

Say you so? come on, let's set all things in order quickly.


Oh fly, fly.


This is prodigious.


Come, our meat is ready, let's sit. Pox on this foolish Statue, it puzles me
to know the reason on it. Sir, I'll give you leave to sit.


Let's eat, ne'er think on it.


Ay, come, let's eat; I am too hungry now to think on the fright --


This is excellent Meat. How the Rogue eats. You'll choke your self.


I warrant you, look to yourself.


Why, Jacomo, is the Devil in you?


No, no; if he be, 'tis a hungry Devil.


Will you not drink?


I'll lay a good foundation first.


The Rascal eats like a Canibal.


Ay, 'tis no matter for that.


Some Wine, Sir.


There, Sir, take it; I am in haste.


'Sdeath, the Fool will be strangled.


The Fool knows what he does.


Here's to Don Pedro's Ghost, he should have been welcome.


O name him not.


The Rascal is afraid of you after death.


Oh! Oh! some Wine, give me some Wine.


Take it.


So, now 'tis down.


Are you not satisfied yet?


Peace, peace; I have but just begun.

Who's there? come in, I am very busy.


Rise, and do your duty.


But one morsel more, I come.
What a pox, are you mad?
Oh! the Devil, the Devil.


Hah! it is the Ghost, let's rise and receive him.


I am amazed.


Not frighted are you?


I scorn the thoughts of fear.


Come, Governor, you are welcome, sit there; if we had thought you would have
come, we would have staid for you. But come on, Sir, give me some Wine.


Oh! I am dead; what shall I do? I dare not come near you.


Come, Rascal, or I'll cut your throat.


I come, I come. Oh! Oh!


Why do you tremble, Rascal? hold it steadily --


Oh! I cannot.


Here, Governor, your health. Friends, put it about. Here's excellent meat;
taste of this Ragoust. If you had had a body of flesh, I would have given you
cher entire -- but the Women care not for Marble. Come, I'll help you. Come,
eat and let old quarrels be forgotten.


I come not here to take repast with you;
Heaven has permitted me to animate
This Marble body and I come to warn
You of that vengeance is in store for you,
If you amend not your pernicious lives.

Oh Heaven!


What, are you ^ome to preach to us?


Keep your Harangues for Fools that will believe 'em.


We are too much confirmed. Pox of this dry discourse, give me some Wine. Come,
here's to your Mistress; you had one when you were living: not forgetting your
sweet Sister* Sir, more Wine.


Ay, Sir -- Good Sir, do not provoke the Ghost; his Marble fists may fly about
your ears, and knock your brains out.


Peace, Fool.


Trem^le, you impious Wretches, and repent; Behold, the powers of Hell wait for
you --


Oh! I will steal from hence. Oh the Devil!


Sir, stir not; by Heaven I'll use thee worse than Devils can do. Come near,
Coward.


O I dare not stir; what will become of me?


Come, Sir, eat.


O, Sir, my appetite is satisfied.


Drink, Dog, the Ghost's health: Rogue, do it, or I'll run my Sword down your
throat.


Oh! Oh! Here, Mr. Statue, your health.


Now, Rascal, sing to entertain him.


Sing, quoth he! Oh! I have lost my voice; I cannot be merry in such company.
Sing --


Who are these with ugly shapes?


Their manner of appearing is something strange.


They're Devils, that wait for such hard impious Men. They're Heavens
Instruments of eternal vengeance.


Are they some of your Retinue? Devils, say you? I am sorry I have no Burnt
Brandey to treat'em with, that's Drink fit for Devils -- Hah! they vanish.


Cannot the fear of Hell's eternal tortures,
Change the horrid course of your abandoned lives?
Think on those Fires, those everlasting Fires,
That shall without consuming burn you ever.

Dreams, dreams, too slight to lose my pleasure for.
In spite of all you say I will go on,
Till I have surfeited on all delights.
Youth is a Fruit that can but once be gathered,
And I'll enjoy it to the full.

Let's push it on; Nature chalks out the way that we should follow.


'Tis her fault, if we do what we should not. Let's on, here's a Brimmer to our
Leader's health.


Wha^ hellish Fiends are these?


Let me tell you, 'tis something ill bred to rail at your Host, that treats you
civilly. You have not yet forgot your quarrel to me.


'Tis for your good; by me Heaven warns you of its wrath, and gives you a
longer time for your repentance. I invite you this night to a repast of mine.


Where?


At my Tomb.


What time?


At dead of night.


We'll come.


Fail not.


I warrant you.


Farewell, and think upon your lost co^dition.


Farewell, Governor; I'll see what Treat you'll give us.


And I.


And I.


That will not I. Pox on him, I have had enough of his company, I shall not
recover it this week. If I eat with such an Host, I'll be hanged.


If you do not, by Heaven you shall be hanged.


Whither will your lewdness carry me? I do not care for having a Ghost for my
Landlord. Will not these Miracles do good upon you?


There's nothing happens but by Natural Causes,
Which in unusual things Fools cannot find,
And then they stile 'em Miracles. But no Accident
Can alter me from what I am by Nature.
Were there --
Legions of Ghosts and Devils in my way,
One moment in my course of pleasure I'd not stay.

WEll, this damned Master of mine will not part with me; and we must fight five
or six times a day, one day with another, that's certain: Therefore thou art
wise, honest Jacomo, to arm thy self, I take it. Sa, sa, sa -- Methinks I am
very valiant on the sudden. Sa, sa, sa. Hah! there I have you. Paph -- Have at
you. Hah -- there I have you through: that was a fine thrust in tierce. Hah --
Death! what noise is that?


How now, Sir, what are you doing?


Nothing, but practising to run people through the bodies, that's all; for I
know some body's throat must be cut before midnight.


In Armour too! why, that cannot help you, you are such a cowardly Fool; fear
will betray you faster within, than that can defend you without --


I fear no body breathing, I; nothing can terrify me but the Devilish Ghost.
Ha! who's that coming? Oh Heaven!


Is this your courage? you are preparing for flight before an Enemy appears.


No, no, Sir, not I; I only leapt back to put my self upon my guard -- Fa, la,
la --


Whom have we here?


Oh where! where! who are they?


Oh my Friends! where have you been?


We went to view the stately Nunnery hard by, and have been chatting with the
poor sanctifi'd Fools, till it's dark; we have been chaffering for Nuns-flesh.


There I made such a discovery, if you do not assist me, I am ruined for ever.
Don Bernardo's Sister, whom I fell in love with in Sevil, is this day placed
there for probation; and if you cannot advise me to some way or other of
getting her out, for some present occasion I have for her, I am a lost man,
that's certain.


The business is difficult, and we resolve to manage it in council.


Now will they bring me into some wicked occasion or other of showing my
prowess: a pox on 'em.


Have you so long followed my fortunes, to boggle at difficulty upon so
honourable an occasion; besides, here is no difficulty.


No? the Walls are so high, and the Nunnery so strongly fortified, 'twill be
impossible to do it by force; we must find some stratagem.


The stratagem is soon found out --


As how, Don John?


Why, I will set fire on the Nunnery; fire the Hive, and the Drones must out,
or be burnt within: then may you, with ease, under pretence of succour, take
whom you will.


'Tis a gallant design.


I long to be about it. Well, Don, thou art the bravest Fellow breathing.


Gentlemen, pray what became of that brave Fellow, that fired the Temple at
Ephesus? was he not hanged, Gentlemen, hum --


We are his Rivals, Fool; and who would not suffer for so brave an action?


He's a Scoundrel and a Poultroon, that would not have his Death for his Fame.


That he is, a damned Son of a Whore, and not fit to drink with.


'Tis a rare thing to be a Martyr for the Devil; But what good will infamy do
you, when you are dead? when Honour is nothing but a vapour to you, while you
are living. For my part I'd not be hanged to be Alexander the Great.


What a phlegmatic dull Rascal is that, who has no Ambition in him.


Ambition! what, to be hanged? besides, what's the intrinsic value of Honour
when a man is under ground? Let '^m but call me honest Jacomo, as I am, while I
live, and let 'em call m^, wh^n I am dead, Don John if they will.


Villain, dare you profane my name?


Hold, Sir, think what you do; you cannot ^urt me, my Arms are Pistol-proof.


I come to give you notice of an approaching danger: You must fly; an Officer
with some Shepherds have found you were at our house, and are come to apprehend
you, for some outrage you have committed; I came to give you notice, knowing
our Family has a great respect for you.


Yes, I know your Family has a great respect for me, for I have lain with every
one in it, but thee and thy Master.


Why look you now, I thought what it would come to: Fly, Sir, fly; the darkness
of the night will help us. Come, I'll lead the way.


Stay, Sir, you shall have one occasion more of showing your valour.


Did ever any Knight Errant fly, that was so well appointed?


No; you shall stay, and get Honour, Jacomo.


Pox of Honour, I am content with the Stock I have already.


You are easily satisfied. But now let's fire the Nunnery.


Come on.


I long to be at it.


O Jacomo! thy life is not worth a Piece of Eight. 'Tis in vain to dissuade
'em, Sir; I will never trouble you with another request, if you'll be
graciously pleased to leave me out of this adventure.


Well, you have your desire.


A thousand thanks; and when I see you again, I will be humbly content with a
Halter.


But, do you hear, Fool? stand Sentinel here; and if any thing happens
extraordinary, give us notice of it.


O, good Sir! what do you mean? that's as bad as going with you.


Let me find you here when I come again, or you are a dead man --


I am sure I am a dead man, if you find me here: But would my Armour were off
now, that I might run the lighter. Night assist me. Heaven! what noise is that?
to be left alone in the dark, and fear Ghosts and Devils, is very horrible. But
Oh* who are these?


We are thus far right; the Ravishers went this way.


For Heavens sake take 'em dead or alive; such desperate Villains ne'er were
seen.


So; if I be caught, I shall be hanged; if not, I shall be killed. 'Tis very
fine. The^e are the Shepherds. I'll hide my self.


If we catch the Rogues, we will broil 'em alive; no death can be painful
enough for such Wretches.


O bloody minded men --


O impious vile Wretches! that we had you in our clutches! Open your Dark
Lantern, and let's search for 'em.


What will become of me? my Armour will not do now.


Thus far we hunted them upon a good scent: but now we are at a fault.


Let me see; I have one trick left, I have a Disguise will fright the Devil.


They must be hereabouts.


I'll in amongst them, and certainly this will (...) (...).


Oh Heaven! what horrid Object's this?


The Devil.


Oh fly, ^ly! the Devil, the Devil! fly --


Farewell, good Gentlemen. This is the first ti^ my face ever did me good. But
I'll not stay I take it; Yet wh^her shall I fly? Oh! what noise is that? I am
in the dark, in a strange place too; what will follow? There lie. Oh! my A^ms.
Hah! Who's there? Let me go this way -- Oh ^he Ghost! the Ghost! Gad forgive
me, 'twas nothing but my fear --

Oh vile Wretches! they have done the deed. There is no ^lying; now the place
will be full of people, and wicked Lights, that will discover me, if I fly.


Fire, fire, fire; the Nunnery's on fire; help, help --


What shall I do? there's no way but one, I'll go with the Crowd. Fire! Fire --
Murder! help! help! fire! fire --


Fear not, Ladies, we'll protect you.


Our Sex and Habits will protect us.


Not enough, we will protect you better.


Pray leave us, we must not consort with men.


What would you run into the ^ire to avoid Mankind? you are zealous Ladies
indeed.


Come, Ladies, walk with us; we'll put you in a place of safety.


We'll go no further, we are safe enough; be gone, and help to quench the fire.


We have another fi^e to quench; come along with us.


Ay, come, you must go.


Come ^long, we know what's good for you; you must go with us.


^ven! what violence is this? what impious men are thes^? H^lp! help!


Here are the bloody Villains, the causes of our misery.


Inhumane Butchers! now we'll have your lives.


Hah! here are a brace of my Wives. If you have a mind to this Fool, take her
betwixt you; for my part, I'll have my own. Come, Wives, along with me; we must
consummate, my Spouses, we must consummate.


What Monsters are these?


Help! help!


'Sdeath! these foolish Women are their own Enemies.


Here are so many people, if they cry out more, they'll interrupt us in our
brave design.


I warrant you; when they cry out, let us out-noise 'em. Come, Women, you must
go along with us.


Heaven! what shall we do? Help! help!


Help! help! Fire! fire! fire!


Help! help!


Help! help!


Fire! fire! fire! Help! help!
'Sdeath! here's my Master,

Sir, come along with me, I have use of you.


I am caught.


Here, Sir, take one of my Wives, and force her after me. Do you refuse,
Villain?


Help! help! good people ^elp! rescue us from these Villains.


Who are you, committing viol^nce on Women?


Heavens! they are the Villains we seek for.


Where is my Armour now? Oh my Armour.


Fall on.


Say you so, Rogues?


So, the Field's our own.


But a pox on it, we have bought a Vic^ory too dear, we have lost the Women.


We'll find 'em again. But poor Jacomo's killed.


That's a lie.


Faith, let's carry off our dead.


Agreed; we'll bury him in the Church, while the Ghost treats us, we'll ^reat
the Worms with the body of a Rascal.


Not yet a while.


Come, let's take away the Fool.


No, the Fool can take up himself. 'Sdeath! you resolve not to let me alone
dead or alive --

Here are more Murders. Oh!


Oh counterf^iting Rascal! are you alive?


The Clock strikes Twelve.


'Slife, our times come, we must to the Tomb: I would not break my word with
the Ghost for a thousand Doubloons --


Nor I keep it for ten times the Money.


But you shall keep your word, Sir.


Sir, I am resolved to fast to night, 'tis a Vigil: Besides, I care not for
eating in such base company.


Follow, follow, follow --


D'hear that noise? the remaining Rogues have ^ais'd the Mob^le, and are coming
upon us.


Oh! l^t's f^ie -- f^ie -- what will become of me?


Let's to the Church, and give the Rogues the Go-by.


Come on, since 'tis my time, and I have promised the Governor, I'll go -- You
had best stay, Sir, and be taken.


No: now I must go to the Church whether I will or no. Away, away, fly!

Here they went; follow, follow --


Good Sir, let's go no farther; look what horrid Attendants are here. This
wicked Ghost has no good meaning in him.


He resolves to treat us in State; I think he has robbed all the Graves
hereabouts of their Dead, to wait upon us.


I see no Entertainment prepared.


He has had the manners to light off his Horse, and entertain us.


He would not sure be so ill bred, to make us wait on him on foot.


Pox on his breeding, I shall die with fear; I had as good have been taken and
hanged. What horror seizes me!


Well, Governor, you see we are as good as ou^ words.


Where's your Collation?


Bid some of your Attendants give us some Wine.


Have you not yet thought on your lost condition?
Here are the Ghosts of some whom you have murdered,
That cry for vengeance on you --

Repent, repent of all your horrid crimes: Monsters, repent, or Hell will
swallow you.


That's my Old man's voice. D'hear, Old Gentleman, you talk idly.


I do repent, O spare me. I do repent of all my sins, but especially of
following this wicked Wretch.


Away, Fool


My blood cries out upon thee, barbarous Wretch.


That's my Host Francisco, faith thou were a good honest Blockhead, that's the
truth on it --


Thou shalt not escape vengeance for all thy crimes.


What Fool's that, I am not acquainted with her.


In time lay hold on mercy, and repent.


That was Leonora, a good natured silly Wench, something too loving, that was
all her fault.


Villain, this is the last moment of thy life,
And thou in flames eternally shalt howl.

Thou li'st. This is the young hot-headed Fool we killed at Francisco's. Pox on
him, he disappointed me in my design upon the Daughters. Would thou were alive
again, that I might kill thee once more.


No more of this old foolish stuff; give us some Wine to begin with.


Ay, give us some Wine, Governor.


What, do you think to treat us thus? I offered you a better entertainment.
Prithee trouble us no more, but bid some of your Attendants give us some Wine;
I'll drink to you and all the good Company.


Give 'em the Liquor they have most delighted in.


This is something.


This is civil.


I hope a good desert will follow.


Are you stark distracted? will you drink of that ^iquor? Oh! Oh! what do you
mean? Good sweet Ghost forbear your civility; Oh I am not dry, I thank you --


Give it me. Here, take it, Sir.


By no means, Sir, I never drink between meals. Oh Sir --


Take it, Rascal.


Oh Heavens!


Now, Governor, your Health; 'tis the reddest drink I ever saw.


Hah! pah! 'tis blood.


Pah! it is --


Oh! I'll have none of it.


'Sdeath, do you mean to affront us?


'Tis fit for such bloud-thirsty Wretches.


Do you upbraid me with my killing of you; I did it, and would do it again: I'd
fight with all your Family one by one; and cut off root and branch to enjoy
your Sister. But will you treat us yet no otherwise?


Yes, I will, ye impious Wretches.


What's here? Music to treat us with?


There is some pleasure in this.


PRepare, prepare, new Guests draw near,
And on the brink of Hell appear.

Kindle fresh flames of Sulphur th^re.
Assemble all ye Fiends,
Wait for the dreadful ends
Of impious men; who far excel
All the Inhabitants of H^ll.

-- Let 'em come, let 'em come,
To an eternal dreadful doom,
Let 'em come, let 'em come.

In mi^iefs they have all the damned outdone;
Here they shall weep, and shall unpiti'd groan,
Here they shall howl, and make eternal mo^n.

By B^oud and Lust they have deserved so well,
That they shall feel the hottest flames of Hell.

In vain they shall here their past mischiess bewail,
In exquisite torments that never shall fail.

Eternal darkness they shall find,
And them eternal Chains shall bind
To infinite pain of sense and mind.

-- Let 'em come, let 'em come,
To an eternal dreadful doom
Let 'em come, let 'em come.

Will you not relent, and feel remorse?


Could thou bestow another heart on me, I might; but with this heart I have,
I cannot.


These things are prodigious.


I have a kind of grudging to relent, but something holds me back.


If we could, 'tis now too late; I will not.


We defy thee.


Perish, ye impious Wretches, go and find
The punishments laid up in store for you.
Behold their dreadful Fates, and know, that thy last moment's come.


Think not to fright me, foolish Ghost; I ll break your Marble body in pieces,
and pull down your Horse.


If fear has left me my strength, I'll steal away.


These things I see with wonder, but no fear.
Were all the Elements to be confounded,
And shu^l'd all into their former Chaos;
Were Seas of Sulphur flaming round about me,
And all Mankind roaring within those fires,
I could not fear or feel the least remorse.
To the last instant I would dare thy power.
Here I stand firm* and all thy threats contemn;
Thy Murderer stands here, now do thy worst.

Thus perish all,
Those men, who by their words and actions dare,
Against the will and power of Heaven declare.

THrough all the Perils of the Play I've run,
But know not how your fury I may shun;
I'm in new dangers now to be undone --
I had but one sierce Master there,
But I have many cruel Tyrants here.
Who do most bloodily my life pursue;
Who takes my Livelihood, may take that too.
Against little Players you great factions raise,
Make Solemn Leagues and Cov'nants against Plays.
We, who by no Allies assisted are,
Against the Great Confederates must make War.
You need not strive our Province to o'r-run,
By our own stratagems we are undone.
We've laid out all our Pains, nay Wealth for you,
And yet, hard-hearted men, all will not do.
'Tis not your Judgments sway for you can be
Pleased with damned Plays (as heart can wish to see)
'Ounds, we do what we can, what would you more?
Why do you come, and rant, and damn, and roar?
'Sdeath, what a Devil would you have us do?
Each take a Prison, and there humbly sue,
Angling sor single Money with a Shoo.
What, will you be Don Johns? have you no remorse?
Farewell then, bloody men, and take your course.
Yet stay --
If you'll be civil, we will treat of Peace,
And the Articles of the Treaty shall be these.
First, to the men of Wit we all submit;
The rest shall swagger too within the Pit,
And may roar out their little or no Wit.
But do not swear so loud to fright the City,
Who neither care for wicked men, nor witty;
They start at ills they do not like to do,
But shall in Shops be wickeder than you.
Next, you'll no more be troubled with M^chines.
Item, you shall appe^r behind our Scenes,
And there make love with the sweet chink of Guinnies,
The unresisted Eloquence of Ninnies.
Some of our Wom^ shall be kind to you,
And promise free ingress and egress too.
But if the Faces which we have wo'n't do,
We will find out some of Sixteen for you.
We will be civil when nought else will win ye;
We will new bait our Trap, and that will bring ye.
Come, faith let all old breaches now be healed,
And the said Articles shall be Signed and Sealed.

