TO what a wretched state are Poets born,
Split on the Rocks of Envy or of Scorn?
Even to the best the promised Wreath's denied,
And just Contempt attends on all beside.
This one would think should lessen the Temptation,
But they are Poets by Predestination.
The fatal Bait undaunted they pursue;
And claim the Laurel as their Labour's Due.
But where's the Use of Merit, or of Laws,
When Ingnorance and Malice judge the Cause?
'Twixt these, like Aesop's Husband, Poets fare,
This pulls the black and that the silver Hair,
Till they have left the Poem bald and bare.
Behold the dreadful spot they ought to fear,
Whole Loads of Poet-bane are scattered here.
Where ever it lights the sad Effects we find,
Though on the tender Hearts of Woman-kind.
The Men (whose Talents they themselves mistake,
Or misapply, for Contradiction sake.)
Spite of their Stars must needs be Critiques still,
Nay, though prohibited by the Irish Bill.
Blessed Age! when all our Actions seem designed
To prove a War 'twixt Reason and Mankind!
Here an affected Coquette perks and prunes,
Though she's below the Level of Lampoons,
Venting her Fly-blown Charms till her Own Squire
Is grown too nice and dainty to Admire.
There a pretending Fop (a Man of Note
More for his thread-bare Jest than Gaudy Coat)
Sees every Coxcomb's Mirth, yet wants the Sense
To know 'tis caused by his Impertinence.
Nor rests the Mighty Grievance here alone;
For not content with Follys of our own,
We plunder the fair Sex of what we can,
Who seldom miss their dear Revenge on Man.
Their property of Falsehood we invade,
Whilst they usurp our Mid-night Scouring Trade.

OLD Iohn of Gaunt time honoured Lancaster;
Hast thou according to thy Oath and Bond
Brought hither Harry Herford thy bold Son,
Here to make good th'Impeachment lately charged
Against the Duke of Norfolk Thomas Mowbray?

I have my Liege.

Hast thou moreover sifted him to find
If he Impeach the Duke on private malice;
Or worthily as a good Subject should.

As far as I can sound him in the Business
On some Apparent danger from the Duke
Aimed at your Highness, no Inveterate Malice!

Then set 'em in our presence Face to Face;
And Frowning, Brow to Brow, our self will hear
The Accuser and the Accused both freely speak;
High-Stomacht are they both and in their Rage
Deaf as the storming Sea, hasty as Fire.

Now many years of happy day's befall
My gracious Sovereign my most honoured Liege.

Each day exceeding the others happiness
Till Heaven in Jealousy to Earth's success
Add an immortal Title to your Crown.

Cousin of Herford what dost thou object
Against the Duke of Norfolk Thomas Mowbray?

First then be Heaven the Record to my speech.,
That in devotion to a Subjects love
(Not on Suggestions of a private Hatred)
Come I Appealant to this Princely presence. --
Now Thomas Mowbray do I turn to Thee,
And mark my greeting well; for what I speak
My Body shall make good upon this Earth,
Or my divine Soul answer it in Heaven:
Thou art a Trayter to the King and State,
A foul Excrescence of a Noble Stem;
To Heaven I speak it, and by Heaven 'tis true,
That thou art Treason spotted, false as Hell,
And wish (so please my Sovereign) ere we move,
What my Tongue speaks, my right drawn Sword may prove.

Let not the coldness of my Language draw
My Sov'reign Liege your Censure on my Zeal,
'Tis not the Trial of a Woman's War,
The senseless clamour of contending Tongues
Can arbitrate the Difference 'twixt us Two,
The Blood is hot that must be cooled for this:
The Reverence of this Presence curbs my speech,
That else had shot like Lightning and returned
This charge of Treason, to the slanderers Throat:
Set but aside his high Blood's Royalty,
And let him be no Kins-man to the King.
Allow me this, and Bulling-brook's a Villain;
Which to maintain I will allow him odds,
Pursue him bare-foot to the farthest North,
Whose Chastisement I tamely now forbear,

White-liver'd Coward there I throw my Gage,
Disclaiming my Relation to the King,
Which Fear, not Reverence make thee to object;
If guilty Dread has left thee so much strength,
Stoop and take up forthwith my Honour's Pawn;
By that and all the Rights of Knight-hood else
I will make good against thee Arm to Arm
What I have said, and Seal it with thy Soul.

I seize it Herford as I would seize Thee,
And by the Sword that laid my Knight-hood on me
I'll answer thee in any Knightly Trial
As hot in Combat as thou art in Brawl.

What does our Cousin lay to Norfolk's Charge?

First then I say (my Sword shall prove it true)
That Mow-bray has received eight thousand Nobles
In Name of Lendings for your Highness Service,
All which for lewd Employments he detains
Like a false Traitor and injurious Villain;
Besides I say and will in Combat prove,
That all the Treasons, Plots, Conspiracies
Hatched for these eighteen years within this Realm,
Fetched from false Mowbray their first Spring and Head:
Farther I say, and on his Heart will prove it,
That he did Plot the Duke of Gloster's Death,
Whose Martial Ghost to me for Vengeance cries,
And by the glorious Worth of my Descent
This Arm shall give it, or this Blood be spent.

How high a Pitch his Resolution Soars.
Thomas of Norfolk what say thou to this?

O let my Sovereign turn away his Face
And bid his Ear a little while be Deaf,
Till I have told this slander of his Blood,
How Heaven and good men hate so foul a Liar.

Now by our Sceptres Awe I tell thee Mowbray,
Were he my Brother, nay my Kingdoms Heir,
Our Blood should nothing privilege him, nor bend
Our upright Soul from Justice.

Then Bulling-brook as low as to thy Heart
Thou lie; Three parts of my Receipts for Callice
I have disbursed amongst his Highness Soldiers;
The Rest I by the King's consent reserved
Upon remainder of a dear Account,
Since last I went to fetch the Queen from France.
First swallow down that Lye -- for Gloster's Death
I slew him not, but rather to my fault
Neglected my Sworn Duty in that Case,
Compassion being here all my Offence.
And for the rest of thy perfidious Charge,
It Issues from the rancour of a Villain,
The flowing Gall of a degenerate Traitor,
In proof of which I summon thee to Combat,
Beseeching of his Majesty the Grace
To my wronged Fame t'appoint our Tryal-day
Where Herford's Blood shall for his slanders pay,
And wash the Poison of his Tongue away.

Rash men, thus long we have given you the hearing,
Now let the pleasure of your King be heard;
And know our Wisdom shall prescribe a way
To purge this Choler without letting Blood,
Forget, forgive, conclude and be agreed,
Gaunt, see this difference end where it begun,
We'll calm the Duke of Norfolk, you your Son.

To be a Peace-maker becomes my Age
Throw down my Son the Duke of Norfolk's Gage.

And Norfolk throw down his.

When Harry when?
Obedience bids, I should not bid again.

Will Norfolk when the King commands be slow?

My self dread Sovereign at your feet I throw;
My Life you may command, but not my Shame,
I cannot give, nor will you ask my Fame;
I am Impeacht, disgrac't before my King,
Pierced to the Soul with Slanders Venomed Sting,
Incurable but by the Traytor's Blood
That breathed the Poison.

Rage must be withstood;
Give me his Gage, Lyons make Leopards tame.

Yes, but not change their Spots, take but my shame,
And I resign my Gage; my dear dread Lord,
The purest Treasure Mortal times afford
Is spotless honour; take but that away
Men are but gilded Loam and painted Clay.

Cousin, throw down his Gage, do you begin,

Just Heaven defend me from so foul a sin.
Condemn not Sir your Blood to such disgrace!
Shall I seem braved before my Father's Face?
No, Royal Sir, ere my Blaspheaming Tongue
Shall do my Loyalty so foul a wrong,
Or sound so base a Parle, by the Roots I'll tear
The slavish Herrald of so vile a fear,
And spit it bleeding where the worst disgrace,
And slanders harbour, even in Mowbray's face.

Now by my Sceptre you have waked my spleen,
And since we sue in vain to make ye friends,
Prepare to meet before us in the Lists,
You shall, and he that bauk's the Combat, dies.
Behold me give your head-long fury Scope,
Each to chastise the others guilty Pride.
What Council cannot, let the Sword decide.

How slow alas the hours of Sorrow fly,
Whose Wings are damped with Tears! my dear, dear Gloster,
I have more than a Widows loss to mourn,
She but laments a Death; but I a Murder.

When Sister will you find the way to comfort?

When Gaunt has found the way to Vengeance, Comfort
Before that hour were Guilty.
Edwards seven Sons (whereof thy self art one)
Where as seven Viols of his sacred Blood,
Or seven fair Branches springing from one Stock;
Some of those Streams by natures course are dried,
Some of those Branches by the Destinies cut;
But Thomas, my dear Lord, my Life, my Gloster,
One flourishing Branch of that most Royal Stem,
Is hewed and all his verdant Leaves dispersed,
By envies hand and Murders bloody Axe.

Sister, the part I have in Gloster's Blood,
Does more solicit me than your exclaims,
To stir against the Butchers of his life;
But since Revenge is Heavens Prerogative,
Put we our Quarrel to the will of Heaven.

Save ye Sister -- very hot! oh! hot weather and hot work: come Brother, the
Lists are ready; the Fight will be worth the while: besides your concern there
is somewhat more than ordinary. In faith now I could be content to have Harry
escape; but for all that I would have the Traitor die.


Could my impartial eye but find him such,
Fell Mow-bray's Sword should come to late.

Where shall my Sorrows make their last complaint,
If York deny me too?

What would our Sister?


Revenge, and speedy for my Glosters death.


Why there 'tis -- Revenge, ho! a fine morsel for a Lady fasting, Gloster was
my Brother, true -- but Gloster was a Traitor and that's true too -- I hate a
Traitor more than I love a Brother.


A Traitor York?


'Tis somewhat a course name for a Kinsman, but yet to my thinking, to raise an
Army, execute Subjects, threaten the King himself, and reduce him to answer
particulars, has a very strong smatch with it -- go too, you are in fault, your
complaints are guilty; your very Tears are Treason. No remedy but Patience.


Call it not patience, York, 'tis cold despair,
In suffering thus your Brother to be slaughtered,
You show the naked path to your own Lives;
Ah! had his fate been yours my Gloster would
Have set a Nobler Prince upon your Lives.

This Air grows infectious: will you go Brother.

But one word more, grief ever was a Talker,
But I will teach him silence; of you both
I take eternal leave. Comforts wait on you
When I am laid in Earth: to some dark Cell
Will I betake me, where this weary Life
Shall with the taper waste: there shall I greet,
No Visitant but Death -- adieu! my Lords!
If this Farewell your Patience has abused,
Think 'twas my last, and let it be excused.

My Lord Aumerle is Harry Herford armed?

Yes, at all points and longs to enter in,

The Duke of Norfolk sprightfully and bold
Waits but the Summons of the Appealants Trumpet,
But see, the King.

Marshal demand of yonder Combatant,
Why he comes here, and orderly proceed
To swear him in the justice of his cause.

In the Kings name say who thou art and what's thy Quarrel?
Speak truly on thy Knighthood and thy Oath,
So Heaven defend thee and thy Valour.

Hither is Mowbray come upon his Oath,
To justify his Loyalty and truth,
Against false Bullingbrook that has appealed me,
And as I truly fight defend me Heaven.

Demand of yonder Knight why he comes here,
And formally according to our Law,
Depose him in the justice of his Cause.

Thy name, and wherefore thou art hither come
Before King Richard in his Royal Lists,
Speak like a true Knight: so defend thee Heaven,

Harry of Herford, Lancaster and Derby,
Stands here in Arms to prove on Thomas Mowbray,
That he's a Traitor to the King and State,
And as I truly fight defend me Heaven.
But first Lord Marshal I entreat the Grace
To kiss my Sovereigns hand and do him homage,
For Mowbray and my self are like to men
That vow along and weary Pilgrimage,
Therefore should take a ceremonious leave
And tender farewell of our several Friends.

Th'Appealant in all duly greets your Highness,
Craving to kiss your hand and take his leave.

We will descend and fouled him in our Arms;
Now Cousin, as thy Cause is just,
So be thy Fortune in this Royal Fight;
Farewell my Blood, which if thou chance to shed,
Lament we may, but not revenge the dead.

No noble eye be seen to loose a Tear
On me if I be foiled by Mowbrays Arm;
As confident as is the Faulcon's flight
At timorous Birds do I with Mowbray fight.
O thou the generous Author of my Blood,
Whose youthful Spirit enflames and lifts me up
To reach at Victory above my Head,
Add proof to this my Armour with thy Prayers,
And with thy Blessings point my vengeful Sword
To furbish new th'illustrious name of Gaunt.

However Heaven or Fortune cast my Lot,
There lives or dies a just and loyal man:
Never did wretched Captive greet the hour
Of freedom with more welcome or delight
Than my transported soul does celebrate
This Feast of battle -- Blessings on my King,
And peace on all.

Farewell my Lord,
Virtue and Valour guard thee: Marshal finish.

Harry of Herford, Lancaster and Derby,
Receive thy Sword and Heaven defend thy Right,
Fear this to Mowbray.

Curse on your tedious Ceremonies, more
To us tormenting then t'expecting Bridegrooms.
The signal for Heavens sake.

Sound Trumpets, and set forward Combatants.
Stay, stay, the King has thrown his Warder down.

Command the Knights once more back to their Posts,
And let the Trumpets sound a second charge,
Whilst with our Lords we briefly do advise.
Command 'em to resign their Arms, and listen
To what we with our Council have Decreed,
For that our Eyes detest the spectacle
Of Civil Wounds, from whence the dire infection
Of general War may spring, we bar your Combat,
Suppress those Arms that from our Coast would fright
Fair Peace, and make us wade in Kinsmen's Blood:
And lest your Neighbour-hood cause after-broils,
We banish you our Realms to different Climes,
You Bullingbrook on pain of Death,
Till twice five Summers have enircht our Fields.

And must this be your Pleasure? well!
Your pleasure stand, 'twill be my comfort still,
The Sun that warms you here, shall shine on me
And guild my Banishment.

Mowbray for thee remains a heavier doom,
The slow succeeding hours shall not determine
The dateless limit of thy dear exile,
The hopeless word of never to return,
Breath we against thee upon pain of Death.

A heavy Sentence my most Sovereign Lord,
The Language I have learnt these Forty years,
My native English must I now forgo?
I am too old to fawn upon a Nurse,
And learn the Prattle of a foreign tongue.
What is thy Sentence then, but speechless Death?
You take the cruellest way to rob my Breath.

Complaint comes all too late where we decree.

Then thus I turn me from my Countries light,
Pleased with my doom because it pleased the King,
Farewell my Lord, now Mowbray cannot stray,
Let me shun England, all the worlds my way.

Return again and take an Oath with thee.
Lay on our Royal Sword your banished Hands,
Swear by the duty that you owe to Heaven
Ne'er to embrace each others love in Banishment,
Nor ever meet, nor write to reconcile
This lowering tempest of your home-bred hate,
Nor Plot to turn the edge of your Revenge,
On Us, our State, our Subjects and our Land.

I Swear.

And I to keep all this!

By this time Mowbray, had the King permitted,
One of our Souls had wandered in the Air,
As now our flesh is doomed on Earth to wander,
Confess thy Treason ere thou fly the Land;
Since thou hast far to go, bear not along
Th'incumbring Burden of a guilty Soul.

No Bullingbrook, if ever I were false,
Let Heaven renounce me as my Country has;
But what thou art, Heaven, Thou and I do know,
And all (my heart forbodes) too soon shall rue.
My absence then shall yet this comfort bring,
Not to behold the Troubles of my King.

Uncle within thy tear-charg'd Eyes I read
Thy hearts fell sorrow, and that troubled Look,
Has from the number of his Banished years
Plucked four away; Six frozen Winters spent,
Return with welcome from thy Banishment.

I thank my Liege, that in regard to me,
He cuts off four years from my Sons exile,
But small advantage shall I reap thereby,
For ere those slow six years can change their Moons,
My inch of Taper will be spent and done,
Nor Gaunt have life to welcome home his Son.

Despair not Uncle, you have long to live.

But not a Minute King that thou can give.

Thy Son was banished upon advice,
To which thy Tongue a party -- Verdict gave,

My interest I submitted to your Will,
You urged me like a Judge, and I forgot
A Father's Name, and like a strict Judge doomed Him.
Alas I looked when some of you should say,
I was too strict to make my Own away!
But all gave leave to my unwilling Tongue,
To do my ag'd heart this unnatural wrong.

Now for the Rebels that hold out in Ireland,
And turn our mild forbearance to contempt,
Fresh forces must be levi'd with best speed,
Ere farther leisure yield them further strength,
We will our self in person to this War,
And quench this flame before it spread too far.

O to what purpose dost thou hoard thy words,
When thou should breath dear farewells to thy Friends
That round thee, all like silent Mourners gaze.

They will not censure me whose scanty time
And breath's too little to take leave of you.
My dear Companions you have known my Heart
Too long, to doubt it on a silent grief --
Ha! by my swelling blood my Father's pale!
How fare's your honour? good my Lords your hands.

I feel a heaviness like Death, and hope
It is no counterfeit -- All shall be well.

By Heaven it shall -- I feel my veins work high,
And conscious glory kindling in my breast,
Inspires a Thought to vast to be expressed;
Where this disgrace will end the Heavens can tell,
And Herford's Soul divines, that 'twill be well!
A Beam of royal splendour strikes my Eye,
Before my charmed sight, Crowns and Scepters fly;
The minutes big with Fate, too slowly run,
But hasty Bullingbrook shall push 'em on.

NOW Brother, what cheer?


Why well, 'tis with me as old Gaunt could wish.


What, Harry sticks with you still; well I hear he's safe in France and very
busy.


My Blood were never Idle.


I fear too busy; come, he's a parlous Boy, I smell a confed'racy betwixt him
and his Companions here, Mischief will come on it, cut him off I say; Let him be
Kites-meat -- I would hang a Son, to kill a Traitor.


Go sleep good York and wake with better thoughts.


Heaven grant we sleep not all 'till Alarms wake us. I tell you Brother I
liked not the manner of his departure, 'twas the very smooth smiling Face of
Infant Rebellion; with what familiar Courtesy did he caress the Rabble?

What reverence did he throw away on Slaves?
Off goes his Bonnet to an Oysterwench,
A Brace of Dray-men bid God speed him well
And had the Tribute of his supple knee,
Then shakes a Shoo-maker by the waxed Thumbs,
With thanks my Country-men, my Friends, my Brothers,
Then comes a Peal of sighs would knock a Church down,
Roguery, mechanic Roguery! rank Treason,

My sickness grows upon me, set me higher.


Villainy takes its time, all goes worse and worse in Ireland, Rebellion is
there on the Wing, and here in the Egg; yet still the Court dances after the
French Pipe, Eternal Apes of Vanity: Mutiny stirring, Discipline asleep, Knaves
in Office, all's wrong; make much of your Sickness Brother: if it be Mortal,
'tis worth a Duke-dome.


How happy Heaven were my approaching death
Could my last words prevail upon the King,
Whose easy gentle Nature has exposed
His unexperienced Youth to flatterers frauds;
Yet at this hour, I hope to bend his Ear
To Council, for the Tongues of dying men
Enforce attention like deep Harmony:
Where words are scarce, they are seldom spent in Vain,
For they breath Truth, that breath their Words in Pain.

How fares our Noble Uncle Lancaster?

How is't with aged Gaunt?

Ag'd as your Highness says, and Gaunt indeed.
Gaunt, as a Grave whose Womb holds nought but Bones,

Can sick men play so nicely with their Names?

Since thou dost seek to kill my Name in me,
I mock my Name great King to flatter thee.

Should dying men then, flatter those that Live?

No, no, Men living flatter those that dye.

Thou now a dying say, thou flatter me.

Oh! no, Thou die though I the sicker am,

I am in health breath, free but see thee ill

Now he that made me knows I see thee ill.
Thy death-bed is no less than the whole Land,
Whereon thou lie in Reputation sick.
Yet hurried on by a malignant fate
Commit thy anointed Body to the Cure
Of those Physicians that first Poisoned thee!
Upon thy Youth a Swarm of flatterers hang
And with their fulsome weight are daily found
To bend thy yielding Glories to the ground.

Judge Heaven how poor a thing is Majesty,
Be thou thy self the Judge, when thou sick Wight
Presuming on an Agues Privilege
Dare with thy Frozen admonition,
Make pale our Cheek, but I excuse thy weakness.

Think not the Riot of your Court can last,
Tho fed with the dear Life blood of your Realms;
For vanity at last preys of it self.
This Earth of Majesty, this seat of Mars,
This Fortress built by Nature in the Floods,
Whose Rocky shores beat back the foaming Sedge,
This England Conqu'rour of the Neighbring Lands,
Makes now a shameful Conquest on it self.

Now will I stake (my Liege) my Soul upon it;
Old Gaunt is hearty in his wishes for you,
And what he speaks, is out of honest Zeal,
And tho thy Anger prove to me as Mortal,
As is to him this sickness, yet blunt York
Must Echo to his words and cry,
Thou art abused and flattered.

Gentle Uncle,
Excuse the sallies of my youthful Blood,
I know you're Loyal both and mean us well,
Nor shall we be unmindful to redress,
(However difficult) our States corruption,
And purge the Vanities that Crowned our Court.

My gracious Liege your Pardon, this bold duty,
Was all that stood betwixt my Grave and me,
Your Sycophants bred from your Child-hood with you,
Have such advantage had to work upon you,
That scarce your failings can be called your faults;
Now to Heavens care and your own Piety,
I leave my sacred Lord, and may you have
In life that peace that waits me in the Grave.

Thanks my good Uncle, bear him to his Bed,
Attend him well, and if a Princes Prayers
Have more than common interest with Heaven,
Our Realm shall yet enjoy his honest Council.
And now my Soldiers for our Irish Wars,
We must suppress these rough prevailing Kerns,
That live like Venom, where no Venom else
But only they have privilege to live.
But first our Uncle Gaunt being indisposed,
We do create his Brother both in Blood
And Loyalty our Uncle York,
Lord Governor of England, in our absence
Observe me Lords, and pay him that respect
You give our Royal Presence.

My Liege old Gaunt commends him to your Highness.

What says our Uncle?

Nothing; all is said.
His Tongue is now a stringless instrument,
But called on your loved name and blessed you dying.

The ripest fruit falls first and so does He,
His course is done, our Pilgrimage to come,
So much for that; return we to our War
And cause our Coffers with too great a Court
And liberal Largess, are grown somewhat Light:
Pressed with this exigence, we for a time
Do seize on our dead Uncles large Revenues
In Herford's absence.

O my Liege pardon me if you please, if not, I please not to be pardoned, spare
to seize the Royalties and Rights of banished Herford, I fear already he's too
apt t'engage against your Power, and these proceedings will give countenance
and growth to his Designs, forbear to draw such Dangers on your Head.


Be Heaven our judge we mean him nothing fowl
But shortly will with interest restore
The Loan our sudden streights make necessary. --
Weep not my Love nor drown with boding Tears,
Our springing Conquest, bear our absence well,
Nor think that I have joy to part with Thee,
Tho never vacant Swain in silent Bowers,
Could boast a passion so sincere as mine,
Yet where the interest of the Subject calls,
We wave the dearest Transports of our Love
Flying from Beauty' Arms to rugged War;
Conscience our first, and Thou our second Care.

Well Lords, the Duke of Lancaster is dead.

And living too if Justice had her right,
For Herford then were more than a bare Name,
Who now succeeds departed Gaunt in nothing,
But in his mind's rich Virtues, the Kings pleased
To have occasion for his temporal wealth!
O my heart swells, but let it burst with silence,
Ere it be disburdened with a liberal tongue.

Now rot the tongue that scants a Subjects freedom,
Losers at least are priviledgd to talk,
And who accounts not Herfords looss his own
Deserves not the esteem of Herford's friend.
There's none of us here present but did weep
At parting, and if there be any one
Whose tears are not converted now to fire
He is a Crocodile.

The fate of Bullingbrook will soon be ours,
We hear the Tempest sing yet seek no shelter,
We see our wreck and yet securely perish,
A sure, but wilful Fate -- for had ye Spirits
But worthy to receive it, I could say
How near the tidings of our comfort is.

Give us thy thoughts and rate 'em as thou wilt,
Here's Blood for 'em, but point us to the veins
That hold the richest, we will empty those,
To purchase 'em.

Hold generous Youth.
This gallantry unlocks my inmost Breast,
Seizing a secret dearer than my heart.
Attend me Lords, I have from Port le Blanc
This very day received intelligence,
That our wronged Herford with Lord Rainold Cobham,
Sir Thomas Arpingham, bold Sir Iohn Rainston,
Sir Robert Waterton, Quaint, Norbery,
With eight tall Ships, three thousand men in Arms,
Design with speed to touch our Northern shore,
If then you have a spark of British glory,
To imp our drooping Countries broken Wing,
Join hands with me and post to Ravenspurg.

Now business stirs and life is worth our while.

Nature her self of late hath broke her Order,
Then why should we continue our dull Round?
Rivers themselves refuse their wonted course,
Start wide or turn on their own Fountain heads;
Our Laurels all are blasted, rambling Meteors
Affright the fixst inhabitants of Heaven.
The pale faced Moon looks bloody on the Earth,
And lean-lookt Prophets whisper dreadful change.

Away, let's post to the North, and see for once
A Sun rise there; the glorious Bulling-brook.
For our Return will not pass a thought,
For if our Courtiers passage be withstood,
We'll make our selves a Sea and sail in Blood.

Despair not Madam.

Who shall hinder me?
I will despair and be at enmity,
With flattering hope, he is a Couzener,
A Parasite, a keeper back of Death,
That would dissolve at once our pain and Life,
Which lingering hope holds long upon the Rack;
Yet Murders at the last the cruel'st way.

Here comes the Duke.

With signs of War about his aged neck,
And full of careful business are his looks.

Death and confusion! oh! -- set my Corsleet right, fetch my commanding Sword:
scour up the brown Bills, Arm, Arm, Arm.


Now Uncle for Heavens sake speak comfort.


Comforts in Heaven, and we are on the Earth, nothing but crosses on this side
of the Moon; my heart stews in Choler, I shall dissolve to a Gelly. That your
Husband should have no more wit than to go a Knight Erranting whilst Rogues
seize all at home, and that I should have no more wit than to be his Deputy at
such a proper time: to undertake to support a crazy Government, that can scarce
carry my own Fat: Well Sirrah, have you given my Son orders to strengthen his
Forces? if he prove a Flincher too. --


My Lord I know not how he stands affected,
Not well, I fear, because at my Arrival
He was withdrawn, at least pretended so
So that I could not give him your Commands.

Why so? go all which way it will, the Nobles are all fled, and hide themselves
like my ungracious Rascal, or else strike in with the Rebels; the Commons find
our Exchequer empty and revolt too, and a blessed bargain I have on it.


Alas my Bank and Jewels are disposed off
For the Kings wants already, and to wait
Till fresh recruits come from our Fathers Court,
I fear will lose our Cause.

Get thee to Plashy to my Sister Gloster,
Her Coffers I am sure are strongly lined,
Bid her send me presently 50000. Nobles.
Hold -- take my Ring, fly if thou love thy Head.

My Lord I had forgot to tell you that to day
Passing by there I was informed --
But I shall grieve you to report the rest.

What is't Knave?

An hour before I came the Dutch Died,
Her Son your Nephew ere her Blood was cold,
Makes all secure and flies to Bullingbrook.

Death what a tide of woes break upon us at once. Perverse Woman to take this
time to Die in, and the varlet her Son too to take this time to play the
villain in: would to Heaven the King had cut off my Head as he did my Brothers,
Come Sister -- Cousin I would say, pray Pardon me, if I know how to order these
perplexed Affairs, I am a Sturgeon. Gentlemen go Muster up your Men, and meet me
at Barkley Castle. I should to Plashy too, but time will not suffer; the
Wind's cross too, and will let us hear nothing from Ireland, nor boots it much,
if they have no better News for us, than we have for them. All's wrong, Oh!
fie, hot! hot!


And thus like Seamen, scattered in a Storm
Meet we to Revel on the safer Shore;
Accept my worthy Friends, my dearest thanks,
For yet my Infant Fortunes can present
Returns no Richer but when these are Ripe, --

Your Presence was the Happiness we sighed for,
And now made Rich in that we seek no more.

My Lords, you're well returned, what News from Wales,
We hear that Salisbury has Levi'd there
Full 40000 on the Kings behalf.

My Lord, that Cloud's dispersed, the Welshmen hearing
That all the North here had resigned to you,
Dispersed themselves and part are hither fled.

Fortune so Labours to Confirm your Power
That all Attempts go cross on the Enemies side.

But see our Uncle York, come as I guess
To Treat with us, being doubtful of his strength,
His hot and testy humour else would ne'er
Salute us but with Blows; be ready Guards
When I shall give Command -- My Noble Uncle.

Show me thy humble Heart and not thy Knee,
Whose Duty's feigned and false.

My Gracious Uncle.

Tut, tut, Grace me no Grace, and Uncle me no Uncle,
I am no Traitors Uncle, I renounce thee,
Why have these banished and forbidden Feet
Dared once to touch a Dust of English ground,
But more then why, why have they dared to march
So many Miles upon her Peaceful Bosom,
Frighting her pale-fac't Villages with War?
Come thou because th'annointed King is hence,
Why graceless Boy the King is left behind
And in my Loyal Bosom lies the Power:
Were I but now the Lord of such hot Youth,
As when brave Gaunt thy Father and my Self
Rescued the Black Prince, that young Mars of Men,
O then how quickly should this Arm of mine,
(Now Prisoner to the Palsy) Chastise thee,
And this raw Crew of hot-braind Youth about thee?
Your Boys should have Correction, much Correction.

Why reverend Uncle, let me know my fault
On what Condition stands it and wherein?

Even in Condition of the worst Degree,
In gross Rebellion and detested Treason,
Thou art a Banished Man and here art come,
Before the Expiration of thy time,
In braving Arms against thy Sovereign.

As I was Banished, I was Banished Herford,
But as I come I come for Lancaster,
Look on my wrongs with an indifferent Eye,
You are my Father, for methinks in you,
I see Old Gaunt Alive: O then my Father
Will you permit that I shall stand Condemned
A wandering Vagabond, my Rights and Royalties
Snatched from my Hand perforce and given away
To up-start Unthrifts? wherefore was I Born?
If that my Cousin King, be King of England,
It must be granted I am Duke of Lancaster,

Thy words are all as false as thy Intents,
The King but for the Service of the State,
Has Borrowed thy Revenue for a time,
And Pawned to me his Honour to repay it,
Which I as Gaunt Executour allow'd.

Then Uncle I am sorry you have drawn the Guilt on your own head, and that of
Course Justice must fall there too; we must Commit you to our Guards Custody.


Perfidious Villain,
Now he that has a Soul give me a Sword!
And since my Followers are too few to Engage,
Give but this Villain here and me a Ring,
And if you do not see a Traitor Cudgell'd,
As a Vile Traitor should, I'll give ye leave
To hang my Brawn in the Sun.

The Duke has sworn he comes but for his own,
And in that Claim we all resolve to Assist him.

What says Northumberland? thou reverend Rebel,
Think what a Figure makes thy Beard amongst
This Callow Crew; allow that he were wronged,
As on the Kings Faith and mine he is not,
Yet in this kind to come with threatening Arms,
To Compass right with wrong, it may not be;
And you that do abet him in this sort
From the hoar'd Head to the raw beardless Chin,
Cherish Rebellion, and are Rebels all.

We have not leisure to debate; strike Drums.

Now the Villains Curse light on thee, and if thou dost seize the Crown, may
thou be more Plagued with being King, than I am with being Deputy.


1. Silence hey! I Revelation Stitch Command Silence.

Peace hoa!

1. Am I not Nobly Descended and Honourably Born?

2. Right, the Field is Honourable, and there was he Born under a Hedge.

1. Have I not born Commission with Watt Tyler (witness our luminary lost in
that Service) and was I not president at Jack Straw's Council, to kill all the
Nobility and Clergy; but the Fryers mendicant, that in our Reign would soon
have starved out of the way?


Hum! hum! hem!

1. What place then do our gifts desere at such a season, where the temporal
King is absent and Usurpers invade?

2. Why, it behooves thee to take unto thee a good Conscience, and make thy
self King.

1. Simon Shuttle, I never liked thy Politics, our meanest Brethren pretend to
the spirit of Governing, our Talent is to govern the Governor; therefore as
Bullingbrook shall approve himself to our liking, we will fix him upon the last
of the Government, or cast him out amongst the shreds and shavings of the
Common-wealth.

4. But pray Neighbour, what is this same Common-wealth?

3. You may see it at Smithfield all the Fair-time, 'tis the Butt End of the
Nation.

5. Peace hey! hear Master Revelation expound it.

1. Why the Common-wealth is a-Kin to your-a-republick, like Man and Wife, the
very same thing, only the Common-wealth is the Common-wealth and the Republic
is the Republic.

2. What an excellent Spirit of knowledge is here?

3. We'll have no more Bills nor Bonds, but all shall be reduced to the Score
and Tally.

4. No Physic, but what shall be administered in a Horn.

5. We will have Privileges taken off, and all sorts compelled to pay their
Debts.

7. I except against that, I would rather break, than have gentlemen out of my
debt; it gives us privilege of being Saucy: how are we fain to cringe 'till we
have got them into our Books? and then I warrant we can cock up with the best
of 'em. I hate mortally to be paid off, it makes a man such a sneaking Rascal.

1. We will have strict and wholesome Laws --

6. Laws, Strict Laws, so will there be no mischief done, and our Profession
starve. I'll have no Laws.

Others, no Laws, no Laws, no Laws.

Others, Laws, Laws, Laws.


1. Hark, Bullingbrook approaches, put your selves in posture, and Sow-gelder,
wind me a strong Blast to return their Complement.

Behold my Lord an Object strange and sudden,
The Rabble up in Arms to mock your powers,
As once the Indian Apes are said to have done
To Alexander's Army.

Death my Lord.
Permit me play for once the Scavinger,
And sweep this Dirt out of your way.

Gently my valiant Piercy.
Rage is the proper weapon of these Bruits,
With which 'tis odds, they foil us, Rainston go to 'em,
Bespeak 'em fair, and know what caused this Tumult.
1. Oh an envoy! know of him his Quality.

4. 'Tis Sir Iohn Rainston, I have wrought for him.

1. Down on thy knee; now (because we will observe Decorums of State) rise up
Sir Iohn Drench and Treat with him.


Hold Rainston, we will treat with 'em in person,
For in their looks I read a sober judgment,
All careful to preserve the public weal,
Chiefly this awful man, to whose grave Censure
We do refer the justice of our Arms.
2. Goodly! what a gracious person he is.


I weep for joy, to see so brave a spirit,
So jealous of your Liberty and Rights.
Trust me my Countrymen, my Friends, my Brothers,
'Tis worthy of the fame the world affords you,
And that cursed Limb that stirs against your Privileges,
Why, let it Rot, though it were this right hand.

A Bullingbrook! a Bullingbrook! c.

Mistake not my dear Countrymen our purpose,
You think perhaps cause we are now arrived,
With formal Arms, in absence of the King,
That we take this occasion to Usurp,
Alas we harbour no such foul design.
1. How's that? not usurp? hear ye that Neighbours? he refuses to Usurp.

Others, Fall on then, he is not for our turn, down with him.

1. Sir, we shall give you to understand that we want a Usurper, and if you
refuse to usurp you are a Traitor, and so we put our selves in Battle array.


Yet hear me -- what you mean by Usurpation,
I may mistake, and beg to be informd.
If it be only to ascend the Throne,
To see that justice has a liberal course,
In needful Wars to lead you forth to Conquest,
And then dismiss you laden home with Spoils;
If you mean this, I am at your disposal,
And for your profit am content to take
The burden of the State upon my hands.

A Bullingbrook, a Bullingbrook, c.
1. One word of caution Friend, be not Chicken-hearted, but pluck up a Spirit
for the work before thee; it was revealed to me that now there should arise a
Son of Thunder, a second Tyler -- and I am resolved the vision shall not Lie;
therefore I say again pluck up a Spirit; otherwise I shall discharge my
Conscience and usurp my Self.


Friends think me not made of such easy phlegm,
That I can timely pocket wrongs; if so
Why come I thus in Arms to seek my Right?
No sirs, to give you proof that Bullingbrook
Can do bold justice, here stands one Example:
This bold presumer that dares call in question,
The courage of the Man you choose for King,
Shall die for his Offence, Guards hang him up.
1. Why Neighbours will ye thus give up your Light? who shall reveal to ye, to
save you from the Poison of the Whore and the Horns of the Beast.

2. He had no Vision to foretell this, therefore deserves Hanging for being a
false Prophet.


Thus as a Ruler, justice bids me doom,
But for my private part I weep to think
That Blood should be the Prologue to my Reign.
4. Good Prince he weeps for him! Neighbour Revelation depart in peace. For thy
honour it will be recorded that Bullingbrook was Crowned and thou hanged all on
a Day.

1. What a spirit of delusion has seized ye? why thus will this rav'nous Storck
devour ye all? do, do, deliver me to the Gibbet, and let the next turn be
yours, thus shall these Nobility Rascals hold you in Slavery, seize your Houses
over your heads, hang your Sons and ravish your Daughters.


Say ye so? they must excuse us for that: fall on Neighbours.
A Rescue, a Rescue, c.

Hold Gentlemen, if I have done ye wrong,
The fault is mine and let me suffer for it;
But be not thus injurious to your selves,
To fling your naked Breasts on our Swords points.
Alas it will not be within my Power,
To save ye, when my Troops are once enraged.
Therefore give up this vile Incendiary,
Who as you see, to save his miscreant Life,
Seeks to expose all yours -- trust me I weep
To think that I must loose a Member -- but
Let justice have its course.

Ay, ay, Let justice have it's course, hang, hang him up.
A Bullingbrook, a Bullingbrook, a Bullingbrook, c,

BArklay-Castle, call you this at hand?

The same my Lord, how brooks your Grace the Air,
After long tossing on the breaking Seas.

Needs must I like it, well, I weep for joy
To stand upon my Kingdom once again,
Dear Earth I do salute thee with my Hand,
Though Rebels wound thee with their Horses hoofs;
Feed not thy Sov'raigns foes my gentle earth,
Nor with thy fragrant sweets refresh their sense,
With Thorns and Brambles Choke their Treacherous way;
And when they stoop to Rob thee of a Flower,
Guard it I pray thee with a lurking Adder!
Serpents with Serpents fitly will engage --
Mock not my senseless Conjuration Lords,
This Earth shall have a feeling, and these Stones
Rise Soldiers Armed before their Native King,
Shall falter under foul Rebellious Arms.

Doubt not my Lord, the Conduct and the Courage
With which you have suppressed one Rebel Crew,
Will Crown your Temples with fresh Lawrells here;
How have we else Employed our absent time
But Practising the way to Victory.

I fear my Lord that we are too remiss
Whilst Bullingbrook through our security,
Strengthens himself in substance and in Friends.

Desponding Cousin dost thou not consider
That when the searching Eye of Heaven is hid,
Then Thieves and Robbers do securely Range,
Alarm with Cries of Murder starting sleep,
And fill with Out-rages the guilty Shades,
But when the Day's discov'ring Rays return,
Firing the proud tops of the Eastern Pines,
And dart their Lightnings through each Guilty Nook
Then Murders, Treasons, and detested Crimes,
Dismantled from the Cloak of Night, stand bare,
And Tremble at their own Deformity!
So, when this Thief Night-rev'ling Bullingbrook
Shall see our Beams of Majesty returned,
His Treasons shall sit blushing on his Face,
Not able to endure the sight of Day.

Not all the Waters of th'unfathom'd Sea
Can wash the Balm from an Anointed King.

Move we secure then in our Royal Right,
To the Traitors Executions, not to Fight.

Our Uncle York's delay brings fresh suspicion,
That we are Prisoners in a larger Chain;
Besides I fear that our Intelligence
Is Smoothed and Tampered ere it reach our Ear.

Our Servants wear a doubtful Countenance,
Struck with a general fear whilst they observe
Fresh Prodigies start forth with every Hour.
The frighted Springs retreat to Earth again,
The Seasons change their Courses, as the Year
Had found some Months asleep and leapt them over.

Here come the Gardiners; let us step aside,
They'll talk of State, for every one does so
Before a Change, and dullest Animals
Have oft the earliest sense of Alterations.

Support those Vines, and Bind those Peaches up,
Then like an Executioner
Cut off the Heads of Sprigs that grow too fast,
And look too lofty in our Commonwealth,
All must be even in our Government.
But now we speak of Execution,
2. Are Bushy Green and the Earl of Wiltshire Dead?


By Bullingbrook's Command they have lost their Heads;
The King is Landed, but it seems too late
To Head the Forces raised by Salisbury
Who had dispersed themselves ere he arrived.

Then all our fears are true, we are betrayed.

Patience dear Madam, we may get hear further.

Think you the King will be deposed?

Depressed he is already, and 'tis feared
His fortune will decline from bad to worse,
Do what we can, you see our Laurels wither,
Our Sun-flowers all are blasted, streams run backward,
These Prodigies forbode some dreadful change,
'Tis thought at last the King will be deposed.

I'm pressed to death with silence -- boding Peazant,
More senseless then the Plants or Earth thou tend'st,
Dare thou divine the downfall of a King?
Old Adams likeness set to dress this Garden,
What Eve, what Serpent has seduced thy soul,
To prophecy this second fall of Man?

Pardon me Madam, little joy have I
To breath this News, but fear you'll find 'em true.

Come Ladies, let us post to meet the King,
This Scretch-Owl yet amongst his bodingcries,
Has sung the glad news of the Kings Arrival!
Which otherwise we were forbid to know;
Thou fear lest York should meet with Bushies Fate,
Suspend thy Tears, the heavy time may come,
That thou wilt blush to see thy York alive;
If Richard fall, 'tis Treason to survive.

Command a halt, we will a while refresh,
Our sultry March, a cool breeze fanns this Air --
The last expresses we received from Wales,
Spoke of full 20000 fighting men,
Did it not Lords?

And some odd Troops besides.

Nor will our Uncle York be negligent,
To muster up what Force he can,
Sure we shall blush my Lords, at our own strength,
Heaping such numbers for so just a cause.

Sir, doubt not but the active Foe will find
Business enough t'employ our outmost Numbers.
I fear me we shall more want Hands than Work.

See Cousin who comes here, in the 'very Minute
To clear thy doubts, our trusty Salisbury.
Welcome my Lord, how far off lies your Power?

My gracious Lord, no farther off nor nearer
Then this weak Arm, discomfort guides my tongue,
And bids me speak of nothing but despair.
I fear my noble Lord one day too late,
Has clouded all your happy days on earth!
O call back yesterday, bid time return,
Thou shalt have 20000 Fightingmen,
To day to day! one luckless day too late,
O'rethrows thy Friends, thy Fortune and thy State;
Our Welshmen Miss-inform'd that you were dead,
Are gone to Bullingbrook dispersed and fled.

Comfort my Liege, why looks your Grace so pale?

But now the blood of 20000 men,
Did triumph in my Face and they are fled,
Have I not reason think you to look pale?
My Fortune like a wife that has arrived
The hardness to have once proved open false,
Will set no Limits to her treach'rys now:
But turn to every upstart that will court her,
Now all that will be safe fly from my side,
For time has set a blast upon my Pride.

My Liege remember who you are.

I had forgot my self, am I not King?
Awake thou sluggard Majesty thou sleep!
Is not the Kings name 40000 names,
Arm, arm my Name! a puny Subject strikes
At thy great glory! look not to the ground
Ye favourites of a King;
See Salisbury, our hasty Scroop brings Balm
To salve the Wound thy piercing tidings gave.
Come on thou trusty Soldier; oh draw near!
Thou never shew'dst thy self more seasonably,
Not when the flying Battle thou hast turned,
And from the hands of Conquest forced the Day.

More health and happiness befall my Liege,
Then my care burdened Tongue has to deliver.

How's that? I charge thee on thy Soul speak comfort.
Ha! wilt thou not speak Comfort? then speak Truth.
My ear is open and my heart prepared,
The worst thou can unfold is worldly loss,
Say, is my Kingdom lost? why 'twas my Care;
And what loss is it to be rid of Care?
Strives Bullingbrook to be as great as we?
If Heaven approve his hopes, why let 'em thrive!
Revolt our Subjects? that we cannot mend,
To Heaven they first were false and then to us!
Then give thy heavy heart as heavy speech,
Cry Woe, Destruction, Ruin, Loss, Decay,
The worst is Death, and Death will have his Day.

I'm glad to find your Highness so prepared,
Like a fierce sudden Storm that swells the Floods,
As if the world were all dissolved to Tears,
So rages Bullingbrook above his bounds,
Cov'ring the fearful Land with clashing Arms;
Old Sires have bound their hairless Scalps in steel,
Boys leave their sports and tune their tender Pipes
To the big voice of War, and strut in Armour;
The very Beadsmen learn to bend their Bows,
The very Women throw their Infants by,
Snatch rusty Bills and flock to the mad War,
And all goes worse than I have Power to tell.

Too well, alas, thou tell'sta Tale so Ill!
Where is the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Bagot?
That they have let these mischiefs spread so far,
If we prevail their Heads shall answer for it!
I warrant they have made peace with Bullingbrook.

Peace have they made with him indeed.

Oh Villains Vipers, damned without redemption!
Dogs, quickly won to fawn on any Comer,
Snakes in my Heartsblood warmed to sting my Heart,
Would they make Peace? eternal Hell make War
Upon their spotted souls for this Offence.

Again uncurse their Souls, their Peace is made
With Heads and not with Hands, those whom you curse
Are butchered in your Cause, beheaded all
And with their last breath wished your Arms success.

Where is the Duke my Father with his Forces?

No matter where; of Comfort no man speak;
Let's talk of Graves, of Worms and Epitaphs,
Make Dust our paper, and with rainy eyes
Write sorrow on the bosom of the earth!
For Heavens sake let's sit upon the ground,
And tell sad stories of the Death of Kings,
How some have been deposed, some slain in War,
Some poisoned by their Wives, some sleeping killed;
All murdered: for within the hollow Crown
That rounds the mortal Temples of a King,
Keeps death his Court, and there the Antique sits,
Scoffing his State, and grinning at his Pomp!
Allowing him a short fictitious Scene,
To play the Prince, be feared, and kill with looks,
'Till swelled with vain conceit the flattered thing
Believes himself immortal as a God;
Then to the train fate's Engineer sets fire,
Blows up his pageant Pride and farewell King.
Cover your heads and mock not flesh and blood,
With solemn reverence, throw away Respect,
Obeisance, Form and Ceremonious Duty,
For you have but mistook me all this while,
I live with bread like you, feel Wants, taste Grief,
Therefore am I no King, or a King nothing.

Give to the Foe my Lord, this cold despair,
No worse can come of Fight, of Death much better.
My Fathers Troops are firm let's join with them,
And manage wisely that last stake of the War,
Want's craft can make a body of a limb.

You chide me well, proud Bullingbrook I come,
To change blows with thee for our day of Doom,
This Ague-fit of fear is overblown,
An easy task it is to win our own;
Say, Scroop, where lies our Uncle with his Power?
My fired heart now longs for the fatal hour.

Men by the Skies complexion judge the day,
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
Find that my tongue brings yet a heavier Tale,
I play the Torturer by small and small!
Your Uncle York treating with Bullingbrook,
Was seized by him, and's still kept close Confined,
So that the strength which he was must'ring up,
Is quast and come to nought.

Thou hast said enough,
Beshrew thee Cousin that did lead me forth
Of that sweet I was in to despair!
What say ye now? what comfort have ye now?
By Heaven I'll hate him everlastingly,
That bids me be of comfort any more!

Now by despair my Queen and her fair train!
Come to congratulate our Victory,
And claim the triumph we at parting promised;
Go tell 'em Lords, what feats you have performed,
And if ye please tell my adventures too,
You know I was no Idler in the War.
Oh! torture, now I feel my miseries sting,
And this appearance strikes me dead with shame
Welcome my Lord,
This minute is our own, and I'll devote it all
To ecstasy, the Realm receives her King,
And I my Lover, -- thou dost turn away!
Nor are they tears of joy which thou dost shed,
I give thee welcome, thou reply'st with sighs!

What language shall my bankrupt fortunes find,
To greet such Heavenly excellence as thine?
I promised thee success and bring thee Tears!
O could thou but devorce me from thy Heart!
But oh! I know thy virtue will undo thee,
Thou wilt be still a faithful constant Wife,
Feel all my Wrongs and suffer in my Fall?
There is the sting and venom of my Fate,
When I shall think that I have ruined Thee.

I ask no more my Lord, at Fortunes hands
Then privilege to suffer for your sake!
Who would not share your Grief to share your Love?
This Kingdom yet, which once you did prefer
To the worlds sway, this Beauty and this Heart
Is Richards still, millions of Loyal thoughts
Are always waiting there to pay you homage.
That glorious Empire yields to you alone,
No Bullingbrook can chase you from that Throne.

We'll march no farther, lead to the Castle here.

The News is very fair and good My Lord,
Richard within this Fort has hid his head.

It would become the Lord Northumberland
To say King Richard, that so good a King
Should be compelled to hide a sacred Head,
And Thou have leave to show a Villains Face!

Mistake not Uncle farther then you should.

Talk not thou Traitor farther then thou should.

What say thou Ross? will not this Castle yield?

My Lord the Castle Royally is manned
Against your entrance, for the King and Queen
But newly are arrived and entered there,
With them the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a Clergy-man
Of holy reverence, whom I cannot learn.

I know him, 'tis the Bishop of Carlisle.

Go Northumberland, through the ribs of this Castle,
With brazen Trumpets sound the breath of Parle,
Say thus -- that Bullingbrook upon his knees
Kisses King Richards hands with true allegiance,
And that with thoughts of Peace he's hither come.
Even at his feet to lay his Arms and Power,
Provided his Revenues be restored,
His Banishment repeal'd; let this be granted
Or else he'll use th'advantage of his Power,
And lay the Summers Dust with showers of Blood: --
But see where on the walls he does appear,
As does the blushing discontented Sun,
When envious Clouds combine to shade his Glory.

O my dear Liege, Heaven guard your Majesty,
Before Heaven, my old heart leaps at sight of you,
Think not that falsely I gave up your Power,
If any Villain of 'em dares to say it,
I'll call that Villain Liar to his teeth,
He is a Rogue, though it be Bullingbrook!
Lo, here I kneel, and pay thee Homage as a true
Subject should before the Rebels Faces.

Rise York, I know thy truth, and pity thee.
We are amazed, and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of his knee;
Because We thought Our Self his lawful King.
Tell Bullingbrook, for yond' methinks is he,
That every stride he makes upon Our Land
Is dangerous Treason: He is come to unfold
The purple Testament of bleeding War:
But e're the Crown he seeks shall bind his Brow,
A thousand Orphan'd Widowed Mothers Tears
Shall wash from Earth their Sons and Husbands Blood.

Heaven forbid our Lord the King
Should thus with civil Arms be rushed upon;
Lord Bullingbrook does humbly kiss your Hand,
And swears his coming hither has no other scope
Then to demand his Royalties, and beg
Enfrancisement from Exile; grant but this,
His Glittering Arms he will commend to Rust.

Northumberland say thus, -- The King complies
With his Demands; and so commend us to him.
We do debase Our Self Cousin, do we not,
To look so peaceful and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the Traytor's Heart, and Die.

No, good my Lord, let's fight with gentle words,
Till time lend Friends, and Friends their conquering Swords.

That ere this power-chang'd Tongue
That laid the Sentence of dread Banishment
On yond proud Man, should take it off again.
O that I were as great
As is my Grief, or lesser than my Name!
That I could quite forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now.

Northumberland comes back from Bullingbrook.

What must the King do now? Must he forgo
The Name of King? O'God's Name let it pass,
I'll give my Jewels for a set of Beads,
My gilded Palace for a Hermitage,
My Robes of Empire for an Alms-man's Gown,
My figured Goblets for a Dish of Wood,
My Sceptre for an humble Palmers Staff,
My Subjects for a pair of Poor Carved Saints,
And my large Kingdom for a little Grave,
A little, very little obscure Grave!

Thou weep; my tender hearted Cousin,
We'll join our Royal with thy Loyal Tears,
Our sighs and they shall lodge the Summer Corn
And make a Dearth in this revolting Land.

My Lord he thanks your Highness and begs leave
To speak with you, Sir please you to come down:
Hee'll wait your Majesty in the Court below.

Down, down, I come like Blazing Phaeton,
Wanting the Menage of unruly Steeds;
Down pomp, down swelling stubborn Heart, down King,
For Night-Owls shrick where Mounting Larks should sing.

Northumberland to London, with all speed,
Summon a Parliament in the Commons Name,
In Order to the Kings Appearance there;
But see -- his Highness comes, stand all apart
And show sair Duty to his Majesty.

Now left the Rebels seize me if they can,
For here I'll perish by my Sovereign's side.

Fie Cousin, you debase your princely Knee
And make our Earth too proud with Kissing it;
Methinks my Heart had rather feel your Love,
Then thus in Eye behold the Courtesy:
Up Cousin, up -- Your Heart is up, I know.

My gracious Lord I come but for my own.

And to that Title who must set the Bounds?

Nor even to that do I lay farther claim,
Than my true Service shall deserve your Love.

Well you deserve, they best deserve to have,
That know the strongest surest way to get;
But Heaven rules all -- good Uncle dry your Tears --
Cousin I am to young to be your Father
Though you are Old enough to be my Heir!
Methinks one Person's wanting yet
To this fair Presence, our Old Loyal Gaunt,
He was thy Father Herford, was he not?
Excuse me Cousin, Tears but ill become
A King, at least when Friends and Kinsmen meet,
And yet I cannot choose but weep to think,
That whilst you press and I permit this Scorn;
What Plagues we heap on Children yet unborn.

TUt, tut, tut, tell not me of Patience, 'tis a Load a Burden that Knaves will
never cease to lay on whilst Asses will carry it! nothing but Villainy in this
versal World, and nothing plagues me but that I can't turn Villain too, to be
Revenged.


Persidious Bullingbrook to bow the knee,
And do Obeisance to our Royal Master;
To treat of Peace and tend him all the way
With duteous Ceremony humblest Service,
Yet basely to confine him after all,
To call a Senate in King Richard's Name
Against King Richard, to depose King Richard,
Is such a Monster to cursed usurpation,
As ne'er was practised in the barb'rous Climes,
Where Subject her'd and Courts themselves are Savage.

Out on this Sultry Robe! O Spleen! Spleen! -- Fat and
Vexation will be the Death of me, -- Behold this Brace
Of Raizor-nos'd Rascals, you'd swear that a split
Groat made both their Faces; lean Pimps,
That could scarce stop a Cranny in a Door:
Why? they are sorsooth no less than Rogues of State.

My Lord, this is no Answer to our Message.


I, the Message! I had rather you had brought me -- Poison; for certain 'twas
sent to be the Death of me: Thou know Boy, on what Account we are going this
Morning. Wouldn't you think it, this Traitor Bullingbrook has sent for me; for me,
I say, sent by these Rogues for me, to confer with him in private before the
House sits.


That was indeed provoking.


Nay, let honest men judge if Murder was not in his heart, and that he thought
the Message would make me Die with Choler. -- Now should I clap this pair of
Arrows to a Bow-string and shoot 'em back to the Usurper. -- Go tell the Knave
your Master, He's a Fool to send for me, I renounce him: Speak with him in
private before the House sits. Why? I would not meet him there but to show my
self for Richard, and then tell him he'll see one that that hates a Traitor, be
Bullingbrook what he will.


Aumarle, come back, by all the Charms of Duty,
I do conjure you temper your rash Father,
His Zeal can do the abandoned King no good;
But will provoke the usurper to our ruin.

Already, I have pressed beyond his Patience,
What can our poor Endeavours help the King
When he himself comply's with his hard fortune;
He comes this Morning to Resign the Crown.

Where then is that amazing Resolution,
That in his Non-age fired his Youthful Breast:
To face Rebellion and strike dead the Monster,
When Tyler's Deluge covered all the Land?
Or where the fury that suppressed the Kerns;
Whilst numbers perished by his Royal Arm?

With such Malignant fortune he is pressed,
As renders bravest Resolution vain;
By force and fraud reduced to that Distress,
That even in the best opinion of his Friends
He is advised to yield his Sceptre up,
This poor reserve being all, to make that seem
As voluntary, which perforce must be;
But how resents the Queen this strange Oppression?

As yet the worst has been dissembled to her,
A slumber now has seized her wakeful Lids:
But here she comes, I must attend, Away.

Convey me to my Lord, or bring him hither,
Fate labours in my Breast and frights my Dreams;
No sooner sleep can seize my weeping Eyes,
But boding Images of Death and Horror
Affright the Infant slumber into Cries,
A Thousand forms of ruin strike my thoughts;
A Thousand various Scenes of Fate are shown,
Which in their sad Catastrophe agree,
The Moral still concludes in Richard's fall.

How shall we now dare to inform her Grief
Of the sad Scene the King must Act to day?

Even now amidst a Chaos of distraction,
A Towering Eagle winged his cloudy way,
Pursued by rav'nous Kites, and clamorous Daws,
That stripped the imperial Bird of all his Plumes,
And with their Numbers sunk him to the ground:
But as I nearer drew, the Figure changed,
My Richard there lay weltering in his gore!
So dreamt Calphurnia, and so fell Caesar.

Madam, the King is coming.

Thou bring a welcome hearing, and already
I feel his powerful influence chase my fears,
For grief it self must smile when Richard's by.
Oh Heaven is this? is this my promised joy!
Not all the terrors of my sleep presented
A Spectacle like this! O speak, my Lord!
The Blood starts back to my cold Heart; O speak!
What means this dark and mournful Pageantry,
This pomp of Death?

Command your Waiters forth,
My space is short, and I have much to say.

Are these the Robes of State? The imperial Garb,
In which the King should go to meet his Senate?
Was I not made to hope this Day should be
Your second Coronation, second Birth
Of Empire, when our Civil Broils should sleep,
For ever husht in deep Oblivion's Grave?

O Isabel! This Pageantry suits best
With the black Day's more black Solemnity;
But 'tis not worth a Tear, for, say what part
Of Life's vain Fable can deserve a Tear,
A real Sorrow for a feigned Distress!
My Coronation was (methinks) a Dream,
Think then my Resignation is no more.

What Resignation? Mean you of the Crown?
Will Richard then against himself conspire?
The Usurper will have more excuse than he:
No, Richard, never tamely yield your Honours,
Yield me; yield if you must your precious Life,
But seize the Crown, and grasp your Sceptre dying.

Why dost thou fret a Lyon in the Toil
To Rage, that only makes his Hunters sport?
Permit me briefly to recount the steps,
By which my Fortune grew to this distress.
Then tell me, what could Alexander do
Against a Fate so obstinate as mine.

Oh Heaven! Is awful Majesty no more?

First, had I not bin absent when the Invader
Set footing here; or if being then in Ireland,
The cross Winds not forbad the News to reach me;
Or when the shocking Tidings were arrived,
Had not the veering Winds again obstructed
My passage back, till rumour of my Death
Dispersed the Forces raised by Salisbury;
Or when these hopes were perished, had not Baggot,
Bushy, and Green, by Bullingbrook been murdered,
Old York himself (our last reserve) surprised,
There were some scope for Resolution left.
But what cursed Accident in the power of Chance,
That did not then befall to cross my Wishes;
And what strange hit could Bullingbrook, desire,
That fell not out to push his Forttnes on;
Whatever outmost Fate could do to blast
My hopes was done; what outmost Fate could do
To advance proud Bullingbrooks as sure befell.
Now which of these Misfortunes was my fault?
Or what could I against resisting Heaven!

Oh my dear Lord, think not I meant t'upbraid
Your Misery --
Death seize my Youth, when any other passion
For injured Richard in my Breasts finds room,
But tendrest Love and Pity of his Woes.

That I resign the Crown with seeming will,
Is now the best my Friends can counsel me,
The usurping House decrees it must be done,
And therefore best that it seem Voluntary.

Has Loyalty so quite renoune't the World,
That none will yet strike for an injured King?

Alas! my sinking Bark shall wreck no more
My generous Friends, let Crowns and Scepters go
Before I swim to 'em in Subjects blood.
The King in pity to his Subjects quits
His Right, that have no pity for their King!
Let me be blessed with cool Retreat and thee,
Thou World of Beauty, and thou Heaven of Love,
To Bullingbrook I yield the Toils of State:
And may the Crown sit lighter on his Head
Than e're it did on Richard's.

Destiny
Is Tyrant over King's; Heaven guard my Lord.

Weep not my Love, each Tear thou shedst is Theft,
For know, thou rob the great ones of their due;
Of Pomp divested we should now put off,
It's dull Companion Grief -- Farewell my Love:
Thy Richard shall return to thee again,
The King no more.

In spite of me, my sorrow
In sad Prophetic Language does reply
Nor Richard, nor the King.

Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From Richard, who with free and willing Soul
Adopts thee Heir, and his high Sceptre yields
To the possession of thy Royal Hand;
Ascend his Throne descending now from him,
And long live Henry of that Name the Fourth.

Richard Consents, and Lords I have your Voices,
In Heavens Name therefore I ascend the Throne.

No, hasty Bullingbrook, in Heavens Name stay,
Though meanest of this Presence, yet I'll speak
A Truth that does beseem me best to speak,
And would to God, the noblest of this presence
Were enough noble to be Richard's Judge:
What subject can give sentence on his King!
And who sits here that is not Richard's Subject?
Thieves are not judged, but they are by to hear,
The indictment read, and Answer to their Charge,
And shall the Figure of Heavens Majesty,
His Captain, Steward, Deputy, Elect,
Anointed, Crowned and planted many years,
Be judged by Subject and inferior Breath,
And he not present! of forbid it God!
That in a Christian Climate Souls refined,
Should Plot so heinous black obscene a deed;
I speak to Subjects, and a Subject speaks,
Stirred up by Heaven thus boldly for his King.

Now by my Life, I thank thee honest Prelate,
My Lords what say ye to the Bishops Doctrine,
Is't not Heavenly true? you know it is;
Nor can even graceless Herford's self gain say it.

My Lord of Hereford here whom you call King,
Is a foul Traitor to proud Herford's King,
And if you Crown him, let me prophecy,
The blood of English shall manure the Land,
And future Ages groan for this foul Deed:
And if you rear this House against its self,
It will the woefullest Division prove
That ever yet befell this guilty Earth.
Prevent, resist it, stop this breach in Time
Lest Childrens Children, curse you for this Crime.

Well have you argued, Sir, and for your pains
Of Capital Treason we Arrest you here;
My Lord of Westminster, be it your care
To keep him safely till his Day of Trial.
Will it please you Lords to grant the Common's Suit?

First let me move and yield some Knave a Seat.

Bring hither Richard, that in open view
He may surrender so shall we proceed
Without suspicion.

Alack why am I sent for to the King,
Before I have shook off the Regal thoughts
With which I Reigned -- as yet I have not learnt
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend the Knee,
Give sorrow leave a while to tutor me
To this submission -- Yet I well remember
The favours these Men! were they not mine?
To do what service am I sent for hither?

To do that Office of your own good will,
Which wearied Majesty did prompt thee to
The Resignation of thy Crown and State
To Henry Bullingbrook.

My own good Will?
Yes, Heaven and you know with what sort of Will!
You say it is my Will: why be it so,
Give me the Crown -- come Cousin seize the Crown
Upon this side my Hand, on that side thine.
Now is this Crown a Well wherein two Vessels
That in successive Motion rise and fall,
The emptier ever dancing in the Air,
The oppressed one down, unseen and sunk, that Vessel
Dejected, pressed and full of Tears am I,
Drinking my Griefs whilst Herford mounts on high.

I thought you had been willing to Resign.

My Crown I am, but still my Griefs are mine.

Are you contented to Resign or no?

Yes -- No -- yet let it pass,
From off my Head I give this heavy weight,
And this unwieldy Sceptre from my Hand;
So with my Tears I wash my Balm away,
With my own breath release all duteous Oaths,
My Pomp and Majesty for ever quit,
My manors, Rents, Revenues I forego,
My Acts, Decrees and Statutes I repeal,
Heaven pardon all Oaths that are broke to me;
Heaven keep unbroke all Vows are made to thee
Make me that nothing have, to covet nought,
And thee possessed of all that all hast sought:
What more remains?

No more, but that you read
This Bill of Accusations charged upon your Crimes.

Distraction! made my own accuser too
To read a bead-roll of my own defaults,
Read it my self? by piece-meal to unrauel
My weav'd-up follies? why, Northumberland,
If thy Offences were upon Record,
Would it not shame thee in so full a Presence
To read a Lecture of 'em? if thou should,
There would thou find one heinous Article,
Containing the deposing of a King:
And cracking the strong warrant of an Oath,
Marked with a blot damned in the book of Heaven,
Nay all of you that stand and look upon me,
Waiting to see my Misery bait it self;
Like Pilates have betrayed me to my Cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.

My Lord dispatch, read ore the Articles.

My Eyes are full of Tears! I cannot see.

My Lord --

No Lord of thine thou false insulting Man,
Nor no Man's Lord -- I have no Name, no Title;
Let me Command a Mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a Face I have
Since stripped and Bankrupt of it's Majesty.

Fetch him a Glass.

In the mean time read over this Paper.

Hell! -- for a Charm to lay
This foul Tormenting Fiend.

Urge it no more Northumberland.

The Commons Sir will not be satisfied,
Unless he Read, Confess, and Sign it too.

They shall be satisfied, I'll Read enough
When I shall see the very Book indeed
Where all my faults are writ, and that's my Self,
Give me that Mirror --
No deeper wrinkles yet? has Sorrow struck
So many many blows upon these Cheeks and made
No deeper wounds? -- Of flattering Instrument,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
So shall just Fate dash them as I dash thee:
So Pomp and Fals-hood ends -- I'll beg one Boon,
Then take my leave and trouble you no more,
Shall I obtain it?

Name it fair Cousin.

Fair Cousin? -- I am greater than a King!
For when I was a King my Flatterers
Were then but Subjects, being now a Subject
I have a King here for my Flaterer.
'Tis only leave to go.

Whether?

Why, from your sight and then no matter where

Convey him to the Tower.

Ha! ha! my fortune's Malice now
Is grown so strange that 'tis become my sport;
Convey, Convey, Conveighers are you all
That rise thus nimbly on your Monarchs fall.

Lords, I shall study to requite your Favours:
On Wednesday next we Solemnly set down
Our Coronation, so prepare your selves.

Long live King Bullingbrook, Henry the Fourth.

Well, my Allegiance follows still the Crown,
True to the King I shall be, and thereon
I kiss his Hand; 'tis equally as true
That I shall always Love and Guard the King,
As that I always shall hate Bullingbrook.
The King's Sacred, be Herford what he will
Yet 'tis no Treason sure to pity Richard.

Break up the Assembly, so we'll pass in state
To greet the Loves of our expecting Subjects,
Lead there and bid our Trumpets speak.

Peace Hell-hounds or your own breath Poison ye.

Good Uncle give 'em way, all Monsters Act
To their own kind, so do the Multitude.

Why impious hardened wretches, Brands for Hell?
Forbear this barb'rous Out-rage, Tears of Blood
Can never wash this Monstrous Guilt away.

What must I then preach Patience to my Priest?
Let no Man's wrongs complain whilst mine are silent,
How think ye my good Friends, will not
Succeeding Ages call this Day to witness
What Changes sway the World; your King must pass
A Spectacle of scorn through crowded streets,
That at the same time view the usurpers Triumph;
Heaven shut thy Eye till this dire Scene be past,
The light that sees it, sure will be the last.

AT that sad passage Tears broke off your Story,
Where rude misgoverned Hands from Windows threw
Rank weeds and rubbish on King Richard's Head.

Then as I said, the haughty Bullingbrook
Mounted upon an hot and fiery Steed,
Which his aspiring Rider seemed to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his Course;
Whilst all Tongues cried, God save King Bullingbrook!
You would have thought the very Windows spoke,
So many greedy looks of young and old,
Through Casements darted their desiring Eyes:
You would have thought the very Walls themselves,
With all their painted Imag'ry, had cried,
Hail to the King, all Hail to Bullingbrook!
Whilst bending lower than his Coursers neck,
The Rabble he saluted on each side;
Thus praising and thus praised he past along.

Alas, poor Richard! where rides he the while?

As in the Theatre the Eyes of Men,
After a well-grac't Actor leaves the Stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
With such contempt they turned their Eyes from Richard,
No joyful Tongue gave him his welcome home;
But Dust was thrown upon his sacred Head,
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His Face still combating with Smiles and Fears,
(The Badges of his Grief and Patience)
That had not Heaven for some strange purpose steeled
The Hearts of Men, they must of force relented,
And Cruelty it self have pitied him.

What, in Tears still? Well, Heavens will must be -- mark me Boy, I cannot
blame thy grieving for Richard, because I do it my self; neither can I blame
thee for not loving Bullingbrook, because I cannot do it my self: But to be
true to him (or rather to our Oath, being now his sworn Subjects) I conjure
thee. This I speak, because the King suspects thee, and made me even now pledge
for thy truth and fealty: Bear you well therefore in this new Spring of
Government, lest you be cropped before your time -- Well, what News from Oxford,
Boy? Hold the intended Triumphs there? 'Tis said our new King will grace them
with his Presence.


They hold, my Lord, for certain -- and as certain
This upstart King shall die if he comes there.

Ha! come nearer, what Seal is that which hangs out from thy Bosom? Ha! look
thou pale? Let me see the writing.


I do beseech your Grace to pardon me;
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.

Which for some reasons! Sir, I mean to see,
Just as I feared, Treason, foul Treason, Villain Traitor.

What's the matter my Lord, good York inform me.

Away fond Woman, give me my Boots, saddle my Horse.

The matter, Son.

Good Madam, be content.
It is no more than my poor Life must Answer.

Thy Life!
Hence Villain, strike him Aumarle.

My Boots I say, I will away to the King.

Why York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the Trespass of thine own?

Peace Woman, or I will impeach thee too;
Would thou conceal this dark Conspiracy?
A dozen of 'em here have taken the Sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their Hands
To kill the King at Oxford.

He shall be none;
We'll keep him here, then what's that to him?

Though I love not Bullingbrook, yet I hate Treason, and will impeach the
Villain.


Our Son, our only Son, our Ages comfort;
Is he not thine own?

Wife, I believe it, therefore I impeach him; were he none of mine, let his own
Father look to him; but since he is my Villain, I'll see the Villain ordered: My
Horse, I say.


Had thou groaned for him, York, as I have done --

And art even like to groan for him again. Away.

Haste thee Aumarle, mount thee upon his Horse;
Spur post, and get before him to the King,
And beg thy pardon e're he come to accuse thee:
Born on the wings of Mother's love I'll fly,
And doubt not to prevent thy Father's speed;
On thy behalf i'll with the King prevail,
Or root into the ground whereon I kneel.

This way the King will come; this is the way
To Iulius Caesar's ill erected Tower,
To whose flint Bosom my dear injured Lord
Is deemed a Prisoner by proud Bullingbrook!
Here let us rest, if this rebellious Earth
Have any resting for her true King's Queen.
This Garb no less befits our present state,
Than richest Tissue did our Bridal day;
Thus dead in Honour, my Lord and I
Officiate at our own sad Funeral.

Give grief a Tongue, art thou not Isabel,
The faithful Wife of the unfortunate Richard?

O! can I speak and live? Yet silence gives
More torturing Death! O thou King Richard's Tomb,
And not King Richard! -- On thy sacred Face
I see the shameful Marks of foulest usage;
Thy Royal Cheeks soiled and besmeared with Dust,
Foul Rubbish lodged in thy anointed Locks;
O thou dishonoured Flower of Majesty!
Lean on my Breast whilst I dissolve to Dew,
And wash thee fair again with Tears of Love.

Join not with Grief fair Innocence
To make my end more wretched, learn dear Saint
To think our former State a happy Dream,
From which we wake into this true distress!
Thou most distressed, most Virtuous of thy sex,
Go Cloister thee in some Religious house,
This vicious World and I can ne'er deserve thee!
For Shrines and Altars keep keep those precious Tears,
Nor shed that heavenly Dew on Land accursed.

Never did sorrow triumph thus before.

Convey thee hence to France,
Think I am Dead, and that even now thou take
As from my Death-bed the last living leave.
In Winters tedious Nights sit by the fire,
With good Old Matrons, let them tell thee Tales
Of woeful Ages long ago betide,
And ere thou bid good Night, to quit their Griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable fall of Me!
And send the Hearers weeping to their Beds.

Rob not my Virtue of its dearest Triumph!
Love like the Dolphin shows it self in storms:
This is the Season for my Truth to prove,
That I was worthy to be Richard's Wife!
And would you now command me from your Presence,
Who then shall lull your raging Griefs asleep,
And wing the hours of dull Imprisonment?

O my afflicted Heart!

No, with my Lord i'll be a Prisoner too,
Where my officious Love shall serve him with
Such ready care, that he shall think he has
His numerous Train of waiters round him still;
With wondrous Story's we'll beguile the day,
Despise the World and Triumph over fortune,
Laugh at fantastic life and die together.

Now Heaven I thank thee, all my Griefs are paid!
I've lost a single frail uncertain Crown,
And found a Virtue Richer than the World:
Yes, Bird of Paradise, we'll perch together,
Sing in our Cage, and make our Cell a Grove.

My Lord, King Bullingbrook has changed his Orders,
You must to Pomfrett Castle, not to the Tower;
And for you, Madam, he has given Command
That you be instantly conveyed to France.

Must I to Pomfrett, and my Queen to France?
Patience is stale, and I am weary ont't,
Blood, Fire, rank Leprosies and blewest Plagues --

But This was wanting to complete our Woe.

Northumberland Thou Ladder by whose Aid
The mounting Bullingbrook ascends my Throne,
The Time shall come when foul Sin gath'ring Head
Shall break in to Corruption, Thou shalt think,
Tho he divide the Realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to All:
He too shall think that thou which knew the Way
To plant unrightful Kings, wilt know again
To cast him from the Throne he has Usurped:
The Love of wicked Friends converts to Fear,
That Fear to Hate, that still concludes in Death.

My guilt be on my head, so to our business.
Take leave and part.

Doubly Divorc't! soul Fiends ye violate
A two-fold Marriage, 'twixt my Crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my tender Wife;
Oh Isabel, oh my unfortunate Fair,
Let me unkiss the Oath that bound our Loves,
And yet not so, for with a Kiss 'twas made.
Part us Northumberland, me towards the North
Where shivering Cold and Sickness pines the Clime;
My Queen to France, from whence set forth in Pomp
She hither came, decked like the blooming May,
Sent back like weeping Winter stripped and Bare.

For ever will I clasp these sacred Knees,
Tear up my Breast and bind them to my Heart!
Northumberland allow me one short minute
To yield my Life and Woes in one Embrace,
One Minute will suffice.

Force her away.

Permit yet once our Death cold Lips to join,
Permit a Kiss that must Divorce for ever,
I'll ravish yet one more, farewell my Love!
My Royal Constant Dear farewell for ever!
Give Sorrow Speech, and let thy Farewell come,
Mine speaks the Voice of Death, but Thine is Dumb.

Can no man tell of my ungracious Son,
My Young misgoverned and licentious Harry?
If any Plague hang over us 'tis He!
Enquire amongst the Taverns where he haunts
With loose Companions, such as beat Our Watch
And rob Our Passengers, which he rash Boy
Mistakes for Feats of Gallantry and Honour.

My Lord, some two days since I saw the Prince,
And told him of those Tournaments at Oxford.

And what said the Gallant?

His Answer was, He would to a Brothel
And from the commonest Creature snatch a Glove,
To wear it as a Mistress favour, and
With that unhorse the lustiest Challenger.

As dissolute as desperate.

Where's the King?

What means our Cousin that he looks so wildly?

My Lord, I humbly beg the favour of a word in private with your Majesty.


Withdraw my Lords; now Cousin to your business.

For ever may my knees root to this Earth,
And let Eternal silence bind my Tongue,
Unless you pardon e're I rise or speak.

Intended or committed was this fault?
If but the first, how heinous e're it be,
To win thy future Love I pardon Thee.

Then Sir, permit me to make fast the door,
That no man Enter e're my Tale be done.

Have they Desire.

Beware my Liege, look to thy Life, thou hast a
Traitor in thy Presence.

Ha! Villain I'll secure Thee.

Stay thy revengeful Hand, Thou hast no cause to fear.

Open the Door, or I will force my Passage.

The Matter, Uncle, speak, recover Breath.

Peruse this Writing and read there my Business.

Remember as thou read thy promise past,
I do repent me, read not my Name There,
My Heart is not Confederate with my Hand.

'Twas Villain when thy Hand did set it down,
I tore it from the Traitors Bosom, King,
Pardon the Villain, do, and in Return be Murdered.

O heinous black Conspiracy! Why Uncle can
This Kindness come from Thee? Let me Embrace Thee.

Embrace not me, It was no Kindness, I owe thee no kindness,
It was my Love to Truth, and Hate to Murder.

Give it what Name thou wilt, it shall excuse
This deadly blott in thy transgressing Son.

So shall my Virtue be his Vices Bawd:
Thou kill me if he live, sparing his Life
The Traitor scapes, the True Man's put to Death.

What hoa my Liege, for Heavens sake let me in.
Speak with me, pity me, Open the Door.

My dangerous Cousin let your Mother in,
I know she's come to Entreat for you.

If thou dost pardon whosoever prays,
Thy Mercy makes thee Traitor to thy self.

O King believe not this hard-hearted Man.

Thou frantic Woman what makes thee here?
Wilt thou once more a Traitor nourish?

Dear York be patient, hear me gentle Liege.

Rise up good Aunt.

No, never more I'll rise,
'Till thou uncharm me from the Ground with sounds
Of Pardon to my poor transgressing Son:

And to my Prayers, I bend my Knee.

Against 'em Both my Old stiff Joints I bend.

Pleads he in Earnest, see, his Eyes are dry.
His Prayers come from his Mouth, ours from the Heart;
He begs but faintly, and would be denied.
His weary Joints would gladly rise I know,
Our Knees shall bend, till to the Earth they grow;
Deny him, King, he kneels in pain to crave
A Boon, that would dismiss him to the Grave:
Granting his Suit, the Suer you destroy,
But yielding ours, you give your Beggar's Joy.

Good Madam rise up.

Nay do not say rise up,
But pardon first, and then we rise indeed.
The word is short, but endless Comfort brings,
Pardon, the Language both of Heaven and Kings.

I pardon him as Heaven shall pardon me.

Thanks Gracious Liege, a God on Earth thou art.

So much for that, -- one word at parting King, Let me tell thee King, 'twas
none of these Politics that made thee King, and so farewell to Court.


But for the Rest of this Consorted Crew,
Our Justice shall o're-take 'em -- injured Richard,
Thy wrongs already are too deep revenged,
As yet the Crown's scarce settled to my Brow,
When Royal Cares are rooted in my Heart.
Have I no Friend, my Lords, in this fair Train?
No Friend that to his Monarch's Peace will clear
The Way, and rid me of this Living Fear?

I Have bin studying how to compare
This lonesom Prison to the populous World,
The Paradox seems hard; but thus I'll prove it,
I'll call my B^ain the Female to my Soul;
My Soul the Father, and these Two beget
A Generation of succeeding Thoughts,
Th'Inhabitants that stock this little World
In humours like the People of the World,
No Thought Contented: for, the better sort
As Thoughts of things Divine, are mixed with doubts
That set the Faith it self against the Faith,
Thoughts tending to Ambition, they are plotting
Unlikely Wonders, how these poor weak Hands
May force a passage through these stubborn flints;
And cause they cannot, Die in their own Pride,
Thoughts tending to Content are whispring to me,
That I am not the first of Fortunes Slaves,
And shall not be the Last; poor flattering Comfort,
Thus I and every other Son of Earth
With nothing shall be pleased, till we be eased
With being nothing.
What mean my Jailers by that plenteous Board?
For three days past I've fed upon my Sighs,
And drunk my Tears; rest craving Nature, rest,
I'll humour thy dire Need and taste this food,
That only serves to make Misfortune Live.
Thus Tantalus they say is used below;
But Tantalus his Guilt is then his Torture.
I smile at this fantastic Cruelty.
Ha, Music too! -- Even what my Torturers please.

Hail Royal Sir, with dangerous difficulty
I've entered here to bear These to your hand;
O killing Spectacle!

From whom? -- my Queen,
My Isabell, my Royal wretched Wife?
O Sacred Character, oh Heav'n-born Saint!
Why! here are words would charm the raging Sea,
Cure Lunatics, dissolve the Wizzard's Spell,
Check baleful Planets, and make Winter bloom.
How fares my Angel, say, what Air's made rich
With her arrival, for she breathes the Spring.
What Land is by her presence privileged
From Heavn's ripe Vengeance? O my labouring Heart!
Inn, hide Thee, and prepare in short to Answer
To th'infinite Enquiries that my Love
Shall make of this dear Darling of my Soul.
Whilst undisturbed I seize the present Minute
To answer the Contents of this blessed Paper.
Furies! what means this Pageantry of Death?
Speak thou the foremost Murderer, thy own hand
Is armed with th'Instrument of thy own Slaughter,
Go Thou and fill a room in Hell,
Another Thou.
That hand shall burn in never quenching Fire,
That staggers thus my Person, cruel Exton,
The blackest Fiend shall see thee lodged beneath him.
The Damned will shun the Villain whose cursed Hand
Has with the King's blood stained the King's own Land.

Hast and convey his Body to our Master
Before the very Rumour reach his Ear.
As full of Valour as of Royal Blood,
Both have I spilt, O that the Deed were Good.
Despair already seizes on my Soul;
Through my dark Breast Eternal Horrors roll:
Even that false Fiend that told me I did well,
Cry's now, This Deed is Registered in Hell.

Our last Expresses speak the Rebels high,
Who have consumed with Fire Our Town of Gloster.
Welcome Northumberland, what News?

Health to my Liege, I have to London sent
The Heads of Spencer, Blunt and Salsbury.

Broccas and Seely too are headless Trunks,
The dangerous Chiefs of that consorted Crew
That sought your Life at Oxford.

Our Abbot grieved to see his Plot defeated,
Has yielded up his Body to the Grave.
But here's Carlisle yet living to receive
Your Royal Doom.

Carlisle I must confess,
Tho thou hast ever bin my Enemy,
Such sparks of Honour always shined in Thee,
As privilege Thee from our Justice now;
Choose out some secret place, some reverend Cell,
There live in peace, and we shall not disturb
The Quiet of thy Death -- what sudden Damp
Congeals my Blood -- ha Exton? then comes Mischief.

Great Sir, within this Coffin I present
Thy buried Fear, possess the Crown secure,
Which breathless Richard never more will claim.

Exton I thank thee not; for thou hast wrought
A Deed of Slaughter fatal for my Peace,
Which Thou and I, and all the Land shall rue.

From your own Mouth, my Lord, did I this Deed.

They love not Poison that have need of Poison,
Nor do I Thee, I hate his Murderer.
Though I did wish him Dead: Hell thank thee for it,
And guilt of Royal Blood be thy Reward;
Cursing and Cursed go wander through the World,
Branded like Cain for all Mankind to shun Thee.
Wake Richard, wake, give me my Peace again,
And I will give Thee back thy ravished Crown.
Come Lords prepare to pay your last Respects
To this great Hearse, and help a King to Mourn
A King's untimely Fall: O torturing Guilt!
In vain I wish The happy Change could be,
That I slept There, and Richard Mourned for Me.

NOw we expect to hear our rare Blades say
Dam' me, I see no Sense in this dull Play;
Tho much of it our abler Judges know,
Was famous Sense 'bove Forty Years ago.
Sometimes we fail to Please for want of Wit
In the Play -- but more for want on it in the Pitt;
For many a ruined Poets Work it would Save,
Had you but half the Sense you think you have.
Poets on your Fore-Fathers pam'd dull Plays,
And shrewdly you revenge it in our Days
In troth we fare by it as your Tradesmen do,
For whilst they raise Estates by Cheating You:
Into Acquaintance with their Wives you fall,
And get 'em Graceless Sons to spend it All.
'Tis plain They are Yours, Cause All our Arts miscarry,
For just like You, They'll Damn before they'll. Marry.
Of honest Terms I now almost Despair,
Unless retrieved by some rich Yeoman's Heir,
In Grannam's Ribbans and his Own straight Hair!
What Comforts such a Lover will afford,
Jointure, Dear Jointure, O the Heavenly Word!
But -- E're of You my Sparks my Leave I take,
For your Unkindness past these Prayers I make --
So very Constant may Your Misses be,
'Till You grow Cloid for Want of Jealousy!
Into such Dullness may your Poets Tire,
'Till They shall write such Plays as You Admire:
May You, instead of Gaming, Whoring, Drinking,
Be Doomed to your Aversion -- Books and Thinking:
And for a Last Wish -- What I'm sure You'll Call
The Curse of Curses -- Marriage Take ye All.

