SInce by Mistakes your best Delights are made,
(For even your Wives can please in Masquerade)
'Twere worth our While to have drawn you in this day
By a new Name to our old honest Play;
But he that did this Evenings Treat prepare
Bluntly resolved before-hand to declare
Your Entertainment should be most old Fare.
Yet hopes, since in rich Shakespear's soil it grew,
'Twill relish yet with those whose Tastes are True,
And his Ambition is to please a Few.
If then this Heap of Flowers shall chance to wear
Fresh Beauty in the Order they now bear,
Even this Shakespear's Praise; each Rustic knows
Amongst plenteous Flowers a Garland to Compose,
Which strung by his course Hand may fairer Show,
But 'twas a Power: Divine first made 'em Grow.
Why should these Scenes lie hid, in which we find
What may at Once divert and teach the Mind?
Morals were always proper for the Stage,
But are even necessary in this Age.
Poets must take the Churches Teaching Trade,
Since Priests their Province of Intrigue invade;
But We the worst in this Exchange have got,
In vain our Poets Preach, whilst Church-men Plot.

THOU Nature art my Goddess, to thy Law
My Services are bound, why am I then
Deprived of a Son's Right because I came not
In the dull Road that custom has prescribed?
Why Bastard, wherefore Base, when I can boast
A Mind as generous and a Shape as true
As honest Madam's Issue? why are we
Held Base, who in the lusty stealth of Nature
Take fiercer Qualities than what compound
The scanted Births of the stale Marriage-bed?
Well then, legitimate Edgar, to thy right
Of Law I will oppose a Bastard's Cunning.
Our Father's Love is to the Bastard Edmund
As to Legitimate Edgar: with success
I've practised yet on both their easy Natures:
Here comes the old Man chaf't with the Information
Which last I forged against my Brother Edgar,
A Tale so plausible, so boldly uttered
And heightened by such lucky Accidents,
That now the slightest circumstance confirms him,
And Base-born Edmund spite of Law inherits.

Nay, good my Lord, your Charity
O'reshoots it self to plead in his behalf;
You are your self a Father, and may feel
The sting of disobedience from a Son
First-born and best Beloved: Oh Villain Edgar!

Be not too rash, all may be forgery,
And time yet clear the Duty of your Son.

Plead with the Seas, and reason down the Winds,
Yet shalt thou ne'er convince me, I have seen
His foul Designs through all a Father's fondness:
But be this Light and Thou my Witnesses
That I discard him here from my Possessions,
Divorce him from my Heart, my Blood and Name.

It works as I could wish; I'll show my self.

Ha Edmund! welcome Boy; O Kent see here
Inverted Nature, Gloster's Shame and Glory,
This By-born, the wild sally of my Youth,
Pursues me with all filial Offices,
Whilst Edgar, begged of Heaven and born in Honour,
Draws plagues on my white head that urge me still
To curse in Age the pleasure of my Youth.
Nay weep not, Edmund, for thy Brother's crimes;
O generous Boy, thou shar'st but half his blood,
Yet love beyond the kindness of a Brother.
But I'll reward thy Virtue. Follow me.
My Lord, you wait the King who comes resolved
To quit the Toils of Empire, and divide
His Realms amongst his Daughters, Heaven succeed it,
But much I fear the Change.

I grieve to see him
With such wild starts of passion hourly seized,
As renders Majesty beneath it self.

Alas! 'tis the Infirmity of his Age,
Yet has his Temper ever been unfixed,
Chol'rick and sudden; hark, They approach.

Cordelia, royal Fair, turn yet once more,
And e're successful Burgundy receive
The treasure of thy Beauties from the King,
E're happy Burgundy for ever fold Thee,
Cast back one pitying Look on wretched Edgar.

Alas what would the wretched Edgar with
The more Unfortunate Cordelia;
Who in obedience to a Father's will
Flies from her Edgar's Arms to Burgundy's?

Attend my Lords of Albany and Cornwall
With Princely Burgundy.

We do, my Liege.

Give me the Mapp -- know, Lords, We have divided
In Three our Kingdom, having now resolved
To disengage from Our long Toil of State,
Conferring All upon your younger years;
You, Burgundy, Cornwall and Albany
Long in Our Court have made your amorous sojourn
And now are to be answered -- tell me my Daughters
Which of you Loves Us most, that We may place
Our largest Bounty with the largest Merit.
Gonerill, Our Eldest-born, speak first.

Sir, I do love You more than words can utter,
Beyond what can be valued, Rich or Rare,
Nor Liberty, nor Sight, Health, Fame, or Beauty
Are half so dear, my Life for you were vile,
As much as Child can love the best of Fathers.

Of all these Bounds, even from this Line to this
With shady Forests and wide-skirted Meads,
We make Thee Lady, to thine and Albany's Issue
Be this perpetual -- What says Our Second Daughter?

My Sister, Sir, in part expressed my Love,
For such as Hers, is mine, though more extended;
Sense has no other Joy that I can relish,
I have my All in my dear Lieges Love!

Therefore to thee and thine Hereditary
Remain this ample Third of our fair Kingdom.

Now comes my Trial, how am I distressed,
That must with cold speech tempt the chol'rick King
Rather to leave me Dowerless, than condemn me
To loathed Embraces!

Speak now Our last, not least in Our dear Love,
So ends my Task of State, -- Cordelia speak,
What can Thou say to win a richer Third
Than what thy Sisters gained?

Now must my Love in words fall short of theirs
As much as it exceeds in Truth -- Nothing my Lord.

Nothing can come of Nothing, speak again.

Unhappy am I that I can't dissemble,
Sir, as I ought, I love your Majesty,
No more nor less.

Take heed Cordelia,
Thy Fortunes are at stake, think better on it
And mend thy Speech a little.

O my Liege,
You gave me Being, Bred me, dearly Love me,
And I return my Duty as I ought,
Obey you, Love you, and most Honour you!
Why have my Sisters Husbands, if they love you All?
Happ'ly when I shall Wed, the Lord whose Hand
Shall take my Plight, will carry half my Love,
For I shall never marry, like my Sisters,
To Love my Father All.

And goes thy Heart with this?
'Tis said that I am Chol'rick, judge me Gods,
Is there not cause? now Minion I perceive
The Truth of what has been suggested to Us,
Thy Fondness for the Rebel Son of Gloster,
False to his Father, as Thou art to my Hopes:
And oh take heed, rash Girl, lest We comply
With thy fond wishes, which thou wilt too late
Repent, for know Our nature cannot brook
A Child so young and so Ungentle.

So young my Lord and True.

Thy Truth then be thy Dower,
For by the sacred Sun and solemn Night
I here disclaim all my paternal Care,
And from this minute hold thee as a Stranger
Both to my Blood and Favour.

This is Frenzy.
Consider, good my Liege --

Peace Kent.
Come not between a Dragon and his Rage.
I loved her most, and in her tender Trust
Designed to have bestowed my Age at Ease!
So be my Grave my Peace as here I give
My Heart from her, and with it all my Wealth:
My Lords of Cornwall and of Albany,
I do invest you jointly with full Right
In this fair Third, Cordelia's forfeit Dower.
Mark me, My Lords, observe Our last Resolve,
Our Self attended with an hundred Knights
Will make Abode with you in monthly Course,
The Name alone of King remain with me,
Yours be the Execution and Revenues,
This is Our final Will, and to confirm it
This Coronet part between you.

Royal Lear,
Whom I have ever honoured as my King,
Loved as my Father, as my Master follow'd,
And as my Patron thought on in my Prayers --

Away, the Bow is bent, make from the Shaft.

No, let it fall and drench within my Heart,
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear is mad:
Thy youngest Daughter --

On thy Life no more.

What wilt thou do, old Man?

Out of my sight!

See better first.

Now by the gods --

Now by the gods, rash King, thou swear in vain.

Ha Traitor --

Do, kill thy Physician, Lear,
Strike through my Throat, yet with my latest Breath
I'll Thunder in thine Ear my just Complaint,
And tell Thee to thy Face that Thou dost ill.

Hear me rash Man, on thy Allegiance hear me;
Since thou hast striv'n to make Us break our Vow
And pressed between our Sentence and our Power,
Which nor our Nature nor our Place can bear,
We banish thee for ever from our Sight
And Kingdom; if when Three days are expired
Thy hated Trunk be found in our Dominions
That moment is thy Death; Away.

Why fare thee well, King, since thou art resolved,
I take thee at thy word, and will not stay
To see thy Fall: the gods protect the Maid
That truly thinks, and has most justly said.
Thus to new Climates my old Truth I bear,
Friendship lives Hence, and Banishment is Here.

Now Burgundy, you see her Price is fallen,
Yet if the fondness of your Passion still
Affects her as she stands, Dow'rless, and lost
In our Esteem, she's yours, take her or leave her.

Pardon me, Royal Lear, I but demand
The Dower your Self proposed, and here I take
Cordelia by the Hand Duchess of Burgundy.

Then leave her Sir, for by a Father's rage
I tell you all her Wealth. Away.

Then Sir be pleased to charge the breach
Of our Alliance on your own Will
Not my Inconstancy.

Has Heaven then weighed the merit of my Love,
Or is't the raving of my sickly Thought?
Could Burgundy forgo so rich a Prize
And leave her to despairing Edgar's Arms?
Have I thy Hand Cordelia, do I clasp it,
The Hand that was this minute to have joined
My hated Rivals? do I kneel before thee
And offer at thy feet my panting Heart?
Smile, Princess, and convince me, for as yet
I doubt, and dare not trust the dazzling Joy.

Some Comfort yet that 'twas no vicious Blot
That has deprived me of a Father's Grace,
But merely want of that that makes me rich
In wanting it, a smooth professing Tongue:
O Sisters, I am loath to call your fault
As it deserves; but use our Father well,
And wronged Cordelia never shall repine.

O heavenly Maid that art thy self thy Dower,
Richer in Virtue than the Stars in Light,
If Edgar's humble fortunes may be graced
With thy Acceptance, at thy feet he lays 'em.
Ha my Cordelia! dost thou turn away?
What have I done t'offend Thee?

Talked of Love.

Then I've offended oft, Cordelia too
Has oft permitted me so to offend.

When, Edgar, I permitted your Addresses,
I was the darling Daughter of a King,
Nor can I now forget my royal Birth,
And live dependent on my Lover's Fortune.
I cannot to so low a fate submit,
And therefore study to forget your Passion,
And trouble me upon this Theme no more.

Thus Majesty takes most State in Distress!
How are we tossed on Fortune's fickle flood!
The Wave that with surprising kindness brought
The dear Wreck to my Arms, has snatched it back,
And left me mourning on the barren Shore.

This Baseness of the ignoble Burgundy
Draws just suspicion on the Race of Men,
His Love was Interest, so may Edgar's be
And He but with more Complement dissemble;
If so, I shall oblige him by Denying:
But if his Love be fixed, such Constant flame
As warms our Breasts, if such I find his Passion,
My Heart as grateful to his Truth shall be,
And Cold Cordelia prove as Kind as He.

Brother, I've found you in a lucky minute,
Fly and be safe, some Villain has incensed
Our Father against your Life.

Distressed Cordelia! but oh! more Cruel!

Hear me Sir, your Life, your Life's in Danger.

A Resolve so sudden
And of such black Importance!

'Twas not sudden,
Some Villain has of long time laid the Train.

And yet perhaps 'twas but pretended Coldness,
To try how far my passion would pursue.

He hears me not; wake, wake Sir.

Say ye Brother? --
No Tears good Edmund, if thou bring me tidings
To strike me dead, for Charity delay not,
That present will befit so kind a Hand.

Your danger Sir comes on so fast
That I want time t'inform you, but retire
Whilst I take care to turn the pressing Stream.
O gods! for Heavens sake Sir.

Pardon me Sir, a serious Thought
Had seized me, but I think you talked of danger
And wished me to Retire; must all our Vows
End thus! -- Friend I obey you -- O Cordelia!

Ha! ha! fond Man, such credulous Honesty
Lessens the Glory of my Artifice,
His Nature is so far from doing wrongs
That he suspects none: if this Letter speed
And pass for Edgar's, as himself would own
The Counterfeit but for the foul Contents,
Then my designs are perfect -- here comes Gloster.

Stay Edmund, turn, what paper were you reading?

A Trifle Sir.

What needed then that terrible dispatch of it
Into your Pocket, come produce it Sir.

A Letter from my Brother Sir, I had
Just broke the Seal but knew not the Contents,
Yet fearing they might prove to blame
Endeavoured to conceal it from your sight.

'Tis Edgar's Character.

This Policy of Fathers is intolerable that keeps our Fortunes from us till
Age will not suffer us to enjoy 'em; I am weary of the Tyranny: Come to me that
of this I may speak more: if our Father would sleep till I waked him, you
should enjoy half his Possessions, and live beloved of your Brother

Edgar.

Slept till I wake him, you should enjoy
Half his possessions -- Edgar to write this
Against his indulgent Father! Death and Hell!
Fly, Edmund, seek him out, wind me into him
That I may bite the Traytor's heart, and fold
His bleeding Entrails on my vengeful Arm.
Perhaps 'twas writ, my Lord, to prove my Virtue.

These late Eclipses of the Sun and Moon
Can bode no less; Love cools, and friendship fails,
In Cities mutiny, in Countries discord,
The bond of Nature cracked 'twixt Son and Father:
Find out the Villain, do it carefully
And it shall lose thee nothing.

So, now my project's firm, but to make sure
I'll throw in one proof more and that a bold one;
I'll place old Gloster where he shall o're-hear us
Confer of this design, whilst to his thinking,
Deluded Edgar shall accuse himself.
Be Honesty my Interest and I can
Be honest too, and what Saint so Divine
That will successful Villainy decline!

Now banished Kent, if thou can pay thy duty
In this disguise where thou dost stand condemned,
Thy Master Lear shall find thee full of Labours.

In there, and tell our Daughter we are here
Now; What art Thou?

A Man, Sir.

What dost thou profess, or would with us?

I do profess to be no less then I seem, to serve him truly that puts me in
Trust, to love him that's Honest, to converse with him that's wise and speaks
little, to fight when I can't choose; and to eat no Fish.


I say, what art Thou?

A very honest-hearted fellow, and as poor as the King.

Then art thou poor indeed -- What can thou do?

I can keep honest Counsel, mar a curious Tale in the telling, deliver a plain
Message bluntly, that which ordinary Men are fit for I am qualified in, and the
best of me is Diligence.


Follow me, thou shalt serve me.

Now Sir?
Sir --

What says the fellow? Call the Clatpole back.

My Lord, I know not, but methinks your Highness is entertained with slender
Ceremony.


He says, my Lord, your Daughter is not well.

Why came not the Slave back when I called him?

My Lord, he answered me in the surliest manner,
That he would not.

I hope our Daughter did not so instruct him:
Now, who am I Sir?

My Ladies Father.

My Lord's Knave --

I'll not be struck my Lord.

Nor tripped neither, thou vile Civet-box.

By Day and Night this is insufferable,
I will not bear it.

Now, Daughter, why that frontlet on?
Speak, does that Frown become our Presence?

Sir, this licentious Insolence of your Servants
Is most unseemly, hourly they break out
In quarrels bred by their unbounded Riots,
I had fair hope by making this known to you
To have had a quick Redress, but find too late
That you protect and countenance their out-rage;
And therefore, Sir, I take this freedom, which
Necessity makes Discreet.

Are you our Daughter?

Come, Sir, let me entreat you to make use
Of your discretion, and put off betimes
This Disposition that of late transforms you
From what you rightly are.

Does any here know me? why this is not Lear.
Does Lear walk thus? speak thus? where are his Eyes?
Who is it that can tell me who I am?

Come, Sir, this Admiration's much of the savour
Of other your new humours, I beseech you
To understand my purposes aright;
As you are old, you should be staid and wise,
Here do you keep an hundred Knights and Squires,
Men so debauched and bold that this our Palace
Shows like a riotous Inn, a Tavern, Brothel;
Be then advised by her that else will take
The she begs, to lessen your Attendance,
Take half a way, and see that the remainder
Be such as may befit your Age, and know
Themselves and you.

Darkness and Devils!
Saddle my Horses, call my Train together,
Degenerate Viper, I'll not stay with Thee;
I yet have left a Daughter -- Serpent, Monster,
Lessen my Train, and call 'em riotous?
All men approved of choice and rarest Parts,
That each particular of duty know --
How small, Cordelia, was thy Fault? O Lear,
Beat at this Gate that let thy Folly in,
And thy dear Judgment out; Go, go, my People.

Ungrateful Duke, was this your will?
What Sir?

Death! fifty of my Followers at a clap!

The matter Madam?

Never afflict your self to know the Cause,
But give his Dotage way.

Blasts upon thee,
The untented woundings of a Father's Curse
Pierce every Sense about Thee; old fond Eyes
Lament this Cause again, I'll pluck ye out
And cast ye with the Waters that ye lose
To temper Clay -- No, Gorgon, thou shalt find
That I'll resume the Shape which thou dost think
I have cast off for ever.

Mark ye that.

Hear Nature!
Dear Goddess hear, and if thou dost intend
To make that Creature fruitful, change thy purpose;
Pronounce upon her Womb the barren Curse,
That from her blasted Body never spring
A Babe to honour her -- but if she must bring forth,
Defeat her Joy with some distorted Birth,
Or monstrous Form, the Prodigy of the Time,
And so perverse of spirit, that it may Live
Her Torment as 'twas Born, to fret her Cheeks
With constant Tears, and wrinkle her young Brow.
Turn all her Mother's Pains to Shame and Scorn,
That she may curse her Crime too late, and feel
How sharper than a Serpent's Tooth it is
To have a Thankless Child! Away, away.

Presuming thus upon his numerous Train
He thinks to play the Tyrant here, and hold
Our Lives at will.

Well, you may bear too far.

THE Duke comes here to night, I'll take advantage
Of his Arrival to complete my project,
Brother a Word, come forth, 'tis I your Friend,
My Father watches for you, fly this place,
Intelligence is given where you are hid,
Take the advantage of the Night, bethink ye
Have not spoke against the Duke of Cornwall
Something might show you a favourer of
Duke Albany's Party?

Nothing, why ask you?

Because he's coming here to Night in haste
And Regan with him -- hark! the Guards, Away.

Let 'em come on, I'll stay and clear my self.

Your Innocence at leisure may be heard,
But Gloster's storming Rage as yet is deaf,
And you may perish e're allow'd the hearing.
Gloster comes yonder: now to my feigned scuffle --
Yield, come before my Father! Lights here, Lights!
Some Blood drawn on me would beget opinion
Of our more fierce Encounter -- I have seen
Drunkards do more than this in sport.

Now, Edmund, where's the Traitor?

That Name, Sir,
Strikes Horror through me, but my Brother, Sir,
Stood here in the Dark.

Thou bleed, pursue the Villain
And bring him piece-meal to me.

Sir, he's fled.

Let him fly far, this Kingdom shall not hide him:
The noble Duke, my Patron, comes to Night,
By his Authority I will proclaim
Rewards for him that brings him to the Stake,
And Death for the Concealer.
Then of my Lands, loyal and natural Boy,
I'll work the means to make thee capable.

Good morrow Friend, belong'st thou to this House?

Ask them will answer thee.

Where may we set our Horses?

In the Mire.

I am in haste, prithee and thou lov^st me, tell me.

I love thee not.

Why then I care not for Thee.

And I had thee in Lipsbury Pinfold, I'd make thee care for me.

What dost thou mean? I know thee not.

But, Minion, I know Thee.

What dost thou know me for?

For a base, proud, beggarly, white-liver'd, Glass-gazing, superserviceable
finical Rogue; one that would be a Pimp in way of good Service, and art nothing
but a composition of Knave, Beggar, Coward, Pandar --


What a monstrous Fellow art thou to rail at one that is neither known of thee
nor knows thee?


Impudent Slave, not know me, who but two days since tripped up thy heels before
the King: draw, Miscreant, or I'll make the Moon shine through thee.


What means the Fellow? -- Why prithee, prithee;
I tell thee I have nothing to do with thee.

I know your Rogueship's Office, you come with Letters against the King, taking
my young Lady Vanity's part against her royal Father; draw Rascal.


Murder, murder, help Ho!

Dost thou scream Peacock, strike Puppet, stand dappar
Slave.

Help Hea'! Murder, help.

All Welcome to your Graces, you do me honour.

Gloster w'ave heard with sorrow that your Life
Has been attempted by your impious Son,
But Edmund here has paid you strictest Duty.

He did betray his Practice, and received
The Hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.

Is He pursued?

He is, my Lord.

Use our Authority to apprehend
The Traitor and do Justice on his Head;
For you, Edmund, that have so signalized
Your Virtue, you from henceforth shall be ours;
Natures of such firm Trust we much shall need.
A charming Youth and worth my further Thought.

Lay comforts, noble Gloster, to your Breast,
As we to ours, This Night be spent in Revels,
We choose you, Gloster, for our Host to Night,
A troublesome expression of our Love.
On, to the Sports before us -- who are These?

Now, what's the matter?

Keep peace upon your Lives, he dies that strikes.
Whence and what are ye?

Sir, they are Messengers, the one from your Sister,
The other from the King.

Your Difference? speak.

I'm scarce in breath, my Lord.

No marvel, you have so bestirred your Valour,
Nature disclaims the Dastard, a Taylor made him.

Speak yet, how grew your Quarrel?

Sir this old Ruffian here, whose Life I spared
In pity to his Beard --

Thou Essence Bottle!
In pity to my Beard? -- Your leave, my Lord,
And I will tread the Muss-cat into Mortar.

Know thou our Presence?

Yes, Sir, but Anger has a Privilege.

Why art thou angry?

That such a Slave as this should wear a Sword
And have no Courage, Office and no Honesty.
Not Frost and Fire hold more Antipathy
Than I and such a Knave.

Why dost thou call him Knave?

His Countenance likes me not.

No more perhaps does Mine, nor His or Hers.

Plain-dealing is my Trade, and to be plain, Sir,
I have seen better Faces in my time
Than stands on any Shoulders now before me.

This is some Fellow that having once been praised,
For Bluntness, since affects a saucy Rudeness,
But I have known one of these surly Knaves
That in his Plainness harboured more Design
Than twenty cringing complementing Minions.

What's the offence you gave him?

Never any, Sir.
It pleased the King his Master lately
To strike me on a slender misconstruction,
Whilst watching his Advantage this old Lurcher
Tripped me behind, for which the King extolled him;
And, flushed with the honour of this bold exploit,
Drew on me here again.

Bring forth the Stocks, we'll teach you.

Sir I'm too old to learn;
Call not the Stocks for me, I serve the King,
On whose Employment I was sent to you,
You'll show too small Respect, and too bold Malice
Against the Person of my royal Master,
Stocking his Messenger.

Bring forth the Stocks, as I have Life and Honour,
There shall he sit till Noon.

Till Noon, my Lord? till Night, and all Night too.

Why, Madam, if I were your Father's Dog
You would not use me so.

Sir, being his Knave I will.

Let me beseech your Graces to forbear him,
His fault is much, and the good King his Master
Will check him for it, but needs must take it ill
To be thus slighted in his Messenger.

We'll answer that;
Our Sister may receive it worse to have
Her Gentleman assaulted: to our business lead.

I am sorry for thee, Friend, 'tis the Duke's pleasure
Whose Disposition will not be controlled,
But I'll entreat for thee.

Pray do not, Sir --
I have watched and travelled hard,
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest I'll whistle:
Fare-well t'ye, Sir.
All weary and o're-watcht,
I feel the drowsy Guest steal on me; take
Advantage heavy Eyes of this kind Slumber,
Not to behold this vile and shameful Lodging

I heard my self proclaimed,
And by the friendly Hollow of a Tree
Escaped the Hunt, no Port is free, no place
Where Guards and most unusual Vigilance
Do not attend to take me -- how easy now
'Twere to defeat the malice of my Trale,
And leave my Griefs on my Sword's reeking point;
But Love detains me from Death's peaceful Cell,
Still whispering me Cordelia's in distress;
Unkind as she is I cannot see her wretched,
But must be near to wait upon her Fortune.
Who knows but the white minute yet may come
When Edgar may do service to Cordelia,
That charming Hope still ties me to the Oar
Of painful Life, and makes me too, submit
To the humblest shifts to keep that Life a foot;
My Face I will besmear and knit my Locks,
The Country gives me proof and president
Of Bedlam Beggars, who with roaring Voices
Strike in their numm'd and mortified bare Arms
Pins, Iron-spikes, Thorns, sprigs of Rosemary,
And thus from Sheep-coats Villages and Mills,
Sometimes with Prayers, sometimes with Lunatic Banns
Enforce their Charity, poor Tyrligod, poor Tom
That's something yet, Edgar I am no more.

'Tis strange that they should so depart from home
And not send back our Messenger.

Hail, noble Master.

How? make thou this Shame thy Pastime?
What's he that has so much mistook thy Place
To set thee here?

It is both He and She, Sir, your Son and Daughter.

No. Kent: Yes: Lear: No I say. Kent: I say yea:

By Jupiter I swear no.

By Juno I swear, I swear I.

They durst not do it
They could not, would not do it, 'tis worse then Murder
To do upon Respect such violent out-rage.
Resolve me with all modest haste which way
Thou may deserve, or they impose this usage?

My Lord, when at their Home
I did commend your Highness Letters to them,
Ever I was Ris'n, arrived another Post
Steered in his haste, breathless and panting forth
From Gonerill his Mistress Salutations,
Whose Message being delivered, they took Horse,
Commanding me to follow and attend
The leisure of their Answer; which I did,
But meeting that other Messenger
Whose welcome I perceived had poisoned mine,
Being the very Fellow that of late
Had shew'n such rudeness to your Highness, I
Having more Man than Wit about me, Drew,
On which he raised the House with Coward cries:
This was the Trespass which your Son and Daughter
Thought worth the shame you see it suffer here.

Oh! how this Spleen swells upward to my Heart
And heaves for passage -- down thou climbing Rage
Thy Element's below; where is this Daughter?

Within, Sir, at a Masque.

Now Gloster? -- ha!
Deny to speak with me? they are sick, they are weary,
They have travelled hard to Night -- mere fetches;
Bring me a better Answer.

My dear Lord,
You know the fiery Quality of the Duke --

Vengeance! Death, Plague, Confusion,
Fiery? what Quality -- why Gloster, Gloster,
I'd speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his Wife.

I have informed 'em so.

Informed 'em! dost thou understand me, Man,
I tell thee Gloster --

I, my good Lord.

The King would speak with Cornwall, the dear Father
Would with his Daughter speak, commands her Service.
Are they informed of this? my Breath and Blood!
Fiery! the fiery Duke! tell the hot Duke --
No, but not yet, may be he is not well:
Infirmity does still neglect all Office;
I beg his Pardon, and I'll chide my Rashness
That took the indisposed and sickly Fit
For the sound Man -- but wherefore sits he there?
Death on my State, this Act convinces me
That this Retiredness of the Duke and her
Is plain Contempt; give me my Servant forth,
Go tell the Duke and's Wife I'd speak with 'em.
Now, instantly, bid 'em come forth and hear me,
Or at their Chamber door I'll beat the Drum
Till it cry sleep to Death --

Oh! are ye come?
Health to the King.

I am glad to see your Highness.

Regan, I think you are, I know what cause
I have to think so; should thou not be glad
I would divorce me from thy Mother's Tomb?
Beloved Regan, thou wilt shake to hear
What I shall utter: Thou coud'st ne'er have thought it,
Thy Sister's nought, O Regan, she has tied
Ingratitude like a keen Vulture here,
I scarce can speak to thee.

I pray you, Sir, take patience; I have hope
That you know less to value her Desert,
Then she to slack her Duty.

Ha! how's that?

I cannot think my Sister in the least
Would fail in her respects, but if perchance
She has restrained the Riots of your Followers
'Tis on such Grounds, and to such wholesome Ends
As clears her from all Blame.

My Curses on her.

O Sir, you are old
And should content you to be ruled and led
By some discretion that discerns your State
Better than you yourself, therefore Sir,
Return to our Sister, and say you have wronged her.

Ha! ask her Forgiveness?
No, no, 'twas my mistake thou did not mean so,
Dear Daughter, I confess that I am old;
Age is unnecessary, but thou art good,
And wilt dispense with my Infirmity.

Good Sir, no more of these unsightly passions,
Return back to our Sister.

Never, Regan,
She has abated me of half of my Train,
Looked black upon me, stabbed me with her Tongue;
All the stored Vengeances of Heaven fall
On her Ungrateful Head; strike her young Bones
Ye taking Airs with Lameness.

O the blessed Gods! Thus will you wish on me
When the rash mood --

No, Regan, Thou shalt never have my Curse,
Thy tender Nature cannot give thee over
To such Impiety; Thou better know
The Offices of Nature, bond of Child-hood,
And dues of Gratitude: Thou bear in mind
The halfo'th' Kingdom which our love conferred
On thee and thine.

Good Sir, to the purpose.

Who put my Man in the Stocks?

What Trumpet's that?

I know it, my Sister's, this confirms her Letters.
Sir, is your Lady come?

More Torture still?
This is a Slave whose easy borrowed pride
Dwells in the fickle Grace of her he follows;
A Fashion-fop that spends the day in Dressing,
And all to bear his Lady's flattering Message,
That can deliver with a Grace her Lie,
And with as bold a face bring back a greater.
Out Varlet from my sight.

What means your Grace?

Who stocked my Servant? Regan, I have hope
Thou did not know it.

Who comes here! oh Heavens!
If you do love Old men, if your sweet sway
Allow Obedience; if your selves are Old,
Make it your Cause, send down and take my part;
Why, Gorgon, dost thou come to haunt me here?
Art not ashamed to look upon this Beard?
Darkness upon my Eyes they play me false,
O Regan, wilt thou take her by the Hand?
Why not by the Hand, Sir, how have I offended?
All's not Offence that indiscretion finds,
And Dotage terms so.

Heart thou art too tough.

I pray you, Sir, being old confessyou are so,
If till the expiration of your Month
You will return and sojourn with your Sister,
Dismissing half your Train, come then to me,
I am now from Home, and out of that Provision
That shall be needful for your Entertainment.

Return with her and fifty Knights dismissed?
No, rather I'll forswear all Roofs, and choose
To be Companion to the Midnight Wolf,
My naked Head exposed to the merciless Air
Then have my smallest wants supplied by her.

At your choice, Sir.

Now I prithee Daughter do not make me mad;
I will not trouble thee, my Child, farewell,
We'll meet no more, no more see one another;
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it,
I do not bid the Thunder-bearer strike,
Nor tell Tales of thee to avenging Heaven;
Mend when thou can, be better at thy leisure,
I can be patient, I can stay with Regan,
I, and my hundred Knights.

Your Pardon, Sir.
I looked not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome.

Is this well spoken now?

My Sister treats you fair; what fifty Followers
Is it not well? what should you need of more?

Why might not you, my Lord, receive Attendance
From those whom she calls Servants, or from mine?

Why not, my Lord? if then they chance to slack you
We could controll'em -- if you come to me,
For now Isee the Danger, I entreat you
To bring but Five and Twenty; to no more
Will I give place.

Hold now my Temper, stand this bolt unmoved
And I am Thunder-proof;
The wicked when compared with the more wicked
Seem beautiful, and not to be the worst,
Stands in some rank of Praise; now, Gonerill,
Thou art innocent again, I'll go with thee;
Thy Fifty yet, does double Five and Twenty,
And thou art twice her Love.

Hear me, my Lord,
What need you Five and Twenty, Ten, or Five,
To follow in a House where twice so many
Have a Command t'attend you?

What need one?

Blood, Fire! hear -- Leaprosies and bluest Plague
Room, room for Hell to belch her Horrors up
And drench the Circes in a stream of Fire;
Hark how the Infernals echo to my Rage
Their Whips and Snakes --

How lewd a thing is Passion!

So old and stomachfull.

Heavens drop your Patience down;
You see me here, ye Gods, a poor old Man
As full of Griefs as Age, wretched in both --
I'll bear no more: no, you unnatural Hags,
I will have such Revenges on you both,
That all the world shall -- I will do such things
What they are yet I know not, but they shall be
The Terrors of the Earth; you think I'll weep,
This Heart shall break into a thousand pieces
Before I'll weep -- O Gods! I shall go mad.

'Tis a wild Night, come out of the Storm.

BLOW Winds and burst your Cheeks, rage louderyet,
Fantastic Lightning singe, singe my white Head;
Spout Cataracts, and Hurricanos fall
Till you have drowned the Towns and Palaces
Of proud ungrateful Man.

Not all my best entreaties can persuade him
Into some needful shelter, or to bide
This poor slight Cov'ring on his aged Head
Exposed to this wild war of Earth and Heaven.

Rumble thy fill, fight Whirlwind, Rain and Fire:
Not Fire, Wind, Rain or Thunder are my Daughters:
I tax not you ye Elements with unkindness;
I never gave you Kingdoms, called you Children,
You owe me no Obedience, then let fall
Your horrible pleasure, here I stand your Slave,
A poor, infirm, weak and despised old man;
Yet I will call you servile Ministers,
That have with two pernicious Daughters joined
Their high-engendred Battle against a Head
So Old and White as mine, Oh! oh! 'tis Foul.

Hard by, Sir, is a Hovel that will lend
Some shelter from this Tempest.

I will forget my Nature, what? so kind a Father,
I, there's the point.

Consider, good my Liege, Things that love Night
Love not such Nights as this; these wrathful Skies
Frighten the very wanderers of the Dark,
And make 'em keep their Caves; such drenching Rain,
Such Sheets of Fire, such Claps of horrid Thunder,
Such Groans of roaring Winds have ne'er been known.

Let the Great Gods,
That keep this dreadful pother over our Heads
Find out their Enemies now, tremble thou Wretch
That hast within thee undiscovered Crimes.
Hide, thou bloody Hand,
Thou perjured Villain, holy, holy Hypocrite,
That drinkst the Widows Tears, sigh now and cry
These dreadful Summoners Grace, I am a Man
More sinned against than sinning.

Good Sir, to the Hovell.

My wit begins to burn,
Come on my Boy, how dost my Boy? art Cold?
I'm cold my Self; show me this Straw, my Fellow,
The Art of our Necessity is strange,
And can make vile things precious; my poor Knave,
Cold as I am at Heart, I've one place There
That's sorry yet for Thee.

The Storm is in our louder Rev'lings drowned.
Thus would I Reign could I but mount a Throne.
The Riots of these proud imperial Sisters
Already have imposed the galling Yoke
Of Taxes, and hard Impositions on
The drudging Peasants Neck, who bellow out.
Their loud Complaints in Vain -- Triumphant Queens!
With what Assurance do they tread the Crowd.
O for a Taste of such Majestic Beauty,
Which none but my hot Veins are fit to engage;
Nor are my Wishes desperate, for even now
During the Banquet I observed their Glances
Shot thick at me, and as they left the Room
Each cast by stealth a kind inviting Smile,
The happy Earnest -- ha!

Where merit is so Transparent, not to behold it
Were Blindness, and not to reward it Ingratitude.
Enough! Blind, and Ungrateful should I be
Not to Obey the Summons ofThis Oracle.
Now for a Second Letter.
If Modesty be not your Enemy, doubt not to
Find me your Friend.

Excellent Sybill! O my glowing Blood!
I am already sick of expectation,
And pant for the Possession -- here Gloster comes
With Business on his Brow; be husht my Joys.

I come to seek thee, Edmund, to impart a business of Importance; I knew thy
loyal Heart is touched to see the Cruelty of these ungrateful Daughters against
our royal Master.


Most Savage and Unnatural.

This change in the State sits uneasy. The Commons repine aloud at their
female Tyrants, already they Cry out for the re-installment of their good old
King, whose Injuries I fear will inflame 'em into Mutiny.


'Tis to be hopt, not feared.

Thou hast it Boy, 'tis to be hopt indeed,
On me they cast their Eyes, and hourly Court me
To lead 'em on, and whilst this Head is Mine
I am Theirs, a little covert Craft, my Boy,
And then for open Action, 'twill be Employment
Worthy such honest daring Souls as Thine.
Thou, Edmund, art my trusty Emissary,
Haste on the Spur at the first break of day
With these Dispatches to the Duke of Combray;
You know what mortal Feuds have always flamed
Between this Duke of Cornwall's Family, and his
Full Twenty thousand Mountaners
Th invetrate Prince will send to our Assistance.
Dispatch; Commend us to his Grace, and Prosper.

Yes, credulous old Man,
I will commend you to his Grace,
His Grace the Duke of Cornwall -- instantly
To show him these Contents in thy own Character,
And Sealed with thy own Signet; then forthwith
The Chol'rick Duke gives Sentence on thy Life;
And to my hand thy vast Revenues fall
To glut my Pleasure that till now has starved.

Turn, Gloster, Turn, by all the sacred Powers
I do conjure you give my Griefs a Hearing,
You must, you shall, nay I am sure you will,
For you were always styled the Just and Good.

What would thou, Princess? rise and speak thy Griefs.

Nay, you shall promise to redress 'em too,
Or here I'll kneel for ever; I entreat
Thy succour for a Father and a King,
An injured Father and an injured King.

O charming Sorrow! how her Tears adorn her
Like Dew on Flowers, but she is Virtuous,
And I must quench this hopeless Fire in the Kindling.

Consider, Princess,
For whom thou beg, 'tis for the King that wronged Thee.

O name not that; he did not, could not wrong me.
Nay muse not, Gloster, for it is too likely
This injured King e're this is past your Aid,
And gone Distracted, with his savage Wrongs.

I'll gaze no more -- and yet my Eyes are Charmed.

Or what if it be Worse? can there be Worse?
As 'tis too probable this furious Night
Has pierced his tender Body, the bleak Winds
And cold Rain chilled, or Lightning struck him Dead;
If it be so your Promise is discharged,
And I have only one poor Boon to beg,
That you'd Convey me to his breathless Trunk,
With my torn Robes to wrap his hoary Head,
With my torn Hair to bind his Hands and Feet,
Then with a shew'r of Tears
To wash his Clay-smear'd Cheeks, and Die beside him.
Glost, Rise, fair Cordelia, thou hast Piety
Enough to atone for both thy Sisters Crimes.
I have already plotted to restore
My injured Master, and thy Virtue tells me
We shall succeed, and suddenly.

Dispatch, Arante,
Provide me a Disguise, we'll instantly
Go seek the King, and bring him some Relief.

How, Madam? are you Ignorant
Of what your impious Sisters have decreed?
Immediate Death for any that relieve him.

I cannot dread the Furies in this case.

In such a Night as This? Consider, Madam,
For many Miles about there's scarce a Bush
To shelter in.

Therefore no shelter for the King,
And more our Charity to find him out:
What have not Women dared for vicious Love,
And we'll be shining Proofs that they can dare
For Piety as much; blow Winds, and Lightnings fall,
Bold in my Virgin Innocence, I'll fly
My Royal Father to Relieve, or Die.

Provide me a Disguise, we'll instantly
Go seek the King: -- ha! ha! a lucky change,
That Virtue which I feared would be my hindrance
Has proved the Bond to my Design;
I'll bribe two Ruffians that shall at a distance follow,
And seize 'em in some desert Place, and there
Whilst one retains her to other shall return
To inform me where she's Lodged; I'll be disguised too.
Whilst they are poching for me I 'll to the Duke
With these Dispatches, then to th'Field
Where like the vigorous Jove I will enjoy
This Semele in a Storm, 'twill deaf her Cries
Like Drums in Battle, lest her Groans should pierce
My pitying Ear, and make the amorous Fight less fierce.

Here is the place, my Lord; good my Lord enter;
The Tyranny of this open Night's too rough
For Nature to endure.

Let me alone.

Good my Lord, enter.

Wilt break my Heart?

Beseech you, Sir.

Thou think 'tis much that this contentious Storm
Invades us to the Skin so, 'tis to thee
But where the greater Malady is fixed
The lesser is scarce felt: the Tempest in my Mind
Does from my Senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial Ingratitude!
Is it not as this Mouth should tear this Hand
For lifting Food to it? -- but I'll punish home.
No, I will weep no more; in such a Night
To shut me out -- pour on, I will endure
In such a Night as this: O Regan, Gonerill,
Your old kind Father whose frank heart gave All,
O that way madness lies, let me shun that,
No more of that.

See, my Lord, here's the Entrance.

Well, I'll go in
And pass it all, I'll pray and then I'll sleep:
Poor naked Wretches wheresoever you are,
That 'bide the pelting of this pittiless Storm,
How shall your houseless Heads and unfed Sides
Sustain this Shock? your raggedness defend you
From Seasons such as These.
O I have taken too little Care of this,
Take Physic, Pomp,
Expose thy self to feel what Wretches feel,
That thou may cast the superflux to them,
And show the Heavens more Just.
Five Fathom and a half, poor Tom.

What art thou that dost grumble there in the Straw?
Come forth.

Away! The foul Fiend follows me -- through the sharp Haw-thorn blows the cold
Wind -- Mum, Go to thy Bed and warm Thee. -- ha! what do I see? by all my
Griefs the poor old King beheaded,

And drenched in this fow Storm, professing Siren,
Are all your Protestations come to this?

Tell me, Fellow, did thou give all to thy Daughters?


Who gives any thing to poor Tom, whom the foul Fiend has led through Fire and
through Flame, through Bushes and Bogs, that has laid Knives under his Pillow,
and Halters in his Pue, that has made him proud of Heart to ride on a
Baytrotting Horse over four inch'd Bridges, to course his own Shadow for a
Traitor. -- bless thy five Wits, Tom's a cold [ Shivers.] bless thee from
Whirlwinds, Star-blasting and Taking: do poor Tom some Charity, whom the foul
Fiend vexes -- Sa, sa, there I could have him now, and there, and there again.


Have his Daughters brought him to this pass?
Could thou save Nothing? did thou give 'em All?

He has no Daughters, Sir.

Death, Traitor, nothing could have subdued Nature
To such a Lowness but his unkind Daughters.

Pillicock sat upon Pillicock Hill; Hello, hello, hello.

Is it the fashion that discarded Fathers
Should have such little Mercy on their Flesh?
Judicious punishment, 'twas this Flesh begot
Those Pelican Daughters.

Take heed of the fow Fiend, obey thy Parents, keep thy Word justly, Swear not,
commit not with Man's sworn Spouse, set not thy sweet Heart on proud Array:
Tom's a Cold.


What hast thou been?

A Serving-man proud of Heart, that curled my Hair, used Perfume and Washes,
that served the Lust of my Mistresses Heart, and did the Act of Darkness with
her. Swore as many Oaths as I spoke Words, and broke 'em all in the sweet Face
of Heaven: Let not the Paint, nor the Patch, nor the rushing of Silks betray
thy poor Heart to Woman, keep thy Foot out of Brothels, thy Hand out of
Plackets, thy Pen from Creditors Books, and defy the foul Fiend -- still
through the Hawthorn blows the cold Wind -- Sess, Suum, Mun, Nonny, Dolphin my
Boy -- hist! the Boy, Sesey! soft let him Trot by.


Death, thou were better in thy Grave, than thus to answer with thy uncovered
Body this Extremity of the Sky. And yet consider him well, and Man's no more
than This; Thou art indebted to the Worm for no Silk, to the Beast for no Hide,
to the Cat for no Perfume -- ha! here's Two of us are Sophisticated; Thou art
the Thing it self, unaccommated Man is no more than such a poor bare forkt
Animal as thou art.

Off, Off, ye vain Disguises, empty Lendings,
I'll be my Original Self, quick, quick, Uncase me.

Defend his Wits, good Heaven!

One point I had forgot; what's your Name?

Poor Tom that eats the swimming Frog, the Wall-nut, and the Water-nut; that in
the fury of his Heart when the foul Fiend rages eats Cow-dung for Sallets,
swallows the old Rat and the Ditch-dog, that drinks the green Mantle of the
standing Pool that's whipped from Tithing to Tithing; that has Three Suits to his
Back, Six Shirts to his Body, Horse to Ride, and Weapon to wear,
But Rats and Mice, and such small Deer
Have been Tom's Food for Seven long Year.
Beware, my Follower; Peace, Smulkin; Peace, thou foul Fiend.


One word more, but be sure true Council; tell me, is a Madman a Gentleman, or
a Yeoman?


I feared 't would come to This, his Wits are gone.

Fraterreto calls me, and tells me, Nero is an Angler in the Lake of Darkness.
Pray, Innocent, and beware the foul Fiend.


Right, ha! ha! was it not pleasant to have a Thousand with red hot Spits come
hizzing in upon 'em?


My Tears begin to take his part so much
They mar my Counterfeiting.

The little Dogs and all, Trey, Blanch and Sweet-heart, see they Bark at me.


Tom will throw his Head at'em; Avaunt ye Curs.
Be thy Mouth or black or white,
Tooth that poisons if it bite,
Mastiff, Grey-hound, Mungrill, Grim,
Hound or Spanniel, Brach or Him,
Bob-tail, Tight, or Trundle-tail,
Tom will make 'em weep and wail,
For with throwing thus my Head
Dogs leap the Hatch, and All are fled.
Ud, de, de, de. Se, se, se. Come march to Wakes, and Fairs, and Market-Towns,
-- Poor Tom, thy Horn is dry.


You Sir, I entertain you for One of my Hundred, only I do not like the fashion
of your Garments, you'll say they're Persian, but no matter, let 'em be
changed.


This is the foul Flibertigibet, he begins at Curfew and walks at first Cock,
he gives the Web and the Pin, knits the Elflock, squints the Eye, and makes the
Hair-lip, mildews the white Wheat, and hurts the poor Creature of the Earth;
Swithin footed Thrice the Cold,
He met the Night-mare and her Nine-fold,
'Twas there he did appoint her;
He bid her alight and her Troth plight,
And arroynt the Witch arroynt her.



What, has your Grace no better Company?

The Prince of Darkness is a Gentleman; Modo he is called, and Mahu.


Go with me, Sir, hard by I have a Tenant.
My Duty cannot suffer me to obey in all your Daughters hard Commands, who have
enjoined me to make fast my Doors, and let this Tyrannous Night take hold upon
you. Yet have I ventured to come seek you out, and bring you where both Fire
and Food is ready.


Good my Lord, take his offer.

First let me talk with this Philosopher,
Say, Stagirite, what is the Cause of Thunder.

Beseech you, Sir, go with me.

I'll talk a Word with this same Learned Theban.
What is your Study?

How to prevent the Fiend, and to kill Vermin.

Let me ask you a Word in private.

His Wits are quite unsettled; Good Sir, let's force him hence.


Can blame him? his Daughters seek his Death; This Bedlam but disturbs him
the more. Fellow, be gone.


Child Rowland to the dark Tower came,
His Word was still Fie, Fo, and Fum,
I smell the Blood of a British Man. -- Oh Torture!

Now, I prithee Friend, let's take him in our Arms, and carry him where he
shall meet both Welcome, and Protection.

Good Sir, along with us.

You say right, let 'em Anatomize Regan, see what breeds about her Heart; is
there any Cause in Nature for these hard Hearts?


Beseech your Grace.

Hist! -- Make no Noise, make no Noise -- so so; we'll to Supper in the Morning.


Dear Madam, rest ye here, our search is Vain,
Look here's a shed, beseech ye, enter here.

Prithee go in thy self, seek thy own Ease,
Where the Mind's free, the Body's Delicate:
This Tempest but diverts me from the Thought
Of what would hurt me more.

We have dogged 'em far enough, this Place is private,
I'll keep 'em Prisoners here within this Hovell,
Whilst you return and bring Lord Edmund Hither;
But help me first to House 'em.

Nothing but this dear Devil
Should have drawn me through all this Tempest;
But to our Work.
Soft, Madam, we are Friends, dispatch, I say.

Help, Murder, help! Gods! some kind Thunderbolt
To strike me Dead.

What Cry was That? -- ha, Women seized by Ruffians?
Is this a Place and Time for Villainy?
Avaunt ye Bloud-hounds.

The Devil, the Devil!

O speak, what are ye that appear to be
Of the tender Sex, and yet unguarded Wander
Through the dead Mazes of this dreadful Night,
Where (though at full) the Clouded Moon scarce darts
Imperfect Glimmerings.

First say what art thou
Our Guardian Angel, that were it pleased to assume
That horrid shape to fright the Ravishers?
We 'll kneel to Thee.

O my tumultuous Blood!
By all my trembling Veins Cordelia's Voice!
'Tis she her self! -- My Senses sure conform
To my wild Garb, and I am Mad indeed.

Whatever thou art, befriend a wretched Virgin,
And if thou can direct our weary search.

Who relieves poor Tom, that sleeps on the Nettle, with the Hedge-pig for his
Pillow.

Whilst Smug plied the Bellows
She trucked with her Fellows,
The Freckle-fac't Mab
Was a Blouze and a Drab,
Yet Swithin made Oberon jealous -- Oh! Torture.

Alack, Madam, a poor wandering Lunatic.

And yet his Language seemed but now well tempered.
Speak, Friend, to one more wretched than thy self,
And if thou hast one Interval of sense,
Inform us if thou can where we may find
A poor old Man, who through this Heath has strayed
The tedious Night -- Speak, saw thou such a One?

The King, her Father, whom she's come to seek
Through all the Terrors of this Night. O Gods!
That such amazing Piety, such Tenderness
Should yet to me be Cruel --
Yes, Fair One, such a One was lately here,
And is conveyed by some that came to seek him,
To a Neighbouring Cottage; but distinctly where,
I know not.

Blessings on'em,
Let's find him out, Arante, for thou see
We are in Heavens Protection.

O Cordelia!

Ha! -- Thou know my Name.

As you did once know Edgar's.

Edgar!

The poor Remains of Edgar, what your Scorn
Has left him.

Do we wake, Arante?

My Father seeks my Life, which I preserved
In hopes of some blessed Minute to oblige
Distressed Cordelia, and the Gods have given it;
That Thought alone prevailed with me to take
This Frantic Dress, to make the Earth my Bed,
With these bare Limbs all change ofSeasons bide,
Noons scorching Heat, and Midnights piercing Cold,
To feed on Offals, and to drink with Herds,
To Combat with the Winds, and be the Sport
Of Clowns, or what's more wretched yet, their Pity.

Was ever Tale so full ofMisery!

But such a Fall as this I grant was due
To my aspiring Love, for 'twas presumptuous,
Though not presumptuously pursued;
For well you know I wore my Flames concealed,
And silent as the Lamps that Burn in Tombs,
'Till you perceived my Grief, with modest Grace
Drew forth the Secret, and then sealed my Pardon.

You had your Pardon, nor can you Challenge more.

What do I. Challenge more?
Such Vanity agrees not with these Rags;
When in my prosperous State rich Gloster's Heir,
You silenced my Pretences, and enjoined me
To trouble you upon that Theme no more;
Then what Reception must Love's Language find
From these bare Limbs and Beggars humble Weeds?

Such as the Voice of Pardon to a Wretch Condemned;
Such as the Shouts
Of succ'ring Forces to a Town besieged.

Ah! what new Method now of Cruelty?

Come to my Arms, thou dearest, best of Men,
And take the kindest Vows that e're were spoke
By a protesting Maid.

Is't possible?

By the dear Vital Stream that baths my Heart,
These hallowed Rags ofThine, and naked Virtue,
These abject Tassels, these fantastic Shreds,
(Ridiculous even to the meanest Clown)
To me are dearer than the richest Pomp
Of purple Monarchs.

Generous charming Maid,
The Gods alone that made, can rate thy Worth!
This most amazing Excellence shall be
Fame's Triumph, in succeeding Ages, when
Thy bright Example shall adorn the Scene,
And teach the World Perfection.

Cold and weary,
We'll rest a while, Arante, on that Straw,
Then forward to find out the poor Old King.

Look I have Flint and Steel, the Implements
Of wandering Lunatics, I'll strike a Light,
And make a Fire beneath this Shed, to dry
Thy Storm-drencht Garments, e're thou Lie to rest thee;
Then Fierce and Wakeful as the Hesperian Dragon,
I'll watch beside thee to protect thy Sleep;
Mean while, the Stars shall dart their kindest Beams,
And Angels Visit my Cordelia's Dreams

I will have my Revenge e're I depart his house.
Regan, see here, a Plot upon our State,
'Tis Gloster's Character, that has betrayed
His double Trust of Subject, and ofOst.

Then double be our Vengeance, this confirms
Th'Intelligence that we now now received,
That he has been this Night to seek the King;
But who, Sir, was the kind Discoverer?

Our Eagle, quick to spy, and fierce to seize,
Our trusty Edmund.

'Twas a noble Service;
O Cornwall, take him to thy deepest Trust,
And wear him as a Jewel at thy Heart.

Think, Sir, how hard a Fortune I sustain,
That makes me thus repent of serving you!
O that this Treason had not been, or I
Not the Discoverer.

Edmund, Thou shalt find
A Father in our Love, and from this Minute
We call thee Earl of Gloster; but there yet
Remains another Justice to be done,
And that's to punish this discarded Traitor;
But least thy tender Nature should relent
At his just Sufferings, nor brooke the Sight,
We wish thee to withdraw.

The Grotto, Sir, within the lower Grove,
Has Privacy to suit a Mourner's Thought.

And there I may expect a Comforter,
Ha, Madam?

What may happen, Sir, I know not,
But 'twas a Friends Advice.

Bring in the Traitor.
Bind fast his Arms.

What mean your Graces?
You are my Guests, pray do me no foul Play.

Bind him, I say, hard, harder yet.

Now, Traitor, thou shalt find --

Speak, Rebel, where hast thou sent the King?
Whom spite of our Decree thou saw last Night.

I'm tide to th'Stake, and I must stand the Course.

Say where, and why thou hast conceeal'd him.

Because I would not see thy cruel Hands
Tear out his poor old Eyes, nor thy fierce Sister
Carve his anointed Flesh; but I shall see
The swift winged Vengeance overtake such Childrer.

See it shalt thou never, Slaves perform your Work,
Out with those treacherous Eyes, dispatch, I say,
If thou see Vengeance --

He that will think to live 'till he be old,
Give me some help -- O cruel! oh! ye Gods.

Hold, hold, my Lord, I bar your Cruelty,
I cannot love your safety and give way
To such a barbarous Practise.

Ha, my Villain.

I have been your Servant from my Infancy,
But better Service have I never done you
Then with this Boldness --

Take thy Death, Slave.

Nay, then Revenge whilst yet my Blood is Warm.

Help here -- are you not hurt, my Lord?

Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of Nature
To quit this horrid Act.

Out, treacherous Villain,
Thou call on him that Hates thee, it was He
That broached thy Treason, showed us thy Dispatches;
There -- read, and save the Cambrian Prince a Labour,
If thy Eyes fail thee call for Spectacles.

O my Folly!
Then Edgar was abused, kind Gods forgive me that.

How is't, my Lord?

Turn out that Eye-less Villain, let him smell
His way to Cambray, throw this Slave upon a Dunghill.

I Bleed apace, give me your Arm.

All Dark and Comfortless!
Where are those various Objects that but now
Employed my busy Eyes? where those Eyes?
Dead are their piercing Rays that lately shot
Over flowery Vales to distant Sunny Hills,
And drew with Joy the vast Horizon in.
These groping Hands are now my only Guids,
And Feeling all my Sight.
O Misery! what words can sound my Grief?
Shut from the Living whilst among the Living;
Dark as the Grave amidst the bustling World.
At once from Business and from Pleasure bared;
No more to view the Beauty of the Spring,
Nor see the Face of Kindred, or of Friend.
Yet still one way the extremest Fate affords,
And even the Blind can find the Way to Death.
Must I then tamely Die, and unrevenged?
So Lear may fall: No, with these bleeding Rings
I will present me to the pitying Crowd,
And with the Rhetoric of these dropping Veins
Inflame 'em to Revenge their King and me;
Then when the Glorious Mischief is on Wing,
This Lumber from some Precipice I'll throw,
And dash it on the ragged Flint below;
Whence my freed Soul to her bright Sphere shall fly,
Through boundless Orbs, eternal Regions spy,
And like the Sun, be All one glorious Eye.

WHY were those Beauties made Another Right
Which None can prize like Me? charming Queen
Take all my blooming Youth, for ever fold me
In those soft Arms, Lull me in endless Sleep
That I may dream of pleasures too transporting
For Life to bear.

Live, live, my Gloster,
And feel no Death but that of swooning joy,
I yield thee Blisses on no harder Terms
Than that thou continue to be Happy.

This Jealousy is yet more kind, is't possible
That I should wander from a Paradise
To feed on sickly Weeds? such Sweets live here
That Constancy will be no Virtue in me,
And yet must I forth with go meet her Sister,
To whom I must protest as much --
Suppose it be the same; why best of all,
And I have then my Lesson ready conned.

Wear this Remembrance of me -- I dare now
Absent my self no longer from the Duke
Whose Wound grows Dangerous -- I hope Mortal.

And let this happy Image of your Gloster,
Lodge in that Breast where all his Treasure lies.

To this brave Youth a Woman's blooming beauties
Are due: my Fool usurps my Bed -- What's here?
Confusion on my Eyes.
Where Merit is so Transparent, not to behold it were Blindness, and not to
reward it, Ingratitude.



Vexatious Accident! yet Fortunate too,
My Jealousie's confirmed, and I am taught
To cast for my Defence --
Now, what mean those Shouts? and what thy hasty Entrance?

A most surprising and a sudden Change,
The Peasants are all up in Mutiny,
And only want a Chief to lead'em on
To Storm your Palace.

On what Provocation?

At last day's public Festival, to which
The Yeomen from all Quarters had repaired,
Old Gloster, whom you late deprived of Sight,
(His Veins yet Streaming fresh) presents himself,
Proclaims your Cruelty, and their Oppression,
With the King's Injuries; which so errag'd 'em,
That now that Mutiny which long had crept
Takes Wing, and threatens your Best Powers.

White-liver'd Slave!
Our Forces raised and led by Valiant Edmund,
Shall drive this Monster of Rebellion back
To her dark Cell; young Gloster's Arm allays
The Storm, his Father's feeble Breath did Raise.

The lowest and most abject Thing of Fortune
Stands still in Hope, and is secure from Fear,
The lamentable Change is from the Best,
The Worst returns to Better -- who comes here
My Father poorly led? deprived of Sight,
The precious Stones torn from their bleeding Rings!
Some-thing I heard of this inhumane Deed
But disbelieved it, as an Act too horrid
For the hot Hell of a cursed Woman's fury,
When will the measure of my woes be full?

Revenge, thou art afoot, Success attend Thee.
Well have I sold my Eyes, if the Event
Prove happy for the injured King.

O, my good Lord, I have been your Tenant, and your Father's Tenant these
Fourscore years.


Away, get thee Away, good Friend, be gone,
Thy Comforts can do me no good at All,
Thee they may hurt.

You cannot see your Way.

I have no Way, and therefore want no Eyes,
I stumbled when I saw: O dear Son Edgar,
The Food of thy abused Father's Wrath,
Might I but live to see thee in my Touch
I'd say, I had Eyes again.

Alas, he's sensible that I was wronged,
And should I own my Self, his tender Heart
Would break betwixt the extremes of Grief and Joy.

How now, who's There?

A Charity for poor Tom. Play fair, and defy the foul Fiend.

O Gods! and must I still pursue this Trade,
Trifling beneath such Loads ofMisery?

'Tis poor mad Tom.

In the late Storm I such a Fellow saw,
Which made me think a Man a Worm,
Where is the Lunatic?

Here, my Lord.

Get thee now away, if for my sake
Thou wilt o're-take us hence a Mile or Two
In the way towered Dover, do it for ancient Love,
And bring some cov'ring for this naked Wretch
Whom I'll entreat to lead me.

Alack, my Lord, He's Mad.

'Tis the Time's Plague when Mad-men lead the Blind.
Do as I bid thee.

I'll bring him the best 'Parrel that I have
Come on it what will.

Sirrah, naked Fellow.

Poor Tom's a cold; -- I cannot fool it longer,
And yet I must -- bless thy sweet Eyes they Bleed,
Believe 't poor Tom even weeps his Blind to see 'em.

Know thou the way to Dover?

Both Stile and Gate, Horse-way and Foot-path, poor Tom has been scared out of
his good Wits; bless every true Man's Son from the foul Fiend.


Here, take this Purse, that I am wretched
Makes thee the Happier, Heaven deal so still.
Thus let the griping Usurers Hoard be Scattered,
So Distribution shall undo Excess,
And each Man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?

I, Master.

There is a Cliff, whose high and bending Head
Looks dreadfully down on the roaring Deep.
Bring me but to the very Brink of it,
And I'll repair the Poverty thou bear
With something Rich about me, from that Place
I shall no leading need.

Give me thy Arm: poor Tom shall guide thee.

Soft, for I hear the Tread ofPassengers.

Ah me! your Fear's too true, it was the King;
I spoke but now with some that met him
As Mad as the vexed Sea, Singing aloud,
Crowned with rank Femiter and furrow Weeds,
With Berries, Burdocks, Violets, Daisies, Poppies,
And all the idle Flowers that grow
In our sustaining Corn, conduct me to him
To prove my last Endeavours to restore him,
And Heaven so prosper thee.

I will, good Lady.
Ha, Gloster here! -- turn, poor dark Man, and hear
A Friend's Condolement, who at Sight of thine
Forgets his own Distress, thy old true Kent.

How, Kent? from whence returned?

I have not since my Banishment been absent,
But in Disguise follow'd the abandoned King;
'Twas me thou saw with him in the late Storm.

Let me embrace thee, had I Eyes I now
Should weep for Joy, but let this trickling Blood
Suffice instead of Tears.

O misery!
To whom shall I complain, or in what Language?
Forgive, O wretched Man, the Piety
That brought thee to this pass, 'twas I that caused it,
I cast me at thy Feet, and beg of thee
To crush these weeping Eyes to equal Darkness,
If that will give thee any Recompense.

Was ever Season so distressed as This?

I think Cordelia's Voice! rise, pious Princess,
And take a dark Man's Blessing.

O, my Edgar,
My Vertue's now grown Guilty, works the Bane
Of those that do befriend me, Heaven forsakes me,
And when you look that Way, it is but Just
That you should hate me too.

O wave this cutting Speech, and spare to wound
A Heart that's on the Rack.

No longer cloud thee, Kent, in that Disguise,
There's business for thee and of noblest weight;
Our injured Country is at length in Arms,
Urged by the King's inhumane Wrongs and Mine,
And only want a Chief to lead'em on.
That Task be Thine.

Brave Britains then there's Life in it yet.

Then have we one cast for our Fortune yet.
Come, Princess, I'll bestow you with the King,
Then on the Spur to Head these Forces.
Farewell, good Gloster, to our Conduct trust.

And be your Cause as Prosperous as tis Just.

It was great Ignorance Gloster's Eyes being out
To let him live, where he arrives he moves
All Hearts against us, Edmund I think is gone
In pity to his Misery to dispatch him.

No, Madam, he's returned on speedy Summons
Back to your Sister.

Ha! I like not That,
Such speed must have the Wings of Love; where's Albany.

Madam, within, but never Man so changed;
I told him of the uproar of the Peasants,
He smiled at it, when I informed him
Of Gloster's Treason --

Trouble him no further,
It is his coward Spirit, back to our Sister,
Hasten her Musters, and let her know
I have given the Distaff into my Husband's Hands.
That done, with special Care deliver these Dispatches
In private to young Gloster.

O Madam, most unseasonable News,
The Duke of Cornwall's Dead of his late Wound,
Whose loss your Sister has in part supplied,
Making brave Edmund General of her Forces.

One way I like this well;
But being Widow and my Gloster with her
May blast the promised Harvest of our Love.
A word more, Sir, -- add Speed to your Journey,
And if you chance to meet with that blind Traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.

When shall we come to th'Top of that same Hill?

We climb it now, mark how we Labour.

Methinks the Ground is even.

Horrible Steep; hark, do you hear the Sea?

No truly.

Why then your other Senses grow imperfect,
By your Eyes Anguish.

So may it be indeed.
Methinks thy Voice is altered, and thou speak
In better Phrase and Matter than thou did.

You are much deceived, in nothing am I Altered
But in my Garments.

Methinks you're better Spoken.

Come on, Sir, here's the Place, how fearful
And dizy 'tis to cast one's Eyes so Low.
The Crows and Choughs that wing the Mid-way Air
Show scarce so big as Beetles, half way down
Hangs one that gathers Sampire, dreadful Trade!
The Fisher-men that walk upon the Beach
Appear like Mice, and yon tall Anch'ring Bark
Seems lessened to her Cock, her Cock a Buoy
Almost too small for Sight; the murmuring Surge
Cannot be heard so high, I'll look no more
Lest my Brain turn, and the disorder make me
Tumble down head-long.

Set me where you stand.

You are now within a Foot of the extreme Verge.
For all beneath the Moon I would not now
Leap forward.

Let go my Hand,
Here, Friend, is another Purse, in it a Jewel
Well worth a poor Man's taking; get thee further,
Bid me Farewell, and let me hear thee going.

Fare you well, Sir, -- that I do Trifle thus
With this his Despair is with Design to cure it.

Thus, mighty Gods, this World I do renounce,
And in your Sight shake my Afflictions off;
If I could bear'em longer and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless Wills,
My Snuff and feebler Part ofNature should
Burn it self out; if Edgar Live, O Bless him.
Now, Fellow, fare thee well.

Gone, Sir! Farewell.
And yet I know not how Conceit may rob
The Treasury ofLife, had he been where he thought,
By this had Thought been past -- Alive, or Dead?
Hoa Sir, Friend; hear you, Sir, speak --
Thus might he pass indeed -- yet he revives.
What are you, Sir?

Away, and let me Die.

Had thou been ought but Gosmore, Feathers, Air,
Falling so many Fathom down
Thou had Shivered like an Egg; but thou dost breath
Hast heavy Substance, bleedst not, speak, art sound;
Thy Live's a Miracle.

But have I fallen or no?

From the dread Summit of this chalky Bourn:
Look up an Height, the shrill-tun'd Lark so high
Cannot be seen, or heard; do but look up.

Alack, I have no Eyes.
Is wretchedness deprived that Benefit
To End it selfby Death?

Give me your Arm.
Up, so, how is't? feel you your Legs? you stand.

Too well, too well.

Upon the Crow of the Cliff, what Thing was that
Which parted from you?

A poor unfortunate Beggar.

As I stood here below, me-thought his Eyes
Were two Full Moons, wide Nostrils breathing Fire.
It was some Fiend, therefore thou happy Father,
Think that th'all-powerfull Gods who make them Honours
Of Men's Impossibilities have preserved thee.

'Tis wonderful; henceforth I'll bear Affliction
Till it expire; the Goblin which you speak of,
I took it for a Man: oft-times 'twould say,
The Fiend, the Fiend: He led me to that Place.

Bear free and patient Thoughts: but who comes here?

No, no, they cannot touch me for Coining, I am the King Himself.


O piercing Sight.

Nature's above Art in that Respect; There's your Press-money: that Fellow
handles his Bow like a Cow-keeper, -- draw me a Clothier's yard. A Mouse, a
Mouse; peace hoa: there's my Gauntlet, I'll prove it on a Giant: bring up the
brown Bills: O well flown Bird; in the White, in the White -- Hewgh! give the
Word.


Sweet Marjorum.

Pass.

I know that Voice.

Ha! Gonerill with a white Beard! they flattered me like a Dog, and told me I
had white Hairs on my Chin, before the Black ones were there; to say I and No
to every thing that I said, I and No too was no good Divinity. When the Rain
came once to wet me, and the Winds to make me Chatter; when the Thunder would
not Peace at my Bidding. There I found'em, there I smelt'em out; go too, they
are not men of their words, They told me I was a King, 'tis a Lie, I am not
Ague proof.


That Voice I well remember, is't not the King's?

I, every Inch a King, when I do Stare
See how the Subject quakes.
I pardon that Man's Life, what was the Cause?
Adultery? Thou shalt not Die. Die for Adultery!
The Wren goes to it, and the small gilded Fly
Engenders in my Sight: Let Copulation thrive,
For Gloster's Bastard Son was kinder to his Father
Than were my Daughters got in the lawful Bed.
To it Luxury, pell mell, for I lack Soldiers.

Not all my Sorrows past so deep have touched me,
As the sad Accents: Sight were now a Torment --

Behold that simp'ring Lady, she that starts
At Pleasure's Name, and thinks her Ear profaned
With the least wanton Word, would you believe it,
The Fitcher nor the pampered Steed goes to it
With such a riotous Appetite: down from the Wast they are Centaurs, tho Women
all Above; but to the Girdle do the Gods inherit, beneath is all the Fiends;
There's Hell, there's Darkness, the Sulphurous unfathom'd -- Fie! fie! pah! --
an Ounce of Civet, good Apothecary, to sweeten my Imagination -- There's Money
for thee.


Let me kiss that Hand.

Let we wipe it first; it smells of Mortality.

Speak, Sir; do you know me?

I remember thy Eyes well enough: Nay, do thy worst, blind Cupid, I'll not Love
-- read me this Challenge, mark but the penning of it.


Were all the Letters Suns I could not see.

I would not take this from Report: wretched Cordelia,
What will thy Virtue do when thou shalt find
This fresh Affliction added to the Tale
Of thy unparrallel'd Griefs.

Read.

What with this Case of Eyes?

O ho! are you there with me? no Eyes in your Head, and no money in your Purse?
yet you see how this World goes.


I see it Feelingly.

What? art Mad? a Man may see how this World goes with no Eyes. Look with thy
Ears, see how yon Justice rails on that simple Thief; shake'em together, and
the first that drops, be it Thief or Justice, is a Villain. -- Thou hast seen a
Farmer's Dog bark at a Beggar.


I, Sir.

And the Man ran from the Cur; there thou might behold the great Image of
Authority, a Dog's obeyed in Office. Thou Rascal, Beadle, hold thy bloody Hand,
why dost thou Lash that Strumpet? thou hotly Lust'st to enjoy her in that kind
for which thou whipst her, do, do, the Judge that sentenced herhas been
before-hand with thee.


How stiff is my vile Sense that yields not yet?

I tell thee the Usurer hangs the Couz'ner, through tattered Robes small Vices
do appear, Robes and Fur-gowns hide All: Place Sins with Gold, why there 'tis
for thee, my Friend, make much of it, it has the Power to seal the Accuser's
Lips. Get thee glass Eyes, and like a scurvy Politician, seem to see the Things
thou dost not. Pull, pull off my Boots, hard, harder, so, so.


O Matter and Impertinency mixed
Reason in Madness.

If thou wilt weep my Fortunes take my Eyes,
I know thee well enough, thy Name is Gloster.
Thou must be patient, we came Crying hither
Thou know, the first time that We taste the Air
We Wail and Cry -- I'll preach to thee, Mark.

Break labouring Heart.

When we are Born we Cry that we are come
To this great Stage of Fools. --

O here he is, lay hand upon him, Sir,
Your dearest Daughter sends --

No Rescue? what, a Prisoner? I am even the natural Fool of Fortune: Use me
well, you shall have Ransom -- let me have Surgeons, Oh I am cut to the
Brains.


You shall have any Thing.

No Second's? all my Self? I will Die bravely like a smug Bridegroom, flushed
and pampered as a Priest's Whore. I am a King, my Masters, know ye that?


You are a Royal one, and we Obey you.

It were an excellent Stratagem to Shoe a Troop of Horse with Felt, I'll put in
proof -- no Noise, no Noise -- now will we steal upon these Sons in Law, and
then -- Kill, kill, kill, kill!


A Sight most moving in the meanest Wretch,
Past speaking in a King. Now, good Sir, what are you?

A most poor Man made tame to Fortune's strokes,
And prone to Pity by experienced Sorrows; give me your
Hand.

You ever gentle Gods take my Breath from me,
And let not my ill Genius tempt me more
To Die before you please.

A proclaimed Prize, O most happily met,
That Eye-less Head of thine was first framed Flesh
To raise my Fortunes; Thou old unhappy Traitor,
The Sword is out that must Destroy thee.

Now let thy friendly Hand put Strength enough to 't.

Wherefore, bold Peasant,
Dare thou support a published Traitor, hence,
Lest I destroy Thee too. Let go his Arm.

'Chill not Let go Zir, without vurther Occasion.

Let go Slave, or thou Die.

Good Gentleman go your Gate, and let poor Volk pass, and'Chu'd have bin
Zwagger'd out of my Life it would not a bin so long as 'tis by a Vort-night --
Nay, and thou come near the old Man, I'ce try whether your Costard or my
Ballow be the harder.


Out, Dunghill.

'Chill pick your Teeth, Zir; Come, no matter for your
Voines.

Slave, thou hast Slain me; oh untimely Death.

I know thee well, a serviceable Villain,
As duteous to the Vices of thy Mistress
As Lust could wish.

What, is he Dead?

Sit you, Sir, and rest you.
This is a Letter Carrier, and may have
Some Papers of Intelligence that may stand
Our Party in good stead, to know -- what's here?
To Edmund Earl of Glester.
Let our Mutual Loves be remembered, you have many opportu nities to Cut him
off, if he return the Conqueror then I am still a Prisoner, and his Bed my
Goal, from the loathed Warmth of which deliver me, and supply the Place for
your Labour.



A Plot upon her Husband's Life,
And the Exchange my Brother -- here in the Sands.
I'll rake thee up thou Messenger ofLust,
Grieved only that thou had no other Deaths-man.
In Time and Place convenient I'll produce
These Letters to the Sight of the injured Duke
As best shall serve our Purpose; Come, your Hand.
Far off methinks I hear the beaten Drum,
Come, Sir, I will bestow you with a Friend.

His Sleep is sound, and may have good Effect
To Cure his jarring Senses, and repair
This Breach of Nature.

We have employed the utmost Power of Art,
And this deep Rest will perfect our Design.

O Regan, Gonerill, inhumane Sisters,
Had he not been your Father, these white Hairs
Had challenged sure some pity, was this a Face
To be exposed against the jarring Winds?
My Enemy's Dog though he had bit me should
Have stood that Night against my Fire -- he wakes, speak to him.


Madam, do you, 'tis fittest.

How does my royal Lord? how fares your Majesty?

You do me wrong to take me out of the Grave.
Ha! is this too a World of Cruelty?
I know my Privilege, think not that I will
Be used still like a wretched Mortal, no,
No more of That.

Speak to me, Sir, who am I?

You are a Soul in Bliss, but I am bound
Upon a wheel of Fire, which my own Tears
Do scald like Molten Lead.

Sir, do you know me?

You are a Spirit, I know, where did you Die?

Still, still, far wide.

Madam, he's scarce awake; he'll soon grow more composed.


Where have I been? where am I? fair Day-light!
I am mightily abused, I should even Die with pity
To see Another thus. I will not swear
These are my Hands.

O look upon me, Sir,
And hold your Hands in Blessing over me, nay,
You must not kneel.

Pray do not mock me.
I am a very foolish fond Old Man,
Fourscore and upward, and to deal plainly with you,
I fear I am not in my perfect Mind.

Nay, then farewell to patience; witness for me
Ye mighty Powers, I ne'er complained till now!

Methinks I should know you, and know this Man,
Yet I am Doubtful, for I am mainly Ignorant
What Place this is, and all the skill I have
Remembers not these Garments, nor do I know
Where I did Sleep last Night -- pray do not mock me --
For, as I am a Man, I think that Lady
To be my Child Cordelia.

O my dear, dear Father!

Be your Tears wet? yes faith; pray do not weep,
I know I have given thee Cause, and am so humbled
With Crosses since, that I could ask
Forgiveness of thee were it possible
That thou could grant it, but I'm well assured
Thou can not; therefore I do stand thy Justice,
If thou hast Poison for me I will Drink it,
Bless thee and Die.

O pity, Sir, a bleeding Heart, and cease
This killing Language.

Tell me, Friends, where am I?

In your own Kingdom, Sir.

Do not Abuse me.

Be comforted, good Madam, for the Violence
Of his Distemper's past; we'll lead him in
Nor trouble him, till he is better Settled.
Wilt please you, Sir, walk into freer Air.

You must bear with me, I am Old and Foolish.

The Gods restore you -- hark, I hear afar
The beaten Drum, Old Kent's a Man of's Word.
O for an Arm
Like the fierce Thunderer's, when the earth-born Sons
Stormed Heaven, to fight this injured Father's Battle.
That I could shift my Sex, and die me deep
In his Opposer's Blood, but as I may
With Women's Weapons, Piety and Prayers,
I'll aid his Cause -- You never-erring Gods
Fight on his side, and Thunder on his Foes
Such Tempest as his poor ag'd Head sustained;
Your Image suffers when a Monarch bleeds.
'Tis your own Cause, for that your Succours bring,
Revenge your Selves, and right an injured King.

OUR Sisters Powers already are arrived,
And She her self has promised to prevent
The Night with her Approach: have you provided
The Banquet I bespoke for her Reception
At my Tent?

So, please your Grace, we have.

But thou, my Poysner, must prepare the Bowl
That Crowns this Banquet, when our Mirth is high,
The Trumpets sounding and the Flutes replying,
Then is the Time to give this fatal Draught
To this imperious Sister; if then our Arms succeed,
Edmund more dear than Victory is mine.
But if Defeat or Death it self attend me,
'Twill charm my Ghost to think I've left behind me
No happy Rival: hark, she comes.

To both these Sisters have I sworn my Love,
Each jealous of the other, as the Stung
Are of the Adder; neither can be held
If both remain Alive; where shall I fix?
Cornwall is Dead, and Regan's empty Bed
Seems cast by Fortune for me, but already
I have enjoyed her, and bright Gonerill
With equal Charms brings dear variety,
And yet untasted Beauty: I will use
Her Husband's Countenance for the Battle, then
Usurp at once his Bed and Throne.
My trusty Scouts y' are well returned, have ye descried
The Strength and Posture of the Enemy?

We have, and were surprised to find
The banished Kent returned, and at their Head;
Your Brother Edgar on the Rear; Old Gloster
(a moving Spectacle) led through their Ranks,
Whose pow'rfull Tongue, and more prevailing Wrongs,
Have so enraged their rustic Spirits, that with
The approaching Dawn we must expect their Battle.

You bring a welcome Hearing; Each to his Charge.
Line well your Ranks and stand on your Award,
To Night repose you, and in the Morn we'll give
The Sun a Sight that shall be worth his Rising.

Here, Sir, take you the shadow of this Tree
For your good Host, pray that the Right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again
I'll bring you Comfort.

Thanks; friendly Sir;
The Fortune your good Cause deserves betide you.
The Fight grows hot; the whole War's now at Work,
And the goar'd Battle bleeds in every Vein,
Whilst Drums and Trumpets drown loud Slaughter's Roar:
Where's Gloster now that used to head the Fray,
And scour the Ranks where deadliest Danger lay?
Here like a Shepherd in a lonely Shade,
Idle, unarmed, and listening to the Fight.
Yet the disabled Courser, Maimed and Blind,
When to his Stall he hears the rattling War,
Foaming with Rage tears up the battered Ground,
And tugs for Liberty.
No more of Shelter, thou blind Worm, but forth
To the open Field; the War may come this way
And crush thee into Rest. -- Here lay thee down
And tear the Earth, that work befits a Mole.
O dark Despair! when, Edgar, wilt thou come
To pardon and dismiss me to the Grave!
Hark! a Retreat, the King has Lost or Won.

Away, old Man, give me your Hand, away!
King Lear has loft, He and his Daughter taken,
And this, ye Gods, is all that I can save
Of this most precious Wreck: give me your Hand.

No farther, Sir, a Man may Rot even here.

What? in ill Thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence even as their coming hither.

And that's true too.

It is enough to have Conquered, Cruelty
Should ne'er survive the Fight, Captain of the Guards
Treat well your royal Prisoners till you have
Our further Orders, as you hold our Pleasure.

Hark, Sir, not as you hold our Husbands pleasure
But as you hold your Life, dispatch your Prisoners.
Our Empire can have no sure Settlement
But in their Death, the Earth that covers them
Binds fast our Throne. Let me hear they are Dead.

I shall obey your Orders.

Sir, I approve it safest to pronounce
Sentence of Death upon this wretched King,
Whose Age has Charms in it, his Title more,
To draw the Commons once more to his Side,
'Twere best prevent --

Sir, by your Favour,
I hold you but a Subject of this War,
Not as a Brother.

That's as we list to Grace him.
Have you forgot that He did lead our Powers?
Bore the Commission, of our Place and Person?
And that Authority may well stand up
And call it self your Brother.

Not so hot,
In his own Merits he exalts himself
More than in your Addition.

What art Thou?

Pardon me, Sir, that I presume to stop
A Prince and Conqueror, yet ever you Triumph,
Give Ear to what a Stranger can deliver
Of what concerns you more than Triumph can.
I do impeach your General there of Treason,
Lord Edmund, that usurps the Name of Gloster,
Of foulest Practice against your Life and Honour;
This Charge is True, and wretched though I seem
I can produce a Champion that will prove
In single Combat what I do avouch;
If Edmund dares but trust his Cause and Sword.

What will not Edmund dare, my Lord, I beg
The favour that you'd instantly appoint
The Place where I may meet this Challenger,
Whom I will sacrifice to my wronged Fame,
Remember, Sir, that injured Honour's nice
And cannot brook delay.

Anon, before our Tent, in the Army's view,
There let the Herald cry.

I thank your Highness in my Champion's Name,
He'll wait your Trumpet's call.

Lead.

O Kent, Cordelia!
You are the only Pair that I ever wronged,
And the just Gods have made you Witnesses
Of my Disgrace, the very shame of Fortune,
To see me chained and shackled at these years!
Yet were you but Spectators of my Woes,
Not fellow-sufferers, all were well!

This language, Sir, adds yet to our Affliction.

Thou, Kent, did head the Troops that fought my Battle,
Exposed thy Life and Fortunes for a Master
That had (as I remember) banished Thee.

Pardon me, Sir, that once I broke your Orders,
Banished by you, I kept me here disguised
To watch your Fortunes, and protect your Person,
You know you entertained a rough blunt Fellow,
One Cajus, and you thought he did you Service.

My trusty Cajus, I have lost him too!
'Twas a rough Honesty.

I was that Cajus,
Disguised in that course Dress to follow you.

My Cajus too! were it thou my trusty Cajus,
Enough, enough --

Ah me, he faints! his Blood forsakes his Cheek,
Help, Kent --

No, no, they shall not see us weep,
We'll see them rot first, -- Guards lead away to Prison,
Come, Kent, Cordelia come,
We Two will sit alone, like Birds in the Cage,
When Thou dost ask me Blessing, I'll kneel down
And ask of Thee Forgiveness; Thus we'll live,
And Pray, and Sing, and tell old Tales, and Laugh
At gilded Butter-flies, hear Sycophants.
Talk of Court News, and we'll talk with them too,
Who loses, and who wins, who's in, who's out,
And take upon us the Mystery of Things
As if we were Heavens Spies.

Upon such Sacrifices
The Gods themselves throw Incense.

Have I caught ye?
He that parts us must bring a Brand from Heaven.
Together we'll out-toil the spite of Hell,
And Die the Wonders of the World; A way.

Here's Gold for Thee, Thou know our late Command
Upon your Prisoners Lives, about it straight, and at
Our Evening Banquet let it raise our Mirth
To hear that They are Dead.

I shall not fail your Orders.

Now, Gloster, trust to thy single Virtue, for thy Soldiers,
All levied in my Name, have in my Name
Took their Discharge; now let our Trumpets speak,
And Herald read out This.

If any Man of Quality, within the Lists of the Army, will maintain upon
Edmund, supposed Earl of Gloster, that he is a manifold Traitor, let him
appear by the third sound of the Trumpet; He is bold in his Defence. -- Again,
Again.

Lord Edgar!

Ha! my Brother!
This is the only Combatant that I could fear;
For in my Breast Guilt Duels on his side,
But, Conscience, what have I to do with Thee?
Awe Thou thy dull Legitimate Slaves, but I
Was born a Libertine, and so I keep me.

My noble Prince, a word -- ever we engage
Into your Highness's Hands I give this Paper,
It will the truth of my Impeachment prove
Whatever be my fortune in the Fight.

We shall peruse it.

Now, Edmund, draw thy Sword,
That if my Speech has wronged a noble Heart,
Thy Arm may do thee Justice: here in the presence
Of this high Prince, these Queens, and this crowned List,
I brand thee with the spotted name of Traitor,
False to thy Gods, thy Father and thy Brother,
And what is more, thy Friend; false to this Prince:
If then Thou shar'st a spark of Gloster's Virtue,
Acquit thy self, or if Thou shar'st his Courage,
Meet this Defiance bravely.

And dares Edgar,
The beaten routed Edgar, brave his Conqueror?
From all thy Troops and Thee, I forced the Field,
Thou hast lost the general Stake, and art Thou now
Come with thy petty single Stock to play
This after-Game?

Half-blooded Man,
Thy Father's Sin first, then his Punishment,
The dark and vicious Place where he begot thee
Cost him his Eyes: from thy licentious Mother
Thou draw thy Villainy; but for thy part
Of Gloster's Blood, I hold thee worth my Sword.

Thou bear thee on thy Mother's Piety,
Which I despise; thy Mother being chaste
Thou art assured Thou art but Gloster's Son,
But mine, disdaining Constancy, leaves me
To hope that I am sprung from nobler Blood,
And possibly a King might be my Sire:
But be my Birth's uncertain Chance as 'twill,
Who 'twas that had the hit to Father me
I know not; 'tis enough that I am I:
Of this one thing I'm certain -- that I have
A daring Soul, and so have at thy Heart
Sound Trumpet.

Save him, save him.

This was Practice, Gloster,
Thou won'st the Field, and wast not bound to Fight
A vanquished Enemy, Thou art not Conquered
But couz'ned and betrayed.

Shut your Mouth, Lady,
Or with this Paper I shall stop it -- hold, Sir,
Thou worse than any Name, read thy own evil,
No Tearing, Lady, I perceive you know it.

Say if I do, who shall arraign me for it?
The Laws are Mine, not Thine.

Most monstrous! ha, Thou know it too.

Ask me not what I know,
I have not Breath to Answer idle Questions.

I have resolved -- your Right, brave Sir, has conquered,
Along with me, I must consult your Father.

Help every Hand to save a noble Life;
My half of the Kingdom for a Man of Skill
To stop this precious stream.

Away ye Empericks,
Torment me not with your vain Offices:
The Sword has pierced too far; Legitimacy
At last has got it.

The Pride of Nature Dies.

Away, the minutes are too precious,
Disturb us not with thy impertinent Sorrow.

Art Thou my Rival then professed?

Why, was our Love a Secret? could there be
Beauty like Mine, and Gallantry like His
And not a mutual Love? just Nature then
Had erred: behold that Copy of Perfection,
That Youth whose Story will have no foul Page
But where it says he stooped to Regan's Arms:
Which yet was but compliance, not Affection;
A Charity to begging, ruined Beauty!

Who begged when Gonerill writ That? expose it
And let it be your Army's mirth, as 'twas
This charming Youth's and mine, when in the Bower
He breathed the warmest ecstasies of Love,
Then panting on my Breast, cried matchless Regan
That Gonerill and Thou should ever be Kin!

Die, Circe, for thy Charms are at an End,
Expire before my Face, and let me see
How well that boasted Beauty will become
Congealing Blood and Death's convulsive Pangs.
Die and be husht, for at my Tent last Night
Thou drank'st thy Bane, amidst thy rev'ling Bowls:
Ha! dost thou Smile? is then thy Death thy Sport
Or has the trusty Potion made thee Mad?

Thou come as short of me in thy Revenge
As in my Gloster's Love, my Jealousy
Inspired me to prevent thy feeble Malice
And Poison Thee at thy own Banquet.

Ha!

No more, my Queens, of this untimely Strife,
You both deserved my Love and both possessed it.
Come, Soldiers, bear me in; and let
Your royal Presence grace my last minutes:
Now, Edgar, thy proud Conquest I forgive;
Who would not choose, like me, to yield his Breath
To have Rival Queens contend for him in Death?

What Toils, thou wretched King, hast Thou endured
To make thee draw, in Chains, a Sleep so sound?
Thy better Angel charm thy ravished Mind
With fancied Freedom; Peace is used to lodge
On Cottage Straw, Thou hast the Begger's Bed,
Therefore should have the Begger's careless Thought.
And now, my Edgar, I remember Thee,
What Fate has seized Thee in this general Wreck
I know not, but I know thou must be wretched
Because Cordelia holds Thee Dear.
O Gods! a sudden Gloom o'er-whelms me, and the Image
Of Death o'er-spreads the Place. -- ha! who are These?

Now, Sirs, dispatch, already you are paid
In part, the best of your Reward's to come.

Charge, charge upon their Flank, their last Wing haults;

Push, push the Battle, and the Day's our own.
Their Ranks are broke, down, down with Albany.
Who holds my Hands? -- O thou deceiving Sleep,
I was this very Minute on the Chase;
And now a Prisoner here -- What mean the Slaves?
You will not Murder me?

Help Earth and Heaven!
For your Souls sake's, dear Sirs, and for the Gods.

No Tears, good Lady, no pleading against Gold and Preferment;

Come, Sirs, make ready your C^ds.

You, Sir, I'll seize,
You have a humane Form, and if no Prayers
Can touch your Soul to spare a poor King's Life,
If there be any Thing that you hold dear,
By That I beg you to dispatch me First.

Comply with her Request, dispatch her First.

Off Hell-hounds, by the Gods I charge you spare her;
'Tis my Cordelia, my true pious Daughter:
No Pity? -- Nay then take an old Man's Vengeance.

Death! Hell! Ye Vultures hold your impious Hands,
Or take a speedier Death than you would give.

By whose Command?

Behold the Duke your Lord.

Guards, seize those Instruments of Cruelty.

My Edgar, Oh!

My dear Cordelia, Lucky was the Minute
Of our Approach, the Gods have weighed our Sufferings;
W' are past the Fire, and now must shine to Ages.

Look here, my Lord, see where the generous King
Has slain Two of'em.

Did I not, Fellow?
I've seen the Day, with my good biting Falchion
I could have made'em skip; I am Old now,
And these vile Crosses spoil me; Out of Breath!
Fie, Oh! quite out of Breath and spent.

Bring in old Kent, and, Edgar, guide you hither
Your Father, whom you said was near,
He may be an Ear-witness at the least
Of our Proceedings.

Who are you?
My Eyes are none o'th'best, I'll tell you straight;
Oh Albany!. Well, Sir, we are your Captives,
And you are come to see Death pass upon us.
Why this Delay? -- or is't your Highness pleasure
To give us first the Torture? Say ye so?
Why here's old Kent and I, as tough a Pair
As ever bore Tyrant's Stroke: -- but my Cordelia,
My poor Cordelia here, O pity! --

Take off their Chains -- Thou injured Majesty,
The Wheel of Fortune now has made her Circle,
And Blessings yet stand 'twixt thy Grave and Thee.

Come Thou, inhumane Lord, to sooth us back
To a Fool's Paradise of Hope, to make
Our Doom more wretched? go too, we are too well
Acquainted with Misfortune to be gulled
With Lying Hope; No, we will hope no more.

I have a Tale to unfold so full of Wonder
As cannot meet an easy Faith;
But by that Royal injured Head 'tis True.

What would your Highness?

Know the noble Edgar
Impeacht Lord Edmund since the Fight, of Treason,
And dared him for the Proof to single Combat,
In which the Gods confirmed his Charge by Conquest;
I left even now the Traitor wounded Mortally.

And whither tends this Story?

Ever they fought
Lord Edgar gave into my Hands this Paper,
A blacker Scrowl of Treason, and of Lust
Than can be found in the Records of Hell;
There, Sacred Sir, behold the Character
Of Gonerill the worst of Daughters, but
More Vicious Wife.

Could there be yet Addition to their Guilt?
What will not They that wrong a Father do?

Since then my Injuries, Lear, fall in with Thine:
I have resolved the same Redress for Both.

What says my Lord?

Speak, for me thought I heard
The charming Voice of a descending God.

The Troops by Edmnnd raised, I have disbanded;
Those that remain are under my Command.
What Comfort may be brought to cheer your Age
And heal your savage Wrongs, shall be applied;
For to your Majesty we do Refign
Your Kingdom, save what Part your Self conferred
On Us in Marriage.

Hear you that, my Liege?

Then there are Gods, and Virtue is their Care.

Is't Possible?
Let the Spheres stop their Course, the Sun make Halt,
The Winds be husht, the Seas and Fountains Rest;
All Nature pause, and listen to the Change.
Where is my Kent, my Cajus?

Here, my Liege.

Why I have News that will recall thy Youth;
Ha! Did Thou hear't, or did the inspiring Gods
Whisper to me Alone? Old Lear shall be
A King again.

The Prince, that like a God has Power, has said it.

Cordelia then shall be a Queen, mark that:
Cordelia shall be Queen; Winds catch the Sound
And bear it on your rosie Wings to Heaven.
Cordelia is a Queen.

Look, Sir, where pious Edgar comes
Leading his Eye-less Father: O my Liege!
His wondrous Story will deserve your Leisure:
What He has done and suffered for your Sake,
What for the Fair Cordelia's.

Where is my Liege? Conduct me to his Knees to hail

His second Birth of Empire; my dear Edgar
Has, with himself, revealed the King's blessed Restoration.

My poor dark Gloster;

O let me kiss that once more sceptred Hand!

Hold, Thou mistake the Majesty, kneel here;
Cordelia has our Power, Cordelia's Queen.
Speak, is not that the noble Suffering Edgar?

My pious Son, more dear than my lost Eyes.

I wronged Him too, but here's the fair Amends.

Your leave, my Liege, for an unwelcome Message.
Edmund (but that's a Trifle) is expired;
What more will touch you, your imperious Daughters
Gonerill and haughty Regan, both are Dead,
Each by the other poisoned at a Banquet;
This, Dying, they confessed.

O fatal Period of ill-govern'd Life!

Ungrateful as they were, my Heart feels yet
A Pang of Nature for their wretched Fall; --
But, Edgar, I defer thy Joys too long:
Thou serv'dst distressed Cordelia; take her Crowned:
Th'imperial Grace fresh Blooming on her Brow;
Nay, Gloster, Thou hast here a Father's Right;
Thv helping Hand t'heap Blessings on their Head.

Old Kent throws in his hearty Wishes too.

The Gods and You too largely recompense
What I have done; the Gift strikes Merit Dumb.

Nor do I blush to own my Self over paid
For all my Sufferings past.

Now, gentle Gods, give Gloster his Discharge.

No, Gloster, Thou hast Business yet for Life;
Thou, Kent and I, retired to some cool Cell
Will gently pass our short reserves of Time
In calm Reflections on our Fortunes past,
Cheered with relation of the prosperous Reign
Of this celestial Pair; Thus our Remains
Shall in an even Course of Thought be past,
Enjoy the present Hour, nor fear the Last.

Our drooping Country now erects her Head,
Peace spreads her balmy Wings, and Plenty Blooms.
Divine Cordelia, all the Gods can witness
How much thy Love to Empire I prefer!
Thy bright Example shall convince the World
(Whatever Storms of Fortune are decreed)
That Truth and Virtue shall at last succeed.

INconstancy, the reigning Sin of the Age,
Will scarce endure true Lovers on the Stage;
You hardly even in Plays with such dispense,
And Poets kill'em in their own Defence.
Yet One bold Proof I was resolved to give,
That I could three Hours Constancy Out-live.
You fear, perhaps, whilst on the Stage w' are made
Such Saints, we shall indeed take up the Trade;
Sometimes we Threaten -- but our Virtue may
For Truth I fear with your Pit-Valour weigh:
For (not to flatter either) I much doubt
When We are off the Stage, and You are out,
We are not quite so Coy, nor You so Stout.
We talk of Nunn'ries -- but to be sincere
Whoever lives to see us Cloistered There,
May hope to meet our Critiques at Tangier.
For shame give over this inglorious Trade
Of worrying Poets, and go maule the Alcade.
Well -- since y' are All for blustering in the Pit,
This Play's Reviver humbly does admit
Your abs'lute Power to damn his Part of it;
But still so many Master-Touches shine
Of that vast Hand that first laid this Design,
That in great Shakespear's Right, He's bold to say
If you like nothing you have seen to Day
The Play your Judgment damns, not you the Play.

