SCowrers! Methinks I hear some Ladies say,
How shall we bear the lewdness of this Play!
The Author begs the Title may not fright,
Of what he does to virtuous Ladies write.
Others for guilt may blush, or rag^ look pale,
And, as they used, maliciously may rail.
Tho he exposes Vice, the Play's (...) clean,
The nicest shall not tax it for Obscene:
Though some have been so ticklish in the Mind,
They could find Bawdy, which he ne'er designed:
Nor can he think he gave the least occasion,
Wanting their Vigour of Imagination;
But they, their ends had in their false reports,
And frightened whom he most would please, the Court;
To you he appeals, the Witty, Fair, and Good;
Whose sovereign power can never be withstood,
To all the Audience be bid me say,
He of the Gout lay in, and of this Play
Not long continued his Poetic Fit,
The other grief he cannot part with yet,
But give him case, and let who will have Wit.
Your kind Indulgence sure he ought to gain,
Who for your pleasure writes in spite of Pain:
You have been kind to many of his Plays,
And should not leave him in his latter days.
Though Loyal Writers of the last two Reigns,
Who tired their Pens for Popery and Chains;
Grumble at the Reward of all his Pains:
They would, like some, the benefit enjoy,
Of what they vilely laboured to destroy.
They cry him down as for his place unfit,
Since they have all the humour and the Wit,
They must write better e're he fears them yet;
Till they have shown you more Variety,
Of natural, unstoln Comedy than he,
By you at least he should Protected be.
Till then may he that Mark of Bounty have,
Which his renowned and Royal Master gave;
Who loves a Subject and contemns a Slave,
Whom Heaven in spite of Hellish plots designed,
To humble Tyrants, and exalt Mankind.

I Am plaguy qualmish this morning, we drunk swingingly last night, what did we
do? tell me the History.


Must every Morning be spent in asking Questions? 'tis a fine life, you'll sin
over Night, and I must come to Confession next Morning.


Sirrah, Know I will have no Wit nor Wisdom from you.

I don't know what you call Wit, but certainly Wisdom will never agree with
that hot head of yours, Sir!


You solid Lump of Massy Phlegm! there is no such blessing under Heaven, as a
hot Head.


'Twill cost you and your Companions dear before you part with it; the Devil
on it is, you are always the Transgressor, and I never fail of being the
Penitent.


Sirrah, The Inside of thy Loggerhead will endanger the Outside, if thou begin
not thy Narrative immediately; some Action in the fore-part of night, I
remember, but the latter part is all Darkness to me: Yet it runs in my head we
had a Fray.


And don't you feel it in your Shoulders? I am sure you've Reason, so have I.


Where was it?

Why here, in Covent-Garden. You would needs have a Skirmish with some drunken
Bullies, awkward, roaring, blustering Rascals: And Brigadier Stokes with a
detachment of Quarter-Staves, and rusty* Halberds fell in Pell Mell and routed
both Parties.


That damned Quarter-staff Rogue would be universal Monarch of the Night; We
must confederate and humble him, but what execution was there? Whose Skull
cracked? whose Lungs pierced? or who lustily bruised.


One of the Bullies has a good lusty flesh wound, the other are a little hacked,
but all of them were carried Captive to the Round-house, where they have solaced
with Ale and Brandy all night long: Two of your Footmen with bloody Coxcombs,
were likewise in Limbo: Two or three of the Watchmen have slight hurts, which
they are ready to swear are mortal; But your Friends Mr. Top and Mr Wildfire
are escaped unhurt, save a little dry beating which indeed we seldom fail of.


An Evening very handsomely spent; I am glad the Bullies are mauled. I would
rejoice as much to run an English Bully through, as an Irish Rapparee. The City
ought to pay a certain number of Bullies heads a tribute to the Government, as
the Welsh did Wolves; but see my Footmen ransomed.


They are bayl'd by your Taylor, and dressed by your Surgeon, and are ready to
be drunk, and scower again, Sir, but that was not all, that happened last
night, 'twould take a Volume to write the History of your Actions one week.


We should be diligent, I love an active life, but what more?

Why, in your retreat homewards you picked up a Strumpet! I must needs say not
very handsome, nor over well dressed, nor extremely sober, nor extraordinary
clean, and made me put her to bed in your own Bed, I thank you, Sir.


Well, thou art a faithful Bawd.

Bawd, Sir?

Yes Bawd Sir, what a Devil dost thou think I keep thee for thy neat parts?
Indeed thou art a little stout.


Any man but my Master, should find I were a great deal so, if he talked thus
to me.


Well well Sir, but where is the Whore?

I believe where she should be, at the civil Recreation of Hemp-beating.

Pox on your Impertinence! How got she out?

Why truly Sir, after you had taken your wonted Nap in your Chair, recovered a
little, and came to your Bed-side, you puk'd at the sight of her, asked her how
she had the Impudence to bring so ugly a Countenance along with her under your
Roof: To all Entreaties were inexorable, you tore her out of the bed, flung her
clothes out of the window, and made me turn her naked out of the house.


'Twas a very impudent thing of an ugly Jade to come hither.

She picked up her Clothes, but was in great want of a Tiring-room; and most
certainly fell into the enemies hands.


Well, and I have never a wench this morning?

Here have been five or six, they all said they'd come again.

Pox on 'em, come again! but into whose hands may they fall before they come
again? I hate even a Rose, after it opens in the morning, and is ruffled by the
wind.


Your provident, prudent, and pious House-keeper has lodged two who came last
night, for peace sake, in two several apartments of your Seraglio, not knowing
which of them you would vouchsafe your Handkerchief to.


She has done wisely, I will have them both: Who are they?

Mrs. Haughty and Mrs. Mavis.

Oh pox they'll never draw together. But go into my Closet and fetch me a
bottle of Spirit of Clary, and a lusty Glass.

Now is my Father I warrant grieving in the Country bewailing my lewd courses:
To say truth, I cannot but love him, he has been very indulgent to me; but
methinks he should have the conscience to remember his own youthful gambols;
Top tells me he knew him almost as lewd a fellow as my self. But the worst of
all is I am in love, most desperate most abominable love, the worst of all
love, I am afraid honest love.


Here's your Spirit of Clary.

Set it down, and see what confounded

Well what's the matter?


The noise you are pretty well used to; an assembly of Duns, Whores and Bawds,
as there are every morning at your Levee.


Hail, hail my dear Companions of the night, Jack Top and Tom Wildfire.


My dear Knight, my dear Will Rant, thou art the Prince of Drunkards and of
Scowrers; thou art a noble Seavenger, and every night thou clearest the streets
of scoundrel Bullies, and of idle Rascals; and of all Aletosts and sops in
Brandy.


And the Taverns of Trades-men and of sober Rogues of business, who should be
at their cheating callings, or watching of their Wives at home.


I am glad to find you so hearty, and that ye suffered so little in our last
nights rout.


I will not wear like a Bully my arm in a Scarf as a sign of battle past* when
perhaps the wound is no bigger than that of a Lancet in letting blood; I have
seen danger in my life time.


Yes and felt it too to my knowledge.

Puh this is nothing, why I knew the Hectors, and before thom the Muns and the
Titire Tu's, they were brave fellows indeed; in those days a man could not go
from the Rose Tavern to the Piazza once, but he must venture his life twice. My
dear Sir Willy.


Yes, and the Wine was better, and the Women handsomer; you old fellows are
always magnifying the days of your youth.


Old! Gad take me, hem, hem; here's a body sound wind and limb! Old! quoth he.
Indeed I have drank off two generations, and intend to drink off three more
yet. Why I wench'd, drunk and scoured with thy Father, Will: He was a pretty
fellow in his youth, and I thought he would have come to something, but he
married and run into the Country, left our noble cause, and grew a very wise,
discreet, virtuous Country Jobbernoll.


Why you debauched with my Grandfather.

I knew him in his ebb: but thy Father, Tom, was a sober for a consumptive
Scoundrel, and we could make nothing of him, he married like a Puppy, and grew
most pitifully uxorious, but the comfort is few of that sort get their own
Children: Thou art not like him at all.


Thank Heaven, I never remember him, Providence took care of me in good time.


Here Ralph fill. Gentlemen, a health to my Mistress in a brimmer of Clary.


I defy mornings Draughts, besides Spirits will bring you from two pound of
Peef, to two poatch'd Eggs, trust an experienced Drunkard, thou will not I've
out half thy days, if thou take these lewd courses of drinking in a Morning.


But we will live out all our Nights.

I have buried two hundred Mornings draught-men of my Acquaintance.

You may well kill 'em if you drink not fair with them; but thou hast killed as
many Evenings Draught-men too. Never Hero in Romance killed more in his
Adventures.


Their Deaths be upon their own Heads, I preserved my self: why I have been
walking two hours in the Park.


The Deaths of these men lie upon his Conscience, and he cannot sleep.

No, no, he wants the dear Balsom of his Youthful blood, that balmy sovereign
Juice that sends kind vapours up to rock the brain; Here, I will have my
Mistress pledged.


Thy Mistress! ha ha ha, why every one in a Petticoat is thy Mistress, from
humble Bulker to exalted Countess.


No I am particular, damnably particular, why I am fallen in love.

In Love! What a Devil! That is, thou hast a plaguy mind to some Wench; I have
known thee have that to many a Damsel, but when thou hast gotten her, thou
never sail'st to leave either her, or a child by her, to the Parish.


Why those kind of Ladies come to the Parish at last, and the sooner they take
care of them the better, it is a good settled kind of Life. But this is a Lady
of Quality.


A pox of a Whore of Quality; they are ten times more troublesome, and not
handsomer than poor Whores.


A whore! this is a Saint.

A Saint! ha ha ha, a world of Saints there are in these days, but very few
honest.


I can scarce forbear to worship her, and call her Nymph; divine, Goddess.


Nymph! divine, Goddess! ha ha ha, language for a young Coxcombly Chaplain to
his Ladies waiting woman.


Love! Faith I could never believe there was any such thing: I have had a
furious Appetite to a new Face, like a greedy stomach to a new Dish, but I
never made a very full meal, but I wished it off again.


Love! Why what a Pox, I have had as many Whores as any of you; but I never had
one whom I cared if she were hanged or no.


Oh base, gross Appetites, of ill-natur'd Fellows.

Oh thou Flower of Civility, and good Nature! I never knew you, or any
Whore-master, but minded himself, and never cared what became of the woman, why
prithee don't we ruin all we have to do with?


Some few keeping Coxcombs indeed are undone by them; but that grows much out
of Fashion, because keep what you can, Particular Whores will soon grow Commons
ones.


Hence all such profane thoughts, this is a Lady, who has all the Beauty and
Virtue of the Sex.


Pish, Sex savst thou? I warrant she is not over stocked neither if she has;
but Beauty is frail, and Virtue is more frail, Will.


Away with your babbling, Tom here's to her, take a Glass.

Come Jack her Health.

God not I! I would not drink the Queens health fasting, not I; charge a bill
upon me, and I'll answer you in a couple of brimmers of Claret at Lockets at
dinner, where I have bespoken an admirable good one for ye; but my Wine shall
always have something to feed upon.


Here are a company of Letters, some are waiting for answers.

From Whores, all Whores.

Hah! they are so, some in distress I suppose: Like a true great man, I will
put Petitions in my pocket and never read 'em.


Sir the Duns are very noisy, and will not be kept out.

Obstinate Rogues that will fling away their precious time so.

But there's a pert dapper fellow whom I know not, he will not be denied.


Let him in first. How now, who are you?

And please your Worship I am a Glazier, and have an humble petition to your
Worship; your Glazier dyed within this hour, the bell now goes for him; and I
humbly desire I may succeed in your Worships work.


Thou act a very pretty fellow.

I waited for this happy occasion, and hoped for it so I made him drink like a
Fish, and treated him with brandy. The man indeed was an honest man, but alack,
alack! he had little to do for a long time, till your business and your
friends, Sir, brought him into request: He has had a fine time under you; for
your Worship I understand has to Shash-windows an utter aversion, Sir, when you
are in beer.


A very pretty discreet fellow.

Why Sir he bore Offices, maintained his wife with all things about her, and
now dyes well to pass, and for all may thank your Worship. Now if your Worship
will let me have the place, I shall see that all the Parish, when you please to
break their windows, shall have as good goods as any man can furnish 'em with.


Let me see, this place must be worth Money.

Let me speak with you, I can do your business.

I will Sir; but Sir do they sell places now adays?

Oh no no, Heaven forbid! thou shalt have it for nothing.

Thank you, sweet Sir.

Hum, hum, hum.

Ay Sir, there and please you.

A pox on him, a thirteen pence half penny* but I'll after him, and squeeze the
Sponge, I warrant him.


Come let in the Canaille, the Rabble of my Anti-chamber, my Duns, c. Now will
I behave my self statelily, impudently, and do no mans business but my own.


Sir Humphrey Maggot has sent word he'll wait on you e're you go out.

That's the Coxcombly Alderman that married my termagant Aunt; her first
Husband was my Fathers brother by the second venture. She has this dolt under
correction, sweet Princess; and has forced him out of Marklane to live in Soho
Square. I warrant some old lecture from my Daddy. Let the Duns enter.


Now Rogues, Rascals, Vermin, Catterpillers, Duns, come on; I will use you so
like Duns for plaguing me with so many daily visits, I say, I will use you so
like Duns.


That is send them away without Money.

You silly impudent Puppies, to come to me for sums fit for Haberdashers of
small Wares to pay, ridiculous, petty sums, come up to bulky ones, either in
valuable Goods or Money, fit for a Gentleman's consideration, and Security may
follow.


Here's a Spark, thank Heaven I have kept my Nephew at the Inns of Court, whom
I bred up, free from his lewd Acquaintance.


Why I never pay a bill till it be as long as an account in Chancery, you
Rogues, Dogs:


Why we ask but for our own Sir. I hope a man may ask for his own Sir. My Goods
were my own Sir, my own. Very fine a man must not ask for his own. Rogues for
asking for a mans own?


And Rogues I will make you know this House is my own, which I will signify to
you by this Foot which is my own, and by this Cudgel which is my own.


Fly, fly, Murder, murder. May not ask for his own, my own. Murder, Murder.
For my own, help, Murder.


Gad forgive me, Help help.

Oh Sir Humphrey I cry you mercy, I was at my Morning Exercise, disciplining my
Rogues, my Duns.


Duns, Sir Will. Rant? let me tell you Duns may be very honest men.


Hum, so you Citizens are apt to think, but we Gentlemen believe no such
matter. But come I know you have some wise Lecture from nown Daddy, or some
such business, come out with it, I stand fair.


Poor Gentleman! my heart bleeds for him, you make him miserable with your
extravagant lewd Life, he writes me word you got the Parsons daughter with
Child, when you were at home last, and now she is near her time she names you
for the Father, this is the strangest thing that ever was.


Not at all, it had been strange if she had gotten me with Child; the Parsons
are lusty, lazy, well sed Fellows, and will be too hard for the Laity, if we
don't take Letters of Reprisal upon them.


Save us Heaven! I would not have my Nephew VVhachum acquainted with you for
the World.


Nor I with him Sir Nump, I keep somewhat better Company, you have seen my
Friends here.


Yes an I heard of them too, the Nation rings of'em, my Lady my Wife and your
Aunt is perpetually grieving and sighing for you.


Ha, good Lady! Nuncle look to thy City Forehead, there are those who can graft
and inoculate.


She has kept her two Daughters (she had by your half Uncle) in the Country
these five years, for fear you should come to her House and bring a scandal
upon them.


But they are now in Town, to my cost I find it Eugenia! she has killed me.


Pox on this Blockhead he grows tedious; to your Cue: Has Monsieur Catinat
given the Vaudois such a bang?


Undoubtedly, there's a World of News in Town.

Hold hold Gentlemen, I beseech you hold, News say you? have a little Patience
Sir William, here's a Letter from your Father, I have had it ever since the
last Post, and you have not been at home till this Morning. But pray Gentlemen
what News is of Master Catinat? I love News extremely, I have read Three News
Letters to day, I go from Coffee-House to Coffee-House all day on purpose. I
talked with as pretty a man, of a News Writer, as any in London, and of as neat
parts, as bold a Fellow, he cares not what he writes. But he knew nothing of
the Vaudois this Morning.


They are soundly beaten, almost all cut off.

Heaven be praised, they are damned Presbyterian Fellows, and hate the Church,
for my part, had I my will, I would put all the Phanaticks in Christendom in
pitched shirts, light them, and let them blaze like City Funerals. But hold, is
it true that Prince VValdeck is dead of a Fever?


Oh yes, and he got it with scouring at the Canal at Bruges.

Goodlack! Teckely and the Cossacks upon the Ukrain have totally routed Prince
Lewis of Baden, and cut his Army all to pieces, Well this Louis is the bravest
King.


The old Gentleman is very prolix.
Lewd courses -- great affliction -- hum: have I been so kind. Very well.

Your wicked extravagance will kill me. Ha ha ha, kill! not these Twenty years,
if Heaven takes no better care of me I shall be in a pretty case.

But this Action of the Parsons daughter. Pray Heaven the old man got her not
himself, for her Mother was my Mothers Woman. Pish pox this is stuff, I would
the old Gentleman would spare his pains.


Oh impious! what tear your Fathers Letter?

Yes when they are nothing to the purpose: I sent to him for a lusty sum of
Money, and he sends me a parcel of wise Council that is not worth a Farthing.


But Sir the other News you were speaking of.

Why 'tis most certain Catinat has laid a bridge over the Rhine and secured
his passage into France, and another over the Mosell to secure his pass into
Italy,


Well that Master Catinat is a very pretty man, he'll soon destroy the
Presbyterians and burn that Anti-christian Town of Geneva. Oh this Louis is a
glorious Prince, what would I give to see him, I believe I might have a pass to
go over to be touched for the Evil, He must needs do it rarely.


Well said old Grumble, have you no wise advice from my Aunt? she will have
you under Correction if you deliver it not.


poor Lady, she grieves that you should drink and roar, and beat the whole Town
and spend your Money upon ugly Whores. But pray what News of Buda?


Now they are both gotten up, Wars will ensue.

Hold hold Nuncle, ugly Whores say you? be you Judge, who keeps the uglier
Whores my Aunt or I?


Oh impudence! another in the House, oh oh.

Oh Devil I cannot endure this, oh oh.

Gad forgive me, look to the Gentlewomen, look to the Gentlewomen.


Now my dear Friends let's go quickly now now, I love to leave VVhores in Fits
mightily.


Gad take me! hold the Gentlewomen, bring some cold water, and flower, burn
some blew inkle and Partridge Feathers, 'tis my Ladies Medicine.


Is the Villain gone?

Is the Rogue fled?

Oh you Flirts I'll pluck your Eyes out.

I'll tear you Limb from Limb.

Gad forgive me! help help, part them, they are incensed, why Ladies,
Gentlewomen, keep the peace, I charge ye in the Kings Name, I am of the Quorum.


Oh Impudence!

Thou common thing.

Go Iezabel, go.

Avoid paint and wash!

Go pitiful Creature.

Creature! creature in the very face of thee.

The Town knows what thou art.

What am I, Ione? What do they know of me?

In truth you are to blame, to disturb a civil well ordered Family thus, well
were it not for good Book^ that comfort me, I could never bear such
exorbitances.


Ha, The Ladies calling, a very Matronly Gentlewoman truly.

But these godly books quiet the Conscience mightily.

Hah good Soul!

Let me come at her.

I'll tear her Throat out.

Bawd, bawd.

Thou art old enough to be my Mother.

Let me come at her.

Let me come at her.

In truth Ladies you are much to blame, cannot you be civil? take them away
separately.


Whore, whore, whore, whore.

Whore, whore, whore, whore.

WHat account shall I give of my Charge, and Guardianship? my Lady sends you
out under my prudent conduct, as I may say, to look after Commodes and Top
knots, with a flat Injunction not to see this lewd place, the Park.


Did she so old Mumpsimus?

And you in Contempt of her sovereign power, and my lawful authority under her,
presume to come hither; what shall I do? what shall I say?


Can flesh and blood forbear this sweet, this most delicious place?

Flesh and Blood! Yes, it is a place fit for the carrying on the designs of
flesh and blood indeed.


And what dost thou take us for Spirits, Woman?

Come come Gentlewomen, my Lady is a wise woman: This is the Exchange for
Lovers: Here they meet, and if they absent themselves are looked upon as broken;
nay worse, it is the Rendezvous of Fornicators and Adulterers.


Tis the Rendezvous of all who have sense enough to love the delicatest place on
Earth.


But I have a secret to tell you, it concerns you Madam Clara, I have found
from Sir Humphrey your Father in Law, that he has made a match between his
Nephew Mr. Whachum and you.


The Devil he shall! there's a mechanic thing, there is not such an odious
creature as a City Spark.


Don't you trouble your self, his Uncle says you are not sober enough for him.


Nor I fool enough for him, I thank Heaven, a filthy City wit, those Fellows
are as lewd as the Gentlemen every whit, only more impudent, foolish and
ill-manner'd.


Dear Clara thou art in the right, when a man is lewd with a bon Grace there's
something in it; but a Fellow that is awkwardly wicked is not to be born.


He wicked! why he is a Student of the Inns of Court, Madam Eugenia.

Well you had a great secret for my Sister, and I have one for you: In short we
are both resolved not to endure any longer the intolerable Yoke of Arbitrary
power, under which we have so long groaned, if you will comply, one or both of
us will provide for you:


And preserve you from making Night-caps or footing Stockings in a Garret, the
pitiful remnant of thy decrepit Life.


Oh times and manners! will you break loose from all Government? I shall be
undone, what will my Lady say, if she knows that you saw your Cozen Rant here
yesterday?


Mutter no more under thy Gums, old Sybil I did see my Cozen yesterday, and I
hope to see him this day, and every day of my life; keep your distance, we that
are resolved to cast off my Mothers Tyranny, will no longer suffer thy
Insolence.


What will become of poor me?

We are true English women, Co-heirs of two thousand pounds a year, and are
resolved to assert our Liberty and Property.


Does my Mother think she shall mew us up any more, at her Jointure house, old
Do little?


Amongst poor innocent country things, who never stir beyond the Parish but to
some Fair.


Did she not bestow good breeding upon you there?

Breeding! what to learn to feed Ducklings, and cram Chickens?

To see Cows milkd, learn to churn, and make cheese?

To make clouted cream, and whipped Sillabubs?

To make a Caraway Cake, and raise Py-crust?

And to learn the top of your skill in Syrrup, Sweat-meats, Aqua mirabilis, and
Snayl water.


Or your great cunning in Cheese-cakes, several Creams and Almondbutter.


Ay ay, and 'twere better for all the Gentlemen in England if their Wives had
no other breeding, but you had Music and Dancing.


Yes an ignorant, illiterate hopping Puppy, that rides his dancing Circuit
thirty miles about, Lights off his tyred Steed, draws his Kit at a poor country
creature, and gives her a Hich in her pace, that she shall never recover.


And for Music an old hoarse singing man riding ten miles from his Cathedral
to Quaver out the Glories of our Birth and State, or it may be a Scotch Song
more hideous and barbarous than an Irish Cronan.


And another Musick-master from the next Town to teach one to twinkle out Lilly
burlero upon an old pair of Virginals, that sound worse than a Tinkers kettle
that he cries his work upon -- we'll have no more on it, we are come up to London
and common sense, and we defy thee and thy works.


Keep distance.

Avoid thou that think because thou art old thou must be wise.

Avaunt we'll have no more to do with thee.

Attend.

Obey.

Be under good Discipline.

Be a towardly old Governess.

We are free from this minute.

Never more to hear thy wise advice,

Thy old Saws, and foolish Sayings.

We will pare our Nails on any day of the Week.

And do what we will upon Childermas day, oh my dear Sister! How happy are we
to come to this most blessed Town, and these most heavenly walks.


This Paradise of the world.

Oh this Cozen of ours, he is the prettyest man my Eyes e're yet beheld.


But sure Eugenia thou art mad.

Yes I am mad, stark mad, in love with him, and will be mad.

Thou art mad indeed, in love with so wild a man?

Wild, never trouble thy self for that, my dear! I warrant thee I'll tame him,
the wilder the better.


This is stark staring madness, why this lewd Cozen of ours, they say, has had
all the women in Town that are to be had for Love or Money.


Say thou so my Child? then will my conquest be the greater, and I shall
triumph over all them he has had, and he will be the more likely to be constant
to me whom he never had.


A short Triumph 'twould be, till he can meet with another weak enough to be
taken.


I would not give a Farthing for her that cannot secure the Conquest she has
made: I will have him, and I am mistaken if he be not as fierce upon me, as I
am upon him.


Thou art a mad Girl, I would not fall in love with a wild Fellow of the Town,
if he would Jointure me with the East-Indies.


I could not, would not, but have fallen in love with this wild Fellow of the
Town, to have been Mistress of all the Gold and Jewels in both Indies.


Heaven defend me.

Thou art only fit to be Spouse to some Ladies darling, who has been cockered
with Cawdles by his Lady mother, bred under a very humble civil Tutor in the
house, who is always in most profound awe of his Pupil, from whence to the
University he goes, where Divines (for the great respect they have to some
Livings in his gift) flatter and indulge him in what he thinks fit.


You are very merrily disposed.

From thence the Fop comes home, and sets up his rest upon Horses, and Dogs,
rides for a place, grows a most furious Nimrod, and hunts perpetually.


Will the Alarm of your Tongue never be down?

Come let's walk, and see if we can spy this same dear, dear, wild, very wild
cousin, come along.


Mercy on me, the World's turned topsy turvy. My Lady will kill me: She is a
very Fury, and when provoked, nor man, woman nor child can stand in her way.


My dear Rogues! Dear Dogs! Bluster and Dingboy! you are the bravest fellows
that ever scoured yet.


Dear Squire VVhachum! If ever there was such soowring in High-Holbourn since
'twas built, may I never taste Nants-Brandy more at midnight.


The Nation will ring of us; such Exploits! such Achievements! Not a window
left in all the Inns of Chancery; those Hives of Attorneys, those
Suit-breeders, those Litigious Rogues, the Sons of Court-hand, Copy Paper and
Green Wax.


Not a Tavern window in all the street has a Quarrel in it.

Then how we scoured the Market people, overthrew the Butterwomen, defeated the
Pippin-Merchants, wiped out the Milk-scores, pulled off the Door-knockers,
Dawb'd the gilt Signs!


But a pox on it, we were confoundedly beaten by the Hellish Constable and his
Posse of Scoundrel Dogs.


That most Damnable Inflexible Prig that bound us over this morning must be
tossed in a Blanket.


Slit in the Nose, and suffer other operations not very agreeable to him.

No, let's be brave, but not too brave, I'll pay for the Windows and all; my
Head's broken, but no matter I'll not be dismayed: Well, never men laughed and
roared more: This same Flipp and Punch are rare drinks.


Nay, I'll hang for it if there be a knot of better Laughers in England.

We'll laugh with e're a gang in England for a thousand pound. Why laughing's
all the joy of a mans life.


Then we have scoured so magnanimously these three nights, that we were taken
for Sir VVilliam Rant and his company.


Sir VVilliam? no, no; oh Sir VVilliam is the finest, completest Gentleman
that ever wore a head.


There are others, Squire, that shall be nameless.

Oh no, never talk on it: there will never be his Fellow. Oh had you seen him
scour as I did, oh so delicately, so like a Gentleman! how he cleared the
Rose-Tavern! I was there about Law business, compounding for a Bastard, and he
and two fine Gentlemen came roaring in the handsomeliest, and the most genteelly
turned us all out of the Room, and swinged us, and kicked us about, I vow to
Gad, 'twould have done your heart good to have seen it.


l'faith did he? ha, ha, ha.

Brave fellows! ha, ha, ha.

Aye, was't not handsome, ha, ha, ha. And in a minutes time cleared the whole
house, and broke all the windows, beat the woman at the Bar, and swagger'd by
themselves. Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha.

Ha, ha, ha.

Peace, peace; hold, hold! Here he comes, with his brave Friends. Stand by, and
observe. Look you there, look you there, there's a fine person! there's a
complete Gentleman!


A good pretty man.

The man's well enough, but Squire VVhachum I say for all that.

O fie fie, Pretty-man! well he shall be my pattern while I live, an't please
Heaven. You shall see him, oh if did you but hear him swear and curse you'd be
in love with him! He does 'em so like a Gentleman, while a company of ye here
about the Town, pop out your Oaths like pellets out of Elder Guns. They come so
easily, so sweetly from him, even like Music from an Organ-Pipe.


What do they lay more upon us than we did? who the Devil should these be that
scour so to be taken for us?


Puh, pox these must be some Scoundrels that profane our noble actions with
vile bungling imitation.


A man would think we need no imputative wickedness.

These Mushroom Scowrers had best see they do it handsomely, and bring no
disgrace upon us, or we may chance to whip some of 'em through the Lungs about
that business.


Do you hear Bluster and Dingboy? Oh if Fate, and my own Industry, could ever
make me like this Dear, this gallant, Sir William, I were at the end of my
Ambition.


'Tis a hard thing to scour naturally, and handsomely.

Every Puppy, now a-days, presumes to set up for a Drunkard; but there are more
good qualities requisite to a Drunkard than to a Minister of State, or a deep
Divine. I'll pick up fellows fit for great men every hour in the Streets, but a
Drunkard. --


Well said, Jack Top, thou art in the right, he must be of Mien and Person not
ungraceful, of pleasing Speech, sharp must his Wit be, and his Judgment solid.


He must be cheerful, easy, and well tempered.

He must be well bred have seen the World; learned, knowing, and retentive of a
secret: He must have Truth and Courage.


In short, he must be just such a fellow as thou art, if it be possible; while
all thy Contemporaries have either Dyed, or left off, and grown sober Sots,
thou still perseverest in generous Lewdness.


He is only to blame a little, to brush up the Ladies so much, when he's an
Ancient Gentleman, and knows his own ability.


Prithee Stripling, trouble not thy self with what I can do, I can make love
enough to make a Husband or Gallant Jealous, and that's as good as any thing
thou can do.


Look you there now! Well, all Europe cannot show a knot of finer Wits, and
braver Gentlemen.


Faith, they are pretty smart men.

The Gentlemen, I must confess, are pretty Gentlemen; but time shall try. I'll
say no more -- --


Gentlemen, I have an adventure will separate as for a while; but this shall be
our Rendezvous.


'Tis not fit for a Gentleman to be without an Adventure in this place, Jack
Top.


Pox of your Whores! I come here to venture for a good stomach to my Calvert
Salmon, and my Turbot; your lazy fellows lose the pleasure of the Park, you
should be here in a morning, and observe crowching Spaniels hastening to some
great mans Levee, whom they wish hanged; and lean, assiduous knaves of business
running from Office to Office, to get all they can under the Government they
hate.


How many Villains that wish the Government destroyed, yet crowd for places in
it.


Such Rogues can do the Government no harm if they be kept out. But Top, if
thou growst politic, and trouble thy self how matters go, thou art too solid
for a Drunkard, and must knock off.


I knock off! Gad I scorn your words, I'll bury two or three hundred of you.
Hem, hem, I'll scour in the Mall now, if you will, without the help of Spirit
of Clary, fasting, and in cold blood: Come on, fall on, I need no provocations
to Lewdness.


Hold hold, a Sail! a sail! Each part, and cruise about.

Adieu for a while.

A while! a pox of your damned Caterwauling: Think on the Turbott and the
Calvert Salmon at Lockets.


Two a clock be the time.

Let's follow at a distance and observe 'em. They are the bravest Blades, and
purest Wits in Christendom.


But hark you Squire, by their discourse, even now, they seem to be Whiggs.


Damned Whiggs methinks.

I am afraid they are a little Whiggish; really 'tis a thousand pities, they
have kept ill company.

Cods me, here's my Uncle! Great souls contain your selves.

How Nephew! What you are never to be found in your Chamber of late: How will
your studies go on at this rate?


I was not well this morning, and came to take a little air.

Air, say you? Is there not as good air in Westminster-hall? Yes, and a
profitable air some find it. I went thither expecting to find you upon a
Cricket, civilly taking Reports, I think they call 'em.


In good time Sir.

In good time! Come mind your business, I have made a match for you with my
wives second daughter; the first is a Mad-cap, I'll have nothing to do with
her; but the second for my money. I have agreed with her Mother that you shall
give 5000l.


I am for the eldest, she is for a mad fellows. She will fall in love with me,
and I'll marry her for nothing.


How! What Companions are these?

Students of the Temple Sir, hard Students, very hard Students.

Students of the Temple? they look like Students of White-Fryers.

Have a care what you say Sir? your words will be actionable, they study hard
all nights, lye rough, and seldom go to bed.


Have they read the Year books?

Read all all.

The Devil of bit, read quoth he?

Year books! I never read any thing but Gazettes, those are the week books.


Well Gentlemen de'e hear any news ^ I hear the Pope and the King of France are
agreed.


We hard Students never mind News, but that's very good.

Hold I see one that owes me Money, stay I'll come to you here and tell you
more, I hope we are all honest.


Oh aye.

Do you and they come dine with me then.

A pox on him, he has hindered us observing these fine Gentlemen, let's walk,
we shall lose them.


Are there no Gallants left? poor gentle love is now neglected, and all men's
heads lye towards Knavery and Business. I have walked the whole length of the
Mall alone, on purpose for an amorous Adventure, and met none; nor have had any
observe me except this old Red nosed, bettered Drunkard, and yet my shape and
habit are enough inviting, besides some Jewels which I seem to conceal, and yet
take care to expose, show my Wealth and Quality sufficiently.


What solitary adventure is this? she is richly laden, I'll lay her on board
with my two Pounders and my Patercras


That must be my sweet Duckling -- I know her by her pretty waddle in her Gate
-- besides I have had a sight of her Rump Jewel: I know it -- my Dear, my
Chicken I know thee well enough.


Unlucky Omen for a Lady to be picked up by her own musty Husband first? How
now, what old Fellow art thou?


Come Chicken! don't think to bob thy own Dear, don't I know that Jewel?


Ha! This is the Aldermans Wife, I'll cuckold him, that's certain: I have not
cuckolded an Alderman these 7 years. If honest Jack Top (...) live to be kept
in his old Age? Hah!


Well Sneak-goose what then? what do you come poking hither for?

Come Chicken, I'll take a walk with thee.

With me! I faith but you shall not, when did you ever see a Lady of my Quality
walk with her own Husband? well I shall never reach a Citizen manners. I
warrant you think you are in Moor-Fields seeing Haberdashers walking with their
whole Fireside.


Prithee Chicken be appeased:

Chicken! you are very familiar, what you would have the world believe you
Jealous?


Who I Jealous? Heaven forbid.

Besides a Lady of my Quality, that have so many great people of kin to me, to
be seen with a pitiful mechanic Alderman. I have disgraced the Ancient Noble
Family of the Rants enough already in marrying you. Be gone I say out of the
Park.


Well Chicken, thou wilt have thy own way, be not offended no more, I am gone.


So now have at her, pray Heaven she be sound -- she's of Quality -- hah! may
be ne'er the founder for that neither -- Hail solitary Damsel! by thy
pensive-walking I find thou art in Distress; and being a true Knight Errant,
come to offer thee the succour of my person.


Not in so much distress neither.

These Vizards have all gotten a road of talking pertly and impudently, they
learn it of the Beaux; come, I know what 'tis thou want; I am ready to pay a
Bill at sight.


What do you think I have a mind to drink a Bottle or two?

No, thou pervese creature, thou know my meaning well enough; if thou wilt
have me speak broad I can bear it, have at thee.


Hold, hold, methinks you seem to be an Ancient Gentleman.

Ancient! Gad take me, I am tough, and well seasoned! All this last Generation
were but half gotten, and have the Rickets.


Do not grow troublesome.

Troublesome, Sweet-heart, be not foolish: Ah! thou know not what's in me.


Yes, I suppose last Nights lewd Dose, and two Bottles this Morning: That an
old Gentleman with one foot in the Grave should be thus lewd.


Ounds! I could find in my heart to kick her; she has provoked my choler more
than ever she can raise my love. But I will dissemble, a whore she is, my whore
I'll make her, that I may revenge the indignity, and use her scuryily. Come, my
Dear, thou dost not take me for a Milk-sop, to accept of one denial -- Have at
her.

-- Women born to be controlled,
Stoop to the forward and the bold.

Old Gentleman be civil.

Old again! you women are for the young stripling that switch, and spur a short
race like Citizens on May-day in the Park, but we solid Lovers are for the
whole course, come come I know what you come for, and you shall not go without
it -- I'll carry you to a Friends Lodging -- and I gad I'll, I'll -- no more to
be said.


You are a saucy old Fool, and I'll have you kicked.

Come, come, you shall go, no matter for that.

Help, help, help!

A Lady in Distress! Do you want my assistance? I am at your service -- How now
Jack, what Ravishing?


I see you are a man of Honour, a thousand thanks for delivering me from the
Assaults of this Libidinous Goat. He is the finest Gentleman I ever saw.


So fine a Lady shall never want any Service I can do her.

Sweet Sir, really your manner is so obliging.

These damned young Fellows, like Dutch Capers, will snap up all Adventurers,
they have the better of us at cruising, we have no game to play at but ready
Whore, ready Money.


You do me too much honour

O I am charmed with him -- Soho Square.


You make me blush at my little service: Alas that Gentleman may say what he
will, he puts on a rough outside, but he is a very harmless man to a Lady as
can be.


Prithee, now I see her Face take her and make your best on it.

Was there ever so rude a Person?

You know where you are Sir.

What Sir?

Prithee Jack Top dissemble a little, there's a trick in it, it shall turn to
thy good.


Pox on her? I care not if she were hanged.

Sir I beseech you engage not your Person in my Quarrel, if any hurt should
come on it, I should for ever hate and curse my self.


Not on my honour -- this is Maggot the Aldermans wife, she has two pretty
Daughters come to Town, and great Fortunes; besides tho she is declining, she
is but a little on the other side of the Hill, and looks well and lusty.


Sir I fear you are meditating on Revenge upon that old Ruffian; I shall wish I
had never been born, if I should engage so fine a Gentleman in danger, for that
reason let me desire the honour of your walking with me while I am in the Mall,
and afterwards if you please to protect me to my House; I shall there be able
to make in some measure a return for this signal favour.


I am your Slave Madam, wholly at your disposal.

Oh lucky adventure! this was the happiest moment of my Life.


My charge, they have broken loose from me and defied me, and you too: They
forced me to the Park, here they are taken up by a wild Fellow; who bid his
Footmen seize on me and toss me in a Blanket.


Oh vile wretch! I'll strangle thee, I'll tear thy Windpipe out, where are
they? speak, speak, speak.


Hold off your hands. you choke me, I can't speak.

Where where, you old Iudas?

At the further end of the Mall.

Forgive my indecent passion, and let me beg your assistance -- follow Beldam.


I wait on you Madam, this was a happy opportunity.

Dear Sister, Let's go, I tremble every Joint, Oh if my Mother should see us?


Dear pretty Cozen know thy power, and desy the Tyranny of thy Mother.


The only man my Mother has perpetually warned us oss.

Ha! I am glad of that, she could not possibly have contrived better to bring
us together. Eugenia, thou sweetest creature that the Earth e're bore! consider
thy own confinement, and my misery: There is not in a Dungeon such a wretch as
I should be without thy kindness.


What you take me for a poor weak country thing, as ready to be caught as any
Fool you ever ruined yet; I'll make you know I am above your Arts.


You are to me what e're you please to be, but I to you must be the truest, and
the heartiest Lover that ever Beauty was too hard for yet.


You talk as if you were serious, can you imagine this will pass, how smoothly
you rehearse it?


Tear out my heart and thou wilt find thy Image there:

Fustian! rapture! said to a hundred tawdy things in a week. Can you think me
so mad to fling my self away upon so notorious a lewd creature? 'Tis a certain
ruin to be seen with you.


I am struck in a moment, you have already converted me, I will be as
remarkable in my penitence, as ever I was in my wickedness, Parsons shall write
books of it, and preach upon it while I am living.


A very pretty piece of Raillery.

Raillery! by Heaven and Earth!

Nay, nay, no swearing, your Bead roll's long enough already, you shall shave
no Sin added to it upon my account.


Sister, dear Sister lets be gone.

All the Sins I ever shall commit will fall upon you, I shall run mad, stark
mad, most furiously mad.


What madder than you have been?

My former life will be thought an Anchorets to what will follow, if you refuse
me. I am resolved to use all the ways that e're were tried to gain a woman, --
and did the world depend on me, I'd ruin all before I'd lose you.


Oh fearful, I dare not hear him any longer.

Softly good Sir, he that dares make love to me must undergo a Task too hard
for you.


Name it, there's nothing too hard for such a Lover.

I must have my weekly Tribute of Sonnet and Madrigal, full of sacred, divine,
Nymph and Goddess.


It shall be done.

And my daily offering of humble, and disconsolate billets do (...) about the
Lustre of my Beauty, the light of my Eyes, c.


And this.

I must have all former women sacrificed to me, and he must not dare to look
upon another besides me.


All all, if I had ten thousand.

All lewd Company must be deserted, and Wine abolished save three Glasses at a
meal, and he must be the pattern of Virtue for the whole Town, consider now,
and tremble.


All this shall be done, I have considered, and will consider no more, nor
think, nor live any longer than I shall call Eugenia mine.


Oh Heaven they are here with my Nephew, the lewdest wretch that ever breathed
this wicked air, but hold!


What delicate man is this? He is a most surprising creature, Heaven! would I
had not seen him!


What Angel's this? I ne'er saw Beauty till this minute. She has struck me under
the left Pap.


Oh my Mother.

Do you start you Baggages? were it not in the Park, I'd make you such Examples
of my Rage -- come along -- I'll rout you out of this place. Go, go packing
through St. Iames's house: I'll bring up the Rear. Follow 'em you old Gipsy,
Governess. Nephew how dare you commit this outrage, this insolence upon me!
Avoid my presence, and never more come near me or my house.


This new Beauty has fired me, and blown me up.

Look thee, my Termagant, Masculine, He-Aunt, if thou use me or my Cousins
thus, I will scour, and roar thee out of Soho-Square into Mark-lane again: And
that will break thy heart.


I will consider of that. Sir, if you please let me still hold the honour of
your company; haste, haste.


Why how now Tom!

Peace Will peace, I'll keep my time*

What a Devil has Tom Wildfire taken up my Aunt?

How now Knight Errant, have you done adventuring for Surgeons work? 'tis
almost Dinner time, I long for Brimmers, did you see who went off with your
Aunt! is she given to stumble? will she take a stone in her Ear?


She comes of a good strain by the Males, but come along with me we'll make 'em
a visit, what Rogues are these?


Sir, I understand Sir, that you are Sir William Rant, Sir.

I am, w^at then?

Nay no offence, my name is Tim Whachum, Alderman Whachums Son deceased, and
Alderman Maggot your Uncle in laws Nephew.


It may be so.

What would this Puppy be at?

I have seen your Person before, and admired you, I have seen you scower so
rarely, Sir I have had a mighty Ambition for the honour of your acquaintance;
For my part Sir, I am a very mad Fellow as any wears a head, and I conceive Sir
you love a mad Fellow.


A very pleasant Rascal.

I have heard Sir, that you delight much in drinking, whoring, scouring,
beating the Watch, breaking Windows and serenading, and the like Sir.


Was there ever such an awkward Rogue, to make a man out of love with Lewdness


Now if there be madder Fellows about the Town than I, and my two Companions --
Why we have been bound over to the Sessions three times this week. I suppose
you may have heard of our roaring about Holbourn, Fetter-lane, Salisbury court,
c.


Yes I have Sir, and you are most gallant, and magnanimous Fellows. Now all's
out Jack Top, we will so swinge these Rogues, Here's a Fellow of this Nuncles
breeding.


Now good noble Sir if you please to honour us with your Acquaintance, I vow to
Gad Sir, I shall be as proud Sir, as proud Sir as --


Sir 'tis much to my Advantage, and I embrace the honour most greedily.


Well here's the finest Gentleman that ever beat a Constable, let him be whom
he will; Sir, Sir I am most infinitely overjoyed, be pleased to know my
Friends, Godsookes, they are as gallant Fellows as ever walked the streets at
Midnight.


Your Servant Gentlemen.

Your most obsequious Spaniel.

Your most humble Trout.

Trout! Pox on him for a Blockhead, is that Fellow a Trout?

Be pleased to know my Friend.

Sir I am no Stranger to your Worth, and Magnanimity; now noble Sir if you, and
your Gang will complete this Hononr, and sup with us to night at the Bear and
Harrow, behind St. Clements, where we intend to begin our Frolic; it may be
Sir you may see scouring that will not be amiss.


We will, be sure to bespeak a good Supper.

Dam me I am overjoyed Sir, if we join together we'll carry all the Town before
us, your Servant sweet Sir, I'll be sure to bespeak Supper, do you love a huge
Shoulder of Mutton and Oysters, and a couple of fat Capons in the first place.


Aye aye, very well: at Eight let it be.

Come Dingboy and Bluster, I am transported, I have much ado to forbear
Huzzahing in the Mall.


Did you ever meet such nauseous Rascals, they will convert more than the
drunken Spartan Slaves.


Whett thy Rage and let us make examples of'em, now will I tease my haughty
Aunt, and confound my foolish Uncle.


SO, you young Rebellious Sluts, I have you safe; I'll teach you to go to the
Park.


So you do, by your own example.

Yes, Huswife, I am experienced, and proof against temptation, by my known
Virtue and Wisdom.


And we doubt not but our unknown Virtue and Wisdom, as you call it, will
defend us too.


How now, Mrs. Milksop, are you grown pert and refractory?

She, she is as bad as the other every whit.

There's none so bad as thee, old puss. Thou filthy, toothless, wormeaten old
Maid, I'll maul thee, thou Witch of Ender.


Murder, Murder, Murder, will you throttle me?

I cannot live without my pretty Creature: What charms are these? What do I
feel?


Oh Sister, the sight of this man has ruined me; I never shall recover it.


Ah! art thou there faith, recover it: Why, who would put a stop to love? Give
Reins to it, and let it run away with thee.


Oh! prodigious and amazing! Did they say all this?

Yes, that they did, and ten times more: So they did, what would you have me
do? They said they would throw off your Tyranny, and have no more to do with
you.


Oh, Heaven! Is this true? Did you say so, young Rebels?

Yes, and are resolved to do so. Sister, take courage, and speak thy mind.


We were not made to be mewed up like the Hawks in moulting time.

We were born free, and we'll preserve that freedom; we have learned more Wit
than to call Self-defence Rebellion.


Brave mettled Girls; I grow mad in Love, and 'twill break out into a flame.


Most amazing impudent Girls; I'll tear your eyes out.

Offer to use us thus one moment longer, and I will choose my Uncle Rant my
Guardian.


And I am resolved to do the same.

Most incredible impudence, let me come at 'em.

I beseech your Ladyship.
If you be unkind as you are fair, I am for ever miserable.

Heaven! what do I hear!

Sir, I humbly demand your pardon; I must confess, the disorders of my Family
have transported me into an indecent passion, which a Lady of my Quality should
not have exposed to a person so gallant and well-bred as your self.


Pardon me, Madam.

But you shall find, Noble Sir, that she who can to extravagance be sensible of
affronts and injuries, can with as much zeal and ardency, resent the generous
favour you have loaded her with.


Madam, you make me blush with --

And I'll assure you, Sir, there is not a person living, who can be more
grateful to a person, that obliges any person, than I shall show my self to
your Noble Person.


Hey: What Riddle's this?

Oh, Eugenia, pity me: I am ruined! lost to all the World!

But to him, and him, and only him.

You young Rebellious Sluts, go to your Chamber, I'll come to you and discourse
these matters calmly with you.


We'll obey.

You Cecropia, when they are in their Chamber lock the Door upon them, and keep
the Key, or I will strangle thee, thou old withered she Baboon.


Hey ho, hey ho, what shall I say, what shall I do!

I am finely drawn in! Must I come at the Daughter by the Mother? my Conscience
ne'er will serve me, that's certain: She's furious too, what the Devil shall I
do to keep her off; I'll try great civility and respect to her.


Now noble Sir, I beseech you please to retire where we shall have a sitter
place and opportunity more apt to express my grateful resentments.


For Heavens sake, Madam, put not a value upon nothing; you have those charms,
those graces, and that wit and beauty, that all the services of my life would
be too little to express the passion which I have for you.


Oh Lord, Sir, for me! a person that -- I beseech you Sir let us retire, since
I have something to impart to you, in which I willingly would not meet an
interruption.


I am yours, and only yours.

So now they are sure, I have 'em under Lock and Key, I warrant 'em.

How now old Prisc. Where is my Lady?

With a Gentleman who came to visit her, in her Chamber; he is a stranger, I
know him not. But I'll take care she shall not be surprised.


Tell her I am here, bid 'em hasten dinner and bid the Butler bring some Hock
for a whet; we in the City can't eat without several whets in a forenoon.


I whet so often when I am there, that at last 'tis a blunt.

Well said Nephew, you shall see your Mistress presently.
Come, here fill a Glass. May I crave your names again, Gentlemen.

Mine is Bluster.

And mine is Dingboy.

Brave names for bold pleaders at the Bar.

They plead at the Bar! ha, ha, ha: They may hold up their hands there, but
never hold up a breviate to point at a Judge with.


Come Nephew all of us chockon, chockon, to an absent friend, ha, hum; you know
-- no more to be said.


With all our hearts.

Well, things will come about again. Let me tell you, we shall be upon a right
bottom once more.


I am glad to hear you say so: Your Worship's a wise man.

As wears a Head in the City.

As wears a pair of Horns there.

Look you, the King of France will have the greatest Fleet in the World at the
Needles by February.


But those French do so burn Houses, Churches, Barns, Men, Women and Children,
that I am afraid they'll do a great deal of hurt.


Ay that's to their Enemies, but they are our Friends, Did not the Grand Lewis
declare so? and that he loved the Church? by that brave and gallant Person, our
Friend Admiral Bagnio.


Oh ay, all he does is out of kindness to us, and the sincere Friendship he has
for his Kindred, I'll tell you, but we say here that, the Turks are beaten:


Pish not a word, alas we never have any Truth, a worthy Roman Catholic whom I
rely upon, told me that this same Duke of Croy lost his whole Army, and ran
away by himself to the Emperor, and the Turks are now in possession of that
Bridge and Town, and County of what do you call 'em, of Essex in Moldavia, and
Teckley and the great Bashaw have cooped up the German Army. Give us another
Whett.


Come on.

Here's to the Turk, the Pope, and King of France, we are of one side now.


Come on.

We hear all Lies: I warrant you think Cork and Kinsale are taken, No no no,
not a word; but come we shall have my Wife or some body come to interrupt us,
let's retire into my smoking Room, and we'll discourse freely of these
affairs.


Oh Madam the great Tenderness I have for Ladyships honour, chills my (...)


'Tis generously spoken most noble Sir, though I am perfect mist^ use.


Oh Madam the danger affrights me from the chief happiness: I wish on earth
never man had such a passion as I have for her Daughter.


So generous a passion, I cannot but think an honour to me, but I must have all
go in the Platonic way henceforth. I shall make bold to call you my Strephon,
and I beseech you to accept of this Ring.


Dear Madam you confound me.

Dear Sir it must not be refused, I vowed never to part with it but as a pledge
of my affection, and you being the worthiest Gentleman I ever saw.


You undo me with your Favours; this may be of use as I will make it.



What a prize would this be to a young Fellow, who wanted a keeper, who can
part with such a Ring for a bare promise, which I am sure I ne'er will keep.


What is there no body in the house? hah Tom what will nothing serve you but
my Family, but she is by the half blood.


Upon my honour Will. thou art in the wrong, I have no design upon thy Aunts
person, but I hope to make her my instrument for stealing one of her Daughters
persons.


How, one of her Daughters!

You know I have a good clear Estate, I saw your two Cousins by accident, and
am so devillishly in Love with one of 'em, that I am resolved if I can, even to
marry her for one good night, though I were sure to be hanged next Morning.


As for the honour of my Aunt, lye with her when you will, and I'll be no more
concerned than other Sparks about the Town are for their Sisters; but for my
Cousins know I am in love to greater madness with one of 'em, and if yours
happens to be her, I am sure that both of us shall not live.


Thou know Will, I am not capable of fear, if it be my fate to be in Love
with the same, I can bewayl it, but can never alter.


Keep me in doubt no longer, in this case a short clearing of the matter's
best.


You are in the right, and it must out, it is --

Which.

The youngest.

My dear dear Tommy, let me hug and kiss thee; go on and prosper, I'll assist
thee.


Mercy on me, who's here! are they such dear friends? What will become of me!
Yet sure he's a man of Honour; he has too fast hold on me, and 'tis too late to
retreat.


Oh my sweet, my honoured Aunt, your humble servant; it is a common blockheaded
trick to serenade and disturb people at midnight, I am come to serenade you at
Noon, and have ordered my dinner to come hither' I come a house-warming.


Unheard of Impudence, thou most audacious Fellow, thou only blemish of our
Family, did I not forbid thee my house? must thou bring Infamy where it never
entered.


Look thee Aunt, if thou wilt be civil and well bred, I will kiss thy Hand,
make Legs and use thee like an Aunt, but if wars must ensue, I will roar and
scour thy house so, that thou might lye as quietly in a besieged Town, with
^mbs and Carcasses flying about thy Lodging.


Avaunt thou Devil incarnate, I'll order thee.

Nay then, enter my Friend Jack Top, all my Singers, and Fiddles, and my whole
Equipage De boyre.


Fear not your person, I'll protect it.

You shall not expose your own for it, most generous Sir, I'll order him, lewd
wretch.


Come, enter.

Help, help, here Mr. Alderman, Mr. Maggot.

Strike up my Lads.

Come on my Boys, halloo.
Come Lady give me thy hand, dance and frisk about.

Hang the old Coxcomb, Hold, hold, hold, Mr. Maggot, Mr. Maggot.


Hah, Gad forgive me, who are here?

Oh honest Alderman, nown Nuncle, in faith we are come to roar a little with
thee, and we have ordered our Dinner, we come a housewarming.


Oh thou tame Beast, wilt thou hear them speak? make a Warrant and send them to
the Gatehouse, or Newgate.


Oh Nephew have a care of him, let's retire.

Look you Mr. Alderman, I have secured the Pass, If you will be a good towardly
Uncle and take advice by me, it shall be most profound peace, and great
Civility, but if you will provoke me, I'll make you spend your time very
uneasily.


Oh rare, Bluster and Dingboy, here will be gallant sport, to our Hearts
desire.


Oh pitiful Nincompoop, what dost fear him?

Good Chicken, have a little patience.

Consider Madam, patience is a great virtue for a Lady of your years.

My years, I spit at thee thou old musty Rascal, my years! Oh thou cowardly
Wittal, is thy wise Nephew a coward too: I will thunder in their ears.


Nay let thee alone thou art a notable Girl.

Begone you Villains, lewd Rascals.

Strike up, out noise her!

Russians, Vagabonds, Ragemuffians,
Slaves, Dogs, Scoundrels, hold, hold, hold.

Hold, hold, shall we come to Articles of Peace?

Oh Gallant! Oh rare sport! by Gad they are the finest Gentlemen in
Christendom.


Mercy on me Nephew, did you sing and rejoice with them.

Gad take me Sir, 'tis such a pretty Tune, flesh and blood could not forbear.


Alderman, I will swinge thee with brimmers, and make thy old mouldy
Aldermanship, more drunk than ever any of the huzzahing, roaring, loyal Rascals
were, who would have given up the City Charter.


I beseech you Madam, dissemble a little patience, they shall give a severe
account upon my honour.


Well you have silenced me, and in some measure appeased me since you say you
intend only a civil Music Consort and a Dance, what would you more, I am tame.


I must have both my Cousins, it is my intention to welcome them to Town.


Out of my house, you shall be hanged first, bring Infamy upon them, they are
far enough off.


Ralph secure the passes, and let no body out, send for my precise
house-keeper, and instruct her as I bid thee.


Yes, I must do it.

Come my Lads march and roar, I will search every Room in the house, but I will
have her.


Oh thou sneaking old Fumbling Fool! get thou out thou Coward, Maggot, Infect,
Nittworm.


Why Chicken, chicken, chicken.

Get thee out I say, and send for a Constable, and send them to Jail.


Come along Madam, I'll protect you, and appease them, put on a little
patience, and I'll warrant you all shall be well.


Huzza my dear Rascals! Here's a day! here's a happy day! Let's hug and kiss
one another, oh my brave Midnight-boys, what a night shall we have with this
rare, this excellent, this most accomplished Gentleman! Oh I could kiss the
ground he goes upon.


Now we are leagued, we'll govern all the Town by night.

We shall be styled the High and Mighty Princes of the night.

Shall our dull Loggerheaded Magistrates think to rule the City, with old
decrepit Fools in Rug-gowns, and Furred Caps, no let them govern by day, but
Gad take me, we honest Fellows will swagger by Night, Boys, Ha Rogues, have at
them, hey.


What shall I do? Look, my Nephew and his Companions rejoice as much as any of
'em.


Hold; my Uncle!

Students of the Law, quoth he! Rakehells damned Rakehells, pray come and
retire with me.


Madam this is to save the trouble of a Habeas Corpus, to free my Cousins from
illegal Imprisonment.


Well I will have patience Sir, but to morrow into the Country they go, and
shall never come into this wicked Town, till their Husbands shall think fit to
bring 'em.


You will do well.
but I shall take care to prevent you.

We Knights Errant, Lady, are bound by our noble order to succour distressed
Damsels, and free them from enchanted Castles, and to mall Giants, and more
fell creatures, your Viragos Madam, your Viragos, hah.


Now my pretty sweet Cousins, let me have the honour to entertain you with
Music, as your welcome to Town, this is a Forenoon Serenade.


Sir 'tis a favour we must think our selves obliged for, after Bag-pipers,
blind Harpers, and Country old-fashion'd Virginal Masters.


And which is worse than all, the full cry of a country Cathedral.

Very well, very well Baggages, I'll order you.
Let 'em begin Sir William.

Now you are my good Aunt, I love and honour you, now I have brought you to
reason, come Gentlemen begin.


Where's my Alderman? my dear Alderman? I must have him here, I will fetch him
in.


If you do not contrive suddenly, to get your Aunt out of the way for a moment,
that I may speak to my Mistress, I am utterly ruined. I'll tell you the Reason.


I warrant you, after the dance expect I have a way.

'Tis admirable Music.

And well performed.

I charge you Nephew, avoid this Company, as you would Bears or Tigers.


Avoid 'em, no I'll hang first, good Nuncle, I intend to throw off your Yoke
immediately, our scouring cannot be long concealed.


Pox I hate these melancholy, foolish, love Madrigals, with damned imitation of
the Italians quavering and division, one Jolly drinking Song, is worth a
thousand, you shall let me have my Frolic, sing me a Chauson de boire. Phillis
and Cloris, this is my Frolic.


Tis very well Jack, now strike up for a Dance, and by that time Dinner will
enter.


Come along my Lads, hem, hem, now Madam you shall see who's old, I will be
Master of the Revels, and couple ye, here Alderman you shall dance with my
Lady, no parting Man and Wife, ne'er dispute, Gad it shall be so: Here Will
here's a Lady for you.

Tom VVildfire here's a Lady for you.

And for my self, I have a pretty young Jade in my Eye, here come out, come I
say, I'll seague thee away i'faith, strike up, strike up, men of Rosin, Old!
Gad take me, I'll see who's old now.


Why thou art a Youth, a Lad Jack in thy prime.

Oh thou old fumbling cowardly Fellow to bear all this, I'll order thee, Old
Numps.


Gad forgive me, what a sad life shall I live with? Chicken.

Strike up again.

What a Pox they make nothing of me, but I'll make something of my self, they
shall find.


Now Tom watch, my Lady will follow me: Madam I beg the Honour of one word in
the next Room.


I will if it be only to tease my Mother.

Come my little Rogue, let us retire, Alderman I will lye with thy Maid, and
make thee drunk, and that will be a good days work.


Go you are a VVag, in faith you are.

Oh Impudence! My vile Nephew run away with my Daughter, along with me old
Fool, with your Nephew and his Friends, come, come.


Well Chicken well, come along Nephew and Students.

Madam your opportunities are so few, and like to be fewer, that it were an
unpardonable sin to let one slip, your mother intends to send you into the
Country by violence to morrow morning, you see Madam I dare not address to you
before her.


Sir you oblige me in this notice, but my Sister and we will prevent it.


I humbly beg the honour of serving you, never man had such a passion as you
have raised in me, a flame will ruin and destroy me, your Person nothing can
deserve, but my Estate is plentiful without encumbrance.


Pardon me Sir, that I am so free with you, you are a wild man of the Town, and
I would as soon commit my self to the Mercy of the Sea, in a storm, as into
your Hands.


I should not presume to be thus daring to mention love, at first encounter,
but that the difficulty is like to be so great of seeing you; and I must let
you know it, if you refuse me, I must perish, and I dare prophesy you'll be
unfortunate.


Are you at that sport, this shall to my Lady.

'^is better to be unfortunate than foolish.

Whatever I have been, the world shall never make me wild again unless your
scorn should make me desperate, and then what fury it may drive (...) to I know
not.


Nor have I reason to be concerned, 'twill be no fault of mine. Why does the
custom of our foolish Sex oblige us to lying, I see no prospect of any thing
but ruin; I am resolved never to join my self to Lewdness, and yet his Person
charms me into madness, oh misfortune!


I shall wish all the world except your self, on fire! if you despise me.

Curse on this Rascal, I could willingly cut his throat.

Madam your most obedient Servant. Sir under the Rose she is my Mistress.


Damnation on this Loggerhead.

I'll tell you in your ear her Father has made a match for me and her, and I am
to give her Mother 5000l. for her, ha, hum.


Tis very well.

Ay but you are a man of honour, to tell you truth I am for the Eldest, she
loves a mad Fellow like me.


Now Madam consider, your Father in Law has made a match, and your Mother has
sold you for 5000l. to this Puppy, but he says he is for the Eldest, she loves
a mad Fellow like him.


Sir, let me tell you, 'tis somewhat uncivil to tell words that I spoke under
the Rose, I trusted to the Faith of a gallant Scourer.


Thou art a mighty thick skull'd Coxcomb, and I have a great Temptation to
tweak thee by the Nose.


Gad save me he is a very gallant Gentleman.

Oh outrageous Impudence! You steal one Daughter out of my presence, and
another makes love to her I left, I'll blow up the house before I'll bear this.


Prithee come on your self, you sneaking City wit and make love to your
Mistress your self, do you think to put me upon it.


What a Devil does he mean.

You are the bashfullest Fop, I ever saw, prithee stand up, hold up your head,
and speak your mind. Oh Madam I humbly kiss your Ladyships hands, your Kinsman
here has been putting me upon saying fine things for him.


I am overjoyed to find you the same man of honour I thought you, but my Nephew
Sir William --


Madam, I never keep him Company.

Come on my Lads, all you that are not given to mornings draughts rejoice,
enter Dinner in state, come in Fiddles, I am Sewer and will march in the head
of it. Enter Venison, Turbott, Calvert Salmon and the rest; and let the lusty
Bearers of the swinging Hamper come, do you Friends bring up the Rear.


Well I will dissemble, till I get these Rascals out of my house.

Oh my dear Rogue here will be sport; here will be a glorious day! Bluster and
Dingboy that old Gentleman is a very pretty Gentleman!


Now strike up and march along Boys.

HERE will be fine work to day, the Alderman will by typsy'd as he calls it, my
Lady-mother will be outrageous; but it seems she intends us for the Country to
morrow.


And has sold me for 5000l. to the Aldermans most impertinent Nephew.

And no doubt has made as good a bargain for me, but we will defeat her
Ladyship: And for that end I withdrew with thee to consult about our
Deliverance.


I have no prospect of Deliverance, let me stay here, or go into the Country, I
must be for ever miserable; I am in love to madness, to utter madness.


No sure it cannot be, did not I hear a certain young Lady say, she would not
fall in love with a wild man of the Town, tho he could jointure her with the
East Indies.


Oh Eugenia! 'tis against my will, I sooner would have chosen to have been
blasted with Lightning: Love struck as fiercely through my heart, and as little
could I resist it: But prithee do not triumph over my Misfortune.


Misfortune: why Loves the greatest blessing upon Earth, Life is nothing but a
Shadow, Love is the Substance: Methinks I should be nothing but a moving clod
without it: Besides he loves thee as furiously too, what would thou have?


Not him of all the world.

Nor I the other, till I see a full Reformation in his Life, and Manners; If
they think us worth that, they will soon show the change, if they do not, sure
we shall have the sense to think them not worthy of us.


These wild young men, like Tinder soon take Fire, and as soon 'tis out again;
they'll never change, nor has Love left me any sense but of my Misery --


Poor Clara! What dost weep? poor Girl, thou art a Maudlin Lover; This comes of
Romances: I could never wean thee from 'em, for my part I am resolved to keep
up my Spirit, come what will.


Prithee do not laugh at me, to be a Jest is the vilest, and most miserable of
Conditions.


And that thou wilt deserve, ifthou wilt not do any thing towards thy own
Freedom, thou art like those unreasonable craven Fellows that would do nothing
towards the Deliverance of England, and yet would have all the benefit of the
change, nay would keep those that did, out of the Government.


Prithee don't draw a Simile upon me, I am resolved to do any thing Reason or
Honour will allow.


In the first place, you resolve to choose my Uncle Rant your Guardian.

I do.

Secondly to be ruled by him, he is a just, virtuous and honourable man, and of
great Humanity.


I will wholly resign my self to him.

Thirdly and lastly, thou wilt take the first opportunity of honourably, and
prudently running away.


I will.

Thy hand upon it.

Done.

Now let my brain work, what has our Jailer been at the Door?

Twas very silently.

Are you there old Mrs Turnkey?

Yes, and you are like to be there, I can tell you, while I am so.

Ladies I am your most humble Footstool to command, we have had a smart bout
on it with these Gallants, to say the Truth on it, they are as fine Gentlemen as
e're the Sun shined on.


But how came you to enter here, sweet Sir?

Sweet Sir! good. Eugenia! But it must be in private, your Ear sweet Madam.


You need not whisper, I'll into the Closet.

Now Madam, Cozen, if I may be so bold, but I hope to be nearer of Kin to you.


What you have bought my Sister for 5000l. I hear?

Yes that I have of your Lady Mother, but as Gad save me I think my Lady's too
dear, she is a very Jew, she has no Conscience, and to tell you the Truth
Madam, as I am an honest man, betwixt you and I, I don't like the bargain, I
had rather buy you Gold to Silver.


To tell you Truth, I don't like that bargain.

You are a Wag Madam, but I am for your aerie, brisk, gay, wild, young Filly,
such as you are, there's your Lady for my Money; and if you will be ruled by
me, we'll save the 5000l. and mump my Lady, Faith what say you? hah hum.


My Lady shall have no 5000l. there I'll be ruled by you.

Sweet Madam, I kiss your hands, Come, come, I know your heart, as well as if I
were in you, as the saying is, come you love a brave mad Fellow, such as I am,
Sniggs, I am one of the maddest Fellows about the Town, I sing, roar, serenade,
bluster, break Windows, demolish Bawdy-houses, beat Bawds, scower the Streets,
and the like, as well as any he that swaggers in the Town, ha Lady.


A very pretty ingenious Fellow.

Ay Madam, I am all Frolic, how many Knockers of Doors do you think I have at
home now, that I twisted off when I scowered, guess now:


Tis impossible to guess.

Why above two Hundred, ha hum, is not that very well? O my Conscience this
morning I beat 20 Haggling women! spread their Butter about the Kennel, broke
all their Eggs, let their sucking Pigs loose, flung down all the Peds with
Pippins about the streets, scowered like Lightning, and kicked fellows like
Thunder, ha, ha, ha.


Very well.

Ay wast not, ha, ha, ha; I wiped out all the Milk scores at the Doors, nay I
went about serenading with six Fiddlers in a Dung-cart. Ha, ha, there was a
Frolic, ha, ha, there's a mad fellow for you, and you talk of a mad Fellow;
'tis true Sir William and his Companions are pretty men, very pretty men: But I
would you saw me scower.


You a mad Fellow, and talk of scouring! why don't you break open the door, and
beat our old saucy Governess for locking us up?


Ha, now you put me in mind of it, I vow and swear I'll do it presently, for I
love and honour you, and if you don't look upon me, I shall hang my self.


No no but you are in a pretty fair way for another to do it for you.

Well Madam, but I'll show you what a mad Fellow I am, this Night I'll scower
Soho Square, I gad you shall see such scouring, 'twill rejoice your heart.


Can you drink hard?

Oh bloodily, if you could but see me at the Popes-head, no merry gang can be
without me, there I laugh, and roar, and sing and am exceeding witty, the
purest Company! never stir, they swear I have more wit than any of the Poets.


That may very well be by the late Plays I have read, but all this while we are
Prisoners.


Odsookers that's true. Here where are you, old damned old she Jaylour? I'll
break open the door.


What means this uproar.

Come on Mrs. Tawdry? Old Trigrimate? I will make thy dry bones rattle within
the old tanned Hide of thee; I'll swinge thee, Mother Damnable! what dost thou
lock up these pretty Ladies, Drab, Pole-cat.


Help, help, Murder, murder,
oh you young Impudent Fellow,
I'll tear out your Eyes.

Why how now Hag! dost thou scratch?
Old Puss, thou art grown into a Cat already, and shortly wilt take the degree
of a Witch upon thee, have at thee, do you provoke me you damned Puss?


Murder, murder, murder.

Heaven and Earth! What outrage is this? Some trick of yours, you wicked Sluts.


Oh she has scratched and blooded me all over, for ought I know, I may lose the
use of my Face.


O Madam he has called me filthy names, abused and beat and kicked me, for
locking these pert unruly Creatures up.


Death you young Rascal! dare you abuse my faithful Servant for obliging me?
you stupid Coxcomb, for keeping your Mistress from running away from that ugly
Phiz of thine; get thee out of my house, I'll order thee for a City Puppy, be
gone, be gone.


Hold hold, hold -- was ever such a Vixen? hold!

Come Baggages you were of the party, come come, I'll endure these things no
longer.


Nor we neither.

How?

Nor will we be for a Country Journey to morrow.

Will not?

No, will not.

The World, this House, and my Brains, are turned topsy turvy. The plagues of
this one day alone are able to distract me: Priscilla, thou hast done well,
haste and lock 'em up again, I'll try a pluck with ye.


I warrant 'em, I'll keep them safe.

Let's into our Closet and consult, we will escape before our Country Journey
yet.


O Will, this Cousin of thine has so bewitched me, that I begin to hate
lewdness already.


Faith, I have not such a relish for it, methinks, as I have had; but not a
word to old Top.


When he finds us out, the Rogue will play the Tyrant most insolently.

He'll be worse to us two than Doll Common to Face and Subtle* But something
must be done to deliver these pretty Rogues; to morrow, at Nine in the Morning,
is short warning.


Manage matters so, that we may appear Enemies when your Aunt comes to us; and
that, with what I have already protested, will beget such confidence of me,
that I'll undertake to secure her early in the morning.


I have laid a design, which I hope will take, to free them; but if Stratagem
will not do it, Force shall.


That may be dangerous, and hinder us for ever. Here she is, I assure you, Sir
--

You shall not carry this off, I passed my word to protect your Aunt, and I
shall require a strict account of this affront you have put upon her.


What a Devil! Are you concerned for the honour of my Aunt? What, do you lye
with her?


What say you, Sir?

Hold, hold; out thou filthy Fellow: Thou foul-mouth'd Brute: Thou very Spirit
of Lewdness and Scandal: Shall I, who am most notorious for Virtue and Prudence
to the whole Town, be blasted by thy Contagious breath.


Far be it from me to think such a thing; but I might justly, for your sake,
suspect his Vanity.


He is a Man of Honour, and a Worthy Gentleman; I would I could say that of
thee. But, sweet Mr. VVildfire, if you should engage your felt in a Quarrel for
me, I should never enjoy my self while I lived.


No, Madam, I'll not engage with him; what, mine own Aunt! My dear aunt! I love
and honour thee.


Love and Honour thee, quoth he! Pray Love and Honour me, and (...) get out of
my House.


I will; but by this hand I will Serenade and Scour thee most confoundedly.


Sir, I must have your word not to Quarrel: You see what his lewd heart is apt
to suggest, upon your beginning One, I shall suffer in my untainced Reputation,
besides the exposing your dear person, will endanger my life.


You are infinitely gracious.


Oh Madam are you there, here is your Alderman safe and sound, I deliver him to
you, pray give me a note under your hand for the Receipt of him.


I fack Mr. Top you are a Wag, ay I fack a very Wag.

I could make as pretty a Magistrate of him, if I had but the breeding of him
as ever slept upon a Bench yet, Old, Madam! Jack Top old, Madam! hah.


Oh Chicken, Chicken! my dear Chicken! I'll so mouse thee.

Confusion of Babel! what has this day produced? I shall run mad, mad, staring
mad.


Why Chicken! I say, Chicken.

Why Buzzard, I say Buzzard, get you gone you drunken Owl.

Nay Alderman, what are you a Flincher? does the Hen crow? come the other
Brimmer.


Out on thee old Satan! thou vile Tempter! would thou most wickedly seduce a
man from the Loyalty, and Obedience he owes to his lawful Sovereign wife.


One brimmer dear Chicken, it shall be thy health, never stir I'll buss thee my
pretty Chicken, I'll buss thee.


Buss me, oh Insolence! get you out, I say, be gone, ha, what dare you stay?


Sweet Chicken, now do but hear me.

How! Is it come to this? Nay then I'll make you go, do you Rebel?


Good, good, ha ha, good, hey brave Matrimony! oh rare Matrimony! Oh gallant
Matrimony! Most comfortable Matrimony! Oh delicate Matrimony! Oh sweet
Matrimony! Oh heavenly Matrimony! Where are you Flinchers? I have been fain to
carry on the work of the day; you have been as dull as a couple of old gelt
Mastisses.


Why, Jack, thou art the Hero of the Age.

There's not a Youth in Town comes near thee.

Hem, hem; Old said ye; hem, hem.

Sir, here's a Letter from your Father, came just now by the Post.

Some wise advice again, I warrant; but how does my House-keeper, and the
damned Governess agree?


The Old Dragon swallows Sack as greedily as a Essex Calf sucks Milk. She was
called away once, but we are safe now, and hope to bring her to reason.


How are the rest of the Family?

All, every one, as drunk as ever you were Sir, except two Maids of my Ladies,
Whachum and his two Friends are slipped away; but Whachum had beaten the
Governess, and she scratched him most wickedly before he went.


Go about thy business.
Now what says Daddy?


Gad I had made fine work on it indeed!

This is pleasant Jack, it goes to it now.

As sure as ever Martyr did in Smithfield.

Paid away, quoth he? paid to a Banker? Oh plague of a Banker, go on, go on,
burn in the Devils name,

Ha! Death and Hell! what's this? I am undone, no 'tis legible.



In two Will, at least.

Thou art resolved to be a finished piece.

I hate Owl-light, I would either be dead sober or dead drunk. I hate to have
one keep a pother, to make me gamesome for another.


Thou scorn to be an odious Trimmer in drink. But prithee Jack, what if we
three should resolve once, to go to bed sober in a Frolic.


Faith Jack, let us even try how it will agree with us.

What a Pox do you mean? are you mad? stark mad? I go to bed sober! what to
hear Chimes, Bell-men, and tell Clocks all night, and be Fleabitten like a
Nurse-Maid? I think the Devil's in you, what is this Fool in Love too?


Ten times more than I.

Why you brace of Baboons! what melancholy dull Puppies does Love make of
Fellows? A Pox of your Love. Love! 'tis a silly boyish Disease, and should
never come after the Chicken pox, and Kib'd heels.


Now Sir William, I hope you will be so civil to leave my House, and take that
old Sinner with you.


Yes, Madam, and that young Sinner too.

Old sinner! Gad as good a sinner as your self.

I must secure him for fear of a Quarrel.

Quarrel! No no, there shall be no quarrel; but we will have him along with us.


There is no remedy, but your Ladyship shall hear from me the first minute I
can get loose from them, or free from their dogging.


I shall either be at home, sweet Sir, or at my Lady VVagtayles, at Ombre,
within two doors.


This noble present of yours be the Token.

Farewell my most dearly beloved and highly honoured Aunt.

^or serenading and scowering have at you*sweet young Lady

Your most humble Servant Madam.

Your most obliged humble Servant, dear Sir! Oh he is the sweetest person, the
most charming Creature: but for the other two, vengeance lig^ on them; they
have put me by the happiest opportunity.


Dear Cousin! I am heartily glad do'e see of your acquaintance, 'tis pure ^ack,
one cup more and then I stop, I would not be disguised for the world.


Here sweet Madam, drink it off, it makes you look so lovely in my Eyes, I am
ten times more enamoured.


You are very obliging, sweet Sir.

He will be an excellent Match, my Master has given him his Life in a brave
Farm.


Alas, I marry! Nay not but I must confess, he is a pretty young man, c.


Humph, sweet Madam, the other Cup I beseech you.

Ha, ha, ha, well, you havea strange way with you.

Oh let me kiss those pretty eyes!

Go get you gone you go^d natured Toad.

^ut Cozen my master is resolved to increase your Fortune, that you shall live
like a Gentlewoman, and he intends you 1000l.


Truly he is a sine Gentleman, and if I can with a safe Conscience, well, no
more to be said.


I'll send you a divine.

No no, I can drink no more.

I'll send you a Divine to satisfy your Conscience.

No, not a drop more, good night, good night.

Do you see now you simple Fellow, you have over-drunk her, and made her commit
a great sin, and spoiled all.


Old Nab thou art a Fool, I will pick her Pocket of the Key, and release the
Ladies, and leave them to their own Discretion: Ha this must be it.


Go go quickly, and I'll hasten home.

And I to the Bear and Harrow after my master, where I doubt not but I shall
venture a broken head at least.


What's the matter in this house? The Porter's drunk, and can't speak, no body
to be seen about the house? Nothing but Chairs, Stools, Tables flung about, and
every corner strewed over with empty Bottles, I wish the house is not robbed.


Here's an old Gentlewoman in her Cups.

How, what confusion has been here? Some very extraordinary accident has been
in this House, this is the Dragon employed to watch my Nieces. Go out and bring
what Servants you can muster, Butler, under Butler, and Grooms, let us see if
any one in the Family can speak.


I will Sir.

This looks as if my Son, and all his lewd Companions, had been here. My
Sister's not at home, her Doors open, no body to give account of her, or her
Husband, that I could see, what all drunk? where's my Lady?


We have been drinking, Helter Skelter, Faith!

Sir William Rant's the finest Gentleman.

Oh the bravest Gentleman! and his men the bravest Drinkers.

I thought none, but my profligate Son could have made such disorder and
confusion any where.


A most brave Gallant! No more to be said.

Is there not one in the Family can speak?

Yes here's a young Gentlewoman pretty sober, but there are 8 or 10 men and
boys drunk, roaring under Benches and upon the Floor, the house looks like a
Field after a Battle, strewed with Bodies.


Sweet-heart! what's the cause of all this?

Sir William Rant and his Companions came in here, roaring and singing with
Fiddles at Noon, entertained us with Music, very fine indeed, and we had a
Dance.


Heaven! there is no hopes of Amendment.

At last marched in a noble Dinner, and great Hampers of all sorts of wine, and
there has been nothing but Roaring, and Drinking ever since, till just now. My
Lady laid my master drunk upon the Bed, but he has made his escape. My Lady has
been almost distracted.


Fly fly, my Lady will be outrageous.

Oh Heaven and Earth! what's here?
What an image of Hell has this house been to day? Who's here my Brother?

Madam I knew I should surprise you, my coming to Town was very unexpected, and
sudden.


You find me Sir, in amazement and confusion, and I am troubled that I must
tell you, your wild Son after I had warned him my house, broke open my Doors,
roared and swagger'd, and debauched all my Family.


Ah, Madam, I heard something before, and am infinitely sorry, his perseverance
in this wicked life will break my heart, it cannot hold long.


Oh Horror, Horror! Priscilla drunk too! Huswife! Huswife! speak.


I will drink no more, I tell you, I am sleepy.

Mercy on me, where are my Daughters? They are flown, they are flown. Ha how
came they here?


O dear pretty Ladies! your humble Servant, bless you my sweet God-daughter.


How now Baggages, how came you out?

A thousand welcomes to you most honoured Uncle.

You never could have arrived so seasonably.

What mean my pretty Nieces?

I shall be distracted, ruined. O this fatal day! I am sorry, Sir, you must be
witness of the further confusion in our Family; these wicked young Sluts have
rebelled against me, that I am forced to lock 'em up.


We do rebel against the Locking up.

And will dye before we will endure it.

And therefore are both resolved to choose you our Guardian: And never to
disobey you, who we know to be a man of Honour.


How they astonish me! All this mischief has your Son caused: Oh I shall grow
mad.


Oh that Son lies heavy on me. My pretty Nieces, I should be glad to serve you,
for your own sakes, and for my dear Brothers sake, tho by the second venture, he
was a brave, and worthyman, an ornament of our Family. But I must by no means
encourage disobedience to a Parent, or rob a mother of her Daughters.


I beseech you give us leave to state our Case to you.

And if you think we have not reason --

We will do whatever you determine with us.

But if you will not protect us from the most horrible Cruelty imaginable, some
body else must.


We'll bear all Torments, rather than the Usage we have met with from a mother.


Oh Impudence! I'll beat their teeth out.

Hold Madam, no such correction, let's discourse this matter in the
drawing-room Nieces, a little Coolness and kind Usage shall bring 'em into a
good Temper, I'll warrant you.


Heaven preserve my Senses, I have scarce any left.

I am almost typsy'd but I must have one Half-Flask with my Attorney who is
here, as his Clerk says.


Very welcome Gentlemen, here Ralph, George, Humphrey, speak here.


Is Mr. Split-cause the Attorney here.

Yes Sir, show the Half-Moon there.
Speak there, they have rung thrice in the Bear.

Anon, anon Sir. Anon, anon Sir.

Anon you Dogs, can't you hear? I'll try if you have Ears, I'll lug ye.

Come Rogues, cant you feel, if you can't hear.

Dance ye Dogs, we'll make you frisk.

Murder! murder.

Ye Rogues, I'll teach you to wait, you Spaniels! you Curs.

Gentlemen what's the matter? Why do you abuse and beat my Drawers.

Nay then, Rogue, lay hold on him Footmen.

Gentlemen what do you mean?

To swinge you most exceedingly, Rascal.

To learn you the reverence due to a Gentleman, Sirrah.

Hold him sast, first let's demolish;
Now as a Correction of greater Dignity to your Person, you shall be tossed in
a Blanket, and not kicked, and we'll toss fair.


Hold, hold Gentlemen for Mercies sake, and I will do any thing in the world.


We'll let him go on his good behaviour.

This must be Sir W. Rant, and his Company, most certainly.

Look you Puppy, we intend to swagger, roar, and drink bloodily, and domineer
in the House by our selves.


I beseech you Gentlemen.

Dam me, what do you mutter?

No Sir, not I in the least, do your pleasure Sir: Plague on 'em they'll undo
my House.


You harbour a Company of Tradesmen, who should be at home, minding of their
Callings, and solacing their Wives.


Attorneys, and Students, and Clarks; I warrant you.

Grave men and men of business drink, and come to Taverns!

It must not be, I will reform these Exorbitances, and you shall find us
Drunkards do more good than all the Formal, Hypocritical, Nonsensical
Magistrates. Fetch us a Flask, and let it be better than our last, as thou
tendrest any member about thee, and if thou value thy late Deliverance.


I will Sir.

We will drink some Bumpers, at thy late Bar, and then begin our Frolics.


A Devil of your Frolics, my house had as good be visited by the Plague, as
such Customers.


Oh that Sir William were here, he'd be in love with us. Come fill round you
Rascal, What Glasses are these? fit for Quakers, Brownists, or Fifth-Monarchy
men, take one your self, now altogether give fire; now to our work.


Well there's no resisting, this same Sir William and his damned Company have
beaten half the Town.


Get you out you Scoundrels, men of Callings, Knaves of business, must you be
swilling at a Tavern, and neglect your several and respective cozening
Vocations?


You Rogues must your poor Wives want your Loggerheads at home, and you be here
idling and spending their Money.


Go ye Scot and Lot Knaves that cheat the Parish, and the poor when you come to
Offices.


Do you mutter, avaunt ye what do ye lacks; And impudent Duns, be gone. Don't I
do it rarely? Come to the next Room.


You idle drunken Puppies, we'll swinge you for your Debauchery, and
Extravagance.


What's this? I'll bring my Quare fremuerunt; the Law's my Buckler.

You Scoundrels stay at home, and make cozening bills for your Clients.


Practice Court-hand, you lazy drunken Rascals.

And never be out at a Knavish Trickum de Leg.

Out ye Rogues, I'll show you the Law

Here's one Rogue still hidden in a Closet.

Mercy upon me, my Uncle.

Oh lack, Oh lack my Nephew! Students of the Law! quoth he?

What a Pox, all must out; 'tis too late to go back: Get you home old Fellow,
interrupt not our pleasures. Get you gone and comfort my Lady if you can;
march, march, I say.


Prodigious! Amazing!

March, march, or I will swinge you extremely.

Murder! murder! Students of the Law!

This was bravely done, Squire.

Admirably performed.

Aye wast not? come let's in, Sir William will be here soon.

These are rare Customers, they have a huge Supper, but what a Pox all I get by
'em.


Hey what has been to do here? The Puppies have been at work already, 'who's
here? what Company have you in your House?


Company, Sir? but one, who have beat all the rest out of my house, blooded all
my Drawers, pulled down my Bar and swinged me off, Company for the Devil: Sir
William Rant and his wicked Crew, I ne'er saw 'em before, and the Devil take
'em before I see 'em again.


Have they a good Supper?

A huge one.

We'll sup with 'em, these are the Rogues that laugh.

Gentlemen, as you love your lives --

Peace Fool, we'll govern your House a little better, come on Friends, let's
make 'em a civil visit by the way of Kick and Cudgel.


So now I shall have Murder in my House:

This beating of Nuncle, was the gallantest action.

Ay what care I.

He could not have been more amazed, if he had seen a Ghost.

Oh Sir William and Gentlemen, your most humble Servant, oh if you had come
sooner you had seen such Scouring.


You scour, you are mere novices, we'll teach ye how to scour.

Thank you sweet Sir Will. we shall be glad to learn, I vow to Gad Sir.

Why look you Gentlemen, you city Puppies, you impertinent conceited Rascals!
Go and swagger at Puddle-dock, but do you think we will suffer such awkward
sneaking Coxcombs, to wench, drink, and scower, to usurp the Sins of Gentlemen.


We will tweak you by the Noses most excessively,

Kick you most plentifully.

And cudgel you most extravagantly.

I'll take my Oath 'tis mighty well, Ha ha ha.

Come Insects, we will correct your Impudence. Such as you turn Gentlemen, when
you are intended for Pleaders of the Law.


Rarely! Admirably well done!

They tweak damnably hard though.

They do not consider the Tenderness of my Bolt-Sprit.

Get you home Rogues? study the Law, and put cases over a pot of Ale in your
Chambers.


Must such paltry Fellows as you swagger in Taverns, go and pester Ale-houses.


Incomparable! by my Sword, they are the finest Gentlemen in Europe.


Dam me Squire I don't like this.

Gad they kick with Iron toes.

What do you take me to be in Jest?

Ay ay, why Sir are you not?

We'll put you out of doubt of that presently.

Our you Rascals, must you be taken for us? to our utter Scandal,
Get you out.

Ye damned dull imitating Dogs, have at ye.

Why Sir VVilliam, Sir VVilliam, hold hold.

What a Devil do you mean?

Do not provoke me any further.

Provoke? Damn thee out, beat 'em out.

What will become of the Supper?

Come turn out, hang the Supper.

Now Ralph here's Honour to be gotten.

Broken Heads.

Fall on.

Hasten the Serenade, the Morning comes on apace, 'tis almost three.

People will be awake, and then we shall lose the great end
Serenading and Scowering, which is disturbing of Mankind.

Now guilty Wretches in their frighted sleeps,
Start with the Terror of their crying sins:
Now the mean, busy, undermining Knave,
The treacherous Statesman who betrays his Prince,
And Country, rolls, and turns himself about,
The Horror of his crimes admits no rest.

What a Devil is the Fellow mad.

The tender Virgins in soft Slumbers dream,
With Innocence of all the Toys of Love;
When Nature free, and undisguised by Art,
The Genuine Dictates of the mind pursues,
And they are pleased with imitated Joy.

What's the matter man, art thou in a Fit?

Thou art mad Will, that's most certain. but thou hast laid down a true
Doctrine, that women always dissemble, but when they are asleep: But what a
Devil do you mean? if you don't begin your Music, Gad take me, I will roar
most bloodily by my self.


Why don't the Poets always make a man, if he be damnably in Love, in any great
Passion, in Haste, or a Dying, to be full of Similes and long Descriptions?


And because they are Coxcombs, wilt thou be one?

I have extraordinary business in haste, at Three in the Morning, and I must
stop till I make a Poetical Description.


For example. The thirsty Drunkard dreams of Bottle Ale,
Or sucking a whole Barrel from the Tap;
The Oily Cookmaid stretches now, and yawns,
And calls on Dick the Plowman in her Sleep,
Who snores with Fumes from Suffolk Cheese and Bacon:
Green-sickness Maids now dream of Clay and Lime.
Now what a Devil's this to my business if they do? either begin your serenade,
or I will roar and wake your Mistress with my shrill melodious Pipe.


A ganders Pipe has much more Music in it.

Thou sing! she will take it for braying: but come on, Ralph is the Constables
trap set to secure that passage.


Yes it is, they must come this way, 'tis directly from their Guard.

Come then begin.
Hold, the young Ladies window opens, give me the cleft stick, Ralph. Now Tom
for our Billets, good luck go with them, they are they, I see now.

Ladies take these Notes they concern you. Go on, and sing.

Who's at the other window?

My Lady, I warrant you, I must stand close.

My Lady, then I will roar, play my Rant.

This must be my Son and his lewd Associates, but if this were the worst I
could dispense with it.


Rogues, Villains, Thieves,
Robbers, Murderers, hold, hold.

Hold, does the Lady treat from her Castle?

Villains, Thieves, be gone.

Nay then.

Who's there? Follow, follow.

Come on Bell-weather of that Flock of Rascals.

Come Cuckolds, come on Cuckolds.

Follow, follow, follow, knock 'em down.

Here is a Stratagem for ye.

Fall on the Rogues, have at the Dogs.

Heaven! what will become of this! We shall have murder here, Sir VVilliam,
Sir VVilliam.


The door opens and I am called, this must be from the Ladies.

I must sneak away, Top you must along with me, you may do me great service
and your self too.


You may be sure I shall be civil to my self, what e're I am to you.

Sir VVilliam.

Who calls me?

Tis I, follow me.

If Lucifer should lead me into this House, I would follow him.

What are become of these Rogues that have mauled us?

Mr. Constable, the Hectorly Rogues that fell upon you, run into the next
street, and now they have lighted their Flambeaux, and are coming in Triumph
over you, I and my fellow servants came just now out of my Masters house, the
Justice, to assist you: Here's another Stratagem to get off without bloody
Pates.


Have we met you again Rogues? you shall not escape this bout, knock 'em down.


We are civilly serenading.

We'll serenade ye, do you lay snares for us, and beat us when we are down?


What a Devil does he mean now?

Knock 'em down.

Away with them, away with them.

Why, Mr. Constable --

Come Rascals, what do you prate? away with them, 'tis Day-light.

Damned Luck, but 'tis Fortune de la guerre.

Whether do you lead me?

Into full light, if you dare look upon it.

Oh Heaven, my Father!

I wonder not at your surprise, if there be left
But any Seeds of Ingenuity
Within thy hardened Breast, thou could not bear
The sight of me.

It is with great confusion,
That I behold you now, I hardly dare
Implore your blessing.

Heaven turn your heart:
I am glad at least, you appear so much ashamed,
For Shame for Faults ^ one good step to Wisdom;
But what hope can I have, that one short Moment
Can make you turn from your long course of Lewdness,
Such Lewdness as I am ashamed to think of:
Such mean, such foolish Lewdness as has made
Your Name too scandalous for a civil Mouth,
When but even now I saw you in your Pranks -- --

Tis the last time.

Till wicked drink possesses you again,
That bane to Virtue and to common Sense,
That makes you live in a continued Mist,
Without the benefit of one clear thought;
Nature has prudently contrived each Man,
In the worst miseries of humane Life
Would be himself, and I would be I still,
But sordid Drunkenness makes you differ more
From your loved self, than from another Man.

You rouse me, Sir, out of a Lethargy.

Ye think your selves the finest Gentlemen,
When you are most to be despised or pitied,
Not Monkeys can be more ridiculous,
Besides the Infamy you most contract,
In the opinion of the good and wise,
As soon I'd choose a Madman for a Friend,
You vomit secrets, when o'recharg'd with Wine,
You often quarrel with the best of Friends:
And she must be as bold as is a Lioness,
Who takes you for a Husband: Drink in short:
Provokes you to all Folly, to all Vice,
Till you become a Nuisance to Mankind;
You'll say they are men of Wit, but have a care
Of a great Wit, who has no Understanding.

You speak, Sir, like an Oracle.

By Drunkeness you are useless at the best,
Unless as Flies or humble Bees, mere Drones.
What Office is there in a Common-wealth,
A Drunkard can sustain? Unless it be one,
To be a Strainer through which Claret runs,
Your Nerves you weaken, and you drown your Minds;
You're all mere Sops in Wine, your Brains are Bogs;
A Toast is equal to a common Drunkard:
You'll say you have Courage, No, it is not Valour;
Valour is joined with Virtue, never prostitute,
But sacred, and employed to just Defence
Of Prince and Country, and the best of Friends,
With necessary vindication of our Honour:
Yours is a brutal Fierceness that annoys
Mankind, and makes 'em fear and hate you too.

These are unanswerable Truths.

The use of common Whores is most pernicious,
By which, the least you venture is your Nose
And private ones you cannot gain, without
Being a most perfidious Knave, and striking
At the very Root of all Morality.
Have I with such Tenderness bred you up?
With such great care and vast Expense, infused
Whatever you were capable of receiving,
Taught you all Arts that could adorn a Gentleman:
None with such care could cultivate a Plant.

All this with humble Gratitude I confess.

Heaven had endued you with sufficient Wit
And Parts, and you, in spite of these Advantages,
Which might have made you famous in your Country,
To make your self lewd, even to a Proverb!
Is this your sense of Honour, and is this
Your Gratitude to me, after such great Indulgence,
Such good Advice, such tender Love, as I
Have so long showed you? You have so often
Set my Eyes on flowing, that I have wondered
Whence the Moisture came that could supply them.

Good Sir no more you'll break my Heart,
Gentle and kind Reproof I cannot bear.

I gave you such an ample Income,
'Twould have sufficed the most extravagant,
Except your self, and when the Court had offered
Knighthood to me, I made it be bestowed
On you, Not that I think it much of Value,
Unless it be conferred for Merit, but a bait
For women. All this in order to a Wife
I did, and you ungrateful. --

No more, Sir, dear and honoured Sir, pray no more,
You've melted me, and wrought a passion in me,
Which hitherto I've never felt, pray trust me,
And I will be what you will have me,
And, such as you shall never blush to own.

Oh Will, that this conversion were but perfect;
Yet, as it is, I cannot but embrace
And weep over thee.

Oh, best of Fathers, believe me or you kill me.

Come then into my Arms.

I will soon convince you I am
Sincere, for though you have finished my
Repentance, another had begun it.
I had fixed upon the most charming Creature in the World
To be my Wife, and with your assistance, have no
Reason to doubt of success; one, Sir, whom you'll
Approve.

Dear Will, who is it?

It is my Cousin Eugenia, who to avoid the Tyranny of her Mother, which has
been very barbarous, resolves to choose you her Guardian.


This, this, completes my joy, and I shall dote upon thee more than e're I
grieved for thee.


Oh, wicked creature, most abandoned wretch, how dare thou be so impudent to
come within my House, after the great confusion yesterday, and the uproar thou
hast made to Night.


Sister, if thou wilt pardon this, I'll pass my honour he shall never do it
more, 'twas I now brought him in.


You are a fine easy Father if you can hope for his amendment, but I'll see my
Daughters safe; though he has by craft gotten the Key, I have a Watch upon
them.


What does she mean?

There is a Messenger below will not be answered, he has sent up this Letter by
me, but he says he must speak with you, it is a business that concerns you
nearly.


Thus early in the Morning, I'll lay my Life, it is to give me notice of some
lewd design of my Rebellious Daughters. Hah, from Mr. Wildfire: O let me
contain my self.

Where is the Messenger? I must leave you for a while; Brother, pray dispatch
your Lewd Son out of the House: but I have set Sentinels upon my Daughters.


They shall be safe for him, I give you my Honour.

Oh dear, dear Wildfire, thou art a Man of Honour; come, Lattice, bring me to
the Messenger.


'Tis time for you to rest Will, and I'll repose a while.

Sir, let me beg of you not to sleep yet, my Lady has a wicked design of
sending her Daughters into the Country this morning, to keep them Prisoners as
she did before; I have, indeed, provided for a Rescue, but if you please, I had
rather have it done a fairer way.


Well, Son, we will consult about it in my Chamber.

A Pox on it, this has been a damned sober Night, I shall be sick after it; this
is your Love, with a Murrain: A Drunkard, and in Love! You will be as bad
company as a Green-sickness'd Chamber-maid; nay, worse, for she, perhaps, may
be persuaded to take her Cure, Love; ha, ha, ha.


I am convinced, a man will certainly have it e're he dyes, as the small Pox;
look to it, Jack, yet.


Heaven send me the great ones rather, without the help of Sarsa, Guya^um or
Mercury; but prithee, what service can I do thee, Tom?


The truth is, Jack, I have sent a Billet to the Lady you would have Ravished
yesterday and cried; she will come, I believe, very suddenly, hither. Will Rant
and I, have some designs upon her Daughters, which we cannot effect without her
absence. When she comes, I will make way for thee.


Prithee, Tom, let me have a young Wench, I am fit for her now.

If thou hast not love for her, I am sure thou hast malice enough for her;
satisfy which passion thou wilt, so thou keep her from interrupting us.


Ha, this is no ill design, hah; I'll serve you in this, if she thinks me not
too old to please her; I am sure I am young enough to scandalize her. Most of
the young fellows now make love more for Vanity than Lust; they have more of
the first, and less of the last, than any Generation since the Conquest.


The decrepit young fools, were gotten when slavery was breaking in; and
indeed, by their education, were fitted for it; they have no vigour in 'em.
Jack, do thou retire, I'll come to thee instantly.


I will; but do ye hear, Tom, fair play.

Upon my Honour.
Dear, sweet Madam, I am transported beyond my senses.

If I had not believed you to be a Man of shining honour, I would not have
ventured for the World.


Sweet Madam, your Ladyship is come so much earlier than I could have
suspected, that I must go and take order, that no body comes into my House, and
confine my Servants to their several Posts.


Sweet Sir, you deserve to be trusted by a Lady. Oh, thou dear creature, my
heart and eyes yet never felt such charms.


I here him coming, I'll catch him at the door. My dear, dear Strephon.

My dear, dear Phillis.

Ah, who's here, Old Satan.

I thought you had been past the Age of squeaking.

Devil, how came thou here?

Sweet Lady, how came thou here?

Abused, betrayed, undone, by Heaven; they shall not live who have done this.


Oh, Madam, Ladies should not kill but with their Eyes.

This Wildfire promised me assistance, to send my vile rebellious Daughters
into the Country, and sent for me, telling me all was ready.


He was not you see, but you shall find me so.

Oh Beelzebub incarnate, I am confident he is a man of Honour, thou hast
betrayed him; see in what Confusion I am in.


He is a man of Honour, and knowing the great Passion I have for your Ladyship
contrived this Opportunity.


What pimp for thee? and a man of Honour!

Pimp is a foul word, Pimps are Rogues; but men of Honour assist one another in
these necessary matters, and take it for a point of Honour.


Where's the Key then, let me out thou old decrepit Tossed.

Hold there, I have some urgent business with you here.

Had I a Dagger or a Bodkin I would dispatch my self and him.

And for old, if I don't convince you, have at you.

Ah ah, murder, help, help.

She squeaks like one of Sixteen, if she could but look so too, I should be
more sharp set; Come sweet Madam, let us be more familiar.


Stand off thou drivelling Drunkard, or I'll scratch thy eyes out.

I can make love like a man, but not like a Cat, I can't caterwaul.

Oh vile, perfidious Villain! Wildfire.

Look you sweet Lady, I can secure my Eyes against your Hands, ah could I have
as well defended my poor Heart, against your Eyes, you had not visited this
place.


Villain let go my Hands.

Madam let go my Heart, in short Madam, I am in Love, here's an Opportunity,
and I will not be baffled, we must come to a close fight.


Avoid thou worst of Devils.

If Ladies will be civil, Jack Top can be so too, but if not, though he uses
not his Hands, yet he can use his Tongue and publish Frailties on so; consider,
be not perverse, come, come, nay don't put me to wrestle, if you put me to two
Exercises, I may fail you at one.


Oh impudent old Devil!

Hold hold, Sword and Eyes are too much, for my single Weapon.
Fare you well.

Oh Heaven and Earth he has locked me in! Oh damned Villain, Villain! Wildfire,
let me see if I can make any body hear out of the Window, I shall run mad,
Confusion seize these Rascals.


Why Sir, do you make this so nice a point of Honour? when you may save us two
from Ruin.


Sir on my Knees I beg your Protection.

And I on mine, or I by all that's good, will fling my self on any one, that
will defend me from my Tyrant Mother.


I cannot, will not, bear her Cruelty.

Can so much Beauty be denied Sir?

Ladies your humble Servant.

Who is this, Son?

Mr. Wildfire, you knew his Father, a man of Quality and of great Estate, who
is a convert to that Lady, as I am made to this.


I knew him well, he was a sober honest Gentleman.

Sober and honest! Gad take me that's impossible.

My old Acquaintance! Mr. Top your Servant.

Mr. Rant, a Miracle! who thought to have seen you here?

You will have your Jest still.

No faith I am in earnest, I have known an honest man that could not, but I
never knew one honest that would not drink, Knaves durst not trust themselves
with drink, it draws the Scene, and discovers them.


How the Devil came you here?

You left me with the Devil, she whipped out my Sword, and if I had not run away,
had run me through, but I left her safe, here's the Key.


Good sweet Uncle, consider our sad case, and give an Answer.

Ladies now is the time, your Mother's absent, and is safe for some time, if
you will take this opportunity, there's a Coach and Six, and half a score men
well armed and mounted, Sir Williams and my Servants, that will conduct you
where you please.


We are obliged to you Sir, but I fear the Reputation of such an Escape would
be worse than our Confinement.


Sir I beseech you, consider and accept of their Guardianship.

Now Sir or never, make us happy in your care of us, for let my Sister be as
scrupulous as she will, I will lay hold on these Gentlemen's favour, and fly any
where, so it be from my Mother; but Gentlemen we must not have you with us.


Well my fair Nieces I'll protect ye, on my honour be it.

We fling our selves wholly on you Sir,

We trust your Honour, and will in every thing obey you.

I never will command, but what you please.

Now Madam you are happy, will you not pity my case, who still am miserable.


Would you wish me to love any man till I am assured he loves himself, you now
are your own greatest Enemy.


Since I hope you will now be more easy of access, I shall with the greatest
Duty and Respect I can, make approaches regularly, and show you I am become
another man.


E're I shall have the Impudence to beg one Favour of you, I shall be glad to
hear of your amendment Sir.


Why Tom, Tom, this is a vile repenting strein, as if thou were showing thy
parts at the Gallows, why dost thou not lay this Lewdness upon Sabath breaking.


And ill Company Jack, Old Seducers and Corrupters.

Will you be still hard hearted, this is a day of Jubilee, and you should do
some generous Act of Mercy.


No, there is a great deal to be said, and a great deal to be done, I must see
a Sample of your New Life.


My Life is in your Hand, dispose of it, and direct it as you please.

You call this Love now, all Cant, Cant, and sillyer than Gypsies Cant: what a
Pox you are none of you in Earnest.


Oh Brother good morrow, how do you, I was typsied last night, but they tell me
you were disturbed with Roysters, and scowreing Rogues, I protest and vow I
never heard them, but the Constable has brought them before me, here in the
House, I'll order them. Hah Gentleman he does not mean you, are you brought by
the Constable? Oh here he is.


Here are the Scowrers that beat us, and wounded us, there are two of my Watch
almost killed, and several lamed, they broke Windows, roared and disturbed your
Worship too, all Night.


Oh Heaven, my Nephew! Oh Villain, profligate Villain, my Nephew! But you shall
find Justice is blind, do you remember Rogues, what you did, beat me, and lamed
me.


What a Pox care I, why did you come in the way of our Scouring? Prithee old
Nuncle content your self, I am out of your Hands, and I will fling off the
remainder of your City breeding, and swagger, roar and scour, like a Gentleman
of the Suburbs.


Here Clerk, make their Mittimus, and I'll send 'em to Newgate.

I think Sir, you are one of those Gentlemen, that we beat and kicked very
much, last Night.


Send me to Newgate? Let me speak in your Ear, how much Treason did you talk
before me and my Friends?


What Healths and Confusions did you drink?

What secret Correspondence, and who invited the French Fleet last summer?


By these ten bones, all shall out if you presume.

I shall be hanged. What says the Rogue? Go out Constable and Watch into the
next Room, leave your Prisoner.


Oh Heaven and Earth are they here! betrayed, abused, most villainously abused!
Oh thou old Devil in Grain, and thou worst of all, thou base dishonourable
Rascal.


Why Chicken, Chicken.

Make their Mittimus, I'll give you sufficient Reason, sit in your Seat of
Justice, and give me my Oath.


I will Chicken, I will.

What can this mean?

Madam let me advise you, you will suffer in your Honour. This Ring will be
testimony.


I'll swear you stole it from me, and you shall be hanged for it:

Top and my man are better evidence, Madam.

Thou most detestable malicious toad.

Stir not this matter farther, if you do I'll tell all I know, and more.

What has my rashness brought me to, I will run into a mad-house, and never
see the world again.


Why Chicken, I am ready, lay thy pretty hand on the book.

Hold Madam, pray make good your bargain with me, did not I agree to give you
5000l. for one of your Daughters.


Out you impudent Rascal; does all the world conspire-against me!


What a Pox, what a Devil are you mad? Ounds I'll turn again.


Sister, sister, I beseech you contain your self.

I cannot contain, will not contain, Flesh and Blood cannot contain, never Lady
was so betrayed, abused, and disappointed; Hell take you all.


Oh Ladies have pity on me, I believe some Rogue that had a mind to marry me,
gave me Deutery last Night, and I was disguised and lost the Key too, and my
Lady has discharged me, to beg in my old Age.


Fear not, we'll provide for you.

Will you not provide for me, Madam, or at least give me some hopes.


And can you, Madam, can you have the heart to use your Conquest to destroy me?


I know of no conquest of mine, nor will I believe it till I see you have
conquered your self.


What time will it require to satisfy you of my conversion?

Why you must be at least a years Probationer before you enter into the vow of
Chastity, if I believe you then.


Twill be a thousand without you, Madam, I hope you will relent.

It must be a Year at least, and then, for ought I know, you may serve longer.


You are absolute, and must govern me, I'll strive by all the Services. I can
to mollify your Heart.


The Pomps and all the Vanities of this wicked Town you must renounce.


Wine, Women, and base Company.

Upon my Knees I vow to it.

And I for ever to observe it.

I will be Umpire in this Business, and I doubt not but to bring my Nieces to
Reason.


What are you disposing of my Ladies Daughters without her Consent.


No Sir, nothing shall be done without her Confent, I will convince her, of
what e're I do shall be to her Honour, and her Daughters Advantage.


Where's my Wife in the mean time? I forbid the Banes.

Sirrah, Coxcomb, if you speak one word I'll slit your VVindpipe.

Very well, very well, no more to be said: Pox on him; I begin to hate him now,
I don't think him a fine Gentleman.


Why what a Devil are you mad? I thought you had been Drolling, or Fooling all
this while, are you in earnest?


Most certainly.

And I, Jack, we must part.

Ha, ha, ha, fine Fools, turn sober Sots, give over all Vanities, as you call
'em, for the greatest Vanity on the Earth, Matrimony! you may leave any other
Vanities when you please, but that will stick to you with a Vengeance. Matrimony
ha, ha ha, there's nothing in the world worth being in earnest, I am sure not
being sober, 'tis all a Farce.


I hope for, old Acquaintance, you will embrace this motion, reform, and live a
sober Country Life, then we shall be Neighbours.


Reform, quoth he, 'tis a pretty age, at Five and Fifty to begin to lead a new
Life: No, no, I have gone too far to retreat, I must charge through, I'll drink
like a Fish, these Fifty Years, these Fellows will be at Asses Milk, within six
Months, and dye of the Pip soon after.


This old Gentleman's a gallant man, Godsookes, I'll whore, drink, swagger and
scour while I live.


Ah brave Squire.

Oh noble Squire.

Farewell you Apostates, sneaking sober Sots, go marry, marry, you are fit for
no other purpose.


So Brother, I have lost a Nephew, you have found a Son.

Old Habits are with Difficulty broken,
And Fools are ever found most obstinate;
But the least Seeds of Wit with Understanding.
Will in some time spring up, and grow and thrive,
And bear down the rank VVeeds of Vice and Folly.

Ladies your Charms a miracle have wrought,
And early us home to our selves have brought;
No power but Love could thus call back a stray,
From all the crooked Paths, to the right way.

But where Wit, Beauty, Virtue keep the Field,
As Prisoners at discretion, all must yield,
Those Forces joined, subdue all Vanities;
The most compendious way of being wise,
Is to be Convert to a Ladies Eyes.

NOW Lady Mothers, you who frown to Day,
Will be thought like the Lady of this Play;
You'll not condemn your selves, but like bad Faces,
Loath the Reflections, and abhor true Glasses:
But know all, by these Presents; there's no way
But Gentleness, to make ripe Girls obey:
Used ill, if they have Beauty, Wit, or Sense;
They will rebel in their own just Defence.
You in your selves, from Grandam Eve should find,
The true Perverseness of a Woman's Mind,
To what is most forbidden, most inclined;
What sharply to your Daughters you deny,
You fire their Curiosities to try:
They think when strictly kept from all Mankind,
There's much more in it than afterwards they find.
Your selves, go Flaunting to all public Places,
Exposing all you can, your Feeble Graces,
Darting weak Rays from your Autumnal Faces.
Heaven knows true Languishing of Eyes you show,
When e're you mince, and simper at a Beaux;
High Dresses, and rich Pettieoats will tell us,
That all your Ornaments you wear at Fellows;
Like Woodcocks, or like Teagues pursued, you hide
Your Heads, and think your Body's unespy d;
Your Daughters find you out, and will obey,
What e're they see you do; not hear you say.
The Gaudy Mother hates the Daughters sight,
Whose dazzling Beams Eclipse her glimmering Light;
She must the Visitants but seldom see,
And when admitted to the Company,
With down cast Looks she enters, and afraid,
She sneaks like an offending Chamber-maid:
With tossed up Head, she must be snubbed and chidden,
And Mothers dear Delights to her forbidden;
This begets Scorn, how can one stand in awe,
Of a vain Tawdry, Amorous Mamma.
Of these the Poet must despair to Day,
They will be mortal Foes to him and's Play.
While these frail Dames the Author does expose,
The Lustre of the Good, that clearly shows,
From them a Plaudit must not be denied,
The Witty, Fair ones, must be on our side,
So much their Power by him is magnified.
We show you how your vigorous Beams t'exert,
Young vicious men to Conquer and Convert:
Firm to our selves we always have a way,
To make the fiercest Beast, Wild man, obey.
SQuire of Alsatia.

Bury-Fair:

True Widow.

Amorous Bigott, or, Teague O Devilly, the Irish Priest.

The Scowrers. All 5 Comedies, and Written by Tho. Shadwell.

Fortune-Hunters, a Comedy; written by Captain Carlisle.

Widow Ranter, or, the History of Bacon in Viginia; a Tragi-Comedy.

Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom; a Tragi-Comedy.

Sir Patient Fancy; a Comedy.

The feigned Courtesan, or a Nights Intrigue; a Comedy: all four written by
Mrs. A. Behn the Author of the Rover, and Emperor of the Moon.

English Friar, or the Town-Sparks a Comedy; written by Mr. Crown, author of
Sir Courtly Nice.

Female Prelate being a History of the Life and Death of Pope Ioan; a Tragedy
written by Elk. Settle.

Mr. Anthony a Comedy; written by the Right Honourable the Earl of Orery,
author of Henry V. and Mustapha.

The Devil of a Wife, or a Comical Transformation; written by Mr. Ievon.

Deluge, or the Destruction of the World; an Opera.

Don Carlos, a Tragedy.

Friendship in Fashion, a Comedy.

Titus and Berenice, a Tragedy, with a Farce called The Cheats of Scapin; all
three written by Mr. Tho. Otway.

The Spanish Friar, or, the Double Discovery, written by Mr. Dryden. Circe, a
Tragedy, written by Charles D'Avanant, LLD.

Anthony and Cleopatra, a Tragedy, written by Sir Charles Sedley, Bar.

Lucius Iunius Brutus, a Tragedy, written by Mr. Lee.

The Siege of Babylon, written by Samuel Pordage, Esq

The Sicilian Usurper, a Tragedy, written by Mr. Nath. Tate, with a Prefatory
Epistle in Vindication of the author, occasioned by the prohibition of this
Play on the Stage.

Citherea, or the Enamouring Girdle; by Mr. Iohn Smith.

The English Monarch, an Heroic Tragedy; by Tho. Rymer, Esq

A Congratulatory Poem to His Highness the P. of O. on his coming into England

A Congratulatory Poem to Q. M. on her coming into England.

Ode on the Anniversary of the King's Birth.

Ode on the Kings Return from Ieland; all written by Tho-Shadwell, Poet Laureate
and Historiographer-Royal.

Governor of Cyprus, or the Loves of Viotto and Dorothea, a Novel, in Twelves

The Wanton Friar, or the Irish Amour, 1st 2d part, a Novel, in Twel.

The History of the Inquisition, as it is Exercised at Goa; written in French
by the Ingenious Monsieur Dellon, who laboured 5 years under those Severities;
with an account of his Deliverance. Translated into English. Quarto, price 1 s.

Some Observations concerning Regulating of Elections for Parliament, humbly
Recommended to the Consideration of this present Parliament.

Quadriennium Iacobi, or the History of the Reign of King Iames II. from his
coming to the Crown to his Desertion. Price bound 1s 6d.

Their Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Orange's Opinion about a General
Liberty of Conscience, being a Collection of four Select Papers, viz. 1. Mijn
Heer Fagel's first Letter to Mr. Stewart. 2. Reflections on Monsieur Fagell's
second Letter. 3. Fagell's second Letter to Mr. Stewart. 4. Some Extracts out
of Mr. Stewarts Letter, which were communicated to Mijn Heer Fagell; together
with some References to Mr. Stewarts Letters. Quarto, stitched 6 d.

Miracles of the Blessed Virgin, or an Historical Account of the Original and
Stupendous performances of the Image, called our Blessed Lady of Halle, viz.
Restoring the Dead to Life, Healing the Sick, Delivering of Captives, c. Price
6 d.

A Justification of K. W. and Q. M. of their Royal Highnesses Prince George and
Princess Anne, of the Convention, Army, Ministers of State, and others, in this
great Revolution.


