TO what hard Laws you Comic Writers bind,
Who must at every turn new humour find;
Though the great Masters of the former Age,
Had all the choice of humour for the Stage:
And they that plenteous Harvest reaped so clean,
Their Successors can little else but glean.
Frolic, and Cockwood yet were good and new,
And the Plain-dealer, and Sir Foplin you
Have seen, and justly have applauded too.
Our Author some new humour did produce,
But look not for an unexhausted Cruise.
The task each day grows harder than before;
For as good Poets have brought forth great store,
So Fellows of no Genius, with much Toil,
Still Sweat for humour, which they always spoil:
And by their hints good Comic Pens prevent,
As Whelps stanch Hounds, by foiling of the scent.
^hese wretched Poetitos, who got praise
For writing most confounded Loyal Plays,
With viler, courser Jests than at Bear-Garden,
And silly Grubstreet Songs worse than Tom Farthing.
If any Noble Patriot did excel
His own, and Country's Rights defending well,
^hese yelping Currs were straight loo'd on to bark,
(...) the deserving Man to set a mark.
(...) abject, fawning Parasites and Knaves,
^ince they were such, would have all others Slaves,
Twas precious Loyalty that was thought fit
(...) atone for want of Honesty and Wit.
No wonder Common Sense was all cried down,
And Noise and Nonsense swagger'd through the Town*
Our Author then oppressed, would have you know it,
Was Silenced for a Non-conformist Poet:
In those hard times he bore the utmost test,
And now he Swears he's Loyal as the best.
Now Sirs, since Common Sense has won the day,
Be kind to this, as to his last years Play.
His Friends stood firmly to him when distressed;
He hopes the number is not now decreased:
He found esteem from those he valued most,
Proud of his Friends, he of his Foes could boast.
To all you. Bury Sparks, he bid me say
That every Part is Fiction in his Play;
Particular Reflections there are none,
Our Poet knows not one in all your Town.
If any has so very little Wit
To think a Fop's dress can his Person fit,
Even let him take it, and make much of it.

NOW I hope, Sir, you will acknowledge you see a sweet Town, clean, and finely
Situated, in a delicate Air; here I was Born, here I Sucked my first Breath.


Thus every Coxcomb is big with the praise of the Country and Place of his
Nativity.


All the World says as much of St. Edmand's Bury.


There is indeed some Truth in this; but 'tis not thou, but the Town, is in the
right: for thou would have recommended the Air of the worst Town in the
Hundreds of Essex, had thou Sucked thy first breath in it, as thou say.
But one thing I can tell of thy Town, That it can produce a Blockhead.


You may say what you please of me, Sir, but there are so many fine Gentlemen
and Ladies, so Gallant, and so well bred, we call it little London; and it
out-does St. Iames's Square, and all the Squares, in Dressing and Breeding;
nay, even the Court it self, under the Rose.


I doubt not, but they are given to out-do, as all Imitators are.


Well, you London Wits, will never give any Man, nor any thing, a good Word.


You impudent Rascal! Wit, say you! What, do you call me Names? I had as leive
be called a Pick-pocket, as a Wit. A Wit is always a Merry, Idle, Waggish
Fellow, of no Understanding: Parts indeed he has, but ^he had better be without
'em: Your solid Fop is a better Man; he'll be Diligent and Fawning, always in
the way, and with his Blockhead do his business at last; but your Wit will
either neglect all Opportunities for Pleasure, or if he brings his business
into a hopeful way, he will laugh at, or draw his Wit upon some great Man or
other, and spoil all.


Would I were a Wit for all that. But to give you an Example of the Wit and
Breeding of our Town; there is the Lady Fantast, and her Daughter.


The most perpetual, impertinent, prattling, conceited, affected Jades, that
ever plagued Mankind.


Mercy on me! Impertinent! Why, they're the Flower of Bury. Is not the young
Lady a Beauty too?


I must confess, God has given her one good Face; but by her most insupportable
Affectation, she screws it into twenty bad ones. She has naturally a good
Complexion, becoming good Features; and she, by Art, makes her Face look like a
new White Wall with a Red Lattice.


I hope, you'll grant Mr. Oldwit is a fine Facetious, Witty, Old Gentleman, my
Lady Fantast's Husband.


Almost as arrant an Ass, as thou art. He is a paltry Old-fashion'd Wit, and
Punner of the last Age; that pretends to have been one of Ben Iohn* son's Sons,
and to have seen Plays at the Blackfryers.


You'll be Stoned in the Streets, Sir, if you talk thus in Bury. I warrant, you
will not allow Sir Humphrey Noddy to be a Wit, and a fine Gentleman.


A Blunt, Noisy, Laughing, Roaring, Drinking Fellow; as troublesome as a Monky,
and as Witless as a Jackdaw. He is, at best, but a Wag.


Well, Sir, say what you please, he is a fine Gentleman, and will make a Man
burst a Vein to keep him Company; he has Wit at will, that's certain.


If the Rogue had no more Money at will, he'd dye in a Ditch.


Will no body at Bury please you? What think you of Mr. Trim? he's accounted
the finest Gentleman in all Bury, for Breeding and Civility, and the like.


Now you have hit on it: He is a most Complete, and finished Fop: Nature has not
been negligent, nor Art been Idle, in his Composition. He is very Wise,
Reserved, full of Forms, and empty of Substance; all Ceremony, and no Sense:
more troublesomely ill-bred with his Formality, than a High-shoo'd Peasant with
his Roughness. Sir Noddy and he are two excellent Fops in Consort!


Fops! Mercy upon me! You will be accounted a Mad-man, if you talk thus at
Bury.


Yes, among Fools.


Why, they are those that carry all the Town before 'em.


No doubt on it, I never knew a Town yet, wherein the Fops do not carry all
before 'em: They are a numerous, Impudent, and Noisy Party; while the Wise and
Ingenious are Few, Modest and Reserved. There are Men of Wit, Honour, and
Breeding; and Women of great Wit, Beauty, and Ingenuity, and Well-bred too, in
this Town, which is really a sweet Town; but these pretend to nothing: Your
pretenders never have any thing in 'em.


Hold, Sir, here is Mr. Trim.


Sweet Mr. Wildish! I am your most humble Servant; and cannot but congratulate
those auspicious Stars that brought you hither, to render this Town, and your
Friends in it, happy by your presence.


You do me Honour, Sir.


Coming abroad to participate of the freshness of the Morning, among our Bury
Gallants; the thrice fortunate rencounter with one of your Train, put me in
mind of paying that Tribute of my Service which I long have wished to pay: But
my wishes have often been frustrated, for want of that happy opportunity of
kissing your hands, which I now enjoy.


Your great Civilities are surprising; really your Generosity is as much beyond
my expectation, as it is above my Merit. What an Engine is this Fop.


It is impossible that we of Bury, who I may say with modesty enough, have no
small Fame for Breeding and Civility, can ever be so obnoxious to that
Stupidity, or neglect of either, as not to value the great Honour done to us,
and the cohonestation of us, by your arrival at Bury at this time of the Fair:
Which will add to the wonted gaiety and Splendour of the Place and Season.


You astonish me, with your most admirable Address, and Complaisance: and I
think there lives not, among the race of Mankind, a person more skilful in all
Decencies of Behaviour, compleatness of Expression, Gestures of Body,
Modulations of Voice, and all those Arts of Modish Gallantry, which might
render a man the Mirror of Courts, and the Wonder and Example of all other
places.


Rarely done on both sides! Oh how their Tongues are hung!


Be pleased to sit.


Oh Lord, Sir, while you are on your Feet! Sure I can never live to be blotted
with that odious Soloecism in Manners. Nay, Sir, I beseech you.


Sir, you will catch cold.


I had rather catch any thing, than the Infamy of ill Breeding.


Well, Sir, how stand Affairs at Bury?


Singularly well, Sir; the amenity of our Situation, together with the equal
Temperature of the Climate, produces in us that serenity of Mind, that Bury
seems to be the Habitation of the Graces and the Muses.


Bury indeed seems to be the Scene of Beauty, Wit and Breeding.


'Tis a great Honour to us, to hear this pronounced by a Person, who is no less
Eminent in Wit, than celebrated for Humanity, and Decency of Deportment.


A Pox on this Puppy! Two such more, would drive me out of Bury, before I see
my Mistress, the Creature of the World I am most passionately in Love with.


You, that make so noble a Figure among the nimble and quick Spirits of the
Age, and are such a Top Wit, that all England rings out your Fame!


Pray thee, Mr. Trim, what e're you do, don't call me a Wit; 'tis good for
nothing in this Age, but to undo a Man: I shall be hunted for a Wild Beast. But
pray, what Lady rides Admiral here at Bury?


O Lord! who should, but Madam Fantast, the sweet Lady Fantast's Daughter? a
Paragon of Beauty, and a Mirror of Wit and Breeding! at once the Envy and
Wonder of the Sex and Age! She bears the Flag of Wit and Breeding on the main
Topsail of her Beauty.


How does Mr. Oldwit's young Daughter? I saw her in London last Easter-Term:
She is the prettiest Charming Creature my Eyes ever beheld!


She is indeed a pretty Bud of Beauty: and if she Blossoms under the Sun-shine
of my Lady Fantast's Favour, and her Daughters Example, she will flourish;
otherwise not.


Very concise and dogmatical. Fantast's.


I, I am her humble Admirer, her Adorer: I call her Dorinda, and she honours me
with the name of Eugenius. I visit her daily.


Nick-names and Visits! then there's somewhat more between you, in faith Mr.
Trim.


Upon my Honour, nothing but a certain creeping correspondence; a Conversation
that savours somewhat of Gallantry, mixed now and then with Ombre, Crimp,
Comet, or Uncertain; and sometimes we read an Author, or so.


Or so! Hark in your Ear.


Sir, I am astonished to think I shoud be obnoxious to that Infelicity to be so
mistaken: and I must tell you, Sir, I scorn your words.


I did not think it had been a Dishonour to a man to lye with a pretty woman.


I would not for the whole World: Nor ever did. Mistake me not, unless I were
Married.


What a Devil do we all run after 'em, and keep 'em company for, and Dance, and
play the Fool, but in ordine ad?


I visit all the Ladies for their Conversation, for the excellence of their
Conversation.


Conversation! That is so frivolous, it were not to be born, but for something
else that shall be nameless: and I'll tell you one thing, Mr. Trim, That any
Woman you keep company with, who does not think you have a mind to lye with
her, will never forgive you, to my knowledge.


Their Conversation does infinitely transcend men's, I assure you: I have
studied the Sex.


I'll tell you one thing more: That you must never be alone with a Woman, but
you must offer, or she knows you care not for her: Five to one but she grants:
But if she does not care for you, but denies, she's certain by that you care
for her, and will esteem you the better ever after.


Oh uncharitable Sentence!


Come, you and I'll sup together, and be merry; and two or three Bottles will
make you freer, and more open-hearted.


I never Sup: We of the better Rank never Sup, at Bury.


How? not Sup!


No.


Nor drink a Bottle?


Never between Meals: We do indeed divert our selves with some Milk-Pottage in
the Evening; that's all.


Now, now this Rogue's my Rival: I shall Tease him, ere I have done with him.


Sir Humphrey, forbear; I pray forbear: You'll be the death of me.


How now? what, will not this Fool cut the other Fool over the Pate? Shall I
have no Sport with 'em?


I shall break a Vein, if I keep you company, you arch Wag you. Mr. Wildish, I
am come to kiss your hands: you are welcome to Bury-Fair.


Sir, I am your most humble Servant: you honour me with this Visit.


Dear Ned, let me kiss thee! Ah, Ned, that night I saw thee at Newmarket!


Which was the first night I ever saw the Puppy.


I shall never forget it. Ah, 'twas the merriest Night!


Ay, 'twas so: we talked of nothing but Cocks, Dogs, and Horses.


Not a word. 'Twas the bravest Night! But I was too hard for, and out vapour'd
all the Jockeys and Cockers; and after that I hunted over a bottle. Here
Jowler; hey Venus! and we roared so till four in the Morning; that, Gad take
me, between you and me, I was deaf on both Ears for three weeks after; I have
scarce recovered one Ear yet. I would give Fifty pound for such another night.


Sir, I must tell you, your Deportment is very undecent, and savours much of
ill Breeding: And I would desire you would please to explain your self, in this
particular.


Puh! Waggery, mere Waggery. Dear Jack, kiss me: Honest Jack, I love to be
familiar with my Friends. Jack, Jack, dear Jack! nowns Jack!


Jack, Jack, Jack! Familiar! I must tell you, Sir, I cannot brook the Roughness
of your Demeanour; the consequences whereof may produce those effects, as may
not be agreeable to those decencies required in Conversation. But I shall at
present take my leave, and visit Ladies, Sir, I kiss your hands.


Sir, your most humble Servant.


Mr. Oldwit, I am your most faithful Servant.


Your Servant, sweet Mr. Trim. Well, Sir Humphrey Noddy, go thy ways; thou art
the Archest Wit and Wag! I must forswear thy Company: thou'lt kill me else.


Hanged, a pox on it, what is this World worth, without wit, and waggery, and
Mirth? I love to be merry.


Plague on him; his Mirth is the melancholiest thing in the world.


You saw, Mr. Wildish, how I run down Fellows at Newmarket, with my Jests and
my Tricks: They took me for a Put; but I outroar'd 'em all, i'faith, and could
have put them all in a Mouse-hole.


How does my Lord, your dear Friend, and Patron?


Oh, Sir, his Lordship is in good Health. He is no body without we poor Man: he
loves Wit, and good Company; I'll tell you, I'll tell you --


Now we shall hear some Wit and Waggery!


'T'other day we were a Hunting, and at a cold Scent; one of his Gentlemen
being alighted, stood by a Plash of Water: I sneaked behind, and pushed him, I
vow to Gad, up to the Knees.


Good, Good: Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha. But, if you had seen his Lordship laugh: the Water trickled down
his Honours Cheeks: then one Ieremy stood staring; I called him loudly and
suddenly, and held my Fingers thus: he turned suddenly, and hit his Nose such a
Bump, that all the Blood gushed out. Ha, ha, ha.


Look you there: Ha, ha* ha. Well, well.


But if you had seen his Honour Chuckle and Laugh, till he was black in the
Face! I twirled another Fellows Hat over a little River, that was not
Navigable; and he was forced to go a Mile about to fetch it: I thought my Lord
would have killed himself! He desired me at last to forbear; he was not able to
endure it.


My Lord is a very merry Man.


Ay, Gad take me, as any's upon the face of the Earth. But, how goes Wit at
London?


You are the chief Genius, the high Wit of the Age.


Prithee, Mr. Oldwit, lay not that to my charge; you had as good accuse me of
Felony.


Ne'er talk of that, your Pen has betrayed you; and we look upon you here, to
be the choicest Wit of the Times.


And, i'faith, we can show you Wit at Bury too.


What, a Devil, you wont make a Wit of me, in spite of my Teeth, will you?


No, Nature has made you a Wit. Why do you take it ill? I think it the
greatest Honour can be done to a Man. I my self, simple as I stand here, was a
Wit in the last Age: I was created Ben Iohnson's Son, in the Apollo. I knew
Fletcher, my Friend Fletcher, and his Maid Ioan: Well, I shall never forget
him, I have Supped with him, at his House, on the Bankside: He loved a fat Loyn
of Pork of all things in the World: and Ioan, his Maid, had her Beerglass of
Sack; and we all kissed her, i'faith, and were as merry as passed.


This was enough to make any Man a Wit.


Puh! this was nothing: I was a Critic at Blackfriers; but at Cambridge, none
so great as I, with Jack Cleaveland: But Tom Randol and I were Hand and Glove:
Tom was a brave Fellow; the most Natural Poet!


They were brave Fellows, but you VVits now a days, out-top them all.


Zounds, I will have nothing to do with Wit, I tell you!


Pshaw, pshaw! but I was telling you, you have seen many pretty things, that
were written in those Times, that were mine. For Example: One Mr. Murial, a
Fellow of Pembroke-Hall, had a Horse dyed; I writ this upon it. Now Cruel Mors
Has ta'n the Horse
Of Mr. Murial:
Ye Scholars all,
Of Pembroke-Hall,
Come to his Burial.
Ha! hum! hum! Nay, I was good at Epitaphs, both of Man and Beast.


Ha, ha, ha; admirable good, i'faith, Mr. Oldwit!


Why, this was Wit all over! You were an errant Wit!


And that Translation too was mine.

Mittiur in disco mihi Piscis ab Archiepisco
Po, non ponatur quia potus non mihi datur.
I sent a Fish,
In a great Dish,
To the Archbish.
Hop was not there,
Because he gave me no Beer.
Was not that Lucky? Ha? humh? anon?


Most incomparable:


I was such a Rakehell, I would needs be a Wit, My Friends soon perceived I
could not be a Divine; so they sent me to the Inns of Court, and there,
i'faith, I peppered the Court with Libels and Lampoons: my Wit was so bitter, I
escaped the Pillory very narrowly, between you and I. But then, for good
Language, and strong Lines, none out did me.


Why, thou were a most Plaguy Wit indeed!


Ay, Faith: and the Poets were so in awe of me! You must know, I was a devilish
biting Fellow: Why, we had a couple of your Poets here: Sir Humphrey, and I
made nothing of 'em, i'faith.


Gad take me, they were but silly Fellows: and yet, they say, they were Cock
Poets.


That may very well be: we have Poets, as pretty Fops as any about Town; and
are fitter for Subjects of Comedies, than Authors of any thing.


Sir, my Lord Bellamy is come to Town: and my Lady bid me tell you, she has
invited him to Dinner.


Ha! my Lord come to Bury! Gad forgive me, what's the matter? ha?


What's this? what, are we linked together?


Oh, you wag, you wag; this is Sir Humphrey! Ha, ha, ha. You'll never give over.


No, faith; not I.


Go home: I'll follow you.

Mr. Wildish, pray Honour my House at Dinner.


I will, my Lord Bellamy's my great Friend.


You shall have Sir Humphrey too; i'faith, we will be merry, and turn the House
out of the Window.


And I will Roar, Roar most exceedingly.


Your humble Servant.


Your Servant, Sir, we shall see you?


I will wait on you. Here, Roger my Gloves, Handkerchief, and my Sword. My dear
Bellamy in Town! This is a happiness I dreamed not of: I thought he had been
retired from the World, and would not come to so public a place. You Puppy,
these are your VVits, and fine Gentlemen, I have been Plagued with! A curse on
'em! What must I undergo, for the sake of my Love!


I took 'em, Sir, and so do most here, for fine Gentlemen; but I wonder Mr.
Oldwit is so merry after his Disaster: And yet Sir Humphrey would make a Man
burst.


What Disaster?


Why, Sir, his eldest Daughter, a great Fortune by her Mother, (his first
Wife; for he has had three) about four Months since, fled, the night before he
was to have Married her to a fine Bury Gentleman.


I heard so; but she has sent a Letter, to let him know, that she will not be
forced to Marry: And for that end, she will not appear till the day after she's
at Age to dispose of her self; and that then she will; and is in the mean time
safe, beyond his enquiry.


The young Daughter is a great Fortune by her Mother, who was an Heiress.


He has had a lucky hand at Heiresses: but I must find out my dear Bellamy.


My Kinswoman, who recommended thee, Charles, to my Service, told me, thou were
a Young Gentleman of the North, whom she knew and was of Kin too, and that thou
had left thy Guardian for harsh usage: And she engaged me to conceal and
protect thee.


I can assure your Lordship, I have done nothing that can make you blush to own
me.


I believe thee, my Kinswoman made me give my word to inquire no farther; and I
have kept it.


You have, my good Lord.


I see thy Education has been good, and find thou art a virtuous Boy, and so
ready in thy Service; thy diligence has almost out flown my thoughts; yet it
has kept pace with my desires: and every thing thou dost, thou seem to do
with pleasure.


I should be wicked else, having so excellent a Lord and Master.


I use thee not as other Noblemen their Pages, who let Gentlemen's Sons ride at
the Tails of their Coaches, crowded with rascally Footmen: 'tis a French mode;
they used formerly to give 'em the same Education with their Sons, which made
their Fortunes; and 'twas a Preferment then, for a Gentleman's younger Son:
Now, they are bred to Box and Dice, and Cheat with the Footmen; after they're
out of Livery, perhaps they turn to the Recreation of the High-way; or the top
of their Fortune is to take up in some Troop, and there's an end of 'em.


I must confess, your usage of me has been so Noble, that all the Service of my
Life, can never make return.


Thou art too grateful. Thou Charm'st me too with thy pretty Voice: I'll breed
thee up to be my Friend. But, prithee, what's the reason that thou, who hast
been ready to fly at my Command, hast seemed to be uneasy, and unwilling, to
come to Bury?


'Tis the public time of the Fair, when Men of ^ll Countries flock hither;
and, as I told your Lordship, I was afraid of being discovered, and that my
Guardian would find me out, and seize me: and, Heaven knows, I had rather Dye,
than leave so good a Lord.


Kindest of Youths, I love thee so, I will not part with thee, let who will
discover thee.


My kind, good Lord, let me kiss your hands.


Besides, thou need not be seen in the Fair; only I am to Dine at Mr.
Oldwit's to day.


At Mr. Oldwit's! what do I hear?


Thou art my little Friend; I come to make love to his Daughter: She knows me
not; but I have seen her, and am extremely taken with her: the old man and I am
agreed. I must entertain her with some Music: I know thou'lt lend me thy Voice.


Oh Heaven and Earth! what killing words are these! Ah me!


Why dost thou sigh?


If your Lordship Marries, as no Lady sure can resist you, I shall be cast off.


Prithee think not so, dear Boy; thou art too secure of my kindness for that.


I ne'er shall please your Lady. Besides, the Ladies never can endure their
Lords favourite Servants.


I give thee my Hand, I'll never part with thee, till thou quittest me.


I'll quit my Life when I do that. Oh fatal hour, wherein I saw those Eyes! How
many years of Misery are like to hang upon it!


Ned, my dear Ned, welcome to my Arms! This is a happy Surprise.


My dear Bellamy! my dear Peer! I could not embrace a Mistress with more
Ardour! I thought you had been so retired, I had lost you.


That was your fault: I have as pleasant a House and Seat, as most in England,
that is thine as much as mine, Ned.


But 'tis in the Country; a pretty Habitation for Birds and Cattle: but Man is
a herded Animal, and made for Towns and Cities.


So many Pens of Wild Beasts upon two Legs, undermining, lying in wait, preying
upon, informing against, and hanging one another: A Crowd of Fools, Knaves,
Whores, and Hypocrites.


Hey, my Renegade Country-man: thou had once the Respect due to good Wine,
fine Women, Music, Wit and Sense, and true Pleasure.


For good Wine; I could never be Drunk, but I did some mad thing or other, which
made me ashamed to show my Face. For Women; those that were worth the having,
were hard to come by, and harder to put off; besides, the immorality of the
matter, gave me anxiety of Mind; I saw Men of Wit, when they came to
understanding, gave it over: and, when a thing must be done, 'tis best to do it
quickly.


Thou may as well say, since we must dye, let's hang our selves now: No,
that's time enough, when we are weary of living. At our years, leave Women and
Conve^sation!


He that Debauches private Women, is a Knave, and injures others: And he that
uses public ones, is a Fool, and hurts himself. And for Conversation, 'twas
all run into Parties and Politics, and become Dull and Dangerous: The Living
were such Knaves, I was resolved to Converse with the Dead, in my Study.


But, in this late Scene of Action, the Knaves are pretty well laid open: and,
for all those Parties, we could meet with choice Company, truly honest, and
with whom good Wit and Sense was stirring, and would pass for currant.


Wit and Sense may pass in a Room with honest Fellows, but Noise, and Nonsense,
always carry it in the World.


Pox on this dull Wisdom at our Age! 'tis as unseasonable as Snow in the
Dogdays. Can thou think, my dear Peer, that thy Philosophy can tame the
Vigour of my Appetites?


I will no more suffer my Appetites to Master me, than Fire and Water* they
are good Ministers, while they can be kept under.


I'd not give a Farthing for an Appetite that can be Curbed: My Stoic, I'd
have my Appetites high mettled, and run away with me.


And I must always think a Man a Slave, till he has Conquered himself: for my
part, I had almost as leive be in subjection to another Appetites, as to my
own.


This is Spleen, Wind in the Hypocondriacks pent: Why, thou wilt Prophecy at
least.


Come, dear Ned, we'll debate this matter at more leisure: Time will make you
of my mind: for I observe, all men of Wit Reclaim; and only Coxcombs persevere
to the end of Debauchery. But prithee, what makes thee hereabouts? I'll lay my
Life, there's some Wench or other in the way.


May be, that may be somewhat; but at present I come to ease my self from the
Swearing, Lying, Roaring, Vapouring, Cozening Noise and Tumult of New-Market:
But I thought thou had renounced all Crowds, and should as soon have expected
a Hermit here.


A little time may satisfy you I have reason.


Ha! Bell. what pretty Boy is this? ha!


He is a Gentleman's Son, he serves me at present. I'll tell the more entre
nous: But, in the mean time, he and my little Consort shall entertain you.


This is somewhat.


I will not live like an ordinary Hunting, Hawking Puppy; I'll have my City
Pleasures in the Country: of which good Music being one; I'll spare some
Rogues, some Dogs, and Horses, to have that good.


I have been visited this Morning, by three most confounded Fops, that ever
Plagued me yet; and they talked of nothing, but the Wit and Breeding of Bury:
Trim, Sir Humphrey Noddy, and Mr. Oldwit.


There are those things in Bury, but as 'tis in Religion; least among those who
talk of them most, men are always proudest of their foibles, and keep their
Strength's concealed: If a fellow has but a difficulty of Speaking, or
Stutters, his Tongue will never lye still.


A fellow that has one Leg shorter than another, will never stand still; but
Hop, hop, hop, round, round, round.


Observe any Fellow that has a stinking Breath, as if a Voice were not intended
to be heard but smelt, will speak in your very Nose: and turn round as often as
you will, he turns with you, and your Nostrils must have it. Come begin.


'Tis very pretty; and delicately Sung.


Now I have got thee in the Country, I'll carry thee to my House, and make a
Convert of thee.


Hey! La Roch, what makes you here?


Serviteur, Monsieur; my Lor, vot Serviteur: I see your Laquais below, dat make
me come up to kiss your hands.


How now, Monsieur Cutbeard? what makes you at Bury-Fair?


Dis is de place dat is Fameux for de pretty Garl wid de cheveux blond, de
farie hair: my Man and I come for buy de vite lock, indeed to get de Monee
to make de Pot Boyle, my Lor.


A thought comes into my Head: It shall be so. I will have some Diversion,
while I am here.


Dat be de last Peruke I send your Lordship? Begar, is fine Air, Curl
delicate morbleu: You talk of de Chedreux, he is no bodee to me; dere is no
man can Travaille vid me; Monsieur VVildish has got my Peruke on his Head:
let me see, here is de Hair, de Curl de bouckle, ver good, ver good. If dat
Fool Chedreux make de Peruke like me, I will be Hanga.


Hold, good Monsieur Snip-snap, I have another Employment for you: Were you
ever here before?


No.


That's well. I must have you be a French Count. I remember we had a Count de
Briand at London, passed upon the choicest Sparks, and best Bred Men and Ladies:
I will have this Fellow pass upon the Fops of Bury, and amuse the wiser sort.


You will never be without some mad Frolic, or other: But this, certainly must
be very pleasant.


Of all female Creatures, my aversion is to the Lady Fantast, and her Affected,
Conceited, Disdainful Daughter: I will have this fellow personate a French
Count, and make Love to the Daughter.


Ha, ha, ha, de French Count! dat be ver well: ha, ha! Make de Love! begar, I
come for make de Monee. Love! Morbleu, de French Count spend de Monee, de
French Peruke-maker make de French Count, he loosee de Monee.


You shall lose no Money, you Puppy, my Man is acquainted with all this
Country, and shall help your Man to buy the Wenches Hair, the pretty'st Wenches
in England; and if you be a French Count, you shall have the Wenches too; all
the Town will run after you: you'll be courted by every body, feasted, and
invited to Balls, and all Meetings; but the Lady Fantast, and her Daughter,
will be mad after you.


Ha, ha, ha; de French Count, ver well indeed, ha, ha: I make de French Count:
begar, Monsieur, I have de Count of my Familee, I am a Gentleman of France.
Indeed my Parens did condiscent to let me make de Peruke, for I delighted in
it.


Go you Rogue, you shall do this, I am resolved on it, or I'll cut your Throat.
You shall have Clothes and Ornaments of me, here are wholesale men; three or
four Suits for Footmen will do, and we'll help you to the men too. I'll bear
all the Charges; I'll do it, if it cost me a Hundred pound.


Are you in earnest?


Ay, by Heaven, it shall be. You shall be called Monsieur le Count de Cheveux;
you shall be entertained like a Prince: the Women will lye with you, as if the
Devil were in them.


Hah! dat be ver good indeed! I was not bred to make Peruke, it was for my
diversion I did itte: I spent my time among de Gens de Quality in de Academy.


Yes, to Shave them, thou true Picture of a French Scoundrel.


Dere I did appen to kille de Count for my Honneur.


Then there is a Count missing: you shall supply his place.


I flay, they seize on my Land and my Chatteaux; and begar, it was ver well for
me dat I did delight in make de Peruke ven I was young indeed.


This good Breeding of yours will qualify you excellently! Why, you'll be
Adored by the Ladies: But, of all, I charge you to Court Mrs. Fantast; commend
her Wit and Breeding.


Suppose she falls in love with him in earnest!


I'd give a hundred pound to see that. Well, Monsieur le Count, let's to my
Lodging, and fit you for this Enterprise.


Hold, hold: if they find me out, will they not wippe de French Count? Begar, I no
love to be wippe.


Upon my Honour, I'll protect you.


Vel, vel; no more to be said: I am Monsieur le Count de Cheveux. Serviteur
Monsieur my Lor, vot tres humble Serviteur.

Fala ha la.


Come, my Lord, your humble Servant, we are to meet at Dinner: I must about
this business, my Heart is set upon it; 'twill make an Admirable Farce.


Get thee gone, Ned, thou art a mad Fellow: I'll go and take a little Air.


Allons Monsieur: Fa la la la la.
If my wise Conduct you please to rely on,
I'll make as good a Count, as Count de Briand.

WEll, I am weary of the Life I lead here; never poor Creature was so Teased,
as I am still, with my Stepmother, and her Daughter, the Old Cucko and the
Young, that tire me continually with the same Notes of Wit and Breeding: And
having themselves nothing but Folly and Affectation, are always reproaching me
for want of both.


Madam, my Lady Madam Fantast, having attired her self in her morning
Habiliments, is Ambitious of the Honour of your Ladyship's company, to Survey
the Fair.


Here's a foul Copy of one of 'em: I see, this Folly is Contagious. Tell her,
I'll wait on her.


She will suddenly arrive at this Place, where she desires the Interview may be
betwixt you*


I will haste for my Hoods and Gloves, and the rest of my Movables; and be
here instantly.


A fine young Lady this, if she had but half the Wit and Breeding of my Lady.

Madam, Mrs. Gatty will kiss your Ladyship's hands here incontinently.


Come, my sweet Daughter, consider what I have said. Thou art in thy maturity
of blooming Age; I have bred thee to the very Achme and Perfection of Bury
Breeding, which is inferior to none in this our Island; Dancing, Singing,
Ghittar, French Master: And I'll say that for thee, my Jewel, thou hast
Sacrificed all thy Endeavours to attain thy Education; which, corroborated: by
thy Acuteness of Parts, have rendered thee exactly accomplished, and together
with the excellence of thy Beauty, justly admired by the Amorous Males, and
envied by the malicious Females.


To all that, which the World calls Wit and Breeding, I have always had a
natural tendency, a penchen, derived, as the Learned say, Ex traduce, from your
Ladyship: Besides the great Prevalence of your Ladyship's most shining Example,
has perpetually Stimulated me, to the Sacrificing all my Endeavours towards the
attaining of those inestimable Jewels; than which, nothing in the Universe can
be so much a mon gre, as the French say. And for Beauty, Madam, the Stock I am
enriched with, comes by emanation from your Ladyship; who ha^ been long held a
Paragon of Perfection: most Charmant most Tuant.


Ah, my dear Child: I! Alas, alas! Time has been, and yet I am not quite gone;
but thou hast those Attractions, which I bewail the want of: Poetry, Latin, and
the French Tongue.


I must confess, I have ever had a Tendress for the Muses, and have a due
reverence for Helicon, and Parnassus, and the Graces: But Heroic Numbers upon
Love and Honour, are most Ravissant, most Suprenant; and a Tragedy is so
Touchant! I dye at a Tragedy; I'll swear I do.


I must confess, my dear, thy Wit has more of Notoriety, than thy Beauty; since
the pretty various Diversions of thy Pen, have transmitted thy Fame of Wit,
beyond the narrow limits of an Island. But it is now high time to manifest thy
Judgment, in the disposal of thy Person; and thou hast rejected a Multitude of
Lovers.


I am so much indebted to Nature and Education, that I am resolved not
unequally to dispose of that Person, which (without vanity I may say) Nature by
its genuine Bounty, and Art by its friendly Additions, have rendered not
disagreeable, or void of Attraits: But all want of Wit and Breeding, does
affect me with that unconquerable Chagrin, that, eh Good, I cannot suffer such
Fellows.


Mine own dear Daughter, to a hair! And I must confess, we are troubled enough
with it in Mr. Oldwit, his Daughter, and his Companions: Had not my Jointure
been somewhat entangled, I had never had him. But Mr. Trim is as fine a
Gentleman, as the Sun in all his Circuit sees.


Oh, my Eugenius! he is a finished piece of Humanity; but has not the Estate I
would have.


Sir, Humphrey Noddy,


Has a very good Estate, but wants the Noble Accomplishments of my Eugenius,
whom I intend to preserve for my Platonic Servant. Gatty, I have some Minutes
impatiently expected your arrival, that I might do my self the great Honour to
kiss your Hands, and enjoy the favour of your Company into the Fair; which I
see, out of my Window, begins to fill apace.


I got ready as soon as e're I could, and am now come to wait on you.


Oh, fie, Daughter! will you never attain, by mine, and my dear Daughters
Examples, to a more Polite way of Expression, and a Nicer form of Breeding?
Fie, fie, I come to wait on you! You should have said; I assure you, Madam, the
honour is all on my side, and I cannot be ambitious of a greater, than the
enjoyment of the sweet Society of so excellent a Person. This is Breeding.


Ah, this had been a Propos: Observe my Lady.


Breeding! why, this had been a Flam, a mere Flam.


Eh, Mondieu! this had been delicate et bien tournee. Call generous
Complements, Flames.


Thus you had s^own true breeding.


Breeding! I know no breeding necessary, but Discretion to distinguish Company
and Occasions, and Common Sense, to entertain Persons according to their Rank,
besides making a Courtesy not awkwardly, and walking with one's Toes out*


Eh Good, eh Good.


Let me tell you, you are a pert young Thing: you are a Curious Judge indeed,
of the Art of refined Conversation.


Art! Conversation ought to be free, easy, and natural.


Eh Good, eh Good: Sweet Madam, despise not Art. Can there be any Conversation
well dressed, as I may say, without French in the first place, to Lard it?


Some Fops indeed think so, that use it in every Sentence.


Nothing is so Confident as Ignorance.


Ars non habet Inimicum praeter Ignorantem.


Look you there: I have bred my Daughter a Linguist.


A Lady may look after the affairs of a Family, the demeanour of her Servants,
take care of her Nursery, take all her Accounts every VVeek, obey her Husband,
and discharge all the Offices of a good Wife with her Native Tongue; and this
is all I desire to arrive at; and this is to be of some use in a Generation,
while your Fantastic Lady with all those Trappings and Ornaments you speak of,
is good for no more than a Dancing Mare, to be led about and shown.


Eh, mon Dieu! pray forbear, sweet Madam, forbear; I am not able to hear this
Blasphemy against true breeding.


It must needs be pretty French one learns of an Irishman at Bury. I believe
'tis a kind of bastard French.


Good Mrs. Gatty, you are very Confident.


Whatever you do, never speak against Art.


Art stiffens, and spoils Conversation, as Painting does Faces: if you hear
never so many florid Coxcombs, they speak all alike; and see never so many
painted Women, they look all alike.


Eh, mon dieu! Quel fascheux; Ex quovis ligno, c. Mercury's Statue is not made
of every Wood.


Look you, I know your secret cogitations: Because you are so ill bred as to
look like a Tallow thing, and will not improve your Complexion by Art, you
obliquely reflect upon me and my Daughter, for our melioration of Nature.


Come, come, Madam, if you be ready without a Complement, to go to the Fair, I
am ready to go with you; but, by my troth, if you look for Complements, you
must get them somewhere else. Come, I'll lead you.


Ill breeding, au dernier point! Oh, my Chagrin. I kiss your Ladyships hands.


Oh, Mr. Oldwit, would you had been here, you would have heard a fine deal of
ill breeding from your Daughter Gatty.


I was here at part of your discourse, and I heard nothing but good Sense from
her.


Nay, she's like you.


Gad take me, I am glad she is not like you.


I know your ill breeding; but 'tis a shame you have not better cultivated your
Daughter as I have mine.


Cultivate! A Pox on your affected stuff; should I have made her an affected
Ass, to be laughed at, as you and your Daughter are?


Prodigy of Ignorance! my Daughter and I laughed at! Whom even the Court, when
we are there, perpetually Gaze at and Admire; and all the Beauties and Gallants
here make their Court to!


A great many Flutterers do flock about you indeed, as small Birds would about
a Cast of Owls, to wonder at you.


This is most Stupendous.


A Pox on this perpetual Noise about Wit and Breeding! You made my Daughter by
my first Wife run away, with Teasing her, and persuading me to be such an Ass
to press her to Marry one of your formal Fops, against her will, and now you
are plaguing this poor Girl, to make her run-away too, but I have agreed upon
Articles with one that will soon rid you of her.


Most Exorbitant, and Amazing! 'Twere well, if beholding us could do any good
upon her.


No doubt it will; as the sight of the Drunken Slaves did upon the Spartan
Children. There's Wit, and Reading, for her.


Were not we well fortified by Art and Nature, we might be obnoxious to the
taint of your and her most unsavoury Rusticity. While all the Beau Mond, as my
Daughter says, are with us, in the Drawing-room, you have none but Ill-bred,
Witless Drunkards with you, in your Smoaking-room. What punishment do I
deserve, for making Alliance with so much Ill-breeding.


What Plagues have I met with, in marrying an Affected Old Lady; who, with her
Daughter, take themselves to be VVits! Their Tongues never lye still: At
Dinner, they must have the whole discourse; at dinner the Common Crier, were he
there, could not be heard; no, not another Woman. There's my Friend Iuvenal,
for you: Wit and Breeding.


My Daughter and I no Wit, and you have it! this is most Astonishing! Ha, ha,
ha. If ever you had Wit, it is obliterated, antiquated, and buried in the
Grave of Oblivion.


No Wit! Ounds, now you provoke me. Shall I, who was Jack Fletcher's Friend,
Ben Iohnson's Son, and afterward an Intimate Crony of Jack Cleaveland, and Tom
Randal, have kept Company with VVits, and been accounted a Wit these Fifty
Years, live to be Deposed by you?


Ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha. I, that was a Judge at Blackfriers, writ before Fletcher's Works
and Cartwright's, taught even Taylor and the best of them to speak. I cannot go
to London yet, but the VVits get me amongst them, and the Players will get me
to Rehearsal to teach them, even the best of them: and you to say I have no
Wit, I say, you have not, nor ever had, any Beauty.


Nay, now Mr. Oldwit, I can bear no longer. Shall I, that in my Youth Charmed
all the Gallants of that time, even to Fascination; and in my Widowhood, but
five years since, was Adored by Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and captivated
several of their Hearts, be thus Calumniated! Know, I have more Beauty than you
can make use of.


Indeed, towards you, I am somewhat frigid; but some in the World know I have
a Colt's Tooth.


I should serve you right, to have others find out my Colt's Tooth too, though
thou can not.


Thy Tooth! the Devil of one thou hast, but what came out of Bowlane: Three
remaining Stumps there are, that look like three broken Pillars in a ruined
Cloister. And there's Wit for you now, and a Clinch to boot.


Poor Railing Buffoon! there Wit! Well, there are some of another mind,
concerning my Beauty.


Prithee take thy course with them: Whoever commits Adultery with thee, it
must be merely the Act of the Devil; there's nothing of the Flesh in it. What a
Pox, you and your Daughter are notorious, for out-painting all the Christian
Iezebels in England.


'Tis false, rude Fellow: we only use a Wash, and lay on a little Red.


No more does a Wall: but you, for your part, are fain to fill up the Chinks in
your rivelled Skin, as House-painters do the Cracks in Wainscot, with Putty.
Pox on it, you would by Art appear a Beauty, and are by Nature a mere Mummy.
There's Wit for you again. Gad, I'll pepper you with Wit.


Did I not despise thee for thy want of Wit and Breeding, these barbarous
Contumelies would exhaust Tears from my Eyes.


If thou should cry, it would make streaks down thy Face; as the Tears of the
Tankard do upon my fat Hosts Belly-pieces. There's Wit again for you.


Farewell Brute.


Fare thee well. He that would have the Devil more Damned, let him get him to
Marry a She Wit. Now, for the Fair. Here; who waits?


'Tis pleasant to observe the mixture of People here*


Ah, how pleasant 'twoud be, if none but the Beau monde made their promenade
here! but I hate the Canaille.


What do ye lack, Ladies? fine Mazarine Hoods, Fontanges, Girdles, Sable
Tippets, choice of fine Gloves and Ribbands.


Stockings, Silk Stockings; choice of Silk Stockings: very fine Silk Stockings.


All sorts of Essences, Perfumes, Pulvilio's, Sweet-bags, Perfumed Boxes for
your Hoods and Gloves, all sorts of sweets for your Linen, Portugal sweets to
burn in your Chamber. What do ye lack? What do ye buy?


I have no such contempt for the common People: they come near Nature, and have
no Art or Affectation; and there are a thousand Fops made by Art, for one Fool
by Nature.


Oh fie! Odi profanum vulgus, c.


Fine morning Gowns, very rich Indian stuffs; choice of fine Atlasses; fine
morning Gowns.


Will you please to Raffle for a Tea-pot, a pair of Candlesticks, a couple of
Sconces.


Not all the Clouds assembled in the Firmament, can hide, or can eclipse so
muffle the Sun, but we poor Mortals know it shines, and feel the warm effects.
Why should Dorinda think to blunt her pointed Glories, or conceal the Radiant
Lustre of her conquering Beams?


I see, to the quick-sighted Eugenius, nothing is obscure. Nor could Eugenius in
the Dark be hid: that golden Tongue, and that sweet Eloquence would soon reveal
him; as the Proscribed Senator was by his Perfumes betrayed.


How does the bright Dorinda make me blush, when she commends my Eloquence; and
in that very Act so much exceeds me!


Fine! very fine! bien turn! that thought's very recherchee. Observe, Madam:
this is a true Witty and well-bred Gentleman.


Now really, Madam, between you and me, this man appears to me a most
extraordinary Shallow Coxcomb, as one can possibly see in a Summer's day.


Eh Good, eh Good! poor Soul, I pity thee: but, assurement, nothing can be more
engaging than the Wit and Breeding of Eugenius.


I see, there is no contending with Dorinda: she will have the Ascendant over
poor Eugenius; his small Pinnace must strike Sail to her Admiral. Wit.


These Fops are very happy: for if an Archangel should tell 'em they were Fops,
they would not believe it,


Let me present to the fair Dorinda's hands a little offspring of my Brain* the
Tribute of my Morning Service.


I was just going to present Eugenius with the Issue of my teeming Muse, who
was delivered this morning of a Pastoral: I must needs say, she had a good
time, for she had an easy Labour; Aurora Musis amica. But pray let me read
yours first.


Oh, Madam, does your Ladyship hear the News?


What News; Luce?


Oh, Madam, such news, as perhaps may not be ungrateful to your Ladyships Ears.
There is now, even now arrived a Noble French Count; the finest Person my eyes
yet ever beheld: I saw him, heard him speak; he speaks English. He has the
prettiest Charming way! no Lady sure can e're resist him.


Who can this be?


Ha! a French Count? Oh Lord! I am afraid I am not in Order enough: he'll
certainly make addresses to me; how is my dress.


Very French, and very exact.


The report of me has certainly brought him hither. Heaven a French Count, say
you! Now we shall see Breeding in Perfection: and I am glad I shall have the
opportunity of appearing before so great a Judge.


How do you know but this French Count may be an errant Coxcomb?


Oh, Madam, Madam, I beseech you betray not your ill Breeding. A French Count a
Coxcomb! Mon dieu.


It is not, my Dorinda --


When shall our Eyes be blessed with the sight? when, think thou, will he make
this place happy?


My Eyes saluted him first upon the Change: his Landlord, who was with him,
told me what he was; from thence I follow'd him to Cook-row, and so through the
Fair to the Bowling-green* His Air, his Men, and his Deportment charmed me so,
I could not leave him: there I saw him ride the Flying Horse, with his Equipage,
which much delighted him.


Shall we go to the Bowling-green? My expectation is on Tiptoes, till I behold
him.


That's a rare saying! I'll remember that. My expectation is on Tiptoes! Madam,
he is gone from thence, and said he would be in the Fair presently.


This sudden indifference towards me seems abrupt and temerarious!


Fine mellow Pears; fine Burgamy Pears; fine Norwich Pears.


Fine Ginger-bread: very good Ginger-bread.


Yonder's my Mistress; I know her, for all her Mask: I'll present her with a
Fairing.


Madam, 'tis not a Mask can conceal you from a Lover; whether I see you or no,
my Heart will leap up to my Teeth when ever you come in presence; as a dead
Body will bleed at the arrival of the Murderer. Is not that well said, Mr.
Trim?


'Sdeath, my Shins!


Men's Hearts seldom come so near their Mouths.


Madam, let me present you with your first Fairing, a Heart.


Of Ginger-bread.


Ay faith, pretty Lady.


Is it a true Image of your own? Did you sit for it?


Ha, ha, ha; a very good Jest! Udsbud, there's a pair of Gloves of the same
mettle, to stop your pretty Mouth. And, Mr. Trim, here is a Wise Cap, befitting
your Gravity, and the Solidity of your Parts, for you.


Sir, there is an old Adge, that says, Familiarity breeds Contempt: I am past
those Juvenile Joques.


Alas, poor old Gentleman! Come, Madam, walk, and let us see the diversions of
the Fair: I warrant you, I'll make you merry.


Oh, this Count! Did you see the Count?


No; but I hear there's a flaming French Beau come to Town: Will your Lordship
Raffle a bout or two?


The activity of this Monky is as ridiculous as the Gravity of that Paboon.
Wildish here! Down, down my Heart: Thou foolish Heart; why dost thou flutter
so? I see he is thus far a Man of Honour: If all he says, in his Letters, were
as true! And yet I know not whether I should wish it.


Oh, Madam, here is the rarest News! Have you heard of the French Count?


Ay, my Dear; and therefore am come to bless my Eyes. His Fame is diffused
throughout the Town: they say, he is the finest Gentleman that ever came to
Bury!


Good! It takes as I could wish.


How now, Sir, who are you?


One who has lost a Heart, and apprehends you for it.


You are somewhat free of Carriage.


Think not, my pretty Mad-cap, that a piece of Velvet can conceal you: Your
Eyes strike at every one you level at, like Lightning through a Cloud.


Very pretty! Shall I oblige Mr. Trim with this fine expression? he'll give you
any Money for it.


Sir, --


Now is this Fop setting out his Bum for a smart bout at Complement.


It is so great an Honour to our Town --


Sir, your most humble Servant.


Is this his Breeding? Indeed, when I left him, he led me not to the door of
his Lodging.


Oh, mon Dieu! here is that London Wit, that is a Laugher, and Scoffer! I hear
he has made a Lampoon upon Bury. I hate the Fellow.


He a Wit! Mr. Trim or Sir Humphrey, would make nothing of him.


Look you, my dear Mad-cap, I must love you, and will love you; say what you
can, do what you can, I will always haunt you while I am alive, and never leave
you when I am dead.


Nay hold, good Mr. Hothead, I doubt not but our Lives will differ so, that we
shall part when we are dead, Sir, whatever we do living: And a sure way to part
while we are alive, would be to Marry, which Heaven forbid; then it would
certainly follow to some purpose.


The Steel shall sooner willingly desert the Loadstone, than I my pretty Miss.


You are not sure in Earnest


By Heaven, and all the Powers --


I mind Vows in Love, no more than Oaths in Anger. That I were sure once that
you were in love with me.


There is nothing to prove it to you, which I will not undertake.


Your Hand upon it.


My Heart upon it; which here I present you.


Now have I one to Domineer over. Tremble; for I will make thee such an
Example, as shall be a Terror to thy Sex, and revenge all the Insolences
committed upon mine.


I am prepared for all thy Tyranny, good Semiramis.


I will make thee fetch and carry, and come at my foot, like a Spaniel.


And I will persevere so, I'll make thee relent, tho thou were a Devil.


Come, Gentlemen and Ladies, come down Guinea's apiece, and Raffle for a
Tea-pot: Come, Jack Trim, Jack; Mr. Wildish, Ladies.


Jack! Jack! ill Bred. For Complaisance and Breeding sake, I'll do it. Bellamy!
My Lord, I can assure your Lordship, there is not a Person among the race of
Mankind --


Sir, I am your humble Servant. My dear Ned! I see, here is all the good
Company.


My dear Lord, I am glad you are come: here is the best Company in Bury.


'Tis a delicate Morning: I have been sucking in the sweetest Air in England.


My noble Lord, your most humble Servant. 'Tis indeed very fine Weather; it
used to be Bury-foul, instead of Bury-fair. Is not that a pretty Clinch, Jack?


Sir, let me tell you, there is a Spanish Proverb, which says, Whego de manos,
whego de Villanos.


Do you call me Villain in Spanish? I shall reckon with you for that.


I'll put in for a Rafflle with these Ladies. Come, Madam, will you Raffle for
a Heart?


No, my Lord: that is usually a light, hollow thing, and not Sterling neither;
I am for massy Plate, that will endure the touch.


Mine will endure the strictest touch. If your Beauty be equal to your Shape
and Wit, you Conquer all you look on.


What do I see! that is my Sister! He is already fixed upon my Ruin, my Death.
Sister, I ne'er till now could wish thy Beauty less. If not discovered, I am at
least undone.


Come, Charles, thou shalt Raffle too: Here's a Guinea for him.


My Lord, your Lordships most humble Servant.


Sir, I kiss your Hands.


What a Pox, is this Puss my Wife here? I'll lay my Life she hears of the
French Count: I was in hopes she would have been sullen, and we might have had
the House to our selves. Come, come, off with your foolish Masks: My Lord, this
is my Wife.


And this is my Daughter.


I dare swear she is.


Mr. Wildish!
This, my Lord, is my Daughter.

Madam, your Father has commanded me to do my self the honour of the World I
am most ambitious of.


You are resolved, my Lord, your Ambition shall be no danger to the Government.


I own no Government, but yours: Others, but rule the Body; you, the Mind.


How can I hear my own sad Funeral Peal?


Mr. Wildish, my Daughter.


So, Madam, you have my Heart; 'tis flown, I could not hold it: look to it, and
make much on it, and see that it comes to no Damage; I shall require it whole,
and safe.


'Tis a light one, and always ready to whistle off at any Game; and as ready to
be lured back again: but, if I have it, I'll use it so, it shall be glad to be
gone.


That Beauty cannot harbour so much Cruelty. Oh, that this Kiss would last to
Eternity!


Raptures are no more signs of Love, than Huffing is of Courage.


Oh, you Arch Wag you! are you there?


Yes, that I am. Ha, ha, ha. Come, down with your Guinea. Now we have enough
for a Tea-Pot, and a pair of Sconces.


She's delicately handsome as an Angel! what think thou, my Boy?


With Submission, my good Lord, I think she is mortal; I am not surprised with
her Beauty. Look narrowly; does she not look like a Shrew?


No; she is all sweetness in perfection!


I wish you find her not so: Fame whispers


Daughter, Daughter; yonder comes the French Count! It must be he.


Mon Dieu, it is he! Nay, if Quality or Breeding scapes my Eye, I have lost my
Cunning. What an Air? what a Men is there?


Nicholas.


Monsieur?


Take de notice of dose two Garle, vatch them, they have de very fine Air.


His Person is Charmant, Tuant his Air, victorious his Men: Mon pauvre Coeur!


I could not wish better success.


A most Charmant, Tuant Men, in eating Burgamies: he out-craunches a
School-boy on a Holy-day. I'll lay my life, he is an errant Coxcomb.


Page, set my Cravat-string. Ver well, ver well.


He is an incomparable Person!


Thy Farce is like to take admirably: the Rogue looks very stately, and
Fantastical!


No Gudgeons ever took their Baits more greedily.


Monsieur, Serviter tres humble. Have you forgot me?


Monsieur le Count de Cheveux!


De same* I had de Honeur to wait upon you vid my Regiment of Gen d' Arms, on
de right Attaque at Luxemburgh. Oh, my Lor Bellamy, I am surprise ver much! you
did Charge my Regiment at de Battle of Monts. I will say no more of dat; but,
Begar, you did make us turn de Back; vich de Regiment never did before, nor
since; But is all one for dat, Serviteur tres humble.


The Rogue Acts it admirably!


You are welcome into England.


I come to see de fine Lady, de grand Beautee English; which, Begar, is beyond
all de Varle: yes indeed.


You have learnt the Language?


I speak a little. I did keep de Company vid de English Officeers; de ver
brave Gentleman indeed, to learn de Langage; for I did resolve to come di^
plas, for see de Beautee de Wit of England.


Perhaps, your most auspicious Stars could not have guided your wandering course
to a more proper Region of the Earth, than this little City of Bury, for the
full Satisfaction of both these Curiosities you are pleased to mention: nor is
in all the Regions of Earth you have Surveyed, a Person more devoted to your
Service, than your most humble Servant Iohn Trim.


Monsieur Jean Trim, you do me de grand Honeur; Begar, me am your humble
Serviteur. Jerny bleau, dis fellow be one great Fool indeed.


That is the Lady and Daughter I told you of: this is the Lady's Husband.


Is ver well: let me alone for dat.


A most admirable Person of a Man! his Eyes brilliant, and fierre! my Heart is
gone: he may say, as Caesar did, Veni, vidi, vici.


My Eyes never beheld a Parallel.


Eh Good! how the French Noblesse outshines our's! methinks, they look like
Tailors to 'em.


Monsieur, your most humble Servant: welcome to Bury as I may say.


My Lord Count, you are heartily welcome to Bury: and I beg the honour of your
Company at Dinner, at my House.


Monsieurs, me kis^e your hands: me did tinke to invite de Shief Majistrat, I
don know vat you call him, Oh, is Alderman, to take de Collation vid me; butte
me can no refuse de faveur.


I am transported with Joy!


Daughter, speak to him in French; he seems already Captivated with your Looks.


You are appy in de Conversation of de very fine Ladee; butte to let you know
my Skill, my Cunning, me will gage a hundred Pistol, dat dat fine Ladee, and her
ver pretty Sister, are de French Ladee.


Ounds, this Count will make my damned affected Toad so proud, the Devil would
not live with her. French, and Sister, with a Pox!


We have often bewailed the not having had the honour to be born French.


Pardon me; is impossible.


Monfoy, je parle vray: we are mere English assurement.


Mon foy, je parle vray! vat is dat Gibberish? Oh, let me see; de Fader is de
Lawyere, an she learn of him at de Temple: is de Law French. I am amaze!
French Look, French Air, French men, French movement of de Bodee! Morbleau.
Monsieur, I will gage 4, 500 Pistol, dat this two Sister vere bred in France,
yes. Teste bleau, I can no be deceive.


Iee vous en pry, do not; we never had the blessing to be in France; you do us
too much honour. Alas, we are forced to be content with plain English Breeding:
you will bring all my blood into a blush. I had indeed a penchen always to
French.


Penchen! vat is dat? Oh, is Law French. You put de very great Confusion upon
me: I tought it was impossible to find dat Men, Air, Wit, an Breeding, out of
France.


French! why, my Lord Count, this is my Wife, this is her Daughter.


Daughtere! dis young Ladee have de Daughtere! Begar, you make my Head turn
round, an mine Hair stand up: is impossible. Pardon me.


My dear sweet Lord Count, you pose me now with your grand Civilities: She is
my Daughter; I was Married indeed exceeding young.


Pegar, Madam, den you be de pretty Modere, she de pretty Daughtere, in de
whole Varle. Oh mine Art, mine Art! dose Eyes, dat Air, ave kille me! I
brought de Art out of France, and I ave lost it in dis plas: is gone, Madam;
an Morbleau, you see now de French Count without a Heart.


With what frigidity she looks on me! and with what warm Transport she seems to
pierce the Frenchman through! Varium mutabile semper foemina.


What would you give for such a Servant?


Just as much as I would for you: I had not so much as pitched upon a Country
yet for my choice; but methinks France should be the last. I like not these
Apish Counts; they're mere Kickshaws.


You judge right, Madam, of this Count at least.


Indeed, he seems to me a very choice Coxcomb.


Oh, Madam, you have de fine Hair, de very fine Hair! dose tresses Conquer de
Lovere; Cupid make his Net of dat Hair, to catch de Art: de coleur delicat,
better den my Peruke is great deal: Begar, if I had dat Hair, I would make two
tree Peruke of dat.


Pox on you, you Rascal. You are no Barber, Sir; yo are a Count.


Have de Patiance: dat is, me could make de Peruke two tree; butte I would make
de Locket, de Bracelet, an de pretty Love knack.


A very good Monster! a very pretty delicate Monster: the like ne'er seen in
England! The Monster is just now beginning.


Pimper le Pimp, the High German Juggler! pray walk in, and take your places;
'tis the last time of Showing this morning.


Vat is Pimp? Vat, does he let a de Whore at de Fair?


A most delicious dainty monster, the most delightful monster, the prettiest
monster ever was seen! The most admirable! The most incomparable monster!


Ha, ha, ha. Begar, I like dis Jean Pudding very well; I will talk vid him,
Begar: he make me Laugh dis morning, he almost kille me.


You Rogue, remember you are a Count, and no Barber, Puppy.


You see his Wit and Judgment! he finds out good Breeding immediately!


Yes, he has found Wit in a Jack Pudding.


Morbleau, Madam, I have see de Marionette de Jean Pudding in France* dat have
de great deal of Esprits, and of de Wit: de very pretty man, and de very good
Company; yes indeed.


No doubt, Sir, Assurement ouy. Look you, Mrs. Gatty.


Begar, dat be very merry Gentleman; English!


Dea^h, let's in, and Rescue him.


Sir Humphrey, you have suffered for your Wit I see.


Only a Head broken, that's all: the inside of your Head will often endanger
the outside, Sir Humphrey.


Pish, this is nothing. Pox on it, an accident; a mere Accident Gad take me,
I'll have my Jest, let what will come on it.


Insolent Peasan! Begar, me will kille two tree thousand Peasant. Strike de
Gentleman! Sire morbleau, me will help you to kille de damn Peasant.


Come, come to my House: my Daughters Woman shall lay you on a Plaster.


I would be glad to put my Cutto into de Body of de Peasant, they have fright
de Lady.


But, Monsieur le Count, our Peasants have Quarter-staves; and if Gentlemen go
to run 'em through, they will knock 'em down: and we commend 'em for it.


De Peasant! begar, de Peasant be de Slave, de Dog, morbleu.


Our Peasants wear Shoes and Stockings, and lye warm; and have good Meat and
Drink in their Houses.


Your King is a King of Dogs then: but how much greater is ours, who is a King
of Men, and Free Men! Ours Governs the willing, he the unwilling.


Your King great as our King! Jerny, your King can do noting, dere is de Law,
de Parliament, I don know vat begar: my King can send for my Head wen he pleas;
yes indeed, hum.


My Lord Count, 'tis almost Dinner time.


The Rogue talks, as if he were of the Blood Royal.


Yes, like the next Successor.


Yes, Begar, he can send for my Head: and dat be very good for him.


But my King cannot send for my Head when he please.


Morbleu, dat be very good for you: yes indeed.


COme my Lord Count, my Lord Bellamy, and Gentlemen, may good Digestion wait on
Appetite, and Health on both; as Mackbeth says: Ah, I love those old Wits.


You are a Wit in your Heart.


Ay, faith, so I am; and I love to be merry at Meals. Ah, Wit is as necessary
as good Wine at Table.


Ay, faith, so 'tis: I summon up all my Wit at Dinner.


My Lords, and Gentlemen, we'll into my Smoaking-room, and sport about a
Brimmer; and Wit shall fly about like Hail-shot. Oh, the Wit that I have heard
in that Room!


We will wait on you soon; but I have promised the Ladies an Entertainment,
with a little Concert of Music by my own Servants, who are ready now: and I
desire you will call the Ladies, Sir.


If your Lordship please: but, faith, we had better be a Topping.


Did you ever hear the Thetford Music?


Not I, Sir.


'Sbud, they are the best Music in England: there's the best Shawm and
Bandore, and a Fellow that Acts Tom of Bet'lem to a Miracle! and they ^ing
Charon, Oh gentle Charon, and Come my Daphne, better than Singleton and Clayton
did.


Her^'s the pleasure of Country Conversation, Bellamy: Had not a man better be
condemned to the Galleys, than endure it?


I am of your Opinion, Ned; and for that Reason, never have such Company at my
House: If I have, 'tis but for once; for Country Gentlemen, unless you repay
their Visit, are too proud to see you twice: and I never Visit any, but such as
I like very well.


Morbleu, vat is dat? Monsieur Wildish, did you hi^e me?


Not I, Monsieur.


Nor you, my Lore?


Not I, Monsieur le Count.


Ventre bleu, is dere again! Sire, vat you mean by dat, to strike me between de
Head and de Shouldere?


My Lord, if your Honour had given your self the leisure circumspectly to have
made Inquisition into any part of the History of my Life and Breeding, or into
the sedate Composure and Serenity of Mind, you might easily have Collected that
I am a Person that either never exercised my self in such Juvenile and Jocular
Diversions; or, at least, have totally abandoned them.


Begar, dis be de very great Fop, Teste bleu, I no understanda him. Again? is de
Diable. Ah, may foy, is dat merry Gentleman.


Nothing, nothing at all, my Lord Count, among Friends: I can't forbear my
Jest, i'faith; let's Kiss, and be better acquainted.


Vid all mine Art.


Sirrah, Rogue, remember you are a Count still.


Is all one: I sometime take delight to Shave de Noblesse of France, for my
plaisir.


Now, my Lord, let the Music strike up; here are the Women: I long to be at
Brimmers.


Now for ^ fit of Mirth.


Come Charles, begin.


'Tis admirable! the Court has no better.


You must be putting in, with your ill Breeding! If any Traveller* should
affirm that Italy afforded better, I should humbly demand his Pardon.


I am swallowed up in Admiration! je suis astonne! I am only in doubt, whether
the Harmonious Composition, or the elegant Performance, be most Charmant.


Dat is admirable bien dict, Madam!


I had a Daughter that sung -- But, no more of her.


What do I hear? I'll haste away: Farewell.


I never heard a Voice and Manner so like my poor Sister's. I thought he had
some resemblance of her, but that he's of another Complexion: But he was so
Bashful, he would not show his Face.


My Lord, can they sing Lilly Burlero? or have they e're a merry Song?


My Servants are no Fiddlers.


Come, come, my Lords and Gentlemen, into my Smoking Room: Women, go pack into
the Drawing Room, and play at Toe Gleek, or Ombre; go.


Oh, Madam, get the French Count with us, or I am Ruined. Oh, he is the finest
Personage, and most agreeable!


Good Mr. Oldwit, you will betray your ill Breeding: Entertain one of the
French Noblesse with Smoking and Sotting! he shall with us. You show your Wit,
and not a word of French among you!


'Sdeath, my Wit! dare you profane my Wit? Thou old, ill-bred, silly Creature,
I'll teach thee better Breeding, and make thee submit to thy Lord and Master.


Sir* I beg your pardon; I am for de Ladee: I no Drink, I no Smoke. Come,
Madam, vee will play at de petites jeux, or some ting or oder. Begar, de smoke
spoil my orangery and Pulvilio.


Oh, I love de Petites jeux extremement.


I am also for the Ladies; to whom I have ever Sacrificed all my devoir: Madam,
I kiss your hands.


Pish! But as I was saying, Monsieur --


Ha! must I be Sacrificed to that Kickshaw of a Frenchman? It shall not be long
e're he receive a Chartel from me.


Mr. Oldwit is so importunate, that I cannot leave him yet, i'faith; But I'll
steal away, and pay my Duty to you.


No, no, Sir Humphrey, no matter: the Count is an Accomplished Gentleman.
Monsieur, you were speaking --


Say you so, Ud'sbud? the Count my Rival! I will take an occasion to kick that
damned Count most exceedingly.


Daughter, meet me half an hour hence, without fail, in the great Dining Room
above.


I will, Sir.


Pray let it be within a quarter of an hour, for most important Reasons I will
give you there.


I have contrived an opportunity for your Lordship to be private with your
Mistress, my Lord.


You infinitely oblige me, Sir.


Come, now let's all into my Smoaking-room. Go, Womankind, pack away to your
Cards, and your Tea.


Mr. Oldwit, I humbly take my leave, to withdraw with the Ladies.


No, faith, shall you not. Sir Humphrey, take him you by one Arm, and I'll take
him by the other.


Gentlemen, Gentlemen, commit not a Rape upon me, I beseech you: I drink not
between Meals. Did you know how averse I am -- Sir, Sir, I would not be
Intoxicated for the Universe: Sir, Sir.


Come, my Lord, and Mr. Wildish.


We wait on you.


What are we Condemned to?


Here, where is this damned Butler? bring the Monteith, and Bottles. Well, Mr.
VVildish, you are one of the top London Wits.


Not guilty, upon my Honour.


No matter for that. But did you ever hear more Wit fly about a Dinner at
London? Such Broadsides and such Merriment, my Lord?


Yes, indeed, a great deal of Wit did fly about the Room.


Sir, your humble Servant. When my Lady asked me for a piece of Rabbit, you
remember I told her it was a Rawbit, for 'twas not roasted; ha, ha, ha.


That was a good jest indeed.


She asked me, if I would have any Custard? I told her, I was not such a Fool to
refuse it.


And, when she asked me, Will you have any Woodcock, Husband, I answered No: I
will have some Goose, Wife. She thought to have put the Woodcock upon me; and I
put the Goose upon her, i'faith.


Ha, ha: Very good! excellent!


These Gentlemen, Mr Wildish, are Witty, I must confess they want not Salt, and
are indeed very Jocose; but I would gladly hear something from your self, and my
Lords Honour, that savours more of Solidity, than what they hitherto have
produced.


Are you always thus Witty, Sir Humphrey?


Oh, ay. The Judges, when they come the Circuit, certainly send for me: they
love my Company.


Do Judges love this way of Wit?


Ever while you live; and your Sergeants, and Doctors of Divinity: the last
time I Dined in such company, I told a Story of a Doctor of Divinity, whose
Wife used to entertain him with three Dishes every day; Bitter, Pout, and Tart.
There was such a Laughing, they Roared out again: The Ladies Tyhee'd under
their Napkins; I am the Son of a Whore, if the Tyhee did not take a reverend
old Gentlewoman as she was a Drinking, and she squirted out the Beer out of her
Nose, as an Indian does Tobacco. Ha, ha, ha.


Prithee, dear Sir Humphrey, forbear; I am not able to bear it: I have laughed
my self sore. Mr. Trim, what ails you? you are melancholy.


I must confess, Sir Humphrey is a man of neat concise parts, and exceeding
Jocular; but my way is to affect, being more grave and solid.


Grave and solid! Come, come, you want a Bottle. Why, Sirrah, Butler, come
quickly. You shall have a whisking Bumper.


Sir, I protest against Bumpers: I would not drink a Bumper for the Universe.


Rascal, make haste, you lazy Elephant* and, do ye hear, bring me my Horn I use
to Drench the Restive Drinkers with. I'll make you take your Dose.


That men should cloud the Faculties of their noble Souls, and put their minds,
as 'twere, into a Mist!


VVy, you can make a Joque, Sir Humphrey upon any thing.


I seldom fail, thank God.


Let's hear now, upon the VVainscot.


Pshaw waw! 'tis weak Wainscot.


How so? 'tis good Danish Oak.


Ha, ha, ha; you know, the weakest goes to the VVall: the VVainscot goes to the
VVall; Ergo, weak VVainscot. Ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha: passing good!


I am ready again: Reprieving VVainscot.


How so? the Devil can't find that out.


Ha, ha, ha: why, Wainscot saves many a Hanging:


Ha, ha: admirable! for, if I had not. VVainscoted my Rooms, I must have had
Hangings. He'll kill me some time or other.


Upon the Window.


Why 'tis a damned mutinous Window; for 'tis full of Quarrels: You shall never
take me at a Why not.


Upon the Looking-glass.


Why, 'tis an Ill-natur'd Looking-glass.


How so?


Because it makes Reflections; ha, ha.


Upon the day.


Upon the day. Hah, hum; why, 'tis a scabby day.


A scabby day?


Ay, because the Sun's broken out.


For the love of Heaven, dear Friend, not so fast: I cannot suffer it. Come,
Sirrah, a Bumper.


Sir, there are four Gentlemen come to wait on you.


Who? Butler, remove the things into my Parlour: this Room's


Sir, you have Company enough, I beseech you, Sir: Sir, I disclaim Drink
between Meals.


VVildish is not here yet; I am come somewhat before my time, to fly from the
horrible Impertinence in the Drawing-Room. I'll lay my life, this French Count
is some idle Scoundrel, and an Impostor.


Madam, your most humble Servant: you have not stayed long, I hope.


Not at all for you, I assure you, Sir: my Father appointed me --


Not this quarters hour yet, by my Watch.


It wants nothing by mine: but you Sparks have such vanity, that you are ready
to turn every thing to your own advantage. Can you believe I come to meet you
here?


Is it not fitter for your Youth and Beauty, to meet an honest young Fellow,
who is in Love with you to Madness, than an Old Fellow with musty Sayings, old
Proverbs, and wise Counsel?


Don't abuse my Father behind his back. He wise! No wiser than your self: He is
a Bury Wit, as you are a London one.


I a Wit, Madam? You are resolved to use your Sovereign Power over me; and I'll
show you my Passive Obedience. Do you Swagger like a Tyrant? you shall find I
can bear like a Slave.


Yes, you can act a Slave for a time, in hopes of making me one ever after.


Ah, Madam, those eyes were made to Conquer, and preserve their Conquests:
where e're they come, they'll Govern always.


For all that, if I were Married to you, which Heaven avert, you would, within
three months, be apt to think my Maids eyes, though a Doudy, more Victorious.


It is impossible: I could as soon prefer a farthing Candle to the Sun.


Nay, I shall never try.


I am resolved I'll never leave you: I will wait upon your Person, or watch
about your House continually.


But I'll command you from me; I'll try my Dominion.


In what ever I can, I will obey you: but you may as well command your Shadow
from you, in the Sun-shine.


I'll call in aid, to remove you farther.


Not Bombs, or Cannons, can do that. While you are awake, I'll ne'er be from
you; and when you sleep, I'll watch, and sigh, and sing my Plaints about your
House.


Sure you dare not be thus bold!


By Heaven, I cannot help it: and look to it; for this in Bury (as all little
Towns are full of Tattling and Censure) will bring Scandal to you, at least, if
it does not produce Love in you.


For Love, I am sure it shall not: and for Scandal, I'll remove.


Where ever you go, you have fast hold on my Heart-strings, and will tug me
along with you.


If I have, I'll tug you, I'll warrant you, till I crack them. These are Flames:
I'll to London; there I shall be lost to you, like a Hare in a Hare Warren, and
you shall yelp no more after me.


You are so fair, so bright, above all others, that I shall follow you by your
Track of Light, and never miss you.


Are there any Lovers thus Impudent, to think to procure Love by troubling one.


Is it Impudence, to own your Power, and my Weakness? In short, Madam, I am
resolved to haunt you worse than any Beau, and pelt you with Billets doux some
Fifteen times a day.


What, like one of those odious Creatures, will you Dress at me? and tie
Cravats at me? and strut like a Turky-cock, and prune your self?


Even so; and stare, and goggle at you; and never have my Eyes off you, while I
Side-box you in the Play-house.


What, where the Beaux draw up three Ranks deep every day?


Yes.


Well, and I'll never cast my Eyes upon you for a whole Play together.


That will be over acted; and cunning Intriguers will Censure you from that.


Very fine! But I assure you, if you join with the Beaux, you shall never be
looked upon by me: for there is not upon Earth a more odious sight, than those
Boxes full of ugly Beaux. I observe, the Beaux now are the ugliest
Hatchet-fac'd Fellows about Town.


Fellows of five and fifty, with grizly Beards, set up for Beaux: and among
these will I herd, when you are at a Play, that I may Ogle you, Fair.


Then will I leave the Play.


So will I.


And to the Park.


So will I: where I will Side-glass you, turn when you turn, --


Then will I leave the Park.


So will I, and follow you to the Mall.


You will not dare sure?


Yes I will: and strut up to you, with a Slur and a Coupee; sing a silly new
Song or two softly in your Ear, and put on an Air of Gaiety, as if I had
succceeded.


I'll soon shake you off, and go to the Drawing Room.


No sooner there, but I am with you: and 'tis as good a Scene of Ogling, as
any.


Sure, I shall cast you off when I go to Church.


The Beaux are the most constant Church-men: you shall see Troops of 'em pork'd
up in Galleries, setting their Cravats. There you shall be sure to find me: and
I will stare you out of your Prayers. In short, my dear, sweet, pretty Madcap,
I am resolved never to give thee over, while I have breath.


This is most amazing! Art not thou a very Impudent Fellow, to talk thus? Do
you call this making Love? why, this is making War; worse than Blockades and
Sieges, which they write of in Gazettes.


It is a gentle Siege; but I will never raise it. I may fall dead before your
Fort.


And that you shall, before you take it.
What a dissembling Jade am I now

Then will I haunt you at noon, at dead of night --

You will come a faithful Humble Be, and Hum, and Buzz; as the Rehearsal says.


Oh, my Lord, I have had the Advantage of you, in stealing from you confounded
Company before you.


You have so; but there's great enquiry made after you.


We were bad enough with our Punning Fools; but that new Detachment of
Drunkards and Visitants, made 'em completely the most confounded Company I ever
was condemned to. Here are the fruits of the Country! Prithee, my Dear Peer,
fling off this melancholy thought of Retirement, and let us enjoy thee again in
London: let me not lose my dearest Friend, for a Fit of the Spleen, or two.


Dear Ned, if any thing could tempt me to that noisy Town, thou, and some
choice Friends, whose Conversation I extremely value, might do it: but I am
weary of it, and dote upon my quiet Retirement.


Man is not self-sufficient: he was made a Sociable Animal, and must have
Conversation.


And that, by a Man of a good Estate, as you and I have, may be had in the
Country.


Merry Meetings may be had; but not so frequently, as your Sessions: and when
you think you have a choice Company, in rushes some loud obstreperous Hunter,
Hawker, or Jockey, good for nothing else, and Roars about Dogs, Kites, and
Horses,; and spoils that Meeting. To keep open House, and entertain the
neighbouring Coxcombs is worse than being Host of an Inn: and to meet Company
elsewhere, is to be poisoned with damned Wine.


I take care to meet none but good Company; and where-ever we meet, we take a
course to have as good Wine from London, as any there: and at my own House, I
will entertain none but good Company.


Then the Country Gentlemen, who are most of 'em ill Company, will hate you,
and you will have no Interest.


He that esteems himself by another mans opinion, is an Ass. My Tenants I make
much of.


But what can be the diversion of a Country Life? A man must bewak'd at three
in a Morning, by the cracked Voices of Huntsmen, with damned Bugle Horns, and
the confounded yelps of Curs: and for want of Friendship with Men, divert
themselves with their Enmity to Beasts; and hunt as if the Devil were in 'em,
till at dark night they are scarce able to dismount their Horses.


They are Fops, Ned, that make a business of Sport. I hunt with my Harriers
half a dozen heats in a Morning, for Health and an Appetite: and, at Dinner
time, let 'em be in never such full cry, I knock off.


There is some Reason in that; but your true Country Squire lives in Boots all
the Winter, never talks or thinks of any thing but Sports, as he calls 'em: and
if an ill Day comes, saunters about his House, lolls upon Couches; sighs and
groans, as if he were a Prisoner in the Fleet; and the best thing he can find
to do, is to Smoke, and Drink, and play at Back-gammon, with the Parson.


These are of the strictest Order of Hunters, such as keep Journals of every
Days hunting, and write long Letters of Foxchases from one end of England to
the other. Tho these are Fops, Ned, a Reasonable man may enjoy himself very
well in the Country.


How so?


I have a noble House, an Air pure, and uncorrupted.


Which are to be had in St. Iames's- Square and Hide-park.


I view my stately Fields and Meads, laden with Corn and Grass; my Herds of
Kine, and Flocks of Sheep; my Breed of Horses; my Delicate Gardens full of all
sorts of Fruits and Herbs; my River full of Fish, with Ponds, and a Decoy for
Water Fowl, and plenty of Game of all kinds in my Fields and Woods; my Parks
for Venison; my Cellar well furnished with all variety of excellent Drinks: and
all my own, Ned.


All these things have we at London. The product of the best Cornfields at
Queen-Hithe; Hay, Straw, and Cattle, at Smithfield; with Horses too. Where is
such a Garden in Europe, as the Stocks-Market? Where such a River as the
Thames? Such Ponds and Decoys, as in Leaden-Hall-Market, for your Fish and
Fowl? Such Game as at the Poulterers? And instead of Parks, every Cook's Shop
for Venison, without Hunting, and venturing Neck or Arms for it. And for
Cellars, from Temple-Bar to Aldgate; and all that I have use of, my own too,
since I have Money.


But I have pleasure in reading the Georgies, and contemplating the Works of
Nature.


I contemplate the chief Works of Nature: fine Women; and the Juice of the
Grape, well concocted by the Sun.


Your fine Women, are a Company of proud, vain, Fops and Jilts, abominably
Daubed and Painted; and I had rather kiss a Blackamoor, with a Natural
Complexion, than any such: And, besides, many of them are so unsound, that
making Love is become as dangerous as making War; and the Wounds and Scars are
dishonourable to boot. Then, for your Wine, 'tis attended with such Surfeits,
Qualms, Head-akes, late Hours, Quarrels and Uproars, that every Scene of
Drunkenness is a very Bedlam.


Poor Bellamy! thou were never happy, since thou left'st off those Noble
Maxims, Beati non numerant horas, measure not your time by Hour-glasses, but by
Wine-glasses. Oh, the sweet of a Brimmer at Midnight! The Night was made for
Beasts to sleep in, and for Man to Watch in.


And if I have no other misfortune but the Head-ake, and Puking in the morning,
to hear of this Friend breaking a Collar Bone with a fall, that having his
Scull cracked by the Watch, another run through the Lungs by drunken Bullies;
and all this to Treasure up Diseases, if you shall arrive to a miserable Age.


Who would not be sick ten Days for one good Night, with Men of Wit and Sense?


There's no true Pleasure but in Health.


What should a Man do with Health in damned Country Company, which a man ought
either to be a very good Philosopher, or none at all, to endure?


What good does Wit and Sense do you? do what you can, the Fops will be at
the top of Pleasures; and the Knaves will be at the head of all Business in
spite of you; and will bear down the World, that a man who has Wit can be good
for nothing.


That makes the business of the World so foolishly done.


My Father is not here.


He commanded me to bid you meet him in this Room.


Whither goes my pretty Tyrant? Though your Father be not here, here is (I am
sure) one humble Servant of yours.


That I am sure of, Madam, who is tesolv'd to lay himself at your Feet, there
humbly to receive his Doom.


What the Devil does he say? Is my best Friend my Rival? I hope, Madam, you are
not in doubt, who that Servant is I spoke of?


What's this? Are we Rivals? This is the greatest misfortune that could have
happened! Hold! perhaps it may be only his usual Gallantry to all young Women.
Would you could see the Wounds you make in Hearts; then, Madam, mine would
expect your pity.


This is a very pretty Scene; runs smoothly off the Tongue, and is very well
Acted: Can you do it over again?


Oh, Mr. VVildish! I have been searching, and sending for you, all over the
House. What? turned Flincher! Faith, I must have you down with me.


Here's my Lord's a Flincher too.


I wink at that: I can give you some Reason for that, as we go* Daughter, you
know what I have said to yeu-of this Noble man: I could not find out in all the
Nation, such a Match. Do you mind me?


Yes, Sir -- But, by your good favour, I'll find out for my self, for all that.



'Tis evident! What damned misfortune could have fallen out like this?


Come, faith, Mr. Wildish, you shall not escape so: Brimmers fly about handsomely*
and we are a rare Company.


I must not discover my Love to this Old Fellow yet; I will knock him down,
with two or three in a Hand.


How I hate this kind of Fooling! A Woman never makes so silly a Figure, as
when she is to look demurely, and stand to be made Love to.


Madam, the several Letters I have addressed to your Ladyship's hands, and my
good Orator your Father, though you never saw me, have let you know who I am; and
then you'll guess what I have to say.


'Tis true, my Lord, I do guess, and therefore your Lordship need not trouble
your self to say it; for all Discourse, about that affair, runs to the same
Tune.


I never loved before; nor can I believe that any Man loves like me.


'Tis all alike. Madam, your Beauties! your excellent Accomplishments! your
extraordinary Merits! Divine, c. The lustre of your Eyes! and the rest. The
honour to kiss your fair hands! c. All this we have in Romances, and Love and
Honour Plays. Trust me, my Lord, 'tis tedious.


Could I incline your gentle Heart to Love, then no Discourse of it would seem
so.


I can't tell that; but as things stand now, indeed it makes me smile, to think
of a grave Mother, or, for want of her, a wise Father, putting a Daughter into
a Room, like a Hare out of a Basket, and letting him loose; that is, to act the
Part of a Lover before Marriage, and never think of it afterward. Then is she
either to frown, be peevish, or sullen, and make no answers, or very scurvy
ones; or else to blush, hold down her Head, tell the Sticks, and play with her
Fan, and say, I have no thoughts of Marriage, I am too young, 'tis time enough.


But, Madam, a Lady of your Wit and Sense, knows 'tis the great end that
Woman is designed for; and 'tis in vain for you to speak against Love; for
every look, and every word of yours, inflames me more.


There's a word now, Inflames, and Chains, and Fetters! I warrant you; One
would think a man were a Martyr, or a Slave at Algiers at least. What
conversation might Men and Women have, did not this foolish Love interpose!


'Tis impossible for a Man to forbear thinking, or talking of Love, in the
presence of so Beautiful, so excellent a Lady.


I could expect no less* Beautiful! Excellent! c. How sillily one looks, who
must stand to hear her self Complemented! My Lord, you are a Man of Honour, and
I will speak plainly to you: I am resolved against Love, therefore pray deal
frankly with me: Disappoint the Old Gentleman, and let's not have one word of
it betwixt us. My happiness or ruin depends upon your Breath. I am too young
and giddy, to fix upon so solemn a business; and the pleasure I find in being
free, cannot be bought at any rate.


Your Father, Madam, I hope may be a prevailing Advocate.


Hope is a very thin Diet, fit for Love in a Fever; but, to tell you true, I
am apt to believe there is no such thing as love: but, if there be, I can
assure you, you have gone the wrong way; for my Father is no Outwork of mine:
you may take him, but you are ne'er the nearer me. I am a free Heiress of
England, where Arbitrrry Power is at an end, and I am resolved to choose for my
self. How happily am I relieved! French Count has gotten an absolute Conquest.
Let's retire, and hear the Love betwixt them: they'll divert us upon that
subject, better than we can our selves.


I must obey.


Now Monsieur le Count, we are free: we were embarrassed with Company below,
that we could not enjoy our selves; and some so ill bred, that, eh Good, they
caused such a Chagrin in me!


I am very appy in de occasion of kiss your And, in secret; indeed de Bury
Ladies be ver fine, ver prettee, and do me de great honeur;; butte, Madam, your
Lustre does outshine them, as the great Sun does de leetel Star dat twinkel,
twinkel, in the Sky, Madam.


Oh, Monsieur, the ebat of your Wit will make any thing appear well: I must
confess, I never have met such brilliant Conversation, as from your most
agreeable person.


See be de Victorious Ladee; butte, begar, see speak de dam French for all
dat.


En verity, you have Charmed them all; but, mon foy, I hate the Impertinence
of a numerous Assembl?e.


Oh, Madam, dere is no plaisir in de Varle, as de retirement vid so bright a
Nymp: and, Madam, I must tell dat, now you have steal me out of de Companee,
you cannot but perceive me, dat I have de ver great and signal Passion for your
Ladyship; and I have but de few little opportunitee to say, dat, if you take no
Compassion upon me, you break mine Art; and I must kille my self vid de French
Bayonett, if you make de scorn of me.


I am not so ill bred to scorn one of the Noblesse.


Pray forbear, my Lord, they will come to the point presently: would you have
us play the Fool thus?


If you have no scorn, de Indifferance is fatal, and will kille me too.


Sincerement, Monsieur, a Lady cannot have indifference for a Person so bien
fait, and whose Conversation is Ravissant.


She comes on handsomely.


Ah, Madam! I kiss your sweet And, for dis great honeur: butte, Madam, if my
Ambition might aspire at your Love, I will be more appy ten Thousand time, den
de great Monarch, Madam.


You know very well what the Poet says: Res est Solliciti plena timoris amor.



Ver well, Madam, you be de most profound Ladee, and de great Scholar. Morbleu,
she will find me out! Begar, I can no read.


No, no assuremant, pretty well read in the Classic Authors. Or so. Monsieur
Scudery says very well: L'amour est un grande chose.


He be ver pretty Poet too. Begar, she will puzzle me.


Poet! Monsieur, he writ Romances.


Ah, Madam, in France we call de Romance, de Poeste:


Oh, Rogue! that's well come off.


And, as Monsieur Balzac says, Songez unpeu.


Dat Balzac write de very good Romance.


Indeed, I never heard that.


Je vous assure. A pox on her reading!


Take time, Sir, I beseech you; we must consider on this affair.


Madame, I have no time to consider; de grand Monarch, my Maitre, want me for
a Lieutenan General, to make de War again Holland and Flandre, to burna de
House, and to kille de Man, Woman, and Shilde, as de great Monarch does, for
his Glory. And I will speak one proud Word for my self; he has not one
Officier in his Armee dat burn, make de Ravage, and kille de Man, Woman and
Shilde, better den my self; no indeed.


Eh, mon Dieu! that is Sanglant cruel.


Pardon me, Madam, is de Discipline of War to put de Village and de House in
flame, and vid de Pistolet to shoot de Woman paph in de Ear vid big Bellees,
and de oder vid de Shilde in dere Arm paph paph, ver dum, ver dum, paph, paph,
and to put de Pike an alf Pike into de little Suck Shilde, and they sprawl,
sprawl, vid deir Arm and deir Leg, and make de ver pretty Shight; and take de
little Boy and de Garle, so high, so high, so high, and stick, and stick de
Rapier into de Bodee. Madam.


This is very Bloody.


Oh, no, Madam; they be de Enemee: de great Hero always burn and kille de Man,
Woman, and Shilde, for deir Glory.


If you Heroes be so cruel, 'tis enough to fright a Lady.


Ah, Madam, 'tis de Enemee: butte to de Maitress, de Heroes be jentle as de
Lamb.


This Rascal must be an Impostor: I scarce believe he is a French man; though I
have seen many a French Coxcomb, yet I never saw a French Clown before.


I will assure you, he is so: 'tis Ned Wildish his Frolic; and 'tis fit you
know it, before the business go too far. I'll tell you more.


Oh, the farther the better: I love mischief heartily.


If I should agree to your Honourable Proposal, I must lose you presently.


Ah, Madam, 'tis for mine Honeur, you fall go to my chatteau, my great House;
for I have several, vid de great Royaltee.


These Ladies have entertained your, and my Lord Count's absence, with some
regret and Chagrin, suitable to the occasion.


Ah, Madam, did you design to engross my Lord Count?


That was foul play, indeed, Madam. Well, he's a fine Person!


Quelle me Impertinance! Why would you bring them, Madam? I shall be a great
Woman; he is Captivated to the last degree, he has ten thousand Pistols a year,
and great Houses and Castles.


In the Air.


Oh, Fie; how her pitiful English Lord looks, in presence of my French Count.


Pray, my Lord, do my Husband the Honour to Dine with him tomorrow.


If your Lordship be not engaged, be pleased to honour my House at a Collation
this Night.


My Lord, your Lordship shall do my Husdand a great Honour, to take a Repast
with him.


My Lord Count --


They are all Amoreuse of him: his Eye is Cupid's Quiver, and his Beams the
Darts.


So, here's a very fair Assembly!


He's engagee to Night, Ladies.


Ladee all, you do me de very great honeur: I vish I could divide my self; but
I am engagee to wait upon this Lady, and her pretty Modere. I find, she lovee
me, by dat Lye she make for me.


I like your Frolic admirably, for all 'tis yours.


So well acquainted, to tell secrets, already!


They are very familiar: ha! 'tis most apparent!


Serviteur, my Lor: Serviteur, Monsieur Wildish. De Ladee ^ake mush of de
French Count: ma foy, you will see presentlee.


I am not a little afflicted, that I have been constrained to borrow my self so
long, from your Ladyship's most --


Oh, Fie! you smell of Tobacco to a great degree.


Ah, Madam! take my Peruke, and smelle de Pulvilio: here, Madam.


Mon Dieu! Obligeant! Here is Breeding, to divest himself of his chiefest
Ornament, to gratify my sense! 'tis very sine!


'Tis admirable, I swear!


Delicate, I vow!


Very fine!


Is de ver fine Hair, Ladee: I have a great deal of de best in England or
France, in my Shop.


How? in your Shop! Do you keep Shop, Monsieur? How do you sell it?


Morbleu, vat is dis? Begar, I will bite my Tongue. Shop! Shop! I no understand
English, Shop! Vat you call de place de Jentilman put his Peruke? Oh, his
Cabinet, his Closet.


Now you see, Madam Gertrude; would you have him understand English like one of
us? Je vous remercy; there's your Peruke again.


Sir, be pleased to read that Chartel, and give me such an Answer.


Gentlemen and Ladies, I kiss all your hands.


Pox take de Note: Ventre bleu, I can no read; but I believe is a Challenge.


Madam, Udsbud, we have drunk your Health in Bumpers Supernaculum.


Oh, fie! stand off.


Hold: de Ladee no love de smell de Tobac.


Are you there, i'faith? I hate the sight of a French Dog, and I will pluck him
by the Nose.


If I draw, they will part me.


Oh, Insolence! save the Count, save the Count.

There were three Men came out of the West,
To make Salt-petre strong, c.
Where are my Drunkards? where are my Drunkards? You flinchers, you sober Sots!
Where is my Iezebel, my Cockatrice, my Clogdogdo, as honest Tom Otter says? A
senseless Jade, with her Wit, and her Breeding: She steals away my Drunkards.
Old Spouse, Mummy; thou that wrap'st thy self every Night in Sear-cloths!


Consider I did kille de Count, and have de Blood upon me. Vel, Monsieur, you
will take de care o de business; Morbleu, Pox take de Note, me can no read, me
can no Fight: vat me can do vid de Shallange?


You have done rarely! let me alone; I'll protect you: but let's fly the fury
of this Drunkard.


Where is my Goad? my damned for better for worse? She has stolen my Drunkards
and my Wits from me. Where are my Drunkards? Rogues, let me go to my Drunkards,
and my Wits, you Rogues.

There were three Men came out of the West,
To make Salt Petre strong;
To turn it into Gun-powder
For to Charge the King's Cannon.

I Am the Count's Friend, but he will not engage me: he says, he always Kills,
for he never gives Quarter; and he will not be the occasion of my leaving my
Country. He must into France, he is a great Officer; he has laid Horses, and
will be ready to escape.


Is he so inveterate an Enemy?


Yes, and Fences like a Provost: he throws in his Passes quick as Lightning,
and hits what Button he pleases.


Then, if I reap the Honour of the Field, my Laurel will be greater. At the
East end of the biggest Church, you say, a quarter of an hour hence: I will not
fail. I kiss your Hands, Sir. How ever the unfortunate arrival of this Count,
who has prodigiously insinuated himself into my Mistresses affections, may have
ruffled and disordered the wonted serenity of my Temper; yet in all occasions
that may occur, I assure you, Sir, you shall ever find me Rational and Civil.
Your humble Servant: the Time fleets quick away, and Honour calls.


This formal Coxcomb, I find, is stout; and the Count will find some trouble in
him: but 'twill advance the Farce, to have the Ladies, who are stark mad after
him, see or hear he's soundly Cudgell'd. Humphrey, if you make not haste, the
Count will be before you: he'll wait alone, at the East end of the great
Church.


A Pox on him; does he Fence so devilishly, and never give Quarter? Bloody
Rogue! But, what care I, I make no more account of this Count, than of a
Jackanapes.


Never without a Conceit!


Take me without a Jest? But I'll be gone, and make the French Count dance a
Minouet. Your Servant.


This fellow may be a Coward, by his Vapouring.
Have you found the Count?

Yes, Sir* very melancholy at your Lodging, where he has told me the secrets of
his Heart: he bewailed this unlucky Quarrel, which he apprehends so much, that,
were he not sure, as he says, of the Love of Mrs. Fantast, he would leave his
Countship, and run from Bury immediately. But he is now coming hither.


Well; go about yous business, and say nothing yet.


Vell, Monsieur, vat is become of dis business vid Monsieur Jean Trim?


I told him, I was your Friend, and I have appointed him a place to meet you
in.


Begar, I will no meet.


I have passed my Honour, you shall be there.


Morbleu, I will no be dere: Jerny, I will tell you de secret. Dis fine Ladee
Maitres Fantast is in Love vid me: Ventre bleu, I will no fight; if I do, I am
de very great Fool indeed, to lose de great Fortune; for if dis dam Rogue run
me trough de Bodee, me lose de Maitress.


How, you Rogue? Lose her! you shall never have her: as great an aversion as I
have to her, the Frolic shall not go so far.


Ma foy, you be mistake: de Frolic shall go more far; yes indeed.


Don't trouble your self: I have given him that Character of you, that he
trembles at you; he'll never dare come. But we must be there, for our Honours
sake.


Is de Coward indeed?


I have met Sir Humphrey, and I have Challenged him to Fight with you, for the
tweak he gave you by the Nose: and told him, I would be your Second.


Jerny, vat is dis? Begar, I will no kille two: I will no meet dat dam Rogue,
ma foy.


I have appointed him; you must be there: I believe he is a Poltroon; but you
will be Cudgell'd by all the Men, and scorned by all the Women, if you take the
Tweak by the Nose. Come along with me, I'll tell you more.


Is better to take de Cudgel upon de Shouldere two tree four time, den to have
de Rapier trough de Bodee one time: yes, a great deal better.


Allons: here's Company coming.


There goes the Rival to my Lord: Oh, may he prosper in his suit, and cure my
Lord of his short Fevor! I am sure, he can never be so mean, to love one who
shall love another. But here he comes.


Not all the ill Fortune I have ever met, can equal this; that he, whom I have
loved so long, so true a Friend, so much a Man of Honour, should be my Rival! I
cannot blame him for it neither; he has broken no Trust: and any Man, that
looks upon her, must be subdued, as I am. But my hope is yet, she is unapt to
Love. Oh, Charles, did thou see Ned Wildish this Evening?


Yes, my Lord: even now, he went into the Abby-ya^d.


But, what says my Mistress to the Present, and the Letter, which I sent?


She was not at home. Here is your Golden Box, full of Jewels: It is the finest
Present I ever saw made to a Lady. My Lord, I beseech your Lordship, let one of
your Gentlemen carry 'em.


Is my service then become irksome to you?


Oh, no, my Lord; pray frown not: I'll plunge into the Deep, I'll run into the
Fire, to do you service. Pray be not angry.


I cannot tell what 'tis should move thee to it; but thou art still averse to
the proceeding of my Love.


I love you more than ever Servant loved a Lord: and 'tis my fear for you. My
Cousin in Northampton shire is of Kin to her, your Lordship knows; and I once
heard her say, she had too great a Spirit for a Wife.


She has all the Beauty and Wit, of her whole Sex in her; and none of all their
Vanities. Did thou not Observe?


I did, my Lord, that which your Lordship did not.


Ha! what was that?


My Lord, I fear I shall offend.


Yes, if you tell me not.


Did you not perceive she made a difference in her looks, and entertained not
every man with equal sweetness?


He stings me to the Heart!


I may mistake; but yet, methinks, there is one Gentleman, whom she beholds
with greater favour, than what seems indifferent.


It is her gaiety of Temper: you are too Jealous.


It is for you, my Lord: pray pardon me. Alas! what Interest can I have, but
yours? I should be loath to be Officious.


What means the Youth? sure, young as he is, he is in Love with her; and Love
will nourish even the highest Ambition: for why should he be so concerned?
Where is the Letter, which I ordered you to give my Mistress with the Present?


It is here, my Lord.


Ha! what do I see? 'Tis Wildish's hand! To the fair hands of -- How came you
by this Note?


My Lord, the Note? Ha! 'Twas my mistake. I did, at the beginning of my
Discourse, intend to show it to your Lordship; but found you would be too much
moved. It dropped from Mrs. Gertrude, after Dinner, and I took it up.


Why did you not restore it?


I, knowing the Hand, thought I might do your Lordship service in showing it to
you. Will you not read it?


Did you?


Oh yes, my Lord, knowing your Lordship was so highly concerned; and found it
so familiar --


It was Impertinent.


My Lord!


It was not honest.


My Lord, my noble Lord, pray pardon my misguided Zeal for you: impute it to my
Youth, my small Experience, my mistake of Honour; Forgive me, or my Knees shall
grow to the Earth.


Rise, and learn better: to open others Letters is mean, and dishonourable.


How glad am I to have Instruction from you! You are a Man of strictest Honour!
How shall I expiate my Fault, and gain your Pardon?


I pardon you, and will impute it to your want of Knowledge: and to make
atonement for it, you shall return it to her, and make her what excuse you
can: Go instantly, and find her, and give me the Present, with my Letter


Into how sad, and how perplexed a case, has my too headstrong Passion brought
me, which every day increases, while my hopes grow less? What prospect have I
now, or glimpse of Comfort? She, in a little time, must love as I do. What shall
I say to her? She will discover me: She said, she never saw one yet so like her
Sister, but for the colour of my Hair; I overheard her: What shall I do? Hold:
If this Jealousy should make him fight with Wildish, I am lost! I'll follow
him; for, sure, I shall be Valiant in his Cause. Oh, wicked rashness!


'Tis a fine Moon-light night: these Fellows are Poultrons, and dare not come.


'Tis de grand pity dat de Coward should be suffer to live indeed, me vould
hang de Coward. Begar, is time to go.


We must stay a little: if they come, I'll run Sir Humphrey through the Lungs,
while you whip the other through.


Jerny, vat, stay for de Coward? Begar, I scorn to stay for de Coward: ver well
indeed, de man of Courage stay for de Coward! is no Raison for dat.


I see two coming toward us; they are them two.


Pox take him, he does Love de Tilt: Ma foy, is all one for dat; begar, I will
no meet them: they have affronte me, to make me vait so long time; and I will
put de affront upon them, an leave them now they be come.


Monsieur le Count, come back: What, will you leave me to two?


Hum, hum, hum; me will no come back.


Mr. Wildish.


My Lord.


O, begar is my Lor; de Coward will no come.


I have somewhat to say to you, which concerns me nearly.


My Lord, I lately have perceived something of you, that lies heavy at my
heart.


I never yet met with misfortune which could equal this.


I know too well your meaning. I never yet had any Cross, which I with ease
could not have born before.


We have been Friends.


Long Friends, and true.


I think so.


How, my Lord, do you but think so?


I never, till this day, had the least doubt. What pleasant Conversation, what
Endearments, what mutual Kindnesses, have passed betwixt us.


And are you weary of my Friendship, that you resolve to break with me, by
doubting it? How have I loved you present? with what regret have I sustained
your absence? how often have we ventured our Lives for one another Honour?
And am I changed, my Lord?


Oh yes, Friend, we are both Changed: I have a Mistress now, so Charming, it is
impossible that I should Live without her.


I have a Mistress too; so much above her Sex, so Fair, so Witty, so Engaging,
that I must Enjoy her, or I perish!


How? Enjoy her! Take heed, Friend.


I mean all Honour to her.


Would you possess the Mistress of your Friend?


Would you possess the Mistress of your Friend?


How, Sir? do you Echo me?


The Case, my Lord, is so. Once, there was nothing in the World so dear to me,
as you; but, since I knew my Mistress, I would quit all that is precious in the
World, e're I would lose her.


What do I hear! Sir, have you then possession of her?


A Sanguine man is never out of hope: I have her in Imagination now methinks.


Methinks, you go too fast, Sir; you know my Temper: Sir, how long do you think
that I can bear a Rival?


I can consider nothing but her, and her, and only her.


You slight me, Sir.


I hope I have more manners*


Oh, how I tremble! They will Fight, and I am lost for ever!


They seem in de Passion. If they two be mad, as to make de Duel, they will take
me for de Second, against dat little Jentilman, de Page; and I have seen de
Page in France Fence like de Diable: he will put his Rapier in my Bodee; me
will steal away.


I am agreed upon Articles with her Father, who is her Guardian.


And I am endeavouring to agree upon Articles with her: which is a shorter way.


But 'tis not so fair a way.


How, not so fair?


No: nor can any man enjoy her, while I live.


'Sdeath! what do you say? Defend your self.


I am always ready to do that.


Help! help! murder, murder! help, help!


Hold, Sir; hold: you want a Sword; pray make use of mine.


You are generous, my Lord; my Life's yours, and so it was before, and
whatsoever I could call mine was so; except my Mistress.


Let us be still such Friends: there's not a man on Earth I value equal with
you.


They are embracing! blessed Heaven! I hope my Lord's not hurt:


What remains then, but we proceed like men of Reason; each take his way to
gain the Divine Creature's Love? And, since one must be for ever miserable, let
her be Arbitress of our two Fates.


You still possess the same Honour which you ever had; I am now your most
unhappy, but most faithful Friend.


Is de Fight done? Oh, they embrace, is no dangere.


You most impudent Cowardly Dog! if you had not run away, you might have parted
us, and not have suffered Friends to Fight.


Hold, hold: is ver well, you kick de French Count! Begar, you show de
Breeding: Kick de Count! you take me for de Barbier; ver fine, yes indeed.


Sirrah, you shall be Count no longer: this Frolic shall not turn to earnest.


I will be gone, an get de Ladee, for all dat. Adieu: Jerny, me will no stay
to be kick.


My Lord, I must take off this Rogue, my Honour may be questioned: for, tho I
hate the Affected Creature, I would not have this go on to a Marriage, or a
Contract. I'll follow him.


You have reason: by what I over-heard, 'twill come to one of them* if you
prevent 'em not.

Come Charles, come along with me: this Evening all the Company will be in the
Fair, and there I must meet my Mistress.


What deadly sound is this! On every side I am lost!


I could not have imagined, that this French Count should be so devoid of
Breeding, and the Decencies which become all Gentlemen, as to make me wait so
long, upon so important an occasion.


This damned French Count will stay here for ever, I think: A Pox on him, for a
Blood-thirsty Rascal! But I will outstay him, and face him down, that I waited
here for him; and there may be hopes it may be taken up. Gad take me, he's a
Murdrous Rogue, and I will not Fight! I durst have sworn he had been a Coward.


Will he never appear?


Oh, Madam, I am ruined, if my dear Count should Fight! my Passion is extreme,
as his for me.


I cannot blame thee, Daughter: he is the most Charming Person, that ever my
eyes beheld!


Oh, Madam, should he fall, I never can survive him! He las, mon pauvre Ceur!


Sir Humphrey was seen come into the Church-yard.


Here is Company: I must retire.


Ounds, the Rogue will find me out! he comes upon me!


Ha! who's this?


Oh pox is it he? Jack, Jack, little Jack, nown Jack, my Lad!


Jack! Jack! Jack! Sir, you are too familiar, and by your Apish Gesticulations
have endeavoured to expose my Person on all occasions; for which, now we are
opportunely met; I will Chastise you, as becomes a Gentleman.


Why Jack! nown Jack! what, art thou mad? Pray thee kiss me.


I will salute you in another manner.


Why Jack, Jack, prithee leave fooling.


Draw: or I will Sacrifice you to my just Revenge, this very individual Moment.
Have at you.


Hold, hold! this Rogue will kill me.


Oh Heaven! there they are Fighting! Run, run, and save the Count! Oh, save the
--


Oh, save the Count! save the Count!


Take your Life; I give you your Life: and learn how you provoke me another
time.


Pish! are these two here?


Take notice I give him his Life.


Is this all? Madam, let's go.


Come on.


Sir, you have good Fortune only, but no Valour, to boast of.


Sir, I have disarmed you, and there's an end on it.


You will return my Rapier, as becomes a Gentleman?


Gad take me, not I, till you come in the Fair: for ought I know, a Whim may
take you to fight again.


Sure, I have a greater share of Honour, and a greater stock of Breeding, than
to commit such an Error against him whom Fortune has presented with that
advantage.


Uds bud, I'll not trust you: follow me. But I am resolved to Cudgel this
damnable Count, for a Coward.


And I likewise: and surely Cudgels will render him obnoxious to the Hate and
Scorn of Madam Fantast.


I'll lay him on. Come, follow me.


That Persons should frequent Bury, and suck in no more Breeding, is I must
confess Prodigious!


Where is this damned Count? Oh, here. Do you hear, Sirrah? I am told, you have
succeeded so far with this Fantastic foolish Creature, that she will Marry
you.


Den, begar, I have make de French Count ver vel.


If you make any farther application, I will cut your Throat. But, in the first
place, I will un-Count you, and cut off your Train, Sir.


Vel, vel, vat you please: ma foy, she Love me ver vel. Sall I make de
Fornication vid her? begar, I will no Marry upon my Honeur.


I had rather you should do that, than Marry her; but I will have no more Love
to her: and then carry on your Countship as much as you will; you may have your
choice of others. But be sure to use the Cowards scurvily.


I warrant you, I will beat them.


Then Cudgelling will ensue.


Jerny, he cut my Troat! Begar, me make de great Laugh at dat: he no dare
behanga; me will have de Ladee for all dis; me know de Law.


Oh, Monsieur le Count, Serviteur!


Monsieur, your humble Servant.


Monsieur, I am yours, I assure you.


Oh, my Lord, we thought the Fair had lost you.


Madams, me kiss all your Hand: me would be two tree four Count for your
saka; begar, me will make two tree four Cuckold, and Marry de Ladee too.


Oh, my most cruel Mistress!


Oh, my most ungracious Servant; can I come no where, but you must cross me
with your unlucky Countenance?


You can come no where, but I will endeavour to Bless my self with the sight of
yours, or I must die.


Oh, that it were in my Power to make a Lover hang himself! then I would
Triumph for the rest of my poor deluded Sex. They talk of being Martyrs, and
Dying, and Dying, and such stuff; but would I could see one of 'em Die once:
that would be worth the seeing.


My pretty Charming Tyrant, sure you are not so bloody minded!


Well, I am of opinion, that a Lady is no more to be accounted a Beauty, till
she has killed her Man; than the Bullies think one a fine Gentleman, till he
has killed his.


I must beg leave to be a little more serious with you.


Never; why, you'll come to the Point then, which I can never endure: Love in
Jest, is but just Tolerable; but serious Love is duller than a Rhyming Play.


My case is now more desperate than I thought: I have discovered, that my
greatest Friend, a man of Worth and Honour, is my Rival.


Ne'er the more the desperate for that; 'twas full as desperate before: but, ^f
you be a true Friend to him, give over troubling me.


How! have you then made choice of him?


Of neither: but, if I can be once rid of you, he is somewhat modester, ^nd I
doubt not but to shake him off. Here he comes.


These free-spirited Ladies are hard to be subdued: a Man may get Ten modest,
meek, and shamefaced Ladies, e're he can conquer one of these; they have not
the Heart to deny.


My Lord, I beseech your Lordship, no Love in the Fair.


How hard is my Condition; who have so Cruel a Mistress, and so deserving a
Rival! and, which is most unfortunate, my greatest Friend too!


In the first part of my Character, you do me too much Honour: but in the
later, you are Just.


So; here's a fine Subject for a Love and Honour Poet! But you are in no danger
of him; for I am resolved to keep my self free, and incline to none* Methinks
'tis Air I tread! how light I am without a yoke!


Oh, my little Gatty! Ha, my Lord! here's Flesh and Blood for you! will she not
make a rare Bedfellow?


By, Sir, what do you mean? Farewell.


You must both Sup with me, my Lord, and you, Sir. I have had Company with me;
and we have had such a Discourse about Wit: they, of the New Wit; and I of the
Old Wit, and my own things I writ in the last Age.


Well, and you run 'em down, I make no doubt.


Servant, Ladies.


Oh, Monsieur Le Count, I am o'rejoy'd, to see you safe!


Safe, Madam! Begar, Trim and Sir Noddy be de two great Coward indeed, and me
beata them like two Dogua; yes, fait.


If your pretended passion have Reality, follow me to our House: you are in
danger for my sake, and I will stick to you with my Life and Fortune; come
instantly, there are Spies upon us. Madam, come away.


I come, dear Child.


Poor Rogua! she love me extrememant! Begar, Monsieur Vildish is an Ass, an me
will have de Ladee for all him.


What? a French Barber and Peruke-maker, and no Count! Hang him, he would not
Drink, I thought there was no good in him.


I am to beg a Thousand Pardons of you: 'twas my Frolic, but 'tis gone too far;
for, if you don't prevent it, he may marry Mrs. Fantast.


Nay, faith, 'tis no great matter if he does: would he could marry the Mother
too; for, under the Rose, never man was so plagued with a couple of
Impertinent, Fantastic Jades, as I with them: And to complete the Affliction,
they must pretend to Wit before me, and will allow me to have none!


That indeed is most unsufferable.


Ay, is't not?


Now is your time, Count, to put an affront upon that Coward.


Let me alone for dat. Begar, I am amaze, dat de Coward dare show his Face
any where: Begar, I will pluck you by de Nose, because you ^o dare me a me.


And I will make that return which becomes a man of Honour to do in like
cases.


Jerny, vat is dis? vat you do? You Cane de Count! Begar, you show de Breeding.
Hold, ^old: vat you do? Monsieur Vildish, my Lor, stand by me.


Are you there, you Coward?


Eh, Morbleu! vat is dis?


Now it works.


Passing good, i'faith! Come, let's to my House.


Come, Gentlemen, you shall go before the Alderman: he'll teach you to make a
Disturbaace in the Fair.


Sweet Mr. Constable: Sir, Sir; Mr. Constable, Mr. Constable!


Away with 'em, I say.


I Shall have nothing but Uproars and Quarrels in my Family: Trim and Sir
Humphrey have quarrelled with the Count, about Madam Fantast, with a Pox to her;
and even now my Lord Bellamy and Mr. Wildish have fought about you, as the Page
said, and I heard it.


How? Fought about me!


So I say, I shall have my foolish Family the whole Discourse of this
Tittle-Tattle Town. Look you, Daughter, I knew not of Mr. Wildish's Love to
you; they have both very good Estates: but Mr. Wildish is a Wit, a great Wit,
in faith. I leave you to your Choice.


I thank you, Sir: then I choose neither of 'em, nor any other.


Thou art so wild, and such a skittish Filly, you must be Tamed and Married.
Come, come* determine your choice suddenly, which they have past their Honours
shall determine them, or Battle and Murder may ensue about you.


I am not so vain, to believe that.


Be not so foolish to believe otherwise. Look you, they are coming in, and you
are to sit upon Life and Death: be an upright Judge, and do not delay Justice;
I must have an end of this Suit presently. Farewell.


A very grave Judge shall I be, without doubt! But I think the Petticoat may
vie for Wisdom and Sincerity, with the Long Robe, before our late Restoration.


Madam, this Letter, which fell from your Ladyship accidentally, came into my
Lords hands; and he commanded me to deliver it to you, unread, and unopened,
tho he knew the Hand.


How? my Note fallen into his hands! How unlucky was this! Ha, gone! How
strangely this Youth resembles my Sister Philadelphia! This is handsomely done
of my Lord, and like a Man of Honour.


Madam, behold a pair of Rivals, hand in hand, and Friends.


Who come to prostrate themselves at your Feet, and must from your fair Mouth
expect their Doom.


Oh, she will choose my Lord, and I must perish!


To whom ever you shall give leave to continue your Servant, the other will
quietly Retire, and suffer his hard Fate with all the Patience that he can: But
if I am Rejected, I shall be for ever miserable.


And to me, Heaven knows, not all the World besides, can recompense the loss of
you.


Ah me!


Are you resolved to be in Earnest, and would you make me so? I have not yet
determined to marry any one.


Must we then both sue on, and try by constant Service to obtain your Heart?


No, no: you will oblige me more, if you will both desist. I have that Joy in
Freedom, that I cannot think of parting with it yet.


You are born to Command, and always must be Free.


I love so, Madam, I must be your Slave for ever.


Yes, if you Love, so long I may keep you at my Command: but this same Whoreson
Marriage kills all Love, and makes best Friends fall out.


Nothing can ever make my Love decrease.


Yes, if I love again: as Fire takes out Fire.


Not all your Cruelty can Tame my Love: which, if it be so Raging now, what
would your Kindness make it?


Oh, Marriage is a Sovereign Julep; and Thirst grows less apace by Drinking.


Not where 'tis a Distemper, a Violent Fever; as all Love is, sure.


Too violent to last.


Madam, in short, if you do not determine which of us shall have leave to sue,
implicitly you give it both of us.


Is that your Logic, Sir? No: in the first place, I never will give you leave
to make the least Address to me more.


Oh, I am lost!


What's the matter?


Your Page is in a swoon: Help, help! Open his Breast. Oh Heaven! this is a
Woman!


A Woman!


She comes to herself.


Oh, Madam, I am your Sister: for Heavens sake, conceal me!


Run up privately into my Chamber quickly. I am amazed! This is Prodigious!


A Woman! Madam, I was never so surprised.


No doubt, you are surprised; and so was she: I believe she is run out of doors
in haste enough.


Accursed misfortune! I am undone for ever! I'll hasten and have a full account
of all this matter.





Will you be pleased then to begin with me? I am the truest Lover of my Sex.


If you are, I'll keep you so: for, should I think of Marrying you, I give up
my Dominion. No, no: I will Domineer seven years first.


'Sdeath Madam, seven years! What, do you take me for a Patriarch; serve seven
years? They might stay, who begun at Fourscore to get Sons and Daughters: but I
have but a short time to live.


I am sure, if I should Marry you, I should have but a short time to Reign.


Consider, Madam.


I have considered: Farewell.


How glad I am, to see you safe! Your Life is beset, for my sake; and I am
bound in Honour to protect it.


Madam, you have de great share of Honeur, and de great share of de Beautee;
but for de Rival, I will beat and kille them all.


They are a greater number, Monsieur, than you imagine.


Begar, all dat look upon you are de Rival; butte they dat make de Love, I will
make de Example: I had kille two of them just now, but de Fair all rise upon me,
and make me make de Retreat.


Heaven grant you be not blessee, Monsieur.


Me have no Wound, Madam, but vat you give me trough de Art: de Dangere of de
Rival, Morbleu, me despise; me will run them trough de Bodee dus, in Quart,
Second, Tierce; hah, hah, hah.


Oh je suis rouge, you make me blush: I fear, you have decouvre more of my
Tendress, than I would have had you.


Madamma, if you will make me your Husband, you stop all de insolance of de
Rival, and make me appy beyond de Varle: else, me will be bound in Honeur to
kille two tree Rival every day, every day, Madam, and dat will be Bloody varke;
butte is all one for dat, if you no Marry vid me, me am desperate.


Tho, I must confess, I never met such Charms in any Person; yet I should be
censured for being too precipitous, in agreeing so soon to your Honourable
Proposals.


Vee will go into France, beyond de Censure, to de great Chatteau of min, as
big as Amptong Coor, vid de great Canaille, de great Park, de grand Royalty,
vid two tree grand Chatteau beside: butte it must be sudden; for de grand
Monarch expect me.


Come, Daughter, I have been acquainted before with my Lord Count's Honourable
Passion towards you; and he is a Person of undoubted Excellence: you have full
Ten Thousand pounds; and I shall think your Fortune and your Person well
bestowed, upon a noble Gentleman of such grand Merit.


Oh, fair Madamma, you do me de great Honeur: me no care for (...), it is de
Person; dis hope make me all on Flame. Madam, get de Parson, de Minister, to
dispatch de business presantlee.


Sir, it is Night: 'tis not de Canonical hour.


Is all one: de good Roman Catolique Priest will do it presantlee.


No, by no means; not till to morrow, Madam.


Break de Gold, and make de Contract den now: dat will break de Art of all de
Rival, and make them sneak, like de pitiful Roga, Begar.


Let it be so, Daughter: if by any accident you should lose the Count, we were
undone.


Ouy sans doubt, I should be most miserable.


Oh, Luce, you are come in season.


My Lord Count, your Page is here to speak with you.


Let him come in. Hey, Page. Let all be witness of de Contract: me will be no
Fourb, no Frippon. Upon de Knee me Swear to Marry dis Ladee Madam Fantast, to
morrow in de morning.


Daughter, you must Promise: Come, never be ashamed of so transcendent a
Choice.


I am Obedient: I swear to marry this Noble Person Mounsieur le Count de
Cheveux, to morrow morning.


Ah, Madamma, now break de Gold, de Broad Piece: so, is done; and now, rise up
ma cher Countess:


Eh, mon Chere Count!


Millions of Joys fall on you both. I weep for Joy.


Master, they have got the Report now all over the Town, that you are a Barber,
and Peruke-maker; your Equipage is revolted: Mr. Wildish's Men talk it every
where, and my Lord Bellamy's Men; and 'tis in every Body's mouth.


Begar, they be de Rogua, de Scoundrella: but begone from dis House, and be seen
no more here; and say, you can no find me.


Somebody's coming up; a Rival, I believe;


Where, where is de Closet? Begar, I vou'd kille de Rival before your Face, but
is not Decent, Madam.


Madam, I beseech you entertain 'em, while I retire with Mon cher Count.


Madam, I kiss your Ladyships fair hands.


Your Servant, sweet Mr. Trim.


Could I think to have lived to have seen this inauspitious Day, who had so
long admired the Beauty, and adored the Mind of my Divine Dorinda? That I,
having devoted not only my Heart, but all the Actions of my Life to her
Service, should be thus Sacrificed to a Frenchman!


'Tis a most fatal Mistake: she bears a most profound Respect towards the
worthy Mr. Trim.


At his first approach, her sad indifference appeared in the Bud, which since
has sprouted up to complete Scorn; And all for this Frenchman, this false
Count, this Impostor!


How? False Count!


Let me go: Begar, I will run him trough de Bodee.


You shall not* stir.


Yes; he is a false Count, and a true Barber and Peruke*maker.


Jerny, dam Rogue, make de great Lye of me! Let me go, Madamma; me will kille
de Rogue, for dis affront.


I will not part with you out of my Arms.


Sir, be not so temerarious: he is one of the Noblesse, and his Nature's
vindicative in Honour's Cause.


Hang him, Snip-snap Rogue, I contemn him; I Challenged him: he is a Coward,
and durst not answer my Chartel to meet me; for which, I exercised him
plentifully with this numerical Cane.


O de dam Lye Rogue! Begar, me must kille him, for mine Honeur. Morbleu,
Madamma, me did beata dis Rascal, like de Spaniel Dogue, indeed.


Let him Lye on: I'll revenge it.


You must pardon me, Sir, if I give not Credit to what you say: I am assured,
he's as brave a Gentleman as e're drew Sword, and a great Commander.


I do aver, That he's a Barber in Pickadilly.


Ha, ha, ha: that's a Jest! My Daughter and I mistake in Breeding and Quality!


Oh, Madam, I am come to vent my just Resentments, for the Slight your Daughter
has put upon me for this damned Rascally Count, whom I tweaked by the Nose last
Night. I Challenged him: he dared not meet; but, by Cross-biting, made Jack
here, little Jack and me meet, and fall out; and you saw me give him his Life,


If you hold your own at any rate, boast not once more: if you persist, you
will awaken my Fury till it may destroy you.


Prithee, Jack, hold thy peace: thou art the peevishest Fellow! But after all,
this Count of yours is a Rogue, a Cheat; he's a Barber in Pickadilly.


Ha, ha, ha: as if my Daughter and I could take a Barber for a Count! Ha, ha,
ha.


Udsbud, this Fellow's a Barber: I can prove it upon him.


Oh, Madamma, me beg upon de Knee dat you will let me but kille this two, and
me will kille no more, upon mine Honeur. De Devil can no make de Lye so.


Nay, Gad take me, I don't much care; I have a good Estate, and I shall have
Women enough Court me, where I need not apprehend a French Count, made of a
Barber and a Peruke-maker; a damned Coward too, that durst not meet me; but I
Cudgeled him so in the Fair, Jack, hah! that he will not be very Active awhile.


Ah, Madam, they provoke me beyond de Pa^iance.


Go in, I say; and let me alone with them.


Honour! hang him, Scoundrel: Gad take me, I Cudgeled him, till my Arm aches; a
damned Cowardly Barber and Peruke-maker.


And I chastised him in like manner most exorbitantly.


You are insolent, thus to Traduce a Person of his Worth!


Call you this Breeding; to Challenge and abuse a Person of Quality in my
House, for his Gallantry to my Daughter?


How dare you commit the Insolence, to Challenge a Person whom I favour? and
then to blacken his unspotted Fame? when I know you dare not meet him, and he
cudgeled you.


Admired Dorinda, the Faculties of whose noble Soul did use to shine more
bright, than to be led into so gross an Error as to mistake a Barber for a
Count --


Ha, ha, ha: My Lady and I mistake Breeding and Quality, and take a Barber for
a Nobleman! Mondieu, this is Malice, mere Envy of my Favours.


If my Daughter and I can mistake in such material Points, who can be Judges?


Nay, for my part, Madam, if you must love a Cudgeled Barber, and take him for
a valiant Count; make much of him, I shall desist: there are more Ladies,
Heaven be thanked.


Yes, Sir, there are more Ladies: but, if any man affirms, that my fair Dorinda
has an Equal; I thus fling down my Glove, and do demand the Combat for her
Honour. This is a nice point of Honour I have hit.


Why, Jack, Jack, nown Jack; what, art thou Mad? Jack, Jack!


Prithee Jack me no Jacks; but speak with Honour of my Mistress, or Draw.


What, more Quarrels in my House!


Prithee, Jack: why, I gave thee thy Life, Man. What, a Devil, if you be so
peevish* Fare you well. Ladies, your humble Servant: and a Pox of all Cowardly
French Peruke-makers, I say.


Quell insolance! I will not hear his Honour lessened so.


'Tis an undoubted Verity, most inevitably true, that he is a Barber, Madam.


'Tis false. 'Tis the basest malice to blacken men in absence: he is a Person,
in whom all Charms are met.


He Charms! Alas, Dorinda, whither do you stray?


Begone: avoid my Presence.


Can my Dorinda. --


I say, begone.


Will you not hear?


No.


I obey: I say no more at present.


Monsieur, my dear Count come forth.


Ah, Madam ma Chere, mine Honeur! de Barbier! de Peruke-man! Morbleu, vi do they
no call me de Tinkre, de Juggler, vat they will? If you please let me kille
this two Rogua, you will oblige me ver mush indeed, my dear Countess.


Would you kill me, by bringing your self into that Danger? No; Let the happy
Lovers, Love and Revel: -- Hi sunt de pace triumphi,
Bella gerent alios.



Here's some coming: keep my Lord Count in your Lodging, till Three in the
morning, I will have a Coach ready to carry you to be Married.


I beseech you, let me but kill one Rogua.


In, into the Closet.


But one, Madam. Call de Count, de Barbier! Jerny bleu, vat is dis?


Where is my most Wise and Subtle Spouse, with her Witty well Bred Daughter?


What have you to do with Wit, or Breeding?


Such counterfeit Breeding and false Wit, as you, old doting Fop, with the most
Affected and Fantastic Thing your Daughter do possess, I utterly renounce.


What says the Antiquated Wit, with his Shreds of old Poets?


Helas! you be de very fine Judge indeed! Ha, ha, ha.


Judge; ha, ha, ha! Have a care of losing your English, before you have gotten
another Language. But, do you hear? In earnest, do you two think that you two
have either Wit, or Breeding?


Think! we know we have: and that you want both, is too evident by your
Question.


Yes, thou old Lumber full of Frippery, we have: while, Heaven knows, you have
neither.


Ounds; what, I no Wit?


No.


No.


No, no! why, thou piece of Clock-work, thou hast no Teeth; no Hair, no
Eye-brows, no Complexion, but what cost thee Money: and, but for Iron Bodice,
art as crooked as a Bugle Horn; and I have made an Epigram upon thee.

She's bent, like a Nine-pence; and had been quite broken,
Had not Nature intended the Devil a Token:
Sure, Heaven in its Indignation hath made her,
And in her Mam's crooked Paunch Neck and Heels laid her.
There's Wit, old Sybil, for thee.


That Wit, you silly old Fumbler! You are an Opprobrium to the name of Wit,
thou ill-bred old Sot.


You a Wit! Eh Good! The very Spirit of Grubstreet Reigns in you.


Thou young Iezebel, with nothing natural about thee! thou look as if thou
were painted by some lewd Painter for the Sign of Folly, with such turning up
of Eyes, and screwing of Faces, with Convulsions in your Mouth: She makes wry
Mouths, and chews every word,
Like an old Sow, that simpereth with a new T --
You understand me. There's Wit for you both now, you Brace of Flirts. I no
Wit. quoth they!


If Rudeness, Railing, and Ill Breeding, may pass for Wit, you are plentifully
endued; but I despise it.


An old Soaker, with a white Head, a red Face, a Brain clouded with Fumes, and
empty of Wit, full of Whims and Maggots.


Come, come, you brace of Fopdoodles, where's your French Barber you are both
so fond of; and you are to Marry, Mrs. Wit? A pox on him: if he could Marry you
both, with all my Heart.


What, have you gotten that silly story too? Ha, ha.


This is raised by some London Wit, some Laugher: They call it Shamming.


A Barber! Ha, ha, ha.


Can we be deceived in Quality and Breeding?


Not know a Mechanic, a Barber, from a noble Count! very likely.





Go, Doatard, go: A Barber! Ha, ha, ha!


O filly! a Barber! Ha, ha, ha. Mondieu.


Ounds, you make me Mad, you most incorrigible pair of Fools. Well, for once,
I'll take more care of you, than you of your self: I'll have this Rogue Barber,
if he be above ground, and make an Example of him.


Here's one can tell you who your Count is.


Why, he is my Peruke-maker, and he is a Barber: I put him upon this Frolic,
thinking to make Sport in the time of the Fair; but never thought it would have
come to Earnest.


Ha, ha, ha: this is finely carried on indeed!


Envy, Malice! Believe a London Wit! a Jeerer! a Scoffer! a Shammer! ha, ha,
ha.


Ounds, I'll have no more Fooling about this Business: Produce this Barber; he
came into my House, has not gone out since, and you must have hid him.


I hide a man in my Apartment! I defy you, insolent.


I'll see; is he not behind the Bed? or in it? Hah, I cannot find him. He must
be somewhere in these Rooms.


What can provoke you to abuse my Daughter thus?


Must I, who have been Admired (I may say Adored) for Virtue, have my
Reputation questioned thus by you?


Are you angry to be kept from marrying a Barber?


How dare you Domineer in my House thus?


Stand by, Old Fool. Who is in this Closet? let me see.


Oh Heaven, the Count here!


Mon dieu! how came you here?


Come, Mr. Barber, instead of Monsieur Le Count.


Vat you mean? Begar, I will have de satisfaction: and, vere it not for de
Reverence to de Ladee, Begar, me vou'd cut all your Troat, Morbleu.


Why, Sirrah, Rascal, are you not my Barber and Peruke-maker? Did I not set you
up for a Count? Is not that my Suit of Cloths?


Do not provoke me to run you trough de Bodee: me am amaze! Ventre bleu,
Madam, they be all stark mad; they Dream, and they talk in deir Sleep: Jerny, me
can no tell vat they mean. Do they Treat de French Count in England dus? Oh
Brutal!


If you dare persist in rhis business, I will cut your Throat infallibly.


Let me alone: Begar, you no dare be Hanga.


Nay, then 'tis time to speak. Good Mr. Impudence, what have you to say to my
Husband?


Your Husband!


Yes, Sir, her Husband: So he is.


Yes, vat you say to dis Ladee's Husban? Ha! Morbleu!


Oh thou damnable betrayer of thy Daughter! I warrant you, I'll have a Trick
for him, and have him in the Pillory: you shall see your Husband peep through
Wood, I warrant you. Come, Sir, let's go.


He is gone with some wicked Design, or other: Let us fly.


Me will do vat you pleas, but Monseur le Count did never fly before.


Come, haste and escape, while he's gone out.


Had not my Sister, against my will, surprised me with the sight of you; I ne'er
had seen your Eyes again, but had found out some melancholy hole, and died for
shame.


I had been then completely miserable. She's excellently Fair!


With what Confusion must I look on you! I never shall behold you, but with a
Face covered with blushes.


The infinite Honour you have done me, o'rewhelms me with such shame; that,
being conscious how little I deserve, I cannot bear it: But, Madam, I will
never rise from hence, till you have pardoned me for every Command I had the
Impudence to lay upon you.


There is no colour for a Pardon: I owe you all the Thanks I am capable of
expressing; and I can forgive all the World, but my self. I beseech your
Lordship, impute the rashness of my Conduct to my Madness ^ that Madness which
my Father drove me to, who would have forced me to marry a Fop I hated: You I
had seen in public places often. What moved me to run to you, I know not; pray
think the best.


Come, Sister, Comfort your self; such things have been done: the knowledge of
this is in a narrow compass; you differ from your self so in this habit, you
cannot be known to have worn the other.


It is so much to my Advantage, that I will enquire no farther of the Cause;
but such it is, that makes me owe my Life, and all I have to you: which I shall
prostrate at your Feet:


My Kinswoman, my Lady Loveland, had never assisted me in my rash design; but
that, (Distracted) I know not how, she thought I would have killed my self, had
she not answered my desires.


A Thousand Blessings on her.


My Lord, I beseech you, do me the right to believe, That I intended to have
died e're you should have discovered me: for so, Heaven knows, I did.


That was unkindly designed, to lock up my chief Happiness.


Here are some coming; pray retire quickly.


'Tis true; this damned Count is a Barber! The Barber in Cook-row knows him,
and has seen him often at London.


I am undone for ever! Lost! Wretched! Miserable! Oh me! I will hide my Head
within some Hole, and ne'er be seen again.


How? what, this man of Quality and Breeding, a Barber!


What's that to you, Minx?


Could you mistake in Quality, and Breeding!


Oh, Impertinante!


What, married to a Barber!


How? Married!


What pity '^is?


Oh, I shall burst! He is not my Husband: I only said so, for fear my
Father-in-law and Wildish should have Murdered him in their Rage.


Vat, you Renounce me? Begar, me will make you know, dat me am your Husband.


Avaunt, thou Impudent Fellow.


I could burst my Spleen at this; but I have more serious business.


Is all one, Morbleu, if you no let me have your Person, me will have your
Monee, Testebleu.


Say you so, Sirrah? I have confined you from flying, and have Officers now to
wait on you: and I will have your Ears, and have you whipped.


Is all one for dat: me will loose de two Ear, and be wippe two, tree, four
time, for Ten Tousan pound; and, begar, me will have de Portion, do vat you
will.


Enter: here, take him away to Jail.


'Tis no great matter: she was a Proud, Fantastic Creature.


Nay, for my part, I am glad on it.


How sneakingly he looks! He is but a pitiful Fellow!


He looks like a Barber, methinks: Lord, that I should not discover it before!


I think, I was bewitched, for my part.


That I should ever take him to be a Count!


Madam, as in Duty bound, I wish you happy in your Choice.


Madam, much Joy to you, and your Count Barber: Ha, ha, ha.


I'll run away, and never see the Face of Man again.


Mr. Oldwit, farewell; Let me have my Coach, I'll never see Bury, or you, after
this Hour.


Who waits there? Bring the Coach and six Horses to the Door; and, Grooms, be
ready instantly.


Farewell for ever.


We'll Kiss at parting, faith.


What, on your Knees?


Ay, faith: and never had more Reason in my life.


Pray, Sir, down on your Knees once more.


Say thou so, my Girl?


Do you know this Face?


My Daughter! Oh Heaven! Ten Thousand Welcomes! as many Blessings on thy Head!
Rise, dear Child, where hast thou been? when did thou come? which way? I am
o'rjoy'd!


Ask no Questions; 'tis no time to ask Questions: here she is.


Can thou forgive me, Child? I'll ne'er endeavour more to force thy
Inclinations: Thou art free.


'Tis I must ask your Pardon, Sir.


Oh, name it not.


Now, Sir, can you part with what you love so dearly? If so, I beg her on my
Knees?


How's this? I am amazed! astonished! my Head turns round! How came this about?


By Love and Fate, that Govern every thing. I loved this Daughter, while she
was lost to you and me: and, if she will accept of me, I have all I wish on
Earth.


Have I my Senses, my Lord?


Again asking Questions! Come, come, do the Duty of a Father, and bestow your
Daughter, when she has, like a free Woman, chosen for her self.


My Head turns round! but come, Daughter: are you willing, Phil.?


Yes; here I will Obey.


All Joy be with you. I am not my self!


Joy to my Friend. This is a happy Turn!


I was Passionate to Marry the other Sister, because I loved her; but I think
it more reasonable to Marry this, because she loves me:


Call all my Servants, lay down all my Meat to the Fire, set all my Hogsheads
abroach: Call in the Fiddlers; let's Revel for a Month at least.


Hold, hold, Sir, a little. Madam, Madam.


Have you any thing to say to me?


Can you find in your Heart to dispose of your Sister to my Friend, and not of
your Self to me?


Time enough to think on that, after I have tamed you, and brought you up to
hand: you are too Wild for me, a great deal.


Come, Daughter, let me persuade you: Let it be a general Night of Joy.


I think I had as good: he is the most Importunate Lover, I shall never be
quiet for him. Well, I will Dissemble no longer: here's my Hand.


And here's my Heart: which you shall ever Reign in, while I live.


No Raptures. And know, for all my vapouring, I can obey, as well as ever a
meek, simpering Milksop on 'em all; and have ever held Non resistance a
Doctrine fit for all Wives, tho for nobody else.


Call in the Fiddlers: I am Transported! I am all Air! Sirrah, go you, and set
the Bells a going in both Churches: Call in all my Neighbours, I'll have him
hanged that's Sober to Night: let every Room in my House Roar, that it may keep
the whole Town awake. Here are the Fiddles: fall to Dancing presently; lose no
time.

Let all this Night be spent in Mirth, and Wine.
Let's lose no part of it in beastly Sleep.
This is the happy'st Day of all my Life;
I've found my Daughter, and have lost my Wife.

I Was our Authors Advocate last year,
And then ye very gentle did appear.
To him ye now should more Indulgence show,
Eight months he has been sick, and well we know
How very little a sick man can do.
But could he Write with never so much Wit,
He must despair of seeing a full Pit:
Most of our constant Friends have left the Town,
Bravely to serve their King and Country gone.
Our unfrequented Theatre must mourn,
Till the Brave Youths Triumphantly return.
Soft Men of Peace enough are left at home,
Daily to cram our House, if they'd but come:
They eagerly elsewhere in throngs resort,
Crowding for Places in the well filled Court.
Here one who has been fifty years a Knave,
Strives for a Place, with one foot in the Grave.
Another there, who did what e're he could
Against the Sovereign Author of our good.
Some who rode Westward at least ten miles down,
Some made Blue Coats at him, and staid in Town.
All these would have preferment, as if they
Had to this Glorious Change prepared the way:
Thus there are more admirers to each place,
Than e're a Celebrated Beauty has.
And they who cannot that advancement gain,
They think their mighty Merits ought to attain,
Steal to some Grumbling Club, and there complain.
Pox on it, things go not well, I'll change my side,
I thought they would for my great Worth provide.
Pray have less Vanity, and learn more Wit,
Come here, we've Places for you all most fit
Within our empty Boxes and our Pit.
But you who use to hiss, pray keep away,
And try to Write before you damn a Play;
'Twill then so hard a task to you appear,
You will not have the Heart to be severe.

