SInce you are all resolved to be severe,
To laugh and rail at every thing you hear,
I know not why a Prologue should forbear:
First we declare against the wary Wit,
Who having had the luck of one good hit
Dares not appear again before the Pit.
Some have done well; yet to remove all doubt,
Men must fight more than once to be thought st^t:
Others are too much in a scribbling vein,
As if they had a looseness in the brain:
These catch at every little slight occasion,
As our Gay empty Sparks at each new Fashion:
Perpetually they fumble for the Baize,
With Poems, Songs, Lampoons, and long dull Plays.
A man would wonder what the Devil they meant,
(Like ill-nos'd Currs that only foil the scent)
To mangle Plots, and they'll as boldly do it;
As our Sir Martin undertakes the Lute.
Now for the Women --
The little Fools into extremes are got,
Either they are stone cold or scalding hot.
Some peevish and ill-bred, are kind to none;
Others stark mad, in love with all the Town.
The famous Eater had his Worm to feed,
These Rampants have a hungry Worm indeed.
And as his ravenous stomach made him get
Tripes, Livers, and the coursest sort of Meat,
Our craving Damsels, rather than stand out,
With any raw-bone Coxcombs run about;
Making no difference of Size or Age,
From the Grim Hector to the beardless Page.
Learn little ones, for shame learn to be wise,
And not so very rank, nor yet so nice.
Who buries all his Wealth, and never lends,
Is more a Wretch than he that wildly spends.
And she who is so coy to fancy no man,
Is yet a viler thing than she that's common.
If you will own your selves concerned you may,
And for a Saucy Prologue damn the Play.

OH this Surgeon! this damned Surgeon, will this Villainous Quack never come to
me? Oh this Plaster on my Neck! It gnaws more than Aqua-Fortis: this
abominable Rascal has mistaken sure, and given me the same Caustic he applied
to my Shins, when they were opened last.


Good morrow sweet Mr. Crazy.


Good morrow Mrs. Errant.


How does the pain in your Head?


Oh I am on the Rack! No Primitive Christian under Dioclesian ever suffered so
much as I do under this Rascal: This Villain, that like a Hangman destroys
Mankind, and has the Law for it. Oh abominable Quacks! that devour more than all
the Diseases would do, were they let alone, which they pretend to cure.


Ay, but Sir, yours is a French Surgeon, and who so fit to cure the French
Disease as a French-Surgeon?


Yes, as one poison expels another; but if this Rogue should cure me, he can
cure me of nothing but what he has given me himself: 'twas nothing, when I put
my self into his hands; he has brought it to what it is, and I think I must
deal with him as they do that are bitten with a Viper, crush the Rogues Head
and apply it to the part, for if I do not kill him, he'll be the death of me.


It may be Sir, he favours the Disease for Countrey's sake.


A Curse on these French Cheats, they begin to be as rife amongst us, as their
Country Disease, and do almost as much mischief too: No Corner, without French
Taylors, Weavers, Milliners, Strong-Water-Men, Perfumers, and Surgeons: but
must I be such a fantastic Sot as to be cheated by them? Could not I make use
of my own Countrymen, that are famous all over the World for cheating one
another?


I am heartily sorry Sir, for you could not have been ill in so unseasonable a
time.


Oh! why Mrs. Errant, what's the matter?


Do you think he could not mend you, and patch you up to hold together a little
for the present?


Why Mrs. Erran^? Oh death! what's this I feel?


I was with Mrs. Striker the Habberdashers Wife, this morning, to sell some of
my little French Toys, as Fans, Points, that had been worn a little, and
Jessamine Gloves; but chiefly a Maid of Honours Old Gown, that fitted her to a
hair; and a delicate white Mantou: and a pair of the neatest little Shoes that
had been worn two or three days by a Countess, that bewitched the very heart of
her.


Well! and how does my dear Striker? Does she not desire to see me poor
heart.... Oh what a twinge was that?


She does most impatiently wait the good hour, that she may steal from her
Husband and give you a meeting at the WhiteHart at Hammersmith.


Alas! dear soul! I know she loves me entirely. Oh my Shin! 'tis there now:
sweet Mrs. Errant sit down, and do me the favour to chafe it a little.


Ha, ha, ha! this is pleasant, faith; this Itinerant Haberdasher of small
Wares, is a Ranger of the Game, a very BawdErrant... chafing of his Shins too!
ha, ha, ha.... but how could I think any of that Profession could be otherwise,
procuring lies so in their way, they cannot avoid it.


She is a most delicate person, I love her infinitely, and I believe she has no
unkindness for me.


Ah brave Crazy! do st thou hold up thy humour still? Art thou still in love
with all Women?


Faith Raymund I cannot but have an affection, nay a veneration for the whole
Sex yet.


I'll swear all Women ought to believe thou love 'em, for thou hast suffered
more for them than all Knight Errants in Romances ever did. I'll say that for
thee, and thou hast as much Passive-Valour as to Pill and Bolus, as any man in
Christendom.


It shows him to be a person of much generosity and honour.


Perhaps there is not a truer Lover of the Sex than my self among Mankind.....
Oh my Shoulders!


Thou hast reason, witness that twinge else: well certainly so much Love and
Pox never met together in one Man since the Creation. Nor faith do I know
which is the more tolerable Disease of the two.


Prethe Raymund no more of this Raillery.


Do not scandalize Mr. Crazy so; the Venom of his Disease is all gone, this is
but a Rheum, a mere Rheum.


Why thou Villain Crazy, wilt thou never leave wheedling Women thus*


Prethe^ leave off; I tell thee 'tis no more.


Why what impudence is this? If thou go on in this, thou art not fit to go
loose, I will have a Red Cross set upon thy Door: why don't I know thou hast
taken Bushels of Pills and Bolus's enough to purge all the Corporations in the
Kings Dominions.


You make good use of your time, to get drunk so soon in a Morning.


Hast thou not raised the price of Sarsaperilla, and Guiacum all over the
Town.. the Drugsters are very ungrateful Fellows, if they do not give thee a
Pension for the good thou hast done to their Trade.


Mind him not Mrs. Errant, he's lewdly drunk...


I protest Sir he's the least in my thoughts.


Why thou Sot thou, dost thou talk of Love, and say thou hast no Pox; why I
will not give Six Months purchase for an Estate during the term of thy Natural
Nose! I shall l^ve to see thee snuffle worse than a Scotch-Bag-Pipe that has
got a flaw in the Bellows.


Let him alone, let him alone! this is a way he has with him.


He's a very uncivil man, let me tell you that.


Why hast thou not for these seven years observed thy seasons like the Swallow
or the Cuckoo; with them thou stir'st abroad in the Summer, and with them
retir'st in the Winter; why thou art a kind of Vegetable, that peep^st out thy
head at the coming of the Spring, and Shrink'st it in again at the approach of
the Winter; while we that drink Burgundy, like Bay-trees, are green and
flourish all the year.


Why, hast thou the confidence to compare Wine to Beauty?


Ay, I thought what a proper man you were.


Wine, that makes you swelled like Trumpetters with pimpl'd Faces; and Eyes
staring like Pigs half roasted, prominent Bellies, perished Lungs, tainted
Breaths, parched Livers, decayed Nerves, perpetual Fevers, Dropfies, Gowts,
Palseys, and a Complication of more Diseases than you drink Healths.


With what ease can I return upon thee; Women, that bring you to sore Eyes,
weakened Hams, S^iatica's, falling Noses, and Rheums, Crazy.


Now out upon you for a base man, to revile Women thus.


But then Wine, the Bond of humane Society, that makes us free as absolute
Princes, rich without covetousness, merry, valiant, witty, generous, and wise
without allay; that inspires us far above the level of humane thoughts, and
affords us diviner Raptures than the deities of old did to their prophets in
their Ecstasies.


But then Beauty, Heaven's brightest Image, the thing which all the World
desires and fights for; the Spur to Honour and all glorious Actions, without
which no Dominion would have been prized or Hero ever heard of; the most
gentle, sweet, delicate, soft thing --


O dear Mr. Crazy! Go thy ways, thou art a sweet man.


O Death! what have you done? You have murdered me; oh you have struck me just
upon a Callous Node, do you think I have a body of Iron?


Sir I beg your pardon, I had quite forgot it, this Rheum is very violent.


Oh, oh.


The most sweet, delicate, gentle soft thing, go on Crazy.


The most delicate, sweet, gentle, soft -- Oh Devil what do I endure?


G^d morr, good morre.


Oh, oh!


'Tis ver vel, come to our Business, ve will proceed to de operation.


Oh my Neck and Shoulders.


Yes, yes, I was ver vel assure of dat; it will put you to de pain ^ndeed; but
if dere be such tinge in Englande for draw, den I am no Syrigin indeed.


Oh you damned eternal Son of a Whore Quack!


Cacque morbleu! Vat is Cacque? I know ver vel vat is Son for a Whore, but vat
is Cacque vertu-bleu I can no tell.


'Tis a certain Rascal, that cheats a man both of his money and health.


Just such a Rascal as you are.


Begar, you are mistake, Cacque is no French vard; it is for the Damned
Sy^igin-English. Mais vat is de matre vid you?


Damned English Surgeon! Why you impudent Villain, did not you when you came
first into England, ride upon a Milch Ass, and did not you maintain your self
by selling her Milk to people in Consumptions, till you set up for an
abominable Barber, but for the damned roughness of your hand and the filthy
noisomness of your breath, could get no Customers; and then were fai^ to set up
with six pennyworth of Diaculum and a Collection of rot^n Pippins, and pretended
only to the Cure of Broken Heads; and had you any other Customers for a year
together than the Cudgel Players of Moor-Fields, or now and then a Drawer that
was wounded w^th a Quart Pot.


I am amaze, vat is de business?


Sir, I must make bold to take my leave.


Your Servant sweet Mrs. Errant, present my service to Theodosia, and let her
know I have a passion for her, you understand me.


Fear it not Sir --


Ver vel, you make de jest of me.


Was not the next thing you arrived at, the inestimable secret of Brimstone and
Butter for the Cure of the Itch, and had you any one Receipt more?


'Tis ver vel indeed Mr. Crazy! I am come to be abuse.


Why, have you the impudence to deny this: Good Mounseur Pullin, do not I
remember when you first set up for the Cure of this Disease you pretend to,
with only two pound of Turpentine and a little China, a few Hermodactyles, a
pound or two of Sarsaperilla, and Guiacum; two Glyster-bags and one Syringe:
Could all thy wealth arrive at more Materials than these?


I must confess, since, you have learned some little experience, by marrying an
unsound English Strumpet, that was peppered by some of your Ambassadors
Footmen; she, by the many Courses she has gone thorough, has taught you
something.


Tete bleu, dat I should be dus affronte.


If you had been good for any thing, there were Diseases enough in your own
Country, to maintain you, without coming to us, with a Pox to you.


O Jernie, vat is dis? I have cure ten thousand Gentlemen of de Clap in Paris,
and to be abuse! --


Am not I obliged to you then, that you would not cure one in England? for
Raymund, now there is not a Woman here, I confess to you, he has not wholly
cured me; but on my conscience I can do a Woman no hurt.


I am assure dat all de Operators for de Clap in England can no do so much as
I do to cure you.


Why hast thou not been longer in curing him than a Chancery Suit is depending?


Did not I put my self into your hands when it was first a Ghonorhea virulenta?
Did not you by your damned French Tricks, your Styptick-Injections, and your
Turpentine Clysters, suffer me to be Chord, to come to Caruncles, to the
Phymasii, Caries, Pubii, Bubones, Herniae.


Nay, have you not driven his Enemy out of the open Field, where he might have
been easily conquered, into his Strong Holds and Garrisons.


Ver vel, ver vel.


Is there any one Symptom which I have not had.. oh - - have I not had your
Carbuncula, Achrocordones, Mermecii, Thymi, all sorts of Ulcers superficial and
profound, Callous, Cancerous, Fistulous.


Hey-brave Crazy! thou hast terms enough to set up two reasonable Mountebanks.


Have I not had your Pustul^, Crustatae, and Sine Crustis Ver^cae, Cristae,
Tophi, Ossis, Caries, Chyronya, Telephia, Phagadenia, Disepulotica.


What art thou going to raise the Devil with these hard words?


Vel! and have I no cure all this? Have I no given you de sweat, not in a
damned English Tub or Hot-house, but I have taught you to sweat in de Cradle,
and vid Spirit of Vine in de Paper Lanthorn, ala Francois, and taught you de
use of de Bain d'Alexandre.


And has all this done any thing but driven him to his Winter Quarters, where
he domineers as much as ever; Oh I have him here.


You have given him so many Bolus's in Leaf Gold, that the loathsomeness of 'em,
has made his Stomach turn at a Twenty Shillings Piece, and that's the reason he
never carries any in his Pocket.


Do you hear that Rascal? I have been cheated enough by you; but I'll bilk your
Cribbage for you.


But assure de Law will give de remede.


And that thou m^yest be cursed sufficiently for this, may thou be as long in
Law as I have been in Physic.


Prithee curse him to purpose, may he be choked with Bolus's, drowned in
Dyet-drink, or smothered in a Privy-house, that he may die by that Excrement by
which he lived.


Diable, no curse me, give de Madiction to the Dam Whore.


O Impudence! I protest to you Raymund she is as pretty a civil young Lady, and
between you and I, a Person of Honour?


She was a very Pocky Person of Honour.


And on my Conscience and Soul loved me as passionately as any young Lady in
England.


Besides, if she were a Whore, her Calling is to give it, and yours to cure it,
Sirrah.


Shall I suffer so excellent, so virtuous a Person, to be traduced by your fowl
Mouth, you Rascal: Get you gon, you Dog. --


O vat is dis? Elp, Elp.... vel, vel, dere is the Law for do me Justice -- --
--


Sir, here's a Lady alighted out of a Coach, and coming up hither.


'Slife a Lady! give me my Hat and Peruke, quick, quick, prithee Raymund help
me quickly, that I may appear well before her.


If thou can appear no better than thou art, she'll not like thee very well.


So, so! you say I am not in favour with the Ladies.


Your humble servant sweet Mr. Crazy, I have just broke loose from my husband,
and come to kiss your hands. Oh cry you mercy, you have a Stranger with you; I
protest if I had known it, I would not have been so bold.


Though I be a stranger Madam, I am ready to be as well acquainted with you as
you please.


Dear Madam Striker stay a little, this is a Friend of mine, you may trust him
You see Raymund, alas, I am no body with the Ladies, not I. This is a Person of
honour.


No doubt on it.


Sir, I beseech you misconstrue not my innocent intentions, I heard Mr. Crazy
was not well, or I should not have seen him.


If I were not, I should be obliged to my distemper, were it the Gout, and be
very loath to part with it, to be deprived of the honour of seeing you; but I
am very well.


Your servant, sweet Mr. Crazy, I heard you were not well.


Another! they flock about this Fellow as Ravens do about a sick man for the
reversion of Carrion.


How came she here trow? I do not like this Mr. Crazy.


Your servant Madam Striker.


Your servant Madam Frisk.


Really, Madam Frisk, this is such a favour as will make me eternally indebted
to you -- but I am so well, as I intended to come and kiss your hands.


But how came she here I wonder?


Pray Madam, do me the favour to tell me who she is?


Sir, I'll inform you present^y. Truly Mr. Crazy, this is not civil, to be so
familiar with such a one as she is in my presence; I thought for my part that I
had been enough for any one person.


Mr. Crazy, one word with you; I wonder for my part Madam Fli^ts should have no
more breeding than to interrupt us.


Why I'll tell you Sir, what she is, she is a person of mean descent; I think
her Father was at first a Journey-man Taylor or some such thing: She was
debauched by one Mr. Brisk an Inns ofC^urt-Gentleman, and I am sure 'twas well
f^r her, she was so; for before that she went in Paragon and Pattens: for my
part I would not be known to be in her company for more than I'll speak of.


This is pleasant.


Pray Mr. Crazy favour me with one word; Lord, Madam Frisk, cannot you let one
speak a word with ones Friend?


Your friend, alas poor soul, sure I may pretend to as much interest in him as
you can.


How's this? you pretend!


No Ray^und, I have no share in the Ladies favours not I! Do you see how
jealous the poor things are of me, poor Hearts! Oh my Shoulders! they are both
Persons of Quality -- But Madam Striker, pray mistrust not my affection.


Pray Madam, let me beg the favour to know who she is?


She! why she's a pitiful Habberdasher's Wife, her Husband's a poor sneaking
Cuckold; she has a very ill reputation, for my part I don't care for being seen
in her Company, that's the truth on it.


That's very well.


She used to appear in a scurvy Fleetstreet Dress, but now she comes into the
Pit at the Play-House, and makes brisk Reparties to young Sparks.


What to have such a scandalous Woman as she come to your Chamber* truly if it
were not here, I should have soon left her company. One may have one Friend I
confess, or so; but to have two or three club for one, I scorn her.


I see there are Punctilio's of Honour among Whores as well as Bullies.


But pray Mr. Crazy, come hither; you do not tell me how you like my new
Petticoat here?


Lord, Madam Frisk, why how should he like it, 'tis but an ordinary ^light
thing; for my part I do not like it at all.


No matter what you say, as long as one does.


Who's that one, Crazy?


'Slife you hurt my Arm; but that one is I man, that thou should not find
it.


But pray Mr. Crazy how do you like this Point about my Neck?


'Tis a very pretty Ornament, but you give an Ornament to that.


That (...) is a foolish Counterfeit Point.


I come, come; I come by my things honestly.


Ay, and I as honestly as you too; but pray how do you like this Ruby upon my
Finger?


'Tis very glorious indeed.


Is not this a very pretty Locket?


Let me see what's a Clock? 'tis just Eleven --


'Tis a quarter past by mine.


Yours! Ay I think so; yours is a scurvy Silver Watch, and does not go right.


Good lack a day, a Silver Watch! why it should go with any Gold Watch in Town
for 20 l.


Yes, yes; 'tis very like a Silver Watch can go as well as a Gold one? ha, ha,
ha --


Hey! they use him as if they were bidding for him by Candles ends.


Alas poor silly Creature!


But, Madam Frisk, from whence come all these fine things?


Ha, ha, there is a way that we have Sir.


But Mr. Crazy, I must of necessity leave you; my husband will ^e come home:
but I'll see you again.


I am sorry you must make me unhappy so soon, but have you a Coach?


Yes, I have a Hackney waiting below.


O fie! a Hackney! I hate 'em all they are so uneasy: I have a Coach with a
Coronet waits for me.


Ay, ay, there's some could borrow Lords Coaches too, if they would do as
others do, Madam Frisk, let me tell you that.


I don't know, Madam Striker, but I believe they would if they could.


Well, well, I like a Hackney; but 'tis no matter, Mr. Crazy, your servant --


I must be gone Sir too.


Will you eclipse me so soon?


Indeed I beg your pardon for eclipsing of you, but I cannot help it at
present; your servant --


Have you such Ladies as these come to vifit you?


No Sir, I keep no such ill Company.


Company! why they are Persons of Honour.


Yes, yes, I know Habberdashers Wives and Taylors Daughters are Persons of
Honour; fare you well, fare you well, and keep your Persons of Honour to your
self.


But do ye hear Sir?


No Sir, no; no wheadles upon me, I am to dine at Chatolins with some Persons
of Honour -- Adieu.


'Sdeath! how unlucky is this, he should discover it, Boy.


Sir.


Come in and dress me: Oh my head and shoulders --


I wonder my Lady Loveyouths Woman appears not yet; this was the time
appointed! if'twere an assignation for her self, she would be more punctual:
Waiting Women have always the Grace to keep touch for that. Sir, Go tell Mrs.
Bridget I am here.


I will Sir --


I am very uneasy, till I hear an Account from her of my Letter to Theodosia,
Excellent Theodosia, I have sought many opportunities to make my passion known
to her; and upon her receiving it, depends my life or death.

Oh Mrs. Bridget your servant --

Come! you are my little Genius from whom I expect nothing but good; what's my
doom?


Why Sir, she read your Letter, and whether ^he would not trust me, being a
Servant to her Aunt, or what it was, I know not; but methought your Letter did
not seem so agreeable as I expected.


He's a faint Soldier that gives off for one repulse, if she were as hard to
be taken as Candia, I'll not raise the Siege: but you are my dear Confident, do
me the honour to receive this little earnest of my Gratitude: I must confess it
is too small a Present, and yet enough to make a Waiting Woman betray her
Country, were it in her power.


Really Sir, you make me blush.


No more, no more; but dear Mrs. Bridget, can you tell me why your Lady so
narrowly watches me, that I could never yet have opportunity to speak to her
Niece?


Well! there is nothing I can keep from you; the truth is, my Lady loves you
most passionately, and desires no such Rivals as her Niece, I warrant you.


Prithee don't rally with me, but tell me --


You are strangely dull, if you perceive it not your self; does she not admit
those that have less fortunes, as Mr. Drybob and Mr. Brisk to make love to
her, and yet bars you of that liberty: Can this be any thing but her love to
you?


It is impossible.


Well, it shall all out; the truth on it is, she can neither think nor talk of
any thing but Mr. Raymund in her very sleep; she embraces me when I lie with
her, and calls me Mr Raymund; I remember once she did it so eagerly, I protest
I was afraid of a Rape.


If this be true she tells me, I must disguise my love to her Niece, or I shall
be sure to lose her.


My Lady, Sir you know, has a great Estate, besides her Jointu^e, and has the
disposal of Theodosia absolutely given her by her B^others Will.


What u lucky Devil designed this to cross me.


If you please to consider, 'twould be no ill bargain for you; I should be very
glad of the honour to serve you in it.


But I have heard she is not yet assured of the death of her husband, indeed I
have been told he parted from her about three years since upon some discontent,
and never since was heard of.


Yes Sir, my Lady heard of him from Venice, from whence about two years since,
he went to the War at Candia, and we having never hea^d from him fince,
conclude him dead.


'Tis very probable, she is employed by her Lady, I must not trust her. It must
be so, I see there is no way to come to the Niece, but by the Aunt -- Wonder
not that I am am surprised at th^s News, since it is a happiness too great for
my belief.


Do you think it a happiness?


So great, that I am doubly paid for the loss of Theodosia, in gaining so
excellent a Lady as my Lady Loveyouth; and I'll assure you there I should have
made my first address, but that I heard she had made a Vow of Widowhood.


And did you believe that Vow Sir?


No I warrant you. I would as soon credit a Knight of the Post, as a protesting
Widow. Dear Mrs. Bridget let me entrust you with my love to your Lady, since
it concerns me so nearly.


Sir, I shall be very glad of this occasion, and can the more easily promise
you my assistance in it; since Mr. Sneak, whom I have no small power over, can
persuade my Lady to any thing.


Is't he that speaks nothing but Greek or Latin, or English Fustian? He's
Fellow of a College, if I mistake not.


The same Sir.


Indeed I have heard he is a Well-wisher to you. But he's out of Town --


He will be in Town this Afternoon, I had an Epistle from him, which tells me
so, which perhaps is one of the pleasant'st you ever read.


What's this?

Why this is conjuring.


O Lord Sir, yonder comes Mr. Drybob; walk off I beseech you, I must not be
seen with you. --


Well, I know some Sots, that are still presenting their Mistresses rich Rings
and Lockets, till they spend more than their Portions in the wooing o^ them;
but let 'em match me for a Present. He e's a pretty French Dog shall charm the
Heart of Theodosia This is as new a Present it may be as can be thought on,
besides, really 'tis very pretty and fantastic.


What has this Fop got under his Arm?


Besides, this Dog I stole from my Mother, who loved him as well as if she had
whelp'd him her self; and I can say so many fine ingenious pretty things upon
him too, besides a Song that I have made of him that shall bewitch her
certainly.


How n^w Mr. Drybob, what are you designing some Reformation in the Government,
you are so studious?


Oh Mrs. Bridget your Servant! my little Factor in Love! ha! I think that was
no ill expression of mine; but what News of the Cargo of my Love, which I
entrusted you with? Will it turn to account? I think by the way, that thought
of mine was well enough? Oh what think thou?


O admirably well said!


Nay, it may be I do say as many fine things in a year, as ever a wit of 'em
all; but let that alone.


I think so, you are the Chief of all the Wits.


I! no alas, not I; I know they will have me one amongst them, do what I can:
but deuce take me, if I care much for the Name on it. Indeed I do value my self
upon Reperty a little that's the truth on it, and not to lie to you, I must
confess I am very happy in that; but alas! who can help it.


But what have you got under your Arm Sir?


A pretty little French Dog, which I intend to sacrifice to my Mistress;
Sacrifice! observe that word -- hum, ha.


What Sir, shall he die for your Mistress?


I thank you for that, ha! ne'er a Dog in Christendom shall have the honour to
die for my Mistress, I intend to do that my self, if there be occasion for it.


How then Sir?


I intend to present him to her delicate Ala^laster hands, as an Hieroglyphic
of my affection; Hierogliphick? ha, ha, well, I am amazed to think how these
thoughts come into my head. I am, as to matter of Jests, as my F iend Ovid was
in Verses, Quicquid conabor dicere -- now as I hope to live, this came into my
head before I was aware on it.


Good lack! 'tis wonderful.


Nay, faith, 'tis strange, as thou say, but would I might ne'er stir out of
this place, if it was not ex tempore, I protest and vow, as I am an honest man
it was.


It is impossible.


Nay, prithee, dear Mrs. Bridget, believe now, deuce take me, if it was not;
but faith I think Hieroglyphic was very pretty and Catachrestical. -- hum.


Sir, If you please, I'll sacrifice this Dog to my Lady Theodosia. --


No, I beg your pardon, I will my self make an Oblation of him to her, as I do
of this little Tribute of a Purse to you.


Your humble Servant Sir.

If this Trade holds, I shall get as much by Bribery as ever a Magistrate in the
Nation can --


But pray how does Theodosia receive or entertain my Love? no, no, my Flame, my
Flame? ay Flame: that's well enough expressed too, hah.


Very well Sir; and yet I must tell you, you have a very dangerous Rival, one
Mr. Crazy.


He, pshaw! a pox on him, he has no wit; a damned dull fellow, he cannot break
a jest in an hour: but may I have the liberty to go and caress my Mistress.


No Sir, at present she is not visible.


Visible! ha, ha, ha, very prettily said upon my life and soul; well I see thou
art happy in thy thoughts sometimes as well as I am.


Hold Sir, I hear my Ladies Bell! I am called, adieu.


Adieu -- my dear Love Factor, as I said before.

Here comes Crazy, ha, ha, he is my Rival, pox on him; I fear him not; no, no,
Th^odosia has judgement to distinguish between a dull fellow and a man of
parts. Hold, I must conceal my Dog.


I am your Servant Mr. Drybob.


O Sir, your humble -- but whither are you marching with so galliard and
facetious a Countenance, as if you intended this day to storm Ladies hearts --
hah.


Ha, ha! faith to tell thee the truth, I am going to visit a Lady a Person of
Honour.


By what Name or Title dignified or distinguished?


Well, honest Drybob, thou art my loving Friend; I'll bring thee to her: She is
upon my honour, the most delicate bewit^hing Person; and I think I may say
without vanity, has some affection for me.


He little thinks I am his Rival. Pox on me, if he be not one of the dullest
fellows. I could find in my heart to write against him, and I'll be hanged, if
in a Months time I did not write his Head off.


On my soul and conscience she is one of the most ingenious and judicious
Ladies -- and in good earnest I don't use to be mistaken in these things. I
could tell you many symptoms of her affection.


Symptoms of affection; to give the Devil his due, that's not amiss; but I'd
be hanged if I did not break his heart with Reperties in half an hour for all
this; poor Sot.


As Sir, I'll tell you some.


Mr. Crazy I arrest you.


Arrest me! at whose Suit? Hold, hold, hands off. Oh you hurt my Callous Node.


Do not tell us of this and that, I arrest you at the Suit of Mounsieur Pullin,
the French Surgeon. Come away.


Let me go. -- --


Prithee, dear Drybob, bail me.


Hold Crazy, do not name me, I was bound with a wit for a sum of money, and
'tis come to an Execution, as most of their debts do; and there is a Warrant
out against me -- I dare not stay -- --


Oh I am undone, beyond redemption.


So, so, Crazy is caught as sure as a Rat in a Trap.


O my Shoulders! I am murdered --


Help, help, here, will you kill Mr. Crazy?
Help, help.

Out you Strumpet, what do you come to make a rescue?


Murder, murder! help, help.


Good, honest, worthy, loving, pretty, dear, good-natur'd Gentlemen, stay but a
moment.


No Sir, no; come along. --


Nay, dear hearts, dear souls, I have no money, but here is a Ring, I had at
the Funeral of my Uncle, take that to let me have the honour to speak with that
Lady.


Nay, I'll be glad for my part to do any Civility I can for a Gentleman.


What's the matter, Sir, are you arrested? I'll fetch you bayl.


No it is no matter for that; but dear Mrs. Errant thou art my life and soul,
prithee tell me, how dost thou find Theodosia inclined, dost thou think she
loves me.


Without question she has some kindness for you, she confessed to me you were one
of the wittiest persons.


No alas, not so neither.


And one of the handsomest Gentlemen she ever saw.


Nay, fie, fie, that was a little too much faith, she's a very Judicious
Woman.


But you have a dangerous Rival one Mr. Drybob.


He alas! alas!


Come Sir, we can stay no longer.


Hold but a little, but one minute.


How now Crazy? are they hurrying thee to base durance, and contagious prison?


Yes Raymund, at the Suit of Pullin the French Surgeon.


Stay ye Dogs.


Who are you? What would you rescue our prisoner from us? then have at you.


How now Rascals?


Hey brave Mr. Crazy, hey brave Mr. Raymund: So Sir, now you are at liberty,
I'll take my leave; I'm in haste to go to Mrs. Striker the Habberdashers Wife.


And wilt thou remember me dear Mrs. Errant?


Ay, ay, I warrant you.


Your most obliged Servant --


Come on Crazy, thou behav'st thy self bravely.


O S^r, I should have fought better, but for some damned Pustles upon my Arm,
and some Acrochordones upon my right Shoulder; but really Mr. Raymund this is
such a deliverance, that nothing can show my gratitude, but to bring you to see
a Person of Honour hard by.


What a Habberdashers Wife and a Journeyman Taylors Daughter --


Nay prithee Raymund, no fooling; I'll tell thee who 'tis, 'tis Theodosia; I
hope she is a Person of Honour Sir.


Are you acquainted with her?


Acquainted! yes, yes, I shall not say much, but it may be -- but I am a fool for
speaking -- yet thou art my friend, she commends me extremely, and says I am
the wittiest Gentleman and the finest person, and if I may with modesty tell
thee, I have some assurances of her kindness.


Death, if I did not know the vanity of this Rascal, this would strangely move
me.


But why do I talk, you'll not believe I am in favour with the Ladies, but I'll
bring you to her and convince you.


Come on Sir, I'll go with you --


Come, come, Gentlewoman, deny it not to me; I perceive your inclinations well
enough: but pray let me advise you not to set your thoughts upon Mr. Raymund.


What's your reason, Madam?


My reason, Minx! Come, come, there's something in it that is not fit to tell
you.


I understand the mystery well enough, but I will set my heart upon him in
spite of her ravenous Ladyship, that would make him her prey.


Besides, he's a wild young Gentleman.


And you would have the taming of him.


I believe he'll dispose of himself in another place too I'll assure you --
This insolent Girl would come in competition with me forsooth. Do not I allow
you three Suitors, that's enough for any reasonable Woman one would think*


And three such too! Madam!


Such, I'll assure you Mr. Crazy, Mr. Brisk, and Mr. Drybob, are three as
agreeable persons and as pretty Sparks perhaps.


And as well matched as any three Baboons in Europe, why, Madam, I would as
soon marry a Drill as any one of them. The little Gentleman a Horse-back, that
leads the Bears to persecution, is a Prince to any of them.


Ay, ay, I know her drift, she would rob me of Mr. Raymund, but if I have any
prevailing Charms remaining in these Eyes of mine, she shall not.


They Husbands, why a Nunnery were more tolerable, to be mewed up with none but
musty old Women, or your melancholy young Eaters of Chalk. I had rather be kept
waking at a Conventicle than hear the name of them.


You are a foolish Girl! I protest they are pretty Gallants and Wits of the
Town.


Gallants and Wits! Buffoons and Jack-puddens; rather condemn me to a little
City-Shop-Keeper, with whom I may never have new Gown and Handkercher, but half
a year behind the Fashion; where I may be bred to rail against the Ladies of
the Court, among my public She Neighbours, and to mince and simper at an
Up-sitting or a Christening.


Ay, ay, go on, go on.


To live all the Week in a melancholy Back-room, and on Sunday go to Church
with my Husband in a broad Hat, strutting before me, and the Fore-man of the
Shop having me in one hand, and a huge Boss'd Bible, as big as I am, in the
other.


Good Mrs. Dis-dain make much of them, for I'll assure you, you are like to
have no other; I'll look to you for Mr. Raymund I promise you.


No other! why I had rather marry a Country Justice, that lives in a
Hall-place, two mile from a Town; that's too covetous to keep a Coach, and too
jealous to suffer me to come to London: that makes me rise by five a clock in
the morning to look to my Dairy, and to receive Geese and Capons as Bribes to
his Worship for Justice.


How your Tongue runs?


Or when I have a Holiday, to have the liberty to walk two mile to fill my
Belly with Stewed Prunes or Rashers of Bacon at a poor Neighbours-house.


Good Mrs. Nimble Chopps they are fit for your betters.


Yes, for your Ladyship, why don't you choose one of them.


So I would, Mrs. Malapert, had I not vowed to live a Widow.


A Widow, that keeps a Vow against Marriage, were a more monstrous Creature
than the Fish taken at Greenwich.


How now Sauce Box? Oh Bridget where hast thou been?


Oh Madam, I have News for your Ladyship, that I hope w^ll not be unpleasant.


For me? What is't?


F^om Mr. Raymund, Madam.


How's th^s?


From Mr. Raymund, alas, what can that be?


Madam, I'll tell it in your Ladyships Ear.


Nay, nay, pray speak it out -- well he ^s an excellent person --


Madam, he told me, he had an extraordinary passion for your Ladyship.


What says she?


For me! O my dear Raymund, I am sure I have for thee -- What did you say
Bridget, I did not mind it?


That Mr. Raymund had a very great passion for your Ladish^p, and I am sure he
loves your Ladyship most violently.


Can I endure to hear this?


Me, fie, fie, why sure he did not tell thee so?
I am transported at this happy News --

I'll assure your Ladyship he did, and but that I would not take money to
betray your Ladysh^ps affections, offered me good round Fees, to be his
Advocate.


Perfidious Man!


I told you Gentlewoman he had disposed himself in another place.


But Madam, you a^e resolved to live a Widow.


I know not, I am as unwilling to marry as any body; but you know where
Marriages are made, alas, there's no resisting of our Fate. How I am o'rjoy'd
that I shall get him from this confident Girl! who would be my Rival.


Here he comes, that I could breath infection on him.


Good lack! he's here, and I am not half in order. Bridget you have dressed me so
carelessly to day.


Ladies your most humble Servant, I make bold to introduce a F^iend of mine.


Prithee peace, I can introduce my self.


He is very welcome upon his own account.


Madam, you infinitely oblige me.


Dear Madam, I kiss your fa^r hands.


Dear Sir, 'tis very civilly done of you.


Alas Madam! but I make bold to present this worthy Friend of mine.


Poxo' this Coxcomb --

Madam, I hope you will do me the honour to receive my duty from my self -- ha!
what means this scorn?


I knew 'twould vex her to see him make his applications to me.


P^ethee Raymund do'nt be troubled at her a version, you know I told you before
I was the only person in her affection; Faith I was afraid she would use you
thus.


Curse on this Fool, I will find some means to put a Ticket I have into her
hand, that will try her farther.


Sir, My Niece is a foolish ill-bred Girl, that knows not how to value a
Gentleman; but I hope you will be so just to me, to bell eve you are to me most
welcome.


If you knew how much I desir^d to be so to you, of all your ^ex, I fear I
should be less.


No Sir, I should not be so uncivil.


'Slife! she comes on faster than I have occasion for her. Madam, I beseech
you, Let the violence of my passion excuse me, when I presume to tell you that
I have so long suffered by your Charming (...), tha^ I can no longer keep my
passion in; 'tis now too head-strong for me.


Oh, he's a rare person --


This is an affl^ction which nothing can su^pa's but the love of this Coxcomb.


Well! 'tis most evident, she has a pass^on for me, but who can help it.


Kill not a young Gentleman at first dash Madam 'tis too inhumane.


Sir, I hope you intend nothing but honourable.


Injure me not to suspect my honour.


No Sir, by no means. Indeed I heard something of this from my Maid.


But I am now come to present my heart with my own hands.


Sir, If you please, let us retire a little and discourse of this business.


Madam! I humbly demand your pardon, I perceive your aversion to Raymund does
disturb you a li^le, had I known it, I would not have brought him; and yet
faith he's a very honest Fellow.


Do not believe so ill of me, to think any thing can give me a disturbance
while you are present.


Ah Madam, I kiss your fair hands; you are so obliging, really I know not how
to deserve it.


This conceited Ass can never know when he is abused.


Ladies! Your most obedient humble Footstool, I take the liberty to pay my
devoir here.


You are welcome, sweet Mr. Drybob.


Dear sweet Lady, your Vassal couchant. Raymund, servant Raymund. How now
Crazy?


How I despise this Fool?


But Sir, what were you saying, these G^ntlemen in^errupted us.


I will conceal my resentment, if Raymund should perceive it, 'twould make him
more insolent.


Madam, You see I am a bold man, that dare venture to come within Eye-shot of
you. It may be Crazy that was not ill said. But Madam, I would adventure any
danger to a^chieve a Kiss of your fair hand. Mind that Crazy.


Sir, you have conferred a favour on me, that I cannot be worthy of, tho I
should sacrifice all my endeavours to merit it.


This Coxcomb does not find that she abuses him.


Dear Spark of Beauty, your are very pleasurable; but I swear Madam by the Tip
of your Ear, that I love*you most immaculately, there again Crazy --


Death, this Rogue has murdered me! Oh my Shins, a Pox of his fine Sayings.


And as Hieroglyphic of that affection, I present you with his little French
Dog to be Servant to your little Bitch.


What an Employment has he found out to be Pimp to a Bitch.


Really Sir, it is a Dog of a very elegant composure.


Admirably well said, I protest and vow, Madam, is it not, Crazy. I know
'twould take her strangely; but what does this dull Sot hope for, that does not
say two good things in a day. But I beseech you, Madam, how does your little
Domestic Animal your Bitch. Mark that Crazy.


'Slife can't a man stand in quiet for this Rascal, if he be so damnable witty
I'll draw upon him.


Really Sir, the poor Creature, by reason of a great Defluxion of Rheum, has
sore Eyes and keeps her Chamber.


This Lady has an admirable wit, pox on me Madam, if I am not extremely
afflicted for the indisposition of her body.


Madam, here's one from Mrs. Errant --


Sir, I ^ake my leave of you at present, but shall wait on you immediately.


Your humble Servant, this is a happy opportunity. Madam, I beg the honour of
you to hear me one word.


No Sir, I have heard too much already.


Hah! this anger of hers is no ill sig^.


Prithee Raymund, for my sake, don't trouble thy self for this; Alas, I told
thee this before. That Coxcomb may be allow'd to be abused.


Raymund, thou see this Lady is most abstemiously squeamish, and yet that
damned dull Fellow Crazy does most per^inaciously caress her* Poor Sot, I pity
him*


Sir, Jam now returned, if you please to the point.


Pox of all impatient Widows.


Let me see, I forgot something I was to say of this Dog that was worth
Diamonds.


Madam* This is a very Impertinent Fellow, but I could wish we were alone, that
we might enjoy our selves.


That were too great a happiness for me.


No Madam, you deserve a great deal more.


Oh I have it.


Now is this Villain going to break a jest, and I dare not stand near him.


Madam, I must confess the Dog was not born in France, but of French parents
upon my honour, and is of as ancient a Family, and has as good blood running in
his veins (no dispraise) as ere a Dog in France. But Raymund I'll show the Song
I made of this Present, that may be is well enough.


Most excellent.


Ay is't not brisk, I am ashamed to give it to my Mistress, prithee do thou.


With all my heart. Madam, Mr. Drybob desires to present this to you.


^ He might have don't himself. Ha! what's this?

MAdam, The love I make to your Aunt, is only acted by me, finding I can never
come to an opportunity of revealing my passion to you, till by pretending love
to her I have removed all jealo^sies; you see at present she watches me so
narrowly, that I can find no occasion to tell you how much I honour you, who am
entirely yours

Raymund.

Forgive my unjust suspicion, this is a happy turn.


Come, Madam, I see it pleases you; if you please, Madam, pronounce it with an
audible voice, that this little Audience may communicate.


Ay, do so Niece. I have seen very pretty things of Mr. Drybobs; or if you will
I'll read it, give it me.


Heaven! what shall I do?


Madam, I fear you are not used to the hand, give me leave --


But I hope Mr. Drybob will be pleased to give it breath, and utter it
harmoniously.


My mellodious Pipes are a little obstructed, but to serve you, I will chant it
forth incontinently, hem, hem, but Madam, I want a Theorbo to pitch my voice.


Will not a Gittar serve?


It will in some measure supply the defect.


Bridget go fetch one --


Now Raymund observe. Crazy listen carefully, Methinks it should break this
Fools heart to see how kindly I am used. -- Hem, hem.

I hope it is your pleasure
To accept of this Dog for a Treasure,
From him that loves you beyond all measure
Which may mystically show
What to your Ey^s I owe.
That of your affection I have put on the Cl^g,
And am your most humble Servant and Dog.
With a Bow, Wow, Wow, c.
Ha, how do you like that Chorus, faith I think it is very new.


'Tis so, and in my judgement has as much sense as mo^ Chorus's.


Is it not very brisk and facetious, hah?


It is so, but in good t^uth I did not take you for a Dog before.


Now for a Reparty to knock down this Coxcomb, with hum -- Death it will not
do. Pox on it, I used to be more present to my se^f.


Madam, I beseech you let's retire from this impertinent Ass.


Yes, with a more impertinent one.


Now I have it, ha, ha, ha, though I am a Dog, I am not the Son of a Bitch
Crazy, ha, ha, ha.


Why Sir, who is?


Nay Sir, I say nothing, Mum is the Italian tu quoque word.


But Sir, let me tell you, if you be a Dog, and not the Son of a Bitch, you are
not lawfully begotten.


Ha, ha, pox on me, if it be notwell said; prithee let me kiss thee for that. O
my Conscience my Company makes thee witty.


Sir, since I find you are so honourable, if you please we'll with-draw.


'Sdeath I have plunged my self over head and ears before I was aware on it --


My Termagant Aunt has no mercy on her Lover.


Sir, notwithstanding your mirth, I hope you are ready to gi^e me satisfaction
for the affront.


This dull infipid Fellow takes a witty reparty for an affront, but I'll bear
up to him. Sir, if you talk of satisfaction, the world knows I am ready to
a^tend any mans motion in that way.


Gentlemen, I must retire a while.


I hope I shall have the honour to wait on you.


Madam I'll wait on you.


How shall I rid my self of these Fopps?


You wait on her?


Yes Sir I, for all you Sir. Lord, Sir, you are so hasty.


Do not be impertinent, to intrude upon a Ladies privacy.


Peace Coxcomb, peace. Come, Madam, I'll wait on you, I vow this Fop makes me
very merry.


Prithee stand by and learn more manners.


A^as, Madam, mind him not.


Farewell Gentlemen --


Keep back I say.


Keep you back then, if you go to that. --


COme, come, have you made your Will?


Yes, yes, don't you trouble your self for that, I have it always ready upon
these occasions.


If you have not, your Estate by being unsettled, may come* to be divided among
the Lawyers, after I have killed you.


Sweet. Mr. Crazy, don't think to f^ght me, for I am a Rhinoceros, if I care
any more for you than I do for a Feather of a Shuttlecock.


This will not fright the Rogue. --

Under favour I will run you thorough the Lungs immediately.


He shall not out-huffe me --

Look you Sir, I am no man to be frighted, though you look as big as a Dutch
Trumpeter; and I think that's well enough said too.


I am no Gentleman, if I do not stick you to the ground the first Pass.


I am the Son of a Corn-Cutter if I do not rip up your Puddens instantly. Death
this Rogue looks like a very Bussy d' Ambois.


Come on Sir, have at you -- yet if you will resign Theodosia, I care not, if I
be contented with a Leg or an Arm; not that I believe you have an interest; but
for form sake.


Resign my Mistress! ha, ha, if I should, do you think she would marry a Fellow
with a face that looks like a squeezed Turnip; and I think there's a Satirical
Bob upon you.


I must try some other way.


Why you look already as sourly as the Picture of a Stabbed Lucrece. I shall
break the Rogues heart with these Bobs.


Now Sir, pray quickly.


Hold, hold, I cannot pray very well, but I can run as well as most men in the
Nation, which will serve my turn better at this time --


Are you so nimble, I shall overtake you; 'Slife this Rogue has run his heats
at New Market I think --


This is a lucky opportunity:


Hold, hold, I say; I'll spare your life two minutes, till I wait upon you,
Lady.


You spare my life! I scorn your words; but I will in mercy let you take your
leave of her; since 'tis the last time you shall ever see her.


Ah -- what's here, a Sword drawn --


Be not afraid, Madam Frisk, I am fighting with a simple fellow here for your
honour.


For my honour? I was going to Mr. Brisk's Lodging, I'll call him to help you.


By no means. Dear Madam Frisk let me kiss but this fair hand, and that will
inspire me to kill twenty such Rascals in an Afternoon. -- But where shall I
have the honour to wait upon you by and by?


Put up your Sword then, I will be at my Lodging within a quarter of an hour,
and I shall have never a friend with me.


What will you ne'er have done there?


Madam, I will but run this Fellow thorough the Body a little, and I'll not fail
to wait on you.


If I fall on now I shall come off with honour, for she'll be sure to call some
body to part us.


Help, help, Mr. Brisk. Oh help, help Mr. Brisk.


Stand your ground you Coxcomb, do you think I am bound to fight you by the
mile.


Where are they?


There, I dare not stay to look on them --


Hold, hold! What a pox ails you? Hold, hold, you Wits can never agree among
your selves; you are not so strong a Party, that you should need to destroy one
another: you are fighting here as fiercely as Guy of Warwick and Colbrand the
Dane.


Faith Jack Brisk that's a pretty thought of thine, ha, ha.


Put up, for shame, put up, and be Pilades and Orestes, what was your quarrel?
I am afraid you do not understand these nice points of honour. Let me hear, how
was it?


He had the insolence obliquely to give me the Name of Son of a Bitch.


I protest and vow he gave me the ignominious appellation of a Dog, like a
damned Cynic Philosopher.


Why look you, here's your mistake already: Why I was called Son of a Whore at
Chatolins last night, and what do you think I did?


According to the Laws of honour I make no question.


P'shaw, you understand those things no more than a Costermonger.


Pish, you are out, you are out! Lord. Lord, To see the fault of men's
Education. I'll tell you -- when he called me Son of a Whore, I even took him
up roundly, and told him flat and plain I scorned his words. Now by this means
I put this Rogue out of his Road; the Sot knew not what to reply, I took such a
new way of affronting him.


This fellow is no better than a Coxcomb.


I am the Son of a Squi^rel, if this was not mighty pretty and exoti^k.


Ay, was't not, I knew I should vex the heart of him with this affront, and
upon my honour it incensed him so devillishly, that ha, ha, ha -- he gave me
three as good sufficient substantial kicks as a man would wish to see in a
Summers day, ha, ha, ha.


But what did thou reply to the kicks, Jack, ha?


Why faith when he kicked me, I told him very smartly, I scorned such ill-bred
Sots from my heart, and that I thought him as much below me as the fellow that
cries Tinder-Boxes and MouseTrapps; and then sung a Corant of Berkenshawes in
D'sol, re, fa, la, la, la.


By Gayland Ben. Buker, and Taffaletta, most judiciously managed.


At this he was amazed, and said I was a Stoic, but I sung on, fa la, la, la,
which by the way is an excellent Corant, thou shalt hear't, fa la, la.


In good faith it is a very merry and luscious Corant.


But come, my dear friends, embrace, embrace.


Sir, under favour, I do no more care for him, than I do for one of your
Operators for Teeth.


Nor I for you, any more than for one of those obstreperous wide-mouth'd Rogues
that cry Spratts, which I think by the way is another guess thought than yours,
ha, ha.


Come, upon my honour you shall embrace* and I will bring you to my Mistress,
and we'll have Fiddles and dance too.


Nay, if there be a Lady in the Case I submit.


And what care I, no body shall be too hard for me in kindnes^.


Your Servant, Mr. Drybob.


Your humble Servant Mr. Crazy.


So come, let's go to my Mistress, fa la, la, la.


This was a lucky ^' ancounter --


Good Mr. Sneak, you will overset me with Learning, you smell so strong of the
Un^versity.


Truly Mrs. Bridget, by the interposition of an Opacous distance between those
Luminaries your Eyes and my self, I have suffered a Deliquium, viz. an Eclipse.


You have not, I deny your Major.


I could delucidate this by way of illustration, but I confess Metaphors are
not argumentive; but your Eyes I say are like the Birds in the Hyrcinian
Groves, which by the refulgency of their Wings did guide the wandering Traveller,
and enlighten the most Opacous tenebrosity.


So much for this time, yonder comes a st^anger, we will retire.


I am your Servant in any thing within the Sphere of my Activity


Who's this --


You shall have conference with her, I will cause her to approach
incontinently.


What Coxcomb have we got here? well this disguise and my long absence will
secure me from my Wives knowledge, I am resolved to try her farther. 'Tis
possible that impertinence, that vanity and frowardness, that made me leave
her, by this time may have forsaken her -- Here she comes. I'll observe her.

Madam, Are you my Lady Loveyouth.


I am, would you have any thing with me?


I am the unhappy Messenger of ill new^ to your Ladyship.


Ill news? What can that be?


Your Husband, Sir Richard Loveyouth.


My Husband! What of him? I hope he is not living yet.


Madam, He is dead.


Dead! and how died he?


He was killed in Candia in that fatal Sally made by the French upon the Turks.


Art thou sure of it?


This is very fine.

Madam, I brought off his body, having then the honour to be his Servant, and
to confirm what I say, behold this Ring of his.


It is so; but I will not afflict my self farther, we must all die; the grief
that was due to his memory, I believing him dead, have paid alteady.


A very short lived grief I thank her for it. Ha! I have a way to make
discoveries of her, that may be cause of a Divorce, which Heaven send me.
Madam, the death of my Master has put me out of employment, and if your
Ladyship has any vacant place, I beg to serve you. I will do it faithfully.


You speak very seasonably; for my GentlemanUsher died last week for love of my
Shoemakers Daughter, you shall succeed him.


A worthy Employment --

Madam, I humbly thank you.


Much good may it do you, and as a beginning of your service, pray go into the
next room, and desire Mr. Raymund, a handsome worthy Gentleman, that waits
there, to come to me.


I will Madam -- A very good beginning --


Now Mr. Raymund I am assured of my Husbands death.


How Madam?


This honest fellow, whom I have entertained into my service, saw him dead.
Pray tell him you Sir.


O Devil! what's this? --

'Tis too true Sir.


And now Sir] I take the liberty to tell you I can no longer be refractory to
your honourable desires.


Sir, Here's a Letter for you left by a Porter; who said it required no answer
and is gone.


For me, what can it be?


Where's my Niece?


In her Chamber, Madam.


If she offers to intrude upon Mr. Raymund and my self; tell her we are busy.


I will Madam.


And do you hear?


Shall I believe my Senses?

I Cannot but be sensible of the honour you do me in your Professions of
kindness to me, and since this Paper cannot blush, I presume to tell you what
nothing but the restraint I suffer could force me to; which is, that your
person and your passion are esteemed by

You may trust this Bearer.

Theodosia.

Ah my dear Theodosia.


How now Minx? What makes you saucily intrude upon Mr. Raym^nd and me?


A certain curiosity of doing things that are forbidden me.


'Tis very well; but pray gape not after him. You may if you please call him
Uncle: In the mean time get you in*


Curse on her impertinent Jealousy.

Madam, I have too short a time to tell you how I am transported at your
Letter.


Pray take care, we are spied; talk with Bridget, I am assured of her faith to
me.


Good lack! Niece, you might have spoken loud, Mr. Raymund would have trusted
me; but pray get you to your Chamber.


Well Aunt I shall be quit with you --


Hark vou Robin.


Mrs. Bridget, since Theodosia has entrusted you, you must not refuse to bring
me privately into her Chamber this Night.


I shall be glad to serve you, but my Lady will discover it.


Let me alone to manage that; I'll dispose of her that she shall never know of
it.


Mr. Raymund I beg your pardon; but if you please at present we will with-draw.


I'll wait on your Ladyship.


Ah Madam! your Ladyships humble Servant.


Gentlemen your Servant.


Where is your Niece?


I'll send her to you --


Now, you shall see my Mistress.


This is a very good jest i faith, Crazy; his Mistress.


That men should understand them^elves no better?


Fa, la, la, la, that's an excellent Corant; really I must confess Grabu is a
very pretty hopeful man, but Berkenshaw is a rare fellow, give him his due, fa
la, la, for he can teach men to compose, that are deaf, dumb, and blind.


This is a good, pretty, apish, docible fellow; really he might have made a
very pretty Barber Surgeon, if he had been put out in time: but it arrides me
extremely, to th^nk how he will be bobbed?


Yes, yes, he will be bobbed; that men should be so mi^.


Ay, on my Conscience and (...) the Palate of (...) Judgement is down; and by
the way how dost like that Metaphor or rather Catachresis?


Oh admirably.


Drybob.


While these Coxcombs are in discourse, I'll privately go in and see my
Mistress --


Here's a Periwig, no Flax in the world can be whiter; how delicately it
appears by this Coloured Hanging, and let me advise you ever while you live, if
you have a fair Peruke, get by a Green or some Dark colou^'d Hanging or
Curtain, if there be one in the Room. Oh it sets it off admirably.


A ve^y Metaphysical Notion.


And be sure if your Eye-brows be not black, to black 'em soundly; ah your
Black Eye-brow is your fashionable Eyebrow. I hate Rogues that wear Eye-brows
that are out of Fashion.


By the soul of Gresham a most Phylosophical Invention.


Thou'lt scarce believe it, but upon my honour, two Ladies fell in love with me
one day at the Kings Play-House, and are in a desperate condition at this very
time, for this Perywig.


But why are you so cruel?


Alas! if I should mind every Lady that falls in love with me, I should have a
fine time on it indeed.


Stultorum omnia plena! I am the spurious issue of a Fishmonger, if a more
conceited Puppy ever presented himself to my Eyes.


I had three several Suits in one year won me three very ingenious,
quick-spirited, and very pretty merry conceited Ladies as any are within the
Walls of Europe. You must know I do value my self upon my Clothes and the
judicious wearing of 'em.


N^y certainly you are a most complete and polite Gentleman in the opinion of
at least two besides your self.


No, no, but I'll tell thee an honest fellow of my acquaintance, by imitating
one of my Sui^s, got himself a (...) of 3000 l. a yea^ Penny Rent.


Pray Madam, let me advise you, don't run your self into trouble with these
Puppies, but let us enjoy our selves in private.


Sir, I must obey my Aunt, 'tis not for want of Inclination to your sweet
Society, I assure you.


Ah, my Queen Regent, I salute the hem of your Garment.


I cannot without a blush, allow the humility of the address.


Thou shalt see Crazy how she'll abuse him, for I am the Son of a Bum-Bayly if
she has not the most exuberant and luxurious expressions that ever entered the
concave of this Ear.


This Fool Drybob has no more understanding than a Gander.


By the Coat of our Family, which is an Ass Rampant, a very ancient and
honourable one, I am ready to venture my life under the Banner of your Beauty;
and honour you so, that I would, oh 'tis incomparable, 'tis incomprehenfible.
--


By my Grandfather's Spur-leather, which was in those days worn by very
honourable Persons, you oblige me so immoderately: That oh -- 'tis admirable,
tis inexpressible!


How I blush for this fellow!


Come, Madam, let's be frolic, Galliard, and extraordinary brisk, fa, la, la,
la.


Sir, I cannot behold the lines of that face, but I am provoked to mirth, fa,
la, la, la.


Look you there Drybob and Crazy, look ye --


Madam, I am so interrupted by these fellows, that I have not time to tell you
that I feed a Flame within, which so torments me.


Pox on it that's stole out of a Play.


What then, that's lawful; 'tis a shifting age for wit, and every body lies
upon the Catch.


O Madam, where were you, that I missed you last Night, at the Park?


Did you shine there last Night?


Madam, I did; for after I had pranc^d before your Window upon my Roan-Nag, in
honour to my Love, --

Did you see me Madam?


O Sir, my Eyes met you in your Career, by the same token you had a Muskatoon
and Pistols.


I had so Madam, and my man carried a screwed Gun, that I bought at Brussels;
for I always love to do those things en Cavalier; but thus equipped, I went to
take the Air in the Park, and immediately all the Ladies and Persons of Quality
left the Tour and came about me, and were most incomparably pleased with the
fashion; so that I am resolved next time to go with Back, Breast, and
Head-Piece.


Most accutely imagined.


But hark you Madam, yonder are my Fiddles: I bespoke 'em, and pray let me have
the honour to dance with you; it may be you will like my manner well enough.


But we want Women.


I'll supply that, Madam, immediately.


Prithee do, and make haste Crazy.


Now will I be revenged upon Brisk, and bring his own Strumpet hither. --


You must not deny me this Evening some private Conference with you.


But how shall I keep it from the knowledge of my Niece.


I'll tell you, Madam, If you please to walk in the Garden, I'll come in at the
Back-door and wait on you there, where we will confer about our mutual
happiness.


I will not fail --


My honourable Aunt that shall be, I adore your Shoestrings.


O Lord Sir, your Servant. Come on Mr. Raymund, let's hear you break a jest,
and put these two Wits o^t of Countenance.


Methinks Mr. Drybob is a notable man.


Ay, Madam, as far as Inns of Court breeding; but alas, we are above those
things.


Are you above Inns of Court breeding?


Yes, that I am S^r, what's that to you?


Why it is not six Months since you used to keep Company with none but Clerks,
and call for your Three-pence in Beef at Hercules Pillars or the Harrow in
Chancery-Lane; where the whole Company used to fall out about the divi^ing of
Three-halfpence: when every Night you used to drink Ale and put Law Cases as
long as you could see.


You are merry Sir.


And where you used --


Nor is it five Months since I saw you st^ut most Majestically in the Hall and
inveagle a thi^d man at Sixpenny In and ^n, and by the help of a dozen men,
chastiz one poor Topper or Palme^; where I have seen you most magnanimously
assist at the (...) of a Bawd, or the washing and trimming of a Bailey.


Where I have seen you? --


Is this your breeding?


A pox on it a man cannot speak for you.


But Sir, I'd have you know I was as well esteemed there (...) man that ever
eat Loins of Mutton dry-rosted yet, and danced as well at the Revels too.


I have seen you there, how you --


And let me tell you that at Christmas, when we were to have had a Prince, I
was as fair for preferment as any man there.


Yes, and I can tell you --


But the Government, by reason of some civil dissentions, fell that Christmas
to a Common-wealth; but alas I am above these things.


Above 'em! -- I'll tell you --


Why this to me?


Pox of these uncivil fellows, they won't let a man break a jest among 'em; and
Madam, I am the Son of a Baboon, if stoppage of Wit be not as great a pain to
me as stoppage of Urine.


Have not I seen you within these three Months lolling out of Mundens with a
Glass of Windy-Bottle-Ale in one hand and a Pipe of Mundungu^ in the other; and
out of a brisk gay humour, drinking to Passengers in the Street.


'Tis well Sir, I hope you will give me satisfaction for these affronts?


Yes, as much as you dare ask.


Then blood will ensue.


Madam, here is one Lady.


Death this Rogue has undone me! ^riske here! Theodosia will for ever disown me
--


What's the matter Brisk? are you Planet struck. Crazy, I could hug thee for
this.


We need your assistance in a Dance, Madam.


Your Servant sweet Madam; Lord, Mr. Brisk, you need not be so strange.


Ah Cousin your Servant.


Is she your Cousin Sir?


Mr. Brisk is none of my Cousin, I assure your Ladyship; is my Servant, nay
perhaps there is a little nearer relation betwixt us.


How's this Sir?


'Slife, this She Devil will ruin me! Alas, Madam, she's merry, she drolls; but
come le^s dance and put these things out of our heads. Come in Mi^m and
Crotchet and fegue your Violins away, fa, la, la, la.


O Heaven! who's here, I am undone.


This is a Revenge beyond my expectation, stand by Crazy; whither do you put
the Lady? Come in Mrs. Striker; here's a Mistress of Crazy's will serve to make
up the number of Dancers, Madam.


Prithee begone, if thou lov st me.


Come Mr. Crazy, this won't pass upon me. Your Ladysh ps most obedient Servant
--


Bea^ up Crazy, you know she's a Person of Honour.


Come Fiddles strike up, p ay Madam, let's dance.


Now Sir, I hope you are ready to give me sati^faction.


I am Sir.


Fo low me then Ladies, I have ^n inexorable business calls me away at p^esent
-- Serv^nt, you^ Se vant.


L^dies, I'll w^t on you again instantly; Mrs. Bridget prithee forget not what I
said to you, we shall hav^ (...) sport.


I warrant you I'd do it Sir.


Now he's gone, I'll retire; Ladies and Gentlemen you Se v nt --


O me, Madam, why does not your Ladyship frequent the Mulberry Garden, oftner:
I vow we had the pleasant'^ D vertisement there last night.


Ay, I was there, Madam Frisk, and the Garden was very full; M^dam, of Gentlemen
and Ladies that made love together till Twelve a lock at Night, the
prett^ly'st: I vow 'twould do ones heart good to see them.


Why that's a time for Cats to make love in, not Men and Women.


Well Madam, there was a Lord, that shall be nameless, would needs come and
proff^ his service to me.


I know who that was; a^as, he'll do that to any body, Madam Frisk.


Lord, you are so troubled, I warrant you, Madam Striker.


But are thou sure thy Mistress loves me?


Why ^he cannot rest for you.


But she's so pestered with these Fools Brisk and Crazy, that I can have
no-time to ca ress her.


I'll tell you a way to get privately, into her Chamber this Night.


But M^dam, this Lord took me by the hand and kiss d it, and told me it was as
sweet as Roses and as soft as Jelly of Quinces.


Or he might have said as sweet as Frankincence or as soft as the Pap of an
Apple.


Alas, Madam, that's nothing; I assure your Ladyship, he has said the same
thing to me twenty times.


For my part, Madam Striker, I do not think you know him.


Lord, Madam Frisk, you are always detracting from one, I am sure I saw him
last Night, and he told me, Madam, he honoured the ground I trod upon, and made
me abundance of the rarest (...), and ^ said a number of the pretty'st things
to him; if I could remember, I'd tell 'em your Ladyship, you should be judge of
them, Madam.


Dear Mrs. Bridget accept of this little Present, I'll not fail to do it --
Ladies I have an exorbitant affair causes me at present to bestow my absence
upon you, but I'll besure not to fail you --


What means this foolish fellow?


Pray Mr. Crazy let me beg a word with you.


I'll tell you, Madam, now she talks thus, there was another Person of Quality
came to me, and told me I was a pretty Nymph, and he was a Satyr, and invited
me to drink a Bottle of Rhenish and Sugar, and I protest and vow he would not
drink one drop, t^ll I had dipped my Finger in the Glass.


It seems he loved to drink with a Tossed --


Pish! that's nothing, I assure you a Person of Quality, that treated me, would
not drink a drop of Wine, till I had washed my hands in the Glass, now she
talks of that, (...).


What ridiculous vain Wenches are these?


Pish! mind her not Madam, but I vow, now she puts me in mind on it, a Gentlem^n
the other day played the Wagg with me, and would needs ^ull my Shoe off my Foot
and drink it full of Wine; upon my word he did now.


Faith, as thou say, I believe she loves me; but why would she not tel^ me
this her self?


She had no opportunity, but she charged me to desire you to come in at her
Window this Night as I tell you.


And upon my honour I'll do it, were it as high as Paul's. Ladies, my occasions
invite me hence, and I shall be glad to wait on you.


Madam, I humbly covet the honour of your further acquaintance.


I hope your Ladyship will not deny me that honour.


Your humble Servant, Madam.


Your humble Servant, Ladies.


Madam, I'll not fail you upon my honour. --


What means this fellow? Bridget, what trick have you put upon these two
Coxcombs, that they both tell me they will not fail me.


Madam, Mr. Raymund designs this Night privately to wait on you, and that he
may not be interrupted, has appointed my Lady to wait for him in the Garden;
and I to get rid of this brace of Widgeons, have appointed each of 'em to get
in at your Window by Ladders privately this Night.


How then shall I see Raymund in my Chamber without discovery?


Madam, I have appointed them to come to a wrong Window, but were it the right
Window, they being to come both at one time, would disappoint one another.


That's not unpleasant, we may have good sport. 'Tis possible they may be taken
by the Watch, and apprehendded for House-breakers; but come along with me. --


COme out Sir, and fight, if you have a maw to t: I am ready, I thought you
would have brought me into the Field, and you bring me into a Tavern.


Nay prithee dear Rogue, le'ts stay a little and debate the business over a
Bottle of Wine first: Look you, here's to you.


Must I stay, till by the strength of Terse Claret, you have whet your self
into courage?


But look you, dear Raymund, the Case is this --


No more words, I am ready.


Now I think on it better, we must adjourn the Combat, for 'tis grown dark and
we cannot see to kill one another.


Come I warrant you we can see one another Bodies, and that's enough.


Ay, but I have sworn never to fight, but when I can see to parry.


I'll take away that objection; here are Candles in the Room, and I'll bolt the
Door, that no Drawer shall come to part us.


Fie Raymund, is that like men of honour, fight in a Tavern? why 'tis like the
Bullies man.


None of your foolish punctilio's here, draw.


Well, ha, ha, ha, I have considered on it, and Gad thou art a very honest
fellow, I have that affection for thee, that the Devil take me if I fight with
thee.


Why did you call me out then?


Come, pox on it, put up; I must confess I have rashly embarked my self in a
most prejudicial affair, but thou art a man of honour, and I will not fight
with thee.


Are you not a Coward?


Ha, ha, honest Raymund, thou art a very merry fellow, I'll give thee leave to
say what thou wilt.


I need not ask the question.


Well faith, I will not fight with thee, say what thou wilt, but upon my honour
I'll give thee this Diamond Ring and my Roan Nag, if thou'lt oblige me in one
thing.


In what can that be?


You know my Mistress will-think I ought in honour to fight; and if you will do
me the favour to make her believe you fought with me, I'll tell her you
disarmed me, and by this means I shall save honour, and you will get it; and
for ever oblige me.


Faith I had best take 'em for sport sake, though I retu^n 'em again. --


Prithee, dear Rvymund do; I'll do as much for thee upon my honour.


Would you have a Gentleman lie for you?


Why I ll lie for you again man, wh^n you will; what do you (...) of that?


Not I Sir.


Let me see, I have thought upon a way to save that; (...) ou, we^ll fight a
l^ttle in jest; and I'll let you disarm me. (...), (...) take the Ring, and
do it; and I'll send for my Roan Nag (...).


(...) ^ir, to oblig^ you I will, Draw then. --


Hon st (...), I am thy dear Servant. --


Come on, come, have at you --


H^ld hold m^n -- hold --


What's the matter?


How shall I be sure you won't fight in earnest?


I g^ve my word for it.


(...) Gad now I think on it, I won't trust you, if you (...) me your Bond; I
don't know how the Devil may tempt you: B^sides, who knows, but your foot may
slip, and you may ^un me thorough the Body.


What an immoderate Coward is this?


Faith, thou had as good tell her so without this Expe^.*


But there must appear some signs of fighting, or she'll not believe it.


Why I'll tear my Band and my Shirt, and run my self thorough the Coat.


But there must be some sign of blood.


Pox on it, how shall we contrive that?


Why take your Sword, and run your self thorough the Arm.


Thank you for that i'faith, I have known men have died of that.


Fie, Fie! 'tis nothing; I'll do it my self then.


Hold, hold, 'Slife you may prick an Artery and bleed to death, and then I
shall be hanged for that.


That's well thought on! O incomparable Coward!


'Twill do as well if my Shirt be bloody at the hand, an^ I'll venture to prick
my fingar for that; and to run thorough my Coat.


Well, as you will; but do it as you go along.


Dear Raymund kiss me, you have obliged me so, that I am a Son of a Scavenger,
if I die without issue, I'll make you my Heir: but if you love me, not a word
of all this.


I warrant you. Drawer to pay.


Prithee, by no means, G^d I'll treat thee dear Rogue; 'tis all mine. Come on,
dear Raymund, let's ^o --


This is the W^ndow Mrs (...) ^ppointed to get in at, so now (...) my Climbing.
--

How I shall l^ugh at my two too (...) Riv ^s Brisk n^ (...) ^oor (...), that
they could not find all this (...) how ^heodosia abuses them.


This is the Window, my expectation is on Tiptoes, as I may so say, but let me
fix my portable pair of Stairs.


Heaven! what will become of me? This is some Vi^lain coming to commit
Burglary.


Pox ta e me, if I know what is the matter; it cannot be the (...) that yields
thus.


Slife if it should be a Thief, he'll cut my Throat, least I should discover
him; what shall I do?


Well, let what will come on it, though I precipitate my fate, I will storm this
i chanted Castle.


Who ever he be, I am sure I'll not suffer him to come up; if he be a mortal
man, I'll try if he has a Neck to spare, for I am resolved to break one for him
--


'S^fe! what's this, am I to be turned off and executed for Love felony before
my time? what can this mean? I have got no hurt yet: it may be 'twas the corner
of the Balcony I set my Ladder against: I'll make one experiment more: so now,
'tis fast.


Theodosia, Theodosia, open your Window.


The Ladder stands very fast now, I will once more enterprise this honourable
action, though Beelzebub himself stood in my way -- Theodosia open your Window,
'tis I my Dear.


Death, what will become of me, this must be the Devil, a Man would have broke
his Neck.

O Heaven! yonder is a Light coming towards us. I shall be ruined if I don't
shift for my self.


If I be discovered by yon Ignis fatuus or Lanthorn, I shall be undone for
ever, I must try to make an escape.


Come on my dear Friend, strike up my Men of Noise; How now! what's hete?
Thieves with Ladders at my Mistrisfes Window, I'll mall 'em.


How now Villains -- Bridget has done this admirably.


'Slife Raymund, if I had not come, I might have lost my Mistress out of this
Window; for on my Conscience these Rogues came with a felonious intention: but
come let's in and give 'em an account of it: and Fiddles make way for us.


Come on: But how shall I get ^id of this Fool, I must think of some way.


O Gentlemen! what's the cause of this uproar?


Oh, Mrs. Bridget, I have made bold to beat a couple of Rascals; that were
going to commit Felony, without the benefit of the Clergy; but I'll go and wait
upon my Mistress


Oh, Mrs. Bridget, 'twas Crazy and Drybob, our Pl^t is spoiled; I shall be
diverted by them from seeing my Mistress.


No, no, let me alone, I'll dispose of 'em another way.


Adieu --


Oh I am beaten, bruised, and lamed so, that I had rather have been twice
fluxed than have endured it; my bones are as loose as the Skeletons in the
Physic School: Oh my Head and Shoulders! Mrs. Bridget I kiss your hands, and
rest your humble Servant Crazy.


Sir, I find you are defeated by some ill accident or other, but I'll put you
in another way to be secure. The Lady Theodosia is in that passion for you,
that I fear she will discover her self.


Poor heart! I know she loves me; but I hope she will be so discreet as to
conceal her passion; but here was another with a Ladder climbing up to the
Window, or I had got in.


Another! that's impossible; but least you should be suspected, take away your
Ladder, and set it against the Garden Wall, and I will appoint your Mistress to
receive you there; if you will venture to come over to her; and there shall be
a Parson ready to join you in the Banquetting-house: make haste, least you be
surprised, and come to us instantly.


Dear Mrs. Bridget take this, I fly, I fly. --


O Mrs. Bridget! Are you there? I have been beaten more severely than ever Turk
was by Tamberlain; which by the way is no ill comparison, hah?


I have heard so; but take up your Ladder and be gone, and lay it down on the
back-side of the house and come to us presently, and I will design an easier
assignation for you; haste, lest you be discovered.


Dear Mrs. Bridget take this Ring, I'll be with you instantly.


Go your ways you brace of Baboons, and be still the subject of all Farces --


Is it possible! Thieves coming in at my Window! Heaven! how I tremble!


Truly Madam, they were as sufficiently beaten as your Ladyship can wish.


That's some revenge for the trouble their impertinence has given me, but I am
afraid these Coxcombs will hinder Mr. Raymunds Visit.


Fear not that, Madam.


Be not apprehensive Madam, for the Rascals are too well satisfied for their
pains to attempt any more.


Ladies and Gentlemen, your humble Servant.


Dear friends, your Slave; I am in one word the Enemy to all your Foes.


Oh are you here! I'll tell you as I was coming in to give my Mistress a
Serenade, a couple of Felonious Rascals were with two Ladders climbing in at a
Window of the House; but I think I have so bruised the Dogs, they'll scarce be
fit for climbing this Week again.


A plague on it, I feel it in my bones, but I must dissemble it.


Pox on them, the Rogues^ laid on as if they had been threshing for Twelve
Pence a day.


But is it possible?


Yes, I assure you as this Blade doth testify.


Why, what impudent Rogues were these Crazy?


'Death, that I must be forced to call my self so. -- If I had been there I
would have mall'd the Villains.


For my part I don't wish I had been there, for my extraordinary passion would
have made me had the blood of the Rogues; that's certain. -- O pox of their
heavy hands.


He has been fighting, Madam, that's the truth on it; pray take notice on it.


I wonder, Raymund, no body takes notice of my torn Band, my bloody Sleeve, and
my Coat being run thorough, I think they are all blind.


Good lack, Mr. Brisk, you are bloody and your Band's torn.


Ha! bloody say you?


Pray hold up the humour, Madam.


I protest, Sir, you fright me, what dangers have you run your self into?


Alas, Madam, this is nothing, a trifle, a trifle.


Your Coat's run through, you have been fighting.


My Coat run through! where, where? ha, ha, 'tis so.


A pox on him this damned Bully Heildibrand was fleshed, and would needs show
his Valour upon my Shoulders.


Are you wounded Sir?


'Pshaw Madam, this, alas, alas, I beseech you take no notice of this; 'pshaw,
a slight thing, a toy, fa, la, la, la.


Shall I go for a Surgeon?


No, I thank you, he'd discover the trick on it; no, no, by no means; alas, you
make so much on it: I am used to these things; 'pshaw, this is nothing: Pray
call in the Fiddles, come, come; let us be very merry, fa, la, la, la.


Sweet Mr. Brisk do me the favour to tell me the occasion of this?


Nothing, nothing, Madam, alas, alas, --


Assure your self I'll not fail to wait for you in the Garden.


I hope your Ladyship doubts not me.


Faith Madam, if you will needs have it, I made bold to call Mr. Raymund to an
account for some words that passed before you; and upon my honour, Madam, he's
a very gallant fellow.*


Nay, I beseech you Mr. Brisk.


Nay, Gad it shall all out, he fought like Thunder and Lightning, and I must
confess it was my fortune to be disarmed, Madam; but I hope I lost no honour,
since 'twas by so brave a fellow, whom for his generosity I embrace. Dear
Friend, you have obliged me for ever. Come Fiddles strike up, I have provided a
very honest fellow to dance.


Madam, I'll not fail to wait on you, your humble Servant. --


Madam, I hope you will be punctual.


Trust me Sir.


Adieu to all. --


Madam, I'll instantly go and prepare to wait on you, you'll not fail.


I shall not be so injurious to my self.


I humbly kiss your hands. Madam, your Ladyships most obedient Servant. --


Good night, sweet Mr. Crazy; Mr. Brisk, I pray be pleased to favour me with
your absence.


'Pray do, and get a Surgeon to dress you, and to morrow I shall be ready to
receive a Visit.


Ladies your Servant, Servant, Ladies, fa la, la, la. --


P^ay Gentlewoman go up into your Chamber.


Madam, I'll obey. --


Be sure you do. --


Go thy ways, my dear Aunt, and meditate on what thou'lt ne'er enjoy -- If my
Uncle, after all this report of his being killed, should appear again, when she
has, as she thinks, made sure of another Husband, it would be no ill Farce.


Now, now, my Incomparable Theodosia, I am blessed with the opportunity I have so
long sought for to cast my self at your feet, and to tell you, that it belongs
to you to make my life for ever happy or miserable.


You may with justice enough accuse me of levity, in so suddenly granting it;
but I hope you have so much honour, to impute my easiness somewhat to the
slavery I suffer, though I have no disesteem of you.


Madam, It is so much to my advantage, that I shall never enquire the Cause,
only let me beg of you, since our fortune is like to allow us so few of those
opportunities, that we may make what use we can of this.


I have so ab^olute a confidence in your honour, that I yield to you conduct in
this affair, and defire nothing more than to be redeem d from the foolish
Tyranny of my Aunt.


I have left my Lady in the Garden, most impatiently expecting you Mr. Raymund.
But pray Madam, if you love me, retire into your Chamber, lest any of the
Servants should unluckily see you, and inform your Aunt.


'^ is no ill advice.


But how have you disposed of Drybob and Crazy.


O they are safe enough, Sir.


Sure the passion he has for me, will not suffer him to stay long, the Story of
Thieves at my Window, has put me into such a fright, that nothing but Love
could engage me to walk here alone.


The Coast is clear on this side, if my Mistress be but in the Garden, I am
safe -- My Dear.


Here I am.


Now I come, were it as high as (...) Steeple! Death I have broke both my Shins:
I am murdered* Oh I see these leaps are not for men that have fluxed thrice.


How Mr. Raymund* Have you hurt your self?


Did you expect Raymund here? I am not he.


Now for my leap of honour.


Oh Heaven! Thieves, thieves, help, help.


Death what do I here?


Thieves! I shall be apprehended for a House-breaker.


Where shall I hide my self? I would not be discovered for the World.


I am astonished like the Head of a Gorgon; what shall I do to abscond a
little, I shall be apprehended for a Thief else.


'Tis very dark, where shall I hide my self?


What Devilish mistake is this? Pox o'this damned post, I am sure I had like to
get a most Diabolical fall with running against it.


Death what was that I run against, what an unfortunate fellow am I, to be thus
disappointed, just as I thought to have been sure of my Mistress? but my
comfort is, I know she loves me.


What a Devilish Catastrophe is this? --


O horrid! sure this House is haunted, which way can I escape?


If this be the Devil that touched me, I don't like his (...) Tricks to fright
a man thus; would he would be as civil as the Wiltshire Devil was: and beat a
Drum, to give a man notice where he is, that I might avoid him, unless he were
better company.


What's here? her amazement hath made her leave open the Door of the House,
I'll in there, there's more safety yet than here --


Ha, I saw one enter at that Door, I'll follow and apprehend him; and his
attachment will secure me. --


What Door is this? I'll even hide my self here till this (...) be over.


If I could but conceal my self till they are past, I might easily insinuate my
self into Theodosia's Chamber. What's here? This I believe leads into the
Cellar, I will descend and lie in Ambush there. --


Come, now we have mustered up our forces, let's into the Garden.


Ay, come let's see who this Devil is my Lady speaks of; we shall find more
than one I believe.


I believe we shall find them to be Thieves.


If it be the Devil, Mr. Parson, we'll turn you loose to him, you take pay to
fight against him; we are but Volunteers.


If he dares approach, I will conquer him syllogistically in Mood and figure,
and conjure him down with

Barbara Celarent Darii, Ferioque Darapti.
Cesare, Camestres, c.

Hold, hold, 'slife this is the way to raise him:


I think your best way is to take the great Bible in the Hall, and fling at his
head; that will knock him down certainly.


Come, let's in quickly, if they be Thieves, they'll escape else. --


The Cellar Door is open, if there be any body there, we'll lock it and secure
'em --


How unlucky is this! this has marred all our design; my Lady has found Mr.
Raymund and her Niece, we are undone (...) yond redemption.


False and ungrateful man, did I for this, so soon bestow upon you my too
credulous heart, so early to betray me; O unheard of Villainy.


Madam, pray hear me.


No, thou vile treacherous man, I will hear no more, Hast thou the impu^ence to
excuse it! O heaven! I am lost for ever. But for you, you most abominable
Creature, to undermine me thus: Take leave of liberty, hence forwards your
Chamber shall be your Prison, till I have disposed of you to another Person, I
assure you.


Then Madam, you force me to declare my self sooner than my Modesty would give
me leave; this Gentleman is mine while I have breath; nothing but death shall
part us.


And Madam, that minute that I am false to you, may all the plagues that ever
afflicted yet mankind fall on me.


In what a miserable condition am I? but Mr. Raymund I cannot believe this,
sure this is some enterlude.


Madam, it is a truth I'll die for, though Madam, I am obliged to beg your
Ladyships pardon for making you a property.


O impudence! Come Mistress into your Chamber quickly, I'll be your Keeper.


Madam, we will be prisoners together.


Out of my Doors, you Villain, or I will have those that shall chastise your
insolence with death.


Madam, I haven t so mean a soul, to be frighted from protecting my Mistress.


Sir, Let me entreat you to leave me, and assure your self we will not long be
separated.


But Madam, 'twill be dangerous to leave you to her ^ury.


Sir, Let me beg you will not dispute it further, but be gone; if you should
make more noise in this business, it might call my honour in question.


Madam, I must obey, and I have a way to free you instantly, 'tis this.


Away, no more discourses. --


Well, a de^perate disease must have a desperate Cure; Mrs. Bridget I have a
way this moment to secure my Mistress.


O Sir, I am in that fright for you.


within. Bridget come up quickly.


O Sir, I am called I must away.


I have not time to tell you; but desire Theodosia, whatever happens not to be
frighted, I'll about it instantly.


My Lady was frighted with nothing.


If any body had been there, the Walls are so high on the inside, they could
not have escaped.


Ha, here's one, seize him.


Seize me, you Rascals; have at you.


Nay, now you are in Combat, I'll leave you --


This a Thief, I am sure he fights like a Devil.


'Tis Mr. Raymund, did you not know him.


A pox on him, was't he? but let^s to my Lady, and give her an account. --


I hear a bustling here about the Cellar that frights me horribly! This is a
most unfortunate ^ght.


O that I were out of this Hellish Place! if ever I had to do with Love and
Honour more, would I were an Eunuch in the Turks Seraglio. -- Oh Heaven, who's
that there?


'Tis a ma^ by his asking that Question, and may be one of the House.


Who are you in the Name of Wonder? O how I dissolve!


I am the Devil.


The Devil! oh he's come to fetch me away for my whoring and my drinking.


Mortal, thou art my due.


That may be, but he's a damned impatient Devil to dun before his day.


Come into my Arms.


Fire, fire, fire.


O Heaven, what shall we do?


'Slife fire! Oh Heaven! how shall we get out?


groping. Which is the way out? The Door's locked, what shall I do? They'll not
mind us if we call; we shall be burnt.


What are you a Devil, and afraid of your own Element? Methinks a Devil out of
the Fire should be like a Fish out of the Water.


Fire, fire, fire.


Help, help here, fire, murder, help.


What noise was that below?


Help, help.


Oh ho, have we caught you? They are the Thieves.


That's well, stay there; you Dogs, if the House be burnt, I'll assure you, you
shall burn with it.


O help, help, 'tis Crazy.


Crazy! a Curse on you for frighting me; help, 'tis I Drybob.


We'll see if we can get out at the Window. Well this is a judgment upon me for
acting the Devil. --


More hands, water quickly, and we shall quench it instantly.


'Tis strang^ h^w the Coach-House should be (...). --


This was an excellent Stratagem, Sir, and with (...) or no danger.


Come Madam, while your Aunt is seeing the fire quenched on the back-side, let
us escape at the fore-door. --


So, Heaven be thanked, all danger's past; How could this fire happen? This has
been a night of wonder.


I will dilucidate it to you, you saw a Spirit in the Garden, Madam?


I did, I think, to my great astonishment; I have not yet recovered the ^right.


Look you, Madam, These Philosophers av^, that ^ll Spirits are transported
through the Air in their several and res^ctive Vehicles; now this was infernal,
and had a Bituminous Vehicle, which by a violent Motion against the
Coach-House, as it were by Collision, did generate this ^lame, which had (...)
^o have caused this Conflagration.


A pox of this F^stian Rascal.


Come Madam, it must be some Thieves design to rifle your house.


We have some of the Thieves safe in the Cellar, they shall-suffer for it.


In the Cellar, fetch 'em up quickly; by them we may discover something. Go see
where my Niece is Bridget.


Come along you Rascals.


Come out you Sons of Bitches.


Who are these Mr. Crazy and Mr. Drybob? this is as strange as all the rest.


Madam, I kiss your fair hands.


Pish, that's a vile old phrase. I am an humble Servant of your Footmans.


Sure this is enchantment! How came you two in the Cellar?


Madam, I will most expeditiously inform you.


How now, where's my Niece?


Madam, She's gone! fled away! I have been in every Room of the House and
cannot find her.


Gone! What can this mean?


Gone! I am undone! Ruined for ever! What shall I do?


She undone! Oh invincible impudence!


What imports this transport of yours, Madam?


You and I and all of us are abused! betrayed! this false Wretch, this base
Villain Raymund, has stolen away my Niece.


I see Raymund is a man of honour. This pleases me.


Madam, Do not fear that, to my knowledge there is a person in the world, she
is more than half engaged to. No, no, she cares not for Raymund, take that from
me.


Flatter not your self, 'tis true, 'tis true.


Raymund! I'll assure you Madam, she used to simper more ^vourably upon me than
upon any man, and gad if the truth were known, she thinks me all the Nine
Worthies, compared to him.


Come Gentlemen, Let's in and hear the Story, while I send for a Warrant to
search for my Niece; I'll have her dead or alive. --


NO News of either Raymund or Theodosia?


All possible search has been made after 'em both last night and this morning,
and they are neither to be found.


How am I confounded with this disaster; yet I have it in my head to be
revenged on 'em both.


Your Ladyship was too credulous to trust him so soon.


And Robin, he's a dirty person thus to desert me; but I'll be quit with him,
and that Jig-em-bob my Niece.


How Madam?


Why, I will immediately settle my Estate, to which she is Heir, for want of
lawful Issue of my Body, on my Cousin Richard, and to plague Raymund I will
marry another; for I am resolved to play at a small game rather than stand out.


Oh unparalleled impudence! I'll try her further: Madam, What think you of Mr.
Crazy, he is no unfit man for a Husband?


Why really I believe he is a good natured Person and a Child of Honour, the
softness and gentleness of his Amorous Nature is admirable; but do you think he
will have any sprinklings of affection for me.


'Sdeath! what do I hear?


Sprinklings, Madam? He will have a whole Flood of Love for you.


Why truly, he is a pretty hopeful man, and I have no aversion to, but r^her a
concern for him; you shall see, Bridget, I am a Woman easy to command my
passions; but in the mean time send for a Scrivener, and bid him bring a Blank
Conveyance with him: for though I do resolve to make Mr. Crazy my Husband, yet
I will dispose of my Estate, as prudent Widows are wont to do.


'Slife! now 'tis time to appear! I shall be finely used else by this
Villainous Woman. I'll into the Town and prepare for it.


Madam, Mr. Crazy is coming to wait on you*


Tell him I am retired. Bridget, I'll leave thee to sound him as to point of
this Concern. --


This is pleasant, I'll observe him.


Murder, murder. O Heaven! what shall I do? I have hurt my self just upon the
Shin-bone, that was exfoliated: I have spoiled my Arm: I fell just upon that
part of my Arm, where is a (...) Node upon the (...).


What's the matter Sir?


I have hurt my self a little with the fall; besides I am i^ a little disorder
for the loss of Theodosia; sure some base fellow has forced her hence; for I am
sure she loved me most extremely. 'Sdeath I have spilt my Bottle of Diet-drink
in my Pocket, and spoiled all my Almonds and Raisins.


Flatter not your self, Mr. Crazy; she loves you not.


Prithee do not put this upon me; ha, ha, ha. I am sure no man had those
favourable smiles from her that I received. Oh! that twinge.


Come, the truth is, Sir, she is fled away with Mr. Raymund.


Lord, Mrs. Bridget! all this won't do; as if I did not know when a Woman loves
me?


You may please to slight it; but to my knowledge she is married to Mr.
Raymund.


Is it true?


Too true for you. --


I am ruined beyond redemption, I am ^or ever disappointed both of Love and
Money.


There is another person in the world that's worth your Love, and has a Fortune
equal to Theodosia.


Dear Soul, thou do 'st eternally oblige me! but prithee who is't? Oh, oh,
prithee tell me.


My Lady Loveyouth.


Ha, ha, ha, well really she is a fine person, and I am extremely deceived, if
she has not a violent and most predominant passion for me.


Sir, You are not deceived.


I think not -- I would forgive a Woman that can deceive me in that point. --
But where is she?


In her Chamber, where I am sure you would be no unwelcome person.


This is very lucky, by this means I shall be fully revenged for the most
perfidious Apostasy of Theodosia, and with this ample fortune patch up my own
ruinous condition.


No more, Sir, but go to my Lady while she is in this humour.


I am happy beyond expression i^ your Friendship; alas, I know this poor thing
loves me dearly; and gad she shall be no loser by it: I will go immediately and
kiss my Ladies hand; but in the mean time receive this little piece of my
gratitude.


Your humble Servant, Sir.


Sweet, dear Rogue, I kiss thy pretty hand. --


How now?
Is the stray Lady returned home?

No Sir, there's no news of her?


I am the unlawful Off spring of a Juggler, if ever man of honour encountered
such a Crocodile; and yet let me not live, if she had not the most pretty
harmonious strain of wit with her that evet tempted a judicious Ear.


But she is false -- she is false.


Really I begin to conjecture it, yet she has so many predominant perfections
with her, which I did adore; that I can scarce invite this into my belief:
Invite it -- faith that's well enough too.


'Tis too true.


Well she is gone, adieu to her; yet really she had the prettiest Figures and
the choicest Phrases in her ordinary Conferences: there are not better in
Pharamond, or Cleopatra.


I am glad to see you so indifferent.


Not so indifferent: Gad I admire the sharpness of her Ingenuity -- But I'll
tell thee the truth I have sent my man to a little Rosicrucian or Star-gazer;
to enquire of my ^tar how she comes thus to start from her Sphere: Start from
her Sphere, that is well now; that is well.


And when will he return?


I expect him at every pulse o^ (...) Watch; (...) by the way is not that
prettily said -- (...) But I (...) I shall recover her, and yet if I lose her, I
am (...) I have not as many Mistresses as I can turn my self too* Faith I have
abundance of Ladies that would think themselves happy to enjoy me: but I cannot
be in all places at once: yet in good faith I wish my self an Ubiquitary for
their Love, as I am an honest man.


Bridget.


I am called, adieu Sir. --


How now! What's the News? Has Raymund stole away Theodosia -- ha.


Ay pox on him, he, or some damned Robber as bad as he, that I fear by this
time have committed Burglary upon her Bo^y.


And shall I be thus cheated of my Mistress?


Your Mistress -- ha, ha, ha, you speak as freely of her as if you were
acquainted ever since the Deluge with her.


Why, had you any pretence to her?


Yes Sir, that I had, and perhaps no man rece^v'd larger testimonies of her
innate affection.


Oh impudence! why sure you don't pretend to be a man fit for Ladies
Conversation! What Charms have you to attract 'em? Ha, ha, ha, you --


What Charms quoth he? Is any man in Europe more notorious among Ladies, or
valued for his pregnant parts, than Drybob? My manner of speaking, if it were
nothing else, is enough to intoxicate Ladies affections. No Orator in
Christendom adorns his Language with those Flowers that I do, or is enriched
with more plentif^l Discourse.


Ad autre Monsieur ad autr^.


Ne'er tell me Sir, The Ladies of the Town are so exorbitantly pleased with my
manner of speaking, that I have been often set upon a Table to speak ex tempore
to a whole Room full, and have ravished 'em all for half an hour together; and
this I have got by University Learning and Travelling.


Fiddle, faddle on your Travelling and University.


Ha, ha, ha, I protest you make me smile.


You talk of Ladies, I am a man that still flourish in the Spring of all the
Fashions, and in such variety that upon my honour 'tis not a fortnight since
the publishing of my last new Suit.


Publishing! Pox o'this Rogue! how came he to lite upon that pretty expression.
--


You visit Ladies! Gad I spend more money in a year to keep my self sweet, than
thy revenue comes to.


I am the Son of a Lancashire Witch, if thou art not an errant stinking Fellow
then; but what do such people signify but to maintain Fools, Whores, Mercers,
Barbers, and Fiddlers.


Look you Sir, I care not a farthing for your fr^mps; what can you do? I can
sing or walk a Corant with any man in Europe, fa, la, la, la.


As I hope ever to live to eat Woodcocks, this is a most stupendous Baboon.
Pshaw, what do ye talk of this? Can you break a Jest or make a Reperte to render
your self acceptable to Persons? That ought to be the business of all
Gentlemen, to take all opportunities of showing their parts and complying with
Company.


Break Jests! Pshaw, no man in Europe better; but I have other ways to catch
Ladies. Look you no man appears better upon a Bench in the Play-House, when I
stand up to expose my person between the Acts; I take out my Comb, and with a
^onne mien comb my Periwig to the tune the Fiddles play: thus, look you, fa,
la, la, la.


'Pshaw, I bear my self at another rate; I sit in judgement upon Plays with my
Hat thus; with a brow wrinckl'd like a withered Pear-mayne; which Gad is a very
pretty thought, take notice of that: but by this posture am I become more
dreadful to the Poets and Players then, -- What, let me see, pox on it, hum.
This is the first time I ever wanted a smile in my life.


Madam, I am transported with your favours.


Why in earnest, Sir, I take you for a Person of Genetosity, and I cannot but
comply with your honourable affections.


Madam, I humbly kiss your foot, I will immediately go and prepare for the
perfection of my happiness.


Why truly Sir, it is something too sudden and temerarious, but you h^e so
absolute an Ascendant over me, that I cannot signify any thing as to point of
Repulse.


I make bold to take my leave for some few moments.


Have you brought a Deed with you?


Yes Madam, such a one as will fit you to a hair.


Let us in and read it. --


Pox on it Mrs. Bridget, thou know well enough what's become of Theodosia,
prithee tell me.


Well, to you I must confess I do, since she gave me commission to do it; and
Sir, the report of Mr. Raymund's stealing her is false: she still preserves her
love to you, you are the man (...) resolves to live and die with.


Dear Rogue bring me to her; ^aith I was amazed to think she should leave me,
and betray her self to Raymund, a fellow that never wore a noble and polite
Garnitu^e or a white (...); one that has not a Bit of Interest at (...), or
ever eat a good Fricacy, Sup, or Rogust, in his life; but prithee bring me to
her.


Go immediately to your Lodging, you shall hear from me.


Adieu, Servant Drybob.


Pray will you oblige my understanding, to reveal to it this Mystery.


'Tis all for you, in short Theodosia has employed me to tell you, that to
avoid the importunity of Crazy and Brisk, she fled away, but for you she has
still the same honour and esteem which you deserve.


In good faith this thought was no stranger to my imagination.


I have sent him away, that he might not pry into our actions. Hark, my Lady is
coming; go i^stantly and walk in the Piaza, I will send to you suddenly.


I will, I will --


I have a plot in this mischievous head of mine, if it takes, shall prove no
ill farce.


What are the Gentlemen gone? Pray call a Servant or two to be witnesses of
this Deed of Gift of all my Estate to my Cousin Richard after my decease.


Yes, Madam. --


Remember Mrs. Bridget.


Now I shall fit Theodosia for a punishment for all her ^illany, by this Deed,
shall I not?


Yes, Madam, -- better than you imagine.


Oh are you come, Come, are you ready?


I will put on the Wax, Madam, here's a Deed will match it, and ready filled up
to my purpose; I have changed it without discovery. -- Come Madam.


I declare this as my Act and Deed. Come witness it. So, -- here Bridget take
my Key and lock it up.


Yes, it shall be kept safe, -- from you I assure you. --


There's for your pains; does that content you?


Yes, Madam, I am contented. --

Or all the world can never make me so, to have obtained my Theodosia, is a
happiness so great, that I could think of nothing beyond that; nor should I
have done this, had it not been for her: for I in her have all I ever would aim
at.


There Sir, there's the Deed.


Dear Mrs. Bridget, you have obliged me beyond a Recompense.


Now you are married to her and have the Writing, pray let the Lady Theodosia
come hither instantly, I have more Irons in the Fire, and need her assistance.


'Tis well, I ll not fail to tell her --


Now, dear Madam Bridget, Let our Flames incorporate, and by the Mysterious
Union of a Conjugal Knot, beyond the Gordian, too strong for the Macedonian
Steel to rescind.


Shall I never learn to understand you, pray help me to a Clavis.


The meaning of it is I would make you my Spouse.


What? would you lose your Fellowship?


I would to that, as they say -- Nuncium remittere; for I am presented to a
Benefice worth six on it.


You have reason, I shall deny you nothing that's reasonable, upon condition
you will do one thing for me.


'Tis very well, I shall not deny it.

Post various Casus post tot discrimin^ rerum.
Tendimus in Latium --

You must first marry Mr. Brisk and Mr. Drybob as I shall direct you, but the
Ladies will not be known, therefore you must marry 'em in Visor Masks.


I wi^l, since you command, make no haesitation or dilatory scruple.


Pray be gone, I see one coming I must speak with; well, this Plot if it takes,
will produce no unpleasant effects. Oh Madam!

I am heartily glad your Plot succeeded so well.


Dear Bridget I owe a great deal of it to thee.


I am happy that I could serve you; but now I have a design of my own, in which
I beg your Ladyships assistance.


You may be assured of that, what is it?


I have persuaded each of the Coxcombs Brisk and Drybob, that you fled to
reserve your self for him; and each has so good an op^nion of himself, that I
found it no hard matter.


What can this produce to your advantage?


Madam, (...) tell you.


Good lack, Madam Striker, who thought to have seen you here*


Why, Madam Frisk? I ho^e I may be as welcome here as you can.


I do not know that neither.


Madam, your Ladyships most obedient Servant.


Madam, your Ladyships most affectionate Servant.


Madam, your Ladyships most obliged Servant.


Madam, your Ladyships most faithful and devoted Servant.


Madam, I have weighty occasion invites me to kiss your Ladyships hands this
Forenoon.


And I one of no less consequence, I assure your Ladyship.


I hope your Ladyships will do me the honour to pronounce both your occasions.


Madam, Mine is.


Madam, Mine is.


I wonder you have no more breeding than to interrupt one.


Marry come up Mrs. Habberdas^er! Do you think my Breeding inferior to yours?
I am sure I was bred at a very pretty dancing School hard by, and you talk of
that.


Good Mrs. Gigg-em-bob! your breeding, ha, ha, I am sure my husband married me
from Hackney School, where there was a number of Substantial Citizens
Daughters; your Breeding --


Good Mrs. Gill-flirts we live in a fine age, if a little Paltry Citizens Wife
shall compare her self with a Person of my Quality, i^aith.


Thy Quality Mrs. Kick-up --


Nay* pray Ladies! Pray keep the peace. Come, have but a little pat^ence, and I
will give Audience to both; but no more contention, I am in haste Mrs. Striker.


Madam, I have done; and my business is this: I protest I am almost ashamed to
tell you, but it must out: Mr. Crazy has long since engaged his heart to me and
I mine to him, and therefore I think, Madam, your Ladyship ought not to encou
rage the falsehood of any Ladies Servant, to listen to any proffers of affection
from him.


Why, you are married! Your Servant.


Ay, ay, by that time your Ladyship has been married a year or two, you'll soon
find the necessity of a Gallant as well as I; besides my husband's in a
Consumption, heaven be praised, he cannot live long.


Madam, upon my word I will not rob you of your Jewel, I freely resign him to
you.


What! will you never have done? Madam, Does your Ladysh^p know that Mr. Brisk
is my Servant.


Yes, yes, and know (and know what you would have) and I have found out a way
to get you married to this Servant too, or to another as good.


I humbly thank your Ladyship; indeed I had rather have another, for besides
variety in the Case, I shall be then at once provided with a Husband and a
Gallant.


Pray take this Key, and go up two pair of Stairs to a Chamber on your left
hand and stay there till further order. I warrant you, I'll please you; but at
present you must leave me: Be gone.


Madam, I humbly take my leave of your Ladyship, your Servant. --


Your Servant Madam, I am gone. --


Your Ladysh^ps humble Servant, I'll to my Chamber Bridget, and I'll warrant
thee to effect thy design.


Why sure you have not the confidence to take place of me, have you Mrs.
Whirliwigg.


P^ethee Pusse be quiet, I know what I do.


Avoid you Sttumpet, I am the Mother of Children.


Then stay there thou grave Ma^ron. --


She has got it, well I was never so affronted in my life, I could tear her
heart out: I'll be revenged if I live --


Stay, here! I'll send for the brace of Oa^s.


I will, Madam --


Sweet Mrs. Bridget I am thy most obliged Servant, I have ^ound out Mr. Sneak
and brought him here along with me, to complete my happiness in joining me to
your Lady, and upon my honour the whole remainder of my life and love shall be
at thy service.


I am glad it was in my power to oblige my Lady in so fine a Person.


Not ^o neither, yet I will be bold to say she will not be altogether unhappy
in a Husband. Boy, I had forgot, go home, and bring me a Bottle of my
Dyet-Drink, or I shall eat no Dinner to day. Come Si^ --


Where's my dear Thodosia?


She'll instantly be here; now Sir I have time to wish you all happiness.


I thank you, but 'tis a superfluous wish, I have it all already; nothing is
yet behind but to make peace with my Lady Loveyouth, whom I really have used
ill; and to reward your kindness, in ea^nest of which, you must receive this
small present.


Sir, I am already too well rewarded, the honour of serving you carries that
along with it.


You are too kind; but what possibilities is there of reconciling me to your
Lady.


She is now pretty well appeased, and has made choice of another for a Husband.


Who's that?

My dearest Theodosia, I am so happy in thy love, that 'tis beyond the power of
Fortune to oblige me more; I can now look down on those I once have envied, and
scorn all pleasures in the world but thee.


I can sooner distrust my self than your honour, and cannot but be very easy
to believe what I like so well; though my own want of merit would persuade me
to the contrary.


I find the wisest have still less knowledge of themselves than of others, or
you would value more what all men do; your Beauty, Wit, and Virtue, are so
admirable, that Nature could have added nothing to you; nor is there one Charm
in all the rest of your Sex, that can one moment divide my thoughts from you.


I have so great a belief in your constancy and truth, your words can ne'er
confirm me more; therefore let us leave this, and think of some atonement to
my Aunt: for my part I know none better than helping her to another for a
Husband if we can: for she longs more for one, than a Son and Heir of one and
twenty does for the death of his Father.


Madam, She does not want that, for she and Mr. Crazy have resolved, he to be
revenged of you, and she to be revenged of Mr. Raymund, to couple in the Bonds
of Wedlock.


'Tis pity to forbid the Banes.


To Crazy! what has she a mind to practise Physic and Surgery.


O! yonder comes Drybob and Brisk.

Pray Mr. Raymund avoid the room, and enter not till I give you your cue --


I am come, Madam, according to appointment, and understand your resolutions
are to live and die with Jack Brisk.


I will no longer conceal my affections! I am so ill used by my Aunt, that if
you think fit, I will immediately consent to be your Wife; Mr. Sneak shall do
it for us.


How am I exalted! Dear Madam, let it be instantly.


But I must hide my face, or he'll discover me to my Aunt, and we may be
prevented for this time.


'Slife, I have thought (...), you shall put on a Visor Mask.


What! will you engross the Ladies Ear?


Pray go and expect me suddenly.


Farewell Drybob, ha, ha, ha! poor sneaking fellow.


Mr. Drybob I will not blush to own my affection to you.


I hope, Madam, you need not.


Yonder comes one I must speak with, pray go with Bridget; I have entrusted her
with the rest: I will be with you suddenly.


Come, my Dear Bridget, I fly as quick as thought.


Madam I beseech you where'^ my Lady*


Oh she's married to Grazy since I saw you* she has made quick dispatch I
assure you.


'S Death and Hell married! Is this truth, Madam?


Ay Sir, but what's the Cause that makes you so concerned at it?


Have I not reason? Do you know this face?


O Heaven! my Uncle Sir Rich. Loveyouth.


Cease your wonder Niece, you see the Story of my death was feigned.


My dear Uncle! I am infinitely happy to see you once more in this place. This
was a happy change.


Niece I rejoice no less to see thee; thou art improved in beauty since I saw
thee: but this abominable Woman I for ever banish from my thoughts.


But pray Sir, what made you keep your disguise so long after your return?


I ll tell you Niece, but hold I hear some coming hither; I'll with-draw and
acquaint you with it.


Come Sir, and I'll bring you to one that will be glad to see you -- --


Now, my dear Lady, I am happy beyond my wishes*


Sir, I beseech you be not the worse opinionated of me, for your easy
Conquest; for I have long had an inclination for you.

How now? whom have we here?


Madam! your Servant, ha, ha, ha, you little think wher^ Theodofia is?


Name her not, vile Creature, to run away with Raym^nd.


No, no, she did not run away with him. With Raymund quoth she? no, no.


What does this Fool mean? ha, ha, ha.


Not married to Raymund! how unlucky is this? that I should fool my self into
marrying this fellow; I might yet have captivated Mr. Raymund.


Gentlemen, are you both satisfied with your marriage?


Ay, ay.


Ay, ay. Come, my dear Theodosia, u^ask your self, and keep 'em no longer in
suspense.


Sir, I obey you. --


*SDeath and Hell! Who's this? Bridget!


Bridget -- ha, ha, ha.


O tempora! O mores! Would you serve me thus? I shall not live to endure it, I
shall suddenly expire, and (...).


Now Brisk, thou hast married the Chamber-maid* I'll prefer thee; I told thee
the Mistress was for my tu^: Prithee my dear unmask, ha! Who's this?


Even as you see Sir --


Death, Fire brands, Devils Damnation,! What's this!


My old Mistress! Prithee Drybob be patient* thou wil^ have a Son and Heir of
mine shortly; and prithee for my sake take care and see him well educated.


How now Gentlemen, are you bobbed?


Madam, We are come to beg your approbation of ou^ M^iage* I humbly beg your
pardon for the irr^gular means I used: Pray Madam turn not from us, but give us
your consent; since 'tis now too late to prevent it.


Avoid my presence thou impudent fellow, I'll have thee kicked.


Poor fellows, methinks you look as scurvily as if you were mounting the
Pillo^y with Papers on your backs.


Married say you? Ah false man! have you used me thus? Did I for this yield up
my honour to you, and you promised me to marry me after the death of my
Husband; who is in a deep Consumption! Ah villainous man! I will have thee
kicked and beaten.


Drybob, Tell him his Wife has made over all her Estate.


Yet this condition of mine is as good as marrying a Widow that has made over
her Estate, as you have done.


Is this true, Madam?


I must confess I did it to defeat my ungracious Niece of her inheritance.


Give you joy good Mr. Crazy.


Give you joy good Mr. Crazy.


Madam, your Ladyship is mistaken, it is a Deed of Gift of all your Estate,
after your decease, to Theodosia: I have it here.


Madam, I thank your Ladyship: I shall study to deserve it.


Am I thus cozened and abused?


'Tis I am cozen^d and abused.


Go thy ways thou vile man, thou art served right for thy falsehood to me.


I'll be revenged of her. -- --

I must tell you, Madam, you are not less disappointed than I am; for I must
ingeniously confess I am very much visited with the Pox


Pox on him for a Rascal; visited is a very pretty word there i'faith.


O Heaven! I am undone for ever; this is a most unspeakable disappointment to a
Lady! O miserable unfortunate Woman that I am.


What's the matter Madam?


Oh I have just now cast my self upon that diseased impotent fellow, that
walking Hospital Crazy.


Now, Madam, d'e wish your other Husband alive in Candia?


No, not so neither; but would I were as fair rid of this Husband, as I was of
him.


So! I am beholding to her!

I have a way to rid you of this Husband.


If you have, you shall command my person and my purse.


And you shall know that I'll command 'em both.


Sir Richard Loveyouth alive!


O Heaven! I am ruined for ever* there is now no dissembling! all my
misfortunes are completed now.


I am glad you are come to take your Wife again.


Fond Woman, thy foolishness and vanity, and thy impertinent contentions with
me, caused my three years absence; and shall make me still continue a stranger
to your Conversation: yet you shall never want what ever befits your Quality:
upon the rest of all the Company let no Cloud appear to day.


You are a happy man Crazy.


You have had ill luck with honest Women, Crazy, you had even as good stick to
Whores.


I have had worse luck with them I am sure, yet this is better than marrying a
Chamber-maid, or Wench big with Child, Gentlemen.


Sir, I am a stranger to your repute, and think my self much honoured in the
relation I have to you.


Sir, The honour is wholly on my side.


Come Gentlemen, I am informed of all your Stories, and 'tis wisdom in you to
be content, with what you can't redress.


I shall ne'er have Children, I therefore here declare my Niece my Heir.


Sir, I can return nothing but my thanks.


This day, Sir, I dedicate to my fair Niece and you.


You do me too much honour.


Come Gentlemen and Ladies, Let's b^ merry; we'll have Music, we'll begin this
days jollity with a Dance.


Sweet Madam Striker, receive me into your favour; for upon my honour, tho I
married her, I intended to reserve the whole stock of my affection for thee.


Get thee gone, thou wicked fellow, I will have ^one of thee; thou hast
declared thou hast the Disease: Get thee gone, I tell thee I will have thee
kicked.


Come Gentlemen, join in a Dance.

So, 'tis well.

All hap ness to both, and may you be,
From discontents of Marriage ever free,
May a^l your life be one continue^ peace,
And may your Loves each day and hour increase. --

THe Mighty Prince of Poets, learned BEN,
Who alone dived into the Minds of Men:
Saw all their wanderings, all their follies knew,
And all their vain fantastic passions drew.
In Images so lively and so true;
That there each Humorist himself might view.
Yet only lashed the Errors of the Times,
And ne'er exposed the Persons, but the Crimes:
And never cared for private frowns, when he
Did but chastise public iniquity.
He feared no Pimp, no Pick-pocket, or Drab;
He feared no Bravo, nor no Ruffian's Stab.
'Twas he alone true Humours understood,
And with great Wit and Judgment made them good.
A Humour is the Bias of the Mind,
By which with violence 'tis one way inclined:
It makes our Actions lean on one side still,
And in all Changes that way bends the will.
This --
He only knew and represented right.
Thus none but Mighty Johnson ever could write.
Expect not then, since that most flourishing Age,
Of BEN. to see true Humour on the Stage.
All that have since been writ, if they be scan'd,
Are but faint Copies from that Master's hand.
Our Poet now, amongst those petty things,
Alas, his too weak trifling humours brings.
As much beneath the worst in Johnson's Plays,
As his great Merit is above our praise.
For could he imitate that great Author right,
He would with ease all Poets else out-write.
But to out-go all other men, would be
O Noble BEN! less than to follow thee.
Gallants you see how hard it is to write,
Forgive all faults the Poet made to night:
Since if he finn'd, *twas meant for your delight.
Pray let this find --
As good success, though it be very bad,
As any damned successful Play ever had.
Yet if you hiss, he knows not where the harm is,
He'll not defend his Non-sence Vi Armis.
But this poor Play has been so torn before,
That all your Cruelty can't wound it more.

