YOu come with such an eager appetite
To a late Play, which gave so great delight;
Our Poet fears, that by so rich a Treat,
Your Palates are become too delicate.
Yet ^ince y'have had Rhyme for a relishing Bit,
To give a better taste to Comic Wit.
But this requires expense of time and pains,
Too great, alas, for Poets slender gains.
For Wit, like China, should long buri'd lie,
Before it ripens to good Comedy;
A thing we ne'er have seen since Johnson's days,
And but a few of his were perfect Plays.
Now Drudges of the Stage must oft appear,
They must be bound to scribble twice a year.
Thus the thin thred-bare Vicar still must toil,
While the fat lazy Doctor bears the spoil.
In the last Comedy some Wits were shown;
In this are Fools that much infest the Town.
Plenty of Fops, grievances of the Age,
Whose nauseous Figures ne'er were on a Stage.
He cannot say they'll please you, but they're new;
And he hopes you will say, he has drawn *em true.
He's sure in Wit he cannot excel the rest,
He'd but be thought to write a Fool the best.
Such Fools as haunt and trouble Men of Wit,
And spite of them will for their Pictures sit.
Yet no one Coxcomb in this Play is shown;
No one Man's humour makes a part alone,
But scattered follies gathered into one.
He says, if with new Fops he can but please;
He'll twice a year produce as new as these.

THou great Lucreti^s! Thou profound Oracle of Wi^ and Sense! thou art no
Trifling-Landskip-Poet, no Fantastic Heroic Dreamer, with empty Descriptions
of Impossibilities, and mighty sounding Nothings. Thou reconcil'st Philosophy
with Verse, and dost, almost alone, demonstrate that Poetry and Good Sense may
go together.

Omnis enim per se Divum Natura (...) ^st,
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur,
Semota a n^stris Rebus, sejunctaque lunge,
Nam privata dolor omni, privata periclis,
Ipsa suis pollens opibus, nihil indiga nostri,
Nec been promeritis capitur, nec tangitur ira.

Bruce, Good Morrow; what great Author ar^ thou* chewing the Cud upon? I looked
to have found you with* your* Head-ake, and your Morning-Qualms.


We should not live always hot-headed; we should give our selves leave
sometimes to think.


Lucretius! Divine Lucretius: But my Noble Epicurean* what an Unfashionable
Fellow* art thou, that in this Age art given to understand Latin?


'Tis true, Longvil, I am a bold Fellow to pretend to it, when 'tis accounted
Pedantry for a Gentleman to spell, and where the Race of Gentlemen is more
degenerated than that of Horses.


It must needs be so: for Gentlemen care not upon what strain they g^t ^heir
So^, nor how they (...) 'em, when they have got 'em: the best of 'em now have a
kind of Education like Pages; and you shall (...) (...) a Young Fellow of this
Age that does not look like one of those overgrown Animals newly manum^tted
from ^unk-Breeches.


Some are first Instructed by Ignorant-young-housholdPedan^s, who dare not whip
the Dunces, their Pupils, for fear of their Lady-Mothers* then before they can
Construe and Pearce, they are sent into France, with sordid illiterate
Creatures, called Dry'd-Nurses, or Gov^rnors; Engines of as little use as
Pacing-Saddies, and as unfit to Govern 'em as the Post-Horses they ride to
Paris on: From whence they return with a little smattering of that Mighty,
Universal Language, without being ever able to write ^rue English.


O but then they'll v^lue 'em for speaking good French.


Perhaps good French may be spoken with little sense; but good English cannot.


Thou art in the right: but then there are a sort of hopeful Youths that do not
^ravel; and they are either such as keep Company with their Sisters, and visit
their Kindred, and are a great co^fort to their Mothers, and a scorn to all
others; or they are sparks that early break loose from D^scipline, and at
Sixteen ^or sooth set up for Men of the Town.


Such as come Drunk and Screaming into a Play-House, and stand upon the
Benches, and toss their full Periwigs and empty Heads, and with their shrill
unbroken Pipes, cry, Dam-me, this is a Damned Play; Prithee let's to a Whore,
Jack. Then says another with great Gallantry, pulling out his Box of Pills,
Damme. Tom, I am not in a condition; here's my Turpentine for my Third Clap:
when you would ^hink he was not old enough to be able to get one.


Heaven be praised, these Youths, like untimely Fruit, are like to be rotten
before they are ripe!


These are sure the only Animals that live without thinking: A Sensible Plant
has more imagination than most of 'em.


Gad, if they go on as they begin, the Gentlemen of the next Age will scarce
have Learning enough to claim the benefit of the Clergy f^r Man-slaughter.


The highest pitch our Youth do generally arrive at* is to have a ^orm, a
fashion of Wit, a Rotine of spe^king, which they get by i^itation; and
generally they imitate the extravagancies of witty Men drunk, which they very
discreetly practice ^ober; but in so clumsie and awkward a way, that methinks it
should make witty men out of love with their Vices; as Prentices wearing
Pantaloons, would make Gentlemen lay by the Habit.


These are sad Truths: but I am not such a fop to disquiet my self one minute
for a thousand of 'em.


You have Reason, say what we can, the Beastly Restive World will go its way;
and there is not so foolish a Creature as ^ Reformer.


Thank Heaven, I am not such a publick-spirited fop, to lose one moment of my
private pleasure for all that can happen without me.


Thou art a Philosopher: and now thou talk of private pleasure, what
think thou of our Adventure with Clarinda and Miranda, the Vertuoso's, Sir
Nicholas Gimcrak's Nieces? See the danger of going to Church, Longvil: I
advised thee against it; 'twas a ^ine Curiosity, and has cost us dear.


Did ever I think we two should be caught any way in a Church?


'Tis a little strange that we, that have run together into all the Vices of
Men, of Wit and Gentlemen, should at last together fall into the Vice of Fools
and Country-Squires, Love.


We that have wondered at all other amorous Coxcombs must now laugh at one
another. I am amazed at thy passion for Clarinda.


And I no less at thine for Miranda. There's Witchcraft in it, to love where
there's such apparent difficulty: for ^irtuoso is as jealous as an Italian
Uncle; his jealousy, helped by the vigilance and malice of that impertinent
Strumpet his Wife, keeps 'em from all manner of address. Letters they have
received from us, and we can have no answer; what the Devil's left for us to do
in this case?


Fall down and worship me! I have found out the Noblest Tool to work with, and
the most excellent Coxcomb that Nature ever began, or Art e're finished.


Thou reviv'st my dying hope. Who is't?


A Rascal that is Vertuoso's Admirer, Flatterer, and great Confident, the only
Man he'll trust his Nieces with, who has discovered to me that he has a passion
for your Clarinda.


Curse on him: But a Rival's a very improper Instrument.


But this is a Rival so conceited of his own parts, that he can never be
jealous of another. He is indeed a very choice Spirit; the greatest Master of
Tropes and Figures: The most Cicero^ian Coxcomb: the noblest Orator breathing;
he never speaks without Flowers of Rhetoric; In short, he is very much
abounding in words, and very much defective in sense, Sir Formal Trifle.


He's an Original indeed, the most Florid Knight alive; I have some little
knowledge of him.


I have persuaded him, that you and I are the greatest Philosophers, and the
greatest Admirers of the Virtuoso and his Works that can be: This has already
produced that good effect, that Sir Formal has this morning been with me from
his noble Friend Sir Nicholas, to invite me to come to his House to see a
Cock-Lobster dissected, and afterwards to Dine with him; and will be here with
the same Message to you.


How I applaud thy Wit! but why would not thou communicate thy design
before-hand?


I was resolved to surprise thee with it if it took, and to conceal it if it
did not,


Sir Samuel Hearty has sent you word, he will come and give you a visit.


There's an Ass, an Original of another kind; one that thinks that all Mirth
consists in noise, tumult, and violent laughter: At once, the merriest and the
dullest Rogue alive -- One that affects a great many nonsensical by-words,
which he takes to be Wit, and uses upon all occasions.


But the best part of his Character is behind; he is the most amorous Coxcomb,
the most designing and adventurous Knight alive; a great Masquerader, and has
forty several disguises to make love in; and has been the most unlucky Fellow
breathing, in that and all other adventures. He has never made Love where he
was not refused, nor waged War where he was not beaten. Here he is.


Tom. Bruce. Good morrow to thee. Dear Jack Longvil, how dost do? Faith I
wished you with me last night; we were a knot of merry Rogues of thirteen or
fourteen of us got together, sung, and tore, and roared, and ranted 'igad all
weathers, and drunk and laughed Dagger out o'sheath, I vow to gad: We were upon
the high Ropes, i'faith. Hey poop -- troll -- come aloft Boys -- ha-ha-ha. Ah
Rogues, that you had been with us, 'ifaith. Ha-ha-ha.


(...) and would we had.


'Igad Boys: we'd have paid you off. We swinged it away 'ifaith: We were so
merry, o'my Conscience, you might have heard us half a mile.


What a Divine hearing was that?


Faith I was pure company, I was never on a better pin in my life. There was
one of the Company would needs pretend to be a Wit forsooth; but 'ifaith Boys I
run him down so, the Devil take me, he had not a word to throw at a Dog about
business. When ever he was impertinent, I took him up with my old repartee;
Peace, said I, Tace is Latin for a Candle; and when ever he began again, Tace
is Latin for a Candle again said I. Thus I run him down with a Hey poop! Whoo!
ha-haha! he had not a word, not one word, I vow to gad. Ha-ha-ha!


As this Fellow thinks all mirth consists in noise, so he thinks all Wit is in
running a Man down, as he calls it; not considering that impudence does that
better.


Faith I was very frolic; and there came a fellow abruptly into our company.
I whipped him up to. Hey! slap, dash! gave him a kick in the arse to drink, and
made Pilgarlike go ten times faster down stairs than he came up, i'faith, Boys


But this may cost you a Challenge, Sir Samuel.


Challenge! igad if he does challenge me, I'll run him through the Lungs about
that business. He shall not only blow out a Candle with his wound, but the Sun
shall shine through him. Pox! he's a raw fellow, he does not know what 'tis to
have a Towel drawn through his Body.


This Fellow's brains, like some bottle-beer, fly all intofroth.


So brisk and dull a Rogue I never saw.


Come, faith we are choice Lads, and should make much of one another. I have
indeed to night an Intrigo with a Lady, and I am to venture in a disguise. I
give a Masquerade you know, and, I hope will be there. But to morrow night,
faith I'll be very drunk about business. Ha Boys! ha! ha!


Sir, one Sir Formal Trifle bids me tell you, he's come to pay his Devoir to
you; he charged me to use that expression, I know not what he means by it.


'Twas very quaintly expressed: desire him to come up.


Oh I have often seen him at Sir Nicholas Gimcrack's house, the Virtuoso;
faith of a grave fellow, he's a very ingenious Rogue, and i'gad he has a fine
way with him --


I never knew any man that had a way with him (as they call it) that was not a
Coxcomb.


He has a notable Vein of Oratory, a brave Delivery; and when he's in the
humour, i'gad he'll speak finely, finely very finely. --


Gentlemen, I humbly kiss all your hands in general, but, Sir, yours in a more
particular manner.


Sir Formal, your most humble Servant; you do me a great deal of honour in this
visit.


Sir, I never could admit a thought within the slender Sphere of my
imagination, that could once suggest to me the not meeting with a good
reception, from a person that is so strictly obliged by, and so nicely
practised in the severer rules and stricter methods of honour, as you are.


Sir, you oblige me with your fair Char^cter.


Upon my sincerity, I wholly eschew all Oratory, and Compliments, with persons
of your worth and generosity. And though I must confess upon due occasions, I
am extremely delighted with those pretty spruce expressions, wherewith Wit and
Eloquence use to tric^ up humane thoughts, and with the gaudy dress that
smoother Pens so finely cloth them in, yet I never used the least tincture of
Rhetoric with my Friend, which I hope you'll do me the Honour to let me call
you -- I think I am florid --


I told you i'faith he'd speak notably; he has a Silver Tongue.


Oyes! a Golden one! What would such Coxcombs do, if there were not greater to
admire them? This Sir Formal is called a well-spoken man, with a pox to him --
*


Sir, I shall think my self honoured with the Title of your Servant.


It is so much to my advantage, that I do assure you, Sir Formal Trifle shall
never give Mr Bruce any occasion to believe, that he shall omit any opportunity
of avowing himself to all the World, to be the most humble and obedient of his
Servants. Sweet Mr. Longvil, having already this morning paid my devoir to you,
I shall at present only tell you that, which I hope is no news to you; to wit,
that I am your most humble Servant. There I think I was concise and florid.


You do me too much honour.


Is (...) so great a Rascal upon earth as an Orator, that would slur and top
upon our understandings, and impose his false conceits for true reasoning, and
his florid words for good sense?


Your ^ully, with his false Dice and Box, is an honester man.


Truly Sir, I am afflicted at the late falling out between Sir Nicholas and
your noble self, which has deprived me of so frequently enjoying the honour of
kissing your fair hands there.


O Lord, Sir, your Servant, your Servant: faith I am very sorry for it too. But
I shall be glad to wait upon you, and drink his health in a glass of Burgundy,
and be very merry about bus^ness: He's a fine person 'ifaith, though he does
not care much for Wit*


And now Mr Bruce after these little digressions which my particular esteem of
every person in this presence has engaged me to, I am to inform you, that my
nob^e Friend Sir Nicholas Gim^rack does by me invite you, with your Friend,
being Philosophers, and consequently his Admirers, to come to his house this
fore-noon, to see the dissection of a little Animal^, commonly called a
Chichester Cock-Lo^ster; and afterwards to take a dish of meat, and discourse
of the noble Operation, and to sport an Author over a Glass of Wine.


Ha! this will prove for my design.


Give me your Orator for dispatch. What a flourish the Rogue has made to invite
us to dinner.


Sir, I will not do my self the injure to fail two fuch Ingenious and Learned
men as Sir Nicholas and your self*


Alas, Sir, (...) I am but his shadow, his humble Admirer; but I will
undertake for him* Fame has not promised more of him to your expectation, than
he will perform to your understanding. Trust me, he is the finest speculative
Gentleman in the whole World, and in his Cogitations the most serene Animal
alive: Not a Creature so little, but affords him great Curiosities: He is the
most admirable person in the Meletetiques, viz. in Refl^ctions and Meditations,
in the whole World. Not a Creature so inanimate, to which he does not give a
Tongue; he makes the whole World Vocal; he makes Flowers, nay, Weeds, speak
eloquently, and, by a noble kind of Prosopopeia, instruct Mankind.

And, Sir, though I ignore not what the envy of Detractors have expressed of
him, yet, in short, I opine him to be the most curious and inquisitive
Philosopher breathing; and I will let him know you intend to wait on him;
within two hours he will show. 'Tis his time of Operation.


We will not fail. What an Employment has this Fool under him? he is the Chorus
to his Puppet-show.


I would rather be Trumpeter to a Monster, and call in the Rabble to see a Calf
with six legs, than show such a Blockhead.


'Pray, Sir, commend me heartily to Sir Nicholas, and tell h^m, Faith and Troth
I am sorry my Wit should offend him; and I shall henceforth endeavour to be as
dull as I can to merit his esteem. I confess I was a little too aerie and brisk
about that bus*ness: but faith I am his most humble Servant, and have a Sword
and Arm at his service, and 'gad will draw it against any man breathing, in
defence of his Person and Philosophy; and so let him know from Sir Samuel.


I shall perform your commands, and doubt not but to do you service in it.
Gentlemen again, I kiss your hands.


Sir Samuel, how came your Wit to offend the Virtuoso?


Faith I was very well there; but you know I am an aerie brisk merry Fellow,
and facetious: and his grave Philosophical humour, did not agree with mine.
Besides, h does not value Wit at all, he wo'nt be pleased with you, I assure
you.


Why so?


Why, he did not like me at all; he's an enemy to Wit, as all Vertuoso's are.


Sure if he had liked Wit, he would have liked you.


That I think without vanity, but you must know, I pretended to Miranda.


Pox on him, what says he?


And not to boast, I found my love would have had a good reception; but her
malicious Sister, Clarind^, discovered my Intriguo, and Sir Nicholas forbad me
his house upon that business.


What exception had he against you?


Why faith he would not dispose of his Niece to a Wit, he said.


A Wit! faith he might as well have called thee a Dromedary.


Peace, I say; Tace is Latin for a Candle, Ha-ha-ha. You know I can run you
down. In short, he said* I was a Wit, a flashy Wit. But if you have any
kindness in the World for me, you might help me in this Intriguo.


How so?


Now you are invited, let me wait on you in a Livery for one of your Footmen. I
have forty several Periwigs for these Intriguo's and bus'nesses: 'gad if you
will whip* slapdash -- I'll bring this business about as round as a Hoop.


Prithee, Longvil* let him go, that we may make sport with him, and abuse the
Rogue damnably.


'Sdeath! what, bring him to my Mistress!


Can thou be jealous of so silly a Rascal?


'Tis ill trusting the fantastic appetites of Women; they are subject to the
Green-sickness of the mind, as well as that of the body: One makes them love
Fools and Block-heads, as the other does Dirt and Char-coal.


She's a Woman of Wit; besides, let him wear your Livery, and by your
prerogative you may kick your Rival all this day, if he should be saucy, which
he will certainly be.


That consideration prevails with me.


What say you, Boys? is it not an admirable Intriguo? -- Hah! --


Sir Samuel, there is some difficulty: but, to serve you, we can refuse
nothing. You shall do me the honour to wear a Livery of mine; I have new ones
come home this morning my man will give you one.


If I do not my bus'nes^, Jack* I am the Son of a Tinder-box.


Well! Pray Mr. Tinder-box, go about it quickly.


Gad I'll do it instantly, in the twinkling of a Bedstaff. Ha-ha-ha.


In the twinkling of what?


Hey! pull away, Rogues; in the twinkling of a Bed-staff! a witty way I have of
expressing my self. I'll away.


Was there ever so senseless a Fop? words are no more to him than breaking wind,
they only give him vent; they serve not with him to express thoughts, for he
does not think.


A Wit! a flashy Wit! a flashy Wit! What a dull Villain is this Virtuoso; But
prithee take all occasions to kick this flashy Wit much; he'll give thee
enough.


Pox on him* he has read Seneca: he ca^es not for kicking; he never escaped
kicking in any disguise he ever put on.


Nor in ^ny of his own habits neither. But I'll in and dress me.


Were ever Women so confined in England by a foolish Uncle? worse than an
Italian. But that I should be loath to speak ill of the dead, I should think my
Father was not Compose mentis when he made his Will, to bequeath us to the
government of a Virtuoso only, because his first Wife was our Aunt.


A Sot, that has spent 2000 l. in Microscopes, to find out the Nature of Eels
in Vinegar, Mites in a Cheese, and the Blu^ of Plums, which he has subtly
found out to be living Creatures.


One who has broken his brains about the nature of Magots* who has stud^'d
these twenty years to (...) out the several sorts of Spiders, and never cares
for un^standing Mankind.


Shall we never get free from his jealousy, and the malice of ^is impertinent
Wife?


Though he be jealous of us, yet h^'s as tame a civil London Husband to his
Wife, as she can wish -- who certainly Cuckolds him abundantly.


She hate^ us in her heart, because she thinks we see too much. To be confined,
and to such impertinence too, puts me beyond all patience.


*Twill make Dogs ^urst to be tied up, and sure 'twill provoke free-born Women
more?


We should have as good company in ^ Go a; for none but Quacks and Fools come
hither; and one of the worst of 'em is my foolish florid Coxcomb, Sir Formal.


He has banished my Coxcomb, Sir Samuel; a brisk airy Fool, that there is some
diversion in. He had as many tricks as a well educated Spaniel, would fetch and
carry, and come over a stick for the King: He had some tricks of a Man too, and
may pass Muster among the young gay fellows of this Town; and could sing all
the new Tunes and Songs at the Play-houses.


And we are troubled with an old Fellow here in the House, his Uncle Snarl, a
great Declaimer against the Vices of the Age, a clownish blunt Satirical
Fellow; a hater of all young people, and new Fashions.


But he is such a froward testy old fellow, he should be Wormed like a mad Dog.


We try his patience sometimes; but I am pleased to hear him abuse the Virtuoso
his Nephew, who bears all in hope of his Estate. Snarle is a Fellow spares no
body, always speaks what he thinks, and does what he pleases. But yet* Miranda,
there's a worse misfortune than all this, that we two should, in a Church, when
we should ha'been thinking of something else, fall in love with two men of Wit
and Pleasure, who are two much Men of the Town to think of Marriage, we being
too little Women of the Town to think of any other Love.


We have Fortunes good enough to lure them to Matrimony, if that were all; but
the worst part of the story is, he whom I love is in love with yo^, and your
Man makes add^esses to me, as their Letters tell us: And even these Men we
cannot see, but at Church, or at a Play-house, when we are guarded by our
malicious watchful Aunt.


If we could but see these Men privately, there yet might be some hopes; we
might each of us use our Lover s^urvily, and him we love we might charm with
kindness; for they are men that have known the pomps and vanities of this
wicked World, too much to love a face only.


If we could bring this about, I would stand out at ^othing that might procure
our freedom; the mischief is, if we rebel, Virtuoso will allow us nothing out
of our Fortunes till we come of age.


Then we must even live upon the credit of a Reversion, as so^e young fellows
do that wish their Fathers hanged: I warrant thee we'll find credit.


And lose our Reputations: we have much ado to keep 'em as we are.


Let what will come on it, I am resolved to break out: he shall sooner stop a
Tide than my Inclinations.


Oh if your Knight Errants and we agree upon the point, they'll soon deliver us
distressed Damsels from our Enchanted Castle.


'Tis a fine morning: fetch me a Pipe of Tobacco and a Match into the Garden.


Here's old Snarl, he has called for his Tobacco too: he smokes all day like a
Kitchen-chimney.


Prithee let's tease him a little, 'tis the greatest pleasure we have. Morrow
Uncle --


How now you Baggages! what do you abro^d thus early? you used to be stewing a
bed till eleven a clock, like paltry lazy Cockatrices, that are good for
nothing, by the Mass: You'll make excellent Wives, Cuckold your Husbands
immoderately: You mind nothing but prinking your selves up. A wholesome good
housewifely Country Wench is worth a thousand of you, in sadness.


You have a course stomach, and to such a one a Sirloin of Beef were better
than a dish of Wheat ears.


A man must have ^ lusty stomach that has a mind to any of*the Town-Ladies;
they have so many tricks to disguise themselves, washing, painting, patching,
and their damned ugly new-fashion'd dresses, that a Man knows not what to make
on 'em, by t^e Mass: Besides, I have not heard, that their Reputations are
famous all over the World.


You are an old fashioned Fellow, Uncle* and think no Dress handsome, but that
which Ladies wore at the Coronation of the last King.


And think no Ladies honest, but your old formal Creatures, that were in
fashion in the year 1640* and censure all Ladies that have freedom in their
carriage.


Freedom with a pox! ay, 'tis freedom indeed: But the last Age was an Age of
innocence, you young Sluts you; now a company of Jillflirts, flaunting vain
Cockatrices, take more pains to lose Reputation, than those did to preserve it.
I am afraid the next Age will have very few that are lawfully begotten in it, by
the Mass. Besides, the young Fellows are like all to be effeminate Coxcombs,
and the young Women Strumpets, in sadness, all Strumpets by the Mass.


You are a fine old Sa^yr indeed; 'twere well if you decri'd Vices for any
other reason but that you are past them.


You pert Baggages, you think you are very handsome now, I warrant you. What a
devil's this pound of hair upon your paltry frowses for? what a Pox are those
Patches for? what are your faces sore? I'd not kiss a Lady of this Age, by the
Mass, I'd rather kiss my horse.


Heaven, for the gener^l good of our Sex, keep you still in that mind.


Some Ladies with scabs and pimples on their faces invented patches, and those
that have none must follow: Just as our young Fellows imitate the French; their
Summer fashion of going op^-breasted came to us at Micha^lmas, and we wore it
all Winter; and their Winter-fashion of buttoning close their
strait-long-wasted Coats, that made them look like Monkeys, came not to us ^ill
A^arch, and our Coxcombs wore it all Summer. Nay, I'll say that for your
comfort, the young fashionable Fellows of ^he Town have as little Wit as you
have.


You had a better opinion of our Sex sure in your youth, were you never in
love?


O yes, with himself always*


Never with any such as you, I thank Heaven, I was never such an Ass; I'd not
be such a Puppy for the World, in sadness.


Pish: you are an old insignificant Fellow, Nuncle, such as you should be
destroyed, like Drones that have lost their (...) and afford no Honey.


Marry come up, you young Slut, are you so liquorish after the Honey of Man? in
sadness this is fine.


You have no pleasure but drinking, and smoking, and riding with your
Gambadoes on your little pacing Tit, to take a Pipe, and drink a cup of Ale at
Hamstead or Highgate.


Prithee, you prating Slut, do not trouble me with your impertinence. What
pleasure can a Man have in this coxcombly, scandalous Age; in sadness, I am
almost ashamed to live i^'t, by the Mass.


Then die in it, as soon as you can, if you do not like it*


Met^inks, though all pleasures have left you, you may go to see Plays.


I am not such a Coxcomb, I thank God: I have seen 'em at Bla^k-Fryers; pox,
they act like Poppets now in sadness, I, that have seen Joseph Taylor, and
Lowen, and Swanstead: Oh a brave roaring Fellow! would make the house shake
again. Besides, I can never endure to see Plays since Women came on the Stage,
Boys are better by half.


But here are a great many new Plays.


New ones! yes, either damned insipid dull Farces, confounded toothless Satyrs,
or plaguy Rhyming Plays, with s^urvy Hero's, worse than the Knight of the Sun,
or Amadis de Ga^l; by the Mass. Pish, why should I talk with such foolish
Girls. Here, Sir, give me my Pipe of Tobacco, with the Match. So --

Go now, and fetch me a lusty Tankerd of Ale, with Nutmeg and Sugar in it --


Prithee do thee fling away his Cane, and I'll break his Pipe, which will
almost break his heart --


Agreed. Fie Nuncle, is this your breeding, to take nasty Tobacco, and stink
much before Ladies?


A way with it.


'Sdeath! you saucy Jades, what's this? I'll thrum you; 'twas well you flung
away my Cane, you young Sluts; in sadness I'd ha'made Bamboo fly about your
Jackets else, by the Mass. Ha! 'tis not broken all to pieces.

'Ounds! you young Jades, I'll maul you, you Strumpets, you damned Cocka^rices:
I'll disinherit my Nephew, if he does not turn you out of doors, you
Crocadills.


That's it we'd have, we will weary you both of your lives till you bring it
about.


You young Jades, you Strumpets.


Let's away, he*ll beat us.


Ladies, whither so gay, and in such hast? Is Sir Nicholas here?


No no, Clarinda, come away.


Let me first violently ravish a k^ss from your fair hands; I had this morning,
ere I went out, tender*d you my service of this day; had I not opin'd, I should
too early have disturbed your Beauty: but, Madam, you ignore not, that those
venturous Blossoms, whose over-hasty obedience to the early Spring, does
anticipate the proper Season, do of^en suffer from ^he injuries of severer
weather, unless protected by the happy patronage of some more benign shelter.


Farewell, I am in hast --


Her departure savors somewhat of abruptness --


Strumpets, Jades!


Sweet Mr. Snarl, had my eyes sooner encountered you, I had more early paid you
the Tribute of my respect, which I opine to be so much your due, that though I
ignore not that you are happy in having many Admirers, yet --


'Ounds, if I be not revenged on those Cockatrices.


Yet I say, none of 'em is endued with a more zealous heart to do you service,
than your most humble Servant Sir* Formal Triste.


Pox! What do you trouble me with your foolish Rhetoric?


What is it so disorders the Operative Faculties of your noble Soul? But I
beseech you argue yo^ me not of Or^tory; though I confess it to be a great
virtue to be florid: nor is there in the whole World so generous and
Prince-like a Quality as Oratory --


Prince-like, Pimp-like in sadness! I never knew a^ Orator that was not a
Rascal, by the Mass: Orators are foolish flashy Coxcombs, of no sense or
judgment, turned with every wind; they are never of the same opinion half an
hour together, nor ever speak of the opinion they are of. Pox o'your Tropes and
Flowers.


Sir, upon my honour you mistake me still. I assure you I am a person --


Whom I hope to see hanged --


O Sir, you are in a merry humour: but, in good earnest, there is not a person
in the whole World that is a greater admi^er of your politer parts than my
self.


Pshhaw! pox of admi^ers; pish! what care I whether you be or no. Prithee,
pish! you are very troublesome, in sadness.


Well Sir, you will have your pretty humours, you are disposed to be merry.


Merry! Oh your Jack-pudding! merry quo^h a! ^ounds you lie --


Sir, I have often entreated you to avo^d passion, it drowns your parts, and
obstructs the faculties of your mind, while a serene Soul, like that which I
wear about me, operates clearly, notwithstanding the oppression of Clay, and
the clog of my sordid humane Body.


In sadness! would you were hanged, that your serene Soul might be free from
your sordid humane Body; 'tis a very sordid one, by the Mass.


O Sir, I will retire, and take away all occasions of your uttering things that
r^ vera, are more injurious to your self, than reflecting on me. I take my
leave, Sir.


You do well in so doing, by the Mass. It's a fine life I live here: I am
tormented with a couple of young ramping Sluts; and then there's my Nephew's
Wife, the most impertinent foolish Creature breathing. Then my Nephew is such a
Co^comb, he has studi'd ^hese twenty years about the nat^e of Lice, Spiders,
and Insects; and has been as long compiling a Book of Geography for the World
in the Moon Did he not give me my Board for nothing, in hopes of my Estate, I'd
not stay here -- But above all Villaim, and tedious insipid Blockheads, this
Sir Formal is the greatest; he is the most intolerable plague I have: I could
--

With any Fools but Orators dispense,
Who love words so, they never care for sense.

WE are here to our wishes; and neither the Virtuoso, nor his Master of his
Ceremonies within: If we could but meet with the Ladies now --


Ay, if the Ladies were but here -- you should see how I would show my parts.
Whip-slap-dash. I'd come up roundly with A^iranda, faith Boy^ -- ha --


A pox o'this fellow, he'll be intolerable: I see there's no tempering with
that Edge tool called a Fool --


I am disguised Cap a pe to all intents and purposes, and if any Man manages an
Intriguo better than I, I will never hope for a Masquerade more, or expect to
Dance my self again into any Lady's affection, and about that business. Come
aloft, Sir Samuel, I say --


But sweet Sir Samuel, if you discover your self, you will be turned out of the
house, and we for company.


Let me alone; pox, if I should be discove^'d, Ill bring you off as round as a
hoop, in the twinkling of an Oystershell. But gad I cannot conceal my self from
my Mistress; my Love and Wit will break out now and then a little about the
edges, or I shall burst, faith and troth.


^onder come the Ladies -- Good Sam. keep your Distance.


My distance! why the Ladies are by themselves; I'll present you to 'em, I'll
introduce you. Come along, pull away, Boys. Now, my choice Lad^. Hey poop, come
alo^t, Boy -- ^ah --


Do you hear, Sir Samuel, act the Footman a little better, or by Heaven I'll
turn you out-of my Livery.


What a pox, you are upon the High Ropes now. Prithee, Longvil, hold thy peace,
with a whip-stich, your nose in my breech, I know what I have to do mun -- Do
you think to make a fool of Pil-garlick?


By Heaven, Pil-garlick, I'll cut your throat, if you advance beyond your post
-- Stand Sentry there.


If you do not, Sam. you'll find your Master very choleric, honest Sam.


Choleric! what a pox care I; how shall I show my parts about this business?
if I should stand here. Pshaw, Prithe^ hold thy peace --


Sir, stand there, and mind your waiting -- Damme stand still --


What a pox does he mean now? O'my Conscience and Soul he has been a drinking
hard this morning, and is halfSeas over already.


Ladies your humble Servant.


How long have we pray^d to Heaven for this opportunity of kissing your hands!


I see then you can be devout upon some occasions.


We showed our devotion sufficiently the first time we saw you; 'tw^s in a
Church Ladies --


Lo^! that it shoul^ be ou^ (...) (...) ^ee you in a place so little used by
you.


I warr^nt they came hither as th^y do (...) a Play-house, bolting out of some
eating-house, having (...) else to do in an idle after-noon.


'Tis a wonder they do not come as the Spark^ do to a Play-house too, full of
Champagn, venting very much noise, and very little wit --


What ever your intentions a^e, I am sure it is a very wicke^ thing for you to
go to Church.


How so, Sir?


Why to seduce zealous young men, as we might have b^n, but for you.


Your zeal will never do you hurt I warrant you.


You for your part committed Sacrilege, and robbed Heaven of all my thoughts.


That's strange, for I assure you, none of mine ever strayed towards you.


I am glad to find you can be so very zealous: They that can be so very violent
in that higher sort of zeal, will often be so in a lower -- I am glad to see my
Mistress violent in any passion; 'tis ten to one Love will have its turn then.


You could not but observe my great zeal to you, Madam; had I soared ne'er so
high, you would have lured me down again.


Alas, Sir, you never soar so high, but any lure will bring you down with a
swoop, I warrant you.


You are he that have pestered me with your Billets Doux: your fine little
fashionable Notes ti'd with filk.


Yes, I have presented several Bills of Love upon you, and you would never make
good payment of ^ny of 'em.


Would you have one answer a Bill of Love at sight? that's only for
substantial Traders: young Beginners dare not venture, they ought to be
cautious.


Not, when they know him to be a responsable Merchant they have to deal with?


Such, who keep a correspondence with too many Factories, venture too much, and
are in danger of breaking.


My Sister's in the right: 'Tis more danger trusting Love with such, than Money
with Go^dsmiths; especially considering most Men are apt to break in Women's
debts. I have received several honourable Summons from you, if I would have
accepted the Challenges.


I only provoked you fairly into the open Field; and 'gad, I wonder you had
not honour enough to answer me.


You would have drawn me into some wicked ambush or other, Matrimony or worse,
I warrant you --


What a pox do these Fellows mean? I shall stand here till one of them has
whipped away my Mistress about business, with a Hixius Doxius, with the force of
Repartee, and this, and that, and every thing in the world.


Why Sir, Rascal!


Ay, 'tis no matter for that Madam --


You impudent Dog.


Psha! psha! I care not a farthing for this. This is nothing, I am hardened; I
have been killed and beaten to all inten^s and purposes an hundred times, about
intrigues and businesses* Madam, Madam, don't you know me?


What impudent saw^y footman's this?


Poor silly Rogue, he must be beaten into good manners.


Ha-ha-ha, that's good i'faith! Poor silly Rogue! that's well. Ha-ha-ha. But
all these kicks, and these businesses, and all that, we Men of Intrigue must
bear. Prithee, Longvil, do not play the Fool; but let me discover my self --


Sir, be gone, or I'll beat you most infinitely --

Madam, let us not trifle away those few happy minutes Fortune lends us Lovers.
We know your streights, and how few opportunities we are like to have; and
therefore let me tell you in short, I am most desperately in love with you.


O Traitor! what says he? I must discover my self quickly about this business,
or whip slap -- I shall be bobbed of my Mistress in the twinkling of a
Bed-staff.


'Tis true, our opportunities are like to be rare; but I'll improve this so
well, we shall need no more -- Good Sir, let it not transport you too much: for
I do assure you, I am extremely and desperately out of love with you, and shall
be so as long as I live.


Say you so, Madam? and are you absolutely and violently resolved upon this?


I am.


Faith, Madam, I am glad to hear on it. I never knew a Woman absolutely resolve
upon any thing, but she did the contrary.


I hope you'^ not take example by your hard-hearted Sister, to nip so hopeful a
Love in the Bud; but nourish it, and in time 'twill bring forth fruit worth the
gathering.


It shall produce none for me, it's a dangerous surfeiting fruit, and I'll have
none on it.


I'll sing a Song that I used to entertain 'em with, and that will discover me.
I shall be even with these impudent Fellow^.

She tripped like a Baron Do, c.

'Sdeath! what does this Rascal mean?


Pox on him; he sings worse than an old Woman a spinning.


How's this? I have heard that charming voice: 'tis very like a Coxcomb's that
used to come hither, one Sir Samuel Hearty.


Peace, Envy, Peace, Coxcomb; she never was so much in the wrong in her life:
she was always malicious against me, because I could not love her, poor Fool --
Coxcomb, whip-stich, your Nose in my Breech. -- Pish.


Hang him, let him discover himself.


'Tis he sure -- What project's this? he was ever a great Designer.


I can hold no longer. Madam, you have lost your senses?


'Sdeath! this Rascal puts me beyond all patience. Impudent Villain --


Ay, ay, it's no matter for that; it's no matter for that: I can bear any thing
for my Mistress. Don't you know me yet?


'Tis he: I'll make as if I did not know him, and we'll have excellent sport
with him.


Hold Sir; by your favour I am resolved to speak with him, and know the meaning
of this.


Sir.


Psha! prithee hold thy tongue, Tace is Latin for a Candle, I say again. I
knew I should screw her up to the tune of Love -- Now do you know your faithful
Servant Sir Samuel?


I do; but have a care, if my Sister discovers you, you are undone.


I warrant you I'll be as secret as a Cockle.


I am sorry you have been so exceedingly beaten and kicked, Sir --


Psha! psha! it's nothing, nothing. Come, come -- 'tis well it's no worse --
Come, if any man in England outdoes me in passive-valor about Intrigues, I am
the son of a Tinder box --


Have a care, she suspects something --


Ay, let me alone --


What saucy impudent Footman's this? Correct his insolence, and send him hence,
I like not his face --


The truth is, the Rascal is saucy; but he'll learn better manners.


Good! how the Rogues Love makes her dissemble! Ah cunning Toad!


'Sdeath you Dog! I'll learn you better manners; get you gone.


Pox on you, you over-act a Master, and kick too hard about business --


Do you hear* you nonsensical Owl, be gone out of the Garden, or by Heaven I'll
run my Sword in your guts --


Hold, Longvil, do not kill me; 'twill be something uncivil --


Uncivil! what a pox do you talk? Uncivil! why 'twill be murder mun. Uncivil
quoth a -- Well, I must be gone with a cup of Content, to the tune of a damned
beating, or so -- This is a fine nimble piece of business, that a Man cannot
make love to his own Mistress. But I'll come upon him with a Quare impedit, and
a good lusty cup of Revenge to boot --


We have discovered your Fool. Do you want a Fool, that you must bring such a
one as Sir Samuel along with you?


Perhaps they thought themselves not able to divert us, and brought him to
assist th^m --


Faith Ladies, if you make trial of us, if we be not able to divert you, you
shall find us very willing.


I am sure if we do not divert you from your cruel resolutions, we are the most
undone men that ever sighed, and looked pale for Ladies, yet --


I do not doubt but some Ladies, such as they are, may have made you look pale
and wan.


But a civil Woman could never yet come near your hearts, or alter your faces.


The greatest Generals do not escape always unwounded; you have done my
business, Madam.


I have held out a long time against the Artillery of Ladies eyes; but a
random shot has mauled me at last.


That cannot be; you were the greatest Mutineers against civil Women that could
be.


Always showing your parts against Matrimony, and defending the tawdry ill-bred
fluttering Wenches of the Town.


That may be, Madam; but we are taken off.


Ay, Madam; we are taken off.


There's no trusting you; for though you seem to be taken off, as you call it,
yet you'll stick fast to your good old Cause.


A Man often parts with his honesty, but never with his opinion for a Bribe --


Mr. Bruce and Mr. Longvil in the Garden with my Nieces, say you! young Sluts!
do they snap at all the Game that comes hither? what are they discoursing of?


Why to the Tune of Love, Madam; what should young Gentlemen and Ladies talk of
else?


O impudent Gill-flirts! cannot one young Gentleman escape 'em? Are they making
Love to my Nieces, say you?


Yes, that they are, Madam, with a helter-skelter, whip-dash, as round as a
hoop, what should they do else? I'll retire --


That's Mr. Bruce, a fine strait well-bred Gentleman, of a pleasing form, with
a charming air in his face. The other, Mr. Longvil, who has a pleasing
sweetness in his countenance, an agreeable straitness, and a grareful composure
and strength in his Limbs. I am distracted in my choice on whom to fix my
affection. Let me see, which shall I like best? Mr. Bruce is a fine person
really, and so is Mr. Longvil: and so is Mr. Bruce I vow, and so is Mr.
Longvil, I swear. In short, I like 'em both best, and these fluttering Sluts
shall have none of 'em.


Prithee, Sister, let's change our Men, and then we shall be troubled with no
love from 'em --


Agreed. But if we be, it is shifting of our torment, and that's some ease. But
hold, we are undone: here's my Aunt.


Gentlemen, your Servant. So, Nieces, you are soon acquainted with young
Gentlemen, I see, It will in modesty befit you to retire.


We heard Sir Nicholas was at home, and took the liberty of a turn in the
Garden.


Where by accident we found these Ladies, who have done us the honour to
entertain some discourse with us --


They are always ready to show their little or no breeding; you must pardon
them they are raw Girls --


Thank Heaven; we have not ^ad the age and experience of your Ladi^hip.


We will leave your Reverend Ladyship, to show your great wisdom and breeding.


How now, you pert Sluts -- --

Gentlemen, you are not to take notice what these idle Girls say concerning my
age: for I protest, Gentlemen, I exceed not Twenty two, upon my Honour I do not.


That's well; I remember her a Woman Twenty years ago.


'Tis true.

'Tis ^mpossible your Ladyship should be more.


You are in the very blossom of your age.


O Lord, S^rs! now, I swear, you do me too much honour. Yet had I not had some
cares in the World, and the truth on it is, been ma^ri'd somewhat against my
will, I might have looked much better. But 'tis no matter for that, I'm
disposed of --


This is to let us know she does not care for her Husband.


She means to trust one or both of us.


Yet I confess, Sir Nicholas is a fine solitary Philosophical person. But my
nature more affects the vigorous gaiety and jollity of Youth, than the fruitless
speculations of Age.


Those fitter for your youth and blood. But may we not have the honour we were
promised of seeing Sir Nicholas?


The truth on it is, he is within, but upon some private business: but nothing
shall be reserved from such accomplished persons as you are. The truth on it is,
he's learning to swim.


Is there any Water hereabouts, Madam?


He does not learn to swim in the Water, Sir.


Not in the Water, Madam! how then?


In his Laboratory, aspacious Room, where all his Instruments and fine Knacks
are.


How is this possible?


Why he has a Swiming-Master comes to him.


A Swiming-Master! this is beyond all president -- He is ^he most curious
Coxcomb breathing --


He has a Frog in a Bowl of Water, t^'d with a pack-thred by the loins; which
pack-thred Sir Nichol^s holds in his teeth, lying upon his belly on a Table;
and as the Frog strike^, he strikes; and his swiming-Master stands by, to tell
him when he does well or ill.


This is the rarest Fop that ever was heard of.


Few Virtuoso's can arrive to this pitch, Madam. This is the most curious
invention I ever heard of.


Alas! he has many such He is a rare Mechanic Philosopher. The College indeed
refused him, they envied him.


Were it no^ possible to have the favour of seeing this Experiment?


I cannot deny any thing to such persons. I'll introduce you.


In earnest this is very fine: I doubt not, Sir, but in a short space of time,
you will arrive at that curiosity in this watery Science, that not a Frog
breathing will exceed you. Though I confess it is the most curious of all
amphibious Animals (in the Art, shall I say, or rather nature of Swimming.)


Ah! well struck, Sir Nicholas; that was admirable, that was as well swam as
any Man in England can. Observe the Frog, Draw up your Arms a little nearer,
and then thrust 'em out strongly -- Gather up your Legs a little more -- So,
very well -- -- Incomparable --


Let's not interrupt them, Madam, yet but observe a little this great
Curiosity.


'Tis a noble Invention.


'Tis a thing the College never thought on.


Let me rest a little to respire. So it is wonderful, my noble Friend, to
observe the agility of this pretty Animal, which, notwithstanding I impede its
motion, by the detention of this Filum or Thread within my teeth, which makes a
ligature about its loins, and though by many sudden stops I cause the Animal
sometimes to sink or immerge, yet with indefatigable activity it rises and
keeps almost its whole body upon the superficies or surface of this humid
Element --


True, Noble Sir; no^ do I doubt but your Genius will make Art equal, if not
excced Nature; nor will this or any other Frog upon the face of the Earth
out-swim you --


Nay, I doubt not, Sir, in a very little time to become amphibious; a man, by
Art, may appropriate any Element to himself. You know a great many Virtuoso's
that can fly; but I am so much advanced in the Art of Flying, that I can
already out fly that ponderous Animal called a Bustard; nor should any
Grey-hound in England catch me in the calmest day, before I get upon wing: Nay,
I doubt not, but in a little time to improve the Art so far, 'twill be as
common to buy a pair of Wings to fly to the World in the Moon, as to buy a pair
of Wax Boots to ride into Sussex with.


Nay doubtless, Sir, if you proceed in those swift gradations you have hitherto
prospered in, there will be no difficulty in the noble enterprise, which is
devoutly to be effligated by all ingenious persons since the intelligence with
that Lunary World would be of infinite advantage to us, in the improvement of
our Politics.


Right: for the Moon being Domina humidiorum, to wit, the Governess of moist
Bodies, has, no doubt, the superior Government of all Islands; and its
influence is the cause so many of us are Delirious and Lunatic in this. But
having sufficiently refrigerated my lungs by way of respiration, I will return
to my swimming --


Admirably well struck! rarely swum! he shall swim with any man in Europe.


Hold, Sir Nicholas; here are those Noble Gentlemen and Philosophers, whom I
invited to kiss your hands; and I am not a little proud of the honour, of being
the grateful and happy Instrument of the necessitude and familiar communication
which is like to intervene between such excellent Virtuoso's.


We are, Sir Nicholas's, and your most humble Servants.


We shall thi^k our selves much honoured with the knowledge of so celebrated a
Virtuoso.


You are right welcome into my poor Laboratory; and if in ought I can serve you
in the way of Science my nature is diffusive, and I shall be glad of
communicating with such eminent Virtuoso's as I am let to know you are.


We pretend to nothing more than to be your humbl admirers.


All the ingenious World are proud of Sir Nicholas, for his Physico-mecha^ical
Excellencie^.


I confess I have some felicity that way; but were I as praecelling in
Physico-Mechanical Investigations, as you in Tropical Rhetorical Flourishes, I
would yield to none.


How the As^es claw one another?


We are both your admirers. But of all quaint Inventions, none ever came near
this of Swimming.


Truly I opine it to be a most compendious method, that in ^ fortnig^ts
prosecution has advanced him to be the best Swimer (...) Europe. Nay, if it
were possible to swim with any Fish of his Inches.


Have you ever tried in the Water, Sir?


No, Sir; but I swim most exquisitely on Land.


Do you intend to practise in the Water, Sir?


Never, Sir; I hate the Water, I never come upon the Water, Sir.


Then there will be no use of Swimming.


I content my se^f with the Speculative part of Swimming, I care not for the
Practick. I seldom bring any thing to use, 'tis not my way. Knowledge is my
ultimate end.


You have reason, Sir; Knowledge is like Virtue, its own reward.


To study for use is base and mercenary, below the serene and quiet temper of a
sedate Philosopher,


You have hit it right, Sir. I never studi'd any thing for use but Physic,
which I administer to poor people: you shall see my method.


Sir, I beseech you, what new curiosities have you found out in Physic?


Why I have found out the use of Respiration, or Breathing, which is a motion
of the Thorax and the Lungs, whereby the Air is impelled by the Nose* Mouth*
and Windpipe into the Lungs, and thence expelled farther to elaborate the
Blood, b^ refrigerating it, and separating its fuliginous steams.


What a secret the Rogue has found out?


I have found too, that an Animal may be preserved without respiration, when
the wind-pipe's cut in two, by ^ollicular impulsion of Air; to wit, by blowing
wind with a pair of bellows into the Lungs.


I have heard of a Creature preserved by blowing wind in the Breech, Sir.


That's frequent. Besides, though I confess, I did not invent it, I have
performed admirable effects by tra^sfusion of Blood; to wit, by putting the
Blood of one Animal into another.


Upon m^ integrity he has advanced transfusion to the Achme of perfection, and
has the Ascendent over all the Virtu^si in point of that Operation. I saw him
do the most admi^able effects in the World upon two Animals; the one a
Domestic Animal* commonly called a Mangy Spaniel; and a less Fame^lick
Crea^ure, commonly called a Sound Bull-Dog. Be pleased, S^r to (...) it.


(...) I made, Sir, both the Animals to b^ Emittent and Recipie^ (...) ^he same
time, after I had made Ligatures as hard I (...), f^r ^ear of s^rangling the
Animals, to render the (...) (...), I opened the ^arotid Arteries, and Jugular
(...) (...) at one time, and so caused them to change Blood (...) (...)
ano^her.


Indeed that which ensued upon the Operation was miraculous; for the mangy
Spaniel became sound, and the sound Bull-dog mangy.


Not only so, Gentlemen, but the Spaniel became a Bull-dog, and the Bull-dog a
Spani^l.


Which considering the civil and ingenuous temper and education of the Spaniel,
with the rough and untaught savageness and ill-breeding of the Bull-dog, may
not undeservedly challenge the name of a Wonder.


'Tis an Experiment you'll deserve a Statue for.


Sir, I must beg your pardon for my intrusion: but I have found out such a
practise upon my Sister, as will nearly concern you to prevent it.


What does she mean now?


Against Miranda, say you?


This Foot-man has brought a Letter, and has been tempting her fr^m that vile
Man Sir Samuel Hearty. There 'tis.


'Tis no matter for her persecution. Be confident of me, you can endure any
thing --


Ay, any thing, the most substantial be^ting under the Sun. I have had a pretty
parcel of kicks already about this business: but as long as I find love, I care
not for ^icking.


A pox o 'this Rascal, he'll undo us --


This is a Villain indeed, to tempt my Niece from that Knight; why he is a
Spark, a Gallant, a Wit of the Town; the greatest debaucher of Youth, and
corrupter of Ladies in England.


The Rogue has hit me to a Cows thumb, he's as cunning a Fellow as any within
forty shillings of his head.


The Man indeed has spruce, polite, Mercurial, and pretty concise parts; but
he's a little too volatile and flashy; he would make a fine person if he were
but solid.


Good! solid! would he so? That's as dull a Fellow as a man wou^d wish to lay
his leg over.


I confess he is my Foot-man, but shall be no longer so; let him be soundly
pumped and tossed in a Blanket.


Truly it is an injury beyond all sufferance, and with your leave, I'll have
him so exercised. Call in my people.


Hold, hold, Sir! what do you mean? Sir Samuel desired me to deliver this Note;
and he's a person I am much beholding to, that's all I know of the matter, only
that he is a fine Gentleman, and a w^tty facetious perso^ as any wears a head.


Here! where are my Servants!

Sir! strip that Rascal's Coat over his ears.


Hold, hold, Longvil! what are you mad? I shall catch cold in the twinkling of
a Bedstaff, man.


Do you hear, let him be taken, and first pumped soundly, and then ^oss'd in a
blanket.


Impudent Rascal! away with him.


Pump him soundly impudent Fellow.


Ah, my pretty little dissembling Rogue.


See it done to purpose, and then turn him out a doors.


What a Devil shall I do? but she loves me still. Come -- 'tis well it's no
worse -- my intrigue goes on rarely --


Let's see the execu^ion.


Come on let's see how generously he suffers.


But now to return to my transfusion.


That was a rare Experiment of transfusing the blood of a Sheep into a Mad-man.


Short of many of mine. I assure you I have transfus'd into a humane Vein 64
ounces Haver du pois weight, from one Sheep. The emittent Sheep died under the
Operation, but the recipient Mad-man is still alive; he suffered some disorder
at first. The Sheep's blood being Heterogeneous, but in a short time it became
Homogeneous with his own.


Ha! Gentlemen, was not this incomparable? but tyou shall hear more.


The Patient from being Mania^l, or raging mad, became wholly Ovine or
Sheepish; he bleated perpetually, and chewed the Cud: he had Wool growing on
him in great quantities, and a Northamptonshire Sheep's Tail did soon emerge or
arise from his Anus or humane Fundament.


In sadness Nephew, I am ashamed of you, you will never leave Lying and
Quacking with your Transfusions and Fools tricks. I believe if the blood of an
Ass were transfused into a Virtuoso, you would not know the emittent Ass from
the Recipient Philosopher, by the Mass.


O Uncle! you'll have your way; he's a merry Gentleman.


Pox! merry! prithee leave prating and lying; I am not merry, I am angry with
such Coxcombs as you are.


Well, Sir, you are very pleasant, and will have your facetious pretty humours.


You are the Z^ny to this Mountebank.


Pray, Uncle, interrupt us not. ^o convince you Gentlemen, of the truth of what
I say, here is a Letter from the Patient, who calls himself the meanest of my
Flock, and sent me some of his own Wool. I shall shortly have a Flock of 'em;
I'll make all my Clothes of 'em, 'tis finer than Beaver. Here was one to thank
me for the Cure by Sheeps blood just now --


O yes! he did not speak, but bleated his thanks to you. In sadness you deserve
to be hanged* You killed four or five that I know with your transfusion --


Sir, alas! those men suffered not under the Operation, but they were
Cacochymious, and had depraved Viscera, that is to say, their Bowels were
gangren'd.


Pish! I do not know what you mean by your damned Cacochymious canting; but
they died in sadness. Prithee make hast with your canting and lying, and let's
go to dinner, or you shall quack by your self -- --


A pleasant blunt old Fellow --


He's in the wro^g in abusing Transfusion: for excellent Experiments may be
made in changing one Creature into the nature of another.


Nay, it may be improved to that height, to alter the flesh of Creatures that
we eat, as much as grafting and inoculating does Fruits --


'Tis very true, I do it, I use it to that end.


Pox! let me see you invent any thing so useful as a Mousetrap, and I'll
believe some of your Lies. Prithee! did not a fellow cheat thee with Eggs,
which he pretended were laid with hairs in them, and you gave him ten shillings
apiece for the Eggs; till I discovered they were put in at a hole, made by a
very fine Needle.


Well Mr. Snarl, you have the prettiest way of drolling. Gentlemen, pray let me
recommend him to you, he's a fine facetious witty person indeed.


You recommend me! Prithee, damned Orator, hold thy tongue. In sadness you are
a foolish flashy Fellow --


We shall be glad of the honour to know you.


I desire no acquaintance with any young Man of this Age, no^ I.


Why so, Sir?


Why then are vicious illiterate foolish Fellows, good for nothing but to roar
and make a noise in a Play-house. To be very brisk with pert Whores in Vizards,
who, though never so ill-bred, are most commonly too hard for them at their own
weapon, Repartee -- And when Whores are not there, they play Monkey-tricks with
one another, while all sober men laugh at them.


They are even with them, for they laugh at all sober men again.


No Man's happy but by comparison. 'Tis the great comfort of all the World to
despise and laugh at one another.


But these are such unthinking Animals, and so weary of themselves, they can
never be alone; always complaining of short life, yet never know what to do
with the time they have.


This snarling Fellow's sometimes in the right.


Thei^ top of ^heir Educa^ion is to sma^er French: for in Fr^nce they have been
to learn French V^ces to spend English Estates with; with an insipid gaiety,
which is to be slight and bright, very pert and very dull.


S^r I beseech you to be civiller to my Friends.


I am transported with passio n against the young Fellows of the Age.


Old Fools always envy young Fools.


^hey are all forward and positive in things they understand not; they laugh at
any Gentleman that has Art or Science, and make it the property of a well bred
Gentleman, to be good for nothing, but to make a Figure in the Drawingroom, set
his Periwig in the Glass, smile, whisper, and make legs and foolish faces for
an hour or two, without one word of sense in s^dness.


The snarling Rogue's very tart upon the Youngsters.


When the pleasures of Wine and Women, the jo^s of Youth leaves us, Envy and
Malice the lusts of Age, succeed 'em --


Besides, they are all such Whoring fellows, in sadness ^ am ashamed of 'em.
The last Age was an Age of Modesty --


I believe there was the same Wenching then: only they dissembled it. They
added Hypocrasie to Fornication, and so made two Sins of what we make but one.


After all his virtue, this old Fellow keeps a Whore. I*ll tell you m^re on it.


I hope you will pardon the rough n^ture of my Uncle, who sp^res no body. Now
if you please, Gentlemen, we'll retire. I am sorry I cannot perform the
dissection of the Lobster, wh^ch I promised. My Fi^h-monger that serves me for
that Operation, has failed me: but I'll assure you it is the most curious of
all Testaceous or Crustace^us Animals whasoever.


But we will read an Author, and sport about a little Gr^k and Latin bef^re
Dinn^r. The one is a noble ref^ction of the Mind, as the other is of the Body.


We wait on you.


After Dinner we will have a Lecture concerning the Natu^e of Insects, and will
survey my Microscopes, (...), (...), (...), Pn^umatick Engin^s, St^ntrophonical
Tub^s, and the like --


We ^re infinitely obliged to you, Sir. But all this does not edify with our
Mistresses, Longvil.


We must find a way to get rid of ^hese insipid Fools. I have a way to get rid
of the Lady.


G^ntlemen, we most humbly attend your motions.


We wait on you.


DEar Madam! tender the life and welfare of a poor humble Lover.


What a fashionable Gentleman of this Ag^, and a Lover! it is impos^ible! They
are all Keepers, and (...) tawdry things from the Ex^hange or the Play-^ouse,
and make the poor Creatures run mad with the ex^remity of the alt^ration; as a
young Heir, being kept short, does at the death of his Father.


I was never one of those Madam: nothing but age and impotence can reduce me to
that condition. I had (...) kill my own Game, than send to a Poulterers.
Besides, I never eat Tame things, when wild of the same kind are in season. I
hate your cooped cramb'd Lady; I love 'em as they go about, as I do your
Barn-door Fowl.


'Tis more natural indeed.


But had I been ne'er so wicked, you have made such an absolute whining Convert
of me, that forgetting all shame and reproach from the Wits and Debauchees of
the Town, I can be a Martyr for Matrimony.


Lord! that you should not take warning! ^ave not several of your married
Friends, like those upon the Ladder, bidden all good people take warning by
them.


For all that, neither Lovers nor Malefactors can take it; one will make
experiment of Marriage, and the other of Ha^ging at their own sad costs. Neither
of the Executions will e er be left off.


They are both so terrible to Women, 'tis hard to know which to choose.


If you Ladies were willing, we Men are apt to be civil upon easier terms.


No; those terms are harder than the other.


You are so nimble, a Man knows not which way to catch you.


Once for all I assure you, I will never be caught any way by you.


Do not provoke Love thus, lest he should revenge his cause, and make you dote
upon some nauseous Coxcomb, whom all the Town scorns.


Let Love do what it will, I neither dare nor will talk on it any longer.


You are afraid of talking of Love, as some are of reading in a Coujuring-book,
for fear it should raise the Devil.


What ever you can say, will as soon raise one as the other in me. But I must
take leave of you and your Similes. My Uncle will want you.


Will you not in charity afford me one interview more this after-noon?


Provided I hear not one word of Love, and my Uncle and Aunt be secure; I shall
be in the Walk on the East-side of the Garden an hour hence. But, by your
leave, I shall meet another there --


A thousand thanks for the honour. Yonder come Bruce and Clarinda; I'll retire
--


I have taken more pains to single you out, than ever Wood-man did for a Deer.


If the Wood-man were no better a Marks-man, the Deer would be safe for all his
singling. Besides, I am not so tame to stand a shot yet, I thank you --


Lovers are quick Aimers, and can shoot flying.


Not, if they fly so fast as I shall from you.


Come, I see this way will not do: I'll try another with you. Ah, Madam! change
your cruel intentions, or I shall become the most desolate Lover, that ever
yet, with arms across, sighed to a murmuring Grove, or to a purling Stream
complained. Savage! I'll wander up and down the Woods, and carve my passion on
the Barks of T^ees, ^nd vent my grief to winds, that as they fly shall sigh and
pity me*


How now! what foolish Fustian's this? you talk like an Heroic Poet.


Since the common down-right way of speaking sense wou^d not please you, I had
a mind to try what the Romantic way of wining Love could do.


No more of this, I had rather hear the tattling of Gossips at an Upsetting, or
Christening, nay, a Phanatick Sermon, or, which is worse than all, a dull
Rhyming Play, with nothing in it but lewd Hero's huffi^g against the Gods.


Why, I'll try any sort of Love to please you, Madam; I*ll show you that of a
gay Coxcomb; with his full plumes, strutting and rustling about his Mistress,
like a Turky-cock, baiting her with brisk aerie motion, and fashionable
nonsense, thinking to carry her by dint of Periwig and Garniture, or by
chan^ing some pretty foolish sonnet of Phillis or Coeli^; or at best, treating
her with nothing but ends of Plays, or second-hand Jests, which he runs on tick
with witty men for, and is never able to pay them again.


No, there are too many of these fine Sparks you talk of, who perhaps may be
very clinquant, slight and bright, and make a very pretty show at first; but
the Tincel-Gentleman do so tarnish in the wearing, there's no enduring them.


But I am of good metal, Madam, and so true, that I shall abide any
Touch-stone, even that of Marriage.


But it's an ill-bargai^, where I must buy my Metal first, and touch it
afterwards.


You shall touch it first, Madam, and if you do not like it, I'll take it again
and no harm done.


No: I'll take care there shall be no harm done* Pray divert this unseasonable
Discourse of Love, for I will never hear on it more. Farewell, I see my Lady
Gimcrack in the Garden.


Let me but beg to have one Treaty more with you this afternoon: if I convince
you not of the error of your hard heart, I must submit and be miserable.


If you love to hear the same thing again, I will declare it to you an hour
hence in the green Walk on the other side the Wilderness -- Farewell -- But, by
your leave, you shall find another in my place --


Your Ladiship's humble Servant. I have been taking the fresh air in the
Garden, Madam.


I am come with the same intention, and am happy in the company of a person,
who is so much a Gentleman.


Your Ladyship does me too much honour.


By no means, Sir, your accomplishments command respect from all Ladies. I
doubt not but you have been happy in many Ladies affections --


What will th^s come to? --


But Women will be frail, while there are such per^ons in the world, that's
most certain.


Your Ladiship's in a merry humour, to rally a poor young Gentleman thus.


Far be it from me, I swear; your perfections are so prevalent, that were I not
in honour engaged unto Sir Nicholas (and Honour has the greatest Ascendent in
the World upon me) I assure you I would not ^enture my self alone with such a
person: But Honour's a great matter, a great thing, I'll vow and swear.


You Ladies will abuse your humble Servants; we are born to suffer.


Lord, Sir, that you should take me to be in jest! I swear I am in earnest, and
were I not sure of my Honour, that never fai^'d me in a doubtful occasion, I
would not give you this opportunity of tempting my frailty; not but that my
virtuous inclinations are equal with any Ladies: but there is a prodigious
Witch-craft in opportunity. But honour does much, yet oppo^tunity is a great
thing, I swear a great thing.


Ay, Madam, if we use it when it offers it self.


How Sir! ne'er hope for it! ne'er think on it! I would not for all the World I
protest. Let not such ^houghts of me enter into your head. My honour will
protect me. I make use of an opportunity -- I am none of those I assure you.


'Sdeath! how apprehensive she is? I shall forget the Speculative part of Love
with Clarinda, and fall to the practick with her. But I shall ne'er hold out
that long journey, without this or some other bait by the way.


Yet, as I was saying, opportunity's a bewitching thing* Le^ all Ladies beware
of opportunity, I say,: for alas, if we were not innocent and virtuous now*
what use might we make of this opportunity now?


She's so damnably affected, and silly, it would pall any one's appetite but
mine. Folly and affection are as nauseous as deformity.


Should we now retire into that cool Grotto for refreshment, the censorious
world might think it stra^ge; but honour will preserve me. Honou^'s a rare
thing, I swear, I defy temptatio^.


You'll not give a man leave to trouble you with much. I have not observed that
Grotto; shall I wait on you to survey it.


Ay Sir, with all my heart to survey that; but if you have any wicked
intentions, I'll swear you'll move me prodigiously. I^ your intentions be
dishonourable, you'll provoke me strangely.


Try me, Madam.


Hold! hold! have a care what you do. I will not try if you be not sure of your
Honour. I'll not ven^re, I protest.


What ever you are of mine, you are sure of your own.


Right, that will defend me. Now tempt what you will though we go in, nay,
though we shut the door too: I fear nothing; it's all one to me as long as I
have my Honour about me. Come.


Yonder comes Longvil, Madam.


For Heaven's sake remove from me, or he'll suspect my Honour.


So, this accident has p^eserv'd me honest. I am as constant a Lover as any man
in England, when I have no oppo^unity to be otherwise --


Fa-la-la-la* O me Sir (...) swear* you frighted me* I protest my heart was at
my mouth. Alas! I shall nor recover the disorder a good while.


What'^ the matter, Mad^?


You brought a G^tlemen that'^ (...) ^o fresh into my mind, one (...) wa^ the
^st Object o^ my (...) and Affections, no^ (...) (...) se^ you (...). (...) I
th^ught it had been his Ghost, upon my word.


I am happy in resembling any one you could love, Madam


I have long forgotten my passion for him; but the sight of you did stir in me
a strange Je no scai quoi towards you; and but that I am another now --
otherwise -- But I say too much.


I have been too much acquainted with her character to doubt her meaning.
Madam, you honour me so much, I cannot acknowledge it enough by my words, my
hearty actions shall speak my thanks.


Actions! Oh Heaven! what actions? I hope you mean honourably. I swear you
brought all the blood of my body into my face. Actions, said you! I hope you
are a person of honour, my Honour's dearer to me than the whole Word. I would
not violate my Reputation for the whole Earth.


Let us retire, Madam. If I do not show my self a Man of Honour, may your
Ladyship renounce me.


Retire! Heaven forbid! Are we not private enough? W^ll, you put me more and
more in mind of my first Love, I swear you do.


By your leave, Miranda, I can hold no longer. Though I am as true as Steel,
any handsome Woman will strike fire on me. Let us repose a while in the Grotto,
Madam.


O Heaven, Sir! do not tempt me. What, give my self an opportunity! Consider my
Honour, Sir; I am another*


And shall be so still; Madam, whatsoever use I shall make of your Ladyship, I
shall return you again, and ne'er alter the property. Dear Madam, retire.


O Lord, Sir! what do you mean? you fright me so, I protest my heart is at my
mouth. I am no such person. Dear Sir, mistake me not, misconstrue not my
freedom; I would not for the World -- Well, I swear you are to blame now,
mever (...) you are -- But 'tis your first fault, I can forgive you.


I am sorry I have offended. But let us retire into the Grotto, and I'll make
as many acknowledgments as I can.


Well, Sir, since you are a little more civil, I am con^ for discourse sake,
for I love discourse mightily --


W^l, I (...) a (...)* Dear Miranda, forgive me this once. Come, dear Madam.


I'll follow. But do ye hear, Sir, if you be the least uncivil, upon my honour
I'll cry out. Remember, Sir, I give you warning. Do not think on it, I swear and
vow I will; do not, I say, do not.


No, no, I warrant y^u; I'll trust you for that. How fearful she is I should
not think on it?


Sweet Mr. Longvil, Sir Nicholas Gi^crack desires your noble presence: ^e being
now ready to impart those secrets about Insects, which I d^re be bold to say,
no Virtuoso, Domestic or Foreign, has explored but himself.


I wait on you.


I humbly kiss your Ladiship's fair hands.


Shame on this unlucky Fellow: I have discovered the cross love between my
Nieces and these Gentlemen, and will make work wi^h it.


Madam, here's a Letter for your Ladyship; the Messenger would deliver it to
none but me.


Ha! it is from my dear Hazard.

Madam, I am extremely impa^ient to see your Ladyship at (...) old place of
assignation, as well for a great ^eal of Love, as for a little Business.


Well, I will go, though it cost me money. I know that's his little business. I
know not why we Ladies should not keep as well as Men sometimes. But I shall
neglect ^y important affair with these two fine sweet persons. But that's
uncertain, this is su^e.


How happy am I in thy Love! here I can find re^eat, when tired with all the
Rogues and Fools in Town.


Ay, Dearest! come to thine own Miss; she loves thee, Buddy, poor Buddy.
Coachee, coachee.


O my poor Rogue. But when did thou see thy Friend* Mrs. Flirt, my Nephew
Gimcrack's Mistress?


O shame on her! out upon her! O name her not.


Why, what's the matter, Bird?


O filthy Creature, I cannot abide her* she's (...) she's nought.


Why, what's the matter, Figg? what has she done to thee?


Done! I'll never forgive her while ^ ha'breath. Do not speak of her, she's a
base Creature; name her not, I ha'done with her.


Has she affronted thee, poor Rogue? I'll have her mauled. Filthy Creature.


Ay, birds-nyes, she's a Quean. But do not thee trouble thy self with her; 'tis
no matter.


I will know what she has done to thee. In sadness, if you do not tell me, I
won't love thee, Pigs-nie.


Well, I will, but won't you laugh at me then?


No, by the Mass, not I.


Nay, but thou wilt, Bird.


In sadness I won't.


Why would you think it? I wish I might ne'er stir out o'this place, if the lewd
Carrion had not the impudence to tell me, that Sir Nicholas Gim^rack was a
handsomer Man than thou art. No, I'll ne'er forgive her while I ha've breath.


Poor Rogue! thou art a dear Creature in sadness.


Impudent Flirts! but I swear our Sex grows so vicious and infamous, I am
ashamed of 'em, they have no modesty in 'em.


In sadness it's a very wicked Age; men make no conscience o'their ways, by the
Mass. In the last Age we were modest and virtuous, we spent our time in making
visits, and playing at Cards with the Ladies, so civil so virtuous, and
wellbred.


For my part, I blush at the impudent Creatures of the Town, that's the truth
on it.


So do I, in sadness. To see Villains wrong their sweet Wives, and, while they
keep them short, let little dowdy Strumpets spend their Estates for 'em, by the
Mass my heart bleeds, to see so great a decay of Conjugal affection in the
Nation.


Out upon 'em, filthy Wenches; I wonder they dare show ^heir hardened faces.
They are so bold, 'tis a burning shame they should be suffered I vow.


Nay, the young Coxcombs are worse; nothing but swearing, drinking, whoring,
tearing, ranting, and roaring. In sadness I should be weary of the world for
the vices of it, but that thou comfort'st me sometimes, Buddy.


Prithee, dear Numps, talk no more of 'em; I spit at 'em; but I love n'own
Buddy Mun. Predee kiss me.


Ah poor Bud, poor Rogue! we are civil now; what harm's in this?


None, none. Poor Dear, kiss again, Mun.


Ah poor thing. In sadness thou shalt have this Purse; nay, by the Mass thou
shalt.


Na^ p^sh! I cannot abide the money, not I* I love thee, thou art a civil,
discreet, sober person of the last Age.


Ah poor little Rogue! in sadness I'ill bite thee by the lip, i'faith I will.
Thou hast incenc'st me strangely, thou ha^t fired my blood, I can bear it no
longer, i'faith I cannot. Where are the instruments of our pleasure? Nay,
prithee do not frown, by the Mass thou shalt do it now.


I wonder that should please you so much, that pleases me so little?


I was so used to it at Westminster-School, I could never leave it o^t since.


Well: look under the Carpet then if I must.


Very well, my dear Rogue. But dost hear, thou art too gentle. Do not spare thy
pains. I love C^stigation mightily -- So, here's good provision.


Ho there within! open the door. 'Sdeath I'll break it open. What Rascal have
you got with you? I'll maul him.


O Heaven! this Rascal will undo me. What shall I do? 'Tis my Brother.


In sadness I shall be ruined.


Run, run, if ^ou love me, into the Wood-^ole quickly. I'll get rid of him. For
Heaven's sake take the Birch along with you


Ah Hectoring Rascal! we had none o'this in the last Age. Rogues! Dogs! A man
cannot be in private with a Sister, but he must be disturbed by th'impertinent
Brother, in sadness.


In! in! I'll out to him --


Sir Nicholas, Sir For^al* Bruce, Longvil:

I do assur^ you, Gentlemen, no man upon the (...) of the earth is so well seen
in the Nature of Ants, Flies, Humble-Bees, Ear-wigs, Millepedes, Hogs-Lice,
Maggots, Mites in a Cheese, Todpoles, Worms, Neufts, Spiders, and all the noble
products of the Sun, by equivocal Generation.


Indeed, I have found more curious Phoenomina in these minute Animals, than in
those of vas^er magnitude.


I take the Ant to be a most curious Animal.


More curious than all Oviperous or Egg-laying Creatures in the whole World.
There are three sorts, Black, Darkbrown, and Fillamot.


Right, Sir.


The Black will pinch the Dark-brown with his forceps, till it kills it upon
the place; the like will the Dark-brown do by the Fillamot -- I have dissected
their Eggs upon the object plate of a Microscope, and find that each has within
it an included Ant, which has adhering to its Anus or Fundament, a small black
speck, which becomes a Vermicle, like a Mite, which I have watched whole days
and nights; and Sir Formal has watched 'em thirty hours together.


A very pretty employment.


And a long time we could find no motion, but that of Flexion and Extension:
but ^t last it becomes an Ant, Gentlemen.


What does it concern a Man to know the nature of an Ant?


O it concerns a Virtuoso mightily: so it be Knowledge, 'tis no matter of what.


Sir, I take 'em to be the most politic of all Insects.


You have hit it, Gentlemen* they have the best Government in the World: What
do you opine it to be?


O! a Common-wealth most certainly.


Worthy Sir, I see you are a great Observer; it is a Republic resembling that
of the States-General.


Undoubtedly! and the Dutch are just such industrious and busy Animals.


Right. But now I beseech you be pleased to communicate some of your quainter
Observations to these Philosophers, about those subtle and insidious Animals
called Spiders.


I think I have found out more Phoenomena's or Appearance^ of Nature in
Spiders, than any Man breathing: Would you think it? there are in E^gland si^
and thirty several sorts of Spiders; there's your Hound, Grey-hound, Lurch^r,
Spaniel Spider.


But, above all, your Tumbler-Spider is most admirable.


O Sir, I am no Stranger to it: it catches ^lies as T^mblers do Conies.


Good! how these Fools will meet a lie half-way.


Great Liars are always civil in that point; as there is no lie too great for
their t^lling, so there's no^e too great for their believing.


The Fabric or Structure of this Insect, with its Texture, is most admirable.


Nor is its Sagacity, or Address, less to be wondered at, as I have had the
honour to observe under my noble Friend; as soon as it has spied its Prey, as
suppose upon a Table, it will crawl underneath till it arrive to the An^ipodes
of the Fl^, which it discovers by sometimes peeping up; and if the capricious
Fly happens not to remove it self by crural motio^, or the vibration of its
wings, it makes a fatal leap upon the heedless prey, of which, when it has
satisfied its appetite, it carries the remainder to its Cell, or Hermitage.


It will teach its young ones to hunt, and discipline 'em severely when they
commit faults; and when an old one misses its Prey, it will retire, and keep
its Chamber for grief, shame and anguish, ten hours together.


Upon my integrity it is true, for I have several times, by Sir Nicholas's
command watched the Animal, upon thi^ or the like miscarriages.


But, Sir, there is not in the World a more docible Creature, I have kept
several of 'em tame.


That's curious indeed* I never heard of a tame Spider before.


One above all the rest, I had called him Nick, and h^ knew his name so well,
he would follow me all over the house* I fed him indeed with fair Flesh-flies.
He was the best natured, best conditioned Spider, that ever I met with. You ^ew
Nick very well, ^ir Formal, h^ was of the Spanie^ breed, Si^ --


Knew him! I knew Nick intimately well*


These Fools are beyond all that Art or Nature ever produced.


These are the admirable Secrets they find out --


Have you observed that delicate Spider called Tarantula?


Now you have hit me, now you come home to me; why I travelled all over Italy,
and had no other affair in the world, but to study the secrets of that
harmonious Insect.


Did you not observe the Wisdom, Policies, and Customs of that ingenious
people?


Oh by no means! 'Tis below a Virtuoso, to trouble himself with Men and
Manners. I study Insects; a^d I have observed the Tarantula, does infinitely
delight in Music, which is the reason of its poison being drawn out by it.
There's your Phenomenon of Sympathy!


Does a Tarantula delight so in Music?


Oh extravagantly. There are three sorts, Black, Grey and Red, that delight in
three several sorts and modes of Music.


That was a curious Inquisition; how did you make it?


Why I put them upon three s^veral Chips in water, then caused a Musician to
play, first a grave Pa^in, or Almain, at which the black Tarantula only moved;
it danced to it with a kind of grave mo^ion, much like the Benchers at the
Revels.


Sir, The Gentleman that's going for Lapland, Russi^, and those parts, is come
for your Letters and Queries which you are to send thither.


I'll wait on him. I keep a constant correspondence with all the Virtuoso's in
the Nor^h and North-East parts. Ther^ are rare Phaenomena's in those Countries.
I am beholding to Finland, Lapland, and Russia, for a great part of my
Philosophy. I send my Queries thither. Come, Sir Formal, will you help ^o
dispatch him?


I am proud to serve you.


Be pleased to take a turn in the Garden. When we have dispatch'd, we will
impart more of our Microscopical (...).


Your humble Servant -- This is a happy deliverance.


I have removed the Lady by writing to Hazard, to send for her, and keep her an
hour or two.


And I have sent my man to find out Sir Nicholas his Strumpet, as soon as he
has found her, she'll send for him.


For all his Virtue and Philosophy. This grave Fool will be in the fashion too.
Now if we can get rid of this wordy Fool Sir Formal, we have the Ladies to our
selves. In the mean time, let's to our several and respective assignations.


What shall I say to this Bruce? Oh unjust Custom! that has made Women but
passive in Love, as if Nature had intended us for Ciphers only, to make up the
number of the Creation.


Yonder's my Clarinda: Now Love inspire me, I am infinitely transported with
this honour you do me.


If I have done you any honour, pray make your best on it.


Is it you, Madam? this honour was unexpected.


Why whom did you expect? O I see you are not so much transported as you
thought you were.


The honour of your Ladyships company I did not expect.


Nor much care for, I see.


'Twere Blasphemy if I should say so. 'Twas your Sister I expected.


My Sister! so, I am not fit for your company it seems.


If I would tell you how I prize the honour, I should invade the interest of my
Friend.


Your Friend! if you had no more interest in him, than I am resolved he shall
ever have in me: he'd be the worst Friend you have.


He's a Man of Honour, and of Wealth: and if any man could deser^e you, he
might.


The World is not so barren, but I have found a fitter man: but, Sir, 'twas not
my Sister; ^twas my Lady Gimcrack you hoped to meet here. You are a Man of
Honour. The Grotto is a fine Scene of Love. The Lady not very unwilling, 'twas
well you were interrupted, Sir.


'Sdeath! how came she to know that? but I must bear it out; I cannot guess
your meaning: but I see you love your Sister well, to be jealous of her.


No, I assure you, I have no reason to be jealous for her: for to my knowledge,
she has irrecoverably disposed of her heart in another place.


What's that? What says she? She's certainly jealous for her self then. ^here
must be something in this.


In what confusion am I? ^his can never end well* What! I see you are troubled
that I have told you a Secret of my Sisters, and discovered one of yours. Come,
walk and consider on it.


I am surprised so, I know not what to do in this exigence --


You stare about like a Hare-finder: what's the matter?


Faith* Madam, I expected to have met your Sister here.


Say you so? the truth on it is, she desired me to take the trouble off her
(...).


I am sorry, Madam, she thinks it so.


You see, Sir, I am content to suffer for her sake.


You have a mind to try me for your Sister, Madam.


No: I assure you, Sir, she's resolved never to make trial of you her self, nor
by another.


What can the meaning of this be?


Come, Sir, I will be a little plainer with you; She has disposed of her heart
to another, without power of revocation.


Why would she not meet me* to tell me so her self?


She thought me fitter for it: besides, perhaps this has given her an
opportunity to see one she likes better.


I see, Madam, she has not the same kindness for you, to send yo^ to one she
likes so ill.


You do not know^, but she may have taken as great a trouble off my hands, and
kept me from one I like as ill, as she does you.


There's nothing but Riddle in Woman, they deceive as much with the Vizards of
their mind, as they do with those o^ the^r faces --


I discover Sir* Formal. We must be private no longer.


So Bruce, you are a happy man, I fee.


You are a pleasant one, I see* you and I must come to a cleari^g of this
business.


Ladies, we ha^ (...) to impart to you, but shall be hindered by ^his Coxcomb,
Sir For^al


We must have some consultations too with you. Sister, we'll catch him in a
Trap --


Here's a Trap-door of a Vault, where my Uncle keeps h^s bottles of Air, which
he weighs, of which you^ll hear more anon. We'll snap him in that, and then we
shall have the plac^ to our selves.


Let me alone, I'll catch him.


Gentlemen and Ladies, some affairs have engaged my noble Friend, Sir Nicholas
to borrow himself of you a while; and he has commanded me ^o pawn my person
till he shall redeem it with his own --


Very quaintly expressed. We were just desiring you^ company.


And we were admiring this Talent of yours, your excellent manner of speaking;
and I've engaged to give you a Subject to show your parts upon to these
Gentlemen.


What ever is within the Sphere of my activity, you must command. I must
confess, I have some felicity in speaking.


Dear Sis^er, give him a subject; you shall hear what Oracles hang on his lips.
'Tis all one what subject he speaks upon, great or little.


That it is, Madam; we Orators speak alike upon all Subjects -- My speeches are
all so subtly designed, that whatever I speak in praise of any thing, with
very little alteration, will serve in praise of the contrary.


Let it be upon seeing a Mouse enclosed in a Trap.


'Tis all one to me, I am ready to speak upon all occasions.


Stand there, Sir, while we place our selves on each side.


I kiss your hand, Madam. Now I am inspired with Eloquenc^ Hem! hem! Being one
day, most noble Audit^rs, musing in my Study upon the too fleeting condition of
poor humane kind, I observed, not far from the Scene of my Meditation, an
excellent Machine, called a Mouse-trap (which my Man had placed there) which
had included in it a solitary Mouse, which pensive Prisoner, in ^ain bewailing
its o^n (...)* and the precipit^tion of it^ ^oo (...) (...)* (...) (...) ^or
liber^y ag^inst the too stubborn opposition of solid Wood, and more obdurate
Wire: at last, the pretty Mal^factor having tired, alas, its too feeble limbs,
till they became languid in fruitless e^deavors for its excarceration. The
pr^tty Felon, since it could not break Prison, and its offence being beyond the
benefit of the Clergy, could hope for no ^ail, at last sate still pensively
lamenting the severi^y of its Fate, and the narrowness of its, alas! too
withering durance: after I had contemplated a while upon the no little curio^ty
of the Engine, and the subtilty of its Inventor; I began to reflect upon the
i^ticement which so fatally betrayed the uncautious animal to its sudden ruin,
and found it to be the too, alas! specious bait of CheshireC^eese, which seems
to be a great delicate to the palate of this Animal, who in seeking to preserve
its life, O misfortune, took the certain means to death; and searching for its
livelihood, had sadly encountered its own destruction. Even so --


Now let the Trap go --


Even so, I say.


Even so, I say, I have caught the Orator --


Help! help! murder!


Let the florid Fool lie there.


I warrant him.


He uses as many Tropes and Flourishes about a Mousetrap, as he would in praise
of Alexander.


This is the subt'lest disguise to make love in that ever was invented; this has
served me upon many intrigues. Well, she shall see, for all the sufferings of
this day, to the Tun^ of Kicking, Beating, Pumping, and Tossing in a Blanket,
and all that* that nothing shall hinder me in my Love. Shall Sir Samuel be
frighted from an Intrigue? No!


Whom have we he^e.


Ladies, I was commanded by my Lady Pleasant to wait on you with choice of good
things, which she ^old me, you would buy.


What's the meaning of this?


Since she came from my Lady, we must see what she would sell.


I have choice of good Gloves, Amber, Orangery, Genoa, Roman, Frangipand,
Neroly, Tuberose, Jessimine, and Marshal; all manner of Tires for the Head,
Locks, Tours, Frowzes, and so forth; all manner of Washes, Almond-water, and
Mercury-water for the Complexion; the best Peter and Spanish Paper that ever
came over; the best Poma^ums of Europe, but one rare, one made of a Lamb's Caul
and May dew -- Also all manner of Confections of Mercury and Hog^bones, to
preserve present, and to restore lost Beauty. If any out-does me in these
businesses, or have better Goods than I, I am the Son of a Tinde^-box. O Devil!
what did I say? I shall bet^ay my self --


How's thi^, the Son of a Tinder-box?


Pish! I mean the D^ughter of a Tinder-box.


This is the Rascal Sir Samuel in disguise.


In the first place try a pair of Gloves, Madam, don't you know me?


How should I know you?


Le^ me tell you, Sir Samuel's as true a Lover, as e'^ wo^e a head.


What's the meaning of ^his private discourse?


Pox on her envy; she's always for a Cup of Mischief. I'll put this Note into a
Glove, and that will do my business. Slap-dash -- as flat as a Flounder. I have
no private business -- Be pleased to try on this Glove, Madam. Do not you know
me yet? -- I am Sir Samuel.


What's ^his? a Note within it.


Keep it to your self.


What Note's that? from Sir Samuel Hearty? Oh Heaven! this is a Bawd.


A down-right Bawd, and Bawd to that Rascal.


'Sdeath! pull the Bawd in pieces.


Lay hold on the Bawd, we'll hav^ her Carted. Sei^e her till Sir Nicholas comes
in; we'll ha^e her sent to Bridewell, and soundly whipped there, and then Carted.


So! this is a fine merry way of proceeding. I'have made ^imble wo^k on it. Let
me go, I am a^ honest Woma^, and l^bour in my vocation. Let me go, or as I am
an honest man I'll sue you about this business.


How's this? a Man* nay then I'll try a good kicking, upon you.


Hold! hold! What do you mean to beat a Woman? will you make me miscarry? I am
with child, and for ought I ^now, you have kill*d that within me,


You said, a^ you were an honest man.


O Dunce that I am! That's a way I have of expressing my self. Bu^ I'll make
you know I am a Woman.


It is my Fool Sir Samuel; prithee Clarinda, let's put him to Sir Formal, and
secure him till my Uncle comes; it will make excellent sport.


Do you set him upon the Trap, it will do rarely.


One word with you. Come this way, Sir Sa^uel. I cannot tell you how much I am
afflicted for your sufferings.


Sha! it's no ma^er. Come it's well it's no worse.


Now Clarinda --


O murder, murder! Who's here? the Devil?


So, now we have the Garden to our selves. Let's walk, ^nd consult about our
affairs --


I Can no longer contain my self. This Lady, joined with darkness and
opportunity, the Midwife of Vice, as we may so say, has so inflamed me, that I
must farther attempt ^er chastity: I am confident she must be handsome, ^nd no
mean person, by her silken Garments. M^dam, as I was saying, since we are
unwittingly enclosed in dark^ess, which yet cannot be so, since enlightened by
the Rays of your Beauty.


For all your Oratory about this business, I cannot see my hand, it is so dark.


Ah, Madam! the bright enlightener of the day, by which all Creatures see, is
yet it self deprived of vision.


^ox o'this damned Rhetoric! what will become of me! I must either discover my
self, which I would ^ot for the world, or be sent to Bridewell, and be whipped
with a Certiorari; and yet me-thinks I h^ve no need on'^, for I have been very
plentifully kicked and beaten about this business to day already --


L^t me be ^eveng'd on this fair* Enemy, the prettiest, (...), a^d ^ving hand I
ever had the honour ^o imprint my kisses on; she has inflamed me mightily: I'll
try her this way. Do me the honour to accept of this Purse, and the contents
thereof.


I'll take the Rogues P^rse, what ever come on it.


Sweet Lady, let's make our condition as happy as in us lies.


Nay, good Sir! O Lord, Sir, what d^'e mean? fie, Sir.


Let me approach the honour of your lip, far sweeter than the ^hoenix Nest, and
all the spicy Treasures of Arabia.


'Tis your goodness, Sir; but pray forbear --


Nay strive not, upon my sincerity I will.


Nay, good Sir, be not uncivil, I am no such person. Nay pish! I never saw the
like; you are the strange^t man. Well, take it then. I vow you make me blush If
I were not in apparent danger of being whipped damnably, a^ mis^ing my
masquerade, I could be merry with ^his Fool.


The sweets of Hybla dwell upon thy lips! Not all the fragrant bosom of the
Spring affords such ravishing perfumes.


O Lord, Sir! you are pleased to complement! Ah, lying Rogue, my brea^h smells
of Tobacco.


Our time may be but short, pardon the unbecoming roughness which my passion
prompts me to. Come, my dear Cloris.


Lord, what a pretty name is that! I was ne'er called Cloris before.


Come, my dear Nymph, let us be more familiar: the solitary darkness of the
place invites us to Love's silent pleasures. Now, dearest Cloris, let us taste
those sweets --


Nay pish! fie! Lord! what do you mean? what would you be at? Keep off. I
protest I'll call out. Nay pish! never stir I will.


Thou hast provoked my gentle spirit so, it is become furious, and it is
decreed I must enjoy thy lovely body --


Out upon you! my body, I de^e you* I am an honest woman. I sco^n your words. I
will call-out for some b^dy to pro^ect my honour.


Your Honour (...) suffer; none can see us* a^d: who will declare it?


Out upon you! get you gone, you Swine. I will not s^ffer in my honour, I am
virtuous. Help! help! a Rape! a Rape! help! help.


Be not obstreperous, none can hear you. You have provoked me contrary to my
gentle temper, even to a Rape, Come, I will, I must, i'faith I must.


'Sdeath! the Rogue begins to pry into the difference of Sexes, and will
discover mine -- I must try my strength with him. Out lustful Tarquin! you
libidinous Goat, have at you.


Help! help! murder! murder!


Be not obstreperous, none can hear you.


Upon my verity I think this be an Amazon! Well, I can bear this; but --


Do you again attempt my Honour? I'll maul you, you las^vious Villain.


Hold! hold! I beseech you; I humbly rest contented, I acquiesce.


Get you from me, lustful Swine -- Be gone --


I go, Madam: But I know not whether this Vault doth terminate here, or whether
it doth issue farther.


Come, now we are safe in this hold, none will interrupt us in our great
design. Ah pox o'these wicked Hectors, vicious impudent Rogues! a Man cannot
retire with a Lady for his private satisfaction, but these ranting Rogues must
roar and interrupt us; 'tis a very impudent vicious Age in sadness.


But my Dear, if any body else should have a Key to this Room (as I know they
have) thongh I dare not tell him, it is a common Scene of Love matters.


Fear not, the Land-lady tells me, no body has a Key but my self. I h^ve agreed
to give her a Gui^ney a week for these private occasions. In sadness 'tis a
fine place: Here a man may bring a Lady, and even none of the house observe it.
There is not such a convenience in all the Pall-mall for these occasions,
though som^ there are, much given to such diversions. How glad am I to have
thee here, poor Pigsn^e --


Ah Lord! there's some body at the door --


In sadness there is. ^here's one with a Key too. In into the Wood-hole
quickly, or we shall be discovered -- quick, quick --


Come, my Dear Lady, now we are safe from interption; how happy am I in your
favours?


Ah! so you say; but if ever I hear of your inconst^cy, you shall be no longer
happy, as you call it: I cannot suffer a Riv^l.


Nothing shall ever divert me from the happiness I enjoy in you; nor am I less
impatient of a Rival than you are. I am so covetous of you, that the thought of
your Husband keeps me still inquiet.


Fear not a Husband. Husbands are such phlegmatic indifferent Rivals, they
ne'er can hurt the Gallants; they poor easy Souls, do every thing as if they
did it not.


They do but court and keep a pother,
To make one Gamesome for another.

You are in the right.


Nay, I think a Husband is very insipid foolish Animal. and is growing out of
fashion.


We shall begin to lay 'em by. Husbands will be left off, as Gentlemen Ushe^s
are: indeed they are more unnecessary Instruments, than those formal
spindle-sh^nkt finical Fools, with Nose-gays and white Gloves were.


Those, though they could do no service themselves, would make way for them
that could; but a Husband is a Clog, a Dog in a Manger, a Miser, that hoards up
Gold from others, and will not make use on it himself --


Nay, a thousand times worse; a Miser would keep to himself what he loves, and
a Husband what he does not care for. Out on him. A Husband's an Insect, a
Drone, a Dormouse --


A foolish Matrimonial Lump --


A Cuckoo in Winter --


An Opiat for Love --


A Body without a Soul --


A Chip in Porridge. --


A White of an Egg --


All Phlegm, and no Choler --


A Drudge --


An ^xcuse --


A necessary thing --


A Cloak at a pinch --


A pitiful Utensil --


Good for nothing, but to cover shame, pay Debts, and own Children for his
Wife.


In short, a Husband is a Husband, and there's an end of him; but a Lover is --



Not to be expressed but in action. I'll show you what a Lover is with a
vengeance, Madam. Come on. 'Sdeath! there's a Key in the doot.


What shall we do?


Run into the Wood-hole quickly; I'll bear the brunt, and I may perhaps make a
discovery into the bargain --


Come, Dearest, the Land-lady is not at home, or we would have a Collation
here.


O Heaven! who's this, Hazard?


'Sdeath, Sir! How dare you invade my room?


Oh! who's here? the Devil, the Devil --

Oh Heaven! who's this? my Husband with a Whore!


Death and Hell! my Wife with a Hectorly Fellow here! Oh my disgrace.


Oh vile false Man! thy falsehood I have long suspected; now this happy
opportunity has discovered all.


What means her impudence?


Was I not sufficient for thee, vile Man, but thou must thus betray me? I
cannot look on thee with patience. I shall faint! I shall faint! Oh! Oh!


Help, help the Lady.


Hang the Lady. Oh Woman-kind! what artifice is this? I was informed by this
Lady I should find you here; I wonder not at your disorder upon this unexpected
surprise. O vile treacherous Woman!


Take him from my sight, I shall die else. Have I been always your obedient,
virtuous Wife, and am I thus requited? Heaven sent this honourable Gentleman to
assist me in the discovery, who on purpose got a Key to this Room, it seems the
filthy Scene of all thy lust and baseness. Be gone -- thou infamous Wretch, I
am not able to support the sight of thee --


Lewd Woman! thou abstract of impudence and falsehood! tremble at my revenge.
Have I at length found out your base lascivious haunt.


O insufferable! do you add to all your barbarous injuries this of aspersing my
innocence?


False man? did I for this give my affection jto thee? and can thou think
I'll bear this unrevenged?


'Sdeath! this Wench will undo me with my Lady.


What do I hear? is he false too? then my misfortunes are complete. Base vile
ungrateful Fellow; is this your constancy and gratitude to me?


Madam, this is a Lady of a great Estate, whom I should have marri'd; and this
accident, I fear, has ruined all my Fortune.


Has my kindness deserved th^s? is this your Gallant too? Oh this Villain has
made me doubly a Cuckold.


Do not mistake me; this Fellow took me for a great Fortune, and should have
marri*d me.

Are you consulting for my ruin?


This is a flam, I'll not believe it* This S^rumpet has doubly betrayed me.
Lewd Creature, first I'll take revenge on thee.


I thought I should at last find out the cause of my misfortune.

You are like to make a good Husband, that can make so ill a Lover.


After I have heard all your accusation, which is false, let me ^ell you, I
have been informed of your frequent coming hither with Sir Nicholas, and was
resolved at once to be revenged of him and you, by bringing my Lady hither to
discover both.


O insolence! I never saw the place before.


^ am too well satisfied of he^ falsehood, and though ^t be something below a
Philosopher to draw a Sword, yet to punish her I will.


Hold, Sir, first you must try with me.


What are you, her Stallion, and her Bravo too?


Was ever Woman yet so miserable, to be betrayed, by one whom she has loved so
much better than her life? she would have laid it down to have done him any
kindness: and yet to perfect all his cruelty, he blots my reputation. And since
the only* ^reasure of my life is gone, p^ay ^ake that too. Do not resist him;
let him pierce this breast, that ne'er bore any Image but his own. Come on then,
cruel man.


Wha^ can this mean?


For Heavens sake do not betray me to him; if I be no^ cleared in this I am
und^ne.


Now hear me Sir: This Lady, on my honour, Sir, is free from all blemish, I
believe even in thought. But I being informed you use to come with that Lady to
this House, of ill reputation, in anger to you both betrayed you to my Lady: I
dogged her Mess^nger from her ^odging to you, and immediately gave notice to my
Lady; and in all hast we came --


Indeed I have been acquainted with this Lady, being a Vir^uosa, upon
Philosophical matters, but never saw her here, till we now came for this
discovery. She informed me, she saw you two come hither, and my Wife being gone
out before me, and alone, gave me more suspicion.


I having seen you privately talking with my Lady in the Mall, susp^cted you;
and to revenge my s^lf on her and you, I sen^ for him, and we have dogged you
hither.


But why was she hidden to avoid my sight, if she came for a discovery?


She thought to have discovered more by being unseen, and over-hearing your
discourse.


Now see, injurious man, how you have wronged me.


Though I hope I have deceived her with a lie, yet what she says looks like
truth.

It must be so. Come, no more; I will believe you t^ue, and so am I.


Though this sham passes upon him, I know too well you are guilty, good Mr.
Hazard, and I hate you for it.


Prithee hold thy peace, I am kept by her, as I know ou are by him -- I am
kept, I --


Heaven knows I am true.


And Heaven can witness for my innocence.


I am glad that all things are thus happily cleared.


But what was it frighted you within, my Dear?


There is some body in the Wood-hole.


Now all's over, I'll see who it is. Come out here. What's here? a Woman --


A shame on her; how sneakingly she looks? This is some Strumpet I warrant you.
Oh! Foh! how I hate such Cattle! Heaven grant she did not hear me and Hazard.


Here's a Man too. Come out of your hole. Mr. Snarl is it you?


Is this the fruit of your virtue, and declaiming against the vice of the Age?


Heaven! if he over-heard me, I am ruined eternally. I'll try him. We met all
here upon a mistake, which is now happily rectifi'd. But 'tis too apparent,
Uncle, you came for wickedness and abomination.


I scorn your words, Madam, I am civil and virtuous.


Ay in sadness are we; our intentions were honourable. I meet this Lady upon a
virtuous account, by the Mass. I love and honour her in a civil way, and scorn
your filthy lascivious Beasts of this Age.


Remember, Sir, I have you on the hip; no more will I endure your frumps and
taunts about my Philosophy, and the noble exercise of my parts.


Nephew, let me tell you, you are an Ass in sadness, and Iwill make you know
this Lady is virtuous, yes, as virtuous as your Ladyship; and I will defend her
honour with my Sword by the Mass; and he that dares be so presumptous to
contradict it, let him draw.


Gad forgive me, what means he?


No, none are so much concerned at it -- But what are these Rods which I drew
out with you? what do they mean?


O Devil -- I shall be betrayed. Ha! Rods! what a pox know I what they are? I
believe the Mistress of the House is a School-Mistris.


Yes, she keeps a very virtuous School, for the disciplining of hopeful
towardly old Gentlemen.


Now my honour's clear. Let's go, Sir. Besides, h^res that base Creature Flirt;
I cannot abide the sight of her, since she discommended thee, my Dear.


Come, Madam -- In sadness this is very fine. Two civil persons cannot meet
privately in an affectionate way, but such as you must censure them. But I will
make you know this Lady is honourable; I will, in sadness, and so fare you
well.


Come, my Dear, now let's go home: do not grieve at my unhappy jealousy, since
my belief of thy dear Truth is more confirmed by it -- Come, my Dear --


Come, to divert this insipid talk of Love, a ^heme so thred-bare, no man can
speak new sense upon it: My Maid shall sing you a new Song she learnt the other
day.


You must expect much Wit in it: for Poets are grown such good Husbands,
they'll lay out none upon a Song.


All we must look for, is smooth Verse, and a good Tune.


And how a good Tune, and tinkling Rhyme atones for nonsense, the Songsters
and Heroics of the time may sufficiently convince you.


They make nonsense go down as glib without t^sting, as a seditious Lie is
swallowed in a City Coffee house, or Common-wealth Club, without examination.


But now let's hear it --


HOw wretched is the Slave ^o Love,
Who can no real pleasures prove;
For still th^y're mixed wi^h pain^:
When not obtained, restless is the desire.
Enjoyment puts out all the fire,
And shows the Love was vain.
I^ wanders to another soon,
Wanes and En^reases like the Mo^n,
And like her never rest^:
(...) Tides of Pleasure now, and then of Tear^;
Makes Ebbs and Flow^ of Joys and Cares.
(...) ^overs wav^ring breasts.
^ut (...) of Love I will be free,
And tri^mph in the liberty:
I wi^hout him enjoy.
(...)* worst of Prisons I'll my Body bind,
Rather than Ch^in my free-bor^ mind.
For such a foolish Toy.
'Tis ve^y well, Madam.


But to us ^here is no Music like Love, or Harmony like the consent of Lover's
hearts.


But as Music is improved by practise, Love decay^ by it, and therefore I
scarce da^e talk on'^.


Let what harmony soever be between Lovers at first, in a short time it ^urns
to scurvy jangling; and therefore can you blame u^ if we divert so dangerous a
thing any way --


I confess it may come to discord, but 'tis ^s i^ Music* if it be made good,
it makes the following concord ^etter.


If they pla^ upon one another, till they are out of Tune, they must needs
jangle.


In that case they must lay by, and tune again, and then ^rike up afresh.


That Simile, will never hold; for when Love grows once out of Tune, they may
scew and keep a coil* but 'twill ^ever stand in Tune ^gain.


'Tis most certain: when Love comes once ^o bend, it breaks presently.


But perhaps it may be set again like a broken Limb, and be the stronge^ for it.


No: when Love breaks, 'tis into so many splinter^, 'tis never to be set again.


Shift for your selves, Sir Nichol^ a^d my (...) ^re both ^eturn'd home again.


O mischievo^ ill for^ne.


U^lucky accident.


I mu^t look af^er Sir Formal.


Their ca^riage, si^ce their cross appoin^ment in the Garden, has too evidently
decl^r'd their i^tentions. We have mistaken, I see, if we de^gn to (...), we
must change Mistr^es.


'Tis too evident, we have pl^c'd our Loves wrong, They are handsome, rich, and
honest, three qualities that seldom meet in Women.


'Tis true, and since '^will be necessary, after all our Rambles, to fix our
unsettled lives, to be grave, formal, very wise, ^nd serve our Country, and
propagate our species; Let us think on it here.


Let us walk and consult about this weighty affair.


A Woman with a Letter, a Tire-Woman too! are they all Bawds? Their very Art of
washing and adorning Women i^ implicit Bawding, but this is down-right
explicit Bawdery.


Good Sir, let her be made an Example to all vile Women.


We have secured her in the Vault here.


You have done well, she shall be brought to condign punishment.


But we can tell you yet a stranger thing; Sir Formal is privately shut up with
this lewd Woman, and has been this hour.


'Tis very true; what his intentions are, I know not, but *tis a very
scandalous thing.


O Monstrum horrendum! Is my Friend, that seeming virtuous man, fallen into the
snare?


O Virtue, whither art thou fled? my House is dishono^red, abused! I am ready
to faint when I hear of lewdness. My Dear, do not endure it; I shall never
endure my House again; let it with all speed, and let's remove.


Prithee, Dear; be pacifi'd.


Oh I cannot be pacifi'd: my b^ood rises when I hear of lewd whoring Fellows; I
would have 'em all hanged.


Excellent Hypocrite!


Well, Heaven be praised, I am the happiest Man in a Wife. I will rebuke him:
but for the Baw^, I'll have a Warrant from the next Justice; I will have her
Whipped and Carted. Come, bring 'em out here.

Truly Sir Formal, I am much ashamed, to find a (...) in such a posture with a
lewd woman.


Why, Sir, upon my sincerity.


Out upon you, have you the face to speak in your own defence, or in defence of
this odious Vice? Out on it! you think to bring all off with your Eloquence; but
I'll not hear it: You have defil^d my house, and committed lewdness within the
walls.


Why, Ladies, you know --


What, you are angry we have discovered you.


Would you have had us keep your pernicious counsel? had that been becoming our
virtue?


Why, Sir Nicholas, I profess --


I cannot suffer it. '^is fit such Hypocrites should be punished. Is this your
Virtue? your sereneness of mind? and are all your Flowers of Rhetoric come to
this?


I know not what to say in your excuse, to retire with such a lewd Creature. I
did not think you could have fallen into so shameful a scandal. I am sorry, fince
'twill be a reproach to all Virtuoso's.


By my Integrity.


You are a man of integrity, to meet privately with a filthy Creature, a Bawd!
an ugly Bawd too!


I scorn your words; neither a Bawd, nor ugly, neither by your leave -- Ugly,
and Bawd, quoth she?


Can I not be heard? shall Oratory have no place?


You think to bewitch us with your Oratory, but 'tis too apparent; you have
dishonoured my house.


Here are some Phae^omena's of scandal, but I will dissolve all in a punctum of
time.


I will never endure you, you shall solve none of your Phaenomena's here more.


'Tis true, I confess I was found here (privately with this Woman, but no less
true --


Pray let me hea^ him speak --


My Oratory was never sl^ghted before; when did I open my mouth in vain before?
I confess --


Why look you, Sir, he confesses it; what would you have?


Will you not believe us, he has been privately with her this hour?


I say, Peace; I will hear him.


I confess to you all --


Do you see ^gain? ^e confesses to us all --


Now my shame comes upon me.


What! is my florid Fool caught with a Whore? an ugly Whore? does your noble
Soul operate clearly without the clog of your sor did humane Body now? you are
a fine formal Hypocrite, in sadness; by the Mass it's a fine world we live in.


I am confident my Friend is innocent.


He innocent? hang him, he would have ravished ^e, if I had not been stronger
than he, and beaten him soundly: my Honour h^d suffered upon that business --


O Tempo^a! O Mores! but I doubt not but I shall shine clearer after this
Eclipse; I will bear these wrongs with a ^erene temper of mind.


Hang you! never trust your Orator, in sadness they will all lie like Dogs: by
the Mass I would go fifty miles to see an Orator hanged. Orators are Rogues,
the very grievances of the Nation, always putting in an Oar, and prating and
disturbing the business of the Nation, with their foolish Tropes, and care not
which way matters go so they may show their parts.


I do believe you, Sir Formal. You young Sluts; will you never leave?


Will you not take the Woman's word?


What a Bawd's word! she suffer in her honour one that brought a Letter to you
--


A Bawd! I scorn your words; I brought a Letter from a Gentleman that makes
honourable Love, and would marry her.


A Match-maker! that's worst of all.


Your Marriage*Bawd, your Canonical-Bawd is worst of all; they betray people
for their lives-time. Here, carry her, and lock her up in the green-room; I'll
maul your Bawdship.


Oh Heaven! I shall be whipped, nay, which is ten times worse, I shall disappoint
the Town, and have no Masquerade to ^ight. But I'll bayl my self with Money, if
it be possible --


Courage! my Sist^ ^ought this upon you but I'll re^eem all.


Nay, if I succeed in my love, I care not if I be beaten, kicked, and whipped, as
if Heaven and Earth would come together.


Come, I'll see her locked up safe my self; filthy Creature!


Not a word more o'this business. I could not forbear the trick; but you will
find me more favourabl^*


I shall be content to suffer any thing for your swee^ sake. --


If you had come sooner, you might ha'taken this Orator, this flashy Fellow,
with a Whore, in sadness, a foul deformed S^rumpet --


Upon my ho^our, Gentlemen, I am wronged; but he was taken with a Lady, and
Rods too, in German-stree^, abou^ an hour since.


What, this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age?


One that so justly repro^ches the Vices of this? I^ cannot be.


Oh Dog! Rogue! Nephew, I'll be revenged. No, it cannot be, it is not. The
Orator's a Son of a Whore, and my Nephew a foolish Rascally Philosopher, one
good for nothing but an empty noise of florid words, without sense, in ^adness.
And the other good for nothing but useless Experiments upon Flies* Maggots,
Eels in Vinegar, and the Blue upon Plumbs, which he finds to be living
Creatures: but all the world will find him an Ass, and so I leave him and all
of ye, with a pox t'yee. But in sadness, Orator, I will beat thee migh^ily. I
with a Whore? I scorn your words by the Mass.


I know he's in a rage, but 'tis true; Sir Formal, we'll no more endure his
taunt^. But now he talks of Eels, I'll show you millions in a Saucer of
Vinegar; they resemble other Eels, save in their motion, which in others is
side-ways, but in them upwards and downwards, thus, and very slow.


We have heard of these, Sir, often.


Another difference is, these have sharp stings in their ^ails. By the way, the
sharpest Vinegar is most full of 'em.


Then certainly the sharpness, or biting of Vinegar, pro^eeds from those
stings, striking upon the Tongue.


I see you are a most admirable ob^erver: it must needs be so. So, this is a
rare Phenomenon solved by the by.

I have often conclud^d that before -- The whole Air is full of living
Creatures, a thousand times less visible than those living Creature^, mistaken
for Motes in the Sun; I know most of 'em d^stinctly by my Glasses.


^lk of use. These are the Mysteries of Natures Closet.


This foolish Virtuoso does not consider, that one Brick-layer is worth forty
Philosophers.


Then for the Blue upon Plumbs, it is nothing but many living Creatures. I have
observed upon a Wall-plum (with my most exquisite Glass^s, which cost me
several thousands of pounds) at first beginning to turn blue, it comes first to
Fluidi^y, then to Orbiculation, then Fixation, so to Angulization, th^n
Christallization, from thence to G^rmination or Ebullition, then Vegetation,
then Plantan^nimation, perfect Animation, Sensation, Local Motion, and the like
--


Sir, there are a great number of sick men waiting in the Hall for your
Worship, and desire to be dispatch'd.


Now, Gentlemen you shall see my method of practise. Sir Formal, will ^ou go
and rank 'em?


I obey in my wonted Office. G^ntlemen, I humbly ki^s your hands.


He ranks the (...) people in their ^everal Classes, Forms, or Orders of
Di^eases. To save trouble, you shall s^e all.


Sir, the Constable is come with a Warrant to carry the Bawd away.


Come, we will deliver the Bawd into their Clu^ches, ^nd w^en I have
admi^istred to my sick, we'll take the air* By ^he way, Gentlemen, what
Country air do you like best?


^hy we cannot travel far for it this evening.


Tr^vel! I thought I should have you. Why I never travel, I take it in a close
chamber.


Why you can take but one kind of nasty smoky air in a Chamber.


Th^re's your Mistake. Choose your Air, you shall have it in my Chamber;
N^wmarket, Banstead-down, Wil^shire, Bury-air, Norwich-air; what you will.


Would a man think it possible for a Virtuoso to arrive at this extravagance?


Yes, I assure you; it is beyond the wit of man to invent such extravagant
things for them, as their folly finds out for themselves. Is it possible to
take all these several Country Airs in your Chamber?


I knew you were to seek. I employ men all over England, Factors for Air, who
bottle up Air, and weigh it in all places, sealing the Bottles Hermetically:
they send me Loads from all places. That Vault is full of Countrey-air.


To weigh Air, and send it to you!


O yes, I have sent one to weigh Air at the Picque of T^nerifs, that's the
lightest Air. I shall have a considerable Cargo of that Air. She^rness and the
Isle of Dogs Air is the heaviest. Now if I have a mind to take Country Air, I
send for, may be, forty Gallons of Bury Air, shut all my windows and doors
close, and let it fly in my Chamber.


This is a most admirable invention.


But to what purpose do you weigh Air?


That I shall tell you as we are taking it. Now let's see this Bawd disposed
of: every thing in its order.


How long shall I expect my fate? Well! there never was such a Ma^tyr in Love,
to be kicked, be^en, pumped; tossed in a blanke^ about business, and now in
danger of being whipped with a slap-dash. But she loves me! come, 'ts well 'tis
no worse! but to miss my Masquerade, that's the sum of all: but I'll bribe my
Justice and escape. 'Tis a Trade; som^ of the Justices are liker Malefactors
than Magistrates: but 'twill cost me a plaguy deal, for this damned Vertuo^o*
will prosecu^e furiously. Ha! what's h^re, a Rope? I am delivered as Rabby
Busy was by Miracle. I'll slide down from th^ window into the garden* The
back-door's open: so I save my money ipso facto, and go to my Ball; and, Whip
stich, your (...) in my Breech, Sir Nicholas. I'll leave my C^oaths behind me.
Though I am Bawd above, I am Sir Samuel underneath. So Tyre-woman, lie thou
there, and away Knight. 'Tis well 'tis no worse --


Come! where is this Bawd? now we shall make her an example. Here! where are
you? Ha! here's no body.


I am sure I saw her locked in.


The door was locked when we came in: here are her Clothes to^.


The Rogue has stripped himself, and has escaped ^aked.


O Heaven! this must be the Devil: the House is haunted.


I have set all the sick men in order, and they wait for your prescription.


O Sir Formal, your Mistress is flown, and has left her case behind her*


The doors are fast, and she is flown out of the Chimney: have a care, Sir
Formal, if you were nought with her, you will be torn in pieces.


Not I upon my sincerity.


It was undoubtedly a Spirit. I could have told you that before, but I was
afraid I should fright you all.


How, Sir! was it a Spirit say you?


You must know, Sir, I am much skilled in Rosacrucian Lea^ning. I am one of the
Vere ad^pti, as simple as I stand here. I discovered i^ by my sight, having
familiar Conversation with Spirits.


O the subtilty of this Virtuoso. This notable Spirit Sir Sa^el makes a ball to
night; we will steal out one way or other.


You'll remember the Masquerade Ladies.


Yes, yes! we will se^ the Spirit.


I see your cross Love, and will plague ye, ye young Sluts, for it.


You converse with a great many people which you take to be men and women* but
we Rosa-crucians know 'em to be spirits. Now let us go to my sick people, and
administer.


Heaven bless your Worship.


Come, Gentlemen, you must know I have studi'd all manner of C^ses, and have
Bills ready written for all Diseases; that's my way, I give 'em advice for
nothing.


Not more resorted to th^ Temple of Aesculapius; I am sure not so many found
relief, as from my Noble Friend: You have reason, good languishing people, to
be Trumpeters to his Illustrious Fame, whose indefatigable care, for the good
of feeble and distressed Mankind, with his transcendent skill, each day cures
even incurable diseases.


Your Orators are very subject to that Figure in Speech, called a Bull.


I still administered to the incurable in Italy, and never failed of success.
Here are my Bills. Where is the Roll? call it over.


Gout.


Here --


There's a Bill for you two, take it betwixt you.


Stone.


Here, Sir.


There's one for you two.


Scurvy.


Here, Sir.


There's a Bill for you four.


Go, pass by as you are served.


Consumption.


Here.


Take your Bill.


Dropsy.


Here, Sir.


There's for you two.


There is a Mad-man I have set by for transfusion of blood.


That's well. The truth on it is, we shall never get any but Mad-men, for that
Operation. But proceed.


These are the last, but not the least.

Pox.


Here, here, here --


There are three or four Bills for you, you are so many.


Heaven bless your Worship --


HOw long shall I languish in expectation of your noble favour, for the
enjoyment of which h, my desires are as great, as my deserts are little?


Truly, Sir Formal, I am so sensible of your service, and so troubled with my
confinement under my Uncle, that at length I have determined by you, to free my
self from him.


Hold, Madam, I am too suddenly blessed, I am all Rapture, all Ecstasy, my Soul,
methinks, is fled from its corporeal clog, and I am all unbodi'd, Divinest
Lady. Let me kneel and adore that hand, that snowy hand, to which the Snow it
self is tanned and Sun-burnt.


Not too mnch of this: but in short, conduct my Sisters and me out of these
doors to the Masquerade; for we canno' get out without your authority with the
Porter, and after you have returned to my Uncle sometime; procure the habit of
Scaramoncha, that I may know you, and come to us, and you shall absolutely
dispose of me.


Madam, I'll fly; nay, out-fly Sir Ni^holas himself, to do ^ou service, or any
Virtuoso in England* But how shall I know you? you'll be disguised.


^ ll find you out; besides, you know this Ri^g and Bracelet. We must have our
Maids with us, for we ll no^ return. Let's find my sister, and about it
instantly.


I am all obedience. I should not envy now an Universal Mona^ch -- I hear my
Ladies vo^ce --


Mr. Bruce is coming to wait on you.


Sir, your Servant. Now open the Bottles, and l^t the Air fly, Gentlemen, be
ready to snuff it up. O this Bur^Air is delicate, 'tis delicious; O very
refreshing.


O admirable -- who would go to Bury to take it?


Not I, 'tis much the better here; it takes so much the fresher for being
botled, as other Liquors do. For let me tell you, Gent^emen, Air is but a
thinner sort of Liquor, and drinks much the better for being botled.


Most certainly the world is very foolish, not to snuff up botled Air, as they
drink botled Drink.


The foolish World is never to be mended. For all this, your Glass-Coach will
to Hide-park for Air. The Suburb-fools trudge to Lambs-Conduit or Totnam; ^our
sprucer sort of Citizens gallop to Epsom; your Mechanic gross Fellows, showing
much conjugal affection, strut before their Wives, each with a Child in his
Arms, to Islington, or Hogsdon.


Ay poor d^ll Fools!


But to what end do you weigh this Air, Sir?


To what end should I? to know what it weighs. O knowledge is a fine thing; why
I can tell to a Grain what a gallon of any Air in England weighs.


Is that all the use you make of these Pneumatic Engines?


No, I eclipse the light of rotten Wood, stinking Whitings and Thornback, and
putrid Flesh when it becomes lucid.


Will stinking Flesh give light like rotten Wood?


O yes; there was a lucid Sirloin of Beef in the Strand, foolish people thought
it burnt, when it only became lucid and crystalline by the coagulation of the
aqueous juice of the Beef, by the corruption that invaded it. 'Tis frequent. I
my self have read a Geneva Bible by a Leg of Pork.


How, a Gen^va Bible by a Leg of Pork?


O Ay, 'tis the finest Light in the World: but for all that, I could eclipse
the Leg of Pork in my Receiver, by pumping out the Air; but immediately upon
the appulse of the Air let in again, it becomes lucid as before.


Is it so curious a Light?


O admirable! I am now studying of Glow-worms, a fine Study; it is a curious
Animal: I think I shall preserve 'em light all the year, and then I'll never
use any other light in my Study but Glow-worms and Concave-glasses.


What do you with the Speaking-Trumpet?


O that Stentrophonical Tube, though not invented by me, yet is improved beyond
all men's expectation^.


They can hear distinctly a League at Sea by them alrea^y.


Pi^! ^hat's noth^ng; I have made one, you may hear e^ght mile about, and I
shall improve it very much more: for (...) no stop in Art. But of all
La^guages, none is heard so far as Greek; your Ioni^k Dialect of O^o does so
roll in the found. I make Sir Formal speak Gr^ek of^en in it.


This Sir Formal ^as a great many pretty Employments under him.


I doubt not but in three months to improve it so, that from the chief
Mountain, H^ll, or Eminence in a County, a man may be heard round the County.


This will be above all wonder.


I have thought of this to do the King service; for when I have perfected it,
there needs but one Par^on to Preach to a whole County; the King may then take
all the ChurchLands into his own hands, and serve all England with his
C^aplains in Ordinary.


This is a most admirable project. But what will become of the rest of the
Parsons?


It is no matter, let 'em learn to make Woollen Cloth, and advance the
Manufacture of the Nation; or learn to make Nets, and improve the
Fishing-Trade; it is a fine sedentary life for those idle Fel^ows in black.


These illiterate Virtuoso's hate all that have relation to Learning.


You cannot blame 'em. But there being no stop in Art, you may advance this
Trumpe^ so far, ^ou may make 'em talk from one Nation to another.


So I may in time.


By this Princes m^y converse, treat, congratu^ate, and co^dole, without the
great charge and trouble of Ambassadors.


I hope to eff^ct it* But I wonder Sir Form^l is not returned; I sent hi^ to
fix my Telescopes for surveying the Moon.


Do you believe the Moon is an Ear^h, as you told us?


Believe it! I know it; I shall shortly publish a Book of Geography for it.
Why, 'tis as big as our Earth; I can see all the Mountainous parts* and Valleys
and Seas, and Lakes in it; nay, the larger sort of Animals, as Elephants and
Camels; but public Buildings and Ships very easil^. I ^ave seen several
Battles fought there. They have great Guns, and have the use of (...). At Land
they fight with Elephants and Castles. I h^ve seen 'em --


No Phan^tick that has lost his Wits in Revelation, is so mad as this Fool.


You are mistaken, this is but a faint Copy to some Originals among the Tribe.


Th^re's now a great Monarch, who has Armies in several Countries in the Moon,
which we find out, because th^ Colours which we see are a^l alike. There are a
great many S^ates, which we take to be Confederates against him. He is a very
ambitious Prince* and aims at Universal Monarchy; but the rest of the Moon will
be too hard for him.


I have fixed the Tubes in the Garden; and, if we be not deceived, the great
Monarch is making an Attaque upon a Town, and they are in very hard Service.


'Tis probable -- W^'ll haste to see it. But ^irst do me the favour to speak
two or three Greek Verses in this Trumpet.


With all my heart.


Sir, Sir! stand upon your Guard; the House is beset by a great Rabble of
People, who threaten to pull yo^ out of it, and tear you in pieces.


O Heaven! what is the matter?


Sir, they are Ribbon-weavers; who have been informed, that you are he that
invented the Engine-Loom, which has provoked 'em to rise up in Arms, and they
are resolved to be revenged for it: L^sten, Sir, you may hear 'em.


O what will become of me! Gentlemen, Gentlemen, for Heavens sake do something
for me; I protest and vow they wrong me, I never invented any thing of use in
my life, as gad shall mend me not I.


We shall be beaten for being in such damned company, and faith we shall
deserve it.


Mercy on me! how loud they are!

O Gentlemen, What is to be done?


Get your Guns and Pistols charged. The Rabble, like wild Beasts, are frighted
at Fire-arms.


Go, get 'em charged quickly.


Now is the time for me to show my parts. I have another Weapon. Let me alone
with them.


What Weapon, Sir Formal?


Eloquence: I warrant ye. Let me alone. I'll go out among 'em.


O 'twill never do; they are very outrageous Rogues. What will become of us?


You know not the charms of Oratory.

'Twas my fortune to be near the Temple* stairs, when the Watermen, who had
drunk too deep of a Liquor, somewhat stronger than that which is the Scene of
their Vocation, were stirred up into so popular a heat and fervour, that its
fury threatened the adjacent Society -- The Water-men were themselves (as I may
so say) blown into a Tempest, when strait I ventured in among the intemperate
Crowd, and by the force of Rhetoric, dispelled the barbarity of their
over-boyling Ale, and too much fermented Choler, and gently recomposed their
minds into a sedate and quiet temper: and I doubt not but to have the same
effect upon these.


Quickly then, dispatch. Tell 'em I am innocent, I never invented any thing in
my life. Go-go, quickly.


What ever they say, this Sir Nicholas, and one Sir Formal that's with him,
invented the Engine-loom, to the confusion of Ribbon-weavers. I shall be
sufficiently revenged on the Rogues now.


O Villains! we'll maul 'em. Are these the tricks of a Vertoso? have they
studi'd these fourteen years for this?


Yes, for much less. The truth is, 'tis a burning sham^ that poor men shou^d be
ruined by such Fellows, in sadness 'tis --


I never thought these Vertoso's would do any thing but mischief, for my part.


Where are the Rogues? Come out of your Den.


Come ou^! where are the Vertoso's here?


Break open the house. Open the do,, or we'll demolish --


What would you have? stand off?


What would you have, you S^n of a Whore; the Engine, and the Rogues that
invented it.


Here's no Engine, no Rogues, nor Inventers neither --


Now will I try my Eloquence. Come, Gentlemen, What is it you would have? What
is the fountain of your discontents? now for the power of Oratory! Come, come,
come --


Here's one of the Rascals, take him amongst you.


Why, Gentlemen.


Tear him in pieces.


I say, Gentlemen --


Cut off his ears.


Take him and hang him upon the next Sign*


I beseech you.


Ay, hang him up quickly.


Hold! hold! shall I not speak?


Yes, if you can after you are hanged.


Why, Gentlemen, I am of your side. If you commit this rash outrage, you will
be soundly punished upon a Quare ^remuerunt G^ntes --


Let him speak.


No, he shall not speak; hang him --


Hold, Neig^bours and Friends, let's hear him; he^ may perhaps discover
something of this business.


Let him speak --


By what occasion or accident this unheard of Torrent of tempestuous-rage was
thus in^lam'd, ^ very much ignore. But let it ^ot be said that Englishmen, good
common-wealth's men, and sober discreet Ribbon-weavers, should be thus hurried
by the rapid force of the too dangerous Whirlwind, or Hurricane of passion.


He speaks notably.


He's a well-spoken man truly --


Of p^ssion, I s^y, which with its sudden and, alas! too violent
circumgyrations, does too often shipwreck those that are agitated by it, while
it turns them into such giddy confusion, that they can no longer trim the Sails
of Reason, or steer by the Compass of Judgment.


His Tongue's well hung, but I know not what he means by all this stuff.


I say, Gentlemen.


Pox on you, ^ou shall say no more. What's this to the invention of the Loom?


This is one of the Inventers, hang him. Where's the other? break open the house


Do but hear me?


No, Rascal, we will not hear you.


All this I can bear, if you will but hear me, Gentlemen -- I am a person --


A person, a Rogue, a Villain! a damned Vertoso! A perso^!


I say, Gentlemen, I am a person --


Pox on you -- we'll use you like a Dog -- Sir --


Quousque tandem efsrenata jactabit audacia.

This is a barbarity which Scythians would blush at.


Scythians! What a pox does he call us names? take him, and hang him up.


I see Sir Formal's Oratory cannot prevail; What shall I do?


O there he is. Come down, or we'll fetch you down, and your Engine too.


Nay, then 'tis time to sally out --


Give us Pistols, quickly --


Hear me, Gentlemen, I never invented an Engine in my life; as gad shall sa' me
you do me wrong. I never invent^d so much as an Engine to pair Cream* cheese
with. We Vertuoso's (...) find out any thing of use, 'tis not our way.


Hang your way. You are a damned lying Vertoso. Break open the door quickly --


Where are these Dogs?


Murder! murder!


Where are these Rogues?


Sir, go and call the Guard, least they should rally again.


Sir Formal is shot, and all the Rabble is escaped u^hurt.


O my Friend! Sir Formal! Sir Formal!


I am alive, Sir Nicholas, but surely I ^m shot.


Let's search -- Here is no hole in your clothes.


Hum -- I find no blood. Truly I did opine that I was shot -- but I am
exceedingly beaten and bruised, Though there be no discretion, I have suffered
much confusion.


I see your Oratory could not prevail.


No, no, these Barbarians understand not Eloquence. I must go in, and discover
this disorder --


Let's take this opportunity to get rid of the Virtuoso, and go to the
Masquerade.


Sir, the Guard was coming to suppress the tumult ere I went; they seized some
of the Mutineers, and dispersed the rest.


Now we are safe, Sir. We humbly take our leaves till to morrow --


Gentlemen, your humble Servant;

Where are my Wife and Nieces?


They are gone abroad, Sir.


At this time of night? Did they go together?


No, Sir, my Lady went alo^e*


And did you let my Nieces go out, Villain, without your Lady?


Sir Formal carried them out.


'Death! what design is this? they are gone to the Masquerade: My Wif^ alone
too! I like not this* The story in German-^treet was very suspi^ious. I shall
find out ^hese practises.


Now, Hazard, let's enjoy our selves: I am never in my Element, but when I am
adventuring about an Intriguo, or Masquerading about business. Now you shall
see me show my parts.


Do. Sir Samuel, you are excellent at these things.


Nay, if any man outdoes me about this business. Well, no more to be said. Is
not mine a very pretty Disguise? Ha!


An admirable one --


I have forty of 'em upon Intriguo's and b^sinesses. But now to work. Do you
know me?


No: yet me-thinks you look through your disguise like a foolish Fellow I have
seen.


A foolish Fellow -- Hey poop! you were never so much in the wrong in your
life, as gad mend me --


I do not think so; a Mask might cover deformity, but not folly. You have the
very Men of a Coxcomb; all the motions of your body declare the weakness of
your mind.


Pish! what you are upon the high Ropes now. Whip st^ch, Your nose in my
breech. Pish! I*ll talk no more with her.


Do you know me?


No; I neither know ye, nor care to know ye.


They who have so little curiosity, have less pleasure.


I guess your inside to be no better than your outside.


Try 'em both, and you'll be of another opinion.


The Conviction's not worth the Trial.


I wonder which is Haz^rd. But my business is not with him.


These are very angry Ladies, Hazard. Just now we met ^wo were very kind to us.
Pretty Rogues. They had delicate hands, arms and necks -- and they were Women
of Quality, I'm sure by their Linen* --


That's no rule -- for Whores wear as good Linen as honest Women: fine Clothes
and good Linen are the Working-Tools of their Trade.


But I know by their Wit and Repertees they were fine persons. I am confident
my Woman knows me, and has a kindness for me.


Me-thought they seemed to be rank Strumpets --


Prithee hold thy peace. T^ce is Latin for a Candle. I am used to these
Intregues and Businesses --


Longv. and Br^ce! let's watch them, and see where they'll direct themselves.


Like right-bred men o'th'Town; I warrant upon the next they light on.


'Ods my life, I have lost my Laced Handkercher --


'Death! I ha^ 'lost mine too. Heart! all my money's gone --


Ha! Money! what a pox, mine's all flown too. Whip, slap-dash --


Whip, slap-dash! a pox o'your Women of Quality, they are flown too. Whip,
slap-dash -- But you have been used to such Intriguo's and Businesses --


I durst ha'sworn I could not be deceived. Though I ha* been often served so by
Vizard Masques in the Pit, they are mightily given to it; we men of adventure
must bear this* Come, no more to be said. Come, 'tis well it's no worse. Come!


This is a fine civil Assembly ^ruly. The Knight has great conveniences of
Coaches and Retiring-Rooms.


It is a very rank Ball; there's like to be very much Fornication committed to
night.


A M^squerade's good for nothing else, but to hide blushes, and bring bashful
people together, who are ashamed to sin bare-fac'd. There's a Lady hovering
about you, and longs to pickeer with you.


O that it were Cl^rinda in a good mind.


I wish it be not Miranda in a bad one; her shape's like hers --


Come, Fiddles, be ready -- Shall I wait on you in a D^nce about business --

The Bor^ --


A Corant.


May I no^ have the honour to know who yo^ ar^*


'Tis sufficient to tell you, I am one you have no ill wishes to, and would not
tell you this but in Masque.


She's finely shaped, and by her Jewels a Woman of some condition. Come, off
with this Cloud to a good face, and Ornament ^o a bad one.


No: but if you will withdraw into another Room, I'll let yo^ know more of my
mind, though not of my face.


The temptation is too strong to be resisted. Let's steal off.


Very fine, I swear very fine --

Where the Devil's this ^iranda? I cannot find her out for my life --


Did you not see Bruce steal off with a Lady?


Yes, and cannot bear it. I am so foolish, I would I were not.


But hold. Who held my Sword while I danced? 'Twas a French Sword, cost me
fifteen Pistols: a curse on him, he*s rubbed off with -- But Come, 'tis well
its no worse yet --


This Bruce stays somewhat long, I like it not. If I could find out either
Clarinda or Miranda here, I should be out of doubt -- Let me see, who are you?


What authority have you to examine me? --


What have we here, a Poppet?


Such a Poppet as you'll be glad to change for the Player you keep --


You are mistaken, I love the Stage too well to keep any of their women to make
'em proud and insolent, and despise that Calling, to take up a worse.


Then you are none of the Fops I ^ook you for.


I can never rest till I know who has obliged me.


Since you are so importunate, I'll give you a Note will discover it, if you'll
give me your Honour not to open it ^ill the Masquerade be done.


Upon my Honour I will not.


Now show your self a man of Hono^r.


Gad I think I have already --


Yonder's Sir Formal. You have your Cue, Be^ty.


I warrant you, Madam.

You see I am as good as my word.


'Tis she by her Bracelet and Pendants. Madam, had not some disaster
intervened, I had sooner kissed your hands. But of that, more anon.


Now for the rest of my Plot. I shall disappoint these young Sluts, or make
mischief enough.


Did not you see Longvil steal out with a woman?


Too well Our ^overs are well matched.


In sadness I think Bedlam's broke loose and come hither. What a company of
Antic Puppies are here? Pox on '^m all. But where is this Figgup? by the Mass
I'll not suffer her to go to these Schools of Bawdery; in sadness she'll be too
ap^ a Scholar I am afraid.


Hey Snarl! What, do you come to a Masquerade bare-fac'd?


Yes, that I do, nor am I ashamed of my face, as Rogues and VVhores are. Whose
Fool are you?


Sir, will you please to dance?


No indeed won't I. I thank God I am not such a Coxcomb yet in sadness. --
What do you find in my face to think me such an Owl?


What do you come for then?


Why to find one that should be wiser than to be here, by the Mass.


He means me, I shall be undone.


Whom do you mean? she that was in the Wood hole?


She that was discovered in Germin-street.


Ounds! I shall be a By-word all over the Town, in sadness.


My Uncle here?


Is it she you look for?


What pert-snivelling, squeaking-Bagg^ges are you? here's a squealing with you,
with a pox to you.


To him, Sir Samuel.


Sir, let me ask you one civil question.


What civil question would you ask now?


Were not you with a Lady in Germin-^treet pulled out by the heels to day?


Ounds! What Rogue art thou? I could find in my heart to beat thee most
exorbitantly.


Your Land-lady in Germin-street is a School-mistris, is she not, Sir?


O my shame comes upon me! In sadness you are all a company of squealing
Coxcombs; would you were all Eunuchs by the Mass, that you might always keep
your Treble Voices.


What, was this virtuous Gentleman taken with a Whore?


Sir, do you very much delight in Birch?


Yes, for mortification-sake. He's a great doer of Penance.


A fine old Gentleman, with gray hairs, to be over-taken.


Truly I am sorry a person of your gravity should so expose your discretion.


What damned antic Rascal's this?


As gad mend me it was uncivil. But, Madam, we will retire, if you please.


What a Devil, shall I be over-set with Rogues and Fools here --


Damn Rogues and Fools.


So I say, in sadness. The Men are all Rogues and Fools, and the Women all
Strumpets, by the Mass, or which are ten times worse, scandalous honest Women.
In sadness it is a shame such Bawdy doings should be suffered in a civil
Nation; my heart bleeds for it, by the Mass. It was not so in the last Age. Why,
what do I talk with a company of Owls for? I come to find one whom I'll never
seek again; if she will not appear now --


O Buddy, I am here; but I was afraid you'd be an angered.


In sadness I wonder you are not ashamed ^o come to these vicious scandalous
bawdy places. Come away for shame --


I never yet knew one so free of her body, and so nice of her face before.
Shall I know no more of you?


Since you will have it so -- there's a Note will inform you more: But upon
your Honour you must not open it till the Masquerade be over.


I will not.


My Dear, I wondered I could not see you before.


O Hazard, have I found thee? this is good luck, my Dear.


O infamous damned Woman!


It makes me break my Spleen almost to think, what an Ass we made of Sir
Nicholas to day.


Ay, so it does mine. Ha-ha-ha -- A curse on Woman-kind!


He, poor Fool, believes ^s all this while to be as innocent. Now shall you
have free liberty to come home to me.


Shall he so, Madam?


What's here? one offering violence to a Lady!


Who, this my Lady Gimcrack?


It is my Husband! for Heaven's sake keep him here, till I run home.


Villain! how dare you abuse a Lady?


It's no matter for that, I shall not discover my self.


It is Sir Nicholas; now you may lock him up, and be revenged of him -- --


No more to be said. Hey! who waits there? Take this Fellow and lock him up,
till I talk with him about business.


'Death! What will become of me?


I have fixed upon almost every Woman of the Masquerade, and cannot find which
is either Clarinda or Miranda.


Ounds you lie. --


Take that, Rascal.


These damned Bully Rogues have spoiled my Intrigue; a pox o^'em all, the
Ladies are gone. But I'll find a way ^o be conveyed into Miranda's Chamber to
night yet


Is not Sir Nicholas within?


No: but my Lady and the two Ladies are come; my Lady is gone up to my Master's
Closet, and the young Ladies are in the Garden.


We come to tell Sir Nicholas, we've wholly quelled the Mutiny, and seen the
Offenders committed.


He will be within presently --


I do not see the Ladies here: but this was a very strange adventure at the
M^squerade.


The Circumstances are so like, had I not seen two several habits, I should
believe 'twas the same Woman I have a Note to, and received the same
injunction not to open it.


Let me read your Note, and you shall read mine; the Moon-light will serve for
that.

By that means I may discover something.


Agreed. I may perhaps make a discovery.

You see I dare not own my kindness, but when I h^d something to ^ide ^y
blushes. I hope you'll use the Conquest like a Gentleman. Clarinda.


How! this is to the same effect, subscribed by Miranda. There needs no further
argument of your treachery, and such as I did not think a Gentleman could be
guilty of.


'Death! Do you accuse me of Treachery, who are your self so great a Traitor?
Draw --


Are you so ^imble? Have at you --


Hold! hold! hold! for Heaven's sake hold!


Hold! hold! hold! for Heaven's sake hold!


What means this madness in this place?


I suppose you guess at the meaning.


If not, Miranda can inform you.


This is absolute distraction, Gentlemen.


You let Lo^gvil know mo^e of your mind* (...), in a private Room at the
Masquerade to night.


If she did not, this Lady was kind enough to you there.


What madness is this! I spoke ne'er a word to either of you there.


Nor I, Heaven knows! but we saw each of you steal away with a Lady --


Do you know that hand, Madam?


Or you this, Madam?


My na^e subscribed!


And here is mine.


This mischief is too evident. This is my Aunts hand.


And this is her Character too. This malice is beyond example, and your
baseness, so soo^ to entertain such thoughts of u^.


That senseless vanity, that makes them think so well of themselves, made 'e^
think so ill of us.


Oh Heaven! what have we done! I beg a thousand pardons for my fault.


Hear but my acknowledgment, on my knees I beg forgiveness for my ill thoughts
of so excelle^t a Lady.


Be gone, unworthy Men, ^nd never see us more.


I'll ne'er forgive the Man that thus dare injure me.


This damned Lady ha^ put her self upon us for two Women. Let's not leave 'e^,
till we have satisfied them of the occasion of our jealousy.


Let's follow at a distance --


They are gone into that Arbour: Let's do an* ungenerous thing for once, and
listen.


Agreed; we then perhaps may hear what thei^ resentments are.


I see we must carry our selves with more reservedness, since Men of Wit and
Pleasure are so apt to think ill of our Sex.


For all this, I love Longvil ^o that height, I cannot be ^eserved to him, I
can forgive him any thing.


(...) (...) (...) ^oo al^ost to distraction, and could venture any thing but
honour for him.


(...) lose (...) Life and Love a thousand times before my Virtue. But our
cross Love can never meet.


The breach was great enough before: but this falsehood and malice of my Lady
has made it wider. But hold, we are over-heard.


O Heaven! here are Longvil and Bruce --


Our case is plain, we have no hopes of succeeding in our inten^ed Loves; or if
I had, I would not have the Body without the Mind.


A man enjoys as much by a Rape as that way. But I am so pleased to find
Miranda loves me, that I'd not change for any but C^arinda.


I have the same opinion of Clarinda's love; and could you be contented, I
would willingly change. Gratitude to her will move my heart, more than
Miranda's charms with her aversion can.


Since our affections will not thrive in the soil we had placed them in, we
must trasplant them.


Love, like the Sun-beams, will not warm much, unless reflected back agai^. It
is resolved it shall be so.


Let's follow them now; and while the Metall's hot, 'twill take a Bent the
easier.


Infamous, vile Woman, I^l be revenged on all your lewdness.


I have broken open your C^oset, and her^ are all ^our Le^ters from your
several Whores: And do you think I^ll bear your falsehood without revenge?


Be gone out of my doors, I cast you from me; and I have here another Mistress
of this House. Come in.

To you I give possession of all here, Madam. Out of m^ doors.


Is this one of the Creatu^es you converse with about Philosophical matters?
Fare ye well. I have, thanks to my Friends, a settlement for separate
maintenance, and I have provided for my sel^ too* A wo^hy (...): Com^ in, Sir;
he will defend my Person, and my Honour.


Who e're shall make such settlemen^s hereafter, may they be plagued as I am!
Vil^ Creature --


Sir, I shall publish your Letters into b^rgain and send 'em to
Gresham-Colledge; then you'll be more despised than now you are there --


O misfortune! that will be worse than all the miseries can happen to me. Hold,
Madam, I have thought on it; and to show how mu^h I can be a Philosopher, I am
content it should be a drawn Battle betwixt us: Do you forgive, and you shall
find that I can do so too.


O Sir! I bring you the most unfortunate news that ever you heard.


More c^osses still!


Several Engineers, Glass-makers, and other people you have dealt with for
Experiments, have brought Executions, and Extents, and seized on all your
Estate in the Country.


'Tis very well; you were all this while Botling of Air, and studying Spiders
and Glow-worms, stinking Fish, and rotten Wood.


This last affliction is too great to bear; but I am resolved to ^orgive ^hee,
my Dear, and be a good Husband, and redeem all.


No, Sir, I thank you; my Settlement is without inbrance, and I'll preserve it
wi^hout you, which you are the greatest a Woman can have.


Sir, I humbly implo^ your pardon, for a crime, which Love, w^ch was too s^ong
for my resistance, caused in me.


What do you mean?


I have m^rrid' Clarinda; the pretty Creature had an odd fancy to be marr^d in
(...)* I hope (...) I pardo^ it; Love is not in our power.


O Heav^n! (...) is to (...) to all the r^st. No, base man, I never will
forgive it.


Si^, you ma^ if you please, and he ^oo; consider, Sir, Love is not in our
power.


I am amazed, I am struck dumb, I ne'er shall speak again!


I am sorry for you, Sir Formal; but I have grea^er sorrows of my own: Yet I
have my Uncle Snarl in reserve, I'll try his bounty -- Oh here he is!


Here! Where is this Coxcomb? Nephew -- This Ver^uoso, I was with a Whore in
Germin-street, was I? and your Ladyship reproached me too; she is your Aunt in
sadness.


How, Sir! What do you mean?


Mean! why what should I mean? she is my Wife, I am marri'd to her --


Yes, Sir, we are marri'd, I assure you.


Oh this is worst of all, I have lost all hopes of his Estate, for which I've
so long suffered all his frowardness.


Oh Heaven! are they so soon come to a right understanding? I am undone. Curse
on 'em!


O Gen^lemen! that foolish V^rtuoso, and that wordy Puppy Sir Formal, said, I
was taken with a Whore in Germinstreet: This is the Lady, and she's my Wife.


Be pleased to give Sir Formal joy; he is married to Mrs. Betty too.


Upon my sincerity, Madam, it was very uncivilly done, to slur your Maid upon
me in your stead: But I must rest contented; no more to be said.


B^tty, I wish thee joy; Sir Formal, she's as good a Gentlewoman as you a
Gentleman.


I thought my foolish flashy Orator would be caught at last. Ha-ha-ha! what,
marry a Chamber-maid!


But, Sir, I have not marri'd a S^rumpet, as you have.


How! Is this virtuous Gentleman of the last Age so over-^aken?


Did Gentlemen and men of Honour marry Whores in the last Age?


In sadness they have much ado to avoid it in this; if I have marri'd one, she
is my own; a^d I had better marry ^y own than another mans, by the Mass, as
'tis ^fty to one I should, if I had marri'd else-where, in sadness.


I have yet a reserve: Nieces, my Land in the Country is Extended, and my
Goods are seized on: The Money which I have of yours will redeem all, and I
will account with you.


Sir, I can do nothing, but by my Guardian's consent; and I have chosen Mr.
Longvil for mine.


And Mr. Bruce has undertaken the pro^ection of my Fortune.


'Death! now all my hopes are cut off; I thought to have made a good sum of
money of my Nieces. Was this the Philosophy you came for, Gentlemen?

How now? Whom have we here?


Sir, here is a Chest of Goods directed to Mrs Miranda, and we were commanded
to bring it to her.


For me! set it down there.


Sh^ll we not carry it into your Chamber, Madam?


No: there's something for you: ^e gone.


It stands in the way; Foot-men, set it upon one end.


Hold, hold; murder, murder!


How's this? some Rogue and Thief! pull him out.


Rogue and Thief! I scorn your words.


An Antic Coxcomb; I have seen a Baboon with more common sense.


I came hither to my Mistress Miranda, and would marry her about this business.


You must ask my leave, she has chosen me for her Guardian; and I will cut your
throat if you attempt to make Love to her any more.


And do you own what he says, Madam?


I must be ruled by my Guardia^.


Why then I have been kicked, beaten, pumped, and tossed in a blanket, c. to no
purpose: I am unfortunate in this Intriguo. But no more to be said. Come; 'tis
well its no worse yet.


Su^e, Sir Form^l, you'll not deny me that.


Truly I opine it not reasonable for one, who has marri'd one with nothing, to
be security for another.


^hat I should know Men no better! I would I had studi'd Mankind instead of
Spiders and Insects. Sure, my Dear, thou wilt not leave me!


I am resolved to part this moment.


Well, I have something left yet; and here's one loves me, she has told me so a
thousand times.


Sir, trust not to that; for Women of my profession love Men but as far as
their Money goes.


Am I deserted by all? Well, now 'tis time to study ^or use: I will presently
find out the Philosophers Stone; I had like to have gotten it last year, but
that I wanted MayDew, being a dry season.


I hope, Ladies, since you have put your Estates into our hands, you'll let us
dispose of your persons.


You must have time to leave off your old Love, before you put on new.


Nothing but time can fit it to you.


You have given us hope, and we must live on that a while; and sure 'twill not
be long that we shall live upon that slender D^et: For,

If Love can once a Lady's Out-works win,
It soon will Master all that is within.

NOw you who think y^are Judges of the Pit,
Who never, but in finding faults, show wit;
Who to your dear dull s^lves are kind alone,
And ne'er reflect on follies of your own:
Our Poet can from you no mercy find,
Who savage are to all but your own kind.
Nay, on the Stage if some of those appear,
Though ne'er so like your selves, you hate 'em there,
As the whole Herd falls on a wounded Deer.
But of those Ladies he desp^irs to day,
Who love a dull Romantic whining Play;
Where poor frail Woman's made a Deity,
With sens^ss amoro^s Idolatry,
And s^ivelling Heroes sigh, and pine, and cry.
Though singly they beat Armies, and Hu^s Kings,
Rant at the Gods, and do impossible things;
Though they can laugh at danger, blood and wounds;
Yet if the Dame once chides, the milk-sop Hero swoons.
These doughty things, nor Manners have, nor Wit;
We ne'er saw Hero fit to drink with yet.
But hold, I hear some say among the rest,
This Play is not well bred, nor yet well dressed;
Such Plays the Women's Poets can write best:
They difser from the Men's, you must allow,
As Women's Taylors Women's Poets too.
But know, good breeding sh^ws its excellence,
Not in small trifling forms, but in good sense.
Yet, Ladies, to Stage-fools some favour show,
Since off the Stage some Fops you can allow.
Few of the Sexes happy Favourites yet
Have been the most remarkable for Wit:
Sure you must like Copies of such as these,
If the Original Coxcombs can so please.
But to the Men of Wit our Poet flies,
And ^akes his Fops to them a Sacrifice:
You know the pangs, and many labouring throws,
By which your Brains their perfect births disclose.
You can the faults and excellencies find;
Pass by the one, and be to the other kind.
By you he is resolved to stand or fall:
What e'r's his doom he'll not repine at all.
And if this Birth should want its perfect shape,
And cannot by your care its death escape,
Th'abortive Issue came before its day,
And the Poet has miscarri'd of a Play.

