BEliev't my Lords, they say the Prince does Wonders.

They say he kills a world of men indeed;
But faith I think the wonder had been greater
If he had made but half so many live.

Perchance, my Lord, you'd have him turn Physician.

Rather than Butcher, 'tis the Nobler Trade.

But they are his Enemies he kills,
Men that offend, and do deserve to die.

O! then I think you'll praise the Hangman next,
You give a definition of his Trade.

If I do not mistake your humour Sir,
You were never taken with this dying,
It is a thing does mar a Courtier much.

'Thank Heaven, I am not yet so mad to wish for it;
Let Broken-Merchants, and the busy Rout
That dirt the Streets, when their designs miscarry,
Cry that there's nothing Certain in this World,
I think there's less in that which is to come:
Here I'm sure of something, I'm a Lord,
And live with men: But to be turned a grazing
In the Elizian-Fields (that men do talk of)
Among Philosophers, ne'er could make a Leg.

Fie, fie, Neander! this is too profane,
And relishes far more of Beast than Man.
(...) Arcadia shall Command those Provinces,
Who lately thought our long and happy peace
Had softened so our Minds, that now we were
Fit to be Lo^ded over by their Wills:
But strange it is, to see the King so little
Joyed with the news, that still he bears a Face
More troubled than Sicilian Seas in storms.

'Tis for the Love of that poor Shepherdess,
The Prince not Ten months since took from a Cottage
As he was a hunting, and gave the fair
Cleantha for a Present.

Alas! my poor Urania! how doth
Thy harder Fortune vindicate my Choice?
Who now dares say Endymion loves to low,
When he loves her that can make Princes die;
No more, no more, we must scorn Cottages
Those are the Rocks from whence our Jewels come.
Gold breeds in barren Hills, the brightest Stars
Shine over the poorer Regions of the North.

Here comes the King* Endymion, pray retire,
It is not fit you should be privy to his Thoughts.

I'll try if I can hear what resolution
The Kings enraged Passion makes him take.

Pyrrhus! how thrives my Love? I have
Entrusted you with all I am, and all I wish for.

Sir, I have already done,
What Language and Rewards have power to do

And what return am I to hope for then?

There's little hope: This Ermine will not be
Persuaded from the whiteness she so Loves.

Poor Country Girl, where can she find Words
Or Resolution when you do assault her?

When I first
Mentioned the business to her, all alone,
Poor soul she blushed, as if already she
Had done some harm by hearing of me speak.
Whilst from her pretty Eyes two Fountains run
(So true, so Native) down her fairest Cheeks,
As if she thought her self obliged to weep
That all the World was not as good as she.

Heaven! how does this Carriage please me!

This Modesty of hers inflames me more.
As springs are hottest in the coldest weather.

Her Tears so innocently begged my pity,
That I was straight turned over to her side,
And had forgot the Cause for which I strove*
Till rallying again, I once more gave
A new assault, and urged her to answer:
All her reply was no: then humbly prayed me,
Not to be Cruel to a poor weak Maid,
Who had not any thing, in all the World,
To give her value but her Innocence;
With such Success as this I often have
Assailed her Virtue.

Ah Pyrrhus! where will this Tyrant end? shall I
Still be Priest, and Sacrifice, and Altar too,
Unto a Passion, I can satisfy,
But never Conquer? What poor things are Kings?
What poorer things are Nations to obey
Him whom a petty Passion does Command?
Heaven! why was man made so ridiculous?

Your Majesty says that of your self,
Which were Impiety in any else,
But once to think.

Men but Flatter me.
Oh Fate! why were not Kings made more than men?
Or why will people have us to be more?
Alas! we govern others, but our selves
We cannot rule, like to our Eyes, that see
All other things, but Cannot see themselves.

Sir, do not discompose your self; you may
Soon Queench this mighty Flame, and where your Prayers
Have not prevailed, your Power may Command:
Who in Arcadia dares resist your Will?

My Lord 'tis true, Let's to the Queen --

How does this Minute transport my soul with Joy, to have the blessed
privilege to be with fair Evadne?


I a^ glad it makes some body happy.


With her who has my Heart. --


Have I it? pray my Lord take it again.
I would not be troubled with keeping such a Bauble for the World.

She whom great Nature (now grown wanton) made to look upon, and scorn her
other Works.


My Lord Neander! I see you are resolved not to study to no purpose, you will
have out your Complement, let me say what I please: but I must take liberty to
leave you in the middle of it.


Nay, Madam, I beseech you be not so unkind.


Nay now I have put you out of your Complement; I care not if I stay a little
longer.


Madam! you are Cruel! how do you Kill?


Kill Neander? No sure then you would not be so near me.


I ne'er could fear death from so fair a hand as yours.


I believe indeed, my Lord, you fear death least from the hands of a Woman,
which is the Reason you choose to stay here at Court among the Ladies, rather
than go to War with the Prince.


Madam! -- You Ladies have a Privilege.


Yes, my Lord, ^it's sometimes a privilege to speak Truth.


Faith Madam, you may say what you please.


Pardon me, my Lord, it would please me much better if I could s^y you were in
the War in Thessaly.


T^u^y Madam, I could give you very good reasons why I went not to the War with
the Prince.


I believe you can, and so can every body else that knows your Lordship: The
first and Chiefest reason was a certain tenderness you have for the
prese^vation of your Person, some scandalous people stick (...) to call it
fear.


Do not judge so Madam; I can assure you it was for very different reasons.


You will give very much satisfaction to the World, if you say what they are.


Why then, to tell you the truth, Madam, I am somewhat troubled with Corns that
I cannot without pain wear a riding Boot* and then I am strangely subject to
the Tooth-ach, which makes me very unsit to lie in the Field, which indeed were
the two main Reasons made me refuse the War.


What pity 'tis so brave a Mind should be so unluckily hindered from showing it
self.


I perceive you railly, Madam.


I see Sir, you are a man of a quick apprehension.


How now Daughter? what do you here? my Lord I do not desire your Lordship
should make any address^s to my Daughter, her Fortune is too humble for your
thoughts.


Your servant, Madam.


Well now Evadne, my dear Child, thou art
Come forth upon the Worlds great Stage, and it
Must be my care first to advise thee, then
To pray for thee: Yet thou art innocent,
(Oh may thou still be so my Child) yet know not
Ought but the holy practices of cells,
Where virtuous Matrons have instructed thee.

But now the Scene is changed, the Queens Commands
Have brought me to the Court to wait on he^;
The employment truly noble: and I have
In her the brightest pattern of true virtue
That all the world can boast of.

But tho^'lt find
Few more besides whose wandr^ng paths are safe:
Those of thy Sex thou't find so strangely vain,
That they think they have washed, and patched, and cutl'd
Themselves even into little Deities:
They do believe that wanton men speak truth,
When to consume those hours, they care not fo^,

Ay, Madam, is it not? would you be willing to be used so? Besides, Madam, no
man in the Court offers to speak to me, but he thinks 'tis Love.


He thinks you are so handsome, perhaps, that it is impossible fo^ any man to
look upon you without being smitten.


That may be something, as you say, Madam, but I will never put up this Injury:
Marry me to keep me honest, quoth he? I'll never endure it, while I have breath:
-- See Madam -- where he comes -- do but observe him.


I have brought my self into a sweet condition, like an old fool as I am, why
could not I remember how many I had Cuckolded my self, and to think I should
not be served in the same kind, were to suppose neither Wickedness, nor Justice
in the World.


Look, Madam upon this Mischievous Countenance.

Phronesia! are you there?


Yes! you old Fumbling Sot I am here. --


Fare you well.


O wicked Phronesia! how have you used me? whom have you appointed now to do me
the Courtesy? -- my Lord Pirrhus -- he is of a black Complexion, and that
never fails; -- My Lord Endymion's a Poet forsooth, and prevails with Sonnets;
-- and for my Lord Neander, -- the Priest convinced him the other day, that
Adultery was a very great Sin, and that's reason enough for him to lie at Rack
and Manger; I am sure my head must ache for it.


Let it ache on, you old Fop, you married me to keep me honest, did you? I'll
honest you; I will go instantly and meet 'em all three*


But I'll follow you close at the heels, and prevent your recreation! -- If any
Man be weary of his life,
Let him at Threescore marry such a Wife.



COme fair Urania, think upon the honour
To be a Mistress to a King, sounds it not Well?

It is an Honour I should not envy her
That sought my ruin! I will ne'er forsake
My Virtue, for a little outward splendour.

Is Love a Vice Urania? why did Nature
Make us all Vicious, when she did immerse
Love in the very beings of all Creatures:
Go search the Universe, and show me there
What but affrighted man is not as free
To satisfy his Love as Thirst or Hunger;
Beasts ne'er dispute the Lawfulness of what is Natural.

'Tis well, my Lord, when you intend
Unlawful Loves to instance not in men
But Beasts -- but let me ever be
Of that affrighted Number tha^ follow virtue.

Come, come, Urania! Love, like men, was free,
E'^e ^w'r and Laws had taught 'em both the use
Of Chains, and Fetters: Nature ne'er Confined
Her No lest Creature to the Narrow'st Prison,
Nor gave him Inclinations to torment him,
(...) And with a holy Flame, my Sighs and Tears
Have been as pure, as are those Gales and Springs
which in Elizium do refresh the blessed:
And yet thou hast not pitied him that loves thee,
Even though thou be as gentle, and as soft
As morning dew just melting into Air.

What shall I serve you in my Lord?

Permit
Me to enjoy the Title of your servant,
And pay my fire with equal flames again.

My Lord, I were ungrateful if I should not.

Then be not so, but (to be short) I fear
The Kings approach, and therefore if thou'lt promise
This night to sleep within my arms (being first
Authorised by Hymens Priest)
I'll free thee from the Kings unlawful Love.

What's to be done in this sad Exigence? --


You must appoint the King to meet you there,
In yonder Grotto, and oblige him to
The Language, and the time of Love, soft Whispers,
And the Night; and I'll prepare
So^e other Woman to supply your place;
This will gain time till to morrow, when
I'll own you to the King to be my Wife:
Then the respect to all my Loyal services
Will make him quench his now Unruly Passion.

Ah, who will be so wicked as to meet him?

Enough, ne'er fear it.

Sure 'tis impossible!
What Woman would consent to such an Act?

Ten thousand, Madam!

But they shall not for me,
I'll rather choose a Thousand times to die,
Then own a wretched Life, saved at the rate
Of so much ^nfamy.

Come, be content,
Chaste Soul; I'll do what you shall well approve;
My dear, I must retire, I fear the King:
Now act thy part, and then confide in me;
Be happy fair Urania, I am blessed
That my employment is to do thee service.

Ah, dear Endymion! how could I weep
If tears were able but to wash away
The blackness of my Crime? now thou hast thought
To lead me from the Labyrinth of my Woes,
The next thing I must think must be to cheat
All thy Innocent expectations, which
^ to my self,
^ Soul;
^
^
^ King.
^ Showers allay you thus your Beams?
^ and more are due to my Misfortunes.
^ this, Pyrrhus told me you had consented.

With what Face can I say yes to the King?
Though I but feign consent, and mean to cheat him, --
It is Immodest sure -- it cannot fit
A Woman's Mouth.

Are you not yet resolved?
What means this doubt? Consent to my desires,
And you shall live adored and feared by all;
The Kingdom shall rejoice at all your smiles,
And tremble at your frowns: But if you do not --

Is there no other way to save my life?

Come, do not trifle thus to tempt my rage.

Good Sir, be not angry; I will.

My dear Urania! now be happy, let's withdraw
This place is much too public for our Love. --

Let me not lose all Modesty at once,
But let Sin take possession by degrees,
I have some sparks of Virtue yet remaining
Which will require some time to quench.

I am impatient of delays, in this

A death from your fair hand, I would embrace.


Ay, th^s kind of dying put's a man to no pain, but to be run through the
Lungs, or shot through the Body is mighty inconvenient.


Ay, faith is it. --


But 'tis honourable.


For my part, I cannot possibly find what honour there is in having Oylet-holes
made in a mans body: 'Slife a Mans body is not made to see through, is it? and
yet I know some Duelling Coxcombs so often run through, as if their bodies were
intended Through-fares for Swords. --


But I hope you have more prudence then to venture that danger.


If I be run through, may I be pickled up when I am dead like a Sturgeon, be
served up to the Table of an old ^surer.


I will say this in your Commendations, ^ presents it self, I believe there is
not a man in ^ as your self, I mean so swift of Foot.


Not so, Madam, indifferent, indifferen^ ^


But suppose Sir I should stand in need of a ^mpion.


O Madam! your Eyes will revenge your Quarrels.


Or they must be unrevenged for you!


Nay, Madam, in a Lady's Cause I can be a Lyon.


When you meet with a Lamb.


Nay, Madam! I have Courage, but I must confess,
'Tis a thing a man may better spare then any of his
Goods and Ghattels.

Yes, yes, you have Courage, witness the going to The War when you were
commanded!


It was not want of that; But who the Devil, that had a plentiful Estate, like
me, and might live among these pretty Ladies at the Court, would go to lie
withou^ Sheets, with Stones and Blocks, for Pillows, and be most honourably
Lousy, and damnably n^l'd, for a company of ungrateful Fellows, that live
Luxuriously at home, and laugh at the Honourable Affairs abroad? and when they
have done, they value these Mighty men of War, just as a man doe^ a Credito^
that Duns him for Money lent, which he never intended to pay.


What would this old jealous Fop have?


Nay, now I will not hang my self yet: I'll be revenged on this Lord first --
My Lord --


Pox of this Rogue, how I scorn any one that's below me, What say you Geron?


Furies pursue him.

How does your Lordship?


Very well! how does your Lady?


'Tis he has done it, a Curse on him.


Why how now? what do you Conjure? what's the matter?


I need not Conjure, I know the Father now.


Why what dost thou mutter man?


My Lord! why should you ask for my Wife?


Because I am Civil.


Because I am a Cuckold.


Pox on thee, why dost not speak out?


Your Servant, my Lord, suppose by this time my Lord Endymion has left the
Queen.


I beseech you let me wait on your Ladyship


This is the man! 'tis he; Why should he ask for my Wife? Suppose I have a
Wife, what's that to him, must he needs be asking for her presently? This
Rascal Neander, this Villain that I dare not say any thing to; not because he's
Valiant, for then it would not grieve me, but because he's a Lord, which he
could no more help, then I can that I am a Cuckold: Here's another Lord too.


O Geron! how is't with you?


Your Servant, my Lord.


How does Phronesia?


Here's another, what Two Lords to make one Cuckold?


What, are you mute? has any Misfortune befallen your Wife?


Too much has befallen me I am sure: 'Sdeath I am Cuckolded and laughed at too;
you do not well my Lord to use me thus.

(...) And her great Titles reckoned up, whilst she,
Does in her Closet, weep she is not less,
Poor Endymion! how little dare thou think
My Thoughts; or I dare say them to thee?

Should Endymion speak,
You then would hate him for his Confidence,
A Crime of which he never can be guilty.

Nay, should he speak, in that he would forfeit
The very thing I love him for, that rest
He finds in the Elizium of his thoughts,
And those true satisfactions which he takes
In being all the World unto himself.

Sir, I beseech you ^,
It would incense my Father ^ against me
If he should see you.

Madam, never mind
What old Gray people in their Wisdom talk of,
They'd Cross us out of Envy to our youth;
For when the Wine of Love is drawn out of 'em,
Th^y live some years by its Vinegar, spite.

Poor Lady, how she's pestered with yon gaudy Nothing.

O Madam! we shall have a Ball to night, The Queen will entertain his Majesty,
and desires your Highness to be ready.


I attend her pleasure.


Hell take that Clogg of mine; how overjoyed she is to have an opportunity to
show her self, and lay baits for young Gudgeons?


Let me Consider how I may look


Well Minion, there's a Ball; but let me but see you dare to look upon any man
but my self there, and by all the villainies of thy Sex, I'll tear thy flesh
from thy bones, and hang thy Skeleton up in a Physic School.


How now Geron, what in passion with your Wife?


O no: and 'please your Highness I cannot be angry with any one I love so well.


Ah, Madam! he threatens to tear my flesh from my bones, and't please your
Highness.


Geron! do you know before whom you do this?


Certainly, my dear, thou art distracted, how come thou to mistake thy self
so; Madam, I have a great Tenderness for her as I have for my own eyes, Heaven
knows.


They deserve much alike; his Eyes are Blood-shot, Rhumatick and Blind, and his
Wife Ugly, Insolent and Froward.


If thou knew, my dear Phronesia, how great a value I have for thee, thou
would not thus have injured me.


So, this is well; but Urania and Evadne let us go wait upon the Queen:
Neander, stay you here.


I like not that so well, I love this Evadne most abominably.


Prithee! my Dear, harbour not so ill thoughts of thy loving Husband till
death; Geron -- you Strumpet, I'll make you know what 'tis to use me thus.


My Lord Neander help, or this old Wizard will murder me; Avaunt Beelzebub.


Hold Geron!
Here's a Fellow I may show my Valour on;
He is old, and Cowardly: Oh, that all Hectors had the
Same discretion in the Choice of their men that I have,
They would not be so often beaten as they are; Now
Will I prove as good a Knight Errant as the best of 'em,
And rescue this distressed Lady.

Huswife, to morrow will come. --

My Lord! 'Pray take my part against this wicked old Jealous, Toothless,
Impotent fellow.


Do you hear Sir! do but dare to think of injuring this Lady,


Alas! dear Sir! you injure me to think that that same Evening that gives pain
to you; Can give me pleasure.


My dear! I am not sick.
I only am a little indisposed,
I'll beg your pardon to retire this night,
But pray stay you, and take no further Care,
Till at your own apartment I see you
To morrow morning.

Sir! your will is still my Law.

Once more good Night --

Poor Prince! now little dost thou think
How soon thou art to meet with her thou fly'st,
That wife that still has been so constant!
Oh! how ridiculous
Just Heaven does make the ways of men,
When they forsake the ways of Virtue.
This brave Prince,
(At whose Victorious Armies Greece now trembles)
When he contrives inglorious actions, shall
At the same time, be pitied by his servants,
And a poor Girl shall up-braid him, in
Contriving to preserve him virtuous:
How do men ravel back to Child-hood, when
They cease to be thy Children, sacred Virtue!
And need the Care of every little person,
That what they call for may not do 'em harm.

Not to be subject to temptation is
A privilege only had in the other world,
And yet I hope, Madam, what you design
Will him from his intended Crime defend,
Use you the means, and Heaven will crown the End.

GOod morrow, my Lord.

A good day to your Majesty.
A day as pleasant as your night has been.

Ah Pyrrhus! I wish it indeed.

I hope your Majesty has been well enough diverted
This night. --

Yes, my Lord, though not as you suppose,
I've been diverted from those wild desires
That made me first injure my self, and then
Unlord my Confident, but I have asked pardon
Of Heaven, and my own Majesty, and now
I beg it too from you, my Loyal Pyrrhus;
Forgive me that I have profaned thy faith,
By such Commands, that thou art bound to ask
Blessed Heaven forgiveness for thy Loyalty.

Your Majesty I hope will give me leave
To wonder at this Change, and understand it,
When you shall please to think me fit for it.

I'll tell thee all -- when now the Night
Grew blak enough to hide a skulking action,
I softly stole
To yonder Grotto, through the upper Walks,
And there found my Urania; but I found her,
I found her Pyrrhus, not a Mistress, but
A Goddess rather, which made me to be,
No more her Lover, but her Worshipper:
She only whispered to me as she promised,
Yet never heard I any voice so loud,
And though her Words were gentler far than those
That holy Priests do speak to dying Saints;

Heaven bless you --
-- when Every thing is green
Must poor Cleantha only wither, and never
Know a Spring? Was I made only high
Like Rhodope, and Haemus, or the Alps,
To dwell with everlasting Winter? to wear Snow,
When every Valley is adorned with Roses?
Well I must die, then I may also be
Happy as other Folks; the Grave looks Wistly,
Like my Fortune, there I shall not see
Poor Villagers more blessed in Love then I,
And there I shall be able to make appear
Cleantha and Endymion Equal are;
Then possibly some of Cleantha's Earth
May prove a little Flower, and look fresher
Then when it was a part of a great Princess.

Madam! the Queen expects your Highness.

I'll wait on her. --

Endymion is returned! what shall I do?
To be at once both Just and Civil too.
If I could satisfy Endymion's Love,
I should unjust to great Theander prove;
That Prince who to so mean a thing as I,
(Bred in a little Cottage) did bestow
His Noble Heart, which is a Present fit
For any Princess fruitful Greece can boast of:
From whom if I could give my Love, I would not.
Why did I give my Promise then last night?
And yet the Generous Endymion
Will sure forgive me when he knows the Cause:
He's here; Heaven forgive me, what I'm forced to.

Madam! I come upon my Knees to beg your pardon.

My Lord, it is not well to mock me further,
You have deluded me enough already:
Thus we that are so easy to bestow
Our Love, the greatest Treasure we possess,
Are still neglected by ungrateful men;
But I had thought to have found more truth in you.

Madam! 'twas my allegiance forced me from you.

Those men, who dare offer such injuries,
Never want bolduess to excuse their Crimes.

Had I refused to obey my Kings Command,
You could not think me Worthy of your Love.


What a fond Fool was I to be so forward
In trusting a Court Lord, to believe
You e're would marry one of my mean Fortune.

Dear Vrania, I appeal to'th' Gods
Who are honoured when they are witnesses to truth.

Make no more Vows, I am not to be deceived again,
I was too foolish to believe your last: Farewell, my Lord.


How much unlike Vrania is this Passion?
Who used to be all Calm, and gentle still:
And sure would be so, did not my unlucky
Stars, that never meant me good, incline
Her to this Anger. --

Your servant, my Lord!

'Curse on this vain, Fop. --

Are you so stout; Farewell. -- Well! I wonder whom the Devil intends I shall
marry with? I have been a servant, as they call it; that is, I have Lied, and
Sworn, and spent Money upon every Lady about the Court, and still am as far
from having one of them as the very'st Evnuch is; nay more, for they say
Evnuchs have a Trick now a-dayes to please the Ladies Exceedingly: -- I was in
most hopes of Evadne, and love her best: but the old Priest forbids her to see
me, or speak with me; Here she comes! I will force her to hear me --


There is a sufficient reason for it.


Must then Neander die?



We may in pleasant safety keep.
Here a perpetual Spring does cloth the Earth,
And makes it fruitful with each seasons birth.
In this fair Climate every day
Is fresh and green as May,
And here no beauty can decay.

As the Elements free
Each day and each night
Is Crowned with delight
Without either Envy or Strife
This is the Jolly Shepherds life.
Free from all Cares in pleasant Shades,
And fragrant Bowers, we spend the day;
(Bowers which no Heat, nor Cold invades;
Which all the year are fresh and gay)
Each does his Loving Mate embrace,
And in soft pleasures melts the Hours away,
So Innocently that no Face,
Of Nymph or Shepherd can a guilt betray:
And having Ease, the Nurse of Poetry,
We sing the stories of our Loves,
As Chaste as Turtle-Doves,
Free from all Fear and Jealousy
From every Envious Eye:
For every Man possesses but his own,
No Shepherd sighs, nor Shepherdess does frown:
No Ambition here is found,
But to be Crowned
Lord or Lady of the May;
And on that solemn day,
For Singing to have praise
Or f^r ind^ting to deserve the Baize,
Thus, thus, live we, c.
In the Cool Evening, on the Lawns we play,
And merrily pass our time away.
We dance, and run, and pipe, and sing,
And Wrestle in a Ring.
For some gaudy Wreaths of Flowers,
Cropped from the fruitful Fields, and Bowers.
By some pretty Nymps composed,
By their fair hands to be disposed,
To those ambitious Shepherds, who
With Virtuous Emulation strive to do
What may deserve the Garlands, and (obtained)
Are prouder far than Princes that have gained
In fight their Valours prize,
Or ever stubborn Nation's Victories;
Whilst in the adjoining Grove the Nightingale
Does tell her mournful Tale,
And does our Pleasures greet,
With each Note,
So sweet, so sweet, so sweet
From her pret^y jugging, jugging throat.
It does each Breast inspire
With loving heat and with Poetic Fire.
Thus, thus live we, c.
We live aloof from Destiny,
(That only quarrels with the Great)
And in this Calm Rretreat,
(Content with Nature uncorrupted) we
From splendid miseries of Courts are free;
From pomp, and noise, from pride, and fear,
From Factions, from divisions Clear,
F^ee from brave beggary, smiling strife.
This is indeed a Life:
O Gods! banish Endymion: desire Evadne to come
To me.

I will --

Wretched Cleantha! is thy Love a Crime,
A Crime to him thou love? must it be ruin
To a person, if thou but affect'st him?
Have I some Plague that I must thus destroy,
Whom I embrace? or is my Destiny
G^own Paradoxical, and proves my Love
To be true Hatred? --
O Death! thou art not half so Cruel yet,
In thy destructions of the Prosperous,
As in not killing Wretches that would die.

Vrania does not well to treat me thus:
I took no leave of her, but I have told her
The reasons why my Love forbad it me,
Yet she persists in Cruelty.

He's here --
His Countenance betokens grief.

To be thus angry and accuse me of
Slighting a poor deluded Maid
In spite of all my Vows of Love to her --
The Princess still is Gracious to me:
I had best entreat her to persuade my now
Provoked Vrania She's here;
But she's alone, I dare not interrupt her Thoughts.

Good morrow, my Lord.

Your pardon, Madam, if unthought of, I
Have rush^d on your Retirement.

Your Presence will better it.
'Pray what News f^om Argos?

Madam, the Repo^t was brought last night to Cortu
Had nothing ^n't of Truth: I found all quiet,
But only for the disturbance which we made
Our selves by our Arrival in the Night.

I am glad my Lord your danger was no more.

You oblige me Madam to undergo
Much greater danger for your Highness then
This could have proved.

My Lord! you have already
Served me beyond what I can recompense.

Madam! t'has been your Highness's pleasure still
To honour with two great respects the little
Merits of your mean Servant, who's advanced
When numbered in the lowest rank of those
That have been Fortunate to do you service.

You add still to my debts, my Lord, yet are
No way injurious, since you make me rich
In having such a Noble Creditor:
But pray, my Lord, tell me, (as one concerned
Much in your Fortunes) what's the Cause
Your Lordship has not worn of late that rest
Upon your looks which heretofore appeared.

Madam, it is for you to wear that rest who are
Placed in that upper Region where there is
No Wind, but a little Bark, in the midst
Of a great Sea, subject to every Wave,
And every gust of Wind, can ne'er pretend
To this blessed 'State.

My Lord; you have some griefs that are particular.

For my troubles, Madam,
Alas; their objects would appear so small
To your great Eye, you'd think I did affront you
Should I dare say them to you. Could the Lyon
In his Midnight-walks hear some poor Worms
Complain for want of little drops of dew,
What pity could that noble Creature have,
Who never wanted small things, for those poor
Ambitions? yet these are their concernments,
And but for want of these they pine and die.

I hope my Lord what is your Trouble may
Not be augmented by my knowing it,
Else I shall never think ought small that can
(...) Thus to instruct you in Astronomy.

I am lost in wonder: --
Madam, 'tis not strange,
If I'm proud of what you blush at, but
I am sure your unbounded wit to morrow
Will with much greater reason quite deny it.

My Lord, you think no woman can be constant
To what she says a day, but your Vrania:
But till you have tried, pray have more Charity,
You'll after have more Faith: my Lord Farewell:
The Gods forgive my breach of Modesty --

What have I heard!
Was't not enough to lose my dear Urania,
Unless I also did adore the hand
That snatched her from me, Cleantha Loves Endymion
But Fool it cannot be; ne'er may I know
Her Noble breast harbour a thought so low. --

I Was (at least in my own conceit) in probability of winning the sweet Evadne;
and now, that not only her ugly Father, but the Queen too should forbid her to
see me or speak to me; it is what I cannot, will not bear: Though Fate it self
say, I shall do it, I am resolved that old grey Priest and his Mistress the
Queen, shall be the subjects of my Revenge: and yet I am not ambitious to show
my Valour so far, as to be hanged for it neither -- I think I have it; If I can do
this, 'twill be the sweetest part of my Revenge, to live, and tread, and spit
upon their Graves: I have sent for Geron, a Rogue sit for my purpose, for he is
Covet^us to Extremity, and I have Gold to bribe him, and which is lucky above
my Wishes, the Priest and Queen have chec'kd him lately, and countenanced his
Wife against him, which torments him so, that I believe he would be glad to be
hanged on any terms. -- Here he is.


Consume him he's here --


Dear Geron, let him embrace thee that
Perhaps is thy best Friend.

Perhaps, with a Curse to him --
No, my Lord, you are a Friend to my Wife.

Geron! give me your hand.

Would I had your Heart's blood. --

Give me your Hand, Geron.

My Good Lord! you do me too much honour.

I beg your pardon heartily that I presumed to
Countenance your ugly, impertinent, ill-natur'd, vain
Wife against you, you that are so worthy an honest Knight;
It was Ignorance of her, and you made me do it. I protest it was.

What the Devil does he mean by this? --


Upon my Honour Geron it was; had I not been a stranger to her ill Qualities.


I am afraid you know 'em too well. --


I should never have encouraged her in her Insolence to you.


What does all this tend to? --


For I am well satisfied, a Man, especially an old Man that has had experience
of the vanity of the World, ought to have an absolute Dominion over his Wife.


My Lord, this is a Truth! I would you had acknowledged sooner; for my
abominable Wife, instead of being humbled, is ^ncourg'd by the Court.


I know though too late now, your Wife is froward, Foolish, petulant, wanton,
proud, expensive, disobedient, Ungrateful. --


'Tis too true; but a Plague on him, I am afraid he has

(...) Night resumed his desires, and that Vrania has promised it in earnest.


But Vrania will contradict that --


No; she asked the Princess liberty to leave the Court a day or two for some
private business or other, and is now absent.


Excellent Geron! but how shall we carry this story?


My Wife; who shall still be ignorant of the matter.


Admirably invented: thou shall it have the Talents; besides if thy Wife should
discover thee or me, if she be questioned, we will face her down in it and she
shall hang for it.


That Argument prevails with me more then the Talents: whether she betrays us
or no, we will do that my Lord.


With all my heart, Excellent Geron: for the Priest, thou shalt go to him, and
subtly persuade him that the Queen has made an appointment to meet me in the
Grotto, and that I to avoid suspicion am to be in Woman's Clothes.


My Lord, he'll ne'er believe it.


Do thou confirm it by ten thousand Oaths.


That will be dangerous.


Not at all: But think on the Talents, and the death of thy Wi^e man: Thou
may persuade the Priest to meet her to prevent it in a Woman's loose habit,
and then bring the King to see them.


But the Priest will soon undeceive the King.


No, no, fear not that, the King will be so enraged: 'tis ten to one he kills
'em both without Examination; if not, you and I, who will be the first Accusers
will swear 'em both down in it; think upon Revenge and Profit.


My Lord -- I'll do it about the time of this Even'ng Sacrifice for the Victory
of Theander.


What means this?


O Endymion's banished.
And this Guard is to convey him out of the
Kings Dominions; let him be hanged and
He will. -- let us about our business --

May I not see the Princess for
Whom I am banished before I go?

No, no, along Sir.

Pray Sir, go a little faster.

Prithee, let the Gentleman alone, soft
And ^air goes far, and the Gentleman
Considers he has far to go.

Farewell than brave Cleantha, may thou never
Once think Endymion suffers for thy sake:
And farewell dear Vrania, I will love thee
On those hard Rocks I now must dwell upon.

What's this muttering? Along Sir.


Good Gentleman! he's loath to leave the Princess
I warrant him.

Here she comes.

The Princess! -- Great Princess pardon
My glorious sufferings; forgive me that
I ever saw the Light, or lived a Minute:
That you are injured thus by him whose being
Is not worth your meanest thought.

Ah, my Lord, affront me not:
Rise brave Endymion! 'Tis my misfortune:
Thou art too low already.

Fortune made me low to be advanced by a hand
More Worthy than her own.

My Noble Lord!
I have undone you! what can I give you now
In recompense of Liberty, and all
The pleasures you must loose
In a sad banishment, for her who only
Can be afflicted at your sufferings.

Madam, you have Enough to give to pay
So mean a debt, if you will call it one
A thousand times.

Name it, and take it, dear
Endymion, though it be my life.

Madam!
Then grant me this request: use every art
To make your Hours as blessed as I shall pray
They may be many; and never let a ^hought
(...) My impatience to be troublesome to others.

You grieve for Endymion, when all Arcadia
Rejoices at the Victory of
Theander, which this Evening we shall Celebrate
With Sacrifices, and with other Rites, for whom
We will prepare a public Triumph:
Compose your self, and let not others see
Your shame.

My Shame they ne'er
Shall see; Call it ^y Glory, so it is.

Sir, the Sacrifice is ready for the
Altar, and the Priests wait your Royal presence
For the Execution.

Niece! think on what I've said, and follow us.

Come, dear Cleantha, prithee be not sad,
The Prince of Macedon will be fitter for
Your noble Blood which is derived from Kings.

And some other will b^ fitter for him
Then I, unless he likes a broken heart.
Besides the Prince is Contracted already to
The Queen of Thrace's eldest Daughter.

She is long since dead.

Who can tell that, Madam; I am apt to believe
If she had her Kingdom yet the Prince would find
Her out.

What News with you?

News that does import your Majesty. --

Madam! the Queen and your Highness are expected at the Temple* this will be a
night of Joy.


That brings me nought but sorrow; the name of joy
Is odious to me, since Endymion's gone.

Art thou sure of this Phronesia?


Yes, Madam, doubt it not.


The Gods amend all once more, I'll prevent it:
But first I'll to the Temple; Come Cleantha.

What have you told the Queen
What I enjoined you?

I h^ve, and she is resolved to Circumvent him: Come to the Temple, haste. --


Thus far it goes well; I have with many Oaths and P^otestations confirmed the
Priest in the belief that Neander in Woman's Clothes is this night to meet the
Queen: it takes admirably -- The Talents are my own, and this wife of mine is
dead already.


ALL Praises to the God of War,
Who in our Battles gives Success,
By whom we now Victorious are,
Who does not only us with Conquests bless,
But 'tis his Power that gives us Peace.
Arcadia now may safely that enjoy,
Thessalians cannot that destroy:
For brave Theander has our Foes oppressed,
And by his Noble Toils procured our Rest.
In vain they did their Heedless Force oppose,
Against such Courage, and such Conduct too,
Such as required more strong and numerous Foes*
Fit for his Noble fury to subdue.
Oh how he thundered in the Van,
Godlike he threatened, and did more than man^.
Heaven bless you Madam. --

In it's own horrid shape e're you attempt it,
And yet she bears it with so much assurance
I could believe her Innocent, yet why
Should Geron dare to invoke all the Gods
To testify it; if it be false, what can
Provoke him to this Villainy? If true,
She never will acknowledge it to me
What ere it be; 'tis worth my venturing
To be undeceived. --

Is't possible? my Queen an Adulteress?
It cannot be: Be sure Sir, if you accuse her
Falsely, ye shall not only die, but
Linger out a wretched life in Torments.

Sir! if I lye, let me have what death
The witty'st Cruelty can invent.

I am amazed! the Queen and Priest
In Woman's Clothes? strange Circumstance
To meet in Grotto, this Night? Sure 'tis
Impossible.

Sir, I am content to dye fort, if you see not your self all this to Night.


In the mean time, you'll be content to be secured?


Sir with all my heart.


Guard! take Geron, and secure him till further order.


Sir! this dreadful news amazes me!


Ah Pyrrhus? in this very Grotto
I met Urania, and forgot the Queen,
Though then I thought her faithful.
And as free from any Carnal thoughts
At (...) departed Souls in the other world.

The Gods grant this meeting prove no worse
Than that did.

O Heaven! methinks I see 'em already in their Lust, yet sure it cannot be; if
I find this Accusation false, it had been better for this fellow he never had
been born.


Sir, you may yet prevent it.

I may for this time, but I will not harbour
That Devil Jealousy within my breast
For all this World can give me: I am resolved
To see the certainty my self; and if
It prove untrue, my Queen shall live with freedom,
As she has ever done, in all my Thoughts,
And her Accuser fall her Sacrifice:
But if she can forget her former Virtue,
I can take as much pleasure to see her blood
Drop from the fatal S^ord, as e're I did
To see it blushing on her Cheek, when first
I thought her modest*
Look! where they come --
Let us withdraw; it may be we shall
Discover something.

And nothing is more Common
Then this, which is not thought a sin, because
It seems an Impulse of Nature.

Hear thou Pyrrhus? I am distracted!

The King.

All happiness attend your Majesty.

I must contain! how do you Madam?

Always happy whilst your Majesty is so.

And what are you discoursing of?

Nothing! but good with this good person sure.

What^s that you talk of which is not Sin
Because an impulse of Nature? --

What do you mean Sir?

I know not how we came by Chance to speak
How little wantonness is thought a sin
Because it seems an Impulse of Nature.
Whereas the Virtuous still fix their Eyes
(...) It has been very long, two hours at least:
It's bad enough for certain: here it comes!
My Lord, you have been long; but I expect
No good; and therefore care not if you had
Been longer.

Sir, before I can satisfy your Expectations,
I must humbly pray you will be pleased to pardon
The entreating your Answer to a Question
On which all we have done depends.

What's that?

I may seem too insolent: but the whole Truth
Of all the Examination does depend
Upon it; that is, Whether your Majesty
Did not one night Command a little Lady,
That waits on the Princess, one Vrania,
To attend you in that Grotto, where
The Queen and Priest were seized on*

I did.

And she was there?

She was.

Is your Majesty assured it was she, or might it be the Queen?


Ha! -- her Whispers were like the Queens: Pyrrhus knows I told him so.


Be happy then great Prince;
Your Queen is Innocent; your Priest is holy,
And Geron and Neander only are
T^e Criminals.

Are you assured of this?

Yes Sir; it was the Hellish contrivance of
Geron and Neander brought them both together.

Why did not the Queen reveal this?

She rather would have died then have disclosed
Your S^mmo^ to Vrania, which with your Majesties
Pa^on, she's pleased to call your dishonour.

My Lord it was; but pray relieve my Wonder
And tell me the whole Story.

Sir, in this Confession of Geron and Neander, and Phronesia, which we, (having
found them Tripping in some part of the Story) by threatening Tortures, have
extorted from 'em: Your Majesty may fully read the Story of the Innocence of
the Queen and Priest, and of the guilt of these Barbarous Wretches.


Blest' Heaven! how are thy ways just like thy Orbs,
Involved within each other: yet still we find
Thy Judgements are like Comets that do blaze,
And fright, but die withal, whilst all thy Mercies
Are like the Stars which ofttimes are obscured,
But still remain the same behind the Clouds.

May all your Doubts and Fears thus terminate*

Thus are you shaken to be more confirmed.

Send for Vrania, Pyrrhus! she shall wear
This day the just rewards of Virtue; I
Will visit my brave Queen, who rather chose
To die unjustly as a Criminal
Then I should justly be so termed,
For which I will proclaim my Fault since she
Will have the Glory of concealing it.

The King seems pleased, as he has reason.

My Lord! let the Council remove
Into the Hall, where before all the Court
I'll bring my Queen in Triumph there to hear
Her base Accusers sentenced. --

I was told I should find Cleantha here --
Why did I beg to leave my Cell?
(Where I did never injure any one)
To see this place, and in so little time
To do more mischief than whole Generations
Can parallel? how much
Had it been better I had ever dwelt
In those Retirements, where small Sins seem great*
And great Devotions small, then to be here
Where the blood of Queens and Priests had like
To have been sacrificed to the Malice of
Wicked men? (had not the Gods taken the Cause

How's this?

What mean thou?

See Sir, see,
Those Cheeks that lately Beauty wore, now pale
With guilt.

Her Crime!

She is with Child.

It is impossible; she cannot dissem^e so much Virtue,
I'll engage my Life she's Innocent.

How know you this?

Sir, being sent in haste by my Lord Pyrrhus,
To bring her to your Majesty, by chance
I learned of one of the Servants of the Princess
Near to what place he thought she was:
I made Enquiry there, at a small house
I was acquainted at; The Woman told me,
She thought she I enquired for was in the house:
And asking of me many Circumstances,
She told me it was surely she: but told me too,
As a great Secret, That she was with Child,
But that she said she was Married;
As did her Mother who this morning left her,
At this I went to Vrania, who confes't it,
But would not tell me who her Husband was,
And was very loath to come with me, though
I told her, your Majesty had sent for her.

And is this truth Urania?

Speak to the King.

'Tis true.

And who's your Husband?

^e not: shamed to name your Husband, Madam,
'Twill be your shame if you name none.

I am not ^sham'd to name him, but afraid --

(...) ^s't, speak?

^ not disobey, and by my Lord
Am autho^ ^ him, when
^ qu^stion'd, who's more tender
^ his own.

Name him!

It is the Great Theander.

The Prince!

What are you married to the Prince!
Married to Theander? --

O pardon me, Great King,
That I refused not to be taken from
A Cottage, to the bosom of a Prince,
On such Conditions as we dared to call
The Gods to Witness.

Whether she be his Wife,
Or only dares affirm it, though she were
More to me then my Eyes, she should
Die e're I sleep.

Upon my Knees I beg,
Great Sir, you will recall this hasty Sentence;
It is the Princes fault, not hers.

I will hear
No Intercessions -- by the Honour of a King,
I swear it. -- The Prince in some few hours
Will be in Town; -- if what she says be false,
This news shall be his welcome: but if true,
'Tis fit his coming be too late to save her.

Ah, Great Prince, pity the distressed who has
No friend to plead her Cause; all I affirm
Is truth; Theander is my Witness, see
That Noble Name; this I received from him
Not three days since.

'Tis so; but know Vrania!
My Crown would prove too heavy for your off-spring,
Fit only for ^ottages; it will behove you to
Prepare ^or death this day within Two hours.

Sir hold!

I beseech your Majesty --

I charge you on your Loyalty to hold;
I swear again this day within ^wo hours
I'll see her head off* Marshall take her hence,

Peace, wicked Woman!


O vile Woman! 'tis you that have brought me to this! must I be cut in pieces?


Truly loving Husband you must, and be given to Dogs too, but they'll have but
ill Commons of you; you will be mighty tough; besides you have so many
diseases, that if you were divided into as many pieces as there are hairs in
your Beard, each Morsel would own a several Malady: for my part I would not
advise any Dog that I have a kindness for to taste of you, for fear of
endangering his health.


O thou abominable filthy Hag, if thou were to be served so first, it would not
trouble me.


O Sir, you would have drawn me in, but I shall live to tread upon your Grave!
you know it were ill manners for me to be hanged before my Husband! but how
does your Lordship? will you have some Greek-wine to comfort your cold stomach,
you'll die with the fear on it else before to morrow morning; but I beseech you,
my Lord, do not forget, if you do live till then, to have a Nose-gay, and a
pair of white Gloves, with clean Linen too, for the Execution! Men of quality
are always very cleanly when they go to be hanged.


O! what will become of me? I shall never be able to endure it. Oh! you old
cowardly Sot! this comes of your confessing; Rogue.


This may thank your villainous design, with a Curse to you, I was only drawn
in.


You deserve to be hanged Rascal, and will be so.


'Twill be some comfort to me to have a Lord suffer with me, but 'twould be
more honour to me, if that Lord were a wiser man.


O! you old Dog! that I could come at you.


That I could poison you with my breath, but that 'twould put you out of your
pain, which is your immoderate fear.


Peace be here!


You come as seasonably as can be, for the Traitors are at Civil War.


Away, woman, and interrupt 'em not.


I will not take my leave on you, for I intend to see my dear Husband again, at
least before you be cut into Messes, Farewell. --


I am now come to speak to you as dying men.


Ay, ay, you old Rascal Geron, whom may that thank?


A villainous Lord that corrupted a poor innocent man as I was: a Curse on him
for drawing me in.


A Curse upon an old Cowardly Rogue, to let his fear betray us.


Come, 'tis not now a season to quarrel with one another, but to make peace
with the Gods: I am come to prepare you for your deaths, and first Neander I
begin with you.


'Pray Sir begin with him, he needs it most! he has always been the most
perfidious, impious Wretch.


I need it most? I scorn to be prepared any more then your self, if you go to
that, with that ugly, pocky Who^e-masters face of your own.


Sir, it's no matter what he says; he has as much malice to good men, as
Whores have to honest Women


I must first begin with you my Lord.


Look there, he knows who has most need on it.


Peace Wisard, peace! do you say this to me?


Peace stupid Wretches, I command you: and confess, and repent of your most
horrid Crimes.


Well Sir, I have done; and I do confess from the bottom of my heart -- O you
old dry, raw-bon'd, wretched, decrepit-Cuckold you, to bring me to this.


Heaven! what impiety is this?


Ay Sir! you see his Devotion? O! Villainous wicked man.


Sir! hold your Tongue! my Lord, 'tis time now to be sensible of your sad
condition.


Ay Sir! so it is, if you knew as much as I do of his wickedness, you'd say so.


Well Sir! I do confess, I'll torment the Rogue


If pity poor Urania could do thee good,
Thou hast enough on it.

I do confess I'm married to the Prince;
But he will witness for me 'twas the effect
Of his own Choice: I never presumed
To think i^ till he told me it should be so;
Since when how faithful I have been to him
Witness! Oh! Heaven! and all those Powers that dare
Acquit whom Kings condemn; and though for this
I now must suffer death, I cannot wish
I had not don't, since 'twas the Prince's pleasure,
Whom to contradict, to me were worse then death.

Alas! I pity her, her Case is too severe.

And yet I feel
That death is bitter, 'tis an Enemy
Looks cruelly on those who have no friends:
'Tis hard to undergo the greatest Task alone;
But 'tis my Fate, and Heaven must be obeyed --
-- 'Tis a long hazard that we run in death,
And a short warn^ng rather does disturb
Then sit us for it; were it not for this,
I could be well content to close these Eyes
That have of late beheld so little pleasure.

She draws Tears from my Eyes; I was not wont
To be so soft.

But I too long
Detain you with Complaints, whose business is
To see me die: Live happy brave Theander,
May all thy Sorrows die with thy Vrania,
And all those Joys live with thee which she took
(...) thy ^ontents* -- May thou be happy in
A Princess, great as thy own Merits, bright
As thy own ^yes, and virtuous as
Are all thy Thoughts; and may she honour thee
As ^uly as thy poor Vrania did.

Are you ready, Madam?

Who is this?

Madam, 'tis your Destiny.

O, it is he
Sir, you can instruct me what I am to do;
I never yet saw any body die.

Madam, you must kneel.

How will he strike?

With all the mercy that he can.

When you have ended all you have to say,
Pray kneel with your Face that way, and give
Some sign when I shall strike.

I will.

I cannot stay to see it; Farewell, dear Vrania.

When I am dead, pray Sirs suffer none
But my Mother to fit me for my Grave;
She will be careful of me, she will pay
Holy devotions for me, and bedew
With pious Tears that face she still has loved:
And may the Gods give comforts in her sorrows,
And all those Stars which have been hard to me
Be merciful to her -- May my misfortune
Work in her only a more true content
In the low Sphere she so securely moves in*

I think she'll ne'er a done prating, they all keep such a coil when they come
to die: Would the King would please to forbid all Speeches upon Scaffolds.


Sirs! Farewell, pray present
My humble Service to my Noble Princess,
With thanks for all her Favours, in my life,
And Charity in death -- blessed Gods assist me. --
Pray expect the Sign.

I shall. --

Stay stay the fatal Blow.

What's this?

A miserable Mother come to save her only Child.

Executioner do your Office.
(...) To dawn upon me, and instruct me, those
Are nearer it, who kneel in humble Cells,
Then such as stand on Tiptoe on high Towers.
For now Theander makes Urania more
A Princess, then a Kingdom could, by courting
Her as a Shepherdess, and shows the World,
That more then Chance conduced to her Greatness.

Why did you not tell Theander the whole truth?

Sir, he married her at Court, and I knew not of it
Till he we was gone to the War in Thessaly:
For witness of all this, I do invoke
Those Powers, who never testify untruths;
And here produce those small Remains of Greatness
Misfortune yet hath left me; See, Sir, here
That so famed Jewel which so many Kings
Of Thrace have worn, and with such veneration
Have still preserved on an old Prophecy, that
This should preserve the Thracian Family.

Pyrrhus! 'tis all true! Go tell the Queen and Princess this:
I need no Testimony but those words,
All Queens might blush to hear from Cottagers,
But is it possible so mean a place
So long should hold great Cleopatra?

Know, great Prince (and know it too
From one who has experimented Greatness)
When I had satisfied my self in my
Endeavours of regaining my lost Rights,
And saw 'em all unprosperous, (as if
Heaven long enough had given one Family
The privilege to govern others)
I was as well content to be the first
Must learn to act with common people,
As he who first was called from them to rule.

Great Queen,
The Prophecy is now fulfilled, That Jewel
Will serve to satisfy the World as much
Of all you say, as your own Words have me:
And thus preserves the Thracian Family, --
Dear Daughter! still be happy and forgive
Our ignorance; I cannot love thee better
Then at that very time I did condemn thee,
I could as well have sentenced my two Eyes;
And pardon me, dear Sister, if I first --
Asked pardon where I most did need it.
Call the Queen, and tell Cleantha Vrania is alive.

Now, my dear Daughter thou art safe within my Arms.

Madam, it only did belong to you
Who gave me life, thus to preserve it too. --

What's this?

The Prince is come.

What will Theander say to see his dear Vrania
Thus attired at his return?

He'll say you're merciful.

Madam, see here great Cleopatra
And call her Sister; take Cleantha!
Her thou hast wept for: Pyrrhus has told you all.
My Son! never more welcome! never
Did more Joy spring from more Sorrow.

Bless me dread Sir!
What Scene does entertain me? Are your Joys
Expressed by Sacrifice?

Theander, take,
Take thy Vrania, and wonder not
At any thing but her.

My Triumphs are more dreadful than my Conquests.

My Son be happy
In thy best Choice; let not thy wonder make
(...) 'Twill be but gratitude in me to do
Some of their business for them, and reward
So brave a Virtue as Endymion owns,
And make him great for his Cleantha too.

Is Endymion returned? O happy hour!

The War in Thessaly has found an happy end,
And there I've left
Those hands that made that Sceptre stoop, who, now,
Want but a Scene to do new wonders in,
And this may prove rebellious Thrace, if you
Sir, think fit I wear that Crown Vrania gives me;
In this Conquest, the brave Endymion
Shall be my second; what shall I not expect from
Such virtue and such valour when they meet?

I have of late received such mercies, that
I cannot think of any thing which looks
Like Cruelty. Therefore wonder not
All that you ask so soon is granted you,
Cleantha; Take then your Endymion; be
More blessed in him than Greatness e're could make you.

And now you're doing works of mercy Sir,
I beg for the sake of this glorious day
Which is a day of mercy to us all,
That Geron and Neander may not die
But suffer Banishment for life.

What you propose has much of Piety;
I'll not deny it: and now I've one request
To you my honoured Priest, your leave
That Pyrrhus my best Confident may serve
The fair Evadne

You oblige me Sir to make me see
My poor Evadne is so much your care,
It shall ^e mine; she still shall think that best
Your Majesty is pleased to choose ^or her.

Endymion! why so slowly to thy Joys?
Re^p here the fruits of Gratitude and Mercy.

Welcome my Lord.

My Lord, you're welcome from your Banishment.

You've only now this Ladies leave to ask
For any thing you'd have.

I am happy in your Royal mercy Sir,
And hope in time to be so too in hers.
Madam, I hope your Highness has the Charity
To pardon your poor Servant, who was the
Unwilling occasion of so much injury
To so Noble a Princess.

You need not fear
Your Sentence when Cleantha is your Judge.

Let us all away, and satisfy our selves with what
We have so long travail'd with, and let the World
Learn from this story, Those that are virtuous
Cannot be long in Clouds; Innocence concealed is the
Stolen pleasure of the Gods, which never ends
In shame as that of Men does oft times, but
Like the Sun breaks forth, when he has
Gratified another World, and to our Eyes appears
More Glorious through his late obscurity.

The Impious here a while may find some Rest,
But in the End the good are only blessed.


