OUR Poet once resolved to quit the stage,
But seeing what slight Plays still please the Age
He is drawn in: And thinks to pass with ease,
He cannot write so ill ^s some that please.
Our Author says he has no need to fear,
^
The common Eyes all paintings please ^like,
^
Instruction is an honest Poets aim,
And not a large or wide, but a goo^ (...)*
But he has found long since this would not do,
And therefore thought to have deserted you:
But Poets and Young Girls by no mishaps
Are warned, those damming fright not, nor these (...)*
Their former I^tch will spite of all persuade,
And both will fall again to their old trade:
Our Poet says that some resolve in spite
To damn, th^' good, what ever he shall write.
He fears not such as right or wrong oppose,
He swears, in sense, his friends out weigh such fo^s.
He cares not much whether he sink or (...),
He will not suffer, but we shall for him.
We then ^
Your charity for this Crippled peace we pray
We are only losers if you damn the play

SIR, give me leave, as by my duty bound,
To let you know (though I am lately come
Into your Family) I have observed
(For all your real courtesy, and seeming mirth
Among your Friends that visit you) a fixed
And constant melancholy does possess you, Sir,
When you're alone, and you seem not to relish
The happiness your ample fortune, and
The great esteem your worth has ever gained
From all good men might give you, I am bound
To inquire the Cause, and offer my Advice.

Pray search no further, I, for once, can pardon
The rashness of your curiosity.
I did not take you for my Councellor.

You now, Sir, are become one of my Flock:
And I am bound in Conscience to Advise,
And search into the troubles of your spirit,
To find the secrets that disturb your mind.

I do not wonder that a Parson should
Be foolish and pragmatical; but know,
I will advise and teach your Master of Artship
(That made you lord it over Boys and Fr^shmen)
To add to y^ur small Logic and Divinity
Two main Ingredi^nts, Sir, Sense and Good-manners,

Consider, Sir, the Dignity of my Func^ion.

Your Father is my Taylor, you are my Servant.
And d^ you think a Cassock and a Girdle
Can (...) you so much, as to enable
You (who before were but a Coxcomb, Sir,)
To t^ach me? Know, I only took you for
A me^hanick ^vine, to read Church Prayers
Twice every day, and once a week to Teach
My Servants Honesty and Obedience.
You may (...) to a silly Flock,
And leadem where you please, but ne^re must hope
To govern men of sense and knowledge.

My Office bids me say this is profane,
And little less than Athiestical.

You're insolent, you're one of the senseless,
H^theaded Fools, that injure all your Tribe;
Learn of the wise, the moderate and good,
Our Church abounds with such examples for you.
I (...) the name of Atheist, you^re ill-manner^d.
But who ere touches one of you hot-spur Parsons,
You brand him home, and right, or wrong, no matter.

My Orders give me Authority to speak.

Your Orders separate, and set you apart
To Minister, That is to serve in Churches,
And not to domine^r in Families.

A p^wer Legantine I have from Heaven.

Show your Credentials. Come good petulant
Mr. (...)-L^gick, pack up your for Books
And ^ld Black thred-bare Clothes to morrow-morning,
And have my House; get you a Wall-ey^d Mare,
Will carry double, for your Spouse and you;
When some ^ast Chamber-Maid shall smile upon you,
Charmed with a Vic^aridge of forty pound
A year, the greatest you can ^.

Good Sir! I have offended, and am sorry.
I (...) will once c^mmit this fault again,
Now I am acquainted with your Worships mind*

So, now you are not bound in Conscience then.
The indiscretion of such paltry fellows
Are scandals to the Church and Cause they Preach for.
What fatal mi^chiefs have domestic Priests
Brought on the best of Families in England!
Where their dull Patrons give them line enough,
First with the Women they insinuate,
(Whose fear and folly makes them slaves t'you,)
And give them ill opinions of their Husbands.
Oft ye divide them if the women rule not.
But, if they govern, then your reign is sure.
Then y' have the secrets of the Family,
Dispose of the Children, place and then displace,
Whom, and when you think fit.

Good, Noble Sir! I humbly shall desist.

The Husband must not drink a Glass, but when
You shall, of your good grace, think fit for him.
None shall be welcome but whom you approve:
And all this favour is, perhaps, requited
With the infusing of ill principles into the Sons,
And stealing, or corrupting of the Daughters.
Sometimes upon a weak and bigot Patron you
Obtain so much to be Executor:
And, if he dies, marry his Widow, and
Claim then the cheating of his Orphans too.

Sweet Sir forbear, I am fully sensible.

With furious zeal you press for Discipline,
With fire and blood maintain your great Diana.
Foam at the mouth when a Dissenter's named,
(With fiery eyes, wherein we flaming see
A persecuting spirit) you roar at
Those whom the wisest of your function strive
To win by gentleness and easy ways.
You dam em if they do not love a Surplice.

Had I the power, I'd make them wear pitched Surplices,
And light them till they flamed about their Ears
I would --

Such Firebrands as you but hurt the Cause.
The learned and the wisest of your Tribe
Strive by good life and meekness to overcome them.
We serve a Prince renowned for Grace and Mercy,
Abhorring ways of Blood and Cruelty;
Whose Glory will, for this, last to all Ages.
Him Heaven preserve long quiet in his Throne.
I will have no such violent Sons of Thunder,
I will have moderation in my House.

Forgive my zeal, and, if your Worship please,
I will submit to all your wise Instructions.

Then (on your good behaviour) I receive you,
Search not the secrets of my House or me.
Vain was our Reformation, if we still
Suffer auricular Confession here,
By which the Popish Clergy rule the world.
No business in my Family shall concern you;
Preach nothing but good life and honesty.

I will not.

No controversial Sermons will I hear:
No meddling with Government; you're ignorant
(...) Laws and Customs of cur Realm, and should be so.
The other world should be your care, not this.
A Plow-man is as fit to be a Pilot,
As a good Clergy-man to be a States-man, Sir,
Besides, the People are not apt to love you,
Because your sloth is supported by their labours.
And you do hurt to any Cause you would
Advance.

I humbly bow, Sir, to your Wisdom.

A meek and humble modest Teacher be;
For piteous tri^les you Divines fall out.
If you must Quarrel, Quarrel who shall be
Most honest men; leave me, and then consider
Of what I have said.

I will do any thing,
Rather than lose your Worships grace and favour.

Begone.

Sir, why do you walk alone, and Melancholy?
I have observed you droop much on the sudden.

Dear Isabella, the most solid joy
And comfort of my fading life! thou truest Image
Of thy dead Mother! who excell^d her Sex:
Fair, and not proud on it; witty, and not vain;
Not grave, but Wise; Chaste, and yet kind and free;
Devout, not sower; Religious, not precise:
In her no foolish affectation was
Which makes us na^seate all good qualities.
She was all meekness and humility;
The tenderest Mother, and the softest Wife.

My Dearest and most Honoured Father,
(Had you not been the best of Parents living)
I could not have outlived that Mothers loss:
Loss of her tender care, and great example.

Yet learn, my Child, never to grieve for that
Which cannot be recalled; those whom I love
With tenderness I will embrace, when living,
And when they're dead strive to forget 'em soon.

What is it can afflict you now, dear Father?

You're wise, to thee I can declare my grief;
Thy Brother has been still my tender care,
Out of my duty, rather than affection,
Whom I could never bend by education
To any generous purpose, who delights
In Dogs and Horses, Peasants, Ale and Sloth.

He may have Children will be wiser, Sir.
And you are young enough yet to expect
Many years comfort in your Grandchildren.

To that end, I would match the unhewn Clown
To the fair Daughter of Sir Ieffery Shaklehead,
Who has all the perfections can be wished
In wom^n-kind, and might restore the breed:
But he neglects her to enjoy his Clowns,
His foolish sports, and is averse to Marriage.
I would not have my name perish in him.



But thou art good, my Child, obedient,
And though Sir Timothy, Sir Ieffery's Son,
Has not the great accomplishments I wish him,
His temper yet is flexible and kind,
And will be apt to yield to thy discretion.
His person not ungratious, his Estate
Large, and lies altogether about his House,
Which (for its situation and its building)
With noble Gardens, Fountains, and a River
Running quite through his Park and Garden,
Exceeds most in the North: Thou know my Child
How this cross match will strengthen and advance
My Family -- He is coming hither from
His sport, He has given his Horse to his man, and now*
Is walking towards us; I'll go and find
My Lady and her Daughter.

Oh hard fate!
That I must disobey so good a Father:
I to no punishment can be condemned
Like to the Marriage with this foolish Knight.
But by ill usage of him, I will make him,
I^ possible, hate me as I hate him.

Oh my Fair Cousin, I spi^d ye, and that made me give my man my Horse to come
to you.


Me? have you any business with me?


Business! yes Faith, I think I have, you know it well enough, but we have had
no sport this afternoon, and therefore I made hast to come to you.


Such as you should have no sport made to you, you should make it for others.


Ay, its no matter for that; but Cousin, would you believe it, we were all
(...), Mother Demdike and all her Imps were abroad, I think, but you are the
pr^tty (...) that enchants my heart. This must n^ds please her.


Well said, Academy of Compliments, you are well read I see.


Ods Bud, who would have thought she had read that!


Nay, for Learning and good breeding let Tim alone.


Tim! I might be Sir Timothy in your mouth though one would think.


I am sorry the King bestowed Honour so cheaply.


Nay, not so cheap neither; for though my Lady Mother had a dear Friend at
Court, yet I was fain to give one a Hundred pounds, besides my Fees, I am sure
of that: Tim, hum go too --


Was there ever so fulsome a Fool*


Besides, I gave Thirty Guinnies for the Sword I was Knighted with to one of
his Nobles, for the King di^ not draw his own Sword upon me.


Do you abuse the Nobility? would a Nobleman sell you a Sword?


Yes that they will, s^ll that or any thing else at Court. I am sure he was a
great Courtier he talked so prettily to the Kings Dogs, and was so familiar
with them, and they were very kind to (...), and he had great interest in them:
He had all their names as quick, and ^ know who, and discours^d with them, I
protest and vow, as if they had (...) Christians.


Oh thou art a pretty F^llow; hey for little Tim of Lancashire.


You might give one on^s title one would think, I say again, especially one
that loves you too.


Yes, I will give you your Title.


Thank you dear Co^z^n.


Take that, and your proper Title, Fool.


Fool! I (...) you, I s^orn your words, 'tis a burning shame you should be
(...), th^t it is: Little think my ^ady Mother how I am used.


Once for all, as a Kinsman I w^ll b^ civil to you; but if you dare make love
(...), I'll make thee such an example, thou shalt be a terror to all foolish
Knights.


^oolish! ha, ha, ha, that's a pretty jest; why have not I been at Oxford and the
(...) of Court? I have spent my time well indeed if I be a Fool still: But I am
not such a Fool to give you over for all this.


Dost thou hear? thou most incorrigible lump, never to be licked into form; thou
Coxcomb incarnate; thou fresh, insipid, witless, mannerless Knight, who wear
a Knighthood worse than a Haberdasher of Small wares would; It serves but to
make thy folly more eminent.


Well, well, forsooth, somebody shall know this.


Every one that knows thee knows it. Dost thou think, because thy foolish
Mother has Cocker^d thee with morning Cawdles and afternoons Luncheons, thou
art fit to make Love? I'll use thee like a Dog if thou dare but speak once
more of Love, or name the world before me.


Mum, mum, no more to be said, I shall be heard some-where. Will your Father
maintain you in these things, ha Gentlewoman?


Tell if thou durst, I'll make thee tremble. Heart, if you bent gone now
presently, I'll beat you.


My Dear, art thou come! I have been just now tormented by thy foolish Brothers
awkward Courtship, forgive me that I make so bold with him.


Prithee do, my Dear, I shall be as free with thine, though he is not so great
a Plague, for he is bashful, very indifferent, and for ought I perceive, to my
great comfort, no Lover at all: But mine is pert, foolish, confident, and on my
Conscience in love to boot.


Well, we are resolved never to Marry where we are designed, that^s certain.
For my part I am a free English woman, and will stand up for* my Liberty, and
Property of Choice.


And Faith, Girl, I'll be a mutineer on thy side; I hate the imposition of a
Husband, 'tis as bad as Pop^ry.


We will be Husband and Wife to one another, dear Theodosia.


But there are a brace of Sparks we saw at the Spaw, I am apt to believe would
forbid the Banes if they were here.


Bellfort and D^ubt^ they write us word they will be here suddenly, but I have
little hopes; for my Father is so resolved in whatever he proposes, I must
despair of his consent for Bellfort, though he is too reasonable to force me to
Marry any one* besides he is engaged, in honour, to your Father.


Nay, if thou think of subjection still, or I either, we are in a desperate
case: No, mutiny, mutiny, I say.


And no money, no money will our Fathers say.


If our Lovers will not take us upon those Terms they are not worthy of us. If
they will, farewell Daddy, say I.


If so, I will be as hearty a Rebel, and as brisk as thou art for thy life; But
can thou think they are such Romance Knights to take Ladies with nothing? I
am scarce so vain though I am a woman.


I would not live without vanity for the Earth; if every one could see their
own faults 'twould be a sad World.


Thou say right, sure the world would be almost depopulated, most men ^ould
hang themselves.


Ay, and women too: Is there any creature so happy as your affected Lady? or
(...) Coxcomb?


I must confess they have a happy error, that serves their turn better than
truth; but away with Philosophy, and let's walk on and consider of the more
weighty matters of our Love.


Come along my Dear.


What a pox is the matter? She has pissed upon a Nettle to day, or else the
Witch^s have b^witched h^r. Hah, now I talk of Witches, I am plag^eily afraid,
and all alone: No here's Nun^e Tomas.


How now Cousin?


Cousin? plain Cousin? You might have more manners Uncle, S flesh, and one
gives you an Inch, you'll take an Ell. I see Familiarity breeds Contempt.


Well, Sir Timothy, then, Byr Lady I thought no harm; But I am your ^ that.


Yes, my Father's younger Brother. What a Murrain do we keep you for, but to
have an eye over our Dogs and Hawks, to drink Ale with the Tennants (when they
come with R^nt or ^resents) in Black Jacks, at the upper end of a Brown
Sho^-board ^able in the Hal^? to sit at lower end of the board at meals, rise
make ^our (...), and take away your Plate at second Course? And you to be thus
familiar!


Pray forgive me good Cousin: Sir Timothy, I mean.


V^ry well, you will be fa^cy again Uncle. Uds lord, Why was I Knighted but to
have my Title given me? My Father, and Lady Mother can give it me, and s^h a
Fellow as you, a mere younger Brother to forget it.


Nay, nay, ha^d ye yeou mun tat in good part, I did but forget a bit, good Sir
Timo^hy.


My Mother would (...) a fine taking about it, and she knew it.


Nay, pray now do not ^ my ^ady, by the Mass who'l be even (...) wood an who
hears o^t. But look a, look a, here come the Caursers, the Har^ (...) played the
D^l with us to (...), we ^ bewitched.


Ay, so we have, to have the Hare vanish in open Field before all our fa^, and
our eyes never (...) from her.


Ay, and then an old wife (they caw'n her Mother Demdike) to start ^ very spot
o grawnt where we losten puss!


These are Prodigies you tell, they cannot be; your senses are deceived.


My senses deceived! that's well, Is there a Justice in Lancashire has so much
skill in Witches as I have? Nay, I'll speak a proud word, you shall turn me
loose against any Witch-finder in Europe; I'd make an Ass of Hopkins if he were
alive.


Nay, I'll swear 'tis true, a Pox on that old Carrion Mother Demdike, she ha's
marr^d all our sports, and almost killed Two Brace of Greyhounds worth a
Thousand pound.


Dreams, mere Dreams of Witches, old women's fables, the Devil's not such a Fool
as you would make him.


Dreams! mercy upon me! are you so profane to deny Witches?


Heaven defend! will you deny the existence of Witches? 'Tis very Atheistical.


Incorrigible ignorance! 'tis such as you are Atheistical, that would equal the
Devils power with that of Heaven its self. I see such simple Parsons cannot
endure to hear the Devil dishonoured.


No Witches? why I have hanged above Fourscore. Read Bodin, Remigius, Delrio,
Nider, Instit^r, Sprenger, Godelman, and More, and Malleus Maleficarum, a great
Author, that Writes sweetly about Witches, very sweetly.


Malleus Maleficarum a Writer, he has read nothing but the titles I see.


Oh I a great man, Malleus was a great man; Read Cousin, read the Antidote
against Atheism: Well, I'll make work among your Witches.


Ay good Sir Ieffery do, Uds Lord they'll grow so bold one shan^ go a Caursing,
Hunting or Hawking for 'em one of these days; and then all the joy of ones
life's gone.


Why are those all the joys of Life?


Ay Godsflesh are they, I'd not give a Farthing to live with out 'em, what's a
Gentleman but his Sports.


Nay, byr Lady, I mun have a saup of Ale now and then, besides sports.


Why here's my Son, Sir Timothy, saw the Hare vanish, and the Witch appear.


That I did upon my Honour Sir Ieffery.


So ho, here's the Hare again.


He Boys, loo on the Dogs, more sport, more sport.


'Tis almost dark, let's home: go to your Mistress, Fool.


Time enough for that, Sir, I must have this Course first, halloo.


Now, Sir Edward, do you see, the Hare is vanished, and here is the Hag.


Yes, I see 'tis almost dark, the Hare is run from your tired Dogs, and here is
a poor old Woman gathering of sticks.


Avaunt thou filthy Hag, I defy thee and all thy works.


This is wheint indeed Sir, you are a Scholar, pray defend me.


Now you shall see how the Witches fear me.


The old women ha^ reason to fear you, you have hanged so many of 'em.


Now Tom Shaklehead, and you Clod, lay hold of the Witch quickly; now you shall
see my skill, we'll search her, I warrant she has biggs or ^eats a handful long
about her parts that shall be nam^less; then we^l have her wa^c^ed e^ght and
forty hours, and pricked with Needles, to keep her from sleeping, and make her
(...), Gad ^hee'l confess any thing in the world then; and if nor, after all,
wee^l tie her Thumbs and great Toes together and (...) her into your great
Pond. Let me alone with her, I warrant ye, come, come, come, where are you?


So I must have a poor old woman murdered in my House.


Oh the Witch, the Devil.


How now, whats the matter?


Why by'r Lady, the De^ls in the matter, the old Hag has knocked us both dawn, and
is vanished under grawnt I think.


Your fear has knocked you down, and the old woman has escaped.


No, no, she has done it; a Witch has a mighty strength: Six men are not strong
enough for a Witch of Fourscore.


Come prethy, Sir Ieffery, let's home and drive these fables out of her heads,
its dark.


Nay, I know how to deal with her, I^le send my Warrant, and a Constable with
that is strong enough to beat six Witches, ay, six the ablest Witches on 'em
all^you'd wonder at it, but faith 'tis true.


Ha, ha, ha, how I have fooled these fellows, let 'em go home and prate about
it, this night we'll revel in Sir Edward's Cellar, and laugh at the Justice.
But to the business of the Night.

Come, Sisters, come, why do you stay?
Our business will not brook delay,

From Lakes and Bogs the Toads do croak.
The Foxes bark, the Screetch-Owl screams:
Wolves howl, Bats fly, and the faint beams
O^ Glow-worms light grows bright a-pace;
The Stars are fled, the Moon hides her face.




Of Wax and Wool, which we must
With Needles urging to the quick*

Of Black Lambs blood, to make all good.
The Lamb with Nails and Teeth wee^l tear.
Come wheres the Sacrifice? appear.

^Tis here.

Why are you all so tardy grown?
Must I the work perform alone?



Come then to work, anon we'll play.
To yonder Hall
Our Lord Weel call,
Sing, dance and eat,
Play many a feat,
And fright the Justice and the Squire,
And plunge the Cattle into the Mire.
But now to work

Upon the Waves go sport and play*
And see the ship be Cast away.
Come let us now our parts perform,
And Scrape a hole, and raise a Storm.


Which thus into the Air I Throw.

Here's sage, that under ground was rotten,
Which thus a-round me I bestow.

Sticks on the Bank a-cross are laid.

The hole by our nails is almost made.
Hogs Bristles boil within the Pot.

The Hollow flint Stone I have Got,
Which I over my Shoulder throw,
Into the west, to make winds blow.
Now water here, and urine put,
And with your Sti^ks stir it about.
Now dip your brooms, and toss them high,
To bring the Rain down from the Sky.
Not yet a Storm?
The Air with every dreadful sound,
And with live vipers beat the ground.

NOw the winds roar*
And the Skies Pour
Down all their Store.
And now the Nights black,
Hark how the Clouds crack.
Hark how the Clouds crack.
A hollow din the Woods now make,
The Valleys tremble, Mountains Shake,
And all the living Creatures quake.
It keeps awake the Sleepy fowl,
The Sailors Swear, the high Seas roll,
And all the frighted Dogs do howl.
Now to our tasks let's all be gone,
Our Master we shall meet anon,
Between the hours of twelve and one.

Whaw, what a Storm is this! I think Mother Demdike and all her Dee'ls are
abroad to neeght, 'tis so dark too

I canno see my hont.

help! help! this is Mother
Demdike, help, S-lesh,
what m^n I do? I canno
get dawn, 'swawnds Ayst
be clemd an I stay here awe neeght.

Was there ever such a Storm raised on a sudden, the Sky being clear, and no
appearance on it before?


But the worst part of our misfortune is to be out of our way in a strange
Country, the night so dark that Owls and Bats are wildred.


There is is no help, Cover the Saddles, and stand with the Horses under that
Tree, while we stand close and shelter our selves here; the Tempest is so
violent it cannot last.


Now Philosophy help us to a little patience, Heaven be praised we are not at
Sea yet.


These troubles we Knight Errants must endure when we march in search of
Ladies.


Would we were in as good Lodging as our Dogs have which we sent before to
Whalley. I fear too (after all this device of yours) our pretending to hunt
here will never take.


Why So?


Will any body think that a man in his right wits should choose this Hilly
Country to hunt in?


O* yes, there are Huntsmen that think there's no sport without venturing Necks
or Collet-bones; besides, there is no other way to hope to see our Mistresses:
by this means we shall troll out my Mistresses Brother, who loves, and
understands nothing but Country sports. By that we may get acquaintance with
Sir Edward Harfourt, who is reported to be a wise, honest, hospitable, true
English man. And that will bring us into Sir Ieffery Shaklehead's family,
Whally being in the mid-way betwixt them.


I am resolved to see my Mistress, what ere comes on^t, and know my doom. Your
Yorkshire Spaw was a fatal place to me, I lost a heart there, Heaven knows when
I shall find it again.


Those interviews have spoiled me for a man of this World, I can no more throw
of my loose corns of Love upon a Tennants Daughter in the Country, or think of
Cuckolding a Keeping Fool in the City; I am grown as pitiful a (...) Loving
animal as any Romance can furnish us with.


That we should escape in all the Tour of France and Italy, where the (...) has
power to ripen Love, and catch this distemper in the North! but my Theodosia in
humour, wit and beauty has no equal.


Besides, my Isabella!


To you your Isabella's equal.


We are pretty fellows to talk of Love, we shall be wet to the Skin; yond^r are
lights in many Rooms, it must be a great House, let's make towards it.


It is so dark, and among these Hills and Enclosures 'tis impossible. Will no
lucky fellow, of this place, come by and guide us? We are out of all Roads.


Oh! Oh! what mun Ay do? Ay am well neegh parisht: I mun try to get dawn. Help,
help, Murder, Murder.


What a Devil ^s here a fellow fallen from the top of a Tree?


Sdeath ^s tais a night to climb in? what does this mean?


Oh! Oh!


Here, who art thou? Whats the matter?


Oh the Dee^l; avaunt, I defy thee and all thy warks.


Is he drunk or mad? give me thy hand, I'll help thee.


Begone, Witches I defy ye, help! help.


What dost thou talk of? we are no Witches nor Devils, but travellers that have
lost our way, and will reward thee well if thou wilt guide us into it.


An yeow been a mon Ay'st talk wy ye a bir, yeow mun tack a care o your ^lls,
the (...) haunted with Buggarts, and Witches, one of 'em took my Condle and I
a^thorn out of my hont, and ^ew along wy it; and an other Set me o top o the
tree, where I feel dawn naw, Av ha well neegh brocken my theegh.


The fellows mad, I neither understand his words, nor his Sense, prithee ^ow
far is it to Whalley?


Why yeow are quite b^said the road mon, yeow Shoulden a gone dawn (...) ^onk
by Thomas o Georges, and then ee'n at yate, and turned dawn the Lone, and (...)
the Steepo of the reeght ^ont.


Prithee don't tell us what we should have done, but how far it is to Whalisl^y.


Why marry four mail and a bit.


We'll give thee an Angel and show us the way thither.


Marry that's Whaint I conno see my hont, haw con Ay show yeou to Whalley to
neeght.


Can thou show us to any house where we may have Shelter and Lodging to
night? we are Gentlemen and strangers, and will pay you well for it.


Ay byr Lady con I, the best ludging and d^t too in awe Loncashire, Yonder at
the ^ough where yeow seen the leeghts there.


Whose house is that?


Why what a pox, w^ere ^an yeow lived? why yeow are Strongers indeed! why, 'tis
Sir Yedard Harfourts, he ^ to all Gentry, yeou^ st be welcome to him by day and
by neeg^t (...) Lord of awe here abauts.


My Mistresses Father, Lu^k if it be thy will, have at my Isabella, Can thou
guide us thither?


Ay, Ay, there's a pawer of Company there naw, S^ Ieffery Shaklehead, and the
Knight his Son, and Daughter.


Lucky above my wishes, o my Dear Theodosia, how my heart leaps at her! ^ guide
us thither, we'll pay thee well.


Come on, I am e^n breed aut o my senses, I was never so freeghtend sin I was
born, give me your hont.


No here are our men and Horses, we'll get up, and you shall lead the foremost:
Now Stars be kind.


HOW this insolence provokes me!
You are not sure in earnest!

Can any one behold those radiant eyes
And not have sentiments of Love like mine?

This fellow has read Romances as well as Scholmen*

Those eyes to which mine are the Burning-glasses
That to my heart convey the fire of Love.

What a ^ustian Fool's this! Is this language
For a Divine?

Are not Divines made of those Elements
Which make up other men: Divines may be
In love I hope.

And may they make love to the Daughter withou^
The consent of the Father?

Undoubtedly, as Casuists must determine.

Will not common sense, without a Casuist, tell
Us when we do wrong, if so, the Law we are
Bound to is not plan enough.

Submit to the judgment of Divines (sweet Lady)
Marriage is not an Ordinance made by Parents,
B^t from above derived* and 'tis for that I sue.

Is it not fit I should obey my Father?

O no, sweet Lady, ^ve it not to him,
Your Father has not reverence enough
For the Church and Churchmen,
Besides, I'll tell you,
He is Atheistically inclined: pardon my boldness*
For he believes no Witches: But, Madam, if my
Poor person and my parts may seem gracious to you,
You lawfully may choose me to make happy.

Your person needs must please; ^Tis amiable.

Ah sweet Madam!

Your parts beyond exception, ^eat, spruce, florid,
And very ^verting.

No, no, dear Madam.

Who can behold your face without pleasure? or
Consider your parts without Reverence?

O Lord, I swear you pose me with your great civilities: I profess you do.


'Tis impossible you should keep long from being Dignified.


'Tis that I m^inly aim at next the enjoyment
Of so fine a Lady.

May I ^latter my self to think you are in earnest?

You may most excellent Lady.

And so am I.

Sweet Madam, I receive you as a blessing on my knees.

Thou most insolent of Pedants, thou silly formal Thing with a stiff plain
band, a little parsonical Grogram and a Girdle thou art so proud of, in which
thou would do well to hang thy self; some have vouchsafed to use it to that
purpose: Thou that never were but a Curate, -- a Iourney-man Divine, as thy
Father was a Iourney-man Taylor, before he could set up for himself, to have
the impudence to pretend love to me!


My function yet, I say, deserves more reverence.


Does it make you not an Ass, or not a Taylors Son?


It equals me with the best of Gentry.


How Arrogance! Can any power give honour but the Kings? This is Popery, I^e
have you trounc'd. Could it once enter into thy vain pate, that I could be
contented with the pitiful equipage of a Parsons Wife? Bless me^ to be carried
home to an antique building, with narrow windows, and huge Iron-bars, like an
old Iail in some Country Borough, wickedly abused too with delapidations. To
lye in Darneux Curtains, and a Beds-Tester, carved with Idolatrous Images, out
of two load of old Timber: or to have for a Friend or a Lying in, one better,
one of worsted Chamblet, and to be dressed and undressed by my Cookmaid, who is my
Woman and my Chambermaid, and serves me and the Hogs.


I intend none of these. I assure you my House shall be --


I know what it will be: your Parlour hung with Green printed stuff, of the new
fashion, with guilt Leather in panes, a fingers breadth at least, sruft up with
a great many stinking Russia Leather Chairs, and an odious Carpet of the same:
Then Shelves on one side of your Chimney for a pair of Tables, A Chess-board,
your frame of Wax Candle and Tobacco-pipes.


No, no, no, Madam.


On the other side, Shelves for huge Folices, by which you would be counted a
great read man; vast large volumes of expositions upon a short Creed; some
Twenty folio's upon the Ten Commandments; Lauds, Heylins, Andrews, and Tom
Fullers works, with perhaps a piece of Austin, to show you understand a little
Latin; and this is your Ecclesiastical furniture, very fit for a Gentlewoman's
eating room is it not?


I understand the mode, Madam, and contemn such vulgar Ornaments.


And in this Parlour to eat Five Tithe-Piggs in a week, brought in by my
Woman-Chambermaid, Wash-maid, Cook-maid, c. And if it be not a working day,
waited on by your Groom, Ploughman, Carter, Butler, Tithe-gatherer all in one,
with Horse-naild Shoes; his head new kemb^d and slick'd, with a starc'd-Band
and no Cuffs.


My merits will provide you better, please to bear me.


Yes, I know your merits. Then to quible with you, for my desert, your
Back-side of half an Acre, with some Sixteen Trees of Marigold and
Sweeting-Apples, Horse-Plums, and Warden-pares, hem^d in with panes of antique
crumbling Clay; where I should have six Hives of Bees, and you a Mare and Feal,
going with a Peacock and Hen.


All these I much despise would you hea^.


Hear, yes, how I should have nothing to entertain my Visitors with, but stewed
Prunes and H^nycombs, and flying Ale bottled with Lymen-pill, without all sight
of Wine. And should I march abroad to visit, ^would be behind my Can^nical
Husband, perhaps upon a pied ^ld Mare big with Foal, holding both hands upon
his Girdle, and when at place appointed I arrive, for want of Groom, off slips
my nimble Husband first, then helps me down. And now, Fo^l, I have painted
thee, and what thou art to trust to, in thy colours.


I beseech you, Madam, moderate your passions: Hear my propositions.


No, Impudence, my Father shall hear 'em.


I beseech you, Madam, for Heavens sake, that will undo me. I shall desist, I
shall desist.

Good lack how a man may be mistaken!
I durst ha sworn, by her courtesy and frequent smiles, she had been in love
with me.

Sweet Sir, what is befallen you? has my Lady angered you? If she can, her
heart is not like mine.


Nothing, Mrs. Susan, nothing, but to be thus despised.


Dear Sir, can I serve you in any thing? I am bound. I ne'er have been so
elevated by any man; methinks I never should have enough of your powerful
Mi^istry sweet Sir.


Pish: If she tells her Father I am ruined.


Dear man, now, come drive away this sadness.
Come, give me thy hand; let's sit down and be merry.

How! my hand! go too.
This creature is in Love with me: But shall my prodigious natural parts, and
no less amazing acquisitions in Metaphysics and Schooled Divinity be cast upon
a Chambermaid? Farewell, I must not be too familiar.


So scornful! Cruel creature, I will soften thee yet. Have I for thee set days
and nights cross-legged and sighed before thou came hither? And fasted on St.
Agnes night for thee? And since thy coming have tied three coulour'd True Loves
Knots, quill'd thy Cuffs and startch^d thy Band my self, and never failed thee
of thy morning Ca^dle or Jelly Broth? have I already put my Hair and Nails in
Powder in thy Drink, and put a live Fish in a part about me till it died, and
then gave it thee to eat in thy Drink, and all for this? Well, I will mollify
thee. And Mother Demdike shall help me to morrow: I^le to her, and discourse
her about it. If I have breath, I cannot live without him.


Susan, Go tell my Cousin Theodosia, I would speak with her.


I will Sir.


Pshaw, now must I be troubled with making Love; a deuce take it for me: I had
rather be a Coursing an twere time o^th day.


Now Son, for your own good and my satisfaction, I would have you (since her
Father and I am agreed) to settle this business, and marry with Theodosia with
all the speed that can be.


What haste Sir? For my part I care not for Marriage, not I. I love my
Neighbours, a Cup of Ale, and my sports, I care for nought else.


(But that thy Mother was too virtuous for my suspicion) I should think that by
thy ^ordid mind thou were a Stranger to my Blood; and, if you be not ruled by
me, assure your self I'll make you a stranger to my Estate.


What does he mean now? hah, to disinherit me?


No, part of its entail^d; and if you will not marry where I direct you, your
Sister will obey me, and may bring me one to inherit it. Consider that.

Here comes your Mistress, beautiful and good as any of her Sex. Sweet Cousin
be pleased to stay one moment with my Son: I^le wait on you again.


Your Servant Sir. How shall I be entertained by this Dolt! How much rather had
he be with Country Justices and Farmers, in a low Thatched House, with a smooth
Black Pot of Ale in his hand, or with his Kites, Dogs and Cattle?


What a Devil shall I say to her now? I had as leive knock my head against the
wall as make Love. Will you please to sit down Cousin?


Ay Cousin. And fall fast a-sleep if I can.


'Twas a great Storm, and rose very suddenly to night Cousin.


Very true.


Pox, I don't know what to say to her.
'Tis almost over though now.

'^is so.


'Tis so, What a Devil shall I say more? Would I were at six go downs ^pon
reputation, in Ale, with honest Tom Shaklehead.

What do you think tis a Clock Madam?

Six minutes past eight by mine.


Mine goes faster, Is yours Aspenwolds?


No Tompions.


'Tis a very pretty one! Pish, I can go no farther, not I.


'Tis Bed-time.


Ay so it is, and I am main sleepy byr Lady,
Coursing had gotten me a woundy Stomach,
And I eat like a Swine Faith and Troth.

But it got you nothing to your Stomach.


You have heard the story, we cours'd a Witch all day instead of a Hair; Mother
Demdike.


Tis well you did not catch her, she would have been very tough meat.


Ha, ha, ha, well I ^ow that^s very well. I hope Sir Ieffery will hang the
Wit^h; I am sure she has tired my Dogs and me so, that I am so sleepy I can
scarce hold up my head by^r Lady.


I am tired too: This dullness is almost as tedious as his making of Love would
be.


If 'twould hold up now, we should have fine weather for Hawking to morrow, and
then have at the Powts.


Your Hawks would not fly at Mother Demdike too.


Nay, marry I cannot tell: But would you would go a Hawking, you should ride
upon a Pad of mine, should carry you with a Bumper in your hand, and not spill
a drop.


I am for no Field sports I thank you Sir.


Now can't I speak a word more.


Now methinks we are mere man and Wife already, without marrying for the
matter. Hah, he's a-sleep, and snores like the Base-pipe of an Organ: Though I
like his indifference better than I should his Love; yet I have no patience to
bear sleeping in my face; that's a little too much.


Oh Lord, what's that! Oh Mother Demdike! Oh, oh, the Witch, the Witch!


He talks in his sleep, I believe, even as well, as when he's awake.


Murder, murder, oh help, the Witch; oh the Witch, oh, oh, Mother Demdike!


He talks and dreams of the Witch: I'll try a trick with him.


Oh help, help, the Witch, the Witch, ay there she vanished: I saw her, oh she
flew up the Chimney. I'll go to Sir Ieffery, and take my Oath presently. Oh I
am fore frightened.

Oh the Witch, the Witch, Mother Demdike.

What ails the Fool, is he mad?
Here's a Coil with Witches.

Oh Madam, are you there? I have done your errant.


Your Servant Cousin.


Your Ladyships humble Servant.


Look you Cousin, Lady me no Ladies, unless you be civiller to Sir Timothy.


Look you there.


I suppose you are not ignorant who we are.


Nay, prithee, Sir Ieffery, hold; Let me alone.


Nay, go on my Dear, thou shalt have it; well, thou art as notable a woman as
any is within Fifty miles of thy head, I^le say that for thee.


Pray Cousin conceive me, breeding is a fine thing; but you have always lived
in the Country* I have, for my part, been often at London, lodged in
Covent-Garden ay, and been in the drawing Room too. Poor creature, she does not
know what that is.


Pray mind my Chicken, she's the best bred Woman in the Country.


Pray spare me Sir Ieffery, here's Sir Timothy, I have bred him with great care
and charges at Oxford and the Inns of Court.


Ay, and I have been in the Drawing-Room too.


I have gotten him Knighted too, for mine and Sir Iefferies services, which we
have performed in governing the Country about us so well.


What does your Ladyship drive at?


Ay, you know well enough: Now you look as if Butter would not melt in your
mouth.


Besides, let me tell you, Sir Timothy's person's as charming as another; his
shape and height perfect, his Face, though I say it, exceeding good, his Eyes
vigorous and sparkling his Nose and Chin resembling our Family; in short,
Nature has not been negligent in his Composition.


Well, thou art the best spoken Woman in England, I'll say that for thee.


I confess all this Madam.


Oh, do you so.


Pray give me leave, not one Knight in the Land dresses better, or wears better
fancied Garniture, or better P^riwigs.


My Triming's my own fancy; and the best Wigg-maker in England, one in
Crooked-lane works for me.


Hold Sir Timothy, I say these things premis'd, it is not ^it to use my Son
uncivilly: I am loath to complain to your Father, consider and be wise. I know
we are politically coy, that's decent; I, my self, was so to Sir Ieffery.


Ay by'r Lady was she. Well, I thought I should never have won thee* Thou were
a parlous Girl.


But I was never uncivil.


I know not what you mean! I uncivil to my dear Cousin! what mak^s thee think
so? I assure your Ladyship I value him as he deserves. What Cousin art angry
for a jest? I think no man like him for my part.


Why, look you Sir Timothy.


Nay Sir Timothy, you are to blame, jesting shows ones kindness, go too.


I swear and vow I thought you had been in earnest Cousin. I am your humble
Servant.


Well, we'll leave you together.


Come on Boy, stand up to her, Gad I bore up briskly to thy Mother before I won
her. Ah, when I was young, I would have -- Well, no more to be ^id.


Come, come away, you will have your saying!


Well, but have you so good an opinion of me as you declar^d? hum --


The very same I assure you.


Ah my dear pretty Rogue! Then I^le marry you presently, and make you a La^y.


Let me see, are they out of hearing?


Come f^th, let's kiss upon that business, here's a Parson in the House; nay,
feth, feth, I must kiss thee, my dear little Rogue.


Stand off Baboon, nay, a Baboon of good parts Exceeds thee; Thou Magg^t,
Insect, worse then any nasty thing the Sun is Father to.


What do you begin to call names again? but this is in Jest too prithee, ^et me
Kiss thee, pray dear, feth do.


In ^est! Heaven is my witness there's not a living thing ^pon Two Legs I would
not choose before Thee.


Hello, Wheres Sir Ieffery and my Lady?


They are out of thy hearing Oaph. 'Slife how dare thou be so Impudent to love
me with that face, that can provoke nothing but laughter at best in any one?
Why thou ha^t the Rickets in thy fa^: There^s no proportion, every feature by
it s^lf is abominable; and put togeth^r I^tollerable. Thou hast the very Lines
and air of a Pigs face, Baptista Porta would have drawn thee so.


Hah, What do you say? my face! I'll not change with e're a man in Lancashire.
Face! talk of my face, Hah.


Thou art uglier than any Witch in Lancashire, and if thou were in Woman's
Clothes, thy own Father would apprehend thee for one: Thy Face, I never saw so
deformed a thing on the head of an old Lyra viol. It might fright Birds from a
Cherry garden: But what else tis good for, I know not.


'Sbud, now you provoke me, I must tell you, I think my self as handsome for a
Man, as you are for a woman.


Oh, foh, out upon that filthy visage, My maid with her Sizars in two minutes
shall Cut me a Better in brown paper. There is not a Creature upon Earth but i^
a Beauty to thee; besides, thou hast a hollw Tooth would Cure the Mother beyond
^r^a setida or burnt Feathers.


Well, well, You'll sing another note when I have acquainted your Father, you
will.


Thou li^t, I will not* If I were condemned to Death, I would not take a pardon
(...) marry thee. Set thy Fools heart at rest then, and make no more nauseous
Love to m^. Thy Face to one fasting would give a vomit beyond Crocus.


You are a proud, peevish, Mi^x, and that's the best of you. Let me tell you
that, hum. I can have your betters every day I rise.


How now! What says the fool?


Uds Ludlikins, huswife, If you provoke me I'll take you of the Pate.


Thou odious, Loathsome Coxcomb, out of my sight, or I'll tear thy Eyes ou^.


Coxcomb! ha, ha, ha, ah thou are a good one. Well I say no more.


Da, da, pretty thing!


Gentlemen, the storm has obliged me that drove you under my Roof, I knew your
Fathers well, we were in Italy together, and all of us came home with our
English Religion, and our English Principles. During your stay here (which for
my own sake I hope will not be short) command my House: let not your Dogs and
Servants lye at Whalley; but be pleased to know this House is yours, and you
will do me honour in commanding it.


This generosity makes good the Character that all men give of you.


A Character that England rings with, and all men of never so differing
opinions agree in.


Gentlemen, you do me too much honour; I would endeavour to imitate the life of
our English Gentry before we were corrupted with the base manners of the
Fren^h.


If all had had that Noble resolution, long since we had curbed the greatness
of that Monarch.


What are these Apparitions, Doubty and Bellfort!


They are they indeed. Hay, what ails my heart to beat so fast?


Methinks mine is a little too busy here.


Gentlemen, here is my Daughter and her Kinswoman, I think you saw 'em last
Summer at Scarbrough.


We did Sir.


We little thought to have the honour of seeing so fine Ladies this night.


We could not expect this happiness, till next Season at the Waters.


What story is this? My Son almost frighted out of his wits with a Witch!
Gentlemen, I beg your pardon for a moment.


Your humble Servant.


Nothing could be more unexpected than seeing you here!


Pray Gentlemen, How did you come?


Travelling for Whalley, where I told you, Madam, in my Letters, I would
suddenly be, we lost our way by the darkness of the night, and wander^d till
we came near this House, whither an honest Co^ntry fellow brought us for
shelter from this dreadful Tempest.


And your Father is pleased to admit a brace of stray-fellows with the greatest
civility in the world: But, Madam, coming safe to shore, after a Shipwreck,
could not bring such joy to me, as I find in seeing you.


The Sun, to a man left a Winter at Greenland, could not be so ravishing a
sight, as you dear Madam are to me.


This is Knight Errantry indeed.


Methinks they talk Romance too. But 'tis too late if they be in earnest; for
the Dames are disposed of.


How, Married!


Not executed but condemned!


Beyond all hopes of mercy.


Death, Madam, you struck me to the heart: I felt your Words here.


My heart was just at my mouth, if you had not stopped it with this Cordial 'thad
slown. I may live now in hope of a reprieve for you.


Our Fathers will never consent to that.


Mine will not I am sure. I have a Mother, to boot, more obstinate than he.


If they be so merciless, self-preservation, the great Law of Nature will
justify your escape.


We Knight Errants, as you call us* will rescue you I^ warrant you.


But if we leave our fools, our Fathers will leave us.


If you lose your Father, Madam, you shall find one that will value you
in^initely more, and love you more tenderly.


And you, Madam, shall meet with one, whose person and whose fortune shall be
always at your command.


We grow a little too serious about this matter.


'Tis from Matrimony we would fly! oh 'tis a dreadful thing.


This heresy can never be defended by you: a man must be blind that inclines to
that opinion before you.


Gentlemen, I ask your pardon, be pleased to walk into the next Room, and take
a small Collation to refresh your selves.


Your Humble Servant.


This Country Fellow that led you hither, tells me a Tale of Witches, and
here's and uproar in my Family, and they say this place is haunted with them; I
hope you have no faith in those things.


When I hear a very strange story, I always think 'tis more likely he should
lye that tells it me, than that should be true.


'Tis a good rule for our belief.


My blood rises at them, These are damned Hobbists and Atheists, I'd have 'em
burn^ in Smithfield.


Well, these Gentlemen may perhaps go to their Servants and Horses at Whall^y
to morrow, where they must stay some time before we see 'em again.


We are ruined then: For this Marriage will be so pressed upon us, now the
Writings are sealed, and Clothes bought, we shall have no way to delay it, but
downright breaking with our Fathers.


I am resolv^d to consult with the Gentlemen this night whatever comes on it.


How can thou possibly bring it about my Dear?


I warrant thee, a Woman's wit will naturally work about these matters. Come my
Dear.


Lo here our little
Let each of us
See our provisions ready here,
To which no

Who draws the Wine?

Our
Go thou.

And thou.

And thou.

And thou.


Relate the service of the night.

To a Mothers Bed I softly crept,
And while the unchristen'd Brat yet slept,

And stole another flesh and fat,
Which I will boil before it stink;
The thick for Ointment, then for Drink
I^le keep --

I bit dried Sinews and shrunk Veins.
Marrow and Entrails I have Brought,
A piece ot'h' Gibbet too I got,
And of the Rope the fatal Knot.
I sunk a Ship, and in my flight
I kicked a Steeple down to Night.

Well done my Dame, Ho, ho, ho, ho.


To Charnel houses and to Graves.

From dead men's Eyes the glewy^Stuff,
Their Eye-balls with my nailes scoop'd out
And pieces of their Limbs I've brought --

The Fathers neck I Twisted too.
Doggs-barkt, Cocks-Crowed, away I flew.

A good Servant, Ho, ho, ho.


I snatched, and more from a ravenous Bitch.



And the blood of murdered men,

A Serpents Bowels, Adders Ears,
I put in my Pou^ch; and coming back
The Bells in a Steeple I did crack.
I sent the murren into Hogs,
And drove the Kine into the Bogs.

Tis well, 'tis well. Ho, ho, ho, ho.


A Wolfs Tail, Hair, and Yard, I've got
The Green Frogs Bones, whose flesh was tain
From thence by Ants; then a Cats Brain,
The Bunch of flesh from a black Foals head,
Just as his Dam was brought to Bed,
Before she li^kt it; and I have some
Of that which falls from a Mares Womb
When she's in Lust; and as I came home
I put a woman into ^its
And ^righted a Parson out of his wits.

All's well. Ho, ho, ho, ho.

WHat joy like ours can mortals find?
We can command the Sea and Wind:
All Elements our Charms obey,
And all good things become our prey;
The daintiest Meat, and lustiest Wine,
We for our Sabaths still design.
Amongst all the great Princes the sun shall ere see.
None can be so great, or so happy as we.
We Sail in Egg-shells on rough Seas,
And se^ strange (...) when we please*
Or on our Be^soms we can fly,
And nimbly mounting to the Sky,
We leave the swiftest Birds behind,
And when we please outstrip the Wind:
Then we feast and we revel after long ^light,
Or with a Loved Incubus sport all the night.
When we're on Wing, we sport and play,
Mankind, like Emmets, we survey;
With Lightening blast with Thunder Kill.
Cause barrennesss where e're we will.
Of full revenge we have the power;
And Heaven it self can have no more.
Here's a health to our Master the Prince of the Flies,
Who commands from Center all up to the Skies.



YOu have extremely delighted us this morning, by your House, Gardens, your
Accommodation, and your way of Living, you put me in mind of the renowned
Sidneys Admirable description of Kalandar.


Sir you Complement me too much.


Methinks you represent to us the Golden days of Queen Elizabeth, such sure
were our Gentry then; now they are grown Servile Apes to Foreign customs,
they leave off Hospitality, for which we were famous all over Europe, and turn
Servants to Board-wages.


For my part, I love to have my Servants part of my Family, the other were to
hire day Labourers to wait on me, I had rather my Friends, Kindred, Tennants
and Servants should live well out of me, than Coach-makers, Taylors,
Embroiderers, and Lacemen should: To be pointed at in the Streets, and have
Fools stare at my Equipage, is a vanity I have always scorned.


You speak like one descended from those Noble Ancestors that made France
tremble, and all the rest of Europe Honour 'em.


I reverence the Memory of 'em: But our New-fashion'd Gentry love the French
too well to fight against 'em; they are bred abroad without knowing any thing
of our Constitution, and come home tainted with Foppery, slavish Principles,
and Popish Religion.


They bring home Arts of Building from hot Countries to serve for our cold one;
and F^gality from those places where they have little Meat and small Stomachs,
to suffice us who have great plenty and lusty Appetites.


They build Houses with Halls in 'em, not so big as former Porches; Beggars
were better entertained by their Ancestors, than their Tennants by them.


For my part, I think 'twas never good days, but when great Tables were kept in
large Halls; the Buttery-hatch always open, Black Jacks, and a good smell of
Meat and March-beer, with Dogs-turds, and Mary-bones as Ornaments in the Hall:
These were signs of good House keeping, I hate to see Italian fine Buildings
with no Meat or Drink in 'em*


I like not their little Plates, methinks there's Virtue in an English
Sur-loyn.


Our Sparks bring nothing but Foreign Vices and Follies home; 'tis ridiculous
to be bred in one Country to learn to live in another.


While we lived thus (to borrow a Coxcombly word) we made a better Figure in
the World.


You have a mind that suits your Fortune, and can make your own happiness.


The greatest is the Enjoyment of my Friends, and such Worthy ^e^tlemen ^s your
Selves, and when I cannot have enough of that; I have a Library, good Hors^s
and good Music.


Princes may envy such an English Gentleman.


You are too kind, I am a true English man, I love the Princes Rights and
P^ples liberties, and will defend 'em both with th^ last penny in my purse, and
the last drop ^n my veins, and dare defy the witless Plots of Papists.


Spoken like a Noble Patriot.


Pardon me, you talk like English-men, and you have warmed me; I hope to see
the Prince and People flourish yet; old as I am, inspire of Jesuits, I am sure
our Constitution is the Noblest in the World.


Would there were enough such English Gentlemen.


Twere to be wished; but our Gentry are so much poisoned with Foreign V^nities,
that methinks the Genius of England seems sunk into the Yeoma^y.


We have indeed too many rotten Members* You speak like Gentlemen, Worthy of
such Noble Fathers, as you both had; but Gentlemen I spoke of Music, I see two
of my Artists, come into the Garden, they shall entertain you with a Song this
Morning.


Sir you oblige us every way.
Finely composed, and excellently performed.

I see Sir you are well served in every thing.


My sweet Cousin good Morrow to thee, I hope to call thee shortly by another
Name, my dear Child, Heaven's bless thee*


Ladies your most humble Servant; you are early up to take the pleasure of the
Morning in these Gardens.


'Tis a Paradise you are in; every object within this place is ravishing.


This place affords variety of Pleasures; nothing here is wanting.


Where such fine Ladies are.


A Gentleman, To speak with you.


With me! Daughter pray show those Gentlemen the Statues, Grottoes and the
Water-works, I^le wait on you immediately.


This is an opportunity beyond our hopes.


Would you speak with me?


Arrah, and please tie Oorship, I am come here to displaash to maake a (...)
unto thee, dest dou not know me Joy?


Oh! You live at Mr. Redletters my Catholic Neighbours.


Ah by my Should, I.


How came you to venture hither? you are a Popish-Priest.


Ay, but 'tis no matter for all daat ^oy: by my Should, but I will taak de
Oades, and I think I will be excused, but hark (...) you a while, by my trott I
shall be a Pa^pist too for all daat, indeed, yes.


Excellent Principles.


I do come for de nonest to see dee, and yet I do not come on purpose gra: But
it is no matter, I will talk vid you about daat, I do come upon occaasion and
Mr. Redletter did shend me unto de^.


For What?


What will I say unto dee now, but Mr. Redletter did shend me, and yet I did
come of my self too for all daat upon occaasion, daat I did hear, concerning
of dee, dat die House and de Plaash is all over-run with Witches and Spirits, do
you see now?


I had best let this Fool stay to laugh at him, he may be out of the damned
Plot, if any Priest was? Sure they would never trust this Fool.


What shaall you shay unto me upon all dis, I will exorcize doze Vitches, and I
will plague dose Devils now by my Should, vid Holy-Water, and vid Relics, and
I will ^reet 'em out of his Plaash, God shaave the King.


I have forgot your Name.


They do put the Name of Kelly upon me, Joy, but by my fait I am called by my
own right Name, Tegue O Devilly.


Tegue O Devilly?


Yes, a very oold Name in Eereland by my Shalvaation, well gra, I have brought
upon my Cloke-bagg shome Holy-water, and I will put it upon the Devils and de
Vitches Faashes, and I will make you shome more Holy-water, and you will vaash
all de Rooms vid it and be --


Well, Father Tegue O Devilly, You're welcome; but how ^are you venture
publicly in these times?


Why, I have great consideraation upon die Prudence; for if dou woudst betray
me, now phare will be de soleedity of dat Joy.


I speak not for my self, but others.


The Devil ^aak me now, I do think, I will suffer for my Religion, I am afraid
I will be slain at lashed at the plaash they call Saint Ty-burn, but I do not
caare by my Shalvaation; for if I will be hanged, I will be a Saint presently,
and all my Country shall pray unto Saint Tegue, besides, shome great people
will be naamless too, I tell you I shay no more, but I will be prayed unto
Joy.


Prayed too! Very well.


Yes by my Shoule will I, and I will have Relics maade of me too.


Sir Ieffery Shacklehead and my Lady have some business with you, and desire
your company within.


Come Father Tegue, come along with me, do you hear, find the Gentlemen that
are walking with my Daughter and her Cousin, and tell 'em I will wait on 'em
presently.


I will. They are here, Gentlemen, my Master is called away upon business (...)
begs your excuse, and will wait on you presently.


Heaven gives us yet a longer Opportunity, and certainly intends we should make
use of it; I have my own Parson that comes to hunt with me at Whally, Madam, an
excellent School Divine, that will end all differences betwixt us.


He is like to begin 'em betwixt us* the Name of a Parson is a dreadful Name
upon these occasions, he I bring us into a Condition we can never get out of
but by Death.


If the absolute command of me and my Fortune can please you, you shall never
desire to get out of it.


I should at more distance and with more reverence approach you, Madam, did not
the shortness of the time, and the great danger of losing you, force me to be
free; Throw not away this precious time, a Minute now is Inestimable.


Yet I must consider on that Minute on which the happiness or Misery of all my
Life may depend.


How can ^ imagine that you who have rambled up and down the Southern World,
should at last ^ix on a Horne-bred Mistress in the North? how can you be in
earnest?


Consult your Understanding and your Looking-Glass, one will tell you how
Witty, Wise, and Good you are, the other, how Beautiful, how Sweet, how
Charming.


Men before they are Married turn the great end of their Perspective; but the
little end after it.


They are Men of ill Eyes, and worse Understanding; but for your Perfections
there needs no Perspective.


If I were inclined to Marriage, methinks we are not well enough acquainted yet
to think of that.


To my Reputation I suppose you are no Stranger, nor to my Estate, which li^s
all in the next County; and for my Love, I will convince you of it, by settling
what ever you please, or all that Estate upon you before I expect any Favour
from you.


You are so Generous beyond my Deserts, that I know not how to Credit you.


Your Modesty is too Great, and your Faith too Little.


Death, Who are these with my Mistress and my Sister? Oh! they are the silly
Fellows that we saw at the Spaw, that came hither last night, do you know Sir,
that this is my Mistress Sir?


I know Sir that no man is worthy of that Honour.


Ye^ Sir, I will make you know that I am Sir, and She has the Honour to be my
Mi^tress.


Very well Sir.


Very well Sir, No 'tis very ill Sir, that you should have the boldness to take
my Mistress by the Hand Sir, and if you do Sir, I must tell* you Sir -- What do
you Smile Sir?


A man may do what he will with his own Face. I may Smile Sir --


If you do Sir, I will fight Sir, I tell you that Sir. hah,


Sir Timothy, you are a Bloody-minded man.


'Tis for my Honour, my Honour, he is plaguely afraid; look you Sir, if you
Smile Sir, at me Sir, I will Kick Sir, that's more Sir.


If you do, you will be the fifteenth man I have run through the Body Sir.


Hah! What does he say, through the Body, oh.


Yonders my Brother, we must not be so particular, lets join.


How, the Body Sir?


Yes Sir, and my custom is (if it be a great affront, I kill them, for) I rip
out their Hearts, dry 'em to Powder, and make Snuff on 'em.


Oh Lord! Snuff!


I have a box full in my pocket Sir, will you please to take some.


No Sir, I thank you Sir: Snuff quoth a, I will have nothing to do with such a
cruel man, I say no more Sir.


Your Servant Sir --


Your Servant Sir: does he take such Snuff too?


The same -- do you hear Sir, if you value your own life, which I will save for
the Families sakes, not a word of this to any man.


No Sir, Not I Sir? Your humble servant.


I ask your pardon Gentlemen, I was stayed by what, if you please to walk in,
will divert you well enough.


We will wait on you Sir.


Daughter, Sir Ieffery and my Ladies have made complaints of you for abusing Sir
Timothy; let me hear no more on it, we have resolved the Marriage shall be to
Morrow, it will become you to be upon a little better Terms to day.


Do you here that Gentlewoman --


Gentlemen, I have sent to Whally for all your Servants, and Horses, and Dogs,
you Must do me the honour to Make some stay with me.


We cannot enough acknowledge your great Civility.


No Complements, I obliege my self; Sir Ieffery Shacklehead and I have just now
agreed, that to morrow shall be the Day of Marriage between our Sons and
Daughters.


Very short warning.


He I not delay it longer.


I'll in and see what the reason of this sudden resolution.


Sir we wait on you.


Stay you there a while with Sir Timothy.


Dear Cousin, prithee be kinder to me, I protest and vow, as I am a Christian,
I love the better then both my Eyes, for all this.


Why how now Dogs face, hast thou the Impudence to make love again, with that
hideous Countenance? that very insipid silly Physiognomy of thine? with that most
piteous mean? why thou look like an Operat^r for Teeth.


This is all sham, I wont believe it; I can see my self in the great glass, and
to my mind no man looks more like a Gentleman than my self.


A Gentleman! with that silly wadling shuffling gate? thou hast not mien good
enough for a chief Constable, every change of thy Countenance, and every motion
of thy Body proclaims thee an Ass.


Ay, Ay, come Madam, I shall please you better when I am Married, with a (...)
that I have; I tell ye.


Out of my sight, thou make me sick to see thee.


I shall be more Familiar with you to Morrow-night, oh my dear rogue -- well I
say no more, faith I shall, well, no more to be said.


Be gone thou Basilisk, here, I vow if thou were the only man on Earth, the
Kind should cease rather than I would Marry thee.


You'll be in a better humour to Morrow-night, though you are such a (...) now.


This place, where some Materials are to mend the Wall, will furnish me with
some Ammunition: be gone I say.


I shant do^t, I know when I am in good Company, come prithee Cousin, do not
let us Fool any longer, to Morrow we shall be one flesh -- de ye see:


I had rather be inoculated into a Tree, than be made one Flesh with thee; can
that Westph^lia hide of thine ever become one Flesh with me? when, I can become
one Ass with thee it may, you shall never change my mind.


Well, well, I shall have your Body to Morrow-night, and I warrant you your
mind shall soon follow it.


Be gone, thou infinite Coxcomb, I'll set thee farther.


What, what, what a pox! hold, what a Devil, are you mad? Flesh, heart, hold,
what a plague, uds bud, I could find in my heart to turn again.


Do ^ilthy Face, do if thou dare.


Oh help, murder, murder.


I have no patience with this Fool, no Racks, or Tortures shall force me to
marry him.


I am very indifferent about this Matrimony, and for ought I see, you are so
too.


I must confess you are as fine a Gentlewoman as ever I saw, and I am not
worthy of you; but my Father says he will disinherit me, if I will not marry
you to Morrow; therefore I desire you would please to think on it.


I will think on it.


You shall command all my Estate, and do what you will; for my part, I r^solve
all my Life, to give up my self wholly to my Sports, and my Horses, and my
Dogs, and to drink now and then a cup of Ale with my Neighbours, I hate Wine.


You will do very well.


He says we must be Married to Morrow at Ten, I can be going a Hawking by six
and come home time enough, I would be loath to neglect my Hawking at Pow^s in
the height of the Season.


By no means, you'd do very ill if you should.


Ay so I should, but shall I tell my Father that you will have me to Morrow?
you know the Writings are Sealed, and Wedding-Cloaths bought of all sides.


Well, I shall do as becomes me.


Well, Cousin there's no more to be said betwixt you and I then, Pa^ce Verba, a
word to the Wise, I say, is enough, so I rest your humble Servant to command;
^e tell my Father what you say presently, your Servant to, tell you truly I had
never so much mind to be Married as now; for I have been so woundedly frightened
with Witches, that I am afraid to lye alone, dee see; well, I am glad this
business is over: a pox upon all m^king of Love for me.


I thought I saw my Cousin in yo^ Walk, 'tis time for us to consult what to do,
my Father and Mother are resolved upon to Morrow for the fatal day.


By my shoule, Joy, I thank you for my Fast-break, for it does give refreshment
unto me, and Consolaation too gra.


Thank you Mistress Susan, my Caudle was admirable; I am much strengthened by
these good Creatures.


Yours was admirable -- if Mother Demdike has any Skill, I shall find the
opperati^ before night, and I will be revenged for his scorn to me.


Though thou dosht know me, yet thou dosht shay thou wilt tell nothing
concerning of me.


No, for my part though I differ in some things, yet I honour the Church of
Rome as a true Church.


By my Shalvaation ye did all come out of us indeed, and I have expectaation
daa^ you will come in again, and I think I will live to she it; perhaps I will
tell you now, you had your Ordination too with us.


For my part, I think the Papists are honest, loyal men, and the Iesuits dyed
innocent.


Phaat dou dosht not believe de Plot de Devil taak me.


No, no, no Papist Plot, but a Presbyterian one.


Aboo, boo, boo, By my Shalvaation I will embraash die Fathers Child, and I will
put a great kish upon die cheek, now for dat, ay dear ish a damned Presbyterian
Plot to put out de Paapists, and de Priests, and de good Men, and if I would
have my mind, de Devil taak me I would she 'em all broil and fry in de (...)
they call Smithfi^ld, (...).


I would have S^plices crammed down their Throats, or would have 'em hanged in
^.


^.


^ with these Priests, see they are come from their Breakfast, and (...)


^ not believe de Paapist P^ot my Joy.


^ Presbyterian Plot I do: I would be a Turk before I would be a ^


^ I will give Satisf^ction unto dee, and ^aak dee of my Church, we have ^ of
die Church, and dou art almost as good a Friend as he in de West, I have ^ take
it did begin vid a T.


How now! Do n^t you believe a P^pish Plot?


No, but a (...) I do.


This is great Impudence, a^ter the King has affirmed it in so many
Pr^clamations, and three Parliaments have (...) it, Nemine (...).


Parliaments, tell me of Parliaments, with my Bible in my hand, ^le dispute
with the whole (...) of Commons; Sir, I hate Parliaments, n^ne but Phanaticks,
Hobbists, and Athiests, believe the (...).


By my ^, dou d^sh't maak me weep indeed, by my Should, Joy, dou wilt be a good
Cath^lick, if I will instruct dee, I will weep on dee indeed.


Why the true and wise Church of England-men believes it, and are a great Rock
against the Church of Rome.


And Preach and Write learnedly against it; but such Fellows as you are
scandals to the Church, a Company of Tantivy Fools.


All the Eminent men of the Church of England believe the Plot, and detest it
with horror, and abominate the Religion that contrived it.


Not all the Eminent men, for I am of another opinion.


By my should, by my Shoud, Joy, they are our Enemies, and I would have no fait
put upon de^, but dis is my dear Friend.


This is a Rascal concealed in the Church, and is none of it; sure his Patron
know^ him not.


No certainly!


You are Hobbists and Athiests.


It is no ma^ter for all daat Joy, what they do shay unto dee for by Chreest,
and by Saint Paatrick they be Heretic Dogs, by my Shalvaation dou dosht maake
me weep upon de again; by de Lady Mary, I think I will be after reconciling deet
o de Catholic Church indeed.


Your Servant Gentlemen.


Your most humble Servant.


Your most humble Servant.


Is not my Irish man a pleasant fellow?


A great Father of the Church.


And perhaps may come to be hanged for it.


Sir ^ to take some informations about Witches, perhaps that may divert you not
ill, 'Tis against my opinion, but I give him way.


I hope you are pleased to pardon my incivility, in rushing unawares into your
Chamber last night; but I know you are so much a Gentleman, so well-bred* and
so a^mplis^t, I know you do --


^adam.


And for that reason I will make you my Confident in a business, that perhaps,
I do not know, but I think it may not be t^ your disadvantage, I will
communicate it to you in ^ivate. N^w, Sir Ieffery and I are to take some
Examinations. I assist him very ^ business, or he could never do it.


Call in these Fellows, (...) hear what they'll say about these Witches; come
on, Did you serve my Warrant on Mother Demdike?


Sir, I went to her House (and please your Worship) and looked in at her Window,
and she was feeding three great Toads, and they danced and leapt about her,
and she suckled a great black Cat well nigh as big as a Spaniel; I went into
the House, and she vanished, and there was nothing but the Cat in the middle,
who spit and stared at me, and I was frighted away.


An arch Witch I warrant her.


I went out at the backdoor, and by the Threshold sat a great Hare, I struck
at it, and it run away, and ever since I have had a great pain in my back, and
cannot make Water, saving your presence.


A fit of the Gravel.


No, by my shoule, she is a great Witch, and I will cure you upon ^aat.


No: I tell you, Sir Edward, I am sure she is a Witch, and between you and I,
last night, when I would have been kind to my Wife, she bewit^ht me, I found it
so.


Those things will happen about ^ive and fifty.


I will tell you now, Joy, I will cure you too. Patrick, and I will shay shome
Ave Maaries for dee, and dou wilt be ^ound again: gra.


Who is this pretends to skill in Witchcraft?


A very lea^ed man in these matters, that comes hither on purpose.


I shall be gla^ of your better acquaintance.


I will be very vel pleash'd to b after being acquainted vid dee Joy.


Have you any more to say? Fellow speak to me.


Why, an't please your Worship forsooth, Mother Demdike said she would be
reveng^d on me for not giving her some Butturmilk; and the next night coming
from Rachdale, I saw a great Black Hog, and my Horse threw me, and I lost a Hog
that night, he died, that was as well when he went to bed, as ever he was since
he was born.


'Tis enough, a plain, a manifest Witch, make a Warrant for her.


Ay, do.


Take some of the Thatch of her House, and burn it at your House, and you shall
see she will come straight.


Or to morrow about dawn, piss in a Pot, and cover it with your right, neither
Stocking, and the Witch will be tormented in her Bladder, and come to you
roaring before night.


A most profound Science.


And poor old Ignorant wretches must be hanged for this.


A Cow of mine is bewitched too, and runs about the Close as if she were mad;
and that, I believe, Mother Hargrave bewitched, because I denied her some (...).
-- good.


(...) into the Warrant too: 'Tis enough, a little thing will serve for
evidence against ^ Witch.


A very little one.


Irish Trousers upon your Cows head, Fellow, upon a Friday Morning, and wid a
great Stick maak beat upon her, till she do depart out of de Close, and she
will repair unto de Witches door, and she will knock upon it vid her Horns
indeed.


Thank you good Sir.


Sir, I see you are a Learned man in this business, and I honour you.


Your Servant Sir, I will put shome holy waater into your Cows mout, and I will
maak Cure upon her for all daat indeed.


Come, has any one else any thing to inform?


Yes an^t please your Worship, here is a Neighbour, Thomas o Georges.


Why, an't please your Worships, I was at Mal. Spencers^ House where he one
(...) Lone, and whoo had a meeghty great Cat, a black one by'r Lady, and whoo
kissed and who clipped Cat, and ay set me d^wn a bit (meet a bit) and believe Cat
went under her Coats, Quo ay what don yeo do with that fow Cat? why, says
Whoo, who soukes me. Soukes tee! Marry that's whaint quo ay, by'r Lady what ^an
Cat do besides? Why, says whoo, whoost carry me to Rachdale believe. Whaw, quo
ay, that's pr^tty! Why, says whoo, ye^st ha one an yeow win to carry yeow;
by'r lady, quo ay, with awe my heart, and thank ow too, marry 'twill save my Tit
a power of labour; so whoo cawd a Cat to me, a huge Cat, and we ridden both to
Rachdale strieght along.


Well said, this was home; I love a Fellow that will go through stitch.


This is a Witch, indeed, put her name in.


This is n^w thing by my Shoule, I will tell you now it is naw thing for all
d^at, a Vi^h, if she be a good Witch, will ride upon a Graashopper, I tell you,
very well, and yet a Graashopper is but a weak beast neither; you do maak
wonder upon dis^ but by my Shoule it is naw thing.


Where did you take Cat, say you, together?


Why, we took Cat^ith^ Lone meet a mile off.


So you rid eight mile upon Cats: are there any more informations?


No more an^t please your Worship, but when I have once taken 'em, enough will
come in.


Go then about taking 'em, and bring 'em before Sir Ieffery, and my self, Ple
warrant you we'll order 'em.


I will tell you now Fellow, taak de shoe of a Horse, and nail it upon your
Threshold, de plaash dou dosht go into die door upon.


And put a Clove of Garlic into the Roof of thy Ho^se.


Femel is very good in your House against Spirits and Witches, and Alicium, and
the Herb Mullein, and Long-wort, and Moly too is very good.





Thank you good Sir.


Thank a.


Is not this an excellent Art?


'Tis so extravagant, that a man would think they were all in Dreams that ever
writ of it.


I see no manner of Evidences against these poor Creatures.


I could laugh at the^e Fools sufficiently, but that all the while our
Mistresses are in danger.


Our time is very short, prithee let's consider what is to be done.


Well, my Dear, I must open my heart to thee; I am so much in Love with this
Bellfort, that I shall dye if I lose him.


Poor Isabella, dying is something an inconvenient business; and yet I should
live very uncomfortable without my Spark.


Our time's very short, therefore preethee let's play the fool no longer, but
come to the point when we meet 'em.


Agreed: But when shall we meet 'em?


I warrant thee before Midnight.


Come, let us take one turn in the Garden, and by that time my Dinner will be
ready.


Madam, For Heaven's sake consider on what a short time my Happiness or Ruin
depends.


Have a care, Sir Ieffery and his Lady will be Jealous.


This is a good sign.


Not a word, we shall be suspected, at night we will design a cenferrence.


Why so unkind Cl^d? You frown and wonnot kiss me.


No marry, ^e be none of thy Imp, I wott.


What do^t thou mean my Love? prithee kiss me.


Stand off by'r Lady an I li^t kibbo once, (...) raddle thy bones: ^ that, thou
art a fow Witch.


(...) Witch^ a poor Innocent young Lass, that's whaint, I am not old (...) for
that Mon.


And I believe my ^yne, by the Mass I saw you in Sir Yedards Cellar last neeght
with your (...), thou art a rank Witch, uds flesh I'll not come ne'er thee.


Did you see me? Why, if I be a Witch, I am the better Fortune for you, ^ of
the best and be rich.


(...) marry ^le fare none with thee, I'll not be hanged, nor go to the Deel ^
mass, but I will hang thee on I con by'r Lady.


Say you so Rogue, I'll plague you for that.


What is whoo gone? ^Tis for no good marry, I ha escaped a fine waife, a fow
(...) by'r Lady, I^le hang the Whean and there be no more Witches in
Loncashire. (...) whats tiss?


S.
And carry me where I shall flee.


This Pit or^ grown with Brakes and Briers,
Is fit for our dark Works, and here
Our Mast^r dear, will soon appear,
And make th^e Mother Madge a Witch,
^ be Happy, long-liv'd, Rich,
Thou wi^ be Pow^rful and Wise,
And be revenged of thy Enemies.

'Tis that I'd have, I thank you Dame,


H^l do what e're thou bid him, call
Him ^,

Come hither Puck-Hairy.


Where is thy Contract written in Blood?


'Tis here.


So t'^ firm and good.
Where^s my Mamilion^ come my Rogue,
And take thy Dinner.

Where^ my Puggy?
Come to me and take thy Duggy.

Come my Rouney, where art thou?


Come Sirrah, I have switcht you well
I'll tie you up now to the Rack.
Well met Sisters, where^s my Pucklin?
Come away my pretty Sucklin.

Waunds and Flesh, what con Ay do naw, I am turned into a Horse, a Capo, a mere
Titt; Flesh Ayst ne'er be a Mon again, I marle I con speak, I conno pray, I wot
a pox of the Deel Mun, Ay live of Oats, and Beans, and Hay awe my life, instead
of Beef and Pudding: uds Flesh I neigh too,

Oh who has switcht and spurred me plaguely, I am raw all over me, whoo has
ridden a wounded way about too.


Ointment for Flying here I have,


Of Poplar Leaves, and Aconite made
With these.
The Aromattic Reed I boil,
With Water-parsnip, and Cinquesoil;
With store of Soot, and add to that,
The reeking Blood of many a Bat.


I fetch^d to open Locks at need.

All flowing lo^sly in the Air,
With naked Feet I went among

With A^omt^ and Martagon,
Henbane, Hemlock, Moon-wort too,

The deadly Night-shade, Cypress, Yew,
And Libbards Bane, and venomous Dew,
I gathered for my Charms. Harg.
Dug up a Mandrake which did cry,
Three Circles I made, and the Wind was good,
And looking to the West I stood.


With Screetch-Owls Eggs, and Feathers too.

The Eyes of Owls, and Brains of Cats.

Peace, here's our Master him Salute,
And kiss the Toe of his Cloven Foot,
Now our new Sister we present,
The Contract too, sign it with Blood.

First, Heaven you must renounce.

I do.

Your Baptism, thus I wash out too.
The new Name Maudlin you must take,
And all your Gossips must forsake,
And I these new ones for you make.

A piece of your Garment now present.

Here, take it Master, I'm content.

Within this Circle I make here,
Truth to our Master you must swear.

I do.

You must each month some murdered Children pay,
Besides your yearly tribute at your day.

I will.

Some Secret part I with my mark must sign.
A lasting token, that you are wholly mine.

Oh!

Now do your Homage.

Curse Heaven, Plague Mankind, go forth and be a Witch.

WElcome, welcome, happy be,
In this blessed Society.
Men and Beasts are in thy Power,
Thou can Save, and can Devour,
Thou can Bless, and Curse the Earth,
And cause Plenty, or a Dearth.
Welcome, c.
Over Natures Powers thou can prevail,
Raise Winds, bring Snow, or Rain, or Hail;
Without their Causes, and can make
The steady Course of Nature shake.
Welcome, c.
Thou can mount upon the Clouds,
And skim over the rugged Floods;
Thou can dive to the Sands below,
And through the solid earth can go.
Welcome, c.
Thou'lt open Looks, or through a Chink
Shalt creep for daintiest Meat and Drink.
Thou may sleep on tops of Trees,
And lye in Flowers like Humble Bees.
Welcome, c.
Revenge, revenge, the sweetest part
Of all thou hast by thy black Art.
O^ Heaven thou ne'er shalt f^x thy mind,
For here 'tis Heaven to plague mankind.

And all the Elements make war or peace:
The Sky no more shall its known Laws obey,
Night shall retreat whilst you prolong the day.

And in thick darkness, hide the Sun at Noon.


Hearing thy mighty Charms, the troubled Sky
Shall crack with Thunder, Heaven not knowing why.

Then though all Winds together should engage,
The silent Sea shall not the Tempest feel.


Stones from their Quarries, and fixed Oaks remove.

The most impetuous Torrents shall stand still:
Swift Rivers shall (while wondering Banks admire)
Back to their Springs, with violent hast, retire.



And any living creature save or kill:


Who's here? who's here?

Waunds what^s here? The Witches By'r Lady,
I'll shoot amongst 'em: have at ye.
Hey, Dive-dappers, Dive-dappers:
What a Devils here! Clod tied by a Bridle and Neighing! What a Pox ail'st
thou?
Constable a tell?

Uds flesh, I am a Mon again naw!
Why, I was a Horse, a mere Tit, I had lost awe
My speech, and could do nought but neigh;
Flesh I am a Mon again.

What a dickens is the fellee wood?

Ise ta the Bridle with me, fly from the Dee'l, and the Witches, and I'll tell
you
awe at the Ale-house.

What a murrain ails the Hobbell?
I mun follow, and see what's the matter.

I Am sorry I am forced to complain of my Cousin.


Sorry, marry so am not I; I am sorry she is so pert and ill-bred, truly Sir
Edward 'tis unsufferable for my Son, a man of his Quality and Title, Born of
such a Family, and so Educated, to be so abused, to have Stones thrown at him
li^e a Dog.


We must even break off the Match, Sir Edward.


Sir, I am as^med of it, I blush and grieve to hear it; Daughter, I never
thought to see this day.


Sir, I am so amazed I know not what to say, I abuse my Cousin! Sure he is
b^witched.


I think I am, to Love you after it, I am sure my Arm's black and blew, that it
is.


He ^ested with me, as I thought, and would have ruffled me, and kissed me, a^d
I run from him, and in foolish play, I quoited a little Stone or two at him.


And why did you call me Filthy-face, and ugly Fellow, h^h, Gentlewoman?


He ugly! Nay, then I have no Eyes, though I say it, that should not say it, ^
his Fellow --


Nor I neither: 'twas a jest, a jest, he told me he was handsomer for a Man,
than I for a Woman.


Why, look you there, you Blockhead, you Clown, you Puppy, why do you trouble
us with this impertinent lye?


Good words, Sir Ieffery, 'twas not so much amiss; hah, I'll tell you that.


Sure this is some mistake, you told me you were willing to marry.


I did not think I should be put to acknowledge it before this Company: But
Heaven knows, I am not more willing to live; the time is now so short, I may
confess it.


You would not use him, you intend to marry, ill.


I Love him I am to marry more than Light or Liberty. I have thus long
dissembled it through Modesty; but, now I am provoked, I beseech you Sir, think
not that I'd dishonour you so.


Look you, you have made her weep; I never found her false or disobedient.


Nay, good dear Cousin, don't cry, you'll make me cry too; I can't forbear, I
ask your pardon with all my heart, I vow I do, I was to blame, I must confess.


Go too, Sir Timothy, I never could believe one of your parts would play the
Fool so.


And you will marry to morrow.


I never wished for any thing so much, you make me blush to say this.


Sweet Cousin forgive me, and Sir Ieffery, and Sir Timothy.


Can I be angry at any thing* when I am to be married to morrow? And I am sure
I will be, to him I love more than I hate this Fool.


I could find in my heart to break your head, Sir Timothy, you are a Puppy.


Come lets leave 'em together, to understand one another better.


Cousin, Daughter I should say, I beg your pardon, your Servant.


Servant, Sweet Daughter.


Dear Cousin be in good humour, I could wish my self well beaten for mistaking
one that loves me so, I would I might ne'er stir, if I did not think you had
been in earnest: well, but I vow and swear I am mightily beholden to you, that
you think me so fine a person, and love me so dearly; Oh how happy am I that I
shall have thee to morrow in these Arms! by these ten bones, I love you more
than all the Ladies in London put them together. Prithee Speak to me, O that
Smile Kills me, oh I will ^o Hug thee and Kiss thee, and Love thee to morrow
night -- I'd give forty pound to morrow night were to night, I hope we shall
have twins before the year comes about*


Do you so Puppy?


Help, Help, Murder, Murder.


Help, Help, Murder, Murder.


What a Devils to do now? hah, she Counterfeits a Sound.


How now, my Dear, what's the matter?


What's the Matter?


I feel the matter, She gave me a Cuff, and lugged me by the Ears, and I think
she is in a Sound.


Oh the Witch! the Witch came just now into the Room, and struck Sir Timothy,
and Lugged him, and beat me down.


Oh Lord, a Witch! Ay, 'twas a two legged Witch.


And, as soon as she had done, she run out of that Door.


'Tis very true, I met her and was frighted, and left her muttering in the next
(...).


Oh Impudence!


You Puppy, you Coxcomb, will you never leave these lies, is the fellow
bewitched?


Go Fool, I am ashamed of you.


Let^s see if we can take this Witch.


Quickly, before she flies away.


Well, I have done, I'll ne'er tell tale more.


Begone, Fool, go.


Well, I will ^ndure this, but I am resolved to marry her to morrow and be
revenged on her; if she serves me so then, I will tickle her Toby for her,
faith I will.


Well, I'll be gone, and get out of the way of 'em.


Come on.


Madam! Cozen hold a little, I desire a word with you.


I must stay.


Adieu then.


I am drunken well (...), and now I am not so hala (since we must marry to
morrow) I pray you n^w l^t us be a little better acquainted to neeght, He make
bold to Salute you in a Civil way.


The Fool's drunk.


By the Mass she kisses rarely, uds lord she has a Breath as sweet as a Cow, I
have been a Hawking, and have brought you home a power of Powts in my bag here;
we have had the rarest sport, we had been at it still, but that 'tis neeght.


You have been at some other sport I see.


What, because I am merry? nay, and I list, I can be as merry as the best on
^em all.

An onny mon Smait my Sweet hear^,
Ayst Smait him again an I con,
Flesh what care for a brokken Yead,
For onest a mon's a mon.

I see you can be merry indeed.


Ay that I can, Fa, la, la, fa, la.

I was at it helter Skelter in excellent Ale, with Londoners that went a
Hawking, brave Roysters, honest fellows that did not believe the Plot.


Why don't you believe the Plot?


No, the Chaplain has told me all; there's no Popish Plot, but there's a
Presbyterian one, he says, none but Phanaticks believe it.


An Excellent Chaplain to make love to his Patrons Daughter, and Corrupt the
Son.

Why all the Eminent men of our Church believe it; this fellow is none of the
Church, but crept into it for a livelihood, and as soon as they find him they'll
turn him out of it.


Nay, Cousin I should not have told it, he Charged me to say nothing of it; but
you and I a^e all one, you are to be bone of my bone to morrow: And I will
Salute you once more upon that d'e see.


Hold, Hold, not so fast 'tis not come to that yet.


'Twill come to that and more to morrow, fa, la, la, but I'll out at four a
Hawking, though for all that, d'e understand me?


Her'es Doubty, I must get rid of this fool.

Cousin, I hear your Father coming; if he sees you in this Condition he will be
very Angry.


Thank you Kindly, no more to be said, I'll go and Sleep a little, I see she
loves me, fa, la, la, la.


Dear Madam, this is a happy (...) thrown upon me unexpectedly, and I must use
it: To morrow is the faral day to ruin me.


It shall not ruin me: the Inquisition should not force me to a Marriage with
this fool.


This is a step to my Comfort; but when your Father shall to morrow hear your
refusal, you know not what his passion may produce; restraint of Liberty is the
least.


He shall not restrain my Liberty of Choice.


Put your self into those hands that may defend you from his Power: the hands
of him, who loves you more than the most Pious value Heaven, than Misers Gold,
than Clergy men love Power, than Lawyers strife, than Jesuits Blood and
Treachery.


If I could find such a man.


Then look no farther Madam, I am he; speak but one word, and make me the
happiest man on Earth.


It comes a little to quick upon me; are you sure you are the man you speak of?


By Heaven; and by your Self I am, or may I be the scorn of all Mankind; and
the most Miserable too, without you.


Then you shall be the man.


Heaven; on my Knees I must receive this Blessing; there's not another I would
ask, my Joy's too big for me.


No Raptures for Heavens sake, here comes my Mother, adieu.


I must Compose my self.


Sir your most humble Servant.


Your Ladyships most humble Servant.


It is not fit I should lose this opportunity, to tell you that (which perhaps
may not be unacceptable to a person of your Complexion) who is so much a
Gentleman, that I'll swear I have not seen your equal.


Dear Madam, you confound me with your Praises.


I vow 'tis true; indeed I have struggled with my self before I thought fit to
reveal this: but the consideration of your great accomplishments, do indeed, as
it were, ravish, or extort it from me, as I may so say.


I beseech you Madam.


There is a Friend of mine, a Lady (whom the world has acknowledged to be well
bread, and of Parts too, that I must say, and almost confess) not in the Bud
indeed, but in the Flower of her Age, whom time has not yet invaded with his
injuries; in fine, envy cannot say that she is less than a full ripe Beauty.


That this Creature should bring forth such a Daughter.


Fair of Complexion, Tall, Straight, and shaped much above the ordinary; in
short, this Lady (whom many have Languished, and Sighed in vain for) does of
her self, so much admire your Person, and your Parts, that she extremely
desires to contract a Friendship with you, entire to all intents and purposes.


'Tis impossible she should be in earnest, Madam, but were she, I cannot Marry
ever.


Why she is Married already, Lord how dull he is! she is the best Friend I
have, Married to an old man, far above her sprightly years.


What a Mother-in-Law am I like to have!


Can you not Guess who this is all this while?


Too well.
Not I truly Madam.

Ha, ha, ha, no! that's strange, ha, ha, ha.


I cannot possibly.


Ha, ha, ha. I'll swear! ha, ha, ha.


No, I^le swear.


'Tis very much, you are an ill guesser, I'll vow, ha, ha, ha! Oh Lord, not
yet?


Not yet, nor ever can.


Here's Company, retire.


I am all on fire, what is it that Inspires me! I thought her ugly once, but
this morning thought ^ in love already! Sure I was blind, she is a beauty ^ a
minutes absence is death to me.


Phaat Joy, dou art in Meditaation and Consideraation upon something? if it be
a Scruple upon thy Conscience, I believe I will maak it out unto dee.


No Sir, I am only ruminating a while; I am inflamed with her affection, O
Susan! Susan! Ah me! Ah me!


Phaat dost dou not mind me? nor put die thought upon me? I do desire to know of
die Faathers Child, what he does differ from de Caatholick Church in, by my fait
it is a braave Church, and a gaallant Church (de Devil taake me) I will tell
you now, phare is dere such a one? will you speak unto me now Joy, ho?


'Tis a fine Church, a Church of Splender, and riches, and power, but there are
some things in it --


Shome things! Phaat dosht dou taalk of shome things? By my shoule I will not
see a better Church in a Shommers day, indeed, dan de Caatholick Church. I tell
you there is braave dignities, and promotions too; what will I shay unto you?
by St. Phaatrick, but I do believe I will be a Cardinal before I will have
death. They have had not one Eerish Cardinal a great while indeed.


What power is this that urges me so fast, oh Love! Love!


Phaat dosht dou shay, dosht dou love promotions and dignities? den I predee
now be a Caatholick. What will I say unto you more? but I will tell you, You do
shay dat de Caatholicks may be shaved, and de Caatholicks do shay, dat you will
be after being damned, and phare is de solidity now of daat, daat dou will not
turn a good Caatholick?


I cannot believe there is a Purgatory.


No! Phy I will tell you what I will shay unto you, I have sheen many Shoules
of Purgatory dat did appear unto me; And by my trot, I do know a Shoule when I
do she it, and de Shoules did speak unto me, and did deshire of me dat I vould
pray them out of that plaashe: And dere Paarents, and Friends did give me shome
money, and I did pray 'em out. Widout money indeed, we cannot pray them out, no
fait.


That may not be so hard; but for Transubstantiation, I can never believe it.


Phaat dosht not believe de Cooncel of Trent Joy? dou vilt be damned indeed,
and de Devil take me, if dou dosht not believe it. I will tell you phaat will I
say to you, a Cooncel is infalible; and I tell you, de Cardinals are infalible
too, upon occaasion, and they are damned Heretic Dogs, by my shoulvaation, dat
do not believe every oord they will speak indeed.


I feel a flame within me, oh Love, Love, whether wilt thou carry me?


Art thou in love Joy? by my shoule dou dosht Commit fornicaation, I will tell
you it is a venial Sin, and I will after be absolveing you for it: but if dou
dosh Commit Marrage, it is mortal, and dou vilt be damned and be fait and
trot. I predee now will dou fornicate and not Marry: for my shaake now vilt dou
fornicate.


Sure I am bewitched.


Bewitched in love, Aboo! boo! I'll tell you now, you must taake de Woman's


Oh the Witch! the Witch! Mal. Spencer, I am struck in my Bowels, take her
away, there, oh! I have a Thousand Needles in me, take her away, Mal. Spencer.


Phaare is she, Mal. Spencer. Exercise te Conjure te in Nomine, c.


Oh, I have a Million of Needles Pricking my Bowels.


I will, set up a hubub for dee, help! help! who is dere? help, Aboo, boo, boo.


Oh Needles! Needles! Take away Mal. Spencer, take her away.


He is bewitched, some Witch has gotten his Image, and is tormenting it.


Hold him, and I will taak some course vid him, he is possessed, or obess'd, I
will touch him vid some Relics.


Oh, good Sir, help him, what shall I do for him?


Get some Lead melted (and holding over his body) power it into a Poringer full
of Water, and if there appear any image upon the Lead, then he is bewitched.


Peash, I shay, here is shome of St. Phaatricks own Whisker, and some of the
Snuff he did use to taak, dat did hang upon his Beard; here is a Tooth of St.
Winifred, indeed, here is a Corn from de Toe of St. Ignatius, and here is de
paring of his Nails too.


Oh worse, worse, take her away.


By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, I will try some more, here is St.
Caaterine de Virgins Wedding-Ring, here is one of St. Bridge^s Nipples of her
Tuggs, by my shoule, here is some of de sweat of St. Francis, and here is a
piece of St. Laurence's Gridiron, this will make Cure upon any shickness, if it
be not ones lashed shickness.


What will become of me, I have poisoned him, I shall lose my Lover, and be
hanged into the bargain.


Oh! I dye, I dye, oh, oh.


By my shoule it is a very strong Devil, a very aable Devil, I will run and
^etch shome Holy-vater.


Look up, dear Sir, speak to me, ah woes me, Mr. Smerk, Mr. Smerk.


This Irish-man is a Gallant man about Witches, he out does me.


But I do not know what to think of his Popish way, his Words, his Charms, and
Holy Water, and Relics, methinks he is guilty of Witchcraft too, and you
should send him to Goal for it.


Oh! oh!


Now, I varrant you Joy, I will do de Devil's business for him, now I have dis
Holy-Vater.


This is wonderful!


Most amazing!


Conjure te malum (...), Conjure te pessir^ in (...), red mihi me^ ((...)
Latime) Bottle, phaat will I do? It is gone


'Tis strange: You se he does not fear holy-water.


I tell you phaat is de matter, by my Shoule he will touch de Bottle, because
daat is not Consecrate; but, by my fait, he will not meddle vid de Vater. I
will fetch shome, I have in a Baashon.


He lies as if he were a Sleep.


Oh! I begin to have some ease.


I did never meet vid a Devil dat did Cosht so much Laabour before.

Exercis^ te Demonens fuge, fuge, Exerciso te, per Melchefideck, per Bethlehem
Gabor, per omne quod Exit in um seu Graecum sive Latinum.


I am much better now, and the Witch is gone.


Good Sir retire to your Chamber, I will fetch some Cordials.


Sweet beautiful Creature! How I am Enamoured with thee! Thy beauty dazzles like
the Sun in his Meridian.


Beauty, Enamourd! Why he seems distracted still; lead him to his Chamber, and
let him rest.


Now Joy, dosht dou she, I have maade a Miracle by my shoule. Phen will I she
one of your Church maake a Miracle, ho? by my Shoulevaation they cannot maake
Miracles out of de Caatolick Church, I tell you now, ho.

Phaat is de matter now, ah? by my shoule shomething does cuff upon my faash,
an be, Exercise te in ^omine, nomine, by my shoule Saatan, I will pelt dee vid
Holy-Vater indeed; he is Angry dat I did make a Miracle.


What is this, I hear the blows, and see nothing.


So do I, I am frighted and amazed; lets fly.


Oh, oh, vat is dis for Joy, oh, all my Holy-Vater is gone, I must fly.


All this day have I watched for this opportunity, let me improve it now.
Consider, Madam, my Extreme Love to you, and your own harred to that Fool, for
whom you are designed to morrow.


My consent is to be had first.


Your Fathers resentment of your refusal, may put you out of all possibillity
of making me happy, or providing for your own Content.


To Marry one against his Consent is a Crime heel ne'er forgive.


Though his Engagement to Sir Ieffery would make him Refuse his Consent
beforehand: He is too reasonable a man to be troubled afterwards, at your
Marrying to a better Estate, and to one that loves more than he can tell you: I
have not words for it.


Though I must Confess you may deserve much better, would you not Imagine I
were very forward to receive you upon so short an Acquaintance.


Would I had a Casement in my Breast. Make me not, by your delay, the
miserablest wretch on Earth. (Which I shall ever be without you) think quickly
Madam, you have not time to Consider long, I lay my self at your Feet, to be
for ever made happy or miserable by you.


How shall I be sure you'll not deceive me? These hasty vows, like Angry words,
Seldom shoes the Heart.


By all the Powers of Heaven and Earth.


Hold, Swear not, I had better take a man of honour at his Word.


And may Heaven throw its Curses on me when I break it; my Chaplin's in the
House, and passes for my valet de Chambre. Will you for ever make me Happy
Madam?


I'll trust your honour; and I'll make my self so; I throw my self upon you, use
me nobly: now 'tis out.


Use ye, as I would use my Soul; my Honour, my Heart, my Life, my Liberty, and
all I have is yours. There's not a man in all the World, that I can envy now,
or wish to be.


Take care, we shall be spied: The short time I have to resolve in, will, I
hope, make you have a better Opinion of my modesty, than otherwise you would
have occasion for.


Dearest! Sweetest of Creatures! my Joy distracts me, I cannot speak to you.


For Heavens sake leave me, if you raise a Jealously in the House I am ruined,
we'll meet soon.


Adieu my Life! my Soul! I am all obedience.


Oh my Dear, I am happy, all's out that pained me so; my Lover knows I love
him.


I have Confessed to my Ghostly Father too, and my Conscience is at ease.


Mine received the news with more Joy, than he Could put in Words.


And mine in rapture; I am the happiest Woman Living.


I'll not yield to you at all in that.


There's no cause, I would not submit to you in, but this my Dear.


I will hold out in this cause while I have breath, I am happier in my Choice
than all the World can make me.


Mine is the Hansomest, Wittiest, most accomplished Gentleman --


Mine is the beautifullest, sweetest, well-shap'd, well-bred, wittiest
Gentleman --


That must be I, whom she means, for all my Quarrels with her.


Peace, we shall hear more.


Little think our Fathers how happy we shall be to morrow.


What's that? Listen.


(If no unlucky Accident should hinder us) we shall be far happier than they
can Imagine.


How we have Cheated them all this while!


'Slife they are behind us, stir not. We have hidden our love from them all
this while.


Have you so? but we shall find it now.


Your Brother Little thinks I Love him so; For I have been Cross and coy to him
on purpose. I shall be the happiest Woman in him, I am to have, that ever was.


I could wish your Brother loved me as well as mine does you. For never Woman
loved the man she was to Marry as I do him, I am to have to morrow.


That's my best Daughter, thou were ever a good Child, nay blush no^, all is
out, we heard ye both.


Ay, all is out, my pretty Dear dissembler: well, I protest and vow, I am
mightily obliged to you for your great love to me, and good opinion of me.


I hope to morrow will be a happy day for both our families.
Oh Sir Edward, is not that strange I told you, I should not have believed it
if I had not seen it.


And pray give me the same liberty: But now we'll have some music, that's good
against enchantment, Sing me the Song I Commanded you, and then we'll have a
dance before we go to bed.


Ho, 'tis a pretty Shong, but I will shing a brave Cronan now, dat is better I
tell you.


'Tis very fine but sing me one Song more in three parts, to sweeten our Ears,
for all that.


Do you play, play I say, Oh they are bewitched, I will shay no more.


Play I say.


I can't, my Arms are on the sudden stiff as marble, I cannot move them.


Sure this is roguery, and Confederacy.


Conjuro te conjuro in nonime, c.


Hold, hold, prithee don't duck us all we are not all bewitched.


I tell you it ish good for you an be, and will defend you upon occasion.


Now you see, Sir, with your own Eyes; cannot you give us a Receipt to make
Holy-water?


A Resheit, aboo, boo, boo; by my Shoule he is a Fool. I have ma^e two
Hogsheads gra: and I will have you vast all de Rooms vid it, and de Devil will
not come upon de plaash by my Shalvaation.


'Tis a little odd; but however, I shall not fly from my Belief, that every
thing is done by Natural Causes, because I cannot presently assign those
Causes.


You are in the right, we know not the powers of matter.


When any thing unwonted happens, and we not see the cause, we call it
unnatural and miraculous.


By my Shoule you do talk like Heretick-Dogs, and Aathiests.


Let us enquire farther about these Musicians.


I will maake shome Miracles, and I think I will be after reconcileing them
indeed, oh dou damned witch.


Byr Lady 'tis meeghty strong Ale, Ay am well neegh drunken, and my Nephew will
be stark wood, his Hawks want their Pigeon saw this neeght.


Why what wouden yeow be a Angee? Flesh, Ay ha getten de Bridle byr Lady, Ayst
ma some body carry me, and be my Titt too.


You're a strange Fillee (Horse I should say) why did thou think thou wast a
Titt when the Bridle was on thee.


Ay marry, I know weel I am sure, I wott I was a Titt, a mere Titt.


Listen, there's a noise of women in the Air, it comes towards us.


Ay by th'Mass, 'tis Witches.




Wawnds and Flesh it is a flock of Witches byr Lady, they come reeght ore head,
I'st let fly at 'em, hah, be the mass I ha mamed one, here's one has a wing
brocken at least.


M. Spencer by the mass.


O Rogues! I'll be revenged on you, Dogs, Villains, you have broken my Arm.


I was made a Horse, a Titt by thee, by the mass I'st be revenged o'thee.

Horse, Horse, be thou to me.
And carry me where e're I flee.

O'ds Flesh, what's this? I connot believe my Senses; I mun walk home alone,
but I'll charge my Peace again byr Lady, and the Hags come again I'st have
the other Shoot at 'em.


My Dear Friend, I am so transported with excess of Joy, it is become a pain, I
cannot bear it.


Dear Bellfort! I am in the same Case, but (if the hope transports us so) what
will Enjoyment do?


My Blood is chill, and shivers when I think on it.


One night with my Mistress would outweigh an Age of Slavery to come.


Rather than be without a nights Enjoyment of mine, I would be hanged next
morning: I am Impatient till they appear.


They are Women of Honour, and will keep their Words; your Parson's ready, and
three or four of our Servants for Witnesses.


He is so, 'twill be dispatch'd in half a quarter of an hour, all are retired
to bed.


Go in, yonders my Lady-Mother-in-Law coming, I must contrive a way to secure
her: in, in.


I go.


Death, that this old Fellow should be asleep already! she comes now to
discover, what I know too well already.


He is there I'll swear, a punctual Gentleman, and a person of much honour;
Sir, I am come according to your appointment; Sir Ieffery is fast.


'Tis before I expected, Madam, I thought to have left Bellfort asleep, who is
a Jealous man, and believes there is an Intrigue betwixt your Ladyship and me.


I vow: ha, ha, ha, me! no, no; ha, ha, ha.


Retire for a short time, and when I have secured him, I'll wait on you; but
let it be in the dark.


You speak like a Discreet and Worthy Person, remember this Room, there's no
body lies in it; I will stay there in the dark for you.


Your most humble Servant. Well, I will go to the Ladies Chamber as if I
^istook it for mine, and let them know this is the time.


Dere is shometimes de pretty Wenches, do walk here in de dark at night, and
by my Shoulvaation if I do catch one, I will be after enjoying her Body: and
fait and trot I have a great need too, it is a venial Sin, and I do not care.


Death, who is here? stay Ladies, here's the damned Priest in the way.


Go you, we'll follow by and by in the dark.


I hear one trampling, he is come already, sure Bellfort is asleep; who is
there?


By my Should it is a Woman's speech, 'tis I; where are you? by my fait I will
maak a Child upon her Body.


Mr. Doubty.


Ay, let me put a sweet Kish upon die hand Joy, and now I will Shalute die Mout,
and I will embraash die Body too indeed.


S'life, I am mistaken, this is the Irish Priest; his understanding is sure to
betray him.


I predee now Joy be not nishe, I will maak shome good sport vid dee indeed.

Hoo now, phaare is die hand now? oh,
Here it is by my Shoule.
I will use dee braavely upon occaasion, I will tell you, predee kish me upon
my Faash now, it is a braave kish indeed.

By my Should don art very handsome, I do know it, dough I cannot she dee. I
predee now retire vid me, aboo, aboo, by my Shoule dis is a Gaalant occaasion,
come Joy.


What's the meaning of this? he talked to some Woman, and kissed her too, and
is retired into the Chamber I was in.


Every thing is quiet, I hear no noise.


Nor I, this is the happy time.


This must be he; who's there?


S'life! this is my Mothers voice, retire softly.


Oh Misfortune! What makes her here? we are undone if she discovers us.


Whose there I say? will you not answer? what can this mean? 'tis not a Wench I
hope for Doubty, and then I care not.

I am impatient till he comes; ha, whom have we here? I am sure this is not he,
he does not come that way.


By my should Joy, dou art a Gaalant piece of Flesh, a braave Bedfellow, phoo
art dou?


One that loves you dearly.


Phaat will I do to she die faash I wonder? Oh, here is a light approaching
unto us.


Who's this with a light? I must fly.


Now I will she die faash.


O, Sir, are you there? I am going to Mr. Smirk with this Candle poor man.


O phaat have I done? Oh! de Vich! de Vich!


Oh! the Witch! the Witch!


By my Shoule I have had communicaation and Copulaation too vid a Succubus; Oh!
phaat will I do! phaat will I do! by my fait and trot, I did tought she had
been a braave and gaallant Lady, and be, oh! oh!


What shriek was that? hah! here's nobody, sure all's clear now!


I heard a shriek, this is the time to venture, they are frighted out of the
Gallery, and all's clear now.


Let's venture; we shall have people stirring very early this morning to
prepare for the Wedding else.


Ha! who's that?
I am terribly afraid: Heaven!
what's this! the Chamber door opened, and I saw a woman
(...) in, I am enraged, I'll distrub 'em.
Isabella, The dosia, Bellfort, Doubty disguised, Parson and Servants in the
Chamber.


You see we are women of words, and women of courage too, that dare venture
upon this dreadful business.


Welcome, more welcome than all the Treasures of the Sea and Land.


More welcome than a Thousand Angels.


Death! we are undone, one knocks.


Curse on 'em; keep the door fast.


Gentlemen open the door for Heavens sake, quickly.


Open it, we are ruined else; we'll into the Bed, you know what you have to do.


Gentlemen, the House is alarm'd with Witches, and I saw two come into this
Chamber, and come to give you notice.


Here are none but whom you see.


They come invisibly then; for we had our eyes on the door.


Are they not about the Bed somewhere? Let's search.


There are no Witches there, I can assure you.


Look a little, I warrant you.


Open the door quickly, quickly, the Witches are there.


Oh! my Husband, I am ruined if he sees me here.


Put out the Candles,


Oh! Oh! I have broken my knees; this is the Witches doing: I have loast my
Wife too: lights, lights there.


I'll not stay here.


Here's no staying for us.


Quickly, go by the Wall.


For Heavens sake let's into the Gallery and call for lights.


A Curse upon this Fellow and all ill luck.


Hell take him, the Ladies are gone too.


WHat unfortunate disapointments have we met with!


All ill luck has conspired against us this night.


We have been near being discovered, which would have ruined us.


And we have but this night to do our business in; if we dispatch not this
affair now, all will come out to morrow.


I tremble to think on it; sure the surprise the Ladies were in before, has
frighted 'em from attempting again.


I rather think that they have met with people, in the Gallery, that have
prevented 'em.


Now I reflect, I am apt to think so too; for they seem to be very hearty in
this matter. Once more go to their Chamber.


Go you in then to ours.


Hold, Mr. Doubty.


A Curse on all damned luck, is she here?


Sweet Madam, is it you! I have been watching, for Bellfort's sleeping ever
since.

I venture hard, since Sir Ieffery missed me out of Bed, I had much ado to
^asten an excuse upon him.


I am so afraid of Bellforts coming, Madam, he was here but even now: The
hazard of your honour puts me in an Agony.


O dear Sir, put out the Candle, and he can never discover any thing; besides,
we will retire into you Room.


Death, what shall I do now.


And since it is dark, and you cannot see my Blushes, I must tell you, you are
a very ill guesser; for I my self was the person I described.


Oh Madam! you raille me, I will never believe it while I live; it is
impossible.


I'll swear 'tis true: Let us withdraw into that Room, or we shall be
discovered.

Oh Heaven, I am undone, my Husband with a light run into your Chamber.


Tis a happy deliverance.


I'll counterfeit walking in my sleep.


Where is this Wife of mine? She told me she fell asleep in the Closet, at her
Prayers, when I mist her before; and I found her there at my coming back to my
Chamber: But now she is not there I am sure. Ha! here she is. Ha, what is she
blind! she takes no notice of me! how gingerly she treads!


Oh! stand off -- who's that would kill my dear Sir Ieffery? stand off I say.


Oh Lord, kill me! where! ha! here's nobody.


Oh! the Witch, the Witch, oh she pulls the clothes off me. Hold me, dear Sir
Ieffery, hold me.


On my Conscience and Soul she walks in her sleep.


Oh, all the Clothes are off, cover me, oh I am so cold!


Good lack a day, it is so! my Dear, my Lady.


Hah, hah.


Wake I say, wake.


Ah.


'Tis I my dear.


Oh Heaven! Sir Ieffery, where am I?


Here in the Gallery.


Oh! how came I here?


Why, thou did walk in thy sleep; good lack a day, I never saw the like.


In my sleep say you! oh Heaven! I have caught my death. Let's to Bed, and tell
me the story there.


Come on. Ha, ha, ha, this is such a jest! walk in your sleep! godsniggs, I
shall so laugh at this in the morning.


This is a happy come off.


If we do not get into this Chamber suddenly, we are undone: They are up in the
Offices already.


Never have adventures been so often disapointed, in so short a time.


There's no body in the Gallery now, we may go.


Hast then, and let us fly thither.


Ah, what's this?


Oh! the Witches, the Witches.


Oh mercy upon us, where is this Candle?

So let me tell you, 'Twas no Witch; they were the two young Ladies, that
frighted my dear beauteous Love so; and I'll acquaint their Parents with it
I'll assure you.


This is strange, what could they have to do at this time of the night!


I know not. But I well know what I have to do. I am inflamed beyond all
measure, with thy heavenly beauty.


Alas, my beauty is but moderate; yet none of the worst, I must needs say.


'Tis blasphemy to say so; your eyes are bright like two Twin-Stars; your Face
is an Ocean of beauty; and your Nose a Rock arising from it, on which my heart
did split; Nothing but Ruby and Pearl is about thee; I must blazon thee by
Jewels, thy beauty is of a Noble rank.


Good lack, what fine language is this! well, 'tis a rare thing to be a
Scholar.


'Tis a miracle I should not think her handsome before this day; she is an
Angel! Isabella is a Dowdy to her. You have an unexhausted mine of beauty. Dear
Mrs. Susan cast thy Smiles upon me, and let me labour in thy Quarry: Love makes
me Eloquent and Allegorical.


Sweet Sir, you oblige me very much by your fine Language; but I vow I
understand it not: yet methinks it goes very prettily.


I will unfold my hear unto thee; let me approach thy lip, Oh fragrant!
fragrant! Arabia felix is upon this lip.


Ha! upon my lip, what's that? I have nothing, I have no pimple, nor any thing
upon my lip, not I.


Sweet Innocence -- I will be plain; I am inflamed within, and would enjoy thy
lovely Body in sweet dalliance.


How Sir! do you pretend to be a Divine, and would commit this sin! know, I
will preserve my Honour and my Conscience.


Conscience? why so you shall, as long as our minds are united. The Casuists
will tell you, it is a Marriage in foro (...)* and besides, the Church of Rome
allows Fornication: And truly it is much practised in our (...) too. Let us
retire, come, come.


Stand off, I defy you: your Casuists are Knaves, and you are a Papist, you
are a foul voluptuous Sw^n^, and I will never smile on you more. Farewell.


Hold, hold, Dear, ^autious Creature, I am at thy mercy: Must I marry then?
speak. Prithee spare me that, and I'll do any thing.


Stand off, I scorn thy Love; thou art a piteous Fellow.


Dear Mrs. Susan hear me; let us but do the thing, and then I'll marry thee.


I'll see thee hanged e're I'll trust thee, or e're a Whoremaster of you all.
No, I have been served that trick too often already, I thank you.


Must I then Marry?


Yonders the Chaplin and Susan;
But this disguise will fright 'em.

Let's on, we must venture.

Oh! the Witches, the Witches.

Oh! fly, fly.

What shriek was that?

We have been several times alarm'd with these Noises.

Here's ^othing but madness and confusion in this Family.

Heaven! who are these whispering?

Who's this I have hold on, heaven grant it be not my Lady?

'Tis I, 'tis Theodosia.

'Tis lucky -- where is your fair Companion?

Here.

And here's my Friend --

A thousand Blessings on you.

Phoo are this?

Heaven what's this, the damned Priest? These disguises will serve our turn
yet: oh, Sir we are haunted with Witches here, run in quickly for some
Holy-water.


I will, I will, let me alone.


Now in, in quickly.


Phaar is this Vitches? phaar are they? hah, they are Wanisht for fear of me, I
will put dish down in dis plaash for my defence; what will I do now? I have
maade Fornication vid dis Witch or Succubus indeed; when I do go home, I will
be after being absolved for it, and den I will be as Innocent as de child
unborn by my Shoule. I have hanged my self all round vid relics indeed, and
de Sprights and de Vitches cannot hurt me fait and trot. --


My Dear, I come to visit thee again.


Phaat is here, de Witch again does come to haunt me, Benidi^e, out upon dee dou
damned Witch, vat dosht dou come upon me for? I defy dee, a plaague taak dee
indeed.


I am no Witch, I am a poor Innocent woman, and a Tenant of Sir Edwards, and
one that loves you dearly.


Dou plaagy Witch, let me come unto my holy vater, and I will pay dee off
indeed; ho, by my shoulvaation 'tis all flown away -- oh dou damned Witch, I
will hang dee indeed.


Pretdee be kinder, my Dear, and kiss me.


Out, out, kiss dee -- a plaague taake dee Joy* stand off upon me, by my
shoulvaation, I will kiss de dogs Arse shaving die presence, before I will be
after kishing dee.


Be not so unkind to thy own Dear. Thou did promise me Marriage, thou
know, and I come to claim thee for my Husband.


Aboo, boo, boo, Marriage, Vat will I Marry vid a Witch, by my shoule --
Conjuro ^e, fuge, fuge.


Do not think to put me off with your Latin; for do you hear Sir, you promised
me Marriage, and I will have you.


Oh phaat will I do? Vat will I do?


This Morning I will Marry you, I'll stay no longer, you are mine.


By my shoule Joy I will tell you, I am a Romish Priest, and I cannot Maarry.
What would you have now?


You shall turn Protestant then, for I will have you.


By St. Paatrick phaat does she say? Oh damned Protestant Witch. I will speak
civilly, Madam, I will tell dee now, if dou will repair unto dine own House,
by my shoulwaation I will come unto dee to morrow, and I will give dee
satisfaaction indeed.


I'll not be put off, I'll have you now.


By my Should I will not go, I will hang dee for a Witch; and now I do apprehend
dee upon daat. Help, help.

I have taaken a Witch ineeed: Help, help.


I am your Wife.


Help, help, I have taaken a Witch.


Ha! what's here? one of the Witches by th'Mess.


Ay, by my Shoule Joy, I have taaken her.


Nay, byr Lady, whoo has taken yeow by yeowr leave.


We han taken a Witch too; lay hawd on her.


Deber, Deber, little Martin, little
Martin, where art thou little
Master? where art thou little Master?

Dost dou mutter? By my shoule I will hang dee Joy; a plaague taak dee indeed.


Thou art a Popish Priest, and I will hang thee.


I am Innocent as the Child unborn, I will taak de Oades, and be --


Marmot, Mamilion, Rouncy, Puckling, little Master, have you left me all?


We han got another Witch, who's strongly gaurded and Watched in the stabo.


Come let's hale her thither: We could not get into the hawse till naw, we came
whoame so late at night.


Come let us taake de Witch away: I will hang dee Joy -- a plaague taake dee
fait.


Am I o'retaken then -- I am Innocent, I am Innocent.


Let us carry her thither, come along.


Pull her away -- we will be after hanging of you Fait and Trot.


I could not rest to night for the Joy of being Married to day: 'Tis a pretty
Rogue -- she's somewhat Cross -- but I warrant her she will love me, when she
has tried me once.


Why would you rise so soon? 'Tis not day yet.


'Tis no matter, I cannot sleep man, I am to be Married Sirrah.


Ay, and therefore you should have slept now, that you might watch the better
at night: For 'twill be uncivil to sleep much upon your Wedding Night.


Uncivil, ay that it will -- very uncivil: I wont sleep a wink. call my new
Brother-in-Law: Oh here he is, he can't sleep neither.


Set down the Candle; and go bid the Groom get the Horses ready, I must away to
the Powts.


Oh Brother, good morrow to you; what a Devil's this -- what booted! are you
taking a Journey upon your wedding day?


No, but I will not lose my Hawking this Morning; I will come back time enough
to be Married Brother.


Well, breeding's a fine thing -- this is a strange ill-bred Fellow! what Hawk
upon your Wedding day! I have other game to fly at -- Oh how I long for night
-- why my Sister will think you care not for her.





Sir, I cannot come at the Horses, for the People have taken a brace of
Witches, and they are in the stable under a strong guard, that will let no body
come at 'em.


Uds flesh, I shall have my Horses bewitched, and lose 500 Pounds worth of
Horse Flesh.


No, no, they can do no hurt -- when they are taken the Devil leaves 'em --
Let's go see 'em --


What shall we do?


Let us stand up close against the Wall.


Listen, here are the Witches, what will become of us?


A Thousand blessings light on thee my Dear Pretty Witch.


O Lord! there's the Devil too Courting of a Witch.


This is the first Night I ever lived, thou Dearest, Sweetest Creature.


Oh! sweet quoth a, that's more than I can say of my self at this time.


We will go and be decently prepared for the Wedding that's Expected:


Not a word of discovery till the last; creep by the Wall. Ha -- who's here!


Where?


Oh good Devil don't hurt us, we are your humble servants.


In* in quickly --


Lights, Lights, Help, Help, Murder, Murder, Oh good Devil don't hurt me; I am a
Whoremaster.


And I am a Drunkard; Help, Help, Murder.


What's the Matter?


Phaat is de matter Joy?


O Nuncle! here have been Devils and Witches: They have flown away with our
Candles, and put us in fear of our lives.


Here's a great Storm Arising -- what can be the matter! the Hags are at Warck
by'r Lady, and they come to me by the mass, I ha getten my brawd Sward: Ay^ mow
'em down, general faith will I.


Be not afraid, I will taake a Caare, and I will conjure down this Tempest
fait an be.


Fl^sh that Thunder Clap shook the haw^e, Candle burns blew too.


Death, it goes out, what will become of us?


An the Witches come, by'r Lady Ayst mow 'em down with my brawd Sward I warrant
of -- I have shot one Witch ^lying to Neeght already.


What's this! we are set upon by Cats.


They are Witches in the shape of Cats, what shall we do?


Phaat will I do? Cat, Cat, Cat, Oh, oh.
Conjuro vos ^gite, fugite. Cacodaem^nes, Cats, Cats.

Have at ye all, I ha Mauld some of 'em by the mass, they are fled, but I am
plagneily scratched.


They ware afraid of my Charms, and de sign of de Cross did maake them fly --
but d^y have s^ratcht a great deal upon my faash for all daat.


Mine is all of a gore blood.


And mine too -- that th^s^ damned Witches should disfigure my Countenance upon
my Wedding day.


O Lord, what a Tempest's this?


Heaven! What a Storm is this! The Witches and all their Imps are at work. Who
are these? hah! -- your Faces are all bloody.


We have been frighted out of our Wits; we have been assaulted by Witches in
the shape of Cats, and they have scratched us most ruefully.


But I did fright them away, by my Shoule.


Why you are as much mauld as any one, nay, they are at work -- I never
remember such Thunder and Lightning; bid 'em ring out all the Bells at the
Church.


I will


Flesh, Christen Bells!


Yes, I believe the great Bell at Oxford was Christened Tom.


And that at Lincoln has a Christen name too.


I tell de Joy, I will carry de hosht and shome relics abroad, and we will
get a black Chicken and maak one of de Vitches throw it into de Air, and it
will maak stop upon de Tempest.


Why, all the Authors say,


What's here a haund! uds Flesh, you see I have cut off a haund of one of the
Hags.


Let's see, this is a lucky evidence; keep it and see what Witch it will fit,
and 'tis enough to hang her.


The Storm begins to stay; I did shay shome Aves, and part of de Gospd of St.
Iohn, and in fine, fugiat Tempestas, and it does go away upon it indeed.


We may trace her by her Blood.


But hark you, What's the reason my Hawks wanted their Pigeons: uds bud I
shall remember you for it; you think to live like a Lubber here and do nothing.


Peace, I was drunken, peace good Sir Timothy, Ayst do no more so.


Methinks all on a sudden the Storm is laid.


Sir, the Constable and the rest of us have taken the whole flock of Witches:
but they fell upon us like Cats first; but we have beaten 'em into Witches, and
now we have 'em fast.


So now, their Power's gone when they are taken, let's go see 'em.


I'll wash my face and away a Hawking, now the Storm's over, 'tis broad day.


I will call up Sir Edward; Music, and wake the two Brides with a Serenade
this morning.


It has been a dreadful Storm, and strangely laid of the sudden, this is a
joyful day to me: I am now in hopes to strengthen and preserve my Family -- my
poor Daughter has the worst on it, but she is discreet; and will mould Sir
Timothy to what she pleases: he is good natur, ^, and he loves her, and his
Estate's beyond Exception. -- Go call my Son to me, bid him rise, 'tis day, put
out the Candle now.

How now, your Face scrach't! what were you drunk last night, and have been at
Cuffs?


No, Sir Timothy, I, and Tegue O Devilly, and Tom. Shaklehead were assaulted by
Witches in the Shapes of Cats; and Tom. Shaklehead has cut off one of the Cats
hands; and all the Witches are taken, and are in the Stable under a strong
Guard.


What foolish wild story is this? you have been drunk in Ale, that makes such
foggy Dreams.


Sbud Sir, the story is true, you'll find it so.


How now! what makes you booted upon your Wedding-day?


Why, I am going a Hawking this morning, and I'll come home time enough to be
married.


Thou most incorrigible Ass, whom no precept or example can teach common sense
to, that would have made thee full of Joy at thy approaching happiness; it would
have filled thy mind, there could have been no room for any other object; to
have a good Estate settled upon thee, and to be married to a woman of that
Beauty, and that Wit and Wisdom, I have not known her equal, would have
transported any one but such a clod of Earth as thou art: thou art an excrement
broken from me, not my Son.


Why Sir, I am transported; but can't one be transported with Hawking too? I
love it as I love my life, would you have a Gentleman neglect his sports?


None but the vilest men will make their sports their business; their books,
their friends, their kindred and their country should concern 'em: such drones
serve not the ends of their Creation, and should be lopped of from the rest of
men.


A man had better dye than leave his sport; tell me of books, I think there's
nothing in 'em for my part; and for Music I had as live set in the stocks, as
hear your fine songs; I love a Bagpipe well enough, but there's no Music like
a ^eep Mouthed Hound.


Thou most excessive blockhead, thou art enough to embitter all my sweets; thou
art a Wen belonging to me, and I shall do well to cut thee off: but do you hear
Fool, go and dress your self, and wait upon your Bride, or by Heaven I will
disinherit you. This is the Critical day, on which your happiness or misery
depends; Think on that.


Was ever so devilish a Father to make one neglect one's sport, because he's no
sports-man himself; A Pox on Marrying, could not I Hawk and Marry too? well I
am resolved I'll steal out after I am Married.


Come on: Place your selves just by her Chamber and play -- and sing that Song
I love so well.


My Dear, my sweet, and most delicious Bride
Awake, and see thine own Dear waiting at thy Door;
Surely she cannot sleep for thinking of me, poor Rogue.



Well, you have a pleasant way with you, you'll never leave your pretty humours,
I see that.


Ha! Thou hast been scratching with Wenches, was not thy face ugly enough, but
thou must disfigure it more than Nature has done? one would have thought that
had don't enough.


Faith thou art a pretty wag, Thou It never leave thy Roguery; Wenches, why
'twas done by Witches, who in the shape of Cats, had like to have killed us:
your Brother, my Uncle, and the Irish man are all as bad as I.


Prithee begone, and mend thy Face, I cannot bear it.


Ay, ay, it's no matter, I'll come into thy Chamber, I must be famil^ar with
you --


And I will be very free with you; you are a Nauseous Fool and you shall never
come into my Chamber. ^S life, would your begin you Reign before you are
Married? no, I'll dominere now -- begone.


Nay, faith I'll not leave you so, you little Cross Rogue you; open the door
there, let me in, let me in I say.


Who's that? Thou art my love, come into my arms.


Oh the Witch! the Witch! help,


So, Now thou art come, my Dear, I'll dispatch the Witches, they are all taken
and Guarded in the stable: Clod, bid 'em bring em all hither.


That's well, are they caught? let 'em come before us, we will order 'em.


I would do nothing without thee my Dear.


Here Lady Taake some


Thank you Sir.


I did give die Husband shome before Joy, but I will speak a word unto you all,
let every one


It shall be done.


Daat is very well now.

Let no Witch Eerland* that kill vid deir Countenance.


This is a very Learned and Wise man.


He is a great man indeed, we are nothing to him.


You will she now, now I will speak unto them, here they come; I shay bring
their Arshes before deir Faashes.


Bring 'em backward, thus.


You Clod, and you Tom. Shacklehead have sworn sufficiently against the Witch
Spencer, and so has that Country Fellow.


I am an Innocent Woman, and they have broken my arm with a shot, Rogues,
Villains, Murderers.


They are angry, daat is a certain sign of a Witch; and they cannot cry, Bodin
dosh shay, daat a Witch can cry three drops vid her right Eye, I tell you.


Have you searched 'em all as I bid you Woman?


Yes an't please your Worship, and they have all great Biggs and Teates in many
parts, except Mother Madge, and hers are but small ones.


It is enough, make their Mittimus, and send 'em all to Goal.


I am Innocent, I am Innocent,
Save my life, I am no Witch,
I am Innocent, save my life.

Ven they do shay they are Innocent, and deshire to shave deir lives, 'tis a
shertain shigne of a Witch fait and trot.


Besides, this Woman Margaret Demdike by name, threatened to be revenged on me,
and my Cow has been sucked dry ever since, and my Child has had fits.


She lies, she lies, I am Innocent.


This is she that had a hand cut off, it fits her to a hair.


Tis enough: Tis enough.


Must I be hanged for having my hand cut off? I am Innocent, I am Innocent.


Did not you say to my Wife you would be revenged on me? and has not she be^n
struck with pain in her rump-bone ever since? and did not my Sow cast her
farrow last Night?


You should send your Brother to Goal for cutting my hand off.


What for cutting a Cats hand off? you were a Cat when I cut it off.


An't please your Worship this Woman, Gamer Dickinson, Who threped: and
threped, and awe to becaw'd me last Neeght in the Lone, and who said he would be
revenged on me; and this Morning at four a Clock Butter would not come, nor the
Ale warck a bit, who has bewitched it.


I have heard enough, send 'em all to the Goal.


You must never give a Witch any Milk, Butter, Cheese, or any thing that comes
from the Cows.


Now dou damned Witch, I will be after sheeing dee hanged indeed, I did taake
her by my shoule --


I am a poor Innocent Woman, I am abused, and I am his wife an't please your
worship: He had knowledge of me in a Room in the Gallery, and did promise me
Marriage.


Hah! what's this?


By my Shalvaation I am innocent as de Child unborn, I speak it before Heaven,
I did never make fornicaation in my life. To them. It is malice upon me.


There is something in this story, but I dare not speak of it.


I do believe you Mr. O Devilly.


Besides, he is a Popish Priest.


Aboo, boo, boo, a Priest, I will taake de Oades Fait and trot; I did never
taake. Holy Orders since I was bore. Iamaica. Dere is anoder Mental
reservaation too; and it is Lawful.


Indeed Sir, I have been told he is a Popish Priest, and has been at Rome.


I speak it in de presence of all de Saints, daat I never did see Rome in all
my life, Vid de eyes of a Lyon,


Take away the Witches, there is their Mittimus, carry 'em all to Lancaster.
Witches. I am Innocent, I am Innocent.


Come on you Hags, now your Master the Devil has left you.


Sir you must excuse me, I must give you the Oaths upon this Information.


And by my shoule Joy, I will taak them and twenty or thirty more Oades if dou
dosht please indeed, I will take 'em all to serve dee, Fait and Trot.


Come into the Hall, there's the Statute Book.


I will go in and see if the Brides be Ready.


Gentlemen, This day I am to do the great Duty of a Father in providing for the
Settlement of my Children; this day we will dedicate to Mirth, I hope you will
partake with me in my Joy.


I should have had a greater share in any Joy that could affect so worthy a
man, had not your Daughter been the only Person, I ever saw, whom I could have
fixed my love upon; but I am unhappy that I had not the honour to know you till
it was to late.


This had been a great honour to me, and my Daughter, and I am sorry I did not
know it sooner, and assure you it is some trouble upon me.


How like a Gentleman he takes it, but I have an Ass, Nay two, to deal with.


Good morrow Brother, our brace of Brides are ready, where are the lusty
Bridegrooms?


Heaven grant this may prove a happy day.


Mr. Doubty, was ever such an unlucky Night as we have had.


'Tis happy to me who was assured of the love of one, I love much more than all
the Joys on Earth.


Now you make me blush, I swear it is a little too much.


Ladies, I wish you much joy of this day.


Much happiness to you.


Brother, good morrow to you; This is a happy day, our families will soon be
one: I have sent all the Witches to the Goal.


Had you Evidence enough?


Ay, too much; this Gentleman was accused for being a Papist and a Priest, and
I have given him the Oaths, and my Certificate, and on my Conscience he is a
very good Protestant.


It is no matter, I did taak de Oades, and I am a very good Protestant upon
occasion, Fait.


Say you so? between you and I, how many Sacraments are there?


How many? by my shoule dere are sheven; how many would would dere be ^ink you
Hob? ^y my shoule I have a dispensaation, indeed I am t^o (...) for 'em fait I
am.


So here are the Bridegrooms.


Oh my Dear pretty Bride, let me kiss thy hand, how joyful am I, that I shall
have my Dear within these arms! ah! now the little Rogue can smile upon me.


Cousin good morrow to you, I am glad to see you, how do you do this Morning?


Never better.


God be thanked, I am very glad on it.


Is not the Parson come yet?


Yes Sir, he is very busy at his Breakfast in the buttery: And as soon as he
has finished his Pipe and his Tankard -- he will wait on you: he has Married one
Couple already, The Chaplin and Mrs. Susan.


How!


'Tis true.


I am sorry for it, that Chaplin is a Rascal -- I have found him out, and will
turn him away --


Sir, here are some of your Tennants and Country men come to be merry with you,
and have brought their Piper and desire to dance before you.


We are come to wish your Worship, my Young Master and Lady Joy of this happy
day.


You are kindly welcome Neighbours, this is happiness indeed, to see my Friends,
and all my loving Neighbours thus about me.


Heavens bless your good Worship.


These honest men are the strength and sinnews of our Country; such men as
these are uncorrupted, and while they stand to us we fear no Papists, nor
French invasion; this day we will be merry together.


Ayst make bold to Dance for joy.


Prithee do --


Hold, there needs no Parson.


What say you?


How!


We are Married already, and desire your blessing.


It is impossible.


Heaven! what's this I see?


Thieves! Robbers! Murderers of my honour, I'll hang that Fellow.


What pageantry is this? explain your self.


What a Devil do they mean now!


The truth is Sir, we are Married; we found you Fathers were too far engaged to
break off: I (...) forced us to this way, and nothing else can be a fit excuse.


We have designed this ever since last Summer, and any other but a private way,
had certainly prevented it. Let excess of love excuse our fault, Sir Ieffery, I
will exceed what s^tlement was made upon your Daughter.


An! I will, Sir, do the same Right to yours.


Flesh and Heart -- I'll Murder her.


Hold Sir, she is mine now; I beseech you moderate your passion.


Oh vile Creature; I'll tear her Eyes out.


Forbear good Madam: What cannot be redressed must be past by --


Thou worst of Thieves, thou know I can ne'er pass it by.


Sir Edward, you may do what you will, but I'll go in and meditat^ revenge.


And I --


Hold, hold me, I am bloody minded, and shall commit Murder else; my honour, my
honour, I must kill him, hold me fast, or I shall kill him.


For my part Cousin, I wish you Joy, for I am resolved to hunt and hawk, and
course as long as I live --


Cruel Woman, I did not think you would have served me so; I shall ^un mad, and
hang my self an^ walk.


Now phaar is de soleedity of all dish -- phy all ish paasht* and what will you
say now? You must taak shome Consolaation unto you -- Dou must Fornicaate vid
die Mothers Maid sharvants; and daat is all one by my shoule.


Hold, Gentlemen, who Married you?


This Gentleman, who is under his gray Coat, my Parson.


'Tis something unhospitable.


I hope Sir, you'll not have cause to repent it; had there been any other way
for me to have escaped perpetual misery, I had not taken this.


But you Sir have most Iniurd me.


I beg a thousand pardons, Though I must have perished if I had not done it.


It is no injury Sir, I never could have loved your Son; we must have been
unhappy.


And I had been miserable with Sir Timothy.


To say truth, I did not much care for her neither, I had rather not marry.


Eternal Blockhead! I will have other means to preserve my Name: Gentlemen,
your are men of ample Fortunes and worthy Families -- Sir I wish you happiness
with my Daughter, take her.


You have given me more than my own Father did, then life and fortune.


You are the best of Fathers and of men.


I will endeavour to appease Sir Ieffery and my Lady.


Your are Generous beyond expression Sir.


Sir, I hope your Worship will pardon me, I am Married to Mrs. Susan.


You are a Villain, that has made love to my Daughter, and corrupted my Son.


Have they told all, I am ruined? good Sir, continue me your Chaplin, and I
will Do and Preach whatever you command me.


I'll not have a Divine with so flexible a Conscience, there shall be no such
Vipers in my Family; I will take care you never shall have Orders. But she has
served me well, and I will give her a Farm of 40. l. per annum to Plow: Go Sir,
it was an Office you were born to.


Did I not bid de Fornicaate? and dou did Marry Joy; if dou had not maade
Marriage, I vould have maade dee a Catholic, and preferred dee to Saint Omers,
They should have bred dee for one of deir Witnesses fait.


I must beg your pardon Sir, I have a warrant against this Kelly, Alias Tegue O
Devilly -- he is accused for being in the Plot.


My house is no refuge for Traitors Sir.


Aboo, boo, boo! by my shalvaation dere is no Plot, and I will not go vid you.
Dou art a damned Fanaatick, if dou dosht shay dere is a Plot. Dou art a
Presbiterian Dog.


No striving, come a long with me.


Phaat will I do: I am Innocent as de Child dat is to be Born; and if they
vill^hang me, I will be a shaint indeed. My hanging Speech was made for me,
long a go by de Iesuits, and I have it ready, and I will live and die by it, by
my shoule.


Gentlemen, I charge you in the Kings Name assist me.


Come Gentlemen, I wish you both the happiness you deserve.
How shallow is our foresight and our prudence!
Be ne'er so wise, design what e're we will
There is a Fate that over-rules us still.

A Skilful Mistress uses wondrous Art,
To keep a peevish crazy Lovers Heart,
His awkward Limbs forgetful of Delights,
Must be urged on by Tricks and Painful Nights:
Which the poor Creature is content to bear,
Fine Manteau's and new Petticoats to wear.
And Sirs, your sickly Appetites to raise,
Yhe starving Players try a thousand ways.
Tou had a Spanish Fryer of Intrigue,
And now we have presented you a Tegue;
Which with much cost from Ireland we have got,
If he be dull, even hang him for the Plot.

Now have a care, for by my Should shalwaation.
Dish will offend a Party in de Naation.

They that are angry must be very Beasts,
For all Religions laugh at foolish Priests.

By Creesh, I swear, de Poet has undone me,
Some simple Tory will maake beat upon me.

Good Protestants, I hope you will not see,
A Martyr made of our poor Tony Leigh.
Our Popes and Fryers on one side offend,
And yet alas the City's not our Friend:
The City neither like us nor our Wit.
They say their Wives learn ogling in the Pit.
They are from the Boxes taught to make advances,
To answer stolen Sighs and naughty Glances.
We Virtuous Ladies some new way must seek,
For all conspire our playing Trade to break.
If the bold Poet freely shows his Vein,
In every place the snarling ^ops complain,
Of your gross follies if you will not hear,
With inoffensive Nonsense you must bear.
You, like the Husband, never shall receive,
Half the delight the sportful Wife can give.
A Poet dares not whip this foolish Age,
You cannot bear the Physic of the Stage.


