POets and Thieves can scarce be rooted out,
Escape ne'er so hardly, they'll have th^other bout;
Burnt in the hand the Thieves fall to it again,
And Poets hist, cry they did so to Ben --:
Like Boys, who have at School too o^t been stripped,
They have no feeling in the part that's whipped.
They're for your pity, not your anger, fit,
They're even such fools, they would be thought to have wit.
Elsewhere you all can flatter, why not here;
You'll say you pay, and so may be severe:
Judge for your selves then Gallants as you pay,
And lead not each of you his Bench astray:
Let easy Cities be pleased with all they hear,
Go home and to their Neighbours praise our Ware.
They with good stomachs come, and fain would eat,
You nothing like, and make them loath their meat.
Though some men are with Wine, Wit, Beauty cloyed,
The Creatures still by others are enjoyed.
'Tis not fair Play, that one for his Half Crown
Should judge, and rail, and damn for hal^ the Town.
But do your worst; if once the Pit grows thin,
Your dear loved Masks, will hardly venture in.
Then we're revenged on you, who needs must come
Hither, to shun your own dull selves at home:
But you kind Burgers who had never yet,
Either your Heads or Bellies full of wit:
Our Poet hopes to please; but not too well;
Nor would he have the angry Critics swell.
A moderate Fate best fits his humble mind,
Be neither they too sharp, nor you too kind.

POets and Soldiers used to various chance,
Cannot expect they should each day advance;
Sometimes their Wreaths they miss, sometimes obtain;
But whensoe're one lucky hit they gain,
Loudly the triumphs of that day they boast,
And ne'er reflect on all their Battles lost,
So, Royal Sir, the Poet of this night,
Since he contributed to your delight,
No thoughts of ^ormer losses does retain,
But boasts that now he has not lived in vain:
His tide of joy will to ambition swell,
He that would think his whole life managed well,
Once pleasing him --
To whom all the l^bours of our lives are due,
Has now lived twice, since he has twice plea^'d you.

After this honour sure they'd claim their own.
Yet, to complete his wishes, does remain
This new addition, which he hopes to gain,
That you, the other glory of our Isle,
Would grace his labours with your Royal smile.
Though he has ^aults, yet, Madam, you will save
The Criminal your Royal Lord forgave;
And that indulgence he will much prefer
To all the applauses of the Theater.
A common Audience gives but common praise,
The applause of Princes must confer the Bays.

I Vow it is a pleasurable Morning; the Waters ^ so finely after being fudled
last Night. Neighbour Fribble, here's a Pint to you.


I'll pledge you Mr. Biscuit, I have drunk eight already.


How do the Waters agree with your Ladyship?


Oh Soveraignly; how many Cups are you arrived to?


Truly six, and they pass so kindly --


'Tis a delicious Morning.


Honest Kick, how is it? you were drunk last night; I was so, and was damnably
beaten.


I was drunk, Ned Cuff, and was not beaten, but beat; I am come to wash away my
Claret, but you'll scarce wash away your black Eye.


I am glad to see your Ladyship this Morning, you look so fresh and fair; my
service to you, Madam.


How the white Aprons scuttle, and leap, and dance yonder; some of 'em are
dancing the Hey.


Many a London Strumpet comes to Jump and was^ down her unlawful Issue, to
prevent shame; but more especially charges.


Others come hither to procure Conception.


Ay Pox, that's not from the Waters, but something else that shall be nameless.


I have a great mind to run roaring in amongst 'em all.


Thou had as good fling thy self among the Lyons in the Tower when they are
fasting. They'll tear thee in pieces, but we'll have a course as they are going
from the Wells.


Agreed: we seldom use to miss of some kind good body to supply our necessities
that way.


Is your Ladyships Coach here?


It goes before, I'll follow it on foot for the pleasure of the walk.


Madam, good Morrow, have your Ladyships Waters passed well.


Yes wonderfully, I'll be going.


Mr. Kick, and Mr. Cuff, good Morrow to you, we shall have you at the
Bowling-Green in the afternoon.


I play on your side.


I know it, and I'll lay all I am worth on it.


I hope he will, Cuff, that we may ruin him.


And I am on my Neighbour Biscuits side all I can rap and rend.


Let's be sure to bet all we can. I have known a great Bowler, whose Betters
place was worth above 200 l. a year without venturing a farthing for himself.


They begin to go homewards, let's be gone.


Jack, how is't this Morning? we are late, the Company is going from the Wells;
how does thy last nights work agree with thee?


Whether that agrees with me or no, I am resolved to agree with that; for no
distemper can trouble me that comes from so generous a Cause, as lusty
Burgundy, and good Company.


Thou art in the right, we should no more be troubled at the Fevers we get in
drinking, than the Honourable wounds we receive in Battle.


'Tis true, the first are the effects of our pleasure, and the last of our
honour; which are two things absolutely necessary to the life of a Gentleman.


Yet your dull spleenatick sober Sots will tell you, we shorten our lives, and
bring Gouts, Dropsies, Palsies, and the Devil and all upon us.


Let 'em lye and preach on, while we live more in a week, than those
insipid-temperate-fools do in a year.


We like subtle Chemists extract and refine our pleasure; While they like
Fulsome Galenists take it in gross.


I confess, a disorder got by Wine in scurvy company, would trouble a man as
much as a Clap got of a Bawd; but there are some women so beautiful, that the
pleasure would more than balance the disaster.


And as your honest Whore-master makes haste to his cure only to be at it
again; so do we take Pills and the Waters to prepare us for another heat.


For my part I hate to hoard up a great stock of health, as Misers do Gold, and
make no use on it: I am resolved to lay it out upon my Friends as far as 'twill
go; and if I run my self out, I'll be a good Husband for a while to lay it out
again when I have it.


But, Jack, there are duties to our she, as well as he^neighbours, which the
Dull, Grave, and Wise say, is lighting our Candle at both ends.


Let 'em be light at both ends. Is it not better to let life go out in a blaze
than a snuff?


I see thou art a brave fellow, and not to be moved by the formal Fops of this
world.


I will converse with grave fellows in their Books; but with such as thou art
over a bottle Ned. But where's Woodly this morning? I warrant he was drunk last
night, and has had a tedious lecture from his Impertinent Wife; who impudently
rails at him, as she says, because she loves him.


He's an honest fellow, and ventures hard when ^e drinks with us; for to say
truth, she's a damned Wife, but a very good Mistress.


Art not thou a Villain to Cuckold this ^ and thy friend Ned?


Gad it's impossible to be a man of honour in these Cases. But my intrigue with
her began before my Friendship with him, and so I made a friend of my Cuckold,
and not a Cuckold of my friend.


An admirable School distinction.


Rains and Bevil, good Morrow to you.


O Frank Woodly, where were it thou last night? you escaped a bloody night on it.


Faith Rains there is no scaping, a Coward may be killed as well as a brave
man; I ran away from you but to little purpose. See how my hand shakes this
Morning.


O let me kiss that hand; he must be an illustrious Man whose hand shakes at
22.


You are pleased to say so, but faith I take pains and live as fast as I can
that's the truth on it.


Thou art in the right, and a Pox on them that live slowly, lazily, and
soberly. I love riding Post in a Journey, I hate a damned dull Carriers pace.


But I was in damned Company with that Public spirited Fool, and Country
Justice, Mr. Clodpate, and one or two as bad.


Thou art often seduced by Fools, Frank; have a care of 'em I say, have a care
of 'em.


He Counsels you well; for conversation is to the mind, as the air we live in
is to the body; in the good we by degrees suck in health, and in the ill
Diseases. Wit is improved in good Company; but there is a Contagion in Folly,
that insensibly in^inuates into one that often converses with Fools, let his
constitution of mind be never so good.


But Clodpate is a Clownish-Country Fool. The Murrain among Cattle is not
infectious to men, nor can his blunt folly ever insinuate it self into an
honest debauchee.


Here he comes, let's observe him a little.


Did you call upon my Cozen Spatter-Brain for that Interest money due to me
this Midsummer?


I have, Sir, every day since he came to Epsom, and yesterday he said upon his
Honour he would pay me, and went immediately to London.


Honour, a Pox on his Honour, I'll sooner trust the honour of a Country
Horse-Courser, than one of the Publicans and Sinners of that odious Town. They
never pay so much as a Taylors-Bill till it comes to Execution: But i'll have
Spatter-Brain by the back the next Term, though he be my Sisters Son. But how
does my dapple Mare?


She's much discontented to hear her Neighbours Whiney over their Oats and
Beans, while she is fain to mortify with a poor lock of Hay.


You Rogue, you would have her as fat, and as foggy, as my Landlady the
Hostess. I care not what I spend amongst my Neighbours in Sussex, but I'd not
have a Rogue so near that damned Town of London get a farthing by me.


Besides, some dull Encomiums upon a Country life, and discourse of his serving
the Nation with his Magistracy, popularity, and House-keeping, you see the best
and worst of him.


But is his hatred to London so inveterate as is reported?


Six times more. Since 'twas burnt he calls it nothing but Sodom; he is such a
Villain, he swears the Frenchman that was hanged for burning on it was a Martyr;
he was so glad at the burning of it, that ever since he has kept the second of
September a Festival; he thinks a Woman cannot be honest, scarce sound that
comes within the smell on it, he is shocked at the very name on it.


I have heard that the reasons of his hatred, are, because he has been beaten,
clapped, and cheated there.


Pox on him, he has found us, and there's no avoiding him.


O Mr. Woodly, how is it? You drink no Waters; but have you had your other
Mornings draught yet.


Yes, I never leave off my Evenings draught till it becomes my Mornings
draught.


Mr. Rains and Bevill, gad save ye; how de'e like the Country? is't not worth a
hundred of old Sodom yonder? good Horses, good Dogs, good Ale, hah --


Good Wine, good Wit, and fine Women, may I take it, compare with them.


I find you'll never leave that place of sin and sea-coal, give me drink for all
that, that breeds no Gout; a wholesome plain Wench, that will neither bring my
body to the Surgeons hands, nor my Land to the S^rivners: and for Wit, there is
such a stir amongst you, who has it, and who has it not, that we honest Country
Gentlemen begin to think there's no such thing, and have hearty Mirth and good
old Catches amongst us, that do the business every whit as well.


He's in the right.


But Mr. Woodly, how do you like my Dapple Mare?


Not comparable to a Hackney Coach.


But she shall run with e're a Hackney Coach in England for all that, or e're a
Horse in your stable, weight him and inch him.


I would not keep a running horse, though a running horse would half keep me.


We are for London to morrow; shall we have your company?


Ud's bud, I go to London! I am almost sick at Epsom, when the wind sits to
bring any of the wind this way, and by my good will would not talk with a man
that comes from thence till he hath ayr'd himself a day or two.


Why, there's no Plague.


There's Pride, Popery, Folly, Lust, Prodigality, Cheating Knaves, and Jilting
Whores; Wine of half a crown a quart, and Ale of twelve pence, and what not.


This is a terrible regiment you have mustered; but neither the Priests nor the
Women will ravish you; nor are you forced to take the Wine, as the French are
their Salt, there are twelve penny Ordinaries.


Ay, and Cards and false Dice, and Quarrels, Hectors and reformed Officers to
borrow a Crown, and beat a man that refuses it, or asks for it again; besides,
I'll sum you up the beastly pleasures of the best of ye.


What are those?


Why, to sit up drunk till three a clock in the morning, rise at twelve, follow
damned French Fashions, get dressed to go to a damned Play, choke your selves
afterwards with dust in Hide-park, or with Sea-coal in the Town, flatter and
fawn in the drawing room, keep your Wench, and turn away your Wife, Gods-ooks.


The Rogue is a tart and witty whoreson.


I was at Sodom at eighteen, I thank 'em, but now I serve my Country, and spend
upon my Tenants what I get amongst them.


And so, indeed, are no better than their Sponge, which they moisten only to
squeeze again. But what important service do you do your Country?


S'bud I -- why I am Justice of Quorum in Sussex, and this County too, and I
make the Surveyors mend the High ways; I cause Rogues to be whipped for breaking
fences or pilling trees, especially if they be my own; I swear Constables and
the like.


But is this all?


No: I call Over-^eers for the Poor to an account, sign Rates, am a
Game-keeper, and take away Guns and Greyhounds, bind fellows to the Peace,
observe my monthly Meeting, am now and then an Arbitrator, and License
Ale-houses, and make people bury in Flannel, to encourage the Woollen
Manufacture; which never a Justice of Peace in England does but I.


Look you, what would you have?


Besides, I am drunk once a week at my Lord Lieutenants; and at my own house
spend not scurvy French kick-shaws, but much Ale and Beef, and Mutton, the
Manufactures of the Country.


The Manufactures of the Country, that's well.


Ay, and, I warrant, by the virtue of that, can bring as many wide mouthed
Rogues to Ball and holloa for a Knight of the shire, as any man.


Ay gods-ooks can I.


That men should be such infinite Coxcombs to live scurvily to get reputation
among thick-scull'd Peasants, and be at as a great a distance with men of wit
and sense, as if they were another sort of Animals.


'Tis fit such fools should govern and do the drudgery of the world, while
reasonable men enjoy it.


Mr. Woodly, I'll go now and wait upon your Cousin Lucia, and if I can get her
to marry me, and fill up my pack of dogs, my two great works are over in this
world. God-by-gentleman. Ud's-bud, I had forgot, I have the rarest stand of Ale
to drink out in the afternoon, with three or four honest Country fellows; you
shall be very welcome to it I^ack; and we'll dust it away.


We thank you, Sir.


I am now in haste to read a Gazette, this is the day, I am impatient till I
see it -- Oh, I love Gazetes extremely, and they are the only things I can
endure that come from London. They are such pretty penned things, and I do so
love to hear of Wisnowisky, Potosky, General Wrangle, and Count Tot, and all
those brave fellows -- Gad save ye.


Look how the women begin to trip it from the Wells; I see some of 'em well
dressed in Masques; oh that admirable invention of Vizor-masques for us poor
Lovers; Vizors are so provocative, the Devil take me, I cannot forbear 'em.


Thou art such a Termagant fellow, thou art as eager at a woman in a
Vizard-masque, as thou

Oh Mrs. Woodly is it you?


I dare not stay a minute, read that note, adie^.


Short and sweet, let me see -- My Husband staid up late, and was very drunk
last night, and I have had a happy quarrel with him this morning, that has
driven him from home, where I shall have the happiness not to see him till
night, so that I safely may enjoy your sweet society most part of this day.

Yours Woodly.

Well, the sin's so sweet, and the temptation so strong^ I have no power to
resist it.


Let the Coach walk up the Hill, we'll follow it.


It shall, Madam.


But as I was saying, Lu^ia, here's very scurvy company.


We have no body near us here, but some impertinent ill-bred City-wives, where
they have more trading with the youth of the Suburbs, than their Husbands with
their Customers within the walls.


Sometimes we have their tame Husbands, who gallop hither upon their Tits, to
see their faithful Wives play a game at Ninepins, and be drunk with stum'd
wine; and strait are gone to their several and respective cozening vocations.
Therefore, prithee, let's go to Tunbridge; for London is so empty, 'tis a very
Wilderness this Vocation.


No faith, Carolina, I have a project in my head shall stay me here a little
longer, and thee to --


What, you hanker after an acquaintance with Rains and Bevil? thou art a mad
wench, but they are so very wild.


An they be naturally wilder than I, or you either, for all your simpering;
I'll be condemned to Fools and ill company for ever.


Do not wish that dreadful curse; we are already so much pestered with gay
Fools, that have no more sense than our Shock-dogs; that I long for an
acquaintance with witty men as well as thou dost. But how can we bring it about
without scandal?


Let this brain of mine alone for that. I blush for my Sex, to see the Ladies
of London (as if they had forsworn common sense) make insipid young Fools their
greatest Favourites.


'Tis a shame that a company of young wall-fac'd fellows, that have no sense
beyond Perruques and Pantaloons, should be the only men with the Ladies; whilst
the acquaintance of witty men is thought scandalous.


For my part, I am resolved to redeem the honour of our Sex, and love Wit, and
never think a Fool a fine Gentleman.

What Ruffians are these that come to interrupt us in our great design?


Ah, Ladies, have we caught ye i'faith; you shall go along with us.


What pitiful fellows are these?


Pitiful fellows, Gad have a care what you say, we do not use to put up such
words, either from man or woman.


What would you do you dowty Hectors?


Hectors? upon my honour, if we can find them out, we'll beat your Gallants for
this.


If I had a Gallant that kept a Footman, that would not beat either of ye, I'd
disown the Master for the cowardice of the man.


S'death, I could ^ind in my heart to draw upon her.


Would you had two of the bravest fellows in Christendom to defend ye, you
should see how weed swinge 'em.


Avaunt, you Hectors, we are not fit for you. I am sure, neither of you; yet
were ever honoured with a favour from a Chamber-maid.


Your acquaintance never rises higher than a Laundress or an Hostess.


Be not perverse and foolish, we are persons of quality, and have money. Look
ye, let this tempt you.


Come faith, we'll pay you well upon my honour.


Upon my honour you shall be well paid with a couple of sufficient beatings, if
you leave us not.


Hilts and blades, men of honour beaten, ye proud Flirts.


Gentlemen, ye look like men of quality; pray own us to be of your
acq^aintance, and protect us from a couple of troublesome Ruffians.


Own thee! that I will faith in any ground in Christendom, and I hope thou
wilt be of my acquaintance before we part. I embrace the adventure as greedily
as a Knight errand could.


This is the Dame that I'll defend.


Gentlemen, have you any business with these Ladies?


Why, Sir, what if we have?


May be we have not, Sir, may be we have.


Nay, Gentlemen, no huffing, know your'e men and vanish.


You may else, unawares, pull down a beating upon your own heads.


Beating, Sir.


We are Gentlemen of quality; never tell us of this, and that, I gad --


Do not provoke us, but be gone.


Well, Sir, fare ye well; who cares? I care no more for 'em. --


No, nor I neither. What a pox care I; tell me -- fare ye well. But who the
Devil thought they would have come hither?


Pox on 'em for me.





'Pshaw, prithee hold thy tongue, talk to me -- fa, la, la.


This is lucky Carolina for our design. Gentlemen, you have obliged us
extremely.


We are like Knights Errands, or Knights of the Bath, bound to relieve Ladies
by our Order.


But i^ we have obliged you; pray let us see whom we have had the honour of
obliging.


Generous men should be content with the Action, without knowing whom they have
obliged. But let it satisfy you, we are women of no small quality.


This desire of knowing us, looks as if ye expected a reward; the seeing of our
faces would be none; and upon my word, Gentlemen, we can go no farther if we
would do that --


Besides, you may think us handsome now, and if we show our ^aces, we shall
convince you to the contrary, and make you re^t the obligation.


I like thy shape and humour so well, that gad if thou'lt satisfy my
Curiosity; I'll not repent, though you want that great ornament of a face,
called a Nose.


I am sure mine's handsome; I have an instinct that never ^ails me.


Your infallible instinct has guessed wrong now.


Come, Ladies, faith off with these Clouds and shine upon us.


We can never leave you till we see your faces; and if ye don't show 'em us, we
shall think you desire to keep us with ye.


Nay, rather than have that scandal upon us, we'll show 'em.


With all my heart, but upon these terms; you shall promise, upon your honour,
not to dog us, or inquire further after us at this time.


You hear the conditions.


The conditions are very hard -- but I promise --


Come, Ladies, I find you are handsome, and think your s^lves so; or you would
not be afraid of our dogging you, when we have seen you.


No seeing our faces but upon these terms.


You are cruel Tigers -- but since there's no remedy, I promise --


Look you, Sir, do you like it now?


You'll believe us another time.


By Heaven a Divine Creature!


Beyond all comparison! where have I lived?


Gad mine has killed me. Since they were so much too hard ^or us at Blunts, we
were fools to go to sharps with them.


I will never believe a Ladies word of her self again.


Come you flatter now.


To show that I don't, I cannot help making my honour yield to my love; and
must beg the favour of you to know who you are; and that I m^y wait on you
home.


And, Madam, had I sworn by your self, I must have been perjured, the
temptation is so powerful.


Have you seen so much Love and Honour upon the Stage, and are so little Judges
of it here?


In short, if you are men of Honour, you'll keep your words; for we will never
release you of 'em.


Shall we have hopes of seeing you hereafter?


As you behave your selves now.


Give me hopes of once more seeing you -- and I'll trust you, and let you carry
my heart away with you.


You shall hear further from us, and suddenly.


Upon your Honour?


Upon my Honour.


And mine.


Farewell then, but let me tell you, 'tis very cruel.


Why did leave 'em so soon, I could have stayed longer with all my heart.


'Tis enough at first -- and let me alone hereafter.


This was a lucky Adventure, and so much the more lucky, that I lighted upon
the Lady I love best, though they are both beautiful.


And I am even with you in that too.

Here's Woodly; the Intrigue is not ripe for his knowledge yet; where have you
been, Frank?


I have had two damned unlucky Adventures. The first Visor Masque I pursued
after, I had followed her a Furlong, and importuned her to show her Face; when
I thought I had got a Prize beyond my hopes, proved an old Lady of threescore,
with a wrinkled pimpl'd Face, but one Eye, and no Teeth; but which was ten
times a worse disappointment, the next that I follow'd proved to be my own
Wife.


This was for your good, Frank; Heaven designs to keep you virtuous.


But I like not virtue that springs from necessity. Mine is so Noble, I'd have
it tried o^ten.


Well, Gentlemen, where shall we waste the latter part of the day? for I must
spend this former part on it with a convenient sort of Utensil, called a
Citizens Wi^e.


I must divert that design, and carry you to my Cousin whom you never saw, the
prettiest Girl in Christendom, she has seen you, and likes you extremely.


Prithee, Woodly, what should I do with her? I love thee and thy Family too
well to lye with her, and my self too well to marry her; and I think a man has
no excuse for himself that visits a Woman without design of lying with her one
way or other.


Why, Jack, eight thousand pound and a handsome Wench of seventeen were no ill
bargain.


But here's eight thousand pound, there's liberty, Frank. Would you be content
to lye in Ludgate all your life time for eight thousand pound?


No, certainly.


Marriage is the worst of Prisons.


But by your leave, Rains, though Marriage be a Prison, yet you may make the
Rules as large as those of the Kings Bench, that extend to the East-Indies.


O hang it. No more of that Ecclesiastical Mouse-Trap.


Prithee, speak more reverently of the happiest condition of life.


A married man is not to be believed. You are like the Fox in the Fable that
had lost his Tail, and would have persuaded all others to lose theirs; you are
one of the Parsons Decoy-Ducks, to wheadle poor innocent Fowls into the Net.


Why should thou think so ill of my Wife, to think I am not in earnest?


No application, Frank, I think thy Wife as good a Woman as a Wife can be.


She loves me extremely, is tolerable handsome, and I am sure virtuous.


That thou know, Ned Bevil.


'Tis true, she values her self a little too much upon her Virtue, which makes
her sometimes a little troublesome and impertinent.


I never knew a Woman that pretended over much to Virtue, that either had it,
or was not troublesome and impertinent.


Mr. Biscuit, good morrow to you.


Your humble Servant, Sir.


This is Rains his most obsequious humble Cuckold, his Wife is a pretty
impertinent Strumpet, and scorns to have any other Pimp but her own Husband,
who all the while thinks her the innocentest Creature.


A glorious Punk! but what a despicable thing a Cuckold is; they look as if
they had the mark of Cain upon 'em. I would not be a Cuckold for the World.


How blind a thing a Husband is!


Now as I am an honest man, and would I might ne'er stir, if I have not had
such a life about you with my pretty Mollie, I would not have her so angry
again for fifty pound, Cod-sniggs.


About me, what's the matter, man?


Why, I promised to bring you to her last night, and got a little tipsy'd, as
they say, and forgot it. She says you play the best at Cribach of any body, and
she loves gaming mightily, and is as true a Gamester, though I say it.


I know it, man.


Besides, she would fain learn that new Song of you; she says 'tis a rare one.
Thou shalt have any thing, thou shalt have me,
And I have one thing that will please thee.
'Tis such a pretty little innocent Rogue, and has such odd Fancies with her,
ha, ha, ha --


Lord, what a strange Creature a Cuckold is!


But I swear all that I could do to her could not please her this morning. I
fackings no body can satisfy her but you; therefore as you tender the quiet
and welfare of a poor humble Husband, come and play at Cribach with her to day;
for she loves Cribach most intemperately. I do wonder that a Woman should love
Gaming so.


Faith I am half engaged.


For Heavens sake, as you love me do not deny me, I shall have no quiet with
her; besides, some Cheapside Neighbours of mine are to have a Game at Bowls,
and a merry meeting this Afternoon, and she wishes the Waters may ne'er go
through her, if she'll give me leave to go to 'em, unless I bring you to her to
keep her Company, and sing and play at Cards with her, therefore dear Mr.
Rains.


This is beyond all Example.


Well, there is not in Nature so tame and inoffensive a Beast as a London
Cuckold, I'll say that for him.


Prithee, Jack, do not refuse to go to my Cousin for a little Strumpet.


I cannot be so inhumane to refuse a Husband that invites me to his own Wife
alone, Mr. Biscuit.


Come, good Sir, I thank you for this favour a thousand times; my Wife will be
in a very good humour to day, Sir.


Go before, I'll follow you, and carry her this Kiss from me.


I thank you, Sir, I'll carry it her, poor Rogue, she'll be overjoyed; but pray
don't stay long.


Are Mr. Rains and Mr. Bevil here?


Yes, we two are they.


Here's a Letter for you.


How now, Gentlemen, what an Assignation to both of you!


Upon my life, Ned, 'tis from the Ladies.

You two have injured a couple of Gentlemen that will expect you with your
Swords in your hands at eleven in a Field on the North-side of the Church. If
you sail, you shall not fail of being posted. 'Till you meet us, you shall not
know our names, but know that we are worth the meeting, c.





This is a business of another nature, Rains.


We must to Tilts and Tournaments, Ned, sure they are the Bullies we saw just
now.


From whom did you bring this, Boy?


From a couple of Gentlemen in Buff Belts, Red Coats, and Shammey Breeches.


'Tis from them; sure they'll not fight.


But we must try whether they will or no: tell 'em we'll not fail.


I shall, Sir.


I have a business of another nature to dispatch, Ned; I'll meet before eleven
at your lodging.


I have just such another business too; but I'll not fail to meet you -- But
how can you relish Mrs. Biscuit after the Lady you saw this morning?


I am not sure of her I saw this morning; besides, if I were, is it reasonable
that a man that has a good stomach should refuse Mutton to day, because he
expects Quails to morrow? but how can you in conscience think of Concupiscence,
when for ought you know, we may venture our lives within two hours?


Since, for ought I know, my life may be in danger, I'll make use on it while it
is not.


Adieu, Woodly, let's meet on the Bowling^green in the afternoon.


You are happy men, Gentlemen, but I am going to visit one that I love more
than my eyes, and would give both of them to enjoy.





Adieu, we'll meet about five.


Agreed; --


Now for my dear Carolina. -- Thus all the world by several ways does move,
But all the Mighty business ends in love.



Prithee stay with me, that I may be no longer pestered with this Country
Coxcomb.


Would thou have me so barbarous to interrupt Lovers.


He a Lover! yes, of a clear Title in his next Purchase, his Dapple Mare, a
dear year of Corn, or so.


Come, he has as violent a substantial country passion for you, as one would
wish; and I will leave you to him.


You mischievous creature, I'll be revenged on you.


If my propositions be not reasonable, ^'ll ne'er pretend to serve my Country
more.


A pretty Country to be served by such fellows.


In that noble Brick-house, moted round with Turrets and ^ine things, that I
now spoke of, in the best hunting Country in Europe, with a thousand pounds a
year will I jointure you.


'Tis not profit, but honour I respect; and I have vowed never to Marry one
that cannot make me a Lady, and you are no Knight.


A Knight, no I thank you; why, I have known a Fishmonger Knighted:
Knigthhood's a pretty bauble for a fellow to play with that is no Gentleman. But
what needs he that is a Gentleman desire to be more?


But, methinks, the name of Clodpate does not sound well without a title.


I thank you heartily; my name is now Hugh Clodpate; and I should give two or
three hundred pounds to add three letters to it, Sir Hugh Clodpate: no, no, I
can't make so much on it again.


Oh, a Knight is such a thing!


Such a thing! has he more hands or legs, or more brains than another man?


But if I could be content without being a Lady, I have vowed to spend all my
life in London.


Pox on her; live in London did she say? London say you?


Yes, is that so wonderful? why people do really live no where else; they
breath, and move, and have a kind of insipid dull being: but there is no life
but in London.


London! that sink of sin.


I believe there is no Village but sins as much in proportion to the bigness;
only your Country sins are something the more block-headed sins.


Madam, give me leave to ask you one question.


You may.


Do you resolve to live honest?


'Tis a familiar question; you had need to ask my leave first.


Why? you may as reasonably expect to preserve your health in a Pest-house, as
your Chastity in that damned lascivious Town.


You are rude, Sir.


Come, Madam, plain dealing is a jewel. But can you prefer an idle scandalous
London-life, before a pretty innocent huswifely-life in the Country to look to
your Family, and visit your Neighbours.


To see my Ducks and Geese fed, and cram my own Chickens.


Ay.


To have my Closet stink like a Apothecaries shop with Drugs and Medicines, to
administer to my sick Neighbours; and spoil the next Quacks practice with the
receipt book that belongs to the family.


Very well.


And then to have one approved Green-salve, and dress sore legs with it; and
all this to deserve the name of as good a neighbourly body as ever came into
Sussex.


Very good.


Never to hear a Fiddle, but such as sounds worse than the Tongs and Key, or a
Gridiron; never to read better Poetry, than Iohn ^opkins, or Robert Wisdoms
vile Metre; nor hear better singing than a company of Peasants praising God
with doleful untunable hoarce voices, that are only fit to be heard under the
Gallows.


However you make bold with the Country, be not profane. Is not this better
than any thing in that stinking Town?


Stinking Town! I had rather be Countess of Puddledock, than Queen o^ Sussex.


Oh foh -- but ah, the excellent fresh air upon the Downs.


So there's fresh air in a Wilderness, if one could be content with Bears and
Wolves for her companions. But, Sir, in short, I am resolved to live at London,
and at, or very near the Court too.


S'death the Court? I shall not only be C^ckolded, but lose all my true Country
interest; Madam, I beg your pardon, I shall take my leave; I am not cut out for
a Londoner, or a Courtier; fare you well, good Madam, though I like your person
pretty well, I like not your conditions; I'd not Marry a London Cherubin.


Farewell, Sir, but I'll not be wholly ungrate^ul for the address you have
honoured me with: know then my friend Carolina is the most averse to London,
and most infatuated with the love of the Country.


Ud's bud infatuated; pray change that word if you please.


You know my meaning by it; she and I are parting, because she will not with
patience hear of returning to London; she calls it nothing but vain, obscene,
wicked, filthy, Popish place.


Ha! how's this? I did not think she had so much sense.


She often says she had rather marry a Country Justice of five hundred pounds a
year, than a man of five thousand pounds a year in London. Nay, than a Duke at
Court.





This is a very Country Courtier -- Here she comes, let's withdraw; I will tell
you more, and we'll consult about this business.


Your servant, Madam.


How can you mistrust a man in so credible a thing?


As what?


As that he would love the pretiest, sweetest, dearest creature he ever saw --


So far from that, I believe, he will love all the pretyest, sweetest, dearest
Creatures, as he calls 'em, that he ever shall see: but you have paid that
tribute already to virtuous Madam Woodly, and are Married.


I am so, and there's the less danger in my love; I should else be tempting you
to accept me for better for worse till death us depart, c. Now, Madam, take my
heart upon its good behaviour, as much as you have use on, and the rest again,
and no hurt done.


Where there are so many free; why should I venture upon a heart with so
manifest a flaw, in the title as a Married mans.


Faith, there are none without their encumbrances; your fashionable Spark has
his Miss in the Play-house; your Ladies eldest Son his Mothers Chamber-maid;
The Country Gentleman his Tennants Daughter; A handsome young fellow that is to
make his fortune, s^me elderly Sinner, that keeps him fine, so that Marriage is
the least engagement of all; for that only points out where a man cannot love.


Since Marriage obliges men so little, and women so much; I wonder we endure
the cheat on it.


You're in the right, 'tis worse than cross I win, pile you lose: but there are
some left that can love upon the square.


A woman may be undone upon the square, as well as a Gamester if she ventures
too much.


Never so long as you play for nothing but what you have about you; and, upon
my honour, I would engage you no deeper at this time; 'tis tick and after
reckonings that ruin Lovers, as well as Gamesters; and, gad, if you mistrust
me, I am ready to make stakes; and because you're a young beginner, I'll play
three to one.


Not so fast, good Sir, you'll make me quit the few good thoughts I had of you,
if you persist.


Persist in loving you I must till death; but the method and ceremonies I leave
to you to prescribe. I guessed you would not care for a whining Lover.


Nor do I care for one in your extremity the other way.


Take your choice; I can make love from the stiff formal way of the year 42. to
the gay brisk way of this present day and hour.


Since I suppose it is for diversion, pray let me see how that is.


Look you thus


Is this it? why, you don't mind me?


I mind my self though, and make you fall in love with me after a careless way
by the by.


When do you begin?


Begin, why? I am at it all this while.


Must I answer you like a Lady of the times too?


Ay, by all means, Madam.


This, Mr. Woodly, is the strangest man, he would make one dye to hear him, I
vow, ha, ha, ha.


Lord, what a set of teeth you show when you laugh! if they were mine, I'd pull
'em out; sure your breath can't be sweet, let me see.


Well, I vow your a pleasant man, but you go too fast.


For your Lover of the last Age I grant you; but the World is well mended
since, fair Ladies and fortified Towns yield upon easier terms now a-days.


I had rather you should think so than take the pains to satisfy you; but I
vow you'd make one burst, you have such a way with you, ha, ha, ha.


I hate to live in doubt, you have a pretty Face; but an ill Breath, and
crooked Legs, Gad, are insufferable.


Is this your new way? I have enough on it, no more drinking my health in a
Beer-glass, and quarrelling with the man that can't pledge. Scribbling your
passion in Glass-windows, and wearing my Colours continually I can better
endure; but now I talk of scribbling, divert me a little better, and give me the
Song you promised me.


I have taught it your Woman, who I conceive has something a better voice than
I, she's here too.


Sing that Song Mr. Woodly taught you.

How pleasant is mutual Love that is true,
Then Phillis let us our affections unite;
For the more you love me, the more I love you,
The more we contribute to each others delight:
For they that enjoy without loving first,
Still eat without stomach, and drink without thirst.
Such is the poor Fool who loves upon duty,
Because a Canonical Coxcomb has made him,
And ne'er tastes the sweets of love and of beauty,
But drudges because a dull Priest has betrayed him;
But who in enjoyment from love take their measure,
Are raped with delight, and still ravished with pleasure.
Each night he's a Bridegroom, and she is a Bride.
When their minds and their bodies shall both so agree;
That neither shall pleasure from the other divide,
But that at one instance shall satisfied be;
Let Fools ^or convenience be drawn to their love,
But this the way real pleasure to prove.

So, you are pleasant here, Mr. Clodpate, how do you like this Song? 'tis a
London Song.


Ay, Pox on it, I hate it for it; when I had the misfortune to know that damned
Town first, they had better Songs by half; they put no wit in their Songs now
adays.


Pray do us the favour to Sing one of those you speak of.


Faith, Madam, I have but an ordinary voice, but I cannot disobey you.

Sings ridiculously this old Song. Lay by your pleading,
Law lies a bleeding, c.



What an incomprehensible block-head is this.


This pleases us in the Country; I know you like it ne'er the worse, Madam.


Nor much the better.


Come, Madam, I am sure you love a Country life, and hate that vile Town of
London; and I honour you for it.


I hate London.


I knew you would dissemble it, but I know your heart; 'tis true, indeed, 'tis
a vain obscene wicked filthy popish place.


What means the Worshipful Fop.


And a Virtuous Lady had better Marry a Country Justice of five hundred pounds
a year, than one in London of five thousand pounds; nay, than a Duke at Court
-- 'tis granted Madam, tis granted.


It may be granted by you, but not by me.


There are some such fools to refuse good offers; but there are others have
more wit, Heaven be praised.


Sure you have been at cross purposes of late, Mr. Clodpate.


No, Madam, but I know you hate Sodom yonder; foh -- methinks I smell it
hither; let me tell you in private; I would not marry Mrs. Lucia if she had
fifty thousand pounds; Ud's bud, marry one that would live at London, nay at
Court; No, I had rather go to Sea in a Fire-ship; but I'll show you the finest
seat in Sussex which you shall call your own.


What do you mean by this?


All this I know very well, and though by the Sot her Uncle I was misguided to
Mrs. Lucia, 'tis to you, Madam, my affection first inclined.


Ah mischief, have you contrived this? you thought to punish me much, but I had
rather have such a fellow to Fool with, than a lap Dog, or a Squirrel; abusing
of a Fool is almost as pleasant as conversing with a witty Man.


'Tis true, now I consider it, and he that's laughed at is oft times as good
Company as he that laughs, nay some have raised their fortunes by it; but you
forget our appointment; pray let's go?


Ay, prithee. My dear, Gentlemen we must leave you; your servant.


Will you not let me wait on you?


By no means 'tis a private affair.


Shall not I wait on you?


I shall not refuse the favour another time, but now I must beg your pardon.


Allons, let's meet the Duellists, I warrant you they are men of honour.


Come, I am going a setting, will you go?


No, I must go home.


Whither are you a going Mr. Woodly? will you not go to the Bowling^Green to
day?


Yes, perhaps in the Afternoon, -- Adieu


Why do you follow me with your Impertinence?


My dear honey, how have I offended thee? did I not with my own hands put the
to Bed when thou were sudled last night? did I not set thy Bottle of small Beer
by thy Bedside? did I not rise early and make thee a Caudel when thou were it
puking, and gave thee Aqua Mirabilis, to fetch up the Water off thy Stomach?


All this you did, and 'twas your Duty, but you are strangely troublesome.


Think not my love a trouble Dear; I speak for thy good, prithee do not go
abroad to day, thou'lt kill thy self with drinking, and thy Death will be sure
to kill me.


You are impertinent, I'll go, let that suffice.


You are shrewdly mistaken if you think I desire your Company. But I am sure
this is the way to be rid on it.


I am to meet Mr. Biscuit, and some Cheapside Neighbours, be silent, my will is
like the Laws of the Maids and Parsons.


I cannot hide my love and fears from thee; prithee, dearest, kiss me.


I say again, Peace, I shall be much offended.


Thou art a naughty man, and always abroad while I am languishing for thee; and
I have thee but two days in a Week at Epsom.


Know your Lord and Master, and be subject to my Government; I though but a
Haberdasher will be as absolute a Monarch over you, as the great Turk over his
Sultan Queen.


Well, I can but submit and weep for thy absence.


Can't you keep Company with Mrs. Biscuit?


What thou please, my Dear.

So you'll go and not hinder me from better Company.


Well, I have the most Virtuous, and best Governed Wife in all the Ward; but I
must observe Discipline, and keep a strict hand over her.


I am an unfortunate Woman not to have thy Company; so I am.


What, in tears Mrs. Fribble! this is that naughty man; out on thee, thou art a
shame to all Husbands, thou would be so insolent to command thy own Wife;
dost thou use thy own flesh, thy own rib so, out upon thee.


I am my own Master, and will be hers.


Ah, thou art a good one i'faith; and thou were it mine, I'd teach the better
manners.


Dorothy, listen not to this lewd Woman, her Husband is a sneaking, snivelling
Cuckold; if you should be like her, I would make you such a terrible Example!
Mrs. Biscuit, you are impertinent, were I your Husband, I would swinge you much.


Swinge me, say you, I could tear thy Eyes out. Death if you provoke me, I'll
show you what the Courage of an enraged Woman can do.


Nay, good Mrs. Biscuit, Mr. Fribble is a good Man for all his passion.


Swinge me --


This Woman is as outrageous as a Milch Bear that wants her Breakfast. Fare you
well.


Come Neighbour, you are a shame to all Wives to be so ^ame and foolish; pluck
up a Spirit, and order him as I do my Biscuit.


This is the only way to order a surly Husband.


I am ashamed of you, you betray our cause; submit to a Husband; I'd fain see
that Husband that I'd crouch to. I say again pluck up a Spirit; I keep a strict
hand of Discipline over mine.

Here he comes, you shall see how I order him.


How now my pretty Dear, poor Duck.


Duck, you Widgeon; how came you and I so familiar? observe me now.


Well, Mrs. Fribble, 'tis such a pretty Rogue, and has such pleasant fancies
with her, ha, ha, ha. I protest and vow I could kiss the very ground she goes
on. If she would eat Gold, nay Pearls and Diamonds, she should have them, I vow
and swear.


You Beast, you had best be drunk again, i^aith I'll order you, I'll keep you in
better awe, you shall neither have Caudel nor Custard for it this week.


Nay, good Dear, be not so cruel, I protest and vow I could not help it: my
Neighbour Fribble is a very merry man, I could not forbear, we were at it, Tory
Rory, and sung old Rose, the Song that you love so, Duck. Thou shalt have any
thing, thou shalt have me, c.



Ay, Mr. Fribble maintains his Wife like a Lady, and she has all things about
her as well as any Woman in the Parish, he keeps her the prettiest pacing Nag
with the finest Side-saddle of any Woman's in the Ward, and lets her take her
pleasure at Epsom two months together.


Ay, that's because the Air's good to make one be with Child, and he longs
mightily for a Child; and truly, Neighbour, I use all the means I can, since he
is so desirous of one.


All this thou shalt do, my Dear; I'll omit nothing that shall please thee.


Yes, you Nincompoop, you are a pretty Fellow to please a Woman indeed.


But prithee, my Dear, let me go to the Bowling-green to my Neighbours: would I
might ne'er stir, if I drink above a pint of Wine, or a quart of Mum for my
share at most.


You impertinent Puppy, I wonder you have the impudence to ask me such a
question.


Mrs. Fribble^ my pretty Mollie has some humours, but this is the worst you'll
see of her.


How rarely she ord^rs a Husband; I vow I think I must pluck up a spirit asshe
does, that's the truth on it.


Where's Mr. Rains, you Lolpoop? do you think you shall go, and he not here?


O Duck, he'll be here presently, and sent thee a kiss by me.


Yes, I warrant he'd kiss such a Fellow as thee.


I vow he did; prithee take it of me, my Dear.


I'll swear he's a fine person. Well, because it comes from him, I'll take it;
he's the completest man, and so courteous and well-behav'd.


Now thou'lt let me go.


No not till he comes.


Nay, good Dear.


I tell you you shall not; get you in.


Pray, Duck, now.


I never saw any thing so admirable as this Discipline of hers; I am resolved
to try my Fribble, that's once.


Why, look here he is now already.


Oh me! is he acquainted with her?


Does he know her?


I'll steal away and say nothing.


Come, Mr. Rains, let's in. Mrs. Fribble, your Servant.


Madam, I'll wait on you in; Mr. Rains will not think my Company troublesome.


Ah, shame on her. Rains is pleased to come and play at Cribach with me, and
'twill be no sport to look on.


I'll make one at Gleek, that's better than any two-handed Game.


I do not think so, by your leave, Madam Fribble, Oh Impertinence!


Well then, I'll be content to be a looker on for once. She would fain have him
to her self, but I'll look to her for that.


Mr. Bevil stays mighty long, pray Heaven he be not diverted by some paltry
Citizens Wife; here are such a Company of them that lye upon the snap for young
Gentlemen, as Rooks and Bullies do for their Husbands when they come to Town.


Madam, your Servant.


O Mr. Bevil, are you come? I vow I was afraid I had lost you. A Woman that's
apt to be jealous as I am should not make such a person the object of her
affections.


Words are the common payment of those that intend no other. There is no such
sign of being long fasting, as falling to with a good stomach.


I am so afraid you should be seduced by some of these naughty Women at Epsom.
A shame take 'em, I hate a lewd Woman with my heart, I vow I do now.


Madam, I have a very pressing affair that requires some speedy conference with
you in your Bed-chamber.


No, Sir, no -- I wonder you have the confidence to ask me, when you were so
rude to me there last time.


I do not know what she calls rude. I am sure I obliged her as often I could
there.


One can't be private with you, but you are so uncivil presently. I can scarce
forgive you; I wonder who learnt you such tricks for my part.


If I were ne'er so backward, she'd soon instruct me. I am not so ill-bred, but
I know what I owe to a Lady. Come, Dearest.


Do not ask me; I vow I won't. You are the strangest man that I ever met with,
you won't let one alone; nay pish, fie, Mr. Bevil, arn't you ashamed?


No more, nay, Dear, come in, come in.


Nay, pish, ha, ha, ha, ha. I vow you make me blush; get you gone, you naughty
man you.


You'll make me outrageous; I shall force you, have a care.


Well, I vow you are a parlous man. Will you promise me then ^o sit still when
you are there, and not stir hand or foot.


Ay, Ay, come, come.


Nay, but will you swear?


Yes, yes, come allons, my Dearest, she'll soon dispense with that Oath. Well,
I am so ashamed, I vow I would not go, but that you said you would force me,
and swore too besides.


Madam, here's my Master just coming in a doors.


Heaven! what shall I do?


I told him I had private business, to get rid of him, and he'll discover all.


Go into the Bed-chamber, I'll lock it.


But how will you get rid of him?


Let me alone, this is an unlucky surprise, in quickly.


If I should be locked up so long till I fail Rains, and our fighting
appointment, I shall get much honour, I take it.


In, in.


I thought your fit might have been off by this time.


No, it shall never be off, thou inhumane Beast; to sit up a nights late, and
come home drunk and wake me, and lye like a Statue by me all the rest of the
night, flesh and blood can't bear it; you make me cry my Eyes out, to see that
you'll kill your self by your villainous debauchery.

Fa, la, la, la, fa.


Fa, la, la, la -- Is that the notice you take of me? If I were not the best
Woman in the World, and did not love thee, thou base Fellow, 'twould not
trouble me. Oh that I should be so unfortunate, so bewitched, to love such a
Monster of a man!


Fa, la, la, la, Oh Impudence!


I wonder what I should see in thee to love thee so, out on thee for a Villain.
Oh that I could withdraw my affection from thee, thou Brute! but I can't for my
life, 'tis that makes me miserable, thou barbarous wicked Wretch.


If to seek quiet abroad, when one can't have it at home, is a sin, Heaven help
the wicked, but pox on it.


Ay, now you ban and curse, you Wretch; this you get by keeping Company with
Wits, as you call them, a Company of wicked Fellows, the Scum of the Nation,
Fellows that have no Religion in 'em, that swear and drink, and wench, and
never consider me that am disconsolate at home.


Oh the incomprehensible blessing of Matrimony!


If I were so perfidious and false to take pleasure in a Gallant in the absence
of my Husband; but I am too honest, too virtuous for thee, thou ungrateful
Wretch: besides, if my Conscience would give me leave, I love you too well for
that, you barbarous base Fellow.


A Pox on her troublesome Virtue, would to Heaven she were a Whore, I should
know then what to do with her.


Other Women can be happy, and have their Husbands carry 'em abroad and delight
in their Company, and be proud to be seen with them; but I have such an
inhumane ungrateful Creature to mine!


Come, come, I confess I am behind-hand with you, but I'll pay thee all thy
arrears, I have a stock in bank.


Heaven, what shall I do?


Where's the Key, I'll break open the door.


Let the Key alone, go get you gone, I am not so impatient, but I'll trust you
till night, I should leave open the door, and let all my things be lost; go get
you gone, you naughty man, I love you too well to hold out long.


Well, now you're come to your self, and speak reason, and have left off
railing, I'll go and encourage my self with eating and drinking well, and
return and pay you the foresaid sum with interest.

Are you gone? Joy be with you, and more with me, Mr. Bevil.


Madam, is he gone?


Yes, now I hope we shall be safe from further interruption.


S'death, this accident has frighted me so, that I am afraid to venture, lest I
should be taken Prisoner again, and disappoint the Duellists.

And yet I will; come, Madam.


Madam, here's Mrs. Iilt coming up to give you a Visit.


Why did you not deny me, Huswife, must that vain silly Wench come to trouble
us at such a time too.


That is she that reports every man that she see's is in Love with her, and
would marry her, and has been a Whore these seven years. I will take my leave,
I see this is an unfortunate day.


No, I'll get rid of her soon by some Trick or other.


'Tis impossible. I'll wait on you an hour or two hence, but now I am engaged
upon my reputation, and must not break my engagement. Your Servant.


In such haste there must be something more than ordinary in it, I long to know
it. Peg, go and dog Mr. Bevil at a distance, till you have fixed him somewhere,
and let me have an account of the reason of his haste.


I'll not fail.


I wonder Bevil stays so long, this Mrs. Woodly has no no mercy him, there's
some cross accident or other; for methinks after a year or two's intrigue he
should not be so very Termagant a Fellow, if these Roguy Bullies should come;
but methinks they are a little slow too. Oh Bevil, are you come?


I beg your pardon, Jack, I have been locked up to save the Honour of a Lady,
whose Husband came in most uncivilly without giving us warning enough of it.


Was that it? But the Rogues begin to think 'twill come to Battaille, and their
hearts misgive 'em.


I was afraid of this. A Hector dares no more fight than be honest, and yet
'tis strange they should make it their Trade when they are so little fit for it.


'Tis so in all Mankind, they are most violently bent upon the things they are
least capable of, as if it were in spite of Nature.


'Tis true, so I have observed while a wise-man that's fit for employment is
restrained by his modesty; your pragmatic dull Fool thrusts himself forward
into policy and business.


Great dullness qualifies men for great business, there's nothing but order and
road in it; your Mill-horse is a Creature of great business. The methodical
Block-head that is as regular as a Clock, and as little knows why he is so, is
the man cut out by Nature and Fortune for business and government.

Hold, here come two sprightly Girls, this may prove the softer and pleasanter
encounter of the two.


I see they are men of Honour, and will answer a Challenge.


Now are they meditating on blood, what a disappointment they'll have. Well,
men that are so punctual in their anger would sure be so in in their love.


Ladies, having the Honour to meet you in so solitary a place, we cannot but
offer you our Service.


You look as if you stayed here to make Ladies stand and deliver.


If you should deliver yo^r best Jewel, I'd be very honest, and make but a
little use on it for the present, and you should carry it away with you ne'er
the worse.


I know the Law too well to compound a Felony. If you should take any thing of
mine, you should even keep it as long as you live, but I'd prosecute you
for it.


'Tis enough, this is Mr. Bevils engagement, that's Carolina, and the other is
Mrs. Lucia.


Ye don't look as if you would make Love, but War; ye have long Swords, and
your hair tucked up.


If we were never so much inclined to War, you have power to soften us into
Peace.


They are pleasant Wenches; if they are handsome, we are undone.


Twice in a day caught with Visor Masks!


What wild Fellows hands are we fallen into? they run at all, you see, they
know us not.


Oh, if witty men had but the constancy of Fools, what Jewels were they?


Ladies, pray lay by your disguises, and let's converse upon the square.


You make all Prize, Gentlemen; but I'll venture to show my face to you, Sir,
if you'll give me your word not to discover it to your Friend.


I do, Madam.


And you shall see mine upon that condition.


Upon my Honour I will not discover you.


Ha, who's this? this is a Trick.


I cannot invade the propriety of my Friend, though I must confess the great
temptation would excuse the crime.


This is the Lady I must apprehend.


And, Madam, I must seize upon you.


Who ^ays they are not a couple of constant men?


What, I warrant, you think we did not know you?


O yes, as Falstaff did the true Prince by instinct. You are brisk men, I see
you run at all.


The wilder we are, the more honour you'll have in reclaiming us.


'Tis in your power to m^ke us a couple of as constant dull Fellows as ye could
wish.


Ye have constancy enough of all conscience, for the use we shall have of it.


And for dullness, for our own sakes we do not wish it you, since I find ye are
resolved to be acquainted with us, whether we will or no.


Is it not pity that witty men should be so sc^ndalous, that if we converse
with them, we must do it with the same privacy that Statesmen debauch.


If wit be a scandalous thing, you are the most scandalous Women I have met
with; but methinks Fools should rather be scandalous, since they can have but
one way of passing their time with.


You rally well, but your wit is never without extravagancy; you drink Burgundy
perpetually, and Scower as you call it.


We hate debauching, but love complaisance, Madam. And can no more deny a
Friend that calls for another Bottle, than you can deny to turn up a Card at
Ombre.


We use Wine, Madam, to elevate our thoughts; but Love has don't for me a
pleasanter way.


And, Madam, your Beauty has already reclaimed me.


If you're as soon drunk as you're in love, you're the weakest Drinkers in
Christendom.


You see, Madam, the strength and spirit of your Beauty.


For love I bar you, can't we converse without remembering we are of different
Sexes.


If you will accept of such conditions, we may sometimes admit you into our
Privy-Council.


Would you have us spend our time like some visiting Fools, that never aspire
at more, than playing at Langtriloo with Women, all days of their lives,


Our communication would then be as dull and insipid, as the mirth of
Statesmen.


Yonders Company coming; such scandal has want of discretion brought upon your
wit, that we dare not stay with you.


Let's have the honour to know your Names and Lodgings before you go?


Our Names are Carolina and Lucia; our Lodgings next House to Mr. Woodly's
nearer the Wells.


The Rogues are come at last.


Let's make to the Bowling^Green, we shall be too late to begin to engage and
bubble the Citizens.


Who are these make toward us?


What do Rains and Bevil make up to yon two for?


We have done finely, if our feigned Challenge should occasion a real Duel --
Let's stay and observe.


Come, Gentlemen, you are very late.


I hope we shall be time enough there.


Y'have done scurvily to make us wait so long, we are not used to it.


What the Devil do they mean, Cuff?


Come, prepare.


Prepare, to what?


'Sdeath, ye Rascals, do you trifle with us? Come Draw.


Draw, Sir, why should we draw, Sir?


What this is for the Ladies in the morning, ne'er be jealous of us, Gad take
me we resign to ye.


Why what impudent Rascals are ye, did not you send this Challenge?


We send a Challenge, Sir!


You're a couple of hardened Cowards.


Cowards, Gad take me, ye were never so much in the wrong in your life.


But I believe if you did not think us Cowards, you'd scarce call us so.


Ye shall be very much kicked.


We scorn to be kicked, Sir.


I see some body behind the Trees, Kick; draw and be valiant. Kicked, d' ye
say? I'd fain see that.


Hold, hold, Gentlemen.


Hear us, what do you do?


Hold for Heavens sake.


Oh you nimble-footed Rogues! we cannot run so fast forward as you do backward.


What's the matter, Gentlemen?


These Fellows sent us a Challenge, and then disowned it.


As Gad mend me, not we: But if we be not revenged on 'em Cuff.


What a Pox ail they, we ne'er trouble such as they are, if they'll be quiet we
know our men.


No, to our knowledge they did not send the Challenge.


The Challenge was sent by better Friends of yours, but such as would be as
loath to engage with you at this Weapon, as they are, and would not have
discovered this but to prevent bloodshed.


Oh, is it so, Ladies?


'Sdeath, what dull Rogues were we. Gentlemen, ye may go.


Well, Sir, fare you well.


Who cares, you may pay for this though --


Had you a mind to try our courage? Gad we would have met ye in any ground in
Christendom, without being dared to it.


We did send the Challenge, and are here to answer ye; make your best on it.


Faith, Ladies, if you shrink from us now, we shall think ye have as little
Honour as yo^ Bullies have.


We did not doubt your Honour, and pray don't you doubt ours.


We know you have too much wit to be vain upon this, and too much generosity to
impute it to our weakness. We told ye you should hear from us, and we kept our
words, not thinking of this accident.


We had no way to quit the obligations you did us in the morning, but this.


But, Ladies, I hope you'll give us leave now, to meet without these
preparations, though we should be glad to meet you upon any terms.


Shall we have free admittance?


So long as you use your freedom wisely.


But let us now part in the next Field, and when you see us, still take this
rule with you.


Think not what's pleasant, but what's just and fit,
And let discretion bridle in your wit.
ARE you sure Bevil met with Carolina?


I am sure 'twas one in her dress, and Mr. Rains walked with Mrs. Lucia; but I
do not know but they might meet by accident.


I'll soon try that. Find some means to convey this Note to Bevil, as from
Carolina.


I will, Madam, and give you an account of it.


If he be false, I shall soon turn my love into revenge.


Madam, I beg your Ladyships pardon, I have staid too long within; my Maid
brought me a Love Letter from a sweet fine person indeed, and I vow I could not
but answer it.


No doubt you had reason.

Am I sacrificed to Carolina?


He's in the saddest condition for me, just for all the world like a man in a
Consumption; I'll swear 'twould grieve your heart to see him: I'll swear it
would, Madam --


And why were you so cruel?


I vow I am the strangest person for that in the whole world; I could not marry
a Prince if I did not like his person strangely, and I have a world of choice,
upon my word that's all, I'll swear it is.


Since you have such choice, why are you unmarried two days?


I have such an odd fancy, Madam, I am so nice and hard to please, and I vow I
don't care for Marriage, but that I would be a little settled in the World,
that's all; there's Mr. Bevil, Oh he loves me dearly!


Love her, how she stabs me.


And I'll swear he's a fine person, I have the prettiest, sweetest, delicate
Letters from him every day.


What says she?


Your Ladyship will be secret, I know: he has a strange passion for me; upon my
word he sighs and sits with his Arms a-cross, and makes Doux yeux upon me; I'll
swear 'twould do your Ladyship good to see him. Now I think on it I'll show your
Ladyship the kindest Letters from him. I have so many Love-letters, I vow I can
scarce find it. I have twice as many come to me in a week.


Vain silly Creature!


Oh here's one of his hand!


Heaven, it is his hand. Mrs. Iilt, I wonder at the occasion of your mistrust,
unless you have been tampering with some body else; I am very well, and drink
much Hockamore, and per^aps have given you more occasion for a Midwife than a
Surgeon.

Bevil.

O perfidious Wreth! this is since my Intrigue with him. This will distract me;
I could tear him in pieces.


Your Ladyship is disturbed at something.


No, no; but this is a very familiar Love-letter, as you call it.


Oh mischief! that I should put this among the rest of my Letters; but I'l^
face her down in it it, ha, ha, ha.


What's the cause of your laughter?


Ha, ha, ha, to see what a ridiculous mistake this was. It seems there's a
Wench in Coven-garden of my Name, and Mr. Bevils Man brought this Note to me
instead of her; I'll swear he did, ha, ha, ha.


Oh Impudence!


We had such a quarrel about it; I did not speak to him ^or three days after, I
vow I did not.


How now, Peg, what News of Bevil?


I got a Maid of my acquaintance to deliver the Note to him, which he received
with the greatest Joy imaginable, and said he would wait on her instantly.


Oh perfidious Wretch! I'll to him immediately. Excuse me, Mrs. Iilt, I am in
great haste.


Your Servant, sweet Madam. She's strangely nettled about something. Well, now
we are alone, Sister, I'll own thee; I hope your Lady knows not that we are of
Kin.


No nor any body else here.


Prithee keep it secret still, that I may be taken for a greater person than I
am; it will further my designs.


But I wonder you will not bend all your designs upon Mr. Clodpate.


I have baits ready for him, I can humour him to a hair; but I'll lay by no
design that can get me any manner of Husband, that's once. But 'tis strange
Clodpate and I should not meet, I lying in this house too where he comes often.


Next time he comes to visit my Master, I'll give you notice.


Oh me! he's here to our wish, and we alone; remember your Cue.


Mr. Woodly is not here I see.


Oh that villainous lewd Town of London! how happy am I that am out on it,
nothing shall ever persuade me thither again.


Why? Sir William your Father sent you thither for Breeding.


Breeding, yes; could I not play, I am the Duke of Norfolk, Green Sleeves, and
the fourth Psalm upon the Virginals; and did I not learn, and could play six
Lessons upon the Viol de Gambo before I went to that nasty, stinking, wicked
Town; out on it?


Ud's bud, this is an ingenious Woman.


Besides, Madam, though you be a Person of Quality, and have a good portion,
yet London is the properest place to get a Husband in.


Oh foh -- I'll swear I had rather marry a Farmer of forty pound a year in the
Country, than a vain, idle, fluttering, foolish London-Fellow of two thousand
pound a year. Oh the pleasure of a pretty innocent Country-life!


Ud'sooks she^s in the right; as God judge me, she's a judicious perso^.


Oh hang a dull silly Country-life.


A Pox on that Carrion, how I could beat her.


Out on thee for a foolish Wench; were I thy Lady, I'd turn thee away for that
word.


Pray pardon me, Madam, I am sorry I offended your Ladyship.


Can thou talk so after the Song the Fiddler sung this morning in praise of
the Country? Oh that he were here, I should never be weary of hearing that
Song.


I see him yonder, I'll call him to you.


Madam, I have over-heard and admired your excellent Discourse upon the
Country.


Who are you, some bold, jeering, fleering Londoner? avoid my presence.


Ud's bud, you wrong me, I am a Country Justice, God'sooks.


Pray be gone, and leave me, you are some rude London Fellow; foh you smell
rank on it.


As Gad shall save me she's a fine person: if I were not engaged to Carolina I
should like her strangely.


Here's the honest Fellow that sings the Song, Madam.


I have nothing to say to him, I am troubled with an impertinent Fellow here,
and he shall not sing.


By your leave, Madam, 'tis in praise of the Country, ^nd he shall sing. Sing,
dear Rogue.

Oh how I abhor
The tumult and smoke of the Town,
The Clamours of War.
The glittering Court, the fraudulent Gown,
The Suburb debauches,
The Cheats of the City,
The rattling of Coaches,
And the noise of the men they call witty.

Admirable. But give me the man from all vanity ^ree,
with good store o^ Land,
And a Country Command,
who honest dares be.
Who Justice dares do, and the Nation will serve,
And ne'er from his true Country principal swerve.
This, this is the man for me.



Very fine. While the fluttering vain Gallant in London consumes
His Estate in rich Clothes and Per^umes,
And with drinking and swilling corrupts all his health;
Or on Punk and on Bawd spends his youth and his wealth,
While such shall his wit and his bounty applaud.



Admirable.

Give me the good man that lives on his own grounds,
And within his own bounds
Has room for his Hawks and his Hounds,
Can feast his own Tenants with Fowls and with Fishes,
And from his own plenty with good store of Dishes,
And not with damned Wine, but with good English Ale
Over their faith^ul hearts can prevail,
And nothing to others does owe.
But ^rom his own house hears his ow^ Oxen low,
And his own Sheep bleat,
While the grate^ul sounds sweet Echoes repeat^
This, this is the man that is truly called great.

Excellent, there's a Crown; pray come and sing this to me twice a day as long
as I stay in Epsom.


I will, Mad^m.


'Tis incomparable, let me embrace thee, there's ten shillings for thee; and if
thou wilt live with me in Sussex, thou shalt never see London again.


Pardon me, Sir, I was born and bred in London, and would not live out on it for
five hundred pound a year.


Out on you, you s^urvy Fellow.





There 'tis and please you.


Ay, and here 'tis, and shall be. Do you think I'll let a London Rogue carry
away ten shilling^ o^ my money?


Why, you will not take it away thus.


Yes, I will, and you may thank Heaven that it is unseemly in a Magistrate to
break heads. Be gone you insolent Rascal, lest you should tempt me to
condescend to break yours.


What the Devil, are they both mad? farewell.


An insolent London Rogue to sing against his Conscience; but pray, Madam, let
me salute you, you're a fine person.


No, Sir, ^are you well; Sir, you're a Stranger, fare you well, I am none of
those.


Who's this Mrs. Margaret?


She's a Person of Quality comes to Epsom for her plea^ure, I must wait on her.



She's a fine Lady, but I must to Carolina.


Carolina write to me to meet her alone? She's very frank; let me see, she says
meet me alone, that we may freely confer about an affair which nearly concerns
us both. 'Sdeath I have dropped my Letter, unlucky accident, I must go back
for it. I cannot now, she's here.


Ah false wretch! how punctual he is.


Ah my dear Carolina.


Ah my cursed Bevil.


I have not words enough to acknowledge and thank you for this favour.


No^ I words enough to upbraid you for this injury.


How now, what is she dumb? Madam, you see how conscientious I am in my duty of
assignation; you shall always find me a man of Honour.


Yes, I thank you, you are a man of Honour


^Sdeath Mrs. Woodly! how unlucky is this, she'll stay too, and prevent my
meeting with Carolina; I am undone, I must conceal the Intrigue. Nothing but
impudence can bring me off.


Unworthy man.


You do well, pray who was this assignation made to? I can watch your private
haunts, you see, Madam.


Are you past all sense of modesty?


We shall soon see your Lover here, I suppose.


Have I caught you, and do you accuse me? I have been as virtuous and as
constant to my Intrigue as any Woman breathing: have I not had as many
Addresses made to me by the fine persons of the Town and Court as any Lady has?


And have refused as few, I'll say that for you.


Have I not denied all to be constant to you?


Gad I hate cons^ancy in a Woman, after a little while; especially in an
impertinent one, as much as constancy in a Quartain Ague.


And all this to be betrayed to Carolina! per^idious man!


Ha, ha, ha -- I knew I should catch you; there was no way I knew to make you
sh^w your face, but my pretending to another: Carolina I think I called her.


Oh abominable treachery! I forged that Letter from Carolina, which you even
now received with the greatest joy imaginable: Ungrateful man!


Well, give me your little Punck, for Marriage is not so troublesome as the
imperiousness of your Whore of Honour.


Have I deserved this from you?


Well, I confess you have caught me. I was indeed amazed at the Letter, having
only heard of Carolina, and had a curiosity to see the meaning on it.


Yes 'twas curiosity made you walk with her in the Forenoon, in a Field beyond
the New Inn.


'Sdeath, how came she to know it? Carolina?


As if you did not know it, inhumane Creature. Nor is this all; I saw a Letter
just now to one Mrs. Iilt, wherein you tell her you have given her more
occasion for a Midwife than a Surgeon.


'Sdeath, how came she to see that, she deals with the Devil?


You shall find, ungrateful man, that love does as naturally degenerate into
revenge, as Wine into Vinegar: do you abuse me, a virtuous Lady, a Lady of
Honour, for such a Creature, without any consideration of my Quality?


Pox on her Quality. This is all a mistake, Madam.


I know your Hand too well for that: you might use your little tawdry mercenary
Creatures so, that flutter about the Town in their short-liv'd bravery: but a
Woman of my Quality --


Well, however 'tis in other things, I would have no liberty of Conscience in
whoring: I would have none but those women hold forth that are in lawful
Orders, 'tis the more settled way, and has more the face of Discipline.


If I be not revenged for this --


How the Devil came Bevil to lose this Note in the Fields, Carolina appoint to
meet him privately? I thought he ne'er had seen her -- Death how she Jilts me.
That we may freely confer about an Affair which nearly concerns us both.

Carolina.

Hell and Devil he's with her there; I'll steal behind 'em and surprise 'em.
So. Bevil, is this your private business?


My Husband, I dye, I dye.


You have done well, you have frighted a Lady into a swooned; Heaven knows what
will become of her.


I knew she would be surprised.


Unlucky man.


Death, Ned, you'll stifle her, pull off her Mask and give her more air.


Pray forbear, Sir, you are not to see her; she recovers.


Give her more air, quoth a'? How he frighted me?


Good Sir Pol make a secret on it no longer; she may as well unmask, she and I
are no strangers to one another.


What says he?


You may have seen her, but you are not acquainted with her.


Ad autre prithee leave fooling.


Upon my Honour you are not -- A Gentleman ought in Honour to lye for his
Mistress.


I could sooner believe a Country Gentleman that swears and lies for the honour
of his Horse, when he is selling him.


He knows me; I am lost, undone for ever.


Whatever happens, do not discover your self.


I am obliged to you, you can be kind to others.


Can any thing be more plain?


Prithee, Woodly, trouble us no farther; I assure you you neither do nor shall
know this Lady.


Is it so? Fare you well. I will let 'em alone at present.


He'll go home, and discover that 'tis you.


As good luck would have it, I have the Key of the back Gate, and can be there
before him: I hope I shall bear him down that it was not I.


I doubt not. Oh Woman, Woman! impudence and invention never fail thee at a
pinch.


Come, Mr. Biscuit, let's hold 'em the other Game.


As I am an honest man I have lost all my money.


And so have I, and yet you bowled like an Emperor, Neighbour Biscuit, the two
last Games, but Mr. Cuffs hand was quite out.


A Deuce take it, we ne'er won one Game since Mr. Kick laid against us; and in
my Conscience and Soul he is a Witch, for Mr. Cuff ne'er plaid well after.


I'll make you amends if you'll play again.


But we have no money.


I have 40 or 50 l. to spare, you shall have it betwixt you.


No, we'll drink a Bottle first and rest, my thighs ache with bowling. Cods me,
yonder are our Wives looking out at the Window to see us bowl; poor Rogues, in
fack we'll have a Bo^tl^ with them.

I warrant you they have been dancing in a Barn yonder, with some Neighbours, I
hear their Fiddles.


Mr. Rains is not yonder; I'll swear he's rare company.


A Murrain take you; and you had not troubled us with your impertinence, he had
been better company to me to day than he was.


Yonder are our Husbands, I am resolved as you have advised me to pluck up a
spirit. But let's down to 'em now, for fear we lose 'em.


Now here's my Wife, I'll be bold to say, I'll show you the handsomest Woman in
Epsom.


It must be my Wife then, I'll tell you that.


Your Wife handsomer than mine! that's pleasant, ha, ha.


This may prove as good as bowling with them.


I never saw two so cut out for honest tame suffering Cuckolds.


There are many as fit here, if their Wives be as handsome as they say theirs
are.


Come, I'll hold you 20 s. to be spent, and these Gentlemen shall be Judges
here.


With all my heart. But I am sure mine is the prettiest, neatest, titest Woman
in the Ward.


I have seen our Minister stare at my Wife in her Pew, 'till he has been out in
his Sermon, she's so pretty. And you shall see, Gentlemen, what discipline I
keep her in; 'tis the obedientest poor Creature!


Nay, mine has some humours, but they become her so prettily, and 'tis the
sweetest little Rogue! I vow she has had more temptations than any Woman in
Cheapside, ne'er stir.


More temptations than my Wife, I scorn your words. There are a company of the
bravest Gallants come to my Shop to see her, and she'll not speak to any of
them -- i'faith not she.


I have known Knights, nay Lords in love with my Wife, and she does make such
Fools of 'em all. Poor Rogue, ha, ha, ha, my dear Lamb art thou come?


Yes, you Sot; but is't not time for you to come home? Mr. Rains has been gone
this three hours.


I told you she had some humours. Pretty Duck, in ^ack now I have caught you,
I'll give you a Bottle of Wine and a Quart of Mum.


These are my Friends, Gentlemen, an please you.


This is my Duck, Gentlemen.


I ^ear you not.


What admirable Cuckolds and Bubbles have we met with.


Now, Gentlemen, observe here's a stately forehead.


But here's a delicious Eye-brow, and sweet rolling wanton Eye: She's my Cacara
camouchi, my pretty Pigs ny, as Mamamouchi notably has it.


Excellent fine.


Alas, a^as! I but what do you mean by this, you are always fooling thus before
Company.


Peace, I have laid a Wager on thy head Against Mrs. Fribble.


Here are pretty plump red lips.


But see my Ducks teeth, and smell her sweet breath. Breath on 'em Duck.


Here's pure red and white; here's a shape.


Most admirable.


'Tis your goodness, Sir.


These Fools praise their Wives, as Horse-Coursers do their Horses, to put 'em
off.


Prithee Dear do but show them a little of your Foot and Leg, good Duck now if
thou love me, do prithee now.


Well, well, so I can: there 'tis.


A little higher, but ^p to your G^rter, good Lamb.


You are such a simple Fellow.


Oh, 'tis charming!


You are so obliging really.


Here's a fine round small white hand.


Extreme fine.


You are pleased to Complement.


Now you shall see how obedient my Wife is, she durst as well eat he^ Nails as
refuse what I command. Doll, pray kiss these^ two Gentlemen immediately. Now
you shall see.


Pray, Dear, what do you mean?


How now, Huswife, dare you dispute my Commands, Hah?


Be not angry, I must obey.


Your Servant, dear Madam.


Your humble Servant.


Look you, did I not tell you what Discipline she was under.


Good sweet dear Lamb, do thee as much if thou love me do.


Not for your bidding: but they shall find I am not behind Mrs. Fribble in good
breeding.


Gentlemen, my Dear shall salute you too.


Ay it won't do.


Your Servant, dear Lady.


Sweet, Madam, your humble Servant.


Come now, let's in, and be very merry, and decide the Wager.


Allons, this is the most extraordinary adventure, but you know we have a
weighty Affair in hand; our Bullies will be all ready immediately.


We'll swinge the Rascals, Rains and Bevil: but we must make haste, this is the
time they use to come to the Bowling-Green, we'll meet them.


There is another weighty affair. Clodpate is to dust his St^d of Ale, and he
must be bubbled; we have not long to stay with 'em.


We must borrow our selves of 'em for a while.


Gentlemen, will you please to walk in?


Come on.


A man of wit and make love, leave off this foolish old fashioned subject: I'd
have all discourse between us tend to something.


'Tis as unseasonable for a young Lady not to entertain love, as for a Judge or
a Bishop to make love.


Love is so foolish and scandalous a thing, none now make use of any thing but
ready money.


Methinks ready Love is a pretty thing.


But there are few in this Age have it about 'em.


I have as good a Stock, and am as full of love, Madam --


That you squander it away upon every one you see, as a young Prodigal newly of
age, treats and pays reckonings for every body.


How prodigal soever I have been, I am resolved to take up in my expenses, and
reserve all my love for you.


For me? I am as hard to be fixed as you: I love liberty as well as any of ye.


Say yo^ so? Faith let's make use on it.


Not the lewd liberty you mean: Come, to divert us better, go a little further
and try the Echo, here is an extraordinary one that will answer you to as much
purpose as I can.


'Tis a fine Echo, but, Madam --


Nothing but love, love: always one Note like a Cuckoo.


Fine Iilt I can no more restrain my self, than a Fanatic full of new lights
and revelations can himself.


Can I suffer this any longer without prejudice to my virtue and honour; let me
hear no more you will not suffer me to use you like a Gentleman.


I am too loyal to rebel against you, but I may attack your ^vil Counsellors,
your virtue and honour.


You'll find them impregnable.


Virtue and Chastity unsociable foolish qualities! I hope to live till every
such Woman shall be thought vicious, or at least as much scandalous as a Lawyer
with a tattered Gown out of practice:

We are in a fair way to it.


If you resolve to persist in this subject, I will ask the advice of your Lady
before I treat further.


Say you so, Madam? there is a pleasant Field behind my Lodgings, 'tis delicate
walking there at this this time o'day, especially if you have one you like
there.


What say you, Sir?


No, no, Madam, you were not there, you know not what I mean.


What Riddle's this of yours?


But the Lady was not so ill to pull off her Mask, and discover her face, though
for more Air.


You are mad, that I confess is one sign of a Lover.


Oh Woman-kind, the original of all lying, I confess he said upon his Honour, I
did not know her, but I could read her Note, it would not do.


This is so extravagantly ridiculous, it deserves no serious Answer.


Here's Bevil, I'll not show her Note till I have an opportunity to push this
business home. I knew you were not far off, Ned, come.


Does he know of our interviews?


What mean thou, Frank?


You are not acquainted with this Lady, no.


I wish nothing more than the acquaintance of so fine a Lady.


What impudence is this that makes thee fool with me and longer thus? Yonder's
Rains, he is not acquainted with my Cousin Lucia neither. No, no, come, Rains,
you may show your self, your Intrigue is discovered.


What Intrigue, Frank?


Cousin Lucia, your Servant; I see, Sir, you can serve your self without the
help of your friends.


Is this his Cousin Lucia?


Oh! is that the Intrigue? These two Gentlemen rescued us this morning from the
insolence of two Hectors.


Yes, and with their Swords protected us from their violence, and revenged the
affront.


We are not so ungrateful to disowne those that had obliged us so much.


This morning was the first time they ever saw us.


You are grown very familiar already, Madam.


If I be, you are not concerned, I assure you.


I fear too much. But how do you like Lucia, Jack? have you a design of lying
with her one way or other?


Mum, Woodly, or I will discover all your Rogueries to your Lady Bright at
home; be satisfied I like her too well to dishonour her. But to divert this.


What a Devil's this?


We are fallen into an Ambuscade of Fiddlers.


Do you conjure?


You charm the Air to give us Sounds.


The truth is, Madam, 'tis a Trap I have laid for you, and you have no way but
to dance your self out on it.


No, then I am resolved to free my self as soon as I can. Play a Jigue.


What you are merry with your Fiddles. I have been hunting up and down for
Madam Carolina; I came to present you with some Country Partridges; here's dear
Tray, a Sussex-Dog, set 'em for you, Oh he ranges with such mettle, and points
so true. Poor Tray, G^d I love and honour him.


That Tray is the bett^r qualified Beast of the two.


Pray, Madam, kiss him a little.


Kiss a Dog?


A Dog, Ud'sooks he has as sweet a breath as any man, I won't say Lady has.
Your scurvy London-Ladies feed their Dogs at their Tables, and have Jo^nts of
Mutton roasted on purpose for 'em, and make them their Bed-fellows for want of
better. But since you don't love a Dog, Madam, I'll be bold to say, yonder's
the beautifull'st Dapple Mare of mine that my Man leads there. There's a
Buttock, Madam, how clean she treads upon her Pasterns. There's a Body round as
a Barrel; there's a Head and Neck finely raised, a delicate broad Chest.
Gods'ooks she's the finest fore-handed Mare in Christendom, there's Beauty, and
you talk of Beauty.


He describes his Mare so passionately, I shall begin to suspect her virtue.


But I must desire some words with you in private.


I am going to visit now; but shortly I will hear you.


I had waited on you sooner, but that I have been giving out Warrants, and
binding some London Rogues to the Peace, and the like. Thus I represent the
Kings Person, I.


You are the worst Picture of him that ever I saw.


I am content, Madam, to employ my self in business, and to serve my Country,
while your London Sparks lascivious libidinous Swines follow their beastly
lusts and sensual pleasures. Poor Fools, I pity 'em.


Why, we have Justices of the Peace that serve the Nation at London.


What, honest ones? thank you for that; they are the greatest Malefactors
there; they make a pretty Trade on it in the Suburbs with Bribes received from
Pads, Pick-pockets, and Shop-lifts, with the Taxes they raise from labouring
Whores, and Contributions from Tributary Bawds; but Gentlemen, will you dust a
stand with me?


We are all engaged.


Here they are, they shall find that none shall affront any of our Gang
unpunisht.


As long as we Bullies hold together, we defi^ the Wo^ld, we'll chastise their
insolence: fall on.


Come, have at you.


How now.


Rogues.


You Dogs.


Hold, I command you in the Kings Name keep the Peace. I am a Justice of
Quorum, and represent the Kings Person. I say keep the Peace, or I'll bind you
all over to the Sessions.


Let's pursue the Rogues, and now we have won the field take them Prisoners.


Dam 'em, they are not worth our pursuit; I know two of 'em, and shall find out
the rest.


Go, I say, and bring 'em before me, and I will bind 'em to the Peace, and make
'em be of good abearing till the next Sessions, or they shall forfeit their
Recullisence.


We are obliged to you for your help, you fought bravely.


'Tis very indencent for a Magistrate to fight, I will give you Law.


'Pox of his Cowardice; but what mean these Rogues?


Let's find the Ladies, I'll tell you as we go.


THese Disguises have done us Knights Service.


He'll begin to be drunk by and by, preach the Parson upon him, or try Coal
under the Candlestick, even or odd with a Witness, or the grande Game at Put,
for I find he hates Dice.


Come, Gentlemen, put about a Cup of Ale. 'Tis stingo i'faith; is not this
better than your foolish French Kickshaw Claret? This is of the growth and
product of our own Country, and we encourage the noble Manufacture of Ale. How
say you? come fill all.


His Worship is a notable man in the Politics as e're a Justice of England, no
dispraise --


He has a brave Head-piece of his own.


Fill again once, Oh Gentlemen, things do not go well. There's the Streights
Trade I was speaking of, why it signifies not a Farthing to us; for, look you,
if the Manufacture or Commodity exported, be not equal to the Commodity
imported, we must ruin our Trade, that's clear demonstration. Now we send them
money in specie for foolish superfluities, for Currants to make Mince-pyes with;
it grieves my heart to think on it: but come, dust it away.


Your Worship speaks like an Oracle.


Then there's your Canary Trade takes away not one of our Manufactures. Well,
no more to be said, I am not thought worthy, but here's to you.


A very politic Coxcomb.


What News is there in the Gazette, an't please you?


Why there 'tis. We keep a puther about the honest Dutch, I say nothing, but I
hate French Fricasies and Ragousts, and French Dances too; but no more to be
said, fill again. Gud'sooks here's your true English Ale and your true English
Hearts.


I protest he's incomparable man.


In the mean time poor Poland's in danger, and yet Sobieski's a pretty man, and
Wisnoweski, and Lubomirski, and Potoski too pretty men, very pretty men; but
alas! they are but men, we ne'er think of assisting 'em, and poor Poland may be
lost, and we are in in a fine condition; but here's to'ther Pot.


Excellent Coxcomb! but what hurt can the loss of Poland do us, Sir?


Lord, that you should ask such a question, why 'twill spoil our Trade of Tin,
no people in the World can make Latin Ware, or work our Tin well but they; the
Germans indeed pretend to it: this would trouble a man that loves his Country
as I do.


What Religion are they of in Poland, an't please your Worship?


Why they are Christians, they are not within the Pale indeed, but they are
very good out-liers.


Let's ply him hard. Come here's a Health to all your Deputy Li^utenants.


Come on, I hope to be one my self, I serve the Nation upon a true Country
principle, and have as many friends as any man upon a National account.


Here's News from Ditto; an't please your Wo^ship, what place is that? I asked
our Minister, and he could not tell me.


Fie upon him; why Ditto is a Town in Pomerania, a very fine Town: but fill
again.


Here's a Health to the Bishop of Munster.


Excuse me, Sir, he's a Popish Bishop, and I'll drink ne'er a Papists Health on
'em all; he a Clergy-man, and run up and down souldiering and fighting! truly
he may be ashamed on it; and he were a godly man, he'd stay at home and preach;
I hate a lazy Bishop that won't preach; but here's my Cup. Come on, Udsooks, I
begin to be fox't.


That's good News, Kick.


Well, Poland's a brave Nation, and they have a Company of the fiercest
magnanimous Fellows, your Iskies, Oskies, Irskies, Ouskies, Erskis, and the
Cossacks upon the Vkrain, there's a Monarchy as it should be, every thing
governed by the great Council.

Uds bud they have the best Diet in Christendom.


Nay, with his Worships leave, and they have better Diet than English Beef.
I'll be sacrificed --


An't please your Worship we'll present you with a Country-dance; we have
Companions without, if you please, Sir.


With all my heart.

Uds bud, my head begins to turn round; but let's into the house. 'Tis dark,
we'll have one Bellarmine there, and then Bonus Nocius, I must to my Mistress,
she's the prettiest Rogue --
Where first I began to miscarry,
Her Breasts of delight
Are two Bottles of white,
And her Eyes are two C^ps of Canary.



Mrs. Iilt appointed to meet me here, she's handsome, and I hope sound. I love
Lucia even to the renouncing of Wine and good Company; but flesh and blood is
not able to hold out her time without some refreshment by the bye.


O are you here! well you think me a strange confident person to meet you thus;
but if I had not known you to be a fine sweet man, and 'tis dark, and you
cannot see my blushes, Sir, I would have suffered all the extremities in the
World before I would have done it, I'll swear I would.


What extremities can you suffer, pretty Mrs. Iilt.


No, 'tis no matter what I suffer, Alas! Alas!


What's the matter?


I am the most unhappy Lady in the whole World, I'll swear, ah, ha; but 'tis no
matter, I may thank my self for it, I vow.


What have you lost friends or money?


No, no, I have something nearer my heart than all that. 'Tis not money that I
care for, I'll swear, not I.


I find that some body has caught you, you are in Love.


If I were not in Love, I were a happy Woman; but now I am the most unfortunate
Maid in the whole World, I'll swear, oh, oh.


Fie on it, young and pretty, and despair in this Age.


Oh, but this is so fine, so excellent a person, he'll ne'er love me, I am
ruined, oh, oh.


Who is this bewitching man?


Oh it's no matter, alas! who cares what becomes of me? a poor inconsiderable
person, though none can say I am not a Gentlewoman, and well bred, but 'tis no
matter. Oh, oh, but the Gentleman is no ill friend of yours, upon my word, now.


Prithe^ who is it?


A great acquaintance of Mr. Bevils, a Norfolk Gentleman.


S'death, she won't put this upon me at last, he's acquainted with none of my
Country but my self.


He's the wittiest, finest, handsomest, well-bred Gentlem^n in the whole World,
I'll swear.


Prithee tell his N^me, I can be secret.


The first Letter of his Name is R. but why should I say so much? I am a lost
Woman, he'll never love me, oh, oh.


Though not by your fine description, yet by my Country and my Name you would
persuade me, that I am the happy man.





Gad, her Tears have mollified me: it shall ne'er be said a Woman shall dye
under my hands; but she might have brought it about without all these
Circumstances.


Oh unfortunate Woman! I know you'll hate me for this, oh, oh.


No, my Dear, I am none of those, do but step into my Lodging where there's a
good Convenience as can be; and if I do not give you as good proof of my
affections --


Good Sir, you mistake me; do you take me for a Strumpet? No, Sir, I'd have
you to know I am no such, I swear.


I know you are modest; but Lovers should lay by that.


I lay by my modesty! Heaven forbid, you are a wicked libidinous person; I
wonder you have the confidence to affront one of my Birth and Breeding thus
like a base man.


Oh, oh, all this talk of love is a trick, is it? you might have placed it
better, good Madam Iilt.


No, Sir, it is no trick, and that you should find, if you would but --


But what?


But marry me, that's all I swear.


All, in the Devils name! Marry, quoth she, Zounds what a word was that?


I knew how I should be used by an ungrateful man; oh that I should betray my
weakness, oh, oh!


Fare you well, good Mrs. Iilt: 'Sbloud, marry? ha, ha, ha, ha.


Miserable Woman, how unlucky am I? but I am resolved never to give over 'till
I get a Husband, if I live and breath.


This is your Husbands story.


No, 'tis their own, I assure you: why did you intend your acquaintance with
Rains and Bevil should be a secret? that's pleasant, they have only proclaimed
it in the Town, yet no where else.


They cannot be so base; we saw 'em but by accident.


By accident! you are pleasant, Madam, ha, ha, ha.


What's the cause of your unseemly mirth, Cousin?


By accident Mr. Rains applies himself wholly to you, and by accident Mr. Bevil
makes love to you, Madam; by accident ye all met in a Field this Forenoon, by
accident, Madam, Mr. Bevil expected you to meet him alone in a Field on the
backside of my Lodging.


Me: you drive a jest too far, do you intend to affront me?


I have no mind to fall under the lash of their malicious tongues; but I walked
over that Field in a Masque, Bevil meets me, calls me dear Carolina, said he
had obeyed my summons, and that I was punctual in my assignation, thanked me for
the favour of my Note --


Heaven! what do I hear? this is your project, you must be acquainted with
witty men.


Unworthy men! have they no sense of honour?


Yonder, I believe, comes one of them; I'll leave ye lest I should be suspected
to tell this.


I love Carolina so, I must underm^e Bevil, whom I fear she's inclined to; I
must render Rain^ ^uspected too, lest they should clear one another.


If this be true, we have been finely mistaken.


Oh Ladies, are you here, you're punctual, are your new Gallants come yet --
Perhaps I may guess right.


What Gallants?


Nay, perhaps it may be a mistake; but I was told by 5 or 6 Gentlemen upon
Clay-Hill, that you were to meet with Rains and Bevil privately this night here
in Mawses Garden; that's all.


O base perfidious men!


We meet 'em?


Why, did you think it had been a secret, so is a Proclamation, they themselves
have bragged on it.


Do they already boast of our easiness, vile men! Well I see we must condemn
our selves to the conversation of dull sober Fools.


Or which is as bad, confine our selves to the impertinence of our own Sex.


I proffered to day to bring Rains acquainted with you, Cousin; but he refused
it, and said he would not marry you for his own sake, nor lie with you for
mine; and that a man had no excuse for himself, that visited a Woman without
design of lying with her one way or other.


Oh Impudence!


They are men of wit and good company, but not so fit for young Ladies that
love reputation; but I hope my Cousin is not so intimate with Rains, as you are
with Bevil, Madam?


I intimate with him, what mean you?


You are pleasant, Madam; I mean she does not meet him alone, as you do Bevil.


Had he the impudence to say this? or have you so little honour to believe the
words of a vain idle fellow?


But I must believe my eyes: did I not see you with him masked? and speak to
you, by the same token you fell into a swooned at the surprise?


You are mad, Sir, or would make me so.


To show you I am not mad, there's the Note you wrote to Bevil.


That I wrote? Heaven! Lucia do you hear what Monsters of men our ill fate, or
your worse Conduct have thrown us upon? Let's in and read this Note.


How am I amazed?


All this confidence won't clear her with me; I know Woman-kind too well.


Lucia and Carolina are slipped into the House, or some Arbour, I see a Hackney
Coach, for they resolved not to bring their own.


Death, that we lewd young fellows should be caught thus; I ne'er had any love
yet, that I could not satisfy with Gold, or wash away with Burgundy; but to be
content to leave all the numerous Ladies of the Game in London, for two that on
my conscience are foolishly honest.


But by your leave, Bevil, London is overstock'd with Wenches, that like too
many Hares in a Hare-Warren, they cross our hunting, and we can make no work
on it; the difficulty of finding is one part of the Game.


I love these Women the more, for declaring against Fools, contrary to most of
their Sex.


I hate a woman that's in love with a fulsome Coxcomb, she's a foul feeder, and
I can no more have an appetite to her, when I think of her diet, than to a tame
Duck, when I think it feeds on Toads.


Well, I love Carolina beyond all sense of modesty, so much, that I am resolved
if she will to turn recreant and marry her, let what will be the consequence.


To forbear pleasing our selves to day, for fear of being troubled to morrow,
were to adjourn life and never to live.


I am sure of the present pleasure, and but venture the future pain.


But I am resolved to venture, though the Galleys were the consequence.


And I too. I will live 50 years in that one night I first enjoy her; and care
not if I were to be a Slave all the rest of my life. Yonder I believe they are.


Ungrateful men!


'Tis not too late to retreat from this adventure.


Ladies, your humble Servant: I see you are to be trusted.


But you are not, you treacherous ungrateful men!


How's this, Madam?


Your infamous dealing with us exceeds all barbarousness, Indians and Cannibals
would have used us better.


What mean they? do you think, Madam, we would eat you? we have a pleasanter
way of using Ladies.


Do you make our anger your mirth?


It may thank our selves to trust such perfidious men.


You amaze us, you are just declaring War, when we thought to have concluded a
Peace with you.


Avoid our sight, thou vain man.


And take thy lewd Companion with thee.


Ladies you have so much wit that I cannot think you are in earnest.


Our love is not so dull, that it needs to be spurred with anger.


I hope this is only to make us relish your kindness the better. Anger is a
Sauce to Love, as Sickness is to Health.


For my part I love so violently, that every look of yours charms me, your
anger pleases, I am in love with your frowns.


It seems so, you would not else so justly have provoked 'em.


'Tis some honour, Madam, to be thought worth your anger. I could never be
angry with those I despised.


But you shall find I can. Let's leave 'em Carolina.


Death, this is madness, I'll not leave you so.


I write Letters, and make private appointments with you? perfidious man! to
blast my reputation thus --


This is Mrs. Woodly's malice --


No, Sir. Farewell.


There go Bevil and Carolina.


I long to hear what my information has wrought upon 'em. Mischief enough I
hope.


Why do you follow me thus far? begone, inhumane Creature!


Oh it works ^inely.


Hear me but one word: if you condemn me then, I will own my self the Rasc^l
you speak of.


What can you say in defence of your treachery? I write Notes to you?


I know who is my Accuser, and the reason of my Accusation.


Who is your Accuser besides your self --


I have had the misfortune to be pursued by the love and jealousy of a Woman,
choleric, haughty, and revengeful, Mrs. Woodly, I am sure she is my Accuser.


Heaven! what says the Villain? I will tear him in piece^.


Death, Hell, and the Devil! the love of my Wife. But I will hear further.


Is this possible?


'Tis true, I assure you; she wrote that Letter as from you to me, and met me
in the Field; I was amazed at the Letter, and resolved to see the event on it:
but I found her instead of you.


Damnation on this Woman.


I could stab the Traitor: but I'll yet have patience.


Her Husband came by in the mean time, and as I believe took her for you, said
he knew her, and seemed to be much concerned; and she sounded.


Now the Riddle's cleared.


I will yet hear farther.


But how came you to part with the Note which I have now? I see you are not to
be trusted with a Ticket.


I am glad you have it, Madam, I unluckily dropped it I know not how; and have
been a^raid of the effects a strangers finding it might have produced. With all
my diligence I could not find it; but how came you by it?


You have told a plausible Story, and I will let you know, but I conjure you to
take no notice of it.


You shall command me, Madam --


Know then I have been perpetually importuned since I came to Epsom, by the
love of Mr. Woodly, and I suppose he having the same jealousy of me, that his
virtuous Lady has of you, though there's no danger, gave me this Note, with an
excellent character of Mr. Rains and you --


Hell and Devils! now all's out.


Where's the Traitor that has abused me thus?


Madam Carolina, I thank you, you have obliged me much.


My Husband! I am undone.


'Sdeath, is she here?


Heaven! what will this come to?


Unlucky accident!


Oh let me stab this perjured man!


Hold, Madam.


Sir, I must have a farther account of you.


Let it suffice to tell you my anger against your Wife; for contriving this
mischief against me, made me say more than was true: She's innocent of any
Intrigue with me, only the Letter she did write, what made her I know not.


But, Sir --


But, Sir, I must demand an account of you, concerning the Letter and the fair
Character you gave me; 'twas not so like a Gentleman.


'Sdeath, not like a Gentleman.


Hold, Gentlemen.


Oh, Madam, I thank you for your favours.


If I have any power with you, follow me, or I shall distrust all you have
said.


Oh base inhumane Villain! so falsely to asperse my Honour.


Madam, I must obey you. Monsieur no mettez vous pas en peine, je trouverai l'
occasion de vous voir demain an Matin.


Et Bien Monsieur si faites.


None of your French to show your breeding; come along.


I am basely abused by a forsworn Wretch. If you have honour in you be^r it
not. Heaven knows, I know nothing of the Letter, nor have I seen him this day
be^ore.


No! what can provoke him to so injurious an accusation.


Do you wonder at the malice of base lascivious men, that cannot have their
ends: I was loath to make a quarrel between you, not knowing how fatal it might
be: but I have never r^sted from the importunity of his love --


I know how to deal with him; but for you Madam --


For me! Heaven knows I am innocent and virtuous; but 'tis too apparent thou
art false; Carolina speaks truth certainly: besides I have heard this day that
you are pleased to keep a Wench too, nay one that was a Bawd, and you pervert
the use of her, and turn her into a Whore; an honest Gentleman complained on it;
I'll not endure it.


'Tis well invented: but methinks, Madam, you should have too much to do to
clear your self, to think of accusing me.


If thou had courage in thee, thou would revenge me of this false Rascal.
But why should I expect such honour from you? you are one of those keeping
Coxcombs; that rather than not keep will keep a Bawd: Nay, your Mistress,
forsooth, has turned from Bawd to Punk, from Punk to Bawd, as often as they say
Thames Water will stink and grow sweet again at Sea.


'Sdeath, none of your foolery, clear your self, or I'll make you an example.


Now all the power of revengeful rage assist me: here's company I'll away.


There can be nothing plainer than that the jealousy and malice of Mrs. Woodly
contrived this. Can you believe we can be such Rascals wihtout provocation?


'Tis probable Woodly has d^ne this for Love and Jealousy of Carolina, and his
Wife for Love and Jealousy of Bevil. Epsom allows almost nothing to be
scandalous.


Do you know, Madam, there is no such thing as scandal in this Age. Infamy is
now almost as hard to get as preferment.


Who's here, Mr. Rains? Udsbud I am almost fox't, we have dusted it away,
Gudsooks; but there were two Country-fellows there that I never saw before, won
above forty pound of me at Put, but they are honest Country-fellows; one of 'em
is a chief Constable, a very honest Fellow. But where's Madam Carolina? I have
been at her Lodging.


Oh Mr. Clodpate! I am glad I have found you, I sent all up and down the Town
for you.


Udsbud, Madam, what's the matter, is my Mistress not well?


Her Brother is come this Evening to Town; with a resolution to force her to
London, to marry one, he has provided for her: the poor Lady is almost
distracted, and bid me tell you, if you'll relieve her from this distress,
she'll be for ever yours.


Udsooks, does he take her vi armis, I'll send my Warrant for him, and stop his
Journey.


No, she has designed a better way; her Brother has carried her in his Coach to
see a Kinswoman that lodges near the Church, and intends to sup there, and not
to come home till eleven of the Clock.


Good.


If you'll go and stay for her in the Church-yard, and have your man with
Horses just by, she'll steal away and come to you, and go where e're you'll
dispose of her, she'd rather dye than live in London.


As Gad judge me, she's a fine person; but why the Church-yard? that's a place
to meet in when we are dead, not while we are living, there are Sprights and
dead Folks walk: I tremble to think on it.


This Fellow has not yet out-grown the belief of Raw-head and Bloody-bones.


There is now no remedy; if you omit this opportunity, you will for ever lose
her.


Nay, rather than that I'll venture; but I'll take my Practice of Piety in my
Pocket.


Do so, and then let 'em walk their hearts out.


Well, Gad save you, I'll marry her to night.


If I had not sent him away, we had been pestered with him all night.


Since you have gone thus far with him, I'll have my share in the sport.


If he should see Bevil and Carolina, 'twould spoil all.


Madam, my Lady sent me to tell you, that she is gone home with Mr. Bevil, and
desires your Company.


I'll follow her.


Roger, you heard what passed, pray go you with my Valet de Chambre, and take
each of you a Sheet, and wait in the Church-porch till Clodpate comes into the
Church-yard, and then sally out upon him, and fright him to purpose.


I will, Sir, and am glad of the employment: let us alone for mischief.


He believes in Spirits and dead Folks walking, as steadfastly as in his Creed.


This may make excellent Sport.


I'll about it instantly; if we do not fright him out of that little wit his
Justiceship has, I am mistaken.


Where's Mr. Kick and Cuff, Doll, we left 'em here but even now when we went to
drink with our Neighbours.


They were sent for upon extraordinary business, they paid the Reckoning.


I vow they are very civil fair conditioned Gentlemen as one would wish to
drink or bowl with; but I vow there were some Bullies there swore so bloodily,
I was afraid the Bowling-green would have fallen upon our heads; but where's my
Lamb?


She's stepped to a Neighbour in the Bowling-green, she'll come instantly.


Come, Neighbour Biscuit, will you go? our friends expect us to be merry with
them, I could be so brisk to night, fa, la, la, c.


Ay, and I too, fa, la, la; we'll sing old Rose, faith, hey, Boys.


Why, have you the confidence to offer to leave me when the Gentlemen are gone,
and you in this condition?


How, what say you?


I have been too tame; 'tis time now to pluck up a spirit, you scurvy Fellow.


As Gad judge me, the Jade's drunk.


'Tis you are drunk, Beast, every night; you are sipping off your half-pints
all day long, and one has no more comfort of you at night than of a Bed-staff,
nay not so much.


Oh monstrous impudence! the Woman's possessed, as I hope to breathe.


Pish, this is nothing, my Duck says more to me than this every day; they will
have these humours with 'em, mine has abundance, pretty Rogue, ha, ha.


But if you be a fool, Neighbour, I'll be none, I'll not endure it. Know your
Lord and Master.


I am my own Mistress. Did I marry a foolish Haberdasher to be governed by him?
out upon thee, Nickcompoop, I'll order thee, i'faith.


Just, my Duck, to a hair, ha, ha, ha.


Oh unheard of impudence!


All my Neighbours cry out on me, for suffering you in your impudence. Shall I
endure a Fellow to be drunk and loose, and spend that abroad that he should
spend with me at home; you villainous man, I'll not endure it.


Just, my Mollie, for all the world, ha, ha ha.


Nay then, 'tis time to be in earnest. Huswife, know your Lord and Master, I
say know your Lord and Master.


My Lord and Master, I scorn thee, thou insolent Fellow, know your Lady and
Mistress, Sirrah, I'll order you better, you scurvy Fellow.


Oh horrible! she's distracted. Huswife, get you home and sleep, and be sober,
or I'll send you home with a Flea in your Ear.


Get you home, you pitiful Fellow, or I'll send you home with a Flea in your
Ear, and you go to that, thou fumbling Fool.


This is prodigious. Do you know, Huswife, that I will give you much
correction.


You give me correction, you Coward?


The Law allows me to give my Wife due correction. I know the Law, Huswife,
consider and tremble.


You give me correction, you Wittal? I'll teach you Law.


Oh Impudence! nay then have at you. If you be mad, I'll cure you without the
help of Bedlam.


Help, help, murder, murder.


Nay hold, Neighbour, for Heaven sake.


Stand by, let me alone, or I will mischief you. Would you be so wicked as to
part man and wife, a curse will follow you, if you do.


Nay then, whom Heaven has joined I will not put asunder.


Come, Huswife, ask me pardon, or I will swinge you immoderately.


Hold, I do ask you pardon.


Will you never be so insolent again?


No, I will never pluck up a spirit again.


Go, get you home.


Yes I will; but if I do not make your head ache for it before to morrow morning.



Castigo te, non quod odio habeam, sed quod amen, is an excellent Sentence I
learnt in my Grammar.


This is incomparable. Oh that I could govern my Wife thus! if I thought I
could, I would swinge my Duck extremely, I'd beat my Lamb inordinately.


I warrant you, try. This is the only way to govern her; let her feel, if she
can't understand that you are her head.


I vow and swear I have a good mind, really, though she is a pretty Rogue. She
does lead me such a life sometimes, I protest and vow, flesh^ and blood is not
able to bear it.


I tell you, Neighbour, 'tis a dishonourable thing to bear an affront from a
Woman, specially your own Wife.


Uds me, here she is, I tremble.


Bear up for shame.


Where have you been, you Fop Doodle?


What's that to you Jilt-Flirts?


What says the Fellow?


I say know your Lord and Master.


Oh Heaven! the Boar's drunk, and has lost his senses.


No, the Sow is drunk, and has lost her manners.


Oh horrid insolence! you Villain, I'll order you, I can hear you have lost all
your money at Bowls. Get you home, Sirrah, you drunken Beast, you shall have
money again, you shall.


Peace, you impertinent unseasonable Ass, or I shall grow passionate.


You scurvy Fellow, I'll tear your eyes out. I am amazed what can this
insolence mean.


Stand by me, Neighbour, I have too long endured your impudence. I will give
you a great deal of Correction: I am your head, Huswife.


You my head, you Cuckold; nay then 'tis time to begin with you. I'll head you
before I have done.


Now it begins.


Nay then have at you.


Strike your own Wife, I'll tear your Throat out.


Help, murder, murder, Neighbour, help, help, help.


I'll make an Example on you. Hah would you govern your own Wife? Lord and
Master, Quoth a!


Oh my Throat, Oh my Eyes!


Come off for shame, you're an insolent Woman, and were you my Wife, I would
take off your Woman-hood.


Oh you are one of the Rascal^ that put him upon this! I'll try a pluck with
you, I'll tear your Eyes out, you Villain, you Cuckoldly Villain.


Hold, hold -- Oh Cowardly Rogue! Has he left me in the Lurch?


I'll order all such Rascals.


Hold, hold, this is a she-Devil.


So, are you routed? now the field's my own; but I'll order my Cuckold. Attempt
to conquer his own Wife -- I to my Husband scorn to be a Slave,
I ne'er can fear the beast whose horns I gave.



THis has been a lucky day; but this last business you drew me into, frighted
me devilishly.


We that are to live by virtuous industry, ought to stand out at nothing.


But no more of this, if you please, yet 'twas well designed to rob Clodpate; a
false Rogue to have threescore pounds in his Pocket, and leave us off at Put.
He robbed us of that first, and we took it by way of Reprisal.


His Man is gagged and bound far enough from helping him.


And away the Horses are gone for London. The Rogue will neither go nor send to
London for a discovery, he hates it so; but what a Pox made the Sot in the
Church-yard.


Nay, I know not, unless he waited to kill some body, and then give him
Christian Burial. I am sure it furnished me with a good invention.


If thou had not been a thorough-pac'd Rogue, thou could never have been
so present to thy self. If we had only bound him, some body might have passed
by by accident and unloosed him; but to tie his hands behind him, and take a
sheet off the next Hedge, and tie him up in it like a Ghost, and gag him, was a
Master-piece of Roguery.


This way will not only secure us from present pursuit, for no body durst come
near him to unbind his hands. But it will make excellent sport, he'll fright
all the Town out of their wits.


There's Rains, let us retire for fear of broken heads.


How now, what news of Clodpate?


Oh, Sir, we had like to have been frighted out of our wits our selves.


How so?


When we expected to have frighted Mr. Clodpate, we saw another in a sheet, at
which at first we cried out for fear, which he (to our comfort) hearing, roared
like a Bull at a Country Bear-bating, and run from us with all the speed he
could.


'Tis strange! who should it be?


We know not, Sir; but the amazement made us soon pull off our Ghostly Habits,
and come home.


Who's here?


Mr. Rains, I am glad I have found you.


Oh, Sir, is it you? we are to thank you for the favour you did us in giving
those excellent Characters of us to our Mistresses.


Your Mistresses? you are men of dispatch, you take Women as fast as the French
Towns; none of 'em endure a Siege, but yield upon the first Summons to you.


You are in the wrong, such as we can buy or corrupt the Governors of, may be
easily had; but there are your Nimmegen Ladies that will hold out, and pelt
damnably. But, Sir, I must be a little more serious with you. Do you think you
have used a couple of honest Fellows as you ought?


Why, I could do no less for the honour of my Kinswoman, or the securing my own
love to Carolina, which was desperate; and let me tell you, it is a silly
Honour that will hinder a man the satisfying of his love, and is never to be
found but in foolish Rhyming Plays and Romances.


I could however be no rub in your way, since all my pretences are to your
Cousin Lucia, and I'll assure you as honourable --


That's as she pleases; for you have no more honour in love than needs must.
There's no trusting young Ladies now a-days to the Invasion of Audacious men.


But they may to the men of easy Phlegm.


You are no man of easy Phlegm; but this is not my business. I suppose you
have heard of the Bustle at Mawse's Garden to night.


I have.


I have no more to say, but that you would tell Bevil I desire to see him with
his Sword in his hand.


Sure you are too well grounded in the belief of your Wives virtue, to
entertain a slight suspicion of her.


I am sure they ne'er shall know that I suspect her. with it, 'tis for his
false accusation that I require satisfaction.


The same love that provoked you to accuse him falsely, made him do the same to
your Wife; he loves Carolina almost to madness.


The Honour of my Wife is too nice a thing to be used at that rate, especially
by one that rivalled me in my Mistress, without further dispute I will fight
with him; if he refuses to meet me, I shall think he dares not.


That you shall not think; since you are so brisk, provide one to entertain me,
I am his Friend.


Such a one you shall not want instantly.


We cannot possibly meet to night, at 5 in the morning we'll meet you at Box
Hill.


I will expect you there, adieu.


Goodnight.


Come on Fiddles, play us a Serenade; a Serenade's a fine merry Tune; we'll be
as merry as the veryest Roysters of of 'em all, and as drunk too, an we set
upon it, Neighbour Fribble.


I warrant you, come we are choice Lads; come play a Serenade at this Window,
fa, la, la, la.


Fa, la. Hold, can't you sing Hey for Cavaliers, ho for Cavaliers, Dub, a dub,
dub, have at old Beelzebub, Oliver stinks for fear.


No an't please you, Sir.


Ah brave Neighbour Biscuit, you are a merry man i'fack.


I, am I not? I defy any man in Epsom to be merrier, i'fags. Come let's all be
Musitioners, and all roar and sing, Here's a Health unto his Majesty,
With a Fall, la, la, la, la lero.



Come on, hey Boys, strike up --


Now have I as much courage as any man upon the face of the Earth, if my
Sweeting were here I'd beat her extremely, I'd Chastise my Pigs^ye
immoderately: I love her, poor Bird, but she's too unruly.

If she prove constant, obliging, and kind,
Perhaps I'll vouchsafe for to love her,
But if pride or inconstancy in her I find,
I'd have her to know I'm above her.

Bravely resolved. But for all that you left me engaged basely and scurvily.


Mr. Rains should be here by the Fiddles. O lamentable, our Husbands are drunk
and roaring and serenading.


Oh my fingers itch at 'em, I'll order my Rogue.


'Slife here they are; now does my heart fail me: Fiddlers do you keep back;
they shall be the Reserve, you shall lead the Van, and I'll bring up the Rear:
There's discipline for you.


We are fallen into an Ambush, bear thy self bravely.


Where's my drunken beast? do you sneak behind? I'll make you an example.

But if pride or inconstancy in her I find,
I'd have her to know I am above her.

Above me! a pitiful Comfit-maker above me! I'll have better men above me.
Sirrah, I'll spoil your singing.


They are our Bubbles drunk, but not drunk enough, and their Wives with them
too. Now for some stratagem to part 'em --


Ladies a word of consultation.


Your Servant, Sir.


Oh Gentlemen, your Servant; now we'll be merry as Princes in faith: who cares
for you now, come strike up Fiddles.


Ay come, fa, la, la, let 'em alone, who cares.


Ay come, let 'em alone, who cares.


Ladies let me desire you to walk away, your Husbands are too drunk for your
company; we'll carry 'em to our Lodgings, and they shall sleep till they be
sober.


And we'll come back and wait on you with our Fiddles.


Your Servant, sweet Sir, you are very obliging.


We shall be proud to wait on you. Your humble Servant.


Are you gone. Come, Gentlemen, let's join our forces, and away serenading, fa,
la, la, la.


Come on toward our Lodging.


Strike up fa, la, la, la.


He's here, the Rogue has made haste; ^ will our Ladies be afraid to lye alone
to night.


We must even be content to supply their Husbands places. Come along.


Oh, oh, oh, Udsooks there's my Gag broke at length, thanks to the strength of
my teeth; unmerciful Rogues, if it had been like Dappers Gag of Ginger-bread,
it would have melted in my mouth; never man has been so unfortunate as I have
been this night, I have been frighted out of my Wits, I saw two Ghosts in the
Church yard, I have almost sweat my^elf into a Consumption, my man's gone, for
ought I know murdered; nay which is worse, my Dapple Mare's lost, I am robbed of
Threescore Pounds, my hands tied behind me, every one takes me for a Ghost; oh,
oh, oh.


Oh the Devil, the Devil!


Do you hear, I am no Devil, stay, stay. If I should run after him he'd run ten
times faster. If I go home they'll shut the doors upon me, no body will come
near me this night, nor for ought I know to morrow.


Oh here's the Ghost, the Ghost.


Stay, I am no Ghost, Landlord; Rogue stay, I will pursue that Rascal.


How luckily was I relieved? I had been sure for one night, if an honest Fellow
had not come by, by Miracle; but he told me a dreadful story of a Spirit
walking to night. Toby?


Oh the Devil, the Devil!


Why Toby, Rogue, Rascal, I am your Master Clodpate. Clodpate, Rogue, Rascal.


Devil I defy thee, and all thy works: oh, oh, oh!


Lye still, or I will stamp thy guts out, hear me, hear me; why Rogue Toby,
Rascal, I am thy Master.


Ha, I think it is my Masters voice.


Oh I am robbed and abused, rise and unbind my hands.


Oh it is he, let me recover the fright. Oh! how came you in this condition?


Ask no questions, but untie my hands.


Oh, Sir, your Dapple Mare's gone.


Oh what shall I do? oh miserable man! Oh poor Dapple -- I love her so, I could
go into mourning for her. I had as good almost have lost Carolina.


Nay you had better, Sir; she was in the Plot against you to night, and abused
you all this while with a story of the Church-yard.


Gudsooks, abuse me?


She has no Brother hates the Country, is an absolute vain London-Lady, and has
made sport with you all this night.


Now I reflect upon it, Udsbud, the Assignation in the Church-yard was very odd.


Mrs. Woodly's Maid has told me all; she has been laughing at you, and her
design upon you all this night.


Gudsooks, laugh at me, a Magistrate? I could find in my heart to bind her to
her good behaviour.


Ha, who's this, Mrs. Margaret? Look you, Sir, she's come in time. I have told
my Master what you told me.


'Tis true; but I shall be ruined, if he tells it again.


Fear not that, Godsbud, I tell! but if I be not revenged on her. Hold, it
comes into my head; what is become of the pretty Country-Lady I saw to day?


At her Lodging, the same we lie in; but why do you ask, Sir?


As Gad judge me, 'tis the finest Lady I ever saw.


I could tell you, Sir, but I dare not?


What could thou tell me? Upon the honour of a Country-Justice I'll be
secret.


Sir, she is extremely taken with your Worship. Alas! she's a poor innocent
Country thing.


Nay, but is she, poor Rogue?


She loves your honest, true, English Country Gentlemen, and wonders what
Ladies can see in foolish London Fellows, to charm 'em so.


And so do I, a Company of Spindle-shank Pocky Fellows, that will scarce hold
together: I am of your true tuff English heart of Oak, Gudsooks.


But, Sir, I am in haste, my Lady sent me of an Errant, and I must go.


Hold, Mrs. Margaret; if you can bring about my Marriage with this Lady, I will
give you 50 l.


That I know not whether I can do or no; but, Sir, I'll endeavour to serve you
without a reward, if you be in earnest.


I am, prepare a Visit for me presently.


I'll do what I can to serve you, but I must go, your Servant.


If I do not give Carolina such a bob, she shall repent it all her life time.


Good Brisk; Sir, you shall not meet with Woodly this night.


And you, Sir, shall pass your word for your self and him. I know you'll offer
your help to commit a Gentlemanlike murder for his Honour.


Faith, Ladies, there's no way to secure us, but to take each of us and keep us
in your several Chambers all night.


No, Sir, we shall be in more danger with that than you'll be with fighting.


We shall find a better way with a Constable and Watch, if you will not pass
your words to go home peaceably to night.


If I could think this care of me proceeded from a value you have for me, I
would renounce my Honour for my Love.


Perhaps I have such a value for you, as in time might grow to a kind of
Friendship. But that's the farthest point I shall ever stretch it to.


Friendship's a dull, foolish, phlegmatic affection, which you might a had,
being a Woman for the matter; but if it could ever grow to Love, I would
renounce my dear Friends, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil for you.


A Lady will be little pleased with one that should renounce the Flesh for her
sake.


Are not you angry in your heart to be kept from your beloved Bottles?


The Devil take me, I love you so, that I could be content to abjure Wine for
ever, and drink nothing but Almond-milk for your sake.


We never meet like Country-Sots to drink only, but to enjoy one another, and
then Wine steals upon us unawares, as late hours do sometimes upon your selves
at Cards.


And it makes your dull Fools sit hickupping, sneezing, drivelling, and
belching, with their eyes set in their heads, while it raises men of heat and
vigour to mirth, and sometimes to extravagance.


And which is most scandalous, witty extravagance, or drivelling, snivelling,
sneaking dullness.


Is my Lady here, Ladies? 'tis past eleven, and she's not come home yet.


No, she's not here.


My Lady is at home, and bid me give you that Note. Bevil, good night. I have
taken order the other Note shall be given to Mr. Bevil.


Gentlemen, we are not used to your late hours, we must retire; but if you will
not promise to go home peaceably I will send for the Constable.


Take my word, Madam, there shall be nothing done to night.


Gentlemen, your Servant.


I hope the noise of Fiddles under your Window will not offend you.


In a Town where there are such vile noises all night long, we may suffer good
Music to come into the Consort.


Adieu.


Your Servant, dear, dear Madam.


Is this for me?


It was left in the house for you.


What's this? Reads, I know you to be a generous person, and that you will
succour a distressed Lady, who stands in need of your Advice immediately. Sarah
Woodly. Gad I believe she stands in need of something else than my Advice, she
has a design on my Chastity; shall I go? good Devil, don't tempt me, I must be
constant, I will be constant: nay, Gad I can be constant when I resolve on it,
and yet I am a Rogue. But I hope I shall have Grace, and yet I fear I shall
not; but come what will, I must suffer ^his trial of my Virtue.


How now, Jack, and Assignation?


Peace, Ned, peace, go home, I'll be with you in half an hour.


Farewell Constancy. Woodly has repented him of fighting in the morning, and
would dispatch the business to night, 'tis a Moon-light night, and we shall
do it well enough. Reads, Meet me in the Field behind my Lodging, and I will,
Sir, since you are pleased to doubt whether I durst or no.


Udsooks, do you suspect me? my word will go for ten thousand pounds in Sussex.


Alas! I am a poor innocent Country thing unexperienced in the World; do not go
about to betray a harmless Maid as I am, God wot.


As I am an honest man, I am in earnest; here's a Parson lies in the house, and
I'll marry you immediately.


Alas! I am an inconsiderable person, and not worth your Love, though I have
been offered the Love of Knights, nay Lords, upon my word; but they were scurvy
London ones, and I swear I scorn 'em all.


As Gad judge me, you are in the right.


Oh I hate that Town, my Father forced me thither for Breeding, forsooth.
Excellent Breeding is learnt there indeed, to wash, daub, paint, and be proud,
and senseless; out on 'em for Iezabels.


Very fine, she's an Angel, Gudsbud.


I had rather wait upon a Lady in the Country, than be that vain thing at
London; upon my word now.


Leave all, and cleave to me, we'll into Sussex far enough off that lewd Town.


Alas! I am a silly innocent poor creature, I cannot abide marriage, upon my
word not I; yet I would undergo any thing rather than live at London; I had
rather milk Cows in the Country, than be a Maid of Honour there.


Maid of Honour! I'll make you a Wife of Honour, if you'll go with me; that's
better.


Well, I vow I use to go sometimes for my pleasure to Milk a Cow; it is a very
pleasant recreation to stroke the Cows Teats, I delighted in it extremely.


Admirable --


Nay I have gone a Hay-making in a frolic, upon my word now; but my Father
was stark mad with me, and forced me to London, to learn breeding, and to break
me of those tricks as he called 'em.


Gudsooks, he was to blame. If you'll be my Wife you shall milk and make Hay as
much as you will.


Sir, you are in a manner a stranger to me, though Mrs. Margaret has told me
your condition and quality; yet an innoce^t simple thing as I am must take
advice of Friends.


Friends! Gad take me, I have 2000 l. a year, take advice of that, 'twill be
the best friend you can advise with.


'Tis strange this Husband of mine is not come home yet; but I hope Mr. Rains
will not fail his appointment.


Here's company, let us retire and discourse of this business. If I do not give
Carolina such a bob as she never had in her life --


Mr. Rains seems to be a person of worth, and fitter to be trusted with an
intrigue, than that Villain Bevil.


What a Rogue am I to run into temptation; but Pox on it, Lucia will never miss
what I shall lose. Madam, your humble Servant; I have obeyed your Summons.


Sir, I hope you'll pardon the confidence of a stranger, that blushes for it, as
I do.


I must thank you for the honour. I'll ne'er stand out at serving such a Lady
with my soul and body too; I Gad as far as it will go -- I am a Rogue, poor
Lucia, forgive me.


Your Friend Bevil is the falsest of men, but I do not doubt your honour; you
are fit to make a friend of, and advise a Lady in the dangerous actions of her
life.


It was an unlucky embroilment you were in this night.


It was, Sir; but I am the more easily appeased, since it has offered me an
occasion of knowing, in some measure, so worthy a person as your self.


Why there it is -- I see what it must come to.


Madam, Mr. Bevil is walking yonder, but my Master is coming in.


'Sdeath, Madam, I shall be discovered.


Fear it not, go in. Peg, go down.


So, Madam, does not your Ladishp blush, and tremble at my presence?


You are an unworthy man to suspect my virtue, I am the most abused Woman upon
the earth.


Abused! it is impossible.


I can clear my self, would you could do so, barbarous man!


You clear your self!


That false Villain, Bevil, has again had the impudence to solicit my virtue,
and after he had asked me a thousand pardons, he was so audacious to press me
to a meeting, saying, he would defend me against all your rage, and that there
was no way for me left, but to fling my self upon him for protection.


S'death and Hell, and I'll reward him for it.


Lord, how I tremble, do not quarrel, good Dear; though you are a naughty man,
I cannot but love you yet, and would not have told you this but to clear my
honour; take two or three of your Servants, and beat him soundly; do not
quarrel, good Dear.


I'll warrant you, let me alone.


I know he has two much honour not to meet him singly; if he kills Bevil I am
^eveng'd, if Bevil kills him he rids me of the worst Husband for my humour in
Christendom; but I'll to Mr. Rains, he's a Gentleman indeed.


Where is this Woodly? 'Tis as fine a Moon-light night to run a man through the
Lungs in, as one would wish; 'Twas unlucky he should over-hear me to night, but
'tis too late to retreat now.


'Slife yonder's Bevil; I must to him, for I gave my word to keep him from
meeting your Husband to night.


You need not fear, my Husbands gone another way.


However, Madam, I must secure him in my Lodgings, and I'll wait on you again
presently.


But, Sir, I have an immediate occasion for your assistance and advice.


Madam, I'll return immediately.


My affair is so pressing and urgent, it must be dispatch'd instantly.


I'll not stay a moment from you.


Stay but one minute; they'll not meet I tell you.


Madam, I passed my honour, and dare not venture it.


Excellent honour, to leave a Lady that has such occasion for you as I have.


I have as much occasion, Madam, for you; but those old Enemies Love and Honour
will never agree.


Sir, you shall not stir, for a reason I have to my self.


For a reason I have to my self, I must, Madam.


Farewell you ill-bred, rude, unworthy Fellow: Heaven! how unlucky this is? I
am ruined.


All's true she has said, he's here.


Oh, Sir, are you come, I have waited sufficiently for you.


Oh cunning! how ready he's at a lye to excuse himself? Do you think to carry
it off thus?


Carry what off? you see, Sir, I dare meet you.


Rare impudence, meet me! have at you, Sir.


Your life --


Take it -- I deserve to lose it Since I defended it no better.


No, Sir -- live -- and live my friend if you please; and know your Lady's
innocent: I had not gone so far, but that you were pleased to make a question
to Rains, whether I durst meet you or no.


How, Gentlemen, you have put a fine trick upon me, to engage me, and then
leave me out at this business.


He came hither to meet another, Sir, not me.


Another, you are mad, Sir.


So, Gentlemen, you are men of honour, you keep your words well, but we would
not trust you -- we had you dogged --


This will redound much to our reputation, to have our names used in one of
your quarrels.


There's a mistake, Madam, hear it out.


Did not you come to meet a Lady of my Acquaintance?


I received a Challenge from you, there 'tis --


From me? I sent none. Ha, this must be my damned Wife. 'Sdeath and Hell; but no
more, I am resolved. Ladies and Gentlemen, do me the favour to go into my
Lodgings with me, and you shall see I will behave my self like a man of Honour,
and doubt not but to have all your approbations.


What does he mean?


Come, let's in.


A deuce take Mr. Cuff and Mr. Kick for looking us up. I'll take him up roundly
for it to morrow^ it's well his Landlord took pity on us and released us.


Well, I am so loving in my drink, I'll go to bed to my Dear, and forgive her
all.


I can hold out no longer, I'll go to bed and make peace with my Bird, there's
no such peace as that concluded between a pair of sheets. Prithee, Neighbour,
go you first gently into her Chamber, and try to appease her, a little to
prepare my way.


Well, I'll venture a Broken-head for you once.


Gently, gently.


'Sdeath, what do I see?


Be not afraid, man, what's the matter?


Mr. Kick is in a very indecent posture upon the Bed with your Wife.





You must get a Constable and apprehend him; but for my Jade I'd maul her, if I
should find her at it.


I will, I will, come along with me, Neighbour.


Stay but a minute till I see how my poor Rogue does, and I'll go with you; I
beat her damnably, and am very sorry for it, i'^aick.


Oh make haste, make haste!


Oh Lord! Oh Lord!


What's the matter.


Oh Lord!


What's the matter, come away?


As Gad judge me, my Jade's at the same recreation with Mr. Cuff. Oh look,
look, Neighbour, that you may be my Witness as w^ll as I am yours.


She h^s given you occasion to maul her, Neighbour.


This I m^y thank you for; you must be bringing Fellows acq^ai^d with your
Wife, ye Sot.


And you m^st be laying wagers upon your Wives head. Come, come, let's fetch a
Constable, the World shall know what lewd Creatures they are.


Since Mr. Woodly is so busy within, settling his great affair with his Lady,
let us mind our business. Ladies, our Loves to you two are so violent, they
must end in Marriage.


Your Love is violent indeed, it is a hot Spur French Love.


I am sure I have loved out a year of ordinary Love in this one day.


Marriage! that were time to talk of when we have known you seven years.


'Sdeath, would you have a man have the patience of a Patriarch?


Methinks 'twere enough to arrive at Platonic Love at first.


The pretence to that is more out of fashion in this active Age, than Ruffs and
Trunk-breeches are.


If we hear one word of Marriage more, we'll discard you. We may perhaps admit
of a little harmless Gallantry.


This is no Age for Marriage; but if you'll keep your distance, we will admit
you for a Couple of Servants as far as a Country Dance or Ombre, or so.


So, Ladies, I thank you for the Tricks you have put upon me; but, Madam, I am
even with you for your London Tricks, I have given you such a bob.


Me?


You have lost me, Madam, you have. I have married a pretty innocent
Country-Lady worth fifty of you. Come in my Dear. Here's the Parson too that
dispatch'd the business for us. I think I have met with you now.


Mrs. Iilt.


Old Acquaintance.


How's this!


I have got a Husband at last, though much ado, I'll swear.


Sister, I wish you Joy. Now I hope I may be owned by you.


Is she her Sister? Cursed Instrument of Hell, I am cheated, abused.


Is this your Country-Lady? she has lived in London all her life.


Udsbud, is this true?


I was never so far out of London, nor ever will be again, I'll swear.


Nay, now I am sure she has lived in London, she could not have been so
impudent else.


I wish you happy in her, Sir, though it was not my good Fortune to be made so
by you; but let's in, and hear Woodly's resolution.


Did you think I would be mop'd up in a house in Sussex? Sister, take a place
in the Coach, and go to morrow to London, get my Brother to bespeak me a fine
Coach and Horses, and to hire me a House in Lincolns-Inn-fields, I shall find
Credit for Furniture; but now I think on it, my Dear, you shall go with me. You
are so strangely Rustical, I swear, you must be better bred, if you think to
please me; upon my word you must.


Gudsooks, Gudsbud, I'll go hang my self.


A person of your Quality keep Company with Boars and Rascals, it's a shame.
I'll have you to London, and bring you acquainted with Wits and Courtiers, upon
my word, and you shall learn such Breeding of 'em. I am beloved and courted at
a high rate by 'em all, I'll swear.


Oh miserable m^n! I have not only married a Londoner, and consequently a
Strumpet, and consequently one that is not sound, but the most audacious of her
Sex, a Mall Cutpurse, a Doll Common.


My Dear, you are strangely unkind upon your Wedding night. We'll to London
together to morrow, you'll find great r^spect the^e for my sake. I have had so
many Lovers I have been cruel to, that I'll swear you'll be the most envied man
in the whole World, upon my word you will.


I am distracted, I know not what to do or say.


Why are you troubled, my Dear? you shall find I have interest at Court, and
can keep you from being Sheriff; nay, I believe I could get you Knighted.


K^ighted with a Pox; would you had interest enough with the Parson, and would
get me unmarried, I would willingly give a Leg or an Arm.


Unmarried; nay, Sir, and you despise me, I scorn such a pitiful Fellow as you
are; matters are not gone so far, but upon good terms I can release you.


How, Gudsbud, what say you?


Leave it to me, give me a handsome reward, and her some consideration for the
loss she shall have in such a Husband, and I'll do it.


I will, any thing that you can in reason demand.


We'll in, and consult about the business.


'Sbud I'd give half my Estate to be rid on her.


Sir, an please your Worship, I have brought a Malefactor before you here, that
in most unseemly manner did make an assault upon the body of my Wife.


And I another, that committed the same insolence upon mine.


Ha, Rogues! I'll vent some of my anger upon them: Hah, you were the Rogues in
Country Habits, to day, that won my money at Putt: I'll make you Examples,
cheating Villains; you, for ought I know, robbed me, bound me, and stole my
Dapple Mare.


Shameless Rascals, to publish thus your own disgraces.


Rogues! we shall meet with you.


Away with 'em, cheating Slaves! adulterous Rogues!


Mr. Justice, you are a Coxcomb; and I shall find a time to cut your Nose.


And I will make bold to piss upon your Worship.


Oh impudence! Constable secure 'em to night, and I'll send 'em in the morning
to Kingstone Goal without Bail or Mainprize.


Pheu, our party is too strong for that, here in Town.


Oh this cursed Match of mine! I'll see what they do within.


Good Dear forgive me: I will never do the like again.


Again, quoth she! no she had not need --


Good Duck, now forgive me; I will never commit Adultery again, nay I will
never pluck up a spirit against thee more. Thou shalt command me for ever, if
thou'lt say no more of this business.


Well, my heart melts -- I cannot deny my Lamb when she begs any thing upon her
Knees. Rise, poor Bird -- but i'fack you were to blame, Duck.


I was; but I will never do so again.


But will you swear, as you hope to be saved.


Ay, as I hope to be saved.


Pray, Dear, forgive me.


Ay, now you are upon your Knees; but you were in another posture just now.


And I wish I may never stir out of this place alive, if I ere do so again.
Pray forgive me.


Well, I'll pass it by for once; but I'll not fail to sue Cuff upon an Action
of Assault and Battery.


And I'll sue Kick too. If we order our business wisely and impannel a good
substantial Jury, of all married men, they'll give us vast damages.


I have known a man recover 4 or 500 l. in such a Case, and his Wife not one
jot the worse.


No not a bit. But shall I always command you?


Yes, you shall, you shall.


Why then this is the first day of my reign.


I desire you all here to stay, and be Witnesses of what I now shall do.


Be not rash, consider 'till to morrow.


I have considered, dissuade me not: next to the obligation she did me to let
me enjoy her when I liked her, is the giving me occasion to part with her when
I do not like her.


I am ex^ream sorry, Madam, that I was the occasion, though unwillingly, of
this breach.


You are not the occasion, he believes you not; but if you were, I should thank
you; for you would rid me at once of him and your self too: but the business
is, we like not one another, and there's an end on it.


But let's execute our Divorce decently; for my part I'll celebrate it like a
Wedding.


To me 'tis a more joyful day.


Do but sign this Warrant, to confess a Judgment to my Sister, and this Bond to
me; and I'll null your Marriage, or declare these Writings before all these
Witnesses to be void.


Give me the Writings^ I will do it with all my heart.


What's here another Divorce? Clodpate begins betimes.


Here they are, take 'em.


Well now, Sir, know the Parson would not marry you, because the hour was not
Canonical, but I was fain to steal a Cassock, and counterfeit a Beard for Mr.
Woodly's man. Look you^ this is the first Parson I ever ordained.


I release you of your Marriage and thank you, you have qualified me to marry
one I like better, for I am resolved to marry upon my word, and suddenly too.


'Sdeath and Hell, if ever I come so near London again, I'll commit Treason, and
have my head and quarters set upon the Bridge.


Now listen, and be witnesses to our agreement.


This I think is the first time we e're agreed since our Wedding.


Imprimis, I Francis Woodly, for several causes me thereunto especially moving,
do declare I will for ever separate from the compa^y of Sarah my now Wife.


Your lewd disorderly life made you separate before. The said Sarah having ^o^
^hi^ ^wo y^ar^ s^rce seen you by day-light.


And that I will never hereafter use her like a Wife.


That is scurvily. Also all Obligations of conjugal affections, shall from
henceforth cease, be null, void, and of none effect.


Then, that I am to keep what Mistress I please, and how I please, after the
laudable custom o^ other Husbands.


And that I am to have no Spies upon my company or actions, but may enjoy all
Privileges of other separate Ladies, without any let, hindrance, or
molesta^ion whatsoever.


And if at any time I should be in drink, or otherwise in a loving fit, and
should be desirous to visit you, it shall and may be lawful for you to deny me
ingress, egress, and regress.


Yes, though you serve me as you do others, and break my Windows.


I restore you all your Portion, and add 2000 l. to it for the use I have had
on you.


So^ it is done.


Is not this better than to live and quarrel, and to keep a pother with one
another. Faith take a Kiss at parting for old acquaintance.


Farewell, dear Husband.


Adieu, dear Wife.





Ay, but we Citizens use our Wives better: let me tell you, Neighbour Fribble,
I would not part from my Lamb for all the world, let her do what she will, she
is such a pretty Rogue.


See what Matrimony comes to --


Madam, since we cannot agree upon better terms, let me claim your promise,
and admit me for your Servant.


I do receive you upon trial.


And I you upon your good behaviour: I think you have gone far enough in one
day.


If you should improve every day so, what would it come to in time?


To what it should come to, Madam.


'Twill come to that, Ia^k; for one Fortnights conversing with us will lay such
a scandal upon 'em, they'^ be glad to repair to Marriage.


To show you, that there was never yet so decent a Divorce, I have Fiddles to
play at it, as they use to do at Weddings.


And to show you I am extremely pleased, I'll dance at it.


How easy and how light I walk without this Yoke! methinks 'tis air I tread --
Come let's Dance, strike up.


Marriage that does the hearts and wills unite,
Is the best state of pleasure and delight:
But --
When man and Wife no more each other please,
They may at least like us each other ease.
A Play without a Wedding, made in spite
Of old Black-Fryars; 'tis a fine way they write;
They please the wicked Wenchers of the Age,
And scoff at civil Husbands on the Stage:
To the great decay of Children in the Nation,
They laugh poor Matrimony out of fashion.
A young man dares not marry now for shame,
He is afraid of losing his good name.
If they go on thus, in a short time we
Shall but few Sons of honest Women see:
And when no virtuous Mothers there shall be,
Who is't will boast his ancient Family?
Therefore, for Heavens sake, take the first occasion,
And marry all of you for the good of the Nation.
Gallants, leave your lewd whoring and take Wives,
Repent for shame your Covent-Garden lives:
Fear not the fate of us, whom in the Play
Our bawdy Poet Cuckolded to day;
For ours are Epsom Water-drinking Wives,
And few in that lewd Town lead stricter lives:
But for the rest, he'd have it understood
By representing few ill Wives he would
Advance the value of the many good.
He knows the wise, the fair, the chaste, the young,
A party are so numerous and strong,
Would they his Play with their protection own,
They might each day fill all this House alone.
He says, none but ill Wives can ever be
Banded in ^action against this Comedy.
Therefore come all, who wish to have it known,
Though there are scurvy Wives, that they are none.
PAge 6. after he's in the right, insert, The Wits are as bad as the Divines,
and have made such Civil Wars, that the little Nation is almost undone. p. 6.
for Wind this way, r. Smoke this way. p. 9. for this vocation, r. this
vacation. p. 16 for alone, r. Allons. p. 17. for meet, r. meet you. p. 19. for
Aside to her, r. Aside. p. 20. for most infatuated, r. the most infatuated. p.
21. for would love, r. should love. p. 22. for and make, r. and am to make. p.
24. for that at one instance, r. both at one instant. p. 27. for dost thou, r.
would thou. p. 30. for being long fasting, r. having been long fasting. p. 31
for is a sin, r. be a sin. p. 3^. for blessing, r. blessings. p. 33. for Exit,
r. Exeunt. p. 36. for their time with, r. their time with you. p. 43. for
principal, r. principle. p. 56. for indencent, r. indecent. p. 57. for
Wisnoweski, r. Wisnowiski. p. 68. for can provoke, r. could provoke. p. 68. for
an honest Gentleman complained, r. and honest Gentlemen complain on it. p. 77.
for Amen, r. Amen.


