DUncan, King of the Scots, had two Principal Men, whom he Employed in all
Matters of Importance, Macbeth and Banquo, These two Travelling together through
a Forest, were met by three Fairy Witches (Weirds the Scots call them)
whereof the first making Obeisance unto Macbeth, saluted him, Thane (a Title
unto which that of Earl afterwards succeeded) of Glammis, the second Thane of
Cowder, and the third King of Scotland: This is unequal dealing, saith Banquo,
to give my Friend all the Honours, and none unto me: To which one of the Weirds
made Answer, That he indeed should not be a King, but out of his Loins should
come a Race of Kings; that should for ever Rule the Scots. And having thus
said, they all suddenly Vanished, Vpon' their Arrival at the Court, Macbeth was
immediately Created Thane of Glammis; and not long after some new Service of
his, requiring new Recompense, he was Honoured with Title of Thane of Cowder.
Seeing then how happily the Prediction of the three Weirds fell out, in the
former he Resolved not to be wanting to himself in fulfilling the third; and
therefore first he Killed the King, and after by reason of his Command among
the Soldiers and Common People, he Succeeded in his Throne. Being scarce warm
in his Seat, he called to mind the Prediction given to his Companion Banquo:
Whom hereupon suspected as his Supplanter, he caused to be Killed, together
with his Posterity: Flean one of his Sons, Escaped only, with no small
difficulty into Wales, Freed as he thought from all fear of Banquo and his
Issue; he Built Dunsinan Castle, and made it his Ordinary Seat: And afterwards
on some new Fears, Consulted with certain of his Wizards about his future
Estate: Was told by one of them, that he should never be Overcome, till Birnam
Wood (being some Miles distant) came to Dunsinan Castle; and by another, that
he should never be Slain by any Man which was Born of a Woman. Secure then as
he thought, from all future Dangers; he omitted no kind of Libidinous Cruelty
for the space of 18 Years; for so long he Tyrannised over Scotland. But having
then made up the Measure of his Iniquities, Macduff the Governor of Fife,
associating to himself some few Patriots (and being assisted with Ten Thousand
English) equally hated by the Tyrant, and abhorring the Tyranny, met in Birnam
Wood, taking every one of them a Bough in his hand (the better to keep them
from discovery) Marching early in the Morning towards Dunsinan Castle, which
they took by Scalado. Macbeth escaping, was pursued by Macduff, who having
overtaken him, urged him to the Combat; to whom the Tyrant, half in scorn,
returned this Answer: That he did in Vain attempt to Kill him, it being his
Destiny never to be Slain by any that was Born of Woman. Now then said Macduff,
is thy fatal end drawing fast upon thee, for I was never Born of Woman, but
violently Cut out of my Mothers Belly: Which words so daunted the cruel Tyrant,
though otherways a Valiant man and of great Performances, that he was very
easily slain; and Malcolm Conmer, the true Heir, Seated in his Throne.



WHEN shall we three meet again, In Thunder, Lightning, and in Rain?


When the Hurly-burly's done, When the Battle's lost and won.


And that will be e're set of Sun.


VVhere's the place?


Upon the Heath.


There we resolve to meet Macbeth.....


I come Gray Malkin.


Paddock calls!

To us fair weather's foul, and foul is fair!
Come hover through the foggy, filthy Air........

What aged man is that? if we may guess
His message by his looks, He can relate the
Issue of the Battle!

This is the valiant Seyton,
Who like a good and hardy Soldier fought
To save my liberty. Hail, Worthy Friend,
Inform the King in what condition you
Did leave the Battle?

It was doubtful;
As two spent swimmers, who together cling
And choke their Art: the merciless Mackdonald
(Worthy to be a Rebel, to which end
The multiplying Villainies of Nature
Swarmed thick upon him) from the western Isles:
With Kernes and Gallow-glasses was supplied.
Whom Fortune with her smiles obliged awhile;
But brave Macbeth (who well deserves that name)
Did with his frowns put all her smiles to flight:
And Cut his passage to the Rebels person:
Then having Conquered him with single force,
He fixed his Head upon our Battlements.

O valiant Cousin! Worthy Gentleman!

But then this Day-break of our Victory
Served but to light us into other Dangers
That spring from whence our hopes did seem to rise;
Produced our hazard: for no sooner had
The justice of your Cause, Sir, (armed with valour,)
Compelled these nimble Kernes to trust their Heels.
But the Norweyan Lord, (having expected
This opportunity) with new supplies
Began a fresh assault.

Dismayed not this our Genenerals, Macbeth
And Banquo?

Yes, as sparrows Eagles, or as hares do Lions;
As flames are heightened by access of fuel;
So did their valours gather strength, by having
Fresh Foes on whom to exercise their Swords:
Whose thunder still did drown the dying groans
Of those they slew, which else had been so great,
The had frighted all the rest into-Retreat.
My spirits faint: I would relate the wounds
Which their Swords made; but my own silence me.

So well thy wounds become thee as thy words:
The are full of Honour both: Go get him Surgeons --
But, who comes there?

Noble Macduff!

What haste looks through his eyes!

So should he look who comes to speak things strange.

Long live the King!

Whence come thou, worthy Thane?

From Fife, Great King; where the Norweyan Banners
Darkened the Air; and fanned our people cold:
Norwey himself, with infinite supplies,
(Assisted by that most disloyal Thane.
Of Cawdor) long maintained a dismal Conflict,
Till brave Macbeth opposed his bloody rage,
And checked his haughty spirits, after which
His Army fled: Thus shallow streams may flow
Forward with violence awhile; but when
They are opposed, as fast run back again.
In brief, the Victory was ours.

Great Happiness!

And now the Norwey King craves Composition.
We would not grant the burial of his men,
Until at Colems-Inch he had disbursed
Great heaps of Treasure to our Generals use.

No more that Thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our confidence: pronounce his present Death;
And with his former Title greet Macbeth.
He has deserved it.

Sir! I'll see it done.

What he has lost, Noble Macbeth has won.....

Where hast thou been, Sister?

Killing Swine!

Sister; where thou?

A Sailor's wife had Chestnuts in her lap,
And mounch'd, and mounch'd, and mounch'd; give me quoth I;
Anoint thee, Witch, the rump-fed Ronyon cried,
Her Husband's to the Baltic gone, Master of the Tiger.
But in a sieve I'll thither sail,
And like a Rat without a tail
I'll do, I'll do, and I will do.

I'll give thee a wind.

Thou art kind.

And I another.

I my self have all the other.
And then from every Port they blow;
From all the points that Sea-men know.
I will drain him dry as hay;
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his pent-house lid;
My charms shall his repose forbid,
Weary sen-nights nine times nine,
Shall he dwindle, waste, and pine.
Though his Bark cannot be lost,
Yet shall be Tempest-tost.
Look what I have.

Show me, show me, --

Here I have a Pilot's thumb
Wracked, as homeward he did come!

A Drum, a Drum:
Macbeth does come.

The weyward Sisters hand in hand,
Posters of the Sea and Land
Thus do go about, about
Thrice to thine,

And thrice to mine;

And thrice again to make up nine.

Peace, the Charms wound up.

Command; they make a halt upon the Heath. --
So fail, and foul a day I have not seen!

How far is't now to Soris? what are these
So withered, and so wild in their attire?
That look not like the Earths Inhabitants,
And yet are on it? Live you? or are you things
Crept hither from the lower World to fright
The Inhabitants of this? You seem to know me
By laying all at once your choppy fingers
Upon your skinny-lips; you should be women,
And yet your looks forbid me to interpret
So well of you. --

Speak, if you can, what are you?

All hail, Macbeth, Hail to thee Thane of Glamis;

All hail, Macbeth, Hail to thee Thane of Cawdor.

All hail, Macbeth, who shall be King hereafter?

Good Sir, what makes you start? and seem to dread
Events which sound so fair? In the name of Truth
Are you fantastical? or that indeed
Which outwardly you show? my noble Partner,
You greet with present Grace,
And strange prediction
Of noble Fortune, and of Royal hope;
With which he seems surprised: To me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of Time,
And tell which grain will grow, and which will not,
Speak then to me; who, neither beg your favour,
Nor fear your hate. --

Hail!

Hail!

Hail!

Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.

Not so happy, yet much happier.

Thou shalt get Kings, thou shalt ne'er be one.
So all Hail Macbeth and Banquo. --

Banquo and Macbeth, all Hail......

Stay! you imperfect Speakers! tell me more;
By Sinel's death I know I am Thane of Glamis;
But how of Cawdor, whilst that Thane yet lives?
And, for your promise, that I shall be King,
'Tis not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor: say from whence
You have this strange Intelligence: or why
Upon this blasted Heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
Ha! gone!......

The earth has Bubbles like the water:
And these are some of them: how soon they are vanished!

The are turned to Air; what seemed Corporeal
Is melted into nothing; would they had staid.

Were such things here as we discoursed of now?
Or have we tasted some infectious Herb
That captivates our Reason?

Your Children shall be Kings.

You shall be King.

And Thane of Cawdor too, went it not so?

Just to that very tune! who's here?

Macbeth the King has happily received
The news of your success: And when he reads
Your pers'nal venture in the Rebels fight,
His wonder and his praises then contend
Which shall exceed: when he reviews your worth,
He sinds you in the stout Norweyan-ranks;
Not starting at the Images of Death
Made by your self: each Messenger which came
Being laden with the praises of your Valour;
Seemed proud to speak your Glories to the King;
Who, for an earnest of a greater Honour
Bad me, from him, to call you Thane of Cawdor:
In which Addition, Hail, most Noble Thane!

What, can the Devil speak true?

The Thane of Cawdor lives!
Why do you dress me in his borrowed Robes?

'Tis true, Sir; He, who was the Thane, lives yet;
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he in justice is condemned to lose,
Whether he was combined with those of Norway,
Or did assist the Rebel privately;
Or whether he concurred with both, to cause
His Country's danger, Sir, I cannot tell:
But, Treasons Capital, confessed, and proved,
Have over-thrown him.

Glamis and Thane of Cawdor!
The greatest is behind; my noble Partner!
Do you not hope your Children shall be Kings?
When those who gave to me the Thane of Cawdor
Promised no less to them.

If all be true,
You have a Title to a Crown, as well
As to the Thane of Cawdor. It seems strange;
But many times to win us to our harm,
The Instruments of darkness tell us truths,
And tempt us with low trifles; that they may
Betray us in the things of high concern.

The have told me truth as to the name of Cawdor,
That may be prologue to the name of King.
Less Titles should the greater still fore-run,
The morning Star doth usher in the Sun.
This strange prediction in as strange a manner
Delivered: neither can be good nor ill,
If ill; it would give no earnest of success,
Beginning in a truth: I'm Thane of Cawdor;
If good? why am I then perplexed with doubt?
My future bliss causes my present fears,
Fortune, methinks, which rains down Honour on me,
Seems to rain blood too: Duncan does appear
Clouded by my increasing Glories: but
These are but dreams.

Look how my Partner's raped!

If Chance will have me King; Chance may bestow*
A Crown without my stir.

His Honours are surprises, and resemble*
New Garments, which but seldom fit men well,
Unless by help of use.

Come, what come may;
Patience and time run through the roughest day.

Worthy Macbeth! we wait upon your leisure.

I was reflecting upon past transactions;
Worthy Macduff; your pains are registered
Where every day I turn the leaf to read them.
Let's hasten to the King: we'll think upon
These accidents at more convenient time.
When w'have maturely weighed them, we'll impart
Our mutual judgments to each others breasts.

Let it be so.

Till then, enough. Come Friends......

Is execution done on Cawdor yet?
Or are they not returned, who were employed
In doing it?

They are not yet come back;
But I have spoke with one who saw him die,
And did report that very frankly, he
Confessed his Treasons; and implored your pardon,
With signs of a sincere and deep repentance.
He told me, nothing in his life became him
so well, as did his leaving it. He died
As one who had been studied in his Death,
Quitting the dearest thing he ever had,
As 'twere a worthless trifle.

There's no Art
To find the minds construction in the face:
He was a Gentleman on whom I built
An absolute trust.
O worthy'st Cozen!
The sin of my Ingratitude even now
Seemed heavy on me. Thou art so far before,
That all the wings of recompense are slow
To overtake thee: would thou had less deserved,
That the proportion both of thanks and payment
Might have been mine: I've only left to say,
That thou deserve more than I have to pay.

The service and the loyalty I owe you,
Is a sufficient payment for it self:
Your Royal part is to receive our Duties;
Which Duties are, Sir, to your Throne and State,
Children and Servants; and when we expose
Our dearest lives to save your Interest,
We do but what we ought.

You're welcome hither;
I have begun to plant thee, and will labour
Still to advance thy growth: And noble Banquo,
(Who hast no less deserved; nor must partake
Less of our favour,) let me here enfold thee,
And hold thee to my heart.

There if I grow,
The harvest is your own.

My joys are now
Wanton in fulness; and would hide themselves
In drops of sorrow. Kinsmen, Sons, and Thanes;
And you, whose places are the nearest, know
We will establish our estate upon
Our Eldest, Malcolm, whom we name hereafter
The Prince of Cumberland: nor must he wear
His Honours unaccompanied by others,
But marks of nobleness, like Stars shall shine
On all deservers. Now we'll hasten hence
To Enverness: we'll be your guest, Macbeth,
And there contract a greater debt than that
Which I already owe you.

That Honour, Sir,
Out-speaks the best expression of my thanks:
I'll be my self the Harbinger, and bless
My wife with the glad news of your approach.
I humbly take my leave.

My worthy Cawdor!..

The Prince of Cumberland! that is a step
On which I must fall down, or else o're-leap;
For in my way it lies. Stars! hide your fires,
Let no light see my black and deep desires.
The strange Idea of a bloody act
Does into doubt all my resolves distract.
My eye shall at my hand connive, the Sun
Himself should wink when such a deed is done....

True, Noble Banquo, he is full of worth;
And with his Commendations I am fed;
It is a Feast to me. Let's after him,
Whose care is gone before to bid us welcome:
He is a matchless Kinsman....

Madam, I have observed since you came hither,
You have been still disconsolate. Pray tell me,
Are you in perfect health?

Alas! how can I?
My Lord, when Honour called him to the War,
Took with him half of my divided soul,
Which lodging in his bosom, liked so well
The place, that 'tis not yet returned.

Methinks
That should not disorder you: for, no doubt
The brave Macduff left half his soul behind him,
To make up the defect of yours.

Alas!
The part transplanted from his breast to mine,
(As 'twere by sympathy) still bore a share
In all the hazards which the other half
Incurred, and filled my bosom up with fears.

Those fears, methinks, should cease now he is safe.

Ah, Madam, dangers which have long prevailed
Upon the fancy; even when they are dead
Live in the memory awhile.

Although his safety has not power enough to put
Your doubts to flight, yet the bright glories which
He gained in Battle might dispel those Clouds.

The world mistakes the glories gained in war,
Thinking their Lustre true: alas, they are
But Comets, Vapours! by some men exhaled
From others blood, and kindled in the Region
Of popular applause, in which they live
Awhile; then vanish: and the very breath
Which first inflamed them, blows them out again.

I willingly would read this Letter; but
Her presence hinders me; I must divert her.
If you are ill, repose may do you good;
You'd best retire; and try if you can sleep.

My doubtful thoughts too long have kept me waking,
Madam! I'll take your Counsel.....

Now I have leisure, peruse this Letter.
His last brought some imperfect news of things
Which in the shape of women greeted him
In a strange manner. This perhaps may give
More full intelligence.
Reads. They met me in the day of success; and I have been told they have more
in them than mortal Knowledge. When I desired to question them further; they
made themselves air. Whilst I entertained my self with the wonder of it, came
Missives from the King, who called me Thane of Cawdor: by which Title, these
weyward Sisters had saluted me before, and referred me to the coming on of
time; with, Hail King that shall be. This have I imparted to thee, (my dearest
partner of Greatness) that thou might not lose thy rights of rejoicing, by
being ignorant of what is promised.Lay it to thy heart, and farewell.

Glamis thou art, and Cawdor, and shalt be
What thou art promised: yet I fear thy Nature
Has too much of the milk of humane kindness
To take the nearest way: thou would be great:
Thou dost not want ambition: but the ill
Which should attend it: what thou highly covet'st
Thou covet'st holily! alas, thou art
Loath to play false; and yet would wrongly win!
Oh how irregular are thy desires?
Thou willingly, Great Glamis, would enjoy
The end without the means! Oh haste thee hither,
That I may pour my spirits in thy ear:
And chastise with the valour of my tongue
Thy too effeminate desires of that
Which supernatural assistance seems
To Crown thee with. What may be your news?

The King comes hither to night.

You are mad to say it:
Is not thy Master with him? were this true,
He would give notice for the pre^ration.

So please you, it is true: our Thane is coming;
One of my fellows had the speed of him;
Who, almost dead for breath, had scarcely more
Than would make up his Message.

See him well looked too: he brings welcome news.
There would be music in a Raven's voice,
Which should but croak the Entrance of the King
Under my Battlements. Come all you spirits
That wait on mortal thoughts: unsex me here:
Empty my Nature of humanity,
And fill it up with cruelty: make thick
My blood, and stop all passage to remorse;
That no relapses into mercy may
Shake my design, nor make it fall before
'Tis ripened to effect: you murthering spirits,
(Where ere in sightless substances you wait
On Natures mischief) come, and fill my breasts
With gall instead of milk: make haste dark night,
And hide me in a smoke as black as hell;
That my keen steel see not the wound it makes:
Nor Heaven peep through the Curtains of the dark,
To cry, hold! hold!
Great Glamis! worthy Cawdor!
Greater than both, by the all-Hail hereafter;
Thy Letters have transported me beyond
My present posture; I already feel
The future in the instant.

Dearest Love,
Duncan comes here to night.

When goes he hence?

To morrow, as he purposes*

O Never!
Never may any Sun that morrow see.
Your face, my Thane, is as a book, where men
May read strange matters to beguile the time.
Be cheerful, Sir; bear welcome in your eye,
Your hand, your tongue: Look like the innocent flower,
But be the serpent under't: He that's coming
Must be provided for: And you shall put
This nights great business into my dispatch;
Which shall to all our future nights and days
Give sovereign Command: we will with-draw,
And talk on it further: Let your looks be clear,
Your change of Countenance does betoken fear.

This Castle has a very pleasant seat;
The air does sweetly recommend it self
To our delighted senses.

The Guest of Summer,
The Temple-haunting Martin by his choice
Of this place for his Mansion, seems to tell us;
That here Heavens breath smells pleasantly. No window,
Buttrice, nor place of vantage; but this Bird
Has made his pendant bed and cradle where
He breeds and haunts. I have observed the Air,
'Tis delicate.

See, see our honoured Hostess,
By loving us, some persons cause our trouble;
Which still we thank as love: herein I teach
You how you should bid us welcome for your pains,
And thank you for your trouble.

All our services
In every point twice done, would prove but poor
And single gratitude, if weighed with these
Obliging honours which
Your Majesty confers upon our house;
For dignities of old and later date
(Being too poor to pay) we must be still
Your humble debtors.

Madam, we are all jointly, to night, your trouble;
But I am your trespasser upon another score.
My wife, I understand, has in my absence
Retired to you.

I must thank her: for whilst she came to me
Seeking a Cure for her own solitude,
She brought a remedy to mine: her fears
For you, have somewhat indisposed her, Sir,
She's now with-drawn, to try if she can sleep:
When she shall wake, I doubt not but your presence
Will perfectly restore her health.

VVhere's the Thane of Cawdor?
We cours'd him at the heels, and had a purpose
To be his purveyor: but he rides well,
And his great love (sharp as his spur) has brought him
Hither before us. Fair and Noble Lady,
We are your Guests to night.

Your servants
Should make their Audit at your pleasure, Sir,
And still return it as their debt.

Give me your hand.
Conduct me to Macbeth: we love him highly,
And shall continue our affection to him.

If it were well when done; then it were well
It were done quickly; if his Death might be
Without the Death of nature in my self,
And killing my own rest; it would suffice;
But deeds of this complexion still return
To plague the doer, and destroy his peace:
Yet let me think; he's here in double trust.
First, as I am his Kinsman, and his Subject,
Strong both against the Deed: then as his Host,
Who should against his murderer shut the door,
Not bear the sword my self. Besides, this Duncan
Has born his faculties so meek, and been
So clear in his great Office; that his Virtues,
Like Angels, plead against so black a deed;
Vaulting Ambition! thou o're-leap'st thy self
To fall upon another: now, what news?

H' has almost supped: why have you left the chamber?

Has he enquired for me?

You know he has!

We will proceed no further in this business:
H' has honoured me of late; and I have bought
Golden opinions from all sorts of people,
Which should be worn now in their newest gloss;,
Not cast aside so soon.

Was the hope drunk
Wherein you dressed your self? has it slept since?
And wakes it now to look so pale and fearful
At what it wished so freely? Can you fear
To be the same in your own act and valour,
As in desire you are? would you enjoy
What you repute the Ornament of Life,
And live a Coward in your own esteem?
You dare not venture on the thing you wish:
But still would be in tame expectance of it.

I prithee peace: I dare do all that may
Become a man; he who dares more, is none.

What Beast then made you break this Enterprise
To me? when you did that, you were a man:
Nay, to be more than what you were, you would
Be so much more the man. Nor time nor place
Did then adhere; and yet you wished for both;
And now the have made themselves; how you betray
Your Cowardice? I've given suck, and know
How tender 'tis to love the Babe that milks me:
I would, whilst it was smiling in my face,
Have plucked my Nipple from his boneless gums,
And dashed the brains out, had I so resolved,
As you have done for this.

If we should fail: --

How, fail! --
Bring but your Courage to the fatal place,
And we'll not fail; when Duncan is a-sleep,
(To which, the pains of this days journey will
Soundly invite him) his two Chamberlains
I will with wine and wassel so convince;
That memory (the sentry of the brain)
Shall be a fume; and the receipt of reason,
A limbeck only: when, in swinish sleep,
Their natures shall lie drenched, as in their Death,
What cannot you and I perform upon
His spungy Officers? we'll make them bear
The guilt of our black Deed.

Bring forth men-children only;
For thy undaunted temper should produce
Nothing but males: but yet when we have marked
Those of his Chamber (whilst they are a-sleep)
With Duncan's blood, and used their very daggers;
I fear it will not be, with ease, believed
That they have don't.

Who dares believe it otherwise,
As we shall make our griefs and clamours loud
After his death?

I'm settled, and will stretch up
Each fainting sinew to this bloody act.
Come, let's delude the time with fairest show,
Feigned looks must hide what the false heart does know.

HOW goes the night, Boy?

I have not heard the Clock,
But the Moon is down.

And she goes down at twelve.

I take it 'tis late, Sir,

An heavy summons lies like lead upon me;
Nature would have me sleep, and yet I fain would wake:
Merciful powers restrain me in these cursed thoughts
That thus disturb my rest.
Who's there? Macbeth, a friend.

What, Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a-bed;
He has been to night in an unusual pleasure:
He to your servants has been bountiful,
And with this Diamond he greets your wife
By the obliging name of most kind Hostess.

The King taking us unprepared, restrained our power
Of serving him; which else should have wrought more free.

All's well.
I dreamed last night of the three weyward Sisters
To you they have shown some truth.

I think not of them;
Yet, when we can entreat an hour or two,
We'll spend it in some wood upon that business.

At your kindest leisure.

If when the Prophecy begins to look like truth
You will adhere to me, it shall make honour for you.

So I lose none in seeking to augment it, but still
Keeping my bosom free, and my Allegiances dear,
I shall be counselled.

Good repose the while.

The like to you, Sir.

Go bid your Mistress, when she is undressed,
To strike the Closet-bell, and I'll go to bed.
Is this a dagger which I see before me?
The hilt draws towards my hand; come, let me grasp thee:
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still;
Art thou not fatal Vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? or, art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation
Proceeding from the brain, oppressed with heat.
My eyes are made the fools of the other senses;
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still,
And on thy blade are stains of reeking blood.
It is the bloody business that thus
Informs my eye-sight; now, to half the world
Nature seems dead, and wicked dreams infect
The health of sleep; now witchcraft celebrates
Pale Heccate's Offerings; now murder is
Alarm'd by his nights Sentinel: the wolf,
Whose howling seems the watch-word to the dead:
But whilst I talk, he lives: hark, I am summoned;
O Duncan, hear it not, for 'tis a bell
That rings my Coronation, and thy Knell.

That which made them drunk, has made me bold;
What has quenched them, hath given new fire to me.
Hark; oh, it was the Owl that shrieked;
The fatal Bell-man that oft bids good night
To dying men, he is about it; the doors are open,
And whilst the surfeited Grooms neglect their charges for sleep,
Nature and death are now contending in them.

VVho's there?

Alas, I am afraid they are awaked,
And 'tis not done; the attempt without the deed
Would ruin us. I laid the daggers ready,
He could not miss them; and had he not resembled
My Father, as he slept, I would have don't
My Husband.

I have done the deed, did thou not hear a noise?

I heard the Owl scream, and the Crickets cry,
Did dot you speak?

When?

Now.

Who lies in the Anti-chamber?

Donalbain.

This is a dismal sight.

A foolish thought to say a dismal sight:

There is one did laugh as he securely slept,
And one cried Murder, that they waked each other.
I stood and heard them; but they said their Prayers,
And then addressed themselves to sleep again.

There are two lodged together.

One cried, Heaven bless us, the other said, Amen:
As they had seen me with these Hang-mans hands,
Silenced with fear, I could not say Amen
When they did say, Heaven bless us.

Consider it not so deeply.

But, wherefore could not I pronounce, Amen?
I had most need of blessing, and Amen
Stuck in my throat.

These deeds should be forgot as soon as done,
Lest they distract the doer.

Methoughts I heard a noise cry, sleep no more:
Macbeth has murdered sleep, the innocent sleep;
Sleep, that locks up the senses from their care;
The death of each days life; tired labours bath;
Balm of hurt; minds great natures second course;
Chief nourisher in life's feast.

What do you mean?

Still it cried, sleep no more, to all the house.
Glamis hath murdered sleep, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleep no more; Macbeth shall sleep no more.

Why do you dream thus? go, get some water,
And cleanse this filthy witness from your hands.
Why did you bring the daggers from the place?
They must be there, go carry them, and stain
The sleepy Grooms with blood.

I'll go no more;
I am afraid to think what I have done.
What then, with looking on it, shall I do?

Give me the daggers, the sleeping and the dead*
Are but as pictures; 'tis the eye of childhood
That fears a painted Devil: with his blood
I'll stain the faces of the Grooms; by that
It will appear their guilt.

What knocking's that?
How is't with me, when every noise affrights me?
What hands are here! can the Sea afford
Water enough to wash away the stains?
No, they would sooner add a tincture to
The Sea, and turn the green into a red.

My hands are of your colour; but I scorn
To wear an heart so white. Hark,
I hear a knocking at the Gate: to your Chamber;
A little water clears us of this deed.
Your fear has left you unmanned; hark, more knocking.
Get on your Gown, lest occasions call us,
And shows us to be watchers; be not lost
So poorly in your thoughts.

Disguised in blood, I scarce can find my way.
VVake Duncan with this knocking, would thou could.

You sleep soundly, that so much knocking
Could not wake you.

Labour by day causes rest by night.

See the Noble Macduff.
Good morrow, my Lord, have you observed
How great a mist does now possess the air;
It makes me doubt whether't be day or night.

Rising this morning early, I went to look out of my
Window, and I could scarce see farther than my breath:
The darkness of the night brought but few objects
To our eyes, but too many to our ears.
Strange claps and creekings of the doors were heard;
The Screech-Owl with his screams, seemed to foretell*
Some deed more black than night.

Is the King stirring?

Not yet.

He did command me to attend him early;
I have almost slipped the hour.

I'll bring you to him.

I know this is a joyful trouble to you.

The labour we delight in, gives;
That door will bring you to him.

I'll make bold to call; for 'tis my limited service.

Goes the King hence to day?

So he designs.

The night has been unruly:
Where we lay, our chimneys were blown down;
And, as they say, terrible groanings were heard in the air:
Strange screams of death, which seemed to prophecy
More strange events, filled divers.
Some say the Earth shook.

'Twas a rough night.

My young remembrance cannot recollect its fellow.

Oh horror! horror! horror!
Which no heart can conceive, nor tongue can utter.

What's the matter?

What's the matter?

Horror has done its worst:
Most sacrilegious murder has broke open
The Lord's anointed Temple, and stole thence
The life of the building.

What is't you say; the life?

Meaning his Majesty.

Approach the Chamber, and behold a sight
Enough to turn spectators into stone.
I cannot speak, see, and then speak your selves:
Ring the Alarum-bell. Awake, awake,
Murder, Treason; Banquo, Malcom, and Donalbain,
Shake off your downy sleep, Death's counterfeit;
And look on Death it self; up, up, and see,
As from your Graves, rise up, and walk like spirits
To countenance this horror: ring the bell.

What's the business, that at this dead of night
You alar'm us from our rest?

O, Madam!
'Tis not for you to hear what I can speak:
The repetition in a woman's ear
Would do another murder.
Oh Banquo, Banquo, our Royal Master's murdered!

Ah me! in our house?

The deed's too cruel any where, Macduff;
Oh, that you could but contradict your self,
And say it is not true.

Had I but died an hour before this chance,
I had lived a blessed time; for, from this instant,
There's nothing in it worth a good mans care;
All is but toys, Renown and Grace are dead.

What is amiss?

You are, and do not know it:
The spring, the head, the fountain of your blood
Is stopped; the very source of it is stopped.

Your Royal Father's murdered.

Murdered! by whom?

Those of his Chamber, as it seemed, had don't;
Their hands and faces were all stained with blood:
So were their Daggers, which we found unwip'd,
Upon their pillows. Why was the life of one,
So much above the best of men, entrusted
To the hands of two, so much below
The worst of beasts.

Then I repent me I so rashly killed em.

Why did you so?

Who can be prudent and amazed together;
Loyal and neutral in a moment? no man.
The expedition of my violent love
Out-ran my pausing reason: I saw Duncan,
Whose gaping wounds looked like a breach in nature,
Where ruin entered there. I saw the murderers
Steeped in the colours of their trade; their Daggers
Being yet unwip'd, seemed to own the deed,
And call for vengeance; who could then refrain,
That had an heart to love; and in that heart
Courage to manifest his affection.

Oh, oh, oh.

Look to the Lady.

Why are we silent now, that have so large
An argument for sorrow?

What should be spoken here, where our fate may rush*
Suddenly upon us, and as if it lay
Hid in some corner; make our death succeed
The ruin of our Father e're we are aware.

I find this place too public for true sorrow:
Let us retire, and mourn: but first,
Guarded by Virtue, I'm resolved to find
The utmost of this business.

And I.

And all.
Let all of us take manly resolution;
And two hours hence meet together in the Hall
To question this most bloody fact.

We shall be ready, Sir,

What will you do?
Let's not consort with them:
To show an unfelt-sorrow, is an office
Which false men* do with ease.
I'll to England.

To Ireland I'm resolved to steer my course;
Our separated fortune may protect our persons
Where we are: Daggers lie hid under men's smiles,
And the nearer some men are allied to our blood,
The more, I fear, they seek to shed it.

This murderous shaft that's shot,
Hath not yet lighted; and our safest way
Is, to avoid the aim: then let's to horse,
And use no ceremony in taking leave of any.

I can remember well,
Within the compass of which time I've seen
Hours dreadful, and things strange; but this one night
Has made that knowledge void.

Thou see the Heavens, as troubled with mans act,
Threatened this bloody day: by th'hour 'tis day,
And yet dark night does cover all the sky,
As if it had quite blotted out the Sun.
Is't nights predominance, or the days shame
Makes darkness thus usurp the place of light.

'Tis strange and unnatural,
Even like the deed that's done; on Tuesday last,
A Falcon towering in her height of pride,
Was by a mousing Owl hawked at, and killed.

And Duncan's Horses, which before were tame,
Did on a sudden change their gentle natures,
And became wild; they broke out of their Stables,
As if they would make war with mankind.

'Tis said they eat each other.

They did so,
To th'amazement of those eyes that saw it.
Here comes the good Macduff:
How goes the world, Sir, now?

Is't known who did this more than bloody deed?

Those that Macbeth hath slain, are most suspected.

Alas, what good could they pretend?

It is supposed they were suborned.
Malcolm and Donalbain, the Kings two Sons,
Are stolen away from Court,
Which puts upon them suspicion of the deed.

Unnatural still.
Could their ambition prompt them to destroy
The means of their own life.

You are free to judge
Of their deportment as you please; but most
Men think em guilty.

Then 'tis most like the Sovereignty will fall
Upon Macbeth.

He is already named, and gone to Scone
To be invested.

Where's Duncan's body?

Carried to Colmehill,
The sacred Store-house of his Predecessors.

Will you to Scone?

No, Cousin, I'll to Fyfe:
My wife and children frighted at the Alar'm
Of this sad news, have thither led the way,
And I'll follow them: may the King you go
To see invested, prove as great and good
As Duncan was; but I'm in doubt of it.
New Robes ne'er as the old so easy sit.

Art sure this is the place my Lord appointed
Us to meet him?

This is the entrance of the Heath; and here
He ordered me to attend him with the Chariot.

How fondly did my Lord conceive that we
Should shun the place of danger by our flight
From Everness? The darkness of the day*
Makes the Heath seem the gloomy walks of death.
We are in danger still: they who dare here.
Trust Providence, may trust it any where.

But this place, Madam, is more free from terror:
Last night methoughts I heard a dismal noise
Of shrieks and groanings in the air.

'Tis true, this is a place of greater silence;
Not so much troubled with the groans of those
That die; nor with the out-cries of the living.

Yes, I have heard stories, how some men
Have in such lonely places been affrighted
With dreadful shapes and noises.

But hark, my Lord sure hollows;
'Tis he; answer him quickly.

Illo, ho, ho, ho.

Now, I begin to see him: are you a foot,
My Lord?

Knowing the way to be both short and easy,
And that the Chariot did attend me here,
I have adventured. Where are our children?

They are securely sleeping in the Chariot.

Speak, Sister, speak; is the deed done?

Long ago, long ago:
Above twelve glasses since have run.

Ill deeds are seldom slow;
Nor single: following crimes on former wait.
The worst of creatures fastest propagate.
Many more murders must this one ensue,
As if in death were propagation too*

He will.

He shall.

He must spill much more blood;
And become worse, to make his Title good.

Now let's dance.

Agreed.

Agreed.

Agreed.

We should rejoice when good Kings bleed.
When cattle die, about we go,
What then, when Monarchs perish, should we do?

What can this be?

This is most strange: but why seem you afraid?
Can you be capable of fears, who have
So often caused it in your enemies?

It was an hellish Song: I cannot dread
Ought that is mortal; but this is something more.
Let's have a dance upon the Heath;
We gain more life by Duncan's death.
Sometimes like brinded Cats we show,
Having no music but our mew.
Sometimes we dance in some old mill,
Upon the hopper, stones, and wheel.
To some old saw, or Bardish Rhyme,
Where still the Mill clack does keep time.
Sometimes about an hollow tree,
A round, a round, a round dance we.
Thither the chirping Cricket comes,
And Beetle, singing drowsy hums.
Sometimes we dance over Fens and Furs,
To howls of wolves, and barks of curs.
And when with none of those we meet,
We dance to the echoes of our feet.
At the night-Raven's dismal voice,
Whilst others tremble, we rejoice;
And nimbly, nimbly dance we still
To the echoes from an hollow Hill.

I am glad you are not afraid.

I would not willingly to fear submit:
None can fear ill, but those that merit it.

Am I made bold by her? how strong a guard
Is innocence? if any one would be
Reputed valiant, let him learn of you;
Virtue both courage is, and safety too.

These seem foul spirits; I'll speak to em.
If you can any thing by more than nature know;
You may in those prodigious times fore-tell
Some ill we may avoid.

Saving thy blood will cause it to be shed;

He'll bleed by thee, by whom thou first hast bled.

Thy wife shall shunning danger, dangers find,
And fatal be, to whom* she most is kind.

Why are you altered, Sir? be not so thoughtful:
The Messengers of Darkness never spake
To men, but to deceive them.

Their words seem to fore-tell some dire predictions.

He that believes ill news from such as these,
Deserves to find it true. Their words are like
Their shape; nothing but fiction.
Let's hasten to our journey.

I'll take your counsel; for to permit
Such thoughts upon our memories to dwell,
Will make our minds the Registers of Hell.

THou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the three Sisters promised; but I fear
Thou plaid'st most foully for it: yet it was said
It should not stand in thy Posterity:
But that my self should be the Root and Father
Of many Kings; they told thee truth.
Why, since their promise was made good to thee,
May they not be my Oracles as well.

Here's our chief Guest, if he had been forgotten,
It had been want of music to our Feast
To night we hold a solemn supper, Sir;
And all request your presence.

Your Majesty lays your command on me,
To which my duty is to obey.

Ride you this afternoon?

Yes, Royal Sir.

We should have else desired your good advice,
(Which still hath been both grave and prosperous)
In this days Counsel; but we'll take to morrow.
Is't far you ride?

As far, Great Sir, as will take up the time:
Go not my Horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the night,
For a dark hour or two.

Fail not our Feast.

My Lord, I shall not.

We hear our bloody Cousins are bestowed
In England, and in Ireland; not confessing
Their cruel Parricide; filling their hearers
With strange invention. But, of that to morrow.
Goes your Son with you?

He does; and our time now calls upon us.

I wish your Horses swift, and sure of foot.
Farewell.
Let every man be master of his time;
Till seven at night, to make society
The more welcome; we will our selves withdraw,
And be alone till supper.
Macduff departed frowningly, perhaps
He is grown jealous; he and Banquo must
Embrace the same fate.
Do those men attend our pleasure?

They do; and wait without.

Bring them before us.
I am no King till I am safely so.
My fears stick deep in Banquo's successors;
And in his Royalty of Nature reigns that
Which would be feared. He dares do much;
And to that dauntless temper of his mind,
He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valour
To act in safety. Under him
My genius is rebuked: he chid the Sisters
When first they put the name of King upon me,
And bade them speak to him. Then, Prophet like,
They hailed him Father to a line of Kings.
Upon my head they placed a fruitless Crown,
And put a barren Sceptre in my hand:
Thence to be wrested by another race;
No son of mine succeeding: if it be so;
For Banquo's Issue, I have stained my soul
For them: the gracious Duncan I have murdered:
Rather than so, I will attempt yet further,
And blot out, by their blood, what e're
Is written of them in the book of Fate.
Wait you without, and stay there till we call.
Was it not yesterday we spoke together?

It was; so please your Highness.

And have you since considered what I told you?
How it was Banquo, who in former times
Held you so much in slavery;
Whilst you were guided to suspect my innocence.
This I made good to you in your last conference;
How you were born in hand; how crossed:
The Instruments, who wrought with them.

You made it known to us.

I did so; and now let me reason with you:
Do you find your patience so predominant
In your nature,
As tamely to remit those injuries?
Are you so Gospell'd to pray for this good man,
And for his Issue; whose heavy hand
Hath bowed you to the Grave, and begger'd
Yours for ever?

We are men, my Liege.

Ay, in the catalogue you go for men;
As hounds, and grey-hounds, mungrels, spaniels, curs,
Shoughs, water-rugs, and demi-wolves, are all
Called by the name of dogs: the list of which
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The house-keeper, the hunter, every one
According to the gift which bounteous Nature
Hath bestowed on him; and so of men.
Now, if you have a station is the list,
Nor in the worst rank of manhood; say it,
And I will put that business in your bosoms,
Which, if performed, will rid you of your enemy,
And will endear you to the love of us.

I am one, my Liege,
Whom the vile blows, and malice of the Age
Hath so incensed, that I care not what I do
To spite the World.

And I another,
So weary with disasters, and so inflicted by fortune,
That I would set my life on any chance,
To mend it, or to lose it.

Both of you know Banquo was your enemy.

True, my Lord.

So is he mine; and though I could
With open power take him from my sight,
And bid my will avouch it: yet I must not;
For certain friends that are both his and mine;
Whose loves I may not hazard; would ill
Resent a public process: and thence it is
That I do your assistance crave, to mask
The business from the common eye.

We shall, my Lord, perform what you command us.

Though our lives --

Your spirits shine through you*
Within this hour, at most,
I will advise you where to plant your selves;
For it must be done to night:
And something from the Palace; always remembered,
That you keep secrecy with the prescribed Father.
Flean, his Son too, keeps him company;
Whose absence is no less material to me
Than that of Banquo's: he too must embrace the fate
Of that dark hour. Resolve your selves apart.

We are resolved, my Liege.

I'll call upon you straight.
Now, Banquo, if thy soul can in her flight
Find Heaven, thy happiness begins to night.

It must be so. Great Duncan's bloody death
Can have no other Author but Macbeth.
His Dagger now is to a Sceptre grown;
From Duncan's Grave he has derived his Throne.

Ambition urged him to that bloody deed:
May you be never by Ambition led:
Forbid it Heaven, that in revenge you should
Follow a Copy that is writ in blood.

From Duncan's Grave, methinks, I hear a groan
That call's a loud for justice.

If the Throne
Was by Macbeth ill gained, Heavens may,
Without your Sword, sufficient vengeance pay.
Usurpers lives have but a short extent,
Nothing lives long in a strange Element.

My Countries dangers call for my defence
Against the bloody Tyrants violence.

I am afraid you have some other end,
Than merely Scotland's freedom to defend.
You'd raise your self, whilst you would him dethrone;
And shake his Greatness, to confirm your own.
That purpose will appear, when rightly scan'd,
But usurpation at the second hand.
Good Sir, recall your thoughts.

What if I should*
Assume the Sceptre for my Countrey's good?
Is that an usurpation? can it be
Ambition to procure the liberty
Of this sad Realm; which does by Treason bleed?
That which provokes, will justify the deed.

If the Design should prosper, the Event
May make us safe, but not you Innocent:
For whilst to set our fellow Subjects free
From present Death, or future Slavery.
You wear a Crown, not by your Title due,
Defence in them, is an Offence in you;
That Deed's unlawful though it cost no Blood,
In which you'll be at best unjustly Good.
You, by your Pity which for us you plead,
Weave but Ambition of a finer thread.

Ambition does the height of power affect,
My aim is not to Govern, but Protect:
And he is not ambitious that declares,
He nothing seeks of Scepters but their cares.

Can you so patiently your self molest,
And lose your own, to give your Country rest!
In Plagues what sound Physician would endure
To be infected for another Cure.

If by my troubles I could yours release,
My Love would turn those torments to my ease:
I should at once be sick and healthy too,
Though Sickly in my self, yet Well in you.

But then reflect upon the Danger, Sr.
Which you by your aspiring would incur
From Fortunes Pinnacle, you will too late
Look down, when you are giddy with your height;
Whilst you with Fortune play to win a Crown,
The Peoples Stakes are greater than your own.

In hopes to have the common Ills redressed,
Who would not venture single interest.

My Lord, a Gentleman, just now arrived
From Court, has brought a Message from the King:

One sent from him, can no good Tidings bring?

What would the Tyrant have?

Go, I will hear
The News, though it a dismal Accent bear;
Those who expect and do not fear their Doom,
May hear a Message though from Hell it come:

Is Banquo gone from Court?

Yes Madam, but returns again to night.

Say to the King, I would attend his leisure
For a few words.
Where our desire is got without content,
Alas, it is not Gain, but punishment!
Tis safer to be that which we destroy,
Then by Destruction live in doubtful joy.
How now my Lord, why do you keep alone?
Making the worst of Fancy your Companions,
Converting with those thoughts which should have died
With those they think on: things without redress
Should be without regard: what's done, is done.

Alas, we have but scorched the Snake, not killed it,
She'll close and be her self, whilst our poor malice
Remains in danger of her former Sting.
But let the frame of all things be disjoint
E're we will eat our bread in fear; and sleep
In the affliction of those horrid Dreams
That shake us mightily! Better be with him
Whom we to gain the Crown, have sent to peace;
Then on the torture of the Mind to lye
In restless Agony. Duncan is dead;
He, after life's show feavor, now sleeps; Well:
Treason has done it's worst; nor Steel, nor Poison,
No Ferreign force, nor yet Domestic Malice
Can touch him further.

Come on, smooth your rough brow:
Be free and merry with your guest to night.

I shall, and so I pray be you but still,
Remember to apply your self to Banquo:
Present him kindness with your Eye and Tongue,
In how unsafe a posture are our honours
That we must have recourse to flattery,
And make our Faces Vizors to our hearts.

You must leave this.

How full of Scorpions is my mind? Dear wife
Thou know that Banquo and his Flean lives.

But they are not Immortal, there's comfort yet in tha^.

Be merry then, for e're the Bat has flown
His Cloistered flight; e're to black Heceate's Summons*
The sharp browed Beetle with his drowsy hums,
Has rung night's second Peal:
There shall be done a deed of dreadful Note.

What is't?

Be innocent of knowing it, my Dear,
Till thou applaud the deed, come dismal Night
Close up the Eye of the quick sighted Day
With thy invisible and bloody hand,
The Crow, makes wing to the thick shady Grove,
Good things of day grow dark and overcast,
Whilst Night's black Agent's to their Preys make hast,
Thou wonder'st at my Language, wonder still,
Things ill begun; strengthen themselves by ill.

The time is almost come,
The West yet glimmers with some streaks of day,
Now the benighted Traveller spurs on,
To gain the timely Inn.

Hark, I hear Horses, and saw some body alight
At the Park gate.

Then tis he; the rest
That are expected are in the Court already.

His Horses go about almost a Mile,
And men from hence to the Palace make it their usual walk.

It will be Rain to night.

We must make hast;

Our hast concerns us more then being wet.
The King expects me at his feast to night,
To which he did invite me with a kindness,
Greater then he was wont to express.

Banquo, thou little think what, bloody feast
Is now preparing for thee.

Nor to what shades the darkness of this night,
Shall lead thy wandering spirit.

Murder, help, help, my Father's killed.

You know your own Degrees, sit down.

Thanks to your Majesty.

Our Self will keep you company,
And Play the humble Host to entertain you:
Our Lady keeps her State; but you shall have her welcome too.

Pronounce it for me Sir, to all our Friends.

Both sides are even; be free in Mirth, anon
We'll drink a measure about the Table.
There's blood upon thy face.

'Tis Banquo's then.

Is he dispatch'd?

My Lord, his Throat is cut: that I did for him.

Thou are the best of Cut-throats;
Yet he is good that did the like for Flean.

Most Royal Sir he escaped.

Then comes my fit again, I had else been Perfect,
Firm a^ a Pillar founded on a Rock!
As unconfined as the free spreading Air.
But now I'm checked with saucy Doubts and Fears.
But Banquo's safe?

Safe in a Ditch he lies,
With twenty gaping wounds on his head,
The least of which was Mortal.

There the ground Serpent lies; the worm that's fled
Hath Nature, that in time will Venom breed.
Though at present it wants a Sting, to morrow,
To morrow you* shall hear further.

My Royal Lord, you spoil the Feast,
The Sauce to Meat is cheerfulness.

Let good digestion wait on Appetite,
And Health on both.

May it please your Highness to sit.

Had we but here our Countries honour;
Were the graced person of our Banquo present,
Whom we may justly challenge for unkindness.

His absence Sir,
Lays blame upon his promise; please your Highness
To grace us with your Company?

Yes, I'll sit down. The Table's full

Here is a place reserved Sir:

Where Sir?

Here. What is 'tthat moves your Highness?

Which of you have done this?

Done what?

Thou can not say I did it; never shake
Thy goary Locks at me.

Gentlemen rise, his Highness is not well.

Sit worthy Friends, my Lord is often thus,
And hath been from his youth: pray keep your Seats,
The fit is ever sudden, if you take notice of it,
You shall offend him, and provoke his passion
In a moment he'll be well again.
Are you a Man?

Ay, and a bold one; that dare look on that
Which would distract the Devil

O proper stuff:
This is the very painting of your fear:
This is the Air-drawn Dagger, which you said
Led you to Duncan. O these Fits and Starts,
(Impostors to true fear) would well become
A woman's story, authorised by her Grandam,
Why do you stare thus? when all's done
You look but on a Chair.

Prithee see there, how say you now!
Why, what care I, If thou can nod; speak too,
If Charnel-houses and our Graves must send
Those that we bury, back; our Monuments
Shall be the maws of Kites.

What quite unmanned in folly?

If I stand here, I saw it:

Fie, for shame.

Tis not the first of Murders; blood was shed
E're humane Law decreed it for a sin.
Ay, and since Murders too have been committed
Too terrible for the Ear. The times has been,
That when the brains were out, the man would dye;
And there lye still; but now they rise again
And thrust us from our seats.

Sir, your noble Friends do lack you.

Wonder not at me my most worthy Friends,
I have a strange Infirmity; tis nothing
To those that know me. Give me some Wine,
Here's to the general Joy of all the Table,
And to our dear friend Banquo, whom we miss,
Would he were here: to all, and him, we drink.

Our Duties are to pledge it.

Let the Earth hide thee: thy blood is cold,
Thou hast no use now of thy glaring Eyes.

Think of this good my Lords, but as a thing
Of Custom: tis no other,
Only it spoils the pleasure of the time.

What Man can dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian Bear,
The Armed Rhinoceros, or the Hircanian Tiger:
Take any shape but that; and my firm Nerves
Shall never tremble; Or revive a while,
And dare me to the Desert with thy Sword,
If any Sinew shrink, proclaim me then
The Baby of a Girl. Hence horrible shadow.
So, now I am a man again: pray you sit still.

You have disturbed the Mirth;
Broke the glad Meeting with your wild disorder.

Can such things be without Astonishment.
You make me strange,
Even to the disposition that I owe,
When now I think you can behold such sights,
And keep the Natural colour of your Cheeks,
Whilst mine grew pale with fear.

What sights?

I pray you speak not, he'll grow worse and worse;
Questions enrages him, at once good night:
Stand not upon the Order of your going.

Good night, and better health attend his Majesty.

A kind good night to all.

It will have Blood they say. Blood will have blood.
Stones have been known to move, and Trees to speak.
Augures well read in Languages of Birds
By Magpies, Rooks, and Daws, have revealed
The secret Murder. How goes the night?

Almost at odds with morning, which is which.

Why did Macduffe after a solemn Invitation,
Deny his presence at our Feast?

Did you send to him Sir?

I did; But I'll send again,
There's not one great Thane in all Scotland,
But in his house I keep a Servant,
He and Banquo must embrace the same fate.
I will to morrow to the Weyward Sisters,
They shall tell me more; for now I am bent to know
By the worst means, the worst that can befall me:
All Causes shall give way; I am in Blood
Stepped in so far, that should I wade no more,
Returning were as bad, as to go over.

You lack the season of all Natures, sleep.

Well I'll in
And rest; if sleeping I repose can have,
When the Dead rise and want it in the Grave.

Are you resolved then to be gone?

I am:
I know my Answer cannot but inflame
The Tyrants fury to pronounce my death,
My life will soon be blasted by his breath.

But why so far as England must you fly?

The farthest part of Scotland is too nigh.

Can you leave me, your Daughter and young Son,
To perish by that Tempest which you shun.
When Birds of stronger Wing are fled away,
The Ravenous Kite does on the weaker Prey.

He will not injure you, he cannot be
Postest with such unmanly cruelty:
You will your safety to your weakness owe
As Grass escapes the Sith by being low.
Together we shall be too slow to fly:
Single, we may outride the Enemy.
I'll from the English King such Succours crave,
As shall revenge the Dead, and Living save.
My greatest misery is to remove,
With all the wings of haste from what I love.

If to be gone seems misery to you,
Good Sir, let us be miserable too.

Your Sex which here is your security,
Will by the toils of flight your Danger be.
What fatal News does bring thee out of breath?

Sir, Banquo's killed.

Then I am warned of Death.
Farewell; our safety, Us, a while must sever:

Fly, fly, or we may bid farewell for ever.

Flying from Death, I am to Life unkind,
For leaving you, I leave my Life behind.

O^ my dear Lord, I find now thou art gone,
I am more Va^iant when unsafe alone.
My heart feels man-hood, it does Death despise,
Yet I am still a Woman in my eyes.
And of my Tears thy absence is the cause,
So falls the Dew when the bright Sun withdraws.

My former speeches have but hit your thoughts
Which can interpret further; Only I say
Things have been strangely carried.
Duncan was pitti'd, but he first was dead.
And the right Valiant Banquo walked too late:
Men must not walk so late: who can want Sense
To know how Mostrous it was in Nature,
For Malcolme and Donalbain, to kill
Their Royal Father; horrid Fact! how did
It grieve Macbeth, did he not straight
In Pious rage the two Delinquents kill,
That were the slaves of Drunkenness and Sleep.
Was not that Nobly done?

Ay, and wisely too:
For it would have angered any Loyal heart
to hear the men deny it.

So that I say he has born all things well:
And I do think that had he Duncan's Sons
Under his power (as may please Heaven he shall not)
They should find what it were to kill a Father.
So should Flean: but peace; I hear Macduffe
Denied his presence at the Feast: For which
He lives in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestows himself?

I hear that Malcolme lives in the English Court,
And is received of the most Pious Edward,
With such Grace, that the Malevolences of Fortune
Takes nothing from his high Respect; thither
Macduff is gone to beg the Holy King's
Kind aid, to wake Northumberland
And VVarlike Seyward, and by the help of these,
To finish what they have so well begun.
This report
Does so Exasperate the King, that he
Prepares for some attempt of War.

Sent he to Macduffe?

He did, his absolute Command.

Some Angel fly to the English Court, and tell
His Message e're he come; that some quick blessing,
To this afflicted Country, may arrive
Whilst those that merit it, are yet alive.

How, Hecat, you look angrily?

Have I not reason Beldams?
Why did you all Traffic with Macbeth
About Riddles and affairs of Death,
And called not me; All you have done
Hath been but for a Weyward Son:
Make some amends now: get you gon,
And at the pit of Achaeron
Meet me in the morning: Thither he
Will come to know his Destiny.
Dire business will be wrought e're Noon,
For on a corner of the Moon,
A drop my Spectacles have found,
I'll catch it e're it come to ground.
And that distilled shall yet e're night,
Raise from the Center such a Spright:
As by the strength of his Illusion,
Shall draw Macbeth to his Confusion
HEccate, Heccate, Heccate! Oh come away:
Hark, I am called, my little Spirit see,
Sits in a foggy Cloud, and stays for me.
Come away Heccate, Heccate! Oh come away:

I come, I come, with all the speed I may,
With all the speed I may.
VVhere's Stadling?

Here.

VVhere's Puckle?

Here, and Hopper too, and Helway too.

We want but you, we want but you:
Come away make up the Count,

I will but Noint, and the I mount,
I will but, c.

Here comes down one to fetch his due, a Kiss,
A Cull, a sip of blood.
And why thou staist so long, I muse,
Since the Air's so sweet and good.

O art thou come; What News?
All goes fair for our delight,
Either come, or else refuse,
Now I'm furnished for the flight
Now I go, and now I fly,
Malking my sweet Spirit and I.

O what a dainty pleasure's this,
To sail in the Air
While the Moon shines fair;
To Sing, to Toy, to Dance and Kiss,
Over Woods, high Rocks and Mountains;
Over Hills, and misty Fountains:
Over Steeples, Towers, and Turrets:
We fly by night amongst troops of Spirits.
No Ring of Bells to our Ears sounds,
No howls of VVolves, nor Yelps of Hounds;
No, nor the noise of VVaters breach,
Nor Cannons Throats our Height can reach.

Come let's make hast she'll soon be back again:

But whilst she moves through the foggy Air,
Let's to the Cave and our dire Charms prepare.

THrice the brinded Cat hath Mewed.

Thrice, and once the Hedge-Pig whin'd,
Shutting his Eyes against the Wind.

Harpier cries, tis time, tis time.

Then round about the Cauldron go,
And poisoned Entrails throw.
This Toad which under Mossy stone,
Has days and nights lain thirty one:
And sweltered Venom sleeping got,
We will boil in the Enchanted Pot.

Double double, toil and trouble;
Fire burn, and Cauldron bubble.

The Fillet of a Fenny Snake
Of Scuttle Fish the vomit black.
The Eye of New't, and Toe of Frog,
The wool of Bat, and tongue of Dog.
An Adders fork and blind Worms sting,
A Lizzard's leg, and Owlets wing,
Shall like a Hell-broth boil and bubble.

Double, double, c.

The scale of Dragon, tooth of Wolf,
A Witches mummy: Maw and Gulf
Of Cormorant and the Sea Shark,
The root of Hemlock dug in the dark.
The liver of blaspheming Jew,
With gall of Goats, and slips of Yew,
Plucked when the Moon was in Eclips,
With a Turks nose, and Tarters lips
The finger of a strangled Babe
Born of a Di^ch delivered Drab,
Shall make the Greuel thick and slab.
Adding thereto a fat Dutchman's Chawdron,
For the ingredients of our Cauldron.

Double, double, c.

I'll cool it with a Baboons blood,
And so the Charm is firm and good.

Oh well done, I commend your pains,
And every one shall share the Gains.
And now about the Cauldron sin
Like Elves and Fairies in a ring.

BLack Spirits, and white,
Red Spirits and gray;
Mingle, mingle, mingle,
You that mingle may.

Tiffin, Tiffin, keep it stiff in,
Fire drake Puckey, make it luckey:
Liar Robin, you must bob in.

A round, a round, about, about,
All ill come running in, all good keep out.

Here's the blood of a Bat!

O put in that, put in that.

Here's Lizards brain,

Put in a grain.

Here's Juice of Toad, here's oil of Adder
That will make the Charm grow madder.

Put in all these, 'twill raise the stanch;

Nay here's three ownces of a red-hair'd Wench.
Chor. A round, a round, c.

I by the pricking of my Thumbs,
Know something Wicked this way comes,
Open Locks, whoever knocks.

How now you Secret, black and mid-night Hags,
What are you doing?

A deed without a name.

I conjure you by that which you profess.
How e're you come to know it, answer me.
Though you let loose the raging Winds to shake whole Towns,
Though bladed Corn be lodged, and Trees blown down.
Though Castles tumble on their Warders heads;
Though Palaces and towering Piramids
Are swallowed up in Earth-quakes. Answer me.

Speak.

Pronounce.

Demand.

I'll answer thee

What Destinie's appointed for my Fate?

Thou double Thane and King; beware Macduffe:
Avoiding him, Macbeth is safe enough.

What e're thou art for try kind Caution, Thanks.

Be bold and bloody, and man's hatred scorn,
Thou shalt be harmed by none of Woman born'd.

Then live Macduffe; what need I fear thy power:
But none can be too sure, thou shalt not live,
That I may tell pale hearted fear it lies,
And sleep in spite of Thunder.

Be Confident, be Proud, and take no care
Who wages War, or where Conspirers are,
Macbeth shall like a lucky Monarch Reign,
Till Birnam Wood shall come to Dunsenain.

Can Forests move? the Prophecy is good,
If I shall never fall till the great Wood
Of B^rnan rise; thou may presume Macbeth,
To live out Natures Lease, and pay thy breath
To Time and mortal Custom. Yet my heart
Longs for more Knowledge: Tell me if your Art
Extends so far: shall Banquo's Issue over
This Kingdom reign?

Enquire no more.

I will not be denied. Ha!
An eternal Curse fall on you; let me know
Why sinks that Cauldron, and what noise is this.

Appear.

appear,

appear.
Wound through his Eyes, his hardened Heart,
Like Shadows come, and straigth depart.

Thy Crown offends my sight. A second too like the first.
A third resembles him: a fourth too like the former:
Ye filthy Hags, will they succeed
Each other still till Dooms-day?
Another yet; a seventh? I'll see no more:
And yet the eigth appears.
Ha! the bloody Banquo smiles upon me,
And by his smiling on me, seems to say
That they are all Successors of his race.

Ay, Sir, all this is so: but why
Macbeth, stand thou amazedly:
Come Sisters, let us cheer his heart,
And show the pleasures of our Art;
I'll charm the Air to give a sound
While you perform your Antic round.

Where are they? Gone?
Let this pernicious hour stand
Accursed to all eternity.

What's your Graces will?

Saw you the Wayward sisters?

No my Lord.

Came they not by you?

By me Sir?

Infected be the Earth in which they sunk,
And Damned all those that trust 'em. Just now
I heard the galloping of Horse; who was't came by?

A Messenger from the English Court, who
Brings word Macduff is fled to England.

Fled to England?

Ay my Lord.

Time thou' Anticipate all my Designs;
Our Purposes seldom succeed, unless
Our Deeds go with them.
My Thoughts shall henceforth into Actions rise,
The Witches made me cruel, but not wise.

I then was frighted with the sad alarm
Of Banquo's Death, when I did counsel him
To fly, but now alas! I much repent it,
What had he done to leave the Land? Macbeth
Did know him Innocent.

You must have patience Madam.

He had none.
His flight was madness. When our Actions do not,
Our fears oft make us Traitors.

You know not whether it was his Wisdom or his Fear.

Wisdom? to leave his Wife and Children in a place
From whence himself did fly; he loves us not.
He wants the natural touch: For the poor Wren
(The most diminutive of Birds) will with
The Ravenous Owl, fight stoutly for her young ones.

Your Husband, Madam;
Is Noble, Wise, Judicious, and best knows
The fits of the Season. I dare not speak much further,
But cruel are the Times; when we are Traitors,
And do not know our selves: when we hold Rumour,
From what we fear, yet know not what we fear;
But float upon a wild and violent Sea.
Each way, and more, I take my way of you:
'T shall not be long but I'll be here again.
Things at the worst will cease, or else climb upwards
To what they were before. Heaven protect you.

Farewell Sir.

Madam, a Gentleman in haste desires
To speak with you.

A Gentleman, admit him.

Though I have not the honour to be known
To you, Yet I was well acquainted with
The Lord Macduff which brings me here to tell you
There's danger near you, be not found here,
Fly with your little one; Heaven preserve you,
I dare stay no longer.

Where shall I go, and whither shall I fly?
I've done no harm; but I remember now
I'm in a vicious world, where to do harm
Is often prosperous, and to do good
Accounted dangerous folly; Why do I then
Make use of this so womanly defence?
I'll boldly in, and dare this new Alarm:
What need they fear whom Innocence doth arm?

In these close shades of Birnam Wood let us
Weep our sad Bosoms empty.

You'll think my Fortunes desperate,
That I dare meet you here upon your summons.

You should now
Take Arms to serve your Country. Each new day
New Widows mourn, new Orphans cry, and still
Changes of sorrow reach attentive Heaven.

This Tyrant whose foul Name blisters our Tongues,
Was once thought, honest. You have loved him well.
He has not touched you yet.

I am not treacherous.

But Macbeth is.
And yet Macduff may be what I did always think him,
Just, and good.

I've lost my hopes.

Perhaps even there where I did find my doubts;
But let not Jealousies be your Dishonours,
But my own safeties.

Bleed, Bleed, poor Country.
Great Tyranny, lay thy Foundation sure,
Villains are safe when good men are suspected.
I'll say no more. Fare thee well young Prince,
I would not be that Traitor which thou think me
For twice Macbeths reward of Treachery.

Be not offended:
I speak not as in absolute fear of you:
I think our Country sinks beneath the Yoke,
It weeps, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I think withal
That many hands would in my Cause be active.
And here from gracious England have I offer
Of goodly Thousands. But for all this,
When I shall tread upon the Tyrants head,
Or wear it on my Sword; yet my poor Country
Will suffer under greater Tyranny
Than what it suffers now,

It cannot be.

Alas I find my Nature so inclined
To Vice, that foul Macbeth when I shall rule,
Will seem as white as Snow.

There cannot in all ransacked Hell be found
A Devil equal to Macbeth.

I grant him bloody false, deceiptful malicious,
And participating in some sins too horrid to name;
But there's no bottom, no depths in my ill appetite,
If such a one be fit to govern, speak?

O Scotlond, Scotland, when shalt thou see day again?
Since that the truest Issue of thy Throne,
Disclaims his Virtue to avoid thy Crown?
Your Royal Father
Was a most Saint-like King; the Queen that bore you,
Oftner upon her Knees, than on her Feet,
Died every day she lived. Fare thee well,
These Evils thou repeat upon thy self,
Hath banished me from Scotland. O my breast!
Thy hope ends here.

Macduff this Noble Passion
Child of Integrity hath from my Soul
Wiped the black scruples, reconciled my Thoughts
To thy good truth and honour. Macbeth
By many of these Trains hath sought to win me
Into his Power: And modest wisdom plucks me
From over-credulous haste. But now
I put my self to thy direction, and
Unspeak mine own Detraction. I abjure
The taunts and blames I laid upon my self,
For strangers to my Nature. What I am truly
Is thine, and my poor Countries to command.
The gracious Edward has lent us Seymour,
And ten thousand Men. Why are you silent?

Such welcome and unwelcome things at once
Are Subjects for my Wonder not my Speech,
My grief and Joy contesting in my bosom,
I find that I can scarce my tongue command,
When two Streams meet the Water's at a stand.

Assistance granted by that pious King
Must be successful, he who by his touch,
Can cure our Bodies of a foul Disease,
Can by just force suddue a Traitors Mind,
Power supernatural is unconfined.

If his Compassion does on Men Diseased
Effect such Cures; What Wonders will he do,
When to Compassion he ads Justice too?

Seaton, go bid the Army March.

The posture of Affairs requires your Presence.

But the Indosposition of my Wife
Detains me here.

Th'Enemy is upon our borders, Scotland's in danger.

So is my Wife, and I am doubly so.
I am sick in her, and my Kingdom too.

Sir,

The Spur of my Ambition prompts me to go
And make my Kingdom safe; but Love which softens me
To pity her in her distress, curbs my Resolves.

He's strangely disordered.

Yet why should Love since confined, desire
To control Ambition, for whose spreading hopes
The world's too narrow, It shall not; Great Fires
Put out the Less; Seaton go bid my Grooms
Make ready; I'll not delay my going.

I go.

Stay Seaton, stay, Compassion calls me back.

He looks and moves disorderly.

I'll not go yet.

Well Sir.

Is the Queen asleep?

What makes 'em whisper and his countenance change?
Perhaps some new design has had ill success.

Seaton, Go see what posture our Affairs are in.

I shall, and give you notice Sir.

How does my Gentle Love?

Duncan is dead.

No words of that.

And yet to Me he Lives.
His fatal Ghost is now my shadow, and pursues me
Where e're I go.

It cannot be My Dear,
Your Fears have misinformed your eyes.

See there; Believe your own.
Why do you follow Me? I did not do it.

Methinks there's nothing.

If you have Valour force him hence.
Hold, hold, he's gone. Now you look strangely.

'Tis the strange error of your Eyes.

But the strange error of my Eyes
Proceeds from the strange Action of your Hands.
Distraction does by fits possess my head,
Because a Crown unjustly covers it.
I stand so high that I am giddy grown.
A Mist does cover me, as Clouds the tops
Of Hills. Let us get down apace.

If by your high ascent you giddy grow,
'Tis when you cast your Eyes on things below.

You may in Peace resign the ill gained Crown.
Why should you labour still to be unjust?
There has been too much Blood already spilt.
Make not the Subjects Victims to your guilt.

Can you think that a crime, which you did once
Provoke me to commit, had not your breath
Blown my Ambition up into a Flame
Duncan had yet been living*

You were a Man.
And by the Charter of your Sex you should
Have governed me, there was more crime in you
When you obeyed my Councels, then I contracted
By my giving it. Resign your Kingdom now,
And with your Crown put off your guilt.

Resign the Crown, and with it both our Lives.
I must have better Councellors.

What, your Witches?
Curse on your Messengers of Hell. Their Breath
Infected first my Breast: See me no more.
As King your Crown sits heavy on your Head,
But heavier on my Heart: I have had too much
Of Kings already. See the Ghost again.

Now she relapses.

Speak to him if thou can.
Thou look on me, and shew'st thy wounded breast.
Show it the Murderer.

Within there, Ho.

Am I taken Prisoner? then the Battle's lost.

She does from Duncans death to sickness grieve,
And shall from Malcoms death her health receive.
When by a Viper bitten, nothing's good
To cure the venom but a Vipers blood.

See who comes here!

My Countrey-man; but yet I know him not.

My ever Gentle Couzin! Welcome.

I know him now.
Kind Heaven remove the Means that makes us strangers.

Amen.

What looks does Scotland bear?

Alas poor Country, almost afraid to know it self.
It can't be called our Mother but our Grave; where nothing,
But who knows nothing is once seen to smile?
Where sighs, and groans, and shrieks that rend the air,
Are made, not marked, where violent sorrow seems
A Modern Ecstasy: there Bells
Are always ringing, and no Man asks for whom;
There good Men's lives expire e're they sicken.

Oh Relation! too nice, and yet too true.

What's the newest grief?

That of an hours age is out of date,
Each Minute brings a new one.

How does my Wife?

Why well.

And all my Children?

Well too.

The Tyrant has not quarrelled at their peace?

No, they were well at peace when I left 'em

Be not so sparing of your speech. How goe'st?

When I came hither to transport the tidings,
Which I have heavily born, there ran a rumour
Of many Worthy Men that rose into a head,
Which was to my Belief; witness the rather,
For that I saw the Tyrants Power a foot.
Now, is the time of help; your Eye in Scotland
Would create Soldiers, and make Women fight.

Be it their Comfort,
We are coming thither: Gracious England hath
Lent us good Seymour, and ten thousand Men.

Would I could answer this comfort with the like;
But I have words,
That would be uttered in the desert air,
Where no Mans ear should hear'em.

What concern they? the general cause,
Or is't a grief due to some single breast?

All honest Minds must share in it;
But the main part pertains to you.

If it be mine, keep it not from Me.

Let not your ears condemn my tongue for ever,
When they shall possess them with the heaviest sound
That ever yet they heard.

At once I guess, yet am afraid to know,

Your Castle is surprised, your Wife and Children.
Savagely Murdered: to relate the Manner,
Were to increase the Butchery of them,
By adding to their fall the Death of You.

Merciful Heaven! Noble Macduff
Give sorrow words; the grief that does not speak,
Whispers the over charged heart, and bids it break.

My Children too?

Your Wife, and both your Children,

And I not with them dead? Both, both my Children
Did you say; my Two?

I have said,

Be comforted;
Let's make us Cordials of our great Revenues,
To cure this deadly Grief.

He has no Children, nor can he feel
A fathers Grief: Did you say all my Children?
Oh hellish ravenous Kite! all three at one swoop!

Dispute it like a Man.

I shall.
But I must first too feel it as a Man.
I cannot but remember such things were,
And were most precious to me: Did Heaven look on,
And would not take their part? sinful Macduff,
They were all struck for thee; for thee they fell:
Not for their own offences; but for thine.

Let this give Edges to our Swords; let your tears
Become Oil to our kindled Rage.

Oh I could play the Woman with my Eyes,
And brag on it with my tongue; kind Heavens bring this
Dire Friend of Scotland, and my self face to face,
And set him within the reach of my keen Sword.
And if he outlives that hour, may Heaven forgive
His sins, and punish Me for his escape.

Let's hasten to the Army, since Macbeth
Is ripe for fall.

Heaven give our quarrel but as good success
As it hath Justice in it: Kind Powers above
Grant Peace to us, whilst we take his away;
The Night is long that never finds a Day.

I have seen her rise from her bed, throw
Her Night-Gown on her, unlock her Closet,
Take forth Paper, fold it, write upon it, read it,
Afterwards Seal it, and again return to Bed,
Yet all this while in a most fast sleep.

'Tis strange she should receive the Benefit
Of sleep, and do the Effects of waking.
In this disorder what at any time have
You heard her say?

That Sir, which I will not report of her.

You may to Me; and 'tis most meet you should.

Neither to You, nor any one living;
Having no witness to confirm my Speech.
See here she comes: observe her, and stand close.

You see her eyes are open.

Ay, But her Sense is shut.

What is't she does now? look how she rubs her hands:

It is an accustomed action with her to seem
Thus washing her hands: I have known
Her continue in this a quarter of an hour.

Yet out, out, here's a spot.

Hark, she speaks.

Out, out, out I say. One, two: Nay then
'Tis time to do it: Fie my Lord, fie, a Soldier,
And afraid? what need we fear? who knows it?
There's none dares call our Power to account;
Yet who would have thought the old Man had
So much Blood in him.

Do you mark that?

Macduff had once a Wife; where is she now?
Will these Hands ne'er be clean? Fie my Lord,
You spoil all with this starting: Yet here's
A smell of blood; not all the perfumes of Arabia
Will sweeten this little Hand. Oh, Oh, Oh.

Is not that DONALBAIN and young Flean, Banquo's Son.

Who is this my worthy Friend?

I by your presence feel my hopes full blown,
Which hitherto have been but in the Bud.
What happy gale has brought you here to see
Your Fathers Death Revenged?

Hearing of aid sent by the English King,
To check the Tyrants Insolence; I am come
From Ireland:

And I from France, we are but newly met.

Where's my Brother?

He and the Good Macduff are with the Army
Behind the Wood.

What does the Tyrant now?

He strongly Fortifies in Dunsinane;
Some say he is Mad, others who Love him less,
Call it a Valiant Fury; but what e're
The matter is, there is a Civil War
Within his Bosom; and he finds his Crown
Sit loose about him: His Power grows less,
His Fear grows greater still.

Let's haste and meet my Brother,
My Interest is Grafted into his,
And cannot Grow without it.

So may you both Out-grow unlucky Chance,
And may the Tyrant's Fall that Growth Advance.

Bring me no more Reports: Let 'em fly all
Till Byrnam Wood remove to Dunsinane
I cannot fear. What's the Boy Malcome? What
Are all the English? Are they not of Women
Born? And t'all such I am Invincible,
Then fly false Thanes,
By your Revolt you have inflamed my Rage,
And now have Borrowed English Blood to quench it.
Now Friend, what means thy change of Countenance?

There are Ten Thousand, Sir,

What, Ghosts?

No, Armed men.

But such as shall be Ghosts e're it be Night.
Art thou turned Coward too, since I made thee Captain:
Go Blush away thy Paleness, I am sure
Thy Hands are of another Colour; thou hast Hands
Of Blood, but Looks of Milk.

The English Force so please you --???

Take thy Face hence.
He has Infected me with Fear
I am sure to die by none of Woman morn.
And yet the English Drums beat an Alarm,
As fatal to my Life as are the Crokes
Of Ravens, when they Flutter about the Windows
Of departing men.
My Hopes are great, and yet me-thinks I fear
My Subjects cry out Curses on my Name,
Which like a North-wind seems to blast my Hopes:

That Wind is a contagious Vapour exhaled from Blood.
What News more?

All's confirmed my Liege, that was Reported.

And my Resolves in spite of Fate shall be as firmly.
Send out more Horse; and Scour the Country round.
How does my Wife?

Not so Sick, my Lord, as She is Troubled
With disturbing Fancies, that keep Her from Her rest.

And I, me-thinks, am Sick of her Disease:
Seaton send out; Captain, the Thanes fly from thee:
Would she were well, I'd quickly win the Field.
Stay Seaton, stay, I'll bear you company,
The English cannot long maintain the Fight;
They come not here to Kill, but to be Slain;
Send out our Scouts.

Sir, I am gone.

I'll to the English Train whose Hopes are built
Upon their Cause, and not on Witches Prophesies.

Poor Thanes, you vainly hope for Victory:
You'll find Macbeth Invincible; or if
He can be Overcome, it must be then
By Birnam Oaks, and not by English-men.

The Sun shall see us Drain the Tyrants Blood
And Dry up Scotlands Tears: How much we are
Obliged to England, which like a kind Neighbour
Lift's us up when we were Fallen below
Our own Recovery.

What Wood is this before us?

The Wood of Birnam.

Let every Soldier hew him down a Bough,
And bear't before him: By that we may
Keep the Number of our Force undiscovered
By the Enemy.

It shall be done. We Learn no more then that
The Confident Tyrant keeps still in Dunsinane,
And will endure a Seige.
He is of late grown Conscious of his Guilt,
Which makes him make that City his Place of Refuge.

He'll find even there but little Safety;
His very Subjects will against him Rise.
So Travellers Fly to an Aged Barn
For Shelter from the Rain; when the next Shock
Of Wind throws Down that Roof upon their Heads,
From which they hoped for Succour.

The wretched Kernes which now like Boughs are tied
To forced Obedience; will when our Swords
Have Cut those Bonds, start from Obedience.

May the Event make good our Guess:

It must, unless our Resolutions fail
They'll kindle, Sir, their just Revenge at ours:
Which double Flame will Singe the Wings of all
The Tyrants hopes; deprived of those Supports,
He'll quickly Fall.

Let's all Retire to our Commands; our Breath
Spent in Discourse does but defer his Death,
And but delays our Vengeance,

Come let's go.
The swiftest hast is for Revenge too slow.

Hang out our Banners proudly over the Wall,
The Cry is still, they Come: Our Castles Strength
Will Laugh a Siege to Scorn: Here let them lie
Till Famine eat them up: Had Seaton still
Been ours, and others who now Increase the Number
Of our Enemies, we might have met 'em
Face to Face.
What Noise is that?

It seems the Cry of Women.

I have almost forgot the Taste of Fears,
The time has been that Dangers have been my Familiars.
Wherefore was that Cry?

Great, Sir, the Queen is Dead.

She should have Died hereafter,
I brought Her here, to see my Victines, not to Die.
To Morrow, to Morrow, and to Morrow,
Creeps in a stealing pace from Day to Day,
To the last Minute of Recorded Time:
And all our Yesterdays have lighted Fools
To their Eternal Homes: Out, out that Candle,
Life's but a Walking Shadow, a poor Player
That Struts and Frets his Hour upon the Stage,
And then is Heard no more. It is a Tale
Told by an Idiot, full of Sound and Fury
Signifying Nothing.
Thou come to use thy Tongue: Thy Story quickly.

Let my Eyes speak what they have seen,
For my Tongue cannot.

Thy Eyes speak Terror, let thy Tongue expound,
Their Language, or be for ever Dumb.

As I did stand my Watch upon the Hill,
I looked towards Birnam, and anon me thoughts
The Wood began to move:

Liar and Slave.

Let me endure your Wrath if it be not so:
Within this three Mile may you see it coming,
I say, a moving Grove.

If thou speak False, I'll send thy Soul
To the other World to meet with moving Woods,
And walking Forests;
There to Possess what it but Dreamt of here.
If thy Speech be true, I care not if thou doest
The same for me. I now begin
To doubt the Equivocation of the Fiend,
They bid me not to fear till Birnam Wood
Should come to Dansinane: And now a Wood
Is on its March this way; Arm, Arm.
Since thus a Wood does in a March appear,
There is no Flying hence, nor Tarrying here:
Methinks I now grow weary of the Sun,
And wish the Worlds great Glass of Life were run.

Here we are near enough; throw down
Your Leafie Screens
And show like those you are. You worthy Uncle
Shall with my Brother and the Noble Lenox,
March in the Van, whilst Valiant Seymour
And my Self, make up the Gross of the Army,
And follow you with speed.

Fare well; the Monster has forsook his hold and comes
To offer Battle.

Let him come on; his Title now
Sits Loose about him, like a Giants Robe
Upon a Dwarfish Thief.

'Tis too Ignoble, and too base to Fly;
Who's he that is not of a Woman Born,
For such a one I am to fear, or none.

Kind Heaven, I thank thee; have I found thee here;
Oh Scotland! Scotland! may thou owe thy just
Revenge to this sharp Sword, or this blessed Minute.

Retire fond Man, I would not Kill thee.
Why should Falcons prey on Flies?
It is below Macbeth to Fight with Men.

But not to Murder Women.

Lenox, I pity thee; thy Arm's too weak.

This Arm has hitherto found good Success
On your Ministers of Blood, who Murdered
Macduffs Lady, and brave Banquo:
Art thou less Mortal then they were? Or more
Exempt from Punishment? Because thou most
Deserve it. Have at thy Life.

Since then thou art in Love with Death, I will
Vouchsafe it thee.
Thou art of Woman Born, I'm sure.

Oh my dear Country, Pardon me that I,
Do in a Cause so great, so quickly Die.

This way the Noise is, Tyrant show thy Face,
If thou be Slain and by no hand of Mine,
My Wife and Childrens Ghosts will haunt me for it*
I cannot Strike
At wretched Slaves, who sell their Lives for Pay;
No, my Revenge shall seek a Nobler Prey.
Through all the Paths of Death, I'll search him out:
Let me but find him, Fortune.

This way, Great Sir, the Tyrants People Fight
With Fear as great as is his Guilt.

See who Lies here; the Noble Lenox slain,
What Storm has brought this Blood over our
Rising hopes.

Restrain your Passion, Sir, let's to our Men,
Those who in Noble Causes fall, deserve
Our Pity, not our Sorrow.
I le bid some Body bear the Body further hence.

Why should I play the Roman Fool and Fall,
On my own Sword, while I have living Foes
To Conquer; my Wounds show better upon them.

Turn Hell-Hound, Turn.

Of all Men else, I have avoided Thee;
But get thee back, my Soul is too much clogged
With Blood of thine already.

I'll have no Words, thy Villainies are worse
Then ever yet were Punished with a Curse.

Thou may as well attempt to Wound the Air,
As me; my Destiny's reserved for some Immortal Power,
And I must fall by Miracle; I cannot Bleed.

Have thy black Deeds then turned thee to a Devil.

Thou would but share the Fate of Lenox.

Is Lenox slain? and by a Hand that would Damn all it kills,
But thattheir Cause preserves 'em.

I have a Prophecy secures my Life.

I have another which tells me I shall have his Blood,
Who first shed mine.

None of Woman born can spill my Blood.

Then let the Devils tell thee, Macduff
Was from his Mothers Womb untimely Ripped.

Cursed be that Tongue that tells me so,
And double Damned be they who with a double sense
Make Promises to our Ears, and Break at last
That Promise to our sight: I will not Fight with thee.

Then yield thy self a Prisoner to be Led about
The World, and Gazed on as a Monster, a Monster
More Deformed then ever Ambition Framed,
Or Tyranny could shape.

I scorn to Yield. I will in spite of Enchantment
Fight with thee, though Birnam Wood be come
To Dunsinane:
And thou art of no Woman Born, I'll try,
If by a Man it be thy Fate to Die.

This for my Royal Master Duncan,
This for my dearest Friend my Wife,
This for those Pledges of our Loves, my Children.
Hark I hear a Noise, sure there are more
Reserves to Conquer.
I'll as a Trophy bear away his Sword,
To witness my Revenge.

Farewell vain World, and what's most vain in it,

I wish Macduff were safe Arrived, I am
In doubt for him; for Lenox I'm in grief.

Consider Lenox, Sir, is nobly Slain:
They who in Noble Causes fall, deserve
Our Pity, not our Sorrow. Look where the Tyrant is.

The Witches, Sir, with all the Power of Hell,
Could not preserve him from the Hand of Heaven.

Long Live Malcolm, King of Scotland, so you are;
And though I should not Boast, that one
Whom Guilt might easily weigh down, fell
By my Hand; yet here I present you with
The Tyrants Sword, to show that Heaven appointed
Me to take Revenge for you, and all
That Suffered by his Power.

Macduff, we have more Ancient Records
Then this of your successful Courage.

Now Scotland, thou shalt see bright Day again,
That Cloud's removed that did Eclipse thy Sun,
And Rain down Blood upon thee. As your Arms
Did all contribute to this Victory;
So let your Voices all concur to give
One joyful Acclamation.
Long Live Malcolm, King of Scotland.

We shall not make a large Expense of time
Before we Reckon with your several Loves,
And make us even with you. Thanes and Kinsman,
Henceforth be Earls, the first that ever Scotland
Saw Honoured with that Title: And may they full Flourish
On your Families; though like the Laurels
You have Won to Day; they Spring from a Field of Blood.
Drag his Body hence, and let it Hang upon
A Pinnacle in Dunsinane, to show
To show to future Ages what to those is due,
Who others Right, by Lawless Power pursue.

So may kind Fortune Crown your Reign with Peace,
As it has Crowned your Armies with Success;
And may the Peoples Prayers still wait on you,
As all their Curses did Macbeth pursue:
His Vice shall make your Virtue shine more Bright,
As a Fair Day succeeds a Stormy Night.


