THE CONTENTION OF AJAX and ULYSSES, FOR THE ARMOUR Of ACHILLES.

AS It was nobly represented by young Gentlemen of quality, at a private
Entertainment of some persons of Honour.

WRITTEN By IAMES SHIRLEY.

LONDON, Printed for Iohn Crook, at the sign of the ship in S. Paul's
Church-yard.

WHy how now Insolence?

You know me Sir?

For one that wants good manners; yes, I know
Your name, and best relation, you attend
A Page on Ajax Telamon.

And you
In such an office wait upon Ulysses,
But with this (...), that I am your better,
In reference to my Lord, as he exceeds
Your Master both in Fortitude and Honour:
Therefore I take this boldness to instruct
Your diminutive Worship in convenient duties,
And that hereafter when you see me pass,
You may descend, and vail, and know fit distance.

To you descend, and vail? to you? poor Rat!
Is he not poisoned, that he swells so strangely:
I would bestow this admonition, that
You talk within your limits, I may find
A pity for your folly, while you make
Comparisons with me, but let your ^ongue
Preserve a modesty, and not dare to name
My Lord, without a reverence, and not
In the same week your Master is in mention,
Least I chas^ise you.

Ha, ha, prodigy!
The Monkey grin^, the Pygmy would be Rampant:
Sirrah, 'tis I pronounce, if you have
A mind to lose one of your lug^, or quit
Some teeth that stick impertinent in your gums,
Orrun the hazard of an eye, or have
Your han hes ki knight into a gentle ^ullice,
Or tell your Master in whose cause you have
Deserved a ^dgell^ng, and m^rited
A ^rutch to carry home your broken body;
Talk on, and when it is too late, you may
R^pen^ your impudence.

Mighty man of (...)!
Is not your n^me Lysippus? what mad Dog
Has bi^ thee; thou art wild, hast lost thy s^nses?

You'll find, I have not.

Is all this in earnest?
And hast thou so much ignorance, to think
That lump of flesh, thy Master (a thing meant
By nature for a flail, and bang the sheafs)
Is fit to be in competition
With the wise Prince of Ithaca? whose name
Shines like a Constellation throughout Greece,
And is looked at with admiration
By friends and enemies? for shame retract
Thy gross opinion, it is possible
Thou may retrive thy lost wits,

Very well
Then, you do think my little spawn of Policy,
That your sly Master, the oyl-tongu'd Ulysses,
Will win the prize to day, Achilles Armour;
And that the Kingly Judges, and grave Counsel
Will give it against Ajax.

In true wisdom,
As to the best deserver.

Dandiprat.

Remove your selves, and petty differences,
This place is meant the scene for a contention
Between the valiant Ajax Telamon,
And the far famed Ulysses, who shall best
Me it to wear the great Achilles Arms:
Methinks I see Heavens mighty windows open,
And those great souls, whom noble actions here
Translated to take plac^ among the Stars:
Look down, and listen with much expectation
Of this days glory. The rough winds (least they
Should interrupt the plea of these Competitors)
S^and close committed in thei^ horrid caves,
And habus dressed in all his brightest beams,
Cu^bs in his Steeds to stay, to wait upon
The g^eat Decision.
Silence, no noise profane this place, and may
The soul of wisdom be at this great Council.

I need not, Grecian Princes, spend much time
Or Language, in discousing the occasion
Why this great Council hath been called; Achilles,
Whose very name will be enough to fill
The breath of fame, is here again concerned,
Nor can his honoured ashes b^ without
Contention in his sacred Urn, until
The difference between these great Competitors
Be reconciled.

They both, great Agamemnon, are prepared,
And cheerful, as when Honour called them forth
To fight, impati^nt of delay, or danger.

Attend them hither,

Let the Officers
Take care the Soldiers press not past their limit.

appears, with lightning in his eyes,
His big heart seems to boil with rage.

He was ever passionate:
Here comes Ulysses.
A man of other temper, and as far
From being transported with unhandsome anger,
He seems to smile.

They have both deserved
For their great service in this expedition,
We should with calm, and most impartial souls
Hear and determine; therefore, if you please,
Because the hours are precious, I shall
Desire them lose no time.

We all submit, and shall obey your prudence.

You honour much:
Your Agamemnon -- Princes then to you,
I hope you have brought hither, with your persons,
Nothing but what your honours may consent too;
Speak your selves freely then, these are your Judges*
Who are not only great in birth and titles,
And therefore bring no thoughts to stain their honour,
But bound by obligation of one Country,
Will love, and do your name and valours justice.
There lies your great reward, Achilles Arms,
Forged by the subtle art of him, that framed
I^ves Thunderbolts, pride of Cyclopian labours,
He that is meant by his kind stars, to have
The happy wearing of them next, may write
Himself a Champion ^or the Gods, and Heaven,
Against a race of Giants that wo^ld scale it:
I have said, and we wi^h silence now as deep
As that doth wait on midnight, and as fixed
As marble Images, expect your pleasure.

Great Jove, immure my heart, or gi^t it with
Some ribs of steel, lest it break through this flesh,
And with a flame contracted from just fury,
Set fire on all the world: How am I fal^?
How shrunk to nothing? my fame ravished from me?
That this sly talking Prince is made my Rival
In great Achilles Armour: Is it day?
And can a Cloud darker than night, so muffle
Your eyes, they cannot reach the Promontory,
Beneath which now the Grecian fleet rides safe,
Which I so late ref^ued from Trojan flames,
When Hector f^ightful, like a Globe of fire,
By his example taught the enrag^d youth
To brandish lightning; but I cannot talk,
Nor knows he how to fight, unless 'ith dark
Wi^h shadows. I confess, his eloquence
And tongue are mighty, but Pelides sword
And armour were not made things to be talked on,
But worn and used, and when you shall determine
My juster claim, it will be fame enough
For him, to boast, he strove with Ajax Telamon.
And lost the prize, due only to my merit.

Now Didimus, how goes Ulysses pulse?
Run to his Tent, and fetch him some strong waters.

This storm shakes not a leaf, it had been more
Honour for Ajax Telamon to have hired
A Tru^peter, than make this noise himself.

Silence.
The Duke proceeds.

I am ashamed
And blush, that I can plead so vast a marit:
Why am I not less honour^ble? a cheaper
Portion of wo^h, weighed in the balance, with
This Rival, would so crowd, and fill my scale,
His virtues, like a thin and trembling vapour,
Would lose themselves in the air, or stick a Comet
Upon Heavens face, from whence the matter spent,
It would fall down, the sport* and scorn of Children,
Allow me then less valiant, pinch all
The Laurels from my brow, that else would grow there,
The honour of my birth and blood must lift me
Above the Competition with Ulysses;
My Father was Duke Telamon, a name
Fatal to Troy, companion to Alcides,
Whom in the expedition to Colchos,
Argo was proud to bear: his father Aeacus,
Who for his exemplary justice here,
Was by Eternal Patent from the Gods,
Made Judge of souls; him Iupiter begot
On f^ir Egina, from whose womb, I write
My self a third from Jove: But let not this
Entitle me to great Achilles arms,
Without my interest in his blood: Our fathers
Grew from one royal stem, I am his Kinsman,
And I demand in this, but just inheritance.
In what relation of blood can then
Ulysses. of a strange and forfeit race,
Equal in fraud to his Progenitor,
Condemned to labour at the restless stone,
Lay claim to Achilles Arms?

What, asleep Thersander?

No, no, I observe every word, Ulysses has
Said very well, he was ever a good Orator.

You are mistaken, Sir, 'tis Ajax pleads,
Ulysses has not spoke one word.

Wast Ajax?
I cry you mercy, it was very handsome,
And to the purpose in my opinion,
Who ever said it.

I entreat your silence.

With all my heart.

It is wonder Princes,
That this Dulichyan King dare bring his face
Before a Sun-beam, and expose that brand
Of infamy, the name of Coward, writ
In Leprous Characters upon his brow,
To the worlds eye.

How Telamon?

Ulysses,
'Tis I, that said it, and these Kings may all
Remember, when most wretchedly, to save
Those tender limbs of yours, and that warped face,
When Greece rise up, one man to punish Troy,
Thou cowardly did counterfeit a madness,
Till Palamedes pulled that visor off.
Was Ajax Telamon at that sordid posture?
Nay, was not I the first in field, and eager
To engage my person in these Wars of Troy?
(Witness thou sacred Genius of our Country)
As a curled youth could fly to meet a Mistress,
And print his fervour on her amorous lip:
But for his valour since, let Nestor speak;
That good old man made not his age excuse,
Nor his white hairs, that like a Grove of snow,
Showed what a Winter dwelt ^pon his head,
But flung himself on War, when in the heat
Of Bat^el, over-charg'd with multitudes,
And his horse wounded, he espi'd Ulysses,
To whom in this distress, he called for succour,
When he (unworthy of his name and honours)
Left the old man to struggle with his dangers,
To whom the Gods sent aid. But here's the justice,
He that dishonourably forsook his friend,
Met with an enemy, that made him call
As loud for his relief; I heard that clamour,
And with my sword cut out my passage to thee,
When thou were quaking at the enemies feet,
And ready to exhale thy panting soul,
I interposed, bestrid thy coward body,
And took thy many deaths upon my Target:
I Ajax brought thee off (my least of honours)
And saved thy wretched life.

This Ajax did,
But being done, the honour's over paid,
When he that did the act is Commentator.

If thou could call again that time ^sses,
The wounds upon thee, and thy fears of death,
When thou did skulk behind my shield, and tremble
At every lightning of a sword, thy soul
Would have a less ambition to contest
For great Pelides Arms.

Ajax will carry it.

It will
Become our prudence to expect, what may
Be said in answer to this accusation;
I have heard an Orator, with that subtle method
Of art and language, state his Clients cause,
And with such captivating arguments
Prevailed on every ear, it was concluded,
All law must be in favour of that interest,
But when the adverse part was heard, that which
Appeared so sacred in the first relation,
Vanished, and 'twas the wonder of all men,
By what strange magic they were so deceived:
I speak not this in prejudice of him
That pleads, whom we all know a man made up
Of every masculine virtue, but to stay
(Where two of so much honour are concerned)
Precipitate, and partial votes of merit:
A^ax Has more to say.

I know not how, with safety of mine own,
I should direct your judgements to consider,
That after all this story of my self,
I do not seek these arms, nor court the glory
To wear em, for 'tis justice to pronounce
They seek me, Ajax, and should prompt you to
B^lieve, I only worthily can wear 'em.
What hath Ulysses done, he should be named
With Telamon; we have his Chronicle,
He surprised R^esus in his Tent, a great
And goodly act, nay, had the heart to kill him;
He snatched a spy up, Dolon, and dispatcht him
To the other world, a most heroic service!
And had the confidence to filch from Troy,
The dead Palladium, memorable actions:
Fought he with Hector? did he stand immov'd
As I, when I received upon my cask,
A mighty Javelin that he darted at me?
When you, pale with the wonder of my strength,
Forsook your prayers, and gave me from the Gods
Into my own protection, and at last
I was not overcome, but in the face
Of both the Armies, sent this mighty Champion
Staggering home to Troy.

'Twas a fierce battle,
And Aax lost no honour.

Had I done
But this alone, it might be argument
To prefer Ajax lelamon before
Ulysses to that armour; which I'^n thinking
How he'll become, or how he dare sustain 'em,
Their very weight will crack his chine, that Burgonet
Will bring his neck in danger of a cramp,
In pity of his fears, discharge his hope
Of so much steel, he has ^he art of running,
'Twill much reta d his motion: Are you yet
Considering as doub^ful to distinguish us?
Some God convey ^hose arms up ^n the wings
Of a swift win^i^ he enemies camp,
Guard'em with ^ll the strength and soul of Troy,
Let every sword mount death upon the point,
And leave us^o our single fate, who soonest
Should fetch 'em off: Then you should tell your selves,
How much this Carpet Prince came short of Ajax,
I had rather fight than talk: Now here him tattle.

An Ajax, an Ajax

If my prayers, with your own, renovvned Kings,
Could have prevailed with Heaven, there had been no
Contention for these arms, he might have lived
To have enjoyed them still, and we Achilles.
But since by the unkindness of our fate,
We are decreed to want him (pardon me
If at that word, unmanly tears break forth)
Who can with greater merit claim the armour,
Than he whose piety to Greece and you,
Engaged alone his valour to these Wars,
And made him yours. Nor let it be a sin
Ere I proceed, to pray this justice from you,
That since my adversary hath been pleased
To make a virtue my reproach, and stain
The name of Eloquence, which in me, is not worth
Your envy, or his rage (since he declares
His incapacity for more than fighting)
You will not judge his dullness an advantage,
Or that which he calls eloquence in me,
A blemish to my cause, who have employed
All that the Gods made mine, to serve my Country.

Thersander,
Are you not ashamed to sleep?

Ha? no, I sleep?
I have not escaped a syllable by my honour,
I thought not Ajax half so good an Orator.

Ajax? it was Ulysses that spoke last.

Ulysses? I, I meant Ulysses; did I say Ajax?
Between you and I be it spoken Diomedes,
Ajax is a blockhead.

Yet he spoke to purpose.

I grant you that; nay, nay, let him alone.

Silence.

The lu^re of our birth by Ajax boasted,
Which we derive not from our act or virtue,
We vainly call o^r own, nature contributes
A common gloss to all our blood, the honours
And swelling titles, pinned upon our name,
Chance often ^amps upon a Fool or Coward:
But if provoked by Ajax, I must yield
Him magnified by blood; that title which
He takes from Jove, makes me his Grandchild too,
Lacrtes was my father; his Arcesius,
Whom Iupiter begot, no difference here,
But that our Family contained no Uncle
Banished for murder, as in Telamons.
Besides, my mother but remembered, makes
My derivation on both sides Divine,
Which lifts me above Ajax, if I were
No King of Ithaca: but he hath pleaded
A nearer privilege by being Kinsman,
And calls these arms his just inheritance,
Your wisdom could not choose but smile to he^ him,
(...) his son is yet alive, and Peleus,
Achilles father, Teucer his next Cousin; ^
And Ajax to be heir, is worth your wonder;
But you know how to wave impertinence
^
I need to pray your justice, that we both
May only charge the balance with our merits.

This is not ranting, he is Master of A worthy temper.

Give him your permissions.

Ajax hath read, not without mighty lungs,
His own bold History, when I shall tell
But my first act for Troy, if it be less
Than all that Ajax yet hath done, or boasted,
And with his own consent too, I quit all:
I have raised your expectations up to wonder,
And there I'll fix it, when I name Achilles,
Whose actions for your service, scorning all
Equality, are owing to Ulysses;
And I may call them mine, that made him yours,
By his sword fell the great Priamides
Hoctor, whose single arm carried the strength
And fate of Ilium: The death alone
Of Hector, is an act, if well considered,
Doth easily exceed, what hath been done
In all your Grecian Commentaries: I armed
Achilles first to do these mighty things,
And for those may deserve Achilles armour,

We must acknowledge all the benefits
Of great Achilles valour are a debt
We owe to Ulysses, who discovered him
Under a Female habit, 'twas Ulysses
That made him man again, and our great Champion.

All this is granted, yet I think Ulysses
Lost little blood in any of these services;
What do you think Thersander?

I think as the General thinks, he's wise enough.

But give me leave to offer to your memory
Another service, and reduce your thoughts
To Aulis, when our Army shipped, and big
With our desires for Troy, for want of wind
Were locked in the Eubean Bay at Anchor.
When the Oracle consulted, gave no hope
Of the least breath of Heaven, or gentle gale
To be expected, till Diana's anger
Were first appeased by Iphigenias blood;
I melt with the remembrance, and I could
Accuse my faith, but that the public interest
And all your honours, armed me to persuade
Nature, against the stream of her own happiness,
There stands the tear -- drowned father Agamemnon,
Ask his vexed soul (and let me beg his pardon)
How I did work upon his murmuring heart,
Divided 'twixt a Father and his Country,
To give his child up to the bleeding altar?
Whose drops (too precious to enrich the earth,
The Goddess hid within a cloud) drank up,
And snatched her soul; whose brighter substance made
One of the fairest Stars that deck yon Canopy.
Had Ajax been employed to have wrought Atrides
When he was angry with the Gods, to have given
His only pledge, his loved Iphigenia
Up to the Fatal knife, our Grecian fleet,
Had by this time been rotten in the Bay,
And we by a dishonourable return,
Been wounded in our fames to after ages.

This truth is urged too home.

The Deity appeased with Virgin Sacrifice,
The winds put on fresh wings, and we arrived
Swi^ (...) wishes to affrighted Troy;
(...) after their first battle, they no more
Drew forth their Army, which engaged us to
Nine horrid Winters expectation:
It would be tedious to relate, how active
My counsels were, during this nine years siege,
When Ajax (only good at knocks and vvrestling)
Was of no use, the bold designs I carried,
My care of our defences and approaches,
Encouraging the Soldier, wearied
And vvorn away with empty expectations,
How I did apt provisions, arms, and hearts
To fight withal, I shall not here enforce,
When you whose just commands I still obeyed,
Are conscious of my pious undertakings.

He'll talk eternally.

These actions have deserved no brand of Covvard,
How it may stain his forehead that accused me,
Judge you, by the short following story, Princes
There was a time, when Agamemnon was
Deluded by a dream, and bid to leave
The siege, which coming to the Soldiers ear,
(Whose fears were helped by superstition)
How did they run to'th ships from every quarter:
Where was the torrent of great Ajax valour
So talked of, that did bear all things before it?
Why, it was here, that torrent carried him too:
I saw and blushed at Ajax preparation
To be aboard, (I will not call it running)
How (...) I, careless of all danger, throw
My self among the Mutineers, and court
The Fugitives to face about again,
And build themselves a name, and wealth in Troy,
Given over by the Gods to be their captive?
What acted Telamon, but unworthy fears,
And rather coward them by his retreat,
Than teach them honour by his own example.

Can Jove hear this? ha!

Look to Ajax.

Contain yourself.

Let me fight him here,
Or you are all confederates in my infamy.

For my sake.

I am patient --

Nor am I without wounds, and crimson characters,
Which as her ornament, my bosom carries,
Greater than Telamon can boast, although
He fought with Hector, which was but his Fortune,
And might have been the lot of Agam^mnon,
Of Menelaus, Diomed, my self,
And others, who had equally engaged,
And only chance preferred him to the combat:
But let me not be thought to take from Ajax
His just reward of fortitude, I grant
He did repress the fury of the Trojans,
When they came armed in fires against our Navy,
But 'twas nor single valour, that repulsed
The numerous enemy. Patroclus had
The armour of Achilles on that day,
Which struck a terror in the Phrygian courages,
And many Princes swords contributed,
Mine was not idle, and I merit some
Proportion of fame for that days victory;
But if it come with murmuring, defer it,
And make it up in your accounts of honour
Due, for the great Palladium, which I fetched
(Assisted by the valiant Diomedes)
Out of the heart of Troy, spite of the Groves
Of Spears, that grew a bright defence about it,
And Swords, whose every motion darted lightning
To guard the fatal Image; in this act
I gave you Troy, till this was ravished from 'em,
It was not in your fate to make a conquest,
Ajax and all the Army might have fought
Against the Moon, with as much hope of Victory.

This must be granted him a signal Service,
I can attest the danger of this action.

I blush, I am compelled to mention these,
But where my honour is traduced, 'tis just
To make my fairest vindication:
The wealth of Greece should not have bribed me to
This Contestation; but Achilles armour
Would strike ambitious thoughts into a Hermit,
Nor will my limbs much tremble to sustain^ 'em
I had the honour at his death, to carry
His body with all that weight of arms upon it,
And placed him in his Tent, although I want
Some bulk of Ajax, I can walk, and fight,
And tell him where he fails, and mark him out
A truer path to Glory, than his strength
Is able to pursue, with no more brains
To guide him, than his empty pannier carries:
Wisemen join policy with force, the Lyon
Thus with the Fox, makes up the Soldiers emblem.
And now I look on Ajax Telamon,
I may compare him to some specious building,
His body holds vast rooms of entertainment,
And lower parts maintain the Offices,
Only the Garret, his exalted head,
Useless for wise receipt, is filled with lumber,
A Mastiff dares attempt to combat Lyons,
And I'll find men among your Mercenaries
Shall fly on Hydra's, if you name that valour:
But he, that we call valiant indeed,
Knows how, and when to fight, as well as bleed.

Ulysses, Ulysses.

Please you withdraw your persons for some minutes,

Is't come to this.

I obey.

I scorn to court
Such staggering opinions, and repent
That I once thought you fit to be my Judges.

For my part, with pardon of the General,
My voice shall be to please them both.

Impossible.

Divide the armour, and compose the difference;
Or give Ulysses, because he has the better
Head-piece, Achilles Helmet; and to Ajax,
Those parts that guard the body.

I am for
Ulysses.

He shall have my vote.

And mine.

Your judgements meet with Agamem^nons,
Entreat the Prince of Ithaca return.

Sir I congratulate your fa^e, you have
With the concurrence of our votes, deserved
To be the second owner of these arms;
Which as the first reward of all your service,
I in their names present: Nor are these Trophies
More than an earnest, and a glimpse, of those
Eternal Monuments shall Crown your Wisdom;
VVhere's Ajax Telomon?

Transported hence with fury.

You have honoured your Ulysses, and I now
Must call these things my blessing, and your bounty.

Bear them in Triumph to his Tent, and say,
Wisdom, not down-right Valour wins the day;
Better is wise Ulysses in the field,
Than the great Master of the seven-sold Shield.

I think Lysippus, we may now be friends,
For though you had a mind to quarrel when
The victory was doubtful, I am not
The more exalted for my Masters triumph,
His wit is none of mine; I honour Ajax
In his own arms; for I have seen him do
Brave things.

Thy hand, I love thee Didimus,
And I will love Ulysses for thy sake too.

But how does thy Lord Ajax take the business?

He's mad, and rails at heaven and earth, I dare not
Come near him -- Whose this, Poiybrontes?

Let us forget all differences, and make
Some sport with him -- Polybrontes,
I am proud to see your military face.
My Magazine of Valour, I do honour you,
From that exalted trust upon your Skonce,
To the cold iron Star upon your heel, how is't?

How is't my Low, and Mighty Polybrontes?

Tired out with killing of the Creature,
Wild Beasts, and Men, will come in^ my way;
Some, I look dead, others I take the pains
To cut or quarter, as they move my fury,
The hate of Iuno is entailed upon
Our generation I think.

How, Iuno? I pray what kin are you to Hercules?

I am his son, son to the Theban Hercules
That did the mighty Labours; we number twelve,
I have been told too, I am very like him;
There were fifty of us in one night begotten.

You are not, Sir, so big boned as Hercules altogether.

Hang bones, and flesh, and blood,
It is the soul that's tall, a Giants spirit.

Not in that body,
A soul can hardly stand upright in it.

'Tis the more dangerous, being confined, and must
Break out like lightning.

What's that upon your hat?

My case of Tooth-picks.

How, 'tis a Lyons paw.

A Legacy my father left me, part
Of that Nemean Lyon, that he killed,
Whose skin he used to wear, which since these Wars
I turned into a Knapsack, and it carries
A charm against all venomous B^asts, come near it,

Vermin he means:
What kind of belt is this?

This was a Serpent, which at Aulis was
Obse^d to climb up to the Sparrows nest,
Where having swallowed nine, Calchas presaged,
We should be nine years at the siege of Troy,
And in the tenth be Conqueros, this I killed
With a Flint stone, as it came hissing toward me,
It had ten row of iron teeth.

Where are they?

All beaten out with that stone I threw at her.

Nothing scapes you then:
But good Sir favour us, to let us know
How many men have fallen by your sword
During our siege, I know you keep a Catalogue.

Not of all,
I only register within my Diary,
The men of honour that I kill, the rest
I leave to the common bills of Mortality.

The men of honour, I pray, Sir.

They rise to --
^oo in my roll.

With your own hand?

Ten Princes, beside two of Priams sons,
Paris and Hector,

Paris is alive.

Not that Paris I killed upon my honour.

And all the Army knows, Achille^ with
His Mirmidons ^lew Hector.

From me tell Achilles
'Tis false.

He's dead too.

'Tis well he is so, he that steals my fame,
Must not be long in the number of the living.

You are
The little wonder of the world, you had
Done your self right, to have put in with Ulysses
And Ajax, for the armour.

Had he stood,
There had been no Competitor, Ulysses
Had this day mist his triumph.

Had Ulysses
The armour then?

Given by all Judges.

I believe
The man is so modest, ^at mention
Of me, would have recanted his ambition;
Do not I know Ulysses? yes, and Ajax.

Ha!

And all the swelling flies that blow the Army,
I'll tell that Ajax, when I see him next,
That I dare fight?

With whom Sir, dare you fight?

With any man that shall affront you, Sir,
Renowned Ajax, my soul falls to crumbs
That day, I do not honour your remembrance.
Ulysses is a Juggler, I do wonder
At's impudence, to stand in competition
With him, that is the man of men, brave Telamon:
Shall I carry him a challenge; prithee let me,
I long to thunder him.

Stay Wesel!

Or to Agamemnon, or the best of them,
Would I were in my knapsack nibbling cheese now.

I say the word, be dead.

My brains, my brains!
Ah my own sweet brains; who wants any brains?

Art thou not dead?

Oh yes Sir, I am dead,
Give my Ghost leave to walk a little.

Come back, your name?

Ah, when I was alive, the Soldiers called me --

Agamemnon.

I shall be brained in earnest!

When thou hast past the Stygian Lake, commend me
To Eacus, one of the Infernal Judges.

I will Sir, I am acquainted with his Clark.

And when I have made my revenge perfect,
I'll visit him my self.

I'll bring you an answer too.

Do so.

I were best to make haste, Sir, Charon stays for me,
And I shall lose my tide.

Then vanish.

Presto.

There's one dispatch'd, he's company for Ghosts,
I know whose fate is next, and then I leap
To immortality: what cloud is that
Descends so big with prodigy, my steel
Shall give the Monster birth, have 'tis Ulysses,
Come to affront me in Achilles armour:
A thousand serpents creep within my skull:
I'll find the Cowards soul through all this darkness,
Have at thee Politician, dost thou bleed?
Now I have met we'e, thanks to my good sword,
I kiss thy cold lips, for this brave revenge,
Thou art my own, without competitor,
And must be my last refuge and companion.

Alas poor Telamon!

Who calls Telamon?

One you have known and loved; can you forget
Calchas so soon?

Our Grecian Prophet, you are very welcome,
What news from the upper World? do they agree
In heaven? we are all to pieces.

I am trusted
With a direction to you, the sacred powers
You serve --

Speak on, but let me tell you as a friend,
They have not used me kindly, but no matter,
I'll be my own revenger.

Sir, take heed.
How you provoke their anger, or contemn
Their Precepts, for the partial acts of men,
They know, and pity that a man so valiant,
Should for a trifle lose his manly temper:
You are not, Sir, forgotten by the Gods
And I am sent, their Prophet to acquaint you,
That what you lost alive by humane Judges,
Their divine Justice shall restore with honour
To your calm dust; for know, those very arms
In which Ulysses triumphs now, shall be
Snatched from him by a tempest, and shall land
A floating treasure upon Ajax Tomb,
And by their stay convince the future age,
Who best deserved em; be not then unmanned,
And thus deface the beauties of your reason.

I thank 'em, they are pleased, when I am dead
To make a restitution to my fame,
And send me home the armour, this is something,
I'll make my self in a capacity
By death to be an object of their justice,
I'll dye immediately, I can do it my self.

Your Piety avert so black a deed!
This is a way to make the world suspect
The worth of all your former actions,
And that they were not births Legitimate,
Born from true honour, but the spurious issue
Of an ung ided heat, or chance: How shall
We think, that man is truly valiant,
And fit to be engaged in things of fright
And danger, that wants courage to sustain
An injury? it shows a fear of others,
To be revenged upon our selves, and he
Is not so much a Coward that flies death,
As he that suffers, and doth fear to live:
Besides, this will enlarge your enemies triumph,
An^ in the world opinions, be granted
A tame concession to his worth; nay men,
And with much face of reason, may affirm,
Ulysses did not only win the arms,
^ Ajax.

Therefore I will dye
With (...) own hand, and save that infamy;
I am resolved, all fate shall not prevent it:
Leave me:

I must not.

I am not confined
To place, thy office yet is thy protection,
Do not presume to follow, left my rage
Make me forget your person, and by sad
Mistake, I turn the Priest into a Sacrifice:
Go tell the world I am dead, and make it known,
That Ajax fell by no hand but his own.

This will turn all our Triumph into mourning,

The glories of our blood and state,
are shadows, not substantial things,
There is no armour against fate,
Death lays his icy hand on Kings,
Sceptre and Crown,
Must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made,
With the poor crooked sith and spade,

Some men with swords may reap the field,
and plant fresh laurels where they kill,
But their strong nerves at last must yield,
They tame but one another still;
Early or late,
They stoop to fate,
And must give up their murmuring hreath,
When they pale Captives creep to death.
The Garlands wither on your brow,
Then boast no more your mighty deeds,
Upon Deaths purple Altar now,
See where the Victor-victim bleeds,
Your beads must come,
To the cold Tomb,
Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet, and blossom in their dust.
Set forward to the Temple, this was once
A day of Triumph, but the death of Ajax
Will make it dark within our Calendar;
Joys are obortive, or not born to last,
And our bright days are quickly overcast.


