Are all things in their preparation
For my immortal guests?

Nothing is wanting
That doth concern my Province sir, I am
Your Officer above stairs. The great Chamber
With the two wooden Monuments to sleep in
(That weigh six load of Timber, sir) are ready.
That for the ^ce D'amour, whom we call Cupid,
I have trimmed artificially with Roses,
And his Mother's Myrtle. But I have
Committed Sacrilege to please the other,
Death does delight in Ew, and I have robbed
A Church-yard for him. Are you sure they'll come
To night? I would fain see this Dwarf called Cupid,
For the other I look on him in my fancy,
Like a starved Goblin.

Death. I must confess,
Cuts not so many inches in the Say
As our last Venison, 'tis a thin-chap'd hound,
And yet the Cormorant is ever feeding.

But good sir resolve me,
Are they good spirited Guests? will they tipple
To elevation? do they scatter metal
Upon the VVaiters? will they roar, and fancy
The Drawers, and the Fiddles, till their pockets
Are empty as our neighbours drone? and after
Drop by degrees their wardrobe? and in the morning,
When they have day-light to behold their nakedness,
Will they with confidence amaze the streets?
And in their shirts, to save their pickel'd credits,
Pretend a Race, and trip it like fell footmen?
These rantings were the Badges of our Gentry,
But all their dancing days are done I fear.

These were the garbs, and motions late in fashion
With humorous mortals; but these guests are of
No humane race.

Pray what attendance have they?


Love has two
Gentlemen, that wait on him in his Chamber,
Of special trust, he cannot act without them.

Their names sir, I beseech you?


Folly and Madness.


A pair of precious instruments,
Sure they are well descended sir.

The fool
Could ride a hundred mile in his own Pedigree,
And give as many Coats --

Fools coats, there are
Enough to wear them.

As he had acres in
Eleven fat Lordships,
And plaid at duck and drake with Gold, like Pebbles.

Was this man born a fool?


No, but his keeping
Company with Philosophers undid him,
Who found him out a Mistress they called Fame,
And made him spend half his estate in Libraries,
Which he bestowed on Colleges, took the toy
Of building Quadrangles, kept open house,
And fell at last most desperately in love
With a poor dairy maid, for which he was begged --

A Fool?


And leads the the Van in Cupid's Regiment.


What was the Mad-man sir?


A Thing was born to a very fair per annum,
And spent it all in Looking-glasses.

How?
That's a project I never heard on, Looking-glasses?
How many did he break sir in a day?

They broke him rather, in the right understanding,
For Nature having given him a good face,
The man grew wild with his own admirations,
And spent his full means upon Flatterers,
That represented him next to an Angel.
Thus blown up, he took confidence to court
A Lady of noble blood, and swelling fortune;
Within three days fell sick of the small Pox,
And on the fourth run mad, with the conceit
His face, when he recovered, would be like
A country Cake, from which some Children had
New picked the plumms.

A brace of pretty Beagles.


They are here.


I see not Death.


He's the last thing we look for.


THough little be the God of Love,
Yet his Arrows mighty are,
And his Victories above
What the valiant reach by War,
Nor are his limits with the sky,
Over the milky way he'll fly,
And sometimes wound a Deity.
Apollo once the Python slew,
But a keener Arrow flew
From Daphne's eye, and made a wound
For which the God no Balsam found;
One smile of Venus too did more
On Mars, than Armies could before;
If a warm fit thus pull him down,
How will she ague-shake him with a frown;
Thus Love can fiery spirits tame,
And when he please cold Rocks inflame.
Holla! within!


You are welcome Gentlemen; ha?
Quarter, oh quarter, I am a friend sir,
A moveable belonging to this Tenement
Where you are expected, Gupid is come already,
And supped, and almost drunk, We have reserved
According to order, for your palate, sir,
The Cockatrices Eggs, the cold Toad-Pie,
Ten dozen of Spiders and Adders tongues
Your servant Famine, sir, bespoke.

Live, live.


I thank you sir; a curse upon his Physiognomy;
How was I surprised? twas high time to comfort me,
I felt my life was melting downward.
Death, oh Death.


Who's that? I do not like the voice. What art?


A miserable thing.


I, so thou seem;
Hast not a name?

My name, sir, is Despair.


Despair, my time's not come yet, what have I
To do with thee? what come thou hither for?

To find out Death; Life is a burden to me;
I have pursued all Paths to find him out,
And here in the Forest had a glimpse on him,
But could not reach him with my feet, or voice;
I would fain dye, but Death flies from me, sir.

I wonder you should travel in the Forest,
And among so many Trees find none convenient,
Having the tackling ready, about your neck too.
Some great affairs take up the Devils time,
He cannot sure attend these low employments,
He's busy about Leviathans. I know not,
There's something in it; you have not made your Will sure.

Yes sir, I carry it wo'me, it wants nothing
But his name, and my subscription.

Whose name?


His name I mean to make my Heir.


Whose that?


That charitable man
Will bring Death to me, there's a blank left for him,
And if you please to do me, sir, the office,
Even you shall be the man; I have professed
An Usurerer this fifty years, and upwards,
The VVidows and sad Orphans, whose estates
I have devoured, are croaking in my Conscience.

And shall he be your Heir that does this feat?
To make you acquainted with this Cannibal
You talk of?

Oh my happiness.


I'll do it.
But I believe you are sorry for your baseness,
Your Rapines and Extortions --

Mistake not,
am sorry for no mischief I have done,
That would come near Repentance, which you know
Cures all the achings of the Soul. If I
Could but be sorry, Death were of no use to me.

Keep ye of that mind, you say very right sir,
I'll try what I can do
With Death, to do your Conscience a courtesy,
He's now within our house; I'll bring you pen
And ink to write my name too, honest Father.

Thou art my dearest child, take all my blessings.


Here's like to be a Fortune.


I want strength
To climb, I see a very pretty twig else
And space for a most comfortable swing,
'Tis a hard case the Devil will not help
At a dead lift.
O my Sciatica.
I have broke my spectacles, and both my hips
Are out of joint, help --

Death will be with you presently, the last course
Is now on the Table that you may not think
The time long, I have brought you* ha? rise up sir.

Alas, I have had a fall, I was endeavouring
To do the meritorious work, and hang
My self, for Death me thought was long a coming,
But my foot slipped.

Alas what pity 'twas?
If I had thought your Soul had been in such
Haste, I would have given you a lift before
I went.

It was my zeal.


Alas it seemed so,
You might have took the River with more ease,
The stream would have conveyed you down so gently,
You should not feel which way your soul was going.
But against the frights, Death might bring with him,
I have brought you a bottle of wine. I'll begin sir.

Would it were poison.


So would not I, I thank you,
'Tis pure blood of the Grape.

Wine?


A^ my charge, I know you do not use
To pay for Nectar,
I bestow it sir.

That's kindly said, I care not if I taste --


In the mean time please you, I'll peruse the Will,
I can put in my own name, and make it fit
For your subscription -- what's here? --
Ha? a thousand pound in Jewels -- in ready money
Ten thousand more -- Land -- have preserve my senses.
I'll write my name and thank Heaven afterwards.
-- Here sir, before you can subscribe, the Gentleman
Will come and kill you to your hearts content.

Hum! this foolish wine has warmed me, what do ye
Call the name on it?

Sack.


Sack, my truly son --


Nay sir make hast, for Death will be here instantly.


At his own leisure, I would not be troublesome*
Now I do know his lodging, I can come
Another time.

But the Will Father, you may write now --


Deeds are not vigorous without legal witnesses;
My Scrivener lives at the next Town, and I
Do find my body in a disposition
To walk a mile or two. Sack do ye call it?
How strangely it does alter my opinion?

Why? have you no mind to hang your self?


I thank you,
I find no inclination.

Sha'not I be your Heir then?


In the humour
And spirit I now feel in Brain and Body,
I may live -- to see you hanged; I thank you heartily.

But you will have the conscience, I hope,
To pay me for the wine, has wrought this miracle.

Your free gift I remember, you know, I use not
To pay for Nectar, as you call it. Yet
I am not without purpose to be grateful,
Some things shall be corrected in my Will,
In the mean time, if you'll accept of a
Small Legacy, this Hemp is at your service,
And it shall cost you nothing, I bestow it.
We men of money, worn w^nd cares,
Drink in new life, from VVin^ costs us nothing.
Farewell, and learn this Lesson from Despair,
Give not your Father Sack to be his Heir.

Not a tear left? would's brains were in the bottle.


VIctorious men of Earth, no more
Proclaim how wide your Empires are;
Though you bind in every shore,
And your triumphs reach as far
as Night or Day,
Yet you proud Monarchs must obey,
And mingle with forgotten ashes, when
Death calls ye to the crowd of common men.
Devouring Famine, Plague, and War,
Each able to undo Man-kind,
Death's servile Emissaries are,
Nor to these alone confined,
He hath at will
More quaint and subtle ways to kill.
A smile or kiss, as he will use the art,
Shall have the cunning skill to break a heart.
Ho Master, Master.


What's the matter?


Nothing but to ask you, whether you be
Alive or no, or whether I am not
My own ghost, that thus walk and haunt your house.

Thou look frighted.


Death and his train are gone,
I thank Heaven he's departed; I slept not
One wink to Night, nor durst I pray aloud,
For fear of waking Death; but he, at Midnight,
Calls for a Cup to quench his thirst, a Bowl
Of Blood I gave him for a mornings draught,
And had and Ague all the while he drank it.
At parting, in my own defence, and hope
To please him, I desired to kiss his hand,
Which was so cold, of the sudden sir, my mouth
Was frozen up, which as the Case stood
Then with my Teeth, did me a benefit,
And kept the dancing bones from leaping out,
At length, fearing for ever to be speechless,
I used the strength of both my hands to open
My lips, and now feel'd eve^ I spake
Drop from it like an Icycl^

This cold
Fit will be over; what said Cupid?

He
Was fast asleep.

The Boy went drunk to bed,
Death did not wake him?

It was not necessary in point of reckoning.
Death was as free as any Emperor,
And pays all where he comes, Death quits all scores.
I have the summa totalis in my pocket.
But he without more ceremony left
The house at morning twilight.

Ha? they knock --
Get thee a cup of Wine to warm thy intralls.
Though Love himself be but a water-drinker,
His train allow themselves rich Wines. Your Fool
And Madman is your only guests to Taverns,
And to Excess; this Licence time affords,
When Masters pay, their servants drink like lords.

Sir, they call for you, Cupid's up, and ready.
And looks as fresh, as if he had known no surfeit
Of Virgins tears, for whose fair satisfaction,
He broke his Leaden shafts, and vows hereafter
To shoot all flames of love into their servants.
There are some Music come, to give his godship
Good morrow, so he means to hear one Song,
And then he takes his Progress.

I attend him.


But I have made my own revenge upon him,
For the hard-hearted baggage that he sent me;
And Death I have served a trick for all his huffing.
They think not what Artillery they carry
Along with them, I have changed their Arrows.
How Death will fret to see his fury cozened?
But how will Love look pale, when he shall find
What a Mortality his Arrows make
Among the Lovers? let the God look to it,
I have put it past my care, and not expect
To see them again, or should I meet with Death,
I shall not fear him now; for Cupid, if
Lovers must only by his Arrows fall,
I'm safe, for Ladies I defy you all.

STay Cupid, whither art thou flying?
Pity the pale Lovers dying.
They that honoured thee before, Will no more
At thy Altar pay their vows.
O let the weeping Virgins strew,
In stead of Rose, and Myrtle boughs,
Sad Ew, and funeral Cypress now.
Unkind Cupid leave thy killing,
These are all thy Mothers Doves,
Oh do not wound such noble Loves,
And make them bleed that should be billing.
Fly, sly my Children, love that should preserve
And warm your hearts, with kind and active
Is now become your enemy, a murderer.
This Garden that was once your entertainment
With all the beauty of the Spring is now
By some strange curse upon the shafts of Cupid,
Designed to be a Grave; look every where
The noble Lovers on the ground lie bleeding,
By frantic Cupid slain; into whose wounds,
Distracted Virgins pour their tears so fast,
That having drein'd their fountains, they present
Their own pale Monuments; while I but relate
This story, see, more added to the dead.
Oh sly and save your selves, I am your Parent
Nature, that thus advise you to your safeties.

He's come already.

Ha? what Winter creeps
Into my heart?

He faints, 'tis now too late,
Some kinder God call back the winged Boy,
And give him eyes to look upon his murders.
Nature grows stiff with horror of this spectacle;
If it be Death to love, what will it be
When Death it self must act his cruelty?

And here he comes, what Tragedies are next?

Two aged pair, these will be fit for death,
They can expect but a few minutes more
To wear the heavy burden of their lives.

Astonishment to Nature, they throw off
All their infirmities, as young men do
Their aerie upper garments. These were the
Effects of Cupids Shafts; prodigious change!
I have not patience to behold 'em longer.

what will it Death advance thy name
Upon cold Rocks to waste a flame,
Or by mistake to throw
Bright Torches into pits of Snow?
Thy rage is lost,
And thy old killing Frost*
With thy Arrows thou may try
To make the young or aged bleed, But indeed
Not compel one heart to die.
O Love! oh Death! be it your fate
Before you both repent too late to meet and try
Upon your selves, your sad Artillery.
So Death may make Love kind again,
Or cruel Death by Love be slain.
CHange, oh change your fatal bows,
Since neither knows
The virtue of each others Darts;
Alas, what will become of hearts
If it prove
A Death to Love,
We shall find
Death will be cruel to be kind:
For when he shall to Armies fly,
Where men think blood too cheap to buy
Themselves a name,
He reconciles them, and deprives
The valiant men of more then lives,
A Victory, and Fame.
Whilst Love deceived by these cold shafts, in steed,
Of curing wounded hearts, must kill indeed.
Take pity Gods, some ease the world will find,
To give young Cupid eyes, or strike Death blind.
Death should not then have his own will.
And Love, by seeing men bleed, leave off to kill.
Oh yes, oh yes, oh yes,
All you that delight to be merry come see
My brace of Court Apes, for a need we be three;
I have left my old trade of up and down stairs
And now live by leading my Apes unto Fairs.
Will you have any sport? draw your money, be quick sir,
And then come aloft Jack, they shall show you a trick sir.
Now* am I in my Natural Condition,
For I was born under a wandering Planet;
I durst no longer stay with my old Master,
For fear Cupid and Death be reconciled
To their own Arrows, and so renew with me
Some precious acquaintance.

Oh, my heart,
'Twas Death I fear, I am paid then with a vengeance;
My dear Apes do not leave me, ha? come near --
What goodly shapes they have, what lovely faces!
Ye Twins of beauty, where were all those graces
Obscured so long? what Cloud did interpose
I could not see before this Lip, this Nose?
These eyes? that do invite all hearts to woo, them,
Brighter then Stars; Ladies are nothing to them,
Oh let me here pay down a Lovers duty;
Who is so mad to dote on Woman's beauty?
Nature doth here her own complexion spread,
No borrowed Ornaments of white and red;
These cheeks were no adulterate mixtures on them,
To make them blush as some do, fie upon them!
Look what fair cherries on their Lips do grow?
Black cherries, such as none of you can show,
That boast your beauties, let me kiss your a --

What's that? a shot in the shoulder too? ha.
What will become of me now? oh my Apes!
The Darlings of my heart are ravished from me.
No? not yet? nor yet hard-hearted Apes?
I must despair for ever to enjoy them.
Despair? that name puts me in mind,
'Tis here;
Welcome dear Legacy, I see he was
A Prophet that bestowed it; how it fits me?
As well as if the Hangman had took measure.
'Tis honour in some men to fight and die
In their fair Ladies quarrel, and shall I
Be 'fraid to hang my self in such a cause?
Farewell my pretty Apes, when Hemp is ti'd
Drop tears apace, and I am satisfied.
Hence ye profane, and take your dwellings up
Within some Cave, that never saw the Sun,
Whose Beams grow pale, and sick to look upon you;
This place be sacred to more noble Objects,
And see where Nature tired with her Complaints
To Heaven for Death and Cupid's Tyranny
Upon a bank of smiling Flowers lies sleeping,
Cares that devour the peace of other bosoms,
Have by an over charge of sorrow wrought
Her heart into a calm, where every sense
Is bound up in a soft repose, and silence;
Be her Dreams all of me. But to my Embassy.
Cupid, wheresoe'r thou be,
The Gods lay their commands on thee,
In pain of being banished to
The unfrequented shades below
At my first summons to appear.
Cupid, Cupid.

I am here,
What send the Gods by Mercury?

Thy shame and horror. I remove
This mist.
Now see in every Grove
What slaughter thou hast made, all these
Fond Cupid were thy Votaries,
Does not their blood make thine look pale?
All slain by thee, 'two* not prevail
To urge mistakes, thy fact appears;
Jove, and the Gods have bowed their ears
To groaning Nature, and sent me
From their high Crystal Thrones to see
What blood, like a dire Vapour rise,
Doth spread his wings to blind the eyes
Of Heaven and Day; and to declare
Their Justice and Immortal care
Over the lower world, but stay
Another must his fate obey.
Death heretofore, the look'd-for close
To tedious life, the long repose
To wearied Nature, and the gate
That leads to Mans eternal fate,
I in the name of every God,
Command thee from thy dark abode,
As thou wilt fly their wrath, appear
At my first Summon --

I am here.


Nature awake, and with thy sleep
Shake off the heavy Chains that keep
Thy Soul a Captive.

Mercury?
Or am I still in Dreams?

Thy Eye
Take truce with tears, see much abused
Nature, whom thou hast long accused,
Leave thy wonder, and attend
What the Gods by Hermes send.
But first I charge you to resign
Your fatal Shafts.

I, these are mine.


Cupid, the Gods do banish thee
From every palace, thou must be
Confined to Cottages, to poor,
And humble Cells, Love must no more,
Appear in Princes Courts, their heart
Impenetrable by thy Dart,
And from softer influence free
By their own wills must guided be.

I shall obey.


Death, thou may still
Exercise thy power to kill,
With this limit, that thy rage
Presume not henceforth to engage
On Persons, in whose breast, divine
Marks of Art, or Honour shine;
Upon these, if thy malice try,
They may bleed, but never die;
These are not to be overcome,
Above the force of Age or Tomb.
Is Nature pleased?


The Gods are just.


To this you both submit?


We must.


Ye are dismissed.


But Mercury,
What satisfaction shall I have
For noble Children in the Grave
By Cupid slain?

They cannot be
Reduced to live again with thee,
And could thy fancy entertain
In what blessed seats they now remain,
Thou would not wish them here.

Might I
With some knowledge bless my eye,
Nature would put on Youth.

Then see
Their blessed condition.

Where am I?
The World no such Perfection yields.

These are the fair Elizian fields.


OPen blessed Elizium Grove,
Where an eternal Spring of Love
Keeps each beauty fair, these shades
No chill Dew or Frost invades;
Look how the Flowers, and every Tree
Pregnant with Ambrosia be;
Near banks of Violet Springs appear,
Weeping out Nectar every tear;
While the once harmonious Spears,
(turned all to ears)
Now listen to the Birds, whose Quire
Sing every charming Accent higher.
If this place be not Heaven, one thought can make it,
And Gods by their own wonder led, mistake it.
Oh, who shall guide me hence? old Natures sight
Grows feeble at the brightness of this glory.

I will be Natures conduct.


Mercury -- be ever honoured.


Return, return you happy men
To your own blessed Shades again,
Lest staying long, some new desire
In your calm bosoms raise a fire;
Here are some Eyes, whose every beam
May your wandering hearts inflame,
And make you forfeit your cool Groves,
By being false to your first Loves.
Like a Perfuming gale o'r Flowers,
Now glide again to your own Bowers.


