THE Court Secret, A TRAGI-COMEDY: Never Acted, But prepared for the Scene at
BLACK-FRIERS.

WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the three Pigeons, and for Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in Saint Paul's Church-yard. 1653.

My Lord, THE Character of true Nobility is sacred, and indeleble; that Yours
is such, needs no Testimony, the World bearing witness to Your Honourable
Mind, upon which all other access of Titles wait like a fair Train of
Attendance, not Ornaments, Your own Virtue giving them lustre, and enterteining
them as Rewards paid down to Your Person, and Merit.

This Principle, gave me boldness to make this approach to Your Lordship, and
not without some design in my Ambition, to renew my self to Your smile, who
have enjoyed the happiness (many years since) to kiss Your hand, and to
observe with Admiration the Beauties that shined upon Your Youth, which as they
gained upon Time, so they have grown above the prejudice of Opinion, and
improved their Maturity by the Earliness of their Spring.

But my humble duty (my Lord) at this fortunate hour to attend You, comes not
alone, it brings a Present, such as my weak condition could reach to; a Poem,
one, that wears no Ribbands in the forehead; not so much as warranted by
Applause; for it happened to receive birth, when the Stage was interdicted, and
wanted that public Seal which other Compositions enjoyed; Though it hath been
read and honoured with the Allowance of some men, whose Opinion was as
acceptable to me, as the Vote of a smiling Theater.

But this is not to prescribe to your Honour, whom I have by this Application
made my Judge (should You wave the Patron) and from whom there lies no Appeal.

If your Honour, descending from your higher Contemplations, vouchsa^e to look
upon these Papers, though Your Justice should condemn them, it would be their
Reputation to fall by so Honourable a Sentence: But if they happen to obtain
Your Lordships favour, that they may live, your Name will not only be a
powerful defence to them, but a lasting Record of Honour upon the Composer,
whose heart is full of Devotions to your Lordship, and ambitious of no greater
addition, than to be known,

My Lord, Your most obliged, and humble Servant, IAMES SHIRLEY,
THe Wild-Goose Chase, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont, and Iohn Fletcher,
Gent.

THe Widow, a Comedy written by Ben. Iohnson, Iohn Fletcher, and Thomas
Midleton, Gent.

THe Changeling, written by Thomas Midleton, and William Rowley, Gent.

THe Prince of Portugal, Don Antonio --

He courts our Infanta close.

And may deserve her.

Your Grace --

'Tis none of min^, Don Manuel.
Will your Highness walk?

Observe you that?

The Prince seemed not well pleased.

What doth the Princess mean?
I saw it fall from her.

My eyes are witness,
Noble Don Manuel.

My Lords, your servant.

How do you like the Spanish Court? Although
My Lord your father were a native, yet
Your birth and education were abroad;
Compelled by your father's destiny.

My unhappiness!
I have heard him say, some policies prevailed
To make him leave this Kingdom, and his fortunes,
To try his fate at sea, till he found means
To plant himself in Portugal, from whence
He was but Iate reduced by the good Prince,
With promise of a pardon; and his honour
Is full security for us.

The Prince
Can do becoming things, and knows good acts
Are in themselves rewards; but the report
Was here, that fifteen thousand Ducats
Were offered Roderigo our Kings brother,
By your father Lord Piracquo, to assure
His reconcilement here, for trespasses
He did at sea.

But not accepted.
I know not which will be his more vexation,
To know the Prince's act, restore Piracquo,
Or so much money lost.

The Prince.

Don Manuel,
You are become a man of mighty business,
Or I have lost some interest, I had
Since I left Portugal; but I'll not chide.
Where is the King?

In his Bed chamber, Sir,
With Duke Mendoza.

I'll not intterrupt 'em.
You may redeem your error, and we both
Converse again.

You infinitely honour,
And with it bind the obedience of your creature.

Now he is going to his Mistress.

To Clara
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter.

Mistress? do you forget, my Lord, the treaty,
And his own personal contract, the kiss warm
On Isabella's lip, and strengthened by the hope
And expectation of another Marriage,
Betwixt Anthonio and Maria his Sister?

We are used
To freedom here, with as much innocence
I may, perhaps, hereafter say, the Princess
Maria meant you honour, when she dropped
A Jewel; Sir, it cannot be much blemish
For you to own her service.

'T were an insolence
(Beyond her mercy to forgive) in me,
To think she meant it grace, or I apply it
At such a distance of my blood and fortune.
This in a whisper, but conveyed through Court,
Would forfeit me for ever: As you're honourable,
Preserve me in my humbler thoughts.

Be confident.

And pardon my expression; Sir, your servant.

I have observed the Princess scatter beams
Upon me, and talk language with her eyes
Sometime, such as I dare not apprehend
With safety, or Religion; for I find
My heart another conquest. But the Prince!
Why should he move my jealousy? I know
His amorous thoughts, already placed upon
Fair Isabella, must inhabit there,
And meet their just reward; he cannot be
So carelesless of his honour.

Can you direct me, Sir, to Don Piracquo,
Your noble father? I bring affairs concern him.

You wait upon the Duke Mendoza, Sir?

I was in the first number of those attended
His Duchess, while she lived; his Grace doth now
Acknowledge me a waiting movable
Within his family; my name is Pedro,
A poor kinsman of yours, if you be, Sir,
My Lord Piracquo's son, and might have been
His heir, had not you Mother been more fruitful
At sea, before she died, who left you an infant;
'Twas something to my prejudice, but your Father --

Is in the privy Garden, Sir.

Your servant.

What means this fellow to survey me? ha! Clara!
And her Father Duke Mendoza! I
Must wish a time without his presence, to
Confirm, how much I honour her: Loud fame
Speaks him a noble Gentleman, but of late
(By what misfortune 'tis not known) he hath
Some garbs, that show not a clear spirit in him.
But that his Lady's dead, men would interpret
His starts proceed from jealousy: I'll leave 'em.
And wait some private opportunity.

I must confess, Prince Carlo, Sir, hath courted me,
But with a noble flame.

Flame me no flame, unless you mean to turn our family
And name to ashes in the Kings displeasure.
Thou dost not know the Prince, as I do, Clara.

Sure you have known me, Sir, I have expected
Some time, when you would own me --

Your name's Pedro --

You thought me of your blood, Sir, when you promised
I should be your heir; I did a service for it
Deserves your memory, not contempt, my Lord.

Oh, thou did well, and though as I then stood
Proscribed, I wished it otherwise, I now thank
Thy witty cozenage, and allow thy faith
Religious to thy Prince; be honest still.

Honest? you are mistaken, I have been
Honest to none but you, Sir.

Be to thy self.

I know not what you mean by witty cozenage;
But to my danger, I may say, I did
The feat as you desired; you know I did,
And 'tis my wonder, what we both projected
To make your own conditions for your pardon,
And safe return, afcer proscription,
Hath not been worth your use so many years;
Where is the Prince?

The Prince? you are witty, Kinsman.

Nay if you slight me, Sir, and pay my service
With this neglect, I can undo my self
To make you find repentance --

Come nearer --

Therefore upon my blessing, if thou hast
Such an ambitious thought I charge thee leave it.

Sir, you may spare these preeepts, I have not
Given away my freedom, or by promise
Of more than may become my duty, offered
The Prince an expectation; I am
Not ignorant he is designed a Bridegroom
To the fair Isabella, and it were
Saucy injustice to distract a blessing
Now hovering o'r two Kingdoms --

Thou art wise;
Preserve this duty. Ha! is not that Pedro?
I do not like their whisper --

You look pale, Sir.

Can this be truth? was it Prince Carlo, then
Without imposture was delivered me?
Did thou not cousin me?

If I be mortal, Sir,
It was my Ladies art, for her own safety,
To put this trick upon the Court, which she
Kept me from my Lord, until upon her death-bed
She made him overseer of the Secret.

Did he not name a Secret?

You are troubled.

I? thou art deceived.

Ha! 'tis thy Lord Mendoza.

He may take
Some jealousy, if he observe our whisper.

Add, Pedro, but to this, thy future secrecy,
Till I mature some act, my thoughts now fix upon,
And choose thy place within my heart; meet me --

Enough, you seal the mystery again.

Pedro, come hither; What did you whisper?

Duke Roderigo, my Lord, desires
Your conference in the garden.

I'll attend him.

He is my Kinsman, Sir, and did salute me --

I would thou were his Cousin ten removes
( Pedro) as far as the two Poles are distant.

My father need not fear Prince Carlo now;
I find another guest here, 'tis Don Manuel
Holds chief intelligence with my thoughts.

Well Pedro,
Take heed, my life is in thy lips --

I know my duty, Sir, if you suspect,
Command me to be dumb; Sir, you must trust me.

I know not how to help it, wait upon
My daughter.
I would my Lady had lived, or died without
Bequeathing me this Legacy on her death-bed,
A Secret to consume me; this servant, whom
I dare not mu^h displease, is all the witness
Survives, sworn with the rest to secrecy,
And though I have small argument to suspect him,
After so long a silence, yet I am
Not safe to be at his devotion:
I could soon purge him with a Fig, but that's
Not honest: Was it ever known, a man
So innocent, should have so many Agu^s
In's ^onscience? I am weary of the Court;
I must have some device --
Duke Roderigo,
And Don Piracquo? they are whispering too;
This jealousy will take my brains apiece.

I have said, now expect, my Lord, your answer.

I must acknowledge from your Grace, a favour,
That you have been so clear, and free with me;
I might have thought my self secure in the dark,
And ignorant of this expectation,
Incurred your Graces jealousy.

I had allwaies
A firm opinion of your Lordships gratitude.

But for the sum, he fi^ty thousand Ducats,
I must acknowledge, if your Grace had mediated
My pardon then with the good King, your brother,
It had obliged my payment; but my cause
Not worth your Graces agitation,
Or breath, was like a vessel struck upon
Some shelf, without all hope ^' have sayl'd again,
Had not the Prince's mercy, when he came
To Portugal, relieved it with a gal^,
And set my bark afloat.

The Prince?
Why? doth your Lordship think I had no part
In the work of your repair? the power, and office
I hold at Court, is not asleep, my Lord,
When any act of grace is done by the King.

I dare not do so much injustice to
The Prince's bounty, to divide and ow
But half the benefit to his Grace; I not
Extenuate your prevalence at Court, but
His Highne^s did compassionate my exile,
And I am returned by his commands, my Lord,
I am his creature for it, and shall sooner
Lose what he hath preserved, my life and peace here,
Than doubt his honour, or dispute his power
In my behalf.

Sir, you are not safe yet,
There has past no seal, I take it, for your pardon.
You hang in the air, not fixed to the roof of heaven,
As when you shined a star; take heed you prove
No Comet, a prodigious thing snatched up
To blaze, and be let fall again, upon
Their eyes, that so mistook the region
Where you were placed.

I know, my Lord, your greatness,
And hold it not becoming, to contest
In language wi'ee; but I am confident --

Of what?

And will wager, if your Grace please,
The to either fifty thousand Ducats, Sir,
That I'll not pay you a Marvedie; if I may
On other honourable terms possess
Your favour, I shall meet your just commands,
But if you set such price upon your smile^,
After the Prince's honour to secure me,
I know my self, my fortune, and upon
What strength I must depend.

I shall, my Lord,
Send you to sea again.

I made a shift, and may again, my Lord,
Amongst the Merchants.

Pirate --

'Tis confessed,
I was so, but your Grace may be informed
I was not born to the trade, I had a soul
Above my fortune, and a toy I took
To lose what was beneath my birth and titles,
Or purchase an estate fit to sustain 'em;
The sea was my Exchequer; for I thrived,
I thank my watery Destinies, and commanded
Many a tall ship, won with so much horror,
As possibly would have made your Lordship (had you^
But in a cloud, or airy scaffold stood
Spectator of our fight) sweat out your soul
Like a thin vapour with the fright, and after
Drop your forsaken body on our deck,
To increase the number of the dead.

But we
May deal with you at land again.

With reverence to your blood as 'tis the Kings, withal my age,
My wounds upon me, and that innocence,
The Prince's word hath new created in me,
I do not fear --

Whom?

The Devil.

I shall conjure down the spirit.

Hell hath not art to keep it down.

So brave?

So just.

Thou talking fool, dost think I have no stings?

I know you are a Statesman, Sir, but he
That fears with his own innocence about him,
Deserves not a protection --

Piracquo,
Stay, I now see thou hast a gallant spirit,
Let me embrace thee, and with this confirm
An honourable friendship; I have not
A thought so base to injure thee.

I have --
An easy faith my Lord --

Farewell --
Noble Piracquo, I have tried and found thee.

I wo 'not trust you for all this; I know
The Devill's excellent at the hug; your Servant.

The Princess.

I do not like his Courtship there.

So gracious with my Niece? I'll make him curse
Those smiles --

All is not well within me, and the Princess
Was never so unwelcome; they confer
With much delight, or else my fears abuse me.
What hath she in the greatness of her birth,
That I should be so passive? Heaven look on
Our hearts, and if my love want a degree
Of noble heat, when they are both compared,
Let what I carry be the Funeral pile,
And my own flame consume it. Ha, the Prince
I shall betray my self too soon I fear.

My sweetest Clara!

Either there were no Ladies that could love
In that Court, or you could not want a Mistress.

They are not born with incapacity
Of loving, where they find a worth t'invite:
The fault was in my undesert, that could
Attract no Ladies grace to own me there,
So inconsiderable a servant Madam.

There is some hope, you will not be thought here
Unworthy of a nobler Character;
I do not think but Clara hath a better
Opinion of your merit.

You cannot be so cruel; what could in
My absence interpose, to make your heart
Unkind to those desires at my return?

My justice, and the care of both our honours,
I have not lost; nor can Time make me forfeit,
(What Nature, and the Laws of Heaven and Earth
Command me to preserve) my duty Sir.
What is above, would taste ambitious.

This was not wont.

If any of your smiles,
Or favours Sir before, have led my tongue
To unbecoming boldness, you have mercy:
Some things of error are exalted by
Our bold belief, when Princes make themselves
But merry with their servants, who are apt
To antedate their honour, and expound,
In their own flattery, the text of Princes.

But is all this in earnest?

Is not that
Don Manuell with the Princess? Observe Sir.

They are pleasant.

Dare he presume?

Vexation!

While I have
The memory of what you are, a Prince,
And dare believe what is as true, as talked of,
Your Contract made in Portugall to the Princess
Isabella --

No Contract Madam; I confess,
To please my Father, who engaged me to
The travel, I did seem to court the Princess,
And with some shadows of a promise, might
Advance her expectation; but here
I left my heart, and dare appeal to thine.

Madam --

Your Graces pardon but a minute.

Sir --

Nay then I shall repent I asked your pardon.

I have done, and will attend your Graces pleasure.

I am now at your commands.

Clara his Mistress?

Possible! was not that Prince Antonio, Uncle?

Yes Sir, and gone displeased,
He hath been affronted by that Gentleman.

He dares not be so rude.

He dares be insolent, and court your Sister.

How? my Sister? be less ambitious, Manuel.

Your favours have exalted him too much.

But I can change my brow.

It does become you.

The Prince did frown upon me, Madam, you
Are wise, as well as fair, can you resolve
The Prince's riddle?

Sir, I have no art
To decipher mysteries, but if I err not,
He named his Sister.

Ha!

With caution you should be less ambitious.

'Tis so, he's jealous of my courtship there,
It can be nothing else, can it, sweet Madam?
I dare make you the judge of all my thoughts,
Unbosom every counsel, and divest
My soul of this thin garment that it wears,
To let your eye examine it; if you find
Within that great diaphanal an atom
Look black, as guilty of the Prince's anger,
Let him doom me to death, or if that be
Not punishment enough, be you more cruel,
And frown upon me too.

If I were judge,
Without such narrow, and severe dissection,
Don Manuel, of your heart, I should declare
Boldly your innocence, and rather than
A frown of mine should rob your thought of quiet,
I would deprive mine eyes of what they honour,
By a more cruel absence. Ma. But to be
Assured of so much charity I could wish
My self in some degrees a guilty person,
And stand the Prince's anger; but if I
Be cleared in your opinion, I dread not
The malice of accusers; yet if you had
Wav'd my integrity, I had an argument
To have convinced you, Madam, that Maria,
Though sacred in her person, was to me
No more enflaming than a piece of Alabaster,
Which some great Master's hand had shaped a Virgin;
For if you dare believe me, you have won
By your virtue here so much dominion,
There is no room to entertain a guest,
Much less a competition. Oh Madam,
I took so strange a charm in at my eyes
When first your presence made 'em happy, that
To say I only loved you, were profane,
And would detract from that religious honour,
My heart in that first minute promised you.

I know not in what language, Sir, to dress
My answer, but in that small skill I have,
Sir, of my self, I am not guilty of
Unkind rewards, where I can understand
A fair respect invite 'em; yet if you
But flatter, for it is hard to say, when men
Dissemble not at Court --

The curse of Virgins, and
What else can make a Lover miserable
Feed on my heart, that minute I betray
Your faith by any treason of my tongue:
I must not live with your suspicion on me;
Why do you obscure your face?

I do but hide
Sir an unruly blush that's stolen into
My cheek; I fear a Spy, that hath discovered,
And would tell what complexion my heart has.
Pray leave me.

That command
Received but faint commission from your heart,
From whence those amorous spies your blushes came;
It had a sound like Virgins, when they teach
A way to be denied. Pardon sweet Madam,
If I presume to interpret my own happiness;
Your eyes are not so kind to obscure themselves
Behind that cloud, they may behold me kiss
Your hands with this devotion, and not
Repent to be a witness. Did you not
Feel a chaste trembling on my lip? with such
A fear do Pilgrims salute holy Shrines,
And touch the flesh of Martyrs: but this circumstance
Is but the pomp, no essence of affection.
Say, can you love me, Madam? if your tongue
Not used to such a dialect, refuse
Articulate consent, a smile will make
No noise, speak that way; I will keep this hand
Both a white pledge, and prisoner, till your eye
Or welcome accent do redeem it from me;
Or if you still be silent, I'll secure
My fate, and teach your hand without a voice
To chant a Song to Hymen.
What help of tongue need they require,
Or use of other art,
Whose hands thus speak their chaste desire,
And grasp each others heart?
Weak is that chain that's made of air,
Our tongues but chafe our breath,
When Palms thus meet, there's no despair
To make a double wreath.
Give but a sigh, a speaking look,
I care not for more noise,
Or let me kiss your hand, the Book,
And I have made my choice.
Weeping? I'll kiss those drops away.

Away --

That echo was not sweet, yet being thine --

I am too much thine.

There's no place for fears;
Love is the purest, when 'tis washed in tears.

DAres he be so insolent already? we
Shall humble him.

He durst affront me Sir;
And when I urged the folly of his pride,
Tell me, he knew himself, and on what strength
He must depend; words of a dangerous consequence.

My Son hath been too forward.

He affects him strangely.

Whose undertaking must not bind beyond
The rule of our own greatness.

Your Son is full
Of honourable thoughts, but being young,
May meet with subtle natures, whose oblique
And partial ends want no dissembled forms
Of duty to betray him. This Piracquo
In his experience of the world, hath art,
And can from every accident extract
A cunning use of time, and dispositions;
And 'tis not to be doubted but the man
Practised in storms, and rapine (by which he
Hath drawn a wealth above your treasury)
May find a minute apt for his revenge
Upon your justice --
He that is a Pirate
In the first act of spoil he makes, doth open
His conscience at sea, and throws the key
Into the waves.

He hath acquired a mighty wealth.

But who can number their undoings and wet eyes
That have been robbed? how many lives and fortunes
Of your own subjects have increased the pile
Of his estate and cruelty? think of that:
And if you can bring nearer thoughts, and look
Upon your self, your present sums are lean,
Compared to what did swell your treasury;
Your customs are less numerous for his thefts,
And your great debts and charge upon your crown,
Are called upon, but drouzy with their weight,
They make no answer to the kingdoms clamour.
Some King, to whom the waves had sent a wrack
So great upon his shore, would both secure,
And call the timely benefit, a providence.

'Tis not too late.

Wise Princes that have law strength about 'em,
Must take all forfeits; he that is too tame
In Sovereignty, makes treason his own judge,
And gives a patent to be disobeyed.

Let him be sent for straight.

To hear him plead?
What Traitor did want reasons of defence?
Command him safe first, see his wealth sealed up
Against the confiscation; Kings must act,
And not dispute their maxims; I could much
Amaze you, Sir, with other argument
To prove Piracquo's insolence; his son
(And 'tis to be believed, in things of consequence
Their counsels often meet) Don Manuel,
Hath been ambitious to court Maria,
Your daughter, Sir.

Unsufferable impudence!

Antonio too suspects him, and what honour
You can maintain with the Prince, what danger
It may produce; if this resented, and
Proclam'd, beget a War upon your country --
For Treaties are the immunities of Kings,
Subjects adulterate the Prince's coin,
Not without high injustice, but he that
Doth play the wanton with his royal promise,
Defaces his own stamp, and teaches, by
His violation, others not to trust him.

Treason!

Be fearless, Sir, I am provoked
Beyond the sufferings of a Gentleman.

Where is the guard? no mischief the result
Of such a skirmish?

I was not made for servitude, nor must I
Have patience, when the greatest man is in Spain,
Whose title cannot challenge my subjection,
Throws infamy upon me.

Do the Kings
Of Spain allow this saucy privilege
Against a Prince.

Not we: To prison with him.
You shall be judge your self, and set the punishment
Upon his insolent act; away with him.

Not hear me? this is tyranny.

Away, do ye make a cipher of the King?

May we
Entreat to know the circumstance?

I must
Acknowledge, Sir, I had suspicion
Of some attempts by him against my honour,
Which made me first provoke him.

Dare he hope
To keep a thought unpunished?

Sir, I met
My Son by your command lead prisoner hence,
It will not unbecome your royal justice,
To let me know his crime, I am no father
To any sin he dares commit against
Your Laws, or person.

You came in good time.
Another guard for him.

A guard? for what?

You shall know that hereafter.

I shall beseech, my cause against Don Manuel
May not involve his innocence; my Lord
Piracquo is full of honour.

The Duke's gone.

Nay he is right, at the wrong end of a cause still*

If they be crimes against your state, I am not
To prescribe your Justice, Sir.

Away with him.

To me? I have seen this character.

Return him at my peril, Sir.

What do you think of my Lord Piracquo?

I think he's gone to prison; yet I think
He's here again, if that be he; for we are
Not sure of any thing at Court. Now, my Lord --

Do any of you know, my Lords, wherefore
I am under guard?

Not we.

I could not satisfy the Prince's question.

Your sons offence was an affront to the Prince
Antonio.

That was not well; 'twas
Some high provocation made him lose his temper.

They were at it with their swords.

No hurt, I hope?

The Prince's feather discomposed, or so.

This was not my fault, Gentlemen.

Proclaim to the world I'm not your son, take off
Mine and your peoples expectation,
And then 'tis no dishonour; for to be
Believed the Prince at the same time, and one
That dares betray a Gentleman from his Sanctuary,
To be a sacrifice at home, are things
Of inconsistent nature, and destructive.
Charge him with new committed crimes, since I
Gave him my word and honour to secure him,
And there he stands, without an Altar to
Protect him; but far be it from the King,
To make it a new treason to be rich;
It will be thought your avarice to his wealth,
And read in story to your shame for ever,
Piracquo died to pay your debts.

The Prince
Solicits hard; the King inclines.

I know
This doth not, Sir, proceed from your own soul,
But some malignant nature, that hath dropped,
And would infect your ear with wicked counsel;
'Twas some malicious enemy to me,
And to your fame (as well as Don Piracquo
His life and fortune) hath conspired to make
Me less than Prince, and you unfit to be
A King, when once men catch at your inconstancy.
For I must pray you to remember, Sir,
I had your royal promise to confirm
My undertaking for his facts at sea,
And give me leave to say, Sir, this dishonourable
Retreat will stagger all your peoples faith:
A King to break his sacred word, will teach
The great men to be safe without your service;
Who will believe your smiles are snares to catch
Their fortunes; and when once the crowd takes sent
Of this, you leave your self no oath to swear by.

The Prince bestirs himself bravely in your cause.

I may do something to reward it, one day.
Sir, shall I speak? not in my own defence;
For since I came to Spain, I have not been
Guilty in thought of any breach of duty;
Nor for my son, if youth or ignorance
Have made him err, my humble knees beseech
My cause may take no royal beam from him,
That now is pleased to be my Advocate,
Your son; in whom there's such an active heat
Of honour, better all my blood was scattered
Than you should frown upon him. But I know
If I had paid the Duke your brother, Sir,
But fifteen thousand Ducats --

Ha? what then?

I had bought my peace, and been commended by
His Grace to your full pardon.

Boldly urged.

Was it his act?

We restore thee,
Piracquo, to thy self, and us; and let
Our largest pardon for all past offences
Be ready for our signature; my brother,
I'll promise reconciled too: Carlo, thou
Hast but confirmed our hope, nor did we purpose
This other than a trial of thy temper,
Thy gratitude, and jealousy of thy honour:
Preserve them still thus, Carlo, nothing wants
To fix our Kingdoms joy, but the completing
Thy marriage with the Princess Isabella,
Which shall be done by Proxy, when Antonio
Hath made his courtship perfect with thy Sister.
Who saw the Duke Mendoza? send for him;
He doth too much absent himself.

By Proxy?
The Duke Mendoza's counsel is too busy
To advance that, and Clara is grown cold,
Or seems so, in her cunning to provoke
My flame; but I must teach her how to meet it.
My father may be wrought to a consent
When things are done; forgive me, Isabella,
My first thoughts cannot on thy beauty wait,
I am not master of my love, or fate.

Things are not now so desperate, whilst my Lord
Piracquo keeps possession; but if I were
Worthy to advise his Lordship, he should not lose
Much time to settle things, secrets do burn --
His grace; now for a fit of jealousy --
I'll be here --

He's troublesome in my eye, and yet I cannot
Endure him from my sight.

That's I.

Methinks he hath every day a more discovering look,
There's Scaffolds in his face; I shall prevent him,
And send him far enough, with the next Fleet
He goes, the Sea may roar, and crack the Cabins,
Or he may meet the Calenture; I have heard
Of Hericanoes that have torn up Mountains,
One boisterous enough would strike his Ship
Clean through, a'tother side to the Antipodes,
And that would cure me; all my Art must be
To win him to the Voyage, and not stir
His jealousy; the Knave is apprehensive.

Are you good at that?

I do not like his business with Piracquo,
'Tis for no good, I'll break their correspondence;
Piracquo has been honourable, yet
I do not much confide in him -- he's here;
Come hither Pedro.

Your Graces Pleasure?

What consult
Have you with Don Piracquo?

Please your Grace,
He hath been fishing, some or other have
Infused a scruple, I'll engage my life:
But though he be my Kinsman and a Lord
I honour, and from whom I have received
The promise of a Fortune, and a great one,
Yet, I have said little --

Hast said any thing?

How could I choose Sir? he did squeeze me subtly,
But I was wise, and faithful to your trust,
He knows no more than I, or you --

Ha?

Would wish him Sir, let me alone to be cautious.

The art honest Pedro, and I have been studying
How to encourage and reward thy service,
And I have thought of a preferment for thee.

Your Grace was ever bountiful.

A place
Of honour and command.

That will do well Sir;
And shall I come in as your Churchmen do?
No first-fruits to be paid twice in a year,
No buying of a Jewell at the rate
Of fifteen hundred times the value Sir?

Remove that care.

That care is well removed.

I have considered, that to live at home
My Servant, is to dark thy abilities,
That will abroad shine, and do services
Worth Spain's acknowledgement.

Abroad? why, must I travel?

By any means.

Whither, an't please your Grace?

But to the Indies.

No farther? Columbus did it in 7 years,
And less.

In the next Fleet thou shalt have an employment
Shall speak my care of thee, and interest
^ith his Catholic Majesty; he shall deny
Me hard, but I'll prevail to make thee of
(...) Council there, and the State Secretary.

This is a mighty honour.

We may hold
Correspondence still by Letters, thou art wise;
The King shall knight thee too of Calatrava;
How will it joy my heart to write to thee,
Al Signor illustrissimo Don Pedro.

Sir, the King hath sent for you?

For me?

Yes, Sir, I could have told your Grace
His Majesty commanded your attendance.

For what?

I know not that, but I suspect
There hath been some intelligence, however
Go, Sir, it may do worse, and argue guilt,
To be commanded twice.

Intelligence?
It will be worth my safety to confess.

By no means, Sir, that simplicity
Would rather become me.

Why? wo't thou confess?

Not, unless you begin; go Sir, an't be
But to prepare his Majesty, for me
To wear the order of the Caletrava;
You have put me, Sir, into the gang of going
This Indian voyage.

Well, I must to the King.

Shall I attend you?

Yes -- no -- do what thou wilt; yet now I think on it
'Twill be as well to go -- yet do not neither.

Be cheerful, Sir, why doth your head shake so?

My head?

It trembles like the Needle of a Sun-dial, do ye not feel it?

Ha? yes 'tis here; but do not breath upon me;
I feel the very wind of thy words blow it
To and again like a Weather-cock; but I must go.

I will prepare my self for this voyage.
Forget not the Calatrava.

I would thou were shipped --

And sunk.
It shall go hard but I'll requite your Lordship.

A prisoner say?

'Tis a confirmed report.

I fear Prince Carlo's jealousy is cause
Of this; poor Manuel, it will not be
Safe, or seem honourable for me to visit him:
But since I cannot suffer with him, he
Shall hear I dare confine my self to sorrow.

Madam, the Princess
Maria is coming up the stairs.

I must dissemble now my grief, and meet her, yet
I may entreat her Graces mediation
To the King for his enlarge.

Let us be private.
If ever thou lov'dst me, Clara, now express it.

I have an humble suit to your Highness, which
In hope to prosper, will direct my faith,
And services to what you can prescribe me.
Speak your commands.

Don Manuel stands committed by the King,
And I would have thy counsel, how I should
Best work his liberty.

That, Madam, is
All my petition to your Grace.

I know my least desire let fall to the Prince
Antonio, were enough to engage, and make him
The Orator to effect it, but in honour
I would not contrive him the means, and instrument
To advance his Rival's liberty.

Rival, Madam?

For I must tell thee, Clara, and with it
Give up the secret of my soul, I love
Don Manuel, I fear, better than my self.

You do not mock me, I hope, Madam?

No,
By all that Ladies once in love do pray for,
By him thou love, who ever he be, and this
Kiss (that I rather wish on Manuel's lip,
Would modesty and honour give it privilege
And durst entrust thy faith to carry it to him,
In my experience of thy virtue, Clara)
I speak no fable.

It becomes my truth
To answer yours, though not so cheerfully;
I should not much repent, to carry, Madam,
Your kiss to Manuel, but I fear, I should
Forget who sent it. If you have a plot
To raise mirth from my weakness, when you know
How much my heart is his, I yield my self
Your triumph, Madam, but the glories of
Your blood, and title are not price enough
To buy him from my thoughts, could you invest
My name with their possession.

Doth she love him?
I have destroyed my own hope then; alas
Poor Clara, I must pity thee, and for that
Love that hath been between us, I'll apply
To cure thy wound; for mine is not so desperate,
Though I bleed inwards, I confess, since he,
Whom I esteem best, suffers for Maria.

Suffer for you? pray Madam, clear this mystery.

It is poor Manuel's fortune to affect
Me with a passion great; as mine, and love,
That like a rebel forrageth our soul,
And can obey no law, but what it likes,
Impatient that Antonio loved me too,
Made him forget the Prince, and gave the affront,
For which he suffers in the Kings displeasure.

No repetition of this story, Madam,
Lest you destroy all my belief in virtue;
It cannot be, you may as soon persuade
That snow, the innocent fleece of heaven, that's born
Upon the fleet wings of some sportive wind,
Is Ethiop's wool, as call this truth.

This will be rudeness, Clara, if you do not
Convince, and with more reason, and with temper.
And 'tis no little wonder, that when I
Have fairly thus disclosed my thoughts of Manuel,
You should retain a murmuring thought, and dare
Pretend rivality with me.

The law
You gave to love, that stoops to no prerogative
Of birth, or name (mine only a degree
Beneath your own) will answer your disdain,
And justify my passion; and if reason
And temper (which in vain you think are lost
In me) be assigned judges, I dare more
Than say I love, I can deserve him --

Better?
Fate bring it to a trial.

So just are my affections, I dare make
A Saint my judge.

That Judge you make, is not
A friend to so much pride.

You are but my accuser, Madam.

This affront I must
Remember, Clara, and find time to teach
You know me better.

Madam, as you are
The Princess, I can fall thus low, to kiss
Your hand, and pay all duties that become me,
Or your command; but if you think by being
Great, I must own no passion, but in what
Degree you are pleased to fix it, nor compare
My soul born with its freedom to affection,
With yours, because one shaft hath wounded both,
I rise my own defender.

Thy own ruin
For this presumption.

I'll not bribe your mercy,
When you can love as I do, we may both
Deserve him equally: Oh Manuell!
Though I defend thy honour to the Princess,
Yet he hath scattered seeds of jealousy
About my heart, if this ground fertile prove,
I wo'not curse his faith, but my own love.

Why should we murmur to be circumscribed,
As if it were a new thing to wear fetters?
When the whole World was meant but to confine us;
Wherein who walks from one Clime to another,
Hath but a greater freedom of the Prison;
Our Soul was the first Captive, born to inherit
But her own Chains, nor can it be discharged
Till Nature tire with its own weight, and then
We are but more undone to be at liberty.
The Prince, he brings a storm, I see it rising
As Seamen do, the wind far off.

Don Manuell,

You have named a suffering man, but one that holds
His life and death at such an even rate,
No matter which is first employed* with honour.
I dare submit me to your justice Sir.

Your Cause would droop to trust to that, my love
Willing to justify the choice it made
In thee, hath pleaded better, and prevailed
With me to bring thee counsel to redeem
Thy self becomingly.

Your goodness flows still,
'Twas not the Prince that frowned.

Submit your self to Prince Antonio.

Submit my self?

Ask him forgiveness.

I must be guilty first of an offence,
Ere my tongue be so base, and ask a pardon.

Then I must chide you Manuell; deny
This trivial satisfaction? your crime
Will upon second thoughts be much enlarged,
Nor will the Prince be ever thought to merit
His birth and name, unless he kill thee for it,
'Tis an affront of so supreme a nature.

Hath it no name Sir?

Dost not shake to ask it?
Are you Sir a fit Rival for the Prince?
Abstract that she's my Sister, which considered,
Carries so vast a guilt against the Kings,
Mine, and Maria's honour, all thy blood
Mixed with repentance cannot purge; you are
Instructed Sir.

Not yet, to know my self
Conscious of any action should contract
The Prince's brow, or yours, much less deserve
The horrid name of guilt against the Kings,
Yours, and Maria's honour.

Did not you Sir court my Sister?

Never Sir.

Do not you love her?

Heaven in that word includes all that we owe
His precept; 'Tis my justice, Sir, to love her;
But with a greater distance, than she is
From me removed by birth; and if her smile
Meant the reward of my attendance, Sir,
At any time have met with false observers,
Their tongues, and no audacious thought of mine,
Or application, are in fault; I have,
Beside the lesson of my birth, been taught
A piety from your favours, Sir, to know
My self their creature, and with humble thoughts
To show my gratitude, not proudly assume
(Could she descend) a Courtship to Maria,
Who by the King, every good mans vote,
Is meant a sacred pledge to Portugal,
To chain two kingdoms.

If this, Manuel,
Be truth --

Without condition of my liberty,
Or dread of what Antonio shall attempt
In his revenge, my soul dare with ith an oath
Confirm it at the Altar.

This doth please me.
Possess thy first place in my friendship, Manuel;
Antonio shall embrace thee too, his ear
And mine have been abused.

There was
A providence upon our Swords, that meant
Less fatal than his passion showed, when we
Last met, against whose weapon threatening me first,
The safety of my fame, more than my life,
Called up my just defence.

I do believe thee;
To what a loss of virtue, and of blood
Credulity engages? this shall be
No more thy dwelling; Prince Antonio
Shall for thy honour make it his own act,
Who yet believes thy interest in Maria
Hath made his Courtship vain, and will I fear,
Not presently admit thy innocence
Into his quiet faith, but I'll convince him.

If he but knew my heart, he should not need
Much argument; no man can love with honour,
And let his thoughts divide upon two Mistresses.
I have contracted love --

With whom? may Time,
When this World fails, and Nature grows decrepit;
Present it to Eternity.

This prayer opens my heart, and all the wealth within it,
Commands me draw the Curtain from her name,
That you may read my Clara,
And I shall beseech your Graces smile --

Your Clara? what
The Duke Mendoza's Daughter?

You have named her.

No, I am in the dark still, speak again,
Or rather say, thou hast mistook, it is
Some other Clara, and not the Lady
I understand.

Life cannot bribe me with another wealth,
Or death with all his horrors make me desert
That name.

What a strange Sea-breach has
This little storm of breath made here already?
I was taking pains to unconcern the jealousy
Of Antonio, and find him my own Rival;
Thou had been kinder to have loved Maria
My Sister, though Antonio had sworn
Thy death, and the Kings anger with my own
Had met thee like a torrent, than presumed
This interest in Clara.

I see no
Such mighty danger in it.

I'll tell thee, Manuel,
Thou hast invaded all my joys, I love her.

Honour forbid it, Sir.

Honor's a dream,
And a cold everlasting sleep must chain
My soul up; for if once it wake, and know
What thou hast torn from it, it will vex it self
Into a flame, and turn thee into ashes.

Never till now unhappy, with my weight
I see my self now bearing down before me,
A rotten part of some prodigious mountain
Into the sea, with which I shall soon mingle.

Collect thy self betimes, and give her back
Unsullied with thy claim, release thy own,
And with her, every thought as much a virgin
As her soul was, when first I courted her,
Or thou art lost --

With greater justice, Sir,
Command to uncreate my self, as call
My faith or heart again.

How?

Sir, my life,
The cement that doth hold this frame together,
You have power to melt, or but command my exile,
And I may live far off, and be forgotten
By all, but Clara; bu^ to ask that back,
Which with the full consent of heaven I gave her
(And in exchange received her equal vow)
I dare not, or if I had will, to be
So false to honour, 'tis within my heart
So rivetted, I may with as much innocence
Commit a rape, or murder, as attempt it.

You have no doubt a valour too, that dare
Love with so fierce a resolution.

When I am master of my sword, I dare
Not draw it against you; but he that lives
Beneath you, may have little time to wish
Himself unmade that would divorce us.

Leave me, leave me --
How many lones are shaken with one tempest?
And if one suffer, ruined all? I know
The faith he bears me, and the reverence
He gives my blood, will never be provoked
To fight against my person; but I must not
By tameness give my self a public wound;
He shall be master of his sword and freedom,
And then let fate determine; Clara must
Be mine, or make a Bridegroom of his dust.

PRince Carlo's not come yet.

My Lord Piracquo
And his son Manuel are expected too.

I wonder at this hasty reconcilement;
We did imagine it as possible
The two Poles should have met, as they together
Friends at a Banquet.

In my opinion, peace, and wine, and music,
Are more convenient for the natural body,
Than swords or guns.

And for the politic too,
If men were but so wise to like, and cherish
Their own estates: If I had all the Plate
In the Indies, I'd not give a silver spoon
To have my head cut off.

Why is not the great Duke Roderigo here?

Who, the Kings Evil Genius? he was
Invited, but excused himself.

Why, there's
A Statesman, that can side with every faction,
And yet most subtly can untwist himself
When he hath wrought the business up to danger.
He lives within a labyrinth, some think
He deals with the devil, and he looks like one,
With a more Holiday face.

But he hath so behaved himself,
That no man now dare much confide in him.
They are come.

Don Manuel, the Prince hath made me know
My error, and your worth.

He has too much honoured me,
And you have reason to command for this
The service of my life.

You are not pleasant, Sir --
My Lord Piracquo.

Your Highness humble servant.

All is not
Reconciled here, I but suppress a flame,
To give it vent more dangerous.

A free welcome to all;
Sit, and some wine; this Music is not
Sprightly enough: To his Majesty of Spain --

He that doth pledge the Kings health with a murmur
May his next thirst inflame him to drink poison.

The King hath a true servant in Piracquo.

He that is not, had never sense of honour;
And may he perish all but soul, that dares
Harbour a thought disloyal. To your Highness --

Give me another:
This wine looks cheerful as my heart, to drink
The Princess fair Maria's health.

My turn
Will come, Sir, to be grateful.

Here my Lord.

May swift time perfect by your sacred Loves,
The happiness of both kingdoms.

May that day,
That seals your glorious Hymen, Sir, be ever
Holy within our Calendar, and beget
A faith, that all things then begun, may prosper.

I thank thee, Manuel.

Sir, you may
Believe Don Manuel's language, and his heart
Are twins, they bear one date of time, sense.
You must now give me leave, Sir, to requite
You in part; A health to the King of Portugal;
Let it move this way, Manuel.

It shall
With humble thoughts be entertained -- you honour me.

It is but Justice Manuel; for when Spain
Would not acknowledge, nor allow us being,
Our lives were welcome there, till better stars
Sent him, to whose bounty we ow all that's left us.

No more o'that my Lord, I am very confident,
In any honourable cause, you dare
Express your faith to me; and for your son,
We two have been companions, I dare say,
Our hearts are touched by one Magnetic virtue,
And such a sympathy, I cannot wish
What's dearest to me, but he flies t'embrace it.

I like not this --

Manuel, begin a health:
We have had my Sisters and the Kings already,
Name your own Mistress for the next.

I should conclude her worthy of remembrance,
If one were first preferred. Will your Grace please Sir,
To let me have the honour --

Come, to me.

To the white hand of fairest Isabella.

Would she were
Present to thank you Manuel.

'Tis an affront, as Clara were his own
Already; ha! civility and honour
Prescribe me patience, dares he insult?
When this hath had the ceremony, Manuel,
'T shall be my office to remember Clara;
I must have time to quit the favour, Sir,
You've done my Mistress; in your ear; though I
Was pleased to reconcile you to the Prince,
And order your enlargement, Clara must
Be mine, or one of us be nothing; you
May think on it yet.

I have Sir, and to show
How much I can obey, and that I have not
Intruded like a thief upon your treasure,
And filcht her heart away, 'tis now within
Her choice again, if you prevail upon
Her kinder thoughts, I can sit down despised.

Thou art my best friend now. Antonio --
Me-thinks we are not pleasant -- if she should
Be a little obstinate, it would become,
And speak the bravery of thy soul, and service,
To use some language for me, wo't thou Manuel?
Thou dost not know the sufferings of my soul
For Clara.

But I pity 'em.

'Tis new balsom
Into my wounds; where is the health, Piracquo?
I feel new spirits dancing in my blood,
The health begun to Clara languishes,
Why should I want it, Gentlemen?

It was named
By Manuel to my Sister Isabella;
Prince Carlo, you forget.

To Isabella?
Your Graces pardon, I confess my error,
I forgot her indeed, but could your wishes
Translate that Princess hither, she should be
A witness of my honourable thoughts.
What Magick's this? do any know that face?

'Tis very like the Princess Isabella.

I would she were a Ghost; Antonio,
Ha you got enchantments?

You may stay, Sir.

I love not to converse with spirits.

Sir,
This is no shadow.

It is to me, Sir.
Meet me at Clara's, or be lost to honour.

It was your Counsel brother, that reserved me
For this first entertainment. My good Lord
Piracquo, and Don Manuel, you seem not
So much affrighted, as the Prince.

A devil
In such a shape could never fright me, Madam;
But persons of your quality shift not so
Much air without a noise; the motion
Of Princes has much rumour to attend it.

I chose to come so private, I arrived
The City but last evening.

You have much
Honoured Madrid.

Why, how now brother, are
You frighted too?

Yes, and do sweat at soul,
To see our selves neglected.

Some are not fortified against a sudden accident;
In my desert, and innocence, I can
Interpret nothing yet in my dishonour,
Since joys have ecstasies sometimes, and with
Their rapture may transport our senses from us,
As soon as any other passion.
Besides, I heard him wish me here a witness
Of honourable thoughts, he has but now
Removed his person, to acquaint the King,
With greater preparation to receive
A Guest so unexpected.

But I like not the Prince's humour, you
Had whisperings Manuel I observed.

I shall
Keep nothing Sir in Clouds from you.

Thou shall it direct me Isabella, we'll to Court
My Lord Piracquo, Manuel.

How ere
I put a valiant brow on his neglect,
And seem to make a gloss in his defence,
My soul is sick with fear.

Come Isabella.

We both attend your grace.

My engines want success, Piracquo is
Restored to his full being, and his Son
At large, and reconciled by Carlo's act.
My Nephew had been better to have waked
A sleeping Dragon, than have crossed my aims;
He has rescued them, but drawn upon his bosom
As many wounds as policy and my
Revenge can make. I was too tame, to strike
At useless Shrubs, that hinder not my prospect;
My thoughts should have no study but a Kingdom;
It is my Heaven, and this young Cedar spread*
Betwixt my eyes, and it; I have already
Betrayed his love to Clara, and the King
That hath made up an Idol to himself
Of honour, is inflamed to my own wishes;
I know the Prince will be impatient
To hear his Mistress tossed by the Kings anger,
And he may leap into some disobedience,
That may be worth my second charge to sink him;
And then Piracquo, Manuel, and the Kingdom
Shall stoop to my devotion; yet I carry
A smiling brow to all, and please the King,
To think I am reconciled.
My Nephew --

Where is the King?

Where I left him displeased, and was now coming
To Prince Antonio's Lodgings to acquaint you.

With what?

Have you contracted love with Duke Mendoza's
Daughter, the Lady Clara?

What officious
Tongue hath been bold to mention her?

He has
Had some intelligence, and is almost grown
Wild with the strange resentment, I not knowing
What to object against his passion, thus
Surprised, you may believe applied what lenitives
My understanding could collect of the sudden,
With confidence, when you came to give account,
The accusation would fall off, and he
Appear too credulous against your honour.

It were no treason to Castile, my Lord,
If I confessed this mighty fact.

'Tis justice
If you d^e love her honourably, to avow it.

Isabella is no Angel.

Nor is Clara
Of an extraction to digrace a Prince.

Though he be my Father, he did not
Beget my Soul; who's with him?

I left the Duke Mendoza.

Has he made
Complaint o'me? 'tis well; let me preserve
Good Uncle still your loving thoughts; it is
^n vain to move my Father now.

There is
I way, if you could but dissemble, Sir,
To set your wishes right, and Letters may
^e so contrived to Portugall.

The Princess
Is here already Uncle.

Isabella?

Now with Antonio, and I am lost.

Would thou were never to be found again.

I must do something.

The Princess thus
Affronted may be worth my own ambition.
Calm thoughts attend you Sir.

I'm glad I came so well off from the King,
His anger made me tremble, I was jealous
Of more discovery, when he named the Prince:
This Treason is a kind of a quotidian,
It leaves a man no interval; I durst
Not mention Pedro at all, for fear
The King had skill in Cabala; I'm afraid
There's something in the very name, that may
With a small key be opened to my danger.

You are well met my Lord, do you know me?

Know you Sir? yes I know you for --

For what?

The Prince, I hope; now I'm betrayed for certain,
Yet if he know it, he will not be so furious.

Are you so much an enemy to your self,
To tell the King?

I tell the King? alas
I dare not tell it to my Ghostly Father,
I have more regard to you, and my own life,
My Family's undone by it.

By what Sir?

Nay if you know not, I know not neither, Sir;
What do you mean?

Am not I worthy in your opinion
Your Daughter Clara's love?

Oh, is that all?

But you must dote, and tell the King on it.

I? I disclaim it, by my life and honour.

I thought you had loved me Sir.

He is a Traitor
That dares accuse me; now I may speak boldly;
My Blood and Fortune have a little name
In the World, to which make an addition of
My Life, my Daughter Clara too, were these
In balance against you, they would be light,
And their whole loss repaird, to see you happy:
If this be false, a Whirlwind snatch me Sir,
And let me hang in some prodigious Cloud
'Twixt Earth and Heaven.

This is a bold expression.

But I must tell you Sir, for your own sake,
I would not have you love my Daughter Clara,
Were she in beauty, person, and all ornaments,
Fortune and Nature could bestow, more excellent
Than Isabella.

Why an't please your Wisdom?

Sir in my love to you, and Isabella,
My duty to your Father, and the Kingdom,
Nay for my Daughter's sake, and all my hope
Of after-joyes, and for one other reason
Above all these, which I conceal; yet I
Complained not to the King.

Excluding me,
Your Grace can be content, Don Manuel
Should have your Daughter.

Rather than your Highness,
I know a reason for it.

I must so too.

Your Grace shall pardon me at this time.

I wo'not Sir.

If you'll needs have it, I have made a vow
I wo'not ask my Daughter blessing Sir;
If you two meet, and marry, she may live
To be a Queen, and then I'll kneel to her,
Which is not in the Oath of my Allegiance.

The old man raves.

The King.

He shall not see me
Till I know all my fate.

How do you like the Prince Antonio?

Sir, if you allow me freedom --

You enjoy it.

His Person, Blood, and expectations, are
High as the wishes of a Queen, and I
With pious gratitude acknowledge all
My duty, and my prayers a just return
To your great care; but give me Sir your pardon,
If I prefer some thoughts that prompt me to
A better choice.

A better choice? look back
Upon that character your breath but now
Delivered in his honour.

I confirm it;
But when you hear me humbly beg I may
Perform religious duties Sir to Heaven,
You will think nature hath a place beneath 'em:
If I could find any consent to marriage,
Antonio would prefer himself the first
To my election: but if you were pleased --

You would be a Nunn?

That hath expressed my wishes.

So I should
Affront the Prince: how long Maria has
This fit of your Religion held you? ha!
No more, least I suspect this a pretence
To hide your love placed otherwise unfitly,
If I find where your heart is wandering --

It knows obedience better, and your name,
Than to choose any path leads not to honour.

I must direct it then to love Antonio.
My Children are turned rebel.

Sir I hope
My offer with your leave, to ded^cate
My life to prayer, and Virgin-thoughts, will merit
A better name.

Your brother Carlo too
Will find himself at loss, if he collect not
Himself, and make our Royal Promise good
To Isabella; while my studies are
To make the Kingdom firm by our alliance
With Portugall, be courts the Lady Clara.

I would she were his Bride, so I had Manuel.

And you at the same time, and height of both
The Kingdoms expectations, would take a Cloister,
Is this to pay obedience to a Father,
Whose cares have kept him wake to make you happy?

Goodness forbid, that Carlo or Maria
Should move me to just anger.

This is virtue.

He is passionate, and Love that makes all Ladies
Apt and ingenious to contrive, cannot
Inspire or help me with an heart to advance
A little hope.

It cannot be! Maria,
We are surprised, the Princess Isabella
Is privately arrived, and come to Court:
Where is our Son? all should prepare to meet her.

You may believe I trifle not.

The Princess Isabella come?

Now if but Clara think I honour her,
And instantly accept what I am willing
In presence of the Priest and Heaven to give her,
The Ceremony waits to make all perfect.

I dare not Sir.

Say but you love, and that will teach you valour;
I bring not only proof of my own loyalty,
Which if examined must invite thy faith,
But thy security, a Release from Manuell;
His soul is on my side, and comes to render
In pity of thy wound, a balm into
Thy breath; be gentle Clara.

A Release? of what?

Of all, thy Promise hath made mine;
Observe me wisely Clara, and distinguish,
As far as honour will permit, how long,
And with what bleeding thoughts the Prince affects thee;
For I have looked into his soul, and back
Upon the feeble merits of my self,
And therefore giving thy own Vows again,
I dis-engage their strength to bind thee Clara,
And to that sweetness thy first bosom had,
Remit thy quiet thoughts.

You are just.

Pray give
Me leave to understand this mystery,
To give me back all those assurances
Of Love my Promise made, I'll not dispute
For what unworthiness I am neglected.

I dare not be so impious.

Then here I take
My liberty again.

You have it.

Now I with safety of my honour, may
Choose where I please.

You may.

And you desire it;
You have power I must confess to give me from you
Into my own possession, but no title
Now to direct my heart, then though I meet
My own despair, here I give Clara back,
And with new Vows as strong as my Religion,
And Love can make, contract my self again
To Death, or Manuell.

A Conspiracy!

I have resigned no interest in him,
And by new choice -- am not my own again.

So, so, it is as possible in our destinies
We should enjoy her both, as live together,
When Clara is thy Bride.

That sound was tragical;
Oh call those fatal words again, and think
That if with safety of my faith I cannot
Meet your desires already, you will force
My soul to greater distance, by destroying
What most I love; I know you do but fright me.

If I be marked for your revenge, I dare not
Think you will stain your honour, to contrive
My death ignobly.

What was that he mentioned?
Sir, by your name and blood I charge you hear me,
By these (your rage compels) a Virgins tears,
I can kneel too, take your revenge on me,
'Tis I that have offended, for your sake
He did return the interest I gave him,
But 'twas not in his power to revoke
Himself made mine, nor dare I quit possession.

I have but tried thy virtue, Manuel
And I are friends.

That was a heavenly language.

Our swords shall serve to nobler uses, Clara,
I'll not disturb the progress of your Marriage;
And since I see you're fixed so gloriously,
Proceed to your own Hymen, I'll attend you,
And witness all your holy rites.

Blessed change!
What prayers and duty can reward his goodness?

I hope you'll not deny for my past service,
Madam, your smile upon me, which shall be
A triumph after all my wounds received,
And boast a glory next to be your husband;
For I consider now I am unfit.
Farewell, we may salute. Remember, Manuel,
The time and place.

What was it the Prince whispered?

Nothing, Madam,
To fright your cheek to paleness.

I do tremble.

Were all this reconcilement a disguise,
And that he meant revenge, should time and place
Fit his inteuts, and I should meet his anger,
^t this secure thy peace, his honour will
Not let him wound me basely, and when I
Lift up a sword against him, fate let me dye.

My Lord is coming to my chamber, he
Has been with the King, I see my self already
Knight of the order of the Calatrava,
And my Commission signed for the State Secretary.
I am not the first servant of the Court
Has kept his Lord in awe; these Secrets are
An excellent curb to ride a Statesman with,
That is not come to the art of poisoning.
I know he wishes heartily I were hanged;
I tried him once for the wars; to find his pulse,
And I was listed Captain, before some
The General knew had been seven years in service
(As Ushers to right honourable Ladies)
There was his Graces commendations
To a Field-officer, that should drill me out,
The first to dye, with honour on some on-slaught;
So quitted that preferment.
He is come; I'll take no notice.

If he lived at the the other end of the world,
He might betray me in the next packet: Ha!

Item I bequeath --

What art thou doing?

Only making up my Will, Sir; and my self eady for the Indies; 'tis a lon^age,

And therefore I would settle every thing
Before I go; if your Grace please to honour me,
I would make you my Executor.

But when,
Will you dye Pedro? ha?

Sir, there be storms,
Abroad, and who does know how soon the waves
May roar, and crack the cabins?

Ha!

There may be Calentures, my Lord, and twenty
Devices to be met at sea, beside
The land diseases; there be Hericanoes
Are boisterous enough to tear up mountains,
And strike a ship clean through o't'other side
To the Antipodes.

He deals with the devil, and knows my thoughts.
There's no hast to make your will, I have
Considered of the business, and truth is,
I cannot find my heart willing to part with thee,
So far thou hast been faithful; we will live
And dye together.

By no means, my Lord:
I am resolved I will not live in Spain
A month, for as much plate as the next Fleet
Brings home; no, I beseech your Grace excuse me.

Why Pedro?

If your Grace please I shall be Knighted,
Or have the Office you have promised, do it,
And do it betime, it will be worse for both else.

You do not threaten to reveal the business?

'Lass, there be other matters, Sir, as dangerou^
And if you love your self, or honour, finish --
I cannot help it.

I am all a bath!
Pedro, why dost thou fright me so? if thou
Be honest, there's no mortal ean betray us.

Worse, worse than that; let me go travel, Sir,
And far enough; it is not possible
That I should stay, and you preserve your wits.

The reason?

It will make you mad to hear it, Sir,
But 'tis my desperate fate, the stars command it;
Would I had never seen --

What?

A face that I could name.

If it concerns not
The other mystery, let me hear it, Pedro,
I will be armed.

Why then you'll cut my throat;
You cannot hold your hand; pray let me go,
And you may save all yet.

Thou dost torment me.

And yet it is no fault of mine, directly,
We are all flesh and blood -- oh Sir.

Out with it.

You'll curse me when you know it.
I would your Grace would guess, but 'tis impossible;
'Tis working to get out, I am --

Well said.

Oh Sir, I am -- I am -- in love -- now 'tis out.

That all?

All? a Pistol to a Maravide you (...)
Your Rapier presently upon me, and
If I name but the party, will not have
The patience to foin, but tilt it at me.
Sir, do not know it; what will become of me?
It will be safer, Sir, to hoist sails yet,
No matter whither, So I never come
Again; for if I see one face too often,
Both you, and I, and she's undone: I have
Beaten my self already, fasted, prayed,
Been drunk, and prayed again, nothing will kill
Concupiscence -- oh Sir.

Why, this is raving.

I, you may call it what you please, but here
She lies a cross that must, or do the deed,
Or make poor Pedro miserable.

How he sweats?
Pedro do not despair, this fever may
Be cured, it may.

Indeed you can do much;
For to say truth, your Grace is both acquainted,
And has no small command upon the party.

Nay then be confident -- who is't?

It is -- shall I name her?

By my honour I will beat thee else.

Why so then;
The pretty soul, I will confess to you,
Whom, if I stay, I must --

Enjoy; this such a business?

Is -- is -- Clara, your Graces one, only daughter.

Ha!

I told you this before, but do not do it, Sir, now,
I rather look for it in the next salad,
Or in my mornings draught; there's spice in your closet;
Or we have Spanish figs.

Thou most unheard-of impudence! how can'^t hope
I should not cut thy head off? sirrah, rascal.

To these things humane nature has been prone;
But if you kill ^e, Sir, there is a schedule,
A Secret in a bag of writings, left
In a friends hand -- nay I did look for this,
There is an Inventory of Goods were stolen;
The Anno Domini, with Aetatis suae
Set down, the day of the month, and place remembered,
If these do not revenge my death --

Why so; a pox upon thee -- yet come hither,
And let me cut thy tongue out.

I confess
I am not fit to marry, Sir, a Lady of
Her Princely birth and fortune, all considered;
Alas, I know I am a wreth -- but --

Thou would have her to be thy whore, me
Thy pander to speak for thee -- rogue, devil,
I must kill thee, there is no remedy.

Hold, you mistake me, Sir, '^is no such business.

What would thou have then?

I would go beyond sea, I, to the Indies, ^ir,
Or turn a Haddack by the way; send me
To the new Islands, or Iapan.

From whence you may send Letters to the King;
No sirrah, I'll not trust you.

'Tis a hard case, my Lord, I have dangerous sailing
Betwixt your Graces Scylla and her Caribdis.

I dare not kill him; why do I not kill my self t^en?
No, I wo'not, I will talk reason to him;
Come hither sir, my tormentor.

I Sir --

If your hot blood must have a cooler, will
None serve your rogues turn, but my daughter Clara?
Say thou art mad --

I have too many senses.

Or if your wantonness must be confined
Within my walls --

The more my sorrow -- but I'll try my Lord,
If you will give me leave, for your sake, Sir,
Among her Gentlewomen, what I can do
To conjure down my devil, I will take
Some physic too, Sir, every thing will help;
Would I were whipped, my Lord --

Whipped with a vengeance?

But I am grieved
For your vexation, and my scurvey fortune;
But if there be a wench, a witch, a medicine
Above ground, that can give me any charm,
Your Grace shall hear no more on it -- So, your pardon.
And now my Lord, let your unworthy servant
Have leave to ask one question; does not your Grace
Suspect me monstrously? nay do ye not think
I do presume too much upon your fears?
And that the knowledge of this Secret makes
Me bold and saucy, my good Lord?

'Tis all too true, but 'tis not in my brain
To helped, unless I take some course to kill thee.

How?

I fear I shall be driven to it; one fit
Like this will work my impatience up: look to it.

Why, then I'll tel your Grace an easy way
To remove all your jealousy, and never
Trouble your brain with study how to kill me,
A most compendious way.

I would I knew it.

'Tis but my going to the Court, my Lord,
And if you be not cured within an hour
After I have told the King a story, how
Your wife the Duchess lost -- I have done --
Fear nothing.

Is not Prince Carlo here?

Not here, my Lord.

'Tis the Kings pleasure you attend him presently,
Your daughters presence is expected too
Among the Ladies, for the entertainment
Of Princess Isabella, new arrived the Court.

We humbly wait to kiss his hand.

Shall I attend?

I am resolved now not to sleep without thee,
And in the day, I'll look upon thee, Pedro,
As thou were my great Seal, and I thy keep^r.

Yet I may give you a slip.

We'll to Clara:
The Princess Isabella come so private, ha! Pedro?

I am here, my Lord.

This is the place by his commands to meet in;
It has a sad and fatal invitation.
A Hermit that forsakes the world for prayer,
And solitude, would be timo^ous to live here.
There's not a spray for birds to perch upon;
For every tree that over-looks the vale,
Carries the mark of lightning, and is blasted.
The day which smiled as I came forth, and spread
Fair beams about, has taken a deep melancholy,
That fits more omino^s in her face than night;
All darkness i^ less horrid than half light.
Never was such a scene for death presented,
And there's a ragged mountain peeping over
With many heads, seeming to crowd themselves
Spectators of some Tragedy; but I'll
Prevent 'em all; though my obedience
Instructed me to wait here, it shall not
Be bribed to draw my sword against the Prince;
And in his honour I am safe, how ever
This sense of Clara's loss transport him, 'tis not
Within his nature to be impious.
And if ^ gain his friendship, I return
With triumph to my Clara.

Oh help, Don Manuel, help for heavens sake.

Celio the Princes page? where is the Prince?

Oh Sir, I fear he's slain.

By whom?

The Devil, or one not very much unlike him,
A More, that basely set upon him, sure
He has dispatcht the Prince, he pursues me,
And if he have, Death shall be welcome to me,
For I am not fit to live, and lose my Master.
He's here, and his sword bloody.

Villain! were all thy blood rivers of balm,
Or such a flood as would restore a life
To the departed World, it should be all
A sacrifice to Carlo.

Hold, hold Don Manuell.

Can thou be merciful to the Princes Murderer

Curse on my Duty to obey so far.
My Lord, the Prince is slain, you are wounded too.

The Prince!

Don Manuell, I forgive thee.

Pray Heaven this be a Dream; for if my hand
Have been so much a Traitor, it shall call
No other aid in your revenge: Are you
Prince Carlo?

I was.

That voice shall be my sentence.

Hold, I charge thee by thy honour, Manuell.

Why did you wear this black upon you Sir?
Or how could art of man contrive a Cloud
Which this Soul had no eyes to penetrate?

I knew thou would not fight against me knowingly,
And if I fell, I meant it to secure
Thy act from punishment, when in this darkness
I took my leave of the World, only that boy,
Whom I compelled to feign me wounded, so
To make thee draw thy sword; but with my blood
I feel my spirits vanish, if I have
^ut breath enough, I send by thee a kiss
To thy own Clara now.

Oh, help good boy!
For 'tis no time to curse thee now, my horse
Is not far off, this scarf may stay his bleeding
Until we meet with better Surgery.
Now Heaven reprieve my strength but to convey him
To some good place, and I resign my self
To all the justice you will call me to.

You're all but my tormentors; where's Piraecquo?

His son is absent too.

Have comfort Sir.

Our neglect is lost in the General Cause,
What do you think my Lord Mendoza?

This no news of the Prince is not so comfortable.

The news you bring?

Unless he had left the Kingdom --

Be dumb -- and he had left the World
Your cares might have pursued him; if he
Return not, you have murdered him.

My Stars are now
At work in Heaven, their influence is powerful,
I will adore the Sun if it dissolve not
This mi^t in which the Prince is lost; I am
Content thou be a Constellation Carlo,
In any Sphere but this.

To me? 'tis Manuel's character.

Unless we hear some good news of the Prince,
I fear we lose the King too.

'Tis strange none should attend him but his Page.

I fear some plot is practised against his life,
But dare not speak.

That's it distracts the King,
Whose fears are helped by a sad dream he had
Last night.

My Lord Piracquo's son is missing too.

Comfort your self till my return,
I'll find 'em, or ne'er see your face again.

Well said Piracquo, all my prayers go with thee.

Pedro.

My Lord.

I know not what to say, but stand
Before, they may not see me weep.

Sir, I must confess --

Ha! Confess?

You are still suspicious, have a true heart,
And let your conscience look less abroad Sir,
If he be dead, your trouble's over Sir;
We must all dye, Death has his several ways
And times to take us off, some expire humbly
In the Cradle, some dismissed upon a Scaffold --

Come hither, do not name a Scaffold, I
Was innocent thou know, the plot was all
My Ladies, and not one survives the Secret,
But we two.

Keep your own counsel Sir,
This Fatherly affection may do harm,
He could not dye in better time,

Madam, can you,
Whose honour seems to suffer by this absence,
Have so much charity to comfort me?

He is not desperate, while we have hope.
My Lord Piracquo's son may wait upon him.

Don Manuell.

Hast brought news of my Son?

I can inform you a sad story Sir.

Where is the Prince?

Not dead I hope.

Hast thou a jealousy will concern that fear?
My soul has been a Prophet: what misfortune?

If you have strength to hear a truth
So sad, he has been wounded.

By what Traitor? look to the Princess.

I had not with such boldness undertook
The Tragic Story, if I had not brought
The great Offender.

Oh, welcome Manuell -- where's the Body?

Where it doth want no Surgery, but my Father
Is gone with all the wings his fear and duty
Can aid him with, at his return to acquaint you
With Carlo's life, or death.

Would I were his Surgeon.

Thou hast not named the Villain yet, he may
Escape.

I have took order for his stay,
Until your anger and the Laws conclude him.

Thou hast done us service.

And it will sink by slow degrees into
Your faith, that he, who gave him all his wounds,
Was one that loved him faithfully.

Loved him?

Above his own life.

Torments oretake the Traitor.

'Tis not well said, with pardon of the King;
When I shall bring you to the weeping heart
Of this poor man, some may allow his penitence,
So great, it may invite a mercy to him;
Alas, he was betrayed to the black deed,
Both sword and soul compelled to it.

Here's a prodigy!

Are you acquainted with the guilty person,
That you dare thus extenuate his fact?

I am, and dare produce him -- here he stands,
So far from wishes to out-live the Prince,
He begs to wait upon his Shade.

Does he not bleed?

Apprehend his person.

They are but churlish drops,
And know not their own happiness; this wound
Was made by Carlo, yet how slow it weeps
To answer his effusion? could I reach
Their orifice, I'd kiss the crimson lips,
For his dear name that made 'em.

Did he kill him?
Justice Sir, Justice^ I beg for Justice
Upon this Murderer.

Now it works.

You? by what nearer interest in Carlo
Should you imagine we are slow to punish him?
'Twas a black hour when Carlo saw thee first,
Rewarded now for all his love; to prison with him,
And let him see no day.

I kiss your Sentence.

This circumstance is strange, I am not satisfied.

How is the Princess?

Sir she is alive,
And would be glad to hear the Prince were so.

We cannot promise, Clara. Roderigo,
We should be satisfied where his Body is,
^or'tis without a Soul, I fear, by this time.

I could instruct the Surgeon a way
To make that sure.

And Manuell hath confessed himself the Murderer.

This change was unexpected.

Is he gone to Prison then?

Go home, by that time thou
Hast wept out all thy tears, I'll come, and tell thee
A little sad tale Clara, that shall make
An end, and we will break our hearts together.

Mendoza?

Sir.

Why does thy grief appear
So rude to out-swell mine? he was my Son.

My tears are anger Sir, as well as grief,
That he that did commit this Paricide,
Should be so impudent to say he loved him.

That amazes me.

But Traitors have their Gloss,
And dare expound their disobedient acts,
A branch of their allegiance: precious juggling^
Treason would be too ugly to appear
With his own face, but Duty and Religion
Are handsome visors to abuse weak sight,
That cannot penetrate beyond the bark,
And false complexion of things; I hope
You wo'not think a single death sufficient,
If Iulio dye.

Carlo thou meanst --

I, I, the Prince, I know not what I say Sir,
Things make me wild --

Take heed Sir what you say.
Piracquo is returned.

My son confess the deed, and sent to Prison? so.

Now Sir.

How is the Prince, my Lord?

This was an act of his last strength, as when
A short-liv'd Taper makes a blaze, it has
Direction to your Sister Sir, and I
His last commands I fear --

For the conveyance,
Trust that to me -- give this Sir to my Sister.

Then he is dead, Piracquo?

Not yet Sir,
But he hath such a wound will not allow
Him many minutes life, 'tis mortal Sir,
They say, and wo'not pain him past next dressing.

How things succeed to my Ambition -- Sir --

I care not for my head, now let him take it,
'Tis but for keeping counsel.

It is apparent this misfurtune grew
From both their loves to Clara.

Thy son, Piracquo, dyes.

Great Sir, hear me.

Manuell affirms he did not know the Prince
In the habit of a More, and that his Page
By the command of Carlo told him, that
His Master had been wounded by that More,
To engage their fight.

All this the Prince acknowledged.

These are devices to paint Manuel's Treason.

I sooner dare believe one accent from
The Prince's breath, when his just soul was parting,
Than all your Commentaries; I am bold;
Nor can the Law, and all your anger weigh
So heavy as my curse, upon his head
That durst lift up a Sword to wound the Prince:
But let not passion take away your justice,
'Tis that I kneel for.

Against whom Piracquo?

against him that's guilty of the Prince's loss,
You may incline to think poor Manuell innocent.

What riddle's this?

Has not your son, Piracquo,
Confessed himself the Murderer?

Manuel's fortune
Distracts the old man.

Pardon my love of truth, I here accuse
Mendoza, that hath slept so long in Treason.

Ha -- Pe -- Pedro.

If he deny, I have proof to make him blush,
And sink him with dishonour; Pedro can
Relate a Story will be worth your wonder.

Nay then 'tis come about, I see,
I cannot Sir confess in better time.
Don Manuel has accused himself unjustly
For Carlo's death, that Prince, if I may trust
A Wife upon her death-bed --

Roderigo --
Give us account from their examination,
And guide us in this Labyrinth. Piracquo
Return to the Prince, what Death hath left of him
Command may be attended hither.

Sir, if you please, I have a great desire
To take a sad leave of the Prince, and kiss
His pale hand, ere his Body be embalmed,
And sear-cloths hide him from us.

It will but
Enlarge your grief.

I will attend my Sister; my Lord Piracquo
You can best direct us.

Convey 'em with a strong guard.

What think you of an Indian voyage now Sir?

My joys are firm at root, Don Manuel,
Sir, is not guilty of the Prince's death,
Yet stained with blood to merit execution.
He that is slain did but usurp your blessing,
And was by the art of Duke Mendoza's Lady,
Then Governess to the Prince, after the loss
Of Carlo, that was stolen away an infant,
Put in his place; the Court has been long cozened.

This story will want faith.

The circumstance will make all clear.

Expound the riddle as we walk, there's no
Condition more exposed to care than Princes.
Private men meet the force of common stings,
But none can feel the weight of Kings, but Kings.

A Very goodly pile; a hansom prison!

It has been graced with persons of some honour,

They had but little grace, as well as I,
That came to be your Tenants for all that.
Signior, where is my quondam servant?
My fellow prisoner, Pedro.

He is singing, Sir.

What?

Catches.

He has a fine time on it.
He need not clear his throat for a confession,
He has done that already, and I too;
That trouble's over; and yet call him hither;
But I'll not sing. Poor Iulio, thou art gone,
^nd with thy eyes all my delights are closed,
^y senses vanish too apace -- I was
^oo hasty when my Duchess lay a dying
^o visit her; had I but stayed one hour,
^he had been speechless, and I had been happy
^ithout the reach of this unlucky Secret.

Does the house fill, Sir? these are active times,
^nd if all men had their deserts, the State
Must be at charge to build new tenements
^or Traitors.

The times are busy, Sir.

They are indeed,
Good for al squires of the delinquent body
And sable Twig.

You are very pleasant, Sir.

You would not smile, I think, so much, if Justice
Should take a toy and turn about, it is
Within the hand of fate to fetch a compass,
With your own rod, whip, you know what follows.

Is this a time and place convenient, Pedro,
To sing your catches?

Yes, and please your Grace.
And cause my songs are set for three parts, Sir,
If it will please your Grace to take the Tenor,
And get the Prince's Page, newly committed,
To sing the Treble, for the Base, let me alone.

You can sing that part at first sight.

I can reach double ef-fa-uth: Shall the boy come?

Yes, yes, why should I grieve?

Why now you are right;
Let men that have no hope to get their freedom
Be fullen, whine like whelps, and break the^r sleep,
We must be jolly, and drink sack, and sing.

We? why we? is any thing in our condition
Can promise hope to be enlarged before
The rest? our state, if you consider, Pedro,
Exceeds, in being desperate, other men's,
As we out-sin them in the fact.

Why, there's your error, we are in for Treason, Sir,
That's to our comfort.

Comfort? can there be
A greater charge?

Oh our discharge the nearer;
Poor things, whose highest thoughts are pilfering,
Lye by it, and languish Sessions after Sessions,
Till they have worn away their clothes, and skins too,
And often are reprieved, when he that's sent
Hitherfor Treason, quickly comes to th'bar,
Pleads his not guilty, and is hanged compendiously.

Yet some, with reverence to your observations,
Are not dispatcht.

Then, doubt their causes mainly;
Your Grace, I hope, shall not complain for want
Of timely execution; I am thinking
What Speech is best to please the people at it.

I shall have cause to name your treachery.

Why so, there's more argument by that
To stuff out your confession.

Tell me, and tell me truly,
How long since you discovered this Court Secret
To Don Piracquo?

I was tender hearted, Sir,
And knew that I had but a weak memory,
Therefore the first time that I saw his Lordship,
After he came from Portugal, I told him
The punctual story, lest I should forget, Sir;
What should a man dissemble, lose time for?
I did it for your good.

It does appear.

It was no faul^ of mine, you came no sooner
To this preferment.

It might have saved my Iulio's life indeed,
And then though I had dyed --

Yet you were against it still;
These jealousies and fears do seldom prosper;
I knew by instinct 'twere better, but as it is
'Tis well, your death will be more pitied,
And remarkable.

But what have you got by betraying me?

The credit to be hanged for treason, as
I told your Grace, besides the benefit
Of being read in Chronicles with Lords,
And men of worship, I have prepared a business,
For the present, a provision, Sir,
Will serve any turn.

What's that?

A ballad, Sir,
Before I dye, to let the people know
How I behaved my self upon the scaffold;
With other passages, that will delight
The people, when I take my leave of the world,
Made to a Pavin tune,
Will you hear it?

Away you knave.

Sir, your Daughter.

She comes to condole.
I'll see you another time; your Graces servant.

Sir, I beseech you tell me, for I dare not
Believe the busy noise, they say you have
Confessed strange things, and he that was received
These many years, Prince Carlo, and so lately
Slain, is my brother Iulio.

Sad truth, Clara.

I have heard my Mother say, he dyed an infant.

And I believed it too, but at her death
She told me another story, Clara, that
Prince Carlo by some Pirats had been stolen
An infant from our Castle, on which loss,
She sent me word to Court, my son dyed suddenly;
At which the King fearing some danger might
Follow to the Prince her charge, commanded him
To court, instead of whom, she sent thy brother,
Who was believed the Kingdoms heir, until
Pedro, who waited then nearest thy Mother,
And knew the imposture, brake his oath, and told
Piracquo all the Secret, by whose charge
My death and shame must make up the full Tragedy.

Manuel killed my brother then?

He has don't;
And if thou hast a Sister's soul, thou must
Join with thy father, to pull curses on him.

That will not call poor Iulio back again;
They say that Charity will open Heaven.

Charity? will you not curse your brother's murderer?
Upon my blessing I command thee curse him.

That would but wound us more, not reach him;
Beside, 'twere an entrenchment upon heaven,
So boldly to prescribe our own revenge,
It were a sin might draw another punishment,
Great as the loss of you.

You are a baggage;
But if thou hast a thought to wish him live,
Here I disclame thee; if thou were a son,
I would pronounce thee bastard, if thou did not
Kill himself thy self, but as it is, I sha'not
Be satisfied, since my own hands are bound,
If thou attempt not something in his danger.

Good Sir, you speak, as you were to expect
No killing sentence from the offended Law.

I'll study some revenge my self.

He's lost;
And in this storm like a distracted passenger,
Whose bark has struck upon some sand, I look
^rom the forsaken deck upon the seas,
^ find my own despair, which every wave
Swells high, and bids me die for fear of drowning.
May I not see Don Manuel your prisoner?

Yes Madam, if you expect until
Princess Maria, who is come to visit him --

My affairs concern 'em both,
Direct me with more hast.

Then this way, Madam.

Madam, I ow to your charity this light,
And yet this little Taper may be useless,
I fear the King will lose part of his sentence
When you go hence, for such a full light waits
About you, when you take away your person,
^t will be some day still, as I foresee
As you appeared some dawning of the morning.

I would I could bring comfort to thee, Manuel*

What comfort can you wish me?

Life and liberty;
With these my self, if fate, and thy consent
Were to allow the gift.

It is not well,
Unless you doubted, Madam, my repentance,
To afflict me with these mockeries.
When will you rather perfect what your own
Revenge must prompt you to, my death for Carlo,
Your Princely Brother, Madam? I confess
This hand robbed him of life.

Yet in my heart
I dare pronounce thy pardon, Manuel.

It is not possible.
Is not that Clara?
That's come to take her leave, before I print
My everlasting farewell on her lip?
Which I shall hardly find, if this rain last,
To drown these lovely meadows; thou shalt be
A Judge between the Princess and poor Manuel,
To enable thee for sentence, take upon thee
Her person, Clara; Be the Princess, wo't?
And hear me plead against my sell fand her,
Till she repent her love, and leave me to
A quiet death. I know not how to think
( Maria) you can mean this love to me,
Or that your voice, when it does chime the sweetest,
Is more than preface to my dirge; say that
You have a heart less penetrable than
The scale of Dragons, and as many stings
When they make war, and I'll give faith to you;
For such an enemy as I, must not
Be looked on, but with all your wrath upon me;
Me-thinks I hear your brother call you, Madam,
And hovering, as he scorned to touch the earth
Sustains his Murderer, is pointing to
The wounds I made, whose fountains are still weeping.
I feel a purple dew descend upon me,
And I am all a bloody rock already;
Are not you stiff with wonder yet? if once
You had when I appeared a man, fair thoughts
Of me; it is too much to love me now,
You must convert them into curses, Madam,
And I will call it justice.

I came not
To hear this Comment on my brother's story,
Whom you have killed.

Observe her act your person,
And speak now, as if the sorrow were her own,
And she had lost a brother.

Indeed,
I have wept before, and came not now to learn
A grief for him that was so near my blood:
But I've considered too, the ties of nature
Should have no force against the rules of Justice;
Allthough it be a sorrow, to remember
He took his great misfortune from your sword,
You did not murder him, nay you did not kill him,
You fought in his revenge, and while he came
Hid in the name and person of a Traitor,
It was your virtue made him bleed, and yet
He was my brother, Sir.

Your brother? more,
He was your Prince too, Madam, think o'that,
The full blown expectation of the Kingdom,
One that redeemed my life from banishment,
And yet I killed him, can you forgive me?
You cannot, must not, Madam.

Yes, and dare
Say, I still love you.

She will punish me,
For giving up my interest to Carlo,
If she encourage thus Maria, Madam,
Do you consider how few sands are left
In my poor glass of time, I cannot promise
Three minutes here, Law and the Kings de^ree
Have turned two parts of me to dust already;
I feel the third unsettle, and make fit
To be dissolved, but could fate give my life
The period to be wished (remember whom
I speak to Clara) and I need no more
Accuse my self, my heart was long since given
Away, and you as soon may reconcile
Time and Eternity to one growth, and age,
As hope my love and yours should ever meet.

Then it is time to dye.

Madam, she faints,
Oh help, she has forgot her part, this was
Not meant to Clara.

Madam, Madam.

Clara, so, so, she returns,
I should have quickly followed else.

I see
Your loves are sacred, and 'tis sin to attempt
Your separation; though I loved thee Manuel,
I can resign to Clara, whom I hoped
Her Brothers death might have provoked to leave thee.

Her Brothers? let me hear Clara speak; her Brothers death?
Having so little time to stay with thee
Alive, why did thou make such hast?

Did not
You Sir pronounce it was impossible
That our two loves should meet?

Thou did not
Represent Clara then, thou were the Princess.

I know not, but your last profession
That our two hearts should never grow together,
Followed so close my Brother's death, I thought
The meaning looked on me.

Thy Brothers death?

You have not slain the Prince my Brother, Manuel,
But Clara's, this may yet appear a mystery.

'Tis too true.

But stay; and can my Clara then forgive me?
No man despair to find Mercy in Heaven,
There is so great a Charity upon Earth.
But do not leave me lost in the wonder, Madam,
Allthough it would be happiness to know
The Prince not dead, I cannot hear without
A wound next his, that I have killed thy Brother;
It cannot be, allthough thou would forgive me,
I cannot be so miserable.

How
Their Souls agree? 'twere tyranny to part 'em.
Clara, I envied, now allow thy happiness,
And will have no more thoughts upon your loves,
But what shall be employed in hearty wishes
That Manuel may live still to reward it;
Thou hast deserved him better than I have
Antonio.

If my death may speak
Addition to the love I owe thee; 'tis
In my resolution, at that minute
Thy Soul takes leave, my own shall wait upon it,
And take a journey through the Clouds together:
Who knows but they may fill one Star? Farewell,
Till we begin that progress.

Do not make
Death horrid to me Clara, for to think,
When this unworthy Frame must fall to pieces,
Thy Soul, a fairer Tenant to this building,
Should wander in pursuit of mine --

No more;
Let me advise your griefs, I have tears for both,
Divide at distance, you may kiss in heart.

With such a groan souls from their bodi^ part*

How, an Impostor! though the Peoples tongues,
That catch at every noise, and wave their duty,
As they are prescribed by Faction, or lewd Pamphlets,
Do talk this loud --

Upon my honour, Madam.

I hope your Lordship has another knowledge,
And faith, than to disgrace your blood, the Prince --

I say he is no Prince, and we are sorry
A Lady of your greatness should in the height
Of such a glorious expectation, lose
What did invite your person hither.

Ha!
Then I am lost, that Letter has undone me,
Which full of love and satisfaction, made
Me hasty to destroy my self.

'Tis yet
Within your choice to lose no honour, Madam,
And in my sense of what you else might suffer,
I come to tender reparation,
Both to your love and greatness.

'Tis not possible.

If you can find within your heart a will
To entertain my love, I'm no Impostor,
The King will call me Brother, be kind Madam,
And what is past shall vanish like a dream.
Secure me with a smile.

My Lord, I thank you;
But there will still remain some characters
By which the world may guess at my sad story.

There cannot.

Yes, I find some printed here,
For I did love the person, I confess,
Of him you call the Impostor: did he know
Himself a Counterfeit?

Let me be just,
And quit him from that Treason.

That is something
To plead his innocence to me; I dare not
Yet ask his name, when I remember what
My tongue consented to before the Priest
So late; yet 'twill be known; if he be not
The Prince we thought, tel me his other name;
Say, is he basely born?

He is the Duke
Mendoza's son.

That is a comfort yet,
And in the confidence of this truth, my Lord,
I am well again, I thank you.

If this please you,
Do you remember Madam, he hath wounds
Fatal upon him, that already may
Exclude him from the living?

'Twould be impious,
While there is any life remaining Sir,
To make another promise; when you say
He's dead, I may with modest freedom hear
What you too early now prepare me for.

You honour me enough.
I find her judgement
Already meet what I propound, he cannot,
He sha'not live to cross me.
'Tis Piracquo,
He can assure me; you look sad my Lord,
As if with Iulio's giving up the ghost,
Your sons life now were forfeit.

'Tis too true.

I'll follow, and acquaint her; yet 'tis safer
She take it from another.

All my hopes
Are in your Grace, the King is coming hither,
If you will bind an old mans prayers, and service,
Second my feeble breath, and mediate
His mercy to my boy, you may be satisfied
In conscience, he had no thoughts to kill him;
The Prince's death will not engage you now
To be poor Manuel's enemy; good my Lord,
Forgive what past in my rash language.

Does not
Your Lordship call to mind there was a sum
Of fifty thousand Ducats?

They shall be sent to your Grace's Secretary, nay
I'll make 'em fifty thousand more, and think
It cheap to save his life, now you are merciful --

The bargain would do well, but you are cozened,
I will not take a Maravide, not I,
If upon other honourable terms
I may possess you favour, I shall meet
Your just commands; have you forgot my Lord?
Some men do keep Records, but I am charitable,
And will not rack your patience --

You're gracious.

Ten millions of Ducats shall not ransom
Your Darling from the Scaffold: you observe?
You know your self, your fortune, and upon
What strength you must depend, now I have said --

Will your Grace hear?
My son shall live then, and not lose one hair,
If you would pawn your soul to have it otherwise.
I have said too.

So peremptory?

Your Grace must pardon me the truth, I have
A scurvy sullen humour where I meet
A worse, and cannot hold, though I should hang for it,
And so God bu'y to your Grace, we are alone --

Be merry with your head on -- time may come --

I would take boldness, once more, to entreat
That the young man may live till the next Spring,
And then your Grace may purge --

So Sir,
I shall find ways to stay your vomiting --
The King.

Good Sir be comforted.

Good Sir give me reasons;
I had a son till now, yet long since lost him.

Now you may take revenge.

Tis well remembered.
Mendoza is the Traitor, he shall bleed
For Carlo's loss.

And he deserves, that would
Have cozened the whole Kingdom.

Send for him;
I'll ask him in what wilderness the boy
Has hid himself, command him hither presently,
And if he give me not a satisfaction,
It will be justice then to send his soul
About the world, to find him out.

The Prince Antonio, Sir.

If at a time, when sorrow
Hath exercised his sting, you can admit
To hear me happy in Maria's love,
Let me begin to call you father, and
Till Carlo find your blessing, think you have
One to supply his duty.

It is some
Allay to Carlo's loss, Maria has
Not left her father.

I shall ever live
Within your precept to express a daughter
As unto him a wife.

Both to my heart!
Sit down, where is your sister Isabella?

She not despairs
To be a Bride to one, that may repair
My Nephews loss; and if she smile on me,
It will not draw I hope your frown upon it.

Is not that Isabella?

And this he,
Who, if you call me Sister, must be worth
Your noblest Friendship, and embrace.

Alive?

Your pardon Sir, they knew me innocent,
Made me usurp Prince Carlo's name for Iulio's.

Confusion!

I appeal Sir to your justice, and have brought
My son, to hear your breath pronounce his pardon.

Thus all meet happiness but I; receive
Him free Piracquo, only I must mourn
The loss of mine.

I am no Prince, Don Manuel, my fate
Has been unriddled.

My Brother living? we are all safe.

Ha^ my Iulio?

Your blessing now.

Take it, and with it all my tears, I scorn
To shed one other drop, my joys are mighty,
My heart is all one bonefire --

Plead no more,
Mendoza dies, the sentence is irrevocable.

There is a cooler Sir after your bonefire.

Sister, I'll kiss these sorrows off.

You cannot while my Father's doomed to death.

Why does Mendoza live?

Because he must not dye yet. Pedro --

My Lord.

I'll give thee Clara first, here take her Manuel,
I see she loves thee, lose no tears for me,
My Taper has burnt dim this many years.

Antonio! Maria! Isabella!
Mendoza! witness all -- proceed Piracquo --

I was that Pirat Sir, that stole your son,
And being desperate meant by this surprise
To make my peace --

I was in the Confederacy,
And must affirm this truth.

But just when I had fitted my design,
And did expect to have brought Don Carlo home,
I heard he was at Court, no loss deplored,
For by the Duchess of Mendoza's art
Iulio supplied the Princes name, and person.

And sent me word to Court my Son was dead? ha!

This made me think my Kinsman had deceived me,
And then resolved my stay in Portugal,
Where, as my own, I bred, and called him Manuel;
Till after many years your Grace redeemed us,
And I at my return confirmed in the story
By Pedro, hitherto protracted time,
With hope to serve Don Iulio for our freedom.
I have your pardon Sir for all.

Thou hast.

I am included, trust me with a Secret Sir
Another time, I knew 'twould come to this
At last, and with some justice did but punish
Your fears and jealousies; is not this better
Than sending me to the Wars, or shipping me
For the other World before my time?

You are my best Servant.

And my heir again.

Depose me from this glorious title, Sir,
Unless my Clara may divide the honour.

Providence meant her thine, both call me father.

There is no remedy, Nephew, welcome home,
And Niece, we shall be kindred now Mendoza,
Piracquo we are friends too, and I'll try,
How I can love you heartily.

I hear
The Altar call, make hast, the triumph will
Attend too long, the clouds are chased away,
Night ne'er was mother to so bright a day.


