THE IMPOSTVRE A Tragi-Comedie, AS It was Acted at the private House IN BLACK
FRYERS.

WRITTEN By JAMES SHIRLEY.

Never Printed before.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Robinson at the Three Pigeons, and Humphrey
Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's Curch-yard. 1652.

SIR, IT hath been a Complement with some, when they have treated Friends, to
profess a barrenness in that which they had prepared not without studied
charge, and Curio sitie. As I was never so insolent to magnify my own, being
best acquainted with my weak abilities: so I should deserve a just affront to
my self, and undervalue your person, to present you with any thing were first
cheap in my own opinion. Sir, this Poem, I may with modesty affirm, had a fair
reception, when ^t was personated on the stage, and may march in the first rank
of my own compositions, which directed now by my humble devotion, comes from
the press to kiss your hand, and bear your noble Name in the dedication. I
cannot have so much prejudice upon your nature, to think you will decline it,
and should I abate those other characters of honour that shine upon you, your
indulgence to Music and singular love to the worthy professors eminently, show
the harmony of your soul, and while Poetry is received a Musical part of
humane knowledge, I cannot despair of your candid entertainment. Sr. I beseech
you take it, as an earnest of my thoughts to serve you, I am assured it brings
with it, beside the acknowledgment of your late obligation upon me, ambitious
desires to preserve my interest in your favour, while I subseribe my self,

Sir, The humblest of your Honourers, In: Shirley.
OUr poet not full confident he says,
When Theaters free vote had crowned his plays,
Came never with more trembling to the stage,
Since that poetic S^hism possessed the age.
A Prologue must have more wit than the play,
He knows not what to write, fears what to say.
He has been stranger long to'th' English scene,
Knows not the mode, nor how with artful pen,
To charm your airy souls; beside, he sees
The Muses have forsook their groves, the trees
That feared no thunder, and were safely worn
By Phoebus own priests, are now rudely torn
By every scurrile wit that can but say
He made a Prologue to a new -- no play.
But let 'em pass; you Gentlemen that sit
Our judges, great Commissioners of wit,
Be pleased I may one humble motion make,
'Tis that you would resolve for the authors sake,
In the progress of his play not to be such
Who'l understand too little, or too much
But choose your way to Judge; to the Ladies one
Address from the Author, and the Prologue's done,
In all his Poems, you have been his care,
Nor shall you need to wrinkle now that fair
Smooth Alabaster of your brow, no fright
Shall strike chaste ears, or dye the harmlese white
Of any cheek with blushes, by this pen
No Innocence shall bleed in any scene,
If then your thoughts secured you smile, the w^se
Will lear^ to like by looking on your eyes.
NO Army yet discovered?

None.

We are lost.

Despair not sir.

Away, thy confidence is folly,
Is not danger round about us,
From every part destruction staring us
In the face? this City, like a fatal Center,
Wherein the bloody lines of War, and Famine,
Prepare to meet?

And every minute we expect a Battery.

The walls are not so easily made dust,
As the besiegers would persuade our faith;
Disarm not your own hearts, my confidence
Tells me we sha'not suffer, the Duke of
Ferrara may send yet to raise the siege.

Fond Boy, it was thy counsel to depend
Upon his aids, and promise Fioretta,
Thy Sister, with so great a dowry to
The Dukes vainglorious Son; fame has beli'd
His valour, and we now are cheated of
Our lives and Dukedom.

Sir, with my duty safe, let me entreat you
Not stain the character of a Prince so much;
The interest we have in that great Title
Should make us wise in our belief; for when
Princes break faith, Religion must dissolve,
And nature groan with burden of the living
Beside his Son Leonato, how ever
Traduced or sullied by some Traitors envy,
Deserves a noble fame, and loves the hope
Of our alliance; I ne'er saw his person
But, twere a sin, honour could not forgive
In us to question him.

We fool our selves;
Lets think of timely Articles and yield.

Whilst there is hope of mercy.

Oh! this want
Of man will make all our well meaning stars
Forfiet their kind aspects, turn their influence to death

My Lord, I cannot be concerned in name
And honour with your person, whose least blood
Is worth ten thousand arteries of mine,
Therefore while such necessities invade us
I cannot but prefer your lives, and in
My duty counsel, you would think of what
Is offered here, rather than hazard all
By a vain expectation of an Army
From Leonato, who with all his forces
Is not yet sure to prosper in our cause.

Consider that Honorio.

Nay, should Heaven
So smile upon us, that his sword o'r come,
This to weak apprehension may promise
Our glory, but examine well the close,
There may be greater danger in his victory,
Than all our want of him can threaten.

You perplex my understanding.

He expects your Sister the reward of his great service.

Is it not Justice?

Yes, forbid it goodness,
He should not thrive in his fair hope, and promises;
But if her Highness find not in her heart
Consent, to meet the Prince with love and marriage,
Who shall defend us from his power? that must
Keep us in awe, and this earth, panting yet
With frights and sufferings of the War.

It is my wonder Lord Flaviano, your wisdom
Should weave these wild impossibilities;
My Sister not consent? nature, her birth,
Obedience, honour, common gratitude,
Beside ambition of what can be hoped for
To make her happy, will give wings to her desires.

I cannot tell.

I cannot think,
Your reason sir can be so much corrupted,
To look upon my Sister with that fear,
She should not fly to meet our great preserver;
Do you believe, she now among holy Virgins,
Lead thither by her own devotion,
During this War to pray, and weep for us
(Tears, whose clear Innocence might tempt an Angel
To gather up the drops, and string for Saints
A Crystal Rosarie) can wish us safe
By his victorious arm, without a will
To be her self his own reward? her virtue
Must needs instruct her that, and we apply
No motive to her heart --

What news?

From the Watch-tower we descry an Army
Marching this way; the Sun which hath thus long
Muffled his face in clouds, as it delighted
In their approach, doth gild their way, and shine
Upon their burgonets to dazzle the faint eyes
Of our beseigers.

' Tis Leonato.

Our Enemies, whose Troops circle the Town,
Are making hast to meet 'em, and the Foot
Quitting their trenches, now are gathering
Into a body, as it seems resolved
To give 'em battle.

We have life again.
H^norio, collect what strength we have,
And make a sally at your best advantage.
'Tis good to engage 'em both ways.

How my thoughts triumph already!

Now my Son is gone,
Who is not of our Counsel; we must think
How to behave us, if the Prince succeed,
Our daughter which we promised him in marriage,
Being already sent away, the price
Of his great Victory.

Trouble not your self,
Great Sir, your wisdom that inclined your faith
To my true Character of the Prince,
And took my counsel for her absence, shall
Applaud my future policy; he's not come
To conquest yet, however Princes are not
Obliged to keep, what their necessities
Contract, but prudently secure their states
And dear posterity; trust to my care,
Fioretta is no match for Ferraras Son,
A Prince deep read in lusts, faithless, and cruel,
So will a Turtle with a Vulture show,
Or Lamb yoked with a Tiger: she's a pledge
Destined by better fate to Crown your age
And heart with blessings Sir.

Hark,
The d^ums talk louder, from the battlements,
I may behold their fight, and see which Army,
Conquest, now hovering in the air, will mark
Her glorious perch, upon whose Plumed heads
She may advance, and clap her brazen wings.

Sir I'll attend: Claudio.

My Lord.

Thou left'st the Princes Fioretta safe at Placentia?

Yes Sir.

How did she like her progress? thou did urge
It was my care of her, to take her from
The fright and noise of War.

I did my Lord.

And did she taste it well?

To my apprehension exceeding well,
And gave me strict commands
To say she will remember, and reward
Your love and care of her.

Did she name love?

The very word she used, and I returned,
How much your study and ambition was
To merit her fair thoughts.

And did thou scatter, as I instructed
Here and there dark language, to
Dissafect her with the Prince, to whom
The Duke hath rashly made a promise?

All; I had failed my duty else my Lord.

Call me thy friend, thou hast deserved me, now
Attend the Duke -- so, now my next art must be,
How to come off with with Leonato, if his
Army prevail, the Duke must be instructed;
Honorio thinks his Sister still in the Nunnery;
That thought must be preserved; a thousand wheels
Move in my spacious brain, whose motions are
Directed by my ambition to possess
And call Fioretta mine, while shallow Princes
I make my State decoyes, then laugh at 'em.
The Prince Honorio wounded; fate I bless thee.
How is it with your highness?

I am shot sir.

Would it were dangerous -- be careful of him;
A curse upon that hand that mist his heart.
So, so, fortune thou shalt have eyes again
If thou would smile on mischief, I will build thee
An Altar, and upon it sacrifice
Folly and all her children, from whose blood
A curled smoke shall rise, thick as the mists
That breath from Incense to perfume and hide
The sacrificing Priest; sight on,
Ye are brave Fellows, he that conquers may
Get Honour, and deep wounds, but I the day.
You Virgins, that did late despair
To keep your Wealth from cruel men,
Tie up in silk your careless hair,
Soft peace is come again.
Now lovers eyes may gently shoot
A flame that wo'not kill:
The Drum was angry, but the Lute
Shall whisper what you will.
Sing Io, Io, for his sake,
Who hath restored your drooping heads,
With choice of sweetest flowers make
A garden where he treads;
Whilst, we whole groves of Laurel bring,
A petty triumph to his brow,
Who is the Master of our Spring,
And all the bloom we ow.

Our hearts were open sir before the gates
To Entertain you, I see Laurells grow
About your temples, where, as in a grove
Fair Victory Enamoured on your brow
Delights to sit, and cool her reeking head
And crimson tresses in your shade.

The City
In glory of this day shall build a Statue
To you their great preserver, whose tough brass
Too hard for the devouring teeth of age
Shall eat up Time, to keep your fame Eternal;
Our active youth in honour of your name
Shall bring again the old Olympic games,
And willing to forget what's past in time,
And story, count their years from this days triumph,
As if the World began but now; the wives
As if there were no legends past of love,
Shall only talk of you, and your great Valour;
And careless how mans race should be continued
Grow old in wonder of your deeds; our Virgins
Leaving the natural tremblings that attend
On timorous maids, struck pale at sight of blood,
Shall take delight to tell what wounds you gave,
Making the horror sweet to hear them sing it;
Their hands at the same time composing Garlands
Of Roses, Myrtle, and the conquering Bay,
To adorn our Temples, and the Priests, and while
The Spring contributes to their art, make in
Each garden a remonstrance of this battle,
Where flowers shall seem to Fight, and every plant
Cut into Forms of green Artillery,
And instruments of War, shall keep alive
The memory of this day, and your great Victory^
Yet all that can be studied short of you,
Our best, a rude Imperfect Monument
Of your deserved honours.

You're too bountiful
In language sir, the service we have done
May merit your acknow^edgment, which though
The Justice of your cause directed first
To this success, was not without a hope
Of a reward you promised, and I value it
More than you can esteem all your pr^servings;
So much hath fame preferred your Daughters Virtue
To every excellence.

This adds to what
We held before excess of honour to us.
I had but a part in the Universal benefit
Your Valour gave, but this affection
Falls like a happy Influence on my self
And blood, whose aged s^r^ams you fill with blessings.
My Daughter shall be yours, in which I sum
My lives chief satisfaction. My Lord
Go to the house of Benedictine Nuns,
Among whose sweet society our Daughter,
During this War and tumult, went to offer
Her prayers for our deliveran^e.
I am in a storm, and now must stand
My desperate fate.

I hope she's not turned Nun?

I should not like it.

May not we visit the holy house? 'tis pity so much
Sweet flesh, should be engrossed and barrelled up
With penitential pickle before their time,
That would keep fresh and fair, and make just work
For their Confessions. I do not like the women
Should be cabled up.

I think so.

I would this Virgin would be peevish now.

Why so?

That we might have some sport among the Leverets.
For I would so inflame the General
He were affronted, that we should have all
Commission to work into the Warren.

We do want a person here, whose name is great
In the Register of honour, it would much
Enlarge our present happiness to Embrace him,
Your Son the prince Honorio. Duke. 'Twas his chance
Upon a sally, when your colours gave
Us Invitation to the Field, and spirited
Our soldiers, to receive a shot, whose cure
May excuse the want of his attendance sir,
Nor will I doubt his wounds are doubled by
The thought he cannot wait upon your person.

He should have honoured us, and made me proud
To know, whom so much fair desert hath made
Dear in the voice and love of men: but I
Shall not despair to see him. We want
A limb of our own Army, where is Signior
Bertoldi, that came with us to see Fashions?
I hope we have not lost him.

Sir, I know not, I fear he's slain.

He wo'not die so nobly;
He'll ne'er give up the ghost without a Featherbed.
He was sick last night at the report we were
But three leagues off the Enemy, and called
For a hot caudle. I that knew his cold
Disease persuaded him to drink, which he
Did fiercely as I could wish, in hope to see him
Valiant and vvalk the round, but quite against
Nature his ague shook him more, and all the Drink
Which was the full proportion of a gallon
Came out at's forehead in faint svveat; he had
Not moved ten paces, but he fell down backward
And swore he was shot with a cold bullet; how
They rolled him like a Barrel back to his Tent,
For levers could not raise him to make use
Of's feet again, I know not, nor since saw him.

I hope he's still asleep.

But when he wakes,
And finds the Army marched away, He dares not,
Go home again alone, how he will venture
O'r the dead bodies hither -- he has don't.

Where is the General?

Here comes our mirth.

A walking Armoury; noble Signior Bertoldi.

If you want Pikes or Muskets there, I could
Ha brought field pieces, but I durst not venture
My chine.

Where had you these?

Ask, ask the men I killed, if they deny
A syllable I'll forswear the Wars.

He has disarmed and robbed the dead.

A coward has impudence to rob a Church.

He durst not take 'em from a man that had
But so much life in him to gasp or groan,
That noise would fright him.

I rejoice Signior, you're safe come home.

I would I were at home, and you get me
Among your Guns again -- how is't Volterino?

This news will much exalt your Mothers heart.

He is returned but with a melancholy face.
Where is the Princess?

Where is our Daughter?

Where her devotion I fear will make
This Dukedom most unhappy, if your virtue
Exceed not what is read in other Princes,
It was my fear that place, and conversation,
Would mortisie too much that active heat
Sh^uld wait on the desires of high-born Ladies.

The mystery?

Do not you find it? they have nunnified her.

Sir, your pardon;
She whom first fear and fright of War persuaded
To join her prayer and person with the Virgins
In the religious Cloister, by what art
Or holy magic won, is now resolved --

What, hath she vowed?

Until a year be finished
By revolution of the days great guide,
Not to forsake the Nunnery, but spend
Her hours in thankful prayers to Heaveu for this
Great victory.

So, so, It will come to the battery I talked on.

It cannot be.

It must not be

I am of that opinion my Lord,
It must not be, this is a stratagem.

She humbly prays you would interpret this
No breach of filial piety, nor your
Highness a will to wrong so great a merit
As hath engaged all fortunes here, and lives
To bleed for you, but weigh in your best charity
That duties are first paid to Heaven, the spring
And preservation of what makes us happy,
And she is confident when you consider --

How much my honour suffers, to employ
The strength I have to punish this affront.

A pox upon it, we shall have more fighting now

I hope you have no thought of any p^ctice
Here to deserve that language?

You're abused.

If you be her Father sir, I must expect
What did engage me hither, and without
Delays, or leave this City in a flame.

More Fire-works?

In whose Ashes I will bury this foul ingratitude.

We are ruined all.

There is not so much danger, to be put
In Rank and File with Pye-meat in an Oven,
If a man were certain to come out again
Dow-bak'd.

Yet stay. I have considered,
I may have leave to see this Frozen Lady.

We are more undone.

Your person may prevail sir,
And by some better charm, gain her consent,
Or if you please not to engage your self
Upon the trouble of a hasty visit,
The presence of her Father, and what else
We can prepare to keep your smile upon us,
Shall be enforced, to clear how much we aim
At the perfection of your wishes.

So, so. Leon. Prospen.

I have now^ courage sir to serve your will,
And am of the sudden confident.

It pleases.

It is impossible.

Promise any thing
In such a strait, and not despair to effect it.
Be private men content with their poor Fathom,
Since Heaveu we limit not, why should not Kings
Next Gods, perform the second mighty things?
Your ear --

YOu will obey the Dukes command?

Good Princes,
Punish, not teach us sacrilege; I'll obey
A thousand sufferings ere such a rape --

A rape?

Of honour, Honesty, Religion;
I am placed here to preserve, and not betray^
The Innocent; should I instead of prayer,
Chaste life, the holiness of vow, of discipline,
With those austerities that keep wild blood
In calm obedience, now begin to teach^
Soul-murdering liberty, the breach of all
Was promised Heaven.

Wy' Madam you mistake,
We ask no Virgin to turn Whore, we only
Desire you would persuade some pretty Nun,
In this extremity, to take upon her
The Princess Fioretta, whom Leonato
Ne'er saw, and be his Wife in honest marriage.

Can you be thus
Unjust to him, so late preserved your lives?

Trouble you not your reverend head with that,
He shall be satisfied, and you remain
Still mother of the Maid, no more sour faces,
But turn your wit to'th' business.

Never sir.

Take heed and have a care of this enclosure,
The Dukes breath makes all flat, tis yet no common;
(...) are old, and should be wise.

I would be honest.

Show it in your obedience; will you do it?

Never.

Do ye hear? I sent unto this holy place,
A Damsel called Iuliana, she's in your Catalogue,
And yet but in probation, cause I see,
You make so nice a conscience, so severe,
In the rules of honesty, and would not have,
Your Virgin province touched with least defilemen^,
Pray let me speak with her, it will concern you.

Would you pervert her?

I know not what you call perverting,
But she has not too much Nuns flesh,
And tis my charity to your chaste Order
To give you timely notice.

What do I hear?

No more than you may justify in time,
If things prove right, she was a merry soul
And you have not spoiled her, if you mean to be
No Midwife, let me talk with her a while.

Protect us Virgin thoughts

So, so, this was reserved to wind up all,
It may be fortunate;
I know her spirit high, and apt to catch at
Ambitious hopes and freedom, some good counsel
May form her to my purpose, I have plunged
Too far, to hope for safety by return,
I'll trust my destiny to the stream, and reach
The point I see, or leave my self a rock
In the relentless waves; she's here, I'm armed.

By your own goodness, reverend Mother give
No belief to him; though he be a great man,
He hath not been held guilty of much virtue,
Yet tis my wonder he should stain my Innocence;
Pray in your presence, give me leave to acquit
My Virgin honour; for the wealth of all
The World, I would not have this shame be whispered
To the stain of our profession.

Madam, the Duke.

The Duke?

Peace to the fair Iuliana.

You're not noble,
A most dishonord Lord, your titles cannot
Bribe my just passion, who will trust a man?
Oh sir, you are as black, nay have a soul
As leprous with ingratitude, as the Angels
Are white with Innocence; was't not enough
To rob me of my honour, the chief wealth
Of Virgins, and confine me to my tears,
Which ne'er can wash away my guilt (should I
Live here to melt my soul into a stream
With penitence) but when I had resigned
The World with hope to pray, and find out mercy,
You must thus haunt me with new shame and brand
My forehead here, as if you meant to kill
My better essence by despair, as you
Have stained my body.

Deer Iuliana I
Confess I injured thee thou knew no sin
But from my charm, 'twas only I betrayed thee
To loss of thy dear honour, then of liberty,
For 'twas my practice, not thy pure devotion
Made thee a Recluse first; but let not passion
Lose what I would not only save from shipwreck,
But make as happy as thy thoughts can wish thee;
By thy wronged self tis true, nor could I choose
Another way than by discovery
Of both our shames to right thee, I am come
To make thee satisfaction in so high
And unexampled way of honour, thou
Shalt say I did deserve to be more wicked,
When thou hast vveighed the recompense.

You amaze me

Collect thy senses, and discreetly mind me;
Thou can not be concerned so much alive
In any other story, hear me gently
And prize the wealth of every syllable.

Had you been pleased to have left your daughter still
My charge and sweet companion, I should
Have left no duty unessaid, to have shown
In what degree I honoured her, but I
Must not dispute your royal pleasure, though
With some sad thoughts to separate, I resigned her
To your commands.

It was your virtue Madam, she found no
Consent to be professed, nor love the Prince,
To whom I promised her a Wife, although
Our fears keep warm his hope, in his belief
She's here enclosed still, but without thy help,
We are all lost.

The Prince Leonato?

There's a preferment, this is considerable.

If you my Lord be serious; a Princess!
The change would do well.

Be but confident to manage it.

Hath he not seen the Princess by picture?

Never.

Strange!

'T was a ceremony, in the necessities of our state,
The Duke ne'er thought on, I meant not to insert it,
As knowing Fioretta had no zeal,
To what her Father darkly had contracted;
His Highness doth expect thee.

It would be
More for my honour, if he took the pains,
To visit our Religious house, and then --

It shall be so.

But twill be necessary,
You purge me to the Abbess, no suspicion,
Must live within her thought.

I apprehend;
Oh! you have shot a trembling through my soul,
I dare not kiss your hand, the Earth you tread on,
Would too much grace the lips have so profaned you.
Madam your pardon; sir be you the witness,
I have wronged this noble Virgins honour,
It was my anger, and revenge upon
Your goodness that so late opposed me made
Me careless, where I flung disgrace and scandal,
Thus I implore her mercy and forgiveness,
Take her white thoughts to your again, she is
As innocent from sinful act by me
As the chaste womb that gave me life.

Tis piety,
Thus to restore the Innocent, I conceive not
His aim in this.

Tis satisfaction.

When I stray from your sweet precepts --

In, I am confirmed.

All to our expectation, she's prepared,
A Mistress for the Prince.

But now I think on it
She must not marry him, it will breed ill blood.

By all means marry him, there's no other way
To send him hence, and quit us of the Army,
I'll instantly acquaint him how I prosper.

It must not be, my honour will bleed for it.
I have been too much guided by Flaviano.
Madam --

Your face is troubled.

No, my heart
Which you may curc with honour, as I have
Contrived it now --

I shall study with my loss of life
To gain your bosom peace.

I like this Virgin,
I know my Lord here hath been practising,
But finds her not inclined to that extent
We had proposed, she is virtuous, you shall
Counsel her only but to take the name
Of my Fioretta, but not change her life
To marry with the Prince; I do believe,
Her chaste, Oh let your goodness keep her still so,
And fortify her virtuous thoughts, I doubt not
But she with holy eloquence, and pretence
Of vow, and Virgin sanctity,
May so prevail upon him both to save her self,
Our honours, and the Kingdom from a sacrifice.
May not this be?

Such extremes I know not.

If she persist a chaste, and noble Virgin,
You must dispense, we have but little time
For pause, unless this present care be found,
We all must bleed to death upon the wound.

Hum! shall I never fight? drink wo'not do it,
No nor a Whore the greater provocation;
I speak it to my shame, I never durst
Fight for my wench, yet Gentlemen commend
My confidence at paying of a reckoning,
There I can kill 'em all with courtesy,
Discharge my Pieces like a Mr. Gunner at a great supper,
Yet I am not valiant, this must be mended someway.
Volterino? a word;
Tis not unknown to you, that I am a coward.

No, not a coward, but you, are not sir,
If I were put to answer upon Oath,
So valiant altogether as Don Hercules,
That strangled a great Bull with his forefinger
And's Thumb, and killed the King of Troys great Coach horse
With a box of the car.

Pox on it, do not abuse me, I shall take it
Scurvily and you deny it.

But you wo'not beat me.

There's the thing, I know it
As well as you can tell me, I am base,
And in plain terms a coward.

Why dost not beat thy self for being one?

Then I durst fight; no, I was begotten
In a great Frost, between two shaking Agues,
I never shall be valiant, who can help it?
But when you come home again, if you will but
Swear I am valiant --

You shall pardon me.

Come, my Mother shall make you amends; a ha,
You love her, she's a Lady and a Widow,
That has the Goldfinches, hark in your ear,
You shall have her.

Shall I have her?

A word to the wise.

Would I were sure on it.
If I have thy Mother, I will not only swear thou art,
But make thee valiant.

Would it were possible, upon that condition
You should have my Sister too.

She's dead.

(...) she were alive I mean --

^arewell, we'll treat again, and if I live
Thou shalt be Iulius Caesar.

When I dye, thou shalt be Caesa^s heir.
Noble Hortensio.

I am in hast, what's the matter?

There lies your way, a hundred thousand Ducats
Will find entertainment somewhere else.

Can thou help me to 'em?

Yes, and a better business.

How? where noble Bertoldi?

Wy -- but you are in hast.

No, no, where is all this money?

Safe enough in a place.

But how shall I come by it?

You know my Mother.

The rich Lady Florclia, the Court Widow,
She's my Mistress.

You shall have her.

Shall I?

Yes, and be Master of as much money
As will make you mad.
The Prince, hark in your ear.

I knew I should prevail, and I am happy,
There's no frost now within her, if your excellence
Would grace the Monastery with a visit
And satisfy your self, your presence will
Perfect the business, and be a just excuse
To some nice ceremonies that detain
Her Person to comply with virgin modesty,
The Duke will meet you there.

I will attend him.

You will consider Sir it is a place
Not used to public treaties, though dispensed with
For this your solemn view, and conference,
Your person may be trusted there, without
A numerous train.

You shall direct me Sir.
Volterino, you shall only wait upon me.
Sir when you please.

I'm proud to be your conduct.

You shall have her
And her Estate, that's fair, she has enough
To undo the Devil if he go to law with her,
My Father's dead and has told him that already.

I'll do it.

Here's my hand, my mother's thine.

Not my mother.

She shall be any thing I'll have her,
Do you but persuade her I am valiant,
And I'll venture to beat her, and she dare
Deny to marry any man I please
To call my Father in law.

Let's walk and think on it.

You may swear any thing,
And you pawn your soul for me,
You know you cannot be a loser.

O fly my soul, what hangs upon
thy drooping wings,
and weighs them down,
With love of gaudy mortal things?
The Sun is now in the East, each shade
as he doth rise,
is shorter made,
That Earth may lesson to our eyes:
Oh be not careless then, and play
until the Star of peace
Hide all his beams in dark recess;
Poor Pilgrims needs must lose their way,
When all the shadows do entrease.
She is exceeding fair, what pity 'twere
Such beauty and perfection should be
Confined to a melancholy Cell: I approach
You Madam with the reverence of a votary,
You look so like a Saint, yet nature meant
You should not with such early hast translate
Your self to heaven, till earth had been made happy
With living modells from your excellent figure.
You that become a cloud, and this dull dress
So well, whose sight doth pale, and freeze the blood,
How will you shine to admiration
Of every eye, when you put on those Ornaments
That fit your name and birth? if like a statue
Cold and unglorified by art, you call
Our sense to wonder, where shall we find eyes
To stand the brightness, when you're turned a shrine,
Embellisht with the burning light of Diamonds,
And other gifts that dwell like stars about you?

If you do fancy me an object so
Prodigious, for the safety of your eyes
And others, tender-sighted, give consent,
I may not change this poverty a^d place,
(More pleasing to my self, than all the pride
Can wait those Goddesses, at Court you bow to)

And yet 'twere heresy in me to say
You could receive addition or glory
By the contributary blaze of Wealth,
Or other dress, which art and curiosity
Can form; you are not by them graced, but they
By you made beautiful. Jewels near your eye,
Take soul and Lustre, which but once removed
Look dull as in their quarry.

He is taken.

I now applaud my fate, and must account
My undertaking in this War to save
Your Dukedom, but the shadow of a service,
When I consider my reward. Oh! hast
To make me Envi'd of the World, and once
Possessed of you, to undervalue all
But Heaven, of which you are the fairest copy.

My Lord, our study here is life, not language,
And in that little time I've had of practice,
My tongue hath learned simplicity, and truth;
You are a Prince, and in your Cr^ation
But one degree from Angels, strive to rise
That one round higher, and y' are perfect; I am
By my good Fathers leave, and the sweet rules
Of this Religious order, now in the way
To meet another Bridegroom, before whom
While you stand a competitor, you fall
To Atoms; sir my love is planted here,
And I have made a vow, which your own charity
Will bid me not to violate, (your triumph
Being the spring of my imperfect duty,)
That for a year, I'll spend my time among
This happy Quire, to offer up my Prayers
And humble gratitude to Heaven, a weak
Oblation for our safeties.

Ha? how's this?

My Lord, did you not say you had prevailed?
What mockery is this?

I am undone.
What does the Gypsy mean, she'll betray all.
Most excellent Madam.

Oh my Lord employ
Your counsel, to advance not Kill our Virtue,
Remember where, and what I am.

So, so.

Sir will you suffer this? a new affront.

I am resolved
To live and pay you better tribute here
For your affection, and unequalled service.
Here no distraction will afflict my prayers,
Which trust me I will offer chastely for you,
At every hour of my devotion.
'Tis you, next Heaven, that gave this blessing to us,
To meet, and in the holy Quire breath up
Our sacred Hymes, while Angels Echo to us,
And Heaven delighted with our harmony,
Opening her azure curtains will present us
A vision of all the joys we pray and hope for.

This my instructions?

O think my Lord
To what a loss of Heaven your love invites me,
Yet let me not be thought while I pretend
The choice, and sweetness of a Recluse, I
Should in a thought accuse your worth, who are
The man of all the World I most could fancy;
If I be seen (...) blush, make it no sin,
I know it is but honourable love
Wings your desire, and that which should prefer you,
Is merit of your Sword that cut our way,
To freedom and soft peace, Religions Pillow,
The Nurse of Science, and the general blessing,
You have a title yet more strong pleads for you,
The contrac^, ^nd the promise of a Prince
A chain with many Links of Adamant.

I like not that.

To bind and make me yours,
When I have named these several interests,
And look upon my self so short of merit,
I chide your unkind destiny, at such
Expense of honour to go off unsatisfied,
And quickly should despise my self the cause
Of your distaste, but that my vow confirms me,
And mustering up Religious thoughts prevails,
Above my other will, made to obey you,
Tis but a year my Lord, that I have bound
My self this exile.

Tis an age.

But whil^ Time hath one minute in his Glass of that,
Nothing shall take me hence, unless you bring
An impious strength upon this holy dwelling,
And force me from my cell, but you are far
From such a sacrilege, oh think not on it,
I'll place you in my heart while you are virtuous,
But such an Act might lose those noble thoughts
Of you I wish preserved, but I offend,
And am too large in this unwelcome argument,
May wisdom guide your Princely thoughts,
Whilst I return to pray for you.

She has orethrown all.

Sir, if you love her she
Hath taught you a cunning way to make her yours,
This habit is compelled, a little force,
For form will disengage her, she does love you,
And pleaded handsomely against her self.

N^more -- I'll not despair yet of your Daughter,
This is but Virgin nicety, at the next
Meeting she may incline to smile upon me,
She's too much treasure to be won at first
Assault, Volterino.

Flaviano.

I did expect a storm.

We are not safe yet.

I wonder why Iuliana kept not promise,
The Dog-dayes thaw her chastity, I'm mad,
Oh for some stratagem to save all yet,
But you Sir (give me leave to say) are timorous,
Princes should fix in their resolves, your conscience
Should be as subject to your will, as I am.

I must confess Flaviano I had
No fancy to Iulianas marriage.

That was all my hope, how could I love the man
Durst kill him now.

I shudder, what noise is that?

These horrors will eternally affright us.

The man that dares be guilty of least Insolence,
To any Virgin, dyes.

My hopes are nipped, I thought to have tasted,
Nuns flesh, but the General has made it fasting day.

I hope he means to force away Iuliana --
Ha? they attempt it, prosper'em deer fate.
Blessed beyond expectation.

Dost think,
We shall be safe.

Enjoy the other benefit of my Sword
In peace, this shall be mine.

The stars dote on us.

What unexpected tumults fright the City?

You are too bold upon your wound Honorio
To come abroad.

The Prince has stolen your Sister
From the Nunnery.

He dares not
Blemish his honour so, though he deserved her,
And all our lives, should she be obstinate.

Tis done.

This Act shall lose him, death upon
The Surgeon, that hath dallied with my wounds,
But I'll revenge this rape.

Look to the Prince.

I could adore my destiny, the wench sure,
Meant to be ravished thus, I kiss thy policy;
This chance hath made a dancing in my blood,
While sin thrives, tis too early to be good.

IS this Ferraras Court?

Yes Madam.

I will not yet discover, I shall find,
A time Antonio to reward thy faith
And service to me.

Here are Ladies Madam.

I have a great desire to see this wonder,
The Princess Fioretta, so much famed
For beauty.

Comes she with his Excellence?

Most certainly, so speaks the Prince Leonato's
My Brothers Letters, and that with some difficulty,
He gained her from the Nunnery.

Who is this?

She has an excellent shape, some stranger;
Prithee Florelia ask.

This Lady Madam,
Seems to make some address this way; I know not,
Upon what Jealousy my Lady left
Placentia so privately, where she
Was entertained by Flavianos Mother,
Though old, a Lady of no decrepit brain.

Antonio.

A Lady, Madam, calls her self Lauriana,
Born in Placentia, but the Wars affrighting,
Both Mantua and the confines, she came hither
With confidence of safety, till the storm
At home be over.

It is not fit a person of your quality
And presence should be engaged to common persons,
And if I may entreat, you shall consent
To be my guest at Court, which will be proud
To entertain such beauty.

It must be
Too great an honour Madam.

Leonato my Brother hath secured your peace at home,
Which cannot be less pleasing, if you taste
The freedom I can here provide and promise you,
We expect him every minute with the Princess
Fioretta, in whose love he holds more triumph

And yet his fame was Earlier than this conquest,
For many noble Virtues, but has your grace
A confidence that he brings Fioretta with him?

Since he left Mantua we received such letters.

Madam, the Prince is come to court, and with him
The gallant Lady we expected.

I am not well of the sudden.

Virue defend!

The good old Duke your Father, will
Show comfort in his sick-bed to behold
A Son and Daughter.

Are they married?

No Madam, but I am confident
So great a joy will not be long deferred,
'Twere sin such hope should wither by delay,
They both wish to be happy in your presence,
And you at first sight of this Princely sister
Will much applaud your brothers fate.

I hope so,
How is it Madam yet?

I do beseech you
Let not your graces too much care of me
Detain you from the joy your brother brings.
Another Fioretta?

Donabella?

I shall not fear a surfeit in my joys
To see you safe.

A gallant Gentleman.

What Lady's that?

A stranger, sir, with whom I have prevailed
To grace our court a while, which will be Honoured
In such a guest.

And I should call it happiness
If you would please to dwell for ever with us,
I have brought home such a companion,
For both your beauties you will not repent.

The Duke of Mantuas Daughter, I congratulate
Y^ double victory, and if I may,
Without imputed flattery speak my thoughts,
You did deserve her, had she to her birth,
All the additions that grace a Woman.

You have conferred a bounty on me Madam,
And leave me hopeless to reward the debt
Iow this fair opinion.

Sir, the venture
You made through blood, and danger, doth deserve it,
And she were impious, did not think her self
Much honoured to be called your valors triumph.
I shall betray my self. Censure me not,
Immodest or suspectful of her virtue,
Whom you have made the darling of your heart.

Sir the Duke calls for you.

Signior Bertoldi.

Your Graces creature.

Will it please you Madam?

I humbly pray your Highness to excuse me,
I may have time and happiness to attend you,
When with more health I may present my services,
I dare not see this Lady.

Wait you upon that Lady Signior.

With all my heart; incomparable Lady --

I have servants to attend me.

But not one,
More humble, or more active for your service,
You cannot choose but know my Lady Mother;
I have not seen her yet, but she shall stay,
I'll kneel to her when I have done with you.

But is my Son so valiant, Signior?
This War hath wrought a miracle upon him.

He was a coward beyond Ela, Madam,
I must acknowledge, to whom men in pity
Of his Birth, and care of your much-loved honour
Often forgave his life, but see the turn,
He that went forth (for all our conjurings
And promise of no danger) as he had
Been marching towards Aetna, nay before
The instant fight would have given all the World
To have been assured when he came home, but one
Of every thing about him --

What do ye mean?

One eye, one ear, one arm, and but one leg
To have hopt home withal, strange, how in the heat
Of the Battle he grew double, and there fought
As he had two souls; oh! had you seen
When like a Magazine he marched, with pikes
With guns Corslets, which he took from the Enemy,
With swords more than a Surgeons sign, stuck round,
And seeming like a porcupine to shoot
The Iron Quills --

But is this possible?

I never saw a Dragon do such thing^

This was not by instinct, but some example
He saw in you, that waked his sleeping spirit.
And he must owe all that is Valiant in him
To your brave soul, which like a burning Comet
Flew with prodigious terror to the Enemy.

You do not Jeer your servant?

And so he, by your great blaze
Saw his next way to honour;
Nor can I but acknowledge all my joys
Now in my Son do flow from you; a soldier
Was ever high in my esteem, but you
Have placed the title nearest to me, pray
Favour me often' with your visit.

The Town's my own.

No complement good Signior, your love
If placed on me, shall find an object, though,
Not equal to your favours, not ungrateful;
I wonder he absents himself so long.

My care shall be to find him out and bring him
A welcome present to your eye. She's caught.

These Soldiers think if they but once lay siege,
We must come in by force or c^mposition.
Although a Maiden Town may not hold out,
A Widow but well vittled with the bare
Munition of her tongue, will tire an Army;
I must suspect my Son, for all this legend,
No mighty man at arms; he's here.

Your blessing.

Take it, and with it all my prayers, thou may
Grow up in honour, and deserve to be
Thy Fathers Son.

Kiss her Hortensio, do, she is thine own.

'Twas my ambition Madam
To wait upon my Convert, and to kiss
Your white hand.

Signior Volterino was here but now, and has
Told me such stories, Son --

Of me?
He had better eat my Spaniard, then mention me
With any scruple of dishonour.

He extolls you for ^ Soldier, and tells me wonders.

If you dare believe me Madam, your Son has
Behaved him like a Gentleman.

I confess,
I was -- but that's no matter, thank this Cavalier;
can receive and give a gash, and look on it
When I have don without your cordial waters
Shall I cut you o'r the face Mother?

Sir I am poor to recompense the honour
You have done my Son, I see he is your convert,
You that infused a soul in him cannot
Enough be glorified.

Tis within your power
Madam to overpoise all my deserts.
True, I did stir those dormant seeds of nobleness
Your blood left in him, and made glow those sparks,
Into a flame, were hid in hills of Ashes;
Now he is yours, and if you Madam think
I have done any service by an Act
Or precept that could light your Son to honour,
You make me fortunate, and encourage
A Soldier to employ his whole life here.

How do ye mean?

Without more complement to love you, and --

What?

Wish my self with you Madam when you dream

You would be with me when I dream.

But I should wake you.

But I should be very angry to have my sleep broke.

But I would please you again,
And rock you into a trance with so much harmony,
You shall wish to dye in it. I am very plain.

Me thinks you are very rough.

A Soldiers garb,
The old but the best fashion; a Sword,
And flattery were not meant for one mans wearing;
Madam I love you, but not dote upon you,
For you are something old.

I am indeed sir.

Yet you are very handsome, and I love you;
You're witty, fair, and honest, but a VViddow,
And yet I love you; I do know you are rich,
Exceeding mighty rich.

And yet you love me*

But Madam, I am a man.

I do not mean to try you Signior,
Pray Son do you.

Now put your vote in.

What should I do Madam?

Try whether he be a man or no.

Should I?

Do ye hear? they say you are grown valiant^
Upon my blessing I command you strike
This Gentleman, and do it presently.

Strike him?

Yes.

A way, away, what here?

Even here, this very minute.

Not for your house, and all the monies in it,
Not for my Fathers Wardrob, and I were
An Adamite a top of the Alps, though you
Admire the relics, and have turned your Gallery
Into a Chapel, where his several suites
Hang up like Images for you to pray to:
Strike one taught me to fight?

Is she gone? what said she?

The foolish woman --

Why what's the matter?

She shows her breeding, but do not you despair.

If I mistake not sir, you would pretend
You love me honourably.

May I perish else.

When you can maked appear in visible wounds
Upon your head' or body, that my Son
Dares fight -- you and I'll be married.

I told you Signior you should have my Mother.

The Devil shall have you both upon easier conditions;
Visible wounds upon my head or body?

And here's my hand upon the sight thereof,
I'll be your wife; and so farewell till dooms-day.

But hark you Lady

My Mother's a Witch. I shallne'r be valiant
In this World, what quarrels I may have in the next,
I know not,
There are some dead threatened to cudgel me.

Is there no hope, that I may catch you in
The Noose of Matrimony, unless your Son
First break my head?

I wo' not swear.

It is not your best course, take heed of vows.

Why my dear Signior?

For your souls sake, and yet
Dispose that as you please, I'll see who dare
Cary your body from me, spite of Lucifer
I will have that, and come by it ^awfully;
And so my service; think on it.

A fine fellow.

Would I had his audacity; my Mistress,
Yet knows not what I mean, but I will to her,
And kiss her Glove immediately.

This Court is like a twilight, where I cannot
Distinguish day, or perfect night, some faces
Are c^eerfull as the morn, others again
Are dark, and wrapped like evenings in a mist
^s is instinct for my approach, that brings
A resolution to revenge the rape
Upon my Sister; grow more strong my thoughts,
And let no fear distract you. Prince I have
Con^ider'd thee in all thy pride of merit,
Allow'd my Fathers Contract, and did give thee
My Sisters heart in thy own vote, but when,
She only made a pause for ceremony,
Not disaffection, since thou could forget
Thy honour of a Prince, to invade her Chastity,
And forfeit thy Religion, thus I come,
To whip thy blood, or leave my own a sacrifice.
Sir, may a stranger ask without offence, why
The Court like Ianus doth present a double
Face, as it laboured twixt the fierce extremes
Of triumph and despair*

Sir you mistake not
The mixture of our passions, the Court
Smiles in our happiness to entertain
The Prince, and his fair Mistress, but doth wear,
A grief and paleness, for the Duke, whose want
Of health delays their marriage.

I apprehend;
Sir I am bold, May not a Gentleman
Engaged to visit other Courts of Italy,
Make his ambition fortunate to receive
A favour from this Prince, and kiss his hand,
Before he leave the Dukedom?

He is here Sir.

Lord Petroni^, entreat the Princess
Fioretta, and my Sister meet me in the grove --
This Gentleman --

You have made me happy;
Though I want honour to be known, your fame
Speaks you a valiant Prince, and fortunate,
And I must with the World congratulate
Your victory at Mant^a, upon which,
So rich a triumph waits.

What triumph fir?

The Princess Fioretta.

I acknowledge,
That Garland is my glory, such a treasure,
Was worth more service, than my sword could merit:
But I must be a debtor to my stars,
And can release all other happiness,
Within their influence to come, so they
Confirm me Lord still of her beauties Empire.

This doth become your Excellence; what error
(Receive it not profane) should Heaven and nature,
Have made, to have kept your hearts too long asunder?
And yet I may mistake, for though your Grace,
Affect her with all height your soul can fancy,
I know not how her love may answer this
Desert in you.

How sir?

Your Highness pardon;
I am no Prophet, nor do wish to see,
Upon your spring, another wind than what
The wings of pregnant Western gales do enrich
The air withal, which gliding as you walk,
May kiss the teeming flowers, and with soft breath
Open the Buds to welcome their preserver;
I wish you might grow up two even Cedars,
Till your top-boughs kiss Heaven that made you flourish,
When stooping to behold the numerous branches
That prosper in your growth, and what refreshing
The World below receives by your cool shade,
You wave your heads in the applause and wonder.
This is the Song I bri^g to your chaste Hymen,
And thus would every good man pray, but that
They fear.

Fear, what?

The blessings they invoke,
With all their importunity of prayers,
Will not descend.

Icannot reach you sir
Without a perspective, but this wanders from
The doubt you made of Fiorettas love,
To answer mine, that talk was dangerous,
I must not hear't again.

You must, unless
You can be deaf, or cut the tongue of fame out.

The man hath somwhere lost his senses; go back
And sind thy strangled wits, this language has
No chain of reason, I lose breath upon
A thing distracted.

Tis not come to that,
I've no such hot vexation, but a soul
Possessed with noble anger, and with pity.
Prince, I must tell you there are dangerous symptoms
Of a State Apoplex; those aerie stilts
Of fame you walk on, will deceive your pride,
When every honest breath, angry at what
You did so late in the contempt of goodness,
Will tell the wind how it mistook your praise,
And in a sigh conclude her sad repentance.
I come not sir to flatter.

It appears so.

But tell you what hath eat into your soul
Of honour, and there poisond all the worth
The World once loved you for.

You talk as if
You had consulted with my fate, and read
The leaves of my inevitable doom;
What action hath so much incensed my late
Kind stars to this revolt, and threatens like
To busy tongues in my disgrace?

The noise is loud already, would there were
No truth in men, who say, you ravished Fioretta
Sweet Princess from her Prayers, and left a Monument
Of such a sacrilege committed by you,
The very stones since groan in her behalf
You ravished from the Nunnery, on this
Must needs depend her hate,
Whose person and Religious vow you have
Unlike a Prince profaned.

You're very bold,
What confidence can that outside raise in you
To be thus saucy?

Saucy?

Impudent.
Is life a burden, that you dare my anger?
What art?

A gentleman, that have more right to honour
Than he that is a Prince, and dares degenerate.

There's something in thy face would have me think
Thou may be worth my punishment, that I
^ould uncreate thee, if thy veins do house
But Common blood, to make thee a fit Enemy
In Birth, and soul to me, that I might kill thee
Without a blush to honour, do not tempt
My Just rage, that provoked will scorn a sword,
And make thee nothing with a look; be gone,
Get hence with the same speed, thou would avoid
A falling Tower, or had new seen a Lioness
Walking upon some cliff, and gazing round
To find a prey, which she pursues with eyes
That shoot contracted flame, but when her teeth
And paws arrive, they quickly leave no part
Or sign of what there was.

Just heaven, how high he talks, and counterfeits
Your noise! I have a charm against your thunder;
If thou hast courage to stay, thou quickly shalt repent
Heavens Justice in my arm sent to revenge
Thy sacrilege, the more to encourage thee
To fight, I am thy equal, and a Prince.
Or may thy sin o'take my blood, and set
A weight upon my soul when thou hast killed me

Alas my Lord?

Dear Brother?
Help, what traitor's this?

Away sweet Fioretta.

Fioretta.

Ha? I am undone, alas what do you mean?
My Brother, Prince Honorio.

Thy brother?

Oh let me hold thee safe in my Embraces.

Leo. Honorio.

The same, but not her brother.

Pardon me,
Whose soul disdained in my belief thou were
An insolent stranger, to acknowledge any thing
Of satisfaction, but let thy sister
Now speak for both.

Give space to my amazement.

If changing thus soft kisses, arms and heart
You interpret violence, Fioretta, then
Thy sister has been ravished; who hath thus
Abused your faith, and wronged this Princes Virtue?
Clear as the light of stars. I must confess
I seemed to wave his courtship, when he first
Beheld me veild, which modesty instructed,
And though my heart were won, I kept it secret,
To make more proof of his, who not consenting
To be deprived too long of what he loved,
He brought a force to the Cloister: but took me
His own away without a rape, and since
All his addresses have been honourable.

Instead of satisfaction, you enlarge
My wonder, what Impostures here? the Prince
Is cosend, yet she owns me; pardon sir,
I was made believe, you did most impiously
Compel my sister, and by force enjoyed her,
But now I find we are all abused, to what
Misfortune might this error have engaged us?

This is my sister.

You cannot want a charity
That are so fair.

Would Leonato's Sword
Had prospered in his death; I must be confident;
You have not yet made glad my heart Honorio,
With our good Fathers health, I have some trembling
Within my blood, and fear all is not well.

Gypsye?

You look not cherefully.

My Father injoyes a perfect health.

That word hath blessed me.
Sister and Leonato, you'll excuse,
If I transgress with joy to see my Brother;
Were but the Duke my Father here, I summed
All my delights on earth --

She confounds me.

Honorio and I will follow you.

You are not my Sister?

Sir, tis very true.

Where is she?

You shall know what will make you happy sir,
If you preserve this wisdom.

I have seen you before.

But I am destined here, to do such service
To your Family you shall know more --

Give me breath for two minutes,
Be confident of my silence, they expect you.
So let me have some air, am I Honorio.
What prodigies are these? we are all bewitched,
Ha Sister,

Brother Honorio.

Tis she, what's he?

Not worth the interruption of one kiss.

My friend --

My fool -- Fioretta show me where
We may enjoy a shade, I'll tell thee wonders.

Sir I shall meet with you again; a pretty fellow.

MAdam I fear this walk into the Park,
May engage your grace too far without some more
To attend you,

Our own thoughts may be our guard,
I use it frequently; but to our dlscourse
Of Prince Honorio, for we cannot find
A nobler subject, I observe that he
And you have been acquainted.

Twas my happiness,
To have my breeding in the Court of Mantua,
Where I among the rest of his admirers,
Seeing his youth improved with so much honour,
Grew into admiration of his virtues,
Which now he writes man do so fully crown him,
His Fathers Dukedom holds no ornament
To stand in competition.

You speak him high,
And with a passion too, that tastes of love.

Madam, I honour him,
As may become his servant.

As his Mistress rather.

My heart is clear from such ambition,

But yet not proof against all Cupids shaf^s;
I do not think but you have been in love.

Who hath not felt the wounds? but I ne'er looked
Above my birth and fortunes; Prince Honorio,
May become your election, and great blood.

I find it here already.

Nor could you
Endear it where so much desert invites
It to be beloved.

My looks do sure betray me,
I do believe him all composed of honour,
And have received your Character from the World
So noble, all your praise can be no flattery.
I know not by what powerful charm within
His person, Madam, I confess my eyes
Take some delight to see him, but I fear --

I find your Jealousy, and dare secure you.
If in your amorous bosom, you feel, Madam,
A Golden shaft, the cure is made by cherishing
The happy wound; my destiny hath placed
My thoughts of love, where they cannot concern
Your trouble or suspicion, nor indeed
My hope, for I despair ever to meet,
His clear affection whom I honour.

Would
This Court containd whom you would make so precious;
I should with as much cherefullness assist
Thy wishes, as desire thy aid to mine;
I do believe you have much credit with
His thoughts, and virtue to deserve it Madam,

If you trust me,
The favour I have with his Highness, shall not
Create your prejudice, be confident,
Your birth, your beauty, and those numerous graces
That wait upon you, must command his heart.

Madam you force a blush for my much want
Of what you're pleased to impute my ornaments,
You are acquainted with your self, and show
What I should be, if I were rich like you,
But my disparity of worth allow'd,
Would you would call me Sister, and impose
Something on me, my act of confidence,
And free discovery of my soul, may
Deserve faith from you, that I shall never
Injure his name you love.

There is no hope
In my desires, and therefore I beseech,
Dear Madam, your excuse, yet thus much I
Dare borrow of my grief to say, he lives
Now in the Court, for whose sake I thus wither.

Alas I fear again, is he composed
Of gentle blood, and can to thee he cruel?

No, he is very kind, for he did promise
To be my Husband, we have been contracted.

Disperse these mist^, clear my wonder Madam.

When time and sorrow shall by death prepare
My sad release of love, you may know all;
Were the condition of my fa^e like others,
It were no grief to name him.

This doth more enlarge my Jealousy.

But let us leave this subject, till time fit,
To open the maze of my unhappy fortune.

I heard that she was come into the Park,
They cannot far be; they are in view,
And no man with'em, I'll now be valiant.

It was her Highness charge I should direct you,
I know her walk.

The blustering Prince again;
Who sent him hither? I think he conjures.
Now dare I with as much confidence undertake
To cure a Lyon rampant, of the Tooth-ach,
As but go forward; and my valiant Mother --

Your Son; I must excuse my self then to him.

Now shall I be fit for a Carbonado.

I hope you'll pardon sir, if I appeared,
Less smooth when I la^t saw you.

My good Lord; your Grace is too much humble,
I'm your blow-ball, your breath dissolves my being,
But to show how free my wishes are to serve you,
If you have any mind, or meaning to my Mother --

How do you mean?

In what way your Grace pleases,
She shall be yours, your Highness may do worse,
Although I say it she has those things may give
A Prince content.

Your Son is very courteous.

I should prepare you sir to look with mercy
Upon his folly. But the Princess.

Mother.

Will you be still a fool,
What said you sir to the Prince?

Will you be wise and use him tenderly.

Stain to thy Fathers blood --
I was coming Madam.

Vmh: he is my rival, would my hilts
Were in his belly; they are out of sight;
It is no rutting time, no trick?

Signior Bertoldi.

I do not know you friends, but how soever,
There is a purse of money

Sir, I want not.

That Gentleman perhaps can drink; I like not
Their goggle eyes, twas well I gave 'em money:
What do ye want else? you are Soldiers;
I love a Soldier.

I am a Gentleman of Mantua sir,
That owe my life to your command, as one,
That had an interest in the preservation,
Your army brought when the Enemy besieged us.

Your mercy Signior, and how do all
Our limber friends 'it 'h Nunnery? I was one
Of the Cavaliers went with the General,
Into the Orchard of Hesperides
To fetch the golden Dragon.

Golden Apple,
You mean the Princess Fioretta Signior;
Is she married sir?

No, no, the Duke will neither dye, nor live,
To any purpose, but they will be shortly;
Have you a mind to kiss her hand?

I shall be proud --

You shall be as proud as you please sir.

You can resolve me, is Honorio
Our Duke of Mantuas Son here?

Yes, he is here,
Heaven were a fitter place for him.

Ha! look to him,
For he is come with bloody thoughts to murder
Your Prince Leonato, caution him to walk
With a strong guard, and arm himself with all
That can be proof against his Sword or Pistol,
He cannot be too safe against the treason
And horrid purpose of Honorio.

His mouth is Musket bore; but are you sure
He did resolve to kill our Prince?

Most certain.

I am very glad to hear't.

Glad sir?

Yes, I cannot wish him better then a Traitor,
Now I shall be revenged.

Has he been guilty of any affront to you?

He is my Rival.

Why do not you kill him then?

Pox on him, I cannot endure him.

He is then reserved to fall by me.

Tis too good to be true; are you married Signior?

What then?

If you be not, do this you shall have
My mother, a Lady that has Gold enough to pave
The Streets with double Ducats, here's my hand,
Kill but this huffing Prince, my Mothers yours,
And all her movables -- tis he alone too,
There's convenient bottom sir hard by
The finest place to cut his throat, I'll not
Be seen.

I am resolved, charge home thy little Murderers,
And follow.

I warrant you my Lord.

But tell me hast thou any hopes of Madam Flo^elia?

I had a lusty promise.

From her?

Ye Coxcomb her sweet Son.

Why so had I, he did contract her to me,
A flat bargain and sale of all she had,
So I would say he was valiant.

That was the price he made to me, but I,
Had hope last visit from her self.

Be plain, I'll tell thee, she gave me strong expectation,
And came on like a Cheverell.

I hear,
She has given out she wi^l have one of us,

She cannot love us bo^h.

Would she had on^, then the toy were over,
I could make shift to love her.

And to lye with her estate, one helps the the other well.

I find a change within my self, I hope,
I sha'not prove in love now after all
My jesting, and so many coy repulses,
To men of birth and honour.

Tis she.

Why do I think upon him, then? I fear,
This man of War has don't.

I have it, we'll find whether she affect
Or Juggle with us presently.

Those postures,
Would show some difference, here I can observe --

Your Mistress?

Mine if she be pleased, what interest
Can all your merit challenge above me?

You will repent this insolence, I must,
Forget to wear a sword, and hear thee name
Florelia, with that confident relation
To her fair thoughts, and not correct your pride,
I'll search your heart, and let out those proud hopes,
That thus exalt you.

You are cofend Signior,
I do not fear your probe -- she lets us fight,
If we had no more wit, we might foin in ear^st.

Ha, ha, ha, are you at that ward Gentlemen?

She laughs to see us fence of this fashion,
Lets come a little closer.

Hold, hold Gentlemen,
For your own honours, is this valour well
Employed? what cause can urge effusion,
Thus of that noble blood was given you
To serve your Country? are you mad?

We are but little better to be both in love.

What Woman,
Considered in her best is worth this difference;
She is cruel cannot ^inde a better way
To reconcile you, than by letting blood.
Do you both love one?

It does appear so Madam.

I would I knew the Lady makes you both
Unhappy, I would counsel her some way,
To set your hearts at peace.

Tis in your power.

Without more circumstance, do but look upon
Your self, and end our civil Wars; we have both
Opinion of your virtue, and both hope
An interest in your love, if you will please
To point which of us two is most concerned
In your affection, ^ou conclude our danger,
And oblige one your everlasting Servant.

This Madam is a charitable way
To know your own, and save two lives, for we
Shall fix upon your sentence, and obey
The fate you give us.

Do you fight for me?
And will it save ^ncision and preserve
Your noble veins to know whom I prefer
In my best thoughts of love? this is but reasonable,
And twill be hard to set a period
To this contention, for I love you both
So equally, observe me Cavaliers,
Tis most impossible to distinguish which
Is first in my neglect, for I love neither:
Fight or be friends, you have your choice, and I
My liberty -- I had forgot to thank you,
For your infusion of that fierce courage
Into my Son, there is great hope if he
Live till next year, he may be a Constable,
He has an excellent art to keep the peace. Farewell.

Madam, for all this I believe you love --

I believe now she's old and has no teeth,
Else she would bite at one of us -- Reverend Madam,
That word has fetched her, -- we have no other cordial,
At this dead pang for your disdain, but drink now;
If you will have your Son made a fine Gentleman,
Be sure you send him to the Tavern to us,
He knows the rendezvous, though you despair,
We may wind him up yet with spirit of Wine,
How ever we'll be merry, and perhaps,
For all this, drink your health.

Buoy Madam.

If you love your Baby send him.

I am to blame, but I must help it some way.

Two Engines of so small extent to do
Such mighty execution? may I see
These instruments you say you have invented,
And so commend for service?

Yes my Lord,
Show 'em to the Prince, do they not fright already?
Your Grace may take full view, and quickly be
The proof what force they have.

I am betrayed,
Who hath conspired my death

To vex you, see him --

Flaviano, what make thou here?

To put of these commodities; you are
A princely Merchant, and affect this kind
Of traffic, that you may not die in the dark,
I'll tell you a brief story, which you may
Report in the other world, I did affect
Ambitiously thy Sister Fioretta,
Abused thy Father with a false opinion
Of Leonato, for my end removed
His Mistress from the Cloister, and persuaded
A witty Nun to take her name, and cheat
The Prince, whom he suspects not yet.

Damned rascal?

For pure love to your Sister I did this.

Why having been so impious, does thy malice
Pursue me, ignorant of all thy treasons?

Would you know that? -- because I am undone
In my chief hope, the Princess whom I thought
Thus placed secure, and apt for my own visit
Is gone, is vanished, and as soon I may
Find the impression of a Ship at Sea,
And by the hollow tract in waves oretake
The winged Bark, distinguish where the Birds,
At Chase 'ith' air, do print their active flight,
As find in what part of the envious World
Fioretta is bestowed; this sad intelligence
Surprised me like a storm, nor was it safe
To look upon the Duke, who must too late
Repent his trust, and punish it. In this conflict
Of desperate thoughts, I thus resolved to see
Ferrara, and the Lady I preferred,
But find things cannot prosper, if you live?
Whose angry breath will throw down waht my policy
Wrought high, and strike my head beneath the ruins.
Are you now satisfied why you must not live?

Hear me, she's still in silence, and believed
My Sister by the Prince.

When you are dead, then
You Will be sure to tell no tales; now shoot --

In my opinion, if all this be truth,
The mischief you have done may be sufficient,
And he may live.

Villain wilt thou betray me?

You have betrayed your self, and after this
Confession, as I take it, I may be
Your Ghostly Father, and prescribe you a Penance.

Hold.

I will but Physic you, your soul has caught
A vehement cold, and I have two hot pills
Will warm you at heart.

Shall my revenge be idle?

Good Prince, you are too forward, you be
So hasty, I'm of this side; did you think,
I would be false? yet lest my aim be unlucky,
Trust your own hand to guide 'em.

Thou art honest,
Thus I salute thy heart Honori^ -- ha, no charge.

Tis time sir to be honest, I could serve you
In some Court sins, that are but flesh-colour,
A wickedness of the first dye, whose brightness
Will fade, and tincture change; your murder i^
Crimson in grain, I have no fancy too't.
Sir you are safe.

I see thou hast preserved me.

I'm lost for ever.

Tis but a minute
Since you were found, you must be plea^'d to walk
Into the Court, the Vestal you preferred
No doubt will bid you welcome. Fate I thank thee.

False stars, I dare you now.

I shall wait on you.

I have collected all my brain, and cannot
In any counsel of my thoughts find safety;
Honorio's death wo'not secure my strength,
Or prop my languishing greatness; tis but like
A cordial when the pangs of death hang on us,
Nay to my present state no other than
Some liberal portion of a quivering stream,
Drunk to abate the scorching of my Fever,
It cools to'th' taste, and creeps like Ice dissolved
Into my blood, but meeting with the flame,
It scalds my bosom, and augments the fire
That turns my heart to ashes; poor Iuliana,
To what a loss hath thy first ^in betrayed thee*
Ambition hath revenged thy breach of Honour,
And Death must cure Ambition, for I have
No prospect left, but what invites to ruin.
I am resolved not to expect my fate,
But meet it this way.

Dearest Fioretta?
Ha, what offends my Princess? there is something
That dwells like an Eclipse upon thy eyes,
They shine not as they did, a discontent,
Is like a mildew fallen upon thy cheek,
Tis pale and cold, as Winter were come back
To over-run the Spring.

My dearest Lord,
My face is but the title to a volume
Of so much misery within, as will
Tire your amazed soul to read.

Thou dost
Freeze up my blood already. O call back
Part of this killing language, if thou mean
To make me understand thee; the amazement
Doth fall so like a deluge, I am drowned,
Ere I can think my fears; how have we lived
At distance? thou should walk upon this Earthquake
And my ground tremble not, but with this fright
I am awake, open the volume now,
I will read every circumstance.

Observe then, what first becomes my sorrow.

Dost thou kneel?
That posture is for them have lost their Innocence;
We must do this to Heaven.

I must to you.

What guilt can weigh thee down so low?
Dost weep too!

I should not love my eyes if they were silent,
They know this story will too soon o'rcharge
My fe^ble voice, that every tear could fall
Into some character which you might read,
That so I might disp^nse with my sad tongue,
And leave my sorrows legible; oh my Lord,
I have wronged you above hope to find your mercy.

Take heed, think once more what thou hast don
Ere thou describe such an offence, lest I
Believe a fault, will drown us both with horror;
T^ou hast not broke thy vow* nor given away
Thy honour, since thy faith did seal thee mine?

Not in a thought.

I wo'not see thee kneel,
Rise, and be welcome to my arms, thou hast
Done nothing can offend me Fioretta.

Alas -- I am not Fioretta.

Ha! this doth confirm me, thou hast all this while
But mocked my fear, and yet this weeping is
Not counterfeit, thou art too blame my love,
Is it thy jealousy, that I am cold
In my returns to answer thy affection?
Or have I less in thy esteem of merit
Than thy hopes flatterd thee? or doth the time
That dully moves, and intermit the joys
We promised when the Altar had confirmed us
Sit heavy on thy thought? we will awake
From this our sullen sleep, and quit off those
Sick Feathers that did droop our wings; fly to
The holy man whose charm shall perfect us,
And chain our amorous souls.

Divide us rather;
Joy is a fugitive of late, and while
You think of Hymen, you remove your wishes.
Fioretta will forbid the Priest.

Can thou forget thy love so much?

Alas my Lord,
You have been all this while abused, and when
I have said enough to assure your Faith, that I
Am not your Fioretta, but a Virgin,
Compelled to take her name, you will I hope
Kill me your self, and save me a despair,
That will conclude my breath else in few Minutes.

Are not you Fioretta, but a Virgin
Compelled to take her name? who durst compel thee?

The Duke of Mantua.

I dissolve in wonder.
Durst Mantua use me thus? thy name?

Iuliana;
My blood, (excepting what does fill the veins
Of Princes) flowing from the noblest spring
Of honour.

Where was Fioretta then?

Conveid I know not whither, ere you came
To save their lives that did betray you thus.
I was too careless of my fate, that I
Kept such a glowing secret still within me,
I had no fear to be consumed, that had
Another Fire within me, whose wide flame
Had soon devoured all my considerings.
Alas my Lord, You did appear so full
Of honour, virtue, and such Princely love,
Twas easy to forget on whom you smiled,
I had no thought to wish my self unhappy,
Or own another name to my undoing,
Yet now more tender of your birth and fame
Than my own life, I cast my self beneath
Your feet a bleeding sacrifice.

Am I awake and hear all this?

I see my Lord,
In your enraged eye, what lightning is
Prepared, tis welcome; since I danot hope
To live upon your smile, I would fain dye
Betime, before the shame of my dishonour
Enforce a mutiny upon my self*
But think my Lord while I confess all this
Against my self, how free I might have been,
How happy, how near Heaven, above those glories,
Had not you forced me from the blessed Garden
Where I was planted, and grew fair, though not
Obliged by any solemn vow, 'twas you,
Your own hand ravished me from that sweet life,
Where without thought of more than should concern
Your welfare in my prayers, I might have sung,
And had converse with Angels.

Sir, I bring sad news.

I prithee speak, I am prepared for all.

The Duke is dead.

My Father dead?

I do not like the Princess at that posture.

I have forgot your name Lady -- you may rise.

My Lord I bring you news welcome as health
Or liberty, your soul will not be spacious
Enough to entertain what will with joys
And strong amazement fill it; how I swell,
With my own happiness to think I shall
Redeem your noble heart from a dishonour
Will weigh down death. You think you vvalk on Roses
And feel not to what Dragons teeth, and stings,
You were betrayed. I bring a disinchantment,
And come with happy proofs.

To tell me this is not
Your Sister Fioretta: but a Nun
Subornd to cheat me -- I know all the business,
And am resolved in my revenge. Iuliana,
Sweet suffering Maid, dry thy fair eyes, tis I
Must make thee satisfaction, I thus
By thy own name receive thee to my bosom,
But you that practised cunning, shall ever time
Contract the age of one pale Moon, behold
The Country I preserved a heap of ruins.

Flaviano? sir --

Do you know whom you embrace?
Flaviano has confessed
Himself the Traitor, and the black contriver
Of all this mischief; Leonato hear me,
Or by thy Father nevvly falln to ashes,
I shall repent I had an honourable
Thought of thee. Flaviano; Madam, witchcraft,
My rage will strangle my discourse, my soul
Is leaping forth to be revenged upon
That Devil; Prince keep off, his very breath
Will stifle thee, and dam thy honour to
All ages* Fioretta's now in Court.

Ha! in the Court?

This is some new device.

I charge thee by thy blood throw of these Harpies,
And do my Sister justice, whom their treason
Hath made a scorn, that minute she usurps
Her name of Bride, I shall forget the Altar,
And turn my self the Priest, with all your blood
To make a purging sacrifice.

If when we
Receive our rites, thou dost but frovvn, or vvhispe^
To interrupt one ceremony, I
Will make thee hold the tapers while the Priest
Performs the holy office; tell thy Sister
Here I bestow, what you have made me forfeit.
Present her to the Nunnery, and counsel
Thy ignoble Father, when I next see Mantua
To be a sleep in's Coffin, and his vault
Deep, and thick rib'd with Marble, my noise else
Will shake his dust; thy youth finds mercy yet,
Take the next whirl-wind, and remove -- our guard;
Petronio we confine him to your house.

Thou coward Prince, there's not one honest man
In all the World, our sins ascend like vapours,
And will, if Justice sleep, stupefy Heaven,
For thine own glory wake, if thou dispense
With this, proud man will cry down providence.

SUch Wine as Ganimede doth skink to Jove
When he invites the Gods to feast with him
On Iunos wedding-day.

Jove never drank so brisk a Nectar as I'll draw.
But does Signior Bertoldi come?

What else? my Alderman of the Cellar.

He is our Hilas; shall we not ha Music?

By all means, and the Mermaids.

You shall have any thing;
But if Signior Bertoldi come, I have
A boon to beg, I have a pretty plot
To make you laugh.

What is't?

As you are Gentlemen, do not deny me;
I have been your up-and-down-stairs-man to draw
The best blood of the Grape these ten years,
Troy held out not longer, I have a device
Shall make you merry when he comes, if you
Will give me leave to shift, and help a jest.
He is a Coward still, under the Rose?

As any lives under the Sun, be confident.

The same senseless piece of timber,
You may cut him into a Bed-staff.

I'll send you Wine, say I am valiant,
Let me alone with the Catastrophe.

What will he do?

I know not, he were best make us laugh,
I shall expound the matter else.

My Mother remembers her service Gentlemen,
I left my Mistress to come to you; and how?
Shall we drink like Fishes? Toll roll lolly, c.

Sit, sit, a health to the Lady you kissed last.

Let it come, I'll pledge it,
And it were the Gulf of Venice.

And who's your Mistress?

Faith I do not know her name, nor ever kissed any thing but her Glove in my
life.


But you have told her your mind?


Not I by this Wine -- but that's all one,
She is a Lady, well bred, and companion
To the Princess, that's enough.
Here Signior -- would we had some Wenches here.

Some bouncing bona robas, hang this dull City there's no music in it, no silken
Music.


Oh for a Wench could spit fire now, that could whizze like a Rocket, and fall
into a 100 blazing stars, such a Fire-drake would be warm company in a close
room, Signior.


And it were in a Cellar under the Alps, it would make Hercules melt in the
back.


But for all that, I do not like a sinner of such a fiery constitution.


You would not venture upon the golden Fleece then, which is but the moral of
a Maidenhead.


I never heard that before.


So say the learned, first for the difficulty to obtain it, being watched by a
Dragon, and then for the Rarity, there being but one in all the World.


But one Maidenhead?


And that some hold as doubtful as the Phoenix or Unicorn, such things are in
History, but the man's not alive that will take his Oath in what climate they
are visible. Here's to the Swan that broke her heart with singing last.


And to the Dolphin that was in love with a Fiddlers Boy of Thebes, who carried
him cross the Seas on her back a fishing, while he sung the ^iedge of Troy to
the Tune of Green-sleeves, and caught a Whale with an angling rod.


I'll pledge 'em both; they are very fine healths. Are these your Mistresses
names Gentlemen?


Mystical, Mystical.


I Understand they are mystical -- who's this?


Save you Gentlemen.


Tis the Drawer.


I do not like the odor of your Wine


Was it a health? let it go round Gent. I am troubled with sore eyes, this
Signior has washed 'em for me, I hope I shall see to thank him.


Cry mercy Signior, you are like a noble Gent. I saw at Rome, you are the very
same, to whom his Holiness gave a pension, for killing 6 great Turks in
Tra^silvania, whose heads were boiled, and brought home in a Portmanteau.


It was but 5 sir and a Sarasens.

You are the man?

Pray give me leave to honour you.

I desire to be your poor admirer too,
My eyes are clear to see your worth, my name
Is Bertoldi at your service.

To you Signior, a health to Iulius Caesar, Prester Iohn,
And the grand Cham of Tartaria.

You sha'not pledge him.

No.

Make your exceptions, I'll justify 'em.

This Cavalier drank t'ee sir.

I do remember, but I cannot pledge him.

How sir?

No sir, I'll pledge my friend Prester Jack,
But for Iulius Caesar and the grand Cham they are
Pagans, I have nothing to say to 'em.

Here is a Gentleman, he seems of quality,
Enquiring for Signior Volterino and Hortensio.

Admit him, and he be a Gentleman.

You'll pardon if a stranger that has had
A long ambition to kiss your hands,
Rather entreat for his access, than lose
The happiness of your knowledge.

Sir, you're most welcome.

If you will keep us company
You must be equally engaged.

My humble service, Signior Hortensios Mistress.

You honour me; would I were off again.

Excuse me Signior.

You're too full of ceremony.

Sir, is there any difference between you Iulius Caesar,
You would not pledge his health?

No difference in the world.

How, no difference between you, and a Roman Emperor?

Divide'em, what's the matter?

O for some Trumpets.

Somebody hold my Sword, give me the Wine,
I'll drink it --

So, we are friends.

O shameful!

But I shall find a time --

Find twenty thousand years, there's time enough.

I'll be your stickler.

I have not pledged the Cham yet, nor I wo' not, come, I know you well enough.


Know me, for what?


For a brave fellow, and a man may believe thee thou hast done things as well
as the best on 'em, but I know not where, nor I care not, tel me of Iulius
Caesar: I am a Gentleman, and have seen fighting before now, here's a Cavalier
knows it, I scorn to be baffel'd by any Transilvanian Turk-killer in
Christendom, I; thar't a


Well said, and a Sandiack.


And a Sandiack, I defy the grand Cham, and Muftie. all his Tartars, you're a
stinking obstreperons fellow to tell me of a Turd and a Fart, and I honour you
with all my heart. Hort. He called you Muftie.


What's that?

And a Sandiack, that is son of whor in 2 languages.

How? in two languages? then my honour is
Concerned, have I in 30 battles against the Turk
Stood the dire shock, when the Grenades flew
Like Atoms in the Sun,
Have I killed 20 Pashas, and a Musselman,
And took the Sultans Turban Prisoner,
And shall I be affronted by a thing
Less than a Lancepresado?

Will no body hold me?

Gentlemen, this heat must needs be dangerous.

Let me but speak with him

No danger of my life, let 'em go together:
And let us mind our business.

Signior, I am your friend, and pity you
Should lose so much your honour, be advised,
I'll show a way how to repair your fame,
And without danger.

To Volterinos Mistress.

I receive it, I shall have my share, I now
Repent my curiosity to see
Their humours, and to hear what they would say
Of me --

Let 'em alone -- to Volterinos Mistress.

Come, to my Whore.

Your Whore Signior?

Does that offend you?

Not me -- I ha done you right.
I am well enough rewarded they beat me.

I know not how to deserve this courtesy being a stranger^
But if you want a Wife noble sir, and will accept of my
Mother, you shall have her before any man in Italy.

I thank you sir,
But be sure you hit me full of the head.

Tis too much, a cut of the leg and please you.

No, let it be of the head.

You wo'not strike again?

Mine's but a foil.

They measure and give back --

Oh I am slain, a Surgeon. Bertoldi strikes Pand.

I'll take my leave.

By this hand, I'll drink his Mothers health first,
There's no danger he were dead; a health to the Lady
Florelia, I drink it for his sake.

Away, and get a Surgeon.

Come, to my Lady Mother.
A man is not born to be a coward all his li^e.

I can no more sir.

You should have told me sir at first,
There is no remedy, tis to an honourable Lady.

You must excuse me sir.

Throw't in his eyes.

At your request.

You're most uncivil.

You're a mushrump.

So sir, you're a multitude, and in a Tavern,
I did believe you sir a Gentleman,
If you be, give me satisfaction nobly.

With all my heart.

Then thus --

Signior Bertoldi fly, his wound is dangerous,
We fear he will bleed to death before the Surgeon come.

Out by the Postern.

Pox, a conspiracy, I shall kill but one, I see that;
Would I were a Mite in a Holland Cheese now.

I wo'not fail you sir.

He desires to speak with you before he dye.

Is Bertoldi gone?

Hortensio, I guess you may be engaged:
Leave me to these things, There may be danger.

I know the private way.

Virtue and honour, I allow you names,
You may give matter for dispute, and noise,
But you have lost your Essence, and that truth
We fondly have believed in human souls,
Is ceased to be, we are grown fantastic bodies,
Figures, and empty titles, and make hast
To our first nothing, he that will be honest,
Must quite throw off his cold decrepit nature,
And have a new creation -- my poor Sister,
She has heard the Dukes resolve.

Oh let me dye, upon thy bosom Brother,
I have lived
Too long; they say the Duke resolves to marry
With Iuliana, so they call her now,
Whose sorcery hath won upon his soul;
I have walked too long in dark Clouds, and accuse
Too late my silence, I am quite undone,
There was some hope while he did love my name,
But that and all is banished; is't not in
The power of fancy to imagine this
A dream that hath perplexed us all this while?
If it be real, I will be revenged,
Tis but forgetting what I am, and then
I am not concerned.

Rather forget the Duke,
And live to triumph in a love more happy.
He is not worth a tear.

How's this? my heart!

Come, I will kiss these sorrows from thy cheek,
This Garden wants no watering, preserve
This rain, it is a wealth should ransom Queens,
As thou dost love me, chide thy saucy grief,
That will undo the spring here, and enforce
My heart to weep within me equal drops
Of blood for these.

Oh my abused confidence,
Lauriana now I find hath but betrayed me,
Instruct me rage and jealousy.

I am resolved.

Well said, take courage Fioretta,
Appear with thy own name and sufferings,
Thy sight will strike the proud Impostors from
Their Pyramids of glory.

It were more revenge to dye.

Not so deer Fioretta, something glides
Like cheerfulness of the suddrn through my blood;
Despair not to be happy: Let's consult,
And form the aptest way for all our honour.

There's but one cloud in all our sky, were that
Removed, we were above the rage of storms:
That Claudio knows too much. I look upon
His life like a prodigions blazing Comet;
He palls my blood; if I but meet him handsomely,
I'll make him fixed as the North-star. I hear
No whisper of him yet; were but he dead,
Iuliana and her friend might revel here:
The Duke should have the name, but we would steer
The Helm of State, and govern all. I have
Gained much upon Leonato's easy faith,
Who thinks me innocent, and that only duty
Mislead my nature and my tongue to obey
The Duke of Mantua and the Prince, upon
Whose heads I have translated all my guilt,
And framed their jealousy at home my cause
Of flight for refuge hither -- Ha, my eyes
Take in confusion! The Duke and Claudio!
'Tis doomsday in my soul.

Can this be justified?

I dare confirm this truth with my last blood.

I dare not hear it. That I now could fling
My self upon the winds --

And should be happy
Were Flaviano's life put into balance
Against my own, to make it clear by his
Confession. To my shame I must acknowledge
was the agent 'twixt 'em; he was pleased
To choose me his smock Officer, a place
Poor Gentlemen at Court are forced to serve in,
To please luxurious greatness, younger brothers,
Who cannot live by fair and honest ways,
Must not starve sir.

Flaviano's Whore?
Where can we hope to trust our faith, when such
White brows deceive us?

I do not like
This Claudio's business here, the Duke is troubled;
My whole frame trembles.

Madam Iuliana?
My excellent white Devil, you are welcome,
Where is your Catamountain Flaviano?
You are no Serpents spawn?

Oh hear me sir, by your own goodness.

When did thou kneel to Heaven?

I see my leprosy unveild, that sin
Which with my loss of honour first engaged
My misery, is with a Sun-beam writ
Upon my guilty forehead, but I have not
(Excepting the concealment of my shame,
Which charity might privelege) offended
^bove what I confessed, and you have pardond.

She hath a tongue would almost tempt a Sai^
To unbeleeve Divinity, she learned
^me accents from the first Apostate Angel
That mutined in Heaven; away,
^ dare not trust my frailty; where's Flaviano?

My soul doth apprehend strange shapes of horror.
^a -- tis the Princess Fioretta.

Can you direct me Madam, how I may
(...) with the noble Lady Iuliana?

I can instruct you Madam where to find
A miserable woman of that name.

Where?

Here.

Do not deceive me,
I came to visit her whom the Dukes love
And confluence of glories must create
A Duchess, to whose greatness I must pay
My adoration.

Do not mock her, Madam,
To whose undoing nothing wants but death;
Let not my sin, which cannot hope your pardon,
Make you forget your virtue; Princely natures,
As they are next to Forms Angelical,
Show the next acts of pity, not derision,
When we are fallen from Innocence.

Do you know me?

For the most injured Princess, Fioretta.

You must know more, I come to take revenge
And kill thee.

Thus I kneel to meet your wounds,
And shall account the drops my proud veins weep
Spent for my cure; oh Madam you are not cruel,
You have too soft, too merciful a look;
When you see me, your countenance should wear
Upon it all the terrors that pale men
Can apprehend from the wild face of War,
A civil War, that wo' not spare the womb
That gron'd and gave it life, this would become you,
Or fancy meager Famine when she hunts
With hollow eyes, and teeth able to grind
A rock of Adamant to dust, or what
Complexion the devouring pest should have,
Were it to take a shape, and when you put
Their horrors in your visage, look on me.

What hath prepared this bold resolve?

A hope
To be your sacrifice; I was not before
Without a thought to wish my self thus laid,
And at your feet to beg you would destroy me.

Can you so easily consent to die,
And know not whither afterwards this guilt
Would fling thy wandering soul?

Yes. I would pray
And ask your self, and the wronged world forgiveness.

Why did thou use me thus?

I could, if you
Durst hear me, say something perhaps would take
Your charity. Do you weep? gentle Madam?
And not one crimson drop from me, to wait
Upon those precious showers? not to invite
Your patience upon the lost Iuliana,
But to call back your tears into their spring,
And stay the weeping stream, I can inform you,
The Duke looks on me now with eyes of anger;
I have no interest in a thought from him,
That is not armed with hate and scorn against me.

This will undo my pity, and assure me
Thou hast all this while dissembled with my Justice.

I would I might as soon invest my soul
With my first purity, as clear this truth;
Or would the loss of him were all that sits
Heavy upon my heart; I cannot hope
For comfort in delays of death, and dare
Attend you to him, though it more undo me.

Rise, and obey me then.

I follow, Madam;
My use of life is only meant to serve you.

This is the place within the wood he promised
To meet in, there is Saint Felices Chapel,
That Father Cyprians cell, I hope my Gamester
Will think it fit, I should not walk and wait
Too long for him, these businesses of fighting
Should be dispatch'd as Doctors do prescribe
Physical Pills, not to be chewd but swallowed;
Time spent in the considering dead the appetite,
If I were not to fight now, I could pray;
These terms of honour have but little grace with 'em,
Like Oysters we do open one another^
Without much preface; he that fights a duel
Like a blind man that falls but cares to keep
His staff, provides with art to save his honour,
But trusts his soul to chance, tis an ill fashion.

This is the Gentleman by her description
That comes to fight, another Champion?

Do none pursue me, what a timorous Hare
This guilty conscience is, I am not safe,
I had no time to think of a disguise,
And this can be no wilderness, the Duke
Would give his Palace for my head.

Say so?

Oh for some Pegasus to mount! a Friar?
His habit will serve rarely, seeming holiness
Is a most excellent shrovvd to cheat the world.
Good Father sanctity, I must be bold,
Or cut your throat, nay I can follow.

Help, help.

Thou sacrilegious Villain.

I am caught already.

My good Lord Flaviano. Father
You may come back, and help to bind the Gentleman
If I did understand him well, he said
The Duke has some affairs to use his head-peece;
I would not have him out of the way, when I^
Return -- to that tree -- you were best be gentle.

I can but dye.

Oh yes, you may be damned
All in good time, and it is very likely.

You have preserved my life Son.

It was my happiness to be so near,
When virtue was distressed.

You have not done sir,
As you are noble follow me, there is
Another ^nemy to meet, but I
Dare be your second and direct you.

What means the Fryer?
I'll walk and see the worst on it.

Oh for a Tenement under ground to hide me*
This wood will hardly do it, if I can lurk
Here but till night; I am furnished well with ducats;
Your melancholy mole is happy now,
He fears no Officers, but walks invisible;
Would I were chamber-fellow to a worm,
The Rooks have princely lives that dwell upon
The top^ of Trees, the Owls and Bats are Gentlemen,
They fly and fear no warrants, every Hare
Out-runs the Constable, only poor man
By nature slow and full of phlegm, must stay,
And stand the cursed Law, I do not think
Tis so much Penance to be hanged indeed,
As to be thus in fear on it.

Sir, look this way.

Oh! if I had but the heart of a woman's Tailor,
I might run away now.

I am robbed and bound.

Umh, are you bound? there's the less danger in you.

For charity release me.

You are surely bound -- whats that?
I hear another whispering of that side;
Now I sweat all over, I but think
If I were naked, how Maids might gather dew
From every part about me -- Tis the wind
Among the leaves. I do not like the Trees
Should lay their heads together of this fashion.
You are my fast friend still.

Signior Bertoldi.

Does he name me?
You and the Tree shall grow together now,
I came not hither to be known; some Thief,
Or sturdy rogue; I have heard of these devices
In woods before; should I unbind him now,
He would cut my throat, or rob me for my charity.

I am the man for your sake undertook
To kill the Prince your rival.

Did you so? I'll trust you ne'er the sooner;
Well remembered, I'm glad you're not at leisure;
You that will kill your Prince, will make but little
Conscience to quarter me.

But he is still alive.

Is he so?
Why then I am the less beholding to you.
So, you shall cancel your own bonds your self.
How now, more persecution?

Here was a Duel quickly taken up,
And quaintly too, I did not think to marry
The Gentleman that challenged me to fight,
I thank your device Madam.

Thank the blow you gave me sir,
I love a man dares strike.

I'll please you better with my after striking.

My Mother and Hortensio?

Signior Bertoldi well met, lay hands on him
And bind him fast, he has a dangerous spirit

Who I? you may as well say I have skill in the
Black art, Volterino, Gentlemen, there's my Mother.

Your Son is valiant Madam now I hope,
As you can wish, he has killed his man; but I
Studious to gain your favour have procured?
His pardon from the Duke.

Is the Drawer dead?

Dead as the Wine he sometimes drew.

Farewell he; will you salute my Lady Signior
And give us joy? yon Friar married us.

Let me go, I have my pardon.

Not yet; now you shall be hanged again,
Did not you swear I should have your Mother

You shall have her yet.

If it be so,
He shall be worth your suit, and compound fairly.

No, I have thought of my revenge; because
I cannot have your Mother, do ye observe,
If you expect the benefit of this pardon,
You shall marry mine.

I'll marry any living soul,

She's somethi^g old, till the last night I see her not
These forty years, since when she's grown so ugly,
I dare not own her, and some think the reason
Of her deformity to proceed from witchcraft.

Alas good Gentlewoman.

I mean she is a Witch her self,
And has two Cats they say,
Suck her by turns, which some call her Familiars;
She has not had a tooth this thirty years;
And you must kiss her with a spung in your mouth,
She is so full of phlegm, else she'll go near
To strangle you, and yet they say she has
A most devouring appetite to mans flesh,
You may have a devil of your own to attend you,
And when you're melancholy,
She'll make you Ghosts and Goblins dance before you
Bring Bears and Bandogs with an o'r grown Ape
Playing upon the Gittern.

Where is this creature? shall he not see her first?

I left her in a Sive was bound for Scotland,
This morn to see some kindred, whence she was
Determined to take Eg-shell to Skeedam.
From thence when she has dined she promised me
To ride post hither on a Distaff.

How?

Oh here she is, what think you of a Husband
Mother? can you love this Gentleman, he's one
Will be a great comfort to you.

I like the stripling well,
He will serve to watch my pits, and see that non^
Of my spirits boil over.

Is this your Mother
Come I'll be hanged, tis the more handsome destiny
Unless you will take composition --

Let me talk with the Gentleman.

I am at leisure now to wait on you sir.
Unbind, and lead him to the Duke.

Flaviano? you are the Gentleman his Highness
Gave strict command should be pursued, I shall
Be proud to wait upon you to the Court.

I wo'not lose my passion on such bloodhounds.

We are agreed, hey, here's my pardon.

Yes, I am satisfied, and can thank you Signior
In several shapes --

The Drawer.

I did want a sum like this to set me up: I was
Provided against your Sword, a pretty night-cap,
And almost Pistol proof, I shall be rich,
I thank your bounty, and so rid the Witch.

Here's none of the Dukes hand.

It needs not Madam.
I know not yet by what device you came together thus.

I'll tell you as we walk.

Pay for a pardon and not kill my man?
The Duke shall hear of this.

No news of Flaviano yet? some furies
Have sure transported him.

A Gentleman with Letters sir from Mantua.

Ha! admit him -- leave us, the Duke himself?

That comes to offer
A pledge for young Honorio, not in thought
Guilty of that unprincely entertainment
You h^d at Mantua. if my Son, as fame
Is ^sie in Ferrara, be exposed
To your displeasure, change my fate with his,
That to my shame in part consented to
The practice of a Traitor Flaviano,
Who used my power to advance his own ambition
To your dishonour, and instead of my
Fioretta, whether now alive or dead
I know not, cheat your faith with Iuliana,
To quit the noble safety your Sword brought us,
My life is troublesome in the loss of fame,
And Fioretta.

Where is Flaviano?
Duke Fled like a guilty villain from my Justice,
May hortor overtake him; let my Son
Live by some noble deeds to expiate
His Fathers forfeit, and disgrace; I come
Without a guard, and were it not a crime
To my eternity, could sacrifice
My self without expecting your revenge,
Or nature to conclude my age.

Let me have Justice.

Give me Justice Prince.

Let me have Justice too.

Against whom Sister?

Against this Lady.
She hath conspired to take away my life.

My enemy is Duke Leonato sir,
Who hath conspired to take away himself,
A Treasure equal with my life.

My enemy is Iuliana sir, that hath con^pir'd
To rob her self, both of her life and honour.

Mant. Tis she, my aged eyes take leave of seeing,
Expect no object after this so welome.
My Daughter Fioretta.

Dearest Father.

How, Fioretta? she is then but Sister
To my Honorio, life of all my joys,
My feet have wings at this glad news.

Were you the Suffering Lady Fioretta?
How could you live so long within the Court,
And no good Angel all this while acquaint me?

This joy is too too mighty, and I sha' not
Repent my exile to be thus rewarded.

Confirm my happiness again, no treason
Shall now divide us.

Your hearts grow together.

I have received by Claudio the particular
Of Flavianos treason, he has guilt
Above your knowledge sir, Iuliana finds it,
And is confessed his strumpet.

You amaze me.

I bless now my suspicion, when I was
Convaid from Mantua, which directed me
To leave Placentia secretly, and invite
My self a stranger to this Court, where now
I meet as much joy as my soul can fancy.

You have not all this while pronounced my doom,
I fear you hold intelligence with my soul,
And know what pains I feel while I am living,
You will not be so merciful to kill me.

Flaviano!

I present you with a Gentleman,
I took rifling a Hermit in the Wood,
As it appears in hope to escape pursuit,
Hid in a Friars habit, who dispatch'd
After a matrimonial betwixt
This Lady and my self.

That old Gentleman should be Duke of Mantua
What think you sir?

And that his Daughter Fioretta.

She is my Mistress.

She is like to prove the Duchess of Ferrara.

His Grace will not use me so,
I will have Justice, Justice Gentle Duke.

Are you mad.

I'll be revenged of somebody.

Honorio your son, to meet your blessing.

This was the life I feared to lose by her,
Whom I supposed my rival, pardon Madam.

Thus circled, I must faint beneath my happiness

Forgive my passion, and receive a Brother.

That name doth honour us, where is Flaviano?

Whose witty brain must sentence me? let it
Be home and hansom, I shall else despise
And scorn your coarse inventions.

Let me obtain, since providence hath wrought
This happy change, you would not stain our joys
With any blood, let not their sins exceed our charity.

Let him for ever then be banished both
Our Duke-doms.

What shall become of Iuliana?

She (if your grace more fit to judge, consent)
Shall to a house of converts and strict penance,
Where Flaviano, as the price of her
L^st honour, shall pay her dowry to Religion;
What doth remain of his estate, shall be
Emploid toward the redeeming Christian Captives.

I cheerfully obey, and call it mercy.

Tis a most pious Justice.

Justice, that's my kue, Justice, Justice to Bertoldi
Against Signior Volterino, I am cheated.

Will you be a fool upon record?

You shall have Justice.

we appoint you, till he learn
More wit, to be his Guardian, and at your
Discretion govern his estate, so leave us.

I shall with my best study manage both.

I am as good as begged for a fool.

And thus we chain our hearts and provinces.
Madam I wish you joys, to Fioretta
I give my self, my Sister to Honorio.
Treason is sick in her short reign, but when
Heaven sees his time, Truth takes her Throne again.

NOW the play's done, I will confess to you,
And wo' not doubt but you'll absolve me too.
There is a mystery, let it not go far;
For this Confession is a^ricular:
I am sent among the Nuns to fast and pray,
And suffer piteous penance, ha, ha, ha,
They could no better way please my desires,
I am no Nun -- but one of the Black-Friers.

