SIR, by the humble Writer I am sent
To move you in a Suit by President,
That you will please, like Charles the 5 th, to lay
Aside (this Night) the Business of the Day,
And look upon slight Images, far short
Of those presented in that Emp'rour's Court;
For, Art does not our Power so far enlarge,
That we can make two wooden armies charge,
Or a carved Sparrow fly: but we do bring
A Nightingale, sweet Philomel to sing:
And from old Verulam (among Time's Decays
Shrunk to a name) the Inhabitants we raise,
Who if in their new life they may invite
The best of Caesars to the least Delight,
To th Author 'twill be such a Joy, as none
Conceive, but only those You smile upon,

WHat's here? so many Noble Persons m^t?
Nay then I see, this House will not be let,
Which by our Friends (from all parts of the Nation)
Is so well warmed after the long Vacation,
Believe me, Ladies, the pure Country-air
Has made you fresh-complexion'd; and our Care
Shall be (whilst you're in London) to expel
Care from your hearts, that you may still look well.
Gentlemen, when we lay becalmed, you wa^k'd
^ver the pleasant Meads, bowled, hunted, hawked,
And having exercised your Bodies thus,
To recreate your Minds, you come to Us.
Never were Friends more welcome -- if I may
Be bold to bid you welcome to a Play
Of your own making; I confess, 'tis writ
By the Author of The Slighted Maid, and yet
You're the Authors of it: for I heard him say,
When you encouraged that, you made this Play.
And now, since to your selves your title's known,
We hope, you'll have a kindness for your Own.

NO, Fromund, I have had too many proofs
Of thy Fidelity, to doubt it now.

Sir, if you were not Filamor, nor Son
To my Prince, if I were not your sworn Servant;
Without relation, merely for your Virtues,
Fromund would sacrifice his life to serve you
In this Design against your Step-Mother,
Your envious and imperious Step-Mother,
Who rules your Father, and would r^ine You.

The difficulty of the work will be,
When we have got my Father to the Woods,
How we shall keep him there: for since he married
This Woman, she has mastered both his Courage
And Reason; she governs his very Soul,
He cannot live without her.

There's the man
Whose power can balance hers, for your Old Father
Dotes but on two, his Wife and that great Scholar
My Friend.

And you can make him ours.


Not I,
What I am to present him from your Highness
Will make him Yours.

Firm?


If he once engages
Nothing can alter him, he's an honest man*
Peev^sh, but (to our comfort) Covetous:
Yet he'll not take a Bribe to do unjustly;
But if he be employed, he will be paid,
This Gold and this rich Book will sweeten him.

Attacque him; I wait for my severe Mistress,
'Tis Princess Caesarina's walking-time.

The Prince's Tutor? Well returned to Britain.


Our good old Master's Favourite, learned Tetrick.


Out of what Region have the Clouds drop*
Fromund?
Where all this while were thou and our young Prince?

We lived where Grapes grow, like our Crabs, in
hedges,
Where every Tree looks lovelier then this Garden,
In Italy, the Paradise of Nature

The plague of War consume your Paradise;
The Galls over-run Italy again;
Ten thousand Dropsies, Cramps and Gouts torment
That leg of earth.

Still snarling my friend Tetrick?


Men may well snarle when they are used like Dogs,
As we have been, by our Italian Masters.

But now the Roman Legions are called back,
And we are free-men, Britain is old Britain.

But Italy is still cursed Italy,
I would not hear thee praise it any more,
For twenty pieces of Imperial Gold.

I'll try what power one piece has over you.
This Medall ( Caesar grav'd in gold) I brought
From Rome for thee: and is not Italy
(Where these Flowers grow) a most delicious Country?

The Garden of the World! how blind was I,
That could not see the Beauty of Italy
Till I had wiped my eyes with Caesar's Picture;
Now I perceive the error of my Judgment;
Why should we hate Countries that hurt not us?
The Roman Yoke galls not our necks: you see
Our old Lord, Prince of Verulam, dares own
His Title: and what Curiosities
Has our young Prince brought from the Nursery
Of Arms and Arts, sweet Italy?

Rare Musique;
And Voices, such a Treble and a Base --

How merrily shall we live -- pox of the devil.
There's the confoundress of thy Master's musique,
Pluto could not have raked him ou^ of hell
Such a Step-Mother, she reigns over his Father.

But the date of her Sovereign power i^ out*
By this time the old Prince is in our hands,
We have him in the Woods.

And long you'll keep him;
His very first reflection on the fury
Or slat^ery of's Wife, posts him to Court,
He'll leave you.

'Tis expected; therefore, Tetrick,
My Master has sent me to engage you,
If th'old Prince change his mind, you can persuade him,
He believes all you say.

I believe nothing
You say, or do; your Plot's a scurvy Plot.

But you can mold it into a better form.


Nay, since you can begin your plots without me,
End em without me.

And shall I return
The Prince this answer?

Every syllable.


Shall I return his Princely Present too?


That is to be considered of -- let's fee't.


Alas, 'Tis only a poor Table-Book,
The cover is but Gold and set with Rubies,
Not worth your looking on

This needed not;
Without fee, I'd have been of the Prince's Counsel,
And the Cause shall go with him, never fear 't;
But they say, the Step-mother's inquiring
For Witches, th^y'l discover all we do.

That she may seek no further, I have told
Her Favourite, my Mistress Brianella,
That yesternight there came into the Woods
A Bard, that's a Witch-maker:

Your Witch-maker
By any means must be attended by
A Conju^er and a Witch to learn their Trades.

I'll be the Witch, I think my face will serve;


And Scholars make rare Conjurers, I'll play my part,
Come, bring me now to kiss your Masters hand.

Stir Caesarina, only exercise,
Can prevent the undermining of thy Colour
By the Green Sickness, that long gravel walk
Did always please thee.

When I was in breath,
But I'm grown too short-winded for a walk
Of this length, Madam, I shall ne'er hold out.

One quarter of an hour, and I'll release thee.
But Brianella, art thou sure thou saw
Filamor in the Arbor?

At this Lute;
With him a Flamen, and a winged Boy
That should be Cupid, perhaps Priest and God
Will in some Dialogue present themselves
To Princess Caesarina; the Prince said,
They should sing the Description of a Triumph*

Then I shall now see whether Filamor
Continue still his Love to Caesarina,
And how she looks on him after his Travails;
Lets to the close walk, my Son Adolph's there.

Why unarmed, poor Cupid, pray thee,
Tell a Mortal how tis with thee?

To one Mortal, what another
Has committed, may be told;
I am plundered, so's my Mother.

What frail Man durst be so bold?


No, to make us more inglorious,
Tis a Woman that's Victorious.

Caesarina?


They (who saw her)
Say, she rides in Triumph here,
That my Mother's white Doves draw her
In their Chariot.

Look, she's there.


How know thou?


By a sure Token,
Thy Torch quenched, and thy Bow broken,
Makes her Trophy; Captives follow.

One Slave Sorrow's Livery wears,
His Eyes sink, his Cheeks fall hollow,
In his Face his fate appears.

That Slaves Filamon; no Lover
Caesarina triumphs over,
Suffers in Love's Cause so sadly,
Cupid help?

I cannot do
Him a favour; I would gladly:
But I am her Captive too.

The World's grown so stupid
That now 'tis in fashion
To pray to God Cupid,
If a Man have a passion,
He that hopes for a Cure,
Must get it of Beauty,
Or else do his Duty.
That's Dye, or Endure.
Has Filamor been so long out of Britain,
To forget Caesarina is your Daughter?
Court her without your leave?

Or thy consent.


That's more then you know (by your favour, Madam)


He kneels, see.


Hear him.


Heaven is in your Eyes,
Disorder not that beauty with a frown
On your Adorer; if my love displease,
Be not offended with my gratitude,
I name you in my Hymns, as shipwrecked men
Sing to the Deities which have preserved them*
By virtue of that sacred word, your Name,
I have out-liv'd the pains of death in absence,
At my return to you, dearer then life,
Friends, Father, or our common Mother Britain;
Will you, for want of one poor smile, destroy me?

Make not your self a Supplicant to me,
Prince Filamor, kneel where you owe a Duty;
Kneel to the Gods, to grant you Understanding,
That you may see, I cannot love; and then
To one that can love you, apply your self;
You have my counsel and resolve.

For pity,
Leave me not to despair; though all my sighs
Breathed on the air of Italy, were lost
At such a distance; now we'r met again;
May not prayers alter your severity?

Can prayers alter a Decree of Fate?


Prayers joined with services: if Verulam
Open too narrow a Prospect for your eye
I'll draw my sword, and merit from my Country
Th'inlargement of our bounds.

He works upon
The humours of Ambition; I'm afraid
The Milk she sucked from my Breast will betray her.

To be the first on Mountains, in poor hovells,
Rather then to have the second place in Rome,
Was Caesar's wish, but 'tis not Caesarina's;
Your Cottages cannot make me a Court;
I'm not like Ladies newly come to London,
Who from the vast height of Diana's Temple
Look down, and please their eyes with little people,
Ob^ects, that are not magnified, I s^orn;
The Prince that would dis^over his Dominions,
Let him turn the Prospective Glass to me
At the right End, great Subjects I must fee.

She yields?


For my friends sake, would she did yield.


Great Subjects! all our British Lords shall kneel
To Caesarina; I have formed it thus,
You know the Kentish-men have took up arms
Against the Trinobants, the Lond^ers*
Whilst Scots and Borderers, with their deadly feuds,
Engage the Northern parts in Civil War;
No sooner from the Roman Slavery
This Iland's free, but we (like mad-men armed)
Die our white-feather'd shafts in our own blood;
Against these Enemies to the Public Peace
I'll make a League, and fight my Country's battles,
Till I fix Britain in a Settlement.
Then, as the best means to keep Peace, (thus Purchased
By me) I may with confidence presume,
The Wisdom of the Nation for their King
Will choose their General; who shall lay down,
At Caesarina's feet, his British Crown.

Filamor, you have had a pleasing Dream,
And I was loath to wake you, till I found
My self concerned; Britain you may subdue,
If you fight well: but for your fancied Conquest
Of Caesarina, let me undeceive you:
'Tis true, I have declared for Sovereignty,
The Title of a Queen I dote upon;
But if you offered me a Crown, I should
Refuse it as Gold poisoned by the giver.

Fly Brianella, and relieve my daughter,
She comes off bravely; tell her, I and Adolph
Stay for her; bid one call my General.

Will you not love? then I'll revenge you hatred.


Do, revenge.


On my self, I feel my Spirits,
Like those the Chemist is extracting, search
Their brittle prison, with a hope to find
Some Vent, and then to fly into the Wind.

In that point you may use your own discretion.


Madam, your Mother's in the Sicamor-Walk.


I shall attend her.


I'll stay, and get news
Out of my Servant.

Tetrick w^its you, Sir,
With modells for a Mask, he has already
Made your Witch-maker's Prophecy; I'll play
A Witch, Tetrick will be a Conjurer,
^assus the Bard, and we will show your weak Father
What a pernicious Wife he doates upon:
What a^les he now, that he has lost his tongue?
Has not the Princess vexed him?

Yes indeed.


And will not vo^ vex me so?


No indeed,
For, you love me, you say:

I'll swear it, Madam.


What will not men swear; but swear your heart out,
You never shall swear me out of my Reason.

Reason! I warrant, Tetrick reads to you
The Mathematics, you think nothing certain
But D^monstration.

Is Proof Demonstration?
Nothing but Proof is certain.

Kiss me then,
And we will prove, that One and Two make Three.

I will not two and three, pray leave your ^ooling,


In ser^ou^ earne^t, I would marry you.


Meaning my Fortune?


Meaning Brianella;
Without a Portion you're a Fortune, Madam*

Thou art a flattering Knave, I doubt


Resolve
Your self, please to lay your Commands upon me.

I've no Commands for you, but I've some Questions.


Which if I answer not --


You'll hold your peace:
How many Duels did you fight at Rome*

But one.


Answer me like a Gentleman,
Was't for your Mistress?

It concerned You, Madam.


How do you look when you lie*


Not You alone,
But joined with all our noble British Beauties,
Whose Honour a base Roman had traduced.

You killed him?


Your Cause slew him by my hand.


Modestly spoke; Had you no hurt?


He pricked
An Artery, which pos'd the Italian Surgeons.

Since, you your self have studied Surgery?


Would all Gentlemen spent their time no worse;
I have found out some Secrets.

You've a Powder,
What do you call it?

The Sympathetic Powder.


Will it cure the Tooth-ake?


Presently; try, Madam.


No, it may prov^ Love-Pouder, then twill cause
The Heart-ake: in spite of my own and Love's teeth
I'll k^ep my heart whole. Now to my last Quaere,
What design has your Charge upon the Princess,
I see in thy sweet looks, there is some plotting.

Plotting of Masks.


Plotting of Knavery!
But I shall know it, my Lady will tell me,
And she'll know it if there be a Witch in Britain.

What is thy Lady going to the Devil?
But let her go, for ther^'s other way
To sound the bo^tom of Prince Filamor,
He's forty ^athom deep below my plummit,
She goes to a wisewoman?

No, she means
To go to a Wiseman, to the VVitch-maker,
The Bard; who came last night into a Cave
In our Woods, you shall bring me to the Bard,

Fie! the Bard sings only to Princes Ears,
His Prentices, VVitches, and Conjurers
Answer Great Ladies; I'll commend you to
Th'old Witch that deals in Palmistry; but then
I'll be your husband.

Who shall be my husband
The Witch must tell me.

And that Witch I'll be.


I live again, my Children ar^ be^ome
The^r Mother's Parents: when thou, my dear Adolph,
Look'dst with the ^yes of pious rage and scorn
Upon the Sacriledg of Filamor,
Who (without leave from me) durst court thy Sister,
Then my Soul closed in your dead Father's Urn,
Sprung from his ashes; but when Caesarina
Stood the temptation of a Shower of Gold,
Such as the Poets dreamed not of, a Crown
Offered her by a Prince, wise, young and handsome;
But yet my Enemy, then I felt the joys
Of Immortality, to see my self
Mother to a Beauty, born to revenge me
Upon a Villain.

Villain? then Fame is --


Filamor's Fool. Before he went to Rom^,
Filamor had the art of coz'ning Fame:
For with a Rebels Impudence he masked
Foul Treasons under fair and specious Names:
The disimpowering me to rule my Husband
(An affront not to be forgiven) he called
Friendship to Adolph, Love to Caesarina:
He's now returned improved in Villainy,
Therefore tis time he went a longer Voy^ge.

And whether will you send him now?


To Hell*
Nor shall he go so far alone; his Father,

And his Sister Violinda
Shall bear him Company; the indignity,
He would have put on me, shall ruin him
And his whole Family; I did not think
(When this Match with Sylvanus was first treated)
Occasion durst be given, but I resolved
It should be taken; for I that was born
A Prince, and no mean Beauty, certainly
Would never have buried my self alive
In the cold Grave of an Old Prince's Bed,
But to rise up with his Crown on my head.
The principality of Verulam,
Which I am married to, I'll join to that
Of Malden, which is my Inheritance,

But Madam, is this Justice?


Give me Power,
Let honest men, that go to Law, have Justice:
Sub^ects may plead th^ir Titles, Princes must
Dispute what's Advantageous, not what's Just:
A Crown he merits, who piles Tower on Tower
To scale the Stars, and ri^le Sovereign Power:
But he that puts himself into a fright
With empty sounds, mere Terms of Wrong and Rights.
Is sitter (when his Conscience checks at them)
To wear a Mitre then a Diadem.

Madam, my Lord General,


My Lord,
Are not our Orders s^nt away to Malde^*
That I see your Lieutennant-General ^ere*

Yes^erday your Expr^ss came to his hand
In Malde^.

Pres^ntly I horsed the Foot,
We marched all night, and by the break of da^
I brought your Army into Barnet-Woods,
Whic^ is within a League of Verulam,
Wh^re s^fe and undiscovered they are lodged
Till my Lord General C^ispus please to come.

Capito, you've been active in my Servic^.
Our thanks is but the earnest of your reward,
Ha! w^o are these?

Two of my Life-Guard,


Britains?


No, Madam, Roman Gladiators, Sword-men,
We call them Masters of Defence,

Stout-men?


Men that fear nothing, death's their play-fellow,
Th^y dye upon the Stage ^o please Spectators,

But w^re thes^ kind of men ever employed
In a great Action?

In the Servile War;
They brought it to a measuring cast at Rome,
Which should Command in Chief the Lords or Slaves.

I'^ have '^m for my own Guard, tel^ '^m so;


G^ntlemen, tis the pleasure of my Prin^e,
On the account of Valour and of Service,
To entrust you with the Guard of her Person.

Tis a high ^onour; Gracchus, I had rathe^
Be trusted with her Daughter,

So had I:
Pox, that a Swan's N^st, this poor Island should
Have more great Beauties then the sever^d World.

That narrow Seas should breed such Venuses,


That British Whales should play with such sweet Mermaids.


We make short Meals, you may dine ere you go.


Tis past Twelve, if by One we be a Horse-back,
We shall return by Three to do your Work.

Then you'll have time to hear what good success
The British Bard will promise, do you look
Your General's Commission be drawn up
For the Conqu^st of Verulam; come my Lord.

My Mother used to give us better Precepts,


She was good-natur'd, and had sense of Honour,


And of R^ligion; but now she leaves
The Temples of the Gods, to ^onsult Witches,
As Brianella tells me; I suppose
The General must go with her, she knows we
Are for no such black Voyages, tis strange
The General should, for he's a man of Honour.

Was not our Mother once as strict as he
In point of Honour, but she's changed; this comes
Of Ma^ice; Sister, take you heed of Malice,
Outside and inside you're my Mother's Picture,
In hate to Filamor you resemble her.

I have the air of her Face, not of her Vices;
I love not Filamor, as you do, Brother,
B^t would not be his murdress, like my Mother.

You would not with a Dart or Poniard kill
Prince Filamor, but with a Frown you will:
It were an Honour by your Hand to dye,
My Friend falls sa^lly, murdered by your Eye.

Can he be murdered, who has power to live?


He has no power, but what you please to give*
Loved Sister, save my dear Friend's life, and make
The noblest person happy, for my sake.

Can you (who to a Brother's love pretend)
Ruin your Sist^r to preserve your Friend?

Ruin my Sister?


Free Love forced, d^stroys
More then our Fortunes, or our Lives, our Joys;
I'll here no more on it.

So, you'll part in anger,
And take this fair occasion to break promise?

In what?


Did not you promise me, to beg
Princess^ Violindas's Picture?

For my self?
But you shall have it.

Thou art my best Sister.


But if I get y' her Picture, you must do
Something for me.

Something, nay any thing;
Still my best Sister.

But when I enjoin you
To take off him, for whom you thus torment me,
I shall be your worst Sister; for this Picture,
You will do whatsoever I Command?

Give me her Picture, and command my Life.


A Lover's life? what's that? some Authors say,
You've one to keep, and eight to give away:
Muster your nine Lives, Brother, if you'll stand
My Charge, for 'tis your Patience I^l Command.

BLessing on Blessing fall upon my Son,
Faster then tears fall from my Eyes for Joy
To see thee in my Arms, I^l keep thee her^,
Thou shalt travail no more.

Yes, if I say,
That 'tis not fit your wife should govern you.

Alas! I could not ^at nor sleep in quiet,
Till I had to^d her, that 'twas thy advice:
Excuse the weakness of thy Father's age,
I was not born a Cowr'd.

Your Valour, Sir
Is one of Brinains memorable Fortunes;
For when Arcadius and Honorius lost
Their Laurel to the Scots, then you defeated
A Cohort of the Roman Horse of Malde^.

A man would think those Romans ran away
With my commanding Power, for, ever since
I married Pontia, I've served under her,
She shall obey me now.

Spoke like a Prince
That und^rstands the duty of his Subjects.

I'll have no Governess -- but if my wi^e
Kn^w of our Meeting --

What will your wife do?


She'll take 't unkindly, and I would not grieve her*
Because she Loves me; she'll not stay thus long
From me -- by this she's in my Bed-Chamber,
And misses me.

No, Sir, no Creature comes
Into your Bed-Chamber, the doors are bolted,
And your Physicians (fee'd by me) give out,
You rested not last Night, and have took something
To pro^ure sleep.

Then Filamor makes this
A day of happiness to his old Father.

Sir, you'll make this day happy to your Children,
If you'll lay your Commands on Violinda
To Love her Servant, my brave Friend, Prince Adolph;
I am a Suitor for him.

So am I,
And two such Suitors must have no denial.

My Brother knows, Sir, that I love Prince Adolph,
As much as he loves Filamor^

Enough,
'Tis enough in all conscience, Violinda.

In conscience: Violinda should love him
As much as he loves her, he dotes upon her.

Then I would have thee dote upon him too.


Adolph's my Brother's Friend, and Caesarin^
Is my Friend; Sir, for both I have a ^riendship:
Bu^ that I should love Caesarina's Brother
Unless she's loves my Brother, there's no reason.

No reason, Girl, I am for thee again.


Away, you triffler, you spin out the time,
Knowing I must prepare for the entertainment
Of my Step-Mother.

Comes she to the Wood,


Presently.


My wife shall not come to me,
I'll go to her.

She shall not see you here,
Pray, stay, Sir.

Cross me not; I vow I'll go.


I must call Tetrick to him: Come away
My Father's leaving us.

You never think
Of me, but when you're at a loss; I'll meddle
With no blown business.

Keep him in the Woods,
And I will make thee Lord of the whole Forest,

Excuse, Original Infirmity,
My humour's peevish, Sir, but my hearts good;
I'll stop your Father's hast: Sir, I must Charm you.

A Conjurer? I will so devil thee,


Hold, hold your hand Sir; I'm your Servant Tetrick*


Alas poor Tetrick.


I am justly punished
For looking ugly.

Follow me, thou know
My sweet wife loves me.

That's the Question, Sir
Be pleased to stay and you will hear 't determined;
Mat^er of Fact 's this, The Princess of Malden,
Your wife, intended to have dealt with Witches
For the bewitching you (some say) to death:
Your Son diverts her with the arti^ice
Of setting up (as she thinks) a Witch-maker,
Called (for the singing of's Predictions)
The British Bard; as soon as she has dined
Your wife co^es to the Bard's Cave, then you'll know
Whether she loves or hates you.

Son, I'll stay;
But hide me from my wife.

She shall not see you.


Fromund, I Conjure thee, appear O Witch.
All goes as well as heart can wish, the old Prince
Is now engaged.

Yonder comes Brianella,
My Mistr^ss, with a Basket full of Plate,
Her Lady's offering to the British Bard:
You owe me thanks for 't, I hinted the Plate,
We must help one another,

In requital
I'll make teee tell h^r Fortune; speak out Sister,
You do so mumble, what would y' have me do?

Move the great Witch-maker, the British Bard,
To enlarge my Commission with power
Of Life and Death, over Plants, Beasts, and Men.

What, what?


Sooner or latter, I am sure,
I must come to the Faggot and the Fire;
Shall I be burned for nothing?

One year more
You must tell Fortunes by the Hand; next Spring*
I'll move the Bard for you, pretty sweet Sister.

In the mean time, if I might but bewitch
Dumb Creatures, only Monkeys, Cats, and Dogs:
A scurvy proud young Widow, yesternight,
Called me old Beldam, let me but bewitch
Her little Dog; though she bears patiently
The loss of a kind Husband, yet the death of
Her little Dog (I'm sure) will break her heart.

Teach me? I'll pull thy nose off, and that Dog
Shall eat it: go, take from that noble Lady
That Basket full of Plate, look in her hand
And tell her Fortune.

Your hand -- I'm prevented.


But Mother, Mother, I hope we shall meet,


At the Mark-Beech, an hour hence.


I'll not fail.
O Madam! they know all things; the Magician
Could tell me, 'twas a Basket full of Plate.

Ministers of Fate, I come to know the Issue
Of a design of Blood.

My Song will fit her
Madam, we'r not impowr'd to answer Princes,
That's reserved for the Bard himself, who now
Lies in a Trance: I'll hold up to his Soul
Your Princely Off'ring, with the names of those
You vow to death, if you'll but write them down,
'Tis the Bard's Custom.

Bring Pen, Ink and Paper.


So, I've her Treason, now, under her hand.


You'll wake him?


With our usual Ceremony
Of Musique and a Dance.

Look you there Sirrha,
Barbara de pictis veni Bascauda Britannis:
That British Bascaud would sell well at Rome.

So would the pretty Maid that brought the Vascaud;
But Princess Caesarina for my money.

On the Poplars and Oaks
When the white Raven croaks,
And the crafty young Fox withdraws,
With the fair Fawn
Through a green Lawn
Just into the Lion's paws:
Then the Scene of Blood is acted;
Then the Wood- Nymphs run distracted;
The Mandrake shrieks,
The Moon's pale cheeks
Look dark;
But hark,
Brass Ba^ons and Trumpets are sounding;
See, see, how soon
They thunder the Moon
Out of the Eclipse she was drowned in.
What should we fear?
The Sun shines clear;
No Mist on the Hill,
Not a Cloud in the Sky:
The Lark sings shrill,
And the Swallow flies high.
The Generall's Commission, under Seal.


You're now impowr'd to conquer Verulam;
What do you think of the success presaged?
My Lord, what's your opinion of the Bard?

First, Madam, give me leave to hear your judgment.


I take him to be somewhat more then humane;
He speaks the Language of another World,
So well; that his expressions are all Picture;
The fair Fawn, the young Fox, and the white Raven
Is clearly my old Husband and his Children;
The Moon e^lyps'd that's I, whose light is drowned
Till your victorious Drums and Trumpets sound:
You have my sense, give me your own; I know
Crispus to be a man of so much worth,
He scorns to flatter any Prince; speak freely.

E're we end our discourse, I'll clear that point:
She'll find I am no flatterer, I have watched
A long time for this opportunity,
To s^t a Look^ng-glass before her Soul:
Then freely (since I have it in command)
I think our D^uids Prophets; but our Bards
(Like all the tribe of Fortune-tellers) Jugglers.

Th^n you believe not this to be a Vision;
What do you think it is?

Intellig^nce
From his confederate Knaves; you are betrayed.

And so, you would advise, not to proceed?


Madam, had I been of your Cabinet-Counsel,
You should not have begun it. What's, your quarrel?
Th'Opinion, That Wives should not rule their Husbands,
For words spoken by a Child (for then
Prince Filamor was not sixteen years old,
You'll ruin him, his Sister, and your Husband;
Strange grounds for murdering Princes, and for Vesting
All their Dominions in your self.

Yet, Sir,
Some Counsellors that are as wise as You,
Have approved both the Grounds and the Design.

If by wise, your Highness means Politic,
I grant those Counsellors were more wise than I:
For, my simplicity will never flatter
My Prince into a Deity; I cannot
Tell you, that Princes are exempted from
The Law of Nations; that Revenge and Murd^r
(Stains in the Mean) are Triumphs to the Great:
I cannot find out Presidents for Injustice,
Nor instance (as your Flatterers have done)
That if particular Rights had been preserved,
The World had been unconqu^r'd, Macedon
One private Kingdom still, and Rome another.

What are the M^xims upon which you build?


My Principles are Hones^y and Honour,
Jewels of value in a poor man's hand,
Inestinmable in a Prince's Breast:
How happy our Posterity will live
Under a Prince charact^'d by a Druid
Who prophecies that you little British Princes
Shall kneel to one King, and describes him.

How?
May we hear the description?

I remember
So much as shows the great disparity
Between You and that Monarch: Thus 't begins,
Now in Britain reigns a King,
Young and act^ve as the Spring;
And pray observe it, Madam, thus it ends,
He has Valour, such as might
For the whole World safely fight:
Wisdom, which could rule it too;
But he's Just, and will not do
For a thousand Worlds one Wrong:
Never did his spirit long,
On another Prince's Throne
(By mere Power) to raise his own.
And so far, for any ends,
Is he from destroying Friends,
Th at even his Enemies confess
His Mercy to the Merciless.
Make this Just King your Pattern.

Saw^y fool;
Deliver your Commission; we shall choose
A General, not a Tutor.

Humbly thus,
My public Person I put off, and pray,
That, as a private man, I may be heard.

But not for your Commission; young man,
You have a Successor: he's in my ^ye;
Capito's our General.

For him I move,
(In reference to your safety) that you'll put him
Into immediate Action, else you're lost.
For (if I understand the Bard) you lie
Open to Filamor, your plot's betrayed,
Your life at stake: the Question is not now,
On what ill Grounds you have begun, but how
(Being engaged) you may preserve your Self.
That's a Just Cause, in which your nicest Subject
May draw his Sword with honour.

And who worthier,
In a Just Cause, to be our General,
Then noble Crispus? There, take your Commission.

No, Madam; as the Romans manumit
Their Slaves, you have freed Crispus with a blow;
You struck me, as men strike their swooning friends,
To bring me to my Senses: hitherto,
Devotion to your service first, and then
My own concern (both as to Fame, and Fortune)
Gave me the trouble of distracted hopes:
Now all the lines of my Ambition
Meet in one little point (touch^d by your hand,)
I centre in my Self: fixed to enjoy
The pleasure of a private life; retirement
From splendour, and from Care, which pr^sses in
To gilded Rooms; Porters at Prince's Gates
Could never keep out Care and Fear, two strangers
To low-rooft Houses, where I'll live and dye.

Will Crispus do a Service to his Prince
With such disservice, as to let me know
My Cause is just, and make the World suspect it,
By quitting the Employment?

Pardon me;
Should the Gods send their winged Messenger
With that Commission, and all their Hands to it,
The Go^s should pardon me.

Stay, if he goes,
In my Attempt I can proceed no further;
We may use valiant Rogues to do a Murder;
But Politicians are concerned to find
Persons of Wort^, when Conquests are designed.
Crispus, how high a value I have for thee,
Let my great Heart demonstrate, which descends
B^low it self, to an acknowledgment
That I have wronged thee.

When I serve again,
I'll take up your Commission.

So obstinate?
Then I stand up my self, your Prince, Accept it
From my Command.

You may command my Head,
My Hand shall be my Subject.

Yet hear Reason,
Though you'll not hear your Prince; you censure m^
For secking to destroy a Family
For a Boy's words; yet for a Woman's words
(And she your Sovegraign) you can dispense
With Loyalty in your self, abandoning
Your Prince to her awakened Enemies.

Justly I am rebuked; upon my knee
I beg your pardon, and accept your favour;
Longer to hold you in discourse, were dangerous
To your Affairs; I take my humble leave:
Now that your Sword is in my Hand again,
It shall not freeze, I'll strike a sudden blow;
Fortune's swift-turning Wheel deceives the slow.

Capito, you perceive, that in our Army
You hold the second Place, to have the first;
At the next Vacancy

Let me serve your Highness
In any Place, 'tis to my hand alike,
To bear a Truncheon or to trail a Pike.

Other men are Fles^ and Blood, the General, Fire;
Here were a Husband now, if one could catch him:
Old Witch, I'll venture at thy Lottery
All my Gold, but I'll draw a General.

The sudden blow tis I must strike, not Crispus;
Before he comes, Filamor may be fled:
Filamor's the Bard's Fox, Crispus my Lion,
Valiant, but generous, I know he'll seize,
But that's all, for he'll never kill the Prey,
Nor can I, bare-fac'd, do it; that Foxe's case
Shall piece this Lion's skin -- Go Brianella,
Bid Caesarina meet me at the Poplars,
I've new Instructions for her, she must smooth
Her fore-head when she looks upon the Prince;
Do you seek him out, and tell Filamor
You're not sent by my Daughter, (nor forbid)
To let her know (after his Mask) if he
Take her out, she'll dance with him.

I'll acquaint him.


The Gods are bound in Honour to perform
What they have promised by the British Bard.

My life upon it;


Filamor's life's upon it;
And my Hand shall revenge his base affront,

If with our Pictures we could change our selves*
I would be you: Would you be Violinda?

And never wish to be my self again;
If I were Violinda, I'd not Change
With Caesarina for the World to boot
But Violinda were you Caesarina,
You would not love your Brother Filamor.

What would he care for my hate, when you loved him?


My love would hardly please him were we changed,
For I should be his Sister, you his Mistress,
And you would be no kinder then I am,
But here's my Brother.

Then I take my leave.


Madam, you fly from me; as if our Hearts
Moved upon Needles touched by the opposite Poles,
Of the Celestial Loadstone Love, yet may
I mention it to you.

From that I fly,
And not from you; I've an Esteem for you,
As Brother to my Friend; but till she love
My Brother, when you mention love to me;
I shall retire.

You see, how I'm concerned
To be my Friend's Solicitor in his Suit.

Solicit me for your Mistresse's Picture.


Have you her Picture, that's some comfort yet,
This Violinda and I will never part.

Hold, you're not like to meet, but on Conditions.


Have I not Signed a Blank? fill you it up
With yo^r own Articles.

First, you shall promise,
Never more to move me for Filamor.

You are not (sure you cannot be) in earnest?


No promise, Sir, no Picture*


I am silenced,
Let Filamor's own Merits speak for him --
Come --

Not so hasty: Secondly --


Have you
A pair of these Commands?

You shall engage,
To use your best endeavours to persuade
Filamor to relinquish his pretence
Of Love to me.

And all this for a Picture?
Would y' have me loose, like Aesop's Dog, the substance
With catching at the Shadow? You know, Sister,
On Filamor's hope of you, depends my hope
Of Violinda.

Let what will depend;
These are your Terms.

You think, I'll not accept them?
Give me the Picture, I'll undo my self
To be revenged on thee; such pow'rfull Reasons
I'll give my Friend against thee -- he shall take up
Thy scorn, and thou (as he does now) shalt sigh
(When Filamor enjoys a greater Beauty)
And say, That matchless Prince was once my Servant.

Well, I have all, I would have; here's the Picture,
And there's your Man, look yo^ to your Engagement.

Dance with me? Caesarina dance with me*
One name may sound, at distance, like another,
Did she name me? Madam, excuse my doubts,
I do believe you, yet so great an honour,
To me so unexpected, on the sudden
Puzzled my faith: I owe to Brianeila
For the first news that makes me Fortunate.

But, Sir, you must conceal th Intelligence,
Or else you'll lose your Spy.

I'd rath^r lose
Verulam.

You're not like to keep it long,
But to tell that, is out of my Commission:
I take my humble leave.

Far^well sweet Maid.
Compared to me, how happy art thou Adolph,
When Violinda gives thee a denial,
She grieves th^e with so much Civility.

Your sister ^arri^s it the handsom^r;
Mine, like a Tigr^sse, shows an angry fore-head,
Her fury light^ns in her eyes: your Si^r
Poisons me, like a Politician, smiling;
Long since I'd burst, but for this Antidote
Our Friendship, Filamor.

Our Friendship, Adolph,
Is a feli^ity which balances
All our misfortunes.

Love it self gives place
To Frien^ship in my Herauldry.

Take heed
How you set up Friendship against Love, Adolph*
Love is a God.

He is, and we are Men,
Who importune the Gods, and give them trouble
With Prayers and Sacrifices for our Loves;
But what Wives they will prove, Heaven only knows:
We may pray for a curse, and some kind God
May cross us for a blessing -- let me tell you
(As I do love you) truly, I suspect
My Sister.

Ha!


Did I say, I suspect?


That was a Princely che^k upon his tongue.


I know, my Sister will be no good Wife.


If any man, but Adolph, ^old me so,
I should not be thus patient.

In plain terms,
I know, my Sister will be an ill Wife.

Is't madness? or is't envy that asp^rses
Thy Sister?

Wherefore do you furl your brow?
I tell you Caesarina is not worth
A thought of Filamor's.

Unsay thy words,
Whilst we are friends.

If you remember her,
Let it be so as we remember Tyrants,
For th'evill they have done.

Be wise betimes,
Kneel, and beg pardon of thy Sister's virtue:
Y^t we are friends.

Therefore I am obliged
To disabuse you --

Friendship, up to heaven,
From whence thou came; against this Enemy,
The Common Enemy of Love and Virtue,
I draw the Swor^ of Justice.

H^ar me out,
Before I set this Seal upon thy hearing;
What Fury strikes out th^t clear light, thy R^ason?
Ar^ you so blind, so obstinately blind,
You will not see a dreadful Pr^cipice,
When I point to it? If you'll not believe
Your Fri^nd, you have before your ^yes the sad
Example of your Fath^r, good old man!
How like a child is he awed by my Mother!
There's twenty thousand Mothers in my Sister;
Already she b^gins her tyrannous reign,
And mak^s you more a child than your weak Fath^r,
Or else you would have more Sense then to love
On^ that scorns you. I've done.

And I begin;
First, let me joy my self, for cancelling
The long misplaced relation of a Friend
To so unnatural a Brother; then,
Thou stranger to my heart, in thy heart's blood
I'll wash off the dirt cast upon thy Sister.
Not love her? Why? because she scorns me? fool,
I would not love her if she did not scorn
One of no merit.

Then you do her wrong,
To move my Sister for one of no merit.

Unworthy man, that which thou would destroy,
My Love to her, creates i^ me a Merit.

Alas poor Filamor, to deceive thy self
What curious Art thou hast, what subtle non-cense,
A merit and no Merit? and for this,
The fast an^ loose, the Juggle of a Word,
Thou draw upon thy friend?

Dear friend, forgive me,
Som^thing you said (which concerned Caesarina)
That put m^ into passion; what it was
I have fo^got, but as 'tis state^ now,
I must confess, I blush to find my self
In this off^n^ve posture.

Put not up
Your sword; for you may fight, and you may choose:
Will you relinquish all pretence of love
To Caesarina?

Not whilst I've a sword,
And strength to guide to thy heart.

'T^ well;
I'm glad to hear that you are so resolved:
You may fight; bu^, Filamor, if you do,
You shall fight with my Sister. For this Picture,
(A part of F^lamor, and Adolph's All)
I p^omis'd ^aesari^a, to persuade you
(With ^y be^ oratory) to relinquish
Your lov^ to h^r; I ^ave performed: and you,
B^fore, lik^ a rough Dia^ond, only rich
In my belief t^us polished, strikes ^y eyes:
Ama^'d to m^et so glorious a surprise.
Filamor's ^stimate is trebbl^d now
In Adolph's valuation; and by this time
(You have y^t more advantage by your trial,
For) Caesarina's heart (I warrant) ^akes
For fear I should prevail.

She meant (I hope
I flatter not my self) to try, if she
Might vent^re on me any further Grace
Then th'honour she intends me at my Mask,
To dance with me.

That's some kindness yet; my Sister
Has but one fault, she thinks Love is below her;
But Friend if, from so high a pitch* h^r Pride
Can stoop to any Husband, sh^'s thy Bride.

THis is the appointed place; th^re's the Mark-Beech,
And the old Witch too; luck an't be thy will:
A General, I beseech thee, gracious B^ldam;
Mother, you are a Woman of your word.

O ^y good Daughter, neither Man nor Woman
Will break their word with you; show me your hand,
Off with your Glove* Ay marry, Child, if Caesar
Were now our Lord, he would send for his Guards
That watch the Arabian Trees, and set them Centree
Upon this Balm.

A Complemental Hag,
How come you to be such a Courtier, Mother?

I shall be caught -- First, Daughter, I pray resolve me,
Did never any Gentleman, at Court,
Tell you your Fortune?

Yes.


Then if your Hand
Can turn a Courtier to a Fortune-Teller;
Why may it not make us Fortune-Tellers Courtiers?

A pleasant Witch: what? Compasses? do you
Mean to survey my Hand with your Glass-eyes?
Come, on with them: First, how long sha^ I li^e?

Here's a deep Life-line, without Cross or Break;
Ten, twenty, thirty, you'll live, till you be
Just a year older then am I, a hundr^d.

That's long enough; shall I b^ fortunate?


I never saw such a prosperity-line
Running quite through your Triangle; it cuts
Your Table-line, and has the nobl^st Sis^er,
You'll be Right Honourable.

So, here's Fortune,
And Honour; but what Pleasure? how many Hu^b^ds?

To that what say^s the Mount of Mercury?
Tis crossed with one Line, you'll have but one Husband,

How? but one Husband in a hundred years?
O pitiful!

But in the Mount of Venus
Are Stars; in Sol and Iupiter a Zone;
A Venus-Girle, you'll have store of Servants.

Shall I keep Counsel?


At foot of Iove's Mount,
Your Capital line and your Vital line
Meet in an acute Angle, which demonstrates,
Your Head holds correspondence with your Heart:
You'll not tell any Secrets of your own.

No, if I do; like a poor Vestal-Nun
That can't keep Counsel when she meets her Servant,
Let me be buried alive; this one Husband
Will be (I hope) a good one: pray, what manner
Of Man?

Black hair, not curled by Art, but Nature;
Good hop^full Signs*

Have I seen him?


To day,
He courted you for a Wife.

Ha! that's Fromund?
He has a voluble Tongue?

The Gudg^on bites.
A winning way (^he's taken with my Courtship)
The young man Complem^nts better then the old Witch.

A Traveller?


One who in Forr^ign parts
Has noted Men and Manners; I'm cock-sure.

A Co^rti^r too?


In some Pla^e, or Employment,
About a Prince: ^he's m^ne, from all the World.

Prince Filamor's Tutor, Fromund, out upon him
A younger Brother.

So, so, my C^ke's dow,
Wh^n I believed my self to be cock-sure,
If I had flung off my disguise, how she
Had laughed at m^?

What? Moth^r, a la mort?


Daughter, I am considering your Condition,
Will you lead Ap^s in Hell.

Yes, (Apes is something
To t^ust to) rather then I'll marry Hopes:
I am for Honour, and Estate in Hand,
No promising Husband is for me; can you
Change me this Courtier for a General?
For Fromund I'll not give one farthing-token.

He's much bound to you.


Make it my Lord Crispus,
You shall ^ave the worth of a hundred pieces,
This Saphyr-Ring.

If you would give me Lo^don,
I cannot find a General in your Hand.

Adieu.


But the young Conjurer makes Love to me,
And I'll lay my Commands upon my Servant,
To search the Stars for my Lord General.

Take the Ring; Mother: when shall I hear of you?


In th'Evening: mean time, if you could but get
Your Lady to move my Lord Crispus for you.

That I am sure she will.


Then I am sure --
The General will not have thee, he's a person
Of so much honour, that he'll never marry
One, thy dishonourable Lady speaks for:
There's life in it yet; Tetrick, I must have thee
To help me in the business of my love.

The devill's in it, when men make love their business;
Thou a man? thou a horse: and would thou had
(Besides thy amorous curveting qualm)
All the diseases of a horse: I help thee?

Thee I have helped, and may prove to thy p^rse
More instrumental yet.

Why, look you, Fromund,
How you misconstrue me: I'll serve your love,
If you will love at seasonable times,
But to stand fooling now, when Pontia,
Th'Illustrious Traitoress, takes up Gladiators
To murder our great Master -- here he
Reading the bloody List she gave the Bard.

Dis Manibus. Pontia devotes to hell
Filamor, Violinda, and Sylvanus --
Am I here? Is my name down? thank you, Wife;
Kind second wife, I v^ry ^umbly thank you
For the recovery of my Wits -- you hear
No news?

None, Sir.


But what you hear from me --


What news is that, Sir?


Sense, Sir; I speak sense.


That we have heard oft.


But when, Tetrick? when?
Before I married Pontia; never since,
Till now.

And now you understand your danger*
Pr^vent it in her ruin.

You're a fool;
Sha^l I destroy my wife for her first fault?

That were to imitate her cruelty.


You're wise.


If she commit another Treason --


Then she shall die.


But you'll forget your Promise,
Be pleased to write it down.

I'll set my hand
To nothing --

That's unprincely: but 'tis just
To write as she did, your Note for her Note.

'Tis just indeed, I'll underwrite her Paper.


You'll find her Pen and Ink too ith'Bard's Cave.


See how Affection sways! though both our Reasons
Were of one colour, mine looked dull; thine bright,
When Prejudice and Favour changed the light.

This Mask was made for you by Filamor,
And therefore if he take you out to dan^e,
Dance with him Caesarina, though you love not
The Man, be civil to the Prin^e.

I shall.


Af^er the Masque, whither will you two walk*


Through the Lawn.


Just into the Lion's paws;
O excellent, incomparable Bard!
Gracchus and Sergiu^, you know the Lawn?

I do; That's the Place.


I Pay well.


Then hang well,
If ^ither he or I n^glect your s^rvice.

Our Roman Swords shall fall upon your Foes*
Swift^r then Arrow^s from your British bows.

When the Masque's done, remember Bria^ella,
Your part.

Your M^ssage to the Prince shall be
D^liver'd, as from Princess Caesari^a.

Filamor will beli^ve th^e, when he sees
Thy first news (of h^r dancing with him) true:
Do it ^arefully, and I'll make th^e my care,
The General will not deny thy love
When I move for thee.

You're a royal Mistress.


My Dear; what are these Maskers?


Ovid's Huntsmen:
Their Forms (changed by his Gods) the God of Hunting,
Apollo, has restored to Phaeton,
Cephalus and Actaeon.

See, they come.


Hey! brother -- Wood-men come away,
Actaeon? Cephalus? So ho?
Chorus within.
Never may they see Sport, who stay
When Phaeton says, Come, or Go:

Shall we (...) the long-liv'd Hart?


Ask the Youthful God of Art,
(Who restored us our Forms) Apollo,
My Father promised he would follow:
See, the great Huntsman comes at last.

Our morning-Rites in Delphos past;
I came to London, where my Sister
Dwells in her Temple; but I missed her:
For (vexed with things, which fools desired)
She was into her Grove retired:
Then swift as ever Lightning flew,
I cut the Clouds, and sailed to You.

You'll hunt?


We dance.


No Ladies?


Yes,
Four of the Metamorphosis:
In those three Poplars grow thy Sisters,
That Laurel Cloisters my coy Mis^ris;
We two will untrans^orm them now.

A^-pow'rfull Father, show me how.


My sacred Tree,
That Conquerors and Poets brows
Crown'st with thy immortal boughs,
From thunder free,
With Musique shaken, cleave asunder,

Ay me! a sudden clap of thunder
Could not strike Daphne's heart so dead,
As does that Voice, from which I fled
To this Tree, that (whea th'Earth denied me)
Opened, and shut again to hide me:
False Laurel, were it thou kind so long,
At last to sell me for a Song?
What hope that Strangers will be just,
When our old Friends betray their trust?
Cruel Apollo, dost thou give
Life to a Maid who fears to live?
Some gentler God take Daphne's part,
And close my Tree, or break my Heart.

Sweet Nymph, thy Panick Fear dismiss,
Apollo will not force a kiss.

Why then for Daphne do you call?


This is the Huntsman's Festival,
We will only dance together.

Then Daphne may
(With honour) say,
Apollo's welcome hither.

Dear Sisters, that (when I was drowned)
Wept your selves into Poplar-Trees:
Now my Platonic Year's come round,
Enjoy the Light which Phaeton sees;
Phaethusa?

I am here.


Lampethusa re-appear.


I come, I come.


Lampetie, live.


Thy Breath is my Restorative


On the Huntsman's Feast,
Like Prisoners released,
Let's dance and sing;
Till the Birds admire,
What new happy Quire
Make the Woods ring,
And draws the Spears nigher.
No Pleasure transcends
The Meeting of Friends.
Not Filamor, but Cephalus begs the honour
Of a Corant.

Cephalus'es Suit is granted.


Come my bold Sword-men, now you'll have employment,


May I presume to kiss the Princely hand
To which I owe this honour.

Does my bounty
Encourage begging? you shall be content
With the next favour you receive from me.

So does the covetous Favourite lose his place,
By offering to impose upon free Grace.

My Sister's too high-hea^ted to be gov^rn'd;
Proud Minds, like billows in a storm, are tossed
At their own rate; but if you steer, you're lost.

What a dull fool was I to lose her thus?
I hope not; here comes one who can resolve me;
Dear friend, leave me alone with my Goo^ Angel.

What means he? is the Devil his Good Angel?
My Mother's Messenger? I'll hear

Now Brianella, speak; is't life, or death?


Life, life Sir, Princess Caesarina walks
To gather Violets in the Lawn, from thence
She strikes up to the Lime-tree Grove, come thither,
But keep your masking habit on, she said,
If so by chance you met her in that Grove,
You might have better Audience as a Huntsman,
Then ever yet she gave you as a Prince.

How's that? my Mother has a Plot upon hi^
This cannot be a Message from my Sister.

This Embassage shall put about thy neck
A string of Pearl.

A string of hemp were fitter,
I am sure I deserve't, If you knew all:
Excuse me; if my Lady call, she may
Suspect my absence.

Filamor, no haste,
You shall not go.

Then you shall kill me, Adolph;
For if I live, I'll go.

You are not mad?
Do you know, who invites you? Brianella,
My Mother's Confident, the Agent for
Thy cruel Step-Mother, who seeks thy blood:
Do you know, what she said? Is't probable,
My Sister (who scorned th'offer of a Crown)
Will love a Masking Suit?

Was't probable,
Your Sister would have danced with me? yet she would;
And Brianella praeacquainted me
With her intention: non ore words, I'll go.

A happy voyage; I'll be there before yo^:
She told him, Caesarina's in the Lawn;
If he go thither, 'tis upon the Bow;
I know the String, the strait path to the Grove;
And whosoever is to meet him there,
Shall find me on the place, to answer for him.

Our Trade is to kill men, we never yet
Shed Woman's blood.

But Madam, for your service --


And my Reward: you shall be so rewarded,
You'll wish I had more Princess Violinda's
For you to kill.

May we not have the honour
Of murdering her brother?

That's reserved
For my hand; none shall revenge Pontia,
But Pontia.

If the Prince, your husband, wants
An Officer -- to cut his Throat --

For him,
I'll provide meaner Instruments, there's Gold,
Jewels too; You are Strangers, and the Natives
(After this fact, if th^y can take you) will
Tear you to pieces: To prevent your danger
You see my Groom waits for you with good horses,
Fly; though for me you have lost Italy,
And must lose Bri^ain; wheresoever you land,
You'll make your selves a Country with that Treasure;
Romans farewell.

Our saddest loss is, such
A bounteous Mistr^sse.

And it wounds us deeper
Then we can wound the Princess, when our Swords
Shall weep her blood.

But Gentlemen, pray skill
My Daughter-in-Law with as little fright
To my own Daughter, as is possible:
If you bind Caesarina, bind her gently.

As gently as these arms can bind a Lady;
To kill her Step-Daughter, she gives me a stock,
Will keep me like a man on any Ground;
But before I leave Britain, I'^ be bold
To ravish her own Daughter; I have had
A Stoma^k ^o her long.

Meat for your Master;
Thou ravish her? I'll ravish her my self;
Room for your betters, from the Gracchi I am
Descended.

No, degenerated, Raskal;
When we played Prizes on the Stage at Rome,
Then were not thou my Mimic? did not I,
With this short Faucheon, round about the Stage,
Chase thee in that high crowned Hat, with Gold-labells?

And what did I, the while?


Why, at my Head
(Helmet and all, in which I wore this Fish)
Thou flungst a Casting-Net, and crydst, fear nothing,
I catch not you Sir, I catch but your Fish.

Upbraided with my Calling? Ganlick-Rogue,
You Country-low, did not I hear thee Beg
(Like a cowed Slave) the People's suff'rages;
To give thee leave to take up that white wand,
The Rudies (which discharges Sword-Players,
From f^ar of playing Prizes by Command)
And wilt thou play a new Prize for a Princess?
Come on.

Take notice of this Thumb reverst,
The sign of death to Fencers.

Hold, you puppy,
What? Roman against Roman? lets draw Cuts?

Then I bend down my Thumb; live, to be hanged:
The long cut carries her.

Fortune's a Slut,
To give the prop'rer man the shorter Cut*
No remedy, I must content my self
With Prin^ess Violinda.

Here she comes,
Princesses by your leave, I'm somewhat bold.

And I am welcome.


Help ho!


Murder, murder.


No faith, tis but a Rape.


Unhand me, Rogue.


Peace, you shrill Grasshopper,
Or I'll open your Heart to stop your mouth;
Do y' see this trifle, this was Tarquin's Dagger,
And knows the way to Rape.

Prodigious Villain
Look a man in the Face.

That's not so pleasant
As looking Babies in a Ladye's Eyes:
Help Gracchus.

There's a poor Remembrance


Die like a Coward: he's dead out-right that stirs;
Answer, what put into your hearts a hope
To ravish Princesses?

The Devil-Lust;
There was a Devil (of their own Sex) in 't,
The Devil Pontia -- she contracted for
The Life of Violinda --

I have paid
Your Wages, Slave.

Justly, oh, I die justly.


How it afflicts me, that my cruel Mother
Should be my dear Friend's mortal Enemy,
And seek the Life I prize above my own?
Your Brother bleeds much, Violinda; have you
Nothing about you that will stop his Wound?
Tear, tear my Handkercher! Pray, take it Sir,
Lose not you self in the preserving me;
You look pale.

Madam, My Wound blushes for me,
To hear your pr^servation ascribed
To Filamor, 'twas Innocence preserved you,
When betrayed by this habit.

By what Habit?


By the honour you intended me, if thus
^T had been my Fortune to have met you in
The Lime-Tree Grove.

Who said so?


Brianella.


She did abuse you.


Has she not abused
Your Brother too, and sent him to meet me
Among the Lime-Trees? to that Grove he went,
Just as we turned into the Lawn.

Did Adolph?
Excuse me, Madam, I must needs go see
What becomes of my Friend.

Tis a Bow-shot
To the place, if you go thus bleeding thither,
You'll faint.

I'll die, before I leave Prince Adolph
To danger.

Let us follow Filamor,
I hear my Mother has a plot upon him.

'Twas well for me that I was bred a Mimic,
If I could not have made strange ugly Faces,
And imitated the Grimas of Death,
The very last grinn, I had never past
For a dead man; Dead-man indeed, by'r leave,
Your Gold and Jewels too fall to my
By the right of Survivorship.

The right
Of a Fool's head: soft; Hands off, Goodman Gracchus,
Or I'll so slice your Fingers --

What? another
Dead man's Ape? nay, Sergius, if you out-do me
At my own Weapon, I'll give thee the Bucklers:
Hereafter we will turn Tables (since thou art
The better Zany,) thou shalt be my Mimic.

Come, let's not fool away our Lives, and stay
Until the Hangman cure our wounds; our Horses
Stand ready: Farewell Britain, where the Ladies
Yield not to Romans.

Where we have no luck
In any thing; for as the Mastives fly on's,
So do the Men, and they both fright like Lions.

Sure all but I forget this Lune-tree Grove;
Here's neither Filamor, not Violinda,
Nor any of my Mother's blood-hounds; ha!
My nose bleeds, and these drops some hold to be
Ominous Effects, when they've a natural Cause,
The fear that hants a Lover till he sees
His absent Mistress safe: but Violinda
Thou art not altogether absent from me,
For here -- here sits thy Proxy, in my bosom
I wear thy painted Representative
In Gold, too poor a Temple for my Goddess.

The strong imagination Filamor has
That Caesarina is to meet him here,
And something in my face resembling her,
Will pass me, and my Poniard.

Fair'^t of Pictures,
Come forth, thou dear Companion to my heart.

Fall right; go now, and counsel thy old Father
Not to be ruled by's Wife.

I come too late
To save my friend, but not to perish with him.

My Mother?


My Son Adolph?


Adolph's killed.


No, noble Violinda, Adolph lives.


Filamor's dead.


Yes, cruel Caesarina,
But he might have survived this fatal hour,
Had thou been kind.

Had I been fortunate,
But I was Mistress neither of my Love,
Nor Fortune: the Gods governed that and me.

Pray let me weep Filamor's Obsequies,
He was my Friend.

He was my dearest Brother.


He was, thou best of Sisters; and methinks
There should be virtue in thy lips to kiss him
Alive again: but if he lived, thy kiss
Would kill him, cruel, cruel Caesarina,
Thou hast no title to him.

More then you,
He was my honour's and my life's pres^rver.

And would you not, if he could live now, love
So brave a man?

They who dispose our Wills,
Left it not in my power to grain him love.

A Surgeon! call a Surgeon for the Prince!
Here comes one that has skill inn Surgery,
Good Fromund, search your noble Master's wound.
No hope?

No fear; 'twas but the loss of blood
That made him swooned, he lives, carry him to rest*
O Sir, your Mother's giving up the ghost,
I left her Women chafing her.

I'm sure
She deserves death for murdering of her Son:
Good Fromund search Prince Adolph, for he has
A wound at heart.

But Violinda gave it;
Come Caesarina, if our Mother were
Worse then she is, yet she's our Mother still,
Not to be cast away for want of help,
When we see how 'tis with her, I'll be dressed
For this slight hurt, a scratch upon my breast:
But Violinda shoots into my heart
A poisoned arrow, past the Surgeon's Art.

FIlamor slightly hurt, and did he swooned?
What riddle's this?

'Tis easily unriddled;
After the Villain hurt him, when he knew
That Princess Caesarina never wished
To meet him like a Huntsman in the Grove,
As Brianella told Prince Filamor,
Hearing that Adolph (who believed her Message
An Artifice used by his bloody Mother)
In the same Habit was upon the Place:
The wounded Prince (never considering
Himself, but fearing danger to his friend)
From the Lawn walked up to the Grove so fast,
That th'agitation of his Mind and Body
Caused such effusion of his Blood and Spirits,
As made him (when he came to embrace Adolph)
Fall in a swooned at's feet* I stanch'd the blood,
And Sir, immediately your Son recovered.

My Wife's recovered too?


H^r Mask go^s on,
In whi^h you are to represent your name-sake,
The God Sylvanus: 'tis time you were dressed,
They are ready to begin.

Her Mask? does she
Triumph in Princes blood?

Perhaps she hopes
The pleasure of a Mask will make the Prince
Forget her malice, and her Servants say,
That when the Mask's done, sh^'l divulge a Secr^t
In which you are concerned.

How is't with Adolph?
Did not my Wife take him for Filamor,
And strike a^ her Son's heart?

But missed her aim
Miraculously; for Prince Adolph had
Princess Violinda's Picture, which he wore
In a Gold Tablet next his heart, he was
About to look on it; opening of his buttons
And stooping, comes your wife, who being deceived
By's Huntsman's Suit (so like Prince Filamor's)
Stabbed at his heart, but light upon the Gold
And did not pierce it, only her Poniard glanced
Upon his breast, and drew some crimson drops*
Straight he looked up; but when she saw her hand
Imbru'd in her son's blood, she fled and fell
Dead (as we thought); but she deceived us all.

Will you please to put on the Wood-God's shape;
You'll be too late, what do you study on?

Why should the Gods reprieve that guilty woman*


The Gods themselves had not been innocent,
If they had let her die a natural death,
And escape the hand of Justice*

Sir, the Mask?


I'll have no Mask, till Pontia's in her Grave;
Arrest her, Fromund, and when she's condemned
See Execution done, be sure my wife
Revive no more,

Fear no Recovery,
My life for her death: she's a Venimons Creature;
But if she were a Viper, let me get
Her Head and Body parted once, I'll watch 'em
For ever meeting.

In her List for Hell,
When Pontia writ my Name, I bound my self
To punish her with death for her next Treason.

Sir, your best time will be when her Mask's done,
Or else the Secret she means then to publish.
Will die with her.

God of the Woods, Sylvanus,
Whose shape I now assume, do thou inspire me.

If the Celestial minds had been possessed
With such a bloody rage as filled my Breast,
My House had been destroyed for my Offence:
But the Gods spared my Children's Innocence;
And when my Soul was frighted with her Crime,
Bound for Eternity, they gave me Time
For the recovery of Life, and Fame
(Dearer then Life) that my corrupted Name
Might be with tears purifi'd, and made fit
To grace my Tomb, when my Inscription's writ.

Madam?


I sent for you, to let you know
The Gladiators were not slain; my Servant
Tells me, they fled to Barnet-Woods: I 'v^ sent
To have them apprehended, and they shall
Be brought to Justice; now let's mind our Sport,
Which must disguise my trouble, that I may
Give Filamor an opportunity:
Diana's Crescent to a nobler end
Was never worn; Goddess of Chastity
Assist the God of Love, shout from thy Bow
His Arrow into Caesarina's Heart.
Dear Caesarina, you are dressed, stay here
And thank Prince Filamor.

I shall obey you;
But Madam, I beseech you, why am I
Enjoined to give him thanks? do you suspect,
That I'm inclining to ingratitude?

No: But your Gratitude at this time, may
Dispose him to forgive my Cruelty,
Which strikes into my Heart the very Poniard
I aimed at his.

This you'd have him believe?


That Question makes me fear, that you your self
Believe not my Repentance; 'tis no more
Then I am to expect from all the World.
But ere the Hour-glass, that's now turned, runs out,
I hope to satisfy that general Doubt.
He's here, the God of Marriage bless their Meeting.

What Nymph's this? tis not Caesarina, sure,
Though it presents her divine form? 'tis she.

Filamor!


Hark, she calls me Filamor!
But am I Filamor? do I see and hear?
Nay, do I live? has not the Villain slain me?
And is not that blessed Form, inherent in
My Soul, descended with it to the Shades?

No, Filamor lives, a Sacrifice of Thanks
For the Panth^on in which all the Gods
Are worshipped, whose united Powers preserved
Your Valour, that redeemed my Life and Honour*
An Obligation (past a^knowledgment)
For which I wish you all you can desire --

How I am ravished with Celestial Musique*


My self excepted.


Oh, that Clause has spoiled
The fair^st Evidence that was ever drawn
For the intitling of a Lov^r's Faith
To his sweet ^ope.

Valiant Prince Filamor,
(...) away that ^ff^minate vain Hope,
And ^hink of noble Objects, Spoils and Triumphs.

Gr^at Actions, M^dam, are for happy men*
But misery designs my Arms to Rust,
My Glory to the Urn that holds my Dust:
I see, you do not love me,

More Sir, more
Then you do love your self; for if I might
Dispose of your Succ^sses, Filamor
Sho^l^, like young Alexander, conquer all
Th^ World, but Caesarina; there's your Friend;
Now Company comes in, I take leave of you.

And I must bi^ adieu to Happiness.


Yet this my brave Preserver may believe,
If I'd sub^ect my self to any man,
Filamor should be Lord of Caesarina.

And so thou shalt, I'll pass my word; and then
You may be the Insurer of my Mistress:
For as the great Ship towes the little Cock-boat,
My Sister towes thy Sister after her.

You're mighty pleasant.


Which presages well,
Now sit, and let's see, if Diana's Mask
Be no worse than Apollo's; What says th'Authour?

That the Mask is -- beginning.


Then ^e down.


Goddess of Flowr's, though you have still
Narcissus in your Daffadil,
I fear you'll lose him by degrees;
My Brother dis-inchants the Trees;
Birds I restore; some other Powers
May un-metamorphose Flowe^s.

Diana, the fair Huntress* ^nowes
She may my Flowr's and Me dispose.

Come hither Flora, do you know
This blushing Lady?

No, yes, no.


You have ^orgot her; so bad ^:
When, lo, I saw a Swallow fly
Over London, to my Temple-top,
Then to the gro^nd she seems to drop.
But in her fall spreading her wings,
Flies to my Altar, sits and sings;
Her voice I know, and that she mourned
For her lost Form, which I returned;
The Swallow's Progne once again.

And shall be happy Progne, when
My Sister P^ilomel I see;
I hear her in that Hawthorn-tree:
Diana, pity her sweet sorrow.

My Grove, thy Nightingale I'll borrow,
She shall be now Diana's Creature,
I'll join her Honour to her Feature.
A Maid the second time I'll make her;
Bac^ back my Moons, and overtake her
An hour before that sad dishonour
Thy husband (Progne) forced upon her.

He was a Villain; yet that shape
Might tempt a God to act a Rape.

How my Rape was brought about,
And how my Tongue cut out,
I need not t^ll,
'Tis known as well
As my woeful name of Philomel,
Which, though my speech did fail,
My Soul did so bewail,
That it throbbed into a Nightingale.
Then I, poor Bird,
Had Tongue, but not a Word;
I sung, but c^uld not speak:
As if my heart would break
Warbled I.
But no more Revenge I cry,
Now the Ravisher's acquitted;
For, Diana's mighty power
Calls back this the happy'st Hour,
The Hour before the Crime committed.

Twice a Maid
And both times betrayed:
Your Virginity's private Gra^t
Must be sung
With your new tongue,
To inveigle ^ young Gallant?

What art thou?


A lustful Satyr.


Out, foul Goat.


I can assure you,
Goats are ravishers by Nature;
But I love, let that secure you.

What dost thou love?


To dance, that's Sweet.


Satyr, our Inclinations meet;
Let's dance.

No; I'm too much below you,
My antique tricks I dare not show you,

Diana so affects Sobriety,
Th'old Wood-God dances with her Deity;
For you three God Sylvanus brings
Gods of the Copses, Groves and Springs;
But though you are above my levell,
Yet through a Bush I'll see you revel.

The Wood puts down
The Field and the Town:
Men labour there,
As Ants toil here;
But we still please our fancies:
Nature sets us no task,
Our whole Life's a Mask
Composed of Songs and Dances.
The S^tyr acts the Roman


Yes, I made
Princes^ Violinda Philomel, to mind
Th'old Prince of's wife's barbarity to's daughter.

By the Princessse
The Compa^y's desired to stay, and hear
What she'll discover for the Public Good*

The Public Good?


Perhaps she may build Temples,
Now that she's in the habit of a Goddess.

W^en she does any Good, Public or Private,
Let none think that I'm versed in both the Globes,
If th'Earth does not rise up, or the Sky fall*

Justice and Truth compel me to reveal
A Secret, which Discretion would conceal:
But I'll reveal it to no private Ear;
All are concen'd, and therefore all shall hear.
If any think it stange, that I express
My serious thoughts in such a fained Dress,
Know, since by his sad fate your Prince was curs't
To marry me, this Habit is the first
In which I've done no mischief; Treason stains
My Prin^ely Robes: and if my Hand retains
The native whiteness, tis not that I'm Good,
But that I could not take the dye of Blood.
So foul as I never had Woman been,
Had but my Power been equal to my Spleen:
My Husband's life I did to Hell devote,
Ma^ice, which Hell it self would not promote;
But the just wrath of Heaven turned my Design
Laid against him and his, on me and mine;
To murder Violinda, Rogues I hired,
To ravish Caesarina they Conspired;
And wh^n I thought a Dagg^r to have struck
In Filamor, at Adolph's Heart I stuck.
Who would be wicked? when the very Crime
Conceived, torments our Souls, and at the time
When 'tis delivered, like an Engine broke,
D^stroys us with the force of our own stroke.
Forgive me all that bear a Prince's Name,
The glorious Title which sets off my shame;
And you, dear Pledges of my Lord's first Bed,
With mer^y look upon the tears I shed;
Now that you see my traitors Offence
Washed in these streams of Public Penitence*
In one Orb let us near Relations move,
Forget my Hatred, and embrace my Love.

The Devil, out of all his Languages,
Could not pick words more moving.

Yet they work not,
The Prince sits still.

Though she stands up to Court him.


If any man believes the secret of
The Princess's Repentance, let him speak.

Their very silence has pronounced her door.


The hope of comfort adds but to my grief,
For I see, all I say finds no belief;
But when in Charge against my self I bring
Facts out of which your fears and dangers spring;
You'll answer, what security affords,
The soft contexture of a few good words;
I grant, they rather may your Fears increase,
And therefore I'll give Hostages of Peace:
My Adolph bound in Love's eternal Bands,
I'll ^ender into Violinda's Hands;
And Filamor (by sacred Hymen's leave)
Shall Caesarina from my hand receive.
Come Caesarina, give the Prince your self.

From me what is not due to Filamor,
Who, with his life in's hand, rescued my Honour?

Did not I prophesy? dear Filamor?


The Prince, in lieu of his, may claim my Life,
But not my Slavery; I'll be no man's Wife.

She speaks my resolution.


Doy' hear Adolph?
Now who's the Prophet?

Thou art -- the blind Prophet;
I am the Seer; they are ours as sure
As we are theirs --

I'll try another Speech --
Ha! who presumes to take my place? what's he?

A Judge, bound by his oath, when he hears Treaso^
C^nfess'd, to doom the Parricide to death.

No Judge shall doom me, but the Prince my Husband.


Behold the Husband to whom you appeal,
A Judge, bound by the honour of my word,
When you first sought my life, that if you ever
Committed a new Treason, you should die:
There needs no form of Law, from your own mouth
A cloud of Witnesses have proved your Treason;
Nor will we torture you with hearing it
Repeated, nor with your accursed blood
Will we profane Diana's sacred Grove.
Be it decreed, That in the Lawn, the place
Where by thy Gladiators Violinda
Should have been murdered, thou shalt lose thy head.
A guard: away with her, but give her time
(So it exceed not half an hour) to pray.

Vengeance is slow, but certain. I have vexed
This World too long, dispatch me to the next.

Doubt nothing Adolph, I'll secure her life:
Tetrick, you have too far engaged my Father,
'Twas never my intention, she should die.

'Tis your own business, you may do it your way
And save h^r life, that she may ruin you.

Nay I would have her out of hope to live*
That she may really repent, but then
Dear Tetrick (thou command the Guards) reprieve her:
Do it at my peril.

I am like to do it
At my own peril too; but I'll obey you.

Come friend, and as we go, tell Caesarina
How careful I am to preserve your Mother.

What a strange Monster your great Mistress is,
That neither her son nor her daughter open
Their lips for her?

But do you think she'll die?


Unless she has, like Nile, more Heads then one,
One head's condemned, I'll see it cut off, your servant.

But hark you Fromund; I took you to be
An honest man.

Do y' find the contrary?


Troth, 'tis no sign of exc'lent honesty
To profess love to me, and in a time
Of danger leave me to my Fortune.

Why?
Are you in any danger?

Then you know not
I was my Lady's Coy-duck, to bring in
Prince Filamor?

Pish! a poor little Treason,
They'll never mind you, now they've got the Princess.

This all the care yo^ take for her that loves you?


I understand not loving; will you marry?


Who?


Me.


Do you call marrying, loving?


Yes,


Then I will love you.


Then I'll secure you.
But will you not break promise when you're safe?

No, I hate baseness; I have loved you long,
But I'm so bashful, I should scarce have owned it,
If this unlucky occasion had not offered
It self.

Well, Madam, I have caught you now.


I hope you'll keep me


Safe --


Undone, undone!


Who's undone?


Every good man, you're undone.


Must I be hanged?


No (drown you) you'll escape th'halter,
That falls to our shares; but no matter what
Becomes of us: Sylvanus --

What of him?


Lost! all's lost, Pontia rescued, we are now
Her Slaves.

How's this possible?


H^ar, and wonder:
We came into the Lawn; and though 'twas meant
Pontia should live, she knew't not, but composed
Her self to die, so mildly, that it struck
Into astonishment all the beholders;
Such a dead stillness was upon the place,
'Twas like a Sea becalmed; when, in an instant,
The Storm breaks forth, thundering came Pontia's Horse,
And in the head of them her Gen'rall Crispus:
Our Guards (amazed before) now as if they
Had seen in th'En^mies shields the Gorgon's head
(Which had the petrifying quality)
Turned Statues; stood still, whilst the Maldener^
Bound them; and Crispus, like young Perseu^,
Released the condemned Princess, seized the Prince.
And Principality of Verulam:
They took me Pris'n^r, but the General
(When he was told my Name, ^emembering
He had r^ad my Book of Fortification)
Freed me.

Then we may live to free our Masters;
Nay, we may speak Treason before this Lady;
(...) has promised me marriage.

Sinc^ when, pray?
I'll be judged by this learned Gentleman;
You said, that mar^ying was loving; I
Answ^r'd, that I would love you; but I hope
I did not say, that I would marry you:
Alas, poor Fool; O brave, brave General!

The General's the Man, and I'm the Fool;
You will not have me?

First, I'll see you hanged.


But though in point of Love you have deceived me,
Upon the account of Gratitude; I hope
You'll beg my life?

That's all you have to beg,
Y' have neither Lands nor Goods; but I'm too rich
To be a B^ggar upon any score.

To save your Life, I would have ventured mine,


But your simplicity's no rule for me;
In sober sadness, I will never marry
You, nor espouse your Danger: So adieu,
Kind younger Brother, do what you were born to;
Shift for your self: O brave, brave General!

Come Fromund, follow me, I know the Woods,
I'll lead thee to a place of sweet recess,
Where we will enjoy our selves, and never think
Of Women more.

But rise up Bard and Driud.
Farewell Philosophers, and welcome General.

Command in our Name, upon pain of death,
That none presume to pillage, or take Prisoner
Any of my Subjects of Verulam,
Unless that Subject desperately rebel,
And put his Country in Blood

O Heaven!
And have I lived to see my Princely Mistress
Sovereign of Verulam?

My Sovereignty
And Life I owe to ^y Lord General.

What Virgin would not love so brave a man?
Madam, R^member now your gracious Promise,
And move the General for me.

Your best time
Will be when business of the War is over;
For, Marriages are businesses of Peace.

O Madam, when your Highness was concerned,
I put not you off to a better time.

If you'll not take advise, then take your Fortune;
My Lord, you know this Lady?

Brianella.


You know her quality?


That she's the richest
In all your Principality of Malden;
In all your Court of Verulam the greatest,
For she's your Favourite.

She would be your wife;
I have engaged to use my power with you --

Not to make her my wife* you're not in earnest*


In earnest.


So am I.


And so am I,
Never to marry a Property.

Property?


A Property for Murder, was not she
Used for the intrapping of Prince Filamor?
Madam, to me you made another Promise,
By which you are obliged to banish her.

My word's past, so's her greatness: Brianella,
If to our Court thou come after this day,
Thou dy'st.

But I may see your Husband dye
Before I go; then, I hope, you'll perform
Your other Promise to the General;
For, it seems, you have promised him your self;
Give you Joy -- of my Curses, I've one day
Yet left to curse you; ^ang me, if I pray.

My Fav'rite's banished; now Sir do you think
That I'll perform my Promise?

If you were
A real Convert, of your own accord
You would have banished all such Instruments,

I have been so long wicked, that no man
Will credit my Repentance, but distrust
From Crispus wounds me.

Why then (I beseech you)
Do y' keep your Husband and his Children Prisoners?

Why are you so presumptuous as to ask?
Who made you our Examiner? your duty
Is to attend, till we declare our self.

Bid the Groom bring my Horses to the Gate.


Stay, Brianella.


Sure, you'll let me go.


Believe't I'll sooner part with my new Conquest;
After you were commanded to withdraw,
My Promise being debated, 'twas resolved
Upon the Question, that you should be still
My Favourite.

Great hope of her amendment.


Sir, you shall now have proof of our Repentance,
Call in the Prisoners.

To restore me to
Your favour, was t^e General consenting?

He hates thee, as I hate him, mortally.


Shall he live?


Poorly; thou shalt see him crushed
To his first Nothing.

Mighty General,
'Twill elevate my Soul to see thy Fall:
There is a Pleasure in Revenge, above
The expectation or the joys of Love.
And to revenge my self on thee, is just;
But the betraying of Prince Filamor,
Who never injured me, was base: Some power
That, as I do, pities that noble Prince,
Put it into her Heart, to spare his life
One hour, and I'll make use of her new Favour
To expiate my Crime; I'll now Charm Her,
And free him from his cruel Step-Mother.

Old man, who hast outlived Humanity,
From me what can expect?

What thou deserve,
Death: death, to which my Justice sentenced thee,
I do expect now from thy Cruelty;
And I'll meet th'Axe with such a Resolution
As shall (if thou dare be a looker on)
Shake thy weak Soul into another Swooned.
Though I lived under thy Reign like a Waman,
Yet I'll die like a Man.

Since you're so brave,
I'll not take pattern by your former baseness;
For, Sir, when I was to have lost my head,
No state was thought upon, no Princes ordered
To follow me; You shall have Filamor
And Violinda to bear up your train.
Between your Sentence and my Execution,
Your withered narrow heart could afford me
But half an hour; I'll give you a whole hour.

Bountiful wife, you are extreme obliging.


My Prayer is heard, I'll now serve Filamor.


Filamor, what is Death?


Better than Life,
'Tis Nature's greater bounty, for we may
Improve it to an immortality
Of Fame, by dying nobly.

I have lived
By Caesarina's rule, by yours I'll dye.

Oh, name not dying; though my Mother has
Condemned you, yet Heaven cannot be so cruel.

Capito take you charge of the old man,
And my Lord Gen'rall to your Custody,
We do commit his Children.

Here's Reward
For all my Services, I am preferred
To th'Office of a Marshall.

May we two
With your permission, my Lord General,
Speak with your Prisoners?

At your pleasure, Sir:
For, as to that, I am not limited,
And I'll put no R^straint upon my self.

You ever were a Person of great honour.


Therefore in this base Charge ^y Shame's the more;
To serve my Prince I never blushed before.

FOr taking of the Prisoners from the General,
That Letter to Pri^ce Adolph I procured,
Which shows there is a justice in my nature,
I hope 'twill save the life of Filamor
Whom I wronged: and I'm sure 'twill take away
The last remainder of his Trust from Crispus,
Who wronged me -- my Lord General Capito,
The Princess called for you: he minds uot me?
I have no fortune to these Generals.

My Lord, you're raised to the command in chi^f
Over our Forces, by obeying us.

Madam, my Will is vassal to your Pleasure,
You are my Gen'rall, not to be asked, Why,
But What you please; and that I'll do, or die.

First, show to Crispus your Commission,
And vacate his: then take you charge of th'Army,
Which we designed you two hours since, when he
Gave rules to us, but I was forced to use him,
Till to this height he raised my Sovereignty.
Now Verulam is ours, the Building's finished,
And we will take down the Scaffolds.

Such a fall
May all the proud Men have, who scorn kind Women.

In the last place, double your Guards, that w^
May prevent sudden tumults, and attempts
In favour of the condemned Princes, they
(I doubt) have Parties in our Camp and Court;
But were it in our own veins th^y should bleed.

Without distinction, whos'^re lifts his hand
Against your power, shall feel the weight of mine.
Please to dismiss me, that I be not straitened
In point of time?

Go, and be fortunate.

Fortune, my Goddess, is great Pontia's hand-maid.

I forgot one particular; I'll send
This Lady to you, when she comes, do you
Return, and bring Crispus to us.

I shall.

There Brianella, I have writ to Adolph
As you desired, I can deny you nothing;
But y^t to trust my Son with custody
Of Violinda and Filamor (the Prince
Being my Son's Friend, the Princ^ss his Mistress,
(Should Love against his Interest bias him)
May be of dangerous consequence.

Prince Adolph,
To preserve them, will not lose Verulam.

I see Brianella is for Filamor:
Well, I will venture't, upon your account*
Though Adolph may d^c^ive me.

I hope he will.

Give him that Letter, in which is enclosed
A discharge of our latest trust to Crispu^.

Then Crispus (whether bound for Heaven or Hel^)
She, whom you scorned, shall toul your passing Bell.

Away, leave me to perfect my own story;
I'll add to my two Crowns a third of Glory.

We have out-walk'd the General and my Sister*
Let's tarry for them?

By no means, least Fate
Should overtake you; the Executioner
Is setting up your Scaffold: Filamor
S^ands now upon the Verge of Life and Death;
Here is a Grave, and there's a Sanctuary:
Behind that Hedge I've laid for you a Horse,
A Fleeter's not in Britain; mount him, fly.

As for your noble Sister and your Father,
(When on^e my Mother knows that you're escaped)
She will not dare to touch them; fly.

How? fly?
You heard the General take my Parol,
And would my Friends have me to save my Life
Lose th'end for which Man lives, Honour?

O Sir,
Under the notion of a private man
Consider not your self, on you depend.
Thousands of Subjects Lives.

And a whole race
Of unborn Princes.

To preserve Mankind,
I'd not break my Engagement; though till now
I never valued life, yet when 'tis off^r'd
By those I prize above life, I am bound
In honour to refuse it.

'Tis too late
To pass now; here's your Keeper, but I'll make
Way through him with my sword, I'll fight with Crispus.

I hope you'll not fight with the General
That uses us with such Civility,
'Tis Pontia, not Crispu^, that condemned us;
And we had rather suffer death, than you
Should res^ue us with hazard of your life.

First let me move him: My Lord General,
Fame gives you such a noble Character,
That I can't think you a willing Instrument
In the injustice done to these two Princes.

Madam, to show how my Obedience
Has been constrained to act against my Will,
If an exchange of Lives may be admitted,
I'll die to excuse them.

That you may do,
And not die, only wink at their Escape*

No, then my Honour dyes.

Honour and Fortune
Shall recompense that Piety.

More Titles
Than Caesar claims, and all the sparkling Gold
Into the Sea with ebbing Tagus rolled,
Cannot buy me out of a sacred Trust:
Poor Crispus may be, but he will be just.

Crispus, with a Friend's arm I could embrace thee,
W^re not thy worth destructive to my Friends;
But now I'll meet thee as an enemy.
Capito? what news?

Such as does amaze
The Messenger, that Parchment will inform
You, my Lord General.

I kiss her Name
That signed it, and so vanishes my power;
'Tis Capito's the General: Have y' Order
To take the prisoners from me?

T^at's my Office;
For I bring up the rear of your Discharges,
This is your last: but this you're willed to l^av^
Your Prisoners with Prince Adolph.

Then these are
My last Commands?

No; we two must attend
The P^incess, after we have viewed the Army.

My Lord, I'll wa^t on you, as cheerfully
As ever I charged with you.

Go thy way
In qui^t; though I long, I have no pow^r
To insult o'r^ thee, you're so brave a man:
B^t to my business: humbly at your feet,
Prince Filamor, I beg your pardon, for
The impudent abuse I put on You
To pl^ase my Mistress: but to make my self
Capable of your mercy, I've used all
My interest with her ^o get that Letter
Which trusts you and your Sister to your Friend;
Your Mother thought it dangerous, but my power
Wi^h her, prevailed against her Reason.

Rise,
For what your Prince commands, you may be excused,
I'm satisfied.

So am not I, to see
My Mother's favour thus misplaced on thee:
Out of my sight; were not Women, like Priests,
Exempted from the power of the sword,
I would have ki'lld thee.

It had been but Justice,
I do deserve to die, and I deserve not
To be believed.

Come Princes, I'll not trust you
Out of my hands till I have lodged you safe.

Then you must see them out of Verulam
Within this half hour.

This goes to my Mother;
But my Friend and my Love shall go with me.

We will all be prisoners, or we will all be free.


Once more I'm the mock-Conjurer, the Gods
Or else the devil take her that's the cause on it!
Another Devil take mock-Prophecies,
They prove so true: when I made the Bard's Song,
Who would have thought those can^ing words should prove
An Oracle?

I'll be the Bard to purpose;
For, Tetrick, in these Fortune-tell^ng Shapes,
As mighty Po^t^a's Prophets we shall pass
The regim^nt drawn up to guard the Scaffold.

T^en if the G^n^ral^ escape my dagger, he
Shall have Prince Adolph's luck, but Crispu^ is not
So well br^d as to w^ar a La^y's Picture
Next to his heart.

Strike home I'll second thee;
By ^y hand the L^t^nant-G^nerall fal^s:
Prince Adolph ^ay t^en be th^ G^nerall,
And he'll prot^ct the Prin^es: what b^com^s
Of thee and me, no matter.

As I live,
Thy Mistress, coming hither, do thou slip
Be^i^d these Bush^s; as I promised t^ee,
I'll dispatch thy love business, if w'have time

Within th^re?


Who's witho^t th^re?


Brianella.


Go see the Princes die.


No, th^y'r sa^e in
Prince Adolph's hands, that one good deed I've done.

Th^n to the Bard's Cave you are kindly w^lcome;
(Now I may fool a little) what's your pleasure?

Is the good Wo^an h^re, she that tells fortunes?


You mean ^y pretty Mistress, the old Witch;
She's riding on her di^aff into Lapland,
(To morrow being our Wedding-day) to fetch
Her Gems, and all her Parafarnalia:
Before she set forth, she commanded me,
I should examine all the Stars that shined
At your Nativity, for a General
To be your husband: take it upon my word,
The Planets know not any General
That loves you.

I hate Generals, can you tell
My husband's name?

Ill news I'll tell you, Madam;
My reverend Spouse went away in a whirlwind;
Poor heart, the saddest soul; you'll hardly guess
What grieved her, the loss of your Saphyr-Ring,
For which I set a figure, and t'appears
Your Ring was lost by a strange providence,
For he that finds it is to be your Husband.

What if I like him not?


You'll only be
Torn in a hundred pieces.

If he be
Of the malignant party, or a rebel,
You shall tear me into a thousand pieces
Before I marry him.

The man that found it
(For now 'tis found) is of the Loyal Party.

Madam, I think, you dropped this Sap^yr-ring?
I saw you p^sse, and strove to over-take you:
You were too n^mble for me; but I kissed
The ground you trod upon, and there lay this.

'Twas mine, 'tis yours, keep't, I'll take nothing from you
Which Fortune gives you.

Though it be her self;
An^ (as the mouth of fortune) I pronounce,
'Tis so; com^, let me join your hands in Marriage:
Now you are Man and Wife; I leave the rest
For night, if we out-live this day, that looks
So black on Verulam, and our great Masters.

Who's the Magician's Master, pray?


Sylvanus.


But the Magician is Pontia's Creature.


Your humble Servant, Madam; do you know me?


Tetrick the Conjurer?


Fromund was th'old Witch.


Yes faith, I was th'old Witch, an't please you Daughter.


Oh you're rare Fortune-telling youths! but we
Are soon persuaded to a thing we like:
For if I had not loved you --

And I you;
I would not have married another Lady.

Nor would I've had another younger brother.


On, on; the Princes have employment for us?


And We have Lives for them.


I'll be your guide.


Our horses are now come, I'll be your Conyoy.


You shall not give your self that dangerous trouble.


I'll see you safe, out of my Mother's power.


Then you must see us die, for that determine^
Your Mother's power.

Why do you make a halt?
What do you mean?

I mean to go no further;
Filamor is now at his Journey's end,
Here I'll lay down the burden of my life,
And rest.

Defend me! this is such a Madness,
That 'tis infectious, it distracts me too;
Will you stay, till your last hour be run out?
Will you be accessory (not alone
To your own death, but) to the murder of
Your Father, and your Sister?

Should I escape
By a base flight, my Father's age would fall
At Pontia's feet a bleeding Sacrifice:
Forgive me, Sister; for thy tender Youth
My heart bleeds through my ^yes.

Do not afflict
Your self for me; the World is full of Ladies,
And I shall not be missed in that great Crowd:
But howsoever, when you go to find
Another World, I would not stay behind.

Do y' pity her sweet youth? and are y'unmov'd
With her mind's bravery? how easily
Will you leave us?

As the soul leaves the body;
Forced to it by fatal necessity:
For a memorial of my love, I make you
My Heirs, between you divide Verulam.

Let a Sea-breach (to quench thy Funeral Fire)
Swallow up Verulam, and Malden first:
But whence comes this fatal necessity?
You think to fly, is base? who ever stood
More upon honour then th'old Romans? y^t,
After his Cimbrian Triumph, Marius fled
And begged near conquered Carthage; you shall live
Like a Prince still.

I must not live at all;
And bett^r die by the hand of Injustice,
Then by my own hand: in a word, I'm barred
From my love, and I'll not accept my life.

Do y'hear this, Caesarina? now you know,
Your resolution is the cause of his;
He will not live, because you will not love him:
Though Filamor might live long, if my Sister
Were not more barbarous to him than my Mother:
For she's his enemy, death from her must be
Expected: You, his friend, may get him off,
And yet you leave him to his enemy's mercy.

Farewell, brave Filamor; a point is started
Which makes me take my leave.

You shall not go;
Though for my own life I was not concer^'d,
Yet, Caesarina, for my brother's safety
I must petition you.

Move not a Suit,
I cannot grant.

Can you not grant one Suit,
To save two Lives?

Nay Siste^, you may go:
But yet, remember, he, you leave to die,
Res^u'd your honour*

'Tis impossible,
I can preserve his life without destroying
My own contentment; therefore, Filamor,
Your interest h^s the preference, I am yours.

I am I know not what, my Joy's so vast,
It puts an Army's strength into my nerves.
To horse, to horse, I'll bear this Prize away
Through Groves of Pikes.

Stay, stay till I be ready;
I'll not fight, till Violinda gives the word:
Madam, you know, I had your gracious promise,
When she was his Wife, that you would be mine?

Well Adolph, by her copy I'm your wife:
But Sir, if she had not been forced to render,
I would have held out, till I had been older
And wiser, for I understand not Love.

Dear Madam, I'll instruct you -- now l^t's ^harge --


Your Mistresses; this Coupling-time's the death
Of more Wild-fowl then all the Year besides;
Look, here's another pair, of Widgeons, caught,
And I am in the Net for company:
The Army has h^dg'd -- about the Grove, on^ Pass
Is only open, at which we came in.

No matter; Hannibal wrought through the Rock.


Our Swords are sharper then his Vinegar.


Yet, my young Hannibals, pray, view your danger?


That's requisite; come dear.


Come,


What would you do?


I'd only kiss my heart into more courage.


Speak softly, Sir, for fear your Mother hear you,
And then, you will be chid abominably.

Crispus, you see, your Greatness, like our Coin,
Even when 'twas Yours was Ours; wee've called it in
As a base Mettle, that dishonours us.

I'm what you please, but only --


No Proviso's.

Yet will you own the Justice of my Cause,
And act in the reducing of the Prisoners,
And th'Army for their General shall own you?

First, do like Xerxes, cut me into halves:
Then lay me, where the moving Army may
March through their General.

Make him close Prisoner.


Take Crispus to your Custody, admit
None to speak with him.

Yet your Emissaries
May be deceived.

One in a tree (close by them)
Saw them join hands.

It seems th^y'r married then,
Yet since Adolph's engaged, I'd have them taken
Without a drop of blood.

That cannot be,
Unless we send out more Spies to discover,
Before the Princes come to fight, what place
They leave the Ladies in: If th^y be taken,
Adolph and Filamor will lay down their arms,
As I shall work it.

Go, dispatch your Spies.


None believes my Predictions but your Mother;
You're in a Pound now, get out as you may.

The Pass^, at which you came, is slightest guarded,
Let's break out there.

Where shall the Ladies be?


In the Bard's Cave, for there they will be safe,


Your Mother has a reverence for the place,
She'll violate a Temple e're she'll take em
Out of that Cave.

The Counsel is not ill;
To the Bard's Cave we will wait upon our Loves,
If we break through, we will send for you at night:
But if the Army comes in to Prince Adolph,
We will see you presently.

And if we fall,
(Nay, weep not, Dear) we will have company
Into the Stars, if the rogues go not downward.

'Tis only Multitudes that I'm afraid of*


When Filamor fights, I can fear no odds,
His Cause is Honour's, Love's, and all the Gods.

Your Spies are not come in?


They've had no time
For a discovery yet: do y' know these,
Madam?

The Jewels which I gave the Gladiators.


One would think, you sprung from that fortunate King,
Whose Jewels, lost at Sea, came to his Table
Served up in the belly of a Fish.

Where are
The Villains?

This account the Letter gives:
Barnet- Woods were laid for them; by your Order:
Our Soldiers follow'd, and came up so close;
The rogues, for their last refuge, were constrained
To imitate Merchants in a storm, who save
Themselves, by casting over-board their Treasure:
So, emptying into their hands these purses,
They sewed th'unplough'd Earth with your Gold and Jewels;
And whilst our covetous men gathered them up,
The Gladiators fled; and here's your Own.

And they have their reward, a fearful Judgm^nt;
Their Lives are saved, but their Livelihood's lost,
And that's more horrid then the death th^y feared;
For in this Isle they dare not stay, nor dare they
Go to the Continent, lest their Countrymen
(Who command there) should hang them; they must starve.
You look as if we had our wish, what news?

How infinitely fortunate are you,
The Ladies in the Bard's Cave are secured.

For Us, not for Themselves.


My men have orders;
The Princesses shall be brought in, to face
The Princes, there they come; I will amuse them
Till the work's done.

They shall not see me yet.


Princes, what means this fury, that you brave
With a few hands the strength of a whole Army?
Pray, tell me, what do you rely upon,
Your selves? or others? do y' look for Assistance?
It must come down from heaven, and there dwells none
That will assist a Son against a Mother:
Nor will heaven own a Cause it has deserted?
With Adolph Nature's angry, and the Gods
With Filamor: If to your selves you trust,
Reason will tell you, four before four thousand
Must fall to th'Earth's cold arms, from whence they sprung*
So that you only can expect to have
From Heaven a Thunderbolt, from the Earth a Grave.

Our Answer's in our hands.


Hold Filamor,
If you have no compassion for your self,
Look on the snow that lies uponthat head,
Which must be taken off, at the first blow
You strike.

Filamor, if thou pitty'st me,
Strike quickly, and let me die, any death,
So I may be rid of my wife, I care not.

Poor Prince, the Grief to see his Son so wilful,
Distracts him.

If he will not hold his prating,
Cut his throat, Filamor; charge them, that my Soul
May have her liberty, a thousand blessings
Upon the hand, that fighting moves this Engine
To strike my head off and divorce me from
My brutish wife.

We shall obey you, Sir.


Hold, once more; Princes take heed what y do
How shows this Object?

Caesarina taken?


Yes, Filamor; she that was once my child,
Is now my prisoner: when she married thee,
I disclai^'d her: I look upon her now
As on a Rebel, yet her life I'll pardon,
If you lay down your Arms.

Immediately,
A Roman would not pause in such a C^se.

If you but offer at your life, she dyes.


Friend, there's no struggling against Fate, give me
Thy Sword; There Capito, with my own I render
Prince Filamor's Arms, he shall not kill himself,
Let's Enemy do that office, I'll wait on him.

So, now I'm all that I can wish to be;
O 'tis the Queen of all Felicities
To have full power to reward and revenge.
Bring the late General Crisp^, that I may
At one time cut off all my Enemies.
First, Filamor, to you -- I give my Daughter;
To your Sister my Son, and to my Son
I give my Principality of Malden,
For I'll depend only upon my husband:
For whose pardon and love thus low I b^g.

Rely on me, and you'll be a good Wife,
Then I shall study to forget your Evil,
And love you for your Goodness.

With my thanks
For this inestimable Gift, I crave
Your pardon for my incredulity
When you returned to Virtue.

That distrust
Was universal, for which all have suffered;
And yet thus far I would not have pursued
Th'advantage fortune put into my hands,
But that I knew nothing could bring my Daughter
To Love's obedience, but the hope to save
His life who saved her honour: To give her
That opportunity, I committed you
Both Prisoners to your Friend.

I am bound to you
For my conv^rsion to Love's Deity.

Adolph, for thee I have a second Gift,
But greater then the first; into thy service
And (nearer yet) into thy bosom take
This man of honour, thoroughly I've
He's perfect, use him, and he'll make thee Great.
Let him be Captain General of thy Army,
And give the Second Place to Capito,
Whose strict Obedience and prudent Conduct,
Makes him inferior to none but Crispu^.

Now Pontia, like the Planet of the Night,
Breaks from her cloud, and shows us her pure light.

Though one Prince limits my Obedience,
Two Sov^reigns my bosom does contain,
For in my heart Adolph and Pontia reign.

Me and my love you've crowned, and added these
Two rich Crown-jewels.

I'm obliged to you
Both for my interest in the Crown and Prince.

Fromund, I joy you; and I'll move my husband
To add a Title of Honour to you^ Fortune.

Your Servant, Madam.


Well, you are a Witch,
You told me, I should be Right Honourable.

Tetrick, to make you a Fortune, take this gold
And Jewels.

Nay, since Fortune smiles upon me,
I'll not be testy now: I humbly thank you.

Let us all thank Providence, that directs
Bad Causes to produce such good Effects.

THe Ancient Britains I have pleased; and now
I come to their Descendents, to know how
You'll censure me; my Doom I fain would hear,
Yet, like you Lovers, what I hope, I fear.
But fear arrives too late, the time is past;
No going less, when once the Dice are cast,
Whether I fairly pass, or have thrown out,
You are to judge; pray, put me out of doubt.
HAppy were those who English Plays first writ,
They flourished in the golden times of Wit;
Ripe Harvests then from Old and Modern Scenes
The Industrious Poet reaped, but now he gleans*
In that kind Age every one praised all Plays,
No mercy's in the Critic^s of our days.
The Author knew these Disadvantages,
Yet ventured, hoping his desire to please;
May Royal Pity move: You represent
That Power, which for the act accepts the intent.

