IF Favours merit Thanks, what then is due
For Blessings, Sir, derived to Us from You?
Such Blessings as no People, ever since
They prospered into Kingdoms, owed a Prince:
Three Nations (by all others disesteemed)
To Honour and to Freedom you redeemed.
Now your Nobility are Lords age'n,
Your Commonalty Valiant Loyal Men.
Th'Oil that Anointed you healed our sad wounds,
Your Laws have fixed us in our old just Bounds.
When to your Throne you came, Justice returned
From Heaven, and on the Bench (over which she mourned,)
Sits in your Splendour, gives (not takes) the Word,
And with her Balance over-rules the Sword,
Which now protects your poorest Subject's Plea,
And guards the Labours of your Land and Sea.
Nor is Toil barred from Pleasure any more,
For, Public Recreations you restore;
Not Roman Theaters, that were designed
For Sword-play, our Plays recreate the Mind,
Instruct the Judgment, which Men's Natures learns,
And how to manage Low and High Concerns:
Our whole Globe in this Hemisphere we see
Inlightned with the Rays of Majesty,
Where all, but the Authors doubtful Eye, looks clear,
But, Sir, he hopes you'll smile away his fear.

YOur looks are eager, Gentlemen; new Plays,
Like our new Beauties, expectation raise
So high, you promise to your selves a Feast
Of Wonders; alas, Miracles are ceased:
No working now by Supernatural means,
Beaumont and Fletcher have writ their last Scenes.
No Johnson's Art, no Shakespear's Wit in Nature:
For, Men are shrunk in Brain as well as Stature.
Little pure Wit is stirring, (I confess;)
And that's cried down by those that have much less;
And some by the Fanatics have been taught
To conclude, All Gentlemen do, is nought.
When those Grave Critics in their Cradles lay,
Good Plays grew faster than ill Weeds, than they:
Now, one would think, that our slow Writers played
A Spanish Mate at Chess, few Draughts are made,
Since mere Gambetters kept the Stage in awe,
For, (whoe'r sets the Men) they give the Law,
Tyrannically, to our cost we know it,
For (right or wrong) they judge against the Poet.
From such (whom Spleen and Prejudice transport)
The Author refers himself to this just Court,
These Noble Ladies, Lords, and Gentlemen,
And humbly at your feet he lays his Pen:
If bad, it shall not write another letter;
If it please, he'll take it up, and please you better.
Incourage'd Poets heighten their Designs,
Like Painters, who at first draw ruder Lines.

COme, come; as sure as I am in my wits,
My Lord Filomarini, you are mad:
You would not go to Sea else at your years.

To Sea? no, if I do, let me be drowned.

Are you so old, you've lived past sense of danger?

I've lived past the age of telling him my secrets.

Or so poor, that Need makes you trust your life
To Planks and Billows?

Is my Wine aboard?

'Tis stowed, and all your Goods.

All your Discretion,
That's stowed too; your grave Wisdom's under Hatches,
Princess Diacelia's Guardian wants a Guardian.

Princess Leandra wants a Guardian;
This Pirate little thinks she's landed here,
And that my Voyage ends in her Arrival.

Turn Child again? now, when you have invited
All Naples to a Feast, you'll not stay dinner;
Pray, do but eat your breakfast with your friends.

But is Leandra grown the greater Beauty?
My son's Bride, Diacelia, was the Sweeter.

Your Lordship knew Leandra in her childhood,
You'll see her finely built, so tight, so yare;
She lacks but you at Helm.

And I can Steer;
I shall keep her from falling foul upon
Lugo Filomarini. Where the Devil
Did my son Lugo meet her?

Where the Devil
Never appeared before so near an Angel,
At Church, with the Greek Cheat her cursed Mother,
That passes here for an Illustrious Lady;
The Vice-Roy heard she was a Grecian Princess.

Was ever a Vagary so well timed?
This morning, when your Son is to reap here
The Harvest which you sowed in the Isle of Candy,
To marry a young Princess; you are going
To solace your cold body with the Mermaids.

To Princess Diacelia be a Traitor?
On's Wedding-Eve fall in love with Leandra?

At the Altar: down he fell upon his knees,
And would have prayed to Her, but that I whispered,
Take heed, Sir, how you set up a new Saint,
He that kneels there is an Inquisitor;
This frighted him from Superstition;
But then he fell to Witchcraft, with the Impostress
Her Mother, the Greek Devil, made a Compact,
That is, a Bargain, for twelve thousand Pistols,
And struck a Match.

Hey boy! how sits the Wind?

Fore-right, and a brisk Gale.

There's such a wind
In your head, my good Lord, you hear not me.

Why did they not marry upon the place?

Because the Greek Leech holds it proper first
To purge your son, and Bleed him in the Purse:
She'll first be sure of his twelve thousand Pistols.

Captain Peralta, there's not such a wind
In my head, but I hear thee, and know, all
Thou sai'st is nothing; answered in a word
(The little Word, that governs the great World)
Interest; advantage calls me, I'm concerned
To leave my Son on's Wedding-day, no less
Than he to complement his Guests, or kiss
His Bride, and I will do it as heartily.

Answer your Son so, he's here (I have pressed
Your father's Stay, to make him go his Voyage,
He'll sail, near fear't) break my Lord Lugo's heart?

Hold up thy head, boy; I may come again,
But if it be my Destiny to sink,
I leave thee' a Fortune to buoy up thy heart,
I leave thee' a Bride to multiply my Honour.

There's two good Fortunes.

And the third's not ill,
I leave thee' a Friend, my old Comrade in Candy;
This Spanish Captain to draw his Sword for thee;
Embrace him, he's experienced, take his counsel;
Take heed he cheat not; if a Spaniard got him
'Twas on a Gypsy, for he lives by Pillage,
The Trade that set him up was Piracy;
Had the Rogue been a Neopolitan,
(He's stout and subtle) he'd have made a rare Bandit.

You would make a rare Gally-slave,
For you can Look one way and Row another.
The Captain may be needful, when I quarrel.

Use him, but trust thy self. So, farewell Naples.
No further, son, my Blessing: I have blessed
The Excellent Princess Diacelia,
Thy Bride, be worthy of her; and remember,
Remember, Sir, that her Ancestors
Were Sovereign Princes; and (although I am
Her Guardian, yet) that I imposed not thee
Upon her, but thou art her own free choice;
Remember how thou were obliged, when she
Refused my Nephew, the Prince of Salerno.

You'll give me leave to wait you to the Port?

To cut thee off, I draw a line, this River
Of Rubicon no Soldier is to pass.

No talking to the old man; is he not drunk?

He may be so, he took care for his Wine.

More than he did for me; I'd rather be
My Father's Sack or Claret, than his Son,
He's better at choosing of Wines than Brides.

He chose, for you, a Princess.

But 'twas I
That should have chosen for my self. O Captain!
I would have took Leandra in her Smock,
Rather than marri'd Princess Diacelia
With all Bulgaria', had she't in possession.
My Father shows his judgment.

He was thought
(Ere he ran Sea-mad) wise.

Yes, for himself;
Like an unnatural Moor, he would take money
Even for the chaming of his son to th'Oar:
But, Captain, thou hast promised to redeem me
From the worst of all Slaveries, a loathed Marriage.

I use not to redeem, but to sell Slaves.
Would I could make a Bargain for his Lordship.
My Lord, I hope to serve you [such a trick
As yet you never saw] but the contrivance
Must be considered in a place more private.
See, the Prince of Salerno and his Friend
My Lord Iberio, who commands the Forces
Designed for Candy.

By their whispering,
It seems, they would be private too; leave them
The house, we will take a turn or two in the Garden,
My Bride is not yet dressed, there's time enough.

She is the most --

Inconstant, you would say:
Speak softlier.

Why not louder? 'tis a truth.

But, friend, all truths are not to be proclam'd.
Prithee, my Lord Iberio, do not vex
Thy self, because a Woman proves a Woman:
Be thou a Man, laugh, as I do.

You may
Have cause to laugh?

Thou hast almost as much,
For, our two Cases differ, like two Clocks,
About some half an hour: thy Mistress comes
From the Church marri'd, mine's going to be marri'd,
I give her.

Pish, you cannot, if you loved her.

Special Considerations moving us,
I loved her for her Person, she was handsome;
I loved her for her Fortune, she was rich;
I loved her for her Title, though the Turk
Usurps her Country of Bulgaria,
Still she's a Princess: Princess of Salerno
I wished her, but my cousin Lugo had
The Preference; and since I must not be
Her Husband, I'll even be her Reverend Father,
And give her. What think thou of my Resolve?

I think, there's never a Prince in Italy
Better than you are, at digesting Willow.

Willow feeds me fat, I'm a kind of Kid,
I feel my self so gamesome after it,
So wanton: now am I for Mistresses,
Mistresses in abundance.

One's too much.

The Enemy to my Bulgarian Love,
He that unthron'd her Crowned Progenitors,
The Great Turk, keeps not Mistresses enough:
A Mistress, Sir, may be your fairest play,
For it is possible, she may be your Mistress,
That would not be your Wife.

Impossible,
I'll never see her more.

What will you lay?
Your Cousin can resolve us, he has made it
His business to inquire. Where's Pyramena?

She's in the House.

In this House, Arviedo?

Her husband told me, she was going hither:
And when his Highness lighted from his Coach,
Her Chair was carried in.

A Plot! she marri'd
So early, to meet thee, and make Proposals:
But she will lose her Time, and I my Sport,
If the Bride be not hastened.

I would make
The Prince no sport, but that I have engaged
To dine here.

Better you would dine at home,
For, Pyramena's husband, Decio,
Armed with Gold, that puts Confidence in Cow'rds,
Offers to every wanting hand a Bribe
To poison you.

Decio poison me?
Thy kind fear thinks (now he has married her,
I should have had) that he must with my life
Secure his Purchase.

He attempted me.

Do not I know, he loves to droll with thee?

He would scarce droll away the Sum he offered.

To thee? my kinsman, one that I bred up?

He urged my Obligation and Relation
As the best Blinds; told me, that I might act
In his Revenge, and make my self a Fortune,
Like a destructive Mountebank, that thrives
By Poison, first takes Money, then takes Lives.

In Rhyme? but he's an Illustrissimo
Of Venice and Parnassus, a rich Poet:
Would thou had took his Money.

And given you
The Poison? sure I sooner should have drunk it.

I dare be sworn thou would.

And can you wish
Such Faith corrupted?

No, my noble Cousin,
'Tis to prevent a Rogue that might be hired,
That I wish thee employed.

On that account,
I'll take his Gold, and undertake your Murder;
To serve your Lordship I'll be any thing,
Your Pois'ner to preserve you.

Were he bold,
I might suspect, that Decio would revenge
His sister Ericina.

She that died
For love of you.

But from so soft a spirit
I apprehend no danger, howe'r sound him.

Well, Princess Diacelia, my first Love,
Although you make your unseen Guest, my Heart,
A Mourner at your Wedding; yet those Joys
From which you banish me, I wish to you.

In the Prince of Salerno's Arms I wish
A better Wife.

Bar curses; no Wife, Madam,
Mistresses what you please.

Fie, fie, Sir, leave
This Raillery.

Leave you your frowning then;
Learn of your Senior Bride there, how to smile
On a condemned Prisoner of Love. He frowns?
Abominable! frown when his Mistress smiles?
Pardon my zeal, Madam, I hope my Friend
May have a Mistress?

Not of Pyramena;
She's Virtuous, take it upon my word.

Nay, now
That I have the word of a Princess for
Her Virtue, I'll engage my Friend to try it.
Thy Love is Chaste, they tell theeso;
But how, young Soldier, shalt thou know?
Do by her
As by thy Sword,
Take no Friend's word,
But try her:
'Twill raise her Honour one step higher.
Fame has her Trial at Love's Bar,
Deified Venus from a Star
Shoots her Lustre:
She had never been Goddess't,
If Mars had been modest:
Try and trust her.

What a strange wild-brain'd husband have I escaped!

You think, I take this for a current smile,
I know 'tis counterfeit, gilt brass, your Face
Puts mirth on, when your Conscience is tormented.

My conscience?

Have you none? or is't a-sleep?
It shall be waked, I'll thunder.

If Heaven thundered
I should not tremble, for I am not guilty.

Then you' are not marri'd?

I am Wife to Decio,
No Lord, but equal to a Lord of Naples;
A Gentleman of Venice. When will it thunder?
I see no Lightning yet.

The Clap comes now,
(Avoid it, if you can) did you not swear
You would be my Wife?

Did not you swear first,
That you would not be jealous? were ye not?
Fell you not out with me, for visiting
My Kindred? then I marri'd: Where's my crime?
'Tis you that should fear Thunder, you are perjured,
You broke the Oath upon which my Oath was built,
And Superstructures always fall to ground,
When their Foundation sinks. Can you deny it?

Mine was not Jealousy, but Tenderness
Of your Repute: 'tis a censorious Clime
We live in; from the Liberty you took,
I feared a popular Scandal on your Honour.

It seems so, by the Insolence of your Language;
Did you not tell me, that the world would say,
Iberio was a fool to venture her
To common Courtship, that was Vowed to him --

This makes for me, if Vow have past between them;
May not Iberio court his own Wife, Madam?

And would you leave me for a hasty word?

Yes, he that would control me when my Servant,
Would tyrannize when he should be my Husband.
I have one that Vows he never will commit
Your Jealous Sin against my Innocence*
But I forgive you; something too I'll give you,
My self I cannot, you have forfeited
Your Right in me: but I'll create a Title
For you, next Husband, you shall be my Friend.

Did not I tell thee?

If your Lordship please
To taste the First-fruits of our Bridal Board

And Bed. Ah Rogue, wrapped in thy Mothers Smock.

You shall be the Bride's guest.

I won't.

Out Clown.

Honest old friend Gioseppe, I dare say,
My Guardian, my Lord Filomarini,
Is misinformed; for grant that his son Lugo
Had no Love for me, yet for his own Honour,
Now we are going to Church to be married,
He'd not fly off.

But when you see the proof;
Your Highness (as your Guardian directs)
Will be pleased to put on the Spanish Veil,
And go with me.

He writes, that, by your means,
He has preferred himself and me for Servants
To the Greek Cheat, your Mistress. I'll obey him.

Pray send for me, I'll wait at your Back-stairs.

My Husband is a Stranger, a Venetian,
(For when I found you jealous, I resolved
Never to have a Neopolitan,)
But he so loves your Town, he'll dwell with you:
And sure you cannot but love him again,
The goodest man, nothing but innocent mirth,
His whole delight is to make Songs and Masks;
I hope you'll come?

If I do, I'll tell Decio
What an inviting Wife he has.

Your Servant.

Sir, my dear Love, my good Lord, noble Lady,
Please to excuse me, that I have thus long
Deferred the Ceremony of the Day,
I stayed for this slow Friend: let's now to Church.

No haste: I was your Friend more than mine own,
Or else I would not have engaged with you
(For such a vast sum) to the Iews.

Engage?
Pirates engage? will Iews trust Freebooters?

My Bill's protested, and my Credit lost,
By your neglect of payment at your Day,
And I come not to give your Lordship Joy,
But to renounce the name of Friend to one
That has so publicly renounced his Honour.

Good angry Captain, Soldiers should not be
Judges of Lovers: if you come to the Honour
Of being a Bridegroom, you will never think
Of transitory things. When I am marri'd,
I'll satisfy the Iews.

Satisfy me,
In point of Reputation. [You are out,
You're out: seem moved; answer, Is that the business?]

Is that the business? You have reason, Captain:
Before the Priest join our hands, I'll dispatch thee.
My dear, once more excuse me, if you pardon
Th'adjournment of our Marriage, my Friends will;
Indeed they would not pardon me, if I
Preferred the Law of Hospitality
Before the Rule of Honour. Follow, Captain.

Your colour changes, Madam? use my service.

Pardon me, that I decline company,
Till my Lord comes back.

Your obedient Servant.

Now I perceive my Guardian's a great Prophet.

This is the second time that I'm enforced
To give you over, for the Infirmity
You sucked from Nature, Jealousy; yet once
You had some colour, but now no pretence,
For, you ate Jealous of another Wife.

Deny another Wife? art thou a Man?

Not such a man as the Prince of Salerno;
You are for serving Mistresses, but I
Serve Christendom against the Encroaching Turk,
And so, our cross-designes must sever us.

A cross-grain'd Dunce thou art, and so I leave thee.

Stay, hear my Cousin Arviedo's news,
Though there be not a Mistress in the case;
Did thou or I guess right?

Your Lordship did;
For Decio vows, that when he courted me
To poison you, he meant you no more hurt
Than I, when I accepted the employment.

What a Droll's this?

I have a Drolling message,
But more ridiculous.

Better still, what is't?

An Offer, such as man yet never made,
He calls't a Kindness: Decio prays your Lordship,
To think his House and all within it, yours;
Though all without it be not so much worth
As one within it, and that is, his Wife.

I vow a kindness.

He acknowledges,
She wronged you in her marriage, and that you,
For her offence, might justly make your self
A stranger to his Wife, but if you do,
'Twill grieve her, and her grief will break his heart.

By his kind heart, who would not swear this fool
Marked for this Cuckold; were thou not resolved
Never to see his Wife?

Who told you so?

Thou.

True, I did, but that was in my rage,
When my hot fit was on me, now 'tis off,
I'll dine with Decio.

Will you?

Will I live?
I'm the Bride's guest.

Your Highness is his friend,
Pray, Sir, dissuade him, interpose your power.

What, now there is a Mistress in the case?

But there's a Man too, and a spleenful Man,
Decio's an Enemy.

Decio's an Ass.

Although he has a pretty innocent face,
Decio is not the Fool you take him for;
But would a Fool invite Him to his Wife,
And mean less than a Murder?

I'll secure
All Avenues, he shall not be surprised.

You forget whose death Decio would revenge,
Think of his Sister.

I think of his Wife.

You ought to think of her as of a Siren,
That sings but to entice you to a Rock.

In those soft Rocks there is no danger, Cousin.

I only fear the danger of their Honours.

Danger? now there's a Mistress in the Case?
Mark the word Mistress, does it not sound well?

Sweeter (by far) than Arviedo's Lute.

Or Trills of Nightingales.

Or Canary-Birds,
Whistling the Flajolet.

Now, as friends should be,
We are of one mind, and I will not leave thee;
Never may be Plead more, that leaves his place
At Bar, when there's a Mistress in the case.

THis Wedding-day, this Dancing, and this Fiddling,
Puts all my Master Decio's business by:
Porter at Gate, speak to the Paquet-Boat,
These are for Venice, hast thou any Letters?

None.

Hast thou any Wine? the Slave's a-dry.

None neither.

Corbulo, then farewell and be --

Hanged thou mean, Rogue, that stop deserves a Bottle,
And in my Lodge I have a bouncing Bottle,
Good-fellows too, come in, we will take a Touch;
But first, sing over the Roll, and name our Healths.
Drink to me, Boy;
Here's to thee, Boy;
A Health to our Master,
A Nobler never obeyed I;
Couple him with my Lady,
Never Man had a Chaster;
Match the Vice-Roy, as even,
With his Royal Creator,
To the King: bless him Heaven,
And a Pox take the Traitor.

Hey! what rapping? Vindex, turn the Key.

Thou think that thou art a Lieutenant still,
And take me for thy Corporal? look thou
To the Gate, I dare not, lest I be knocked,
Their fingers are so furious.

If the Lodge
Be thus unquiet, such an Iron-mill,
I'll turn our fine young Master, Decio,
Out of my service; hold, and let me see
Who 'tis, that knocks so like a Gentleman.
Cry mercy, Sir; though I thought 'twas no Beggar,
I looked not for a Prince.

Iberio, go,
Mind thou thy Mistress; Fear is the best Spy,
Thou, Arviedo, make discoveries.

I have made one, Sir, Is not this the Soldier,
That, when our men fell basely from the Assault,
Rallied them, beat the French, entered the Breach,
And set upon the Bulwark the King's Colours?

He serve a private man?

Know thou the Prince?

He has forgot me.

Sure I have seen thy face?

And this hand, Arviedo, better armed.

Lieutenant Corbulo? why, fellow-Soldier,
Prithee, how comes thy Partisan thus changed
Into a Porter's Staff?

The times are changed, Sir,
War into Peace, and Soldiers into Beggars,
And, Sir, you know, Beggars must be no Choosers;
If I might choose my Office, I would be
(Not Porter, but) Lieutenant Corbulo,
And in my hand I'd flourish Steel, not Silver.

I cannot blame thee, for Steel masters Gold,
There's some for thee, drink my Mistrise's Health.

I must drink to your Inclinations.
Health upon Health; we hear, Sir, you are raising.
A Regiment of Mistresses; how full
Your Companies, how many do you Muster?

I beat my Drums yet.

March a thousand strong,
I am for your first Mistress, a pitched Battle,
A fair Campania; War, Sir, glorious War
Will dignify your Title, raise your Fame.

True, Corbulo, and ruin my Estate,
Have we not President for that? what Fortune
Has famed Gonsalvo, the great Captain, left
To his Posterity? is not the young Heir
Of that brave General's Family, Giulio,
So poor, he dares not show his face in Naples?

But you know Generals Heirs who are great Lords.

Why dost not thou fight to advance thy self?
Now the Pope raises here a Regiment
Commanded by my Lord Iberio.
Go with my Friend to Candy and get Honour;
Kill Turks, man, and the Signory of Venice
Will make thee' a Knight of th'Order of St. Marc.

Though I've got only wounds in the King's Service,
I will not fight but by the King's command,
And in a place of Honour and of Profit:
But, Sir, your Highness needs no Salary.

I may, like the Emperor Maximilian,
Trail my Pike under an Invincible King.

Serve ours again, fight for the Crown of Spain,
And I'll no longer serve a Foreiner.

Wu't serve me, in thy Neopolitan Mistress?

No; I keep her for my Venetian Master.

It seems, thou hast a Charge of Chastity.

One of the Warders in the Brazen Tower.

That keep thy Danae safe from midnight Visits.

I'll help your Highness to a handsomer --

Handsomer than thy Lady?

Than all Ladies,
Th'incomparable Beauty, Continence:
Make short sleeps; lie and fare (as I do) hard,
You shall have Continence, an't please your Highness.

Hang her, She pleases neither High nor Low:
But I am pleased to see thy care, Lieutenant.

True to my trust.

For which (hold) there's more Gold.

More Counsel I will give you for this Fee,
Marry, and make me your Porter.

Here's my hand --

It is a liberal one, I kiss your Bounty.

I dare not trust this Soldier, there may be
More of the Crew, he may command a Party:
Let's seek Iberio out, and fetch him off.

You may praise my good Nature, you'll scarce match it
In Naples; show another of my Sex,
That scorned like me, will slight the Injury,
And welcome the Affronter; but you're welcome
To Decio's House, my Heart, and your old Love.

But will you love me, may I ask, and hope?

I promise you any thing in my power.

Will you then, do --

Do what?

It will not out;
Do me the favour to show me the House,
Which seems to be, like you, a Paradise.

The Building is much handsomer than I,
But both are (equally) at your dispose:
The Rooms of State your Lordship may see now,
But 'twill be dinner-time ere I can show you
The private Lodgings.

On, sweet Madam, on.

Iberio? stay.

You will not offer it,
Now she invites me?

To this ruin, fool:
The Porter is Lieutenant Corbulo,
The boldest Officer of all our Foot,
Thou know him, he confesses, he takes Pay
Of Decio for securing his fair Wife.

Stand on your Guard, Decio has lined his House
With Mariners out of the Turky-Ship,
Which came from the Levant into the Harbour
This morning.

See the fruit of Mistresses.

How much more noble would your death have been
Had your blood smeer'd a Bashaw's Scimitar?
Then you had died upon the Bed of Honour.

He cannot have a Plot to murder you.

Two hours since he had one to poison him;
I heard the Word given now, it is, Fall on.

Your Forlorn I will be.

Say thou me so?
I shall love Mistresses better for thy sake.

Fall on.

Do, Rogues, we will sell our -- how? a Dance?

What will you do?

Villain, how dare thou ask?
Justice I'll do, teach men how to slight Maids.
Princes, the Turky-Ship thus speaks your welcome
To my Wife's House, for I have neither House,
Nor Land, nor Body, nor Soul, all's my Wife's,
And (mark Poetic Prophecy) she'll be yours.

My Wife?

Your Wife.

When, Decio?

Let me see?
All the men of my Race died (punctually)
At two and twenty, so that three years hence
She's yours, if you've a stomach to her then,
As ready as the Wedding-dinner now
On my Wife's Table, your Wife that shall be
Three years hence.

Have but patience till we have dined,
After the Banquet.

Thou shalt see and taste
The Fruit of Mistresses and my Endeavours.
Look you serve me (another time) as well.

Better, I'll work thee a new Mine of Beauty.

Quick, fellow-servants, set the Chairs, Gioseppe:
My Lady's little Dog has fouled the Carpet,
Perfume here, Princess Diacelia.

Princess Diacelia?

I should say, Fritilla,
For, to serve Diacelia and Leandra
(As by a Guardian's duty bound) I have
Unlorded my self and Unprincess'd thee,
Granchild Fritilla, Daughter to my Son
That's at Madrid, Mace-bearer to the King;
But I defy the City of Madrid
To match this Spanish Beauty.

You are pleasant;
But Guardian, I should say, Grand-father Draco,
Why are we Spaniards? if you had still been
My Lord Filomarini, your son Lugo
Had marri'd me without dispute.

No, Grand-child,
He had too great a passion for Leandra.

Me-thinks, in your own shape you might have awed him.

I should have shamed him into Impudence
If I had made a public Business of it.

Twelve thousand Pistols you had saved your son.

What ever he loses, she shall not lose him,
Nor shall my Nephew, the Prince of Salerno,
That's mad for Mistresses, now want a Wife:
I'll bring them about, Master, as the Wind
Carries thy Sails, without appearing in it.
Look where Leandra comes, your Bride-grooms Love.

Let me embrace my Rival.

We will not quarrel;
Here sticks Love's Arrow with the golden head,
My sullen heart is wounded with dull Lead.

By why alone, young Mistress? where's our Lady,
The old Hag, your Mother?

Talking with a Captain
Sent from your Son.

The Fool employs the Pirate.

Yes, to lay me aboard; I hope you'll fight him?

My Nephew shall; for, the Prince of Salerno
(If you can like him) must love you, I'll charm him
With this Leandra' in little, this thy Picture
Given me by a Witch (I mean, thy Mother)
Shall melt him, (Liver, Lungs, Brain, Heart, and all)
As if it were his own Picture, made in Wax,
And stuck with Needles.

When I see your Nephew,
I'll tell you how I like him: 'tis the Man,
And not the Prince, that I shall look upon.

I see, thy humble humour is quite spent.

I found my spirits when I found my friends,
(Thanks to this Pilot, my good Guide Gioseppe)
But to your Lordship's Orders I submit.

Yet a while seem obedient to th'old Woman;
She comes, the Pirate after her.

Wait here,
Till I dispatch these to their several duties.
Hosepe, we are pleased with these new Servants
Of thy commending, once again you're welcome.
Draco, do what you undertook to do,
Show the young Prince, (who cries up Mistresses)
Leandra's Picture, try how much he'll offer,
Lugo's twelve thousand Pistols must not buy her.
Hosepe, take you, from the Captain's man,
Those Turky-Vests sent us by my Lord Lugo.
Fritilla, choose you out the richest Vest,
And fit it to Leandra: Minion, look
That you obey my Maid in point of Dress;
And hark you? trifle not your time away,
Your Lord will come straight: do y' hear? put on Patches.
Twelve thousand Pistols in Gold I expected,
But, Friend, if you engage that, bonafide,
The Jewels are worth so much, I'll accept 'em.

Two thousand Pistols my Lord Lugo will
Bring from the Mint, these are well worth ten thousand.

These you deliver upon Reputation?

First, Madam, give me leave to satisfy
My curiosity; do you, Greek Ladies,
Keep Turkish State?

It is both State and Wisdom,
Servants and Children to their Mistresses
And Mothers should be Mutes, bow, not presume
To ta k.

But may a Stranger use his tongue?
Will you not be offended if I speak?

What would you say?

Protest, I know not what:
For though we that are bred up in the Wars,
Are seldom out of countenance in Peace,
Your presence daunts me.

We are Great, not Proud.

I am not ignorant, what a high Esteem
The Court has for you, what respect the Lords;
May then a poor plain Captain ask a question?

It shall be answered, if it be in our Sphere.

'Tis in the Sphere of your Activity;
Live you not by your Wits?

Alas, poor Captain;
Are you come to your Wits? Fear's a short Frenzy*
Speak again.

Live you by your Wits?

Again.

Are you a Cheat?

In Hell's name, what art thou,
That ask me this damned question?

A Sea-Captain.

Or (as some Copies render it) a Pirate.

I was a Pirate, Sovereign of the Sea,
Fired Billows, to make way for Robbery,
Kept a Prize-Office at Algier, of Goods
Stolen from my Prince, the mighty King of Spain,
(For which I have his Pardon in my poquet)
And do you think a Pirate, an old Thief,
Can want eyes to discern his fellow-Thief?

It were a vanity for me to halt
Before a Cripple; I employ the Talent
Nature gave me to live by, This young Lord
I mean to cheat; Leandra shall be sold
Over and over. But (bold Captain) you
That were the Sovereign of the Sea (and so forth)
Kept a Prize-Office at Algier, of Goods
Stolen from your Prince, the mighty King of Spain,
You will not scruple (sure) to join in cheating
Any of the King's Subjects, though your Friend?

Join? we will join Issue, for I'll marry thee.

Two words to such a bargain, worthy Captain.
Discharge your Trust, deliver me the Jewels,
And on my Honour, I'll not be unthankful.

Three words to such a bargain, noble Lady.
These Gems are held in Mort-main, locked as fast
As in a dead man's hands, I will take nothing,
I'll give my self and these; accept of both,
Or neither.

What if neither?

Why then, Madam,
Graciously you may please to hang your self,
And save the Law a labour. Does Menanthe
Because grown gallanter, (Leandra taller)
Think I forget thee and thy theft in Candy?
Refuse me, and to all Thieves (that dare live
Under the Noses of the men they robbed)
I'll make thee an Example; marry me,
This Hand, this Sword protects thee.

Nay, if you
Have had a Passion for me so long since,
And never yet, from your undaunted heart,
Could blot out my Remembrance; 'tis a Match.

Lugo shall pay thy Portion.

One half, Captain,
The Prince shall pay the other Moiety.

From th'Universal Monarch?

That's his Style.

Tell me (ere I inquire into thy Message)
How long is't since his Holiness conferred
That Title on the King?

What King?

Our King,
The King of Spain; come thou not from the King?

I come from one to whom the King's a Subject.

Thou speak not like a Subject; what's thy name?

My name is Draco.

Of the Athenian Draco's?

No, of the English Drakes, great Captain Drake
(That sailed the World round) left in Spain a By-blow,
Of whom I come.

From whence come thou to me?
What Prince's Agent art thou?

Love's, Love's Envoy;
I am a Messenger from Cupid, sent
To help you to a Venus.

But one Venus?

To one, two, three, four hundred Venuses:
Build a Seraglio, I can furnish it
With Rarities, Provided, you will have
The Patience of a Prince, to see, and hear.

Reverend Pimp, thou shalt have Audience.

Illustrious Potentate, Love's Envoy shows
Letters of Credence; There's a Mistress for you.

There she's for thee again, the Pox to boot,
To wish it her, the curse would come too late;
Why, one Eye's perished.

Sir, I Articled
For patience; what great Lapidary ever
Showed his best Diamond first? Here's one will fit you.

Fourscore years hence, for she's at least a hundred.

You're very curious; this is young enough.

Ugly enough too in all conscience;
Pretty' Owl, how't stares? and deep in the Green-sickness:
Go, go; she that I take the pains to cure,
Shall be a Paragon.

A Paragon
This is, or my eyes fail me; by degrees
Examine her, the Morning is not younger --

Nor blushes sweeter; what a Skin? the Alps
Were never whiter: Lips which eager Birds
Would peck at, for Ripe Cherries; Caesar's Eyes,
That Conquer Nations they but look upon.

Have I performed like a Discoverer?

Had the great Drake (whose Issue thou art) put
As many Girdles round about the Earth,
As ever the Sun* did about the Heavens,
A Lovelier he could not have discovered.
But, Sirrha, will you justify this Piece?
Shall not I (as a mighty Prince did) curse
The Picture-drawer, when I see the Maid?

Sir, if her Character were to be writ:
The sweetness of her Disposition,
Her Mildness, Innocence, Humility,
Obedience, if these were to be described,
Your Highness might curse the Orator and Poet,
But you will bless me and the Picture-drawer,
When you shall see Leandra.

Ha, Leandra?
I have heard of her Mother, the Greek Lady,
My service, honest Draco, soon at night
I'll visit her.

No, then you'll come too late;
Your Cousin Lugo will be marri'd to her:
His Duel was a trick, Sir, to change Brides.

That must not be; then I'll go with thee, Draco.

No, then you'll come too early; let me try
My little wit first to break off the Treaty.
If you'll be at your Palace, when 'tis time
I'll call you.

What if Lugo should debauch her?

I'll watch for you, like Danae's old Father.

I'll pay thee better then young Iupiter
Paid his Procurer, when the wanton God
Coined himself into Gold. Let none corrupt*
Her Virtues but my self. Iberio, see,
Wonder, and shake hands, I am going to her.

You shall stay, and rid me of Decio first.

I cannot get my Husband to the Banquet,
He's so pleased with your Cousin Arviedo,
(His Brother-Lutenist) he has carried him
To see his new Scenes, for this hour they're safe.
Sir, will you please to sit?

To wait of you.

Oh, pray be gone; he's full of business, Madam;
You lose your time.

Then I've my liberty.

I'll throw Marc Antony's old Shoo after you,
His Slippers will serve me, I'm going to bed.
Now, Madam, we are (to our wish) alone.

The fewer tho better fare; you freelier may
Taste any thing you love here.

I love you.

You cannot, better than I love your Lordship.

That's Musique to our Banquet. Let's embrace
The Opportunity, and one another.

I hope I understand not, what do y' mean?

To claim your promise.

What was't?

Any thing
In your power.

Such a promise I did make.

Perform it; your Injoyment's in your power.

I have heard Casuists say, That's only in
Our power which justly and safely we may do.

Then do what's in your Power, perform your Promise,
That's just; and be my Love, and you are safe.

In Honour?

Honour?

I love you, my Lord,
Above all men, (my Husband not excepted)
But I love Virtue more than I love you.

If you love Virtue so much, when you knew
My application vicious, why did you
Encourage me to hope? tell me the truth?

The truth is, I have fooled you.

Cruelly.

I have indeed, cruelly fooled your Lordship.
Do y' lock the door? you will not ravish me?

Oh no; my fair inviting Cruelty,
You will be found the Ravisher: no Law
Adjudges him a Murderer, that kills
One that provoked him. The Anch'rite, who has lived
An Age in's Grave, remembers not his Mistress
With greater horror, than I thought of you,
Until you courted me, and blew the sparks
Of my old Love into a flame of Lust,
Which shall (as your due Punishment) consume you,
In your own Instrument of Tyranny,
Like the Designer of the Brazen Bull.

Your Brazen Bull's an Ass; th'Inventer of it
A Novice in my Art of Tyranny,
He tortured but the Body, I the Soul,
Which I know nothing more torments, than Hope
Raised high, and levelled.

Do you smile?

I laugh,
To see so great a Soldier fool himself
With a belief, that the Enemy (the Traitor,
As you were graciously pleased to call me)
Would yield without a Summons: true it is,
To work your Hope up to a Confidence,
My white Flag I hung out, courted a Treaty,
As if I held a Fort untenable,
You'll find it Manned, the Woman so well Manned,
That you may sooner take Constantinople.

Yet valiant Madam, notwithstanding all
Your scornful Ranting in our Terms of War,
You are impolitique in your cruelty,
That to torment me sacrifice your Honour.

See what protects my Honour; if you stir,
I'll show you, what poor Lucrece should have done,
My Honour shall not die before my Self.

But if you kill your self, the Prince (who knows
You sought this meeting) what will he report?

Report can neither do me good nor hurt,
Here's that will justify me after death.
And know, that since Iberio declared
For Jealousy against Love, I scorned life:
Nor had my Soul endured her Glog so long,
But to convince you of Apostasy:
This made me marry a Pool, and then invite
You to this Parley, that your Eyes might give
Your Heart the Lie, when you beheld me stand
The Flatteries and Threats of him I love,
Yet not dishonour him that I love not;
And now, farewell to both.

Hold, more than Woman,
Heroic Lady, show one Bravery more,
Forgive me; next ill thoughts I have of you,
I'll pluck my heart out, 'tis no heart for me,
That thinks you less than Saint.

Now we are friends.

And friend, I'll tell y' a secret, kept from you,
When I was but your Servant; I command
These men raised by his Holiness to serve
The State of Venice against the Grand Signor;
They are Imbark't, this night I go aboard,
Therefore my Love, (still you're my Virtuous Love)
Though it grieves me to speak --

And me to hear --

Yet the sad word must be pronounced, Farewell.

You shall not Farewell yet, I'll call for Cards
And hold you one hour longer.

What you please;
I am your Soldier, you command in Chief.

Then play a little, to beguile our grief.

THe breath of Music (Brother Lutenist)
Is Sound, which into points of Time Art breaks:
But Poetry's the Language Music speaks.
Poetry's that Divinity of Numbers,
By which Pythagoras transformed himself
Into the several Shapes of Men and Gods;
And thou, or I may do it, as well as He.

I think we may.

Behold the Experiment,
I'm Decio now; but now that I take up
This Shepherds Hook, Pipe, and Poetic Laurel,
I am Apollo, Shepherd to Admetus,
Not Herdsman: I have left his Royal Droves
In Thessaly, to keep his Flocks in Naples.
Will Arviedo be my Favourite,
My Hyacinthus?

What must transform me?

Poetry; a new Ode, which I've composed;
Sit down and hear it, 'tis Apollo's Song.
Here I Pipe, here I keep
King Admetus's Sheep,
Here I gather Laurel for my Wreath:
But Apollo, where
Dost thou live? Oh not here,
Absent Lovers live not where they breath.
But my Spirit is
In a Place of Bliss,
Wheresoever that Blessed Place may lie,
In a Garden, or a Grove,
In a Grotto, or an Alcove;
Ever where my Love is, there am I.
Uncircumscrib'd thus acts the Mind,
Why should the Body be confined?
Swift as Thought can move,
Little God of Love
Carry me, upon thy nimble Wings,
To the top of yonder Tower,
Where precisely at this hour
Hyacinthus strikes his Lute and sings.
We are met, sweet Boy,
What I now enjoy
Not a God, besides my self, shall know:
Cupid, thou hast leave to play,
To thy Mother fly, and say,
That Apollo has a Heaven below.

You have feasted mine Ear.

I'll treat thy Eye;
The sweetest Prospect Naples has, I'll show thee,
The Pasture where Apollo feeds his Flocks.
The Elysian Fields my Hyacinthus sees,
Those Walks are Jessamine and Orange-trees,
Beneath, a Crystal River cuts the Plain,
Wherein you see those fair Trees over again,
Close by the Flowery Bank, a Flock of Sheep
Feeds in a Mead; the Shepherds fast asleep;
The Shepherdesses lying arm in arm.

Is't Life? or Art?

Art Magic, hear the Charm.
Rise, dull Sleepers, fie, how coldly
You move! Shepherds, come on boldly;
No Wol shall your Flocks endanger;
Dance and welcome this young stranger.

I take this as a high Civility,
For which I'll thank you with a Friend's Advice;
Go to your Wife; lose her not the first day:
If she think you neglect her, she will hate you.

She cannot think it a Neglect in me
To leave her with Iberio and the Prince:
Can she have better company than they?

She may have safer; the Prince flies at all:
You know, my Lord Iberio was your Rival.

True; he and Pyramena were contracted
Upon Conditions (mutually agreed to)
And pray thee, Arviedo, tell me truly,
Which of our Titles dost thou think the best?

I am no competent Judge; but (questionless)
You would resolv't, before you marri'd her;
It must not now be questioned,

Not in public;
But in a Court of Conscience, thou may be
Judge or Assistant?

How do y' mean Assistant?

I mean, if you conceive the Match unlawful,
You then may lawfully assist your Kinsman,
To Cuckold me.

Keep distance; we shall meet
As Friends no more; I am thy Enemy,
As much as thou art Enemy to Virtue;
Draw, I will fairly vindicate my Honour.

I will not fight.

Draw, or I vow to kill thee.
Ungrateful Villain, is an Infamy
All the return thou make for a Friend's counsel,
Against my Kinsman's Opportunity?
I gave it, that thou might not be a Witall,
He an Adulterer, I a Property.
I'll talk no longer --

Hear me, but a word.

Quick; for my Wrong call, for a swift Revenge.

It needs not any; know, all I said now,
And all I did before, when I brought Gold
To work upon thy Poverty, and make thee
For thy advantage poison thy great Kinsman,
Was but to try the gallantry of thy Mind,
Which I find equal to thy outward Beauty.

No fooling now.

If you believe me not,
Behold, I put my life into your hands.

I must believe the Innocence of that face;
A thousand times better than mine --

Dost like it?

Better than any face I ever saw.

It seems, thou, and my Lord Iberio
Are not alli'd in Judgment; for, my Sister
(Whose heart he broke) was like me.

To preserve
So sweet a Maid, I rather would have died.

Pray, wear this Ring for Ericina's sake,
'Twas hers.

The Diamond is a rich Stone,
But Ericina's name doubles the value.

Something from me you must accept; I know,
You're neither Lord of Gold nor Silver-Mines.

My Ancestor did service here in Naples,
Which both the Indies could not pay him for:
It pleased the King to call him into Spain,
And so his Branches (at this distance) withered.

Here, take this Purse.

I take no Purses, Sir,
I am no Thief, I have more of the Merchant,
The Money I receive I will return.

I'll show thee how to pay this Debt, and leave
Me in Arrier: get Dancers, and this Evening
Make me a Serenade, 'tis only a Round
Well-danc'd, and a short Song or two; let's see
Thy Poetry?

I never studi'd it,
Yet naturally I'm a Ballet-maker,
I'll keep your Purse, and lay out the Gold for you.

Then I've the noblest Steward in the world.

Good even* what day's this?

St. Gennaro's day,
Patron of Naples.

And your Wedding-day,
I take it: here's the Bridegroom, at his Pastime,
But where's the Bride? what Sport is she at? Cards;
Who plays with her?

The Prince.

The Prince is gone;
My Lord Iberio plays with your Wife.

I like that well --

And they're locked up; you like
That well too?

Do you grumble at it, Slave?
Cannot my Wife be private with her Servant,
But that my Servant must take notice of it?

Why do I wait?

What did I hire thee for?
To be my Porter, and to guard my Wife.

That she may take her pleasure undisturbed?

That she may take her pleasure undisturbed.

But must she take it with another man?
Cannot you, Sir, contenta Wife?

Nor you, Sir,
Nor any man in Europe, with one Body:
He sooner might content her with one Gown.

The you'll allow your Lady a Gallant?

I hold it Husband's Duty, to provide
An Adjutant.

The Opinion's new, and strange.

'Tis strange, that you (a Soldier) say 'tis new:
Why? Generals have Adjutants General.

This I pass over; look I never hear,
In things of baseness that you use again
The noble name of Soldier, if I do,
I'll lay down your Commission here, my Staff,
And cut your throat.

Thou know, Lieutenant, I
Love Soldiers, and have showed my love to thee,
Relieved thy wants, because thou were a Soldier,
A Sufferer; trusted thee with the guard
Of my fair Wife, because thou hast the name
Of a stout Soldier; but though I love thee,
I do not love thy humour, mine is fooling,
And by a Jeaster's privilege I speak
Severe things against Women, as if we
Had no Italian Wives but Messalinas,
But I know many Portias, gallant Ladies,
Whose life, and death depends upon their Husbands.
And would st thou have me jealous of my Wife?

Sir, I would have you jealous of your Honour.

What Honour can be greater, than to see
The Ladies point at me, and call me, Mirror
Of Marri'd men, Mirror of Marri'd men?

They'll point at you, and call you, what do y' think?

Not Cuckold?

No, not Cuckold --

That were shameful.

But this dishonourable, They'll call you
The basest kind of Cuckold, Withal, Sir.

How? Withal? that's an ugly name indeed,
(Now thou hast spoke to my capacity)
I'll not endure it -- but my Lord Iberio
May challenge me.

Against the world, I'lbe
Your Second.

I shall do brave things, I think:
Lead, Soldier; Devil? Withal? I defy thee.

Ha, ha, ha!

This Laugh promises good news.

If it be not profitable news, 'tis pleasant;
Pray wish your old Comrade, Peralta, joy;
He's marri'd to Menanthe.

They're well matched,
Pirate and Cheat: the Galleys give 'em joy,
Is this the pleasant news?

No, the sport is,
The two Cheats mean to cozen one another.

Why, sure the Pirate will not cheat his Bride?

Even of his first nights service, he's in love
With his Wife's Maid, his supposed Country-woman,
Your Grand-child, she has told it to your Mistress.

But when Thieves fall out, me-thinks true men might
Come by their own.

This is the pleasant news,
Fritilla hopes to cozen the two Cheats.

See, see, the Pirate --

How he tacks about
To weather her? he's got to Windward of her,
But the small Pinnace to the Leau-ward, proves
The better Sailor.

Let us give 'em Sea-room.

Dog, Dog, Piratick Sea-dog --

Patience, Madam,
I may mistake, believe your eyes, from his
That Pillar will obscure you.

Good, good Girl.

Fritilla? hist, Fritilla; is she gone?

Her business requires haste, and so does mine.

One little word with me, before you go.
Dear Country-woman, pity a poor Spaniard,
Or, like a Roman Funeral, I shall burn
To ashes for thy love.

For love to me?
You have a Wife.

Foh! a rich stinking Jew,
Taken into my Body-Politick;
I marri'd an Expedient, not a Wife;
Jewels and Gold I marri'd.

A Rope take thee,
My Garter (Rogue) would serve; Queen Ioan of Naples
Hanged up her Husband in her Wedding-garter.

I took a rich Jade for her wealthy Burden.

Cheated directly, all the Bootie's gone;
Body and Goods I'll venture after it,
But I'll revenge me on this Spanish Rogue,
My Husband- Gusman.

Smile some consolation.

Why, Don, think you here's such a dearth of Spaniards,
That I must be a Spanish Pirate's Wench?
Our Country-Fig, a Spanish Fig for Pirates.

Would mine had one in's guts, a Spanish Fig
Would cure his Itch; but he shall smart, I'll scratch him,
The merry Greek will claw her mangy Don.

My Wench? I scorn it, thou shalt be my Wife.

The Church allows no man two Wives at once.

True; but this Marriage is a Nullity,
'Tis within the Degrees prohibited;
My Mother was a Grecian, and her Father
Was (I can prove it) Brother to Menanthe,
Th'old-woman's my Great-Aunt.

O lying Raskal!

But say thou wilt be mine, and 'tis enough,
I'll hire a passage for's in the Pope's Galley,
That's bound for Ostia, and I'll marry thee
(In the face of the Church, my Girl) at Rome.

You see I'm silent.

Silence gives consent.

No Captain.

Maids say no, and take it, Jewel;
Now I name Jewel, I will give Fritilla
All Lugo's Jewels.

If you keep one back,
It is no Match.

A match then.

You must get
My Grand-fathers good-will. Here's your Great-Aunt.

That we may be kept from committing Incest;
The Devil choke her; hark you, pretty one,
Lugo must not know we are marri'd, Lamb.

I would he knew we were unmarri'd, Goat.

Madam, here's my Lord Lugo.

Call Leandra.

The Prince is come.

Wait him in, honest Draco.

Two thousand Pistols, Madam, I have brought you
In new-coin'd Gold.

I'll give 'em to her Maid.

Hey, Snap! she knows for what use they're designed.

And I know for what use your Maid's designed.

My Lord, you've made a purchase of a Wife.

I've purchased Happiness in so much Beauty;
But her sweetness of Obedience
And Harmony of Nature, all those Worlds
Of Music which Divine Pythagoras
Placed in the Planets. Where's the Priest?

Here's one
That looks more like the Bride-groom than the Priest.

'Tis the Prince of Salerno.

What wind blows
My cousin of Salerno?

The Prince, Madam.

Directed to the life by this fair Figure.

Decline his courtship; slight him.

Slight a Prince?

Withdraw, I pray thee.

Pray thee? pray thee peace,
(I never heard so simple an old Soul)
When a Prince makes his first Address, withdraw?

I charge thee --

Do you hear who charges you?
Your Mother, never disobeyed.

There is
A time for all things, for my Mother too
To be advised better than to enjoin
Ill manners: leave a Prince that visits me?

Not when your Mother (that groaned for you) bids?

I'll ask a question first; pray, Sir, how got you
My Picture?

Madam, by a Miracle.

Get y' in.

I'll stay to hear the Miracle.

Now for a Story to excuse Love's Envoy.
'Twas news at Court, that the great Virtuoso,
Virgetio, was come from Rome to Naples,
And had brought with him a rare Concave-glass,
Made with Art more than Mathematical,
So that upon a white Plane 'twould cast off
The Form or Species of the Man or Woman
Any one wished to see; to him I went
(Out of an Airy curiosity)
To see my Mistress.

And he showed you this?

The form by which my Servant drew this Piece.

This? (what a Villain was the Virtuoso!)
This Mistress? Mother, pardon --

Her first fault.

Take heed, my Girl, take heed of a Relapse,
If you forget your duty any more --

Then do not you remember such a child.

The Priest is ready.

We are ready for him.

I must beg of you --

Of me?

Hear him not.

Not hear a Prince that comes a begging to me?
I'll hear and answer: Sir, what's your command?

Madam, my suit is, that you'll please to sit for
Your Picture, and I'll send you a great Master
Shall limn it (rarely) by the life.

He shall.

Daughter, he shall not.

Woman, Shall thy Men,
Those thou imploy'st: the Limner comes to me,
And I'll not have him Shall'd.

Woman?

Good Woman,
Meddle with thy own Matters, good Old Woman.

Th'Old Woman's Mother to my fine Young Lady,
If she be pleased to remember it.

Remember, that you are a Prince's Mistress.

A Prince's Mistress? though 'twas my Resemblance,
That Mistress could not be Leandra's Spirit;
I do remember, that you are my Mother,
And once again I pray to be forgiven:
But send your Picture-drawer, Sir, I'll sit,
If she were all the Mothers under the Sun.

Go, leave the Prince to pause on it.

Come, my Love.

She would be my Love too, but not my Mistress;
But, Mistress, I may Master you, I may.

You shall; in my Experience, Sir, confide,
Youth marches safe that follows an old Guide.

Your Wife comes.

I'm grown valiant now, Lieutenant,
I'll march, but stand thou --
Centree for my Captain.

My heart, I was at such a loss --

At Cards?

No, I won all I played for: but I was
At such a Loss for want of thee --

To fool?
I know my duty, 'tis my Family-duty;
Tell me true, had thou ever marri'd me,
But for the noble quality of fooling,
Taking me for a Gifted man?

That gift
(I must confess) bribed me.

The Acknowledgment
Is most ingenuous; at another time,
I'll be as free with thee, and tell thee why
I marri'd thee.

Will you not tell me now?

Now you shall tell me, who played at Cards with you?

None but my Lord Iberio and I played.

Who waited?

No body.

No Page?

No Page.

No Groom?

No Groom; I tell you no body.

What, not your Woman?

Not my Woman: lack,
How your tongue runs!

If any man, but I,
Be private with my Wife, is't for her Honour?

Is Honour treated of, by your small Poets?
Do y' find it among Gods and Goddesses?
Pray tell me, what's our Honour? or Dishonour?

What's the Honour or Dishonour of a Wife?
'Tis at her death (when clear unbiased Truth
Takes th'Inventory of her Vice and Virtue)
The Total Sum, the Account which Fame gives of her.

How? this is sense; these are not Parot's words:
This Husband is no Engine, but a Man,
A jealous Man; I shall love Jealousy,
If it awake his Soul. I'll try him further:
But how gets Fame her good and bad Reports?

Of th'eating and the drinking mouths, our Servants:
We must be careful of our Credit (Love)
Unless he mean to be our Servants Slaves.

Kiss me; you shall find fault with me no more,
Henceforth I will be jealous of my self.

How e're you take it, it concerns you most;
If you miscarry in your Honour, I
Shall (like a Merchant broke by his misfortune)
Be pitied; but my Wife will be despised.

What will this Man prove? what shall I say to him?
Iberio never was alone with me,
But by my Maids I made your Men believe 't,
To put the sense of Honour into you.
Now you deserve my Love, kiss me again.

Here's a new Wedding on th'old Wedding-day;
Were the Mask ready --

Sir, a kind of Mask
Is brought you (these hard words stick in my throat)
They call it a Screnade, here's the Presenter.

My Arviedo, welcome; 'tis apparent,
Thou wilt not fail thy friend in great Engagements,
Who art so punctual in a promised trifle.

The man that is not in the Enemies power,
Nor fettered by Misfortune, and breaks promise,
Degrades himself, he never can pretend
To Honour more.

Thou art the Soul of Honour.
What's here? if the Evening (as I fancy it)
Could take a Visible form, this would be ours,
A gloomy Evening, suddenly brought in
By two Winds.

You guess right, 'tis so intended.
Madam, I only beg you'll pardon me,
If you will, he must, for 'twas his Injunction.

I am an Evening dark as Night,
Jack-with-the-Lantern bring a Light --

Whither, whither, whither?

Hither, hither, hither.

Thou art some prattling Echo, of my making.

Thou art a Foolish Fire, by thy mistaking:
I am the Evening that creates thee.

My Lantern and my Candle waits thee.

Those Flajolets that we heard play,
Are Reapers who have lost their way;
They Play, they Sing, they Dance a-Round,
Lead them up, here's Faery-ground.
Let the Men ware the Ditches;
Maids, look to your Breeches,
We will scratch them with Briars and I histles:
When the Flajolets cry,
We are a-dry;
Pond-water shall wet their Whistles.

Does Pyramena know this Dancing Lantern?

The Ignis Fatuus I suppose; some call it
Jack-with-the-Lantern, some, Will with the Wisp;
'Tis the Evening's False Light, which leads stumbling Clowns
(Over Moors and Marshes) into Bogs and Pits.
Buff's a fine Sport,
And so's Course o'-Park;
But both come short
Of a Dance in the Dark.
We trip it completely,
The Pipe sounds so neatly:
But that which surpasses
Is the breath of the Lasses,
O the pretty Rogues kiss featly.

Now if the Bride and Bride-groom's patience
Be not tormented with my Poetry --

Profess 'tis well, 'tis natural, it suits
This cloudy Evening: in a little time
Thou'lt make as pretty a Poet as my self.
I'll pay my thanks in Coin of the same Stamp,
You shall see th'Practice of my Mask; I hope,
Love, you'll be pleased?

With any thing of yours.

That's the sweet Close to Arviedo's Musique;
Th'expression of your love unclowds the Evening;
What greater blessing can from Heaven descend?
Decio is happy in a Wife and Friend.

ITalians are the Prodigies of Malice;
No People under Heaven, nor Fiends in Hell,
Out-do us in the plotting our Revenges;
But a Design like yours I never heard of,
Nor could believe it possible in Nature.
Yet, for Humanitie's sake, stop your progress.

Dissuade me not, I'm deaf to intercession.

I know, 'twill grieve your soft Soul, when 'tis done;
Then how much better were it, not to do it?

If the Train I have laid, would spring a Mine
To blow up Naples, I'd give fire and perish.

Spare me.

How?

I desire to be excused,
Corbulo will not act in it.

But he shall;
Thou hast my Secret, and I have thy Oath:
Dispute not, execute.

Well, then I must.
But you'll curse th'Instrument.

The hand Divine
Moves such an Instrument; the hand of Justice
Squares Punishment adequate to the Offence;
Despair for Scorn is but due Recompense.
My Lord Iberio's with his Regiment
And Arviedo gone aboard, to take
Leave of his Kinsman, then the youth returns
To my house, be you sure you let him in.
My Wife may send Arviedo for Iberio.
Leave me, when I stamp thus, bring in thy Message.
They danced not ill?

Rarely well. Dear, your promise;
Why did you marry me?

Guess.

For my Fortune?

No, not for Money. Guess again.

For Love?

Not for Love neither; thou art a base Guesser;
But I'll resolve thee. I did marry thee
(As th'ill-fac'd woman's Husband was made Cuckold)
For spite.

Ha, ha --

I'm glad it makes you merry.
Why, thou more fool than thou imagin'dst me,
What Worm trepanned thee, boar'd quite through thy skull
Into thy dull brains, to think Decio
Would feed upon Reversions of a Mistress:
A Mistress to my mortal Enemy,
My Sister's Murderer, Iberio?

I doubt --

Dost but doubt? Bondmaid, know thy Lord.
At our last Conference, I cast off my Cloud,
My Property, the Droll; now I appear
My self, a stern Venetian, principled
Out of old Machiavel -- When I marri'd thee,
I marri'd (my dear Sister) thy Revenge.

How miserable have I made my self!

To make me happy; I have escaped the Wheel
By marrying thee, I'd been broke every bone,
Had I done that I came to Naples for,
Poisoned Iberio any way but this --
I triumph in the ruins of his Love,
His Sovereign is my Slave, my hated Slave.

But how have I transgressed? in punishing
Me for him, are you just?

No, I am cruel:
All high Revenges must dispense with Justice.
If I had to my End no other way,
But like a Witch to violate the Grave
Of my (now blessed) Sister Ericina,
Who for her love to false Iberio died,
I would break up her hallowed Marble; tear
Her Sear-cloth; scatter her sweet Bones; and cast
Her dust in's face to blast him.

O my heart!

I would not have it broke, till it be bruised;
Until, by slow (but Sensible) degrees,
I break the Idol which my Enemy worships.
I know, your Hearts are like two Lutes racked up
To the same pitch, and when I touch but one
The other (by mysterious Sympathy)
Will (though at distance) answer Note by Note,
With the same dying sound; and that's the Musique
My heart so longs to hear.

A Messenger,
Sent from the Venice Paquet-boat, desires
That you'll come to the Port, he says, the Searchers
Have seized your Trunk.

Think; like a Soul in Flames,
Think and torment thy self, till I return,
And finish my great work. You are all armed?

Ready, when you say, Strike; but -- yet I've sworn,
Therefore I'll do it.

Arviedo's come;
I hope, she'll send him for Iberio.

Madam, look up, you shall not be thus used
By a base man (how was I cozened in him!)
I've heard all, I'll call him to an account.

But is my Lord Iberio gone aboard.

An hour since, but the Fleet rides still at Anchor;
I'll take a Boat, and tell him how 'tis with you;
I know he'll come.

And let me speak with him,
Before you call Decio to an account:
But let him bring no Soldiers, lest the Porter
Shut up the Gates; Dear Arviedo, go.

Would I could fly.

Hast thou not wings concealed?
Thou look like my Good-Angel.

I had need
To borrow both his Vigilance and Speed.

The greatest honour Draco's Family
Yet ever had, is, that Captain Peralta
(The Glory and the Terror of our Nation)
Has a mind to my Grand-child.

Oh! she's pretty.

Prettiness it self I wish her, for your sake.

She's all that can be wished; I've hired a Passage,
The Master of his Holiness's Gally,
Will land us in St. Peter's Patrimony,
We will straight to Rome, there I'll marry Fritilla.

But your old Wife must be left here in Naples.

Against the next Siege: for when Ammunition
Is spent, she may do service; the old woman
Will make rare Gun-powder, she's pure Salt-peter.

I have been in the blind Alley, old fat Ioan
Melts her grease for you, she has made your bed
In your old Chamber.

Careful Grand-father,
I shall requite thy pains.

You'll find me honest:
I hope you'll find my Granchild honest too,
I mean not of her Body, (as for that,
You, that must be her Husband, may dispose it)
But honest of her Mind your new Bride must be
By Nature, by my Copy; I dare swear
That to redeem me (if I were in pawn)
She would not rob y' of any of the Jewels
(Which you have promised to entrust her with)
Yet if she would she cannot.

For in the Street
I march with my sweet Prisoner in my hand,
And at my Chamber fold her in my arms.

Are you so hot? she has a Julip for you,
Your old Wife shall cure your Concupiscence.

But to my business, Grand-father, The Prince
Offers not at this breathing Shrine, Leandra,
And there's no waiting for uncertain hopes;
Besides I fear my Lord Filomarini
May come unlooked for; I'll pack up my free-boot:
Remember an hour hence, in the close Walk.

All friends, all friends; hang Fears and Jealousies.
I (Cousin) that came to your house this morning,
To give your other Bride, that was my Mistress,
I will not stick at giving of Leandra.

Pray hold your hand, my Mother will give me.

What means Leandra?

As you do, to follow
Her Guardian's advice; and yet she needs not
My Precepts, Nature has instructed her:
Madam, be confident, she'll demean her self
As it becomes a Daughter to your Father.

Take her, Son; finely put off the Fool Lugo.

You must not then be angry, if I rant
As well at you as him.

I will not, Child.

Then I'll spare neither. Diacelia now
Shall see me do a younger Sister's duty,
Cashier your Bride-groom. Mother-Midnight, take
Your Son-in-law and marry him your self;
You may as well obey me, as I you:
I disclaim you for Mother, him for Husband.

Have I with all those thousands purchased this?
What reason have you for disowning me?

What reason had you to disown a Princess?

Would not you be a Princess?

If I were,
This Ancient Gentlewoman (that presumes
To call her self my Mother) should be racked
So long, till she confessed her self to be
My step-mother; for could a Natural Mother
Betray her Child to one that has no Honour
But Title?

Blind Love, thou art off my heart:
And now with open eyes I see my folly.
Were your Ambition pleased, were you a Princess,
Were you an Angel, since the Devil's in you,
I would not marry you. I'll find a Wife
That's not a wicked Daughter.

Do, go home,
'Tis time you ask forgiveness of your Bride.

You, of your Mother; but I'll pardon neither,
Both shall hear from me, th'old Cheat, and young Ranter.

So, so; my Game plays well.

Now he's shook off,
My Child puts on her old Obedience:
And on your Highness freely I bestow
(To be commanded what you please) my Daughter.

Thy Daughter? dost thou in good earnest think
Thy self my Mother?

What think thou?

I know,
By my own Truth, my Mother was no Lier;
I know, by my Integrity, my Mother
Could be no Cheat; and by my Modesty
I know my Mother was no Bawd, which you
Would be to the Prince; or else (virtuous Madam)
I should not be commanded what he pleases.

Wretch, thou wilt break thy aged Mother's heart.

Through her Ear; hark you, Beldam.

Sure the Devil
Is her Intelligencer; 'tis high time
To shift for one, the Rogue will give's the slip.
Let's go, Fritilla; Murd'rer of thy Mother,
Hear my last words, I leave thee to the Prince.

You hear your Mother? she leaves you to me,
By her Will Parole, and that is as good
To all intents of Law, as 'twere in Writing;
Besides, you're left to the wide world, no fortune,
But that foretold me by the Virtuoso --

That I should be your Mistress? that's your Servant,

Servant of Pleasure, put me into waiting,
Pray let me light you to your Bed-chamber?

By no means; I (your Servant) will light you.

The Taper better suits my Fortune, Sir;
And 'tis discretion, ere I do the Fault,
To practise how the Penance will become me.

You cannot think, you have so base a Servant
As would see 'his Mistress do a public Penance;
Should my Lord-Cardinal here, and the whole College
Of Cardinals at Rome, join to disgrace thee,
I'd have a Rendezvous of all my Friends,
And meet them in the head of a brave Army*
To beat them into more Civility.
Set down the Taper.

Not till I have found --

You have lost nothing (to my knowledge) yet:
What do you look for?

A room dark enough
To cover a Maid's blushes.

As I live,
The prettiest humor'd Mistress in the whole world.
Why, do you look for darkness with a Light?
I'll blow it out --

You may extinguish this;
But who can blow out those, the Lights of Heaven?
The Stars still see us.

When we see not them?
If you mean the great Room, the Sky; 'tis dark,
Not one Star there.

Nor any Witness here?

Let's search the Chamber --

Search the Closet first,
Your Bosom; whosoe're contracts a guilt,
Carries a cloud of Witnesses in his bosom.

Her other Fits were Natural, she's now
In her Divine Fit.

Has he got no feeling?
No sense of Honour, in a Man of Honour?
You grow so dull, I see, you'd be at rest,
And you'll not let me usher you: good-night.

Wu't cross thy Fortune?

No, your Virtuoso
Is not so good, as I, at Fortune-telling;
I'm rare at Physiognomy, I see
My Fortune, wanton Prince, in your proud looks;
You think me too unworthy for a Wife,
And I know, I'm too worthy for a Mistress.
Again, Good-night.

Ask any thing but Marriage --

Any thing else I scorn, as you scorn me.
Good-night for ever.

There's a Passing-bell --
No Composition?

Not your Prince's Crown,
I'd rather carry a Milk-pail on my head.

Well, go thy way, no Mean man got that Spirit;
If it be her own air, not an humour put
Into her by th'old Knave, in hope I'll marry her,
And then her grateful hand must feed the old Beggar
With my Gold; I've a Way to find the Plot,
And if it be his, I'll cut off the Projector.
Draco?

Congratulates your Victory,
Nay, your Sword, Sir, never made such a Conquest.
Is she not inimaginable Sweetness
You have enjoyed?

I made her a fair offer.

She took it?

Sooner she'd have taken Ratsbane.

You mean not to kill her, for being honest?

But I mean to kill thee, for being a Knave,
Old lying Tempter: did not thou suggest
The sweetness of her Disposition,
Her Mildness, Innocence, Obedience?

Sir, you're a Prince of Famous Memory,
Those were my words, and I remember yours,
Let none corrupt her Virtues but my self:
You wished her Virtuous, that you only might
Have the debauching of her, I have done
What you commanded; if she disobey you,
Because she's virtuous must I lose my life?

Shall not I sheath my Sword in that Man's breast,
Who has into my bosom flung Fire, Wild-fire,
Not to be quenched but either in thy blood,
Or her fruition; there's no third way? yes,
I'll marry her.

(So cunning) Kill me first;
I would not live, to see your Highness marry
The Daughter of a Cheat.

Live, Draco, live
High in our favour, I suspected thee
To have a plot upon me, had I found
Thy hand in it, the whole Earth should not have saved thee:
I will not lose thee now for the King's Indies.

And shall you lose th'injoyment of Leandra?
Shall such a Prince lauguish for such a Toy,
That's now at my disposal? to be plain,
The Cheat, her Mother, and Sea-Thief, her Husband,
Having rookt your poor Love-sick Cousin, Lugo,
Are fled away, Leandra left to me,
But I've a Spy upon them, they will lodge
With the fat Naples-Hostess, at old Ioan's:
Sign me your Warrant, I'll bring to your Palace
The Cheats to morrow morning, but this night
Leandra to your bed.

Come, I'll dispatch thee,
And when 'tis done, I'll give thee a thousand Crowns.

And if I do it not, cut my throat in earnest.

Ioan, hast thou courage to abuse Peralta?

Emboldened with your Sack (for I have drunk
A pottle of your bounty) I'll so fool
The Knave your Husband into honesty,
That he shall stumble over his young Mistress,
And fall upon's old Wife.

Thou wilt be famous
For this night's work.

This night, I will recover
The credit of good women of my bulk:
Rogues sha'nt say, all fat Hostesses are Bawds.

Me-thinks, this merry Monster should cheer you;
Why do you cry? for your ungracious Child?

No truly, (I've made my best of her) I cry
To think that I should marry such a Villain.

You your self being such an innocent creature?

Send us good luck, for the night's foul and dark.

The fitter for our knavery. They stay long;
Here comes the Captain? no, 'tis Captain Drake.

Captain Peralta's at my heels; stand close.

Husht, and the old Grey Cat shall catch her Mouse.
That nibbles at a young delicious Maid.
You'll have a sweet night, for he's high and hot.

I'll cool him with a Robbery, though I die for it.

Well, Captain, you are a complying Captain,
To trust me with these Jewels, nothing else
Could have made me trust my self in your hands:
But now I'll follow you by Sea and Land,
In Peace and War, I'll fight too.

O brave Girl!

You've made me brave, the Master will mistake
My Coronet for Ariadne's Crown,
And in this knot of Diamonds find a Pole
To sail by, this dark night.

Here is the Osteria,
We are landed at old Iean's: Shipwrecked i'th'Harbour?
My Lantern gone? Fritilla?

Here, Sir, here.

'Twas happy we were come to this blind Alley,
The Streets are laid for me, I durst not call
At any other house. Ioan, Ioan, why Ioan?

Sure I do hear Captain Peralta's voice?
Heigh-ho.

Why dost thou sigh, and speak so faintlie?
A Light, Ioan?

O good Captain, I beseech you
Name not a Light. That ever I was born
To see the Light of Heaven!

Would I could see it,
For 'tis as dark as Hell.

Hell's a sweet place,
If it be dark.

What, is the Devil in thee?

Not in me; but the Devil's in my Husband,
He's run stark staring mad, and plays the Devil
When he sees any Light, Sir: he struck out
My eldest Daughter's Eyes, because he said
They sparkled: and my Nose was almost levelled*
(Pray feel, I wear a Patch) because 'twas tipped,
Only a little sprinkled with my Bottle,
And he cried, 'twas a-fire.

Then you've no fire?

Nor Candle, Sir, Glow-worm, nor Rotten wood,
Nor any thing that shines, besides my Nose,
(And that's under a Cloud) but, Captain, you
Know th'old way to your Bed.

I'll lead thee, Dear.

Is not your Runlet of Sack well bestowed?

Would 'twere a Hogshead for thee, old Shee-Bully.

Why come not on?

Oh softly; the raw Air
Has made my Head ache, as 'twould fly to pieces,
And talking makes it worse: sweet Captain, ask
No Questions, for then I'm obliged to Answer;
But quietly to bed.

With all my heart.

Grand-father, you must watch the Greek Impostress,
Or else she'll carry away the Bag of Gold;
I go a Bride-groom-catching; my old Servant,
The Prince shall help me.

And the Gold shall meet thee.

A Woman, sure, has two Souls, the one Noble,
The other Base, and I've lost my Noble Soul,
Or else could Pyramena (that scorned life
This morning) now at night fear, like a Child,
The Bug-bear we call Death? say he should come,
Death only comes with terror to the Happy,
To me he brings a Blessing, begged in vain
By thousands, which, like me, have need to die;
Alas! Death hears not, when the Wretched cry.
But I've more need to live, that I may get
A pardon for a Sin, but little less
Than Perjury, and yet I saw it not
(Even when it pulled down ruin on my head)
So long as Spleen and Self-will blinded me,
Till Misery opened my eyes: and now
I shall not see his face that would forgive me?
How I belie my Happiness! he's here;
Oh! O Iberio.

Fie, Pyramena,
Why do you kneel to me?

I must not rise,
Till you pronounce my pardon.

For what fault?

You speak, as if I would out-face it still;
For the most foul of all faults, breach of Faith,
For passing to another Man your Right,
Your Pyramena.

Rise, I pardon thee.

But will Iberio love me?

As a Friend.

Not as a Wife?

You are another now:
You know I've forfeited my Right in you.

In my own words most justly I am answered.
Peace of Soul, all Delights that make Life sweet,
Be with you.

Stay, there's something in thy Eyes
That makes thy wishes ineffectual,
Thou look wild.

Why should you concern your self
How I look? do you think Aeneas cared
How Dido looked, when she saw him Embark?

The Clay a Lover's made of, will not mould
A Politician; I can bend my brow
No longer. 'Tis thy Wedding-night, and yet
Not Bed-time: thou art still untouched?

A Virgin.

Then thou art mine. I will put in my Claim
At Rome; the Court, the Rota, must declare
Us Man and Wife, thither I'll send the Case
By the Pope's Galley, which to morrow morning
Leaves the Fleet, and Tacks off for Ostia,
To give our Holy Father an account
Of our Venetian Levies; till we have
The Judgment of the Court, we will live in Candy.

Talk, when you're safe out of this dangerous place.
Madam, I can sit you with a disguise.

No, Pyramena, boldly show your face,
For if the Porter question us, I'll kill him*

The Porter stands as fair to shoot your Lordship,
Unless you yield (and presently) to mercy;
We give no quarter.

Villain, shoot.

Hold, Soldier;
Since I see, my perfidious Crime against
This Lord, must have Expiatory blood,
Kill me.

You shalt be talked withal anon:
Will you lay down your sword? 'tis your last Summons*

My Sword was made for no base hand. I'll die
Thus, like a Soldier: die thou, like a Murd'rer,
Broke on the Wheel.

Hold, Oh hold! By these Tears,
By your recovered first-love! conjure you,
Yield to your cruel Fortune, not to Them:
Yield, or they shoot me.

Thou art safe. There, Slaves,
'Tis she that has disarmed me.

Now, a man
May bid my Lord welcome, (without a Dance)
To's own, not his Wife's House; and loving Wife
(Whether you are his Wife, or mine) you shall
Embrace no more; bind both their arms, and bear 'em
To the place of Execution.

What death?

Such notice as thou gav'st my murdered Sister
Of that base Robbery, when thou stol'st thy self
From her at Venice, I mean to give thee
Of the Intrigue of her Revenge. But know,
Before she died, I promised Ericina
To kill thee in the Joys of thy new Love;
Therefore when you and Pyramena quarel'd,
I held my hand, forbore to poison you,
And from her Hatred to your Jealous Nature,
Won her to marry me or my Free humour;
Then gave you way to reconcile your selves,
That so I might get you into my power.
Go thou, and marry her in the other world.
Bear 'em to death.

Let him; I will not stir,
Unless't be to unbind them.

Dare thou talk?

Freelier yet; set them at Liberty,
Or I'll unriddle You: did not these hands
Bury the Body of --

Braved by a Slave?

Hold thy hand, Corbulo: Vindex, hear thy doom,
Die; or be honest, and live rich and free.

Life's sweet, when handsomely accommodated;
Give me my Tools again, and let's to work.

Comets, that rise and shine a while like Stars,
Will down again and stink. Slaves will be Slaves.

See their last Draught prepared, as I directed.

Spit out thy Poison now for both of us.

I'll satisfy your longing.

Arviedo,
Discover thy self to him; when he hears
Thy name, 'twill shake the bloody Butchers Knife
Out of his hand.

No, my Lord, I will never
Owe my life to your Murd'rer; 'tis my glory
I die with you, whose bounteous hand has kept me
Thus long alive.

Thou hast the old Man's Soul,
Had I his Sword --

It should save none of you;
Yet I've a private kindness for the Youth,
I'll bring him to a Priest before he dies;
But no Sword shall redeem him from these arms.
My long-mock'd Fury, like an Army's rage
That storms a Town, shall spare no Sex, nor Age.

BLess me! (that's more than I have said this seven years)
Come out old Hag, was't you that cast the Mist
Before my eyes?

Yes, Captain-Coxcomb, I;
I, brave Sea-Captain, I removed the Lights
Out of your Admiral: I raised the Fog
Wherein my Man of War was lost, and all
The Gold aboard him shipwrecked, I left nothing
To keep possession for him, not a Cat
To spit Fire: but could thou not see the Beacons?

Fire will take those eyes, Witch, when thou art burned,
They're now as dark as these rooms yesternight.
Well, Night-mare, you have had your pleasure of me,
You do not mean to rob me?

Keep off, Captain,
And do not you fore-speak me; for I mean
To rob thee of this Gold, and pay my self,
Like Wenches that have wit, for my Night's lodging;
Once in my life I'll make prize of a Pirate.
Advance, and if I kill thee not, hang me.

Let me die, if I do n't begin to love
Thy wit and spirit above all young flesh;
Thou art an old Virago.

I have wit
And courage enough, Captain, to keep thee
From any more embraces.

Nay, then be
Incredulous at thy peril, twice that Gold
Will never purchase such a Bed-fellow.

If there were any truth in such a Husband,
I like thee for a Bed-fellow, but --

No but,
Wu't have me swear?

Hast thou not sworn and broke?

An Oath for Form-sake merely, Matrimony
Is sworn of course; but now I'll marry thee
The Sea-way, as the Duke of Venice marries
The Gulf, make all that Gold into a Ring,
And cast it into thee.

Explain your self.

That is, first, as the true Proprietor
I'll take the plunder to my self, and then
Return thee All.

Swear.

As I hope to escape
Being trussed up at the Main-yard, I'll do it.

There's Gold and Sword; and now I hope I please thee.

And I'll perform with thee, as the old Romans
Did with Tarpeia, who betrayed for Gold
The Capitol: thou shalt have the full Agreement,
All, Gold and Sword?

You will not?

Pray, or curse,
For to the Pot thou go.

Then you're a Rogue.

Did you doubt that? thus I resolve thee.

Help!

Fight with your Wife? fie, the Prince of Salerno
Would speak with you; look to your Prisoner,
He catches at your Bills; I tell thee, Captain,
The Prince will only speak, not fight with thee.

Nay, if I must not fight, I will not speak,
The torture shall not get out one word more.

Thou hast the Bag?

Yes, the whole Cheat's recovered.

Then thou art cheered, Cousin?

Almost ruined,

I would not credit the Report, but now
That you confirm it, I am satisfied:
That's all my business.

You are too Noble
To send for me to scorn my wants, I hope
You summon me to better my condition.

On easy terms.

But I have nothing left
To make terms out of.

Is your Bride lost too?

Suppose she were not; think you, I would make
Terms out of Her?

Cousin, you do not love her,
That's public: were it then ill moved, to wish
You would resign her to me, your near Kinsman,
Who loved her first? 'tis to give me your trouble;
But if you please, sell me your Title to her;
To better your Condition, take my Title
To the fair House and Lordship (which you know)
Near Foro del Volcane.

I am poor,
But ere my poverty be wrought upon
To make a sale of Love, I'll starve. A Prince --

Stay, I perceive I move on a wrong ground,
I took't for granted that you loved her not.

I was so fat from loving (once to day)
That nothing was more odious to my heart
Than Diacelia.

What has altered you?

The lovely Face with the deformed Mind,
Leandra; her Impiety reflected
Th'Angelical Form of Diacelia's Virtues;
Nor is the odds so great between their Beauties,
Bating the lustre of the Candian Habit,
Leandra stains not Diacelia.

And now you would enjoy her?

Rather her
Than all the Earth.

And, Cousin, you shall have her,
She plotted this Examination for you;
Appear sweet Princess Diacelia.

Dear, can you pardon?

Can you love?

For ever.

Behold part of your Fortune.

The rest's here:
And here's an honest Spy, Gioseppe, Master
Of the Ship, which to Naples brought from Candy
You, Madam, and my Lord Filomarini,
By whose command I put to Sea again,
Pursued the Greek Cheat to Constantinople,
Gave her intelligence that a Renegade
Meant to inform against her, for imbezling
Her Master the Prince of Bulgaria's Jewels,
Which did by right of Conquest appertain
To the Great Turk: for this Lie she received me
Into her Service: working on her Fears
To Genoa I drew her, tic'd her thence
With Golden Hopes to Naples. What say, Cheat,
To prodigal Neopolitans?

I say,
The hopes of prodigal Neopolitans
Could never have got me to bring Leandra
To Naples, but that you in your Disguise
With your new Spanish name Hosepe (tricks
I dreamed not off) fooled me into belief,
That you your self and my Lord Filomarini
Were out at Sea upon a second Voyage
To Turkey in pursuit of me, and thus
You cheated me as well as I did you,
And being quit, I hope you'll pardon me.

The Chest of Damask (which you robbed me of,
When you fled out of Candy) I forgive thee;
That only was injury to my self,
But, Cheat, you know, there's a great injured person --

The Party's come.

The thousand Crowns are thine;
Bring her in: bid th'Officers leave the room.

Clear the room there; my Lord, you and the Princess
May tarry, for you'll find your selves concerned.

Leandra's yours.

Had you not better been
My Mistress of your own accord? you're now
Brought as an Offering to my Bed, 'tis ready.

Is your Priest ready too?

For what, I pray?

To make your Princely Bed a Lawful Bed,
Into Unlawful Sheets I'll never come.

Rogue- Draco, hast not thou engaged thy throat?

Here, cut it.

Uncle? is this your Sea-voyage?
What meant you?

To reclaim you and my son;
He is reformed; but, Mistris-monger, you
Scarce pleased with three, four hundred Venuses,
Will not this one serve your turn?

Very well.

But here's the spite on it, she'll not be a Mistress.

Faith, Uncle, were not for some few respects I'd marry her.

I have done my endeavours
To join you, and Leandra likes you well,
What is't obstructs the Match?

Nothing, if you
(From being an old Pimp) in an instant can
Become a Saint, work Miracles: make her
Good-natur'd, and the Cheat her Mother honest.

Bring in the Prisoners.
Look me in the face,
Thou know me, and my wrongs; confess the truth
And live; or --

I confess, When the Venetian
Fought with the Turk in Candy; my old Master
Prince of Bulgaria, so valiantly
Charged the Mahometans who from his Ancestor
Had took the Principality, that he fell
Into an Ambush, and received a hurt
Of which he died, and by his Will left you
(His fellow-Soldier in the Candian War)
Guardian to his two Daughters.

How? two Daughters?

What if Leandra now should prove a Princess?

I confess, That the Prince put me, his Laundress,
To wait on's younger Child, Princess Leandra;
But when I saw my hopes to raise my self
Out of my Masters Treasure, frustrated
By his entrusting you, my Lord; the Jewels
Committed to my charge I took away,
And stole this lovely Child, upon whose ruins
I was resolved to build my self a Fortune.
But sure the Prince was more to blame than I,
For placing a mean Wretch so near a Princess.

What? have I made a good Land-voyage, Nephew?
Am I at home? may Drake now Moor his Ship?
Is she good-natur'd, and her Mother honest?

And I most happy in thee, dear Leandra.

I'll answer, like an Oracle, in Heroics;
Most happy in a Wife the Prince may prove,
Not in Leandra, she'll have Love for Love.

If you admit of Love upon Love's score,
Then I may challenge you.

And thousands more.
What share can I expect in such a heart,
Where every pretty Mistress claims a Part?

A Passion for all Beauties I must own;
But they are all contained in you alone.
Believe me, for my Word is a Decree.

Did you not pass your word, that You in Me
Should be Most Happy, which is Most Untrue:
Because I am as Happy, Sir, in You.

This comes off well. No Sun breaks forth so clear
As through a Cloud, no Joy as through a Fear:
Equally Happy (I confess) we are.

And equally your Happiness we share.

Captain, if you have any thing to say --

I've made a resolution to say nothing.

Then I'll speak for thee; Lugo, did not I
Tell thee at first Peralta was a Knave,
A Cheater? to the cozening of thy self
Thou art an Accessory, therefore we
Must either Punish both, or Pardon both.
So, Captain, (for that sometimes thou hast been
My Comrade) I discharge thy'Imprisonment:
But I discharge my Friendship too; be gone,
Nay, take your Baggage with you, worthy Captain*
But let this be (as Pardons that are got
In years of Jubilee) no Encouragement
To Vice, though you escape Justice.

Not so clearly;
For we are still condemned to one another.

The thousand Crowns you owe me, pay Gioseppe,
To make up his Reward.

Uncle, I will.

And now that you and my Son have got Ladies,
'Tis time to carry them to Decio's Mask.

Aloon then, Scenes of Mirth we may expect.

Rare Poison! how suddenly it dispatch'd them?
'Tis done, and bravely done.

'Twas bravely suffered.

And yet his Lordship stooped to make a suit.

But how? when Pyramena did resolve
To drink first, then Iberio entreated
The same Cup might be filled again for him:
In that request to you, he courted her.

I must confess, Man never showed more courage.

Nor Woman greater sense of Love, and less
Of Death; her last words I shall never forget.

Nor shall the World forget them, for I'll be
At charge of setting up their Monument:
First, in the Marble shall be grav'd this Title,
The Poisoned Lovers, then this Epitaph,
Perhaps the Title moves thee not, but hear
The Lady's last words, and thou'lt drop a Tear.
When fairest Pyramena had drunk up
The Poison, and her Lover took the Cup,
She said, Not This I've drunk, but That thou art
To pledge me, That (Iberio) breaks my heart.
Does it not strike thee?

Sadly.

Ha-ha-ha.
What if I had their Figures cast in Brass,
As they are lying on my Bed, embracing?
Th'Object has made me dull, I'll have some mirth,
Make ready for the Mask: but first release
Arviedo, and to show that he's no Prisoner,
Give him his Sword: in the Gallery I'll meet him.
My spleen abates, I've follow'd it too far.
Who's there?

I, Vindex.

Ha! who sent for thee?
How dare thou press upon our privacy?
What would thou have?

Impossibilities,
A Line to bound an Infinite, your Rage:
There is too much of Tiger's blood in you,
I come to let it out --

To murder me?
Help, murder!

Peace, or this shall silence you:
Yet, if you let me alone, I do not come
To kill you.

What's th'intention of thy coming?

To keep you from committing of more murders;
You have sent Corbulo for Arviedo,
Already I am witness to two proofs
Of your strange fury, I'll prevent a third.

Thou wilt not keep me prisoner?

At your peril;
You shall not rob the world of a young Worthy.

Know thou Arviedo?

No; all's one for that,
I hear the Gentleman's a Child of Honour:
I pity him.

I love him.

Who I believe you?

Prodigious! a Slave drawn upon his Lord?
Thy Sword?

You'll not take from me your Defence?

Villain, defend thy self.

I am too honest,
Hear me, or you'll be lost, Sir.

Let him live,
Though he surprised me rudely, he meant well:
Sirrha, about your business: Arviedo,
This was more noble --

Than you can imagine.
I would not have you fall by your Slave's hand.

My life to Arviedo is a debt.

Pay it, for Decio has lived too long.
It had been happy for thee, had thou died
Before thy rage (in pois'ning Pyramena
And my brave Kinsman) made thee a Wild-beast,
Which I must rid the world of.

In your breast
There's more of Honour, than to murder one
That is (you see) defenceless.

Where's thy Sword?

In the Gallery, the place where Corbulo
Appointed you to meet: lead, Sir, from me
You shall have satisfaction; and the like.
I shall require from you.

I'll do you right.
Ask any thing with your Sword in your hand:
I shall be glad to find you so much Man.

How much of Man is in me, you shall try:
I'll make you mine, or by your hand I'll die.

Why one Eye in the fore-head of my Vizard?

Great Puppy, should a Cyclop have two Eyes?
On with your Cyclop face, the Masks beginning;
The Prince? These Chairs are for you and your Friends, Sir.

Where's Decio?

He'll wait upon your Highness.

Song in Dialogue

Phoebus?

Who calls the World's great Light?

Aurora, that abhors the Night.

Why does Aurora from her Cloud
To drowsy Phoebus cry so loud?

Put on thy ^eams; rise, (no regard
To a young Goddess, that lies hard
In th'old Man's bosom?) rise for shame,
And shine my Cloud into a Flame.

Oblige me not beyond my power,
I must not rise before my hour.

Before thy hour? look down, and see,
In vain the Persian kneels to thee,
And I (mocked by the glimmering Shade)
A sad mistake in Naples made;
Like Pliny, I had lost my life,
If I had been a Mortal Wife.

Thou came too near the Burning Mount
Vesuvio?

Upon thy account,
For I took Clouds of Smoke and Fire,
(Which here from Vulcan's Court expire)
For Morning-streaks, Blew, White, and Red,
That Rouse me from cold Tithon's Bed.

Charge not upon me for a Crime,
That I staid th'utmost point of time,
Before I would put off my Bays,
And on Naples shed my Rays,
Where such a mischief they have done,
As will make Venus hate the Sun,
Discovering to Vulcan's eye
Where She and Mars embracing lie.

I'm sorry Mars and Venus had
Such privacy: but I am glad
That Phoebus does at last appear
To shine away Aurora's Fear.

What frighted thee?

I know not what;
But thou know all; what noise is that?

'Tis Vulcan, in a greater Heat
Than th'Irons by his Cyclops beat:
He makes the horror of that noise,
Teaching and Knocking his great Boys,
(From hamm'ring out Jove's Thunder) set
To File and Polish Vulcan's Net,
Which he'll catch Mars and Venus in.

What now?

To laugh the Smiths begin:
At furious Vulcan (halting off
To measure his Wife's Bed) they scoff.

I'll leave the place; I can no more
Endure the Laughter than the Roar.

Hark, they record, they'll sing anon;
'Tis time for Phoebus to be gone:
For when such Lyrick Asses bray,
The God of Musique cannot stay.
Cry our Ware, (Sooty Fellows
Of the Forge and the Bellows)
Has Jove any Oaks to rend?
Has Ceres Sickles to mend?
Wants Neptune a Water-Fork?
All these are the Cyclops work:
But to Wire-draw Iron-rods,
To File Nets to catch the Gods,
What can make our fingers so fine?
Drink, drink, Wine, Lippari-wine.
Smoke, Smoke breeds the Tysick,
Wine, Wine's the best Physic,
For every Cyclop a full Kahn;
Our Terms runs thus,
Some Wine for Us,
Or no Net for our Master Vulcan.

Drink Fire, you Lazy Monsters; Lippari-Wine?
No Liquor down with you, but mine?

We made a shift.

It seems so, for you reel:
Is this my Cobweb weaved in Steel?
How horridly it looks --

But not so horrid
As Vulcan does, who Shoos his forehead.

With gaping loop-holes, and wrought all awry:
My Wife's Pox put out thy one Eye.

He means her Small-pox, and that seldom misses
The Eye, for 'tis a small Ulysses.

I'll dance my Eye out.

Let who dare advance
A step; no, Rogues, you shall not dance;
I'll lay your legs fast, your heels you may shake
In th'Iron Stocks, those you can make.

Not Dance? Cow'rds? here come Cocks that are no
Two Cupids? Y'have a charge of Bastards.

One fo the White Men.

For the Black another.

Your Wife's a very fruitful Mother:
These Cupids shoot in Cross-bows sure, for they
Have forked Arrows?

Sa, sa, sa;
We have our Forks too, and though drunk, yet hearty,
We will join with the Malignant Party.

My Hammer? Dogs, your legs have saved your brains,
Still the European Brat remains
Upon the place: Venus's only Joy
Come hither, my Wives fine White Boy:
You must change Colours, Sirrha, get a robe
As black as Mid-night makes the Globe,
Mourn at thy. Mother's Funeral, if thou stay,
Thine shall be first --

Hold, I'm in haste.

I am so too: my Net I cannot make,
'Tis now Venus's time to wake:
Time Vulcan measures by exacter trial
Than Phoebus does on his Sun-dial:
A Master in my Art I'm known to be,
Though not in the Art of Poetry;
My Verse halts like my self: but (day and night)
My Workmanship, this Watch, goes right.

Why does he look upon his Watch?

It seems
There is a Critical Minute Mars and Venus
Must wake in. What? my Lord Iberio
Is Mars?

And is not Pyramena Venus?

'Tis Pyramena; how durst Decio
Trust her old Servant?

Cupid Watches them.

Are they not dead? for they look deadly pale.

Vanish, Impostor; room for the true Vulcan;
The Minute's come; wake, Lovers, wake, I say.

Wake? did we sleep? did we not both drink poison?

Credit the working, 'twas an Opiate,
Only to make you sleep, till your Friends came
(Stir not, my Lord, nor call for help, in vain)
I sent for your Patron, the Prince, with hope
That in his presence you will be ashamed
To die, the second time, so sensually
Embracing my Wife.

Death shall not part us.

This Knot's a Gordian, never to be loosed.

It may be cut, the Macedonian way.

Thou dare not offer at their Lives?

And yours,
If you protect them; show your Swords the way
Into their Scabbards; mine should be unsheathed,
But I will put it up, and draw my Tongue
Before these Judges: will you hear?

Speak freely.

Sir, I invited you, not to assist
The Malefactors, but to sit and judge
The Equity of my Revenge: and Ladies,
Be not affrighted, whatsoe'r I suffer,
No Affront shall be offered to your Sex.
The Prisoners may (if they except against
The Prince and Lugo) make appeal to you.

Speaks he not well?

He looks exceeding well,
As if his Cause were good.

First, I charge you,
My Lord Iberio, with my Sisters's death.

Falsely, I am not guilty.

How? not guilty?
Did not my Sister (upon your Engagement)
Send for me (then in Candy) but ere I
Could come to Venice, you were got to Naples,
And had disowned her, which perfidiousness
Soon after broke her heart.

You do me wrong,
To charge her Death upon my breach of promise;
Indeed my Father promised, I should marry
Your Sister Ericina; and if I
(Who loved this Lady) had declared my self,
I had been disinherited. My Father
Dying of the Pestilence that reigned in Venice,
I went to settle my Affairs in Naples,
And from thence writ your Sister a Discharge.

Of Life. For who could live to be so scorned
As Ericina was? all Naples called her
The Slighted Maid: in short, it cost her life;
And to revenge her death I came to Naples,
Here I past for an insignificant Poet,
A Railer, invited to all Tables,
Where I but watched an Opportunity
To poison you: until (as luck would have it)
You being fooled out with your Mistress, she
Fools in with me; but now that she's my Wife,
(Faces about) you are in love again,
And make no scruple of Cuckolding poor Decio.

Thou li'st, for Pyramena is as far
From any loose, as thou from noble thoughts.

I'll but examine you to that point, then
'Twill appear, who's the liar: were not you
Contracted to my Wife?

I was.

Conclude;
What the pretension of a Pre-contract?
Were you not preingaged to Cuckold me?
Pray, what am I?

Our Executioner;
Therefore 'tis to no purpose to dissemble
For us that are to die: I do renounce you,
I'll die Iberio's Wife.

No, I forbid
The Banes of Death: you shall live Man and Wife,
Your scorn is now sufficiently revenged:
Behold the Slighted Maid.

Lives Ericina?

What a strange Mother of the Maid is Venice,
That breeds such Furies?

But my Brother Decio,
(The very night he came to Venice) died
Of that Mortality which took away
My noble Friend, your Father. I concealed
My Brother's sudden death, and gave it out
(Eas'ly believed) that your neglect killed me;
My Brother Decio's Funeral passed for mine;
In his shape (putting off my Love and Sex)
I follow'd you, my Lord, as far as Naples;
Here I tried several Keys of Death and Fortune,
To open me a door to my Revenge;
But still compassion stepped in to your reskue:
Till Hatred springing from your Scorn, was buri'd
In Love returned by one of your own blood,
The noblest and the sweetest Person living,
Who will not slight me, if you like the Match.

So well, that Ericina now shall know
Which of my Kinsmen she makes choice of; this
Is Giulio, Heir to the Family
Of Great Gonsalvo; for his poverty
Concealed, under the name of Arviedo;
I bred him, and resolved the frowning World
Should never know him till he had a Fortune;
A noble one fair Ericina brings.

With it I'll serve my Love, next to my Prince.

Nay, the Kings service will go roundly on;
I warrant, she'll bring a whole Nursery
Of Generals, she'll stock thee with young Gonsalvo's.

I'll promise only Possibilities;
Though I deserve not the Great Captain's Heir,
I hope to make him (what has been accepted
By Kings themselves) a Gentleman of Venice.
Judges, can you pardon a Woman's weakness,
That will revenge her blushes?

I forgive
The cruelty of Ericina's Spleen,
Which cured Iberio's Jealousy.

All's pleased
With such a fortunate Close. Send for our Coaches,
Mean time, let's have a Dance, as your Grand Mask.
So, now at the next Chapel we will be marri'd,
Then at my House I'll treat you, where the Inviter
Shall be Leandra's Guest. But still there wants
A just Reward for this deserving Soldier,
That boldly, at his lowest ebb of Fortune,
Durst check a Prince in his career to Vice.

Who taking me for (what I seemed) a Man
That would have given my Wife a wanton freedom,
Advised me to be jealous of my Honour;
And when he (swearing to do my commands)
Knew me to be a Woman, for his Oath's sake,
Against his Nature, he made you my Prisoner.

I'll do my self the honour to advance him.

Then make him your Lieutenant-Colonel.

I can't, but I'll give him my Regiment,
And get the Vice-Roy to Sign his Commission.

And from a Slave, poor Vindex, thou shalt be
(As I have promised) made both Rich and Free.

Corbulo, manage thou our Candian Arms,
The Battle I must fight in, is, at home.

I've not a Courtier's tongue to speak my thanks,
But to the Turk I'll sell my blood so dear,
I hope the Christian Cause will thank my Raiser
For sending me to Candy. My grief is,
I've but one Life to lose for the King's Honour.

No, Cor'nel, (doubtless) the King's better Stars
Will guard thy life, to serve him nearer Spain.
Let's all now joy this Military Bride-groom.
Patience (thou see) may lend blind Fortune Eyes
To find out Men, and make low Suff'rers rise.

SLighted, you know, I was; but, Gentlemen,
Resembling you in Shape and Courage, then
I looked upon it with an angry brow:
'Twould grieve me, if I should be slighted now.
But though our Sex the proud Italians scorn,
The English are Civil, you are Courtiers born,
And she's cursed in her Cradle, that promotes
Her Suit to you, and is denied your Votes.
Behold, your Candidate before you stands:
Your Semele sees Thunder in your hands,
Let's hear it: Claps that would make some afraid,
Will make the Slighted the Exalted Maid.
I'Ve spoke before your Majesty, but yet
I never kneeled in such a shaking Fit;
For, Sir, the Author bids me kneel and pray
Against your Justice: all that he can say
In his defence, is, that you would condemn
His faults, if strictly you examined them.
He hopes you will not; and why should he fear?
Your Majesty was never yet severe
To any thing well-meant, though ill-exprest;
And he presumes, you think, he did his best
To please you: therefore would be hard, if he
In making for your mirth a Comedy,
Should write's own Tragedy, yet that's his Case,
If your Impartial Justice should take place;
But if your Gracious Favour intervene,
The Epilogue is clearly his best Scene.

