BAnkers with Ginnyes may their purses fill,
And travel safer over Shooter's Hill,
Then Poets with their Stock can pass this Road;
To rob them of Applause is now the Mode:
He's scarce esteemed a Gallant, in our days,
Who has not Hectored two or three new Plays.
Joined with this Party, as the Author's told,
Are some, who neither spare new Plays, nor old.
Censurers, that, like Picklocks of the Law,
In any thing that's penned, will find a flaw;
And have a Peck to him, because he chooses
A Subject, which new-modell'd Rhyme abuses:
For Love and Honour (Themes of former Ages)
Are turned into Bourlesque, on modern Stages:
Where a Iack-Pudding acts great Alexander,
And Puppets play mock- Hero and Leander.
That Hero and Leander (further famed
Then any Land which Alexander claimed)
Should be disparaged; Mimic, scorn, not Wit,
Deriding what the noblest Poet writ.
Blame not our Poet, if he be enraged,
Ladies, You and your Servants are engaged;
For, He^o's Injury concerns the Fair;
Leander's, all those Men, who bravely dare.

MAte, O for a fresh Gale, to give me breath.
Stre. Master, this Feast of Venus and Adenis
Is hotter then a dog-Day: how I sweat?
But Castor, 'twas good ^uck, our jeering Friends
(In Asia) could not ^ee how thou and I
Were stranded here (in Europe) run a ground
Upon a multitude of staring Greeks.

Send me aboard my ship; In these Land-Crowds
There's more confusion then in Storms at Sea*
Tack about, Stredon, we have lost the Princes.

Castor? Stredon?


Hark? Our great Master calls.


Is the Show coming yet?


Leander, Stand.
The Chariot moves; and in it, such a Venus
As stirs up my Devotion, a young Lady
In a Youth's arms; what would I give for's Place?

His Wife she may be, or perhaps his Wench,


Ladas (who knows this Town of Se^tos) says,
These Rites admit no Wench, nor Married-Woman;
Venus to day is a Terestrial Maid,
But I adore her,

^ye, Orosis, now,
When Per^a, Syr^* and Arabi^, meet
^t the Great Feast o^ Venu^ an^ Adonis;
When Malta, Cyprus, Rhodes, and Si^ily,
Land their whole Islands on this Continent,
To pay the Immortal Gods religious duties,
Can thou think of adoring mortal Beauties?

Leander of our Trojan Family
You are the Chief; I, your poor younger-Brother:
You, by your Birth-right, may claim Hector's Valour,
A second Paris I: no marvel then,
If I court Women, whilst you conquer Men.

Thou court'st all Women,


To choose out the best;
This Beauty must be nobly born, and Chaste:
She's like Celena, our now-equall'd Sister.

Venus and Adonis kiss;
Pretty Maids, how like you this?

We like all, that Love's Queen esteems.


And she likes Kissing well, it seems:
Our smiling Goddess, this Feast-Day,
Will grant all Suits: pray Virgins, pray.

When you grow Men, that you prove true,
Sweet Boys, we pray: for what pray You?

We pray to Venus, that she'll please
To make us all Adonises.

When Sons of Mars quarrel
For Fame and the Laurel,
They dye, nipped like Buds in the Spring:
We Children of Venus,
When our Nurses weau us,
Play, Laugh, Kiss, and merrily Sing.
Yet We get Renown,
Which Cupid proposes;
And We wear a Crown,
Not Laurel, but Roses.
Our Goddess, Softer then our Flowers,
Will make no resistance.
Malignant and Infernal Powers
S^t Hearts at a distance.
Fair Venus dwells above
The Moon, young Adonis under:
But Youth and Beauty will love,
The Stars cannot keep them asunder.
Let the Crowd follow her, thou shalt not stir,
She's young, and fair, but She's I know not Who.

Who e're she be, so much Divinity
She has, that for it I'll exchange my Honour.

After Troy's ruin, on the Royal House
Of Priam and Assarracus, wilt thou
Bring more destruction by a shameful Match?
I charge thee, stay.

Command your Gally-Slaves.


If reason can persuade, thou wilt not go.


You'll let me send?


None that belongs to me:
Take Captives and thou shalt have all my Fleet.
But not a man to make thy self a Slave.

Though I have here no Servant, I scorn thine,
And thee; I'll Act alone.

Act, like a Prince*
Act with thy Brother, come in for a share
In the Dominion of the Euxine Sea:
I'll join with thee in the pursuit of Glory,
But where there's nothing to be got, but shame,
I leave thee.

Oh, your Servant, you are called
To the relief of some poor fighting Ships;
I'm called-on too.

But 'tis to Court, not Fight.


I would increase, and not destroy, Mankind.


Thou wilt be lost to Honour, and add none
To Nature, but a Race, thou'lt blush to own:
Could thou endure a Son that would like thee,
Marry the Pageant, which he came to see;
A Son that (when the War he should espouse
And with triumphant Laurel Wreath his brows)
Worse then a Coward, should seek to hide his head
In the soft Pillow of a Wanton's bed?

You have alarm'd me, I'm now for Arms*


And now let us embrace as Fellow-Souldiers.


But in great Soldiers hearts, Mistresses have
The second Place.

Dost thou prefer the War,
Before the Mistress?

Yes; and to be serious,
Do not you fear, my Spirit is so low,
To match with Beauty of a mean extraction.

Then, follow thy Amour* I'll follow thee


Let's now embrace as Brothers: I presume,
The sacred Chariot's going to the Temple.
There my Young Venus once more we will behold,
To Her I'll pray: the Goddess is grown Old.

Thou know I love thee.


So't appears; for, you,
Kind Husband, rob me of the Right of Nature,
You take my Child out of her Mother's Power.
Hero's a Priestess, for a whole year Cloistered:
Was this an Act of Love to her, or me?

Aphila, 'twas an Act of Piety,


Tiresias, 'twas an Act of Policy.


This only clears the Account to Venus; she
Lent her to us, I pay her to the Goddess.

You mock me and the Goddess; for to both
Great Zeal you do pretend, but value neither.
These are the Prophet's Tricks, Legerdemains,
That come to you from your Progenitors,
The Delphic Priests: and since you came to Thrace,
Your Pride, is, like your Gold, pil'd-up so high
That you look down, with Scorn, upon my Kindred.

Whom, of your Kindred, have I ever Scorned?


My Nephew Arcas; because he loved Hero,
She was committed Priestess, to the Tower.

This is great news; Arcas, do you love Hero?


Above the World, for she's worth many Worlds;
The Maid's Divine,

That's by the Mother's side;
The Father's grown inhumane to his own.

In my indulgent care, I have expressed
My Fatherly affection to our Children.
I made Samertes Governor of Sestos;
His Chin's still smooth, yet is the Sword in's hand:
And if Great Mentor Admiral of Athens,
Were not yet kept from us by a storm at Sea,
This day, Theamne should have been his Bride.

But Hero is a Priestess.


Dear, you know,
One of my Family's Prerogatives,
Her Priesthood is, and lasts but for a Year,
Then, noble Arcas, you may Court her freely,
Mean time, you have my Wife's consent, and mine.

Gifts, dearer then the life my Parents gave.


Now I adore your holy Ceremonies,
Which Crown our Children, in the Town, and Temple.
Here comes our Venus and Adonis; Son,
Thy Sacred Father to my Nephew Arcas
Has promised Hero: give the Bride-groom joy.

First, Madam, with your leave, I'll joy my self,
That I have such a Brother.

Who admires
Only two Miracles of Nature; Hero,
For Beauty: and for Gallantry, Samertes.

Y' have reason.


What a Peacock is my Brother.

^heamne, this should be thy Wedding-day,
But thy Great Bride-groome's rivalled by a Storm:
Dost thou not pray devoutly for a Calm?

I love a Sea, in which the Dolphin plays.


Thou love a Man.


Known only by his Fame.


Yes, by his Picture.


That's not faced like you;
For I perceive, that Mentor's no Adonis.

But he's a Mars, which Venus likes as well;
There's in a Souldier's roughness a strange Spell;
Then Maids love Title, and he's styled the Great.

A Title merited, when he destroyed
The Persian Fleet, and with his own hand slew
The Great King's Vice-roy.

Nay Sir, he has yet
A higher Title, he's my Fathers Friend.
Sister, ingeniously confess; before
Thou see Great Mentor, fear thou not this loss?

I fear his stern looks] Pity such a Man
Should perish --

And thou live a Maid.


That's pleasant:


Son, thy Unusual mirth presages well.


Sir, you derive your self from Delphian Prophets,
Do y' not fore-see, that I'll be merrier?
My Veins shall swell with your best Wines; this Evening.
I mean to feast those Friends, who at the show
Made-up our Train.

I'll order you a Treat,
And maked as Noble, as my Joys are Great.

You Maids, that in your slowry Youth scorn Men,
Are met withal; for in your withered Age,
Men laugh at you.

As I do, at thy Precepts.


Do y' laugh?


Nurse I should frown, but that I know
The Difference between thee and other Nurses.
In Smooth discourses they hint Wanton thoughts,
Thy Natur's modest; though thy Humour be
Too Gay, for one so Old.

Well, Hero, Well;
Your Humour's froward; will you never Marry?

Pray hear my Reasons.


I dare stay no longer;
My Lady will frown, if she want my Service
At such a Feast.

My duty to my Parents,
Nurse, you'll not fail to say you left me well?

In body; but, I'faith, I'll tell your Mother,
How peevishly you mortify your Mind.
Diana loves to have her Priestess strict;
But Venus favours not a single Life,
She hates a Maid, that would not be a Wife.

Free I was born, why should I not live Free?


What think you Marriage is?


Perpetual Bondage.
O Venus, if the Service I have done,
Here in thy Temple, please thee; Chide thy Son,
When he shoots at me any thing, but Lead;
Save me, dear Goddess, from the Nuptial bed:
Nor to Pos^rity let Time record,
That She, who was thy Servant, had a Lord.

Child, dare you pray to Venus, against Love?
Take heed, some Judgment do not fall upon you:
Never young Virgin made a Prayer so wicked.

Never Old-woman was so Superstitious:
Nay, sweet Nurse, stay; thou shalt not part in fury;
Stay, that I may convert thee to my Faith.

That talking old Priest made us come too late,
The Chariot's gone.

We met him luckily,
Now I may own my Love to fair Theamne.

But sure her Sister Hero is deformed,
And therefore, by her Parents, the poor soul
Was made a Priestess and placed here, to Pray.

They are great Ladies.


Yes, the Priest told us,
Their Father is chief Magistrate of Sestos.

But under him their Brother has the Sword,
He's Governor.

Who, he that was Adonis?


O Sir, to a young Soldier, bred in Sparta,
The Sword may be entrusted.

It suits worse,
With their old Father's Attribute of Prophet,
To make his Son Adonis in a show;
But Greece is wanton.

Leaving your Grave thoughts,
Advise me, shall I move Theamne's Father?
Or with me at the Altar will You kneel,
And try, if we can pray Theamne hither?

We may pray here, or there, but to no purpose,
Tiresias is too rich.

Rust eat his coin;
The poorest Prince deserves --

Triumphal Arches,
When he's Victorious.

Brother, I'll Fight well,
And Love well too.

I am a Man, I scorn
Love's Childish Toys -- What miracle of Nature
Draws Cupid's Bow, to wound me, who so oft
have slighted his Divinity?

He's blasted!
Sure, Love has struck him with a flash of Lightning,

What deprives thee of thy Senses?


Wonder, Fear, Modesty; and Impudence*


Before th^Immortal Gods, could you be bold?


Profanely rude; I hardly can forbear:
Yet, silently I'll sound her inclination.

She steals a look; hang me, but she'll prove kind.


Oh, I have been too busy with my eyes,
They have betrayed their Mistress: Shall I yield
Before the Soldier summons me? Help Nurse.

No, I'm a Superstitious old Woman:
What think you of strict Resolutions now?
Be not you in Love?

I am, I know not what.


'Tis happy, that my Love's not made the sport
Of her Disdain; for Favour now I'll sue.
Priestess, a Temple you your self deserve,
For you're as great a Power, as she you serve:
Here reign two Queens of Love divinely Fair;
And both, I hope, will hear a Stranger's Prayer.

Not strangers, but deserving Friends I hear.


Though I am not related yet so near,
I love you, more then Friend or Brother can.

I never did, nor ever will love Man.


If you'll not love, then cruel-Faire, I'll dye.


I cannot love, nor hate: for 'tis not I
That am mine own Disposer; in my choice
My Father, and my Mother, has a Voice:
Stranger, your Suit depends upon their Wills;
But I must to the Tower, the Temple fills.
How needful your advice is, Nurse, you see?

Child, when the Banquet's served, I'll come again.


Who shall treat with their Parents?


That will I;
For I first loved, and therefore I'll first speak.

With all the Art thou did at Athens learn,
Move both our Suits.

Only my own Concern;
For, you are sure to speed, if I prevail:
And you'll be undiscovered, if I fail.

Nurse, how's the Wind?


As the Trees blow, 'tis West.


Then, Mentor comes.


Poor heart, I give the Pity,
Instead of Joy; What a sad Bride-groom's here!
If this Face be his best, he has the worst
That ever eyes beheld: An Admiral!
A Sea-coale-man; from such an Aethiop
Well might the Persians fly; I shake and tremble
To see his very Picture.

Then, O Nurse!
How must I be confounded, when I fear,
He may be landing?

Now the Devil sink him;
Before my Father should dispose of me,
To one I never saw but in a Shadow;
Which frights me, like a Goblin, I would fly
As far as Asia has a foot of ground.

Rather then I'll stay here, till He arrive,
I'll fly to Persia; least he Conquer that,
To India: but alas, I know no friend,
Who will conceal me here.

You know my Sister,
Step to her House, there You may lye as safe,
As Hero in her Tower; and when the Town
Is searched, my life on it, she'll discover nothing;
In the evening, when the Sailors, that came over
To our Feast from Abydos, shall return;
Go, in my Sisters clothes, and hire your passage;
The Sea from Sestos, is not a Mile-broad,
You'll Sail it, in a quarter of an hour.

Kiss me, dear Nurse, and lets take leave for ever;
I'll follow thy advice, lend me thy Veil,
Unbolt the garden-door Whose here? a Stranger;
But one worth all th'Inhabitants of Greece:
with such a Husband I could live and dye.

Theamne here? Fortune's a gracious Queen;
Love, be not then a Tyrant: Athens now
Inspire me, with thy Vein of Poetry.
Fairest and sweetest of the matchless Greeks,
These Damask-Roses blowing in your Cheeks.
Make all those Garden-Roses look as pale,
As Beauties struck when they see You unveil.

Nay if you speak Verse, I am for you there;
Verse is the Dialect of Prophets Children.
Foreiner (for you are no Greek, I see)
Your Country and your Quality to me,
Are Strangers too

Wonder of Europe, know,
That, till your Countrymen did overthrow
My Family, Troy was our Royal Seat;
But what are Princes after a Defeat!
From all the Lesser Asia, and a Crown,
O^r Empire is reduced to one Sea-Town:
I, cross the Channel, at Abydos born;
Sestos my Neighbour-City, You adorn:
Here, from the World, in my own Right I claim
Theamne --

How come you to know my name?


It concerns him, who moves for a Decree*
To know his Judge.

Your Judge I cannot be,
For to Theamne you pretend a Right.

My Title's Love, at first and second Sight.


But how can I a wandering Stranger trust?


My Claim's put in; and I hope, You'll be just:
But if the Judge will take the Party's Oath,
I give you my inviolable Troth.

More Form, in my Engagement, should be used,
But where Need presses, Modesty's excused;

The Kno^ is tied, untie it He that can.


Whether he be a Monster, or a Man;
See (whom I never saw, but in this Piece)
My Father's choice.

'Tis He that fought for Greece:
I know his Persian Trophy, and his Face;
We matched our Chariots, in the Olympic Race:
In the Isthmian VVrastling-ground, his strength I tried.

You now must wrestle with him, for a Bride.


How? Shall I bear you hence? or prosecute
My first Design, and boldly move my Suit
To your rich Friends?

Do this, but ere you go,
'Tis fit, you should their Dispositions know.
My Father's Mentor's Friend, but governed by
My Mother; She loves nothing, but what's High,
That Kings were your Fore-Fathers, may please Her:
My Brother's of a strange mixed Character,
He's Valiant, but his Valour's drowned in Rage;
And though a Tutor might befit his Age,
Yet He's by this strong Garrison obeyed,
But grown so deadly proud, since He was made
Governor of the Town, that He expects,
All Men should do, what ever He directs;
Where He does love, He flattered like a Child:
And where He hates, He's never reconciled.
My Cousin Arcas lies so near my Brother,
Like Apples touching, they corrupt each other.

These tempers are not to be wrought-on.


Try;
If they, like mortal Enemies, deny
The offer of a Treaty; then, Use Force,
To which you Princes have your last recourse:
I'll take the air, this Evening, on the Strand.

A few, but daring Sea-men, I command.


If they can beat the Soldiers of my Guard.


A Gally, at the Port, shall lye prepared,
To row us off.

I'll back the Garden-way,
Go you to the great Gates; this Holiday,
You'll find them open; and you could not choose
A softer time, Festival Wines infuse
Courtship into my Friends, but look to find
My eyes strange to you, though my heart be kind.

Before that borrowed strangeness you put-on,
I kiss your hand.

Bold Foreiner, be gon.


Castor, What sadness lies upon thy heart?


Would I had never seen these Sisters eyes.


Sure you're in love with neither?


I hate both.
They make us Fast, when all the Town is Feasting.

We should not grudge the loss of a meal's Meat.
Leander Fasts

And prays, but all in vain;
For Hero, like her Goddess, is a Statue,
No Prayer can move her.

Yes, if one could Say
Pigmalion's Prayer to Venus, for that made
A Statue flesh and blood.

To soften Hero,
I know a Natural Expedient,
Worth forty such Greek Lies; let's fire the Temple,
And march off with the Priestess.

O damned Master ^
Rather then I would Commit Sacrilege;
I would eat thee.

Religious Master's Mate:
but we wait well, (the Prince who makes no Halts)
Is marched into the Court of Sestos, follow;
Nay keep your Way.

If it be my Way, 'tis yours.


Do you think me so barbarously rude,
That I'll take 't from you.

Oh, oblige me, Sir.


You're next the door.


I'll open it for you.


I beg, you'll go.


Only to be your Usher


Thus we Barbarians, of the civil Greeks,
Learn how to make our selves ridiculous.

What? Strike your Boy for bringing of a Message?


But Madam, the knave smiled, which made me think,
Mentor was landed, and 'tis one of Asia,
Come from Abydos, send the man away.

He should be, by his bravery, some great man.


All sober Spies upon my Cups, I hate.


Sir, the Youth looks, as though he would do reason:


If he'll drink, bring him: Arcas, Hero's Health.


That has gone round.


Why does Thea^e sigh?
But such a grief as thine, who can resist?
I'll now carouse thy Joy from Sea to Land,
Mentor's Health, Mother.

Husband, to your Friend,
And Son-in-Law.

That Stranger shall pledge me.


The House to all gives public Entertainment,
But Sir, if you'll be welcome to this Board,
Sit down and drink as we do.

Here's a Health
To the preserver of the State of Greece,
And Terror of the Persian Kingdom, Mentor.

To him I'll drink a H^llesp^nt of Wine;
May I presume to offer this to you,
Illustrious Virgin?

Yes.


No; he's too bold.


A Noble stranger has the Privilege,
Of drinking to the Bride.

Is she a Bride?
To whom?

To Mentor, Admiral of Athens.


Have they seen one another?


In their Pictures.


Twice have I seen Her; here, and at the Show;
Love has not yet pierced Mentor's breast, mine bleeds,
And for the first Cure, the first Wounded moves.

She is my Sister; Stranger, do you know,
What the word (Sister) means?

Not very well.


That Greek may easily be understood,
No Foreign Mixture must corrupt our Blood.

Your Blood, and mine, from Sacred Fountains springs:
From Delphic Priests Yours, mine from Trojan Kings.

Though I love Kings, She cannot be your Queen;
For she's obliged to Mentor.

What? to one
She never saw, but as it pleased the Painter,
Who, if he were a Master, drew a Face,
Will break no Lady's Heart.

Draw; in thy blood
I'll wash away the Scorn thou throw'st on Mentor,

Come all; Number's no odds, when Lovers fight.


Samertes! Arcas! Will you Violate
The Law of Hospitality?

Why, Brother,
Will you engage, before I have declared?

Son, hear thy Sister.


You tie up my arm;
And let loose her tongue, which may do more mischief.

No, I'll discharge him, with a formal Speech.
Stranger, we question not your Trojan Race,
For, one may see bold Paris in your Face.
I am no Helen, which (it seems) you find,
Therefore you ask not me, how I'm inclined:
My Friends are courted; they deny your Suit,
Straight You, like Hector, with your Sword dispute;
But Asian Hector, Smooth your angry brow,
For every Greek is an Achilles now.
My Brother, in Obedience, holds his hand;
Take heed, Victorious Mentor do not land:
Fly to your Ship betimes, and escape his Fleet,
[Arm all your Sea-Men, at the Port we will meet.]
I speak not this, my Enemy to save;
But least our House should be a Stranger's Grave.

Am I your Enemy?


My Hate to You,
Equals my Love to Mentor.

Then I go;
To every Lover I wish better Fortune.

Sister, the whole World has but two great Souls,
That's Mine and Thine. What wilt thou do, this Evening?

Get a fresh Breeze, to fan me, on the Strand.


where (I hope) thou'lt discover Mentor's Fleet.


You'll go with me?


Thou knowe'st, I am engaged
To feast our Friends; but Arcas, with a Guard
Shall wait upon thy Chair.

Immediately.


My Lord, we will walk a little in the Garden.


I hope, Nurse, I shall have your company.


No, Child; I'll see an end of the great Set,
Between your Sister Hero, and Leander.
Dear Hearts, they have the harder Game to play:
You're grown a cunning Cheat, shift as you may.

I'll play my Cards as subtly as I can,
To get a Prince, and escape an ugly Man.

Master, Joy; Joy; our Men are weighing Anchors,
Orosis will to sweet Abydos Sail,
With fair Theamne.

If we rout her Guards,


Like Lightning, in a moment, we will dispatch
Her Pikes and Bows; and she her self consents.

I know that, Stredon; can thou tell me News?
Will Hero to Leander be as kind?

No, Castor, no; she neither will nor can.


Nay, if she were but willing; we have those,
Dancers oth'ropes, that would run up her Tower,
Nimbler then Ladas ran to them with Orders.

I'm sent to watch their landing.


'Tis high time;
The Lamp of Heaven burns out so fast, I fear
'T will leave us in the Dark: To the Port, run,
Make all imaginable hast; bring word
Theamne's there, and we will c^p Her aboard.

Hold Nurse, 'ti^ Gold.


This needs no^; I should be
Your Brother's Advoca^e, without a Fee.

Why do you press so much for my reply?
How can I grant, that which my Friends deny?
No Foreign Mixture must corrupt our Blood:
Nurse, 'twas my Brother's Answer, was't not good?

Better your Sister's, to Orosis, is;
She says that if He can get her, She's his.

Were I so minded (which will never be)
Out of this Tower, what Army could get me?
They who to scale these Battlements aspire,
May attacque Heaven, that's but a little higher.

Higher, or lower, be but You content,
He'll neither ask your Towr's, nor Friends consent,

Nurse, hold your peace,

Child, if I should obey,
You would repent; mark therefore what I say.
The Temple will be shut, within this hour;
And Custom then confines You to the Tower:
For a whole Twelve-moneth; and within that Year,
Leander will be dead with grief, I fear;
Perhaps You hope, that Time, who flies from all,
Will come, like your tame Pigeon, at Your call:
No; You have, like this day, but one hour's Light,
And then, bid Opportunity good night.

Since Time is precious, and o^r time so short,
Leander, you shall make no further Court:
I but obey my Goddesse's Command,
Where Ve^us gives my heart, I give my hand.

For this, your more then Princely Donative,
Receive a Faith, p^re as the Hand You give.
Venus, our Marriage-Rites are doubly thine,
Thy Star shines yonder, here thy Tapers shine:
O make the sadder Planets smile upon
Two Souls, blessed, at thy Altar, into one.

Where will you meet, to consummate your bliss?


Hold your Peace now; Nurse, let me speak to this*
To come to a Maid's bed, from which I'm barred
By Sea and Land, must needs be very hard:
But Cupid, into a crossed Lover's heart,
Shoots twice, his Arrow first, and then his Art;
The harder Pass I'll open, with much ease:
For to thy Bed I'll swim these narrow Seas.

How! Swim the Hellespont? You are not able.


Yes, if it were a Sea Innavigable;
When all my Ships scarce safe at Anchor ride,
These Arms shall row me, against Wind and Tide:
Tempests and watery billows fright not me,
Billows of wild-fire I dare swim, to thee.

Since You will needs swim-ore to Europe-side,
A gentle Fire shall be Leander's guide;
That envions Clouds, may not my Love benight,
Upon the Turret I will set a Light,
A Torch, which may a Star hereafter prove,
Seen from all Seas, and called the Star of Love.

Leander, He^o will give audience
To you at Midnight; I must now desire
The assistance of your Courage and your Conduct:
Theam^ (...) Chair; Arcas Commands
Her G^ards; o^r Men are ready for the Charge.

Yo^'l Fight?


B^t (...) the danger's in delay,
So^ldiers, like Chemists, must watch time precisely;
A minute's stay may ruin ^y Design;
Yet to your Sister send one kiss by him.

For the next kiss, the Hellespont I'll swim.


Stredon, Have you got Oil?


Pure, as Rock-water.


Why, then all's ready; when Leander comes,
He'll soon be bathed and noynted; then he'll swim:
I told Celena of her Brother's purpose.

Did it not startle her?


No more then us:
I do not think, that in so soft a Beauty,
The World has ever known a braver Spirit:
She said, a Man, might almost shoot an Arrow
Over the Hellespont, and he that feared
To swim that Sea, deserved not a fair Bride.

What said she, to our beating of the Greeks?


Look here, boy; with this Gold she greets us well*


A gracious Princess, let me kiss her Bounty.
Did she not question thee about Theamne?

Yes, here she's coming to examine thee.


Stredon, your Master tells me, that Orosis
From Sestos brings a Beauty.

But your Highness,
I never saw a sweeter, I have done
My Duty in my Answer, give me leave,
To pay it, in my Thanks, for your great Bounty

Stredon, from Sestos you bring handsome Language:
How long are they in landing, call for Lights,
I'll walk and meet'em.

Here's that trouble saved.


Celena, a new Sister I present.


Madam, we Asians cannot complement;
But I wish you, fair Greek, more Happiness;
Then Greece her self hath Language to express.

Sister, your Ancestors did once enjoy,
A Crown in Asia; then, Greece Conquered Troy;
But to you Trojans now We Grecians yield;
The Court is Yours: Your Brothers have the Field.

I hear, they fought your Guards.


Our Pikes, (that strove
To close, and had your Sea-men in their Grove)
Leander with so brave a courage Charged,
That by their flight the Prisoners were enlarged:
Thorough our Bows Orosis made his way,
And wounding Arcas, won me, and the Day:
For the Archers of my Guard, which Arcas led,
Fought whilst he stood; but when he fell, they fled.

We exerciz'd our men in that Land-Skirmish,
But 'tis at Sea; the Battle must be fought:
Send out a Pinnace to call-in our Fleet,
For, Brother, if the Wind should chop about,
Mentor will land at Sestos; of himself
He's not inclined to fury, but when there
He finds his Friends Inflamed, his Mistress Lost;
Sure 'twill inr^ge him so, as to declare
A Naval War against us: All's at stake.

Swim you to Sestos, when you land again,
Your Fleet shall ride before the Fort: 'Tis late,
The Starry Wain now wheels about the Pole,
And drowsy Midnight steals upon our eyes.

I see, Orosis, you would be a Bed,
And time it is that I should bathe and noyn^.
To put my self into a swimming posture:
Rest to you all.

A Calm Sea to Leander.


You Sea-gods, that still swim the Hellespo^t,
If you take my Attempt for an Affront,
That merits death; Yet make me not a Wrack
As I go, drown me at my coming back.

Now Arcas and Samertes are aboard,
Sure Mentor will not listen to a Treaty?

That was not in debate, his Servant said,
'Twas thought, the Admiral would spare Abydos.

But the Vice-Admiral, that damned old Poet,
(Who has with Poetry infected Mentor)
Musaeus* Voted for a Peace.

Fie, no;
He did not move for mercy to the Princes,
B^t to their City.

These are Mentor's Trumpets.


My Lord, let's meet your Friend, the Admiral.


Enough, Musaeus.


Mentor, I conclude:
Punish not, for a Few, a Multitude.
The guilty Brothers only have conspired,
Why should a Town that's Innocent, be fired?

In public Ruins, who must be involved,
Let Fate determine; but the War's resolved.

My Wound will then be healed: No Balm so good
For a hurt-man, as the Assailant's blood.

Sestos, for thy Affront, Abydos shall,
In Ashes mourn at her Lord's Funeral.

The Brothers are not to be slighted so,
By Us, who their Undaunted Spirits know;
Orosis in the Isthmian Games foiled me,
And Arcas, at this Feast, he wounded thee,
Leander did your Sestian Galleys beat,
And from my Fleet he made a brave Retreat.

Yet, you have conquered braver Men by far.


Ere the Hour-glass run, I hope to end this War.


Great Mentor's Power is equal to his Will.


Friend; Father: Mother, so I'll call you still,
Though of your Daughter I am robbed by one,
The Hellespont and the Winds fawned upon,
Using me worse then Zerxes, when they broke
His bridge of Boats; but this shall not provoke
Mentor to his proud Rage; he chained your Waves,
And whipped your Winds as if they'd been his Slaves.
I'll make them help to play my After-game,
And pay these Princes the just Debt of shame.

And Death, great Mentor, Death; my Lord and I
Live but in hope to see those Pirates die.

The Storm was tedious; Yet I'll not repose,
Nor rest my Men, till I attacque our Foes:
Friend sleep secure, Madam, do you so too*
And when our Enemies believe, they do:
We will pou'r in to Abydos; and bear down,
Like a wild Sea-breach, both the Tower and Town.

'Tis midnight, but noon day looks not more clear,
What, in the name of Venus, should you fear?

That 't will grow dark, and then, dear Nurse, I doubt,
That some ill Fortune may the Torch put out.

Put out the Torch? You may suspect as soon,
That some ill Fortune should put out the Moon:
See, the Torch, sparkling, does good luck betide,
There's a great Stranger coming to the Bride.

Where?


Yonder; where these glittering Billows heave,
Lea^der's neck and arm you may perceive.

That? That's a Dolphin, but she does not bear Leander on her back.


But look you there,
She Ushers to your bed the Man of Men,

Nurse, I'm afraid, that you are wrong again.


Child, take my Spectacles, to help your sight.


Now, now I see him.


Now who's in the right?


I looked to Sea-ward, and he's near the Shore:
See, see; Leander's Pilot, Ship, and Oar.

The Sail, his Vest, is Brail'd: anon 'twill spread,
But now it makes a Turban for his head.

How I did long to see him! Is't not strange,
Wishes, like Winds, should in a moment change?
He comes, and now I long to have him gone:
O Nurse! a Man I dread to think upon:
My trembling heart-strings are upon the rack:
Go, and make some Excuse, to turn him back.

No need of an Excuse; I'll carry word
That Mentor's Landed, and with Fire and Sword,
Means to destroy Abydos, before day,
Unless Leander save it.

Pry thee stay:
Think thou, Leander (under whose command
Abydos prospers both by Sea and Land)
Would leave his Brother; his own Sister, mine,
The Town too, unsecur'd?

'Tis very Fine;
You know not your own mind: Say, I, or No:
What shall I do? Will y' have me stay, or go?

G^, by all means, and tell Leander --


What?


Give me a little time, to think of that.


Ha ha; to stop him you have no more power,
Then I have strength, Child, to remove your Tower,
Whose very Stones will not obstruct his way.
Go, let me hear, what you your self will say.

If I could go, as fast as You have Swum,
At that rate to Leander I would come.

Come not too near; to touch my Sacred Bride,
Would be Profane, till I am Purified;
Of Oil I smell.

That smell will be consumed
In my Rose-Bath; go, bathe, and be perfumed,

Step ^nto that warm Bath; the Cold, I fear
Has pier^'d you.

No; it met a Furnace here:
The water was but Fuel to my Fire;
Still as I lower dived, my Flame grew higher.

Neither cold-Water, nor cold Fear, can daunt
Leander's heart; yet swimming makes it pant.

My Love, you are sore toiled; I did mistake,
Your blood inflamed, does that high Colour make;
Bathe, put your self into a kindly heat,
And then, into my Bosom drop your Sweat.

Why beat the Drums?


Our Fleet, sailed into Port,
Salute our Soldiers in the Citadel.

Then might not You have rested for one hour?


Dear, every minute (now the Wind serves) Mentor
May Land; I go to Sea, to stop him there:
But pray, go You to Bed again; preserve
Your precious Health, with your accustomed Sleep.

No, my Orosis, when I Married You,
My Fortune Married Yours, if you must fight,
I must not sleep; Celena's making ready,
Your Sister goes, What ought Your Wife to do?
Fate's not more fixed then my Resolve: We will live
Happily, or else nobly dye, together;

Incomparable -- What's this noise? Who's there?
Stredon? the News?

Death: Mentor's at your Gates:
Struck with the terror of his dreadful Name,
The Garrison, basely to save their Lives,
Threw down their Arms, the safe-Guard of Your Life:
Castor is still a Prisoner, I escaped,
By Virtue of some Gold: that bribed my keeper;
To Mentor I heard fierce Samertes say,
Upon the sleeping Bride-groom let us steal;
This Slave shall be our Guide (pointing to Castor;)
And in the hot blood of the Ravisher
VVe'l purify my Sister.

Then it seems
They think, I sleep, but they shall find, I wake.

Draw not your Sword, but follow my advice:
They come, play but Your Part, as I'll act Mine;
And with our Plot we will counter theirs: Kneel down.

The Villain kneels to her.


Let's hear his Prayer,
He would not kneel, were not her Fame unblemished.

Humbly I beg, that which I may command:
At Your feet, I confess, my fault was great,
To rob Your Parents of You, but I Use
No other Violence; You see, my End
Is Fair and Chaste, as she, at whom I aim.

An Enemy so generous I forgive.


But You'll revenge me?


Will you not Vouchsafe
Some Love, Some Pity, to a tortured Heart?

Love? Pity? What? To one that durst invade,
My Sacred Father's Promise; and steal me
Out of a Town, which my dear Brother Governs?

Your Brother has so great a Souldier's name;
That 't will be no dishonour to a Soldier,
Who asks his Pardon, for the Crime of Love,
Which Men commit, forced by the Powers above.

Submission wins me.


I'll have Blood, for Blood.


As for the Blood, I drew from noble Arcas,
I'll pay him twice as much, when he'll command,
The Service of my Sword.

Thou shalt not bleed.


Arcas! Samertes here! and Mighty Mentor!
Can Mentor pitch his Toil'es to take a Man?

You are a Beast of Prey; Resist, and dye;
Yield your Arms, and e^pect a legal Trial.

Before what Judge?


The Civil Magistrate.


No, I'll dye here.


Sentence, shall neither pass
From him, nor us; Th^amne only knows
Yo^r Crim's extent, and she shall sentence you,
Upon the place, where you assa^lted her.

Fatal necessity must be obeyed.
Madam, I am your Prisoner.

Soldiers, keep
T^at P^rate safe, till I pronounce his doom.

Great Mentor, from my hand accept this Virgin,


Nature did never make a fairer Jewel,
What Value I have for her --

You expressed
By giving me that Slave; add, if you please
His Sister.

She's yours; What else do y' desire?


A little Sleep, after my frightful Watching.


Retire into my Cabin.


Sir, no Rest
Can close my eyes, till they behold my Parents.

She loves not Mentor; if I take rig^t measures.


Cap^ai^, at Sestos Land my Love, I'll follow,
When we have finished here: Slave, Where's Leander.

He's at Sea.


^ere's his Sister?


You'll find her
In her Bed-chamber, the next Room.

Go in.


They mind not me; in some blind hole I'll mourn;
But you Greek-Dogs, Leander will return.

Celena's in her Bed?


I'll draw the Curtains.


Hold, hold Samertes; she may be a sleep.


And would you wait the waking of a Slave?
Just heaven* I see the Goddess, I blasphemed.

What Goddess? let me see her, for I know
All Goddesses, Cast, Graven, Carved, and Painted:
Save your self, Admiral, Your flight's no shame,
When I fly, Who come armed with Hero's Love.

So, a rash Charge ends in a Panick Fear;
When Conduct (slow, but safe) brings up the Rear,

The little Archer may surprise great Mentor.


Great Mentor! Is there any here so stly'd?


Yes, Madam; I am Mentor.


The Plate-Graver?


The Admiral of Athens.


Other Thieves
Rob Towns, and Houses, but thou steal a Title.

She'll talk you out of your own name, reply.


Her Eyes, like Remoras, have stopped my Tongue,
When it was under Sail:
Musaeus, speak.

Madam, the -- the --


I Vow the Poet's out.


The Admiral suffers an abortive Scorn,
The Mother's shame, which dyes, as soon as born:
As Clouds the Sun, that Name you darken here,
Which over all th'unclouded World shines clear:
Mentor's Sea-Victory, the naked things
Of India, and the painted Briton Sings;
Only sad Persia, the Memorial keeps,
Of her Defeat, and at his Triumph weeps.

How will the Persian's Spleen break through his Tears,
Into a flux of Laughter, when he hears,
That Fleet, that Admiral from whom he fled,
Sailed to surprise a Lady in her Bed?

Silence, and seize her.


Do not, on your Lives.


Touch her, and I'll cut off the saw^y hand.


Disarm them.


Civil Gentlemen I beg,
Before you take the use of my hands away*
That I may drink this Cordial,

Break the Glass,
'Tis Poison, carry her and them aboard:

To Ment^r may I speak!


Not for the Prisoners.


Not for Celena? (come Sir, you'll not find,
Though I have hood-winkt them, that I am blind:)
I know you love Her.

Oh, you think but so?
All Poets have one Fault; they think they know.

You do not Love Theamne, I'm assured,
Or else her Brother had not been secured.

Vice-Admiral, You must have deeper Line,
To sink the Plummet, that sounds my Design.

Farewell, for I perceive, that you intend
At once to change your Mistress, and your Friend.

Friend, dearest Friend, Divine Musaeus, Stay:
Thou know my breast; Would thy Sword knew the way
Into my Heart; My base false heart 'tis now;
'Twas faithful: O Musaeus, Wilt not thou
Remember all that's Good, and nothing Ill,
When thou dost write my Epitaph?

I Will,
If I out -- live you -- but dye fairly then;
Who takes his own Life, merits not my Pen:
How can I write Conqueror, on his Grave,
Who staines his Laurel, and dyes Passion's Slave?

Justice condemns me: He that lives to wron
His Mistress, and his Friends, has lived too long.

But our Lives have determined Periods?
And he that's his own Murd'rer, wrongs the Gods:
The Friends, whom you disarmed, are injured Men*
Restore their Arms, and they'll be friends again.

How can Theamne be repaired?


If She
Love you (but sa^th, that's more then I can see)
You wrong her: But if she your Person slight,
To love another, is, to do her right.

Celena will so false a man abhor.


Yet a great Man, and a great Conqueror;
And if you cannot a soft Maid subdue,
I'll ay, that Art fails me; and Fortune You.

The cowrdize of our Men, preserved the Town.


Nay, if the Soldiers had stood to their Arms,
Without all peradventure, Mentor's Men
Had fired Abydos; thou and I shall now
Live to burn Sestos.

What begets this Hope.


Now that Leander's come, and this night past,
Which proved so dismal to his Family:
He and the Sun, who rise from Sea together,
Promise as well fair Fortune, as fair Weather.

I fear; the Fate, upon his House, will break
Leander's Heart, mine bleeds for brave Orosis.

For fair Celena I have wept so much,
Leander might have swum in my Salt-water.

'Twas well, the Greek Fleet missed him: Some Design
He hammers, by the sparkling of his Eyes.

What a strange active Spirit has our Prince,
He swims the Sea; Yet, landing takes no rest.

I see, to Fury Honour is no Bar:
From Mentor I expected a fair War,
Which unconcerned Spectators might applaud:
In his own Coin I'll pay him, Fraud for Fraud,
That th'Enemy may think our Courage fails,
Take down your Shrouds and put-up Mourning Sails,
Then will the Greeks proud of their Conquest, boast,
We fly to people some unplanted Coast.
At our sad Emblems of Despair they'll laugh,
And all this Day, like true Greeks, dance and quaff:
But when the Conquerours have drunk so deep,
That some lye drowned in Wine, and some in sleep:
The Sestian Garrison we'll over-power,
And with our Sea-men take the Town and Tower:
For to my Wife, at Night I'll swim the Sea,
And open Europe's Portal, wih her Key.
What cheer, my Hearts after this fatal Night?

Sir I hope for a Day of Victory,


For my part, to the Grecians I would loose
One Eye; so with the other I might see
The Conqurours Captive, and the Captives Free.

I ask not questions, as unsatisfied
With either's Courage; I know you can fight,
Like Valiant Men: But tell me which of you
Will be a Woman, to advantage* me?

I look too grim.


For Men there's no access
To Hero's Tower; I'll send my Wife a Letter,
Stredon, Thou'lt carry 't?

Sowed up in my Apron:
And if my Project please you, I'll paint Black;
My nimblest ship-boyes shall be Negroes too,
At Sestos they'll be very serviceable.

Will the Guards pass you?


Into their dull Souls,
I'll strike a pious reverence; telling them
I'm the Aeth^opian Sibyl, come to visit,
Sibyl of Europe, who now Prophesyes
In Hero's Temple.

Very good; from Hero
Receive the Postern-Key, and wait you there,
Till your Boys bring you word, my Fleet's arrived*
Then let-in Castor and the Mariners.
Get me a Pen; and look your Swords be good;
Love shall be writ in Ink: Revenge, in blood.

Thy Freedom, dear Theamne, did not more
Joy me, when I brought thee into the World.

Sons, Daughter, VVelcom home, from base Abydos.


I confess 't was no honourable place
For any of us three; Arcas and I
Were Prisoners there, disarmed by your great Friend.

We heard it.


How my Brother frowns? I see,
He means not to s^t down with his Affront.

How long were you two under a restraint?


We were just brought aboard the Admiral.
When Orders came, for our Transportance hither.

In your Discharge Mentor expressed himself
Your Father's Friend; Some; that Command in chief,
Have punished such an Insolence with Death.

Some will not see a fault, in their young Friends,
That serve as Volunteers, and take no Pay.

No more reflexions, he's severe, but Prudent.


And just, I wish he were; but he detains
Orosis and Celena, though he gave
Them (as a Bride-groom's Present) to Theamne*
Then, Mentor has a Fever, and who knows,
When 'twill please his sick Greatness to be well?
Must our Revenge wait his Recovery?

to Vindicate our Honour, I will write
A Letter for my Slaves.

They shall be drowned,


The Gift's conditioned; I must be their Judge:
What think you, If we had them flayed alive?

No death can be more proper for a Pirate;
When Merchants (burned, and frozen, by both Zone*)
Bring, for their Country, Purple, Gold, and Jewels,
'Tis fit; That he who strips them of that Wealth,
Should have his Skin stripped off.

And She, that shared
The Prizes, let her share the Punishment:
To the Execution I'll ^nvite our Kindred:
Daughter, come-in, let's see, how well you write.

One word; Dost mean the Prisoners shall be flayed?


Would not you, for Celena, intercede?


I Love her.


More (it seems) then you love me:
Was I imprisoned, and shall I not be
Revenged, for an Indignity so base,
Both of Orosis, and of his whole Race?

What Fury has possessed thee? Who am I?
Hast thou forgot Samertes? Shall He dye
Because thou were imprisoned by another?
VVhere's thy old Love, thy Kindness, for thy Brother?

Brother, for You how great a Tenderness
My Heart has, let my melting Eyes express?

Express it, to Celena.


She shall live.


Now but a Pardon to Orosis give;
I'll say, thou art of all thy Sex the best.

A tender Nature should not be thus pressed*
To prejudice it Self; besides, I know
Your temper such; as he, that's once your Foe,
Can never be your Friend* Why then should I
Pardon a Man, You hate?

If he should dye.
Celena would hate me.

Consider, pray;
His Pardon signed, What will the People say?
Theamne by Orosis was enjoyed;
So, to preserve his Life, my Fame's destroyed

I'll stop the People's Mouth.


But I shall sink,
Under great Censure, What will Mentor think?
Him I shall loose.

Undoubtedly; and then,
The best of Maids, will loose the worst of Men.

To him my Father promised me,

He did:
But let thy Brother the cursed Banes forbid:
Thou should not call my Enemy thy Friend,
Much less thy Husband.

But I shall offend,
Our Parents, if I break.

Do but acquit
Orosis; Me^tor will not have the Wit,
To think thee Honest; and then He'll break first.

If I would do it, Do you think I durst?


Dare thou not, for thy Brother?


You'll engage,
To stand between me and my Father's rage?

And Mentor's Fu^y too; though he command
At Sea, I'll make him know, I ru^e at Land,
And that m^ Sister shall be free to choose.

For my self, Brother, I should not refuse;
For You I will -- advantage my own ends:
So flattering Politicians use their Friends.

His Prayers move me, no more then do his Threats;
I will not go.

The Admiral entreats.


Why to his Cabin, Am I not safe here?


You are, but He'll be safer, when you're there:
For, you may bring him Health, I know, you will;
Then make hast, Mentor's dangerously ill.

If any danger of his life you see,
Pray, send for his Physician, and spare me.

My Friend's not sick in Body, but in Mind;
And yet that's curable, if you'll be kind.

Kind, to my Enemy?


Your kindness may
Make him your Friend.

Who has made me his Prey:
No, when the cruel Vulture gripes the Dove,
She cannot hate, but sure she will not love.

But when the Hart the flying Hind pursues,
By yielding, she the Conqueror subdues.

Musaeus, my Ambition is not high:
Let Mentor be Victorious; let me fly.

To him?


To Heaven; if you will but afford,
My hand the timely favour of your Sword.

My Sword for noble uses was ordained.


What's nobler, then to keep a Maid unstain'd?


If that be all the danger you suspect:
I will engage, your Honour He'll protect.

But yet his Passion may deceive your trust.

To Honour Mentor never was unjust,
If he be now, upon my Sword depend;
I am your Guard, and Mentor's not my Friend.

Let's go; but still remember, You are He
I trust, as Guide both to your Friend, and Me.

Theamne is derived from Delphic Prophets,
And like a Prophetess she ends her Letter:
Send me the Prisoners quickly, you had need,
For, you'll not loose your F^avour, till They bleed.
What Answer to this Letter can I make,
But that her just Commands must be obeyed?
The Prisoners to ^heamne were my Gift,
Which 'tis not in my Power now to revoke.
Heaven! Must I send Celena* to be Slaughtered?
Yes, Honour says: Diviner Love says, No:
And should not I offend the Deityes,
To worship Honour by profaning Love?
What shall I do? if I consent they dye;
And my Ingagement's broke, if I refuse.

Celena'^ come


The fairest of her Sex
Comes to be sacrificed.

I am betrayed,


Suspend your Fear, till I awake his Virtue:
From great to Base, Will Mentor change his Style?

Against my Will; what I do, I abhor,
And what she'll suffer, is, the fact of Heaven.

Horrid! Upon the Gods You charge your Crime.


Which is so great, no God will pardon it.


And can a Man so wicked, hope to live?
Draw your Sword.

No; the Guilty, if he fight,
May by misfortune kill the Innocent.

Why then would you be guilty of a Rape,
And make me accessory to your Lust?

That slanderous Lye will justify thy death:
Who poys'ned thy foul tongue? What Villain?

Thou:
Did thou not say, the fairest of her Sex,
Comes to be sacrificed?

I own the words;
But thy Mistake shall not engage our Lives*
Peruse Theamne's Letter, and then bid
Farewell, to fair unfortunate Celena.

Release her, and She'll then be Fortunate.


I have resigned my right, she's not my Prisoner.


Make her your Wife; None upon earth but You,
Can claim an Interest in your Wife.

His Wife?
Had I a thousand Lives, He should not be
My Husband, if he could preserve 'em all:
Render Celena to her Enemies;
Better at once dye, then to be dying ever.

Since to your Bed I must not be admitted*
In one cold Urn, our Ashes shall embrace:
Sail-off my Ship, for Sestos.

Then I see,
The Persian War did but adjourn our Fate;
To both our Lives Her Death will put an end:
You'll not out-live Your Love; nor I, my Friend.

Nurse, I could Vie Tears with that weeping Fountain;
Leander has forgot me.

Do You think,
He can forget his Wife, and such a Beauty?

Ah; Where's the Beauty of a Wife? What Flower
Looks lovely, when 'tis gathered, but one Day?
No since I lost the happy name of Virgin,
Hero is altered, so's Leander too,
The Sea has taught the Swimmer how to change:
His Mistress lives in Asia, he shuns Europe,
And can dispense with his rash Vow to me:
Leander's false.

I'll answer for his Truth.


If he be true, Why does he not come hither?
What answer can you make for his Delay?

Good lack: You long? Can you not stay till Night?
By day he may not Swim.

But he may send,
And so may I; Good sweet Nurse (whilst I write)
Go to the Port and get a Messenger.

My old eyes hardly can find out the way,
Such dark Clouds fly, before the setting Sun:
But, to serve you I'll do my weak endeavour.

Nurse, What's the business?

Child it poses me;
In the Air this Evening, we have flying Clouds
And walking Clouds below: there is without,
AS great black female Shadow ^nd her Spawn:
She says, that she's Leander's Messenger.

She's a black Angel, if she came from him*
Call her in.

Mistress, Ma^am-Devil, Enter.


As I'm alive, 'tis Stredon and his Ship-boyes,
VVas't not well?

Very well; but is this all Leander Sends?


No, Madam, here's a Letter.


Welcome Sweet Image of Leander's thoughts.
My Hero, Before I could swim back to Abydos; my Brother and Sister were
surprised by Mentor, who pretends to Theamne, and means to Sacrifice them to
the Revenge of her Relations. But Fortune, like the Helespont, has Storms and
Calms, bad Hours and good: Hope the best. I'll swim to you at midnight; give
Stre^on the Poster^ Key, he has orders to wait there, till the arrival of my
Fleet at three: then in the head of my Sea-men I'll rout your Soldiers, release
the Prisoners, and Sail-off with Hero and Theamne: This I may safe promise to
those Spirits, which you will infuse into,

Your Leander.



Twas sadly fortuned, but its well designed;
And yet I fear Lea^der's want of fear,
Why will he swim now, whe^ the North-East Wind
Blows-up the watery Glasses with one Gust,
And with another breaks them? Tell me Nurse,
(But tell me true) Dost thou believe, that I
Shall ever see my Lord?

Yes, in your arms;


And Sestian Soldiers kneeling at his feet.


You ^later like Physicians, when they tell
A dying Patient, th^ there's hope of Life.
But for Leander's c^ing, let's prepare:
Give him the Key; the Torch shall be our Charge
This Mantle (held before it, with these hands)
From all the Winds shall Screen that flaming Guide,
Which lights the Swimmer to his clouded Bride.

Sit at Helm, Master, in my Admiral,
But hope not, to Steer me: Sail thou to Ses^s.
I'll swim.

You'll meet a Tempest and be lost:
I am in fear, your Ships may be dispersed

Ships thou dost understand, not Men.


I know,
That if you Swim this Sea, You'll ne'er make Land.

Dare thou dispute with me?


When you thwart Heaven:
Do y' hear how the tumultuous billows roar,
Threatening to overwhelm you on the Shore?

Thou raisest an imaginary Storm;
I see no danger.

I, no hope of safety:
You must not swim in such a boiling Flood.

Villain, I'll swim to Hero in thy blood.


Do, kill me; and that madness I'll forgive:
But shorten not, the Days you have to live.

For all those Days the Sun shall ever light,
I would not lose the pleasure of this Night.

Enjoy it safely, go with us aboard.


No; I have writ and I'll not break my Word


You writ, but no Storm was discovered then:
Now only Death and Horrour's within Ken:
O Sir, if you regard not your own life,
Pity your Sister, Brother, and your Wife.

The folly of thy childish Prayer I scorn;
I, to command the Hellesp^nt was born;
And thou to fear it.

For your sake, I fear
This hideous night, in which no Stars appear.

This dark night Hero's Torch shall be my Star;
The Hours divided, between Peace and War.
Till Two, I'll solace; bring the Fleet at Three:
Gelena and Orosis then I'll free.

You promise, as if you could calm a storm.


That which I promise, Fortune will perform.


To Fortune will you trust your self? She's blind.


Blind Fortune to blind Love was ever kind.


Celena is delivered to Theamne,
And she's as cruel as my Love is fair:
Do Piety and Honour bind a Man
To the performance of a rash Engagement?
All my great Actions this one Act defames.

Thunder against such Piety exclaims,


I hear it, Friend; and do not you admire,
That I'm not struck, when Heaven shoots midnight-Fire?

No but I wonder, you'll not take the Alar'm,
When to your drowsy Valour, Heaven cries, arm:
No, rash Engagement now lies in your way;
You're free to fight.

But sure to loose the Day.
For though the Sestian Governor be young,
His Garrison's well-disciplin'd, and strong:
By making of a Vain Attempt; all those,
Whom I have taught to Conquer, shall I lose?
First let me perish.

Rather first let's try,
The means to live; at last we can but dye:
With our dark Lanterns, Hero's Tower we will View;
We may discover some blind Avenue,
At which our men may enter: if the Tower
And the fair Priestess once be in our Power,
The Town we will force; or such Conditions make,
As they'll not stick to give, nor you to take:
They shall present Celena to your arms.

Her Name, like thy soft Verse, my Senses charms;
My Reason's over-rul'd, not to contemn,
The weak proposal of this Stratagem:
For, Lovers hopes vain Expectation feeds*
Like drowning Men, we catch at broken Reeds.

The Torch is out; Blow, till the Turre^ fall,
Malicious Winds, now I defy you all;
The Torch is out, which we again may light;
But with Leander 'tis eternal night:
Yet there I'll find him.

I must say, he lives;
Or else, I fear, she'll cast her self away:
Have patience, Child, Leander may do well.

No, no; he's drowned; the Thunder rung his Knell.


Too sure:] Why do ye forspeak Leander th^s?
Thunder hurts him no more, then it hurts us.

He's past hurt, and past help, before this time.
Adventro^s Youth, thy Courage was thy Crime,
And hasty Love thy Ruin: a short Stay,
had with thy Navy brought thee safe away:
Did thou not hear the scolding billows rage?
With moving Mountains Why would thou engage?
And rashly, when we might have fixed our Joy,
For gaining of one Hourthy self destroy?
Why would Heaven suffer this, and slight my Prayers!
How unconcerned are Gods in Men's Affairs?
Why in the Temple did I pray and fast,
And on the coals Arabian Incense cast?
Serve Venus? I might bow my knees as well
To Proserpine: For Heaven's less kind then Hell.

She'll run distracted?] Child, 'tis sadly strange,
That you, a Priestess should devotion change;
To Profanation: What? can you distrust
The care of Heaven, and think the Gods unjust?
Will they deprive a sweet young Prince of Life,
Because he swims to bed to his own Wife?
No, they love Man more, then he loves himself:
And in this Sea there's neither Rock nor shelf,
O^ly some troubled Waves; and they'll soon rest,
If you'll ^ut calm the Tempest in your Breast.

Nurse, thou hast laid the Wind: Who would have thought,
Thou had^t been so religious? I am nought,
An impious wretch, for when I was devout,
And prayed, and ^igh'd and prayed, the Tor^h went out.
But dost thou think, that I shall ever see
Leander living?

Do you now see me?
Do y' see this fair calm Morning?

Both inspire
My heart, that was pale ashes, with new fire.
Into his arms I'll fly, with swifter wings,
Then into the East that blushing Day-light springs --
O Horror! horror! Floating by the Shore:
His Body swims: Leander, speak once more?
Oh, Whither is that mighty Spirit fled?
What Not^gs are the bodies of the dead!
See at their pleasure the proud Billows roll:
Those Active Nerves, which did the Sea contro^u.
No Heat, no Motion, now that Bosom warms,
Which lately was encompassed with these arms.
A long, long Farewell to Love's Bitter-sweet;
Death has divorced us, yet in death we will meet.

She'll drown her self? Some Plank, ^ome lucky Fish
Or Fisher, save her: 'tis too late to Wish.
But hark, our Guards upon the Strand I hear;
They'll silence me if I stand crying here;
Life's sweet, though by young Lovers 'tis despised,
By us Old-folks, that know the World, 'tis prized.

No Use of these dark-Lanterns, the Sun shines;
We see our Folly, Madness 'twere to stay,
For Hero's Tower is, like Celena's Heart,
Impregnable.

From both 'tis time You part;
Now when our mighty Lords, the People, write
That you must ^traight return, and shortly fight
The Persian King, whose Navy will transport,
A dreadful Army, and a glorious Court,
And (to revenge his Vice-Roy whom You slew)
A Gallows, to be set-up here, for You:
So vast a Gallows, as it lades two Ships,
With Iron-Chains ballasted, and Steel-Whips,
Prepared for his Greek Slaves; either redeem
Your Country now; or forfeit Your Esteem:
Here stands Celena, fairer Athe^s there;
Think which of these deserves to be most dear.

Love to my Country's Safety must give place,
Before the Sestian Drunkards rise, draw off --
Hold, there's a Postern open.

And the Guards
Are marching in, they see not us, stand close.

Who would have thought, he that had stem'd the Tide,
When cross-Winds fought for the Empire of the Sea,
Leander should be drowned?

Leander Drowned!


This I foretold, and begged of him to Sail;
Yet he would swim; and woe on woe, we see
Hero his matchless Wife (who cast her self
Upon his body, from her Tower) partakes
His Destiny, drowned with her dearest Lord.

Hero a Wife? Thorough the Sea and Shade,
To Hero was Leander's Voyage made,
And hers to him, when floating by the Shore?
I'll make all Mankind their sad Fate deplore,
The wildest Savage when my Verse he ^ears,
Shall o^ce more drown them in a Sea of Tears.

Follow the Bearers; whilst their Bodies burn,
We will take the Brands, and fire this cursed Town.

These were Leander's Men, fall in with them;
And friend, when we have Mastered this strong Piece,
I'll fight, first for Celena then for Greece.

Our Friends are placed; Where's the Executioner?


Setting his Razers; here's the Governor,
Prisoners and Judge.

Bring the Slaves to the Bar,
Theamne take thy place.

Revenge t^y self.


This is the Seat where equal J^stice Sits,
To doom the Guilty and save Innocents:
All crooked Ways and Ends t^is place abhors --
Ha! From the dust, my pious Ancestors.
The Delphic Prophets, to inspire me, rise;
Prisoners, your Case they'll open, and my Eyes:
Blessed Spirits, make, O make me Such a Judge,
As You were, without favour, without grudge.

She's mad?


No, Love; she's doing of her duty,
Listening to our Fore-fathers.

He's mad too.

Thou Act'st it, rarely.


Brother, I'll not hear,
My Father, nor my Mother, in this Cause:
The Gods forbid, that I should Sentence give,
But as their Prophets dictate; Prisoners, live.

I faint; Son, Husband, lead me to my bed.


Prepare Celena, against my return.


Theamne, Thou hast sentenced me to dye.


I but declared that which the Gods decreed.


And in their Sentence, we must acquiesce.


I cannot yet conceive, how this will end,
My Brother loves your Sister, and leaves me,
To court her for him; she's inflexible;
He, violent.

Into my Hand, Leander
Will put a Sword, to prevent Violence:
Did you not see the little Skipper-boy?

That fell down from the Scaffolds, on your neck?


He said, our Sea-men are in Hero's Tower.


This News sounds pleasantly -- Nurse? Why so pale?
How does my Mother?

Well; She's well again,
But your poor Sister --

What of her?


Dead, dead;
Civilly dead, I mean: for she's a Prisoner.

Aboard our ships?


Your Ships and Men are Prisoners
To Mentor, he has taken Hero's Tower.

My Brother, then, would Shine in Steel, not Silks
He looks more like a Bride-groom, then a Soldier;
Celena, Will you please to be his Bride?

My nature cannot brook his Insolence.


But Love's a Fire that softens proudest Souls.


Celena, at your feet I cast a heart,
Used to command, by Love taught to obey.

How Love has humbled him!


My first command,
Is, that you give Theamne to Orosis.

How? Give my Sister to my Enemy?
I will not do it for all which Love calls Pleasure.

Then you may take your Heart up, from my feet*
And give that, where you please; for I will never
Love him who hates my Brother.

Is the Rule
Your Will or Mine? Yield, or I'll force you to it.

How Love has humbled him! My Soul is free,
No Tyranny can over-pow'r the Will.

The Power you brave, I'll make you feel, and marry
The Man you scorn; Guard, Bear her to the Priest.

Celena is my Prisoner.


By what right?
Prisoners of War Yours? Bear her to the Altar.

Forced Love, is --


Sweeter, then Love uncompelled;
Sweet-meats, that drop into my mouth, I loath:
Why stare you? Rogues, Carry her to the Temple;
The Joys of Marriage shall torment her Pride.

Disarm that barb'rous youth, I'll tame his fury:
Sestos, with such a Governor, should fall:
But conquered Sestians know, that I resolve,
To change your Governor, not Government.
I took up Arms now, only to release,
Or to revenge Celena: yet if she
Should have been Sentenced to have lost her life;
I doubted nothing sadder then her death.
Here's Cruelty beyond the Butcher's Skill,
A Marriage to be made, against her Will.
When Drac^ penned our sanguinary Laws;
To punish such, he did insert no Clause,
Crimes of this nature not being understood:
I'll take his Paper and write this in blood,

Great Mentor, pardon him.


Will fair Theamne,
For my Inconstancy give me a Pardon?

'Tis sealed; this Prince and I, are, Man and Wife;
My noble Usage, when I was his Slave,
When he was Mine, made him Theamne's Lord.

Not for our selves --


For our Son's life we kneel.


You, that petition for a life to me;
Must first grant me a Suit.

Command your servants.


Accept of this Prince, for your Son-in-Law.


Is Mentor pleased, that he shall have Theamne?


I am.


Daughter, Is he your choice?


Yes Madam.


Then we will not cross thee; for too late, we find
The crossing of thy Sister, was her death.

If we had left her to dispose her self;
The Hellespont, so named for drowning Hell,
Hero's fate had not made more infamous.

I come now to Love's Infamy, Samertes,
For whom his Friends, more then for Hero, mourn:
Tiresias, I oblige you, for three years,
To banish this rash youth, 't will cool his rage:
And Foreign Schools will make him Understand,
That Love's gained by Obedience, not Command.

Wisdom and Valour adorn Mentor's Mind;
Why, to his Form, was Nature so unkind?

The Garrison (of Sestos, that Guards Europe)
From their old Governor shall take the Word;
So, Friend, farewell: I'll steer my course for Athens.
My Fleet there reinforced; I'll sail to Fight
The Persian Navy.

If great Mentor please,
I'll serve my Country in the Persian War.

Aboard me, You shall fight.


Extend that Favour
To sad Samertes, that with his own blood,
(Or the Enemies) he may wash-out his stain,

To my Friend I must not deny this Suit.


Then on the Persian I'll discharge my Fury.


Lastly ('tis more then you will say to me)
Celena (twice my Prisoner) you are Free.

Victorious Mentor, Freedom make me more,
Your Captive now, than Bondage did before:
I yield my Heart a Prisoner to your Merit;
And that's no lessening to the greatest Spirit.

I stand amazed, at my own Happiness,
To see my Love crowned with this blessed success.

The Stars give Bliss, or Bane, to all beneath;
Last night Mars quartered in the House of Death:
This Morning, Venus, from his arms releast,
Invites us to her Temple and her Feast.

Joy to the Brides and Bridegrooms.


Dear Theamne,
My Sovereign at Abydos you shall reign.

At Sestos. the drowned Lovers carved by Art
That rivals Nature, shall For ever stand
In breathing Marble.

Friend, though few, love Poets
As I do, yet all must confess, no Art
But theirs gives Nature Immortality;
Our Statues, like our selves, old-age decays;
Time cannot ruin what Mu^aeus builds;
He to the World a Poem will present
For Hero and Leander's MONUMENT.

IF The Original had not restrained
The Copy; if our Poet might have feigned:
The Sea should have consented to restore,
His Hero and Leander safe to Shore.
But what a Poet cannot do, You may;
They'll live to Morrow, if You like the Play.

