TIs she in melting Charms that did entice
Revenge and War, to calmed Lullabyes.
By which emboldened unpatron'd doth commit
Her Self unto the World's Protectorship.
And holds experienc't safety, since there are
So numerous Dangers in particular:
So bids farewell, in a disdainful fear,
Knowing, but cares not for a Censurer.
Gilb. Swinhoe.

HEre Lads, here's that that subjects Crowns,
And Ladies to our Lure.

I wonder that Constantinople,
Abounding in such Charms,
Infatuated not our Turkish pride.

It was with them, as Stomachs clogged with Food,
That prized not in their Bulcking State:

I marry Sir,
Their Stomachs clogd, hath sent Repletion to the Brain
That to our good hath lul'd them in security.

Did you not see how all too late, they shook their heads,
And with their idle fingers,
From their Eye-lids, would have brushed the sleep.

Shook it, and brush't it quoth:
By mass, but if they use it thus,
They'll soon wax thread-bare.

Come hold, you'll shake and brush so long
That we'll be shook behind our lawrel'd-army.

Lady, you're here my prisoner,
And if you'll let me lord it but a while
In spoil of your Virginity, You shall for ever be my Conqueror.

Oh Friend, do you conceive that in this huge storm of woe,
When sorrows, like the groaning waves,
Whipped with a spouting Hi^ica^o, Ride posting on the neck of other,
To the deafened shore.
Rush in this narrow Concave of my Breast,
That there is room to lodge a thought of pleasure; Oh! No, no.

Madam, your future state depends not on that is past already,
Constantinople it self doth yet remain,
Although your friends, that in it lived
Are, by our conquering swords sent to declare our valour to the dead*
And if you will subscribe to my desires,
I'll be a means to invest you in that State
That you's acquire greater and nobler Friends.

What hath the slaughtered Ghost of some dear friend
Survei'd your noble Actions in the town;
And in requital sent you here, to act a deed of worth,
And reap the prayers of a perplexed maid.

Oh Madam! How high will our victorious Prince
Judge of his Victory?
When with the great Imperial of the East
He hath a Jem that makes a foil of Nature:
And what art thou that with thy misty breath
Damps this bright Sun?

Oh! noble Sir:
Did you but knowthe foul contagion he hath breathed,
And how his Lungs hath wrought,
To increase the raging sea of my affliction,
No woman groaned at your Nativity,
If that you be not glad at my deliverance.

The wages of my toil; the cordial of my
Scattered blood spilt in the Enterprise;
And would you thus be reave me?
Then never more shall this my sword
In field cut titles for the god of War:
When as my fainting spirits did require
A whiles repose within her quickn^ng breast,
She did deny and falsely rates me thus.

Villain, but that my spirits all
Are charmed with noble pity to this maid;
And passion, stifled in remorse,
Lies swooning for a while:
I'd hack an Epitaph upon thy flesh
That all might shun thee.

'Tis strange Revenge is acted upon me,
That I in courtesy must be constrained
To love my loathed Enemy.

Madam, Be pleased to walk, and see your self deceived.

I would I could.

Welcome great Prince,
Me thinks thy restless blood,
Like the disheveld burning locks of Phoebus,
When he careers the circuit of the Heavens,
Darts forth such Rays of burning spirit
That crackles the world in astonishment.

Friends, Who's lost a man in this successful War,
Amongst these pampered Broods; By our command
Let him take three for one;
Let their enslaved lives pay satisfaction for our blood.

All thanks to our deserving Prince.

Great is the business that's in hand;
Therefore let's about it.

A gracious Prince.

Sir, Will you venture?

Is not the pressure of this mighty wo
Enough to sink my fainted spirits?
But by your mocks you'll add to it.

My high-born Lord,
Let all the Tragic Fancies in the world
Be true in me.
Let sorrow sink between my bone and marrow,
And may all tender soul^ mock my distress
If I so mean:
I wonder that your Lordship staggers thus.

I know you're honest.
How dull thou't seem to be,
To strange that I do stagger?
I am sure the Leaden Clasps of sleep,
That do shut in the Golden Story,
Locked not thy Pent-houses
But that thou saw this huge ov'r-bearing storm,
And yet dost talk so strange.

O Sir! When you should make return of praises
To the gods for your deliverance;
Then to precipita^e yourself in wilful danger:
When an affront of mercy,
And might, deduce the never ended plagues of Heaven,
In showers on your head.

Ah Fool! D^'st ask if I will venture,
That nothing have to lose,
Unless this spounk of life, slighted as much
As she that hangs upon her satiated Lovers neck,
Who loathing would be gone.

But, dear my Lord,
If that you spurn at mercy, And defy the gods,
They'll draw your loathed thread of life
To Nectars broach,
And add destruction every moment.

Away: Thou never readst the maxims of the Wise,
That things at their acquired height descend again:
And when at full perfection,
Do admit no increase.
Sound the unfathom'd Sea of my distress,
Measure the unbounded limits of my sorrow,
My Native Soil, my dearest Country sack't
Our great Imperial, whose reflex
Rivaled the Sun, and shone throughout the Earth*
Lies smothered in her dust;
And my dearest Friends promiscuously
Lie mangled in the fo^getful heaps.
Now might I here prick down a period to my woes,
Me thinks I could sustain.
But oh! oh!
I see a ragi^g stream, a mighty flood
Out-bearing all its Banks,
Will quickly sleep my patience to a sop:
My Love, dost think she lives?
Fond, she cannot die:
Her soule's in me, and mine in hers reciprocal:
So while I live, she cannot die;
But I may die in her: but I'm alive,
Therefore she is not dead.
Then I'll go seek her here.
The contaminous Bed of this grim Tyrant
Shall not de^ain her from me:
And, e're I'll go without her,
I'll leap destruction in the face,
And k^ss the Instrument of my decease.

My Lord, I have ^laid your passion,
And now in reason would confer with you;
Strangers we are, and now in this new Conquest
Each eye labours for new discovery:
The Language we are strangers in,
And pregnant Wits will sift us to the bran;
Therefore amongst these ru^al Hinds
That nothing understand, here in the Suburbs
Let us abide:
Until the pregnant time deliver up the truth.

Well, my great desires I'll curb,
And go along with thee?
Thee alone survivour of my friends.

Madam, I have puzzled the Invention of Arithmetic, --
And find the sum of your perfection
Too great for my receipt:
Therefore to them that better can esteem your worth
I'll render you:
For me to accumulate so rich a Jem,
Were for to lame our Princes Victory,
And a disloyal Fact:
So for your greater honour, and mine esteem,
I will present you to him.

O Sir, You lame your Victory indeed,
And make a light esteem of it,
In poysing me with it.

Lady, 'tis true: the water i^ its quantity,
Is more then the refined spirits;
Yet that's made up in the surpassive quality of them.
So in my drunk-opinion it doth seem
The extracted purity of all the East,
Is ^entred in you.
And for to keep you from my Princ^, were greater loss
Then our received Alcaron,
The which I'll never do.

Sweet Sir, Will you proclaim your error,
And make (of invalidity) your yet esteemed opinion,
And make my else unhappy self hated by every one,
What can you think the Victor of the East
That sits Competitor with Phoebus in his glory,
Will be so blinded, to dote upon his slave,
Where there is no allurement,
Unless his Palate out of relish,
Embrace my salted lips for a recovery.
Recall your scattered judgment,
And lose not your esteem.

Madam, I am not destitute of sense; nor do I dream:
I'm sure 'tis real that I see;
So if you'll go along with me,
I will present you honourably: if not,
I will declare the Cabin where the Jewel lies,
And let the Emperor picked himself:
And so farewell.

Stay, patience but a while,
Give me but three days space,
And I will strive to stop these nigh exhausted Fountains,
And recollect some smiles, the better to adorn your presentation.

So long I wait your leisure, and wish you well advised:
So rest you joyful.

And you the like.
When thrice the burning Carbunckle of Heaven
Hath hit upon the insulting Waves,
And when he would hath thrice been
Mantel'd up in Black.
Must I? But oh disloyal thought!
I am glad thou hast met affection,
Whose Loyal Flame, hath to thy primitive
Non-being reducest thee.
If espoused love, my Lord Paleologus,
Hath yet survived the ruins of his Native Soil,
And should behold me prove inconstant,
How would the sacking of our brave city,
The death of all his Friends, ^enew themselves
In a more Tragic Scene?
Oh! my Soul! that thou wer^ here,
That which of us were strongest, might support
That others grief a little.
Well! I do find my exterior Senses all,
Have a discharge from their great covering soul,
For to suspend their Faculties a while;
Therefore I'll hunt my rest.

What think you, Lords,
If we transfer us to Constan^inople?

If all things sitted were, we like it well.

Your counsel's good:
B^sides, our Conquest made more absolute,
F^om her sweet seated Turrets we may pry
Into the Affairs of Europe, and the bordering Asia,
And sit an Eye-sore to the Christian Foe:
I would it were dispatcht.

My gracious Prince, the Leaden foot of Time
Must stamp some days upon your back
Ere this can be effected: some great Commander
With a power must here reside,
To snafle the pressing crest of this imperious brood;
And many things of great import
Are yet to be resolved.

'Tis true; therefore, your Majesty must court
Your patience yet a while.

To that same purpose came we here
To argue and determine:
But since you are all agreed, that it becomes our State to go,
We do adjourn the Court a while.
And, in the interim, consider of our great Captains to be left behind.

My Lord, the tempest's great, where none escapes the Rack,
The Battail's sore, where none survives to give report.
The great revenging hand of Fate
Hath not pursued your joys unto the utmost;
Nor hath the flame of their great rage
Dried all the Fountains of your bliss; One yet remains,
Whose cordial springs will cool, the inraging passions of your blood,
The fair Irene lives.

How! Hath the intoxing magic of her brow
Conjured the influence of her birth?
Hath the impression of her purer spirit statu'd the Fates?
That the stern sword of great Revenge falls down in homage,
Fearing his Name unjustly threatening such.

Do you intend to wing't, on your own breath to her?

O that I could but fleet it in the Air a while invisible:
I'd fly aloft above her head, until the neighbouring Air
Filled with the sweet perfumes of her,
Like Africa Birds stifled me down.

My Lord, Aire's but a vapour;
And while you vapour an Addition,
The substance may evapourate.
The well composed Body of your Parliament must act
As well as the Lord Speaker; e're you be better.

Act: O! I act Wonders, Nature, and Arts be stairs
To my design.

Oh Sir!
I dread the Hawking Eye,
Of this imperious Victor;
I doubt some of his fawning Spaniels
Will discover your rich Game.
Which once but raised, I tremble at the event.

What if he seized her here below,
The ardent flames of our so chaste desire
Will mollify his horny talents so,
That he I surrend his seizen.
And if he sore the Clouds with her
I'll make a Daggers point spur to my soul
To post to him.

Let us prevent all this,
And in the Sun-shine make our hay:

Come, make hast, I'll be ruled by th^e:

Then we, disguised as we are,
Will venture through these Gates.
I know her Lodging well;
I, as I am, will go your servant;
And you, for an escaped Brother of hers:
And then when you are each informed of others state,
We will consult what best is to be done.

Come in hasto.

But I beseech you call home
Your banished Reason, in this same tickle point.

I will, let's go.

Madam,
I hope your wayward thoughts are all removed,
And your own inclination, courts you now.

Tis true Sir: my thoughts are not the same;
For every minute thoughts do change,
And for my inclination, tis too bashful for to court me.

Madam, Weighty Affairs are in transaction,
'Tis not a time to complement:
But briefly to declare; Will you, or will you not?

My dearest sister,
Had I but dreamt this unexpected joy,
Would have surprised thee thus,
I had rather chose confinement for the day
Then thou'st beheld me.
Arise, Sweet-heart let us rej^yce we met.

B^other (...): Broth^r Tim.

My dearest Brother,
How doth the cordial R^yes of thy (...) love
Restore my yielding spirits?

Sweet Sir, this is the effect of Natures consanguinity,
Make them mistake themselves;
So I presume a S^ppliant for them,
That you'll a while withdraw:
That they more freely may converse
Of their great Parents, and their Kindred gone.

Sir, Great's the respect I always bear
To spirits so nobly q^alified:
Therefore, for me, enjoy the place,
And freedom at their pleasure.

My Lord,
This worthy Gentleman is well content,
That you more private should discourse your miseries.

We thank you Sir;
And most of this our private conference
Shall be to study a requital,
For your high respects.

The freoness of your favours, Sir,
Makes me a sturdy Beggar,
To beg the obliegement of this day:
And if you will, before the Mountain tops
Be bcon'd with the S^n,
Show to the Nighted Vails
The days approach,
I'll smile on your desires.

That's laugh at my delay;
But this one night I'll dream away,
And then behold the final issue
In time to be more wise.
Madam, ^he reciprocal regret
I have of all your woes, command me:
And so in expectation take my leave.

What hath thy near (...) Dart^ of beauty
Slain th^ revengeful ire of all gr^m (...) that did approach (...)
Were all the bloody and revengeful spirits on earth,
In general rand vouz'd, there is ^ beauty,
Such noble charms o^ pity in thy look: if shown,
They'd all ashame dis^erse like heartl^ss H^ndes.

My noble, and most constant Lord,
I love you more, then I can tell you ^o:
Nor will I vent Encomiums of your praise,
It were to lame your worth:
For your h^roick Actions
Will themselves engrave perpetual Epitaphs unto your praise:
Let us not stand and muse the fruits the enjoyment brings.
But act and stir to bring the enjoyment,
The state of which is desperate.

Fair, and discreet, pull down that Cypress Vail,
And make an Artificial Night:
For madd-men soonest recollect in darkness.

If I am mad, and pulling down that vail, make night,
O that I might within that shade, Her Arms the chains,
Lie Bedlam'd up for ever.
Prithee Demostheues act for me now, and when I have injoyd her,
I shall be capable to thank thee.

Well then: to morrow she must give her full resolve;
And as for me, I think it meet, she should most cheerfully
Present her self unto the Emperor.
In all obedience to his will, let her prolong his enjoyment
Of her, so long as possibly she can. Mean time, you and I
Will wander into Hungary: I know you'll find acceptance
Correspondent to your port; because you are like Enemies
Unto the common ^e. Nor do I doubt but your endowments
Will accumulate a mass of friends.
Then in prefixed time, with a strong guard in Turkish habit,
You may so nigh, as possibly you can, approach this City,
Where she, in her disportive liberty, taking the Air
At the appointed place may be surpri^'d; and carried successfully:
All which I wish performed.

O would it prove so!
I would joyfully take farewell of that lip,
And fancy, that mine own retained a remnant
Till I saw her.

Honest Demosthenes,
Thou hast declared the likeliest way:
But oh! 'tis straight and rug^ged
For me poor weak distressed Wretch
To wander in the absence of my Sun:
Thou, thou, my dearest Lord,
O sad! Alas to think! What odious
And detested company, must I befor^'t confer with
When you are gone?
How shall I reel 'twixt hope and fear?
And stagger on the Rocks of Despair,
Benighted in calamity and woe.
But longest nights e're now have had their days,
And I in patience will expect the Sun of my prosperity.

Oh! Oh!
Despair prevails; my Infant-hopes lie dying:
My soul of joy, 'tis like to be ^ redious night
Before thy Rays of Beauty, reflex't by (...),
(...) forth a morning joy.

Sweet Pair,
The sharpest Drugs are of the healthiest operation:
Oft from a cloudy morn,
Ensues a glorious day: Your grief I hope is at the height:
And, in enjoyment, will afford a pleasant Theme
For your Discourse.
See, see, the restless Steeds of Phoebus bright,
Hath quenched their burning thirst i^ the great Ocean,
And freshly rows for this days task,
Telling all s^ln contents, It's time to part.

Like as some beauty, through a mourning Vail,
So seems the Sun muf^'d in yonder Clouds:
My thinks she only seems a Torch
Prepared to attend the Funerals of some mighty man.

Thou more contemned ^ight,
Than is the Dead-mans Torch,
Within the secret Monument! The Sun shines forth,
Which only lights friends to their last farewell:
I would some new born Phae^on had whipped thee from the Sky
Down to the restless Ocean,
That thy diffused Rays might there have been exstinguisht:
Then might I here the Prince of pleasure raing'd,
Unenvied' cause unseen of the mali^ious world.

See poor Demosthenes
The alone partaker of our griefs,
Surprised with equal passion,
Like us in a Letha^gick Muse, forgets the time.

Come, come, our fiery passions are too great
To suffer cold Distempers thus to stupefy.

Blessed be that Reformation,
And collected manhood: take leave in heart,
'Tis far spent day.

Me-thinks the purity of the great Globe
Of Heaven and Earth
Is circumvented all within mine arms:
Can I from thee, thou Universal Spirit be banished?
No, the pure refined Imaginations of my Spirits,
Will still be active, in creating thee anew.
Oh! the ^avisht pleasure of this Kiss
Makes me despair, the enjoyment is so full, my bliss is at the height:
My Soul farewell.

Lady, give me a farewell of your hand,
And Heavens smile on thee.

Farewell my Love; farewell my honest friend;
Good Fares prosper your speed.

Farewell delight, pleasures adieu,
He's gone, by whom you to me did accrue:
Go where you're welcome, and may be
Enjoyed your course, as you have been by me:
And when you h^ve wheeled the world about
Returning chance, I have found Lovers out.
Till then I'll mou^n, and mou^ning sing
Though I be loved, and courted of a King.
Come in:
Save you Madam:
A noble Captain, desirous to accomplish our great triumph,
Hath b^az'd your beauty to the Emperor,
Who doth by me his messenger, invite your presence*
And for this purpose, I, with a noble Guard,
Such as become your State attend you.

Sir, He takes my beauty at a disadvantage;
For, with some friends, h' as past the time till late last night,
And am not yet accomplish: to see his Majestly.

Really Lady, We have command not empty to return.

I must, and will obey his Highness commands.

Where had this perfection,
Who not enjoyed, lames our great Conquest.

Dread Sovereign,
I saved her from the Embraces of a common slave,
That would have wrested her to his desire:
And pricing her, I found her only fit for your great self;
And I in duty and obedience, have told your Majesty of her.

Thou shalt not lose by it, how ere it hap.

Great Emperor:
Your Vassal humbly prostrate,
Wa^ts your Highness pleasure.

Lady, Great,
Your perfections are too heavenly,
And ill besit to g^ovel upon Earth:
Be pleased to r^se.

How ere it is my duty, your Greatness
D^th command me.

'Tis st^ange the fatal breath of our great Guns,
Together with the smothered Air
Of your down tumbling Fabrics,
Should have concealed this beauty;
Which if the mighty Globe should crush together
Contai^s such sacred Rays, would dart into another world.

Most mighty Sir:
The best of my deservings
Have near attained the honour of your presence:
What shall I think of this your praise?
It is your Highness pleasure,
With these Hyperboles to whet your Eloquence on me,
A poor unworthy subject.

Madam,
The great distrust you have on me, I value not,
For 'tis a Maxim wise,
To try before you trust:
But the debasing of your self
'Tis petty Blasphemy, and grieves me much:
For know, the pleasures of Court,
With all the best of us you shall command.

The Bashaw of Natolia
Attends your Majesty.

Well! What's his great heart?
But go, I am at leisure.
Madam, Your look's so full an Academy,
Where the sweet Discipline, so quaintly is abridged;
That in this little gap of time, I flatter
Me a true Proficient.
Me-thinks my unbridled Nature,
Is so sweetly calmed.
That I could cringe, and bow before a beauty,
And call a moderate blush into this countenance
Which heretofore sparkled destruction,
And pursue my Lips into a chirping smile.
Which heretofore moved only in the accents
Of command, and death.
Under correction, my beloved,
I'll exercise before we part.

Your Vassal is rejoiced in her obedience.

I find change.
This touch yields greater pleasure
Then if my brows were circumvented
With the Imperial Crown of all the Earth:
Welcome Natolia.

Great Sir:
Me-thinks you have forgot Constantinople.

Hum! You're almost turned a Prophet:
Why well may I forget that great Imperial now
When that her Crown lies here.
I am sure Hadrianople now
Contains the imperial M^stress of the World:
But quick, assemble our great Council all,
I will converse of it a while.

They are, in a moment, as one man
Prepared, to attend your Excellence:
I will go hasten your commands.

My mighty Name, and wand^ing Spirit
Which heretofore, scorned confinement
Within the Lists of the wide World;
Are by this Sovereing beauty, now so captivate,
That they would wish restraint
Within the narrow Concave of her Breast for ever:
And could I, but unrivaled, in her Affections
Reign Lord Paramont, in freedom void of danger:
I'd throw my inferior Conquests from my hands,
And spurn this g^lt^ temptation, from my brow,
The Beggarly Rewarder of my emptied Veins:
I'm called to Council,
What make I there? A Statue to fill up a place;
For here remains, my Life, my Soul, and Spirits all,
^'d fast in Golden Manacles;
Whose charming bondage is so sweet,
That were I sure, that Sirene-like
'swould bring me to destruction,
I'd not relinquisht:
I le send for her; and from her Lips
Partake so much refreshment:
So, cordelize my S irirs, till I return:
So ho, there;
Go court Irene; here in heart.
I shall, great Sir,

Dread Sir, the Royal Court attends you.

Are they so soon in full Assembly?

Full halt an hour ago, Great Sir:

Withdraw:
Great places have a Court of trouble,
I must forsake my happiness a while,
I sent to take my leave of you.
Before the Leaden foct of Time
Hath pres^ two Glasses ^orth, I will ret^rn,
And here expect you.

I will attend your Greatness.

I wonder of our forward Prince.

He was not wont to do so:
Was there a messenger dispatcht?

Yes: and returned, and says he's coming.

I, but that forward man of War
Is stopped with the strong Charms of an assuring Remora:
But soft, he's here.

My trusty Lords, I have loitered my engagement,
And I'm sorry that your expectations will prove fruitless at this time
Through present indisposedness, of my infirmity,
I only came for to excuse my self,
And to adjourn it till another time,
And till our further order, in your own time, dismiss:
So fare you well.

Prosperity attend your Majesty.

A Remora in Land Na^olia, 'tis strange
And yet 'tis probable; for the flect is monstrous.

Is't possible the Darts of that blind B^y
That wounds none, b^ ^oway breasted Girls,
And you'^ his Muliers, hat^ pierced his slee^y Spirit.

I am afraid since the reverberating Harness was hung by,
The weaker Instruments hav^ made impression.

Then we are like to have a crew of mon^rel Warriors quickly*

Let us depart, to pray for Reformation.

Absent, till you are called.
Madam, Am I not now a full a^complisht Courtier,
That can keep t^k with time.

And have been, since your riper years
Brush^ ch^ldishness away, I do believe, great Sir,

No, fair one,
I was rude as the unbridled Camp,
Stern as the pale Revenge,
Fierce as the god of War:
My Spirits all were lined in proof
Impenetrable to remorse.
Witness the ruful Ruins
Of your stately ^own;
Which dest^n'd to its fatal period,
Had not the Wit for to present you.
For had the piercing Eloquence of your bright look approach^
My martial senses all, as they do:
Esteminated would have sunk
Below the dreadful Steel;
I should have crept for a revival
In the Lap of Venus.

Oh Sir! Had my great Kindred (...),
My state and fortunes stood upright,
Which by the Iron hand of War
Is sh^unk to nothing^ I might in some sort he deserving.

Why doest repent, that cannot be recal'd,
Thy slaughtered Kindred? thou rather should rejoice;
For in Exchange the Power of (...) lies at thy command,
And in the lieu of thy consumed fortune
The Riches of my Realm, I do estate on thee:
And hence do court, that thou'^t embrace the
Affections of a King;
And guild our Turkey with so fair a Queen.

This is an indigested Passion (in your Greatness)
Which seen in its own flattering glass
Delights a little;
But looked on with the piercing Eye of Reason
Proves odiously informed:
Then loa^h'd Hate succeeds, and I with the in^el^ble Characters
Of ne'er expired infamy,
With wonder (...), through the World.

Sweet Soul:
It's thy Charms that hath surprised me,
I dwell inseparably in thine (...),
And not give time to Reason to consult with me.
Sweetheart, prepare to yield, and I'll go frame Petitions,

Do, good my Lord, and recollect your self,
Wh^le, for your good, I am obstina^e.

I wonder what delight
Our Emperor hath found out, that he contemn^ the Establishment
Of his mighty Conquest.

'Tis certain, that same Remora
That great Natolia spoke of.

And do you think that he's surprised with the soft Charms
Of an effeminating Love?

Why not?
Temptation easily gains onidleness
The nimble courser whiles she sweeps
The Beesom of the yielding Air, rides safe;
But while recours^, she sits p^uning on a bow,
Death, from the deadly Level of a Gu^, arrests her.

'Tis true, While death and deep destruction
Were his Objects,
He looked unto his safety:
But the sweet Lullabies of an alluring Peace
Hath epileps't his active Spirits,
And kee^s him cradl'd in Security.

O that some Enterprise would wait our great Designs,
That with a fearful Larum he might be awaked,
And scared to fall asleep again.

O but 'tis dangerous nibbling with the couchant Lion.

But soft, I hope I have prophessed:
See there a Post in haste.

Stay, I see News:
Go you, excuse my promise to my Love.

'Tis my best honour, to discharge
Your Majesties Commands.

What means the blood
To post so from thy face?
As if it rid some deadly
Message to heart.

It signifies my deadly Errand:
For know that your neglected Bands
Are a prepared Banquet
For the Birds of prey,
And with their mangled Corps
Manure the Hungarian fields:
Who, proud in triumph,
Have made a Bone-fire of your Borders.

Well^ I'll go raise a storm
Shall drive the flame back on their faces.
Away, command Natolia hither:
Go you, bring my sweet Greek:
What doth the Hungrian Power
Consist of?

I judge they are 20000.
With an accomplished Leader.

Fie: they ^ be a point so small,
As will not be discerned by my great Power.
They are (...) few to satisfy my great Revenge.

Great Sir: You're pleased to talk of points,
And they are a sha^p one.

Withdraw Sir, till you're called.
Come, come, my Soul, I'll tell thee wh^t;
Although there is some fa^al Meteor dropped from the Sky,
That sets great Spirits on burning;
Yet such is the sweet fruits of calm Peace, lent me by thee,
That were there now a shoak,
Wherein the state of all the world contended:
And would my presence dart capivity to all,
I'd not suspend ^he greater Conquest of thy love
For half an hour.

Oh that your Passion should transform your Reason thus,
To do^e on me your captive slave;
Who's very Bonds were Honour unto me.

Have pity Lady, I am conquered,
Shout fo^th no more denials;
For while you do my thoughts in pleasing doubt,
Make me forget my self?

W^ll! I will leave you now to better company.

But not so much desired, Natolia;
The Body of our Peace,
By the Hungarians, hath received a wound,
And here hard by the fatal P^st Call him here.

What are the fortes in Hungary lost?

They are not only lost, but the insulting Foe
Triumphs over all the Bord^rs.

Great Sir,
This Wound neglected
Festers to your mighty danger.

I know 'tis not so great that we should fear;
Nor is't so small, as for to be neglected:
Therefore, forthwith, see that our Council be assembled.

I'll cause them wait your pleasure.

My trusty Servitor,
'Tis not so much your vowed Order,
Nor the inherent quality of faithfulness
Unto your Queens;
But 'tis the honesty and truth which I discover
In every action of thee,
Which brings me for to discover
The greatest secret of my Soul unto thee.

Madam, if ought lie in the compass of my poor power
For to redress, it's done at your command;
And if it do not,
It's lie promiscuously, as in the Gra^e,
Enfolded from the world (...).

I hav^ so full a confidence in thee,
I will not seek an O^h to tie thee to it.
Knew then, my trusty friend,
I have a noble Lover
Whose constant heart, with mine, reciprocal is placed:
He Pilgrims now in the Hungarian Court,
Begging assistance of some Martial Spirits,
In stealth with him to approach these walls;
Where I at his appointment,
Under the colour of my private Recreation, in the air,
At his appointed hour, and place, was for to meet him,
And be conveyed from hence:
He thought your Emperor, as himself,
Would amorously have 'tane delay:
But oh! my woe, 'tis otherwise:
For where Petitions faintly do retire
The greatness of his Power makes way:
Therefore, my honest friend, go find
My Lord Paeologus by name.
Declare my state, which thou right-well dost know
The time will not permit me write.
Take this, and in Post-haste depart.

Now by the m^ghty Prophet Mahomet,
The hairy Scalp of my dead Father,
And by the Emperors Sword,
I'll act with all my Power, and straight about it:
Farewell, good fortune be thy speed.

Alas poor harmless Maid,
The period of thy hopes rely
On the successful Journey of a Nobleman:
But soft, here comes the interrupter of my joy.

What is Perfection reti^'d into Heresy,
And leaves the World quite destitute:
My Soul, let me partake.

Most Royal Sir,
The best of my Endeavours
Are homage due to you.

Tell me, what means thy unmannerly intrusion.

Pardon Sir,
Your mighty Council waits your pleasure:
Still these harsh News do mingle with my pleasures:
Farewell Heart.

What do you think, that drunk with blood,
They desperately reel on us.

My life for it, they are so flesh;
They'll pay their Nature's Tribute, but feed on us.

Soft: here comes the whining Captive.

Alas! I fear the consequence of these bold words.

What think you Lords of this same Scar?
Who's bent to go a Chiru^gion for it?

Your Self's the great Physician.

Away: it scarce requires the help of an Apothec^y,
And tell you me of it?

But our great Lord:
Your presence will g^ve quicker remedy,
And satisfy your great Revenge the more.

Fie, faint Scars, and inconsiderate reply:
Do yo^ not know the petty Conquest of their Nation
Would not acquit the charges of my Train,
Should I go forth?
Away, forth go you:
Prepare sufficient strength;
And let this tinkling News ^o more trouble my calmed Spirits:
Go all of you, assist in speedy levying of a Power:
Farewell.

Fie, fie,
That the lustful flames of a lascivious Wench,
Should burn the great remembrance of himself to chaff,
Which now is made the sport
Of every vulgar breath.

And must his awful Harnish hang contemptible in rust:
And must that b^o^d that hung ov'r Christendom,
Like a Malignant Meteor,
In ca^kered dust, be food to moths;
It must not be: Sold. Nor shall not be.

What doth deject Natolia so?

That which I would, but cannot remedy.

Let us conjoin in one, and help our selves.

Well! 'tis of too great concernment to be rushed into.

I will go wade,

And so will we.

Come, come, thou Center of my Peace,
Even now while restless Spirits roam the World,
Seeking the noblest blood,
To engrave their Characters of fame.
And while the nimble Posts, whip on each other,
With tidings of my danger:
While in thy bosom laid, I joy in peace,
And, peacefully enjoy, the fulness of delight:
Which mi^ht I but unrivaled still enjoy,
I freely with this mighty Ball, subverted were to its Original:
But speak my Soul, can thou affect?

O mighty Sir, to admiration!

Nay, rather to fruition,
Which if thou can, no longer linger our delights,
Here is a pious Mufty, which for the purpose I have brought
To join our hands as well as hearts:
And so infamy of stolen contents^ may turn to honourable enjoyment.

Oh mighty Sir I since you are serious,
I do beseech you give a precedent of yielding,
By granting me but one Weeks respite,
To beg from our great Deity concurrence to your Yoke:
From under which, till Death, there's no redemption;
And then my (...) fruits,
With all the best of me reap at your pleasure.

Great Emperor,
This her Petition, in honour, cannot be denied,

Nor any: Even my life lies at her mercy:
I'll go, invoke the Sun to haste,
And check the mi^u^es of their slowness.
Oh! How the (...) of Greatness rides on a rotten Cable,
Subject to every flaw of malice,
And impetuous Billow of Rebellion;
O^r mighty Prince, but now,
Rid on the neck of an imperial Conquest:
But oh! one fatal change: he's pulled from thence
By the seducing Charms of whining love;
And, in a probability; of reducement into nothing,
To have his awful Majesty flouted by common (...)
I wonder that the wheeling Orb^s amazed
Stopped not their course at this change,
And all the World stand hush^ in admiration.
Poor, and infatuated Prince:
We told thee, this would rowz thy infatuated spirits,
And who could stand the fierce return of them;
And yet me-thinks, ha^s made good use of life
That uses it for to reclaim thee:
Stand loyal heart:
Welcome Lords,

What solitary Muse possesses thee Natolia?
What hast thou plotted a deliverance?

I rather think he is reciprocal,
And sleeps with drowsy state.

I have not slept, nor was my fancy idle,
I have been ruminating this design,
And horror seizes all my spirits to dream on the attempt.

Natolia, 'tis no disloyalty:
He ha's thrown d^wn his awful Sovereignty,
And do^es to be a Subject.

What will you drive at?

Let go the R^ines to the unbridled Soldiers,
W^o utterly disdain a Queenly Monarchy;
And if he will not be reclaimed, divide the Crown amongst us.

My very good Lords, and noble Friends,
I know there's none of you, but would embrace his death
Before the name of murderous Traitor;
Which, by this horrid act, will soon grain it self on you and your Posterity.
That should your brackish Cisterns tumble forth Oceans,
It would not wash it off.
There's many ways to be attempted, before we do deflower our Maiden Nation;
With the unmatched stain of Kill-Kings:
And blessed be the Fates, I hope there's one.

I'll know his Errand:
Sweet Sir, will your great haste permit you stay,
^o tell us what's your haste.

My Journey's at an end, since great Natolia's there;
For he, as well as I, may tell the Emperor, that his new Conquests stagger:
And that the Paeloponesian Lords, in general Rendezvous, ^ith a great Force,
March to endanger his new Conquests.

Post on, declare it to him.

This is the utmost period of our expectation,
He'll now awake, or he's quite dead unto himself:
He certainly abhors the Rebellious Greeks so much
That he'll disdain this Saint-like Charm for it.

No: I do rather fear her witching tears will cause remorse,
And they shall have mercy for her sake:
But lo some News!

My Lord Natolia, the Emperor, i^ haste, requires your presence:
Farewell, my Lord.

Even there's the opportunity we wish for:
Behold the Captain of the Janisaries, and many Companies with them.

I'll speak to them.
Welcome great Captain,
Where tends your m^rch?

No march: 'tis not^an Age to talk so rufly,
We will walk unto the Palace:
There to hang up our useless Weapons,
And then return to play.

Away, you're part of it.
You have not heard the News, the stubborn Greeks,
Our command of the Paeloponesian Lord,
With mighty Force regain our Conquests.

O then for certain, she a Grecian Goddess,
Invoaked by their prayers, for to descend in Charms, upon our Emperors spirits
Come, let us go, and pluck her from his Arms,
And burn her unto ashes; and strew her in the Air
For the enjoyment of the Bawdy Wind.

Nay first behold the effect of this same News upon him.

Let it be so; and for this time let us return.

Well! forthwith we must assembl^.

But had you seen what an Assembly here was now,
The Janisaries, all in mutinous Arms, going unto the Palace
For fury, we have stopped for present.

Well! these Tumults will awake him:
And till I see you, farew^l.

Harsh News, my Love:
Your unbridled Colts of Greece, not brooking yoke,
Act to disquiet my tranquillity and peace,
And lame the greatness of my dear Enjoyments of thee.
But it shall not be so; thou'st go with me unto the Grecian Empire,
And there be crowned the Empress of thy Native Soil.

No: my dear Lord:
I'll be no Warrior: the iron-side of stern-look't Warriors
Are frightful Objects to my tender sight:
Oh now I hope the horror of my night is past.

Thou'st not be troubled with them,
The effeminated Court shall wait on thee.

But, great my Lord,
If I am found in favour in your sight,
Do not revive my sounded grief,
Not bring the horrid Object.
Of my demolisht Country in my sight;
For if you do, I am so much Mother,
That you will find your Nuptials
But a patient Funeral:
For these my Eyes, that else would sparkle invitation
Will all be blubbered up in tears;
And these my silk Embraces
Incenter Melancholy: So that you'll find me
Little to surpass the breathless Corps
That lie in the cold Jaws of Death.

The weighty Reasons of so great a Friend
Cannot be gain-said.

Oh! Happy now,
Thanks, great my Lord,
You know I am still at your desires
When you return.
Thou'^t hardly be so, soon;
For e're the silent time flit by two hours,
I'll be with thee.
I have subdued the noble parts of your great Realm,
And now will with my Agent 'op the extreamet parts.
Now let disloyal mutiny force him from hence,
Or lad destruction's like to seize on me, poor hopeless Girl;
That have no other Cordial now, but what proceeds from the rele^less world:
Oh their inconstant breath must sentence forth my weal or wot:
I'll send to see which turns my Scale;
Go haste, and see the issue of the Court:
Return with speed.
Oh how my poor tossed Soul, flits on the angry surface of Calami^y;
And how the restless Waves of my continued grief works in suspense,
Against my poor floating Bark.
I wonder that my Eunuch stays so long.
Welcome the issue of the business.
Now Dear prepare your self to take your last farewell of joy.

The issue holds you forth a glorious Bride.

And art thou sure he's full determined for to stay.

Yes certainly, and in that full resolve
He hath dismissed the grumbling Court, and straight he will be here.
My Lord, my Loyal Lord,
My dear Paeologus, did thou but know the exigent that I am in?
That winged from Hungary, but sad, my now despairing thoughts,
Like my grim Fares, persuade me to my last farewell:
My huge coagulated griefs are far too great
For one days task: for if to morrow
By that the Lamp of Heaven, descend the certain Horizon
If thou, thou Sun of my delight appear not.
I'll crowd my self in the dark yawning grave,
And mourn in quiet:
So now Death in his horrid shape appears.

Come, come, my Love,
The fl^me of my desire
Hath scattered into air these interweaving Clouds.

Even so I do behold my self:

Come, let us talk of our approaching delight.
And so deceive the time.

Not so my Lord, for they are so sweet,
That time would, ravished, stop to hear them.

Still contrary:
Well! You serve to gloss the enjoyment.
What news?

Great Sir, Natolia courts an entrance here without.

Natolia may comma^d it; go haste him in:
I wonder what his pregnant Wit doth labour of.

Well! I'll withdraw my Lord.

Command thy liberty.
Come on Natolia.
Me-thinks thou swells with some great tidings.

My mighty Lord,
I am fallen for your Rise,
Had I disloyally affected renovation,
I might have pearkt the Pinnacle of Rule,
And spurned you in forgotten dust:
I need not desperately have rifled the Lion of his prey,
But slightly couchant, have surprised him:
Pardon my boldness, my passions high
Rains me at pleasure:
Where's that great Spirit, that awed the Fates
And cowed the world?
What is it shrunk in fear,
To hide it self within a Ladies Lap?
Or do you think that the mistaken world
Will attribute this Imperial Conquest unto you?
Who, in your greatest might,
Could not withstand a whining fit of love:
Your new acquired name,
In after-ages shall be razed
From dreadful Chronicles,
And registered in froathy birth of working brains:
And your great Deeds shall be a Winters tale
For downy Boys, and puny Wenches:
O mighty Prince! I dread the event of this same Lethargy;
For while your charmed senses
Snort in security,
Your active and great Commanders
Plot dreadful actions.
If this that's spoke be kindly taken, 'tis enough:
If not, too much.

Unreverend Villain!
Thou hast sufficiently begged death.
I could afford to make thee feel I sleep not,
But ancient Love pleads some respect:
Therefore I'll favour thee with Banishment;
From henceforth see my face no more.
Go instantly, Depart the Limits of my Power;
For if thou dost but stay to bid farewell unto thy friends;
For this neglects, of my command, thou die.

Great Sir, Let me but stay a day
To pack some things for my relief abroad.

No: they may come after you.

Then gracious Prince farewell;
I still will wish your Reformation.

Great Lords, we need no longer groan in expectation,
We see the dire Resolve:
The froward fancios of a woman must sna^le us:
By the great Mahomet, we will not suffer it:
He's give her up a Sacrifice for our Revenge;
Or we will force her from him.

Are your Resolves no fouler?

By the hairy scalp of our great Fathers
We wish his standing;
And only hi^, to pull this Witching Charm
From h^s ren^wned Bosom.

A very lamentable --
Surprised my sight as I came here,
That mighty man of war Natolia,
Driv'd by the gusts of his own sighs,
Sailed in the brackish Sea of's own Creation from Turkey.

From Turkie^ declare the enigma.

Banished?, I mean.

The great Natolia banished
Go Sir, we b^g,
And tell the Emperor, that we in arms
Attend his presence at the Palace Gates,
And needs must see him.
Declare the manner, Sir:
For what!

The zeal of Loyal Love
Emboldened him, to tell the Emperor of his state:
But the bewitching flames of Lust
Bu^ n^d all his weighty Reasons into chalk,
Which with his Self must, banished, roam the World.

Fie on it, there's not a head in Turkie
Fi^t so sure, which reels not with a sigh
Of this same idle Whore:
Come, let us antidote this poison.

Great Empero^r,
The troubled Janisaries all in Arms
Attend your presence at the Palace Gates.

What means the unwarranted Assembly of them?
Well! I'll go to them.

Well! did he know he kissed his last,
And courted his farewell:
He'd (...) our expectation:
But soft! he mounts the Battlement.

How n^w! What mean these postures
Of Disloyalty and Treason?

What mean these curled Dangles and Perfumes,
They speak some od^riserous Sacrifice, and must not be in vain:
Bring forth that Witch-like Saint,
That with her Charms poisons thy blood:
We will loose thee from Enchantments,
By the destroying her.

Imperious Villains! for the best life that breathes amongst you,
By your base sultry breath stain her perfection:
Slaves, what hath she done deserves it?
Must she be murdered because I love her?

She hath fettered your heroic spirits,
Impriso^'d your freedom,
And even reduced you to a sluggish carelessness;
Caused brave Natolia's banishment,
Because he sought for to reclaim you.

'Tis false:
She never knew the Conference as yet;
Much less his Banishment:
'Twas his unreveren'd impudence that caused it.

It was no impudence, great Sir:
'Twas his zeal of love,
Ingratefully rewarded,
Caused through respect of her.
This day shall see the dissolution of her, and her Enchantments.
We know we shall be thanked,
When you become your self:
Therefore pardon our rudeness.

Patience, I'^e send for her:
Ah! ah! pure innocent;
Why doth not every thing that pleads
Non-guilty,
Appear like Espine Plants,
While their great Queen ascends her direful Scaffold:
Me-thinks that mighty Rouf an Emblem of her,
Should crush together,
With destruction on her Foes: But soft! she's yonder!
Oh how all murderous thoughts
Creep back with fear at her approach.

What will my mighty Lord?

The preservation of thy life.

Does any covet an improfitable Clod?

Oh! oh! my Soul.
Sad Funerals still succeed a Nuptial Dream:
Thou harm^esly enjoyed the Wedlock thoughts of pleasure,
While sullain Brains bring Death to be thy Bridegroom:
Look over and see the Dogs of Death,
That do pursue so sweet a Game.

Oh gilt-temptation!

Oh Fates! Is my weak Limbs
A subject for your great Revenge?
Well! well! my colour's past; my period draws fast on,^
And I must down to dust
And loathsomeness, return to a none-being.
Great Sir! Who's my prepared Butcher?

Thy Butcher:
That word murders my Soul-deep perplexity;
I'll speak to them again.
Inhumane Wretches! On your allegiance pass: l^t her alone,
I'll stop the gap, betwixt her, and your base Revenge.

Mad men must be madly dealt with.

Stop your unreverend proceedings,
She's not for common Butchers:
This my own hand shall give enlargement to her Soul,
To tower the Heavens to invoke revenge upon your murderous heads.

Well! I am prepared a Sacrifice of Reconciliation
Betwixt you, and your imperious Camp,
Oh! oh! my dear Paeologus;

Thou little know I lip the grave,
And have not now a friend in all the World
For to receive my dying words.
Oh my dear love! that I might melt into thy bosom:
Oh now!
I feel the chillness of cold Death seize on my y^elding spir^ts:
I will go slumber, ^nd not see the fatal blow of my Decease:
Farewell Paeologus: My dearest Lord for ever now adieu.

Not once farewell to me, my S^ul,
Farewell to thee:
O had thou but looked,
I never could have struck this fatal blow.

To a^mes, our
Emperor is himself, with his Falchion ^overs head and body.

O damnatio^, Villains,
I am my self indeed:
For you have rifi'd me of the sweet addi^ion,
And now in all my self,
I cannot find one thought of comfort,
For to please my self.
Well! Revenge and Fury be my Conducts now;
I'll send the Royal Spirits of slaughtered Princes to attend her.
Bring in that great perfection,
That such honour may be laid in dust.

Shines not the fair Irene here.

She did of late:
But Death defaced that beauty now,
Behold her breathless Corps,
By her pare Spirits forsaken ^.. born there.

I beseech you Sir, the fatal Story.

The great content the Emperor took in her,
Made him lay by the great Affairs of State to court her:
At which the imperious Soldiers high incensed,
Forced his unwilling hand to part her head and body.

Were they married?

Oh no! she kept alou^e:
But should the morrow been a Royal Bride.

Oh sad! my Errand's done:
I an unwelcome messenger must now return,
Farewell, sweet Sir.

I wonder our dull Post exceeds the lazy time,
I am wearied with the tosses of this tedious night,
And fain would see my Sun.

I do discover one.

Soft! it bears resemblance of our expectation.

'Tis certain none but he.

Hum! Me-thinks his looks speak horrible destruction.

Oh! and alas!
What mean these News?
That toss thy tongue from Order,
And shakes the frame of thy composed Spirits:
Oh dead! I need not bid thee speak;
I read me senseless in thy look;
Yet of the manner give me satisfaction.

The pure Soul of fair Irene,
Hath now acquired its proper Center.

Oh! oh! Does that bald Tyrant
In secret Clay, reap her sweet Corps.
Oh! my dear Love, whose presence made delight,
Must thou be rotting in the irksome Grave,
The food of loath'ome Worms:
Since I in the Air enjoy the light of Phoebus.
Oh no! There was inherent simplicity in us:
I know her Soul in restless expectation doth remain,
Therefore, I will not now, as hereto, brook a delay^
Demosthenes, thank thou these noble Gentlemen,
For their ^rue pains in this lost labour:
For now the life and soul of all my spirits,
Press to acquire their Center, and rack me fearfully:
Go thou relentless Steel,
And spur them forth:
Come, come, my Soul,
Although our bodies, separate for ever, moulder in the dust:
Our Spirits shall conjoin.
Oh! oh! my Love, I haste.

Oh doleful Tragedy^
I did not dream this ^oint.

I wonder where unseen
He wore the fatal Steel.

I was inseparable in life,
And will not be disjoined in death.
Oh! oh!

Oh! Loyal Servant!
This is a Spectacle of like Woe
To that of Juliet, and her Romeo.


