WHo is the Author of this new Play?


He's a Stranger, and my Master.


He must be a bold Stranger indeed that will venture his reputation to the
Censures of our Critics.


Heaven forbid that any honest mans reputation should depend upon the making of
a Play; But, I must tell you Sir, he had never ventured, if he had not seen the
Wit of the times so easily acquired.


But why is modern wit so easily acquired.


Because a Trivolino, or a Skaramuchio that's dextrous at making of mouths will
sooner raise a Clap then a high flown Fancy.


All the better for us if that be true, for we shall have new Plays come on
like fresh Herring and Mackarell, all the year about, so that our Wits shall
never be out of Season.


But Friend, you are in a monstrous error; for if your Masters Play be not
provided with requisite Materials, both he and it will be condemned to the
Nursery.


I pray what do you reckon them Sir?


The Plot must be new, the Language easy, the Fancies intelligible, and the
Comical part so delicately enterwoven, that both laughter and delight may each
of them enjoy their proportions.


I have heard my Master say, that since the restoration of the Stage, he has
seen all you have said represented to perfection, and yet blown upon with
disdain.


That's only by the young sucking fry of Wits; But tell me, has your Masters
Play the qualifications I told you of.


Not one of them, for the Plot is like all others of the time; viz. A new Toot
out of an old Horn; and in regard he saw small things so acceptable, he has
dubbed his Trifle with the rest, in hopes that it will prove less considerable
then any that's gone before, and consequently expects a better approbation.


By that Character I perceive he's not ambitious to bear up with the Flag-wits.


Right, only a small Privatier to skulk among Creeks and Cliffs.


My advise is then, that he quit the English Shore if he intend to thrive at
Wit Capering, for the Natives of that Trade has left so little now to pilfer,
that the purchase will not defray the rigging of Ink and Paper, and let him try
when he pleases, he'll find the Wit almost as scarce a commodity as the Money.


My Master was lucky then at his first setting out to cruise the Coast of
Spain.


If he has done so, he could not miss of a good Prize.


A small Caravel from Sevill which he freely bestows upon this good company,
and that his present might be entire, he has given the PrizeOffice the go-by.


He might have saved that labour; for not being matter of money they would
ne'er a looked after him. But tell me friend, without any more circumlocutions,
what way is the Play dressed?


What do you mean by that?


That's whether it be set off with Blank verse, Rhyme, or Prose.


My Master is no Arithmetician, and so defies all numerical composition.


This is the first Poet that ever I heard of, could not make Verse; But how
shall the Expectations of the Audience and the Music be prepared at the ending
of Acts.


I am appointed with an Engine to do that.


Which way?


This way.


'Slife, I think this Prose Poets fancy will take; for if I be not mistaken, a
Rattle will be better understood by a great many here then the best kind of
Rhyme.


I see no reason but this same Engine ought to alarm the Minstrills to tune
their Fiddles, and advertise the Audience to refresh their hams as well as a
couplet of Rhyme.


But Sir, it may scare the Ladies from eating their fruit.


Pox take you for a Coxcomb, do you take them for Magpies and Jackdawes.


I hope he has dressed his Prologue in Rhyme.


No, I am to be his Jack-Pudding in the case, and deliver it by way of
Harangue.


Forbear Sirrha, you are a saucy Serving-man; your Master will not be pleased
at this boldness of yours with this Company. I say be gone with your
Jack-Pudding Speech, least the Audience take it for a Directory, and so choke
their expectations of the Play.


Ladies and Gentleman,

You're too well bred not to be kind to day,
Since 'tis a Stranger that presents the Play:
Stranger to our Language, Learning and Rhyme;
He says, to Wit too; and 'tis his first time.
No boldness in our Prologue shall appear
You, but too frequently meet that elsewhere:
We only your Divertisement intend,
Because on your Goodness all our hopes depend.


IS not she, who you saluted now in passing, the Lady you so highly praised the
other day?


The same; the City has not her equal.


What think you of Liviana?


I confess her beauty's great, but for excellency of parts, Sophronia much
excels.


Are there any other parts requisite in a Woman but Beauty accompanied with
riches? all which Liviana hath in abundance.


The Lady Sophronia hath all you named, besides a vast knowledge in Masculine
learning.


Vast knowledge, say you? ought Women to have any other understanding then good
Huswif'ry; particularly to be skilled in composing the valiant decoxions of
Cock-broth, and restorative Jellyes.


That's (I suppose) the only practice of the Northern-Women.


If it be, I conceive it more proper for them, and much more useful for us;
what you call Masculine learning is every way as unbecoming a Woman as to see a
Switzer a Horse-back.


Well Cousin, I am now going to pay her a visit, which I can do at pleasure;
she being my Kinswoman you shall go along, where I doubt not but after a little
time spent in her company, you'll soon recover the gravity of our Spanish
conversation, which I perceive you have altogether cast off for the English way
of freedom.


I wonder what can be the occasion that my Brother's Nuptials with the Lady
Sophronia is retarded, the report being all about the Town that they are
already married.


Madam, all I can learn from his man Alberto is, that since you have been so
strictly confined, the Lady Sophronia has not received your Brothers Visits
with her wonted cheerfulness: For my part, I believe this sudden restraint
upon you hath raised dislike in her against so jealous and peevish a
disposition.


'Tis like enough; if I were in her place I would do the same: but no more, I
hear him coming.


How fares it with my Sister?


Well; I hope in Charity with all the world.


Are you not troubled to be deprived of the accustomed freedom in giving and
receiving Visits.


Not at all, since it is your pleasure; but if I thought any of my actions had
led you to this severity, I should then be highly perplexed.


I did it not upon any such account, only the corruptions of the time urged
that I should not expose you to the temptations of the world, and since 'tis
for the ease of my mind, and preservation of your honour, you ought to be less
dissatisfi'd.


Fear not the ease of your mind, if it depend upon the preservation of my
honour, for 'tis within my breast can do that better then all your restraints.


All the better; yet I'll scarce trust her,


Cousin Horatio, you are opportunely come, for I was just now going to send for
you.


I am glad then my good Angel directed me hither; But pray, Madam, be
acquainted with my Kins-man That's lately arrived from England.


The advantage will be mine to learn the Customs of that wise Nation.


If she be governed by the example of the English Ladies, she'll lead a merry
life, and yet be esteemed a Vertuosa.


Cousin my business will require privacy; Therefore intrear your Friend for a
little space to step into the Gallery: Stanlia, go you along and show him the
Pictures.


Do Cousin: and try to pick out a Mistress among the Court Ladies, for there
you'll find 'em represented to perfection.


Whatever be her Learning I am sure her breeding's good, that will not suffer
me to be alone staring about like a troublesome Dun:


Come Sir, I'll lead the way.


Do Sweet-heart: I wish the Gallery be so blessedly contrived as to have a
Belcone-window in it, that I may tender my love to this Original worth a
thousand Copies.


Now that we are alone, I pray use the same sreedom with me that I shall do
with you.


With all my soul I grant it.


Then tell me, was there ever any serious Love 'twixt you and Liviana?


Such a business was once fairly begun, and I believe in regard my addresses
were generous and real, that in some measure they were favourably received.


Be persuaded they were, and she has signified so much to my self that you are
the only person she affects.


The discovery of this distracts me; for what hopes of enjoying such happiness,
so long as her Brothers jealousy denies her all Conversation?


There's the mischief; however (if your love be real) me hinks you ought to
study all means to get the difficulties removed.


Where is your concern in being so earnest to advance this love 'twixt Liviana
and me?


To be free with you; Patricio is the only Sovereign of my Soul, and I flatter
my self to have a proportionable share in his love: 'Tis long since our Faiths
were plighted, but I am resolved against marriage so long as he practises this
barbarous jealousy against his Sister, who among all the Ladies in Town is
reputed the great example of Virtue; Therefore (dear Cousin) I sent for you
that we may consult either to dispossess Patricio of this new taken up humour,
or find a means to fetch Liviana out of her Prison; That your honourably begun
love may be finished, and happily by the performance of either, Patricio may be
convinced of his Error, and I in a capacity to terminate my enjoyment.


I am ready to advance the design though I suppose it will be more easy to
rescue Liviana, then convince Patricio; for which cause I desire my Kinsman
Tarugo be in the Plot, in regard his Education abroad has wonderfully improved
him in dextrous Stratagems; If there be a way under the Sun he'll find it out.


Let's call presently, and acquaint him with the project. Don Tarugo, now that
we have done, your conversation will be acceptable.


Madam, you can dispose of me at all times: yet I could have wished their
Cabinet Council had lasted till my love to her Maid had been more advanced; for
(if I be not mistaken) her frozen Chastity was beginning to thaw.


O Madam! your call came in good time; Certainly this man has been bred
Commander in a Scotch Privateer.


Why so Stanlia?


Because I suppose he fancied me a Dutch bottom, who for not striking at first,
he was ready with his Grapler to have laid me aboard; and I verily think had
made me prize, if the Authority of your call had not so seasonably come to my
relief.


What a mad way of expression this same Wench uses? but don't you know, the
English humour, with which he hath been so lately accustomed, is not really so
dangerous as it seems.


I am sure 'tis altogether Anti-platonick: Out upon him there where he stands,
for a naughty man: But hark me Sir, the next time you catch me in the like
occasion I'll be better prepared.


With a more willing mind I hope.


Horatio! Be pleased to unfold our design to your Cousin; you need not boggle
at my Maid, for I am fixed in her fidelity.


The Lady Liviana, whom you so lately magnified (though at that time I
concealed my passion) yet she is the only Object of my Love; I have reason to
believe her kindness to me is reciprocal; but for the present her Brothers
Tyrannous restraint interrupts the honourable Fruition that's designed by us
both. Now if we can find a way to bring her out of Patricio's house (which in
effect is her Goal) I am resolved presently to marry her.


What needs so just and fair a design be pursued with such indiscreet means?
being 'tis supposed Patricio's condition and quality ought not to deny alliance
with you, who in all respects are his equal.


That's confessed: but he's drunk and mad with a fancy that none of equal quality
can have any other but dishonest intentions against his Sister, besides another
Fantastic opinion that's lately ceiz'd upon him, that a Woman's Will is easily
restrained, in contemplation of that Paradox he will needs make the experiment
upon his Sister.


What Horatio says is true: and I must tell you Sir, this same idle Caprice of
his is the only occasion that I delay my marriage with him who will entertain
no other Love but mine; if it be your good fortune either to relieve her, or
dispossess him; Horatio and I will have cause to bless you for ever.


Is this all?


It is.


Your business shall be done, but in the first place, let me have that same
little Picture of yours in Minature which was done by the renowned English
Artist when he was last at Madrid.


Take it.


Then, Madam, tell me who is Liviana's Taylor?


'Tis Signior Lorenzo; he lives in Thimble-street, at the Sign of the
Penny-loaf and Cucumber.


I do not understand what all this points at.


I pray have patience, 'tis like I may take your Mistress measure, and give
you no cause of jealousy.


Here is one Alberto that belongs to Don Patricio, impatient to speak with Don
Tarugo.


I'll go see what the matter is, and return presently.


Heaven defend that this be no advertisement of an Arrest.


I hope he is not under that danger.


It's not to be expected but one whose greatest subsistence depends upon his
wit, must sometimes run that hazard.


Here he returns, it seems the business is sudden.


What's the matter Cousin?


A trifling scruple, yet I wish it were removed.


Let's know the particular.


My Taylor has been at Patricio's Lodgings for a warrant to arrest me, but not
finding him I am yet secure; however I have shifts to give this little danger
the go by.


For the greater security I'll instantly send for Patricio, who will be glad of
any opportunity to oblige me, because of the slights I have put upon him since
he began to oppress Liviana and Horatio, you shall not go from hence till you
see the business done.


I am resolved to obey.


I'll lose no time but presently about your affairs.


Good success go along with you.


I perceive for all this Ladies great learning, she still aims at the Natural
practice of a warm Demonstration. -- I have undertaken a business that will
stretch my invention to its height, and therefore in imitation of growing
Politicians, I'll dress my self in the posture of deepest Contemplation. --
It's here, it's here! -- O my beloved Mercury, thou great God of Tricks, one
hit more with a couple of Gusmans Pins to stop two small holes, and then all is
well: As I live it's come. Poh, Proteus was an Ass in comparison of me; me
thinks if my back and lungs would hold out, I could transform my self in the
shape of a household Pedant when he goes to breath Revelations upon his Ladies
Bed-side; and whilst the invention is warm, I'll instantly put it in
execution.


I tell thee Alberto; nothing shall hinder my resolution; see there be Guards
at the great Gate, and Sentinels at every window.


What needs all this Sir? your Sister is a spotless Virgin, and ne'er
discovered the least levity in her behaviour that might render her susspitious.


I must and will be obeyed: Methinks you being a Kinsman, as well as servant,
ought to have a greater regard of my Sisters -- Honour.


The Lady Liviana wants not Virtue in abundance to preserve that her self.


No more words; but with diligence mind my orders.


I pray pardon my boldness in sending for you.


Madam! you have done me honour in the point.


I shall be yet more your Debtor if I speed in my desires.


-- It will be strange with me when your pleading fails.


The Matter is, Don Tarugo, my Cousin Horatio's friend and kinsman is in hazard
to be arrested at his Taylors suit, by a warrant from you, my request is for a
time you suspend the giving it out.


You have spoke too late, for 'tis out already, besides, Madam, if you knew his
indiscretion in defaming of Women, you would be loath to own him.


As how?


He was heard say in an Assembly of persons of Quality, that it was as equally
difficult to make Women in love with Chastity, as to persuade English Quakers
to study Heraldry.


I ne'er heard him say so, though I know its his common discourse to affirm it
a hard matter to confine a woman's humour.


That's every way as ill as the other.


Why Sir, is there any thing more certain then shut up a Woman against her
will, but like a fire of Coals covered with earth, which (though it burns not
clear) yet vents its heat in smoke, and in the end with violent flames breaks
through the cloddy goal that smothered its natural course.


Madam, I know you have store of Philosophy to maintain Paradoxes; therefore
I'll avoid to reason with you upon the Argument, for I am sure that watchful
authority overthrows all hazards of that kind.


I have still observed, that in all Creatures strict Restraint raises both
passion and hatred against the Guardian; but most in Women whose brains are
continually busied, to acquire their freedom, and with such secure ways, as
seldom their inventions are found out.


I do not value your opinion, for such as know the way can no more be mistaken
then a wise man commit folly.


But you know often the wisest men upon occasion distrust their own reason.


I'll not change my mind, Liviana is my Charge, and her will I preserve.


Alas! your virtuous and noble Sister I dare swear ne'er entertained any
dishonourable thoughts.


Here I were in love with one of so cursed an Humour, I had rather be condemned
to the sacrilegious embraces of a revolted Fryer.


Pray, noble Patricio, be advised.


I am not to be shaken from my design.


Sure you are bewitched, those we love and delight in ought to have freedom,
and though you had Hydra's head studded with Linx's eyes, yet a Woman of less
wit and spirit then is your Sister may over-reach you.


By Heaven's they are deceived that think a woman's wit can overcome my Care.


I tell you that's a saucy Contradiction.


Take it in the worst sense then if you please.


How?


I say so again.


O Stanlia! Alberto, separate. Hold noble Knights, this argument was ne'er
designed to be decided by fighting.


I'll justify my opinion with the hazard of my life, what ever reason or
experience say to the contrary, but I must be gone.


And I must follow


O most unfortnnate wretch that I am! my love is great, and yet my sorrow is
greater: Oh, oh! -- If Virtuous Liviana thus be used, his wife must needs
expect to be abused. Oh, Oh!


O Sir! Did not you observe how my Poetical Mistress breathed her last words in
Madrigal Rhyme?


Leave off your fooling.


Oh! Would I could either change my love, or he his humour.


Madam, I would disdain all mankind e're I were thus enslaved with so rigorous
an Opiniator.


O Stanlia! Stanlia! thou know not what it is to be in love.


Nor never shall at this rate.


Cheer up, Madam, my life on it Tarugo finds relief for us both.


Methinks brother your Countenance disovers dissatisfaction in your mind.


Whatever be the business, I'm sure the means that I use shall preserve the
honour of my Family.


Stay, Alberto! who has provoked my Brother to this Choler? How comes the
honour of our Family in question? and tell me freely what means he by this
strict guarding of his house, or has his memory and sense left him that he
talks so idly!


It seems so when he is so causelessly careful.


It cannot be without cause.


Upon my life I know none.


'Tis impossible but you do; neither is it to be imagined. A passion can be
raised to that excess without some ground.


I cannot deny but he pretends one but built upon so slender a foundation. --
I'm sure the sense you have of your own honour might have secured him from
jealousy.


Prithee Alberto be free, for my Innocence protects me from all fear.


Madam, it were cruelty not to satisfy your desire; the truth is he means by
you.


Upon what account?


I know not; only in a dispute the other day he maintained the best way to
secure a Woman's Honesty was close imprisonment, and that freedom furnished 'em
opportunities of looseness.


What was the person with whom he had the debate?


It was the brave Don Horatio, nothing short of his Ancestors who were still
reckoned among the most illustrious Hero's of Spain.


Was I mentioned in the case.


He named none; but on you he is to make the experiment, and besides additional
Guards in the house, your liberty is to be diminished by fresh restraints: In
effect his family is to be converted to a Garrison of Jailers and Spies,
entrusted to my Charge, and to wheadle me into fidelity; he owns me as a
Kinsman: This I have discovered to witness my respects; however I'm resolved to
be faithful. Your pardon, Madam, for I will not stay to be dissuaded


O Locura! Locura.


What's the matter, Madam?


Are not all the faculties of my Brother's fair soul ceiz'd upon by the black
Devil of jealousy?


Against whom?


All woman kind in General, but I'm the unfortunate Wretch that must be the
sacrifice of his folly.


I am still in a mist.


Why then he has the vanity to be thought wiser then any e're went before him.


In what?


No less trifle forsooth then the bridling of a Woman's will.


This is strange: from whence does it proceed?


What was the first occasion of debarring my liberty I know not, but this other
design of a more severe confinement (as Alberta tells me) took its rise from an
Argument 'twixt him and Don Horatio.


O Heavens!


Well Locura! you know with what valour I have trod upon all Temptations,
though the addresses were modest and from persons of equal quality.


I know it very well.


Heavens be my witness I near entertained a thought either too grate upon my
Birth or Chastity; but now that I'm innocently abused, I find a dangerous
spirit revel in my blood. -- Sulphur and Gunpowder when fired in the great
wild Fields does no harm.


No, none at all.


But when coffined within the bowels of the earth, Cities and Mountains cannot
resist its force.


Nothing more certain.


I have often observed, That the most curious Glasses have been aptost to break
when most carefully Tendered.


To my knowledge and expensive experience that's true.


You know Locura that Don Horatio and I had some interviews, he's no less
worthy then the world speaks him.


Indeed a most Excellent person.


Though we were never serious in the point of Love, yet I am apt to believe
there's mutual flames betwixt us which happily on my part might of themselves been
extinguished if my brother had not become so cruel a Guardian; and since 'tis
for him I must suffer, my brains shall never rest till I have found a means to
entertain and renew our Loves.


Nay she should ne'er bear the title of a Woman, that should out-do me either
in Wilfulness or cunning.


Neither shall she, and yet with the highest preservation of my honesty.


Alas! what simple and indiscreet Sots are those men who think their little
inventions are of greater force to correct our Frailties then the sense of our
honours?


No, no, they are grossly mistaken for liberty in a virtuous soul scorns to
abuse it self; what's to be condemned in women at freedom, may be justifi'd
when shut up; and yet without the least hazard of my reputation, I'll find a
way to convince him by experience that nothing wrongs our sex more then the
indiscretion of a groundless jealousy.


When restraints are just they are not to be endured, for this last Lent I was
enjoined to eat but once a day, and yet I could neither want Supper nor
Breakfast.


Advance Friend!


Who is that you bid come in?


Madam! i'ts the Taylors man come to take your measure for a new Gown.


Let him come in.


Laus a Dies.


Your business?


My Master, your old Servant, being sick, hath appointed me as the first trial
of my Skill to come and take your measure.


I like not experiments at my Charges.


He that sent me hither knows I seldom mistake.


Where learned you the Trade?


In the West-Indies!


That's a place indeed.


I was thither carried Captive, being taking by a Muscoviter Man of War, going
to Alexandria; he sold me to a Jew, who brought me to the Southern parts of
America, where to the Queen of the Amazons Taylor I was bartered for an old
Petticoat, there I was instructed, and (though I say it my self) as approved a
Thief as ever yet wielded a Sizzor.


This fellow is of a pleasant humour, but don't you know the fashions here and
there vary?


All's one to me whether I work for Greeks or Pagans; Madam, the Queens name of
that Country is Fatima.


How, Don a Fatima? that's a Christian-name.


It is, Madam, for so was her Mother called, who being a Frenchwoman became
Renegade upon a point of curiosity to try the difference 'twixt Circumcision
and Uncircumcision, and to that effect by way of Love Errantry she travelled
till she arrived to the Kingdom of the Patagoones, where she brought forth this
Lady Fatyma, who now sways the Amazonian Sceptre.


Locura, Did you ever hear such a Grotesk deduction.


But, Madam, before I take measure will your honour view some choice
Indian-Stuffs?


Show 'em out: What's this?


Bless me, Heavens, How brought I it hither?


Hold, let me view it a little; really it is a delicate Piece: I pray whose
Picture is it?


I dare not tell.


Madam, 'tis Don Horatio's, and very like.


I suspect there's more cunning in this fellow then we apprehend. -- But why
will not you tell?


Not for the world: for I was entrusted to give it a Lady, and Madam, take
notice for all my Trade I am sometimes employed with love Embassies.


What's the Lady's name must have the Picture.


That I have forgot: but I cannot forget her condition being she's a Lady
that's kept close-Prisoner through the Caprice of a jealous Brother.


I know you are no Taylor, there's both reward and punishment before you;
therefore I charge you to tell what you are, or if you be a servant to Don
Horatio?


Now the Fish begins to bite, if the line but hold.

In this business some what more.


What? his Kinsman?


Somewhat more yet.


What are you then?


His Friend who has run this hazard to let you know the sincerity of his love,
and how much he is concerned against your Brother's severity.


Is it possible?


Most true, I hope you are not dissatisfi'd with the matter.


On the contrary I infinitely rejoice.


Then, Madam, I have gained my wishes, and he desires you will keep his Picture
till he find a way for your relief, to which he will leave no fair means
unattempted.


Assure him he is the only person in the world on whom I have fixed my love,
and deliver him here my Picture in return of his, which I will sacredly
preserve as a sovereign Antidote against inconstancy; I expect he'll entertain
mine at the same rate.


Be confident of it: Have you any more to say?


Nothing at present, but now that you can visit me unsuspected, let me see you
often.


Doubt not of that, and since I perceive you are both fixed in your affections,
leave it to me to complete your enjoyments.


I dare stay no longer, Heaven accompany your undertakings


The world may now judge Patricio's snar'd by his rash jealousy


Now that you are all under my Charge I conceive my self a mighty Commander,
and therefore fellow-Souldiers, when ever you have occasion to compare me with
other Generals, let none be mentioned under Julius Caesar, or Alexander the
Great.


What think you of Scanderberg?


Well enough for sudden Stratagems, and leading of small Party's; but nothing
like me for the conduct of such a mighty business as this which Don Patricio
has entrusted me with.


A great design indeed to interrupt the admonitions of Nature in point of Love.


To give you a demonstration of my Military skill; suppose I were Governor of
a starved Garrison seituate upon this same spot, and you three the several
Brigadoes of the Enemy that beleagur'd me.


What then?


And we shall suppose the Cook on the top of a Hill in the shape of a smoking
Olio come for my relief.


Which way could you come to him, or he to you?


Why there lies the matter; In the first place I would attaque you with a
multitude of thundering Stockadoes in tertio, the same to you in quarto; and
supposing you to be a stand of Pikes I would trip up all your heels in
Flankanado's.

And thus and thus I would enjoy my beloved Olio.


This same General of ours sucks me as if I were a Marrow-bone.


I wonder at that, for his Snout is more like a Carbonado'd Gizzard upon the
Trencher of a Claret Virtuoso.


Take this instruction along with you: whilst you are upon the duty of
Centinelling, avoid all sort of Devotion, for that brings drowsiness, as it
fell out the other day with me when I was caught sleeping by my Patron with a
pair of Beads in my hand.


For which I remember you were soundly banged.


Therefore let's presently have a Song

Did not you all see how strangely Pug did imitate the Music?


That's nothing; I caught him one day in the Kitchen both Playing and Dancing
with the Negro- wench.


Then I believe they have more in'em then we are aware of; and though we look
upon'em as the By-blowes of drolling Devils begot upon Drills, yet in Italy
when they are associate with Operators, they are then reckoned in the number of
the Vertuosi; and to try what you have said, bring out the Negro- Girl, and
we'll have a Dance to see if he'll imitate us.


My life upon it, provided you donot beat him.


Now Gentlemen let's to our several Posts least Don Patricio come to go the
round


Friends at length I have procured a warrant to arrest Tarugo.


But it may be long enough e're we catch him.


What's your reason.


In the first place he has such a correspondence with the Clerks of the
persecuting Offices, that he never wants Tymous Advertisements: Next, for the
most part, he is so circled with predestinat Hectors, that the attaque will be
as dangerous as to storm a Battery charged with small shot.


Its true what my Brother says.


But if you will be governed by the directions which I shall shape out for you,
there's not the least hazard.


Let's hear them.


You must near think of catching him after Sun set, for by that time he and the
Myrmidons of his Society will be warmed to such despair, that though the whole
Kennel of the Martials Beagles were let loose, they dare not grin upon them.


We know that by woeful experience.


Therefore my advice is, since it's his custom every morning to be at the
Coffee-house, allaying his Claret vapours, that you lay hold upon that sober
opportunity.


Truly Brother the advice is good, for if ever the Law have any operation with
persons of his temper, it must still be in a morning before Dinner.


Nay even at Dinner, if they be half way entered in the second Course they are
impregnable.


No more words since I have told you his haunt there is five Pistols to do my
business


Fear nothing, it shall be done.


These same Tailors are most excellent Benefactors.


Nay, if Protections were not in vigour, they would so advantage our
profession, that it were to be dreaded the second rate, Lawyers would
incorporate with us.


There's no doubt of that, for since the Judges takes their Fees, they poor
wretches are little better then Knights of the Post.


I say again, Long live the Tailors; for since our subsistence depends upon the
wrath of Heaven, Tailors must be in the first rank of stitching Plagues, for
the Egyptian Jugglers could near attain the counterfeiting of Lice.


I wonder Roderigo how you came to stay so long in the Country.


I was so far from wearying, that when once I have ended the business that
brought me to Town, I'll straight thither again.


For shame lay aside that Resolution; 'tis your younger Brother's business to
be your Steward whilst you remain here, and enjoy the pleasures of the City.


I am rather for the English Gentry, who stay at home and mind the preservation
of their families, and let their younger Brothers come to shift in the Court
and City; besides, you know what ill luck I had when I was last here in
pursuance of a Wife.


It was your own want of patience, can you imagine any Lady in the matter of
marriage will yield at first sight?


I cannot help my humour, but now I am so much delighted with Country-sport,
that I can wait with patience till I meet with such a ready disposed woman as
my self, and when I am surprised with Natural Frailties, my Tenants Daughters
are so dutiful, that they think it Rebellion to deny me, that humour being
over, I have no temptation to arrest me from the pleasure of all sorts of
Field-Exercises.


Let's go and divert our selves in the Park; 'tis like before you part from the
City I may sit you with a Wife, that in all respects will answer your Birth and
Fortune.


I'll try it for once; but if I meet the old stiffness and Formality, my
accustomed indifference is still at hand.


This same Roderigo is of a much more easy temper then the huffing Horatio;
I'll try to fix him with my Sister, then all my care is at an end.


WAs there any to enquire for me?


None at all.


Pray Sir when are you to have your Troop?


Speedily now that the War goes on with France. But why do you ask?


Because my man Will. has been so often boxed by our Neighbours Prentices; he
would fain ride six Months a Trooper to learn a little of the Bravo, and so
return with fierce Looks to frighten his old Enemies.


Let him be fitted with a good Horse and other necessaries; then if he'll
hazard so much time as to be beaten into the humour you speak of, for your
respect I'll make him welcome.


I thank you, Noble Sir; But do you observe Will. what the Captain says?


Well enough; but I am told if I can but once be so lucky as to bang a reputed
Killcow, that then I may live in quiet for the future.


But have a care, lest such a success lead you into so saucy an humour, as will
ensnare you into so many beatings, that 'tis to be feared you may be re-cowed
to the tameness of your first temper.


O! Sir: Over the way behind the Pillars, yonder's Hurtante the Taylor, and two
Sergeants, pointing at this House, and by their busy whispers they seem to be
upon a search.


'Slife I am the party concerned: What shall I do Landlord?


If they come here I dare not deny 'em entrance.


If I go out I'm certainly caught: Let Will. and I shift Clothes, and whilst
he acts the part of a Gentleman-Customer, I'll perform his office in serving up
Coffee.


Not amiss if he act the part of a Gentleman handsomely; there's hopes he may
prove a good Trooper, but that you may have the more time to shift, I'll down
stairs, and entertain 'em with some discourse: Remember Sir (when you serve
Customers) you discover nothing of a Gentle-pride.


Let me alone for that: Come Will. quick, quick! your Coat and Apron; take you
my Vest, Hat, Periwig and Sword.


I see that Gentlemen upon occasion will play Tricks to avoid a just debt, as
well as we poor Rogues.


Tush, That's nothing; farewell sweet England, where, what you term Tricks are
accounted acts of Thrist.


This same Hat, with the other ranting Movables, inspires me already with the
heat of a Hector.


All the better; and Roar out your first Trial upon me, but good Will, avoid
blows, least I forget the humility of my disguise. Oh! I hear 'em coming.


It's none of them.


No matter, be what they will I'll begin to practice.


You're very welcome Gentlemen, and as I may say, come in season to taste of the
best Coffee that e're wet purslin.


So it had need, for the last I had here was nothing but warm water boiled with
burnt Beans.


To tell truth, it was but a remain of the last years growth. but I'll assure
you, this is of the first fruits brought home from the Gardens of Sestos and
Abidos.


What places are those?


They are two Houses of pleasure four miles from Constantinople; the one
belongs to the Gand-Signeur's Tallow-Chandler, the other to the Gold-finer of
the Seraglio.


If their Gardens be cultivate with the dung of their Trades, the stuff wants
not heat.


Bring me Chocolette that's prepared with water, for I hate that which is
encouraged with Eggs,


Landlord! pray what's the operation of Coffee?


Gentlemen, do but read this Paper, and there you'll find an exact account of
its qualities.


The Physical operations of Coffee, are dissolving of Corns, correcting
Convulsion-fits upon the Temples of the Posteriors, and cooling those fiery
Blisters upon the Liver that's procured by extraordinary drinking of Lemonado
that's warmed with the frosted Crystal of the Alps.

AS for its operations upon the faculties of the Soul, that varies according to
the several Climats; for in Spain, when the steam is applied to the eyes, it
renders the Inhabitants there most foreseeing and perspicatious in foreign
Discoveries; and when under the Ears of a French-man, it fills his head so full
of Pantaloons, and Sarabands, that he can no more forbear Dancing, then if he
were bit with a Tarantula. In England again it has more politic Effects in
appearance, but little to the purpose, for every Pragmatical fellow will be
cementing the Cracks and Flaws of the Government, especially when the vapour
mounts into the Noddle of a snivelling Lay Elder; for there commonly it fixes
till it has dissolved all the ligaments of Loyalty. But 'tis most useful to
the Hollanders; for when their brains are stupefied with condensed Clouds, by
eating and drinking too much Hair-grout and Brandee, then they use it by way of
Glitter to remove these knotty impediments; but instead of making these Dull
vapours transpire through the passages of the head, by way of repercussion,
they come tumbling down the body, and fly into the Breeches with as great fury
as a Cork does from English Bottle-Ale.


Pray Sir, how do you like this Chocolette?


Well enough.


So you may, for this is the prolific Caudle, that renders all our Curtezans
fruitful when they are transplanted to the West-Indies.


Observe how the Rogue Cants.


I must tell you Sir, this same Fellow is of honest City-Parents, and was well
bred at Schools, but disdaining a Virtuous Life he betook himself to Travel, or
more properly to act the Vagabond; but now the speed of his ranging humour
being spent, he thinks himself happy with this sober condition.


That's commonly the end of all such who avoid the virtue of a laudable Trade
or Profession.


Come Brother, let's to the Table of Salamanca, and not mingle with these
Illiterati.


What you please.


Gentlemen, are you for Coffee, Tea, or Chocolette?


Coffee by any means, for the last Chocolette I drank did so smite me with
drowsiness, that in a Dispute with a Junior Soph, I was still to seek for
distinctions.


Prohac ratione dabo vobis, Coffeeum Sublimatum.


You seem to be a Scholar.


I was a time at the University.


Can you unravel a Syllogism.


Provided it be not drawn up in Latin.


Then Vulgariter I'll try you.


Come then: methinks I can stand one Broad-side of your dreeling Philosophy.


He that drinks most has least Thirst.


That's allow'd.


Then you must grant that he who has least thirst drinks least.


It would seem so.


Ergo he that drinks most drinks least.


I suspect this is a Sophysma, and such a one that I cannot tell where it lies,
though I was four year in the Philosophy-Classe.


Ha ha, ha; Four year at Philosophy, and cannot dissect a Sophism! Friend,
friend, my advice is you near offer at learning among Scholars again.


Nor at sense neither, least he be not understood with such as you, who
Butchers the Truth with distinguishing subdivisions.


Yonder Gentlemen are very eager in their dispute; Heaven forbid they do not
quarrel.


Come Sir, to avoid more contest here, I'll give you five Pistols if you'll
oblige your Heirs to give me forty, a hundred years hence.


Hold him Sir, I and my Heirs will go your half.


What's the debate Gentlemen?


He maintains by this new invention of the Vertuosi of Transfusion of the
blood, that he is able to perpetuate himself to Eternity?


Which way?


When once his own blood decays through Age, that by letting it out, and
filling its place with the blood of a young Hog, then immediately he returns
into the Age of Fifteen.


But why a young Hog?


Because of all Beasts, it resembles most a Man.


You may judge Sir, whether I have not reason for my opinion, for the other day
being at Vertuoso-Hall, I saw a decayed Weather, replenished with the blood of
a Bull-calf, which so soon as it was settled with a Ramish bravery, it broke
from the gripes of the Vertuosi Operators, charged through Ten thousand
Spectators, and most valiantly mounted a Barbary-Mare in view of teh multitude.


Then it seems it participates of the Drain'd-Creatures Faculties by way of
Transmigration.


Nothing more certain; for when I was last in England where such Experiments
are frequent, There was an old usurer past 80, bought a young Welsh Thief from
the Gallows, whose blood by this way of Transmission, having restored him to
youth; this same usurer, contrary to his former practice, was taken stealing of
Cheese, for which I saw him whipped at a Post.


Come Sir, no more dispute, will you hold my Bett.


-- Nay: I'm resolved near to die, so long as I am able to buy a Young-Goat;
It's not out of wantonness I pitch upon this Creature, but to satisfy my
humour of climbing Cliffs for Jack-Daws Nests.


I pray Sir when you were at London, did you know e're a Coffee house that went
by the Title of the Politic Speculatists of the Roundtable.


Those were the ballating Projectors, when the Government was off its hinges,
but that fort of people are no more, for alas who but fools would debate
whether the Hen or the Egg was first; for so they have stated the priority of
propriety and Government, and Heaven knows how in order to that, what Havoc
they made of Bodin, Matchieval,, Plato:


this Son of a Whore your Man, is such a thick-scull'd Rogue, that he brings me
Coffee when I cry for Chocolette.


Why don't you mind the Gentlemen, you Logger-head Booby.


He's not here! That's but earnest of what shall follow if you do the business.


If he had not been gone this morning to E'strema Daura, in order to the
raising of his Troop, I should have set him to you sometime to morrow; it will
be at least ten days e're he return; there sits his man whom he has lest to
send some necessaries after him.


I believe 'tis true, for he wears a cast suit of his Masters.


No more! you'll remember?


Fear nothing on my part.

This danger is fairly over, now shall I have time to finish Don Horatio's
affairs: Come Will. let's shift again, and be as we were; there's a Crown for
you to spinl: I'll delay no longer, but instantly go find Horatio and
Sophronia, and comfort 'em with the success I have already found in this their
amorous intrigue.


By its style of Painting, it seems to me of the Florentine-School, and a Copy
of Tintarets.


I rather think it of the Roman-Class, and an original of Paulo, Verones.


I perceive these blades would fain be reckn'd among the Vertuosi of the time,
for all their knowledge in Painting consists in the naming of famous Artists
basely applied.


Like those who are still retailing the Index's of Books to be esteemed
learned.


Or new started Gentry that are still discoursing of Heraldry.


I'll be judged by any of these Gentlemen.


You're a Coxcomb to tell me 'tis an Original of Hannibal Curachio


Gentlemen, these rude words do not become the Gravity of my house, which I'se
have you to understand, is like the School of Athens, where all things are
debated with reason.


Softly, Friend not too much of that neither; for the Athenian-Magi were
themselves to seek for a definition of Reason, and though it bethe pretended
standard that governs the Actions of this World, I suspect every mans own fancy
takes the largest share.


Remember this Sir. I'll teach you to call a Virtuoso a Coxcomb.


Come Gentlemen, lay aside your quarrelling, and I'll reconcile your scruples;
for if I be not mistaken, the best of you all is not arrived to a Journy-man
Virtuoso as yet.


I begin to suspect to my self.


Take notice then if you had understood the History, you had soon found the
Pencil: for it s the description of Arion the Grecian Piper, that strolled up
and down Italy, where in his return home, crossing the Peloponesus in a
Fish-wherry of the Dardanelli, the Boatmen cast him overboard for his pelf
which this Damned Dutch-painter has made a great ship of two tire of Guns with
the Rainbow-flag of Amsterdam, and instead of making our Min'strel bestride a
Dolphin, he has mounted him upon the Shoulders of a large Codd.


This same gravelike Matron is Cassiopeia, Jupiters Dry-Nurse, and Governess to
Juno's Milk-maids.


Is this she who with her Troop of Country-wenches goes every May-day a milking
Cowes in Via-Lactaea.


The same: and there they make provisions of Cheese-cakes and Cream for the
Mathematical Feast in Copernicus-Hall; but when I come to demonstrate with
Galileus's Tube, I'll discover to you all the black-patches on her Face, and
whether her Whisk be right set off, and how many tire of Gimp-lace circles the
skirts of her Petticoat.


Take notice Gentlemen, the two Scholars are got to hold forth upon the
Globes, observe a little, and you'll hear most strange Learning.


'Pray what old Woman's this with a pair of Scales?


That's a Geneva-Witch, weighing the French-League against the Tripple-corded
Covenant.


What be these old fellow's that seem to oversee the balance.


The one is a Gascoigne-Fryer, the other a New-England Lecturer.


Methinks the West- India-Divines side has the odds in weight.


That's no wonder, in regard he has the advantage of 39 scruples of
Non-conformity.


But why the Devil a witch to manage the Scales?


Nothing so proper, it being a case of sanctifi'd Rebellion: But enough of
this, and take a little view of the Terestrial Globe.


What great Continent is this in Africa that's illustrated with Green and
Yellow?


That's the Territories of Presbyter-John; and mark me, Sir there stands his
principal City, and here stands his Palace, and this same round pile of
building like a Pigeon-house is his Chapel of Ease, which serves likewise for
the Meeting-place of his Synod, when he congregates 'em to knead directory
Discipline; and observe it is the exact Antipodes of the propaganda fide at
Rome.


Under what parallel?


Let me see precisely to a hairs breadth upon the same line with two Villages
in England, known by the names of Kidderminster, and Banbury.


By that account it should be directly as many Degrees of latitude from the
South-pole as the Sollin Geese-Islands are from the North.


Most exactly right.


Now Sir, tell me the reason why in this great Sea, the fish you see swim
there, are of the quantity of Islands.


These are the Trouts of the Atlantic Ocean, which overgrows all other Fish,
by the strong nourishment of its Water.


As how I pray?


Why Sir, this great Sea has its source from the roots of the Coker-nut-trees,
that grows among the Mountains of Tartuffely in America, and after it is
strained through the straits of Magelan it disgorges it self, as you see all
along the large Coast of Terra Australis la.


Then it would seem the Atlantic Sea drinks like Chocolette, because the milk
of the Coker-nut is its greatest ingredient.


The very same.


If this same Ocean had been either Plum pottage, or Brumswick-Mumme, it had
been a great question whether the Aldermen in England, or Burgomasters in
Holland had proved the greatest Discoverers.


I'm told Sir, that Coffee inspires a man in the Mathematics.


So far as it keeps one from sleep, which you know is the ready way to distract
consequently the improvement of the Mathematics.


Neighbour, do you find the Polliticks grow upon you since your drinking of
Coffee.


So far from the hopes of being a Counsellour of State, that I now despair the
preferment of a Constable.


Friends, you are both mistaken, if you think the Spanish-Coffee perfects any
man in the Polliticks; 'tis only in England where the advantage of the Air,
with a particular way of preparation improves the Coffeedrinkers in these
Mysteries.


O! you are a fine man indeed! to leave the Government of the Oven now, when
'tis crammed with the English Consuls pastry, to me that's the weaker vessel,
besides the looking after four small Children, and all forsooth to be thought
wiser then your neighbours by drinking the abominable liquor of Infidels! A
Murrin upon all ambition, for since my Husband came to be a Vertuoso-Hunter in
these Prating-houses, he has altogether left off the caring for his poor
Family.


Hey! Whirr! I think the Woman's mad; hussy though I allow you to find me out
in Taverns, yet this sawdness does not become you to intrude into the society
of Vertuosi.


I hope none of this learned and politic Crew will be offended that my
neighbour here Clubs his cloven Philosophess.


Neighbour, pray pay what I have had, for I must home, and house my Wife.


I won't stay long behind, left my wife do the same.


I wish she had stayed, for they say a woman is the best Engine either to
display a Horizontal-Dial, or Horizontal-Windmill.


I should rather think by her Clack she would make a better demonstration of
the perpetual motion.


If any knew her as well as I, you would think all the members about her are a
perpetual motion.


Gentlemen, here's fresh news from all parts.


Pray let one read for all.


Give it me then. From Constantinople the Dutch Ambassador in imitation of
Algiers hath presented the Grand-Signeur with a Covy of East-Freezland Boys,
fatten'd with black Beans and Butter-milk:


If that be true, then the prophecy of Sybilla Laplandica shall be fulfilled.


Pray what's that?


She says, when Mahomet is glued to the stern of Squab-skipers, then the
whore of Babylon shall be brought to bed of a horned Hermaphrodite.


The long Wars 'twixt the Ribband-makers Daughters of Athens, and the Bone-lace
Weavers of Lacedemon shall be determined by a Match at Stool-ball in the Fields
of Pharsulia, the party vanquished is to pay a Tanzy-Cake of the quantity of a
Mill-stone: after that, with a confort of Bag-Pipers and Jews-harps, they give
a meeting to the Link-boyes of London in the Meads of Arcadia, where the Queen
of the Country treats 'em with ten Tun of Syllybub; from thence they go a
pairing among the Groves of Parnassus, to gender inhabitants for the
Common-wealth of Utopia.


This peace may much conduce to reconcile the jansinists and jesuits.


The Jews have preferred a Bill of Comprehension to the Senate of London, that
they may be admitted into the Society of the Coal-Merchants and Wine-coopers,
because Trade settled in his due latitude, is the stability and advancement of
that Kingdom.


I wonder what can be the reason of that?


My life upon it, it can be for no other reason, then that among other
pretenders to liberty, they may be allow'd to starve and poison the bodies of
Christians, as others would do their minds with dangerous and pernicious
persuasions.

From Amsterdam. The States have taken the allowance from the Vertuosi that
were to find out the longitude, and bestowed it upon their Gazetteers, for
finding out dextrous lies to conceal the defeats they had from the English.

2. A singular Act of prudence, for such tricks have in some sort supported
their reputation over the world.


Ditto. Hans-Bublikins Burgomaster of Enchusen was stigmatised for Adultery,
because in the last Dog-dayes he was found in a Ditch cooling himself with the
embraces of a Virgin- Sturgeon.


O Heavens! certainly that was one of the prodigies that was foretold to fall
out in 1666.


But by their Hogen Mogen-ships favour, that was too severe a punishment, for
conform to one of their own Decrees of the Synod of Dort, providing the
sturgeon be not pickled, it only amounts to a simple Fornication.


From the Islands of Orcades in the North- Indies. The Prize-Brandee is so
plentiful, that in the last great drought they used it for watering their
Gardens, which warmed the ground to such a degree, that their Cabbiges sprung
out Musk-mellons, and their Gooseberry-bushes produced Muskadine-Grapes.


The occult quality of that will be one half years Task for the newhatch'd
Virtuosi.


Here's an Advertisement of a Citizens Daughter of 17 handful High, and 18
years of Age, who went without the Walls to drink Red-Cowes milk: 'tis feared
she has strayed among some of the neighbouring Parks. If any Male or Female
Keepers of the said Chases will bring Notice of her to the Office of Address,
they shall be honestly rewarded.


Her Parents were indiscreet to trust her alone; 'tis a hundred to one if e're
she be recovered without a dangerous Crack.


In Don Pantalions Academy there lives a Virtuoso, who makes Spring Saddles
that will make a mans body amble though mounted on a Flanders Genet.


A good Posting-Saddle for such who are troubled with the Hemerods. But is
there any advertisement of new Books?


Here are two; the one titl'd, Bibliotheca Matrum: or, a Comentary upon Ambrose
Parey's Instructions for Generation, written by Mother Cawdel Wright, Dry-Nurse
to the Society of Philosophical Demonstrators; The other is, let me see,
Observations upon the Memories of Monsieur de Bussy, with a translation of
Aretines Moralls in Burlesque-rhyme; done by a Platonic Lady in her Lucid
Intervals.


The titles proclaim them great works: O to think of the mettle and
ingeniousness of these times, in respect of the dull days of our Ancestors!


Really the News-book Writer has done his part well, and very exactly;
calculate his occurents to the understanding of the Age: neither has he in the
least made any invasion upon the secrets of State.


I am not altogether of your mind; for if our natural enemies get the secret of
the Pacing-saddle, not only we, but all our neighbours may suffer.


I pray which way?


It may encourage all their Fluxed Gallants, whose Bones cannot endure the
jolts of a Trotting-horse to become Troopers, in that case considering their
Warlike Dispositions, it may rationally be feared, they'll ne'er give over till
they have ambled themselves into the Universal Monarchy.


I confess, Brother, your reason is to be allow'd; but if we can find a way to
start-up another holy League among them, the vanity of that Career will be soon
stopped.


Friends, do not flatter your selves with that, for 'tis seldom known that any
stratagem serves twice in one place.


You are in the right; for there were two late experiences of it in Britain:
The one of a Wine-Cooper, who thought to have made disturbance under the
pretext of the Good old Cause; but that kind of stummed stuff would not down
with the people, their stomachs having been so much cloyed with it formerly.
The other was renewing a rebellious Covenant in the North part of the Island,
but that juggle had the same success: so that the effects of both were no
better then if a Garrison of Bedlam had sallied out to conquer the world. But
whereas you say, our Gazettier has discovered no State secrets truly; many are
of the opinion they have none to discover.


I wonder what kind of man that is who is so busy with his Table-book?


I suspect this a Dramatic Poet of a weak memory, come to pick up materials to
help his fancy.


I rather think he's a spy of a Tott'ring-States-man, That's curious to know
the opinion of the world as to his Actions.


Mr. He's a spy, but not of that kind you speak of?


What then?


One of these setters belonging to the Excise-Office comes to peep upon my
gains.


Mark! where I place this Tobacco, Staple was the Battalia.


Right.


Don Hurtado with his red and yellow Brigadoes, commanded the right Wing, and
Don Alonzo with his blew and white the left.


And do not you remember when I commanded the Forlorn, the General sent me
Orders not to be too sudden in the shedding of blood.


Did not you tell me once, that you commanded the Reserve of the Right Wing?


So I did; but the agility of the Enemy in point of wheeling, made me then
become the forlorn of our left Wing; by all good Tokens, at my first onset I
defeated 1500 Curasseers that commanded the Redoubt which flanked th'Enemies
Cannon.


What is a Redoubt?


'Tis a large Field of ploughed ground, circl'd with a Turf Dike; but when it
is appropriated to a line of Circumvallation in a Camp, why then it falls
artificially in to be a spot of ground naturally fortified with Bastions,
Half-moons, Ravelins, Tenalies, Horn-works, Foss-braes and Parapets; for all
which strengths it carries the valiant title of Redoubted.


Did ever any hear a Son of a Whore talk so ignorantly?


Take heed who you call Son of a Whore.


Where's the danger?


Here's the danger.


I cannot but laugh at this impudent Rogue in calling the Redoubt a Field of
ploughed ground, for when this Battle he speaks of was fought, it was in the
latter end of March when the Corn was so high that we ambuscado'd our
Cavall'ry.


Nay, friend, if he be not righter in Military Art, then you in the observation
of your Corn, I believe all your stories alike.


Gentlemen, I pray be gone; this rudeness becomes a Suburb-Tavern; rather then
my Customers shall be disturbed in this fashion, I had better want your change.


Landlord, If you intend your house to be like the School of Athens, you must
take care these Buff-bravo's come no more here; they are nuizances to sober
company in as high a degree, as they are scandalous to true Gallantry.


Did not you observe how their ignorance for want of Logic brought them
presently to blows.


I suspect this Trade will not hold out, for I perceive the Vertuosi are a
company of empty fellows, and most of 'em come here only to change their
breath with the stem of my Coffee. The truth is, the Claret-Philosophers
(though they be few) are my best Customers, for when they come reelingin, no
less then half a score Dishes they require to settle their Stomachs. Well, I'll
try it yet a month longer, and if I fail then, I am resolved to take a House
near a Pump, and with a stock of rotten Raisons and Salsa-parilla, set up a
brewing of Dyet-drink, and Stipone, which I am confident will prove a good
Commodity, if I be not interferr'd by a Monopoly.


TArugo's cheerful countenance speaks good success.


Come Cousin, Keep us no longer in suspense.


Then shortly thus: My Gold prevailed with her Taylor, notwithstanding his
timorous apprehensions of Patricio's anger; by acting the part of his Fore-man
I had access to Liviana, and have managed the business so happily, that nothing
could be more acceptable to her as the perseverance of Horatio's Love, in
return of your Picture she has here sent you hers


The business is so well begun, that I don't despair of its success.


The beauty of this Copy increases my flames, I'm for ever lost if I enjoy not
the Original.


This pleases me, yet I have still a jealousy his love is in complacence to
me, which I'll yet put to a further Trial.


My advice is, that you govern your affection with moderation, least you meet
with disappointments by her Brothers severity, and then you are affected with
fresh sorrows.


Madam I am resolved to perish in the Enterprise, rather then give over so
noble a design that's so well begun.


Be not too confident in so dangerous undertakings; for love is like a frozen
Snake taken up by a compassionate Pilgrim; who trusting to its weakness, gives
it the heat of his Bosom, and whilst the poor wretch is cheerfully marching
on his way, he then finds the force of the Serpents poison by a fatal sting in
his breast: how often has love been known to begin with trifling and
indifferent addresses, yet has swelled to such heights when not ending with
enjoyments, has brought on certain death: and though Loves firstlings be not
violent, yet his motions never cease till he has made a purchase of the heart;
so, when the desired object cannot be acquired, the soul of the poor Lover is
nothing but a compound of griefs and anxieties.


It seems she speaks by experience.

Cheer up Cousin, since I have undertaken the conveyance, 'tis a distrust of my
abilities to question a fortunage success.


O how I love Tarugo, for his confidence is comfortable.


I have been told Madam, that Don Patricio glories much in being a Friend and
Kinsman of Marquess Villana's, and that sometimes he corresponds with him from
the Indies.


'Tis true enough, and upon his account he has writ several times to me.


Then my project holds, Madam, the Fleet being lately arrived, cause with all
expedition to be made ready a parcel of Indian rarities.


What do you intend by that?


To be transformed like a Cavalier of Peru, for so I'll introduce my self to
Patricio's Conversation (and happ'ly be lodged in his Family) and let me have
one of the Marquess's Letters for the better counterseiting his hand in an
Epistle Recommendatory; (I had almost forgot my own little stock is spent in
the first practice according to the Lawyers learned Aphorism) Let not your
Cause starve.


Fear not want; take: here is a Purse of 200 Pistols; and fit your self with
the Conceits you have mentioned.


And there's one of the Letters you desired.


Both of you may now go to Prayer, and leave the rest to me.


Madam? Don Patricio is below, and desires to know if your Ladyship is to be
seen.


Horatio Shall he come up?


By any means, I am not afraid hee'll eat me.


I conjure you then not to be offended it what he speaks.


Provided his words be not accompanied with blows.


I'll answer for that; conduct him here Stanlia.


O here he is, when I view the Picture I am confirmed; 'Tis none else but Don
Horatio's! O Hell and Damnation.


I perceive his looks bend at you with a froward aspect.


It seems his anger continues.


Don Patricio, I hope the last days dispute is forgot.


I am not so easily changed, especially when I met with new reasons to confirm
me.


'Pray, Sir, be not so wilful, and if for arguments sake you have ensnared
your self in a fond opinion, it will become your discretion to lay aside
obstinacy, least you incur the imputation of a peevish Humorist.


Madam! If I find my jealousy rightly grounded, whatever he be that designs
the dishonour of my Family, I am resolved that he and all his Interest shall be
sacrificed to my revenge.


I hope I have given you no offence.


Madam, I crave pardon, that my passion hath thus flown out in your presence,
but the sense of injured honour hurried me on. -- If Horatio be the person that
pursues my disgrace, By all the glory of my Ancestors he shall suffer.


I doubt he suspects.


His passion demonstrates no less: it will not be amiss that we acquaint
Tarugo.


Well thought on; let's go instantly and do it.


Madam, since you have to deal with a Mad-man, and that your love is honourably
grounded, there's no fault to arm your self with a brisk dissimulation.


Upon that consideration, I'll once try to set a bold brow against a steep
hill.


Come, let's begin, for I hear him and his man bending towards us.


Love has sufficiently perfected me in my Cue.


Dear Madam, lay aside your passion, for it's true what I have told you.


You lie like an impudent slut; I say either deliver up the Picture, else I'll
have you whipped for a Bawd.


What's the matter? From whence proceeds this passion?


This same naughty wench here, Locura, as we were yesterday coming from the
Chapel, found a Gentleman's Picture: when she came home, showing it me, I chid
her for taking it up, and presently ordered her to burn it, and now forsooth
she tells me it's lost; which I look upon as a shift that she may keep it.


This is strange, and seems a Riddle; Pray Heaven's it be not the fore-runner
of greater Mischief.


If I did not lose it last night, let me be condemned to the strictest Cloister
in Spain.


Ha! Liviana, this is your cunning; because you see me careful in the
preservation of your honour, you think by this Artifice to abuse me; but all
will not do.


O Heaven's, that I should be thus innocently abused! Did not I foresee this?
Go, Wretch that thou art, and find out the Picture.


As I hope to be saved, Madam, I have searched all I can.


Come, Sister; this trick will not pass upon me; you know that I found the
Picture when I was last in your Chamber; This confirms me of the Intrigues
'twixt you and Don Horatio.


O strange! have you lost your wits?


Peace, least I chastise your loose behaviour with this Dagger.


Brother, let me tell you, your groundless jealousy was temptation enough for
me to have gone astray; if my own honour had not governed me better: If I have
done amiss, you are to blame as well to conceal it, as not to punish it: and
take notice, your austerity has awaked desires in me that might have slept: If
I chance to miscarry, I must attribute all to your idle humour: I'm confident
this sottish distrust in men, thinking to overcome our Wills with violence, has
been, and is still the only great cause that creates vicious Women.


I am almost convinced with the weight of her Reason: go Locura, follow your
Mistress.


O Sir! she's in such a rage, that I'm afraid she'll beat me about the loss of
the Picture!


Be not afraid, I'll remove that scruple.


Here is one Danger past.


This Letter was left by a Sea-man ten days since, with the Porter, who all
this time had forgot to deliver it.


'Tis not the first time I have been so served by that negligent Rascal.

SIR, the enclosed will tell you what I am; that I cannot accompany this
Letter, is by reason the Wayters of the Custom-house will have the Presents I
have brought you from Marquess Villana enrolled as a parcel of Merchandise; I
expect your friendship to deliver me from this trouble. This from aboard the
Pearl of Peru. D. Chrisante de Pego.


O Heavens! when will the exorbitancy of these inferior Officers be at an end,
for they and the like are the Instruments of great Odium upon the Government.


With the insolency of small fellows of birth and parts, when they come to
places of trust.


This is Villana's Character.

THE Gentleman to whom I have delivered this Letter is one of my intimate
Friends; he has business in Sevil, which happ'ly may be advanced by the
discretion of your good Counsel; the particulars he will impart himself:
whatever kindness you witness him, shall be embraced as done to me. That our
Friendship may not be forgot by distance of place, I have sent you such
rarities as our Indies affords, which I hope will be received as coming from
Your faithful Friend, and humble Servant, Villana.


Alberto, I'll go my self, and have this abuse corrected.


If there were not a Present in the Case he would not be so ready.


An't like your Worship, there is an Indian-Gentleman at the Gate, with
Presents for you from the Marquess Villana.


What like man is he?


He seems to be a person of Quality.


Alberto, Conduct him hither.


I am afraid the Letter I sent you has miscarri'd?


If you be the Gentleman that's come from my Cousin Villana, it has miscarri'd
so far, that I have but now received it by my Porters negligence: however, I
was just now going my self to have taken order for your redress.


I hearily thank you Sir, but the Wayters after second thoughts had a regard to
the Authority of your name, and so has dismissed me.


Noble Sir, my Cousin Villana speaks you his Friend, and consequently a person
of merit, upon which account I earnestly entreat that both my house, and all
other assistance, either as to advice or personal hazard, be at your disposal,
during your abode in this place.


I am not deceived of the Character my Friend Villana gave of you; It shall be
my study to deserve your kindness, In the mean time let these Presents be
disposed of.


Alberto, Carry these Boxes to my Closet. -- But oh -- What shall I do with my
Sister now that I have engaged him to lodge in my house?


Since your Hospitality is so great, let me acquaint you with my infirmity
before I give you the trouble of being a Guest.


It would be a strange infirmity that should cause Marquess Villana's friend,
being a Stranger, to lodge any where else but with me.


Sir, not to keep you longer ignorant of my disease; know, that if I meet with
any Women in your house, I run the hazard of my life.


That's strange, it seems an enchantment.


You are in the right; for when I was about ten years of Age in Mexico, where
my Father lived, There lodged a Girl of the same Age at our next door; she and
I were Play-fellows: Her Grand-mother who had the repute of a Witch, seeing me
once tumbling her a little rudely, to snatch a Kiss; the old Hag immediately in
point of Revenge, so enchanted me, that upon the approach of any Woman, except
Blood-relations, I am suddenly struck with the highest extremities of
Convulsion-fits; insomuch that whilst the Paroxism lasts, I run the hazard of
my life by the violence of the pains.


This is an odd kind of Charm.


Nay Sir, it varies according to the handsomeness and Qualities of the persons:
As for example, I can well enough admit of Nurses, and other necessary Vulgar
Women to pass to and fro within my view; But when once either Youth or Beauty,
especially of equal quality appears, then all the torments of Hell seizes on me
at once.


Since 'tis so, you shall be in no danger in my Family; for there is but two
Women, my Sister and her Maid, who shall be disposed of to remote lodgings by
themselves.


This is so great on obligation, that my first Letter to the Marquess shall be
nothing but an account of your civilities.


To his Friend I cannot be kind enough, but were you ever in Spain before?


This is the first time.


Could you receive the Order abroad?


The King sent it me.


No doubt it was upon the score of some eminent service.


I serve none, though in following my own Inclinations, the Kings affairs had
some advantage by my Countenance.


I perceive the Rodomontado's that's left in Spain begins to root in the
Indies.

Your pardon, Sir, till I give order for your Lodging.


Since I have delivered my self up to you, let's avoid Ceremonies.


Your servant Sir. Come Alberto


I have in some sort tuned this unruly Instrument.


Tarugo! I have heard all the discourse that passed 'twixt you and my Brother;
really the Plot is well laid.


You'll think it better if I order it so, that once this night you and Horatio
shall meet.


That I cannot comprehend considering the multitude of Guards.


Has not your Garden a back-door?


Yes, but my Brother keeps the key.


No matter as I have designed, he himself shall open it for Don Horatio's
entrance.


Alas! my Brother has got Horatio's Picture.


How came he by it?


He found it in my Lady's Chamber.


Does he suspect any thing?


Most furiously jealous, though I told him Locura found it as we came from
Chapel, yet nothing can allay his passion.


Trouble your self no more, I'll recover the Picture, and calm his rage. But
hark me Liviana


They are now at counsel, but I am sure to be on the Execution.


Pray remember.


How can my memory fail where such happiness is proposed?


Be gone: I hear your Bother coming.


Don Chrisanto, your Lodgings are ready, so you may retire to them at pleasure.


Noble Sir, I meet with such frank and real friendship, that I should do my
self an injury to retard the communication of the affair brought me to Sevil.


In that do as you think fit.


Being already inform' of my fatal Charm, you must needs conclude, its
consequence debars the satisfaction of Matrimony. I have only one Sister lest
to continue our Family: there is a Knight living in this Town, whose fair
reputation has made a conquest of her affection. 'Tis like, being of the same
quality, and living in the place, he must needs be within the verge of your
Acquaintance.


Speak his name, and I'll satisfy you.


l'le first try you with the sight of his Picture. By all that's sacred 'tis
lost: O how shall I a acquit my self to my Sister?


If your Sister was so passionately in love with him, how came she to part with
the Picture?


That's a just exception which I must tell you flowed from her self, who (not
trusting to any other) she prevailed with me to undertake this Voyage, and try
whether the opinion of the World, as to his Virtues, and his own person
compared with the Picture, be every way consistent. But now having lost it, I
may be satisfied of the one, but scarce of the other.


Sure you remember his name?


That I cannot forget, for he bears the name and Title of D. Horatio De St.
Christophel.


Now I begin to be convinced of the injury I did to Liviana, and her Maid.

But do you remember where you lost it?


Scarcely: unless yesterday coming from a little Chapel, not far from this
place, where in pulling out my Handkercher, I dropped my Sneezingbox, which was
suddenly restored by the first finder, and there I suspect it sell in the hands
of some Reprobate that was not in use of Confession.


The same place that Locura found it.

But Sir, the Picture is not lost.


I would ransom it with a thousand Ducats.


I believe this is it; my Sisters Maid found it in the same place you
mentioned.


O happy Maid! I wish my enchanted infirmity would allow me to give her
personal thanks: however a bountiful Token of my remembrance shall not be
wanting.


That needs not; I am glad any within my house had the good fortune to serve
you.


But as to D. Horatio, how stands his reputation herein Spain?


Most deservedly great, which you will soon find by a little conversation.


And that shall be done with the first convenience.


'Tis a good resolution; and the sooner you finish the matter, so much the
better; for there is still danger accompanies the keeping of young Beauties.


That's true; for those who pretend to be in the greatest security, are aptest
to be deceived.


No! I esteem him a fool that pretends to keep a Woman, and is over-reach'd.


I will not dispute the matter; but if you please now that the night
approaches, let's enjoy a little friscoe in the Garden.


A good motion; Alberto, do you run before, and set the Waterworks a going, and
light the Flamboys of Orpheus's Grot.


I shall Sir.


I admire the cunning and dexterity of Tarugo.


But if he bring D. Horatio hither, and conduct him safely out again, I shall
ne'er doubt his other undertakings.


You need not question it, since hitherto he has been so successful.


Conform to his Directions; we'll stay in the Garden.


But Madam, there comes your Brother and Tarugo; by Patricio's advance he seems
as if he would speak with you.


I think so.


Sister! because the sight of a Woman is not acceptable to my Guest, be pleased
for a time to withdraw to your Chamber, that we may have the freedom of the
Garden.


That's a strange humour; but you know the disposition of my body requires an
after-Suppers walk.


We will not stay long, and so you may return.


Let's go Locura; when my Brother's out of sight we'll hide our selves among
the Bushes, and listen what passes.


A most incomparable piece of Nature richly improved by Art.


It serves me, Sir.


'Tis so delightful a Paradise, that I think I'll scarce be persuaded to get
out of it this night.


I suppose rest would become you better after so tedious a Sea-voyage.


Can there be greater repose then where the most virtuous part of our senses
are so largely regall'd?


O Heavens! no appearance of his going! if my Sister chance to come to the
Garden


Me thinks I hear a noise of fighting.


No matter, it concerns not us.


Ah Traitors five to one.


Bless me Heavens!


O bloody Murderers, is there no generosity? Would it were light that I might
kill the one half of you with my looks, to save the blunting of my Sword.


Don Crisanto! you seem concerned.


The tie we owe to Knighthood obliges us to relieve the oppressed.


Spoke like a Gentleman; lets go then.


What can this mean?


I know the trick; run you towards the Garden door, and if you meet Horatio,
conduct him to the Grove, where I'll stay his coming.


Here's one opportunity gained.


By your countenance, you seem D. Horatio.


I am.


Come along with me.


They escaped us narrowly: but I believe we were mistaken.


Like enough; for I fancy they were only Rogues upon the set, for catching of
Cloaks. Sir, if you think fit, it's time to retire, before the night air come
on severely.


With all my heart.


But I'll shut the Gate.


All falls out well as yet.


Don Crisanto, there's the Garden entry to your Lodgings; I give you good
night.


Your humble servant Sir, but I must return


They are gone Horatio, you may come out.


Yes, Madam, to prostrate my self at your feet.


You're mistaken, I am not Liviana.


Who then?


Her servant Locura.


I have left the jealous Coxcomb fixed in his Chamber.


Is that Tarugo?


The same.


Where's Liviana?


Not far off; the ordr'ing this business has perplexed me to the purpose.


Here she comes that will thank you.


Madam, though the night has clouded the glory of these flowers, yet with the
presence of your Beauty they are restored to all the vanity which Nature ever
bestowed upon 'em.


Don Horatio, if there be any thing makes me question the sincerity of your
expressions, is, that your love to me is upon no other account but to convince
my Brother's rigorous jealousy.


Madam, I dare not deny but the Lady Sophronia engaged me upon that account;
but here I invoke the Heaven's, and all those glorious bodies with which they
are garnished, to be my witnesses that you are the only person I adore with a
sincere and spotless love.


There needs no more; you are believed, and I with the same affection deliver
up my self, and all mine to your disposing; for the present let our care be how
you may be safely conveyed out of this dangerous place.


That will be hard without over-turning the house.


Why, where can he stay?


O Madam! Here's a great noise of Feet, and they bend this way.


'Slife, 'tis your Brother, and all his Servants; and my Sword has unhappily
dropped, that will increase the noise.


Alberto! Haste; bring hither Lights.


I come Master.


Oh, oh! I am the most unfortunate of Women.


I'll secure you at this bout; and for you Don Horatio, shelter your self among
the Myrtles.


I obey.


Madam! when your Brother comes, tell him, being in my Balcony, as you passed
by, I tumbled down.


O Brother! I am afraid your Stranger-Friend has broke his neck; for just as I
passed by he tumbled out of the Balcony.


O Heaven's! will my Torments never have an end?


What's the matter?


Unfortunate Wretch that I am, and more unfortunate in your Friendship! Did not
you tell me I should see no Women in your house: I think the Devil either
brought me to the Balcony, or the Women to the Garden. -- Oh-oh.


Sister! You and your Maid withdraw, the sight of you makes him worse: I am
heartily sorry for this Accident, but I hope you are not ill hurt.


Worse then it appears; but I pray convey me to my Chamber.


Come, lets bear him smoothly.


O! to think of the pleasurable life I should enjoy, if all the Town Stallions
were of the temper of this Gallant?


If that were true, I would farm out my Carcase in as many ninteen shares as
ever a Ship was divided among Widows and Orphans.


The Great question would be then, whether your bodily basting, or my faculty
of Gembling would turn to the best account?


When all is done, I suspect if all these Casties in the Air were true, we
should at the long run find it the most cumbersome of all domestic Drudgeries.


Oh how shall we dispose of Horatio?


In your Closet for one night.


I'll venture, though it consists not with the modesty of our sex.


Madam! What shall become of me?


Sir, the freedom I may chance to afford for your safety, I hope you'll not
abuse it in any thing that may wrong my honour.


I'll sooner undergo the greatest of hazards.


Then my Closet shall be your retreat till morning you get to Tarugo's chamber.


Madam! this bounty becomes a Goddess.


'Tis love that moves me.


May I presume


If my Lady had not been thus mewed up, she would have been burned sooner than
afforded this freedom.


I am astonished at your great Foresight, ready Wit, and courageous Confidence.


Cousin, 'Tis the indulgence of kind Nature, to provide those with shifts who
are destitute of all other help.


I have seen you contrive, and act that on a sudden, which would take a
Play-maker six days to dress in a Scene.


And yet he gains the reputation of a wit, whilst I pass for a Craftyknave.


Nothing more certain.


And when poverty and age comes to oppress me, I shall be scarce admitted in
the hospital of the decayed Vertuosi.


Like enough; unless you can instruct either the contriving of a conceity
Sneezing-box, or a set of Glass-buttons, with Squibs in their Breeches.


For that reason, whilst I am young, I'll bestir my self like a Lord that comes
to his Honour before his Fortune.


Right! or like a hungry Courtier that's been long out of play.


Hist! Hist! Tarugo -- Tarugo! -- my Brother knows there's a man in the house.


What's the matter?


My dearest, how came that about?


A little Negro-wench who see you pass through the Garden to Tarugo's Chamber
hath made discovery.


No matter: do you withdraw to your Chamber, and keep close.


What do you intend now?


To prosecute the same design, only this Alarm hastens it with some change of
Circumstances; Get upon my bed, tie up your arm, and let the bloody slieve of
your Shirt hang out, and be sure to counterfeit a sound sleep.


Fear nothing on my part; but if there be need of fighting, speak loud, and to
the purpose.


Alberto, Go search the Garrets, and secure all the Windows, and Sancho do you
the same to the lower Room; it will be strange if this fellow escape us all.


We obey.


What's the matter Gentlemen, that you come thus armed to my Chamber? Do you
intend to murder me?


Heaven forbid such a villainy; I was told there's Thieves in the house, which
puts me upon the search.


You may forbear that; I was just coming to acquaint you with the strangest
accident that ever befell in Spain.


You amaze me; What's the business Sir?


Do not you remember, last night in the Garden we heard two several noises in
different places about the quarrel.


Very well.


And as we returned from following the first noise which fled from us, there
was some clashing of Swords, as it had been nigh your Garden back-door.


I do remember, and upon our speedy approach it vanished.


Well then; let me ask you a question; Is there such a Knight in or about the
Town that bears the name of Don Alonzo de Figueros.


There is such a noble Person, and of an ancient Family.


Is there a quarrel 'twixt him and any other?


A most lasting and bloody feud 'twixt them and the Lucina's.


All this agrees.


But how came you to the knowledge of Don Alonzo, and what makes you so curious
to understand his Enemies.


I, that will raise your wonder; besides, I shall bless the time I came to be
lodged with you.


That removes part of my wonder into joy.


Take notice Sir, the noise we heard last night, was not as we supposs'd,
occasioned by night Rats.


What then?


It was this same Don Alonzo, and his Kinsman, who were set upon by the
Lucina's, Alonzo was separate from his friend, which it seems was the noise we
sought after first; and that which was towards the Garden-door, was Alonzo's
Kinsman, hardly put to it by his Enemies. But upon our approach, they fancied a
relief from the Figueros, and so betook themselves to flight; the Gentleman
finding himself weak with the loss of blood by a wound in his Arm, laid hold on
the opportunity of your Garden-doors, being open, and came to the seat of the
West-corner to rest himself.


This is a strange accident; I am apt to believe it; for Don Balthazar who is
head of the Lucina's, is a person of a low spirit, and has made several
unworthy attempts of this kind to murder Don Alonzo; but pray what's become of
the Gentleman.


This morning betimes, an hour before Sun-rising, finding my self indifferent
well recovered of my last Convulsion-fits, I came to recreate my self in the
Garden, where I found him in such distress, that in my time I ne'er saw such an
object of compassion.


What became of him then?


With the best skill I had I bound up his wound, and brought him to my Chamber.


An't like your Worship, it was about break of day, the little Moor saw this
same strange man.


I am now satisfied of the Alarm; But where consists your singular happiness,
by saying you would bless the time for lodging with me.


I that's matter indeed.


As how I pray?


Why this same Gentleman in whose relief I was so fortunate, calls himself Don
Horatio de St. Christophel.


It's very like, for he is Cousin-Germain to D. Alonzo; and they are often
together.


However, it was ne'er my intention to be abused by any finistrous belief; but
was resolved so soon as I got ready to have found you out, and have the matter
tried; it seems the Alarm has hastened the discovery in bringing you to me.


That shall be speedily known.


I left him sleeping upon my bed, and I'll in, and try if he be awake.


I pray do it softly, for it were barbarous at such a time to disturb him.


he's fast asleep, but so that you may have a full view of his Face; I pray
let's step in quietly and satisfy my impatience.


'Tis certainly he, now he begins to stir.


Let's withdraw a little, and give him liberty to awake of himself.


I miss the courteous Gentleman that brought me hither, and saved my life; I
wish he were here; for being under Don Patricio's Roof, I know not to what
length his Passion may lead him to revenge the debate of the last encounter;
happy'ly his presence might allay rash Actions: But oh! when I think on it, I
injure honour to imagine Don Patricio can be guilty of Baseness; I hope Heaven
will be satisfied for my unjust jealousy with my inward sorrow: Well, upon
this generous fancy, I'll venture to take a little more rest.


How Patricio? Can you be that man's enemy whom you so lately magnified to me?


You must know Don Crisanto, there ne'er was any material quarrel 'twixt
Horatio and me; only last day we had a little debate upon the nicety of an
Argument, that concerned neither our Honours, nor Interest.


From such a trifle nothing of malicious hate could rise.


Not on my part; I believe it is so with him; for it was only want of skill in
either that could not manage our different opinions with that smooth dexterity
that ought to be in point of Argument.


I have observed indeed, that where the want of such conveyances is not
practised, the variation of fancy is often accompanied with tart
Contradictions; nay, sometimes the loudness of the voice betrays the innocence
of the Mind.


In a few words you have hit upon the difference.


If that be all I'll be the balsam to salve up that fore; and before you come
together, I'll so prepare him that he shall meet your Candid disposition with a
suitable generosity.


A most provident and discret resolution.


I wonder Tarugo stays! yet when I consider, it must be upon some necessity;
for as to me I know neither his kindness nor industry can undo one another.


I just now parted with Don Patricio, in so serious a belief of my Reality,
that he scruples at nothing I say; and I have so ordered the matter, that he
resolves to forget all the heat that passed 'twixt you and him in presence of
the Lady Sophrenia; so when ever you come to meet, embrace as never any such
business had been.


Any thing that will advance our Project.


Here is the picture of my Doxy, which diverted me when I was in England; it
must pass for that of my Sisters which I brought you.


Really it's pretty; But why done like a Shepherdess?


O the most obliging despos'd Ladies there, will ever be drawn in that innocent
dress.


I hope they are not so coy as the Astrea's and Vrania's in Arcadia.


So far from it, that during all my abode in and about Londen, I ne'er knew
either a Tyterus or a Malebeius breath one sigh for his Mistress's cruelty; but
I have heard some scalded Corridons make grevous groans for the warm enjoyments
they had from the Nymphs that ply the Parks in the Upper- Holbornia: But here
comes Patricio; Mind your countenance of dissimulation, keeping the Picture
constantly in your hand, adoring it with the name of the incomparable Durinda.


Is it possible that ever I shall attain that good fortune to be sufficiently
grateful, for the singular happiness I have met with under your Roof, and
within its precincts.


Noble Horatio, I am doubly rewarded, in having the opportunity to serve you,
and D. Crisanto, the friend of the renowned Marquess Villana.


I think my joy ought to be greatest, in being happy in a Brother in Law, who
in all respects goes beyond the Character was given by his Uncle Antonio; at
that time my Sister became in love with the fame of his good parts.


O to think of my happiness when I come to enjoy the incomparable Durinda.


Brother Horatio, I am impatient till I find out your Mother, that I may
discharge her Brother Antonio's Commendations, therefore let's be gone.


I hope Don Crisanto you'll return to your old Quarters.


To do otherwise were to blot my own discretion; assure your self, during my
abode here, I have designed your House to be my home.


The honour's mine.


Brother Crisanto! you tell me the sight of an old Woman brings not on your
disease.


Not at all.


Then my Mother is past 60, and for the other young Waiting-Girles, before you
enter I'll have 'em all removed out of the way


Tarugo's singular dexterity has removed all our fears.


I hear your Brother coming.


That's well, for I intend to entertain him with free language.


How is it with my Sister?


Not so very well.


Where lies your Sickness?


In my mind.


Who has discomposed it?


None but you by defaming my reputation to the world.


In that you wrong me, for the preservation of it is all the business I aim at.


The means you use are barbarous and irrational.


Softly Sister.


My complaint is just; for the World must needs conclude, the severity you have
practised upon me was grounded upon my loose behaviour: Brother, Brother;
There's my loss which is scarce to be repaired; for the action being done by
you who has the repute of a Wise man, makes the deeper and blacker reflexions
upon me.


Trouble your self no more, I am convinced of my error; besides, all my cares
and fears are almost at an end, you being now upon the matter even as good as
married.


That's strange! and I as yet ignorant of the person, pray! what is he?


That noble Cavalier, Don Roderigo de la Rochos.


Do you know if I love him?


I have made choice, and you must be content.


In this matter Brother, I am the person most concerned, and therefore ought to
be first consulted. 'Pray! assume no more power in the Election of a Husband
for me, than I shall do in a Wise for you.


This freedom does not become you.


Have not I a Will?


Nothing in this but obedience: I being your Father in the case.


Here's a story indeed! A grave Father? I wish you had the Wisdom that's
requisite in an elder Brother.


Let me hear no more words; for the business is resolved, and conform to my
promise; I am now going to bring Don Roderigo. Alberto when you have ordered
the Guards, go find out the Priest, for this Night I'll have the Marriage
Consummate.


Did you hear all this Locura.


Yes, Madam, with great grief.


Rather then I'll be false to Don Horatio, I'll embrace the worst of Deaths.


Allege stoutly, That you are married already, and if you please, I'll take
the deepest Oaths that the law affords, that I saw the Priest join you and
Horatio together.


There may fall out bloody Consequences 'twixt my Brother and Horatio by such a
shift! oh! oh! is there no hopes of relief?


Madam! the Lady Sophronia is come to visit you.


She is most welcome: Go, wait upon her in Locura; this is a most blessed
opportunity to advertise Horatio and Tarugo. -- Dear Sophronia, you could ne'er
have come to visit me at so seasonable a time.


I hope, Madam, the pains I have taken to cultivate the love 'twixt you and
Horatio is acceptable.


Nay, Madam, though your interest be equally complex'd, yet when our loves are
Crowned with marriage, I shall ever acknowledge you as the happy instrument.


But what think you of Tarugo's inventions?


He has not his equal in the world.


I verily believe, if he had lived in the days of Lycurgus, he had been
preferred to be Recorder of Lacedemon.


Don't you observe, Locura, how my learned Lady enamels her discourse with
Historical Sippets of Antiquity.


Pish! I have often heard my Grandmother say, that learned Women were sometimes
led into dangerous curiosities, and upon that account I think it no excellent
qualification in our Sex.


You are in the right, there being strange and perilous things mentioned in
Books; for I was once in a condition that I could not rest in ten days, only
for reading six lines of a rapture.


This is strange


Most certain he himself is gone for Don Roderigo, and sent his man Alberto for
a Priest; I expect him every hour, though I am resolved ne'er to yield, yet my
Brothers passion may lead him to commit extravagances upon me.


For that very reason I will stay with you, and at your Brother's Return, 'tis
like I may invegle him to conduct me home. In the mean time Stanlia, run and
advertise Horatio and Tarugo of the danger Liviana is in to be married this
night to D. Roderigo; and assure 'em, I will so divert Patricio, that they
shall have time either to practice force or slight.


O my comfortable Sophronia!


Cheer up Madam! my life upon it Horatio and Tarugo will overcome this
difficulty. Come, let's to the Garden, and stay their coming.


Though the Alliance and the person be in all respects as fair and great as
ever any of my Family would pretend to, yet it still runs in my fancy that the
Lady Liviana will not yield.


What's your reason?


Because she being of so lofty and witty Education, 'tis not to be imagined she
will condescend to marry at first sight.


My Authority shall weather that difficulty.


Because 'tis a matter of marriage, I'll venture two hours Siege, if in that
time she yields not, I fall presently off.


If my Sister do not answer your expectation, I'll conduct you from the Siege
with all honour and safety.


Whatever the matter is, I find Whisp'rings to my Soul of some approaching
happiness.


Would I could entertain such thoughts.


Madam! this should be Don Patricio by his rapping!


Like enough.


Get you to your Chamber; I'll go meet him, and practice my Trick, which shall
in the end convince him, that Mercury as well as Venus clubbed his influence at
my Nativity.


Don Patricio, when I come to visit your Sister, you keep out the way.


Madam! if I had known of your coming, no temptation in the world could have
withdrawn me; but I am glad that you are here at this time.


What's the matter?


Because I am just now going to marry my Sister to this noble Gentleman Don
Roderigo; I hope you will not grudge to be Witness to the Ceremony.


With all my heart: but I must go home first, and I expect you and your friend
will conduct me.


Yes, in hopes you will return and let the same Priest put an end to all our
long loves.


We shall advise of that hereafter.


Come Roderigo, we'll satisfy this Lady.


It cannot he avoided; besides, I am not so hasty, for I still expect a denial.


Mind your duty Alberto; Come then Lady.


Hitherto we have been miraculously successful.


If I had Empire and Sovereignty, you should be my only Minister of State.


So you might, and be well served, for greatness would convert all my Tricks
and Circumventions to the delicate words of prudence, foresight and sagacity.
If I be not mistaken, here comes Stanlia.


Horatio! Tarugo! If you take not a speedy course presently to rescue Liviana,
her Brother is resolved to marry her this night to Roderigo, and to give you
opportunity to act the more securely, my Lady by this time has trained both
Roderigo and Patricio to her own Lodgings, where she intends to divert them
till you have attempted something in order to Liviana's relief.


'Slife, I'll go call my friends, and force the house.


Be sober and resolute, without confusion: the business shall be done at this
time or not at all; Stanlia, return and bid your Lady gain as much time as may
be.


I obey.


We are close by Patricio's House; run you and stand at the corner of
Toledo-street, where I will direct Liviana and her Maid to find you.


I'll do what you bid me, though I am still of the opinion, that now during his
absence, force would be the only way.


It would look so like a Riot, that we should have all the City about our ears:
but no more, let's to our business.


What's the matter Tarugo?


Is Patricio gone out?


Yes, to conduct the Lady Sophronia home.


That's well: there he'll be tied till we have done our business.


Which way?


No more words; but both of you be instantly dressed in your coursest and unusual
Clothes.


What next?


Pass through the Garden where you'll find my Chamber open, and there with your
Faces veiled stay for my coming.


That's easy and quickly done.


When once you find your self free without the great Gate, make all the haste
you can to the corner of Toledo-street, where you'll find Horatio to conduct you
to the Lady Sophronia's back-Entry; there I'll be ready to receive you.


Come, Madam, Let's go valiantly about the business


As I was this morning before I rose out of bed, upon the highest Bensil of
natural contemplation, I was convinced of the unreasonableness of my present
employment.


'Tis so far from being Military, that we are rather like Jailers then
Soldiers.


Therefore with the first convenience, I'll fling it off, and sooner undertake
the weaning of Cub-Rats, rather then be at the drudgery of being a Turkish
Guardian against a Christian Lady, that minds nothing but honourable enjoyment.
But Mum! -- here comes our Indian-Stranger.


Peace be here.


'Bless your Worship.


I'm dry; bring some Lemanado to my Chamber.


Presently Sir.


Heavens defend me, I'm villainously murdered and betrayed.


What do you mean by this, Noble Sir.


O Rascals! Traitors! Villains! have you conveyed Women to my Chamber to
destroy me with Convulsion-fits?


You amaze us, which way came they there?


There they are you Dogs; go instantly and drag 'em out, else one after
another I'll sheath my Sword in all your bellies. Look upon 'em you careless
Coxcombs, are not these Women?


I believe they are Witches.


Yet I'll venture to see their Faces.


Thou Son of an English Sequestrator; do'nt you know the sight of a Woman's face
presently chokes me to death; I say instantly, let 'em be kicked out, least I
prove your Executioner.


Go, and the Devil go with you; But pray Sir discover nothing of this to our
Master.


Provided you be more careful in time coming; against my return let my Chamber
be well perfumed, least their smell renew my disease.


This is the place.


Madam! there waits Horatio.


Are you come my Dearest?


Oh the fears I apprehend.


Continue still veiled, and let's make haste to the Lady Sophronia's.


Let's on then. Oh! oh! Horatio, there comes my Brother and Roderigo; When will
my miseries be at an end?


Fear nothing; I have been too conversant with Tarugo to want a shift for this
danger, which if it fail, 'tis here shall protect you.


What are these coming towards us?


A man and two Women.


Every shadow swells my Jealousy.


Don Patricio, this a happy encounter, if you'll be pleased to afford me another
Trial of your Friendship.


Of that you may rest assured; But what's the matter?


The Lady is my Kinswoman, and Daughter to Don Alonzo: we have been paying a
visit to her Father, who lies ill at a Surgeons house of the wounds he got at
the late quarrel, in the next street our Coach broke and upon such occasions
you know the multitude crowds to gaze. Whereupon I bethought my self of going
to the Lady Sophronia's, to stay the mending of our Coach: and now being alone,
to prevent any affront that might come to the Lady, either by the Lucina's or
any other accident, let me entreat your assistance in the Convoy.


Though there were not friendship in the case; Honour requires my help on such
occasions: I hope Roderigo you'll not grudge your countenance?


In matters of Honour, I am never behind.


I think the Heavens have sent you both to my help.


That we may do it the more methodically, I'll march at a distance in the Van,
and my Friend Roderigo shall keep the Rear, and Don Horatio with the Lady shall
be the Battalia.


With this help I care not for all my Enemies.


It seems I am of the Baggage, and must along with the Artillery; yet I could
wish Alberto with his Javelin were here to defend me.


All that I have told you is true.


Thy invention is not to be equalled.


But, Madam, Ple go below stairs and wait their coming.


Do, and bring 'em up the back way to my Closet.


Now Horatio there's Sophronia's Lodgings, and since this danger is past,
unless you have any other Service, I must beg your pardon being to return home;
and deliver my Sister Liviana to this noble Gentleman, who is to be her
Husband; for both she and the Priest I know by this time expect us.


I wish you both joy, e're long I hope you shall hear that Crisanto and I shall
have likewise put a period to our affairs: it would be no small addition to us
all to hear the same 'twixt you and the Lady Sophronia.


That will soon follow after the settling my Sister.


And that will be sooner then you imagine


Blessed be the Stars that has brought you both safely hither.


The sport of all is, Patricio not knowing any thing conveyed us to your great
Gate: He is just now below, ready to go home with Roderigo, thinking to marry
him to Liviana.


That's best of all: And to have his Error the more solemnly convinced;
Stanlia go instantly and call Patricio up; tell him he must needs come; neither
will I admit of any excuses.


I run, Madam.


What do you mean by this, I begin to have fresh fears?


No danger at all: Horatio, convey your Mistress to my Closet, and there stay
till I call.


Come Liviana, let the apprehension of further danger be a Stranger to your
thoughts; as I am all yours, so I conceive you are so much mine, that though
both your Brother and Roderigo should offer to force your return, Heaven would
lend this single arm strength to justify my right; therefore let's follow the
Lady Sophronia's directions.


Whatever become of me, in spite of all Spain, e're you two go from this House
your Marriage shall be civilly and religiously consummate; for I can order my
family to stand out the finishing half a score of such bargains.


Yes, Madam! and as many more, if you'll let me command your Garrison, as
Alberto did that of Patricio's.


But I hear Patricio coming; Therefore Cousin you and your Love to the Closet
quickly.


Madam, though my affairs are considerable, yet you see my readiness to obey
your commands.


'Twill be for your good in the end: but first let me ask you a question.


If I can I'll satisfy you.


Do you continue in the same opinion, of the facility in keeping a Woman from
her humour?


As yet I know nothing to convince me.


Will no less then a demonstration of the contrary satisfy you?


No, Madam.


I warrant you, you think your self Cock-sure of Liviana's being at home.


What else?


Come out; Advance my new married Couple; if you be not now fitted with a
demonstration, I'll trouble my self no more to find one.


If you be humane, speak. O Heavens! what do I see?


Nothing of Sorcery in the matter: the noble Horatio, who is now my Husband,
has rescued me from your unjust slavery: He wants not generous courage to
maintain what he has done.


That I will with the hazard of my blood, and all that belongs to my Family.


What, Patricio, are you Planet-struck?


Lay aside your wonder; only a little cleanly conveyance of your much esteemed
Friend Don Crisanto, who is now returned to be your humble servant Tarugo.


What say you? can a Woman's will be fettered?


I acknowledge my error.


Then our Nuptials shall be no longer delayed.


Madam, though my spirits be a little troubled, yet the consideration of
enjoying you, reconciles me to my Sister, and the brave Horat is They embrace.


My Noble Knights and Honourable Ladies, when all your Solemnities are over, I
hope you have so much natural compassion as to think there be other mouths that
cannot always chew fodder.


What do you mean?


Ee'n that Domingo, Locura, Stanlia, and I, may clip one another in a
Matrimonial way.


Because you are so discreet in not seeking it till our Nuptials be past, your
desires shall be granted.


Content: let it be so.


When all these knots are tied, there will be old whisking, and nothing lest
for me: however I am not much disappointed, for I ne'er expected Liviana would
love at first sight.


In this there's nothing new, only you see a fresh experience of the
impossibility of restraining a Woman's Will.


THere is a Fate accompanies Play-makers, like the Curse upon the Women of
Holland; which is, besides the Authors true birth, the Audience will not be
satisfied without a Soutterkine, and that forsooth trimmed to a better
advantage with trappings of Rhyme then the Play it self. The truth is, our Poet
bids me tell you, bee'l rather run the hazard of being thought no Wit, then
garnish the corners of his sense with such canting Gingles: And if happ'ly he
should pop upon a revery of Dactylus and Spondaeus, there's none knows h m
would believe it his. Therefore in his own way, he says, that having brought
his Present from Spain, and having' escaped the boisterous Billows of the Bay of
Biscay, he hopes at this time neither to dash or split upon these Boxes, nor be
ingulfed in this Pit. And for his Friends above in the exalted Stalls, he
expects the best from them, since he has complemented them with a Monky and a
Jigge. All the Clap he expects from you is, not to be hist, and say with an
indifferent Grimasse, 'tis well enough for a Novice. I am sure if you knew him
so well as I, this could never be refused, for he is a person that honours your
good Men, and never boiled at the coursest of your Women.

If this prevail not, he hopes he's safe from danger,
For Wit and Malice, ought not to reach a stranger.

