GOod my Liege.

Dear Sovereign.

Why do you keep the Sword of Justice back
From cutting off so foul a blasted branch?

Oh let your milder sense censure this Fate,
And cast her not away in hate of spleen.

Consider Sir, she is your only Child, your Kingdoms Heir, your Countries
future Hope, and she may live


To be a Strumpet, sir: Do not vex my soul with extollation of a thing so vile.
Is't possible a Lady of her Birth should stain her Royal Race with beastly
lust, and mix the blood of Kings with a base issue? Was it for this you were so
long mewed up within your private Chamber? Was it for this we gave so strict a
charge to have your tedious Sickness looked unto? But our examples shall be such
on thee, as all the world shall take a warning by. What man, or devil in the
shape of man was he, that durst presume for to pollute thee? Either confess
him, or by all our gods I'll plague thy body with continual tortures; that being
done, I will devise a death, that time to come shall never pattern it.


There's not the smallest torture while I live
That shall afflict, or touch her tender body.

What Traitor-slave dares interrupt the passage of our will? Cut him in pieces.


Oh, hold your hands; for mercy let him live,
And twenty pieces within my bosom give.

Death? Now 'tis probable, He lay my life this Groom is Father to the Strumpets
Brat.

A Guard there: seize him, make the Slave confess;
And if he will not, kill him instantly.

Villains, unhand me, I'll reveal the truth, I will not die in base obscurity.
Pheander, know I am not what I seem (an abject Groom) but Royal as thy self: My
name is Radagon, son to thy Enemy, Cicillia's King; this thirteen months I
have continued here, in hope for to obtain what now I have, my Ariadnes love.
'Tis I am Father to this Princely Boy, and I'll maintain't even with the utmost
hazard of my life.


Thy life, base Lecher, that is the smallest satisfaction that thou can
render for thy foul Transgression. And were it not against the Law of Arms and
Nature, these hands should sacrifice your guilty souls; and with your bloods
wash the foul stain from off our Royal House. As for the Brat, his brains shall
be dashed out, no base remembrance shall be left of him, I'll have my will
effected instantly.


Dear Sovereign, let Pity plead this Case, and Natural Love reclaim your high
displeasure. The Babe is guiltless of the Fact committed, and She is all the
children that you have, then for your Countries cause, and Kingdoms good, be
pleased to take her to your grace again.


Besides my Liege, 'tis known that Radagon
Is by his Noble Birth, a worthy Lord,
Princely descended, of a Royal Stock,
Although not Heir apparent to a Crown;
Then since their hearts have sympathised in one,
Confirm with love this happy Union.

This hand shall be his Priest that dares again presume to speak for her. What
worse disgrace did ever King sustain, than I by this luxurious couple have? But
you shall see our Clemency is such, that we will mildlier sentence their wild
Fact, than they themselves can look for, or deserve. Take them asunder, and
attend our Doom.


Before you speak, vouchsafe to hear me, Sir:
It is not for my self I bend my knee,
Nor will I crave the least forgiveness,
But for your Daughter; Do but set her free,
And let me feel the worst of Tyranny.

The like Submission do I make for him.

Stop her mouth, we never more intend to hear her speak: I would not have a
Token of Remembrance, that ever I did bear the Name of Father. For you,
lascivious Sir, on pain of death we charge you leave our Kingdom instantly: two
days we limit you for your departure; which time expired, 'tis death to tread
upon our Thracian Bounds.

But Huswife, as for you,
You with your Brat, we'll send afloat the Main,
There to be left, never to Land again:
And that your Copes-mate may be sure to loose
The chief content of his desired Bliss,
You shall be guarded from our Kingdoms Confines,
And put to Sea, with several Winds and Tides,
That ye may never more enjoy each other:
She in a small Boat without Man or Oar,
Shall to the mercy of the Waves be left.
He in a Pinnace without Sail or Pilate,
Shall be dragged forth some five leagues from the shore,
And there be drenched in the vast Ocean.
You hear your Doom, which shall for ever stand irrevocable.
Make no reply: Go strumpet, get thee hence,
No sin so vile as Disobedience.

A heavy, bitter Sentence! when for Love we must be banished from our Native
right: Had his high Rage but suffered me to speak, I could have my Chastity as
clear, as is the unspotted Lamb of Innocence.


Alas, good Lady: Now on my faith I do believe as much, I'll back return unto
his Majesty, and urge him to recall his heavy Doom.


Oh no, I would not for the world, believe me sir,
Endanger you in such an Embassy.
Let him persist, the Heavens hath ever sent,
A Tower of strength to guard the innocent.
Oh Radagon, we two shall never meet,
Until we tread upon the higher Frame.
Farewell, Dear Love. Poor Babe, thy wretched Birth*
Makes us to part eternally on earth.

My life, my soul, all my falicity,
Is in a trice divided from my sight!
No matter now what ere become of me,
All earthly joys are lost in loosing thee.

Come, I must know your cause of Discontent.

I know it is your love to urge thus far, and 'tis my love thus to conceal it
from you: should I relate my cause of Sorrow to you, and you seeking my remedy,
should wound your self, think what a Corsive it would prove to me. And yet I
wonder you conceive it not; if you consider truly your own state, you'll find
our cause of grief to be alike.


You have found a pretty way to silence me, but 'twill not serve, indeed it
will not, sir, because I know you do dissemble with me. The strongest
Allegation that ye have, is that you sorrow for a Fathers death, and that I
know is feigned; for since that time my self have heard you, in your Roundelays
more frolic far than any of the Swains; and in your pastimes on the Holidays
strive to surpass the activest of us all, therefore that cannot serve you for
Excuse; And for your flocks, I'm sure they thrive as well as any shepherds do
upon the plain, that makes me wonder, and importunate to know the cause that
might procure this sadness.


Since nothing but the Truth will satisfy,
Take it in a word, brother: I am in Love.

Ha, ha, what's that?

A god which many thousands do adore.

A Fable that fond fools gives credit too: I that have bin a Shepherd all my
life, and ne'er trained up to School as thou hast bin, would scorn to be
deluded by a Fiction, a thing that's nothing but inconstancy. Did never hear
the Invective that I made?


No, nor desire it now.

Yes, prithee mark it,
I'll tell thee my opinion now of Love.
Love is a Law, a Discord of such force,
That 'twixt our Sense and Reason makes divorce.
Love 's a Desire, that to obtain betime,
We loose an Age of Years plucked from our prime.
Love is a thing to which we soon consent,
As soon refuse, but sooner far repent.
Then what must women be that are the cause,
That Love hath life? that Lovers feel such laws?
They 'r like the Winds upon Lapanthaes shore,
That still are changing. Oh then love no more.
A woman's Love is like that Syrian Flower,
That buds, and spreads, and withers in an hour.

See Orpheus, you have drawn Listners.

What, dost make beasts of 'em?

Come son, let's make haste to fold up our flocks,
I fear we shall have a foul Evening.

I think so too Father, for there's a strong wind risen in the back door.
S'nails! yonder's Mr. Titterus the merry Shepherd, and the old fool my father
would pass by; we'll have a Fit of Mirth before we part.


Hoise a Gods-name, cannot the Puppy see?

Hardly sir, for he has been troubled with sore eyes this nine days.


Muscod, come hither, what shall I give thee to put my brother Pallemon from
his dumps?


I do not know what you'll give me, but promise what you will, I'm sure to be
paid if, I meddle with him: he's the strangest humor'd man now of late that
e're I met withal; he was ready to lay his Hook over my pate the other morning,
for giving him the time of the day. But upon one condition I'll venture a knock
this once.


What's your condition?

Marry, that you would give me a delicate Song to court my Wench withal; but it
must be a good one, for women are grown so musical now adays, they care not a
pin for a Song unless it be well pricked.


Oh, I have one a purpose: hark, shalt hear it.

Nothing shall serve, but what I have prefixed.

I'll pluck the Moon from forth the Starry Throne,
And place thee there to light the lower Orb;
And if stern Pluto offer to embrace thee,
I'll pitch him head-long into Phlegeton.

Phebus defend me! Oh, I fear he's mad.

Or if thou'lt live, and be the Shepherds Queen, I'll fetch Senessa frown the
Down of Swans to be thy handmaid; the Phrygian Boy that Jove so doted on, shall
be thy Page, and serve thee on his knee: Thou shalt be guarded round with Jolly
Swains, such-as was Luno's Love on Latma's hill: Thy Music shall surpass the
Argo's tamer. If this content thee not, I'll dive into the bottom of the Deep,
and fetch thee Bracelets of the Orient Pearl, the Treasure of the Sea shall all
be thine.


He's stark mad! some power withhold him here,
Until I find some place to shelter me.

Art thou gone in haste?
I'll not forsake thee;
Run thou ne'er so fast,
I'll o'retake thee:
Or the Dales, or the Downs,
through the green Meadows,
From the fields through the towns, to the dimshadows.
All along the Plain,
to the low Fountains,
Up and down again
from the high Mountains:
Echo then, shall again
tell her I follow,
And the Floods to the Woods,
carry my holla, holla, ce, la, ho, ho, hue

This storm is over, but now a greater storm is to be feared, that is, your
Censures of this History. From cruel shipwreck you have here beheld the
preservation of these banished Princes, who being put to sea in Mastless Boats,
with several Winds and Tides were driven back to the same Coast that they were
banished from; which understanding, lest they should be known, they change their
Names and Habits, and persuade the silly shepherds they are Foreigners: in
several Cottages remote from Court these Lovers live, thinking each other dead.
The sighs, the tears, the passions that were spent on either side, we could
describe to you,

But time hath barred us: This is all you see
That he hath lent us for our History.
I doubt we hardly shall conclude so soon:
But if you please to like our Authors Pen,
We will beguile Time, and turn his Glass again.

GOod Gods, be merciful.
Oh, oh, oh.

Some Power defend us from this noisome Sickness. Stand: who's that, the Wind?


Keep distance then. Oh my Lord, is't you? this is a fearful Visitation, the
people as they walk, drop down in heaps.

Retire and keep the wind, here comes another.

Oh, oh, falls dead.

Mercy, he's dead!

Who is't?

I cannot well discern him, but I think it is the Lord Leonardo: Yes, 'tis he.


A fearful rest receive him, he was virtuous.
My Lord, I would fain exchange some private words with you, I think you are
clear.


Upon my life I am.

Let's walk together then.

Alas poor Niece, cruel unnatural Father, a Falleris, a smiling Tyrant, to use
his Daughter with such cruelty: Bless me, I fear I have taken the Infection.


'Tis Sophos the Kings Brother come to Court.

I heard some speak, keep off what e're you be:
Who is't, Pallation? where's the King my Brother?

In his Bed-chamber.

Tell him I am here.

I shall my Lord. Some there remove the body.

No, it shall lye,
Himself shall see in what a state we live:
His Daughter's murdered, banished I should say,
And the Cicillian Prince, both innocent.

A little insant perished, the Gods know
As lawfully begot as he or I.
Nay, never stare, 'tis true: the Gods
Are not displeased without cause.
Heyda! Is this a time for Music?
And so it is indeed; for every one
Is ready to kick up his heels.
Oh, oh, oh. I marry sir, here's music fits the time.

What horrid shreiks and clamours fills our ears?
Are groans sit Music for a Princes Court?

'Tis Music fit for Princes that delight in devisish Dances: Look sir, behold
here's one hath danced himself quite out of breath: here's good Leonardo gone,
your Daughter's dead, poor Niece, with tears I speak it, and your Land infected
with a Plague incurable, your Court, and 'twas not wont to be the
Court-disease: what should occasion this but -- -- would I durst speak what I
suspect: suspect, said I? nay what is truth, for that's beyond suspicion. Read
that, then guess the cause of our inflictions.


Ha, ha, ha, ha. This was a subtle and shrewd Device to shadow Treachery, was
it not my Lords? Having wrapped Treason in a poisoned paper, delivers it to us to
take the infection.


By the blessed Sun 'tis false, I am no Traitor, as loyal as the truest Subject
here; yet there is poison in it of power and strength to make a Fathers heart to
swell and burst at the recital of such Tyranny. Thy Daughter's chaste, a Royal
spotless Princess, she here doth vow, and call the Gods to witness, she ne'er
admitted him unto her bed, until the Nuptial Rites were celebrate; yet
Tyrant-like thou putt'st her unto sea, not suffering her to plead her
innocence, where she and her poor Babe did suffer death.


Dissembling hypocrite, art not ashamed to lay such shallow baits to catch a
Crown? Observe what a discovered way he treads, thinking her dead, which all
you know she justly merited, has forged this Letter, to turn your hearts with
seeming pity to dispossess us, and be King himself: But you whose hearts have
ever yet bin loyal, know how to censure of such Treachery with true discretion.
Pray ye use him kindly, let him not feel too many cruel tortures, he is our
Brother, though he have transgressed the Law of Gods and Nature, we are loath to
punish with too much severity.


Ha, ha, ha. Now give me leave to laugh, devouring Crockodile, dost think I
fear to die? Let death fright those that fear to die for ever: let me behold
him in his ugliest shape, he's then most lovely; if I did fear, I'd ne'er have
uttered this, it was to clear thy Daughters innocence, and blaze thy infamy
unto the world, for this I did it: if for this I die, I die for truth, live
with eternity.


Take him aside until we call for him.

Do not touch me, slaves, I scorn to run.

Your council Lords what we best to do,
You see his guilt apparently appears:
We dare not call a Public Consultation
For fear of the Infection, unto you
We will refer the manner of his death.
Here seat your selves, and every man set down
His several Censure; which when we survey,
We will give our Sentence, either Life or Death.

I think this be the Land of Golgotha, inhabited by none but by the dead,
except some airy shadows, and they 'r silent, the streets are strewed with
breathless carcases, as 'twas in Rome when Marius Silla warred. All that do see
me, shun me like the Plague, and shut their doors, sure I am not infectious.
Entering the Court, the Guard stood gazing at me, and gave me free access into
the Palace, without demanding whence, or what I came for; the strangeness of
their looks and fearful action, makes me imagine that I am transformed: would I
could meet but with a Water-spring, to see if I retain my wonted shape. This
should be near the Presence: what are these? they should be Lawyers, they are not
dumb I'm sure.


What's he?

Some stranger.

How came he in the Guard?

They speak, I'll try if they can hear.

Keep back, who are you? The cause of your approach so near the King?


Your out-sides speak you noble. Know my Lords, the Cause of my arrival in this
Land, is in the search of Princely Radagon, now Son and Heir to the Scicilian
King; if ever you did hear of such a Prince, let not fore-passed hate
extinguish him, but glad an aged Father with a Son, who now is all the children
he hath left. They shake their heads and weep: Good Gods I fear they have taken
away his life by tyranny.


What stranger's that? what makes him in our Court?
What, are you dumb? Why do you not resolve us?

He is a Subject to Cicillias King, and comes in search of banished Radagon.


How, banished?

I sir, banished. And 'twas too mild a satisfaction for the base wrongs that I
sustained by him: in a small Boat hopeless of help or life, he was put forth to
sea by our Command. This you may tell your King, and so be gone.


You could not be so unmerciful, to use a virtuous Prince so cruelly: you durst
not so transgress the Law of Kings, to murder him, although your Enemy. I know
no cause of his did merit it, but the stern hate of ancient Enmity.


How dare you sir, capitulate the Cause? Go, bid your Master come himself to
know, and then perchance we may resolve it him.


Be sure he will, thou cruel Homicide, and ask the Cause in such a thundering
Language, will make both thee and all that hear it, tremble.


We will answer him as loud, sir, fear it not.
But to our first Affairs: what is your Censure? is Life or Death the Sentence
we must give?


Mine is his Life, my Liege.

And so is mine.

Mine is his life, but not his liberty.

Why not his death as well? His fact is Treason.

Suspected, but not proved; therefore 'tis fit he should be kept close
Prisoner, till we hear how the rude multitude do stand affected, for he was
deeply seated in their hearts.


We are resolved, let him be straight brought forth,
We will use him with what clemency we may;
I know the Gods, whom Kings should imitate,
Have placed us here to rule, not overthrow.
Justice shall hand in hand with mercy go.
We speak before a King, but now a brother;
If you will yet confess your Guilt and Cause.
That moved you first unto this Forgery,
We may perhaps forgive you; otherwise
There is no other favour but to die.

Ha, ha, ha, to die! I do not think I shall be made so happy, for death's the
honest mans felicity, there is no favour that I crave but death; in living here
I shall more torments find, but being dead, there ends my misery.


If you will yet confess, we will have mercy.

Mercy, on whom, for what? You are deceived,
It is a thing not in thy power to give.
Mercy's immortal, and to humane eyes
Is never seen till fleshly passion dies.

It seems then sir, you do desire to die?

With full consent, for life's a loathsome vale of misery.

In which thou still shalt live: thy life we give, but doom thee to perpetual
banishment: we limit you no time, therefore dispatch. See that he instan^ly
depart the Court.


Dost think I'll stay, by all our gods thy Crown and Kingdom shall not hire me
to it. Tyrant fare vel, if e're I do return, cities that now stand, shall be
heaps of stone.


This foggy Cloud dispersed, I hold it fit some post to the Delphos to the
Oracle, to know what shall ensue these Thunderclaps that threaten such
distraction, we our self will see you furnished for the Offering. Whom shall we
send? Cleanthes? No: you two prepare for your departure presently. What though
he was our Brother? 'tis not fit mistrustful men should live within our Court:
what is't to be a King, and stand in awe?


Those that entreat, and may command with fear,
Are fitter to climb up than tarry here.

Stirring so early, Partner, then I see you'll prove a wealthy shepherd;
watchfulness is the chief star within our Calendar: 'twere vain to ask you how
you affect this life, your forwardness expresses that you like it.


Who can dislike a peaceful happiness? Methinks I never proved a sweeter
happiness; in every corner here Content sits smiling: the Mountain tops I make
my Morning-walks, the evening-shades my recreation, and when Nights Queen puts
on her gorgeous Robe, I take delight to gaze upon the stars, in which methinks
I read Philosophy; and by the Astronomical Aspects I search out Natures
secrets, the chief means for the preventing my Lambs prejudice. I tell-you sir,
I find in being a shepherd, what many Kings want in their Royalties.


I joy in your content, yet wonder sir, you do frequent such melancholy Walks;
I have observed your passions many times, and seen you sit sole companied with
thought, as if your passions were your Comforters, I fear some foolish female
has entrapt you.


Not any sir, believe it, that's a thing
I thank my stars I ne'er did estimate.
Love that imparadizeth some, to me
Is hell it self, if hell on earth there be.

Blessed be the hour that e're I met with thee,
Not love a woman? have I a second self?
Oh happy, happy man, not love a woman!

I do not yet, assure you.

Nor ever do, if you do love your self; of all things in the world take heed of
'em: I have a brother mad forsooth, for Love. But that I had a mother, I could
wish that there were no such things as women are. We shall have such a hoyting
here anon, you'll wonder at it. 'Tis Pan's Holiday, the chiefest Festival the
shepherds keep, 'tis held upon this Green.


I thought as much, belike then that's the cause.
This place is so bedecked and strewn with flowers.

The very same: they come, observe the custom.

Titterus! well met, you are the welcomest man I see to day, the wenches were
afraid you'd not have come, and then our Roundelays had all bin spoiled.


Sir, you may thank this man: pray bid him welcome, he's a stranger here.


What Countrey-man?

Scicillia gave me life, on whose fair Promontories I have lived this many
years, till Covet to see change, brought me to Thrace, which I affect so well,
I would continue.


And welcome.

Welcome,

You're very heartily welcome.

Son, set down thy Hook, and shake it lustily,
Win me the Garland, and I promise thee
I'll give thee two fat Wethers to make merry.
Oh, when I was a young man, I'd a tickled it.

I warrant ye father, for the Cast of the Leg,
The standing Caper, or the Placket Jump,
Let me alone, I'll firk 'em up in faith.

Sir, you'll make one? Nay, no excuse shall serve,
We know you can, and will not be denied.

I shall but shame our Countrymen* Will you?

Who I? And 'twere not to observe the Ceremony,
They should not have me here. I must do somewhat.

Come, you're well matched, strike Music and begin,
We two will sit as Judges.

Nay, you must not refuse it, 'tis deserved, you have it with a general
consent, this shall confirm't.


And this.

And this.

I thank you.

Come, spread the Cloth, and bring away the Meat:
So, so, sit down. Daughter attend the Queen,
It may be thy turn next.
That's a good boy.
NOw does Jolly Janus greet your Merriment;
For since the Worlds Creation,
I never changed my fashion,
'Tis good enough to fence the Cold:
My Hatchet serves to cut my firing yearly,
My Bowl preserves the Juice of Grape and Barley:
Fire, Wine, and Strong Beer, makes me live so long here,
To give the merry New-year a welcome in.
All the potent Powers of Plenty wait upon
You that intend to be frolic to day:
To Bacchus I commend ye, and Ceres eke attend ye,
To keep encroaching Cares away.
That Boreus blasts may never blow to harm you,
Nor Hymens frosts, but give you cause to warm you.
Old Father Janevere, drinks a Health to all here,
To give the merry New-year a welcome in.

Good Janivere depart: Another time
We will bid thee welcome as befits thy years,
But now our Flocks are young, and should they feel
But the smallest breath from thee sent in a storm,
They would go near to perish, Prithee leave us.

Since you desire my absence,
I will depart this Green,
Tho loath to leave the presence
of such a lovely Queen,
Whose Beauty like the Sun,
melts all my frost away.
And now in stead of Winter,
behold a youthful May.

Titterus? Welcome.
I come, I come, I come.

I go, I go, I go.

Oh hide me from him.

Puff, they are blown away with a Whirlwind:
Thanks gentle Eolus, you have left my Love upon a lofty Pine.

Yes, I shall pine, for I'm like to get no Victuals whilst he is here.


That's not her voice: no, now I see her plain,
'Tis an Owl in an Ivy-bush.

I'm glad he takes me for an Owl: now if I could but cry like one, ta wit, ta
woe.


Oh 'tis my Love, she says I come to woo, 'tis true;
Come down, dear Love; or stay, I come to thee.

No, no, no, I come, I come down to thee.
He'll break my neck, if he get up once.

Alas poor heart, how pale and black she looks,
I think she's almost starved, she's black in the mouth!
See, here's a Banquet; come sit down my Love.

I'm glad a this, we shall feed again.

Yet stay: now I remember, those that are kept from victuals a long time, must
not be cloyed too much for fear they surfeit.


I warrant you my Love, I will not feed.

No, do not feed.

Yes, yes, a little.

No, 'tis dangerous, we will first to sea, and purge the blood that dimns thy
rosie cheeks.


Lets fill our bellies, and we shall purge the better.

It is not good to purge on a full stomach.
Come we will embarque us in this hollow Tree,
And sail to Jericho. Music, shall we dance?

I, I, we will dance to Jericho.

Know sacred Goddess, these are sent
From fertile Thrace, whose discontent
By noisome Sickness is increased:
But how, or when it shall be ceased,
Their King Pheander craves resolve,
The reason of his Countries grief,
And when they shall regain relief?

The ileful gods with full consent,
Have plagued the Thracian Continent,
Their Court and Country woe shall sing
For the Transgression of their King;
Who against all Right and Piety,
Hath quite expelled pure Chastity:
But for the time when Plagues shall end,
This Schedule to the King I send,
Wherein at large is full expressed
When all your woe shall be redressed.
Content shall keep in Town and Field,
When Neptune from his Waves shall yield
A Thracian Wonder; and as when
It shall be proved amongst Thracian men
That Lambs have Lions to their Guides,
And Seas have neither Ebbs nor Tides;
Then shall a Shepherd from the Plain,
Restore your Health and Crown again.

The Oracle pronounces still obscure;
But what is writ, is truth most sure.
Tho ne'er so hard to you it seem,
Time will make clear what you misdeem.

But we that time shall never live to see.
What Thracian Wonder can the Sea waves yield?
Lambs ne'er will have stern Lions for their guide:
Or when will Seas leave off their Ebbs and Tides?

Never, oh never.

Then ne'er shall Thrace be blessed.
But we will bear this Problem to the King,
And let him know that for his tyranny,
His Subjects suffer this calamity.

Minnion, take heed, turn not my proffered Love
By peevishness and folly, to disdain; for if thou dost,

You'll turn me out of all, I know it is the sequel of your words, which I
unhappy wreteh must undergo: were every Lamb increased unto a Flock, and every
Flock to thousands multiplied, I must not love you.


You must not?

And worse, I must for ever hate you, if you name but Love again: I must
ungrateful be for all the courtesies you have bestowed. Love, or the thought of
it, to me is like the Tallon of a soaring Hawk striking a silly Dove, it
murders me.


So, you are sensible of your own grief, but no other pity,
I am wounded too, but you feel it not.

Where are you wounded, sir?

Even at the heart: I'm wounded for thy Love.

If I could see it bleed, I should believ't.

You would, I thank you heartily for that.

Sure sir, I think you would not fear a wound, cold and decaying nature has
made you strike-free, you have no blood to die with, you're now buried in your
skins Sear-cloth, and would you warm that monumental Robe at Loves fire in your
grave?


Scorned and abused, 'tis long of Menalchus, go with that hand preserved thee
from the wrack of the devouring Billows, that ravenous and merciless assembly
of salt Drops, that charitable hand that long hath been the tender
Foster-father to thy wants, with that hand now I turn thee off: turn thou thy
face no more to any house of mine, I'll burn them all e're they shall cover
thee. Thou were my joy, but this thy scornful spite,

Has made me hate where I took most delight.

My sweet Eusanius,
It is his Loss makes me unfortunate, that weighty grief
Followed by mercies, yet were thou the chief;
Where e're thou art, Fate in spite send me hither,
Tho in the arms of Death we meet together.
I loved a Lass, alas my folly, was full of her coy disdaining,
I courted her thus: what shall I sweet Dolly do for thy dear Loves obtaining?
At length I did dally so long with my Dolly, that Dolly for all her faining,
Had got such a mountain above her valler, that Dolly came home complaining.

Oh misery, misery! which way should I turn from thee?

Ha? there's a foolish Lover upon my life, a female heigho in faith: Alas poor
heart, why dost thou sit dejected, pretty soul, he is a hard hearted stubborn
Clown I warrant him, what e're he is; but I hold him the wiser man for it
though: will he not do, filthy churl as he is? poor heart, would I had a heart
could pity thee.


What e're you are, sir, my miseries have not deserved your scorn; I do beseech
you leave me with my sorrows, for I desire no other company.


Ha? a good face in faith, a special good face, fine Babies in her eyes, those
lips speak now methinks, and say, Come kiss me. How now Titterus! the singing
Satire against all women, the Madrigal-maker against good faces, Beauties
Despiser, are you in contemplation now? I must not turn my tale sure from
Shepherds Roundelays to Epithilamiums, and Sonnets, and Io's, and Heighos? this
were odd if I should, and yet by my troth I think I must for ought I can
perceive; that thievish god Cupid that uses to steal hearts, affections, and
sighs out of men's bosoms, is now crept into mine, and spite of my proud heart
makes me confess, that

Love's a lovely Lad, his bringing up is Beauty,
Who loves him not is mad; for I must pay him duty now I'm sad.
Hayl to those sweet eyes, that shine celestial wonder,
From thence do flames arise burns my poor heart asunder, now it fryes.

Sir, you are rustic, and no generous spirit to make Calamity your merry
Theme. Beseech you leave me.


Cupid sets a Crown upon those lovely Tresses;
Oh spoil not with a frown what he so sweetly dresses.
I'll sit down.

You'll force me then to rise, and fly your folly;
Yet why should you have power to banish me
From this free spreading Air, that I may claim
For mine as well as yours? but 'tis no matter,
Take this place to ye, where e're you force me go,
I shall keep still my sad Companion, Wo.

Nay then have at you in Prose, if Meter be no Meter for you, you must not
leave me thus; And as even till this hour I hated women, and therefore must
needs be the honester man, I will not stay you for any ill, by my hook and
troth la: And now do not I know what to say to her neither, but you have a good
Face, white Neck, a dainty Cheek, soft Hand, and I love you: if my Nurse had
ever taught me better language, I could afford it you.


That very word will feather my slow feet, and make me fly from you. I hate
all love, and am in love with nought but hate and scorn, sorrows and griefs, I
am exposed to them, turned from a Charity that fed me once, to naked poverty,
thrust into the mouth of Fortunes battery, to stand all malice that she can
shoot at mortal.


What heart could be so cruel? hand so ungentle?

Old Antimon's, till this hour courteous,
Now most unkind and spiteful.

Why then, has Love and Hate mistaken their Quivers to day? He that was
courteous to women is now turned unkind, and I that ever halted am struck most
pitifully in love with 'em. Here, take all the store I have to defend thee from
common necessities, to feed and lodge: I will be thus bountiful, though I never
have better of thee while I live, and I am sorry I am no better furnished; if
thou remain in these fields, I'll lend thee enough to stock thee with a
Flock, and give thee day enough for payment too. He that should have said I
would a bin thus bountiful to day morning, I would have said by this time he
had bin a witch. Fare thee well, I have some strange meditations, that I desire
to be alone my self now, some of 'em must out again howsoever.

Whither shall I go to escape away from folly?
For now there's love I know, or else'cis melancholy. heigh, heigho.
Yonder lies the Snow, but my heart cannot melt it:
Love shoots from his how, and my poor heart hath felt it. heigh, heigho.

WHat news from Delphos? what says the Oracle?
Wherefore is Thrace thus pesterred with these plagues?

My Liege, we have performed your dread Command, yet not command so much, as
our desire did make our tedious travels to seem short, until we heard Apollo's
ireful Doom; but then.


What then? nay quick, go on I say, we long to hear the Oracles Decree.


Having pronounced the gods were all displeased
With woeful Thrace, she said our sorrows spring
Was caused by the Transgressions of our King,
Who against the Law of Equity and Right
Had from his sight abandoned Chastity.
But for the time when Plagues and Woes shall end,
Deliver this unto your Thracian King:
Till this be full accomplished, 'tis in vain
Ever to hope, or seek redress again.

reads. Content shall keep in town and field,
When Neptune from his waves, c.
Pish, these moral Mysteries are incredulous, nor can they contradict the will
of Kings: Comets portend at first blaze, but take effect within the bosom of
the destinies, so Oracles at Delphos, though foretold, are shaped and finished
in your Councel-house; and yet I charge you both upon your lives, let not the
commons understand so much, lest several censures raise a Mutiny: 'Tis death to
show a discontented brow, but smooth your over-burthened grief with smiles,
there's no disaster that afflicts a Clime but it contains some limitation.

Lets wait the time, and with domestic care,
Strive to maintain those Honours we have won.
Lets stand upon our guard, I fear some Treason.
Speak Villains quickly, what means this noise?

My duty, mighty King, made me presume
To press thus boldly to your Highness presence,
To bid you make prevention against your foes,
They are in number numberless to tell.

And as I guess are of Cicillia.

What Trumpet's this? is it our enemy?

One from the enemy.

Quickly the News, that we may give an Answer.

My Royal Master, the Cicillian King.

We know your Message sir, in that one word:
In naming him we understand the Cause.

Desires to parley with your Majesty.

We will parley in no language, but in Steel:
This shall maintain the Justice I have done,
Against my Daughter, and base Radagon;
Whose hateful name when I but think upon, adds vigour to my heart to take
Revenge. Be gone, and tell your King for his presumption, we will lash him from
our Land with iron rods, and dragg him at our stirrup through the streets.


Prepare for battle, when this Answer's known.

We will meet him in the mid-way: say we come.

Your Grace were better parley with the foe, and take a Truce, my Liege, for
certain days; let your pretence be search of Radagon, which proposition they'll
consent unto, then have we time to fortify our Land, and muster stronger
powers to make resistance; for as we are, we are but a handful to a multitude.


Were they ten times as many, and we fewer, they should not rest one night
within our Bounds, till I have sated my revenge in blood: Have we so many
foreign Conquests won, and shall we fear a Broil in our own Land? our powers
shall march and issue forth the Towns, Armies shall grapple, and the earth
shall groan to bear the burden of Wars horror.

Come let's on; base Fear's the brand of slaves,

They that die nobly, shall have honoured graves.

Did he receive our Message with such scorn?

With such a barbarous and proud disdain, he scarce would suffer me to utter
it; but bid me back return, and tell your Grace he'd lash you from his Land
with whips of Steel, and when he had taken you Prisoner hand to hand, he'd
dragg you at his stirrups through the streers.


I'm glad they are so valiant: then they come.

The voice of Arm, Arm, hurried through the Court as swift as Lightning, and
their clattering Arms put on in haste, made such a horrid noise, as if a voice
had issued from the Clouds, and all the way pursued me; methinks my ears still
tingle with the sound.


Courage Cicilians, let this be your honour, they are no Cowards that you fight
withal; for they have been approved in foreign Lands.


Let'em be what they will, we stand prepared, if they be bold, we are as
resolute; if valiant, we undaunted and resolved. Let it be seen which of our
swords this day carves deepest wounds upon the breast of Thrace.


In equal balance since our fortunes lye,
Let each man strive to conquer, vanquished die.

I like your forward spirits, and commend'em: in all our Troops I cannot spy a
man whom I mislike or dread; and for my part, as you have seen a burning Taper
fall and burn most bright when it begins to fade, so shall you see me in
declining Age. Methinks I cannot hear their Drums to thunder, nor their hoarse
brazen pipes breath forth a sound, to publish their defiance.


Does not that Echo issue from the town?

These are no braving Tones.

Yet nearer, nearer still.

Beat up our Drums, and drown their Hornets sound.

How now, what are these?

Mummers my Lord, I think. Set down your Drums, we will play for all your Crowns;
I am sure you know me, you have too much cause.


Behold great Sir, my Ensigns folded up, my Drums unbraced, and all those
instruments that should encourage War, quite put to silence; there's not a hand
in all our warlike Host that's armed for opposition or defence.


Is this the man would lash us from his Land with whips of Steel?


Where are the horses, to whose curled Tails we must be bound and dragged along
the streets?


Can you, my Lord, bear these injurious brands?
This would put life in statues carved with hands,
Much more encourage Cowards; we that late
Persuaded you to peace, upon our knees
Entreat you to command your Ensigns wave,
And by our ancient Honours, which our foes
Cannot without a blushing cheek deny,
We will make'em know they do defy their Victors.

He forfeits his Allegiance that again presumes to motion War: I wish my sorrows
shadows, but alas they are too real, too essential, they dwell not in the face
and outward brow, but have their hahitation here within, where they torment me,
and shall ever till I behold Cicilia's Son secured, and my fair Daughter fast
closed in my arms, those two poor innocent and spotless souls whom my
remorseless rage and tyranny hath sold to all afflictions


Speak Pheander, are not-those passions merely counterfeit? Do they proceed
from Fear and Cowardice, that thus thou fold'st thy warlike Ensigns up, and
without stroke of battle give the day? Or which I rather deem, from Policy
and Matchevillian cunning?


Neither Prince: but mere repentance for my late misdeed, which is so heinous
in the eyes of Heaven, it seems beyond their pardon; therefore now in expiation
of that horrid act, and to inflict due penance on my self, all Regal ornaments
of State put off Awe and Command that wait on Majesty. I henceforth vow a
lasting Pilgrimage, either to bring the Prince thy Son alive, and tender him to
safety in thine arms withal, with her fair Beauty in rich Thrace, robbed of so
rare a Jewel; Or if dead, end the remainder of my afflicted hours in exile and
forsaken solitude, in deserts scare discovered.


A sad Vow.

To make which good, to thee Cicillia's King, in part of recompense to thy
great wrongs, I here resign all State and Empire up, my Crown, my Sceptre* and
Majestic Orb, until the Truce prefixed be quite expired; And charge you all on
your Allegiance, Lords, that you the Faith and Homage sworn to me, pay to this
King in all just Loyalty. This Pilgrims weed be now my Robe of State, no other
gay Trim will Pheander wear; my Sword, the Sword of Justice born before now, is
now no better than a Palmers Staff, by which I will do justice on my self in
humble penance; and in stead of Gold, and Cups of hollowed Pearl, in which I
used to quaff deep Healths of rich Pomegranate Wine, this Scallop shall be now
my Drinking cup to sip cold water. I am now, Cicillia, a man reformed; for lo
I die to State,

Live only to Devotion. Lords adieu,
These are my arms you Kingdom to pursue.

I hear your Princes mind, and hope his vows are out of his mere zeal and
penitence which I accept, will you accord with him, and promise your true
Fealties to us?


L. As we to him were, we are now to you, as loyal and as faithful, 'twas his
pleasure, and we submit to both, acknowledging his wrongs to you, and take them
at the best, far above all forgiveness.


L. You cannot boast of any Conquest won,
To gain a kingdom, and loose such a Son.

This to us is a full satisfaction, and my Lords, we know how to require your
gratitude, the Regency by him assigned to us we in our bounty reassign to you,
be your own Lords, excepting still the fealty due to your Sovereign at his back
return, in whose forced absence should you use our aid, we shall be your
Protector.


Noble in all his Arts is Scicilly.

Billet our Soldiers in such Neighboring-towns, where Victual and best Harbour
may be had; withal Proclaim not the least violence be done to any Thracian,
they are ours now, tho under your command. Here was a happy War fought without
blows, yet no dishonour in it, he that endures such War within, can be no coward
sure.

In all designs this still must be confessed,
He that himself subdues, conquers the best.

WHere's Sophos?

Here my Lord.

Has our command been well effected that we gave in charge?


Great King, it has.

Our purse and people are at thy dispose, leave an army of the stoutest men
Africa affords: we love thee, thou art honest. In Africa the Moors are only
known, and never yet searched part of Christendom; nor do we levy Arms against
their Religion, but like a Prince and Royal Justicer, to patron Right, and
supplant Tyranny.

We are in this as Gods, and in like care,
Should punish Ignomy, and Virtue spare.

They gave a partial measure that subscribed Africa within so small and strict
a limit, making great Europe boundless. Royal Sir, give me but leave to go with
Sophos to the Thracian Wars, that I may speak your Fame unto the world, and
where you are but heard of, make you famous. If ever Fame or Valor crown my
youth with the least Honours, all my services I'll dedicate to you and my fair
Mistress, Wonder of her Sex, whose beauty shines like to a Star amongst so many
clouds of her own Nation. Lillia Guida's name shall be as much in Christendom,
as Greekish Hellen's was. God sir, speak for me.


'Thad bin my first request, but that I feared
It would offend your Mistress: she being pleased,
Upon my knee I do entreat for you.

To show my willingness. I'll be the third my self, and humbly crave it may not
be denied; I do not love to be attended on in a wrought Night-cap, obeyed with
quilted calves, give me a man that Agues cannot quake, nor fire tremble. Pardon
me Princely Father, it is your spirit speaks, I am your own, and by that
privilege become your Suitor.


Our Daughter has prevailed, Sophos your ear.

To give encouragement unto thy hopes, receive this favour; may it prove a charm
unto thy arm, and double puissance add unto thy strength, when any danger's
extant.


This it was that I long since suspected, this shall prove his tragic Fate,
and ruin to her love.


You grace me beyond merit; while I live I will make known your honours, rank
your name amongst the bravest Dames of Christendom; and when I view this Scarf,
it will infuse undaunted vigour, make me overcome impossibilities, there easy
to desire.


Treason, did say?

Against your Majesty, dishonour of your fair and beautuous Child, their
motions, gestures, looks, and conference I have observed and watched with
jealous eyes, and find 'em all corrupt. Lack, my Liege, behold before your
face their amorous fire breaks forth into bright flames, is't not apparent? his
suit to leave the Court, her seconding his Treason with a Boon and Favour too.
You thought 'twas his desire to go to Wars, believe it not, there's no such man
in him: It is some secret Plot they have contrived to fly away. Prevent it
speedily.


Thou hast infused a spirit into my breast I never yet did feel: strange
impudence! Ambition never heard of in a Peasant! A slave that neither knows his
birth nor breeding, should thus presume for to seduce a Princess! Hence with
that Traitor, let him have a death as horrid as his crime.


How's this?

A Traitor?

I Traitor: Traitor, sirrah.

Sirrah, you lie, this shall maintain't against thee or any dares affirm this
Title. Mount us, great King, upon some softy spire, where is but room for two,
place him amidst an host in this just Cause to clear my honour, and her
innocence: I'll pierce thorough armed Guards, and make my way through Halberds,
Pikes, and deadly killing shot, break through many Battles, sally thorough
whole Squadrons, and make him like a confused lump that ne'er had form. Guard
me you sacred Powers, lest I forget time, presence, place, and on this ugly
slave commit an out-rage.


Kill, and stop his fury: insolent boy, how dares thy violence offer it self in
blows, and we in presence? Had we no other cause, this were enough to take away
thy Life. Away with him.


Stay yet, dear sir, as ever I deserved grace at your hand, hear me first
speak: Behold him bow to you, that in your Cause hath made great Kings to
kneel, and tender you submission; for my sake let him not suffer death, 'tis
undeserved, I will engage all that I have on earth that he is loyal; let not
false surmise, suspect, and jealousy beget belief to wrong your Princely
thoughts. In killing him, you make me guilty, and a murderer; for I first
brought him hither, to my hands he did commit his life, being a child, when on
the Plain of Thrace I took him up, let him not loose it at a holy Altar, and
Princes Courts are such, and should maintain as divine Privilege as Sanctuary:

For Kings that circle in themselves with death,
Poison the Air in which themselves draw breath.

Blessed be that Orator: Gracious Father.

Let her not speak, her words confirm suspect: bear her away unto her private
chamber, there let her be confined a prisoner, till we determine further.


It shall be done.

Sophost, his life is thine, but not his freedom.

Durance? Worse then death.

No banishment save Africa; make all the world thine own.


The Kings all mercy.

I'll Proclaim as much.

I but my Lord, what safety for my life, which he so much hath threatened?


I scorn to touch thy life, thou timorous slave,
But Traitors are all Cowards: Fare thee well,
And my deer Foster-father, wanting whom
I loose my better part; Thus they thrive,
That cannot flatter Kings, feel death alive.

Nay Sophos, be not sad, 'tis thy pretended good that we pursue, the Girl was
wanton, and the Boy was young, and Love is kindled by desire as soon in one
poor minute as an age of time: we banished him that she might fancy thee, whom
we intend shall have her, 'tis true as we are royal, if you please for to
accept of her.


'Tis an honour that I shall never merit, to spouse a
Princes of her exellency;
For I have nothing worthy her affection,
She cannot give consent to love a man,
That's bannisht from his Land and native soil:
I have no titles for to honour her,
And that's a thing that women most affect.

Sir, you inherit virtue, that's a thing no mortal can restore, all other State
we will invest you with, the crown of Thrace shall be your own, or cost ten
thousand lives, our sable* Ensigns never yet before displayed beyond the
Mediterean Sea, shall now be seen to fly, men have livers there pale as their
faces, and when we appear, will frighted run from such a Golden soil; our
home-bred fear have end, foreign soes must be our conquest now.

Come my best Sophos, e're the next moon spring,
My child shall call thee husband, Thrace her King.

COntent shall keep in town and field, c.
I know not in what sense to apprehend it,
So intricate this matter seems to me;
Yet in these latter lines I read a comfort.
Then shall a shepherd from the plains,
Restore your Health and Crown again.
There is a sign of truth already past, for when Apollo did pronounce this
doom, I was a king, and did enjoy my Crown, and I must be deposed before
restored. But then the man, I there's the doubt of all, for ever since I took
this Pilgrims habit, I have wandered up and down to find this shepherd;
wandered indeed, for in the search of him I have lost my self, fiting upon the
plain, I saw a face of such surpassing beauty, that Jove and Nature should they
both contend, to make a shape of their mixed purity, could not invent a sky-born
form so beautiful as she, be she a mortal, and a shepherdess, her beauty may
become a Princes Court. Why may not I wedding this shepherds Queen, beget an
heir that may restore my Crown? I'll lay my life the Oracle meant so, the stars
from earthly humours gain their light, our humours from their lights possess
their powers: but now the means for to obtain this prize, I'll send a private
messenger to Court, to bid Pallatio with a well Armed-troop, at such a certain
hour-to meet me here, and lie in secret ambush about the house.

I will conceal my self, and watch a time,
To bear away this Wonder of our Clime.

Oh stay, oh turn, oh pity me, that sighs, that sues for love of thee,
Oh lack I never loved before, if you deny, I'll ne'er love more.
No hope no help, then wretched I, must loose, must lack, must pine, and die,
Since you neglect when I implore,
Farewell hard, I'll ne'er love more,

Here's a sight gives a fresh wound unto my love-sick heart, to think a man
that was reputed wise, should loose himself in a Dedalion maze, and run mad for
a woman, woman that's the cause, it is indeed happy remembrance in searching
out his wound, I have cured my self, shall I see my brother wits caught in a
purse-net, and run my head into the same noose, then count me for a Woodcock;
no, I am now the man I was, and will still say,

There is not any wise man, that fancy can a woman,
Then never turn your eyes on a thing that is so common;
For be they foul or fair,
They tempting devils are, since they first fell,
They that love do live in Hell, and therefore men beware.

What a distraction's this? was ever seen so strange a dotage, not in him
alone, but 'tis in general? that did not grief usurp too much upon a heart
suppressed, 'twere mirth would move to laughter.

This is no Louse sure, I know him not,
Yet I mistrust the hanging of his head,
I'll note him further; 'tis a handsome fellow.

This habit is most frequent in this place, I'll wear't for fashion sake, 'tmay
be a means to gain a sight of the fair Shepherdess, whose beauty fills the
Clime with wonderment.


Alas poor man, he's troubled too in mind,
Would I could over-hear him: how he stands!

I know not where to lye, and it grows late, I have not since I entered on
these Plains, seen any creature that has humane sense. A woman first! good luck
and be thy will.


Why kneel you, sir?

Not to ask blessing, Sweet,
That were a foul disgrace unto a Virgin.

For ought you know I am a Mother, sit.

Would you were mine. Please you, I'll make you one.

I thank your love sir, but I am one already.

Then my suit's at an end; yet one word more.

What is't, sit? I'm in haste.

No more but this, nay in your ears, lest you mis-construe me.


So close and privately, then I perceive I have been too neglectful, shallow
fool! that having had such opportunity, so long continuance, place, and
privacy, durst never utter thy affections. When I beheld her first I fancied
her, and more because she favored my dead wife, whose memory I still mourn: but
since she's gone, rather then loose regeneration, I could wed with her; she's
fair, and may be honest, though the world deem 'em Contrarieties: I'm seen, and
must go on.


Menalchus! you come as wished for: here's a stranger, Sir, that wants reposure,
will you for my sake allow him entertain; the night draws on, and 'twere
unhospitable to deny him, you shall command as great a courtesy.


I doubt it not. To me y' are welcome sir, such homely Cates as a poor Cottage
yields, you shall be sure to taste. Shepherds in this comes nearest to the
Gods; for they allow the smallest hospitality, witness when Bawcis feasted
Jupiter:


For that I'll interrupt you, you shall both before you part from hence, taste
of our cheer. Whence is that aged man? pray question him, let him not go before
he have relief.


Come nearer, father, 'tis a great wonder to see a Pilgrim wander in these
parts. What Countrey-man?


A Roman, gentle sir, one that hath vowed in weary pilgrimage, to spend the
poor remainder of his days; to such you know all places are alike.


How long have you continued in this Land?

But a small time.

You have not seen the Court?

Not yet, fair sir.

What should we do at Court? we have a King knows no Religion, heathens,
infidels inhabit there; the poor live most secure, for as they know no good,
they fear no ill: but we must not decipher. Come sit down.


Fair Mistress.

Good sir sit, this is my place. Menalchus seat you. Fie, fie, complement.


Here's no variety, but such as 'tis, if you can feed, y' are welcome,
shepherds fare.


We thank you.

Sir, fall to, y' are sad methinks.

Not sad, but somewhat grieved to think report should scandalize so sweet a
Continent, not only Foreigners, but Thracians born, hate and abhor the Clime
and Government, saying, it is infectious, and your King a mis-believing Tyrant,
infamous.


Where heard you this?

All Thrace proclaims as much.

I cannot tell: but trust me sir, 'tis thought it was a cruel deed, not like a
King, much less a Father, having but one child to banish her, and for so small
a fault.


What was the offence?

A customary thing, I cannot well appropriate a name.


Is it so slight? and do you shame to utter't?

Your presence must excuse me, otherwise
I should have found a Title.

Then I'll speak. It was so heinous, and so wild a fact, the King could not in
justice pardon it, 'twas a disgrace to him, shame to her Sex, dishonour to her
self and Progeny. What greater infamy unto a King, than for to blot his name
with bastardy?


You speak well in the defence of Virtue, Sweet; but if such defaults should be
so punished, we should have but few women in our kingdom: Admit the Princess in
her wanton blood committed such an error, do but think what frailty is, the
baits, nay more, 'tis thought that they were man and wife; if it were so, he
could be little better than a Tyrant.


A Tyrant, nay a villain, murderer. Pray pardon me, I must and will have leave
to speak my conscience, should I see the King, I'd tell him to his face he were
a Tyrant. Say she did err, he was the cause on it, not suffering her to wed
where she did love: What may his Subjects think, he being dead for want of
Issue, they shall servile be to Turks and Infidels, if worse than he can any
where be found?


Dotard forbear, thou hast already spoke more than thy life can ever satisfy.
If that the King had known they had bin married, questionless he would have
been more merciful; but that rests in suspicion, his sentence was pronounced as
they were guilty, not as man and wife, and then what punishment can be too
great? his supposed ill was so much lenity, to live had been to die a lingering
death, for reputation is the life of honour, and that once lost, the Mother
hates the child, curses the man she did commix withal, and like a shame-fac'd
Felon, seeks to shun the face of every one that knows her guilt.


Admiredst of all women, now I see
There is much Virtue lives in poverty.

And yet methinks the mothers shame, is not to be compared unto the injury the
child sustains; for she receives her sorrows by consent, but the poor infant
guiltless of the fact, grown to maturity, shall bear the brand of Bastard by
his birth, be dispossessed of all inheritance due to the Seed that's sown in
holy wedlock; if a curse belong unto the issue of base lusts, 'tis given to the
child for to bestow on those that did beget him, sure I think who e're he was
that wronged so fair a Dame, as your Kings Daughter, could be no true Prince,
but some base upstart that deluded her, under a fained title.


Slave thou lie.

Had you e're a Mother sir?

I cannot tell. Unhand me.

For my sake,


This is some fallery, it cannot be.

Now by my holy vow what I prescribe I will approve, I know you love this
woman, the revelation of Celestial Orbs, the Aspects and influence of heavenly
planets do direct my skill, by Palmestry and Physiognomy. I have declared to
kings accidents past, portents to come, and told to what event present designs
should run, what should I make experiments of Art on him that not believes it?


Troth I do.

Then reconcile your self unto this man, let him by no means use to visit her,
for in the hour of his nativity, some powerful working star was in conjunction
with too forward Venus, take him from her, and all the Auxillary heavenly
helps, that may give Physic to a Love-sick heart, I'll invoke to be
benevolent, and e're too morrow sun, she shall be yours.


See sir, he comes towards you.

Sir, for my rash offence I'm sorry.

What would ye more good sir?

If you desire a further satisfaction, you shall have it.

How?

Thus.

'Tis accepted.

This device took well. Now to my plot.

I fear you are not friends yet.

Who not we, why should you think so? look you, we embrace, shake hands, nay
more, we will be bed-fellows, and early in the morn revisit you.


Where lies the palmer? Gone, and take no leave.

Oh fear not him, he is provided for. Come sir, take leave and part.

Good rest to both, there is a fire kindled in my breast, I have not felt a
flame this twenty years, betwixt these two, I stand in a dilemma, not knowing
which to fancy or forsake, so equal my heart doth stand affected.


That's she, I'll not be seen.

I am resolved, since from them both I am freed thus,
I'll conclude he that first speaks shall speed.

That's I.

I.

Help, help.

It is in vain to call.

Oh would this hour might be my Funeral.

A Glass, a glass, a glass, I'll trust my face no more in the fair water, 'tis
not bright enough to show me in my smugness, reach a glass.


A Looking-glass?

A Looking-glass I say.

You shall sir presently, there's one stands under my bed.

Why that's a Jorden, fool.

So much the better father, 'tis but making water in it, and then you may behold
your sweet Physiognomy in the clear streams of the river Jordan.


I smell 'twill be a match.

If you smell a match, take heed of your nose, for a little thing will set it a
fire.


How sits my suit? is it not spruce and neat?

A most impertinent suit, I assure you.

She cannot choose but love me now, I'm sure old Menophon ne'er courted in such
clothes, were it not best I should leave off some part of this my bravery, lest
appearing suddenly in this bright splendour, the wenches overcome, and ravished
with my sight, fall at dissention, and so go bi'th ears about me.


'Twas well remembered, that in any case look you put off some of those
glittering Weeds, until you see your Mistress, all the Maids will be stark mad
to see you; do but mark when they behold you, how they'll fight for you, you'll
hardly escape their fingers I'm afraid.


I, say thou so? here do thou wear 'em then,
And give 'em me when Mariana comes.

Yes marry will I, if you can, overtake me,
I'll court her first my self. Father, farewell.

Nay, but.

I shoot at no such Butts. Father, farewell.

Oh villain, slave, I have sold half my Flocks.
To buy these Clothes, and now am cheated.
See if the Rogue has not sent company to laugh at me: if Titterus should see
me in this shape, he would make a Ballad on it. I'll after him, and if I catch
the Rascal, I'll say nothing.


Yet Beauty of these fields be less obdure,
And stay his laboring brains of that great toil
In which it travels for thee.

Love a mad-man?

If he be mad, 'tis you have made him so.
Can you not fancy your own workmanship?
Will you not cure him whom you helped to kill?

Were his hurts made in the body, I have helping herbs and such choice simples,
as should cure his wounds; no shepherdess knows better than my self how to
restore him.

But where that Herb or Science can ye find,
That hath the virtue to restore the mind?

Mind; he minded you too much, the more fool he,
That man's mad that minds any of you all;
For you are, let me see,
Foolish, idle toys. that Nature gave unto us,
But to curb our joys, and only to undo us;
For since Lucretias fall, there are none chaste at all:
Or if perchance there be, one in an Empory,
Some other malady makes her far worse than she.
Out upon ye all.
'I were too much to tell the follies that attend ye,
He must love you well that can but discommend ye;
For your deserts are such, man cannot rayl too much:
Nor is the world so blind, but it may eas'ly find,
The body or mind tainted in woman kind.
Oh, the devil take you all.

Have you now done?

Done? 'Sfoot, if I could find words enough, and bad enough, I'd rail at you
all till tomorrow morning.


If ye should, I'll have the last word.
I have been silent yet, vex me no more:
For if I once begin, I'll make thee mad too,
And send thy Wits a wool-gathering,
After thy brothers.

What the devil are these women made of?
Do not think I would surcease my suit,
But for this interruption.

Is there no valley, nor no mountains top
Free from these Clamours? You see we are intercepted:
But for these, this should have been the place.

Let's watch a fitter time, and spy a place of more convenience.


'Tis agreed: All friends.

Till then.

Think you I meant otherwise?

No.

Well then.

Oh father, well overtaken.

'Tis well you are returned sir, I was coming,
I was even coming for you? How now, what are these?

Receive this stranger to your fellowship,
A partner and a brother, that desires a life retired
And if my genius prompts me not amiss,
He will deserve our Loves.

However sir, to me he's welcome,
Chiefly for your sake my love I tender.

Pray know this man, this is the jovailest shepherd in all Thrace.


His Aspect speaks for him. Sir, I desire to be known
Better to you, and you fair Dame, whose beauty adds more
Lustre to these fields, then all that summer Flora can produce.

And these plains much honoured by your presence.

Receive a welcome too of Antimon.

And I his son Sir, welcome good partner;
Nay good sir, I crave less of your courtesy,
And more of your acquaintance.

Since we are met by chance so luckily,
Let us proceed unto our countries pastimes,
To give this courteous stranger entertain.

I, good father, Let's not loose our sports in any case:

Whom shall we crave to call upon the Queen.

That office shall be mine, stay my return:
Now if the Palmer do but keep his word,
I shall enjoy what I so long have wished.
Ha, what sad object's this? How came thou wounded?

Sure some sheep has bit him.

Speak how came thou hurt?

In rescue of our Queen, basely surprised.

Surprised? by whom?

By Thrace his King, who Pilgrim-like wrapped in a russet weed, taking advantage
when she was alone, has with a private ambush, stole her hence.


To the Court-gates let us pursue the Ravisher, his Court and all the powers
that he can raise, shall not protect him. Plague upon his craft: Is this his
skill in Physiognomy? Worthy friend, let me but call you so, and let our strife
be buried in our loves: The Cause removed, let the effect thus die: and as our
hands, so let our hearts unite to take revenge on this injurious king.


Sir, what is yet scarce man, my heart shall ripen,
I'll stretch beyond my years and power of strength,
But I'll assist you in this enterprise:

Let's muster all the shepherds to our aid,
And fetch her back per force.

In the mean time, be it your charge to cure this
Wounded Swain, that sought to rescue her.

I'll use my best of skill.

Old as I am,
I'll go along, and let my Mistress know,
The King of Thrace makes Antimon his foe.

If I light on him handsomely, I'll have a bout with him at Quarter-staff.


One thing let me entreat, to draw my frantic brother to the field, inform him
'tis Serena is stolen hence, to prove if either terror of the Wars, his Mistress
loss, or sight of death and blood, can win him to his wits.


Persuaded well.

What's he will take that charge?
Marry that will I, let me alone with him,
I'll put it in his pate, I cannot say his brains,
Because he has none: I'll fetch him presently.

Whom shall we make our General, and Leader of this Rabble?


Who but your self shall we impose so great a Charge upon?


Rather bestow it on this noble youth.

That warlike Charge would not become my years,
I shall be proud to be your Soldier, sir.

Give me my Arms, I'll fetch her back again.

Give you more Legs, you'll ne'er o'retake her else.

I'll leap into the Saddle of the Moon,
And tie two Stars unto my heels, like Spurs;
I'll make my warlike Lance of a Sun-beam,
And mounted on some strange Bucephalus,
Thus will I overthrow my Enemy.

This 'tis to keep mad-men company, that has not the wit to know his friends
from his foes; but we shall have your brains beat in again.


Sirrah, take the Moon, and place it me upon the Axle-tree, I'll mount on
horse-back straight.


The Moon's not up yet, sir, some three hours hence you shall be sure to have
her.


How know you that, sir?

Well enough sir, 'tis a shepherd that keeps her,
And he's called The Man in the Moon.

I'll fetch a sheep-skin then to make a Drum,
Ta, ra, ranta, ra, tan, tara, ran tan.

He has possessed him well, let him go on.
Now courage, Fellow-soldiers, and let's try
To fetch her back, or in her quarrel die.

Is't possible the number of the Swains
Should be so many?

Full five hundred strong.

What's their pretence?

That's yet unknown, my Lord, unless it be to have their Queen again.


How should they know 'twas we that stole her thence?

Belike the Swains that sought to rescue her, heard some one name the King; no
other cause could give intelligence, 'twas done so private.


What should we fear? Let's meet 'em in the field,
Were their Force trebled over, when we appear
They'll fly like Hares that fear the Lions frowns.
How might we do for to behold the Rebels?

They lye so low entrenched beyond the hill that fronts the Castle-gate, that no
Prospect about the house can yield the least survey.


Let's Parley with 'em then, so we may hear what they pretend, and view their
Regiment.


Here is a Herald to the same effect arrived at Court.

Go, bring him in, we will hear what brave Defiance they have sent.

Now sir, the Prologue to this bloody Tragedy.

I am a Herald, come to tell the King,
That he has done a most mischievous thing:
We had but one fair Ewe amongst our Lambs,
And he has stolen her, with his wolvish Rams;
For which our Shepherds vow by force of Arms,
To fetch her back, kill all, but do no harm:
But if you'll set her free, they bid me say,
They'll take her home, and so make Holiday.

Ha, ha, ha, ha.

It seems they are not angry at my words, because they laugh, I feared they'd
draw their swords.


Tell 'em we render thanks for their good mirth,
And would entreat a Parley, if they'll come
And meet us here under the Castle-wall.

You would entreat 'em fairly for to come?

I thought as much. Go you along with him, and tell their General what you
heard us say.


I shall. Come, show me to your General.

Will you in person parley with the Rout?

Why not?

'Tis dangerous, for fear the Swains,
Not knowing what belongs to Law of Arms,
Being once crossed, should offer violence.

'Tis well advised: Pastatio bid our Guard
Be near our person, bring up all our Troops
Close to the Gates, that if occasion serve,
They may at unawares make issue forth,
And cut off all the Rear. See it performed,
I have a trick new crept into my brain,
And if my Policy deceive me not,
Shall bring these several bodies to one head,
And crown all my Designs with full event.
They are coming, keep your Ranks.

Which is the General?

This.

We would exchange some private words with him.

You are deceived; I better understand
The Name and Honour of a General,
Than to disgrace it against the Law of Arms;
Though we are not so expert as those men
That daily practice 'em, yet you shall find
We will make a shift to right our injuries.

'S death! where learnt he this Discipline?
Are Shepherds now become such Martialists?
I see I must dissemble.

If you have ought to say, speak publickl
No private Protestations, Bribes, nor Fears,
Have power to convert our Resolutions.
We need not to capitulate our Wrongs,
They are too apparent. Let us see our Queen,
And if she have received the smallest wrong,
A general ruin shall o're-spread the Land;
We will fire thy Castles, burn up all thy Towns,
And make a Desolation of thy people:

You cannot be so shallow, as to think I took her with a lustful appetite? This
honoured Badge proclaims that lust is past. Our seizing her was motive to your
good, if you conceive it. List, and I'll explain it: Within our Land our foes
are resident, Scicilla's King, under whose Government these many years you have
been Servitors. The reason this: When he did first invade, we found our self
too weak to make resistance, and under show of satisfaction we did resign to
him our Dignity, pretending search of Radagon his son; which he accepted, and
did back return to Scicillia, leaving Deputy to Govern here. And though
Pallatio bore the name of Rule, it was by his permission. Do but weigh the
servile yoke of foreign Government, what danger may ensue, what privilege you
loose in Thrace, if we be dispossessed, the time of Truce expired, and he's
returned to take possession? For without his son, our Crown and Kingdom both
are forfeited into his hands; which yet we may prevent, if you'll agree to join
your Force with ours, and back expulse him. We will not only grant your Queen her
liberty, but we will enlarge your former Privilege; give you choice of State,
Honour, and Dignity, make you Lords and Knights, and in remembrance of the
Shepherds Wars, add a new Festival; which at your charge shall yearly be
performed. Consider on it.


Happy Position! thanks great Justicer,
Occasion puts revenge into my hand,
To think that I should be so fortunate,
To be Commander of a Band of men,
To war against my father, blessed Event.

What's your reply?

Good General, consent,
I have a foolish desire to be a Lord.

And what shall I be?

You shall be a Lord too, and if you'll be quiet,
There are a great many mad Lords.

What answer do you give?

Were it in me
To give an answer, you should soon prevail,
But 'tis a General voice; for my own part
My service, and my self I offer to you.

And so do I.

And I.

So do we all.

A King that's thus held up can never fall.
Draw all your force within the Castle Walls,
'Tis large and spacious, and will well contain them.
This night we will feast, to morrow shall be seen
Your loves to us.

Ours to the shepherds Queen.

IS all our Army in a readiness,
prepared for battle if occasion serve?

They are, my Lord.

This day our truce takes end, the king returned,
And we expect our Sons delivery.

Pray heaven it be so happy, but I fear
A worse intent, for all the way he comes
The Commons rise, shepherds and silly Swains
That never were inur'd to carry swords,
Take A rms and follow him.

What's that to us?
Did he not make a vow ne'er to return,
Until he found my Son? may be he comes
For to invest us King, and offer sacrifice
Unto the Gods, and so conclude this weary Pilgrimage.

You speak, my Liege, as you your self would do,
But he that dared to banish 'em,
Think you he fears to violate an oath?
'Tis ill to trust a reconciled foe,
Be still in readiness, you do not know
How soon he may assault us.

Thou speak but well, 'tis good to doubt the worst,
We may in our belief be too secure;
As King's forbidden to condemn the just,
So Kings for safety must not blame mistrust.

Why is this haste?
To bid you haste to Arms,
The foe comes on, the Sentinels fall off,
The Scouts are posting up and down the Plain,
To fetch in all the stragglers. Thraces King
Has break his vow, and seeks by force of Arms
For to expulse you.

Will ye yet give credit
To a Tyrants oath?

By you bright Sphere I vow, and if there be
A greater punishment for perjury
Reigning on earth, then is the conscience sting,
I will inflict it on this perjured man.
You spirits resolute against fear and death,
You that have hither to maintained your being
In equal power, like Rivals to the Gods,
Now show your Valor, let us not debate
Our wrongs like women; for the wrath of Kings
Is like an angry Cloud, swoln big with fire,
Soft charge. that speaks revenge in thunder; hark they charge.
Beat a defiance See, the signal's given,
Who dies in this just cause, shall live in heaven.

The shepherds give the first assault, and beat off some of the Scicillian
Lords.


The fury of this Boy will overthrow
All my Designs; twice since the Fight begun,
In spite of my best A^t, he has unhorsed
My Royal Father, and the last Career
Drew blood from his shrunk veins, yet the good old man,
Like to an aged Oak that long hath stood,
Endangers all that seeks to cut him down;
He does not bear that fearful Policy,
That many use to fight in base disguise,
But has a White Flag carried before him,
Which does signify the justice of his Cause, is innocence;
Or as a mark, as if a man should say,
I am the Butt you aim at, shoot at me.
The greatest Conquest I have won this day,
Hath been the preservation of his Life,
With hazard of mine own: In my pursuit,
Thinking to place him in his Court of Guard,
I followed him so far, that I was forced
To make retire, for to recover breath.

Why do you sound a Retreat? the Day is ours,
See, here's their King, I knew him by his Ensign,
Which I seized in spite of all opposed.
Here General, to your hands I do commit him.
Carry Thraces King this as a ransom for the Shepherds Queen.

Hark, the fight renews, one hour more makes a full Conquest, and I'll ne'er
give over till it be finished.


But that no fame or credit can be got to conquer Age,
I'd scorn for to present another prisoner.

Aged as I am, had I a sword I'd scorn as much to be subdued by thee.


That shall be tried. Here, take your Arms again.

Art thou in earnest then? Come on in faith. How now?
What means this, wilt thou not fight with me?

Yes sir, that I will, with you I'll fight,
But never fight against you. See the man
That thrice this day preserved you from your foe,
And the last time I bore you off from death,
I that man am now your Champion, do not question why?
But rest assured, for you I'll live and die.

What Coward's that began this fearful cry? Is not the day likely to be our
own? Have I not taken their King Prisoner, seized his white Flag, and by our
Generals hand sent him unto Pheander?


But he's revolted, and has set him free,
And we have ne'er a General to lead us.

Oh Villain, Traitor, Coward, were he my father I should call him so: fly from
his Colours. Courage, fellow Swains, let us not blot the Honour we have won.
Want of a General, I'll supply that place, rather than loose so fair a Victory.


No, I'll be General.

I, I, and so you shall, and I'll be Commander over you. We should be led like
Wilde-geese then in faith: Wilde-geese, nay Woodcocks rather; for your
Wilde-geese keep their Wings, their Front, their Rear, and have a Leader too.


I, I, you are the man.

Follow then, come.

Sound a Retreat, it is impossible to win the day,
These Shepherds fight like devils: I saw a man born on our Lances points quite
from the earth, yet when he came to ground he fought again, as if his strength
had bin invincible.

Hark how the proud foe with triumphant voice

Proclaims unto the world her Victory.


Hark how Scicillia with triumphant voice
Proclaims unto the world his Victory.

Scicillia?

I, Scicillia. Sophos, brother to the Thracian King, is with Alcade King of the
Affricans, come to assist you.


Give 'em entertain with all the Royal Pomp our State can yield.


He shall have Soldiers welcome, that's the best.

To give a Welcome fitting to the State of Affrick's King, Sophos, and this
fair Dame, whose Beauty all the Western World admires, were to neglect a
greater happiness; for by your aid fair Victory sits crowned, pluming her
golden wings upon our Crest, let us not beat her back by detraction.


Royal Sir, we come to fight, and not to feast; yet for this might we will
repose our selves, our Troops are weary, and our beatuous Child rests
indisposed of; Let her have a Guard of Demi Negros, called from either part,
and let her Lodgings be place next our own, that's all we do desire.


Which we'll perform.

Let the Retreat we heard at our approach, call back your powers, and early in
the morn when as the daring enemy comes on; thinking to prey upon a yielding
foe.


Our forces shall confound 'em, Thrace shall know Retreat. Sophos is here, come
to perform his vow.

Upon 'em, upon 'em, upon 'em, they fly, they fly, they fly.

I, I, they run away.

I am glad they are retreated, had they stood, his lack of sense had bin his
loss of life, how e're he scapes it yet, come now retire.


I'll have my Love first.

So ho, ho boys.

What noise is that? are you a fouler, sir?

I know what belongs to a retreat sir, I was the first man took flight, and
lured off the rest as well as I could.


Then y are an Engineer?

An admirable fellow Pallemon, hold him in talk whilst I run for Cerena, and
use my best persuasions to procure her gentle patience, his deep wounds to
cure.


Come then grave Nestor to the Council Table, nay, you shall see that I can
speak to you.


And you shall hear that I can answer you.

You say you are a Falconer?

Or a Fowler, which you please.

What think you, Nestor, if we limed our Pikes, as you your Twigs, and set 'em
in the way just as the Army flies? Do you not think they would hang fast by the
wings?


Yes, if they do not leave their wings behind 'em,
And fly away with their legs.

May they do so?

Faith I sir, 't has been the Cowards fashion time out of mind.


Or Father, shall's cast into the Air a gorgeless Falcon, that mounting the
bleak Region, till she spy my beautuous Love Serena, then souze down, and
snatch her from the Army. Joves bird the Eagle, in her Talons bore his Darling
Ganimed to his palace so. Speak Nestor, is it possible or no?


Very easy sir, if women be made of such light Stuff, as they say they are;
besides, no Falcon but dares venture upon a Ring-tale, and what's a woman else?


Then as stern Pirrhus did old Priam take, or stay,
As cruel Nero with his Mother did,
I'll rip thy bowels out, then fling thee
Like a gorgeless Falcon in the Air;
But first I'll tie these bells unto thy legs,
That I may know which way to follow thee.

Nay, and you begin to meddle with my legs,
I'll show you as fair a pair of heels,
As e're you saw in your life.

Nay, fly me not, my fair Angelica.

Put up thy Bilbow then, my mad Orlando.

Thy hand shall be the scabberd, there it is:
I yield me to thy mercy, Alexander;
Yet save my life, great Caesar.

As we are Alexander, we will save thy life.
Come sit at Caesars feet. So, so, now I'll
Deal well enough with you.

Prithee have more remorse, if not for Love,
For love of Life, help to redress his wounds;
Remember 'tis for you he came thus hurt,
Take pity on his smart.

Had I like power to restore his sense, as to re-cure his wounds, upon the
earth I would leave no means unthought, unsought for, but I'd apply't for his
Recovery.


This is the tyranny we men endure,
Women can make us mad, but none can cure.

Oh may I prove the first, upon my knees,
If ever a poor Virgins Prayers were heard,
Grant the fruition of my suit may prove
A saving health both to his Life and Love.

Nay, and you go about it with such willingness,
'Twill come to a good end sure:
The whilst you dress his wounds, I'll sit and sing,
And invoke the Gods to pity him.
Fair Apollo, whose bright beams
Cheers all the world below:
The Birds that sing, the Plants that spring,
The Herbs and Flowers that grow.
Oh lend thy aid to a Swain sore oppressed,
That his mind soon may find the delight that sense admits;
And by a Maid let his harms be redressed,
That no pain do remain in his mind to offend his wits.

His blood returns, rub his Pulses over the fire,
His Looks prescribe an Alteration.

Would I could hear him speak a wise word once.

Either the earth, or else my head turns round.

Lass, my poor brother.

Peace, disturb him not.

And yet methinks I do not feel such pains as I was wont to endure. Ha, sure I
should know! Speak, are not you my Love?


He knows her, I, 'tis she.

And you my brother?

True.

And what am I?

A fool.

But you are no mad-man now? I'm sure. He that can distinguish a fool from a
woman, is a wise man believe it.


Pallemon see, since it hath pleased the Gods, in pity of thy youth, to grant
thysence, Serena grants her love, and at thy feet craves pardon for her cruel
injury.


More welcome now then ever, my Serena.
Love that is often crossed, at length obtained,
Is sweeter far than pleasure eas'ly gained.

But what shall I do now? I'm gone in the Common-law, and if a Jury of women go
upon me, I'm sure to be cast. I think I had best to appeal to the men first,
and make them my Arbitrators.


Oh no, no, no, make your peace with the women first, what e're you do; for if
they take the matter in hand, your men are ne'er able to stand long in a Case
against them.


Then first to you whom I have wronged so much,
And next, to all that's here.
Forgive me, oh forgive me my cruel disdain,
Never poor Lover endured such pain,
As I will in my skill, your praises to tell,
And never sing other, till death rings my Knell.
Therefore no man hate a woman, for now you may prove
It lies in their powers to restore Life and Love.
Therefore no man hate a woman, for now you may prove
It lies in their power to restore Life and Love.

The honour of thy overthrow, brave Moor, is due to great Pheander King of
Thrace; but thy Crowns ransom does belong to me.


Take Life and all, it is not worth the keeping,
Without Addition of a Victory.
To be a Peasants prisoner! Cursed Fate!
Why should a King be so unfortunate?

Unhappy chance! Came I to Thrace for this, to loose both Life and Honour in the
Land that gave me Life? and by a Brother too? Black destiny!


Some post unto Pheander; and glad his ears with this our Victory.


Why come ye on so slowly? renew the fight, our King is taken prisoner by that
slave, that by his falling off lost the last Battle.


Pheander taken?

That's some comfort yet, I hope Scicillia will not ransom him, till he consent
unto our Liberty.


And if he should, he were unworthy to be termed a King.

Why then let's summon 'em unto a Parley,
First offer to exchange our Prisoners,

And then begin the bloody Fight again.

Summon a Parley then.
Look here Scicillia, since by chance of war our Thracian King is taken
prisoner, to ransom him we will deliver back into your hands the great Alcade,
Sophos, and this White moor.


Three prisoners for one, detain 'em still, I'll not be ransomed at so dear a
rate.


And if thou should, I scorn it should be so;
For look what Ransom Scicillia sets down,
I'll pay it trebly over to ransom us.

We will take no Ransom, but will set you free by force of Arms.


Bear back the prisoners, and renew the Fight.

Stay, dare thou that seem so forward, hand to hand, in single opposition
end this Strife?


Oh were these Kings but pleased it should be so,
How soon would we decide this difference?

What says Alcade? if he be so content,
I'll gladly put my Right upon his sword.

The like will I upon my Champion, whose unmatched valor has been well approved.


I like his fair Aspect, and give consent.
May thou prove happy in this Enterprise.

I'll loose my life, or gain your liberty.

The like will I, or set Pheander free.

Then till the Champions be in readiness, let the Conditions be concluded on.
Pallatio, draw the Articles for us.


And you for us, if we be overcome, Pheander is to have his liberty, and we
depart this land, resigning back all interest due by his permission, and never
seek revenge for our lost Son: this as we are Royal, we will consent unto.


If Thrace be overcome, he shall surrender all his dignity into our hands,
which Sophos shall enjoy which our fair daughter, paying Cicilly a yearly
tribute; and your Soldiers pay since their abode in Thrace, shall be discharged
from our Exchecquer.


This I'll add besides, because by us Cicillia lost a Sor, who ever shall enjoy
the Crown of Thrace shall once a year, clad in his pilgrims weeds, offer
sacrifice unto the Gods, and lay his Crown down at Cicillias feet.


And Sophos vows to offer up his life,
A ransom for this beautuous African,
If we be vanquished by our enemy.

There's Scicillias hand.

And mine.

There Alcade.

And mine?

And Sophos joined in one.

A happy end crown this Contention.

Beseech your Graces, since this difference is to be ended by a shepherds hand,
to let our Queen be set at liberty, to see the Champion that must fight for
her.


Go fetch her forth: And now I call to mind the Oracle, that said a shepherd
should restore my Crown; sure one of these will prove that happy man.


The Trumpet sounds again, let's take our seats, and see who shall obtain the
victory.


Nay altogether now, till the last stroke make a division.
Oh the shepherds Queen!

A lovely Dame! sit by our Daughters side.

The Combatants will take encouragement from your fair eyes: hark, now they
come.


Now Boy, thrust home, 'tis for a Lady.

Courage fellow Swain.

The Champions are prepared, sound to the fight:

I for my King.

I for my Countries right fight.

So, recover breath.

What means that strange Device upon their shields? 'tis something sure
concerns the Oracle, God Neptune riding on the Waves o'th Sea, I'll question
them to know the meaning on it.


Come Sir.

What means the King of Thrace?

To ask a question e're they fight again.

Then speak aloud, we will have no whispering.

I prithee tell me, 'tis to thee I speak: what heinous wrongs hast thou
received from us, or good from these, that thou alone should prove the
chiefest Champion for our Enemy?


So psease these Kings vouchsafe me audience, I shall tell you.


Speak freely.

In brief Pheander, I am nor subject unto him, nor you, more then the duty of a
Son allows, tho this rude transmigration of my hair, bars me your knowledge,
with the change of time, yet here behold the banished Radagon.


My Son?

My husband?

Shame and my Joy so struggle in my breast, I shall dissolve to air: Oh my dear
child!


Can it be possible that we should live so long together, and not know each
other?


I knew Menalchus, but not Radagon.

I Mariana, not my beautuous wife: But what's become of my Eusanius, had I my
child again, my Joy were full.


Alas I lost him fourteen years ago, keeping my flocks upon the plain of
Thrace.


This greater tide of Joy overcomes the less, and will not suffer me as yet to
mourn.


Pray speak those Words again, where did you loose him? on the Plains of Thrace?


Indeed I did, just fourteen years ago.

The time, the place, how habited, and then.

In a small coat made of a Panthers skin, a Garland on his head, and in his
hand a hook made of a Cane.


The very same, the time, the place, the habit, all things just as you describe
to me; that child, I being banished from my native soil, found sporting in the
Plains, and that's the child I carried with me into Africa.


Was that the child you brought into the Court? when adverse fate had I to
banish him?


Far worser fate had I to loose my love.

That child, so found so lost,
Brought up in Africa, and banished thence,
Should be my self.

Eusanius? I'tis he.

Oh my deer child.

Are you my Mother? This my father then?

Is this my Warlike Grand-childe?

What wonder's this?

Now is the Oracle confirmed at full.
Here is the Wonder being wracked at sea,
Which Neptune from his Waves cast up again.
These are the Lions that did guide the Lambs,
Living as Shepherds, being Princes born.
And these the Seas, whose-equal valor neither Ebbs nor Tides,
But makes a stand, striving for Victory;
Their shields proclaim as much, whose Figure is
Neptune commanding of the rugged Waves.
And this the happy Shepherd from the Plain,
Whose sight restores me all my joys again.

Radagon, thou shalt wear Scicillia's Crown.

Pheanders too, which is too small a satisfaction for the great wrongs he hath
sustained by us.


Do not impose more Cares upon my head,
Until my joys be fully finished.
Good Father keep your Crown, and govern still,
And let me frolic with my beautuous Bride:
And for Pheanders Crown, let me entreat
My Uncle Sophos, Partner in our Wars,
May, if he survive, be King of Thrace.

With all my heart; and for these harmless Shepherds,
Whose loves have bin Co-partners in our wars, once every year
They shall be seasted in our Roy^l Palace,
And still this day be kept as Holiday
In the remembrance of the Shepherds Queen.

'T would ask an Age of Time to explicate all our delights. Eusanius, take our
Child, with her our Royal Crown of Africa. Thy pardon Sophos, for we promised
thee.


I willingly resign my interest, Sir.

One forty days we will hold a Festival
Within the Court of Thrace before we part.
When was there such a Wonder ever seen?
Forty years banished, and live still a QUEEN!

If any Gentlemen please to repair to my House aforesaid, they may be furnished
with all manner of English, or French Histories, Romances, or Poetry; which are
to be sold, or read for reasonable Considerations.


