OUr Muse describes no Lovers passion,
No wretched Father, no unthrifty Son:
No craving subtle Whore, or shameless Bawd,
Nor stubborn Clown, or daring Parasite,
No lying Servant, or bold Sycophant.
We are not wanton, or Satirical.
These have their time and places fit, but we
Sad hours, and serious studies, to reprive,
Have taught severe Philosophy to smile.
The Senses rash contentions we compose,
And give displeased ambitious TONGUE her due:
Here's all Judicious friends; accept what is not ill,
Who are not such, let them do what they will.
NAy good Auditus do but hear me speak.

Lingua thou strik'st too much upon one string,
Thy tedious plain-song grates my tender ears.

'Tis plain indeed, for Truth no descant needs,
Vna's her name, she cannot be divided.

O but the ground it self is nought, from whence
Thou can not relish out a good division:
Therefore at length surcease, prove not stark mad,
Hopeless to prosecute a haplesse suit:
For though (perchance) thy first strains pleasing are,
I dare engage mine ears, the close will jar.

If then your confidence esteem my cause,
To be so frivolous and weakly wrought:
Why do you daily subtle plots devise,
To stop me from the ears of common Sense,
Whom since our great Queen Psyche hath ordained,
For his sound wisdom, our Vice-governour,
To him, and to his two so wise assistants,
Nimble Phantastes, and firm Memory:
My self and cause, I humbly do commit,
Let them but hear and judge, I wish no more,

Should they but know thy rash presumption,
They would correct it in the sharpest sort:
Good Jove what Sense hast thou to be a Sense;
Since from the first foundation of the world,
We never were accounted more then five;
Yet you forsooth, an idle prating Dame,
Would fain increase the number, and up-start
To our high seats, decking your babbling self
With usurped Titles of our dignity.

An idle prating dame: know fond Auditus,
Records affirm my title full as good,
As his amongst the five is counted best.

Lingua confess the truth, you are wont to lie,

I say so too, therefore I do not lye,
But now spite of you all I speak the truth.
You five among us subjects tyrannize,
Making the sacred name of common Sense,
A cloak to cover your enormities:
He bears the rule, he's judge, but judges still,
As he's informed by your false evidence:
So that a plaintiff cannot have access,
But through your gates he hears but what, nought else
But that thy crafty ears to him conveys,
And all he sees is by proud Visus showed him:
And what he touches is by Tactus hand,
And smells I know but through Olfactus nose,
Gustus begins to him what ere he tastes:
By these quaint tricks free passage hath been barred
That I could never equally be heard.
But well, 'tis well.

Lingua thy feeble sex,
Hath hitherto with-held my ready hands
That longed to pluck that nimble instrument.

O horrible ingratitude? that thou
That thou of all the rest should threaten me:
Who by my means conceiv'st as many tongues,
As Neptune closes Lands betwixt his arms:
The ancient Hebrew clad with mysteres,
The learned Greek rich in fit Epithetes,
Blessed in the lovely marriage of pure words,
The Chaldee Wise, the Arabian Physical,
The Roman Eloquent, the Tuscane Grave,
The Braving Spanish, and the smooth tong'd French,
These precious Jewels that adorn thine ears,
All from my mouths rich Cabinet are stolen,
How oft hast thou been chained unto my tongue,
Hanged at my lips and ravished with my words,
So that a speech fair fether'd could not fly:
But thy ears pit-fall caught it instantly,
But now O Heavens!

O Heavens, thou wrong'st me much,
Thou wrong'st me much thus falsely to upbraid me:
Had not I granted thee the use of hearing,
That sharp edged tongue whetted against her master,
Those puffing lungs, those teeth, those dropsy lips,
That scalding throat, those nostrils full of ire:
Thy palate proper instruments of speech,
Like to the winged chanters of the wood,
Uttring nought else but idle stiflements,
Tunes without sense, words inarticulate:
Had ne'er been able to have abused me thus.
Words are thy Children, but of my begetting.

Perfidious Liar, how can I endure thee?
Call my unspotted chastity in Question:
O could I use the Breath mine anger spends,
I'd make thee know.

Heaven look on my distress,
Defend me from this railing viperesse:
For if I stay her words, sharp vinegar
Will fret me through, Lingua I must be gone:
I hear one call me more then earnestly.

Nay the loud cannoning of thunder-bolts,
Screeking of Wolves, howling of tortured Ghosts,
Pursue thee still, and fill thy amazed ears
With cold astonishment and horrid fears:
O how these senses muffle common sense:
And more, and more with pleasing objects strive,
To dull his judgement, and pervert his will
To their be-hests, who were he not so wrapped
In the dusky clouds of their dark policies,
Would never suffer right to suffer wrong:
Fie Lingua wilt thou now degenerate?
Art not a woman, dost not love revenge?
Delightful speeches, sweet persuasions
I have this long time used to get my right,
My right that is to make the Senses six;
And have both name and power with the rest.
Oft have I seasoned savory periods,
With sugared words, to delude Gustus taste,
And oft embelisht my entreative phrase
With smelling flowers of vernant Rhetoric,
Limning and flashing it with various Dyes,
To draw proud Visus to me by the eyes:
And oft perfumed my petitory style,
With Civet-speech, to entrap Olfactus Nose,
And clad my self in Silken Eloquence,
To allure the nicer touch of Tactus hand,
But all's become lost labour, and my cause
Is still procrastinated; therefore now,
Hence ye base off-spring of a broken mind,
Supple entreaties and smooth flatteries:
Go kiss the love-sick lips of puling Gulls,
That still their Brain to quench their loves disdain;
Go guild the tongues of Bawds and Parasites,
Come not within my thoughts; But thou Deceit,
Break up the pleasure of my Brim-full breast,
Enrich my mind with subtle policies.
Well then I'll go, whither? nay, what know I?
And do, in faith I will, the devil knows what,
What if I set them all at variance,
And so obtain to speak, it must be so.
It must be so, but how? there lies the point:
How? thus t tut this device will never prove,
Augment it so, 'twill be too soon descried,
Or so, nor so 'tis too too dangerous.
Pish, none of these, what if I take this course? ha?
Why there it goes, good, good, most excellent.
He that will catch Eels must disturb the flood,
The Chicken's hatched i'faith; for they are proud,
And soon will take a cause of disagreement.

I see the heavens nurse my new-born device,
For lo my Page Mendacio comes already,
To file and burnish that I hammered out,
Never in better time Mendacio,
What? hast thou done?

Done, yes long ago.


Is't possible? thou should dispatch so soon?


Madame, I had no sooner told
Tactus, that Gustus would fain speak with him:
But I spied Visus, Gustus and the rest,
And served them all with sauce of several lies,
Now the last Sense I spake with was Olfactus,
Who having smelt the meaning of my message,
Straight blew his nose, and quickly pust me hither;
But in the whirl-winde of his furious blast,
Had not by chance a Cobweb held me fast,
Mendacio had been with you long ere this.

Witness this lye, Mendacio's with me now,
But sir out of jesting will they come?

Yes and it like your Ladyship presently;
Here may you have me pressed to flatter them.

I'll flatter no such proud Companions.
'Twill do no good, therefore I am determined
To leave such baseness.

Then shall I turn and bid them stay at home.


No, for their coming hither to this grove,
Shall be a means to further my device;
Therefore I pray thee Mendacio go presently,
Run you vile Ape.

Whither?


What? dost thou stand?


Till I know what to do.


S. precious 'tis true,
So might thou finely out-run thine errand.
Hast to my Chest.

I, I.


There shalt thou find,
A gorgeous Robe, and golden Coronet,
Convey them hither nimbly, let none see them.

Madam, I fly, I fly.


But here you sir?
Lock up your fellow Servant, Veritas.

I warrant you,
You need not fear, so long as I am with you.
What colour is the Robe?

There is but one.


The Key Madam, the Key.


By Juno how forgetful is sudden speed.
Here take it, Run.

I'll be here instantly.


Meanwhile this Crown and gorgeous ornament,
Were the great prize, for which five Orators,
With the sharp weapons of their tongues contended:
But all their speeches were so equal wrought,
And a-like gracious, that if his were witty
His was as wise; the thirds fair eloquence
Did parallel the fourths firm gravity,
The lasts good gesture kept the Balance even
With all the rest, so that the sharpest eye,
And most judicious censor could not judge
To whom the hanging victory should fall,
Therefore with one consent they all agreed,
To offer up both Crown and Robe to me,
As the chief patroness of their profession,
Which heretofore I holily have kept,
Like to a misers gold, to look on only.
But now I'll put them to a better use,
And venture both in hope to --

Have not I hied me Madam? look you here,
What shall be done with these temptations?

They say a golden Ball,
Bred enmity betwixt three Goddesses,
So shall this Crown be author of debate,
Betwixt five Senses.

Where shall it be laid?


There, there, there, 'tis well, so, so, so.


A Crown's a pleasing bait to look upon,
The craftiest Fox will hardly escape this trap.

Come let us away, leave it to the chance.


Nay rather let me stand close here-abouts,
And see the event.

Do so, and if they doubt
How it came there, fain them some pretty fable,
How that some God --

Tut, tut, tut, let me alone,
I that have fained so many hundred Gods,
Can easily forge some fable for the turn:
Whist Madame, away, away, you fright the Fowl,
Tactus comes hard by, look you,

Is't he for certain?


Yes, yes, yes, 'tis he.


'Tis he indeed


Now chaste Diana grant my Nets to hold!


The blasting Childhood of the cheerful morn
Is almost grown a youth and over-climbes
Yonder gilt Eastern hills, about which time,
Gustus most earnestly importuned me,
To meet him here abouts, what cause I know not.

You shall do shortly to your cost I hope.


Sure by the Sun it should be Nine a clock.


What a Star-gazer, will you ne'er look down?


Clear is the Sun and blew the Firmament,
Me thinks the Heavens do smile.

At thy mishap.
To look so high and stumble in a trap.

High thoughts have slippry feet, I had well nie fallen.


Well doth he fall that rises with a fall.


What's this!


O are you taken, 'tis in vain to strive.


How now!


You'll be so entangled straight.


A Crown!


That it will be heard.


And a Robe!


To lose your self.


A Crown and a Robe.


It had been fitter for you, to have found a Fools Coat and a Babble, hey, hey.


Jupiter, Jupiter how came this here?


O Sir Jupiter is making Thunder, he hears you not, here's one knows better.


'Tis wondrous rich, ha, but sure it is not so, ho,
Do I not sleep and dream of this good luck, ha?
No I am awake and feel it now
Whose should it be?

Set up a Si quis for it.


Mercury, All's mine own, here's none to cry half's mine.


When I am gone.


Tactus thy sneezing somewhat did portend*
Was ever man so fortunate as I?
To break his shins at such a stumbling Block.
Roses and Bays pack hence: this Crown and Robe,
My Brows and Body circles and invests.
How gallantly it fits me, sure the slave,
Measured my head that wrought this Coronet.
They lie that say Complexions cannot change:
My Blood's ennobled, and I am transformed,
Unto the sacred temper of a King:
Methink I here my noble Parasites
Styling me Caesar, or great Alexander,
Licking my feet, and wondering where I got
This precious ointment: how my pace is mended,
How Princely do I speak, how sharp I threaten:
Peasants I'll curb your head-strong impudence:
And make you tremble when the Lion roars,
Yea earth-bred worms, O for a looking glass:
Poets will write whole Volumes of this Change:
Where's my attendants? Come hither Sir quickly,
Or by the wings of Hermes. --

Ay me Olfactus comes, I called too soon,
He will have half part I fear; what shall I do?
Where shall I run? how shall I shift him off?

This is the time and this the place appointed,
Where Visus promised to confer with me.
I think he's there -- No, no, 'tis Tactus sure.
How now? What makes you sit so nicely?

It's past imagination, it's so indeed.


How fast his deeds are fixed, and how melancholy he looks. Tactus, Tactus.


For this is true Mans life is wondrous brittle.


He's mad I think, he talks so idly, so ho, Tactus.


And many have been metamorphosed,
To stranger matters and more uncouth forms.

I must go nearer him, he doth not hear.


And yet methinks, I speak as I was wont
And --

Tactus, Tactus.


Olfactus as thou love come not near me,


Why? art thou hatching eggs you are feared to break them?


Touch me not lest thou chance to break my life.


What's this under thee?


If thou meddle with me I am utterly undone.


Why man, what ayls thee?


Let me alone and I'll tell thee,
Lately I came from fine Fantastes house.

So I believe for you are very foolish.


No sooner had I parted out of doors,
But up I held my hands before my face:
To shield mine eyes from th'lights piercing beams,
When I protest I saw the Sun as clear,
Through these my palms, as through a prospective:
No marvel, for when I beheld my fingers,
I saw my fingers near transformed to glass,
Opening my Breast, my Breast was like a window,
Through which I plainly did perceive my heart:
In whose two Concaves I discerned my thoughts,
Confus'ly lodged in great multitudes.

Ha, ha, ha, ha, why this is excellent,
Momus himself can find no fault with thee,
Thou'st make a passing live Anatomy.
And decide the Question much disputed,
Betwixt the Galenists and Aristotle.

But when I had ariv'd and set me down,
Viewing my self, my self ay me was changed.
As thou now see to a perfect Urinal.

T'a perfect Urinal, O monstrous, monstrous, art not mad to think so?


I do not think so, but I say I am so;
Therefore Olfactus come not near I advise you.

See the strange working of dull melancholy;
Whose drossy drying the feeble Brain,
Corrupts the sense, deludes the Intellect.
And in the souls fair table falsely graves,
Whole squadrons of fantastical Chimera's,
And thousand vain imaginations:
Making some think their heads as big as horses,
Some that th'ar dead, some that th'ar turned to Wolves:
As now it makes him think himself all glass,
Tactus dissuade thy self, thou dost but think so.

Olfactus if thou love me get thee gone,
I am an Urinal I dare not stir,
For fear of cracking in the Bottom.

Wilt thou sit thus all day?


Unless thou help me.


Bedlam must help thee, what would have me do?


Go to the City make a Case fit for me:
Stuff it with wool, then come again and fetch.

Ha, ha, ha, thou'lt be laughed out of case and countenance.


I care not, so it must be, or I cannot stir.


I had best leave troubling him, he's obstinate, (Urinal I leave you) but above
all things take heed Jupiter sees you not, for if he do, he'll ne'er make water
in sive again; thou'lt serve his turn so fit to carry his water unto
Aesculapius, Farewell Urinal, Farewell.


Speak not so loud, the sound's enough to crack me, What is he gone? I an
Urinal, ha, ha, ha, I protest I might have had my face washed finely, if he had
meant to abuse me: I an Urinal, ha, ha, ha, go to, Urinal you have escaped a fair
scouring, well I'll away, and get me to mine own house, there I'll lock up my
self fast, playing the Chimick, augmenting this one Crown to troops of Angels,
with which gold-winged messengers, I mean,

To work great wonders, as to build and purchase,
Fare daintily, tie up men's tongues, and loose them,
Command their lives, their goods, their liberties,
And captive all the world with chains of gold:
Hey, hey, tery linkum tinkum.
O Hercules!
Fortune the Queen delights to play with me,
Stopping my passage with the sight of Visus;
But as he makes hither, I'll make hence,
There's more ways to the wood than one.
What more Devils to affright me?
O Diabolo, Gustus comes here to vex me:
So that I poor wretch, am like a Shittle-cock betwixt two Battledoors, If I
run there, Visus beats me to Scilla, If here, then Gustus blows me to Carybdis.
Neptune hath sworn my hope shall suffer shipwreck..
What shall I say?
Mine Urinal's too thin to bide the fury of such storms as these.

Gustus good day.


I cannot have a bad,
Meeting so fair an omen as your self.

Shall I? wilt prove? ha? well 'tis best to venture.


Saw you not Tactus, I should speak with him.


Perchance so, a sudden lie hath best luck.


That face is his, or else mine eye's deceived,
Why how now Tactus, what so gorgeous?

Where did thou get these fair habiliments?


Stand back I charge you as you love your lives,
By Styx, the first that touches me shall die.

I can discern no weapons, will he kill us?


Kill you? not I, but come not near me you had best.


Why, art thou mad?


Friends as you love your lives,
Venture not once to come within my reach.

Why dost threaten so?


I do not threaten, but in pure love advise you for the best,
Dare not to touch me, but hence fly apace,
Add wings unto your feet and save your lives.

Why what's the matter Tactus prethe tell me?


If you will needs jeopard your lives so long,
As hear the ground of my amazedness,
Then for your better safety stand aside.

How full of ceremonies, sure he'll conjure,
For such like Robes Magicians use to wear.

I'll see the end, though he should unlock Hell:
And set the infernal hags at liberty.

How rash is man on hidden arms to rush!
It was my chance, O chance most miserable!
To walk that way that to Crumena leads.

You mean Cremona a little Town hard by.


I say Crumena, called Vacua,
A Town which doth, and always hath belonged,
Chiefly to Scholars: from Crumena walls,
I saw a man came stealing craftily,
Apparelled in this vesture which I wear,
But seeing me est-soons, he took his heels,
And threw his garment from him all in hast,
Which I perceiving to be richly wrought,
Took it me up: But good now get you gone,
Warned by my harms, and escape my misery.

I know no danger, leave these circumstances.


No sooner had I put it on my back,
But suddenly mine eyes began to dim,
My joints wax sore, and all my body burn
With most intestine torture, and at length,
It was too evident, I had caught the plague.

The plague, away good Gustus lets be gone,
I doubt 'tis true, now I remember me,
Crumena Vacua never wants the plague.

Tactus I'll put my self in jeopardy to pleasure thee.


No gentle Gustus, your absence is the only thing I wish,
Lest I infect you with my company.

Farewell.


I willingly would stay to do thee good.


A thousand thanks, but since I needs must die,
Let it suffice, death only murders me,
Oh 'twould augment the dolor of my death,
To know my self the most unhappy Bow,
Through which pale death should aim his shafts at you.

Tactus farewell, yet die with this good hope,
Thy corps shall be interred as they ought.

Go make my Tomb, provide my funerals, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Excellent Asses thus to be deluded,
Bewail his death and cruel destinies,
That lives, and laughs your fooleries to scorn,
But where's my Crown, oh here: I well deserve,
Thus to be crowned for two great victories, ha, ha, ha,
Visus take care my corps be well interred:
Go make my Tomb, and write upon the Stone;
Here lies the Sense, that lying gul'd them all,
With a false plague, and fained Vrinal.

Tactus, Tactus


O Jupiter, 'tis Auditus, all's mard, I doubt the sly knave hears so far, but
yet I'll grope him: how now Ears, what make you here, ha?


Nay, what make you here, I pray what were you talking even now, of an Ass,
and a Crown, and an Urinal, and a plague?


A plague on you, what I?


Oh, what you.


O I had well nigh forgot nothing, but I say --


What?


That if a man (do you mark sir) being sick of the plague (do you see sir) had
a, a, a, hem, hem, (this cold troubles me, It makes me cough sometimes
extremely,) had a French Crown, (sir you understand me) lying by him, and (come
hither, come hither) and would not bestow two pence (do you hear) to buy an
Urinal (do you mark me) to carry his water to the Physician, (hem)


What of all this?


I say such a one was a very Ass, this was all I use to speak to my self, when
I am alone; but Auditus, when shall we hear a new set of singing books, or
th'viols, or the consort of Instruments.


This was not all, for I heard mention of a Tomb, and an Epitaph.


True, true, I made my self merry with this Epitaph, upon such a fools Tomb
thus a, thus, thus, plague brought this man, (foh I have forgotten) O thus,
plague brought this man (so, so, so) unto his burial, because, because,
because, (hem, hem) because he would not buy an Urinal, come, come Auditus,
shall we hear thee play, the Lyroway, or the Lute-way shall we, or the Cornet,
or any Music, I am greatly revived when I hear.


Tactus, Tactus, this will not serve, I heard all, you have not found a Crown:
you, no, you have not.


Peace, peace, faith peace, come hither, hark thee good now.


I cannot hold I must needs tell.


O do not, do not, do not, come hither, will you be a fool?


Had he not wings upon his feet and shoulders?


Yes, yes, and a fine wand in his hand,
Coriously wrapped with a pair of snakes.

Will half content you, pish 'twill ne'er be known.


My life, 'twas Mercury.


I do not know his name, but this I am sure his hat had wings upon it.


Doubtless 'twas he, but say my Boy what did he?


First I beheld him hovering in the air,
And then down stooping with a hundred gires:
His feet he fixed on Mount Chephalon,
From whence he flew and lighted on that plain,
And with disdainful steps soon glided thither:
Whither arrived, he suddenly unfolds
A gorgeous Robe, and glittering ornament,
And lays them all, upon that hillock:
This done he wafts his wand, took wing again,
And in a moment vanished out of sight,
With that mine eyes 'gan stare, and heart grew cold,
And all my quivering joints with sweat bedewed:
My heels my thought had wings as well as his,
And so away I run; but by the way,
I met a man as I thought coming thither,

What marks had he?


He had a great -- what this is he, this is he:


What Tactus?


This was the plague vexed him so, Tactus your Grave gapes for you, are you
ready?


Since you must needs die, do as others do,
Leave all your goods behind you; bequeath the
Crown and Robe to your Executors.

No such matter, I like the Egyptian Knights,
^or the more state, will be buried in them.

Come, come, deliver:


What will you take my purse from me?


No but a Crown, that's just more then your own.
Ha, what's this? 'tis a very small hand,
What Inscription is this?
He of the five that proves himself the best,
Shall have his Temples with this Coronet blessed.
This Crown is mine, and mine this garment is,
For I have always been accounted best.

Next after me, I as your self at any time: besides I found it first, therefore
'tis mine.


Neither of yours but mine as much as both.


And mine the most of any of you all.


Give me it or else --


I'll make you late repent it -- -- --


Presumptuous as you are -- -- --


Spite of your teeth -- --


Never till now* a ha, it works apace,
Visus I know tis yours, and yet methinks,
Auditus you should have some challenge to it,
But that your title Tactus is so good:
Gustus I would swear the Coronet were yours,
What will you all go brawl about a trifle:
View but the pleasant coast of Microcosm,
Is't not great pity to be rent with wars,
Is't not a shame, to stain with brinish tears,
The smiling cheeks of ever-cheerfull peace,
Is't not far better to live quietly,
Than broil in fury of dissention;
Give me the Crown, ye shall not disagree,
If I can please you; I'll play Paris part,
And most unpartial judge the controversy:

Sauce-box go meddle with your Ladies fan, and prate not here.


I speak not for my self, but for my Countries safe commodity.


Sir be still.


Nay and you be so hot, the devil part you,
I'll to Olfactus and send him amongst you.
O that I were Alecto for your sakes:
How liberally would I bestow my snakes.

Tactus upon thine honour,
I challenge thee to meet me here,
Strong as thou can provide in th'afternoon.

I undertake the Challenge, and here's my hand,
In sign thou shalt be answered.

Tactus I'll join with thee, on this condition,
That if we win, he that fought best of us,
Shall have the Crown, the other wear the Robe.

Give me your hand, I like the motion.


Auditus shall we make our forces double,
Upon the same terms.

Very willingly:


Come lets away, fear not the victory.
Right's more advantage, than an host of soldiers.

I long to see those hot-spur senses at it, they say they have gallant
preparations, and not unlikely, for most of the soldiers are ready in Arms
since the last field fought against their yearly enemy Meleager, and his wife
Acrasia; that Conquest hath so fleshed them, that no peace can hold them. But
had not Meleager been sick, and Acrasia drunk, the senses might have whistled
for the victory.


Foh, what a stink of gunpowder is yonder?


Who's this! oh, oh, 'tis Appetitus, Gustus his hungry Parasite.


I cannot endure the smoking of Gunnes, the thundering of drums, I had rather
hear the merry hacking of pot-herbs, and see the reeking of a hot Capon. If
they would use no other Bucklers in war, but shields of Brawn, brandish no
swords but sweards of Bacon, trail no spears, but sparribs of Pork, and instead
of Harquebuss pieces discharge Hartichockpies, toss no pikes but boiled
Pickrels, then Appetitus would rouse up his crest, and bear up himself with the
proudest.


Ah here's a youth stark nought at a trench but old dog at a trencher, a tall
squire at a square table


But now my good masters must pardon me I am not for their service, for their
service is without service, and indeed their service is too hot for my diet.
But what, If I be not my self, but only this be my spirit that wanders up and
down, and Appetitus be kil^ in the Camp, the Devil he is as soon, how's tha^
possible? tut, tut, I know I am, I, I am Appetitus, and alive too, by this
Infallible token, that I feel my sel^ hungry.


Thou might have taken a better token o^ thy self, by knowing thou art a
fool.


Well then, though I made my fellow souldier^ admire the beauty of my back, and
wonder at the nimbleness of my heels, yet now will I at safety a^ home, tell
in what dangers they are abroad, I'll spea^ nothing but guns, and glaves, and
staves, and phalanges, and squadrons, and barracadoes, ambuscadoes, palmedoes
blank point dept, counterpoint, counterscraf, sallies, and lies, saladoes,
tarantantaras, ranta, tara, tara, hey.


I must take the fife out of his mouth, or he'll ne'er adone*


But above all I'll be sure on my knees to thank the great --


Who am I, who am I, who I?


By the bloud-stain'd fashion of Mauors -- I am on your side


Why, who am I?


Are you a soldier?


No.


Then you are master Helluo the Bear-ward,


No, no, he's dead.


Or Gulono the gutty Sergeant, or Delphino the Vintner, or else I know you not,
for these are all my acquaintance.


Would I were hanged, if I be any of these,


What Mendacio, by the faith of a Knight thou art welcome, I must borrow thy
Whetstone to sharpen the edges of my martial complements.


By the faith of a Knight, what a pox, where are thy Spurs?


I need no spurs, I ride like Pegasus on a winged horse, on a swift Jennet,
my Boy, called fear.


What should thou fear in the wars? he's not a good soldier that hath not a
good stomach.


O, but the stink of powder spoils Appetitus stomach, and then thou know
when 'tis gone, Appetitus is dead, therefore I very manfully drew my sword, and
flourished it bravely about mine ears, kissed, and finding my self hurt, most
manfully run away.


All heart indeed, for thou ran like a Hart out of the field:
It seems then the Senses mean to fight it out.

I, and out-fight themselves I think, and all about a trifle, a paltry babble,
found I know not where.


Thou art deceived, they fight for more then that, a thing called Superiority,
of which the Crow^ is but an Emblem.


Mendacio hang this Superiority, Crown me no Crown but Bacchus Crown of Roses,
give me no Sceptre, but a far (apons leg, to show tha^ I am the great King of
Hungary, therefore I prethe^ talk no more of State-matters, but in brief, tell
me my little rascal, how thou hast spent thy time this many a day?


Faith in some credit since thou saw me last*


How so, where?


Every where; in the Court your Gentlewomen hang me at their Apron strings, and
that makes them answer so readily. In the City I am honoured like a God, none
so well acquainted with your Tradesmen: your Lawyers all the Term time hire me
of my Lady, your Gallants if they hear my name abused, they stab for my sake:
your Travellers so dote upon me as passes, O they have good reason, for I have
carried them to many a good meal, under the Countenance of my familiarity: Nay
your States-men have oftentimes closely conveyed me under their tongues, to
make their policies more currant: As for old men they challenge my Company by
authority.


I am exceeding glad of your great promotion.


Now when I am disposed, I can Philophy it in the University, with the
subtilest of them all.


I cannot be persuaded that you are acquainted with Scholars ever since thou
were pressed to death in a Print-house.


No, why I was the first founder of the three sects of Philosophy, except one
of the Peripateticks who acknowledge Aristotle (I confess) their great
Grand-father.


Thou Boy, how is this possible? thou art but a Child and there were sects of
Philosophy before thou were born.


Appetitus, thou mistake me, I tell thee, 3000 years ago was Mendacio born in
Greece, nursed in Creete, and ever since honoured every where: I'll be sworn I
held old Homers pen when he writ his Iliads and his Odysses.


Thou had need, for I hear say he was blind.


I helped Herodotus to pen some part of his Muses, lent Pliny ink to write his
History, rounded Rabalais in the ear when he historified Pantagruell; as for
Lucian, I was his Genius, O those two Books De Vera Historia, howsoever they go
under his Name, I'll be sworn I write them every tittle.


Sure as I am Hungry, thou'st have it for lying. But hast thou rusted this
later time for want of exercise?


Nothing less, I must confess I would fain have jogged Stow and great
Hollinshead on their elbows, when they were about their Chronicles, and as I
remember Sir John Mandevils Travels, and a great part of the Decades were of my
doing. But for the mirror of Knight-hood, Bevis of Southampton, Palmerin of
England, Amadis of Gaul, Huon de Bordeaux, Sir Guy of Warwick, Martin
mar-prelate, Robin-hood, Garragantua, Gevilion, and a thousand such exquisite
monuments as these, no doubt but they breathe on my breath up and down.


Downwards I'll swear, for there's stinking lies in them.


But what should I light a Candle to the bright Sun shine of my glorious
renown, the whole world is full of Mendacios fame.


And so it will be so long as the world is full of fame.


But Sir, how hast thou done this long time?


In as much request as thy self. To begin with the Court, as thou did, I lie
with the Ladies all night, and that's the reason they call for Cullies, and
Gruellies so early before their prayers, your Gallants never sup, break-fast or
beaver without me.


That's false, for I have seen them eat with a full stomach.


True, but because they know a little thing drives me from them, therefore in
midst of meat they present me with some sharp sauce or a dish of delicate
Anchoves, or a Caviare, to entice me back again; nay more, your old Sirs that
hardly go without a prop, will walk a mile or two every day to renew their
acquaintance with me, as for the Academy, it is beholding to me for adding the
eighth province unto noble Heptarchy of the liberal sciences.


What's that I prithee.


The most desired and honourable art of Cookery.
Now Sir in the City I am -- st, st.
O the body of a Louse.

What art a louse in the City?


Not a word more, for yonder comes Phantastes, and some body else.


What a pox can Phantastes do?


Work a miracle if he would prove wise.


'Tis he indeed, the vilest nup: yet the fool loves me exceedingly, but I care
not for his company, for if he once catch me, I shall never be rid of him.


Sir Boy Heuresis? boy how now biting your nails?


Three things have troubled my brain this many a day, and just now, when I was
laying hold on the Invention of them, your sudden call, made them like Tantalus
apples, fly from my fingers.


Some great matters questionless, what were they?


The quadrature of a circle, the Philosophers stone, and the next way to the
Indies.


Thou dost well to meditate on these three things at once, for they'll be found
out altogether, ad gracas calendas, but let them pass, and carry the conceit I
told you this morning, to the party you wot of. In my imagination 'tis
Capritious, 'twill take I warrant thee.


I will Sir: But what say you to the Gentleman that was with you yesterday?


O I think thou meanest him that made nineteen sonnets of his Mistress
Busk-point:


The same, the same, Sir: You promised to help him out with the twentieth.


By Jupiters cloven pate 'tis true; but we witty fellows are so forgetful, but
stay, hue, hue, carry him this:

The gordian knot which Alexander great,
Did meanwhile cut with his all conquering sword:
Was nothing like thy Busk-point pretty Peat,
Nor could so fair an augury afford.
Then to conclude let him pervert Catullus his zonam solvit diu ligatam, thus,
thus,

Which if I chance to cut or else untie,
Thy little world I'll conquer presently.
'Tis pretty, pretty, tell him 'twas extemporal.


Well Sir, but now for Master Inamorato's Love-letter.


Some netling stuffy faith; let him write thus: Most heart commanding faced
Gentlewoman, even as the stone in India called Basiliscus, hurts all that looks
on it: and as the Serpent in Arabia called Smaragdus, delights the sight, so
does thy celestial orb assimilating eyes, both please, and in pleasing wound my
Love-darted heart.


But what trick shall I invent for the conclusion?


Pish, any thing: Love will minister Ink for the rest:

He that once begun well, hath half done, let him begin again, and there's all.


Master Gullio spoke for a new fashion, What for him?


A fashion for his suit -- let him button it down the sleeve with four elbows,
and so make it the pure heiroglyphick of a fool.


Nay then let me request one thing of you.


What's that Boy? by this fair hand thou shalt have it.


Mistress Superbia a Gentlewoman of my acquaintance wished me to devise her a
new set for her Ruff, and an odd tire, I pray Sir, help me out with it.


Ah Boy in my conceit it's a hard matter to perform, these women have well nigh
tired me, with devising tires for them, and set me at a non plus for new sets,
their heads are so light, and their eyes so coy, that I know not how to please
them.


I pray Sir, she hath a bad face, and fain would have Suitors, Fantastical and
odd apparel, would perchance draw some body to look on her.


If her face be nought, in my opinion, the more view it, the worse, bid her
wear the multitude of her deformities under a Mask, till my leisure will serve
to devise some durable, and unstained blush of painting.


Very good Sir.


Away then, hye thee again, meet me at the Court within this hour at the
farthest.

Oh heavens, how have I been troubled these later times with Women, Fools,
Babes, Tailors, Poets, Swaggerers, Gulls, Ballad-makers, they have almost
disrobed me of all the toys and trifles I can devise; were it not that I pity
the poor multitude of Printers, these Sonnet-mongers should starve for
conceits, for all Phantastes. But these puling Lovers, I cannot but laugh at
them and their Encomions of their Mistresses. They make forsooth her hair of
Gold, her eyes of Diamond, her cheeks of Roses, her lips of Rubies, her teeth
of Pearl, and her whole body of Ivory: and when they have thus Idol'd her like
Pigmalion, they fall down and worship her. Psyche, thou hast laid a hard task
upon my shoulders, to invent at every ones ask, were it not that I refresh my
dullness once a day with my most Angelical presence, 'twere unpossible for me
to undergo it.


I cannot stay, I tell you 'tis more then time I were at Court, I know my
Sovereign Psyche hath expected me this hour.


In good time, younder comes Commonsense, I imagine it should be he by his
voice.


Crave my counsel, tell me what manner of man he is? Can he entertain a man
into his house, can he hold his Velvet Cap in one hand, and vale his bonnet
with the other? Knows he how to become a Scarlet gown, hath he a pair of fresh
posts at his door?


He's about some hasty State-matters, he talks of posts methinks.


Can he part a couple of Dogs brawling in the street? why then choose him
Mayor, upon my credit he'll prove a wise Officer.


Save you my Lord, I have attended your leisure this hour.


Fie upon it, what a toil have I had to choose them a Mayor yonder? there's a
fusty Currier will have this man: there's a Chandler wipes his nose on his
sleeve, and swears it shall not be so. There's a Mustard-maker looks as keen as
Vinegar, will have another: O this many headed multitude, it's a hard matter to
please them!


Especially where the multitude is so well headed. But I pray you where's
Master Memory? hath he forgotten himself that he is not here?


'Tis high time he were at Court, I would he would come.


How soon a wise man shall have his wish?


Memory the season of your coming is very ripe.


Had you staid a little longer 'twould have been stark rotten.


I am glad I saved it from the Swine -- Spretious I have forgot something: O my
purse, my purse, why Anamnestes? Remembrance where art thou, Anamnestes
Remembrance, that wild Boy is always gadding, I remember he was at my heels,
even now, and now the wild Rascal is vanished.


Is he not here? why then in my imagination he's left behind, O la Anamnestes
remembrance.





Ha sir, what a brawling's here?


I do but give you an answer with anon Sir.


You answer sweetly, I have called you three or four times one after another.


Sir, I hope I answered you three or four times one in the neck of another. But
if your good worship have lent me any more calls, tell me, and I'll repay them as
I am a Gentleman.


Leave your tattle, had you come at first I had not spent so much breath in
vain.


The truth is Sir, the first time you called, I heard you not, the second I
understood you not, the third I knew not whether it were you or no: the fourth
I could not tell where you were, and that's the reason I answered so suddenly.


Go sir, run, seek every where, I have lost my purse somewhere.


I go Sir: Go sir, seek, run, I have lost, bring, here's a Dogs life, with a
pox, shall I be always used like a water-Spaniel.


Come good Master Register, I wonder you be so late now adays.


My good Lord, I remember that I knew your Grandfather in this your place, and
I remember your Grandfathers great Grandfathers, Grandfathers Fathers, Father,
yet in those days I never remember that any of them could say, that Register
Memory ever broke one minute of his appointment.


Why good Father, why are you so late now adays?


Thus 'tis, the most customers I remember my self to have, are (as your
Lordship knows) Scholars, and now adays the most of them are become Critics,
bringing me home such paltry things to lay up for them, that I can hardly find
them again.


Jupiter, Jupiter, I had thought these Flies had bit none but my self, Do
Critics tickle you in faith?


Very familiarly: for they must know of me forsooth, how every idle word is
written in all the musty moth-eaten Manuscripts, kept in all the old Libraries
in every City betwixt England and Peru.


Indeed I have noted these times to affect Antiquities more than is requisite.


I remember in the age of Assaracus and Ninus, and about the wars of Thebes,
and the siege of Troy, there was few things committed to my charge, but those
that were well worthy the preserving, but now every trifle must be wrapped up
in the volume of Eternity. A rich pudding-wife, or a Cobbler cannot die but I
must immortalize his Name with an Epitaph: A dog cannot peace in a Nobleman's
shoe, but it must be sprinkled into the Chronicles, so that I never could
remember my Treasure more full, and never emptier of Honourable, and true
Heroical actions.


By your leave Memory, you are not alone troubled, Chronologers many of them
are so Fantastic, as when they bring a Captain to the Combat, lifting up his
revengeful arm to dis-part the head of his enemy, they'll hold up his arms so
long till they have bestowed three or four pages in describing the gold hilts
of his threatening Fashion: So that in my Fancy the Reader may well wonder his
adversary stabs him not before he strikes; moreover they are become most
palpable flatterers, always begging at my gates for Invention.


This is a great fault in a Chronologer to turn Parasite: An absolute History
should be in fear of none, neither should he write any thing more then truth
for friendship, or less for hate, but keep himself equal and constant in all
his discourses, but for us, we must be contented, for as our Honours increase,
so must the burden of the cares of our Offices urge us to wax heavy.


But not till our backs break, s'lud there was never any so haunted as I am,
this day there comes a Sophister to my house, knocks at my door, his errand
being asked forsooth his answer was, to borrow a fair suit of conceits out of
my wardrobe, to apparel, a show he had in hand, and what think you is the
plot?


Nay I know not, for I am little acquainted with such toys.


Mean-while he's somewhat acquainted with you, for he's bold to bring your
person upon the Stage.


What me? I cannot remember, that I was ever brought upon the Stage before.


Yes you and you, and my self, with all my Fantastical tricks and humours, but
I trow I have fitted him with Fooleries, I trust he'll never trouble me again.


O times! O manners! when Boys dare to traduce men in authority, was ever such
an attempt heard!


I remember there was For (to say the truth) at my last being at Athens (It is
now, let me see, about 1800 years ago) I was at a Comedy of Aristophanes
making, (I shall never forget it) The Arch-governour of Athens took me by the
hand and placed me, and there I say, I saw Socrates abused most grossly, himself
being then a present spectator: I remember he sate full against me, and did not
so much as show the least countenance of discontent.


In those days it was lawful, but now the abuse of such liberty is
unsufferable.


Think what you will of it, I think 'tis done, and I think it is acting by this
time; hark, hark, what drumming's yonder, I'll lay my life they are come to
present the show I spake of.


It may be so; stay we will see what 'tis.


Fain thy self in great haste.


I warrant you Madam: I doubt 'tis in vain to run, by this they are all past
overtaking.


Is not this Lingua that is in such hast?


Yes, yes, stand still.


I must speak with him.


With whom?


Assure your self they are all at Court ere this.


Run after them, for unless he know it --


Lingua.


O is't your Lordship: I beseech you pardon me; hast and fear, I protest put out
mine eyes: I looked so long for you, that I knew not when I had found you.


In my conceit, that's like the man that enquired, who saw his Ass, when
himself rid on him.


O my heart beats so, fie, fie, fie, fie.


I am so weary, fo, fo, fo, fo.


I prithee Lingua make an end.


Let me begin first I beseech you, but if you will needs have the end first,
thus 'tis. The Commonwealth of Microsme at this instant suffers the pangs of
death, 'tis gasping for breath. Will you have all? 'tis poysned.


What Pothecary durst be so bold as make such a confection? ha what poison is't?


A golden Crown.


I mistake, or else Galen in his Book De sanitate tuenda, commends gold as
restorative.


Lingua express your self.


Madam if you want breath, let me help you out.


I prithee do, do.


My Lord, the report is, that Mercury coming late into this Country, in this
very place, left a Coronet with this inscription, that the best of the five
should have it, which the Senses thinking to belong unto them --


Challenge each other, and are now in arms, and 't like your Lordship.


I protest it likes not me.


Their battles are not far hence ready ranged.


O monstrous presumption! what shall we do?


My Lord, in your great Grandfathers time, there was I remember such a breach
amongst them, therefore my Counsel is, that after his example, by the strength
of your authority you convent them before you.


Lingua go presently, command the Senses upon their allegiance to our dread
Sovereign Queen Psyche, to dismiss their companies, and personally to appear
before me without any pretence of excuse.


I go my Lord.


But hear you Madam, I pray you let your Page tongue walk with us a little,
till you return again.


With all my heart.


Hot youths I protest, saw you those warlike preparations?


Lately my Lords, I spied into the Army,
But oh, 'tis far beyond my reach of wit.
Or strength of utterance to describe their forces.

Go to, speak what thou can.


Upon the right hand of a spacious Hill,
Proud Visus marshalleth a puissant Army,
Three thousand Eagles strong, whose valiant Captain
Is Joves fwift Thunder-bearer, that same Bird,
That hoist up Ganimede from the Trojan plains:
The vant-gard strengthened with a wondrous flight
Of Falcons, Haggards, Hobbies, Terselets,
Lanards and Goshauks, Sparhauks, and Ravenous Birds.
The rereward granted to Anditus charge.
Is stoutly follow'd with an impetuous herd
Of stiff-neckt Bulls, and many horn-mad stags,
Of the best head the Forest can afford.

I promise you a fearful troop of Soldiers


Right opposite stands Tactus strongly mand,
With three thousand bristled Urchins for his Pikemen;
Four hundred Tortesses for Elephants.
Besides a monstrous troop of ugly spiders,
Within an ambushment he hath comnanded,
Of their own guts to spin a cordage fine,
Whereof to have framed a net (O wondrous work)
That fastened by the Concave of the Moon,
Spreads down it self to the earths circumference.

'Tis very strange, I cannot remember the like Engine at any time.


Nay more my Lord, the masks are made so strong,
That I my self upon them scale the heavens,
And boldly walt about the middle region,
Where in the province of the Meteors,
I saw the cloudy shops of Hail and Rain,
Garners of Snow, and Christals full of dew,
Rivers of burning Arrows, Dens of Dragons,
Huge beams of flames, and Spears like fire brands,
Where I beheld hot Mars and Mercury,
With Rackets made of Spears, and Balls of Stars,
Playing at Tennis for a Tun of Nectar.
And that vast gaping of the Firmament,
Under the Southern pole is nothing else
But the great hazard of their Tennis Court,
The Zodiac is the line. The shooting Stars,
Which in an eye bright evening seemed to fall,
Are nothing but the Balls they lose at Bandy.
Thus having took my pleasure with those sights,
By the same net I went up, I descend.

Well Sir to what purpose tends this Stratagem?


None know directly, but I think it is
T'intrap the Eagles, when the Battles join.

Who takes Tactus his part?


Under the standard of thrice hardy Tactus,
Thrice valiant Gustus leads his war-like Forces,
An endless multitude of desperate Apes,
Five hundred Marmosets long-tail'd Monkees:
All trained to the field, and nimble Gunners.

Imagine there's old moving amongst them; Me thinks a handful of Nuts would
turn them out of their Soldiers coats,


Ramparts of Pasty-crust and forts of Pies,
Entrenched with dishes full of Custard stuff,
Hath Gustus made; and planted ordinance,
Strange ordinance: Canons of hollow canes,
Whose powder's Rape seed, charged with Turnip shot.

I remember in the Country of Utopia,
They use no other kind of Artillery.

But what's become of Olfactus?


He politically leans to neither part,
But stands betwixt the camps as at receipt:
Having great wine his Pioners to entrench them.

In my foolish imagination Olfactus is very like the Goddess of victory that
never takes any part but the Conquerors.


And in the Woods he placed secretly
Two hundred couple of Hounds and hungry Mastiffs:
And ore his head hover at his command
A cloud of Vultures, which over spread the light,
Making a night before the day be done:
But to what end not known but feared of all.

I conjecture he intends to see them fight, and after the battle to feed his
Dogs, Hogs and Vultures upon the murdered carcases.


My L. I think the fury of their anger will not be obedient to the Message of
Lingua; for otherwise in my conceit they should have been here ere this: with
your L. good liking we will attend upon you to see the field for more certainty.
It shall be so; Come Master Register lets walk.


Forsooth Oblivio shut the door upon me, I could come no sooner; ha? is he not
there? O excellent! Would I were hanged but I looked for a found rap on the
pate, and that made me before hand to lift up this excuse for a Buckler. I know
he's not at Court, for here's his purse, without which warrant there's no
coming thither; wherefore now Anamnestes sport thy self a little, while thou
art out of the prison of his company. What shall I do? by my troth anatomize
his purse in his absence. Plutus send there be Jewels in it, that I may finely
geld it of the stones -- The best sure lies in the bottom -- pox out, here's
nothing but a company of worm-eaten papers; what's this? Memorandum that Master
Prodigo owes me four thousand pounds, and that his lands are in pawn for it:
Memorandum that I owe; that he owes? 'tis well the old slave hath some care of
his credit; to whom owes he I trow this? that I owe Anamnestes? What me? I
never lent him any thing; ha, this is good, there's something coming to me more
then I looked for. Come on, what is't? Memorandum that I owe Anamnestes -- a
breeching; I faith Sir I will ease you of that payment, (He rends the bill)
Memorandum that when I was a child, Robusto tripped up my heels at foot-ball:
what a revengeful dizard's this?


How now?


Nothing but lay you upon the Cushion Sir, how so?


Nothing but lay the Cushion upon you Sir?


What my little Nam? by this foot I am sorry I mistook thee.


What my little Men? by this hand it grieves me I took thee so right. But Sir
whither with these Cushions?


To lay them here that the Judges may sit softly, least my Lady Lingua's cause
go hard with her.


They should have been wrought with gold, these will do nothing: But what makes
thy Lady with the Judges?


Pish, know not? she sues for the title of a Sense, as well as the rest
that bear the name of the Pentarchy.


Will Common sense and my Master leave their affairs to determine that
Controversy?


Then thou hearst nothing.


What should I hear!


All the Senses fell out about a Crown fallen from Heaven, and pitched a field for
it; but Vicegerent Common-sense hearing of it, took upon him to umpire the
contention, in which regard he hath appointed them (their arms dismissed) to
appear before him, charging every one to bring as it were in a show their
proper objects, that by them he may determine of their several excellencies.


When is all this?


As soon as they can possibly provide,


But can he tell which deserves best by their objects?


No not only; for every sense must describe his Instrument, that is his house
where he performs his daily duty, so that by the Object and the Instrument, my
Lord can with great ease discern their place and dignities.


His Lorship's very wise.


Thou shalt hear all anon, fine Master Phantastes, and thy Master will be here
shortly. But how is't my little Rogue? me thinks thou look lean upon it?


Alas, how should I do otherwise that lie all night with such a Rawbon'd
Skeleton as Memory, and run all day on his Errands! The Churle's grown so old
and forgetful, that every hour he's calling Anamnestes remembrance, where art
Anamnestes? Then presently something's loft, poor I must run for it; and these
words, run Boy, Come Sir quick, quick, quick, are as familiar with him as the
Cough, never out on's mouth.


Alack, alack poor Rogue, I see my fortunes are better. My Lady loves me
exceedingly; she's always kissing me, so that (I tell the Nam) Mendacios never
from betwixt her lips.


Nor out of Memories mouth; but in a worse sort, always exercising my stumps,
and which is more, when he favours best, then I am in the worst taking.


How so?


Thus, when we are friends, then must I come and be dandled upon his
Palsie-quaking knees, and he'll tell me a long story of his acquaintance with
King Priamus and his familiarity with Nestor, and how he plaid at blow-point
with Jupiter when he was in his side-coats, and how he went to look Birds-nests
with Athon, and where he was at Deucalious stood, and twenty such old wives
tales.


I wonder he being so old can talk so much.


Nature thou know (knowing what an unruly Engine the tongue is) hath set
teeth round about for watchmen; Now Sir my Master's old age hath caught out all
his teeth, and that's the cause it runs so much it liberty.


Philosophical!


O but therer's one thing stings me to the very heart, to see an ugly, foul,
idle, fat, dusty ^log-head, called Oblivio preferred before me; dost know him?


Who I? I* But care not for his acquaintance, hang him blockhead, I could never
abide him. Thou Remembrance art the only friend that the arms of my friendship
shall embrace. Thou hast heard Opo^tet mendac^m esse memorem. But what of
Oblivio?


The very naming of him hath made me forget my self. O, O, O, O, that Rascal is
so made of everywhere.


Who Oblivio?


I, for our Courtiers hug him continually in their ungrateful bosoms, and your
smooth-belly, fat-backt, barrel-pauncht, tun-gutted drones are never without
him; as for Memory he's a false-hearted fellow, he always deceives them; they
respect not him except it be to play a game at Chess, Primero, Saun^, Maw, or
such like.


I cannot think such fellows have to do with Oblivio since they never got any
thing to forget.


Again, these prodigal swaggerers that are so much bound to their Creditors, if
they have but one Cross about them they'll spend it in wine upon Oblivio.


To what purpose I prithee?


Only in hope he'll wash them in the Lethe of their cares.


Why then no man cares for thee!


Yes, a company of studious paper-worms and lean Schollers, and niggardly
scraping Usurers, and a troop of heart-eating envious persons, and those
cancker-stomackt spiteful creatures, that furnish up common place-books with
other men's faults. The time hath been in those golden days, when Saturn
reigned, that if a man received a benefit of another, I was presently sent for
to put him in mind of it; but now in these Iron afternoons, save your friends
life, and Oblivio will be more familiar with him then you.


Phantastes not at Court? is't possible? 'tis the strangest accident that ever
was heard off; I had thought the Ladies and Gallants would never lie without
him.


Hist, hist, Mendacio, I prithee observe Heuresis; it seems he cannot find his
Master that's able to find out all things: and art thou now at a fault, can
not find out thine own Master? no? I'll try one more way. O yes.


What a Proclamation for him?


I, I, his nimble head is always full of proclamations.


O yes.


But doth he cry him in the wood?


O good Sir, and good reason, for every beast hath Fantasy at his pleasure.


O yes: If any man can tell any tidings of a spruce, neat, apish, nimble, fine,
foolish, absurd, humerous, conceited, Fantastic Gallant, with hollow eyes,
sharp look, swart complexion, meager face, wearing as many toys in his
apparel, as fooleries in his looks and gesture, let him come forth and certify
me thereof, and he shall have for his reward --


I can tell you where he is, what shall he have?


A box of the ear sir,


How now invention, are you so quick fingered? in faith there's your principle
sir,


Do you bite you Rascal?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, here's the lively picture of this axiom, A quick
Invention and a good Memory can never agree. Fie, fie, fie Heuresis, beat him
when he's down?


Prithee lets alone, proud Jack-an-Apes, I'll*


What will you do?


Untrusse thy points and whip thee, thou paltry -- Let me go Mendacio if thou
love me, shall I put up the --


Come, come, come, you shall fight no more in good faith: Heuresis; your Master
will catch you anon


My Master, where is he?


I'll bring you to him, come away.


Anamnestes, I scorn that thou should think I go away for fear of any thing
thou can do unto me; here's my hand as soon as thou can pick the least
occasion, put up thy finger, I am for thee.


When thou dare Heuresis, when thou dare, I'll be as ready as thy self at
any time.

This Heuresis, this invention, is the proudest Jack-an-Apes, the peartest
self-conceited Boy that ever breathed; because forsooth some odd Poet, or some
such Phantastique fellows make much on him, there's no no with him; the vile
dandi-prat will ore-look the proudest of his acquaintance: but well I remember
me, I learnt a trick the other day, to bring a Boy ore the thigh finely; if he
come, in faith I'll tickle him with it.


As I am a Rascal Nam, they are all coming, I see Master Register trudging
hither, as fast as his three feet will carry up his four Ages.


Ah you leaden-heel'd Rascal.


Here 'tis Sir, I have it, I have it.


Is this all the haste you make?


An't like your worship, your Clog-head Oblivio went before me, and foiled the
trail of your foot-steps, that I could hardly undertake the quest of your purse
forsooth.


You might have been here long ere this: Come hither sir, come hither, what
must you go round about? goodly, goodly, you are full of circumstances.


In truth Sir, I was here before, and missing you, went back into the City,
sought you in every Ale-house, Inn, Tavern, Dicing-house, Tenniscourt, Stews,
and such like places, likely to find your worship in.


Ha? villain, am I a man likely to be found in such places, ha?


No, no Sir; Sir, but I was told by my Lady Lingua's Page that your Worship was
seeking me, therefore I enquired for you in those places where I knew you would
ask for me, and it please your worship.


I remember another quarrel sir, but well, well, I have no leisure.


Lingua, the Senses by our appointment anon are to present their objects before
us; seeing therefore they be not in readiness, we license you in the mean
while, either in your own person, or by your Advocate, to speak what you can
for your self.


My Lord, if I should bring before your honour all my friends ready to
importune you in my behalf, I should have so many Rhetoricians, Logitians,
Lawyers, and which is more, so many women to attend me, that this Grove would
hardly contain the company; wherefore to avoid the tediousness, I will lay the
whole cause upon the tip of mine own tongue.


Be as brief as the necessity of our short time requires.


My Lord, though the Imbecillitas of my feeble sex, might draw me back from
this Tribunal, with the habenis to wit Timoris, and the Catenis Pudoris;
notwithstanding being so fairly led on with the gracious (...) of your
justissimae (...), Especially so aspremente spurd' con'gli sproni di necessita
mia pungente, I Will without the help of Orators, commit the totom salutem of
my action to the Volutabilitati (...) which ( avecuostre bonne playseur) I will
finish with more then Laconica brevitate.


Whats this? here's a Gallemaufry of speech indeed.


I remember about the year 1602. many used this skew kind of language. Which
in my opinion is not much unlike the man Platony the the Son of Lagus, King
of Egypt, brought for a spectacle half white half black.


I am persuaded these same language-makers have the very quality of cold in
their wit, that freezes all Heterogeneall languages together, congealing
English Tynne, Grecian Gold, Roman Latin all In a lump.


Or rather in my imagination like you Fantastical Gulls Apparel, wearing a
Spanish Felt, a French Doblet, a Granado Stocking, a Dutch Slop, an Italian
Cloak, with a Welch frise Jerkin.


Well, leave your toying, we cannot pluck the least feather from the soft wing
of time. Therefore Lingua go on, but in a more formal manner; you know an
ingenious Oration must neither swell above the Banks with insolent words, nor
creep too shallow in the ford, with vulgar terms, but run equally, smooth, and
cheerful, through the clean current of a pure style.


My Lord, this one thing is sufficient to confirm my worth to be equal or
better then the senses, whose best operations are nothing till I polish them
with perfection; for their knowledge is only of things present, quickly
sublimed with the deaf file of time, whereas the tongue is able to recount
things past, and often pronounce things to come, by this means re-edifying such
Excellencies as Time and Age do easily depopulate.


But what profitable service do you undertake for our dread Queen Psyche?


O how I am ravished to think how infinitely she hath graced me with her most
acceptable service. But above all (which you Master Register may well remember)
when her Highness taking my mouth for her instrument, with the Bow of my
tongue struck so heavenly a touch upon my teeth, that she charmed the very
Tigers asleep, the listening Bears and Lions to couch at her feet, while the
Hills leaped, and the Woods danced to the sweet harmony of her most Angelical
accents.


I remember it very well. Orpheus played upon the Harp, while she sang, about
some four years after the contention betwixt Apollo and Pan, and a little
before the excoriation of Marsyas.


By the same token the River Alpheus, at that time pursuing his beloved
Arethusa, dischanel'd himself of his former course to be partaker of their
admirable confort, and the music being ended, thrust himself head long into
earth, the next way to follow his amorous Chase; if you go to Arcadia, you
shall see his coming up again.


Forward Lingua with your reason.


How oft hath her Excellency imployded me as Ambassador in her most urgent
affairs to foreign King and Emperors! I may say to the Gods themselves! How
many bloodless Battles have my persuasions attained, when the senses forces
have been vanquished. How many Rebels have I reclaimed when her sacred
authority was little regarded? her Laws (without exprobation be it spoken) had
been altogether unpublished, her will unperformed, her illustrious deeds
unrenouned, had not the silver sound of my trumpet filled the whole circuit of
the universe with her deserved fame. Her Cities would dissolve, traffic would
decay, friendships be broken, were not my speech the knot. Mercury and
Mastique, to bind, defend, and glue them together. What should I say more? I
can never speak enough of the unspeakable praise of speech, wherein I can find
no other imperfection at all, but that the most exquisite power and excellency
of speech cannot sufficiently express the exquisite power and excellency of
speaking.


Lingua, your service and dignity we confess to be great; nevertheless these
reasons prove you not to have the nature of a sense.


By your Lordships favour, I can soon prove that a sense is a faculty, by which
our Queen sitting in her privy Chamber hath intelligence of exterior
oecurrents. That I am of this nature, I prove thus. The object which I
challenge is --


Stay, stay my Lord, defer I beseech, defer the Judgement.


Who's this that boldly interrupts us thus! hum.


My name is Appetitus, Common servant to the Pentarchy of the senses, who
understanding that your honour was handling this action of Lingua's, sent me
hither thus hastily, most humbly requesting the Bench to consider these
Articles they allege against her, before you proceed to judgement.


Hum, here's good stuff, Master Register read them: Appetitu^, you may depart,
and bid your Mistress make convenient speed.


At your Lordships pleasure.


I Remember that I forgot my spectacles, I left them in the 349. page of Hall's
Chronicles, where he tells a great wonder of a multitude of Mice which had
almost destroyed the Country, but that there resorted a great mighty flight of
Owls, that destroyed them: Anamnestes read these Articles distinctly.


1. Are. Imprimis we accuse Lingua of high treason and sacrilege against the
most honourable Common-wealth of letters: for under pretence of profiting the
people with translations, she hath most vilely prostituted the hard mysteries of
unknown Languages to the profane ears of the vulgar.


This is as much as to make a new Hell in the upper world; for in Hell, they
say, Alexander is no better then a Cobbler; and now by these translations every
Cobbler is as familiar with Alexander as he that wrote his life.


2. art. Item that she hath wrongfully imprisoned a Lady called Veritas.

3. art. Item that she's a witch, and exercises her tongue in exorcisms.

4. art. Item that she's a common whore, and lets everyone lie with her.

5. art. Item that she rails on men in Authority, depraving their Honours with
bitter Jests and taunts, and that she's a Backbiter setting strife betwixt
bosom friends.

6. art. Item that she lends Wives weapons to fight against their Husbands.

7. art. Item that she maintains a train of prating petty-foggers, prouling
Sumners, smooth tongued Bawds, artless Empericks, hungry Parasites,
News-carriers, Janglers, and such like idle Companions, that delude the
Commonalty.

8. art. Item that she made Rhetoric wanton, Logic to babble, Astronomy to
lye.

9. art. Item that she is an incontinent Tel-tale.

10. art. Item (which is the last and worst) that she's a Woman in every
respect, and for these causes not to be admitted to the dignity of a Sense.
That these Articles be true we pawn our honours, and subscribe our names.

1. Visus. 2. Auditus. 3. Gustus. 4. Olfactus. 5. Tactus.


Lingua, these be shrewd allegations, and as I think unanswerable. I will defer
the judgement of your cause till I have finished the contention of the Senses.


Your Lordships must be obeyed; but as for them most ungrateful, and perfidious
wretches.


Good words become you better; you may depart if you will, till we send for
you. Anamnestes, run, remember Visus, 'tis time he were ready.


I go,


Lo here the object that delights the sight,
The goodliest objects that mans heart can wish.
For all things that the Orb first moveable
Wraps in the circuit of his large-stretcht arms,
Are subject to the power of Visus eyes.
That you may know what profit light doth bring,
Note Lumens words that speaks next following,

Light the fair Grand-child to the glorious Sun,
Opening the casements of the Rosie morn,
Makes the abashed Heavens soon to shun
The ugly darkness it embraced beforne,
And at his first appearance puts to flight,
The utmost relics of the Hell-born night.
This heavenly shield soon as it is displayed,
Dismays the vices that abhor the light;
To wanderers by Sea and Land gives aid;
Conquers display, recomforteth affright,
Rowseth dull Idleness, and starts soft sleep.
And all the world to daily labour keeps;
This a true Looking-glasse impartial,
Where Beauties self, her self doth beautify
With native hue, not artificial,
Discovering falsehood, opening verity;
The days bright eye, colours distinction,
Just judge of measure and proportion.
The only means by which each mortal eye
Sends messengers to the wide firmament,
That to the longing soul brings presently
High contemplation and deep wonderment.
By which aspirement she her wings displays,
And her self thither whence she came uprais'd.

What blew thing's that that's dappled so with Stars?


He represents the Heaven.


In my conceit it were pretty if he thundered when he speaks.


Then none could understand him.


Tropic colours, the Equinoctial,
The Zodiac poles, and line Ecliptical,
The Nadaz, Zenith, and Anomalies,
The Azimeth and Ephemerids,
Stars, Orbs and Planets, with their motions,
The Oriental Regradations,
Excentricks, Epicycles, and -- and -- and --

How now Visus, is your heaven at a stay?
Or is it his Motus trepidations that makes him stammer?
I pray you Memory set him agate again.

I remember when Jupiter made Amphitrio Cuckold, and lay with his wife Alemena,
Coelum was in this taking for three days space, and stood still just like him
at a non plus.


Leave jesting, you'll put the fresh Actor out of countenance.


Excentricks, Epicycles, and Aspects,
In Sextile, Trine, and Quadrate which effects
Wonders on earth: also the Oblique part
Of signs that make the day both long and short,
The Constellations rising, Cosmical,
Setting of Stars, Chronick, and Heliacal,
In the Orizon or Meridional,
And all the skill in deep Astronomy,
Is to the soul derived by the eye.

Visus, you have made Coelum a heavenly speech, past earthly capacity, it had
been as good for him he had thundered. But I pray you, who taught him to speak
and use no action; me thinks it had been excellent to have turned round about
in his speech.


He hath so many motions he knows not which to begin withal.


Nay rather it seems he's of Copernicus opinion, and that makes him stand
still.


Lets hear what Terra can say -- just nothing.


And't like your Lordship, 'twere an indecorum Terra should speak.


You are deceived, for I remember when Phaeton ruled the Sun, I shall never
forget him, he was a very pretty youth, the earth opened her mouth wide, and
spoke a very good speech to Jupiter.


By the same token Nilus hid his head then, he could never find it since.


You know Memory, that was an extreme hot day, 'tis likely Terra sweat much,
and so took cold presently after, that ever since she hath lost her voice.


A Cauton Ermines added to the field, is a sure sign the man that bore these
Arms, was to his Prince as a defensive shield, saving him from the force of
present Arms.


I know this fellow of old, 'tis a Herald; many a Centaur, Chimera, Barnacle,
Crocodile, Hippotame, such like toys, hath he stolen out of the shop of my
Invention, to shape new coats for his upstart Gentlemen. Either Africa must
breed more monsters, or you make fewer Gentlemen M. Herald; for you have spent
all my devises already; but since you are here, let me ask you a question, in
your own profession; how comes it to pass that the victorious Arms of
England, quartred with the conquered Coat of France, are not placed on the
dexter side, but give the flowrede luce the better hand?


Because that the three Lyons are one coat made of two French Duke-domes,
Normandy and Aquitaine: but I pray you Visus, what lay is that that follows
him?


'Tis Color an object of mine, subject to his commandment.


Why speaks he not?


He is so bashful, he dares not speak for blushing: What thing is that? tel me
without delay.


That's nothing of it self, yet every way
As like a Man, as a thing like may be,
And yet so unlike, as clean contrary;
For in one point it every way doth miss;
The right side of it a mans left side is.
Tis lighter then a Feather, and withal
It fills no place, nor room it is so small.

How now Visus, have you brought a boy with a riddle to pose us all?


Pose us all? and I here? that were a jest indeed: My Lord, if he have a
Sphinx, I have an Oedipus, assure your self, lets hear it once again.


What thing is that Sir?


This such a knotty Enigma? why my Lord? I think it is a Woman; for first a
Woman is nothing of her self, and again she is likest a man of any thing.


But wherein is she unlike?


In every thing, in peevishness, in folly. -- 'st Boy.


In Pride, Deceit, Prating, Lying, Cogging, Coins, Spite, Hate, Sir.


And in many more such vices: Now he may well say, the left side a mans right
side is; for a cross wife, is always contrary to her husband, ever
contradicting what he wishes for, like to the verse in Marshall, Velle tuum.


Velle tuum nolo, Dindime, nolle volo.


Lighter then a feather; doth any man make question of that?


They need not; for I remember I saw a Cardinal weigh them once, and the Woman
was found 3. grains lighter.


Tis strange; for I have seen Gentlewomen wear Feathers oftentimes; can they
carry heavier things then themselves?


O sir, I remember tis their only delight to do so.


But how apply you the last verse, it fills no place Sir?


By my faith, that spoils all the former; for these fardingalls take up all the
room now a days; tis not a woman questionless; shall I be put down with a
Riddle firrah? Heuresis search the corners of your conceit, and find it me
quickly.


Hay (...), I have it, tis a mans face in a Looking Glass.


My Lord, tis so indeed. Sirrah lets see it, for do you see my right eye here?


What of your eye?


O Lord, sir, this kind of frown is excellent, especially when tis sweetened
with such a pleasing smile.


Phantastes.


O Sir, my left eye is my right in the glass do you see? by these lips my
garters hang so neatly, my Gloves and shoes become my hands and feet so well:
Heuresis, tie my shoes strings with a new knot; -- this point was scarce well
trust. -- so, tis excellent. -- Looking-glasses were a passing invention, I
protest the fittest books for Ladies to study on --


Take heed that you fall not in love with your self Phantastes, as I remember:
Anamnestes, who wast that died of the looking disease?


Forsooth Narcissus, by the same token he was turned to a Daffadill, and as he
died for love of himself, so if you remember there was an old ill-favoured,
precious-nosed, babber-lipt, beetle-browed, bleer-eyd, slouch-eard slave that
looking himself by chance in a Glass, died for pure hate.


By the lip of my -- I could live and die with this face.


Fie fie Phantastes, so effeminate, for shame leave off. Visus, your objects I
must needs say are admirable if the house and instrument be answerable, lets
hear therefore in brief your description --


Under the fore-head of mount Cephalon,
That over-peers the coast of Microcosm,
All in the shadow of two pleasant groves,
Stand my two mansion houses, both as round,
As the clear heavens, both twins as like each other;
As star to star, which by the vulgar sort,
For their resplendent composition,
Are named the bright eyes of mount Cephalon:
With four fair rooms those lodgings are contrived.
Four goodly rooms in form most spherical,
Closing each other like the heavenly orbs:
The first whereof, of Natures substance wrought,
As a strange moat the other to defend,
Is trained moveable by Art divine,
Stirring the whole compacture of the rest;
The second chamber is most curiously
Composed of burnished, and transparent horn.

That's a matter of nothing, I have known many have such bed-chambers.


It may be so, for I remember being once in the towns Library, I read such a
thing, in their great book of monuments called Cornucopia, or rather their
copia-Cornu.


The third's a lesser room of purest glass;
The fourth's smallest, but passes all the former
In worth of matter, built most sumptuously,
With walls transparent of pure Christalline.
This the souls mirror and the bodies guide,
Loves Cabinet, bright beacons of the Realm,
Casements of light, quiver of Cupids shafts:
Wherein I sit and immediately receive
The species of things corporeal,
Keeping continual watch and sentinel:
Least foreign hurt invade our Microcosm,
And warning give, (if pleasant things approach)
To entertain them from this costly room;
Leads my Lord an entry to your house;
Through which I hourly to your self convey
Matters of wisdom by experience bred:
Arts first invention, pleasant vision,
Deep contemplation, that attires the soul,
In gorgeous robes of flowering literature:
Then if that Visus have deserved best,
Let his victorious brow, with Crown be blessed.

Anamnestes, see who's to come next.


Presently my Lord.


Visus, I wonder that amongst all your objects, you presented us not with
Platoes Idea, or the sight of Ninivie, Babylon, London, or some Sturbridge
fair-monsters; they would have done passing well, those motions in my
imagination are very delightful.


I was loath to trouble your honours with such toys, neither could I provide
them in so short a time.


We will consider your worth; mean while we dismiss you.


Hark, hark, hark, hark, peace, peace, O peace; O sweet, admirable,
Swanlike heavenly! hark, O most mellisluous strain; O what a pleasant close
was there; O full, most delicate!


How now Phantastes, is Auditus mad?


Let him alone, his musical head is always full of od crotchets.


Did you mark the dainty driving of the last point? an excellent maintaining of
the song by the choice timpan of mine ear! I never heard a better; hist, st,
st; hark, why there's a cadence able to ravish the dullest Stoic.


I know not what to think on him.


There how sweetly the pliane-song was dissolved into descant, and how easily
they came off with the last rest! hark, hark, the bitter sweetest Acromatick.


Auditus.


Thanks good Apollo for this timely grace; never could thou in fitter: O more
then most musical harmony; O most admirable consort! have you no ears? do you
not hear this music?


It may be good, but in my opinion they rest too long in the beginning.


Are you then deaf? do you not yet perceive the wondrous sound the heavenly
orbs do make with their continual motion! hark, hark, O honey sweet!


What tune do they play?


Why such a tune as never was, nor never shall be heard; mark now, now mark,
now, now.


List, list, list.


Hark, O sweet, sweet, sweet!


List, how my heart envies my happy ears! hisht, by the gold strung Harp of
Apollo, I hear the celestial music of the spears, as plainly as ever
Pythagoras did; O most excellent diapason, good, good, good! It plays Fortune
my so eas distinctly as may be.


As the fool thinks, so the Bell clinketh; I protest I hear no more then a
post.


What, the Lavalta hay? nay, if the heavens fiddle, Fancy must needs dance.


Prithee sit still, thou must dance nothing but the passing measures. Memory,
do you hear this harmony of the spears?


Not now my Lord, but I remember about some 4000. years ago, when the sky was
first made, we heard very perfectly.


By the same token the first tune the Planets played, I remember Venus the
Treble ran sweet division upon Saturn the Base: The first tune they played was
Sellengers round, in memory whereof ever since it hath been called the
beginning of the world.


How comes it we cannot hear it now?


Our ears are so well acquainted with the sound, that we never mark it. As I
remember, the Egyptian Catadupes never heard the roaring of the fall of Nilus,
because the noise was so familiar unto them.


Have you no other objects to judge by then these, Auditus?


This is the rarest and most exquisite,
Most spherical, divine, angelical;
But since your duller ears cannot perceive it,
May it please your Lordship to withdraw yourself
Unto this neighbouring Grove, there shall you see
How the sweet Treble of the chirping birds,
And the soft stirring of the moved leaves,
Running delightful descant to the sound
Of the base murmuring of the bubbling brook,
Becomes a consort of good instruments;
While twenty babbling echoes round about,
Out of the stony concave of their mouth,
Restore the vanished music of each close,
And fill your ears full of redoubled pleasure.

I will walk with you very willingly, for I grow weary of sitting. Come Master
Register and Master Phantastes.


Prithee Nam be persuaded; is't not better go to a feast then stay here for a
fray?


A feast? dost think Auditus will make the Judges a feast?


Faith I, why should he carry them to his house else?


Why sir, to hear a set or two of songs; slid his banquets are nothing but
fish, all soll, soll, soll? I'll teach thee wit boy, never go me to a Musicians
house for Junkets, unless thy stomach lies in thine ears; for there is nothing
but commending this songs delicate air, that motects dainty air; this sonnets
sweet air, that madrigals melting air; this dirgesse mournful air, this
Church-air, that Chamber-air; French air, English air, Italian air; why Lad,
they be pure Chamelions, they feed only upon the air.


Chamelions? I'll be sworn, some of your Fiddlers be rather Camels, for by their
good wills they will never leave eating.


True, and good reason, for they do nothing all the day but stretch and grate
their small guts: But oh, yonders the Ape Heuresis: let me go I prithee.


Nay, good now stay a little, let's see his humour.


I see no reason to the contrary; for we see the quintessense of Wine will
convert Water into Wine; why therefore should not the Elixar of gold turn lead
into pure gold?


Ha, ha, ha, ha, he is turned Chymick sir, it seems so by his talk.


But how shall I devise to blow the fire of Beech-coals with a continual and
equal blast? ha? I will have my bellows driven with a wheel, which wheel shall
be a self mover.


Here's old turning, these Chymicks seeking to turn lead into gold, turn away
all their own Silver.


And my wheel shall be Geometrically proportioned into seven or nine concave
encircled arms, wherein I will put equal poises; hai, hai, hai, (...), I have
it, I have it, I have it,


Heuresis?


But what's best to contain the Quick-silver? ha?


Do you remember your promise Heuresis?


It must not be Iron, for Quick-silver is the tyrant of metals, and will soon
fret it.


Heuresis? Heuresis?


Nor Brass, nor Copper, nor Mastlin, nor Mineral, (...), I have it, I have it,
it must be


You have indeed sir, and thus much more then you looked for


You shall not fight, but if you will always disagree, let us have words and no
blows; Houresis, what reason have you to fall out with him?


Because he is always abusing me, and takes the upper hand of me everywhere.


And why not sir? I am thy better in any place.


Have I been the Author of the seven liberal Sciences, and consequently of all
learning? have I been the patron of all Mechanical devises, to be thy
inferior? I tell thee Anamnestes, thou hast not so much as a point but thou
art beholding to me for it.


Good, good, but what had your invention been, but for my remembrance? I can
prove that thou belly-sprung invention art the most improfitable member in the
world; for ever since thou were born thou hast been a bloody murderer, and
thus I prove it; In the quiet years of Saturn (I remember Jupiter was then but
in his swath-bands) thou rentest the bowels of the earth, and broughtst Gold to
light, whose beauty (like Hellen) set all the world by the ears; then upon that
thou found out Iron, and put weapons in their hands; and now in the last
populous age, thou taught a scab-shin Friar the hellish invention of powder
and Guns.


Call it hellish? thou lie, it is the most admirablest invention of all
others; for whereas others imitate nature, this excells nature her self.


True, for a Cannon will kill as many at one shot, as Thunder doth commonly at
twenty.


Therefore more murthering art thou then the light bolt.


But to show the strength of my conceit, I have found out a means to withstand
the stroke of the most violent culvering: Mendacio, thou saw it when I
demonstrated invention.


What some wool-packs, or mudwalls? or such like?


Mendacio, I prithee tell it him, for I love not to be a trumpeter of mine own
praises.


I must needs confess this devise to pass all that ever I heard or saw; and
thus it was. First, he takes a Falcon and charges it without all deceits, with
dry powder well canphred; then did he put in a single bullet, and a great
quantity of drop-shot, both round and lachrimal; this done he sets me a boy
sixty paces off, just point blank over against the mouth of the piece; now in
the very midst of the direct line he fastens a post, upon which he hangs me in
a cord, a Siderite of Herculean stone.


Well, well, I know it well; it was found out in Ida, in the year of the world
-- by one Magnes, whose name it retains, though vulgarly they call it the
Adamant.


When he had hanged this Adamant in a cord, he comes back and gives fire to the
touch-hole, now the powder consumed to avoid vacuum.


Which is intolerable in nature; for first shall the whole Machine of the World,
Heaven, Earth, Sea and Air, return to the misshapen house of Chaos, then the
least vacuum be found in the universe.


The bullet and drop-shot most impetuously from the fiery throat of the
Culvering (but oh strange) no sooner came they near the Adamant in the cord,
but they were all arrested by the Sargent of Nature, and hovered in the Air
round about it, till they had lost the force of their motion, clasping
themselves close to the stone in most lovely manner, and not any one flew to in
danger the mark; so much did they remember their duty to Nature, that they
forgot the errand they were sent of.


This is a very artificial lye.


Nam, believe it, for I saw it; and which is more, I have practiced this devise
often: Once when I had a quarrel with one of my Lady Veritas naked knaves, and
had pointed him the field, I conveyed into the heart of my Buckler an Adamant,
and when we met I drew all the foins of his Rapier whether soever he intended
them, or howsoever I guided mine arm, pointed still to the midst of my Buckler,
so that by this means I hurt the Knave mortally, and my self came away
untouched, to the wonder of all the beholders.


Sir you speak Metaphorically, because thy wit Mendacio always draws men's
objections to thy fore-thought excuses.


Anamnestes, 'tis true, and I have an addition to this, which is to make the
bullet shot from the enemy, to return immediately upon the Gunner; but let all
this pass, and say the worst thou can against me.


I say Guns were found out for the quick dispatch of mortality; and when thou
saw men grow wise, and beget so fair a child as Peace, of so foul and
deformed a mother as War, least there should be no murder, thou devisedst
poison.


Nay, fie Nam, urge him not too far.


And last and worst, thou soundst out cookery, that kills more then weapons,
guns, wars or poisons, and would destroy all, but that thou inventedst Physic,
that helps to make away some.


But firra, besides all this, I devised Pillories for such forging villains as
thy self.


Call me villain?


You shall not fight as long as I am here; give over I say.


Mendacio, you offer me great wrong to hold me, in good faith I shall fall out
with you.


Away, away, away, you are Invention, are you not?


Yes Sir, what then?


And you Remembrance?


Well sir, well.


Then I will be Judicium, the moderator betwixt you, and make you both friends;
come, come, shake hands, shake hands.


Well, well, if you will needs have it so;


I am in some sort content.


Why this is as it should be, when Mendacio hath Invention on the one hand, and
Remembrance on the other, as he will be sure never to be found with Truth in his
mouth, so he scorns to be taken in a lye; hai, hai, hai, my fine waggs whist?


Whist.


Whist.


They had some reason that held the soul a harmony, for it is greatly delighted
with musique; how fast we were tied by the ears to the consort of voices
powder; but all is but a little pleasure, what profitable objects hath he?


Your ears will teach you presently, for now he is coming, that fellow in the
baize me thinks I should have known him; o tis Comaedus, tis so, but he is
become now a days something humerous, and too too, Satirical, up and down'
like his great grand-father Aristophanes.


These two my Lord, Comaedus Tragedus,
My fellows both, both, twins, but so unlike,
As birth to death, wedding to funeral:
For this that rears himself in buskins quaint,
Is pleasant at the first, proud in the midst,
Stately in all, and bitter death at end.
That in the pumps doth frown at first acquaintance,
Trouble the midst, but in the end concludes,
Closing up all with a sweet catastrophe?
This grave and sad disdain with brinish tears,
That light and quick with wrinkled laughter painted;
This deals with Nobles, Kings, and Emperors:
Full of great fears, great hopes, great enterprises;
This other trades with men of mean condition;
His projects small, small hopes and dangers little*
This gorgeous embroidered with rich sentences:
That fair and purfled round with merriments:
Both vice detect, and virtue beautify,
By being deaths mirror, and lifes looking-glass.

Salutem jam primum a la propiliam, Mihi atque vobis spectatores nuntio.



Pish, pish, this is a speech with no action, lets hear TERENCE, Quid igitur
faciam, c.


Quid igitur faciam? non eam no nunc quidem cum accusor ultro?


Phy, phy, phy, no more action, lend me your bays, do it thus, Quid igitur, c.



I should judge this action Phantastes, most absurd, unless we should come to
a Commody, as Gentlewomen to the Commencement, only to see men speak.


In my imagination it's excellent, for in this kind the hand (you know) is
harbinger to the tongue, and provides the words a lodging in the ears of the
Auditors.


Auditus, it is now time you make us acquainted with the quality of the house
you keep in, for our better help in judgement.


Upon the sides of fair mount Cephalon,
Have I two houses passing humane skill;
Of finest matter by dame nature wrought,
Whose learned singers have adorned the same
With gorgeous porches of so strange a form,
That they command the passengers to stay;
The doors whereof in hospitality,
Nor day, nor night are shut, but open wide,
Gently invite all comers; whereupon
They are named the open ears of Cephalon.
But least some bolder sound should boldly rush,
And break the nice composture of the work,
The skilful builder wisely hath inrang'd
An entry from each port with curious twins,
And crookt Meanders, like the labyrinth
That Dedalus framed to enclose the Minotaur;
At end whereof is placed a costly portal,
Resembling much the figure of a drum,
Granting slow entrance to a private closet;
Where daily with a Mallet in my hand,
I set and frame all words and sounds that come,
Upon an Anvil, and so make them fit
For the perewinckling poor; that winding leads
From my close chamber to your Lordships Cell.
Thither do I chief Justice of all accents,
Psyches next porter, Microcosmes front,
Learnings rich treasure, bring discipline,
Reasons discourse, knowledge of foreign states,
Loud fame of great Heroes virtuous deeds,
The marrow of grave speeches, and the flowers
Of quickest Wits, neat Jests, and pure Conceits,
And often times to ease the heavy burden
Of government your Lordships shoulders bear,
I thither do conduce the pleasing Nuptials
Of sweetest instruments with heavenly noise;
If then Auditus have deserved the best,
Let him be dignified before the rest.

Auditus, I am almost a Sceptic in this matter, scarce knowing which way the
balance of the cause will decline; when I have heard the rest, I will dispatch
judgement; mean while you may depart.


Your only way to make a good pomander, is this, take an ounce of the purest
garden mould, cleansed and steeped seven days in change of motherless rose
Water, then take the best Ladanum, Benioine, both Storaxes, Ambergreece, and
Civet, and musk, incorporate them together, and work them into what form you
please; this if your breath be not too valiant, will make you smell as sweet as
my Ladies dog.


This Boy it should seem represent Odor, he is so perfect a perfumer.


I do my Lord, and have at my command,
The smell of flowers and Odoriferous drugs,
Of ointments sweet, and excellent perfumes,
And Court-like waters, which if once you smell,
You in your heart will wish as I suppose,
That all your Body were transformed to Nose.

Olfactus of all the Senses, your objects have the worst luck, they are always
jarring with their contraries; for none can wear Civet, but they are suspected
of a proper bad sent: where the Proverb springs, He smells best, that doth of
nothing smell.


Foh, foh, what a smell is here? is this one of your delightful objects?


It is your only sent in request Sir.


What fiery fellow is that, which smokes so much in the mouth?


It is the great and puissant god of Tobacco


Ladoch guevarroh pusuer shelvar^ baggon, Olfia di quanon, Indi cortilo
uraggon.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, this in my opinion is the tongue of the Antipodes.


No I remember it very well, it was the language the Arcadians spake, that
lived long before the Moon.


What signifies it Olfactus?


This is the mighty Emperor Tobacco, King of Trinidado, that in being
conquered, conquered all Europe, in making them pay tribute for their smoke.


Erfronge inglues conde hifinge,
Develin floscoth ma pu cocthinge.

Expeller of Catarhes, banisher of all agues, your guts only salve for the
green wounds of a non-plus.


Al vuleam vercu, I parda pora si de gratam call famala
Mara, che Bauho respartera, quirara?

Son to the god Vulcun, and Tellus, kin to the father of Mirth, called
Bacebus?


Viscard^k, pillostuphe, par^ano tinar omagar,
Pagi dagon stollif^fe, car^ciba^o scribus.

Genius of all Swaggerers, grossest enemy to Physicians, sweet ointment for
sour teeth, firm knot of good fellowship, Adamant of Company, swift wind to
spread the wings of Time, hated of none but those that know him not, and of so
great deserts, that who so is acquainted with him, can hardly forsake him.


It seems these last words were very significant, I promise you a god of great
denomination, he may be my Lord Traps for his large Titles.


But forward Olfactus, as they have done before you, with your description.


Just in the midst of Cephalons round face
As'twere a frontis-piece unto the hill,
Olfactus lodging built in figure long,
Doubly dis-parted with two precious vaults,
The roots whereof most richly are enclosed
With Orient Pearls, and sparkling Diamonds:
Beset at the end with Emeralds and Turchois,
And Rubies red and flaming Chrysolits,
At upper end whereof in costly manner,
I lay my head between two spungeous pillows,
Like fair Adonis twixt the paps of Venus,
Where I conducting in and out the wind,
Daily examine all the air inspired.
By my pure searching, if it be pure,
And fit to serve the Lungs with lively breath:
Hence do I likewise minister perfume
Unto the neighbour brain, perfumes of force
To cleanse your head, and make your fantasy
To refine wit, and sharp invention,
And strengthen memory, from whence it came,
That old devotion Incense did ordain
To make mans spirit more apt for things divine;
Besides a thousand more commodities,
In lieu whereof your Lordships I request,
Give me the Crown if I deserve it best.

In good time Gustus, have you brought your objects?


My servant Appetitus follows with them.


Come, come Bacchus, you are so fat; enter, enter.


Fie, fie Gustus, this is a great indecorum to bring Bacchus alone, you should
have made Thirst, led him by the hand.


Right Sir, but men now a days drink often when they be not dry; besides I
could not get red herings, and neat tongues enough to apparel him in.


What, never a speech of him.


I put an Octave of Jambicks in his mouth, and he hath drunk it down.


Well done, Muscadine and Eggs stand hot; what buttered Claret? go thy way thou
had best, for blind men that cannot see how wickedly thou look -- how now,
what small thin fellow are you here? ha.


Beer forsooth, beer forsooth.


Beer forsooth? get you gone to the buttery till I call for you; you are none
of Bacchus attendants I am sure, he cannot endure the smell of Malt. Where is
Ceres? oh well, well, is the March-pane broken? ill luck, ill luck; come hanged
never stand to set it together again; serve out fruit there;


O I remember this dish well, it was first invented by Pluto, to entertain
Proserpina withal.


I think not so Memory; for when Hercules had killed the flaming Dragon of
Hesperia, with the Apples of that Orchard he made this fiery meat, in memory
whereof he named it Snap-dragon.


Gustus, lets hear your description.


Near to the lowly base of Cephalon
My house is placed, not much unlike a Cave;
Yet arched above by wondrous workmanship,
With hewn stones wrought smoother and more fine
Then Jeat or Marble fair from Island brought.
Over the door directly doth incline
A fair Percullis of compacture strong,
To shut out all that may annoy the state
Or health of Microcosm; and within
Is spread a long board like a pliant tongue,
At which I hourly sit, and trial take
Of meats and drinks needful and delectable;
Twice every day do I provision make
For the sumptuous kitchen of the Commonwealth
Which once well boiled is soon distributed
To all the members, well refreshing them
With good supply of strength-renewing food;
Should I neglect this musing diligence,
The body of the Realm would rulnate;
Your self my Lord with all your policies
And wondrous wit, could not preserve your self;
Nor you Phantastes, nor you Memory;
Psyche her self, were it not that I repair
Her crazie house with props of nourishment,
Would soon forsake us; for whose dear sake
Many a grievous pain have I sustained
By bitter pills, and sour purgations,
Which if I had not valiantly abidden,
She had been long ere this departed.
Since the whole Microcosm I maintain,
Let me as Prince above the Senses reign.

The reasons you urge Gustus, breed a new doubt whether it be better to be
commodious or necessary; the resolution whereof I refer to your judgement,
licensing you mean while to depart.


Ready anon forsooth? the Divel she will.
Who would be toiled with wenches in a show?

What in such anger Tactus? what's the matter?


My Lord, I had thought as other Senses did,
By sight of objects to have proved my worth;
Wherefore considering that all the things
That please me most, women are counted chief;
I had thought to have represented in my show,
The Queen of pleasure, Venus and her Son,
Leading a Gentleman enamoured,
With his sweet touching of his Mistress lips,
And gentle griping of her tender hands,
And divers pleasant relishes of touch,
Yet all contained in the bounds of chastity.

Tactus, of all I long to see your objects;
How comes it we have lost those pretty sports?

Thus 'tis, five hours ago I set a dozen maids to atire a boy like a nice
Gentlewoman, but there is such doing with their looking-glasses, pinning,
unpinning, setting, unsetting, formings and conformings, painting blew vains,
and cheeks; such stir with Sticks and Combs, Cascanets, Dressings, Purles,
Falls, Squares, Busks, Bodies, Scarffs, Neck-laces, Carcanets, Rebatoes,
Borders, Tires, Fans, Palizadoes, Puffs, Ruffs, Cuffs, Muffs, Pussles, Fussles,
Par^lets, Frislets, Bandlets, Fillets, Croslets, Pendulets, Amulets, Annulets,
Bracelets, and so many lets, that yet she is scarce dressed to the girdle; and
now there's such calling for Fardingales, Ki^tlets, Busk-points, shoo-ties, c.
that seven Peddlers shops, nay all Sturbridge Fair will scarce furnish her: a
ship is sooner rigd by far, then a Gentlewoman made ready.


'Tis strange, that women being so mutable, will never change in changing their
apparel?


Well let them pass; Tactus we are content, To know your dignity by relation.


The instrument of instruments the hand,
Courtesies index, Chamberlane to Nature,
The bodies Soldier, and mouths Caterer,
Pysches great Secretary, the dumbs eloquence;
The blindmans Candle, and his forheads Buckler,
The minister of wrath, and friendships sign,
This is my instrument: nevertheless my power
Extends it self, far as our Queen commands,
Through all the parts and climes of Microcosm.
I am the root of life spreading my virtue
By sinews that extend from head to foot,
To every living part.
For as a subtle Spider closely sitting,
In center of her web that spreddeth round,
If the least Fly but touch the smallest thread,
She feels it instantly; so doth my self,
Casting my slender nerve and sundry nets,
Over every particle of all the body,
By proper skill perceive the difference,
Of several qualities, hot, cold, moist and dry;
Hard, soft, rough, smooth, clammy and slippery.
Sweet pleasure, and sharp pain profitable,
That makes us wounded seek for remedy;
By these means do I teach the Body fly,
From such bad things as may endanger it;
A wall of brass can be no more defence,
Unto a town then I to Microcosm;
Tell me what sense is not beholding to me;
The nose is hot or cold, the eyes do weep;
The ears do feel, the tast's a kind of touching,
That when I please, I can command them all,
And make them tremble when I threaten them:
I am the eldest, and biggest of all the rest,
The chiefest note, and first distinction
Betwixt a living tree and living beast;
For though one hear, and see, and smell, and taste,
If he wants touch, he is counted but a block?
Therefore my Lord grant me the royalty;
Of whom there is such great necessity.

Tactus stand aside; you sir Anamnestes
Tell the Senses we expect their appearance.

At you Lordships pleasure*


Though you deserve no small punishment for these uproars, yet at the request
of these my assistants I remit it, and by the power of Judgment our gracious
sovereign Psuche hath given me, Thus I determine of your controversies: hum? By
your former objects, instruments and reasons, I conceive the state of Sense to
be divided into two parts, one of commodity, the other of necessity, both which
are either for our Queen or for our country; but as the Soul is more excellent
then the Body, so are the Senses that profit the Soul to be estimated before
those that are needful for the Body; Visus and Auditus serve your selves;
Master Register, give me the crown; because it is better to be well, then
simply to be; therefore I judge the crown by right to belong to you of the
Commodities part, and the robe to you of the Necessities side: and since you
Visus are the author of invention, and you Auditus of increase and addition to
the same; seeing it is more excellent to invent, then to augment; I establish
you Visus the better of the two, and chief of all the rest; in token whereof, I
bestow upon you this crown to wear at your liberty.


I most humbly thank your Lordships.


But lest I should seem to neglect you Auditus, I here choose you to be the
Lords Intelligencer to Psuche her Majesty, and you Olfactus, we bestow upon you
the chief Priesthood of Microcosm, perpetually to offer incense in her
Majesties temple: As for you Tactus, upon your reasons aleaged, I bestow upon
you the robes.


I accept it most gratefully at your just hands, and will wear it in the dear
remembrance of your good Lordship.


And lastly, Gustus, we elect you Psuche her only Taster, and great Purveior
for all her dominions, both by sea and land, in her realm, of Microcosm.


We thank your Lordship, and rest well content with equal arbitrament.


Now for you Lingua.


I beseech your Honour let me speak, I will neither trouble the company, nor
offend your patience.


I cannot stay so long; we have consulted about you, and find your case to
stand upon these terms and conditions. The number of the Senses in this little
world is answerable to the first bodies in the great world: now since there be
but five in the Universe, the four elements and the pure substance of the
heavens, therefore there can be but five Senses in our Microcosm, correspondent
to those, as the sight to the heavens, hearing to the air, touching to the
earth, smelling to the fire, tasting to the water; by which five means only the
understanding is able to apprehend the knowledge of all corporal substances:
wherefore we judge you to be no Sense simply; only thus much we from
henceforth pronounce, that all women for your sake, shall have six Senses,
seeing, hearing, tasting, smelling, touching, and the last and feminine sense,
the sense of speaking.


I beseech your Lordships and your Assistants, (the only cause of our
friendship) to grace my table with your most welcome presence this night at
supper.


I am sorry I cannot stay with you, you know we may by no means omit our daily
attendance at the Court, therefore I pray you pardon us.


I hope I shall not have the denial at your hands my Masters, and you my Lady
Lingua; come let us drown all our anger in a bowl of Hippocras.


Come Master Register, shall we walk?


I pray you stay a little, let me see; ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


How now Memory, so merry? what do you trouble your self with two palsies at
once, shaking and laughing?


'Tis a strange thing that men will so confidently oppose themselves against
Plato's great year.


Why not?


'Tis a true an opinion as need be; for I remember it very readily now, that
this time 49000. years ago all we were in this very place, and your Lordship
judged the very same controversy, after the very same manner, in all respects,
and circumstances alike.


'Tis wondrous strange!


By the same token you held your staff in you right hand, just as you do now,
and Mr. Phantastes stood wondering at you, gaping as wide as you see him.


I, but I did not give you a box on the ear sir 49000. years ago, did I?


I do not remember that Sir.


This time Plato's twelve month to come, look you save your cheeks better.


But what entertainment had we at Court for our long staying?


Lets go, I'll tell you as we walk.


If I do not seem pranker now, then I did in those days, I'll be hanged.


Why this is good by common Senses means;
Lingua, thou hast framed a perfect comedy,
They are all good friends whom thou made enemies,
And I am half a Sense; a sweet piece of service,
I promise you a fair step to preferment.
Was this the care and labour thou hast taken,
To bring thy foes together to a banquet
To lose thy Crown, and be deluded thus?
Well now I see my cause is desperate,
The judgements past, sentence irrevocable;
Therefore I'll be content and clap my hands,
And give a Plaudit to their proceedings:
What shall I leave my hate begun imperfect,
So foully vanquished by the spiteful Senses?
Shall I the Embassadress of gods and men,
That pulled proud Phoebe from her bright some sphere,
And dark'd Apoll^'s countenance with a word,
Raising at pleasure storms, and winds, and earthquakes,
Be overcrow'd, and breath without revenge?
Yet they forsooth base slaves must be preferred,
And deck themselves with my right ornaments;
Doth the all knowing Phoebus see this shame
Without redress? will not Heavens help me?
Then shall Hell do it, my enchanting tongue
Can mount the skies, and in a moment fall
From the Pole Arctic, to dark Acheron.
I'll make them know mine anger is not spent,
Lingua hath power to hurt, and will to do it.
Mendacio, come hither quickly sir.

Madam.


Hark hither in thine ear.


Why do you whish thus? here's none to hear you.


I dare not trust these secrets to the Earth, ere since she brought forth
Reeds, whose babbling noise told all the world of Midas Asses ears,


I, I, I, -- never fear that -- there's a jest indeed -- pish, pish, -- Madam
-- do you think me so foolish? -- tut, tut, doubt not:


Tell her if she do not.


Why do you make any question of it -- what a stir is here -- I warrant you --
presently?


Well, I'll to supper, and so closely cover
The rusty canker of mine Iron spite,
With golden foil of goodly semblances;
But if I do not trounce them --

My Lady Lingua is just like one of these lean-witted Comedians, who disturbing
all to the fifth Act, bring down some Mercuries or Jupiter in an Engine, to make
all friends: So she, but in a contrary manner, seeing her former plots
dispurposed, sends me to an old Witch called Acrasia, to help to wreak her
spite upon the Senses; the old hag after many an incricled circumstance, and
often naming of the direful Hecate, and Demogorgon, gives me this bottle of
Wine mingled with such hellish druggs and forcible words, that whosoever drinks
of it shall be presently possessed with an enraged and mad kind of anger.


What's this Crapula beating Appetitus out of doors? ha!


You filthy long Crane, you meager slave, will you kill our guests with blowing
continual hunger in them? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe) the Senses have
overcharged their stomachs already, and you Sir serve them up a fresh
appetite with every new dish; they had burst their guts if thou had staid but
a thought longer? (tiffe, toffe, tiffe, toffe,) be gon or I'll set thee away;
begone ye gnaw-bone, raw-bone rascal.


Then my devise is clean spoiled. Appetitus should have been as the bowl to
present this medicine to the Senses, and now Crapula hath beaten him out of
doors? what shall I do?


Away Sir, (tiff toff, tiff, c.


Well Crapula, well, I have deserved better as your hands then so, I was the
man you know first brought you into Gustus's service, I lined your guts there,
and you use me thus? but grease a fat sow, c.


Dost thou talk (tiff, toff) hence, hence tiff, tiff, hence avaunt cur,
avaunt you dog!


The belching gor-belly hath wel-nigh killed me: I am shut out of doors finely;
well this is my comfort, I may walk now in liberty at my own pleasure.


Appetitus, Appetitus!


Ah Mendacio, Mendacio.


Why how now man, how now? how is't? can not speak?


Faith I am like a bag-pipe, that never sounds but when the belly is full.


Thou empty, and come from a feast?


From a fray, I tell thee Mendacio. I am now just like the Ewe that gave suck
to a Wolfs whelp. I have nursed up my fellow Crapula so long that he's grown
strong enough to beat me.


And whether wilt thou go, now thou art banished out of service?


Faith I'll travel to some College or other in an University.


Why so?


Because Appetitus is well beloved amongst Scholars, for there I can dine and
sup with them, and rise again as good friends as we sat down, I'll thither
questionless.


Hear thou? give me thy hand, by this hand I love thee; go to then, thou
shalt not forsake thy masters thus, I say thou shalt not.


Alas I am very loath; but how shall I help it?


Why take this bottle of wine, come on, go thy ways to them again.


Ha, ha, ha, what good will this do?


This is the Nepenthe that reconciles the Gods: do but let the Senses taste of
it, and fear not, they'll love thee as well as ever they did.


I pray thee where had it?


My Lady gave it me to bring her: Mercury stole it from Hell for her: thou
know there were some jarres betwixt her and thy masters, and with this drink
she would gladly wash out all the relics of their agreement: Now because I
love thee, thou shalt have the grace of presenting it to them, and so come in
favour again.


It smells well, I would fain begin to them.


Nay stay no longer lest they have supped before thou come.


Mendacio, how shall I requite thy infinite courtesy?


Nay, pray thee leave, go catch occasion by the foretop; but hearst thou? as
soon as it is presented, round my Lady Lingua in the ear, and tell her of it.


I will, I will, I will; adieu, adieu, adieu,


Why this is better then I could have wished it,
Fortune I think is fallen in love with me,
Answering so right mine expectation:
By this time Appetite is at the Table.
And with a lowly Cringe presents the Wine
To his old Master Gustus; now he takes it,
And drinks perchance to Lingua, she craftily
Kisses the Cup, but lets not down a drop,
And gives it to the rest, 'tis sweet, the'l swallow it,
But when 'tis once descended to the stomach,
And sends up noisome vapours to the Brain,
'Twill make them swagger gallantly, the'le rage
Most strangely, or Acrasias Art deceives her:
When if my Lady stir her nimble tongue,
And closely sow contentious words amongst them,
O what a stabbing there will be? what bleeding?

What art thou there Mendacio? pretty rascal, Come let me kiss thee for thy
good deserts.


Madam dost take? have they all tasted it?


All, all and all are well nigh mad already:
Oh how they stare, and swear, and fume, brawl!
Wrath gives them weapons; Pots Candle-sticks,
Joined stools and Trenchers fly about the room,
Like to the bloody banquet of the Centaurs:
But all the sport is to see what several thoughts
The potions work in their imaginations.
For Visus thinks himself; a ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

So-ho Mendacio! so-ho, so-ho!


Madam, I doubt they come, yonder is Appetitus, you had best be gone, least in
their outrage they should injure you. Hunger? how dost thou my fine May-pole,
ha?


I may well be called a May-pole; for the Senses do nothing but dance a morice
about me.


Why? what ails them? are they not (as I promised thee) friends with thee?


Friends with me? nay rather frenzy; I never knew them in such a case in all my
life.


Sure they drank too much, and are mad for love of thee.


They want common Sense amongst them; there's such a hurly burly, Auditus is
stark deaf, and wonders why men speak so softly that he cannot hear them: Visus
hath drunk himself stark blind, and therefore imagines himself to be
Polyphemus: Tactus is raging mad, and cannot be otherwise persuaded but he is
Hercules furens; there's such conceits amongst them.


O that I could but find the villain Outis, Outis the villain that thus blinded
me.


Who is this, Visus?


I, I, I, otherwise called Polyphemus.


By heavens bright Sun, the days most glorious eye,
That lightneth all the world but Polypheme,
And by mine eye that once was answerable
Unto that Sun, but now's extinguished.

He can see to swear methinks.


If I but once lay hands upon the slave,
That thus hath robbed me of my dearest Jewel,
I'll rend the Miscreant into a thousand pieces,
And gnash his trembling members 'twixt my teeth,
Drinking his live-warm blood to satisfy
The boiling thirst of pain and furiousness,
That thus exasperates great Polypheme.

'Pray thee Appetitus see how he grasps for that he would be loath to find.


What's that, a stumbling-block?


These hands that meanwhile tore up sturdy Oaks,
And rent the rock that dashed out Acis brains,
Both in the stole bliss of my Galatea,
Serve now (oh misery) to no better use,
But for bad guides to my unskilful feet,
Never accustomed thus to be directed.

As I am a Rogue he wants nothing but a wheel, to make him the true picture of
Fortune; how say? what, shall we play at blind-man-buffe with him?


I if thou wilt, but first I'll try whether he can see!


Find me out Outis, search the rocks and woods,
The hills and dales, and all the Coasts adjoining,
That I may have him, and revenge my wrong.

Visus, me thinks your eyes are well enough.


What's he that calls me Visus? dost not know?


To him Mendacio, to him, to him.


There, there Appetitus, he comes, he comes; ware, ware, he comes, ha, ha, ha,
ha.


Is this he that thinks himself Hercules?


I, wilt see me out-swagger him?


I do, do, I love not to sport with such mad play-fellows; tickle him
Appetitus, tickle him, tickle him.


Have I not here the great and puissant Club,
Wherewith I conquered three-chopt Cerberus?

Have I not here the sharp and warlike teeth,
That at one break-fast quaild thrice three hogs faces?

And are not these Alcides brawny arms,
That rent the Lions jaws, and killed the boar?

And is not this the Stomach that defeated
Nine yards of pudding, and a rank of pies?

Did not I crop the seaven-fold Hydras crest
And with a river cleansed Augeas stable?

Did not I crush a seven-fold Custards crust,
And with my tongue swept a well furnished table?

Did not these feet and hands oretake and slay
The nimble Stag, and fierce impetuous bull?

Did not this throat at one good meal devour,
That Stags sweet venison, and strong bulls beef?

Shall Hercules be thus disparaged?
Juno! you pouting quean, you lowering trull,
Take heed I take you not, for by Joves thunder
I'll be revenged.

Why Visus, Visus, will you be killed? away, away.


Who have you here? see, see the Giant Cacus,
Draws an Ox backward to his thievish den,
Hath this devise so long deluded me?
Monster of men, Cacus, restore my cattle,
Or instantly I'll crush thy idle Cox-comb,
And dash thy doltish brains against thy Cave.

Cacus, I Cacus? ha, ha, ha. Tactus, you mistake me. I am yours to command,
Appetitus.


Art Appetitus? You are so; run quickly villain, Fetch a whole Ox to satisfy
my stomach.


Fetch an ^sse to keep you company.


Then down to hell, tell Pluto Prince of Devils
That great Alcides wants a kitchen wench
To turn his spit; command him from my self
To fend up Proserpine, she'll serve the turn.

I must find you meat, and the Divel find you Cooks. Which is the next way?


Follow the beaten path thou can not miss it;
'Tis a wide Causie that conducts thither,
An easy tract, and down hill all the way;
But if the black Prince will not send her quickly,
But still detain her for his bed-fellow,
Tell him I'll drag him from his iron-chair,
By the steel tresses, and then sow him fast
With the three furies in a lethern bag,
Thus will drown them in the Ocean.

You had better keep him alive to light Tobacco-pipes, or to sweep chimneys.


Art thou not gone? nay then I'll send thy soul before thee, 'twill do thy
message sooner (tiff, tiff.)


Hercules, Hercules, Hercules; do not you hear Omphale? Hark how she calls
you, beark.


'Tis she indeed, I know her s^gned voice;
Omphale, dear Commandress of my life
My thoughts repose, sweet Center of my cares
Where all my hopes and best desires take rest.
Lo where the mighty Son of Jupiter
Throws himself captive at your conquering feet,
Do not disdain my voluntary humbleness,
Accept my service, bless me with commanding,
I will perform the hardest imposition,
And run through twelve new labours for thy sake
Omphale, dear commandress of my life.

Do you not see how she beckons to you to follow her? Look how she holds her
distaff, look you?


Where is she gone, that I may follow her? Omphale, stay, stay, take thy
Hercules?


There, there man, you are right.


What a strange temper are the Senses in?
How come their wits thus topsy turvy turned?
Hercules, Tactus, Visus, Polypheme,
Two goodly surnames have they purchased:
By the race Ambrosian of an Oyster pie;
They have got such proud imaginations,
That I could wish I were mad for company;
But since my fortunes cannot stretch so high,
I'll rest contented with this wise estate.

What, more anger? Auditus got abroad too?


Take this abuse at base Olfactus hands!
What did he challenge me to meet me here
And is not come? well I'll proclaim the slave
The vilest dastard that ere broke his word;
But stay, yonder's Appetitus.

I pray you Auditus what ails you?


Ha, ha!


What ails you?


Ha! what say thou?


Who hath abused you thus?


Why dost thou whisper thus? Can not speak out?


Save me, I had clean forgotten; why are you so angry Auditus?


Bite us, who dares bite us?


I talk of no biting, I say, what's the matter between Olfactus and you?


Will Olfactus bite me? do if he dares, would he would meet me here according
to his promise: Mine ears are somewhat thick of late, I pray thee speak out
louder.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, this is fine in faith; ha, ha, ha.
Hear you, have you lost your ears at Supper.

Excellent cheer at supper, I confess it:
But when 'tis sauced with sour contentions,
And breeds such quarrels 'tis intolerable.

Pish, pish, this is my question. Hath your supper spoiled your hearing?


Hearing at supper, tel not me of hearing:
But if thou saw Olfactus, bring me to him.

I ask you whether you have lost your hearing?


O, dost hear them ring? what a grief is this
Thus to be deaf, and lose such harmony?
Wretched Auditus now shalt thou never hear
The pleasing changes that a well tuned Cord
Of trowling bells will make, when they are rung.

Here's a do indeed, I think he is mad, as well as drunk or deaf.


Ha, what's that?


I say, you have made me hoarse with speaking so loud.


Ha, what say thou of a creaking Crowd?


I am hoarse I tell you, and my head aches.


Oh, I understand thee, the first crowd was made of a horse head.
'Tis true, the finding of a dead horse-head,
Was the first invention of string instruments,
Whence rose the Gittern, Vial, and the Lute:
Though other think the Lute was first devised
In imitation of a Tortesse back,
Whose sinews parched by Apollo's beams,
Echoed about the concave of the shell;
And seeing the shortest and smallest gave shrillest sound;
They found out frets whose sweet diversity
(Well couched by the skill-full learned fingers)
Raises so strange a multitude of Cords:
Which their opinion many do confirm,
Because Testudo signifies a Lute.
But if I by no means. --

Nay if you begin to critic once, we shall never have done.


Somnus, good Somnus, sweet Somnus, come a pace!


Hei-oh, oh, are you sure they be so? oho, ho, oho, hei, waw?

What good can I do? ou, ho, haw.


Why I tell you unless you help
Soft son of night, right heir to Quietness,
Labours repose, lifes best restorative,
Digestions careful Nurse, bloods Comforter,
Wits help, thoughts charm, the stay of Microcosm,
Sweet Somnus chiefest enemy to Care:
My dearest friend, lift up thy lumpish heap,
Open thy dull eyes, shake of this drowsiness;
Rouse up thy self.

O Crapula, how now, how now, oh oh howe, whose there?

Crapula speak quickly, what's the matter?


As I told you, the noble Senses peers of Microcosm,
Will eft-soon fall to ruin perpetual,
Unless your ready helping hand recure them:
Lately they banqueted at Gustus table,
And there fell mad, or drunk, I know not whether,
So that it's doubtful in these outrageous fits,
That the'le murder one another.

Fear it not if they have escaped already,
Bring me to them, or them to me,
I'll quickly make them know the power
Of my large stretched authority.
These cords of sleep wherewith I wont to bind,
The strongest arms that ere resisted me,
Shall be the means, whereby I will correct,
The Senses outrage, and distemperature.

Thanks gentle Somnus, I'll go seek them out,
And bring them to you soon as possible.

Dispatch it quickly, lest I fall a sleep for want of work.


Stand still, stand still? Visus I think comes yonder.
If you think good, begin and bind him first:
For he made fast, the rest will soon be quiet.

Sage Telemus, I now too late admire,
Thy deep fore-sight and skill in Prophecy;
Who meanwhile toldst me, that in time to come
Vlysses should deprive me of my fight.
And now the slave that marched in Outis name,
Is proved Vlysses; and by this device,
Hath escaped my hands, and fled away by Sea,
Leaving me desolate in eternal night.
Ah wretched Polypheme, where's all thy hope,
And longing for thy beauteous Galatea?
She scorned thee once, but now she will detest,
And loath to look upon thy darkened face:
Aye me most miserable Polyphemus.
But as for Vlisses, heaven and earth
Send vengeance ever on thy damned head
In just revenge of my great injury.
Who is he that dares to touch me? Cyclops come?
Come all ye Cyclop's help to rescue me.

There rest thy self, and and let thy quiet sleep, Restore thy imaginations.


Ha, ha, ha: oh how my spleen is tickled with this sport.
The madding Senses make about the woods,
It cheers my soul and makes my body fat,
To laugh at their mischances, ha, ha, ha, ha,
Heigh ho, the stitch hath caught me, oh my heart!
Would I had one to hold my sides a while,
That I might laugh a fresh: oh how they run,
And chafe, and swear, and threaten one another!
Ay me, out alas, ay me help, help, who's this that binds me?
Help Mendacio, Mendacio help, here's one will ravish me.

Lingua content your self you must be bound.


What a spight's this? are my nailes par'd so near? Can I not scratch his eyes
out? What have I done? what? do you mean to kill me? murder, murder murder,


Who cries out murder! What a woman slain?
My Lady Lingua dead? oh Heavens in just
Can you behold this fact, this blouby fact!
And shower not fire upon the murderer?
Ah peerless Lingua mistress of heavenly words,
Sweet tongue of eloquence, the life of fame,
Heart's dear enchantress: what disaster fates
Have reft this Jewel from our Commonwealth!
Gustus the ruby that adorns thy ringe,
Lo here defect, how shalt thou lead thy days,
Wanting the sweet Companion of thy life?
But in dark sorrow and dull melancholy.
But stay, whose this? inhumane wretch.
Bloud-thirsty miscreant, is this thy handy work?
To kill a woman, a harmless Lady?
Villain prepare thy self, draw, or I'll sheath my faucheon in thy sides.
There take the guerdon fit for murderers.

Here's such a stir I never knew the Senses in such disorder.


Ha, ha, ha; Mendacio, Mendacio? See how Visus hath broke his fore-head against
the oak yonder, ha, ha. ha, ha.


How now? Is not Lingua bound sufficiently? I have more trouble to make one
woman sleep, then all the world besides, they be so full of tattle.


Oh mine ears, mine ears, mine ears.


Oh my nose, my nose, my nose.


Leave, leave at length these base contentions, Olfactus let him go?


Let him first loose my nose.


Good Auditus give over.


I'll have his life that sought to kill me.


Come, come, i'll end this quarrel, bind him Crapula.


Thanks Deianeira for thy kind remembrance,
Tis a fair shirt, I'll wear it for thy sake.

Somnus here's Tactus worse then all his fellows,
Stay but a while, and you shall see him rage.

What will he do? see that he escape us not.


Tis a good shirt, it fits me passing well,
Tis very warm indeed, but what's the matter?
Me thinks I am somewhat hotter then I was,
My heart beats faster then 'twas wont to do.
My brains enflames, my temples ache extremely, oh, oh,
Oh what a wild-fire creeps among my bowels:
Aetna's within my breast, my marrow fries,
And runs about my bones; oh my sides:
My sides, my rains, my head, my rains, my head;
My heart, my heart, my liver, my liver, oh,
I burn, I burn, I burn, oh how I burn,
With scorching heat of implacable fire,
I burn extreme with flames insufferable.

Sure he doth but try how to act Hercules.


Is it this shirt that boils me thus? oh heavens
It fires me worse, and heats more furiously
Then Joves dire thunderbolts; oh miserable,
They bide less pain that bathe in Phlegeton.
Could not the triple kingdom of the world,
Heaven, earth, and hell destroy great Hercules?
Could not the damned sprights of hateful Juno,
Nor the great dangers of my labours kill me?
Am I the mighty son of Jupiter?
And shall this poisoned linen thus consume me?
Shall I be burnt? villains fly up to Heaven,
Bid Iris muster up a troop of cloud,
And shower down catarracts of rain to cool me,
Or else I'll break her speckled bow in pieces:
Will she not? no, she hates me like her Mistress:
Why then descend you rogues to the vile deep,
Fetch Neptune hither, charge him bring the Sea
To quench these flames, or else the worlds fair frame
Will be in greater danger to be burnt,
Then when proud Phaeton ruled the Suns rich Chariot.

I'll take that care, the world shall not be burnt:
If Somnus cords can hold you.

What Vulcan's this that offers to inchain
A greater soldier then the god of Mars?

He that each night with bloodless battle conquers
The proudest conqueror that triumphs by wars.

Now Somnus, there's but only one remaining that was the Author of these
outrages.


Who's that? is he under my command?


Yes, yes, yes, 'tis Appetitus; if you go that way, and look about those
thickets, I'll go hither and search this grove, I doubt not but to find him.


Content.


So now's the time that I would gladly meet
These madding Senses that abused me thus;
What? haunt me like an owl? make an Afs of me?
No they shall know I scorn to serve such masters
As cannot master their affections,
Their injuries have changed my nature,
Now I'll be no more called hungry parasite;
But henceforth answer to the wrathful name
Of angry Appetite, my choller's up;
Zephirus cool me quickly with thy fan,
Or else I'll cut thy cheeks; why this is brave,
Far better then to faun at Gustus table
For a few scraps; no, no such words as these,
By Pluto stab the villain, kill the slave;
By the infernal hags I'll hough the vogue,
And paunch the rascal that abused me thus,
Such words as these fit angry Appetite.

Somnus, Somnus, come hither, come hither quickly, he's here, he's here.


I marry is he sir, what of that? base miscreant Crapula,


O gentle Appetitus.


You muddy gulche, dare look me in the face while mine eyes sparkle with
revengeful fire? (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)


Good Appetitus.


Peace you sat bawson, peace, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)
See not this fatal engine of my wrath?
Villain, I'll maul thee for thine old offences,
And grind thy bones to powder with this pestle:
You when I had no weapons to defend me,
Could beat me out of doors; but now prepare,
Make thy self ready, for thou shalt not escape.
Thus doth the great revengeful Appetite,
Upon his fat foe, wreak his wrathful spite.

Why how now Crapula?


Am I not dead? is not my soul departed?


No, no, see where he lies, that would have hurt thee? fear nothing?

So rest you all in silent quietness,
Let nothing wake you till the power of sleep,
With his sweet dew, cooling your brains inflamed
Hath rectified the vain and idle thoughts,
Bred by your surfeit, and distemperature:
Lo here the Senses late outrageous,
All in a round together sleep like friends,
For there's no difference twixt the King and Clown,
The poor and rich, the beauteous and deformed,
Wrapped in the vail of night, and bonds of sleep,
Without whose power and sweet dominion,
Our life were Hell, and pleasure painfulness,
The sting of envy, and the dart of love,
Avarice talons, and the fire of hate:
Would poison, wound, distract, and soon consume,
The heart, the liver, life, and mind of man;
The sturdy Mower, that with brawny arms
Wieldeth the crooked since, in many a swath,
Cutting the flowery pride on the velvet plain,
Lies down at night, and in the weary folds
Of his wives arms, forgets his labour past.
The painful Mariner, and careful Smith,
The toiling Plowman, all Artificers,
Most humbly yield to my dominion,
Without due rest nothing is durable.
Lo thus doth Somnus conquer all the world
With his most awful wand, and half the year
Raigns over the best and proudest Emperors.
Only the nurslings of the Sisters nine,
Rebels against me, scorn my great command:
And when dark night from her bedewy wings
Drops sleepy silence to the eyes of all,
They only wake, and with unwearied toil,
Labour to find the Via lactea
That leads to the Heaven of immortality;
And by the lofty towering of their mind,
Fledgd with the feathers of a learned muse,
They raise themselves unto the highest pitch,
Marrying base earth and heaven in a thought;
But thus I punish their rebellion,
Their industry was never yet rewarded,
Better to sleep then wake and toil for nothing.

So ho Rocwood, so ho Rocwood, Rocwood, your Organ, hay Chanter, Chanter, by
Acteons hed-tyre it's a very deep mouthed dog, a most admirable cry of hounds;
look here again, again, there, there, there, ah ware counter.


Do you see the full Moon yonder, and not the man in it? why methinks 'tis too,
too evident, I see his dog very plain, and look you, just under his tail is a
Thorn-bush of Furs.


'Twill make a fine tooth-pick: that Larks heel there, O do not burn it.


Boy, Heuresis, what think thou I think when I think nothing?


And it please you Sir, I think you are devising how to answer a man that asks
you nothing.


Well gest boy, but yet thou mistook'st it, for I was thinking of the constancy
of women.


Oh, oh, oh, I am stabbed, I am stabbed, hold your hand, oh, oh, oh.


How now? do they talk in the sleep? are they not awake Heuresis?


No questionless, they be all fast asleep.


Eat not too many of those Apples, they be very flative?


Foh, foh, beat out this Dog here, foh, was it you Appetitus?


In faith it was most sweetly winded, whosoever it was, the warble is very
good, and the horn is excellent.


Put on man, put on, keep your head warm, 'tis cold.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, st, Heuresis, stir not sir.


Shut the door, the pot runs over; sir Cook, that will be a sweet Pasty if
you nibble the venison so?


Say you so, is a Marrow Pie the Helena of meats? give me't, if I play not
Paris hang me; Boy, a clean Trencher?


Serve up, serve up; this is a fat Rabbit, would I might have the maiden-head
of it; come give me the fish there; who hath meddled with these maids? ha?


Fie, shut your Snuffers closer for shame, 'tis the worst smell that can be.


O the cramp, the cramp, the cramp, my leg, my leg.


I must abroad presently, reach me my best Necklace presently.


Ah Lingua, are you there?


Here, take this Rope, and I'll help the leader close with the second Bell: Fie,
fie, there is a goodly peal clean spoiled.


I'll lay my life that Gentlewoman is painted: well, well, I know it, mark but
her nose, do you not see the complexion crack out, I must confess 'tis a good
picture.


Ha, ha, ha, fie, I pray you leave, you tickle me so, oh, ah, ha, ha, take away
your hands, I cannot endure, ah, you tickle me, ah, ha, ha, ha, ah.


Hai, rett, rett, rett, now bird now -- look about that bush, she trust her
thereabout, -- here she is, ware wing Cater, ware wing, avaunt.


Mum, mum, mum, mum.


st, sir take heed you wake her not.


I know Sir she's fast asleep, for her mouth is shut.


This 'tis to venture upon such uncertainties, to lose so rich a Crown to no
end, well, well.


Ha, ha, ha, we shall hear anon where she lost her maiden-head, st, boy, my
Lord Vicegerent, and Master Register are hard by, run quickly, tell them of
this accident, wish them come softly.


Mendacio, never talk farther, I doubt 'tis past recovery, and my Robe
likewise, I shall never have them again, well, well.


How? her Crown, and her Robe, never recover them? hum, wast not said to be
left by Memory? ha? I conjecture here's some knavery -- fast locked with sleep,
in good faith. Was that Crown and Garment yours Lingua?


I marry were they, and that some body hath felt, and shall feel more, if I
live.


O strange; she answers in her sleep to my question; but how come the Senses to
strive for it?


Why, I laid upon purpose in their way, that they might fall together by the
ears.


What a strange thing is this?


st, my Lord, softly, softly, here's the notablest piece of treason discovered,
how say you Lingua set all the Senses at odds, she hath confessed it to me in her
sleep.


Is't possible Master Register! did you ever know any talk in their sleep?


I remember my Lord many have done so very oft, but women are troubled,
especially with this talking disease, many of them have I heard answer in their
dreams, and tell what they did all day awake.


By the same token, there was a wanton maid, that being asked by her Mother,
what such a one did with her so late one night in such a room, she presently
said, that --


Peace you wild rake hell, is such a jest fit for this company, no more I say
sir.


My Lord will you believe your own ears, you shall hear her answer me, as
directly and truly as may be. Lingua, what did you with the Crown and Garments.


I'll tell thee Mendacio.


She thinks Mendacio speaks to her, mark now, mark how truly she will answer:
what say you Madam?


I say Phantastes is a foolish transparent gull: a mere fanatic nupson in my
imagination not worthy to sit as a Judges assistant.


Ha, ha, ha, how truly and directly she answers.


Faw, faw, she dreams now, she knows not what she says, I'll try her once
again: Madame? what remedy can you have for your great losses?


O are you come Acrasia? welcome, welcome, boy reach a Cushion sit down good
Acrasia: I am so beholding to you, your potion wrought exceedingly, the senses
were so mad, did not you see how they raged about the woods?


Hum, Acrasia? is Acrasia her confederate? my life that Witch hath wrought some
villainy, --

How's this? is she a sleep? have you seen one walk thus before?


It is a very common thing, I have seen many sick of a Peripatetic disease.


By the same token my Lord, I knew one that went abroad in his sleep, bent his
bow, shot at a Magpie, killed her, fetched his arrow, came home, locked the doors,
and went to bed again.


What should be the reason of it?


I remember Scalliger told me the reason once; as I think thus: The nerves that
carry the moving faculty, from the brains, to the thighs, legs, feet, and
arms, are wider far then the other nerves; wherefore they are not so easily
stopped with the vapours of sleep, but are night and day ready to perform what
fancy shall command them.


It may be so, but Phantastes enquire more of Acrasia.


What did you with with the potion Acrasia made you.


Gave it to the Senses, and made them as mad as -- well, If I cannot recover it
-- let it go, I'll not leave them thus.


Boy awake the Senses there.


Hoe, hoe, Auditus, up, up, so hoe, Olfactus have at your nose, up Visus,
Gustus, Tactus, up: What can you not feel a pinch? have at you with a pin.


Oh, you stab me, oh.


Tactus, know you how you came hither?


No my Lord, not I; this I remember,
We sup't with Gustus, and had wine good store,
Whereof I think I tasted liberally.
Among the rest, we drunk a composition,
Of a most dellicate, and pleasant relish,
That made our brains, somewhat irregular.

My Lord, here's a fat rascal was lurking in a bush very suspitiously, his name
he says is Crapula.


Sirrah, speak quickly what you know of these troubles.


Nothing my Lord, but that the Senses were mad, and that Somnus at my request
laid them a sleep, in hope to recover them.


Why then tis too evident, Acrasia at Lingua's request, bewitched the Senses,
wake her quickly Heuresis.


Heigh ho, out alas, aye me, where am I? how came I here? where am I? ah.


Lingua look not so strangely upon the matter, you have confessed in your sleep,
that with a Crown, and a Robe, you have disturbed the Senses, using a crafty
help to enrage them, can you deny it?


Aye me, most miserable wretch, I beseech your Lordship forgive me.


No, no, tis a fault unpardonable.


In my conceit Lingua, you should seal up your lips, when you go to bed, these
Feminine tongues be so glib.


Visus, Tactus, and the rest, our former sentence concerning you, we confirm as
irrevocable, and establish the Crown to you Visus, and the Robe to you Tactus,
but as for you Lingua --


Let me have mine own, howsoever you determine, I beseech you.


That may not be, your goods are fallen into our hands, my sentence cannot be
recalled, you may see, those that seek what is not theirs, oftentimes loose
what's their own: Therefore Lingua granting you your life, I commit you to
close Prison, in Gustus his house, and charge you Gustus, to keep her under the
custody of two strong doors, and every day till she come to 80. years of age,
see she be well guarded with 30. tall watchmen, without whose license she shall
by no means wag abroad; nevertheless use her Ladylike, according to her estate.


I pray you my Lord ad this to the judgement, that whenever she obtains
license to walk abroad, in token the Tongue was the cause of her offence, let
her wear a velvet hood, made just in the fashion of a great Tongue, in my
conceit 'tis a very pretty Emblem of a Woman.


My Lord, she hath a wild boy to her Page, a chief agent in this Treason, his
name's Mendacio.


Ha? well, I will inflict this punishment on him for this time, let him be
soundly whipped, and ever after though he shall strengthen his speeches with the
sinews of Truth, yet none shall believe him.


In my imagination my Lord, the Day is dead to the great toe, and in my conceit
it grows dark, by which I conjecture it will be cold; and therefore in my
fancy, and opinion, 'tis best to repair to our Lodgings.


What's this? a fellow whispering so closely with the Earth? so ho, so ho:
Appetitus? faith now I think Morpheus himself hath been here, up with a pox to
you, up you luske, I have such news to tell thee sir: all the Senses are
well, and Lingua is proved guilty, up, up, up, I never knew him so fast a sleep
in my life.

Nay then have at you a fresh, (tiff, toff, tiff, toff.)


Jog me once again, and I'll throw this whole mess of pottage in your face,
cannot one stand quiet at the dresser for you?


Ha, ha, I think it's impossible for him to sleep longer then he dreams of his
victuals. What Appetitus, up quickly, quickly up, Appetitus, quickly sir,
(toff, toff, toff, toff.)


I'll come presently, but I hope you'll stay till they be roasted, will you eat
them raw?


Roasted? ha, ha, ha, ha, up, up, away.


Reach the sauce quickly, here's no Sugar, whaw, wam, oh, oh, oh, oh.


What never wake? (Tiff, toff, tiff, toff,) wilt never be? Then I must try
another way I see.


JVdicious Friends, it is so late at night,
I cannot waken hungry Appetite:
Then since the close upon his rising stands,
Let me obtain this at your courteous hands,
Try if the friendly opportunity,
Of your good will and gracious Plauditie,
With the thrice welcome murmure it shall keep
Can beg this prisoner from the hands of sleep.
LUther's Colloquium Mensalia.

THe Civil Wars of Spain in the Reign of Charles the fifth, Emperor of Germany,
and King of that Nation, where in our late unhappy differences are paralleled
in many particulars.

A general History of Scotland, from the year 767. to the death of King James,
containing the principal Revolutions, and transactions of Church and State,
with political observations, and reflections upon the same: By David Hume of
Gods-croft.

The History of this Iron Age.

Doctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament.

BArklay his Argenis Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight.

ABraham's faith; or the good old Religion, proving the Doctrine of the Church
of England to be the only true faith of Gods Elect; By J. Nicholson Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortallity: by George Stroad

Aynsworth, on the Canticles.

Paul Bayne, his Diocesans Trial.

The supreme power of Christian States and Magistracy, vindicated from the
insolent pretences of Guillilmus Apolonius: By E. Grall.

A Treatise of Civil Policy; being a clear decision of 43. queries, concerning
prerogative right and privilege in reference to the supreme Prince and the
people: By Sumuel Rutherford professor of Divinity of St. Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the birth, increase, decay of Monarchies, the carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Pinchin his meritorious price of mans redemption cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what nature and influence the Stars and Planets
have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

THe Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above 2000. seeming contradictions are
fully and plainly reconciled.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs, and Ceremonies.

Ed. Waterhouse, Esq his discourse of piety and charity.

A view and defence of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful in
these times.

Mr. Peter du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the delusions of the Priests and Jesuits who are now very busy amongst
us.

Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Christian, containing Meditations and
prayers, useful upon all occasions.

Mr. Knowles, his Rudiment, of the Hebrew Tongue.

A Book of scheams or figures of heaven ready set for every four minuits of
times, and very useful for all Astrologers.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the reign of William the
Conqueror, to the death of the late King.

Lingua, or the combat of the Tongue and the five Senses for superiority: a
serious Comedy.

The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the spirit of God or not.

The Poor mans Physician and Surgeon.

DOctor Smith's practice of Physic.

The Grammar War.

Poselius Apothegmes.

Faciculus Florum.

Crashaw's Visions.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The Christian Soldier his combat with the three arch enemies of mankind, the
world, the flesh, and the divel.

THe New Testament.

The third part of the Bible.

THe Ball.

Chawbut.

Martyred Soldier.


