IF yet there be a few that take delight
In that which reasonable Men should write;
To them Alone we Dedicate this Night.
The Rest may satisfy their curious. Itch
With City Gazets or some Factious Speech,
Or what-ere Libel for the Public Good,
Stirs up the Shrove-tide Crew to Fire and Blood!
Remove your Benches you apostate Pit,
And take Above, twelve penny-worth of Wit;
Go back to your dear Dancing on the Rope,
Or see what's worse the Devil and the Pope!
The Plays that take on our Corrupted Stage,
Methinks resemble the distracted Age;
Noise, Madness, all unreasonable Things,
That strike at Sense as Rebels do at Kings!
The stile of Forty One our Poets write,
And you are grown to judge like Forty Eight.
Such Censures our mistaking Audience make,
That 'tis almost grown Scandalous to Take!
They talk of Feavours that infect the Brains,
But Non-sence is the new Disease that reigns.
Weak Stomachs with a long Disease oppressed,
Cannot the Cordials of strong Wit digest:
Therefore thin Nourishment of Farce ye choose,
Decoctions of a Barly-water Muse:
A Meal of Tragedy would make ye Sick,
Unless it were a very tender Chick.
Some Scenes in Sippets would be worth our time,
Those would go down; some Love that's poach'd in Rime;
If these should fail --
We must lie down, and after all our cost,
Keep Holy-day, like Water-men in Frost,
Whilst you turn Players on the Worlds great Stage,
And Act your selves the Farce of your own Age.

TIs certain then the Armies joined this Morn.

There's no Intelligence from either Camp,
But by the joint Report of Cottagers,
That from the Mountains viewed the distant Fray.
The Rebels have the Royal Troops in chase,
Whose broken Squadrons make a Flying ight,
And much disdaining to the Woods Retr eat.

They were the Kings last stake.

This is the day
That crowns the hopes of our designing Queen,
Or sinks her Projects ever; for if now
The Rebels prove the Masters of the Field,
Conquering Argaleon strait Usurps the Throne,
And Weds Edraste Partner of his Power.

The Slaughter of the Field will scarce suffice,
Or effect an Enterprise so great and dangerous;
To finish it, the Princes too must Bleed.

Edraste through their Blood to Empire sails,
And we the Pilots hired to steer her thither.
The Queen to serve her high Designs preferred us
To the Dignity we hold, and dearly made
Our Loyalty the Price of our Preferment.

When with bright Honours to her Plots she drew me,
I snatched at the rich Wages, and ne'er weighed
The dangerous Task; -- but I rec^te,
I'm sold to her Commands, and (...) perform.

Soft, Thereon comes,

Unhappy Greece! Escalus, Pisander!

There's Terror in that Voice; how fares the King?

How brooks he the supposed Defeat?

So various are the Transports of his Rage,
That with each minute his Resolves are changed:
Sometimes desies aloud the Rebel Powers,
Threatening swift Vengeance; then despairs again,
And cries all's lost, the Fates are Factious too!
Thus tossed with Doubts, and starting from his Chair
He grasps his Sceptre, cries I have thee still;
Nor shall the Furies wrest thee: then of the sudden
Disdaining casts it from him; you're a Serpent,
Away infectious Rod, thou fir'st my Hand.

The Kings last hopes depend on your Sage Councils,
Say, what will you advise in these extremes?

The growing ill past Cure he neglected,
And now blames his Physicians want of Skill;
Because we cannot from the Dead restore.
I'll haste, and with dissembled hopes support
His drooping Spirits, and prevent Despair,
Which yet in my own Breast I cannot quell.

How temperate is this Politician grown!
The public Troubles seem t'afflict him now,
Though most industrious once to embroil a State
In Civil Jars; till Ages Winter chilled
His Factious Blood, congealed his working Brain;
And now the Dotard's Loyal for his Ease.

See, Lords; the Intelligence of Conquerors,
Like Victory comes winged: the King as yet
Has no Particulars of the Fight.
Whilst from Argaleon's Camp I am informed
That in the general Rout and hot Pursuit
Of the Royal Forces, both the Princes fell:
Now then Arviola alone remains
The Obstacle of my Edraste's Glory.

We are your Creatures, Madam, by your Favour
Possess the height of Dignity we hold.

And should be proud to perish in your Service.

Experience, Escalus, has proved your Truth;
And for Pisander, my new Servant (in
His sparkling Eyes, his active Zeal I read)
I dare pronounce him resolute and bold,
By Nature formed to engage in glorious Ills,
To embarque in a rough Sea of Court-Designs,
And share the Fortunes of a Plotting Queen.

New Servant; Hell! New Favourite, she meant.
Ah Myrrhoc, thy Conjecture's true, I am
Supplanted by this Partner of my Projects;
Dull that I was, not to suspect before:
'Twas not to serve her Pride but Lust, she drew
This new Confed'rate in; and judged his years
More sit to advise of such Affairs than mine.

Conquering Argaleon now will soon advance
With all his Power, and close besiege these Walls;
The Fort is in your hand --
Come near Edraste;
I travel with thy Fate in greater Pangs
Than when my Womb unwillingly resigned
The Treasure of thy Beauties to the Light.

The Life you gave, I offer at your Feet.
By my dear Fathers shade 'tis nobler far
To die forlorn, than by your Guilt to Reign.
Your Life, which I, of all things hold most dear,
You prodigally stake to win for me
A Crown, which I of all things least esteem.
My private Cares alas! have too much weight
For my weak Mind to bear; how can I then
Sustain the Troubles that infest a Throne.

Could I give Being to a thing so Tame!
Rouse, rouse, thy self, Edraste, nor permit
My active Blood to freeze within thy Veins;
If thou want Heat, come, to my Bosom fly,
For I have yet enough of Warmth to spare.

The rightful Crown at best uneasy sits,
But sinks the crushed usurper to the Ground.

These Thoughts would more befit the Cell than court.

To me there is no Palace like a Cell.

What serves the Cloister for, but last Retreats
To such as have without success aspired;
Where having failed of glorious Action, they
Hush froward Age with the dull Joys of Ease.

Heaven has been pleased t'indulge my humble Thoughts,
Given Heirs to the Crown, which you would wrest for me;
And I must hold it in two Princes Wrongs,
Both graced with Royal Gifts and formed to Reign.

Suppose these Lets removed, the Princes dead?

Arviola, their Sister then succeds.
Arviola, to whom I have sworn Friendship.
Arviola, that loves me as you do.

Fond Girl, 'twas to your Loss you did contract
That Friendship, and must conceal it or perish.

I but complied, in this, with your Commands,
You charged me love her.

To dissemble love,
As I pretend Affection to the King;
And counterfeit so well, 'tis real thought.

O Heaven!

Arviola comes, prepare,
And practise Artfully.

Instruct my Virtue Heaven in these Extremes,
I must unnat'ral or disloyal prove!
Dissemble Friendship! O ye Powers! Dissemble
With the open-hearted true Arviola,
That has not for her Foe one thought of Guil;
Hard Mother! cruel Fate! most cruel Love,
To watch the hour of my Distress, and then
To wound a Heart so much oppressed before!

Despise not Myrrhoe, my threatening Dream,
The Scene presented both my Brothers slain;
I saw their Royal Blood mixed with the stream
Of Common Gore; then as my Theocrin
Rushed on to Death; I started from my sleep
And lost the unfinisht Vision -- dear Edraste.

Dearest Arviola!

I sought thee to redress my Griefs, and find theo
As much oppressed as I; 'tis some new Grief
That now usurps thy Breast, and I suspects
More Tyrannous than ever raged before.

Ah Princess! in this tempest of Affairs,
Nothing remains untroubled but our Friendship;
All other things are from their Channel strayed.

Yet since our Breasts are open to each other,
Let the Storm drive, we have one Harbour sure;
Heaven so be-friend me as I love Edraste.

And were Arviola my happy Rival,
I could (I think) still prize her as I do
Heaven knows I flatter not, she is my Rival;
Yet then my dearest hopes more dear!

Let's stop a while the current of our Tears,
And piously dissembling our Despair,
Divert the pensive King; that Fate should heap
Upon his feeble Age such weighty Ills
As Youth could not sustain.

The event's uncertain; yet, the sudden storm
As soon may scatter, and the Clouded King,
Set glorious as the Rose.

Ah! Myrrhoe, thy Love would flatter us,
As ours impose on him.


Stay Myrrhoe.

Now Brother you are sad.

Your late suspicion of the Queen proves true.
I cease to please, and her regard to me
Grows hourly Cold,
Whilst all her kindness on Pisander streams.

Despond not Brother, there are Joys in Power
To Charm dull Age, when Beauty fails to please:
If Love deserts you, bend henceforth your thoughts
To Nobler Cares; convert that cunning now
(That hitherto has so successful proved,
In the Queens designs) to your own Interest.

Good!
We'll watch the Fate of this tempestuous Realm,
And make our Fortunes of the general wreck.


Why was my Life stretched out to this black day?
Death might have come long since, and sound me ripe
With all my Honours flourishing round my Head:
But now to Winter blasts I'm left exposed,
Stripped of my Leaves, and with'ring on the Bough.
Argaleon come, and press thy Conquest home.
This is our last Retreat, besiege us here,
Sack, Burn, Destroy, and finish my Disgrace.

Your suffering, Royal Sir, this Glory brings,
That from your goodness, your distresses sprang.
For having Conquered in the pitched Field (ensnared
By your own Virtue; which refused to spill
Your Subjects Blood) you treated with the Rebels,
Who sued for Peace to keep your Forces husht,
Till with recruited Power they might oppress you.

Argaleon raised by your too liberal Favour,
Seemed even to cope with you on even Ground;
And wanted but the Crown to match your Height.
Were you as quick to punish a Delinquent
As to reward the smallest Worth, your Throne
Had still been fixed,
And proud Argaleon's Blood.

Hold preaching Fool,
Too late your tedious Lectures you begin:
Where slept your Counsels whilst these Mischiefs grew
And might be ravished by the tender Root;
Then you indulged my Ease, beheld my State
Float loose, whilst I in soft Retirement slept;
Now raked me to the Helm, till the Storm fell.

Live Royal Sir.

Look, I have Homage paid me! Thereon, Diphilus.
Behold, two Princesses kneel at my Feet:
Ha! ha! speak Sirs, am I not yet a King?

Most Sacred Sir --

'Tis false, ye Sycophants, I was a King,
A prosperous Majesty;
But now my Empire shakes,
Oppressed with its own weight.
The unwieldy State falls on the Founders Head.
The Queen! must She be conscious too of my Disgrace!
O Aribell, How is my Fate relapsed
Since first we met? Those Laurels now are blasted
Which in my Myrile Wreath I did ^sert.
When I espoused thee, Triumphs graced our Hymen,
And Captive Princes at our Nuptials served.

Nay Sir, be just still, though unfortunate;
Nor think the transitory Charms of Power
Endeared you to this Breast; this is a season
To excuse such active Love as mine,
That like the Dolphin shows it self in Storms.

What Trumpet's that?

Att. A Soldier from the Camp.

I read thy Message in thy drooping Brow,
Thou bend'st beneath my Fate, hurl it on me,
And crush me with the Burden; Thou hast Wounds,
And may with Honour speak of Vanquishment.

Fly, Royal Sir, all's lost, O fly and save
Our Empires dearer half, your Sacred Life:
Nor think these Walls secure against the Shock
Of Rebels, with Infernal Rage possessed:
Your strongest Fence, your Loyal Old Battalions,
Taught by your self to Conquer, in Pitched Field
Are by these Troops of Furies driven and scattered;
And what I fear will shake your Temper most,
Your Royal Sons, by whom our Wings were led,
Turned in the Chase to oppose the unequal Foe
Till spent; on Heaps of slaughtered Files they fell.

My Sons both slain, my Legions too o'rthrown;
My Sons, my flourishing Branches both lopped off,
And I the useless Trunk left standing yet
For Passengers to descant on my shame:
Rend me consuming Lightnings Earth divide,
Till thy unfathom'd Centre be my Grave;
Nature her self should Shake when Princes Fall.

Dread Sir, restrain this Transport, and resume
Your Reason now in your extremest Need.

Lord Theocrin, who in the Fight performed
What the Beholders scarce believed (and must
Despair of Credit when they shall relate)
Gathered our scattered Stray, a poor Remain,
That scarce a Limb of the Old Body seem;
Which in the Cliffs he posted, where they hold
Spite of the Foe, that scale the Rock in vain.

'Twas well performed, we'll march to their Relief;
Get me new Forces raised, a sudden Host,
Like that which sprung from the dire Serpents Teeth:
Armed with Necessity and steeled with Wrongs,
We'll rush at once on these fierce Savages,
And ravish from their Mouths the panting Prey.

Forgive me, Sacred Sir, that I dissuade
Your Fury from unfeazable Designs.
You must create the Forces you would levy.
Your Loyal Cities, your thin Fields to fill,
Long since were glean'd, the rigid Press scarce spared
Decrepit Age, and weeping Infancy.

Peace Dotard, hast thou worn thy Sable Locks,
To withered Gray, and even that Gray to Baldness.
And art thou still contriving to Inch out
Insipid Life? the general fright should cure
Your Agues, and ferment your freezing Bloods:
Hast and Proclaim our Will, lest all our Males,
From lisping Infancy, to Bed-rid Age.
Set free th'imprison'd, bid the Sick discharge
Their Maladies; the Storm comes thundering on,
And in our sinking State all hands must work.

The Good Old Man, that like an Infant slept
Till now, at last wakes froward; let him Brawl,
He'll quickly Rage himself asleep again.

Be it further published, to enstame our Youth,
That yet survive from the Consuming War.
If any dare so far tempt glorious danger,
To force the Enemies Ward, and bear away
The Arch Rebels Head by our last hopes I swear;
My Crown, and fair Arviola are his:
Empire and Beauty, Valour's Noblest Prize.
Our self in Person will Command and Dazzle
The factious Host with full-beam'd Majesty:
Thus your Ag'd Monarch draws his Vengeful Sword.
Our Flame shall snatch the Foe that thinks us Cold,
There's none destroys like Time, and none so Old.

HIther the Queen enjoined me to Conduct you,
And you must wait her here:

On What Concern?

My Charge was only to admit you hither,
Where none approach without her special Orders;
And We, The Attendants on her Private Hours,
Are sworn to strictest Secrecy.

Sure I am charm'n into an Ecstasy,
And this a scene by Fancy's cunning formed;
Pictures of Nature drawn beyond the Life.
Remove from hence, and the declining Year
Looks sickly and deformed; the withered Leaves
In Search of the retreated Sap fall down,
And from the Root seek what the Bough denied:
But here the Summer blooms, in all its Pride,
The Sun darts in with kindlier Warmth, the Winds
Breath softer, and the Brook complains less loud.
Hail blessed Retreat of Nature happy Shade;
My senses fail, this is some sacred Grove:
And that the bright Divinity of the Place!
Where are the Cupids that should hover round,
I Feel'um here! the are dived into my Breast!
Forgive me Goddess --

You mistake, Pisander.

The Queen! forgive my dazzled Eyes their Error!
I come by your Command to know your Pleasure,
And trust you judge so truly of my Zeal,
To think me worth some Enterprise of danger.

Yes, you shall find how I esteem your Zeal,
By the important service I enjoin,
Indeed 'tis an Affair of so much weight,
I know not how to word it -- You must Guess.

Instruct me what I am to undertake,
And if I fail to attempt --

Alas!
So bold to engage, and slow to apprehend?
How like Conspirators at their first. Meeting,
With caution we gaze silent on each other,
Expecting who shall start the Business first!
Since then I must speak first in the Design,
Draw near and on my Hand swear Secrecy.
Repeat your Vow -- Oh Love! the quickening Touch,
Through my pleased Veins, runs tingling to my Heart.

My Warmth is fled, I've sworn my Life away!
My Soul cleaves to that Hand --

How soft is Youth!
How soon dissolved into an Ecstasy!
Pisander Rise -- now sure you well can guess,
For what I summoned you to this Retirement?

I know it; you'd engage me to perform
A dangerous Task, to blast the Kings Succession,
And settle your Edraste in the Throne;
I'll do it.

Still you are wide of my Design,
I'll Plot at leisure hours for my Ambition,
But Love's my great Affair, the important Business.
Come, speak boldly Youth,
Thy free Conjecture of these private Bowers,
Where I so oft retire, while all is husht,
Silent and close, as Ceres's awful Fane?

Tis said, that for Devotion you repair
From the Court's Crowed to these secluded Shades,
Where you consume successive Nights and Days,
In Abstinence and Penitential Tears.

Ha! ha! the World retains its old perverseness still,
To scandalize the Virtuous, and to Saint
The Libertine; but 'tis no fault of mine,
If Rumour will lay Virtue to my Charge!
What, mar these Eyes with Penitential Tears,
Fond Youth? They have too much of fire to weep.
Their glances could Create a Day in Cells,
And kindle freezing Hermits into Dalliance.
Why this Reserv'dness Sir? Has Majesty
So little Charms? Or does its Splendour dazzle?
Then I'll divest me of my Royalty,
And love upon the Square. Still fixed and senseless?

Think not I have no sense of such full Bliss,
But like Young Prophets from they: Visions Waking;
I fear to stir and loose the Charming Dream.

What means those Shouts?

The are Sounds of Triumph not of Terrot.

Lord Escalus in haste desires Admittance.

He comes unseasonably, but let him Enter.
Pisander hide a while within that Bower.

Forgive me Madam, that with so much haste,
I bring unwelcome New, our Plot's Defeated.
The Subtle Web which with such Toil we wrought,
Is quite unravelled to the very Loom.

Dispatch, cut short the Story of my Fate.

Argaleon's Faction which with so much Cost
And Secrecy, you nourished to that Growth.
That they could grap le with the Kings whole Forces,
Even they, so late the Masters of the Field,
Are now in shameful Rout dispersed and broken,
And their bold Leader, on whose daring Virtue,
Our Hopes depended, shares the Vulgar Fate,
And Headless Bleeds amongst the Common Slain.

'Tis false and shall not be.

'Tis past already,
The Gods have your Resolves fore-stall'd.

Did they from Heaven war with my Officer?
The Loyal Forces were cut off entire,
Except a Despicable Remnant posted
In the Cliffs by Theocrin.

From thence broke forth
The flame that thus laid waste Argaleon's Trenches.
For Theocrin by night forsook the Cliffs,
With his small Train, and Coasting wide Attaqu'd
Argaleon's Camp, with Shouts as of full Legions,
And Numerous Trumpets to increase the Terror,
Which so prevailed on the surprised Host,
(Confused, twixt Wine and Slumber) that at last
Half-arm'd they took themselves to general Flight,
And more oppressed by their own Numbers fell
Than the Pursuers Swords.

Enough, Enough,
'Tis but an Army and a Project lost.
And We'll contrive anew,
Anon Expect my Orders to await me.

So unconcerned, so filled with her new Love,
T'Exclude the Darling of Her Breast Ambition?
Methought Pisander glanced by as I entered;
For his delight she's dec^t as she was wont,
When loose she wantoned with my Vigorous years;
On her young Paramour she shows her Favour,
Whilst a Sapless Trunk neglected fades!
But Age that lessens me in her Esteem,
Has taught me Cunning timely to provide,
And seek elsewhere the Favour she denies.


The Gods, the Gods at last, have owned the Cause,
Of injured Majesty; We have overcome!
Summon the Priests to speedy Sacrifice,
Crown every Altar, heap the Spicy Piles,
Till the vast Fanes be hid in Smoking Gums;
No Pensive Look prosane the General Joy,
Not Orphan'd Matrons be allow'd to Mourn:
Nor Virgins Widdow'd on their Brldal Day!

When Young in the Ranged Field you first appeared,
You Charmed Success, nor had She now forsook you,
But, like a Mistress with Discretion kind,
Withdrew a while till absence made her prized;
Then with Surprising Kindness met your Passion.


Hail best of Kings! Fall every Traitors Head,
Like this, and Flourish all Crowned Brows like yours.
The Savage that so long had Lawless Ranged,
That slew our Youth, and laid our Vineyards Waste,
Lies Bloodless, now by this Successful Hand.

Rise Theocrin, Cast not to Ground, those Limbs,
That Could support a Sinking Monarchy.
Now I am King indeed, my Shaken Throne
Again takes Root, and my Decaying Sceptre
Buds in my Hand anew.
Arviola, Edraste, both draw near;
And pay him with your own the Public Thanks.

My Dearest Theocrin, how greedily
Does my impatient Love snatch this Occasion
T'unlaid it self unseen into your Breast!

O my Arviola, I'm Lost in Joy!
I am too Blessed! Indulgent Powers rest rain
The Flowing Bliss, or I shall Die of Rapture!

Arviola was proclaimed the Prize o'th Valour
That brought Argaleon's Head: 'Tis Theocrin's,
Brave Youth, my Crown is Hers, and She is Thine;
Thou merrit'st Both: Though not from Kings descended,
Thou art by Virtue to the Gods Allied!

Your Goodness, Royal Sir, over rates my Service;
What I performed, was but a Subjects, Duty.
But Oh! I feel a warmth t'attempt such things,
As shall (is merit sound not too profane)
Deserve a Princess, and Oblige a King.

By all the Powers that sped thee in the Fight,
Thou art our Son, and this thy Nuptial Day.
Lo there thy Royal Bride, and too complete
Thy Happy Fortunes, Thou shalt Triumph too.
Bellona once shall be with Myrtle Crowned,
And War's loud Voice in Rev'ling Musique drowned.

Fortunate Princess, Happy Arviola,
Forgive me if I Envy now even Thee!
How long have I been tossed in Storms of Fate,
And still the Tempest darkens round my Head.
The restless Queen's Ambition still projects
To Load my Temples with a Hated Crown.
And to effect her Plot, Aviola
Must bleed, and Theocrin be lost; to Him
My seoret Love long since I have devoted.
To her long since my open Friendship sworn:
Something I will perform in their behalf,
Worthy the Chastest Love and Noblest Friendship;
For from the Court I'll wander in disguise,
No matter where; for one distressed like me,
Can no where loose her way: When I'm removed,
The Queen's Designs will rest, and Theocrin
Possets Arviola, and the Crown in Peace:
And I my self have all the sad Relief
That my Forlorn Condition will admit;
To Mourn retired in Caves and Glut of Sorrow.

Madam the Princess begs your Presence:

No.
My Griefs will make me rude, and check her Mirth:
Thou Myrrhoe ever lov'dst me,
Now like a Dying Miser I'll reveal
A Secret, the dear Treasure of my Soul!
I love this Theocrin even to Distraction:
And for his Quiet, and more private Reasons,
I wi^l for ever hide me from the Court:

Oh Heaven the Eternal Powers!

Make no Reply,
But Treasure still this Secret in thy Breast:
For by the Eternal Powers you meant to invoke,
I am resolved, and if prevented, swear
To act a speedy Violence on my Life.

Your dire Resolve alas! Has Charmed my Tongue;
But my Swoln Eyes will take their Liberty.

When I am gone, give these to Theocrin,
The short sad Accents of my Dying Passion.
He may afford my Memory a Tear:
Nor even Arviola her self Repine.
And so Fare-well to Hope and Thee for ever.


Enough my Dear Companions of the War;
Nor think these Honours all addressed to me:
But hold your selves large Sharers in these Triumphs.
My Courage was more fortunate then vours,
Not greater: Trust me then I Triumph most,
When I the Honour had to Lead such Worthies
To Reap an Host, not now I Head this Pomp.

Myrrhoe.

Madam,

Edraste was unkind
Not to Accompany our Nuptial Rites.

Behold the Silver Moon shot from her Sphere,
With all her Starry Train! Divine Arviola,
Not Victory her self can Charm like Thee.

Ah! Theocrin, my old Griefs still pursue
And haunt me, even upon my Nuptial Day!
A Sumptuous Feast of Joy is spread before us,
But I suspect it as a Poisoned Treat,
And fear to taste; I see you, hear you talk,
Clasp fast your Hand; and yet methinks we're still
As far divided as the distant Poles,
And shall unite as soon.

Our Joy's a Feast of the Gods own preparing;
Permit not then imaginary Fears
To poison your Delights; suspect no Storm
In such a Halcyon Sky, our tender Love
Long nourished covertly, till grown to an Head,
Is now exposed to the Air, and dares the Weather,


Dread Sir, the Queen desires you to excuse
Her Absence from the Pomp; she's indisposed.

It was a rude Distemper to intrude
At such a season -- Bid the Masque begin;
Come to your Monarchs Arms, ye happy Pair,
Supporters of my Age: Thus let me join you;
This Knot I have begun, the Priest shall finish.
Look down ye Spirits of my slaughtered Sons;
Behold the Avenger of your Royal Blood;
Behold our general Mirth; then summon all
Your Brother Stars and Revel in your Spheros.

The Flamen waits, and the preparing Rites
Are finish; thrice has Hymen been invoked,
And Iuno's Altar thrice perfumed.

We come.
Move on, lead to the Temple.

To Arms, to Arms! a Foreign Fleet invades
Our frighted Coast, and brings a floating War:
They spread their Streamers as secure of Conquest;
With Shouts and louder Trumpets rend the Air,
And seem to Triumphe'r the Fight begin.

A Foreign Navv! What new Turn of Fate?
Must then our dear-bought Peace so soon be ravished,
And Wars green Wounds be launc'd and bleed anew?

I thank ye Gods, I have not yet deserved
This charming Princess, am too poor in Fame,
And kindly you provide for my Renown.
Permit me, Royal Sir, forthwith to head
Your Troops, whilst their last Laurels still are green,
To engage Breast-deep this bold invading Foe:
Our Blood shall snatch their Legions, nor permit
Their Corosea once to touch our threatened Soil.

Fly swift as Lightning, and destroy more sure.

Weep not Arviola, but bade me Conquest;
I go to bring thee Honours from the Flood,
Richer than all the Gems the Deep contains;
From Conquest late we moved to Triumph, now
From Triumph to new Conquest, to return
Triumphant, in an endless Round of Glory.

'Tis so! our Halcyon Day is overcast,
And all the smiling Prospect snatched already:
My troubled Heart presaged its own Distress:
And gave dark symptoms of the rising Storm,
That parts, I fear, my Theocrin and me,
To meet no more but on the Coast of Souls.

Can thou inform us nothing more particular?

A Barge before the Fleet arrived the Bay,
As I presume, with speedy Embassy
And full Intelligence.

A Herald Sir,
Sent from the newly arrived Fleet.

Admit him.

Health to the Sacred Majesty of Greece;
Prince Abardanes from the Thracian Coast,
By free Commission from his Royal Father,
With Seven Armed Legions, and full Fifty Sail
Now Anchors in your Port, to assist your Cause,
And quell the Rebels that embroil your State:
Partly our Old Alliance to this Crown,
Obliged our King to engage in your Relief;
But most to uphold the Rights of Majesty,
Whose Dignity's the Common Cause of Kings.

Our Cause already has restored itself;
Bear to your generous Prince a Monarchs Thanks:
And in our Name invite him to our Court;
Our Self will meet our Royal Guest half way,
Doubling our Pomp with his illustrious Train,
Whilst spite of blazing Noon, the wakened Stars
Start from their Cells, our Triumphs to survey,
And join their Glories to this wondrous day.

Jam now on my Pilgrimage, when the Nuptial Ceremonies are over, at your
leisure give the Enclosed to Theocrin, from Yours Edraste.

These Letters speak this Princess ignorant
Of the sudden turn in Theocrin's Affairs:
A quaint Device was forming in my Thought
And these come seas'nably to assist the Project.
Lord Theocrin your pardon --
Penned to my wish; a hopeful Policy,
But time must ripen it. Edraste drew not
From me her Ruin, nor am I unjust
To play the Game which she gave o'r for lost,
And sweep the Stakes.
Brother you'r-are well returned, and as I wished
With busy Brow; How went the Salutation?

The King and Prince, like Old Familiars, met,
And having thrice in close Embraces joined,
Admitted to their Hand each others Nobles.
The Officious Flamen at our Western Gate,
Performed short Sacrifice; mean while the King
And Abardanes joined in solemn League
Of Friendship, and before their Entrance hailed
The Genius of the Place.

On what Design
Should Abardanes with such costly Forces
Arrive our Shore?

To assist the King to o'rthrow
The Rebels, was the plausible Pretence.
A slight disguise -- but hark! they come.

The Pomp seems clouded with a sullen gloom,
The King looks sad, Arviola's Cheek's are flushed
With such disdainful Rage; her flashing Eyes
Struck bold Argaleon at the Treaty dumb.

Dissention, wrecking Discord is broken loose,
And we must cast our Net in the troubled Tide;
It must succeed --

Speak, feast my greedy Ear,
That would devour at once the charming Tale.

This Prince with Passion has beheld Arviola,
Which yet his haughty Mind seemed to disdain,
And with a Lions Fury shook the Toil:
At last to the King, his Grief he did unfold,
And with a haughty men (befitting more
A Conqueror than Suitor) mustering up
His Titles, he demanded her in Marriage:
The King replied, 'twas an Affair of weight,
And in regard of Theocrin's just claim
Of fatal consequence.

And this Reply
The impatient Prince took for Consent.

His Pride resented it as flat denial,
And scarce contained its Swellings within bounds.
And now near Hella's Grove, Lord Theocrin,
Attended with light Horseman, met the Pomp,
Forward we moved, when in a sudden Feud;
The fiery Rivals drew; but first the Prince:
Both mad as Winds contesting for the Main,
And scarce the thundering King their Fury quelled.

A promising Disaster! What ensued?
And why returned not Theocrin?

Scarce was the Fray composed, when there arrived
Intelligence that the Dispersed remains
Of the Rebel Troops, had gathered since the Rout,
And garison'd within Eipercte's Towers:
The King seized this occasion to dismiss
Chaft Theocrin to the Army, with strict charge
To block Eipercte's Walls with speedy Siege:
An exquisite Device of State, at once
To keep the fiery Rivals at just distance,
And compass leisure for the best Resolves.

Soft, he returns with pensive Diphilus
And thoughtful Theocrin.

My Design's afloat!
Pisander in the Queens esteem supplants me;
What then remains but that I shift my Sails,
And seek some richer Port: the King's Esteem,
And Wind and Tide conspire to waft me in!
The Tempest is on Wing, sink Theocrin,
'Tis on thy Ruins I must build my Hopes,
And mounted on thy Ship-wrack make to shore.

Now Lords as you do prize your Countries Peace,
Your Ages ease, your Wives and Childrens Safety;
Ply your best Skill and Bank against the Deluge!
Methinks I see our Greece again embroiled
And Slaughter's bloody Sluices drawn anew;
Our Laws disarmed, and holiest Rites profaned,
Our Streets alarm'd with Tumults, Rapes and Fire,
And all the Terrors of Argaleon's War.

Whence can you fear, dread Sir, Events so fatal?
Not from the Prince, he is your Friend in League.

My Friend in League! Friendship's the privilege
Of private Men, for wretched Greatness knows
No Blessing so substantial.

Sacred Sir;
I see not why your Majesty should take
An anxious Thought! What can the Scruple be?
What better can secure the Peace of Greece,
Then that Prince Abardanes Wed Arviola?

And my late Vows to Theocrin be revok^

Your Interest, and the present Exigence
Of your Affairs require it.

Then blush Hell!
For Earth's more false, and Fiends to Men are Angels;
O hard Estate of Empire! wretched Kings;
How are we snar'd in Errors not our own,
And hood-winkled to the Crimes we most would shun?
Hence 'tis our Names stand Black in Chronicle,
When impious Councellors betray our Reason;
With Eloquence and Sophistry ensnare us,
And make Injustice necessary!

Prince Abardanes aws us from the Bay,
Threatens to pour his Legions on our Coast,
If fair Arviola refuse his Love.
His Rival Theocrin's grown Popular,
And Heads our Army; what if he resent
His Disappointment, seek by Force his Claim?
Shall we permit him take by Arms his Right,
And to a Subjects Tyranny submit?
Or call the Princes Forces to our Aid,
And trust the Courtesy of Foreign Powers?

The Siege will hold him for a while employed;
The Prince and he, fierce as they are, may yet
Burn harmless as dire Planets do; whilst distant:
But meeting hurl swist ruin on our State.

My Business Royal Sir, will justify
My bold Intrusion; give me leave to impeach
Your Favourite of Guilt, which true as 'tis,
Will scarce meet your Belief; of Treason.

Ha!

Lord Theocrin, he Courts the Popular Fame,
And forms Designs against your Life and Empire.

Say, speak thou this on thy own Knowledge or
Conjecture? If no more, on what Presumption?

The cause, his jealousy of Abardanes,
And your deferring his expected Nuptials:
With blood shot Eyes I viewed him in the Pomp,
Whilst diving low from his Triumphant Chair,
The Rabble at each Halt he did salute,
Then eagerly inclined his Lawrell'd Head,
To catch the buzzing Praises of the Crowed;
Whilst on his Youth (his Active Youth they called it)
And (as they termed it) your neglectful Age
They descanted, wounding each Loyal Ear!

I must have Evidence more positive,
Till then suspend my Judgment, make it clear,
And know that on the Proof depends thy Life.

Good Gods, that I were Earth! forgotten Dust;
Th'oblit'rate Marble mouldering o'r my Ashes,
And this Black Charge a Slander: Heaven! My Life!
Your Empire's Life depends on your Belief.
So now I'm Plunged, and must dash through or Perish:
Three Factious Stout Repiners at the State
(Of Bank'rupt Fortunes) I have Bribed already.
To swear this Charge, a Circumstance or two,
Neatly devised and plausibly alleged,
Will make the Impeachment pass.
Now to my She consed'rate to confer
Of my Designs: She's a Projecter too,
Lured on by Interests resistless Charms;
The vigorous Spring that sets all Plots adrist,
From Women's Projects to the Intrigues of State.

Ha! Visit you disguised, too Night?

He comes:
My Theocrin, I but even now discharged
The welcome Messenger he sent to inform me.
No tidings of my dear Edraste yet?
'Twas sure no small Resentment that could move
Her temperate Breast to such a rash Resolve!
My Fate in all its past Severities,
Allow'd me that dear Partner of my Cares;
But now the Charmer of my Griess is gone.

Your sorrow never shall complain alone,
Whilst I have Breath to echo to your Sighs.

Myrrhoe, thy Truth deserves a better Fate,
Then waits thy wretched Princess! O my Heart --
My Theorcrin! -- but that's too harsh a string
And I forbear to touch -- Say Myrrhoe,
How does the Queen resent Edraste's Absence?

Her Women feared to inform her of the Truth,
And forged a formal Tale --


A Stranger, Madam,
Desires Admittance; when I craved his Business,
He enjoined me to deliver you this Ring.

See Myrrhoe.

Lord Theocrin's Signet Madam.

Conduct him privately to my Apartment.
You Myrrhoe wait here, and on your Life,
Permit none to approach us.

I'm winged with Transport, and I tread on Air,
Ha Myrrhoe, what's thero? Lord Theocrin in's Seal?
A prize by Mercury! the Luckiest hit.
Even fortune's self is my Confedrate now,
And Aids me in my juggling: Sister stay,
This Ring must do me present service, but
I'll instantly restore it.

Stay Escalus.

My business is most pressing.

So is mine.
Did not the Queen too night send to invite you
To banquet with her in the Grotto.

Yes,
Pisander too is summoned thither;
Some new adventure that requires our Counsel.

Know then you are invited to your death,
The banquet's Poisoned.

Ha!

The Queen perceives you are jealous of Pisander,
And to prevent your just revenge, conspires
With her Young Paramour to take your life.

Whence your Intelligence?

From Bromian,
Attendant on the Queen in her Retirement,
Who persecutes me with his whining Passion,
And to oblige me made this dear Discovery.

Even this shall give a Lift to my Designs,
For Fencer like I'll Ward and Strike together.
The Queen and I too Night draw Stakes for Life;
The Lots are hid, now for a flight of hand,
To pick the Prize and shift the ^lank to Her.


So hasty were my Orders for the Siege,
That I was forced Disguised to make this Visit
Arviola!

My Lord.

The last days Sun
Was to have seen our Nuptials celebrated:
The busy Priests for us prepared their Temple;
Nor could attend the Morning Sacrifice!
The pompous Streets with Bays and Palm were strewed,
And Legions blessed us as we past along,
Hail Conquering Bridegroom, Royal Bride all Hail,
Enrich our Empire with a glorious Race.
Die Ag'd and Happy! Thus our Loves were greeted:
And now we meet, we meet (Oh Gods!) by stealth!

Dear Theocrin, believe me still your Bride,
For Souls can wed without the Formal Priest:
Why are our Loves, that prospered when concealed,
Like Faiery-Wealth, cursed since they came to light?
Ah! had you ne'er aspired at fatal Glory,
We might at least have given the Night to Love,
Tho we, like Glow-worms, hid by Day our Fires.

Divinest of thy Sex, its past the power
Of Thought to rate my Love! -- Arviola!

What would my Theocrin?

Dismiss me to my Grave, whilst thou art kind;
And hurry from the World this useless Life,
Which if prolonged, must prove to Thee most fatal.

Alas, my Lord, your Griefs talk wildly now.

The haughty Prince his Rival once removed,
Will prove more mild, nor longer threaten War;
With thousand more Conveniences of thine!
The King will ne'er chide with you for my sake,
Nor trembling Mothers curse your Constancy!
Fate wills, and 'tis expedient that I die!

Prince Abardanes, Madam, waits your leisure;
My Lord, your Signet.

The Prince demand Admittance?,
Sure he is well improved in his Acquaintance
To seek Admittance here! -- Go Myrrhoe
Inform the Stranger better. He mistakes,
These are the Apartments of Arviola
The Princess; Privacy. Haste, tell him so.

My Lord 'tis, with the Princess he would speak;
He comes to Visit --

Visit?

Good: He's jealous.
The Furies send the Princess half so apt
To take the Infection and my Project's made.

Retire my Theocrin.

How my Arviola?
Retire? -- by Love I will not understand thee,
Nor would thou sure be understood -- and yet
That angry Brow recalls my Charity!
Is't possible? bid Theocrin retire?
Remove, and give a new Pretender room?

Thank your Distresses that disarm my Rage,
Or my resenting Honour should chastise
This Jealousy; it should rash Man: but now
(Since Fortune treats you ill) I am content
To weigh your Griefs and wink at your Offence.
Once more I do entreat you to with draw,
And humour the perverseness of our Fate;
A little Patience will restore our Wishes.

I find my Error, and am dashed with shame!
Excuse the Ravings of a feav'rish mind;
Nor rate by common Rules immod'rate Love.
Ah Princess, could thou dive into my Heart,
And see how absolute thy Form reigns there,
How much I prize the Treasure of thy Love,
Thou would at least forgive my wakeful care;
That miser-like I wear a watchful Eye,
And weigh each Grain of the hard purchased Store.

Now by a Virgins Truth, I swear (stand still
Ye flying Minutes, and attend my Vow;)
Whilst Nature holds her Course and Time runs on,
VVhil'st Night and Day the Night and Day succeed,
VVhil'st Rivers pay their Tribute to the Sea:
And Seas with fresh recruits the Streams supply,
Whilst Winter strews Hoar-Frost and Summer Dew;
I'm Theocrin's -- So Theocrin prove True.

What pitying God, touched with the sad Estate
Of fallen Mankind, sent from their bright Abodes,
This Virtue to reform the Savage World!
Bright Excellence, Imperial Maid, farewell;
I go to glean the last Remains of the War;
And like Argaleon let me fall accursed,
If once these weary Lids be closed in sleep;
Or these devoted Limbs uncased from Steel,
Till I've completed well my task of Honour,
And brought thee Conquest perfect as my Love.


A Lover's Visit if it fail to meet
The best Reception, most unwelcome proves:
But Madam, if my Passion's troublesome,
Accuse the fatal Power of your own Charms;
Unwillingly I put your Fetters on.

With what an Arrogance his Passion sues.

I know I Court on Disadvantages,
And my rough Passion can have little Charms;
But Love dissolves and Moulds me o'r anew:
My Temper gives beneath each Glance you dart.

None sure can be to your vast Merits blind,
But Prince your Court-ship's to a Bride addressed,
And Brides in Heavens account are wed already.

It was my Rivall's Fortune, not desert,
To have first beheld your Charms; which having seen,
He Loved of necessary Consequence:
Chance laid the dazzling Treasure in his way,
Too vast to be by any Subject held;
And into Royal Hands must be resigned.

Now Prince you press too far your Privilege,
Allow his Worth, as I Dispute not Yours;
Which weighed, perhaps would make the lighter Scale.

I'm pleased to find his Merit swell so high!
Your Praise has made him Worthy of my Sword:
If wanting Royal Blood, it prove his Fate
To enrich himself with mine, you are his Prize:
But first we'll try the Forune of the Field.

Ah me! He is rash, and Theocrin all Fire;
What Ruin must attend such meeting Hames.
My Lord, the Prince, Return -- Could you Pretend
To Love, and in neglectful Rage withdraw?
Permit my Grief to reason calmly with you,
For you are generous and will be just!
This Love that has surprised your noble Mind,
Is but a vicious and irregular Heat --
Which your severer Prudence will Correct.
You'll be advised my Lord, I know you will;
You ought not, must not -- and you will not Love.

O my divided Soul! her painted Grief
Darts through my stubborn Bosom to my Heart.

What Triumph is there in a Virgins Tears?
What Conquest to pursue her to her Grave?
I'm sworn to be Lord Theocrin's or die;
And if from his Embrace I am Divorced;
Who Courts me after, is my Murderer.

Rise Princess, witness these prodigious Tears,
How much I'm touched with your Distress; how much
My labouring Heart resists the powerful Charm.

So may you speed in War and thrive in Glory,
Nor of your Crowns and Trophies know the Tale;
And if again you condescend to Love,
With all the soft Returns of Kindness meet,
Which tender Maids, that pine with secret Flame,
Wish, when retired, they tell the Groves their Pain!

I yield! you have prevailed against your self,
Your Tears have quenched the Fire your Glances gave;
I'll force a Conquest on my Heart, I will.

Then Blessings Crown --

O take your Charms away,
I cannot look and with such Treasure part,
But when removed, I'll try to represent
Your Form less Glorious, and resign you then.
This Pang, and I'm at ease! -- O Sossacles,
I have o'rcome! -- 'Tis false, I'm still her Slave,
I long, and 'tis methinks an Age already
Since I beheld her! How shall I sustain
Eternal Absence? It can never be,
My Fancy forms her fairer now than ever;
As Colours take in Crystal brighter Die.

Your Highness better knows to War than Love;
Presume not Sir to force a Victory
By furious onset here, as in the Field;
'Tis, Patience and a formal Siege must win,
The Fort which you in vain attempt to storm:
Bribes must Corrupt, where Force and Valour fail.

Speak plain, my Oracle, thy Conduct here
May speed my Love, as it has done my Arms.

The Princess Heart's already taken up
With Theocrin, and if you press for Entrance,
Must sink all Three: Plot first to dispossess
Your Rival.

'Tis a Task for Hercules.

I'll work the self-same Engine to dislodge
Your Rival, and to fix you in his room.

'Tis past the power of Wit; but I can trust
Thy Cunning for Impossibilities.


The Queen Confed'rate too with Theocrin?

Your Queen, your pensive, solitary Queen,
Conspires with Theocrin against your Life;
Her Cell, her sacred Grotto, is the Nest
To hatch their Treason; haste and trust your Eyes,
Even now they are brooding there together.

On
And force our Entrance.

TELL my Strephon that I die,
Let the Echoes to each other tell,
Till the mournful Accent fly
To Strephon's Ear and all is well.
But gently break the fatal Truth,
Sweeten every sadder sound;
For Strephon's such a tender Youth,
The gentlest words too deep will wound.
No! Fountains, Eccho's, all be dumb;
For should I cost my Swain a Tear,
I should repent me in the Tomb,
And grieve to have bought my Rest so dear.


My Eyes have surfeited upon their shame;
Guards seize 'em both:
Dissembling Aribell! false Theocrin!
Why that's Pisander.

Ha! Pisander? -- Gods!
Then there's a new Discov'ry -- who'd have thought
Pisander were a Villain.

Perjured Slave!

I blush for thee Pisander! could even weep
To see such hopeful Virtue fallen away.

I know four Majesty decrees my Death;
And with my latest Breath I will pronounce
That Escalus a Traitor.

Treach'rous Fiend!
I'll Perish, and involve Thee in my Ruin!
My Lord, the King, I own foul practices
Against your Crown, but was in all seduced
By that Arch-Devil.

Hear me Sacred Sir?
To clear my Loyalty, I but demand
Your Majesty compel 'em taste these Bowls.

Drink Slave or Perish.

Hell 'tis Drink and Perish.

Unfold this Riddle.

Know my Royal Master
The Queen her self broke with me of this Plot;
But having found me firm of Loyalty,
Resolved to silence me with Death for ever.
On that Design invited me too Night,
To Banquet with her here in the Grotto, where
These Poisoned Goblets were to have given me Welcome.

Guards, bear the Empress to the Citadel,
Till we resolve the manner of her Death.

Death, doting Monarch, must that witherd Brow
Give Sentence on this Bloom, this Spring of Beauty,
That has preserved thy friezing Blood in Motion,
Cous'ning the Grave of her long due; the Grave
That rivalled me, and for thy Lumber waited,
When I received it to my Youthful Bed.
Have I sustained thy sinking Royalty,
And stuffed thy hollow Robes to fill the Throne;
And talk Thou of my Death.

Away with her,
Let darkest Mansions hide her from the Day,
That Sickens at her Insolence.

Be it so.
I'll make those Mansions fairer that those Bow'rs,
And in a Scene of thought repeat these Joys,
So oft within these rev'ling Shades Possessed.
See there thy Rival, King, how lovelier far
In Death than thou art Breathing? Fear him still,
Be jealous of his Memory, and live
Till every Subject scorns thee as I do,
And Vermin like o'r-leap their Wooden King.
State, Tempests, shake thee into Dust -- Fates catch
My Curse, and stamp it in their brazen Volumes.

This jumps not with my Wish, Tame, Suffering King!

But Theocrin --

Is to his Charge returned,
Too late we entered to surprise him here;
These Letters I intended to have produced,
And charged him with his Treason to his Face.

To the Rebels? and with Theocrin's Signet sealed?
See Thereon, Diphilus.

With what Contents.

He taxes me with Breach of Faith, repents
His Service, and solicits them t'espouse
His Cause, and join their Out-law'd Troops with his;
Which will secure at once their forfeit Heads;
And vindicate his Claim to Arviola.
My Lords your speedy and most safe Resolves.

'Twere safest to discover no distrust,
But summon him to Court with speed,
As to some sudden Council, then
Surprise and sentence him to present Death.

Midst all my busy Zeal, this stupid King,
As yet no mention of Reward has made!
And rates my Service as a Subjects Duty:
Had I employed but half the expense of Wit
To serve the Prince, my Pains had past for Merit:
He claims no Sovereign Right in my Endeavours,
And will with Honours crown my Industry.
The time presents, his Agent Sossacles
With Myrrhoe has been tamp'ring; I'll strike in
And share in the Design; 'twere plausible,
And of good credit, to persuade this Prince,
That for his Interest I have undermined
Lord Theocron, his dangerous Rival. Good!
Thus tacking oft to catch the veering Winds,
The skilful Pilot works into the Bay.

TIs odds, but he'll suspect the sudden Summons
(As Guilt is ever jealous) and decline
Our Orders.

Doubt not, Sir, but he'll appear,
And with as bold a men as ever.

Thus forward Spirits, howe'r by Heaven designed
For State-Defenders, prove their Countries Bane;
For when their active Courage has redressed
The Public Wrongs; the proud Restorer's self
Next Tyrant proves, and for Reward Usurps
Now Prince to your Desires I can be just;
Your Rival has by Treason forseited
His Right to Arviola and our Favour,
And nought remains that can resist your claim.

Not even Arviola's Divinest Charms
Are more desirable, than to be styled
Your Son, not Glory could have charmed me more;
Glory that drew me forth to share your War.

Free I received this Crown from Heaven, and leave
Arviola her freedom to confer
The fortune of her Greece, where she bestows
Her Love; and Abardanes is secure
Of our best Aid t'endear him to her Breast.

Come near, my Sossacles, thou art surprised
To find this Cheek turned pale, and see this Breast
Heaved with unwonted Sighs; I know 'tis mean,
And blush at this Disorder, but bear with me,
Thou only conscious art to my Complaint,
And even to thee I tell but half my Pain.

To me you gave the Conduct of your Love,
And with successful Industry I've won
(What most I doubted) Myrrhoe to our side)
The Princess's confident.

Is't possible?
'Twas by her Art that Theocrin prevailed,
And worked into Arviola's esteem.

The fittest Engine therefore to dislodge
And work him out again: She knew to extol
And dazzle the Young Princess with his Praise;
And doubtless can with equal Art accuse.

By what strange Wiles, my subtle Mercury,
Could thou prevail on this demure Deceiver?

With well couched Flattery, and pretended Love;
Besides with Gems and Gold I bribed her Favour,
Yet with such difficulty, that to have viewed
The winding Scene, had proved no small Diversion.

Methinks I see my Engineer at work.

At first, with such disdain, as would have past
For real, with the unskilled in Women's Wiles,
The Present she refused; in passion told me
That she had much projected for your sake,
And by degrees intended to incline
The Princess to accept of your Address,
But was prevented by those hated Gifts,
That rendered her free Service Mercenary.

Then flung away?

No! paused, and with a sigh
Confessed, though you had justly disobliged her,
Yet since it was the Princess Interest
T'slight fallen Theocrin, and approve your Suit,
She'd still proceed to serve you, and engaged
(By what Device I know not) instantly
To render her Averse to Theocrin,
And then of course you seize her vacant Breast.

Thou shalt have Altars raised thee.

See, she comes.

My Lord, I come to check your lavish Bounty,
That leaves no place, for generous and free Service,
But turns my best Endeavours into Hire.

Think not those trivial Presents were designed
For more than Earnests of Rewards to come;
'Tis in your power to enrich me with a Treasure,
Beyond the Wealth of my expected Empire;
Arviola's Love.

Know my Designs on that account were ripe,
Before you shared your Bounty: a few hours
Is all I crave to perfect your Request.
Arviola comes, with-draw Sir, and expect
My Promise.
Now Edraste's Letter
To Theocrin, comes in play; now all the Fraud
That injur d Lovers charge upon our Sex
Inspire me; Tears, Oaths, Swoonings, changing Blood;
And all the seeming Pangs of wildest Rage,
Assist my Cous'nage.

Ha! the Gods forbid!
Stop thy rash Arm, or turn thy Steel on me,
Distracted Myrrhoe; speak what means this Fury.

Where am I? What unkind Hand has disarmed me!
O my asslicted Heart! Arviola?
Fly Princess, for I have resolved on Death,
And shall depart in Pain if you are by.

Speak, I conjure thee, and unfold thy Grief;
Or by our dearest Friendship I'll bleed first.

As you regard your Peace, permit me die
In silence, nor reveal a fatal Truth,
Which you of all the World should last discover.

Thy tender Bosom takes too quick a sense
Of my Distresses; but of me learn temper,
That can survive at once Edraste's Absence
And Theocrin's Disgrace.

I Theocrin!
Was it not I that kindled first your Breast
With Love of Theocrin, and fanned the Flame
With hourly Praise? Unfortunate Zeal.

Thou did,
And I adore thee for it.

I did,
And with that Poniard meant to act
A Justice on my self for doing it;
Tho to the expecting Fates I will appeal
I was abused, and more deceived than you!

Wreck me no longer with tormenting doubt;
If my full Griefs can yet be capable
Of fresh Disasters, let me know the worst.

Swear then to bear it as a Princess should.

Perish my dearest hopes, but I will do
As shall become my Sex and Royal Blood.

Peruse that Letter then.

To Theocrin?
And in Edrastes Hand? Her Name subscribed?
Most strange Contents! -- Yet she concludes more strangely!
The Author of her Ruin! Theocrin
The Author of Edraste's Ruin! Speak!
Confess, or dear as 'tis, I will rip up
That reverend Breast, and tear the Secret forth.

Take then the fatal Story (Sighs be husht
And give me Breath) -- the unfortunate Edraste
(As I have ever been her Confident)
Informed me of the Cause why she with-drew;
You thought her Absence unaccountable;
So little you surmis'd that she retired
To hide her growing shame!

Her growing shame!

With Cheeks now pale, now blushing, she confessed
She had resigned her sacred Virgins Treasure,
And in close dalliance wantoned, till at last,
Her amorous Theft no longer would be hid,
But forced her to retire.

I'll mourn for thee Edraste, and lament
In thy Offence, the Fall of Womankind! --
But -- Myrhoe -- Thou seem not yet discharged
Of half thy Tragic Tale -- Thou fear to say
With whom she did offend; and I to enquire!
Why art thou racked my Heart with fond mistrust;
For 'tis impossible that Theocrin
Should prove so false -- and as impossible
That any other Tempter should prevail!
I dare not -- will not -- yet I must suspect

Now Princess call to mind your solemn Vow,
You swore to act as Honour should advise,
And Honour will inspire you with disdain,
For this ungrateful, most forsworn of Men.

Sink me to Death! Plunge me in streaming Fire,
Heap Mountains on my Head,
And bury my Disgrace,
Abused Arviola.!
Deluded, credulous Maid! -- Oh Perjury!

Rise Princess and compose this dangerous Passion.

No! to this Earth I'll grow,
Out-rave the Winter Sea,
Out-rage the Northern Wind,
And with my loud Complaints alarm the Gods,
Till they resent the Wrongs
Of flattered Virgins, and confound Mankind.

Then curse thy self rash Tongue for thy discovery!
Perish these idle Hands, that had not first
Sheathed this preventing Poniard in my Heart;
But 'tis not yet too late --

Hold Myrrhoe!
Thou art more rash than I;
Think, think how much I loved!
How much I was abused!
And thou wilt say I have a Turtles tameness!
False! perjured Theocrin!
I can almost excuse thee Lost Edraste,
When I recall the smooth Deceivers Charms;
He'd sigh his Passion in such soft Complaints;
Courted with such a winning Modesty,
Even in his Silence reloquent, his words
So Artfully disorde'd, as might move,
Devoted Vestals to a living Grave!

Your Anger does him too much Grace; forget him,

Where then is my Revenge? I hear he's charged
With Treason too, and I believe him guilty;
For false in Love, and false in every Trust:
Yet once again I will repeat my Vow,
And Heaven and Earth refuse me if I fail
To execute the strictest Laws of Honour.
I'll meet him in spite of my relenting Heart,
(For inwardly I fear I shall relent)
Yet I will meet him with a scornful Brow,
And to his Face disdain him, though I die.

Hist. Sister.

Now, what fresh Discovery, whence those Letters, and
Of what Concern?

From our imprisoned, discontented Queen;
Here she solicits me to close afresh
With her Design; already she has urged
Her Brother of Epirus to revenge
The affront of her Confinement on the King.
These are to oblige me to betray the Fort
Into his Hand, when he by Night arrives,
And my Reward the Crown.

Be not too credulous,
Nor trust offended Majesty too far.

With caution I'll resolve, in the mean time
Seem to comply; I'll shun no path to Greatness,
But would seek it in the Jaws of Death.


Leave me my Friends, and of your Jealousies
Take leave; the generous King
Has no dishon'rable Design upon me:
Some sudden Council of the State requires me.

There is no trust in States-men, and in Courts
'Tis dangerous to excel allow our fears,
We know your worth, and would not see you fall.

Meet I the Death of Cowards, the Renown
Of my famed Ancestors expire in me,
Ever I grow vain, and trumpet my own Deeds;
Yet must this King confess,
That what I have for him performed,
Within the Sylvan Courts of Savage Moors,
At least would have procured me my Lifes safety:
I've seen a Lion from the Toil set free,
Yet famished, as he was, spare his Deliverer.

Should the ungrateful Senate dare to call
Your Worth in question; we that know how deep
Your Merit's rooted in your Armies Hearts,
Shall soon reform the Abuses of the Bench,
And teach the ermin'd Doatards Justice.

Ha!
Degenerate Damocles, how art thou fallen,
That Breath has blasted all thy early Glories!
Beware, brave Youth, the least disloyal thought,
That like a Canker will destroy thy Laurel.

Be not betrayed by your Credulity;
Your midnight Summons brings no small suspicion!
The Prince makes open Love to Arviola;
You know his Fleet rides still within our Bay,
And on his least Resentment can pour forth
Their Legions on our Shore; consider then
How this may work on the defenceless King,
To sacrifice you to your Rivals Rage.

My safety's grounded on the Eternal Truth
Of my Arviola; may she desert me,
When once I prove so mean to fear she will;
She's constant as the Diamonds standing Light:
Once more, my Friends, I beg you would retire,
And will not be denied.

We go, but shall be near to watch your Danger.

Spite of my forced neglect, a sullen fear
Intrudes it's terror on me; first it seized
My Slumber, since pursues my waking Thoughts;
A mourning Venus stripped my verdant Baize,
And on my Temples dropped a Cypress Wreath,
Whilst weeping Cupids leaned on slackened Bows,
Shrouding their Faces in their sable Wings.
Dreams I regard not, but this Vision leaves me
Gloomy and Dull, as sated Ravishers.
These Lords once knew me, fawned and kissed my Knees,
When from Argaleon's Conquest I returned,
And now the Doatards pass neglectfully by!
But change in States-men is most natural:
They are Weather-cocks of time, and face about
To every veering Wind!
But here comes Myrrhoe, and her I'll seize.
Tell me kind Patroness of all my hopes,
Thou that hast known my Passions secret growth,
Brought'st kindly warmth, and hatched it with thy Beams.
How fares my bright Arviola?
How mindful of her Pining Theocrin?
How many Sighs has escaped her balmy Lipp?
(For Myrrhoe I will know Particulars.)
How many Tears? -- Reserved, and silent Ha!
What means that wrinkled Brow? Dishonour blast me,
But thou hast struck a Chillness to my Heart,
A Death-like Cold.

Your Pardon Lord,
I am in haste, on Business to the Prince.

The Prince! Confusion! Business to the Prince?
What Business bear thou to the Prince? Whose Business?
I know thou wilt not say Arviola's.
Thou wilt not let me know that killing secret,
Tho it were true.

My Lord; I'm no Dissembler,
When I informed you that the Princess loved you,
'Twas true! -- she did -- at present I affirm
She thinks of you no more.

And that true too!
Were it thou an Oracle to tell me this,
Id slight it as a black malicious lie,
Tho thunder struck me for the misbelief.

Your Lordship's discomposed, I take my leave.

Go then, and like a Sorc'ress blast thy Walk,
How have I pruned my Fortunes till they bleed,
To fill this Mercenary's Coffers:
But this rich Prince's weightier Gold, I find
Has turned the Scale against me; be it so,
I'll give the World the lie, ever I supect:
None but Arviola her self shall ever
Persuade me that Arviola is changed:
Here comes this Pageant Prince! Down swelling Blood,
I must speak to him, and would do it in temper.
Prince, by your Favour, turn; a Soldier calls.

Ha; who art, that with so bold a freedom
Retards my haste?

I am one whom thou hast wronged,
Demand'st thou further? -- One whom thou must right;
Forbear that frown, I would not move thy Passion,
And would much less that thou should wake my Rage:
As therefore calmly I my Grievance tell,
Do thou as calmly promise to redress:
Thou seek to rob me of my Valour's Prize,
My Right by chance of War and Royal Grant,
My Mistress -- more -- my Bride Arviola.

Ha! Theocrin? stand forth, let me survey thee;
Dare thou, poor Sprout of obscure Growth, presume
To be ingrafted to the Royal Stock,
And stain with Peazant Blood the Race of Kings?

Thus far I bear with thee thou barbarous Prince,
Less disciplined then those rough Winter-gusts,
That scourge thy barren Clime. This is the Palace,
The Mansion of the King; the Place protects thee,
Thou art too vile a Sacrifice to fall
On Sacred Ground.

Unhand me Sossacles;
Now thank the Gods that thou art ranked beneath
A Prince's Vengeance; I forbear thy Life,
And will not stoop to take the worthless forfeit:
Thou art hedged in with double Infamy;
For as a Subject I disdain thee much,
But as a Traitor more.

Blasphemer die.


This Insolence within our Palace Walls?
Guards seize the Tiger.

O my Lord the King,
To Heaven and you I will appeal.

Be dumb,
I'll hear thee nothing till the Bench is sate,
And then thy Practices shall have fair Trial.
Guards he's your Charge.

Are these then the Rewards of Loyalty?
To bind these Arms (...) set their Country free?
My Virtue shot too (...), and shaded all
The Bramble Courtiers; therefore I must fall
As one that robbed 'em of the Royal Beams!
But Winter Storms will fall again, and then
They'll wish their Shelter standing -- O my Heart!
Those Beauties must belong to Arviola!
Arviola! Hast thou forgot me too.

Nor am to blame,
You're so much altered now from what you were;
An Angel fallen could take no change so fowl.

Yes -- I am fallen indeed! most strangely altered!
A few days since I triumph, was proclaimed
The States Deliverer; Virgins wreathed in Flowr's,
Sung Hymns of Conquest, Insants lisp'd my Praise;
The King, the King, smiled on me, Fortune smiled,
Arviola smiled -- Where's now the dazzling Pomp?
The bright Scene's changed, the Heavenly Dream with-drawn;
My Flags dispersed, and all my Streamers drowned.

Dispense with me thou nice and rig'rous Honour,
This Penance is too much for Flesh to bear!
False as he is, I cannot see his Pain,!
Yet am condemned to be his Torturer!

Fickle Maid,
Like Venus thou were it wont to scatter Joys;
But now those Eyes have lost their healing Power,
Shoot Pains, and like Malignant Planets strike!

Take on your self the Blame, if I disturb you;
I would have past in Silence by.

Thou woudl'st not!
I'll justify thee, even against thy Self!

To prove what I affirm, I'll leave you now.

Then fickle Maid, thy Love was all a Mock!

The Gods will be my Witnesses, how much
I prized the brave, the valiant Theocrin;
The Conscious Gods will be my Witnesses,
How much the Traitor Theocrin I scorn.

Forbear, my Fame, rash Beauty! O take heed
How thou revild'st a Soldiers Loyalty!
Least Light'nings fall and singe thee Black as Moors.

This Conference is our last, and our Discourse
Has shot too far already -- I have done.

What mute? This silence tortures me beyond
The sting of Slander; speak, though it be to curse me,
Arviola! Arviola! Arviola!
O deaf as storms, to sinking Mariners!
Speak, I conjure thee by the spotless Joys
Of our stolen Visits! by the friendly Bower,
Whose Shade was conscious to our mid-night Meeting.
Whilst from the Jess'mine Roof the Dew distilled,
And trickling from thy Brow perfumed thy Tears!
Whilst to correct the Vapours of the Night,
Officious Loves Celestial Perfumes breathed,
And fanned the Moon-beams, with more shining Wings:
By all those Nights! and that most friendly Night,
When to my ravished Ear you first confessed
Your Love, and shot me through with trembling Joy!
The Stars flamed brighter, and the Flowers breathed forth
A warmer Fragrancy; the gloomy Grove
Approved our Vows, and at our Contract smiled.

Oh! O! O!

Relentless still? What shall I say?
What sad Complaint assume t'extort thy Pity?
This posture can re-call the offended Gods!
Hear cruel Princess; 'tis not yet too late!
One balmy Tear and I am whole! --
With-drawing? - Can it be?
Ha! Wilt thou, can thou part and leave me thus
Grovelling in Agony! - Turn, turn, at least
To view my dying Pangs, and glut thy Sight
With the last Pantings of a broken Heart.
Even yet thou art not quite with-drawn! turn yet,
And leave with bleeding Love, the Charity
Of one relenting Sigh! - She's gone! retired,
Vanished for ever from these closing Eves.
Come Chaos now! Resume thy horrid Reign;
Blend Earth with Heaven, the Elements confound,
And quench in Seas the fallen Ethereal Fires!
When Vertu's dead, 'tis time that Nature die;
Wake Theocrin! forsaken as thou art
Of all; thy Innocence stays with thee still!
Guards, to your Office, wreath me o'r in Chains,
And in the gloomiest Dungeon shroud me fast;
When this is done, if my escape you fear,
The Grave's the safest Prison, lodge me there.

Scarce can I credit what I've heard and seen;
Approach thou subtl'st of the subtle Sex:
Say, what Return, what Off'ring shall I make
To thy immortal Wit -- Sossacles.
The change is wrought, a change more wonderful
Than of black Chaos into smiling Day.

Your Servant Aribert, from Thrace arrived
With Letters of Importance.

Soldier welcome!
Fly Myrrhoe, foment the Princess rage,
That no relenting Thought for Theocrin
Surprise her Breast, and mar the noble Project.
Confusion! Torture! all my hopes are dashed.
Read Sossacles, my Royal Father's sick,
And I am summoned home to Thrace with speed:
Aspiring Sythrax waits the Kings last hour,
To seize the vacant Throne; and they inform me
Our speediest return can scarce prevent him:
What shall I do?

Your danger Sir instructs you;
Your Fleet's in readiness, we'll sail to night.

And leave Arviola? --
Now Escalus,
If thou hast Policy produce it now,
And make a Prince thy Friend; my Father dies
And warns me hence, my Brother Sythrax takes
Advantage of my Absence to Usurp,
Shall I secure my Crown or Love?

Both Sir.

How my Apollo? O my panting Heart!

The means are obvious; bear Arviola
By force aboard your Fleet, then sail for Thrace:
The season gives you opportunity,
Too morrow she attends the Sacred Rites,
And Sacrifices at Diana's Grove.
The Princess early with her Virgin Train,
Sets forth to finish the preparing Ceremonics,
Before the Court Arives; then you may seize her,
For Myrrhoe shall seduce her through the Groves,
Where you shall plant your Servants to surprise her.

Most exquisite contrivance!
We'll send immediate notice to our Fleet.


Where thus confusedly Sister?

Where's the Prince?

What new Disaster?

Theocrin's escaped.

Escaped!

Rescued from the Guards,
And born with violence from the Town.

By whom?

'Tis guest by the Offiers, that from the Camp
Attended him to the Court, for all were Masked,
Nor trusted to the Evenings Dusk.

Perdition;
This happens ill; but Fortune do thy worst,
My ripe Designs are past the blasting now;
Sister one day, one busy morrow more
Crowns out Desires: Retire, and I'll inform you.
I toil for Empire, now at Scepters fly,
Resolved to force'em or expire;
And tho I perish in the attempt,
Even in the Grave, my Pomp, my Court I'll keep,
And dream of Crowns in Deaths Eternal Sleep.

THe Storm is husht, the Winds breath out their last;
The Thunders too in feebler Volleys die;
All Night they humoured my Complaints; but now
The Day intrudes, the dear Confusion's vanished,
And all the ruffled Elements return
To their dull Order. Shroud thy hated Light,
Thou rising Sun, nor summon with such speed,
The o'rlabour'd World to the Toils of a new day!
Why flattered Mortals, will ye wake to Cares,
When Sleep in kind Delusion may divert
Your pensive Minds with pleasing Images.
A Dream sets free the Captive, can restore
Lost Fields to Soldiers, and wreckt Merchants Wealth;
In Dreams the Exile Visits his dear home,
And o'r the sparkling Bowl relates at large
His past Distresses to his wondering Friends!
The lover too the sad forsaken Lover,
May dream and feign the falsest Mistress true.
O for a gentle Slumber, that would thus
Delude my Griefs, and show my Perjured Fair
Constant as once I thought her -- Oh I rave,
For Sleep no more must seal these Lids; this Sun
May set and rise again to his dull Round,
But see me tread Life's giddy Maze no more;
Perform thy work thou deadly Juice -- 'Tis off.
That Death (by Nature so abhorred) should be
As easily into our Vitals drawn,
As the Air by which we live.

I fear his discontent has made him stay,
Regardless of the Storm that raged too Night.

We left him near these Cliffs.

'Twas
Rash to trust him with his Griefs alone.

It was his own Resolve, which we
Obeyed with much Reluctance -- O ye Gods!
See where he prostrate lies in the cold Dew,
With his bare Head exposed to the troubled Air.

Tyrant of Nature, I would view thee near,
Thou Chief of Terrots, Death! a Form so horrid,
As even the Wretched shun: This brittle Glass
Contained that awful thing; the fatal Juice,
That turns my working Organs into Clay;
In could even now have dashed it on the Ground;
But let that pass.

Rise Noble General;
We cometo seek you in the Armies Name.

Nay, now my Friends you are too officious!

O my dear Lord, I grieve to have found now!
Why would you dare the Terrors of this Night?
Such Lightnings, Wind and Rain --

Ha Damocles.
Was't not a merry Night, thou know I should
Have been a Bridegroom now, and therefore 'twas
The rev'ling Storm struck up to make me Music;
The Lightnings danced to entertain me -- True,
The Bride was absent, and the Bed was cold!
But 'twas of Natures making, honest Rock,
O'r-spread with Moss.

His Griefs I fear distract him.

Hark Damocles, a Secret, O my Boy,
When I am Earth, remember thou were warned
To trust no Woman when she smiles, and when
She weeps believe her less, least when she swears;
But if she swear thee Love -- Oh Wracks and Pangs!
Why Sirs do ye gaze so wildly on me? -- Ha!
The Poison I perceive has touched my Brain!
Come Damocles, let's talk no more of Women;
Arms be our Theme, bright Arms -- Arviola!
Tell me of Arms, my Boy -- Arviola!
Of Battles, tattered Ensigns, bloody Baize;
Trophies and Triumphs -- Oh Arviola!

We must divert this Frenzy.

Still they gaze!
My Senses then are going, let em go.
O that my working Thoughts were once at rest,
Still as fallen Stars, or Streams bound up in Frost.

Your Griefs shall be redressed; the Army waits
For your Return, resolved to force your Right,
And place you in the Imperial Bed and Throne.

Then you have weighed my Wrongs.

We have, my Lord,
And must resent your Suffering as our own.

Swear then to work the Army to my Will.

We swear.

'Tis well;
Know then 'twill most conduce to my Content,
That you forget my Abuses from the Court,
And spite of all my Wrongs be Loyal still!
Nay Sirs, seem not dissatisfi'd, you've sworn,
Perform my last Request, for 'tis my last;
I've taken Poison.

Horror!

Infamy!
What Soldiers Tears, a few hours will reduce
This shaken Frame to its first Elements;
Part we like Soldiers without Ceremony:
I must devote my short remains of Life
To private Thoughts, and you must leave me all.

At least permit us wait you to the Grave.
To sling our pining Laurels on your Earth,
And give the Warriour's Volley o'r your Tomb.

I have my self to took care for my Enterment.
The Hermite's Cave is near, where I'll unload me
Of this dull Earth; they'll decently bestow
This Lumber in some Vault by Nature framed;
Wrapped in no Sables, but of deepest Night;
No Pageantry, or more superfluous Trains
Of such as mourn for Hire, no Funeral Dirge,
But what the widdow'd Turtle shall afford me.
The Pomp that I despised in Life, in Death
I hold most vain; nor care to rot in State.
Farewell, commend me to our Valiant Troops,
And as ye wish my Ashes rest, be Loyal.

Enough, the Tomb is hallowed; all retire
To your respective Tasks, your chosen Toil;
Behold my Son this rude unpolished Marble,
The common Receptacle of our Dust,
When Fate shall summon our Obedient Spirits.
What Follows Death, the Dead alone can tell;
But to our Life of Rule and Discipline.
We owe at least, this certain Privilege,
Calmly to wait the change, nor fear to die.

O peaceful Solituds!
Here all things smile, and in sweet Consort join.
All but my Thoughts, that still are out of tune,
And break, like jarring Strings, the Harmony.
Why, cruel Theocrin, dost thou pursue me
To these Retreats? For still thy Image wounds.
My panting Breast, and robs me of Repose,
Tho lodged on Poppies by the murmuring Stream.
Ha! is't the raving of my feverish Thought
Or Theocrin's appears! Defend my Heart,
Some kinder Power, or undeceive my Eyes.

I feel the trusty Person by degrees,
Spread through my yielding Veins, my circling Blood,
At length, will bear the Cordial to my Heart;
As nearer to Eternity I coast,
The Prospect grows more lovely -- Here's the Cave,
And I descry the Hermits working near;
The neighbouring Vale shall be my Walk,
Till the prevailing Poison summon me
To turn and yield this Earth to their disposal.

'Tis he! the Royal Bridegroom wandering here
Alone, Bare-headed, and with sorrowful Brow;
Fortune, I fear, has wrought some dreadful change!
I'll trust to my Disguise, and follow him;
My Heart is on the Rack till I'm informed.

Where Myrrhoe, wilt thou and Sorrow lead me?
This Shade is dark, and silent to my wish,
Here let me sit and breath my last complaints!
He was the falsest of the treach'rous Sex;
The falsest, and as such, my just Revenge
Disdained his Pangs, when grovelling at my Feet.

His Love was feigned, and so was his Remorse.
Where are these Ravishers, this was the time
Designed for the Adventure, this the place.


Rise, we are summoned to attend the Altar;
Speak, have ye sung your Matins, hailed the Grove,
And with the Victim trod the Sacred Round?
Why stand ye thus fixed on each others Look,
As ye had some dire Message to deliver,
Whilst each declines the ungrateful Tale; speak forth.

A better Fate attend our Greece, then what
The Omens of this Morning Rites presage;
Which of us, has with guilty hands approached
The awful Ceremonies, is unknown;
But our dread Goddess is displeased,
And thwarts our Work with boding Prodigies.

'Tis but the Old Mans Fear, the hallowed Wine
Has touched his feeble Brain, and makes him rave.
Shall we retire, yet farther, Madam?

The Virgin Taper thrice I did apply,
Before the Flame would taste the melting Gums,
Nor then blazed prosperously, erect to Heaven,
But scatt'ring, turned his conscious folds to Earth,
And rolled his smoky Globes along the Ground.

These Wizzards will mar all; to lose her thus,
When I've decoyed her to the very Ginn.

The destined Bull in Garlands wreathed, stood bound,
And turned his lowering Eyes upon the Attendants;
Nor sooner had the blushing Wine distained
His snowy Brow, but rearing high in Air,
He shook the yielding Cords from his curled Front,
O'r-threw the Altar, tossed the Golden Pile,
And forcing through the scattered Priests his way,
Ran with high Nostrils, Bellowing through the Grove.

Return, and Consecrate the Place anew,
With mournful Cypress bind your Pensive Brows,
And prostrate falling on the Sacred Ground,
Each Vow his Innocence before the Altar;
Then cast the Lots to find the Osfender out.
O Virgin Goddess, if this Breast indulge
One secret Guilt, turn all thy Rage on me,
And let thy Priestess bleed thy Sacrifice!
Else let me live with fallen Edraste's shame;
My sond Heart, be again seduced to Love.
Deceived again -- Assassins, Treason! Help.


Seize her, Confederates, seize your Royal Prize.

Help Heaven, Rocks, Groves, Diana help!

Soft, Madam, we are Friends, design no Wrong,
But come to bear you to a Lover's Arms.

Off Traitor! Lightning blast
Thy Sacrilegious Hands.

Quick Sirs, convey her to the Prince's Chariot,
That waits without the Grove, thence to the Fleet;
And in the Court of Thrace expect her Thanks.

The Cry came this way -- See! The Princess seized
By Ravishers, even in her sacred Robes.

The Fiends are Vanished; where's the Princess?

Fled off in Fight.

Disperse we strait; you Damocles return
To the General, and inform him what has happened;
You Phorbus to the King, the rest search for the Princess:

Curse on the Coward Slaves, they fought like Women;
Not Wolves more tamely would resign their Prey
To Lion: How shall I excuse
This soul Defeat, to the expecting Prince?
The Prince? Hell! that's the least Difficulty:
How shall I answer to the King this Treason?
Hard-hunted, as I am, I've one shift yet,
And that a sure one: I'll with speed inform
The King, of this Design to seize Arviola:
Charge all the Guilt upon the Prince, pretend
The Plot was frustrated by my Contrivance;
Then when the Intelligence comes, the King
Shall thank me for my Villainy, perhaps
Reward me too; thus cautious Sailers quit
The sinking Ship, and rowing off to shore,
Enrich themselves with the wrecked Merchants Wealth.

Leave me fond Youth, why wilt thou follow me?
I'm Savage as a Sylvan, and unfit
For thy soft Conversation; prithee leave me!

Forgive a Strangers Rudeness, Sir, excuse
A charitable Crime; say you are happy,
And for some pleasing Contemplation seek
This Solitude; convince me with a smile
And I'll retire.

Believe me happy then
And leave me.

Wherefore then that troubled Sigh?

Pretty Impertinence, no more Inquiries;
But since thy Curiosity is such,
Know I am wretched to that sad degree,
That Fiends might pity me, and therefore leave me.

'Tis therefore I would follow.

Thou are Young,
And Grief's infectious; get thee to Court, and revel out thy Youth; Sorrow
will come
Unsought, and poison thy Delights too soon.
Besides, you're Beautiful and formed for Dalliance,
Therefore to Court, there practice every Wile
To charm the Fair; none escape thy Flattery;
But Youth take heed that it be Flattery.
For should thou be sincere in thy Addresses,
Give up thy Heart, and trust thy Happiness
To a Woman's Mercy, you're lost for ever.

Then all all my Fears are just, and Destiny
Has played most fowl;
Arviola is changed, or he abused.

Thou wept! What mean those Tears, I did but speak.
Of disappointed Love, and thou art touched!
Is't possible that thy soft Innocence,
So early, should be Martyred by the scorn
Of any cruel she!
Then I am still to learn in Woman's Falsehood;
And my fair Cous'ner yet may be a Saint,
Compared to the rest of her deluded Sex.
Yes, false Arviola, when I descend,
And to the lower World report my Love,
I'll do thy Fame the Right, to say,
There was one more inhumane Maid than thou!

Your Pardon, my best Lord, that I trangress
Your last Commands, the occasion is surprising;
Your fair Arviola, with her Maiden Train,
This Morning came to attend the Annual Rites
Of Great Diana's Altar in the Grove:
On our Return we found the Princess seized
By Rusfians, whom we soon o'rcome,
But lost her in the hurry of the Fight --
Behold, my Lord, three of their scattered Crew
Flying this way.

False, tho she be, yet some Revenge is due
To injured Beauty and a Princess Name.
Stand Traitors.
How fares my gentle Boy.

The friendly Steel
Has pierced my aching Heart, and given me ease.

Ha! Wounded! We have bought the Villains Lives
Too dear; help Damocles
Yo bear him to the Cell.


Disperse and search each Thicket of the Forest;
And as your for feit Heads shall answer for it,
Return not to our Presence till you've found her.
Stand forth, ye reverend Hypocrites, confess
When, where, for what you bartered, to betray
Your Monarch's Daughter? Hell! I am too cold!
Produce her Traitors, set her in my Sight,
Restore her to my Arms this minute, or
Your pampered Flesh shall on the Rack be torn,
And scattered piece-meal on this hallowed Ground.

This is the Music that I longed to hear;
King, you're too tame, rage louder yet; Ha! Ha!
How vain a Creature were the plotting Knave,
But for the credulous Fool?

Slaves, must I twice command, ever I am answered?

By all the Powers, by Great Diana's Self,
And your own Sacred Head, we are innocent.

They sport with my Revenge, quick, drag'em hence
To present Death; nor shall the ungrateful Prince
Our Vengeance shun: he comes, make ready Guards
To seize him, he shall bleed.

Dread Sir, consider.

O'r-powr'd? Excuse it not, 'twas Cowardice;
Retire, I must to the King, least he suspect.

Disarm him.

I am betrayed,
Basely you have surprised us; give me room,
Slaves know the Prince, nor with your Vassal Hands
Profane my Royalty -- What! Servile Chains!
I'll not endur't.

Now the Chaste Lion foams.

I charge thee King release me, by thy Sceptre,
Thy Head, thy Empire, which my Thracian Troops
Shall drown in Blood, and waste with Vengeful Fire.

We dare thy worst, ungrateful, barb'rous Prince,
That could abuse our Hospitality,
And plot a Rape upon a Royal Maid.

Why then did she not Love? What I designed
Was generous all; and thou should thank me, King,
That of thy Dignity I took such care,
Fo force thy Daughter to my Princely Arms,
That on a Vassal else, a Subject Slave,
Had lost her Crown and Beauty; and corrupted
The untainted Blood of Monarchs!

Bear him off;
Come to my Heart, thou faithful Escaellus;
With what Return shall I reward thy Virtue!
Our Army we commit to thy Command,
Be thou our General in false Theocrin's stead,
And meet the shock of War, this Prince has threatened.
Whom bring ye there?

Dread Sir, A Forester,
That says, he saw but now a Lady fly
In fright to the Hermite's Cave.

'Twas my Arviola, lead thither.

Now Damocles Fly and call the Hermits in,
Their Art will bring Relief; take Heart, my Boy.

I Die, my Lord, and with my latest Breath
Will speak of Wonders; now my Stars are kind,
And for my past Griefs make too large Amends,
Since in your dear Embrace I do expire;
I am Edraste.

This indeed is wondrous.

Deaths Paleness will forbid my Blushes now;
If I confess that I have loved you long,
But with a Flame as Chaste as Vestal Fire;
Or may no Pious Garland crown my Tomb,
But Virgins shun it as unhallowed Ground.

Where shall I hide? O for an Earthquake now
To sink me from these Ravishers -- Whose there?

Speak my Edraste, end thy charming Tale,
For I would Die convinced, there can be Truth
In Woman's Love.

Edraste in Disguise with Theocrin,
In close Embraces joined! My Eyes too long
Are guilty, but the sacred Poniard thus
Shall expiate the Offence; Eternal Night
Remove the hated Object from my view.

She's gone, and in her Cheeks
A scattered Purple smi'es,
Like streaks of Sun-shine from a Setting Day:
My Fate comes next, the sure-slow Poison now
Preys on my Vitals - Ha! what Heavenly Form
Sits there? Bright Vision turn -- Arviola!

O Gods, those ruffled Locks, and that wan Look,
Against my Honour plead in his behalf;
But 'tis a Woman's Weakness, and I'll crush it.

It cannot be! Not Woman's Cruelty
Can swell to that Excess, to persecute
Her poor forsaken Lover to his Cave;
To tear his closing Wounds, and wake
His slumbering Griefs into a fresh Despair.
Is this the tenderness of Beauty, this
The Weeping Sexe's Mercy? Oh! Arviola!

With what divided Passions am I torn!
Stream faster sluggish Blood and give me ease!

That so contemned a Thing as I, should ever
Create your Highness Trouble, were unjust;
But Princess you'll excuse me: that I loved you,
I do confess, but wore my Flames concealed
And silent, as the Lamps that burn in Tombs,
Sighed only to my self and to the Winds,
Gazed on your Beauties with the distant Crowd:
Your self at last perceived my drooping care,
And forced the trembling Secret from my Breast,
Which with my Life I rendered at your Feet:
Then -- I remember -- Oh! the panting Minute --

That panting Minute I remember too!

You raised me by the bloodless Hand from Ground,
With such obliging Tenderness, secured
My trembling Hopes, that next I sunk with joy!
But (Oh the Torture!) this transporting Scene
Was but a gaudy Dream, and waked with Storms,
Here on cold Earth the flattered Dreamer lies.

Tempt not the Gods too far, those Gods that know
The Falseness of your Love: yet O thrice Happy,
If here your Crimes had fixed, but to Corrupt
A Royal Maid -- The fowl Thought strikes me Dumb,
I leave your Guilt to interpret -- Oh Edraste!

Take heed, Licentious Fair! Thy perjured Love
Was but thy Sexe's Sin, a Crime of Nature,
But to Blaspheme the Virtue of the Dead,
Will wrest from the forbearing Gods their Thunder.

Ha! Dead! Each Minute draws fresh Wonders on.

The Princess must perceive that I betrayed her,
Perhaps this Cave will hide me from the Search.

Hast Thou too brought thy Raven's Note t'afflict me?

Gods! Theocrin Pale! Arviola Bloody, and Edraste Dead;
Then Furies lash me with your Scorpion Whips;
Give me the Torments of the Etornal Damned,
Prometheus, Vulture, and Ixion's Wheel.

Alas, what mean those dreadful Execrations?

My Breath grows short, but shall suffice to unfold
Such Treasons, as will fright the Dephts of Hell,
For whilst the Plotting Escalus accused
This generous Lord of Treason to the King,
As falsely I abused his Love to you;
Taxed him of wanton Dalliance with Edraste,
Who from the Court retreated, to divert
The Ambitious Queens Designs on both your Lives:
Thus were you wrought to treat him with Disdain,
At his return from Field.

The Truth, the Truth as thou shalt meet the Gods.

For thy Souls sake, the Truth and I forgive thee.

At fast, Bribe d by the Prince, I undertook
To tempt you through the Groves, till the Assassins
Might seize and bear you to the Thracian Fleet;
But (unexpectedly engaged) in the Fight
I met the unluckily Wound that gives me Death,
By the dar Powers that wait for my Descent.
This is most true, as true as I was false,
Or let my Pains, through circling Ages last,
Nor Time expiring, see my Torments done.


O bounteous Powers! O balmy healing Joy!
Pride of thy Sex, Imperial Excellence,
My still Beloved, still Loving, True Arviola.

Can you forgive my Lord my rash Disdain?
You must, for I was punished in the Crime,
Even then (could you have seen my Heart)
You would confess that your Arviola
Was ne'er so passionate kind.

Let me in haste --
Devour those Sweets, and load me with thy Bloom,
A Stock to feed on in Eternity.

O that some pitying God would six us thus
(To solid Marble turned) Eternal Statues,
Whilst Pious Lovers flock from farthest Lands,
To hear the wondrous Chances of our Loves,
And thence be taught whate'r Disasters fall,
Ne'er to despair of Passion that is true.

My Feeling fails, but ah what purple Dew
Distains this Hand that pressed thy panting Heart?

Thank the Good Gods, 'tis my Life-Blood, my Lord,
I saint; my Theocrin, but one thing more
Tell me, if we shall love in the other World?

'Twill be our Business, 'tis the Land of Love.

And without Jealousy.

Their Paradise knows no such poisonous Weed;
Their Loves are as their Streams, full, calm, and clear!
Secure and free they pass their harmless hours,
Gay as the Birds that revel in the Groves,
And sing the Morning up.

Farewell.

She's gone!
And charms me after.


Confusion! Diphilus see the Princess slain in Theocrin's Arms, more bloodless
Corpses too,
To fill the ghastly Scene -- Dread Sir, Retire;
Such Horror fills this Cave, as will congeal
Your Aged Blood, and blast your Royal Sight.

Why do your Knees prevent me; sink in Earth
And give Passage: Where's the Goblin now
That should appall me? Ha! My Arviola dead.
And in the Traytor's Arms!
Fate thou hast struck me home, but struck thy last.
Here fell my only Comfort, only Care.
Haste, set the Prince at large.

'Twas my sole fear, least Myrrhoe should discover,
And Death has tied her Tongue; there's that breach stopped.

Robbed of my Heirs; be all my Witnesses
How timely for my Empire I provide;
Behold this Man of Worth, and know him all
For our Adopted Son and Heir of Greece;
Bow all to Earth and do him present Homage.

Thus, gracious Sir, thus prostrate at your Feet,
Your Vassal begs you to revoke your Favour;
I am the unworthiest --

Rise, our Pleasure's sixth, Slaves is our Will disputed.

Hail Heir of Greece, Hail Royal Escalus.

Way there, a Message to the King.

What bring thou?

Great Sir, your Queen disdaining her Confinement,
Took Poison, but enjoined me ever she died,
To bear these Papers to your Royal Hand.

O Dephs of Villainy! Guards seize that Fiend.

What means my gracious Lord.

See here, my Lords, what will amaze you too!
Our Empress, by that Escalus detected,
Lived but to take Revenge on the Discoverer;
And to effect it, made pretence of Forces,
Raised by her Brother to invade this Empire,
Which this Designing Lord was to command,
And these his Letters in Return; where he
Accepts her Terms! To Death with the Impostor.

That Breath that doomed me be thy last, weak Monarch;
But King, know thou, and these (but now) my Slaves,
That for that minutes Pride, that single Taste
Of Royal Power, for that one Hail, I'd meet
The worst of Deaths thy feeble Rage can form.

My Lord, I trust your Care to see just Rites
Performed to these dead Bodies; my next charge
(And that my last) is, that you summon straight
Our Senate, and by fair Election crown
Our Successor; for my own private part
I have determined what the Gods inspire:
Reach me a Hermite's Habit.

Now I find
His rash Resolve, but durst not interpose.

How light sits this! And thus have I put off,
With the Imperial Robes, Imperial Cares.
Thus after all my Storms of Court, I make
My last Retreat to the Gods and Poverty.
Here as the Sanctions of this Cell, shall bind
By turns, I'll wait, and in my Course be King.
Here Lust wants Fuel, and Ambition starves,
My tempered Appetites shall here be taught,
T'ask Council of my Reason ever they crave:
Here just but temperate Meals, short Sleeps and sound,
Shall cheer me for the Labours of the Day:
Thus Life's well managed Remant will I spend,
And when the Gods shall lease, resign my Breath
Calmly, as Infants sleep, and smile on Death.

YOUR humble Servant Gentlemen -- How do ye,
In faith I've broke my Prison Walls to see ye;
Must I he cloistered up? Dull Poet stay,
I hate Confinement though but in a Play.
Doom me to a Nun's Life? -- A Nun! Oh Heart!
The Name's so dreadful, that it makes me start!
No! Tell the Scribbling Fool I'm just as sit
To make a Nun as he to make a Wit.
What? A-la-mort Messieurs? Nay then I'll sit ye
Adieu! In faith no Epilogue for Betty!
And yet, shame on my Foolish Woman's Heart,
I fain would see ye smile before we part.
You know how oft, like preaching Sisters, we
Have from the Stage Lectured your Vanity;
Yet like those Sisters, out of the Preaching Mood,
You have surprised and found us Flesh and Blood!
Well, if your stubborn Hearts will not dissolve,
Prepare to hear our fatal last Resolve;
Since Sense has broke us, henceforth shall be shown
The Feats of Robbin Hood and Little John,
With the thrice famed Exploits of Whittington!
(...) Vergers then in your lewd steads shall sit,
A (...) and Scarlet Audience crowd our Pit.
(...) like your Misses, we are forced to quit ye,
And make our last Dependence on the City.

