YOU'RE early Pedro.

Not so early, Sir,
But I've already seen our watch relieved,
And bid our Guards be careful of their Charge,
The Fort being all our Strength.

Our common safety
Requires strict Eyes upon these Islanders:
Believe me, Sirs, they're false and desperate People,
And cruel as they're crafty, when they find
The least advantage of Surprise.

'Tis plain:
Their late attempt is yet too fresh amongst us,
In which against all Arms and Honesty
The Governor of Ternata seized by stealth
This Islands Monarch, our confederate King,
While for diversion coasting in his Barge.

His royal Sister, the fair Quisara,
Has showed a noble Mind, and tendrest Love
To her afflicted Brother, and the Nobler,
Because his Ruin Stiles her Absolute,
The Heiress and Possessor of his Throne.

Such Charms and Virtue with just Admiration
Have robbed the neighbouring Courts, and filled her Palace
With royal Suitors.

Good.

You smile Pymero.

Yet --

What?

If Fame has left her old trick of Lying,
Our Countryman and General, brave Riudias
Is in amongst 'em too, and has the start
Or my she-Oracle deceives me.

I have observed him oft, how privately
He has stolen from us, and how readily
Feigned business too, yea bid the Fort farewell:
Sure there is something in it.

Yet this grave Uncle
Has read me Lectures.

Yet you cared not for it.

In Faith not much, I ventured on still easily,
And took my chance, Danger's a Soldiers honour.

Might he succeed --

Fear not, our Family never failed.

But have you, Pedro, seen the young Armusia?
The handsome Portuguese arrived here lately?
'Tis odds, Pymero, but he mars your Game.

A Youth of noble promise, goodly, courteous,
Without Reservedness, grave, and doubtless Valiant;
For he that dares come hither, dares Fight any where.

Remember we're in the Palace of the Island,
Not our own Fort: do ye mark those Preparations?
Those Doors give entrance to the Princess Shrine,
The Seat of her Devotion, where this Morning
She Summons all her Suitors to assemble;
But for what purpose in such solemn State,
And that most awful Place, we are yet to learn.

Work for her Myrmedons.

But who are Chief?

There's first your King of Bakam, that speaks louder
In his own Commendations than a Cannon;
Yet He's struck Dumb with her.

Syana's Prince too,
A sprightly Lover, wise, and temperate:
The chief Sport, or rather Wonder, is;
The haughty Governor, her mortal Enemy,
He that surprised her Brother, is struck too;
And under formal Hostages arrived.
But see the noble Stranger we described.

YOU'RE welcome Sir:
Know there is nothing in our Power to serve you,
But you may freely challenge.

Sir, we thank you,
And rest your Servants.

Brave Armusia,
You never saw this Court before.

No Sir,
And therefore least in Wonder and Delight
Such Government --

You shall see more anon,
That which will make you start; but hark,
The Signal's given, and see the Pageants Enter.

THese sure are Islanders.

And Princes.

They are goodly Persons: What might hebe, Seignior,
That bears so proud a Port?

The King of Bakam,
A Fellow that looks so highly,
As if he had been begot on the Top of a Steeple.

This is Syana,
A braver tempered Fellow, and more valiant.

What rugged Face is that?

The Governor;
He that surprised the King, and keeps him Captive.

See, their Eyes Lighten; Ware Thunder, Gentlemen.

Away ye Trifles,
Am I in competition with such Toys?

You speak loud, Sir.

Young Man, I will speak louder;
Can any Man but I deserve her Favour?
Ye petty Princes!

He'll put 'em all in's Pocket.

Thou proud vain Thing, whom Nature --

I contemn Thee,
And that Fort-keeping Fellow.

How the Dog looks!
The Bandog Governor,

Ha!

Keep thy Rank, Thing, with thy own petty Peers:
Call out the Princess.

Dost thou know me, Bladder?
Art thou acquainted with my Nature?
What can thou merit?

Merit! I'm above it.
Honour's my Servant, Fortune is my slave;
I slight ye Insects: had not the vain people
Bestowed some Titles on ye,
I should forget your Names.

Mercy on me
What a blown Fool has self-affection made!

His Mother longed for Bellows sure and Bag-pipes.

Swallowed a Drum, and was delivered of an Alarm.

Sir, talk a little handfomer; talk softlier,
That we may be able tohold pace with you; We are Princes,
But those are petty things with you: talk wiser,
As 'twill become your Mightiness: talk less,
That Men may think you can do more.

Talk Truth,
That Men may think you're honest, and believe you.

Why, I can talk and do.
I'll tell you, only I deserve the Princess,
And make good only I; if you dare, you,
Or you, Syana's Prince.

Here lies my proof.

I'll be short with you,
For those long Arguments I was never good at.

How white the Boaster looks.

FOR shame forbearye Princes, rule your Angers;
You violate the Freedom of this Place,
The State and Royalty --

He's well content I see, so I have done.

Is this she Seignior?

This is the Princess, Sir.

An admirable Form: They had cause to justle.

You wrong me and my Court, contentious Princes:
Comes your Love dressed in Violence to seek us?
Is't fit our Palace; this most sacred Shrine
Should be polluted with your bloody Rage?
My very Altar's frighted with your Swords.
He that loves me, loves my Commands; be temperate,
Or be no more what you profess, my Servants.

We are calm as Peace.

Heaven! What command she carries,
And what a sparkling Majesty flies from her.

Since you're for Action, I shall find you Danger;
But not this way: 'tis not this mean Contention
Amongst your selves, nor Courtship to my Face:
Who best can love, or who can flatter most,
Shall guide my Choice; he that will hope my favour
Must win me with his Worth.

Propose the way.

I shall, and then show you
A will to tread that way, I'll say you're worthy.

What Task now will she turn them to? These hot Youths I fear
Will find a cooling Card.

First I shall call our Country Gods to witness
With highest Adorations, what I promise.
Now give me hearing: 'tis well known to you
I had a Royal Brother, now most Wretched,
And Prisoner to this Man: were I Ambitious,
Or coveted these Glories not Born mine,
His Miseries should bear a lasting Date;
Or were I Covetous; had my Heart set
On Riches, or on pleasures Uncontrolled,
There he should Die; his Death would give me These,
For then stood I up absolute.
Yet all theseflattering shows of Dignity,
These golden Dreams of Greatness cannot force me
To forget Nature and a King's Distress.

Now Uncle play the Marks-man.
Quick, watch her Word, and shoot on the Wing.

Thereforethe Man that would be known my Lover,
Must first be known my Brothers faim'd Redeemer:
Bring him alive or dead to my Embraces,
(For even his Bones must scorn such Slavery)
Or seek another Mistress.

Divine Creature!

How they stand gaping all!

I grant ye Princes 'twill be hard
To do this, wondrous hard, a great Adventure:
But finished, the Reward is worthy of it.
You hear your Task.

Tell her 'tis done, Sir;
You'll ride upon a Whirlwind,
And bring him home on Lightning.

Ruidias, cold? not fly like Fire into it.
Perhaps you doubt me, Princes,
He that shall do this is my Husband;
By that most bright and sacred Shrine I Swear,
Before these holy Men I here proclaim it.
No stirring yet.

If, Madam, to attempt
This royal Rescue, through all forms of Danger,
Might Crown our Hope, I had not lost this Minute;
But here, where Conduct must keep pace with Courage,
The starting fiery Will is reined with Torment
To Judgment's flower March.

Take your own Method.

Madam, believe him here: I'll raise an Army,
Shall bring him to your Island, Fort and all,
And fix it here.

How long will this be doing?
You should have begun this in your Grandsire's Days.

What may be, Madam,
And what my power can promise, I engage:
My Will I'm fure stands fair.

Ha! ha!
Madam, their Power and Arts are all too weak,
'Tis only in my Will to give your wishes.
The King your Brother is my Prisoner;
Then thus the Bargains finished, take your Prisoner,
And make me yours, close Prisonerto these Arms:
Say but the word, your Brother shall be Rendered.
Quick as your Wish.

Know base Ravisher,
I hate both you, your Country, and your Love:
Heaven knows how dear I prize his Liberty,
But here I would so basely buy his Freedom,
I'd study to forget he was my Brother.
By force you took him; he that would possess me,
Must fetch him back by force, or never succeed.

Noble Spirit.

Now could I love her, though she's Virtuous.

By force, and make you glad to let him go.

You may look nobler on me.

I say by force, and suddenly;
He lies there till he Rots else: so return, Sir,
And glad we have kept Faith for your safe passage,
Rather than take him as thy Courtesy;
Though no Condition were proposed, I'd see him
Far sunk in Earth, and there forget him.

How's this?

Your Hopes are great, good Governor.

Am I then made a Property?
I'll check this Pride, I'll quench this Bravery,
And turn your glorious Scorn to Tears and Howling;
I will, proud Princess: This Neglect of me
Shall make your Brother King most Miserable;
For as till now I've used him like a King,
And seen all Royal Offices performed,
He now shall lie a sad L^a^ Dungeon,
Laden with Chains and Fetters, Cold and Hunger,
Darkness and lingering Death for his Companions:
And let me see who dares attempt his Rescue;
What desperate Fool look towards it: Farewell:
And when you find him thus lament your Scorn.
Nay, I shall make you kneel to take my Offer.
Once more farewell; and put your Trust in Puppets.

If none dare undertake't, I'll live a Mourner.
Now Ruidias.

Cousin we must resolve and speedily.
Walk with me, Gentlemen.

Now, Sir, you stand as you were Charmed.

O Sforza and Emanuel!

What now?

This Captive King!

I see your drift, and feared the consequence.
Consult your safety, Sir, we know your worth,
And must not see you perish; you are my charge.

What an Action
Would this be to put forward, Sirs? What Glory?

And what an everlasting wealth to Crown it?

To step into it while they are thinking.

Sir, 'tis impossible,
The Fort's impregnable without a Guard.

By Heaven I'll rule in this.

If it must be!

Stay not for second Thoughts -- O she's an Angel!
At least we can attempt, our very Fate
Will sometimes be the Theme of her Discourse,
And I would die Ten thousand thousand Deaths
To have her talk of me. Away.

I Have kept many Men, and many great,
But must confess I never saw till now
A Person of such sufferance; he lies now
Where I would not have laid my Enemies Dog,
Where neither Light nor Comfort can approach him,
Nor Air nor Earth that's wholesome.

'Tis most strange,
Load him with Irons, oppress him with Contempts,
Such are our Governors Orders; give him nothing
To feed Life, or so small 'tis next to nothing,
It moves not him, he smiles upon his Miseries,
And bears 'em with such strength, as if his Nature
Had been Nurst-up, and Fostered with Calamities.

He gives no ill words, curses not, repines not,
Blames nothing, hopes in nothing.

And in the midst of all these Frights, fears nothing.

He fears not, even when I my self shake for him,
As many times my pity will constrain me;
When other Souls that bear not half his Burden,
Shrink in their powers, and burst with their oppression,
Then will he Sing; woo his Afflictions,
And Court them in sad Airs, as he would wed'em.

What stubborn weight of Chains?

Yet he looks temperately.
No wildness, no distempered touch upon him;
How constantly he Smiles, and how undaunted.

Mark with what Majesty he heaves his Head up.
Hark now.

O charming Grief!

Do not disturb him --
Sir, your allowance from the Governor; would 'twere more,
Or in my power to make it handsomer.

Do not transgress thy Charge, I take his bounty;
Fate hurts not him that bears a mind contented,
And hangs not on vain hopes, that may corrupt him.

The Governor himself.

What, at your Banquet?
And in such State, and with such change of Service?

Nature's no Glutton, Sir; a little serves her.

This Diet's wholesome then.

I Beg no better.

Give him less next,
These full Meals will oppress his Health; his Grace
Is of a tender Constitution.

Mock on, it moves not me, Sir.
I cast your Mirth and Malice both behind me.

You carryit handsomely but tell me, Patience,
Do you not Curse the brave and Royal Lady,
Your gracious Sister? Do you not Dam her pity?
Dam twenty times a Day? Dam seriously?
Coud'st thou not wish her a Bastard, Whore, or that
Thou had no Sister?
Blaspheming Heaven for making such a Mischief;
For giving Power to Pride, and Will to Women?

No, Tyrant, no, I love and Bless her for it;
And though her Scorn of Thee should heap upon me
As many Plagues as Air corrupted breeds;
As many Mischiefs, as the Hours have Minutes;
As many forms of Death, as doubt can Frame,
I still should Love her more; more Honour her.
All thou can lay upon me, cannot bend me,
Not even the stroke of Death, that I despise too.
So let Quisara always scorn thy Love;
As I for ever shall despise thy Cruelty.
Could fear possess me thou shouldest ever Win her:
And that she is not Mistress of this Temper,
She is no Kin to me, and I contemn her.

You are Valiant, Sir.

Yes Sir, and Fortunate;
For he that holds my Constancy, still Conquers.

You will relent for all this Talk, I fear not.

You are Cozened;
Or if I were so weak, to be wrought to it,
I still should Curse her Heart, if she consented.

You shall write, and entreat, or --

Do thy outmost.
In the midst of all thy Tortures, I'll Laugh at thee;
And think thee not more Valiant, but more Villain:
Nothing thou hast done brave, but like a Thief
Achieved by Craft, and kept by Cruelty.

Down with him lower yet, there let him Murmur,
And see his Diet be so spare, and little,
He grow not thus High-hearted on it -- I'll cool ye.
Give him no Liberty, let his Bands be doubled;
Let him not Sleep, nothing that's dear to Nature
Let him enjoy -- yet take heed he Dies not;
Keep him as near Death, as wishing for it,
As possible: But let him not arrive to it.
I'll humble him,
And her proud Heart, that stands on such defiance;
And let me see her Champions, that dare venture;
Her high and blustering Suitors -- keep close Guard,
And as you prize your Lives, be diligent,
And what I charge, observe.

We shall be Dutiful.

OUR prosperous Voyage, was a lucky Omen;
A lucky, and fair Omen.

May it prove so.

The Sea and Wind strove which should most befriend us.
Where lies our Boat?

Safe lodged within the Reeds behind the Castle;
Where no Eye can perceive, or thought suspect.

These Merchants Habits too have done us Service;
Unquestioned thus I've Travelled through the Town;
Viewed all the Tyrants Magazines; got knowledge
Even of the Prison, and the Power that Guards it
Where the King's Dungeon'd.

You attempt strong work.

Courage is strong, beside a Monarchs Fate's in it;
Yet loose or win, there's no retiring now.

I see it; your Valiour, Sir, has sealed your Fate;
Yet must confess your Ruin will be Glorious.

Thus far our Game holds fair, as Merchants we
Have hired this Vault, and stowed those mettled Wares
That soon will vent themselves without a Chap-man.

The Trains are all laid, Sir.

Come nearer then,
That no false Ear may reach us, over this Vault
The Castle stands, where this proud Governor
Has stored his Arms and Treasure, next to that
The Prison where the injured King is kept.

What of all this?

You're dull, if ye perceive not:
These Friends which we have here bestowed, will soon
Speak out for us.

Too loud!

The Fire I here brought with me
Shall break into material Flames, and bright ones;
That all the Island shall stand wondering at
An hour hence; noble Friends, look for the Fury,
The Fire to light us to our Honoured purpose.

Our Funeral.

Sforza, I have seen thee braver.

Hell catch my Soul, if for my self I fear;
But with what Eyes, can I behold your Fate,
Your Sinews stretched on the revenging Rack.
(Less cannot be expected) that dear Breast,
Torn piece-meal, and that noble Heart lie panting.
The Castle's Ribbed with Rock, the Prison warded.

I say we have a chance for it,
When the Towns full of fright, the Governor
Out of his Wits, to see th'imperious Flames:
The people there employed to stop the Ruins,
And few regarding any private Office:
Then fly we to the Prison instantly,
And push for the King's Rescue.

Fortune speed us.

Let us be worthy of it by our Courage,
And so take leave, but keep still within sight,
Till the Flames Rise, then meet to do or die:
Fail not dear Fire, and Powder,
Hold thy Nature

My Heart bodes with thy Fate brave Youth;
But we will sell thee dearly.

No, Captain, for those Troops, we need them not,
The Town is strong enough to stand their furies;
I would see 'em come and offer to do something,
They are high in words.

'Tis safer, Sir, than doing.

Dost thou think they dare attempt.

May be, by treaty,
But sure, by force, they will not prove so forward.

No faith, I warrant thee, they know me well enough,
And know they have no Child in hand to play with:
They know my naturetoo I have bit some of them,
And to the Bones; they havereason to remember me.
It makes me laugh to think how glorious
The Fools are in their promise, and how pregnant
Their wits and power are to bring things to pass;
Am not I grown lean with loss of sleep, and care
To prevent these threatenings, Captain?

You look well, Sir:
Upon my Conscience, you are not like to sicken
Upon any such conceit.

I hope I shall not:
Well, would I had this wench, for I must have her,
She must be mine; and there's another charge, Captain;
What betwixt love and brawling, I got nothing:
All goes in maintenance --
Hark, what's that,
That noise there, it went with a violence.

Some old wall, belike, Sir,
That hath no neighbour-help to hold it up,
Is fallen suddenly.

I must discard these Rascals,
That are not able to maintain their buildings,
They blur the beauty of the Town.
Fire, fire.

I hear another Tune, good Captain;
It comes on fresher still, 'tis loud and fearful:
Look up into the Town, how bright the Air shows;
Upon my life some sudden Fire.
The Bell too?
I hear the noise more clear.

Fire, fire.

Where? where?

Suddenly taken in a Merchants Vault, Sir,
Fearful and high it blazes; help, good people.

Pox o'their paper houses, how they smother;
They light, like Candles; how the Roar still rises?

Your Magazin's a fire, Sir, help, help suddenly,
All will be lost, get the people presently;
And all that are your Guard, and all help, all hands, Sir,
Your wealth, your strength is burnt else, the Town perished,
The Castle now begins to flame.

My Soul shakes.

A Merchant's house next joining? Shame light on him,
That ever such a Neighbour, such a Villain --

Go raise all the Garrison, and bring them up.
And beat the people forward -- Oh I have lost all
In one House, all my hopes, good worthy Citizens,
Follow me all, and all your powers give to me;
I will reward you all. Oh cursed fortune --
The flames more, arise still, help, help, Citizens,
Freedom and wealth to him that helps; follow, oh follow,
Fling Wine, or any thing, I'll see it recompensed.
Buckets, more buckets, fire, fire, fire.

So, thou art open, keep the way clear
Behind still, now for the place.

'Tis here, Sir.

Sure, this is it,
Force open the door -- A miserable Creature,
Yet, by his manly face --

Why stare ye on me?
You cannot put on Faces to fright me:
In Death, I am a King still, and contemn ye:
Where is that Governor? Methinks his manhood
Should be well pleased to see my Tragedy,
And come to Bath his stern eyes in my sorrows;
I dare him to the sight, bring his scorn with him,
And all his rugged threats, here's a throat, Soldiers,
Come see who can strike deepest.

Break the Chain there.

What does this mean?

Come, talk of no more Governors,
He has other business; Sir, put your Legs forward,
And gather up your courage, like a man,
We are Friends,
And come to give your Sorrows ease.

On bravely;
Delays may lose all again.

The Guard.

Upon 'em.

Make speedy and sure work.

They fly.

Up with them, to the Boat stand, fast, now be speedy,
When this heat's past, we'll sing our History
Away like Thought.

Now sacred Chance be ours.

Pray when we have done, Sir.

What, is the Fire out? or past the worst yet?


'Tis out Neighbour, I can tell you, but whether past the worst, or no, I know
not. I never wrought so stoutly since I was a Man; I have been burnt at both
ends like a Squib, -- I lived two long Hours in the Fire: The Flame at last got
down my Throat, and broke out again at my North-Door. If they had not clapped in
a Dozen Buckets upon me as they did, I had flamed up, and been one of the Seven
Stars by this time.


He would have made a rare Flambeau.


Well said Wax-Chandler; thou art in thy Element.


Now you talk of Elements, 'pray' Neighbours how many Elements are there?


Why, there's but one, Fool, where the Sun and Moon dwell, and all their little
Prentices.


Well said Shopkeeper: Thou art in thy Element too. Dost call 'em Prentices, I
have known 'em These Threescore Years, and sure they are out of their time by
this, or they do not serve by our Charter. I tell ye there are four Elements;
Water and Malt, are two of 'em; and Fire and Brimstone the other. They have past
through me a little too late, I thank 'em.


My Wife took leave of me a hundred times after I was burnt to a Cinder, yet I
bore up still, and tossed the Buckets, Boys.


In the latter end of the hurry, me thought I heard a Voice cry, Treason.


Murder you might, by Timbers falling, but for my part as a House fell, I still
stepped into the Chimney.


Ay, Neighbour, if every Man had wrought as you did.


Why? I stole nothing Neighbour.


How many Rogues were there pretending to help remove Goods, and ran away with
them?


And your damned, Suburb Cart-rogues: an I were Governor, I would not leave a
Carter unhanged for twenty Miles round. This honesty is my ruin, Neighbours; I
could have born my Poverty, had Fortune not made me honest; or Honesty, if she
had not made me poor, but both together -- the Devil himself were not able to
live on it.


Right Neighbour, my Conscience whispered me to Steal in the Fire, but my
honesty would not suffer it. O for some Drink; get me a whole Tun of Drink,
whole Cisterns, for I have Four Dozen of Fire-brands in my Belly, and Smoke
enough in my Throat, to bloat a Shoal of Herrings.


We'll lay you under the Tap, and let the Tub run through you.


And, Neighbour, you shall lie at my Bung again, to take it at second-hand.


Well, since we have no plunder our selves, let's set our selves to Drink, and
rail at them that have.


Look, yonder comes our Governor, a worse Plague than the Fire; he has Beams
enough yet standing to hang all for helping him. Away.


MAKE ready all, we'll Sail with the next Flood.
'Tis fit I should be foremost in the Attempt,
As in her favour, I stand first -- Let's see.
My self, my Cousin, and my Garrison;
With our Confederate Neighbours of the out-Isles.
I trust we cannot fail. -- What means that shout?

Where are you, Sir?

Not yet aboard, Pymero?

Alas we are topped, Sir:
Turned all to shotten Herrings, the King, Sir:
The King's come home again.

The Devil --

Nay, sure he came o'Gods Name.

Who should attempt him:
The Princes are all here.

'Tis done, Sir, and most bravely.

It cannot be! done! Who dares do it?

An honest Fellow, who it seems has ended
His Market, here you were up.

Can it be possible,
A stranger, that I have not known nor seen;
A man I never graced: O Captain, Captain!
What shall we do? I am betrayed by Fortune:
It cannot, shall not be.

'Twas Witch-craft did it:
No mortal means could take effect so soon.

Must I then be given
To a Man I never saw, nor spoke withal,
And know not of what Nation? -- O Ruidias,
This might have your Lot --
The general Joy comes on, and I must meet it:
But with what Comfort --

Rise my Sister!
I am not welcome yet, till you embrace me.

My Dear, and Royal Brother! Joy over powers me,
To see you safe again, your Self and Mighty.

A general gladness, Sir, spreads through the City,
And Mirth possesses all for your Redemption,
'Twas a brave Venture, whosoever put for it;
A high and noble One, worthy much honour;
Yet had it mist, my Project had not failed,
Andin short time --

I thank you noble, Sir;
I know you love me.

I have an Army, Sir,
That would have scoured your Tyrant, and his Confines,
And rung him such a Peal.

Yes, backward,
To make a Dog howl.

I have done nothing, Sir, and therefore think it
Convenient to say little what I purposed,
And what my Love designed.

I like your Modesty. My royal Friends,
I thank ye all: I know it grieved ye
To hear my Misery -- but this Man, Princes,
I must thank heartily indeed;
For this Man saw me in it, and redeemed me;
He looked upon me sinking, and plundg'd for me:
This wondrous Man, even from the Grave of Sorrow,
Has new begot my Name, and once more made me:
O Sister, if there may be thanks for this,
Or any thing near Recompense, invent it.

You are too noble, Sir; there is reward,
Reward above my Action too, by Millions;
A Recompense so rich and glorious,
I durst not dream it mine -- but that it was promised,
But that it was Propounded, Sworn and Sealed
Before the Face of Heaven.
For nothing in the life of Man or Merit,
(It is so truly great) could else embrace it.

O speak it, speak it, bless my Ear to hear it;
Make me a happy Man to know 'tmay be;
For still methinks I am a Prisoner,
And feel no Liberty, till I find that.

It is -- but first to Heaven, and you I bend,
If either can forgive the high Demand;
It is your Sister, royal Sir; she's mine:
I claim her, by her own word, and her honour:
It was her open promise to the Man,
That durst redeem you -- Beauty set me on,
And Fortune Crowns me fair, if she receive me.

Receive you, Sir, -- why Sister -- ha -- turn from him?
Stand as you knew not me, nor what he has ventured,
My dearest Sister?

Good, Sir, your pardon:
There is a blushing Modesty about her
That holds her back; Virgins are nice to Love;
I would not have her forced; give her fair liberty:
Creatures of such soft Nature, if compelled,
Turn into fears, and fly from their own Wishes.

Look on him Princess, is there such another?
Oh! all ye Powers so excellent in Nature;
In Honour, so abundant!

I confess,
My word is passed, and he by that has purchased;
But, good Sir, give me leave to think some time
To be acquainted with his worth -- We are Strangers.
For Love like Power, must pass through Ceremonies,
Here he can fix in Virgin Hearts.

Be sudden,
You will respect your Word, I know you will;
I'll be your pledge, my Hero, come my Sister,
Let's see what welcome you can give a Prisoner,
And what fair looks, a Friend --
Thus in my Arms, once more.

You make me blush, Sir.

Lead on, This Day shall see
Our whole Court Crowned with Pleasure.

O Ruidias.

WHY are you sad, Sir? what can grieve or vex you?
That have the pleasures ofthe World, the profits,
The Honours, and the Loves at your dispose?

I want what Beggars are allow'd I mean content.
I want the Grace I have merited, the favour,
The due respect.

Does not the King allow it?

Yes, and all Honours else that I can ask,
Or he has power to give: but Oh! his Sister,
That scornsul Cruelty; forgive me, Beauty,
That I Transgress from her, that should look on me;
That should a little Smile upon my Service,
And fosten my Deserts, for her own Faith's sake:
That should at least acknowledge me, speak to me.

And you go Sighing up and down for this;
Lamenting and disputing of your Grievances?

What would you have me do?
Do what a Man would in this Case, a wise man,
An understanding Man, that knows the Sex.
Go to her.

That's the way.

And talk as you fought for her boldly;
Both what you are, and what you have deserved.

It makes me smile.

Now you look handsomely;
Had I so fair a Prize to win,
I would so flatter.

Pray take our Counsel.

I shall do something,
But not your way, it seems too Boisterous,
For my Affections are as fair, and gentle,
As her I serve. Friends leave me to my thoughts
An Hour or two, anon you shall command me.

I hate this thinking, it mars all business.

We shall look for you, Sir.

What shall I do to make her know my Misery,
To make her sensible -- This is her Woman.
I have a Toy come to me suddenly,
That may work for the best, she can but scorn me,
Lower I cannot fall -- I try my Fate:
May I presume, fair One --

'Tis the brave Stranger.
Now by my Ladies Hand, a handsome Gentleman.
How happy shall she be in such a Husband:
Would I were so provided.

Can you have so much Charity for a Stranger;
To let him pass this Evening in your Company,
And what must be a Charity indeed
(In one whose Youth and Beauty dart such Charms)
To think my meaning fair.

I dare believe you;
Or if it were not, that's no great matter,
What have we Virtue for, but to be exercised;
Besides we take men's promises -- Would you speak
With me, Sir?

That you would favour me with your acquaintance;
I would say Friendship, for my Grief requires it.
You are the Princess confident,
And wait upon her near?

I understand you.

With one kind office, you may bind a Gentleman
Hereafter to be yours.
Such beauteous Faces should have courteous Minds,
And ready Faculties.

Tell me your business;
Yet if it be to her, I think your self, Sir,
Would do much better:
The Princess must be pleased with your Addresses;
I'm sure I should.

I want assurance,
And yet am but a Stranger, would fain speak with her

'Tis growing late, and on her Hour of Sleep.

Pray wear this, and believe my meaning Civil.
My business of that fair respect and carriage.

I must do it now, an'I were to be hanged: nay, and I
Will do it; for another so good, and from a Gentleman
So handsome, I should even venture upon high
Treasure.

I would speak to her, and privately.

So you shall, Sir.
My Service were not else worth thanks: you must make hast, Sir.

This Minute.

And I must leave you in my Chamber, Sir:
Where you must lock your self, that none may see you:
'Tis next to hers -- You cannot miss the Entrance,
When she comes down to Bed.

Once more I thank ye, Lady.

Thank me but thus.

So far and truly you have discovered to me
The former currents of my life and fortunes,
That I am bold to acknowledge you most holy,
And certainly to credit your predictions,
Of what are yet to come.

I am no liar,
'Tis strange I should, and live so near a Neighbour;
But these are not my ends.

I pray you sit, good Father,
Certain a reverend Man, and most Religious.

I; that belief's well now, and let me work then,
I'll make ye curse Religion before I leave ye;
I have liv'da long time, Son, a mewed up Man,
Seauestred by the special hand of Heaven,
From the World's vanity, all to find out knowledge,
Which I have now attained to, thanks to Heaven,
All for my Countries good too, and many a Vision,
Many a Mystic Vision, have I seen Son.
And many a sight from Heaven, which has been terrible,
Wherein the goods and evils of these Islands,
Were lively shadowed; many a charge have I had too.
Still as the time grew ripe, to reveal these,
To travel and discover, now I am come, Son,
The hour is now appointed,
And now I speak.

Do holy man, I'll hear ye.

Beware these Portuguese, I say, beware'em,
These smooth-fac'd strangers, have an Eye on 'em,
The cause is now the Gods; hear and believe, King.

-- I do hear, but before I give rash credit,
Or hang too-light on belief, which is a Sin, Father;
Know I have found 'em gentle, faithful, valiant,
And am in my particular bound to 'em,
I mean to some for my most strange deliverance.

O Son, the future aims of men! observe me,
Above their present actions, and their glory,
Are to be looked at, the Stars show many turnings
If you could see, mark but with my eye, Pupil;
These men came hither, as my Vision tells me,
Poor, weather-beaten, almost starved, feebled,
Their Vessels like themselves, most miserable,
Made a long suit for Traffic, and for comfort,
To vend their Childrens toys, cure their diseases:
They had their suit, they landed and to the rate,
Grew rich and powerful, sucked the Fat and Freedom
Of thy most noble Isle, taught her to tremble,
Witness the Castle here, the Citadel,
They have clapped up the neek of your Tidore,
This happy Town, till that she knew these strangers;
To check her, when she is Jolly.

They have so, indeed Father.

Take heed, take heed, I find your fair delivery,
Though you be pleased to glorify that Fortune,
And think these strangers Goods, take heed, I say,
I find it but a handsome preparation,
A fair faced Prologue to future mischief:
Mark but the end, good King, the pin he shoots at,
That was the Man delivered ye; the Mirror.
Your Sister is his due, what's she, your heir, Sir?
And what's he a kin then to the Kingdom?
But heirs are not Ambitious, who then suffers?
What Reverence shall the Gods have? and what Justice?
The miserable People, what shall they do?

He points at Truth directly.

Think of these, Son:
The Person, nor the manner I dislike not
Of your Preserver, nor the whole Man together,
Were he but seasoned in the Faith we are,
Or our Devotions learned.

You say right, Father.

To change our worships now, and our Religion;
To be Traitor to our God.

You have well advised me,
And I will seriously consider, Father,
In the mean time you shall have your fair access
Unto my Sister, advise her to your purpose,
And let me still know how the Gods determine.

I will, but my main end is to advise
The Destruction of you all, a general Ruin,
And when I am revenged, let the Gods whistle.

MAke me unready,
I slept but ill last Night.

You'll sleep the better to Night I hope, Madam.

A little Rest contents me -- fetch my Book.

I'm glad of that.

I'll read awhile before I sleep.
And if Ruidias meet you, and be importunate,
He may come in.

I have better fare for you.
Now least in sight play I.

Ye Gods how happy is that Shepherdess,
Who through Love is to the Plains confined,
And ne'er aspires above the Shepherds Tribe;
Yet still she's free to take the Swain she Loves,
While Royal Virgins Hearts are public Pawns
To serve the needs of State; bartered and sold:
Nor can I only blame my Birth or Fortune;
Virtue and Honour have alike betrayed me.
The Kings restored, but I a Prisoner made.
By promise his Restorer's Sacrifice.
Oh Fortune! Fatal Virtue! Oh Ruidas!
Shield me ye Powers! What's here?
Sure 'tis the Phantasm of the Man I dread;
Formed by my Fears: Who are you; and whence come you?

You sure may know me:
I bring no such Amazement.

Who waits there? rude Intruder speak?
What means this Treachery? Who let you in?

My restless Love that serves you.

This is an Impudence unparalleled,
A rudeness that becomesa Thief or Ruffian.
Nor shall my Brother's Love protect this boldness;
My Rooms are Sanctuaries, and shall be approached
With Reverence equal to the Temples of
Our Gods.

Mine are not less.

I am Mistress of my self, and will not be
Thus Visited, spite of boasted Service.

Most Royal. --

Stand off, I see dishonour in your Eyes.

There's none.
By all that Beauty they are innocent;
'Pray' tremble not, you have no Cause.

So base a Violation of my Privacy?

If there be in you any Female pity,
And that your fears have not proclaimed me Monstrous,
Look on me and believe me; is this Violence?
The Griefs and Sorrows that grow here, Impudence?
Is it to fall thus prostrate to your Beauty,
A Ruffian's boldness? is Humility Rudeness?
Far be it from my Heart to fright your Quiet,
And heaviest Curse fall on me, when I intend it.

May I believe?

Had I been mischievous,
As then I must be Mad, or were a Monster,
If any such base Thoughts had harboured here,
Or Violence becoming not a Man,
You have a thousand Bulwarks to assure you,
The Holy Powers bear shields for Chastity.
If you misdoubt me still,
Or yet retain a fear I am not honest,
Or come with impure Thoughts to these blessed Mansions,
Take this and sheath it here; be your own safety:
Make hast to rid fears, and let me perish.
How willing shall I sleep to satisfy you!

What came you then for?

To complain, my Angel,
But Modestly.

Of What?

Your Cruelty.
For though I die I will not blame the Doer.
To instance what I have done to obtain you,
If any thing that Love Commands, may reach you,
To have remembered you -- but I'm unworthy,
And to that Misery falls all my Fortune,
That Oh I fear to claim what you have promised!
(So much more easy was the Task proposed,
Than to demand the Recompense) to have told you,
That as my Love is honest 'tis confirmed.
Beyond the Power even of your dread Commands,
To change or make it less; beyond your Scorn:
For though despairing I have sworn to Marry
You or your Memory -- 'Pray' be not Angry.

Then you would have me pass a fair Opinion
Of this untimely Entrance; that it meant
No Violation to my Peace or Honour,
And but the rash Effects of Love's Excess?

No more by Heaven.

And that you are hereafter
Devoted to my Service.

Life and Fortune.

I'll try then your Obedience.

I am ready,
Without demanding what.

Then from this hour expect no farther favour, nor once remember services you
have done, nor dangers past, nor the rewards due to them.


Is this my Doom, and is there no Redress?

But one,
Which you must wholly to my Favour owe;
For I must blush to tell your Cure -- I LOVE --
My Heart was all disposed before you claimed it;
Fancy had got the start of your Deserts,
Which yet I prize so high, that for your Ease,
I force my Modesty on this Confession,
To disengage your hopes: nor let the Man,
That has so highly served, depend
On Fruitless Air.

This is indeed Court Mercy,
To let the Suitor know his Doom betimes.
But, Madam, was. --

I've said and must enjoin you,
To quit this Place immediately.

I obey you.

Ha! Who is This?

Who art Thou?

A Gentleman.

Thou art no more I am sure. -- Oh'tis Ruidias,
And I perceive her favoured Lover.

Is there not Door enough,
You takesuch Elbow room?

What I take I'll carry.

Does this become you Princess?

Jealousalas of Me! How blind is Man.
Go, freely go, I give thee Leave.

Your Leave?

The Place and you are privileged; therefore go.

What a pure Soul inhabits in this Youth?
Courage and Temper; such transcending Worth,
As cannot fail to make Impress of Love
In heart not pre-engaged: My choice is past!

Am I then made your Property? Are these, Madam,
The Banquets that you bid me to? the trust
I build my goodly hopes on?

Be more Temperate;
Your Love stands yet upon my Courtesy;
I never gave you Promise, bare Permission,
To tell your Love was all i've yet allow'd,
And if you do abuse your Privilege --

Armusia here, and in the dead of Night?
May I not, Madam, take the leave to ask,
How he came hither; pressing, or invited?

You are too bold.

What, At these private Hours?

You are to rash to tax me with an Error.
Know what I am, and my Prerogative,
I never taught you too dispose my Freedom.
How durst you touch my Honour, blot my meaning,
And name an Action and of mine, but Noble!
Are those the Gratitudes you bring, Ruidias,
The Thanks, the Services? How have I graced thee?
And dost thou in return upbraid my Virtue?

I was to blame.

Armusia would not pass so rash a Censure,
And Justice tells me I should punish thee:
But 'twas a fault of Love -- Yet learn henceforth
Less Jealousy, nay I had almost said,
More Gallantry..

More Gallantry! She cannot doubt my Courage,
This Isle has found it -- But Armusia's Laurels
Bear fresher Date -- Yet still I hold her Heart,
And must with him dispute the point of Fame,
And when I have overcome him the Field,
His ruined Glories mine shall firmer Build.

MY Uncle haunts me up and down, looks Melancholy, wondrous proof-Melancholy,
sometimes Swears, then Whistles, Starts, Cries, Groans, as he had got the
Botts: I think he has little better. And would sain speak to me; bids me
Good-Morrow at Midnight, and Good-Night when it is Noon: Has something hovers
about his Brains, that's loath to out.

Still he follows me. How he looks still, and how he beats about like an old
Dog at a dead Scent -- I marry therewas a sigh to set a Ship a Sailing -- These
Winds of Love and Honour blow at all ends -- Now speak an't be thy will?
Good-Morrow Uncle.


Good Morrow, Sir.

This is a new Salute.
Sure he has forgot me: This Pur-blind Cupid.

My Nephew.

Yes, Sir, if I am not changed.

I would fain speak with you.

I would fain have you, Sir.

You know I love you:
Next to my self, you stand in all Employments,
Your Counsels, Cares, Assignments with me equal;
So is my study still to plant your Person,
O my Pymero!

Sir, What hangs upon you?
What heavy weight Oppresses you? You've lost
An opportunity to gain a Mistress,
Time will Cure that.

But Oh the Reputation!
To have another get the start in Glory,
What Time cures that?

Your Fame already has enough to live on;
It may be you fear her too, doubt your Mistress
May fall away, or be forced from you.

O she is true, but I undone for ever.
Oh that Armusia, that new thing, that Stranger,
That Flag stuck up to rob me of my Honour,
That Murdering Chain shot at me from my Country,
That goodly Plague, that I must Court to kill me!

Has he not done a brave Thing?

I confess it, Nephew, must allow it,
But that brave thing has undone me, has sunk me,
Has trod me like a Name in Sand, to nothing;
Hangs betwixt Hopes and me and threats my Ruin:
If he thus rise and blaze, farewell my Fortune.

In Complaisance t'ye Uncle, a Pox-on-him,
And Pox-a-me for saying so, he's brave,
And like enough to hold --

Then I must perish:
Had he set up at any rest but this,
Done any thing but what concerned my Fame,
The everlasting losing of my Worth --

Which yet you must retrive, I know your Drift.

My Sword is in my hand, my Cause upon it,
And Man to Man, one Valour to another,
My Hope to his.

Why, this is like Ruidias.

The difference of our State flung by, forgotten,
The full opinion, each was won in Service,
Laid handsomely aside, only our Fortunes,
Our single Manhoods.

I conceive you, Sir.

You guess what this means.

Yes, a Portion of Scripture, that has puzzled many an
Interpreter.

As soon as you can find him --

That won't be long, Uncle,
And o'my Conscience, he'll be ready as quickly.

Be sure you carryit so, that we may Fight.

Assure your self --

Pray hear me,
In some such place, where 'tmay be possible
The Princess may behold us.

I conceive you:
Upon the Sands behind the Castle, Sir;
A place remote enough, and there are Windows
Out of her Lodging too, or I'm mistaken.

You're in the right -- if you can work this handsomely.

Let me alone, I pray you be prepared
Some three hours hence.
If you have a few light Prayers that may befriend you --
Run 'em over quickly.

Farewell, Nephew, --
And when we meet again --

I shall dispatch, Sir, -- I have seen this Uncle
Curry a Fellows Carcase handsomely,
And in the Head of a Troop, stand as he had been
Rooted there, dealing large Doles of Death --
Success be with him -- What a Rascal was that, did
Not not see his Will drawn.

BLess you my royal Daughter,
And in you bless this Island, Heaven.

Panura,
What think thou of this Man?

Sure he's a wise man,
And a religious; he tells us things have happened
So many years ago almost forgotten,
As readily as if they were come this hour.

Does he not meet with your sharp Tongue?

He tells me, Madam,
Marriage and mouldy Cheese will make me tamer.

Lady, I would talk with you.

Do, reverend Sir.

And for your good, for that, that must concern you,
And give ear wisely to me.

I shall, Father.

You are a Princess of that excellence,
Sweetness and grace, that Angel-like fair feature:
Nay, do not blush, I do not flatter you,
Nor do I dote in telling this; I am amazed, Lady,
And as I think the Gods bestowed these on ye,
The Gods that love ye.

I confess their bounty.

Apply it then to their use, to their honour,
To them and to their service give this sweetness,
They have an instant great use of your goodness;
You are a Saint esteemed here for your beauty;
And many a longing heart --

I seek no fealty,
Nor will I blemish that Heaven hath sealed on me,
I know my worth. Indeed the Portuguese
I have at those commands, and their last Services;
Nay, even their lives; so much I think my Power,
That what I shall enjoin --

Use it disereetly,
For I perceive ye understand me rightly,
For here the Gods regard your help, and suddenly;
The Portuguese, like sharp thorns (mark me, Lady,)
Stick in our sides like Razors, wound Religion,
Draw deep, they wound till the life-blood follows,
Our Gods they spurn at, and their worships scorn,
A mighty hand they bear upon our Government,
These are the men your miracle must work on,
Your Heavenly form either to root them out,
Which as you may endeavour, will be easy,
Remember whose great cause you have to exceute,
To nip their memory, that may not spring more,
Or fairly bring 'em home to our Devotions,
Which will be blessed, and for which you Sainted,
But cannot be, and they go, let me buzzle.

Go up with me,
Where we'll converse more privately;
I'll show you shortly, how I hold their Temper,
And in what chain their Souls.

Keep fast that, hold still,
And either bring that chain, and those bound in it,
And link it to our Gods, and their fair Worships,
Or Daughter, pinch their hearts a pieces with it,
I'll wait upon your Grace.

Come, reverend Father,
Wait you below.

If this Prophet were a young thing,
I should suspect him now, he cleaves so close to her,
These holy Coats are long, and hide iniquities.

Away, away Fool; a poor wretch.

These poor ones,
Warm but their Stomach once --

Come in, thou art foolish.

I am sorry, Sir, my Fortune is so stubborn,
To court my Sword against my Country-man;
I love my Nation well, and where I find
A Portugal of noble Name and Virtue,
I am his humble Servant, Seignior Pymero,
Your person, nor your Uncle, am Iangry with,
You are both fair Gentlemen, in my opinion,
And I protest I had rather use my Sword
In your defences, than against your safeties;
'Tis methinks, a strange dearth of Enemies,
When we seek Foes amongst our selves.

You are injured,
And ye must make the best on it now, and readiest --

You see I am ready in the place, and Armed
To his desire that called me.

Ye speak worthily,
And I could wish ye had met on Terms more friendly,
But it cannot now be so.

Turn, Sir, and see.

I have kept my word with ye, Uncle,
The Gentleman's ready.

Ye are welcome.

Bid those Fools welcome that affect your courtesy,
I come not to use Complements, ye have wronged me,
And ye shall feel, proud man, here I part from ye,
The effects of that, if Fortune do not fool me,
Thy life is mine, and no hope shall redeem it.

That's a proud word,
More than your Faith can justify.

Sure they will fight.

She's there, I am happy.

Let 'em alone, let 'em kill one another,
These are the main posts, if they fall, the buildings
Will tumble quickly.

How temperate, Armusia?
No more, be quiet yet.

I am not bloody,
Nor do feel such mortal malice in me,
But since we cannot both enjoy the Princess,
I am resolved to fight.

Fight home, Armusia,
For if thou faint'st or fail --

Do you make all advantages?

All ways unto thy life, I will not spare thee,
Nor look not for thy mercy.

I am armed then.

Stand still I charge ye, Nephew, as ye honour me.

And good Emanuel -- not --.

Ye speak fitly,
For we had not stood idle else.

I am sorry for it.

But since you will have it so --

Come, Sir.

I wait ye.

I marry, this looks handsomely,
This is warm work.

Both fall, an't be thy will.

My Uncle dead?

Stand still, my Sword in --

Now brave Ruidias,
Now where's your Confidence, your Prayers? quickly,
Your own spite has condemned ye.

Hold! Armusta.

Most happy Lady.

Hold, and let him rise,
Spare him for me.

A long life may he enjoy, Lady.

What have you done? 'tis better they had all perished.

Peace, Father, I work for thebest; Armusia, meet me
In the Temple, an hour hence.

I shall, Madam.

Now as I live, a Gentleman, at all Inches,
So brave a mingled temper, saw I never.

Why are you sad, Sir? how would this have grieved ye,
If you had fallen under a professed Enemy?
Under one had taken vantage of your shame too?
Pray you be at peace, I am so far from wronging,
Or glorying in the pride of such Victory,
That I desire to serve you; 'pray' be cheerful.

Do ye hear this, Sir? Why do you hold your head down?
'Tis no High Treason, I take it to be equalled:
To have a Slip in the Field no mortal Sin.

It may be,
You think my Tongue may be your Enemy,
And though restrained sometimes out of a Bravery,
May take a privilege to dishonour you.
Believe me, Sir, so much I hate that freedom,
That in a strangers Mouth, 'twill prove an injury,
And I shall right you in it

Let me Curse Fortune yet --
Nephew, your Arm.

SIR, Sir, you must do something suddenly,
To stop his Pride, so great and high he shoots,
Upon his person too, your State sinks else.
You must not stand now on terms of Gratitude,
And let a simple tenderness besot you;
I'll bring you instantly, where you shall see him,
Attempting your fair Sister privately:
Mark but his high behaviour then.

I will, Father.

And with what scorn, I fear contempt too,
Against our Deities.

I hope not.

I say, attempting to Corrupt her Soul,
The worst Debauchery -- I will not name Lust;
It may be that also.
A little force must be applied upon him,
Now, now, apply a little force to humble him;
These kind Caresses do but make him wanton.

Take heed you wrong him not.

Take you heed to your safety,
The freedom of your People; to the Gods:
I but forewarn you, King; if you misdoubt me,
Or think I come unsent --

No, I'll go with you.

MAdam, you see there's nothing I can reach,
Either in my obedience, or my Service,
That can deserve your Love, but I pursue it;
Take pleasure in your will; even in your Anger,
I study new Humility to please you;
And take a kind of Joy in my Afflictions,
Because they come from you.

I know you have deserved,
And know that in the Rigour of strict Justice,
I should endeavour to requite your Service,
I know you Love.

If ever Love was mortal,
And dwelt in Man, so fixed I find it here,
Respect of such a greatness as allows
What I have done already, weak performance,
And unproportion'd to the vast Reward.
It is but just, that who aspires to Heaven,
Should win it by his worth, and not Sleep to it.

Now, Sir, stand close, to hear, and as you find him,
Believe me right or let Religion suffer.

I dare believe your worth, without additions:
You had my Summons to attend me here,
On some Commands of weight

I am prepared:
But point to me the Course, you'd have me Steer,
And if I shrink --

I know you are no Coward;
Then take the outmost Trial of your Duty;
You hold there's nothing dear that may oblige me,
Doubted or dangerous.

Nothing, Madam.
Let me but know, that I may fly into it.

I'll tell you then -- Change your Religion,
And be of one Belief with me.

How!

Mark me,
Worship our Gods, renounce the Faith you were bred in.

Ha! I'll die first.

Offer as we do.

To the Devil?

O Blasphemy!

Peace.

Offer to him, I hate!
Offer to Dogs and Cats! To them you offer,
To every Bird that flies, to every Worm:
Is this the Trial?

I will reason with you;
Are not our Powers eternal, and their Comforts
As great and full of Hopes, as yours?

They are Shadows.

Now mark him, Sir, observe him nearly.

Their comforts, like themselves, mere Fictions:
You make 'em Sick, as we are, Peevish, Mad,
Subject to Age, and how can they cure us,
That are not able to refine themselves?

The Sun and Moon we Worship; they are Heavenly.

But I the maker of that Sun and Moon,
That gave those Bodies light, and influence,
That pointed out their Paths, and taught their motions:
Excuse me, Princess, if my Zeal for Truth
Extort a generous Freedom of my Tongue;
What here restraints my private Griefs have born,
Yet for Heavens cause I must proclaim aloud.
Take privilege even to oppose your Will,
And call for Justice to the Eternal due:
I hoped you would have said, make me a Christian;
Work that great Cure, for 'tis a great one, Princess.
To mortify the Sense, subdue the Will,
Refining Earth to Immortality.
I hoped your Royal Brother, in return
Of Providence, that by my Arm retrieved him,
Would have e're this, before the face of Heaven,
Destroyed those Idol Gods you here adore,
Beat down their Altars, ruined these false Temples.

Now Sir. --

I'll hear no more --

Thus far in Charity I was obliged
To rectify the Errors of your thought,
Nor can the blame be mine to want success,
'Twas by these Pow'ers that I was sworn to wed
The Kings deliverer; these you blaspheme,
Them and their Power you frankly have renounced,
And thereby free me from all Obligation.

You are too just to make this slight Evasion,
And with Religious subtlety destroy.

You shall both find me just, sincere and plain,
Therefore resolve to quit your Faith or me.

My Life and Love forever must be yours,
Butmy Religion Heavens.

You heard you Task.

Name any Task but that; extremest danger,
And certain Death, to gratify your will;
I dare do any thing but injure Heaven,
And stab th'Almighty's Image in my Soul.
Can I renounce the Power, the whole Creation,
Which every Plant and Element confess,
That gave this very Breath, with which I plead?
Shall I abjure the Author of that Form?
A Temple fit for Angels to inhabit,
When once the mist of Error is withdrawn.

Acknowledge our Belief, and instantly;
For if you let this happy minute pass,
No Recantation shall prevail hereafter.

Call you this Charity?

Nay then. --

You must not go.
What have I done to Merit this hard Sentence?
To have my very Soul rack't, forced to quit
My Heaven above, or Paradise on Earth?
How well I Love, how much I do prefer
Your Charms to all that's good beneath the Stars,
Truth must declare; but to th'Eternal Being
Can never be Apostate -- Heart or Soul
Must perish on this Sea --; Then sink my Heart,
To save th'Immortal Treasure, thus I quit
Your Love's rich claim, tho while I so resign
No Martyrdom sure ever equalled mine.

Noble Armusia, I am now confirmed,
In quiting you have gained me: I resolved
To make the outmost Trial of your Faith,
And in your Faith of you: I know your Doctrine
Is heavenly all, and you have proved the practice.
While her you Love you could for Heaven resign,
The Faith that rules your breast must be Divine,
That Faith and you for ever now are mine.

Is't possible! O unexpected bliss!
Look down ye sacred Quires and share my Joy.

Nay, start not, take my confirmation too,
You had my Promise, Sir, of Recompense,
For your high Service: 'Twas my free consent,
T o let Quisara's hand in Nuptial tie,
Be joined with yours: This Sir was my engagement;
Which in the presence of this holy Man
I ratify.

The Devil!
What can this mean?

But as the holy Powers that here reside,
Have seen me just to your deserts and you;
To their own Altars they must see me just,
And to those Laws, with which no claim of Friendship
Or Interest can dispense --. Guards seize your Prisoner.

That's well retrieved; be sure ye bind him fast.

Bind your Restorer, Prince?

Are these the Nuptials
You promised my free Service?

'Tis an Office,
That only can become a Tyrant Fiend,
Such as Ternusa's Governor.

That's right.

Such vile returns as these, must stagger Nature;
And banish Virtue from the World.

O Sister!
Heavens knows what sense of gratitude I bear,
And to his Friendship how sublime regard:
Had he offended me I had forgiven,
Though to th'attempting of my Life and Crown:
I own them both his gift, but to our Gods,
Our sacred Powers the injury is done,
Basphemed, Reviled.

And think you they will bear it?
I see ripe Vengeance teeming from the Heavens,
If you dispense with this, on you and me,
And all Tedore, whose Marble ribs shall rend
And sink beneath the Main: Spare us kind Powers,
Forgive our impious Clemency, that yet
The proud Blaspemer lives.

Most holy Father,
Urge not the Vengeance ofthe Gods too far:
Must he needs Dye?

'Tis next to Blasphemy
To make a doubt on it.

True! our most dear affections
Must yield to sacred Laws.

Use all your Violence,
I ask no Mercy nor recant my Words.

His Virtue serves a Power will give him strength
To scorn your Idol-Gods.

How's this, Quisara!

Know King that if your Laws require his Blood,
They challenge mine; our Love and Faith are One.

Quisara too! O Sister wound not thus
My tortured Heart? Good Father, your assistance.
What means this frenzy?

These are tokens, Sir,
The Gods displeasure is gone out; be quick,
And ever it fall, do something to appease them.

Quisara own his Faith! What must be done,

They must die both, in Sacrifi^e, and instantly;
To those dread Powers they have blasphemed:
It makes me weep to urge their Punishment.

Most Gracious and Compassionate Soul.

Yet if you mitigate or defer their doom,
I then must Curse you from the Gods;
Call up their Vengeance from the flaming Lake,
And hurl it on your Land; I have charge for it!

Bear them to Justice, for I dare not trust
My Nature with the Parley: Your hand Father.
Our Gods exact their Blood and they must Die;
Yet shall their Obsequies this comfort have,
Their Judge shall be their Mourner -- O support me.

My Heart aches too.

Such cruel Piety
Was never known. Princess, I have betrayedyou,
But to eternal rest.

Our Souls shall meet,
And celebrate in Paradise their Nuptials.

Seraphic Maid? Thy Name shall stand recorded
With Virgin-Saints, the first in Vertue's Roll,
Through many years experience they arrived.
Consummate Piety, with matchless speed,
You take you Progress on the sacred way,
A Convert and a Martyr in a Day.

I Am ungrateful, and a wretch, (persuade me not)
Forgetful of the mercy he showed me,
The timely noble Pity. Why should I,
Why should I make him die, who set me free?
Why should it come from me? Why, I command it?
Will not all Tongues, and Truths call me ungrateful?

Had the offencebeen aimed at you, 'tis certain
It had been in you power, and your discretion,
To have turned it into Mercy, and forgiven it;
It then had showed a virtuous point of Gratitude.
Timely and nobly paid; But since the Cause
Concerns the Honour of the Gods, their Title,
'Tis in their Wills, their Mercies, or Revenges:
And these Revolts in you show plain Rebellion.

They are mild and pitiful.

To those Repent.

Their Natures soft, and tender.

To true Hearts,
That feel compunction for their Trespasses:
This pair defies 'em still, threaten destruction
And demolition to their Arms and Worship;
Therefore take heed, Sir, that you be not found,
And marked a favourer of their Dishonour:
They use no common Justice.

You say right.
But see; behold the Pomp of Death comes on!
What shall I do to merit of this Man.
I'll once more try if I can fairly win 'em.

Once more, Armusia,
Because I love you tenderly and dearly,
And would be glad to win you mine; I wish you,
Even from my heart, I wish and woo you --

What, Sir?
Take heed how you persuade me falsely, then you hate me;
Take heed how you entrap me.

I advise you,
And tenderly and truly I advise you,
Both for your Souls health and your safety.

Stay,
And name my Soul no more; she is too precious,
Too glorious for your flatteries; too secure too.

Consider the reward, Sir, and the honour
That is prepared, the Glory you shall grow to.

They are not to be considered in these Cases,
Not to be named when Souls are questioned;
They are vain and flying Vapours: Touch my Life,
'Tis ready for you, put it to what Test
It shall please you, I am patient; but for the rest --

We must use Tortures then.

Your worst, and painfull'st
I am joyful to accept.

You must our sharpest;
For such has been your hate against our Deities,
Delivered openly; your threats, and scornings;
And either your Repentance must be mighty,
Which is your free Conversion to our Customs,
Or equal punishment, which is your life, Sir.

I am glad I have it for you; take it, Priest,
And all the Misery that shall attend it:
Let the Gods glut themselves with Christian Blood,
It will be asked again, and so far follow'd,
So far revenged, and with such holy Justice,
Your Gods of Gold shall melt and sink before it;
Your Altars and your Temples shake to nothing,
And you, false Worshippers, blind Fools of Ceremonies,
Shall seek for Holes to hide your heads and fears in;
For Seas to swallow you from this Destruction;
Darkness to dwell about you and conceal you.

Make the Fires ready,
And bring the several Tortures out.

Stand fast, Sir,
And fear'em not; you that have stepped so nobly
Into this pious Trial, start not now:
Keep on your way, a Virgin will assist you,
A Virgin, won by your fair constancy,
And glorying that she is won, so will die with you.

Let me begin my Triumph;
Come, clap your Terrors on.

All your fell Tortures;
For there is nothing he shall suffer, Brother,
I swear by my new Faith, which is most sacred,
And I will keep it so, but I will follow in,
And follow to a scruple of affliction.
In spite of all your Gods, without prevention.

S'Death, she amazes me!

What shall be done now?

They must die both,
And suddenly, they will corrupt all else.
Go you in, Sir, I'll see the Execution.

'Tis cruel;
You injured Powers, that I permit you justice;
But for the sight --

You are excused for that,
I'll bear that Torture for you; good Sir, in;
You see all's ready, Sir, and we must strike
Before your Eyes else.

Well, what must be

Arms, Arms, Sir;
Seek for defence, the Castle Plays, and Thunders,
Our Town Rocks, and our Houses fly in Air,
The people die for fear; General Ruidias
Has sent t'inform us, he'll not leave a Stone,
No, not the memory there has stood a City,
Unless Armusia be delivered fairly.

Father, what can our Gods do for us now?

Ruidias do this! what, to free Armusia,
His Rival? 'tis impossible.

This was his Summons,
Which still you hear him Thunder from the Fort.

Would I were safe at home again.
Come, Sir,
Leave me to see the Execution done,
While you return and fortify the Palace:
Nothing but mischief, till th'incensed Powers
Are satisfied with these Blasphemers Blood;
Earthquakes and Hurricanes will seize us next:
Dispatch, dispatch there.

By Heaven I'll rule in this: they shall not die,
Till I have seen this furious Storm allayed,
Bear back the Prisoners to the Palace, Guards;
All to your charge, how desperately they Thunder!

Brave Ruidias, this is like a Soldier,
A Portuguese and Christian, to do favours
Without the form of promise.

'Tis but a debt of Honour nobly paid.

Plague on your bellowing.

Blessus, what a Thundering is here! What Fire-spitting! We can't drink but the
Cans are mauled out of our hands.


I would they would maul our scores too. A shame of their Guns, how devilishy
they bounce! and how the Bullets borrow the side of a House here, and there
another, and mend those up again with another Ward!


I had the roof of my House taken off with a Chainshot, and half an hour after,
I found another standing in the room on it.


We shall make a wonderful Siege on it, if we talk at this rate.


You think he lyesnow: why, I have seen a Steeple taken off, and another clapped
i'th-place, with twenty Men ringing the Bells in it.


Thou Boy!


Why then, we shall not know our own Streets again.


Nor where to pay our Duties. I hope I should love Chain-shot the better as
long as I live, for that good turn, i'Faith: I know not, it may fall out so;
for these Guns make strange work. Here flies a Powdering tub; and there the
Soldiers go together by the Ears, for the Meat in it: There flies the
Roast-meat, spit and all: here a Barrel pisses Vinegar.


A Vengeance fire 'em all.


They fire fast enough; they need no help.


Are these the Portugal Bulls? How loud they Bellow?


Their Horns are wonderful strong, they push down Palaces; they toss our little
habitations like Whelps, like Trundle-tails, with their Hells upwards: All the
Windows in the Town dance Trenchmore; 'Tis like to prove a blessed Age for
Glasiers; I met a Hand and a Hand and a Letter in it, in great hast; and by and
by, a Leg running after it, as if the hand had forgot part of its errand.


Heads fly like Foot-balls every where: What shall we do?


I care not, my Shop's cancelled, and all the Pots and Pipkins vanished; there
was a single Bullet and they, together by the Ears, you would have thought Tom
Tumbler, and all his Troop of Devils had been there.


Well, for my part, I'll to the Templeand pray for you all: I tell you
Neighbours, I trouble Heaven so seldom, that sure I may be heard, when I come.
For I begin to like this Portuguese Kerson Religion: What can these Worm-eaten
Gods of ours do for us?


Worm-eaten Gods! I tell you, Neighbour, you do our Gods wrong, and me wrong: I
made 'em of the best seasoned Timber the Island would afford.


But do the Cannon Bullets think there is no Law?


No, nor Gospel neither; Law, prithee run to a Granado, when it comes piping
hot out of a Mortar-piece into the Town, and tell it there's Law; 'twill
seratch they face for thee, worse than ever thy Wife did. Law! I do but think,
what Lanes a Chain-shot would make in the Law! And how like an Ass a Judge
would sit upon the Bench, with his head shot off.


Let's to the King, and get this Gentleman delivered handsomely, by this hand
there's no walking above ground else.


By this Leg, (let me swear nimbly by it, for I know not how long) if I were
out o'th'Town, if I came in again to fetch my Breakfast, I'd give 'em leave to
cram me with a Portugal Pudding. But come Neighbours, our best way will be to
go to the Insurance-Office and compound: I am a Fencer; I'll give 'em one Arm,
to secure the other. Thou art a Dancing-Master; thou shalt give thy Head to
secure thy Heels.


Why my Head?


Because that's of least use to thee, of any thing about thee: So every Man
shall give aw^y the rest of his Body, to Insure the Limbs that are of most use
in his calling.


Art' sure it was the blind Priest?

Yes, most certain,
He has provoked all this: The King is merciful,
And wondrous loving, but he fires him on still,
And when he cools enrages him; I know it:
Threatens new Vengeance, and the Gods fierce Justice,
When he but looks with fair Eyes on Armufia;
Will lend him no time to relent; my Royal Mistress,
She has entertained a Christian hope.

Speak truly.

Nay 'tis most true; but Lord, how he lies at her,
And threatens her, and flatters her, and damns her;
And I fear, if not speedily prevented;
If she continues stout, both shall be executed.

I'll kiss thee for this News: Nay, poor Panura,
If thou wilt give me leave, I'll get thee with Christian;
The best way to convert thee.

Make me believe so.

I will I'faith: But which way came thou hither?
The Palace is close guarded and barricaded.

I camethrough a private Vault, which few there know of,
It rises in a Temple not far hence,
Close by the Castle here.

How -- To what end?

A good one,
To give you knowledge of my new born Mistress,
And in what doubt Armusia stands:
Think any present means, or hope, to stop 'em
From their fell ends. The Princes are come in too,
And they are hard'ned also.

The damned Priest. --

Sure he's a cruel Man? Methinks Religion
Should teach more temperate Lessons.

He, the Firebrand!
He dare to touch at such fair Lives as theirs are!
Well, Prophet, I Prophecy I shall catch you,
When all your Prophesies will not redeem you:
Wilt thou do one thing bravely?

Any good I am able.

And by thy own white hand, swear thou art Virtuous,
And a brave Wench, durst thou but guide me presently
Through the same Vault thou came into the Palace,
And those I shall appoint, such as I shall think fit.

Yes, I will do it, and suddenly and truly.

I would fain behold this Prophet.

Now I have you.
And I shall bring you where you shall behold him,
Alone too, and unfurnished of Defences:
That shall be my Care; but you must not betray me.

Dost think we are so base? Such slavish Rogues?

I do not,
And you shall see how fairly I'll work for you.

I must needs steal that Priest,
Steal him, and hang him.

Do any thing to remove his Mischiefs, strangle him.

Come, Prithee.

You'll offer me no foul Play.
The Vault is dark.

'Twas well remembered.

And you may --.
But I hold you honest.

Honest enough, I'll warrant thee.

I am but a poor weak Wench; and what with the Place,
And your Persuasion Sir, -- But I hope you will not.
You know we are often Cozened.

If thou dost fear me,
Why dost thou put me in mind?

To let you know, Sir,
Though it be in your Power, and things sitting to it,
Yet a true Gentleman --

I know what he'll do?
Come, and remember me, and I'll answer thee;
I'll answer to the full: we'll call at the Castle,
And then, my good guide, do thy Will, 'shalt find me
A very tractable Man.

I hope I shall, Sir.

Let my Men guard the Gates.

And mine the Temple,
For fear the honour of our Gods should suffer;
And on your lives be watchful.

And be Valiant,
And lets see if these Portuguese dare enter,
What their high hearts dare do; let's see how readily
The great Ruidias will redeem his Countryman:
He speaks proud Words and Threatens.

He is approved, Sir,
And will put fair for what he promises:
I could wish friendlier Terms;
Yet for our Liberties, and for our Gods,
We are bound in our best Services,
Even in the hazard of our Lives.

Come up, Princes,
And give your Counsels, and your helps; the Fort still
Plays fearfully upon us, beats our buildings,
And turns our People wild with fears.

Send for the Prisoner, and give us leave to argue.

Come on nobly,
And let the Fort Play still: we are strong enough
To look upon 'em, and return at pleasure;
It may be on our view they will return him.

How the People stare!
And some cry, some pray, and some curse heartily;
But it is the King -- --
I cannot blame their Wisdom.
They are all above, Armusia chained and bound too!
O, these are thankful Squires.

Hear Ruidias:
Command thy Cannon instantly to cease,
No more to trouble the afficted People,
Or suddenly Armusia's head goes off,
As suddenly as said:
Stay and be Temperate.

Do nothing that's dishonourable, brave Ruidias;
Let not the care of me restrain your Valour;
Pursue 'em still, they are base malicious People.

Be not thus desperate.

I scorn your courtesies,
Strike when you dare, a fair aim guide the Gunner,
And may he still let fly with Fortune. Friend,
Do me the honour of a Soldiers Funeral,
The last fair Christian Rites, see me i'th'ground;
Then make these Idol Temples burn,
On their scorned Gods erect my Monument;
Touch not the Princess, as you are a Soldier.

Your fate, Sir, must be mine; one Life, one Death.

Be wise, and beg for Truce yet.

Let our Cannon Answer.

So resolute! Draw all our Forces out,
And make the General Assault.

No, no, go on;
Look here's your God and Prophet.

Heaven, I'm amazed! How came he taken?

I conjured for him, King;
I'm a sure Cur at an old blind Prophet,
I'll hunt you such a false Knave admirably,
A Terrier I; I Earth'd him, and then Snapped him.

By your good favour, Sir, we stole him,
Even from the next Chamber to you.

I am amazed at these men's courage, Guards,
Rescue our Prophet first, then storm the Fort.

Come, come, begin, King,
Begin this bloody contest, when you please,
Your Minion first shall go to the Dogs:
And yet I soorn my Sword should touch the Rascal.
We'll tear him piece-meal thus before you -- Ha!

How's this?
Art thou a Prophet? What a dangerous Mist
Have I been wrapped in! Noble Ruidias,
Our strife is at an end; I was abused,
My dear Armusia, O my injured Sister,
What shall I urge in my defence? Ruidias,
Descend in peace, and meet me, on a Kings word.

This isa precious Prophet! Why, Don Govenour,
What makes you here? how long have you taken Orders?

I can't speak for wonder.

I had paid you all,
But Fortune plaid the Jade.

Generous Souls!
Y'have half persuaded me to be a Christian.
Once more, Armusia, let me do you justice.

Which I, Sir, needs must own, though once your Rival.

Brave Ruidias,
You have in Honour started now beyond me,
'Twas my Ambition but to quit the score.

And Fortune made me blessed with the occasion.

To Prison with that wretch, there let him howl^
And, if he can repent, sigh out his Villainies:
His Island we shall seize into our Hands,
His Father and himself have both usurped it,
And kept it by Oppression; the Town and Castle
(In which I lay my self most miserably,
Till my most honourable Friend redeemed me)
Signior Pymero, I bestow on you;
The rest of next Command upon these Gentlemen,
And on you all, my Love.

I am o'er-prest with Fortune, past my Merit.

Our Court and Island, Sir, shall share your Joy;
Our interests are one; let Mirth and Triumph,
And Universal gladness freely flow.
What ever false and subtle men dare cast,
Just Heaven on Virtue showers rewards at last.

THAT famous Powder, called Arcanum Magnum, formerly prepared by the Learned
Riverius Physician Regent to the French King, and approved by most Persons of
Quality in Christendom, for preserving and beautifying the Face, even to old
Age; it Cures Red Faces, it takes away all Heat, Pimples, Sun-burn, and
Morphew; it prevents, and takes away Superfluous Hair, growing on the Face; in
short, it adds more Lustre and Beauty, than any Powder or Wash known, as many
Persons of Quality can testify, who daily use it, with the greatest
approbation: it is prepared only by I. H. Doctor in Phyfick in Great
Knight-Rider-Street, nigh Doctors-Commons Gate, A blew Ball being over the
Door, where it may be had for 23. 6. d. the Paper with Diractions for the use.

LA Montre: or the Lavers-watch, a Paraphrase from the French, likewise the
last new Comedy, called the Lucky Chance, or ^n Aldermans Bargain, both written
by Mrs. A. Behn, Sold by W. ^anning, at his Shop in the Temple-Cloysters.


