THE Barges belonging to the several 12. Companies, are with the Morning-tide
carried up the River from White hall to Chelsey, beginning with the Mercers,
Grocers, c. and ending with the inferior Companies, who are placed at Chelsey;
most of the Barges are attended with a Pageant, some more richly set out then
the rest, but none remiss in showing something of Affection and Loyalty.

The Pageants are placed at the head of every Barge. That which attends the
MERCERS is thus set forth. Under a Canopy of State is seated a Virgin, on her
head a Silver Coronet. Her Garment of Violet coloured Satin, over which is a
large cloth of Silver Mantle.

Her Attendants are three Maids of Honour, and six Pages. Her Maids of Honour
are habited in Cloth of Silver, their Heads neatly Ornamented.

Her Pages are habited in Cloth of Silver Doublets, and Velvet Breeches, in
their Hats Plumes of Feathers, and in their Hands several Ban^ers and
Escutcheons.

They are placed three of each side the Pageant.

The DRAPERS Pageant is thus set forth. Under a Canopy of State is represented
a Grave Roman Magistrate, habited in a long Robe, on his head a Helmet, in his
right hand he holds a Sceptre, in his left a Triple Crown, a Sword girt to him.
His Attendants are four, Loyalty, Truth, Fame, and Honour. Loyalty and Truth
are placed in the Front, at the two Corners; Fame and Honour at the two Rear
Corners.

Loyalty is habited like a Grave Citizen, plain and decent; in one hand he
holds a Banner of the Arms of England and Portugall impaled, in the other hand
a Sword, signifying his resolution to defend their Right.

Truth is habited in white, on her head a wreath of Stars; in one hand she
bears a Banner of the Companies Arms, in the other a little Book.

Fame is represented in a long loose light Robe, his head circled with a wreath
of intermixed Colours; in one hand he holds a Trumpet, in the other a wreath of
Laurel, as intended for Loyalty.

Honour is habited in Cloth of Gold, on his head a Hat and Plume of Feathers;
in one hand he holds a Shield, in which is figured a Portuges with a Sword
drawn, holding it over some India^s there, figured kneeling; in the other he
bears an Escutcheon, with the Arms of E^gland and Portugall impaled.

The MERCHANT TAILORS Pageant is thus set forth. The Stage (being 12. foot
long, and 7. foot broad) is Arched with a wild Arbour, made in manner of a
Wilderness.

The two Camels (supporters of the Companies Arms) are backed with two Indians,
bearing in one hand an Escutcheon of the Arms of England and Portugall impaled.
In the other hand they hold Darts downwards, betokening subjection, Their Motto
LUSITANIAE ORIENS ET MERIDIES*

There are two Moors, that attend the Camels, as their guiders.

In the Wilderness is seated an Aged Man, representing a Pilgrim, and habited
accordingly. In one hand he holds a Staff, in the other a Banner, bea^ing the
Figure of a Golden Lamb, with this Motto, INTER NOCENTES INNOCENS.

This alludes to St. Iohn, the Patron of their Company: for his Attendants he
hath Faith, Hope, and Charity, who ar^ placed before.

Faith is presented in a flaming coloured Silk Robe, her head Circled with a
Wreath of sprightly colours dilated from the Sun. In one hand she holds a
Shield, on which is Figured a Young Man, endeavouring to f^thom the Sea with a
Staff, with this Motto, NIL PROFUNDIUS.

In the other hand she holds a Shield, whereon is Figured a Cross, with this
Motto, NIL SALUBRIUS.

Hope is presented in a sad Russet Garment close girt. On her head she wears a
Wreath of Linen shadowed with the Sun-Beams. In one hand she bears a Banner,
on which is Figured an Anchor, with this Motto, SUPERABO.

In the other hand she bears a Banner with the Companies Arms.

Charity is habit^d in a carel^sse Robe of White Silk, and a Green mantle, On
her head a Coronet of Stars; In one hand she holds a Banner, on which is
Figured an Arm out of a Cloud reaching to an Almsbasket to relieve a poor
person* with this Motto, CONSUMMAVI.

In the other hand she bears a Banner of the Companies Arms.

The Illustrious Iames Duke of York, that never-to-be-forgotten Prince the Duke
of Gloucester, the Right Honourable the Duke of Buckingham, Duke of Ormond, the
Earl of Manchester, being all free of this Company.

The GOLDSMITHS Pageant is thus set out. Under a Canopy of State sits Justice,
her hair dishevelled. She wears on her head a golden Crown, her Garment Gold
colour, girt with a girdle of Gold, in one hand she holds a Balance, in the
other a Touch-stone. At her feet is placed two Virgins, their Hair dishevelled,
their Heads are encompassed with Wreaths of Flowers of several Colours, as the
Blew, Red, and Yellow, their habits answerable. In one hand they hold a golden
Hammer, in the other a golden Cup.

It would be too tedious to insert here the bravery of the rest of the
Pageants, and being streigthned in point of time, I shall omit it.

The Barges are anchored some 40. or 50. yards distant in the middle of the
River, behind them is left an open passage for Boats to pass, this side of the
River is kept clear for their Majesties, and their Train.

Between 8. and 9. of the Clock, the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder. men, move
towards Chelsey, where they attend their Majesties coming from Putney, and
then the Lord Mayor leads the way down the River before their Majesties.

The Grand Pageants appointed for this day are placed thus: The First at
Chelsey; The second between Fox-hall and Lambeth; The third at the private
Stairs at Whitehall

Those thr^e entertain their Majesties with Speeches, in their motion to
Whitehall.

There are two Drolls, one of Watermen the other of Seamen, continually
employed in dancing and singing.

The Droll of Watermen is placed between Chelsey and Fox-hall.

That of Seamen between Lambeth and Whitehall, cross the Thames, where there is
several tricks of Activity performed, both on the Stage and the Rope.

And the Seamen throw themselves into several Antic postures and dances.

So much for the Preludium: Now to the Entertainment it self*

IN the front whereof is seated ISIS; her hair of a light brown colour,
somewhat Contorted, her head adorned with an Anadem, or Crown of all manner of
Flowers belonging and relating to Gardens, as the Red, White and Damask Roses,
Pinks, July flowers, Violets, c. Her Garment of white Silk, intermixed with a
pale green. In her right hand she bears a Sceptre (made up like a Cornu-copia)
out of which all sorts of Flowers seem to sprout. In her left hand she holds a
Wa^ing pot, to denote her the Lady of the Western Meadows, and Wife to THAM.
At her feet are placed several inferior Water Nymphs, belonging to small
Rivulets, who are Contributaries to her, their habits answerable to hers.

This View is presented to their MAjESTYES at Chelsey, in the head of the Lord
Mayors and Companies Barges; And upon the motion of their Majesties Barge, ISIS
directs her self to Them in this Speech.

DIvinest pair! whose equal Virtues claim
Affinity with Heaven, adds life to Fame.
You! whose conjunctive sweetness does complete
What ever can be thought of Good, or Great,
Proud with your Barges weight, Isis (to meet
Your unmatched loves) kisses your Sacred Feet;
The Turtles now may learn of You to Woo,
And find a fellowship they never knew.
The Poets in their Fictions never dreamt
Of such a Bliss as in your meeting's meant:
Nor did the Romantic writers ever tell
An Amorous Story (what you Act) so well.
If Dangers, overcome, sweeten Joys most,
Where rests Comparison? How is Fancy lost?
Though the Enamoured Boy to a Sestos swome,
Our chaster Hero to Leander's come,
And Loves blessed Taper burning still, in spite
Of raging Tempests, or the Envious Night.
Thus unexampled (Sir) remain, and prove
There can be no Example to your Love.
From Oxford Truant-like with Joy I've run
To do you Lackey-service, and 'tis done.
Tham now receives you with expanded Arms,
Made happy by your Presence, and the Charms
Of Epecedian whose soft breath
Sing their own Requiems, and Consort in death.
Though Hampton mourn, Whitehall with joys abound,
And Eccho-like, the City takes the sound:
c Vertumnus that doth circulate the year,
Ushered you there, as now he waits you here;
So that we see it is an easy thing
(Such is your Presence) to Create a Spring
Where ere you come. d Hymns now clothes the West
In Russian frieze, while the glad Cities dressed
In her full pride, out-vying Summers Queen,
And Plenty in each house with freedom seen;
Nor do We at their happiness repine,
'Twill come about again, on Us you'll shine,
Let them enjoy their fullness of You here,
So We may hope. Your Splendour the next year.
Not to inform the knowing person, but to help such as are unacquainted with
Poetical Authors and History, I set down the Explanations following.

a Leander was a famous Youth that dwelt in Abydus, a place situate upon the
opposite shore of Sestos, the place where Hero lived, a Beautiful Maid; To her
Leander swimming by night over Hellespont (a part of the Sea in Asia) a storm
arose and drowned him. By Leander we may see the violent passion and servency
of Love, that neither water could quench, nor the roaring of the waves
terrify: As Virgil (the best of Poets) in his Georgics l. 3. takes occasion
to mention.

The b Swans are said to sing a little before they die, which is called an
Epecedean, or Funeral Song.

By c Vertumnus is meant the Year, returning into it self from the middle or
end of September, to September again; Every month he assumes a new shape,
wherefore he is by some thought to be Proteus, by reason of his often changes,
which is said he did to Court Pomona the Goddess of Fruits: In the Spring he
appears more Lovely then in any other season of the Year, and therefore he had
usually offered (and is still attributed) to him the first Flowers of the
Gardens; He is the aptest for his beloved Pomona in September and October, the
return of his course, for then she likes him best.

d Hymns is the Father of Frosts, and nipping cold, the sharpest part of
Winter, it alludes to decreppid Age, and is painted like an Old man with
Crutches.

Isis having ended her Speech, their MAjESTIES Train pass by another view or
Pageant, in the nature of a Droll of Watermen, placed not far distance from
that of Isis; in their passage the Watermen, who are continually in action,
consort into this Song, being set for three parts.

LEt sadness sly Boys, fly;
The King and Queen draw nigh,
And their Loyal train
Po're in amain,
Like Hailstones from the Sky,
The Town to fill,
And fears to kill
The Tradesmen had of breaking,
Who scarce a penny
Would spare to any.
They were so poor and sneaking;
But now
Speed the Plow,
All will be
Employed, and free,
From the Mercer to the Draper,
All sorts and all sizes
Of Trades and Devises,
Will make us sing and caper.
The River shall no more
Catch cold, and be bound over,
Wee'le keep her in heat,
Use does the feat,
Though Winter fume and roar;
The Prentice he
Of each Degree,
To Lambeth, or to Fox-hall,
With their Lasses, cry
What Oars will you ply?
Where are you with a Pox all?
See then
You be men,
And stand to it;
Set a hand to it,
That our Stretchers may be working;
For if you intend Boy,
A Penny to spend Boy,
You must get it with Yerking.
A Lazy life is base,
True labour we embrace;
'Tis the best Physic
To cure the Tissick,
Ill humours purge apace;
Our sweats, and pains,
Brings health, and gains,
Which makes us bouncing merry,
We ne'er are o'rejoy'd,
Till we are employed
In Scullar, Oars, or Wherry:
Then Sing,
Bless the KING,
And the QUEEN,
And all here seen,
That our Masters are, and feed us
With Meat and Wine stored
When they are once shored,
And for Spring Garden need us.
The Song ended, and upon theit MAjESTIES drawing near, one of the Watermen
boldly steps forward, and expresses himself to their MAjESTIES in these words.

HAul in, haul in for the honour of your calling, and be hanged, do you know
your Fellows no better? I have something to say for the good of ye all: God
Bless Thee King CHARLES, and Thy Good Woman there, a Blessed Creature she is I
warrant Thee, and a True: Go thy ways for a wagg, Thou hast had a merry time
on it in the West, I need say no more, a word to the Wise, Thou understandst me,
much good may it do Thee, fall to and welcome, the Devil take the Grudger; But
dost hear me, don't take it in dudgeon that I am so familiar with Thee, Thou
may rather take it kindly, for I am not always in this good humour; though I
Thee Thee, and Thou Thee, I am no Quaker, take notice of that; he that does not
love Thee in his heart, may he be drawn in a Cart: God Bless me, that Rime has
put me in mind of the Old Poet my Brother Waterman, have at ye in faith, if I
have any Guts in my Brains, I'll give you a dish of Poetry to stay Your Stomach
till You get further, a Distich or two does it. We in our Hearts do foster no
Deceit,
They and our Tongues simplicity do meet,
As Sands and Fishes are thought Numberless,
So may Your Joys be pregnant, and increase.
And so God speed you well. --

WHich is a Pageant made in the manner of an Island floating, and presented
between Fox Hall and Lambeth, with a Lion and a Unicorn standing in the Front,
the Supporters of the Arms of ENGLAND: upon whose backs are placed two big
Boys, the one a Scotch, the other an English, and habited accordingly, with
Banners in their hands, whereon is the Arms of eitheir Nation.

In the middle of this View is seated THAM, represented in an Old Man with long
Hair and Beard, which may signify the Weeds and Sedges of the River: On his
head he wears a Crown of Flowers, such as belong to Meads and fruitful
Pastures, as the Primrose, Daisy, Blewbottle, and the like: In his right hand he
holds a Trident, as he is Viceroy to Thetis, and King of Rivers. In his left
hand he bears a Pitcher of Water, as he is Son to Achelous (the Father of
Rivers) and and Grandchild to Oceanus. He wears a long Silk Robe tincted with
several colours like the Rainbow. On his right hand is placed a Nymph of the
Water, on whose head is the Figure of Greenwich Castle. On his left hand
another Nymph, on whose head is placed the Figure of Windsor Castle, which two
Nymphs are holding Banners in their hands, habited in Blew and White.

Upon his MAjESTIES approach, THAM presents himself in these words.

WHen You (Great Sir!) did in Caesarean State,
Through the Glad City, Ride to meet Your fate,
( The Hand-maid to Your Right) Your Regal Throne*
Which had been lost, had it not been Your Own;
So many false Pretenders laying claim
To what, they wanted Virtue to maintain:
Among the rest did that day press to see
Phoebus display his Beams in Monarchy,
I, a Sub-servant, strove beyond my bound,
To express a Loyal Error on the Ground:
Nor wonder now Tham in a House is pent,
Brittain is by this Floating Island meant,
German Ocean,
The Irish, Scottish, and the Belgican:
This Spot of Earth that doth so much create
In other Nations Fear, 'twixt Love, and Hate;
The Name of England shakes 'em, War, and it*
Strikes 'em into their Mother* Ague fit:
And that your ample glories may increase,
Portugal clasps you with the Arms of Peace.
That Portugall is so famous for their Kings,
And Wondrous Acts, which Worthy Clio sings,
ENGLAND and PORTUGAL are one in Fame,
There is no difference 'twixt 'em but in Name,
Lisbon is London, Tagus Thames, and then,
The Portugues are become Englishmen,
The English, Portugues; both meet in hearts,
Thus Providence unites remotest parts*
This strange Conjunction staggers the dull Age,
Your Shadows no Ecclipses do presage;
For from those darker Tresses, as from Night,
Proceeds the efficient Cause of early Light,
By which We live. It is your gracious heat
( Blessed Pair) that doth each Element replete:
When You your Hymenean Triumphs kept
^th West, the Eye of Joy here never slept;
The Dreggs of grief for Your departure hence,
Were purged away by a retaining Sense
Of Your Return; which now so safe, does add
More Blessings to this CITY then it had,
How to return a Thankfullness for this,
Comes not within the Rule Hypo^hesis.
Then though they cannot their full Joys express,
Be pleased to think their Dutie's ne'er the less.
Why England the Floating Island?

a It is Environed on the East with the German Sea; on the West with the Irish;
on the North with the Scottish; on the South it is by a Narrow Sea divided from
Gallia Belgica.

b Clio, one of the Muses, that relates the Acts of Honour and Chivalry.

c Hymeneus was the Son of Bacchus and Venus, he is the God of Marriages;
Hymenea in the Neuter Gender, are the Nuptial Ceremonies, therefore called
Hymenean Rites or Triumphs.

THAM having ended his Speech, their MAJESTIES move towards White Hall, but
before their drawing near, the Nobility and Gentry of their Majesties Train are
Entertained by the Second Droll, Indians and Seamen (being continually in
Action) with this Song.

LIve, Lads, live, good days are coming on,
This seconds that o'th Coronation:
See, see how thick the Boats and Barges come,
The River sweats to bring it's burden home.
CAESAR and His Fortune's there,
Heavens delight, Our Kingdoms Prayer.
Welcome you Stars that them attend,
From whose light you borrow yours,
May they still your Wants befriend,
So you will remember Ours.
The Song ended, and their Majesties Barge ready for landing at the Private
Stairs, at White Hall, The third VIEW receives them; being a Sea Chariot made
in manner of a Scollop shell, drawn with two Dolphins, on whose backs are
placed two Tritons. In the front of the Chariot is seated Thetis, Her hair long
and grey, dishevelled; On her head is placed a triple Crown, to denote and
distinguish her three Estates, as she is supposed to be Mother of all the Gods,
Goddess of the Sea, and Empress of all Rivers. On the upper part of the Crown
is fixed a Star; on the middle circle, a silver Crescent, on the triplicite
part a wreath of Flags deep green, her Robe likewise of deep green, with a
loose Mantle of several colours. In the right hand she holds a Sceptre, in the
left a Chard or Mapp; her Attendants are four Sea Nymphs clothed in White and
Seagreen Robes.

Thetis Addresses her self to their Majesties in these words, alluding to the
Storm, and Joy of the Portugues, which happened at one and the same time.

FAME having echoed in our Ears Your choice,
We summoned all Our Daughters to rejoice,
That to the five a Hill'd City do belong*
Whose Murmurs did consort a Nuptial Song;
The Golden footed b Tagus, many more
That wanton about the Famed c Ulyssian shore:
They being sprightly met, a sudden sound,
(As though the imprisoned Winds had broke the Ground)
Surprised our Joys, we guest not what it meant,
Till seconded by the Upper Element.
At which the Voice of Sirens became loud,
Though soft before; the humbled Waves grow proud
To caper into some seditious trick,
And Prey upon the Body Politic,
For so is Traffic held, The Cannons plaid,
And Fires (like Scaling-ladders) t'wards Heaven laid;
As though the Quarrels, and long-buried Odds
Betwixt the daring Giants and the Gods,
Were now (...): what then they could not do
With their ^eap'd hills, ^lames should aspire unto.
This gave Great Oceanus cause to (...)
A helpful Council, who concluded (All)
So mighty a Conjunction could not be,
Without a Mirable or Prodigy.
The glorious Heir to Great Braganzaes Name*
And the Worlds Wonder, Englands CHARLEMAIN*
The Result being past, a trusty Triton straight
(Who at the Councell-Table then did wait)
Was forthwith sent the raging Waves to quell,
And to inquire the cause they did Rebel.
Scarce could you think ere (clad in a cold sweat)
He did return to make our hopes complete,
Declared that all was clear, the Sky serene,
And Ships in Safety rode where the Storm had been;
That the Four Winds had Liberty to meet,
Not to Destroy, but Whistle to Your Fleet
(Though rudely) tunes of Joy in different Sets,
Only to show they were Joves Flagerets,
And every Element in its Degree
Expressed a Power knit in a Jubilee.
Thus Heaven and Earth did your blessed Nuptials keep,
As well as we that Revelled in the Deep:
Thetis her self none else allow'd to bring
This intermixed Tale to Britains King;
Which ended, with my Wishes I begin,
(Not against your Patience to commit a Sin:)
May You out-live the Malice of Your Foes,
While they, subjected to Your Justice, Close;
May You grow strong (too) in Your Peoples Love,
Which will Your Treasure, and Your Armour prove.
And You Blessed Queen! so Famed for Piety,
May Your Deeds ever Live, Your Self ne'er Dye.
Why Thetis drawn in a Sea Chariot, accompanied with Tritons, and Sea Nymphs.

By the Chariot, is meant the swift motion of the Sea, and by the diversity of
her Attendance, are understood the various sorts of Fishes, which are said to
wait upon the Sea Gods and Goddesses, because they have their being and
habitation in the Sea; But Tritons are commonly taken for Neptunes Trumpeters,
and sometimes for Sea Monsters. Thetis was also married to Peleus an excellent
Navigator, and therefore is presented with gray hairs, which is partly to
intimate the Antiquity of Navigation, and partly to show the cares and fears of
Seamen, who are observed to become sooner Gray haired then others.

Why her Mantle of several Colours?

B^cause the Sea-water will look Red in a Storm, sometimes Blew, sometimes
Green, sometimes White and Green, in which Colours her Nymphs are clothed; for
it were very improper to infer or allude any thing in this Nature contrary to
her Element, and therefore their habits are apted accordingly. So much for
their shapes, now to the Speech.

a The famous City of Lisbon in Portugall, by her Daughters are meant Rivers
belonging to that Kingdom; This City is situated upon five Hills, it is
encircled with strong Castles, upon which there are 76. Turrets; this City is
seven Miles in Compass, and hath 20. Gates towards the Sea Coast.

b The principal River in Lisbon so much spoken of and commended in ancient and
modern Poetry, there are 150. great and small Rivers belonging to Portugall.

c Lisbon, so called of Ulysses who passed that way, her ancient name was
Olysippo from thence.

d The Dukes of that name were of ancient Renown, and of such Valour and
success, that Prosperity and Plenty were never wanting among the Portugues.

Don Edward (whom they call Duarte) was the 6th. Son to King Emanuell, he had
issue Katharine, Married to Iohn Duke of Braganza, which Katharin (after the
Death of King Henry her Uncle) was right Heir to the Crown of Portugall, from
whom descended.

Iohn Duke of Braganza restored to his Right, and Crowned King of Portugall by
the name of King Iohn the 4th. who had issue by Donna Lucia, Daughter to the
Duke of Medina Sidonia in Spain, Alfonso the 6th. King of Portugall, and Donna
Catharina now Queen of England.

I hope Reader this Relation hath not been too tedious to thee, it falling in
my way I could not omit it.

After their Maj^sties and the Nobility are Landed, the Companies Barges that
were in the Front, fall into the Rear, and so hasten to their several homes.

The Songs were set by Mr. Iohn Gamble, one of His Majesties Servants, a Person
well known in Music.


