ABout Eight of the Clock at Skinners-Hall, to attend his Lordship according to
Order, meet,

Hereupon, the Foot Marshal divides the persons so met into seven Divisions,
ranked out two by two, beginning with the inferior part, the Standard-Bearers;
and in the head of them are placed two Drums, one Fife, and one Gentleman,
bearing the Companies Ensign.

In the Rear of those Standard-Bearers fall in six Trumpets, two Gentlemen
bearing Banners, being the Arms of Deceased Benefactors; after them march the
aged Pensioners in Gowns, and in the Center of them fall in two Drums beating
the Switzers March.

In the Rear of them fall in two Drums, one Fife, and two Gentlemen in Plush
Coats, bearing two Banners or Ensigns; after them, fall in six Gentlemen
Ushers, and in the Rear of them fall in the Budge Batchellors.

In the Rear of them, fall in six other Trumpets; after them two other
Gentlemen bearing two other Banners or Ensigns; after them fall in eight
Gentlemen Ushers* and after them the Foins Batchellors.

In the Rear of them, fall in the Duke of York's, and the Duke of Albemarle's
eight Trumpets; after them two Gentlemen bearing two other Banners or Ensigns,
then 12 Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Livery.

In the Rear of them fall in the Drum-Major, and His Majesties four Drums and
Fife; after them two other Gentlemen, the one bearing the Lord Majors, the
other the Cities Banners, and after them twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and after
them the Court of Assistants.

In the Rear of them fall in the Sergeant Trumpet and sixteen other of His
Majesties Trumpets, and a Kettle Drum in His Majesties Livery; after them three
Gentlemen bearing three Banners, the one the Kings, the other the Duke of
York's, and the third the Banner of St. George marching Triangular; after them
fall in twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and in the Rear of them the present Master and
Wardens.

In this Equipage two by two, they march from Skinners-Hall towards the Lord
Maior's House in Mincing-lane, the Foot Marshal and his attendants, make a Lane
to receive his Lordsh^p and his attendants, together with the old Lord Mayor
and his attendants, which having done, the Foot Marshal ranks them as formerly,
and the whole body march towards Guildhall, and from thence to three Crane
Wharf in the Vintrey, his Lordship enters his Barge at the Stairs next
Westminster, the Company enters theirs at Merchant Taylors Stairs, and the rest
of the Companies at several other places: but the Gentlemen Ushers Budge and
Foins Batchellors, repair to their place of refreshment.

The Lord Mayor and the several Companies of London being thus embarked, they
make all speed to Westminster, where by the way several pieces of Ordinances
are discharged, placed on the Bank-side to that purpose, for congratulating his
Lordship.

The Companies being landed at Westminster, they set themselves as a Guard on
both sides, from Westminster Bridge to the Hall, in which likewise they make a
Lane for the Company of Skinners to pass, the Lord Mayor, the old Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and their attendants, but the Livery and their attendants return to
their Barge, the Assistants, the Master, Wardens, and their several attendants,
march up the Exchequer Stairs, and from the stair head to the Exchequer Bar,
make a Lane, through which the new and old Lord Majors with the Recorder pass,
the new Lord Mayor on the right hand of him; and the old Lord Mayor on the
left, where the Recorder makes a Speech.

A Writ being sealed at the Chancery, Kings Bench, Common Pleas Bar, and the
accustomed Ceremonies performed, his Lordship and the rest in order repair to
their several Barges, and hasten to Baynard Castle, Paul's Wharf, and other
places, in order to their making a Guard or Gallory, from Paul's Chain Hill, and
Paul's Church Yard, to Cheapside, through which the Company of Skinners, the
Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, with their Attendants pass.

His Lordship being landed, and all things in a readiness in reference to it;
he is saluted by one Scene being two Leopards richly set out, on whose Backs
are seated two Negroes, habited very costly after their manner, two Girls
likewise placed on the Stage thereof, one in the Front, the other in the Rear,
and accommodated accordingly; the Negroes hold each a Banner of the Cities Arms
in one hand, and the Arms of the Company in the other, the Girls hold the
like.

This Scene moves all the Morning with other Pageants up and down Paul's
Church-yard, and upon his Lordships approach retreat towards Fosterlane end,
where a Pageant relating to the Companies Trade receive them; The Leopards (as
they are Supporters of the Companies Arms) flank each side thereof.

This Pageant is made in manner of a Wood or Wilderness, the Stage thereof
being fourteen foot long, and eight foot broad; the Front thereof is arched
over with a Wild Arbour, in which sits a living Figure representing Faunus.
His head is Circled with a Crown of Wool inter-mixed with Ermyns, the upper
part of his body habited like a Forester in Green; his nether pa^ like a
Woodman in Russet; He wears a long loose Robe over it lined with Fur, and
inter-mixed with Ermyns; In one hand he holds a Javelin, in the other a Bugle
Horn. His attendants are three Satyrs habited accordingly, who are in
continual Motion, playing on several rude Instruments, singing and dancing.
Upon four Pedestalls sit four Girls, alluding to the Nymphs of the Wood and
Forests, called Dryads, and habited accordingly. On the Stage are placed
several Boys in the shapes of Bears, Monkeys, and several other beasts
relating to the placed several Boys in the shapes o f Bears, Monkeys, and
several other beasts relating to the Companies Trade, who likewise are in
continual action.

Faunus is said to be God of the Woods and Forests, and Father of all the
Rural gods.

[He is reported to be the Ancient'st of all the Kings in Italy, and was the
first that brought in any Form of Religion thither. He Consecrated Groves, gave
Names unto Cities, erected Temples, ordained Sacrifices; from whom the
Churches, as some say, were named Fana.]

Upon his Lordships approach Faunus directs himself in these words;

E'Re scarce the face of Government was known,
Or superstitious Ceremonies shown,
E're Rome received from Romulus a Law,
(Which did the Sabines to Subjection draw;)
Or that her Gods into request became,
And Altars on her Holy
I lead the way to those mysterious rights.
By the Pale Tapers of Instinctive lights:
For nature (then) us Heathens reason lent
To worship what we held Omnipotent.
When now there are a sort strive to deface
With Oaths and Blasphemy the Seat of Grace,
Worser then Heathens live; past sense of shame,
From Christian into Atheist change their Name,
We were devout in what we did not know,
They know, and yet will not devotion show;
In Woods and Groves (at first) we sacrificed,
And then we Temples to erect devised.
As we grew up in Knowledge we the more
Our unknown Gods did Honour and Adore,
These sort of Men your Temples do despise,
And to their lusts do (only) sacrifice;
That such who thus your Government displease
Deserve the name of Satyrs more then
Licentious liberty obdurates hearts,
And man from virtue more then beasts departs;
For they forsake not theirs, And as we do
Order our Beasts, let them be ordered too;
Wild Beasts are Tamed by men, and wild-men may
Be brought in time to be as Tame as they.
'Tis Wisdom in the Magistrate that must
Crumble all such Profaneness into dust.
Let such as in your Church no service lovee
Confined be to a Forest, Wood, or Grove.
Let them be Company for Beasts not Men,
Till they return unto the Truth again.
By this their Punishment you will appear Unto the World, more Virtuous then
Severe.
The speech ended, his Lordship and his Retinue move towards the place where
Cheapside-Crosse stood, and there he is entertained by another Scene or
Pageant, being a stately Fabric made after the Doric order, on the Top
whereof is seated a lively Figure representing Albion or England, taking her
Name from the White Cliffs; her hair is of a Flaxen colour dishevelled, her
Temples are Circled with an Imperial Diadem, her Neck ornamented with a Collor
of SS, her Garment Cloth of Silver, about her shoulders a loose flying scarf of
Gold: In one hand she holds a Shield whereon is figured the Heptarchy, (or the
seven petty Kings that once ruled here), kneeling and tendering their Crowns to
her; in the other hand she holds a rich Banner, whereon the Arms of England and
Portugall is impaled. At her Feet upon a Pedestal is seated a living Figure
representing the City of London; her hair of a light Brown, on her head a
Coronet of Gold, her Garment white sarsenet fringed with Gold, over her
shoulders she has a loose flying Green sarsenet scarf fringed with silver: in
one hand she holds a Banner of the Cities Arms, in the other one of the
Companies.

On either side of the Pageant sit two more living Figures, representing two
Cities, York and Bristoll; and in the Rear sits another figure representing
Worcester.

York is habited in a Flame coloured Sarsenet Robe, her hair a dark Brown
disheveled, on her head a Coronet of Gold, in one hand she holds a Banner with
the Arms of that City, in the other the Arms of England.

Bristoll is habited in a Limon-coloured Sarsenet Robe, her hair disheveled, on
her head a Coronet of Gold; in one hand she holds a Banner with the Arms of
that City, in the other the Arms of England.

Norwich is habited in a Crimson coloured Srasnet-Robe, her hair disheveled, on
her head she has a Coronet of Gold, in one hand she holds a Banner with the
Arms of that City, and in the other the Arms of England.

All these Banners are made of Silk, about the Pageant is painted the Figure of
every City in little.

His Lordship and the rest drawing near, Albion directs her self to him in
these words;

Albion that not long since was left forlorn,
Her Bosom ransacked, and her Garments torn
By her unnatural Children, now presumes
Your presence, and her ancient State assumes.
Blessed be the happy Change, the Sacred Cause
Of our Religion, Liberty, and Laws.
So great a Work could not accomplished be,
Without restoring Heaven-born Monarchy;
How happy are you, could you prize your good,
And your Conditions rightly understood;
Now Peace has got the upper hand of War,
And Plenty hath exiled Famine far
Remote from hence our fields are clad with Corn
Whose laden Ears do listen to be shorn.
The Husbandman hides not his Cattle, now,
Lest that they shall be taken from the Plough;
The Shepherd fears not those Sheep stealing men
(Far worse then Wolves) of late, but laughs again.
And to his harmless flock tunes forth the Praise
of Peace, and our Revived Halcion days.
Thrice happy England in so blessed a King,
Under whose Government the Clergy sing
The Songs of Zion in the sacred Tongue,
Converting old Men and Informing young.
Where vile Oppression is suppressed by Law,
And Clemency doth more then rigour Awe.
Then London, and my other Daughters, know
How much to God for such a King you owe;
And let no dirty thoughts Rebellious, prove
The dark rewarders of his Serene love.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and his Retinue move towards Milk-street, and
there he is saluted by another Scene or Pageant, made in manner of a Chariot,
in the Front whereof sits a living Figure, representing a Turk (alluding to his
Lordships Quality, a Turkish Merchant, and so to Trade) his Habit is very rich,
apted to the Fashion of that Country; in the body of the Pageant are three
Turks more habited accordingly, and three Slaves employed in ordering and
making up Commodities.

Upon his Lordships adproach, the Turk salutes him in these words;

HAil to the honour that attends your name,
We that ne'er stoop to fear, yet must to fame;
We that dare Grapple with the Universe,
And maked our Glory (only) to Converse
With horrid Slaughter, do appeal to you,
And for your Amity and Commerce sue:
Nor is it such a monstrous thing to be
In league with us* rather security:
The trembling Nations where our Sultan comes
Surrender up their rights, and quit their homes;
Our numerous host staggers the Christians faith,
And our success like admiration hath:
The Inveigling French we neither love, nor fear,
Your deeds abroad draw our affections here.
England's the seat of honour, and the flower
Of Chivalry, Valours Imperial Bower;
Her Prince inur'd to Arms, and rugged war,
Her Soldiers (like to Alexanders,) are
So expert in their Discipline, not one
But may a Title of Commander own.
Her Magistrates are sober, grave, and wise,
Not Kickshaw-pated-fellows, Butterflies,
But such as Rome did in her Pride select
For Government, to Traffic, and Protect,
And as to her, remotest parts did bow,
Let us not shame to do the like to you.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and the rest move on towards Soper-lane end,
the four Pageants by whom his Lordship past, falling into the Rear. At
Soper-lane end, another Pageant waits his Lordship, being a stately Building,
in the Front whereof sits Minerva; her Hair dishevelled, on her head she wears
a silver Helmet with a Plume of red and white Feathers, her Garment of
changeable coloured Sarsenet, alluding to her Properties, as she is Pallas,
Bellona, and Minerva; in one hand she holds a Lance, in the other a Shield,
whereon is figured several sorts of Books and Instruments of Music, as she is
Goddess of Arts and Arms; upon the four Pedestals of the Pageant, sit four
Nymphs in several coloured habits, richly set forth, circled with Wreaths of
Roses, and holding a shield and a Banner in each hand, on one whereof is
figured the head of Medusa, on the other the Lord Mayors Arms.

On the Top of the Pageant is placed an other lively Figure representing
Mercury; his habit, and basis are Cloth of silver: There are three Children
more which represent the three Graces habited accordingly.

His Lordship drawing near Minerva Addresses her self to him in these words.

IN all the primitive times Learning did shine
Like to the Sun both speculative, and divine;
The more she spread her self, the more she grew,
In veneration and esteem; This drew
The youth of famous Athens to admire
Not only her rich beauty, but acquire
Her as a Bride; for which their Genii strove,
And in their several Orbs expressed their love.
But as the Sun cannot be said to give
Life to one Plant (though all by him do live)
So Learning from her various Rays imparts
The several Species of both Arms and Arts.
While they did flourish she was in request,
And held a Jewel for a Prince's breast;
When now her Glory is Eclipsed, and she
Wanders in Rags, and despised Poverty.
Let parts be what they will, Fools only scan
The Out-side, not the Inside of a Man.
If she address her self to Court (the place
Where she should find acceptance, and a Grace)
The wanton leer of a betraying Eye
Bespeaks her (straight) a scornful Injury.
The Country knows her not; they with all right,
But hardly to her Help will add a Mite;
To what place must her Miseries repair,
But unto Athens? of the which you are
By Divine hand appointed Magistrate
Oh! let her not be starved at your Gate,
Encourage her, and for your Cities Fame.
Both Arts and Arms shall gloryfie your Name.
Perpetuate your Memory, and raise
From this days Basis Pyramids of Praise.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and his Attendants retire to Guild-Hall to
Dinner, and the Company to the place of their Refreshment; and after Dinner
are again by the Foot Marshal set in Order as in the Morning, only the
Pensioners carry in stead of Javelins and Targets, Torches to attend my Lord,
the Aldarmen, and Companies from St. Paul's, to which place his Lordship directs
his passage, and the Pageants to wait his Coming from thence, hasten towards
his Lordships house in Mincing-lane, and the Pageants are placed in Grace
Church-street; and at Mincing-lane end near Cloth-workers-Hall; his Lordship
(upon his Return from Paul's) is Accosted by the person representing the Turk in
these words;

MY LORD, THe Company on whom I wait,
Command me to salute you at your Gate
With their fraternal-hearty-wishes; May
Your Joys exceed the Glory of this Day.
May never Night approach them, never Ill
Divine them, but be fair and rising still.
May you in Traffic no Disaster know,
Your Riches never Ebb, but ever Flow.
Piety be your practice, and the poor.
Never go Empty-handed from your door.
May you grow up in Honours seat, and prove
A Subject for your King, and Cities love.
May you live Centuries of years, and see
Your-self still young in your posterity:
And so your Company bids (in your own right)
Good Morrow to your Glories, not Good night.
Which ended, and his Lordship entered his house, all depart in order (as the
Convenience of Night will admit) And the several persons appointed to attend
the service of the day take especial care to lodge the silk-works and Triumphs
in some secure place till they can remove them to SkinnersHall, in regard they
are of some weight, and the burden of the day was heavy to the Undertakers.

Licensed October 27, 1663.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.


