THe Author not distrusting of his Play,
Leaves Customs Road, and walks another way.
Expect not here Language Three stories high;
Star-tearing Strains fit not a Comedy.
Here's no Elaborate Scenes, for he confesses
He took no pains in it, Truth doth need no Dresses.
No Amorous Puling passions, here the Lord
And Lady rather differ then accord.
What can be in it, you'll say, if none of these?
It is all one; he's sure the thing will please
The truly Loyal Party; But what then?
Why, truly he thinks them the better men.
But if in's Progress he does chance to hit
Hab nab on something that may sound like Wit,
Pray take no notice of't; for if you do,
You'll spoil the Poet, and the Players too;
They will grow proud upon it, and in the Street
In stead of Cringing, Nod to those they meet.
Yet now I think on it, 'twill not be amiss,
We'd rather have your Plaudit then your Hiss:
And promise faithfully we will endeavour,
If you do favour this, to please you ever.

AH, Rogues, the business is done,


In a dish I Warrant you,


And thrown out of the Windows:
The Town's Our own, Boys,

And all the Wealth in it.


And Wenches to boot Boys.


Boot me no Boots, 'tis Bootless, 'till we have them,


Those are Commodities, I confess I sain would truck for.


Thou shalt have them by the Belly, Lad.


Rare Recruits after a long March!


Gramercy Bertlam.


Heroic Bertlam.


The Man of Men and Might.


We were Opposed, and even at Push a Pike for it; though a wet Morning, 'twould
have been dry Service had We gon to it.


Dry blows would ne'er have done it, some must have sweat blood for it; but 'tis
prevented.


The Nail of Providence was in it.


Or the parings rather; but no matter which, 'tis done.


Leymor was a Stubborn Lad, yet Bertlam fitted him, and in his kind too, his
Rhetoric silenced the Mouth of his Pistol; it had sent a bad Report else, and
a home one: But Bertlam, brave Bertlam, that carries Charms on the Tip of his
Tongue, acted the part both of a Soldier and a Courtier, an Enemy, and a
Friend, Exposing his Breast to danger, under the Canopy of Security; And all
this for Us you knaves. He told them a fair Tale, but means to trust them no
further then he can fling them:


That's some out of Commission,


Or into Prison, or both.


We may Lads in time grow up to something.


Ill Weeds grow apace, Brother, and thou art one of them, and in time may
reach the Gallows.


Speak for your self, Brother, I need not your Oratory; well, Bertlam has Wit
at Will, Woodfleet's an Ass to him.


A mere Milk-sop.


A Whey-brain'd fellow.


And of Courage as cold as a Cucumber.


A Fool in Folio.


Ambitions Puppet.


A general in the Hangings, and no better.


What think you of Vane?


As of a Vain fellow.


And what of Haslerigge?


A Hangman for Haslerigge, I cry.


One and all, One and all.


'Tis Bertlam for my Money Boys, he is Our General, Our Protector, Our King,
Our Emperor, Our Caesar, Our Keasar, Our -- Even what he pleases himself.


If he pleases himself, he shall please me.


He is Our rising Sun, and We'll adore him.


For the Speakers Glory's s^t


At nought Boy; how the Slave looked when his Coach was stopped?


Like a Dog outlawed, the Palate of his Breech fell down with fear.


He told Us he was our General.


Of what? Bills, Bonds, and Obligations, or Green-sleeves and Pudding-pies.


And we told him he was an Old doring fool, and bad him get him home, and take
a Caudle of Calves Eggs to Comfort his Learned Coxcomb, for he looked but
faintly on it.


And what said he?


Said he! I prithee what could he say that. We would admit for a reasonable
answer? We were better principled then so, Reason and our business were two
things, what We did We did, that was Our Will, and the word of Command lodged
in Our hilts. Alas poor Worm, Cobbet and Duckingfield showed him Cockpit Law,
and O're-rul'd his Rolls, he understood not the Soldiers Dialect, the
searching Language of the Sword puzl'd his Intellect, the Keenness whereof
would have proved too sharp for his Wit, had he been Obstinate or persisted in
the Interpretation; and therefore very mannerly he kissed his hand and wheeled
about


To the place from whence he came,


And e're long to the place of Execution.


No, hang him, he will have his Clergy.


Is he such an Infidel to love them?


Yes, as We do: Barbers, that is, while they are Trimming Us; he would fain go Ala
mode to Heaven.


If his foot slip not, but if it do, his sinery is spoiled, he will be so
sootifi'd.


He that deals with Pitch must expect no better, black will to black, quoth the
Divel to the Collier; but, dost thou think there is a Heaven or Hell?


Why dost thou ask me that question? I am a Soldier, and so art thou, let's
ne'er trouble Our heads about it, a short life, and a merry life I cry, happy
Man be his Dole.


And so say I, while We are here, We are here; when We are gone, We are gone,
for better or for worse, for rich or for poor; amongst the good or the bad We
shall find room I warrant thee Lad, and Our General can expect no more.


And now you have put Us in mind of Our General, I mean Bertlam* (not
Woodfleet) (that Son of a Custard-maker, always quaking) let us as bravely
spend his this days benevolence, as he Nobly intended it.


A good Resolution.


Rather a proposition, Brother; but where, how, and in what?


Not in Rot-gut Beer, I will assure you, or Muddy Ale, Wine for my money.


Wine is the life of Action, 'tis Decreed and I obey.

Blood requires blood, then from the Purple Grape
I'll suck my fill, spite of you, Jack a Nape:
There's Poetry for you, Gentlemen.

A Pin for your Poetry, March upon it.

Bring us Wine there, come who sings?

Though the Morning was wet,
We are merrily met
In a house more dry then Our skin, Boys;
We'll drink down the day,
Ne'er question Our Pay,
Let them heartily laugh out that win, Boys:

Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends
For the good of the Soldier to labour his ends.

Let let him flatter and lie,
What is't to thee or I,
And Ape Noll in every Condition;
If we thrive upon it,
Let all the world want,
And the City kneel down and petition:

Then drink a full Brimmer to him that intends,
For the good of the Soldier to labour his ends.

Hey Boys, come away.

Trotter.


My Lord?


Has Lockwhite been here yet?


Not yet, my Lord, Sir --


What would thou have?


Nothing, my Lord, not I.


Thou hast not thy name for nothing, I see thy Tongue will keep pace with thy
wit, and still be Trotting, I rethee leave off thy Impertinences, I have told
thee enough on it.


Why my Lord, and it shall please you.


I tell thee it does not please me, 'tis my fear thou'lt be my shame, I sent
thee into France to learn some breeding, and thou rendrest me the poorest and
the pittifull'st Account that ever Porter gave on a slight Errant. Dost thou
keep Company?


Yes, my Lord.


What are they, of what sort?


Of the better, Sir.


'Tis strange! thy knowledge being so bad:

Are they Men of Intelligence?


I think so, my Lord.


You think so! sad, I profess 'tis very sad; were it my Case as it is yours,
and it behoves you, as you assume the Title of a Secretary;) I'd draw Men's
Souls out by Inspeculation, and in the Inquest of their Faculties cull out such
matter as would yield advantage to him I had relation to, and without this,
thou neither dost deserve the place thou hast, nor art thou sit for Company.


My Lord, I have done my Endeavour.


A weak one, let Thurloe be your President.


When your Lordship is Translated to your Highness, and that you have Command
of the Public Pu^se, I shall be as ready to waste it, as he or the proudest of
them, but I am but a fool to Explain my self.


That time is drawing near.


In the mean time I have not been idle, I have done something.


What hast thou done that may deserve Recording.


Why, I have Endeavoured to find how the Common Cry of the Town goes, as to this
days business.


That's something indeed, and how do the People relish it?


Relish it! why truly Sir it is thought --


Thou wilt return to thy Vomit.


Why truly Sir it is thought, and if I may speak my thoughts freely, the Rump
was but a stinking Rump, and scented so ill in the Nostrils of the People that
they feared a sudden Plague attended the Concavity, and with much Joy blessed the
Rue and Wormword you brought to their Conservation.


Dost thou know what thou say?


I could say more, Sir.


To as little purpose -- begone, I would be private -- yet if Lockwhite come
admit him.


Nay my Lord, I warrant here will be the whole fry presently.


Thou a Secretary, and talk so like a Fisherman; what Fry, you fool?


Woodfleet and the rest, Sir.


My mind is not at rest while thou art here. Begone --

I wonder Lockwhite comes not? he's a Man
Has run all h^zzards, with as good success,
Except Old Noll, as any Man I know;
He was his Creature, and he now is mine,
And hitherto he has performed his part
In my Revenge upon that family,
So home, even to their doors, that my disgrace
Lies buried in their Infamy -- How now --

My Lo^d, he's come.

'Tis well -- Leave Us.
My Lord, how goes Causes?

They cannot go amiss, Sir,
Whilst you are Advocate.

The Sword thou meanest,
That must decide all Controversies.

It will do much Sir, but Policy puts the best Edge to it.


And that you have, come my Lord be free,
Where shall We set up Our Rest?
We have had Tossing times.

Indeed, my Lord, Time hath been tossed in a Blanquet; but I hope now We shall
use time better then so.


As how?


You may Trim him, Sir,
You have him by the foretop.

If I thought so, I'd hold him fast.


Now, or never, If you let slip your hold you are undone, aut Caesar aut
Nullus.


But the Remora to that is Woodfleet.


Alas! you know him, Sir.


True, he's but of a softly Nature.


A fine Commendation for a General, that should be rough as War it self, but
he has a soft place in his head too, and that's worse, how ever he's a fit
Subject for your purpose, and therefore, Sir, use him as Cataline did Lentulus,
drill him along with hope that all this tends to his only advancement, fools
are soon persuaded; And believe me (my Lord) that was the very Engine made him
consent to the blowing up of his Brother, a Gentleman in some sense better
qualified.


I, but a small Nutshel I am confident may with ease contain both their
Courages, yet I know Woodfleet will sleer (he dare not grin) after Honour, and
is as greedy on it, as a Cat is of a dish of Milk.


'Twill be ill bestowed, Sir, if it light on him.


Wha^, a Dish of Milk?


You misinterpret me, Honour I me^nt Sir,
If you make him groom of your Close-stool,
'Twill draw more from your goodness then his Merit,
And keep his wife in Smocks too, during pleasure,
That will be (Sir) your Highness pleasure.

It is not come to that yet.


Oliver had it, his time is past, and your time's coming on, Princes have power
over the persons of both S^xes.


Name him no more, I hate his memory.


I confess I do not much care fo^t, yet I hate nothing brought, or brings me
profit. I loved the Father of the Heroics, while he had a power to do me good,
that failing, my reason did direct me to that Party then prevailing, the fagg
end of the Parliament. What though I took the Oath of Allegiance as Oliver,
your Lordship* and others did, (without the which I could not have sat there?)
yet it Conducing not to Our Advantage, It was an ill Oath, better broke then
kept, and so are all Oaths in the stricter sense, the Laws of Nature and of
Nations do dispenle with matters of Divinity in such a case, for no (...)
willingly would be an Enemy to himself, the (...) Beaf^s do by instinct of
Nature seek for self-reservation, vation, why not Man who is the Lord of
Reason? Oaths, what are they, but Bubbles, that break with their own Emptiness.


You say very right, my Lord, I am of your Opinion.


Yet the Pulpiteirs belch forth Fire and Brimstone against it: But my Lord, how
could I have served my Country, by setting the Dane and Sweed by the Ears,
while the Thread for a Protectorian interest was spinning here? how could I
have carried on, or rather promoted the Design for Iamaica, (though it went in
Revilo's name?) how could I have lopped off those ill branches to the Common
wealth, the Cavaliers and Essex his discontented Reformadoes? how could I have
showed my self loyal to your Interest, by foolling Fleetwood in the disseating
of Dick, by his dissolving the honest Parliament as they call it, and bringing
in the Odious Rump? how could I in my Speech at the Council of State, have
raked up Revilo's ashes, by bespattering him and his family, and told Ireto^,
how Providence had brought things about, and that the hand of the Lord was
in it, when I meant nothing less? how could I (under favour) have advised you
to this days Enterprise, if I should have startled, or scrupled at Oaths,
preferred honesty or Divinity before temporal interest or humane reason? I
desire (my Lord) in this case you will be my Judge.


Nay, my Lord, you are your own Judge in this Case, but in my Opinion you have
done your self but Justice.


And he that will not do Justice to himself, will never do it to another.


You advise well.


My Lord, take it from me, He that will live in this world, must be endowed
with these three rare Qualities; Dissimulation, Equivocation, and Mental
reservation.


How now, the news with you.


The Lord Woodfleet, Sir.


What of him?


My Lord, he is come, Sir.


Prithee -- Thy wit and his may walk together, admit him -- I knew I should be
troubled with him.


I doubt not but you have prepared your self for the Encounter.


I am pretty well Antidoted against the Poison, He's here -- My Lord, your most
submissive Servant.


My Lord, I cannot Complement, but I am in heart your Creature, that is, at
your disposal.


Seriously, I profess, I cannot reach your meaning, Gentlemen.


Our meaning's not amiss, Sir,
We know Sir, what we say.

Indeed, I profess I believe so Gentlemen, I hope things are now in the Lords
handling, and will go on well, and become the doings of Christians.


The Government has been all this while in the horrid hands of Infidels, Jews,
Pagans and Turks -- I must make him up a Medley.


Yea, Abomination hath been in the hands of Iniquity.


But, my Lord, those hands are now cut off, and all our Ambition is, that your
Lordship would take the Government into the white hands of your goodness.


Who I, Gentlemen -- Seriously -- I profess -- Indeed -- And by yea and nay law
-- You shame me -- So you do! I can say no more, alas! I!


You -- Why, my Lord, if you knew your self as well as I do, you would say
more.


Truly, I think, I have been something in my time,


Something! You have been more then something.


That's stark nought, (my Lord) but it shall pass.


What's the meaning of this?


The Lord Stonware, the Lord Huson, Colonel Cobbet, Colonel Duckinfield, and
others, desire your favourable and Courteous Admittance, Sir.


By all means, let them Enter: but my Lord be sparing of your Speech, for these
are Catching fellows, and will interpret strangely, Our aim is only to advance
your Interest.


You know my Lord, I can keep my Tongue within my Teeth, sometimes.


'Tis a high point of Wisdom in you, Sir.


Oddso they are here, I cry Mum --


The less you speak, the better 'twill be, Sir.


My Lord Stonware.


Many Benisons lite on you for this days wark my good Loord.


How do you do my Lord Woodfleet? how do you my Lord Bertlam, how do you my
Lord Lockwhite? and how do you all? Hah.


The better for your asking, Sir.


Say you so, then I'll ask again, and how? and how?


And what? and what?


Your Language cannot be Translated, Brother,


Let them take me by the meaning then.


By the Members, hawd there my Loord, 'tis sere, and faw pley, Sirs.


My Lords, I have not been backward in this days business, nor any here I
think.


'Tis confessed (Sir) what would you infer farther upon it?


And therefore requisite We should know how things will go.


As they may Sir, soft fire makes sweet Malt, you know that Colonel.


And that I know very well too, and you have said very well, as much as a Man
can say, and no more.


And that's enough.


But We are in a Chaos, a Confusion.


A mere Chaos, a Confusion.


And the People expect suddenly something from Us.


Why Gentlemen, Rome was not built in a day.


Mickle Wisdom geod feath in that, Sirs, there's Mickle wisdom in that Ise
sure ye.


At three a Clock we will meet at Wallingford-House, and discuss the business
further, what say you my Lord?


I profess I say so too, at three a Clock be it Gentlemen, what say you?


We'll wait upon my Lords -- Your Servants.


I protest I am glad of this withal my heart, for I have business in Smithfield
where my Horse stands, now it comes in my mind, on my Conscience the Roguish
Ostler has not given him Oats to day, and the Knaves Hay is Musty too; well,
my Man is such another Ass, farewell Gentlemen, I'll see you anon, if I come
not soon enough, pray keep me a place in the Council, or let my Vote stand for
one, no matter how.


Au geod rason too my Loord, he's a braw Mo this, my Leords ye kenn him we'll
enough.


And you too, Sir.


Come my Lord Stonware, We presume you are a knowing Man, to what kind of
Government stand you affected?


Even tol what ye place Sir.


What think you of a Single person? here's my Lord Woodfleet.


Marry an he's a braw Mon, Sir, bet are ye in geod earnest Sirs.


What else, my Lord.


Bred a God Ise for him than.


You see, my Lord, how heaven does raise you friends.


Seriously I profess my Lord you know, 'tis none of my seeking.


Nor is like to be of your enjoyin -- My Lord, a word with you, what if my Lord
Bertlam were the Man?


Reight Sir -- Ou'z in on word ya ha spoken awe, Sir, he's a Mon, indeed Mon, gif
Stonware ha any brains Sir.


You will live I see Sir -- My Lord he's your friend now.


No matter whose, he's a required Property, and must be used by some body --
And why so Melancholy, my Lord?


I profess not I, I was thinking 'twas Dinner time.


Will your Lordship please to take part of our small Cheer?


No indeed my Lord I thank you, not I, my wife I profess stays for me, adieu
Gentlemen all --


Your Servants my Lord.


Nor you my Lord Stonware?


No in geod feath, Sir, pardon me, Ise invited by a gay Mon Sirs, tol platters
of bra Capons Sir, and awe the foals in the Eyre, Sirs, I an marry Sirs, tol ove
a my none Country men ta, geod feath now.


If you please to stay my Lord, you're welcome.


Gods Benizon and mine lite on you, Sir, geod feath, you're like a bra Mon,
'twould berst a Mons heart to part fro ye, Ise ce'n yar humble Servant my
geod-Loord.


You'll stay then.


I marry Sir, wi yar none sell tol deeth Sir, gif ye ta place Sir.


I knew, a small hair would have drawn him to your Table, without this ado.


My Lord, lead Lockwhite the way.


Ater ye is geod manners Sir --


That's more then you know -- My Lord I am your Servant.


Well I'll break off the Complement then.


Priss, Priss.


Madam.


Why, how now Priss? where hast thou left thy breeding, in thy other Pocket?
Art thou not read in Times and Seasons?


I never was such a fool to put trust in Almanack-makers yet, Madam.


What a Wench art thou? and why Madam, prithee? there's a word indeed, as
Common as the Cries about the Town.


Your Ladyship hath used me to it.


I'll break that Custom, 'tis a rude one; hast thou no wit Wench? can thou
pick out no better title for me.


Insooth I cannot reach it yet, Madam.


Reach a fools head of thy own, sure thou art Mad, Wench.


The Secretary indeed says I am a Mad Wench, but I thank my Stars I can make a
fool of Twenty such as he is, Madam.


Again, can flesh and blood endure this, I must new Mold thy Manners, Madam!
there's a Gammers title, out upon it.


Seriously I know not by what other Names or Titles to distinguish you, Madam.


I profess thou art dull, abominable dull; dost thou not know upon what Score
my dear, and secondself is gon to Wallingford-House.


How should I Madam, I cannot Divine?


Lord help thy head, why, he is gon to be made a made a Man Wench.


Was he not so before, if not, your Ladyship hath had but an ill time on it.


The Prince of Men, you Baggage; thou art such a dull one.


I cannot help it, Madam, while I remain in Ignorance.


I see I must open thy Eyes by way of Explanation; Then know that from
henceforth I will be called her Highness.


Nay, now you tell me what you would be called, I shall Obey your Highness.


It will do well, and 'twill be but your Duty, prithee tell me, how dost think
I shall Behave my self in it?


Highly well, you cannot choose, you begin so soon, if it shall please your
Highness.


I think I am better shaped for it then Iea^, or what do you call her Cromwell.


Abundantly, for at her best She was but a bundle of ^ -- Madam -- Lord, I am
so forgetful, Highness I should have said.


That's the Word, Con it, and be perfect in it, or I profess you and I shall
part --

What's the News with you?
Am I sent for to Wallingford-House?

No, Madam.


What a beetle-headed fellow's this.


Highness, you Changeling; you must call her Highness.


No, and it shall please your Highness.


It pleases me very well,
What's your business?

Gammer Cromwell would speak a word or two with your Highness.


Bid the poor Woman wait without, I'll do her what good I can for her
Childrens sake.


Or rather for Husbands sake, if it shall please your Highness; good turns
ought not to be forgotten.


Thou say true, One good turn requires another, he was, I confess, a Man
every Inch of him.


I, and though he was out with my Lord many times, he would be in with you, as
the saying is, and please your Highness.


Well, I care not if I go to her.


Your Highness will decline much your State then.


Say thou so Priss ^Walker admit her, I'll hear what the poor Creature can
say for her self.


I thought I should have staid at the door 'till Midnight; Marry come up Mrs.
Minks. Is there such a do to speak with you? No marvel indeed.


Prithee woman, what would have?


Thy Husband by the Throat, had I him here, and I could find in my heart in
the mean time, to claw thy Eyes out, and make thee wear black patches for
something, thou proud Imperious Slut thou.


The Woman sure is lately come from Billingsgate: Priss, ask her how goes
Oysters there.


She's very quick of hearing, and't please your Highness.


Highness in the Devils Name, it is not come to that sure yet, is it? hah! Thy
Husband may be hanged first like a Crafty knave as he is; Did my Husband make
him a Lord for this? to Ruin our Family? Or as the Word is indeed, Trapan'um?
Curss on the time thy Husband was born, he fooled my Son in Law to betray the
Innocent Babe my poor Child Richard, that Our Fames are now brought to the
Slaughter houses, and the very Names of the Cromwells will become far more
Odiou^ then ever Needham could make the Heroics; Wo worth the time.


Priss, I pity the Creature, ne'er trust me, alas it Weeps.


Thou lie Baggage; I scorn thy pity, my Spirit is above it -- Let me come at
her -- As old as I am, I can spoil that fine face, my dear, deceased Lord, did
so much dote on, let me come at her, Hands off, I'll do it, thou Iezabell.


She begins to rave, send her to Bedlam among her Consorts.


I promise you, you shall have, clean straw Mrs. Cromwell.


Out Rogue, Rascal, Vagabon, a fellow raised from the Horse heels, dost thou
upbraid me too? I'll be the death of thee, if thou come near me. Oh Dick,
Dick, had thou had but thy Fathers Spirit, thy Mother ne'er had come unto
this Shame.


Priss, a Cordial presently, Odds so She faints.


I run, and't please your Highness -- I have it here.


Prithee give it her, I would not for a hundred pound She should die here, we
should be put to the Charge of burying her.


'Tis a precious Cordial-Water of my own making, Madam, I hope there's no
offence in that.


I need it not, proud Woman, I Divine this Scorn will be Revenged on thee and
thine.


Farewell Nought,
You are better lost then sought.

She has a Notable Spirit of her own.


'Twill get her nothing, She beats against the Wind.


She's Wind fallen, and't please your Highness.


'Tis an ill Wind they say bloughs no body good, let her rave, and rail, my
dearest second-self will fare the better for it.


The fox fares best when he is cursed.


Priss, Priss, a word or two, Sweet Priss.


Why how now Sauce? Plain Priss? Am not I her Highness Maid of Honour?


I know thou art a Maid of Honour, but the meaning of this, dear Priss?


The meaning of what, thou Novice?


That Madam is so suddenly turned to Highness, Is my Lord made Protector?


No, you Dunce; well, thou art the simpl'st Secretary! what must I find thee
brains and Understanding, know then and grow wise upon it, She will be
Protectoress whether he be Protector or not: If he has any Honour it must come
from her, for ought I see; she is before hand with him, and hath Installed her
self already, I'm sure my Voice was Herald to it, thou piteous thing, question
the Pride and pleasure of a Woman? I will have thee Scribe to know, the time
will come I shall have Honour too, and be Courted by the better sort.


Have I been wanting in that Duty, Priss?


Wanting, why thou art always wanting, never provided, still behind hand,
never before hand to a Woman; this I profess, and to thy shame be it spoken:
And therefore walk upon it, I have no more to say to thee.


But I have something to say to thee, oh Ungrateful Priss!


Ungrateful? and why Ungrateful, pray?


Hast thou forgot the small token I sent thee.


I was a small one indeed if it came from thee.


The tweezers out of France


Did Travail hither, but were as dull as he that sent them, they would not cut
a feather. Is that your precious Present? If thou hast no better, Walk alone
for Priss, She's not for thy Company.


Nay, Dear Priss, shall We be Married.


What are you so hot, Sir? there's a jest indeed, Marry, before your Prentiship
is out.


What dost thou mean Wench? prithee kiss me.


I'll see better Clothes on your back first.


Why, are not these good?


Enough, had not a fool the Wearing of them.


Thou may say any thing Priss, I may have better.


When that time comes, and thy Wit is more refined, I may say something to
thee.


Oh my Dear Priss, in the mean time, let me but kiss thy hand.


That you may, but hear me, be not proud on it, Nor take this as a punctual
promise from me, I love my self better then so.


Yet I may live in hope.


If it were not for hope, the heart would break, they say: But odds so, I
forget my Duty to her Highness.


And so do I, thou hast Transported me.


Not to Iamaica yet.


Good Lady Mother, be patient.


Good Lady Fool, hold your prating; Was ever Mother so unhappy, or Children so
sensles^ly ungratious?


I beseech you think not so, things will make for the best.


Oh fond Girl, what hope can thou create unto thy self can save Us now from
sinking? We must perish, undoubtedly We must; though Ber^lam carry a smooth
Tongue to thy Husband, it speaks not the Language of his heart, for that is
rugged. It will deceive him as it did thy Brother, and the late Idolised
Parliament, he set up, out of a Malice to thy fathers Memory, to make it
Odious, because he pulled the Babell down, yet now he has Usurped that
Privilege himself* let his pretence be what it will, it bears no other Weight
but that of his Ambition, to which thy Husband is a Property.


Mother I profess I'm glad to see you here, ne'er trust me law, how do you
forsooth?


The worse for thee, I wish I ne'er had known the time Occasioned thee to call
me Mother.


Why forsooth Mother, if it please your Highness?


Oh Monstrous, not to be endured! I have been tame too long, the fool hath
found a way to upbraid my Misery, She had a husband dear Ireton, my best of
Sons, had Wit, and by his Council s^ilted up Our Honours, which thou pull'st
down as fast by thy simplicity.


I profess, ne'er trust me, I speak Ingeniously ne'er stur now, I am no such
Baby neither, as you take me to be, Mother.


A mere Stalking horse to Bertlam's Pride; his Wife, that Minion, doth assume
that title, I once, and my Son Richard's wife Enjoyed; She will be called her
Highness with a horse pox, while I am called Old Ioan, old Bess, old Bedlam,
old Witch, old Hag, the Commonwealth's Night Mare; 'tis well, if any have the
modesty to call me Gammer, or old Mrs. Cromwell, and leave out many other
horrid Nick-Names, this Infamy and more thou hast brought on Us.


Good Mother, do not Weep.


Would I were dead; Nothing Torments me more, then that thy Father, who whilst
he lived, was called the most Serene, the most Illustrious and most Puissant
Prince; (whilst that the fawning Poets Panegyrics swelled with Ambitious
Epithetes) is now called the fire-brand of Hell, Monster of Mankind, Regicide,
Homicide, Murderer of Piety, a Lump of flesh sok'd in a Sea of blood, Traitor
to God and goodness, an Advancer of Fiends and Darkness; such as these and
worse, could I but think on them, are daily cast into my Ears, by every idle
fellow.


I pray take their Names, I profess Mother, I'll Order them, as I am here.


Thou Order them, alas! they value not so poor a thing as thou art, had Dick
continued, he had kept Our Fame up fair it the World, none durst have blemished
it. They tell me that the time is coming, I must make a Stall my Court, and
learn to thrive by footing Stockings, and if that won't do it, must be (what I
ne'er was) a Woman of Carriage, either for Tubs of Ale, as Suiting best with my
Original Condition, or else for Oysters; I was made for Burdens, and am too
Old, and Ugly to cry Oringes; If these Trades fail me, then I must turn Bawd,
they think me tough enough t'endure that Tempest, and tell me there's a place
called Sodom, will receive me and my Retinue; I know it not, but thus I am made
a Public scorn by all Men; And in that, thee nor thine, nor any other that
claim relation to Us are exempted; And all this by the foolery.


I profess Mother I will be even with them, I know what I know, and there's an
end, as I am here.


I would there were an end to Our disgraces, which I do prophecy is but
beginning. What will become of that fair Monument thy careful father did Erect
unto thy memory, before (least none should do it after) thy death, next to thy
Husband Iretons; nay, even of his, thy Fathers too, and all that living bore a
love to him and Us? The raging Malice of proud Bertlam is so irrisistible,
'twill destroy all.


I profess Mother, my Lord Bertlam is a very honest Gentleman, and he loves me
well, I profess now to you; well, I know what I know, few words are best, I am,
and must be the Man when all is done, as I am here.


'Tis very likely, when all is done, shoul't be the Man will prove their Scorn
and laughing-stock.


I profess now Mother, in sober sadness, I scorn the words, so I do -- You know
what I told you, Sweet heart, as I am here.


Very well, and do believe't, though you forsooth are so doubtful.


Doubtful, of what? of that I never heard.


No more words, but Mum, I say, I charge you Sweet-heart.


My Lord, the Council waits your coming.


Why law ye now, as I am here, you thought I warrant, I should not be sent for
neither; I profess forsooth Mother you are very hard of belief -- Tell the
Lords I'm coming.


I shall, my Lord, most honoured Lady your most humble Servant. Your humble
Servant Madam.


I have seen this fellows face before, methinks he does retain something of the
duty he paid me formerly.


Be put patient Mother, I'll warrant, things will go according to your wish.


I, if you'll have some patience, if not, I profess Mother I cannot tell how to
help it, for I must to Coach, that's the truth on it. Sweet-heart, pray make
much of my Mother.


Will you please to walk in, forsooth.


My heart was very heavy when I came hither, 'tis somewhat now at ease, by the
disburdening of my Oppressing Griefs.


I hope forsooth, you'll have no cause to Create more of them.


Hast thou Summoned those inferior things?


What the Ladies of the last Edition?


Those whose husbands have been Stygmatiz'd by Noll and Dick, with the Title of
Baronets.


I gave Order to Trotter to Trot about it, an't shall please your Highness.


The Ladies are coming forth.


They were not bound to their good behaviour, but -- 'Tis well they Understand
their Duties; set Us Our Chair of State, and then admit them.


Gentlewomen, for Ladies We cannot call you, your Obedience to our Commands is
well rese^ed, if you persevere in it you will Oblige Our favour: Priss proceed.


By what Authority, and from whom do you derive your Titles of Madams, I pray.


From Our Husbands.


What are they? of what standing?


Of no long standing, We confess.


That's a common complaint, and a general grievance.


And shall be taken into consideration for a thing we know; Priss, prick that
down in your Note book: Who made your Husbands Knights?


Oliver the first


Of horried memory, put that in your Note book, Priss,


And Richard.


Of Sottish memory, shall I put that down too, '^is remarkable?


By all means, put it down in the Margin, as a hand directing to the rest.


Of their foolish Families, 'tis done an't please your Highness.


What Coares of Arms do your Husbands beat?


Who? Mine, Madam.


I, thine, Woman.


You a Lady, and show so little manners: Forget her Highness!


I pass by their dirty breeding. Woman. We say, what Coat of Arms does thy
Husband give?


He bears Argent upon a Bend Gules, three Cuekolds Heads Attired Or.


Three Cuckolds Heads! Why one is sufficient in all conscience.


'Tis a Paternal Coat belonging to the Family of the Wittals.


It may be they were Founders of Cuckoldsaven.


No more of Cuckolds, Priss, 'tis approbrious, and intrencheth much upon the
Honour of our Sex: Put that down in your Note-book as a public Grievance, and
it concerns Us to look after, and the Committee of Safety to Remedy.


'Tis a material and punctual point to a Woman.


And what does thy Husband give, prithee?


He bears Three Gantlets Dexter Or.


Or again: Your Highness may perceive they have had Golden times on it.


Dexter Or: Well, we know he has been an Ambo-dexter all his life time, and he
shall now give another Coat; A Body without a Head in a Field Sable -- And
what's thine, prithee?


Ours is but Part per pale.


Part per pale: What's that?


A Motley Coat of two colours.


'Tis a wonder with what Impudence those Fellows Noll and Dick could Knightifie
your Husbands! For 'tis a Rule in Heraldry, that none can make a Knight but he
that is a Knight himself: 'Tis Zanca Panca's Case in Donquixott.


If none can make a Knight but he that is a Knight, how shall our Husbands
receive honour from your Husband, who is no Knight himself?


Let me alone to Dub him.


You have done that already, and 't please your Highness.


If Dubbing our Husbands will carry it, we can do that our selves.


But Ours is of greater Honour and Antiquity, and therefore ought to take place.
Receive that as a Maxim from Us, dispute no further.


We shall not.


Since, being Enfranchised through our grace and favour you are become Members
of Our Common-wealth, Declare your Grievances, and we will hear 'em, whether
public or private.


Begin with the private first, Sweet Mrs. Priss.


This Lady complains her Husband prays too much, and it take him off his other
business.


There can be no Charity in that Man is remiss in his Benevolence. Receive that
as another Maxim -- Priss, You mind Us not.


I'm pricking of it down* and't please your highness.


But, it may be he prays when's Zeal's on fire (as Bells ring) backwards.


And then he ^ails against the Whore of Babylon, and then the people think he
calls me Who^e.


That's gross, and shows small breeding; We will have it rectifi'd, it concerns
Us.


And my husband says I talk in my sleep, and call on Men to come to bed to me,
and discover his infirmities.


Oh! have a care of that.


Have a care of what? Were he capable of more care of me, I should have less
care of my sel^.


I commend the Ladies resolution.


And, what say thou?


Why truly I cannot say much. My husband is a Man of reason, and is willing I
should satisfy my self; he know the ^ailings of Women, and imputes it to the
frailty of our Sex.


He's an honest Man, I warrant him.


Such a Husband for my money.


As you are a Lover of Women, let the Act of the 24 of June against Fornication
be repeal'd; Me thinks it frights as there were a Furnace in'^.


As there were Conveniences in that Act, which tied up Men's tongues from
babbling, so there were destructive Inconveniences in it, familiarity not so
frequently used between Man and Woman. When know, Society is the life of
Republics -- Martin the first, and Peters the second -- Indeed, things were
rather done in fear then freedom.


In a Free State who is not Free?


I beseech you in the next place, that the Cavaliers may not be looked upon as
Monsters, for they are Men.


And that it may be imputed no Crime to keep 'em company, for they are honest.


And men that will stand to their Tackling.


Well, we will have these amended: What have you more to say?


Now, Mrs. Priss, to the Public, I pray.


Whereas several abuses have lately crept in amongst Us.


That's a small abuse; Love must creep till it can go.


Her Highness hath the Feeling sense of it, and gropes out the meaning already,
you see.


We could not go to Hide-park, nor Spring-garden so much as with our own
husbands.


Why, what had you to do to go with them? Could you find no better company?


Good men were scarce; and then to avoid suspicion.


In my foolish opinion that rather bred it; what walked with your own Husbands?
How contrary to Conscience and high breeding is that?


When things are settled, we'll have an Act that no Lady or Gentelwoman shall be
put to that Slavery, but shall have liberty to walk or -- talk, with whom they
please: Now may a multitude of men's blessings light on you. Priss proceed.


Here's a Lady desires a pa^ten for Painting.


'Tis too great for a Subject, we intend it for our selves, and to that end,
have employed several persons as our Agents in foreign parts, to find out the
readiest and securest way for making it, that it may not eat into the Cheeks,
beget Wrinkles, impare the Eyesight, or rot the Teeth.


I have found the woeful experience of that.


We have Intelligence of a Water that will in two hours time take the withered
skin off the face, and a new one shall supply the place. That no Lady or
Gentlewoman, though she have out-worn Sixty, shall appear above five and twenty
years of Age.


That makes your Highness look so smooth upon it.


There's no Invention for sleeking, glazing, or anointing, but we have notice
of; and for Powders and Perfumes, we may be scented a street off.


Oh sweet Woman!


Then for Attiring, and to find out the Mazes of Fashions, there's no Lady but
must follow Us.


You are at a great charge, sure.


We are so, but 'tis Princely. --


We hope your Highness will remember the foregoing premises.


Priss, be it your care to mind Us; We must to Wallingford House and have um
confirmed.

And in the mean time, let our Music play
To Celebrate the Glory of this Day.

The Lords are coming.


Are you sure on it?


They are upon us already.


That they are not, I'll assure you, Gentlemen; However I will attend my charge.
Keep back there, keep back there, I say, keep back there, make room for the
Lords there. God bless your Honours.


It must be done (my Lord) we have nothing else to take him off.


Scots, we know generally are greedy of gain, and since we have made him
President, and sensible of our Secrets, 'tis requisite we do something to stop
his Mouth.


Lest he -- No matter, it must be done, my Lord.


Say you so, I profess, seriously, If I thought good would ensue of it, with
all my heart.


My Lord believe us, all We can serve you in you may Command.


And you shall find it so when occasion serves, and the Governments new molded.


Marry Sirs, a^ise sa mold it, twas near so molded, sen the Dam bound the
head on it.


I know there are some Ambitious spirits, would have it settled in a Single
person, but we are quite against it.


The few Deel splitt his pipe will be sort than, for Archibald.


But my Lord Bertlam is a stirring man, you see,


Bertlam, let Bertlam gang tol Bedlam in the Deels nam, what ha I to da with
him, Ise year humble Servant Gentlemen.


How do you, how do you, and how dow do you my Lords and Gentlemen all, how do
you?


And how do you, how do you?


Ah my geod Loords, ken ye me, Sirs.


We shall make up our number anon: Will you please to assume the Chair, my
Lord.


Marry, and Ise your humble Servant, my geod Loord Bertlam.


Come come, What Government must we have? what Government must we have?


I, I, I; What Government? Let's know quickly: Come, you talk of Conservetat,
Conservetat, 'tis a hard word, hanged; but there's tors in it, I'm sure of that.


Conservetor, my Lord! Conservator.


Conservators let it be then; When shall we have um, when shall we have um?


My Lord, We will think on that hereafter.


Hereafter comes not yet then, it seems.


But while the grass grows the Horse may starve.


Howere, Gramercy Horse, though't has no tail to it.


Geod feath Sirs, and I'll tell you a blithe tale of a Scottish Puddin, will gar
ye awe tell laugh, Sirs.


That Puddin will have no ent ^o't, good my Lord.


I love to hear of a puddin, so it be a bag-puddin.


So do I, if it be a good one.


Bred a goad, as geod a puddin as ere was cut up.


I profess my hair stands an end.


No more Swea^ing, my Lord, 'tis not seasonable in this place.


Hark ye me than, Sirs, mind ye me now or near: There was a poor woman,
Sirs, bog'd oath Karle the Speaker, Sirs, an heed gee her noought Whilke guard
her to let a crack, Sirs; I marry quo the Woman quo now I see my Rump has a
Speaker too. Haw lick ye my Tail now, Sirs?


Ha, ha, ha!


My Lord, I know you have many of em, but pray let's mind our business.


Business, Why there's the thing; I think every man ought to mind his business:
I should go and bespeak a pair of Mittins and Sheers for my Sheerer, a pair of
Cards for my Thrasher, a Scythe for my Mower, hob-nayl Shoes for my Carter, a
Screen for my Lady Wife; and I know not what: My head is so full of business, I
cannot stay, Gentlemen.


Fie, fie, Gentlemen, will you neglect the business of this Day; We meet to
gratify our Friends.


Nay, then do what you will, so I may rise time enough to see my Horse at
night.


Is that it? Clerk, read what we past the other Day; I mean the heads of 'em;
what Papers and Petitions remain in your hands, referring to this Days
business.


Forbid we should be backward in rewarding such have done Service to the
Common-wealth.


There's Money enough, Gentlemen.


If we knew where to find it. However, Clerk, read* To Walter Walton Draper
6929 l. 6 s. 5 d. for Blacks for his Highness.


For a Halter: Put it down for Oliver Cromwel's Burial. We will have no record
rise up in judgment against Us for such a Villain.


But first let's consider whether that were good Service, or not.


However, we will give him a Paper for it: Let him get his money when he can: Paper
is not so Dear, Gentlemen, and the Clerks pains will be rewarded.


Geod Consideration my geod Loord; bred Sir, that Cromwell was the veryest
Limmer Loone that ere cam intoll our Country, the faw Deel has taken him bith
Lugs by this time for robbing so rich a Country; bred Sirs, I.


I profess my Lord Stoneware you are to blame, I promise you, you are; Why do
you Swear so?


Geod feath I go you thanks for your chastisement, Ise sit ye Sir, au
professta, an se gif you ha me.


That may bring you profit indeed. Clerk, proceed.


To Walter Frost Treasurer of the Contingencies, 5000 l. To Mr. Edward Backwel
4600 l. To Mr. Hutchinson Treasurer of the N^vy, 200000 l.


O^nds, there's asum! marry it cam from a Canon sure. Clerk. To Mr. Backwell
more 326 l. 16 s. 5 d. To Mr. Ice 400 l. To Mr. Loethur Secretary to his --


To Oliver Cromwell say, leave out Highness: You were ordered so before, where
ere you find it.


Secretary to O. Cromwell, 2999 l. 5 s. 7 d. for Intelligence, and Trapanning
the Kings liege people.


Marry Sirs, an ye gif so fast, yeel go awe away fro poor Archibald Johnson.


Oil the Wheel (my Lord) your Engine will go the better: Move for him first.


Be it your business, I'll do as much for you.


Content* Gentlemen, since we have set this Day apart from other business,
purposely to gratify our most concerned Friends, let us consider the Worth of
the Lord Stoneware, a person of eminent fidelity and trust.


Geod feath, and I ha been a trusty Trojan, Sirs.


We know it very well Sir, I profess, my Lord.


And 'tis but reason you should be rewarded.


I'd scorn to let a Dog go unrewarded.


And so would I, he fawns so prettily.


My Lord, you are Witty, I hope we shall have no more on it. Huson. And performs
his Graces to a Scottish Pipe so handsomely.


You may content your self with that (my Lord) he is our Friend.


Geod feath Sirs, an sa I am; when denies it?


Nay, my Lord, we are not Foes; I am for you.


And so am I, as live.


Geod feath weel sed* ye ken well enough Ise sure Ise a man can serve ye awe,
Sirs: Sin ye are so kind Sirs, Scribe read my Paper to.


You have a Petition then?


Geod feath I had been a very fool else.


Give us the substance of it.


That your Honours would be pleased, in consideration of his faithful Service,
and the constant charge he is at both at home and abroad, to grant him some
certain considerable sum of Money for his present supply.


Order him Two thousand pound.


Seriously, let it be Three thousand, Gentlem. You must understand he is much
in debt.


God; benizon lite on your saw, my geod Loord Bertlam.


Three thousand pound! Why, half such a sum will buy all Scotland.


Bred Sir, ye leoke bett blindly out than.


Gramercy, my Lord.


Well Brother, the time was, a mi^e of it would have bought all the Shoes in
your Shop, I will not say your Stall for your Honour sake, though now you do
abound in Irish Lands.


You're my geod friend Sir, geod feath you've ^ene hit him h^me. Clerk, gang a
tyny bit farther.


That your Honours would be pleased to Confer some Annual Pension upon him.


Gentlemen, I think it but reason; he has been faithful, and I hold him a good
Commonwealths Man, and the rather because Hazlerigge hath so bespattered him;
since you have consented to his present supply, let him not suffer for want of
a future one: What think you of 400 l. per ann. 'Tis but small; Say, are you
willing to it Gentlen.


I, I, I.


Are you pleased, my Lord?


Bred, thar'es a question indeed; Onnz Sir, ye ha won my heart.


Then Gentlemen, since my Lord Lockwhit's Modesty is such he cannot speak for
himself, give me leave to become an humble Suitor in his behalf --


That you will be pleased to make him Const^ble of Windsor Castle, Warden of
the Forests, c. Lieuten^nt of the Castles and Forests, with the Rents,
Perqu^sites, and profits thereof. Gentlemen, I need not instance his
faithfulness to us and our Designments hitherto: No man here (I presume) but
hath been, and is satisfied in himself of his reality; And therefore I am
confident you cannot confer a place of so great honour or trust upon a person
more deserving: But I submit to your Wisdom.


'Tis granted.


Bred my good Lord, what can ye ask that we sall not grant?


I have heard some say, that Honour without Maintenance is like a blew Coat
without a Badge.


Or a Pudding without Suet.


You have made him Keeper of the great Seal; 'tis honour, I confess, but no
salary attends upon it; and bribes you know are not now so frequent as they
were in Noll's time: Besides, my Lord is a person of that honour.


Well my Lord, let us be brief and tedious, let us humour one another; I love
my Lord Lockwhit well.


I move for a Salary, Gentlemen; Scobel and other petty Clerks have had 500 l.
a year apeice granted to them* I hope he merits more.


Let him have a thousand pound a year then, you shall not want my voice, my
Lord.


'Tis a liberal one, my Lord.


I profess soberly with all my heart.


Does that please your Lordship?


Your faithful Servant, my Lord; but if I may be so bold to know from whence I
shall receive it.


Out of the Customs, the best place, I think.


Sure pay my Loord, bred a goad, Ise uphold you now, ga^g your ways; on
Scribe, let us mind mere good Warks, we sall prosper then, awe my s^w, Sirs.


Clerk, proceed where you left off.


Honyleybres 3000 l. upon account, Backwell for 9600 l. Worseley Aubrey for
2500 l.


Bred holt for tham, where the Deel sall they ha awe this siller, Sirs.


Ne'er trouble your self for that, my Lord.


These things must be granted, we know the persons, they are our friends.


I profess, indeed Brotherly love ought to go along with us all; but when all
is gone, when shall we have more?


Pough, my Lord, the City's big with riches, and near her time I hope to be
Delivered.


I'll be the Midwife, or what you will call me, I'll under^ake to do my office as
well as Dr. Chamberlyn can do his.


Well said Brother, what's the matter there?


I'll wait on you immediately, Gentlemen.


Is the Lord Bertlam gone?


I profess, I know not.


Why, how now Sweet-heart, What make you here?


Nay, what make you here then?


This is not a place for Women.


How so, Sir, pray, while thou art here I have as much right to the place as
thou hast, if I am Iohn Bertlam's Lady, and for ought I know my advice may do
as well here as thine, for all you perk it so.


Good Sweet-heart, return to thy Coach.


Good Sweet-heart, tell me, am I her Highness or not her Highness, or what do
you intend to make of me?


Thou make thy self seem to be a Mad Woman.


Do I so, Sir, I'll be madder yet; then I'll to the Board, and know what they
intend to do with me.


Thou wilt not, sure.


But I will, and hear what they will say to me; I will be put off no longer.


Be not so loud.


I'll be Louder Sir, and they shall hear me; If I am not Her Highness, they
shall not sit there.


Thou shalt be as high as can be, if thou wilt be patient.


Patient, I, thou know too well I am a patient fool; pray, when will the time
come I shall be styled Her Highness? for that I will be.


I'll tell thee that anon; prithee Sweet-heart take thy Coach.


I, thou think with thy fine Words to Work me to any thing, but if you Deser
the time too long, you'll find the Contrary -- Call my Man there -- Do ye hear
me? pray make haste home.


Well.


My Lord, We thought you had been gone.


No, my Lord, I have been better bred then so, to leave you in the heat and
midst of business.


Nay, I think the heat of our business is over for this Day. Clerk, See, have
you any more Papers?


Not any.


Let us rise then, I think we have sate a pretty time by it.


And my colon begins to cry out beans and bacon.


I profess my Lord, it is not I think fit to put you in mind, I hope I need
not, I profess.


Oh, to move concerning a Single person.


By all means, for his Lordship.


Seriously, my Lords, I hold it would have been unseasonable, but at the next
Sitting it will fall in course my Lord, and then my Lord --


We are your Creatures.


Say you so, I profess let it be so then.


Come let us go, I'm mad to be gone; What should we stay here for?


Marry, an ye speak right, Sir. Scribe, See awe theise Orders be ready for my
hond aneust Morn; mere especially my none and my geod Loods here, that they
may gang to the Patent Scribe, here ye me.


They shall, my Lord.


Come Sirrah, here be thriving Times, some men rise with their Breech upwards.


And 'tis very probable may be lashed for it: How they Divide the Kingdoms
Treasure.


I commend them, they make use of their time, make Hay whilst the Sun shines.
I wonder my Lord Desbrough mist that Proverb at the Table.


Was ever such Language heard at a Council-Table before? They are all made up
of Proverbs and Old-sayings, except his tamen semper, Bertlam and Lockwhit.


Oh! those are two precious Devils; but for a fawning and colloguing Divel,
give me the Scotch Divel.


No more of this, the Dore-keeper has Ears.


I would his Ears were off, they are not worth the Sense of Hearing: But come,
let's put up our trinkets; a pox on it, I did not think they would have sate so
long.


Thou hast some Baggage or other to go to, I'll be hanged else.


Thou may be hanged in time; however weel go.


Well, go your ways, you are a precious Couple.


What's the matter? Corporal.


The City's up in Arms.


I am glad on it.


And so am I, there's plunder enough, I am mad to be at it.


The Committee sate all this night about it; 'tis said they are up every where.


I warrant that Dog in a Doublet Has^erigg i^ the Ring-leader.


'Tis likely, the news came but within this hour, and the danger that lu^ks
in it hath called the Committee together, to morrow the Prentices intend to
petition the Lord Mayor for a Free Parliament.


Let em', 'tis good fishing in troubled waters.


Must the RUMP come in again?


I know not, good Lads make haste, the Captain stays for us.


Pox on it, let's ne'er stand buttoning our selves, We'll leave our Doublets
behind us.


No, by no means.


And is't come to that, then hey for Lumbard-street, there's a Shop that I have
marked out for mine already.


You must not think to have it all your self, Brother.


He that Wins gold, let him Wear gold, I cry.


Well, we shall have enough, 'tis a rich City, never came better news to the
Soldiery.


We'll Cancel the Prentices Indentures, and bind them to us in surer bonds.


And they shall ne'er be made free by my Consent till they have paid for their
Learnings.


Me thinks I see the Town on fire, and hear the Shrieks and Cries of Women and
Children already; the Rogues running to quench the fire, and we following the
slaughter. Here lies one without an Arm, and he cannot hold up a Hand against
us; another without a Leg, and he shall not run for it; another without a Nose,
he will ne'er smell us out; another without a Head, and his plotting's spoiled:
Here lies a rich Courmogeon burnt to Ashes, who rather then he would survive
his Treasure, perishes with his Chests, and leaves his better Angels to wait
on Us, you Knaves.


Oh brave Tom.


I know you have all Mettle enough, but our Captain stays.


Not a minute longer -- hey for Lumbard-street, hey for Lumbard-street!


Hey for Lumbard-street, hey for Lumbard-street!


Come boys come, as long as this Club lasts fear nothing, it shall beat out
Husons the other Eye, I scorn to take him on the blind side, I'm more a man than
so.


Thou a Man, a mere Pigmy!


Children are poor Worms, I would have you to know that I am the Cities
Champion.


Thou the Cities Champion!


Yes, and will spend life and limb for Magna Charta and a Free Parliament.


So we will all, so we will all.


Why then you are my Boys, and true Sons to the City; Cry up a Free Parliament.


A Free Parliament, A Free Parliament!


Boys, this was done like Men; but do you hear the News? My Intelligence is
good.


What is't Champion, What is't?


There's a Proclamation come from the Committee of no Safety.


For what? Champion.


To hang us all up if we Depart not to our Homes: How like you that, Gallants;
how like you that?


This hanging is such a thing, I do not like it; well, I'll go home.


Why now you show what a Man you are; I was a Pigmy as you said but erewhile;
but now I say and will maintain it, Thou hast not so much spirit or spleen in
thee as a Wasp.


Oh brave Champion!


Will you like Cowards forsake your Petition and have no Answer to it? Rather
let's dye One and All.


One and All, One and All.


Why this is bravely said, now I'll tell you what you shall do; when the Sheriff
begins to read the Proclamation, every man enlarge his Voice, and cry No
proclamation, No proclamation.


Agreed, agreed; No proclaamation, No proclamation, No proclamation.


Was ever such a sort of Rogues seen in a City? Come follow me, I'll so order
um.


Oh brave Colonel!


Shoot, shoot; I charge you kill the Rogues, leave not one of them alive,


Cain has killed his Brother, Coll. Cordwainer he has spun a fine Thread to
day.


It may bring him to his End.


St. Hugh's Bones must go to the wrack, and there let him take his Last, Whoop
Cobbler.


Whoop Cobbler, Whoop Cobbler.


From whence come these? Search that House, and every House: I vow there's not
a Street free from these Rogues.


Where hast thou been, Champion?


Where none but a Champion durst be.


Where's that? Where's that?


Stand here and admire; You are beholding to me, I have past the Pikes to meet
you, and sweat for it: I tell you I have been at Guildhall, and what I have done
there, let Histories record. I'll not be my own Trumpet.


What did thou do there?


Do you see this small Engine? 'Tis a good one, and has been trusty to his
Master: I say no more.


Nay, good Champion; What, what?


How Dull you are! With this (I say) heartily charged and ram'd, under my Apron
closely hid, Latit anguis in herba, (There's Latin for you Rogues) I got into
the Yard.


What then, What then?


By good fortune I espied a very fine fellow, some Officer no doubt, he did Ran
Dan so.


But prithee be plain and short.


No it was home, the sting of my Serpent hath either killed him or lamed him
downright, I warrant he troubles us no more this Day. Hark, the


Viva le roy, Viva le roy.


My Lord, you will still endear me.


A Duty so obliged cannot be paid too often, my prayers go with you, my most
honoured Lord.


If I return, my Lord, Command my Heart; In the mean time, let not your
friendship Cool.


My body shall be Ice first.


My Lord Stoneware, this is a high peace of Kindness indeed.


Marry, Ise come toll kiss your none hand, Sir, ^re ye gang anenst the limmer
loowne.


Your Servant, my Lord -- Walker, Are you ready?


Yes, my Lord.


Direct the Lord Stoneware to the Blew Chamber; where I'll attend your Lordship.


Your very humble Servant, my Loords.


I know She's clogged with passion, and 'tis not fit a Scot should understand
it.


You have done wisely in that, my Lord.


Have I stayed long enough, may you be spoken with yet?


Why not, Sweet-heart?


Am I a Wife, or no Wife.


My only Joy and comfort -- Why dost Weep? There's not a Tear but Wounds me.
Prithee leave, I'm sure you have no occasion for it.


Did Noll do so by his Wife Bess, that Puss? He had some care of her, and made
her what her heart could wish; but I have nought but empty promises.


Will you believe me? This Gentleman --


He's a Lawyer, and may lie.


He's my Friend.


'Twas a by-Complement, I confess; but I believe he knows more then you do.
Pray Sir, say, Shall I be what I will be, as he says?


The power is now in his own hands, and Doubtless my Lord's so wise he will
not pa^t with it.


Say you so! Then prithee kiss me Iohn, ne'er stir, I shall so love thee.


But we forget the Lord Stoneware.


He has got a Scottish Fog in's mouth by this time.


Hang him, 'tis such a Boorish stammering fellow, I cannot endure him.


But he's a property, if I return Victorious, I must make use of; Therefore,
prithee Sweet, be modederately sparing in thy language; let it not soar so
high, lest it prevent my Towering thoughts of their fruition, and clip those
Wings should hover thee to Greatness.


I'll not tie my tongue up for no mans pleasure living: I think I am a Free
Woman, no Bondslave, Sir.


But under favour, Madam, when you Weigh the Advancement --


I Weigh it not a rush, nor shall I Fee you for your Counsel, Sir.


He's a good Man, Sweet-heart.


Let him be near so good, I'll have my will,


I prithee do.


I trust I have not angered you, Madam.


Again Madam! let his goodness be what it will, I'm sure, he hath but ill
breeding.


My Lord Stonware is going, Sir.


Odds so, indeed, we have been too uncivil, come Sweet-heart, my Lord, will you
please to walk in.


How now Gentlemen? you are upon the merry March, I hear.


I, a pox on it, We shall have little cause, I fear, to call it a merry one.


Well, I thank my Stars, Our Regiment stays here at the well head, you Rogues,
where there is plenty of all things.


What says Pluck? The Worser knave, the better luck.


But do you hear me, Sirrah? for all that, your Colonel may be hanged for
killing his Brother Cobbler.


I hear no harm, I'm not to answer for him: But prithee tell me, Do ye think
there will be bloody Noses?


Those that have a mind to it, let 'em give, or take 'em, hang him that fights a
stroke, for my par^.


Or mine either; Our Company swear they'll all be hanged first.


The General is like to be well hoped up with such Soldiers.


Why, what would you have us to do? If the General cannot agree them, let 'em
fight it out themselves and the Devil part 'em I cry.


If they will fight, we will make a ring for 'em.


They say that General Philagathus is a gallant Stout Man, an Excellent
Soldier, and a Marvellours honest Man.


Then we have the less reason to fight against him.


Nor will we fight against him.


But Brothers, let me advise you to have a Care what you say, lest you make
your Words good, and be hanged in earnest, there are Rogues abroad.


I, too many, I thank you Brother for your Advice.


A lack we talk away our time, let's go, let's go.


Nay, sure Brother Soldiers, we will not part with dry Lips.


What you intend to do, do quickly.


Come away then.


Now Priss, what think you now?


Why, truly Secretary I think thou wilt be a brave Fellow when my Lord returns.


You will let me kiss you now, I hope.


No indeed Secretary, I will not make you so bold yet; If you return safe and
sound, and in good plight, that is, my Lords brows circled with laurel, and
people smell you out to be a Secretary of State, 'tis very probable you may
have admittance to my Lip, and something else in a lawful way.


These words have comforted my heart, I'm overjoyed, trust me now: Odds so, my
Lords upon taking Horse; ah! ah! Dear Priss.


Sigh not Man, thou shalt have it; come take Livery and Seisin, and adieu.


Oh, So sweet as the Hony-combe!


Have a care you do not surfeit with it.


I must begone, Dear Priss, once more.


Why law you now give you an Inch and you will take an Ell; I shall be troubled
with you -- Kisses.


No truly Priss --


Why, you are bold indeed.


Oh Heart! Oh Fates! Why should such Lovers part?


Well, go thy ways for a Modest Ass, thou might have had something else,
had thou pressed me to it; but the Fool will make a fine Husband; when he
comes to taste the fruit, he'll so love the Tree! 'Tis a sweet thing for a Woman
of Knowledge to meet with a Man of Ignorance, and better to keep him in it. My
Secretary I see never read Arratine, if he had he would have been furnished
with more Audacity. Lord, how Honour Creeps upon me! I shall be Ladifi'd there's
no Doubt on it. How my Ears will be sill'd with Madams! And, Will your Ladyship
be pleased? What will your Honour have to Breakfast? How do you, Madam? I am
come to give you a Visit, Madam. Will you go to Hide-Park to day, Madam? How
does your good Lord, Madam? Did you Sleep well to night, Madam? Is your Dog
recovered of his Fit, Madam? Your faithful Servant, Madam. Have you any Service
to Command me, Madam? This her Highness despises. I am as proud as She; and me
thinks it sounds very well. Madam! Why, 'tis a word of State.


Mrs. Priss, Mrs. Priss, You must come away to her Highness presently.


Why, how now, Sance?


Sauce! Why, what are you, pray? Will you come away? I'll tell her.


I'll have you boxt anon, Sirrah, for this.


Champion, how now Champion? What news, Champion?


Nay, what news do you say, then?


Bertlam is gone.


The Devil and Iohn a Cumber go with him. Well, I hope General Philagathus will
so pay his Jacquet!


He will be forced to turn it.


That he hath done often enough already.


The Rogues were well mounted.


May the Horse founder, and the Foot die in Ditches! My prayers go along 'em.


Oh brave Champion!


Come Gentlemen, If you have any Chink go along with me; Weel drink Philagathus
Health. How they look at one another!


Faith Champion --


Speak no more, your Countenance betray your meanings, I perceive your Masters
are not so tender-hearted as mine; He's honest, lives in hope, allows me the
merry Sic a day to spend till better Times come.


Thou art happy, Champion.


You shall participate of that happiness! 'Twere pity such proper Fellows as we
are should part without Drinking a Health to Noble Philagathus his Success.


Well Champion, weel make you amends.


Let the mends make it self; Come away, begone.


How say you so forsooth Mother? as I'm here.


I say thy folly will undo us all.


I profess Mother, as I'm here you always harp upon one string: Ne'er stir, As
I'm here, and like the Cuckoo, have but one Note, Ne'er stir now.


What dost make of me, a Hooting-stock?


No, I profess not I, I know my Duty, as I'm here.


Thou Would fain seem a Soldier, and a Courtier, but thou art neither.


Good Mother be not so bitter, he's an honest Man.


Hang honesty, 'tis mere foolery; thy Father had more Wit then to be thought
one of that needy Crew; could ever Man have given the power out of his own
hand, as he hath done, and to his Enemy, a fellow as fierce as Aqua fortis, and
will eat into the very marrow of our families.


I profess Mother, you may be mistaken for all this, he is in some sense, but
my Servant.


And he'll become thy Master to thy shame, why did not go thy self?


Why? I profess, Whether you believe it or not, Mother, I am the greatest Man
in the Nation.


Until a greater come; How stupid art thou? Girl, prithee instruct him.


'Twould ill become me, sure to teach my Lord, I near was guilty of that crime
yet, he knows his own Business best.


I profess, Mother, you are such a strange Woman, I know not what to say to
you; had not General Philagathus (like a fool) made this disturbance, I know,
what I had been this time.


Thou had been neither better nor worse then what thou art, the Common
Tavern, and Town Table-Talk.


Why? I profess, Mother, you are not so well spoken of, neither, for all you
look so.


That's long of such an Idiot as thou art.


Nay Mother, indeed you do not well: He's my Husband, I ought not to suffer
this.


Good Lord! It seems he plays better at Tratrip with thee then thy Husband
Ireton did: Thou could find Tongue enough for him: Or, there's foul liars if
this March-pane fellow did not Melt in your Mouth in his life time.


I thank you, Mother.


What's that, what's that she says Sweetheart?


Nothing, my Lord, worthy your notice.


Had not a sool rid thee, thou had known thy Duty better. So much for that,
farewell.


Nay, good Mother.


Let her go, Sweetheart; the house will be the quieter, I profess.


She is my mother, my lord.


And I'm your husband my lady, as I'm here I think so: I profess I know not any
body cares for her company.


She does not come to trouble you, Sir.


Yes, She does, I profess, and very much: I was just thinking of State-Affairs,
and She has put all out of my head: The Committee have no reason to thank her,
to my knowledge.


Why, my Lord?


Why, the Citizens are mad for a Free Parliament, the Counties are all up; and
is it not time to look about us, I profess?


Indeed, my Lord, you say right.


If a Free Parliament sit once, what will become of Us, I profess we must
secure our selves as well as we can: the Rump (as the Wicked call it) must and
shall come in again, I profess.


What will become of your Friend the Lord Bertlam then?


I profess, I care not; your Mother takes me for a fool, but let me alone to
deal my Cards, the Speaker and I are reconciled: But Sweet-heart, I profess I
must be gon, I say no more, Bertlam, Stoneware, and Lockwhit are Knaves,
down-right Knaves, I profess they have fooled me all this while, it will now
turn to 'em, I profess, let 'em suffer.


I understood, my Lord, they were your Friends.


But I have found 'em out; say no more, will you go in, Sweet heart? I profess
I must be gon.


I obey you, my Lord.


I Wonder Priss, that none of the Modern Poets have been here with their
Encomiums since thy Lord Went!


It may be Helicon is Dried up, or their Brains are turned Addle.


Well, I'm resolved to make Him that brings me the first Copy Poet Laureate,
provided he brings Victory in it: I will Dispose of my Places my self, and be
Lord Steward my self, or it shall cost me a fall. Lockwhit for all his art
shall never Carry it.


How, Her Highness become Lord Steward!


No matter for that; Profit and Service will come by it: I'll have the ordering
of all Places both above and below Stairs, and so give out to the people.


And good reason too, bir Lady.


A Counsellor, a foolish fellow, at every end he calls me Madam.


Truly, there was one called me Madam too the other day. Lord, we Women are so
frail! I thought my self to be a Madam in good Earnest.


I Priss, thou might, and be proud on it; but I, I think am somewhat above
that.


A Story, so please your Highness.


I will have Eight Gentlemen Ushers, that Puss B^ss had Four; Two shall bear
up my Trai^.


Rather Four, and it shall please your Highness; that Petty-fogger Loethur's
Wise had one, and as I'm a Christian, another foolish fellow went bare before
her, no Countess could have been better Manned -- Well, it will come to my turn
shortly, but that the Wicked Rump is sat; there lies my fear, Oh Woodfleet!
Woodfleet! thou art stark nought.


What say thou, Priss?


I was thinking, and it please your Highness, what a Canary-bird Woodfleet was,
to settle the Rump, the abominable Rump, and pretended so much love to my Lord
and Master.


His love is not Worth the enquiring after, Wench; as for the Rump, I smell
'tis stale already, and must be peppered when thy Lord returns; dost think
Wench it shall have a sitting place then, no I warrant thee, he that jerked it
when he came out of the West, will do the like, when he comes out of the North.


I, and it shall please your Highness, if he return with Victory.


Ne'er fear it Wench, I have sent for Lilly, and Wonder he stays so long, 'tis
such a Dreaming fellow.


Here's Master Lilly, an't please your Highness.


How now Lilly, hast thou don what I Commanded thee?


I have Examined the Zodiac, Searched the 12 Houses, and by my powerful Art,
put the whole regiment of gods and goddesses out of order, Saturn and Iupiter
are by the Ears, and Venus will he rampant assisted by Mars the god of
Battles.


This makes for your Highness, I love Mischief with all my heart.


How stands my Husbands fortune?


In the Alnathay of Aries, or as some others have it Salhay, being the head of
Aries.


Aries, what is that Aries?


A Monster, I Warrant it.


'Tis a sign, and signifies a Ram.


You Rascal, Do you put the Horns upon my Princely Husband.


It may be a new peace of Heraldry.


He's subtle, politic, and crafty.


Thou hitst pretty well there.


Then in the Allothanie, or (as some have it) Alhurto, being the Tail of Aries,
I find him eloquent, prodigal in necessity proud, inconstant, and deceitful.


Dost thou abuse me, Rascal.


No such matter.


Alas! he means innocently, for these are virtues given to most of the
Male-kind.


He's there denoted to be fortunate in Warfare.


Go on, Fellow.


In Adoldaya, being the Head of Taurus.


Taurus, What's that?


A Bull.


Dare thou Horn him again.


'Tis a Sign.


A very ill Sign, the Sign of the Bull: But he does not mean, and it shall
please your Highness, the Town-Bull of Ely.


Has your Lord are a Mark or Mold upon his Members? If he has, he vanquishes
his Enemies.


He has that Priss, I'm sure on it.


You are best acquainted with his Secrets.


For Mars being with the Moon in the Sextile Aspect, encourages men of War, and
in the Trine promises Success.


I'll love that Trine while I live for it.


I wonder where the Fellow got all these hard Words.


Lose not an Inch of your State, lest you diminish the lustre of that Planet
predominates.


Why Sirrah, you grow sa^cy. Priss, Let the Foot-boy pay the Fellow for his
pains.


I hope she does not mean to pay me with Kicks: Is she angry?


No no, you have only put her in mind of her Majesty, she loves you ne'er the
worse for it; You must flatter her.


I have been bred to it. I take my leave of your Highness.


But take thy reward with thee: Thou art sure of what thou say?


As sure as if I had the Planets in my hand; a man can say no more.


Well, go thy ways, and if thy judgment ^alter, To second thy gold Chain expect
a Halter.


What dost thou think now?


How can I think amiss? He's a notable Man: I'll get him into the Larder one
time or other, and I'll make him show me all.


Show thee all, Wench! Out upon it.


What, the Lilly and the Rose: I promise you, for ought I see, the Lilly is the
best flower in your garden.


Here's a Letter from my Lord to your Highness.


Hast ne'er a one for me from the Secretary?


Yes, Mrs. Priss.


So, this Fellow is Saucy, I must take him down a button-hole lower. Good news,
no doubt on it; and then we shall have such Bonefiring. I'll read my Switter-com
Swatter-com's Letter anon. But, her Highness begins to look pale upon it; I do
not like this changing Countenance.


Thy Lord is Murdered.


Then my honour goes to the Dunghill: A pox of Lilly and his legion of Devils.


Murdered in his ^ame, his honour, the Soldiery have forsaken him.


If that be all, (...) matter Madam.


Even call me what thou wilt.


I should have called you Highness, I confess, but I hope you are not offended;
Lilly is a mere rogue, I'll never endure a Lilly hereafter, 'tis a flattering
flower, and stinks abominably.


He Writes me Word, he will be in Town this Night, he's sent for by the Rump.


Oh nasty Rump! But an't shall please your Highness, shall I seek out for eight
proper Striplings to to man your Highness and four Spring-cits to trick up your
Train, a French Taylor that has a yard thus long, a Cook whose Nose will not
offend your Sauce by dropping in it, a Gentleman Sewer that can dance before
your Dishes, an able Carver to cut up your Custards, a Taster that hath a sweet
Breath and no rotten Teeth, a Baker whose hands is not mangy; who shall be Lord
Chamberlain, Groom of the Stool, your Maids of honour, your Starcher, your
Tyrer, Yeoman of your Cellar, Yeoman of your Pan^rey, Yeoman of your Pastrey,
Clerk of your Kitchen, Clerk of the Roles? Lord, I'm even out of Breath with
reckoning up your Servitors!


How now Audaciousness!


Why, seriously I dreamt last night, an't please your Highness, that we have
been but Princes in disguise all this while, and that our Vizors are now
falling off; and who would think that Dreams should come to light so?


Now could I tear my flesh, all my hopes are lost.


No, you say there's one a coming.


How? this Woodfleets Wi^e will ore-top me.


Pull her eyes ont, and then let a Dog lead her.


Well, I'll do something.


I'll see your second so good, and 't please your Highness.


Hy Boys, the Noble General Philagathus lay at Barnet last night.


Say thou so, Champion.


And the pitiful, dityful Lambert, one of Donquixott's Lords, is in the Tower.
He has been a Whipste^ all his Life time, and now is become a staid Gentleman.


Well said, Champion.


No more of that if you love me, Noble Philagathus must be the Cities Champion,
I'll resign my Office, and yet be Loyal still.


Who will not? who will not?


Then you are my Boys again; do you not observe how the Phanaticks are
trotting out of town, some of the Rogues begin to mutiny?


Hang 'em up then, I cry.


So say I, by thousands; noble Phylagathus enters with love, and they go out
with curses, or like the Snuff of a Candle, stinckingly.


I'm sure they have eaten our Masters up.


Even to their Bowels, that Trading is become a mere Skelliton.


Now I hope we shall see better days.


Ne'er fear it Lads. Philagatbus is right, and sound to the very Core.


What will become of our Exchange. Merchant.


What? he that turned part of the House of God into a Den of Thieves.


The very same, the very same.


Let him hang himself, and when he is cold meat, the Divel carbanadoe him for a
Break-fast: But hark they are marching out, and Philagathus his honest
Soldiers are coming in. Oh let's see um! let's see um.


By all means let's see um.


Bless my Eye-sight! what? her Highness without her Train: Where is that
precious Bird thy Husband, Cag'd? His Wings are Clipped from flying: Faith now,
this comes of Threachery: Had he been true to my Son Dick, he might have still
continued honourable, and thou a Lady; and now I know not what to call thee.


Thy rudeness cannot move me, I impute it to thy Want of Breeding.


My Want of Breeding, Mrs. Mincks.


We Cannot expect from the Dunghill odorous savours: Were our affections
greater than they are, they merit not half the Contempt and Scorn pursues thy
wretched Family, and the Memory of thy abhorred Husband.


How durst thou name him but with reverence: He that out-did all Histories of
Kings or Keasors: was his own Herald, and could give Titles of Honour to the
meanest Peasants; made Brewers, Dray-men, Cobblers, Tinkers, or any body Lords:
Such was his power no Prince ere did the like: Amongst the rest, that precious
piece thy Husband was one of his making.


Would we had never known these painted Titles that are so easily washed off:


Ne'er go, yonder's my Mother; I profess, as I'm here, I'd rather meet, ne'er
stir, a Beggar in my Dish, so I had, as I'm here.


And, art thou there? Nay, ne'er hide thy face for it, though thou may be
ashamed of all thy Actions.


Why I, forsooth Mother? I profess, ne'er go, not I Mother, as I'm here.


C^ll (...) not Mother: Thou hast ruined my Children, and thy self too, like a
Fool as thou art.


And me and my Husband, like a Knave as thou art.


Would ever Coxcomb have committed such folly!


Or ever Changeling done the like! Jack Adams is a Man to thee.


I pro^ess indeed law, you are strange folks, I profess, ne'er go law: Cannot a
man, as I'm here pass the Street, I p^ofess law?


Hang thee, you're good for nothing,


But ^leering and fooling.


And how do you, forsooth? I profess.


And truly, I know what I know, and there's an end,


Of an old Song, Few words are best.


Ne'er go, I'm the greatest man in the Nation* I profess I, ne'er stir now:
Think you what you will, forsooth Mother, as I'm here.


I profess, ne'er stir, as I'm here, there's no enduring it, law now* as I'm
here; and therefore farewell, as I'm here, for I'll be gone, ne'er stir now.


Now Champion, what think you of your General Philagathus?


A ro^e on it, I know not what to think on it: Was ever such a Ra^e committed
upon a poor She City before? Lay her legs open to the wide world, for every
Rogue to peep in her Breech. I


'Tis Monstrous!


Is this the Cities Champion?


Well, On my Conscience he's honest for all this: The plaguy Rump has done this
Mischief: Well, Club stand stiff to thy Master, some body shall suffer for it: I
say no more.


We shall be Cooped up shortly for Hawks-meat in our Cellars, while they
possess our Shops, and Feast upon our Mistresses*


Well, I'll Warrant the Soldiery will be honest for all this, and then we will
Singe the Maggots out of the louzy Rump, or else Swindge me.


News Boys, News.


From whence, from Tripulo?


From Guildhall, you Knaves: We shall have a Free Parliament.


Hy, hy, hy.


The General and the City are agreed, and he has promised it.


Oh noble Philagathus!


Brave Phylagathus!


Honourable Philagathus!


Renowned Philagathus!


Now you Infidels, What think you now? Has your Fears and Jealousies left you,
or will you still damn your selves up with dirty Suspicion. You that spoke even
now you should be Cooped up for Hawks-meat, shall be Crammed up for ^apons;
your Cellars shall become Ware-houses, your Shops Exchanges, and your
Mistresses persons of honour.


And, what shall we be?


Squires of the Body: Honour sufficient enough for men of our rank, Gentlemen.


Oh brave Champion!


I tell you, I will have no more of that: Where is Lilly now?


In one of the Twelve houses.


We will fire him out of 'em.


How will the Man in the Moon drink Clarret then?


Clarret is best burnt, Sir, by your leave.


I, but Lilly has Eighteen houses.


A Bakers dozen: we will fire the odd end first.


A Match, a Match; we will do it.


But now I think on it, we must have no firing of houses, there's a Statute
against it: Better once Wise than never.


Oh brave Sack!


We will be merry to night, I'm resolved on it, or else never let Prentices presume
to be honest again, and therefore follow me: God bless the General!


Now Secretary, where's your Titles now? Not so much as a title of 'em
remaining, all sunk in the Sand-box.


I'm between Silla and Carybdis, I must confess; and thou hast gravelled me, my
dear Priss.


Hang your Dog Poetry, it made my Lord thrive so ill as he did: I think thou
did infect him; he used to have a Serene brain, and Courage good enough: Sure
the Viccar of Fools was his Ghostly Father: Be beat without a blow, there's a
mystery indeed!


Truly Priss, my Lord could not help it.


Not help it, there's a jest indeed, I'm sure he has helped himself into prison
for it, let who will help him out again. What course wilt thou take now,
Secretary?


Not horse-coursing Priss, I'd have thee know that.


Why, you're pretty well Timbered for such an Employment. Can thou make
pens?


Yes, and Ink too Priss, I tell you but so.


There will be a Trade indeed for thee.


Nay, and the worst come to the worst, I can teach to Dance.


I confess thy Sword is always Dancing.


That's the Alamode is learnt in France.


Come, if thou can Dance so well, let's have a frisk, if thou dare.


Truly Priss, I have not my Pumps in my pocket.


'Tis well thy Mother left thee Wit enough for an Excuse.


That is not all, look here, I can fence too --


What dost thou mean to do! --


Set your right foot forward, keep a Close guard, have an Eye to your Enemies
point, extend your Arm thus.


Lord, Lord, the man is mad sure.


Traverse your ground sometimes reverse, as thus: Give back then, come on again,
play with his point: I^ he makes a pass, put it by, make a home thrust thus,
run him thorough, and he falls I Warrant you.


Put up thy Fools-bawble there: I profess I'll ^all my Lady else.


Why, did it fright thee, Priss? seriously, I did but show thee what skill I
had at my Weapon.


Thou would make a rare fellow to fence before the Bears, if there were any.


Why, Priss? I dare say I can kill any man living that can't defend himself.


Ha, ha, ha! I am of thy mind, that can't Defend himself.


Why Priss, such as fight must take all Advantages.


And I that do not ^ight, will take the advantage to leave thee and thy
foolery.


Nay, dear Priss, ne'er go I'll follow thee.


Roast the Rump, Roast the Rump.


Silence, Silence, I say.


Silence, Silence there.


Gentlemen all, I tell you plain,
My Rump does itch, and we shall have rain.

Come Gentlemen, you are Welcome, Sit down, bring some Drink there, 'tis a
night of Jubilee, we will want no Drink while the Rump roasts.

Here's a Health to your noble General.


Thank you, young Man.


Baste the Rump ^oundly.


It bastes it self, i^ his been well^ed, a D^g take it: But pray give us some
Drink too, we are almost Dry roasted.


Begarr* dis b^ very lite night* me can ^ind my way to my loging* begarr very
well if me not take a Cup to (...) by the way: Now ga^soone, (...) be de matter
(...) you?


Some ^ the Bonfi^e (...).


Bonfi^es! begfrr me ^ be in the bonfires: here garsoone, ^ larshan to de
bonsire?


We are Musicians, and will give you a Lesson Mounsieur.


A Lesson, dat be very good, begarr me love it vitt all mine heart, alle alle
vic moy to de bonfire, begarr furboone Company de Souldate


Oh brave Mounsieur!


Furboone begarr now give me de merry Song, me give you de Larshan.


Have you this Song? We came from Scotland.


Yes, Sir.


Begarr me will have a dat.
We came from Scotland with a small force,
With a hey down down a down a,
But with hearts far truer then steel;
We got by my fay,
The Glory of the day,
Yet no man a hurt did feel:
When Bertlam first our Army did face,
Hey down down a down a,
He looked as fierce as the Divel;
We feared a Rout,
But he Wheeled about,
The Gentleman was so Civil:
Our General Marched with the Countries love,
With a hey down down a down a,
All persons to him did address;
Small money we spent,
For we found as we Went,
Good friends, and here find no less.

Furboone, begar furboone, done moy de toder Cup burn a de Rump.


That has been often done in your Country, Mounsieur.


Begar me vilt dance about de Bonfire, come vit me men.


Oh brave Mounsieur!


Let my Lady say what she will, I will see the Bonfire.


Begarr Metress you be a very fine Shentileveman, begarr me dance one time vitt
you, nay begar you no serve a me ^oe.


I cannot dance indeed, Sir.


Begarr me will have on touch vitt you, Metress.


What, before all this Company, Mounsieur?


Datt me will begarr.


Well, if I must dance, play Fortune my foe.


No, Sellingers Round, We are beginning the World again.


Me will have none of dat, me will have a de Corrant of de foot sa saw, come
Metress lend a


Well, now indeed I must begone, Sir.


Begar me will see you to your loging, pardon a moy.


By no means, I shall be knocked of the head then.


Me no care for dat, par ma moy adieu Iee vou remercy pour dis^boone Company,
adieu petit garsoone.


Adieu Mounsieur.


What are you resolved to do? Every man to his home, or shall we make a Night
on it.


A night on it, a night on it.


Come to the next Bonfire.


To the next Bonfire, to the next Bonfire.


We have played our Cards fair.


I deny it, We have not played our Cards fair.


B^ed Sirs, then ye have plaid then faw, and that's faw play geod feath, Sirs.


A Fool had the shuffling of them, the game had gone better else.


The faw deel himself was Trump, Sirs; I think s^rrs we ha had nee geod luck,
Sir^, this bout.


We are lost Sirs, utterly lost.


No Sir, we are found Sir, caught in a Net of our own making.


Thou would give all the Shoes in thy Shop to be ont of't.


Is there no remedy my Lord Lockwhit?


No remedy ^ ^ill.


Bred, (...) no ^, hes my Noble Liar Sirs.


Who^e Kee^ of the ^ now?


Where will you find your 1000. l. p. annum now.


Bred Sir^* (...) y^e gire* do ye gire? hes gatt rought Sirs, ^eit^er of any
the gifts I had geen me geod feath.


He^k you Mr. Lawyer, have you e^re a Habulus Corpulus to remove us from the
Storm is coming?


With a Sy^ers, Razer, or what a Divel do you call it.


You are politic, will you sell a penny worth of Policy, Sir?


Bred, he had mere need buy some to save his Cregg, Sirs.


Come lets let's leave the Law in the Lurch, and every man shift for himself?
Adieu! Mr. Lawyer.


Adieu! Mr. Lawyer.


Adieu! Mr. Liar.


How monstrously have I exposed my self to the dirty Censure of the basest
Creatures, things never mentioned but with scorn, and now I am become the
Thesis unto theirs? The very Cobbler reads a Lecture to me and I'm convinced, I
should amend my manners, and become Loyal Dictates long before Divinity
discovered! There's no sin like that we know, and that we surfeit in.


Do you want any Pens or Ink, Pens or Ink? Will you Fence, or will you Dance?
What Pens and Ink do you want, Gentlemen?


Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons* fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons: Me thinks
it sounds very well; a pox of her Tallnesse for me, no matter, ne'er repine
Wench, thy Trade's both pleasant and profitable, and if any Gentleman take me
up, I am still, Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.


Pens or Ink, Pens, Pens or Ink?


'Tis he. -- Walker.


Priss, my Dear Priss.


Why, how now Secretary, thou see my words are come to pass, I knew what a
Lord thou would be: But Fortunes a Whore.


A whip take her: But shall we meet now: Priss?


I think we are met Walker, although unhappily.


I mean upon equal terms.


Will you buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, will we buy a geodly
ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, any thing to live in this World? Bred, if I
should gang intoll my none Country, my Cregg would be stretched two inches
longer then 'tis: Will ye^ buy a geodly ballad, or a Scott Spur Sirs, will a
buy a Line a Iack-line, a Line a Jack Bertlams Line?


'Tis the Lord Stoneware.


No more Lord then thy self, Walker: Let's have some sport with him, Fine civil
Oranges, fine Lemmons: Will your Lordship buy any Lemmons and Oranges? Fine
civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.


Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will your Lordship buy any Ink or Pens for the
Committee of no Safety?


Bred a geod what a Whore and a Knave is this.


Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe, did ever Lord cry Turnips before? But a pox of
Lordship, would I had my old Farm over my head again, Turnips, Turnips Turnips
hoe, Turn-up Mistress, and Turn-up the Maid, and who buys my long Turnips ho!


He does it rarely well; Fine Oranges, fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons.


Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens for the Lord Desborough.


Bred 'tis he indeed, these are Witches sure, how does your geod Lady, Sir?


What my Lord Stoneware?


No bred a geod Ime no mere a Loord then yer neene self, my Honoor is in the
dust, Sir.


Have you any old Boots or Shoes to mend, I have helped to under lay the
Government this 20. years, and have been upon the mending hand, but I fear now
I shall be brought to my Last, therefore ought to mind my end; will you buy
Shoes for Brooms, or Brooms for Shoes?


Or a Knave for a whip, or a whip for a Knave? Fine civil Oranges, Fine
Lemmons.


Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, how do you my Lord?


Dost mock me fellow? Who are these?


My geod friend.


Brother Huson, and how, and how?


And what, and what? and pox of that, and that; lets embrace however.


What Kitchen stuff have you Maids? was ever Princess brought to such a pass?
what Kitchen stuff have you Maids?


Gammer Cromwell, our Maid calls you.


Where you Rascal?


In my --


You Rogue do you abuse me? I'll claw your eyes out.


Oh Dick! Dick! Did ever I think to come to this? What Kitchen stuff have you
Maids, Maids have you any Kitchen stuff Maids?


Fine civil Oranges, fine Lemmons? Will your Ladyship buy any Oranges and
Lemmons?


Dost thou mock me Bag^ge? I'll be at thee presently.


No indeed she does not, 'tis Priss my Lady Bertlams Woman, and I am Walker
her Secretary.


How? Thou hast walked fair indeed, where is her Highness now?


They say she intends to cry fresh Cheese Cream.


She has brought her hogs to a fair market.


And so we have all me thinks.


What art thou there too?


Bred an Ise here ta, and my geod Loord Desborough, bred a geod here's even a
Jolly Company.


It somewhat palliates my misery, That inafflictions yo^ like Sharets be.


Come let's mind our business, words are but wind* Fine civil Oranges, fine
Lemmons.


Ink or Pens, Ink or Pens, will you buy any Ink or Pens?


Will ye buy a geodly Ballad, or a Scott Spur, will ye buy a Iack-line a
Jack Bertlams line, or a line for a Jack a Bertlam.


Turnips, Turnips, Turnips hoe! Turn-up Mistress, and Turn-up Maid, and Turn-up
my Cousin and be not afraid of a long, long, Red Turn-up ho.


Boots or Shoes, Boots or Shoes to mend?


What Kitchen stuff have you Maids? what Kitchen stuff have you Maids?


I am a poor Lawyer Gentlemen, and can show you Legerdemain for your money, no
Hocus Po^us like me. I have two hands, neither of them disabled from taking
^ees; have you any canses to split? for that's my Doom, my Bag is a Receptacle
for them; I am for that ^use brings me most profit, be it good or be it bad;
but indeed have been better experienced in the bad, and now would ^ain follow
the good Cause and turn honest; but a man shall hardly grow rich then you'll
say, and then 'twill vex a man.

How e're I'll try' ^, for to my grief I find
Riches ill got, do scatter with the Wind.
Have you any work for a poor Housell Lawyer, for all (...) honest Lawyer, I am
your next man, Gentleman.

Ambition and (...) Avarice, adieu!
How e're your Gl^yes yes seem, they are not true.

T^s done, and now to Censure; But be just;
The Authors name's committed to your trust*
You have here in a MIRROR seen the Crimes
Of the late P^ageantry Changeling Times.
Let me Survey your Brows -- They are Serene,
Not clouded, or disturbed with what you've seen:
None whose grand Guilt appears touched to the quick*
And in Revenge would against their MIRROR kick.
Nor in a Corner can I one descry
Sneaking, that dare give Bellarmine the Lie.
So that we do conclude, the Authors fear
Is now removed; there's no Phanatick here.
You are a glorious Presence, clear as Day,
And innocent as Buds that sprout in May.
Tis you must gild our Hemisphere, and give
A life to us who willingly would live.
Then, If you please to grant ^us our Request,
Sign us your Servants, and we^l do, our best.

