October 29. 1659.

THe whole Body appointed for the service of the day, being met together at
Grocers-Hall; that is to say:

1. WIth the said Pensioners, after them the Standard and Banner Bearers, and
in the Front of the said Pensioners, places four Drums, Two Fifes, and two
Ensigns.

2. In the second Division falls in six Drums, two Fifes more, and two other
Ensigns; after them falls in six Gentlemen Ushers, and after them the Budge
Batchellors.

3. In the third Division falls in six Trumpets, after them the Banners of St.
George, in the rear of which falls in eight more of the Gentlemen Ushers, and
after them the Foins Batchellors.

4. In the fourth Division, falls in six other Trumpets, after them the
Companies Banners, in the rear of which, falls in ten other of the Gentlemen
Ushers, and after them the Livery.

5. In the fifth Division, falls in six other Trumpets, after them the Lord
Mayors and Cities Banners, after them ten other Gentlemen Ushers, and after
them the Assistants.

6. In the sixth or last Division, falls in four Pages, each of them a Truntion
in one hand, and a Target in the other; wherein is painted the Coats of Arms of
the present Master and Wardens, after them falls in eight other Gentlemen
Ushers, and after them the present Master and Wardens.

In this equipage of ranks two by two, they march from Grocers-hall towards the
Lord Mayors house, the Foot Marshall and his Attendants removing, the first two
Ensigns, four Drums and two Fifes next the Master and Wardens, placing
himself and his Attendants in the front, do lead the way, till either they
meet his Lordship or come to his Gate; and then removing the said Ensigns,
Drums, and Fifes to their first place or head of the Pensioners, placing
himself in the Front; they led back down Cornhill and the Old-jury, by
Guild-Hall Gate, there taking in the old Lord Mayor, do march up Lawrence Lain,
down Soper Lain, Cloak Lain, College Hill; and at the foot of the said Hill,
the said Pensioners, Standard, and Banner bearers, do open to the right and
left, making a Gallory, through which the Budge and Foins Batchellors do pass
to the place assigned for them to dine at, the Livery, Assistants, the Master,
the Wardens, and their attendant Ushers (except Pages) together with their
Trumpets pass through the said Gallory to Merchant Taylor Stairs (at the East
end of Three-Crain Wharf) into their several Barges.

The Lord Mayors* Aldermen and their attendants into their Barge; and being so,
all convenient speed is made towards Westminster by them and the several
Companies of London, in Barges adorned with Streamers and Banners, Wind-musick,
Drums, and Trumpets, where by the way several pieces of Ordnance are
discharged; but the Banner and Standard Bearers, with the Pensioners, Pages,
Drums, Fifes, Ensigns, Foot Marshall and his attendants repair towards
Baynard Castle, there waiting his Lordships and the Companies return.

The Companies being landed, they set themselves as a Guard on both sides, from
Westminster Bridge round Westminster Hall, through which the Company of Grocers
do pass, likewise the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their attendants, but the Livery
and their attendants do return to their Barge, the Assistants the Master and
Wardens and their several attendants march up the Chequer stairs, making a
Guard from the Chequer Barr to the stairs head, through which the Lord Mayor
and Aldermen do pass (the new Lord Mayor on the right, the old on the left of
the Recorder toward the said Barr) and after a speech made by the said
Recorder, showing the cause of their addresses, answer made by the Lord Chief
Baron, his Lordship is Sworn; and being so, the Company fall in as before,
leading to the Chancery, the Upper-Bench, and the Common-Pleas Bars, Seals a
Writ at each Court, and presently the whole Body marches to their Barges, and
being entered and the several Barges on float, the former Ordnance (as a token
of joy) are again discharged, all convenient speed being likewise made by that
body towards Baynard Castle; but the several Companies to Paul's Wharf, and
other places in order to their making of a Guard or Gallory from the top of
Paul's Wharf, or Paul's Chain hill, through Paul's Church yard, Cheap-side,
Cornhill, Leaden-hall-street, to his Lordships House; through which said
Gallory the Company of Grocers, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their attendants
are to pass.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their attendants being landed at the foresaid
place; do meet the Foot-Marshall, the Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Ensigns,
Silk-worke, Pensioners, Pages, Gentlemen Ushers, Budge and Foins Bachellers,
set in order as at first, and ready to March, and placing himself and Company
in the Front, marches up Paul's Wharfe-hill through Paul's Church yard into
Cheap-side, and between Foster, and Gutter-laine is saluted by one Scene,
flankt with two Griffins, on the back of one is placed a Negar, on the other an
Indian with Banners in the hands of both: The Scene represents Commerce in
the figure of a young man sitting under a Canopy, supported by four figures or
young persons, holding Pendants and Shields in their hands, wherein is painted
the badges of the four parts of the world; his Lordship drawing nigh the said
Scene, Commerce salutes him in these words.

MY Lord, 'tis thought the world was but a plain
Levell, or Champion, whilst men did remain
In idleness, the Nurse of Ignorance;
Which lulls men's brains, in a Lethergean Trance;
At the last Necessity seemed to infuse
In them the Art of Arthitect, the use
Of Huts and Houses; every one began
To show himself or more, or less a Man.
Left their wild kind of living, and did build
Cities for safety, in the which they held,
A Civilised communication, each
By a Divine instinct the Arts did teach;
Nor did they perish when the World was drowned
Their Hyrogliphicks were in pillars found,
That by degrees succeeding ages did
Reveal to one another secrets hid;
Which though before were seeds in them, yet they
Showed not until Experience taught the way.
Then did the Navigator search the Mayne,
How to steer forth, how to return again
With prize and safety? straight that art was hurled,
Into our lap, the center of the World,
By divine hand; that we in a short time,
Made our selves countrymen of every climb,
Searching the spacious Universe, our skill,
And courage did the mouth of wonder fill,
Riding on dangers neck, as though 'twere meant,
We should be Lords of the whole Continent.
Such were our darings, that, what, Histories
Forget to speak of our discoveries.
Greenland, Lapland, Michar, Isles remote
And many more, which later times denote,
Unto our Countries glory, we made ours,
By the direction of fore-seeing Powers:
Thus are we nourish't from the breasts increase;
Could we among our selves but mediate peace.
The ancient Poets Pyramids of praise,
Did to the Honour of their Countries raise,
In all my reading, or my travels (Sir)
I must our own above the rest prefer.
For as the Magnetique Courts, the Adamant
With her Simphatick faculty, the want
Of whose Assotiation makes her seem
Useless, regardless, as of small esteem:
So we from most parts of the Universe
Are sought, rather petitioned for Commerce.
Traffic brings profit, towards which they bend,
As though their welfare did on ours depend:
Thus do we (Sir) still by our patriots care,
Over take their riches at their full Carreire.
My Lord, you are Our Cities Hope, whereon
She doth rely, her Father and her Son;
She gave you breath, and education too,
Which made you fit for whats conferred on you:
Then since the extention of Her love was such;
Your care of Her, cannot be shown too much:
Which, as she doubts not of, so we rejoice,
And celebrate Your Triumphs in Her Uoice.
The Speech ended, the Scene quits the place, and (hastening towards his
Lordships House) is placed in the rear of a Ship, not yet visible to his
Lordship, and his Lordship, the Aldermen and their attendants pass through
Cheap-side, and the Poultry; towards the Exchange they meet another Scean,
representing several of the places or Countries, in which the Commodities
belonging to the Grocers trade do grow, and the natives disporting therein, in
habits of each Nation; on one part of the said Stage is placed a Clove Tree, in
another a Nutmeg Tree and a Current Tree, on another part thereof is planted
Rice, Rasons, Figgs, and Druggs; and in the Front is placed or fixed a
Crockadile, with an Egyptian on his back, a banner in his hand, at each Angle
of the Stage a Nymph; when his Lordship draws nigh, the Egyptian salutes him in
these words:

WHere am I? What auspicious wind conveyed
Me to this Isle? what sudden thoughts invade
My faculties? Egyptian darkness, hence,
I now discern the cause and the influence;
It was the soft and winning breath of Fame,
Fanning the way unto the honoured name
Of him, that this days Triumphs wait upon,
Wafted me hither, and hath put me on
This bold attempt. My Lord, all Nations are
Bound to this Seat, and must Concenter here
In point of Traffic; other parts but stand
Like Marginal Notes, directing to this Land:
Or, as in times past Mercurie's Statues were
Fixed in high-wayes by the hand of Public care,
To point at consequents, this little Round
Is in it self a World; Istmus and Sound,
Memphis no more of your feigned Rampires boast;
Lysbone your Tagus, Caria your Coasts
Persia, Scythia, Parthia, Thratia,
Lydia, Syria, Syberia, Caspia,
Tie up your numerous Glories, with your Tongue,
That heretofore the want on Muses sung;
For in this Inch of Earth's comprised more,
Than all the Poets fanoi'd yours before.
It is Our wishes ( Sir) your beloved Name,
May add a breathing to the breath of Fame;
To sound you Great and Good, that your just Fate
May fix you a firm Pillar to this State:
May You in Her, and She in You this year
Propitious be, as the Motion of a Sphere.
The Speech ended, this Scene likewise quits the place, and is conveyed through
Leaden Hall street toward his Lordships House, where meeting with the former,
is divided into two parts; that Stage whereon the Spaniards and Negars are,
being placed on the Right hand of Commerce, the Persians and Indians on the
Left, and the Griffins Flanking of each; In the Front is placed the Ship, and
on the Right wing thereof is the Crookodile placed, and on the Left a Camel,
with a Negar on his back, having a Pendent in the one hand, and with the other
takes out of his Dorcers* Cloves, Currence and other Fruit, and throws among
the people; and on the head of that Stage stands one in a Persian habit, with a
two Attendants, on each side: The several Scens thus placed, and his Lordship
with the Aldermen and their attendants coming ne'er, the Mariners presented his
Lordship wi^h this Song:

SInce the ^pan^ reap,
By Hazard grows cheap;
And that we are now within Ken, boys:
Let's cast Anchor here,
No City more freer,
To Harbour sueh Iovial Men boys:
Then merrily sing, and as merrily quaf't,
Let's drink up the Riches of the World in a draught.
The Song ended, the Foot Marshal with his Company, and likewise the
Pensioners, being come ne'er to the Lord Mayors door, the Foot Marshal places
the said Pensioners in a single File, on the North side the said street, and
causes every man to hang his Target on the top of his Javelin, then opens
the remaining part of the said Company to the Right and Left, himself and
Company passes through, till they come to the Masters and Wardens, and then
Marches them, and the whole Body through that Interval, placing the Master at
the Lord Mayors Gate, and the whole Body successively, on the Wing each of
other, before the said Pensioners, and the Drums, Fises, Trumpets, Ensigns,
Banners, and Streamer bearers, in equal divisions as a Front Guard before
them, who as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their attendants pass* do each one
perform his part; but the Lords being come ne'er, the Scenes being placed as
aforesaid, the person representing a Persian Merchant, makes his address in
this manner:

My Lord, THe European Traveller with Experienced Keys*
Open*d the Gate to his Discoveries,
Sh^wing the essential species of Commerce
The very hinges to the Universe.
The Egyptian seemed in his discourse to Treat
Of places, and for Trade made this the Seat.
And now my Lord to amplyfy what they
Before have spoke, the Candid winds this day
Set me on Shore, as though the Twins had known,
What Tyumphs to your Honour would be shown.
The Mariners their several voices rear
For joy they safely have arrived here;
And brought their Vessel to their wished for home
Laden with Eastern Treasure, Spice and Gum;
The Dulcid Trees, whose substances do bear,
Heart pleasing Synamon, Cloves, Mace Nutmeggs are
From famed Arabia brought, likewise from thence
Comes Casia, Myrrh, and precious Frankincense,
From Pharo Figgs; Zant, Currants; Maligo,
Affords you Reasons; Dates and Pepper grow
In other places; Sugar and what not
But brings a benefit unto this Spot.
The manner how they grow (my Lord) you'll see,
In the perfect Figure of each branch and tree.
Then Sena, Rhuberb, China, Roots that do
Not only purify, but strengthen too,
Sarsaparella, Aggrick, then comes in
Storax, Aloes, Indico, Benjamin,
And hundreds more, that the Indies and the Streights
Heap in to add unto your wealth by freights,
As though the Company of which you're free
With your own Trade twisted Society
In their Commerce and profits doubtless so
And may that linck and firm affection flow
T'inrich this City, that the Nation may
Participate the comfort of this day;
For (Sir) the Causes our disturbance bred
Are now Composed, rage and fury fled
To their dark Celles; That by your light we move
The second Subject of Our Hopes and Love.
May to the addition of your Name and Blood
Be attributed all that fame speaks good;
That so your praises may like lines from hence
The Center, fill the worlds circumference.
The Speech ended, and my Lords and their company within the Gate; the foot
Marshall ranks the whole body as before; and placing himself and Attendants in
the Front, do lead towards Grocers Hall, and the Sceanes or Pageants make what
haste or speed, they possibly can after them.

FRom the Indies and the Streights,
We come with full freight,
To add to your Wealth,
Your Pleasure, and Health,
Ingrediences such,
Would puzle one much:
To search out their Natures, and define their Names:
For their growth, and their places;
Hard things, as the case is,
Ye must Travel further than the River of Thames.
Your Currants from Zant,
When your Worships want,
Come flying as wood,
In Vessels so good:
And Reason you know
Come from Maligo;
Dates, Figs, Cloves, and Nutmegs, with Sugar and Rice:
Then Pepper and Ginger,
That Nose ^osting twinger,
Then (...) and mace ^ spice.
Then Casia and Myrrh,
We next must prefer,
With fine Francking sense,
That doth cost you pence:
Then sweet Bejamine
Doth draw Storax in
With Seva, and China, and Rhuberb so good:
All the next I can tell a,
Is Sarsaparella
Which strengthens the body and cleanses the blood.
This was an Entertainment to the Committee Appointed for carrying on the
Charge of the whole business; and presented before them on Thursday night last
at Gresham College.

Although the Gentleman whose singular judgment designed and Modelled the
several Fabrics, Structures and Sceanes of this days Triumph, desired to have
his Name concealed; I hold it a piece of prejudice to omit theirs employed by
him; In the performance thereof, as Capt. Andrew Dakers and Mr. William
Lightfoot, Painters: Mr. Thomas Whiting, Joiner: Mr. Richard Clear, Carver,
each of them in their qualities deserving ample commendations.


