The number of Persons thought necessary to attend the Service, are

The said persons being thus accoutred, are by the Care of the Foot-Marshal and
his Men ranked out two by two. And between each Distinction places Gentlemen
Ushers, Banners, and Military Music (except in the Van of the Pensioners, who
have no Gentlemen Ushers*) And thus march,

Being thus Ranked, the whole Body move towards his Lordships house in St.
Elens, beginning with the Pensioners, so that the Master and Wardens bring up
the Rear, till joining with his Lordships Attendants, Sergeant Trumpet, and his
Majesties 16 Trumpets, and Kettle Drum, quit their Division* fall into his
Lordships, marching in the head of the four Attorneys of the Mayors Court.

Which done, the whole Body move through Cornwall, and down the Old Jury,
towards Guildhall, where taking in the Lord Mayor and his Attendants, they
pass up St. Laurence-lane; and Soaper-lane, and so to Three-Crane-Wharf. At
the west end whereof the Lord Majors take Barge, and at the East-end the
Company of Haberdashers, Sergeant Trumpet, and 8 of His Majesties 16 Trumpets,
and Kettle Drum, do pass into his Lordships Barge, and the rest into the
Companies, as their only Music: But the Wardens of the Yeomandry, Batchellors,
and Ushers, in their Divisions, do pass to their several places of
Refreshment. The said Barges, and all other the Companies (appointed for that
Service) with their Music and Trophies being on Float, all convenient speed is
made to Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted from the Bank-side,
by a Peal of 30. Pieces Ordnance.

Being come to Westminster, The Companies make a Gallery or Guard from
Westminster-bridge and Westminster-hall, through which the Worshipful Drapers,
Grocers, and Mercers Companies (together with the Gentlemen of the
Haberdashers) in their several Distinctions, with their Music ordered as
before do pass; but the Lord Mayor and his Attendants, do all pass from thence
up to the Exchequer-Bar in order to his being Sworn into the Office of Lord
Mayor.

Being Sworn, his Lordship (between the old Lord Mayor and Recorder doth pass
down to the Common-pleas, and Chancery-Bar, and in those Courts performs the
accustomed Duty. And from thence all of them hast to their several Barges, and
convenient speed is made to Baynards-Castle, and by the way his Lordship (as
before) is entertained from the Bank-side with another Peal of Thirty Piece of
Ordnance. And being landed at Baynards-Castle,

The Gentlemen of the Artillery are there ready to receive him, Commanded by
the right Worshipful and much deserving Sir Robert Peak Knight, Vice-President
of the Artillery ground. The Foot-Marshal having set the Batchellors, the
Pensioners, their Trophies, and Music in Order as in the Morning, the whole
body move up Paul's Wharf-hill, beginning with the Worshipful the Drapers,
Grocers, and Mercers Companies; after them the Artillery, after them the
Pensioners, Music, Trophies, and Gentlemen-Ushers, Batchellors, Liveries,
Assistants, Master and Wardens, his Lordships Attendants, both Lord Majors, and
Aldermen.

His Lordship being come into Pauls-Church-yard near the School,

Is entertained with a Scene, the Angles of one part whereof is adorned with
small Shelters in the manner of Arbours, under which are discovered some
persons knitting Caps, others spinning, others making Brushes, and such like
parts of the Haberdashers-Trade. In one part of the Stage is a Table, and
thereat several persons making Hats, and other dependences thereon. This Scene
is represented as the Hierogliphick of Humility; on the head whereof sits a
grave person, as Master or Overseer of those persons, seeming to smile on their
labour and Industry; he is habited like a grave Citizen, according to the
ancient manner, in Trunk-hose, Stockings tied cross above and below the knee, a
Satin Doublet, close Coat gathered at the Wast, a Set Ruff about his Neck,
ruff Cuffs about his Wrists, a broad brimmed Hat, a large Cypress Hatband, gold
Girdle and Gloves hung thereon, Rings on his Fingers, and a Seal Ring on his
Thumb, a blew Linsey Wolsey Apron wrapped about his middle.

His male Servants, as Hatters, Brush-makers, c. are habited in Half Shirts,
and blew Breeches, with Caps on their Heads ornamented with Ribboning, c.

His Female Servants in blew Bodies, blew Petticoats, linen about their heads
after the ancient manner, and Aprons.

As the body moves, they are in continual Action, working and Singing at their
Work, and sometimes wantonly tumbling.

On the four Trees, and other parts of the Scene, is set the Motto of the
Companies Arms, SERVE and OBEY.

His Lordship drawing near, The said Master or Overseer, entertains his
Lordship thus;

welcome (My Lord) the Glory of this day,
Thanks which your Merits call for, now we pay;
Instructed by your Company, whose love
Is the Main Wheel by which these Triumphs move.
Here are the Branches of that ancient Tree
Which Time can scarce reduce to Memory:
An Ancient numerous Loyal Brother-hood
Whence Men have sprung who have bin great good
And though their Rooms have bin debauched, you know
Their Company has hated to be so,
But has brave Members in all times brought forth,
Conspicuous both for Virtue and for Worth;
Witness their Schools and Hospitals, which must
Remain till Time turns all things into Dust;
Such a Congenial Mystery, that one
Would think they are made all others to atone;
For by their Arts and Industry they are
Makers or Sellers of all sorts of Ware.
And the Ingenious Motto that they give
Teaches Men how to labour and to live,
SERVE and OBEY; By one Men come to know,
And by the other they wise Rulers grow.
Birth may advance, or may not, but We see
Labour and Art raise Men to Dignity.
The Root of Honour Prudent men conclude
To be Humility and Gratitude:
Nor can They choose but noble Actions do,
Having this Patron, and this Pattern You.
Who being sublimed above all vulgar reach
Do both by Precept and Example teach
How Men of Fortune Birth and Honour should
Lay out Themselves for their dear Countries good.
Blessed is that Commonwealth where Goodmen sway,
And People not for fear, but love, Obey.
The Speech ended, the whole Body move towards Cheapside and in the Rear of
this Scene, and between Foster-Lane and Gutter-Lane, is entertained by another
Scene made in manner of an Imperial Crown Garnished with Festoones and Flowers;
under which (elevated three Ascents) sits a living figure Representing St.
Katharine Patroness of the Company, her hair light brown dishelv'd, her
Temples circled with a Coronet of Gold adorned with precious Stones, her Robe
of Crimson Sarsenet, a loose Skye-coloured Scarf about her Shoulder with Gold
and Silver fringe; on one side of her a Broken Wheel and an Axe, on which she
lays one hand, and in the other she bears the Banner of St. George.

Her Attendants are Patience, Chastity, Constancy, and Fidelity, who fill the
Four Angles of the Stage, habited in White Sarsenet, betokening Innocence, with
a Crimson Girdle betokening Martyrdom, Sky-coloured Scarves about their
Shoulders, Wreaths of Flowers of several Colours on their heads, in one hand
they hold the Banner of St. George with this Inscription Victoria: In the other
a Shield.

At her Foot sits Scientia (aluding to St. Katharine her knowledge in Arts)
habited in Sky-coloured Sarsenet; on her head a Crown made in manner of a
Celestial Globe, in one hand a Book, in the other the Banner of St. George with
the former Motto Victoria.

This Scene is presented as the Hyroglyphick of Integrity.

And is flanked with two Goats, the Supporters of the Companies Arms, backed
with two Boys, each holding in one hand a Banner, in the other a Shield with
the Cities and Companies Arms.

The Angles are filled with eight persons, representing Shepherds and
Shepherdesses, with Hooks, Scrips, c. and habited answerable.

PArdon not Praise, great Monarch! we implore,
For showing you no better Sights, nor more:
The Greek and Roman Wits (we must confess)
Showed greater Fancy, but their Themes were less;
For we more excellence in You behold
Than they in all their Emperors of old.
We hope Your Majesty will not suppose
You're with your Johnsons and your Inigoes;
And though you make a Court, you're in the City,
Whose vein is to be humble, though not witty.
To help us You are opportunely come
In the Wedding day of your Emporium.
This day You show as well as see, for You
Are both our Triumph and Spectator too.
Oh what a Glorious sight 'tis to behold
Your City in her Loyal Arms enfold!
This Spouse whom You to give her have thought fit,
And to his Rule (that's Yours) meekly submit.
To Your Indulgence we this Blessing owe,
Who to your Subjects peace and joy bestow,
May we Your Royal favours still improve,
First to Obey, and next rejoice, and love.
MADAM, THe Brotherhood to whom we Owe
The occasion and Expense of all this Show,
Reaps no small favour from her laying claim
Unto that Saint who bore your Sacred name;
Under whose Umbrage they have greatly thriven,
And Testimonies of their Bounty given:
And 'tis their happiness that they relate
To this great Cities Princely Magistrate;
A Branch sprung out of this undying Stem,
And is a Glory to himself and Them.
This seems to be a Prophesy of you,
And of that happiness which will accrue
To this Fraternity, if you would bless
Them with your Smiles, and be their Patroness;
'Twill be their Glory while the World endures,
When 'tis Recorded that you made them yours.
SIR, when the Heathen Persecution struck
At all that at Religion seemed to look,
Kath'rine to seal it with her Royal blood
In Opposition to their Torments stood.
Twice with undaunted courage she appeared
To Combat death, and her Faiths Standard Reared;
When the Wheel would not do, the Axe was brought,
And she with eager haste to meet it sought:
Then took her flight above their Fury's reach,
And left her Converts the dull World to teach.
This is the Saint which is related to
Your honoured Company, and so to you
Whose Patronage knits your Fraternity
In such firm Peace and Love it ne'er shall dye.
Taught by the Example of this pious Guide,
Uphold that Faith for which she boldly died,
Against Faction and Profaneness; By the one
She is Defaced, by the other Overthrown.
Root out those spreading and pernicious Weeds
Which Clemency in stead of Killing breeds:
If you defend this, this will you defend,
And make your Name live when your life shall end.
Saint Katharine was born in Alexandria of the Blood Royal, she was Learned in
all the Sciences, and (before her death) by her learned disputations, she
confuted many ^hilosophers; at whose instigation she was Imprisoned and
punished; and being visited in Prison by Faustina the Empress, she converted
her to the Christian Faith, with Porplurius and 200. of the Emperors
Soldiers: afterwards she was tied to a Wheel, but was miraculously delivered
by the breaking thereof* whereupon she was beheaded on the 25. of November, in
the year of our Lord. 310. with the Empress Faustina, in the Reign of
Maxentius and Maximanus.

There is an Hospital that bears her name to this day, which was dedicated to
her by Matilda Wife to King Stephen, and confirmed by Maud the Empress, for
the maintenance of many poor People, by the name of the Brother and
Sister-hood. It had very large Revenues belonging to it, but through corruption
of time and the Governors and Trustees, it is much decayed.

Upon his Lordships motion, This Scene falls into the Rear of the former, and
near the great Conduit his Lordship is entertained with another Scene, the
Hyrogliphick of Honour; the form is made in manner of a Circular Building,
beautified and adorned with Flowers and Fruit; The upper part whereof is
advanced by two Arms, supporting a Laurel, being the Crest of the Companies
Arms, under the Bower (three Ascents) is seated a Beautiful person representing
Honour. Her

Her Hair dishevelled, her head encompassed with a wreath of Stars, in one hand
she holds a Sceptre, in the other a Crown of Gold (to Crown Merit) her Robe
purple Satin, a Scarf of Gold about her Shoulders.

Her Attendants are Five, Reason, Judgment, Resolution, Fortituds, and
Munificence.

His Lordship drawing near, Reason accosts him in these words,

HOnour, the aim of all men, but by few
Directly sought, much less attained unto;
Whose Glories are not purchased with Pelf,
But Virtues, such as center in your self;
Where she finds Merit from vain-glory free,
A gallant mind mixed with Humillitie;
VVose upright Actions are praise worthy, still
Guided by Reason and not swayed by will:
Hither she's come, not for a day or two,
But to Eternity will wait on You.
Such as through Treason seeks her, them she flies,
She hates all Factions and close Mutinies,
And shines the brightest both in Church and State
When Men love Peace, and a just Magistrate:
You are the Cities Eye, which must not be
Shut, lest you shut out her security;
But pry into all private Corners where
Suspicion points the least Offenders are:
For 'tis a Rule, Such easily dispense
With greatest sins that have of small no sense.
Your honoured Company their wishes send,
That you this year may with such Honour end
That King and People may applaud your care,
Whose Substitute and Steward now you are.
And when you quit this world your mem'ry may
Have a perfume that time cannot decay.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and his Attendants do pass down the Old Jury
through a Gallery of Guard, made by the Foot Marshal of the Haberdashers
Company, in their several Distinctions, the Pensioners in the Rear of them with
their Targets hung on the top of their Javelins; The Banners flying, Trumpets
sounding, and Drums beating until his Lordship and his Attendants be entered
into Guildhall to Dinner, in order not only for the welcoming his and the
Sheriffs Guests, but also for their own refreshment.

Which done, the Company do pass to Haberdashers-Hall, but the Pageants are
conveyed down the Old Jury into Blackwell-Hall.

The Foot Marshal orders the whole Body as in the Morning only the Pensioners
in stead of Javelins and Targets, each man hath two Torches for enlightening the
Streets, through which the whole Body pass, and for conveying the Aldermen and
Members of the Company to their Habitations (if thereto required.)

The Body moves up St. Lawrence-Lane towards Paules Church* and all the
Pageants are placed on the South-side of Cheapside in these several places,
viz.

Magnanimity is habited like a Roman General, on his head a Helmet of Gold with
a Plume of Feathers, a Buff-Doublet with Sleeves of Cloth of Gold, and Scarlet
Breeches richly laced.

This Scene is flanked with two Sea horses, two Tritons mounted on their backs,
playing on retorted Music (as at Sea) because the Mountain represents an
Island surrounded with the Sea, near the foot whereof sits a person seeming to
be Shipwrecked and cast on the Shore, habited like a Sea-Commander.

The four Angles of the Stage are filled with four persons representing
Sea-men.

His Lordship drawing near, he rouzeth himself, and (as in a Maze) salutes his
Lordship thus,

COntract thy Mischiefs to a period, Fate,
That I may prove the utmost of thy hate;
But see She smiles, and safely casts me on
The Land of Promise, plenteous Albion;
Where by Instinct I am instructed to
Congratulate the Honour waits on You.
You (Sir) whose innate Virtues did appear
E're your Election in this Hemisphere;
And were Examples of a public good,
Which claim a greater Privilege then Blood:
As you are Merchant and to Traffic tend,
So are you both to Land and Sea a Friend;
A Merchants generous Breeding is allow'd
Before those empty vanities, are proud
Only of Titles; Then (Sir) in a word
A virtuous Man sounds better then my Lord:
Your Titles have not changed you, for though thus
You are Translated, you are the same to us:
And where is centred Magnanimity,
There (we conclude) dwells true Nobility;
Wisdom and Magistracy should be One,
An Individual Species, like the Sun.
Your Breast (Sir) is a Fortress to protect
The Innocent, and Nocent to reject;

But cannot reach their Prey, they are kept in;
The generous Lyon does their Fury awe,
Whilst the Lambs feed, their breaths fearless draw.
May Honour glorify your beloved Name,
Though not as
The Speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Body move towards St. Paul's
Wharf, and the several Pageants face about and move towards his Lordships
house, and are placed in manner of a half Moon cross the Street, from
Lymestreet-end to St. Mary Axe; The Speaker in the Triumph alluding to Humility
(placing himself in that of Magnanimity) and that alluding to Integrity with
that of Honour; and those two in the midst are flanked with the rest; Also
forms sufficient for 33 persons of the Assistants, are set in Front of the said
Scenes, with a Stage conveniently mounted for His Majesties 16 Trumpets, Drums,
and Kettle Drums; by which time the whole Body are advanced at a convenient
distance from his Lordships house, and then by the Foot-Marshal filed off for a
Guard, each man placing himself to the right of his Leader: The Master and
Wardens placed on the said Front; the eldest Livery under the Degree of an
Assistant terminate at his Lordships Gate; The Colours, Trumpets, Banners and
Files, being placed at a convenient Distance each from other, do all Sound,
Play, and Beat Tryumphantly, till his Lordship and the Aldermen come close to
the Scenes, where suddenly the four Speakers rise together, and entertain his
Lordship as follows.

MY Lord --


My Lord --


My Lord --


My Lord --


Pray stay,
'Tis fit Humility should lead the way,

Accompanied with pure Integrity,


And the Minds Buckler Magnanimity;


Honour to Crown the end, Merit rewards,


And in that Sense Humility regards.


Integrity is Heavens delight,


And he,
Dares reach at Stars has Magnanimity:

Nor can his Breast lodge Virtue, that disdains
Humility, or an Ingenious pains:
Labour and Industry enrich the Land,
That Wealth will thrive's got by a painful hand;
A Magistrate should have a careful Eye
To see the Poor have Work, not Starve and Dye.

By Patience, Constancy, Fidelity,
(Handmaids to Katharines spotless Loyalty)
A Magistrate is Taught to spend his blood
Against Schism and Faction, for the Churches good.

Reason, though plain, takes Judgment by the hand,
Leads Courage on, gives Fortitude Command.
Princely Munificence whose Mind is free,
And Purse still open to Necessity;
All which relate to You, and You to Them,
They are the Splendour, though You are the Gem.

This shows a Magistrate should never sleep,
But from the Ravenous Wolves his poor Lambs keep;
Still to be Armed against the worst of Fate,
Should Storms arise to shake his settled State.

There is no Virtue (Sir) Exempt in you,
Receive then what deservedly's your due.

The Cities wishes,


And your Companies.


May you be ever in your Princes Eyes,
His Favours Crown you.

And your honoured Name
In your Successors Breasts brave Deeds inflame.

Your Goodness with your Honours still increase,


And stifle those that smother would our Peace.


Miriades of Blessings (Sir) your Life attend,
Your Fame and Honour live, when that doth end.

Which done, The Foot-Marshal takes care of all the Silk-works. And the
Artificer of the Pageants convey them with what speed they can, some to
Haberdashers hall, the rest to the place where they were Built: By which time
most men may imagine (by reason of the great March) the Members concerned
therein will be willing to rest.

REpine not, my Children, my Lads nor my Lasses,
For labour is stinted to time, and so passes;
We sweeten it with our Content and our sleep,
And the Wolf from the door of our Masters do keep:
Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
The Snail that you see (of Proportion) not tall
In time doth clime up to the top of a wall;
And tis an old Proverb that few Men but know,
That Children must creep before they can go:
Then cast up your Caps, though Thrumed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
For ought we do know there's ne'er a Lad here
But may be a Lord Mayor or something as near,
And his Maioresse may take from this Innocent Rout
And give her a hood in stead of a Clout:
Then cast up your Caps though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
To serve and obey is no such hard matter,
When we find a full Jack, and no empty Platter:
Then think of your work in the midst of your play,
And you'll find it your own another day.
Then cast up your Caps, though Thrummed they be,
We shall be as finical one day as he.
Reader, THe Gentleman, Undertaker of this Business, is not ambitious to have
his name known, however his merit may deserve your commendations.

The singular Artists, the Master Painters, and other the Master Workmen (I
humbly conceive) have performed their parts so well, you cannot (in Justice)
but give them your applause. And so Good night.


