The whole Body being met at Merchant Taylors hall, that is to say:

FIrst, the Master and Wardens in their Gowns faced, with Foyns and Hoods, each
of them having a Page attending, habited with blew Cassocks, whire-stockings
and flat Caps; each Page bearing a Target with their Arms in one hand and a
Trunchion in the other.

2. The Assistants in their Gowns and Hoods.

3. The Livery in their Gowns and Hoods.

4. The Foyns Batchellors in Gowns and Hoods.

5. The Budge Batchellors in Gowns and Scarlet Hoods.

6. Forty eight Gentlemen Ushers in Plush Coats, white Staves and Gold Chains.

7. Eight other Gentlemen carrying Banners in Plush Coats, and Sky coloured
Scarffs about their Shoulders.

8. Three Gentlemen more in Buff Coats, and Sky coloured Scarffs about their
middles.

9. The Foot Martial with a like coloured Scarff about his Shoulder with six
Attendants, and each of them habited in a white Fustian Doublet, black Breeches,
blew stockings, a white Hat, and blew Hatband, and every one of them a
Trunchian in his hand.

10. The Sergeant, Trumpeter, with a sky coloured Scarff about his Shoulders,
and eight other of his Majesties Trumpeters, together with his Majesties Kettle
Drums.

11. His Majesties Drum Major with a like coloured Scarff about his Waste, with
his Majesties others Drums.

12. Twenty other Trumpeters divided and disposed of into eight Pageants.

13. Seven other Drums (whereof Iohn Bibby Drum Major to the City is chief)
habited either in Buff coats or Buff coloured Dublets, and blew Scarffs about
their wastes.

14. Francis Burgess Master of Defence with his twelve Attendants.

15. One hundred and twenty poor aged persons Free-men of the Company in blew
Gowns with red Sleeves, and red Caps, each of them having a Javelin in one
hand, and an Escochin in the other; Six other poor people also Free men of the
said Company in blew Jackets and red Caps appointed to carry the Silk-works,
and twenty four poor men in disguises, commonly called Green men.

Being so met and habited, as aforesaid, about eight a clock, the Foot Marshall
Ranks them out by two and two*

FIrst, the Pensioners in blew Gowns, in the head of them is placed three
Drums, one Fife, and the Ensign whereon the Crest of the Company is painted.

Secondly, The several Banners and Streamers carried by the poor men in blew
Coats; in the Front of them four Drums and one Fife.

Thirdly, The Budge Batchellors, in the front of them eight Gentlemen Ushers,
the other two Colours and six Trumpets.

Fourthly, The Foyns Batchellors, in the Front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen
Ushers, and two other Gentlemen, the one carrying the Companies, the other the
Cities Banner, and six other Trumpets in the head of them.

Fifthly, The Livery, in the front of them, twelve Gentlemen Ushers, and two
other of the said Gentlement, each of them carrying two Banners, and four of
his Majesties Drums with one Fife.

Sixthly, The Assistants, in the front of whom is placed ten Gentlemen Ushers,
two other of the said Gentlemen, one carrying the Lord Mayor, the other the
Cities Banner, and eight other of the best Trumpets.

Seventhly, The Master and his four Wardens, each of them having a Page
attending, habited as aforesaid, carrying his Coat of Arms in the Escohin;
likewise ten other of the said Gentlemen Ushers, and two other of the former
specified Gentlemen, the one carrying his Majesties, the other the Duke of
Yorkes Banner, his Majesties Sergeant Trumpeter, and eight other Trumpets, in
the front of them.

Being thus Ranked out, the Foot Marshall places himself in the head of the
Pensioners, and leads the way towards his Lordships house, after them the
Banners and Streamers, the Master, Wardens and Assistants and Livery following
next them; after them the Wardens of the Yeomandry, the Foyns and Budge
Batchellors.

THe Master and Wardens being come to his Lordships house, or meeting him by
the way, the Gentlemen Ushers, Colours, Trumpets, Drums and Fifes, remove their
Stations, and now place themselves in the head of the Juniors; whereas they
were placed in the head of the Seniors before, and so lead on the accustomed
way towards Three Crain Wharff, beginning with the Pensioners and Silk-works,
and the Budge and Foyns Batchellors, the Livery, Assistants, and the Master and
Wardens march next the Lord Mayors Attendants.

The Pensioners and Silkworks being come to Colledge-hill, do open to the right
and left, making a lane through which the Drums, Fifes Trumpets, Colours,
Gentlemen Ushers, and Rich Batchellors do pass to the place assigned to
refresh themselves; and the Livery Assistants, Master and Wardens and their
Gentlemen Ushers do pass to their Barges laid at the Stairs at the East end of
three Crain Wharff.

The Lord Mayor, Aldermen and their Attendants pass into their Barge, laid at
the accustomed place.

Their Barges and all other the Companies, adorned with Streamers and Banners,
and fitted with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets; being on the water move
towards Westminster, and by the way his Lordship is saluted with twenty pieces
of Ordnance, as peals of entertainment and joy; Against White-hall appears a
large Stage or Fabric at the one end whereof is a Ship, floating, rigged and
manned, at the other end a Rock with various Figures; one representing Oceanus,
who is said to be God of Seas, and the Father of the Rivers; He was son to
Coelum and Vesta; Archelous was his son begat of Thetis; and the Sirens are
said to be the daughters of Achelous; and Calliope to show his Majesty, he
walks or treads upon his Watery Regiment, several Fishes are discovered to
play at his Feet, and Tryton's sporting themselves; four Virgins clothed in
white loose garments, and their Brows circled with Sage, representing the
Nymphs that frequent Rivers.

Upon his Lordships approach Oceanus addresses himself in these words.

I Oceanus of old Coelums race,
That like a Ring doth Circle and Embrace
The spacious Universe, God of the Main,
And unto Rivers Lord and Sovereign
Am come to grace my Daughter, Silver Thames,
So much admired and loved by James:
Whose peaceful reign did make her murmurs sweet
Not harsh, her Tide run with harmonious feet:
'Tis Peace that Barbs the Billows, scumbs the foam,
Invites Trade abroad, and brings it home:
My Lord, you are a Royal Substitute,
Your clear Election, is without dispute;
Employ your Interest, Trade may now increase,
And be envol'd within the Arm of Peace.
Then shall my Grand-Girles
And drink Carouses to great Britains King.
The Speech ended, his Lordship and the Aldermen and Companies make for
Westminster, his Lordship being landed, and the accustomed Ceremonies in the
several Courts performed, they return to Baynard Castle, in the way his
Lordship receives another Peal of Ordnance, as a token of joy; and at Baynard
Castle his Lordship and Attendants are entertained by the first Gentlemen Budge
and Foyn Batchellors, their several Attendants; and being in like Order as they
marched from his Lordships house, the whole body move up Paul's Wharff hill
towards the East end of St. Paul's, in the Front of which, the Gentlemen of the
Artillary march to show their affection and loyalty, who are led by Sir Iohn
Robinson, the President of the said Fraternity, and Lieutenant of the Tower, in
his Scarlet Gown and Sword: After whom the Pensioners and his Lordships Company
march in the same manner and equipage as before. His Lordship being come to the
East end of Paul's, as aforesaid, is entertained by a Pageant or Scean
representing a Pavillion or Tent Royal, flankt with two Camels, the supporters
of the Companies Arms; on the back of each Camel a figure clothed in white, a
Banner in his hand, and on the 2. stages 9. figures are placed, 5. of them in
livery gowns, representing the Mr. and Wardens of the Company, and 4.
representing Persons of honour that have been free of the Company: under the
Pavillion sits the figures of 8. Kings that have been free of the Company. In
the front whereof sits Hen. 7. holding in his hand their first Charter or
Patent of Merchant Taylors; and on a lower seat is placed a grave Person
representing a Soldier Senator, under his Gown a white Armour, holding in the
one hand a Gantlet, the property of a Soldier in the other a statute Book as a
Senator and maintainer of laws: All parts of this Scaen is beautified and
agreeable with their Arms: His Lordship drawing near, the person under the
Pavillion entertains him in these words.

My Lord, I As a Senator, and Soldier do
(Relating to your Triumphs) wait on you,
You being both; A double Laurel now
Beset with Stars wreaths your deserving brow;
Who but a Senator can Soldier be?
'Tis Valour to be read in Policy:
For when the Martialist is at a stand,
The wary Statesman takes him by the hand,
And leads him through the way did dangerous seem
" Nestor was more then Ajax in esteem;
" Strength without Wisdom, madly running on,
" Receives its own Precipitation.
The Oracle being asked why Iupiter
Was the chief God, Mars being the Soldier,
Replied, he has what to either wants, he's wise;
Can when he please with Thunder clear the skies,
Implying that a Governor should be
Endowed with Courage and Philosophy,
Reasons best ward to Argue and dispute;
A watchful eye, and a heart resolute:
Great merits require great rewards, nor is
There one more happy then your self in this;
You have obliged your King Countries love,
Your received honours will not barren prove,
But multiply, since that the Government
Of our three States rest in one Continent:
For where all Rule, no Rule at all can be
Where dwells Confe^sion but in Anarchy?
Nor can society possibly Twist,
When every one will be even what he list,
When Godlike-Monarchy, does keep in Awe,
Licentious freedom, by a penal Law;
Derivitive from Heaven; he that did spring,
From mighty Ancestors, is now your Kign,
By right succession As the hands of Heaven,
We bagg'd him, and he was as freely given;
To rescue us from Wolves, God under whom,
He is Vice-Gerent, safely sent him home,
To rule his People, that we may express,
By former Griefs, our new-found Happiness;
Nor ought we to omit the Antiquity,
Of the Honoured Company, of which y' are free,
By a new choice; Edward the fourth first made,
Them Lynnen Armourers, a select Trade,
After incorporated by the Name,
Of Merchant Taylors, by that Prince of Fame.
and several Kings and Princes have thought good
To be admitted in their Brother-hood,
Fifteen Lord Mayor from the Royal stem,
Have received Knightwood, you the last otf hem;
Yet in as great Grace, with your Sovereign,
Who, cannot of your Loyalty Complain.
For through the thickest of your troubles you,
Have showed your sellfe to him a Subject true
And Providence that duty to requite,
Hath now at last restored you to your right:
For which the Company, and City may,
Give hearty thanks for this so happy day.
The speech ended the Sceanes quitts the place and is conveyed into Cheapside,
and make a halt about the Cross till further Order.

His Lordship drawing near the Nagg^-head Tavern is received by another scene,
seated like a wood in the midst whereof is a formal building like a house, on
the stage or vacant part whereof several persons in the habit of Wood-men and
Wood-Nymphs disport themselves, dancing about the Royal Oak, never out of
Action.

Upon the Companies approach, one of the Woodmen calls to the rest of his
Companions*

Mass, Gotheard, Mass, Logred, zen, ye, zen, ye, what a warren a gay folk are
yonden, Zibb, Tibb, Trot, Zquot Wab, Win, Nab, Gin, what done o mean wullo be
zen the vine zight, ho ho, what pestilent gay vellow's yon a Woodman tis the
Lord Mayor.

Che vears en not for all that cham resolved to say zomething tollen

A Meezle take thee, Name cham glad to see thee
Give me thyn hond, how don mine Aunt I prithe
Had Iche but knowno this same gaudy Noone,
Chad don'd on viner Clothes and viner Shoon.
The one we but Rustics are, and woods done keep,
Ich know there is vine wool elongs to sheep,
And some there are now were the finest thread
In zimple Russet ha bin zheltered,
We Woodmen ha been honest I will say that
And a vart vort, cham sure that Iche know what
The sturdy Oak ha bin a vrend to some
It wud no bow, no more o that but Mum
Iche hope your Lordship takes all in good part
Cham sure Ich love a Woodman wi mine heart,
" In down right English Sir you're welcome to
" that place of Honour hath been long your due.
The Speech ended Mr. Diamond and others tumble and after the Sumerset is
performed the Rustics and the Nymphs make a great shout, at which noise (as
from the Wood) Silvanus the Rural God, attired like a Huntsman, about his wast
a girdle of leaves, his Habit Russet, on his Breast a star to distinguish him,
and in his hand a Bugle horn, Accosts the Lord Mayor in these words.

No more of noise as you respect our Care
Forsake your Natures, and be still as Air.
Ever Time had laid his Iron Coat aside
And Peace was rather ravished then a Bride,
Whilst that the subtle Eye of Tyranny
Greedily hunted after Majesty,
The Close Trunk of the Oak did entertain
And so secured your royal Sovereign,
Twice she received him in her happy womb
At his conveying hence and coming home
As though a greater knot had been t'unty
Then e're was twisted in the Prophesy.
The pendant leaves his head enshadow'd round
(...) only to conceal but to be Crowned,
The Bark that brought him, flew* as though it meant
To steal upon us without Times consent*
Thus does the Oak draw a fresh breath from Fame
By the instinctive virtue of his Name;
And consecrated ought to be to Jove
Producing both the effects of Peace and Love.
The Rustics shall be civilised and now
Embrace what heretofore they'd not allow,
About the Royal Oak the Nymphs shall sing
And dance a measure to their Lord the King,
The Woodmen so refused, shall on each Tree
Inscription make of their quit slavery,
And for a Girdle in a Garter sense
About the Oak write Honey soit qui mali Pence.
Which done his Lordship passes towards the East end of Cheapside, where he is
entertained by another scene, being a Chariot drawn by a Lyon and a Lamb, in
the Chario is placed three figures, PEACE TRUTH PLENTY the Chariot is driven by
Time who salutes his Lordship in these words:

My Lord, TIME is the Register of all Men's Acts
Or good, or bad, their virtue and their facts.
Although by violence he hath bin made
a Property unto the Traitors Trade;
Yet Time (that every secret brings to light)
At last (you see) their Treacheries requites,
Pays them in their own Coin, the bloody stamp,
(...) hath turned Surgeon, cured them of the Cramp.
" Treason may flourish for a little space,
" but Time at length writes Villane in its face.
Whilst Iulius Caesars death Revengless past
Rome ne'er was free from sword Fire Plague and Wast
Till Time revealed the Murderers and then
their better Genius did return again,
And closed up Ianus Temple. Though Time hath
bin cursed by those had neither wit nor faith,
But rashly did conclude he would never mend
And therefore in despair did wish his End.
Yet he for every sore and malady
hath brought you home a Sovereign remedy,
Occasion is his foretop, which had some
long since taken hold of, bad days had not come,
Twas not Times fault, but theirs that let him go,
He's swift of foot, their Courage was but slow,
You have been wise in this (Sir) to your praise,
Oretak'n Time, renewed the Alchion days,
With such Alacrity, that poring on
with serious eye, my Enchyridion
That monstrous Murder that outfac'd the Sun
Appears to me as yesterday but done,
So home hath Justice follow'd them, their heels
are now tripped up, each his own horror feels.
This was Times work, though wisdom was the scout
without Time nothing could be brought a bout
Peace is restored; Truth doth in Triumph ride,
(not long since scorned, forsaken, and denied.)
Plenty their hand-maid follows to maintain
the Majesty of the Heroic Train
It is a Maxim (Traitors bitter Cup)
" wars makes Thieves, but Peace doth hang them up:
Since Time has done such Cures by Providence,
let him not be abused under pretence
Of this, or that, seeds of Phanatick brains;
But while you Govern (Sir) hold in the Reins;
And while the glorious starr-bestudy'd sky
retains a light your Fame shall never die.
The speech ended, his Lordship and the whole Attendance pass down the old
Jury, through Catt-eaten street and Lad Lane, Mayden-Lane, from which place to
his Lordships house a Gallery is a made by the Company of the Merchant-Taylors,
on the North and on the South by the Gentlemen of the Artillery and their
Attendants, where another scene a Rock is placed on the top whereof is seated
a figure representing Peace and upon his Lordships entering into his house,
Peace salutes him from the top of the Rock.

AFter so many various Sceans of strife
Horror and Mischief acted to the Life,
By those that seemed to own th shapes of men,
But Monsters rather were of Caucus Denn,
Whole sulphurous Nostrells breathed into stine Jars,
Sword, Fire, and Famine, the effect of Wars,
Peace (that their hate and fury did exile)
Is once again returned unto this Isle,
And with her brought Truth to Illuminate,
Your hearts to nourish Love, and banish Hate.
Truth is the Center wherein all things meet,
The Chard by which Wisdom directs her feet,
The ground of science; scale to Charity,
The unmoved Rock; Tip of Eternity.
While Peace and Truth do flourish in the Land.
Plenty shall wait on it with a full hand,
Ceres shall cram your Barns, and Bacchus Crown
Your Boles, no more of Penury be known,
Trade long since dead revived, shall be again
By the Vertual Influence of your Sovereign,
Whose gracious Beams, like to the Sun doth shine,
Upon his Subjects by a power divine,
Whose Immence, Majesty, and Glory shall
Outlast Times Age, and the Worlds Funeral.
Blessed be the happy minute of his birth
That elevates our Joys above the Earth.
Flora the Queen of May shall honoured be
By all the sons of Lyrick Poesy,
And you my Lord, whose Prudent care hath bin
Employed in the great work to bring him in,
Keep Faction down, suppress Seditions seed,
The bag being broke did the Imposthume breed,
Let it not gather to a head again,
Infectious matter dwells in a bad brain:
So shall your years and happiness increase,
Live in your Countries, love and dye in Peace.
The Speech being ended the Companies hasten to their Hall, the Gentlemen of
the Artillery take leave by their several Volleys.

In the undertaking of this days Triumph were employed, (by a person of
approved Judgment, who designed and modelled, the several Fabrics, and
Structures thereof) Capt. Andrew Dakers Painter, Mr. William Lightfoot,
Painter, Mr. Thomas Whiteing Joiner, Mr. Richard Clear, Carver, all of them
being the Cities Artificers, and deserve in their several qualities, ample
Commendations.


