My Lord, THere are a sort of Persons that make Flattery their Trade, and the
Subjects they work upon, are such as are self-Affected, whose Ears are still
open to hear their own Praise: It is confessed, where Disert Inhabits,
Commendation is requisite; so it put on a modest Attire, and not shape it self
with the vanity of Hyperbolizing: And as your Lordship is a known Enemy to such
Aereall Nothings; So have I strove rather to follow the narrow Tract of Truth,
than the common Road of Adulation. All I have aimed at in this Epitome, is to
set forth the ample Love and Affection your Company bears you; And if in the
Progress thereof, I have hinted any way upon your Honours Goodness, as it hath
been, and is a general received Truth; So I shall not blush or be a shamed to
own it, and my self in all humbleness, my Lord,

Your Servant Iohn Tatham.
THe Body being met in Cloth-workers Hall, consisting of,

1. WIth the Pensioners, in the Front of whom are placed three Drums, two
Fifes, and one Ensign.

2. In the second Division, falls in six Drums, two Fifes, two Ensigns; in the
Rear of them, six Gentlemen Ushers, with Chains of Gold about their Shoulders,
and White Staves in their hands, and in the Rear of them March the Budge
Batchellors.

3. In the third Division, falls in six Trumpets, after them the Standard and
Banner of St. George; In the Rear of which, fall in eight more of the Gentlemen
Ushers, accommodated as before; and in the Rear of them, the Foins
Batchellors.

4. In the fourth Division, falls in six other Trumpets, after them the
Companies Standard and Banner; in the Rear of which, falls in ten more of the
said Gentlemen Ushers* and in the Rear of them the Livery.

5. In the fifth Division, falls in four other Trumpets, Mr. Beale, Mr.
Simpson, (famous men in their quality) and others after them; the Lord Mayors
Standard and Banner; after them ten more of the Gentlemen Ushers; and after
them the Assistants.

6. In the sixth Division, falls in eight more of the Gentlemen Ushers; after
them the present Master and Wardens; and in the Rear of them, the City's
Standard and Banner. The Body being thus drawn forth into several Divisions,
the Foot Marshall and his men, place themselves in the Front, and lead down
Fan-Church street along to Cheapside and so into Warwick-lane, where the Body
receives the Lord Mayor, and his Retinue, and so march up Pater Noster Row,
through Milk-street; and at Guild-hall-gate embrace the former Lord Mayor, and
entertain his Attendance; from thence the whole Body march through Laurence
lane, Soaper lane, and down Colledge-hill, where the Pensioners, Streamers, and
Banner-bearers, open to the Right and Left, and make a Lane or Guard, through
the which the Budge and Foins Batchellors and their attendant Ushers, pass to
the place appointed, for them to refresh themselves.

The Livery, Assistants, the Master and Wardens and their Attendant Ushers with
the Trumpets pass down to Merchant-Taylors Stairs, at the East end of
Three-Crain Wharff, into several Barges: The Foot Marshall, Pensioners,
Streamers and Banner-bearers, Drums, Fifes and Ensigns, repair to Baynard
Castle, where they are designed to wait the Lord Mayors return from
Westminster: And the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants, take to their
Barges, and the several Companies betake themselves to the like, adorned with
Streamers and Banners, and fitted with Hoe-boyes, Cornets, Drums and Trumpets,
and so move towards Westminster, and by the way are saluted with several peals
of Ordnance, in token of Love; Being landed there, they make a lane or guard,
from the Bridge to Westminster-hall, through which the Company of Cloth-workers
and their Attendants pass, and the Lord Mayor and his Attendants: But the
Livery and their Attendants return to their Barge.

The Master, Wardens and Assistants, and their Retinue, march up into the Court
of Exchequer, where a lane or guard is again made from the Exchequer Stairs to
the Exchequer Bar, through which the two Lord Mayors pass, the new on the right
hand, the old on the left, together with the two honourable Sheriffs, and the
Recorder to the Bar, where after a Speech made by the Recorder, declaring the
cause of their Addresses, and Answer returned by the chief Baron, the new Lord
Mayor receives his Oath; And then the Company falls in as before, leading down
the Exchequer Stairs, to the Chancery, Upper Bench, and Common Pleas Bars: At
each of which the new Lord Mayor, Seals a Writ, and then all march away in
order as before, to their several Barges; where being entered, and the Barges
on float, they are entertained by several pieces of Ordnance as acclamations
of joy: The Body making all convenient speed for Baynard Castle, but the
several Companies to Paul's Wharff, and other places in order to their making a
guard or lane from Paul's Wharff, all along Thames street, and up Dowgate hill,
and so through Walbrook unto the Stocks along Cheapside, into Paul's Churchyard
round by Paul's Chain, through which the Company of Cloth-workers, and their
Attendants the Lord Mayor and his attendants are to pass.

The Lord Mayor being landed at Baynard Castle, the Gentlemen of the Artillery
ground accommodate his Lordship with their Company, the Marshall with Drums,
Fifes, Trumpets, Colours, Silk-works, Pensioners, Gentlemen Ushers, Budge
Batchellors, and Foins Batchellors, all in an Equipage ready to march. The
Foot Martial having ranked them out, the Gentlemen of the Artillery ground
fall in there, and leading the Van through Thames street up Dowgate hill,
through Walbrook towards the Stocks, where the two Scaenes or representative
Triumphs appear, being taken in the Rear of the Gentlemen of the Artillery
ground, the whole body marching, till they come to Soaper lane, where that of
Industry is placed.

Represents the Manufacture of Cloth-working in the several Qualities thereof;
on the top of the Pageant, is sixth a Ram (the Crest of the Companies Arms) on
which is seated a Figure.

A Chariot drawn by two Griffins, wherein is presented the several
qualifications of a true Honourable Person.

IN the same Equipage, the whole Body march, till the first Scaene comes near
Soaper-lane end; where it makes a stand; and the other Scaene, moves with the
Body, till they come near Paul's Chain, where that makes a stand; the Marshall
moving on till the Lord Mayor is ready to flanck the first Scaene, in which
Industry is seated, clothed in Grey, on her head a Kirchief, in one hand she
bears a Card or Shears, in the other a Sceptre; on the top of which Sceptre, is
an open hand, and in the midest of it an Eye; and at the end of the Sceptre,
two small Wings, like those of the Cadices; and being always busied in the
midst of the Stage, a Bush is represented, under which a Shepherd sits
playing on Bag-pipes, Sheep feeding by him, and other persons clothed in Grey
or Russet, representing the several Occupations appertaining to the said*
Trade, sometimes leaving work and falling to dancing or singing; ever in one
action or other.

Who can boast a happiness more securely safe than we:
Since our harmless thoughts we dress, in a pure simplicity:
And chaste nature doth dispense, here her beauties Innocence.
Envy is a stranger here; blessed Content our bowls doth crown:
Let such slave themselves to fear, on whose guilt the judge doth frown:
We from evil actions are free, as uncorrupted air.
With the Turtles whisper love,
With the Birds do practice mirth:
With our harmless Sheep we move, and receive our food from Earth:
Nor do we disdain to be, Clothed with the Lambs Livery.
Which being endded, on a sudden the Lord Mayor draws near to the Scaen, to
whom Industry makes her Address:

MY Lord your Pardon if my People do
Exceed their wonted Bounds to honour you;
And laying work a side, presume to play;
The sight of you gives them a Holli-day.
Such seasoned harmless pastime cannot hurt,
That labor's hard,'s not softened with some sport:
And though I'm called painful Industry,
Figured with weary hand and watchful Eye:
Yet I a moderate labour like the best,
Whose burden makes us not the same detest:
For where the Mean is used, 'tis such a Treasure,
It makes the Toil become a seeming pleasure:
And as no Art or Science can be found,
Or Manull Trade within the spacious round
Of the vast Universe without me, so
Experience Fames me, and the Finders too.
The Mathematician that can sound* the Seas;
And find their depth, number the Pleiades;
By whom the Mariner his course doth steer,
Bringing the Merchant profit far and near:
Finding out Tract-less places, but for me
Had mist the aim of his discovery.
I have digressed from what I was to say;
A lawful calling is our Theme to day:
The benefit of which the Ancients have
Set forth in several Ideoms, wise and grave:
It is a Cities glory, and in part,
Is to the Governor or Head, a Heart,
To which he is a very welcome guest;
Not to devour, but temperately to Feast:
And this of Cloth-working is known to be,
As numerous as full of Charity.
It clothes the naked, feeds the hungry, and
A general profit brings unto the Land.
The Picker, Carder, and the Spinner too;
The Weaver, Fuller and the Dyer do
Relate to it, though in a different kind,
Like several Nations to one power confined:
Yet from those various vains many do feed,
And are supplied with succour in their need:
I fear I'm tedious (Sir) and may offend:
I'll therefore with the Companies wishes end.
May no intestine broils disturb your rest,
But Peace continue in the
That when your time doth terminate; all may
Applaud your Government, and bless this day.
The Speech ended, this Triumph moves up to the Van of the Marshall, and
marches till the Lord Mayor come up to the second Triumph.

A Chariot drawn by two Griffins (being the Supporters of the Companies Arms)
on each of which is set a Figure, representing Africa and Asia; each, having a
Pendant in their hands, wherein is painted the Lord Mayor and Companies Arms:
Between the Griffins is placed a Figure holding the Cities Banner, and
representing Temperance; she is habited in white, with a red Mantle cast
lightly over her,

In the Front of the Chariot, is seated another Figure, Prudence with the
raigns in her hand, guiding the Griffins; she represents the figure of Ianus,
as still foreseeing; on her head a Helmet of gold, circled with Leaves, habited
in white with an orange Mantle; in her right hand she holds a Dart, about which
is twisted the fish called Remora, whereof Pliny speaks, hath force to hinder
the passage of Ships; in her left hand she holds a Looking-glasse,

In the midest of the Chariot are placed three other Figures, Faith, Hope and
Charity: Faith, habited in white with a Mantle of flame colour, in her right
hand she bears an Altar with a Heart upon it; and in her left hand a Rock; her
head circled with gold, in the front whereof is the figure of a Lamb.

Hope is Clothed in White with a Green Mantle, and upon her head a
flourishing Tree, and in her left hand, an Ancher.

Charity is Clothed in White with a blew Mantle,

On the head of the Chariot is seated Honour, a Man with a grave Aspect, his
Brows encircled with Palm, a chain of Gold about his Neck, and Bracelets of
Gold about his Wrests; his Garment of Purple coloured Satin; in his right hand
a Lance; in the left a Shield, on the which is painted two Temples, with this
Motto, Hic terminus erit; alluding to the Temple of Marcellus: On the flanck of
the Chariot, two figures more representing Justice and Fortitude.

Justice clothed in white, with a Mantle of Purple, on her head a Wreath of
Stars; in one hand she holds a Sword, in the other a Balance.

Fortitude, habited in white, with a Sky coloured Mantle; On her head a Tower,
in her right hand a Pillar, or the arm of an Oak; in her left hand a Shield,
on which is painted, a Lyon fighting, or grappling with a Bear: Each of the
seven Virtues trampling a Vice under feet.

At the rear of the Chariot, are placed two Banners, the one adorned with the
Lord Protectors; and the other with the Arms of such Members of the Company, as
have been Lord Mayors.

The body of the Scaen is full of Hills, whereon grows several Teasels (part of
the Companies Badge) and about them several Briars and Thistles, where Lambs
feed.

The Lord Mayor being drawn near to the second Triumph Honour, makes his
address thus,

THough some dark
And seems her comely Beauty to destroy:
The
And Honour should in the same Livery mourn:
Yet that this day may not obscured be,
We'ave set our Confined heart at Liberty.
I come not (Sir) to tell what Honour is,
Or how attended; farther than what these
Do represent; a Mind Serene should be,
Of Lambe-like Innocence, from Envy free:
And armed with Courage, to pass through the Brier*
Of sharpe Afflictions, till the Soul retires.
These are the virtues that make man complete,
Fitted for Honour, and for Honours Seat;
Faith, Hope, Charity, Prudence, Temperance,
Justice and Fortitude, seem to advance
Your this days Triumph, at whose feet doth lye.
Each Rebel-Vice, to show the standers by,
The power of Virtue, and encourage them
To shun the Counterfeit, and take the Gem.
Disert is Honours Parent; I am then
Yours by Descent, receive your own again.
To speak the truth of the Antiquity,
Of the honoured Company of which you're free.
'Tis twelve times twelve years since that they were made
A Genuine Fraternity in Trade.
You are the twelfth Lord Mayor that sprung from thence:
And equal with the rest in Eminence.
As Rivers pay their Tribute to the Maine,
And yet from thence replenished are again:
So fares your Company, from whom you do,
Receive their Love, and they your liking too:
Then Sir extend your Talent, and expose
Your large Endowments to their best repose,
And the Honour of your Country; temper so
Mercy with Justice, neither may over flow:
Justice doth bear a Sword to terrify,
And likewise Scales to weigh Offences by.
May Fortitude and Temperance guide you ever:
And the whole stock of Virtues leave you never;
That when you shall surrender up your breath,
Your Memory may Triumph after death.
The Speech ended, this Scaen keeps the place, and his Lordship with the whole
body pass through Ave Mary lane, and down Warwick-lane.

The first Scaen placing it self at the South end of Warwick lane, and that of
Honour marches down Warwick lane; and is placed at the Lord Mayors gate; the
Pensioners fyling on the East side the lane, hanging their Targets on their
Javelins.

The Martial in Paul's Church yard, cause the Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Ensigns,
Streamers, and Banner-bearers, to open to the right and left, for a lane,
through which the Company is to pass; causing the first right hand man to
stand; the rest advancing each before his Leader, until the Master and Wardens
terminate at the Lord Mayor door; So as the Master, Wardens, Assistants,
Livery, and Batchellors have as a Rearguard; a Pentioner with his Target hung
on the top of his Javelin; and then the Ushers, Colours, Trumpets, Drums and
Silkworks, file up and place themselves in several parts as a Frontguard, as
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen pass into the Lord Mayors house.

The Lord Mayor being entered his house, the Martial, Drums, Trumpets, and
Gentlemen-Ushers, march up to the head of the Master and Wardens, two by two:
The whole Body march away to Cloth workers Hall; the Colours and Silk: works
are furled, and with the Scaenes are conveyed to Cloth workers Hall.


