AMIDST all the memorable Triumphs of all Ages, Ancient and Modern, the
Ovations of the Caesars, or triumphal Arches of the neighbouring Monarch,
there's none exceeds the Lustre of London this Day; which, for the Antiquity of
its Institution, the Grandeur of the Preparations, the Splendour of the
Pageantry, and the Magnifice of the Entertainments, may properly be styled
Triumphant above all the Cities in the Universe. It is a liberal and unanimous
Assembly of all the Chiefs of the Imperial City of the most flourishing Kingdom
in the Universe. This Year adorned with the Presence of their most Sacred
Majesties, the King, Queen, Queen Dowager, Prince and Princess of Denmark, with
all the chief Nobility and principal Officers of the Court; the Arch-Bishop of
Canterbury, and chief Prelates of the Church: The Lord Chancellor, Lord Chief
Justice, and all the learned Judges in the Laws; with all foreign Ministers,
Ambassadors, Envoys, Residents, who having observed the Tables of the most
Puissant Princes, and seen the most hospitable Preparations of Foreign Nations,
rest here amazed at the No plus altra of all Entertainments.

Before we describe the Magnificence of the Pageantry, we must not omit the
stateliness of the Morning Procession, and Progress by Water to Westminster,
where his Lordship once a Year (as the Duke of Venice to the Sea) weds himself
to the Thames, with a Ring of surrounding Barges, that being also a part of his
Dominion, of which, this Day he takes Possession, and thus he exercises his
double Sovereignty both by Land and Water: Of which in their Order.

THE most eminent and most accomplished Citizens, selected for the Management
of this Days Triumph, assemble together, at Seven of the Clock in the Morning
at Goldsmiths Hall.

THE Foot Marshal divides them into several Companies, and ranks them out Two
by Two, beginning with the Pensioners in Gowns; and in the Front of them
places the Companies Ensigns, Four Drums, and one Fife, which is the lowest
Division.

In the Rear of them fall Four Drums and one Fife.

After them the several Pensioners in Coats, bearing several Banners and
Standards. After them Four Trumpets. After the Unicorns and Justice, the
Supporters and Crest of the Ensigns of the Company, Six Gentlemen Ushers. After
them the Budge Batchellors, which conclude the next Division.

In the Rear of those fall six Trumpets: After them Two Gentlemen bearing Two
Banners, the one of the Cities, the other of the Companies Arms. After them
follow Eight Gentlemen Ushers, and then the Foyn Batchellors, which make up the
Third Division.

After them Two Gentlemen Ushers bearing Two Banners. After them Ten Gentlemen
Ushers, habited as before; and after them the Livery.

In the Rear of these fall other of the City Trumpets, and after them Two
Gentlemen bearing the Banners of the City and my Lord Mayor; and then the
Gentlemen and the Court of Assistants, which conclude that Division.

In the Rear of them fall in Four Drums, and six Trumpets: After them Three
Gentlemen, bearing the King's, Queen's, and City's Banners; and after them Foor
Gentlemen Ushers, with Four Pages attending; and after them the Masters and
Wardens, which concludes all, and is the last Division.

In this Order they march from Goldsmiths Hall to his Lordships House,
beginning with the Pensioners, until the Marshal comes and makes a Halt at the
Gate, till such time as the Lord Mayor and Aldermen are mounted.

Which being done, the whole Body march towards Guild-Hall, and at Guild-Hall
Gate the New Lord Mayor joins with the Old Lord Mayor and his Attendants; so
all of them march through Cheapside to Three-Crane Warf, and then the Lord
Mayor, Aldermen, and their Attendants, at the West End of the said Wharf take
their Barge; the Court of Assistants, the Livery, and the Gentlemen Ushers of
those Three Divisions at the East End of the said Wharf, whilst the rest of the
Retinue, some Gentlemen Ushers, the Budge Batchellors and Foyn Batchellors
remain behind to attend their Return.

His Lordship, the Aldermen, and Company of Goldsmiths, in their Barges, with
the Barges of the respective Companies attending, make towards Westminster;
several Pleasure-Boats, adorned with Flags and Streamers, saluting his Lordship
all the way with Drakes and great Guns. His Lordship, the Aldermen and Company
of Goldsmiths, with some other Companies, landing at Westminster, have a Lane
made from Kings-Bridge to Westminster-Hall; where having taken the accustomed
Oaths, before the Lords and Barons of the Exchequer, they return to their
Barges (a Lane being made as before) to the Water-side; the Barges all the way
echoing with most Harmonious Wind-Musick, viz. Flutes, Ho-boys, Trumphets, c.
and adorned with various Streamers, Flags, and Banners of the respective
Companies; which Solemnity by Water is not the least Addition to the Lustre of
this Day.

His Lordship, with the Companies attending him, land at Black-Friars-Stairs,
where they are saluted by the Famous Artillery-Company, led by Sir William
Pritchard, and brought up by Colonel Friend; the Granadeers led by Colonel
Kelk, and brought up by Lieutenant Bell; all adorned in their Martial
Ornaments, in Buff and shining Head-Pieces, many whereof are Massy Silver.

From Black-friars they march before my Lord Mayor and Aldermen from Cheapside
to Guild-Hall. The Pensioners and Banners being set in order, the Foot Marshal
in the Rear of the Artillery Company, leads the way through Ludgate-Hill, into
St. Paul's Church-Yard, and so into Cheapside; where, over against the
Half-Moon, his Lordship is entertained with the first Scene, or Pageant.

IS a spacious Triumphant Chariot of Gold curiously contrived with all the
Elegancy of Art and Invention, gloriously set round with precious Stones and
various coloured Jewels of inestimable Value, adorned with several pleasant and
delightful Figures, as well Artificial as Natural, lively Representing and
properly appertaining to the Solemnity of the Day. About the middle of this
glorious Structure, on an Ascent of State up to a Throne, sits ASTRAEA the
Goddess of Justice, a person of Majestic Aspect, attired in a long Robe of
Silver, a Crimson Mantle fringed with Silver, a Veil of Silver fringed with
Gold; and on her head a Coronet of Silver set with Stars. In her right hand she
bears a Touchstone, the distinguisher of Sterling from Counterfeit, Truth
from Falsehood; and in her left hand a Golden Beam or Balance, with Silver
Scales, to weigh every thing Impartially according to the Standard of Truth and
Equity. She is placed between Two Leopards heads, as the Stamp and Standard of
the Company, invested with a wreath of Stars, as an Emblem of the Celestial
Sphere from whence she Descended.

On each Arm of this Celestial Goddess are placed two other Cardinal Virtues,
PRVDENCE and TEMPERANCE, as the necessary supporters of Justice; and on a
Descent, remote from the former, two other attending Virtues, COVRAGE and
CONCORD.

PRVDENCE, a Grave Matron in a golden Robe fringed with Silver, and silver
Mantle fringed with Gold, a Chaplet of Flowers, a Shield Vert charged with a
Dove Argent, bearing a Banner of the City's.

TEMPERANCE, in a white Robe of Silver, a green Mantle fringed with Gold, a
Chaplet of white Lilies and Roses. In one hand bearing a Shield with a golden
Cup; in the other a Banner of the Company's.

COVRAGE, a Person of an Heroic Aspect, in Armour, with a black Peruque, tied
in a silken Bag behind. A black Velvet Cap with a plume of red and blew
Feathers, and a red and blew coloured Scarf about his waste. In his right hand
holding a Sword with a Coronet of Gold elevated on the point, and in his left
hand a Standard of the King's with this Inscription, Audaces fortuna juvat.

CONCORD, a fair Virgin in a Crimson coloured Robe, a Sky coloured Scarf
fringed with Silver, fair bright Hair, and about her Head a Garland of red and
white Roses, representing the Concord and Union of King and People, the Court
and City, in the Honour this Day conferred upon them by his Majesty's Presence.
In her left hand she bears a shield of polished Gold, charged with a Grove of
Myrtles, for such is the nature and harmonious concord of those Trees, that
although they be planted a good space one from another, they will meet and one
Embrace the other. In her right hand she bears a Banner of the Company's.

This stately Chariot is drawn by Two golden Unicorns, excellently carved and
painted, with equal proportion, to the Life; with Trappings of Gold and Silver;
their Bridles richly beset with precious Stones, Jasper, Topaz, and Sapphire.
On the Forehead a large Amathyst, and on their Crests the Leopards Heads in
Massy Silver richly embossed, as the Stamp and Badge of the Worshipful the
Company of Goldsmiths.

On the backs of these two Unicorns are mounted two beautiful young Negroes,
brought over from Barbary and Guinnea, their places of Traffic, attired
according to the richest Dress of those places; with Coronets on their Heads
beset with plumes of divers coloured Feathers. In their left hands they bear
Two displayed Banners, one of the King's, the other of the City's, intimating
their submission to the powerful Monarch of Great Britain, as absolute
Sovereign of Sea and Land, and their ambition to preserve an amicable
correspondence and commerce with this renowned City. ASTRAEA, or the Goddess of
Justice drawn in this Triumphant Chariot represents the Crest; the Unicorns as
an Enblem of Strength and Unity, the supporters of this ancient and worshipful
Company. Beneath the supporters are added seven other Figures properly attired.

Lastly, To the supporters, the Unicorns which draw this Chariot, is added a
Postilion, the Hieroglyphic of CONDVCT, in a Vest of Cloth of Silver, and
Trunks of Crimson Velvet, a Crimson Cap with red and blue Feathers, and
pearl-colour'd Buskins lined with Crimson, bearing in the one hand a golden
Truncheon, and in the other a Banner of the Lord Mayors. His Lordship taking a
short survey of this surprising Object, is thus saluted by Astraea.

DOwn from the Regions of the spangled Skies,
Where I sate Crowned amongst the Deities,
ASTRAEA in a golden Throne descends,
To grace those Walls, which Warlike JAMES defends.
Once in the golden Age of former days,
I amongst Mortals had assigned a place:
But Justice fled, Astraea with her flies,
And makes her new Apartment in the Skies.
Those happy days again revived in you,
I view the World from whence I then withdrew:
With Temperance and Prudence on each side,
To be this Year Your Conduct and Your Guide.
The Leopards heads that guard our Throne, imply
The Stamp and Standard of the Company;
That no Alloy corrupt Your brighter Mass,
And Justice may again for Sterling pass.
This equal Balance guides you as a Scene,
'Twixt both Extremes to hold the Golden Mean.
WHich is the Hieroglyphic of the Company, is a large and spacious Laboratory
or Work-house, containing several conveniences and distinct apartments, for
the several Operators and Artificers, with Forges, Anvils, Hammers, and all
Instruments proper for the Mystery of the Goldsmiths. In the middle of the
Frontispiece, on a rich golden Chair of State, sits St. DVNSTAN, the ancient
Patron, and Tutelar Guardian of the Company, canonically attired in his
pontifical Ornaments, properly expressing his Prelatical Dignity and
Canonization, in a Robe of finest white Lawn, over which he wears a Cope, or
vest of bright shining Cloth of Gold, which reaches down to the ground; on his
Reverend hoary Head a golden Mitre, beset with all sorts of precious Stones,
from the Topaz to the Sapphire. In his left hand he holds a golden Crosier as
an Emblem of his prelatical Function, and in his right hand a pair of
Goldsmiths Tongues, as an Emblem of his Patronage.

Behind him are placed ORPHEVS and AMPHION, playing upon several melodious
Instruments, as well for his Lordship's Diversion as to preserve a Harmony and
Decorum amongst the Artificers; the one, that with his excellent Music drew
after him wild Beasts, Woods and Mountains; the other, who by his Eloquence,
taught the rude Savages to lead a civil Life, and by the harmonious Charms of
his Music built the City Thebes.

ORPHEVS, an old grave Patron with a white Beard and long gray Hair; in a
Crimson coloured Robe, and blue Buskins; between his Arms a Harp.

AMPHION, a young Man of a ruddy Complexion, in a Robe of Crimson Velvet, on
his Head a Coronet of red and white Flowers, playing upon an Instrument.

In a degree more forward are placed the CHAM of Tartary and the Grand SVLTAN,
in Robes and Turbans, peculiar for the dress of the Ottoman Court; who being
Conquered by the Christian Harmony seem to sue for a Reconcilement.

Beneath these steps of Ascention to the Canonical Chair, in opposition to the
Patron, is planted a Goldsmiths Forge and Furnace, with Fire, Crucibles and
Gold in it, a Work-man blowing with the Bellows. On either Hand there is
elegantly set up a large Press of Gold and Silver Plate, representing a shop of
formal Trade. And further, towards the front, are several Artificers and
Jewellers at Work, with Anvils and Hammers, with Stones, Sparks, and other
Instruments, fit for Enamelling: The several Artificers beating out Plate, fit
for the Fashioning and Formation of several Vessels of Gold and Silver. In
these Shops are also divers Wedges or Ingots of Gold and Silver. A step below
St. Dunstan, sits an Essay-Master, with his Class, Frame and Balance for
trying of Gold and Silver according to the Standard. In another apartment is
also Disgrossing, Flatting and Drawing of Gold and Silver Wyre: In another are
included your Finers, Melting, Smelting, Fining, Refining and Separating Gold
and Silver, both by Fire and Water.

In a Forge before this Office are divers Miners in Canvas Breeches, red
Waistcoats and red Caps, bearing Spades, Pick-axes, Twibbles and Crows, fit to
sink Shafts, and make Addits. The Cham of Tartary and Grand Sultan having made
their Obeisance, are rejected. The Devil also appearing at the latter end of
the Speech, is caught by the Nose by St. Dunstan. When the Speech is over the
great Anvil is set forth, with a Silversmith holding on it a Plate of Massy
Silver, and Three other Work-men at work, singing, and keeping time upon the
Anvil.

His Lordship having viewed the curiosity of its Design, is addressed by St.
Dunstan, in these Words:

WAked with this Music from my silent Vrn,
Your Patron Dunstan comes t'attend your Turn.
Amphion and old Orpheus playing by,
To keep our Forge in tuneful Harmony.
These pontificial Ornaments I wear,
Are types of Rule and Order all the Year.
In these white Robes none can a fault descry,
Since all have liberty as well as I:
Nor need you fear the Shipwreck of your Cause,
Your loss of Charter or the Penal Laws,
Indulgence granted by your bounteous Prince,
Makes for that loss too great a Recompense.
This Charm the Lernaean Hydra will reclaim;
Your Patron shall the tameless Rabble tame.
Of the proud Cham I scorn to be afeared;
I'll take the angry Sultan by the Beard.
Nay, should the Devil intrude amongst your Foes,
What then?


-- Snap, thus, I have him by the Nose.


The Speech being ended, the Pageant moves easily, being led by a Guard of
Twenty four in the front, Twelve of which are Lictors in Roman Habits, bearing
Axes in their Hands, with Head-pieces, and Leopards Heads on each Shoulder, as
also on their Buskins; and Twelve Yeomen, bearing Blunderbusses, apparelled
after the same manner, with Head-pieces and Buskins; besides Green-men, Swabs,
Satyrs, and Attendants innumerable.

THE Company, as a farther testimony of their Bounty, present his Lordship with
a Ship; The Unity of London; a Merchant-Adventurer to Norway and Denmark. This
Ship is Laden with Deals, Masts, Beams, Trees, and all sort of Timber, for
building Ships, Houses, and all other sort of Architecture; as representing his
Lordships way of Traffic and Adventure into those Countries. It is in length
from Poop to Stern One hundred forty five Foot by scale, Forty five Foot high,
from the Water to the top of the Stern in proportion of building. She bears
Twenty two Guns, with Ancients and Pendents, Streamers, Flags, Standards,
Tackling, Braces, Bowlings, Cables, Anchors, Cordage, and all sorts of Rigging
appertaining to a Merchantman of that Burden. On board this Ship are a Captain
and his Mate, a Gunner and his Mate, a Boatswain and Mariners, every man at
work in his proper station, some at the main Tack, others the main Braces,
others the Bowlings; some climbing up the Ladders to the main Top, and others
sitting cross the Yards Arm. On the Stern is painted the Arms and Crest of the
Company, for Bowsprit the Unicorn which is the supporters of the Worshipful
Company of Goldsmiths.

The Captain, who with several Trumpets is placed on the Stern, is dressed in
Indian Silk with a rich Fur Cap; the rest of the Mariners in Indian stripes and
rugged Yarn Caps, blue, white and red. The Boatswain having given his signet by
his Whistle, and commanded silence, the Captain accosts his Lordship in these
Words.

SOme Years ago we bore up to this Port,
But different Winds preventing, we fell short.
Now having stemmed the Currant of the Tide,
In this calm Bay, we safe at Anchor ride.
We have with double Cheer this Voy'ge contrived,
To see you in your proper Haven arrived,
Where may all prosperous Gales your Course direct,
May all the Gods of Sea and Land protect,
With Drake to guide you through the Gulf this Year,
Where you through Scylla and Charybdis steer.
If you this steady Compass can maintain,
You need not fear an after Hurricane.
You shall subdue the Foes insulting Rage,
And bring the Pirates to the Weather-gage.
If any dare resist your juster Power,
This Ship shall make 'em to your Standard Lower:
And all the World (while you are placed at Helm)
Strike Sail to the Admiral that guides the Realm.
THE Temple of JANVS of the Compositive Order, most elegantly contrived, being
a composition of all the five Orders, the last and finest. This Temple is
erected on a Rock, whereon are four Pyramids, elevated and adorned with Laurels
of Victory, and Coronets of Honour, beset with Emeralds and Topaz, Rubies,
Sapphires, Amathysts, Chrysolites, and all manner of precious Stones. On the
top of these Pyramids is exalted the Sun and Moon, in opposite Angles one
against the other; the Sun as an Emblem of heat, by which the Minerals are
reduced into Gold and Silver, fit for the Goldsmiths operation; and the Moon
for its Transparency and Brightness, representing the spendor and shining
Quality of such Metal. On the top of this Temple is exalted FAME, holding a
Banner of the Lord Mayors, trampling upon ENVY, as a Trophy of his Lordship's
Triumph over his Enemies. At the Temple-gate stands JANVS wearing on his Head a
Crown, in manner of a Globe, part Celestial and part Terrestrial, alluding to
the Revolution of the Year; his Head of Hair thin and lank, but white; his
Beard broad and long, as he is supposed to be the Father of Time; his Garment
part Purple, part Russet, close girt, in one hand a Sceptre, in the other a
Plough-share, the one relating to his kingly Office, the other to Agriculture
and Tillage. He is figured with Two Faces alluding to his Wisdom; that judges
by things past what will ensue; on the forehead of his Face, directed towards
the Lord Mayor, is fixed a Star, on his breast another of more Magnitude,
relating to his Deification. About that part of the Garment which is purple,
are fixed several small Stars; and that of Russet several Crescents alluding to
Plenty, the Fruits of Peace and Industry. At the basis of the Pyramids,
surrounding the God of Time, as Attendants, sit the Seven liberal Sciences, as
Daughters of Experience, Time and Industry, viz. Grammar, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Astronomy, Astrology, Rhetoric and Logic, attired in their proper
Habiliments. GRAMMAR, distinguished by holding in one hand a Book, and a Banner
of the Cities in the other. ARITHMETIC, in a Vest of Cloth of Gold, with a
Label charged with Figures. GEOMETRY, bearing a Castle upon her head, a green
Mantle fringed with Silver, in her right hand a silver Wand, in her left a
Banner of the Cities. ASTRONOMY, in an Azure Mantle, a watched Scarf with
golden Stars, with a silver Crescent on her forehead. ASTROLOGY, in a Robe of
Cloth of Silver, seeded with Stars, holding a Telescope erected towards the
Heavens. RHETORIC, with the right Palm Expanded, and LOGIC with the same hand
shut and close fisted, the one implying the copiousness of Elocution, the other
the closeness of Logic, and syllogistical Argument.

On an ascent above these sit Wisdom, History and Government.

WISDOM, in a silver Robe and blue Mantle, seeded with Stars and fringed with
Silver, purple Buskins, in the one hand bearing a Label with this Inscription,
Sapientia docet; in the other a Banner of the Cities.

HISTORY, a Reverend grave Matron in a Robe of Cloth of Gold, and Mantle of
Crimson Velvet, holding in her Hand a Roll of Parchment expanded, bearing a
History of the Foundation and Antiquity of the Worshipful the Company of
Goldsmiths; who were Confirmed and Incorporated in the 16 th. of Richard the
Second; and who had the Honour to be the First Lord Mayors of London: Together
with a Catalogue of those Worthy and Famous Citizens, (Goldsmiths) that had the
Diginity of the Majoralty of this City some Years before; as the memorable
Leofstane, Goldsmith, who was Provost of London in the Reign of Henry the
First: Henry fitz Leofstane, in the Reign of Richard the First, Mayor: Gregory
Rochley chief Say Master of the King's-Mint, Goldsmith, Mayor in the Third year
of Edward the First, and continued Seven years. Then Alderman Faringdon of
Faringdon-Ward, in the Ninth of the same, as appears upon Record; with many
others.

GOVERNMENT, in Armour of Silver and a Helmet, with a plume of red and white
Feathers, a Gold Truncheon in the right hand, a crimson Scarf fringed with
Gold, and crimson Stockings; in the Left a Banner of the King's.

In the other Niches sit Three other Figures, being Votaries to Peace,
Providence, Liberty, Honour.

PROVIDENCE, a Lady lifting up both her hands to Heaven, and in a Shield these
words inserted, Providentia deorum; her Robe or Garment green, fringed with
Gold, at her Foot a Sceptre and Cornucopia, her Mantle yellow, fringed with
Silver, on her head a Garland of Poppeys.

LIBERTY, in a cherry-coker Robe fringed with Silver, a purple Mantle fringed
with Gold, a Coronet Murrey with a silver Chaplet of divers Flowers, in one
hand bearing a Shield with this Inscription, Liberty of Conscience; in the
other, a Banner of the King's.

HONOVR, in a purple Robe wrought with Gold, a Crown with several Cities
bearing the Arms of England; a Mantle of white Silk fringed with Crimson,
bearing in her right hand my Lord Mayor's Banner, in her left a Shield of the
Company.

His Lordship having viewed the variety and regular contrivance of this Design,
Janus addresses himself to him in these words.

HEre Times gray Emblem from this Temple-Gate,
Which Mortals to my Fame did Dedicate,
JANUS descends t'attend your brighter State.
My Brows with lasting Ornaments are Crowned,
And all the Arts and Sciences Surround:
This Old-young, double Vifage I assume,
Implies both what is past, and what's to come.
In a Celestial and Terrestrial Sphere,
To show the Revolutions of this Year,
In which you have a harder Course to run,
Than since with Infant Time your Course begun.
To guard you through this Scene, I have applied
Wisdom and Providence to be your guide;
With Liberty of Conscience to be just,
That You with Honour may discharge your Trust.
The Speech being ended, the Foot Marshal placing the Assistants, Livery, and
Companies on both sides of King's-Street, and their Pensioners with the Targets
hung on the tops of their Javelins, in the Rear of them, and the
Ensign-Bearers, Drums and Fifes in the Front; he hastens the Foyns and Budge
Batchellors, together with the Gentlemen Ushers to Guild-Hall, where his
Lordship is again saluted by the Artillery-Men, with three Volleys more, which
conclude their Duty. His Majesty having before passed on Horse-back through the
City with a large Guard to attend him, led up by the Duke of Northumberland,
and the Foot Guard by the Lord Craven. The Lord Mayor being arrived at
Guild-Hall, (which is hung round with the richest Tapestry) repairs to Dinner
with the Companies, where to make the Feast more famous, he is this Year
dignified with the presence of the King, Queen, Queen Dowager, their Royal
Highnesses the Prince and Princess of Denmark, the Archbishops, Bishops, and
all the principal Clergy, all the Lords of the Privy-Council and principal
Officers of State, all the Judges and Sergeants at Law and their Ladies;
together with all foreign Ministers, Envoys, Residents and Ambassadors. His
Majesty with the Queen, Queen Dowager, c. Dine at a Table raised upon the
Hustings at the East end of the Hall; the foreign Ambassadors, the Lords of the
Council and others of the Peerage and Nobility, at the two next Tables raised
on each side of the Hall; the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen Dine at a Table
raised at the West end of the Hall, and the Citizens of the Liveries at several
Tables, which fill the whole body of the Hall.

His Lordship beginning their Majesties Healths, the Hall is filled with
Huzza's and Acclamations. At Dinner before the Banquet, his Majesty is
entertained with the following Song.

HOW great are the Blessings of Government made,
By the excellent Rule of our Prince;
Who, while Troubles and Cares do his Pleasures invade,
To his People all Joys does dispense:
And while he for us is still Caring and Thinking,
We have nothing to mind, but our Shops and our Trade,
And then to Divert us with Drinking,
And then to Divert us with Feasting and Drinking.
From him we derive all our Pleasures, our Pleasures and Wealth;
Then fill me Glass; nay, fill it up, fill it up higher:
My Soul is a thirst, for his Majesty's Health;
Then fill, fill, fill it up higher,
My Soul is a thirst for his Majest'y Health,
And an Ocean of Drink cannot quench my Desire.
Since all we Enjoy to his Bounty we owe,
'Tis fit all our Bumpers like that should o'er-flow;
'Tis fit all our Bumpers, 'tis fit all our Bumpers,
Like that should over -- flow.
Then whilst in a Consort the Minstrela do play,
Let a Health to Great Caesar go round:
He who crowns with His Presence the state of this Day,
Whom all conquering Laurels have Crowned.
And whilst we Enjoy the inestimate Blessings,
The extent of his Freedom, each Man his own way,
Let's show it in thankful Caressing,
Let's show it in thankful, in thankful Caressing.
From him we derive all our Pleasures, our Pleasures and Mirth;
Then fill me a Glass, c.
The Song being ended, and the whole Entertainment managed with as good Order
and Decency as the Circumstance, can permit, nothing being omitted by the City,
that may express their Duty to their Majesties, and the humble sense they have
in particular of their Royal Appearance; Their Majesties return in the same
order to White-hall, and his Lordship to Grocers-Hall, which (as well as the
former Lord Mayor) for the Convenience of its Situation and other Accommodations
he hath chosen this Year, for the seat of his Majoralty. When his Lordship is
Housed, those that attend him depart in decent and regular Order to their,
respective Habitations; the Fire-works and Rockets lighting them all the way.
The Triumphs, Pageants and Silk Works are taken into the special Care and
Custody of the Masters, Painters and Artificers; who over-joy'd with the
success, in contributing to this Solemnity, repair to drink his Lordships
Prosperity; and all crown the Day with a Health to His Majesty; Whom Heaven
long Preserve.


