WHO is't would be a Poet in our days,
When every Coxcomb crowns his Head with Bays,
And stands a saucy Candidate for Praise?
The Stage is quite debauched, for every Day
Some new-born Monster's shown you for a Play;
Art Magic is for Poetry professed,
Horses, Asses, Monkeys, and each obscener Beast,
(To which Egyptian Monarch once did bow)
Upon our English Stage are worshipped now.
Fletcher's despised, your Johnson's out of fashion,
And Wit's the only Drug in all the Nation.
Whilst Scenes, Machines, and empty Opera's reign,
And for the Pencil you the Pen disdain,
Nature is out of countenance, and gives place
To beastly Mimicry and vile Grimace.
A Woman now comes to reform the Stage,
Who once has stood the Brunt of this unthinking Age;
Yet should her Pen, her Beauty cannot fail;
But, oh! she vows she'll not her Charms unvail,
Nor shall you know, harsh Men, at whom you rail.
Then how you censure this her Play beware,
Lest through the Poetess you wound the Fair:
But --
If you'll go on to dawn good Sense in spite,
I'll be revenged on you to morrow night:
In this Side-box she'll sit, I'll maked my Task,
Before you all, to strip her of her Mask;
Oh, how your Malice then you will repent,
And court those Favours which she shall not grant!
Her Face once seen, she cannot want Applause,
For Wit and Beauty both will plead her Cause.

HOW can you call me Friend, and thus conceal a Grief from me almost distracts
you? All Night you sighed and wept, and in your broken Slumbers started, and
cried, Oh that fatal Grove! Tell me, my Bebbemeah, I conjure thee, by all the
Love we ever vowed each other, make me a Sharer in your killing Sorrows.


O, do not press my yielding Heart to tell the only Secret I ever hid from you;
alas, you'll blame my weakness, and, instead of Pity, meet with your Contempt.


Is't possible to think so meanly of Choufera? Have we not from our tender
Infancy loved far beyond the common Ties of Blood, in all our harmless Joys
been a partaker with each other, and can you think I would contemn you in
distress? Unkind Bebbemeah! I will not call you Friend; if you can meet with
one more faithful to you than Choufera has always been, I wish it you.


Stay, stay Choufera, would you for one Denial throw me from your Breast? O, do
not add that weight to what I already feel, I will most faithfully discharge my
Heart of that vast load of Grief which almost overwhelms me, but you must
promise not to chide me, I cannot bear your Anger.


Pray do not fear it, I'll ease you of half the burden, by bearing it my self.


You know by what Engagements I am promised by my Father to Munzuffer, to which
with blind Obedience I gave confent, having only indifference for all Mankind;
but, O my dear Choufera, I am ^ longer Mistress of my Heart, for yesterday, a
fatal day I fear ^, I went to pass the tedious hours your Absence made me think
so in the Orange grove, where we so oft have been, I seated my self by the cool
purling Stream, a Melancholy seized me, I knew not why, as a Forerunner of my
Woes to come, a gentle Slumber crept unawares upon me; but long I had not
slept, when I was waked by trampling of a Horse; I started up, and the first
Object presented to my view was a Youth of Heavenly form, kneeling at my Feet.


Go on, my Dearest.


'Tis impossible to tell you my Surprise, and his appeared to be no less than
mine; If you're the Goddess of these Groves, said he, forgive the rashness of a
Stranger, who thus presumes to worship; but if of mortal race, I do conjure you
by all the Powers of Love, to tell me who you are. So soon as recovered my
Amazement, I told him I was Daughter to Pechai a private Gentleman, who lived
far from thence; and, that with my Father I was going hence next day: I see he
had Servants waiting at a distance, but I entreated him so earnestly not to
follow me, at last he promised me upon his Honour he would not; Go, go fair
Tyrant, cried he, and boast, whoever thou art, you've robbed a hapless Youth of
his dear Liberty, which all the Beauties of our East could never do before; but
be assured, wherever thou go, I'll find thee out, though in the remotest
corner of the World.


And so you parted.


Oh, no, I had no power to leave him, with Passion he talked on, and moving
Eloquence enough to warm the Heart of cold Diana; Night drew her sable
Curtains, and forced us to a cruel separation, I fear for ever; the Soul parts
from the Body not with more reluctance than we did from each other; nor was I
so much Mistress of my self, but he, alas, perceived it. I could run on and
draw this Story to an endless length; at last I homeward went by several
turnings, that he might not discern which way I took. Forgive, my dear
Choufera, my prolixity, and pity my misfortune.


I do with all my Soul; but why did you so carefully conceal the Knowledge who
you were?


I durst not trust so powerful a Temptation to draw me from my Duty to my
Father.


He ever promised not to force your inclination.


And I never to disobey his Will; his Goodness to me is the Rock on which I'm
lost, and I resolve to sacrifice my Happiness to his Pleasure.


You never yet see Munzuffer, and 'tis possible might not have liked him, if
you had not seen this Stranger.


All People speak of him in such high Characters, I fear I shall not find out
one Excuse that will seem just; he's young, has Wit and Sense, and beautiful to
admiration, good-humour'd, brave, and generous, what Objections can there be to
these Qualities, that will not discover the Prepossession of my Heart to be the
only Cause.


Compose your self, your Father's coming.


Persuade me not, I'll hear no more; Have I not promised her to Sennorat's Son,
the noble young Munzuffer?


You promised her before to me, for my Son Cemat, who is as worthy of her.


You know she hates him, and I will never compel her to any thing she likes
not.


Girls Humours are not to be consulted, they may like to day what yesterday
they hated, just as the Fancy takes 'em; if you thus fondly leave her to her
own choice, she may not perhaps like the Match you're so desirous of, but bring
a Son of her own seeking to call you Father, that you may blush to own.


I know so well her Obedience, I fear it not; sh'as promised me to marry
Munzuffer, I know she will: What say you Bebbemeah, will you not keep your Word
with me?


You may command me, Sir, to any thing, you ne'er shall find me wanting in my
Duty.


Where was your Duty when he commanded you to receive the Address of my Son?
But when a young Girl likes her Man, then, then it is Obedience.


She knows not yet whether she does or no, she never saw him.


She hears he's a smug young fellow, a pretty Play-thing for a foolish Child,
had she understood Merit, she'd found it in my Son.


Since you will force me then to tell you so, though I left her to her self in
that Affair, I did not think him worthy of her.


Nay, now you wrong him, basely wrong him, by the Gods you do; what if his Body
is not so well made as that of her young Paramour, he has a Soul as great as
was Alcides: Not worthy of her, that raw, young, foolish thing, who understands
no other Merit in a Man but a fine gay out-side! it shall be tried who's the
worthiest man.


You never were wanting to give her your ill word; come to my Closet Bebbemeah,
I must speak with you.


Come hither, my Choufera, can you thus tamely hear thy Brother injured, and
not thirst to be revenged on that proud Girl?


He is not the first man has been denied in an amorous Suit; it is impossible
to force an inclination where 'tis not natural, nor can I think him injured by
it.


Not injured! base, base degenerate Choufera! Oh! I shall burst with Rage;
hence, from my sight. Cemat; thus to have all my Hopes blown into Air, and
frustrated by a young beardless Boy, I am all Fury: Who waits there? bid my Son
come to me here, if he has Spirit, as I believe he has, it shall be tried what
he durst do to right himself and me. Cemat, that Bebbemeah is snatched from
your Arms, and given to another?


Let her be whose she will, I care not, were but her Fortune mine.


That's right, my Son, but there's no way to compass that without the Woman
too.


Do but direct me what you'd have me do, I have a Hand and Heart I dare employ
in any gainful mischief.


O, thou reviv'st my almost-dying Hopes, thou were born to be thy Mother's only
Blessing: This Munzuffer, this happy Rival comes, he hourly is expected, you
want no Friends to serve you on such occasions, way-lay him in the Wood through
which you know he passes, and spoil his fine Addresses; you understand me, do
it, and leave the rest unto thy Mother's Care.


What, murder him, you mean; conclude it done, you never shall see him here.


Success attend, I'll leave thee to contrive it.


Cemat! that, that's the Saint you worship: What! love thy own Sister! why,
where's the harm? she's a handsome young sprightly Wench, and made to be
enjoyed, and why not by her Brother? Jupiter lye with his Sister? Ah, but he's
a God, they say, and may do what he pleases, without being accountable to
Mortals; oh, for his Shower of Gold, the most powerful shape he ever assumed,
that I might wanton in my Danae's Arms. Two pretty Undertakings I'm upon,
that's the Truth on it, Murder and Incest,

I'll murder him, his Mistress to enjoy,
Ravish my Sister, if the Fool is coy,
And set the World on fire ever I will lose one Joy.

Stay and take fresh Intelligence, here's a Messenger just arrived from
Sennorat.


From Sennorat, say you? conduct him in.


Now, my Choufera, I am lost indeed; this Message comes to bring the tidings of
his approach.


You know not that, have Patience till you see the result.


There's some unwelcome News, do you observe him?


I do, and hope the Gods, in pity to me, have given some interruption to his
coming.


My Service to your Lord, tell him, I will suddenly return an Answer by a
Servant of my own. Sennorat would not fool me in this Concern; he's a Man of
that nice Honour, I think he would not do it: Here Bebbemeah, peruse that
Letter, 'tis you are most concerned.








Sure Heaven is not propitious to this Match, not one kind Star has smiled upon
it yet, I'll think on it more; What say you, Bebbemeah, art thou contented to
be thus neglected, and lose a rich young Husband?


You are to me a Husband, Father, all things; whilst I enjoy the Blessing of
your Life, I never shall think my self unhappy.


My Care shall always be for your Advantage, I'll go and answer Sennorat's
Letter.


Kind Heaven has heard my Prayers, and I'm released of half my Cares already.
Choufera; see what a world of Grief these Letters have removed from Bebbemeah's
Heart.


'Tis with a Confusion great as my Affliction that I acquaint you with the
disappointment of my Hopes; my rebellious Son, by whom I was to gain the Honour
of your Alliance, has left me without giving further Reasons for it than what
he inserts in the Note I have enclosed, sent you, which was delivered to me
after his flight: Judge of my Trouble, and consider his Folly as the rashness
of an unadvised young Man, who will, I hope, quickly see his Error, and return
to his Duty.

SENNORAT.


Never, I hope; proceed, my Dear, to the other.


I have always been unworthy of the Care you took of my Happiness, but much
more since the Affairs of my Heart are changed, which renders me incapable of
the Honour was intended me in the fair Bebbemeah, who has too much Merit only
to share a Heart; mine is prepossessed by an Accident, as unforeseen by me as
unwelcome to you: I fly your Anger, not being able to obey you, and I beg you,
with as much Compassion as your Resentment will permit, to consider 'tis a
Passion not to be resisted, though I have made my utmost Efforts to overcome it,
'tis the only Fault I have committed, who in all other things am your dutiful
Son,

MVNZVFFER.


'Tis true, you're freed from the Apprehensions of marrying one you love not,
but see not how 'twill compass him you love; do not you now repent your owning
your Name and Quality.


Since Fortune is so kind, I'll hope the best,
Rejoice at this, and trust her with the rest.

I'm almost weary with riding these few miles; what a vast Load's the Body when
the Soul's oppressed! At yonder stately Pagode there lives a learned Tallapoy,
profoundly read in Art and Nature's Secrets, he may inform me what my Stars
design, and teach my wandering steps to find out what I'm in search of; Do you
know him, Rulup?


Know him, yes Sir, I have heard enough of him to tremble at his very Name;
why, he's the Devil incarnate, would you go to the Devil, Sir, for a Woman?


Away, you Fool! he is a mighty Prophet, Austere of Life, a Favourite of the
holy Gods, can their Decrees foretell, and what is writ in the dark Book of
Fate; go tell him I beg to speak with him, and wait his coming here.


O S^r! no sooner conjure, but you know who's in the Circle. Yonder he comes, I
beseech you let me go, I'm not holy enough for his company; besides, Sir, you
may have Secrets to discourse on are not fit a poor Serving-man should hear.


Stay sirrah, I charge you, I may perhaps have use of you.


Use! I'm not fit for the use of any living Creature at this time, but if I
must stay, I'll secure my self as well as I can; I believe, for all his
holiness, he seldom looks up to Heaven.


Hail reverend Father, pitiful and good, vouchsafe to tell the Destiny of him
whom Love has made unhappy.


I will, I'm therefore hither sent by the great Gods, to whom thy Virtues are
most dear; descend thou airy Spirit, thou that of Lovers take the greatest
care, and tell this Love-sick Youth the utmost he would know.


YOU fly from what you seek, deny what you implore;
Return, thy Father's Grief to cheer,
Tell him thy Love, and do not fear,
'Tis he thy Doubts can clear,
And to thy longing Wish thy Mistress will restore.
The hellish fatal Sisters thy senses will beguile,
Thy envied Joys they will debar,
And cause a deadly mortal Jar,
Of Jealousy beware,
Thy Sight too will delude thee, and Innocence exile.
The Parricide, who woo's thee to her lewd Bed, detest;
For Heaven will at last agree
To crown thy constant Loyalty,
And happy thou shalt be;
Take warning, gentle Youth, and be for ever blessed.
Thanks, holy Father, for this kind Admonition.


Be careful, noble Munzuffer, there is a dreadful Fate hangs over your Head, be
virtuous, and be happy.


Some Power above direct me what to do, and steer my Actions to your Heavenly
Will. Come down, you Coward, do you not see he's gone?


No indeed, not I, my Eyes have been close shut, and my Ears stopped, I would
not countenance their diabolical Music by my attention; besides, I have heard
of some fine singing things that draw their list'ners to follow them whether
they will or no, perhaps she might be one of them.


Sirens you mean.


I know not what you call them, but I heard a Story of a great Man that tied
himself to the Mast, for fear of leaping into the Sea after them.


A very famous Story indeed, Vlysses, was it not?


I think he had some such cramp Name; but be it what it will, his Example, for
ought I know, has saved me from breaking my neck.


Come down you Sot.


As soon as I can get loose.


Go, bring the Horses, I'll go back again, what think you of that?





Hold your profane Tongue Sirrah, and do as I command.


Most willingly.


Eastern Kingdoms.





To appease my angry Father I will go,
Who if my Mistress finds, will more bestow
Than all his Wealth can give me here below.

NAY, further yet; it is a Secret of that great importance, the remotest corner
of this mighty Wood is hardly private enough.


I'm sure we have no overhearers in this place, and I'm so weary I can go no
further.





You see it is an unfrequented Path by the high Grass, I do believe no human
Ear can reach us.


Then this it is: Sister, I love you, nay, start not, more than a Brother
should, and must enjoy you.


Good Heavens! what mean you Brother, you are not sure in earnest?


Why not in earnest? Is it such a Wonder to love a pretty Woman?


I'm sure you jest, and tell me so to fright me.


If any Crime there be, 'tis you're the cause; your Honour is secure with me:
Come, come, my dear Choufera, let's be free, I'll give you a strong Proof how
much I love you.


Stand off, foul Monster; what villainous intentions thou art bent upon,
profane thy own Blood, ravish thy Sister! Think, think Cemat, upon the horrid
Deed.


I did not bring you here to rail, and am resolved, if you will not consent, to
force you.


I'll rend the Skies with shrieks, and move some pitying God, a Friend to
Chastity, to come to my assistance; and see, my Prayers are heard.


Ha! is she gone? she shall not escape me so, I soon shall overtake her.

Let the Coach go softly up the Hill, 'tis a cool pleasant Morning, we will walk
and overtake it: Disperse that Cloud upon thy Brow Munzuffer, and look as if
thou were to see thy fair lost Mistress: Have not I promised I will put no
Force upon thy Heart? she may be like the Picture which you showed me, and
therefore you may love her.


I wish I may, Sir, to oblige the kindest Father ever Son was blessed with.





Ha! a Woman's Voice, it sounded this way; Art to gone? The Youth is too nimble
for me.


But I'll not stay behind.


Whoever they be, curse on 'em, for coming just the very minute, a little
longer, and I had enjoyed my Ends, and then she would have kept the Secret for
her own sake. But this is no place to stay in, I'll get home before her, and if
the silly Slut does tell her Tale, why I'll forswear it.


I'm sorry the Villain escaped us.


Banish your fears, Madam, you are secure, we will see you safely home, where ever
it be.


How shall I return my Thanks to Heaven and you for this deliverance?

Oh Bebbemeah! a Fate like thine I mourn,
A Stranger love, and for one I know not, burn.

Compose your Thoughts, fair Lady, and tell us where 'tis we shall wait on you.


Since to the mighty Obligation I stand indebted for, you yet will add a fresh
one, which I dare not refuse, for fear again of that bold Ravisher from whom
you rescued me; on yonder Hill, at that great House, is where I live.


At Pechai's! 'tis thither we are going.


Bebbemeah.


I beg you'd leave me in the Orange-grove, at the entrance to the Park, and to
conceal the meeting me in this unlucky place, I have some Reasons for it are
fit you should not know at present.


Fear it not Lady, we will do as you desire.





Conduct the Lady to the Coach, Munzuffer.


Munzuffer! this is Bebbemeah's fugitive Lover returned; oh, if she see him
with my Eyes, what will become of poor unhappy Choufera?


Munzuffer returned to his Father, say you! art to sure on it?


Yes, Sir, I see him; I had just delivered your Letter to Sennorat, who sighed
and almost wept, and cried, Ungracious Boy! thou hast broke thy Father's Heart;
but strait a general Joy ran through the House, and nothing but Murzuffer's
Name repeated: He asked in haste, distrustful of his Joy, what meant those
Acclamations; before he could be answered, his Son was at his Feet, imploring
his Forgiveness, which he soon obtained: He bid me say, he'd send Munzuffer to
beg your Mediation to his injured Mistress, and come himself to obtain from
fair Bebbemeah a Pardon for his Son: I just arrived with these happy tidings,
they will not be long after me. This Letter, Sir, he charged me with to you,
and this to fair Bebbemeah.


Now, my Bebbemeah, prepare to receive the noble young Munzuffer.





I cannot now but join with her, I think her Request is just.


Madam* I know from whence your Advice proceeds. Rise my Child, remember what I
always promised you, be satisfied till you see him.


O, where is my Choufera, that I may ease my overcharged Heart into her
friendly Bosom.


My Lord, Sennorat is arrived.


Conduct him in; Callapia, pray withdraw for a few minutes.


Welcome, most noble Sennorat, and you, brave Youth.


I'm come, my Lord, with my offending Son, to entreat a Pardon for him.





Most certainly; know you this Picture?


I do: Who waits there?





Ha! what do I see! by all the Powers of Love, the very very same; how shall I
hide my Transports?


Choufera, the lovely charming Stranger I see in the Orange grove; I am all
Joys, O help me to conceal 'em.


Choufera!


Munzuffer, take her to your Wishes, I'm not so much a stranger to both your
Hearts, to doubt the Present is not acceptable.




With all my Heart, Lovers Discourses are not for others Ears.


They seem acquainted already, sure they before have seen each other; O, he's a
lovely sweet young Gentleman.


Now, now my Joys are full, divinest Bebbemeah; but what a world of Grief you
would have spared me, had you not used another Name!


I'd Reasons for it, my Lord, which, when convenient, you shall know.


Fly, fly you tardy hours, to bring about the time that blessed Munzuffer may
call the matchless Bebbemeah his.


My Lord, I have a doubt I do believe you can resolve; how came my Lord
Sennorat and my Father to know our meeting in the Grove?


It was the happiest minute of my Life, I told him of it; when most unkindly
you had left me alone to my Despair, I homeward went full of the Idea of your
charming self; next Morning 'twas designed by my Father, for all things were in
a readiness to wait on Bebbemeah, I found out many Excuses to put it off a
little longer, but none were of force enough to prevail: I rose e're break of
Day, and only with one of my Grooms, a simple honest fellow, I left my Father's
House, never to see it more till I had at least found out who 'twas had robbed
me of my Liberty: By what strange means I was sent back to my Father, I'll take
another time to tell: But after I had gained his Pardon for my Disobedience, I
told him my Adventure in the Grove, and showed him this Picture, which there
you dropped.


I never knew till now which way I lost it, nor can well remember for what
reason I should have it about me.


He seemed overjoyed, embraced, and said I should but only see, and if your
Beauty could not efface that of my Fair unknown, he would not press me to it,
and help himself to find my Charmer out. He asked me several Questions, and if
I thought my Love was not displeasing to her; Pardon me, lovely Mistress, for I
told him, by what I could perceive in the small Conversation we had together,
I'd made some small impression on your Heart.


That was the Purport of the Letter, I suppose, my Father was so pleased at. I
find they design to surprise us both.





My dearest Bebbem. will you not give me leave to call you so, and hope a
little Inclination, as well as Duty, gives you to Munzuffer.


'Tis time enough, my Lord, for such Confessions.


Bebbemeah, you'll surfeit your new Lover with too much forwardness; retire,
I'll keep him company.


Choufera, we must obey.





This is a Freedom, Sir, not usual in our Country, to give young People leave
to talk together before they're married; it is her Father's blind Indulgence to
her, who suffers her in every thing to follow her own Humour, which always led
her to love Men's company; she's of an amorous Complexion.


That is a rigorous and cruel Custom, all People ought to please themselves in
such a great concern as Marriage is.


And do you like her, Sir?


I love her more than Life, or all things else on Earth.


I'm sorry for it, so pretty a Gentleman deserves a better Fortune.


I want nothing, Madam, in having her, but Merit to deserve her; she's
beautiful to adoration, and virtuous, what can the blessed Munzuffer wish for
more?


The Levity you see her guilty of is no great sign of that.


It was not only by her Father's Permission, but Command, she gave me leave to
tell her that I loved her.


You have seen her, Sir, before, where you had opportunity enough to tell her
often so.


We then were Strangers to each other, and 'twas by accident we met in the
Orange-grove.


A likely matter to meet in such a place by accident.


I'd lost my Company a hunting, and went to repose my self under the cool
shade, not knowing she was there, nor any else; 'tis very easy to give credit
to me, if you consider why I refused to marry Bebbemeah, whilst I went in
search of her, far from knowing I fled from the Happiness I was seeking.





That I cannot believe, I'm sati^fied she loves me, and no one else; I saw it
by an hundred Signs at the very time I mention.





There is no danger, Madam, of that trial of my Faith, it needs no serious
Answer.


Oh stay, too lovely Stranger, and take the soft Confession of my Soul; 'tis I
my self that love thee, charming Youth, and here I swear to die, if you refuse
me yours.


Bebbemeah, and then I fear her not.


Why do you pause, Sir? Is it so hard a thing to love again where you are best
beloved?


Pardon me, Madam, if I am surprised; I am not worthy of the least part of your
Affection, you have a noble Husband, who best deserves it all, I would not rob
him of his just share to be the happy man my self.


Suppose I were a Widow, would you then love me and quit my hated Rival?





If that be all, the Objection I will soon remove, this feeble doting Husband
shall not live to bar me of my Bliss, and I doubt not but the Wealth I have
unknown, and what I add by Bebbemeah's Ruin, which I will contrive to make her
Fortune mine, will charm his wavering Heart. Cemat, you're come the very
minute I was wishing for thee.





I charge thee touch him not; no, no Cemat, I have another Game to play, in
which you must assist.





Thou mind'st me not, what ailst' Cemat?


I do, Madam, most heedfully; pray go on, and tell me what it is you'd have me
do.


A matter which you with greatest ease may compass, a Dose of Poison for my
Husband.


I'm only vexed to be outdone in Wickedness; you have it, (...) me but the
reason for it.


It is for thy advantage and my happiness this wise Munzuffer, this wondrous
Young-man, love mes Cemat, and would marry me, were Pechai but removed out of
the way, and then, without control, thou may have Bebbemeah.





It must be so, or I shall have Munzuffer snatched from me; I'll lose no time,
but instantly about it.

This honest old virtuous Fool I've always been in fear of, I'm glad he's so
disposed; like the fierce Ranger of the Lybian Deserts, I now will reign
without control in my Pleasures; I am my Mothers Son I dare to swear, but sure
Choufera's no Child of hers, Virtue, Modesty, and Goodness, thank Pluto, were
never Attributes of our Family: I must take new measures with this skittish
Girl, pretend Penitence, and beg her Pardon, I shall never else get another
opportunity, she so carefully aviods me; I see her coming, I'll abscond till I
have secured her to hear me speak.


Where shall I go to give my Sorrows vent, and ease my poor sunk Heart, oppressed
with Grief and Sadness? I have no Friend to pour out my Complaints to: O happy
Bebbemeah, happy lucky Sister! I'll not disturb thy Joys with the unfortunate
Story of my Woes, I know so well thou love Choufera, thou'd pity her more
than a Rival ought.





Take back, good Gods, the hated Life you lent, let me not live to a long Age
of endless Misery: What a false Notion is it, that no one loves, but hopes!
alas, I have not one to save me, falling into the deep Abyss of horrid dark
Despair: Unhappy Maid! thou can have no Relief from any thing but Death.


Choufera of Death? Tell me, my dearest Sister, who has wronged thee, thy
Brother wears a Sword will right thy Injuries.





I have a Secret, Madam, of yours in keeping, you would not be well pleased I
should discover: you love Munzuffer, Choufera; nay, blush not, 'tis no Crime.


Still, still unlucky in all I say or do?


Choufera, say not that you have no Friend, you shall always find a true one of
your Brother; distrust me not, I would redeem the Injuries I intended thee with
the last drop of all my Blood; I come to ask your Pardon for my rash Attempt,
which thus I humbly beg,


Rise Cemat, I do forgive you, ask it of Heaven, 'twas a most foul Attempt, and
not a common Sin.





O Cemat, thou know the only Secret of my Life, keep it I charge thee, as
you would one that would betray thy Liberty or Life.


My Life is but a Trifle, I would give that to expiate my Offence; rely on me,
and if I can without a Crime make Munzuffer yours, it shall be done.


O no, I would not injure Bebbemeah's Happiness to gain my own; she loved him
with a boundless Passion before I saw him, he is her Due* my Fate's
unalterable, I wish for nothing but a Grave to hide my Sorrows in.


Munzuffer, that will be one way to get my self into her good Opinion, which I
must be possessed of to get her in my power.


Throw me in Ice, and cover me with Snow, to cool this raging Fever in my
Bowels, I'm all in flames, I burn, I burn; convey me to the River Menam, where
I may quench my most immoderate thirst.


Run for Physicians, let no Art be spared to save my dearest Husband's precious
Life: O most unfortunate Callapia! I'll not outlive my dearest Lord, but perish
with his Ashes.


A Chill now runs through all my Veins, Agues and Fevers successively by turns
torture my perishing Entrails, O lay me, lay me in the hot Beams of the most
scorching Sun, or plunge me in the Streams of boiling Phlegeton. I'm now again
on fire; Sennorat, Munzuffer, Wife, Daughter, all, all help to quench me. I
feel a Numbness seize on all my Limbs, and Death steal gently on me; I am now
at ease.


O most unhappy day of all my Life! my dearest tenderest Father, give me your
Blessing e're your Soul departs.


Thou hast it, Child: My Lord Sennorat, take her to your Care, and when my
Funeral Obsequies are over, give her to Munzuffer; farewell, a long farewell to
all.


O stay and take me with you: He's gone, he's gone, and I will follow him.


Look to the Lady there, bow her, and give her Air; dry up thy Tears,
Bebbemeah, I'll be a Father to thee; we must submit to the Decrees of Fate, do
not afflict thy self for what thy Tears can never bring thee back.





Carry her to her Apartment -- True Grief is seldom thus outrageous: Come
Bebbemeah, thou art my Charge.


Such Grief as mine, admits no lookers on; pray, Sir, give me leave to retire
to my Chamber.


I must not leave you to such Grief, fair Mourner, I'll wait on you.


So, he's safe enough; O excellent Woman! fit only to be the Mother of Cemat!


Hist, Cemat, come back, Pechai's dead, dost know it?


I do, I stood concealed and see your Grief, I almost thought it real, you
counterfeited rarely.


Now Cemat, I will pretend such an unbounded Grief, that like our Indian Wives,
who burn themselves in the Pile which consumes their Husbands Bodies, so I will
feign to do, 'twill take off suspicion.


You may safely venture to attempt it, you know 'tis not the Custom of our
happier Siameses, and 'twill not be permitted you.


But you however shall to Choufera, and tell her my intention, and beg her to
be earnest with Sennorat to prevent it.


You need not doubt, Choufera will be sure to do her part, her love to you will
prompt her quickly to undertake it as soon as I have told her; I'll instantly
about it.

With Caution I must act, I have a mighty Game to play before Munzuffer will be
mine; if Bebbemeah dies, her Fortune comes to me by Contract of my Marriage
with Pechai; but let her live for my Cemat, I have enough, I hope, to dazzle the
young Eyes of my dear lovely Charmer, and move his Father to consider my
Fortune, in value far exceeding hers, to be the better Match for his brave Son:
I had a Prince, when I was young, who was my private Lover, from whose vast
Bounty I raised a most invaluable Treasure, which I most carefully concealed
from Pechai's Knowledge, and likewise my first Husband, in whose days it was;
this I will show to Sennorat, and his most charming Son: But something I must
do with Bebbemeah, to ruin her in the good Opinion of both the Son and the
Father, but I will try all Arts to win him first by fair and gentle means:
They're both coming this way, now for my Handkercher and Tears again.


I had just sent for you, my Lord, to let you know my Resolution's fixed to
expire in the Pile whose flames are to consume the dear dead Body of my
much-lov'd Lord.


I cannot but commend the Piety to your departed Husband, but 'tis not a Custom
here that will be countenanced, therefore you must forbear the Thoughts, and
live to be a Comfort to your Children.


Alas! what's Life to me now he is gone, the only Comfort of it? I have that to
leave my Son and Daughter, beside the Provision already made most largely, will
provide for them, and make 'em always happy, which I'll ent^st you with, to see
it equally disposed to both: Draw in that Chest.


Prodigious! this is a mass would enrich an Emperor! whence came this, Madam?


'Twas given to my Father by our late King of Siam, for a private Service he
did him, who left it all to me.


If you resolve to die, I will with Justice see your Will performed; Choufera I
will take into my Care, your Son's a Man, I hear, and will not like a Guardian.


I beg, my Lord, you'd see the Rites prepared, I have a greater business takes
up all my Thoughts.


I come, my Lord, with my afflicted Sister, to beg you'd save her Mother from
the hard Death we hear she'as doomed her self.


I do design, fair Ladies, to prevent it, but she's so bent upon it, I fear
there's no prevailing with her to lay the Thoughts aside; let her, to satisfy
her Melancholy Humour, appear in all the solemn Pomp used on such occasions,
and in the sight of all the lookers on I'll interpose and save her.


May you be ever blessed in all you wish, for this kind Pity.


This I have overheard most luckily; thus far Success has crowned my Designs.

The Brave that dare may always happy be,
Laugh at the Fates, and baffle Destiny.

HEnce, you infernal Spirits, come not near
This sacred Pile, let those pure Ashes rest:
His spotless Soul to the great God's most dear
Ascend through these bright Flames up to the Blessed.

O Vespa! place this Vrn safe from the reach
Of the black Serpent of the House of Smoke:
Let his most pious Life Example teach,
The God of thousand Gods we thus invoke.

Great Tanagoopoo, hear our Prayer,
These Ashes take into thy Care;
Keep the foul Dragon in his Den,
The Enemy of Gods and Men.

Thou that to Virgin-Prayers an Ear dost lend,
Sacred Amida, Goddess of our Vow,
To thy chaste Care these Ashes we commend,
Thy Favour to our just Request allow.

To Paradise his holy Soul convey,
What happy Spirits on the Good do wait,
Where the bright Sun makes an eternal Day,
Blessed for ever from the reach of Fate.

Ascend, ye Flames, up to the Skies,
We with it send our Prayers and Cries:
Great Tanagoopoo bow thine Ear,
Vouchsafe our Prayers and Tears to hear.



O save her, save her from the raging Flames.


Callapia, you have showed your Kindness to your Husband surpassing far the
common Love of Wives, I must not let you die.


Will you not let me go to Paradise, most barbarous Man!


Conduct her to her Chamber, and there let's labour all to give her quiet.


Ha, ha, ha, you need not take such care of her, she has outdone the very
Original of Dissimulation, I could even hug my self to see our thriving Plots
go on so fast: Are they coming? They must not see me.


She's so immoderate in her Grief, all Reasoning is in vain.


A little time will wear it off, now, Sir, I beg you to proceed to solemnize
our Marriage, I have some boding Thoughts I cannot overcome, which makes me
fear my Bebbemeah will be snatched away.


That cannot be, my Son, you know she's at my disposal, but to disperse thy
Fears, this very night she shall be yours, beyond the reach of Fortune to take
her from you.





Shine, shine my Stars, and Hymen light his Torch, and thou great Goddess that
attends on Marriage Rites, bless our mutual loves. Bebbemeah! lovely Mistress,
say, wilt thou not give thy wondrous Beauty up to blessed Munzuffer's Longings?
This very night gives Bebbemeah to me, and nothing waits to crown my Joys but
thy Consent.


It is too soon, my Lord, to talk of Joys, my dearest Father's Ashes yet are
warm; delay it longer, 'tis indeed too soon.


You know it was your Father's dying word, and though I may command you to it, I
only will entreat; there's danger in Delays, Munzuffer, do not leave her till
you have gained the point, whilst I take care that nothing else be wanting to
complete it.


Bebbemeah! can you so soon forget your tender loving Father, to talk of
Marriage? the Funeral Pile is hardly yet extinguished; withdraw, I'll talk to
your Lover about it.

Now all my Fears return. Munzuffer, when you the proffer of my Love refused,
it was because I was another Right? what hinders now to take me to your Arms
instead of Bebbemeah? that vast Wealth I showed you shall be yours, take it all
and me unto your Bosom.


'Tis you forget the Grief so lately showed for your dear Husband's death, and,
I must tell you, 'tis Bebbemeah wholly has my Heart, her Image there so deeply
is impressed, nothing can blot it out, do not for pity interrupt my Joys, could I
love another, it should be you.


What are thy Joys to me, if I must be unhappy? Consider, Munzuffer, what thou
dost refuse; I sue thee for thy Love, she but obeys her Father; besides, she
long since was contracted to my Son, her broken Vows will pull down Vengeance
from the Gods upon her self and you.


Forbid it Heaven, I love her with that Passion, I'll through all Obstacles
whatever they be, without her I am ruined.


And with her too, fond Youth, she's not the virtuous modest thing you take her
for, she's lewd as Hell, there's scarce a Slave or Groom in all her Father's
House but has enjoyed her; you'll find it so when 'tis too late to help it.


It cannot be, I'm sure you wrong her Virtue; I see you're a Counterfeit all
over, thy Griefs just now were not to be repaired, and now you're suing for
another Husband, would you had died before you troubled thus the Quiet of my
Soul.


I would I had indeed, since you can be so cruel to her who tells you of the
danger that you may escape; 'twas only for your sake that I did live, O throw
this Prostitute from thy generous Heart, and take me in her room.


Stand off Witch, Sorceress, I hate thee most implacably;


Munzuffer! is this the Recompense you give my Love? I'll take my self for ever
from your sight, and weep, like Niobe, into a Marble Statue, to leave a lasting
Monument of thy unmanly Cruelty.


Leave me not, I charge you, come back and tell me.
Yet what I know not.

You'd have me unsay what I told you of Bebbemeah; is it not so, my Lord?


Callapia, see, at your Feet Munzuffer falls, unasked I do forgive you, ease
but my tortured Mind, and say she's innocent.


I'll say so if you please, or any thing you'd have me.


Bebbemeah, pardon my jealous Thoughts.


How soon you'd cheat your self in what you wish! consider what I said, and
think if it be a just occasion of this mighty Joy.


Ha, what say you? Did you not tell me she is innocent of those black Crimes
you charged her with in Passion?


I told you I would say what you would have me, did that include her guiltless?
Worthy Munzuffer, believe e're 'tis too late her Shame and thine, if you join
Wedlock with this infamous Creature.


To what a Labyrinth am I hurried on! I'll hear no more, I'm sure you wrong
her, yet I am all distraction.


Go Fool, I think I have stung thee to some purpose, I have not done with thee:
Done, did I say? I yet have scarce begun: if all the Stratagems and Art that
Woman ever practised can compass him, I yet will make him mine. Come in, Cemat,
Bebbemeah's, this Idol of his Soul's destruction, he has downright refused my
Love.


What, break his Promise to you! his Life shall make you satisfaction.


No, my Cemat, then I lose all my Hopes; I've raised his thoughts to doubts of
her already, which I'll convince him of to be all Truth, by having a black
Slave found with her on the Bed, himself shall see it, 'twill ruin her for
ever in his Opinion, and cause a Breath, which never shall be healed, if I can
help it.


It looks with a good Face, if you can bring it well about.


it, and give it to one of her own Slaves, no matter which, 'twill cause
immediate Sleep as sound as Death, I'll take the same care of Bebbemeah, when
you have done convey him to her Apartment, and leave me to the rest.

Your Duty in your quick dispatch be known;
This hour, kind Fate, and then he's sure my own.

It is a Calumny thrown on her, believe it not, my Son, upon my life you'll find
it so; however we will delay the Marriage for some time, and keep the strictest
watch on all her Actions; Callapia may have some Design in it, though what I know
not.





I never liked Callapia, she is a subtle Woman; I look upon the information
with less concern, because it came from her; perhaps she has a mind to thee her
self: Ha, you blush! nay, then 'tis so indeed, the Wealth she showed thee has
seduced thy Heart from Bebbemeah, which makes you so easily entertain an ill
Opinion of her.


Sir, your Reproaches are too severe, and most unjust, I love fair Bebbemeah
above my Life or Liberty, I'd rather live a wandering Fugitive, by all but her
forsaken than sit on the bright Throne of our great Siam's King without her:
Callapia, Sir, cannot by any means seduce my faithful Heart, tho I must own she
has endeavoured it.


Then banish all thy Doubts, and take thy Bebbemeah to thy Bosom, 'tis all
Design, where's thy Sense, that thou dost not perceive it?


I would most willingly believe it so, but sure she could not be so very wicked
without some Cause.


Is not that Cause enough? Go, go, and find thy Bebbemeah out, a sight of her
will quite dispel thy Fears.


Callapia speak with me! tell her I'll wait on her.


Pechai's death have had a suspicion of his being poisoned, he died with all
the Signs, and much I fear Callapia's Hand was in it, I must examine when first
her Love begun to Munzuffer, that might be the cause of his untimely End, and
all her Grief dissembled to palliate her Crime; the Resolution too of burning
might be the same, for well she knew she should be saved: Here comes her
Daughter, for once I'll listen, I may discover something by it.


I am denied admittance to Bebbemeah's Chamber, what's the meaning of't I know
not, but much I fear some foul Play's designed. My Mother sent for her to come
to her Apartment: Cemat too I met in haste going to Callapia, I would have
spoke to him, but could not make him stay, such was his haste: And just now I
see Munzuffer enter my Mother's Lodgings; there must be something in it, good
Heavens protect her, I know my Mother always hated her.


This is as I would have it; if they're all together, they'll quickly come to
clearing the business; I hope she does repent of what she said, and gives this
meeting to reconcile the matter: Choufera may perhaps interrupt 'em, I'll
divert her some other way. Choufera, I have some business, pray let me talk
with you.


I fear he knows I love his charming Son.


I sent for you, Munzuffer, to let you know your Bebbemeah, whom you're so fond
of, has given up her right in you to me, and says she loves you not, nor ever
did, and is resolved to give her self to my Son Cemat: Now, Munzuffer, see who
loves you best, and be not still ungrateful.


How can you say you love me, Madam, and find so many ways to torture me? I'm
sure 'tis false, she did confess to me her self she loved me.


She told you so indeed she said, but 'twas to please her Father, she now is
Mistress of her self, and will not be imposed on in her Choice; she added
likewise, if you distrusted what I said, she'd tell you so her self.


If she does that, I'll never trouble her again; I shall not think her worth
the asking for.


I'll lead you to her Chamber, if she's there, you'll be convinced that what I
say is true.


Ha! what do I see! sure 'tis Delusion all, I dare not trust my sight; good
Gods, can that be Bebbemeah!


Infamous Girl! this was an unexpected sight, but now, I hope, you are
convinced of my Truth and her Disloyalty.





Lock there, lascivious Girl, and see by me your black Amorat slain.


Mine! Heavens, what do ye mean? this is some Plot upon my Honour: say,
Munzuffer, sure you will tell me truth, how came all this to pass? how came I
here, you, and Callapia, and that poor wretch who lies weltering in his Blood?





Sure 'tis no wonder, Madam, to find you in your own Apartment, but to be found
in the Embraces of a poor Slave, who you must court to satisfy your Lust,
think, think on that, false Bebbemeah.


How Munzuffer! do you conspire against me too? you cannot sure believe so foul
a thought of me.





O Bebbemeah! is it possible that heavenly Form, surprising Fair, should hide
so black a Soul? had the great Rulers of the enamelled Sky descended and told me
this, I would not have believed 'em; but with my own Eyes wide open, to thy
shame, to view thy lustful Sin, there is not one bare Hope left me, that I
might be deceived. Adieu.


O stay and hear me speak; I am ruined and betrayed, by whom or by what means I
cannot tell; how that Wretch came here, by all the sacred Powers, I know not,
I'm truly innocent, my dear Munzuffer, believe me so, or I am lost for ever.


Did not I see your fair white Arms lay twined about that sooty fellow's Neck,
and all that melting lovely Body in his black lustful Arms? is this to be
forgiven by a young Lover, who almost died each day for the enjoyment of that
Treasure a poor despised Slave has robbed thee of?


I do not ask Forgiveness Munzuffer, I have not committed any Crime that needs
it.


O monstrous! not a Crime to be found in the Arms of a black loathsome Slave!


This barbarous Usage to me you'll repent, Heaven, who of Innocence take care,
will clear the wrong you do my Virtue; you cannot entertain, I'm sure, so vile
a Thought of your once-lov'd Bebbemeah: You shall not leave me till you believe
me,


Why would you keep me with you, Madam, you've given your Interest up in me to
be another Right.


I give my Interest up! what is't you mean? I see the Powers of Hell are all
conspired to ruin Bebbemeah; my dear-lov'd Lord, hear and believe my Vows: May
never the Sun's all-cheering Light appear to my benighted Eyes, but an eternal
Darkness always cover me; may this poor Body, which you once did love, be the
living Prey of Lions, Bears, or Tigers; and all the Hopes I ever had for
Happiness, prove endless Curses to me, if ever my Heart, so much as in one
Thought, strayed from you since first you took the sole possession there. And
for this horrid Injury you do my spotless Fame, may I unpitied die, loathed and
abhorred by all, and leave an everlasting Scandal on my Name to all succeeding
Ages, if ever a Deed so foul was known to the chaste Soul of the much-wrong'd
Bebbemeah.


My Heart pleads strongly, and I would believe thee, but 'tis impossible, did
not I see thy Falsehood my self; I'll hear no more, farewell for ever.


You must, you shall believe me, I will not let you go till I have quite drove
out this black Suspicion from your noble Soul. Bebbemeah, to put the World in
mind that once there was such an unhappy Maid. Callapia showed has corrupted
him, and this a Trick of both for a Pretence to break our Marriage off:
ungenerous man! was it not Injustice enough to break thy Vows, but sacrifice my
Fame to thy Perfidiousness? cursed, cursed Gold, what mighty Evil is it that
thou hast not done?


Ha, Bebbemeah! my dearest Sister, why in this posture, and why that Face and
Voice of Sorrow?


No, Choufera, let me lye on this cold Bed, like Byblis, I would weep my self
into a streaming Fountain: O Sister, could you think it! I'm betrayed by thy
false Mother and falser base Munzuffer; they found me here (by what means they
best can tell, I'm sure I cannot) in that murdered Monster's Arms; can you,
Choufera, believe me such a Prostitute? if you forsake me too, I am abandoned
by all the World.


No, Bebbemeah, I never will forsake thee, but like a Friend indeed, partake of
all thy wretched Fortune: Treacherous Man! would he not hear thee plead thy
Innocence?


He gave no credit to all that I could say; no, no, thy Mother, by a Wealth she
has unknown to thee, has charmed his avaricious Mind, and snatched his Heart
from me.


Stay not in this most unlucky place, poor ruined Bebbemeah, fly to some
private corner of the World, where we will end our days together, and never be
heard of more.





I never can consent to leave thee in such Misery, I'll follow and share thy
mighty Sorrow, it never shall be said Choufera forsakes her Bebbemeah when most
she has need of Comfort.


Or will I ever involve my dearest Friend in my unheard of Woes.


O Madam! fly from this fatal place; I just now heard designs are laid against
your dearest Life; Callapia's Woman has undertaken, by her persuasion, to
poison you, which she consented to, to hinder employing some one else that
might perform her devilish Commands; she came and told me of it, to give you
timely Warning.


Most wicked Woman! I will not call thee Mother.


Yet I would not so tamely die, and leave an everlasting Blot upon my Name;
What shall I do, Sardea, or whither shall I go?


Close by the Menam's side, on Levo's Plain, there is a House the People
whereof I know very well, there you may be concealed till we can find a Vessel
to transport us further.


Till then I'll here remain, and give you daily information of all that passes;
but go no further I charge thee, Bebbemeah, without Choufera with thee.


Sardea, I may have use of'em. And now, my Choufera, adieu; my sad Heart bodes
I never shall see thee more.


Take not this solemn Leave, I'll see thee e're I sleep.


This poor perfidiousness of base Munzuffer has almost cured my Passion for
him; but still I am unhappy, to be the Daughter of such a wicked Mother, 'tis
my dearest Sister's Calamities that now afflict me most.


Where is this injured Lady, this abused Bebbemeah?


Where indeed, most generous Lord, 'tis noble in you to vindicate oppressed and
helpless Virtue; she's gone, I know not where, to voluntary Exile.


O mad, rash, foolish Boy! thou'st thrown away a Treasure never perhaps to be
recovered; this was Callapia's doings, wicked Woman! forgive me, Lady I had
forgot she is your Mother.


I wish I could forget it too, but I disown all Duty to her, who has forgot her
self and Goodness.


So, Sir! you're come to triumph, are you, at the fine piece of work your
rashness has cut out; you've sent your Bebbemeah from you never to be recal'd;
there now remains no Obstacle, you'd best take your Callapia, the contriver of
all this fatal mischief,


Stay, stay Choufera, and tell me what my angry Father means and where's
Bebbemeah; I do begin to think we both have been abused, and I to blame.


To blame indeed, unfaithful man! you know her Innocence too well, and should
you now repent, she's gone beyond the reach of hearing thy Remorse, and by thy
treacherous Vows, broken to Heaven and her, will never be deluded more.


If, Bebbemeah, thou art guiltless, what an unhappy man has lost Munzuffer made
himself!

Reveal, kind Heaven, (if so she be) her Truth and my Offence;
My Blood shall expiate the wrong is done her Innocence.

WHY where's this Chavo? the Fool is always out of the way when he should be
doing himzelf good.


Look'e now, you're so hasty a Dog won't live with you, as the Saying is, call
him all to nought presently, though you know not wherefore; he's gone to put on
his Holiday clothes, I hope you would not have you fine Gentlewoman see him in
his Every-day Ger, would you trow?


No, no, I'm pacified, a word to the wise; but this poor Gentlewoman is huge
molloncholy, Metam, can you tell what ails her, or who is she?


No truly, not I, but Sardea says 'tis her Sister, though I don't believe it,
she's so much finer and handsomer; poor Heart, she takes on pitifully, it makes
a bodies Heart yearn to hear her; she sighs and cries, and won't tell what the
matter's with her, and won't eat one bit of Victuals.


Well, I hope our Sports will make her merry; but why don't this Boy come? one
might a cut half a Field of Rice in the time he's bin dressing, would I war
behind him, I'd make him a little quicker.


Lord Husband, you have no forecast with you, let him have time to smug himself
a little, you don't know but the young Gentlewoman may cast a Sheeps-eye upon
him, and like him; Chavo's as pretty a Stripling as any's in forty mile an end,
when he'as his best Clothes on. Sardea may say what she will, but I warrant her
huge rich, she'as a Box full of the bravest shining things I ever see all days
of my Life, it would even make a-bodies Eyes dazzle to look on 'em: O Muto, if we
could get her in the mind to have our Chavo, it would be the making of us all;
and, who knows but we may ride in our Palankeens as well as the best?


Away, away you fool, such a fine Gentlewoman look upon our Son! why I warrant
she never milked a Cow in all her Life, and knows no more how to fat our Pullen
than the Man in the Moon.


For that matter, she'd quickly learn. O, here comes Chavo, do but see,
Husband, how pure handsome he looks.


Hei, hei! handsome, kether! sure somebody has been rolling him in the Rice;
sirrah, you a spoiled your clothes.


Nay, what de do, Faather? now to see your ignorance, why 'tis all the fashion,
man; it came over from England with the last Ship came in here, there's no-body
looked upon that is not bedon so; nay, they say the fine Ladies like it so
hugeously, they powder their Dogs and Monkeys.


Nay, nay, an 'tis the fashion, well and good, I'm contented.


Well, but where's thiz hanzom Gentlewoman? shaunt I see her? adzflesh, I want
to be at her, as a body may say.


Fair and softly Son at her, marry gap, pray keep your distance, and make a
fine Leg every time you speak to her; besure you behave your self handsomely.


Why what a-pies, iz she made of, musten she be tucht? sure a Man may buss her,
has a body may say, and no harm dun.


Hark'e, Sirrah, don't you be zawcy, but keep your Busses to your self you'd
best, she may be angry, and leave us in a pett, and then what shall we get by
your Busses?


Well, well, if I mussent I mussent, what a coil is here about a Buss! marry,
I've laid over the Lips as good as she, and no disparagement to her: Are all
the Slaves come up? when must we begin? I long to be at it.


Not till she come, 'twont be long first.


Here's a heavy fuss with her; an now if she wont have a body, after all, why
then all the Fat's in the Fire again.


Adzflesh, is this she? she's terrible hanzom indeed, I long to be at her;
odsnigs, I have much ado to keep my


Why dost thou bring me here, Sardea? such Woes as mine are not to be aleviated
by Music, I have no taste of any of their Sports, no Sound is grateful to my
bleeding Heart, but the sad note of mourning Philomel, or the repining voice of
discontented Echo: I would not see any thing that bears the Shape of faithless
Man.


They'll take it unkindly, Madam, should you refuse to see their Entertainment,
they mean it well to please you, seem so however, -- you know we have use of
them as long as as we stay here, and therefore must oblige 'em.





No, no, she's hougely discontented, poor Soul; I know not what the matter's
with her, go and speak to her.


Nay, nay, and that be all, let me alone for speaking.
You're welcome to our House, forsooth, has a body may say.

This is our Landlord's Son, Madam.


Thank you, Friend.


Thank you, Friend, is that all? Adzflesh, I'll to her again for all that:
You're woundy fine methinks, Mistress; Do you wear these fine Clothes every
day? you'd need have a power of Money to buy such costly Ger.


I'm glad you like it.


Like it korher, I never see the like in all my born days, not I; but for all
that, the best piece is in the middle, as a body may say: Odsnigs, if you'd but
like me half so well, I'd quickly set you out of your dumps.


Sure Fortune designs me for her Sport.


Sarrah, learn more Respect to the Gentlewoman, or I'll so belabour you, I'll
make you feel it this two days.


Nay, an she be so proud, I can keep my distance an that be all; I won't come
near you again mun, if you'd kiss -- Adzflesh, what was I going to say!


Pray forsooth don't take pleasure in his words, he dus not mean any harm to
you, 'tis for want of Wit and Manors.


Marry an you'd need talk of that too, 'tiz has you've taught me, and who's the
Fool then? but I meant no harm, by Jingo, not I; I only say you're a woundy
hansom Gentlewoman, an I hope that's no Offence; but I warrant I pleaz you again
when we come to dance, there's never a Lad on all the Plain can outdo me, though
I say it that shouldn't; nay, and I can zing too, marry can I.


I do not question it.


Then why are you so stout? Are you angry because a body loves you? or is it
because you're so much finer than I? Adsflesh, if you'd but let me lye with you
two or three Nights, you'd love me too; the Hogs love by lying together.





What, would you have a body stand like Mumchance, has if I didn't know better
than your old mouldy Chops how to car my zelf to a Gentlewoman; 'tis the
fashion to talk a great deal, though never so little to the purpose, an if you
don't like't, you may leave it, an that be all.


Prithee Sardea, let me not be tortured with that Fool's Impertinence, I have
more weighty Thoughts to entertain than his ridiculous Folly.


Are the Dancers ready Chavo? I long to see you begin.


May be thay are, may be thay ant, I'd a told her


And why won't you tell me?


Because you ant half so hansom as she; you may be angry too an you will, I
don't care.


Ay, but Chavo, I can speak a good word for you to your Mistress, you know
she's my Sister, and will follow my Advice.


Marry, an you will, I'll give you the best Flock of Sheep my Faather haz.


Well, say no more, you shall see what I'll do if you will but begin.


An so we will then presently,

I'll dance and zing, and do my best to win her,
An if she won't be pleased, the Devil's in her.

You see forsooth we be merry Folks, how de like this Sport, has a body may say?


Exceeding well.


You dance and sing to a Miracle Chavo.


'Tis your pleasure to say so, but I think I do pretty well for one of my
inches; Adzflesh, we will make you has merry has a Cricket if you do but stay
amongst us a little while, has a body may say: But I can do more than this mun,
I can pitch the Bar, play at Cat and Cudgels, and wrestle with ever a one in a
good way; I'll try a Fall with you an you will forsooth.


De think Gentlewomen use to wrestle, you Boobee you?


Marry, an she may even do worse, as the Zong says; but you are so given to call
a body ill Names, if you wan't my Faather, adzflesh, I'd crack your Conundrum
for you; no more a Boobee than zomebody else, if you go to that.


I thank you all for this Divertion, I know 'twas so designed, I hope I shall
not give Offence to any, if I retire to my Chamber, I have some Business to
dispatch requires my bei^g alone; come Sardea.





Never fear it, I'll do your business for you.


Chavo, I'll disown 'em when I grow rich, has 'tiz the fashion, for fear of
being put in mind of my Pedigree.


So Sarrah, hant you carr'd your self finely, perhaps she's angry, and will
leave our House.


Marry an let her be pleased again for Chavo, musten she be looked upon? 'tis
all long of your niggardliness; you might have let me had some new Clothes to a
gone a suitoring in; you may even thank your zelf, what de tell me of it for?


Come Metam, let's go and get the best Cheer we can for her Supper, poor Soul,
she'as eat nothing since she came.


Marry, an I won't feed of her Diet then; Sardea can but get her for me, I
don't know how I shall make her amends; but she's so coy, has if a body warned
has good Flesh and Blood has she: Adzflesh, if I could but get some Love-powder
and give her, that would do rarely.

Well, I resolve to try what may be done,
Fair Lady with faint Heart war never won.

To escape me thus, when all my Plots were ripe for execution! I'm all
Confusion at it; should she return, I'm ruined for ever in all Designs upon
Munzuffer, Sennorat most zealously pleads for her Innocence, his Son, I hear,
inclines to think her so, and is deaf to all the Overtures I make him; Sennorat
is my deadly Enemy, and does suspect me of my Husband's Death, I must not
suffer such Thoughts to grow upon him, but nip'em in the Bud, take the old
Dotard off, and spoil his thinking.


You're blinded with your Passion, and thirst of Bebbemeah's Blood; 'tis better
as it is, for had you effected your Designs upon her Life, you would have been
believed to be the Cause; and think what Hopes you then must ever have had of
your Munzuffer's Love: She's safe enough, where-e'er she is, from returning
hither again, her flight was voluntary, and the same Reason that caused it will
keep her from coming back: Try all the fair means possible to gain Munzuffer,
no other way will do, Force cannot compel him to marry you.


If Bebbemeah never does return, her Fortune falls to me; or if she does, I'll
take such care she never shall enjoy it: Can I before but possess my self of
dear Munzuffer, I then will happy be in spite of Fate, and triumph over the
Mischief I have done; her Wealth added to what I have already, would tempt a
King to falsify a Vow made even at the Altar: I'll find him instantly, and
will not leave till I have made him mine, if possible; but if he still persists
in his Ingratitude, I will not longer bear his Scorn, he shall be mine or no
ones else, by Heavens.


Stay Madam, you forget that Bebbemeah was the Reward you promised for my
Services.


Why find her if you can, and take her, you would not have me seek her for you,
perhaps she's concealed in some of the neighbouring Villages, you'll do well to
search.


You know I do not value her, nay, hate her for her scorn of me, it is her
Fortune, Madam, that I'd have, and do expect; consider if I do not well deserve
it.


Trust to thy Mother's Care, Cemat, I'll see thee well provided for, thou dost
deserve more than I have to give thee.


I thank you, Madam, but I will not trust your Care or Courtesy, I claim it as
my Due; I find you do reserve it all to promote your own Happiness, and never
take care of mine.


Why art thou so mistrustful of thy Mother's Love? it shall be all thine
whenever I die, and whilst I live thou shalt command at all times what thou
wilt: Be satisfied, I will most largely recompense thy Services, let me but
make Munzuffer mine, thou then shalt share in all things thou can wish.


Think not to put those Tricks on me you have to all beside, I know you too
well to be my self deceived; there's nothing shall or will content me, but
putting all Bebbemeah's Wealth into my present possession; you will not do
discreetly to refuse me, you know your Life is in my power, I would not
willingly betray you, but yet I will (like you) sacrifice all things to my
Interest.





No fear for that, I will secure my self, therefore give me the Promise under
your own Hand, or else this very minute I will discover all your wicked
Practises.


Come to my Closet half an hour hence, and there I'll make it entirely over to
thee, and more than thou desire.


Swear then, As ever you hope for Happiness with Munzuffer; I know no other
Oath will bind you.


I do, and wish I never may enjoy him, if I do not make thee Master of all the
Wealth that's Bebbemeah's before to morrow dawn,


I now believe you, and if you have further use of the Hand and Heart of your
obliged Son, you may command.


I shall employ you, come, as I said, to my Closet half an hour hence, I have a
new Design a foot I then will tell you of,


I will be sure to wait on you. So, now I may with reason hope I've secured
Bebbemeah's Fortune, which she dare not refuse me; I'm pleased to think how
very potent I shall be in wickedness; I must and will enjoy my Lovely Sister,
but first I'll after my pious Mother, she's hatching some new Project, I wish
it be but wicked enough, and when I've gotten what she promised, if I can reap
advantage by it any other way, I will betray her; Honour and Honesty are
starving Qualities, 'tis only Wickedness that thrives in this blessed Age; I own
no Powers but Almighty Gold, that, that's the Idol of my Worship.


I'm all Distractions if I have thus rashly thrown away the Blessing of my
Life, what will become of the miserable Munzuffer? Yet, oh! it cannot be, these
Eyes beheld the fatal sight, they could not be deceived; I will recover my lost
Peace again, why should I thus disturb my self for one not worth the wracking
of my Soul? she's false, and I will study to forget her.


Unstable Boy! did you not say just now you did believe her blameless, and that
you would seek her through the World to beg her Pardon?


I know not Sir, alas, what I think my self, my Mind's so discomposed.


Think, as you'll in time find true, it was a hellish Trick of Callapia; has she
not since spread all the Snares she thinks will catch thee? I charge thee, on
my Blessing, think not of her; if thou dost consent to marry her, I will
renounce thee from that hour, and wish thee always wretched.


Marry her! I'd rather be condemned to endless Slavery, and never taste of
Liberty again, than have a Thought of such a thing; I hate her worse than
Death, nay, much more, for that would be welcome now, I wish I could forget all
the vast Troubles of my Mind in an eternal Sleep.


Munzuffer, say not so, for thou may live to a long Age of Joys, thy Fortunes
yet are not so desperate, but we may find a Salve to heal them all, if
Bebbemeah's Innocence appears, thy Trouble's at an end; consider all the ways
Callapia has taken to bring thee to her Lust, and think if she would stick at
any thing to effect it, she knew it was impossible while Bebbemeah reigned, and
this was a Contrivance to drive her from you.


How should a Slave be admitted to her Apartment without her knowledge, and
found within her Arms?


Most easily; it was not an hour before you went thither her wicked Mother sent
for her, Choufera told me so, and said withal, she feared some foul Play was
designed her.


What say you, Sir! O, now I do remember the very time, she likewise sent for
me, and by a Trick carried me to her Chamber to find her in that posture; too
late I see it must be so: O injured lovely Lady! where shall I find thee out,
to show my Penitence? Choufera sure can tell, I never will leave her till she
does, I'll fly with Lovers Wings, to implore her Pardon, which I too justly
fear she ne'er will grant to the guilty Munzuffer.


No, but heard a Voice, from whence I cannot tell, it repeated your last words.


Sure it was our Fancy, here's no one near us, I hope 'tis Bebbemeah's good
Angel, sent to clear her Innocence. Again Sir, did you not hear it?


I did, and am amazed.


O tell me, gentle Spirit, if such thou be, where I shall find my much-wrong'd
Bebbemeah. Callapia is the cause of all this fatal mischief.


If you're a human shape, I do invoke thee, by the God you serve, to show thy
self.


This is the very same that gave me warning of my ensuing Troubles.


FOllow, follow, follow me,
Thy Enemies at jars thou't see:
Be thankful Youth, the Gods take care
Thy Doubts and Jealousies to clear:
Follow, follow, follow me,
The Mystery shall unravelled be.

Go where thou wilt, I'll follow thee.


And I'll not stay behind.


My Guilt in her wronged Virtue does appear;
Heaven of the Innocent, I find, takes care.

I Must not now lose time in hearing thy weak Arguments, the Penitence you
insist upon was the only means to get you in my power, and now you are, you
shall not escape again.


Heavens! what will become of me!


Not Heaven or Hell shall take you from me now.


Yonder he is, and Choufera with him, I must keep an Eye upon him till he's
safe from telling Tales, the working of the Poison may make him rave, and in
his Frenzy discover all he knows; I must remove her from him, it is not safe
that she should see him die.





What shall I do? good Heaven send me some assistance.


Ha! the Villain's forcing her to his hot Lust! Cemat! what, ravish thy own
Sister!


Nay, now I've lost all hopes indeed, but since I can't enjoy her, no other
shall.


O barbarous, inhuman, bloody Man! speak, my Choufera, to thy afflicted Mother.


He'as given me my Death, but I forgive him, and beg you'd do so too.


Ha! what ails me? sure I am not well, my Head grows giddy, and my Eyes are
dim; my Body trembles, sure 'tis not what they call remorse, I find none in my
Heart.


Stand there, you're invisible so long as you are silent.


No, Fool, thou hast the just Reward of this most horrid deed, you're poisoned
by thy Mother, you drank your last in that dire Cordial I gave you in my
Closet.


Hell thank you for it, Fury and Vengeance direct me to sink her with me to the
black Kingdom where my Soul is going. Bebbemeah?


Did not you tell me my Life was in your power? how could you think I'd tamely
bear your Threats?


I can hold no longer, for fear she escapes my Vengeance give your assistance
to poor Choufera, while I secure the Murderess.


She's only in a Swoon with loss of Blood, I hope her wound's not mortal.


See Munzuffer, this is the very Villain we rescued Choufera from before; is't
possible, good Heaven, you could attempt your Sister's Honour?


I have no time to answer idle Questions, if I can rally but Strength enough to
perfect my Revenge upon my unnatural Mother there, I'll die contented. She had
from me a Dose, which she gave Pechai, and that did his business; and by a
sleeping Potion given to both Bebbemeah and the Slave, it was contrived by her,
that Munzuffer should see 'em as they lay; how she effected it I need not tell
you, and did design her Death, had not her flight prevented: I was by Covenant
to have her Fortune, for my assistance to her, which basely she refused; I
threatened to betray her, for which she'as recompensed me as you see, I can no
more.


He raves, 'tis false as Hell each Syllable he utters.


O whither am I going! stand off, foul Fiend: O Horror, Horror! I dare not die,
I see Hell gape, and all the Devils with their forked Spears stand ready to
receive me; grim Pluto too sits in his fiery Throne, and laughs at my
Amazement: Help, help! they drag me down, oh!


You see, my Lord, how the just Gods abhor the Imputation he has laid on me, by
the disturbance of his Mind just at the point of death.


No, barbarous Lady, that will not clear your Guilt, we heard you own your
Wickedness your self, no sly Evasions now shall serve your turn, I will commit
you to the Hands of Justice, and prosecute you with utmost Rigour, the
poisoning your Son is Crime enough to die for.


The Injury he offered to his Sister deserved no less than death. I found him
offering Violence to her Virgin-honour, and when he see he was surprised in his
Attempt, he stabbed her; ask Choufera if it is not Truth.


The Draught was given him in your Closet, Lady, you cannot shift it off, you
must along with me, and shall have all the Justice done you that your Crime
deserves: Take care, Munzuffer, of that fair bleeding Lady, and if her Wound
admits of any Cure, let nothing be spared for her recovery.


Munzuffer, Daughter, will you not save me from this cruel Man?


was unkindly done: Where am I, in Munzuffer's Arms? Nay, then I will not live
to be snatched from these Embraces: Alas, I need not say I will not, cold Death
sits busy at my Heart, and I am going where I shall find an everlasting end to
all my Woes.


Dear Choufera, for Pity tell me where to find the injured Bebbemeah, your
Brother with his latest Breath declared her so, accused himself and thy most
barbarous Mother to be the cause of all this deadly mischief.


Too credulous Munzuffer! that you could believe her guilty of so black a Sin!
but I'll not now upbraid you, the Remorse you feel is Punishment enough, that
Paper will direct you where to find her; I was going thither now, when my
impious Brother, disappointed of his brutish Lust, did this bloody Deed: When
you have reconciled your justly-angry Mistress, sometimes reflect on poor
Choufera's Misfortunes, who (had she lived) must always have been unhappy;
for, oh! before my Soul expires, take, take the long-hid Secret, that I love
you, my dear Lord; permit me so to call you, since 'tis not many minutes I have
left to repeat that charming sound: O turn those Eyes away, or I shall die with
blushing. Comfort my Bebbemeah, for my untimely Death, I know so well she loved
me, 'twill grieve her much; commend me to her: my Business on Earth's done, and
I have nothing else to do but die. Grieve not, Munzuffer, at my Death, it
brings me what I wish, eternal Peace, an end of all my Misery here, and
boundless Pleasure in the Elizian Fields, where we shall meet again: May you be
blessed in all things with your dear Bebbemeah; farewell: take this first, last,
and chaste Embrace from poor Choufera.


Bebbemeah.

At Muto's House, on the Levoan Plain, close by the Menam's side; she's there
concealed: I know it well, 'tis not a full mile off, I will not sleep till I
atone her Anger.

I'll fly with Lovers Wings, to appease the injured Fair,
And meet the just Reproaches of my angry Dear.

What shall I tamely yield my Body to the Stake? I cannot, must not die, I've
yet a Work to do I must not leave unfinished, I'll summon all the Devils to my
aid, but I will compass it: Two Murders, what's that! 'twill hardly give me
place in Hell fitting my quality, I'd have a Hecatomb of Ghosts to attend me
there: I'm grieved for poor Choufera's death, and for Cemat's too, but 'tis
because I have him not to kill again; oh that the Villain had as many Lives as
Hydra Heads, that I might stab him in each one, and be an Age in killing him.


Thou hast not so long to live, most miserable Woman! e're this to morrow thou
shall it be with me in endless Torment not to be expressed, the just Reward of all
thy horrid Crimes, thy fatal Thread is spun, and thy unalterable Doom
pronounced.


Thou lie, cursed Wretch, thou lie.


It is too true, and is decreed above in those blessed Courts where thou must
never come, inhuman Murderess! O think, thou wretched Woman, on thy lost
Condition; think how you can bear the scorching Flames about your tender Limbs,
which never never are to be extinguished; let thy Associate there tell the
Miseries which attend thee, whilst I return to my blessed Habitation, and praise
the Gods for their just Vengeance on thee.


Farewell, old godly Fool, I do not wish to come where I may have thy Company
again.


Thou't wish for any thing but what thou art condemned to, most unrelenting
Sinner! Prometheus Vulture! Tantalus's Feast, or the Belides never finished
Labour is all but Sport to what's reserved for thee; think not I come to warn
you to repent, 'tis now too late, despair and die, and be as cursed as I am.




If in those fiery Regions I must dwell,
I'll do such things shall make me Queen of Hell.

I wonder my Choufera does not come, has she forgot forsaken Bebbemeah? Prithee
Sardea sing the Song you used to entertain me with.

'TWas on a fatal day by chance a lovely Swain I saw,
His graceful Mean and noble Air did my attention draw.
When on his Knees the timorous Youth did first my Pity move,
With tender Sighs and moving Tears he swore eternal love.
I soon believed what most I wished; for, ah too heedless Maid!
The easy Conquest he obtained my treacherous Eyes betrayed.
He gained the soft Confession too from my unguarded Heart
In Transports all over ecstasy, but all, alas, was Art;
For now the false forsworn forgets his Vows to Heaven and me;
Regardless of my Honour too, he boasts his Perjury.
Ye Gods, if injured Innocence be your peculiar care,
Revenge my Wrongs on that false Man, and wounded Fame repair.

Adzflesh, forsooth, yonder haz been a most heavy racket, by the zide of the
Wood, there is a curious hansom Gentlewoman lies as dead as a Herring, and
bleeds like any stuck Pig.


Ha! what say you, a Lady killed! by what means do you know?


Nay, I can't tell that; for my part, I thought at first it waz you, methought
she waz has like you has if she had been spit out of your Mouth, has a body may
say.


Did you see her? what was her Habit? O Sardea, Heaven send it is not Choufera;
was any body with her?


See her! I think I did, there was a great many fine Folks.


It is Munzuffer, Madam.


Sardea, let's be gone, I will not see that faithless man.


Stay, stay, fair injured Lady, thus low I humbly beg you'll hear the guilty
Munzuffer speak.


Too well, false Man, you know the way to Bebbemeah's Heart, I must not will
not hear you; you did deny to me when most I pleaded for it, remember that,
thou perjured Man!





I do too well, and many faults beside:


Tell me, Munzuffer, is Choufera well? Ha, you look sad and sigh; answer me, I
charge you, what is become of her, and by what means you found me here.





Forbear to hear what will increase thy Grief to such a weight too heavy to be
born.





Since you will force me to be the unhappy Messenger of such dismal tidings,
Choufera's killed by barbarous Cemat, the cause I'll take another time to tell;
he is poisoned by his Mother, and before he died confessed the wrong they had
done your virtue and my love.


O my Choufera, my dearest tender Sister! 'tis I, unhappy Slave, have been the
cause of all these sad Misfortunes.


She expired within my Arms, bid me commend her to you, and comfort you for her
untimely Fall.


Alas, what Comfort can I ever receive for such a Loss! my only constant Friend
on Earth is gone, I hope I shall not long remain behind her.


O say not so, cruel Bebbemeah, thou hast a Friend which ever will be yours;
how shall I atone for my Offence? is it not possible you can forgive?





No, never; the Injuries you've done me are of such a nature, to pardon would
look as if I were conscious of the Guilt you threw upon me, and were glad on
any terms to pass it by; Callapia, she will be angry, indeed she will, and
chide you most unmercifully.


What mean you Bebbemeah? my Callapia! I'd sooner take a Witch, a Succubus, to
my Arms: I do believe in Hell there is not such another Fury.


Her Wealth, my Lord, will make you compensation for all Personal Defects; and
for her Mind, the blacker 'tis, the more like thee, perfidious Man.


By Heaven you wrong me, Madam, her Wealth and her I equally contemn, I ever
scorn her loathsome Love, which has created all these sad Distractions; 'twill
soon be seen how well I love her, the Murder of your Father is detected, done
by her cursed Hand, for which she is to die.


Merciless Woman! when shall I find an end to all my Sorrows? they still
increase, and will at last overwhelm me.


Still worse and worse; all I can say to justify my self turns to my
disadvantage; may I for ever be deprived of you, the greatest Curse I can wish,
if ever I had a Thought of loving any else since the first moment that I see
you; were that vile Creature which you unjustly tax me with Empress of all our
wealthy Indies, I'd scorn her as I have already done.


How can you hope I ever should? all I could say you would not lend an Ear to.


Upbraid me not with what 'tis Death to hear; all my whole Life shall be a
continued Service, to expiate that one Fault: I do not blame your Anger, you
have just reason for it; the mighty Gods are pacified by Penitence, and all I
now dare ask is only your forgiveness.


Suppose, my Lord, I should, you do not think I ever will put my self in that
man's power who could so easily believe so poorly of my Virtue? I need not say
I will not, I do not find you do desire it: You say you wish for nothing but
Forgiveness; you have it, Sir. Now I suppose I may be gone, you've nothing else
to ask.


Still, Madam, you reproach me with the only Blot I ever was ashamed of; I do
indeed deserve your utmost Rigour, but O, unkind it is to say I've nothing else
to ask! I have a mighty Boon, too much for you to give or me to crave; my
Wishes are unbounded, but still they center all in Bebbemeah. Think if the
hoarding Miser would be pleased to have his Coffers rifled, and all his Idol
Gold thrown into the Sea; if so, believe I've no desires to be possessed of what
I most adore, fair Bebbemeah.





O no, you do not, if you did you'd run into these faithful loving Arms;
convince me that you do so, and let me conduct you home.


How Munzuffer! can you think I will return to live in the same place where my
blasted Fame by this is grown the public Talk? No, I will seek some Desert far
from the Society of human Conversation, where I will spend my melancholy days,
and never return to this bad World again.


Is this Forgiveness, obdurate Bebbemeah? I cannot live without you, I swear by
all that's good I will not, the minute that you leave me I'll with my Blood,
since nothing else will do, implore your Pity, and wash away my Guilt.


I could most willingly consent to your Desires, but still so much I owe my
injured Honour, I must and will resolve to never see thee more; take, if you
will, a parting Kiss, sure I may give that without offence to Modesty, since
'tis the last Favour you must ever receive from Bebbemeah's Love; for, O
Munzuffer! can thou think it, for all this usage I have had, I love thee
still?


O no, I will not taste of Bliss, to make the deprivation of it more
intolerable: Since then it must be so, farewell indeed for ever.


Rash Boy! what mean you?


O! I can hold no longer. Bebbemeah can give you Life; I yield to thy
all-conquering Love, dispose me as you will, clear but my Reputation, and I'm
yours for ever.


Some help, good Sir, to support this Ecstasy, I've now more need of Moderation
than under my pressing Grief: Am I awake? I know not how to trust my Senses
with this happy change of my Condition.


I'm glad, fair injured Lady, there's no use for my Authority to carry you
back: Your Reputation has, if possible, received a double Lustre by the black
detraction; all wait with eager haste to see due Justice done on your inhuman
Mother, and in a fury they drag the Body of wicked Cemat about the Streets;
I've brought a Chariot to conduct you home in triumph over your Foes.


My Lord, I'll wait upon you when you please; Sardea, stay and let our kind
Landlord and his Family know where I would see them, to gratify their
Troubles.


Bear witness, Gods, I envy not your boasted Bliss above,
Nor would I change my Happiness to be the mighty Jove.
Look ye there now, I thought how much you'd speak a good word for one; I would
that old Man had even let him have killed himself, and then may be I might have
got her in the mind, and now he's gone away with her, and I shall never see her
again all days of my breath.


Alas poor Chavo! come man, have patience, you shall see her again presently,
did you not hear her invite you to her House? come, come, there's Hopes still,
dry up your Eyes, we will take your Father and Mother and follow her.


Will you not think on your unhappy state? You cannot hope for Pardon in this
World, you know your Crimes deserve none, repent e're 'tis too late, or you
will be condemned to the infernal Dungeon, where you must live in endless
Torments, ne'er to be released.


I'll tell you a Secret, but be sure you tell no body of it: Ceres will send
her winged Dragons for me, and bear me through the Air, I'll get into the Zodiac,
turn the Bear out of her Skin, and creep into it, so close that they shall never
find me; ha, ha, ha, how I shall laugh to look down and see 'em searching for
me!


Sure she's distracted, I know not what to think of her. Madam, will you not
think of your Condition?


Ha! thou art old Pechai, I know thee now; did I not poison thee? Away, away
with that old worn-out Face, I'll send thee to Medea to be new boiled, and when
thou art young again I will be fond of thee; let her take pattern by Munzuffer,
be sure you be like him, I will not love thee else.


I find it now, her Guilt has turned her Brain, there is no hopes to make a
Mad-woman hear Reason, she may perhaps have an outrageous Fit, and do me
mischief.


Wilt thou then leave me, cruel Munzuffer? I will not part with thee; thus,
thus I'll clasp thee to me, Bebbemeah. Ha, stand off,


I hope her Fit is over, and she will have an interval of Sense; it grows late,
Madam, the Officers by this time wait for you, repent and think whither you are
going.


Did not I call for Music? but let it be such as will best suit the Discord of
my Soul, the Shrieks of the Damned, the Cries of tortured Infants, the Howlings
of the Free born Wretch condemned to endless Slavery; this is the Harmony will
please my Ear. Hark! did you not hear the clattering of Chains? Oh for Aeneas's
Cloak to shroud me in: Who art thou? speak: 'tis poor Choufera, I know her by
her Wound.


She is relapsed, would I were fairly rid of her.


Thou shalt not go, we are to have a Feast, which you must partake of: Fie,
fie, leave a Banquet, where thou may feast thy most luxurious Gut with
choicest Dainties! I'll snatch the curling Snakes from Tiryphone's Head, 'twill
make a most delicious Dish; a Salad too we will have of Aconite and Hellebore,
and drink in flowing Bowls, instead of Nectar, Blood; what think thou of
that? I know it will down with thee seasoned with a Gold Goblet: Prithee tell
me, how do they fare in Hell?


Too soon I fear you'll know, most miserable Woman.


Cannot you tell, do ye say? be gone and see,


Oh! I am slain! --


I charge you clear the way, I do not love a Crowd, tell 'em I'm coming, bid
old Charon be ready with his Boat. Ha! what's this, a Shower of Blood! 'tis old
Pechai's, where, where shall I shelter, 'twil drown me, who'd a thought he had
so much in his old shrivelled Body? I'm sick at Heart, oh for a Cordial from the
Lethean River, to pass a dark Oblivion on all my forepast Life.


Ha, what means this, a holy Father slain! had you not Murder enough upon your
guilty Soul, but you must add a fresh one just as you're going to give an
Account in the other World of what you've done already, impious Sinner! Call
for the Officers, and let her presently be executed, each minute that she lives
draws a new Crime upon her.


Hush, hush, Cerberus, don't wake him, he'll give a triple bark will fright us
back to Hell again.


What, you would feign Distraction to save your Life! that will not do, Lady,
we too well know you Mistress of the Trade of Falsehood and Deceit; I brought
these wronged Lovers, that you may ask Forgiveness before you leave the World,
for the unheard-of Injuries you have done them.


Lovers, say you! O they are Orpheus and Euridice; take, take her, and run away
with her, don't you look back and lose her again, you have ventured hard for
her, but not so much as I have done for cruel unkind Munzuffer. Ha! do you not
see you blazing Comet? it points just full at me: Shoot, shoot, I fear you not,
you cannot pierce my Heart, 'tis hard as solid Adamantine Rocks, and will
rebound your Darts up to the Skies again.


Do not thus madly rave, but tell me why you killed this holy Man; What could
provoke you to such a cursed deed?


Look not on him, 'tis Medusa's Head, 'twil turn thee into stone as hard as
Munzuffer's stubborn Heart always was to me.


Alas, I pity her, she's mad indeed.


Reserve thy Pity for a nobler Cause, she deserves it not from any; Vexation
and Despair has made her thus.


If she has lost her Senses, she has not her wicked Inclinations, there's a
fresh bleeding Instance of it.


I can't but have Compassion for the Mother of my dear Choufera.


And for the Murdress of thy Father, Bebbemeah, think of that.


That was indeed a hellish fact, and never to be forgiven.


Forgiveness say you! is there then Mercy for me? did you not talk of my
Choufera? O show me where she is: I see her, she's yonder fleeting in the milky
way; stay, stay, dear Child, and take thy Mother with thee: wonderful! she's
dissolved into a Star, and shines just in my Face, I cannot bear the Lustre, my
Eye-balls ache with gazing, let me repose them in eternal Night, and lay me fast
to sleep, where I may never never wake again.


Yes, you shall be laid to sleep, but will be quickly roused by Pains will keep
you ever waking.


Alack poor Gentlewoman, she's in a pitiful plight, she's upon the hard floor,
poor Soul.


Ai, ai, I warrant you'd have no Woman die for poisoning her Husband, 'tis that
you'd all be at if you dared; even let her be burnt, I say, she deserves it.


Do your Office, and take her to the Stake, secure her fast, she either feigns
a Lunacy, or is so; there lies a holy man just slain by her.


Radamanthus, do but blot out the Murder of my Husband, and the false
imputation laid on Bebbemeah, I'll stand my Trial for the rest. Ha! 'tis Cemat,
now I will be revenged on him indeed, I'll spoil his Evidence in Hell against
me: see, see, he steals away, will you not stop him? he's gone, and I will
follow him, he shall not escape my Vengeance so. Callapia, you'll quickly
overtake him, 'tis a broad Road, and down Hill all the way.


Unhappy Woman! thou hast put a dreadful period to thy wickedness, and draws
Compassion from me, though an Enemy to all thy Cruelties. Now, Bebbemeah, I'll
resign the Charge your noble Father trusted me withal, and thus I give it up.
Munzuffer, and beg the Gods to give thee Merit to deserve the richest Prize
that ever happy Youth was blessed with.


From the great Gods and you I thankfully receive the only Blessing which they
have in store to make Munzuffer happy.

So the joyed Merchant, who with Storms long tossed
Sees his dear Wealth and Hopes of Life all lost:
When unexpected the Heavens grow clear and smile,
And safely lands him after all his Toil,
At the long-wish'd for Haven;
Such Joys too weakly does my Bliss express,
No Thoughts or Words can reach my Happiness.

MY Faather is a Landed Man, haz Acres of hiz own,
Pays scot and lot, and Office bears, beholden is to none;
Haz Cow and Kine, haz Goats and Horse, and Rupies too good store,
Which will be Chavo's all in time, with many a good thing more,
Two Folds of Sheep, an Herd of Boars the common size exceeding;
And zinc from Holland came their size, you need not doubt their breeding.
A flock of Geese of wisest Race, came from Fingallian Highland,
Enough to plant a Colony in a West Indian Island.
Of Asses too as grave as Sancho's he up to War does train,
To car the English powdered Beaux to make the next Campaign.
And something else shall nameless be, Chavo has more than Purse;
If all will not your Favour win, adz flesh, you may do worse.


