SInce 'tis the Intent and Business of the Stag^,
To Copy out the Follies of the Age;
To hold to every Man a Faithful Glass,
And show him of what Species he's an Ass.
I hope the next that teaches in the School,
Will show our Author he's a scribbling Fool.
And that the Satyr may be sure to Bite,
Kind Heaven! Inspire some venomed Priest to Write,
And grant some Ugly Lady may Indite.
For I would have him lashed, by Heavens! I would,
Till his presumption swam away in Blood.
Three Plays at once proclaims a Face of Brass,
No matter what they are! That's not the Case,
To Write three Plays, even that's to be an Ass.
But what I least forgive, he knows it too,
For to his Cost he lately has known you.
Experience shows, to many a Writers smart
You hold a Court where mercy ne'er had part;
So much of the old Serpent's Sting you have,
You Love to Damn, as Heaven Delights to Save.
In Foreign Parts, let a bold Voluntiere,
For public Good upon the Stage appear,
He meets ten thousand Smiles to Dissipate his Fear.
All tickle on, the adventuring young Beginner,
And only scourge the incorragible Sinner;
They touch indeed his Faults, but with a hand
So gentle, that his Merit still may stand:
Kindly they Buoy the Follies of his Pen,
That he may shun 'em when he Writes again.
But 'tis not so, in this good natured Town,
All's one, an Ox, a P^et, or a Crown,
Old England's play was always knocking Down.

WHAT cloying meat is Love, -- when Matrimony's the Sauce to it. Two years
Marriage has debauched my five Senses. Every thing I see, every thing I hear,
every thing I feel, every thing I smell, and every thing I taste -- methinks
has Wife in it.

No Boy was ever so weary of his Tutor; no Girl of her Bib; no Nun of doing
Penance nor Old Maid of being Chaste, as I am of being Married.

Sure there's a secret Curse entailed upon the very Name of Wife. My Lady is a
young Lady, a fine Lady, a Witty Lady, a Virtuous Lady -- and yet I hate her.
There is but one thing on Earth I loath beyond her: That's fighting. Would my
Courage come up but to a fourth part of my Ill Nature, I'd stand buff to her
Relations, and thrust her out of Doors.

But Marriage has sunk me down to such an Ebb of Resolution, I dare not draw my
Sword, tho even to get rid of my Wife. But here she comes.


Do you Dine at home to day, Sir Iohn?


Why, do you expect I should tell you, what I don't know my self?


I thought there was no harm in asking you.


If thinking wrong were an excuse for Impertinence, Women might be justifi'd in
most things they say or do.


I'm sorry I have said any thing to displease you.


Sorrow for things past, is of as little Importance to me, as my dining at home
or a broad ought to be to you.


My Enquiry was only that I might have provided what you liked.


Six to four you had been in the wrong there again, for what I liked yesterday
I don't like to day, and what I like to day, 'tis odds I may'nt like to morrow.


But if I had asked you what you liked?


Why then there would have been more asking about it, than the thing was worth.


I wish I did but know how I might please you.


Ay, but that sort of knowledge is not a Wife's Talent.


What ever my Talent is, I'm sure my Will has ever been to make you easy.


If Women were to have their Wills, the World would be finely governed.


What reason have I given you to use me as you do of late? It once was
otherwise: You married me for Love.


And you me for Money: So you have your Reward, and I have mine.


What is it that disturbs you?


A Parson.


Why, what has he done to you?


He has married me.

The Devil's in the Fellow I think -- I was told before I married him, that
thus 'twou^d be; But I thought I had Charms enough to govern him; and that
where there was an Estate, a Woman must needs be happy; so my Vanity has
deceived me, and my Ambition has made me uneasy. But some comfort still; if
one would be reveng^d of him, these are good times; a Woman may have a Gallant,
and a separate maintenance too -- The surly Puppy -- yet he's a Fool for it: For
hitherto he has been no Monster: But who knows how far he may provoke me. I
never loved him, yet I have been ever true to him; and that, in spite of all
the attacks of Art and Nature upon a poor weak Woman's heart, in favour of a
Tempting Lover.

Methinks so Noble a Defence as I have made, should be rewarded with a better
usage -- Or who can tell -- Perhaps a good part of what I suffer from my
Husband may be a Judgment upon me for my cruelty to my Lover. -- Lord with what
pleasure could I indulge that thought, were there but a possibility of finding
Arguments to make it good. And how do I know but there may -- Let me see --
What opposes? -- My Matrimonial Vow? -- Why, what did I Vow: I think I promised
to be true to my Husband.

Well; and he promised to be kind to me.

But he have not kept his Word --

Why then I'm absolved from mine -- ay, that seems clear to me. The Arguments
good between the King and the People, why not between the Husband and the Wife?
O, but that Condition was not expressed. -- No matter, 'twas understood.

Well, by all I see, If I argue the matter a little longer with my self, I
shall not find so many Bug-bears in the way, as I thought I should. Lord what fine
notions of Virtue do we Women take up upon the Credit of old foolish
Philosophers. Virtue's it's own reward, Virtue's this, Virtue's that; --
Virtue's an Ass, and a Gallant's worth forty on it.


Good morrow, Dear Cousin.


Good morrow, Madam; you look pleased this morning.


I am so.


With what, pray?


With my Husband.


Drown Husbands; for yours is a provoking Fellow: As he went out just now, I
prayed him to tell me what time of day 'twas: And he asked me if I took him for
the Church Clock, that was Obliged to tell all the Parish.


He has been saying some good obliging things to me too. In short, Bellinda, he
has used me so barbarously of late, that I could almost resolve to play the
down-right Wife, -- and Cuckold him.


That would be down-right indeed.


Why, after all, there's more to be said for it than you'd Imagine, Child. I
know according to the strict Statute Law of Religion, I shou^d do wrong: But if
there were a Court of Chancery in Heaven, I'm sure I should cast him.


If there were a House of Lords you might.


In either I should infallibly carry my Cause.
Why, he is the first Aggressor. Not I.

Ay, but you know, we must return Good for Evil.


That may be a mistake in the Translation --

Prithee be of my opinion, Bellinda; for I'm positive I'm in the right; and if
you'll keep up the Prerogative of a Woman, yo^ll likewise be positive you are
in the right, when ever you do any thing you have a mind to. But I shall play
the fool, and jest on till I make you begin to think I'm in Earnest


I shall not take the liberty, Madam, to think of any thing that you desire to
keep a Secret from me.


Alas, my Dear, I have no Secrets. My heart could never yet con^ine my Tongue.


Your eyes you mean; for I am sure I have seen them gadding, when your Tongue
has been locked up safe enough.


My eyes gadding? Prithee after who, Child?


Why, after one that thinks you hate him, as much as I know you love him.


Constant you mean.


I do so.


Lord, what should put such a thing into your head?


That which puts things into most peoples Heads; Observation.


Why, what have you observed, in the name of Wonder?


I have observed you blush when you meet him; force your self away from him;
and then be out of humour with every thing about you: In a word; never was poor
Creature so spurred on by desire, and so reined in with fear!


How strong is Fancy!


How weak is Woman


Prithee, Niece, have a better opinion of your Aunt's Inclinations.


Dear Aunt, have a better opinion of your Neice's Understanding.


You'll make me Angry.


You'll make me Laugh.


Then you are resolved to persist?


Positively.


And all I can say --


Will signify nothing,


Though I should swear 'twere false --


I should think it true.


Then let us both forgive


Good nature may do much: But you have more reason to forgive one, than I have
to pardon the other.


'Tis true, Bellinda, you have given me so many proofs or your Friendship, that
my reserve has been indeed a Crime: But that you may more easily forgive me,
Remember, Child, that when our Nature prompts us to a thing, our Honour and
Religion have forbid us. We would (were it possible) conceal even from the Soul
it self, the knowledge of the Bodies weakness.


Well, I hope, to make your Friend amends, you'll hide nothing from her for the
future, though the Body should still grow weaker and weaker.


No, from this moment I have no more reserve; and for a proof of my Repentance,
I own, Bellinda, I'm in danger. Merit and Wit assault me from without: Nature
and Love soli^ite me within; my Husbands barbarous usage piques me to revenge;
and Satan catching at the fair occasion, throws in my way that vengeance,
which of all Vengeance pleases Women best.


'Tis well Constant don't know the weakness of the Fortifications; for o'my
Conscience he'd soon come on to the Assault.


Ay, and I'm afraid carry the Town too. But whatever you may have observed, I
have dissembled so well as to keep him Ignorant. So you see I'm no Coquette,
Bellinda: And if you'll follow my advice you'll never be one neither. 'Tis
true, Coquetry is one of the main ingredients in the natural Composition of a
Woman, and I as well as others, could be well enough pleased to see a Crowd of
young Fellows, Ogling and Glancing and Watching all occasions to do forty
foolish officious things: nay should some of 'em push on, even to Hanging or
Drowning: Why -- Faith -- if I should let pure Woman alone, I should even be
but too well pleased with it.


I'll swear 'twou^d tickle me strangely.


But after all, 'tis a Vicious practice in us, to give the least encouragement
but where we design to come to a Conclusion. For 'tis an unreasonable thing, to
engage a Man in a Disease which we before-han^ resolve we never will apply a
Cure to.


'Tis true; but then a Woman must abandon one of the supreme Blessings of her
Life. For I am fully convinced, no Man has half that pleasure in possessing a
Mistress, as a Woman has in jilting a Gallant.


The Happiest Woman then on Earth must be our Neighbour.


O the Impertinent Composition; she has Vanity and Affectation enough to make
her a Ridiculous Original, in spite of all that Art and Nature ever furnished
to any of her Sex before her.


She concludes all Men her Captives; and whatever Course they take, it serves
to confirm her in that opinion.


If they shun her, she thinks 'tis modesty, and takes it for a proo^ of their
Passion.


And if they are rude to her, 'tis Conduct, and done to prevent Town talk.


When her Folly makes 'em laugh, she thinks they are pleased with her Wit.


And when her impertinence makes 'em Dull, Concludes they are jealous of her
favours.


All their Actions and their Words, she takes for granted, aim at her.


And pities all other Women, because she thinks they envy her.


Pray, out of pity to our selves, let us find a better Subject, for I am weary
of this. Do you think your Husband inclined to Jealousy?


O, no; he does not love me well enough for that.

Lord how wrong Men's Maxims are. They are seldom jealous of their Wives,
unless they are very fond of 'em; whereas they ought to consider the Woman's
inclinations, for there depends their Fate.

Well, Men may talk; but they are not so Wise as we -- that's certain.


At least in our Affairs.


Nay, I believe we should out do 'em in the business of the State too: For me
thinks they Do and Undo, and make but mad work on it


Why then don't we get into the Intrigues of Government as well as they?


Because we have Intrigues of our own, that make us more sport, Child. And so
let's in and consider of 'em.


How do I look this morning?


Your Ladyship looks very ill, truly.


Lard how ill-natur'd thou art, Cornet, to tell me so, tho the thing should be
true. Don't you know that I have humility enough to be but too easily out of
Conceit with my self. Hold the Glass; I dare swear that will have more manners
than you have* Mademoiselle, let me have your opinion too.


My opinion pe, Matam, dat your Ladyship never look so well in your Life.


Well, the French are the prettiest obliging People, they say the most
acceptable, well mannered things -- and never flatter.


Your Ladyship say great Justice inteed.


Nay every thing's Just in my House but Cornet. The very Looking-Glass gives
her the Dementi. But I'm almost afraid it flatters me, it makes me look so very
engaging.


Inteed, Matam, your Face pe hansomer den all de Looking-Glass in tee World,
croyiez moy.


But is it possible my Eyes can be so languishing -- and so very full of fire?


Matam, if de Glass was burning Glass, I believe your Eyes set de fire in de
House.


You may take that Night-Gown, Mademoiselle; get out of the Room Cornet; I
can't endure you. This Wench methinks does look so unsufferably ugly.


Every ting look ugly Matam, dat stand by your Latiship.


No really, Mademoiselle, methinks you look mighty pretty.


Ah Matam; de Moon have ^o ?clat, ven de Sun appear.


O pretty Expression. Have you ever been in Love, Mademoiselle?


Ouy, Matam.


And were you, beloved again?


No Matam.


O ye Gods, What an Unfortunate Creature should I be in such a Case. But nature
has made me Nice for my own defence; I'm Nice, strangely Nice, Mademoiselle; I
believe were the merit of whole mankind bestowed upon one single Person, I
should still think the Fellow wanted something, to make it worth my while to
take notice of him: And yet I could Love; nay fondly Love, were it possible to
have a thing made on purpose for me: For I'm not cruel, Mademoiselle, I'm only
Nice.


Ah Matam, I wish I was fine Gentelman for your sake. I do all de ting in de
World to get leetel way into your heart. I make Song, I make Verse, I give you
de Serenade, I give great many Present to Mademoiselle, I no eat, I no sleep, I
be lean, I be mad, I hang my self, I drown my self? Ah ma Chere Dame, Que je
vous Aimerois.


Well the French have strange obliging ways with 'em; you may take those two
pair of Gloves Madamois^lle.


Me humbly tank my sweet Lady.


Madam here's a Letter for your Ladyship by the Pennypost.


Some new Conquest I'll warrant you. For without Vanity I looked extremely
clear last night, when I went to the Park.

O agreeable. Here's a new Song made of me. And ready set too. O thou Welcome
thing. Pipe hither, she shall Sing it instantly.

Here, Sing me this new Song, Pipe.


FLy, fly, you happy Shepherds, fly,
Avoid Philira's Charms;
The rigour of her heart denies
The Heaven that's in her Arms.
Never hope to gaze and then retire,
Nor yielding, to be blessed:
Nature who formed her Eyes of Fire,
Of Ice Composed her Breast.
Yet, lovely Maid, this once believe
A slave, whose Zeal you move:
The Gods Alas, your youth deceive;
Their Heaven consists in Love.
In spite of all the thanks you owe,
You may Reproach 'em this,
That where they did their Form bestow
They have denied their Bliss.
Well, there may be faults, Mademoiselle, but the Design is so very obliging,
it would be a matchless Ingratitude in me to discover 'em.


Ma foy Matam, I think de Gentelman's Song tell you de trute. If you never Love,
you never be Happy -- Ah -- que In aim l' amour moy.


Madam here's another Letter for your Ladyship.


'Tis thus I am importuned every morning, Mademoiselle. Pray how do the French
Ladies when they are thus Accablees?


Matam, they never Complain. Au Contraire. When one Frense Laty have got hundred
Lover -- Den she do all she can -- to get hundred more.


Well, strike me dead, I think they have Le gout bon. For 'tis an unutterable
pleasure to be adored by all the Men, and envied by all the Women -- Yet I'll
swear I'm concerned at the Torture I give 'em. Lard, why was I formed to make
the whole Creation uneasy? But let me read my Letter. If you have a mind to
hear of your faults, instead of being praised for your Virtues, take the pains
to walk in the Green walk in St. Iames's with your Woman an hour hence. You'll
there meet one, who hates you for some things, as he could love you for Others,
and therefore is willing to endeavour your Reformation -- If you come to the
Place I mention, you'll know who I am; if you don't, you never shall, so take
your Choice.


This is strangely Familiar, Mademoiselle; now have I a provoking Fancy to know
who this Impudent fellow is.


Den take your Scarf and your Mask, and go to de Rendezvous De Frense Laty do
iustement ^omme sa.


Rendezvous! What, Rendezvous with a man; Mademoiselle.


Eh, pourquoy non?


What? and a man perhaps I never saw in my Life


Tant m^eux: c'est don^ quelque chose de n^uveau.


Why, how do I know what designs he may have. He may intend to Ravish me for
ought I know.


Ravish? -- Bagatelle. I would fain see one Impudent Rogue Ravish Mademoiselle;
Ouy, je le voadrois.


O but my Reputation, Mademoiselle, my Reputation, a^ ma Chere Reputation.


Matam; -- Quand on l' a un fois perdue -- On n'en est plus embarassee.


Fe Mademoiselle, Fe: Reputation is a Jewel.


Qui coute bien chere Matam.


Why sure you would not Sacrifice your Honour to your Pleasure?


Je suis Philosophe.


Bless me how you talk. Why what if Honour be a burden, Mademoiselle, must it
not be born?


Chaque un a sa fason -- quand quelque chose my incommode moy je my en defais,
Vite.


Get you gone you little naughty French woman you, I vow and swear I must turn
you out of doors if you talk thus.


Turn me out of doors? -- turn your self out of doors and go see what de
Gentelman have to say to you Tennez. Voila

Hey, Mercure, Coquin; Call one Chair for Matam, and one oder


Well, for once, Mademoiselle, I'll follow your Advice, out of the intemperate
desire I have to know who this ill bred Fellow is. But I have too much
Delicatesse, to make a Practice on it.


Belle chose Vraiment que la Delicatesse, lors qu' il s'agit this devertir. --
a za -- Vous Voila equipee parto^ns. -- He bien? -- q' avez vous donc?


In ay peur.


In n'en ay point moy.


I dare not go.


Demeurez donc.


Je suis Poltrone.


Tant pis pour Vous


Curiosity's a wicked Devil.


C'est un Charmante Saint.


It ruined our first Parents.


Elle a bien diverti leurs Enfants.


L' honneur est contre.


Le plaisir est pour.


Must I then go?


Must you go? -- must you eat, must you drink, must you sleep, must you live?
De nature bid you do one, de nature bid you do toder. Vous me ferez enrager.


But when reason corrects nature, Mademoiselle.


Elle est donc bien Insolent C'est sa soeur aisnee.


Do you then prefer your nature to your reason, Mademoiselle.


Ouy da.


Pourquoy?


Because my nature make me merry, my reason make me mad.


Ah la Mechante Fransoise.


Ah la Belle Angloise,


WEll, I vow, Mademoiselle I'm strangely impatient to know who this confident
Fellow is. Heartfree. But sure it can't be him, he's a professed Woman-hater.
Yet who knows what my wicked Eyes may have done?


Il nous approach, Madam.


Yes, 'tis he: Now will he be most intolerably Cavalier, though he should be in
love with me.


Madam, I'm your humble Servant: I perceive you have more Humility and
Good-nature than I thought you had.


What you attribute to Humility and Good-nature, Sir, may perhaps be only due
to Curiosity. I had a mind to know who 'twas had ill manners enough to write
that Letter.


Well, and now, I hope, you are satisfied.


I am so, Sir; good b'w^y to ye.


Nay, hold there; though you have done your Business, I have not done mine: By your
Ladiship's leave, we must have one moments prattle together. Have you a mind to
be the prettiest Woman about Town, or not? How she stares upon me! What! this
passes for an impertinent Question with you now, because you think you are so
already.


Pray Sir, let me ask you a Question in my turn: By what right do you pretend
to examine me?


By the same right that the Strong govern the Weak, because I have you in my
power; for you cannot get so quickly to your Coach, but I shall have time
enough to make you hear every thing I have to say to you.


These are strange Liberties you take, Mr. Heartfree.


They are so, Madam, but there's no help for it; for know, that I have a Design
upon you.


Upon me, Sir!


Yes; and one that will turn to your Glory and my Comfort, if you will but be a
little wiser than you use to be.


Very well, Sir.


Let me see, -- Your Vanity, Madam, I take to be about some eight degrees
higher than any Woman's in the Town, let t^other be who she will; and my
Indifference is naturally about the same pitch. Now, could you find the way to
turn this Indifference into Fire and Flames, methinks your Vanity ought to be
satisfied; and this, perhaps, you might bring about upon pretty reasonable
terms.


And pray at what rate would this Indifference be bought off, if one should
have so depraved an Appetite to desire it?


Why, Madam, to drive a Quaker's Bargain, and make but one word with you, if I
do part with it, -- you must lay me down -- your Affectation.


My Affectation, Sir!


Why, I ask you nothing but what you may very well spare.


You grow rude, Sir. Come, Mademoiselle, 'tis high time to be gone.


Alons, alons, alons.





What mean you, sir?


I mean to tell you, that you are the most ungrateful Woman upon Earth.


Ungrateful! To who?


To Nature.


Why, what has Nature done for me?


What you have undone by Art. It made you handsome; it gave you Beauty to a
Miracle, a Shape without a fault, Wit enough to make 'em relish, and so turned
you loose to your own Discretion; which has made such Work with you, that you
are become the Pity of our Sex, and the Jest of your own. There is not a
Feature in your Face, but you have found the way to teach it some affected
Convulsion; your Feet, your Hands, your very Fingers ends, are directed never
to move without some ridiculous Air or other; and your Language is a suitable
Trumpet, to draw Peoples Eyes upon the Raree-show.








Now do you hate me for telling you the Truth; but that's because you don't
believe it is so: for were you once convinced of that, you'd reform for your
own sake. But 'tis as hard to persuade a Woman to quit any thing that makes her
ridiculous, as 'tis to prevail with a Poet to see a Fault in his own Play.


Every Circumstance of nice Breeding must needs appear ridiculous to one who
has so natural an Antipathy to good Manners.


But suppose I could find the means to convince you, That the whole World is of
my Opinion, and that those who flatter and commend you, do it to no other
intent, but to make you persevere in your Folly, that they may continue in
their Mirth.


Sir, though you and all that World you talk of, should be so impertinently
officious, as to think to persuade me, I don't know how to behave my self, I
should still have Charity enough for my own Understanding, to believe my self
in the right, and all you in the wrong.


Le voila mort.




Well, this once I have endeavoured to wash the Blackamoor white; but
henceforward I'll sooner undertake to teach Sincerity to a Courtier, Generosity
to an Usurer, Honesty to a Lawyer, nay, Humility to a Divine, than Discretion
to a Woman I see has once set her Heart upon playing the Fool.

'Morrow, Constant.


Good morrow, Jack; What are you doing here this morning?


Doing! guess if thou can.

Why, I have been endeavouring to persuade my Lady Fanciful, that she's the
foolishest Woman about Town.


A pretty Endeavour truly.


I have told her in as plain English as I could speak, both what the Town says
of her, and what I think of her. In short, I have used her as an Absolute King
would do Magna Charta.


And how does she take it?


As Children do Pills; bite 'em, but can't swallow 'em.


But, prithee, what has put it in your Head, of all Mankind, to turn Reformer?


Why, one thing was, the Morning hung upon my Hands, I did not know what to do
with my self. And another was, That as little as I care for Women, I could not
see with patience one that Heaven had taken such wondrous pains about, be so
very industrious, to make her self the Jack Pudding of the Creation.


Well, now could I almost wish to see my cruel Mistress make the self-same use
of what Heaven has done for her, that so I might be cured of a Disease that
makes me so very uneasy; for Love, Love is the Devil, Heartfree.


And why do you let the Devil govern you?


Because I have more Flesh and Blood than Grace and Self-denial. My dear, dear
Mistress, 'd ^death! that so gent^el a Woman should be a Saint, when Religion's
out of fashion!


Nay, she's much in the wrong truly; but who knows ^ow far Time and Good
Example may prevail?


O! they have played their Parts in vain already: 'Tis now two Years since that
damned fellow her Husband invited me to his Wedding; and there was the first
time I saw that charming Woman, whom I have loved ever since, more than ever a
Martyr did his Soul; but she's cold, my Friend, still cold as the Northern
Star.


So are all Women by Nature, which makes 'em so willing to be warm^d.


O, don't profane the ^ex; prithee think 'em all Angels for her sake, for
she's virtuous, even to a fault.


A Lover's Head is a good accountable thing truly; he adores his Mistress for
being virtuous, and yet is very angry with her, because she won't be lewd.


Well, the only Relief I expect in my Misery, is to see thee some day or other
as deeply engaged as my self, which will force me to be merry in the midst of
all my Misfortunes.


That day will never come, be assured, Ned: Not but that I can pass a Night
with a Woman, and for the time, perhaps, make my self as good sport as you can
do. Nay, I can court a Woman too, call her Nymph, Angel, Goddess, what you
please; but here's the Difference 'twixt you and I: I persuade a Woman she's an
Angel; she persuades you she's one.

Prithee let me tell you how I avoid falling in love; that which serves me for
Prevention, may chance to serve you for a Cure.


Well, use the Ladies moderately then, and I'll hear you.


That using 'em moderately undoes us all; but I'll use 'em justly, and that you
ought to be satisfied with.

I always consider a Woman, not as the Taylor, the Shoo-maker, the Tire-woman,
the Sempstress, (and which is more than all that) the Poet makes her; but I
consider her as pure Nature has contrived her, and that more strictly than I
should have done our old Grandmother Eve, had I seen her naked in the Garden;
for I consider her turned inside out. Her Heart well examined, I find there
Pride, Vanity, Covetousness, Indiscretion, but above all things, Malice; Plots
eternally aforging, to destroy one another Reputations, and as honestly to
charge the Levity of Men's Tongues with the Scandal; hourly Debates how to make
poor Gentlemen in love with 'em, with no other intent, but to use 'em like Dogs
when they have done; a constant Desire of doing more mischief, and an
everlasting War, wag^d against Truth and Good-nature.


Very well, Sir, an admirable Composition truly.


Then for her Outside, I consider it merely as an Outside; She has a thin
Tiffany covering over just such Stuff as you and I are made on.

As for her Motion, her Men, her Airs, and all those Tricks, I know they
affect you mightily. If you should see your Mistress at a Coronation, dragging
her Peacock's Train, with all her state and insolence about her, 'twould strike
you with all the awful thoughts that Heaven it self could pretend to from you;
whereas I turn the whole matter into a Jest, and suppose her strutting in the
self-same stately manner, with nothing on but her Stays, and her under scanty
(...) Petticoat.


Hold thy profane Tongue, for I'll hear no more.


What you'll love on then?


Yes, to Eternity.


Yet you have no Hopes at all.


None.


Nay, the Resolution may be discreet enough; perhaps you have found out some
new Philosophy, That Love's like Virtue, its own Reward: so you and your
Mistress will be as well content at a distance, as others that have less
Learning are in coming together.


No; but if she should prove kind at last, my dear Heartfree.


Nay, prithee don't take me for your Mistress, for Lovers are very troublesome.


Well, who knows what Time may do?


And just now he was sure Time could do nothing.


Yet not one kind Glance in Two Years, is somewhat strange.


Not strange at all; she don't like you, that's all the business.


Prithee don't distract me.


Nay, you are a good handsome young Fellow, she might use you better: Come,
will you go see her? perhaps she may have changed her mind; there's some Hopes
as long as she's a Woman.


O, 'tis in vain to visit her: sometimes to get a sight of her, I visit that
Beast her Husband, but she certainly finds some Preten^e to quit the Room as
soon as I enter.


It's much she don't tell him you have made Love to her too, for that's another
good-natur'd thing usual amongst Women, in which they have several Ends.

Sometimes 'tis to recommend their Virtue, that they may be lewd with the
greater security.

Sometimes 'tis to make their Husbands fight in hopes they may be kill^d, when
their Affairs require it should be so. But most commonl^ 'tis to engage two men
in a Quarrel, that they may have the Credit of being fought for; and if the
Lover's killed in the business, they cry, Poor Fellow! he had ill Luck. -- And
so they go to Cards.


Thy Injuries to Women are not to be fo^rgiven. Lo^k to it if ever thou dost
fall into their hands --


They can't use me worse than they do you, that speak well of 'em.

Co^o! here comes the Knight.


Your humble Servant, Sir Iohn.


Servant, Sir.


How does all your Family?


Pox of my Family.


How does your Lady? I have not seen her abroad a good while.


Do! I don't know how she does, not I; she was well enough yesterday: I had not
been at home to night.


What! were you out of Town!


Out of Town! no, I was drinking.


You are a true Englishman; Don't know your own Happiness? if I were married to
such a Woman, I would not be from her a Night for all the Wine in France.


Not from her! -- Oons, -- what a time should a man have of that!


Why, there's no Division, I hope?


No; but there's a Conjunction, and that's worse; a Pox of the Parson. -- Why
the plague don't you two marry? I fancy I look like the Devil to you.


Why, you don't think you have Horns, do you?


No; I believe my Wife's Religion will keep her honest.


And what will make her keep her Religion?


Persecution; and therefore she shall have it.


Have a care Knight, Women are tender things.


And yet, methinks, 'tis a hard matter to break their Hearts.


Fie, fie; you have one of the best Wives in the World, and yet you seem the
most uneasy Husband.


Best Wives! -- the Woman's well enough, she has no Vice that I know of, but
she's a Wife, and -- damn a Wife; if I were married to a Hogshead of Claret,
Matrimony would make me hate it.


Why did you marry then? you were old enough to know your own mind.


Why did I marry! I married because I had a mind to lie with her, and she would
not let me.


Why did not you ravish her?


Yes, and so have hedged my self into forty Quarrels with her Relations,
besides buying my Pardon: But more than a^ that, you must know, I was afraid of
being damned in those days, for I kept sneaking cowardly Company, Fellows that
went to Church, said Grace to their Meat, and had not the least Tincture of
Quality about 'em.


But I think you are got into a better Gang now.


Zoons, Sir, my Lord Rake and I are Hand and Glove, I believe we may get our
Bones broke together to night; Have you a mind to share a Frolic?


Not I truly, my Talent lies to softer Exercises.


What? a Doune-bed and a Strumpet?
A Pox of Venery, I say.
Will you come and drink with me this Afternoon?

I can't drink to day, but we'll come and sit an hour with you if you will.


Phugh, Pox, sit an hour!
Why can't you drink?

Because I'm to see my Mistress.

Who's that?

Why, do you use to tell?

Yes.

So won't I.

Why?

Because 'tis a Secret.

Would my Wife knew it, 'twould be no Secret long.

Why, do you think she can't keep a Secret?

No more than she can keep Lent.

Prithee tell it her to try, Constant.

No, prithee don't, that I may not be plagued with it.

I'll hold you a Guinea you don't make her tell it you:

I'll hold you a Guinea I do.

Which way?

Why I'll beg her not to tell it me.

Nay, if any thing does it, that will.

But do you think, Sir? --

Oons, Sir, I think a Woman and a Secret, are the two impertinentest Themes in
the Universe. Therefore pray let's hear no more, of my Wife nor your Mistress.
Damn 'em both with all my Heart, and every thing else that Daggles a Petticoat,
except four Generous Whores, with Betty Sands at the head of 'em, who were
drunk with my Lord Rake and I, ten times in a Fortnight.


Here's a dainty fellow for you. And the veriest Coward too. But his usage of
his Wife makes me ready to stab the Villain.


Lovers are short sighted: All their Senses run into that of feeling. This
proceeding of his is the only thing on Earth can make your Fortune. If any
thing can prevail with her to accept of a Gallant 'tis his ill usage of her;
for Women will do more for revenge than they'll do fo^r the Gospel.

Prithee take heart, I have great hopes for you, and since I can't bring you
quite off of her, I'll endeavour to bring you quite on; for a whining ^over, is
the damn'd'st Companion upon Earth.


My Dear Friend, flatter me a little more with these hopes: for whilst they
prevail I have Heaven within me, and could melt with joy.


Pray no melting yet: let things go farther first. This afternoon perhaps we
shall make some advance. In the mean while, let's go Dine at Locket's, and let
hope get you a Stomach.


Did you ever see any thing so Importune, Mademoiselle?


Inteed Matam, to say de trute, he want leetel good breeding.


Good breeding? He wants to be cain'd, Mademoiselle: an Insolent Fellow.

And yet let me expose my Weakness, 'tis the only Man on earth I could resolve
to dispense my Favours on, were he but a fine Gentleman. Well; did Men but know
how deep an Impression a fine Gentleman makes in a Lady's heart, they wou^d
reduce all their studies to that of good breeding alone.


Madam here's Mr. Treble. He has brought home the Verses your Ladyship made,
and gave him to set.


O let him come in by all means.
Now, Mademoiselle, am I going to be unspeakably happy.
So Mr. Treble, you have set my little Dialogue?

Yes, Madam, and I hope your Ladyship will be pleased with it.


O, no doubt on it; for really Mr. Treble, you set all things to a Wonder: But
your Music is in particular Heavenly, when you have my words to cloth in it.


Your words themselves, Madam, have so much Music in 'em they inspire me.


Nay, now you make me blush, Mr. Treble; but pray let's hear what you have
done.


You shall, Madam.


AH Lovely Nymph, the wor^'s on Fire:
Viel, Veil those cruel Eyes.

The World may then in Flames expire,
And boast that so it Dies.

But when all Mortals are destroyed,
Who then shall Sing your Praise?

Those who are fit to be employed:
The Gods shall Altars raise.

How does your Ladship like it, Madam?


Rapture, Rapture, Mr. Treble, I'm all Rapture. O Wit and Art, what power you
have when joined. I must needs tell you the Birth of this Little Dialogue, Mr.
Treble. It's Father was a Dream, and it's Mother was the Moon. I dreamt, that
by an unanimous Vote, I was chosen Queen of that Pale World. And that the first
time I appeared upon my Throne, -- all my Subjects fell in Love with me. Just
then I waked: and seeing Pen, Ink and Paper lie idle upon the Table, I slid
into my Morning Gown, and writ this in promptu.


So I guess the Dialogue, Madam, is supposed to be between your Majesty and
your first Minister of State.


Just: he as Minister advises me to trouble my head about the welfare of my
Subjects; which I as Sovereign, find a very impertinent proposal. But is the
Town so Dull, Mr. Treble, it affords us never another New Song?


Madam, I have one in my Pocket, came out but yesterday, if your Ladyship
pleases to let Mrs. Pipe Sing it.


By all means. Here Pipe. Make what Musique you can of this Song, here.


NOT an Angel dwells above
Half so fair as her I Love:
Heaven knows how she'll receive me:
If she smiles, I'm blessed indeed
If she frowns, I'm quickly freed;
Heaven knows, she never can grieve me.
None can Love her more than I,
Yet she never shall make me die.
If my flame can never warm her;
Lasting Beauty, I'll adore,
I shall never Love her more,
Cruel^y will so deform her.
Very well: This is Heartfree's Poetry without question.


Won't your Ladyship please to sing your self this morning?


O Lord, Mr. Treble, my cold is still so Barbarous, to refuse me that pleasure;
He he hem.


I'm very sorry for it, Madam: Methinks all Mankind should turn Physicians for
the Cure on it.


Why truly to give mankind their due; There's few that know me, but have
offered their Remedy.


They have reason, Madam, for I know no body Sings so near a Cherubin as your
Ladyship.


What I do I owe chiefly to your skill and care, Mr. Treble. People do ^t^er me
indeed, that I have a voice and a je no scai quoy in the Conduct of it, that
will make Music of any thing. And truly I begin to believe so, since what
happened the other night: would you think it, Mr. Treble; walking pretty late in
the Park, (for I often walk late in the Park, Mr. Treble;) A whim took me to
sing Chivy-Chase, and would you believe it? Next morning I had three Copies of
Verses, and six B^llet-doux at my Levee upon it.


And without all dispute you deserved as many more, Madam, are there any
further Commands for your Ladyship^s humble Servant?


Nothing more at this time, Mr. Treble. But I shall expect you here every
morning for this Month, to sing my little matter there to me. I'll reward you
for your pains.


O Lord, Madam --


Good morrow, sweet Mr. Treble.


Your Ladyships most obedient Servant.


Will your Ladyship please to dine yet?


Yes: let 'em serve.

Sure this Heartfree has bewitched me, Mademoiselle.

You can't imagine how oddly he mixed himself in my thoughts during my Rapture
even now. I vow 'tis a thousand pities he is not more polish^d. Don't you think
so?


Matam. I think it so great pity, dat if I was in your Ladyship place, I take
him home in my House, I lock him up in my Closet, and I never let him go till I
teach him every ting dat fine Laty expect from fine Gentelman.


Why truly I believe, I should soon subdue his Brutality; for without doubt, he
has a strange penchant to grow fond of me, in spite of his Aversion to the
Sex, else he would never have taken so much pains about me. Lord how proud
would some poor Creatures be of such a Conquest? But I alas, I don't know how
to receive as a favour, what I take to be so infinitely my due But what shall I
do to new mould him, Mademoiselle? for till then he's my utter aversion.


Matam, you must laugh at him in all de place dat you meet him, and turn into
de ridicule all he say and all he do.


Why truly Satyr has been ever of wondrous use, to reform ill manners. Besides
'tis my particular Talent to ridicule folks. I can be severe; strangely severe,
when I will, Mademoiselle. -- Give me the Pen and Ink: -- I find my self
whimsical -- I'll write to him.

-- or I ll let it alone, and be severe upon him that way.

-- Yet active severity is better than passive.

-- 'Tis as good let alone too, for every lash I give him, perhaps he'll take
for a favour.

-- Yet 'tis a thousand pities so much

-- Satyr should be lost.

-- But if it should have a wrong effect upon him 'twould distract me.

-- Well I must write though after all.

-- Or I'll let it alone which is the same thing.


La Voila determinee.


HEre; take away the things: I expect Company. But first bring me a Pipe; I'll
smoke.


Lord, Sir Iohn, I wonder you won't leave that nasty Custom.


Prithee don't be Impertinent.





I'd give the World to know: Perhaps 'tis Constant; he comes here sometimes; If
it does prove him, I'm resolved I'll share the visit.


We'll send for our Work and sit here.


He'll choke us with his Tobacco.


Nothing will choke us, when we are doing what we have a mind to.


Madam.


Here; bring my Cousin's work and mine hither


Who; Pox, can't you work somewhere else?


We shall be careful not to disturb you, Sir.


Your Pipe would make you too thoughtful, Uncle, if you were left alone; Our
prittle prattle will Cure your Spleen.


Will it so, Mrs. Pert? Now I believe it will so increase it





A Woman^s Tongue a cure for the Spleen -- Oons --


You have done a great deal Bellinda since yesterday.


Yes, I have worked very hard; how do you like it?


Of 'tis the prettiest Fringe in the World. Well Cousin you have the happiest
fancy. Prithee advice me about altering my Crimson Petticoat.


A Pox of your Petticoat; here's such a prating a man can't digest his own
thoughts for you.


Don't answer him.

Well, what do you advise me?


Why really I would not alter it at all.
Methinks 'tis very pretty as it is.

Ay that^s true: But you know one grows weary of the prettiest things in the
world, when one has had 'em long.


Yes, I have taught her that.


Shall we provoke him a little?


With all my heart.
Bellinda, don't you long to be Married?

Why there are some things in it I could like well enough.


What do you think you should dislike?


My Husband a hundred to one else.


O ye wicked wretch: Sure you don't speak as you think.


Yes I do: Especially if he smoked Tobacco.


Why that many times takes off worse smells.


Then he must smell very ill indeed.


So some Men will, to keep their Wives from coming near 'em.


Then those Wives should Cuckold 'em at a Distance.


Oons get you gone up stairs you confederating Strumpets you, or I'll Cuckold
you with a Vengeance.


O Lord he'll beat us, he'll beat us. Dear, Dear Mr. Constant save us.


I'll Cuckold you with a Pox.


Heavens, Sir Iohn, what's the matter?


Sure if Woman had been ready created, the Devil, instead of being kicked down
into Hell, had been Married.


Why what new plague have you found now?


Why these two Gentlewomen did but hear me say, I expected you here this
afternoon; upon which, they presently resolved to take up the Roon, of purpose
to plague me and my Friends.


Was that all? why we should have been glad of their Company.


Then I should have been weary of yours. For I can't relish both together. They
found fault with my smoking Tobacco too; and said Men stunk. But I have a good
mind -- to say something.


No, nothing against the Ladies pray.


Split the Ladies. Come, will you sit down? Give us some Wine, Fellow:

You won't smoke?


No nor drink neither at this time, I must ask your pardon.


What, this Mistress of yours runs in your head; I'll warrant it's some such
squeamish Minx as my Wife, that's grown so dainty of late, she finds fault even
with a Dirty shirt.


That a woman may do, and not be very dainty neither.


Pox of the women, let's drink. Come, you shall take one Glass, though I send for
a Box of Lozenges to sweeten your mouth after it.


Nay if one Glass will satisfy you I'll drink it without putting you to that
expense.


Why that's honest. Fill some Wine, Sirrah: So, Here's to you Gentlemen -- A
VVife's the Devil. To your being both married


O your most humble Servant, Sir.


Well? how do you like my Wine?


'Tis very good indeed.


'Tis Admirable.


Then give us the other Glass.


No, pray excuse us now. VVe'll come another time, and then we won't spare it.


This one Glass and no more. Come: It shall be your Mistresses health: And
that's a great Compliment from me, I assure you.


And 'tis a very obliging one to me: So give us the Glasses.


So: Let her live.


And be kind.


What's the matter? does't go the wrong way?


If I had love enough to be jealous, I should take this for an ill Omen. For I
never drank my VVives health in my life, but I puk'd in the Glass.


O she's too Virtuous to make a Reasonable man jealous.


Pox of her Virtue. If I could but catch her Adulterating I might be devorc'd
from her by Law.


And so pay her a yearly Pension, to be a distinguished Cuckold.

Sir, There's my Lord Rake, Colonel Bully, and some other Gentlemen at the
Blew-Posts, desire your Company.


Cods so, we are to Consult about playing the Devil to night.


Well we won't hinder business.


Methinks I don't know how to leave you though. But for once I must make bold -
Or look you: may be the Conference may not last long; so if you'll wait here
half an hour, or an hour; if I don't come then, -- why then -- I won't come at
all.





But let's accept on it however. Who knows what may happen.


Well Sir, to show you how fond we are of your Company we'll expect your
return as long as we can.


Nay, may be I may not stay at all: But business you know must be done. So your
Servant -- Or hark you: If you have a mind to take a frisk with us, I have an
interest with my Lord, I can easily introduce you.


We are much beholding to you, but for my part I'm engaged another way.


What? To your Mistress I'll warrant. Prithee leave your nasty Punk to
entertain her self with her own Lewd thoughts, and make one with us to Night.


Sir, 'tis business that is to employ me.


And me; and business must be done you know.


Ay; Women's business, though the world were consumed for it.


Farewell Beast: And now my Dear Friend, would my Mistress be but as
Complaisant as some men's Wives, who think it a piece of good breeding to
receive the visits of their Husbands Friends in his absence.


Why for your sake I could forgive her, though she should be so Complaisant to
receive something else in his absence. But what way shall we invent to see her.


O never hope it: Invention will prove as Vain as Wishes.


What do you think now, Friend?


I think I shall swoon.


I'll speak first then, whilst you fetch breath.


We think our selves obliged Gentlemen, to come and return you thanks for your
Knight Errantry. We were just upon being devoured by the Fiery Dragon.


Did not his fumes almost knock you down, Gentlemen?


Truly Ladies, we did undergo some hardships, and should have done more, if
some greater Hero's than our selves hard by had not diverted him.


Though I'm glad of the Service, you are pleased to say we have done you; yet I'm
sorry we could do it no other way, than by making our selves privy, to what you
would perhaps have kept a secret.


For Sir Iohn's part, I suppose be designed it no s^cret since he made so much
noise. And for my self, truly I am not much concerned, since 'tis fallen only
into this* Gentleman^s hands and yours; who I have many reasons to believe,
will neither interpret nor report any thing to my disadvantage.


Your good opinion, Madam, was what I feared, I never could have merited.


Your fears were vain then, Sir, for I am just to every body.


Prithee, Constant, what is't you do to get the Ladies good Opinions; for I'm a
Novice at it?


Sir, will you give me leave to instruct you?


Yes, that I will with all my Soul, Madam.


Why then you must never be slovenly, never be out of humour, fare well and cry
Roast-meat; smoke Tobacco, nor drink but when you are a-dry.


That's hard.


Nay, if you take his Bottle from him, you break his Heart, Madam.


Why, is it possible the Gentleman can love Drinking?


Only by way of Antidote.


Against what, p^ay?


Against Love, Madam?


Are you afraid of being in Love, Sir?


I should, if there were any danger of it.


Pray why so?


Because I always had an aversion to being used like a Dog.


Why truly, men in love are seldom used better.


But was you never in love, Sir?


No, I thank Heaven, Madam.


Pray where got you your Learning then?


From other Peoples Expense.


That's being a Spunger, Sir, which is scarce honest; if you'd buy some
Experience with your own Money, as 'twould be fairlyer got, so 'twould stick
longer by you.


Madam, here's my Lady Fanciful, to wait upon your Ladyship.


Shield me, kind Heaven, what an inundation of Impertinence is here coming upon
us!


My dear Lady Brute, and sweet Bellinda! methinks 'tis an Age since I saw you.


Yet 'tis but three days; sure you have passed your time very ill, it seems so
long to you.


Why really, to confess the Truth to you, I am so everlastingly ^atigu'd with
the Addresses of Unfortunate Gentlemen, that were it not for the extravagancy
of the Example, I should even tear out these wicked Eyes with my own Fingers,
to make both my self and Mankind easy. What think you on it, Mr. Heartfree, for
I take you to be my faithful Adviser?


Why truly, Madam, -- I think -- every Project that is for the Good of Mankind,
ought to be encouraged.


Then I have your Consent, Sir.


To do whatever you please, Madam.


You had a much-more limited Complaisance this Morning, Sir. Would you believe
it, Ladies? The Gentleman has been so exceeding generous, to tell me of above
fifty Faults, in less time than it was well possible for me to commit two of
'em.


Why truly, Madam, my Friend there is apt to be something familiar with the
Ladies.


He is indeed, Sir; but he's wondrous charitable with it; he has had the
Goodness to design a Reformation, even down to my Fingers ends.

'Twas thus, I think, Sir, you would have


Just thus Women do, when


'Twould however be less Vanity for me to conclude the former, than you the
latter, Sir.


Madam, all I shall presume to conclude, is, That if I were in Love, you^d find
the means to make me soon weary on ^t.


Not by over-fondness, upon my word, Sir. But pray let^s stop here, for you are
so much governed by Instinct, I know you'll grow brutish at last.




Well, for my part, I should be glad to find some-body would be so free with
me, that I might know my Faults, and mend 'em.


Then pray let me recommend this Gentleman to you: I have known him some time,
and will be Surety for him, That upon a very limited Encouragement on your
side, you shall find an extended Impudence on his.


I thank you Madam, for your recommendation; But hating idleness, I'm unwilling
to enter into a place where I believe there would be nothing to do. I was fond
of serving your Ladyship, because I knew you'd find me constant employment.


I told you he'd be rude, Bellinda.


O, a little Bluntness is a sign of honesty, which makes me always ready to
pardon it. So, Sir, if you have no other exceptions to my service, but the fear
of being idle in it, You may venture to list your self: I shall find you work I
warrant you.


Upon those terms I engage, Madam, and this (with your leave) I take for
earnest.


Hold there, Sir, I'm none of your earnest givers. But if I'm well served, I
give good wages and pay punctually.




-- ^rd what a difference there is between me and her.

Mr. Heartfree, do you know that you and I must have no Quarrel for all this. I
can't forbear being a little severe now and then: But Women you know may be
allowed any thing.


Up to a certain age, Madam.


Which I am not yet past I hope.








You agree then at last.








Then there's no Challenges sent between you?


Not from me I promise.


That I believe. But I think we had best be going lest she should suspect
something, and be maliciou.


With all my my heart.


Ladies we are your humble Servants. I see Sir Iohn is quite engaged, 'twould
be in vain to expect him. Come Heartfree


Ladies your Servant. won't forget our Bargain; I'm to say what I please to you


Liberty of Speech entire, Sir.




But I can bear her sight no longer -- methinks she^s grown ten times uglier
than Cornet.

I must go home, and study revenge.




What going already Madam?


I must beg you'll excuse me this once. For really I have eighteen visits to
return this afternoon so you see I'm importun^d by the Women as well as the
Men.







Indeed I'll wait upon you down.


No, sweet Lady Brute; you know I swoon at Ceremony.


Pray give me leave.


You know I won't.


Indeed I must.


Indeed you shall not.


Indeed I will.


Indeed you shall not.


Indeed I will.


Indeed you shall not. Indeed Indeed Indeed you shall not.

This impertinent Woman, has put me out of humour for a Fortnight. -- What an
agreeable moment has her foolish v^sit interrupted -- Lord how like a Torrent
Love flows into the Heart when once the sluice of desire is opened! Good Gods
what a pleasure there is in doing what we should not do!

Ha! here again?


Though the renewing my visit may seem a little irregular, I hope I shall obtain
your pardon for it, Madam, when you know I only left the Room, lest the Lady
who was here should have been as malicious in her Remarks, as she's foolish in
her Conduct.


He who has discretion enough to be tender of a Woman's Reputation, carries a
Virtue about him may atone for a great many faults.


If it has a Title to atone for any, it's pretentions must needs be strongest,
where the Crime is Love. I therefore hope I shall be forgiven the attempt I
have made upon your Heart, since my Enterrprize has been a secret to all the
World but your self.


Secrecy indeed in sins of this kind, is an Argument of weight to lessen the
Punishment; but nothing's a Plea, for a Pardon entire, without a sincere
Repentance.


If Sincerity in Repentance, consist in sorrow for offending: No Cloister ever
enclosed, so true a Penitent as I should be. But I hope it cannot be reckoned
an offence to Love, where 'tis a duty to adore.


'Tis an offence, a great one, where it would rob a Woman of all she ought to
be adored for; her Virtue.


Virtue? -- Virtue alas is no more like the thing that's called so, than 'tis
like Vice it self. Virtue consists in Goodness, Honour, Gratitude, Sincerity
and Pity; and not in Peevish, snarling streightlac'd Chastity. True Virtue
whereso'e'er it moves, still carries an intrinsic worth about it, and is in
every place, and in each Sex of equal value. So is not Continence you see: That
Phantom of Honour, which men in every Age have so contemned, they have thrown
it amongst the Women to scrable for.


If it be a thing of so very little Value; Why do you so earnestly recommend it
to your Wives and Daughters?


We recommend it to our Wives, Madam, because we would keep 'em to our selves.
And to our Daughters, because we would dispose of 'em to others.


'Tis then of some Importance it seems, since you ^an't dispose of 'em without
it.


That importance, Madam, lies in the humour of the Country, not in the nature
of the thing.


How do you prove that, Sir?


From the Wisdom of a neighbouring Nation in a Contrary Practice. In Monarchies
things go by Whimsy, but Commonwealth's weigh all things in the Scale of
Reason.


I hope we are not so very light a People to bring up fashions without some
Ground.


Pray what does your Ladyship think of a powdered Coat (...) Dee^ M^rning*


I think, Sir, your Sophistry has all the effect that you can reasonably expect
it should have: it puzzles, but don't convince


I'm sorry for it.


I'm sorry to hear you say so.


Pray why?


Because if you expected more from it, you have a worse opinion of my
understanding than I desire you should have.







It is I think so great a one, as nothing can repay.


Yes; the making the man you love your everlasting Debtor.


When Debtors once have borrowed all we have to lend, they are very apt to grow
very shy of their Creditors Company.


That, Madam, is only when they are forced to borrow of Usurers, and not of a
Generous Friend. Let us choose our Creditors, and we are seldom so ungrateful
to shun 'em.


What think you of Sir Iohn, Sir? I was his free choice.


I think he's marri'd, Madam.


Does Marriage then exclude men from your Rule of Constancy.


It does. Constancy's a Brave, free, haughty, generous Agent, that cannot
buckle to the Chains of Wedlock. There's a poor sordid slavery in Marriage,
that turns the slowing Tide of Honour, and sinks us to the lowest ebb of
Infamy. 'Tis a corrupted Soil; I'll Nature, Avarice, Sloth, Cowardice and
Dirt, are all its product.


Have you no exceptions to th^s General Rule* as well as to to'ther?


Yes: I would (after all) ^e an exception to it my self if you were free, in
Power and Will to make me so.


Compliments are well placed, where 'tis impossible to lay hold on 'em.


I would to Heaven 'twere possible for you to lay hold on mine, that you might
see it is no Compliment at all. But since you are already disposed on beyond
Redemption, to one who ^os not know the value of the Jewel you have put into
his hands: I hope you would not think him greatly wronged, though it shou^d
sometimes be looked on by a Friend, who knows how to esteem it as he ought.


If looking on^t alone would serve his turn, the wrong perhaps might not be
very great.


Why, what if he should wear it now and then a day, so he gave good Security to
bring it home again at night?


Small Security I fancy might serve for that. One might venture to take his
word.


Then where's the injury to the Owner?


'Tis an injury to him, if he think it one. For if Happiness be seated in the
Mind, Unhappiness must be so t^o.


Here I close with you, Madam, and draw my conclusive Argument from your own
Position: If the injury lie in the fancy, there needs nothing but Secrecy to
prevent the Wrong.








But, Sir, 'tis my turn to be discreet now, and not suffer too long a Visit.





I give you just Hopes enough -- ( breaking from him) To get loose from you:
And that's all I can afford you at this time.

Now by all that's Great and Good, she is a charming Woman. In what Ecstasy of
Joy she has left me. For she gave me Hope; Did she not say she gave me Hope?
Hope? Ay; what Hope? -- enough to make me let her go -- Why that's enough in
Conscience. Or no matter how 'twas spoke; Hope was the word: It came from her,
and it was said to me.

Ha, Heartfree: Thou hast done me Noble Service in prattling to the young
Gentlewoman without there; come to my Arms, Thou Venerable Bawd, and let me
squeeze thee ( Embracing him eagerly) as a new pair of stays do^s a Fat
Country Girl, when she's carried to Court to stand for a Maid of Honour.


Why what the Devil's all this Rapture for?


Rapture? There's ground for Rapture, man, there's hopes, ^, hopes, my Friend.


Hope's? of what?


Why hopes that my Lady and I together, (for 'tis more than one bodies work)
should make Sir Iohn a Cuckold.


Prithee what did she say to thee?


Say? what did she not say? she said that -- says she -- she said -- Zoons I
don't know what she said: But she looked as if she said every thing I'd have
her, and so if thou'lt go to the Tavern, I'll treat thee with any thing that
Gold can buy; I'll give all my Silver amongst the Drawers, make a Bonfire
before the Door, say the Plenipo's, have signed the Peace, and the Bank of
England^s grown honest.


Huzza.


Come Boys. Charge again. -- So -- Confusion to all order. Here's Liberty of
Conscience.


Huzza.


I'll Sing you a Song I made this morning to this purpose.


'Tis wicked I hope.


Don't my Lord tell you he made it?


Well then let's have it.


WHat a Pother of Late
Have they kept in the State
About setting our Consciences free
A Bottle has more
Dispensation in Store,
Than the King and the State can decree.
When my Head's full of Wine,
I over flow with Design
And know no penal Laws that can curb me.
What ever I devise,
Seems good in my Eyes,
And Religion never dares to disturb me
No saucy remorse
Intrudes in my Course,
Nor Impertinent notions of Evil*
So there's Claret in store,
In Peace I've my VVhore,
And in Peace I jog on to the Devil.
c.

Well, how do you like it, Gentlemen?


O, Admirable.


I would not give a fig for a Song, that is not full of Sin ^nd Impudence.


Then my Muse is to your taste.

But drink away; The Night steals upon us, we shall want time to be Lewd in.
Hey Page, sally out, Sirrah, and see what's doing in the Camp, we'll beat up
their Quarters presently.


I'll bring your Lordship an Exact account.


Now let the spirit of Clary go round.
Fill me a Brimmer. Here's to our forlorn-hope.
Courage Knight; Victory attends you.

And Lawrells shall Crown me. Drink away and be damned


Again Boys; to'ther Glass, and damn Morality.


And let the Constable be married.


Huzza.


How are the Streets inhabited, Sirrah?


My Lord it's Sunday night, they are full of Drunken Citizens.


Along then Boys, we shall have a feast.


Along Noble Knight.


Ay -- along Bully; and he that says Sir Iohn Brute, is ^ot as Drunk and as
Religious, as the Drunkenest Citizen of 'em all -- is a liar, and the Son of a
Whore.


Why that was bravely spoke, and like a free-born Englishman.


What's that to you, Sir, whether I am an English man or a French man?


Zoons, you are not angry, Sir?


Zoons I am angry, Sir, -- for if I am a Free-born English man, what have you
to do, even to talk of my Privileges.


Why prithee Knight don't quarrel here, leave private Animosities to be decided
by day light, let the night be employed against the public Enemy.


My Lord I respect you, because you are a man of Quality: But I'll make that
fellow know I am within a hairs breadth as absolute by my Priveleges, as the
King of France is by his prerogative. He by his prerogative takes money where
it is not his due; I, by my Privelege refuse paying it, where I owe it. Liberty
and Property and Old England, Huzza.


Huzza.


Sure it's late, Bellinda? I begin to be sleepy.


Yes 'tis near twelve. Will you go to Bed?


To bed my Dear? And by that ^me I'm fallen into a sweet sleep, (or perhaps a
sweet Dream which is better and better) Sir Iohn will come home, roaring drunk,
and be over-joy'd he finds me in a Condition to be disturbed.


(...) in need ^t ^ear him, he's in for all night (...) The Servant's in he's
gone to drink with my Lord Rake?


Nay tis not very likely indeed, such suitable ^ompany should part presently.
What Hogs Men turn, Bellinda, when they grow (...) or Women.


And what Owls they are whilst they are fond of 'em.


But that we may forgive well enough, because they are so upon our Accounts.


We ought to do s^ indeed: But 'tis a hard matter.

For when a man is really in love he looks so u^sufferably silly that tho a
Woman liked him well enough before, she has then ^o, to endure the sight of
him. And this I take to be the reason, why Lovers are so generally ill used.


Well ^own now, I'm well enough pleased to see a man look like an Ass for me.


Ay, I'm pleased he should look like an Ass too -- That is I'm pleased with my
self for making him look so.


Nay tr^y* I think it (...) find some other way to express his Passion, 'twould
be more to his advantage.


Yes; For then a Woman might like his Passion and him too.


Yet, Bellinda, after all, A Woman's life* would be but a dull business, if
'twere not for Men; And Men that can look like Asses to^. We should never blame
Fate, for the shortness of our days; our time would hang wretchedly upon our
hands.


Why truly they do help us off with a good share on it. For were there no Men in
the World, Of my Conscience I should be no longer a dressing than I'm a saying
my prayers; Nay tho it were Sunday: For you know that one may go to Church
without Stays on.


But don't you think Emulation might do something; for every Woman you see
desires to be finer than her Neighbour.


That's only that the men may like her better than her Neighbour. No^ if there
were no men, adieu fine Petticoats, we should be weary of wearing 'em.


And adieu Plays, we should be weary of seeing 'em.


Adieu Hide-Park, the Dust would Choke us.


Adieu St. Iames's, Walking would Tire us.


Adieu London, the smoke wou^d stifle us.


And adieu going to Church, for Religion would never prevail with us.


Ha ha ha ha ha


Our Confession is so very hearty, sure we merit Abs^lution.


Not unless we go through with it, and confess all. So prithee, for the Ease of
our Consciences, let's hide nothing.


Agreed.


Why then I confess, That I love to sit in the Fore-front of a Box. For if one
sits behind, there's two Acts gone perhaps, before one's found out. And when I
am there, if I perceive the Men whispering and looking upon me, you must know I
cannot for my Life forbear thinking they talk to my Advantage. And that sets a
Thousand little tickling Vanities on Foot. --


Just my Case for all the World; but go on.


I watch with Impatience for the next Jest in the Play, that I may laugh and
show my white Teeth. If the Poet has been dull, and the Jest be long a coming,
I pretend to whisper one to my Friend, and from thence fall into a little short
Discourse, in which I take Occasion to show my Face in all Humours, Brisk,
Pleased, Serious, Melancholy, Languishing; -- Not that what we say to one
another causes any of these Alterations. But --


Don't trouble your self to explain: For if I'm not mistaken, you and I have
had some of these necessary Dialogues before now, with the same Intention.


Why I'll swear Bellinda, some People do give strange agreeable Airs to their
Faces in speaking.

Tell me true! -- Did you never practice in the Glass?


Why, did you?


Yes Faith, many a time.


And I too, I own it. Both how to speak my self, and how to look when others
speak; But my Glass and I could never yet agree what Face I should make, when
they come blurt out, with a nasty thing in a Play: For all the Men presently
look upon the Women, that's certain; so laugh we must not, though our Stays
burst for it, Because that's telling Truth, and owning we understand the Jest.
And to look serious is so dull, when the whole House is a laughing.


Besides, that looking serious, does really betray our Knowledge in the Matter,
as much as laughing with the Company would do. For if we did not understand the
thing, we should naturally do like other People.


For my part I always take that Occasion to blow my Nose.


You must blow your Nose half off then at some Plays.


Why don't some Reformer or other, beat the Poet for it?


Because he is not so sure of our private Approbation as of our public Thanks.
Well, sure there is not upon Earth, so impertinent a thing, as Women's Modesty.


Yes; Men's Fantasque, that obliges us to it.

If we quit our Modesty, they say we lose our Charms, and yet they know that
very Modesty is Affectation, and rail at our Hypocrisy.


Thus one would think, 'twere a hard Matter to please 'em, Niece. Yet our kind
Mother Nature has given us something, that makes amends for all. Let our
Weakness be what it will, Mankind will still be weaker, and whilst there is a
World, 'tis Woman that will govern it.

But prithee one word of poor Constant before we go to Bed; if it be but to
furnish Matter for Dreams; I dare swear he's talking of me now, or thinking of
me at least, though it be in the middle of his Prayers.


So he ought I think; for you were pleased to make him a good round Advance to
day, Madam.


Why, I have even plagued him enough to satisfy any reasonable Woman: He has
besieged me these two Years to no Purpose.


And if he besieged you two Years more, he'd be well enough paid, so he had the
plundering of you at last.


That may be; but I'm afraid the Town won't be able to hold out much longer;
for to confess the Truth to you, Bellinda, the Garrison begins to grow
mutinous.


Then the sooner you capitulate, the better.


Yet methinks I would fain stay a little longer, to see you fixed too, that we
might start together, and see who could love longest. What think you if
Heartfree should have a Month's Mind to you?


Why Faith I could almost be in Love with him, for despising that foolish
affected Lady Fancyfull, but I'm afraid he's too cold ever to warm himself by
my Fire.


Then he deserves to be froze to Death. Would I were a Man for your sake, my
dear Rogue.


You'd wish your self a Woman again for your own, or the Men are mistaken.

But if I could make a Conquest of this Son of Bacchus, and rival his Bottle:
What should I do with him, he has no Fortune; I can't marry him; and sure you
would not have me commit Fornication.


Why, if you did, Child, it would be but a good friendly part; if 'twere only to
keep me in Countenance whilst I commit -- You know what.


Well, if I can't resolve to serve you that way, I may perhaps some other, as
much to your Satisfaction. But pray how shall we contrive to see these Blades
again quickly?


We must even have Recourse to the old way; make 'em an Appointment 'twixt jest
and earnest, 'twill look like a Frolic, and that you know's a very good thing
to save a Woman's Blushes.


You advise well; but where shall it be?


In Spring-Garden. But they shall not know their Women, till their Women pull off
their Masques; for a Surprise is the most agreeable thing in the World: And I
find my self in a very good Humour, ready to do 'em any good turn I can think
on.


Then pray write 'em the necessary Billet, without farther Delay.


Let's go into your Chamber then, and whilst you say your Prayers, I'll do it,
Child.


IS the Dog dead?


No, damn him, I heard him wheeze.


How the Witch his Wife howled!


Ay, she'll alarm the Watch presently.


Appear, Knight, then; come, you have a good Cause to fight for, there's a Man
murdered.


Is there? Then let his Ghost be satisfied: For I'll sacrifice a Constable to
it presently; and burn his Body upon his wooden Chair.


How now? What have we got here? A Thief?


No an't please you; I'm no Thief.


That we'll see presently: Here, let the General examine him.


Ay, Ay; Let me examine him; and I'll lay a Hundred Pound I find him guilty, in
spite of his Teeth -- for he looks -- like a -- sneaking Rascal.

Come Sirrah, without Equivocation, or mental Reservation, tell me of what
Opinion you are, and what Calling; for by them -- I shall guess at your Morals.


An't please you, I'm a Dissenting Journeyman Taylor.


Then Sir, you love Lying by your Religion, and Theft by your Trade. And so,
that your Punishment may be suitable to your Crimes, -- I'll have you firs^
gagged, -- and then hanged.


Pray good worthy Gentlemen, don't abuse me; indeed I'm an honest Man, and a
good Workman, though I say it, that should not say it.


No Words, Sirrah, but attend your Fate.


Let me see what's in that Bundle.


An't please you, it's the Doctor of the Parish's Gown.


The Doctor's Gown! -- Hark you, Knight, you won't stick at abusing the
Clergy, will you?


No, I'm drunk, and I'll abuse any thing -- but my Wife* and her I name -- with
Reverence.


Then you shall wear this Gown, whilst you charge the Watch. That though the
Blows fall upon you, the Scandal may light upon the Church.


A generous Design -- by all the Gods -- give it me.


O dear Gentlemen, I shall be quite undone, if you take the Gown.


Retire, Sirrah; and since you carry off your Skin -- go home, and be happy.





So, how do ye like my Shapes now?


This Will do to a Miracle; he looks like a Bishop going to the Holy War. But
to your Arms, Gentlemen, the Enemy appears.


Stand! Who goes there? Come before the Constable.


The Constable's a Rascal -- and you are the Son of a Whore.


A good civil Answer for a Parson, truly.


Methinks Sir, a Man of your Coat, might set a better Example.


Sirrah, I'll make you know -- there are Men of my Coat can set as bad Examples
-- as you can do, you Dog you.


So, we have secured the Parson however.


Blood and Blood -- and Blood.


Lord have Mercy upon us: How the wicked Wretch Raves of Blood. I'll warrant he
has been murdering some body to, Night.


Sirrah, There's nothing got by Murder but a Halter: My Talent lies towards
Drunkenness and Simony.


Why that now was spoke like a Man of Parts, Neighbours: It's pity he should be
so Disguised.


You Lye, -- I am not Disguised; for I am Drunk baref^c'd.


Look you there again, -- This is a mad Parson, Mr. Constable; I'll lay a Pot
of Ale upon's Head, he's a good Preacher.


Come Sir, out of Respect to your Calling, I shall not put you into the
Round-house; but we must Secure you in our Drawing-Room till Morning, that you
may do no Mischief. So, Come along.


You may put me where you will, Sirrah, now you have overcome me; -- But if I
can't do Mischief, I'll think of Mischief -- in spite of your Teeth, you Dog
you.


What the Plague Ail's me? -- Love? No, I thank you for that; my heart's Rock
still. --

Yet 'tis Bellinda that disturbs me; that's positive.

-- Well, what of all that? Must I love her for being troublesome? at that
rate, I might love all the Women I meet, I gad.

But hold? -- though I don't love her for disturbing me, yet she may disturb me,
because I love her -- Ay, that may be, faith.

I have dream't of her, that's certain --

Well, so I have of my Mother; therefore what's that to the purpose?

Ay, but Bellinda runs in my Mind waking --

And so does many a damned thing, that I don't care a Farthing for --

Methinks though, I would fain be talking to her, and yet I have no Business. --

Well, am I the first Man, that has had a Mind to do an Impertinent thing?


How now, Heartfree? What makes you up and Dressed so soon? I thought none but
Lovers quarrelled with their Beds; I expected to have found you snoring, as I
used to do.


Why, faith Friend, 'tis the Care I have of your Affairs, that makes me so
thoughtful; I have been studying all Night, how to bring your Matter about with
Bellinda.


With Bellinda?


With my Lady, I mean: And faith I have mighty hopes on it. Sure you must be
very well satisfied with her Behaviour to you Yesterday?


So well; that nothing but a Lover's Fears, can make me doubt of Success. But
what can this sudden Change proceed from?


Why, you saw her Husband beat her, did you not?


That's true: A Husband is scarce to be born upon any terms, much less when he
fights with his Wife. Methinks she should even have Cuckolded him upon the very
spot, to show that after the Battle, she was Master of the Field.


A Council of War of Women, would infallibly have advised her to it. But, I
confess, so agreeable a Woman as Bellinda, deserves a better usage.


Bellinda again?


My Lady, I mean: What a-pox makes me blunder so to day?


Prithee look upon me seriously, Heartfree -- Now answer me directly! Is it my
Lady, or Bellinda, employs your careful Thoughts thus?


My Lady, or Bellinda?


In Love, by this Light in Love.


In Love?


Nay, never deny it: for thou'lt do it so awkerdly, 'twill but make the Jest
sit heavier about thee. My Dear Friend, I give thee much Joy*


Why prithee, you won't persuade me to it, will you?


That she's Mistress of your Tongue, that's plain, and I know you are so honest
a Fellow, your Tongue and Heart always go together.

But how? but how the Devil? Pha, ha, ha, ha --


Hey day: Why sure you don't believe it in earnest?


Yes, I do; because I see you deny it in jest.


Nay, but look you Ned, -- a -- deny in jest -- a -- gadzooks, you know I say
-- a -- when a Man denies a thing in jest -- a --


Pha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Nay, then we shall have it: What, because a Man stumbles at a word: Did you
never make a Blunder?


Yes, for I am in Love, I own it.


Then; so am I. --
Now laugh till thy Soul's glutted with Mirth,
But, dear Constant, don't tell the Town on it.

Nay, then 'twere almost pity to laugh at thee, after so honest a Confession.

But tell us a little, Jack. By what new-invented Arms, has this mighty Stroke
been given?


Even by that unaccountable Weapon, called, Ie no scai quoy; For every thing
that can come within the Virge of Beauty, I have seen it with Indifference.


So in few words then; the, Ie no scai quoy, has been too hard for the Quilted
Petticoat.


I gad, I think the Ie no scai quoy, is in the Quilted Petticoat; at least,
'tis certain, I never think on it without -- a -- a Ie no scai quoy in every
Part about me.


Well, but have all your Remedies lost their Virtue, have you turned her
In-side out yet?


I dare not so much as think on it.


But don't the two Years Fatigue, I have had, discourage you?


Yes: I dread what I foresee; yet cannot quit the Enterprise. Like some
Soldiers; whose Courage dwells more in their Honour, than their Nature; On they
go, though the Body trembles, at what the Soul makes it Undertake.


Nay, if you expect your Mistress will use you, as your Profanations against
her Sex deserve, you tremble Justly.

But how do you intend to proceed, Friend?


Thou know I'm but a Novice; be friendly and advise me.


Why look you then; I'd have you -- Serenade and a -- write a Song -- Go to
Church; Look like a Fool -- Be very Officious: Ogle, Write and Lead out; And
who knows, but in a Year or two's time, you may be -- called a troublesome
Puppy, and sent about your Business.


That's hard.


Yet thus it oft falls out with Lovers, Sir.


Pox on me for making one of the Number.


Have a Care: Say no Saucy things: 'twill but augment your Crime, and if your
Mistress hears on it, increase your Punishment.


Prithee say something then to encourage me, you know I helped you in your
Distress.


Why then to encourage you to Perseverance, that you may be thoroughly ill used
for your Offences, I'll put you in Mind, That even the coyest Ladies of 'em
all, are made up of Desires, as well as we; and though they do hold out a long
time, they will Capitulate at last. For that thundering Engenier, Nature, does
make such havoc in the Town, they must Surrender at long Run, or Perish in
their own Flames.

Sir, There's a Porter without with a Letter; he desires to give it into your
own Hands.


Call him in.


What Io; Is it thee?


An't please you Sir, I was Ordered to Deliver this into your own Hands, by two
well-shap'd Ladies, at the New-Exchange. I was at your Honour's Lodgings, and
your Servants sent me hither.


'Tis well, Are you to carry any Answer?


No, my noble Master. They gave me my Orders, and whip, they were gone, like a
Maiden-head at Fifteen.


Very well; there.


God bless your Honour.


Now let's see, what honest trusty Io has brought us.

If you and your Play-fellow, can spare time from your Business and Devotions,
don't fail to be at Spring-Garden about Eight in the Evening. You'll find
nothing there but Women, so you need bring no other Arms than what you usually
carry about you.




So, Play-fellow: Here's something to stay your Stomach, till your Mistresses
Dish is ready for you.


Some of our old Battered Acquaintance. I wont go, not I.


Nay, that you can't avoid: There's honour in the Case, 'tis a Challenge, and I
want a Second.


I doubt I shall be but a very useless one to you; for I'm so disheartened by
this Wound Bellinda has given me; I don't think I shall have Courage enough to
draw my Sword.


O, if that be all, come along; I'll warrant you find Sword enough for such
Enemies as we have to deal withal.


Come along, Sir, I thought to have let you slip this Morning, because you were
a Minister; but you are as Drunk and as Abusive as ever. We'll see what the
Justice of the Peace will say to you.


And you shall see what I'll say to the Justice of the Peace, Sirrah.


Pray Acquaint his Worship, we have got an unruly Parson here: We are unwilling
to expose him, but don't know what to do with him.


I'll Acquaint my Master.


You -- Constable -- What damned Justice is this?


One that will take Care of you, I warrant you.


Well, Mr. Constable; What's the Disorder here?


An't Please your Worship --


Let me speak and be damned: I'm a Divine, and can unfold Mysteries better than
you can do.


Sadness, Sadness, a Minister so Over-taken. Pray Sir, Give the Constable leave
to speak, and I'll hear you very patiently; I assure you Sir, I will.


Sir, -- You are a very Civil Magistrate. Your most humble Servant.


An't Please your Worship then; he has attempted to beat the Watch to Night,
and Swore --


You Lye.


Hold, pray Sir, a little.


Sir, your very humble Servant.


Indeed Sir, he came at us without any Provocation, called us Whores and
Rogues, and laid us on with a great Quarter-Staff. He was in my Lord Rake's
Company. They have been playing the Devil to Night.


Hem -- Hem -- Pray Sir -- May you be Chaplain to my Lord?


Sir -- I presume -- I may if I will.


My meaning Sir, is -- Are you so?


Sir, -- You mean very well.


He hem -- hem -- Under favour, Sir, Pray Answer me directly.


Under favour, Sir -- Do you use to Answer directly when you are Drunk?


Good lack, good lack: Here's nothing to be got from him. Pray Sir, may I crave
your Name?


Sir, -- My Name's --


Hyccop? Doctor Hyccop. I have known a great many Country Parsons of that Name,
especially down in the Fenns. Pray where do you live, Sir?


Here -- and there, Sir.


Why, what a strange Man is this? Where do you Preach, Sir? Have you any Cure?


Sir -- I have -- a very good Cure -- for a Clap, at your Service.


Lord have mercy upon us.





Mr. Constable, I Vow and Protest, I don't know what to do with him.


Truly, he has been but a troublesome Guest to us all Night.


I think, I had even best let him go about his Business, for I'm unwilling to
expose him.


Even what your Worship thinks fit.


Sir, -- not to interrupt Mr. Constable, I have a small Favour to ask.


Sir, I open both my Ears to you.


Sir, your very humble Servant. I have a little Urgent Business calls upon me;
And therefore I desire the Favour of you, to bring Matters to a Conclusion.


Sir, If I were sure that Business, were not to Commit more Disorders; I would
release you.


None, -- By my Priesthood.


Then, Mr. Constable, you may Discharge him.


Sir, your very humble Servant. If you please to Accept of a Bottle --


I thank you kindly, Sir; but I never drink in a Morning. Good-buy to ye, Sir,
good-buy to ye.


Good-buy t'ye, good Sir.

So -- now, Mr. Constable, Shall you and I go pick up a Whore together.


No, thank you, Sir; My Wife's enough to satisfy any reasonable Man.





Not I, truly.


Then I'll go by my self; and you and your Wife may be Damned.

Why God-a-marcy Parson.


So: I think we are about the time appointed; Let us walk up this w^y.


Good: Thus far I have Dogged 'em without being discovered. 'Tis infallibly
some Intrigue that brings them to Spring-Garden. How my poor Heart is torn and
wracked with Fear and Jealousy. Yet let it be any thing, but that Flirt
Bellinda, and I'll try to hear it. But if it prove her, All that's Woman in me
shall be employed to destroy her.


I see no Females yet, that have any thing to say to us. I'm afraid we are
bantered.


I wish we were; for I'm in no Humour to make either them or my self merry.


Nay, I'm sure you'll make them merry enough; if I tell 'em why you are dull.
But prithee why so heavy and sad, before you begin to be ill used?


For the same Reason, perhaps, that you are so brisk and well pleased; because
both Pains and Pleasures are generally more considerable in Prospect, than when
they come to pass.


How now, who are these? Not our Game I hope.


If they are, we are even well enough served, to come hunting here, when we had
so much better Game in Chase elsewhere.


So, those are their Ladies without doubt. But I'm afraid that Doily Stuff is
not worn for want of better Clothes. They are the very Shape and Size of
Bellinda and her Aunt.


So day be inteed, Matam.


We'll slip into this close Arbor, where we may hear all they say.


What, are you afraid of us, Gentlemen?


Why truly I think we may, if Appearance don't lye.


Do you always find Women what they appear to be, Sir?


No Forsooth; but I seldom find 'em better than they appear to be.


Then the Outside's best, you think?


'Tis the honestest.


Have a care, Heartfree; you are relapsing again.


Why, does the Gentleman use to rail at Women?


He has done formerly.


I suppose he had very good Cause for it:
They did not use you so well, as you thought you deserved, Sir.

They made themselves merry at your Expense, Sir.


Laughed when you Sighed


Slept while you were waking.


Had your Porter beat.


And threw your Billet doux in the Fire.


Hey day, I shall do more than rail presently.


Why you won't beat us, will you?


I don't know but I may.


What the Devil's coming here? Sir Iohn in a Gown? -- And drunk I'faith.


What a Pox -- here's Constant, Heartfree, -- and two Whores I gad: -- O you
covetous Rogues; what, have you never a spare Punk for you Friend? -- But I'll
share with you.


Why, what the Plague have you been doing, Knight.


Why, I have been beating the Watch, and scandalizing the Clergy.


A very good Account, truly.


And what do you think I'll do next?


Nay, that no Man can guess.


Why, if you'll let me sup with you, I'll treat both your Strumpets.





No, we can't sup together, because we have some Affairs elsewhere. But if
you'll accept of these two Ladies, we'll be so complaisant to you, to resign
our Right in 'em.





Let me see, their Clothes are such damned Clothes, they won't pawn for the
Reckoning.


Sir Iohn, your Servant. Rapture attend you.


Adieu Ladies, make much of the Gentleman.


Why sure, you won't leave us in the Hands of a drunken Fellow to abuse us.


Who do you call a drunken Fellow, you Slut you? I'm a Man of Quality; the King
has made me a Knight.


Ay, ay, you are in good Hands, Adieu, adieu.


The Devil's Hands: Let me go, or I'll -- For Heaven's sake protect us.


I'll Devil you, you Jade you. I'll demolish your ugly Face.


Hold a little, Knight, she swoons.


I'll swoon her.


Hey, Heartfree.


O Heavens! My dear Creature, stand there a little.


Pull him off, Jack.


Hold, mighty Man; look you, Sir, we did but jest with you. These are Ladies of
our Acquaintance, that we had a mind to frighten a little, but now you must
leave us.


Oons, I won't leave you, not I.


Nay, but you must though; and therefore make no words on it.


Then you are a couple of damned uncivil Fellows. And I hope your Punks will
give you sauce to your Mutton.


Oh, I shall never come to my self again, I'm so frightened.


'Twas a narrow escape, indeed.


Women must have Frolics, you see, whatever they cost 'em.


This might have proved a dear one though.


You are the more obliged to us, for the Risque we run upon your Accounts.


And I hope you'll acknowledge something due to our Knight Errantry, Ladies.
This is the second time we have delivered you.


'Tis true; and since we see Fate has designed you for our Guardians, 'twill
make us the more willing to trust our selves in your Hands. But you must not
have the worse Opinion of us for our Innocent Frolic.


Ladies, you may command our Opinions in every thing that is to your Advantage.


Then, Sir, I command you to be of Opinion, That Women are sometimes better
than they appear to be.


Madam, you have made a Convert of me in every thing. I'm grown a Fool: I could
be fond of a Woman.


I thank you, Sir, in the Name of the whole Sex.


Which Sex nothing but your self, could ever have atoned for.


Now has my Vanity a devilish Itch, to know in what my Merit consists.


In your Humility, Madam, that keeps you ignorant it consists at all.


One other Compliment with that serious Face, and I hate you for ever after.


Some Women love to be abused: Is that it you would be at?


No, not that neither: But I'd have Men talk plainly what's fit for Women to
hear; without putting 'em either to a real, or an affected Blush.


Why then, in as plain Terms as I can find to express my self: I could love you
even to -- Matrimony it self a-most I-gad.


Just as Sir Iohn did her Ladyship there.

What think you? Don't you believe one Month's time might bring you down to the
same Indifference, only clad in a little better Manners, perhaps. Well, you Men
are unaccountable things, mad till you have your Mistresses; and then stark mad
till you are rid of 'em again. Tell me, honestly, is not your Patience put to a
much severer Trial after Possession, than before?


With a great many, I must confess, it is, to our eternal Scandal; but I --
dear Creature, do but try me.


That's the surest way indeed, to know, but not the safest.




Really I find my self something idle, Bellinda, besides, I dote upon this
little odd private Corner. But don't let my lazy Fancy confine you.





Well, we'll take one turn, and come to you again.




Madam, I'm at your Service.





Enough.


Sure you think me scandalously free, Mr. Constant. I'm afraid I shall lose
your good Opinion of me.


My good Opinion, Madam, is like your Cruelty, never to be removed.


But if I should remove my Cruelty, then there's an end of your good Opinion.


There is not so strict an Alliance between 'em neither. 'Tis certain I should
love you then better (if that be possible) than I do now; and where I love, I
always esteem.


Indeed, I doubt you much:
Why suppose you had a Wife, and she should entertain a Gallant.

If I gave her just Cause, how could I justly condemn her?


Ah; but you'd differ widely about just Causes.


But blows can bear no Dispute.


Nor Ill Manners much, truly.


Then no Woman upon Earth, has so just a Cause as you have.


O, but a faithful Wife, is a beautiful Character.


To a deserving Husband, I confess it is.


But can his Faults Release my Duty?


In Equity without doubt. And where Laws dispense with Equity; Equity should
dispense with Laws.


Pray let's leave this Dispute; for you Men have as much Witchcraft in your
Arguments, as Women have in their Eyes.


But whilst you Attack me with your Charms, 'tis but reasonable I Assault you
with mine.


The Case is not the same. What Mischief we do, we can't help, and therefore
are to be forgiven.


Beauty soon obtains Pardon, for the Pain that it gives, when it applies the
Balm of Compassion to the Wound; But a fine Face, and a hard Heart, is almost
as bad as an ugly Face and a soft one: both very troublesome to many a Poor
Gentleman.


Yes, and to many a Poor Gentlewoman too, I can assure you. But pray which of
'em is it, that most afflicts you?


Your Glass and Conscience will inform you, Madam. But for Heaven's sake (for
now I must be serious) if Pity or if Gratitude can move you,


Your Sufferings eased, your Flame would soon abate; And that I would preserve,
not quench it, Sir.


Would you preserve it, nourish it with favours; for that's the Food, it
naturally requires.


Yet on that Natural Food, it would Surfeit soon, should I resolve to grant all
that you would ask.


And in refusing all, you starve it. Forgive me therefore, since my Hunger
rages, if I at last grow Wild, and in my frenzy force at least, This from you.
Or if you'd have my Flame, soar higher still, then grant me this, and this, and
this, and Thousands more;





Ay, go, ay: Where shall we go, my Charming Angel, -- into this private Arbour.
-- Nay, let's lose no time -- Moments are precious.


And Lovers wild. Pray let us stop here; at least for this time.


'Tis impossible: He that has Power over you, can have none over himself.


Ah; I'm lost.


Fe, fe, fe, fe, fe.


Fe, fe, fe, fe, fe.


Death and Furies, who are these?


Oh heavens, I'm out of my Wits; if they knew me, I'm Ruined.


Don't be frightened; Ten thousand to One they are Strangers to you.


Whatever they are, I won't stay here a moment longer.


Whither will you go?


Home, as if the Devil were in me. Lord where's this Bellinda now?

O! it's well you are come: I'm so frightened my Hair stands an end.

Let's be gone for Heaven's sake.


Lord, What's the Matter?


The Devil's the Matter, we are discovered. Here's a Couple of Women have done
the most impertinent thing. Away, Away, Away, Away, Away.


Well Mademoiselle, 'tis a Prodigious thing, how Women can suffer filthy
Fellows, to grow so familiar with 'em.


Ah Matam, il n'y a rien desi Naturel.


Fe, fe, fe. But oh my Heart; O Jealousy, O Torture, I'm upon the rack. What
shall I do, my Lover's lost, I never shall see him. Mine.



To Woman how indulgent Nature's kind.
No Blast of Fortune long disturbs her Mind.
Compliance to her Fate supports her still,
If Love won't make her Happy -- Mischief will.

WEll, Mademoiselle; Did you Dog the filthy things?


O que Ouy Matam.


And where are they?


Au Logis.


What? Men and All?


Tous ensemble.


O Confidence! What, carry their Fellows to their own House?


C'est que le Mari n'y est pas.


No, so I believe, truly. But he shall be there, and quickly too, if I can find
him out.

Well, 'tis a Prodigious thing, to see when Men and Women get together, how
they fortify one another in their Impudence. But if that Drunken Fool, her
Husband, be to be found in ever a Tavern in Town, I'll send him amongst 'em.
I'll spoil their Sport.


En Verite Matam, ce seroit damage.


'Tis in Vain to Oppose it, Mademoiselle; therefore never go about it. For I am
the steadiest Creature in the World -- when I have determined to do Mischief.
So, Come along.


But are you sure you don't Mistake, Lovewell?


Madam, I saw 'em all go into the Tavern together, and my Master was so drunk
he could scarce stand.


Then, Gentlemen, I believe we may Venture to let you Stay and Play at Cards
with us an Hour or two; for they'll scarce part till Morning.


I think 'tis pity they should ever part.


The Company that's here, Madam.


Then, Sir, the Company that's here, must remember to part it self, in time.


Madam, we don't intend to forfeit your future Favours, by an indiscreet Usage
of this. The moment you give us the Signal, we shall not fail to make our
Retreat.


Upon those Conditions then, Let us sit down to Cards.


Into the Closet, Gentlemen, for Heaven's ^ake; I'll wheedle him to Bed, if
possible.


Ah -- ah -- he's all over Blood.


What the Plague, does the Woman -- Squall for? Did you never see a Man in
Pickle before?


Lord, where have you been?


I have been at -- Cuffs.


I fear that is not all. I hope you are not wounded.


Sound as a Roche, Wife.


I'm mighty glad to hear it.


You know -- I think you Lye.


I know you do me wrong to think so, then. For Heaven's my Witness, I had
rather see my own Blood trickle down, than yours.


Then will I be Crucified.


'Tis a hard Fate, I should not be believed.


'Tis a damned Atheistical Age, Wife.


I am sure I have given you a Thousand tender Proofs, how great my Care is of
you.

Nay, spite of all your Cruel Thoughts, I'll still persist, and at this moment,
if I can, persuade you to lie down, and Sleep a little.


Why, -- do you think I am drunk -- you Slut, you?


Heaven forbid, I should: But I'm afraid you are Feverish. Pray let me feel
your Pulse.


Stand off and be damned.


Why, I see your Distemper in your very Eyes. You are all on fire. Pray go to
Bed; Let me entreat you.


-- Come kiss me, then.





I see it go's damnably against your Stomach --
And therefore -- Kiss me again.

Nay, now you fool me.


Do it, I say.



Well; There; Now will you go?

Now Wife, you shall see my Gratitude. You give me two Kisses, I'll give you --
two Hundred.


O Lord: Pray, Sir Iohn, be quiet.
Heavens, what a Pickle am I in.




So; Now, you being as dirty and as nasty as my self, We may go Pig together.
But first, I must have a Cup of your Cold Tea, Wife.


O, I'm ruined.

^ there, my Dear.

(...) I'll warrant you, I'll find some, my Dear.

^ Open the Door, the Lock's spoiled. I have been ^ the Key this half hour to
no purpose. I'll send for ^ Morrow.


There's never a Smith in Europe can Open a Door with more Expedition than I
can do. -- As for Example, -- Pou.

-- How now? --

What the Devil have we got here? --

Constant -- Heartfree -- And two VVhores again, I gad. -- -- This is the worst
Cold Tea -- that ever I met with in my Life. --





Gentlemen -- I am your very humble Servant -- I give you many Thanks -- I see
you take Care of my Family -- I shall do all I can to return the Obligation.


Sir, how oddly soever this Business may appear to you, you would have no Cause
to be uneasy, if you knew the Truth of all things; your Lady is the most
virtuous Woman in the World, and nothing has past, but an Innocent Frolic.


Nothing else, upon my Honour, Sir.


You are both very Civil Gentlemen -- And my Wife, there, is a very Civil
Gentlewoman; therefore I don't doubt but many Civil things have past between
you. Your very humble Servant.





I'll Obey you, Madam.

Sir, when you are Cool, you'll understand Reason better. So then I shall take
the Pains to Inform you.

If not -- I wear a Sword, Sir, and so good-b'uy to you.

Come along, Heartfree.


-- Wear a Sword, Sir: -- And what of all that, Sir? -- He comes to my House;
Eats my Meat; Lies with my Wife; Dishonours my Family; Gets a Bastard to
Inherit my Estate. -- And when I ask a Civil Account of all this -- Sir, says,
he, I wear a Sword. -- Wear a Sword, Sir? Yes Sir, says he; I wear a Sword --
It may be a good Answer at Cross-Purposes; But 'tis a Damned One to a Man in my
Whimsical Circumstance -- Sir, says he, I wear a Sword.





What? you are Modest and cant? --

Why then I'll tell you, you Slut you.

You wear -- an Impudent Lewd Face. --

A Damned Designing Heart -- And a Tail -- and a Tail full of --


So; Thanks to Kind Heaven, he's fast for some Hours.


'Tis well he is so, that we may have time to lay our Story handsomely; for we
must Lie like the Devil to bring our selves off.


What shall we say, Bellinda?


Heartfree and I. We'll say he has Courted me some time, but for Reasons
unknown to us, has ever been very earnest the thing might be kept from Sir
Iohn. That therefore hearing him upon the Stairs, he run into the Closet, though
against our Will, and Constant with him, to prevent Jealousy. And to give this
a good Impudent face of Truth (that I may deliver you from the Trouble you are
in:) I'll even (if he pleases) Marry him.


I'm beholding to you, Cousin; but that would be carrying the Jest a little too
far for your Own sake: You know he's a younger Brother, and has Nothing.


'Tis true; But I like him, and have Fortune enough to keep above Extremity: I
can't say, I would live with him in a Cell upon Love and Bread and Butter. But
I had rather have the Man I love, and a Middle State of Life, Than that
Gentleman in the Chair there, and twice your Ladiship's Splendour.


In truth, Niece, you are in the Right on it: for I am very Uneasy with my
Ambition. But perhaps, had I married as you'll do, I might have been as Ill
used.


Some Risque, I do confess, there always is; But if a Man has the least spark,
either of Honour or good Nature, he can never use a Woman Ill, that loves him
and makes his Fortune both. Yet I must own to you, some little Struggling I
still have, with this teasing Ambition of ours. For Pride, you know, is as
Natural to a Woman, as 'tis to a Saint. I can't help being fond of this Rogue;
and yet it go's to my Heart to think I must never Whisk to Hide-Park, with
above a Pair of Horses; Have no Coronet upon my Coach, nor a Page to carry up
my Train. But above all -- that business of Place -- Well; Taking Place, is a
Noble Prerogative.


Especially after a Quarrel.


Or of a Rival. But pray say no more on it, for fear I change my Mind. For of my
Conscience, were it not for your Affair in the balance, I should go near to
pick up some Odious Man of Quality yet, and only take poor Heartfree for a
Gallant.


Then him you must have, however things go?


Yes.


Why we may pretend what we will; but 'tis a hard matter to Live without the
Man we Love.


Especially when we are Married to the Man we hate. Pray tell me? Do the Men of
the Town ever believe us Virtuous, when they see us do so?


O, no: Nor indeed hardly, let us do what we will. They most of 'em think,
there is no such thing as Virtue considered in the strictest notions of it: And
therefore when you hear 'em say, Such a one is a Woman of Reputation, They only
mean she's a Woman of Discretion. For they consider, we have no more Religion
than they have, nor so much Morality; and between you and I, Bellinda, I'm
afraid the want of Inclination seldom protects any of us.


But what think you of the fear of being found out.


I think that never kept any Woman virtuous long. We are not such Cowards
neither. No: Let us once pass Fifteen, and we have too good an Opinion of our
own Cunning, to believe the World can penetrate, into what we would keep a
Secret. And so in short, We cannot reasonably blame the Men for judging of us
by themselves.


But sure we are not so Wicked as they are, after all.


We are as Wicked, Child, but our Vice lies another way: Men have more Courage
than we, so they commit more Bold, Impudent Sins. They Quarrel, Fight, Swear,
Drink, Blaspheme, and the like. Whereas we, being Cowards, only Backbite, tell
Lies, Cheat at Cards and so forth. But 'tis late. Let's end our Discourse for
to Night, and out of an excess of Charity, take a small Care, of that nasty
drunken thing there -- Do but look at him, Bellinda.


Ah -- 'tis a Savoury Dish.


As savoury as 'tis, I'm cloyed with it. Prithee Call the Butler to take away.


Call the Butler? -- Call the Scavenger.

Razor! Let him take away his Master, Scower him clean with a little Soap and
Sand, and so put him to Bed.


Come Bellinda, I'll even lie with you to Night; and in the Morning we'll send
for our Gentlemen to set this Matter even:


Withal my Heart.


Good Night, my Dear.


Ha, ha, ha.

My Lady there's a Wag -- My Master there's a Cuckold. Marriage is a slippery
thing -- Women have depraved Appetites: -- My Lady's a Wag, I have heard all: I
have seen all: I understand all, and I'll tell all; for my little French-woman
loves News dearly. This Story'll gain her Heart or nothing will.




But, why did not you tell me before, Mademoiselle, that Razor and you were
fond?


De Modesty hinder me, Matam.


Why truly Modesty does often hinder us from doing things we have an
Extravagant Mind to. But does he love you well enough yet, to do any thing you
bid him? Do you think to Oblige you he wo^'d speak Scandal?


Matam, to Oblige your Ladyship, he shall speak Blasphemy.


Why then, Mademoiselle, I'll tell you what you shall do. You shall engage him
to tell his Master, all that past at Spring-Garden. I have a Mind he should
know what a Wife and a Niece he has got.


Il le fera, Matam.


Mademoiselle; Yonder's Mr. Razor desires to speak with you.


Tell him, I come presently. Razor be dare, Matam.


That's Fortunate: Well, I'll leave you together. And if you find him stubborn,
Mademoiselle, -- hark you -- don't refuse him a few little reasonable
Liberties, to put him into humour.


Laisez moy fair.


How now, Confidence.


How now, Modesty.


Who make you so familiar, Sirrah?


My Impudence, Hussy.


Stand off, Rogue-face.


Ah -- Mademoiselle -- great News at our House.


Wy wat be de matter?


The Matter? -- why, Uptails All's the Matter.


Tu te mocque de moy.


Now do you long to know the particulars:
The time when: The place where: The manner how;
But I won't tell you a Word more.

Nay, den dou Kill me, Razor.


Come, Kiss me, then.


Nay, pridee tell me.


Good b'wy to ye.


Hold, hold: I will Kiss dee.


So: that's Civil: Why now, my pretty Pall; My Goldfinch; My little
Waterwagtail -- you must know that -- Come, Kiss me again.


I won't Kiss dee no more.


Good b'wy to ye.


Doucement: Dare: es tu content?


So: Now I'll tell thee all. Why the News is, That Cuckoldom in Folio, is newly
Printed; and Matrimony in Quarto, is just going into the Press. Will you Buy
any Books, Mademoiselle?


Tu Parle comme un Librair, de Devil no Understand dee.


Why then, that I may make my self intelligible to a Waiting-woman, I'll speak
like a Valet de Chamber. My Lady has Cuckolded my Master.


Bon.


Which we take very ill from her hands, I can tell her that. We can't yet prove
Matter of Fact upon her.


N'importe.


But we can prove, that Matter of Fact had like to have been upon her.


Ouy da.


For we have such bloody Circumstances.


Sans Dout.


That any Man of Parts, may draw tickling Conclusions from 'em.


Fort bien.


We have found a couple of tight well-built Gentlemen, stuffed into her Ladyships
Closet.


Le Diable


And I, in my particular Person, have discovered a most Damnable Plot, how to
persuade my poor Master, that all this Hide and Seek, this Will in the Wisp,
has no other meaning than a Christian Marriage for sweet Mrs. Bellinda.


Un Marriage? -- Ah les Droless.


Don't you interrupt me, Hussy; 'tis Agreed, I say. And my Innocent Lady, to
Riggle her self out at the Back-door of the Business, turns Marriage-Bawd to
her Niece, and resolves to deliver up her fair Body, to be tumbled and mumbled,
by that young Liquorish Whipster, Heartfree. Now are you satisfied?


No.


Right Woman; Always gaping for more.


Dis be all den, dat dou know?


All? Ay, and a great deal too, I think.


Dou be fool, dou know noting.
Ecoute mon pa^vre Razor.
Dou see des two Eyes? -- Des two Eyes have see de Devil.

The Woman's Mad.


In Spring-Garden, dat Rogue Constant, meet die Lady.


Bon.


-- I'll tell dee no more.


Nay, prithee, my Swan.


Come, Kiss me den*


I won't Kiss you, not I.


Adieu.


Hold: -- Now proceed.


A ca -- I hide my self in one Cunning place, where I hear all, and see all.
First die drunken Master come mal a propos; But de Sot no know his own dear
Wife, so he leave her to her Sport --

Den de game begin.

De Lover say soft ting.

De Lady look upon de Ground

He take her by de Hand.

She turn her Head, one oder way.

Den he squeeze very hard.

Den she pull -- very softly.

Den he take her in his Arm.

Den she give him, Leetel pat.

Den he Kiss her Tettons.

Den she say -- Pish, nay see.

Den he tremble,

Den she -- Sigh.

Den he pull her into de Arbour,

Den she pinch him


Ay, but not so hard, you Baggage you.


Den he grow Bold.

She grow Weak.

He trow her down

Il tomb dessu,

Le Diable assist,

Il emport tout:

Stand off, Sirrah.


You have set me a fire, you Jade you.


Den go to de River and quench die self.


What an unnatural Harlot 'tis.


Razor.


Mademoiselle.


Dou no love me.


Not love thee! -- More than a French-man does Soup.


Den dou will refuse noting dat I bid dee?


Don't bid me be damned then:


No, only tell die Master, all I have tell dee of die Laty.


Why you little malicious Strumpet, you; should you like to be served so?


Dou dispute den? -- Adieu.


Hold -- But why wilt thou make me be such a Rogue, my Dear?


Voila un Vrai Anglois: il est Amoureux, et cependant il veut raisoner. Vat 'en
au Diable.


Hold once more: In hopes thou'lt give me up thy Body, I resign thee up my
Soul.


Bon: eccute done: -- if dou fail me -- I never see dee more --

if dou obey me --

Ie m'abandonne a toy.

Not be a Rogue? -- Amor Vineit omnia.


Marry, say ye? Will the two things marry?


On le va fair, Matam.


Look you, Madamo sell, in short, I can't bear it -- -- No; I find I can't --
If once I see 'em a-bed together, I shall have ten thousand Thoughts in my Head
will make me run distracted. Therefore run and call Razor back immediately, for
something must be done to stop this Impertinent Wedding. If I can but defer it
four and twenty Hours, I'll make such work about Town, with that little pert
Sluts Reputation. He shall as soon marry a Witch.





But what dost think will come of this Business?


'Tis easier to think what will not come on it.


What's that?


A Challenge. I know the Knight too well for that. His dear Body will always
prevail upon his noble Soul to be quiet.


But though he dare not challenge me, perhaps he may venture to challenge his
Wife.


Not if you whisper him in the Ear, you won't have him do it, and there's no
other way left that I see. For as drunk as he was, he'll remember you and I
were where we should not be; and I don't think him quite Blockhead enough yet,
to be persuaded we were got into his Wife's Closet, only to peep in her
Prayer-book.


Sir, Here's a Letter, a Porter brought it.


O ho, here's Instructions for us.

The Accident that has happened has touched our Invention to the quick. We
would fain come off, without your help; but find that's impossible. In a word,
the whole Business must be thrown upon a Matrimonial Intrigue, between your
Friend and mine. But if the Parties are not fond enough, to go quite through
with the Matter; 'tis sufficient for our turn, they own the Design. We'll find
Pretences enough, to break the Match. Adieu.




-- Well, Woman for Invention: How long would my Blockhead have been a
producing this.

-- Hey, Heartfree; what, musing Man? Prithee be cheerful. What say thou,
Friend, to this Matrimonial Remedy?


Why I say, it's worse than the Disease.


Here's a Fellow for you: There's Beauty and Money on her Side, and Love up to
the Ears on his; and yet --


And yet, I think, I may reasonably be allow'd to boggle at marrying the Niece,
in the very Moment that you are a debauching the Aunt.


Why truly, there may be something in that. But have not you a good Opinion
enough of your own Parts, to believe you could keep a Wife to your self?


I should have, if I had a good Opinion enough of hers, to believe she could do
as much by me. For to do 'em Right, after all, the Wife seldom rambles, till
the Husband shows her the way.


'Tis true; a Man of real Worth, scarce ever is a Cuckold, but by his own
Fault* Women are not naturally lewd, there must be something to urge 'em to it.
They'll cuckold a Churl, out of Revenge; A Fool, because they despise him; a
Beast because they loath him. But when they make bold with a Man they once had
a well grounded Value for, 'tis because they first see themselves neglected by
him.


Nay, were I well assured, that I should never grow Sir Iohn. I never should
fear Bellinda^d play my Lady. But our Weakness, thou know, my Friend,
consists in that very Change, we so impudently throw upon (indeed) a steadier
and more generous Sex.


Why Faith we are a little Impudent in that Matter that's the Truth on it. But
this is wonderful, to see you grown so warm an Advocate for those (but the other
Day) you took so much pains to abuse.


All Revolutions run into Extremes, the Bigot makes the boldest Atheist; and
the coyest Saint, the most extravagant Strumpet. But Prithee advise me in this
good and Evil; this Life and Death, this Blessing and Cursing, that is set
before me. Shall I marry -- or die a Maid?


Why Faith, Heartfree, Matrimony is like an Army going to engage. Love's the
forlorn Hope, which is soon cut off; the Marriage-Knot is the main Body, which
may stand Buff a long long time; and Repentance is the Rear-Guard, which rarely
gives ground, as long as the main Battle has a Being.


Conclusion then; you advise me to whore on, as you do.


That's not concluded yet. For though Marriage be a Lottery in which there are a
wondrous many Blanks; yet there is one inestimable Lot, in which the only
Heaven on Earth is written. Would your kind Fate but guide your Hand to that,
though I were wrapped in all that Luxury it self could cloth me with, I still
should envy you.


And justly too: For to be capable of loving one, doubtless is better than to
possess a Thousand. But how far that Capacity's in me, alas I know not.


But you would know?


I would so.


Matrimony will inform you.

Come, one Flight of Resolution carries you to the Land of Experience; where,
in a very moderate time, you'll know the Capacity of your Soul, and your Body
both, or I'm mistaken.


Well, Madam, what Answer have you from 'em?


That they'll be here this Moment. I fancy 'twill end in a Wedding. I'm sure
he's a Fool if it don't. Ten Thousand Pound, and such a Lass as you are, is no
contemptible Offer to a younger Brother. But are not you under strange
Agitations? Prithee how does your Pulse beat?


High and low, I have much ado to be Valiant, feel very strange to go to Bed to
a Man?


Um -- it does feel a little odd at first, but it will soon grow easy to you.


Good Morrow Gentlemen: How have you slept after your Adventure?


Some careful Thoughts, Ladies, on your Accounts have kept us waking.


And some careful Thoughts on your own, I believe, have hindered you from
sleeping. Pray how does this Matrimonial Project relish with you.


Why Faith even as storming Towns does with Soldiers, where the Hopes of
delicious Plunder banishes the Fear of being knocked on the Head.


Is it then possible after all, That you dare think of downright lawful
Wedlock?


Madam, you have made me so Fool-hardy, I dare do any thing.


Then Sir, I challenge you; and Matrimony's the Spot where I expect you.


'Tis enough; I'll not fail.

Hobs's Voyage; a great Leap in the Dark.


Well, Gentlemen, this Matter being concluded then, have you got your Lessons
ready? For Sir Iohn is grown such an Atheist of late, he'll believe nothing
upon easy Terms.


We'll find ways to extend his Faith, Madam. But pray how do you find him this
Morning?


Most lamentably morose, chewing the Cud after last Night's Discovery; of which
however he had but a confused Notion even now. But I'm afraid his Valet de
Chamber has told him all, for they are very busy together at this Moment. When
I told him of Bellinda's Marriage, I had no other Answer but a Grunt: From
which, you may draw what Conclusions you think fit.

But to your Notes, Gentlemen, He's here.


Good Morrow, Sir.


Good Morrow, Sir Iohn. I'm very sorry my Indiscretion should cause so much
Disorder in your Family.


Disorders generally come from Indiscretions, Sir, 'tis no strange thing at
all.


I hope, my Dear, you are satisfied there was no wrong intended you.


None, my Dove.


If not, I hope my Consent to marry Mr. Heartfree will convince you. For as
little as I know of Amours, Sir, I can assure you, one Intrigue is enough to
bring four People together, without further mischief.


And I know too, that Intrigues tends to Procreation of more kinds than one.
One Intrigue will beget another as soon as beget a Son or a Daughter.


I am very sorry, Sir, to see you still seem unsatisfied with a Lady, whose
more than common Virtue, I am sure, were she my Wife, should meet a better
Usage.


Sir, If her Conduct has put a trick upon her Virtue, her Vertue's the Bubble,
but her Husband's the Loser.


Sir, You have received a sufficient Answer already, to justify both her
Conduct and mine. You'll pardon me for meddling in your Family Affairs; but I
perceive I am the Man you are jealous of, and therefore it concerns me.


Would it did not concern me, and then I should not care who it concerned.


Well, Sir, if Truth and Reason won't content you; I know but one way more,
which, if you think fit, you may take.


Lord, Sir, you are very hasty: If I had been found at Prayers in your Wife's
Closet, I should have allow'd you twice as much time to come to your self in.


Nay, Sir, if Time be all you want. We have no Quarrel.


I told you how the Sword would work


Let him muze; however, I'll lay Fifty Pound our Foreman brings us in, Not
Guilty.




What the plague did I marry her for? I knew she did not like me; if she had,
she would have lain with me; for I would have done so, because I liked her: But
that's past, and I have her. And now, what shall I do with her -- If I put my
Horns in my Pocket, she'll grow Insolent. -- If I don't; that Goat there, that
Stallion, is ready to whip me through the Guts. -- The Debate then is reduced
to this; Shall I die a Hero? or live a Rascal? -- Why, Wiser Men than I, have
long since concluded, that a living Dog is better than a dead Lion. --




I am glad to see your Reason rule at last. Give me your Hand: I hope you'll
look upon me as you are wont.


Your humble Servant.


And that I may be sure you are Friends with me too, pray give me your Consent
to wed your Niece.


Sir, you have it with all my Heart: Damn me if you have not.


Heartfree your Husband, say you? 'tis impossible.


Would to kind Heaven it were: but 'tis too true; and in the World there lives
not such a Wretch. I'm young; and either I have been flattered by my Friends,
as well as Glass, or Nature has been kind and generous to me. I had a Fortune
too, was greater far than he could ever hope for. But with my Heart, I am
robbed of all the rest. I'm Slighted and I'm Beggared both at once. I have
scarce a bare Subsistence from the Villain, yet dare complain to none; for he
has sworn, if ever 'tis known I am his Wife, he'll murder me.


The Traitor.


I accidentally was told he Courted you; Charity soon prevailed upon me to
prevent your Misery: And as you see, I'm still so generous even to him, as not
to suffer he should do a thing, for which the Law might take away his Life.


Poor Creature; how I pity her!


Though I have a particular Reason, not to let you know who I am till I see
you; yet you'll easily believe 'tis a faithful Friend that gives you this
Advice. -- I have lain with Bellinda. ( Good.) -- I have a Child by her,
(Better and Better.) which is now at Nurse; ( Heaven be praised.) and I think
the Foundation laid for another: (Ha! -- Old Trupenny!) -- No Rack could have
tortured this Story from me; but Friendship has done it. I heard of your design
to Marry her, and could not see you Abused. Make use of my Advice, but keep my
Secret till I ask you for it again. Adieu.





Come, Madam; Shall we send for the Parson? I doubt here's no business for the
Lawyer: Younger Brothers have nothing to settle but their Hearts, and that I
believe my Friend here has already done, very faithfully.













The more Time we take to consider on it, Madam, the less apt we shall be to
commit Oversights; Therefore, if you please, we'll put it off, for just Nine
Months.


Guilty Consciences make Men Cowards: I don't wonder you want Time to Resolve.


And they make Women Desperate: I don't wonder you were so quickly Determined.


What does the Fellow mean?


What does the Lady mean?


Zoons, what do you both mean?


Fancyfull, and her Plots, and her French-woman too. She's a Whimsical,
Ill-natur'd Bitch, and when I have got my Bones broke in her Service, 'tis Ten
to One but my Recompense is a Clap; I hear 'em tittering without still. I Cod
I'll even go lug 'em both in by the Ears, and Discover the Plot, to secure my
Pardon.


Prithee explain, Heartfree.


A fair Deliverance; thank my Stars and my Friend.


'Tis well it went no farther. A Base Fellow.


What can be the meaning of all this?


What's his meaning, I don't know. But mine is; That if I had Married him -- I
had had no Husband.


And what's her meaning, I don't know. But mine is; That if I had Married her
-- I had had Wife enough.


Your People of Wit, have got such Cramp ways of expressing themselves, they
seldom comprehend one another. Pox take you both, will you speak that you may
be Understood.


If they won't, here comes an Interpreter.


Heavens, what have we here?


A Villain, -- but a Repenting Villain. Stuff which Saints in all Ages have
been made of.


Razor.


What means this sudden Metamorphose?


Nothing: without my Pardon.


What Pardon do you want?


Imprimis, Your Ladyships; For a Damnable Lye made upon your Spotless Virtue,
and set to the Tune of Spring-Garden.













Well Sir, upon Condition you confess all, I'll Pardon you my self, and try to
obtain as much from the rest of the Company. But I must know then, who 'tis has
put you upon all this Mischief?


Satan, and his Equipage. Woman tempted me, Lust weakened me; -- And so the
Devil overcame me: As fell Adam, so fell I.


Then pray, Mr. Adam, will you make us acquainted with your Eve.


France.


Mademoiselle?


Me ask ten thousand Pardon of all de good Company.


Why this Mystery thickens instead of clearing up.




One moment brings Sun-shine.






Lady Fancyfull.


Impertinent.


Ridiculous.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.


I hope your Ladyship will give me leave to wish you Joy, since you have owned
your Marriage your self.

Mr. Heartfree: I vow 'twas strangely wicked in you, to think of another Wife,
when you had one already so Charming as her Ladyship.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.





Que le Diable e tout ce Maraut de Razor.


Your Ladyship seems disordered: A Breeding Qualm, perhaps. Mr. Heartfree: Your
Bottle of Hungry Water to your Lady. Why Madam, he stands as Unconcerned, as
if he were your Husband in earnest


Your Mirth's as nauseous as your self Bellinda.

You think you triumph over a Rival now.

Helas ma pauvre fill^. Where ever I'm Rival, there's no cause for Mirth. No,
my poor Wretch; 'tis from another Principle I have acted. I knew that thing
there would make so perverse a Husband, and you so impertinent a Wife; that
left your mutual Plagues should make you both run Mad, I charitably would have
broke the Match. He, he, he, he, he.


He, he, he, he, he.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.





Poor Creature, what a Passion she's in: But I forgive her.


Since you have so much goodness for her, I hope you'll Pardon my Offence too,
Madam.


There will be no great difficulty in that, since I am guilty of an equal
Fault.


Then Pardons being past on all Sides, Pray let's to Church to conclude the
Day's Work.


But before you go, let me treat you pray with a Song, a new married Lady made
within this Week; it may be of use to you both.


WHen yielding first to Damon's flame
I sunk into his Arms,
He swore he'd ever be the same,
Then rif^'d all my Charms.
But fond of what h'ad long desired,
Too greedy of his Prey,
My Shepherds flame, alas, expired
Before the Virge of Day.
My Innocence in Lovers Wars,
Reproached his quick defeat.
Confused, Ashamed, and Bathed in Tears,
I mourned his Cold Retreat.
At length, Ah Shepherdess, cried he,
Would you my Fire renew,
Alas you must retreat like me,
I'm lost if you pursue.
So Madam; Now had the Parson but done his Business --


You'd be half weary of your Bargain.


No sure, I might dispense with one Night's Lodging.


I'm ready to try, Sir.


Then Let's to Church:
And if it be our Chance, to disagree, --

Take heed: -- The surly Husband's Fate you see.


Where you may be Furnished with all Sorts of PLAYS.


