
IS Appius sent for, that we may acquaint him
with the decree of the Senate?

He is, my Lord, and will attend
your Lordships presently.

Lictor, did you tell him that our business
was from the Senate?

I did, my Lord, and here he is at hand.

My Lords, your pleasure?

Appius, the Senate greet you well,
and by us do signify unto you
that they have chosen you one of the Decemviti.

My Lords, far be it from the thoughts
of so poor a Plebeian, as your unworthy servant
Appius, to soar so high: the dignity of so
eminent a place would require a person
of the best parts and blood in Rome.
My Lords, he that must steer at the head of an
Empire, ought to be the Mirror of the times
for Wisdom and for Policy, and therefore
I would beseech the Senate to elect one.
worthy of the place, and not to think of
one so unfit as Appius.

My Lord, ^y Lord* you ^ally with your wits.
I have seen children oft eat sweet meats thus,
as fearful to devour them
you are wise and play the ^odest (...) right
to make so many (...) of ^our delight

^t yo^ must ^ow, what ^e have once concluded
cannot for any private mans affection
be slighted: take your choice then with best judgement
of these two proffers, either to accept
the place prop^'d you, or be b^nished Rome
immediately: Lictors ^e wa^: we expe^
you^ ^peedy re^olution.

Noble cozen,
you wrong your self extremely to refuse
so Eminent a place.

It is a means
to raise your kindred. Who shall dare t'oppose
himself against our Family, when yonder
shall sit your power, and frown?

Or banis^t Rome!
I pray forbear a little. Marcus.

Sir.

How dost thou like my cunning?

I protest
I was be-agued, fearing le^t the Senate
should have accepted at your feigned refusal.
See how your kindred and your friends are must^r'd
to warm them at your sun-shine. Were you now
in prison, or arraigned before the Senate
for some suspect of treason, all these swallows
would fly your stormy winter, not one ^ing:
their Music is the Summer and the Spring.

Thou observe^t shrewdly: well, ^e fit them ^ort.
I must be one of the Decemvir^,
or banished Rome. Banish^ laugh, my trusty Marcus,
I am enforced to my ambition.
I have heard of cunning footmen that have worn
shoes made of lead some ten days fore a race
to give them nimble and more active feet:
so great men should, that (...) eminent place,
load themselves with excuse and ^aint deny^ll,
that they with more speed may perform the trial:
Mark his humility says one; how far
his dreams are from ambition* ^aies another:
he would not show his Eloquence, lest that
should draw him into office: and a third
is meditating on some thrifty suite
to beg before dinner. Had I as many hands
as had Briarius, I'd extend them all
to catch this office; 'twas my sleeps disturber,
my diets ill digestion, my melancholy
past physics cure.

The Senators return.

My Lord, your answer.

To obey my Lord, and to know how to rule
do differ much: to obey by nature comes,
but to command by long experience.
Never were great men in so eminent place
without their shadows. Envy will attend
on greatness till this general frame takes end.
'Twixt these extremes of state and banishment,
my mind hath held long conflict, and at last
I thus return my answer, noble friends,
we now must part, necessity of State
compels it so.
I must inhabit, now a place unknown,
you see it compels me leave you. Fare you well.

To banishment, my Lord?

I am given up
to a long travel full of fear and danger,
to waste the day in sweat, and the cold night
in a most desolate contemplation,
banished from all my kindred and my friends,
yea banished from my self; for I accept
this honourable calling.

Worthy Appius,
the gods conduct you hither: Lictors, His robes.

We are made for ever, noble kinsman,
'twas but to fright us.

But my loving kinsmen,
mistake me not, for what I spake was true,
bear witness all the gods: I told you first,
I was to inhabit in a place unknown;
'tis very certain, for this reverend seat
receives me as a pupil, rather gives
ornament to the person, then our person
the least of grace to it. I showed you next
I am to travel; 'tis a certain truth:
Look by how much the labour of the mind
exceeds the bodies, so far am I ^ound
with pain and industry, beyond the toil
of those that sweat in war, beyond the toil
of any Artisan, pale cheeks, and sunk eyes,
a head with watching dizied, and a hair
turned white in youth, all these at a dear rate.
we purchase speedily that tend a State.
I told you I must leave you, 'tis most true.
Henceforth the face of a Barbarian
and yours shall be all one, henceforth I'll know you
but only by your virtue: brother or father
in dishonest suite shall be to me
as is the branded slave. Justice should have
no kindred, friends, nor foes, nor hate, nor love,
as free from passion as the gods above.
I was your friend and kinsman, now your Judge,
and whilst I hold the scales, a downy feather
shall as soon turn them as a mass of Pearl
or Diamonds.

Excellent, excellent Lapwing,
there's other stuff closed in that subtle breast.
He sings and beats his wings far from his nest.

So Gentlemen, I take it, here takes end
your business; my acquaintance, fare you well.

Here's a quick change, who did expect this cloud?
Thus men when they grow great do strait grow proud.

Now to our present business at the camp:
the army that doth winter before Agidon,
is much distressed we hear: Minutius,
you with the levies and the little corn
this present dearth will yield, are speedily
to hasten thither, so to appease the mind
of the intemperate soldier.

I am ready
the levies do attend me, our Lieutenant
send on our Troops.

Farewell Minutius.
the gods go with you, and be still at hand
to add a triumph to your bold command.

Noble Icilius. welcome, teach your self
a ^older freedom here, for by our love
your suite to my fair Niece doth parallel
her kindreds wishes. There's not in all Rome
a man that is by honour more approved
nor worthier, were you poor, to be beloved.

You give me (noble Lord) that character
which I cood never yet read in my self:
but from your censure shall I take much care
to adorn it with the fairest ornaments
of unambitious virtue: here I hold
my honourable pattern, one whose mind
appears more like a ceremonious chapel
full of sweet music, then a thronging presence.
I am confirmed, the court doth make some show
fairer then else they would do; but her port
being simple virtue, beautifies the court,

It is a flattery (my Lord)
you breath upon me, and it shows much like
the borrowed painting which some Ladies use,
it is not to continue many days;
my wedding garments will outwear this praise.

Thus Ladies still foretell the funeral
of their Lords kindness.
But my Lord, what news?

Virginius, my Lord, your noble brother
disguised in dust and sweat, is new arrived
within the City: troops of artisans
follow his panting horse, and with a strange
confused noise, partly with joy to see him,
partly with fear for what his hast portends,
they show as if a sudden mutiny
orespread the City.

Cozen take your chamber.
What business from the camp?

Sure Sir it bears
the form of some great danger, for his horse
bloody with spurring, shows as if he came
from forth a battle: never did you see
amongst quails or cocks in fight a bloodier Heel,
then that your brother strikes with. In this form
of orespent horseman, having as it seems,
with the distracting of his news, forgot
house, friends, or change of raiment, he is gone
to th'Senate house.

Now the gods bring us safety,
the face of this is cloudy, let us haste
to'th Senate house, and there enquire how near
the body moves of this our threatened fear.

My Lord.

Thor trouble me.

My hand's as ready armed to work your peace
as my tongue bold to inquire your diseontents.
Good my Lord hear me.

I am at much variance
within my self, there's discord in my blood,
my powers are all in combat, I have nothing
left but sedition in me.

Trust my bosom
to be the closet of your private griefs.
Believe me, I am uncranied.

May I trust thee?

As the firm centre to endure the burden
of your light soot, as you would trust the poles
to bear on them this airy cannopy,
and not to fear their shrinking. I am strong,
fixed and unshaking.

Art thou? Then thine ever: I love.

Ha ha he.

Can this my ponderous secrecy
be in thine ear so light? seems my disturbance
worthy such scorn that thou deride my griefs?
Believe me, Clodius, I am not a twig
that every gust can shake, but 'tis a tempest
that must be able to use violence
on my grown branches. Wherefore laugh thou then?

Not that you're moved, it makes me smile in scorn
that wise men cannot understand themselves,
nor know their own proved greatness. Clodius laughs not
to think you love, but that you are so hopeless
not to presume to enjoy whom you affect.
What's she in Rome your greatness cannot awe
or your rich purse purchase? Promises and thr^ats
are statemens Lictors to arrest such pleasures
as they would bring within their strict commands;
why should my Lord droop, or deject his eye?
can you command Rome, and not countermand
a woman's weakness? Let your Gr^ce (...)
your purse and power on me. I'll prostrate you.

Ask both and lavish them to purchase ^ie
the rich fee-simple of Virginia's heart.

Virginia's!

Hers.

I have already found
an easy path which you may safely tread,
yet no man trace you.

Thou art my comforter.

Her father's busied in our foreign wars,
and there hath chief employment; all their pay
must your discretion scantle: keep it back,
restrain it in the common Treasury.
Thus may a states-man'gainst a soldier stand,
to keep his purse weak, whilst you arm his hand.
Her father thus kept low, gifts and rewards
will tempt the maid the sooner; nay happily draw
the father in to plead in your behalf.
But should these ^aile, then siege her Virgin Tower
with too prevailing engines, fear and power.

Go then and prove a speeding advocate;
Arm thee with all our bounty, oratory,
variety of promise.

L. Appius, the Decemvirate entreat
your voice in this days Senate. Old Virginius
craves audience from the camp with earnest suite
for quick dispatch.

We will attend the Senate.

Be gone.

We sent to you to assist us in this counsel
touching the expeditions of our war.

Ours is a willing presence to the trouble
of all State cares. Admit him from the camp.

Speak the camps will.

The camp wants money, we have store of knocks,
and wounds Gods pl^nty, but we have no pay,
this three months did we never house our heads,
but in yon great star-chamber; never bedded
but in the cold field-beds, our vittaile fails us,
yet meet with no supply; we're fairly promised,
but soldiers cannot feed on promises;
all our provant, apparell's torn to rags,
and our Munition fails us: Will you send us
to fight for Rome like beggars? Noble Gentlemen,
are you the high State of Decemviri,
that have those things in manage? Pity us,
for we have need on it. Let not your delays
be cold to us, whose bloods have oft been heated
to gain you fame and riches. Prove not to us
(being our friends) worse foes then we fight with:
Let's not be starved in kindness. Sleep you now
upon the bench, when your deaf ears should listen
unto the wretchlesse clamours of the poor?
Then would I had my Drums here, they might rattle,
and rouse you to attendance. Most grave Fathers,
show your selves worthy stewards to our Mother
fair Rome, to whom we are no bastard sons,
though we be soldiers. She hath in her store
food to maintain life in the Camp, as well
as surfeit for the City. Do not save
the foe a labour; send us some supply,
lest ere they kill us, we by famine die.

Shall I (my Lords) give answer to this soldier?

Be you the Cities voice.

Virginius, we would have you thus possessed,
we sit not here to be prescib'd and taught,
nor to have any suitor give us limit,
whose power admits no curb. Next know, Virginius,
the Camp's our servant, and must be disposed,
controlled and used by us, that have the strength
to knit it or dissolve it. When we please
out of our Princely grace and clemency
to look upon your wants, it may be then
we shall redress them: But till then, it fits not
that any petty fellow waged by us
should have a tongue found here before a Bench
of such grave Auditors. Further, --

Pray give me leave,
Not here? pray Appius, is not this the Judgment seat?
Where should a poor mans cause be heard but here?
To you the Statists of long flourishing Rome,
to you I call, If you have charity,
if you be humane, and not quite given ore
to Furs and Metal, if you be Romans,
if you have any soldiers blood at all
flow in your veins, help with your able arms
to prop a sinking camp, an infinite
of fair Rome's sons, cold, weak, hungry, and clothles,
would feed upon your surfeit. Will you save them,
or shall they perish?

What we will, we will,
be that your answer: perhaps at further leisure
We will help you, not your merit but our pleasure.

I will not curse thee, Appius, but I wish
thou were in the camp amongst the Mutineers
to tell my answers, not to trouble me.
Make you us dogs, yet not allow us bones?
Oh what are soldiers come too! Shall your camp.
the strength of all your peace, and the iron wall
that rings this Pomp in from invasive steel;
shall that decay? Then let the foreign fires
climb over these buildings; let the sword and slaughter
chase the gown'd Senate through the streets of Rome.
to double dye their robes in Scarlet; let
the enemies stripped arm have his crimsoned brawns
up to the elbows in your traitorous blood;
Let Ianus Temple be devolved, your Treasures
ripped up to pay the common adversaryes
with our due wages. Do you look for less?
the rottenness of this misgoverned State
must grow to some Disease, incurable
save with a sack or slaughter.

You're too bold.

Know you our extremities?

We do.

And will not help them?

Yes.

When?

Hereafter.

Hereafter? when so many gallant spirits
that yet may stand betwixt you and destruction,
are sunk in death? Hereafter? when disorder
hath swallowed all our Forces?

We will hear no more.

Peace, fellow peace, know the Decemviri,
and their Authority; we shall commit you else.

Do so, and I shall thank you; be relieved
and have a strong house over me, fear no Alarms
given in the night by any quick perdue.
Your Guilty in the City feeds more dainty
then doth your General. 'Tis a better Office
to be an under Keeper then a Captain;
The gods of Rome amend it.

Break up the Senate.

And shall I have no answer?

So farewell.

What Slave would be a soldier to be censured
by such as never saw danger? To have out pay,
our worths and merits ^allano'd in the scale
of base moth-eaten peace. I have had wounds
would have made all this Bench faint and look pale
but to behold them searched. They lay their heads
on their soft pillow^, pore upon then bags,
grow fat with laziness and resty (...).
And us that stand betwixt them and disaster
they will not spare a Drachma. O my soldiers,
before you want, I'll sell my small possessions
even to my skin to help you, Plate and Jewels
all shall be yours. Men that are men indeed,
the earth shall find, the Sun and air must feed.

Your daughter, noble brother, heating late
of your arrvial from the Camp, most humbly
prostrates her filial Duty.

Daughter rise.
And brother I am only rich in her,
and in your love, link'^ with the honoured friendship
of those fair Roman Lords. For you Icilius,
I hear I must adopt you with the title
of a new son; you are Virginia's chief,
and I am proud she hath built her fair election
Upon such store of virtues. May you grow,
although a Cities child, to know a soldier
and rate him to his merit.

Noble father,
(for henceforth I shall only use that name)
Our meeting was to urge you to the process
of our fair contract.

Witness Gentlemen,
here I give up a fathers interest,
but not a fathers love, that I will ever
wear next my heart, for (...) was born with her
^d grows still with my age.

Icilius,
receive her: witness noble Gentlemen.

With all my heart. I would Icilius could do as much
for me; but Rome affords not such another Virginia.

I am my fathers daughter, and by him
I must be swayed in all things.

Brother, this happy Contract asks a Feast,
as a thing due to such solemnities.
It shall be at my house, where we this night
will sport away some hours.

I must to horse.

What, ride to night?

Must see the Camp to night.
'Tis full of trouble and destracted fears,
and may grow mutinous. I am bent to ride.

To night?

I am engaged: short farwels now must serve,
the universal business calls me hence,
that touches a whole people. Rome, I fear,
thou wilt pay use for what thou dost forbear.


SIrrah, go tell Calpharina, I am walking
to take the air: entreat her company.
Say I attend her coming.

Madam, I shall: but if you could walk abroad, and get an Heir, it were better,
for your father hath a fair revenue, and never a son to inherit.


You are, sirrah --

Yes I am sirrah: but not the party that is born to do that; though I have no
Lorships, yet I have so much manners to give my betters place.


Whom mean you by your betters?

I hope I have learnt to know the three degrees of comparison: for though I be
bonus, and you melior as well as mulier; yet my Lord Icilius is optimus.


I see there's nothing in such private done,
but you must inquire after.

And can you blame us (Madam) to long for the merry day, as you do for the
merry night?


Will you be gone sir? (^nd.

Oh yes, to my Lady (...). I remember my er-

My father's wondrous (...), and withal
with a suppressed rage left his house displeased,
and so in post is hurried to the camp:
it sad me much; to expel which melancholy,
I have sent for company.

This opportunity was ^illy waited,
it is the best part of a politician
when he would compass ought to fame his industry
wisely to wait the advantage of the hours,
his happy minutes are not always present.
Express your greatest art, Virginia hears you,

Oh I conceive the occasion of this harmony.
Icilius sent it, I must thank his kindness.

Let not Virginia wate her contemplation
so high, to call this visit an intrusion;
for when she understands I took my message
from one that did compose it with affection,
I know she will not only extend pardon,
but grace it with her favour.

You mediate excuse for courtesies,
as if I were so (...) of civi^y,
not to esteem it worthy of my thanks;
assure your self I could be longer patient
to hear my ears so feasted.

Join all your voices till you make the air
proud to usurp your no^s, and to please her
with a sweet echo; serve Virginias pleasure.
As you have been so full of gentleness
to hear with patience what was brought to serve you
so hearken with your usual clemency
^o the relation of a lovers sufferings:
your figure still does revel in his dreams,
he banquets on your memory, yet finds
not thoughts enough to satisfy his wishes,
as if Virginia had composed his heart,
and fills it with her beauty.

I see he is a miser in his wishes,
and thinks he never has enough of that
which only he possesses: but to give
his wishes satisfaction, let him know
his heart and mine do^ (...) so near together,
that hourly they converse, and guard each other.

Is fair Virginia confident she knows
her favour dwells with the same man I plead for?

-- Unto Icilius.

Worthy fair one,
I would not wrong your worth so to employ
my language for a man so much beneath
the merit of your beauty: he I plead for
has power to make your beauty populous,
your frown shall awe the world, and in your smile
great Rome shall build her happiness;
honour and wealth shall not be styled companions,
but servants to your pleasure.
Then shall Icilius (but a refined Citizen)
boast your affection, when Lord Appius loves you.

Bless his great Lordship, I was much mistaken,
let thy Lord know, thou Advocate of lust,
all the intentions of that youth are honourable,
whilst his are filled with sensuality.
And for a final resolution know,
our hearts in love like twins alike shall grow.

Had I a wife, or daughter that could please him
I would devote her to him, but I must
shadow this scorn, and sooth him still in lust.

What news yet of Virginius return?

Not any.

O the misery of Soldiers!
They doubly starve us with fair promises.
We spread the earth like hail, or new reaped corn
in this fierce famine; and yet patiently
make our obedience the confined ^ile
that starves us:

Soldiers, let us draw our swords
while we have strength to use them.

'Tis a motion
which nature and necessity commands.

You're of Virginius Regiment.

We are.

Why do you swarm in troops thus? to your quarter.
Is our command grown idle? to your trench.
Come I'll divide you, this your conference
is not without suspect of mutiny.

Soldiers, shall I relate the grievances.
of the whole Regiment.

Boldly.

Then thus my Lord.

Come, I will not hear thee,

Sir you shall:
Sound all the Drums and Trumpets in the camp,
to drown my utterance, yet above them all
I'll rear our just complaint. Stir not my Lord,
I vow you are not safe if you but move
a sinew till you hear us.

Well sir, command us: you are the General.

No my Lord, not I,
I am almost starved; I wake in the wet trench,
loaded with more cold iron then a Jail
would give a murderer, while the General
sleeps in a field bed, and to mock our hunger
feeds us with scent of the most curious fare
that makes his tables crack, our pay detained
by those that are our Leaders: and at once
we in this sad, and unprepared plight,
with the Enemy, and Famine daily sight.

Do you threaten us?

Sir you shall hear him out.

You send us whips, and iron manackles,
and shackles plenty, but the devil a coin.
Would you would teach us that caniball trick, my Lord,
which some rich men 'ith' City oft do use:
shall's one devour another?

Will you hear me?

O Rome you are grown a most unnatural mother,
to those have held thee by the golden locks
from sinking into ruin; Romulus
was fed by a she wolf, but now our wolves
instead of feeding us devour our flesh,
carouse our blood, yet are not drunk with it,
for three parts of 't is water.

Your Captain,
noble Virginius is sent Rome,
for ease of all your grievances.

'Tis false.

I, 'Tis false.

He's stolen away from his, never to return,
and now his age will suffer him no more
deal on the Enemy, belike he will ^rne
an usurer, and in the City air
cut poor men's throats at home sitting in's chair.

You wrong one of the honorablest Commanders.

Honourable Commander?

Commander? I my Lord, there goes the thrist
in victories, the General and Commanders
share all the honour as they share the spoil;
but in our overthrowes, where lies the blame?
the common soldiers fault, ours is the shame.
What is the reason that being so far distant
from the affrighted enemy? we lie
'ith' open field, subject to the sick humours
of heaven and earth: unless you cood bestow
two summers of us? shall I tell you truth,
You account the expense of Ingines, and of swords,
of horses and of armour dearer far,
then soldiers lives.

Now by the gods you do.

Observe you not the ravens and the crows
have left the City surfeit, and with us
they make full banquets. Come you birds of death,
and fill your greedy croppes with humane flesh;
then to the City fly, disgorge it there
before the Senate, and from thence arise
a plague to choke all Rome. Omnes. And all the Suburbs*

Upon a soldiers word, bold Gentlemen,
I expect every hour Virginius
to bring fresh comfort.

Whom? Virginius?

Now by the gods, if ever he return,
wee'le drag him to the slaughter by his locks,
turned white with riot and incontinence,
and leave a president to all the world,
how Captains use their soldiers.

See, he's returned*
Virginius, you are not safe, retire,
your troops are mutinous, we are begirt
with Enemies more daring, and more fierce,
then is the common foe.

My Troops, my Lord?

Your life is threatened by these desperate men,
betake you to your horse.

My noble Lord,
I never yet p^oiest to teach the art
of ^ying. (...), out troops grown mutinous?
he dares not look on me with half a (...)
that spread this wildfire. Where is our Lieutenant?

My Lord.

Sirrah, order our companies.

What do you mean, my Lord?

Take air a little, they have heated me.
Sirrah, i'st you will mutiny?

Not I Sir.

Is your gall burst, you Traitor?

The gods defend Sir.

Or is your stomach sea sick, doth it rise?
I'll make a passage for it.

Noble Captain, I'll dye beneath your foot.

You rough porcupine, ha.
do you bristle, do you shoot your quills you rogue?

They have no points to hurt you, noble Captain.

Wast you (my nimble shaver) that would whet
your sword against your Commanders throat, you sirrah?

My Lord I never dream't on it.

Slaves and cowards,
what are you choleric now? by the gods
the way to purge it were to let you blood.
I am in the center of you, and I'll make
the proudest of you teach the Aspen leaf
to tremble, when I breath.

A strange Conversion.

Advance your pikes. The word,

Advance your pikes.

See noble Lord these are no Mutineers,
these are obedient soldiers, civil men:
You shall command these, if your Lordship please,
to fill a ditch up with their slaughtered bodies,
that with more ease you may assault some Town.
So now lay down your Arms. Villains and Traitors,
I here cashier you. Hence from me my poison,
not worthy of our Discipline: Go beg,
go beg, you mutinous rogues, brag of the service
you never durst look on; it were charity
to hang you, for my mind gives, you're reserved
to rob poor market women.

O Viginius.

I do beseech you to confirm my sentence,
as you respect me. I will stand my self
for the whole Regiment, and safer far
in mine own single valour, then begirt
with cowards and with traitors.

O my Lord, you are too severe.

Now by the gods, my Lord,
you know no discipline, to pity them.
Precious devils? no sooner my back turned,
but presently to mutiny?

dear Captain.

Refuse me if such traitorous rogues
would not confound an Army. When do you march?
when do you march, gentlemen?

My Lord, we'll starve first,
wee'le hang first, by the gods, do any thing
ere wee'le forsake you.

Good Virginius,
limit your passion.

Sir, you may take my place,
not my just anger from me: these are they
have bred a dearth in the camp: I'll wish our foes
no greater plague then to have their company:
show but among them all so many scars
as stick upon this flesh, I'll pardon them.

How now, my Lord, breathless?

By your favour. I ha said.
Mischiefs confound me if I could not wish
my youth renewed again, with all her sollies,
only to'ave breath enough to rail against
these -- 'Tis too short.

See Gentlemen, what strange distraction
your falling off from duty hath begot
in this most noble soldier: You may live
the meanest of you to command a Troop,
and then in others you'll correct those faults,
which in your selves you cherished, every Captain
bears in his private government that form,
which Kings should ore their Subjects, and to them
should be the like obedient. We confess
you have been distressed: but can you justly challenge
any commander that hath surfeited,
while that your food was limited? You cannot.

My Lord, I have shared with them an equal for*
hunger, and cold, marched thorough watery fens, tune,
borne as great burdens as the pioneer,
when scarce the ground would bear me.

Good my Lord, give us leave to proceed;
the punishment your Captain hath inflicted
is not sufficient; for it cannot bring
any example to succeeding (...)
of penance worth your faulting: happily
it may in you beget a certain shame;
But it will in others a strong hope
of the like lenity. Yet gentlemen,
you have in one thing given me such a taste
of your obedience; when the fire was raised
of fierce sedition, and the cheek was swollen
to sound the fatal Trumpet, then the sight
of this your worthy Captain did disperse
all those unfruitful humours, and even then
convert you from feirce Tigers to stayed men:
we therefore pardon you, and do restore
your Captain to you, you unto your Captain.

The gods requite you, noble General.

My Lord, my Lord:

Your pardon noble Captain.

Well, you are the General, and the fault is quit,
a soldiers tears, an elder brothers wit
have little fault in them, nor do they season
things worth observing, for their want of reason.
Take up your arms and use them, do I pray,
ere long you'll take your (...) to run away.

And what supply from Rome?

Good store of corn.

What entertainment there?

Most honourable,
especially by the Lord Appius.
There is great hope that Appius will grow
the soldiers patron: with what vehemence
he urged our wants, and with what expedition
he hasted the supplies, it is almost
i^redible. There's promised to the soldier
besides their corn a bounteous donative;
but 'tis not certain yet when't shall be paid.

How for your own particular?

My Lord,
I was not enter^d fully two pikes length
into the Senate, but they all stood bare,
and each man offered me his seat: The business
for which I went dispatcht, what gifts, what favours
were done me, your good Lordship shall not hear,
for you would wonder at them, only this,
'twould make a man fight up to'th' neck in blood,
to think how nobly he shall be received
when he returns to'th' City.

'Tis well,
give order the provision be divided
and sent to every quarter.

Sir, it shall.
Thus men must flight their wrongs, or else conceal them,
when general safety wills us not reveal them.

Pray is your Lord at leisure?

What is your suite?

To accept this poor Petition which makes known,
my many wrongs in which I crave his Justice,
and upright sentence to support my cause,
which else is trod down by oppression.

My Lords hand is the prop of Innocence,
and if your cause be worthy his supportance
it cannot fall.

The gods of Rome protect him.

What, is your paper too petitionary?

It leanes upon the Justice of the Judge,
your noble Lord, the very stay of Rome.

And surer basis, for a poor mans cause,
she cannot yield. Your papers I'll deliver,
and when my Lord ascends the Judgement seat,
you shall find gracious comfort.

Where's your Lord?

Icilius? fair Virginia's late betrothed?

Your ears, I hope, you have not forfeited,
that you return no answer. Where's your Lord?

At's study.

I desire admittance to him.

Please you attend, I'll know his Lordships pleasure.
Icilius? I pray heaven she have not blabbed.

Attend? a petty Lawyer the other day,
glad of a fee, but called to eminent place,
even to his betters, now the word's, Attend.
This gowned office, what a breadth it bears?
how many tempests wait upon his frown?

All the petitioners withdraw. L. Appius
must have this place more private* as a favour,
reserved for you, Icilius. Here's my Lord.

Be gone, this place is only spared for us,
and you Icilius. Now your business.

May I speak it freely?

We have suffering ears,
A heart the sof^est down may penetrate.
Proceed.

My Lord.

We are private, Pray your courtefie.

My duty.

Leave that to the public eye
of Rome, and of Romes people. Clodius there.

My Lord.

Place me a second Chair; that done,
remove your self. So now, your absence Clodius.
Icilius sit, this grace we make not common
unto the noblest Roman, but to you
our love affords it freely. Now your suit?

It is, you would be kind unto the Camp.

Wherein, Icilius, doth the Camp touch thee?

Thus: Old Virginius, now my father in Law,
kept from the public pay, consumes himself,
sells his Revenues, turns his plate to coin,
to wage his soldiers, and supply the Camp,
wasting that useful substance which indeed
should rise to me, as my Virginia's Dowry.

We meet that opposition thus Icilius.
The Camps supplies doth not consist in us,
but those that keep the common Treasury;
speak or entreat we may, but not command.
But Sir, I wonder, you so brave a Youth,
son to a thrifty Roman, should ally you,
and knit your strong arms to such falling branches;
which rather in their ruin will bear down
your strength, then you support their rottenness.
Be swayed by me, fly from that ruinous house.
whose fall may crush you; and contract with mine,
whose bases are of Marble, deeply fixed
to ^uger all gusts and impending storms.
Ca^ off that beggars daughter, poor Virginia,
whose dowry and beauty, I'll see trebled both,
in one ^lly'd to me. Smile you Icilius?

My Lord, my Lord, think you, I can imagine
your close and sparing hand can be profuse
to give that man a Palace, whom you late
denied a cottage? Will you from your own coffers
grant me a treble Dowry, yet interpose me
a poor third from the common Treasury?
You must move me by possibilities,
for I have brains; give first your hand and Seal,
that old Virginius shall receive his pay
both for himself and soldiers, and that done,
I shall perhaps be soon induced to think,
that you who with such willingness did that --

Is my Love mispriz'd?

Not to Virginia.

Virginia?

Yes Virginia, Lustful Lord.
I did but trace your cunning all this while.
You would bestow me on some Appian Trull,
and for that dross to cheat me of my Gold;
for this the Camp pines, and the City smarts.
All Rome fares worse for thy incontinence.

Mine boy?

Thine Judge. This hand hath intercepted
thy Letters, and perused thy tempting guests,
these ears have heard thy amorous passions, wretch,
these eyes beheld thy treacherous name subscribed.
A Judge, a Divel.

Come I'^hear no more.

Sit still, or by the powerful Gods of Rome
I'll nail thee to the Chair. But suffer me,
I'll offend nothing but thine ears.

Our Secretary.

Tempt not a Lovers fury, if thou dost
now by my vow, insculpt in heaven, I'll send thee. --

You see I am patient.

But withal revengeless.

So, say on.

Hope not of any grace, or the least favour,
I am so covetous of Virginia's love,
I cannot spare thee the least look, glance, touch.
Divide one bare imaginary thought
into a thousand, thousand parts, and that
I'll not afford thee.

Thou shalt not.

Nay, I will not.
Had thou a Judges place above those Judges
that judge all souls, having power to sentence me,
I would not bribe thee, no not with one hair
from her fair temples.

Thou should not.

Nay, I would not.
Think not her Beauty shall have leave to crown
thy lustful hopes with the least spark of bliss,
or have thine ears charmed with the ravishing sound
even of her harshest phrase.

I will not.

Nay, thou shalt not.
She's mine, my soul is crowned in her desire,
to her I'd travel through a land of fire.

Now have you done?

I have spoke my thoughts.

Then will thy fury give me leave to speak?

I pray say on.

Icilius, I must chide you, and withal
tell you, your rashness hath made forfeiture
even of your precious life, which we esteem
too deer to call in question. I^ I wished you
of my alliance, graft into my blood,
condemn you me for that? Oh see the rashness
and blind misprision of (...) youth!
As for the Maid Virginia, we are far
even in least thought from her; and for those Letters,
Tokens and Presents, we acknowledge none.
Alas, though great in place, we are not gods.
If any false impostor hath usurped
our hand or greatness in his own behoof,
can we help that? Icilius, there's our hand,
your rashness we remit; let's have hereafter
your love and best opinion. For your suit,
repair to us at both our better leisures,
we'll breathe in it new life.

I crave your ^don.

Granted ere craved, my good Icilius.

-- Morrow.

It is no more indeed. Morrow Icilius.
If any of our servants wait, without,
command them in.

I shall.

Our Secretary,
we have use for him. Icilius, send him hither.
Again good morrow.
Go to thy death, thy life is doomed and cast.
Appius be circumspect, and be not rash
in blood as you are in lust: Be murderous still,
but when thou strik'st, with unseen weapons kill.

My Honourable Lord.

Deride me, dog?

Who hath stirred up this tempest in your brow?

Not you? Fie, you?

All you Panthean Gods,
confound me, if my soul be accessory
to your distractions.

To send a ruffian higher,
even to my closet, first, to brave my Greatness,
play with my beard, revile me, taunt me, hiss me;
nay after all these deep disparagements,
threat me with steel, and menace me unarmed,
to nail me to my seat, if I but moved:
all these are slight, slight toys.

Icilius do this?

Ruffian Icilius, he that in the front
of a smooth Citizen, bears the rugged soul
of a most base Bandetto.

He shall die for it.

Be not too rash.

Were there no more men to support great Rome,
even falling Rome should perish, ere he stand:
I'll after him, and kill him.

Stay, I charge thee.
Lend me a patient ear; To right our wrongs,
we must not menace with a public hand;
we stand in the worlds eye, and shall be taxed
of the least violence, where we revenge:
We should smile smoothest where our hate's most deep,
and when our spleen's broad waking, seem to sleep.
Let the young man play still upon the bit,
till we have brought and trained him to our lure;
Great men should strike but once, and then strike sure.

Love you Virginia still?

Do I still live?

Then she's your own. Virginius is, you say,
still in the Camp.

True.

Now in his absence will I claim Virginia
to be the daughter of a bond woman,
and slave to me; to prove which, I'll produce
firm proofs, notes probable, sound Witnesses;
then having with your Lictors summoned her,
I'll bring the cause before your Judgement Seat,
where, upon my infallid evidence,
you may pronounce the sentence on my side,
and she become your Strumpet not your Bride.

Thou hast a copius brain, but how in this
shall we dispose Icilius?

If he spurn
clap him up close, there's ways to charm his spleen.
By this no scandal can redound to you;
the Cause is mine; you but the Sentencer
upon that evidence which I shall bring.
The business is, to 'ave Warrants by Arrest.
to answer such things at the Judgment Bar
as can be laid against her; Ere her friends
can be assembled, ere her self can study
her answer or scarce know her cause of summons
to descant on the matter, Appius may
examine, try, and doom Virginia.
But all this must be sudden.

Thou art born
to mount me high above Icilius scorn.
I'll leave it to thy manage.


WHat was that you said, Nurse?

Why, I did say thou must bestir thy self.

I warrant you I can bestir my stumps as soon as another, if fit occasion be
offered; but why do you come upon me in such haste? is it because (Nurse) I
should come over you at leisure?


Come over me, thou knave? what dost thou mean by that?

Only this, if you will come off, I will come on.

My Lord hath strangers to night: you must make ready the Parlour, a table and
lights; nay when, I say?


Me thinks you should rather wish for a bed then for a board, for darkness then
for lights; yet I must confess you have been a light woman in your time: but
now.


But now? what now, you knave?

But now I'll go fetch the table and some lights presently.

Some lights to usher in these Gentlemen,
Clear all the rooms without there. Sit, pray sit.
None interrupt our conference.
Ha, whose that?

My most -- child, if it please you.

Fair Virginia, you are welcome.
The rest forbear us till we call. Sweet cozen,
our business, and the cause of our discourse
admits you to this Council. Take your place.
Ieilius we are private, now proceed.

Then thus; Lord Appius doth intend me wrong,
and under his smooth calmnesse cloaks a tempest,
that will ere long break out in violence
on me and on my fortunes.

My good cozen,
you are young, and youth breeds rashness. Can I think
Lord Appius will do wrong, who is all Justice,
the most austere and upright Censurer
that ever sate upon the awful Bench?

Icilius, you are near to me in blood,
and I esteem your safety as mine own.
If you will needs wage eminence and state,
Choose out a weaker opposite, not one
that in his arm bears all the strength of Rome.

Besides Icilius,
know you the danger what it is to scandal
one of his place and sway?

I know it kinsmen, yet this popular Greatness
can be no bug-bear to affright mine innocence.
No his smooth crest hath cast a palped film
over Romes eyes. He juggles, a plain Juggler.
Lord Appius is no less.

Nay, then Cozen,
you are too harsh, and I must hear no more.
It ill becomes my place and gravity,
to lend a face to such reproachful terms
against one of his high presence.

Sit, pray sit.
to see me draw his picture before your eyes,
to make this man seem monstrous, and this god
Rome so adores, a divel, a plain divel.
This Lord, this Judge, this Appius, that professes
to all the world a vestal chastity,
is an incontinent, loose Lecher grown.

Fie cozen.

Nay 'tis true. Daily and hourly
he tempts this blushing Virgin with large promises,
with melting words and Presents of high rate,
to be the stale to his unchaste desires.

Is't possible?

Possible?
'Tis actual Truth, I pray but ask your Niece.

Most true, I am extremely tired and wearied
with messages and tokens of his love;
no answer, no repulse will satisfy
the tediousness of his importunate suit.
And whilst I could with modesty and honour,
without the danger of reproach and shame,
I kept it secret from Icilius;
but when I saw their boldness found no limit,
and they from fair entreaty grew to threats,
I told him all.

True: understanding which
to him I went.

To Appius?

To that Giant,
the high Colossus that bestrides us all;
I went to him.

How did you bear your self?

Like Appius, at the first, dissemblingly,
but when I saw the coast clear, all withdrawn,
and none but we two in the Lobby, then
I drew my Poinyard, took him by the throat,
and when he would have clamoured, threatened death,
unless he would with pa^ence hear me out.

Did he, Icilius?

I made him that he durst not squeak,
not move an eye, not draw a breath too loud,
nor stir a fingar.

What succeeded then?

Keep fast the door there: Sweet Couz not too loud.
What then succeeded?

Why, I told him all,
gave him his due, called him lascivious Judge,
(a thousand things which I have now forgot)
showed him his hand a witness against himself,
and every thing with such known circumstance,
that he might well excuse, but not deny.

How parted you?

Why Friends, in outward show.
But I perceived his heart: that Hypocrite
was born to gull Rome, and deceive us all.
He swore to me quite to abjure her love;
yet ere my self could reach Virginia's chamber,
one was before me with regreets from him,
I know his hand. The intent of this our meeting
was to entreat your counsel and advice:
The good old man her Father is from home,
I think it good that she now in his absence
should lodge in secret with some private friend,
where Appius nor his Lictors, those blood-hounds
can hunt her out. You are her uncle Sir,
I pray counsel the best.

To oppose our selves
now in this heat against so great a man,
might in my judgment to our selves bring danger,
and to my Niece no safety. If we fall
she cannot stand; lets then preserve our selves
until her father be discharged the Camp.

And good Icilius, for your private ends,
and the dear safety of your friends and kindred,
against that Statist, spare to use your spleen.

I will be swayed by you. My Lords, 'tis late,
and time to break up conference. Noble Uncle
I am your growing Debtor.

Lights without there.

I will conduct Virginia to her lodging.
Good night to all at once.

The Gods of Rome protect you all, and then
we need not fear the envious rage of men.


bestow your selves in some close shops,
about the forum, till you have the sight
of fair Virginia, for I understand
this present morning she'll come forth to buy
some necessaries at the Sempsters shops:
how ere accompanied be it your care
to seas her at our action. Good my friends,
disperse your selves, and keep a careful watch.

'Tis strange that Ladies will not pay their debts.

'It were strange indeed, if that our Roman Knights.
would give them good example and pay theirs.

The Calender that we Lictors go by, is all dog days.

Right, our common hunt is still to dog unthrifts.

And whats your book of common-prayer?

Faith only for the increase of riotous young Gentlemen in the country, and
banquerouts in the City.


I know no man more valiant then we are, for we
back Knights and Gentlemen daily.

Right, we have them by the back hourly: your French fly applied to the nape
of the neck for the French Rheum, is not so sore a drawer as a Lictor.


Some say that if a little timbered fellow would just^e a great logerhead, let
him be sure to lay him in the kennel; but when we shoulder a Knight, or a
Knights fellow, we make him more sure, for we kennel him in the counter.


Come, lets about our business.

You are grown wondrous amorous of late,
why do you look back so often?

Madam, I go as a Frenchman rides, all upon one buttock.

And what's the reason?

Your Ladyship never saw a Monky in all your life time have a clog at's tail,
but he's still looking back to see what the devil 'tis that follows him.


Very good, we are your clogs then.

Your crest is grown regardant; here's the beauty*
that makes your eyes forgetful of their way.

Beauty? O the gods! Madam I cannot endure her com-

Why sir, what's my complexion? (plexion.

Thy complexion is just between a moore a french woman.

But she hath a matchless eye sir,

True, her eyes are not right matches, besides she is a widow.

What then, I pray you?

Of all waters I would not have my beef powdered with a widows tears.


Why, I beseech you?

O they are too fresh Madam, assure your self they will not last for the death
of fourteen husbands above a day and a quarter; besides, if a man come a wooing
to a widow, and invite her to a banquet contrary to the old rule, she will
sooner fill her eye then her belly. Besides that, if he look into her estate,
first, look you, Here are four fingers, first the charge of her husbands
funeral, next debts, and legacies, and lastly the reversion; now take away
debts and legacies, and what remains for her second husband?


I would some of the Tribe heard you.

There's a certain fish, that as the learned divulge, is called a shark. Now
this fish can never feed while he swims upon's belly, marry when he lies upon
his back, oh he takes it at pleasure.


Well sir, about your business, make provision
of those things I directed.

Sweet Lady, these eyes shall be the clarks of the kitchen for your belly; but
I can assure you Woodcocks will be hard to be spoke with, for there's a great
feast towards.


You are very pleasant.

And fresh cod is taken down thick and threefold, women without great bellies
go together by the ears for it, and such a number of sweet tooth'd ca^ers in
the market, not a calves head to be got for love or money; Muttons mutton now.


Why, was it not so ever?

No Madam, the sinners in the Suburbs had almost taken the ^me quite away from it,
'twas so cheap and common: but now 'tis at a sweet reckoning, the Term time is
the muttonmonger in the whole calender.


Do your Lawyers eat any sallet^ with their mutton.

Yes, the younger revellers use capers to their mutton, so long till with their
shuffling and cutting some of them be out at heals again. A bountiful mind
and a full purse ever attend your Ladyship.


O I thank you.

See, yon's the Lady.

I will buy up for your Ladyship all the young cuckoos in the market.


What to do?

O 'tis the most deli^atest dish I'll assure you, and newest in fash on: not a
great feast in all Rome without a cuckoo.


Virginia. Virg. Sir.

Mistress you do not know me,
yet we must be acquainted: follow me.

You do salute me strangely. Follow you.

Do you hear sir, me thinks you have followers enough. Many Gentlemen that I
know, would not have so many tall followers as you have for the price often
(...) geldings, I'll assure you.


Come, will you go?

Whither? by what command?

By warrant of these men, and privilege
I hold even on thy life. Comeye proud dame,
you are not what you seem.

Uncivil sir,
what makes you thus familiar and thus bold?
Unhand me villain.

What Mistress, to your Lord?
he that can set the raso^ to your throat,
and punish you as freely as the gods,
no man to ask the cause? Thou art my slave,
and here I seas what's mine.

Ignoble villain,
I am as free as the best King or Consul
since Romulus. What dost thou mean? Unhand me.
Give notice to my uncle and Icilius,
what violence is offered me* Clod. Do, do.

Do you press women for ^diers, or do you beg women, instead of other
commodities; to keep your hands in ^e? By this light if thou hast any ears on
thy head, as it is a question, I'll make my Lord pull you out by the ears,
though you take a Castle.


Come, will you go along?

Whither should she go sir? here's pulling and haling a poor Gentlewoman.


Hold you your prating reverence, the whip
shall cease on you for your smooth cozenage.

Are not you servant to Lord Appius.

How ere I am your Lord, and will approve it
before all the Senate.

Thou wilt prove thy self
the cursed pander for another lust,
and this your plot shall burst about your Ears
like thunderbo^ts.

Hold you that confidence,
first I will (...) you by (...) (...) co^ of l^,
And then I'll ^alke with you.

How now, fair (...)

How now, Gen^?
What's the offence of fair Virginia,
you bend your weapons on us?

Sir stand back, we fear a rescue.

There's no need of fear,
where there's no cause of rescue: what's the matter?

O my Icilius! Your incredulity
hath quite undone me, I am now no more
Virginius daughter, so this villain urges;
But published for his bond woman.

How's this?

'Tis true my Lord,
and I will take my right by course of Law.

Villains set her free,
or by the power of all our Roman gods,
I'll give that just revenge unto my rage
which should be given to Justice. Bondwoman?

Sir, we do not come to fight, wee'le deal
By course of Law. My Lord we fear a rescue.

A rescue? never fear't, here's none in presence
but civil men. My Lord, I am glad to see you.
Noble Icilius, we shall ever love you.
Now Gentlemen reach your Petitions.

My Lord, my Lord.

Worthy Icilius, if you have any business defer't
until tomorrow, or the afternoon,
I shall be proud to pleasure you.

The Fox is earth't, my Lord you cannot wind him yet.

Stools for my noble friends. -- I pray you sit

May it please your Lordship.

Why uncivil sir?
have I not begged for bearance of my best
and dearest friends, and must you trouble me?

My Lord, I must be heard, and will be heard,
were all the gods in Parliament, I'd burst
their silence with my importunity,
but they should hear me.

The fellow's mad;
we have no leisure now to hear you sir.

Hast now no leisure to hear just complaints?
Resign thy place O Appius, that some other
may do me Justice then.

We'll hear't to morrow.

O my Lord,
Deny me Justice absolutely, rather
them feed me with delays.

Good my Lord hear him,
and wonder when you hear him, that a case
so full of vile Imposture, should desire
to be unfoulded.

I my Lord, 'tis true,
the Imposture is on their parts.

Hold your prating,
away with him to prison, clamorous fellow.
Suspect you our uprightness?

No my Lord:
but I have mighty Enemies, my Lord,
will overflow my cause. See, here I hold
my bondwoman that brags her self to be
descended of a noble family.
My purse is too scant to wage Law with them,
I am infor^'t be mine own advocate,
not one will plead for me. Now if your Lordship
will do me justice so, if not then know
high hills are safe, when seas poor dales or* eflow.

Sir, I think it fit to let you know,
e're you proceed in this your subtle suite,
what penalty and danger you acrne,
if you be found to double. Here's a virgin
famous by birth, by education noble,
and she forsooth, happily but to draw
some piece of money from her worthy father,
must needs be challenged for a bondwoman.
Sir take heed, and well bethink your self,
I'll make you a president to all the world,
If I but find you tripping.

Do it freely.
and view on that condition these just proofs.

Is that the Virgins nurse.

He^ milc^ Nurse my Lord, I had a sore hand with her for a year and a quarter,
I have had somewhat to do with her since too, for the poor Gentlewoman hath
been so troubled with the green sickness.


I pray thee Nurse entreat Sertorius
to come and speak with me.

Here is strange circumstance, view it my Lord,
if he should prove this, it would make Virginius
think he were wronged.

There is a devilish cunning
expressed in this black forgery.

Icilius and Virginia, pray come near,
compound with this base fellow. You were better
disburse some trifle then to undergo
the question of her freedom.

O my Lord!
she were not worth a handful of a bride,
if she did need a bribe.

Nay, take your course,
I only give you my opinion,
I ask no fee for it. Do you know this fellow?

Yes my Lord, he's your servant.

You're in the right:
But will you truly know his character?
he was at first a petty Notary,
a fellow that being trusted with large sums
of honest Citizens, to be employed
in the trade of usury; this Gentleman,
couching his credit like a tilting staff
most cunningly it brake, and at one course
he ran away with thirty thousand pound,
returning to the City seven year after,
having compounded with his creditors
for the third moity, he buys an office
belonging to our place, depends on us,
in which the oppression and vile injuries
he hath done poor suitors, they have cause to rue,
and I to pity: he hath sold his smiles
for silver, but his promises for gold,
his delays have undone men.
The plague that in some folded cloud remains,
the bright Sun soon disperses; but observe,
when black infection in some dunghill lies,
there's work for bells and graves, if it do rise.

He was an ill prop to your house, my Lord.

Tis true my Lord, but we that have such servants,
are like to Cuccolds that have riotous wives,
we are the last that know it: this is it
makes noblemen suspected to have done ill,
when the oppression lies in their proud followers.

My Lord, it was some soothing sicophant,
some base detracting Rascal that hath spread
this falsehood in your ears.

Peace Impudence, did I not yester day, no longer since
surprise thee in thy Study counterfeiting.
our hand?

'Tis true, my Lord.

Being subscribed
unto a Letter filled with amorous stuff
unto this Lady?

I have asked your pardon,
and gave you reason why I was so bold
to use that forgery.

Did you receive it?

I did my Lord, and I can show your Lordship
a packet of such Letters.

Now by the Gods,
I'll make you rue it. I beseech you Sir,
show them the reason moved you counterfeit
our Letter.

Sir, I had no other colour.
to come to speak with her.

A goodly reason!
Did you until this hour acquaint the Lady
with your intended suit?

At several times,
and would have drawn her by some private course
to have compounded for her liberty.

Now by a Virgins honour and true birth,
'tis false, my Lord, I never had a dream
so terrible as is this monstrous divel.

Well Sir, referring my particular wrong
to a particular censure, I would know
what is your suit?

My Lord, a speedy trial.

You shall obtain't with all severity,
I will not give you longer time to dream
upon new slights to cloak your forgery,
Observe you this Camelion, my Lords.
I'll make him change his colour presently.

My Lord, although the uprightness of our cause
needs no delays, yet for the satisfaction
of old Virginius, let him be present
when we shall crave a trial.

Sir it needs not:
Who stands for father of the Innocent,
if not the Judge? I'll save the poor old man
that needless travel.

With your favour Sir,
we must entreat some respit in a business
so needful of his presence.

I do protest,
you wrong your selves thus to importune it.
Well, let it be to morrow, I'll not sleep
till I have made this thicket a smooth plain,
and given you your true honour back again.

My Lord, the distance 'twixt the Camp and us
cannot be measured in so short a time.
Let us have four days respit.

You are unwise;
rumour by that time will have fully spread
the scandal, which being ended in one hour
will turn to air: To morrow is the Trial,
in the mean time, let all contented thoughts
attend you.

My Lord, you deal unjustly
thus to dismiss her; this is that they seek for,
before to morrow they'll convey her hence
where my claim shall not seize her.

Cunning knave,
You would have bond for her appearance? say.

I think the motions honest.

Very good.
Icilius shall engage his honoured word
for her appearance.

As you please, my Lord,
But it were, fitting her old Uucle there
were jointly bound with him.

Well Sir, your pleasure
shall have satiety. You'll take our word
for her appearance; will you not Sir, I pray?

Most willingly my Lord.

Then Sir you have it,
and in the mean time I'll take the honoured Lady
into my guardianship, and by my life,
I'll use her in all kindness as my wife.

Now by the Gods you shall not.

Shall not, what?

Not use her as your wife Sir.

O my Lord, I spake it from my heart.

I very likely.
She is a Virgin Sir, and must not lye
under a mans forth coming; do you mark?
not under your forth coming, lecherous Appius.

Mistake me not, my Lord: Our Secretary,
Take bonds for the appearance of this Lady.
And now to you sir, you that were my servant,
I here casheire you; never shalt thou shroud
thy villainies under our noble roof,
nor escape the whip, or the fell hangmans book
by warrant of our favour.

So my Lord,
I am more free to serve the Gods, I hope,
now I have lost your service.

Hark you sir,
who shall give bonds for your appearance, ha?
to justify your claim?

I have none, my Lord.

Away, commit him prisoner to his chamber:
I'll keep you safe from starting.

Why my Lord?

Away, I will not hear you.
A Judges heart here in the midst must stand,
and move not a hairs breadth to either hand.

O were thy heart but of the self same piece
thy tongue is, Appius; how blessed were Rome!

Post to the camp Sertorius, thou hast heard
th'effect of all, relate it to Virginius.
I pray thee use thy ablest horsemanship,
for it concerns us near.

I go my Lord.

Sure all this is damned cunning.

O my Lord,
seamen in tempests shun the flattering shore,
to bear full sails upon it were danger more.
So men over born with greatness still hold dread,
false seeming friends that on their bosoms spread:
for this is a safe truth which never varies,
He that strikes all his sails seldom miscarries.

Must we be slaves both to a tyrants will,
and confounding ignorance at once?
Where are we, in a mist, or is this hell?
I have seen as great as the proud Judge have fell:
the bending Willow yielding to each wind,
shall keep his rooting firm, when the proud Oak.
braving the storm, presuming on his root,
shall have his body rent from head to foot;
Let us expect the worst that may befall,
and with a noble confidence bear all.


Here, bear this packet to Minutius,
and privately deliver't, make as much speed
as if thy father were deceas'di'th' Camp,
and that thou went to take th'Administration
of what he left thee. Fly.

I go my Lord.

O my trusty Clodius.

My dear Lord,
let me adore your divine policy.
You have poisoned them with sweet meats, you have my Lord.
But what contain those Letters?

Much importance.
Minutius is commanded by that packet
to hold Virginius prisoner in the Camp
on some suspect of Treason.

But my Lord, how will you answer this?

Tush, any fault
or shadow of a Crime will be sufficient
for his committing: thus when he is absent
we shall in a more calm and friendly sea
sail to our purpose.

Mercury himself
could not direct more safely.

O my Clodius,
Observe this rule, one ill must cure another;
as Aconi^um a strong poison, brings
a present cure against all Serpents stings.
In high attempts, the soul hath infinite eyes,
and 'tis necessity makes men most wise.
Should I miscarry in this desperate plot,
this of my fate in after times be spoken,
I'll break that with my weight on which I am broken.

Why how now Corbulo? thou wast not wont to be of this sad temper. What's the
matter now?


Times change, and seasons alter, some men are born to the Bench, and some to
the halter. What do you think now that I am?


I think thee to be Virginia's man, and Corbulo.

No, no such matter: guess again, tell me but what I am, or what manner of
fellow you imagine me to be?


I take thee to be an honest good, fellow.

Wide of the ^ow hand stil^ Corbulo is no such man.

What art thou then?

Listen, and I'll describe my self to you: I am something better then a Knave,
and yet come shor^ of being an honest man; and though I can sing a ^ble, yet^m
accounted b^ (...) one of the base, being indeed, and a^ the ca^ stands with me
at this present, inferior to a rogue, and three degrees worse then a Rascal.


How comes this to pass?

Only by my services success. Take heed whom you serve. Oh you serving
Creatures; for this is all I have got by serving my Lady Virginia.


Why, what of her?

She is not the woman you take he to be; for though she have borrowed no
money, yet she (...) entered into bonds; and though you may think her a woman
not sufficient, yet 'tis very like her bond will be taken. The truth (...)
(...) challenged to be a bond woman; now if she be a bond woman and a slave,
and I her servant and Vassal, what did you take me to be? I am an A^, a Coat, a
worm, a Woodcock amongst birds, a Hodmond^d amongst flies, amongst Cu^s a
trindle tale, and amongst fishes a poor Iper; but amongst Serving men worse,
worse then the mans man to the under Yeomen Few^rer.


But is it possible, thy Lady is challenged to be a slave? What witness have
they?


Witness these Fountains, these Flood-gates, these Wellsprings: the poor
Gentlewoman was Arrested in the open Market; I offered, I offered to bail her;
(...) (though she was) I could not be taken. The grief hath gone so ^ar my
heart, that (...) I be made free, I shall never be mine own man. The Lord
Appius hath committed her to Ward, and it is thought she shall neither lye on
the Knight side, not in the Troping Ward, for if he may have his will of her,
he means to put (...) in the Hole. His Warrant hath be^ out for her, but how
the case stands with him, or how matters will be taken up with her, ^s yet
uncertain.


When shall the Trial be?

I take it to be as soon as the morning is brought a bed of a new son and (...)


And when is that*

(...) to (...), (...) every morning you know brings forth a new ^n, b^ they
(...) (...) short lived, for every night she drovvns them in the Western ^ea.
But (...) ^hese (...), as too high for your d^ll app^ (...). Shall (...) (...)
you at the Trial to morrow?


By (...) ^lp (...) ^e there.

And I, if I li^*

And I, if I dye for (...): Here's my hand I'll meet you. It is thought my old
master will be there at the Bar; for though all the timber of his house yet
stand, yet my Lord Numitorius hath sent one of his Posts to the Camp to bid him
spur cut and come to the sentence. Oh we have a house at home as heavy as if it
were covered with lead. But you will remember to be there.


And not to fail.

If I chance to meet you there, and that the Case go against us, I will give
you a quart, not of Wine, but of Tears; for instead of a new Role, I purpose to
break my Fast with sops of sorrow.



THanks to my noble friends, itnow appears
that you have rather loved me then my fortune,
for that's near shipwrecked: chance you see still ranges,
and this short dance of life is full of changes.
Appius! how hollow that name founds, how dreadful?
It is a question, whether the proud Lecher
will view us to our merit; for they say,
his memory to virtue and good men
is still carousing Leth^. O the Gods,
not with more terror do the souls in hell
appear before the seat of Rhadamant,
then the poor Client yonder.

O Virginius.
Why do you wear this habit? it ill fits
your noble person, or this reverend place.

That's true, old man, but it well fits the case
that's now in question. If with form and show
they prove her slaved, all freedom I'll forgo^.

Noble Virginius,
put out a bold and confident defence:
search the Imposture, like a cunning Tryer,
false me^als bear the touch, but brook not fire:
their brittleness betrays them; let your breath
discover as much shame in them, as death
did ever draw from Offenders. Let your truth
nobly supported, void of fear or art,
welcome what ever comes with a great heart.

Now by the Gods, I thank thee noble youth.
I never feared in a besieged Town
Mines or great Engines like you Lawyers Gown.

O my dear Lord and father, once you gave me
a noble freedom, do not see it lost
without a forfeit; take the life you gave me
and sacrifice it rather to the gods
then to a villains Lust. Happy the Wretch
who born in bondage lives and dies a slave,
and sees no lustful projects bent upon her,
and neither knows the life nor death of honour.

We have neither Justice, no nor violence,
which should reform corruption sufficient
to cross their black premeditated doom.
Appius will seize her, all the fire in hell
is leapt into his bosom.

O you Gods,
extinguish it with your compassionate tears,
although you make a second deluge spread,
and swell more high then Tenerif^'s high head.
Have not the Wars heaped snow sufficient
upon this aged head, but they will still
pile winter upon winter?

Is he come? say.
Now by my life I'll quit the General.

Your reverence to the Judge, good brother.

Yes Sir, I have learnt my complement thus,
Blessed mean estates who stand in fear of many,
and great are cursed for that they f^ar not any.

What is Virginius come?

I am here my Lord.

Where is your daughter?

Here my reverend Lord.
Your habit shows you strangely.

O 'tis fit,
it suits both time and cause. Pray pardon it,

Where is your Advocate?

I have none my Lord.
Truth needs no Advocate, the unjust Cause
buys up the tongues that travel with applause
in these your thronged Courts. I want not any,
and count him the most wretched that needs many.

May it please your reverend Lordships?

What are you Sir?

Of counsel with my Client Marcus Clodius.

My Lord, I undertake a desperate combat
to cope with this most eloquent Lawyer:
I have no skill in the weapon, good my Lord;
I mean, I am not travelled in your Laws.
My suit is therefore by your special goodness
they be not wrested against me.

O Virginius, the gods defend they should.

Your humble servant shall ever pray for you.
Thus shall your glory be above your place,
or those high titles which you hold in Court,
for they die blessed that die in good report.
Now Sir I stand you.

Then have at you Sir.
May it please your Lordships, here is such a Case
so full of subtilty, and as it were,
so far benighted in an ignorant mist,
that though my reading be sufficient,
my practice more, I never was entangled
in the like pursenet. Here is one that claims
this woman for his daughter. Here's another
affirms she is his Bond-slave. Now the Question
(with favour of the Bench) I shall make plain
in two words only without circumstance.

Fall to your proofs.

Where are our papers.

Here Sir.

Where Sir? I vow you're the most tedious Client.
Now we come to it my Lord. Thus stands the Case,
the Law is clear on our sides. Hold your prating.
That honourable Lord Virginius,
having been married about fifteen year,
and Issuless, this Virgins politic mother
Seeing the Land was likely to descend
to Numitorius. I pray Sir listen.
You my Lord Numitorius attend,
we are on your side. Old Virginius
employed in foreign wars, she se^ him (...)
she was with child; observe it, I beseech you,
and note the trick of a deceitful woman:
she in the mean time fai^ the passions
of a great b^llyed woman, counter^s
their passions and their (...) and verily
all Rome held this for no ^posterous stuff.
What's to be done now? here's a rumour spread
of a young Heir, gods bless it, and belly
bombasted with a cushion: but their wants,
(What wants there?) nothing but a pretty babe,
bought with some piece of money, where it skils not,
to furnish this supposed lying in.

I protest my Lord, the fellow in the night cap
hath not spoke one true word yet.

Hold you your prating woman till you are called.

'Tis purchased. Where? From this mans bond-woman
The money paid. What was the sum of money?

A thousand Drachmas.

Good, a thousand Drachmas.

Where is that bond-woman.

She's dead, my Lord.

O dead, that makes your Cause suspicious.

But here's her deposition on her death bed,
with other testimony to confirm
what we have said is true. Wilt please your Lordship
take pains to view these writings. Here, my Lord,
we shall not need to hold your Lordships long,
we will make short work on it.

My Lord.

By your favour.
If that your claim be just, how happens it
that you have discontinued it the space
of fourteen years?

I shall resolve your Lordship.

I vow this is a practised Dialogue:
comes it not rarely off?

Peace, give them leave.

'Tis very true, this Gentleman at first
thought to conceal this accident, and did so,
only revealed his knowledge to the mother
of this fair bond-woman, who bought his silence
during her life time with great sums of Coin.

Where are your proofs of that?

Here, my good Lord, with depositions likewi^.

Well, go on.

For your question
of discontinuance. Put case my slave
run away from me, dwell in some near City
the space of twenty years, and there grow rich,
it is in my discretion, by your favour,
to seize him when I please.

That's very true.

Cast not your nobler beams, you reverend Judges
on such a putrified dunghill.

By your favour, you shall be heard anon.

My Lords, believe not this spruce Orator.
Had I but fee'd him first, he would have told
as smooth a tale on our side.

Give us leave.

He deals in formal glosses, cunning shows,
and cares not greatly which way the Case goes;
Examine I beseech you this old woman,
who is the truest witness of her birth.

Soft you, is she your only witness?

She is, my Lord.

Why, is it possible
such a great Lady in her time of child birth,
should have no other Witness but a Nurse?

For ought I know the rest are dead, my Lord.

Dead? no my Lord, belike they were of counsel
with your deceased Lady, and so shamed
twice to give colour to so vile an act.
Thou Nurse observe me, thy offence already
doth merit punishment beyond our censure,
pull not more whips upon thee.

I defy your whips, my Lord.

Command her silence Lictors.

O injustice! you frown away my Witness;
Is this Law? is this uprightness?

Have you viewed the Writings?
This is a trick to make our slaves our heirs
beyond prevention.

Appius, wilt thou hear me?
You have standred a sweet Lady that now sleeps
in a most noble Monument. Observe me,
I would have taken her simple word to gage
before his soul or thine.

That makes thee wretched.
Old man, I am sorry for thee that thy love,
by custom is grown natural, which by nature
should be an absolute loathing. Note the Sparrow,
that having hatched a Cucko, when it sees
her brood a Monster to her proper kind,
forsakes it, and with more fear shuns the nest,
then she had care in the Spring to have it dressed.
cast thy affection then behind thy back, and think. --

Be wise, take counsel of your friends.
You have many soldiers in their time of service
father strange children.

True: and Pleaders too,
when they are sent to visit Provinces.
You my most neat and cunning Orator,
whose tongue is Quick-silver, Pray thee good Janus
look not so many several ways at once,
but go to the point.

I will, and keep you out
at points end, though I am no soldier.

First the oath of the deceased bond-woman.

A very virtuous Matron.

Joined with the testimony of Clodius.

A most approved honest Gentleman.

Besides six other honest Gentlemen.

All Knights, and there's no question but their oaths will go for currant.


See my reverend Lords,
and wonder at a Case so evident.

My Lord, I knew it.

Observe my Lord how their own Policy
confounds them. Had your Lordship yesterday
proceeded as 'twas fit, to a just sentence,
the Apparel and the Jewels that she wore,
more worth then all her Tribe, had then been due
unto our Client: now to cousin him
of such a forfeit, see they bring the maid
in her most proper habit, bond-slave like,
and they will save by the hand too. Please your Lordships,
I crave a sentence.

My Lord.

Lord Appius.

Now by the Gods here's juggling.

Who cannot counterfeit a dead mans hand?

Or hire some villain^ to swear forge^ies?

Clodius was brought up in your house my Lord,
and that's suspicious.

How is't probable,
that our wife being present at the child-birth,
whom this did nearest concern, should ne'er reveal it?

Or if ours dealt thus cunningly, how haps it
her policy, as you term it, did not rather
provide an Issue male to cheer the father?

I'll answer each particular.

It needs not,
Here's witness, most sufficient witness.
Think you, my Lord, our Laws are writ in snow,
and that your breath can melt them?

No my Lord,
We have not such hot livers: Mark you that?

Remember yet the Gods, O Appius,
who have no part in this. Thy violent Lust
shall like the biting of the envenomed Aspick,
steal thee to hell. So subtle are thy evils,
in life they'll seem good Angels, in death devils.

Observe you not this scandal?

Sir, 'Tis none.
I'll show thy Letters full of violent Lust
sent to this Lady.

Wilt thou breath a lye
before such a reverend Audience?

That place
is sanctuary to thee. Lye? see here they are.

My Lords, these are but dilatory shifts.
Sirrah I know you to the very heart,
and I'll observe you.

Do but do it with Justice.
Clear thy self first, O Appius, ere thou judge
our imperfections rashly, for we wot
the Office of a Justice is perverted quite
when one thief hangs another.

You are too bold.

Lictors take charge of him*

'Tis very good.
Will no man view these papers? What not one?
Jove thou hast found a Rival upon earth,
his nod strikes all men dumb. My duty to you.
The Ass that carried ^sis on his back,
thought that the superstitious people kneeled
to give his dullness humble reverence.
If thou think so, proud Judge, I let thee see
I bend low to thy Gown, but not to thee.

There's one in hold already. Noble youth
fetters grace one being worn for speaking truth;
I'll lye with thee, I swear, though in a dungeon;
the injuries you do us we shall pardon,
but it is just the wrongs which we forgive,
the gods are charged therewith to see revenged.

Come, you're a proud Pleb^ian.

True my Lord.
Proud in the glory of my Ancestors,
who have continued these eight hundred years:
the Heralds have not known you these eight months.

Your madness wrongs you, by my soul I love you.

Thy soul?
O thy opinion old Pythagoras,
Whither, O whither should thy black soul fly,
into what ravenous bird or beast most vile?
only into a weeping Crocodile.
Love me? Thou loy'st me (Appius) as the earth loves rain,
thou fain would swallow me.

Know you the place you speak in?

I'll speak freely.
Good men too much trusting their innocence
do not betake them to that just defence
which Gods and Nature gave them; but even wink
in the black tempest, and so fondly sink.

Let us proceed to sentence.

Ere you speak
One parting farewell let me borrow of you
to take of my Virginia.

Now my Lords,
we shall have fair confession of the truth.
Pray take your course.

Farewell my sweet Virginia, never, never
shall I taste fruit of the most blessed hope
I had in thee. Let me forget the thought
of thy most pretty infancy, when first
returning from the Wars, I took delight
to rock thee in my Target, when my Girl
would kiss her father in his burganet
of glittering steel hung'bout his armed neck;
and viewing the bright mettle, smile to see
another fair Virginia smile on thee.
When I first taught thee how to go, to speak,
and when my wounds have smarted, I have sung
with an unskilful, yet a willing voice,
to bring my Girl asleep. O my Virginia,
when we begun to be, begun our woes,
increasing still, as dying life still grows.

This tediousness doth much offend the Court.
Silence: attend her Sentence.

Hold, without Sentence I'll resign her freely,
since you will prove her to be none of mine.

See, see, how evidently Truth appears.
Receive her Clodius.

Thus I surrender her into the Court
of all the Gods. And see proud Appius see,
although not justly, I have made her free.
And if thy Lust with this Act be not fed,
bury her in thy bowels, now she's dead.

O horrid act!

Lay hand upon the Murderer.

Oh for a ring of pikes to circle me.
What? have I stood the brunt of thousand enemies
here to be slain by hang-men? No. I'll fly
to safety in the Camp.

Some pursue the villain,
others take up the body. Madness and rage
are still the Attendants of old doting age.

Is our Hut swept clean?

As I can make it.

'Tis betwixt us two;
but how many think thou, bred of Roman blood,
did lodge with us last night?

More I think then the Camp hath enemies,
they are not to be numbered.

Comrague, I fear Appius will doom us to Acteons death,
to be worried by the Cattle that we feed.
How goes the day?

My stomach has struck twelve.

Come see what provant our knapsack yields.
This is our store, our Garner.

A small pit^ance.

Feeds Appius thus, is this a City feast?
This crust doth taste like date stones, and this thing
if I knew what to call it.

I can tell you: cheese struck in years.

I do not think but this same crust was baked
and this cheese frighted out of milk and whey
before we two were soldiers: though it be old
I see 't can crawl; what living things be these
that walk so freely 'tween the ^ind and pith?
for here's no sap left.

They call them Gentles.

Therefore 'tis thought fit,
that Soldiers by profession Gentlemen
should thus be fed with Gentles. I am stomach sick,
I must have some strong water.

Where will you hav't?

In you green ditch, a place which none can pass
but he must stop his nose, thou know it well,
there where the two dead dogs lye.

Yes I know it.

And see the Cat that lies a distance off
be flayed for supper. Though we dine to day
as Dutch men feed their soldiers, we will sup
bravely like Roman Leaguerers.

Sir, the General.

We'll give him place,
but tell none of our dainties, lest we have
too many guests to supper.

Most sure 'tis so, it cannot otherwise be,
Either Virginius is degenerate
from the ancient virtues he was wont to boast,
or in some strange displeasure with the Senate;
Why should these letters else from Appius
confine him a close prisoner to the Camp?
and which confirms his guilt, why should he fly?
needs then must I incur some high displeasure
for negligence to let him thus escape;
which to excuse, and that it may appear
I have no band with him, but am of faction
opposed in all things to the least mildeed,
I will casheir him, and his Tribuneship
bestow upon some noble Gentleman
belonging to the Camp. Soldiers and friends,
you that beneath Virginius Colours march^,
by strict command from the Decemvirat,
we take you from the charge of him late (...),
and his Authority, Command, and Honour
we give this worthy Roman. Know his Colours,
and prove his faithful Soldiers.

Warlike General,
my courage and my forwardness in battle,
shall plead how well I can deserve the title,
to be a Roman Tribune.

Now, the news?

Virginius in a strange shape of distraction,
enters the Camp, and at his heels a legion
of all estates, growths, ages, and degrees,
with breathless paces dog his frighted steps.
It seems half Roo^'s unpeopled with a train
that either for some mischief done, pursue him,
or to attend some uncouth novelty.

Some wonder our fear promises. Worthy soldiers,
martial your selves, and entertain this novel
within a ring of steel: Wall in this portent
with men and harness, be it ne'er so dreadful.
He's entered by the clamour of the camp,
that entertains him with these echoing shouts.
Affection that in Soldiers hearts is bred,
survives the wounded, and out lives the dead.

Have I in all this populous Assembly
of soldiers that have proved Virginius valour,
one friend? Let him come thrill his partisan
against this breast, that through a large wide wound,
my mighty soul might rush out of this prison
to fly more freely to yon crystal palace,
where honour sits inthronis'd. What, no friend?
Can this great multitude then yield an enemy
that hates my life? Here let him seize it freely.
What, no man strike? am I so well beloved?
Minutius then to thee. If in this camp
there lives one man so just to punish sin,
so charitable to redeem from torments
a wretched soldier, at his worthy hand
(...) a death.

What means Virginius?

O^ if the Generals heart be so obdu^,
to an old begging soldier, Have I here
no honest Legionary of mine own Troo^
at whose bold hand and sword, if not (...).
I may command a death?

Alas good Captain.

Virginius, you have no command at all,
your Companies are elsewhere now bestowed.
Besides, we have a Charge to (...) you here.
and make you the Camps prisoner.

General, thanks.
For thou hast done as much with one harsh word
as I begged from their weapons. Thou hast killed me
but with a living death.

Besides, I charge you
to speak what means this ugly face of blood,
you put on your distractions? Whats the reason
all Rome pursues you, covering those high (...),
as if they dogged you for some damned act?
What have you done?

I have plaid the Pa^cide,
Killed mine own child,

Virginia?

Yes, even she.
These rude hands ripped her, and her innocent blood
flowed above my elbows.

Killed her willingly?

Willingly, with advice, premeditation,
and settled purpose; and see still I wear
her crimson colours, and these withered arms
are died in her heart blood.

Most wretched villain?

But how? I loved her life. Lend me amongst you
one speaking Organ to discourse her death;
It is too harsh an imposition
to lay upon a father. O my Virginia!

How agrees this? love her, and murder her?

Yes, Give me but a little leave to (...)
a few red tears, (for soldiers should weep blood)
and I'll agree them well. Attend me all.
Alas, might I have kept her chaste and free,
this life so oft engaged for ungrateful Rome,
lay in her bosom. But when I saw her pulled
by Appius Lictors to be claimed a sl^ve,
and dragged unto a public Sessions house,
divorced from her fore Spousals with Icilius,
a noble youth, and made a bond-woman,
enforced by violence from her fathers arms
to be a Prostiture and Permour
to the rude twinings of a lecherous Judge;
Then, then, O loving Soldiers, (I'll not deny it)
for 'twas mine honour, my pa^ernal pity,
and the sole act, for which I love my life.
Then lustful Appius, he that sways the Land,
slew poor Virginia by this fathers hand.

O villain Appius.

O noble Virginius.

To you I appeal, you are my Sentencers:
Did Appius right, or poor Virginius wrong?
Sentence my Fact with a free general tongue.

Appius is the Parricide.

Virginins guiltless of his daughters death.

It this be true, Virginius as the moan
of all the Roman fry that follows you
confirms at large, this cause is to be pitied,
and should not die revengelesse.

Noble Minutius,
Thou hast a daughter, thou hast a wife too,
so most of you have Soldiers. Why might not this
have happened you? Which of you all, deer friends,
but now, even now, may have your wives deflowered,
your daughters slav'd, and made a Lictors prey?
Think them not safe in Rome, for mine lived there.

It is a common cause.

Appius shall die for it.

Lets make Virginius General.

A General, a General, lets make Virginius General.

It shall be so. Virginius take my Charge,
the wrongs are thine, so violent and so weighty
that none but he that lost fo (...) a child,
knows how to punish. By the Gods of Rome,
Virginius shall succeed my full command.

What's honour unto me, a weak old man,
weary of life, and covetous of a grave?
I am a dead man now Virginia lives not,
the self same hand that dared to save from shame
a child, dares in the father (...) the (...)

Stay noble General

You much for^ ^nge, Virginias.
Who, if you dye, will take your ^ause in hand,
and proscribe Appius, should you p^ish thus?

Thou ought Minutius. Soldiers, so ought you.
I'm out of fear, my noble wife's expired,
My daughter (of blessed memory) the object
of Appius lust, lives (...) the Ely^an Vestals,
my house yields none fit for his Lictors spoil.
You that have wives lodged in you prison Rome,
have Lands unri^ed, houses yet (...);
your freeborn daughters yet unstrumpeted,
prevent these mischiefs yet while you have time.

We will by you our noble General.

He that was destined to preserve great Rome.

I accept your ch^* in hope to guard you all
from my inhumane sufferings. Be^ my pride
that I have bred a daughter whose chaste blood
was spilt for you, and for Romes la^ing good.


IS Appius then committed?

So 'tis (...).

How will you bear you in this turbule^ state?
You are a Member of that wretched Faction.
I wonder how you escape imprisonment?

Let me alone, I have learnt with the wi^ Hed^og.
to stop my cave that way the ^pest drives.
Never did Bear-whelp ^bling down a hill
with more art shrink his head betwixt his claws
then I will work my safety Appius
is in the sand already up to the chin,
and shall I hazard landing on that shelf?
He's a wise friend that first (...) himself.

What is your course, of (...)?

Marry this (...)
Virginius with his Troops is entering Rome,
and it is like that in the market place
my L. Icilius and himself shall meet.
Now to encounter these, two such great Armies,
where lies my Court of Guard?

Why in your heels.
There are strange dogs uncoupled.

You are deceived,
I have studied a most eloquent Oration,
that shall applaud their fortune, and distaste
the cruelty of Appius.

Very good Sir.
It seems then you will rail upon your Lord,
your late good Benefactor.

By the way Sir.

Protest Virginia was no bond-woman,
and read her noble Pedigree.

By the way Sir.

Could you not by the way too find occasion
to beg Lord Appius Lands?

And by the way
perchance I will. For I will gull them all
most palbably.

Indeed you have the Art
of flattery.

Of Rhetoric you would say.
And I'll begin my smooth Oration thus,
Most learned Captains.

Fie, fie, that's horrible, most of your Captains.
are utterly unlearned.

Yet I assure you,
most of them know Arithmatick so well,
that in a Muster to preserve dead pays,
they I make twelve stand for twenty.

Very good.

Then I proceed,
I do applaud your fortunes, and commend
in this your observation, noble shake-rags.
The Helmet shall no more harbour the spider,
but it shall serve to carouse Sack and Cider.
The rest within I'll study.

Farewell Proteus,
and I shall wish thy eloquent bravado
may sh^ild thee from the whip and Eastinado.
now in this furious tempest let us glide,
with folded sails at pleasure of the Tide.

Stand.

Make a stand.

A p^rly with Virginius.

We will not trust our General 'twixt the Armies,
but upon terms of hostage.

Well advised!
Nor we our General: who for the leaguer?

Our self.

Who for the City?

Numitorius.

How is it with your sorrow noble brother?

I am forsaken of the gods, old man.

Preach not that wretched doctrine to your self,
It will beget despair.

What do you call
a burning Fever? Is not that a divel?
It shakes me like an earthquake. Wilt a, wilt a
give me some Wine?

O it is hurtful for you!

Why so? are all things that the appetite
of man doth covet in his perfect'st health,
what ever Art or Nature have invented,
to make the boundless wish of man contented,
Are all his poison? Give me the Wine there. -- When?
Do you grudge me a poor cup of drink? Say, Say.
Now by the gods, I'll leave enough behind me
to pay my debts, and for the rest, no matter
who scrambles for it.

Here my noble brother I
Alas, your hand shakes. I will guide it to you.

'Tis true, it trembles. Welcome thou just palsy,
'twere pity this should do me longer service,
now it hath slain my daughter. So I thank you;
now I have lost all comforts in the world,
it seems I must a little longer live;
be it but to serve my belly.

O my Lord,
this violent Fever took him late last night,
since when, the cruelty of the disease,
hath drawn him into sundry passions
beyond his wonted temper.

'Tis the gods
have powered their Justice on him.

You are sadly met my Lord.

Would we had met
in a cold grave together two months since,
I should not then have cursed you.

Ha! Whats that?

Old man, thou hast showed thy self a noble Roman,
but an unnatural Father; thou hast turned
my Bridal to a Funeral. What divel
did arm thy fury with the Lions paw,
the Dragons tail, with the Bulls double horne,
the Cormorants beak, the Cockatrices eyes,
the Scorpions teeth? and all these by a father
to be employed upon his innocent child?

Young man, I love thy true description;
I am happy now, that one beside my self,
doth teach me for this act. Yet were I pleased,
I could approve the deed most Just and noble;
and sure posterity, which truly renders
to each man his desert, shall praise me for it.

Come, 'twas unnatural and damnable.

You need not interrupt me. Here's a fury
will do it for you! You are a Roman Knight.
What was your oath when you received your Knighthood?
a parcel of it is, as I rememember,
rather to die with honour, then to live
in servitude. Had my poor girl been ravished,
in her dishonour, and in my sad grief,
your love and pity quickly had taken end.
Great men's misfortunes thus have ever stood,
they touch none nearly, but their nearest blood.
What do you mean to do? It seems, my Lord,
now you have caught the sword within your hand,
like a madman you'll draw it to offend
those that best love you; and perhaps the counsel
of some loose unthrifts, and vile male contents
hearten you to it: go to, take your course,
my faction shall not give the least advantage
to murderers, to banquerouts, or thieves,
to fleece the common Wealth.

Do you term us so?
Shall I reprove your rage, or is't your malice?
He that would tame a Lion, doth not use
the goad or wierd whip, but a sweet voice,
a fearful stroking, and with food in hand
must ply his wanton hunger.

Want of sleep will do it better then all these, my Lord.
I would not have you wake for others ruin,
lest you turn mad with watching.

O you gods!
You are now a General; learn to know your place,
and use your noble calling modestly.
Better had Appius been an upright Judge,
and yet an evil man, then honest man,
and yet a dissolute Judge; for all disgrace
lights less upon the person, then the place.
You are in the City now, where if you raise
but the least uproar, even your Fathers house
shall not be free from ransack. Piteous fires
that chance in Towrs of stone, are not so feared
as those that light in Flax shops; for there's food
for eminent ruin.

O my noble Lord!
Let not your passion bring a fatal end
to such a good beginning. All the world
shall honour that deed in him, which first
grew to a reconcilement.

Come my Lord,
I love your friendship; yes in sooth I do,
but will not seal it with that bloody hand.
Join we our armies. No fantastic copy,
or borrowed President will I assume
in my revenge. There's hope yet you may live,
to outwear this sorrow.

O Impossible.
A minutes joy to me, would quite cross nature,
as those that long have dwelt in noisome rooms,
swoon presently if they but scent perfumes.

to the Senate. Come, no more of this sad tale,
for such a tel-tale may we term our grief,
and doth as 'twere so listen to her own words,
Envious of others sleep, because she wakes.
I ever would converse with a grieved person
in a lunge journey to beguile the day,
or winter evening to pass time away.
March on, and let proud Appius in our view
like a tree rotted, fall that way he grew.

The world is changed now. All damnations
seize on the Hydra headed multitude,
that only gape for innovation.
O who would trust a people?

Nay, who would not,
rather then one reared on a popular suffrage,
whose station's built on Avees and Applause?
There's no firm structure on these airy Bases.
O fie upon such Greatness.

The same ^ands
that yesterday to hear me conscionate.
and Orarorize, rung shrill Plaudits forth
in sign of grace, now in contempt and scorn
hurry me to this place of darkness.

Could not their poisons rather spend themselves,
on the Judges folly, but must it needs stretch
to me his servant, and sweep me along?
Curse on the inconstant rabble.

Grieves it thee
to impart my sad disaster?

Marry doth it.

Thou shared'st a fortune with me in my Greatness,
I ha^'d thee after when I climb my State,
and shrink'st thou at my ruin?

I loved your Greatness,
and would have traced you in the golden path
of sweet promotion; but this your decline
sowrs all these hoped sweets.

'Tis the world right.
Such gratitude a great man still shall have
that trusts unto a temporizing slave.

Slave? Good. Which of us two in our dejection
is basest? I am most sure
your loathsome dungeon is as dark as mine,
your conscience for a thousand sentences
wrongly denounced, much more oppressed then mine.
then which is the most slave*

O double baseness,
to hear a drudge thus with his Lord compare!
Great men disgraced, slaves to their servants are.

Soldiers, keep a strong guard whilst we survey
our sentenced prisoners: And from this deep dungeon
keep off that great concourse, whose violent hands
would ruin this stone building and drag hence
this impious Judge peace* meal, to tear his limbs
before the Law convince him.

See these Monsters,
whose fronts the fair Virginias innocent blood
hath visarded with such black ugliness,
that they are loathsome to all good men's souls.
Speak damned Judge how can thou purge thy self
from Lust and blood?

I do confess my self
guilty of both: yet hear me, noble Romans,
Virginius, thou dost but supply my place,
I thine. Fortune hath lift thee to my Chair,
and thrown me headlong to thy pleading bar.
If in mine eminence I was stern to thee;
shunning my rigour, likewise shun my fall.
And being mild where I showed cruelty,
establish still thy greatness. Make some use
of this my bondage. With indifference
survey me, and comp^e my yesterday
with this sad hour, my height with my decline,
and give them equal balance.

U^certain fate, but yesterday his breath
^'d Rome, and his least ^ved frown was death:
I cannot choose but pity and lament,
So high a rise should have such low descent.

He's ready to forget his injury.
(Oh too relenting age!) Thinks not Virginius,
if he should pardon Appius this black deed,
and set him once more in the Ivory Chair,
he would be wary to avoid the like,
become a new man, a more upright Judge,
and deserve better of the Common Weal?

'Tis like he would.

Nay, if you thus begin,
I'll fetch that shall anatomize his (...).

Virginius, you are ^oo (...) to (...)
deeds of this nature. You must fashion now
your actions to your place, not to your passion,
severity to such acts is as necessary
as pity to the tears of innocence.

He speaks but Law and Justice.
Make good the streets, with your best men at arms:
Valerius and Horatio know the reason
of this loud uproar, and confused noise.
Although my heart be melting at the fall
of men in place and Office, we will be just
to punish murdrous Acts, and censure Lust.

Icilius, worthy Lord, bears through the street
the body of Virginia towards this prison;
which when it was discovered to the people,
moved such a mournful clamour, that their cries
pierced heaven, and forced tears from their sorrowing eyes.

Here comes Icilius.

Where was thy pity when thou slew this maid,
thou would extend to Appius? Pity? See
her wounds still bleeding at the horrid presence
of you stern Murderer, till she find revenge;
nor will these drops stench, or these springs be dry
till theirs be set a bleeding: Shall her soul
(whose essence some suppose lives in the blood)
still labour without rest? Will old Virginius
murder her once again in this delay?

Pause there Icilius.
This sight hath stiffened all my operant powers,
ic'd all my blood, benumbed my motion quite.
I'll power my soul into my daughters belly,
and with a soldiers tears embalm her wounds.
My only dear Virginia!

Leave this passion,
proceed to your just sentence.

We will. Give me two sword^. Appius grasp this,
You Clodius that. You shall be your own hang-men,
do Justice on your selves. You made Virginius.
^uce his own blood: lodged in his daughters breast,
which your own hands shall act upon your selves.
If you be Romans, and retain their spirits,
redeem a base life with a noble death,
and through your (...) (...) (...) yo^ ^ath.

Virginius is a noble Justicer,
had I my crooked paths levelled by thine.
I had not swayed the balance. Think not Lords,
but he that had the s^it to oppose the Gods,
dares likewise suffer what their powers inflict:
I have not dreaded famine, fire, no^ strange,
their common vengeance, poison in my cup,
nor dagger in my bosom, the revenge
of private men for private injuries;
nay more then these, not fe^'d to commit evil,
and shall I tremble at the punishment?
Now with as much resolved constancy,
as I offended, will I pay the mulct,
and this black stain laid on my family,
then which a nobler hath not place in Rome,
Wash with my blood away. Learn of me Clodius,
I'll teach thee what thou never studiest yet,
that's bravely how to die. Judges are termed
the Gods on earth; and such as are corrupt
read me in this my ruin. Those that succeed me
that so offend, thus punish. This the sum of all,
Appius that ^in'd, by Appius hand shall fall.

He dyed as boldly as he basely erred,
and so should every true bred Roman do.
And he whose lise was odious, thus expiring;
in his death forces pity. Clodius thou
wast follower of his fortunes in his being,
therefore in his not being imitate
his fair example.

Death is terrible
unto a conscience that's oppressed with guilt.
They say there is Elizium and Hell,
the first I have forfeited, the latter fear.
My skin is not sword proof.

Why dost thou pause?

For mercy, mercy I entreat you all.
Is't not sufficient for Virginia slain
that Appius suffered; one of noble blood,
and eminence in place, for a Plebian?
Besides, he was my Lord and might command me:
If I did ought, 'twas by compulsion, Lords,
and therefore I crave mercy.

Shall I doom him?

Do, good Icilius.

Then I sentence thus:
Thou had a mercy, most unme^riting slave,
of which thy base birth was not capable,
which we take off by taking thence thy sword.
And note the difference 'twixt a noble strain,
and one bred from the rabble: both alike
da^'d to transgress, but see their odds in death:
Appius died like a Roman Gentleman,
and a man both ways knowing; but this slave
is only sensible of vicious living,
not apprehensive of a noble death.
Therefore as a base Malefactor (we)
and timorous slave, give him (as he deserves)
unto the common Hangman.

What, no mercy?

Stop's mouth,
away with him: the life of the Decemviri
expires in them. Rome thou at length art free,
restored unto thine ancient liberty.

Of Consu^: which bold Iunius Brutus first
begun in Tarquins fall. Virginius you
and young Icilius shall his place succeed,
so by the peoples suffrage 'tis decreed.

We martial then our soldiers in that name
of Consuls, honoured with these golden baize.
Two fair, but Ladies most unfortunate,
have in their ruins raised declining Rome,
Lucretia and Virginia, both renowned*
for chastity. Soldiers and noble Romans
to grace her death, whose life hath freed great Rome,
march with her Course to her sad Funeral Tomb.


