GAllants, in this good Godly time of Lent
I am come forth to bid you all repent:
You Sparks I see have got a pious notion,
And put on black to show your great Devotion.
But lest you should mistake what I intend,
Let me tell you your faults, and how to mend.
First, leave to show your Valour in the Pit,
Leave Railing at Great Men to show your Wit.
With Vizard-Masks leave your Lewd Raillery,
Leave your Disturbance in the Midle-Gallery.
Leave all your Jests of Bant'ring and Dumfounding.
Leave always Duelling and never wounding.
Leave coming here, when you do not intend
To see the Play, but pick up a She friend.
Leave Sharping for your selves, and pay your Guiney
For Procuration there -- to Honest Jenney.
And for the Men of business in the Nation,
Let them begin a Thoro Reformation.
Let 'em leave Faction, Jealousies and Fears.
Leave setting us together by the Ears.
Let Corporations leave Petitioning,
And learn all due Allegiance to the King.
Let Politicians too not be so hot
To swear that a Spring-tide's a Popish-Plot.
Do not too eagerly that scent pursue,
Least hunting an Old Plot you make a New.
Leave your provoking Caesar and his frowns,
Leave crossing Birth-Rights and disposing Crowns.
Leave Englands ancient glory so to wrong,
As naming Princes with irreverent tongue:
Tho Foreigners and Enemies they be,
Forget not what is Due to Majesty.
Whilst brutishly those Titles we profane
The World does think we are turned Picts again.
Consider well, and then you'll be, I hope,
So civilised, as ^arce to burn the Pope;
But if you will go on, make this Addition,
Burn too the Rump and Westminster Petition.

THus far my fortune has my thoughts out-run,
And Fate has finished all my hopes begun:
I've joys unsought and unexpected found;
My vainest wishes with success are Crowned:
So large an Empire, and a Lord so great,
Kind in your Love, and glorious in your Seat,
A hopeful Prince sprung from your Royal bed,
And born so great a Monarch to succeed,
Are more then Common blessings; known to few:
Such only our great Prophet could bestow.

Those blessings he by fair Sultana sent;
He was the Author, Thou the Instrument.
Had he not graced my Crown with such a Gem,
I should have scorned his worthless Diadem:
And were I poor, yet I in thee alone
Shoud find an Empire Sceptre and a Throne.

Your love my Lord's above the common rate,
As though it were proportioned to your state:
Thus you my safety and my Glory are:
Not to be matched in kindness, or in war.
And yet I tremble --

-- What, when I am here?
It would be sin in any but in her.
Can Formiana danger apprehend,
That has me for her Champion, and her Friend?
Fear in the breasts of Cowards only lies:
Hazards to them, to us are Victories.

Women, you know, are Childish; so am I:
Alas! I fear I know not what, nor why.
And yet to give my trembling heart it's due,
The Fears it entertains are all for you.
Full of disquiet are my days and nights;
And every thing I see, but you, affrights:
My fancy does such lasting terrors make,
As what I dream asleep, I see awake.

Your causeless fear 'tis pity to reprove,
Because it is the product of your Love:
And yet, fair Princess, you would seem to express
A greater kindness, were your terror less.

I should be glad to have it made appear,
That I have entertained a causeless fear:
Then let the world my over fondness blame;
I would exchange such grief for such a shame.
See the grim Skeleton appears again!
Look, my dear Lord! Now did I fear in vain?
Speak ugly Monster, who thou art or whence;
Say who the offender is, and what the offence.

Alas! my Queen, how fearful you are grown!
Tis nothing but a fancy of your own:
Like Children left in darkness, you create
The Aerie nothing, which you tremble at.
Show it, describe it, tell me what 'tis like --
Will it be struck? or has it power to strike --?

Alas, my Lord, provoke it not too far;
See, it erects an Instrument of War:
Look now my Lord, it beckons you to come;
And seems as if it called you to a Tomb;
But I will interpose 'twixt you and it.
Here, take me -- he's not ready for thee yet.

Kind Innocence! come, lay a side thy fear;
Foes cannot hurt that are afraid to appear.
Who dares but tremble, when I draw my Sword?
Where is this shadow now --

O my dear Lord,
It flies! It flies! but do not you pursue;
It only came, It only stayed for you.

Come, come my dear, indeed you are in fault
To cherish thus a vain and empty thought.
Well now I hope tis gone --

No, Royal Sir,
Still in the door it stands and will not stir;
Hold my dear Lord --

-- Hence bold intruder, hence,
And stay not to disturb her innocence.
I nothing saw, and yet me thinks the mirth
Of my calm soul is damp't with smells of earth:
Moist vapours rise as from some Vault or Cave;
Sure -- I am in a Charnel house or Grave:
My dear Sultana Dead! help there within;
O my fair Princess speak! Look! breath! she's dead!
Perhaps her soul is to my bosom fled;
Here, prithee take it, take mine in its stead;
I think she lives in part, here take the rest,
Let me transfuse my Soul into thy breast.
Conduct her to her bed, and there I'll try
To sigh till she recovers, or I die.

But prithee to the business with the Queen;
Come, come, I know you have successful been.

No faith, she's virtuous obstinate and Chaste;
I but in vain my time and spirits waste;
So ignorant she was and Inocent,
She hardly knew what my addresses meant.

And what -- where you so wise
To make her chaste by crediting her lies?
Or did you look for one so confident
As soon as asked to give you her consent?
Pooh, you're a Novise --
I know she loves you, and if any thing
Debar her kindness -- 'tis the jealous King.

O do not my distorted soul perplex!
I tell you she's the wonder of her Sex.

-- What did she sigh -- blush -- and protest
She'd tell the King. --

I all! --


Then 'twas in jest:
Try her again; for if she will endure
Once to be tempted, she's your one secure.

-- I have it -- sancy to my mind has brought
-- A happy -- Kara -- 'tis a happy thought:
-- I'll do it as sure -- dear friend I cannot stay:
Love like a whirl wind bears me swift away.

Well what says Oglar? --


Why the train has took;
He bit ere I had time to bate the hooke.
I named the King and eyed him all the while:
O how his blood through every vain did boil!

He can his thoughts on nothing now employ,
But how the jealous Sultan to destroy.
So what his humour near inclind him too,
His Passion for the Queen will make him do.

Madam, your inclinations are so good,
I hope I need not prompt your hands to blood.
Since Ahmet, Osman, and Morat, are gone,
Tis only Ibrahim keeps you from a Throne.

Fly naughty man! what kill my only Son?
'Tis such a crime I blush --
To have it named much more to have it done.

Sure Madam you forget you are with me*
Twas I that helped you muder the other three.

With Bectas still! I Vow I thought I'd been
With the fond Sultan and his Godly Queen --
Yet he's my Son, and she is Innocent --
Twou'd look Romantic if I should relent.
What? kill a Prince to whom I am allied,
To please my lust and satisfy my Pride?
The honour due to the Majesty of Kings
Should teach a pious Woman better things.

Nay I confess tis a fine tale to tell,
An Empress lost a Crown for fear of Hell.
Even turn Religious and confess your faults,
And end your days in Grottoes and in Vaults.

Poor Bectas how you're troubled to believe
That I should ever for past mischiefs greive!
No, no, for while old Murders we review,
By them we cut out patterns for the new:
As skilled Anotomists learn by their art
The nearest and directest way to the heart.

Tis bravely said! you are unwomand now,
Your beardless chin belyes your manly brow.
Fate, fortune, honour, Majesty attend
Expecting which you please to make you're friend.
The Empire for its rider grows too strong,
And wonders you its guide should stay so long.

The Empire should not want a Guide tis true,
-- Stay let me think -- Iv nothing else to do.
Bectas do you to the Seraglio haste,
And tell the Sultan he has reigned his last.
If he should seem offended when you come,
Tell him I'll take his place, tis troublesome:
Perhaps he'll make resistance --

What fate for the young Queen have you decreed?
Is it not fit she and her Son should bleed?

Alas! when he is dead* you'll find she'll crave
The favour to be buried in his grave.
And for the Unfledged Imp of Majesty,
For want of Drams to cherish him, he'll dye:
But if they live, the increase our Glory still;
More fame we gain the more we have to kill.

Madam, a Messenger come from the King.


He may come in, but -- what message can he bring?


Madam, my hast will scarce afford me breath
To tell the news of the Queens sudden death.

My Daughter dead! Hence ugly screech*owl Hence;
To bring such news to me is an offence;
Fly thou ill Omen! we by nature hate
Plagues, and all common Messengers of fate;
But art thou sure she's dead? why dost thou Muse?

It may be dangerous to confirm the news.


It shall not by the Alcoran, I swear;
Thy doleful tale I am prepared to hear.

Madam, for proof of the ill news I bring,
At first, I heard the whole Seraglio ring
With mournful shouts and doleful cries; that done,
A silent horror in the Court begun.

Well, prithee to the business, is She dead?


Her copied death in every face I read.
A ghastly paleness hung on every brow;
I asked whence the disorder came, or how?
But all in dumb confusion stood amazed,
And stead of answering only stalked and gazed.

My labouring soul delay not to relieve,
Tell me's she dead that I may fully greive.

Madam, at length I to the presence went,
Which still I found more full of discontent;
Having entered, Madam, there I found
The Queen was fallen into a deadly swoon,
So that tis thought all hopes of life are past:

What's her death come to swoun's and thoughts at last?


Madam, your presence will be welcome there,
She may recover yet with timely care

Alas, how you revive my dying heart!
If all the helps of industry or art
Will save her life -- my Poisons I will bring;
Carry my answer Quickly to the King.

Madam, we now a happy time may find
To bring about the mischeifs we've designed.
For while the Court is filled with this affright,
The Sultan to the Garden I'll invite;
And there a Guard of sturdy Mutes shall watch
To give his hated life a quick dispatch.

But charge 'em Bectas, it be gently done;
I would by no means have 'em hurt my Son.

Puh! they shall do it with such sudden care,
He'll be in Heaven before he is aware.

But now you talk of Heaven -- in our way
We will take the Royal Mosch, and there we will pray
For divine helps and blessings from above,
Endeavours else will unccesful prove.

Nay, if thus tedious you'll begin,
I yield our Religion is the way to sin;
But here the path is easy, where one Mute
Can all the ways of Providence confute:
Into their hands deliver Ibrahim,
The neither Heaven nor Hell can rescue him.

Urge me no further, I can hear no more
I must forgo the vows I made before;
My Mothers cruelty pursues me so,
I must my promise and my Love forgo.

O my best wishes! all my senses lie!
Can Flatra thus her love and faith deny?
Forgo your promises of being mine:
Can falsehood dwell in natures so Divine?
Tis false it cannot! Madan speak again,
Not the same words, but tell me what you mean.

My meaning and my words are still the same,
Both free from guilt and should be so from blame;
Tis the Queen Mother does the day defer,
So that the fault is not in me, but her.

Has she the power our nuptials to protract?
You'll answer for the Crimes you make her act.

What Impudence is this? sure you forget
Your distance, we're not so familiar yet.
Why is not this the Vizier? yes tis he?
Who made you judge of crimes in her or me.
Fond man! a Princes actions must be good;
When they seem ill they are not understood.

A strange surprise unravels all my joys!
And doubts succeeding all my hopes destroys!
Where am I? do I dream 'tis Flatras face?
Though spoiled a little of its native grace,
Madam twas you that gave and fed my flame:
View me, I by your own appointment came.
This was the day, wherein your self you tied
With plighted Faith and Vows to be my Bride.

Yes, Faith and Vows are pretty things to bind
The wills of Princes, when they change their mind.
Let the unstable Crowd be obliged by vows,
Empire no such Ignoble tie allows.
Our Will's our Law, and whensoere we please
We alter or abolish our decrees.
Once I had thought to admit you to my bed;
But now perhaps I'd rather have your head.

Is death and your displeasure the reward
Of him that has so oft so boldly dared
What you commanded --

-- No, it was your pride,
You'd have the Sultans Sister for your bride:
But pray what great Atcheivements have you done
To make you think my favour you had won?

Rebelions, Murders, Rapines, Treasons were
The early duties of my infant care,
Vows could not stop my mischiefs in their source,
The Alcoran oft lost its holy force
When you commanded; for my actions still
Took all their Laws and measures from your will.

The Laws were good, the measures adequate,
The'r fit to guide our deeds who guide our fate,
And you, who at my pleasure stand or fall,
Must live my slave, or must not live at all.

What a prevailing terror does there sit
On her Majestic brow? I must submit.
Madam, why call you anger to your aid?
That face in smiles cannot be disobeyed;
Traitors and Rebels to your matchless name
Should feel the horror of your wrath and flame;
Not those who pay their daily sacrifice
To the fair Idols of your Godlike eyes.

He's caught and yields to that all conquering frown
Slaves in despair are fit to attempt a Crown:
Well Meleck Hamet though yo 've done me wrong
I'm too good natured to be angry long,
Must I then pardon this perfidious man?
No, I'm resolved to hate him -- if I can:
Unhappy Flatra! must that treach'rous breath
Betray thy love that should pronounce his death?
You've seen my weakness now you'd best rebel,
Ungrateful man! I love you but to well.

Whence do these doubts and these disorders grow?
Men by their actions their obedience show,
And by that measure you can never have,
A more submissive, or more grateful Slave.

Men prize themselves so much on actions past,
That they take us for debtors at the last.
Thus far your deeds have worthy been, 'tis true,
But, here you win me, you have more to do.

To do or suffer, be it what it will,
I'm Equally prepared to dye or kill;
Nothing shall dare to oppose my force, this hand
Takes strength and warrant both from your command:
Such active Vigour does my heart inflame,
I dare do any mischief you dare name.

Bravely resolved, dare you be Emperor?


I dare attempt it with, or without power.


No man wants power, that nobly does resolve,
The right of Rule and Empire will devolve
On any head that does but reign:
Crowns when they change their stock, new vigour gain.

Madam, with all submission here I stand,
Hoping you'll add advice to your command;
And if I fail the Voyage to perform,
At least I'll perish nobly in the storm.

You talk in vain of perishing, Alas!
We without danger this red Sea may pass;
The Ianizaries of our party are,
And Kiosen the Empire hopes to share;
The discontented Saphees are our friends,
All plot the Sultans fall for different ends,
If therefore in this juncture of affairs,
We join our subtlety and power with theirs,
His destiny we may with safety act,
Since thousands will be proud to own the fact.

But they shall steal from me the vice they own;
I am a Jealous -- Rival -- Sinner grown,
And since I'm Authorised by your command,
He lives a debtor only to this hand:
Let Mutes and Ianizaries leave their trade,
For they that Murder him my right invade.

Brave Melek Hamet! what you have designed
Becomes the greatness of your birth and mind;
Let nothing now your quick resolves retard,
My favour is the least of your reward:
The moment that you prove the Sultan dead,
You challenge the enjoyments of my bed.

Such a reward, what can it not inspire?
Courage in fools, in Eunuchs strong desire;
At your command, if I durst do so much,
What can I stick at when your Guists are such?
I'll boldly go like Priests to sacrifice,
For none can blame the deed that knows the prize.

Rash, Loving fool go pierce the Sultans breast,
He grows too lazy, and takes too much rest.
Ambition! what a powerful God art thou?
To thee the best and mightiest Monarchs bow;
Thy nature is immense, and knows no bounds,
Thy unconceivable Idea drowns
My serious thoughts; I by thy power alone
Murder my Brother to enjoy his Throne.
O I am stung! I swell! I must away!
Perhaps, the Court my torments may allay;
Amongst the Crowed my pain may be transferred:
So wounded Deer for ease fly to the Herd.

COme, Come, there's more than fancy in her dreams*
Fancy does use to gloss on common Themes,
But she in sleep does such nice points discuss,
As waking would become the best of us:
In all her thoughts such mystery there lies,
They seem not to be dreams but Prophesies.

Whom, Royal Sir, or what do they concern?


They teach us more than we desire to learn;
Our Subjects pride, and danger of our Crown.

Are dreams then, of your privy Council grown?
Fancy, methinks, should want power to subdue
That reason which so long has reigned in you:
Pray Sir your Warring thoughts to reconcile,
Into the Garden let's retire a while,

Oh! Sir! the Queens awake with sudden care,
And you entreats of Bectas to beware,
For he is one your Murder has designed.

Oh has he so! -- indeed he's very kind:


I see, Great Sir, the Messenger has brought
Some news of weighty and important thought.

No, only my Physicians bid me stay,
They say tis dangerous to walk to day,
They find abroad a pestilential air.

The clouded day seems Innocent, secure and fair,
The wind in cool and healthful whispers speaks,
Whose wholesome breath through all contagion breaks.

How Innocent he looks! -- avoid my sight,
Thou art a Traitor and an Hyppocrite.

Traitor! -- and Hyppocrite!


-- No more but fly,
Thy very stay confirms thy treachery!

Sir, I obey -- but --


But --
He's gone -- why did I suffer him to go?
He's guilty, though I cannot prove him so;
Ungreatful Bectas! wretched Ibrahim! whence
Proceeds thy danger or his insolence?
Oh! 'tis from kindness too much Love does give,
The Subject that by which a Prince should live:
Subjects when too much favour they enjoy,
Like Louhcy over fed, the stock destroy.

Brave opportunity, he is alone,
Now Melek for a Mistress and a Throne.

Daughter! how d'e, ( Flatra) how does my Sultaness?


Sensible of the kindness you express
And nothing else, but take head what you do,
You will not Murder him, -- nor you, -- nor you, --
He is your Lord, -- your brother, -- and your Son,
And yet who knows? what must be must be done.

What strange distraction does possess her breast?


Alas! her thoughts grow wild for want of rest,
She stands in need of her Physicians care.

Cordials to her the best Physicians are:
Go get her something, that may make her sleep.

In vain we prize those Gems we cannot keep.
How short lived Empire is! when every hour
A Prince is subject to his Subjects power.

Sister you're discomposed, with causeless fear.


Dear Child there's neither foe nor danger here.


Madam the Queens Physician does command,
That she no Cordial take, but from his hand.

These learned Grandees are so over wise,
All safe and common med'cines they despise:
Must she then without rest these fits endure?

The Sultans presence is my only cure,
All my tormenting fears he drives away,
As Ghosts do vanish at the approach of day.

How does my Formina!


-- Ah! my dear Lord,
Your presence does new life and soul afford;
I was even now, like Memnons Statue, dumb,
My Organs move afresh, now you are come,
My dreams did such unwelcome fears suggest,
As in your absence I could find no rest.

What dreamt my Sultaness --


-- Bectas, me thought,
Unwilling Death into your presence brought.

Daughter 'tis ill such fancies to pursue,
They are both vain, unlikely, and untrue.

I know not that, Heaven grant they may be so!
Bectas reproved Death for b'ing too slow,
And forcing him to erect his fatal dart,
Showed him new ways in his long practiced art;
Men seldom such sad Omens long survive.

My Brother yet, you se's returned alive.


'Tis you encourage her to these extremes,
By harkening to her vain fantastic Dreams.

She has been my guardian Angel hitherto,
And has foretold things I have found too true.
But, Madam, let not her concern be yours,
She for her self and me enough endures.

My Lord with you I would retire awhile,
Perhaps I may my thoughts to rest beguile:
Vast Treasures thus prove Enemies to health,
We cannot sleep till we secure our Wealth:

Daughter, I'm glad to sleep you are inclined,
Rest proves the sovereign balsom of the mind:
Son, Heaven preserve you and your Sultaness.

And with like favour the Qu. Mother bless.
See a strict watch at every Gate you keep,
And doubly guard the Chamber where I sleep:
Those need a more than ord'nary defence,
Who are not safe beneath their innocence.

SEe, see how full of troubles are
The Crowns which wakeful Monarchs wear:
They Court short slumbers but in vain,
While sleep seems coy to those that reign;
O wretched State of him! whose mind
Most care and least relief does find.
Then happy are we who attend on our Sheep,
For the nights, when we wake, seem too short for our sleep.
We meet with no cares to disturb our delight:
Not with sorrow by day, nor with danger by night:
More refined are our pleasures, the meaner we are,
When the greatest of Kings are most subject to care.
Then while you thus take your repast,
Who knows but this may be your last.
Sleep, sleep apace, perhaps you may
Be waked to everlasting day:
When sleep is in your way to rest
The shortest slumbers prove the best.
In spite of Morpheus and his Art,
Waked with some frightful dream they start,
They thoughtful are asleep, and take
More care than silly Swains awake;
Yet after all the pain they endure,
Regardless we sleep more secure.
Flatra, what lazy fools do you employ,
That are so long here they one fool destroy?

Perhaps tis from their fate, not laziness;
For Bectas, Madam, finds the like success.

Alas poor man! he's grown infirm with age,
Unfit to act upon the Tragic stage;
He will do well if coupl'd with a Mute,
One to advise, the other to execute;
But Melek Hamet wants not trust or power,
This day to kill, the next be Emperor.

The best designs unfortunate have been,
Witness your last attempt upon the Queen:
But Melek went away in such a rage,
He did what could be done, I dare engage.

Come do not thus extenuate his offence,
You must severely check his negligence.
He grows more careless while his hopes are fair,
For hopes are far less powerful then despair,
Which to the greatest actions can persuade,
As Laurels flourish best that grow in shade.

By that alone is his ambition fed,
For while the Sultan lives his hopes are dead;
My promise is no obligation yet:
My Brothers death alone makes it a debt,
And while I angry seem his blood will prove
The greatest Cement to unite our Love.

Daughter in all your actions, I confess,
Your Wisdom and your duty you express;
I'll leave you with the first advice I gave,
With frowns and distance keep him still your slave;
For while you storm, you heitghten his desire,
But too much sunshine will put out his fire:

Madam we find all our endeavours vain,
The Sultan seems in spite of us to reign;
And either there's deceit among our Friends,
Or some strange fate our enterprise attends.

We through our fears become unfortunate,
Then lay the blame on Providence and Fate;
You were driven hence with an impetuous blast,
I thought that violence too great to last;
Then nothing could oppose your force, and now
Your weakness under one defeat must bow:
So Billows rage with unsuccessful toil
Against the Rocks, and faintly then recoil.

While we on past miscarriages reflect,
We present opportunities neglect;
Now, Madam, is the time to join our power,
And to assault the sleeping Emperor;
Let but the Vizier countenance the attempt,
None from the action will himself exempt.

To kill a lustful Tyrant is a fact
The Vizier will both countenance and act;
As many as dare follow, I dare lead,
Find me a Body, and I'll find a head.

Brave actions do the meanest birth control,
They show the gallant greatness of the Soul;
I neither wealth nor dignity esteem,
Of me the valiant only worthy seem;
See then you prosecute your vast design,
So having shown your love, you challenge mine.

Inspired by her how rapidly I burn!
Bectas, my love does into furv turn.
Why did I not destroy him when I could?
Oh! how I now repent of being good!
How came a man born in the Turkish School,
To be a Loyal conscientious fool?

Come, come, hear me --
The Janissaries are at my command,
Of which ten thousand chosen are at hand.
The valiant Kara and Kulchaia are
Of equal fame in policy and war.
They own our Cause, and will, what e're we please,
Attempt with Courage, and effect with ease.

Then strait for Kara and Kulchaia send,
Those are the Men on which our hopes depend.

They both in my apartment are, and stay
Only to be commanded, and obey:
I'll call 'em in --

O mighty Love! thy power will now be shown,
For thee I dare do more than I dare own;
With an unwilling rage I go prepared,
To take that life, even now I freely spared:
With what amazement will the Sultan look,
To see the bloody cause I've undertook?
To see the only person he dares trust
Become the greatest Rebel and the first?
Hence Conscience hence! away you loyal charms*
Good thoughts are things too foft for men of arms.
O Flatra! Flatra! Flatra! there's a spell
Can drive away all thoughts but those of Hell.
My love to her my Crimes shall mitigate
Of doing, and of loving what I hate.

These, Sir, are men in whom you may confide,
I have their faith as well as courage tried.

My Lords --
Since of the business you're not ignorant,
I hope you do not my Instructions want;
The Cause is worthy tho the attempt be great,
We meet with worse than death in a retreat.
We know our fate, and therefore we must all,
Or through the danger run, or in it fall.

To noble spirits, Sir, 'tis hard to fly,
But 'tis not so to conquer or to die.

Distrust not, Sir, our Valour or success,
We've often conquered greater force with less.

Come on, we lose advantage by our stay,
Your Courage has already won the day.

What Fate, alas! are Princes like to know,
Who favour those that seek their overthrow,
And either slight the service, or distrust
The faith of Loyal hearts, that would be just.

The same which Mariners are like to find,
Who quit their Harbours to caress the Wind;
Their helpless Friends from the neglected shore,
Look on, and hear the Threatening Billows roar;
They see the giddy Ship turn up her Keel,
And their Friends sinking in their hearts they feel,
Until at last, all swallowed up in grief,
They cannot lend an eye to their relief:
Then do they howl out unheard obsequies,
Wishing in sighs their Friends had been more wise.
Ah, Ipsir! this, this is the Sultan's Fate,
And we shall see his fall when 'tis too late.
Unhappy Prince! thou'st too much innocence
To think men can rebel without pretence;
But too much favour teaches men t'aspire,
And greatness ever studies to be higher:
Yet Princes never, till their ruin, find
The inconvenience of being too kind.

'Tis true, but one ill instrument of State
Does many greater than himself create:
In wicked favourites Kings are doubly cursed,
They being bad, still recommend the worst.
So virtuous Statesmen are become despised,
Subjects oppressed and Princes ill advised.

This is the fatal end we must expect,
Yet my dear Prince my counsel does reject;
He thanks me for my kindness, but the while
Seems to reprove my folly in a smile;
'Twixt both I find my fears and kindness such,
Would he saw more, or I saw not so much.

Janizar-Aga, and the Vizier oft
In secret Councels are and whisper soft:
What they design to their own breasts they keep.

For the Queen Mothers, 'tis an old intrigue,
But Flatra's with the Vizier's a new league:
Where the beginning of their Plot the intend
Heaven only knows! but I know where 'twill end.
We will to the Sultan, and the danger show,
Where it takes root, how fast 'tis like to grow:
Perhaps he'll seem offended, but I've chose,
Rather his favour than his life to expose.

It was my chance this minute, Sir, to learn
Something that is the Sultans near concern;
I thought the secret to his ear a debt,
And fain I would a quick admittance get,
Which, whether out of Duty or of pride,
The Guard of Janissaries have denied.

My Lord, the loyalty you seem to express
Calls for our thanks, and you deserve no less:
But too strict watch the Sultan has enjoined
The Guards, and he himself a while confined;
Yet since your business urgent does appear,
We will acquaint the Sultan you are here.

My heart in labour is, and stops my breath,
Now is the Wager laid 'twixt love and death:
The Wager is unequal, yet 'tis just,
If death embrace me not, my Mistress must:
The Pride is greater, where the hope is less;
I'll venture ten lives for one Sultanness.

Oh how these secret Messengers I hate!
They are the cursed Labyrinth of State.

Madam, he comes in Love, and as a friend.


But secret Love does oft in Ruin end.


Oh horrid Traitors to my Crown and Name!
The City Rages in Rebellious Flame:
The Commons are encouraged by the Peers,
Vizier and Bectas head the Mutiniers:
My Lords, what hope, when Villains grow thus bold?

Now, Sir, comes on that Ruin I foretold.


Madam, forbear a while your early Grief,
There's time enough for heaven to send relief.

Dread Sir! If of the news you are assured,
Let the Seraglio Gates be all secured;
Within these Walls you may be safe a while,
Until the misguided Crowd we reconcile.
Great minds consume in sullen flames: The Rout
Send forth fierce blazes, and go quickly out.

O trust 'em not, such shifts can't serve the turn;
For where they cannot enter they will burn.
Foes, that such head-strong violence maintain,
We may deceive, but we can ne'er restrain.

Hark Sir, they are before the outward Gate;
You'll of your safety think when 'tis too late.

Provide for your escape, Sir, while we go,
And try if we can pacify the Foe.

Shall the Grand Seignieur e're be said to fly?
No, flight's too mean a thing for Majesty.
On that will all their innocence be built;
So their Rebellion will become my guilt.

Self preservation will not stain your fame,
Your glorious Ancestors have done the same.

Sir, if you love your self or us, be gone;
And I will these Imperial Robes put on.
So that at last if nothing can assuage
The furious tempest of the peoples rage,
Taking the seeming Sultan for the true,
Their swords shall murder me instead of you.

Dear Oglar, rather than I will expose
So kind a Friend I'll perish by my Foes.

Oh to refuse him, Sir, is cruelty,
Because he does so willing seem to die.

Accept it Sir, for all your Subjects sake;
I'll the same action gladly undertake.

I with a joyful pride would shed my blood,
To save a Prince, so pious and so good.

No, you shall meet 'em to appease their wrath,
By your persuasions you may save us both.
Oh Oglar! I am overcome with shame,
To take a kindness which I dare not name:
What I permit must in your own esteem
Make me ungrateful, and a Coward seem.

Oh Sir, the Foes your Palace gates beat down,
Your stay exposes both your life and Crown:
While I about your safety am employed,
You in a complement will be destroyed.

Ah my dear Lord! unless you will be gone,
You make the kindness, he intended, none.
Fly, Sultan, quickly fly, for by your sloth,
Instead of saving one you ruin both.

To the dark Cloister, Sir, the way you know;
Thither you may with ease and safety go.

You have prevailed, our mighty Prophet send
Comfort to us and succour to our friend.

Farewell my only dearest Lord, Farewell!


Come, Madam, come, these clouds you must dispel;
The Sultans safety should your grief subdue.

Suppose him safe Sir, tears are debts to you.


If you design my kindness to repay,
Madam it must be done some other way.

All such ungrateful thoughts I banish hence;
Your kindness, Sir's above all recompense:
The only poor requital I can make,
Will be to Love your memory for your sake.

A poor reward indeed! Madam, must I
For the advantage of my memory die?
'Tis more when I am dead than you can give,
To enjoy your love one minute while I live.

Of that, I hope, you did not doubt before,
I only wish I could express it more.

Kindness in general, is love 'tis true;


But mine is more particular to you.


Of common love there many Symptoms are,
But one of that which is particular.
I cannot now the time in Courtship spend,
Madam, true love should in enjoyment end:
Give me but that and I can die with joy,
If not, my hated life you twice destroy.

What sudden madness does your mind distract?
Would dying Oglar such a mischief act?
You die infected, and before your death,
Seek to corrupt me with your poisoned breath:
O let more generous thoughts possess your mind!
Be not so cruel, when you've seemed so kind.

You've the unkinder cruelty decreed,
Unless you crown that heart that is to bleed;
For else I fall the Sultans sacrifice,
And, which is worse, am murdered by your eyes.

And if I grant what you expect to have,
I more destroy, than I can hope to save:
I know the Sultan twenty deaths would choose,
Rather than I one virtuous thought should lose:
Nor shall our Annals e're of me record,
She lost her honour to preserve her Lord.

Madam, if you'll the Sultans death prevent,
You to my hopes must yield your quick assent,
Or else I'll meet the foe, and yield him up,
Who drinks the sweet must taste the bitter Cup:
For 'tis in vain to think I'll stay and die,
A foolish Martyr to your Chastity.

Oh cruel Fate! O wretced Sultaness!
What can I do in this so great distress?
I subtly must his lustful heart beguile,
And hide my wrath in a dissembled smile.

Madam by pausing you deny my suit,
I go, if once the question you dispute.

Why would you so? come, Oglar, do not chide,
That I endeavour thus my love to hide;
There is to modesty a little debt,
Which I was studying only to forget:
Do you but go within that private place,
I'll make my self more fit for your embrace.

Seal, Madam, your intention with a kiss;
Who would not die so sweet a death as this!
Madam make haste, when in your Arms I lie,
I Paradise enjoy before I die

Can Heaven, that does the Innocent protect,
Suffer his hellish Plot to take effect!
The Gods forbid it, and some safeguard send
By Mahomet our Prophet and their Friend.
Hark, by th'approaching Triumphs of the Rout,
They seem at my deliverance to shout;
In what a strait I am Heaven only knows,
Who seek protection from my husbands Foes.
Oh my dear Oglar! Oh unhappy chance!
The raging Rebels hitherward advance;
Like envious Messengers of Hell they're sent,
Our heaven, and our enjoyments to prevent:
You to the Inner Closet shall retire,
A place as private as you can desire;
There will I send the disappointed Rout,
Missing the Sultan here, to find him out,
So while they are in search of him, I'll find
A time to be more happy and more kind.

By your persuasions I am ever swayed,
Madam, such love must ever be obeyed.

Oh slow and lingering Rebels how they stay!
They cannot hurt me now but by delay;
My Lord is safe, and they who did decree
His murder, now are come to rescue me.

I like not the contrivance; I am taught
Women are ever good at second thought.
She was compelled this Stratagem to use;
'Twas safer to comply than to refuse.
I'll fetch the Sultan, and secure him here;
Then will her true or feigned love appear:
If she intended the kind things she said,
She will rejoice to find the Sultan dead:
How e're he'll make but an unhappy end,
Whose life does on one Woman's will depend.

I fear his flight will his destruction prove;
Great Fabrics cannot without ruin move:
And on that mischief our sad fate depends;
For falling Greatness buries all its friends.

We must in time endeavour to prevent
A danger which we see so imminent:
E're the Rebellion spread, we will gain a force,
Among the Bosnion and Sclavonian Horse.

The Asiatic Spahees gain renown,
Both zealous for the Laurel and the Crown.
Of their assistance we may rest secured,
And with it be of Victory assured.

Come on, the Empire does begin to bleed,
The reeking Current must be stopped with speed:
Brave Prince! for thee we will spend our latest breath,
To save thy life, or to revenge thy death.

My Lord, my Lord!


Who? Oglar!


I Sir --
I find this place no safety will afford:
Some Rebel has discovered you are here,
They all with Torches and with shouts dray near.

Oh Oglar! let me go and meet their force;
Since I must die, I'll take the noblest course.

O no! Sir follow me, and I'll provide
A place, where you may more securely hide:
That done, I hither quickly will return,
And quench the thirsty rage with which they burn.

Heaven knows with what unwillingness I go,
And yet I must since you will have it so.

My Lords the Sultan does desire to know
From whence your doubts and your disorders grow.
Is any injured, let him but complain;
No man did ever sue to him in vain.

Mufti we seek no favour at his hands;
We come not with petitions, but demands.

What you demand the Sultan wills to hear.


That he shall quickly know he need not fear.


We want his head --


His Head, his head, his head.


Why then you rage in vain, the Sultan's fled.


What you in wisdom have conveyed him hence?


Then they have both contracted his offence.


Down with them, down with them both.


My Lords, what need you use this violence?
I neither make resistance, nor defence:
You'll find, that I can tread a rugged path;
I can do any thing to appease your wrath.

She prates, she prates, a Mute, a Mute, a Mute.


We have no time with Women to dispute;
We want the Sultan, ask no reasons why;
It is our pleasure, therefore he must die.

If you resolve it, she must die, and shall;
A Prince, when by his People left, must fall:
Grant me but time thus to express my grief,
To the afflicted tears are some relief.
Now my Love's conquered, e're my Griefs return,
I'll yield him up, and then take time to mourn:
His Crime, my Lord, I shall not mitigate,
Only I beg I may not see his fate.

Let no man dare his Scimitar to unsheathe*
Nor touch the Sultan upon pain of death,
Till I command him; Madam, show the way;
Revenge with Power joined brooks of no delay.

And am I tamely thus to loose my life,
By the adultrous Treasons of a Wife?
The Vizier here, how causeless were my fears?
My Lord, what want these saucy Mutineers?

The saucy People want the Sultans Head.


Poor Sultan, hast thou then a Viper fed!
Ungrateful Viper! Villain! most accursed
Of all my Foes, that thou should be the worst!

Pish, this is childish, womanish, and vain,
Your business is to die, not to complain.

If to the Queen you've any thing to say,
Dispatch, the people here for Justice stay.

Justice, Justice, Justice.


My Lords I thank you, let the Queen be brought,
I would commit to her a dying thought.

My Lord, with sorrow and with shame I kneel,
Unable to support the weight I feel;
To think your Wife should to your death consent,
Of this I hope I shall in time repent:
Forgive me Sir! the rest I speak in tears,
It was my love was conquered by my fears.

Oh Impudence! thy Sexes stain and blot!
No, 'twas thy Lust thy treachery begot.

The Sultan --


Adulterous Impudence! she makes it strange,
Did not you mine for Oglars life exchange?
Now you can swoon, but I the care will take,
From your dissembled sleep you ne'er shall wake.
Take that --
Villain thou justly to the Shades art sent,
For daring my just Vengeance to prevent.

If this be all the love you bear to her;
Yet Sir me thinks the name of Murderer
Should dying men from such attempts deter,
Who is it he has hurt?

-- We cannot learn.


Is he so wounded that he cannot speak?


O wretched Oglar! thou thy death hast found,
E're with full joy thy ripened hopes were crowned.

The brave Lord Oglar.


-- Oh most strange surprise!
How came you here, or why in this disguise?

Kind Heaven! how strangely just thy Judgmentr are,
While we accuse thee of mistaken care:
What on the Author of my shame was meant,
Thou hast diverted on the Instrument.

Oh Royal Sir, forgive me, I have been
Traitorous to you, and to your injured Queen.
Oh torment of my Soul, I cannot die,
Till some way I repair the injury.
Oh Queen! oh Sultan!

Convey the Sultanness and Oglar hence,
We shall take time to examine their offence.
Sultan prepare to quit your guilty Throne,
All these beneath your lustful Sceptre groan;
You must no more your self nor them abuse,
Too guilty those appear whom all accuse;
Therefore in vain you'll plead your innocence,
For these are armed against all such defence.

My Lords I find no rigour in my fate.
Nor shall I seek my Crimes to mitigate;
Where you condemn the sentence must be just,
And if you think I ought to die, I must.

By this so subtle, and so soft a stile,
He hopes the easy People to beguile.

They all begin to murmur and relent,
And we shall of our fond delay repent,
Dispatch him, Sir,

-- What means this mutiny?
Nay Sultan than 'tis time for thee to die.

Oh my thrice honoured Lord! this happy hour
Heaven set apart to save the Emperor.

Heaven cannot save my life, it may my fame,
By sending Ipsir to revenge my shame*

You are not wounded Sir:


-- O Kuperly!
Wounded to death, and yet I cannot die;
Rebelled against, betrayed, and which is more,
My Son a Bastard, and my Wife a Whore:
Revenge my death on Oglar, and on her;
She's the Adulteress, he the Murderer.
They in the People raised this discontent,
Yet guilty live, while I die innocent,

I hope we all wear loyal hearts and Swords:
Who can forget the dying Sultans words,
Revenge my death?

-- Revenge, Revenge, Revenge.


Now, my Lords, you here may see too late,
The sad effects of discord in a State.
We Childish tears may on his body shed,
And vainly seek revenge without a head.
But if we would the fullest vengeance take,
We with the Foe must seeming Friendship make,
'Till we are on a Successor agreed,
Then all by whom the Sultan bled shall bleed.

To what the Mufti says we must assent,
Our swords and tears are both impertinent.
Muster our Forces in the outward Court,
And draw 'em back in the Royal Fort.
There they are always ready for the Field,
In case the Rebels still refuse to yield.

Dead! And supposed by my contrivance slain!
Must I the loss and infamy sustain?
Can Earth a pleasure yield, which to enjoy
I could my honour and my Lord destroy?
Heaven knows I took no pleasure but in him,
I saught no Joy but Heaven and Ibrahim.

Madam, you vainly hope to gain belief,
By your forced tears, and your dissembled grief.
The pious Sultan, he that was so good,
Dying, charged you and Oglar with his blood.
On us a loyal care he did bequeath
To punish the Contrivers of his death.

You must inflict a punishment too mild,
Since he believed I have his bed defiled.
In this suspicion he did far out-do
All Torments I can ere receive from you,
In that my heart the worst of ills endures
And since I lost his Love, I ask not yours.

Before the Caddee, Madam, you must go,
'Twill be convenient that you tell him so

This is a truth, I dare say any where,
The Guilty, Sir. the only cowards are.
Since he lived not his sentence to Reverse
I'll only shed some tears upon his Hearse:
That duty once performed, when ere you please,
My debt to Nature I shall pay with ease.

Be Madam, in your Ceremony's brief,
A little time will vent a little grief.

Look where the Sultan does for justice stay,
And seems though dead to frown at our delay.

Is this the relic of my Lord, how changed!
Dying from me; dead, from himself estranged!
Behold where Majesty and Beauty lies!
Behold his Ruby lips; his Diamond eyes!
But must they never speak, nor shine again?
Must my black name wear an eternal stain?
O stain! eternal stain! Here I have found
The fatal (yet to me most fatal!) wound.
How could so great a Soul, and so much worth,
So quickly, at so small a wound get forth!
Here will I clear my blasted Innocence;
And breath in Life, or seek my death from hence.

HE's dead, he's dead; seek not in vain
To weep the dead to life again:
Spare, O spare those Orient showers;
They fall too late on withered Flowers.
Your warmer sighs no comfort bring;
Nor can, in Winter make a Spring:
Warm Winds as helpless prove as Dew;
Then let your sighs and tears be few.
Let your unspotted soul appear
Through all the dismal Clouds you wear;
Let Innocence with grief partake:
Both will a watery Sunshine make.
While for the dead too much you grieve,
Your dying Fame you must retrieve.
As for the Balmy drops you shed,
The living want 'em, not the dead.
How is my Soul wrapped up in sudden joys!
Methought I heard a sweet harmonious noise,
On which a glorious luster did attend:
Both seemed my shame and sorrow to befriend.
If e're you'll send relief, your Powers Divine,
To iujur'd Virtue, send it now to mine.

O quickly let me with the Sultan speak,
E're my tormented heart, with sorrow, break.

The Sultan's dead, Sir.


-- Dead! O horrid Fate!
Then I confess the injury too late.

What injury?


-- Peace, Madam: we discern
Too well your guilt, by your too great concern.
What injury!

-- His guiltless blood I shed,
To enjoy the sweets of his Sultana's bed.

She an Adulteress! what deceit there lies
In Women's hearts! what mischief in their eyes!

How yet unmoved she stands! her cursed offence
Nothing can equal, but her impudence.

Shame of thy Sex! before the Caddee come,
For such new Crimes he must invent a Doom.

What sudden Frenzy does your minds possess!
You hear but half; and at the rest you guess.
Unless my Life you'll wilfully destroy.
Ask him how oft he did those sweets enjoy.

O, never; never; her unspotted soul
Would never condescend to deeds so foul.
When I all stratagems in vain had tried;
Hell, with unheard of villainy supplied
My lustful heart: for first, I set on foot
The late Rebellion; from whose cursed root
Sprung greater mischiefs far than you have seen.

How came the Sultan to suspect the Queen?


I, feigning Loyalty above the rest,
The Sultan begged my self I might invest
In the Imperial Robes; that done, he fled*
And left me to be murdered in his stead.
This time in tempting of the Queen I spent;
Who seemingly then granted her consent,
And hid me in her Closet, lest the Rout
Might unexpected come, and find me out;
Intending, when they came, to bring me thence,
Justly to suffer for my insolence.
This when my jealous heart began to fear,
I brought the Sultan back, and placed him there;
Who, finding the base treachery, believed
The Queen and I his murder had contrived.
This truth my dying heart could not conceal;
Confession does in part the torment heal:
Forget, great Queen, forget the injury;
And, with the Traitor, let his Treasons die.

A wretch so villainous did never live!
Shall I my Husband's murderer forgive?
Never -- But, while I think of punishment,
The villain dies, my vengeance to prevent.
My Lords, I hope my Innocence is cleared
From all those stains which on my Soul appeared.

Madam, we likewise hope you'll pardon us,
Whose over-acted Zeal accused you thus:

And from our Swords, expect what can be done.
To save your Person, and enthrone your Son.

This is our duty, and shall be our care,
While you these last solemnities prepare.

My Lords, I'm debtor to your Loyalty:
It shows your love to my dead Lord and me.
Revenged by you, tho Ibrahim be slain,
In his Son's virtue he shall live again.
But O the whining love of the Old Queen!
Her feigned affection has the Author been
Of this sad murder --
Wo to the Nations where such night-Owls Sing!
They're the ill Omens to the Deaths they bring:
Like hasty Ravens, with a Croaking joy,
They sing their Obsequies whom they destroy.

THe deed is, tho with difficulty, done:
We're of our Sultan rid, you of your Son
The safest way that I could think of since
To establish you, is to enthrone the Prince.
To this the Royalists consenting are:
He shall the Title, you the Office bear.

Nay, any trouble, for my Country's good:
Kind Heaven preserve us all from guiltless blood.
'Tis true, the Child is yet a harmless thing;
But a good Prince may make a Tyrant King.

Yet he can do no harm: the way we know,
To clip his Wings, before his Talons grow.

Nay, honest Bect as, what please Heaven and you:
I am for giving every man his due --
I'll do, and teach him, all the good I can.

My Lords, what news?


We find the Fo, at least, of equal force:
They match in Foot; and they exceed in Horse.

The face of all the outward Court they spread:
They seem by Order and by Courage led.

'T will be unsafe to fight 'em: we must try
If upon any terms, they will comply.
Rebels and Traitors find it, to their cost,
When beaten once, they are for ever lost.

My Lords, you see I trust my self once more
With those who rashly sought my life before.
I am the man the Royal party sends,
To know, if ye will be the Prince his Friends:
For the dead Emp'ror, our farther strise
Will nought avail to call his back to life;
'T will please his Ghost, to see his Off-spring reign,
More than to meet a thousand of you slain:
Their arms with you, they'll willingly lay down,
And meet with joy young Mahomet to Crown.

To such Proposals, Sir, we're all agreed:
We are not pleased to see the Empire bleed.
The Forces are no longer theirs nor ours;
Both joining shall become the Emperors.

Sir, by the fair compliance which you make,
You show you ne'er act ill but by mistake.
This news all discontented hearts will ease:
So fair a concord must both parties please.
Thus, what begun in grief, shall end in joy*
And the red morning prove a glorious day.

Beyond what e're we hoped; kind Heaven does bless
All our endeavours with a strange success.
The Sultan being young, they will think fit
The Government of all things to commit
To Kiosem; whose skill in such affairs
Renders her fit to serve our Turn and theirs:
Then will the Emperor be within our power,
When she commands and guides the Emperor.

Hush! the soft footsteps of his Ghost I hear;
There he comes: Why so ghastly dost appear?
Be gone and vanish, or I sink to the ground.
That look, my bleeding heart to death does wound.
O Sultan stay a while, and I'll come
And be a partner with thee in thy tomb.
My guilty heart is lost in fear and shame,
My joys destroyed by him by whom they came.
Rash Fool! Rogue! Coward! Villain! and what worse!
Thy own and thy Friend's Foe! the Empire's Curse!
O Love! accursed Love! you're blind indeed!
How could I hope the Sultan to succeed?
His Children claim that right: or had he none,
The bloody Tartar must ascend the Throne.
Yet silly I, by senseless Passion led,
Could hope to be the Turkish Empire's head.
O Flatra! thou hast fed this foolish flame,
And thou must share the mischief and the blame.

With what an awful Majesty we walk!
How well do we become this graceful Stalk!
When from such hight we cast an eye below,
The Tribe of Peasants but like Pigmies show.

Madam.


Let it be your care
This night our Royal Nuptials to prepare:
To morrow, with a most triumphant noise,
Our Lord is crowned; and with him all our joys.

Heaven grant those joys may never know an end!
I hope your Majesty will be my Friend.

I, my Lentesia; we shall take delight,
Thy love, and thy obedience to requite.
Welcome, Dread Sir;
With a Majestic greatness now you look:
Methought the Palace at your entrance shook.
The bloody Sceptre, which my Lord does bring,
Befits the Courage of a Warlike King:
Our self its force no longer can withstand;
And her you used to court, you now command.

O cursed power of Beauty and of Love!
She does my heart to new Rebellion move:
I'm by her Charms, a strange conversion taught;
For I repent repenting of my fault.

Come, Royal Sir, those Clouds you must dispel:
On whom you frown, their ruin you foretell:
And I shall be afraid to trust those Seas,
Whose swelling rage I cannot first appease.

Hazards are sometimes masked in pleasing forms;
And Sirens prove more dangerous than storms.

You seem offended, Sir: pray tell me where
Those pleasing storms, and dangerous Sirens are.

O, had I power to tell her, that there lie
More than ten thousand Sirens in each eye!
I cannot: -- they are such as strike me dumb,
And from my silence must my Shipwreck come.

What makes you, Sir, thus like a Mute appear?
Are you to be my Executioner?

I am not now, what e're I had designed:
None can harm her, that is not deaf and blind.

Madam, your gracious pardon we entreat,
That we must both your hopes and ours defeat:
We must, in policy, our Arms lay down;
And, for the present, the young Sultan Crown:
But we this night his murder have decreed;
Then, 'tis resolved the Vizier shall succeed.

Deluded fool! believe him not; he Lies!
How I these fawning Parasites despise!
Hoodwinked Ambition! how she is misled!
Yet calls them Friends by whom she is buffeted.

What e're I suffer, your affection cures:
I've no ambition, but of being yours.

O, Charming Siren! I must stop that breath:
Thou never can be mine, except in death.
Sink, and go out, you captivated Eyes;
You charmed ears, be deaf to all her cries:
Now to Ambition I shall put an end.

Help! murder! help! what doth my Lord intend?


Because you love Honour and a Crown so well,
I do intend you shall go Reign in Hell.

O hold, Sir. --


Go, dissembling Villains, go:
Pretend not kindness here; you'd have it so.
Rascals, you shall prepare to follow her:
I, to her Court, will all of you prefer.
How hard a task my heart has undertook!
You Gods, how killing is that dying look!
Her eyes send forth a most bewitching light,
As dying creatures mischievously bite.

My daughter slain!


Alas, poor Sultan^ess!


Which of you d^d this murder act? confess:


O, pious Beldam! you are so devout!
'Twas I that acted what you brought about.

The mans distracted, between sin and shame:
'Tis well Heaven knows how innocent I am.

Heaven knows, 'twas by your own appointment done:
The same hands killed the Daughter and the Son.

O, I am dead; and by a subject slain!
But shall I not have time one hour to reign?
Yet make him Emperor before I go:
Or if you cannot make him, call him so.
But fancy must your unkind sloth supply;
For, in conceit, I will an Empress die.

She's dead!


What think you, Sir, is to this murder due?


Nothing, you villains, but rewards from you.


Come, without doubt the Princess did provoke
The Vizier, ere he gave that fatal stroke.

No, without doubt, the Princess did not, Sir;
For they who killed the Sultan, murdered her.

Puh! he despairs; we must contrive his fall;
For, if we spare him, he'll destroy us all.

What, now your Choler does begin to work?
O, how you hate a tender conscienc'd Turk!
Then you've concluded on my destiny:
And tis decreed amongst you, I must die
By your base hands: villains stand off, for know
This is the hand must give the fatal blow.
Now Flatra I have revenged thy death,
For you I'll cure ye with my dying breath.
On each Traitorous head, let swift vengeance fall,
Hottest plagues, consume, rot, and damn ye all.

My Lords, what mean those insolences here?


Come, come, the Vizier's dead, you need not ear.
Madam, there may be danger in delay.

We must these Bodies secretly convey
To your Apartment; lest, by our neglect,
The World should us of murd'ring them suspect.

'Tis true we may be wrougfully accused:
Our Prophet knows, how I have been abused!
And where opinions are so weakly built,
Suspicion we should shun as well as guilt.

I fear the fair complying he pretends,
Is but to make the Foes he fears his Friends.

We need not at his friendship much rejoice:
He makes it of necessity, not choice.

The same necessity is ours, in part:
Friendship* my Lords, at Court, is grown an Art;
Here vows and protestations have no sorce;
Your Servant, and your Slave, are words of course;
What e're they say, we are not to believe;
He's the best Courtier, that can best deceive.

Our ends we gain, what ever they design,
If all to Crown young Mahomet will join.
To choose a Successor to us belongs.
We must leave him to right the Sultan's wrongs.

In the misfortune I've the greatest share;
Daughter, none knows a tender Mother's care!
I buried Achmet, yet the death of him
Ne'er went so near my heart, as Ibrahim.

I am a Mother, and have been a Wife;
Yet ever found it an unequal strife:
For, had the Gods decreed it, I had chose
My Child, much rather than my Lord, to lose.

Should Heaven that Trial of your patience make,
I fear, you'd be convinced of your mistake.

Madam, while these misfortunes you suggest,
You add more grief to my afflicted breast:
I look to see that fury, which begun
With the good Sultan, fall upon his Son.

Kind Heaven divert thee from such thoughts as these:
Distrust, my Child, is the Soul's worst disease,
A mortal symptom: when we once despair,
We the true Prophets of our ruins are.

The fatal Prophesies come all from you;
Who always find a way to make 'em true.

O Heavens! that e're her Soul, by madness taught,
Should entertain so barbarous a thought!
Sure 'tis beyond distraction to believe
The strange Chimera's that it does conceive.
Come Daughter, come, compose your self to rest,
And let more gentle thoughts possess your breast.
Causelessly hated! wrongfully accused!
Was ever Woman, by her Friends, so used!

What a false flood she weeps! I, in that Nile,
Discern the base dissembling Crocodile:
When you'd destroy, like them, abroad you come;
If you are sorry, even go weep at home

My duty to my Children I must pay:
If you will always doubt my love, you may.
Dear Child! kind Heaven provide your Son and you
A kinder Mother, and a Friend more true!

Alas, what Amulet can us defend
From the sad mischeifs, that her prayers attend?
The Witch prays backward, if she prays at all;
Her tears, like Mildew, blast where e're they fall;
So she appeared, before the Sultan fell;
And left behind just such a sulph'rous smell.
And sure that breath, which blasted fruit full grown,
Will take off blossoms not yet fully blown.
I wish they would forbear to crown my Son;
I fear, they raise him but to pluck him down.
How happy Peasants, in their Children are!
They're free from greatness, danger, and from care:
So happy should we be, to live below,
If, with less pomp* we might more quiet know.
But to the Gods my self I must commit:
I know what's pleasant; they know what is fit.

My Lords, and Gentlemen;
I thank you, since my unhappy Father's dead,
That you are pleased to choose me in his stead:
My Lords, I thank you, that you have supplied
Me, and the Empire, with so wise a Guide.
I ask no power greater than you give;
I ask no boon, but that he may not live
By whose Rebellious hand my Father died;
'Tis a request too just to be denied.
And if you please, my Lords, I'll recommend
This Gentleman, my Father's dearest Friend,
To that employment: I believe he'll be
Equally kind to you, and just to me.
As to all other matters that relate
To Polities in Government or State,
I yield they're things above my years and skill,
I leave 'em all to the Queen-Mothers will:
So of her love and your advice assured,
From Foes and Rebels I shall rest secured.

Long live Sultan Mahomet Han the Fourth.


A Boy! a Child! he Viziers constitute!
Nay, then 'tis time his power to dispute.

Suppose the Vizier had been still alive,
Must we our Leader up to Justice give?

You talk --


Yes; and that done, 'tis ods they would have cried,
Follow your leader: so must we have died.

Nay, ten to one, our turn will be the next;
'Tis but a nat'ral gloss upon the Text.

You are so hot! pray, Gentlemen, be cool. --


Nay, you were all o'fire to Crown the Fool.


Puh! then, my Masters, we shall ne'er have done:
Can we, who killed the Father, die by the Son?

Doubtless, the Youngster has designed it thus:
So we must die by him, or he by us.

Why, he must die, and 'tis resolved he shall;
But you want patience to expect his fall.
We'll call a Divan privately to night,
And the new Vizier thither we'll invite:
Who either to his Murder must assent,
Or be a sharer in his punishment.

Husht!


My Lord, you see the Imperial firm we bring,
Subscribed both by the Mother-Queen and King.
'Tis for the Viziers execution;
And we are straightly charged to see it done.
To others, he has granted to enjoy
Their lives, their fortunes, and the same employ;
Hoping that when his mercy they discern,
They will new duty and obedience learn.

The Mufti, Sir, did promise none should die;
How e're, to show how far we will comply
With your desires, the Vizier, newly fled,
Shall be brought back again, alive or dead.

Go, Traitors, go! their Visage still retains,
Under that Loyal Paint, Rebellious stains:
When they again a fit occasion find,
You'll see which way the Villains are inclined.

Sir, they are men we never cared to trust;
Then 'twas not what we would, but what we must:
Now they are smaller Wheels, and move with ease,
Faster, or slower, as the greater please.

Yet rusty and disordered Wheels, too small
To move the rest, have power to stop 'em all.

My Lords, in States men I've observed it oft,
The smooth and oily only swim aloft;
While those who of their Princes safety think,
And not their own; turn solid fools, and sink.

'Tis very true* none prosper well of late,
But the mere Rogues, the Weather-cocks of State:
The Wealth which in Rebellious times they gained,
Has favour in succeeding Courts obtained:
The Royalist in vain to Court does go;
The Rogue that made him needy, keeps him so.

I hope, and doubt not, but you, generous Sir,
Will only such as well deserve prefer.
On you alone the Empires hopes depend;
You, the Kings Safeguard, and the Subjects Friend.

I'll tell you, Sir, we blame the Emperor
Sometimes for things that are not in his power,
In spite of him, and his: 'twas so of old,
And 'tis so still, Preferment goes with Gold:
We never can with all our care avoid,
But some rich Villains will be still employed.

I, Sir, you see, with all that we could do,
These Rogues get Pardon, and Preferment too:
The Men for gain, and Women for their sport,
Prefer a thousand Rascals to the Court.

Sir, he resisted so, we could contrive
No way to bring him back with us alive:
By this, I hope, you are convinced he's dead,
For all who knew the Vizier, know his Head.

This is that subtle Head that understood,
How to be great, and every thing, but good:
Nay, that he knew; but knowledge was his curse:
He knew the better, but he chose the worse.

He seems to frown. How died he? penitent?
Some time you should have given him to repent.

He with such gallant resolution died,
That in his death his life he justifi'd.

Damned Impudence! by my consent, you should
All justify your Treason with your blood.
I to the Sultan will this Head convey;
Perhaps he'll now be wrought upon to obey.

I'll tell the King how much you are his Friends:
He'll, for this action, make you some amends.

Amends! hang em.


Bubbles! mere Bubbles! these are hopeful Youths,
To trust our Lies, who won't believe their Truths!

Poor easy Gulls! when e're they see their blood,
Like Children whipped, they think 'tis for their good.

Nay, we shall quickly find 'em fresh assaults,
If once they learn to thank us for our faults:
They a fine Sheepish Principle maintain,
To live in quiet, and at last be slain.

They shall, they shall; they are for slaughter fit:
They'll give us thanks for teaching of 'em wit.
Repenting at their deaths of living well,
They go at last like pious fools to Hell.

JAnizar Aga for the Vizier send!
What can this saucy impudence intend?
Why a Divan to night? Rogues! Villains! Tricks!
Sons of the Devil, all inspired by Styx!

Your mighty Spirit, Sir, you must contain.


They're Scandal-proof, you rail at them in vain.


You shall not go at every Rascals call;
The invite you, Sir, to your Funeral.

I know the danger, and I know the cure;
Shame, and the worst of death, I can endure
To serve my Country; but to save my King,
How gladly would I be an Offering!

Can you, Sir, at their business give a guess?


'Tis some damned piece of new-hatch'd wickedness.


I know their business must be Villainy;
Mine's only in appearance to comply:
To all they can propose I must assent;
'Tis the best way their Counsels to prevent.
Should I absent my self, they'll grow more bold,
And act their Hellish mischiefs uncontrolled.
My Lords, 'tis your concern, as well as mine,
To find out what you can of their design.
Therefore, I hope, while I to Bectas go,
You'll be employed in the Seraglio:
So their intention being fully known,
We shall with greater ease effect our own.

Is it not pity such a man should die?
For he's all Soul, his Soul all Loyalty!

A gallant man! great, valiant, good and wise,
One that hates Vice, and scorns his Enemies.

Something our Prophet highly does displease,
If such a man die by such hands as these:
However, this will be his lasting pride,
No man lived better, none more Nobly died.

So many thousand Ianizaries armed,
And not the City, nor the Court alarm'd!
They seem shut up in private rooms of Hell,
Until, Granado-like, they burst the shell.
Shall I retreat? No, I defy 'em* since
While I expose my self, I save my Prince.

Come, Sir, we want your Head-piece, to debate
A little Quirk that we have found in State.

Sir, I am honoured, that you think me fit
Among such wise and learned Heads to sit,
Who are above my advice; but I'll supply
My want of wisdom with fidelity.

Nay, Sir, for that -- The business, Sir, in short,
Concerns the greatest person in the Court.
We find the young and new elected King,
A poor, infirm, consumptive, silly thing;
His younger Brother Solyman, we find
Majestic in his person, and his mind:
To you the Empire does it self submit,
Whether of these to Reign you think most fit.

Alas* Sir, I have said a thousand times,
This Fool will build his Fame upon his Crimes:
In Solyman, an outward Shape we see
Fit for his Soul, and both for Majesty:
Then for our Canons, Sir, we find they are
Greatly deficient, and irregular;
For Boys from divers Nations we collect,
To serve the Sultan, and our own neglect.

Sir, these are things we ought to regulate,
Or they will prove the ruin of the State;
For we bestow upon a Christian Slave
That Bread a Ianizari's Child should have:
Not to be suffered! -- When do you proceed
To act what you so justly have decreed?

To morrow, at a General Divan,
We have resolved to Crown young Solyman:
What with the present Sultan we shall do,
Is not decreed; we leave it, Sir, to you.

By that time I shall my Opinion give,
Whether 'tis best for him to die, or live:
So what we do by general consent,
Will not like Treason look, but punishment.

Poor Head of Wax! he's soft, and apt to take
Any impression we desire to make. --
Come, come, the business is concluded on.

I hope, my Lord, the Vizier is not gone!


What should we stay him for? he has agreed
To all we wished, and more than we decreed.
What ever I proposed as best to do,
I could not speak it e're he thought so too.
Alas! he found the Sultan wanted wit,
And always judged young Solyman more sit.

And would you trust a man afraid to die?


Poor honest fool! he's more afraid to lye.


Sir, should he come, and our designs prevent,
Your easy nature you would then repent.

Poor Mouse! he'll make a dreadful Foe indeed!


Sir, by the Mouse the Lyon has been freed.


What silly fancy does your mind distract?
Can he that dares not think, have Soul to act?
But, grant him Valiant, Wise, and Popular,
A head in Peace, and a right hand in War:
(Come you are learned men I find!) which way
Will he an Army raise by break of day?

I know not that; but, when you let him go,
I'm sure you gave him power to be your Foe.

And I am sure who is, or would be wise,
Should not his meanest Enemy despise:
They 've sometimes wit enough to undermine,
Who have not strength to pull down a design.

Fancy, the careful Parent of your fears,
Turns harmless Sheep to Lyons, and to Bears.

I wish that Reason Fancy lulls asleep,
Find not those Lyons which you took for Sheep.

Away, away! I am ashamed to hear
Soldiers, and men of Arms, so prone to fear.
With Kiosem we are to spend this night,
In Music, Wine, and all that may delight:
To morrow we will Crown young Solyman;
Let Kuperli prevent us if he can.
When Rebels have authority and force,
He'll find it difficult to stop the Source.
But he intends not what you vainly dream:
He's not so mad to strive against the Stream.

Thanks to kind Heaven, I have escaped their rage:
What shifts I used their fury to assuage!
I lied, I flattered, and abused my Lord:
Fool did I call him? -- O disloyal word!
Pardon, dear Prince, the error I confess,
Since of two dangerous ills I chose the less.
Who's there?

Who calls? it is the Viziers voice.


Sir, at your safe return I much rejoice.


What news from Bectas, Sir?


Such news, my Lords,
As will with deepest stains blot our Records.
The Queen, and her Adherents, do ordain,
That our dread Lord shall be deposed, or slain,
And that his Brother Solyman Shall Reign.

O Hell-hounds! can their bloody minds be bent
Against a Prince so brave and Innocent?

They Crowned him first, as if they did despise
A Subject, as too mean a Sacrifice.

Kind Heaven protect us from these men of blood,
Who think all guilty that are great and good.

My Lords, to morrow early they intend
Their Tragedy shall both begin and end:
To night of safety they themselves assure;
Both in my weakness, and my faith secure:
Now therefore let us take the safest course,
And, with our subtilty, prevent their force.
It matters not whether such Enemies
Be overcome by valour or surprise.

Traitors, like Lyons, we must sleeping take;
They're dangerous Creatures when they are awake.

The Queen to night a Banquet does prepare;
And I believe they are expected there:
For to her Lodgings, as I took my round,
The Privy-Garden door unlocked I found:
For which I could no reason understand,
But that 'twas left so by the Queens Command.

And all her Rooms seem hung with joyful light,
That guilds the cheerful face of vanquished Night:
Repeated Healths they drink, and Glasses large,
By Music quickened every time they charge.

Their Songs the Prologues of their Slaughters are;
Like Trumpets, when they sound a point of War.

This only opportunity we have,
Our Lord's, our own, and Childrens lives to save.
Let us with haste to the young Sultan go,
To tell him all we fear, and all we know;
That backed with his Authority, we may
Meet with no Guards to oppose us in our way:
So we an easy Conquest shall obtain,
While they, unarmed, resist us but in vain.

To night we must the fatal quarrel end;
On this one action all our hopes depend:
Which, if successful, brings a double good;
Preserves our Princes Crown, and Peoples blood.

How slept my Son and Lord? did not you find
A pleasing Greatness hanging on your mind?
Between the weight and lustre of a Crown,
Were you not lifted up, and then cast down?

Madam, Alas! I find the Dreams of Kings,
And those of Subjects, are far different things;
Before some sport my Childish Soul possessed,
Which now I find with manly cares depressed:
Then did I entertain my mind with toys;
But now I dream of things unfit for Boys.

What dream't my sweetest Lord?


Madam, methought
Your self and I were to a Valley brought,
Solemn, obscure, and private; separate
From all the World, and styled the House of Fate:
There* at our entrance, I my Father met;
He looked so pale -- methinks I see him yet.

In what a sweet amazement he appears!
His courage gives a lustre to his tears.

By him there sat a Monarch all of Bone;
His Sceptre was a Dart, a Tomb his Throne.
This angry Prince in smiles with horror mixed,
On both of us his hollow Sockets fixed;
And my poor Father shook his careful Head,
As I conceive he would have had us fled:
I cried, and strove; but fear withheld me so,
Methought I wanted power and strength to go.

O where will this unlucky Omen end!
What can such Dreams in such a Child portend!

At last, the Prince his fatal arm held out;
Then drew it back, as if he were in doubt,
Whether 'twere best my life to take, or save:
When lo, a Shape more aged, and more grave;
One that more pity had, and more command,
Stepped in, and bad him stay his doubtful hand:
Daughter, said he to you, and Child to me,
Return; till Seventy Nine, and Eighty Three,
You have no business here: go, live and Reign;
Who my Decrees oppose, oppose in vain.

His kindness somewhat does abate my fear,
How armed, and how attired did he appear?

From his bald head hung down a Lock before;
His hand an uncouth crooked weapon bore.
Upon his shoulders two fair Wings there grew;
In haste he seemed, and while he spoke he flew.

If I interpret not your dream amiss,
There lies a pretty mystery in this.

If dreams have in them any thing divine,
I would be glad to know the event of mine.

My Lord, the Skeleton you saw was death*
The Valley so obscure, the shades beneath;
Old time was he, that all his care employed
To save you, ready then to be destroyed:
And, having got the advantage in the strife,
Promised to give you many years of life.

Had he his kindness spared, I'd been content:
I'm sure I ne'er can die more innocent.

More ill news to disturb our short delight!
What can their business be so late at night?

We come, Dread Sir, to show your Cause we own,
And to secure your Person and your Throne.

This is the minute, which if you neglect,
A sudden ruin, Sir, you must expect.

My Lords, can you a remedy advise,
When you have told me where the danger lies?

Sir, 'tis the chiefest of Physicians laws,
In all distempers to remove the cause:
Some superficial cures this State has found;
We never searched the bottom of the wound.

The gangrin, Sir, through the chief limbs is spread;
And will, 'tis feared, e're morning reach the head.

There's danger in these mysteries of State:
I always dread a way that's intricate.

My Lords I question not your skill or care:
Methinks your terms of Art mysterious are.

Great Sir, my self more fully to explain;
While the Queen lives, you cannot safely reign:
'Twas she that did your Father's death contrive;
Tis she that will not suffer you to live:
Yet she her Hellish Treasons does conceal
Under false love, and counterfeited zeal.

Sir, do not her, your self* or me abuse;
Nor falsely aged Innocence accuse.

I do not, Sir; what I affirm, is true:
I never lied, but once, to rescue you*
Bectas, by her command grown impudent,
To the Divan, for me in private sent;
And there his bloody Treason he began,
Of Murdering you, and Crowning Solyman:
This, with the Queen's authority, he backed;
And this to morrow he resolves to act.

My dearest Lord, now call your Dream to mind;
This is that very time that was so kind;
And you must either quickly be advised,
Or look, by sudden death, to be surprised.

If they a strength more powerful have than mine
What shall we do to hinder their design?

Sir, to the Queen's Apartment we must go.


There we, unlooked for, shall suprise the Fo;
Whose slender force we shall with ease destroy,
While they are overcharged with Wine and joy:
And if, with them, we apprehend the Queen,
Sir, you may guess how guilty she has been.

Go; and, if possible, a way contrive
To bring the Queen, with all her Friends, alive:
So shall our sentence on our Laws be built;
And they find Deaths proportioned to their guilt.
Succeeding times of them shall never say,
That Power, but Justice, took their lives away.

For a free passage, Sir, so late at night,
Your Signet Royal will be requisite;
Lest, while the Sentinels and outward Guard
Dispute our power, they our design retard.

My Lord, unless my slender Judgment fail,
Paper Comissions nothing will avail:
You, with this pass*port, safely, and unseen,
May go to the inward Lodgings of the Queen:
Else, you may Conquer, but can ne'er Surprise;
For that way they expect no Enemies.

Mufti, I think you have no business there*
You, by advice, will be more useful here.
Go; and the Gods your just endeavours bless,

In such a cause, we doubt not of success.


Kind Heaven our Friends protect, assist, and guide;
And let the Justest, be the strongest side.

Hence we may learn Mans frailty: soon or late,
The greatest and the wisest yield to Fate!

They can no more contribute to our mirth;
And now, dull souls! they're only fit for Earth.

How pleasant 'twas to see the Rogues dead drunk!
Their Souls, with mere imagination, sunk.

Nay, truly they were hopeful men of Arms!
Whom you might fright to death with shows and Charms.

I never knew till now what 'twas to fear.
S' death, who are you? or, what's your business here?

Die* Rascals, some of you, for being so rude
In to the Queen's retirements to intrude.

Take not this Office ill, as from my hand,
I do it, Madam, by the Kings command.

Not I: what e're it be, good news you bring,
Since 'tis the will and pleasure of my King:
He shall command my life, and all I have;
Alas, I am his Creature, and his Slave.

What shall we do, my Lord? I am afraid,
Our Plot against the Sultan is betrayed!

O Hell and Furies! mock me to my Face!
Must I die unrevenged for this disgrace?

Are you so full of venom, and so stout?
Sir, we shall find a way to let it out.

Are these your sheep? Now Bectas, do you see
The sad effect of your credulity?

These are the Traitors, Sir, they need not plead;
Our proofs they by their Confession supersede.

What should we plead for? mercy from a Child!
We scorn to have our deaths so much defiled.

Sure they despair, their impudence is such;
They are cloyed with mercy they have found so much.

They slight old torments we must find out new:
The worst of deaths is to such Villains due.

Convey 'em to the darkest Cells you have;
While these are living they deserve a Grave:
When dead, their loathsome Carcasses in the womb
Of rav nous Birds and Beasts shall find a Tomb.

O Sir!


O Cowards! let him do his worst,
And live in lasting torments more accursed.

Now, Kuperli, let Kiosem be brought,
That we may rightly understand her fault.

Assist me Heaven and clear my innocence!
Ca^ be privy thought to their offence?
But who can me from misery protect?
Those most unhappy are, whom you suspect.

For your suspicion there is too much ground,
Since revelling with Traitors you were found.

Oh! had I known the rancor of their Souls,
Poison, instead of Wine, had filled their bowls.
They came to me as Friends, but now I find
Their fury on us all they had designed.

My Lord, without a stronger proof, I fear
Her condemnation will unjust appear.

Sir, here's a Slave of hers, who has confessed
Some of her Crimes, and you may hear the rest.

Sirrah confess the truth, and you shall live:
The King, in Slaves can any fault forgive.

Dread Sir, the Queen, with Bectas and the rest,
Thought good this night to make a Royal Feast:
She, for her better entertainment, sends
For many Nobles, as her chiefest Friends;
All who, for being Royalists she slew:
This by the holy Alchoran, is true.

Pray Heaven a sudden vengeance to withhold
From a rash Slave, so perjured and so bold.

Sir, that you may not my bare word believe,
Your senses let her, if she can, deceive.

O horrid spectacle! now, Sir, you see
The solemn Triumphs of her Cruelty.

Are these the entertainments that she makes,
Wo be to him, that of such Feasts partakes!

Shut up the doors; her guilt we see too plain,
For which we must this punishment ordain:
In some dark Dungeon, where no Sun does shine.
Let her to death with thirst and hunger pine.
We nothing by her misery shall get.
Alas, she is too wicked to die yet.
Thus we her Sole from torments may release:
And she at last may enter into peace.

Do not my life in misery prolong:
Such kindness, Sir, will be the greatest wrong.
Death ne'er was dreadful to the innocent;
Yet you, in mercy, my full joys prevent.

When you can better testimonies give
That you are fit to die, you shall not live.
Go, go together and repent betimes:
Your days are few; and many are your crimes.

Madam, with you most willingly I go:
I would be guilty, since they think you so.

Oh, will not injured Heaven, e're we go hence,
Show, by some Miracle, our Innocence?
The Gods protect you, Sir, when I am dead,
Poor harmless Youth, I think --

She has dissembled with her self so long,
That now her treach'rous heart deludes her tongue.

I never such hypocrisy observed:
It feeds her fancy, when her hopes are starved

Now, Sir, I hope the danger's at an end:
We will to the Armed Ianizaries send,
Who, when the late defeat they understand,
In likelihood will, of themselves disband:
If not, within these Walls you are secure,
Till from abroad we new supplies procure.

My Lords, and you, Sir, in particular,
I thank you, for your Loyalty and care.
While I have hearts so stout, and heads so wise,
One to attaque, the other to advise;
I look upon my self as absolute;
Nor will I safety or success dispute.

For me a double kindness you have done;
Revenged my Husband, and preserved my Son:
My Lord such favours never can forget;
I hope he'll live to pay his Mother's debt.

Madam, the virtuous and the Loyal mind
Within it self its own reward does find.
Great Souls are kinds of Deities, that still
Preserve what's good, and punish what is ill.

SWel'd big with expectation you did come
To see us act our great affairs at home;
Papists accused, and Satyrs against ROME.
That might have pleased, -- but still the modest stage
Forbears to represent the present age.
Let foreign stories matter here supply,
Old Tales and known are best for Tragedy.
Besides I think the business of our Nation
Too sad a Theme to pass for Recreation.
Let us be mute till the whole truth comes out,
Not like the Rabble at Execution shout.
Heathens that knew but just morality.
Pitti'd the Guilty when they came to die:
Barbarians at such Sights did show regret,
How far are we then from Religion yet!
Religion teaches mildness in her Laws,
Triumph suspicion upon justice draws.
Go then contented hence with what you've seen,
Fancy you have two hours in Turkey been;
This was no Popish Plot, yet English too,
For to say truth it was our Plot on you.

