IT is so hard to please, when things must be
Mouldy with Age, or gilt with Novelty;
That, in effect, 'tis but a Cross, or Pile,
In all that's written, whether well, or ill:
Nor have we ventured on this liberty,
That we suspect your judgments -- no -- they're free;
Free, as that Reason that informed 'em first,
And, were those common cloggs of Interest
Once shaken off, would be the same again;
What shall I say? -- shall I entre at ye then?
A poor inducement! -- If ye will not do it,
Out of good Nature, let me bribe ye to it:
I -- now ye hearken -- But mistake me not;
We give no money back -- That were a plot
Upon our selves -- Yet we've as good a shift;
Ye that would learn to thrive, we'll teach ye Thrift;
And ye that would get more -- Why faith -- for you,
We have -- The Lord knows what -- new Projects too;
And you' -- I forget my self -- To run too far,
May chance to cloy ye, ere you see your fare.

NOw send that all things be well at home, -- But troth, I half doubt it, my
mind so misgives me: -- It could not be for nothing sure, that the Rats eat a
hole in my pocket last night, and a Crow kept scraping, and kawing at me this
morning: -- uh -- my fears are out, -- This Rogue has given me the slip, and is
run away with my cloak bag. --

Oh Lean-chops! -- art thou come --

I profess thou did half fright me, -- This London is so villainous a wide
place, I was afraid I had lost thee, and must have been at the charge of crying
thee; -- Art thou come Rogue?


As you see Sir: -- But it seems, must thank this, for your care and my
welcome: -- And yet I'll undertake it might have leapt safe on a Dunghill, for
any thing that's in it.


Away sirrah, -- I have often told you of your surly proud heart, -- sirrah,
sirrah, he that scorns a little, shall never be master of a great deal; -- No
more I say, but stand forth, and lets see whether we have lost any thing by the
journey. --

Lazarus Suckdry! ( -- I God wot, a poor man -- as poor as Lazarus! -- I must
be contended, --) Here I am: -- Zachary Lean-chops!


Here sir.


'Tis well, -- Lets on: -- Item, one horse, -- three shoes and a half, -- two
stirrups, -- one saddle, -- one bridle, -- one girth, -- one crupper, and half
a saddle-cloth.


All safe and forth-coming.


Very well, -- observe, -- one doublet with a new pair of Foreskirts, -- one
pair of Breeches with a blew Codpiece Point, -- one pair of Stockings, --


Without feet Sir. --


No matter, no matter, -- 'Tis not seen, -- one pair of Boots, -- one Spur,
and Spur-leather, -- one pair of Gloves, -- one Basket-hilt sword, -- one
Girdle-hanger, -- one Hat, -- one Band, -- one Coat, -- one jump, -- and one
switch. --


All in view.


Item, In the cloak-bag, -- one Sessions Suit and Cloak, -- one pair of blew
Stockings, with orange coloured garters, and roses, -- Three shoes, -- one
Comb, with five teeth, -- one razor, -- half a washing ball, and a piece of a
Glass, -- let me see, is it fast? -- all safe? -- ha? --


As you left it: -- He deserves to to be damned after it, that would venture a
hanging by stealing any of't:


Come Lean-chops, come, -- This place is a little too public, -- We'll look
over the rest when we come home.


Unless we chance to meet a Rag-man by the way; and then -- Rags to Rags, and
Rubbish to Rubbish.


Follow me, -- and have a care, -- Here comes a couple. --

One does not know what they may do. -- Have a care, I say, -- Have a care. --


Mr. Suckdry! -- Your servant, -- welcome to Town:


Thank you good Sir, -- uh, -- uh, -- he believes I have money in my
Cloak-bagge, -- would I were well rid of him.


How do you? -- you do not look well, -- let me give you a glass of wine; --
'twill comfort your heart.


Wine! -- uh -- uh -- I dare not, -- my Doctor tells me 'tis nought for me. --
I was right: -- He thinks I have got money, and would make me drunk, to steal my
Cloak-bag, -- uh -- uh.


Come, -- it shall cost you nothing.


Another time, -- uh, -- uh, -- This Rogue Lean-chops has smelt (...) my gold
at home, and told him where it lies buried. -- uh, -- uh. --


What ails you Sir.


Uh, -- uh, -- sick, -- A sit of the Colic. -- I must home.


But perhas I have somewhat to say to you, may deserve your stay: -- You have a
daughter?


A poor Girl God wot, -- What of her?


Call her not poor -- she that is virtuous, and handsome, is rich enough.


Ah Sir, -- But every man is not of your opinion -- Alas poor child! she wants
a Portion: -- There's something else required, besides virtue, and handsomeness.
-- This, may bring admirers, that, sweet-hearts, but 'tis money, money that gets
the husband.


Let not that trouble you: -- I have a Son, and though I say it, a handsome
fellow; One, that throw him where you will, shall live in the world.


But I can give nothing with my daughter, -- poor wench, She's a right
Philosopher; She carries all she has about her: -- Good Sir do not abuse our
Poverty, -- uh, -- uh. --


Nor do I: -- Here's my hand, I'm in earnest: -- What say you?


I have told you already: -- she has no money:


And I have answered it: -- Shall we bring 'em together?


For that, as you please, -- you know her Portion, -- uh, -- uh: -- I am sick,
and cannot stay to talk it longer now: -- Farewell Sir, -- This is a Trap to
catch my gold, -- But he may be mistaken, -- Old Rats are not so easily taken,
as young Cats think, -- uh, -- uh:

Jocose, Farewell: -- my Son and I'll see you within a few days.


But (with your leave Sir) I hope you are not in earnest.


No? -- But I am: -- And if I can but compass it, shall think it the best
days work I ever yet did in my life: -- This fellow (as poor as he seems) tell
him but of a good Mortgage shall lend you ten thousand pound upon it, at a days
warning; and yet would have the world believe him to be a poor man: And such,
in troth he is, since he dares not enjoy what he has: for (O my Conscience)
were he now sick in earnest, he would rather die, to save charges, then be at
the expense of a Glister.


A man would wonder at it, -- Yet such I've heard of.


But beyond him, I think few: -- I have had this design in my head a long time,
and made him many a Mortgage, and kept touch with him at his day, merely to
beget an opinion in him that I had great dealings in the world; when yet I have
found enough to do, to keep my head above water.


Do not despair Sir: -- But think how I may be serviceable to you, and see what
I'll do, -- A Mountebanck's Zany, shall not be at more command, nor half so
nimble, as I'll be industrious.


I do believe thee, and perhaps may have occasion to try you sooner then you
think of ^t:


Never too soon; nor nothing too much to serve so good and bountiful a Master:


Well then, to be serious, -- I have a great while gone the plain down-right
honest way, but I find, that begets nothing, but laughter; And therefore, I'm
even resolved to follow the rest of the world, That is to say, feed the humours
of fools, and if they will set up windmils in their heads, contribute my
assistance to cut out the sails; -- When saw you Sir Gudgeon Credulous?


Very lately; -- But so big with contemplation, there was no coming near him,
-- 'Tis true, he cried, How does your Master? -- Remember me to him, -- Gave me
the State Nod, -- and Exit.


'Tis such a Political Hocus! such a Frippery of Shreds, and parings, that I
can liken him to nothing better, then a Taylors Cushion; no two pieces of the
same colour: -- To day this, to morrow, that, the next, a third thing, But what
that is, no man knows; 'tis past all men's understanding, and his own too; for
(to speak truth) he never had more, then a man might well truss up in an
Egge-shell, and room to spare: in a word, I may say of him (as 'tis said of
Nature, concerning Monsters) He was produced, not intended.


Nor have you mistook your Character -- I have known him A Mathematician, a
Pol, a Star-gazer, a Quack, a Chaldean, a Schoolman, a Philosopher, an Ass, a
broken Grammarian, and most abominable Poet, and yet fick of all, but the Ass:
and now at last (if I mistake him not) a most confident, ignorant Projectour.


And that, he may thank me for, -- I saw he was past the remedy of a Mortar,
and if I should have pretended to a miracle, to have reduced him, 'twould have
been hardly believed; And therefore I even let him alone, and as I saw
occasion, worked him to my own purpose: -- me thinks you might be useful to me
in it.


And will: -- I am your servant, command it;


Here dwells hard by, one Mistress Gods-good, a rich Widow, to whom I have made
some long pretences; nor had they been (as I am told) altogether succesless, if
this Cockscombs Estate had not hung in my light: -- she believes him what he
is, an Ass, but yet a golden Ass, and cry's, that's enough to cover his other
faults: Now could I flea him of that fine skin, I need not trouble my self to
make him ridiculous, and consequently, do mine own work.


And truly he's in a fair way to it. -- And now give me leave to tell you, you
could have thought of nothing wherein I could have served you better.


I know thou hast been bred a Scholar, and thy invention not ill: -- But can
thou Cant?


How think you Sir, -- Suppose I should tell him I had studied the
Emporeuticks, Lemnicks, Camnicks, and Plegnicks, could demonstrate the Minimum
quod sit, of Homocrecious, and Heterocrasious; and stripping Materia Prima to
her smock, discover the most private recesses, and occult qualities, of
Ignicadrillica, Metallorgonica, Euricatactica, and Hydropanta pressoria, Do you
believe (I say) he would be able to understand more of it, than I do my self,
which is just nothing? If you call this Canting, let me alone with him.


Excellent! -- Then to subdivide them into as undemonstrable (yet seemingly
probable) Projects, -- We shall make such sport!


And get good money I warrant you Sir, -- But see! my young Master, -- yet me
thinks not so merry at heart as we are.


Now Nando! -- What news with you: -- Thou art as spruce, as if thou had been
with thy young Widow, yet look as heavy, as she had turned thee to lead: --
How goes it?


Why faith Sir, I just came from her.


And what? -- How did she receive thee?


So, so, -- The City way, -- But at last I had laughed her into a pretty good
humour, 'till (as the Devil would have it) in dropped her Uncle, and quite damped
all, with a noise of Jointures, and I know not what, A disease, I think I shall
be last troubled with: -- To be short, she did in effect tell me, she was
handsome, and would never marry, but to better her Fortune.


Let her go, let her go; -- If thou wilt not be wanting to thy self, I le put
thee upon a better, and one that shall never cheat thee by pretending to be
richer then she is; for in a word, she is not worth one groat.


What do you mean Sir?


A good wife, and (for ought I ever heard) may make a virtuous wife.


No ready money Sir? -- me thinks, half one half tother, were somewhat like:


Let not that trouble you: -- Her Father is rich, very rich, and has no other
child to leave his Estate to, and shall rather put her off, to an ordinary
Fortune, with nothing, then give an hundred pound, to marry her to the best
Estate in London.


And who may this be good Sir?


Old Suckdry's daughter.


I could like it well: -- But how is it to be done?


Not, with that tossing Feather, Lewd Peruwig, Laced Band, Flaunting Linen,
Embroidered Belt, wide Slops, Shop of Ribbons, and vile Porte-canons.


Why Sir, you have seen them all before:


Nor am I angry with thee, for doing as other people do, -- no, -- I had rather
have thee comport thy self to every mans humour: -- With old men, severe; with
young, jocund; with the humoursome, morose; with women, galliard; with thy
companions, pleasant; and with a niggardly Rascal, more sordid than himself; at
least, appear so; -- And so would I have thee treat this fellow.


If that were all, I could easily follow your directions.


And you may not repent it: -- Go, -- be ruled by me; -- Strip all this
trumpery, -- 'tis enough to fright him: -- should he see thee now, he'd swear
the feathers were more worth than the Bird: -- Go I say, and get me some little
odd hat, but quite out of fashion; a diminutive Band, no cuffs, hair shorter
than your eye-brows, at most, not beyond your ears, close breeches, greasy
Gloves, Gresham Shoes, Leather Shoe-tyes, and for your Cloak, no matter if it
be of another Parish, he'll like it the better.


My acquaintance would laugh at me.


Get thou the money, and laugh at them boy: -- Then for your discourse, -- get
me together all the base, ill, sordid tricks of a covetous wretch, and deliver
them as morals; -- wonder at the ignorance of the age that knows not those
honest thrifty Rules, or if it do, its shame in not practising them.


Well Sir, I see you are in earnest, -- and for once I'll try what I can do: --
But I doubt --


Do -- and ne'er doubt it: -- about it straight, while 'tis hot, and leave the
rest to me.


You have commanded, and I shall not dispute: -- But if I bring it to pass, I
may well swear, miracles are not ceased.


Come -- let's be gone, -- thou know the plague's in the City, and if I stay
longer, 'tis odds but I may be infected.


I hope Sir, you do not fear Sir Gudgeon Credulous?


O no, -- he's a good preservative against it.


I told you he was as big as he could hold, -- Do you not observe Sir, how hard
he wrings his brows, to the manifest hazard of disblocking his Peruwig? -- Will
you not speak to him?


Presently, -- let's view him a little.


It must take without doubt, and the profit be infinite, -- No man knows what:
-- But for the manner of doing it: -- This way? -- No -- It may be certain, but
'tis too far about the bush. -- That way? -- No: -- for though it be the
shorter cut, we may yet be too hasty in the experiment. -- The other way? --
Neither, -- the charge will be too vast: -- Hang charge, we shall quickly
fetched up again, -- All I fear is, The thing will be so considerable, it may
chance to be begged from us; and against that, there's no other fence, but to
swear 'tis worth nothing -- That was well thought on. -- Then after this, comes
my Widow -- I shall be but too rich -- one Jupiter! there could be no less
then then ten Jupiters, Lords of my Nativity.


Sir Go. Credulous! -- save you! -- I see there's hopes of the business you mind
it so well. -- Have you made any experiment?


Yes. -- But I do not find it altogether answer expectation: -- However, 'tis
but early days yet.


Pray be very curious in it, and Driver (to whom I have committed the
management of my interest) shall assist you: I must tell you, he's no ordinary
Artist.


Better and better -- then he has seen it?


Seen it Sir! -- If I should tell your Worship all I have seen, I should
despair of the work, 'twould so put you out of patience.


Good Driver! -- and how? and when?


Did not I tell you, you would not have patience? -- Good sir let things do
themselves: -- one minutes over-hast, is enough to put us a twelvemonth back:
-- for it fares here as with the Philosophers Stone, the least error in the
work, and we must begin all anew.


Honest Mr. Driver -- I will be ruled. --


'Tis he -- I have his name here fast in my Book in good black and white. --
Let me see -- E, F, G, H, J, J, J -- Jo, Jo, Jo -- Jocose -- Here 'tis --
Jocose -- page. 150. -- Mr. Jocose for himself and Wife -- 108 l. 7 s. 9 d. ob.
-- A good round sum, would I had it, I could be content to bate him the single
money.


But hark you Driver -- Thou see this Pagan Cousin of mine, and know his
business; -- prithee put him off with some whim or other.


I warrant you sir, -- leave him to me.


Cousin! your servant -- I was just sending my man to speak with you, but he
knows the business, and can tell't you, as well as my self. -- Come Sir Gudgeon
-- I le wait on you.


Your servant sir -- I thank you.


Now Mr. Gotam, you may see what 'tis to have a Friend at Court -- You thought,
I warrant, my Master had forgotten you.


Why, truly sir, this money has been due a pretty while; -- long before his Wife
died, I am certain.


No more of that. -- Suppose he put you on a business shall make you for ever,
-- And be worth ye: -- thou hast hardly faith enough to believe, what!


Aa! -- good Mr. Driver. -- As how I pray?


Why thus, -- my Master, you know, has great friends, and therefore doubts not,
but by their assistance to procure a Patent of Privilege, to engross a
business solely to himself. -- I must confess it will scarce amount to more
then a Coppy-hold Project. --


What do you mean by that?


That is to say, it will not exceed Ten Thousand pound a year, -- and I can
assure you, if ever there were an ingenious Invention, 'tis this, -- and in
this my Master intends to take you in with him, and let you go what share you
please. -- You shall do no worse then himself.


Ah sir, my Cousin is an honest Gentleman, and I have had long experience of
his love: -- How do ye call it?


'Tis an Ignicke, Hydre^icke, and Hydroterricke invention, consisting of Heat
without Fire or Smoke: and certainly, Nature and Art, melted down into the same
body, could not produce such another Diacat h^licon, that shall equally serve
to all purposes; Roast, Bake, Boil, Wash, Brew, dry Malt, Hops, Wheat, Oats,
and generally every thing else (as I told you before) without the help of Fire
or Smoke: -- Now sir, you know the business, and may consider of it.


Consider! -- I apprehend it already, and find it too great to be dallied with:
-- Why it will destroy all the Woodmongers upon the River, and reduce them to
their first Dungboats again. -- How have you done touching the charge?


Truly you have hit upon one of the main points, -- and part of the reason why
my Master made you privy to it; -- for as on one hand, we must take in some
Sharers to lessen the charge, so on the other, it behoves us to consider how many
we may admit, for fear of diminishing the profits.


Most true -- we'll carryit on between our selves: -- It will fall to my turn
to be Church-warden this next year, and then I shall have the Custody of the
Parish Stock, if that will serve you, command it, -- we shall be able (I hope)
to fetch it up again before my time be out.


By much: -- But the business is now on foot, and must not stand still for fear
of spoiling; and therefore we must be provided of present money; because, you
know, some fees must be scattered among Servants and Clerks, and some other
will go to making of Trials, -- things will not come without charge.


You say right, -- and now I think on it, I may be able to bring in my Neighbour
Squeeze, the Exchange Broker, and by his means old Mr. Suckdry, and Mrs.
Godsgood; there's money enough at an hours warning, if one could tell how to get
it.


Pray about it, and I'll see you tomorrow; -- if you go forth leave word where
I may find you. -- Ferewell, -- I must follow my Master, -- the Knight and he
are gone to see a proof of what I told you.


Farewell, -- but Mum. -- Certain I rize with the right end upward to day, I
have had such good luck; -- I shall be an Alderman I see, in spite of all
three-half penny Stars: -- I think a Brass-jack-line would hang as well o'my
shoulders as on another mans; -- certain it must. -- But see -- my Wife. --

This Hyterridinctido will be news to her, -- y'faith will it. -- Sweet heart!
-- well met.


I had as lief ha'found you at home; -- the main chance goes well forward in
the mean time, and you never in your Shop: -- God held! a Beggar I found thee,
and a Beggar thoult leave me.


Nay Wife, -- I have good news for thee, -- I have been with my Cousin.


And has he paid you the money? -- I am sure't has been due ever since my first
Husbands time.


'Tis sure enough, -- not too hasty Wife, -- we are beholding to him, -- you
know he took notice of me at Court, showed you the Privy Lodgings, got you a
place at the Play, gave you a Bottle of the Kings Wine, and a Court Tart, and
sends us Venison twice in a season Wife. --


Better he had sent his money, and I could have got the other my self; -- marry
gipp, -- this is one of your old excuses; you think you have got a Wife can
maintain you, and now forsooth you must walk like a Gentleman: -- Sirrah,
sirrah, look out and mind your business, or I'll make you look out.


Good faith I do.


Yes -- among your Gills too much: -- what was that you said to our maid
tother night in the Kitchen, when you thought I was a bed? -- I heard you, --
you mought have come up a pair of stairs higher if you had pleased; -- I do'nt
wonder now she'as lost her stomach.


This is nothing but thy jealous head.


Jealous! -- Come up here! -- You can be merry enough abroad, when you are
amongst your flirts, but at home you're as sad and lumpish as a Gibb'd Cat; --
I can tell you the reason, -- Thou art sad because thou can not bury me: -- I
half doubt the Rats-bane you bought tother day was not altogether for the
Rats: -- Do you understand that, Gentleman?


Not I in troth.


No, you won't, -- you can understand your Gossips well enough. -- 'Tis a fine
thing, you must be perpetually hopping after them; and I forsooth! I cannot
walk in the fields with a Friend, -- but whoop! the house is too little for
you. -- My first Husband was another kind of man; my finger could not ache but
he I woo's! -- nothing was too good for me. -- When will you say, Dear wife,
Honey wife, Sugar wife, how dost thou? dost want any thing? would have a new
Gown? go abroad? walk to Islington? see the Bears? -- Go whither thou wilt; do
what thou hast a mind to, -- I am not jealous: -- Here was a Husband!


Prithee have done, -- I told thee I had been with my Cousin, and have good
news for thee.


As what I warrant?


What! -- Such as shall make thee a Lady within this Twelvemonth: -- My Cousin
and I are engaged in a business cannot be less worth then Fifteen Thousand
Pound a Year honestly: -- Now Wife! -- where's your Loving Husband?


Whatever I say in my passion, thou art -- 'Tis but only to make the better. --
But hark ye my dear, -- sha'nt we not keep a Coach then?


A Coach! -- Yes, -- and Eight Horses, -- and our Country House new built. --
Come -- follow me, and I'll tell thee the rest within, which I would have thee
communicate to your friend Mrs. Godsgood, and bring her in for a share, while I
do the same to my Neighbour Squeeze the Exchange Broker: -- Come --


Any thing good Husband, -- I'll be thy best Wife.


well -- o'my Conscience there was never so unluckey a fellow as my self; --
Service do you call it? Certainly, if Damnation be only Poena Sensus, that were
a fitter name for it: -- Here I live with a Master that has Wealth enough; But
so fearful, sad, pensive, suspicious a fellow, that he disquiets both himself,
and every one else. -- Art (I have heard say) has but Seven Liberal Sciences,
but he has a Thousand Illiberal. -- There lives not a more base, nigarly,
unsatiable Pinch penny, nor a more gaping, griping, Polling, extorting,
devouring Cormorant: -- A sponge sucks not up faster, and yet a Pumice gives
back easier. -- The sign is always with him in the Clutches; and a Kites
Pouncke truss not more readily. -- He shall watch you a young Heir, as
diligently, as a ^aven a dying Horse, and yet swallow him with more tears then
a Crocodile. -- He never sleeps but he Seals up the Nose of his Bellows, least
they loose breath, and has almost broke his Brains, to find the like device for
his Chimney, and his Throat -- A Gamester has not studied the advantage of Dice
half so much, as he, a sordid Parsimony, which yet he calls Thrift; And will
tell you to a Crum, how much difference there is in point of loss, between a
hundred dozen of bread broken with the hand, and cut with a knife: -- The
Devil's in him, and I am as weary of him, as of our last Journey, which both of
us performed on the same horse. -- As thus, -- In the morning (about two hours
before him) out gets Peel-Garlick, he joggs after, overtakes me, rides through
the next Town, and a little beyond it, leaves Palfrey a grazing for me, and
marches on himself; in like manner, I get up, overtake him, ride on, and leave
him on this side the next Town, and so order our business, that he rides out in
the morning, and into the Inn at night, and through every Town by the way. Nor
need we fear any mans stealing him: Smithfield at the end of a long Vacation
cannot show such another Wall-ey'd, Crestfallen, Saddle-back't, Flat-rib d,
Gut-founder'd, Shoulder-pitcht, Spurgall'd, Hip-shotten, Greese-moulten jade;
besides Splint, Spavin, Glanders, Farce, String-halt, Sprains, Scratches,
Malander, and Wind-galls innumerable. -- Like the fools Hobby-horse; were it
not for the name of a horse, a man had as lief go a foot: -- and thus we jog
on in grief together. -- But hold, -- I hear him, -- somewhat's amiss.


Undone, undone, -- whither should I run? -- whither should I not run? -- Stop
there, -- whom? what? where? -- I know not -- Lean-chops!


Sir, -- what ails you?


Oh -- A lost undone man: -- what a deal of misery a day brings forth? -- I
have lost my money, and what should I live longer: -- hunger and poverty will be
my end.


How much have you lost Sir?


I believe thou know as well as I, -- Ah -- a whole half piece, -- Gon, gon,
gon; and I undone. -- I believe thou hast found it; -- open your coat, -- Lets
see your right hand, -- your left hand, -- both hands, -- your third hand, --
vh, -- no hopes, -- undone undone.


Pray sir search, -- perhaps it may be about you -- you have many pockets.


Impossible, -- impossibble, -- vh!


Why see now, -- may not you be ashamed to use me thus, and for nothing too?


Ashamed! -- what should a poor man do with shame? -- Get in, get in. --


Tis past three of the Clock, and I have eat nothing today.


This Rogues mind is nothing but his Gut; -- A good thrifty servant, that
minded his Masters profit, would have gone to the Cooks, and cheapen'd every
joint, tasted all, but bought none, and made a good meal on it. -- One would
think sirrah, you might not be ashamed to do what your Master has done before
you. -- Get in, I say, and look to the house.


There's no fear that any one will carryit away, and for any thing in it,
there's nothing but Cob-webs.


What's that he mutters? No marvel sirrah, if for your sake I am not made an
Alderman! -- I will have the Cob-webs preserved, they are good for a cut
finger. -- Get in I say -- How the slave stirs? -- If I come to ye, I le mend
your Snails pace.


One were better be hanged then endure this life.


How he mumbles the Devils Pater Noster? -- Sirrah get in, and stir one foot
till I call ye, and thou hast as good have broke thy neck. -- So, -- He's gone.
-- Jocose the other day would have given me Wine, and preferred his Son should
marry my Daughter, without a Portion too! -- Ah, Ha, -- I do not like when rich
men speak kindly to a poor man; they offer bread with one hand, but carry a
stone in the other. -- But I loose time, -- my gold, my gold: -- this must be the
place: -- All's safe, and I'm alive again: -- All hail! --

[A board sinks, and his bags are discovered. Thou that give form to every
thing. -- Thou sun of life, -- Thou Guardian that protect'st us; -- Thou Regent
of the world, that disposest's all things as thou best pleasest's and without
whom, humane society would quickly fall in pieces: -- For whatever else may be
called the Girdle, I am sure thou art the Buckle that hold st it together. --
There -- rest in peace my better Lean-chops, Lean-chops.


Your pleasure Sir?


I am going abroad Lean-chops, -- shut the door after me, bolt it, and bar it,
and see you let no one in, in my absence -- Put out the fire (if there be any)
for fear some body seeing the smoke may come to borrow some. -- If any one come
for water, say the Pipe's cut off, -- or to borrow a Pot, Knife, Pestle and
Mortar, or the like, say they were stole last night. -- But hark ye, -- I
charge ye not to open the door to give them an answer, but whisper't through
the key-hole: For I tell you again, I will have no body come into my house while
I'm abroad; -- No, -- no living soul: -- Nay though good Fortune her self
knocked at door, don't let her in.


She'll have care enough of that her self, -- she has been often near us (but I
think there is a Cross upon the door) she ne'er came in yet.


Sirrah, sirrah hold your peace and do as I bid you; -- 'T would better become
you to know more, and speak less: -- See it be done. --

How no! Who was't?


Mr. Squeeze, your Exchange Broker -- he would sain speak with you.


O let him in by all means, -- he is a good man, and never comes empty handed,
-- make haste before he be gone sirrah --

This Rogue will never learn wit, -- one would have thought he had lived long
enough with me to have been able to distinguish persons, -- I must even discard
him, -- 'Twill save charges. --


I'll show you the way Gentlemen, I have some Interest in my pocket for him,
and will pay him that first, -- 'twill make him more supple. -- I was just
coming sir to wait on you with some money that I had received for you, and met
with these Gentlemen coming to me about a like business, and I even brought em
with me. -- Tis --


O they are weleome, they are welcome, and chiefly your self: -- It came in
good time, for I profess, I had hardly a groat in the house.


How? -- Then our business is done already: -- what's worse then ill luck?


Please you to tell it over. -- The overplus is for continuance.


Do'nt speak so loud, -- I understand you.


Let him alone a while, -- let him handle the money, -- He means, he has never
a Groat he would spare by his good will.


Tis all right and well, -- only here's a Parliament Sixpence, pray change it.


How was I mistaken? -- There sir.


Hark you Neighbour, -- what's their business?


Such as you never dealt in before, -- the most ingenuou'st Invention was ever
yet found out. -- I'll undertake after the first Year you may make Cent. per
Cent. of your money every three months, besides a certain Bank ready upon all
occasions.


Say you so good Mr. Squeeze? -- As how? As how?


They'll tell you that themselves; -- You know Mr. Gotam? he has been always
held a sober man.


Indeed has he, and well to pass: -- He is of the Livory, and in a short time
will be Master of his Company; -- He married the Widow Minee; I knew her first
Husband, -- he was a thriving man.


Marry was he. -- But the business is of so great a concernment, that 'tis not
one or two ordinary men's purses are able to carry it on. -- The other is Sir
Gudgeon Credulous, a worthy, wise Knight, and in his own Country of the
Peace, and Quorum.


He seems no other.


There is a Gentlewoman too, one Mistress Gods-good.


O, -- I have heard of her, -- A rich Widow.


That she is o'my knowledge; I deal for her, -- All persons concerned, -- but
the main Wheel of the work is Mr. Jocose. -- Faith sir, I'd have you come in
too; -- As poor a man as I am, I am resolved to go in Five hundred pounds.


But what shall you come out Neighbour? What? c.


No man knows what! -- You had best speak to them.


How much would they have from me?


That shall be as you please, whither any thing or nothing: -- only at present
they would borrow of you Two Thousand pound.


Two thousand pound! -- Do you know what you say?


Yes, 2000 lib. -- You are too quick for me, -- I meant upon good security.


O -- that alters the case. -- Life is frail, man mortal, -- but good Security
may do much; -- What is the Security? -- Citizens, or Country Gentlemen? -- You
know my way, -- I must have a Judgment at least.


Pray talk with 'em your self.


You're welcome Mistress, -- Sir Gudgeon Credulous, I understand, -- And you
Mr. Gotam, -- Your business with me?


The same sir. -- I thought Mr. Squeeze had informed you?


If he has not, we shall.


Why truly -- he has given me a small touch of't.


Then thus Sir, -- We are all persons jointly concerned in the same business;
and we look upon the whole charge (what is past and to come) may amount to 9000
li. -- somewhat under a years profits: -- Of this I am out already 4000 li. The
Widow Gods-good advances 1500 li. more; -- Mr. Gotam 1000 li. Mr. Squeeze 500
li. -- And to make up the sum, we would borrow of you 2000 li. -- upon good
Security. --


Alas sir! -- 2000 li. -- I am a poor man: 2000 li. and I are not so near of
kin, but we may marry to morrow. -- But if your security be like, and you'll
be civil to me, I have some friends: -- Pray Sir what is your security?


Would the Court of Aldermens were as good: -- Security!


Sir there's a Gentleman at door enquires for you.


For me? -- It may be Mr. Jocose, -- Pray desire him to come in, -- I am glad
he found me out, -- Now you'll be able to see the very guts of the business.


What share goes he?


Alas Sir, None; -- 'Tis enough for him that the invention was, and the Patent
will be his: -- There's reason in all things: --

Oh Mr. Driver! Where's your Master?


Where's my Cousin?


He intended to have been with you himself, but being unluckily takenill of the
Gout, he sent me to your house, where I heard of your being here. --


A good rich disease -- I warrant I shall ne'er be troubled with it.


All that he bad me signify to you was, -- That the work went well on, and
only wanted more workmen, and more materials.


We are about it now, and have provided very well for the time. -- And now you
are come, pray save me a labour, and let this Gentleman understand the
business.


Which Sir? -- That of the Plegnick Screw, The Handquern, or the
Horse-Wind-Water-Mill?


Ha! -- Ha! --


Have you more then one?


Divers, divers, which is the reason of the excessive charge, -- Though troth,
twas more then I knew before -- is now in operation -- I think you called it,
The Metallorgan icum Ignicadrillicum.


You mean that of a constant heat, without fire or smoke.


The same, The same.


How is't possible? -- which way?


Tell you that, and tell you all; -- Every Art has it's Occult quality, which
once demonstrated, would cease to be a secret, and some other might chance to
get between us and home: -- However, since here are none but friends, and all
wellwillers, I will give ye some small hints of't, which to be short, is singly
effected by a new kind of motion (for you know, motion is the cause of heat,)
And this meeting with matter ready disposed, shall either work naturally by it
self, or in cases extraordinary, by an Antiperistasis: -- and be, not only
Equi-sufficent, Equicheap, Equi-excellent, as all minor Projects pretend to,
but more cheap, more sufficient, and super-excellent, which when we are better
acquainted, I will easily demonstrate.


I'll promise you, if this be able to be made good, 'twill save abundance of
Wood and Coals.


That's least; -- What say you to this? -- First there can be no danger of
firing; for as I told you before, 'tis done without fire. -- Secondly, You are
not troubled with smoke, the greatest enemy to mans health. -- Thirdly, No
Soot shall fall into the Pot, nor Fat be lost in the Fire. Fourthly, It shall
so preserve the radical moisture, juice, and substance of Hops, and Malt, that
whereas now, they retain in a manner, only their fixed salt, and excrementitious
dead substance, this shall so conserve their Balsamical spirits, That the
Brewer shall be able to afford twelve shilling Beer, at half a Crown a Barrel,
and get more by it then he does now: -- Fifthly, As you well observed, no charge
of fuel. -- Sixthly, (Which one were enough by it self) It is an invention, or
rather a new marvellous Art, useful to all, and injurious to none, and such as
besides the eternising our-names to Posterity, shall give us at present,
Honour, Fame, Friends, Wealth, and (as a consequent of that) every thing.


What think you of this Sir?


O'my Word no contemptible buisness. -- I hear he has more on foot; and why may
n't we get one to our selves?


Perhaps you may: -- And the lending this money may be a good introduction to
the other.


Don't you think they would take half money, and half Jewels?


Perhaps they might, but then you must enlarge the su^, or they may want money
to carry on the work.


You say right: -- What's their Security?


O'my Conscience if you would but stand upon it, they'd go near to Mortgage to
you, a third or a fourth part of the clear Profits.


Softly, -- Don't talk of a Fourth, -- I'll make them believe I will have a
moiety; though rather then fail, I could be contented with less.


If I might advise you Sir --


Why truly to tell you truth, -- we have made very few proofs of the rest: --
But if you will call at my Mastres's, I'll give you that account of 'em may be
worth your trouble: -- There will be enough for you all.


But hark ye Mr. Driver, -- Don't you bob me off, with a third rate Project
now? --


Sir Gudgeon! that you should think so!


Do you propose it to them:


I shall Sir. -- Mr. Gotam you know we propounded 2000. l. for Mr. Suckdry: --
I have done the Work, and he shall be contented with a third part of the
profits for Security, -- I hope you will consider me in my Share.


And all the reason in the World; -- You hear Gentlemen what he says.


I would have him secured, -- But I would not though leave a twenty shilling
piece in pawn for a groat.


Alas Sir, 'Tis none of my money, 'tis my Friends, and I'll account truly
between you both: -- If you intend honestly you cannot give too great
Security.


You may do it, I'll undertake my Master shall not oppose it.


Then get ready the Writings; -- I hope we shall have a good account in a short
time.


As soon as you please; -- I'll about it straight; -- We may be all made and
send us but good luck.


Well Sir, Farewell for the present.


Farewell good Gentlemen; -- But stay Mr. Driver, -- pray stay, -- let me speak
with you, -- methought you were saying your Master had a great many other
Projects; -- Surely, -- surely, he must be a very rich man.


Why faith Sir, he is well enough, though he be at a great deal of charge; for
now and then an Engine breaks, and an experiment fails; should all take right,
he would be too rich, but that's almost impossible; he that will get, must now
and then venture to loss. -- This is our comfort, the first good hit, pays for
all miscarriages.


That's well, -- But pray tell me, -- What children has your Master? --


One Son Sir, and that's all: -- I have often asked him why he toils himself
to leave so great an estate, when the tenth part of what he has already would
serve my Young Master, and to spare.


No ill sign, -- I like him the better, -- But dost think he was in earnest
when he proposed a match between his son, and my daughter?


Yes truly, if he said it, you may believe him; -- But alas! What should my
young Master do with all that Wealth you two are like to leave him?


Keep it, keep it, and breed more: -- Prithee tell me, dost think thy Master
would settle a good swinging Project upon him in possession?


Yes truly, I believe he may.


Then hark you, -- Pick me out a good round one, and it may not be the worse
for thee; -- 'Tis the first part of Faulconrie to hold fast, and if thy young
Master has that good quality, I dare trust him for the rest, -- or he may
quickly learn it. --


I shall be glad with all my heart to be an instrument, in the business; -- And
now upon second thoughts, I think your daughter may make an excellent wife for
him.


Your reason good Mr. Driver, -- Your reason?


Because I have so often heard him protest against your great matches, (as he
calls 'em) and compares 'em to an ill pudding, all blood, and no fat.


I'll be sworn, a hopeful young man; -- But tell me (Prithee be true to me)
what kind of wife does he most affect, if he might have his choice?


What? -- Even a good honest mans daughter that shall bring him no charge, nor
put him in fear of being eat out by her kindred -- One that shall never send
her Husband on a How do ye, or keep more Coaches in Town, then he has plows
going in the Country -- One that shall not spend his Michaelmas Rents, in
Midsomer Moon, and cost him more in sails, and rigging, then the Hull's worth.


'Tis a hundred pities, but thou were Supervisor General of the Female sex.


Faith Sir, I card not much if I were, I should be the better able to serve my
friends -- But this is not all.


Prithee on -- I like it well.


One that is not haunted with Perfumers, Lacemen, Milliners, Silkmen,
Jewellers, Mercers, Exchange-men, Semsters, and Hey day! And can be contented
with her husbands Tailor. -- One that understands not the way of smooth chinned
pages, and can find both Lackeys, and women, in a single Chambermaid -- One
that was never read beyond Aqua fortis, and tinning glass, and is as much
gravelled at Spanish Paper, and Talcke as a Country Vicar, at an Hebrew
Pedigree: -- One that has no Aunts, nor she Cousins to visit, and goes not above
thrice a week to the Drawers for new patterns -- One (to be short) that is all
her self, and thinks it no scorn, to be her own Seamstress, and Tirewoman.


Say thou me so my heart? -- And if I have not a girl that fits him, she is
not like her Father: -- Come Master Driver -- Be but assistant in striking up
this match, and thou shalt ne'er know what it may be worth thee: -- Come, -- A
man must promise at large, though he perform at leisure; hope makes men
diligent.


I -- This is something! -- I protest I should hardly have known thee my self!
-- But one thing -- I do not like this hat, -- 'tis so high Crowned, he'll
swear 'tis mere waste, and three Ounces of stuff might have been well saved.


That may be quickly mended, either by getting another, or circumcising this;
-- it lies under the band, and will ne'er be seen, or if it should, he'll like
it the better.


Ne'er doubt it Sir. -- It must take -- for I have read him such a Lecture of
my young Masters frugality, that he is out of all patience till he see him, --
and if you can but out-cant him now, the work's done.


That must be left to chance, -- And yet 'tis not impossible, but I may make my
party good with him: -- Have I lived in Genoa (where the Jews come laughing
in, and go crying out, as having met with greater Jews then themselves,) and do
you think I shall not be able to deal with him? -- I warrant ye:


Well said Nando, -- A good confidence is half the thing.


But when must this robbery be?


I expect him here instantly, though not purposely about this business; for my
design was to have it come on, as it were by the By, and of it self.


What other business has he?


O Sir! -- To see how the main work goes forward; Besides, he expects you
should settle a good lusty Project upon my young Master; and I am wide of the
mark, if he is not hammering at another for himself. -- And to tell you truth,
so they are all,


Now send that thou hast not engaged us further, then we shall be able to get
off fairly.


Pray Sir trust me -- Have I desired you to appear in it? Or been wanting to it
in any thing my self?


Well, I refer it to thee; -- But must you have all the sport? were it not
possible that I might at least laugh inwardly.


I was just making it my request to you, that you would so dispose your self,
as to overhear the discourse, and perhaps it may not be unworth your while --
for the men having considered that two heads are better than one, have
communicated it to their wives, and asked their Advise in the point, and they
are so a Gogg upon it, that they must have their Projects too, and amongst them,
you'll find your Widow, -- I never saw things hit more luckily, -- 'tis
impossible but you must carry her,


Do you expect them here?


I wonder they stay so long, -- and when they come, what they will say; --

That knock, may chance to be their's.


Take the occasion of leaving 'em alone, -- for perhaps they may be more free
amongst themselves then if either of us were present.


Sir here are some Gentlewomen that enquire for your self, or Mr. Driver.


It must be them.


Desire 'em to walk in. --

Do you tell 'em I am a little busy, but you'll go and acquaint me with it; --
You shall find me in that Window.


So, -- And now for the good Women, -- But what to say to 'em, tell he that
can, he must be better read in these books then I am. --


Lady's! -- Your servant, -- And had you not commanded the contrary, I had
saved you this trouble by waiting on you my self.


No Sir, 'tis our own business, and we thought least notice might be taken of
it, by discoursing it here.


Yes indeed, 'twas all our opinions: -- Only I must confess the Widow here
would have preferred a little state, before convenience.


But since I was over-rul'd; -- Pray Sir, Where's your Master.


I ll let him know you are here, and he'll wait on you presently.


I think this Gentleman would be able to do our business as well.


Yes truly, -- He looks like a likely man.


However if Mr. Jocose were present too, 'twere no whit the worse.


Be pleased to repose your selves a while, and it will not be long here my
Master wait on you.


Your Servant Sir.


Come Neighbours, I think it were not amiss if we agreed among our selves what
we would have, before they come.


Now truly and indeed, 'twas well moved.


I like it well, pray begin.


Trust me not I, -- but I'll do as good, -- I'll put in now and then; -- Pray
Mrs. Godsgood.


However you mistook me, I mean it so; -- pray Madam, -- No pray forsooth --
will you?


Not I indeed, -- how say you? -- The Widow. --


The Widow, -- the Widow. --


Then in obedience to your Commands, -- And may this present meeting be happy
and prosperous, to our selves and the whole Commonwealth of Women; and that we
propose those things that may be for the Common good and dignity of the Sex: --
You cannot be ignorant how much your husbands have incroacht upon you, or (to
speak truth) how much we have all lost, by letting the men engross all business
to themselves, without so much as asking our advice, as if we (forsooth) were
no part of them, and made to no other end, but to sit at home and prick our
fingers.


I indeed, -- a public grievance.


The more's the pity.


Pray Sisters, -- Has not every pitiful Corporation it's Counsel, the meanest
Parish it's Vestry, and our very Fumblers their Common Hall? And shall women
only loose their privilege? Shall we alone do nothing?


Had we no more wit then to be ruled by our husbands, we should n't, -- but for
all that we (now and then) do our parts, and sometimes too, more then comes to
our shares.


Thank themselves, that wo'nt be quiet when 'tis well.


Pray no interruptions in the middle of a speech: There will be time enough for
all. -- Nor would I set up a new thing, only revive an ancient and laudable
(though somewhat antiquated) Custom. -- I have heard of an old Emperor,
somewhere or other, that ordained, That as he had his Counsel of men, so his
wife, should have hers, of women, which should be independent, and without
appeal to tother. --


Marry away with him, -- An old man! -- What should we do with him? -- And I
have heard of a place too, where they hung up the men, after they come to
threescore, as things past their labour, and consequently useless. --


Yet again! --


No more of that good Sister, for if I mistake not the story, they were more
severe upon us, and burnt us for Witches at Forty. --


Hey day! -- Pray Sisters.


Peace, -- Silence.


With all my heart; -- No offence I hope.


None on my part I assure you.


More still! -- This Council, as I told you, (whether in jest or earnest it
matters not) They called the She Senate, and this is that which our present
interest should prick us forward to restore. -- Nor let it be any rubb in the
way, that Women are forbid to speak in Public, that being meant of a
Congregation of men, and I speak only of an Assembly of Women, -- for
otherwise, if we were ever to hold our tongues, to what use were they given us?
Those tongues, I say, that if they might, would speak sense as well as their
own; and upon a good occasion, could be as loud -- Think you (I warrant) they
were given us to no other end, but to lick our teeth, and cheapen Eggs? -- I
think not, -- and why should we not use 'em then? -- No doubt but we may, and
perhaps too, to as much purpose as the men; for could we look into their
Councels, 'tis ten to one but we should find many things our selves would
have been ashamed of. -- How common is it with them to be five days in
vvording the Question, and as many more e're they can put it right, and perhaps
at last, make nothing of it: -- Whereas we, are plain down right, we think what
we please, and speak what we think. -- How does this Consultation thwart that,
a third both, a fourth all, as if they met only to justify the Proverb, So
many men, so many minds; Whereas we, if the reins were in our hands, if we
did not manage them better, I am sure it could not be worse.


Well opened, -- pray proceed.


I think this enough for Introduction; -- The next thing I would have
considered is, of what persons this Council should consist.


Of whom but women?


All that will, -- what else?


That would be rather a Tumult than a Council.


And to select a few, and exclude the rest, would be -- What do ye call it? --
The men have a hard word for it -- Oli -- Oli -- Oligar, -- fie upon it, I can't
hit it, -- Oil and Garlic I think they call it, -- 'tis either that, or
somewhat near it; -- A very mark of tyranny.


Pray no more interruptions, -- If you do not like it refer it to another
time; -- And first, (if I might advise) I would have no maids of this council.


No maids! -- Why I pray? were you never one your self, or was it so long
since, you have forgot it?


Pray give me leave, -- I say no maids, because we may happen to speak that
among our selves, that may not be fit for them to hear.


Goodly, goodly, -- As if we could not tell how the Market went, tho'we neither
bought nor sold in it.


Well said little Gentlewoman, -- stand up for your Privilege.


I warrant they are not so ill bred, but they know what's, what, as well as our
selves; -- How say you Mrs. Nancy, do not you know a pudding, from a Cart
Wheel?


I think I do!


Did not I tell you so?


But how will you know, which are Maids, and which not; -- Do not all go for
Maids till they are married?


And are not some afterwards? -- What think you of those that have overgrown
old fellows to their husbands? -- may not they be called Maids, though perhaps
much against their will?


However for honours sake we'll think 'em otherwise: But my meaning was, that
none be received, but such as are, or have been marri'd.


Well distinguisht, -- And yet perhaps it might be no hurt, if they sat behind
the hangings, though they gave no voice; -- 'twould make ^em the abler against
they came to it themselves.


For that, as you please; -- But pray no more interruptions: -- The next, I
would have none admitted that have been shod round: -- And amongst them I would
place such as are past fifty, who like old Garrisons are fit for nothing but to
be Lighted, and the rather too, to make room for others.


And good reason, -- pray on:


Then I would have none admitted, that had not first purged her self by her
corporal Oath, that she had never made her Husband a Cuckold: -- Unless she be
very ugly, and that in such cases it be taken for granted, that she has not.


Now out upon it!


This Widow I see would make a very Tyrant.


Confess and be hanged, -- I am for none of't,


Nor I neither; -- Here's a fetch with all my heart. --


At least you may qualify it by Proviso, That if it be done to oblige a
Gentleman, she may notwithstanding, c.


That alters the case a little; -- But I am clearly for throwing out both.


And so am I, -- At least for laying the debate aside till a full house.


What you please, -- I do but offer -- Next, That if any discover the secrets
of the house abroad, That such Person or Persons, have their tongues committed,
to a three days silence, without Bail or Mainprise.


Insufferable!


A tyranny never heard of before!


Pray have patience, -- Next, that none be permitted to speak irreverentlie of
their Husbands, in as much, as be the men what they will, the Wives honour,
depends upon theirs, to traduce them, were, but in effect, to disgrace our
selves.


Oh! Worse and worse.


Abominable, and not to be endured.


You see Sir

How hard your Widow's beset, I think 'twere not amiss if you relieved her.


And so I will, -- She's better qualified then I expected, -- Follow me. --


Not speak irreventlie as you call it! -- Do you think it reasonable, that my
sham-leg'd Monsieur should say what he please of me, and I, nothing? Or fit (I
woo's that he be ever rambling abroad, When (though I say it my self) I am as
able a Woman, for the matter of the point of that, as any Woman in the two next
Parishes; -- And I must sit still and blow my nailes forsooth?


Or that mine should be perpetually abusing and striking me, -- I am sure he
has so pomell'd me about the Head, that I am hardly able, to bear a cup of
drink, as they say: -- For look you, do ye see, when I am troubled, I go to the
salutation, with two or three neighbours, or so, and call for our Gills of sack
a piece, (alas you know, it is not much) and then we sit and chat over it, and
look yed'ye see, I am now and then troubled with a Rheum in my side, and go
lame a little, and then when I come home, my Rogue says I am drunk, and stink
of Aquavitae; when alas, 'tis well known, 'tis mere grief, mere grief makes me
in that condition; -- Aa -- you don't know this husband of mine -- he were a
very devil, but that he wears his horns, -- And is this to be born think you.


Hold a little, -- not yet. --)


No by my troth is it not. -- Come, come, serve him as I did mines; -- He
stroke me the other day; and I set out my throat as loud as I could, that he had
murdered me for what I had; and as the neighbours came in, I made 'em believe I
was in a sown, and held him so long in suspense, that from that day forward; I
got the staff into mine own hand; -- Ah my poor first husband, he was a man of
a thousand, I could have made him believe the Cow was made of Wood, -- But how
do ye think I brought him to it; -- Even by complaining first, and pretending he
did this and that in his drink, which he (good man) never thought of; and if
ever he denied it, 'twas but bringing my maid to witness, and I was sure to be
asked pardon.


I -- here were a woman for the Chair! --


Withal my heart. --


Then for the Quorum, -- if two Women and a Goose make a Market, I see no
reason, why three, may not make a Council, at least to determine, though not to
hear?


I agree with you; -- And truly I think so we should all; -- But for this
Widow, -- She's insufferable! -- Come neighbour Squeeze, I see we must be well
advised, whom we trust the Chair with, -- She may in time betray our
liberties.


Madam, Your servant, -- me thought I heard you somewhat hot, -- could n't you
agree?


No indeed Sir, Nor is it likely.


Truly I think 'twere not amiss if we entreated this Gentleman to take up the
business.


You could not have thought better; -- Pray Sir will you give your self a small
trouble to oblige us.


Alas Madam 'tis too large a Parish for me; However I shall look upon your
intreaty's as commands; -- What may it be?


Why thus an't please you. --


No, pray let me.


Hold, -- suppose we walked in; we should be less subject to disturbance, --
Will it please you Madam, --


With all our hearts.


Call you me this Matrimony! -- Help the good man say I, for I am sure they
need it; -- And yet certain there must be some little, I know not what in it,
that I am ignorant of, or they would not be so hot upon it, That like bold
Seamen, having escaped one Wrack, they dare yet venture on another: -- Whatev'r
it be, I envy it no man, bless him with it say I -- I had rather believe my
share of it, then run the experiment; -- For as far as I have ev'r observed,
Between a quiet, and an unquiet Woman, there is only this difference, That he
that has the first, rides an ambling horse to the Devil, and he that has the
second a Trotter. --

Sir, Your Servant.


Honest Mr. Driver, -- And how? -- What news? -- Ha 'you been as good as your
Word?


Yes Sir, -- here are some, -- And you may take your choice.


Aa! -- Mr. Driver, -- You were ever my friend: -- But prithee satisfy me by
discoursing the reason of 'em, as why, some are more lucky in their hits, then
others. --


You must know Sir, that inventions came by degrees, but have ever had this ill
fortune, to be fatal to the first Inventors, who have only discovered a new
shore to shipwreck their persons on it, or bury their fortunes in it.


How shall we do then?


Well enough, -- We have this advantage, that others have gone before us, and
broke the ice to our hands; -- However we must not be so hasty as to expect all
things should be done at once; -- No, -- Nature makes no leaps, and Invention
which is the hand-maid of Nature, must but follow her, and take pattern, from
her.


Nay I grant ye, time perfects every thing; Nor can it be thought, that our
invention should be so absolute, as that it were impossible to be improved.


You have hit the point, and learnedlie; -- However for demonstration: -- The
Spade and Shovel were Primitive Inventions, and from thence came the Plow; --
In like manner from the Rake, the Harrow; -- From the Pestle and Mortar all
sort of Mills, whether Horizontal, or Plegnick; Horse, Hand, Wind, Water, or
otherwise; -- From the Wheel-barrow; Carts and Coaches; -- From the scraping of
a Hen, Letters; -- From Pease-Hulls in the Kennel, the Invention of Shipping; --
And from a Kites tail, the Rudders to them; -- I should have mentioned an other
thing, which how simple soever at first, 't has been since improved to a
wonder.


As what good Sir?


Why thus -- You know men originallie lapped Water like dogs, but finding that a
little troublesome, They soop't from their hands; -- from thence came Wooden
dishes, thence earthen Pitchers, Thence Black-Jacks, thence Flagons, thence
Kanns, thence Horns, thence Pewter cups, thence Glasses, and as an Eumechanick
from the whole, Silver and gold Tankards.


I le be sworn thou hast cut out the buisness notably.


Marry has he; -- A shrewd fellow. -- But hark you, -- Have you remembered me?


Presently -- I was just coming to ye, -- And shall only tell you by way of
Prolegomena, That Inventions are of two sorts (to wit) either such as are
destructive to humane Society (as the Invention of walking invisible, and
making Ships and Boats sail in the Air, as well as on the Water, which we
call Cacamechana) or such as are advantageous and useful; and of this kind, I
think I can show you as much choice, as any man vvhatever he be.


I must confess I am for those, -- let's see.


I, I -- Those, those.


You see Gentlemen, I am not shy to you, I dare trust you to peruse my papers!



Aa! Good Mr. Driver -- What are these?


Let me see -- most Excellent things! -- You know Sir, we English men chiefly
buzzle our heads about two things, That is to say, Religion, and Trade; -- And
truly you have luckily hit upon both, -- The one, is a Project for a
Divinitie-Mill, that shall go by any wind, and never stand still.


But of what use?


Marry -- To grind Controversy, and that so fine, and subtle, it shall hardly
be perceptible, -- And I'll undertake, make more Proselites, than ever did
Cha^cers Friar with his shoulder blade of the lost sheep.


Lay that by, -- I'll fit you a Chapman. -- [The other.


Why -- this -- 'Tis the height of Art! -- An Emporentick Invention, of making
Cloth without Wool.


How's that? -- Cloth without Wool; -- Make me but that good, and Write your
own Conditions.


With your favour Sir, -- I was in before you -- Pray go on -- How is it to be
done?


Why thus -- I shall discover all. --


Not to your friend? -- good Master Driver.


Then thus -- You must gather the Atoms into a Glass well ground, and then
thread 'em upon a fine imperceptible Loom, and when they are once Wove, 'tis
easy milling 'em to what consistence you please.


But how shall we do for this Loom?


Did you never hear of Uulcan^ Net? -- You must take Copy by that.


Cry y'mecrcie good Mr. Driver, -- This shall be mine; -- I have a Glass (as
one would say) made for the purpose, -- A most excellent Optic, -- It shall
make you an Atom show as big as a Quarter Staff.


Alas Sir the Thread will be too big, and fit for nothing but to Thrumme
Coverlets; whereas my design in it was to alter the affairs of Christendom, by
breaking the Spanish trade of fine Wool, and the Duch new manufactures.


I apprehend you, -- The Price?


Why troth Sir it will not go, under five hundred pound and a quarter share.


No more, -- I ll give thee a note to my Goldsmith -- Honest Mr. Driver.


Here -- here Mr. Driver, -- What are these?


A rare invention for the sealing of Butter, without the charge of Butter
Prints; -- The same for Ginger-Bread. --


Go on -- This!


This -- A Whirligig for Dreining the Sea, for Treasure Trove: -- But to this
there belongs another -- oh -- I have it, -- A devise to stop up the Rivers,
that they shall n't run in, till the Work be over: -- But this will be a work
of time, and charge.


However, the profit will answer it.


Here are others would do as well, or better -- You grasp at too great things.
-- An invention for the making Books sell at treble the rate they would have
done otherwise. --


As how good Sir? -- my brother shall be in for this.


By a fine new Title and Picture before it; or if that fail, getting them
suppressed, and somewhat else which I shall only tell the Bookseller himself. --
A new Engine for the better sowing of Wheat, and setting of Leeks; -- A
Proposition for the Farming the Excise upon Jews-Trumps, and Town Tops. --


Not forgetting Nine-Pinns, and Shovel-Board Tables I beseech ye.


As how I pray -- can that amount to any thing?


Almost incredible, -- There's a great mystery in t, -- for look you Sir; Do
but consider how many more boys, then men there are, and then make the
conjecture -- Where's this, -- oh -- Here -- Be happy. -- Here's an Invention
will do thy Work: -- Thou may even shut up Shop, or do what thou wilt.


I can turn it over to another, which will be all one, -- What is't?


Why, 'tis a Project to incorporate the Gold-finders, and makes them turn
Salt-Peeter-men; for besides that the materials will be exceeding cheap, the
learned, upon experiment have found, it makes the best Gunpowder, by reason of
its Nitrous quality, and the refuse, most incomparable soap; An Invention
must necessarily destroy the trade of Pot-Ashes, and consequently bring all the
Soap boilers in London under your girdle.


I'm satisfi^d, -- Not a word to Sir Gudgeon; -- Lets shake him off, and you
and I'll drive the Bargain by our selves; -- Pray Sir use me as kindly as you
can, and I promise to consider you better as the Profits shall arise.


Well Sir I shall not press too hard upon a young beginner, -- I hope you'll be
as good as your Word.


If I am not. --


Here Sir, -- If to morrow be any thing fair, I'll begin the experiment, and
perhaps, make some small essay this night upon the Moon.


I know not what excellent quality your Glass may have above others, -- But
if I might advise you, I would defer it to the Dog-daies.


The goodness of my Glass will supply a small defect, -- I'll tell you what; --
But you'll happily believe it, -- I have discovered with it a Flea in the Bears
tail, and a Louse in Caput Algol -- Anglice, Medusa's head, -- Tis but trying
-- Come -- I am out of patience till I set it on foot: -- My service to your
Master, -- I cannot stay to talk with him now: -- Farewell.


Your Servant Sir.


GOod Mr. Squeeze no more, -- I am so full of business I can hardly tell which
to set about first.


But I am afraid, these will scarce turn to account.


How! -- not turn to account! -- Is the sole engrossing of all Love Letters
(whither in Verse or Prose) within the Realm of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, so cheap in our eyes? -- Besides that
unimaginable Project of procuring a fifth Term, and the multiplication of
Offices, according to the augmentation of Suits, so slight with you? -- O the
boundless Avarice of insatiate men!


Nay good Mr. Driver.


What! -- nothing content you, unless you fine for Sheriff the first year. --
Go me't again.


Pray Sir, -- Are you angry because my Wit is not so ripe as yours; -- Great
things are not so easily apprehended: -- Suppose I offered that of a fifth
Term, to the Innes of Court, and Doctors Commons, do you think they would
advance any thing considerable upon it?


Think! -- About it, and be thankful, -- We shall have you now once in a
twelvemonth not know your old friends; -- But if you do, it shall be a warning
to me, how I ever --


What do ye take me for -- pray no more. -- Fare you well. --


Your Servant. --

So, so -- the wheels go merrily round: -- And now for my main game, Mr.
Suckdry, -- if I can but squeeze that Sponge into my young Masters pocket, the
work's done, -- let me see --

He must not take me unprovided, -- Hark! -- 'tis he. --

A Project for the reprinting of Tom Thumb with Marginal Notes and Cuts; And
that every man within this Kingdom, buy it of the Patentee, at the rate of
Twelve pence, or come up to Town to show cause why he will not.


Good -- I won't disturb him yet.


Another -- for raising six pence upon every thousand of Bricks; and two pence
a joint, for every joint of Meat that shall be dressed on Friday's and
Saturday's.


Excellent! -- This fellow will be rich, he minds his business.


That every Usurer pay twelve pence per pound out of all interest money, towards
Charitable uses, and that the Patentee have the disposing of't.


Oh! -- He'll spoil all again.


Whose there? -- Mr. Suckdry! -- Your servant, -- you see I am at work for you;
-- But this is not the business I have designed for you -- Hmh -- 'tis come at
last -- Here 'tis -- A thing shall bring you in a vast deal of money without any
charge, -- besides the primary charge.


As what, good Mr. Driver? What?


Why 'tis a Wooden-Horse, so contrived with Screws and devices, that he shall
out-travel a Dromedary, carry the burden of fifteen Camels, run you a thousand
mile without drawing bit, and which is more then all this; not cost you two
pence a year the keeping.


Ha, Ha, He -- y'faith -- y'faith! prithee on, -- Is there no difficulty in the
work?


The greatest, will be to set him a going: But I think I have sufficiently
provided for that: -- I'll tell you how I have ordered it: -- Turn one Pin, he
shall Trot, another Amble, a third* Gallop; a fourth, Fly; And all this
performed by Germane Clock-Work: -- Don Quixotes Rosinante, was an Ass;
Reynaldo's Bayart, a mere Slugge; and Clavellino the swift, a very Cow to him;
-- I might mention Alexander Beucephalus, the Cid's Bajeca, the Moors Zebra,
Rogero's Frontino, Astolpho's Hippogryphon, Orlando's Briliadoro; The Muses
Pegase, the Suns Horses, and Zancho's Dapple, -- But they are not to be named
the same day together; -- One thing more I could tell you -- But --


Good Mr. Driver -- out with it: -- No Butts (among friends) I pray.


'Tis but shoeing him with Cork, and he shall tread as firm, and strike as true
a stroke on the water, as he does on land; and which is more, care for neither
tide nor weather, and run in the winds eye: -- A devise, must of necessity
break the Packet Boats, and consequently engross the whole dispatch for
Ireland, France and Holland.


And do you think you could prevail with your Master to part with this horse?


Yes certainly for his Sons good -- Though as I told you before, he has more
already then he knows well how to spend.


No more of that -- Prithee let me speak with him -- He shall have Bags,
Daughter, Devil and all.


I'll wait on you again imediatelie. --


Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping, -- So -- so -- 'Tis an excellent
shaped horse, and must be good, -- Why may not I improve this Project now, and
make him carry as much on his back, as the Trojan horse did in his belly; at
least, as many Citizens and their Wives at once, as the great Bed at Ware, will
hold at twice, -- 'twas well thought on --


This is my young Master Sir, will you please to be known to him.


A towardly young man -- save you Sir --


Your friend and Ferdinand -- Pray no Complements.


An humble young man, and sparing of his very words -- I ll try his temper --
With your favour Sir -- I have long desired your acquaintance, and having a
further inclination to continue it, I must crave leave to ask you a few
questions. --


The fewer the better, -- as near as I could, I would not waste either time or
breath.


Excellent! -- pray Sir what do you take to be the greatest virtue in the
world?


Thrift.


Short, but pithy -- Admirable! But might not I be so much beholding to you, as
to give me your reason for t?


It would better become me to learn from you -- However, since you desire it, I
shall tell you what first moved me to it.


I am beholding to you -- pray begin.


Then truly Sir I find it founded upon Nature, -- The Sun the Moon, the Stars,
are sparing of their light, and do not always shine; The Earth is barren in
some places, that it may be fruitful in others -- And the Sea, has its ebbs and
neaps, as well as flowings and Spring tides; -- And in a Word, from the
beginning 'twas ever so.


Excellent again! let me not interrupt you.


Nor is this all; It has been the general practice of all times -- The golden
age, to save charges, were clad in skins, drank Water, eat Acorns, and to
show their innocence, wiped their noses on their sleeves: -- The Philosophers,
they were sparing -- The Brachmans, went naked, -- Diogenes lived in a Tub --
Pythagoras, on Carrets and Cabbage; -- Plato wondered, a man could eat two
meals a day; -- And Epicurus (whatever we think of him) was as great a Prince
with a tossed in the dripping Pan, as a fat Citizen with his shoulder of mutton
and Capon: -- The Stoics, were abstenious to a miracle, and if ever they
exceeded, 'twas never at their own charge; Nor have they walked alone, The
learned tread hard after them; for either (like the ancient Druids) they commit
nothing to writing, or if they do, 'tis so close and enigmatical, that no body
can pick any thing out of 't: -- But I burden you.


By no means, -- good Sir on.


To come nearer home, we all cry up Charity, and no doubt, do well in it; But
who makes any use of it? at least, any more then needs must; we bless 'tis
true, but without a Cross, And for good Works we do no more then will just
serve (if yet that) for fear of supererogating, -- Pray tell me, was it for
nothing think you that we found a late stile of the Keepers of the Liberty; or
that the Keeper of a Park had his name to no purpose, -- surely no -- The Age
is arrived to that height of thrift, that they find more's got by selling their
Bucks, then by eating them themselves, or giving them their friends.


Right: -- I have not found more thrift, no not in Spain or Italy.


And now you mention Spain, give me leave to put off my hat to that Venerable
name -- The Spaniard! -- the frugal Spaniard! -- that shall make you five meals
upon one Hen, Feast his Family with three Pilchards, and carry a pound of
Mutton in triumph on a Skiver! -- But I forget my self, I am sure now I weary
you -- yet if you have ever so much time to spare, read but Sir Jeffery
Drop-nose his discourse upon Save-alls, or his new method of skinning of
Flints, and perhaps you may not think your time ill spent.


Ha -- Ha -- what was that? -- Books -- Books?


Yes Sir, a good thrifty Author and well received.


Uh -- Have a care, -- No Books I beseech you -- They cost money -- Read men --
Read men. -- Hang these liberal Sciences, This is no time for 'em -- Study
Thrift, -- Study Thrift, -- 'Tis strange, you that are so great Master in the
Theory, should be so much out in the Practick! -- let me read to you.


With all my heart, and I readily embrace it.


'Twas well said -- And first, for your person. -- Have nothing about you that
may be spared, nay though it be not worth a farthing; for if you would but
seriously consider, how much one poor farthing, Use upon Use, in 200 years
amounts to, you would not lay it out upon waste: -- Next, eat little, drink
less, and sleep much, to save fire and candle-light; And if ever you are sick,
be your own Doctor, and never exceed above a half-pennie worth of Sena: -- Then
for your clothes, make no new, but beg an old suit as for a poor friend of
yours, but fit it up for your self; but short and close, lest your wife, taking
example by you, run out as much in train.


But suppose, Sir, I kept her always in mourning, would it not do well, think
ye, to save Linen, and washing?


Very good, and well observed -- And hark you -- never let her be too forward
in making Babie-clouts; perhaps the Child may be still-born, and then, there's
so much saved -- And since you have named mourning, let me advise you, never
give any upon your will, they'll then mourn indeed: and for your wife, make her
no more new clothes than needs must -- As long as the Cat's skin is burnt, you
shall have her keep home, let it be once sleek'd and she's presently a
Caterwauling -- Then for your house-keeping -- Be ever exact in keeping
Fasting-daies, and Hollie-day Eves; for besides that you complie with the
Discipline of the Church, you save your own purse -- And for your provision --
Be sure to buy the worst of every thing, (as rotten Eggs, mouldy Wheat,
stinking Beef, and the like) for besides that it is much cheaper, your family
will eat the less, and for that reason also, let your meat be either bloudraw,
or over-rosted; and as near as you can dine late, that they may have no stomach
to Supper.


Then, Sir, -- If you'll give me leave --


Good leave have you -- proceed --


If your Friend come to dine with you -- Ask him by way of prevention, when
he'll be so kind as to come and dine with you -- But if he chance to surprise
you, Treat him not, but tell him you'll make no Stranger of him -- Either he has
an appetite, or he has not; if he has, hungers the best sauce, if he has not,
'tis all lost -- If he be your friend, he'll be contented with what you have; if
not, 'tis too much.


Or rather take pattern from the Prudent Dutch, tell him your house is visited,
and so carry him to the next Inn, and there eat upon his purse, -- Two men's
meals well saved -- But one thing more which I had quite forgot -- If ever you
should chance to keep Servants, change 'em often; they are generally diligent
in their new clothes -- And for their service -- Let every one perform two
Offices at least; following herein the example of the same thrifty Dutch, with
whom (generally) one and the same person supplies the several Offices of
Chaplain and Barber.


How unfortunate am I, that have been so long a stranger to such excellent
Morals -- Pray, Sir, oblige me once more.


Ha, ha, he -- Shall I turn prodigal in my old age?


Of Counsel you may, Sir -- it costs you nothing.


Well-well-well, -- Since I must -- Make the Ant your pattern for laying up,
and the Limbeck your example for giving it out again -- The Limbeck! (peace be
with him that first invented it) The Limbeck, I say, that be it never so full,
gives back again, but drop by drop -- Which that you may the better do, let me
advise you, first, to avoid Law-suits, it being like a Sheep's flying for
shelter to a Bramble, where commonly he leaves the better part of his Fleece
behind him -- Next, give no money to Servants, it being in effect a paying for
your entertainment -- and as little, upon hopes of return, Ingratitude reigns
-- Then, never fish with a golden hook for fear you lose it, or that the profit
do not countervail the hazard and charge -- But this I would have you -- when
you have any business doing, let your hand be either fumbling about your little
pocket, or playing with some gold -- Ah! -- it makes a man so nimble when he
believes it will be his presently -- But when 'tis done, give him ne'er a groat;
only shake him by the hand, invite him to your house, and tell him your wife
and he are Town-born children; let him say what he will when you're gon, you've
saved your money, and the loser may be allow'd the liberty of speaking -- Let
the world call it sordid, or what they please; He that can do this, may be
presumed to be content with it, and consequently, happy; for happiness consists
in nothing more, than in being content -- Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo --
A good saying, and the only piece of all the Poets I ever understood -- And
hark ye, if thou marri'st my daughter, it shall be the posy of her
Wedding-ring.


How, Sir! marry your daughter -- why I scarce ever saw her.


No matter, no matter -- she shall be ruled by me.


Alas, Sir -- charge of children will come on -- And I have heard say, A Wife's
as chargeable, as an old Tenement, 'twill cost you half your rent to keep it
wind-tight and water-tight.


Well, well, well -- thou shalt be at the charge of repairs during my life, and
after my death, shalt have all -- All I have -- All-All-All.


Troth Sir my young Master is bound to you, -- Come Sir, speak comfortablie to
the old Gentleman.


I can only thank you Sir, and tell you, that I am wholly at your dispose.


Why that's well said. --


Mr. Jocose! in pudding time! Do you remember what you said to me, touching
your son, and my daughter? truly, -- truly, I like the young man so well,
that if I had twenty daughters he should have 'em all, -- All -- Body and
bones, and all I have after my death: -- I truly every groat, -- unless it be
four old Harry groats, which I have thus disposed in my Will, viz. one groat to
the poor of St. Giles's, and St. Andrews Holborn, to be equally divided
amongst them; A second, to the Hospitals of St. Bartholmews, Christ Church, and
St. Thomas, to be equally divided as before; Provided always, that (within
the first six months after my decease) they set up my name amongst their
benefactors; -- A third to charitable uses in general, to be disposed, as to my
Executors shall seem meet; A fourth towards my Funeral Expenses, -- I think
there will be no great need of a Sermon: -- A man must do some good you know.


And may he never thrive that shall go about to subvert so pious an intention;
-- And now for my son, -- You have my consent.


I thank you, -- But do ye hear Mr. Driver, -- Don't you forget the horse now;
-- no more but mum. --


I apprehend you Sir: -- Your nod's enough.


Come Son, for that must be thy name now; -- Come -- go home with me, -- and
good Mr. Driver let it be your care to get us a gentle reader, he will not
expect so much as another, -- But for the Clerk, you may let him alone, -- one
of us can say Amen, as well as he: -- There's so much saved. --


It shall be done Sir. --


Farewell, good Sir, -- we will make no Wedding of it -- Tailor's Lists, and blew
Points, shall be both Garters, and Favours --


So much the better -- Your servant.


Send them good luck.


And none for me, good Widow?


O by any means -- your Project deserves it.


Am I unkind to you then, that I'd have you take your money again? -- No -- you
are rather beholding to me that have not made those advantages of you, that had
I loved your money better than your person, I might have done.


In that respect I must confess I am -- But pray tell me -- How came this
humour about?


You may best answer that your self -- You know I loved you, and could not be
ignorant, but that I looked upon Sir Gudgeon Credulous as a block in my way,
which once removed, I might have the better hopes of kissing the Mistress my
self: pray what did you most fancy in him, his person, his parts, or his
estate?


I was never so greedy to expect all three -- I could for a need have excused
the two former, to have been well secured of the last.


A right Widow.


You men (alas for you) you never mind those little things of Estate -- You are
above Ordinances -- You are altogether for Virtue.


Not so far neither, good Widow -- A little of both does no hurt -- They do as
well together as ill asunder --

-- But see! your Haberdasher of small Projects --


Yours, Sir, -- Madam -- who thought to have found your Ladyship here?


Can you blame me, that am so far dipped in your Projects, to enquire at least
how things went.


You might have trusted that to me -- I dare warrant you a good return, and in
few days. -- A little time must needs make us either Princes, or Beggars -- I
hope the first.


But suppose the latter?


'Tis not to be supposed -- Let me tell the Widow of mine, -- Be happy.


'Tis the thing we all wish -- But how came you to be so confident of a sudden?


Because 'tis impossible we should be otherwise -- The work goes pleasantly on
-- And hark ye, Widow, I am resolved to present thee a piece of Scarlet, for
thy own wearing, shall not have a lock of Wool in it -- And yet good substantial
Cloth.


But who makes it, Sir Gudgeon?


What matters that, so you have it -- I am promised an Artist, shall do
wonders.


A small Philosopher I hope?


'Tis not material whether he be or no -- I love to trust every man in his
way, -- what care I whether my Tailor be a good Musician, or my Coach-man be
able to Con a Ship: -- it is enough to me that he perform what I intend him
for. -- For my own part I am so well assured of the thing, that I could wish I
were no Knight, but had staid to have been made a Lord for altogether -- And so
let me say to thee once again, Widow of mine -- be happy.


For that of Happy, be so as long as you can -- But pray take me along with ye
-- No longer Widow, nor yours I beseech you.


How's this! -- Who dare say the contrary? -- He were better --


Have broken your Worship's pate: -- With this Lady's leave -- That dare I: --
or if you will not believe it -- pray, Madam, lend me your Busk.


Mr. Jocose! -- 'tis impossible! -- I never thought you would have served me
thus.


And why not -- would you engross all to your self? -- He projects, and She
projects too. -- Good, Sir Gudgeon, -- there's Conscience in every thing. --


'Tis well you are my friend -- But do n't ye presume too far.


Further than this Lady I shall not -- and yet so far (with her good favour) I
ever shall.


But you may come short home -- You know the necessity of attending more grand
Affairs lies upon me -- But --


Does the fool prate?


Nay, Mr. Jocose.


I obey -- And now, Madam, I leave it to your own judgment, how much I was out
in my Character -- And if there remains any thing to your further satisfaction,
pray let me know it.


I'll consider of it within.


MRs. Gotam, well met -- whither so fast?


Marry to find out this Rogue that has abused my Husband -- I tell thee what,
Squeeze, He and his Staff-men have made such a stink in our house, that all the
neighbours are up, and cry, A Wedding, a Wedding -- I have been this half hour
a shaking the Bride-laces off my petticoat.


Why, what's the matter? --


Hang him for a fool -- He cries, 'tis a new way of making Gun-powder -- But
when he's in a condition of receiving it, I'll ring him such a peal -- I ll
Gun-powder him --.


And mine's as bad of the t'otherside -- He's so full of business he's even mad
-- He talks of nothing but Sonnets, Madrigalds, Acrostics, Love-letters,
Wedding-Posies, and I know not what -- Well, if thy Husband's Project be the
beginning of Love, I am confident mine's the end of't.


O that these men must do all things by themselves, and never advise with their
Wives till it be too late -- But I'll make my Gentleman know a piece of my mind
before I have done with him. --


Peace, peace -- here he comes. --


Uh -- Hum -- Puth -- 'Ta'd need be profitable, I am sure 'tis not very
toothsome.


And whither, Gentleman? whither so fast? -- Your Wife's nothing with you --
But I've a Crow to pluck w'ye -- Where's my Coach and the eight Horses you
talked of, and the new Dining-room to our Country-house -- Do ye think to rob me
thus.


Nay, good wife -- dear honey -- they're all a coming: -- Dost not see what
pains I have been taking -- and all to make thee a Lady -- Prithee -- 'tis all
for thee -- Good faith it is.


Marry fough -- All what?


What ever I bring to perfection -- Thou must have patience -- 'Tis but an
Embryo yet.


Pray leave me off your Brewing, unless it were to better purpose -- I was
finely holpt up when I married you, and refused more likely men every way,
and such as would have maintained me like a woman -- But the devil owed me a
good turn: --


Nay, dear wife -- thou art always in this Key -- What encouragement can it be
to a man, when his wife believes nothing but what she should not?


Say -- speak -- what should I believe, or what should I not believe? -- you'll
teach me, will you?


No, good wife -- But we may hear one another though.


I ve heard too much -- Thou lets every one lead thee by the Nose, and make
thee an Ass and a Beast -- And I could find in my heart to make thee too --
(Look better to your business) Come come -- where be the Keys of the Chest?
give 'em me.


What to do?


What to do with my own? -- why was it not al mine? -- And dost thou grutch me
my own? -- Go go - try thy Experiments with what thou broughtst thy self,
unless they were better or more likely.


Mr. Driver! -- Never in better season.


Why how now Mrs. Gotam, -- Sitting in judgment upon your Husband?


If I do -- 'tis my own husband -- and one that (if you please Sir) has been
fooled enough by you.


Nay Wife -- you wo'nt spoil all? -- the Gentleman is a Civil Gentleman, and an
excellent person in his way.


I ll excellent ye both -- What fine Project is this you have put my Husband
upon? -- Had your Master no one to fool but his own flesh and blood?


What does your Wife mean Mr. Gotam?


Alas Sir, if you lived at our house you'd never ask that question -- 'tis her
ordinary exercise to keep her self in breath.


I'll breath you -- must you abuse me too! remember this Gentleman. --


But may not I know whence all this heate?


You know but too well -- And as you have brought him on, pray bring him off,
or I ll make the house too hot for you and your Master too -- I'll powder you.
--


And why -- How goes it forward?


In plain Troth Sir (between our selves) I half doubt the Woman's mad, -- She
has thrown all the Tubs about house, and raised the Neighbous about our ears.


And you think you've done a wise action now, to discover in one minute, what
some men might have studied their whole lives for, but never found.


Indeed Sir! -- And do you believe there was any thing in it?


It matters not whither there were or no -- Your own folly of you, I discharge
you of all monies due by virtue of'um.


You've done well Wife -- yo've made a fair hand ^n't.


Nay pray Sir.


Not a word more -- I have done with it. --


And wilt thou gang with me my Jo?
And wilt thou gang with me?
Now for thy Daddy's Benison,
I prithee now gang with me.

I -- here's your diligent man, -- He has traverst Scotland already. -- Now Mr.
Squeeze, how goes all affairs?


Why, as a man may say, on Wheels -- I had no sooner set up my Bills, and hung
out a large Label, with this Inscription in Capital Letters, --

I say I had no sooner hung it out, then my house was too little to hold the
company. Of my Conscience I think Wapping, Ratcliff, and East Smith-old were
never so drained since the last great show -- I'll undertake, 'twould have made
two Ginger-bread women for ever.


See here Mr. Gotam! -- see what industry can do! -- And yet I valued your
device at least 50 per Cent. more then this.


I'm an unlucky fellow -- this a man gets by making his Wife acquainted with
his business.


Nay prithee sweet heart lets home again -- I'll try to recover all.


Impossible, -- or if it wern't, the Neighbours have smoked it. -- O Mr.
Squeeze! what luck you have!


My faith I do pretty well, and at small expense -- I'll be sworn the Packet
of Letters, Familiar Epistles, Academy of Complements, and two or three of the
new Poets, is the greatest charge I have been at -- and I am confident I shall,
in a short time, be able to bring it into a lesser compass, by Printing some
blank Copies of the several kinds, that shall indifferent lie serve to every
occasion.


A pretty device and well found out.


But the main thing I built on, troubles me -- You remember the Fifth Term. --


And what of that?


I have offered it to all the Inns of Court, Chancerie, and Commons, and none
bids me any thing for it -- for they that have any thing to do, cry four is
enough, and they that have not, though they shrug their shoulders, and look
smilingly on it, yet whither it be, that t'others keep them so low, or that they
fear they'd in a short time engross this too, though they seem to wish well
to it, yet they bid me not a farthing. --


No matter -- You'll find enough in this; -- You must not be too covetous.


But good Mr. Driver -- Will you assist us at least in the Soap business.


They go together -- make one, and the other follows: -- But I'll meddle no more
in it -- I am too full else-waie.


Pray consider of't -- and we'll take a turn or two in the Garden the while --
Perhaps I may light udon some new proposals. -- Mr. Squeeze shall I beg your
company?


With all my heart.


Well, I am gon so far -- but how to get clear again, there s the question, -- I
brought it on, and I hope my Master has by this time thought of some device or
other to bring it off. -- Gudgeon Credulous! Your Servant.


Oh Mr. Driver! How have you served me? -- I have been trying your Experiment
at least 40 ways, and I'm sure my glass as good as any in Christendom, but
the Devil of a thread can I make hold, 'twas as rotten as dirt -- An old black,
died out of a rotten Scarlet, and that too, burnt in the die, is Iron to it.


Sure Sir you're mistaken:


No, no, no -- 'tis but too true.


Or did not take the right way:


Oh no -- I was exact to the Thousand part of a hair.


Or perhaps over did your work, and so calcined them -- O'my Conscience if the
truth were known this was it -- And yet 'tis strange, so grave a Philosopher,
that has written so profoundly of Cobwebs, and Perry, should be so much out in
his first rudiments.


I know not, but 'tis as I tell you.


You see what 'tis when men cannot be contented to do, but they must over-do --
'Tis well I did not trust you with the business of Malleable Glass --
Suppressing Mountebanks, -- and Enlarging the City Charter -- If I had, 't ad
been all one.


How's that, good Mr. Driver? -- Pray lets hear them -- They may make amends for
the other.


No, no more -- I'll never trust a man again that can't go by himself -- One of
your Years and Intellectuals, and not read without a Fescue!


Come, come -- lets try to recover't again.


Never, never -- I know, though I have not seen your work, you have spoiled the
design; for things of this nature are so nice, and kickish, the least Error
renders them irretriveable. -- A man had better fix Mercury in a blowing Mill,
then offer to think on it.


What remedy then?


Patience, Sir Gudgen, patience.


Hugh -- Patience -- And had I more, here's that would exercise it all.


And now no longer Widow, be as merry as a good Husband can make thee.


I have but your own word for it; and yet hope I shall have no cause to repent
the action; 'Twas well said -- And I l promise thee (as near as I can) I'll
give thee none -- But see, Sir Gudgeon Credulous! -- He's come to give thee
joy.


Joy -- Choke them --


Save you, Sir Gudgin -- You've been a great stranger -- I see I might have
even done what I would for all you -- you're a kind Suitor!


She jears me too! -- Is it not enough to have injured me, but you must tell me
so?


I injured you! -- forbid it -- Pray how goes on our common business?


All evaporated -- gon -- gon -- quite lost --


Why -- as I understand you, there was to be neither fire nor smoke in 't.


I know not -- The Devil was in it -- And my new Drape -- quite defunct.


And do you think it was kindly done to engage me in such a business?


'Twas no more then what I did my self -- But I see (now it is too late) that I
am merely tricked out of my money, my Widow, and all -- But some body shall
dearly rue it.


That's not I, Sir Gudgeon -- Is it?


No matter whether it be or no -- There are other bodies in the world besides
your self.


Yes that there are -- There are Bodies Politic, as London and Westminster;
and Bodies Simple, as Sir Gudgeon and his Participants.


Do ye hear this, Mr. Driver? -- I shall order you y'faith, if there be any Law
between the Mount in Cornwall and Berwick Stairs.


However, Sir, I am to thank you that you have been pleased to lend me some
money to defend the Suit.


Well -- look to t -- I say no more. --


No departing in wrath, good Sir Gudgeon -- One does not know what you may do
to your self -- You had better stay a while and take a little advise with you:
-- Go -- go down into the Country and awe your poor neighbours with my Lords
nod, or his whisper in your ear at parting -- Study Longitude and the
Philosophers Stone; The North-West Passage, and the Square of a Circle -- So
brave a Sir Poll, trouble himself with trifles! -- By no means -- no -- no --
Embark for the Indies in a Cock-boat, or to France on a Mil-stone; Plant a
Colonie in Terra La, or settle an Intelligence with the Emperor of
Utopia -- These were fit for Sir Gudgeon! -- -- Have tibi sunt arts!


Well, Sir, we^l -- Tis your time now.


Or if you love the smoke of the Town better -- Enter your self a Virtuoso, and
sit in Judgment on every man but your self -- Never open your mouth with less
than a Cabal, and yet speak little, for fear you be understood -- However let
your sententious Tooth-pick speak for you, that you could say more, if you
durst trust the Company, or were not under an Oath of secrefie: -- Sir Gudgeon
beat his brains about ordinary matters! -- fie -- fie --


You do well, Sir --


Not cost a man two pence a year the keeping -- O rare! -- Mr. Driver --


See! here's another of your Brethren -- Prithee, Driver, entertain him, while
I look to the Knight.


So -- keep me a prisoner too -- you fear nothing.


Well met -- well met, Sir Gudgeon -- I sent you home the Boy and the Girl --
Ha --?


They are within.


But hark, Mr. Driver -- A word -- Ha'ye fitted out the Horse yet?


And over-fitted too -- What's worse then ill luck? -- Certain we are
bewitched.


As how, as how, as how, Mr. Driver? -- no hurt I hope, good Mr. Driver?


Yes faith, Sir -- But it could not be helped.


What? what? what? what? what I pray?


Why faith as he was coming full speed down Highgate-hill, he tripped upon a
stone, fell, and broke his leg short off.


Uh -- undone for ever -- No good to be done with him now? -- Speak -- Ha? --


Why truly -- he may be made serve again -- To the Court of Guard, or so --
But I fear me, not without some charge.


Uh -- Charge -- What a fool was I to be so forward in this Match, till I had
seen what would have come of the other?


How, Sir? -- is my young Master so cheap with you already?


Why that's some comfort yet -- He'll save it up again by little. -- Oh?
Driver! -- What's this I see -- surely this house is the Land of Visions -- My
Daughter in beaten Satin -- Held me -- I faint -- I faint -- Uh --


Come, my dear -- And now no more of your No pray I thank ye's -- 'Twas well
carried.


While I was at my Fathers, blame me not if I obei'd him, and now his Election
has made me yours, I hope I shall not so mistake the person, as to pay you
less.


That's a pretty Rogue.


O my father -- Good Sir, help --


Certain he never gat her -- Nay were she not my wife, I'd swear it -- What's
the matter? -- stand off and give him Air.


Uh -- Hue -- my son and all! -- And all to be daubed! -- Is this the thrifty
Gentleman? -- Uh -- How apt is even the best ground to run into weeds? -- Uh --
Uh --


Come, pray Sir, do not disquiet your self, or judge me by my out-side -- 'tis
the way to be mistaken a second time.


Is this founded upon Nature? -- This the habit of the ancient Philosophers? --
It had not been amiss, if while they pretended to instruct others, they had yet
taught themselves.


Let me supply that defect, if yet you doubt it.


This the keeping your wife in mourning, to save Linen and washing? -- This
the burnt Cats skin we talked of? -- defend her from what follows.


Pray Sir hear me -- And though I did a while put a force upon my Nature to
humour you, be not now disturbed that I am yet at last come to my self again.


Vh, -- vh He believes these things are death to me, and will murder me, though
it be but to scatter that little which with so much pains I have raked
together.


Do not misconceive me, -- 'Tis my desire you may live and enjoie what you
have. -- The Earth, though she conveighs the water through her veins, is
allow'd yet, to suck in as much as may refresh her self.


I was right -- He is resolved to break my heart.


Pray Sir hear me, and set not up your rest on that, which simply considered,
is not that blessing the world takes it for. -- No,-Wealth not enjoyed, is but
a dead heap of muck, and the same unactive lump in the Chest, it was in the
Mine. -- Were you master of all the most mighty could wish, did you not only
possess riches, but tread on them -- should fortune cover you with gold, and
were your wealth as boundless as your eye, yet had you not a heart to use't,
you would but from thence learn to covet more, and those false desires having
no limit, would become as infinite as error.


Vh -- vh -- no mercy!


Let me prevail -- good Sir -- You cannot but hear a man that pleads against
his own interest -- You have enough; why should you deny your self, at least,
a moderate use of it? Why should ye be fearful to approach it, and yet be
jealous of others? (like the sensitive Plant, shrink at the touch, and cramp
into a Convulsion) Why should ye use your wealth (as Anglers their little fish)
(...) to bait for more? Or why degrade your self from that (...) wherein Nature
set ye, by a voluntary sale of your (...) Slavery? -- In a word, why should
you possess that with pain, which others behold with envy? Such as (in it
self) rather threatens, then profits, and thus obtained becomes not the end,
but change of misery. -- Come -- Pray Sir.


How shall I believe him? -- He said as much on the other side e're while -- Give
me leave.


I'll be his security -- Pray stay a little, -- All will be well --

Oh Gentlemen you're welcome -- Now Sir Gudgeon, what think you of reconciling
all interests?


You're in your own house -- You may do what you list.


No more of that, I pray -- I must have all friends though to my own loss. --
And therefore, to be short, let me tell you Sir Gudgeon, that finding you so
inclined to Projects, I thought you might be instrumental to mine, and I have
compassed them -- This,


And do you think to carryit off thus? -- Dost look like a Sheep-biter and
see thy self laughed at?


Pray Gentlewoman -- with your good patience a little -- The Use may chance to
be more comfortable then the Doctrine -- For once I'll be the Author of an ill
Court-President, You shall all have your Money again.


Say you so Mr. Jocose! -- Now send us more such Courtiers -- Come Gentlemen we
will be friends before his mind alter -- 'Tis ten to one but he had been too
hard for us.


Indeed might he have been.


And so he has been for me.


I shall loose nothing by it.


What say ye Gentlemen, do ye like my motion?


I -- I -- Mr. Suckdry shall be ruled by me.


That's more then you know though.


Come -- pray Sir.


'T'as taught us wit.


And I hope you'll consider your tutor Driver.


Well -- well -- leave him to me.


And so, you're pleased? -- And you, -- And you, -- And you, -- And I hope The
same of
Who ploughs the Clouds, shall only reap the Wind.



BEfore the three first Acts you'll find Scaen. 1. Wherein the Printer mistook
his Copy; be pleased to blot 'em: each Act being but one Scaene, and the Stage
throughout the whole Play kept full, -- The rest, being at most but literal,
leaves to your favour.

PLAYS, are but Morals, and the Ancients,
That first wrapped Truth in Tales, had their intents.
Full well they knew, nothing discovered Vice,
Like its own Picture -- So we hope of this:
How ill Suckdrie appears! How oddly those,
That grasp at Shadows, and the Substance lose!
Take you the Moral right -- and say -- The Stage
Then does its Work, when it reforms the Age.

