BOld was the Man that first put out to Sea;
Nor less adventurous, he that writes a Play:
Both have their hits; some scudd before the Wind,
Others lie by, and others, lagg behind;
And what's the Fate of Plays, the bare Success
Of any one, makes the next Comer less;
The Market's cloyed; some like not this, some that,
And (as in Surfeits) would, they know not what:
So when the Prophetess has fed your Eye,
From Pit, and Box, to Upper Gallery,
What may our Devil of this Night expect?
Our Auther once, was half afraid, neglect;
'Till he bethought him, the best remedy,
For a palled Stomach, was Variety:
What made the Poets Gods so oft below?
Or what Apollo, so unbend his Bow?
Or what makes you, leave a fair Wife at home,
For a Grass-Girl, or some odd homely Joan?
What, but diversion? And so, I'm bid say,
He's in good hopes you'll not forejudge his Play.
But stay -- Let's see whom 'tis he must accost?
'Tis not the Wits he fears, they're ever just:
And for those, that can only carp, nor care
While they keep pushing, how themselves lie bare:
Those, that speak well of nothing, but their own,
And damn, or save, merely for Faction:
Those, that bolt what they please, no matter how,
And carryit off not by their Brains, but Brow:
If any such are hene, 'twere well they knew,
Rome's greatest Wits, were the best natured too:
But, if this will not do, he justly, thence
Brings his Appeal to you, the Men of Sense;
And if he must be pelted, begs this Boon;
Let him that has least Wit, throw the first Stone.

WE Spirits, uncompounded Essences,
Not manacled, or immured with Walls of Flesh;
We can dilate, condense, or limb our selves,
As like us best; assume what Colour, Shape
Or Size we please. And I have taken this;
My Servants, that -- my Name below, Belphegor;
Here, Roderigo. -- My Quality, a Merchant
Come from the Indies. -- O most happy Lot!
Who would believe, that void and formless Mass,
That fluid infinite, had ever produced
Such an harmonious Order? -- It strikes Wonder
And Ecstasy. --.
And what think ye of this World? Is not this better than toasting the Souls of
our Feet?


The Air, I must confess, is somewhat better -- but for the People -- not a
do it to choose.


I fancy 'em the worst of the two; and more fond of the Place, than our
selves.


Can ye blame 'em? -- They know what they are in this World, they know not what
they may be in the next.


Yet live here, as if they expected no other -- And so exquisitely practised in
Cheating one another, that the best of us is a mere Novice to 'em.


Not a Skip-kennel, but gives you three Tricks for one.


And for their Masters -- could you believe it, Sir, I met with a Signior
the other Night, most devoutly, with his Beads in one Hand; and the other in my
Pocket.


Why did not beat him?


I did but challenge him for it, and the Rogue had the Impudence to kick me, for
taxing a Person of his Honour.


I believe both our assumed Bodies were damned Cowards, while they lived here;
-- for my part, I had rather take ten kicks, than so much as look back to see
who gave me one of 'em.


But sure, the Women treat ye better?


As judge your self -- it is not long since I had a concern with a Signiora;
and just as I had stripped, and was going to Bed to her, slip, went the
Trap-door, and down dropped Crispo into the Common-shore.


And mine has given me such a Remembrance of her Love, that, as Young soever as
my Figure speaks me, I can hardly speak Knitting-needles, without endangering
the Bridge of my Nose -- And when I taxed her for it, had the Impudence to ask
me, how she could give it, when she still kept it her self?


But how do ye find Mankind in general?


Still slandering us -- As drunk as a Devil -- As mad as a Devil -- As poor as
a Devil -- As dull as a Devil -- And what not! -- when yet, there's not so much
difference between us, as would turn a pair of Scales.


And then perpetually playing Fast and Loose with us -- Ever and anon giving
their Souls to the Devil; yet, at last, bequeathing them another Way, without
the least thought of the pre-conveyance to us. -- And therefore, I beseech ye,
give me leave to return to my old Quarters.


Not forgetting thy Excellencies, poor Crispo.


Villiachoes! -- And must ye throw up your Cards, when they play into your
Hand? Peace -- and be thankful -- All this but makes our Game -- Go -- humour
them -- for we're restrained, and can do nothing without themselves -- They
hold the Candle to us -- The Mud's their own; We only shake the Viol, and stir
it up -- and so -- look out -- and sharp. -- Pandaemonium, or Common-Council of
the Infernal Lake -- Present -- Lucifer, Abaddon, Beelzebub, and others, the
High and Mighty Lords, Potentates, and Princes of the Grand Abyss -- Whereas,
upon taking our Yearly Audits, it has been observed, that the Souls of such as
arrive, generally agree, that their Wives sent them -- And whereas, the said
Board had formerly Ordered, That for the better discovery of the Truth thereof,
some one of their Body (as by Lot it should fall) repair to Earth -- And
whereas the said Lot fell to Belphegor, Generalissimo of the Aspaltick Lake --
Resolved, as follows.

1. That the said Belphegor forthwith take upon him that Province, and that a
Million of Duccats be assigned him; not as Advance, but his full Complement. --
And well enough -- no ill Encouragement.

2. That for the better carrying on of the said Service, Himself (and Two other
Spirits assigned him as Servants) be at Liberty to assume, and actuate what
Bodies, and settle in what Part of the World, shall like him best. -- And I
have don't.

3. That upon his first Choice, of his Place of Residence, he immediately Marry
a Wife, and live with her Ten Years (if possible) after which (pretending to
die) that he return, and, upon his own Experience, make Affidavit, of the
Pleasures and Calamities of Marriage. -- And I have done that first. -- A
desperate Service, no doubt! --

4. That he lose all Qualities of a Spirit (unless, perhaps, upon some last
Exigence) and become in all things as a Man; subject to all the Conditions of
Humanity, -- Poverty, Imprisonment, Passions, Fear, Hate, Love. --

Where there Ten Thousand more, that sweetened all.
Love! -- There's no Passion, but what's founded on it:
Men Fear, for what they Love -- Desire, Hate, Envy,
And all, because they Love themselves. -- But mine
Carries a nobler Tincture; and I Love
To that Degree, I've half forgot the Sex.
And, but that she has little odd Humours, and perhaps too, some Fits of her
Mother; O Origin! I'd release thy Kindness, and never accept other Heaven, than
here.

But see! -- She comes!
Such was the Infant-Morn, when it first brake
And blushed, to see the Chaos left behind her.
Thence I felt Passion first -- What else I viewed
Wrought in my Mind no Change, no fond Desire:
But there, I am transported. -- I, that was
High Proof against all things else, There, there alone,
Weak, for to me, whatever she Wills is Fate.
Sure Nature was asleep when thou stol'st forth,
And all the Graces she designed an Age,
Crowded themselves together, and made thee.

And are not you a fine Gentleman, to coax your poor Wife? --
Alas, poor Fool! she cannot choose but believe ye.

Could thou but see my Heart, thou would.


You can't Dissemble -- not you -- you are -- Mary, that you are --


At least would be, whatever I thought might please thee:
And were the World at my dispose, 'twere thine.

No doubt of it -- Witness the Necklace.


I had forgot --


And so you do every thing that concerns me.


See -- I have brought thee a better.


But I longed for the other -- The Set of Neapolitan Horses too -- But I'm your
Wife -- There --


Fie, my Imperia, fie -- Wilt thou be always thus?


And much you care, whether I am or not -- One would think a Woman of my
Quality --


No -- I'll die first, that thou may have another.


No marvel, truly -- I live so well with you.


She cries! -- By Heaven, she cries! -- Poor Innocence! -- My
Life! -- My Soul! -- My Imperia! -- Thou shalt have any thing; --
We'll come to Articles.

And long you'll keep 'em.


By this Kiss -- for ever.


And shall I have the Necklace I longed for?


Thou shalt, my Dear.


The Set of Horses too?


I would they were better for thy Sake. -- Thou shalt.


The broach of Diamonds would be very becoming, -- and the Locket, --


That, and whatever else thou wilt.


The Pearl too -- Were large, round, Oriental -- and the
Pendants -- so delicate -- I fancy how I should appear in them.

Less than thou truly art: -- But thou shalt have 'em.


And --


What pleases thee, shall not be amiss to me -- only be kind, -- and love thy
Roderigo.


A match, a match, -- I will.


Some techy Mortal now would have quarrelled; but we, old
Experienced Devils, know better things, --
And live with her Ten Years (if possible.) -- Mistaken Fools --
'tis possible. -- I will live with her, -- and that, for ever.

Thy Articles, Belphegor; thy Articles.


And what of them? -- The Casuists are clear in the point; --
They may be shifted for Advantage. -- Sue 'em.

But is there not a Public Faith, even among Devils?


It may be broke for Empire, why not for Love then, that commands
Empire? It may, and shall -- Be gone.

Be Witness, thou inviolable Styx! Thou 'ast broken thine; and I pronounce thee
Mutinous.


That I could reach the Slave, -- I'd make him know,
I fill my Orb my self, and make my Circle
Without a barrowed Light --
Squib on -- and say,
I am more proud in my Imperia's Love,
Than when (as Thunder-proof) I once bestrid
That vast Convex of Fire; and leading up
The embattled Legions of Apostate Cherubs,
Ploughed the Parched Earth, and make the affrighted Deep
Shrink to its last Recess.

O my Dear, heard you not the Thunder? I'm so afraid. --


Of what? of thy own Shadow?


How can you be alone?


Yet, meditating on thee -- That very Thought were Company enough.


O, but confess; you look as you were disturbed.


And thou so near? Impossible. -- Or were it so,
The Sight of thee would reconcile my Passions,
And give me to my self.

But won't you tell me true? Are you not well?


How can that Man be Ill, that's Happy enough
To pity Caesar? And such am I in thee.
Here will I fix my Empire -- Here I'll Reign,
And Reign alone.

YOU cannot say, but that he paid you honestly.


I wish I could say, I were as well satisfied. -- I never found such honest
Payments raised an Estate; -- if ever I deal more on single Interest, may I
lose my Principal.


Who'd have expected even that, at least, taken it from one so honourable, that
has perished his own Fortune, to save the Public.


These honourable Rags are such fine Things! -- how, I pray, do you find the
price currant? Does the Frippery deal in such Lumber? -- I think not. -- Good
Sir, keep your whipt-posset for your better Friends, and give me, more
substantial Fare.


His Virtue, might deserve better Language; and it may be a Question, if it had
not been for him, Whether the State had been -- at least, what it now is.


And true. -- When the Sun could hold no longer, and the Moon slept, his Eyes
have been our Sentinels.


But what Money has he got with all this? Or what Share in the Government? --
Simple Merit Lords few Men's Horoscope.


Greater than both, -- the Conscience of Worthy Actions.


What Credit has it in the Bank? -- for my part, I can boast I have killed
mine. -- And, if you'd here me, could show you a Man has done nothing of all
this, and yet, even the Senate will confess him Wise, Prudent, Virtuous, --
every thing. -- And, that he is not one of themselves, I believe it more his
own Fault, than theirs.


Who should this be?


What think ye of his Brother-in-Law? -- Roderigo. --
There's a Man for ye! and, to my Glory, he calls me Friend.

But whence this Meteor?


Whence ever he came, he darkens all our Stars:
You'd swear he were descended of the Goths,
Or had been at the Siege of Constantinople.

Some Moor, or Baptised Jew?


Be what he will,
Turk, Pagan, or Infidel, would I'd his Wealth
With his Religion. -- He's a Castilian.
Were I that Man!

You'd take it for an Affront
His Catholic Majesty should call you Cousin.

And yet you hear me not complain. -- I've that
Which finds me Friends, or makes 'em. -- That one Thing
That can do all Things. -- How it makes a Door --
Or shut, or open.

Or your self (perhaps)
Snore over your Cup, or find a Fly in the Ceiling.

That matters not; -- I'm sure it breeds Compunction,
And Fellow-feeling in a Man of Office;
Makes, and remits Offences; -- even Justice,
More Deaf than she is Blind. -- And who would want it?

That would Grimaldi, and every Man, whose Soul
Is not composed of the same Dirt he treads.
Want it, (I mean) rather than have it, on terms
Dishonourable, or Sordid.

But do ye think
Any ones Morals can reform the World?
Don't they all thus? And, which is more, Court, Follow,
Adore the Rich, and spurn the Unfortunate.

And I as much the World.


But say, that World
Spurn you again. -- Did ever wise Man choose
Him for a Friend, that was depressed by Fortune?
Rats quit a falling House -- and Men, a Party,
When they perceive it going.

Where's Honesty and Honour, all this while?


Nay, if you come to that, farewell Kingdoms.
Nor is it mine to Question 'em. -- Your Servant.

Well, Fieschi, -- and what think thou?


As is his Name, such is the Slave himself:
Who'd expect other from a Dog, but Snarling?

His Soul is Sense; and as he has no Knowledge of Virtue, he has no use of it.
-- But how have you disposed Montalto's Matter? Is it so ordered, that it be
not known from what Hand it came?


'Twas the last thing I did. -- I left the Writings in a sealed Box, with
Bianca, who has assured me, she'll watch an opportunity, and convey it into her
Ladies Closet.


As well as I could wish. -- Good Man!
He could have sooner Perished, than told me,
Told me, his Friend, he wanted me. -- Who sees
His Friend's Distress, and stays till he's entreated,
He comes too late. -- 'Tis an Extorted Kindness;
Lost ere it comes, and shows he wanted Will
T'ave done it at all. -- But, this Marone sticks in my Stomach. --
Whence truly is he?

Pansa (I think) remembers the first Plantation.


That do I, Sir, from the time he first came to Town in Second-Mourning; --
that is, in a Livery as ragged and tattered as an He-Goat; -- his Hat, right
Beggars-block, no Crown to it; -- his Doublet and Breeches so suitable, that in
a dark Morning, he'd have mistaken one for the other; -- his Stockings, without
Feet or Anckles, like a Chandler's drawing-sleeves; and those too he durst not
trust off his Legs, for fear of crawling away. -- In a word, a Thing made up of
so many several Parishes, that you'd have taken him, at first sight, for a
Frontispiece of the Resurrection.


Thence, he came in as a Sub-subcollector; and thence, into St George's Bank;
and now, being in his Nature insolent, this imaginary Reputation has made him
intolerable.


And for his other Qualities, I know somewhat my self: -- He never forgave
beyond the Opportunity of a Revenge; or spake well of any Man, but to his
greater Disadvantage. -- A pretty Gentleman. -- But -- 'tis pity. --


Nay worse, shall play both the Devil's Parts, of Tempter and Accuser: Provoke
his Friend into a freedom of Talk, and then inform it.


Enough -- And for fear of any mistake, make another step to
Bincaa.
And this Man thrive! -- O Lucian thy Gods! -- The Groans of depressed
Virtue, and loud Laughters of exalted Folly, gave first name to the
Fortunate Islands, where Men slept themselves away in the melancholy
Contemplations, between Virtue and Success.
You have prevented me -- I was just coming
To give you joy. -- The Senate have, at last,
Considered your Services.

And sent me a Gugaw,
An empty Nothing -- Pth --

'Twas never intended
Beyond a Mark of Honour, and a Pledge
Of future Kindness.

He's a Beast that serves
A Commonwealth; for when he has spent his Blood,
And sunk his Fortune, to support the Pride
And Luxury of those few that Cheat the rest,
He straight becomes the Object of their Scorn
Or Jealousy.

How oddly my Friend argues
Against himself. -- Have you not served the State
These Twenty Years? And can you think it Wisdom
To quarrel now? Or now, when reasonably
You might expect the Fruit of all your Hazards,
Arm them against you? -- Virtue, Merit, Worth,
Never wanted Enemies; make not you more.

When they behold themselves through their false Optics,
They swell a Gnat into an Elephant;
When others, -- how they turn the Glass, and lessen
A Mountain to a Mole-hill.

Are you the only Man has been so served?
Who deserved better for a Law-giver,
Than Solon? Or Captain, than Thrasibulus?
Or Orator, than Demosthenes? Yet Athens,
Ungrateful Athens, banished the two first,
And slew the latter. -- Unto whom owed Rome
More, than to Manlius; who, when her Capitol
Was grown too hot for Jupiter, preserved it?
Or what might not Camillus have pretence to,
Who, when she was reduced to her last Stake,
Pushed it, and won it? -- What should I mention
Rutilius, Scipio, Hannibal, Themistocles,
Men, famous in their Ages? Yet they fell:
Fell, where they most deserved.

How my Blood curdles at it! And me-thinks,
I feel a kind of Currishness, shot through me;
And want no property of a Dog, but fawning,
Though necessary to a rising Man.

Is this that Fortitude, my Montalto?
This, that heroic Virtue you taught me?
Sure, 'tis not the Montalto I have seen,
When Victory sate perching on his Helm;
Or that Montalto, when Oppressed by Numbers
He lost the Day, and yet brought Home more Glory,
Than if he had been Conqueror: Yet still,
Still the same even Temper; Unconcerned
At Loss, or Vict'ry.

Would it not heat a Man,
To view his Wounds, which, like so many Mouths,
Speak out his Wrongs the louder? t'ave consumed
Himself, to warm Ingratitude?

The Fruit
Of worthy Actions, is, to have done 'em;
And every Man, that will, may give it himself.

How can I stand my Breast, against a Torrent
Of adverse Fortune?

'Tis your greater Glory,
To stem that Flood. -- How 're you beholding to her,
That she could pass the Heard, and single you,
To Combat her?

But she has cut my Sinews.


The more your Honour: -- I have heard you say,
That a Roman, was more Glorious in his scorched,
Than armed Hand. -- Do not distrust your self,
And you must Conquer her. -- The Constant Man
Is Master of himself and Fortune too.

Bless me! -- Thou glorious Woman, never made
Of common Earth! -- I am concerned for thee.

To the World's Foundlings, be their World, -- with me,
My own Montalt' out-weighs the Apparition,
The Airy Dream, which, when they think a Substance,
Grasp at it, they awake, and find it nothing:
Sure, had it any thing worthy our Love,
It were a mind that can contemn it.

Brave Woman!
And who might bring Philosophy to manners.

If you call this Philosophy, 'tis what
Its first Inventers meant it, ere our Pedants
Had made it, rather difficult, than great.
Come, my Montalto, come; and let the Example
Of others Virtue, now, engage your own;
Their Glory, your imitation.

Thou hast overcome my, Portia -- and I'll try
If that Content, the larger World denies,
May be found in our selves. -- Even Poverty,
If it can be content, has lost its Name.
He never has enough that gapes for more;
Opinion was never Rich, nor Content Poor.

Now how I love this rugged Honesty!
Like the first Matter, 't'as all the Seeds of Good,
Only wants Form and Order.

BElieve me, our Signiora has managed her Affair; and (if I understand any
thing of the World) well.


As how? 'Pray' instruct me against the good Time.


Sh'as brought my Don on's Knees; -- 'tis all now, as she'll have it.


That all! -- a mighty Business! -- Had not they been married two Years? -- And
does not he Love her? -- And she know it? -- Few Women but would have done as
much. -- Besides, (and 'tis every days Experience) even the wisest Men, when
they once come to Love in earnest, turn generally half-witted.


You are to be instructed indeed, Scintilla. -- He is good natured, and does
Love her. -- But there are a many stubborn Fools in the World; and a Woman need
have all her Wits about her, to keep her own. -- But to get ground! -- I know
it may be done, but not so easy.


I warrant ye -- do but bring him to the right manage at first; humour him in
every thing, you can't hinder, and the rest follows; -- 'tis not the point
whether she Loves, but whether he believes so. -- There's your Art, to get him
play himself into the Noose, and be proud of't too.


Well, well the World is strangely altered since my time; -- Young Girls then
were not wont to be so knowing, -- but now, they are even able to teach us.


Now Grannum, -- and my pretty Convenience.


Grannum, with a Murrain t'ye!


Get ye to Bianca -- I'll tell her -- you do so mousle one.


Fie, Signior Pansa, fie; -- is there no more, but fall on, without so much as
a short Grace: I'm sure it was not so --


The Year you lost your Maiden-head; -- and that was so long since, you have by
this time forgotten you ever had one.


Away, Knave, -- away.


Yet she'll not turn her Back to you now.


Nor a better than himself.


No anger, I beseech ye -- After the dull rate Men made Love formerly, I should
look upon a Petticoat, as one of the most defensible Spots in Christendom -- So
many Scarfes, Curtains, Portcullises, Counterworks, and what not; but now, that
we'ave a shorter cut, of Surprise, Sapping, down-right Storm, or Springing a
Mine; up goes Scarf, Curtain, Portcullis -- And hey da.


Well, Pansa, thou'lt never break thy Heart for Love.


Love! -- 'tis a kind of Cholick; -- as long as ye keep it under Girdle, ye may
linger on with it, and well enough; but if it once get Breast-high, the whole
Mass is infected, and I can only say (as Physicians of their dying Patients)
his Time is come; cover him up, and send for a Parson.


Come, Scintilla, -- 'tis as thou said, -- here she comes, -- he's a filthy
Man, -- even leave 'em together.


B'w'ye Grannum -- And now, my best Girl -- Thou hast not forgot, I hope.


I wish I had. -- My Lady was Abroad this Afternoon, and I laid the Box as you
directed; -- but when she came forth, she gave me such a Look, -- asked me, who
had been there, -- and particularly named your Master.


Never the worse, -- she could not have done less. -- But thou had the Grace
to deny all?


Do ye take me for a Fool? -- But this I told her, -- A Gentleman, I never saw
before, brought it, and prayed me to lay it in her Closet, as I had done; and I
hoped, without Offence; -- if otherwise, -- I was sorry.


And that cleared all again?


Quite contrary, -- I saw Fire in her Eyes, -- yet trembled, and could hardly
speak; -- at last, she commanded me to find you out, -- and that you let your
Master know, she must speak with him.


Must? -- my She Secretary.


Yes, must -- and out of hand. -- And if I lose my Place by the Bargain, I have
spun a fine Thread.


Fear nothing: -- Or if thou should, my Master's a Gentleman, and my Bed will
hold two.


You Men consider nothing.


And you Women too much. -- I tell thee, my Master, the Knight, shall make his
Amour to thy Lady the Princess, while I Pansa the Squire, put it in Practice
with thee, Bianca, the Dam'sel.


Well now, and that's so fine -- But when will ye bring me some of those Books.
-- Beshrew me, but I should have broke my Heart long ere this, if 'twere not
for 'em.


Thou shalt have any thing; my Heart, my all.


'Tis not the first time you told me so. -- I -- But --


Do ye think I am bound to find ye fresh Oaths every time?


When shall I see ye at our House?


To morrow, without fail. -- And is not this better than putting all to the
last? -- And what's that, but singing a Psalm under the Gallows?


But be sure now; -- and, find out your Master presently, and send him to my
Lady.


Doubt not of either --


MY private Instructions were to pervert, and enlarge the Kingdom of Darkness:
Nor have I been Idle. -- I thought Marone might have given me some pains; but
he was mine at first, and has engaged to me, for his Brothers of the Bank. --
But this Montalto, -- I much doubt, or rather fear him.

My Friend! -- welcome my better half, -- we're now concerned, Body, Soul,
Interest.


And when I fail ye, I'll turn a new Leaf, and build Hospitals. -- But, what
progress have ye made with Montalto?


He's rugged, and will neither lead nor drive, but his own way; and therefore I
question, whether we had not better let him alone.


But he is poor and lofty, -- despair him not. -- This Gold! -- 'twill make a
Man do any thing. -- I never yet found Man or Woman that withstood it long.


I would you'd feel his pulse, and I'll advance the money.


That shall be least in the Case. -- And I'd willingly undertake it, but that
(as you know) there's no kindness between us: And for me (but so much as to
appear in it) may render it suspected; -- whereas from you, -- his
Brother-in-Law, -- his Friend, -- it can't but pass.


I yield. -- It shall be so.


Then, if you find him cold, I'll discover it my self. -- Tell me of's Virtue!
-- A Rattle for Children; -- I hate it perfectly, -- and him for it. -- Why
should any man pretend to more than comes to his share?


Now let me hug my Genius! -- and whom I love so well, that were I not sped
already, I'd go no farther than your Family.


Between our selves, -- give her a Fig, -- and see if I don't fit ye, to your
Wish.


O by no means, -- you run too fast.


You need not be ashamed of her, -- we are descended from Marius, and have had
some Crowned Heads of the House; though, I confess it, somewhat long since they
have had any Sceptre in their Hands.


I judge it by your self.


Nor, to tell ye Truth, can every Man say so much; or would perhaps, be willing
to hear all that may be said of his; and that's the Reason, why so many of the
Ancients were descended from the Gods: For, when their Birth was so obscure,
that they were ashamed to own it, the Jade the Mother, or some blind Poet,
found out a God, to Father the Bastard. -- What, I pray, were Bacchus,
Hercules, Romalus and several others? -- Story Lies, or their Fathers were of
the doubtful Gender, and their Mothers of the Common. -- But this, by the by.
-- And, because I hear some Body coming, I'll withdraw, for fear it happen to
be Montalto.


Devils, do they call us! -- Poor Devils, where have we been bred! -- This one
Marone may shame us all; and had I done no more, is worth my Journey.


Health, and his own Wishes, to my Brother.

The same, and more, (were it possible) to you.

But I'm half angry, -- angry with my self,
That this Alliance, is not yet made Friendship.

No Man shall court it more. -- And such a one,
As loves the Man, and not his Fortune -- Such,
As can hide any thing, but his Love -- And whose
Mistakes, shall be of weakness, not design.

Now how you speak, my Soul! -- This empty World,
Is hollow, -- false, -- ungrateful, -- And Men live
As if 'twere made for them, they, for themselves.

'Twas ever so.

Witness, those mangled Officers,
Maimed Soldiers, wooden-legg'd Artillery-men,
Spies, and Intelligencers out at Heels.
Some, showing their Wounds; -- others, numbering the Battles they have been in,
and the Estates they have lost. -- Some, muttering Libels; -- others, modelling
a Reformation; -- and not the least part of them, studying where to get a meal
upon Reputation.


And yet, there's not a private Soldier, but glories in his Wounds, as having
received them in Defence of his Country.


And no doubt but they call 'em, Worthy Deeds. -- But I say, they are Deeds
worthy of Repentance; and such are all Services paid to the Ungrateful. -- To
go no further than you self, -- What have you got by all yours?


The satisfaction, of having done what I ought. -- Virtue, is Theatre enough
unto her self.


You have said well, and worthily. -- And because, he that is pleased with
another good, increases his own. -- Give me leave, Brother, and now Friend, to
propose to you, an honourable Advantage --


I know not what it may be.


You're at your Liberty, if you don't like it.


You have my word.


Then thus, -- There is a Prince, whose Name must be as yet concealed, is so
sensible of your Merit, and this Republick's Ingratitude, that he has ordered
ye Ten thousand Pistols, as a small Pledge of his future Favour; -- and I'll
advance the Money.


Ten Thousand Pistols! -- and from a Prince unknown! -- and what must I do for
all this?


Kings have their Reasons to themselves, too deep for private Men to fathom. --
Who knows, but he may have a design upon Italy. -- This -- or some other place;
-- and, which is further in my Instructions, -- has pitched on you, as General
for the Expedition.


How are you sure it has not taken wind?


Not a Man on this side the Alps, knows it besides our selves.


Or that your King will keep his Word, more than Genoa has hers?


I have the money in the House. -- He's coming.


But is not this to betray my Country?


Give it another Name, and do it -- Who ever scrupled a safe Revenge? --
Success, will call it Justice.


Upon my Country?


But, Ungrateful Country. -- That only is my Country, where I am well. -- And,
what think you?


That you have said too much for me to hear.
I lend a Hand to Slave my Country! -- No;
That won't Montalt', the disobliged Montalt';
Virtue forbid the Thought. -- Though she may 've lost
The affection of a Mother, she's my Mother:
And as she bears that Name, I must, and will
Support her, or lie buried in her Ruins.

However, I doubt not but I'm safe; -- your Word,
(The great Credential of Mankind) secures me.

Unlawful Promises oblige to nothing,
But a Repentance. -- And to keep mine, here,
Would be a double Crime; and break those Laws
Of Piety, and Faith, my Country claims.

Country! -- A Thing of Chance, no Choice of yours:
Your Mother might have dropped ye any where: -- But if
You break your Word, you violate your Honour;
And that's your own.

Perish for me, that Honour;
Life, Estate, every thing, so she be safe:
And so -- my Sister-in-Law's Husband, no more Friend,
I'll not resolve ye what I'll do. -- But know,
'Twas not within my Word, not to prevent ye.

Bubbled! -- by this good Light, merely bubbled! -- and, when (one would have
thought) I had him, all to nothing. -- Sure, sure, our Masters lie under a
great mistake; and Mankind were once the ancienter Devils, and invented that
Sham, of their Wives sending them, only to frighten us, from vent'ring among
them. --

-- I hope she did not hear me.


And what (if I may be so bold) have my Wise Brother-in-Law and you, been
projecting? -- When do ye set out?


For what? (my Dear) or whither?


Why -- for the Indies, in a Cock-boat; -- or France, on a Millstone. -- I hope
you'll go by the North-West Passage, and take a Bait by the way, to hear the
Mermaids sing? -- Your Friend, my Sister's Husband, would make a special
General for the Expedition. -- Ten Thousand Pistols will do no hurt; -- you
have it in the House, and may advance it.


Betrayed too! --


Methinks you're very Familiar. --


Nay, -- my best Wife, -- do but hear me.


Wife, -- Mary! -- You think I cannot read your Thoughts in your Looks. -- You
must be plotting, must ye!


If to raise thee to Grandeur, be ploting, I'm guilty. -- One successful Work
Al-a-mode, is a surer Game, than a Thousand good Works.


I smell your Design, -- it is to ruin me. -- I was once told by a Cunning
Woman, beggary would be my End; -- and you take the way to it.


I have enough, -- never fear it.


Yes, -- and are free enough of it, to every one but me; -- and there -- it
goes from your Heart.


Thou know the contrary; it is but ask and have. -- Dost want any thing?


As if a Woman must have nothing, but what she wants, and asks; -- my Family
were never wont to ask.


And I've been kind to them, for your sake. -- I have honourably bestowed two
of your Sisters.


They could have don't themselves.


Sent a Brother of yours into the Levant; -- another, for France; -- a third,
into Spain; -- and am now making Provision for a fourth. -- So that, in effect,
I have married a Tribe to Enjoy one.


Yes, -- to wit me with it. --


O Signior! -- that you had come a little sooner. -- Our Spouse and I have been
at Jingle-jangle. -- He knows I love him, and that's the Reason.

Hough! -- Jangle with you! -- I hope, Sir, you did not lift a finger, if you
had --


I'd given him two for one. --


And who are you?


Soy hydalgo come Il Re! -- My Name -- Don Hircio Zanzummim, Gogmagog, lineally
descended from the Dukes of Infantado, Trinidado, -- or some Body else. -- And
if you had! --


No. -- there was nothing like it.


I only say, -- if he had, -- my Great, Great, Great, Great-Grandfather's Ashes
(his that gave the Sultan the Lye, and took the Cham of Tartary by the Whiskers
Royal) would blush to see any of his Posterity not true to Honour. -- You say
he did not, -- and I'm satisfied. -- But if he had, -- or durst but offer't, --
Voto!


Come, Signior, I'll be his Security,


She has her Bravo too! -- Cowardly Devil that I was, not to draw upon him;
yes, and fright my Wife, -- who (which is some sign of Love) did not aggravate
it. -- Well, -- go thy ways, -- thou hast thy Frolics; -- yet it shall go
hard, but I will hit thy Humour.


MY Husband is convinced, and so am I,
The Action, in all its Circumstances,
Must be Grimald's; for it can be none's but his;
And yet I'm racked between the two Extremes,
Of Friendship to him, and my just Resentments
To his false Nephew. -- All unknown to us,
The Generous Grimaldi has restored
My Husband's Fortune: His degenerous Nephew
Has taken this occasion, to renew
His long rejected Love.

Her Virtue sure
Has wrought Impossibilities, and added
New Graces to her Person, -- as if Infinity,
Could be encreast.

I sent for ye, Fieschi;
But it had been more honourable in you,
Not to have given me cause. -- Your worthy Uncle
Has, to his frequent Obligations,
Added a fresh -- I need not tell ye what.

And 'tis his satisfaction, that he wanted
Neither the Will, nor Means of doing it.

Debts are discharged with Payment. -- Benefits,
Pay what we can, there will be still Arrear.
But, -- for his Nephew to profane that Friendship,
I could be angry -- verily I could,
And would, were it not to make an others ill
My own affliction.

Blame your Virtue then,
Montalto loved it. -- And the self-same cause
That absolves him, absolves Fieschi too.
He rested not in Speculation only;
And shall I turn Philosopher?

I'm his,
And only his; and therefore barred to you.

But Nature's free, and walks not by restraint,
But choice --

And I have mine. --

She never Coined
Those Bug-bear Words, of Honour, Jealousy;
She never impaled free Woman; or designed
A thing so Excellent for one's Embrace.

Enough -- When that I ever heard ye was as much
Against my will, as the concealing it
Against my Duty -- No -- a Virtuous Woman
Takes no more Liberty than what she ought.

At least, blame Love, not me. -- I've often raised.
Your great Idea in my Soul; and (as
A Diamond only cuts a Diamond)
Set your own Virtue against your self, -- yet still
Love gets the upper-ground, and pours upon me:
So weak a Fence is Virtue against Love.

We still excuse our selves. -- The fault lies not
In Virtue, but our Resolutions:
Could we once make our Actions work up to our Intentions, the Work were done.
There -- take your idle whatsoever it be;

I knew the hand too well, to open it.
And will you still torment me with the sight
Of a forbidden Good?

Not good to you,
Because forbidden. -- If you're wise, be gone.

You've said it, and I obey.

But take your Box wi'ye.
Sure I have done some Evil, and the Guilt
Sticks on my Brow. -- It must be so, -- or he
Had never offered this Amour to me.
Be it what it will, this I'm sure, my Will
Had nothing in it; -- yet how poor and cheap
Do even the appearances of Evil make us.

Your repeated Obligations
Deprive me of my Liberty.

In exchange, take mine.

The only Injury you ever did us:
For it has put us on the Necessity
Of living and dying Ungrateful.

A Benefit too great to be received.

Not for a Friend to give. --

But what return
Could ye propose?

'Thas overpaid it self.
To have done well, in hopes of a return,
Is the most sordid Usury. -- Allay
Does but embase the Coin; -- and such a thought
Had derogated from the Majesty
Of Friendship, and been Interest. --

But does not
Equality make the lasting Friendship?

Of Minds, I grant it. -- Friendship cannot stand
With Vice or Infamy. -- Degenerous mixtures
Seldom out-live the Birth. -- And as ours was
Founded on Virtue (like a true-built Arch)
May it grow up, until it knit at Top,
And bid Defiance to the Shocks of Fortune.

Thus you overcome us every way. --


Teach me,
What 'tis to be a Friend; -- one, without whom,
As a Man can't be happy, 'tis not his least
Unhappiness, he never knows his Friend,
But by being Unhappy himself. -- A Friend!
My earthly God! --

As you are mine, no more.
Come, let's enjoy this Salt of Life, -- this All,
That gives it relish, and without which, Life
Were but a dull Parenthesis of Time;
The World a Wilderness, and Man the Beast.
I've wanted Company in a Crowd -- Blessed Friendship!
Thou Girdle of the World! -- Had I been Heathen,
I'd Sacrificed unto no other Goddess.

TO say otherwise, were to belie him; -- and, as all Men have their Faults, the
worst of his, that I know, is, that he loves me too well.


And such a Fault may be easily born with.


You're a mere Chicken, Girl; -- there may be as great a mistake in loving a
Woman too well, as in loving her too little. -- What would I care for a Man
should court my little Finger, look Babies in my Eyes, sit and admire me: --
That was not the Fashion of my time. -- Men were Men then.


And there too, he's likely enough. -- Truss and well knit. -- But why this to
me?


Your Ladyship was wont to allow us this harmless Freedom.


Or, if I don't, you'll take it.


Without Offence then -- What Diversion have ye?


As pleases my Husband; -- and I have neither Eye nor Ear to any thing else.


And a Friend would study as much to please you.


I should think one Husband were enough for any modest Woman. -- Are there
naughty Women?


Mary forbid it! -- Or that they should not be content with one Eye, one Hand,
one Leg.


But one's Husband though, is the best Friend.


And the worst Company. -- Fie (Madam) you'll ruin the Sex. -- Husband, say
ye! -- A mere Thing, -- a Cover-slut of Custom.


Has not every Well two Buckets? -- Every Ship two Anchors? -- Or did you never
see two Cocks cruckling about one Hen, and her, all the while picking of
Straws, to make her own Nest?


Well said, my fine Girl! thou may come to something in time.


How these Jades hit my humour! --


Do any thing, but say her Prayers.


Besides -- the Injury. --


To what? Or whom? -- You lose nothing, sell no household Stuff, nor waste
goods.


Or if the main house fall, do but keep up the dove-coat, and you'll never want
Pigeons, till ye damn up the Loover.


But you know I seldom go Abroad, and for me to receive Visits, would make my
Husband Jealous.


That all! --


Or can he be so ill-natur'd, as when his own Belly's full, to deny a Beggar
his Leavings?


But People will be apt to talk of a Body.


For what? -- For going to Church! -- Can't you pretend a Vow of Devotion and
Chastity, for three Days a Week?


And suppose he make the like for the other four?


How willingly now would she be persuaded into her own Desires. --


You could not set-up then with Partridge and Quail, for the Year round?


No (by my Troth) could I not; and yet I've but a puling Stomach.


There's somewhat in it. -- What's every thing we do, but a mere Circle of
Variety, or Grand Oleo, disht-up several ways to sweeten the wearisomeness of
one Pleasure by another? -- What's Imagination or Desire, when once attained,
but Surfeit? -- Fish of Four Days old -- away with it.


Your Ladyship takes it very naturally. -- Don't the Men say of us -- Women --
and Women -- and more Women -- but still Women.


And shall Woman (Natures last hand, to show what she could do) she alone walk
by her self? -- To one Dark-lanthorn? -- She shut her Windows to the Sun, to
pore over a farthing Candle? -- Which of themselves does it? -- And shall I --


No (Madam) if the Men Ring the Changes, I know not why we may not shuffle, and
cast Knaves again?


Welfare honest Mahomet! -- We read of no Couples in his Paradise -- And yet
-- young, juicy Girls, plump -- balmy -- and never above Fifteen.


Beloved Fifteen!


And Eyes!


More sparkling than the Diamond.


I should have thought the Cows Eye better. -- A demure Look keep its own
Counsel, and a little seeming Innocence cheats a Man into a Fondness. -- The
sparkling Eye may hit a straggling Fool; but 'tis the melting, 'tis the dying
Eye, that sweeps whole Ranks. -- Let's see -- [ To Scintilla.] set thine --
hold -- there -- there was a Look! -- so -- that again.


What? practising against the Ball? I fear me, I may have disturbed ye.


Not at all, unless it be with your new Gravity. -- But whence? whence this
startch'd Face? or why?


Besides my former Disappointments, it is not many hours since I left your
Sister Portia. -- But the same Shaggreen still, -- like the Parthian, she kills
by flying.


Alas, poor Fieschi! -- you're smitten: -- I thought how ye loved me, and have
found it.


You wrong me; -- there's nothing might have taken in that sullen Fort, but
I've attempted; -- made all the Approaches, Love, backed with Interest, could
contrive, -- but all in vain.


The Necklace cost me Twelve Hundred Ducats.


That you had seen, with what Scorn she kicked it after me.


That all! -- she shall have a better Jewel.


To as much purpose. -- A Rock is not more immovable.


Yet I have known a Rock blown up.


Her Virtue is as firm, as her Face charming.


Away ye Fool, -- I have too many Charms of my own, to suspect another; --
'tis not her Beauty, but Virtue, quarrels me. -- That half-fac'd Virtue, that
has its Faults as well as others, but a better way of hiding 'em.


Be it what it will, 't'as conquered me; and were it not for my prior Love to
you, I must have doted on her.


False Man. -- And when I think upon the thing I'd Curse, I'll Name Fieschi.


Be merciful, and kill me, or forgive me. -- I'll yet attempt her, -- I will,
-- but -- she's your Sister.


What's that to my command? -- Only conquer her, and wear my self, and Fortune.
-- That Nature had made me a Man! -- Consider, -- I'll return instantly.


If ever Man had a Wolf by the Ears, I have one now. -- If I renew my Attempts
on Portia, and carry her, I hazard the Friendship between my Uncle and
Montalto! and if I don't, I lose Imperia. -- Of all Devils, defend me from a
Woman's Devil!


There -- A Ring.] and my Heart. -- Not yet resolved? -- Away.


I was meditating some new Contrivance. -- 'Tis done.


There spake my better Angel.


But say --


More but's? -- Has she no She-friend, -- no Woman -- (and while I think on it,
you may trust Bianca) your self no Wit, -- or these no Rhetoric?


Once more, 'tis done as sure as Fate had sealed it. -- And if Pansa has
wrought up Bianca, as I once designed it, you'll say it your self.


THey're all Abroad then?


Whether they are or not, you're out of hearing. -- But what does your Master
mean by all this? -- I over-heard them, when he was last here; -- but never let
him look to come again.


Not without thee, Bianca.


I've had enough of it already; -- my Lady has not given me a good Look ever
since.


Patience -- (my Beloved) Time and Patience --


Will do no good with her. -- Besides you Men are so inconstant, -- if ye had
your Wish to day, you'd have another to morrow.


And are not you Women the same; -- as fond of an old Sweetheart, as a brisk
Widow of her third Husband.


Even thank your selves that taught us.


Sick of every thing but a new Face.


Your own Picture to a Hair.


And so fickle, fickle, fickle, -- a Man knows not where to have ye.


Beshrew me now, but that's a Fib; -- where to have you, 's the Question: --
Once fill your Belly, and ye drop off.


And there I must confess, you have the 'vantage, -- you stick the closer. --
And perhaps, though I spake too soon, -- what have we got here?


Nothing of yours, -- I'll secure ye. -- I shall be married a Tuesday next.


Still my good merry Girl! -- But say he find it?


You Men think you have all the Wit; -- but I can tell ye, some Women come two,
three, four, and sometimes five Months sooner than ordinary of the first Child;
-- but for the rest as right as others. -- You're all for Nine Months at least,
but I have known a nimble Fellow, not married above Eight Weeks, and his Wife
has brought him a couple, -- and so like the Father too!


Still the same merry Rogue.


But hark ye though, -- where are the Books you promised me? -- I can't sleep for
thinking of 'em.


And thou shalt have them in a day or two.


O! what a dainty thing it is, to see a Man here to day, and a Thousand Miles
off to morrow; -- mow Giants by the Waste, conquer Armies, ov'r-run Kingdoms,
and all for the Love of some distressed Princess he never saw; whilst she (poor
Lady) apprehending it by instinct, sits bemoaning him in some Castle-Grate; and
if she can borrow so much leisure from her Grief, Records his doughty Deeds to
Posterity, in Window-cushions and Coverlets.


And then, when over the Heads of Forty or Fifty Thousand Men, all slain by his
own Hand, he cuts his way to her Chamber, O! what Sighs, Looks, Half-words, and
I know not what! till the Lord of the Castle, having reinforced his Guards,
Surprises him ere he can recover Morglay; and from his Lady's Arms conveys him
to a Dungeon, where he's fed with nothing but Horse-bisket and Puddle-water,
till being fortunately released by some Enchanter, his Friend, he's dropped in an
unknown Desert, whence, within Three Days, he becomes Master of a great
Kingdom, and within Four more (by some private mark) proves the rightful Heir
of't.


There were a Man for me! -- I hate your Sots that turn Hermits, and can live
Seven Years together on Nuts, Black-berries, and Acorns. -- They Lovers! -- O
that I were a Man! that I might have been a Knight; or, being as I am, some
little odd Princess.


And I have much of thy humour about me; for never had any Man greater desire
of Wealth and Command than my self, and that only to eat well, drink lustick,
care for nothing, and have my Flatterers as other Men. -- But come, Bianca,
though I cannot make thee a Princess, I can put thee in the way, shall make
thee as fine as a Princess. -- Two Hundred Pistols would do no hurt, I take
it.


Ay Mary! but where's the Money?


Thy Master now and then lies at his Country House, and do thou but give my
Master the opportunity of getting into your Lady's Apartment, some such night,
and I'll secure it thee.


To what purpose? -- I'm sure he will do no good.


Do thou thy part, he'll venture that; -- Two Hundred Pistols is Money:


And truly (to speak my Heart) I've often wondered how she can be so unkind.


Good Nature -- thou must; -- and to let thee see he's in earnest, he has sent
thee Fifty in hand. --


But shall I be sure of the rest?


If thou hast it not, never trust Pansa more.


Well then, -- you speak in a lucky hour, for my Master goes out of Town to
morrow, and an hundred to one, if he return that Night. -- Let your Master, and
you, come about Midnight, and you'll find the Street-door unlocked, and me,
ready to receive ye. -- But be sure now --


That thou should doubt it! --


HEre's a Clutter with all my heart; -- why sure, this Master of ours is either
running mad, or never thinks of returning.


Here was a Palace, as well furnished as the Duke's it self, -- such Hangings,
Pictures, Carpets, Plate, and every thing suitable; -- but it seems they were
not rich enough; -- we're all new from top to bottom.


For my part, my Back's almost broke with Luggaging, and I think thine's not
much better. -- Would 'twere her Neck, that has been the cause of all.


Yet, what would not a Man do that Loves his Wife?


Commend me to our old Home; we have no Wives there: And (I've observed) here,
those that so gild this Pill of Matrimony, to make it go down the easier, never
take it themselves.


The Truth is, neither of us need be fond of the Sex. -- But every one is not
our Imperia. -- A Wife, if you have Money, will help to get more.


Or rather spend what you have.


If you're at Home, she'll bear you Company.


Or rather Scold ye out of Doors.


If you're Abroad --


Perhaps Cuckold ye, ere ye come home. -- But how now Mingo, -- have ye forgot
your Knitting-needles?


Nor your Trap-door -- mere Accidents.


I tell thee Brother of mine, A Devil of Clouts, would have more Wit; and I'm
afraid, our Master has spoiled thee.


So, so, ye have done well, -- ye have done more in a few hours, than a dozen
Lazy Block-heads would have done in a Week. -- Yet, methinks, the Rooms might
have been better Perfumed.


We reserved that, till last.


Never the worse -- Is the Music come?


They only wait your call.


Go then, and be sure every thing be in Order. --


O my Dear! and am not I a good Wife now?
That you would been with us at Duke Doria's Garden;
The pretty Contest between Art and Nature:
To see the Wilderness, Grots, Arbours, Ponds,
And in the midst, over a stately Fountain,
The Neptune of the Ligurian Sea,
Andrea Dorea; the Man, who first
Taught Genoa not to serve. -- Then to behold
The curious Water-works, and wanton Streams
Wind here and there, as if they had forgot
Their Errand to the Sea --

Thou set off this
So well, I fancy you would design a fairer.

Dear Husband try. -- And then again, within
That vast prodigious Cage, to see the Groves
Of Myrtle, Orange, Gessamine, beguile
The winged Quire into a Native-Warble,
And Pride of their restraint -- Then, up and down,
An antiquated Marble, or broken Statue,
Majestic, even in ruin. --

It pleases me,
To see thee pleased. --

And such a glorious Palace!
Such Picture! Carving! Furniture! -- my words
Cannot reach half the Splendour. -- And after all,
To see the Sea, fond of the goodly sight,
One while, glide Amorous, and lick her Walls,
As who would say, come follow: But repulsed,
Rally its whole Artillery of Waves,
And crowd into a Storm. -- But when ( my Dear)
When will ye fancy me such a Retirement?

When I, like him that raised it, can command
The Spoils of the rifled Ocean, thou shalt.

Thou'st ever a Fetch for what thou'st no mind to -- How can a Woman love ye?


Do but consider -- the House we now live in, is little inferior to a Palace;
and might become my Better.


A mere Hole -- and that so damp, musty, and raw --


You never complained of it before; -- however, Fire and Perfumes will rectify
the Air.


Yes -- to put a Woman into Fits.


Bating that Palace, there's not a House in Genoa better furnished; -- and for
Picture -- I dare almost vie Italy. -- Come -- and I'll show thee.


What? Those in the Gallery? -- I saw 'em as I came in -- mere Sign-post work.


How? -- Tuian's Venus! and Sign-post work?


A down-right Country Jone.


Raphael's Paris, and the Three Goddesses?


A Bumpkin, and his Milk-maids.


What think thou then of Guido Rheni's Rape of Lucrece? -- Mich'el Angelo's
Leda? -- Or Corregio's Jupiter and Semele?


Enough to make a modest Woman look through her Fingers.


Would thou have nobler Actions? -- What say thou to Carrachio's Perseus
and Andromeda? -- Pietro Testa's Iphigenia? -- Or Mola's Curtius?


What Mr. Dawber pleases.


Or, if thou lik'st Hunting -- there's Tempesta's Acteon!


Even keep it to your self; -- for my part, I would not put such an Affront on
my Friends, as to have 'em seen in my House. -- Picture, do ye call 'em!


Sir, the Company are now lighting at Door.


And why not Madam -- Sauce-Box! --


Nay Wife -- my dear Wife -- what will our Friends say? For thy own sake, if
not mine, be civil.


Say what they will -- shall I humour a Husband that can deny me any thing. --
You'd as good let me go, or I'll spoil all. -- Let me go I say.


Thou shalt have any thing -- Here -- take the Keys of all I have -- and please
thy self. --


You can make me do what you please -- that ye can.


I'll wait upon our Friends -- To Imp.]


Scraping you mean -- I'd 've made as good on a Gridiron.


Softly, my Dear --


And such a string-halt Dance.


WERE I to take Wife,
(As 'tis for my Life)
She should be Brisk, Pleasant, and Merry;
A lovely fine Brown,
A Face all her own,
With a Lip, red, and round, as a Cherry.
Not much of the Wise,
Less of the Precise,
Nor over reserved, nor yet flying:
Hard Breasts, a straight Back,
An Eye, full and black,
But languishing, as she were dying.
And then, for her Dress,
Be it more, or be it less,
Not tawdry set out, nor yet meanly:
And one thing beside,
Just, just so much Pride,
As may serve to keep honest, and cleanly.
Whoo, ho, ho, hoo! -- here's a Voice! -- and a Song, I thank ye --


O Madam, your Monkey has got into the next Room, and overturned all your
Cupboard of China.


Or I had don't my self, to spite my Don.


I beseech ye Gentlemen, let this make no disturbance -- I hope you'll take
share of a short Regale.


Alas, poor Roderigo!


Poor Hen-peckt Devil, they might have said. -- The very Boys will pelt me. --
[ He walks.] But is this Belphegor! -- this, the once, Generalissimo! -- Yes --
[ He makes a shrug.] but subjected to all the Conditions of Humanity -- and I
must be contented, as well as others -- at least, till I get my Keys again: For
to say Truth, my Ships are longer out than was expected, and Bills come thick
upon me; some of them too, begin to be importunate. -- My comfort is, they're
three rich Cargoes, and any on's return will pay for all.


SHE's as good as her word. -- The Door was unlocked.


And I may trust her?


My Life ye may -- for she ever made it a matter of Conscience, to take a
Gentleman's Money, and do nothing for it.


What shall we do, Sir? -- our Master's returned -- but in his own Apartment --
Consider.


It must be -- And why not now?


Then follow me close and softly -- and do you Pansa, stay here till I return.


And if it hits, I'm made -- and who knows but I may marry the Jade my self,
for all her Tuesday next. -- O but -- but what? -- To be a Cuckold. -- And how
many are there in the World, yet live contentedly? -- But -- your own Cuckold
-- forestall the Market -- antidate your own Fortune -- And what of that? I am
not the first has don't, and shall not be the last. -- This I am sure, I am the
less deceived. -- What ere it be, Two hundred Pistols, and my Masters
Kindness, will make amends for all. Bianca, I was thinking, what if thou and I
should join Jiblets, in an honourable Way? -- What think ye of Matrimony
Bianca?


No, Pansa, no -- for though I love ye well enough, you shall never twit me with
any thing of your own Knowledge -- but for old Acquaintance, I'll recommend ye
-- She is!


The very Mop of Modesty! But what has she?


Enough for you, and to spare. -- The truth is -- not above Sixteen or
Seventeen Thousand Ducats ready Money, and as much more, after the Death of
her Grannum -- But for Virtue!


The Lord knows what! -- But say, she won't have me?


I'll put in a good Word for ye. -- This for your comfort, She'll sip Verdua --
privately though -- and then -- so good natured.


That's half the work: For I never knew the Devil at one end, but his Dam was
at the other.


Here, Pansa, here.


Where am I? Blind Fortune assist my blinder self.


There -- bolt the Door t'ye, while I look out another way.


The last noise lay this way -- within there, Ho! He endeavours to open the
Door.] Bolted within too -- nay then --


Thieves, Thieves! -- 'waken my Lord, he may be killed in's Bed.


Hold -- where he stands! -- He bleeds -- a Handkercher, to keep the Wound from
Air.


What needs this noise? -- One of ye stay with me -- another get me a
Surgeon. --


I run, I run.


The rest, look about the House -- 'tis almost impossible he should escape.


The Street Door (my Lord) is open.


Nay, then the Bird is flown. -- However, see what Servants are wanting, or out
of Bed. That Men knew when, to put on Arms.


Here's some ones Bloody Dagger.


And I know whose -- I gave it him -- That was unkind.


My Husband Bloody! -- What have I done, good Heaven! -- Now, pity me -- And
press me not with more than I can bear, or give me strength --


Do not thou stab me too --
'Tis but a scratch, and thy Montalto lives:
Stay! stay my Portia! -- yet one minute stay,
And take me with thee.

She begins to stir, Sir.

Return, return! at least but give an Eye,
And see who calls thee back. --

My hovering Soul
Was on the Wing, and nothing, but that voice,
Had checked its flight.

Do not torment thy self:
Thou may accuse, but can not alter Fate.
Heaven, Earth, all Things, have their Period.

But Portia has resolved, she will be Portia,
In not surviving you.

Respite till then:
Every Wound is not Mortal; or if 'twere,
Who comes to his last Period, dies old.
If l've lived well, it's enough; if ill, too long:
Life's measured, not by Years, but Actions.

But to be thus rent from me --

If I must leave the Town, what matter is't
What Port I go out at? Or which way I die?
Death has a Thousand Roads, but all of then
Meet at the Journeys end -- How happy then
Is Man, that he can neither lose his Way,
Nor pass it twice.

The Surgeons (Sir) are coming.

Bring them into the next Room -- Come (my Dear) I hope there's no danger --
However, happen what will, it shall not surprise me.


'TIS what I feared -- my Levant Merchant taken by the Turks -- my French-man
sunk at Sea -- my Spaniard lost at Dice. -- And what's worse? My Credit is at
Stake -- my Cash in my Wife's Hands, and if she prove cross, there's no more to
be said -- I must break.


I am a Gentleman, Sir -- and the King's no more.


Heaven maintain it, Sir.


Maintain me! -- I have an Estate somewhere beyond the Mountains in my own
Country; and where a Pigeon House once stood; which, were it standing, as it is
now fallen, well-stock'd with Pigeons, and removed to Madrid, might be worth to
me -- a brace of Thousand Mareveds yearly --


That is to say, about Twenty Shillings English.


Maintain me!


Your Pardon, Sir.


Yet think it no Dishonour to converse with our Jews in blackhats, here --
Somewhat below me, I must confess -- but I am now and then serviceable to 'em,
and they thank me.


I remember ye, Sir -- Your commands to me.


That's as you please -- You are Signior, a Man of Fortune, which makes them
Envy you. -- In short, 'tis given out, your Ships are miscarried, -- and now,
one taxes this, another that, a third, your Cattamountain, (my Relation) your
Lady.


Alas, poor Fool! must she suffer too?


I was once about to have made them eat their Words -- but Prudence (as
sometimes it should) interposed. -- Upon the whole, if you pay 'em not Forty
Thousand Ducats, you'll be Arrested ere Night.


Neither my Ships nor that, will much affect me.


The more's my Joy -- But, since they are such Scoundrels, name me the Man ye
do but doubt -- and -- he's dead.


By no means, Signior -- However, as an acknowledgment of your Respect -- be
pleased --


I beseech ye, Sir -- what do ye mean -- nay --


Her Relation, he said -- a worthy one! -- And yet it may be true as he says;
and who knows, but he might be sent to set me. -- My last Comfort is, I have
Cash enough in the House, but the Keys of it hang at my Wife's Girdle.


-- Never more welcome, though to unwelcome News.

Your Ships you mean -- 'Tis every where.


I'm happy yet in such a partner of my Cares -- All will do well again -- Lend
me thy Keys.


For what, I wis' -- your Wife (it seems) is not fit to be trusted?


Thou know the contrary; -- but I have some Bills charged on me, that
require speedy payment, or they'll be protested; and then, where am I?


Even where you please -- But Keys, you get none of me -- the Fool has more
Wit.


I shall be ruined else.


Better you than I -- She'll provide for one.


I have enough to bear Forty such Losses.


Yes -- in your great Iron Chest. -- Away, you pitiful Don -- with what Face
could ye cheat me with a parcel of Stones and Brick-bats, instead of Coin? --
Was this the Treasure? These the Doubleoons ye talked of?


I tell thee, Woman, 'tis all good Silver; and more Gold than the best of thy
Family, thou so much tatlest, ever saw together.


My Family, Gentleman! -- I was finely hope up, when all the Pride of Italy
courted me, to marry a Tramontane, -- a beggarly Don, -- Don Roderigo
Castiliano! the first of his House, and the last of his Name. -- Blot my Blood
with your damned Morisco! -- That Moletto Face, might have fore-warn'd me. --
But, alas, poor me -- I loved.


Thou hast a Prince Incognito in me.


The Devil I have! -- Ha, ha, hah!


Provoke me not, for fear thou find me such.


And what would my poor Pug? -- I have a Charm shall lay ye, good Sir Devil. --
A Circle, shall cool your Courage.


Give me my Keys, I say --


Who should she be? -- my Tire-Woman: She brings me Knots, Gloves, Ribbons,
Points, every thing.


And now and then a Letter in the bottom of the Box.


What's that to you -- Jealous! of my Conscience, Jealous! -- I see a mousled
Hood, rumpled Tippet, or tumbled Petty-coat would not down with you! my Lord
Dick, or my Lord Tom, stick in your stomach. -- Jealous, my Life! Jealous! --
Know Tramontane, Jealousy is the effect of Weakness; whereas, he that's
Virtuous himself, belives the same of another.


Give me my Keys, I say again -- and that Letter -- Or --


But, shall I have 'em again?


Upon my Honour thou shalt -- I'll only take what will serve My present
Occasion.


Shall I indeed La?


All, all's forgotten.


Well then -- I'll try for once --

Murder! Murder! Help! Murder:

Sure all Women had not such Husbands.


Now fie upon him for a Villain, beat his Wife!


Draw upon a Woman!


Do but hear me.


That were wise work indeed.


I hope you are not hurt.


Nor all Men sure such Wives. -- What shall I do? -- Debts, threaten me Abroad
-- my Wife's at Home -- stay here, I cannot -- and return, I dare not --

But yet, to fall thus tamely -- Be outwitted;
And, by a Woman! -- By the drowsy Lethe,
Cocytus, Acheron, or whatever worse,
Than Fables ever feigned, or Fear conceived,
I'll make her know me better; make her know,
What an Italianated Devil can do.
Hoe! Sacrapant! Adramelech!

I am told, Sir, it requires no Answer.


Your House is beset with Bailiffs -- Consult your Safety -- Haste, if you're
wise. -- How I command, how the dull Slaves obey.


What would Belphegor?


Attend me without -- what shall a poor Devil do? -- But -- might not Friends
take up the matter? -- Yes -- and your House beset. -- I'd come to any Terms,
-- but the Letter said, Haste. -- I have a Loop-hool yet -- but never more to
maintain my Figure. -- Haste, was the word; -- but must I leave thee? -- I will
yet stand it. -- Men and their Wives have quarrelled, and been Friends again --

They're got into the House.
The best of't is, I have not far to go.

SIgnior Crispo? -- Mio multo illustre.


Min' Here Mingo? -- Vestre tres humble. -- That Comrades should know one
another no better?


And which becomes us, least of all others. -- Us, that should unite against
the Common Enemy, Mankind.


You're right. -- And now, that we're Pot-valiant, what think thou of a
Frolic?


And kill the next we meet.


My very thought. -- A match --


And better far, than living under the Dominion of this superdevilified
Imperia.


Poor Belphegor -- I have known him somewhat in my time, but now, so sotted on
her, he's not himself; and all this to please her, that will be pleased with
nothing.


How one may be mistaken? -- I remember, while he courted her, Almond-butter
would not melt in her mouth -- so innocent, she'd have blushed t'ave seen her
own Hand naked -- and a Voice so low, she could not hear her self. -- But not
Three Days married, ere (like an Alarm Clock) the House rang of her.


I'm sure I bear her marks. -- Time was, I could have bolted through a
Key-hole; cut Capers on the point of a Needle; given the Double-Somerset on a
Pins-head; felt no more blows than a Sack of Wool; but now she'as beaten me to
mash.


And made me mere Gut-founder'd -- and I'm afraid, our Master (return when he
will) will make but a ragged Account of it.


My only hopes are, he'll be weary in time, and leave her behind him; for if
ere she come among us below, we break up House for certain.


A Lion (they say) runs from a Cock; and well may the Devil from a Crowing Hen.


I am glad to see this amendment, Friend Mingo, and hope now, you are not so
matrimonially inclined, as once you were?


I tell thee, Crispo, I know not what to make of 'em. -- Some are so skittish,
no ground will hold 'em. -- Others so resty, one can bring 'em to nothing. --
And others again (like a Rattle at a Dogs Tail) run where you will, and it still
follows ye.


When all's done, there's nothing like an honest private Friend: And (between
our selves) I have such a piece.


As mine, I warrant ye -- so loving!


So careful of her Honour, yet so obliging!


As if I did not know your old Flora -- a mere Rag of a Jade; I wonder thou
durst venture on her, for fear of Navel-gauling.


And, I think, you have not much reason to brag of your greasy Tripe-wife* for
my part, I hate Bog-trotting.


What need this reservedness among Friends. -- Upon Honour now -- who shall say
first.


And wound Reputation! -- Fie.


You may believe Neighbours, there's somewhat more than ordinary, that I am
here in person. -- Every man would not have don't. -- But see, who are those
Fellows running there -- follow, follow. There is a dangerous Plot now brewing,
and I know who has a Finger in it up to the Elbow. -- Follow, follow 'em.


I Have heard of your Quality, and great Losses -- But your Wife say you? Alas,
poor Gentleman! -- I lost mine about a month since, and though I have no great
reason to brag, find a miss of her.


I'll change with ye; my living Wife, for your dead Wife.


Not too much of that neither -- I had, had one before; and she was well
enough. -- But this last! -- such a -- I'll tread lightly on her Grave, for
fear she 'wake.


And what difference found ye' between a good Wife, and a bad one.


I said not, she was good, but well enough -- though I think the difference be
much the same, as between a wild Rabbit and a tame Rabbit. -- However, at last,
I found the way of beating the Devil out of mine.


And I should have thought, there was more danger of beating him in. -- But,
Sir, you don't consider the Catch-poles; they follow upon a fresh scent; do but
preserve me from 'em, I'll make ye a man for ever.


Nor shall you repent the putting your self under my Protection -- Look ye Sir
--


-- Pray Gentlemen don't trample my Vines -- Who are ye?

We are the States Officers, in quest of a Gentleman we are sure took this
Road.


And cannot be far behind him. -- At your Peril be it, if you conceal him.


My House is open to ye.


Pray thee be honest to us, and thou shalt snack.


We can afford him Forty Ducats -- and that's more than thou'lt get in haste
by diging.


Forty Ducats Gentlemen, would to me a kindness.


And if we take him I'll be thy Pay-master -- I'm sure thou know me -- and
I'll be true to thee.


Signior Bricone, if I mistake not.


Thou hast me right -- and therefore doubt not thy money.


Well then -- he is


The same -- And if he's about thy House, show him us, and here's thy money
down.


There's nothing within.


I rather wish he were -- But do ye see that blind side Road, on the left hand
of my Vineyard, as ye came.


And were I to have fled for my Life, I'd have taken't my self.


There did I see such a Person, and one other with him, ride by, about an hour
since. -- And now I better consider on it -- he was the great Merchant, that
lost some Ships the other day.


The same, the same -- To Horse, to Horse.


Ride hard, and ye can't but overtake him. Roderigo's Wishes follow 'em. -- He
told me, he'd make me a man for ever, and (I hope) he'll be as good as his
word, and not lick himself whole again, by non-performance. -- Hoe Signior! the
Coast is clear, you may advance.


I fancy I hear them still -- Hark! what was that?


Nothing but the Wind among the Leaves. -- I have performed formed my promise,
and you're safe: Though (if you over-heard us, as you needs must) to my
disadvantage.


I did, and doubly thank you, nor shall it ever be said, that I forgot mine. --
But first, 'tis requisite, that you understand my Condition -- Know then, I am
not what I appear to you -- but in few words -- a very Devil.


A Devil!


Yet so it is -- I was sent to Earth by special Command, subject nevertheless
to all the Conditions of Humanity; but more particularly obliged to marry a
Wife.


Keep your Wife to your self, I have no mind to Cuckold the Devil.


And now, what with her insulting peevish Humour, my Losses at Sea, my
Correspondence failing, and Creditors pressing, you see to what Condition I'm
brought.


Is't come to this! -- The Sham wo'n't pass on me -- Come, come -- uncase --


Have but a minutes patience, and if I don't convince you of what I told ye,
and you don't find me the most ingenuous, grateful, and as Gentleman-like a
Devil, as you could wish, I am contented you deliver me up to my Creditors. --
And, without your consent, part from ye I will not.


'Tis Civil though.


Hoe! Sacrapant, Adrameleck, Paganuccio, Fortibrand! -- Fear nothing, they
shall not hurt ye.


Fear nothing said ye? -- I'm not yet secure, but my Soul may slip out at the
wrong end.


I've shown you what I am; and now consider, what Devil of a Thousand would not
such Circumstances have tried? -- But to my promise --


A Tittle tattle of mine; I know her Voice.


My promise, I was saying -- you know the Lady Ambrosia?


And what of her? -- She's rich -- And do you but make a match for me there,
I'll release you your promise.


I am no go-between; but this I'll do -- as soon as I leave this place, I'll
instantly possess her; and, on the Faith of an obliged Devil, will never leave
her, till you come and force me from my Quarters. -- And so, you know how, to
make the Terms.


But which way must I go about it?


Sputter any thing, and that shall do it -- And besides, good brisk Nonsense,
with a little Balderdash, and the Gravity of a graduated Goose, to set it off,
will give ye the Vogue, among the greater number; who, like Socrates's
Children, take more after the Mother than the Father.


My Noble Patron, I see you are in earnest; and, because you and I must be
better acquainted, your Name (I beseech ye) and Quality in the other World?


Belphegor; Generalissimo of the Subterranean Forces: But this Condition of
Humanity, has so discomposed me, that I'm ashamed to own what I was.


Generalissimo! a Friend at Court, may (if he please) stand a man in stead. --
But pray, Sir, what do ye do below?


Much after the rate ye do here; ever speaking well of our selves, and ill of
others. -- And for Friendship, as we profess not much, for what we do, we
observe it as little as your selves.


A wise People! -- But how do men get thither? Have ye no Standing-Porters to
attend the Service.


By no means -- No man comes thither but of himself, or his Wife's sending. --
I wo'n't deny, but when a Devil meets a man with his Skates on, he may give him
a push forward. -- But I'm uneasy.


There's no danger. -- What kind of People are ye?


A Hotch-potch of all Tongues, Nations, and Languages: We speak the Lingua
Franca, keep open House, and never shut our Gates to any, that had either Wit
or Money; and that's the reason we have so many Wits and Usurers among us.


And no Women? -- For notwithstanding all, I am no professed Enemy to the Sex.


They're the best Customers we have; they seldom come alone, with their own
Lading -- Some bring more, some less; not one in ten without a Liver and a
Gizard; two Friends, at least, besides Followers.


But have ye no Divines, Physicians, Lawyers? -- What have ye?


Of that, when we meet next.


And you'll forget -- you will.


Upon Parole, I wo'n't --


OUR Gentleman (it seems) is gone to take the Air, and I can look about me now,
without asking leave.


He took so little with him, I wonder we hear nothing of him -- his proud
Spirit will come down in time.


But to run away in such a hurry!


That last Note I sent him did the business.


What made a Gentleman of his Wealth and Credit, go off so soon?


I was privy to none of his Actions; however, so foresaw it, as to secure his
Estate to my self.


And (with your Ladiship's leave) are you not bound in Honour to set him up
again?


If I thought he might not be troublesome, I'd persuade my Lady to take him home
again, and keep him in Pocket-money, for her own Credit.


No, no -- I'd better remove privately and secure what I have; and that the
rather, for if ever I heard any thing in my Life, I heard his tread in my
Chamber last Night.


So have I fancied a man in bed with me, but when all came to all, 'twas
nothing but a Night-mare. -- However (Madam) remove where you will, a Man is
some Credit to a House, and ours (methinks) seems naked without him.


These Girls never consider, we should have him rummaging the next Bandbox
again.


O thou remember me. Terrachino! -- The Thousand Crowns I formerly presented
your Ladyship, emboldens me -- Ha, ha, hah! -- My Lord Lack-land! -- There --


Now out upon him! -- had he the Impudence to believe other! -- No (Madam) you
have it seven Years yet good to take; and after that, you may truck, barter, or
(at worst) give.


Ye may keep within call -- And now, Fieschi -- we have no more Excuses sure?
-- And how? -- Was my Sister Complaisant? -- Has good Nature yet brought her
about?


Judge of me, as you think I deserve. -- I had found all open Approaches as
troublesome as Fruitless, and therefore resolved on Stratagem. -- To this
purpose, I follow'd the hint you gave me, and engaged her Woman to give me the
opportunity of getting into her Apartment, which (not many Nights since) I
attempted: And though no one knew the House better than my self, yet being in the
dark, it was my Misfortune to mistake his Apartment for hers -- Montalto heard
me, and sprang out; I (as well I might) fled, and by another mistake, fell down
Stairs; He pursued; I, recovered the fall, and got off. --


As to give ye your due, you had ever the discretion, to save one.


I thank your Ladyship, -- In short, my Servant, endeavouring to make up with
me, engaged Montalto; wounded him, and got off himself: And (I know not by what
accident) is since, taken; Or you might have been sure, I'd waited on ye
sooner.


Would thou, were in his room -- A pretty Story! -- And I believe't? -- No,
thou silly nothing -- 'Twas thou, that hir'dst thy Servant, to kill Montalto to
make room for thy self -- You were there? -- The same, was I -- I've heard the
Story -- A mere Invention of your own, to excuse your self, and cheat me.


You do me wrong -- That my design miscarried, is not my fault.


You might have laid it better.
Did I command ye to a Night-Adventure?
I, bid ye Murder? -- No -- my spotless Honour,
Cannot be blasted, by a Villain's tongue:
Send me the Jewels, and the Gold I lent ye;
Or you will rue the time, that I send for 'em:
And so -- As far as Honour, still command me;
Further than that -- Your humble Servant.

Hey-day! -- Perfidious Woman! and I the Fool,
To think, there ever was, or could be other:
How, like Egyptian Temples, do they at distance,
Strike Reverence, and Admiration!
How Beautiful! How Glorious! -- Approach 'em,
And view the God -- You find a Cat, or Ape,
A weeping Crocodile, or perhaps a Goat:
Forgive me Virtue, but a just revenge,
And I'll abjure (That fair defect of Nature)
The very Sex; And never think on it more,
But, as men do, of Debts, and Sins, to curse 'em.
And now, for that revenge -- My Servant's in hold, and I know not, how soon it
may be my turn; but that I think him honest, and Montalto (as 'tis said) in no
great danger -- Help me Invention --


I thought my Lady had called -- however, I am glad to see your Worship so well
-- I have often tasted of your Bounty, and would be glad; it were in my power,
to deserve it.


Thou hast an honest Face, and I ever found thee trusty.


And shall (I hope) continue so -- And for my Face; 'tis all as you see: Let
them, be beholding to slops, that want 'em.


Nay, there is somewhat in it; for Signior Guido, is so concerned for thee!
thou'lt scarce believe it.


Indeed Sir! I am beholding to him, for his Well-wishes.


What wilt thou say now, if I make it a Match between ye?


Ha, ha, ha, -- But how shall we live together?


He has an hundred ways of getting Money: Only (like other Men) an Hundred and
fifty of spending it, besides drinking -- But a Wife, will take him off, that.


And a discreet Woman, will bear, with a small Fault.


Well then -- There is small Job, which thou may, and can (if thou wilt)
do for me: And that once done, Let me alone for thine.


And if I don't: never trust Woman again, for my sake.


Your Lady -- But thou'lt laugh -- And I, are all to pieces.


Mary forbid it! -- Why, I have known ye play together like two Kittens; And as
often told ye, Playing, commonly ended in earnest -- If that be all, I bring ye
together again; and she'll love ye, the better.


To move it to her, were to set her the father off -- But thus -- Tell her,
there's an Outlandish Prince, new come to Town, and that he's so enamoured of
her, that he intends her a rich Damask Bed, and Cup-board of Plate, which he'll
send in to Morrow; and wait on her himself at Night: Now, this Prince will I
personate; let me alone for the Disguise.


Impossible! -- She stands upon her Honour. -- She receive a Night-visit! From
a Stranger! And by her own Consent! -- Besides, your Tongue will betray ye.


Tell her, the Prince understands no Italian; and therefore, she need not speak
to him; nor take more notice of him, than if he were her Husband -- And we
shall have such laughing next Morning. -- Come -- Thou must.


What contrivances you Men have, to betray poor Women! -- Well then -- If
you'll run the hazard; send in your Present to Morrow; and come your self at
Midnight; because we are to remove in a day or two; for she fancies, the House
is haunted.


I'll venture, that too -- only, do thou thy Part.


You are resolved; And be it so. -- In the mean time, you shall see how I'll
work her -- We Women, can do much together -- But I'd almost forgot -- What's
you Prince's Name?


Il Principi Polacco.


Then say, and hold Polacco -- You'll find me ready.


What Fools, a Man must sometimes, be beholding to! -- And if I am not even
with her Ladyship, I'll forgive her -- That once over, I will endeavour, by
some worthy Action, to expiate my past Folly.


'Twas a sad accident; and I fear me, more, than a bare Chance. -- I hear, you
took, th'Examinations.


The Friendship (Madam) I ever owed your Husband, might have commanded more --
The rest, Signior Grimaldi, has appointed, to be taken here.


And what d'ye' think? -- Was my poor Sister? -- I love her with my Soul -- Is
there any thing reaches her?


Directly, nothing; But a single, uncertain Evidence, her Servant Bianca --
Tho'to deal freely with ye', I suspect it -- Men of my Station, can see day, at
a little hole: Letters, make Words, and Circumstances, Things.


Alas! Alas! -- Though yet, my private thoughts, don't contradict ye -- What
would she have done, had she had my Beast? -- But, he was my Husband -- And the
more unfortunate me -- I loved him. But pray -- What ground have ye?


Enough, if not too much. -- Montalto's Estate (however it went in my Name) was
dipped in the Bank, for thirty Thousand Ducats. -- Fieschi, pays the Money: His
Servant, gave Montalto his Wound: And whether, your Sister, and Fieschi, were
absolute Strangers -- I leave it to your Ladyship.


I am afraid, you've gone too deep.


I'll not give a rush for that Man, that cannot pick any thing out of nothing
-- At least, bring it in, by an Innuendo. -- Men of Business (Madam) are not so
much to seek, as the World takes them.


And truly, I tremble, while I speak it -- I wish there were no design, of
taking off, a Husband, to make room, for a Gallant.


My Conscience, tells me, you've hit the Nail.


And shall I own that Sister? Virtue, forbid it!


According to my appointment, I am come -- Yet thought it, not altogether
unfit, that this Lady, who is most concerned, should hear the matter.


And pray Sir, how goes it with our Friend, Montalto? Is there no hopes?


Yes truly: and as far as I conjecture, the greatest danger of his Wound, lies
in the Chirurgeon's hard words -- All of them agree, it fortunately slanted, on
a Rib.


This worthy person informed me, it was his desire, the Examinations might be
taken here, which made me willing, to come my self.


And that (perhaps) too soon, for somebodies credit.


Whose ever it be, I can hear it with more grief, than trouble.


Peradventure your own, or some ones else; who knows.


I beseech you, Madam -- ( To Imperia) What mean ye?


How ill, this had become another?


If any modest Woman, might have resented, an Husband's injuries, I, ought not
to have sat down, with Roderigo's to me -- But when I considered, he was my
Husband, that Name soon covered all -- I prayed, no Gallant's Aid.


What's here! The Devil washing his Face! O Woman! What can thou not!


What virtuous Woman ever did?


Recollect your self -- I never doubted your Wit.


Add Patience, to my Innocence good Heaven!


No more I beseech ye -- And pray (Sir) how do ye find it?


I met a person the other night Incognito; whom (not giving me a good account of
himself) I committed: He's now without.


And being informed; that Bianca was found in her Clothes, at that late hour,
when this accident happened, I thought fit to examine her; and all I could get
from her, was, there were other-guise persons concerned, than Thieves -- I sent
her t'ye.


The same, she says to me: And more -- She's without too:


Let's have her in.


Within there! Bring in Bianca -- But were it not convenient that Portia
withdrew?


She can say nothing, shall shame me to hear.


Now Bianca -- you remember what yo've said. -- Who were those other-guise
Persons?


My Lady will be angry.


Speak boldly Woman -- Let Truth come out, though I perish.


Fieschi, and my Lady, had made an Assignation, and I was privy to it -- But it
seems my Master sitting up later than ordinary, and Fieschi making some noise,
my Master rushed upon him, and in the Scuffle, received that Wound, from him.


Fieschi! -- I'll cut him from my Blood.


My Sister! Her Virtue sure, knew better things!


And does, Imperia -- My Innocence, is above Scandal.


And no one with him, but himself?


Not that I saw, or heard.


Take her back again --

The other (perhaps) may tell you more -- I've kept them asunder, and neither
knows, of the others being apprehended.


It was discreetly managed -- Bring him in -- Fieschi! -- Villain! -- Whom
shall a Man put Faith in!


-- His Servant too! -- What mischief (Sirrah) have your Master, and you, been
contriving?

None, I yet hope -- However, 'come what will of me, I will declare the Truth
-- About three Nights since, Bianca and I, had appointed a Meeting, at her
Master's House, when stealing by his Apartment, it was my misfortune, to make
a stumble; he hears me; I fled; He pursued; I got into a Closet; He sees a
Glimpse of my Lanthorn, and fires through it; I got out, and glared him in the
Face; He fires a second Pistol, and closed with me; and having no other
possibility of escaping, I was forced, to that unfortunate Stab, which yet, I
put not so home, but that he wrenched my dagger from me.


This agrees word for word, with what Montalto told me -- I wish though, I could
have seen the Dagger.


It was my Master's, who having left it carelessly on his Table, and I,
considering there might be danger in the Streets, put it in my Pocket -- And
with that Dagger, made the Blow.


Where was your Master?


Had he been there, it is not to be thought, I'd take another guilt upon my
self.


This Cloud will break by degrees, and I am glad, we're got so far into it --
Take off your Prisoner.


Or rather, confront him with Bianca.


Well thought of -- bring her in again -- Fieschi, -- And Pansa says 'twas
himself only, and that by appointment between you two.


By this token, that she, hearing the noise, put me into the Closet, and bid me
bolt it on the inside.


If you have a mind to hang thy self do -- Yes -- he was there -- And I believe
with a design of robbing the House.


Prithee speak Truth -- Whoever was there, Did your Lady, know any thing of
it?


Good (Madam) forgive me -- You're innocent.


Take them away, and keep them severally.


And now Sister judge favourably of me:
Poor me, whom, nothing, but a quiet Conscience,
Had kept from sinking -- This, is the true joy;
And this, we give our selves; This makes us bear,
A mind, above our Sex: Fortune may clear,
The Visage, only this, can fill the Soul.

Your Servant Sir, and occasion offers, I'll wait on ye.


And now, when all's done, Fieschi, for my Money -- He's scarce half rid of a
Surfeit, and yet vent'ring, on the same dish again -- He has a passion for her,
that's certain, or otherwise, A Love-fit at this time, were inexcusable -- Well
-- his Present is sent in, and that, so noble, I am afraid, he does not intend,
to come often.


What's all that Luggage in the other Room?


A Damask Bed, with massy Fringe, and every thing suitable! besides, a rich
Cupboard of Plate! And no other name for it, but Luggage? -- I wish your
Ladyship had such another to Morrow, we'd find it House-room.


I must confess it noble -- But whence came it?


No Terrachino, I dare warrant ye -- It is the humble Present of the Outlandish
Prince, new come to Town; Il Signior Principi Polacco -- Your Ladyship,
understands the rest -- But did ye know, how I enhanced the affair -- Husband
-- Relations -- Reputation -- Honour -- And to all this, your utter averseness
-- You'd say, I was no Fool


Is he handsome.


What matters that? his Present, is -- However, to satisfy ye -- He's as
handsome a Man, as the best of us need wish, to lie Board, and Board by -- for
my part, I could sink by his side.


When will he be here?


At Midnight -- And you'll be asleep.


But, to a Man I never saw? How shall I look next Morning?


Just as you did before -- Or you may, if you think fit, cry out, your Woman
has betrayed ye -- No body will hear ye. -- though yet, if ye should, he
understands no Italian.


Thou shall it supply my place -- All Petticoats, are Sisters in the dark.


I would it were not, to wrong your Ladyship -- come (Madam) no more Words: Do
you but leave him one side of your Bed, he'll find, the rest, himself.


Well -- we'll further consider it, within.


IT is the same -- Of a better Edition though -- And truly (to give the Devil his
due) He has shown himself, much a Gentleman; which is more, than I'll say of
every Man -- I have already dislodged him, from two great Ladies; and if it
holds, but one Year, how shall I dispose of this good Fortune? -- My Boy -- An
arrant Crack-rope; Fathers own Son -- I'll breed him, to my own new Trade; and
send him abroad, to take his Degree -- My Daughter -- Let me see -- she shall
Marry -- some Count, or other. --

But hold -- who knows, but here may be another Customer -- and if so, I must
stand off, to raise the Price.

Our Duke (Sir) is so well assured, of your more than ordinary faculty, at
Exorcism, that (the Lady Julia) a Niece of ours, being at this time, a
Demoniack, he sent me, to pray your help, and further, assure you, of as large
a Reward, as your self could wish, or the obliging a Prince may merit.


I shall be proud, Signior, if my poor Talent, might contribute any thing, to
his Serenities, or your Service -- How far have you proceeded?


Tried all, that Religion, or Physic could propose.


Have ye erected a Scheme, to know, under what direction, the Lady lies; and
what kind of Devil it is, that possesses her?


I think, not.


The reason I ask ye, is, Because there are diversities of Devils -- some, so
easy, gentle, quiet, ye may do what ye will with 'em -- Others again, so
sullen, refractary, cross-grain'd, that neither Threats, Enchantments, nor
Devotion it self, will do any good on 'em.


I leave it wholly to ye.


Then the first thing I'll do, shall be to erect one; both, as to the Horary
Question, and the matter it self; And when I've done that, I'll make a step to
the Lady (as Incognito) and give ye, my Judgment of it.


And, credit me, it shall be gratefully acknowledged.


So so; here's more Money coming -- A Count, did I say. -- We'll better
consider it.


-- Thy Fist my Mephestophilus! And what? Thou'st left the Lady Julia asleep,
to see a Friend?

Thy self, thou mean -- But how came thou to know it?


You see, how I improve, by your Acquaintance -- 'twas kindly done -- And now,
your Parole -- What sort of People have ye, in the other World?


What not?


Have ye any Divines among ye?


Why truly -- we were once afraid of 'em; And were ever and anon, making Laws
against'em: 'till at last finding, we were more afraid, than hurt; we left them
at their Liberty, to come, or go -- But for the School-men, we ever shackle
them, for fear they make as much disturbance there, as they have already done,
here.


Any Physicians?


And they too (for several Years together) had sent us so many on their Errand,
that we grew jealous of them, as that, they designed a Party: 'till coming to a
better understanding, we have ever since, not denied 'em House-room, for past
Services.


Any Lawyers?


What should they, do there? The poor Devils, have no Money, and the Rich, will
part with none -- And yet we want not their, Company too -- But (alas!) Let
'em get what Estate soever here, they bring not a Groat with 'em, as not
doubting, but to raise another, among us: But there, the case is altered.


Have ye any Poets?


Of Pretenders, not the least Number: And even there too, some few, who
(regarding Glory, more than Profit) in studying, to divert others, slipped their
Opportunities, and lost themselves.


Have you any Philosophers?


What -- They sell Hawks-Bells, and Rattles?


The same.


We are, with them (like Rome of old, with their Figure-flingers) ever
banishing 'em, but never rid of 'em -- However, we reckon them, among the
Vutuosi.


What are those Virtuosi?


They study Nature -- As why a Fly, should have six Legs; and a Dromedary but
four -- Why a Cat, when she's pleased, holds her Tail an end; And a Dog wags
his -- Why Crabs go backward; and the like.


And very useful Enquiries -- What Painters have ye?


The Truth is, we had once banished 'em, for painting us, more ugly than we are;
'till Michael Angelo's Day of Judgment, complemented us, with a Master of the
Ceremonies; and Parmasano, and Carrachi, with their Improvements upon Aretine:
Pieces (I assure ye) of as much Service to us, as their others of Devotion, had
like to have done us mischief.


But what becomes of Tyrants, and others, those common Pests of Mankind? A sort
of Men, we read of, in old Story, though I think the Race, be wholly run out
now.


'Twould make ye laugh, to see 'em -- One, cobbling of old Shoes; another,
heeling of Stockings; a third, rubbing the Sweat in Hot-houses.


Have ye, the Pox, there too?


Millions, of Millions: For they that bring it not with them, are sure to get
it, on their first Landing.


Well, you're a merry Devil; and I must say, an honest Devil. -- But hark ye
-- I must beat up your Quarters once more.


What? never have done?


You know I delivered ye from the Talons of the Law, and then, you told me,
what a grateful, Gentleman Devil, you'd prove. -- Prithee oblige me, this once,
in quitting the Lady Julia, And I release thee of all demands whatever.


And I have paid ye sufficiently.


But I'm concerned in this, beyond a Retreat -- Prithee, this once or I must
say too, thou art not, that grateful Devil I expected.


How Sirrah! Tax me with Ingratitude! -- Have ye forgot, 'twas I that made your
Fortune? I that gave ye the occasion, of that Aphorismatical Cane? And reformed
your greasy Shamois, into Silks, and Satins? -- And are ye now grown
Insolent? I'll make ye know, I can take back, as well as give: or otherwise,
call me the most pitiful, poor-Spirited Rascal of a Devil --


Nay, let's not part in Anger: A word, with ye.


As many words as you please; but no more stark Love, and Kindness.


Now Sirrah too -- And since, nothing else will do it, I'll even return ye to
your Wife. -- They struggle, Rod. sinks under him, and leaves a dead Body.


Now shall I be hanged for killing this Rascal -- There's no more to be done,
but cut of his Head, and bury him; and then (perhaps) wanting a Retreat, he may
quit the Lady, of himself -- I'll run for a Hatchet, and do it.

Ho -- Ho -- Ho --


Whither Belphegor! Hold!


My old Colleague, and Friend, Beelzebub!


Which, I, abjure -- we've heard of ye; Thou poor,
Thou pitiful, Hen-hearted, sneaking Devil!
Thou, General! A Scandal to the name:
Where's all that Fable of the Giants War,
Thou hast so often boasted, as thy Story?

And 'tis my Glory yet.


In Chimney-Corners:
Thou, ever threw Ossa, on Pelion!
Away, thou changeling! -- No -- thy best Pretence,
Is the degenerate Off-spring, of their Gore;
Their, Earth-born Gore: And all thy former Soul,
Is dwindled, to a Gloe-worm -- Thou, a Devil!
A very Shame, t'us all.

The Inclination,
Follows the temper of the Body; And I,
Was out, in mine.

Thou might have chosen better:
How many brave Bandits, were there hanged, yearly,
That durst have trod, the utmost Brink of Space;
Have fought the Devil, on a Precipice;
Braved Fate; And stood, a second, and third Thunder.
And thou, to take, such a tame, snivelling Slave!

Men have no Windows in their Breast; and what
Could I, judge of a Carcase? -- He was handsome,
And so, a step, to get a Wife; which you well know,
Was the first thing, I was obliged to do.

And thou hast, got one, with a Vengeance!

Mistaken Fool! As if Women knew not, what a Smock-face meant? -- They take
him, for one of themselves; only, that Nature, mistook him in the Coineage --
if ever they, loved any thing, it was a rough-hewn Fellow, that knew, what was
fit for 'em, and let 'em have it -- But never, their Wills -- If they once get
that Bit between their Teeth, they run away with ye.


I was to become, in all things, as a Man; And did not more than what other Men
did -- and, if your, Grand Cabal, knew 'em so well, why was I sent hither?


As an honourable Spy -- Thou had the World before thee; Every Lap, was thy
Chapel of Ease; nor were thou bound, to Residence.


And yet, to marry, One?


As, those other Men; for fashion-sake -- You may easily believe, we designed
no Breed -- But where lay the obligation of loving her, more than other Men,
their Wives? -- But to dote on her! 'tis thy Eternal Blot.


There had been no quiet without it.


Unthinking Sot! Could there be any, with it? -- If so, what makes thee,
shifting thus? -- What's become of your Million of Ducats?


My Wife has either spent, or cheated me of 'em.


Beast of a Devil! -- Must we, torment the Bowels of the Earth, Or from our
Treasure of the Ocean, the spoils of Wracks and Tempests, furnish thee? Thy
Folly, or thy Wife's, never to be satisfied -- I know not what?


Ye left me to my self; and I, was guided by others -- What Counsel ever drew
his own Conveyance?


But thou, contrary, to all Rules of Practice, hast given thy self, Physic.


As his Penance then, even take the Doctor.


Stand off, -- thou less than Man, and unworthy, the name, of Devil. -- I hate
a Trimming* Devil -- keep off.


You, are no competent Judge; you, were never Married, your self -- I submit
all to Lucifer.


And when your time's expired, you shall be heard.


But if either my Wife, or Creditors catch me in the mean time, I must, and
will return, at all adventures.


That, at your Peril -- And remember, I tell it ye.


Now Sirrah, remember for what, you brought this Hatchet -- But I'm a Gentleman
-- Live -- And trouble me no more.


A fair Escape -- But what shall I say to Grimaldi though -- Why -- he's a
noble Person, and if I tell him the Truth, he may (perhaps) be satisfied; at
least, for a while -- And if I don't out-wit my Devil, at last, I give him
leave to brain me.


'TIS the most I can gather -- Pansa, stands firm, to his first Examination;
and Bianca, more and more, clears her Lady.


Nor can any thing please me better, but that, my Friend's getting up again.


Would I could say as much, of Roderigo.


For why Man?


He's broke; and run away.


What? he that darkened all our Stars! -- Impossible!


Too true. --


Yet, how you magnified him!


His great dealings, and punctual Payments, might have cheated any Man, as well
as me.


Was the Sum considerable?


Two hundred thousand Ducats at least.


'Tis a wonder, no more follow him: for it is often with Merchants, as
Nine-Pins; Hit but your first, and second right, and 'tis odds but two Parts in
three, tumble.


That (I'm afraid) shall I, for one -- He owes me, ten thousand Ducats; And
when I went to his Lady this Morning, she told me, he had left her, a Beggar.


And yet you know, he was Wise, Prudent, Virtuous, -- and once, your Glory, he
called ye Friend -- and shall a little Dirt part ye? -- Come -- your Credit,
will set him up again.


If it would to the Gallows, l'd venture as much more.


Your Friend -- you would not sure?


My Friend -- A very Rogue: A mere cheating, beggarly, bankrupt Rascal.


Roderigo (Sir) attempting to have got home last night, in a disguise, was met
by the Bailiffs, who secured him; and coming to him this Morning, found him
dead.


Nay then, farewell my ten thousand Ducats, if yet, that were all.


And there were found in his Pocket, some Papers purporting a design, of
betraying this City, wherein you seem concerned; upon which, the Senate have
issued Warrants against you, and seized your House, and Goods, for Moneys (as
'tis said) due to the Bank.


Roderigo! my Papers! the Bank! -- What shall I do?


Consult your Virtue -- A Virtuous Man, is ever present to himself; and proof,
against the worst, of Fortune.


Virtue! -- Cold comfort.


I was at your House, to have adjusted, some Accounts between us, and they
directed me hither.


Roderigo! -- I'm o'er-joyed -- They've belied my Friend -- We'll never part.


Content.


Defend me Heaven! -- What's this?


A Gentleman (Sir) they call him, the Devil-Doctor desires to speak with you.


I would he had come sooner -- Bring him in. --


I was with the Lady according to my promise, but (like a Dog by a Gloyer) the
Devil smelt me out from all the Company -- Ecce signum.


I'm sorry for it -- But the Duke, will send ye, a healing Plaster.


And I, more sorry, that the Lady, lies under such an ill direction. -- Strange
Configurations -- The Planets in their Detriment, Retrograde, and Malevolent;
nor do I remember, to have seen, a worse Aspect of Heaven -- Saturn, and
Jupiter, Sir. --


No Canting I beseech ye -- I believe it.


And for the Spirit, that possesses her -- There has not such an illcontriv'd,
capricious, hectoring Devil, broke-loose, these three last Centuries; I believe
the Fathers are sensible of it.


The truth is, they have had a hard tug with him.


He is perversus Haereticus, -- Bell, Book, and Candle! He danced a Jig to it
-- And for Holy Water! he made no more of it, than I'd have done, of a Bottle
of Montefiasco -- upon the whole matter; I judge him some Devil of Quality; and
then, I have no Power over him: All mine, are poor Devils.


This will not do -- If you please to free her, it will be well accepted, and
better rewarded -- If not, be sure, the Duke will have ye in the Inquisition,
and make ye set forth, by what new way, unkown to the Church, you have
delivered the two former. -- Or (who knows) Inquire de Vita, moribus, and hang
your self.


Will ye then hear me, without canting, and I'll discover all?


Hear ye, I will; but promise, nothing.


I ask no more -- And who do ye think this Devil is? even Roderigo, our late,
great Merchant.


Convince me of that, and thou say somewhat.


The Story is too large, to tell you now; but thus, in short -- 't as by
compact between us for a prior Service, of which I'll give ye an account anon
-- and on that score, and no other, was it, that I freed those Ladies of him.


Then thou may the better do this.


I once, thought it: But since you spake to me, we met; and I proposed to him,
the quitting the Lady Julia, as the last kindness I'd demand of him; and he not
only refused me, but professed himself my mortal Enemy: And if this,


I am inclined to believe thee -- for 'twas not a Minute before you came, but
he was here, and gave me that Evidence of what you say, I'll never desire, to
see it again. -- But what shall we do with the Duke?


Do not despair -- I've yet a trick, shall do the Business -- Get me a large
Stage, with a full throng of People: Fifes, Flutes, Cornets, Trumpets,
Sackbuts, Drums, Kettle-drums, Hautboys, and Bagpipes; and let the Lady Julia,
be brought on the Stage well attended; and when I throw up my Hat, let 'em all
strike up together, and when I cry Advance, let a Lady in a Veil, whom I'll
appoint for that purpose, enter with another shout: And this, with some other
Ingredients that I have, will (I doubt not) send him packing.


Appoint your time, and place, all shall be ready.


I leave that, to your pleasure.


What think you, of t'Morrow, and the Duke's great hall for th'place


None better, and I'll attend ye there.


IT takes, as right as wish -- Quartilla, was just to her hour; and in the
dark, I shuffled my Signior Principi's, Hand, into hers, instead of mine; and
there's no doubt, but she has put them together -- He's a brawny Fellow, and
like enough, to please her -- But for fear the Jade, should be fond of him,
next Morning, he has his Lesson, not to answer her any thing, but broken
Gibberish -- The Jews sent in the Bed, and Plate on Roderigo's account, as new
furniture for his House, and (as I am told) are resolved to seize it -- And if
my Signior Principi has not deceived me, we shall have Rabble enough, about the
House, presently) -- I'll take a turn or two, to see the issue.


I say 'twas your Folly Brother, to send it, hand over Head.


We have had greater dealings with him, and his payment, was ever good.


But Men, may not be the same, at all times -- It was considerable, and you
should have inquired.


You, knew his Broker: And I, saw the Goods delivered.


But he was broke before.


How could I, know that? Men don't proclaim it.


Had we been bitten by a Snap, 'twere somewhat -- But by a prodigal Fool! The
Town, will laugh at us.


Let's not make it worse, by talking -- Come Gentlemen, stand close; and as the
door opens, enter.


'Morrow Gentlemen; you're early Men.


Business, must not be neglected.


And if I mistake not, your Attendants, speak where it lies.


It is too late, to conceal it now -- we're miserably cheated.


What? beaten at your own Weapon! -- Roderigo sure, is a Man of Estate, and
Credit.


Time was, he might have commanded all we have, -- But now -- the Bird is
flown.


Gone, as a Man may say, in fumo!


He left enough behind, unless his Wife has sold it.


There's the Danger -- Knock harder.


I have no small concern with him, my self, which brought me hither too; though
not so well provided -- But


When we have served our selves, we're yours.


What rude Hand profaned this Sanctuary?


And who are you?


I'm the righter of Wrongs, and undoer of Injuries -- Heart of Steel, and Arms
of Brass.


And what Figure do you make in this House?


Only engaged, in Roderigo's absence -- And (like the Dragon of old) I watch
the golden Fruit, 'till his return -- Still, true to Honour, and will fight her
Battles.


As thus, with that Baboons Snout.


Voto! -- Had it been under the Ear, y'ad measured your length.


Sirrah! Begone -- And take to your old Trade of knitting Gaps, making
Hair-buttons, Tooth-picks, and false Dice, which you learnt, of your Comerogues
of the Galleys.


Why Villains! Rogues! Jews! Is there no consideration of a Ladies Honour?


Keep her Honour to her self, and give us, our Goods.


And thou Polacco! -- Oh me!


I hope, your Lady had a good Night of it.


Thou Devil Incarnate!


Picaro! Picaro! make haste Picaro! Execution, stays for ye.


What was that? Picaro!


I'm but buttoning my Coat, and will be with ye, instantly.


Come down! come down! There will be no Sport, 'till you come.


Ah Rogue! art thou there! -- Have we refused Velasco, Tedesco, di Parphar, di
Laco! --


The Devil and all!


And now, to be shamm'd, by the Common-Hangman!


Picaro! Picaro! Picaro! Picaro!


Is this your Principi Polacco! -- Poveraccia! Poveraccia, peccatrice me! -- I
could eat thee.


Thou a Gentleman! -- You said you'd make a Whore of me, too; but, why don't
you Sirrah? why don't ye?

The Fool, raves -- And so Picaro; I hope you liked your Bedfellow?


So well (Sir) I owe ye another Job; and that, for nothing -- She was such
Flesh and Blood!


And shall I, see Honour thus trampled on, and yet wear trusty Steel, on Thigh!
-- Let me, come at the Rogue -- I'll pink his Doublet, and make a Sieve, of's
Skin.


Rogues, Scoundrels, Tatterdemallions!


-- I say -- Rogues, Dogs in Doublets, -- Were ye more renowned, than Palmerin
of England; or valiant, than his Cousin, D'Oliva: More undaunted, than the
twelve Peers of France; or greater Bullies, than King Arthur's Round-Table Men:
More adventurous, than Valentine and Orson; or Invincible, than Don Bellamis of
Greece: Nay -- were the whole Mirror of Knighthood contracted in ye -- I'd
make ye know --

'Twas somewhat sharp, but just -- Her Treachery,
Deserved no better from me -- And, now no more,
But a long, long Farewell, to every thing
That looks like Woman; 'till, some worthy Action,
Compound, for my past Folly -- To repent,
Is the next step, to being Innocent.
Men are no Angels -- Somewhat, must be indulged
To Passion, Error, or Mistake: The best,
Are not without their Faults; and the fairest Life,
Has some leaves in it to be read without Favour.
Marone sure! -- 'tis he -- 'twas said, the Devil had carried him away, and now
(be-like) has thrown him back, as not worth keeping.


Where am I? -- Or whence, came I? -- O Signior! I have wonders to tell ye --
Roderigo is a Spirit -- A very Devil.


And make you, a good use, of your Escape from him.


I will, I will: And never more, oppress any Man, but having got clear of the
Senate, what I once, said in scorn, I'll now perform, in earnest -- I'll build
an Hospital.


To lodge those, your self first Beggared.


Give what I have to Charitable Uses.


That is to say -- you'll sleep upon it, and look out, for another Mortgage,
next Morning -- Charity (you know) begins at home.


Respite your Censure, 'till you hear my Story -- That I had hearkened to your
good, virtuous Uncle!


Whom, under my present Circumstances, I'll never see -- If ever Man lost his
reason in a Petticoat, 'twas I, the poor, unfortunate, mistaken Fieschi.


YOu're a Man of your word.


And pray believe, I made not those Scruples, out of any repugnancy, or want of
Will to serve ye, but, that in case my endeavours, answer not my desires, you
might judge, the more favourably of me -- Are all things ready?


They are; and if you, want nothing, I'll go for the Lady.


I only wait her -- But be sure, you follow the Directions I gave ye.


They shall be observed.


And now, assist me thou great Patron of Mankind, Impudence! -- I have some
ends of Latin my self, besides a Bushel of hard Words, I learnt from others, if
I can hit 'em right -- However (like them) I'll trowl it of boldly, and enough
of it: Nor shall that triflng Circumstance, of Sense, and Pertinence, be any
Rub in my way -- Had not I heard a Man quote the Books he never read; and cited
Authors, that never were? And had not it past? -- What should hinder it?


Are you, there? I'll conjure ye -- Unhand me Villains.


And you too, nor Man, nor Devil: Semibovem{que} virum, Semivirum{que} bovem --
[He whispers her] Belphegor; dear Belphegor; you know I once served ye, at a
dead lift -- Come -- be yet, civil, and depart -- if not -- this, is the last
time of asking.


I forbid the Banes; both Parties, are not agreed -- Have I, gravelled so many
Doctors, to turn out now, for a pitiful Vinerollo? -- Let me, come at him.


Then know, foul Fiend -- Conjuro, commando tibi, by St. Hugh's Bones, St
Luke's Face, and venire St. Gri. And by all the occult Qualities, of Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, I once more, command, and conjure ye, that ye make me
direct answer, touching your self, your Tatterdemallions, and Puggs, and
forthwith depart this Lady, with all your Signatures, Tricks, Trinkets, and
Trumperies, from the Crown of her Head, to the Sole of her Foot: Under the
pain, that I releage, and consine ye, to your dismal Lake, for a Thousand
Years, yet more, than were ever decreed ye.


The Rogue's pleasant; and I'll humour him.


Tell me I say, and conjure ye as before -- What are ye?


Shame faw him that speers, and kenns sa'wele.


Your Name I say.


Monsieur Devile: Don, or Signior Diavolo: Mine Here Tifle: Herenagh mac Deul;
or Sir Duncan, in the Devil's Name.


What's here? Philippus, Aureolus, Theophrastus, Paracelsus, Bombastus of
Hoenhayim? -- How many are there of ye?


Ten hundred thousand Tun.


Of what Order!


Like other Bodies-aggregate; of none, nor ever reducible under any.


At least, your Superior's Name.


I never owned any.


Tell me I say; and Jubeo! -- Is there Absoluta Potentia Asmodei, sive cujusvis
alii; or a vitium Corporis, as say the Learned -- What made ye first, possess
her?


Look on her, and answer your self: She's young, and handsome.


So was your Wife Sirrah: And yet -- Aside] How long have ye been there.


Much about the time, you cracked a Commandment, with your Taylor's Wife --
[Mat. starts.] Are ye concerned Gentlemen! Ha, hah!


Bring me the Flagellum Daemonum -- I'll taw ye.


Or rather, give your self, the first Discipline, and I'll help, to lay it on
-- Ha, hah, ha!


Once more, I say, turn out -- Or by the Phoberon Phoberotaton; Ton de
Apomeibomenos; And Heautontemorumenos -- Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis,
Chios, Argos, Athenae -- I'll --


What? my new Conjurer, what? Ho, ho!


I lead ye about the Country, like a Bear by the Nose; make ye turn Spits, like
a Dog in a Wheel: And if that won't do it* have ye Chained, like a Flea, in a
Box -- And therefore, dispatch; and let me know, what sign, you'll give of your
departure.


Thunder, Thunder, Thunder, as thus, Rascal.


I'll have ye bound over, for Bloodshed, and Battery.


I fear no Justice, under Heaven.


I'll bring ye into the Spiritual Court, and have ye Excommunicated.


I am no Member of your Church: Or if I were, have no Money, to pay Fees.


I'll have ye burnt in Effigy, with Brimstone, Galbanum, Aristolochia,
Hypericon, and Rue; in a more terrible Cap, and painted Coat, than the
Inquisition, yet ever thought of -- And if all this fail; I'll send ye back, to
your Wife.


You told me so, once before; but now (I hope) you'll stay, 'till you catch me
-- Yet, I don't like the Rogue.


Then I'll bring her to you.


What would this Peasant be at? -- I have more than once, viewed all the Pomp
of Heaven, nor am I ignorant, of what's most formidable in Hell: But what means
this? -- Prithee, Matheo, what is it?


Are ye come to your Prithee, Sirrah? -- Either march off civilly, or know;
that Will, or Nil, you shall -- Alas poor Roderigo; your Wife's in chase of ye,
and is just coming up stairs -- Advance Imperia! --


'Tis she, she'as found me out.


Fear nothing; the Work is done -- and now take care of the Lady.


I'll see it done: And having made the Duke laugh, it shall be my next
business, to see you gratified.


And if I get no more, 'tis no great matter -- I have lined my self, pretty
well, already: And now, all things considered, I think my self, happy enough,
that I have escaped Hanging, at last: And if in spite of my Stars, I set up
for a Doctor, who can help it.


I heard it from my Friend; and must confess,
Not without some surprise: I've here, and there,
Read of the Devil's Power, to condense
A Cloud; t'assume, and actuate a Body;
But never came near the Experiment, till now:
Where were ye, in that absence?

I remember
No more of that, than how, I was thrown back.

You would do well to make a Scrutiny
Into your self, and where you guess the Cause,
Unlearn that, first.

And if you chance to find,
You have oppressed the Poor; make restitution;
And by what's past, correct, what is to come.

I'd once, such thoughts: But, when I considered,
I only took, what Law, had given me,
I thought, there was no such great haste, or need.

The greater the Oppression, when Law,
Is made the Stale to it. -- This of Roderigo.
For ought you know, was given ye, as a Caution.

And had there been no Malice of his own,
I should have thought so: But, he owed me Money;
Ten thousand Ducats; And, of my Conscience,
Thought to have frightened me, to a Release;
And, if I've given him one, I'll plead, per dures.
However, this I'm resolved -- That, and other, the like Debts, I'll give 'em
all, to Pious Uses -- But for Restitution -- Alas, my Estate's but small, and I
cannot.


That is, you will not -- Nor (perhaps) repent,
The late intended Treachery to your Country:
A Virtuous Man (like Sceva in the Breach)
Combats an Army, singly, for her, safety;
Inseparably they stand, and fall together:
Cato, would not survive, his Countries Liberty;
Nor did that Liberty, out-live Cato.
Make me think better of ye -- yet, begin;
Delay, is just so much time lost.

My Doctor here, has given him a third remove.

And I hope, there will be no occasion, of Shooing him round.

He'll tell ye the Story within; and, not unworth your hearing --
In the mean, I cannot, too often congratulate, your recovery.

Nor I, acknowledge, your Friendship.
I'll tell ye News -- Good News (for there's nothing,
We must not share) -- Methinks, I am become
Another Man; And this small quiet, pleases,
Beyond the noise, of Crowds -- Now, I can see,
The great ones, heave like Moles, and at next turn,
Heave out themselves; Another (Mushrome like)
Spring in a Night, and cropped ere Noon; A third,
Snatch at a Booty, which, a fourth, strikes from him,
And unconcerned, my self.

True happiness,
Lies not in Greatness, but an honest Mind,
Not framed, of Accidents, nor subject to 'em.
A serene Breast; and such a life, as is not
Ashamed to live, nor yet afraid, to die.

And yet, how does the World, turmoil it self!
How do they play away their days! and trifle,
Their time in parts, 'till they have slipped the whole!
One business breeds another; Hope, desire;
And that, makes room for more: How they afflict
Themselves, and envy others! Restless in War,
And even in peace unquiet! Compass with Care,
What they possess, with more Anxiety!

To them that love it, be it -- I neither, like,
The Merchandise, nor price, -- What is't to him,
That can't dissemble? Him, that cannot flatter?
That's not ambitious, by Indignities,
To rise to Dignities, and lose himself?
Whereas Retirement, as it costs us nothing,
Is much the shorter cut, to Heaven it self.

Help, Help me, Sister! -- Can ye forgive me -- you can't, you can't -- Whither
shall I run -- He'll ha'me, he'll ha'me.


You never injured me, or if you had, I have (as I ought) forgot it.


Our House is more than haunted.


Sister -- Sister -- I've married the Devil -- See! where he stands!


Bless the poor miserable Woman, good Heaven!


His Eyes, as big as Pumpkins. [ She starts.] And a Mouth, like any Baker's
Oven -- Let me alone good Devil, and take my Lady -- she's younger Flesh.


See -- See -- The House cracks -- The Walls, are coming together -- That Beam,
was shot at me.


I'm your old Servant Quartilla -- good Devil.


There too -- The Ground opens -- I'll at him though -- Dost thou yet brave me --
Time was, thou fear'dst me more -- I'll give ye back, your Keys -- Dost thou
yet -- yet --


I see nothing, Sister -- pray walk in with me -- my Innocence, dares speak to
him.


There, there, the greater Devil, Fieschi!


Poor afflicted Woman -- Her hurt Imagination, conceives any thing -- Pray go
in with me; I'll bear ye Company.


No no, -- I'll out, at that Window.


Horror! -- Be Man, or Devil, I'll know what thou art.


Thy Virtue is beyond the Power of Hell -- Be safe -- And if you have not heard
my Story, there's one [ He points to Math.] can tell it ye -- And so, my
Embassy is at an end, per-force.


And your Creditors, may speak to ye, upon even terms.


No more of that -- On what account, I first assumed this Body, you [ To
Matheo.] know -- how I lived among ye, ye all know -- And why, I went off so
soon, my Wife, best knows -- In short, I have found Earth the greater Hell, and
being obliged to no more than my own Experience, must declare, that Men's Souls,
are in the right, and 'tis their Wives, that send them thither. -- And for my
self, promise ye, I'll never again repent me, at so dear a rate.


Stupendous! -- And the more I consider it, the more, I'm at a loss -- My
first surprise, is now, astonishment.


I'm of Opinion, his two Servants, that were taken up the other night, may be
the same, as their Master, and therefore I ordered Picaro, to bring them
hither, as if they were to be put upon the Rack: Perhaps, they'll tell ye more.


It can be no hurt; though, nothing yet appears against em.


I would, I could say as much of my unfortunate Nephew, that was; and whom,
Imperia's last words, unwillingly brought to my Memory -- Can ye, as I have,
and ever will, forget him.


And more than that -- I have forgiven him; do you the same -- He is not,
naturally, Vicious, and who knows, what his future actions may be -- whatever
were the Injury designed, it was to me -- My Portia is safe and I'm revenged
enough -- The dismal Object once again!


But stay -- suppose --


Are you, come again! -- Nay then advance Bailiffs!


Beware sirrah, how you fool, once too much -- Suppose I say (my Term, being
not a full third part expired) they'll not receive me below? -- Why -- I must
find somewhere, to put my Head -- For the Women, I bar 'em, Bye, and Main: Who
knows, but I may have better luck among the Men? -- I have (I must confess)
learned some Wit among ye; and according to your frank, open, wonted
Simplicity, I'll tell ye my design; cross-bite it, if you can.


That could I, sirrah, if I durst.


I'll buzz Fears, and Jealousies, among Citizens -- Factions, among Country
Gentlemen -- Grumblings, among Younger Brothers -- Heartburnings, among
Courtiers -- And Sedition, among the Common People. -- But, suppose again, my
Citizens Wife, work her Husband, into a good Trade? -- My Country-Gentleman, be
made a Justice of the Peace? -- My Younger Brother, become an Elder Brother? --
My Courtier, stumble on a good Office; or, be taken off, with a Feather in his
Cap? -- The common People, get another Opinion by the end? -- And at last
Necessity force every Man, to comply, with what he is? Then am I but where I
was. -- And (as I said before) in the greater Hell -- And therefore Gentlemen,
'till we meet again, Buconos Nochios.


It yet, amazes me.


Do not believe him, -- it is not the first time he has shown me, that trick.


I have brought them (Sir) according to your commands: But, if I may be
believed, in my own Trade; the first stretch, will pull 'em in pieces.


However, give 'em the Question -- What are ye?


The same our Master was -- And since (as I see) he has given us the slip; what
have I to do, but follow him?


The same will trusty Mingo. -- Tell us of Racks! As I, came whole among ye, be
assured, I'll not hazard, a Joint, to satisfy, a World-Ev'n take 'em all
together.


And mine to boot.


'Tis what I thought -- Those Bodies, were assumed -- See if you know 'em;
perhaps, they may have past your hand.


As likely, as not; Roderigo -- I remember him -- his name, was Scabbalucchio,
a Neapolitan Bandit; I made his Passport for the other World, about four Years
since -- But a more cowardly Rogue, I never saw -- He hung an Arse, more than a
Bear, going to a Stake; and was three quarters dead, ere he got half the
Ladder. -- But for the other two, I know no more of them, but that it was my
Work too; and for Plain-Work, I dare justify it.


Well, take them off, and throw 'em together, into some hole or other.


And let 'em lye, 'till I enquire after them.


And beware you, how ye venture another trip, to Terra damnata.


But the Mob (I'm told) are got into my House, and rifling, what the Bank has
left.


'Tis natural to 'em, when they cannot cudgel the Ass, to vent their rage
against the Pack-Saddle -- Go, make your Peace with the Senate, and for the
rest, time may obliterate your Oppressions, and the next Age forget, their
Fathers were undone by ye.


Poor comfortless Woman; she's fallen asleep at last.


I think 'twould do well, to send her, and all the Women, to the Convertiti.


And for Pansa, I'll secure him, the Galleys. -- And now Sir, give me leave to
tell ye in private, what yet, I have in charge from the Senate. -- Our Duke,
having absolved his two Years Government, the Senate, is at last become so
sensible of your Merit, that they have elected you, Duke, in his room: -- A
more solemn Message, will suddenly attend ye.


Tempt not your Friend, with a fair gilded Pill.
All bitterness within: I am content,
And what can Providence add more.
Caesar himself, The Master of so many,
Is yet, the Servant of more.

And why should my Montalto seek elsewhere,
What he may give himself? -- If ever Ambition
Were justifiable, 'tis the Ambition,
Of being rather good, than great.

Let Snakes, and Worms (the Emblems of Self-Love)
Circle themselves, into themselves; while Nature
Minds more, the Preservation of the whole,
Than any single Birth -- Your Country calls,
And you must once more, serve her.

Why should I waste my small remain of Life,
In blind pursuit, of what, can only serve me,
To furnish out, an Epitaph? Yet must,
Subject me, to the World, and lash of Fortune.

Fortune. Who'd trust her, that has ever heard,
A Triumph, turned into a Sacrifice?
Or a swollen Favourite, whom the same day,
Saw worshipped, by the Senate, and ere night,
Torn piece-meal, by the People.

No Portia,
We'll find some nobler Object; one, on which
She has no Empire.

There, spoke Montalto!
And let the World, from his Example, learn.
Crimes may be fortunate, while Virtue creeps;
And (like a Flower, oppressed with Morning Dew)
Droops its neglected Head; but it will, rise;
Rise, under the dead weight; when t'others shall
(Like mighty Ruins) break themselves, on what they fall.

ALL is not done: There's yet, a word or two,
For the Author; And (Fair Ladies) first to you:
You, who're the making, or the marring Powers,
(For most Men's Watches ever went by yours)
From you, he hopes he need not fear a frown,
For what is Portia's Virtue, but your own?
Your own transcribed: and what (if ye must know
The truth) he only copied off from you.
But for my self: For once, even let me pass;
And though the face may not please ye, spareth' Glass;
Ye can't but say, I made the Devil an Ass:
Contraries, by their contraries appear;
Were you all 'like, where were the Good, or Fair?
There were no Fund for Wit, were all Men Wise,
And Fools, would want their Representatives.
Faith (Ladies) take it favourably; and then,
He thinks he's more than half-secure of the Men:
For you, that have good Wives, can't disapprove
That in another, which in them, ye love:
And you, that have got bad ones, cannot call
The Copy ill, that hits the Original:
What, though at home, ye dare scarce tread, for fear;
You're out of hearing now, and may laugh, here:
And you, that never had any of your own,
May view the Ground, before the Match be run.
Sure, some of ye will be pleased: And if so,
Give me your hands upon it: And seal it you
(Fair Ladies) with a Smile, 'twill clear the Air,
Make it a starry Evening, and all, fair.

