Custom prevails, and somewhat must be said,
To tie your Hands, and save the Author's head;
'Tis a new Play you'll cry -- What then? -- 'Twere too
Too much to find you meat, and stomachs too:
But since it must -- Expect no Bill of fare,
No -- I shall only tell ye, What's not here:
We've no Sententious Sir -- No grave Sir Poll;
No little Pugge, nor Devil -- Bless us All!
No tedious Sieges to the Musick-room;
Nor frisks abroad -- No -- Our Scene's all at home:
But if you ask me, How? -- 'Troth, I've forgot;
And now I think on it; -- It may spoil the Plot,
To give it you before hand -- What e're it be,
Have but a little Patience, and you'll see.

SAD News my Masters; And too true, I fear,
For us -- Scruple's a silenced Minister;
Would ye the Cause? -- The Brethren snivle, and say,
'Tis scandalous that any Cheat, but they:
Well -- To be short; He has been before the Triers,
And (by good Fortune) is got out of the Briars;
Where, if he lost a Limb to save the rest,
No hurt -- Here's yet enough, to know the Beast:
Nor let the sisters pule -- (I ll tell y' a thing)
He may be libb'd, and yet have left, a string.

Ho! Major! -- Quibus Hector, c.


Why faith the old Trade still; Here, and there, and every where: -- But how
now Captain! -- Latin! Latin! -- Send us fair weather; -- From small Beer,
and ends of Latin; -- Deliver me.


Troth Iriss with as little of't this morning, as the rest of my Neighbours:
And yet once to day, 'twas a measuring cast, whither I had English enough left
me, to carry me to bed.


For why my man of Memphis? -- New adventures?


Small Game: -- However, 'tis better than idleness. -- A man would pick straws,
rather than not keep his hand in ur: -- Anything good Major in an honest way.


You're in the right Boy: -- But hark you -- Did'he bite?


Yes: -- And I've struck him too.


A Squire? -- Another Squire?


He may be one in time: -- But for the present, he is only a small Bachelor of
the Law, new come to Town, to learn breeding.


I'll say this -- And a fig for thee -- He has as hopeful a Tutor, as a man
need have raked Hell for.


Mean you me Sir, or Runter the Civilian to whose care, his father by his last
will committed him?


Never a Barrel better Herring -- Runter! -- Hah! Hah!


Why, he thinks himself a learned Man; And 'tis some sign that others are of
the same opinion -- I can assure you, he mist the Chancellorship of Dunstable,
as narrowly, as ever any man did, that went without it.


Nay -- nay -- nay -- The Gentleman will be well bred, there's no doubt of 't:
-- But what's the business?


Compositions Major -- Compositions -- A small Collation to save the effusion
of Christian blood: -- Ah that thou had seen him, while the Prudential, and
my Second were discoursing the business -- He looked so like dead a Horse, he
would neither eat, nor drink, before he knew, whither he should live, or dye:
-- But, as soon as the sum was agreed, and we had shaken hands upon it --. Whip
says Jethro! -- He was got drunk, ere I could wet my Whistle.


But are the Pence numbered? -- Do they cry Chink in thy Pocket? -- How many
yellow Boys


Why faith Major, none; -- But we are to take up a 100 l. together, which will
be all one.


But who must lay it down Captain? who must lay it down?


I have a small Broker, that for 40, or 50 l. has undertaken to procure it.


That may do well -- But hark you -- Where does your Horse stand? -- I hear of
a Purchase, and I must out to Night.


No more good Major --. No more of that doleful Tune; -- The very remembrance
of 't puts me into a cold sweat.


'Twas a pretty Nag -- Thou hast not sold him?


Would 'twere no worse.


He is not stolen? -- No Rogues among our selves I hope?


Neither.


Or is he dead?


In Law, I think he be: -- I was out the other Night upon the Randan, and who
should I meet with but our old Gang, some of St. Nicholas's Clerks; Pad was the
word; The Booty set by the Chamberlaine; We took it, and shared it; But coming
home, were all snap't by a Hue, and Cry, for another business, wherein I was
not concerned; which Mr. Constable perceiving, and imaging me as very a Rogue
as the rest, and that I would be glad to escape upon any terms; He takes me
aside, and tells me, That though I was not in this, yet there were others,
wherein I had been; And therefore (because I looked like a civil Gentleman,
merely drawn in by ill Company) if I would give him my Horse, he would let me
escape: -- You may easily believe, he did not speak to a deaf Man, or one that
had no mind to understand him -- I closed with him, got me to my Company, made
them dead drunk, and when they were fast asleep, fairly marched off.


That is to say -- Ran away.


And a good shift too: -- You are put to none of these hazards Major -- You lie
as safe in the Constable's house, as a Thief in a Mill; -- Or (to use a more
familiar expression) some of our friends in Newgate.


Yes -- I could have better accommodations abroad, but he is my loving friend.


His Wife you mean.


Why -- She's a good Girl -- And now you talk of these Trumperies, What's
become of your small Cockatrice, the Astrologer Mopus his Wife?


I had not seen her since my last mischance; I must even to her for new
riggings; -- I hope her Husband has had a good Term of't; I'd live like a
Prince, if I could perform the tenth part of what his Bills promise: -- But see
Major! Pinnace sailing by -- Ah how she booms! -- Prithee hail her Man: Would
I'd the furling of her Main Sail.


Landlord! Well met -- How now Landlady -- This is better than wish; -- I must
give you a Barrel of Oysters, and a Bottle or two of Wine, ere we part, Honest
Landlord!


O -- good Major -- Another time; we are going to exercise now.


But dear Landlord -- Captain, Advance, and know this Gentleman my friend, and
Landlord; -- He is the honestest fellow, and the best natured thing --


Thank you good Major -- I have always your good word.


I indeed Husband that you have; and more behind your back, than ever I told
you of.


Worthy Sir, your servants humble servant.


Alas good Captain -- Indeed and truly -- sweet Sir -- The Major and I are old
friends.


And may you long continue so.


I thank you Sir: -- Come my Joy, shall's walk? I should be loath to have Mr.
Alderman there before us.


I my Dear -- I stay for thee.


But hark you Hussy: --

Where shall you and I exercise? -- Can't you drop him, or give him the slip,
for an hour or two?


Oh -- No -- No -- We are to be at Repetition at Mr. Alderman's -- 'Tis Friday
Night -- But I shall see you anon: Farewell good Major -- Your servant Sir.


Your servant Lady.


Captain -- Prithee let's meet to morrow in the Afternoon, at Mother Formalls
the Midwife's; and bring your small Harlotry with you, -- we'll be merry.


A match -- A match --


You are so Wise: -- I have observed, This World
Dwells most abroad, seldom, or never at home;
Most men can counsel others, few, themselves.

Hah! Sentences! -- There's somewhat troubles you;
What is't? -- And can you call me friend, and yet
Not let me bear my part? Friends should be one;
Breath, Hope, Fear, Will, and Nill the same, in common.

Why -- What were you the better if you knew?
You cannot give me ease. --

However try;
A handsome Fellow! And a fair Estate!
And wit at will! -- Thou may command the Town;
Leave off this fooling: --

I'm beholding to you;
Can you with all your wisdom tell me now
Where this shoe wrings me?

No: --

Then pray believe
I know; and if you are my friend, forbear
A further scrutiny: --

My life, in Love!
Not past that Boys disease? That troublesome itch?
Come -- We'll be Jovial, and divert the humour.

Suppose I were? -- Is not the World the same?
Love is the Bond of Nature, and without it,
The Universe, were but a Besom unbound,
Sand, without Lime: --

I need no further Symptoms
To make the Crisis; -- Hah! -- And you believe,
This dainty Phylosophical Poultis,
Will work the Cure? -- If I have any skill,
There were a better Remedy: --

For shame
Thou Infidel to all that's good, or lovely;
May thou dye in thy Heresy, and never know
What a good Woman means; -- unless perhaps,
For thy conversion: --

This was intended
For a small Curse: -- But I must thank my friend;
And if he were not turned Bigott, I think,
Might satisfy him: You're in love forsooth!
All in good time -- But have you yet considered
What 'tis? How much more misery beyond it,
Then on this side of 't? -- you may fancy Castles,
And forty I know not what's, But they're of Snow,
Come one good shower, and farewell my sine Guegaw*

You're a strange Fellow: -- What dost think of those
Have gone before us, and commend it too?

One Woodcock makes no Winter: -- But I pray,
What are the persons? Are they not concerned?
These married Men, are like Boys in the water,
Ask them how 't goes, Oh! wondrous hot they cry,
When yet their Teeth chatter for very cold;
If you must love, love on; But go no further;
Women enjoyed, like Rivers in the Sea,
Lose both their Taste, and Name; suppose them Junoes
In the pursuit, they 're Clouds in the enjoyment.

Thou 'rt like the Fox, that having lost his Tail,
Would fain persuade the rest to make 't a fashion:
Prithee give over: --

Troth I've scarce begun;
Suppose her handsome; She's a Honey-pot
In the Sun; If otherwise; you'll ne'er endure her;
If honest; Insolent, though ne'er so ugly;
She thinks, you are beholding to her for 't;
And yet, who knows how long she may be so:
Is she the Map of Modesty? perhaps
'Tis but your own Opinion; Love is blind;
There's many pass for such, whose Husbands yet,
Could, if they durst, tell you another Tale.
Is she a Housewife? Can she make a Band?
Order a Dairy? Cure a broken Shin?
Examine your Accounts, and at Years end,
Pray tell me what you've saved: -- Is she high born?
Twenty to one, She's proud, and quickly scorns you:
What are you better for those doughty Acts
My Lord, Her great great Grandfather performed,
The Lord knows where? Or t'ave her Portion paid you
In Genealogies, Gilt Spurs, and Cantons.

Come -- I can hold no longer -- Have you done?

With your good patience, a word -- Consider,
'Tis like a Battle, to be fought but once;
And therefore, if it must be so, Be sure
She be your Equal, and, if possible, Virtuous;
At least, not tainted with her Mothers Vices:
And now, if after this, thou dare be wiving,
The art a bold Fellow, and that's all I'll say;
Heaven keep thee yet within the power of Heleboure.

Prithee be n't so severe: -- Thou art my friend,
And I'll deal plainly with thee -- That Estate
Which you believe so fair (And were 't not for
My father's Debts, and some small slips of mine,
Might have looked somewhat like it) is at present,
At that low Ebb, That if I don't look to it,
In time, 'twill be quite past Recovery:
Come -- The Red Petticoat must piece up all:

'T 'as a half-face of Reason: -- As you say,
Desperate Causes, must have desperate Cures:
But what is he, has got this hank upon 't?

Did you never hear of Alderman Whitebroth?

I, there's a Jew indeed -- I'll tell thee what,
He has a Daughter, Thou shalt have her too,
Though it be but to be revenged of him.

There spake my friend: -- O -- but her father: --

What?

-- Will never give consent: --

To choose; -- She'll make
The better Wife, to justify her folly.

Prithee be serious: --

Good faith I am;
And if thou hast her not, one way, or other,
I'll be thy Bondsman: -- We'll about it straight.

SAturne, and Jupiter, come to a Trine in Taurus, and Capricorne -- Huh -- We
shall have strangers come to Town, and their Wives never miss them in the
Country: -- Next Month they all meet in the house of Mercury, he being Lord
thereof, and Significator of Speech; It may intend, Advocates, Criers of
Courts, Splitters of Causes, Oysters Wives, and Broom Men: -- Hold -- Saturne
-- (nothing but this malevolent Planet) in the sign Virgo, in conjunction with
Venus, in her detriment: -- Beware Women, of green Gowns; Great men, of Stone,
and Colic, and Costermongers, of rotten Pippins: -- Again -- Pars torturae,
coupled with the Catabibason, That is to say, The Dragons Tail: -- Huh -- Huh
-- Children shall be subject to Convulsion sits, young Wenches to the Falling
Evil, and old Women to Cough out their Teeth: -- Diseases, and Resolve all
Astrological Questions) and yet they'll hardly quit cost, for pasting them up:
-- Here dwells an Astrological Physician, Reads one; -- And there let him, till
I trouble him, Answers another; -- His Majesties most excellent Operator, says
one -- Yes -- upon a Post quoth another: And thus you see, how an Artist is
valued: -- O Ignorance! Ignorance! Well may thou be the Mother of Devotion,
but I am sure thou art the Stepdame of Art: -- If it were not for the good
Women with their Groats, and their Vinegar Bottles, and now and then a young
Wench to enquire of her Sweet-heart, I might even hang my self; Nay (which were
worse) my wife would cry her Trade were the better of the two: -- But, Husht! --
I hear some body coming -- Ten to one but 'tis my young Squire, with his
Mercers Wife to have her Fortune read -- I could with less trouble, and more
certainty have told her Husband's: -- I hear them -- Husht -- My Wife understood
their meaning well edough, shemight have put them together without troubling me:
--


But ill enough I'm sure -- I wonder what I'm the better for a Husband in you!
-- Here you sit moping, and moping all day upon a Book, and at Night, you're as
sleepy as a gibed Cat.


Oh ho -- I'm in thy debt, but thou shalt be paid it altogether: -- Is it not
better to receive a 100 l. at one payment, than to dribble't out by shilling,
and shilling?


But you'd be loath though, if your Wife had an occasion, that she should
borrow, though 'twere but sixpence.


Thou say right -- But I dare trust thee further: Prithee go in, and look
after the House; we shall have some or other, come popping in presently.


To mighty purpose -- 'Tis well you get so much: -- Methinks Trading is grown
extreme dead: -- Time was, when your honest Citizen's Wives, and no ordinary
Madams, and their Gallants, would come and be merry here; -- But now --


A little patience good Wife; 't'as been a long Vexation, the Gentry are not
come to Town yet; -- and yet we have some doings too.


Yes -- A Company of Fribbles, enough to discredit any honest House in the
World: -- No, I'd have you to know, I am for none of your Skip-Jacks; -- No; --
Give me your Persons of Quality, there's somewhat to be got by them: Besides, a
Woman need not be ashamed to sit Jig by Joule, with the best of the Parish, and
who dare say, Black is her eye?


Prithee be quiet -- I expected a young Squire, and his Mistress; but I believe
she could not get out, her Husband is so jealous of her.


Now out upon her -- Could she not have took another Woman out with her? He has
been a good one himself (I warrant you) that shall offer to suspect two Women
together: -- Marry hang these jealous-headed Coxcombs, these Ass-Cuckolds, that
believe their Ears to be Horns; And such have you been in your time too -- That
you have.


Well -- Well -- Go in -- All shall be mended -- Prithee in.


No indeed, I don't intend it; I must have some money first: -- Do you think I
can go always in one Gown? -- Pray don't mistake yourself: -- Besides, I must
buy the Child a new Coat; and Mr. Scruple expects I should carry him something
for his pains amongst us: -- Indeed Husband, he is a precious, able man.


Yes -- He is able -- Able to speak more with ease, than another man can hear
with patience: -- Away you fool.


Nay good Husband -- How do you think a Woman can love you, if you will not let
her do as the rest of her Neighbours? -- I warrant you for them, not one of
them mist the meeting to day, and I hope you have found, that they are not the
worst Customers we have: -- Marry come up here -- Scruple.


Be quiet, and thou shall it have any thing: -- I must even stop her mouth, to
be rid of her -- Nile, are but still Music to it: -- Come, we'll in, and see
what may be done.


INdeed your father was my old acquaintance, and very good friend -- Ah! How it
tickles my Lungs, to think how many mad Frolics we have had, at Robbing of
Orchards, and stealing Pudding-pyes -- I hope I may take it for granted, that
you visited the University: -- Pray which of them? and what College?


Gotam College Sir, in the University of Rumford.


My Fellow Collegiate! -- You and I must be acquainted: -- Pray how goes the
old difference between the Scholars, and the Townsmen? Is the breach so wide,
that you believe it irreconcilable?


Indeed I cannot tell -- But it is thought, 'twill hardly be composed, unless
the Rams would forbear marrying.


The more's the pity: -- A Graduate I hope Sir.


Yes Sir -- A small one -- A Bachelor of the Law -- I went out Bachelor, last
Horse-fair.


And I Doctor, in the Throng: -- We must be better acquainted: -- You're come
up to study?


Yes Sir -- My Mother would have it so.


Then let me advise you -- Study both Laws, but chiefly, the Civil: -- You
would not think what an advantage 'tis, to be a general man.


Sir, I shall follow your directions.


Then, when you come to practice; you must get you a good brass Towel, and a
steel Countenance; and ever carry in your green Bag, so much patience, as not
to be discouraged at any thing; for I am to tell you a great Truth, That our
Profession Rotts at the wrong end, The young ones dye, and the old ones live,
But how I pray? Even like Bawds, and Medlars, never Ripe, till Rotten; That is
to say, seldom or never get money, till they are past the use of 't; And then
(perhaps) what with a little favour, and a great deal of money, they may chance
to arrive at last to the height of sleeping out a Cause.


I thank you Sir, and I hope I shall be able to remember it.


Then you must ever be obsequious to great men; not that you expect any good
from them, but (as the Chinese worship the Devil) that they do you no hurt: --
Then, be sure to keep your Chamber, it will keep you; I kept mine many a long
year, and nothing came; But at last (Thanks to my Stars, and these good Times)
it came to the purpose.


Yes Sir, I know this to be true, for my Mother would be continually preaching
this Lesson to my Father.


Then you must never examine your Cause, whither it be good, or bad; If it be
good, and of no great concernment, it will carry it self, If bad, there's your
Master-piece, to help it out; Every Fool can manage a good Cause, but He's your
Man, can set the Nose to which side he pleases, and make something, out of
nothing.


I hope I shall have the grace to put it in practice; and wish, my Father were
alive to thank you.


Then if at any time, you find you have the worst end of the staff; Leave your
Cause, and fall upon the person of your Adversary; Put it out boldly, and
enough of 't, and somewhat must stick; No matter how true, or false, it begets
a prejudice to the person, and many times forjudges the Cause: -- For Example
now, to give you an instance in a Gentleman, a friend of mine, a great Master
of this way of pleading: -- A Gentleman with a long comely beard, demurs to
his Clients Bill; My friend, takes him at first hop, and demurs to his beard;
calls it a Vow-beard, and that he had made an Oath not to cut it till the King
came in; And hark you, had he had Twenty Arguments, he might have better
spared the other Nineteen, than that One: -- I could tell you of as good a one
of my own, and upon as great a Person as any this day in Europe -- (Ah! how I
firk't him up, with -- a Chip of the old Block, and Twenty as good --) But
enough of this now -- The thing is sufficiently known, and it ill becomes a man
to set out his own Virtues; -- But try this, and do it boldly, and never doubt
of Clients: -- A modest Lawyer! -- A silent Woman! -- A Paradox in Nature.


I can but thank you still Sir.


I had almost forgot one thing, and no way inferior to any of the rest: -- If
you find any Commotion in the State, be sure to strike in with the first; If
you get nothing -- Cantabit vacuus -- You'll pass in the Crowd; If you do,
you'll have money enough to purchase your pardon, and perhaps too, get in to be
some great mans Advocate: -- Chew the Cud upon this for the present, and as I
find you growing up to it, I shall instruct you farther.


I Do profess, this Mr. Scruple is a singular man.


I indeed is he: -- I never edified under any man like him: -- But how do you my
Lamb? How do you?


A vengeance over grown one; -- I have seen many a Ram in my time, has not been
so big by the head and the horns.


How do you Sir? -- You don't look well.


Nothing but a Cold my Child -- nothing but a Cold: I hope' twill away again:
--


Cis -- Cis -- A stick of Licoras Cis.


I have some Candid Ginger forsooth.


Here Chick -- prithee bite a bit of't -- 'tis the most sovereign thing (next a
Pepper posset) as can be.


Save your good Worship -- It fell in an ill time -- I am afraid it may beget
an obstruction of justice, by hindering your Worships sitting on the Bench.


How d' you Neighbours both? How do you? -- you're welcome, -- Diligence, you
and I'll walk in, and leave the Women to entertain Mr. Scruple.


I wait upon your Worship.


Timothy.


Madam.


Quickly good Timothy, quickly -- Run in, and get the Towels ready: -- After
good Cis, after him, and see they be through warm: --

Oh Mr. Scruple, Mr. Scruple! -- Alas good man how he sweats! -- Tim. Tim. Tim.
-- A Towel Tim, a Towel -- quick -- quick -- quick.


Here forsooth.


Now blessing of your heart good Mr. Scruple, you have taken a great deal of
pains to day.


Or his Lungs have, which is all one.


Truly, and indeed, a great Pains-taker: -- Scruple -- You have stood long to
day -- Pray sit down -- We must Rule you here. -- Will you have a Caudle Sir?
-- Alas poor man! How wet the Collar of his Shirt is? -- Feel Diligence -- I
prithee feel.


Now beshrew me, but't 'as worked quite through his Doublet, Coat, Cloak and
all.


Hum -- I am refreshed -- yea in good sooth I am.


Will you have a Lemon Posset Sir?


I fear me it is too cold.


Will you go to Bed Sir? -- Or have a fresh Shirt? -- How do you Sir?


Troth very ill, upon a Text.


I am well enough -- only a qualm -- a qualm.


What say you to your Collar of S'. S. then?


That would not be amiss -- There's no false Latin in it.


Quickly Tim, quickly: -- A Pint of Sack, a Quart of Cider, and a handful, or
two, of Sugar, and put them into the great Bowl -- Run Timothy, Run: -- Dear
Child, do thou help him.


Call you me this, his Collar of S'. S? --


I am afraid you are not well Sir.


Yes -- I am so, so: -- You would not think how't has recovered me, one would
hardly believe, what a rejoicing to my spirit it is, to see you thus eager,
and, as it were, hungry for your food: -- Ah-Be the same still you cannot lay
out your selves, nor I my self forth enough, in these ways -- Pray mark it; --
We cannot lay out our selves forth enough one to another: -- These often Duties
put us into a spiritual posture of War -- Ah -- It is best fighting together --
Ah -- What a precious thing it is, when we are both concerned together, and --
Ah -- Ah -- as a man may say, wrapped up in one common Cause and Interest: -- Ah
-- Good sisterly women, consider it, and lay it upon your hearts. Alderman?
Methought I heard him Cough ere while: -- How does he?


Now indeed, I think he sate a little too long in the cold: -- He has gotten a
heavy Cough of 't.


To see the frailty of mans Nature! -- How weary of every thing that is good!
How irksome it is unto us! -- I dare undertake, he should have sate at a lewd
Stage-play, a whole Afternoon: -- Nay, with his Hat off too -- and -- Ah --
been never the worse.


But are these Stage-playes, such lewd things as you make them?


Why truly you are my bosome-sisters -- And I may speak Truth to you; -- Nay --
They are not -- For you will find good moral things in them, As Vice depressed,
Virtue encouraged, and the like; However, we have thought it fit, to rail
at'um, for fear the people should set their hearts upon them, and consequently,
undo us: -- I have often Lectured at'um, in a morning, and yet in the
afternoon, stolen behind a Pillar, to hear them. -- Timothy: -- Timothy --
Though the Bowl be scandalous, 'tis pity the good creature should be spoiled:
-- Pray, next time, let me have the great Tankard, I am of opinion too, it
holds somewhat more: -- Casuists, speak comfortably in this point -- A man may
eat, and drink abundantly, without any necessity, but merely for his pleasure;
Nay, he may; usque ad vomitum ingurgitare, provided always, he do not
prejudice his health thereby; Because it is allowable in the natural appetite,
to be taken up with those actions, that are proper thereunto: -- We must deny
our selves, we may not deny the creature -- Pray observe it -- I say, we may
not deny the creature, it being given us, not for our sustentation only, but
contentation also -- Timothy -- Prithee once more good Timothy.


Here Sir.


Now much good may do it your heart good Mr. Scruple.


Indeed he deserves a good thing, he makes so much of it, when he has it.


This is napping Geer, and well encouraged: -- But pray no more of this Bowl
-- Pray no more of't: -- For this time, it may pass: -- Now trust me, it has
such a pleasant farewell, it invites a man to drink often of it: -- Timothy --


Here Sir.


I do assure ye, special stuff, and too good for the wicked; it may strengthen
them in their Enormities: -- But come -- Let's go visit Mr. Alderman: --
Timothy -- Is all out?


Yes Sir -- Not a drop left.


Then pray speak to Ruth, to dress up the great Tankard, and bring it into Mr.
Alderman's Chamber.


It shall be done Sir.


HUh! He grows worse, and worse: -- I have been with the Doctor, and he'll be
here presently: -- Precions Mr. Scruple is departed, but so like a Dog
out-law'd, that unless the Devil owes me a mischief, I may be troubled with a
mourning Cloak; -- I am sure I have deserved it: -- I am the general Officer of
this house; Like my Mistresses Silver-sack-posset-bason; Screw a handle to it,
and 'tis her Bed-pan; put a Cover to that, her Warming-pan; Take off both, it
serves to wash her hands in the morning, and for a Sack-posset, at Supper: --
In the Stable, I am Groom; In the Garden, Gardner; At Market, Caterer; In the
Cellar, Butler; upon all Visits, her Gentleman-usher; And above Stairs, his
Valet de Chambre.


How does your Master?


Alack Sir! I thought you could have told that by the Stars; -- I have heard
say, That learned men know every thing.


Yes -- I could have erected a Scheme -- But I thought it unnecessary: -- How
does he take his rest?


But ill; And complains of heats, and gripings.


I'll set him right again -- unless the Stars --


What good Sir?


Have predecree'd the contrary -- And if so -- We must submit; -- Will you let
your Mistress know I am here?


I shall Sir.


So -- There's half the disease; I shall easily pick the rest, out of the good
woman: -- It all things hit right, this Alderman may prove a good milch Cow: --



You're welcome Sir -- Nay, what d' you mean? there's no body expects it; --
Pray be pleased -- I can assure you no; -- In truth I do not -- Pray Sir. --


O -- your servant. -- Have you saved the Alderman's water, as I ordered?


Yes Sir: -- Cis, Cis; Thy Masters state.


O Tim, Tim, 'twas in the silver Tankard, and the Cat overthrew it.


There stands some dead Ale upon the Table, put that in the Urinal; -- He'll
tell as much by one, as the other.


A most fortunate face: -- I never met with more lucky lines: -- You'll live,
to bury the Alderman -- and -- shall marry -- let me see; -- a Lord.


Indeed Sir? -- I believe you can tell.


Nay, I am certain of it: -- Hereafter, I may chance to tell you his name; --
But for the present, be sure he is a Vicount, at least.


This --


Oh -- let me see it -- High coloured -- His blood's inflamed: -- Feavourish --
Feavourish.


Indeed Sir he burns like fire.


Sick -- sick -- sick -- He cannot rest.


I indeed; -- you are as right --


Sometimes up, and sometimes down.


Truly he has not been out of his Bed, since he first took his Cold, till just
now.


Huh -- a Cold: --


Now bless me Sir! -- How is't possible you should hit things so right?


How do you hit your mouth in the dark? -- One's as easy as the other: -- That is
to say; to a man of Art; -- I could tell you a Thousand things -- But time is
precious with me: -- May I not see the Alderman?


O by all means; -- I hear him coming: -- O my Deat -- Here's a Gentleman has
told me all your distemper, as right --


And what does he think of it?


Pray bend your wrist Sir. --


Would not some Parma City do him good? Truly I would be loath, he should want
any thing.


You do well: -- Let me see -- What says the College? -- Sperma Caeti,
Confectioquaedam -- Pox on it -- I have forgot the rest: -- Sperma Caeti! --
Sperma Cocks-comb -- They're a Company of quacking Fools; -- 'Tis Parmacitty,
and takes its name, from the City of Parma: Hang this foisting: -- I'll trust
ne'er a Doctor of them all: --

Have a little patience Madam, and I'll send you a preparation of my own: -- In
the mean time your servant: -- I am staid for at present.


Farewell good Doctor: -- Come my heart -- rest thy self within.


AND how d' you like her now? --


Could I like Heaven, If I were there? -- 'Prithee forbear these Questions.


And much good may she do thee: -- Thou shall it have her; I've laid the Plot, and
I am sure 'twill take.


As how my Jolly?


Not so hasty: -- I have an odd humour in my pocket will strike fair to it.


What's here? A printed Bill? -- Prithee lets hear't.


In the Name of God, Through the light of the Son, By the Revelation of the
Spirit, I cure these Diseases, perfectly, and speedily, without any annoyance
to the body, which commonly happens through College Bills, and Apothecaries
Medicines, with which, the Devil has deceived the World, these many Hundreds of
Years.

The new Disease (otherwise called the Great POX) with all its Appendices, in
few days; with Herbs which I gather in the Woods, and Gums of Trees. -- Agues
of all sorts, in three fits: -- Gout, whither-knotted, or running, in four or
five dressings: -- Dropsy -- Timpany -- Rickets -- Spleen -- Convulsion --
Yellow, and black Jaundies -- Stone -- St^angury -- and Colic, in six hours:
-- All kinds of Fluxes; -- Most distempers of the Head -- Shortness of Breath,
and Ptisick, at first sight: -- And have ever by me a most approved Remedy,
against Green-sickness -- Barrenness -- And fits of the Mother.


'Twas fairly vied: -- Who bids more?


He comes again -- As also (To let the World see, how wide of their mark, they
are like to run, That as boldly, as ignorantly, dare adventure on Physic,
without the knowledge of Astrology) I resolve, these ensuing Astrological
Questions.

-- The sick, whither they shall recover, or not: -- The party absent, whither
living, or dead -- How many Husbands, or Children, a Woman shall have: --
Whither one shall marry the party desired, or whom else: -- Whither a Woman has
her Maiden-head or not -- Or shall be honest after Marriage -- Or her portion
well paid: -- If a man be wise, or a fool; -- Whither it be good to put on new
Clothes: -- If Dreams, be for good, or evil; -- Whither a Child be the reputed
fathers; or shall be fortunate, or not: -- Ships at Sea, whither safe, or not:
-- Of Law-suits, which side shall have the better: -- And generally all
Astrological Questions whatever.

A Servant of God, and Secretary of Nature.


Hah Boys! -- If this wo'n't take them, The Devil take them: -- But what are
those hard words?


Oh -- A Physician, a friend to Physicians: -- The only true thing in all his
Bill; -- These Quacks, are the best friends Physicians have, they make work for
them: What dost' think is come into my head?


How is it possible I should know? -- I am no Oedipus.


Why -- This Fellow must be a Cheat, and I am confident, with a little help,
would be able to do your business: -- 'Prithee lets to him: --


This is such fortune, I forgive my stars
All their unkindness.

Is this Natural? Or do you carry set-forms about you, to be used as occasion
shall serve?


Faith neither -- So much Excellence, must needs inform a Statue, and make a
very Post Rhetorical.


Demonstrations? -- Why how now Mr. Afterwitt?


Just as you see: -- How d' you like him?


Well said: -- To her again: -- If I can make no sport,
I'll mar none: -- How now Cis?

The better for your asking, I thank you Sir.


Hark you: -- A word: --


So fair, and so unkind! -- Sure Nature dotes,
She twists such contradictions, or what's worse,
Has lost her wits, and would have all, like her.

Whence this new fury? --


Can you read your self,
And ask that question? Were you made thus lovely,
To make me miserable? -- Would you'd less
Divinity, or more Humanity.

Then you're in Love it seems? Or at least would
Make me believe it: -- Don't I know, you Men
Speak anything? -- Women are fools, and can't
For shame, but credit it: --

You wrong my Truth:
By all that's good. --

No more: -- Admitting yet,
What I can scarce believe; -- Why must you crop
That flower, which as it grows, may peradventure
Look fair, and lovely, but, once gathered, withers?
Give me a Love refined; A Love, that flames
Upon it self, not fed with grosser fuel;
A Love, that loves the Virtue, not the Sex.

And such is mine: -- But fancy not this new
Philosophy of immaterial flames;
Hearts may meet Hearts, and Souls, piquere with Souls;
But if they come no nearer than the Eyes,
For want of matter to maintain them, dye.

Be judge your self: -- Who but the needy pray?
Once fill your belly, yo've no more to say,

Yes -- to give thanks, and ruminate upon
Those blessings, which grow faster, than we reap um:
Come, come, be wise, and trifle not away
That youth, would make an Emperor too happy;
All seek their like; And like the Needle, tremble,
And never settle, till it reach that North:
I'd rather be an Owl, than Phaenix,
If I must live alone: --

These Morals Sir,
Might have been better spent; But since you'll needs
Make me believe you love me -- Court my father;
For, notwithstanding the Respect I bear you,
I must declare. I've neither eyes, nor ears,
To any thing, but what he shall direct.

You need say no more: -- Mind what I told you, and leave the rest to me.


Sure my father went to Heaven, I am so unfortunate; -- Well; be it as 'twill,
I love you; and were I to speak seven year, I could but say the same thing. --
Come -- I'll wait on you.


I Can't away with it; -- unfeignedly, I cannot. -- A man may profess; it is
lawful -- Yea, assuredly it is; And therefore I say, I profess, If any of my
flock, shall so much as straggle into his pastures, I say, I profess, I shall
not only turn them out of my fold, for rotten sheep, but they shall for ever be
to me, as Publicans; That is to say, As the Learned have most ingeniously
observed; Publicanus, quasi, publicus canis.


Why good Mr. Scruple -- A Member should not be cut off for one failing.


Good me no goods, Good Mrs. Whitebroth; -- I tell thee here (sister of mine)
it is a wilful failing; -- A very wilful failing.


For why I pray? -- The man is learned: -- I am sure he told me all my
Husband's distemper, before he so much as saw him.


Told ye! -- I, there's the point -- And I must tell you too, he must needs use
some unlawful means.


Alas -- It cannot be: -- His Wife (good woman) is one of us; And do you think,
if he were such, he would ever sufferit?


Why there's the blind: -- The woman, is a good sisterlie woman, and an often
frequenter; which, he allows of, only to deceive the World, as if he were --!
Well -- well -- Mark what I say -- If he has not made some secret, express
contract, with Satan, I'll be your Teacher no longer; -- If you had ever read
Doctor Faustus, this would not be so strange to you.


Now goodness defend it!


Come, come, -- 'Tis great pity, it is not looked into: -- I dare undertake,
had this Fellow set up in Spain, he had been in the Inquisition long ere this
-- But we; The more light we have, the less we see; -- We are wilfully,
stiff-neckedly blind; Indeed we are.


Be not too rash: -- Many a good body's wronged, or many of our Brethren, and
sisters, are not what they should be.


Yes -- That was always the malice of the Devil, and his instruments; -- But
this Fellow, is a professed Reprobate; -- I have read his Bills, and spoken with
several, that have been with him, And they tell me, he has a Globe, ever
standing upon his Table, and never answers any question proposed, without first
turning that; -- And why may not the Devil be in that Globe, as well as in the
Pummel of Paracelsus's Sword, and Dr. Dee's Crystal? -- D' you mark me that
Gentlewoman? -- Answer me that.


Nay, pray Mr. Scruple -- I must go: -- All that he told me, was without his
Globe: -- I mean no hurt.


That may be something in the case: -- Let me see -- what say the Casuists? --
If any thing help you, it must be the intention; And that, we are forced to
make use of in many cases; especially, such as we cannot hinder, and correct
the viciousness of the means, by the purity of the end: -- For example now --
If a Woman, great with Child, long for another man, besides her Husband, and
this Husband will not give consent; In this case we say, (and so we generally
agree) that she may follow her natural inclination; Provided always, she have
no intention of sin, but only to satisfy her longing; -- For, Actus, non facit
reum, nisi men's sit rea: --


Now blessing on you good Sir -- I always thought so.


In like manner -- If a young woman, of a godly Parentage, do fall into a holy
Fornication (not out of Lust, but Love) and thereupon prove with Child; In such
case we say, That it may be lawful to procure Abortion, provided always, it be
not done, with an intention of Murder, but only to save Life, or Reputation: --
Nay further, lest the Profession should be scandal'd by it; we hold it better,
to trust Providence, by forswearing the Fact, than to fall into the hands of
men, by confessing the infirmity of the flesh: -- And in this (as many other
things) we agree with some Gentlemen ^broad; And truly, where we do differ, the
difference between ^s, is so fine, and nice, we can hardly perceive it our
selves: -- There is (as the School-men term it) an Identificadunity of
Principles, common to us both. -- They have their private shrifts, so we: --
They call it a venial sin with a sister, and in case of necessity can forgive a
Neighbours Wife, so we: -- They allow regulating by Tumults, so we: -- And
lastly, They deny all this in plain words, but grant it in effects, so we.


But what's this to me? -- May not I go? -- Good Mr. Scruple.


If your intention be right, you may: -- However, for fear of the worst, I will
go with you; I should be loath to lose one of the best sheep in my flock, for
want of a little care: -- Come Mrs. Whitebroth, I did not think to have done so
much; -- But you have such a winning way with you -- Such a power upon me, I
can deny you nothing -- Indeed I cannot: -- Come -- We must now and then comply
with one another weakness.


'Tis a good hearing Sir: -- I thank you.


COme Gypsy; -- How came you tolight on this house? -- 'Tis a rare
convenience.


Oh! she's our Midwife.


And faith, they are good necessary things; and generally tractable, before
they grow rich.


How do you know? -- I never met you here before.


Time enough now.


But pray Major, is this Gentleman married?


Hang him Rogue; -- Every mans Boots serve his turn.


And better so, than going bare-foot: -- I am not married (sweet Lady) but a
Lover still.


A pretty Gentleman.


He was, you would have said, had you known him, when I knew him first: -- But
now --


As good as ever my Girl: -- Dear Mopus!


Away Captain: -- You do so mousle one.


Nay, have a care of him -- I say no more.


Marry -- I hope you are not in earnest.


And thou hast no more wit, than to believe him! As sound as a Bell wench -- As
sound as a Bell.


Indeed Captain, I hope the best: -- But sure there's somewhat in it, he does
not fine up himself, as he was wont.


I seldom regard fashions -- Any thing serves me; -- Drape de Berry in the
Summer, keeps out the heat; and Stuff in the Winter, lets it in: -- I must
confess, I have three or four as rich Suits, for Flanders Lace, Gimp, and
Embroidery, as any in the Town.


But where are they good Captain? Where are they?


Why faith, I have had'um all in my head, this Twelvemonth, but could never yet
get one of them upon my back.


Troth Captain, 'twould not be amiss at this time, if you opened your head, and
took one of them out.


The Jade's too hard for me: -- Hark you: --


O good Captain -- It must buy the Child a new Coat.


Hang him Brat; -- One of thy old Petticoats will serve: -- Bestow money upon
Puppy-Dogs!


You always serve me thus: -- Pray Captain -- Give me some of't again.


Not a Cross by this good light; -- D' you hear me?


And must thy Major have no Hatchments? -- 'Prithee disburse, disburse; -- Dear
Landlady: --


Indeed I have no money: -- One would think your Meat, Drink, Lodging, Washing,
and Wringing, were worth somewhat.


Irish Beef, By this good Tilbury -- Nothing but Sheeps Heads, and Irish Beef.


'Tis but too good for you, unless you were more thankful: -- Many an honest
Gentleman would be glad of your Orts.


'Prithee -- My best Landlady: -- Let the small Gem, or the superstuous
Petticoat march.


I will not always endure this; -- For once -- But shall we be merry then?


As merry as thou wilt my Joe: -- Hang pinching, we'll never pine our selves,
though our Heirs smart for it.


Here Major -- Here's an old Elizabeth, has not seen light these seven years.


And even let her go -- She has been Prisoner long enough of all conscience: --
Come Captain, let's be merry.


By this hand 'tis true: --

I love thee above all flesh alive: -- Fear nothing -- All's well, and as right
as my Leg.


And that's crooked to my knowledge.


Nay good Sir; -- You do but jest?


Hang him -- Hang him -- I have said enough -- And now I'm for you: -- Be true
Cuckolds, Be true, Be true, c.


Hoop Holiday! -- That's old.


You are for new faces too! -- Pray Major, Will you oblige this Lady?


Who I? -- With all my heart -- But I've got so strange a Cold, and drunk so
much French Wine of late, that (by this old Companion of my side) 'twill be but
once removed from howling.


However -- Pray venture -- I never knew a good voice, without an excuse: --
Pray try.


My Landlady might command me any thing -- But I'm so out of Tune -- Ta -- La.
La. La. -- Hanged.


Let him alone, and you wo'nt be rid of him -- He's like the blind Beggars of
Bolonia, a man must give them a Half-penny to sing, and Two-pence to hold their
tongues.


Come give me the Wench that is mellow;
And a Pox take all Fools that are yellow:
'Tis the Horne, the Horne,
The advancing of the Horne,
Dubbs a Cuckold, an Aldermans Fellow.
Let no man disorder his rest.
By believing Bulls feathers in's Crest;
When yo've said what you can,
A Cuckold, is a man,
Or most of our Fathers were Beasts.
Then let us sing At it, and At it;
And let every one catch, that car
All Opinions agree,
In one of these Three,
The Horn, the Pot, or the Plaquet.

La' you now -- Did not I tell you as much? -- I'll have my Pipes cleared,
against we meet next.


But when shall that be?


When you will, provided it be for all Night, and out of Town.


That's impossible.


Not at all -- You may leave word, you are gone to a Woman's Labour.


Hah! Hah! -- But her Husband --


What?


-- Will discover the contrary.


Puh -- Puh! -- Never let that trouble you: -- His knowledge, does not lie that
way: -- You know Captain, I have slipped a man into his Tables ere now, and he
not a farthing the wiser.


I that thou hast, I'll be sworn.


Come, come, let's in, and discourse it further: -- A Bottle, and a Fiddle; and
then, Good Night.


A match, a match: -- Lead up before Major.


W^ you of it? -- She is a handsome Gentlewoman, and her Fathers Heir.


Think, do you say? -- I'll promise you, my stomach wambles at her already.


Leave it to me: -- I will not do with you, as I do with my Clerk, Snip
half-profits -- But you know Sir -- Somewhat ought to be done -- Danda est
offa.


Whatever you please Sir: -- If this take, I will down into the Country, get
me an able Clerk, and turn Justice of Peace.


And so you may: -- The Alderman is gone to take the Air, and ten to one but
he makes this way homeward; I did once at distance, propose such a thing, and
now I perceive you relish it, I'll present you to him: -- But to pass the time
till he comes -- You say you are a Bachelor of Law, I'll try your wit: -- I
have a Case here, referred to me, pray observe it, and give me your opinion
in it; -- I take it, it runs through the whole 24 Letters: -- These common
Lawyers, are our younger Brothers, but they have given us the start; They never
let any thing come to us, but what they can make nothing of, themselves.


Pray Sir let me hear't.


You shall -- 'Tis thus. Abigal, a feme sole, seized in tail, of the Manor of
Blackacre, makes a Feoffment in Fee to Cuttbeard, upon condition, that if
Daniel, shall release Emanuel, of, and from all Actions relating to Ferdinand,
that then Gregory, shall satisfy Humphrey, of, and for all Marriage-portions,
intended by Jeromy, to be given Knipperdoling, with his Wives daughter Lattice;
which, Maximilian perceiving, and believing that Nicholas, had a more than
ordinary influence, upon Oliver, procures Peter, to discharge Quintilian, and
engage Rowland, to estate his Wife Susan, in the capital Message of Toungwell
(with a certain Salt-marsh, and Underwoods, thereunto belonging) and stop his
daughter Urselas mouth, with a Wind-mill, and a Water-mill, left her, by her
Mother; whereupon Winifred, having lately recovered in a praecontract, against
Xenophon, makes a Lease to Younker, who releases to Zachary, who enters upon
Abigal, who re-enters upon him, and ejecting him out of the Premises, burns
his principal Evidences. -- And now Sir, What think you? -- Where has this man
his Remedy?


I should think Sir, he were gone at common Law.


You are always hankering after the common Law; -- How shall we hedge in the
Jurisdiction of 't?


Indeed I cannot tell -- But they say, here is a learned Astrologer, that
undertakes to tell such things, by the Stars; perhaps it might not be amiss to
consult him.


Hark you -- I dare trust you: -- He knows no more of Law, than you, or I do:
-- Now by my Troth, but it is a difficult Case; and I have given my opinion
in it, both ways -- The Devil is in it, if one of them be n't right: -- But, as I
told you, the Alderman: --


How do you say it was?


Why thus, an't please you: -- I had (according to the duty of my office) just
walked my Round, when lo! About the first of the morning, we perceived a kind
of glimmering, as of Guido Faux's Lanthorn; And we said unto it -- Stand -- And
what art thou? And what means that light, at this unseasonable hour of the
Night? when presently a voice answered -- Nay, But what are ye? And we said --
The Watch; And to our seeming, it said again -- Harm watch, harm catch -- And
there fell a shower, as it had been of Chamber-pots, and we were most lewdly
bepist, and some Pates broken.


A plain case -- The King's Majesties Authority affronted; in the
representative person, of my Neighbour Double Diligence, the Constable: --
Bring them before me, I'll make them know, what's what.


Will it please your Worship to grant me your Warrant? I had one from
Mistresses Worship, during your sickness, but could make no body obey it.


How? -- Not obey her Warrant? -- I'd have them to know, she is (in my absence)
as good a Justice of Peace, as my self; Are not Man and Wife, one person in
Law? -- Not obey her Warrant! -- Let me see who dares deny it! -- Come
Neighbour, come -- I smell a Rat; -- What would you say now, if this should
prove, to be a Bull from the Pope? -- I say no more:


Save you Mr. Alderman! -- I am glad to see you so well abroad again.


Doctor Runter! My loving Friend, and Neighbour -- Well met.


This is the Gentleman Sir, I told you of: -- He is a thriving young man, and
you may do what you will with him.


I shall be glad to be acquainted with you Sir.


I hope the Doctor will oblige me in it.


Methinks the Air is somewhat sharp: -- Come Doctor, Take your friend with
you.


BE pleased Gentlemen, to take a Turn or two, in this Room; -- My father is a
little private at present, with a person of Honour, but will be with you
presently.


Where are we now? -- Nor better, nor worse, but a down-right Astrological
Bawdy-house: -- The Devil of any thing could I see in to other Room, but two or
three Chairs, broke in the back, half a dozen empty Gally-pots, and a
Deaths-head, between two Syringes.


You may guess Forty times, ere you hit so right again: I believe him a better
Artist at Bawdry; than Conjuring.


Not a jot the worse instrument: -- Do but hear him, and you'll quickly judge:
And if you love me, pray let me manage the Conference: -- He's somewhat long --
Where is this man of learning?


Here Sir -- A poor old man; -- One or other, will never let him be quiet, till
he's in his Grave: -- Your Commands Gentlemen.


Why faith, this Gentleman, and my self, have received so large a character of
you, that we are come to wait on you, in the behalf of a friend of ours.


I have done somewhat in my time; and hope I shall never be too old to do good.


You say well: -- There is a friend of ours (that for the present shall be
nameless) has got a small mischance: -- You may guess what I mean.


Well Sir -- I apprehend you, and will set him right again.


Then you take it for granted, it must be a Man: -- Suppose it be a Woman? Does
that alter the case?


Sir, I'll deal plainly with you -- If your friend be a Man, I'll cure him for
Five Pieces; but if a Woman, I shall not take her in hand under Twenty.


Why this great difference?


O Sir, not without Reason: -- The sooner you cure a Man, the sooner you have
him again -- He's a constant Termor -- But a Woman -- Ah Sir, she brings Grist
to Mill; -- Cure her once, and she grows cunning, you'll hardly ever hear of
her more; -- I shall not bate any thing of Twenty Pieces to cure her: But this
I'll do with you, I'll patch her up against Term, for Forty Shillings.


Hah! Hah! -- Let this satisfy you, 'tis a Man: --


Pray do -- And leave him to me: -- And if there be any virtue, in Sassa,
Guajacum, or Turpentine, you need not fear him.


A rare Rogue.


Well Sir -- I shall: -- But this is not all our business -- We are well
satisfied, that you are a person of occult learning -- Pray Sir will you oblige
us.


You look like Gentlemen, and I am confident are so -- I'll be free with you:
-- I could discover a Secret of Nature to you, and for the expense of a brace
of hundred pounds, put you in possession of't: -- It will give you the
knowledge of all things past, present, and to come; And long life, health,
youth, blessedness, wisdom, and virtue, shall be added to it.


As Paper, and Pack-thread.


But -- If you should not make a right use of it, by living soberly,
temperately, and enjoying it, as if you had it not; but shall misemploy it, in
swaggering, Gluttony, worldly pride, and sensuality; you shall not only lose it
for the present, but be out of all hopes of finding it again for the future --
And this is that which we call, Our Magisterium, Elixar, or Rosy -- crucian
Pantarva: -- The father of it, is the Sun, the mother of it, the Moon, its
brothers, and sisters, the rest of the Planets, the wind carries it in its
belly, and the Nurse thereof, is the Earth.


Pray Sir proceed, and disclose this Son of Gold.


Hermetically, I shall: -- It is situated in the Centre of the Earth, and yet
falls neither within Centre, nor Circumference; small, and yet great; Earthly,
and yet watery; Airy, and yet very fire; Invisible, yet easily found; Soft as
down, yet hard above measure; Far off, and yet near at hand: -- That, that is
inferior, is as that which is superior; and that which is superior, is as
that which is inferior: -- Separate the combustible, from the incombustible;
the Earth, from the fire; the fluid, from the viscous; the hot, from the cold;
the moist, from the dry; the hard, from the soft; the subtle, from the thick;
sweetly, and with a great deal of judgment, Per minima, in the Caverns of the
Earth; And thou shalt see it ascend to Heaven, and descend to Earth, and
receive the powers of superiors, and inferiors: -- Comprehend this, and be
happy: -- Thou hast discovered the Balsom of Sulphur the Humidum radicale of
Metals, the Sanctuary of Nature, and there is little, or nothing, between thee,
and the Mountain of Diamonds, and all the Spirits, of Astromancy, Geomancy, and
Coschinomancy, are at your command.


Pray Sir, How call you that? That last again.


Coschinomancy Sir: That is to say, The most mysterious Art, of Sieve, and
Sheers: -- I must confess, I was once of the mind, to have obliged the World,
with a Discourse upon this Subject; but since that, the World, and I, have been
better acquainted, and I find it base, and unworthy.


Troth Sir, 'tis great pity, but you went on; Such a Quixotism in Philosophy,
must needs please every man; for my own part, I date promise you, you shall
want neither money, nor coals, as long as this Gentleman's purse, and mine, can
supply you.


Why truly Sir, encouragement may do much: -- I am neither Mede, nor Persian,
upon good demonstrative Reasons, I may be persuaded: -- Goth to all good
Literature, for he deserves no better expressions from me) Dioclesian, burnt
all the Books of this Art, and for no other Reason, but that he feared
(forsooth) they would make Gold too common: A wise Fellow, another Lycurgus, to
avoid drunkenness, cut down the Vines: -- You see by this, he confessed it
feasible.


Sir, I must needs speak a word with you in haste.


Gentlemen, I'll wait on you again, instantly.


By no means -- We shall have further business to you, and will see you again:
-- We follow you.


As ever breathed: -- But to my business: -- I am afraid, I shall want present
money; I could never find any wheels move merrily, without greasing.


Nor I neither -- And therefore to prevent the worst, try to get the other 1000
l. of the Alderman; and cross-bite him, with his own money.


And that I can; He has offered it me.


And do it: -- If a man must break, a 1000 l. will signify little in the Sum:
-- Come, mind your business, and you cannot miscarry if you would.


I Am glad to see your Worship tread so lusty, and strong again; -- I hope,
you'll be the better for it.


I Tim. 'Twould have vex'ta man, to have just got an Estate, and strait pipt
over the Perch, e're he had time to look upon it: -- Mr. Scruple put divers
things, very home to me, and 'twas ten to one, but all had come out, but that I
thought with myself, there was no such need yet; -- Come Tim. leave that, and
let's see how Affairs stand at present: -- How have you done with your rotten
Raisons -- Did they yield well?


Troth Sir, the Wine-coopers have done their part; They have made you at least
60 Pipes of Wine out of them -- But they advise your Worship, to get your money
for them, before they stir out of your Cellar; for however they may be palatable
enough, as long as they lie there, yet, as soon as you stir'um, they'll kick up
their Heels.


Good enough to be pissed against a Wall, and they were worse: -- And now I think
on it, you remember the Country Vintner, that bought the Pipe of Canary on
Shipboard, and gave it the Rascal mark, to cheat the Custom-house -- See it be
Craned off into another Pipe, and filled up again, with your New, what do you
call it? -- 'Tis good enough for sinners; -- If he discover it, you may tell
him, 'tis his own mark.


It shall be done Sir: -- But Sir, Mr. Spendall was to have waited on you
yesterday, touching a Bond of his of 500 l. which he says is paid, and you
promised to deliver up.


O Ho! Let me see -- Here 'tis --

If the said Spendall shall content, satisfy or pay, c. Why see -- The
condition of the obligation (which is made for his benefit, and not mine)
says, If he shall content: Pray tell him, (notwithstanding the payment of the
money) his Bond is forfeited; for I am not contented; -- Does he think I can be
content with 6. per Cent? -- I have no more to say to him -- I'll take my
course -- Pray mind your own business -- Have you received the Jews money? and
sent him the Pack of Left-handed Gloves, I order d you?


Yes Sir -- 'Tis done.


Put tricks upon me! -- Make me buy a round parcel of Gloves, and now you know
I have them by me, if I will not bate a third part of the money, you have
occasion but for half of them, and be hanged: -- I'll Jew you, with a Horse-pox
-- I have received half your money, and you shall have half the Gloves (that is
to say) all the Left-handed ones -- You may chance to truck them off, with
maimed Soldiers, if not, I'll make you pay sauce for the other. -- Reach me that
Book -- And while I remember it, go into my Chamber, and upon the Table you'll
find a 1000 l. in Half-crowns; Pray weigh them, one by one, and lay by such as
are over weight, and see them melted down; -- 'Tis a hard World, and fit every
man make the most of his own: -- Bottomary, upon the good Ship called the Mary,
to be paid with interest, after the rate of 30 l. per Cent. within ten days
after her coming to Anchor in the River of Thames -- 1700 l. -- So, so, That's
paid, All got; -- She's sunk at New found-land: -- Besides, I have ensur'd a
1000 l. upon her, my self -- How wealth trowles in, upon an honest man! -- The
Master deserves a 100 l. extraordinary for this, and shall have it; This is the
fifth Ship, he has sunk for me. -- Item, paid the Irish Army, in Peru Dollars
-- I! there's a sweet business! --


Sir, Mr. Afterwitt desires to see you.


Stay him a while without, I'll be for him presently: -- Here's a Squire too,
will be worth me somewhat: Let me see his account -- Lent his father, upon
judgment -- 4000 l. -- Item -- More upon a Statute -- 3000 l. Item, upon
Mortgage -- 2500 l. -- Item, upon his own Account; upon Bond -- 500 l. -- Item,
more -- 300 l. Item, bound to me for other men -- 1000 l. -- Pox of these
Bonds, I must persuade him to take another 1000 l. and hedge all, into one good
Mortgage: -- To see how this World goes round: -- My Great-Grandfather was a
wealthy Citizen, and left my Grandfather, a Gentleman forsooth! But what
between my Father, and him, they so ordered the business, that they left me,
never a Groat. -- This Fellows Grandfather, was a Law-driver, and swallowed my
Father up; His Father set the Estate a moving, and this, will set it quite
away: -- His first Ancestor, cheated mine, and I hope I shall be able, to
require his love, upon his posterity: -- Thus you see, the wheel comes round,
to the same point again -- This City, is like the Sea; few Estates, but ran
of't at first, and will run into 't at last: -- Timothy! Afterwitt! The
welcomest man alive -- You were wont to come and sit with me; But now -- You're
grown such a Courtier, you forget your old friends -- 'On my Conscience you
want money, or I had not seen you now -- Away with it -- 'Tis all but dirt --
You shall not want 1000 l, as long as I can help you; Nay, 'an twere 10000. to
do you good -- The son of my old friend!


I thank you Sir, and shall make use of you; -- But I'll promise you, this was
purely visit.


I am the more beholding to you: -- Hark Tim! Beat out those Rogues -- What
would they have?


They are the Waytes Sir -- They bid you good morrow every morning, and are now
come to congratulate your Worships Recovery.


I'll give them nothing -- They are the cause of more Beggars, and Bastards --
When a man would sleep quietly, they wake him, and be hanged; And then the good
Woman plucks him by the Sleeve, and cries -- Hark Husband -- Hark -- The
Waytes -- Hark! -- Come Mr. Afterwitt, we'll out of the noise; -- 'Tis as
dreadful to me, as the last Trump.


'TIs a fine Child -- I'll try his Wit -- How far have you learnt Youth?


La Pueriles, Sir.


A good Boy! You may in time come to your Genus, and Species.


I am past that already -- Quae genus, aut flexum variant, quocunque novato
Ritu deficiunt, superantve, Heteroclita sunto.


A most emphatical description of us (sister Whitebroth) -- We are a kind of
Heteroclites, and oftentimes saved, even contrary to Rules: -- A witty Child --
Let's see -- Byssus, Abyssus -- How render you that?


Byssus, A bottomless Pit; Abyssus, A more bottomless Pit.


A -- Child, Thou art in the right; There is a Great -- great -- great
Bottomless bottom; -- Indeed there is.


Please you to give me leave to ask you one word.


With all my heart Child -- What is 't?


What's the English of Adolescentior?


Adolescentior! -- Hum! Adolescentior! -- Haw! -- Adolescentior -- I -- That is
as much as to say -- Adolescentior: -- (Now fie Child! Ask questions with that
dirty face! -- Go wash it Child -- Go wash it: -- Fie Child! fie!)


It signifies a Ladder; Adolescens, a Lad; Adolescentior, a Lad-der.


I profess, I did not observe it: -- I see a man may live, and learn every day:
-- Go Child, wash your face, and let your father know I am here.


Yes Sir -- I shall.


Now indeed Mrs. Whiteborth, this is your fault; -- I am present in body, but
absent in mind: -- I could chide you now -- But I hear him coming --

Did not I tell you of that Globe? -- 'Tis well I did not venture you, by your
self: -- I'll sist him.


Worthy Sir, and you good Madam, most welcome: -- Be pleased to let me know
your Commands, and you shall see, I am so great a Reverencer of your Coat, that
my whole Art shall lie at your feet.


He speaks like other men: -- October next, which, the Learned to be the
fore-runner of Dooms-day, if not the thing it self.


You mean Sir, that of the two superior Planets, Saturn, and Jupiter, in
Sagittarius?


The same; What may it portend? -- Good; or Evil?


Much good no doubt; --. Wherein, though I dare not be too positive, yet, as
far as Trismegistus, Albohazen, Haly; -- Messahala, Zael, Rabbi Abraham; --
Albubater, Avenezra, Albumacer; -- Guido, Bonetus, Hispalensis, Firmius, --
Alchindus, Proclus, Monteregius; -- Albertus Teutonicus, Averrois, -- And the
most ancient Chaldeans, Egyptians, Moors, Jews, or Arabians, have discoursed,
either this, or the like, I shall give you my opinion.


I profess, a great red Man!


And here, we are to observe, which of the two Planets, Saturn, and Jupiter
(This, the very best, That, the very worst) is strongest, at the time of his
Conjunction, for according to his nature, will the effects follow.


In truth, learnedly -- Pray Sir on.


The last Conjunction of these two Planets, happened --


Pray Sir, no chance, or happening: -- Was, I pray.


Then, Was, in February, 1643, in 25 Degrees of Pisces, a sign of the watery
Triplicitie (not known in nature before) which produced those monstrous
Actions, not heard of in the World before; And now, forasmuch as this
Conjunction is in Sagittary, the Day-house, and Triplicitie of Jupiter, we may
conclude, it is the more considerable, in regard they have wholly left the
Aquatic Trigon, and will for many Years make their Conjunction, in the fiery
Tranquillity: For when any alteration, from one Trigon, to his contrary,
happens --


Good Sir, no happening -- Let me beseech you -- for look you, d you see, as
this -- Good Sir -- Things come not by hap, or chance.


Well, what you please -- It is impossible, but that some admirable effects,
quite opposite to the former, must needs follow: -- And of this opinion, is the
learned Haly, and generally, all the Ancients, and Moderns.


But suppose it should be otherwise?


Then we're mistaken; And that's very unlikelie amongst so many learned men:
-- As we ordinarily converse in the world, we may be mistaken; but in Cathedra
(That is to say, our studies) 'tis impossible.


A pretty word for a Study -- Cathedra, quasi Cathedra: -- But pray Sir, what
effect do you conceive, this Conjunction may have, upon the Whore of Babylon?


Why truly, that is somewhat uncertain; in regard it will depend so much, upon
that great Eclipse, of Sol, in Cancer, in the house of the Moon, the 22. day of
June, 1666. and will appear, almost Total, at Rome; for my part, I expect, some
or other should marry her up, and make an honest woman of her, or otherwise
(as Mr. Brightman, upon his pair Royal of Sixes, has most excellently
observed) she is likely to get such a Clap, she'll hardly claw it off again in
haste.


I do profess, you have handled the point, notably -- I am convinced --
There's ^il in this Globe.


La' you now Mr. Scruple! -- You'll trust me another time, won't you?


Reproach not my good meaning: -- Certainly Sir, you must needs have added
some rare Collections, to your own observation.


Yes, I have some Toys (for so the world esteems them) however to me, they are
Jewels.


As what good Sir?


Many, many -- In particular, a Treatise of the Philosophers stone, written
originallie by Janboshar, Adam's Tutor, whom likewise you find recorded in the
Indian Books, written by Isazarith, about a hundred Years before his time.


I thought Letters had not been so ancient.


Alas! There were divers very good Authors, writ before the Flood; I have some
half a dozen of'um within, if I could tell where to find'um: -- Men of my
profession, cannot well be without'um: -- When I see you next, I'll show you
the very Antographum, by which Seth, drew his Pillars.


Yes, that were worth the seeing: -- And now I find you so near the flood, give
me leave to try your learning: -- Give me the exact time, and the language of
that time and I'll say you're a Scholar.


For the time; It was (according to our latter computation) the 5th, day of
June, in the 1656. Year of the world, one Month, and 17. days, nor more, nor
less; And by all good Tokens, upon a Friday, Sol in Gemini, the Dominical
letter of that Year, D, fifteen minutes preciselie after Sun-setting.


I see, you're very exact.


Alas! We must be so; Half a minutes loss, so maine Years ago, had been the
Lord knows what by this time: -- Then for the language; notwithstanding any
thing that has been said, to prove it High dutch, I am clearlie of opinion, it
was Hebrew, or some other Jargon.


Nay there, you must bate mean Ace; for though I look upon it as obscure, as
the head of Nile, yet as far as it may be lawful to pry, into unrevealed
mysteries, I dare boldly pronounce it to have been, Welch.


Welch! -- Afedrwch chwi Gymeraege?


Why truly no; But I have a little looked into the learning of the Tongue, and
that for two Reasons: The one, for the honour of my Nurse; for I am to tell
you, I sucked a Welch-nurse, and so by a Synecdoche, Tant -- a -- mount, to all
the Eastern languages, and I'll promise you, as Guttural (that is to say,
Throateral) -- Y Cradog, Crugog, Crogwch, Y Gwan-wr hull fu began (r) hwch.


O'my word there's more than Kawse Pobi, in this; -- Pray Sir, how do you
English it?


It matters not; Or if it did, 'tis not the custom; -- But I had almost lost
the Argument, I say 'twas Welch, and thus I prove it: -- 'Tis confessed of all
hands, That before the confusion of Tongues, there was but one language; which
being so, 'tis more than probable, That Gomer, the first Grand-child of Noah,
and first Ancestor of the Welshmen, spake the same language, that his
Grandfather did, and that from him, by a continued succession, it has been
derived to them: -- For Example; -- Ask a Welshman at this day, what
Countrey-man he is, he will answer, Cymro glan, A true Welshman; That is to
say, Gomera glan: -- In like manner, for his language, Gymeraege, quasi
Gomeraege, both from Gomer: -- And truly, I take the Cimbrians, to be much the
same; Cimbri, quasi Cambri, quasi Cymri, quasi Gomeri; -- And again, Mumgumry,
quasi Mount Gomery, the very seat, of Gomer himself.


This is, Draper, Diaper; Napkin, Nipkin; Pipkin, King Pepin.


Most excellent, I see you have studied Etymolo gy; -- I might yet further, and
(I think) without much difficulty, make it out, That the Mountains of Ararat,
were Penmenmaure in Wales; And the most ancient Egyptians, originally Welch, as
may be more than suspected, from their Deification of Leeks: -- But I had
rather come nearer home -- What pray, were the Galli Senones, that sack't Rome?
Welshmen, no doubt; The very name speaks it: Gallus -- Guallus, or Wallus -- A
Welshman; -- In like manner, the Gallo-Graecians, under Brennus; The same;
Brennus -- Brenn, or Brenning -- A King in Welch: -- But what do I go about to
prove that, which no body dares deny? -- I ll give you but one smart parting
blow -- The red streaked Apple, which makes such excellent Cider, what was it
originallie, but the welch Crab?


Sir, you have shown your self a person, of no ordinary learning; And because I
see, you are a virtuoso, Be pleased to walk in with me, and I may chance to
show you some Rarities, not unworthy your perusal: -- And you Madam, if you
have any commands for me, I'll receive them there.


We'll follow you Sir.


YOu're welcome Sir; And I have heard so well of you, from the Doctor, our
friend, That I'll show you fair Play; -- Catch her, and take her: -- Timothy.


Your pleasure Sir.


Go bid my Daughter come hither. --

'Tis a good Girl, and will make a good Wife; And I hope, who ever marries
her, will be a good Husband to her: -- She will deserve it, though I say it.


Never fear it Sir; If ever I kill her, 'twill be with kindness; -- My mother
would always say,


Come hither Beatrice: -- I am going abroad, and will leave you to entertain
this Gentleman, till I come again.


I shall obey you Sir.


Nay to her man; Never fall into the Rear, when you should charge.


I warrant you Sir for one:


What (in the name of Goodness) have we here? -- By my Father's last words, it
should be a Sweetheart (forsooth) -- how it strutts, like a Crow in a Gutter!
-- I have a great mind to hear it speak.


Methinks (Madam) this is a very fine Room.


It cannot be otherwise Sir, while you are in it.


A -- las good Madam -- 'Tis your Goodness -- Truly -- Pray what a Clock do you
count it?


He has a mind to show his Watch; But I'll prevent him:


I have a thing in my Pocket, corrects the Sun.


How do you call it good Sir?


The Vulgar, call it a Watch; but according to the learned, 'tis a Trochleal
Horadeixe.


He that made it, was as little sparing of his stuff, as the other of his
breath, that New-christen'd it, by so stubborn a Name.


Will your Ladyship be pleased to accept it? -- I assure you, 'tis at your
service; It shall be part of your Parafernalia.


By no means Sir: -- You speak in Phrase.


Alas (Madam) 'tis the way of the learned; -- Term, is three quarters of the
Art: -- Here's this now --


It appears no other to me at present.


Nor yet to me: -- But the word's too common; a Butcher would have said as much
-- Oh no -- 'Tis a ligneous Pixid, accommodated with two plumbeous Receptacles,
or stanueous Repositories, for Ink, and Sand; -- Or, more Laconically -- An
Escritoire.


You're very learned Sir!


Thanks to a good Tutor, some small foundation: -- I must present you something
--


A Suitor say thou! 'Tis a Puppet: --


You may be too confident Sir.


There --


I shall Sir.


How now? -- Where's this Alderman? -- What have we got here? A Glister-pipe?
--


Forbear Sir -- Know where you are.


The Hat cost more money, than to be made a Foot-ball.


Ha! Reply? -- Madam, your Fan.


Murder -- Murder -- Murder --


Was there ever such rudeness?


Nay -- You shall only stay, to see I am not drunk; -- I thought this, the best
disguise I could use, to keep your father from believing, I made any pretences
to you: -- Well (Madam) I love you, and you know it; -- You may be proud: --
Farewell.


A mad Wooer! -- However, would my Father liked him.


GOod Mr. Scruple, satisfy my Conscience: -- An Oath adds no legality to the
Action; If I swear to kill a man, must I do it?


Why thus: -- Hum -- Haw -- Mas' Andrew, told you, That he came to you with a
Commission, to bid you subscribe, That it was a spiritual Contract in letters
of flesh; and that he came a wooing to you, for him that had commissionated
him, and therefore called upon you, to come, and be handfasted, by subscribing
the Contract? Did I for this, convince you, of the lawfulness of the thing,
and, as it were, compel you to the Wedding? And will you call that Holy
Violence, a Spanish Inquisition? -- Have I done all this? And will you now fall
back? -- Shall our old Lease run out? -- And the Land be sowed with Cockles
again? -- Ah -- Ha --

-- Hui.


This is not the point; -- I cannot deny, but that I took it my self; But then,
was then, and now, is now.


Ah -- Be steadfast, and do not believe I speak this out of any particular
Egoitism, or fond Iishness, to my self -- Ah -- No -- This thing of
selfishness, is a very nothingness -- A mere -- mere. -- Ah -- do but consider
it -- (And pray Neighbours there, leave your whispering, and mind the matter in
hand.) -- Hum -- I* say -- Hum -- Do but consider, what acting, wonder-working,
advancing, and Christian-comforting times, these were: -- How the rebuke of the
poor, belied, slandered people, was taken away, and their Reputation cleared!
-- Ah -- Ah -- What great things were wrought upon the spirits of men, even
through the bowels of difficulty! -- Aa -- Antichrist was dying in his limbs,
nay, dying upwards; And this Kingdom that was once so given up to it, that it
was called, The Popes Ass -- Ah -- How was it become (as the Assembly most
happily found it out) the chief of the Ten Horns, that were to gore the Whore:
-- Ah -- Aa -- Good people, do not fear -- There are more Assemblies coming,
and more Purses opening, to carry on, the work -- Aa -- Comfort your selves,
That though these Landdestroying sins of Superstition, Innovation, and
Idolatry, were sins in the Kingdom, they were not sins of the Kingdom; And a
Nation was never destroyed, without National sins: -- Mark that Beloved, pray
mark that: -- Grecian, that when his hands were cut off, clapped hold with his
teeth: -- Ah -- Aa -- Do you but stand in the Gap, and there is a Block in the
way; It cannot be got over; The Nation cannot be destroyed, as long as you are
in it: -- Ah -- Then, do not despond in this day of Trial, this day of treading
down, and not building up -- Aa -- Give not up this Good Old Cause, which you
have so long contended for, with so much precious blood, and so much precious
Treasure -- Aa -- forsake it not, lest the Malignants rejoice, lest the
Malignant, and disaffected, say, You've fought to much purpose: -- Aa -- Bear
it yet but a little, and you will see Dagon totter, and when he is once running
down hill, he will not stop, till he come to the bottom: --


There, I hold with you, good Mr. Scruple; And the Codes, are of the same
opinion -- Tempori, aptare decet: -- Come let's in, and consult the Form.


I am for no Form: -- Yea, I hate the name, I abominate it: -- Forma, bonum
fragile est.


I'll make a Rogue of you, Sirrah!


Why Major -- Nay, good Major -- Have a care.


Thou Son of a Woman; -- Dost think men are Bulls, and get their money by
roaring? -- Cheat me of my share, you Dog? --


Nay Major -- Major -- What do you mean? -- Nay -- Nay -- Nay -- Flesh, and
blood is not able to endure this: --


The Rogue's afraid, or he had mischieft me: --


Hold, Major, hold; -- before George, you might have spoiled a man so.


Why Sirrah -- You stinking, lousy, Totterdemallion; you Ragamuffin, Tanarag
Rogue -- Who made you a Captain? -- Was it not I? -- Speak.


No troth was it not; -- 'Twas even the Box-keeper of the three Kings, and the
Fleece Link-boyes, made us both: -- You, a Major, and me, a Capitain.


Why thou Rotterdam Villain -- Deny it if thou can; -- Did not I pick thee
up, at a three-penny Ordinary, brought you into Gentlemen's company; Dubbed you a
Knight of the Blade; Taught you the method of making new plots, and borrowing
half a Crown of your Landlady, upon the hopes of them; And after all this,
signed your Certificate, to make you capable, of those Arrears, you never
fought for; And do you now forget your Patroon, sirrah? Do you forget your
Patroon?


And good Major, recollect your self too, if you please -- Do'nt you know, that
I know, That you were never above a Corporal, in all your life; And that too,
not till fighting was quite out of fashion? -- Bow the stick on the other side,
and 'twill be strait.


I must kill the Rogue: --

'Twas bravely fought: -- Thou hast acquitted thee like a man of mettle? --
Let's breath.


Did not I (if you are yet cool enough to hear truth) teach you, your Top, your
Palm, and your Slur? -- Showed you the mystery, of your Jack in a Box, and the
frail Dye? -- Taught you the use of Up-hills, Down-hills, and Petarrs? -- The
Waxed, the Grav'd, the Slipped, the Goad, the Fullam, the Flat, the Bristle, the
Bar; And generally, instructed you from Prick-penny, to Long Lawrence? And is
the question now, Who is beholding?


That ever friends, should fall out about trisles!


Agreed -- But hold -- The Devil a Cross have I.


Or I: -- Then knots, and slats -- Our Swords shall serve; -- This knots --
That, slats; -- Joy knots.


And I flats; -- 'Twirle up: --


Well -- It can't be helped -- A man's never the worse man, for a mischance: --
But hark you Captain -- Upon Honour, no talking.


No -- No -- No -- First blood, first blood: -- And now Major, you think I
cheated you: -- By this good Morglay! The Rogue was resolv'e to fight, and I
had no reason but to suffer it to be taken up: -- I'll be sworn, I got not so
much, as a Reconciliation Supper by it.


This is it, when men must manage their business by themselves: -- All cover,
and all lose: -- You think you are well enough, if you can but say your Gamut
by Rote, though you are not able to prove a Note of't: -- Come, come, I must
tell you, there is more required, to be a Rogue, than to say, I will be a
Rogue: -- A man would have thought, one of your Years, and Education, might
have easily guest, who would fight, and who not.


Pox on it, 'tis past: --


Oh Captain, I have been all about to look you: -- Not fighting, I hope?


No -- The Major, and I, have been only measuring blades -- Here's the
pretty'st thing, you ever handled -- Hey dash -- Toledo, to an inch -- right
Thomas de Ayala; -- Upon my credit, but two of them came over in three Ships: --
Do but see how finely 'tis mounted! -- Sa -- Sa -- Observe -- how true it
bends! -- Ah! for a pass in Flanconade now --


A thousand Frogs.


-- More than I'll speak of; or, to tell you truth, dare: -- But hark you
Squire, hast thou any noble Archievements for thy man of Mars? Must the great
Turk dye? -- Speak; -- His breath, hangs upon thy lips.


Why truly Captain, I came to ask your Advice: -- I have been most lamentably
abused; Nay, in the presence of my Mistress too.


Send him a Chartel Boy, send him a Chartel, and I'll carry it: -- Is he of
mortal Race?


Why truly Captain I cannot well tell what he is; -- But this I am sure, he
had a good material hand, and hoof.


How Captain! -- This Gentleman is your friend?


He is; And I'm engaged in honour to see him righted.


'Twas bravely spoke; -- And pray think of no Second, but my self: -- Good Sir
--


Then -- So't please you, thus -- I was entertaining my Mistress, with this
little bauble --


'Tis somewhat beneath the standard, I must confess: -- But pray on.


-- When of a sudden, a rude, roaring, Roister --


His name good Sir.


Truly I could not learn that: -- It being in the City, 'tis probable, it was
some Merchant or other, got drunk.


Not unlikelie -- proceed.


I say then, this rude Fellow, without scarce saying a word, gives me a good
sound box --


Not to interrupt you Sir -- Was it the Bucketoon, or the Bucketadoe? --
Logicallie, or Rhetoricallie? -- That is to say, with the Clunch-fist, or open
Palm?


Why truly, neither: -- But as near as I can remember, it was with the back of
the hand, upon the Cheek; for with the same motion, he struck off my Hat --
Thus Major --


O Ho; -- The De rear main; -- Why then the question will be singlie this --
Whither a blow, with the back of the hand, upon the Cheek, may be called, a box
on the ear; -- For my part, I am clearlie of opinion -- not.


To take it literallie, I grant it you; -- But then answer me, whither it were
not a probable box of the ear; I take it, 'twas.


So far I agree with you Captain -- But pray Sir, the rest.


Then, as if his foot, had kept time with his hand, he gave me such a kick in
Ano, that to avoid him, I had almost beaten out my brains against a post.


This last of the Post, was your own Act, and may by no means be called his: --
However, upon the whole matter, you are wronged, and we'll see you righted.


Thank you good Major -- I am beholding to you.


D' you hear me -- Squire -- You see what pains the Major has taken in your
business -- You must present him.


'Tis my intention -- Pray let's meet here about an hour hence, and we'll
further consider of 't.


We'll attend you -- Your servant. --


SO, so, the Trade goes merrily on: -- Let it hold but one seven years, and I
shall go near to fine for Alderman.


O Mopus! Mopus! -- Here's the Constables wife to have her Fortune read -- She
had a Bastard before she was married -- Has had two Husbands, and one Daughter,
by this: -- One Major Bilbo is her Sweet-heart; and I more than believe, our
Alderman has a finger in the pie too.


The Devil's in it, if I miss her Fortune; I shall be Conjurer, whither I will
or no.


Indeed Sir, I have heard, you're a cunning man, and can tell a woman any
thing.


Such things have been done, and may again: -- Let me see your hand: --


Now indeed Sir, he is a Constable: -- Bless me!


Your third, shall be very rich; A Common-counsel man at least; and you shall
have Children by him.


How many have I had already?


Let me see -- One Daughter -- And no more -- That is -- since you were
married.


To see what learning can do!


Ah Mistress; I travelled hard for it -- I have been, where never any man was
before me, or since -- I'll speak a bold word, -- I have been so far, that I
might have put my finger, in the very Hole, where the wind came out; -- And
all this, for a little knowledge.


Methinks 'tis a great deal -- Pray, a little more.


You should have three diseases; -- And if you escape the first, and second,
you may arrive to the third: -- You shall bury all three Husbands, and be
very fortunate, toward your latter end: -- You were born -- Cancer: -- And
have received a hurt, by fire -- Hot-water -- Or some other way.


Now truly, but I burnt my hand with a smoothing Iron; And all to be scaled my
foot, with taking down the pot one day, when my Maid was gone abroad, with her
Sweetheart.


You have a natural mark, before, or behind, or somewhere about you, between
your head, and your heel.


That's more then I know; But I'll have my Husband look, to morrow morning.


You are pretty neat in your house; somewhat nimble, witty, subtle; -- And a
good Bedfellow.


Indeed Sir (I know not why) but I've been told so.


Double-minded -- Often changing your resolution -- Prone to be angry, but
quickly gone -- And now and then, love a bit in a corner.


'Tis best eating, when one's a hungry.


Your good days, are Monday -- Wednesday -- Friday -- Your evil, Tuesday, and
Thursday -- Saturday, indifferent: -- Your good Fortune lies -- South, and by
Nor'th; and therefore direct your Affairs that way, and place your
Chamber-door, and Bed, to that side.


Now beshrew me Sir, but I'll observe your directions.


Once more your hand -- Your Mons Ventris is exalted -- You love -- I marry
that you do.


Nay, now Sir! What do you mean? I love nothing, but what all women do -- their
Husbands.


Two strange thwarting lines, across the Cingulum -- You have a Sweetheart, or
two, besides your Husband.


Who I Sir? -- I'd have you know I am no such: -- I am as honest a woman, as
any in the Parish -- I scorn your words.


No doubt of it: -- Let me see how your hand agrees with my Globe: -- He is --
Suppose I should name him to you; -- B-I-L-Bilboe; -- He belongs to the Sword.


Oh Sir, have a care -- If my Husband should hear you, he would run Horn-mad,
and knock both our brains out, with his staff of Authority.


To show you more of my Art -- You had a Bastard, before you were married --
And there is an old Fellow that haunts you. --


O good Sir -- If you discover me, I am undone.


Sir, there are two Gentlemen below, desire to speak with you.


I'll wait on them presently. --


If you should betray me now: --


I will not -- I will not: -- But hark you -- Upon condition still, you give
me a bit too.


O Sir, 'tis impossible -- Your wife's in the other Room -- The Gentlemen stay
for you below -- Somebody's coming up -- Mrs. Mopus -- Mrs. Mopus!


Hang her Jade --


See -- See -- See -- Y'faith Mr. Doctor! -- Is this your living soberlie,
temperatelie, and enjoying it, as if you had it not?


Is this your Magisterium -- Elixar -- or Rosy Crucian -- Pantarva? -- No
firrah -- The father of this is the Devil, the mother, his Dam, its brothers,
and sisters, the Tribe of Whore-hoppers, the wind carries it, from Bawdy house,
to Bawdy-house; and the Nurse thereof, is a suburb Tantrum.


A plague of this Boy -- Undone for ever! --


Are you so hot? -- I'll cool you: -- D' ye hear me -- give the next Porter
half a Crown, and let him fetch Double Diligence the Constable -- I am
mistaken, or the woman we found here, was his wife.


Keep him in the mean time.


I warrant you, he stirs not.


Gentlemen -- Good Gentlemen -- As you are men -- You undo me for ever --
Study wherein I may serve you.


Stay a little --


Nor would I, by my good will, deal with other; -- Do you take the wise men,
and give me the fools, and then see, who'll have the most practice: -- There
are but two sorts of people in the World, Aut qui captant, aut qui captantur;
-- Aut Corvi qui lacerant, aut Cadavera, quaelacerantur; which, the great
Albumazar, has most significantlie rendered, by Cheators, and Cheatees -- If it
were not for fools Sir, how should Knaves live?


An ingenious beginning; If it hold, much may be said.


You are Gentlemen; -- And I see, understand -- I'll be plain with you --
Examine the World, and you'll find three quarters of't, down-right fools; And
for the rest, six parts in seven, are little, besides band, and beard, and yet
they make a great bussle in the World, and pass for shrewd men: -- And can you
blame me then? -- Did you ever hear a Fish-wife cry stinking Makarel? Or a
Citizen, gummed Velvet? -- No -- The best in the Town, though the worst in his
Shop: -- Here, we have a learned consultation, whither my Lady may eat Butter
with her Eggs, or have her Posset turned with Lemon, or Ale: -- Yonder, another
keeps a sputter, with his New -- New -- New -- The Wall-ey'd Mare, and the
crop't slea-bitten -- A Book with a hard Title -- A new found language in
Ireland -- Turk, and Pope -- The Flesh-office -- My Ladies Dog -- The safest
way of cutting of Corns -- A bag of Writings -- A house of the Bank-side -- The
Christening of another Turk -- A Franciscan Proselyte -- Gentlemen-ushers, and
Maid-servants -- Dentifrices, and Lozenges: -- Another, dawbs you whole
Volumes, with the difference between sufficient, and efficacious: -- Another,
whither the lining of Aaron's Ephod, were Sky-colour'd, or Sea-green; And hack,
and hew so desperately about their Goats wool, a man would bless himself to
see such piles of elaborate Non-sense: -- And now Gentlemen -- Am I the only
man in fault? -- The worst you can say, is, The people, have so little wit, as
to give me money; and I, am so mad, as to pocket the injury: -- Does this
satisfy?


Rogue enough -- But is't not possible to make thee honest?


Try me -- I have a Wife, and three Children: -- The Devil take my Wife, and
two of them, if ever I fail you.


A safe wish -- But suppose I should order it so, that a young Lady come to
you, could you so read her fortune, as to make her marry me? -- You know how
to play your part, if you please.


And if I don't, to your advantage, Cut my throat.


He must know it at last -- I had as good tell him the person.


So you may; -- And do.


Hold up thy hand -- To make thee honest, here's twenty Pieces for thee; and
if thou dost the business, I'll give thee two hundred more; -- What say
thou?


If I betray you, or do not my best, be seven years in killing me.


You know Alderman Whitebroth?


Know him? -- Why -- I am his Doctor.


'Tis his Daughter -- You know your work.


And if I don't do it -- I'll run my Country: -- And now Gentlemen, you shall
say I am honest -- You observed the woman, that was here when you came in?


Yes, what of her?


Why -- She is the Constables wife, whom (to be short) the Alderman Cuckolds.


Ha! Are you sure of it?


By the help of this Globe, I made her confess, That the Alderman, and one
Bilbo, play Level de coil with her: -- But (I may tell it you now) my wife,
gave me the first hint of't.


Hah! hah! -- Thou art honest: -- Bilbo -- A Hector -- He lies in the
Constables house?


The same: -- Make the best use of it you can, and I'll promise you, to follow
your directions.


This was better than wish -- Come, We'll lay our heads together, and you shall
hear of us again suddenly.


WAs he so drunk do you say?


As ten thousand Beggars.


So, so; -- his money is jogging already: -- Alas Mr. Runter, you hear what he
says -- He was drunk.


Indeed Sir, I was never but half so bad, in all my life, and then, I was
Maudlen, for a whole Month after.


And well it became you -- Compunction is good Timothy.


What say you Sir -- Mr. Tyro is a civil, hopeful Gentleman, and I am sure,
loves your Daughter.


Nay speak to her -- there she is.


Love me! -- 'Tis more than ever he told me yet.


He is a littlemodest -- Ingenui vultus puer, ingenuique pudoris. Truly I
think you could not have chosen better.


I chosen Sir! -- You will not persuade me I hope, that I am in love? -- If I
am, I can assure you, 'tis not with him.


How Child! -- Not be ruled by your father? -- Indeed Husband, it would be
worth your while, to have an eye upon her.


And your own too, good Wife.


It should be both your care -- You must provide a Husband for her in time, or
she will provide one for her self.


Come, leave this discourse to another time; you know we have business.


What pity 'tis, that this Mounsieur Le Coxcomb, Tyro, should have my young
Mistress -- A fool, that knows not the use of money, but to play at
Bob-fatthing, and Span-counter: -- Afterwitt has most right to her, for his
Estates sake -- Come, come, he is a Gentleman, and if things hit right, -- Thou
shalt have her Boy.


ALas Major! Your Arm in a Scarf?


Why faith -- A small badge of Honour; -- And I was dressed up in haste, that I
might not fail you.


How was it good Major?


Nothing, nothing, but a small brush about the wall; and I know not why, but I
fancied he might be the person that had affronted you: -- To be short, he made
me this pass, in second, and I returned it so nimbly in Tierce, that I made
the Sun, shine clean through him.


Lightning by this hand -- Lightning -- Well --


Uh -- Have a care Captain.


-- Go thy ways -- And if thou take a swing in Quart for it, there hangs as
brave a Fellow, as has hung there these forty years.


No murder I hope good Major?


Let him look to that -- I neither know, nor care. -- Do not be troubled Boy!
-- I have an Arm yet left to fight thy Battles.


I thank you Sir -- Be pleased --


O Sir, -- your love --


Ne'er doubt him Squire -- I'd as lief have him upon his stumps, as twenty
others upon no legs.


Well Gentlemen, Courage -- For my own part, I fear no flesh alive -- No upon
my life and soul don't I, and I believe the the same of you -- You may fight,
you are men of the Sword: -- But for me -- A man of the Law! -- How say you
Captain?


By no means Squire.


Say no more -- He's dead.


Nay good Major have a care -- No more murder.


What you please -- I'll promise you, I'll use him the better for your sake.


See Captain -- This is he.


Pray Sir withdraw, and hazard not your self: -- It may prove dangetous.


I have out-staid my time --


Look upon the Dyal.


It wants a Gnomon.


Hold thy Death-threatning hand -- He is a Captain -- Let him dye fairlie: --
You do well to presume upon this Scarf -- I had not been wont, to see such
things, and carry my hands in my pocket: --


Thou art not mad man? -- Hold.


The Rogue has affronted me, for speaking kindly to him -- Be quick -- And let
me know the cause, or I'll nail thee to the ground, for an example to others.


You have injured a worthy friend of ours -- Squire Tyro.


If that be all -- Rise -- There's your Sword.


By no means Sir --


Major Bilbo I think.


The same Sir -- I should know that face too! -- Certain Sir, I have had the
honour, to be drunk in your Company ere now.


And not unlikelie -- We must not part with dry lips, now; -- Afterwitt -- Our
friend -- Dost not remember, we were merry together, at --


Oh -- Your servant Sir;


Come -- All friends -- Well Major (to renew our acquaintance) I have the best
humour for you -- 'Twill get you the Pence, and all of us, mirth.


And what may it be?


Dismiss your friend to the next Tavern, and I'll tell you.


Methinks, I find a dislocation in my Crupper; -- Your servant Gentlemen.


Your servant you Rogue -- Your servant: -- Now Sir, your Commands?


To the point then -- If you are honest to us, it may be worth you 500 l. -- If
not, we are two to one, persons unstain'd in our Reputation; and if we deny,
your affirmation, will signify little -- Will you be trusty?


As steel my Boy -- What is 't?


You lie at Double Diligence the Constables house?


I do -- What then?


And now, and then (for diversion) with your Landladie?


No wounding of Reputation, good Gentlemen: -- She's a pretty Flie-boat, two
men won't sink her.


Nor three, I warrant you.


It may be not -- Have you a mind Gentlemen?


O -- No Sir -- I hope, Alderman Whitebroth visits you pretty often?


For his Rent, or so.


Then we, know more than you -- He has a lick at her too; -- Will you assist us
in a design?


By the faith of a Soldate, and a man of Arms, I will.


To engage you then, here's twenty Pieces for you -- You must Trepan him with
the Constables Wife; -- If you find her shy, you may bring in her Husband for
a share -- My Neck on it, you square him out of a 1000 l. at least -- He'll do
any thing, rather than have it known.


Do it? -- I, and thank you too -- The Bed-pad, is the safest Pad; -- Here's my
hand, I'll be honest to you.


Well, see you are, and let's hear from you again, as soon as you can -- In the
mean time, do you two go to the Captain; -- You know whither I am going; --
Farewell.


THat I could meet with Mr. Afterwitt now; -- He'll never get such another
opportunity -- And at home, 'tis vain to think it.


Oh! Cis! -- Well met -- 'Tis my good Girl.


Nay pish -- Stand away -- Come; -- Do what you will, but don't you rumple my
Handkercher.


Alas poor thing -- I warrant, you much-minded, what I spake to you of last: --
Have you ever said any thing to your Mistress about it?


Yes that I have -- And she likes him well enough; -- But she will never
marry, without her fathers consent -- She loves him well, but her fathers
Estate better.


A good crafty wench -- Let us but secure her, I'll warrant her the Estate: --
And if thou dost it Cis -- I'll promise thee a good portion, and a better
husband.


What would you have me do?


Lose no opportunity of commending Mr. Afterwitt to her: -- A Gentleman -- A
fine man -- A handsome man -- A proper man -- And you dare warrant, a good
woman's man: -- And hark you, you may tell her, how Tyro, had hired a couple of
Fellows, to Hector him, and that he came off bravely: -- And all this for he.


Ineeed Sir, I will not fail you in a tittle.


But were 't not possible, to get her to Mopus's, to have her fortune read?


Suppose I should? -- What then?


The work were done.


Then trouble not your self -- She made me steal out before, and is just
following me to that purpose: -- But hang him; -- He knows as much as my Horse
-- I had almost told her, how Tim. and I cheated him, with some dead Ale in a
Urinal, instead of my Masters water; but that Mr. Scruple, and my old Mistress,
have so cried him up.


Have a care of stories -- They may spoil all -- The Fellow is ignorant enough,
there's no doubt of 't -- But yet as long as they believe him knowing, will be
easily able, to do my friend's business; -- 'Prithee desire her to make him
show her, her husbands face in a glass; -- Doubt nothing, but follow your
instructions -- I must to Afterwitt, and let him know, whither his Mistress is
going.


Well -- Trust to me -- Be gone -- I hear her coming.


O Cis -- I am stolen out, with much ado -- Shall we go? -- What dost think
of him?


Truly, I take him for a huge cunning man -- He has told, all the Maids of the
Parish, the strangest things! -- And they say, can show one, ones Sweethearts
face in a glass.


If he can do that -- I'll believe him -- I am so strangely troubled with
dreams, it passes --


And so have I been too -- And thought several times, to tell you of a strange
thing in our house, but that I was afraid, you would laugh at me.


But tell me -- What was 't?


Why last New-years Eve, when all the house were in Bed, I swept up the Hearth,
and smoothed the Ashes, and next morning, found the print of a Wedding Ring,
and a Grave upon them -- I am confident we shall have a Wedding and a Burial,
out of our house this year -- My old Master dye, and my young Mistress married.


Away fool -- If I marry -- I promise you it shall not be Tyro -- 'Tis such a
piece of Ginger-bread!


Marry hang him -- 'Tis all the News, that he hired a couple of Fellows, to
murder Mr. Afterwitt; But he has paid them, to the purpose: -- And they say, the
quarrel was about you.


Then in short time I shall be Town-talk, and work for Knights Adventurers: --
I should be sorry, he were hurt: -- I would -- But come, I long to hear, what
this Fellow will tell me.


MAkehaste -- I left them coming --


Then do you step into the next Room -- And when you hear me cry -- Jubeo --
Take the small stool in your hand, and come in, and stand upon it behind her
Chair, and look upon the glass -- But be sure, when you have done, to take the
stool away with you.


I must be gone -- I have appointed Runter -- Have you prepared the Aldermans
Dose?


'Tis here --


Sir, there is a Gentlewoman or two at door, desire to speak with you.


Desire them to walk in: -- Here, here -- This way -- And you there: --


I have heard my mother so talk of you, I could not be quiet, till I came to
you too.


I am nor wont to make my Art common -- But do you propose what you will, and
I'll do my best, to resolve you.


Then truly Sir, I have been extremely troubled with dreams, and would fain
know, what they mean.


And shall (Madam) if Art can do it -- Dreams, are certain motions, or fictions,
of the Soul, signifying, some good or evil to come; wherein notwithstanding, we
chiefly regard, how the Moon stands affected: -- What were yours?


Methought, my father was chosen Lord Mayor, and that Cis, and I, were pounding
Spices, to make an entertainment -- And at last, methought, we fell together by
the ears in our smock sleeves.


For the first, 'twas an ill sign -- A sign of your fathers death -- For Death,
is like the Mayor of a Town within his own Corporation; Subject to none, and
has no Companions: -- Then, as to your pounding of spices -- That betokens
Matrimony -- For the Pestle, represents the man, and the Mortar, the'woman: --
Lastly, as to your fighting -- Infalliblie the same; And that, the rather, the
persons being strip't, as you say they were: -- Have you more?


Yes Sir -- Methought I was married to a man, with a great Jolt-head.


A sign of Dignity: -- If there had been a brazen face to it, the better; for
'tis the first step to it.


There were divers others -- But I have forgot them; Pray be pleased to give me
some general hints, that I may the better observe' um for the future.


Any thing (good Madam) to serve you: -- To dream of loss of eyes, betokens
help; For most men help the blind; -- If but one eye, but half of what was
expected: -- For a married woman to dream of beheading; Loss of her Husband; --
To a Maid; Loss of her Maiden-head: -- Of Leeks, and Cheese; that she shall
marry a Welshman; -- Of hanging; Matrimome; for they both go, by one destiny.


Pretty indeed -- Pray Sir some more,


To dream of loss of fingers, betokens, want of employment, to a Lawyer; -- Of
broken Pates; good luck, to Chyrurgions: -- Of cutting high Capers, hanging, to
a Thief: -- Of a Midwife; revealing of secrets: -- Of Grass-hoppers, and
Crickets; more words, than performance: -- Of a Post, and Pillars; a Mayor, and
Aldermen: -- Of a Calves head, and Purtenants; a Foreman, and his Fellows! --
Of being a Bed with a handsome Lady; ill luck, because 'tis not true: -- Of
having a true friend --


I, What sign's that?


A sign he's mistaken: -- But enough of this -- Good Madam, your hand.


Here -- And pray tell me my Fortune.


I cannot make it better, or worse; But such as it is, you shall know
presently. --


What think thou of him Cis?


No doubt but 'tis all true. -- They say, he can show ones Sweethearts face in
a glass; good Madam remember to try him.


You shall have a Husband, in a very short time: -- As to his person -- He is,
c.


But does he love me?


I am sure he does -- And without him, you'll be very unhappy: -- He is a most
excellent person -- He receives his knowledge, from Mercury, in Virgo -- His
compleatness of body, from Caput Draconis, in Gemini -- Saturn and Venus, in
Libra, direct him to the light of nature -- Fortuna Major, and Populus, figures
of Geomancy, give him health -- And Puella, befriends him: -- Mars in Cancer,
is his Enemy -- Jupiter in Capricorne, somewhat uncertain, and two Ideas of
Geomancy, conspire against him -- But he shall receive Treasures from the Sun,
and Jewels from the Moon, and his Guardian Angel shall defend him, and make the
spiteful Dragon, bite his Tail, in Sagittarius, because he cannot be revenged
of him.


But is't not possible to see this excellent person?


'Tis a thing, I rarely do -- I seldom practise beyond the stars -- But if
you'll promise me to sit quiet, and not talk it abroad, I will for once, show
you the height of Art.


Well Sir -- I promise -- But pray, no noise.


No -- He shall rise with Music: Boy --

My glass; And the enchanted Chair:


Oh -- Good Sir have a care!


Be still -- The Spirit knows my meaning, and I dare not baulk him: -- Fear
not, you are as safe, as if you were in your fathers house: --

Now Madam, you have seen the No plus ultra of Art; And if I might advise you,
I would have you complie with your destiny; -- without it, you will be
miserable.


And perhaps with it: -- Do you know the Gentleman?


I never saw him in my life, till now -- But, methought, he had a promising
aspect, and agreed in every thing, with what I told you before -- Do you know
the face?


Yes -- And if my father were consenting to it, it should be the first thing I
would.


I can but wish you well -- Yet one thing I'll do -- 'tis yet in my power -- If
you have no mind to him, avoid seeing him, before you have slept, and let me
know it, before Sun-rising to morrow, and I may prevent it: -- If otherwise,
'tis past the Art of man.


I thank you Sir -- Cis, What shall I do -- Is there no back way? -- If I can
but miss him now, I'm well enough.


Have a good heart Madam -- What must be, will be.


You had best let my Boy conduct you: Boy! Aldermans -- Show it this Lady, and
wait on her, as far as she pleases to command you.


'Twas well contrived -- Your servant.


I Thought what you were -- Is this your going to Repetition? -- I'll tell my
Landlord.


Indeed I could not help it -- I could never be rid of him -- But I am sure, I
always loved you best -- I hope you will not undo a woman.


Nay -- Nay -- That's nothing to me -- I am resolved -- Unless you engage to do
one thing.


Any thing good Mr. Bilbo, that I can -- What is it?


When will the Alderman be here?


At Night, after the Watch is set -- What then?


Why -- You must join with me to Trepan him, -- It may be worth us a 1000 l.


'Tis impossible -- No one will believe him to be such a man.


They'll never know it: -- He'll be hanged ere he let the business come upon
the stage.


I'll never yield to it: -- You shall have what money you will --


Hang money -- Fly Brass, the Devil's a Tinker.


Yes -- After you Major -- I have done it forty times.


Why how now man? -- Melancholy? -- Thou look as if thy head were full of
Accounts.


And truly you are right -- I was just considering how to patch up my Account
with Mr. Alderman -- Indeed he ties me to hard meat -- I cannot take a Rat, but
he makes me account to him, for half-profits; and yet, I allow him as good as
40 l. a year, for the keeping of one poor Gate; -- Would I were once Overseer
of the Poor, or Church-warden, there were somewhat to be got by that -- I'm
sure, this will hardly keep life, and soul together.


Hang care -- I'll tell thee what -- Thou hast the honestest woman to thy wife,
this day in the Parish: -- Poor soul, how she's been plagued by this Alderman!


Nay Major -- What d' you mean?


She was ashamed to tell you't her self, and would not be quiet till I had
promised to do it -- This old Goat, is perpetually soliciting her -- Would one
think it? -- Troth I should have guest him fuller of Mercury, than Venus; But
-- A man may be deceived.


How! -- The Alderman? -- See what 'tis to have an honest woman to ones wife --
I warrant you now had she been right, (as they say) she had never discovered
it: -- Now my dear Chick, how I love thee!


Leave your slobbering, and consider what to do: -- My advice is, that we
Trepan him -- The Thief is rich, and will bleed well.


That would be somewhat! -- But how is't to be done?


He will be here by that time the Watch is set; -- The Captain, and I, will
do it.


If we could get a good round Sum between us, 'twould do no hurt -- You may
compound with the Captain for a small matter.


Let me alone with him; -- He's hard at hand -- I'll fetch him; -- Don't you be
out of the way.


Indeed wise, this is a Providence, and may do us good: -- 'Grant we may make a
right use of 't.


Not gone yet! -- I must rattle him: --


Save your good Worship Sir.


Alas Mr. Double Diligence! That you should be thus negligent of the peace of
the Kingdom! -- Don't you know there are a number of dangerous people abroad,
and your Watch not set yet! -- Now truly but you are too blame, and I could
find in my heart to have you complained of.


I was just going -- Your Worship sees I am ready.


Pray keep your Watch together, and walk your Round in person -- you cannot be
too secure: -- Here -- Here's somewhat for your Watch to drink -- I have given
them nothing a great while.


'Tis a Four-pence-half-penny Sir -- Will your Worship be pleased to have the
odd half-penny again.


No no -- No matter -- Let it go for a Crust.


We thank your Worship.


I just met my Doctor, and he has given me the rarest Cordial -- Methinks I am
so flippant! -- Now my little Mouse! -- How do you? -- Shall we walk in?


Indeed Sir, I am somewhat ill.


'Prithee leave these excuses -- Thou know I love thee.


See Captain -- See! --


Ah the old Rogue!


Come, come -- You must -- I've had no Rent a good while.


Indeed Sir we've a hard bargain of't: -- I hope your Worship will consider us
against next quarter.


Why? -- You pay me no money -- You know I take it out, (as they say.)


I but Mr. Scruple's very hard upon my Husband, and won't believe, but he has a
double Lease.


I'll order that hereafter -- 'Prithee come -- The Cuckold is secure -- Good
faith you shall.


I cannot; -- Nor will I -- Pray unhand me.


How's this? -- My Landlady! -- Cuckold my honest Landlord! -- Kill him -- Kill
him --


Good Gentlemen -- Spare my life -- Oh -- Oh --


Hold -- Hold -- Better geld him.


Agreed -- Agreed.


O good Gentlemen -- 'Twill break my wives heart -- Good Gentlemen -- I am an
Alderman.


Thou an Alderman? -- I'll undertake he stole this Chain -- Gi'me't. --


Come Brother -- Uncase -- Uncase.


I had forgot my Night-Cap -- How now! -- What's here? -- Stand -- I require
you in His Majesties Name to keep the peace. -- Stand -- What are you? --
Thieves -- Thieves -- Down with them -- Mr. Alderman! -- Alas good Sir, what
makes your Worship in this condition?


Landlord -- I am confident this is no Alderman -- The Rogue has served my
Landlady, a man would not serve a Dog so.


How! -- Stick a Bulls feather in my Cap! -- Make me a Knight of the forked
Order! -- Is this true Mr. Alderman? Is this true?


Failings brother Diligence, failings -- Pray let the business be ended between
our selves, and I will patiently submit to a Churchrebuke.


One good Action, is worth two Rebukes, and three Chastisements; -- Pray
Gentlemen keep him here, till I fetch the Watch: -- I will have it recorded to
my own honour, the example of all succeeding Constables, and terror of
Justices, That a Constable once in his time, laid a Justice of Peace, by the
heels: -- I'll be with you instantly.


Good Neighbour -- This will be as great a scandal to our fellowship, as that
abomination of the Elders Maid in Bellyard.


Hold Landlord -- Is he an Alderman in earnest?


Yes, yes -- But I'll Alderman him.


By no means -- Stay -- The old Gentleman may take cold -- Pray Sir put on your
Clothes -- 'Twas well I asked the question -- I would not have it go further
for 5000 l. -- An Alderman!


Thank you good Sir -- Pray take up the business.


Come Landlord -- Hanged -- 'Tis done, and can't be helped. -- He shall give
you a 1000 l.


A thousand pound -- Out upon it --


A 1000 l. Sir -- Alas, I thought 10 l. or so.


How! -- 10 l. -- 'Send we make him accept a 1000. -- 'Tis a foul business, the
more you stir, the worse 'twill be -- Will you refer't to me? -- I hope to
deserve a 100 l. of you my self.


What you will -- But pray beat it as low as you can.


Come Landlord -- What say you? -- The Gentleman's willing to give you a 1000
l.


Oh -- Undone -- I'm a poor man.


Tell me of a thousand pound!


Nay now Mr. Constable, you're unreasonable.


Well then, let him throw in the Lease of my house too -- And (for your sake
Major) I'll do it.


He shall -- He shall -- Burn it; -- 'tis but an old house -- gived him --
Troth I was afraid we should not have got him so low -- You heard what he said,
'twas for my sake too -- I hope you'll consider it.


Well -- If it must be so -- No more words of't -- I'll end y ou a 1000 l. to
morrow, and conveigh over the house, when you please: -- Oh -- Oh -- An undone
man.


In the mean time, a Bond (as you use to say) for mortalities sake, would do
not hurt.


What you will -- I must obey.


Be not troubled -- The flesh, was good flesh, and worth the money.


But the sauce though, was Devilish dear.


Hark you Landlord -- Run to your Neighbour Squeeze the Scrivener, for a
couple of blank Bonds -- Make haste -- And when the work's done, we'll drink
abundantly, and remember the Founder.


Truly I like it well; -- Exceeding well -- It is good to be thankful: -- Pray
take the Alderman in, and I'll be with you instantly.


NOW you see Madam to how little purpose,
We cross our Stars: --

Had you but mist me now,
I should have ventured that, and perhaps staved,
That misery, which always follows rashness.

Trust me: -- I warrant you things will go right:
Now for a small hedge Priest to make the knot,
We'll tie it faster, as we've better leisure.
Keep back a little -- I would not have them see us yet.

Indeed I wont -- You have been large to me already --


Upon one condition I may.


What's that good Sir?


That you'll give me leave to put it in the Diurnal --


I must confess I should be loath to be the Author of so ill a president: -- But
if I should take it; how shall I be able to serve your friend?


I have told you.


Hah -- But such an opportunity will never happen.


I am certainly informed he's now upon it: -- For being taken very ill of a
sudden, he has resolved to publish that draught, which you made for him, and
has lain in your hands ever since his last sickness: Now instead of that, let
him seal and deliver this settlement upon my friend, in consideration of
Marriage, with his Daughter, and the work's done: -- Besides, if he should
discover it, I have him so sure upon other Accounts, he dares not mutter: --


You are a notable Gentleman -- You have done extreme prudently, in leaving a
blank for the first words, This Indenture, c. And that the parchment is plain
at top: -- I will fill it up, with In Nomine Domini, for fear some one may look
over my shoulder while 'tis doing; when once 'tis over, 'tis easy indenting
it, and scraping out, In Nomine Domini; and instead thereof, putting in, This
Indenture made, c. Trust me with it.


Shall my friend depend upon you?


D' you think me a Knave -- A word's enough: -- Yet if you would be ruled by
me, I would advise you to engage Mr. Scruple in the business; He will be able
to do much in it.


Will a Parsonage of 300 l. a year do it? -- If it will, my friend has such a
one newly fallen, and given me order (as I see occasion) to present it him --
But do you think he will conform?


I warrant you he does both -- Leave it to me to make him -- I must confess he
has been somewhat violent heretofore, but of late, I can assure you, very
instrumental: -- Scruple.


And your Worship too: -- I have been looking you every where -- Mr. Alderman
presents you with that health he wants himself, and desires you to come to him,
and bring with you, that draught of his Will, which was engrost when he was
last sick -- I left that learned Artist Dr. Mopus with him, who shakes his
head, and wonders at this sudden alteration -- He says, they drank a glass of
Ale together but few hours before; But truly now, he doubts him.


Why? what's the matter?


The Doctor had a hard word for it, but I have quite forgot it: -- He is taken
with a strange scouring, and vomiting: The Doctor knows not what to make of
him: -- Death is in's face.


Alas poor Gentleman -- I'll wait on him immediately: -- That things should
fall so cross! -- His Daughter is just married.


How! Married? -- I am sure he knows nothing of it -- For his intention of
sending for you, was, That he might so dispose his Estate, that the Court of
Aldermen might not have the fingering of it.


It can't be helped, 'tis done -- But hark you -- 'Tis to a worthy Gentleman,
and one that has so great an esteem for you, That having a Parsonage of 300 l.
a year in his gift, and now void, he is resolved to dispose it to no one, till
you have refused it.


This is true, I can assure you Sir; And by me, has made the offer to this
Gentleman in your behalf; who, I think, knows me too well, to doubt the truth
of 't.


Indeed I do -- I'll take care your Presentation shall be dispatch't out of
hand: -- But -- You must Conform.


Well -- Well -- That shall break no squares -- 300 l. a year -- I do assure
you, a worthy Gentleman.


He comes himself, and his fair Bride. -- Madam! All Joy.


Of what? -- Will you persuade me into it?


Indeed Mrs. Beatrice, give you much joy -- In truth a very worthy Gentleman --
I am sorry it was not my good fortune to have yoak't you together.


Perhaps it may not be too late yet -- You know wise men always marry their
Daughters both ways -- It is not impossible but that Mr. Alderman and myself
may be made friends -- His Daughter is still alive -- How says my Dear?


Nay pish --


I shall be glad Sir to be better known to you; And hope my friend has made you
a small Present from me; Had it been better, your worth deserves it.


Alas -- Sweet Sir -- I thank your love -- I have accepted That, already -- You
are an obliging person.


Come Madam -- You're melancholy -- Be cheery -- All will do well -- Mr.
Scruple; A word -- I think it were not amiss if you went before, and let him
know, I am coming.


With all my heart -- Have you any thing further, wherein I may serve this
worthy person, and his Lady.


Why truly -- Yes -- You will do well to keep him in the same mind of making
his Will -- Since the young couple are together, and 'tis too late now, to part
them, we must do something to secure them an Estate,


You say well -- And I will join with you in any thing; -- Provided always,
you carry it prudently, for fear of scandal: -- A blot, is no blot, till it be
hit.


You must have a care that no one be in the Room, but our selves: -- Not so
much as his wife.


By no means -- If they should, I will cause them to withdraw, upon pretence of
giving him some ghostly counsel, or the like: -- Farewell -- You'll find me
there.


Not a word -- Make haste -- And be sure to break the Marriage to the good
woman, before the Alderman comes to know it -- Watch your time.


I warrant you.


Madam, your father has sent for me, and I must leave you for the present; but
you shall be sure to hear from me suddenly: -- In the mean time, if you please
to repose your selves at my house, you shall be welcome: -- You cannot be safer,
nor nearer, if any occasion should be.


With all our hearts.


THree hundred pounds a year, and conform: -- A fair opportunity, and if I slip
it, may I never have another: -- But hark you Mr. Scruple -- You must
subscribe: -- Well -- And I will do it: -- But what will the Brethren say? --
How will the sisters take it, when it shall be told them, Vir gregis, Ipse caper
decrraverat? -- Why -- 'Twas an Act of my hand, not an Act of my heart: -- But
stay -- What need this? -- Has not the direction of the intention, a faculty to
null promises? -- I take it, it has; -- What say the Casuists? -- If a man
promises, and had no intention to perform -- when he made it, he is not
obliged, unless there be an Oath, or Contract in the case; For, when a man
says simply, I will do thus, or thus, it shall be conceived, he meant, if his
mind did not alter; for otherwise, were to deprive him of his natural liberty:
-- But there is an Oath in the case (friend Scruple) There is an Oath -- How
will you do now? -- Well -- Suppose there be two: -- I take it, the case has
been determined long since -- I may take it proforma, by a previous
protestation nevertheless, that it shall not be prejudicial to me, in any thing
that I shall act to the contrary, hereafter; -- If not -- Our Brethren are
clear in the point -- Equivocation, in cases of necessity, may be lawful; --
'Tis a Pia fraus: -- I'm sure, at worst, 'tis a probable opinion, and all
probable opinions are equally safe in themselves: -- But hold ye brother -- Are
not Oaths to be taken according to the meaning of the Exactor of the Oath? --
Perhaps they are; -- What then? Suppose I bring a probable opinion for the
meaning of the taker: -- The extremes are wide -- But I have found an Expedient
(and yet not mine, but our Brethrens still) The Swearer is not bound to the
meaning of the Prescriber of the Oath, or his own meaning -- How then? --
Sweetly: -- To the reality of the thing sworn: -- I think the hair is split: --
But who shall be Judge of that? -- Of that hereafter: -- In the mean time --
Here is 300 l. a year, and a goodly house upon 't: -- I will Conform, Reform,
Transform, Perform, Deform, Inform, any Form: -- Form -- Form --


Now bless the good man! --. What's that he says? Form -- Form -- Marry I hope
you don't intend to Conform?


Form is a good word -- A very good word -- Forma dat esse rei -- And without
it (sister of mine) you could be neither seen, felt, heard, nor understood.


Now goodness defend him -- In the Highway to Egypt again.


Mistake me not -- I am neither for Highwayes, nor Highplaces: -- But --


But what? -- I hope you are not in earnest -- Will you forsake the Good old
Cause?


Mr. Scruple Spew up the Holy Covenant?


It forsook me, and not I, it.


What will the vile Cavalier say?


How will the despisers of the Brethren bristle?


How will the old Enemy erect himself?


And the holy sisters be humbled?


Who shall carry on the great work?


Or perfect that, which you have begun?


Mr. Scruple transmogrifie?


Ah no --


You say right -- You are my workmanship -- I have been working you these
twenty years, and you are wrought: -- But alas (I speak not this to you) There
are a number of dissenting Brethren, and I have tried them this way, and that
way, and the other way, and (to say Truth) every way, but never the nearer; And
therefore, I'm even resolved, to try what the old way will do.


Ah Mr. Scruple! -- Do you know what you say? -- The old way!


The old Whore!


Yes -- The old way, though no old Whore; -- Wherein notwithstanding, I do no
more than what ever was, is now, and ever will be: -- Mark what I say, and
observe it; -- our Brother Fox, that had so little wit, as to write his Book of
Martyrs, had yet enough, to keep himself, from being one of the number.


Ah -- What will become of the stock?


And the little Lambs, how shall they play?


Who shall destroy the Chicken of the Wolf?


And break the Leviathan's Eggs, in the shell?


Come (sisters of mine) you live on the blind side of the World; -- I find the
Cause, and its interest, deserted by most people, unless it be some few, That
having found how sweet a thing it is to head a Faction, make use of us, as the
Monkey did of the Cats Paw, to scrape the Nuts out of the fire: -- I need say
no more, unless it be, That I have a fair opportunity of 300 l. a year offered
me.


I -- do -- do -- And see who'll repent it first: -- Never expect more Friday
Night Suppers.


Nor the sweet society of Brethren, and sisters.


What fellowship is therein Stock-fish, and Oil?


Or, instead of Gellies, to be swilled with Frummetrie?


To exchange your Venison, for Red Herrings, and Mustard?


And Virgin Pullets, for Ling, and Gaberdine?


Who will be gainers now?


Or whose the loss, when this happens?


When the Benevolence shall dwindle to an Easter penny.


And purifying Dinners, into cracked Groats.


When you're at charge of a Gown, for Sundays, and Holidays.


And the Cassock, comes out of your own Pocket.


When the Boys cry after you, it grows too fast.


And the knot of your Sussingle sits in the wrong place.


And will you then leave us? Let not 300 l. a year be any thing in the case; we
will allow you four: -- Pray consider, Did we ever forsake you? What have you
lost by throwing your self on your friends? -- If the worst come to the worst,
rather than lose you, we will forsake our carnal Husbands, and carnal Children,
and march off, to New-England together.


Now cannot I forbear, but I must accept your 400 l. a year: -- Let a man
strive never so much against it, natural affection will return upon him --
Comfort your selves, That is to say, Be comforted, I will not forsake you --
Conclusum est contra, c. I will not Conform -- Nay, verily I will not.


Aa -- Mr. Scruple!


Hark! -- I hear the Alderman -- Run in -- Run in -- I'll follow you
instantly. l. a year, and not Conform: -- The women are good comfortable women,
and I ought not in Conscience to leave them: -- But hear me Brother -- What will
you do with your new Parsonage? -- Why -- I -- will -- get -- some or other
instituted, and inducted into 't, to save a Lapse, and take a Bond of 500 l. of
him, to resign at six Months; which, he will forfeit of course, as not doubting
but to be relieved against it, as Simoniacal: -- So -- There's 500 l. got too
-- He's gone every way: -- At common Law, 'tis his own Bond; In equity, he
might have resigned: -- But why so fast friend Scruple? Had not you as good
sell it out-right to avoid dispute? -- I cannot tell -- But now I remember me,
The Casuists take a notable difference, that is to say, between money given
(provalore Beneficii) as the full price, and (tanquam motivum ad resignandum)
for your good will, or so; -- The first, they generally agree to be Simony; but
for the latter, they leave it as a controverted point, positivelie denied by
very few, but such as have no money to give.


Troth but ill; I'm half afraid of him.


Who's that? Mr. Scruple?


Yes Sir -- How do you?


Uh -- Uh -- Very ill -- Is the Doctor coming?


He'll be here immediately -- Poor man! He was half distracted when I brought
him the News --


My dear Friend, how do you?


Oh -- Oh -- ill, ill: -- Uh -- Uh -- Uh -- Have you brought my old Will with
you? -- Let me see it. Uh -- Uh -- Uh --


Yes Sir, here 'tis.


Indeed Sir 'tis piouslie, and discreetlie done, to settle Affairs so, that
there may be no wrangling, in case you should do otherwise than well.


I wonder my Boy comes not -- I have sent him for a Rosy-Crucian preparation,
has fetched a man again, after he has been dead a day, and half: -- I hope it
may do good; However, for fear of the worst, you do well to settle your Estate,
it may ease your head.


Uh -- Uh -- Uh -- Here Doctor -- Put some wax to it; -- Set the Table nearer --
And give me my Seal --


Sir you are weak: -- Do you deliver this as your Act and Deed?


Yes -- I do -- Pray Gentlemen be Witnesses to it.


Oh -- Are you come at last -- Here Sir -- Here's the most sovereign Cordial in
all the World -- I was seven years, in making one poor pint, and half of't.


I thank you Sir -- He drinks -- Uh -- Uh -- It warms me strangely -- Uh -- Uh
--


Pray forbear Coughing, -- you are weak -- How do you feel your self now?


I cannot tell -- But methinks it does me good.


I see by this sudden operation, 'twill do the work: -- You were best to walk
in, and rest your self in your Couch awhile, before the fire.


I must run home a little, upon some urgent occasions, but will see you again
presently.


WHy Captain -- What? All a mort?


Faith I was contemplating upon the pence.


And thou shall it have them Boy -- See here my Bully! --


Dear Major give it me.


Thou shall it have any thing my Jo: -- Captain, Courage! We'll be merry to
Night, and have a Wedding, though't be but a Westminster one.


What you will.


Well said Major: -- Ah for a Fiddle now: -- Odds nigs!


I hate those Puritan Oaths -- If thou must swear, swear like a man of Office.


The old Boy still -- Now could I Caper through the Moon: -- Hey Toss -- Hang
one Fiddle, we'll have a whole Kennel: -- Come you Jade -- Dance.


Alas Major -- How pitifully my Husband is cut! -- He'll be so sick tomorrow
morning.


Yes faith; -- He has got a Rattle as big as a Drum.


Major! -- A word -- Do you think my Wife's a Whore?


Such another word -- And -- By all the bones of my back --


Nay good Major -- I was once a little jealous, till she told you of the
Aldernian -- But now, I dare trust her to Lecture by her self.


What's that you say of me?


Stand -- Who comes there? -- Knock them down? -- What are you? -- I am the
Constable.


The Fellow's mad.


No Sir, he's only a little overtaken as they say.


Stand off -- Down with them -- Stand -- Treason -- I command you to apprehend
one another.


Maine a good time, has this Fellows head been broke, to keep the peace whole
-- 'Prithee take him away.


Landlord -- They're friends.


Which -- Where -- Here I could have them, and there I could have them: --
Runter! -- I profess I knew you not.


Then ha'done now -- Come Gentlemen, What say you? The business must be
discovered first or last, and as good now (and perhaps better) than another
time.


I like it well -- But think it were not amiss to lessen the Company -- We will
not appear all at once.


However let them be within call.


Pray Gentlemen keep together -- We shall have occasion to use you presently.


You see my Arm's in a Scarf -- Much cannot be expected from me: -- But for a
dead lift, we'll make a shift to change hands: -- Give the word of command
there, faces about, c.


And hear me Major -- Lend me your Chain: -- And let it be you care to provide
some abominable Music: -- We'll bring him to our Bow, or run him to death with
Fiddlers: --


I warrant you -- Here --


How! Married? O my Child -- My Child!


You might have believed me sooner -- How often have I told you, she was in her
Teenes? -- And you know Teene, quasi Teeming: -- I may be a little free with
you -- Young Girls are like Nuts, you must gather them when they begin to be
brown at bottom, or they'll fall of themselves.


But truly, I hope it is not so plain as you make it.


How think you?


O my Child, my Child -- Thy father is pretty hoddie again, but this will
break his heart quite -- O my Child -- Has he not hurt thee?


No great sign of death Mother.


What's all this clutter? -- Here's a noise for a sick man, with all my heart!
--


Nothing but Matrimony Sir, and Conjugal Love.


And were you Pimp to it? -- I hope you have made sure of her portion -- I can
assure you her Grandfather left her not so much as a grey Groat.


I have enough in her.


Much good may it do you.


Good Sir forgive me.


Out of my doors -- The wench is pretty handsome, and will be able to get her
own living, if the Parish will but keep the Children.


I must not hear this language -- Know you this -- A good honest settlement
upon my self.


Ha! Settlement! And in consideration of Marriage! -- I was not drunk sure! --
When was this done?


Only a little Crop sick -- Very lately.


Indeed Sir, you desired this Gentleman, and my self, to be Witnesses to it --
I know my hand again.


I saw you sign, seal, and deliver it.


I published only my Will.


I know not what your meaning was; but you delivered it as your Act, and Deed.


Timothy -- Fetch me the Constable.


Sir, he'll save you that trouble; I met him just coming to you, about a
suspicious person, whom he apprehended with This Chain in his pocket.


Cheated -- Cheated -- As I'm an Alderman, purelie Cheated.


How can that be -- you have the Reputation, of as shrewd a man, as any upon
the Bench.


Ah -- Rogues all -- Rogues all --


What say you Sir? Here's the Constable now: -- Come, come, be wise: -- Your
Daughter has married a Gentleman: -- Is not this better, than a Smithfield
bargain? -- Give me so much money, and my Horse shall leap your Mare.


Don't worry me with words -- I'll consider of't.


Good Sir -- Marriages are made in Heaven.


Then I'll be sworn, I had never a friend there.


Truly nor I neither -- For indeed, methinks they are very long in coming
down.


Now verily Sir, but this is a just judgment upon you, for hoarding up your
moneys, and suffering the Good Old Cause to starve.


Seriech-owle: -- But where's my Doctor?


Why troth Sir (you cannot blame him) he is somewhat loath to appear, till he
see how things are like to go: -- Come, pray Sir --


Well Sir -- I see by this Chain, the Major and you, understand one another --
Let's have no more words -- All parties shall be satisfied -- Give me't.


There -- And may you long live to wear't: -- You may come down -- All's well
--


Come Son and Daughter, the business is done, and I forgive you both -- And if
that settlement be not large enough, I'll make you a new one upon demand -- You
shall have your own Estate back, in present, and as you love your Wife, the
rest after our deaths: -- And so, you have my blessing.


Bea.


Come, let's be merry -- And as late as 'tis send for the Music -- We must
have a Dance, at least.


See what 'tis to forecast a mans business right; -- They are gone for, and
will be here instantly.


But we forget the main thing, the Posset: -- Quickly Cis, and get one ready.



How's this? Musique! Dancing! Posset! -- Are they lawful good Mr. Scruple?


Are they not, Rags of the Whore?


Thereafter as they may be used -- I will consider it a little, and give you my
opinion --


O my Doctor -- You're a fine Gentleman -- Good faith you are.


Who I? -- I care not if all my faults were writ in my forehead: --


It must be in short hand then, or there will want room.


Here's Tyro, too -- Your even come time enough to dance at your Mistresses
Wedding!


How! My Mistresses Wedding?


Even so -- Alas that I had but known of this before!


Women will have their wills -- Let her go -- I have another guess thing, in
chase for you.


And shall I have her?


Thou shalt -- And hark you --


Hum -- I am full; and shall discourse them graduallie: -- And first, of the
first -- Music; -- Yes certainly, it is lawful -- But, what Music? That's
the question: -- We'll examine it a little -- Cimbals, they are Jewish, -- The
Harp, malignant, and Irish; -- Organs, Antichristian; -- The Fluit, a mere
Horn-pipe; -- The Fiddle, Out upon it! Most abominable, it ushers in Revels, and
May-poles: -- What then? -- Why truly I agree with the Assembly -- Bag-pipes;
-- A harmless, innocent Music, and most agreeable, to the Discipline, and
practice, of our Brethren of the Kirk: -- Besides, it has (as the Learned
observe) a specific quality, to mollify, and soften the most brutal natures
-- Witness, the Bears -- Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. -- But secondly,
for Dancing -- Why truly, that may be lawful too -- But here too, the point
will be the same; -- What Dancing? -- Country Dances; they are Pagan; --
French Dances; Fie, Fie, Antic; -- Our ordinary dancing; villainous; 'tis
mixed, and promiscuous, a very Nicolait^ism: -- The Benchers measures; I must
confess they come somewhat near, were they not superstitious: -- What then? --
Why -- The men may dance in one Room, and the women in the other: -- Lastly, for
the Posset -- And truly here, I'm in a great Wood -- But not to dwell upon the
Letter, whither Posset, or P-osset, I shall take it as it lies before me --
Posset -- And truly that may be lawful too: -- Lemon Posset, is cooling --
Carduus Posset, Benedictus -- And Sack-Posset, comfortable -- But VVedding --
Sack -- Posset -- There's the point; -- Truly, I half doubt it, and that for
fifteen Reasons -- Hum --


A plague of these Fiddlers -- We shall be murdered ere they come.


I say for fifteen Reasons: -- First, from the name of the thing; Posset, from
Posse, To be able; And from that fond supposition, first brought into
VVeddings, An invention, merely carnal: -- But secondly, for that it ministers
abundance of unsavoury discourse: -- Thirdly, for that the Grace before it, is
none at all, and the Grace after it, lewd: -- Fourthly, That it is eaten (by
the parties chiefly concerned) only in spite: -- Fithly, -- Hum -- Haw -- I
say fifthly --


Servavit Apollo! -- Strike up, strike up -- One noise best drowns another.


A wholesome observation lost.


'Twill keep cold for another time.


Come Gentlemen -- One Dance, and then for the Posset,


Well moved -- Well moved -- The Bride begins to be sleepy.


Lead on before there -- I'll bring up the Rear -- Come Landlord -- Bear up for
the Bar of Chester; And since we have had so good fortune to day, we'll
henceforth boyle our Beef in Sack, and make the Beggars drunk with the
Porridge.


THese, and such other literal mistakes, as you may chance to meet with, be
pleased to correct. -- Page 2. line 10. for, dead a Horse -- read -- a dead
Horse. Page. 36. lin. 26. -- for, quocunque -- read Quaecunque. Page. 37. lin.
38. -- for, a great red man -- read, a great read man. And so for the rest, c.

I Had almost forgot -- Let's see -- What weather?
Nor fair; -- Nor foul; -- Indifferent; -- Both together,
Clear, if no Clouds, nor misling; -- If there should,
It shall proceed from former Causes: -- Good:
So much for Doctrine -- To Apply it now;
Yo've had A Play, But, whither good, or No,
'Tis past my Globe, -- yet guess, the weather will
Prove fair enough, unless you make it ill.
'Tis you must make the Play, or stand, or fall;
Therefore, By me, To you, and you, and All,
The Author bows -- And perhaps reason for 't;
Some Men the Judge, others, the Jury Court;
The one, more Just, if unconcerned; The other,
More Pitiful; If he claps both together,
He means no hurt; For in a common Hall,
Noise carries it -- He fain would please you All:
Yo've had for Pit, for Box, for Gallery too;
Keep your own Posts, and he is well enou':
But -- If you must lash out, And think you can't
Be wits your selves, unless you pique, and rant;
At your own Peril be it, And further know,
Who gives a Character, in one, gives two:
He hopes the best -- Nor will we, be perplexed;
Laugh hearty now, and he shall fix you next.

