How now Jack, where hast thou been?


A plague of all Cowards I say and a vengeance too, marry and amen; give me a
Cup of Sack Boy, no virtue extant, you Rogue; there's lime in this Sack too,
there is nothing but Roguery to be found in villainous Man, yet a Coward is
worse then a Cup of Sack with lime in it, a villainous Coward, go thy ways old
Jack, dye when thou wilt: if Man-hood, good Man-hood, be not forgot upon the
face of the Earth, then am I a shotten hearing: there lives not three good men
unhanged in England, and one of them is fat and grows old: a bad World I say,
and a plague of all Cowards I say still.


How now wool-sack, what mutter you?


A Kings Son? If I do not beat thee out of thy Kingdom with a Dagger of lath,
and drive all thy subjects before thee like a stock of wild-Geese, I'll never
wear hair on my face more, you Prince of Wales?


Why you whoreson round man what's the matter?


Are you not a Coward? answer me to that, and Poines there.


Why ye fat paunch, and ye call me, Coward by this light, I'll stab thee.


I call thee Coward? I'll see thee damned e're I call thee Coward; but I would
give a thousand pound I could run as fast as thou can. You are straight
enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back: call you that backing
of your friends? a plague upon such backing: give me them that will face me,
give me a cup of Sack, I am a Rogue if I drank to day.


Oh villain, thy lips are scarce wiped since thou drink last.


All's one for that, a plague of all cowards still say I.


What's the matter?


What's the matter? here be four of us have taken a thousand pound this
morning.


Where is it, I ask where is it.


Where is it? taken from us it is; a hundred upon poor four of us.


What a hundred man?


I am a Rogue if I were not at half Sword with a dozen of them two hours
together; I have escaped by miracle; I am eight times thrust through the
doublet, four through the hose, my Buckler cut through and through, my sword
hacked like a hansaw, ecce signum, I never dealt better since I was a man, all
would not do, a plague of all Cowards, let them speak, if they speak more or
less then truth, they are villains, and the sons of darkness.


Speak Sirs, how was it.


We four set upon a dozen.


Sixteen at least my Lord.


And bound them.


No, no, they were not bound.


You rogue they were bound, every man of them, or I am a Jew else, an Hebrew
Jew.


And as we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us.


And unbound the rest, then came in the others.


What fought ye with them all?


All? I know not what you call all: but if I fought not with fifty of them, I
am a bunch of raddish: if there were not two or three fifty upon poor old Jack,
then I am no two-leg'd Creature.


Pray God you have not murdered some of them.


Nay that's past praying for, I have peppered two of them; two Rogues in
buckrom suites: I tell thee what, Hal, if I tell thee a lye spit in my face,
call me horse, thou know my old ward, here I lay, and thus I bore my point,
four Rogues in buckrom let drive at me.


What four? thou said but two even now.


Four Hal, I told thee four.


I, I, he said four.


These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me; I made no more a do but
took all their seven points in my Target, thus. --


Seven? Why there were but four even now*


In Buckrum Hal, in Buckrum.


I four in Buckrum suits.


Seven by these Hilts, or I am a villain else.


Prithe let him alone, we shall have more anon*


Dost thou hear me.


I, and mark thee too Jack.


Do so for 'tis worth the listening to. These nine in Buckrum that I told thee
off.


So, two more already.


Their points being broken.


Down fell his Hose.


Began to give me ground, but I followed me close, came in foot and hand; and
with a thought seven of the eleven I paid.


O Monstrous! eleven Buckrum men grown out of two.


But as the devil would have it, three mis-begotten knaves, in Kendal green,
came at my back and let drive at me, for it was so dark Hal that thou could
not see thy hand.


These lies are like the father that begets, gross as a Mountain, open,
palpable, why thou clay-brain'd guts thou knotty pated fool, thou whoreson
obscent greasy tallow catch.


What? art thou mad? art thou mad? is not the truth, the truth?


Why how could thou know these men in Kendall green, when it was so dark
thou could not see thy hand? what said thou to this?


Come, your reason Jack, your reason.


What upon compulsion? and I were at the strappado, or all the racks in the
World, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on compulsion?
were reasons as plenty as Blackberries, I would give no Man a reason upon
compulsion, I.


I'll be no longer guilty of this sin, this sanguine Coward, this Bed-presser,
this horseback breaker, this huge ^ill of flesh.


You starveling, you Elf-skin, you dried Neats tongue, Bulls pizle, you stock
fish: O for breath to utter what is like thee? you Taylors yard, you sheath,
you Bow-case, you vile standing Turk.


Hear me sirrah bombast --


Mark Jack.


We two saw you four set upon four, bound them, and were Masters of their
wealth, then did we two set on you four, and with a word out-fac'd you from the
prize; what starting hole can thou now find out to hid thee from this open
and apparent shame?


Come lets hear Jack, what trick hast thou now?


By the Lord I knew ye as well as he that made ye, why hear you Masters, was it
for me to kill the heir apparent? should I turn up in the true Prince? why
thou know I am as valiant as Hercules: but beware instinct, the Lyon will
not touch the true Prince. Instinct is a great matter, I was a Coward on
instinct; I shall think the better of my self, and thee during my life; I for
a valiant Lyon, and thou for a true Prince: but by the Lord Lads, I am glad you
have the money, Hostess clap to the doors, watch to night, pray tomorrow,
what hearts of Gold shall we be merry? shall we have a Play ex tempore.


Content and the argument shall be thy running away.


O no more of that Hal if thou love me.


How longi'st ago Jack since thou saw thine own knee.


My own knee? when I was about thy years ( Hal) I was not an Eagles tallant in
the Wast: I could have crept into any Aldermans Thumb-Ring, a plague of
sighing and grief, it blows a man up like a Bladder; but to he Play Hal.


I have a mind Jack that thou should stand for my father, and examine me upon
the perticulars of my life.


Content: this Chair shall be my State, this dagger my Sceptre, and this
Cushion my Crown. Well if the fire of grace be not quite out of thee, now shalt
thou be moved, give me a cup of Sack to make mine eyes look red, that it may be
thought I have wept: For I must speak in passion, and I will do it in King
Cambysis vein.


Well, here is my Leg.


And here is my speech: stand aside Nobility.


O the Father, how he holds his countenance, he doth it as like one of these
harlotry players as ever Isee.


Peace good pint Pot, peace good tickle branes. Harry I do not only marvel
where thou spend thy time, but also how thou art accompanied, thou art my
Son, I have partly thy Mothers word, partly my opinion, but chiefly a
villainous trick of thine eye, and a foolish hanging of thy neither lip that
doth warrant me. There is a thing Harry which thou hast often heard off, and
known to many, in our Land, by the name of Pitch; this Pitch (as ancient
writers report) doth defile, so doth the company thou keep, yet there is one
virtuous Man whom I have noted in thy company, but I know not his name.


What manner of Man, and it like your Majesty:


A good portly man y'faith, and a corpulent, of a cheerful look, a pleasing
eye, and a most noble carriage, and as I think his age some fifty, or bir Lady,
inclining to threescore, and now I remember me, his name is Falstaff: if that
man be lewdly given he deceives me, for Harry I see virtue in his looks; If
then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then
peremptorily I speak it, there is virtue in that Falstaff, and now thou noughty
varlet, tell me where hast thou been this month?


Dost thou speak like a King? do thou stand for me, and I'll play my father.


If thou dost it so Majestically, ha^g me up by the heels for a Rabbet-sucker
or a Poulters Hare.


Well here I am set.


And here I stand judge my Masters.


Now Harry whence come you?


My noble Lord from Eastcheap.


The complaints I hear of thee are grievous.


Zlud my Lord they are false: nay I'll tickle you for a young Prince.


Swear thou, ungracious Boy? henceforth ne'er look on me, thou art violently
carried away from grace; there is a devil haunts thee in the likeness of a fat
old man, a Tun of man, is thy companion, why dost thou converse with that
trunk of humours, that boulting-Butch of beastliness? that swollen parcel of
dropsies, that huge bombard of Sack, that stuff cloak bag of guts, that roasted
manning-tree Ox, with the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that grey
iniquity, wherein is he good but to taste Sack, and drink it? wherein neat and
cleanly, but to carve a Capon and eat it? wherein cunning but in craft? wherein
crafty but in villainy? wherein vallan^us but in all things? wherein Worthy but
in nothing?


I would your grace would take me with you: who means your grace?


That villainous abominable misleader of youth, Falstaff, that old white bearded
satan.


My Lord the man I know.


I know thou dost.


But to say I know more harm in him then in my self, were to say more then I
know; that he is old, (the more the pity;) his white hairs do witness it: but
that he is (saving your reverence) a whoremaster, that I utter lie deny; if Sack
and Sugar be a fault, Heaven help the wicked: if to be old and merry be a sin,
then many an old Host that I know is damned; if to be fat, be to be hated, then
Pharaoh's lean Kine are to be beloved my good Lord: Banish Peto, banish Bardol,
banish Poynes; but for sweet Jack Falstaff, kind Jack Falstaff, true Jack
Falstaff, valiant Jack Falstaff; and therefore more valiant, being as he is old
Jack Falstaff, banish not him thy Harry's company; banish plump Jack, and
banish all the World.


I do. I will.


Oh my Lord the Sheriff with a monstrous watch is at the door.


Out you Rogue, play out the play, I have much to say in the behalf of that
Falstaff.


Am I not fallen away vilely, do I not bate? do I not diminish? my skin hangs
about me like an old Ladies loose Gown, I am withered like an old apple Iohn:
well I'll repent, and that suddenly I shall be out of heart shortly and then I
shall have no strength to repent, and I haven't forgotten what the inside of a
Church is made of, I am a pepper-corn, villainous company hath been the spoil
of me.


Sir Iohn you are so fretful you cannot live long.


Why there's it, come sing me a bawdy song, make me merry, well I have been as
virtuously given as a Gentleman need to be, lived well and in good compass,
and now I live out of all order, out of all compass.


Why you are so fat Sir Iohn, that you must needs be out of all compass, all
reasonable compass Sir Iohn.


O mend thou thy face, and I'll mend my life: thou art our Admiral, thou
bear the Lanthorn in the poop, but 'tis in the Nose of thee, thou art the
King of the burning Lamp, when thou run'st up Gads Hill in the night to catch
my Horse if I did not think thou had been an Ignis fatuus or a ball of
wild-fire, there's no purchase in money, O thou art a perpetual triumph, an
everlasting Bon-fire, by night.


I would my face were in your belly.


God a mercy, so I should be heart-burnt. Now dame partlet the Hen, have you
enquired yet who picked my pocket.


Why, Sir Iohn do you think I keep thieves in my House Sir Iohn.


I'll besworn my pocket was picked; go, you are a woman, go.


Who I? I defy thee: 'ods light I never was called so in my own House before,
you owe me money Sir Iohn, I bought you a dozen shirts to your back.


Dowlis, filthy Dowlis, I have given them away to Bakers VVives, they have made
boulters of them; I say my pocket was picked, I have lost a Seal-Ring of my
Grandfathers worth forty marks.


Oh Lord I have heard the Prince tell him I know how oft that Ring was Copper.


The Prince is a Jack, a sneak-cap, and he were here I would cudgel him like a
dog, if he would say so.


Good my Lord hear me.


Prithee let her alone and list to me, this house is turned bawdy house, my
pocket has been picked here.


And what did thou lose Jack?


If thou wilt believe me Hal, three or four Bonds of forty pounds a piece, and
a Seal-Ring of my Grandfathers.


A trifle, some eight penny matter.


I told him you said so, and he said he would cudgel you.


What a' did not.


As I am a true woman he did.


Go you thing, go.


Say, what thing, what thing?


Why, a thing to thank God on.


I am nothing to thank God on, I would thou should know it.


Thou slander est her most grosely.


So he doth you my Lord, he said the other day you ought him a thousand pound.


Sirrah do I owe you a thousand pound?


A thousand pound Hal? a million: thy love is worth a million: thou ow'st me
thy love.


Nay, my Lord he called you Jack, and said he would cudgel you.


Did I Bardol?


Indeed Sir Iohn, you said so.


Yea if he said my Ring was Copper.


I say 'tis Copper: dare thou be as good as thy word now?


Why Hal? thou know, as thou art but a man I dare: but as thou art Prince I
fear thee as I fear the roaring of the Lyons Whelp.


And why not as the Lyon?


The King himself is to be feared as the Lyon: dost thou think I'll fear thee,
as I fear thy Father? nay, and I do, I pray my Girdle may break.


If it should, how would thy Guts fall about thy knees.


Well I have misus'd the Kings press damnably, I have got in exchang of 150.
Soldiers 300. And od pound, I press none but warm slaves that had as lieve
hear the devil as a Drum, with hearts in their bellies no bigger then pins
heads, and they have bought out their services, and now my whole charge
consists of Ancients, Corporals, and the like: A mad fellow met me on the way,
and told me I had unloaded all the Gibbets, pressed the dead bodies, there's not
a shirt and an half in all my company, and the half shirt is two napkins
tuckt together, and thrown over the shoulders like a Heralds coat without
sleeves; and the shirt, to speak truth on it, is stolen from my host at St.
Albanes, but that's all one, they*l find linen enough on every hedge.


How now Q^ilt? tell me whose fellows are these that come after?


Mine Hal, mine.


I did never see such pittyfull Rascals.


Tut, tut, good enough to toss; food for powder, food for powder, they'll fill a
pit as well as better: mortal men; mortal men, but I would all were well Hal.


Why, thou ow'st a death.


'Tis not due yet, and I would be loath to pay before the day, what need I be
so forward till I am called upon, well 'tis no matter, Honour pricks me on, yea
but how if Honour pricks me off when I come on? how then? can Honour set to a
leg? or an arm? no: or take away the grief of a wound? no: Honour hath no
skill in surgery then? no: what is Honour? a word: what is that word? Air: a
trym reckoning: who hath it? he that dyed a wednesday: doth he feel it? no:
doth he hear it? No: 'tis insensible then? yea to the dead: but will it not
live with the living? No: why? detraction will not suffer it: therefore I'll
have none of it, Honour is a mere scutcheon, and so ends my Catechism.


What old acquaintance, could not all this flesh keep in a little life? poor
Jack farewell; imbowel'd will I see thee by and by, till then, in blood by
noble Percy lye.


Imbowel'd? if thou imbowell me to day, I'll give you leave to powder me, and
eat me to morrow, Z'Bloud 'twas time to counterfeit, or the Termagant Scot had
paid me scot and lot too. Counterfeit? I am no counterfeit: to die is to be a
counterfeit, for he is but the counterfeit of a man, who hath not the life of a
man; but to counterfeit dying when a man thereby lives, is to be no
counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed, the better part of
valour is destruction; in the which better part I have saved my life. -- I am
afraid of this Gunpowder Percy, though he be dead; how if he should counterfeit
too, and rise? by my faith I am afraid he would prove the better counterfeit:
therefore I'll make him sure; yea and I'll swear I slew him, why may not he
rise as well as I? nothing confutes me but eyes, and no body sees me! therefore
sirrah with a new wound in your thigh, come you a long with me.


What's here? art thou alive? thou art not what thou seem sure.


No, that's certain, I am not a double man: but if I be not Jack Falstaff,
then I am a Jack: there is Percy, if your Father will do me any Honour, So: if
not, let him slay the next Percy himself: I look to be either Earl or Duke, I
can assure you.


Why, Percy I slew my self, and saw thee dead.


Did thou? Lord, Lord, how the World is given to lying! I grant you I was
down, out of breath, and so was he, but we rose at an instant, and fought a
long hour by Shrews busy Clock, if I may be believed, So: if not, let them
that should reward valour, bear the sin upon their own heads, I'll take it upon
my death I gave him this wound in the thigh, if the man were alive and would
deny it i'd make him eat a peace of my sword.


Come bring your luggage nobly on your back, for my part, if a lye will do thee
grace, I'll guild it with the happiest terms I have.


I'll follow, as they say, for a reward: He that rewards me, God reward him, if
I do grow great, I'll grow less: for I'll purge and leave Sack, and live
cleanly, as a Noble man should do.


LOok you Pages where our sweet Heart and pigs-mies be; Sentlewoman if her know
not her name, was Ienkin born in Wales, came of Pighouse, and pritish bloods,
was have great hills and Mountains awl her owns, when was get um again, any
was her Confins and her Country-man was never conquered, but always have the
victories pravely, have her arms and scushrins, to know that say you, was give
in her crests great deal of monsters and Dragons, kill them with their hooks
very valiantly, as any Sentleman in the whole World: was please you place her
affections and good wills upon her in ways of make money, mark you; teal plainly,
Ienkin was love her very honestly, else pox upon her, and her will fight in her
cause and quarrels long as have any plood in bellies and backs too, mark you*
Pray you was her love Ienkin.


In what I may serve you, you shall command me Sir.


Shall her? was make her means satisfactions warrant her, or say Senkin was no
Sentleman of Wales, say you Pages was have her matrimonies and wedlocks very
fast, and when was get her awl her, her cousins was make joys gratulations,
for her good fortunes upon her Welsh Harps, know you dat very well Pages? her
fear, her shall be Knighted one days, and have great cumulations of Uships,
Honours and dignities too, agreat while ago.


And great Castles in the Air.


Was give awl our Lands and craggy Tenements in Wales away to our Cousin ap
Shone, and live her self here upon very good fashions with our monies and
mighty riches, when her can get them.


Whether so fast; thou must get to hell by night, and thou go but Aldermans
pace.


By cots plood her will go to the devil and her list, what is that to her?


Your name is Mr. Ienkin.


And what have her to say to Mr. Shenkin, Shenkin was as good names as her own,
pray you, was good Gentleman as her self, know very well, say you now?


God boy, Sir:


Poyes, does her call her boys? hark you? her name is Shenkin, her be no poyes
no shildren, was knock as tall a man as herself, an her Welsh plood be up,
look you.


'Tis impossible.


Piple papels, 'tis very possible.


An hunger starved Rascal.


Rascals? she shu? was never such names and appellations put upon her awl her
days, begar her will make you eat up all her urds and ignominies, and her plade
shall make holes in her pellies diggon.


I could curse.


Her can curse swear too look you now.


Pardon divinest Creature I submit.


Nay and her crave pardons and make submissions, Shenkin was put up awl her
anger and indignations farewell.


Ienkin has risen very early this mornings and been in studies and
contemplations to make dities and ferces upon her Mistress. Beauties and
pulchritudes, but the tevill sure is in these Poetries, Pages have her seem
treames and apparitions? hark you, Was Selina turned sheapheardess, pray you?


We dream else Sir, the case is altered.


What a tevill is in the matters and businesses pray you? cases! never was
knawn such cases and alterations in awl her life, woman's never wear breeches
in Wales, 'tis not possible we are awl in treames and visions, very treames
and visions.


Bless you Gentlemen awl, and your studies and contemplations: is here a
School of complements pray you.


A place of generous Breeding.


Shenerous preeding, hark you her name was Ienkin, a good Gentleman 'tis
knawn, he take no pleasures and delectations in urds, Welshmen have awl hearts
and fidelities mark you, yet if your Urships has any madrigals look you, for
in truth was going now to the voods and forests, her will give you good
payments of awl your inventions and muses pray you, here is monies and
considerations look you.


Hey? how came you all thus damned?


Damned, whose damned? is Shinkin damned?


Humour him a little.


Will you have her be damned? when hear you pray a Welshman was damned? of all
things in the Urld her cannot abid to be damned.


What are you.


Her have no mind at all to be damned, be gar her will fight with her, and kill
awl the devils in hell: diggon.


Sir 'tis but in jest.


In jests, is it in jests? well, look you her will be content to be damned in
jests and merriments for you.


You will tell me what you are damned for?


And her be so hot, was get some body else to be damned for Ienkin: her will
tell her in patiences, look you, her was damned for her valour, and riding the
Urld of monsters, look you Dragons with seven heads, and serpents with tails a
mile long pray you.


Oh! let me hug thee Owen Glendower.


Owen Glendower was her Cousin pray, so farewell Gentlemen, now her mean to
make travails and peregrinations to the voes and plains, look you very fast.


Has almost lost her self in these vods and Wildernesses, was very weary of
these journeys and travels in foot-backs: have not since her coming beheld any
my reasonable creatures: bless us awl, Iocarello is lost too, cannot tell
where, in these mazes and labourinths:


So ho.


So ho.


Ha, there's some podies yet, hark you t'ere, here is a Gentleman of Wales,
look you, desires very much to have speeches and confabulations with you: where
is her:


here is her.


Here is her? know not which ways to come to her: pray you tell Jenkin where
you be?


Boobie.


Poobies was her call her poobies? tis very saw^y travels, her will teach her
better manners, and moralities; mark you now, if her get her in reaches and
circumferences of her Welsh plaids, truly.


You lye.


How lies, and poobies too? hark you, Jenkin was give you mawles and knocks for
your poobies, and lies, and indignities, look for your pates now.

Here is no poodies but Bushes and Briars, look you awl is very quiet: so ho,
ho.


So ho, ho.


Her am very much deceived, now it comes into our minds, if these voices be
not Echoes,


Echo.


'Tis very true, but her marvel much, have her Echoes in these Countries, pray
you?


Yes pray you.


Warrant her 'tis a Welsh Echo was follow Jenkin in love out of Wales.


Out of Wales.


'Tis very true, bless us awl now, her to remembrances and memories, her had
communications and talkings with this very Echo in Glamorgan-Shire, in de
Valleys a^d Tales there look you, her am very glad her hath met with Echoes
was born in her own Countries, hark you, Jenkin was travel hither out of
loves and affections to Selina.


Nay.


Nay, Yes very true, pray you tell her, be Selina in these Woods, or no?


No.


No, where is her then? have her taken awl these labours and ambulations in
vanities? say you, shall Jenkin then go back as he came?


As he came,


Gon? it is not possible, hit may be Selina was turned spirits and be
invissible rather, she is not gon verily.


There you lye.


Lye, very well, you have privileges to give lies and awl things in the Urld,
but her will not leave these Vods for awl dat; her will be pilgrims awl tayes
of her lifes ever her go without her.


Go without her.


How, not love Jenkin? then there is a tevill in awl female sexes: know very
well she promise loves and good wills in times, great while ago, pray you now,
her will talk no longer with you, pray you if you meet her Pages, bid her make
hastes and expeditions after her, fare you well.


Fare you well.


So ho, ho, master Jenkin.


It is our Pages again. Jocarello where have you been? you are very tilligent
poyes to loose your master thus.


I was lost my self.


Ha pages, here is Selina, awl was very true as our Country-woman Echoes was
make reports. Mrs. Selina call you to memories your promised loves to Jenkin in
matrimonies creat while ago.


I am married to Ruffaldo.


Hit is not possible, Jenkin was never awl her days have such injuries and
contumelies have her made repetitions and Genealogies of her plood for no
Matrimonies: hum, Jenkin could fight with any podies in the whole Urld now,
look you Master Blew-potles have you any stomachs or appetites to have any
plowes or knocks upon your custard; look you now?


No good stomach at this time.


Come we'll all be friends.


Here is very good honest urds, yes look you Shenkin is in all amities and
friendship, but --


Oh, no more shooting at that But.


SAve thy brave shoulder, my young puissant Knight, and may thy Backsword bite
Them to the bone, that love thee not, thou art an errant Man, go on, the
circumcis'd shall fall by thee. Let land and labour fill the Man that tills,
thy Sword must be thy Plow, and Jove it speed, Mecha shall sweat, and Mahomet
shall fall, and thy dear name fill up his Monument.


It shall Captain, I mean to be a worthy.


One worthy is too little, thou shalt be all.


Captain I shall deserve some of your love too.


Thou shalt have heart and hand too, noble Morecraft, if thou wilt lend me
Money, I am a man of Garrison, be ruled, and open to me those infernal gates,
whence none of thy evil Angels pass again, and I will stile thee noble, nay
Don Diego I'll woo thy Infaunta for thee, and my Knight shall feast her with
high meates, and make her apt.


Pardon me Captain, you're beside my meaning.


No Mr. Morecraft 'tis the Captains meaning I should prepare her for ye.


Or provoke her. Speak my modern Man, I say provoke her.


Captain I say-so too, or stir her to it, so says the Critics.


However you expound it, she is welcome, come sit down, some wine here, there
is a scurvy banquet, if we had it. All this fair house is yours Sir; Savil?


Yes Sir.


Are your keys ready, I must ease your burden.


I am ready to be undone Sir when you shall call me to it.


Come, come, thou shalt live better.


I shall have less to do* that's all; there is half a dozen of my friends in the
fields Su^ning against a bank, with half a breech among them, I shall be with
them shortly, the care and continual vexation of being rich, eat up this
raskal; what shall become of my poor family, they are no sheep, and they must
keep themselves.


Drink Mr. Morecraft. Captain, speak loud and drink: Widow a word.


Expound her thoroughly Knight.

Here God a gold? here's to thy fair Possessions: Be a Baron, and a bold one;
leave off your tickling of young heirs like trouts, and let thy Chimneys smoke,
feed men O'war, live and be honest, and be saved yet.


I thank you worthy Captain for your council, you keep your Chimneys smoking
there, your nostrils; and when you can, you feed a man of war, this makes you
not a Baron, but a bare one, and how or when you shall be saved, let the Clerk
o'th company (you have commanded) have a just care of.


The man is much moved, Be not angry Sir, but as the Poet sings, let your
displeasure be a short fury, go out. You have spoke hom^ and bitterly to me
Sir? Captain take truce, the Mi^er is a tart, and a witty whoreson.


Poet, you fain perdie; the wit of this man lies in his fingers ends, he must
tell all; his tongue fills his mouth like a Neats tongue, only serves to lick
his hungry chaps after a purchase: his Brains and brimstone are the Devils
diet to a fat Usurers head: to her Knight, to her: clap her aboard, and stow
her, where's the brave Steward.


Here's you poor friend, and Savil Sir.


Away you are rich in Ornaments of nature, first in thy face, thou hast a
serious face; a^etting, bargaining, and saving face, a rich face, pawn it to
the Usurer; a face to kindle the compassion of the most ignorant and frozen
Justice.


'Tis such I dare not show it shortly Sir.


Be blithe, and bo^ny Steward; Mr. Morecraft drink to this Man of reckoning?


Here's even to him.


The devil guide it downward, would there were in it an acre of the great
Broomfeild, he bought; to sweep his dirty conscience, or to choke you.


Do but look on him, there's nothing in that hid-bound Usurer; that man of mat,
that al decayed but Arches: for you to love, unless his perished Lungs, his dry
Cough, or his scurvy; this is truth, and he has yet past cure of Physic, spaw,
or any diet, a primitive pox in his bones; and a' my knowledge he has been ten
times rowel'd; he had a bastard, his own towardly issue, whipped, and then cropped
for washing out the Roses, in three farthings to make them pence.


I do not like these morals*


You must not like him then. By my troth Sir you're welcome.


I dare say he's glad at heart to see you.


This money must be paid again.


No Sir, pray keep the sale, 'twill make good Taylors measures:


I know not where I am, I am so glad; your worship is the welcom'st man alive;
upon my knees I bid you welcome home: here have been such a hurry, such a din,
such dismal drinking, swearing and whoreing, 'thas almost made me mad: We have
lived in a continual Turneball-street; Sir, blessed be Heaven, that sent you safe
again; now shall I eat, and go to bed again.


What does that fellow tarry for?


Sir, to be Landlord of your House and state: I was bold to make a little sale
Sir:


Am I over reached? if there be Law I'll hamper you.


Prithee be gon, eat redish till you raise your sums again, you are a stale
Cozener, leave my house: no more. --


A pox upon your house. Come Widow, I shall yet hamper this young Gamester.


Good twelve in the hundred, keep your way I am not for your diet, marry in
your own tribe Jew, and get a Broker.


To you good Mr. Savil, and your office; thus much I have to say, you're from my
Steward become, first your own drunkard, then his Baud: they say you are
excellent grown in both, perfect: give me your keys sir Savil. where's the best
drink now? where's the soundest Whores? Ye old he Goat, ye dried ape, ye lame
stallion, must you be leading in my House your Whores, like Fairies dancing
their night rounds, without fear either of King or Constable? Are all my
Hangings safe, my sheep unsold yet? I hope my Plate is Currant, I ha'too much
on it. What say you to three hundred pounds in drink now?


Good Sir for give me, and but hear me speak?


Methinks thou should be drunk still, and not speak, 'tis the more
pardonable.


I will Sir, if you will have it so.


I thank ye. Yes, 'ene pursue it Sir; de'ye hear? Get you a Whore soon for your
recreation: go look out Captain broken-breech your fellow, and quarrel if you
dare; I shall deliver these keys to one shall have more honesty, though not so
much fine wit Sir; you may walk and gather crosses Sir, to cool your liver;
there's something for you to begin a diet, you'll have the pox else; speed you
well Sir Savil: you may eat at my house to preserve life, but keep no
Fornication in the stables.


Now must I hang my self, my friends will look for it. Eating and sleeping I do
despise you both now; I will run mad first, and if that get not pity, I'll
drown my self to a most dismal ditty.


Alas poor Gentlewoman, to what a misery hath age brought thee: to what a
scurvy fortune? Thou that hast been a companion of Noblemen, and at the worst
of those times for Gentlemen: now like a broken Serving-man, must beg for favour
to those that would have craul'd like pilgrims to thy chamber, but for an
apparition of me; you that be coming on, make much of fifteen, and so till five
and twenty, use your time with reverence that your profit may arise; it will
not tarry with you, Ecce signum: here was a face! but time, that like a
surfeit, eats our youth, plague of his Iron teeth, and draw them for it, has
been a little bolder here the^ welcome? and now to say the truth, I am fit for
no man, old men in the house of fifty call me Grannam; and when they are drunk,
even then, when Ioane and my Lady are all one, not one will do me reason; my
little Levite hath forsaken me, his silver sound of Cittern quite abollisht,
his doleful Hymns under my Chamber window, digested into tedious learning;
well fool, you leapt a haddock when you left him; he's a clean man, and a good
edifier, and twenty nobles in's estate de claro, besides his Pigs in posse, to
this good Homili^ I have been ever stubborn, which God forgive me for, and mend
my manners: love if ever thou had care of forty, of such a piece of lapland
ground, hear my prayer, and fire his zeal so far forth, that my faults in this
renewed impression of my love, may show corrected to our Gentle Reader.

See how negligently he passes by me? With what an Equipage canonical? As
though he had broken the heart of Bellarmine, or added something to the singing
brethren. 'Tis scorn, I know it and deserve it. -- Master Roger.


Fair Gentlewoman, my name is Roger.


Then Gentle Roger.


Ungentle Abigal.


Why Mr. Roger, will you set your wit to a weak Woman's.


You are weak indeed, for so the Poet sings,


I confess my weakness sweet Sir Roger.


Good my Ladies Gentlewoman, or my good Ladies Gentlewoman (this trope is lost
to you now) leave your prating, you have a season of your first Mother in you;
and surely had the Devil been in love, he had been abused too: go Dalida, you
make men fools and wear fig Breeches.


Well, well, hard hearted man; dilate upon the weak infirmities of Women; these
are fit Texts, but once there was a time; would I had never seen those eyes,
those eyes, those Orient eyes.


I, they were pearls once with you.


Saving your reverence Sir, so they are still.


Nay, nay, I do beseech you leave your cogging, what they are, they are, they
serve me without spectacles I thank'um.


O will you kill me?


I do not think I can, you're like a copy hold with nine lives in it.


You were wont to bear a Christian fear about you; For your own worships sake?


I was a Christian fool then: do you remember what a dance you led me? How I
grew qualm'd in love, and was a Dunce? Could expound but once a quarter, then
was out too: and then out of the stinking stir you put me in, I prayed for my
own Royal issue, you do remember all this?


O be as then you were.


I thank you for it, sure I will be wise Abigal; and as the Ethnic Poet sings,
I will not loose my Oil and labour too, you're for the Worshipful I take it
Abigal.


O take it so, and then I am for you.


I like these tears well, and this humbling also; they are symptoms of
contrition; if I should fall into my fit again, would you not shake me into a
Quotidian Coxcomb; would you not use me scurvily again, and give me Possets
with purging comfits in it? I tel thee Gentlewoman, thou hast been harder to me
then a long Pedigree.


Oh Curate cure me; I will love thee better, dearer, longer; I will do any
thing, betray the secrets of the whole household to thy reformation, my Lady
shall look lovingly on thy learning, and when true time shall point thee for a
Parson, I will convert thy Eggs to penny Custards, and thy tithe Goose shall
grase and multiply.


I am molifi'd, as well shall testify this faithful kiss, and have a great
care Mistress Abigall how you depress the spirit any more with your rebukes and
mocks: for certainly the edge of such a folly cuts its self.


O Sir, you have peirst me thorough; here I vow a recantation to those malicious
faults I ever did against you, never more will I despise your learning, never
more pin Cards and Cunny tails upon your Cassock, never again reproach your
reverend Night-cap, and call it by the mangy name of murrin, never abuse your
reverend person more, say you look like one of Baals Priests in the hangings,
never again when you say grace, laugh at you, nor put you out at prayers, never
cramp you more, nor when you ride get Soap and Thisles for you, no my Roger,
these faults shall be corrected and amended, as by the tenor of my tears
appears.


Now cannot I hold if I should be hanged, I must cry too, come to thine own
beloved, and do even what thou wilt with me sweet, sweet Abigal. I am thi^e own
for ever, here's my hand, when Roger proves a recreant hang him in the
Bell-ropes.


How now Roger, will no prayers go down with you.


Do but stay a little, I'll chop up prayers and be with you again.


But how these Sir, should live upon so little as Corn and Water, I am
unbeleiving.


Why prithe sweet heart, what's your Ale? is not that corn and water, my sweet
Widow.


I but my sweet Knight where's the meat to this, and clothes that they must
look for?


In this short sentence Ale, is all included; meat, drink, and clothes; these
are no ravening Footmen, no fellows, that at Ordinaries dare eat their eighteen
pence thrice out before they rise, and yet go hungry to a play, and crack more
nuts then would suffice a dozen Squirils; besides the din, which is damnable:
These are people of such a clean discretion in their diet, of such a moderate
sustenance, that they sweat, if they but smell hot meat; pottage is poison,
they hate a Kitchen as they hate a Counter, and shew'um but a Feather-bed they
sound; Ale is their eating and their drinking surely, which keeps their bodies
clear, and soluble: Bread is a binder, and for that abolisht, 'ene in their
Ale, whose lost room fills an Apple, which is more air, and of a subtler nature.
The rest they take is little, and that little, is little ease, for like strict
men of Order, they correct their bodies with a Bench, or a poor stubborn Table;
if a Chimney offers it self with some few broken Rushes they are in Down; when
they are sick, that's drunk, if they may have fresh straw, else they do despise
these Worldly pamperings, for their poor apparel 'tis worn out to the diet;
new they seek none; and if a man should offer, they are angry; scarce to be
reconciled again with him: you shall not heare'um ask one cast Doublet once in
a year: which is modesty befitting my poor friends: you see their Wardrobe,
though slender, competent: for shirts I take it, they are things worn out of
their remembrance, lowzy they will be when they list, and mangy, which shows a
fine variety; and then to cure'um a Tanners Lime-pit which is little charge, to
Dogs and these, these two may be cured for three pence.


Use your pleasure Sir. Since I know your Diet Gentlemen, I'll take care that
meat shall not offend you, you shall have Ale.


We ask no more, let it be mighty Lady; and if we perish, then our own sins on
us.


COme Princes of the ragged Regiment, you of the blood, Prig my most upright
Lord, and these (what name or title e're they bear) Iarkman or Patrico,
Crank, or Clapperdudgeon, Frater, or Abram-man; I speak to all that stand in
fair election for the title of King of Beggars, with the command adjoining,
Higgen your Orator, in this inter-Regnum, that Meanwhile was your Dommerer, doth
beseech you all to stand fair, and put your selves in rank, that the first
comer may at his first view make a free choice to say up the question.


'Tis done Lord Higgen.


Thanks to Prince Prig, Prince Ferret. But where is Clause.


Behold the man. But pray my Masters all, Ferret be chosen, you're like to have
a merciful mild Prince of me.


A very Tyrant, I, an arrant Tyrant. If e're I come to reign; therefore look
to it, except you do provide me Hum enough, and Lour to bouze with: I must have
my Capons and Turkeys brought me in, with my green Geese, and Ducklings in the
season: fine fat Chickens, Or if you chance where an eye of tame Phesants or
Partridges are kept, see they be mine, or straight I seize on all your
privileges, places, revenues, offices, as forfeit, call in your crutches,
wooden legs, false bellies, forced eyes, and teeth, with your dead arms; nor
leave you a dirty clout to beg with on your heads, or an old rag with butter,
frankinsense, brimstone and rosin, birdlime, blood, and cream to make you an
old sore: not so much soap as you may some with in the falling-sickness; the very
bag you bear, and the brown dish shall be escheated, all your daintiest dells
too I will deflower, and take your dearest Doxies from your warm sides; and
then some one cold night I'll watch you what old Barn you go to roust in, and
there I'll smother you all in the musty Hay.


This is Tyrant like indeed: but what would Ginkes or Clause be here, if either
of them should reign?


Best ask an Ass, if he were made a Camel, what he would be; or a Dog and he
were a Lyon.


I care not what you are, Sirs, I shall be a Beggar still, I am sure, find my
self there.


O here a Judge comes.


Cry a Judge, a Judge.


What ayleyou ^irs? what means this out-cry?


Master, a sort of poor souls met: Gods-fools, good Master, have had some
little variance amongst our selves who should be honestest of us; and which
uprightest in his call: now cause me thought we ne'er should gre on it our
selves, because indeed 'tis hard to say; we all dissolved, to put it to whom
that should come next, and that's your Mastership, who I hope, will termine it
as your mind serves you, right, and no otherwise we ask it: which? which does
your worship think is he? sweet Master look over us all, and tell us; we are
seven of us, like to the seven wise Masters, or the Planets.


I should judge this the man with the grave beard, and if he be not, --


Bless you good Master, bless you.


I would he were: there's something too amongst you to keep you all honest.


King of Heaven go with you.


Now God reward him, may he never want it* to comfort still the poor in a good
hour.


What i'st? see; Snap has got it.


A good Crown marry:


A crown of Gold.


For our new King; good luck.


To the common treasury with it; if it be Gold thither it must.


Spoke like a Patriot, Ferret --

King Clause, I bid God save the first, first, Clause, after this golden token
of a Crown; where's Orator Higgen with his gratuling speech now in all our
names?


Here he is pumping for it.


H'has coughed the second time, 'tis but once more and then it comes.


So, out withal; expect now --


That thou art chosen venerable Clause, our King and Sovereign; Monarch o'th
Maunders, thus we throw up our Nab-cheats, first for joy, then our filches;
last we clap our fambles, three subject signs, we do it without envy: for who
is he here did not wish thee chosen, now thou art chosen? ask them: all will say
so, nay swear it, 'tis for the King, but let that pass; when last in conference
at the bouzing Ken this other day we sat about our dead Prince of famous
memory: (rest, go with his rags:) and that I saw thee at the Tables end, rise
moved, and gravely leaning on one Crutch, lift the other like a Sceptre at my
head, I then presaged thou shortly would be King, and now thou art so: but
what needs presage to us, that might have read it in thy beard: Oh happy beard:
but happier Prince whose beard was so remarked, as marked out our Prince, not
baiting us a hair. Long may it grow, and thick and fair, that who lives under
it, may live as safe, as under Beggars-Bush, of which this is the thing, that
but the Type.


Excellent, excellent Orator, forward good Higgen, give him leave to spit: the
fine, well spoken Higgen.


This is the beard, the bush, or bushy-beard under whose Gold and Silver reign
'twas said so many ages since, we all should smile on impositions, taxes,
grievances, knots in a State, and whips unto a subject, lye lurking in his
beard, but all kem'd out: if now the Beard be such, what is the Prince that
owes the Beard? a father; no, a Grandfather; nay the great Grandfather of you
his people. He will not force away your Hens, your Bacon, when you have
ventured hard for it, nor take from you the fattest of your puddings: under him
each Man shall eat his own stolen Eggs and Butter, in his own shade, or Sun
shine, and enjoy his own dear Dell, Doxy, or Mort, at night in his own straw,
with his own shirt, or sheet, that he hath filtch'd that day, I, and possess
what he can purchase, back, or belly-cheats, to his own prop: he will have no
purveyors for Pigs, and Poultry.


That we must have, my Learned Orator, it is our will, and every man to keep
in his own Path and Circuit.


Do you hear.

You must hereafter maundon your own pads he says.


And what they get there, is their own, besides to give good words.


Do you mark? to cut Bene-whids, that is the second Law.


And keep a foot the humble, and the common phrase of begging, least men
discover us.


Yes: and cry sometimes to move compassion; Sir, there is a Table, that doth
command all these things, and enjoins 'em; be perfect in their Crutches: their
feigned Plasters, and their true passe-bords, with the ways to stammer, and to
be dumb, and deaf, and blind, and lame, There, all the halting paces are set
down, in the learned Language.


Thither I refer them, those, you at leisure shall interpret to them, we love
no heaps of Laws, where few will serve.


O gracious Prince, 'save the good King Clause.


A song to Crown him.


Set a Sentinel out first.


The word?


A cove comes. and fumbumbis to it -- strike Which ended.


A Cove; Fumbumbis.


To your postures; Arm.


Yonders the Town; I see it.


There's our danger indeed before us, if our shadows save not.


Bless your good worships.


One small piece of money.


Amongst us all poor wretches.


Blind and lame.


For his sake that gives all.


Pitiful worships.


One little do it.


King, by your leave, where are you?


To buy a little bread.


To feed so many mouths as will ever pray for you.


Here be seven of us.


Seven, good Master, O remember seven, seven blessings.


Remember, gentle Worshipful.


Against seven deadly sins.


And seven sleepers.


If they be hard of heart, and will give nothing -- alas we had not a charity
this three days.


Heaven reward you.


Lord reward you.


The Prince of pity bless thee.


Do I see? or is't my fancy that would have it so? ha? 'tis her face; come
hither Maid.


What have you Bells for ^y Squirrel? I have given Bun meat, you do not love me
do you? catch me a Butterfly, and I'll love you again; when? can you tell?
Peace, we go a birding; I shall have a fine thing.


Her voice too says the same; but for my head I would not that her manners
were so changed, hear me thou honest fellow; what's this Maiden that lives
amongst you here?


Ao, ao, ao, ao.


How? nothing but signs?


Ao, ao, ao, ao.


'Tis strange, I would fain have it her, but not her thus.


He is de -- de -- de -- de -- de -- de -- deaf, and du -- du -- du --
dude-dumb sir.


'Slid they did al speak plain even now me thought, dost thou know this same
Maid?


Why, why, why, why, which, go, go, go, go, Gods fool she was by -- by -- by --
by -- born at the Barn yonder by be -- be -- be -- be -- Beggars Bush, by -- by
-- Bush, her name is My -- my -- my -- my -- Match; so was her Mo -- Mo --
Mothers too too.


I understand no word he says; how long has she been here?


lo -- lo -- long enough to be in -- in -- ingled; and she ha go -- go -- go --
good luck


I must be better informed, then by this way. here was another face to that I
marked, Oh the old man's but they are vanished all most suddenly; I will come
here again, Oh that I were so happy, as to find it, what I yet hope? It is put
on.


The Coast is clear, Ferret, I by -- by -- by -- 'd hence.


I, thou were at thy ba, be, bi, by, bu, which showed thou were a Scholar.


He durst not hold discourse with me, so much for the credit of the Snaps, as
the word says, either Snap some, or Snap all. That is if you cannnot Snap all,
Snap some.


But thy snaping too short makes thee so lean, I think I have ferreted you
there Snap.


We shall not get a snap if we prate longer, our King is served by this time,
Dish, and bit, the Feast waits no man, but the man waits it.


That is an eager stomach Snap; here I Ferret you again.


So rich, and I his sole Executor.


Very right Sir, I am to make his will, will you come near Sir.


I am sorry neighbour to find you in so weak a State.


Ye are welcome, but I am fleeting, Sir.


Methinks he looks well, his colour fresh and, strong, his eyes are cheerful.


A glimering before death Sir, 'tis nothing else; do you see how he fumbles with
the sheets?


My learned Sir pray ye sit, I am bold to send for you to take a care of what I
leave. --


Do you hear that?


My honest neighbours weep not, I must leave ye, I cannot always bear ye
company, we must drop still, there is no remedy: pray ye Mr. Parson will ye
write my Testament, and write it largly, it may be remembered, and be witness to
my legacies good Gentlemen: your worship I do make my full Executor, you are a
man of wit and understanding: give me a cup of Wine to raise my spirits, for I
speak low: I would, before these neighbours, have you to swear, (Sir) that you
will see it executed; and what I give, let equally be rendered for my Souls
health.


I vow it truly neighbours, let not that trouble ye, before all these, once
more I give my Oath.


Then set me higher, and pray you come near me all.


We are ready for you.


First then, after I have given my Body to the Worms: (for they must be served
first, they are seldom cozened.)


Remember your parish Neighbour.


You speak truly, I do remember it, a vile lewd Parish, and pray it may be
mended: To the poor of it (which is to all the Parish) I give nothing, for
nothing unto nothing is most natural, yet leave as much space as will build an
Hospital, their children may pray for me.


What do you give to it?


Set down two thousand Ducats: To your Worship; (because you must take pains
to see all finished) I give two thousand more, it may be three Sir, a poor
gratuity for your paines-taking.


These are large sums?


Nothing to him that has 'em.


To my old Master I give five hundred, (five hundred and five hundred are too
few Sir) but there are more to serve.


This fellow Coins sure.


Give me some more drink, Pray ye buy Books, buy books, you have a learned head
stuff it with libraries, and understand 'em when ye have done, 'tis justice,
run not the parish mad with controversies, nor preach not as abstinence to
longing women, 'twill purdge the bottom of their consciences: I would give the
Church new Organs, but I prophecy the church-Wardens would quickly pipe 'em
out 'oth parish, two hundred Ducats more to mend the Chancell, and to paint
true Orthography as many, They write Sunt with a C which is abominable, pray
you set that down to poor maids Marriages.


I that's well thought of, what's your will in that point? A meritorious
thing.


I give per annum two hundred Ells of Lockram that there be no straight
dealings in their Linens, but the sails cut according to their burdens; to
all Bell-ringers, I bequeath new Ropes, and let them use them at their own
discretions.


You may remember us Sir.


I do, good Gentlemen, and I bequeath you both good careful Surgeons a legacy,
you have need of more then Money, I know you want good diets and good lotions*
and in your pleasures good take heed.


He raves now, but 'twill be quickly off.


I do bequeath ye commodities of thy pins: brown papers: Pack-threads, roast
Pork and puddings: Ginger-bread and Iews trumps of penny pipes, and mouldy
pepper: take them ee'n where you please and be cozened with 'em, I should
bequeath my Executors also, but those I'll leave to the Law.


Now he grows temperate.


You'll give no more.


I am loath to give more from ye, because I know you will have a care to
execute, only to pious uses, Sir a little.


If he be worth all these, I am made for ever.


I give to fatal Dames that spin men's thredsout, and poor distressed Damsels
that are militant, as members of our own afflictions, a hundred crowns to buy
warm Tubs to work in, I give five hundred pounds to buy a Church yard, a
spacious Church yard, to lay thieves and knaves in, rich men and honest men
take all the room up.


Are you not weary?


Never of well doing.


These are mad Legacies.


They were got as madly, my sheep and oxen, and my movables, my Plate and
Jewels and five hundred acres; I have no heirs.


This cannot be, 'tis monstrous.


Three Ships at Sea too.


You have made me full Executor?


Full, full, and total, would I had more to give ye, but these may serve an
honest mind.


You say true, a very honest mind, and make him rich too; But where shall I
raise these moneys, where shall I find these sums?


Even where ye please Sir, you are wise and provident, and know business, even
raise 'em where you shall think good, I am reasonable.


Think good? will that raise thousands?


You have sworn to see it done that's all my comfort.


Where I please? this is packed sure to disgrace me.


Ye are just and honest, and I know ye will do it, even where you please, for
you know where the wealth is.


I am abused, ^baffl'd and board it seems.


No, ye are fooled.


Most finely fooled.


Ha, ha, ha, some more drink, for my heart, Gentlemen this merry Lawyer -- Ha,
ha, ha this Scholar -- I think this fit will cure me: this Executor -- I shall
laugh out my lungs.


This is dirision above sufferance.


Did you think, had this Man been rich, he would have chosen a Wolf, a
Cancker, a Maggot-pate to be his whole Executor?


A Lawyer that entangles all men's honesties, and lives like a Spider in a
cob-web, lurking, and catching at all flies, that pass his Pit falls? Puts
powder to all States, to make 'em caper? would he trust you?


Do you deserve? I find Gentlemen this Cataplasme of a well cozened Lawyer laid
to my Stomach lenifies my fever, Methink I could eat now walk a little.


I am ashamed to see how flat I am cheated, how grosely, and maliciously made a
May-game:


This 'tis to covet all the gains, to have a stirring Oar in all men's
actions.


We did this but to vex your fine officiousies.


I thank ye, I am fooled Gentlemen; the Lawyer is an Ass, I do confess it, a
weak, dull, shallow Ass, good even to your Worships: Vicar, remember Vicar,
Rascal remember, thou notable rich Rascal.


I do remember Sir, pray ye stay a little, I have even two Legacies more to
make your mouth up, Sir.


Remember Varlets, quake and remember Rogues, I have brine for your Buttocks.


Oh, how he frets and fumes now like a dunghill.


His Gall contains fine stuff now to make poisons, rare damned stuff.


Go, let's us crucify him.


Dead, dead, they are no doubt on it, and I Heir apparent to the port-ma^tue,
an aglet hole or two in their hearts has done the business, the port-mantue, I
say bring forth the port-mantue.


'Tis here Sir.


And thy Father too Boy?


What would you have, 'tis very late?


Never too late to tell Money, fetch me a brace of Gennets, I will mount 'em, a
Covey of Courtesans, dost here?


What does the fellow mean?


No fellows friend on thy allegiance, 'tis time to show our self, where is thy
Boy?


Here Seignior.


Kneel down, and ask me blessing.


This does look like a blessing, shall I ask another?


Ask any thing but what I am, I must be still disguised, my Men are absent.


Your men? --


Thou art wise, thine ear, I am a Prince, the reason of my shape thou shalt
know hereafter, thus Jove has been disguised.


Is not your name Pimponio.


It was my pleasure they should call me so, I have not found 'em trusty, how
fares the Duchess? Boy thou shalt wait on me, I'll have you all.


Whether?


To Spain, when thou hast got a chapman for this tub thou liv'st in, let me
know it.


Where's Pimponio?


A pox pimp you, they are alive again, now am I a dead man.


There is a certain moveable, ecclip'd a portmantue.


Would your tongue had been clip'd.


With your pardon Sir, is not this Seignior a Prince disguised, and came hither
to Court the Duchess? he has promised us at his return from Spain to make us
grandees.


Has he betrayed himself? nay then my duty; if please your excellence.


Away, away.


A Prince cannot be hid* though under Mountains, but my dear Prince the bags
must go with me, while you keep State 'ith Inn.


Who shall maintain.


If I did think thou would carry it handsomely -- well I'll excuse thee to
thy Master, when thou hast domineered away this Bag, thou may hear more, and
so I take leave of your excellence.


Hah, am not I a Prince indeed? Grutti, Boy, I entertain you both my Groom, and
Page, and say unto you, Snakes go cast your coats, here's earnest for new
skins, when things are ripe we will to Court.


What thinks your Grace of going to bed.


I am too sober, let the whole house be drunk first, let me have fifty
Strumpets.


Fifty Trumpets.


Strumpets I say, they'll make the greater noise, this Roome's too narrow, beat
down the walls on both sides, advance your light, and call the country in, if
there be a Taylor amongst 'em, he shall first take measure of my highness, for
I must not longer walk in Cuerpo


We attend your Highness.


Why I shall hardly take thee for my own natural child.


Let me alone with my Don, he is gone to fit himself with clothes, and if I do
not fit him, let me never find the way into my own breeches, see he has had a
nimble Taylor, some Suit prepared to his hand, I know my cue to enter, and
pursue his Princely humour out of breath.


And how, and how do things become? We were in clouds but now.


Your Highness is broken out.


Broken out, where?


Out of the clouds and please you.


There is no Infidel among you then, you all believe I am a Prince, there are
no Traitors I hope amongst ye.


Traitors we will cut off any mans neck, that dares but think so.


Do and I will justify it, hang necks among friends, let us be merry, reach me
a Chair and a bottle of Wine, every one take his charge.


Will not your Highness have the dance first.


They will dance the better when they are three quarters drunk, music and give
fire at once -- so, but methings it were necessary there were some difference
in our drinking; all are not Princes, reach me a bigger bottle, I will preserve
my state, This is a Princely draught -- so -- why have we not a concubine?


Brave Prince with what a Majesty he drinks.


Now let 'em frisk the dance you have prepared, we are ready to accept it.


And it shall please your Grace there is a high German desires to speak with
you.


I fear you are betrayed Sir, and that the Duchess has sent for you.


For me, I won not come yet,


Do not affront him Sir for your own sake, this high German has beaten all the
Fencers in Europe.


Let him beat all the World, what's that to me? shall he make a Prize of me?


But if he come Ambassador from the Duchess.


That's an other matter, give me the the other bottle -- now let all the Cantons
of Scorss come -- which is the high German? let me see him.


That Sir.


He's one of the lowest high Germans that e're I looked on.


I kiss thy highness hand.


And we embrace thy Lownes: do ye hear Sir, are you a high German?


I was so at the beginning of the wars, what we are beaten to you may discern.


Are you beaten to this? you'll be a very little Nation if the wars continue.


I have a message to deliver you, the fair Duchess of Urbin, whom I wait on,
hearing a person of your blood and quality, so meanly lodged, by me, desires
you would accept an entertainment in her Court.


We give the Duchess thanks: But what High German in thy little judgement,
doest think the Duchess will do with me there.


'Twere sin to say she'll honour you, for you are above all addition, but her
love, 'tis probable you may be affronted.


No matter, I have been affronted a hundred times, but by whom?


Questionless by some great ones, and perhaps beaten.


I have been beaten too upon good occasion, and will again to save my Honour,
beaten? I can take the strappado, beside in this part I am insensible, a Kick
is cast away.


If you be valiant and endure, it will engage her love the more, go on boldly,
my council shall attend.


I will go on, and fear no beating; well I cannot Knight thee, yet prove but a
witch, I'll make thee one of my privy Councellors.


Tara, Ra ra ra, room for the Duke of Ferrara.


What's the matter.


You have fooled finely, you must be whipped, and stripped, my scurvy Don.


VVhip a Prince? what do ye mean?


You must be Duke of Ferrara*


Duke of a Fidle-stick, are you in earnest Gentlemen? do you intend I shall
catch an Ague Gentlemen?


The lash, when the fit comes, will keep you warm, stay but a little, and we will
send you a whip to comfort you.


'Twill be but cold comfort, make the best on it; how am I transformed? where's
my low high German now? Duke of Ferrara quoth a': -- would I were any thing, I
know not what I am, as they have handled me.


Is the Duke gone?


Yes Madam.


I'll have the fool hanged then.


That's I.


Alas poor fellow, Ha, ha, ha, what art thou?


Nothing, I hope she does not know me again, I must deny my self.


Come hither sirrah, whose devise was it to bid you say you were Duke of
Ferrara?


Alas not I Madam, he is gone.


Who is gone?


The insolent fellow that made a fool of your Highness.


Whether is he gone?


To obey your Grace, and be whipped.


Why do you shake so?


I'm very warm and please your Grace.


VVhere's your Clothiers.


My Clothes? I never wore any more in my life, I sweat with these.


Alas poor fellow, he has punishment enough, who waits there.


Now to be sent to whipping cheer.


Bid Borgia attend us.


I shall Madam.


How now sirrah, what are you?


A tumbler; do you not know me?


I know thee?


What not Pimponio honest Pimponio.


Seignior Borgia her Grace calls for you.


I attend.


How Seignior Borgia? then I am not I. And there is no staying here to find my
self, as I remember some back friends of mine did promise a clean whipped, I'll
rather endure the foulness of the weather then stay for it, I must be dukifi'd,
be persuaded into Kicks -- they'll return I won not tempt my destiny, she
promised to hang me, and I can do that for my self when I have a mind to it.


Kick that fellow out of the Court.


You are mistaken Sir, he means some body else, I have been kicked already,

Oh gentle fate rid me out of their clutches:
And then adieu to our picked-dame Duchess.

What's the matter*


A fool has lost his Master, and thus cries him about the Court thy man
Aurelio.


Oh Yes;

If any Man there be
In Town or in Country
Can tell me of a wight,
Was lost but yester Night:
His name was I know
Seignior Aurelio,
Bring word to the Crier
His desolate Squire,
By these marks, he is known
He had a bush of his own,
Two eyes in their place,
And a Nose on his face,
His Beard is very thin,
But no hair on his Chin,
And for this fine feat
Take what you can get;
And heaven bless Pimponio, for no body knows me and I know no body else to
pray for.


Here, here's thy Master.


No, no, that's Seignior Borgia, not a word of whiping if you love me, do not
deceive your self.


We have been both deceived, Pimponio I am thy master.


Why then I'll wander through an other World with you, a World that hath more
charity in it, then to uncase a man for doing his master Honour.


Shall I never return to my own house again? we are lodged here in the
miserablest Doghole, a conjurers circle gives content above it, a Hawks mew is
a Princly palace to it we have a bed no bigger then a basket, and there we lye
like Butter clapped together, and sweat our selves to sauce immediately, the fumes
are infinite inhabit here too; and to that so thick they cut like Marmalet, so
various too, they'll pose a Gold finder. Never return to mine own paradise? why
wife I say, why Estifania?


Within. I am coming presently.


Make hast good Jewell; I am like the people that live in the sweet Islands: I
dye, I dye, if I stay but one day more here, my lungs are rotten with the damps
that rise, and I cough nothing now but stinks of all sorts; the Inhabitants
we have, are two starved Rats, for they are not able to maintain a Cat here,
and those appear as fearful as two Devils, they have eat a map of the whole
World up already, and if we stay a night longer we are gone for company,
There's an old woman that's now grown to Marble, dried in this Brick hill, she
sits 'ith Chimneys, which is but three tiles raised like a house of Cards, the
true proportion of an old smok'd hovill, there is a young thing too, that's
nature meant for a Maid servant, but 'tis now a monster, she has a husk about
her like a Chestnut, with lasiness, and living under the line here, and these
two make a hollow sound together, like Frogs or winds between two Doors that
murmurs, mercy deliver me, O are you come wife! Shall we be free again?


I am now going, and you shall presently to your own house Sir, by that time
you have said your Orisons, and broke your fast, I shall be back and ready to
usher you to your old content, your freedom.


Break my neck rather, is there any thing here to eat but one another like a
race of Canniballs, a peace of buttered wall you think is excellent, let's have
our house again, immediately, and pray ye take heed unto the Furniture, none be
imbezelled?


Not a pin I warrant you.


And let 'em instantly depart.


They shall both, for by this time she has acquainted him, and will give over
gratefully unto you.


I'll walk 'ith churchyard, the dead cannot offend me more then these living,
an hour hence I'll expect you.


I'll not fail Sir.


And do ye hear, lets have a handsome dinner, and let me have a strong Bath to
restore me, I stink lik a stall-fish-shambles, or an Oyle-shop.


You shall have all; which some interpret nothing.


Nay, pray ye come out, and let me understand ye, and tune your Pipe a little
higher Lady, i'll hold ye fast:


Ha, what would you have?


My goods again, how came my trunks all open.


Are your Trunks gone?


Yes, and clothes gone, and Chains, and Jewels, how she smells like hung
Beef, the palsy and picklocks, fie how she belches the spirit of Garlic.


Where's your Gentlewoman? the young fair Woman?


What's that to my question? she is my Wife, and gone about my business.


Is she your Wife Sir?


Yes Sir, Is that wonder, is the name of Wife unknown here.


Is she truly, truly your Wife?


I think so, for I married her, it was no vision sure.


If you be married to that Gentlewoman you are a wretched man, she has twenty
husbands.


She tells you true.


And she has cozened all Sir.


The devil she has, I had a fair house with her that stands hard by, and
furnished Royally.


You are cozened too, 'tis none of hers, good Gentleman, It is a Ladies,
what's the Ladies name wench?


The Lady Margarita, she was her servant, and kept the house, but going from
her Sir, for some lewd tricks she plaid.


Plague a'the devil, Am I 'ith Meridian of my wisdom cheated by a stale
Quean? what kind of Lady is that, that owes the house?


A young sweet Lady.


Of a low stature?


She is indeed of a low stature, but wondrous fair.


I feel I am cozened, sensible I am undone, was she her Mistress say you?


Her own Mistress, her very Mistress Sir, and all you saw about that house was
hers.


No plate, no Jewels, nor no hangings? No Money?


She is a poor shifting thing, but for one Gown her Lady gave her.


I am mad now, I think I am as poor as she, I am wild else, one civil suit I
have left, and that's all, if she steal that she must flea me for it, where
does she use?


You may find truth as soon, alas a thousand concealed corners Sir she lurks
in, and here she gets a flees, and there another, and lives in mists and
smokes where none can find her.


Is she a whore too?


Little better Gentleman, I dare not say she is so, she is yours.


A Whore and a Theife too, two excellent moral virtue, in one she's Saint, I
hope to see her legend, well here's a Royal left yet, there's for your lodging
and your meat for this week; a Silk-worme lives at a more plentyfull ordinary,
and sleeps in a sweeter Box, Farewell great Grandmother, if I do find you were
an accessory, 'tis but cutting off two smoky minutes, I'll hang you presently.


'Tis he, I am caught, I must stand to it stoutly.


It is my evil Angel, let me bless me; my worthy wife?


My most noble Husband.


I have been in bawdy houses.


I believe you, and very lately too.


To seek your Ladyship, in Cellars too, in private Cellars where the thirsty
bawds hear your confessions, I was among the Nuns because you sing well, but
they say yours are bawdy songs, they morn for ye, and last I went to Church
to seek you out, 'tis so long since you were there, they have forgot you.


You have had a merry progress, I'll tell nine now, I went to twenty Taverns.


And are you sober.


Yes, I reel not yet sir, where I saw twenty drunk, most of them Soldiers,
from thence to'th Diceing-house, there I found quarrels needless, and
senseless, Swords, and Pots, and Candlesticks, Tables, and Stools, and all in
one confusion; then to the Chyrurgions went, who learnedly told me, if you
tippl'd hard twenty to one you whored too, and then he should hear of you; last
to your Confessor I came who told me you were too proud to pray, and here I
have found ye.


She bears up bravely, and the Rogue is witty, why am I cozened, why am I
abused? Thou most vile, base, abominable.


Captain.


Thou stinking, overstew'd, poor, pocky.


Captain.


Do you echo me.


Yes sir, and go before you too, you had best now draw your Sword Captain, draw
it, upon a Woman, do brave Captain, upon your Wife, oh most renowned Captain.


A plague upon thee, why did thou marry me?


To be my Husband.


Why did thou flatter me, and show me wonders, a House and riches? when they
are but shadows, shadows to me.


Why did you work on me with your strong Soldiers wit, and swore you would
bring me so much in Chains? so much in Jewels Husband, and here's your
Treasure, sell it to a Tinker to mend old ^ettles; is this noble usage?


A Fire subtle you, are ye so crafty?


Here's a goodly Jewel, did not you win this at G^lletta Captain, or took it in
the Field from some brave Bashaw? how it sparkles like an old Ladies eyes? and
fills each Room with Light like a Dark-lanthorn, this would do rarely in an Abbey
Window, to cousin Pilgrims.


Prithe leave prating.


And here's a Chain of Whitings-eyes for Pearls, a Mussel-monger would have
made a better.


Nay, prithe Wife, my Clothes, my Clothes.


I'll tell ye, your Clothes are parallels to these all counterfeit, put these
and them on, you are a Man of Copper, a kind of Candlestick, these you thought,
my Husband to have cozened me withal, but I am quit with you.


Is there no House then, nor no ground about it, no Plate, nor Hangings.


There are none sweet Husband; shadow for shadow is an equal; justice, can you
rail now? pray put your fury up sir, and speak great words, you are a
Soldier, Thunder.


I will speak little, I have plaid the fool, and so I am rewarded.


You have spoken well sir.


Shall I never see a lusty Man again.


Faith Mistress, you do so over-labour 'em, and so dryfounder 'em, they cannot
last.


Where's the French-man?


Alas, he's all to fitters, and lies taking the height of his fortune with a
Sirrenger, he's chained, he's chained good Man, he is a mourner.


What's become of the Don?


Who? gold Locks? he's foul in the Touch-hole: and recoiles again, the main
Springs weakened that holds up his Cock, he lies at the sign of the Sun to be
new breech'd.


The Rutter too is gon.


Oh, that was a brave Rascal, he would labour like a Thresher; but alas what
thing can ever last? he has been ill-mew'd, and drawn too soon; I have seen him
in the Hospital.


There was an English-man. --


I, there was an English-man; you'll scant find any now to make that name good.
There was those English-men, that were Men indeed, but they are vanished: They
are so taken up in their own Country, and so beaten off their speed by their
own Women, when they come here they draw their Legs like Hackneys, drink,
and their own devices have undone 'em.


I must have one that's strong, no life in Lisbon else, perfect and young; my
custom with young Ladies and high fed Citty-Dames will fall and break else, I
want my self too in my age to nourish me; They are all sunk I maintained, now
what's this business? what goodly fellows that?


Why do you drag me? Pox on your Justice, let me loose, cannot a Man fall into
one of your drunken Cellars, and venture the breaking on's Neck, but he must be
used thus rascally.


What made you wandering so late in the night? you know that is imprisonment.


May be I walk in my sleep.


What made you wandering sir, into that Vault where all the City store and the
Ammunition lay?


I fell into it by chance, I broke my shins for it, your Worships feel not that;
I knocked my Head against a hundred Posts, would you had had it, cannot I break
my Neck in my own defence?


Your coming thither was to play the Villain, to fire the Powder and blow up
that part o'th City.


Yes, with my Nose.


We have told you what's the Law, he that is taken there, unless a Magistrate,
and have command in that place, presently if there be nothing found appa^ent,
near him worthy his Torture, or his present death, must either pay his Fine for
his presumption, (which is six hundred Ducats) or for six years tug at an
Oa^e in the Galleys; may be you were drunk, you'll be kept sober there.


Tug at an Oar, you are not errant Rascals to catch me in a Pit fall and
betray me?


A lusty-minded Man.


O, wondrous able.


Pray Gentlemen allow me but that liberty to speak a few words with your
Prisoner, and I shall thank you.


Take your pleasure Lady.


What would you give that Woman should redeem you, redeem you from this
slavery.


Besides my service, I would give her my whole self, I would be her Vassal.


She has great reason to expect as much, considering the great sum she pays
for it, yet take comfort, what you shall do to merit this, is easy, and I will
be the Woman shall befriend you, 'Tis but to entertain some handsome Ladies,
and young fair Gentlewomen; you guess the way; but -- giving of your mind --


I am excellent at it, you cannot pick out such another living; I understand
you, is't not thus? * --


Ye have it.


Bring me a hundred of 'em, I'll dispatch 'em, I will be none but yours; should
another offer another way to redeem me, I should scorn it, what Women you shall
please; I am monstrous lusty, not to be taken down; would you have Children?
I'll get you those as ^ast, and thick as fly-blows.


I admire him, wonder at him.


Hark you Lady, you may require some times. --


I by my faith.


And you have it by my faith and handsomely; this old Cat will suck shrewdly;
you have no Daughter? I fly at all; now I am in my Kingdom, Tug at an Oar? no,
tug in a Feather-bed with good warm Caudles; hang your bred and water, I'll
make you young again, believe that Lady; I will so frubbish you.


Come fellow Officers, this Gentleman is free; I'll pay the Ducats.


And when you catch me in your Citty-powdering Tub again, boyle me with
Cabbidge.


You are borh warned and armed Sir.


Now do I look as if I were Crow-trodden, fie, how my hams shrink under me; O
me, I am brokenwinded too; Is this a life? Is this the recreation I have aimed
at? I had a body once, a handsome body, and wholesome too; now I appear like a
Rascal that had been hung a year or two in Gibbets, fie, how I faint; Women?
keep me from Women; Place me before a Cannon, 'tis a pleasure; stretch me upon
a Rack, a recreation; but Women? Women? O the Devil Women? courteous Gulf
was never half so dangerous; Is there no way to fall into the Cellar again,
and be taken? no lucky fortune to direct me that way? no Galleys to be got, nor
yet no Gallows? for I fear nothing now, no Earthly thing but these
unsatisfied Men-leeches, Women: how divelishly my bones ache: oh the old Lady! I
have a kind of waiting-VVoman lies cross my back too, oh how she stinks! no
treason to deliver me? now what are you? do you mock me?


No sir no, we were your predecessors in this place.


And come to see how you bear up.


Good Gentlemen, you seem to have a snuffing in your head sir, a parlous
snuffing, but this same dampish air --


A dampish air indeed.


Blow your face tenderly, your nose will ne'er endure it; mercy on me, what are
men changed to here? is my nose fast yet? methinks it shakes in the hilts; pray
tell me Gentlemen, how long is't since you flourished here?


Not long since.


Move your self easily, I see you are tender, nor long endured.


The labour was so much sir, and so few to perform it --


Must I come to this? and draw my legs after me like a lame dog? I cannot run
away, I am too feeble; will you sue for this place again Gentlemen?


No truly sir, the place has been too warm for our Complexions.


We have enough on it, rest you merry sir, we came but to congratulate your
fortune, you have abundance.


Bear your fortune soberly, and so we leave you to the next fair Lady.


Stay but a little, and i'll meet you Gentlemen, at the next Hospital, there's
no living thus, nor am I able to endure it longer, with all the helps and
heates that can be given me, I am at my trot already; they are fair and young
most of these Women that repair to me, but they stick on like burs, shake me
like feathers, more Women yet?

Would I were honestly married, to any thing that had but half a face, and
not a great to keep her, nor a smock, that I might be civilly merry when I
pleased, rather then labouring in these fulling Mills.


I see you bear up bravely yet.


Do ye hear Lady, do not make a Game-bear of me, to play me hourly, and fling
on all your Whelps; it will not hold; play me with some discretion, to day one
course, and two days hence another.


If you be angry, pay back the money I redeemed you at, and take your course; I
can have Men enough: you have cost me an hundred Crowns since you came hither,
in brothes and strengthening Caudles; till you do pay me, if you will eat and
live, you shall endeavour, i'll chain you to it else.


Make me a Dog-kennel, i'll keep your House and bark, and feed on bare bones,
and be whipped out a' doors, do ye mark me Lady? whipped, i'll eat old shoes.


Your business sir, if it be for a Woman, ye are cozened, I keep none here.


Certain this is the Gentleman, the very same.


Death, if I had but money, or any friend to bring me from this bondage, I
would thrash, set up a Cobblers stall, keep Hogs, and feed with 'em, sell
Tinderboxes, and knights of Ginger-bread, that's for three half pence a day,
and think it Lordly, from this base Stallion trade: why does he eye me, eye me
so narrowly?


It seems you are troubled Sir, I heard you speak of want.


'Tis better hearing far then relieving Sir:


I do not think so, you know me not.


Not yet that I remember.


You shall, and for your friend, be confident I love you, by this you shall
perceive it, 'tis Gold, no small sum, a thousand ducats supply your want.


But do you do this faithfully.


If I mean ill, spit in my face, and kick me; in what else I may serve you Sir,
command.


I thank you, this is as strange to me as Knights adventure? where are you
white broth? now lusty blood come in and tell your money: 'tis ready here, no
threats, nor no Orations, nor prayers now.


You do not mean to leave me.


I'll live in Hell sooner then here, and cooler, come quickly come, dispatch,
this airs unwholesome: quickly good Lady quickly to it.


Well since it must be, the next I'll fetter faster sure, and closer.


And pick his bones, as you've done mine, pox take ye.


At my Lodging for a while, you shall be quartered, and there take Physic for
your health.


I think I have found my good Angel now, if I can keep him.


IS she to be buried in Christian burial, when she wilfully seeks her own
Salvation?

I tell thee she is, therefore make her Grave straight; the Coroner hath sat on
her, and finds it Christian burial.


How can that be, unless she drowned her self, in her* own defence?


Why 'tis found so.


It must be so offended, it cannot be else; for here lies the point, if I drown
my self willingly it argues an act, and an act hath three branches, it is to
act, to do, to perform, or all; she drowned her self wittingly.


Nay, but hear you good man Delver.


Give me leave, here lies the water, good, here stands the man, good, if the
man go to this water and drown himself, it is nill he, will he; he goes, mark
you that: but if the water come to him and drowns him, he drowns not himself;
argall, he that is not guilty of his own death, shortens not his own life.


But is this Law?


I marry is't, Crowners quest law.


Will you have the truth on it, if this had not been a Gentlewoman, she should
have been buried out a' Christian burial.


Why there thou say, and the more pity that great folk should have
countenance in this World to drown or hang themselves, more then meaner
christians: come my spade, there is no ancient Gentlemen but Gardeners,
ditchers and Grave-makers, they hold up Adams profession.


Was he a Gentleman?


He was the first that ever bore Arms. I'll put another question to thee, if
thou answer me not to the purpose, confess thy self.


Go to.


What is he that builds stronger then either the Mason, the Ship-wright or the
Carpenter?


The Gallowes-maker, for that out-lives a thousand Tenants.


I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallows does well, but how does it
well? it does well to those that do ill, now thou dostill to say the Gallows
is built strongerthen the Church, Argall the Gallows may do well to thee, to it
again, come.


Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Ship-wright or a Carpenter?


I, tell me that and unyoke.


Marry now I can tell.


To it.


Mass I cannot tell.


Cudgel thy brains no more about it, for your dull Ass will not mend his pace
with beating, and when you are asked this question next, say a Grave-maker, the
houses he makes last till Doomsday, go get thee in and fetch me a soope of
Liquor.

In youth when I did love, did love
Methought it was very sweet,
To contract, O the time for a my behove,
O methought there was nothing a meet.

Has this fellow no feeling of his business? a sings in Grave-making.


But age with his stealing steps
Hath clawed me in his clutch,
And hath shiped me into the Land,
As if I had never been such.

That skull had a tongue in it, could sing once, how the knave jowles it to the
ground, as if 'twere Caines Jaw-bone, that did the first murder: this might be
the pate of a pollitician which this Ass now o'rereaches, one that would
circumvent God, might it not?


It might Sir.


Or of a Courtier, which could say, good morrow my Lord, how dost thou sweet
Lord? this might be my Lord such a one, that praised my Lord such a ones Horse
when he meant to beg it, might it not?


I Sir.


Why ee'n so, and now my Lady Worms choples, and knocks about the mazer with a
Sextons spade, here's fine revolution, and we had the trick to see it, did these
bones cost no more the breeding but to play at loggits with 'em? mine ache to
think on it.


A Pickaxe and a Spade a spade,
For and a shrouding sheet,
O a pit of Clay for to be made
For such a Guest is meet.

There's another, why may not that be the Scull of a Lawyer? where be his
quiddities now? his quillities, his cases, his terms, and his tricks? why does
he suffer this mad knave now to knock him about the sconce with a dirty
shovel, and will not tell him of his actions of battery? hum: this fellow
might be in's time a great buyer of Land, with his statutes, his rogguizance,
his fines, his double vouchers, his recoveries, to have his fine pate full of
fine dirt; will vouchers vouch him no more of his purchases and doubles, then
the length and breadth of a pair of Indentures? the very conveyances of his
land will scarcely lye in this Box, and must the Inheritor himself have no
more? Ha?


Not a jot more Sir.


Is not parchment made of Sheep skins?


I Sir, and of Calves skins too.


They are Sheep and Calves which seek out assurance in that. I will speak to
this fellow: whose Grave's this firrah?


Mine Sir, or a pit of Clay for to be made.


I think it's thine indeed, for thou lie in it.


You lye out on it Sir, and therefore 'tis not yours: for my part I do not lye
in it, yet it is mine.


Thou dost lye in it, to be in it and say it is thine, 'tis for the dead, not for
the quick, therefore thou lie.


'Tis a quick lye Sir, 'twill again from me to you.


What man dost thou dig it for?


For no man Sir.


What Woman then?


For none neither.


Who is to be buried in it?


One that was a Woman Sir, but rest her soul, she's dead.


How long hast thou been a Grave-maker.


Of the days 'ith year I came to it, that day that our last King Hamlet
overcame Fortinbrass.


How long is that since?


Cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that; it was that very day that
young Hamlet was born, he that is mad, and sent into England.


I marry, why was he sent into England?


Why, because he was mad, a shall recover his wits there, or if he do not, 'tis
no great matter there.


Why?


'T will not been seen in him there, there are Men as mad as he.


How came he mad?


Very strangely they say.


How strangely?


Faith ee'n with loosing his wits.


Upon what ground?


Why here in Denmark: I have been Sexton here man and boy thirty years.


How long will a man lye 'ith earth e're he rot?


Faith if he be not rotten before he dye, as we have many pocky courses that
will scarce hold the laying in, a will last you some eight year or nine year; a
Tanner will last you nine year.


Why he more then another?


Why Sir his Hide is so tanned with his Trade, that a will keep out water a
great while, and your water is a sore decayer of your whoreson dead body: here's
a scull now hath lain you 'ith earth twenty three years.


Whose was it?


A whoreson mad fellow it was, whose do ye think it was?


Nay I know not.


A pest^ence on him for a mad Rogue, a powered a Flagon of Rhenish on my head
once; this same scull Sir, was Sir Yoricks the Kings Jester.


This?


'Een that.


Alas poor Yorick, I knew him friend, a fellow of infinite jest, of most
excellent fancy, but where be your Gibes now* your Gamboles, your Songs of
merriment? quite chop fa^'n? prithee friend tell me one thing.


What's that Sir?


Dost thou think Alexander looked a this fashion 'ith earth?


'Een so.


And smelt so? pah.


Ee'n so Sir.


To what base uses may we return? why may not imagination trace the noble dust
of Alexander, till a find it stopping a Bung-hole.


'Twere to consider, too curiously to consider so.


No faith not a jot, but to follow him thither with modesty enough, and
likelihood to lead it: Alexander dyed, Alexander was buried, Alexander returned
to dust, the dust is Earth, of Earth we make Loom, and why of that Loom whereto
he was converted, might they not stop a Beer-barrel?

Imperial Caesar dead, and turned to clay,
Might stop a hole to keep the wind away;
Oh that that Earth which kept the World in awe,
Should patch a Wall t'expell the Water flaw.

Sirrah, go fetch my Fox from the Cutlers; there's money for the scouring, tell
him, I stop a groat since the last great Muster he had in store pitch for the
bruise he took with the recoiling of his Gun.


Yes sir.


And do you hear? when you come, take down my Buckler, and sweep the Cobwebs
off, and grind the Pick on it, and fetch a Nail or too, and tack on the
Bracers; your Mistress made a Potlet on it, I thank her, at her Maids wedding,
and burnt off the handle.


I will sir.


Whose within here, ho, neighbour, not stirring yet?


Oh good morrow, good morrow: what news, what news?


It holds, he dyes this morning.


Then happy Man be his fortune; I am resolved.


And so am I, and forty more good fellows, that will not give their heads for
the washing, I take it.


'Sfoot Man, who would not hang in such good Company? and such a Cause? A fire,
a Wife, and Children, 'tis such a jest that Men should look behind 'em to the
World; and let their honours, their honours neighbourship. --


I'll give thee a pint of Bastard, and a Role for that bare word.


They say that we Taylors are things that lay one another, and our Geese hatch
us; I'll make some of 'em feel they are Geese 'oth Game then, Jack take down
my Bill, 'tis ten to one I use it; take a good heart Man, all the low Ward is
ours with a wet finger: and lay my cut-fingred Ganlet ready for me, that, that
I used to work in when the Gentlemen were up against us, and beaten out of
Town, and almost out of debt too; for a plague on 'em, they never paid well
since: and take heed sirrah, your Mistress hears not of this business, she's
near her time; yet if she do, I care not, she may long for Rebellion, for she
has a devilish spirit.


Come lets call up the new Ironmunger, he's as tough as steel, and has a fine
wit in these resurrections, are you stirring Neighbour.


Oh good morrow

Neighbours, I'll come to you presently.


Go to, this is his Mothers doing; she's a Ponlcat.


As any is in the World.


Then say I have hit it, and a vengeance on her Let he^ be what she will.


Amen say I, she has brought things to a fine pass with her wisdom: do you
mark it?


One thing I am sure she has, the good old Duke she gives him Pap again they
say, and dandles him, and hangs a Currall and Bells about his Neck, and makes
him believe his teeth will come again, which if they did, and I he, I would
weary her as never Cur was wearied: I would Neighbour, till my teeth meet, I
know where -- but that's council.


Good morrow neighbours: hear you the sad news?


Yes, would we knew as well how to prevent it.


I cannot tell, methinks 'twere no great matter, if men were men: But. --


You do not twit me with my calling neighbour?


No surely: for I know your spirit to be tall, pray be not vexed.


Pray forward with your council: I am what I am: And they that prove me, shall
find me to their cost: do you mark me neighbour? to their cost I say.


Nay look how soon you are angry.


They shall neighbour: Yes, I say they shall.


I do believe they shall.


I know they shall.


Whether you do or no, I care not two pence, I am no beast, I know mine own
strength Neighbours; God bless the King, your companies is fair.


Nay now you err, Neighbour I must tell you so, were ye twenty neighbours.


You had best go Peach, do peach.


Peach, I scorn the motion.


Do and see what follows: I'll spend an hundred pounds, and it be two I care
not, but I'll undo thee.


Peach, Oh disgrace! Peach in thy face, and do the worst thou can I am a true
man, and a free man, peach.


Nay, look, you will spoil all.


Peach.


Whilst you two brawl together, the Prince will loose his life.


Come give me your Hand, I love you well, are you for the action?


Yes, but Peach provokes me, 'tis a cold fruit, I feel it cold in my stomach
still.


No more, I'll give you Cake to digest it.


Shut up my Shop, and be ready at a call boys, and one of you run over my old
Tuck with a few ashes, 'tis grown odious with tosting Cheese! and burn a little
Gun-powder in my murrin, the maid made it her chamber pot, an hour hence I'll
come again; and as you hear from me, send me a clean Shirt.


The chandler by the Wharf, and it be thy will.


Gossip, good morrow.


O good morrow Gossip: good morrow all, I see you of one mind ye cleave so
close together: Come 'tis time, I have prepared a hundred if they stand.


'Tis well done: shall we sever, and about it?


If my Tuck hold, I'll spit the Guard like Larks with Sage in th'be^y o'um.


I have a foolish Bill to reckon with them, will make some of their hearts ache,
and I'll lay it on: now shall I fight, 'twill do ye good to see me.


Come I'll do something for the Town to talk of when I am rotten: pray God
there be enough to kill, that's all.


Thanks my dear Jem, I've found thy virtue now, I had not past 'em else, a man
may have an invissible Ring I see and not know of it, what is this all the
divices sports and delights the Duke shall have for his money? the Proclamation
promises reward for him, shall show any varieties, and will it all come to a
dull Masque? I'll show his Grace some sport my self with help of my good
friend here, which now must off again, by your Majesties leave.


How now what's he?


What's he? the wonder of your Kingdom.


How, the wonder*


I, and can do the greatest, -- now you see me you know me.


Yes Sir, I do know you.


And you all see me, you say.


We do.


And I do see all you, but what's that to the purpose?


Very little I confess.


Shall I demonstrate matter of Art, and have nothing for my pains.


No, no, the Proclamation speaks the contrary.


Well, because Royalty shall have no wrong in suspecting your Bounty -- you see
me you say.


Yes, we do.


But who sees me now?


Trust me he's invissible to me.


And to us all.


I should be very sorry else; for, and my invissible Ring should not keep his
old virtue, I would hang my self directly.


Prithee appear again.


I will have Majesty call me first.


Why, the Duke does call you.


Let me hear him Viva Voce, Smirk is my name, a welbeloved Subject, once a
Painter, but now Squire of the invissible Ring.


Smirk, and our welbeloved Subject, once a Painter, but now Esquire of the
invissible Ring I conjure thee to appear again.


See here I am, what wilt thou mighty Monarch?


I do command thee let me see the Ring by which thou walk invissible.


I do command thee not to command me that, for from my invissible Ring I will
not part.


Lay hands upon him for a Sorcerer.


Assist me my dear Ring, no hands upon me, for being invissible I am a Prince,
no hands is to be laid on me, Treason doth never prosper.


Nay, then, what ho.


Thy will?


Seize it, and fly.


I am gone.


How? whose that exclaims?


The cramps in my Finger.


The cramp?


I the Cramp; the Ring that cured it is gone, the devil go with it, for on my
conscience he fetched it.


What's become of the Ring?


Pardon me my liege, the virtue that it held came from my Art, the Duchess
found the worth on it when time was.


Thy knowledge in good Arts is warranted by us, since all thy actions have been
just and loyal -- -what means this.


Thus was I bidden to my Sovereign,
Fall on my face, now rise I up again,
To render to the Ladies fair salutes,
And give them all their worthy Attributes,
Wonder not that I resolutely come
Boldly, thus daring press into this room,
For from a Lord'tis said of eminent note,
I bring this challenge such as can read may know it.

Very succinct and peremptory.


What i'st?


A Challenge.


Read it.


For this day I am Master of the Revels.

Be it known unto all Men that I, Visconnt Shallew doth Challenge all Courtiers
whatsoever at the true compendious form of compiling Epistles, Alias love
letters to Ladies, or Mistresses* either in prose or verse ex tempore or not,
ex tempore according as it shall please the challenged


Here's unexped sport, Smirk thou shalt take him up, I'll wager on thy side.


Say you so Sir, shall I be the man, 'twill recompense my loss of the Ring for
I know I shall beat him out o'th Pit with Oratry and Poetry.


Which is my Antagonist?


Behold the Man with Pen and Ink provided.


Poor fool thou wilt but make thy self derided.


So nimble in rime, I'll first break your neck in prose, and afterwards whip
you in verse, I'll I ambast you in couplets: you challenge all men to compose.


I do.


With figures or without figures, with sentences or without sentences.


'Tis right.


Draw out your pen and Inkhorn I am for you.


With expedition too, I put in that.


No, expedition belongs to Clerks, and not to Secretaries.


I Sir, celerity I mean.


No more but so, a word's enough.


Smirk goes on smoothly without any rub.


Yet there he had one.


Hold bias, and a sentence then.


Scripsi.


Et Scripsi.


Now lordings lend your Ears.


I will read it first my self.


Good reason


Fairest in the World, and sweetest upon earth.


So so, so.


I remember my duty to you in black and white.


I would it had been black and blew.


Peace.


For all colours else, wave under the standard of your beauty; you a^e the
Mistress of beauty, all other Women a^e but your hand-maids.


Oh abominable ba^ren.


Nay, Smirk silence, you must not interrupt your adversary.


I can say nothing, without saying too much, nor say too much without saying
nothing.


I can say nothing, or else I would say something, but here it is shall shame
thee and thy Lordly botching.


Methinks when thou stand in the Sun with thy feather on thy head, and thy
Fan in thy hand, thou look like the Phoenix of the East Indies, burning in
spices, for Cloves, Mace, and Nutmegs are in thy breath.


She would make an excellent Wassell boale.


Again, fie, fie.


I have done.


The apples of thy breast are like the Lemons of Arabia which makes the Vessel
so sweet, it can never smell of the Cask.


If she should, it might prove the Brewers fault.


Being come to your middle I must draw to an end, for my end is at the middle,
because of the Proverb, In Medio consistit vertus, and so I conclude: yours
while mine own, and afterwards if it were possible.


Well, now let me run on, judgment I crave. --


Which thou shalt have.


Illustrious, bright shining, wellspoken, an^ blood stirring Lady.


I marry Sir.


If the Rope of my capacity could reach to the Belfry of your beauty, these
words of mine like Silver Bells might be worthy to ha^g in the ears of your
favour; but the Ladder of my invention is too low to climb up to the Steeple of
your understanding.


Excellent Smirk.


If it were not, I should ring out my mind to you in a sweet Peal of most
savory conceits. For your face it is like the Sun, no man is able to endure it.


Very good.


Your forehead which I will neither compare to Alleblaster nor to the Lilly,
but it is, as it is, and so are both your Eyes; for your Nose, it is a well
arched bridge, which for brevity sake I pass over: Your cheeks are like a good
Comedy, worthy to be clapped: your lips and your teeth are incomparable; your
tongue like the Instrument of Orpheus, able to tame the furies: to handle every
part of you were too much, but some particular part, no man can sufficient.


Prithee let me give thee a box on the Ear, for that conceit.


No my good Lord, pray keep your bounties; From top to toe you are a sweet
Vessel of delight, I dare not say a Barrel, for often times with much joulting
the Brewer beats out the bunghole, and so the good liquor runs out, but you
contain yours although not hoopt about with the old farthingall after the
newest fashion, and so I leave you fairest of a hundred, and wittyest of a
thousand, resting in little rest till I rest wholly yours in the Down bed of
affection, where ever standing to my utmost I rest all in all yours.


Could any man have said more?


Spare your ce^sures a while Gentlemen; now Sir I challenge you in verse, in
praise of tall Women, and little Women, choose your subject, which you refuse
I'll take.


Why then I'll take your little Women.


And I your lusty, proceed.


Some patience will be required from us, for their verse cannot come off so
roundly as their prose.


As roundly as a Runlet of Sake Sir, I'll warrant ye.


Scripsi.


Sed non feci, stay a little here are a couple of lines, a Halter on 'em, they
won not twist handsomely, go forward I have ended.


Attention.


Listen you tall, and likewise you low man,
I sing the praises of a bouncing Woman:
A full, well set, big-bon'd, and fairly jointed.
Fit to bid welcome, Men, are best appointed.

Excellent.


To your tall Women, your little one is nothing,
No more then is a high thing, to a low-thing.

That's true.


For your small dandiprat, I hope there's no man,
That thinks her but a hobby-horse to Woman,
A thing to be forgot, and never known,
But on a holy day, to the rout shown,
In Wars the Basilisco is preferred,
Before the Musket, and is louder heard.

There's an Error, little, and loud (my friend.)


In every Triumph where there is excess,
The greater always puteth down the less.
The Lyoness is more admired at,
Then her Epitome, which is a Cat.

The fool grows serious: He hath stolen it certainly.


But to weak understandings now I come,
Is your small Taber music to your Drum?

Hum, drum, he has hit within an Inch of a conceit of mine.


Or in an Instrument of peace, can there that cryal
Be made upon a Kit, as a base Viol?
Judge you my Masters, that on both have plaid,
It is but my opinion, and I've said.

Come thou hast said well, Smirk look to your self.


I warrant you, give me Audience.


Silence.


In praise of little Women I begin,
And will maintain what I have entered in:
Is not your Parochit, or Marmoset,
In more request then your Baboon or Parrot?
Give but your little wench freely her Liquor,
And to bed send her, you will find her quicker;
Pearter, nimbler, both to kiss, and cog,
Then your great wench that will lye like a Log:
And he that all day at the Drum doth labour,
Would at night gladly play upon a Taber.
I hope there's no man but of this belief,
That Veal's more sweet and nourishing then Beef:
Small meates are still preferred, for ask your Glutton,
He'll always say Lambs sweeter then your Mutton,
Your Smelt then whiting firmer is, and sounder,
Nor must your Place compare with your neat Flounder.

Well said, now thou art in good victuals thou'lt never out.


In fish or flesh I'll prove it to each wight
A Larks leg, then the body of a Kite
Is better far; Our Bakers always make
The finest flour in the lesser Cake,
And I'll be judged by those that roots do eat,
That your small Turnip's better then your great.

I am of thy mind too.


Who list to be resolved, let them both try,
In that belief I live, in that I'll die

Incomparable Smirk, thou'st my voice, judgment.


A Smirk, a Smirk.


A hot day, a hot day, vengeance hot day boys, give me some drink, this fire's
a plaguy fretter: body of me I am dry still, give me the Jack boy, this wooden
skiff holds nothing.


And faith Master, what brave new meates? for here will be old eating.


Old and young boy; let 'em all eat, I have it; I have ballasse for their
bellies, if they eat a Gods name, let them have ten tire of teeth a piece, I
care not.


But what new rare munition.


Pish, a thousand; I'll make your Pigs speak French at Table, and a fat Swan
come sailing out of England with a Challenge; I'll make you a Dish of
Calves-feet dance the Canaries, and a consort of crammed Capons fidle to 'em; a
Calves-head speak an Oracle, and a dozen of Larks rise from the Dish and ^ing
all super time; 'tis nothing boys: I have framed a fortification out of Rye
past which is impregnable, and against that, for two long hours together, two
dozen of Marrow-bones shall play continually; for fish, I'll make you a
standing lake of white broth, and Pikes come plo^ghing up the plums before
them; Arion like a Dolphin, playing lachrymo, and brave King Herring with his
Oil and Onion crowned with a Lem^n pill, his way prepared with his strong
Guard of Pilchers.


I marry Master.


All these are nothing: I'll make you a stuble Goose turn o'th toe thrice, do a
cross point presently, and sit down again, and cry come eat me: These are for
mirth: now Sir, for matter of mourning, I'll bring you in the Lady loyne of
Veal, with the long love she bore the Prince of Orange.


Thou Boy, thou.


I have a trick for thee too, and a rare trick, and I have done it for thee.


What's that good Master?


'Tis a Sacrifice: a full Vine bending like an Arch, and under the blown God
Bacchus, sitting on a Hogshead, his Alter-beer: before that plump Vintner
kneeling and offering incense to his deity, which shall be only red sprats and
pilchers.


This when the Tables drawn, to draw the Wine in.


Thou hast it right, and then comes thy song Butler.


This will be admirable.


Oh Sir most admirable.


If you'll have the Pasty speak, 'tis in my power, I have fire enough to work
it; what friends hast thou to day? no Citizens?


Yes father, the old crew.


By the Mass true Wenches: sirrah set by a Chine of Beef, and a hot Pasty,
and let the Joll of st^rgeon be corrected: and do you mark Sir, stalk me to a
Pheasant, and see if you can shout her in the Cellar.


God a mercy lad, send me thy roaring bottles, and with such Nectar I will see
'em filled that all thou speak shall be pure helicon.


But what was't we did promise to Monsiure Latorch.


Do you ask that now?


I'll tell you It is to be all villains, knaves and Traitors.


Fine wholesome titles.


But if you dare go forward.


May be hanged drawn and quartered.


Very true Si^.


What a goodly swing I shall give the Gallows? yet I think too, this may be
do^e, and yet we may be rewarded, not with a Rope, but wit^ a Royal Master: and
yet we may be hanged too.


Say it were done; who is't done for? is it not for ^lio? and fo^ his right?


And yet we may be hanged too?


Or say he take it, say we be discovered? Is not the same mam found to protect
us? are we not his?


Sure he will never fail us.


If he do, friends, we shall find that will hold us; yet methinks, this
Prologue to our purpose, the Crowns were given, should promise more: 'Tis
easily done, as easy as a man would roast an Egg, if that be all; for look
you, Gentlemen, here stand my brothes, my finger slips a little, down drops a
Dosse, I stir him with my Ladle, and there's a Dish for a Duke: Ol^a podrida,
here stands a Baked meat, he wants a little seasoning, a foolish mistake; my
Spice-box, Gentlemen, and put in some of this, the matter's ended; dredge you a
dish of Plo^ers, there's the a^t on it.


Or as I fill my Wine.


'Tis very true Sir, blessing it with your hand, thus quick and neatly first,
when 'tis past and done once, 'tis as easy for him to thank us for it, and
reward us.


But 'tis a damned sin.


Oh never fear that, the fire's my playfellow, and now I am resolved boys.


Why then have with you.


The same for me.


For me too.


And now no more our worships, but our Lordships.


Not this year on my knowledge, I'll un-Lord you.


Make room before there, room for the Prisoners.


Are these the Youths?


These are the Youths you look for, and pray my honest friends be not too
hasty, there will be nothing done till we come I assure you.


Here's a wise hanging, are there no more?


Do you hear, you may come in for your share, if you please.


Before, before, Boys here's enough to make us sport.


Pox take you, do you call this sport? are these your recreations? must we be
hanged to make you mirth.


Do you hear Sir? you custard pate, we go to it, for high treason, an Honourable
fault: thy foolish father was hanged for stealing sheep.


Away Boys, away.


Do you see how that sneaking Rogue looks now? you, chip, Pantler, peaching
Rogue, that provided us these Neck-laces: you poor Rogue, you costive Rogue
you.


Pray, pray, fellows.


Pray for thy crusty Soul? where's your reward now goodman manchet for your
fine discovery? I do beseech you Sir, where are your dollars? draw with your
fellows and be hanged.


You must now, for now he shall be hanged first, that's his comfort, a place
too good for thee thou meal-mouth'd Rascal.


Hang handsomely, for shame come leave your praying, you peaking knave, and be
like a good Courtier; die daringly, and like a man; no preaching, with I
beseech you take example by me, I lived a lewd man, good people; pox on it: die
me as if thou had dined, say grace, and Heaven be with you.


Come will you forward?


Good Mr. Sheriff, your leave to, this hasty work was ne'er done well, give us
so much time as but to Sing our own ballads for we'll trust no man, nor no time
but our own, 'twas done in Ale too, your penny pot Poets, are such pelting
thieves, they ever hang men twice, we have it here Sir, and so must every
Merchant of our Voyage, he'll make a sweet return else of his Credit.


One fit of our mirth, and then we are for you.


Make hast then, dispatch.


There's day enough Sir.


Come Boys, sing cheerfully, we shall ne'er sing younger; we have chosen a
lewd tune too, because it should like well.


Come, fortune's a Whore I, care not who tells her,
Would offer to strangle a Page of the Cellar,
That should by his Oath, to any mans thinking,
And place, have had a defence for his drinking;
But thus she does still, when she pleases to palter
Instead of his wages, she gives him a Halter.

Three merry boys three merry boys three merry boys are we
As ever did sing in a bempen string, under the Gallow Tree.

But I that was so lusty,
And ever kept my Bottles,
That neither they were musty,
And seldom less then Pottles;
For me to be thus stopped now,
With them instead of Cork Sir,
And from the Gallows topped now,
Shows that there is a Fork Sir,
In death, and this the token
Man may be two ways killed,
Or like the Bottle broken,
Or like the Wine, be spilled.

And three merry Boys, c.


Oh yet but look on the Master Cooke, the glory of the Kitchen,
In sowing whose fate, at so loftily a rate, no Taylor e're had stitching,
For though he makes the man, the Cooke he makes the Dishes;
The which no Taylor can, wherein I have my wishes,
That I who at so many a feast have pleased so many tasters
Should now my self come to be dressed a dish for you my Masters.

And three merry Boys, c.


There's a few copies for you; now farewell friends: and good Mr. Sheriff let
me not be printed with a Brass pot on my head.


March fair, march fair, before good Captain Pantler.


Oh man, or beast, or you at least
That were or brow or Autler,
Prick up your ears, unto the tears
Of me poor Paul the Pantler,
That thus am clipped, because I chipt
The cursed crust of Treason:
With loyal knife! Oh doleful strife
To hang thus without reason.

Hast thou packed up all thy things? nay prithee weep not.


Affection Sir will burst out, but Master wherefore should we be parted?


Because my fortunes are desperate.


But whether do you mean to go Master?


Why to Sea man, to sea.


Lord bless us methinks I hear of a tempest already.


Where dwells Mr. Bubble?


What is your business with Mr. Bubble? I am the Man.


May I be assured that your name is Mr Bubble?


I tell thee honest friend my name is Mr Bubble, Mr Bartholomew Bubble.


Why then Sir you are Heir to a million; your Uncle the rich Usurer is dead.


Hum, hum.


How my little Bubble is blown up with the news.


Where's the Worshipful Mr. Bubble?


The Worshipful, what you do with the Worshipful Mr. Bubble? I am the Man.


Mr. Thong the Beltmaker by me gives you notice that your Uncle is dead, and
you are his only Heir.


Thy news is good I have looked for it long,
Thanks unto thee my friend, and good man Thong:
Come Master now you shall not need to travel,
Nor feast your Toes with dirt and scurvy Gravel.

I, I, he's gone, he's gone.


What then? 'tis not you can fetch him again, it must be your comfort that he
dyed well.


Truly so it is, I would to God I had ee'n another Uncle that would dye no
worse, the remembrance of death is sharp Gentlemen, therefore there is a
Banquet within to sweeten your conceits.


Well, Mr. Bubble we will go in and taste of your bounty, in the mean time you must
be of good cheer.


If grief take not away my stomach, I will have good cheer.


If grief take not away my stomach I will have good cheer: -- Sprinckle, Had
the women puddens to their dole?


Yes Sir.


And how did they take them?


With their hands Sir.


O thou Hercules of ignorance, I mean how were they satisfied?


By my troth Sir, but so so, and yet some of them had two.


O insatiable Women! whom two puddins would not satisfy,

Off with my mourning Robes, grief to the grave,
For I have Gold and therefore will be brave:
In Silks I'll rattle it of every colour
And when I go by water, scorn a skullar:
In black cornation Velvet I will cloak me,
And when Men bid God save me, cry Tu Quoque:
It is needful a Gentleman should speak Latin some times, i'st not Gervase?


O very graceful, your most accomplished Gentlemen are known by it.


Then I'll use that little I have upon all accasions.


Thanks, and Tu Quo is a word for all, but Gervase how shall I behave my self
to the Gentlewomen.


Why advance your self towards them, and for your discourse your Tu Quoque
will bear you out.


Nay, and that be all I care not, I'll set a good face on it that's flat, and
here's a leg? if ever a Baker in England show me a better I'll give him mine
for nothing.


Oh that's a special thing that I must caution you of, never whilst you live
commend your self, the more vilely you speak of your, -- the more the Ladies
will appla^d.


Say thou so Gervase, then let me alone to dispraise my self, I'll make my
self the a^antest Coxcomb in a whole Country, is this the eldest sir


Yes marry is she sir.


I'll kiss the youngest first, because she likes me ^est, by the mass they
kiss exceeding well, I do not think out they have been brought up to 't, --
now to my speech Lady -- even a -- Drumer or a Pewterer --


Very good sir.


Do, -- do, do. --


What do they do?


By my troth I do not know; for to say truth I am a kind of an Ass.


How sir, an Ass?


So God have me I am Lady, you never saw an erranter Ass in your life, pray
look upon me Lady.


So I do sir.


But look upon me well, and tell me if ever you saw a Man look so simply as I
do, did you ever see a worse timbered Leg, what say you, can you find e're a
good inch about me.


Yes that I can sir.


Find it and take it Lady; there I think I bobbed her Iervase, -- come Ladies
will you lead the way.


Ah while you live Men before Women, custom hath played it so.


Why then custom is not so mannerly as I would be.


Pray let me see your hand, the line of your Maiden-head is out, now for your
fingers; upon which finger will you wear your Wedding-ring.


Upon no finger.


Then I perceive you mean to wear it upon your Thumb, well the time is come
sweet Joyce, the time is come.


What to do sir.


For me to tickle thy Tu Quoque, therefore prepare, provide to morn to meet me
as a Bride.


I'll meet thee like a Ghost first.


Did I eat my Lattice to Supper last night that I am so sleepy, thy eyes are
close too Brother Bubble.


As fast as a Kentish Oyster, surely I was begot in a Plumb-Tree, I have such a
deal of Gum about my eyes, what's this about my shins?


We have metamorphosed our Stoacking for want of Splendour.


Pray, what's that Splendour?


Why, 'tis the Latin word for a Christmas candle.


Tu Quoque to all: What shall we go to Church? I long to be about this gear.


You may take out the other nap now, for you are cozened, and made a coxcomb.


That word coxcomb goes against my Stomach.


And against mine, a man might have digested a Woodcock better.


Do you know that youth in Satin, he's the penner to that Inkhorn.


Are not you my man Gervase? have you married her?


The Priest has Sir.


Then am worse then ten Coxcombs.


And a beggarly one, your time of pageantry is over, sergeants take him to ye.


How's this, is my Tu Quoque come to an Et cetera


If you can put off your former pride and put on this with that humility that
you first wore it, I will pay your debts, free you of all encumbrances, and
take you again into my service.


'Tis, but faces about, and be as I was, Tenterhook let me go, I will take his
Worships offer, rather then be kept in you clutches, a man in a Blew coat may
have some colour for his Knavery, when in the Counter he can have none.


COme my brave mirmidons, lets fall on, let our Caps swa^me my boys, and your
nimble Tongues forget your Mother Gib-rish, of what do you lack, and set your
mouths up Children, till your Palates fall frighted half a fathom, past the
cure of Bay-salt and gross Pepper, and then cry Philaster, brave Philaster,
let Philaster be deeper in request, my ding-dongs, my pairs of dear
Indentures, King of Clubs, then your cold water chamblets, or your paintings
spitted with copper, let not your hasty silks or your branched cloth of
bodkin, or your tishnes, dearly beloved of spiced Cake and Custard, your
Robinhoods scarlet and Johns, tie your affections in darkness to your shops,
no dainty Duckers, up with your three-pil'd spirits, your wrought valours, and
let your uncut collar make the King feel the measure of your mightiness
Philaster, cry my Rose-nobles cry.

Philaster, Philaster.


How do you like this my Lord Prince, these are mad boys* I tell you, these
are things that will not strike their Top-sailes to a foarst, and let a Man of
War an Argosy bull, and cry Cocks.


Why you rude slave, do you know what you do?


My pretty Prince of Puppets, we do know, and give your greatness warning,
that you talk no more such bug-words, or that soldred Crown shall be scratched
with a Musket; Dear Prince Pippin, down with your noble blood, or as I live
i'll have you codled; let him lose my spirits, make as a round Ring with your
Bills my Hectors, and let us see what this trim Man dares do; now sir have at
ye, here I lie, and with this swashing blow, do you sweat Prince; I could hack
your Grace, and hang ye up crosse-leg'd, like a Hare at a Poulterers.


You will not see me murdered wicked Villains.


Yes indeed we will sir, we have not seen one foe a great while.


He would have weapons, would he? give him a broadside my brave Boys with your
Pikes, branch me his skin in flowers like a Satin, and between every flower a
mortal cut, your Royalty shall ravel, jag him Gentlemen, i'll have him cut to
the kell, then down the seames, oh for a whip to make him Galoom-laces, i'll
have a Coach-whip.


O spare me Gentlemen.


Hold, hold, the Man begins to fear and know himself, he shall for this time
only be sealed up with a feather through his nose, that he may only see Heaven,
and think whether he's going, nay my beyond Sea sir, we will proclaim you, you
would be King; thou tender heir apparent to a Church-ale, thou slight Prince
of single scarce^et; thou Royal ring-taile fit to fly at nothing but poor men's
Poultrey, and every Boy beat thee from that too with his bread and butter.


Gods keep me from these hell-hounds.


Shall's geld him Captain?


No, you shall ^pare his dowcets my dear Donsells, as you respect the Ladies
let them flourish; the curses of a longing woman kills as speedy as a Plague
Boys,


I'll have a leg that's certain.


I'll have an arm.


I'll have his nose and at my own charge, build a College and clapped upon the
Gate.


I'll have his little Gut to string a ^it with, for certainly a royal Gut will
sound like Silver.


Would they were in thy belly, and I past my pain once.


Good Captain let me have his liver to feed Ferrets.


Who will have parcels else? speak.


Good Gods consider me I shall be tortured.


Captain I'll give you the trimming of your Hand-sword; and let me have his
s^in to make false scabbards.


He had no horns Sir had he?


No Sir, he's a palla^d, what would thou do with ho^nes?


O if he had, I would have made rare Hafts and whistles of 'em, but his vain
bones if they be sound shall serve me.


Long long live Philaster, the brave Prince Philaster, I thank ye Gentlemen,
but why are these rude weapons brought abroad? to teach your hands uncivil
trades?


We are the royal Rosicleeze, we are thy mirmidons thy Guard, thy rourers, and
when the Noble body is in durance, thus do we clap our musty murryons on, and
trace the streets in terror, ^is it peace thou Mars of men? is the King
sociable, and bids thee i^e? Art thou above thy foemen and fro as Phebus?
speak, of not, this stand of Royal Blood shall be broach, a tilt and run even
to the lees of Honour.


Hold and be satisfied, I am my self, free as my thoughts are: By the Gods I
am.


Art thou the dainty Darling of the King? art thou the hylas to our Hercules?
doth the Lords bow, and the regarded Scarlets, kiss their gummed gols and cry we
are your servants? Is the Court navigable, and the presence struck with Flags
of friendship? if not, we are thy Castle, and this man sleeps.


I am what I do desire to be your friend; I am what I was born to be your
Prince.


Sir there is some humanity in you, you have a noble Soul forget my name, and
know misery, set me safe aboard from these wild camballs, and as I live, I'll
quit this Land for ever.


I do pity you: friends discharge your fears, deliver me the Prince.


Good Sir take heed he does not hurt you, he's a fierce man I can tell you Sir.


Prince by your leave, I'll have a surfingle, and make you like a hawk.


Away, away, there is no danger in him, alas he had rather sleep to shake his
fit off, good my friends go to your houses and by me have your pardons and my
love and for an earnest drink this.


Long may thou live brave Prince, brave Prince, brave Prince.


Thou art the King of Courtesies: fall off again my sweet youths, come, and
every ne^ce to his house again, and hang his pewter up, then to the Tavern and
bring your wives in muffs, we will have Music, and the red Grape shall make us
dance and rise boys.


Go get the Drums, beat round Lieutenant.


Hark ye, Sir, I have a foolish business they call Marriage.


After the Wars are done.


The Party stays Sir, I have given the Priest his money too: all my friends
Sir, my Father, and my Mother.


Will ye go forward.


She brings a pretty matter with her.


Half a dozen Bastards.


Some forty Sir.


A goodly competency.


I mean Sir, pounds a year; I'll dispatch the matter, 'tis but a night or two;
I'll overtake ye Sir.


Where lies the horse quarter?


And if it be a Boy, I'll even make bold Sir.


Away with your whore, a plague o'your whore, damned Rogue, now you are cured
and well; must ye be clicketing?


I have broke my mind to my ancient, in my absence, he's a sufficient
Gentleman.


Get forward.


Only receive her portion.


Get ye forward; else I'll bang ye forward.


Strange Sir, a Gentleman and an Officer, cannot have the liberty to do the
Office of a man.


Shame light on thee, how came this whore into thy head?


This w^ore Sir? 'tis strange, a very poor whore.


Do not answer me: Troop, troop away; Do not name this whore again, or think
there is a whore.


That's very hard Sir.


Turn but thy face, and do but make Mouths at 'em.


And have my teeth knocked out; I thank you heartily.


what the devil ails thee? d^st long to be hanged?


Faith sir, I make no suit for it: but rather then I would live thus out of
charity, continually in brawling. --


And wilt thou ne'er fight more?


'Ith mind I am in.


Nor never be sick again?


I hope I shall not.


Prithee be sick again; prithee, I beseech thee, be just so sick again.


I'll need be hanged first.


If all the arts that are can make a collique, therefore look to it; or if
imposthums mark me, as big as foot balls. --


Deliver me.


O^ stones of ten Pound weight 'ith Kidneys, through ease and ugly diets may be
gathered; I'll feed ye up my self, I'll prepare ye, you cannot fight, unless
the devil fears ye, you shall not want provocations, I'll scratch ye, I'll
have thee have the Tooth-ach and the head-ach.


Good Colonel, I'll do any thing.


No, no, nothing -- then will I have thee blown with a pair of Smiths bellows,
because you shall be sure to have a round Gale with ye, filled full of Oil,
o'devill, and aquafortis, and let these work, these may provoke.


Good Colonel.


A coward in full blood prithee be plain with me, will roasting do thee any
good?


Nor basting neither sir.


Marry that goes hard, -- do you see that thing there*


What thing? I see the brave Lieutenant.


Rogue what a name hast thou lost? be ruled yet, I'll beat thee on; go winck
and fight: a plague upon your sheep heart.


What's all this matter?


Nay I cannot show ye.


There's twenty Pound, go but smell to 'em.


Alas sir, I have taken such a cold I can smell nothing.


I can smell a rascal, a rank rascal: fie how he stincks, stinks like a
tyred jade.


What sir?


Why that sir, do not you smell him?


Smell him.


Stinks like a dead Dog, carrion -- there's no such damnable smell under heaven
as the faint sweat of a coward: will ye fight yet?


Nay, now I defy ye; ye have spoke the worst ye can of me, and if every man
should take what you say to the heart --


God a mercy, God a mercy with all my heart; here I forgive thee; and fight, or
fight not, do but go along with us and keep my Dog.


I love a good Dog naturally.


What's all this stir Lieutenant?


Nothing sir, but a slight matter of argument.


Pox take thee: sure I shall love this Rogue, he's so pretty a Coward; come
play fellow, come, prithee come up; come Chicken, I have a way shall fit yet; a
tame knave; come, look upon us.


I'll tell you who does best boys.


That he is sick again.


Extremely sick; his disease grown incurable, never yet found, nor touched at.


Well we have it and here he comes.


The Prince has been upon him what a platter face he has now? it takes, believe
it; how like an Ass he looks?


I feel no great pain, at least I think I do not; yet I feel sensibly I grow
extremely faint: how cold I sweat now?


So, so, so.


And now 'tis even too true, I feel a pricking, a pricking, a strange pricking:
how it tingles? and as it were a stitch too: the Prince told me, and every one
cried out I was a dead man; I had thought I had been as well.


Upon him now boys, and do it most demurely.


How now Lieutenant.


I thank ye Gentlemen.


Life, how looks this man? how dost thou good Lieutenant?


I ever told ye this man was never cured, I see it too plain now; how do ye
feel your self? you look not perfect, how dull his eye hangs?


That may be discontent.


Believe me friend I would not suffer now the tithe of those pains this man
feels; mark his forehead, what a cloud of cold dew hangs upon it?


I have it, again I have it; how it grows upon me? a miserable man I am.


Ha, ha, ha, a miserable man thou shalt be, this is the tamest trout I ever
tickled.


This way he went.


Pray heaven we find him living, he's a brave fellow, 'tis pity he should
perish thus.


A strong hearted man, and of a noble sufferance.


Ho, ho,


How now? how is it man.


Oh Gentlemen, never so full of pain.


Did I not tell ye?


Never so full of pain Gentlemen.


He is here; how do ye Sir.


Be of good comfort Soldier, the Prince has sent us to you.


Do you think I may live.


Yes you may live; but. --


Finely butted Doctor.


Do not discourage him.


Here comes the Prince.


How now Gentlemen?


bewailing Sir, a soldier, and one I Demetrius think your Grace will greive to
part with, but every living think. --


'Tis true, must perish, our lives are but our marches to our Graves, how dost
thou now Lieutenant?


Faith 'tis true Sir, we are but spans and candles ends.


He's finely mortified.


I see he alters strangely; and that a pace too, I saw it this morning in him,
when he poor man I dare ^wear. --


No beleiv't sir, I never felt it.


How he swells?


The imposthume fed with a new malignant humour now will grow to such a bigness,
'tis incredible, the compass of a Bushel will not hold it, and with such a
hell of torture it will rise too. --


Can you endure me touch it?


Oh, I beseech you Sir? I feel you sensibly e're you come near me.


He's finely wrought, he must be cut, no cure else, and suddenly, you see how
fast he blows out.


Good Mr. Doctor, let me be beholding to you, I feel I cannot last.


For what Lieutenant?


But even for half a dozen cans of good Wine, that I may drink my Will out; I
faint hideously.


Fetch him some Wine, and since ^e must go Gentlemen, why let him take his
journey merrily.


That's even the nearest way.


Here off with that.


These two I give your Grace, a poor remembrance of a dying man Sir, and I
beseech you wear 'em out.


I will soldier, these are fi^e Legacies.


Among the Gentlemen, even all I have left; I am a poor man, naked, yet
something for remembrance; four a piece Gentlemen, and lay my body where you
please.


It will work.


I make your Grace my Executor, and I beseech you see my poor will fulfilled;
sure I shall walk else.


As full as they can be filled, here's my hand soldier.


I would hear a Drum beat but to see how I could endure it.


Beat a Drum there.


Oh Heavenly music, I would hear one sing to it, I am very full of pain.


Sing? 'tis impossible.


Why, then I would drink a Drum full; where lies the Enemy?


Why, here close by.


Now he begins to m^ster.


And dare ye fight? dare ye fight Gentlemen?


You must not cut him: he's gone then in a moment, all the hope left, is to
work his weakness into sudden anger, and make him raise his passion above his
pain, and so dispose him on the Enemy; his body then being stirred with
violence, will purge it self and break the sore.


'Tis true sir.


And then my life for his.


I will not die thus.


But he is too weak to do. --


Die like a Dog?


I he's weak but yet he's heart-hole.


Hem.


An excellent sign.


Hem.


Stronger still, and better.


Hem, hem; Ran, tan, ran, tan, tan.


Now he's 'ith way on it.


Well go thy ways, thou wilt do something certain.


And some brave thing, or let mine Ears be cut off.


Fetch him off, fetch him off; I'm sure he's clouted; did I not tell you how
'twould take?


'Tis admirable


Follow that blow my friend, there's at your Coxcombs, I fight to save me from
the surgeons miseries.


How the knave curryes 'em?


You cannot Rogues, till you have my diseases, fly my fury, ye bread and butter
Rogues, do you run from me? and my side would give me leave, I would so hunt
ye, ye porredg-gutted slaves, ye Veal-broth boobies.


Enough, enough Lieutenant, thou hast done bravely.


Mirror of man.


There's a Flag for ye Sir, I took it out o'th shop, and never paid for it I'll
to 'em again, I am not come to'th text yet.


No more my soldier: beshrew my heart he is hurt sore.


Hang him he'll lick all those whole.


Now will we take him, and cure him a trice.


Be careful of him.


Let me live but two years, and do what ye will with me: I never had but two
hours yet of happynes,; pray ye give me nothing to provoke my Valour, for I am
even as weary of this fighting* --


You shall have nothing; come to the Princes Tent, and there the Surgeons
presently shall search ye, then to your rest.


A little handsome Litter to lay me in, a^d I shall sleep.


Look to him.


I do believe a horse begot this fellow, he never knew his strength yet.


Oh faint not heart, Susan my Lady dear: the Cobblers Maid in Milk-street for
whose sake, I take these Arms, O let the thought of thee, carry thy Knight
through all the adventerous Deeds, and in the honour of thy beauteous self,
may I destroy this monster Barbarosso, knock Squire upon the Basin, till it
break with the shrill strokes, or till the Grant speak.


O George the Giant, the Giant, now Raf for thy life.


What fond unknowing wight is this that dares, so rudely knock at Barbarosso's
cell, where no man comes, but leaves his fleece behind?


I, Traitorous caitiff, who am sent by fate to punish all the sad enormities
thou hast committed against Ladies gentle, and errant Knights, Traitor to heaven
and men: prepare thyself, this is the dismal hour appointed for thee, to give
strict account of all thy beastly treacherous villainies.


Fool hardy Knight, full soon thou shalt aby this fond reproach thy body will I
bang, and lo upon that string shall hang: prepare thy self, for dead soon
shalt thou be.


Saint George for me.


Gargantua for me.


To him Raf to him, hold up the Giant, set out thy leg before Raf.


Falsify a blow


falsify a blow, the Giant lies open on the left side.


Bear't off, bear't off still; there boy, O Rafe's almost down, Rafe's almost
down.


Susan inspire me, now have up again.


Up, up, up, so Raf, down with him, down with him Raf.


Fetch him over the hip boy.


There boy, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill Raf.


No Raf get all out of him first.


Presumptuous man, see to what desperate end thy treachery hath brought thee,
the just Gods, who never prosper those that do despise them, for all the
villan^es which thou hast done to Knights and Ladies, now have paid thee home
by my stiff Arm, a Knight adventurous; but say vile wretch before I send thy
soul to sad avernus, whether it must go, what captives holds't thou thy sable
Cave?


Go in and free them all, thou hast the day.


Go Squire and Dwarf, search in this dreadful Cave, and free the wretched
Prisoners from their bo^ds.


I crave for mercy, thou art a Knight, and scorn to spill the blood of those
that beg.


Thou show no mercy, nor shalt thou have any, prepare thy self for thou
shalt surely die.


Behold brave Knight here is one prisoner, whom this wild man hath used as you
see.


This is the wisest word I heard the Squire speak.


Speak what thou art, and how thou hast been used, that I may give him condign
punishment.


I am a Knight that took my journey post northward from London, and in
courteous wise, this Giant trained me to his den, under pretence of killing of
the I^ch, and all my body with a powder strewed, that smarts and stings, and
cut away my beard, and my curled locks wherein were Ribands tied, and with a
water washed my tender eyes, whilst up and down about me still he skipped, whose
virtue is* that till my eyes be wiped with a dry cloth* for this my foul
disgrace, I shall not dare to look a Dog in the face.


Alas poor Knight relief him Raf, relief poor Knights whilst you live.


My trusty Squire convey him to the Town where he may find relief, adieu fair
Knight.


Pussiant Knight of the Burning Pestle hight, see here another wretch, whom
this foul beast hath scorched and scored in this unhumane wise.


Speak me thy name, and eke thy place of birth, and what hath been thy usage in
this Cave?


I am a Knight Sir Pock-hole is my name, and by my birth I am a Londoner, free
by my Copy, but my Ancestors were Frenchmen all, and riding hard this way, upon
a trotting horse my bones did ache, and I faint Knight to ea^e my weary limbs,
light at this Cave, when straight this furious fiend, with sharpest Instrument
of purest steel, did cut the Gristle of my Nose away, and in the place this
velvet plaster stands, relieve me gentle ^night out of his hands.


Good Raf relieve Sir Pock-hole, and send him away, for in truth his breath
stinks.


Convey him st aight after the other Knight, Sir Pock-hole fa^e you well.


Kind Sir good night.


Hark George, what a woeful ^ry there is I think some Women lies in there.


What ghastly noise is this? speak Barbarossa, or by this blazing steel thy head
goes off.


Prisoners of mine, whom I in diet keep, send lower down into the Cave, and in
a Tub that's heated smoking hot, there may they find them and deliver them.


Run Squire and Dwarf, deliver them with speed.


But will not Raf kill this Giant, surely I am afraid if he let him go he will
do as much hurt, as ever he did.


Not so mouse neither, if he could convert him. I George, if he could convert
him; but a Giant is not so soon converted as one of us ordinary people. There's
a pretty tale of a Witch, that had the devils mark about her, God bless us,
that had a Giant to her son, that was called Lob -- lie -- by -- the fire, did
never hear it George. Citiz. Peace Nell here comes the prisoners.


Here be these pined wretches manful Knight, that for these six weeks have
not seen a wight.


Deliver what you are, and how you came
To this sad Cave, and what your usage was.

I am an Errant-Knight that follow'd Arms,
With Spear and Shield; and in my tender years,
I stricken was with Cupid's fiery Shaft,
And fell in love with this my Lady dear,
And stole her from her Friends in Turnbal-street,
And bore her up and down from Town to Town,
Where we did eat and drink, and Music hear:
Till at the length, at this unhappy Town
We did arrive; and coming to this Cave,
This Beast us caught, and put us in a Tub;
Where we this two months sweat, and should have done
Another month, if you had not relieved us.

This Bread and Water hath our Diet been;
Together with a Rib cut from a Neck
Of burned Mutton. Hard hath been our Fare:
Release us from this ugly Giants Snare.

This hath been half the food we have received;
But only twice a day for novelty,
He gave a spoonful of his hearty Broth
To each of us, through this same tender Quill.

From this infernal Monster you shall go,
That uses Knights and Gentile-Ladies so.
Convey 'em hence

Mercy, great Knight: I do recant my ill;
And henceforth never Gentile-Blood will spill.

I give thee Mercy: but yet thou shalt swea^
Upon my Burning Pestle, to perform
Thy promise uttered.

I swear and kiss.


Depart then, and amend.
Come, Squire and Dwarf, the Sun grows towards his set;
And we have many more Adventures yet.

SIrrah Simpleton, where are you?


Here, here, Father.


Where, where, Sirrah?


At the Cupboard, Father; at the Cupboard.


I thought as much: but come you hither, Sirrah, or I shall make your Ears sing
Prick-song for you.


'Tis a miserable condition that a man cannot eat a little bit for his
After-noons Lunchin, but he must be disturbed in the best of his Stomach.


A bit! dost thou call it? Of my Conscience this devouring Rascal, old as I am,
would eat me if he found me in the Cupboard.


I do not think there is such a genteel Smith in the Town, that hath such an
old niggardly Coxcomb to his Father as I: he knows I have no better a stomach
then a young Green-sickness Girl, and yet he grutches me every bit I eat.


Leave off your muttering, and lend me an Ear a while.


Truly I cannot spare one, Father: yet now I think on it, you have great
occasion for one ever since the last Pillory-day; but since you are my Father,
I will vouchsafe to listen a while.


You know that I am old.


The more's the pity that you were not hanged while you were young.


Thou hast drunk most of my Means away.


In ll eat out the rest.


Leave your ill breeding, and give me sensibly a Reason why you will not work.


Because I am lazy, Father.


Nay, that's true.


True? why, do you think I would be so unmannerly to tell you a Lye, Father?


How I shall maintain that coming stomach of yours, unless your self endeavour
for it, I know not: but if thou wilt be ruled, I 'll make thee a Man.


A Man! why what am I now, a Mouse? what would you make of me?


An Ass, an Ass, a gross Ass.


You may well make me a gross Ass, you have so good a pattern.


Listen to me: you know the Widows Daughter at the Corner, sweet Mistress
Dorothy; she's both young and handsome, and has money too.


I, and that will help to buy victuals.


Go and woo her, and I dare lay my Life thou carry her.


I carry her, Father? Alas! I have but a weak back, and besides I am somewhat
lazily given, as you say: it were a great deal better that she would carry me.


Thou hast no more wit then my Hammers head has, and no more brains then an
Anvil, which every one may strike on, but never move it: Go, take your Fiddle,
at that they say you are excellent; and when she thanks thee from her
Chamber-window, say thou art my son, and that I sent thee about the thing she
wots of.


O must I bumfiddle her under her Chamberwindow? Well, I will go wash my hands,
and starch my face, because I may be sure to go cleanly about my business.


Now must I go play an Alampadoe under Mistress Dorothy's Chamber-window, and
all that time perhaps she is a snorting: for to say the truth, my Music will
hardly have the virtue to waken her; and if she should wake, I could not tell
what to say to her, unless it were to desire her to go to bed again. And
because I will be sure to be acceptable to her, I will join my
Nightingale-Voyce thereunto.


What Slave is this presumes to court my Mistress? Could I but see him, I would
satisfy my anger with the ruin of his limbs; but he is gone, and I loose time
in seeking.


That was a roaring Rogue, he has made my Heart jump upright into my Mouth; and
if I had not held it fast with my Teeth, without doubt it had forsaken my Body;
but he is gone, and now I will venture forward.


I heard some Music at my Sweet-hearts window: could I but find him, I would
cut him, and slash him till his whole body were anatomized: but he is gone, and
it was his wisest course.


That roaring Rogue was far worse then the to other; he has almost frighted my
Song out of my head. Oh! we true and faithful Lovers, what perils and dangers
must we undergo, to gain the wills and affections of our dearest Dears? But now
to my Music; and because she shall take a great pleasure to think on it, I
will sing a song of a young Wench that had a great mind to be married before
her time.

Oh! Mother let me have a Husband kind, with toitre, loytre, loitre.
That day and night I may comfort find of a toitre, c.
I care not whether honest Man or Knave, so that he keep me fine and brave,
And that none else but I may have his toitre, c.
Oh Daughter you are not old enough for a toitre, c.
And Husbands often do prove rough with a toitre, c.
Your tender heart no grief can carry, as they must do sometimes that marry:
You yet may well a twelve-moneth tarry for a toitre, c.
Oh! Mother I am in my teens, for a toitre, c.
And younger Wives are often seen with a toitte, c.
I pray let me not so idle stand, for I can do as well as any can,
I have had a proof with John our Man of his toitre, c.
Well, if she does not run mad for me now, it is pity she should have Music
under her Window as long as she lives.


Oh is it you? I thought none but a Puppy like your self, would have disturbed
the Neighbours with your Gridiron-musick: a Saw were far more pleasing.


Forsooth I am very sorry that you have no better skill in Music; in my
Opinion I sung most melodiously: but if you will be pleased to look with Eyes
of judgement upon me, you will express your love in a better manner to me.


I shall express my love, if you continue here, in a far worser manner then you
think for. Do you see this Chamber-pot? it longs to be acquainted with that
brainless head of yours: therefore be gone, and save your self a washing.


If you should wash me, I think it would be but labour in vain: yet if you
please to distil any of your sweet water upon me, I shall desire to be smelt
out by you.


You Ass, you Puppy; must you needs force a drowning?


Is this the beginning of love? It is almost as bad as the Proverb to me: stay,
it may be it is Rosewater. Voh, it is as rank Urine as ever any Doctor cast.
I'll call this same Old Simpleton my Father that set me about this business.
Oh, Father Simpleton, where are you?


Oh my Son, how hast thou sped, Boy?


O! I have sped most abominably, Father: I got a great deal more then I
expected.


Oh my own natural Boy!


I, natural, to be sure, I had never come here else.


But how did she relish thee?


Why she relished me with a whole Chamber-pot full of water.


Why thou Ass, thou Puppy, thou Fool, thou Coxcomb.


Why? how can I help it? why did you get me so like a Fool?


Come, show me to her, and you shall see how I will handle her.


Nay, Father, I should be loath to marry her, after you have had the handling
of her.


This is her Chamber, is it not?


Yes: I know it by a good token; for here she opened the Sluice, and let the
Flood-gates out upon me.


Mistress Dorothy, Mistress Dorothy, pray come to the window.


Pray to the window, Mistress Dorothy.


Sirrah, hold your tongue.


What again? sure this whole morning is nothing but my trouble: what
VVise-aker is that now?


She calls you VVise-aker: speak now.


I am your Neighbour, Old Simpleton the Smith.


And I Young Simpleton the Smith.


Oh Neighbour, is it you? Here was your Son but now, and he kept a worse noise
then a Bear-baiting: but you are civil, I will come down to you.


Look you there, Sirrah; she will come down to me, she says.


I, by that time I have been a Courtier as long as you have been, one woman or
other may come down to me.


Good morrow, Neighbour: what is your business, pray?


Why it is this: this is my Son. Nay, it is my Son, I'll assure you.


Yes, forsooth, he is sure I am his Son; my Mother told him so.


Now I look better on him, he seems to me more handsome then before; your
company seasons him with discretion: but what's your business, pray Sir?


Why, if you please, forsooth, I would fain join you two together in the way
of Matrimony.


Yes forsooth, to mock a marriage.


But hold, Sir, two words to a bargain: what profession is your Son of?


Forsooth I am a Blacksmith: and though I say it, I have as good VVorking-gear
as any Smith in the Parish; all my Neighbours VVives shall be my witness.


Sirrah, hold your tongue.


Why, shall I come a wooing, and say nothing for my self?


But what Estate, I pray, has your Son in posse?


Father, what Estate have I in a posset?


Forsooth, two Cowes you shall have with him.


With a Calf, to my knowledge.


Four Ewes and Lambs, and a Horse to ride to market on.


Yes, and an A -- No, now I think on it, you may keep your Ass your self.


Four Mark in money.


Do you mark that?


With a Bed and Blankets.


And then we may dance the shaking of the sheets when we can.


These promises are fair; and if performed, I hope I shall not need repent my
bargain.


Nor I neither: Come, let's to bed presently, and afterwards we'll talk on it.


No, no; first to Church, and then to bed.


Oh! then you wo'nt follow the fashion of our Country; we commonly go to bed
first, and to Church when we can: but come, I am contented.


What should this mean? Doll has a Hat on: she did not use to wear one.


Oh Gentlemen! though I desire your company, yet now I could heartily wish your
absence.


Why? what's the matter, Doll?


I am married.


To whom?


Do you not know him? Young Simpleton the Smith.


That Fool, that Coxcomb: I'll break his Hammer with his own jolt-head.


Stand close, I hear him coming.


Sweet-heart, now we are married, things ought to be well carried: and the
first thing we should take care for, is, how to get Victuals. What's that?


Nothing but the Rats and Mice.


As sure as I live, I'll lay a trap for those Rats. But what's the matter now?


Nothing but the Neighbours Dogs.


'Tis a thousand pities but such Curs were hanged up presently.


Oh Gentlemen, I would you were out of the House; for I am afraid he will
return again ere I can handsomely shut the door.


Why Doll, Doll!


Come ye behind me presently; I pray dispatch.


Doll, I have considered, that to set up my Trade is the way to get Victuals;
and I want nothing of my Tools, but only a pair of Bellows.


Fear not, Husband, I have a little money that you know not of; and if I can
but hear of a good bargain, I will not fail to buy a pair of Bellows.


Oh thou pretty loving kind Pigsny! but what makes thee wear thy Coats of
that fashion?


Do not you know, Husband, it is the fashion (...) new-married VVives?


Is it so? it is an excellent fashion in the Summer-time: but I'll go out, and
return presently.


What will you do? 'tis ten to one he spies you, and then my reputation runs a
hazard.


Appoint what way you will, we are contented.


I see him coming back; and truth to say, the course I shall advise, will seem
a strange one, yet it must be: you know he did appoint that I should buy for
him a pair of Bellows; now if you two can beat it lustily, and blow it
strongly, this visit may be kept off from his knowledge.


Nay, any thing, good Doll; we cannot now be choosers.


So, lie down: I'll fetch a Chafingdish of Charcoal hither, and practise you a
while before he come.


I have plaid many a mad prank in my Life, yet never till now acted a pair of
Bellows.


So, so, blow lustily, and fear not.


Wife, I have considered with my self, that if we lay out all the money in a
pair of Bellows, we should have little or nothing left to buy Victuals.


Oh Husband, you are deceived; for I have bought you a pair of Bellows, the
whole Town shows not a neater.


Is this a pair of Bellows? let me see, this is an a-la-moda pair of Bellows.
But look you, Doll, when the Bellows-mender comes by, let him stop this hole
here; for the wind comes out abominably. I'll call my Father Simpleton to see
this pair of Bellows. Father, father, come hither.


Did you ever see such a pair of Bellows as my Wife has bought?


A pair a Bellows, Son! Me-thinks this would serve better for an Anvil: Let's
try how it will bear our strokes.


Well, a match.


WHy, what's the matter?


Nay, I know not: but every day my great Guts and my small Guts make such a
Combustion in my Belly as passes, and my Puddings (like Lances) run a-tilt at
my heart, and make me as queasie-stomacht as a young Green-sickness Girl newly
come to a Big-belly.


Can thou not guess the reason of this trouble?


Yes, I think I can, and I'll be judged by thee, if my case be not desperate; I
have a horrible mind to be in love.


With whom?


With any body; but I cannot find out the way how to be in Love.


Why? I'll instruct thee: Can thou be melancholy?


Yes, as a Dog, or a Hog-louse: I could even find in my heart to cry
presently.


Can thou sleep well?


I cannot tell, I never saw my self sleep.


Is't possible, that thou who hast so long been an attendant upon my Lord
Actaeon, should be to learn the way to be in love?


I would it were not possible, on the condition thou were hanged and quartered.


I thank you, Sir. But Bumpkin, list to me;
This day thou know the Maids and Young-men meet
To sport, and revel it about the May-pole;
Present thy self there; tell thy cause of grief;
And I dare warrant thee a Sweet-heart presently.

If thou can do that, I'll marry her first, and learn to love her afterwards.


Haste thither, Bumpkin; I'll go on before.


And I will follow thee a Dog-trot.

Is it not pity* that a Man of Authority as I am, having been chief Dog-keeper
to my Lord Actaeon this five years, being a Man so comely of person, and having
such a pure Complexion, that all fair Ladies may be ashamed to look on me, and
that I should be distressed for a Sweetheart? May-pole, I come;

And if the Wenches there increase my pains,
And scorn to love, I'll beat out all their brains.

Is it possible, would Bumpkin be in love?


Yes, if he knew but how; and for that sickness
I have undertaken to become his Doctor:
For, at the May-pole-meeting 'tis decreed,
A Sweet-heart must be purchased, come what will on it.

Nay, if he be distressed, twenty to one he may find charitable Persons there.

Come, strike up a Farewell to Misfortune.


That is a Dance that I could never hit of: pray desist a while, and hear my
doleful Tale.


He'll make us cry sure.


Be it known unto all men by these presents.


An Obligation? we will be no witnesses.


Why then I'll hang my self.


We will be witness then.


What, to my hanging? O'my Conscience, if I should woo my heart out, I should
never be the fatter for it. -- VVhere's your promise now?


You have not yet expressed your self; be plain; tell them your grief, a remedy
will follow.


If that be all, 'tis but an easy matter; pray take notice that I am in love
-- with some body.


Would I were she!


Why? so you are, if you have a mind to it.


Why then you are my own.


Pardon me, Sister, I bespake him yesterday.


Yes marry did she.


But I was she that won him at the Maypole.


Was that the cause you strove so for the Garland?


What's that to you?

Would I had any one of them in quietness.


But yet I must have share.


So must I too.


I will not part without the better half.


Then who shall have me whole? what, are you mad?


There's reason for a madness in this case.


I will not loose my right: Let go, I say.


He shall be mine, or else he shall be nothing.


Away you Burrs, why do you stick thus on me?
Now by this hand, if nothing can persuade you,
I'll drown my self for spite, that you may perish.

Hark, hark, my Lord Actaeons warning-piece;
That Horn gives us intelligence he does intend
To spend this day in hunting: Bumpkin, why stay you?
The hounds will quarrel with you: we'll come after.

Will you not stay, my Love?


I'll see you hanged first; and by this hand, ere I will be in love again, I
will feed my hounds with my own proper carcase.


Now he is gone, our dancing may go forward.


My Lord Actaeon stays; be quick, I pray.


Quick as you will; the doing of it quick, makes it show the better.


Be nimble, Sirrah.


Nimble? yes, as a Bear that hath been lugged to purpose: if Love be such a
troublesome Companion, I will entreat him to keep out of my company.


We consume the day.


They have saved me a labour.


Fie, what mean you?
The glory of this day calls us to action.

Sir, you may please to know, that yesternight I lodged a Boar within the
neighbouring Forest.


Yes, Sir, and I lodged a Fox at a house hard by.


BLind Cupid hath made my heart for to bleed:
Fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

But I know a man can help you at need:
With a fa la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la, la.

My husband he often a hunting goes out:
Fa la, la, c.

And brings home a great pair of horns, there's no doubt:
With a fa la, la, la, c.

How is't, Monsieur Simpkin? why are you so sad?
Fa la, la, la, c.

I am up to the ears in love, and it makes me stark mad:
With a fa la, la, la, c.
I am vexed, I am tortured, and troubled at heart:
Fa la, la, c.

But I'll try my skill to take off your smart:
With a fa la, la, c.
And on that condition I give you a kiss:
Fa la, la, c.

But what says your husband when he hears of this?
With a fa la, la, c.

You know my affections, and no one knows more:
Fa, la, la, c.

'Uds niggers noggers who knocks at the door?
With a fa, la, la, c.

There is a Royster at the Door,
he seems a Fellow stout.

I do beseech you, worthy Friend,
which is the back-way out?

He swears and tears he will come in,
and nothing shall him hinder.

I fear he'll strip me out my skin,
and burn it into Tinder.

I have considered of a way,
and 'twill be sure the best.

What may it be, my dearest Dear?


Creep into this same Chest.
And though he roar, speak you no word,
if you'll preserve my favour.

Shut to the Chest, I pray, with speed;
for something has some savour.

I never shall be quiet if
she use me in this fashion.

I am here to bid you welcome;
what mean you by this passion?

With some young sweet-fac'd Fellow,
I thought gone out you were.

No sooth, the sweet-fac'd Fellow
is kept a Prisoner here.

Where is the Fool thy Husband?
say, whither is he gone?

The Wittal is a hunting.


Then we two are alone.
But should he come, and find me here, what might the Cuckold think?
Perhaps he'd call the Neighbours in.

And beat you till you stink.


Yet in the bloody War full oft, my courage I did try.


I know you have killed many a man.


You lye, you Slut, you lye.


I never came before a Foe,
By night nor yet by day,
But that I stoutly roused my self.

And nimbly ran away.


Within this Chest I'll hide my self, if it chance he should come.


O no, my Love, that cannot be.


I have bespoke the room.


I have a place behind here, which yet is known to no man.


She has a place before too, but that is all too common.


Wife, wherefore is the door thus barred? what mean you, pray, by this?


Alas, it is my Husband.


I laugh now till I piss.


Open the Chest, I'll into it, my Life else it may cost.


Alas, I cannot open it.


I believe the Key is lost.


I have bethought my self upon a dainty trick.


What may it be, my dearest Love?
I prithee now be quick.

You must say that your Enemy into this house is fled;
And that your heart can take no rest until that he be dead.
Draw quickly out your furious Blade, and seem to make a strife:
Swear all the excuses can be made, shall not preserve his Life.
Say that the Rogue is fled in here, that stole away your Coin;
And if I'll not deliver him, you'll have as much of mine.

Here's no man but my self, on whom shall I complain?


This great fool does not understand, this thing you must but seign.
My husband thus must be deceived, and afterwards we'll laugh.

Wife, since you will not open the Door,
I'll break't open with my staff.

Good woman show me to the Slave, his limbs I strait will tear.


By all the honesty I have, there's no man came in here*


When I have fought to purchase wealth, and with my blood did win it,
This Rogue has got my purse by stealth.

But never a penny in it.


She's big with Child, therefore take heed you do not fright my wife.


But know you who the Father is?


The Roarer, on my Life.


She knows not of your enemy, then get you gone you were best.


Peace, husband, peace; I tell you true*
I have hid him in the Chest.

I am glad on it at my heart, but do not tell him so.


I would not for a thousand pound the Roarer should it know.


When next we meet, his life is gone, no other must he hope;
I'll kill him whatsoere comes on it.

Pray think upon a Rope.


What kind of person is it then, that in the Chest doth lie?


A goodly handsome sweet young man, as ere was seen with eye.


Then let us both entreat of him --
Pray put us not in fear:
We do beseech you go from hence.

But tomorrow I'll be here.


Wife, run with all the speed you can, and quickly shut the door;
I would not that the roaring Man should come in any more.
Mean time I will release the youth, and tell him how we have sped --
Be comforted my honest friend.

Alas, I'm almost dead.
My heart is tortured in my breast, with sorrow, fear and pain.

I'll fetch some Aqua vitae, to comfort you again.


And because I will require you, whose love doth so excel,
I'll graft a pair of horns on your head* that may defend it well.

Good husband, let the man stay here, 'tis dangerous in the street.


I would not for a Crown of Gold the Roarer should him meet.
For should he come by any harm, they'd say the fault were mine.

There's half a crown, pray send him out to fetch a quart of wine.


There's money for you, Sir, -- pray fetch a quart of Sack.


'Tis well, 'tis well, my honest friend,
I'll see you shall not lack.

But if he should dishonest me, for there are such slippery men.


Then he gets not of his half crown, one penny back again.


Thy husband being gone, my Love, we'll sin^ we'll dance and laugh:
I am sure he's a good fellow, and takes delight to quaff.

I'll fold thee in my arms, my Love, no matter for his listening.


Gentlemen, some forty weeks hence you may come to a Christening.


O Sirrah, have I caught you? now do the best you can;
Your School-master never taught you to wrong an honest man.

Good Sir, I never went to school, then why am I abused?
The truth is, I am but a Fool, and like a Fool am used.

Yet Sirrah you had wit enough to think to Cuckold me.


I jested with him, husband, his knavery to see.


But now you talk of knavery,
I pray where is my sack?

You shall want it in your belly, Sir, and have it on your back.


WHat Paper is that he ruminates upon? Let us observe a little.


'Tis a strange thing I find my self out every day more then other, to be one
of the understanding'st, sweetest, neatest, and completest Shepherds that ever
took hook in hand. The other day I saw my face in a pail of water, and I had much
ado to forbear drowing of my self. 'Tis no wonder then, that the beauteous
Nymph Oenone makes much of me, and lets all the other Shepherds shake their
Ears like Asses: and the truth is, if I can find never a handsomer, she shall
serve the turn. This was her birth-day, she being born in the year -- one
thousand six hundred, -- nay hold a little: but on this day of the month it
was, Winter or Summer, in the honour of which we all keep holiday: and
therefore for the credit of her beauty, and the honour of my own Poetry, I have
made such a Copy of Verses on her, as will make her a thousand times handsomer
then ever she was in her Life.

I will peruse them now with the eyes of understanding.

OEnone fair, whose beauty does enrich us,
Tell me the cause why thou dost so bewitch us.
On this day thou were born, though not begotten;
This day I'll think on when thou art dead and rotten.
And though thy coyness, and thy pretty scorn,
Makes many wish that thou had never been born;
Yet for my own part, this I'll swear and say,
I wish thy time of birth were every day.
If she do not run mad for love of me now, 'tis pity she should have Verses
made on her as long as she lives.


Let's interrupt him. -- Hobbinal, well met.


It may be so.


But why so strange, man? I hope you will remember we are your
fellow-Shepherds.


You were once: but now I command you to know, I am a Master-Shepherd; for the
fair Nymph Oenone, that makes all your mouths run over with water, does
acknowledge me to be both Master and Mistress.


In part 'tis true: yet if you well consider, she makes you but her sport; no
otherwise.


If she make me her sport, 'tis more then ever she can make of thee: for thou
art one of the sowrest looked fellows that ever crept out of a Vinegar-bottle.


Here comes the fairest Idae ever nourished.


Now will I see who is the most deserving Shepherd in all the Vale of Idae. --
Little Rogue, how dost thou?


O Hobbinal, you are welcome; I thought you had forgot me: you are my sport,
and should be ever near me.


Look you there, I am her sport, she says: when will she give any of you such
an honourable Title? but Sport, I do not think but thou art a Conjurer, or a
Witch, or a Devil at least: for thou hast insused such a combustion of Poetry
in my head, that I fear I shall never be my own Man again, nor my Master's
neither. -- There's a Copy of Verses, read 'em: nay, they are my own, as sure
as my name 's Hobbinal.


I thank you, Sport: I'll study a requital.


Honour me with your fair hand, Nymph, that I may lead the way to all those
pastimes which will follow.


The honour is to me, and I accept it.


I'd laugh at that: no, Sport, I'll dance with thee my self.


Some other time by chance I may be at leisure.


Will you not? Well, by this hand then I'll stand out, and laugh at every
thing you do, right or wrong.

Pshaw waw, this dancing is like my Mothers Mares trot:
Sport, shall I show thee a Dance of my own fashion?

It cannot but content.


Nay, I know that: hark hither, Lads.


How like you this Sport?


Beyond Expression, Sport: I see your Virtues were concealed too long.


I, so they were; but I mean to show them every day as fast as I can. But
Sirrah, Sport, yonder's god Pan with a company of the bravest Satyrs that ever
wore horns on their heads: come, Shepherds, let's go make them drunk, and saw
off all their horns.


HEreabout I am to meet this Hercules; and see, he's come.

Well, Iohn, I see you are prepared for murder: have mercy on the Barber, I
say.


No, I scorn it; I will have no mercy: he has made a whore of a wondrous honest
woman; and a Cuckold of one, that for ought I know, might have been a Courtier.
For which abominable deed, I scorn to show my self a Christian; for I do mean
to use him worse then a Jew would.


Nay, but consider, he's a man however, and you can boast your self to be no
more, although you have the spirit of a Giant: you have brought weapons here,
as if you meant to kill him twenty times. Troth 'tis too much.


If I bate him an Ace of forty, call me Coxcomb: I will draw his teeth one by
one, with an instrument called a pair of Tongs, then let him blood in the right
vein, and bid the Devil take him at his own peril.


Let me prevail with thee to calm thy rage, and take acquaintance of this
Gentleman, a worthy friend of mine.


Do you long to be acquainted with me, Sir?


By any means, Sir.


'Tis granted then: I'll toss a Can or a Pot with you as soon as I have
dispatcht this bawdy Barber; would he were dead, that my business might be
over.


What's your profession, Sir? and how may I call you?


I am a Sea-man, Sir; my name's Iohn Swabber: -- an Officer of the Ship, Sir.


I cry you mercy, Sir.


Nay, never cry for the matter. -- But I had forgot this Barber all this while.
Barber, come forth; or by the beard of my great Grandfather, I swear, I will so
shashado, mashado, pashado, and carbonado thee, that thou shalt look like a
Gallimafry all the days of thy Life. Come forth, I say.


Why Neighbour Swabber, who provokes you thus? what do you mean? who has
offended you?


O Slave of all Slaves! who has offended me? why thou base, beastly,
boisterous, Babylonian, bawdy-fac'd Barber, thou hast: thou hast made me fit to
chew the cud with Oxen, climb the mountains with wild Goats, and keep company
with none but Ram-headed people: for which I will tie thee up on the next
Signepost, and there thou shalt hang a twelvemoneth and a day alive, for an
example to all such notable shavers; but if thou come and submittest to my
mercy, I will do thee the favour to let thee hang till thou be dead.


Francisco, hark: -- I'll pawn my Life this fellow is a rank Coward: keep you
his fury up, and I'll persuade the Barber to a greater vein of roaring then ere
was practised by a suburb-Blade: I'll make him at the least seem valiant; fear
not.


Do, if it be possible; I'll hold him in discourse. -- But, Mr. Swabber, what
think you if he does compound with you? will you be won to take an arm or two,
or both his legs, and save his other members?


Pish, tell not me, 'tis neither his arms nor his legs that I stand upon; he
has caused me to go in danger of my Life: for the other day I had an occasion
to pass by a worshipful Gentleman's pack of Hounds, they no sooner looked upon
my forehead, but they came at me in full cry; and I for fear left such a sent
behind me, that they came after me as perfectly by it, as if I had been a
Stagg; and if I had not got shelter of a house, without doubt I had been
presented to some great man for Venison, and my Hanches had been baked by this
time.


You were in danger there, I must confess.


And the Butchers Dogs still take me for a Bull, and fetch such courses at me;
and all this the Barber is the cause of.


I would revenge it: were I as you, he should not have a tool left him to work
with.


No, nor to play with neither: I will have an inch of every tool he has. --
Barber, come forth, and let me kill thee upon fair terms; or else I mill enter
thy house by force, pitch thee down the stairs, and send thee of an Errand
headlong: and if thou dost submit to my mercy, I will shave thee to death with
thy own Razor: therefore take heed. -- So, now let him come if he dare.


Well, now I see there is no hope to appease him: blood must ensue, and death
will take its course.


With whom? what's the matter?


The Barber is preparing for the combat: he has took his pole to serve him for
a lance, and one of his basins for a buckler, and vows to make you the
wind-mill, whilst he plays Don Quixote against you furiously.


A wind-mill! -- I'll be gone.


You will not offer that, sure. What afraid?


Would it not make any one tremble with the thought on it, first to be made a
Cuckold, then a windmill? No, I will be gone, and come again to kill him when I
can find him in a better humour.


Consider what you do; he'll call you Coward, proclaim you Cuckold still in
every Ale-house; and what disgrace will that be?


I care not: 'tis better to be a Cuckold then a wind-mill. If he had meant to
make a Fool, a Puppy, or an Ass of me, or any such Christian-like Creature,
'twere another matter: but to be made a wind-mill of, and never to be respected
but when the wind blows, is not to be endured: therefore let him make
wind-mills of my weapons, if he will; for my own part, I will defend my self
with my heels.


Come, I have brought him to a better temper: he will come armed with nothing
but a Razor; with which if he does s^it your wezand-pipe, it will not be amiss
to take it patiently.


Let him not spoil my drinking, and I care not: but hark you, if you should
let him hurt me, I should be as angry as a Tiger.


Where is this Slave that has provoked my rage to his destruction? I will
swinge this Boor, then hang him up for Bacon in my chimney, and send him to be
broiled for Pluto's breakfast.


Why this is worse then to be made a windmill. Do you hear, Sir? if ever you
had the fit of an Ague upon you, or ever knew the trembling of a Man troubled
in Conscience, that would be loath to die till he had made even with all the
world, consider me. Alas, Sir, I have my Rent to pay yet; and if I should be
sent to Hell of an Errand, they'll like my company so well, I should never come
back again: pray persuade him to send me to Jerusalem, Iericho, or any of those
places nearer hand.


Why, can not thou excuse thy self? where's thy brains?


Alas, my brains are fallen into my breeches; but if you'll stand between me
and harm, I'll venture to reconcile my self to him. -- Cut. -- honest Cutbeard,
did not thou think I was in earnest all this while?


VVhatere thou were, thou shalt be nothing presently: Death waits for thee:
come quickly, I command thee.


Sir, pray persuade Mr. Death to have patience for a matter of 40 or 50 years
more: for I have a great deal of business to do in this world yet.


Shall I be dallied with? let me approach him: for all the entreaties of the
world shall not preserve him past six minutes.


One minute is past already, -- and there's two.


Nay, prithee Cutbeard be more merciful.


Three -- four -- five.


Will no entreaty serve? Then take your course.


Six. O now I am gone.


If he submit, he may live: let him know it. -- Dost thou acknowledge thy own
Cowardice, and my heroic Valour?


O mighty Hercules, I confess my self a Pigmy, and I will never think otherwise
while I live, these Gentlemen be my witnesses.


Why then all is well a gen. -- Remember, Cutbeard.


I'll spice him, fear not. -- Give me thy hand,


Thus do I grasp thy friendship.


He grasps my hand devilish hard tho.


I here pronounce thy wife to be a Venus.


O rare! is my wife a Venus? That's more then ever I knew before: why then I
will be her husband Cupid.


No, Cupid was her Son.


'Tis no matter for that, he shall be her husband for once; and we two will get
such abundance of young Cupids, that we'll make all the world in love with one
another.


Since we are reconciled, know, honest Swabber, that I will make the whole
world dote on thee: I'll wash thy face, and powder thee to the purpose, and
shave thee if thou wilt too.


No, by no means: I dare not venture my throat under thy Fingers: but for
washing and powdering, that all the world may be in love with me, I am content.


Sit down then in this Chair, look on this powder, the snow is nothing to it;
'twill create such a complexion on thee, that no Art did ever set upon the
proudest Lady.


But hark you, Cutbeard, how shall I do to satisfy all the women that will
follow me for kisses? if you make me too beautiful, my lips will be worn
threadbare before I can get home; and then Parnel my own dear wife, will have
the least share of her own sweet husband.


For that we'll take a course -- wink, wink, good Jack; my Ball will search
your eyes else.


My eyes are honest, and fear no searching.


Now I begin to sprucifie thy physiognomy: -- This powder was extracted from the
Phoenix, when she last burnt her self, and is indeed the quintessence of
odours.


Nay, 'tis as odious as ever I smelt, that is certain: good Cutbeard, let me
have enough, I prithee.


Nay, I will spare no cost: -- Judge, Gentlemen, is he not strangely altered?


Past belief: I would not that my Mistress saw him now, my hopes would soon be
cooled then.


I think so: but I would have you to take notice, I will have nothing to do but
with great personages; for I must not make my self common.


What this fellow will come to, no man knows yet; his fame no doubt will
travel over all Countries, and I am fully resolved in my Opinion, the Queen of
Mauritania will run mad for him.


If she run as mad as a March-Hare, she gets not a bit: no, Parnel and my
Neighbours shall have all.


Now if the Painters will draw Adonis our, let them come here for Copies. So, I
have done.


Prithee Cutbeard, lend me a Looking-glass.


By no means: what, did you never hear of one Narcissus, how he pined away for
love of his own shadow? No, go home, your house is hard by; let Parnel see you,
and bless her self with wonder.


Honest Cutbeard, this Gentleman is a worthy friend of mine; prithee bestow
some of the same powder upon his face.


No, no, you shall be beautiful alone; 'tis best.


Parnel, I come; and if thou be not stupid,
Thou '^t say Jack Swabber is a kin to Cupid.

Well, Cutbeard, thou hast dressed him handsomely: I would give a Crown that I
were by when first he finds what beauty he is adorned withal.


This day I am to meet with pretty Parnel; pray Heaven the Fool be absent when
I come: some two hours hence, if you will meet me, Gentlemen, I will tell you
how he takes his transmigration.


We will not fail. Farewell.


I wonder that my Barber stays thus long: can he neglect me thus? Well, I will
fit him; for if he use me once again thus basely, I will cashier him, and bestow
my love upon some one more constant: forty to one but Swabber comes before him,
and spoils all.

Who's this, in the name of blackness? the clothes and walk of my dear husband,
and I will lay my life he has got a Vizard on. -- Nay pray now, indeed you'll
fright me presently; take heed.


She does not know me, that's excellent. -- Parnel, believe it, I am flesh and
blood; I would not have thee take me for a Goddess.


A Goddess, quotha! a black one, if you be one: what hast thou got upon thy
face, I prithee?


Do not look too wistfully upon me, Parnel; my beauty will put your eyes out if
you do, and then I must be at the charge of a Dog and a Bell for you.


A Dog and a fools head! pull off your Vizard.


Do not touch me, unless you make forty curtsies first. Come, kiss me, and thou
wilt be out of thy wits presently.


Nay, then I see 'tis a trick put upon him; I'll fetch you a glass, you shall
behold your beauty.


Do, and I will venture to be in love with my self for once. How shall I
require honest Cutbeard? By this hand he shall have the honour to be Barber to
all my Wenches.


Are you not wondrous fair? Look and admire your self.


O Parnel, Parnel, I am gulled most basely; I have not half so much beauty as a
Chimney-sweeper: I will kill the Barber the first thing I do.


Was it the Barber used thee thus?


I* Parnel, 'twas he: I'll go fetch a company of my Fellow-saylors, drag him
out, and hang him up at the main-Yard presently. Parnel, farewell: if I be
apprehended for the death of Cutbeard, whatever thou dost, send me a clean
shirt; for I shall have need on it.


Well, Cutbeard, I commend thee for this project; thou hast dressed him
handsomely: would thou were here, I would kiss thee for the Jests sake.

Oh are you come, Sir?


I watch^ the time, my Parnel, and have found it: how does the Gull become his
feathers? Ha!


As I would have him: Oh Cutbeard, this Kiss, and this, for the device.


Where is he, Parnel?


Why gone abroad in his new-fashion'd face, to fetch a gang of Sailors, who he
vows shall hang thee up at the main-Yard, and shall use thee worse then the
Prentices a Suburb-bawd on a Shrove-tuesday.


And those same Water-rats are devilish things: what a Slave was I to use him
so?


What can thou fear when I am in thy presence? Away, you Milk-sop, hence from
me, ^ayant.


Nay, gentle Parnel, by this hand I will fight with a whole Army, if thou say
the word: prithee be reconciled.


Why Parnel, Parnel! here's thy own sweet husband; open the door, dear Wife.


O me, my husband's come; what shall I do?


Let me into the Well, if thou think good; or hang me in the Chimney 'stead
of Bacon.


Alas, that's full of hazard: -- No device!


Why huswife, huswife, must I wait half a day?


My Peticoat's fallen off; but I come presently. -- Oh I have thought, come
hither, put on this Biggin, I made it for my Child that is at Nurse, and cram
thy self into this Cradle here: there is no other way, therefore dispatch.


O me! thou never think upon my beard; that will betray all presently.


Take you no care, I'll make him to believe you were born with it; be quick, I
say.


Necessity compels me: send me off of this brunt once, I'll hunt the smock no
more. -- Cover me close, good Parnel.


So, keep you close; and when he prattles to you, snee^e in his face, and call
him Dad; do you hear?


Why you proud, peevish, petty, paltry Parnel, why did you make me stay so
long?


I made what haste I could, but the Child cried so.


The Child! what Child? Have you got Bastards here?


Bastards? they are your own then: Simon's come home, the Boy I had a
twelvemoneth since by you: he was born when you were at Sea.


Is he brought home? As I am an honest man I am glad on it. Let me see him,
Parnel.


Look here he is; the goodliest Boy, and even as like thee, Iohn, as if thou
had begot him all thy self.


Whoop! here's a Boy of a twelvemoneth old: if he grow but thus much this next
year, he'll be able to fight with a Giant presently. But Parnel, he has got a
great beard too, how comes that?


Why he was born with it: many children are so; and 'tis a sign he will be a
man betimes, a wise discreet one too.


Dad, dad, dad!


Nay, 'tis a wise Child, I perceive that; for he calls me Dad at first sight.
Good Parnel, fetch me some Milk for him; I will see him eat.


He had Milk but just now: prithee, Iohn, be patient.


You are a Fool, he has been starved at Nurse, and we must make him fat. Fetch
some, I say.


I will not, truly Iohn, you will spoil the Child.


I saw some stand in the next room, I will fetch it my self, so I will.


What will you do? you must endure with patience; I mingled batter but just
now for pancakes, and that he'll bring, as certain as I live.


I shall be crammed to death: mercy upon me.


He comes, lie close again.


Dad, dad, dad!


I, mine own Boy, here's Milk for thee, Simon.

Look, Parnel, look how greedily he eats it.


Now fie upon you, Iohn, you will choke the Child.


I mean to make him grow as high as Paul's* and show him for a wonder in
Bartholomew Fair. Fetch me some Milk, this is all gone.


What, do you think I will murder the poor Infant?


By this hand I will go to the Milk-woman and fetch him a whole gallon.


Up quickly, and be gone; for when he comes, he will choke you without fail.


A pox upon him, never was Child fed thus. But what will you do now?


Do not you fear; I'll fetch my own Child; 'tis at a Neighbours house, and say
the Fairies have exchanged it.


Send thee good luck: Farewell, sweet Parnel.


So, if this Child will serve him for a Simon, all will be well again.

He comes. -- Oh Iohn.


Come, give me Simon on my Lap; I will feed him till his Guts crack again.


Alas, I went but in the next room, and in the mean time the Fairies have
exchanged him; look what a little thing they have left in his place.


I will have none on it: go, fetch me Simon; and tell the Fairies I will indi^e
them at the Sessions for this. Oh Simon, Simon, what is become of thee?


Nay, prithee take not on so.


The goodliest Boy of his age that ever man saw. Pshaw, this has never a beard:
I will have none on it.


Why how now, Jack? what, in a passion? Ha, 'twas I that blackt thy face to
day for mirth sake, and thou did think it was Cutbeard.


I care not for my face; Simon is gone, that had a beard as big as Cutbeard's
here: the Fairies have exchanged him, and look what a Chitty-face they have
left in his room; a thing of nothing for him.


Come, you must use this they have left with courtesy, for they will whip
Simon every day in the week else: I know the nature of them.


Will they so? Nay, then I must make much on it.


And now you must be friends with Cutbeard too.


With all my heart; for I am angry with none but the Fairies now.


We have brought Music, and some Neighbours with us, and mean to have a
Dance. Come, Iohn.


I can dance nothing but a melancholy Dance: for I am in a grievous dump for
Simon still.


I warrant thee. Strike up there.


Why that's well done: no time is counted lost,

Where civil Mirth is gained with such small cost.


ME be content to have de little patience, and be my trot, me tel you, vat me
have seen a to day, de fine sport in de Varle: me come into de Great Man to
day, me make de reverence Alamode, come ill faut, and he make me de strange a
Sir-reverence de tird time, dat ever you saw.


Oh Monsieur, every Man has not the activity of your feet.


By my fat, tis very estrange a ding, dat they will suffer a des Men to be near
a de King, a de Queen, de Prince, or de Princess, they will marra de
understanding very mush.


Why Monsieur, that lies at the other end.


Be gar you shall excuse a me, for de Conrtier Alamode dere de vit lie in de
foot; be gar dere is no body can be Eiseman, dat does not make a de most
excellent reverence, dat is most certain, dat is de best ting in de hole Varle.


But do you think Caesar, or most of the Emperors or Worthies of the world,
studied the Liberal Science of the Foot, or puissant Toe?


No; but be gar dat make them die all unfortunate: for if they had think but de
reverence, they might a live a great a vile.


I confess the wisdom of it, Sir; but for the wit, do you think that lies
there?


Dat be de best vit can be possible: for your vit, vat is your vit? Your vit is
to break a de jest; vel, look you now a me, me will break a de jest: Dat is
like dat a me Lor, dat is like a de Knight, dat is like dat a de Jentilman: Ha,
ha, ha! dere is now one, two, tree very good jest datmake a me sick wide laugh;
and be gar me will make a de Page, de Lackey, and all de fool in de Court,
break ades very good jest, very quickly, dat is nothing.


To any purpose.


Be my trot me speak a to de King, and to de Queen to give me a Patten, dat
none shall teach a de Aldermen to make a de Reverence but my self; and me will
undertake dat vit in one 12 a mont: but den they must do noting else, they shall
make a de Reverence, vit de Aldermen in de Paris, and dance a Coran, a
Cerebran, a Mountague, and dat will be very brave.


But what shall business do in the mean time, Monsieur?


Is not dis very great a business? Nay be gar, me will undertake to de King, and
to de Queen, to make a my Lor Maire, de Sheriff and de Aldermen very fine a
mask.


And to write it, Monsieur.


Awe, de write? dat is nothing alamode, your speesh two, tree yard long, pshaw?
Give a me de quick a Spirit, de Fancy, de brave Scene, de variety of de
Antimask, de nimble a Foot, no matter de sense, begar it vole be de brave ting
in de Christian varle.


There is no question to be made.


And be my trot, if me have anoder Patten for de Council learned in de Law, for
to teash them de reverence, dat will be very great vark; but my diligence and
skill in dat matre, have no despair to effect in time dis great benefit, and dat
will make a de Law flourish, and Englan a brave Englan begar.


But what will you look for now for your pains, Monsieur? that is considerable.


Begar me look for very mush; for 'tis mush pain, and 'tis brave ting: beside,
me look for a Statur of de brass in de Palace-yard, ven me go out of dis varle.


You will deserve it as a rare Patriot. But what manner of Reverence would you
have the Lawyers to imitate? you must consider their Gravity.


Observe a me.


Such a Reverence under your favour would not become.


Begar you no understand a de matre, vere is your brain? dere is noting in de
varle like a dat motion, for de Jentilman, and for de Jentilvoman.


Yes, by your leave, Sir, there is something else that is as good for them.


I will tell you now, begar, here is a de Kinsman dat is a me, and he live here
very mush time, before he come, they vent in vid deire Toes, and hold deire
Cloak in Stadere, and de Hat so. Fie, a la diable! and now they valk vid deire
Toes out for brave Genty, you call dat a de splay-foot: but me vonder dat de
Lady no come, begar me no use to dis patience, and de vait: pray tell you Madam
dat me have autre business vid de Lor, and de autre Lady have de use of my foot
begar.


Oh Monsieur, by no means: Sir William, let us prevail.


'Tis no good you hold a me begar: me no stay two minutes to save a your soul,
dat is de resolution of de Cavalier de France


Would any man believe there should be so much folly in this Cubit-square?


Do you think he is a French Dancer? Let that answer you.


Monsieur Galliard, my Lady expects you.


Begar me no lik adat reverence, me will change a dat.


'Tis the French Fashion, as you taught me, Monsieur.


Ouy, 'tis de French Fashion, but de French Fashion is always to change, and
dis reverence displease a me very mush, because you go back, back vid your
buttock, as if some vod take you by dat, to vat me will give a no name.


Sweet Mris. Lucy.


Dat de reverence is no good of de man, me must change dat too: be me trot me
doubt dat dis great business will almost break a my brain, dis great work, and
before a Masque of de King and de Queen. Me can eat a no meat, no drink, no
sleep, and me grow so very a lean vid de Contemplation, a so much be my trot de
Privy Council is no so mush troubled as me be vid dis: Oh te Diable! deirs is
noting, they fit all de vile they do deir business: me bissey boat head and de
foot cap a pie, in de French tune, and dat is great matre begar.


You esteem it highly, Monsieur.


Me tell you, and me tell you no tale, 'Tis great matre to make a de Lor, to
make a de

Lady, to make a de Jentilman, to make a de Jentilwoman, and de autre man to
dance, and to make a de boon reverence, for begar dat will make a de King de
great King in de Varle.


How can that be, Sir?


Me tell you, ven they are so bissey to learn a de dance, they will never tinke
of de Rebellion, and den de reverence is obedience to Monarchy, and begar
obedience is ale de ting in de Varle.


But what Music would you govern the people by?


Begar by de best French Fiddles can be got.


What think you of an Irish Harp, a State-Organ, or a Passionate voice to a
Lovers Lute?


Des dull tings make a de men melancholic, and den they tinke on de Devil, and
de Treason, and do any ting dat is no good; but begar des French Fiddles do
fiddle all des tings out of deit head, vid such a jerk as ma ^oy make a them so
fantastical, and make a them as good subject as any is in de France, begar.
Here be one of my Colliers, Monsieur Simpleton, Say you no dat de French Fiddle
make a de brave Government in a de Varle?


I say any thing becomes a Gentleman.


Observe you dat? he have been but two tree mont, and he say any ting dat is
brave. He have de grand understanding in de foot. Tell a me ven you hear a de
little fiddel vat is your think? is your head no free from de Treason, and de
plot of de Rebel as your leg? begar you no stand upon de ground for joy of de
Coran, de Cerebran, de Marquess, de Montague, ha! Me be your humble servant
Madam.

and stay one two tree hours.


I am now ready for you Monsieur. Come Lucy, the practice of the last he taught
us.


Wat Antique be dis?


Monsieur, ask that May-pole and he can dance.


Plait il Monsieur, a la Galliard de Coran, la Princess, le Buckingham, heigh?


Put up your rosin and your Cats-guts presently, and be gone, or I shall find a
grave for you in the pocket of my sleeve, and this shall be your winding sheet.


Me no play dat lesson: Pocket de sleeve? dat is no tune de France: pocket, le
grand pock -- Pardonne moy Monsieur: Me put up my offers to strike him Fiddel
and be gone. Adieu Madam, Serviteur jentilhommes. Pocket de sleeve?


NAy son,

If this be your regard.


Good Mother.


Good me no goods; your Cousin and your self are welcome to me whilst you bear
your selves like honest and true Gentlemen. Bring hither to my house, that hath
ever been reputed a Gentlewoman of a decent and fair carriage, and so have
behaved my self?


I know ye have.


Bring hither, as I say, to make my house stink in my neighbours nostrils, your
devices, your Brats got out of Elegant and broken Oaths? your linsey work,
your hasty puddings? I foster up your filched iniquities? you're deceived in me,
for I am none of those receivers.


Have I not sworn unto you 'tis none of mine, and showed you how I found it?


Ye found an easy fool that let you get it: she had better have worn
Posterons.


Will ye hear me?


Oaths? what do you care for oaths to gain your ends, when you are high and
pampered? what Saint know ye? or what Religion, but your purposed lewdness, is
to be looked for of ye? Nay, I will tell ye, ye will then swear like accused
Cut-purses? as far off truth too: and lie beyond all Faulconers. I'm sick to
see this dealing.


Heaven forbid, Mother.


Nay, I am very sick.


Who waits there?


Sir?


Bring down the bottle of Canary wine.


Exceeding sick, Heaven help me.


I must even make her drunk. Nay, gentle mother.


Now fie upon ye.


Here mother, take a good round draught, 'twill purge spleen from your spirits:
deeper, mother.


I, I, son; you imagine this will mend all.


All in faith, mother.


I confess this wine will do his part.


I'll pledge you.


But son Iohn, I know your meaning.


Mother, touch it once more, alas you look not well; take a round draught, it
warms the blood well, and restores the colour, and then we'll talk at large.


A civil Gentleman! a stranger! one that should weigh his fair name! Oh, a
stitch.


There's nothing better for a stitch: good mother make no spare of it, as you
love your health: Mince not the matter.


As I said, a Gentleman lodge in my house! now heaven's my comfort.


I looked for this.


Where's the infant? come, let's see your workmanship.


None of mine, mother; but there 'tis, and a lusty one.


Heaven bless thee, thou had a hasty making; but the best is, 'tis many a
good mans fortune. As I live, your own eyes, Seignior, and the nether lip as
like ye, as if ye had spit it.


I am glad on it.


Bless me, what things are these!


I thought my labour was not all lost; 'tis gold, and these are jewels, both
rich, and right I hope.


Well, well, son Iohn, I see you are a woodman, and can choose your Deer though
it be i'ch' dark; all your discretion is not yet loft, this was well clapped
aboard here: I am with you now, when, as they say, your pleasure comes with
profit, when you must needs do where ye may be done to; 'tis a wisdom becomes a
young man well. Be sure of one thing, loose not your labour and your time
together, it seasons of a fool. Son, time is precious, work wary whilst ye have
it. Since ye must traffic sometimes this slippery way, take sure hold,
Seignior, trade with no broken Merchants: make your lading as you would make
your rest, adventurously, and with advantage ever.


All this time, mother, the child wants looking to, meat and Nurse.


Now blessing o'thy care, it shall have all, and instantly; I'll seek a Nurse my
self, son; 'tis a sweet child: Ah my young Spaniard, take you no farther care
sir.


Yes, of these jewels I must, by your leave mother: these are yours, to make
your care the stronger; for the rest I'll find a master; the gold for bringing
up on it, I freely render to your charge.


No more words, nor no more children (good son) as you love me, this may do
well.


I shall observe your Morals.


Come, ye do know --


I do not, by this hand Mistress, but I suspect.


What?


That if eggs continue at this price, women will ne'er be saved by their good
works.


I will know.


Ye shall, any thing lies in my power. The Duke of Lorrain is now 7000 strong:
I heard it of a Fish-wife, a woman of fine knowledge.


Sirrah, sirrah.


The Popes Bulls are broken loose too, and 'tis suspected they shall be baited
in England.


Very well, Sir.


No, 'tis not so well neither.


But I say to you, Who is it keeps your Master company?


I say to you, Don Iohn.


I say to you, what woman?


I say so too.


I say again, I will know.


I say 'tis fit you should.


And I tell thee he has a woman here.


And I tell thee, 'tis then the better for him.


You are no Baud now?


Would I were able to be called unto it. A worshipful Vocation for my Elders;
for as I understand, i^ is a place fitting my betters far.


Was ever Gentlewoman so frumpt off with a Fool? Well, saucy sirrah, I will
know who it is, and for what purpose. I pay the rent, and I will know how my
house comes by these inflammations. If this geer hold, best hang a sign-post
up, to tell the Seigniors, here you may have Lewdness at liberty.


'Twould be a great ease to your age.


How now? why what's the matter Landlady?


What's the matter? ye use me decently among ye, Gentlemen.


Who has abused her? you sir?


Ods my witness, I will not be thus treated, that I will not.


I gave her no ill language.


Thou lie lewdly, thou took me up at every word I spoke, as I had been a
Mawkin, a Flutt-Gillian: And thou think, because thou can write and read,
our noses must be under thee.


Dare you, sirrah?


She raves of Wenches, and I know not what, Sir.


Go to, thou know too-well, thou wicked Varlet.


As I live Sir, she is ever thus till dinner.


Get you in.


By this hand I'll break your posset-pan.


Then by this hood I'll lock the meat up.


Now your grief, what is't? for I can guess.


Ye may with shame enough, if there were shame amongst ye; nothing thought on
but how you may abuse my house: not satisfied with bringing home your Bastards
to undo me, but you must drill your Whores here too? My patience (because I
beat and bear, and carry all, and as they say am willing to groan under) must
be your Make-sport now.


No more of these words, nor no more murmurings, Lady: for you know that I know
something. I did suspect your anger; but turn it presently, and handsomely, and
bear your self discreet to this woman, for such a one there is indeed.


'Tis well, son.


Leaving your Devils Matins, and your Melancholies, or we shall leave our
lodgings.


You have much need to use these vagrant ways, and to much profit: ye had that
might content you (at home, within your selves too) right good, Gentlemen,
wholesome, and ye said handsome. But you gallants, boast that I was to believe
you.


Leave your suspicion: for as I live, there's no such thing.


Mine honour; and 'twere not for mine honour.


Come, your honour, your house, and you too, if you dare believe me, are well
enough. Sleek up your self, leave crying.


Worshipful Lady, how does thy velvet scabbard? by this hand thou look most
amiably; now could I willingly, and 'twere not for abusing thy Geneva-Print
there, venture my body with thee.


You will leave this roguery when you come to my years.


By this light, thou art not above fifteen yet, a mere girl; thou hast not half
thy teeth --


Prithee Iohn let her alone, she has been vexed already: she'll grow stark mad.


I would see her mad. An old mad woman is like a Millers Mare troubled with
tooth-ach. She'll make the rarest faces!


Well Don Iohn, there will be times again, when O good mother, what's good for
a Carnositie in the Bladder? O the green water, mother.


Doting take ye, do you remember that?


She has paid you now, Sir.


Clarie, sweet mother, Clarie.


Are ye satisfied?


I'll never whore again, never give Petticoats and VVastcoats at five pounds
apiece; good mother, quickly mother. Now mock on, son.


A devil grind your old chaps.


By this hand, Wench, I'll give thee a new hood for this. Has she met with
your Lordship?


Touch-wood take her, she's a rare costly mother.


I have told you all I can; to me you seem a worthy woman, one of those are
seldom found in our sex, Wise, and Virtuous. Direct me, I beseech you.


Ye say well, Lady, and hold to that point; for in these businesses a woman's
counsel that conceives the matter, Do ye mark me, that conceives the matter,
Lady, is worth ten men's engagements: she knows something, and out of that, can
work like wax; when men are giddy-headed, either out of wine, or a more
drunkenness, vain ostentation, discovering all: there is no more keep in them,
then hold upon an Eels tail; nay, 'tis held fashion to defame now all they can.


I, but these Gentlemen --


Do not you trust to that: these Gentlemen are as all other Gentlemen, of the
same Barrel; I, and the self-same Pickle. Be it granted they have used ye with
respect and fair behaviour yet since ye came: do you know what must follow?
They are Spaniards, Lady, Gennets of high mettle: Things that will thrash the
Devil or his Dam, let 'em appear but cloven.


Now Heaven bless me!


Mad Colts will court the Wind: I know 'em, Lady, to the least hair they have;
and I tell you, old as I am, let but the pint-pot bless'em, they'll offer to my
years.


How! --


Such rude Gambols --


To you? --


I, and so handle me, that oft I am forced to fight of all four for my safety:
There's the younger, Don John, the arrantest Jack in all this City. The other,
Time has blasted, yet he will stoop, if not ore-flown, and freely on the
Quarry: Has been a Dragon in his days. But Tarmont, Don Jenkin is the Devil
himself; the Dog-days the most incomprehensible VVhoremaster, twenty a night
is nothing; Beggars, Broom-women, and those so miserable, they look like
famine, are all sweet Ladies in his drink.


He's a handsome Gentleman, pity he should be master of such follies.


He's ne'er without a noise of Syrrenges in's pocket, those proclaim him,
Birding-pills, VVaters to cool his Conscience, in small Viols; with thousand
such sufficient emblems. The truth is, whose Chastity he chops upon, he cares
not. He flies at all; Bastards upon my Conscience he has in making, multitudes;
The last night he brought home one, I pity her that bore it, but we are all
weak Vessels: some rich woman, (for Wise I dare not call her) was the mother,
for it was hung with jewels, the bearing-cloth no less then crimson-Velvet.


How!


'Tis true, Lady.


Was it a boy too?


A brave boy, deliberation and judgement showed in's begetting; as I'll say for
him, he's as well paced for that sport.


May I see it?


You shall see it: but what do ye think of these men now you know 'em, and of
the cause I told ye of? I but tell you for your own good, and as you will find
it, Lady.


I am advised.


No more words then; do that, and instantly.


I'll fit you for your frumps: she that's wise leaps at occasion first; the
rest pay for it.


DIagoras, look to the doors better for shame, you let in all the world, and
anon the King will rail at me: by Jove, the King will have the Show i'^h'
Court.


Why do you swear so, my Lord? you know he'll have it here.


By this light, if he be wise he will not.


And if he will not be wise, you are forsworn.


One may sweat his heart out with swearing, and get thanks on no side; I'll be
gone, look to it who will.


My Lord, I will never keep 'em out: pray stay, your looks will terrify 'em.


My looks terrify 'em, you Coxcombly Ass you? I'll be judged by all the
company whether thou hast not a worse face then I. --


I mean, because they know you and your office.


Office? I would I could put it off. I am sure I sweat quite through my office:
serve that will.


He's so humorous, -- hark, hark; there, there, so, so, cuds, cuds, what now?


Let him not in.


O my Lord, he must: is your

Lady placed?


Yes Sir, I thank you. My Lord Calianax, well met; your causeless hate to me I
hope is buried.


Who placed the Lady there, so near the presence of the King?


I did.


My Lord, she must not sit there.


Why?


The place is kept for a woman of more worth.


More worth then she? it mis-becomes your age and place to be so womanish;
forbear: what you have spoke, I am content to think the Palsy shook your
tongue to.


Why '^is well if I stand here to place men's Wenches?


I shall forget this place, thy age, and through all, cut that poor sickly
VVeek thou hast to live, away from thee.


Nay, I know you can fight for your VVhore.


Bate the King, and he be flesh and blood, he lies that says it: thy mother at
fifteen was black and sinful to her.


I, you may say your pleasure.


What wild injury has stirred my worthy friend, who is as slow to fight with
words as he is quick of hand?


That heap of age which I should reverence if it were temperate; but testy
years are most contemptible.


Good Sir forbear.


There is just such another as your self.


He will wrong you or me, or any man, and talk as if he had no life to lose.


How now huswifes? what, at your ease? is this a time to sit still? Up, you
young lazy whores, up, or I'll s^inge you.


Nay, good my Lord.


You'll lie down shortly; Get you in and work: what, are you grown so resty?
you want ears; we shall have some of the Court-boys do that office.


My Lord, we do no more then we are charged; it is the Ladies pleasure we be
thus in grief: she is forsaken.


There's a rogue too, a young dissembling slave; well, get you in, I'll have a
bout with that boy, 'tis high time now to be valiant. I confess my youth was
never prone that way: what, made an Ass? a Court-Stale? Well, I will be
valiant, and beat some dozen of these whelps, I will: and there's another of
'em, a trim cheating Soldier, I'll maul that Rascal; has out*braved me twice,
but now I thank the gods I am valiant: Go, get you in, I'll take a course with
all.


O Melantius, my daughter will die.


Trust me, I am sorry; would thou had ta'n her room.


Thou art a Slave, a Cut-throat Slave, a bloody treacherous Slave.


Take heed, old Man, thou wilt be heard to rave, and lose thine offices.


I am valiant grown at all these years, and thou art but a Slave.


Leave: some company will come, and I respect thy years, not thee so much,
that I could wish to laugh at thee alone.


I'll spoil your mirth, I mean to fight with thee; there lie my Cloak, this was
my fathers sword, and he durst fight; are you prepared?


Why? wilt thou dote thy self out of thy life? hence, get thee to bed, have
careful looking to, and eat warm things, and trouble not me; my head is full of
thoughts more weighty then thy life or death can be.


You have a name in War, when you stand safe amongst a multitude; but I will
try what you dare do unto a weak old Man in single fight; you'll ground I
fear. Come, draw.


I will not draw, unless thou pull'st thy death upon thee with a stroke:
there's no one blow that thou can give, hath strength enough to kill me.
Tempt me not so far then; the power of earth shall not redeem thee.


I must let him alone, he's stout and able; and to say the truth, however I may
set a face and talk, I am not valiant. When I was a youth, I kept my credit
with a testy trick I had amongst Cowards, but durst never fight.


I will not promise you to preserve your life if you do stay.


I would give half my land that I durst fight with that proud man a little: if
I had men to hold, I would beat him till he ask me mercy.


Sir, will you be gone?


I dare not stay, but I will go home and beat my servants all over for this.


This old Man haunts me; but the distracted carriage of mine Amintor takes
deeply on me, I will find the cause: I fear his Conscience cries, he wronged
Aspatia.


Good my Lord, forget your spleen to me; I never wronged you, but would have
peace with every man.


'Tis well: if I durst fight, your tongue would lie at quiet.


You're touchie without cause.


Do, mock me.


By mine honour.


Honour? where is't?


See what stairs you make into your hatred, to my love and freedom to you. --
I come with resolution to obtain a suit of you.


A suit of me? 'tis very like it should be granted, Sir.


Nay, go not hence: 'Tis this, You have the keeping of the Fort, and I would
wish you, by the love you ought to bear unto me, to deliver it into my hands.


I am in hope that thou art mad, to talk to me thus.


But there is a reason to move you to it. I would kill the King, that wronged
you and your daughter.


Out Traitor!


Nay, but stay; I cannot escape, the deed once done, without I have this Fort.


And should I help thee? Now thy treacherous mind betrays it self.


Come, delay me not, give me a sudden answer, or already thy last is spoke:
refuse not offered love when it comes clad in secrets.


If I say I will not, he will kill me; I do see it writ in his looks: and
should I say I will, he'll run and tell the King. I do not shun your
friendship, dear Melantius, but this cause is weighty, give me but an hour to
think.


Take it, -- I know this goes unto the King, but I am armed.


Methinks I feel my self but twenty again, this fighting Fool wants policy. I
shall revenge my Girl, and make her red again. I pray my legs will last that
pace that I will carry, I shall want breath before I find the King.


It sounds incredible.


Yes, so does every thing I say, of late.


Not so, Calianax.


Yes, I should sit mute, whilst a rogue with strong arms cuts your throat.


Well, I will try him.


Why, if it be ally, mine ears are false, for I'll be sworn I heard it. Old men
are good for nothing; you were best to put me to death for hearing, and free
him for meaning of it; you would have trusted me once, but the time is altered.


And will still, where I may do it with Justice to the world. You have no
witness?


Yes, my self.


No more, I mean, there were that heard it.


How, no more? why am not I enough to hang a thousand Rogues?


But so you may hang honest men too, if you please.


I may, '^is like I will do so; there are a hundred will swear it for a need
too, if I say it.


Such witnesses we need not.


And 'tis hard if my word cannot hang a boisterous Knave.


Enough: if he should desire the Combat of you, 'tis not in the power of all
our Laws to hinder it.


Why, if you do think 'tis fit an old Man and a Counsellour to fight for what
he says, then you may grant it.


Give me a bowl of wine: Melantius, I am now considering how easy 'twere for
any man to trust to poison one of us in such a bowl.


I think it were not hard, Sir, for a Knave.


Such as you are.


Have you thought of this, Calianax?


Yes marry have I.


And what's your resolution?


Ye shall have it soundly.


Yet I wonder much of the strange desperation of these men; he could not escape
that did it.


Were he known, unpossible.


It would be known, Melantius; I should think no man could kill me and sc^pe
clear, but that old Man.


But I! Heaven bless me, I? should I, my Liege?


I do not think thou would, but yet thou might, for thou hast in thy hands
the means to escape, by keeping of the Fort; he has, Melantius, and he has kept
it well.


From Cobwebs, Sir, 'tis clean swept.


I shall be sure of your good word; but I have kept it safe from such as you.


Melantius, to show you my ears are every where, You meant to kill me, and get
the Fort to escape.


You preserve a race of idle people here about you, Eaters, and Talkers, to
defame men's worths; Give me a pardon (for you ought to do it) to kill him that
spake this.


I, that will be th'end of all; then I am fairly paid for all my care and
service.


That old Man that calls me enemy, and of whom I (thought I will never match
my hate so low) have no good thought, would yet I think excuse me, and swear he
thought me wronged in this.


Who I? thou shameless fellow, did thou not speak to me of it thy self?


O, then it came from him.


From me? who should it come from, but from me?


Nay, I believe your malice is enough, but I ha* lost my anger. Sir, I hope you
are well satisfied.


Melantius, I held it great injustice to believe thine enemy, and did not; if
I did, I do not: let that satisfy.


A few fine words have overcome my truth. Ah, you are a Villain.


Why thou wilt let me have the Fort, Dotard; I will disgrace thee thus for
ever: there shall no credit lie upon thy words: think better, and believe it.


My Liege, he's at me now again to do it; speak, deny it if thou can? Example
him whilst he's hot, for he'll cool again, he will forswear it.


This is Lunacy I hope, Melantius?


He has lost himself much: and though he call me Foe, I pity him; for it
becomes both you and me too, to forgive distraction: Pardon him as I do.


I'll not speak for thee, for all thy cunning; if you will be safe, chop off
his head, for there was never known so impudent a Rascal.


Some that love him, get him to bed.


Calianax, the King believes you; come, you shall go home and rest, you have
done well; you'll give it up when I have used you thus a Month I hope.


Now, now, 'tis plain Sir, he does move me still; he says, he knows I will
give him up the Fort, when he has used me thus this Month; I am mad, am I not
still?


Ha, ha, ha!


I shall be mad indeed, if you do thus; why would you trust a sturdy fellow
there, (that has no virtue in him, all's in's sword) before me? do but take his
weapons away from him, and he's an Ass, and I am a very Fool, both with him and
without him, as you use me.


Ha, ha, ha!


'Tis well, Calianax; but if you use this once again, I shall entreat some
other to see your offices be well discharged. Good Calianax sleep soundly, it
will bring thee to thy self.


Sleep soundly! I sleep soundly now, I hope, I could not be thus else! How
dare thou stay alone with me, knowing how thou hast used me?


You cannot blast me with your tongue, and that's the strongest part you have
about you.


I do look for some great punishment for this, for I begin to forget all my
hate, and take it unkindly that mine enemy should use me so extraordinarily
scurvily.


I shall melt too, if you begin to take unkindness; I never meant you hurt.


Thou'lt anger me again; thou wretched rogue, meant me no hurt? disgrace me
with the King, lose all my offices? this is no hurt, is it? I prithee what dost
thou call hurt?


To poison me because they love me not; to call the credit of Men's wives in
question, to murder children betwixt me and land; this is all hurt.


All this thou think is sport, for mine is worse; but use thy will with me,
for betwixt grief and anger I could cry.


Be wise then, and be safe; thou may revenge.


I of the King? I would revenge o'thee.


That you must plot your self.


I am a fine Plotter.


The short is, I will hold thee with the King in this perplexity, till
peevishness, and thy disgrace hath laid thee in the grave. But if thou wilt
deliver up the Fort, I'll take thy trembling body in my arms, and bear thee
over dangers; thou shalt hold thy wonted state.


If I should tell the King, can thou deny it again?


Try and believe.


Nay, then thou can bring any thing about; thou shalt have the Fort.


Why well, here let our hate be buried.


Nay, I do not love thee yet; I cannot well endure to look on thee. And if I
thought it were a courtesy, thou should not have it; but I am disgraced, my
offices are to be ta'n away. And if I did but hold this Fort a day, I do
believe the King would take it from me, and give it thee, things are so
strangely carried; Ne'er thank me for it: but yet the King shall know there was
some such thing in it I told him of, and that I was an honest man.


He'll buy that knowledge very dearly. What news with thee?


This were a night indeed to do it in.


Go, Diphilus, and take from this good man, my worthy friend, the Fort, he'll
give it thee.


Ha'you got that too?


Art thou of the same breed? can thou deny this to the King too?


With a confidence as great as his.


Faith like enough.


Away, and use him kindly.


Touch not me, I hate the whole strain: if thou follow me a great way off, I'll
give thee up the Fort, and hang your selves.


Be gone.


He's finely wrought.


COme in, What is your name, say you, Abel Drugger?


Yes Sir.


Umh. Free of the Grocers?


I, an't please you.


Well, -- Your business, Abel?


This, an't please your worship; I am a young beginner, and am building of a
new Shop, an't please your Worship, just at corner of a street, (here's the
plat on it) and I would know by Art, Sir, of your Worship, which way I should
make my door, by Necromancy, and where my Shelves, and which should be for
Boxes, and which for Pots. I would be glad to thrive, Sir: and I was wished to
your Worship, by a Gentleman, one Captain Face, that says you know men's
Planets, and their good Angels and their bad.


I do, if I do see 'em. --


What! my honest Abel? thou art well met here.


Troth Sir, I was speaking just as your Worship came here, of your Worship: I
pray you speak for me to Master Doctor.


He shall do any thing. Doctor, do you hear? this is my friend, Abel, an honest
fellow; he lets me have good Tobacco, and he does not sophisticate it with
Sack-lees, or Oil, nor washes it in Muscadel, and Grains, nor buries it in
Gravel, under ground, wrapped up in greasy leather, or pissed clouts, but keeps it
in fine Lilie-pots, that opened, smell like Conserve of Roses, or French Beans.
He has his Maple block, his silver tongs, VVinchester pipes, and fire of
Juniper. A neat, spruce-honest fellow, and no Goldsmith.


He is a fortunate fellow, that I am sure on.


Already Sir, Ha you found it? Lo thee Abel.


And in right way toward riches. --


Sir?


This Summer, he will be of the clothing of his Company: and next Spring
called to the Scarlet, spend what he can.


What, and so little beard!


Sir, you must think he may have a receipt to make hair come: But he'll be wise,
preserve his youth, and fine for it: his fortune looks for him another way.


'Slid Doctor, how can thou know this so soon? I am amused at that!


By a rule, Captain, in Metaposcopy, which I do work by, a certain Star in the
forehead, which you see not. Your Chest-nut, or your Olive-colour'd face does
never fail; and your long ear doth promise. I knew't by certain spots too, in
his teeth, and on the nail of his Mercurial finger.


Which finger's that?


This little finger. Look, you were born upon a VVednesday?


Yes indeed, Sir.


The thumb, in Chiromancie, we give Venus, the fore-finger to Jove, the midst
to Saturn, the ring to Sol, the least to Mercury, who was the Lord, Sir, of
this Horoscope; his House of Life being Libra, which foreshew'd he should be a
Merchant, and should trade with balance.


Why this is strange, is't not, honest Nab?


There is a Ship now coming from Ormus, that shall yield him such a commodity
of Drugs. -- This is the West, and this the South?


Yes, Sir.


And those are your two sides?


I, Sir.


Make me your Door then South, your broadside West. And on the East-side of
your Shop, aloft, write Mathlai, Tarmiel, and Baraborat; upon the North part,
Rael, Velel, Thiel: they are the names of those Mercurial Spirits that do
fright Flies from Boxes.


Yes, Sir.


And beneath your threshold, bury me a Loadstone to draw in Gallants that wear
Spurs: the rest they'll seem to follow.


That's a Secret, Nab!


And on your Stall, a Puppet with a Vice, and a Court-fucus to call
Citie-Dames. You shall deal much with Minerals.


Sir, I have, at home, already --


I, I know you have Arsnike, Vitriol, Sal-tartre, Argaile, Alkaly, Cinoper; I
know all. This fellow, Captain, will come, in time, to be a great Distiller,
and give a say, ( I will not say directly, but very fair) at the Philosophers
Stone.


Why how now, Abel? is this true?


Good Captain, what must I give him?


Nay, I'll not counsel thee; thou hear what wealth (he says, Spend what
thou can) you are like to come to.


I would give him a Crown.


A Crown! and toward such a Fortune! Hear, thou shalt rather give him thy Shop.
No gold about thee?


Yes, I have a Portague, I have kept this half year.


Out on thee, Nab! 'Slight, there was such an offer -- Shalt keep't no longer,
I'll gived him for thee. Doctor, Nab prays your Worship to drink this, and he
will appear more grateful, as your skill does raise him in this World.


I would entreat another favour of his Worship.


What is't, Nab?


But to look over, Sir, my Almanac, and cross out my ill days; that I may
neither bargain, nor trust upon them.


That he shall, Nab.


And a direction for his Shelves.


And one thing more, Sir.


What is it, Nab?


A Sign, Sir.


I, a good lucky one, a thriving Sign, Doctor.


I was devising now.


('Slight, Do not say so, he must give you more.) What say you to his
Constellation, Doctor, the Balance?


No, that way is stale, and common. A Townsman born in Taurus, gives the Bull,
or the Bulls head; in Aries, the Ram. A poor device: No, I will have his Name
formed in some mystic Character; whose radii striking the senses of the
Passers-by, shall, by a vertual influence, breed affections that may result
upon the party owns it. As thus, --


Nab, hast no more gold?


Not here, Sir, I protest.


He first shall have A Bell, that's Abel; and one standing by, whose name is
Dee, in a rug Gown; there's D and Rug, that's Drug; and right anenst him, a
Dog snarling Er, there's Drugger, Abel Drugger; that's his Sign. And here's now
Mystery and Hieroglyphic.


Abel, thou art made.


Sir, I do thank his Worship.


Six o'thy legs more will not do it, Nab. He has brought you a pipe of Tobacco,
Doctor.


Yes, Sir.


It seems to be good Tobacco; what is't an ounce?


He'll send you a pound or two, Doctor.


O no!


He will do it. It is the goodest soul! Abel, about it; thou shalt know more
anon: away, be gone.


Keep aloof off, yonder's another Chapman: observe my call.

Where is my drudge? --


Sir.


Take away the Recipient, and rectify the Menstrue from the Phlegma; then pour
it of the Sol, in the Cucurbite, and let 'em macerate together.


Yes Sir. And save the ground?


No, Terra damnata must not have entrance in the work. Who are you?


A faithful Brother, if it please you.


What's that? a Lullianist? a Ripley? filius artis? Can you sublime, and
dulcifie? calcine? Know you the Sapor pontick? Sapor styptick? or what is
homogene, or heterogene?


I understand no heathen language, truly.


Heathen, you Knipper-Doling? is ars sacra, or Chrysopoeia, or Spagyrica, or
the Pamphysick, or Panarchick knowledge, a Heathen language?


Heathen Greek, I take it.


How! Heathen Greek?


All's Heathen but the Hebrew.


Sirrah, my Varlet, Stand you forth, and speak to him like a Philosopher:
Answer in the language: Name the Vexations, and the Martyrizations of Metals in
the Work.


Sir, Putrefaction, Solution, Ablution, Sublimation, Cohobation, Calcination,
Ceration, and Fixation.


This is Heathen Greek to you now? And when comes Vivification?


After Mortification.


What's Cohobation?


'Tis the pouring on your aqua regis, and then drawing him off, to the trine
circle of the seven spears.


What's the proper passion of Metals?


Malleation.


What's your Ultimum supplicium auri?


Antimonium.


This is Heathen Greek to you? And what's your Mercury?


A very fugitive, he will be gone, Sir.


How know you him?


By his Viscositie, his Oleositie, and his Suscitabilitie.


How do you sublime him?


With the Calce of Egg-shels, white Marble, halk.


Your Magisterium, now, what's that?


Shifting, Sir, your elements, dry into cold, cold into moist, moist into hot,
hot into dry.


This is Heathen Greek to you still? Your Lapis Philosophicus?


'Tis a Stone, and not a Stone; a spirit, a soul, and body: which if you do
dissolve, it is dissolved; if you coagulate, it is coagulated; if you make it
to fly, it flies.


Enough: this is Heathen Greek to you? what are you, Sir?


Please you, a servant of the exile Brethren, that deal with VVidows and with
Orphans goods, and make a just account unto the Saints; a Deacon.


O you are sent from Mr. Wholesome your Teacher?


From Tribulation Wholesome, our very zealous Pastor.


Good. I have some Orphans goods to come here.


Of what kind, Sir?


Pewter, and Brass, and Irons, and Kitchinware; Metals that we must use ou^
Medicine on: wherein the Brethren may have a penn'orth for ready money.


Were the Orphans Parents sincere Professors?


Why do you ask?


Because we then are to deal justly, and give (in truth) their utmost value.


'Slid you'd cousin else, and if their Parents were not of the faithful? I
will not trust you, now I think on it, till I have talked with your Pastor. Have
you brought money to buy more Coals?


No surely.


No? how so?


The Brethren bid me say unto you, Sir, Surely they, they will not venture any
more till they may see Projection.


How?


Y'have had for the instruments, as Bricks, and Loom, and Glasses, already,
thirty pound; and for Materials, they say, some ninety more: and they have
heard since, that one at Heidelberg made it of an Egg, and a small paper of
Pin-dust.


What's your name?


My name is Ananias.


Out, the Varlet that cozened the Apostles! Hence, away, fly Mischief. Had
your holy Consistory no name to send me of another sound, then wicked Ananias?
Send your Elders hither to make atonement for you, quickly, and give me
satisfaction, or out goes the fire, and down th'Alembecks, and the Fornace.
Piger Henricus, or what not? Thou wretch, both Senicon and Bufo shall be lost,
tell 'em. All hope of rooting out the Bishops, or th'Antichristian Hierarchy,
shall perish, if they stay threescore minutes. The Aqueitie, Terreitie, and
Sulphureitie, shall run together again, and all be anull'd, thou wicked
Ananias.

This will fetch 'em, and make 'em haste toward their gulling more.

A man must deal like a rough Nurse, and fright those that are froward, to an
appetite.


COme, come, the Sports are coming on us;
Seat, seat your selves, Gentlemen.

Love is little, and therefore I present him:
Love is a fire, therefore you may lament him.

Alas poor Love, who are they that can quench him?


Love shoots, therefore I bear his Bow about:
And Love is blind, therefore my eyes are ou^.

I never heard Love give reason for what he did, before.


Let such as can see, see such as cannot: behold,
Our Goddesses all three strive for the Ball of Gold;
And here fair Paris comes, the hopeful youth of Troy,
Queen Hecubs darling-son, King Priams only joy.

Is this Paris? I should have taken him for Hector rather.


Paris, at this time pray you hold your prating.


Paris can be angry, I see.


At this time he comes as a Judge.


Mercy on all that looks upon him, say I.


The thundering Seas whose watery fires
Washes the Whiting Mops.
The gentle Whale, whose feet so fell,
Flies over the Mountain tops.
No roars so fierce, no throats so deep,
No howls can bring such fears
As Paris can, if Garden from
He calls his Dogs and Bears.

I, those they were that I feared all this while.


Yes, Jack-an-Apes.


I thank you, Sir Paris.


You may hold your peace, and stand farther out
of the way then: the lines will fall where they light.
Yes, Jack-an-Apes, he hath to sports,
And faces make like Mirth;
Whilst bellowing Bulls, the horned Beasts
Do toss from Ground to Earth.
Blood Bear there is, as Cupid blind.

That Bear would be whipped for loosing of his eyes.


Be whipped man may see,
But we present no such content, but Nymphs such as they be.

Go Cupid blind, conduct the dumb,
For Ladies must not speak here;
Let Shepherds sing with dancing feet,
And cords of Music break here.
Now Ladies fight, with heels so light,
By lot your luck must fall,
Where Paris please, to do you ease,
And give the golden Ball.

The Dance is ended; now to Judgment, Paris.


Here, Iuno, here: but stay, I do espy
A pretty glance coming from Pallas eye:
Here, Pallas, here; yet stay again, methinks
I see the eye of Love, by Venus winks.
Oh close them both! Shut in those golden Eyne,
And I will kiss those sweet blind cheeks of thine.
Iuno is angry; yes, and Pallas frowns:
Would Paris now were gone from Ida's Downs.
They both are fair; but Venus has the Mole,
The fairest hair and sweetest dimple hole.
To her, or her, or her, or her, or neither;
Can one man please three Ladies altogether?
No, take it, Venus, toss it at thy pleasure,
Thou art the Lovers friend, beyond his measure.

Paris has done what Man can do, pleased me, who can do more?


Stay, here's another person.


Come, lovely Venus, leave this lower Orb,
And mount with Mars up to his glorious sphere.

How now! what's he?


I'm ignorant what to do, Sir.


Thy silver yoke of Doves are in the Team,
And thou shalt fly thorough Apollo's beam:
I'll see thee seated in thy golden Throne,
And hold with Mars a sweet Conjunction.

Ha! what fellow's this? he has carried away my sister Venus: he never
rehearsed his part with me before.


What follows now, Prince Paris?


Hue and cry: I think Sir, this is Venus voice, my own and only sister.


What, is there some Tragick-Act behind?


No, no, altogether Comical; Mars and Venus are in the old Conjunction, it
seems.


'Tis very improper then; for Venus never cries out when she Conjoyns with
Mars.


That's true indeed, they are out of their parts sure. It may be 'tis the
Book-holders fault: I'll go see.


How like you our Country-Revels, Gentlemen?


Oh, they commend themselves, Sir.


Methinks now Iuno and Minerva should take revenge on Paris: it cannot end
without it.


It may follow; let's not premeditate the history.


Oh, oh, oh, oh!


So, here's a Passion towards.


Help, help, if you be Gentlemen; my sister, my Venus is stolen away.


The Story changes from our expectation.


Help, my father the Miller will hang me else: God Mars is a bawdy Villain; he
said she should ride upon Doves: she's horsed, she's horsed whether she will or
no.


Sure I think he's serious.


She's horsed upon a double Gelding, and a Stone-horse in the breech of her:
the poor Wench cries help, and I cry help, and none of you will help.


Speak, is it the Show, or dost thou bawl?


A pox on the Ball; my sister bawls, and I bawl. Either bridle a horse and
follow me, or give me a halter to hang my self: I cannot run so fast as a hog.


I'll fill the Country with pursuit, but I will find the Thief. My house thus
abused?


'Tis my house that's abused, the sister of my flesh and blood: oh, oh, oh!


By all means discharge your follower.


If we can gethim off. Sirrah, thou must needs run back.


But I must not, unless you send a Bier, or a Licter at my back. I do not use
to run from my friends.


Well, Go will serve turn: I have forgot.


What, Sir?


See if I can think on it now.


I know what 'tis now.


A Pistolet of that.


Done; you have forgot a device to send me away. You are going a smocking
perhaps.


His own, due, due i'faith Antonio: the Pistolet's his own.


I confess it, there 'tis.

Now if you could afford out of it a reasonable excuse to my Uncle.


Yes, I can: but an excuse will not serve your turn: it must be a lie, a full
lie, a downright lie, 'twill do no good else: if you'll go to the price of
that.


Is a lie dearer then an excuse?


Oh, treble: this is the price of an Excuse; but a Lie is two more. Look how
many foils goes to a fair fall, so many Excuses go to a full Lie; and less
cannot serve your turn, let any Taylor in the Town make it.


'Tis but reasonable; give him his price: let it be large enough now.


I'll warrant you cover him all over.


I would have proof of one now.


What? scale my Invention beforehand? you shall pardon me for that: Well,
I'll commend you to your Uncle, and tell him you'll be at home at Supper with
him.


By no means, I cannot come to night (man.)


I know that too; you do not know a lie when you see it: remember it must
stretch for all night.


I shall want stuff; I doubt 'twill come to the other Pistolet.


Well, lay out, you shall be no loser, Sir.


It must be faced; you know there will be a yard of Dissimulation at least,
(City-measure) and cut upon an untroth or two, lined with fables, that must
needs be, cold weather coming; if it had a gallon of hypocrisy, 'twould do
well; and hooked together with a couple of Conceits, that's necessity: Well,
I'll bring in my Bill: I'll warrant you as fair a Lie, by that time I have done
with it, as any Gentleman in the Town can swear too, if he would betray his Lord
and Master.


So, so, this necessary trouble's over.


I would you had bought an excuse of him before he went: you'll want one for
your Lady.


Oh Gentlemen, look to your selves, ye are men of another world else; your
enemies are upon you: the old house of the Bellides will fall upon your heads:
Seignior Lisauro!


Lisauro?


And Don what call you him? he's a Gentleman: yet he has but a yeomans name,
Don Tarse, Tarso, and a dozen at their heels.


Lisauro, Tarso, nor a dozen more, shall fright me from my ground, nor shun my
path, let 'em come on in their ablest fury.


'Tis worthily resolved: I'll stand by you, Sir; this way I am thy true friend.


I'll be gone, Sir, that one may live to tell what's become of you. -- Put up,
put up; will you never learn to know a Lie from an Aesops Fable? there's a
taste for you now.


'Tis very well, adieu Trojan.


My mind's unquiet; while Antonio
My Nephew is abroad, my heart is not at home,
Only my fears stay with me; bad Company;
But I cannot shift 'em off. This hatred
Betwixt the house o'th Bellides and Us,
Is not fair War: 'tis civil, but uncivil.
It has lasted too many Sun-sets.
Man should not lose so many days of Peace,
To satisfy the Anger of one minute.
I could repent it heartily. I sent
The Knave to attend my Antonio too,
Yet he returns no comfort to me neither.

No, I must not.


Hah! he's come.


I must not; '^will break his heart to hear it.


How! he will not tell me for breaking of my heart: 'tis half split already, I
must obscure and hear it.


I have spied him: Now to knock down a Don with a Lie, a silly harmless Lie;
'twill be valiantly done, and nobly perhaps.


I cannot hear him now.


Oh the bloody days that we live in! the envious, malicious, deadly days that
we draw breath in!


Now I hear too loud.


The children that ever shall be born, may rue it; for men that are slain now,
might have lived to have got children, that might have cursed their fathers.


Oh my posterity is ruined!


Oh sweet Antonio!


Oh dear Antonio!


Yet it was nobly done on both parts, when he and Lisauro met.


Oh, Death has parted'em.


Welcome my mortal Foe (says one,) welcome my deadly Enemy (says the
other): off go their doublets, they in their shirts, and their swords, stark
naked; here lies Antonio, here lies Lisauro: he comes upon him with an
Embroccado, that he puts by with a puncta reversa: Lisauro recoils me two paces
and some six inches back, takes his Career, and then, oh!


Oh!


Runs Antonio quite thorough.


Oh Villain!


Quite thorough, between the arm and the body; so he had no hurt at that bout.


Goodness be praised.


But then at th'next Encounter, he fetches me up Lisauro* Lisauro makes out a
Long at him, which he thinking to be a Passada, Antonio's foot slipping: down,
oh, down.


Oh now thou art lost.


Oh but the quality of the thing: both Gentlemen, both Spanish Christians, yet
one man to shed --


Say his Enemies blood.


His hair may come by divers Casualties, though he never go into the Field with
his Foe: but a man to lose nine ounces and two drams of blood at one wound,
thirteen and a scruple at another, and to live till he die in cold blood: yet
the Surgeon (that cured him) said, if Pia-mater had not been perished, he
had been a lives man to this day.


There he concludes he is gone.


But all this is nothing: now I come to the point.


I, the point, that's deadly: the ancient blow over the buckler ne'er went half
so deep.


Yet Pity bids me keep in my Charity: for me to pull an old Mans ears from his
head with telling of a Tale: Oh foul Tale! Furthermore, there is the charge of
Burial; every one will cry blacks, blacks, that had but the least finger in his
blood, though ten degrees removed when 'twas done. Moreover, the Surgeon
(that made an end of him) will be paid: Sugar-plums, and Sweet-breads; yet it
may be the Man may recover again, and die in his bed.


What motley stuff is this? Sirrah, speak truth what hath befallen my dear
Antonio; what thou keep'it back from truth, thou shalt speak in pain: do not
look to find a Limb in his right place, a Bone unbroke, nor so much flesh
unbroil'd of all that Mountain, as a VVorm might sup on; dispatch, or be
dispatch'd.


Alas Sir, I know nothing, but that Antonio is a man of Gods making to this
hour; 'tis not two since I left him so.


When did thou leave him?


In the same clothes he had on when he went from you.


Does he live?


I saw him drink.


Is he wounded?


He may have a cut in the leg by this time: for Don Martin and he were at whole
slashes.


Met he not with Lysauro?


I do not know her.


Her? Lysauro is a man as he is.


I saw ne'er a man like him.


Did not thou discourse a fight betwixt Antonio and Lysauro?


I, to my self: I hope a man may give himself the Lie, if it please him?


Did thou lie then?


As sure as you live now.


I live the happier by it: when will he return?


That he sent me to tell you, within these ten days, at farthest.


Ten days? he was not wont to be absent two.


Nor I think he will not.

He said he would be at home to morrow; but I love to speak within my compass.


You shall speak within mine, Sir, now. Within there: take this fellow into
custody:

keep him safe, I charge you.


Safe! do you hear? take notice what plight you find me in: if there want but
a Collop, or a Steak o'me, look to it.


If my Nephew return not in his health to morrow, thou go to the Rack.


Let me go to th'Manger first;
I had rather eat Oats then Hay.

So-hoh, Miller, Miller,

Look out, Miller: Is there ne'er a Miller amongst you here, Gentlemen?


Yes, here is a Miller amongst Gentlemen, a Gentleman-Miller.


I should not be far off then; there went but a pair of Shears and a Bodkin
between us. Will you to work, Miller? here's a Maid has a Sack full of News for
you: Shall your Stones walk? will you grind, Miller?


This your son, Franio?


My ungratious, my disobedient, my unnatural, my Rebel-son, (my Lord.)


Fie, your hopper runs over, Miller.


This Villain (of my own flesh and blood) was accessory to the stealing of my
daughter.


Oh Mountain!

Shalt thou call a Mole-hill a scab upon the face of the earth? though a Man be
a Thief, shall a Miller call him so? Oh egregious!


Remember, sirrah, who you speak before.


I speak before a Miller, a Thief in grain; for he steals Corn. He that steals
a Wench, is a true Man, to him.


Can you prove that?


I'll prove it strongly.

He that steals Corn, steals the Bread of the Commonwealth: he that steals a
Wench, steals but the flesh.


And how is their Bread-stealing more criminal then the flesh?


He that steals bread, steals that which is lawful every day: he that steals
flesh, steals nothing from the fasting day: Ergo, to steal the bread is the
arranter Thief.


This is to some purpose.


Again, he that steals flesh, steals for his own belly full: he that steals
bread, robs the Guts of others: Ergo, the arranter Thief the Bread-stealer.
Again, he that steals flesh, steals once and gives over; yes, and often pays
for it; the other steals every day without satisfaction. To conclude,
Bread-stealing is the more Capital Crime: for what he steals, he puts it in at
the head; he that steals flesh (as the Dutch Author says) puts it in at the
foot (the lower Member.) Will you go as you are now, Miller?


I can no longer own
What is not mine with a free Conscience.
My Liege, your pardon.

For what? who knows this woman?


I, best (my Lord.)

I have been acquainted with her these forty Summers, and as many Winters, were
it Spring again; she's like the Gout, I --


Oh, your wife.


'Tis oh my wife indeed (my Lord) a painful stitch to my side; would it were
picked out.


Well, Sir, your silence.


Will you be older and older every day then other? the longer you live, the
older still? Must his Majesty command your silence, ere you'll hold your
tongue?


Your reprehension runs into the same fault: Pray Sir, will you be silent.


I have told him this before now (my Liege) but Age will have his course, and
his weaknesses.


Good Sir, your forbearance.


And his frailties, and his follies (as I may say) that cannot hold his tongue
ere he be bidden.


Why sirrah, ha?


But I believe your Majesty will not be long troubled with him: I hope that
woman has something to confess, will hang 'em both.


Sirrah, you'll pull your Destiny upon you, If you cease not the sooner.


Nay, I have done; yet it grieves me that I should call that man father, that
should be so shameless, that being commanded to hold his tongue --


To th'Porters Lodge with him.


I thank your Grace, I have a friend there.


It hardly will get passage, it is a sorrow of that greatness grown, 'less it
dissolve in tears, and come by parcels.


I'll help you, Sir, in the delivery, and bring you forth a joy: you lost a
daughter.


'Twas that recounted thought brought forth these sorrows.


She's found again; Know you this Mantle, Sir?


Hah!


This did enwrap your child, now the Counts wife, c.


Oh thou hast ta'n so many years from me, and made me young as was her
birth-day to me.


You knew this before.


Oh, oh; Item for you Miller.


I did, my Liege, I must confess I did; We poor ones love, and would have
comfort, Sir, as well as great.


I beseech you, (my Liege) let this Woman be a little farther examined; let the
words of her Conscience be searched. I would know how she came by me; I am a
lost child, if I be theirs: though I have been brought up in a Mill, yet I had
ever a mind (methought) to be a greater man.


Thou art mine own flesh and blood, born of mine own body.


'Tis very unlikely that such a body should bear me; there's no trust in these
Millers. Woman, tell the truth, my father shall forgive thee, whatsoever he
was; were he Knight, Esquire, or Captain; less he could not be.


Thou art mine own child, Boy.


And was the Miller my father?


Would thou make thy mother a whore, Knave?


I, if she make me a Bastard. The Rack must make her confess, I shall never
come to know who I am else. I have a worshipful mind in me sure: methinks I do
scorn poor folks.


You both shall be rewarded bountifully. We'll be a kin too, Brother and Sister
shall be changed with us ever.


Thank you (Uncle) my Sister is my Cousin yet at the last cast: farewell
Sister-foster. If I had known the Civil Law would have allowed it, thou had
had another manner of husband then thou hast: but much good do thee; I'll dance
at thy Wedding, kiss the Bride, and so.


Why how now, Sirrah?


'Tis lawful now, she's none of my sister.

It was a Miller and a Lord
That had a Scabbard and a Sword,
He put it up in the Country word,
The Miller and his Daughter.
She has a face, and she can sing,
She has a grace, and she can spring;
She has a place, with another thing,
Tradoodle.
I would I were acquainted with your Taylor (noble Brother.)


You may, there he is.


If you have any work for me, I can fit you. Sir, I fitted the Lady.


My sister (Taylor)? What fits her, will hardly fit me: you have a true Yard
(Taylor)?


Ne'er a whit too long, I warrant you.


Then (Taylor) march with me away;
I scorn these Robes, I must be gay,
My Noble Brother he shall pay
Tom Taylor.

A Pleurisie, I see it.


I rather hold for tremor cordis.


Do you mark the Foeces?


'Tis a most pestilent contagious Fever, a Surfeit, a plaguy Surfeit: he must
bleed.


By no means.


I say, bleed.


I say 'tis dangerous, the person being spent so much beforehand, and nature
drawn so low: Clysters, cool Clysters.


Now, with your favour, I should think a Vomit; for take away the Cause, the
Effect must follow: the stomack's foul and fur'd, the pot's inflamed yet.


Will it please you draw near? the sick Gentleman grows worse and worse still.


We will attend him.


He shall do well, my friend.


My Masters love, Sir.


There's no doubt in him, none at all, never fear him.


Clap on the Cataplasm.


Good Gentlemen, good learned Gentlemen.


And see those broths there ready within this hour: pray keep your arms in; the
air is raw, and ministers much evil.


Pray leave me, I beseech you leave me, Gentlemen, I have no other sickness but
your presence; convey your Cataplasms to those that need 'em, your Vomits and
your Clysters.


Pray be ruled, Sir.


Bring in the Lattice Cap; you must be shaved, Sir, and then how suddenly we'll
make you sleep!


Till Dooms-day: What unnecessary nothings are these about a wounded mind?


How do ye?


What questions they propound too! How do you, Sir? I am glad to see you well.


A great distemper, it grows hotter still.


Open your mouth, I pray, Sir.


Can you tell me how old I am then? there's my hand, pray show me how many
broken shins within this two year. Who would be thus in fetters? Good Master
Doctor, and you dear Doctor, and the third sweet Doctor, and as precious Master
Apothecary, I do pray you to give me leave to live a little longer: ye stand
before me like my blacks.


How dost thou Frank? bear up, boy; what, shrink in the sinews for a little
sickness?


Thou art a mad Companion, never staid, Tom?


Let Rogues be staid, that have no habitation, a Gentleman may wander: sit thee
down, Frank, and see what I have brought thee: Come, discover, open the Scene,
and let the work appear: a friend at need, you Rogue, is worth a Million.


What hast thou there, a Julip?


He must not touch it, 'tis present death.


Ye are an *Ass, a Twir-pipe, a Jeffery-John-bopeep: thou minister? thou mend a
left-handed pack-saddle; out Puppy. My friend Frank, but a very foolish fellow:
dost thou see that bottle? view it well.


I do, Tom.


There be as many lives in it as a Cat carries, 'tis everlasting liquor.


What?


Old Sack, boy, old reverend Sack.


I see no harm, Tom, drink with moderation.


Drink't with Sugar, which I have ready here; and here's a glass, boy, fill it:
hang up your Julips, and your Portugal-possets, your Barley-broths, and Sorrel
sops; they are mangy, and breed the Scratches only: give me Sack: have at
thee.


Do: I'll pledge thee.


Take it off thrice, and then cry, Heigh! like a Huntsman, with a clear heart,
and no more fits I'll warrant thee; the only Cordial, Frank.


Are the things ready?


Long since, Sir.


Bring out the oils then.


Now or never, Gentlemen, do me a kindness, and deliver me.


From whom, boy?


From those things that talk there, Physicians, Tom, Physicians,
Scouring-sticks; they mean to read upon me.


And be thou confident we will deliver thee: for look ye, Doctors, say the
Devil were sick now, his horns sawed off, and his head bound with a biggin,
sick of a Calenture, taken by a surfeit of stinking souls, at his Nephews and S.
Dunstans, what would you minister upon the sudden? your Judgement, short and
sound.


A fools head.


No Sir, it must be a Physicians, for three causes; the first, because it is a
bald-head likely, which will down easily without apple-pap.


A main cause.


So it is, and well considered. The second, for 'tis filled with broken Greek,
Sir, which so tumbles in his stomach, Doctor, and works upon the Crudities,
conceive me, the fears and the fiddle-strings within it, that those damned
souls must disembogue again.


Or meeting with the Stygian humour.


Right, Sir.


Forced with a Cataplasm of Crackers.


Ever.


Scour all before him like a Sca^inger.


Satisfecisti Domine. My last cause, my last is, and not least, most learned
Doctors, because in most Physicians heads (I mean those that are most
excellent, and old withal, and angry, though a Patient say his prayers, and
Paracelsians that do trade with poisons, we have it by tradition of great
Writers) there is a kind of Toadstone bred, whose virtue the Doctor, being
dried.


We are abused, Sirs.


I take it so, or shall be: for say, the Belly-ach caused by an inundation of
Pease-porridge, are we therefore to open the Port-vein, or the Port-Esquiline?


A learned question: or grant the Diaphragma by a rupture, the Sign being then
in the head of Capricorn --


Meet with the passion Hypercondriaca, and so cause a Carnositie in the
Kidneys, must not the brains being buttered with this humour? answer me that.


Most excellently argued.


The next fit you will have, my most fine Scholer, Bedlam shall find a salve
for. Fare you well, Sir: we came to do you good, but these young Doctors, it
seems, have boar'd our Noses.


Drink hard, Gentlemen, and get unwholesome Drabs; 'tis ten to one then we shall
hear farther from ye, your Note altered.


And wilt thou be gone, says one.


And wilt thou be gone, says the other.


Then take, take the odd Crown,
To mend thy old Gown,

And we'll be gone all together.


My learned Tom, gramercy.


Who for your Pleasure hath produced his Store;
And as you like, he'll furnish you with more.

