So ill success have Poets now adays,
That shortly none will dare to write you Plays.
Dramatic Wit is ominous of late;
The little Flash does still prognosticate
A Paper-war, or a more scurvy Fate.
And (like a graceless Child) Heroic Rattle
Is realliz'd, and turned the Poets Battle.
T'avoid such fears, we shall present to day
An innocent and unprovoking Play:
And that's his comfort, th'Author bid me say.
'Tis plain, well meant; hardly a Song or Dance,
Scene, nor Machine, its Credit to advance.
Yo've nothing here of such prodigious strains,
To swell your Envy greater than his Pains.
But being of English growth, we've cause to fear,
Against home-bred Wit their censure too severe,
Who still usurp a Power to disapprove
What the sick Fancy can't digest, or Love.
Persist -- But Lechers thus, when they decline,
Borrow both Heat and Love from sparkling Wine.
And though poor Chloris thinks their Love's her Prize,
'Tis Burgundy becomes her Sacrifice.
While healthful Lovers vigorously improve
With Native Food and heat th'Entrigues of Love.

HOnest Ned Goodfeild, i'faith I'm as glad to see thee as any man living. Once
more thou art welcome to London. But, what good Star directed thee to my
Chamber?


Marry, that did the good Porter: he showed me the Stair-case; and when I
mounted, the first I happened to meet was your Boy. Gad, Jack, thou livest here
a delicate life; these are better Lodgings than thou had at the College.


Aye, faith, and somewhat better Company. But what a Devil makes thee tarry
thus long at Cambridge? Sure thou art graduated up to the Ears by this time.
Dost thou intend for the Pulpit, or by the way of Physic, wilt thou cure thy
friends of all Diseases? --


No more of that, good Jack; I have a Mother alive, who till I come to age (of
which I lack not many weeks) is also my Guardian. She is a good Soul (as Sancho
said of his Wife) but of a downright Country-principle. She hates your City
here, and all that belongs to it. Look ye, Jack; when you left the College, I
would have follow'd you with all my heart, but my Mother very gravely, and like
a Mother, writ me her Commands, and I think, sent one of her servants to
acquaint me, that I must still continue my Studies where I was: for to come
into the Country, and enter into Commission of the Peace, I was yet too young;
and to go to the Inns a Court she would never think on it, for that was the
ready way to be undone, London being the very sink of all Debauchery.


Hold there: Let me view thee well. Dost thou come from the University, and
charge us with Debauchery? O tempora! O mores! Belike then you made this Voyage
without your Mothers knowledge?


Aye.


Why there's a dutiful Son. Art not thou ashamed, Ned?


For what? for coming to Town without her leave?


No, Ned, for blaming the poor Town, for a lewd ill-manner'd Town, or as your
Mother thinks it, a sink of Perdition. I tell thee, Ned, thou art quite beside
the Cushion. Mind what I say: Your University-men no sooner come hither, but
they forget their dear Art of Drinking. And for a Clap, or so, many are so far
from getting it here, that they bring it with em. -- Boy, see who knocks.


Sir, here's Mr. Docket's Clerk has a Message from his Master, he says, and
desires you would please to dispatch him.


Dispatch him? why how long has he waited?


Not at all, Sir; but you know he's so full of his Lawterms, he can't speak
without 'em.


Bid him enter.


Mr. Dashwel, you may enter.


Sir, I humbly thank ye. May it please you, Mr. Truman, my Master desires to
speak with you some time this afternoon.


How does he do?


Very well, and in good practice, I thank God, Sir.


I'm glad on it. Tell your Master, Sir, I will not fail to wait on him about
three a clock.


By no means, Sir, for then he'll be very busy in examining a special Plea in
Trover, which will hold him at least half an hour.


Why then I'll be with him at five.


That can't be, Sir, for then he'll be gone out to the Walks to meet his
Brother Nuper, and sign Judgment betwixt Wiseman and Spendal: 'Tis a 2000 l.
Action, and cannot be put off.


No? What a Devil -- why then tell him I'll not fail to come as soon as I've
dined, 'twixt one and two a clock.


Aye, Sir, I think that will do very well. Fare you well, Sir.


Godb'w'ye Mr. Dashwel.


Oh Lord! Sir, I had almost forgot; you must not come then, for then there will
be with him a certain Country-Lady, one Madam Goodfeild, who comes about
business; and you must not come then by any means.


Madam Goodfeild, say you friend?


Yes, Sir, of Darbyshire.


Do you know her business?


To that, Sir, I answer Ignoramus: I can say little --


To the purpose, I'm sure. --


Her Servant, one Mr. Trupenny, was with my Master this morning, to desire an
Imparlance after Dinner, and then she'll open her Case. --


Mr. Dashwel, when shall I come to your Master? be brief.


Even when you please, Sir.


Well then, I'll come a little before three, e're he goes upon his Plea; and
that will be a good time.


Aye, Sir, a very good time: Your Servant Sir, your Servant Gentlemen.


My Mother in Town! this amazes me.


Suspend thy wonder a little, Ned; I'll know all if possible, when I go to
Dockets.


In the mean time, what a Devil is this Docket, and this formal Coxcomb his
man, that comes with such a damned Message?


'Tis worth your enquiry indeed, for they are two as notable Creatures as e're
were showed at Bartholomew-Fair. The man you've seen already, and should you
see him a year together, you would see neither more nor less in him; yet people
of his Tribe say he's a good Clerk (as they phrase it.) He's one that manages
his Masters Practice so assiduously, that he can do nothing else -- But a pox
on him, what do I spend so many words of such an Owl?


Then for the Master.


Aye, the Master. There's a rare piece of flesh for ye -- never was Master and
Man so proportioned to one another. You have heard part of the man's Character
already; and, If the man such dullness have -- you know the old Rime in the
Arcadia. To be brief, (for I hate to discourse of such unpleasant subjects) He
is a pure downright Attorney, with as little mixture of Gentleman or Scholar as
possible can be imagined to one who lives in London, the Staple of refined
converse. To this I must add, he is Old and Rich.


In the name of Wonder, how came you acquainted with such things as these? Is
this the refined Converse, you talk of?


Oh, Ned! thereby hangs a tale. You must know then, in an evil hour, I owe him
6000 l. which my Father heretofore borrowed, partly to marry a Daughter, and
partly on other occasions: For this Debt he mortgaged five hundred a year,
which Mortgage has been now forfeited about four year, and he in the Devils
name, has entered. Since my Father's death, Ned, I have been very sensible of
this loss, it being (betwixt you and I) the best half of my Estate. In fine, I
have been several times with him to take in this Mortgage, and get him to
release the Estate. I have offered him, to that end, to pay down 3000 l. with
the Interest due, and a Judgment from my self and two substantial Citizens, for
the other three.


And so he replies that you offer him to his loss, and that he has eleven
Points of the Law against ye; does he not?


Much to that purpose; but in his Gibberish, he tells me, Null tort null
disseisin, I must not complain of wrong, he has but what the Law gives him, and
Executio Iuris non habet Injuriam: And this is all I could ever get from him,
till yesterday, and then we were in somewhat more complaisant terms. He sends
for me now, I am confident, about this business.


Well, is this all you can tell me of him?


No.


Proceed.


He has a pretty Niece, that I must bring you acquainted with.


Me! Gad Jack, you have made such a fine Character of him, I have no ambition
to know any of the Breed.


You mistake me, Ned Goodfeild; she is no ways a kin to the dis-ingenuity of
her Uncle. Believe me, Friend, she is both Young, Pretty, of a good Humour, and
besides a Fortune.


And with all these good Qualities, why do not you strike her up, and by that
means pay off your Mortgage?


Not so fast: The Affair is less feazable to me than any man, for several
reasons that I know. Her Father dying, left this his only Daughter, and 6000
l. to the management of his Wives Brother, this Docket, who he appointed her
Guardian, with this Proviso in his Will, that if she married without her said
Guardian's consent, then to forfeit the said sum intended for her Portion, and
that her Uncle might dispose of it as he thought fit. Her Uncle, a covetous
Jew, has swallowed all this Estate already in imagination, intending never to
marry her with his consent: To that end, confines her (while with him in
London) constantly to her Chamber, never suffering her to see the open air,
unless once or twice a fortnight in the Temple or Lincolns-Inn-Gardens; and
that too, with himself or some such trusty Governor.


These are Impediments, I confess Jack, especially to a Debtor.


This is not all. The damned dull course of life her Uncle has imposed upon
her, has rendered both her discourse and behaviour very reserved, or to say
true, a little heavy; which suits not at all with my fancy; for I must have my
Mistress, Ned, full of Air and Gaiety to the utmost extent.


Faith, then I've a Sister will fit thee to a hair.


Where is she, Ned?


Ah Pox, she's in Darby-shire.


That's a great way off. But how do you know she's not come up with your Mother?


Oh, it can never enter into my thoughts: She'll sooner send her to the Nunnery
at Ghent, than bring her hither. She believes this Town spoils all young men
that come to it; but for women, she's confident the very air of London meets
'em, and debauches 'em at Highate. Hang me if I can comprehend what a Devil
brings my Mother her self up: it must be some extraordinary occasion. She has
not made such a Voyage, to my knowledge, this twenty years.


Well, we shall know all when I have been at Dockets. In the mean time, Ned,
thou shalt dine with me: I'll acquaint thee with the humour of the
Eating-houses. Boy, give me my Sword, and follow me.


NOw, Frank, that we are arrived at London, and have luckily taken Lodgings
near my Mother, our first care must be, to conceal our Disguise; to that end,
be sure you never speak to me otherwise than by the name of Sir: 'ware
tripping.


Leave that to me, Sir; I was the first that thought of this Adventure, and if
I can't manage it, may I never live to be marri'd, and that's no small Curse.
I'll be so far from betraying the secret in public, that even in private, when
we are alone, you shall pass with me for what you seem.


My next endeavours must be, how to suit my own behaviour to what I intend, a
Town-Gallant. In this, Frank, you must instruct me, for you have known the
Town before you came to my service.


True. First then, have you seen any of our new Plays?


Yes, I have read 'em all as they came out in Print.


Good: that will be a great help. For look ye, Sir, just as some raw Poets
borrow their Scenes from the Fop-company they frequent, in the same manner,
many raw Gallants square their behaviour to their Fop-scenes. What else makes
these sort of Phrases so common, Dear heart -- You understand me -- Let me die
-- And all that --


For my own part, I don't know whether people in London talk thus or no; but if
you'd have me discourse out of Plays, let me alone.


Besides this, you must be sure to be very confident, or if you please,
impudent in all your actions: That's the prime Rule of Converse.


Gad take me, I cannot promise very much in that particular, but I'll
endeavour.


Gad take me! Oh, fie, fie, I'm ashamed to hear ye; why that's an Oath for a
Country-Schoolmaster: You must learn to swear more like a Gentleman, or you'll
spoil a Gallant.


Why prithee, how swears a Gentleman? does not a Cobbler swear as well?


No, Sir, a Cobbler swears at the second hand. To swear like a Gentleman, is to
swear in a new Phrase, and with a full mouth. I know a Lady near the place
where I was born, that never encouraged her Children with Apples or
Sugar-plums, but when they had invented some handsome new Oath, as, By my
Mothers Maidenhead, or, By my Fathers dapple Mare; or rather than none at all,
a Rapper would content her, so that it came in, in a right place, and had a
good Emphasis. I have seen her little Imps of four or five years old swear as
heartily for a Breakfast, as e're I heard our Chaplain pray.


But may not a man hope for an indifferent good Behaviour without such blunt
downright Profaneness?


If you converse only with Ladies, indeed, why you may do pretty well if you
have often, Gad Madam, and, As I hope to live Madam, and the like. But e'faith
Sir, if you have to do with a Coach-man or a Mechanic, you must be at it with,
Damn me ye Son of a Tinker, or you'll do no good.


Why Son of a Tinker?


Oh Sir, that's a new Phrase, and much more significant, than Son of a Whore:
Alas, that's grown so common, as 'tis become a term of indearment, only to be
used to Friends and Familiars; as what's more usual, than Dear Son of a Whore,
how I love thee! No body's ashamed of Son of a Whore, but a Son of a Tinker is
not company for a Footboy. -- Then young Gentleman, can you Curse well?


Faith, Frank, I doubt, not.


Why there's it; yet you may perhaps when you're moved. But above all, have a
care when any one offends you, not to cry A Pox take him, or The Devil take
him, for these are (as I said before) Terms of Friendship. Is there any thing
more ready, than A Pox take thee Jack, where hast thou been all this while? and
for the other business, it is so innocent, we use it of our selves; as, The
Devil take me, Sir, that's a good Jest.


'Tis very true.


Therefore I think a more terrible way of Execration would be to say of your
Enemy, May he never see his Mistriss's Eyes again; or May his Taylor never
trust him: But this, Sir, I leave to your Discretion.


These are general Rules fit for all Companies and places. Now for my
particular daily Exercise.


That, Sir, must be divided betwixt Drinking --


I'm nought at that Weapon --


Not so good as your Mother, I confess; -- but I say you must spend the day in
Drinking, Gaming, and Wenching: but in this last affair, you must not enter too
far, for a reason that I know.


If I do, the Devil's in me. But prithee Frank, how must I spend the morning,
which some call the sober part of the day?


Why there's your mistake: The morning is part of the night. A true Gallant
should never wake 'till eleven, nor be dressed 'till twelve at soonest.


Then what's to be done in the night?


For the night, Sir, you must be sure never to go home 'till towards one; then
in your way as you go, you must take occasion to beat two or three Watchmen,
and break all the Windows that dare oppose ye.


This is something harsh, methinks, for a Learner: then to break windows shows
too much like Confederacy with the Glasiers: and for a Gentleman to correspond
with Mechanics, is, I fancy, very odious.


No matter what you fancy. There is, I confess, a milder way of
Night-adventures; and that is, to pass the Watch, give 'em a shilling, abuse
the Constable in clean Language, for which he'll thank ye: and instead of
breaking windows, to serenade your Mistress. --


No more. I'll serenade my Mother, this very night. Let it be your care to
provide Music; and for a Song or so, you can perform it as well as any
Shepherdess in London.


Leave that to me, Sir: In the mean time look ye who comes yonder, to exercise
your Courtship. 'Foregad, Mrs. Loveal, my old Lady's Woman, the easiest Quarry
in the world to enter a young beginner. Go pick her up, and when you've tired
that humour pretty well, I'll cross the way and meet you full in the mouth, and
so give you occasion to drop her.


Sweet Lady, your humble Servant.


O Lord, Sir, I'm in great haste.


Nay, if you're in haste, I can be as hasty as you, and keep pace with ye, I
warrant ye. I cannot in Conscience see such a Delicate, Little, Plump, Pretty,
Young thing, and of such a Ravishing Air, walk the streets alone, as if
disconsolate and forsaken of all mankind: I'faith, Madam, you must not
therefore refuse me both the Honour and Satisfaction to wait on ye.


Oh, Sir, excuse me for that: I am but a Servant my self, and have been but now
at the New Exchange to buy my Ladies things, who is new come to Town. I know,
Sir, a Gentleman of your Quality cannot abase your self so much, to love such a
one as I am.


Love, my Dear? never talk of that; for I must tell thee, my friend, and so
forth, (as my Cousin Wildbloud has it) I am an exceeding Honourer of course
Linen; 'tis as proper sometimes in an under Garment, as a course Towel to rub
and scrub me.


Pardon me, Sir, I vow you are such an obliging Gentleman -- but I know my Lady
expects me.


Never trouble your self; she has other affairs to think on. Look you, sweet
Lady, here's a Tavern hard by, where we may have a very convenient Room, and be
private. And I protest now, I'm so taken with your Discourse and Person, we
cannot part with dry Lips, as they say.


Aye, Sir, but if my Lady should think me long. --





Sir, the next Tavern is downwards.





Well, Sir, I am a Stranger in Town, and therefore submit to your better
experience.


Frank, where is she?


Sir Thomas Whimsy, your most humble Servant.


Honest Rogue, how dost thou? come along with me; I'll tell thee the best Jest.


Darby-shire, and the well-meaning Country-Gentlemen again, if this be not a
pitiful trick: The first man that ever made Love to me in London, serve me
thus; offer me the Wine-tavern, and then run away, without taking his leave
too? Now out upon him: I have been often deceived in my life, but never in so
few words before. Sir Thomas Whimsy quoth a? well, my comfort is, I know no
such Whimsies in the Country. There, if a young man offers Kindness to a young
maid, he will go thorough-stich with it; which does the poor Soul good at
heart. And -- Oh me! it strikes two a clock. Madam I come, I come Madam, I
come, I come.


WHere's Dashwel?


At the Office, Sir.


'Tis well: Go bid my Niece come hither.


Yes, Sir.


This Niece of mine is much offended at her confinement; but it's no matter:
she's young and handsome, and I am old and wary. If she be known broad, she'll
quickly get a Husband, and that will be no small Nuisance to my Estate: For
though her Father devised her and 6000 l. to my tuition, with proviso, that if
she marries without my consent, then to forfeit the said sum; Yet if she
happens to be well marri'd, and without disparagement, what the Chancery may
decree in this Case, I know not.


Niece, I have considered of your grievances, which you moved at Dinner; but I
perceive you are young, and do not weigh things with discretion. Should I
suffer ye to go abroad, or let people come to ye, some vain idle fellow with a
white Periwig and a long Sword, would marry ye, Niece, do you mind me? would
marry ye; and then you're undone. -- Look ye, Niece, Abundans cautela non
nocet, pray observe that.


In the mean time, Sir, the continual imprisonment of my Chamber is
insufferable: I'm sure it is very prejudicial to my health; and I'm troubled
with such a Head-ach, flesh and blood is not able to endure it.


Nay, good Lucy, never talk of that, but consider the Maxim; A private damage
is to be suffered, rather than a public inconveniency. Your distemper
concerns only your self, Niece: But should I see you marri'd to one of those
Fops I told you of but now, it would break my heart. --





Yet because you shall not say I'm made of Marble, and have no consideration of
your Infirmities, look ye, Niece, you and your Maid shall have a turn in the
Temple-Garden this Evening, and there taste the sweet air of the Thames. What
would thou have more, poor thing?


Besides, Sir, by reason of this strict life you impose upon me, I have forgot
all the Education my Friends had heretofore given me.


You would say, you have lost your Dancing; I understand ye: 'Tis no matter, a
modest woman should not Dance well. You have not lost your Singing, I'm sure;
yo'are often practising: yet it were better if you could only sing Psalms.


What to do, Sir? you seldom let me go to Church.


It is not necessary: You have good Books at home, read them: There's The whole
duty of man; think of that, Niece, think of that.


So I do, Sir, as much as possible I can; but --


'Tis enough. I understand what you would say; but you would have some of these
naughty Plays. Niece, I must tell ye, they are not good for ye, and let that
suffice: Yet ye shall have variety, Niece. Look ye, I'll buy ye the Seven
Champions, and I think, Dashwel has Clark's lives of Famous men; I'll borrow
that of him, and you shall read that too: And for Education, you shall have
enough, Lucy. I scorn it should be said that any of my Blood should want
Education. Dashwel shall teach ye French, he understands Littleton perfectly
well: And if you please, I'll have a Master come and teach ye to cast Account,
and write Short-hand. --


Sir, here's Madam Goodfeild newly light out of her Coach, and coming up
stairs.


Away, Niece, here's a Client of Quality coming, and I would not have you seen
in this dress for the world.


Is that your Master?


Yes, Madam.


Mr. Docket, I am come now, only to tell you I cannot stay; I must only
acquaint you with my business, and be gone again.


First, Madam, let me bid you welcome. Spruce, reach me Pen, Ink, and Paper, to
take instructions.


You must know then, good Mr. Docket, that I come to you with Commendations
from my Lady Simple of Darbyshire.


Yes, Madam, I know her very well: her Husband, old Sir Simon, late deceased,
was the very first Client I ever had.


God bless her good Ladyship, say I, for she's my good Neighbour; but let that
pass: I love few words, Mr. Docket, and those to the purpose. --


My own humour directly. --


You must know then, Mr. Docket, that I have a one and only Daughter in the
Country, her name is Elizabeth Goodfeild, (you may set her down, if you please)
a wild Wench she is, and therefore 'tis high time to marry her, (but you need
not set that down.) Now, Sir, my good Lady Simple has but one Son, who since
his Fathers death, is Sir Alexander Simple, (pray set him down;) and my Lady
Simple and I considering that 'tis better to wed over the Mixon, than over the
Moor, as they say in our parts, (but you need not set that down.) Therefore,
Mr. Docket, we two Mothers, like loving Neighbours, have concluded to marry
together.


You mean your Children, but I understand ye: Very good.


My Lady Simple, Sir, is very badly handled with the Gout, that's the plain
truth on it; and therefore she can't travel: And for Sir Alexander, he being the
only Sprig of the Family of the Simples remaining, we were not willing to
venture him to such a naughty Town; he might not only have been spoiled
himself, but done my Daughter no good too. For you know, Mr. Docket, Husband
and Wife are but one flesh.


'Tis very true, Madam, there's a scurvy Disease here in Town, which many a man
gets, besides the Simples.


To conclude, Sir, I am entrusted of all hands, to come to you, as my Lady
Simples Lawyer, to take care with you that my Daughter be well feofft in
something: For the truth is, Mr. Docket, her Father, honest Justice Goodfeild,
before he died, set her a very good Portion, namely 5000 l. which you know
requires a good Jointure.


For that, Madam, let me alone; but will you have it by way of Uses, Feoffment,
Bargain and Sale, Lease and Release, Fine and Recovery, or how? The usual way,
is by way of settlement to certain Uses; but then I must know the names of your
Feoffees in trust: And here Madam, there needs no Livery nor Attornment.


For my part, I understand not a word you say: but here's your Fee, Mr. Docket;
and I'll send Steven Trupenny --


Sir, here's Mr. Truman, without.


Let him attend, and do you bear him company.


And as I was saying, Sir, I ll send my Steward Stephen Truepenny to ye; he can
draw Bonds and Conditions, and he'll acquaint you with the very inside of this
business. In the mean time you see I cannot stay now: I go hence to visit a
Nephew, a Turkie Merchant in the City, with whom I sup; but I sha'not fail to
be at my Lodgings within an hour after Sun-set, at furthest.


Then, Madam, give me leave to wait upon you at your Return, and at the same
time I'll consult with your Steward about this Affair.


Sir, you shall be heartily welcome. I have two or three Bottles of Darby
there, which I brought up in my Coach, (for I hate your London-Drink) you'll
say when you taste it, 'tis the best you ever drank. Till then, God be with
you, good Mr. Docket, I shall not fail to be at home.


I'll wait on ye to your Coach, Madam.


To one Sir Alexander Simple, say thou?


Yes, Sir.


But is her Daughter in Town?


No; the two young people remain with the old Gouty Lady in the Country.


There's the Devil. --


But I have better news for you, Sir; Madam Lucia and her Maid have leave to be
in the Temple-Garden this Evening.


That's well.


And her Maid bid me take care to let you know it.


That's better: I will not fail to meet her.


Whist; not a word more, as you hope to be Knighted.


Mr. Truman, I sent for you, this morning, by my man.


You did Sir, and you see I'm come according to the Summons.


Yo'are welcome. Look ye, Mr. Truman, you and I have often treated about this
Mortgage. I have now considered of it; and you shall know my resolution in few
words. Look ye, Mr. Truman, I will not have you say that Summum jus est Summa
injuria. Therefore mind me, Sir: you know you owe me 6000 l. Principal.


Well, Sir.


Besides this, there is above 300 l. due for Interest, and about 200 l. farily
reckoned for Costs which I have been at in outing your Tenants, and recovering
quiet Possession of your Estate; that's 500 l. Now observe me, Mr. Truman, I ll
pay you down 500 l. more upon the Nail; all which Sums amount to 7000 l. And
for this, you shall confirm the Estate to me and my Heirs for ever, with a
General Warranty contra omnes gentes, and pass a Fine of the said Estate, Come
ceo que il ad de son done. And so you and I will continue good friends, Mr.
Truman.


So in effect, you will have an Estate of 500 l. a year in the best Lands in
Hartfordshire, all improvable, with 100 Acres of Timber, and all this for 7000
l. And so you and I shall continue good Friends.


As any live, I protest.


Never upon these Conditions, I assure ye. Look ye, Mr. Docket, you would have
me confirm the Estate above-said, upon the Conditions aforesaid.


Aye.


Nay mind me, Sir; you would have me pass a Fine upon the said Estate, with
Warranty to you and your Heirs for ever.


Aye.


First the Devil shall have you and your Heirs for ever; observe me, Mr.
Docket. And besides this, I would have ye take notice, and if you think fit, ye
may put down the Memorandum in your Almanac; I will take in my Mortgage within
two days, and that malgre your damned Worship, and all your Confederates in
Hell, do you mind me? And so farewell, Mr. Attorney Docket.


Oh, farewell Huff, if you're so impatient.

Go, spend your grease, vain Fop, fret, swell, and vex:
I laugh at idle words, with Currat Lex.

HEre's no appearance of the Game you expect.


No matter: It is yet too early. I confide in my intelligence; my Lawyer's
Clerk never failed me.


Is your Correspondent that dull Beast that brought you the Message from his
Master this morning? --


Oh Plague on him, no: Mine is a brisk fellow that has Sense and Ingenuity in
him. All of the Tribe are not like Dashwel and Docket; if they were, here would
be no living among 'em: They would infect the Town worse than the Sickness, or
Pox. -- In the mean time, Ned, you little think what your good Mother comes up
about.


Hast thou learnt that? prithee tell me --


Not so hasty; the News is not so welcome. You must know then, Mr. Edward, that
your old woman has agreed with another old woman in the Country, to match your
Sister to her Son; and she has now made this Journey to dispatch the
settlements of Marriage, and so forth: So that my Interest in the party
aforesaid, is dwindled to nothing.


Do you know the Son's name?


Yes; Sir Alexander Simple --


'Tis enough. Remember that I tell ye, Jack, it lies not in the power of Fate
to make up the Match. The old people may please themselves in talking, but 'tis
the young ones must do in these cases. I know Simple well enough; he has a
large Estate indeed, but is the veriest Coxcomb in ten Counties. And for my
Sister, I am sufficiently assured, she'd rather come to London and sell
Oranges, than marry him, of all the Cullies in England. -- But who are these?


This is the Lady, Ned, into whose good Graces I must introdue thee. What
think thou of her?


She seems a delicate Creature, and full of Sweetness. Let us engage 'em.


I thought I should not stave ye off. Allons. -- Madam Lucia! I know not to
what kind Star I owe this happiness; but to see you here, completes my joys.


Mr. Truman, your Servant. You are always in this strain -- What Gentleman is
that?


My very particular Friend. Let me beg you, Madam, to gratify his ambition
with the favour to kiss your fair hand.


Being your friend, Sir, he has sufficient merit to commend him to the most
noted Beauty of the Town. You pass too great a Complement on me, I assure ye,
Mr. Truman.


Your pardon, Madam. As to be noted, is not always to be a Beauty, so I find,
to be the most noted Beauty, is not to be the Greatest or the best. Witness
your self: it is in your example, Madam, I perceive, that Fame neither speaks
always truth, nor all truths.


Nay, Gentlemen, never railly me in this manner: I'd rather you would call me
ugly in plain intelligible expressions, than laugh at my ill face in you fine
Language. My Glass tells me what I am, better than all the Courting Monsieurs
'twixt Ludgate and the Abbey.


Oh, Madam, Ladies are no Competent Judges of their own Beauty.


They always value it too much, or too little.


On the other side, Gallants that are always praising their Mistresses Beauty,
at the same time dispraise their own Wit. 'Tis to be presumed, their
Common-place runs all on that Subject and they have no other matter to
discourse of. -- Therefore, if you please, Gentlemen, we'll talk of something
else.





Faith, Madam, let us improve the time as well for action as discourse; let us
all to the Park this inviting Evening: My Coach will be ready in three minutes.


Mr. Truman, you speak like a stranger to my condition. I am but a Prisoner at
large, and my Fetters reach not farther than this. Garden.


All Curses on the damned Geaolor, your Uncle.


Mr. Truman, I have always looked upon you as my friend. -- Alas, I have but
few. --


Madam, this Gentleman and I, have but one heart: Either direct us how to serve
you, or be pleased to submit* to our advice, and I'll secure your Liberty
before to morrow-night, that Devil of an Uncle shall no longer abuse such
Innocence.


Observe, Frank; is not that my Brother, so busy with yonder Lady?


Yes I vow, or my eyes are the veriest Liars in London.


What a Devil makes he in Town? he's as great a stranger here as I am. When we
left the Country, was not he at Cambridge?


We all thought so: As sure as can be, this is some Mistress. But what's he
that stands with him?


He seems much a Gentleman. I'm resolved to make one of the Company: My Brother
can never know me in this Disguise. Have among'e, e'faith. -- Gallants, are ye
for Love alone, Conversation alone, or Love and Conversation together?


Why, young Bully?


If ye are for Love alone, I'll leave the Lady to ye, and Bien proface
Messieurs. If ye are for Conversation alone, why then Gentlemen, pray learn to
be civil, and you two go together by your selves; 'tis rude to stay here, and
over-hear our discourse, when the Lady and I would be private. --


This is the maddest young Raskal I ever saw in my life.


But if ye are for Love and Conversation together, why then, faith, let us
share the blessed Community; here are four men to two women: A good proportion
for Town-Ladies; two to two is only fit for Nuns that have vowed Chastity: But
I hope, Madam, you are not so vain to think of that. --


Away, rude fellow. --


Belike you think your self a man then. Alas, poor thing, thou art below a
kicking; -- but be gone, or --


Not so fast, Sir; be I man or boy, or whatever I am, I would have thee know,
Bully-hec, I am able to give satisfaction to any man in the Bed of Honour. --
No more huffing. If you are minded to speak to me By the way of Bilbo (as the
Play has it) I'll answer ye by the way of Dangerfeild. Hark ye --


Nay, never urge me, I swear I will not: it is not handsome to tell Names.


Alas poor Creature, thou dost not understand what belongs to a Waiting-Damsel;
it is part of her office to discover her Lady's Secrets. I perceive by this,
thou art but a Callow-maid -- and o'my Conscience a Virigin.


A Virgin? Aye, a pure one.


Fie, fie, Sweet-heart, learn more behaviour; though perhaps, you are such, you
should not acknowledge it. Should you talk thus before Company, you'd be laughed
at for being so out of the Mode. A Maidenhead of this bigness? out upon it!


Now, fie upon you; you're the strangest man, I ever talked with.


-- And without Seconds; if you fail, I'll post ye for a Coward: I know your
name; Goodfeild.


Spare your provocations. I'll meet thee, though thou were the Devil in the
shape of a Boy: as thou may be for ought I know, by thy intelligence.


Well, Sir, now you and I have agreed, I am your very humble Servant. In the
next place, I must borrow a few words of your friend that stands yonder, so
like a civil Gentleman, and has not a word to say for himself.


With me? What would the Child have with me? Come, speak thy mind quickly,
little fellow, thou feest I am engaged.


You would say, with Monsieur Palamede, that T'are a man of business: Yes, no
doubt on it. I suppose; sweet Sir, you are one of those hard Students, whose
delight is continually to affront Littleton and the Law, by writing Farce, to
be laughed at by the Player-women en Chivalier; or else en Debauche to hussah
for a Wench, be perpetually drunk, and break your friends windows that go to
bed before ye.


So: And this you suppose my Character?


Yes: with only this Addition: Yo'are a man of a very excellent temper, you are
not easily provoked neither to Anger nor Raillery. Come, shall I answer for
you? As sure as can be, you either would or should say, Sweet young Gentleman,
or Sweet Sir, or Plain Sir, or something to that purpose; You see I have been
lately discoursing with a Lady, and as I hope to breathe now, she has drawn me
so dry, and all that -- I have not Language enough left me to say, Your
Servant, Sir. -- Come, Sir, confess ingenuously, would you not have said thus,
if you could?


Said thus; quoth a? why thou say so fast, thou wou't not let me say a word
in thy presence. -- What a Devil art thou? whence come thou? thou art the
pertest little thing I ever met with.


Perhaps, Sir, I have wronged ye, and ye are a Wit. For (as the Play says) All
Wits have their failings, and have the fortune to be thought Fools one in their
lives; and who knows but this is your critical minute?


So, so; thou art a very forward stripling, and dost begin betimes to be bolder
than welcome. Thou may thank thy Childhood for this Liberty: If thou were a
man, I should talk to thee in another Dialect.


Then it seems, Sir, you can talk to a man, though not to a boy: but can you
talk to a woman? Suppose me a woman a little, though As arrant a Fruit-woman as
any is in Rome; de grace Monsieur, how would you behave your self?


Away, Boy; if thou hast any business with me, dispatch it: Time's precious,
and I can waste no more.


Nay, never mince the matter. If I were a woman, I know what you'd do. First of
all, you'd pelt me with two or three little pretty deux yeux: Then off goes the
Hat, thus, and out comes the Comb, thus; and after having frisked over the
bottom of your Periwig a little, and exalted the foretop thus, you would make
Love according to the latest (...), thus -- Sweet Lady, you have here a man to
your mind: For to confess the truth to you, I can but counterfeit Love to try
you. Gad, Madam, I never yet could love any woman: and since I have seen you,
and I do not, I am certain now I shall escape for ever.


Why thou art a very impudent fellow to talk of things so much above thee.
Alas, poor child! thou dost not understand what belongs to Love, nor won't
these seven years.


Forbear such frightful words; I am not so young, wise Sir, (...) I understand
what Love is. 'Tis the seducer of Virtue, the disturber of Quiet, the madness
of Youth, the dotage of old Age, the enemy to good Humour, and, as the Play
says very well, The reason of all unreasonable Actions.


And is this all you know of Love?


No: Love was thus from the beginning; our Grandfathers know as much as this.
In our Age the face of Love is very much altered. Our Gallants have wisely
considered Love has been made so common, trite, and out of fashion, that,
though there is something belonging to the thing that is very useful and much
affected, yet the damned Name is hateful; and both Sexes have agreed, though
their designs be never so sensual, to disown the scandal of Love, and call it
Gallantry, Mirth; and Raillery. Love, out upon it! 'tis got into all places,
though never so improper and abusrd. Have ye not Love in a Maze, Love in a Tub,
Love in a Wood, nay, Love in a Nunnery and Love in a Pipkin?


Hold a little, I thou everlasting Talker; I think I must stop thy mouth: Let
me view thee well; things of thy age, are not usually thus witty. I begin to
love thy humour. --


Then, Woe. woe to poor Benito, I sinde my abundance of Wit has ruined me. Dare
you name Love, when yo've heard me declare so much against it? Farewell, Sir --
( Is going, but turns again. Yet if you have Courage enough to be Loves
Champion, I desie you upon it; and will attend you to morrow-morning at five,
near Lambs-Conduit, if you dare meet me.


I dare.


Adieu then, Iusque a revoir.


Nay, but one word more; stay a little --


Not a moment: I never talk with Enemies. Your are engaged: Look, your company
expects you. -- Come Frank.


What hast thou been doing all this while, Jack, with that Boy?


'Tis a witty Impertinent, and Raillies well. -- But how go affairs with you?
what have you resolved on?


Faith, we are not come to Resolutions, but so far from that point, that this
Lady is pleased to refuse whatever I propose. She is too much her own enemy,
and too great a friend to something that looks like Honour, to admit us to
serve her.


Excuse me, Sir, you have obliged me much in such generous offers, but I have
many Reasons not to use 'em. Mr. Truman, you are best acquainted with my
condition, and therefore can best judge of what I tell ye. Should I leave my
Uncle, (though his usage is both unhandsome, and unnatural) I shall not only
loose my Fortune, for my Father has committed both me and it to his
Arbitration. --


Madam, I value not your Fortune, I am already Master of so liberal an Estate,
I care not to increase it. If you please to make me happy in your person, I'll
venture loosing, what your Uncle covets.


That, Sir, is the least of all my thoughts: And had I not, that to think on,
yet I can ne'er consent to leave so near a Relation, to whose Government my
dying Father gave me, without, not only his Consent, but Knowledge: And that
too, with two young men. This, Gentlemen, (although I do not question in the
least your Honour) is so very scandalous, I never can admit it.


Your Uncle has justly forfeited his Trust, abusing it: and, Madam, you may
well be confident your Father never fanci'd him for such a Guardian, when he
first named him yours.


Sir, I not doubt it. And though I sigh for death or a more pleasing life, --
yet I had rather ever continue thus wretched as I am, than be made happy, by
any means that gives the least offence or prejudice to the spotless Fame of an
innocent Maid.


In the mean time, Madam, will you make me so happy as to let me hope I may
hereafter be admitted to your service when you shall be a more absolute Mistress
of your self, and free from the constraint of such a Guardian?


Provided, Sir, you use no violent means to accomplish such a freedom. I am not
so ungrateful to forget a friendship, nor yet so dull as not to apprehend who
has obliged me. -- But Gentlemen, no more. -- You must not know me: This is one
of my Uncle's Spies.


Mistress Lucia, my Master desires to be recommended to you, and has sent me to
conduct you home; he and I are just going forth about business, and he desires
to see your Ingress before our Egress.


So: Have ye any other Commendations from your Master?


Non sum Informatus: That is to say, in English, He gave me no farther
Instructions.


Then come along.


Mr. Dashwel, your humble Servant: Pray, Sir, quota cloka?


Sweet Sir, I think it is near octa hora: Your Servant Gentlemen.


Farewell Cods-head.


Now, Ned, what dost thou think of this Lady?


I think so well of her, that I think the worse of thee for bringing me
acquainted with her to no purpose.


Why to no purpose?


You see she admits not my Addresses.


Thou art a Fool, Ned; and though thou hast studied so long at the University,
thou art very illiterate in Women. Why all her discourse was nothing but I will
and I won't: and when they are once arrived at that, they need but little
Courting.


I perceive thou art very learned in this sort of Philosophy, Jack: I think I
had best get thee to read to me.


Read, quoth a? no faith it needs not, I have it all by heart. In the first
place, you must know, Friend mine, Women are not now so dull, and
unapprehensive, as in former Ages: For just as times and seasons change, so
Behaviour grows more polite; of which, the particular we discourse of, is one
of the chief Examples. Antiently Girls had such a gross Education, that most of
them knew neither to read, Bawdry; nor write, Assignations; their Parents not
caring to improve their judgment to be more capable than to distinguish betwixt
their Husbands Doublet and Breeches; which not only made them ashamed to demand
what most they wanted, but also when they had occasion to do so, or so, -- Gad,
they durst not, though one and twenty years old, without their Mothers leave.


But in this Age --


Aye, Ned, in this Age they begin to refine their Behaviour, and have found out
the way of speaking, and yet not say a word.


How Jack? to speak, and not say a word? that's a xsstrong Line.


No matter, Ned, you have used to such at the place from whence you come. I
say, they can speak their mind, and yet not say a word. And besides this, when
they speak, they have invented such a delicate Language, that they will talk
with you an hour together, and all the while discover a sense quite different
from their words. The advantages they have acquired from Habits and Dress, to
supply the defects of Nature in spite of mankind, I'll omit.


Aye, prithee do: 'Tis a Subject only proper to Taylors and Tyre-women.


By the way, Ned, I must tell thee, I am of opinion, the Mystery of Dress is
now arrived to its utmost perfection; and must of necessity, like the Roman
Empire, decay in after-Ages.


Thou talk high, Jack.


Not so high as the Ladies Toors. I tell thee, Ned Goodfeild, 'tis a frightful
thing to see some women, that pass for Beauties in due time and place,
undressed: I do not mean naked; but only their face without the Toor, Shades,
Locks, Hollows, Bullies, and some transitory Patches.


But to let all this pass for this time. You observed the young fellow was here
but now?


Aye, what's the matter?


Is he not some little Bully here about Fleetstreet?


No: I know 'em all, but never saw his eyes before: But why all these
inquiries?


Nothing; but the little Wasp has challenged me, and I'm to meet him to
morrow-morning at four, in Redlyon-fields.


Why this is the maddest Rogue I e're heard of. He has challenged me too, to be
at five, near Lambs-Canduit. Belike, Ned, he makes nothing of thee; he has done
thy business in imagination, and has chosen me for a second course to
Breakfast. Two Duels in a morning are pretty fair, for such a young beginner.


I rather think he'll meet neither on's. I fancy he neither looked nor spoke
like a Fighter. However, I'll not venture the disgrace of failing in such an
occasion. I'm resolved to observe the place and time appointed.


And I. 'Tis possible the Encounter may be pleasanter than we imagine. I am
much of thy opinion, Ned: He did not at all behave himself like a Killer of
men. --


But hark ye, Jack, you must not be seen with me, for I'm to meet without
Seconds.


No fear of that: I have another field appointed, at sufficient distance.


Come, let's go find out some Company and be merry. This Garden is unpleasant,
now the Lady's gone.


BE pleased, Sir, to repose a while in the Dining-room: I expect my Lady's
Return every minute.


Well said: But hark ye, Youth, is Mr. Trupenny about the house?


Yes, Sir, he's a writing above in his Chamber.


Prithee, Sweet-heart, tell him here's one Docket desires to see him.


Yes, Sir.


Do you hear, Young man? Mr. Docket of Cliffords-Inn: You must ever give things
their due Addition.


Well, Sir.


Hast thou brought thy Inkhorn with thee, Tom?


Yes, yes, Sir, vouz avez the Inkhorn, look ye, Sir, but -- alas, I've forgot
my Almanac.


No matter, man, if thou hast any Paper about thee?


O Lord, Sir, I put a whole Quire of Copying-paper in my Pocket, and here's two
Quills --


Nay, perhaps we may have no occasion to use 'em.


But you know, Sir, it's good to be sure. -- Look ye, Sir, here comes Mr.
Trupenny. I vow he looks like a very understanding man, and one that can do
business: I wonder whether he can write Court-hand.


Mr. Trupenny, your Servant.


Your most humble Servant, good Mr. Docket; I am heartily glad to see ye at our
Quarters: And I vow you're very welcome, as I may say.


Sir, I thank you. Here's I and my man Dashwel are come to wait upon your Lady,
about a little Concern of hers; I suppose, Sir, you're no stranger to it.


No, Sir; my Lady ordered me to draw up the particulars of Sir Alexander
Simple's Estate, which are to pass into my young Mistress Betty's Jointure. I
have been at it e're since she went out; and here 'tis in Writing: Look ye,
Sir, mine's but an indifferent Hand.


Good enough, Mr. Trupenny, good enough. Let me see; here's the Manor of --
uh; and the Manor of -- uh; with the Advouson appurtenant -- Appendant you
mean; but I understand ye. Then here's 600 Acres of Pasture, and 400 Acres of
Meadow -- O fie, that must not be, you must always put Pratum before Pastura:
Remember the old Verse as long as you live, and you'll never do amiss:
Messuagium, Toftum, c. Dashwel shall gi't you in writing.


Yes, Sir, with all my heart.


I thank ye most kindly, good Sir; I'll do as much for you at any time.


Then here's -- All, and all manner of Commons thereunto belonging, In quodam
loke vocate be peak juxta Podex Diaboli, anglice the Devil's Britch. -- Well,
Sir I understand ye: I'll even take these parcels home with me, and put 'em
into due order, and so we'll proceed. I suppose, Mr. Trupenny, you'll submit to
me, as for Form and false Latin?


I Sir, and reason good. Form and false Latin, Mr. Docket? why, if it had not
been for that, we need not ha'come to London. Our Curate might a made the
Jointure well enough, but only for Form and false Latin.


Mr. Trupenny, pray will you instruct me in one thing?


With all my heart, Sir, if I can: But it's a likely matter that I should
instruct your Wordship in any thing, that have been bred all your life-time at
the Inns of Chancery.


O Sir, you are pleased to say so. But pray, Mr. Trupenny, what was Justice
Goodfeilds Christen-name?


Anthony, Sir; and I vow to ye, Mr. Docket, it was great pity it was not Sir
Anthony: For though he was but a Justice of Peace and Coram, so that he could a
brought Rogues Coram nobis at any time, yet he might a been a Knight, and a
good one, both for his Estate and Wit.


Indeed?


Sir, Let me tell ye; There is my young Master Edward, who is now at Cambridge,
God bless him, and send him well at age, for he lacks not much now. Mr. Docket,
he will have about a three months hence, 800 a year, good Rents; and after his
Mothers death, 600 a year more, which is her Jointure.


Dashwel, what think ye, if I strike in with this Widow, ha, Tom?


Innuendo Widow Goodfeild, Sir? I protest that would be excellent.


I have the value of all their Estate to a penny, in my books at home. Besides
this, their Tenants are able men, and special Paymasters; and indeed, my Lady
does oblige 'em to it: For every Christmas she calls 'em all to dinner at the
Hall: Then have we the Bagpipes, and are so passing merry. -- But look ye, Sir,
here comes my Lady her self: I knew she could not tarry long out, after
Sun-set.


O. Mr. Docket, you're welcome. I doubt I've made you expect me too long -- But
I protest now, I've had such a life since I saw you; I'll go no more into the
City an God 'ill.


Why, I pray, Madam?


Awe Lord, Sir, there is such doings -- Here Loveal, take my Scarf -- And then,
Sir, there are such Cruel noises, all along the streets as you go, I dare say,
it would make ones heart ache to hear'em. There was a woman, and she cried old
Stockings, and ends a Gold and Silver; and a little further I met a fellow
crying old Shoos and Brooms. For my part, I could not ha'thought that old thing
had been worth whistling for in this Town, where there is so much Pride and
Ranting. -- Come, Mr. Docket, pray take a feat by me here. -- But that which
will never out of my head, no I shall carry it to my grave wi'me, was some-body
that stood just behind my Coach, and cried -- what was it Loveal?


Mackerel, Madam.


Aye, Mackerel. Mr. Docket, if you will believe me, it made so hideous a Din,
it frighted me out of my place full upon Loveal that fate over against me; and
had it not been a great mercy, I had broke her face.


Pray, Madam, were you never in Town before?


Yes, Sir, once; but I was very young then. It was when I was new marri'd to
Squire Goodfeild: he brought me up to see the Fashion, and have a new Gown
made, and so we went down again. But to proceed, Sir, beside the noises, here
are such ugly smells in every corner -- O, Loveal, did you observe the fine
Gentlewoman that light out of the Coach with the Gentleman at the end of the
long street, as we turned down the narrow lane by the new Church?


Do you mean her, Madam, with the great black Toor, and face all spotted, with
the Flowr'd-sattin Petticoat laced up almost as high as --


Aye, aye, she: I warrant she's nought -- But as I was saying, Mr. Docket, your
smells, here in London, are most wickedly bad: I have been told, the occasion
is your Sea-coal; but I rather think 'tis the sins of your naughty City, that
makes it stink above ground. Had not you Londoners better come down to
Darbyshire and fetch of our Coal from the Pits, which is (though I say it) a
delicate Fuel, and almost as sweet as green Ash?


Indeed, Madam, the Town is offensive to most strangers, in these cases; but if
you were to be demorant here a while, that is, to live among us, you would
quickly be familiar with these things, which otherwise are troublesome to one
that Discontinues the Visinage.


Oh, Mr. Docket, never talk of that; I would not live in London, to be Lady
Mayoress, -- But now I think on it, ha'you done any thing in my Daughters
business yet?


Yes, Madam, Mr. Trupenny has gi'n me sufficient Instructions for the
Conveyance, before your Ladyship made your Entry.


I'm glad on it with all my heart; there's so much time saved. Now have we
nothing to do, but to be merry -- Steven -- Mr. Docket, gi'me your hand: I vow
yo'are heartily welcome. Come, Sir, you shall taste a glass of our Country-ale,
famous all over England -- Come, Boy, fill out -- observe how it flowers and
sparkles: They talk of Canary, but there's no Canary in England like it. Well,
I say nothing: the proof of the Pudding's in the eating -- Sir, my Service to
ye, remembering my good Lady Simple, and all our Friends in Darbyshire.


With all my heart, Madam.


Come, Sir, You and I'll go into the next Room, where I can entertain ye with
more liberty.


Aye, with all my heart; I vow I'm under Coverture, as 'twere, while in my
Masters presence.


Here, Boy, fill -- I protest I had all sorts of your London-Wine at Supper to
night, and it has lain something heavy at my stomach; but this glass of Ale has
done me as much good as a cup of Aqua Mirabilis. -- Give it Mr. Docket.


Mr. Trupenny, here's to ye -- My Lady Simple's good Health.


Come, Steven, sit down and drink with us. -- Mr. Docket, I hate to keep
over-much state with my Steward: There is a time when Ladies may be familiar
with their Servants, an they were never so high and haughty.


'Tis very true, Madam.


Aye, Aye, haughty looks must be humbled sometimes, as well as others. -- Mr.
Docket, do you take any Tobacco?


Yes, Madam; but I fear the smell may be a Nocument to you.


What do you mean by that, Sir?


Madam, I mean, it may be a Nuisance to ye; that is, it may offend ye.


Oh, not at all, Sir: nay, you shall see I can bear you company. Boy, fetch
some Pipes and a Light; I have my Box about me. For my part, Mr. Docket, I'll
tell ye truly, I was advised to it three or four years ago, for a certain
infirmity; and indeed I have continued it ever since, and find a great deal of
good by it. It comforts the Stomach, warms the Heart, and cheers the Brain: And
then for Rheum, 'tis an excellent drier.


Nay, Madam, here are women in Town that take Tobacco.


I but they run into a corner to do it, as if they were a going to be nought --
Steven, fill me a Pipe -- For my part, I am downright honest: I hate
dissimulation. Come, come, there's no shame to take it: 'tis neither sinful,
nor unlawful. I say, let your women in London be ashamed to take other things,
and 'twould be better for 'em -- But, Mr. Docket, you don't tell me how you
like my Ale.


'Tis excellent Drink indeed, Madam.


Has it not a rare Farewell with it? Nay, 'tis brewed in my own house, and I see
to the working it my self: I put nine Strike to the Hogshead, I prorest --


And as good Malt as any in the Country; though I say it: and that's a bold
word.


Come, the other Glass, and then we'll taste our Tobacco -- pray, Sir, make use
of my Box -- Where stands the Ale? Fie, Steven, do you let your Drink die in
your hands? put it about, man, put it about.


Madam, my Service to ye.


Well said. Mr. Docket, have at ye: Whose Health shall this be?


Madam, I seldom use to drink Healths.


O, Sir, two or three will do ye no harm, in a civil way, I'll secure ye --
Come, God bless his Majesty -- ( drinks) here, boy, fill.


Gently, good Youth. -- Mr. Trupenny, his Majesty's Health to ye.


You have, Sir: Now gi't Trupenny, and reach the Candle. -- Come, Sir -- light
your Pipe -- Docket -- this is a Pipe of -- good -- Tobacco -- 'Tis. the very
best sort of -- Virginia -- and that's better -- than Spanish -- ( Trupenny,
lend me your stopper) -- what think ye, Mr. Docket?


Indeed, Madam -- I think it -- is very -- excellent -- To -- tobacco -- and has
no -- fault -- unless it be -- a little too -- hot in the -- mouth.


The better for that, Sir -- but I pray, Mr. -- Docket -- are you -- a marri'd
man? --





Awe Lord, Sir, -- here Truepenny, pick this Pipe; it don't come worth a Rush.
-- I vow, Mr. Docket, you are a very staid Bachelor, and have lived a single
man a long time: but I doubt you had not been honest all this while. -- Boy,
fill a glass of Ale. Come Sir, you shall give me leave to begin your Mistriss's
Health.


Ah, Madam!


Here, Trupenny. -- Docket, she must be very deserving Lady for whom you have
waited thus long: And no doubt but you'll meet with some virtuous body that
will reward all your patience at the long run, ne'er fear it, Sir. For my part,
I have been a Widow now these eight years and upwards, and yet 'tis possible I
may marry again before I die: The truth is, I have made no vow against it.


Ah, Madam! --


Mr. Docket, your Lady's good health, Sir. Super Naculum.


Sir, I thank ye. -- Now, young man, give it me, and fill it lustily. So; Mr.
Trupenny, with my Lady's leave here, I'll begin to you --


Nay, Mr. Docket, first pledge your Mistriss's Health, before ye begin a new
one. I love fair drinking, and fair dealing with all my heart: For my part, I
can't dissemble.


Why then, Madam, there 'tis. --


Take the other Pipe?


No, Madam; make a motion to your Ladyship.


To me, Sir? pray what is't?


Why, Madam, nothing but -- Sweet-heart, prithee gi'me the other Glass; I'll have
one Health more, and then I'll tell ye. Methinks I begin to be very cheerful.
Ha, ha, ha, I can't choose but laugh at the Jest: this is called in our Law,
Idemptitate nominis. Ha, ha, ha, -- Madam, here's your Ladyships good Health,
and I with it were a Sea to the bottom; Mr. Trupenny, here's to ye.


Sir, you oblige me.


Now, Madam, I'll tell ye. You see, Madam, I'm a Bachelor, and you see withal
that your self are a Widow. Faith, Madam, what think ye, if we two, to save
charges, and the like, should make but one Match on it? You see, Madam, I am
plain.


I like ye the better for that, Sir; plain dealing's a Jewel: But alas, alas,
you can never pass this upon me.


Why, pray Madam? do you think I don't know what belongs to a Widow?


Do you think I can imagine, Sir, that a man of your practice would ever think
of marrying such a one as I am?


Nay, never talk of that: but gi'me your hand on it, Widow. You see the worst
o'me. Come, shall it be, I Daniel take thee Mary?


Soft Sir, Two words to a Bargain.


Then consult thy Pillow upon it, Widow: You shall find me reasonable.


Indeed, Sir, that's the fittest place where to think of Marriage: But here's
my hand, you shall know more of my mind to morrow. In the mean time, good
night, Sir. Trupenny, wait upon Mr. Docket. Loveal.


Nay, nay, here's my man: and besides that, look ye, I am not so drunk, but I
can find the way home: therefore, Mr. Trupenny, you may stay, look ye.


O pardon me for that, Sir; indeed I'll wait on ye home: I know what belongs to
breeding.


Well then, Widow farewell 'till to morrow. Be sure ye think of me to night,
and think well. If I imagined, do you see, you'd think amiss, I'd stay all
night, look ye, and correct your thoughts.


No, no, Sir, no fear of that. Good night, good night.


The Lawyer's drunk.


No, not so; only a little fuddled. But this is for the honour of our Country,
wench. An my Lord Mayor were here, and all his Aldermen, I'd serve 'em all so:
'Tis for the honour of Darbyshire.


Aye, Madam, and for the honour of our Sex too.


True, Wench; what's a clock?


Past eleven, Madam.


O me! 'tis late: let's hye to bed; I am not used to these late hours.


HEre, Gentlemen, this is the Window. Range your selves here, and strike a
sprightly Air. Frank, the Song I gave ye.


Gentlemen, my Lady is but just laid down in her naked Bed; but she remembers
her Respects to ye, and has sent ye here half a Crown. She says, she knows Mr.
Docket has sent ye on to welcome her to Town; and she acknowledges the
Civility. Then, Gentlemen, here's a Shilling more of my good will: My Name's
Loveal, and I am my Lady's Woman. I vow, it's the finest Music I e're heard in
my life, and much better than our Country Harp and Bagpipe: And then the Song
was such a pretty thing, I'd give any thing for a Copy. -- But 'tis late, and I
can't stay. Farewell, Gentlemen, and hye ye to bed. Good night t'ye all; I wish
ye well home.


Nay, but hark ye, Damsel.


She's gone. -- Ah, Plague! This Widow don't know what belongs to Serenading.


She should ha'come to the Balcony in her Night-gown, and cried, Who's that
comes at this unseasonable hour to disturb my Quiet? Then I should have
answered in a dying Tone, 'Tis I, forsooth; and have laid all the blame upon
Love. Then raising my voice, I should a hurt, Allons, Widow; let me come in to
ye, hand to fist. Then she thinking I had been drunk, should have replied, (as
another Play has it very well) No, Sir, no, -- I wonder you have the confidence
to ask me, when you were so rude to me the last time. --


But instead of this, she shows her Breeding, to keep her Bed, and ne'er speak
to a Gentleman at all. This is, A-la-mode de pais, Ierny.


Did not the Chambriere name one Docket, to whom her Lady ascribes this
Civility?


Yes. What a Devil should he be?


I can't imagine. 'Tis no matter: Content the Music,


and follow me to my Lodging.


Here, my Masters, here's that will satisfy ye all. Go --

March boldly home, Sirs, without longer staying.
Fear not the Watch, they'll spare ye for your playing.

O the little delights that a Lover takes
To tell his dear Phillis how much he despairs;
How great are his Cares,
And how his heart aches!
Now praising, now blaming, now flattering Miss,
While all the fine story not stgnifies this.
Sure Love can't consist in ill Language and Railing?
To term Miss a Monster for Beauty and Parts,
The thief of men's hearts;
Nay, call her for failing
A Tyrant with all sorts of mischievous Arms,
And make us believe she's a Witch for her Charms.
Much better in my mind, though less like a Poet,
Is plainly to show her, when in a Love-fit,
The meaning of it;
And let her to know it
In such Terms as Nature shall dictate and tell us,
And not like your scribbling Fop-amorous fellows.
LOok ye, Ned; this is the Champain where you are to do Feats: Mine lies a
little lower. But still I see no appearance of our little Duellist. I'll stay a
while with thee, 'till he begins to appear; and then I'll retire, and leave
thee to his mercy.


Aye, aye, there's no great danger.


Hast thou got a Fighting sword on? 'Sbud, Ned, thou art not mad, to venture
thy life with this?


Come, waive this Raillery, and let's talk of something else. -- Did thou
observe yesterday, what havoc the little Rogue made among the Plays?


Aye, like Don Quixote among the Romances, for all the world.


Why, his discourse was almost all Dramatic.


True: but I perceived withal, he did it a purpose; and not through any want of
Invention, or defect in his own Genius, as your Country-Squire uses Wit's
Common Wealth, and the Academy of Complements. For, sometimes you should have
him speak his own Sense, and that in very witty Terms too. -- But, e'faith
yonder he comes. I vanish: Farewell, Ned, take heed he hits you not in Tierce,
when it should be in Quart.


So, now for my Gamester.


Oh, Sir, are ye here already? Well, I perceive you ride the Fore-horse: Yet
methinks, ye don't look like one prepared for Fighting -- Come, faith, what
satisfaction will you give me to take up the Duel?


Satisfaction, quoth a? thou talk as if I were in a posture to beg my life.
Soft, Sir, it is not come to that yet.


No? why then belike you are resolved to fight? Come, Sir, unbutton.


Stay a little. --


Nay, then I perceive you are one of those that will not rend the Buttons from
your Doublet for any man's pleasure; and with good Sir Nicholas, Your
Conscience will not let you fight in a wrong Cause. I thought so at first.


I tell thee, young Sir, thou art much mistaken: Thou shall it have fighting
enough -- but first you shall hear me --


Ad autre, ad autre, this Whedle won't pass. I see, you are minded to reverse
the laudable course of the world; and instead of falling from Disputing to
Fighting, you would drill me from Fighting to Disputing; but this must not be
among friends: Therefore, resolve, sweet Sir, either to give me Amend
honourable, or fight. Choose which you please: you see I am reasonable.


Oh, very reasonable! -- I protest, it's a shame for a man to engage with such
a little young Thing: and yet, I vow, I think I must be forced to chastise him
when all's done. -- Hark ye, Child, do you know what Amend honourable
signifies?


Yes, very well. 'Tis only to confess your offence on your knees, and ask me
pardon, in certain forms proper to that purpose. 'Tis a French Mode of
satisfaction, and of great use among men of Honour. -- Well then, you are
willing to perform it?


Not yet: Hold a little. First let me know how I've offended ye, and for what I
must ask your pardon?


Uds bud, Sir, do you come here only to ask Questions? -- This is not to be
endured: You have wasted my whole stock of Patience; and now you shall find me
as arrant a Lion, as if ye had called my Mistress Son of a Whore. -- Come, Sir,
draw.


Must not we uncase then?


It's no matter; I'll fight you with your Coat on. O'my Conscience, there's no
foul play under it.


Nay then, if ye are desperate, have at ye.


So, Sir, to your Guard -- Good. -- I use always, before I begin a Duel, to
throw off my Periwig. 'Tis troublesome in fighting.


-- Sister --


-- Brother --


I the name of wonder, what make you at London?


Nay, rather, what make you at London?


And why in this Disguise?


You shall first answer me; By my Virginity you shall. You know what the Play
says, For Decency, the man should offer first.


My Tale is quickly told. I grew weary of Cambridge, and came hither to give my
self the Divertisements of the Town. I have been here but three days, and
yesterday my very good friend helped me to a Mistress, with whom I am
desperately in Love. You saw both the parties last night in the Temple-garden.


They seem both of much worth. -- But well, Sir, you have, I suppose,
discovered to her de ver great Affecshoon vid which your heart does boil over,
and all that?


Yes.


And, She takes it to the death?


Not so: Nor much to the life. I am in the middle Class of Lovers.


So much the better; Extremes are dangerous.


But, to observe the method of Romances, now you have had my Adventure, pray
let's know yours.


You shall. But first -- hem.


What's the matter?


Nothing, nothing.


More tricks still? who's this?


One, out of whose company I never venture my self, as much a man as I am. --
You need not be so strange, Brother, 'tis my Maid.


Old Acquaintance! how dost thou? Let's kiss a little. How do thy Breeches fit
thee? Ha, Wench!


Out upon ye, Mr. Goodfeild, you are the strangest man; will ye never leave
your old tricks?


Now, Sister, your story.


'Tis briefly this: My Mother (like a very dutiful Mother in the mean time) has
lately concluded, without my consent or knowledge, to marry me to Sir Alexander
Simple. (you know the fool.) And now she's come up to perfect the Match here,
as to the Law-part --


All this I know already.


That breeds my wonder. -- But to proceed: You may well suppose I abhorred to
marry such a Coxcomb: 'twas therefore by my Maid's advice, here, I resolved to
follow the old woman, Incognito; I performed it, and by good fortune have got
Lodgings near hers: Here I have means to observe her progress in this Affair,
and take all opportunities to interrupt it. And before I left the Country, I
resolved, if I found the business desperate on my part, I would never see her
again, nor leave London. Then in few days I had acquainted you at Cambridge,
where I was, and the occasion, and submitted my self to your conduct.


Well said, my Girl! thou shall loose nothing by my conduct, unless it be thy
Maidenhead, to a good Husband. -- Have not you appointed another Duel this
morning?


Something of that nature. Your friend that I saw with you last night, appeared
so much a Gentleman, and I liked his presence so well, I could not forbear
quarrelling with him; or if you had rather have it Stilo recitativo -- E're
since his bright Eyes, my heart did surprise, I could not extinguish the flame.


Nay, nay, your Champion expects you yonder at the place appointed; and let me
tell ye, you cannot be more taken with his person, than he is with your Wit and
Raillery. But when he knows you are my Sister, he'll be over head and ears in
Love, for he has often heard me speak of ye, and received your Character with
much pleasure. -- Well; you and I have met this morning to fight, and parted
without breathing a vein, or so; but in all probability your second Duel will
have a more bloody conclusion than the first.


Madam, Madam, fear nothing; your Brother talks thus only to fright ye.


Fright me? that's a good one, e'faith! no, Frank, I am more a woman than to
fear any thing of that nature.


Well, a propos; to loose no more time, and keep neither of ye any longer in
suspense, shall I conduct ye to him?


Stay -- were it not better, and more to the honour of our Sex, for you to
fetch him hither?


Away, away; are you a man, and stand upon such Effeminate Punctilio's? You see
he has met you half way; and you cannot in honour, but observe the appointed
place of Combat.


So, in effect, the Challenge will prove no better than an Assignation.


No matter: 'tis the pleasanter Encounter; and that sort of single Combat has
less of danger in it.


As it may happen, Brother. -- But let that pass. A Sudden thought is sprung
within my breast (as the new Play has it) -- you say he fancies me extremely,
as I am a Boy?


Yes.


And withal, he has a very great love for my Name, as I am your Sister in
Darbyshire: I mean, Love by hear-say.


'Tis very true. --


Enough. Come along; we'll to him immediately: But observe that you do and say
exactly what I tell ye, as we go.


Well! thou art so full o'thy Tricks!


Methinks my little Monsieur makes me wait too long: I am almost a weary with
walking for him. Hum. Susppose he has fought Ned Goodfeild in earnest, and so
the Constables have apprehended them in the Fact, and thereupon conveyed'em
both to a certain place. -- Yet it cannot be so, I'm confident; that little
fellow cannot be a Fighter -- and yet what a Devil makes him so tedious? they
might have dispatcht it one way or other before this time. I long to see my
young opposite; 'tis a very witty Rogue; and I know the Duel will prove but a
Wit combat at most -- But these delays are nought for Wit, as well as Love and
Fighting -- Pox on it, the humour's gone over before we draw our Weapons. --
Well, l'll take the other Turn, and then --


Look where he walks yonder, as dull as a Platonic Lover: Is it the thought of
Fighting makes him thus pensive?


No, I assure you: he's none of those. -- Jack Truman.


Ned! art thou alive still? -- What! my little Bully too? Now I perceive thou
art a Boy of thy word. I thought thou would ha'proved Recreant.


Who, I fall back from my own Challenge? Gad, Sir, you have nothing about ye,
that I'm afraid of.


Hark ye, Jack; a word in private. -- Do you observe this little Raskal?


Aye, what's the matter?


Little do you think what was his Affair with me this morning -- he had no
design of fighting.


Why, I always thought so. -- He a fighter? who a Devil can fancy, that
Smock-face to look like a Hector?


In brief, Jack, he is a young fellow of a good Estate in our Country; I have
often heard of him, but never saw him till now: When he challenged me
yesterday, 'twas only to procure a more private opportunity of discourse; and
now he tells me, he is much a Servant to my Sister, and loves her to the last
point: my Mother knows nothing, but he has made several addresses to her, and
finds she is wholly at my disposal, and will never fancy any one, but who I
commend: And now he comes to open himself to me, and get my good will, as they
say. --


He seems moved at this. I warrant him a thorough-paced-Lover.


This is the way to try him, Wench. --


And so; you have consented?


What a question is there! Have not I engaged my self to thee? -- Thou hast
obliged me with a Mistress, Jack Truman; and e'faith I'll fit thy humour with
an other. -- As for the Squire there --


Damn him; does he come hither to disturb my Amours? -- Hark ye,
Country-Gentleman.


'Say ye, Sir?


Nay, nay, leave your Grimace, and be serious: I am not disposed to railly. --
I understand you pretend to a young Lady in the Country that is my Mistress.
Look ye, Mister -- you must quit your claim to her, and that quickly too, or I
shall give your little Worship much Correction; do you mind me? much
Correction: for I hate a Rival, and love her extremely.


And never saw her in your life? I perceive you are a good Catholic lover, and
have a strong implicit faith. It were a happy time for crooked Virgins, and the
like, if all Matches might be made thus, without Demonstration.


These are but idle words: Come, Sir, to the matter. Will ye surrender your
Mistress?


How, Sir, surrender? Morblew! do you talk of surrendering, when I come here to
bid you battle? -- Look ye, Sir, there's Mr. Goodfeild on your side, if he
please, and I have here my friend to oppose him; so that we are provided of
Seconds: But I confess I had rather fight ye single.


Aye, aye, let it be so. -- But I could wish --


That I would surrender without fighting --


No: that thou were more a man, and then I need not blush at such a little
Conquest.


For my part, I'll be ingenious. I confess I have been a servant to your
Mistress; and to tell ye true, I have been very familiar with her: therefore,
look ye, I care not two pins if I do quit her to ye, for once; but I must tell
ye, you'll have no such Prize of her. She's damnably Crooked, and all that:
then she paints like the Devil: she has a Mouth like a Monster: and is blind
of one Eye: her Nose, I confess, is a rich one; but (to be brief) she has the
poorest Presence that e're ye saw in a woman. Then for her Wit and Genius, 'tis
as defective as her Beauty. -- With such a Match as this is, give ye Joy, Sir.


Why, this is not to be endured! I'd rather he had continued still to be my
Rival, than thus blaspheme my Mistress. -- Come, Sir, draw --


Hold, Jack; be thine own Judge whether she lies, or no.


Nay, nay, let him run his Mistress through, and see who'll repent it.


Mock me not, friend: can I be so happy to find a Mistress in a Rival? -- Oh,
Madam!


Where was now your good Genius to prompt ye? (as you know who says) -- Perhaps
you'll say my Brother plaid that part. -- Come, put up, put up your Weapon,
Sir; you are a little too forward: 'tis not the Mode to quarrel 'till after
Marriage.


Well, Madam, by this fair hand --


No threatenings, I beseech you, Sir. Your great Threatners are ever the least
performers.


Are you not much surprised, Jack, at this discovery?


Extremely; but more pleased.


Nay, I my self was as great a stranger to the Intrigue, till this morning. --
Come, you shall know all, as we go.


Aye, aye, let's return: Now my Duels are over, I have no more occasion for the
open field.


True, Sister: A private apartment is much more proper for what's like to
follow.


But as we walk, Madam, how are you pleased I shall treat ye in this disguise?
as a Mistress, or a friend?


As a friend, Sir, for life. If you appear too servile while I am in Breeches,
you will encourage me to wear 'em always. --


Here's my boy -- Honnow, Sirrah, what's the matter?


Sir, this Letter was brought to your Chamber this morning. I have been in
quest of ye at several places, and at last imagined you might be here a
walking.


Look here, Ned Goodfeild, this comes to me from Spruce, Docket's Clerk; no
doubt it contains intelligence of your Mistress -- read it.


Sir, my Master, the Venerable Attorney Mr. Docket, sallies forth this morning
to one Madam Goodfeild, a rich Country-Widow, I mean a Wooing, or perhaps
something more; for if I can apprehend any thing from what I hear, 'tis
possible it may succeed. He began with her last night in no ill hour, and
(according to a Widows expedition in these affairs) he may meet with his match
this morning. -- But this is not the business of my Letter. If you have any
affairs with Mistress Lucia, you may use your discretion. Be at your Chamber,
and within these few hours you shall receive further assistance from

Your Servant I. S.




Frank, dost thou hear? why, this is he that Loveal mentioned at the window.


Assuredly.


Then have I obliged a poor Lover, and never knew it. No doubt but I have had a
great hand in making this Match.


How's that?


Being minded last night to Gallant my Mother, not dreaming that she had a
Servant, I gave her a Song, and the Fiddles, about twelve: to be short, her
Maid came to the window, and from her Mistress told us, she knew we were Mr.
Docket's Music, and very honestly confessed he had much engaged her; or words to
that purpose.


Gad, ye have done well. Did you but know the nature of the beast, you would not
fancy him for a Father-in-Law, of all men living.


Oh! what a Coup d'etourdy have I committed?


No more of that: 'Tis a very happy accident, and will conduce much to our
advantage, for a Reason that I know. -- In the mean time, Ned, we must be
active: 'Tis a shame that young people should be outstripped in their Amours, by
two such old Creatures, that have not known what Love is, and the true ends of
Marriage, these twenty years. Let's see who shall be married first of all us,
and the Devil take the hindmost. -- I am for this morning.


And I.


Nay, nay, though the old folks dote, and are hasty, it would not become us to
do so. Marriage is a serious thing, and should be thought of. Pray let's look a
little before we leap into Wedlock.


How now, Sister! did not you commit your self to my conduct this morning? Gad,
I'll not have my Amours put off one minute for ye, an you were my flesh and
blood a thousand times more than ye are.


Nay, be not furious, Brother. Ha, ha, ha, I know what's what as well as all
the Brothers in England. For my part, look ye, if it must be so, ye shall find
me civil.


Well, Ned, I'll go now about thy Affair: In the mean time I commit my dear
Mistress to thy charge. As we go, I'll appoint where to meet thee with thine,
before the Canonical hour be over.


Come, Sister, now I'm at your service, to wait upon you to your Lodgings, and
help to shift ye.


Sweet Sir, I have a Maid.


Then I'll shift her.


That you sha'nt I assure you, Sir; for to shift a Maid, is to make her a
woman.


Loveal, what's a clock?


'Tis near Eight, Madam.


Come, dress me quickly; for I'm resolved to make a day on it. I protest, Mr.
Docket's Music run in my head all night.


They call it Serenading here in London, as the people of the house tell me:
Without doubt it was a sign of great kindness to your Ladyship. Well; I vow,
Madam, I dreamt of him to night, and me thought he was such a fine man; and
performed things so well. -- Oh, Iupiter, that I had but such a Husband, I
could be contented to stay a whole half year longer on that condition.


Nay, Wench, I confess he is a well-made man: But methinks I could wish he were
a little younger.


O, Madam, ne'er fear that: I warrant he's tough; and though his hair looks now
a little grisled, yet one may easily perceive 'twas black; and that's a hardy
colour, and holds out well. -- But did you observe his Nose, Madam?


Aye, aye, 'tis a promising Member. But that which likes me best, was to see
how loving he appeared in his drink last night: He must needs be good
conditioned. -- Well, Loveal, how say thou, had I best encourage his Wooing,
or send him a flat denial? what's thy advice?


Advice, Madam? I hope there needs no advice in the matter: if your own flesh
and blood can't advise ye, you are in a sad condition. For my part, Madam, I'll
tell ye true, if I were under your Ladyships Coats, I'd make no more ado but
send him a comfortable Message, and marry him this very morning.


Nay, I know there's seldom any good comes of delaying.


I'm sure, Madam, if you had lost so many Suitors as I have by that means, and
been so often Bobbed as I have been, you'd hate a put-off as you hate the Devil.


Well said, Wench; nay, nay, I am not much averse to the business: I only felt
you a little, how you were inclined; and since I find you are of my opinion, I
perceive two heads are better than one. -- Prithee, Loveal, call the Boy.


Jack -- he's a coming, Madam.


Come hither, Sirrah. Can you go to Mr. Dockets? and come again presently; and
not play at Chuck-farthing by the way?


Yes forsooth, Madam.


Yet it's no matter, neither. -- Is Trupenny about the house?


Yes, Madam.


Go, send him to me quickly.


Yes, Madam.


I vow, Madam, our Boy is become very mannerly of late.


Aye, aye, Wench; I hope to get credit by him: and your proud Citizens Wives
shall see that we in the Country can tell how to breed other peoples children,
too, if we are minded. -- But here comes Trupenny. Steven. What, you went home
with Mr. Docket last night?


Yes, Madam: And I protest, he kept me with him above an hour, to toss your
Ladyships Health over and over in a quart of Mum.


Well, Steven, in my mind your Mum is not comparable to our Darbyshire-Ale: it
has a good Body, indeed, but is nothing so palletable.


Kuds niggers, Madam, you say true: it tastes so strong of Beans, o'my
conscience they Malt Beans in that Country where they make it, and so put in a
double quantity of Hops, and that's all.


Nay, nay, I believe I could tell how to brew Mum, an I had a mind. -- But let
that pass: Come hither, Steven, and mind what I say. I would have ye go
presently to Mr. Dockets -- do you observe?


Yes, Madam.


Well: tell him, I sent you to see how he does this morning -- would not that
be best, Loveal?


No, Madam, I think it would be better thus -- tell him, my Lady and I -- do you
observe me, Steven? -- present our Service to him, and would desire him of all
Love --


Awe, Loveal, I doubt that would not be handsome, neither. Therefore, do you
mind me, Steven? only tell him this, I would have him make haste, and put on a
clean Band, and --


Oh, Madam, never talk of a clean Band; he'll wear a Cravat to day, sure,
though he ne'er wore one in his life before. Look ye, Steven, mind me; Tell
him thus; First of all knock at the door, and ask if he be within, then ask if
he be stirring; then he'll send for you up to his Bed-side -- I protest, Madam,
I think ye had better let me go, foro'my Conscience, he'll ne'er do the
business handsomely.


I warrant ye, Madam. -- Lord, Mrs. Loveal, do you think your self such a woman
for the business? I hold a Crown, I do it as well as you can for your heart and
blood, or your Mother before ye. --


Well, good Steven, no more words, but make haste; and tell him only this, I
would have him come and speak with me presently, and I shall satisfy him in
the business which he mentioned last night. This is all at present, but run,
good Steven, for fear he be gone out.


I shall, Madam.


Hark ye, Steven, tell him, my Lady desires he would bring his man with him
that was here last night.


He don't hear. -- But 'tis no matter; leave that to me; I'll provide thee a
Husband, I warrant thee, Wench.


Aye, Madam, you have often said so; but words are wind, and I want something
that's more substantial.


Nay, if I say I will, I will; though it cost me a hundred pound. -- Come, put
on my shoos.


I'll fetch'em, Madam; they are in the next Room.


No matter: I'll go thither my self, and take one Pipe, and by that time,
perhaps, the party will be come.


Sir, what are you pleased shall be done in Mr. Richman's business? the Sheriff
of Essex has returned nulla Bona on the sifa; and to take out a Casa, would be
to little purpose; for I am told, the Defendant can't be found in rerum
naturum, and some say he's gone to Sea.


No matter; let that rest. The Plaintiff have not fee'd me for Expedition this
Term. -- But have you delivered the Declarations in Ejectment yet?


What, those in Holborn, Sir?


Yes, in Com. Middlesex.


No, I protest, Sir, not yet.


O fie, Thomas, don't you know the Tenants in Possession are to appear and
defend Crastino Trin? and you no forwarder? -- Away, man, and about it
presently; and as ye go, take the Devonshire Latitats, and seal 'em. But do you
hear, Thomas, be sure ye return within this hour, for I intend then to go
forth; and we must not be both out.


It shall be done, Sir.


This Dashwel, is a rare fellow for business: I protest, I have had many
Clerks, but never had the like. Spruce, come hither: Do you observe the
Talents of your fellow Dashwel?


Yes, Sir; they are something long. He cuts his Nails but once a fortnight, and
then observes the Moon precisely.


Ye Fool; I mean his gifts, and Qualifications.


Cry ye mercy, Sir, I understand ye now. Indeed, Sir, he writes an excellent
Hand; but his Court is beyond comparison.


That's not all, Spruce, that's not all: He's one that loves the Law, nay,
dotes upon the Law; I mean, the Practick part: and o'my conscience he was cut
out for a Practiser in his Mothers belly. He's one that has found out the
amorous Beauties, and the ravishing Graces of Practice; things that none can
perceive, but such a one as he is. In comparison to these, he hates your Plays,
your Masquerades, your Serenades, your Revellings (except only at Christmas,
and then the good Soul is ravished in the Temple-hall where he drinks small
Beer, and sees'em dance till his belly aches again) but above all things, he
abhors, like a child of the Law, your damned Poetry; with which, Spruce, I
fear you are a little infected.


Who I, Sir? God forbid. I vow, I have so great an aversion to Meeter, and all
that, that if you'll believe me, I dare not sing Psalms for fear of the worst.


Nay, Spruce, there you are again a the other side: I would not have ye think
there's any harm in Robert Wiseman's Psalms, nor in the old Song of Chevie
Chase, but that they may be both used, and very innocently. And more than so, I
believe there are some Volumes of Meeter that are very convenient, and of great
use in a Lawyer's Study, as The Garland of Good will, The furious fight of
Floddon-field, and all Mr. Wither's his Works; all these I believe Dashwel has,
and need not be ashamed of 'em. Nay, I can very well remember, when I first
learnt Court-hand I had all the Ballat of the Two little Children by heart, and
me thought it was so comfortable. But that which ought to be odious to the
understanding of all true Clerks, is your modern Poetry, your new fashion or
modish Poetry, your Play-Poetry, or Dramatic Meeter, your ranting and tearing
Poetry, your Poetry that breaks windows, or, as they themselves call it, your
Heroic Poetry. --


Trupenny, with urgent business from his Lady.


Oh, Sweet Mr. Trupenny! Let me embrace my dear friend: And how does thy good
Lady, ha? I protest, Mr. Trupenny, I was resolved to wait upon her within this
half hour, to know her resolutions in the business aforesaid: You understand
me?


Lord, Sir! how you and my Lady jump together. Let me never stir now, if she
has not sent me to you for the very same end and purpose; namely, that ye
should hye ye to her, and she'd give your Worship all the satisfaction
imaginable.


Say thou so, old boy? hold, here's six Fees I protest, a whole Guiny for
thy good news: Ten groats is below such a Message -- Spruce, here, take my Hat,
run, fetch my new Beaver, my Cane and my Gloves, quickly: I'll not demur a
minute. Oh, Sweet Mr. Trupenny!


I vow to God, Sir, you are such an obliging man. -- Pray, Sir, have ye done
any thing in Mrs. Betty's business? I make bold to ask, because my Lady has
ordered me to slit that cause, as they say.


Not yet, Sir; I protest, I have been so busy: But it shall be dispatcht in
good time.


Nay, nay, let it rest: 'tis fit the old one should be served first.


Sir, here are your things.


Well said: Give 'em me. So; now, Mr. Trupenny, I am ready to wait upon ye.
Come, Sir --


After you, Sir --


Lord, Mr. Trupenny, you are so Complemental! I vow, you shall go first --


Well, if it must be so --


O Lord, what had I forgot! Now if my life lay on it I cannot go till Dashwel
returns.


I hope not so, Mr. Docket. God knows what occasion my Lady has of ye.


Ah, Mr. Trupenny, ye say true; and I would go with all my heart; but if you
did but know what occasion I have to stay at home at this time, you would not
blame me -- Hark ye, Sir, a word in private. You must know, Mr. Trupenny, I
have here in the house a very pretty young Niece, a great fortune she is: her
Father and Mother are both dead, but that's all one, for I am her Guardian.


How's this? a pretty woman in the house, and I ne'er set eye on her as oft as I
have been here? Time has been, that I have smelt out a pretty Wench at a
streets length: it's a sign I grow old.


Nay, never wonder, Mr. Trupenny: She always keeps her Chamber, or to say true,
I keep her there. For I protest, here are so many idle fellows about the Town,
that I dare not let her be seen, as little as possibly. And besides that, I
have a constant eye upon her my self; but in my absence, I commit that trust
generally to Dashwel. As for this Spruce, he's a sly fellow, and I dare not
leave her to him.


What, you are afraid they would be nought together while you are out? not
unlikely.


No; but he's a cunning Raskal in these affairs: and who knows but he may let
her out to some young fellow, or else help some young fellow in to her?
Therefore I dare not trust him; and yet I would sain go to your Lady. --


What an unlucky thing is this! Is there no way? --


O Lord, Mr. Trupenny, now I think on it -- are you engaged in any urgent
business, at this time?


All my business was only to you, Sir, with this Message -- But since you can't
come, I must return, and let my Lady know it.


No, no, that sha'nt be. I'll go my self: But in the mean time, sweet Mr.
Trupenny, let me conjure you, as you are my friend, and the like, to stay
behind and supply my place, as it were. You understand me? 'Tis but only till
Dashwel comes, which will be within this half hour.


Nay, nay, if that be all, let me alone to watch her water; I'm old dog at that
office. I dare swear, I have occupied the place above twenty times in the
Country.


O, Sir, how you oblige me? Well, I'll leave ye. Say nothing, but fall into
discourse with Spruce, and all's, well. I have tarri'd too long from your Lady,
I confess, but I'll redeem the time, and run all the way.


What, is he gone, and does this fellow stay? O the Devil! Truman; and then
I've lost my Credit for ever. Some trick must be thought of. -- Dear Sir, how
glad am I my Master has left us together? I have often wished this happy
opportunity, to be better acquainted with good Mr. Trupenny. I vow, Sir, you
are the goodest Gentleman I ever met with.


O, Sir, your humble Servant. No great Gentleman neither: My Father was a
High-constable, and I am my Lady's Steward, in default of a better -- But I
pray, Mr. Spruce, if a man may be so bold -- what a clock is't?


Not bolder than welcome, I assure ye, Sir. Why truly, Sir, I think 'tis
betwixt nine and ten.


Aye, Sir; but I meant to have craved a glass of your small Beer, but I protest
I was almost ashamed.


Indeed, Sir, it's none of the best, being very thin, and something sour: and
(as you say very well) it's a shame to drink it.


Not so neither, Sir; I do not mean so, Sir; but I vow to Gad, Sir, your Master
pli'd me so with Mum last night, that I'm as dry this morning, as a Post horse;
and my stomach is a little -- as it were.


Shall we go to the next Apothecaries, and drink a Gill of Stomach-water?


No, Sir, no, that needs not; my Lady has an excellent water in the Country
that she makes her self: but that's nothing, you'll say, we are here, and
that's there.


When all's done, I say, after a nights drinking, there's no settler like a
Dose of the same next morning. Come, Sir, you shall go with me to a place hard
by, where there's excellent Mum; faith, we'll have one pint together. Nay, it
sha'nt cost ye a farthing.








Why don't ye hear, man?


Oh, cry ye mercy; I hear it now: 'Tis a young Lady of my acquaintance that
would be private.


Nay, nay, I w'ont disturb her.


To tell ye true, 'tis my Masters Niece, whom he has, for faults best known to
himself, confined to her Chamber. I perceive she is preparing for a Song; and
then you'll hear the best Voice in London, Mr. Trupenny.


Aye marry Sir, I love singing with all my heart; and time was, when I could a
--


Whist, whist.


Ah! how charming is the shade,
How sweet the calm delight,
That in this amorous Grove is made;
How cool the shade, and yet the day how bright!
Hark! the little Philomel
On yonder Bough complains,
And while she her sad tale does tell,
Echo replies in the same mournful strains.
Thus, thus, is both the eye and ear
Ravished with what they see and hear.
Does not all this
Invite us to soft Love, and mutual Bliss?
See my Clymene, see,
How that enamoured pair of Doves
With melting Sympathy,
Enjoy their ever equal Loves.
They know no ears, nor feel they ought
To trouble the more pleasing thought.
Full of the same
Soft fire they burn, and cherish the kind flame.
Ah! happy, happy they!
We two may full as happy be,
If you but smile, and say,
Content, Amintas, I agree.
Content, Amintas, I agree.
By that sigh, with which the Lady concludes her Song, I presume, Mr. Spruce,
she is in Love.


Truly, Mr. Trupenny, it is not impossible; for our Ladies here in London are
apt, once in their lives at least, to love something or other: what they do in
the Country I know not. -- But a fig for your women, and all that belongs to
'em: Let us behave our selves like men. Methinks it is the unseemliest thing in
the world for us two to sit here like sots, when we have so excellent an
opportunity for a Voyage to the next Tavern or Ale-house, and taste a merry
Glass.





I perceive ye are all very sober men, in your Country.


Nay, nay, no more Sobriety than will do us good; but that's all one. Look ye,
Mr. Spruce, for your Wine I don't love it, and for your Ale, ye have not a drop
in London worth drinking; that's the short on it.


How, Mr. Trupenny, not a drop worth drinking? Did you ever taste our Cock-ale?


Cock-ale, no; what's that?


Why, there you show your ignorance. Look ye, Sir, I lay ye five pound you
shall say, ye never tasted the like in the Country.


Nay, nay, nay, nay, five pound is a wager not to be laid among friends; and
besides that, I have not so much about me; but I hold a Crown, let it be what
it will, we have Ale in Darbyshire worth ten on it. --


Ye make me mad. I hold an Angel to your Crown, that after the first Bottle,
you your self shall confess, that for Colour, Taste, Farewell, Body, and all
that, it excels your Darbyshire, as far as your Darbyshire excels your
Dashwood.


How, I confess it? Sir, here's the Guiny your Master gave me even now, I wager
this to your Angel, I'll be hanged first. Come, lead away; this wager shall be
tried presently. -- I'll stand up for my Country while I breathe.


But perhaps you are otherways engaged at present; or perhaps you have made a
vow not to he seen in an Ale-house.


No matter for that, Sir, I'll not suffer my Country to be run down, by ne'er a
pitiful Londoner in England. Come along, Sir.


Nay, then prepare to say, we've better drink.


Which if I do, I'll hang; that's fair I think.


WEll, now I have brought ye together, ye know best your own Affairs, and how
to husband time with most advantage. I must return to my Steward, that was so
lately, Madam, your trusty Overlooker.


Prithee, what hast thou done with him?


Why, faith, Sir, after I had drawn him from his Post, by the means I told ye,
I very soberly conveyed my Gentleman to the Cock-ale-house, where in conclusion
he will be very drunk: for, as good luck would have it, I was no sooner
entered, but I met there a certain true Trojan (indeed a Brother Clerk of my
acquaintance) I left him, after a charming glass or two gone round --


But missing you, may he not make an escape, suspecting --


His Companion's more trusty Keeper. No, Sir, no, he's as fast as if he were in
the Stocks for three lives; I mean, for parting Compose mentis. If he have not a
better opinion of London-Liquor ever after, let 'em spare their Cocks, and boil
me in the next Brewing: And that shall be called Spruce-ale -- Oh, how your
City-wives will flock to it!


Sir, your Coach is ready, and waits where you appointed:


Enough. Come, Madam, give me the honour to conduct you to your Servant; whom
when you have known but half as well as I do, you will confess to be the
worthiest Lover, as I the best of Friends.


You see, Sir, what a confidence I give to what you tell me, and how I trust
your Conduct. I must confess, with many Blushes, I have no Aversion to his love
or person: But still I tremble when I think my Uncle (whose severe nature I too
well know) may dash my happiness with many sorrows.


Think not of that, dear Madam, Fortune is more indulgent. Your Uncle is this
morning with my Friend's Mother, a rich Widow, in the height of his Wooing:
And you may easily conclude, Madam, he dares not show displeasure at her Sons
Match, since so advantageous, for that's the way to disoblige his Mistress.


Then, Sir, why may not he know it beforehand?


By no means. If so, he will undoubtedly by some sinister means prevent it, and
that purely for lucre of your Portion, Madam: But when 'tis done, he cannot
disapprove it, for the former Reason. Besides, an opportunity or advantage once
neglected, is in Love, as in a Battle, never to be recovered. --


Oh, Madam! we are all defeated: Yonder comes Dashwel, your old spy; if he sees
us here, or finds us not at home, he'll raise the Hue and Cry, and we are lost
for ever.


Fear nothing; but you three cross over there, and away: Leave me to him, and
if I don't prevent his doing mischief, think me a duller sot than he is.


Oh! you are a rare one, to stay thus long.


I could not help it for my heart and blood, I vow now. A Country-man, an old
acquaintance, met me in Holborn, and would needs give me a Pint. -- But is my
Master gone out?


No.


Then omnia been. I'll make haste to him, for I know he sits upon thorns. --


Hold. You must not go in: there's Madam Goodfeild with him, and they are
private. But should you know all, you'd cut your throat, that's certain, for
being out of the way.


What, Felo de se? I'll be hanged first. -- But prithee, good Spruce, what's
the matter?


O'my Conscience, you deal with the Devil, or else you were wrapped in your
Mothers Smock; one of the two, I'm confident. Come, come, I know you make use of
Philters, Amulets, and Lovepotions, or something of that nature. --


If I do, the Dews take me. You know there's the Statute of Primo against it.


Aye, aye, but that's nothing: for here was Mrs. Loveal came with her Lady; but
now she's gone. --


Ah, what a Rogue was I to be away. -- Ah, sweet Mrs. Loveal! and how much she
made of me last night!


Look ye; I knew you would run mad at this, and never hear me out.


Yes, yes, I will hear thee: Dear Spruce, say on.


With Mrs. Loveal came a delicate young thing about Eighteen, whom she called
Couzin; but I vow, she was the finest woman, I e're saw in my life --


Oh! --


Such a pretty Mouth, and such a little plump Lip, --


Oh! --


A little nimble Hand and Foot; and then withal so slender, you might span her.
--


Oh! --


Round amorous Breasts, that heave and pant with Love: white and soft as Down
of Swans --


Oh! --


Then to crown all, an Eye like any Basilic -- you know, Tom, a Basilic has a
delicate Eye.


Aye, aye, -- Oh! that I had been at home. Oh! that cursed Country-man, and
that damned Tavern.


Mrs. Loveal had not been entered so long as you might tell one hundred, but
that she asked me for ye -- and smiled like any thing.


Did she e'faith? I vow, I am beholding to her.


I told her you were abroad. At this she seemed as sad as if she'd had her
purse cut.


Alack, alack, Poor heart!


After this she staid but little; and parting, with a low Courtesy, desired me
to remember her Love to ye, and tell ye, she and her Couzin were going directly
to the Folly, where they should both be very glad to see ye.


Edad, I'll go put on a clean pair of Sleeves, and follow 'em immediately. --


Ye be not mad? If ye loose time ye loose 'em. They are hardly got to the
Temple-stairs yet: Away directly, 'tis ten to one you overtake 'em.


Ye say true; farewell. If my Master ask for me, make some Lye or other, and
all's well.


Let me alone for lying -- But do you hear? She bid me tell you, that if you
find 'em not at the Folly, you will not fail to have 'em in the long Walk at
the New-spring-garden.


Enough --


One word more. -- But, says she, If we should chance to be gone from thence,
he will be sure to meet me at my Couzins Lodgings --


Dear Spruce, where's that?


At the sign of the Windmil in the Old-pell-mell.


Enough, enough; I'll not delay my joys one minute longer.


So; thou art secure for one three hours. This Dashwel is the easiest Gudgion!
he gulps a Lye as readily as Jugglers swallow Knives. Now to my Steward; if he
has swallowed Glasses with equal haste and pleasure, he's in his altitudes by
this time.


NOW I can call you Sister again, with a safe Conscience. Methinks, before ye
looked like a Brother of the Blade, or a kind of little Huff. -- Come, bear up,
the Rendezvous is not far off.


Methinks you are grown very Heroic, Brother? you think of nothing but close
fighting. For my part, since I am returned to Petticoats again, my mind is not
so masculine as lately. And I consider, more distance would more become this
Habit.


Cunning Hypocrite! Now should not I proceed in this Assignation, you your self
would be my chief Tormentor; and my own flesh and blood, like another Brutus,
would give me the first Bodkin. --


As sure as can be.


Fie, fie, Sister, be more ingenious: This backward dissimulation of a longing
Female, is odious in a Person of Quality, and a Town-Lady, and shows the
coursest breeding in the world. I shall be ashamed to keep you company, unless
you converse with more Integrity and Candour.


Faith, Brother, I can't help it. Since I shifted my Apparel, I am infected
with what belongs to a Petticoat and Waistcoat: 'tis the humour of the Garment,
and therefore you must pardon me.


I do; but Jack Truman shall prescribe your Penance, which if it be more
pleasant than the fault deserves, you ought to thank your too indulgent
Confessor.


A propos: Let us make haste then to the place of Exccution. But by the way,
Brother, let me tell you, I think it would be better if --


Away with your impertinent Propositions. I think there is nothing in nature so
Capricious as a she-wit. Is this a time for advice, when it is now near eleven
a clock, and you know what we are to do effectually before twelve?


Yet do but hear my Reasons.


Well, Madam, since we are agreed on the main point in Issue, and you are
pleased once more to lie under Covert-Baron, there's now no more to be done,
but to turn down this lane, and we shall quickly arrive at an honest Parson's,
my intimate acquaintance, indeed the Ordinary of Newgate, who will give us the
Book of Matrimony as compendiously as if he were to teach the Neckverse.


Soft, Mr. Docket, though we have a Country-proverb, that Marriage and Hanging
go by Destiny, yet methinks, for lucksake, I would not be marri'd by one that
deals so near the Gallows.


The truth is, Madam, he has often promised to marry me for nothing: but that's
all one; rather than displease my dear Widow, I am content to loose his
Assumpsit. How like ye, Madam, to be marri'd by a Reader of an Inns a Court? I
know 'em all.


By no means, Sir: Do your Readers at the Inns a Court marry folks? Never stir,
now that's as bad as to be marri'd by a Justice of Peace, out upon it!


Nay, my Dear, you mistake me clearly. I mean, a Chappel-Reader.


Cry ye mercy, Mr. Docket, I understand ye now. Well, Sir, what you please. --
O my heart! Come hither, Loveal; do ye know those two that stand talking
yonder?


As I hope to live and do well, Madam, I dare say 'tis Mr. Edward Goodfeild,
and Mrs. Betty, your Ladyships only Son and Daughter. Nay, I'll be sworn
yonder's Frank too.


I vow, I think so. But how come they together, and in London? I left my
Daughter in the Country, and sure an God'll my Son's at Cambridge.


I fear me, Madam, there's some naughty design in hand; for I dare swearupon a
Book 'tis they.


Never trouble your self, Madam, London's a large place, and here's one body or
other like every body in the Nation. For my part; I have sometimes met some-body
as I have been going along the street, as like some-body as I know, as e're you
saw; and yet when all came to all I have been deceived.


Now let me die, and all that, Brother, but yonder's my Mother and her new
Servant, a't'other side the way; and as the Devil would have it, she has spied
us. What shall we do in this case? this is no time to take notice of Mothers.


Well, to be sure, Loveal, we'll walk softly before. Do you step over the way,
and see if it be they for certain, and then follow us.


Brother, we are all undone: This wicked Mother of ours has sent her woman over
to make further discovery. Look where she comes*


Madam, you spoil all: Be not surprised, but you two stand aside as
unconcerned, and leave me to her; if I don't send her off with less
satisfaction than she came on, say I'm not worth your Service.


Belamy! Ah, how bless am I to see me good Friend a Londres! Merdugues, I am
de happy woman in de varlde.


What means this Gibberish? I understand not a word she says.


Ah, Madame, you cunno I speak no good Englesh. I have been but two day in dis
City. Mais Ie Scais bien que vous parlez bon Francois.


Now, for ought I know, she bids the Devil take me, in French. Lord, to see how
I was mistaken, to think this was Frank. Well, I'll even back again, and say
nothing, lest I appear as much beside the Cushion as she is


Belamy, verfore are you so estrange? Ma foy, have you oblie how ver merry we
were ensemble last soomer, vid Messieurs de Cour Dauphnie, at de little
Caberet, Au teste noir, in de Ru'e St. Jasques a Paris? Look you, Madame, dere
stand me ver good friend Monsieur le Marquis de Montausiere, vid his Sister
Madame de Fountain-amante. Give me de honour, Je vous supply, to introduce you
into his cunnisance: you'll find him de ver noble Gentlemane, and he'll make
ver mush of your body, begar.


Pray let me go, Mistress. -- Fie upon her, for a naughty woman! I shall be
undone if I stay.


You need no be affear, sweet Madam Belamy, he was ver well cure a Roan, before
he came in Engleterre, begar.


Let me go, I say. I know ye not, not I. And you are mistaken in me, that you
are; I am none of those you take me for: my name's Loveal, and not Bellany --
How I hate the looks of these French people! It's no wonder we can't abide em.
For my part, I never saw any of 'em before, and I hope, never shall again --
Let me go, I say.


Ma foy, Madame; me ask your pardon tres-humblement, if you be not dat good
English Lady Maistress Belamy, in whose company I have had the great honour to
be garanted a Paris and Fountainbleau. Yet for that you are so ver like the
good graces of me dear friend, if you do please to go along vid Monsieur,
Madame, and your Servant, to a little Frigate below de bridge, we have dere one
two tree glasses of ver excellent Frontiniack, and de little Collation, to
which you will do very great honour, Si vous plaist.


O Lord, a Spirit, a Spiritd a French Spirit! I shall be carried to Barbado's.
Away, Spirit, farewell, Satan; I have heard of your tricks. But soft, older and
wiser.


Well* how like ye my dispatch?


Oh, most cleverly done, Wench! 'Twas a neat Conveyance; there's ne'er a Lawyer
of 'em in Town can draw a better. Take my best French Point, tomorrow, for thy
witty French Wheedle.


Faith 'twas a most important Service, my Girl: and Monsieur the Marquess de
Montausere is your very humble Servant for it. Without doubt, had Loveal been
confirmed in her untimely knowledge of us, it would have been no small
obstruction to our Designs.


Yet was the pleasure of the action greater than the profit. I vow, Madam de
Fountain-amante had much ado to keep the due Grimace proper to a person of her
Quality, and not laugh outright. -- But, I'll stay here no longer, Brothers,
not only to avoid such another Rencounter, but chiefly, because I long to be at
my Journeys end.


That is, you think it long to night. I understand ye, Sister.


'Tis well you do: walk you before, while my Maid ties my shoo-string -- I'll
follow immediately --


Prithee make haste --


So, he is gone


'Slife, Madam, what will your Brother and Servant apprehend from such delays?
--


No matter for my Brother; as for my Servant, this is my last effort to
exercise his patience, and try how much he loves me -- Come away, away --


WEll, all this can't be helped. But the Devil's in the Cards, that's plain. Uds
bud, I've played at Put a thousand times, and a thousand to that, but I never
had such cursed luck before -- Come, Sir, shuffle: But first let's draw the
Table more to the light; Gad I have drunk so much, I can scarcely see.


Sha, sha! this is nothing: Give me a man that can sit at it from twelve at
noon, to twelve at night, then go to bed sober, and swear there's no strong
drink in London: there's your true English heart of Oak.


As I live Mr. Clarke, you say finely. -- But let us to our Books again --


Ten such as these would over-run the Low Countries, and drown all Germany in a
Rummer. Come, Sir, before we go any further, here's one brimmer to your better
fortune. ( drinks) Faith, Sir, you have the worst luck of any man living. Loose
Eleven games together and never turn Stake? why, you don't drink well, man.
Unless you ply the Glass with better Courage, you'll never win a game at One
and thirty.


Say ye so? Nay, then fill it up; I'll do ye right, e'faith, Boy. If you
provoke me once at this Weapon, you'll find me a mad Boy; I'll tell you that.


Sa, sa. That's he, that's he.


Now, Sir, deal. --


Why then I'm gone. You know, Sir, I'm bound and can't refuse: Play away --
that's mine; and there's a Tray, e'faith.


That's tied. --


Gad, there's another Tray, win it and wear it.


Uds, I've lost. Was ever such damned luck? -- Well, I won't leave ye yet --
Drawer, bring a fresh pack o'Cards -- Come, Sir, I'll double the Stakes; what a
Devil, I can't loose always -- Let me see --


How, Sir, lend? Sbud, Sir, you are not in earnest? what butter me with my own
money? this is worse than to play upon tick: You must know, Mr. Trupenny,
there's a Statute against it; and besides that, it is not the custom of London,
I assure ye.


No? why then -- hark ye, Drawer, a word with ye: thou seem an honest
fellow.


Faith, Sir, I can't, and it were to save my life. -- By and by, by and by, I
come, I come, Sir.


Why there's the Devil. Oh, here comes Mr. Spruce: nay; then I care not.


Gentlemen, I must seriously beg your pardon: I have been diverted by so many
unlucky accidents, that I protest, my stay has been almost an hour longer than
I intended.


There needs no Apology, sweet Mr. Spruce; we have been so seriously engaged
since you went, that we scarce ever thought o'you.


Well, then I hope you like the Ale, Mr. Trupenny. Come, where stands the
Glass? we'll whisk it about, e'faith, boys.


Nay, nay, nay, Mr. Spruce, never talk of that. Whisk quoth a? I have had
enough of Put, one would think; but that's all one. Hark ye, Mr. Spruce, one
word in private: Mr. Spruce, as I hope to live now -- yet first I should have
told ye -- but that's no matter neither -- then as I was saying, Sir, your
friend yonder has won Thirty shillings of me at half-Crown-put; and nothing
vexes me, but he has not left me money enough for another stake. Now, worthy
Mr. Spruce, as the saying is, I take you for my friend, and I hope to sinde ye
so: Can ye do a man the favour, Sir, as to lend a Crown, or an Angel? As I'm an
honest man, you shall have it again.


What to do, Mr. Trupenny?


Only to win my Thirty shillings back again: nothing else, I protest.


How, Mr. Trupenny, win it back? I perceive you don't know Mr. Clark: why he's
the only Put-man in Town. I hold ye six to four, an ye play with him till
midnight, ye shall never win two pence of him. He knows ye all the Cards as
well as he that made 'em; and then for the sleek, the nip, the double, and all
that, he is the Devil of a Gamester.


Nay, Guds sooks, if he be the Devil of a Gamester, I have nothing to say to
him. 'Sbud I always thought some such thing. -- But now, how shall we do to
pass the time? methinks now I'm in, I'm loath to leave good company.


What think ye of a Wench, Mr. Trupenny? I know a Miss hard by, that is
excellent company, Gad: What say ye?


Not a word more of that, if you love me, Mr. Spruce. For ought I know, she may
be the Devil of a Gamester too. And then, look ye, I had rather loose Thirty
shillings at Cards, than give a Surgeon Forty shillings for a cure, and Three
pound for seeresie. I must confess, look ye, Mr. Spruce, I love the sport well
enough; but pox on it, there's no doing in this noughty Town of London, (as my
Lady calls it.) Besides, Sir, should I get it, you understand me; Uds bud, Sir,
it were enough to spoil a whole Country. -- Come, come, without further
ceremony, let us all sit down, and drink while we can stand. Mr. Spruce, my
Service to ye.


Sir, your humble Servant --


But pray, Mr. Trupenny, why are you such an enemy to London?


Fough, I hate it. -- Why, did you never hear the Song?


The Song, what Song?


Why this 'tis to be an ignorant Londoner. -- I'll tell ye, Mr. Spruce, for you
are my friend, and an understanding person. It was made by a very honest fellow
in our Country that chanced to be at Bartholomew-fair once, and had his pocket
picked.


Aye, aye, I knew him very well; his name was Bartholomew Cokes.


No, Sir, he was none of your Cokes, I assure ye, but a Kinsman of mine at
Mansfield. To see how your'e mistaken with your Cokes 's. --


Nay, nay, never mind him, man, but on with your Song.


Cuds bud, it's the finest Song you e're heard in your life. The Clerk of our
Parish sings it rarely to the tune of the Sixteenth Psalm, and it will go to
Green sleeves, but that's all one -- I'll sing it as well as I can.


Aye, sweet Mr. Trupenny, let's have it.


Hem, hem. -- Faith, Gentlemen, my voice is but so, so. But that's no matter.
Time was when I could have done well; but --


O London, wicked London-Town!
Whose Spots so many and so brown,
Deform thy face in such a fashion,
Thou dost appear the one black Patch --
Yea, of the Nation.
Ye Ladies that wear powdered Toors:
Ye honest Women eek, and Whores,
Reform your lives, and by degrees
Leave the Back-fall, and rather fall --
Yea, on your knees.
Ye Gallants that wear Sword and Scabbard;
Ye Coopers eek, that deal in Clapboard,
Repent for shame: and do ye hear?
Drink no more Sack, but rather Ale --
Yea, drink small Beer.
Ye men of Trade that deal in Lying,
I mean, in Selling and in Buying,
Look to your Wives, for it is spoken,
They are as cracked as you your selves --
Yea, full as broken --
Boy, bring another Chamber-pot. Plague on ye, you Rogue, you never empty.

Did thou ever hear a foolish Song worse sung in thy life, Dick Clark?


'Tis beyond expectation ridiculous. -- But hang him; this Country-Fop begins
to be cursed drunk, and his humour will quickly become tedious: Let's dispatch
him, and away.


Withal my heart. The other Glass does the work.


Or else the Devil's in him. Let me die, I am consident the Sot has drunk at
least Eight or ten bottles for his own share in less than an hour. While he was
busy in play, I used to fill the Glass and set it by him, and he would never
mind, but take off Three or Four together in that manner. As for example, you
shall see -- Trupenny?


No, Sir, not droop; there's nothing of drooping in the case, I assure you; but
only I was thinking of a thing which I had quite forgot; that is, Mr. Spruce,
how I should have staid at your Master's Chamber, about a thing that I know --
But hanged let it pass, here's a Health in a Rummer.


I protest, Mr. Trupenny, you are the merriest man -- Ha, ha, he -- But all
this while I must not forget to be civil. Look you, Mr. Trupenny, here's one
Glass I'll put about to your best Concern; I mean, the good health of your good
Lady Madam Goodfeild -- Mr. Clark, my Service to you.


Hold, Sir -- you shall excuse me, efeckins.


What, not your Ladies health?


Not so, Sir; I do not mean so, Sir, I assure you: But only I'll begin it my
self -- well, I say nothing; but she's as good a Lady as any in England, and
has as able a Servant as any in the world -- but that's all one. I defy your
pimping Glasses Clark, here's to ye, with all my heart --


Ah, pure Country-frolick *


The Rogue's mad.


How he stares --


And blows --


And sweats at it. --


How now, Mr. Trupenny?





Rather, you want two -- Come, Clark, here's no more to be done. Now, which way
are you bound?


Here, Drawer, here's the Reckoning -- Faith, Jack, now I have recruited my
Pockets indifferently well; I must directly into Holborn: I have a certain
Intrigue there, with a Cutler's Wife, that must not be neglected. Farewell.


Drawer, run and fetch a Porter with a great Basket; and dost hear --


A little below Fetter-lane, say you, Sir?


Yes. I leave this to thy manage: Do it ingeniously, and here's shilling for
thy pains.


Thank ye, noble Master. Let me alone for Roguery --


E'faith, now, 'tis all off -- and -- e -- gad I can drink no more.


Let me help ye up, Sir, -- methinks you're something heavy --


Nay, nay, nay -- take off your Bottle, Mr. Spruce; Uds bud, I'll not bate ye
an Ace, look ye. -- Ho'now, what are you? the Drawer? Ah, poor little Drawer,
let me kiss thee -- where is Mr. Spruce, ye Rogue Drawer?


Sir, the Gentlemen are stepped into the next Room, only to --


As I hope to live, I'll follow them, and see my self pledged, and then, --
call a Coach, ye Rogue -- for I can drink no more, ye Rogue -- but will go home
like a Prince, ye Son of a Nine-eyes.


This way, Sir.


Lord! what a wide Town is this London; I have been, I believe, in Forty
several places, but cannot find my Mistress out -- nor in all my Jaunt I have
not met with Trupenny: Pray Heaven he be not spirited away by that strange
French creature -- Well, I dare swear she had the foul Disease, she spoke so
strangely; for I have heard folk say, it alters the speech much: Out upon her
for a filthy beast; I warrant it is so.


Mrs. Loveal! most happily met --


Mr. Spruce! I profess, I am glad I have met with some-body I know; I had like
to have been spirited away, which so scared me, that I was forced to run for
it; if I had not, I vow, I do believe I should ne'er have seen Darbyshire more.
But pray, Mr. Spruce, may I be so bold to ask where people use to be married in
London? for my Mistress is gone with Mr. Docket on that design, but I cannot
find 'em --


If you will permit me the honour of waiting on you, I will show you the place
--


Indeed, Sir, I would not trouble you; but if you can tell me where our Steward
Trupenny is, he shall go with me -- I protest to you, he has not seen home
since he went this morning to your Master's Chamber: I wonder where a murrain
he should be! --


I left him just now drinking a Glass at the Cock-ale-house, with a Country-man
of his, whom he met with by chance --


The Devil take him; he'll get drunk, and then there will be no ho with him: He
is as mad as a Buck in Rutting-time, when he is in his Beer, as they say --


But, Mrs. Loveal, I have a Request to you, in behalf of a poor despairing
Lover: good Soul, loosing his heart in your company, he is wandering about the
Town to find you out -- for they are your Eyes have conquered him --


Nay, good Mr. Spruce, no more, if you love me; you act the flattering Courtier
now -- but I confess, I have had some languishing looks in my time; I will
assure you, they have been called the Sun, Moon, and seven Stars too: Nay, I
believe I can look killingly still; see, Mr. Spruce, do I not? --


Such looks would kill a Basilisk --


Nay, nay, I could have done, but alas, alas, I grow old, yet not so old, but I
have seen my Elders doted on, aye, and by young men too -- I vow by my
Virginity, I am but forty odd --





Ha, ha, he, that is true; Trupenny knows it of me; but (though with much ado,
I must tell you) I am honest, I can assure you -- but not to appear uncivil,
May I, without offence, desire to know who this poor creature is? for I pity
him heartily; and I vow to you, I am so charitable, I would not have him cast
himself away for me, poor Soul, for the world --


To say true, it is Dashwel, my fellow-clerk --


Loving Mr. Dashwel -- now, Mr. Spruce, I dare swear Marriages are made in
Heaven; for I must confess -- yet, ha, ha, he, you will perhaps wonder at my
confidence, I have had a great kindness for him from the first time I saw him
-- but I vow, I mean honestly --


But you have not only vanquished him, but another too that has seen you, is
become your Admirer; and he being jealous of Dashwel, has on purpose sent him
out of the way, that he might have the freer converse with you -- and now --


Mr. Spruce, speak not for him -- if you do, I must deny you; for I vow to you,
I can like none but Mr. Dashwel --


Then woe to unfortunate Spruce, that must die with despair -- the wretchedest
creature on the earth --


Lord, Mr. Spruce, is't you? hold, hold, Sir, and take some of my Spirit to
comfort you -- but I fear you do but play the rogue.


I swear --


Nay, nay, I vow I believe you do not -- and tell you true, you are the only
man I wished to be my Husband; and to show my good nature -- see, I am ready to
sacrifice my self to your will: But ha! bless me, what's here?


Why, you young Sons of Whores, what ado is here? did you ne'er see a man ride
in a Coach before? -- Ha, Mr. Spruce, and my old Mother Midnight Loveal -- So
ho, Mr. Spruce. Mrs. Loveal, will you ride? hold Coach-man, hold you Rogue --
Yfeck 'tis fine riding.


Now, out upon him for a beast, and a shame take all ill-luck, say I, for
making me loose your good company: Now must I go put him to bed, or my Mistress
will lead me such a life -- for he is my charge when he is in this condition --
a filthy beast -- farewell, sweet Mr. Spruce, till an hour hence, and then I
will steal out to finish the business you wot of, if you think fit.


Farewell, Fondling.
Now to my Lovers
Whose serious Passion merits more success:
This is but Love-burlesque, or something less.

YOu see, Mr. Truman, I have performed what you desired; but know, had I not
been well assured that that was true you told me, I should not have so soon, or
easily consented: and I hope, Sir, you will not impute it either to folly or
fondness, but to an Uncle's rigour, that made me act what now I have done.


Far be it from me, Madam, to harbour such base thoughts of one so Virtuous --
but I shall ever acknowledge the favour my best of Friends hath done me. -- And
Friend, suspect not my Sisters fidelity, for I know she has so just a sense of
Honour, that what she promises she will perform: Yet, I must confess, her long
stay somewhat startles me.


Use no farther motives, for they will rather induce me to cherish, than
dissipate my breeding Jealousies: Her Country-innocence is an argument more
prevailing than all your Rhetoric. Were she indeed one of the gay Ladies of
the Town, whose words and actions ne'er agree, I should have known how to have
managed my Amour.


Your Boy, Mr. Truman, perhaps brings some news of the Lady --


Sirrah, have you met with Madam Goodfeild?


Yes, Sir; and she is just now going to be married to a Gentleman that is with
her.


How, to another? Now, Ned, I begin to suspect thy fidelity.


It is impossible she should be false: the boy mistakes.


I am sure, Sir, that what I say is truth; for I sifted it out of their boy;
who told me, his Lady Mrs. Goodfeild and Mr. Docket were going to be married.


Docket! blessed mistake! it is thy Mother, Ned -- now my hopes revive again.


Did not I tell thee, Jack, it was a mistake? but, Sirrah, are they not married
yet?


No, Sir, for one Parson denied them, the Canonical hour being past, and they
having no License neither, so that now they are coming to Lincolns-Inn, in
hopes to find the Reader within, who is Mr. Docket's friend.


Better than I could have wished. Jack, as thou love me or my Sister, contrive
some way to hinder this match; I hate the thoughts of being controlled or allied
to such an impertinent Ignoramus -- besides, who knows but he may wheedle her
out of what would be our due, when she dies?


They come; therefore retire, Ned, with thy Mistress, and something I will do
to manifest my Love for thy Sister -- I have it --


Good luck attend thee.


Oh, Mr. Docket, I am glad I have met you --


To see me married, you would say, -- Why, look you, Mr. Truman, you must
excuse me, that I did not invite you. Widows use to go to it with secrecy; and
for my part, I love not to blazon to the world what I am going about.


Pray, Mr. Docket, what Gentleman is that? he seems to be a person of Worth --


Why, lovely Bride, it is a worthy friend of mine, a man of a fair State, and
sober Conversation -- therefore for my sake salute him.


Madam, your humble Servant -- but, Mr. Docket -- your Niece --


My Niece? what of her? -- Oh you like her -- and would, with my consent,
marry her, and by that means relieve your Mortgage -- Why look you, Mr.
Truman, I want money -- and you know --


Right, I do know, Mr. Docket, that unless you make haste, your Niece will be
stole away and married.


How, stole away, and married? undone -- undone -- but now I think on it, let
um if they dare, I'll bring my Writ of Ravishment de Guard against them: But for
fear of the worst, good Friend, keep my Widow company till I step home, and
I'll return immediately -- Oh Heavens, my Niece stole! I'll firk un e'faith.


Now, Widow, since the old Goat is shifted off, let us make the best use of our
time we can --


As how? I pray -- (I hope he won't be uncivil --


Why in chousing the old fool, by taking me into his place --


What, marry you? that would be fine --


Certain, Widow, there is some difference between me and the Lawyer Docket:
First, I am younger, and consequently fitter for a Widow's service: In the next
place, I am richer, to please her A varice: and lastly, not to flatter my self,
I think I am handsomer to beget Christian-like Children; for, Agad, if this
fellow get any, it must be with his Inkhorn, and what they will prove, judge
you --


I vow, Sir, you are a pleasant Gentleman -- but --


No buts, good Widow, but along, for I am all-over in Love; and till I
overwhelm thee with kindness, I shall not be my self --


But may I trust to you, that you are inearnest? -- I swear, a comely person,
and so like Squire Goodfeild, that was! I warrant an able person -- London*
tricks on me: I fear you do but exercise your Wit upon me; for you
Town-Gallants love to flout poor Countrie-Gentlewomen to make you sport --


If thou delayest one minute longer, Widow, I'll vow to blast thy Reputation,
kill all that dare pretend to you, and at last, in spite of thy self, enjoy
thee, and then Jilt thee --


Goodness! what pretty words you Gentlemen have; Jilt me? well, that must be
some fine thing, it sounds so well; Jilt -- I might have lived in Darbyshire to
Methusabem's age, and not have heard such fine things.


Uds precious, Widow, what mean you? -- swear instantly to be mine, or I vow, I
will prosecute what I told you --


Hold, hold, Sir, I will swear or do any thing -- but is this the London-way of
Courtship? -- It is somewhat boisterous, methinks, to force a woman to have a
man whether she will or no -- but Lord, what will Mr. Docket say, if I should
cousin him? -- I vow, now I think on it, I cannot, for my honour is engaged, and
he has my word to be none but his --


What an unmannerly old-fashion'd Widow art thou to talk thus


No more, good Sir, and here is my hand, I will be none but yours -- but what
shall we do about Mr. Docket? I would be loath, now he is set agog, as they
say; he should be disappointed: were it my own case, I should not be pleased --



Hang him -- but however, I will contrive some means how to bestow him, now he
is agog, as you say --


So, I have put Trupenny to sleep, and now I will steal to Mr. Spruce, who
longs for my coming: I dare say, poor Soul -- well, he is as loving good
conditioned sweet natured young man as lives, though I say it. -- Ha! my Lady
here? if she sees me, I am ruined --


Oh, Loveal! were they my Son and Daughter we met an hour ago? --


No, Madam, we were both mistaken; they were your beyond-Sea French folk,
Papists I warrant they were, they had such hard names; and they jabber'd so, it
would have frightened you to have heard them speak.


I durst to have sworn it had been them --


Is this your Maid, Madam? --


Yes, Sir, for want of a better --


Fortune is kinder to us than we could have expected -- What should hinder your
Maid supplying your place, and marry Mr. Docket?


Why nothing, Sir, sure; for now I shall oblige her, and keep my word too; for
she to sadly longs for a Husband, that I was forced to promise to help her to
one; and I must have bought one, rather than have failed, or I should have led
a tedious life with her --


Well, Madam, if you will give her a little instructions how to personate your
self, I will step to the Temple in the interim, and find out a Parson there to
complete our business, and in the Cloisters I will expect you -- till then,
dear Widow, your Servant. In the mean time let my Boy attend you.


Your humble Servant, Sir -- Loveal, I remembering my promise to you, have
accordingly found out a Husband for you. This Gentleman that is gone --


Well, this London is a brave place for Husbands; I wonder not now what makes
the Countrie-maids flock up so fast to it -- had I known so much before, I
would not have stayed so long in Darbyshire -- and I vow, this Gentleman is as
handsome a man as ever a Darbyshire-blade of them all.


Hold, you are too fast, Loveal, this is not the man, but he and I have found
out one for you.


How, is not he the man? nay, then, Madam, know, I have not been so long in
Town, but that my good fortune has provided for me; and had not your Ladyship
seen me, within an hour I had altered my condition.


What, were you going to be married? to whom I pray?


Either to Mr. Dashwel, or Mr. Spruce, I know not which; for both, poor things,
are so much in love with me, that I was resolved to marry the first of them I
met.


Dashwel and Spruce? Come, come, you are a fool; but be ruled by me, and you
shall marry their Master.


Mr. Docket! now, Madam, you jeer me; for I cannot believe you will give him
away from your self.


Thou may be sure, Wench, I have provided otherways for my self, or I
should hardly have parted with him.


Well, Madam, do with me as you please: for since I have had Love made to me,
my mind so runs on Matrimony, that I shall not be my self till I have entered
into that delicious kind of life.


See, Mr. Docket comes; here, put on my great Scarf and Vail, and be sure not
to show your face till you come home, but pretend an unusual Modesty, and play
no old Ape's tricks of Fondness, but behave your self decently, and counterfeit
my Speech, for he must take you for me; and when he comes, ask him if he has
found his Niece. -- Do you think you can do all this? I much doubt your
Ability.


I'll warrant you, Madam -- what not remember how to wheedle a man, and of this
Age? it has been my practice this twenty years: But I must confess, my
over-forwardness was the cause of my ill success; but I'll have more wit
hereafter; and if I carry it not swimmingly, may I die before I taste the
sweets of Matrimony, which is a most insupportable Curse.


Be sure you take heed; my Honour will suffer if you prove too coming, as they
phrase it. -- And now for my smug handsome young Gentleman. -- Well, Mr.
Docket, you may thank your self for this deceit; for by your own confession he
is richer, and my own eyes tell me he is both handsomer and younger, and
consequently fitter to satisfy a Widows love.


Certainly there is more in it than I can apprehend, that Mr. Truman should
tell me such a story! for I met Dashwel, and he protestando said, my Niece was
safe at home. Ha! well thought on, if he should be stolen away with my Widow?
-- How, how, no Truman! Docket, Docket, where's thy Widow, man?


Docket, that unmannerly clownish friend of yours left me alone so soon as you
was gone; but I was resolved to stay, were it till midnight: But pray now, have
you found your Niece?


It is her voice -- Sing O be joyful -- Widow mine, my Niece is safe -- and now
I have thee once more, I am resolved not to let thee go till we have joined
Issue -- But why this Vail? A Widow and bashful? for shame turn up -- in troth
I will bring a Levari facias.


Hold, hold, Mr. Docket, let me hide my blushes; when we are fast to one
another, as they say, then you shall turn up what you please.


Say thou so, Widow? along, along then, for fear of another Demurrer.


WHat would she have? I know her not. Has she not picked my pocket?


This is the rarest Mortal I ever met with: see how the Rogue shakes! But Mr.
Anthony --


I say once more, Gentlewoman, you are mistaken; my name is neither Iohn,
Humphery, Dick, Rowland, Ieossery, Stephen, Anthony, nor Mark Anthony neither,
but plain Thomas Dashwel, senior Clerk to Mr. Docket.


Your Father-in-law's Clerk, on my life, Madam. A word, Sir; is not your Master
an Attorney of Cliffords-Inn?


Yes, and Gentleman too.


He is about marrying a Darbyshire-widow --


Yes, yes, they are Legitimo Matrimonio copulat' by this time.


Her name, Goodfeild --


Right -- If this should be the Devil I have been talking with all this while?


Friend, haste to thy Master, tell him if he marries the Widow, this night will
prove his last: I have decreed it, I his fate have said it.


It is a Devil, o'my conscience; would I were rid of her company. Nay, nay,
nay, pray forsooth keep more distance -- Look, look, her Eyes are all of a
flame, and I shall be damned before my time!


What a Rogue am I to disappoint a longing Widow? but when she shall know it
was for younger flesh, she will not certainly be so unreasonable to blame me.
-- Well, her Daughter is a witty wild frollicking Raskal, and I love her to
excess; but her absence sets my patience on the Rack.


Oh, Mr. Truman, I am glad you are come.


What's the matter, man? thou look as if thou were scared out of thy little
Wits.


Wits quoth I? here stands, I fear, the Ruins of one who once was a hopeful
Pleader. See, see, Mr. Truman, this Petticoat-Sathan has made divers and sundry
assaults manus graviter imposuit, cetera, insultum fecit vi armis verbis
opprobriis minis -- I have a good mind to swear the Peace against her -- But
oh, good sweet Mr. Truman -- she approaches; as I hope to draw a Plea again, I
will be gone, and so the Devil take the hindmost.


Some well-meaning Punck, on my life, following her Calling. It is easier to
see a Court-Lady in her natural Complexion, than Fleet-street and the Temples
without this kind of Cattle.


Have at my Temple-lover once more; if he proves according to my wish, he is my
own. I'll try if he is one of the Fashionable Town-Gallants, who, good-natur'd
Souls, keep Wenches for others as well as for themselves.


If he proves constant after all these trials, with my consent he should be
Chronicled.


Your name is Truman, as I take it.


You take it right.


And for want of wit, your dull sottish Worship is entering into the bonds of
Matrimony.


How the Devil came you to know it? 'tis neither in Gazet, nor Banes yet
askti'th' Church.


Gad sa' me, you're a base perfidious fellow.


Dam me! a Raskal.


Hie day, Petticoat-hectors?


To use a Lady thus?


Use her? how? what Lady? which of ye?


Me, ungrateful man? but I'll have your throat cut, Mister --


Or nose slit, look ye.


Dashwel's words prove true; these are a couple of Devils: Nothing but Blood
and Wounds! 'Sbud who are ye? and why this anger to me, Damsels?


Treacherous perjured Villain, who was not only content to debauch me, a poor
innocent Country-girl -- but notwithstanding thousands of protestations of
keeping me with a gilt Coach, and set of Horses for three lives, or one and
twenty years, at last to Jilt me. But hang you, Renegade, your promises,
performances, and treats, prove all too sligh tfor a Ladies service. -- Follow
me, if you dare.


Villain? perjured? debauched? gilt Coach? Jilt me? treats? What a Pox is the
meaning of all this? Hold, hold, Madam Mystery, Gad e're you and I part, you
must explain your self a little better.


Unworthy man, how often did you treat me at Plays, the Park, and
Mulberry-garden, before I yielded? Have you forgot that too -- and how you
carried me to Tunbridge?


Yes, Madam; by the same token he had not money enough to pay the lodging, so
that you were forced to pledge your little Dog for Nine and six pence, to save
his honour -- 'Tis true, when we came to London he sent his Taylor to redeem
him, which he put to his account for this Suit he has on; but I suppose you do
not remember this?


Thou -- I know not what! a Puppy save my Honour? thou riddleing lying Satan,
vanish, or --


I warrant you have forgot too, how last Winter you presented me a Jennet Muff
of a Noble, and at the same time promised me a Ring worth five Guinies, on
condition I would praise your Dancing to my Lady: which I did, but from that
hour to this, I never saw or Ring or Gold.


Oh, impudent Jilt!


Faithless man! consider who it is that courts you to be constant.


Think of her Beauty and Behaviour.


Her Faith in violate.


Her singular Modesty!


Aye, her Modesty; but above all, her Blood and Affinity: Think of her
Relations at Court, able to promote you to what Pitch she pleases: Half a word
from her, can make you a Justice of Quorum, and send you into the Country with
a Commission to domineer over your Betters. I'll tell you as a secret, there is
my Lord -- hum -- and Sir Thomus -- hum -- have been her Couzins any time this
six years, off and on.


In fine, tell me, as you are a Gentleman and no Soldier, how can you find in
your heart to forsake a Lady thus, and undo your self by marrying?


To forsake one that loves you, to be tied to one for life, who without
question, if she has any wit, as you are Husband, will hate and Cuckold you --
Ha, ha, he.


Aye, one that loves and dotes upon you -- Ha, ha, he.


Was ever man thus baited by a couple of Vizard-masks?


Faith I think not.


Oh that I were but a man, for thy sake! I have been too much a woman, I'm
sure.


Nay, nay, Madam, rather than fail, I'll hire a pair of Breeches at the next
Brokers, and then break his pate, for all this.


Why, thou, thou, what shall I call thee? thou unheard-of Jilt, and thou other
Spirit of impudence, what Devil set you on to abuse me thus? Follow me no
further, but tremble at the Neighbourhood of Bridewell, and be silent.


How now, Sister! what do you here?


How? his Sister! 'Slife I am ruined.


Oh, Jack here too! -- then I perceive the business is done betwixt my Sister
and you. -- Methinks you walk at distance like man and wife already.


No, Ned, it is undone, and I so too, if you stand not my friend to her: thy
Sister, whom I had never seen in her own Habit before, has provoked me to do
that I fear will blast that good opinion she before had entertained of me.


Fear not, Sir, I like you never the worse for what has past, especially
considering who was the cause of your passion, and of whom the discourse was
supposed to be. Like a wise Physician who has made a Patient sick by trying
Experiments, I now will apply that remedy which will, I suppose, reduce you to
your Wits again. Here -- how say you?


Gad, now I have you, Madam, hang me if I quit my hold till we are made
Yoak-fellows: and if I trust you more out of my sight --


So; away, and I will follow presently.


Do you know what a dreadful thing it is you go about?


Think not to scare me, Madam; for so long as every couple hitherto, both good
and bad, have had at least a month of pleasure, I am resolved to try what it
is. Madam, it is decreed, and so forth -- Dear Rogue, let us to it. --


HOw, how's this? my Niece with a stranger? undone, undone. Now I begin to
suspect Dashwel is false, and all was true which Mr. Truman told me.


My Uncle, Sir! what shall I do?


Fear. nothing, Madam, I will be your shield against his anger.


Niece, Niece, Niece, Baggage, a word I pray -- What Gentleman is that? what,
what have ye been doing together? why don't you answer me? what is he? from
whence? whither would he? with whom would he speak? -- ha --


Why, faith Sir, I am a Cantabrigian, a Gentleman, and my business was with
this Lady; and we have dispatched the very same Affair as you and my Mother
have been about, To have and to hold, for better for worse, and so forth; and
now in hopes you will pardon a wandering Son, Madam, I beg a blessing on this
Lady and my self.


How? married, married! Cuds lid married?


Now I am sure this is my young Master Edward; and because he takes me for my
Lady, for once I will act the part of a Mother Edward, you have it; but how
came it to pass you left Cambridge? who gave you leave, pray, to come up to
this lewd Town? go to, it is not well done of you.


Widow that was, is this your Son?


Yes, Mr. Docket, and a witty child he is, but much of his Father's resolute
humour, Peace be with him: for if at any time I desired him not to do so, or
so, be sure he would do it; therefore I cannot blame him. But Son, are you
married to that Gentlewoman?


As sure as you are to Mr. Docket, Madam.


But not with my consent. However, Sir, for your Mothers sake, who is now my
bride, this likewise being our Weddingday, I pardon you: But do you hear? expect
nothing from me.


Lass, Sir, I should be too unreasonable to expect anything from you besides
the Portion her Father left her; Six thousand pounds will satisfy me well
enough.


But let me tell you, Sir, she has not Six thousand groats, marrying without my
consent, as by her Father's Will may and doth more fully appear.


-- Now I have it -- Then, Sir, I hope you will not desire or expect to
intermeddle with my Concerns: I have but Six hundred pounds a year Jointure,
besides Four or Five thousand pounds in Money, Plate, and Goods; but these are
not worth speaking of.


How, so wealthy? nay, then I am friends -- It is but three or four years
forbearance, and I shall cheat her of as much as the Portion comes to;
therefore 'twill be policy to comply [ Aside] -- Well, Sir, for your Mothers
sake I am reconciled to you, and must confess --


Six thousand pounds is my Nieces Portion, which in truth I cannot keep from
her, it being by the Will due upon her day of marriage; and my design in
giving out the Penalty, was in hopes that no one would have ventured on her;
and she dying single, her Portion then would have been my own.

To which we are Witnesses.


Oh, Mr. Truman! with all my heart.


Brother, give you joy -- Mother, your Blessing


I can hold no longer -- Betty, I am over-joyed to see you in London --


How, how's this? what cheated of my Widow too? Wretched miserable Docket, thou
art undone, undone --


Fear not that, man; she's a thrifty Soul I warrant you. But Docket, could
thou in thy Conscience think it reasonable to swallow Widows as fast as
Mortgages? No, Sir, no; and you see now, that by my own contrivance, without
the help of the Chancery, I have superseded your desires: ha, ha, he --


Look ye, I will instantly draw up an Indictment against ye all for Cheats.


And I will immediately take out a Writ against you for my wives Portion; you
understand me?


But provided you give an Appearance, and put in good Bayl, you shall not be
arrested; for you know Six thousand pounds requires special Bayl, Mr. Docket.
But to prevent such extremity, I will make a bold proposal. -- Deliver up my
Mortgage, and I will become responsible to my friend for your Nieces Portion.


Hum! Deliver up your Mortgage, Sir? Curia advisare unit: let me consider on
it.


Do it, and I agree to it with all my heart.


Truman, I'll do it; and let all bear witness, I here promise to deliver up Mr.
Truman's Mortgage, provided that upon receipt thereof he enters into Bond to my
Nephew and Niece for the payment of her Portion. In the mean time, Nephew, I
give it you -- And now, Sir, I give you Joy with all my heart.


Your Servant, Sir. -- And now, friend, before these, I give you back your
Mortgage in lieu of my Sisters Portion.


Well done, y'faith, Nephew -- how luckily it falls out! Two Portions paid, and
a Mortgage satisfied, without handling one farthing of Money.


Advance, man, and see thy Mistress in earnest, for she is my Master's Wife
now.


Married to my Master? I will instantly have him up in the Ecclesiastical Court
de Matrimonio preloquut', for that will amount to a Contract.


Spare thy pains, man, he'll be too hard for thee at that weapon; and since he
has her, we must submit to our hard fortune.


Well, patience per force, et cetera -- but what a Raskal was you to make me
run the Gauntlet about the Town?


Hist, hist, Mr. Truman, Mr. Truman --


Your Blessing, Madam.


My Pardon you mean, for making me wait so long.


this Lady, Madam, was pleased to forbid the Banes, and take me her self.


How's this? my Daughter? Lord, Betty, what make you in London?


Madam, understanding your desire of having me married, I thought London the
likeliest place to meet with a good Husband in, which since I have found true;
and I thank my Stars I am better matched than I should ha'been with Sir
Alexander --


My Son Edward in Town too?


Yes, Madam, and begs both Pardon and blessing; for Mr. Docket's Niece and I
have been at the same sport my Sister and Friend have been at.


What a day of Accidents has this been! my Journey made fruitless, my Children
married, and my self disappointed -- But Mr. Truman.


I understand you, Madam -- but enough of that -- could you in reason, expect
to have two Husbands before your Daughter had one?


This vexes me a little: however, I'll carry it off (...)moothly [ aside.] I
swear, Mr. Truman, you have had singular good fortune, to meet with a Wife; for
could you think I was in (...)arnest? that so Grave and Sober a person as my
self would marry (...)o light a young London gallant as you are? I thought only
to (...)ave made sport with you, and to let you know that Country- Gentlewomen
can carry on designs, and have wit upon occasion, (...)s well as your fine
flaunting Londoners, an they list.


That I suspected; besides, Madam, I had not the ambition on to be your
Husband; your Son, was the greatest happiness I aimed at -- which, by my
Friends assistance, and this Ladies kind consent, I am according to my wish.


I cannot be angry with you; for your marrying my Daughter, shows you have a
Respect for me -- therefore Heaven bless you together; and here I publicly
promise not to marry again -- but be good Children, and when I die, share what
I leave behind me.


We are obliged to you.


Frank, suspect me not; thy service shall be rewarded: I hate Ingratitude. --
Find out the man you can like for a Husband, and I promise thee a Portion,
Wench.


With your pardon, Madam -- I am of too modish a nature, to comply with so
ungentile a thing as Matrimony: my Request is only this, that you'll be pleased
to accept of my service, while I am serviceable; but when I grow old and past
my labour, as they say, a small allowance for Pap, Butter-milk, and roasted
Chestnuts is all I desire.


In the mean time, know me for your Gallant; for when that dreadful Winter of
Age comes, you'll be good for nothing but to make Touchwood.


Mr. Spruce, your Service has been so considerable, that when opportunity
offers, I never will appear ungrateful. --


Your Servant, Sir.


So, so, all's concluded, and I am very well satisfied with my Spouse here,
seeing the Widow has mist of her Aim -- and being my Wedding-night, my Niece
disposed of too -- Dashwel, come hither; run you before to the Rose-Tavern, and
bid them send the Supper I bespoke to Cliffords-Inn-Hall; and then step to the
Cock-ale-house and get Fiddles, for I am resolved, Gallants, to dance the
Measures e're I go to bed -- and then --


Aye, marry Sir; shall I see Argulius, and O basse Regis danced again? I love
those Temple-dances with all my heart.


Agreed, agreed. --


This Generous Frolic of thine, old Lawyer, has quite reconciled me to thee;
and I am resolved to make Quarrels, but I'll be thy Client for this -- Lead thy
way with thy Duck there --


Aye, aye, let's be going, I begin to grow very sleepy, my Dear.


Gray heads may dote, as their dull Passions move;
But only Heaven and Youth make perfect Love.

PAge 25. line 31. read le Peak. p. 47. l. 8. r. err. p. 53. l. 7. r. with
whom I left him. p. 70. l. 30. r. certainly.

THe plague of Writing has infected all;
'Tis a Disease grown epidemical,
And not confined to the bounds of this lewd Town,
But over the Nation the Infection's slown.
For Country-Squires now drunken Catches write,
Whilst Miss is here lampooned by Iilted Knight.
The brisk gay Fop, and modest Lover too,
With senseless Rimes coy Mistresses pursue.
Nay, the great man, Heir to more Wealth than Wit,
From Authors steals, yet swears those lines he writ:
But he (suspecting you the cheat should find)
Both to himself, and world, will prove so kind
To let you know in Verse a piece of's mind.
Then blundring through the streams of Poetric
He knowingly displays Debaucherie,
Which proves to be his own Epitomie.
The Zealot too, (as I'm informed) through the Nose
Pronounced a fatal Sentence against Prose:
For being inspired with Brother Hopkins Rime,
He woos a Sister in the like jangling Chime.
Nay, should w'enquire, no doubt there are but few
Amongst ye here, but what are Dablers too;
And Muse as well as Miss for kindness sue.
It is the worlds blind side -- then, Sirs, forbear
Your censures now, lest fondly ye appear,
Not to our Author, but t'your selves severe.
Though plain, 'tis new, your Rigour then suspend,
Since to divert you this he did intend.
If all should write alike, then where would be
Your blessed Diana, sweet Variety?

