Poets like Cudgeled Bullys, never do
At first, or second blow, submit to you;
But will provoke you still, and ne'er have done,
Till you are weary first, with laying on:
The late so bafled Scribler of this day,
Though he stands trembling, bids me boldly say,
What we, before most Plays are used to do,
For Poets out of fear, first draw on you;
In a fierce Prologue, the still Pit defy,
And e're you speak, like Castril, give the lye;
But though our Bayses Batles oft I've fought,
And with bruised knuckles, their dear Conquests bought;
Nay, never yet feared Odds upon the Stage,
In Prologue dare not Hector with the Age,
But would take Quarter from your saving hands,
Though Bayse within all yielding Countermands,
Says you Confed'rate Wits no Quarter give,
Ther'fore his Play shall not ask your leave to live:
Well, let the vain rash Fop, by buffing so,
Think to obtain the better terms of you;
But we the Actors humbly will submit,
Now, and at any time, to a full Pit;
Nay, often we anticipate your rage,
And murder Poets for you, on our Stage:
We set no Guards upon our Tyring-Room,
But when with flying Colours, there you come,
We patiently you see, give up to you,
Our Poets, Virgins, nay our Matrons too.

A Quack is as fit for a Pimp, as a Midwife for a Bawd; they are still but in
their way, both helpers of Nature. --


I have undone you for ever with the Women, and reported you throughout the
whole Town as bad as an Eunuch, with as much trouble as if I had made you one
in earnest.


But have you told all the Midwives you know, the Orange Wenches at the
Playhouses, the City Husbands, and old Fumbling Keepers of this end of the
Town, for they'll be the readiest to report it.


I have told all the Chamber-maids, Waiting women, Tyre women, and Old women of
my acquaintance; nay, and whispered it as a secret to'em, and to the Whisperers
of Whitehal; so that you need not doubt 'twill spread, and you will be as
odious to the handsome young Women, as --


As the small Pox. -- Well --


And to the married Women of this end of the Town, as --


As the great ones; nay, as their own Husbands.


And to the City Dames as Annis-seed Robin of filthy and contemptible memory;
and they will frighten their Children with your name, especially their Females.


And cry Horner's coming to carry you away: I am only afraid 'twill not be
believed; you told'em 'twas by an English-French disaster, and an
English-French Surgeon, who has given me at once, not only a Cure, but an
Antidote for the future, against that damned malady, and that worse distemper,
love, and all other Women's evils.


Your late journey into France has made it the more credible, and your being
here a fortnight before you appeared in public, looks as if you apprehended
the shame, which I wonder you do not: Well I have been hired by young Gallants
to bely'em the other way; but you are the first would be thought a Man unfit for
Women.


Dear Mr. Doctor, let vain Rogues be contented only to be thought abler Men
than they are, generally 'tis all the pleasure they have, but mine lies another
way.


You take, methinks, a very preposterous way to it, and as ridiculous as if we
Operators in Physic, should put forth Bills to disparage our Medicaments, with
hopes to gain Customers.


Doctor, there are Quacks in love, as well as Physic, who get but the fewer
and worse Patients, for their boasting; a good name is seldom got by giving it
ones self, and Women no more than honour are compassed by bragging: Come, come
Doctor, the wisest Lawyer never discovers the merits of his cause till the
trial; the wealthiest Man conceals his riches, and the cunning Gamester his
play; Shy Husbands and Keepers like old Rooks are not to be cheated, but by a
new unpractised trick; false friendship will pass now no more than false dice
upon'em, no, not in the City.


There are two Ladies and a Gentleman coming up.


A Pox, some unbelieving Sisters of my former acquaintance, who I am afraid,
expect their sense should be satisfied of the falsity of the report.

No -- this formal Fool and Women!


His Wife and Sister.


My Coach breaking just now before your door Sir, I look upon as an occasional
repremand to me Sir, for not kissing your hands Sir, since your coming out of
France Sir; and so my disaster Sir, has been my good fortune Sir; and this is
my Wife, and Sister Sir.


What then, Sir?


My Lady, and Sister, Sir. -- Wife, this is Master Horner.


Master Horner, Husband!


My Lady, my Lady Fidget, Sir.


So, Sir.


Won't you be acquainted with her Sir? [So the report is true, I find by his
coldness or aversion to the Sex; but I'll play the wag with him.]

Pray salute my Wife, my Lady, Sir.


I will kiss no Mans Wife, Sir, for him, Sir; I have taken my eternal leave,
Sir, of the Sex already, Sir.


Hah, hah, hah; I'll plague him yet.

Not know my Wife, Sir?


I do know your Wife, Sir, she's a Woman, Sir, and consequently a Monster, Sir,
a greater Monster than a Husband, Sir.


A Husband; how, Sir?


So, Sir; but I make no more Cuckholds, Sir.


Hah, hah, hah, Mercury, Mercury.


Pray, Sir Jaspar, let us be gone from this rude fellow.


Who, by his breeding, would think, he had ever been in France?


Foh, he's but too much a French fellow, such as hate Women of quality and
virtue, for their love to their Husban^, Sr. Jaspar; a Woman is hated by'em as
much for loving her Husband, as for loving their Money: But pray, let's be
gone.


You do well, Madam, for I have nothing that you came for: I have brought over
not so much as a Bawdy Picture, new Postures, nor the second Part of the Escole
de Filles; Nor --


Hold for shame, Sir; what die mean? you'll ruin your self for ever with the Sex
--


Hah, hah, hah, he hates Women perfectly I find.


What pity 'tis he should.


Ay, he's a base rude Fellow for it; but affectation makes not a Woman more
odious to them, than Virtue.


Because your Virtue is your greatest affectation, Madam.


How, you saucy Fellow, would you wrong my honour?


If I could.


How d'y mean, Sir?


Hah, hah, hah, no he can't wrong your Lady ships honour, upon my honour; he
poor Man -- hark you in your eat -- a mere Eunuch.


O filthy French Beast, foh, foh; why do we stay? let's be gone; I can't endure
the sight of him.


Stay, but till the Chairs come, they'll be here presently.


No, no.


Nor can I stay longer; 'tis -- let me see, a quarter and a half quarter of a
minute past eleven; the Council will be sate, I must away: business must be
preferred always before Love and Ceremony with the wise Mr. Horner.


And the Impotent Sir Jaspar.


Ay, ay, the impotent Master Horner, hah, ha, ha.


What leave us with a filthy Man alone in his lodgings?


He's an innocent Man now, you know; pray stay, I'll hasten the Chairs to you.
-- Mr. Horner your Servant, should be glad to see you at my house; pray, come
and dine with me, and play at Cards with my Wife after dinner, you are sit for
Women at that game; yet hah, ha -- ['Tis as much a Husbands prudence to provide
innocent diversion for a Wife, as to hinder her unlawful pleasures; and he had
better employ her, than let her employ her self.

Farewell.


Your Servant Sr. Jaspar.


I will not stay with him, foh --


Nay, Madam, I beseech you stay, if it be but to see, I can be as civil to
Ladies yet, as they would desire.


No, no, foh, you cannot be civil to Ladies.


You as civil as Ladies would desire.


No, no, no, foh, foh, foh.


Now I think, I, or you your self rather, have done your business with the
Women.


Thou art an Ass, don't you see already upon the report and my carriage, this
grave Man of business leaves his Wife in my lodgings, invites me to his house
and wife, who before would not be acquainted with me out of jealousy.


Nay, by this means you may be the more acquainted with the Husbands, but the
less with the Wives.


Let me alone, if I can but abuse the Husbands, I'll soon disabuse the Wives:
Stay -- I'll reckon you up the advantages, I am like to have by my Stratagem:
First, I shall I be rid of all my old Acquaintances, the most insatiable sorts
of Duns, that invade our Lodgings in a morning: And next, to the pleasure of
making a New Mistress, is that of being rid ofan old One, and of all old Debts;
Love when it comes to be so, is paid the most unwillingly.


Well, you may be so rid of your old Acquaintances; but how will you get any
new Ones?


Doctor, thou wilt never make a good Chemist, thou art so incredulous and
impatient; ask but all the young Fellows of the Town, if they do not loose more
time like Huntsmen, in starting the game, than in running it down; one knows
not where to find'em. who will, or will not; Women of Quality are so civil, you
can hardly distinguish love from good breeding, and a Man is often mistaken;
but now I can be sure, she that shows an aversion to me loves the sport, as
those Women that are gone, whom I warrant to be right: And then the next thing,
is your Women of Honour, as you call'em, are only chary of their reputations,
not their Persons, and 'tis scandal they would avoid, not Men: Now may I have,
by the reputation of an Eunuch, the Privileges of One; and be seen in a Ladies
Chamber, in a morning as early as her Husband; kiss Virgins before their
Parents, or Lovers; and may be in short the Pas par tout of the Town. Now
Doctor.


Nay, now you shall be the Doctor; and your Process is so new, that we do not
know but it may succeed.


Not so new neither, Probatum est Doctor.


Well, I wish you luck and many Patients whilst I go to mine.


Come, your appearance at the Play yesterday, has I hope hardened you for the
future against the Women's contempt, and the Men's raillery; and now you'll abroad
as you were wont.


Did I not bear it bravely?


With a most Theatrical impudence; nay more than the Orange-wenches show there,
or a drunken vizard Mask, or a great bellied Actress; nay, or the most impudent
of Creatures, an ill Poet; or what is yet more impudent, a secondhand Critic.


But what say the Ladies, have they no pity?


What Ladies? the vizard Masques you know never pity a Man when all's gone,
though in their Service.


And for the Women in the boxes, you'd never pity them, when 'twas in your
power.


They say 'tis pity, but all that deal with common Women should be served so.


Nay, I dare swear, they won't admit you to play at Cards with them, go to
Plays with'em, or do the little duties which other Shadows of men, are wont to
do for'em.


Who do you call Shadows of Men?


Half Men.


What Boys?


Ay your old Boys, old beaux Garcons, who like superannuated Stallions are
suffered to run, feed, and whinney with the Mares as long as they live, though
they can do nothing else.


Well a Pox on love and wenching, Women serve but to keep a Man from better
Company; though I can't enjoy them, I shall you the more: good fellowship and
friendship, are lasting, rational and manly pleasures.


For all that give me some of those pleasures, you call effeminate too, they
help to relish one another.


They disturb one another.


No, Mistresses are like Books; if you pore upon them too much, they doze you,
and make you unfit for Company; but if used discreetly, you are the fitter for
conversation by'em.


A Mistress should be like a little Country retreat near the Town, not to dwell
in constantly, but only for a night and away; to taste the Town the better when
a Man returns.


I tell you, 'tis as hard to be a good Fellow, a good Friend, and a Lover of
Women, as 'tis to be a good Fellow, a good Friend, and a Lover of Money: You
cannot follow both, then choose your side; Wine gives you liberty, Love takes
it away.


Gad, he's in the right on it.


Wine gives you joy, Love grief and tortures; besides the Chirurgeon's Wine
makes us witty, Love only Sots: Wine makes us sleep, Love breaks it.


By the World he has reason, Harcourt.


Wine makes --


Ay, Wine makes us -- makes us Princes, Love makes us Beggars, poor Rogues, y
gad -- and Wine --


So, there's one converted. -- No, no, Love and Wine, Oil and Vinegar.


I grant it; Love will still be uppermost.


Come, for my part I will have only those glorious, manly pleasures of being
very drunk, and very slovenly.


Mr. Sparkish is below, Sir.


What, my dear Friend! a Rogue that is fond of me, only I think for abusing
him.


No, he can no more think the Men laugh at him, than that Women jilt him, his
opinion of himself is so good.


Well, there's another pleasure by drinking, I thought not of; I shall loose
his acquaintance, because he cannot drink; and you know 'tis a very hard thing
to be rid of him, for he's one of those nauseous offerers at wit, who like the
worst Fiddlers run themselves into all Companies.


One, that by being in the Company of Men of sense would pass for one.


And may so to the short-sighed World, as a false Jewel amongst true ones, is
not discerned at a distance; his Company is as troublesome to us, as a
Cuckolds, when you have a mind to his Wife's.


No, the Rogue will not let us enjoy one another, but ravishes our
conversation, though he signifies no more to it, than Sir Martin Mar-all's
gaping, and auker'd thrumming upon the Lute, does to his Man's Voice, and
Music.


And to pass for a wit in Town, shows himself a fool every night to us, that
are guilty of the plot.


Such wits as he, are, to a Company of reasonable Men, like Rooks to the
Gamesters, who only fill a room at the Table, but are so far from contributing
to the play, that they only serve to spoil the fancy of those that do.


Nay, they are used like Rooks too, snubbed, checked, and abused; yet the Rogues
will hang on.


A Pox on'em, and all that force Nature, and would be still what she
forbids'em; Affectation is her greatest Monster.


Most Men are the contraries to that they would seem; your bully you see, is a
Coward with a long Sword; the little humbly fawning Physician with his Ebony
cane, is he that destroys Men.


The Usurer, a poor Rogue, possessed of moldy Bonds, and Mortgages; and we they
call Spend-thrifts, are only wealthy, who lay out his money upon daily new
purchases of pleasure.


Ay, your errantest cheat, is your Trustee, or Executor; your jealous Man, the
greatest Cuckhold; your Church-man, the greatest Atheist; and your noisy pert
Rogue of a wit, the greatest Fop, dullest Ass, and worst Company as you shall
see: For here he comes.


How is't, Sparks, how is't? Well Faith, Harry, I must railly thee a little,
ha, ha, ha, upon the report in Town of thee, ha, ha, ha, I can't hold y Faith;
shall I speak?


Yes, but you'll be so bitter then.


Honest Dick and Frank here shall answer for me, I will not be extreme bitter
by the Univers.


We will be bound in ten thousand pound Bond, he shall not be bitter at all.


Nor sharp, nor sweet.


What, not down right insipid?


Nay then, since you are so brisk, and provoke me, take what follows; you must
know, I was discoursing and rallying with some Ladies yesterday, and they
happened to talk of the fine new signs in Town.


Very fine Ladies I believe.


Said I, I know where the best new sign is. Where, says one of the Ladies? In
Covent-Garden, I replied. Said another, In what street? In Russel-street,
answered I. Lord says another, I'm sure there was ne'er a fine new sign there
yesterday. Yes, but there was, said I again, and it came out of France, and has
been there a fortnight.


A Pox I can hear no more, prithee.


No hear him out; let him tune his crowd a while.


The worst Music the greatest preparation.


Nay faith, I'll make you laugh. It cannot be, says a third Lady. Yes, yes,
quoth I again. Says a fourth Lady,


Look to it, we will have no more Ladies.


No. -- then mark, mark, now, said I to the fourth, did you never see Mr.
Horner; he lodges in Russel-street, and he's a sign of a Man, you know, since
he came out of France, heh, hah, he.


But the Divel take me, is thine be the sign of a jest.


With that they all fell a laughing, till they bepiss'd themselves; what, but
it does not move you, methinks? well see one had as good go to Law without a
witness, as break a jest without a laugher on ones side. -- Come, come Sparks,
but where do we dine, I have left at Whitehal an Earl to dine with you.


Why, I thought thou had loved a Man with a title better, than a Suit with a
French trimming to it.


Go, to him again.


No, Sir, a wit to me is the greatest title in the World.


But go dine with your Earl, Sir, he may be exceptious; we are your Friends,
and will not take it ill to be left, I do assure you.


Nay, faith he shall go to him.


Nay, pray Gentlemen.


We will thrust you out, if you wo'not, what disappoint any Body for us.


Nay, dear Gentlemen hear me.


No, no, Sir, by no means; pray go Sir.


Why, dear Rogues.


No, no.


Ha, ha, ha.


But, Sparks, pray hear me; what do ye think I'll eat then with gay shallow
Fops, and silent Coxcombs? I think wit as necessary at dinner as a glass of
good wine, and that's the reason I never have any stomach when I eat alone. --
Come, but where do we dine?


Even where you will.


At Chateline's.


Yes, if you will.


Or at the Cock.


Yes, if you please.


Or at the Dog and Partridg.


Ay, if you have mind to it, for we shall dine at neither.


Pshaw, with your fooling we shall loose the new Play; and I would no more miss
seeing a new Play the first day, than I would miss setting in the wits Row;
therefore I'll go fetch my Mistress and away.


Who have we here, Pinchwife?


Gentlemen, your humble Servant.


Well, Jack, by thy long absence from the Town, the grumness of thy
countenance, and the slovenlyness of thy habit; I should give thee joy, shoud'
I not, of Marriage?


[Death does he know I'm married too? I thought to have concealed it from him
at least.]

My long stay in the Country will excuse my dress, and I have a suit of Law;
that brings me up to Town, that puts me out of humour; besides I must give
Sparkish to morrow five thousand pound to lye with my Sister.


Nay, you Country Gentlemen rather than not purchase, will buy any thing, and
he is a cracked title, if we may quibble: Well, but am I to give thee joy, I
heard thou were married.


What then?


Why, the next thing that is to be heard, is you're a Cuckold.


Insupportable name.


But I did not expect Marriage from such a Whoremaster as you, one that knew
the Town so much, and Women so well.


Why, I have married no London Wife.


Pshaw, that's all one, that grave circumspection in marrying a Country Wife,
is like refusing a deceitful pampered Smithfield Jade, to go and be cheated by
a Friend in the Country.


A Pox on him and his Simile.

At least we are a little surer of the breed there, know what her keeping has
been, whether foiled or unsound.


Come, come, I have known a clap gotten in Wales, and there are Cozens,
Justices, Clarks, and Chaplains in the Country, I won't say Coach-men, but
she's handsome and young.


I'll answer as I should do.

No, no, she has no beauty, but her youth; no attraction, but her modesty,
wholesome, homely, and huswifely, that's all.


He talks as like a Grasier as he looks.


She's too auker'd, ill favoured, and silly to bring to Town.


Then methinks you should bring her, to be taught breeding.


To be taught; no, Sir, I thank you, good Wives, and private Soldiers should
be ignorant. -- [I'll keep her from your instructions, I warrant you.


The Rogue is as jealous, as if his wife were not ignorant.


Why, if she be ill favoured, there will be less danger here for you, than by
leaving her in the Country; we have such variety of dainties, that we are
seldom hungry.


But they have always coarse, constant, swinging stomachs in the Country.


Foul Feeders indeed.


And your Hospitality is great there.


Open house, every Man's welcome.


So, so, Gentlemen.


But prithee, why would thou marry her? if she be ugly, ill bred, and silly,
she must be rich then.


As rich as if she brought me twenty thousand pound out of this Town; for she'll
be as sure not to spend her moderate portion, as a London Baggage would be to
spend hers, let it be what it would; so 'tis all one: then because shes ugly,
she's the likelier to be my own; and being ill bred, she'll hate conversation;
and since silly and innocent, will not know the difference betwixt a Man of one
and twenty, and one of forty


Nine -- to my knowledge; but if she be silly, she'll expect as much from a Man
of forty nine, as from him of one and twenty: But methinks wit is more
necessary than beauty, and I think no young Woman ugly that has it, and no
handsome Woman agreeable without it.


'Tis my maxim, he's a Fool that marries, but he's a greater that does not
marry a Fool; what is wit in a Wife good for, but to make a Man a Cuckold?


Yes, to keep it from his knowledge.


A Fool cannot contrive to make her husband a Cuckold.


No, but she'll club with a Man that can; and what is worse, if she cannot make
her Husband a Cuckold, she'll make him jealous, and pass for one, and then 'tis
all one.


Well, well, I'll take care for one, my Wife shall make me no Cuckold, though
she had your help Mr. Horner; I understand the Town, Sir.


His heIp!


He's come newly to Town it seems, and has not heard how things are with him.


But tell me, has Marriage cured thee of whoring, which it seldom does.


'Tis more than age can do.


No, the word is, I'll marry and live honest; but a Marriage vow is like a
penitent Gamesters Oath, and entering into Bonds, and penalties to stint himself
to such a particular small sum at play for the future, which makes him but the
more eager, and not being able to hold out, looses his Money again, and his
forfeit to boot.


Ay, ay, a Gamester will be a Gamester, whilst his Money lasts; and a
Whoremaster, whilst his vigour.


Nay, I have known'em, when they are broke and can loose no more, keep a
fumbling with the Box in their hands to fool with only, and hinder other
Gamesters.


That had wherewithal to make lusty stakes.


Well, Gentlemen, you may laugh at me, but you shall never lye with my Wife, I
know the Town.


But prithee, was not the way you were in better; is not keeping better than
Marriage?


A Pox on it, the Jades would jilt me, I could never keep a Whore to my self.


So then you only married to keep a Whore to your self; well, but let me tell
you, Women, as you say, are like Soldiers made constant and loyal by good pay,
rather than by Oaths and Covenants, therefore I'd advise my Friends to keep
rather than marry; since too I find by your example, it does not serve ones
turn, for I saw you yesterday in the eighteen penny place with a pretty
Country-wench.


How the Divel, did he see my Wife then? I sate there that she might not be
seen; but she shall never go to a play again.


What dost thou blush at nine and forty, for having been seen with a Wench?


No Faith, I warrant 'twas his Wife, which he seated there out of sight, for
he's a cunning Rogue, and understands the Town.


He blushes, then 'twas his Wife; for Men are now more ashamed to be seen with
them in public, than with a Wench.


Hell and damnation, I'm undone, since Horner has seen her, and they know 'twas
she.


But prithee, was it thy Wife? she was exceedingly pretty; I was in love with
her at that distance.


You are like never to be nearer to her. Your Servant Gentlemen.


Nay, prithee stay.


I cannot, I will not.


Come you shall dine with us.


I have dined already.


Come, I know thou hast not; I'll treat thee dear Rogue, thou shall it spend none
of thy Hampshire Money to day.


Treat me; so he uses me already like his Cuckold.


Nay, you shall not go.


I must, I have business at home.


To beat his Wife, he's as jealous of her, as a Cheapside Husband of a
Covent-garden Wife.


Why, 'tis as hard to find an old Whoremaster without jealousy and the gout, as
a young one without fear or the Pox.

As Gout in Age, from Pox in Youth proceeds;
So Wenching past, then jealousy succeeds:
The worst disease that Love and Wenching breeds.

Pray, Sister, where are the best Fields and Woods, to walk in in London?


A pretty Question; why, Sister! Mulberry Garden, and St. James's Park; and for
close walks the New Exchange.


Pray, Sister, tell me why my Husband looks so grum here in Town? and keeps me
up so close, and will not let me go a walking, nor let me wear my best Gown
yesterday?


O he's jealous, Sister.


Jealous, what's that?


He's afraid you should love another Man.


How should he be afraid of my loving another man, when he will not let me see
any but himself.


Did he not carry you yesterday to a Play?


Ay, but we sate amongst ugly People, he would not let me come near the Gentry,
who sate under us, so that I could not see'em: He told me, none but naughty
Women sate there, whom they tous'd and mous'd; but I would have ventured for
all that.


But how did you like the Play?


Indeed I was weary of the Play, but I liked hugeously the Actors; they are
the goodliest proper'st Men, Sister.


O but you must not like the Actors, Sister.


Ay, how should I help it, Sister? Pray, Sister, when my Husband comes in, will
you ask leave for me to go a walking?


A walking, hah, ha; Lord, a Country Gentlewoman's leisure is the drudgery of a
foot-post; and she requires as much airing as her Husbands Horses.

But here comes your Husband; I'll ask, though I'm sure he'll not grant it.


He says he won't let me go abroad, for fear of catching the Pox.


Fie, the small Pox you should say.


Oh my dear, dear Bud, welcome home; why dost thou look so fropish, who has
nanger'd thee?


Your a Fool.


Faith so she is, for crying for no fault, poor tender Creature!


What you would have her as impudent as your self, as errant a Jilflirt, a
gadder, a Magpie, and to say all a mere notorious Town-Woman?


Brother, you are my only Censurer; and the honour of your Family shall sooner
suffer in your Wife there, than in me, though I take the innocent liberty of
the Town.


Hark you Mistress, do not talk so before my Wife, the innocent liberty of the
Town!


Why, pray, who boasts of any intrigue with me? what Lampoon has made my name
notorious? what ill Women frequent my Lodgings? I keep no Company with any
Women of scandalous reputations.


No, you keep the Men of scandalous reputations Company.


Where? would you not have me civil? answer'em in a Box at the Plays? in the
drawing room at Whitehal? in St. James's Park? Mulberry-garden? or --


Hold, hold, do not teach my Wife, where the Men are to be found; I believe
she's the worse for your Town documents already; I bid you keep her in
ignorance as I do.


Indeed be not angry with her Bud, she will tell me nothing of the Town, though
I ask her a thousand times a day.


Then you are very inquisitive to know, I find?


Not I indeed, Dear, I hate London; our Placehouse in the Country is worth a
thousand of't, would I were there again.


So you shall I warrant; but were you not talking of Plays, and Players, when I
came in? you are her encourager in such discourses.


No indeed, Dear, she chid me just now for liking the Player Men.


Nay, if she be so innocent as to own to me her liking them, there is no hurt
in it --

Come my poor Rogue, but thou lik'st none better then me?


Yes indeed, but I do, the Player Men are finer Folks.


But you love none better then me?


You are mine own Dear Bud, and I know you, I hate a Stranger.


Ay, my Dear, you must love me only, and not be like the naughty Town Women,
who only hate their Husbands, and love every Man else, love Plays, Visits, fine
Coaches, fine Clothes, Fiddles, Balls, Treats, and so lead a wicked Town-life.


Nay, if to enjoy all these things be a Town-life, London is not so bad a
place, Dear.


How! if you love me, you must hate London.


The Fool has forbid me discovering to her the pleafures of the Town, and he is
now setting her a gog upon them himself.


But, Husband, do the Town-women love the Player Men too?


Yes, I warrant you.


Ay, I warrant you.


Why, you do not, I hope?


No, no, Bud; but why have we no Player-men in the Country?


Ha -- Mrs. Minx, ask me no more to go to a Play.


Nay, why, Love? I did not care for going; but when you forbid me, you make me
as't were desire it.


So 'twill be in other things, I warrant.


Pray, let me go to a Play, Dear.


Hold your Peace, I wo'not.


Why, Love?


Why, I'll tell you.


Nay, if he tell her, she'll give him more cause to forbid her that place.


Pray, why, Dear?


First, you like the Actors, and the Gallants may like you.


What, a homely Country Girl? no Bud, no body will like me.


I tell you, yes, they may.


No, no, you jest -- I won't believe you, I will go.


I tell you then, that one of the lewdest Fellows in Town, who saw you there,
told me he was in love with you.


Indeed! who, who, pray who wast?


I've gone too far, and slipped before I was aware; how overjoyed she is!


Was it any Hampshire Gallant, any of our Neighbours? I promise you, I am
beholding to him.


I promise you, you lye; for he would but ruin you, as he has done hundreds: he
has no other love for Women, but that, such as he, look upon Women like
Basilicks, but to destroy'em.


Ay, but if he loves me, why should he ruin me? answer me to that: methinks he
should not, I would do him no harm.


Hah, ha, ha.


'Tis very well; but I'll keep him from doing you any harm, or me either.

But here comes Company, get you in, get you in.


But pray, Husband, is he a pretty Gentleman, that loves me?


In baggage, in.

What all the lewd Libertines of the Town brought to my Lodging, by this easy
Coxcomb! S'death I'll not suffer it.


Here Harcourt, do you approve my choice? Dear, little Rogue, I told you, I'd
bring you acquainted with all my Friends, the wits, and --


Ay, they shall know her, as well as you your self will, I warrant you.


This is one of those, my pretty Rogue, that are to dance at your Wedding to
morrow; and him you must bid welcome ever, to what you and I have.


Monstrous! --


Harcourt how dost thou like her, Faith? Nay, Dear, do not look down; I should
hate to have a Wife of mine out of countenance at any thing.


Wonderful!


Tell me, I say, Harcourt, how dost thou like her? thou hast stared upon her
enough, to resolve me.


So infinitely well, that I could wish I had a Mistress too, that might differ
from her in nothing, but her love and engagement to you.


Sir, Master Sparkish has often told me, that his Acquaintance were all Wits
and Raillieurs, and now I find it.


No, by the Universe, Madam, he does not railIy now; you may believe him: I do
assure you, he is the honestest, worthiest, true hearted Gentleman -- A man of
such perfect honour, he would say nothing to a Lady, he does not mean.


Praising another Man to his Mistress!


Sir, you are so beyond expectation obliging, that --


Nay, I gad, I am sure you do admire her extremely, I see it in your eyes. -- He
does admire you Madam. -- By the World, don't you?


Yes, above the World, or, the most glorious part of it, her whole Sex; and
till now I never thought I should have envied you, or any Man about to marry,
but you have the best excuse for Marriage I ever knew.


Nay, now, Sir, I'm satisfied you are of the Society of the Wits, and
Raillieurs, since you cannot spare your Friend, even when he is but too civil
to you; but the surest sign is, since you are an Enemy to Marriage, for that I
hear you hate as much as business or bad Wine.


Truly, Madam, I never was an Enemy to Marriage, till now, because Marriage was
never an Enemy to me before.


But why, Sir, is Marriage an Enemy to you now? Because it robs you of your
Friend here; for you look upon a Friend married, as one gone into a Monastery,
that is dead to the World.


'Tis indeed, because you marry him; I see Madam, you can guess my meaning: I
do confess heartily and openly, I wish it were in my power to break the Match,
by Heavens. I would.


Poor Frank!'


Would you be so unkind to me?


No, no, 'tis not because I would be unkind to you.


Poor Frank, no gad, 'tis only his kindness to me.


Great kindness to you indeed; insensible Fop, let a. Man make love to his Wife
to his face.


Come dear Frank, for all my Wife there that shall be, thou shalt enjoy me
sometimes dear Rogue; by my honour, we Men of wit condole for our deceased
Brother in Marriage, as much as for one dead in earnest: I think that was
prettily said of me, ha Harcourt? -- But come Frank, be not not melancholy for
me.


No, I assure you I am not melancholy for you.


Prithee, Frank, dost think my Wife that shall be there a fine Person?


I could gaze upon her, till I became as blind as you are


How, as I am! how!


Because you are a Lover, and true Lovers are blind; stockblind.


True, true; but by the World, she has wit too, as well as beauty: go, go with
her into a corner, and try if she has wit, talk to her any thing, she's
bashful before me.


Indeed if a Woman wants wit in a corner, she has it no where.


Sir, you dispose of me a little before your time. --


Nay, nay, Madam let me have an earnest of your obedience, or -- go, go, Madam
--


How, Sir, if you are not concerned for the honour of a Wife, I am for that of
a Sister; he shall not debauch her: be a Pander to your own Wife, bring Men to
her, let'em make love before your face, thrust'em into a corner together, then
leav'em in private! is this your Town wit and conduct?


Hah, ha, ha, a silly wise Rogue, would make one laugh more then a stark Fool,
hah, ha: I shall burst. Nay, you shall not disturb'em; I'll vex thee, by the
World.


The writings are drawn, Sir, settlements made; 'tis too late, Sir, and past
all revocation.


Then so is my death.


I would not be unjust to him.


Then why to me so?


I have no obligation to you.


My love.


I had his before.


You never had it; he wants you see jealousy, the only infallible sign of it.


Love proceeds from esteem; he cannot distrust my virtue, besides he loves me,
or he would not marry me.


Marrying you, is no more sign of his love, then bribing your Woman, that he
may marry you, is a sign of his generosity: Marriage is rather a sign of
interest, then love; and he that marries a fortune, covets a Mistress, not
loves her: But if you take Marriage for a sign of love, take it from me
immediately.


No, now you have put a scruple in my head; but in short, Sir, to end our
dispute, I must marry him, my reputation would suffer in the World else.


No, if you do marry him, with your pardon, Madam, your reputation suffers in
the World, and you would be thought in necessity for a cloak.


Nay, now you are rude, Sir. -- Mr. Sparkish, pray come hither, your Friend
here is very troublesome, and very loving.


Hold, hold --


Do ye hear that?


Why, do ye think I'll seem to be jealous, like a Country Bumpkin?


No, rather be a Cuckold, like a credulous Cit.


Madam, you would not have been so little generous as to have told him.


Yes, since you could be so little generous, as to wrong him.


Wrong him, no Man can do it, he's beneath an injury; a Bubble, a Coward, a
senseless Idiot, a Wretch so contemptible to all the World but you, that --


Hold, do not rail at him, for since he is like to be my Husband, I am resolved
to like him: Nay, I think I am obliged to tell him, you are not his Friend. --
Master Sparkish, Master Sparkish.


What, what; now dear Rogue, has not she wit?


Not so much as I thought, and hoped she had.


Mr. Sparkish, do you bring People to rail at you?


Madam --


How! no, but if he does rail at me, 'tis but in jest I warrant; what we wits
do for one another, and never take any notice of it.


He spoke so scurrilously of you, I had no patience to hear him; besides he has
been making love to me.


True damned tell-tale-Woman.


Pshaw, to show his parts -- we wits rail and make love often, but to show our
parts; as we have no affections, so we have no malice, we --


He said, you were a Wretch, below an injury.


Pshaw.


Damned, senseless, impudent, virtuous Jade; well since she won't let me have
her, she'll do as good, she'll make me hate her.


A Common Bubble.


Pshaw.


A Coward.


Pshaw, pshaw.


A senseless drivelling Idiot.


How, did he disparage my parts? Nay, then my honour's concerned, I can't put
up that, Sir; by the World, Brother help me to kill him; [I may draw now, since
we have the odds of him: -- 'tis a good occasion too before my Mistress] --


Hold, hold.


What, what.


I must not let'em kill the Gentleman neither, for his kindness to me; I am so
far from hating him, that I wish my Gallant had his person and understanding:
-- [Nay if my honour --


I'll be thy death.


Hold, hold, indeed to tell the truth, the Gentleman said after all, that what
he spoke, was but out of friendship to you.


How! say, I am, I am a Fool, that is no wit, out of friendship to me.


Yes, to try whether I was concerned enough for you, and made love to me only
to be satisfied of my virtue, for your sake.


Kind however --


Nay, if it were so, my dear Rogue, I ask thee pardon; but why would not you
tell me so, faith.


Because I did not think on it, faith.


Come, Horner does not come, Harcourt, let's be gone to the new Play. -- Come
Madam.


I will not go, if you intend to leave me alone in the Box, and run into the
pit, as you use to do.


Pshaw, I'll leave Harcourt with you in the Box, to entertain you, and that's
as good; if I sate in the Box, I should be thought no Judge, but of trimmings.
-- Come away Harcourt, lead her down.


Well, go thy ways, for the flower of the true Town Fops, such as spend their
Estates, before they come to'em, and are Cuckolds before they are married. But
let me go look to my own Free-hold -- How --


Your Servant, Sir, where is your Lady? we are come to wait upon her to the new
Play.


New Play!


And my Husband will wait upon you presently.


Damn your civility -- Madam, by no means, I will not see Sir Jaspar here, till
I have waited upon him at home; nor shall my Wife see you, till she has waited
upon your Ladyship at your lodgings.


Now we are here, Sir --


No, Madam.


Pray, let us see her.


We will not stir, till we see her.


A Pox on you all -- she has locked the door, and is gone abroad.


No, you have locked the door, and she's within.


They told us below, she was here.


[Will nothing do? ] -- Well it must out then, to tell you the truth, Ladies,
which I was afraid to let you know before, least it might endanger your lives,
my Wife has just now the Small Pox come out upon her, do not be frightened; but
pray, be gone Ladies, you shall not stay here in danger of your lives; pray get
you gone Ladies.


No, no, we have all had'em.


Alack, alack.


Come, come, we must see how it goes with her, I understand the disease.


Come.


Well, there is no being too hard for Women at their own weapon, lying,
therefore I'll quit the Field.


Here's an example of jealousy.


Indeed as the World goes, I wonder there are no more jealous, since Wives are
so neglected.


Pshaw, as the World goes, to what end should they be jealous.


Foh, 'tis a nasty World.


That Men of parts, great acquaintance, and quality should take up with, and
spend themselves and fortunes, in keeping little Play-house Creatures, foh.


Nay, that Women of understanding, great acquaintance, and good quality, should
fall a keeping too of little Creatures, foh.


Why, 'tis the Men of qualities fault, they never visit Women of honour, and
reputation, as they used to do; and have not so much as common civility, for
Ladies of our rank, but use us with the same indifferency, and ill breeding, as
if we were all married to'em.


She says true, 'tis an errant shame Women of quality should be so slighted;
methinks, birth, birth, should go for something; I have known Men admired,
courted, and followed for their titles only.


Ay, one would think Men of honour should not love no more, than marry out of
their own rank.


Fie, fie upon'em, they are come to think cross breeding for themselves best,
as well as for their Dogs, and Horses.


They are Dogs, and Horses for it.


One would think if not for love, for vanity a little.


Nay, they do satisfy their vanity upon us sometimes; and are kind to us in
their report, tell all the World they lye with us.


Damned Rascals, that we should be only wronged by'em; to report a Man has had
a Person, when he has not had a Person, is the greatest wrong in the whole
World, that can be done to a person.


Well, 'tis an errant shame, Noble Persons should be so wronged, and neglected.


But still 'tis an erranter shame for a Noble Person, to neglect her own
honour, and defame her own Noble Person, with little inconsiderable Fellows,
foh! --


I suppose the crime against our honour, is the same with a Man of quality as
with another.


How! no sure the Man of quality is likest one's Husband, and therefore the
fault should be the less.


But then the pleasure should be the less.


Fie, fie, fie, for shame Sister, whither shall we ramble? be continent in your
discourse, or I shall hate you.


Besides an intrigue is so much the more notorious for the man's quality.


'Tis true, no body takes notice of a private Man, and therefore with him, 'tis
more secret, and the crime's the less, when 'tis not known.


You say true; y faith I think you are in the right on it: 'tis not an injury to
a Husband, till it be an injury to our honours; so that a Woman of honour
looses no honour with a private Person; and to say truth --


So the little Fellow is grown a private Person -- with her --


But still my dear, dear Honour.


Ay, my dear, dear of honour, thou hast still so much honour in thy mouth --


That she has none elsewhere --


Oh, what do ye mean to bring in these upon us?


Foh, these are as bad as Wits.


Foh!


Let us leave the Room.


Stay, stay, faith to tell you the naked truth.


Fie, Sir Jaspar, do not use that word naked.


Well, well, in short I have business at Whitehal, and cannot go to the play
with you, therefore would have you go --


With those two to a Play?


No, not with the other, but with Mr. Horner, there can be no more scandal to go
with him, than with Mr. Tatle, or Master Limberham.


With that nasty Fellow! no -- no.


Nay, prithee Dear, hear me.


Ladies.


Stand off.


Do not approach us.


You heard with the wits, you are obscenity all over.


And I would as soon look upon a Picture of Adam and Eve, without fig leaves,
as any of you, if I could help it, therefore keep off, and do not make us sick.


What a Divel are these?


Why, these are pretenders to honour, as critics to wit, only by censuring
others; and as every raw peevish, outof-humour'd, affected, dull, Tea-drinking,
Arithmetical Fop sets up for a wit, by railing at men of sense, so these for
honour, by railing at the Court, and Ladies of as great honour, as quality.


Come, Mr. Horner, I must desire you to go with these Ladies to the Play, Sir.


I! Sir.


Ay, ay, come, Sir.


I must -beg your pardon, Sir, and theirs, I will not be seen in Women's Company
in public again for the World.


Ha, ha, strange Aversion!


No, he's for Women's company in private.


He -- poor Man -- he! hah, ha, ha.


'Tis a greater shame amongst lewd fellows to be seen in virtuous Women's
company, than for the Women to be seen with them.


Indeed, Madam, the time was I only hated virtuous Women, but now I hate the
other too; I beg your pardon Ladies.


You are very obliging, Sir, because we would not be troubled with you.


In sober sadness he shall go.


Nay, if he wo'not, I am ready to wait upon the Ladies; and I think I am the
fitter Man.


You, Sir, no I thank you for that -- Master Horner is a privileged Man amongst
the virtuous Ladies, 'twill be a great while before you are so; heh, he, he,
he's my Wive's Gallant, heh, he he; no pray withdraw, Sir, for as I take it,
the virtuous Ladies have no business with you.


And I am sure, he can have none with them: 'tis strange a Man can't come
amongst virtuous Women now, but upon the same terms, as Men are admitted into
the great Turks Seraglio; but Heavens keep me, from being an hombre Player
with'em: but where is Pinchwife --


Come, come, Man; what avoid the sweet society of Woman-kind? that sweet, soft,
gentle, tame, noble Creature Woman, made for Man's Companion --


So is that soft, gentle, tame, and more noble Creature a Spaniel, and has all
their tricks, can fawn, lye down, suffer beating, and fawn the more; barks at
your Friends, when they come to see you; makes your bed hard, gives you Fleas,
and the mange sometimes: and all the difference is, the Spaniel's the more
faithful Animal, and fawns but upon one Master.


Heh, he, he.


O the rude Beast.


Insolent brute.


Brute! stinking mortified rotten French Weather, to dare --


Hold, an't please your Ladyship; for shame Master, Horner your Mother was a
Woman -- [Now shall I never reconcile'em]

Hark you, Madam, take my advice in your anger; you know you often want one to
make up your droling pack of hombre Players; and you may cheat him easily, for
he's an ill Gamester, and consequently loves play: Besides you know, you have
but two old civil Gentlemen ( with stinking breaths too) to wait upon you
abroad, take in the third, into your service; the other are but crazy: and a
Lady should have a supernumerary Gentleman-Usher, as a supernumerary
Coachhorse, least sometimes you should be forced to stay at home.


But are you sure he loves play, and has money?


He loves play as much as you, and has money as much as I.


Then I am contented to make him pay for his scurrillity; money makes up in a
measure all other wants in Men. -- Those whom we cannot make hold for Gallants,
we make fine.


So, so; now to mollify, to wheedle him, --

Master Horner will you never keep civil Company, methinks 'tis time now, since
you are only fit for them: Come, come, Man you must even fall to visiting our
Wives, eating at our Tables, drinking Tea with our virtuous Relations after
dinner, dealing Cards to'em, reading Plays, and Gazets to'em, picking Fleas out
of their shocks for'em, collecting Receipts, New Songs, Women, Pages, and
Footmen for'em.


I hope they'll afford me better employment, Sir.


Heh, he, he, 'tis fit you know your work before you come into your place; and
since you are unprovided of a Lady to flatter, and a good house to eat at, pray
frequent mine, and call my Wife Mistress, and she shall call you Gallant,
according to the custom.


Who I? --


Faith, thou shall it for my sake, come for my sake only.


For your sake --


Come, come, here's a Gamester for you, let him be a little familiar sometimes;
nay, what if a little rude; Gamesters may be rude with Ladies, you know.


Yes, losing Gamesters have a privilege with Women.


I always thought the contrary, that the winning Gamester had most privilege
with Women, for when you have lost your money to a Man, you'll loose any thing
you have, all you have, they say, and he may use you as he pleases.


Heh, he, he, well, win or loose you shall have your liberty with her.


As he behaves himself; and for your sake I'll give him admittance and freedom.


All sorts of freedom, Madam?


Ay, ay, ay, all forts of freedom thou can take, and so go to her, begin thy
new employment; wheedle her, jest with her, and be better acquainted one with
another.


I think I know her already, therefore may venture with her, my secret for hers
--


Sister Cousin, I have provided an innocent Play-fellow for you there.


Who he!


There's a Play-fellow indeed.


Yes sure, what he is good enough to play at Cards, Blind-mans buff, or the
fool with sometimes.


Foh, we will have no such Play-fellows.


No, Sir, you shall not choose Play-fellows for us, we thank you.


Nay, pray hear me.


But, poor Gentleman, could you be so generous? so truly a Man of honour, as
for the sakes of us Women of honour, to cause your self to be reported no Man?
No Man! and to suffer your self the greatest shame that could fall upon a Man,
that none might fall upon us Women by your conversation; but indeed, Sir, as
perfectly, perfectly, the same Man as before your going into France, Sir; as
perfectly, perfectly, Sir.


As perfectly, perfectly, Madam; nay, I scorn you should take my word; I desire
to be tried only, Madam.


Well, that's spoken again like a Man of honour, all Men of honour desire to
come to the test: But indeed, generally you Men report such things of your
selves, one does not know how, or whom to believe; and it is come to that pass,
we dare not take your words, no more than your Taylors, without some staid
Servant of yours be bound with you; but I have so strong a faith in your
honour, dear, dear, noble Sir, that I'd forfeit mine for yours at any time,
dear Sir.


No, Madam, you should not need to forfeit it for me, I have given you security
already to save you harmless my late reputation being so well known in the
World, Madam.


But if upon any future falling out, or upon a suspicion of my taking the trust
out of your hands, to employ some other, you your self should betray your
trust, dear Sir; I mean, if you'll give me leave to speak obscenely, you might
tell, dear Sir.


If I did, no body would believe me; the reputation of impotency is as hardly
recovered again in the World, as that of cowardice, dear Madam.


Nay then, as one may say, you may do your worst, dear, dear, Sir.


Come, is your Ladyship reconciled to him yet? have you agreed on matters? for
I must be gone to Whitehal.


Why, indeed, Sir Jaspar, Master Horner is a thousand, thousand times a better
Man, than I thought him: Cousin Squeamish, Sister Dainty, I can name him now,
truly not long ago you know, I thought his very name obscenity, and I would as
soon have lain with him, as have named him.


Very likely, poor Madam.


I believe it.


No doubt on it.


Well, well -- that your Ladyship is as virtuous as any she, -- I know, and him
all the Town knows -- heh, he, he; therefore now you like him, get you gone to
your business together; go, go, to your business, I say, pleasure, whilst I go
to my pleasure, business.


Come than dear Gallant.


Come away, my dearest Mistress.


So, so, why 'tis as I'd have it.


And as I'd have it.


Who for his business, from his Wife will run;
Takes the best care, to have her business done.

Sister, what ails you, you are grown melancholy?


Would it not make any one melancholy, to see you go every day fluttering about
abroad, whilst I must stay at home like a poor lonely, sullen Bird in a cage?


Ay, Sister, but you came young, and just from the nest to your cage, so that I
thought you liked it; and could be as cheerful in it, as others that took their
flight themselves early, and are hopping abroad in the open Air.


Nay, I confess I was quiet enough, till my Husband told me, what pure lives,
the London Ladies live abroad, with their dancing, meetings, and junketings,
and dressed every day in their best gowns; and I warrant you, play at nine Pins
every day of the week, so they do.


Come, what's here to do? you are putting the Town pleasures in her head, and
setting her a longing.


Yes, after Nine-pins; you suffer none to give her those longings, you mean,
but your self.


I tell her of the vanities of the Town like a Confessor.


A Confessor! just such a Confessor, as he that by forbidding a silly Ostler
to grease the Horses teeth, taught him to do it.


Come Mistress Flippant, good Precepts are lost, when bad Examples are still
before us; the liberty you take abroad makes her hanker after it; and out of
humour at home, poor Wretch! sho desired not to come to London, I would bring
her.


Very well.


She has been this week in Town, and never desired, till this afternoon, to go
abroad.


Was she not at a Play yesterday?


Yes, but she never asked me; I was my self the cause of her going.


Then if she ask you again, you are the cause of her asking, and not my
example.


Well, to morrow night I shall be rid of you; and the next day before 'tis
light, she and I'll be rid of the Town, and my dreadful apprehensions: Come, be
not melancholy, for thou shall it go into the Country after to morrow, Dearest.


Great comfort.


Pish, what do ye tell me of the Country for?


How's this! what, pish at the Country?


Let me alone, I am not well.


O, if that be all -- what ails my dearest?


Truly I don't know; but I have not been well, since you told me there was a
Gallant at the Play in love with me.


Ha --


That's by my example too.


Nay, if you are not well, but are so concerned, because a lewd Fellow chanced
to lye, and say he liked you, you'll make me sick too.


Of what sickness?


O, of that which is worse than the Plague. Jealousy.


Pish, you jear, I'm sure there's no such disease in our Receipt-book at home.


No, thou never met with it, poor Innocent -- well, if thou Cuckold me,
'twill be my own fault -- for Cuckolds and Bastards, are generally makers of
their own fortune.


Well, but pray Bud, let's go to a Play to night.


'Tis just done, she comes from it; but why are you so eager to see a Play?


Faith Dear, not that I care one pin for their talk there; but I like to look
upon the Player-men, and would see, if I could, the Gallant you say loves me;
that's all dear Bud.


Is that all dear Bud?


This proceeds from my example.


But if the Play be done, let's go abroad however, dear Bud.


Come have a little patience, and thou shalt go into the Country on Friday.


Therefore I would see first some sights, to tell my Neighbours of. Nay, I will
go abroad, that's once.


I'm the cause of this desire too.


But now I think on it, who was the cause of Horners coming to my Lodging to
day? that was you.


No, you, because you would not let him see your handsome Wife out of your
Lodging.


Why, O Lord! did the Gentleman come hither to see me indeed?


No, no; -- You are not cause of that damned question too, Mistress Alithea? --
[Well she's in the right of it; he is in love with my Wife -- and comes after
her -- 'tis so -- but I'll nip his love in the bud; least he should follow us
into the Country, and break his Chariot-wheel near our house, on purpose for an
excuse to come to it; but I think I know the Town.


Come, pray Bud, let's go abroad before 'tis late; for I will go, that's flat
and plain.


So! the obstinacy already of a Town-wife, and I must, whilst she's here,
humour her like one. Sister, how shall we do, that she may not be seen, or
known?


Let her put on her Mask.


Pshaw, a Mask makes People but the more inquisitive, and is as ridiculous a
disguise, as a stage-beard; her shape, stature, habit will be known: and if we
should meet with Horner, he would be sure to take acquaintance with us, must
wish her joy, kiss her, talk to her, leer upon her, and the Devil and all; no
I'll not use her to a Mask, 'tis dangerous; for Masks have made more Cuckolds,
than the best faces that ever were known.


How will you do then?


Nay, shall we go? the Exchange will be shut, and I have a mind to see that.


So -- I have it -- I'll dress her up in the Suit, we are to carry down to her
Brother, little Sir James; nay, I understand the Town tricks: Come let's go
dress her; a Mask! no -- a Woman masked, like a covered Dish, gives a Man
curiosity, and appetite, when, it may be, uncovered, it would turn his stomach;
no, no.


Indeed your comparison is something a greasy one: but I had a gentle Gallant,
used to say, a Beauty masked, liked the Sun in Eclipse, gathers together more
gazers, than if it shined out.


Engaged to Women, and not Sup with us?


Ay, a Pox on'em all.


You were much a more reasonable Man in the morning, and had as noble
resolutions against'em, as a Widower of a weeks liberty.


Did I ever think, to see you keep company with Women in vain.


In vain! no -- 'tis, since I can't love'em, to be revenged on'em.


Now your Sting is gone, you looked in the Box amongst all those Women, like a
drone in the hive, all upon you;shov'd and ill-us'd by'em all, and thrust from
one side to the other.


Yet he must be buzzing amongst'em still, like other old beetle-headed,
lycorish drones; avoid'em, and hate'm as they hate you.


Because I do hate'em, and would hate'em yet more, I'll frequent'em; you may
see by Marriage, nothing makes a Man hate a Woman more, than her constant
conversation: In short, I converse with'em, as you do with rich Fools, to laugh
at'em, and use'em ill.


But I would no more Sup with Women, unless I could lye with'em, than Sup with
a rich Coxcomb, unless I could cheat him.


Yes, I have known thee Sup with a Fool, for his drinking, if he could set out
your hand that way only, you were satisfied; and if he were a Wine-swallowing
mouth 'twas enough.


Yes, a Man drink's often with a Fool, as he tosses with a Marker, only to keep
his hand in Ur; but do the Ladies drink?


Yes, Sir, and I shall have the pleasure at least of laying'em flat with a
Bottle; and bring as much scandal that way upon'em, as formerly the other.


Perhaps you may prove as weak a Brother amongst'em that way, as the other.


Foh, drinking with Women, is as unnatural, as scolding with'em; but 'tis a
pleasure of decayed Fornicators, and the basest way of quenching Love.


Nay, 'tis drowning Love, instead of quenching it; but leave us for civil Women
too!


Ay, when he can't be the better for'em; we hardly pardon a Man, that leaves
his Friend for a Wench, and that's a pretty lawful call.


Faith, I would not leave you for'em, if they would not drink.


Who would disappoint his Company at Lewis's, for a Gossiping?


Foh, Wine and Women good apart, together as nauseous as Sack and Sugar: But
hark you, Sir, before you go, a little of your advice, an old maimed General,
when unfit for action is fittest for Counsel; I have other designs upon Women,
than eating and drinking with them: I am in love with Sparkish's Mistress, whom
he is to marry to morrow, now how shall I get her?


Why, here comes one will help you to her.


He! he, I tell you, is my Rival, and will hinder my love.


No, a foolish Rival, and a jealous Husband assist their Rivals designs; for
they are sure to make their Women hate them, which is the first step to their
love, for another Man.


But I cannot come near his Mistress, but in his company.


Still the better for you, for Fools are most easily cheated, when they
themselves are accessaries; and he is to be bubbled of his Mistress, as of his
Money, the common Mistress, by keeping him company.


Who is that, that is to be bubbled? Faith let me snack, I have not met with a
bubble since Christmas: gad; I think bubles are like their Brother Woodcocks, go
out with the cold weather.


A Pox, he did not hear all I hope.


Come, you bubbling Rogues you, where do we sup -- Oh, Harcourt, my Mistress
tells me, you have been making fierce love to her all the Play long, hah, ha --
but I --


I make love to her?


Nay, I forgive thee; for I think I know thee, and I-know her, but I am sure I
know my self.


Did she tell you so? I see all Women are like these of the Fxchange, who to
enhance the price of their commodities, report to their fond Customers offers
which were never made'em.


Ay, Women are as apt to tell before the intrigue, as Men after it, and so show
themselves the vainer Sex; but hast thou a Mistress, Sparkish? 'tis as hard for
me to believe it, as that thou ever had a bubble, as you bragged just now.


O your Servant, Sir; are you at your raillery, Sir? but we were some of us
beforehand with you to day at the Play: the Wits were something bold with you,
Sir; did you not hear us laugh?


Yes, But I thought you had gone to Plays, to laugh at the Poets wit, not at
your own.


Your Servant, Sir, no I thank you; gad I go to a Play as to a Country-treat, I
carry my own wine to one, and my own wit to the other, or else I'm sure I should
not be merry at either; and the reason why we are so often louder, than the
Players, is, because we think we speak more wit, and so become the Poets Rivals
in his audience: for to tell you the truth, we hate the silly Rogues; nay, so
much that we find fault even with their Bawdy upon the Stage, whilst we talk
nothing else in the Pit as loud.


But, why should thou hate the silly Poets, thou hast too much wit to be
one, and they like Whores are only hated by each other; and thou dost scorn
writing, I'am sure.


Yes, I'd have you to know, I scorn writing; but Women, Women, that make Men do
all foolish things, make'em write Songs too; every body does it: 'tis even as
common with Lovers, as playing with fans; and you can no more help Rhyming to
your Phyllis, than drinking to your Phyllis.


Nay, Poetry in love is no more to be avoided, than jealousy.


But the Poets damned your Songs, did they?


Damn the Poets, they turn'd'em into Burlesque, as they call it; that Burlesque
is a Hocus-Pocus-trick, they have got, which by the virtue of Hictius doctius,
topsey turvey, they make a wise and witty Man in the World, a Fool upon the
Stage you know not how; and 'tis therefore I hate'em too, for I know not but it
may be my own case; for they'll put a Man into a Play for looking a Squint:
Their Predecessors were contented to make Serving-men only their StageFools,
but these Rogues must have Gentlemen, with a Pox to'em, nay Knights: and indeed
you shall hardly see a Fool upon the Stage, but he's a Knight; and to tell you
the truth, they have kept me these six years from being a Knight in earnest,
for fear of being knighted in a Play, and dubbed a Fool.


Blame'em not, they must follow their Copy, the Age.


But why should thou be afraid of being in a Play, who expose your self
every day in the Play-houses, and as public Places.


'Tis but being on the Stage, instead of standing on a Bench in the Pit.


Don't you give money to Painters to draw you like? and are you afraid of your
Pictures, at length in a Play-house, where all your Mistresses may see you.


A Pox, Painters don't draw the Small Pox, or Pimples in ones face; come damn
all your silly Authors whatever, all Books and Booksellers, by the World, and
all Readers, courteous or uncourteous.


But, who comes here, Sparkish?


Oh hide me, there's my Mistress too.


She sees you.


But I will not see her, 'tis time to go to Whitehal, and I must not fail the
drawing Room.


Pray, first carry me, and reconcile me to her.


Another time, faith the King will have sup't.


Not with the worse stomach for thy absence; thou art one of those Fools, that
think their attendance at the King's Meals, as necessary as his Physicians,
when you are more troublesome to him, than his Doctors, or his Dogs.


Pshaw, I know my interest, Sir, prithee hide me.


Your Servant, Pinchwife, -- what he knows us not --


Come along.


Pray, have you any Ballads, give me six-penny worth?


We have no Ballads.


Then give me Covent-garden-Drollery, and a Play or two -- Oh here's Tarugos
Wiles, and the Slighted Maiden, I'll have them.


No, Plays are not for your reading; come along, will you discover your self?


Who is that pretty Youth with him, Sparkish?


I believe his Wife's Brother, because he's something like her, but I never saw
her but once.


Extremely handsome, I have seen a face like it too; let us follow'em.


Come, Sparkish, your Mistress saw you, and will be angry you go not to her;
besides I would fain be reconciled to her, which none but you can do, dear
Friend.


Well that's a better reason, dear Friend; I would not go near her now, for
her's, or my own sake, but I can deny you nothing; for though I have known thee
a great while, never go, if I do not love thee, as well as a new Acquaintance.


I am obliged to you indeed, dear Friend, I would be well with her only, to be
well with thee still; for these ties to Wives usually dissolve all ties to
Friends: I would be contented, she should enjoy you a nights, but I would have
you to my self a days, as I have had, dear Friend.


And thou shalt enjoy me a days, dear, dear Friend, never stir; and I'll be
divorced from her, sooner than from thee; come along --


So we are hard put to it, when we make our Rival our Procurer; but neither she,
nor her Brother, would let me come near her now: when all's done, a Rival is
the best cloak to steal to a Mistress under, without suspicion; and when we
have once got to her as we desire, we throw him off like other Cloaks.


Sister, if you will not go, we must leave you --

The Fool her Gallant, and she, will muster up all the young santerers of this
place, and they will leave their dear Seamstresses to follow us; what a swarm
of Cuckolds, and Cuckold-makers are here?

Come let's be gone Mistress Margery.


Don't you believe that, I have not half my belly full of sights yet.


Then walk this way.


Lord, what a power of brave signs are here! stay -- the Bull's-head, the
Rams-head, and the Stags-head, Dear --


Nay, if every Husbands proper sign here were visible, they would be all alike.


What do ye mean by that, Bud?


'Tis no matter -- no matter, Bud.


Pray tell me; nay, I will know.


They would be all Bulls, Stags, and Rams heads.


Come, dear Madam, for my sake you shall be reconciled to him.


For your sake I hate him.


That's something too cruel, Madam, to hate me for his sake.


Ay indeed, Madam, too, too cruel to me, to hate my Friend for my sake.


I hate him because he is your Enemy; and you ought to hate him too, for making
love to me, if you love me.


That's a good one, I hate a Man for loving you; if he did love you, 'tis but
what he can't help, and 'tis your fault not his, if he admires you: I hate a
Man for being of my opinion, I'll never do it, by the World.


Is it for your honour or mine, to suffer a Man to make love to me, who am to
marry you to morrow?


Is it for your honour or mine, to have me jealous? That he makes love to you,
is a sign you are handsome; and that I am not jealous, is a sign you are
virtuous, that I think is for your honour.


But 'tis your honour too, I am concerned for.


But why, dearest Madam, will you be more concerned for his honour, than he is
himself; let his honour alone for my sake, and his, he, he, has no honour --


How's that?


But what, my dear Friend can guard himself.


O ho -- that's right again.


Your care of his honour argues his neglect of it, which is no honour to my
dear Friend here; therefore once more, let his honour go which way it will,
dear Madam.


Ay, ay, were it for my honour to marry a Woman, whose virtue I suspected, and
could not trust her in a Friends hands?


Are you not afraid to loose me?


He afraid to loose you, Madam! No, no -- you may see how the most estimable,
and most glorious Creature in the World, is valued by him; will you not see it?


Right, honest Frank, I have that noble value for her, that I cannot be
jealous of her.


You mistake him, he means you care not for me, nor who has me.


Lord, Madam, I see you are jealous; will you wrest a poor Mans meaning from
his words?


You astonish me, Sir, with your want of jealousy.


And you make me guiddy, Madam, with your jealousy, and fears, and virtue, and
honour; gad, I see virtue makes a Woman as troublesome, as a little reading, or
learning.


Monstrous!


[Well to see what easy Husbands these Women of quality can meet with, a poor
Chamber maid can never have such Lady-like luck; besides he's thrown away upon
her, she'll make no use of her fortune, her blessing, none to a Gentleman, for a
pure Cuckold, for it requires good breeding to be a Cuckold.


I tell you then plainly, he pursues me to marry me.


Pshaw --


Come, Madam, you see you strive in vain to make him jealous of me; my dear
Friend is the kindest Creature in the World to me.


Poor fellow.


But his kindness only is not enough for me, without your favour; your good
opinion, dear Madam, 'tis that must perfect my happiness: good Gentleman he
believes all I say, would you would do so, jealous of me! I would not wrong him
nor you for the World.


Look you there; hear him, hear him, and do not walk away so.


I love you, Madam, so --


How's that! Nay -- now you begin to go too far indeed.


So much I confess, I say I love you, that I would not have you miserable, and
cast your self away upon so unworthy, and inconsiderable a thing, as what you
see here,


No faith, I believe thou would not, now his meaning is plain: but I knew
before thou would not wrong me nor her.


No, no, Heavens forbid, the glory of her Sex should fall so low as into the
embraces of such a contemptible Wretch, the last of Mankind -- my dear Friend
here -- I injure him.


Very well.


No, no, dear Friend, I knew it Madam, you see he will rather wrong himself
than me, in giving himself such names.


Do not you understand him yet?


Yes, how modestly he speaks of himself, poor Fellow.


Methinks he speaks impudently of your self, since -- before your self too,
insomuch that I can no longer suffer his scurrilous abusiveness to you, no more
than his love to me.


Nay, nay, Madam, pray stay, his love to you: Lord, Madam, has he not spoke yet
plain enough?


Yes indeed, I should think so.


Well then, by the World, a Man can't speak civilly to a Woman now, but
presently she says, he makes love to her: Nay, Madam, you shall stay, with your
pardon, since you have not yet understood him, till he has made an
?claircissement of his love to you, that is what kind of love it is; answer to
thy Catechism: Friend, do you love my Mistress here?


Yes, I wish she would not doubt it.


But how do you love her?


With all my Soul.


I thank him, methinks he speaks plain enough now.


You are out still.

But with what kind of love, Harcourt?


With the best, and truest love in the World.


Look you there then, that is with no matrimonial love, I'm sure.


How's that, do you say matrimonial love is not best?


Gad, I went too far e're I was aware: But speak for thy self Harcourt, you
said you would not wrong me, nor her.


No, no, Madam, even take him for Heaven's sake.


Look you there, Madam.


Who should in all justice be yours, he that loves you most.


Look you there, Mr. Sparkish, who's that?


Who should it be? go on Harcourt.


Who loves you more than Women, Titles, or fortune Fools.


Look you there, he means me still, for he points at me.


Ridiculous!


Who can only match your Faith, and constancy in love.


Ay.


Who knows, if it be possible, how to value so much beauty and virtue.


Ay.


Whose love can no more be equalled in the world, than that Heavenly form of
yours.


No --


Who could no more suffer a Rival, than your absence, and yet could no more
suspect your virtue, than his own constancy in his love to you.


No --


Who in fine loves you better than his eyes, that first made him love you.


Ay -- nay, Madam, faith you shall not go, till --


Have a care, lest you make me stay too long --


But till he has saluted you; that I may be assured you are friends, after his
honest advice and declaration: Come pray, Madam, be friends with him.


You must pardon me, Sir, that I am not yet so obedient to you.


What, invite your Wife to kiss Men? Monstrous, are you not ashamed? I will
never forgive you.


Are you not ashamed, that I should have more confidence in the chastity of
your Family, than you have; you must not teach me, I am a man of honour, Sir,
though I am frank and free; I am frank, Sir --


Very frank, Sir, to share your Wife with your friends.


He is an humble, menial Friend, such as reconciles the differences of the
Marriage-bed; you know Man and Wife do not always agree, I design him for that
use, therefore would have him well with my Wife.


A menial Friend -- you will get a great many menial Friends, by showing your
Wife as you do.


What then, it may be I have a pleasure in it, as I have to show fine Clothes,
at a Play-house the first day, and count money before poor Rogues.


He that shows his wife, or money will be in danger of having them borrowed
sometimes.


I love to be envied, and would not marry a Wife, that I alone could love;
loving alone is as dull, as eating alone; is it not a frank age, and I am a
frank Person? and to tell you the truth, it may be I love to have Rivals in a
Wife, they make her seem to a Man still, but as a kept Mistress; and so good
night, for I must to Whitehal. Madam, I hope you are now reconciled to my
Friend; and so I wish you a good night, Madam, and sleep if you can, for to
morrow you know I must visit you early with a Canonical Gentleman. Good night
dear Harcourt.


Madam, I hope you will not refuse my visit to morrow, if it should be earlier,
with a Canonical Gentleman, than Mr. Sparkish's.


This Gentle-woman is yet under my care, therefore you must yet forbear your
freedom with her, Sir.


Must, Sir --


Yes, Sir, she is my Sister.


'Tis well she is, Sir -- for I must be her Servant, Sir. Madam --


Come away Sister, we had been gone, if it had not been for you, and so avoided
these lewd Rakehells, who seem to haunt us.


How now Pinchwife?


Your Servant.


What, I see a little time in the Country makes a Man turn wild and unsociable,
and only fit to converse with his Horses, Dogs, and his Herds.


I have business, Sir, and must mind it; your business is pleasure, therefore
you and I must go different ways.


Well, you may go on, but this pretty young Gentleman --


The Lady --


And the Maid --


Shall stay with us, for I suppose their business is the same with ours,
pleasure.


'Sdeath he knows her, she carries it so sillily, yet if he does not, I should
be more silly to discover it first.


Pray, let us go, Sir.


Come, come --


Had you not rather stay with us? Pinchwife, who is this pretty young
Gentleman?


One to whom I'm a guardian. [I wish I could keep her out of your hands --


Who is he? I never saw any thing so pretty in all my life.


Pshaw, do not look upon him so much, he's a poor bashful youth, you'll put him
out of countenance. Come away Brother.


O your Brother!


Yes, my Wives Brother; come, come, she'll stay supper for us.


I thought so, for he is very like her I saw you at the Play with, whom I told
you, I was in love with.


O Jeminy! is this he that was in love with me, I am glad on it I vow, for he's
a curious fine Gentleman, and I love him already too.

Is this he Bud?


Come away, come away.


Why, what hast are you in? why wont you let me talk with him?


Because you'll debauch him, he's yet young and innocent, and I would not have
him debauched for any thing in the World.

How she gazes on him! the Divel --


Harcourt, Dorilant, look you here, this is the likeness of that Dowdey he told
us of, his Wife, did you ever see a lovelyer Creature? the Rogue has reason to
be jealous of his Wife, since she is like him, for she would make all that see
her, in love with her.


And as I remember now, she is as like him here as can be.


She is indeed very pretty, if she be like him.


Very pretty, a very pretty commendation -- she is a glorious Creature,
beautiful beyond all things I ever beheld.


So, so.


More beautiful than a Poets first Mistress of Imagination.


Or another Mans last Mistress of flesh and blood.


Nay, now you jeer, Sir; pray don't jeer me --


Come, come. [By Heavens she'll discover her self.


I speak of your Sister, Sir.


Ay, but saying she was handsome, if like him, made him blush. [I am upon a
wrack --


Methinks he is so handsome, he should not be a Man.


O there 'tis out, he has discovered her, I am not able to suffer any longer.

[Come, come away, I say --


Nay, by your leave, Sir, he shall not go yet -- Harcourt, Dorilant, let us
torment this jealous Rogue a little.


How?


How?


I'll show you.


Come, pray let him go, I cannot stay fooling any longer; I tell you his Sister
stays supper for us.


Does she, come then we will all go sup with her and thee.


No, now I think on it, having staid so long for us, I warrant she's gone to bed
-- [I wish she and I were well out of their hands --

Come, I must rise early to morrow, come.


Well then, if she be gone to bed, I wish her and you a good night. But pray,
young Gentleman, present my humble service to her.


Thank you heartily, Sir.


S'death, she will discover her self yet in spite of me.

He is something more civil to you, for your kindness to his Sister, than I am,
it seems.


Tell her, dear sweet little Gentleman, for all your Brother there, that you
have revived the love, I had for her at first sight in the Play-house.


But did you love her indeed, and indeed?


So, so.

Away, I say.


Nay stay; yes indeed, and indeed, pray do you tell her so, and give her this
kiss from me.


O Heavens! what do I suffer; now 'tis too plain he knows her, and yet --


And this, and this --


What do you kiss me for, I am no Woman.


So -- there 'tis out.

Come, I cannot, nor will stay any longer.


Nay, they shall send your Lady a kiss too; here Harcourt, Dorilant, will you
not?


How, do I suffer this? was I not accusing another just now, for this rascally
patience, in permitting his Wife to be kissed before his face? ten thousand
ulcers gnaw away their lips.

Come, come.


Good night dear little Gentleman; Madam goodnight; farewell Pinchwife. [Did not
I tell you, I would raise his jealous gall.


So they are gone at last; stay, let me see first if the Coach be at this door.


What not gone yet? will you be sure to do as I desired you, sweet Sir?


Sweet Sir, but what will you give me then?


Any thing, come away into the next walk.


Hold, hold, -- what do ye do?


Stay, stay, hold --


Hold Madam, hold, let him present him, he'll come presently; nay, I will never
let you go, till you answer my question.


For God's sake, Sir, I must follow'em.


No, I have something to present you with too, you shall not follow them.


Where? -- how? -- what's become of? gone -- whither?


He's only gone with the Gentleman, who will give him something, an't please
your Worship.


Something -- give him something, with a Pox -- where are they?


In the next walk only, Brother.


Only, only; where, where?


What's the matter with him? why so much concerned? but dearest Madam --


Pray, let me go, Sir, I have said, and suffered enough already.


Then you will not look upon, nor pity my sufferings?


To look upon'em, when I cannot help'em, were cruelty, not pity, therefore I
will never see you more.


Let me then, Madam, have my privilege of a banished Lover, complaining or
railing, and giving you but a farewell reason; why, if you cannot condescend to
marry me, you should not take that wretch my Rival.


He only, not you, since my honour is engaged so far to him, can give me a
reason, why I should not marry him; but if he be true, and what I think him to
me, I must be so to him; your Servant, Sir.


Have Women only constancy when 'tis a vice, and like fortune only true to
fools?


Thou shall it not stir thou robust Creature, you see I can deal with you,
thereforefore you should stay the rather, and be kind.


Gone, gone, not to be found; quite gone, ten thousand plagues go with'em;
which way went they?


But into the other walk, Brother.


Their business will be done presently sure, an't please your Worship, it can't
be long in doing I'm sure on it.


Are they not there?


No, you know where they are, you infamous Wretch, Eternal shame of your
Family, which you do not dishonour enough your self, you think, but you must
help her to do it too, thou legion of Bawds.


Good Brother.


Damned, damned Sister.


Look you here, she's coming.


O dear Bud, look you here what I have got, see.


And what I have got here too, which you can't see.


The fine Gentleman has given me better things yet.


Ha's he so? [Out of breath and coloured -- I must hold yet.


I have only given your little Brother an Orange, Sir.


Thank you, Sir.

You have only squeezed my Orange, I suppose, and given it me again; yet I must
have a City-patience.

Come, come away --


Stay, till I have put up my fine things, Bud.


O Master Horner, come, come, the Ladies stay for you; your Mistress, my Wife,
wonders you make not more hast to her.


I have staid this halfhour for you here, and 'tis your fault I am not now with
your Wife.


But pray, don't let her know so much, the truth on it is, I was advancing a
certain Project to his Majesty, about -- I'll tell you.


No, let's go, and hear it at your house: Good night sweet little Gentleman;
one kiss more, you'll remember me now I hope.


What, Sir. Jaspar, will you separate Friends? he promised to sup with us; and
if you take him to your house, you'll be in danger of our company too.


Alas Gentlemen my house is not fit for you, there are none but civil Women
there, which are not for your turn; he you know can bear with the society of
civil Women, now, ha, ha, ha; besides he's one of my Family; -- he's -- heh,
heh, heh.


What is he?


Faith my Eunuch, since you'll have it, heh, he, he.


I rather wish thou were his, or my Cuckold: Harcourt, what a good Cuckold is
lost there, for want of a Man to make him one; thee and I cannot have Horners
privilege, who can make use of it.


Ay, to poor Horner 'tis like coming to an estate at threescore, when a Man
can't be the better for it.


Come.


Presently Bud.


Come let us go too: Madam, your Servant. Good night Strapper. --


Madam. though you will not let me have a good day, or night, I wish you one;
but dare not name the other half of my wish.


Good night, Sir, for ever.


I don't know where to put this here, dear Bud, you shall eat it; nay, you
shall have part of the sine Gentleman's good things, or treat as you call it,
when we come home.


Indeed I deserve it, since I furnished the best part of it.

The Gallant treats, presents, and gives the Ball;
But 'tis the absent Cuckold, pays for all.

Well -- Madam, now have I dressed you, and set you out with so many ornaments,
and spent upon you ounces of essence, and pulvilio; and all this for no other
purpose, but as People adorn, and perfume a Corps, for a stinking
second-hand-grave, such or as bad I think Master Sparkish's bed.


Hold your peace.


Nay, Madam, I will ask you the reason, why you would banish poor Master
Harcourt for ever from your sight? how could you be so hard-hearted?


'Twas because I was not hard-hearted.


No, no; 'twas stark love and kindness, I warrant.


It was so; I would see him no more, because I love him.


Hey day, a very pretty reason.


You do not understand me.


I wish you may your self.


I was engaged to marry, you see, another man, whom my justice will not suffer
me to deceive, or injure.


Can there be a greater cheat, or wrong done to a Man, than to give him your
person, without your heart, I should make a conscience of it.


I'll retrieve it for him after I am married a while.


The Woman that marries to love better, will be as much mistaken, as the
Wencher that marries to live better.No; Madam, marrying to increase love, is
like gaming to become rich; alas you only loose, what little stock you had
before.


I find by your Rhetoric you have been bribed to betray me.


Only by his merit, that has bribed your heart you see against your word, and
rigid honour; but what a Divel is this honour? 'tis sure a disease in the head,
like the Megrim, or Falling-sickness, that always hurries People away to do
themselves mischief; Men loose their lives by it: Women what's dearer to'em,
their love, the life of life.


Come, pray talk you no more of honour, nor Master Harcourt; I wish the other
would come, to secure my fidelity to him, and his right in me.


You will marry him then?


Certainly, I have given him already my word, and will my hand too, to make it
good when he comes.


Well, I wish I may never stick pin more, if he be not an errant Natural, to
the other fine Gentleman.


I own he wants the wit of Harcourt, which I will dispense withal, for another
want he has, which is want of jealousy, which men of wit seldom want.


Lord, Madam, what should you do with a fool to your Husband, you intend to be
honest don't you? then that husbandly virtue, credulity, is thrown away upon
you.


He only that could suspect my virtue, should have cause to do it; 'tis
Sparkish's confidence in my truth, that obliges me to be so faithful to him.


You are not sure his opinion may last.


I am satisfied, 'tis impossible for him to be jealous, after the proofs I have
had of him: Jealousy in a Husband, Heaven defend me from it, it begets a
thousand plagues to a poor Woman, the loss of her honour, her quiet, and her --



And her pleasure.


What do ye mean, Impertinent?


Liberty is a great pleasure, Madam.


I say loss of her honour, her quiet, nay, her life sometimes; and what's as
bad almost, the loss of this Town, that is, she is sent into the Country, which
is the last ill usage of a Husband to a Wife, I think,


O does the wind lye there?

Then of necessity, Madam, you think a man must carry his Wife into the
Country, if he be wise; the Country is as terrible I find to our young English
Ladies, as a Monastery to those abroad: and on my Virginity, I think they would
rather marry a London-Goaler, than a high Sheriff of a County, since neither
can stir from his employment: formerly Women of wit married Fools, for a great
Estate, a fine seat, or the like; but now 'tis for a pretty seat only in
Lincoln's Inn-fields, St. James's-fields, or the Pall-mall.


Madam, your humble Servant, a happy day to you, and to us all.


Amen. --


Who have we here?


My Chaplain faith -- O Madam, poor Harcourt remembers his humble service to
you; and in obedience to your last commands, refrains coming into your sight.


Is not that he?


No, fie no; but to show that he ne'er intended to hinder our Match has sent
his Brother here to join our hands: when I get me a Wife, I must get her a
Chaplain, according to the Custom; this is his Brother, and my Chaplain.


His Brother?


And your Chaplain, to preach in your Pulpit then --


His Brother!


Nay, I knew you would not believe it; I told you, Sir, she would take you for
your Brother Frank.


Believe it!


His Brother! hah, ha, he, he has a trick left still it seems --


Come my dearest, pray let us go to Church before the Canonical hour is past.


For shame you are abused still.


By the World 'tis strange now you are so incredulous.


'Tis strange you are so credulous.


Dearest of my life, hear me, I tell you this is Ned Harcourt of Cambridge, by
the world, you see he has a sneaking College look; 'tis true he's something
like his Brother Frank, and they differ from each other no more than in their
age, for they were Twins.


Hah, ha, he.


Your Servant, Sir, I cannot be so deceived, though you are; but come let's
hear, how do you know what you affirm so confidently?


Why, I'll tell you all; Frank Harcourt coming to me this morning, to wish me
joy and present his service to you: I asked him, if he could help me to a
Parson; whereupon he told me, he had a Brother in Town who was in Orders, and
he went straight away, and sent him, you see there, to me.


Yes, Frank goes, and puts on a black-coat, then tell's you, he is Ned, that's
all you have for it.


Pshaw, pshaw, I tell you by the same token, the Midwife put her Garter about
Frank's neck, to know'em asunder, they were so like.


Frank tell's you this too.


Ay, and Ned there too; nay, they are both in a Story.


So, so, very foolish.


Lord, if you won't believe one, you had best try him by your Chamber maid
there; for Chamber-maids must needs know Chaplains from other Men, they are so
used to'em.


Let's see; nay, I'll be sworn he has the Canonical smirk, and the filthy,
clammy palm of a Chaplain.


Well, most reverend Doctor, pray let us make an end of this fooling.


With all my soul, Divine, Heavenly Creature, when you please.


He speaks like a Chaplain indeed.


Why, was there not, soul, Divine, Heavenly, in what he said.


Once more, most impertinent Black-coat, cease your persecution, and let us
have a Conclusion of this ridiculous love.


I had forgot, I must suit my Stile to my Coat, or I wear it in vain.


I have no more patience left, let us make once an end of this troublesome
Love, I say.


So be it, Seraphic Lady, when your Honour shall think it meet, and convenient
so to do.


Gad I'm sure none but a Chaplain could speak so, I think.


Let me tell you Sir, this dull trick will not serve your turn, though you
delay our marriage, you shall not hinder it.


Far be it from me, Munificent Patroness, to delay your Marriage, I desire
nothing more than to marry you presently, which I might do, if you your self
would; for my Noble, Good-natur'd and thrice Generous Patron here would not
hinder it.


No, poor man, not I faith.


And now, Madam, let me tell you plainly, no body else shall marry you by
Heavens, I'll die first, for I'm sure I should die after it.


How his Love has made him forget his Function, as I have seen it in real
Parsons.


That was spoken like a Chaplain too, now you understand him, I hope.


Poor man, he takes it heinously to be refused; I can't blame him, 'tis putting
an indignity upon him not to be suffered, but you'll pardon me Madam, it shall not
be, he shall marry us, come away, pray Madam.


Hah, ha, he, more ado! 'tis late.


Invincible stupidity, I tell you he would marry me, as your Rival, not as your
Chaplain.


Come, come Madam.


I pray Madam, do not refuse this Reverend Divine, the honour and satisfaction
of marrying you; for I dare say, he has set his heart upon it, good Doctor.


What can you hope, or design by this?


I could answer her, a reprieve for a day only, often revokes a hasty doom; at
worst, if she will not take mercy on me, and let me marry her, I have at least
the Lovers second pleasure, hindering my Rivals enjoyment, though but for a
time.


Come Madam, 'tis even twelve a clock, and my Mother charged me never to be
married out of the Canonical hours; come, come, Lord here's such a deal of
modesty, I warrant the first day.


Yes, an't please your Worship, married women show all their Modesty the first
day, because married men show all their love the first day.


Come tell me, I say.


Lord, have not I told it an hundred times over.


I would try, if in the repetition of the ungrateful tale, I could find her
altering it in the least circumstance, for if her story be false, she is so
too.

Come how was't Baggage?


Lord, what pleasure you take to hear it sure!


No, you take more in telling it I find, but speak how was't?


He carried me up into the house, next to the Exchange.


So, and you two were only in the room.


Yes, for he sent away a youth that was there, for some dried fruit, and China
Oranges.


Did he so? Damn him for it -- and for --.


But presently came up the Gentlewoman of the house.


O 'twas well she did, but what did he do whilst the fruit came?


He kissed me an hundred times, and told me he sancied he kissed my fine
Sister, meaning me you know, whom he said he loved with all his Soul, and bid
me be sure to tell her so, and to desire her to be at her window, by eleven of
the clock this morning, and he would walk under it at that time.


And he was as good as his word, very punctual, a pox reward him for it.


Well, and he said if you were not within, he would come up to her, meaning me
you know, Bud, still.


So -- he knew her certainly, but for this concession, I am obliged to her
simplicity.

But what you stood very still, when he kissed you?


Yes I warrant you, would you have had me discovered my self?


But you told me, he did some beastliness to you, as you called it, what was't?


Why, he put --


What?


Why he put the tip of his tongue between my lips, and so musl'd me -- and I
said, I'd bite it.


An eternal canker seize it, for a dog.


Nay, you need not be so angry with him neither, for to say truth, he has the
sweetest breath I ever knew.


The Devil -- you were satisfied with it then, and would do it again.


Not unless he should force me.


Force you, changeling! I tell you no woman can be forced.


Yes, but she may sure, by such a one as he, for he's a proper, goodly strong
man, 'tis hard, let me tell you, to resist him.


So, 'tis plain she loves him, yet she has not love enough to make her conceal
it from me, but the sight of him will increase her aversion for me, and love
for him; and that love instruct her how to deceive me, and satisfy him, all
Idiot as she is: Love, 'twas he gave women first their craft, their art of
deluding; out of natures hands, they came plain, open, silly and fit for
slaves, as she and Heaven intended 'em; but damned Love -- Well -- I must
strangle that little Monster, whilst I can deal with him.

Go fetch Pen, Ink and Paper out of the next room:


Yes Bud.


Why should Women have more invention in love than men? It can only be, because
they have more desires, more soliciting passions, more lust, and more of the
Devil.

Come, Minks, sit down and write.


Ay, dear Bud, but I can't do it very well.


I wish you could not at all.


But what should I write for?


I'll have you write a Letter to your Lover.


O Lord, to the fine Gentleman a Letter!


Yes, to the fine Gentleman.


Lord, you do but jeer; sure you jest.


I am not so merry, come write as I bid you.


What, do you think I am a fool?


She's afraid I would not dictate any love to him, therefore she's unwilling;
but you had best begin.


Indeed, and indeed, but I won't, so I won't.


Why?


Because he's in Town, you may send for him if you will.


Very well, you would have him brought to you; is it come to this? I say take
the pen and write, or you'll provoke me.


Lord, what do ye make a fool of me for? Don't I know that Letters are never
writ, but from the Country to London, and from London into the Country; now
he's in Town, and I am in Town too; therefore I can't write to him you know.


So I am glad it is no worse, she is innocent enough yet

Yes you may when your Husband bids you write Letters to people that are in
Town.


O may I so! Then I'm satisfied.


Come begin -- Sir --


Shall not I say, Dear Sir? You know one says always something more than bare Sir.


Write as I bid you, or I will write Whore with this Penknife in your Face.


Nay good Bud -- Sir --


Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed Kisses and Embraces --
Write


Nay, why should I say so, you know I told you, he had a sweet breath.


Write.


Let me but put out, loathed.


Write I say.


Well then.


Let's see what have you writ?

Though I suffered last night your kisses and embraces --

Thou impudent creature, where is nauseous and loathed?


I can't abide to write such filthy words.


Once more write as I'd have you, and question it not, or I will spoil thy
writing with this, I will stab out those eyes that cause my mischief.


O Lord, I will.


So -- so -- Let's see now!

Though I suffered last night your nauseous, loathed kisses, and embraces; Go
on -- Yet I would not have you presume that you shall ever repeat them -- So --



I have writ it.


On then -- I then concealed my self from your knowledge, to avoid your
insolences --


So --


The same reason now I am out of your hands --


So --


Makes me own to you my unfortunate, though innocent frolic, of being in man's
cloths.


So --


That you may for ever more cease to pursue her, who hates and detests you --


So -- h --


What do you sigh? -- detests you -- as much as she loves her Husband and her
Honour --


I vow Husband he'll never believe, I should write such a Letter.


What he'd expect a kinder from you? come now your name only.


What, shall not I say your most faithful, humble Servant till death?


No, tormenting Fiend; her stile I find would be very soft.

Come wrap it up now, whilst I go fetch wax and a candle; and write on the
back side, for Mr. Horner.


For Mr. Horner -- So, I am glad he has told me his name; Dear Mr. Horner, but
why should I send thee such a Letter, that will vex thee, and make thee angry
with me; -- well I will not send it -- Ay but then my husband will kill me --
for I see plainly, he won't let me love Mr. Horner -- but what care I for my
Husband -- I won't so I won't send poor Mr. Horner such a Letter -- but then my
Husband -- But oh -- what if I writ at bottom, my Husband made me write it --
Ay but then my Husband would see it -- Can one have no shift, ah, a London woman
would have had a hundred presently; stay -- what if I should write a Letter,
and wrap it up like this, and write upon it too; ay but then my Husband would
see it -- I don't know what to do -- But yet y vads I'll try, so I will -- for I
will not send this Letter to poor Mr. Horner, come what will on it.

Dear, Sweet Mr. Horner -- So -- my Husband would have me send you a base,
rude, unmannerly Letter -- but I won't -- so -- and would have me forbid you
loving me -- but I wont -- so -- and would have me say to you, I hate you poor
Mr. Horner -- but I won't tell a lye for him -- there -- for I'm sure if you
and I were in the Country at cards together, -- so -- I could not help
treading on your Toe under the Table -- so -- or rubbing knees with you, and
staring in your face, 'till you saw me -- very well -- and then looking down,
and blushing for an hour together -- so -- but I must make haste before my
Husband come; and now he has taught me to write Letters: You shall have longer
ones from me, who am Dear, dear, poor dear Mr. Horner, your most Humble Friend,
and Servant to command 'till death, Margery Pinchwife.

Stay I must give him a hint at bottom -- so -- now wrap it up just like
the other -- so -- now write for Mr. Horner, -- But oh now what shall I do with
it? for here comes my Husband.


I have been detained by a Sparkish Coxcomb, who pretended a visit to me; but I
fear 'twas to my Wife.

What, have you done?


Ay, ay Bud, just now.


Let's see it, what do ye tremble for; what, you would not have it go?


Here -- No I must not give him that, so I had been served if I had given him
this.


Come, where's the Wax and Seal?


Lord, what shall I do now? Nay then I have it --

Pray let me see it, Lord you think me so errand a fool, I cannot seal a Letter,
I will do it, so I will.


Nay, I believe you will learn that, and other things too, which I would not
have you.


So, have not I done it curiously?

I think I have, there's my Letter going to Mr. Horner; since he'll needs have
me send Letters to Folks.


'Tis very well, but I warrant, you would not have it go now?


Yes indeed, but I would, Bud, now.


Well you are a good Girl then, come let me lock you up in your chamber, 'till
I come back; and be sure you come not within three strides of the window, when
I am gone; for I have a spy in the street.

At least, 'tis fit she think so, if we do not cheat women, they'll cheat us;
and fraud may be justly used with secret enemies, of which a Wife is the most
dangerous; and he that has a handsome one to keep, and a Frontier Town, must
provide against treachery, rather than open Force -- Now I have secured all
within, I'll deal with the Foe without with false intelligence.


Well Sir, how fadges the new design; have you not the luck of all your brother
Projectors, to deceive only your self at last.


No, good Domine Doctor, I deceive you it seems, and others too; for the grave
Matrons, and old ridgid Husbands think me as unfit for love, as they are; but
their Wives, Sisters and Daughters, know some of 'em better things already.


Already!


Already, I say; last night I was drunk with half a dozen of your civil
persons, as you call 'em, and people of Honour, and so was made free of their
Society, and dressing rooms for ever hereafter; and am already come to the
privileges of sleeping upon their Palates, warming Smocks, tying Shoes and
Garters, and the like Doctor, already, already Doctor.


You have made use of your time, Sir.


I tell thee, I am now no nor interruption to 'em, when they sing, or talk
bawdy, than a little squab French Page, who speaks no English.


But do civil persons, and women of Honour drink, and sing bawdy Songs?


O amongst Friends, amongst Friends; for your Bigots in Honour, are just like
those in Religion; they fear the eye of the world, more than the eye of Heaven,
and think there is no virtue, but railing at vice; and no sin, but giving
scandal: They rail at a poor, little, kept Player, an dkeep themselves some
young, modest Pulpit Comedian to be privy to their sins in their Closets, not
to tell 'em of them in their Chapels.


Nay, the truth on it is, Priests amongst the women now, have quite got the
better of us Lay Confessors, Physicians.


And they are rather their Patients, but --

Now we talk of women of Honour, here comes one, step behind the Screen there,
and but observe; if I have not particular privileges, with the women of
reputation already, Doctor, already.


Well Horner, am not I a woman of Honour? you see I'm as good as my word.


And you shall see Madam, I'll not be behind hand with you in honour; and I'll
be as good as my word too, if you please but to withdraw into the next room.


But first, my dear Sir, you must promise to have a care of my dear Honour.


If you talk a word more of your Honour, you'll make me incapable to wrong it;
to talk of Honour in the mysteries of Love, is like talking of Heaven, or the
Deity in an operation of Witchcraft, just when you are employing the Devil, it
makes the charm impotent.


Nay, fie, let us not be smooty; but you talk of mysteries, and bewitching to
me, I don't understand you.


I tell you Madam, the word money in a Mistresses mouth, at such a nick of
time, is not a more disheartning sound to a younger Brother, than that of
Honour to an eager Lover like my self.


But you can't blame a Lady of my reputation to be chary.


Chary -- I have been chary of it already, by the report I have caused of my
self.


Ay, but if you should ever let other women know that dear secret, it would
come out; nay, you must have a great care of your conduct; for my acquaintance
are so censorious, (oh 'tis a wicked censorious world, Mr. Horner) I say, are
so censorious, and detracting, that perhaps they'll talk to the prejudice of my
Honour, though you should not let them know the dear secret.


Nay Madam, rather than they shall prejudice your Honour, I'll prejudice
theirs; and to serve you, I'll lye with 'em all, make the secret their own, and
then they'll keep it: I am a Machiavel in love Madam.


O, no Sir, not that way.


Nay, the Devil take me, if censorious women are to be silenced any other way.


A secret is better kept I hope, by a single person, than a multitude;
therefore pray do not trust any body else with it, dear, dear Mr. Horner.


How now!


O my Husband -- prevented -- and what's almost as bad, found with my arms
about another man -- that will appear too much -- what shall I say?


come hither, I am trying if Mr. Horner were ticklish, and he's as ticklish as
can be, I love to torment the confounded Toad; let you and I tickle him.


No, your Ladyship will tickle him better without me, I suppose, but is this
your buying China, I thought you had been at the China House?


China-House, that's my Cue, I must take it

A Pox, can't you keep your impertinent Wives at home? some men are troubled
with the Husbands, but I with the Wives; but I'd have you to know, since I
cannot be your Journey-man by night, I will not be your drudge by day, to
squire your wife about, and be your man of straw, or scare-crow only to Pies
and Jays; that would be nibbling at your forbidden fruit; I shall be shortly the
Hackney Gentleman-Usher of the Town.


Heh, heh, he, poor fellow he's in the right on it faith, to squire women about
for other folks, is as ungrateful an employment, as to tell money for other
folks; heh, he, he, be not angry Horner --


No, 'tis I have more reason to be angry, who am left by you, to go abroad
indecently alone; or, what is more indecent, to pin my self upon such ill bred
people of your acquaintance, as this is.


Nay, prithee what has he done?


Nay, he has done nothing.


But what do ye take ill, if he has done nothing?


Hah, hah, hah, Faith, I can't but laugh however; why do ye think the unmannerly
toad would not come down to me to the Coach, I was fain to come up to fetch
him, or go without him, which I was resolved not to do; for he knows China very
well, and has himself very good, but will not let me see it, lest I should beg
some; but I will find it out, and have what I came for yet.


Lock the door Madam --

So, she has got into my chamber, and locked me out; oh the impertinency of
woman-kind! Well Sir Jaspar, plain dealing is a Jewel; if ever you suffer your
Wife to trouble me again here, she shall carry you home a pair of Horns, by my
Lord Major she shall; though I cannot furnish you my self, you are sure, yet
I'll find a way.


Hah, ha, he, at my first coming in, and finding her arms about him, tickling
him it seems, I was half jealous, but now I see my folly.

Heh, he, he, poor Horner.


Nay, though you laugh now, 'twill be my turn e're long: Oh women, more
impertinent, more cunning, and more mischievous than their Monkeys, and to me
almost as ugly -- now is she throwing my things about, and rifling all I have,
but I'll get into her the back way, and so rifle her for it --


Hah, ha, ha, poor angry Horner:


Stay here a little, I'll ferret her out to you presently, I warrant.


Wife, my Lady Fidget, Wife, he is coming into you the back way.


Let him come, and welcome, which way he will.


He'll catch you, and use you roughly, and be too strong for you.


Don't you trouble your self, let him if he can.


This indeed, I could not have believed from him, nor any but my own eyes.


Where's this Woman-hater, this Toad, this ugly, greasy, dirty Sloven?


So the women all will have him ugly, methinks he is a comely person; but his
wants make his form contemptible to'em; and 'tis even as my Wife said
yesterday, talking of him, that a proper handsome Eunuch, was as ridiculous a
thing, as a Gigantic Coward.


Sir Jaspar, your Servant, where is the odious Beast?


He's within in his chamber, with my Wife; she's playing the wag with him.


Is she so, and he's a clownish beast, he'll give her no quarter, he'll play
the wag with her again, let me tell you; come, let's go help her -- What, the
door's locked?


Ay, my Wife locked it --


Did she so, let us break it open then?


No, no, he'll do her no hurt.


No -- But is there no other way to get into 'em, whither goes this? I will
disturb'em.


Where is this Harlotry, this Impudent Baggage, this rambling Tomrigg? O Sir
Jaspar, I'm glad to see you here, did you not see my vil'd Grandchild come in
hither just now?


Yes,


Ay, but where is she then? where is she? Lord Sir Jaspar I have even rattled my
self to pieces in pursuit of her, but can you tell what she makes here, they
say below, no woman lodges here.


No.


No -- What does she here then? say if it be not a woman's lodging, what makes
she here? but are you sure no woman lodges here?


No, nor no man neither, this is Mr. Horners Lodging.


Is it so are you sure?


Yes, yes.


So then there's no hurt in it I hope, but where is he?


He's in the next room with my Wife.


Nay if you trust him with your wife, I may with my Biddy, they say he's a
merry harmless man now, even as harmless a man as ever came out of Italy with a
good voice and as pretty harmless company for a Lady, as a Snake without his
teeth.


Ay. ay poor man.


I can't find'em -- Oh are you here, Grandmother, I follow'd you must know my
Lady Fidget hither, 'tis the prettyest lodging, and I have been staring on the
prettyest Pictures.


And I have been toiling and moyling, for the pretti'st piece of China, my
Dear.


Nay she has been too hard for me do what I could.


Oh Lord I'll have some China too, good Mr. Horner, don't think to give other
people China, and me none, come in with me too.


Upon my honour I have none left now.


Nay, nay I have known you deny your China before now, but you shall not put me
off so, come --


This Lady had the last there.


Yes indeed Madam, to my certain knowledge he has no more left.


O but it may be he may have some you could not find.


What d'y think if he had had any left, I would not have had it too, for we
women of quality never think we have China enough.


Do not take it ill, I cannot make China for you all, but I will have a
Rol-waggon for you too, another time.


Thank you dear Toad.


What do you mean by that promise?


Alas she has an innocent, literal understanding.


Poor Mr. Horner, he has enough to do to please you all, I see.


Ay Madam, you see how they use me.


Poor Gentleman I pity you.


I thank you Madam, I could never find pity, but from such reverend Ladies as
you are, the young ones will never spare a man.


Come come, Beast, and go dine with us, for we shall want a man at Hombre after
dinner.


That's all their use of me Madam you see.


Come Sloven, I'll lead you to be sure of you.


Alas poor man how she tuggs him, kiss, kiss her, that's the way to make such
nice women quiet.


No Madam, that Remedy is worse than the Torment, they know I dare suffer any
thing rather than do it.


Prithee kiss her, and I'll give you her Picture in little, that you admired so
last night, prithee do.


Well nothing but that could bribe me, I love a woman only in Effigy, and good
Painting as much as I hate them -- I'll do it, for I could adore the Devil well
painted.


Foh, you filthy Toad, nay now I've done jesting.


Ha, ha, ha, I told you so.


Foh a kiss of his --


Has no more hurt in it, than one of my Spaniels.


Nor no more good neither.


I will now believe any thing he tells me.


O Lord here's a man, Sir Jaspar, my Mask, my Mask, I would not be seen here
for the world.


What not when I am with you.


No, no my honour -- let's be gone.


Oh Grandmother, let us be gone, make hast, make hast, I know not how he may
censure us.


Be found in the lodging of any thing like a man, away.


What's here another Cuckold -- he looks like one, and none else sure have any
business with him,


Well what brings my dear friend hither?


Your impertinency.


My impertinency -- why you Gentlemen that have got handsome Wives, think you
have a privilege of saying any thing to your friends, and are as brutish, as if
you were our Creditors.


No Sir, I'll ne'er trust you any way.


But why not, dear Jack, why diffide in me, thou know so well.


Because I do know you so well.


Have not I been always thy friend honest Jack, always ready to serve thee, in
love, or battle, before thou were married, and am so still.


I believe so you would be my second now indeed.


Well then dear Jack, why so unkind, so grum, so strange to me, come prithee
kiss me dear Rogue, gad I was always I say, and am still as much thy Servant
as --


As I am yours Sir. What you would send a kiss to my Wife, is that it?


So there 'tis -- a man can't show his friendship to a married man, but
presently he talks of his wife to you, prithee let thy Wife alone, and let thee
and I be all one, as we were wont, what thou art as shy of my kindness, as a
Lumbard-street Alderman of a Courtiers civility at Lockets.


But you are over kind to me, as kind, as if I were your Cuckold already, yet I
must confess you ought to be kind and civil to me, since I am so kind, so civil
to you, as to bring you this, look you there Sir.


What is't?


Only a Love Letter Sir.


From whom -- how, this is from your Wife -- hum -- and hum --


Even from my Wife Sir, am I not wondrous kind and civil to you, now too? But
you'll not think her so.


Ha, is this a trick of his or hers


The Gentleman's surprised I find, what you expected a kinder Letter?


No faith not I, how could I.


Yes yes, I'm sure you did, a man so well made as you are must needs be
disappointed, if the women declare not their passion at first sight or
opportunity.


But what should this mean? stay the Postscript. Be sure you love me whatsoever
my husband says to the contrary, and let him not see this, lest he should come
home, and pinch me, or kill my Squirrel.

It seems he knows not what the Letter contains.


Come ne'er wonder at it so much.


Faith I can't help it.


Now I think I have deserved your infinite friendship, and kindness, and have
showed my self sufficiently an obliging kind friend and husband, am I not so,
to bring a Letter from my Wife to her Gallant?


Ay, the Devil take me, art thou, the most obliging, kind friend and husband in
the world, ha, ha.


Well you may be merry Sir, but in short I must tell you Sir, my honour will
suffer no jesting.


What dost thou mean?


Does the Letter want a Comment? then know Sir, though I have been so civil a
husband, as to bring you a Letter from my Wife, to let you kiss and court her
to my face, I will not be a Cuckold Sir, I will not.


Thou art mad with jealousy, I never saw thy Wife in my life, but at the Play
yesterday, and I know not if it were she or no, I court her, kiss her!


I will not be a Cuckold I say, there will be danger in making me a Cuckold.


Why, were thou not well cured of thy last clap?


I wear a Sword.


It should be taken from thee, lest thou should do thy self a mischief with
it, thou art mad, Man.


As mad as I am, and as merry as you are, I must have more reason from you e're
we part, I say again though you kissed, and courted last night my Wife in man's
clothes, as she confesses in her Letter.


Ha --


Both she and I say you must not design it again, for you have mistaken your
woman, as you have done your man.


Oh -- I understand something now --

Was that thy Wife? why would thou not tell me 'twas she? faith my freedom
with her was your fault, not mine.


Faith so 'twas --


Fie, I'd never do it to a woman before her husbands face, sure.


But I had rather you should do it to my wife before my face, than behind my
back, and that you shall never do.


No -- you will hinder me.


If I would not hinder you, you see by her Letter, she would.


Well, I must even acquiess then, and be contented with what she writes.


I'll assure you 'twas voluntarily writ, I had no hand in it you may believe me.


I do believe thee, faith.


And believe her too, for she's an innocent creature, has no dissembling in
her, and so fare you well Sir.


Pray however present my humble service to her, and tell her I will obey her
Letter to a tittle, and fulfil her desires be what they will, or with what
difficulty soever I do it, and you shall be no more jealous of me, I warrant
her, and you --


Well then fare you well, and play with any mans honour but mine, kiss any mans
wife but mine, and welcome --


Ha, ha, ha, Doctor.


It seems he has not heard the report of you, or does not believe it.


Ha, ha, now Doctor what think you?


Pray let's see the Letter -- hum -- for -- dear -- love you --


I wonder how she could contrive it! what say thou to it, 'tis an Original.


So are your Cuckolds too Originals: for they are like no other common
Cuckolds, and I will henceforth believe it not impossible for you to Cuckold
the Grand Signior amidst his Guards of Eunuchs, that I say --


And I say for the Letter, 'tis the first love Letter that ever was without
Flames, Darts, Fates, Destinies, Lying and Dissembling in it.


Come back, you are a pretty Brother-in-law, neither go to Church, nor to
dinner with your Sister Bride.


My Sister denies her marriage, and you see is gone away from you dissatisfied.


Pshaw, upon a foolish scruple, that our Parson was not in lawful Orders, and
did not say all the Common Prayer, but 'tis her modesty only I believe, but let
women be never so modest the first day, they'll be sure to come to themselves by
night, and I shall have enough of her then; in the mean time, Harry Horner, you
must dine with me, I keep my wedding at my Aunts in the Piazza.


Thy wedding, what stale Maid has lived to despair of a husband, or what young
one of a Gallant?


O your Servant Sir -- this Gentleman's Sister then -- No stale Maid.


I'm sorry for it.


How comes he so concerned for her --


You sorry for it, why do you know any ill by her?


No, I know none but by thee, 'tis for her sake, not yours, and another mans
sake that might have hoped, I thought --


Another Man, another man, what is his Name?


Nay since 'tis past he shall be nameless. Poor Harcourt I am sorry thou hast
mist her --


He seems to be much troubled at the match --.


Prithee tell me -- nay you shall not go Brother.


I must of necessity, but I'll come to you to dinner.


But Harry, what have I a Rival in my Wife already? but withal my heart, for he
may be of use to me hereafter, for though my hunger is now my sauce, and I can
fall on heartily without, but the time will come, when a Rival will be as good
sauce for a married man to a wife, as an Orange to Veale.


O thou damned Rogue, thou hast set my teeth on edge with thy Orange.


Then let's to dinner, there I was with you again, come.


But who dines with thee?


My Friends and Relations, my Brother Pinchwife you see of your acquaintance.


And his Wife.


No gad, he'll ne'er let her come amongst us good fellows, your stingy country
Coxcomb keeps his wife from his friends, as he does his little Firkin of Ale,
for his own drinking, and a Gentleman can't get a smack on it, but his servants,
when his back is turned broach it at their pleasures, and dust it away, ha, ha,
ha, gad I am witty, I think, considering I was married to day, by the world,
but come --


No, I will not dine with you, unless you can fetch her too.


Pshaw what pleasure can thou have with women now, Harry?


My eyes are not gone, I love a good prospect yet, and will not dine with you,
unless she does too, go fetch her therefore, but do not tell her husband, 'tis
for my sake.


Well I'll go try what I can do, in the mean time come away to my Aunts
lodging, 'tis in the way to Pinchwifes.


The poor woman has called for aid, and stretched forth her hand Doctor, I
cannot but help her over the Pale out of the Briars.


Well 'tis'ene so, I have got the London disease, they call Love, I am sick of
my Husband, and for my Gallant; I have heard this distemper, called a Fever,
but methinks 'tis liker an Ague, for when I think of my Husband, I tremble and
am in a cold sweat, and have inclinations to vomit, but when I think of my
Gallant, dear Mr. Horner, my hot fit comes, and I am all in a Fever, indeed,
as in other Fevers, my own Chamber is tedious to me, and I would fain be
removed to his, and then methinks I should be well; ah poor Mr. Horner, well I
cannot, will not stay here, therefore I'll make an end of my Letter to him,
which shall be a finer Letter than my last, because I have studied it like any
thing; O Sick, Sick!


What writing more Letters?


O Lord Bud, why do ye fright me so?


How's this! nay you shall not stir Madam.

Dear, Dear, dear, Mr Horner -- very well -- I have taught you to write
Letters to good purpose -- but let's see it.

First I am to beg your pardon for my boldness in writing to you, which I'd
have you to know, I would not have done, had not you said first you loved me so
extremely, which if you do, you will never suffer me to lye in the arms of
another man, whom I loath. nauseate, and detest -- [Now you can write these
filthy words] but what follows -- Therefore I hope you will speedily find some
way to free me from this unfortunate match, which was never, I assure you, of
my choice, but I'm afraid 'tis already too far gone; however if you love me, as
I do you, you will try what you can do, but you must help me away before to
morrow, or else alas I shall be for ever out of your reach, for I can defer no
longer our -- our -- what is to follow our -- speak what? our Journey into and
Love, damned Love, their old Tempter, for this is one of his miracles, in a
moment, he can make those blind that could see, and those see that were blind,
those dumb that could speak, and those prattle who were dumb before, nay what
is more than all, make these dow-bak'd, senseless, indocile animals, Women, too
hard for us their Politic Lords and Rulers in a moment; But make an end of
your Letter, and then I'll make an end of you thus, and all my plagues
together.


O Lord, O Lord you are such a Passionate Man, Bud.


How now what's here to do.


This Fool here now!


What drawn upon your Wife? you should never do that but at night in the dark
when you can't hurt her, this is my Sister in Law is it not? ay faith even our
Country Margery, one may know her, come


Making you a Cuckold, 'tis that they all do, as soon as they can.


What the Wedding day? no, a Wife that designs to make a Cully of her Husband,
will be sure to let him win the first stake of love, by the world, but come
they stay dinner for us, come I'll lead down our Margery.


No -- Sir go we will follow you.


I will not wag without you.


This Coxcomb is a sensible torment to me amidst the greatest in the world.


Come, come Madam Margery.


No I'll lead her my way, what would you treat your friends with mine, for want
of your own Wife?

I am contented my rage should take breath --


I told Horner this.


Come now.


Lord, how shy you are of your Wife, but let me tell you Brother, we men of
wit have amongst us a saying, that Cuckolding like the small Pox comes with a
fear, and you may keep your Wife as much as you will out of danger of
infection, but if her constitution incline her to it, she'll have it sooner or
later by the world, say they.


What a thing is a Cuckold, that every fool can make him ridiculous --

Well Sir -- But let me advise you, now you are come to be concerned, because
you suspect the danger, not to neglect the means to prevent it, especially when
the greatest share of the Malady will light upon your own head, for --

How'sere the kind Wife's Belly comes to swell.
The Husband breeds for her, and first is ill.

Come take the Pen and make an end of the Letter, just as you intended, if you
are false in a tittle, I shall soon perceive it, and punish you with this as
you deserve, write what was to follow -- let's see --

[You must make haste and help me away before to morrow, or else I shall be for
ever out of your reach, for I can defer no longer our -- ] What follows our? --



Must all out then Bud? -- Look you there then.


Let's see -- [For I can defer no longer our -- Wedding -- Your slighted
Alithea] What's the meaning of this, my Sisters name to it, speak, unriddle?


Yes indeed Bud.


But why her name to it speak -- speak I say?


Ay but you'll tell her then again, if you would not tell her again.


I will not, I am stunned, my head turns round, speak.


Won't you tell her indeed, and indeed.


No, speak I say.


She'll be angry with me, but I had rather she should be angry with me than you
Bud; and to tell you the truth, 'twas the made me write the Letter, and taught
me what I should write.


Ha -- I thought the stile was somewhat better than her own, but how could she
come to you to teach you, since I had locked you up alone.


O through the key hole Bud.


But why should she make you write a Letter for her to him, since she can write
her self?


Why she said because -- for I was unwilling to do it.


Because what -- because.


Because lest Mr. Horner should be cruel, and refuse her, or vain afterwards,
and show the Letter, she might disown it, the hand not being hers.


How's this? ha -- then I think I shall come to my self again -- This
changeling could not invent this lye, but if she could, why should she? she
might think I should soon discover it -- stay -- now I think on it too, Horner
said he was sorry she had married Sparkish, and her disowning her marriage to
me, makes me think she has evaded it, for Horner's sake, yet why should she
take this course, but men in love are fools, women may well be so. --

But hark you Madam, your Sister went out in the morning, and I have not seen
her within since.


A lack a day she has been crying all day above it seems in a corner.


Where is she, let me speak with her.


O Lord then he'll discover all --

Pray hold Bud, what d'y mean to discover me, she'll know I have told you then,
pray Bud let me talk with her first --


I must speak with her to know whether Horner ever made her any promise; and
whether she be married to Sparkish or no.


Pray dear Bud don't, till I have spoken with her and told her that I have
told you all, for she'll kill me else.


Go then and bid her come out to me.


Yes, yes Bud --


Let me see --


I'll go, but she is not within to come to him, I have just got time to know of
Lucy her Maid, who first set me on work, what lye I shall tell next, for I am
even at my wits end --


Well I resolve it, Horner shall have her, I'd rather give him my Sister than
lend him my Wife, and such an alliance will prevent his pretensions to my Wife
sure, -- I'll make him of kinn to her, and then he won't care for her,


O Lord Bud I told you what anger you would make me with my Sister.


Won't she come hither?


No no, alack a day, she's ashamed to look you in the face, and she says if you
go in to her, she'll run away down stairs, and shamefully go her self to Mr.
Horner, who has promised her marriage she says, and she will have no other, so
she won't --


Did he so -- promise her marriage -- then she shall have no other, go tell her
so, and if she will come and discourse with me a little concerning the means, I
will about it immediately, go -- His estate is equal to Sparkish's, and his
extraction as much better than his, as his parts are, but my chief reason is,
I'd rather be of kin to him by the name of Brother-in-law, than that of Cuckold
--

Well what says she now? --


Why she says she would only have you lead her to Horners lodging -- with whom
she first will discourse the matter before she talk with you, which yet she
cannot do; for alack poor creature, she says she can't so much as look you in
the face, therefore she'll come to you in a mask, and you must excuse her if she
make you no answer to any question of yours, till you have brought her to Mr.
Horner, and if you will not chide her, nor question her, she'll come out to you
immediately.


Let her come I will not speak a word to her, nor require a word from her.


Oh I forgot, besides she says, she cannot look you in the face, though through
a mask, therefore would desire you to put out the Candle.


I agree to all, let her make haste -- there 'tis out -- My case is something
better, I'd rather fight with Horner for not lying with my Sister, than for
lying with my Wife, and of the two I had rather find my Sister too forward than
my Wife; I expected no other from her free education, as she calls it, and her
passion for the Town -- well -- Wife and Sister are names which make us expect
Love and duty, pleasure and comfort, but we find 'em plagues and torments, and
are equally, though differently troublesome to their keeper; for we have as
much a do to get people to lye with our Sisters, as to keep 'emfrom lying with
our Wives.

What are you come Sister? let us go then -- but first let me lock up my Wife,
Mrs. Margery where are you?


Here Bud.


Come hither, that I may lock you up, get you in, Come Sister where are you
now?


What all alone, not so much as one of your Cuckolds here, nor one of their
Wives! they use to take their turns with you, as if they were to watch you.


Yes it often happens, that a Cuckold is but his Wives spy, and is more upon
family duty, when he is with her gallant abroad hindering his pleasure, than
when he is at home with her playing the Gallant, but the hardest duty a married
woman imposes upon a lover is, keeping her husband company always.


And his fondness wearies you almost as soon as hers.


A Pox, keeping a Cuckold company after you have had his Wife, is as tiresome
as the company of a Country Squire to a witty fellow of the Town, when he has
got all his Money,


And as at first a man makes a friend of the Husband to get the Wife, so at
last you are fain to fall out with the Wife to be rid of the Husband.


Ay, most Cuckold-makers are true Courtiers, when once a poor man has cracked
his credit for 'em, they can't abide to come near him.


But at first to draw him in are so sweet, so kind, so dear, just as you are to
Pinchwife, but what becomes of that intrigue with his Wife?


A Pox he's as surly as an Alderman that has been bit, and since he's so coy,
his Wife's kindness is in vain, for she's a silly innocent.


Did she not send you a Letter by him?


Yes, but that's a riddle I have not yet solved -- allow the poor creature to
be willing, she is silly too, and he keeps her up so close --


Yes, so close that he makes her but the more willing, and adds but revenge to
her love, which two when met seldom fail of satisfying each other one way or
other.


What here's the man we are talking of I think.


Pshaw.


Bringing his Wife to you is the next thing to bringing a Love Letter from her.


What means this?


The last time you know Sir I brought you a love Letter, now you see a
Mistress, I think you'll say I am a civil man to you.


Ay the Devil take me will I say thou art the civillest man I ever met with,
and I have known some; I fancy, I understand thee now, better than I did the
Letter, but hark thee in thy ear --


What?


Nothing but the usual question man, is she sound on thy word?


What you take her for a Wench and me for a Pimp?


Pshaw, wench and Pimp, paw words, I know thou art an honest fellow, and hast a
great acquaintance among the Ladies, and perhaps hast made love for me rather
than let me make love to thy Wife --


Come Sir, in short, I am for no fooling.


Nor I neither, therefore prithee let's see her face presently, make her show
man, art thou sure I don't know her?


I am sure you do know her.


A Pox why dost thou bring her to me then?


Because she's a Relation of mine.


Is she faith man, then thou art still more civil and obliging, dear Rogue.


Who desired me to bring her to you.


Then she is obliging, dear Rogue.


You'll make her welcome for my sake I hope.


I hope she is handsome enough to make her self welcome; prithee let her
unmask.


Do you speak to her, she would never be ruled by me.


Madam --

She says she must speak with me in private, withdraw prithee.


She's unwilling it seems I should know all her undecent conduct in this
business --

Well then I'll leave you together, and hope when I am gone you'll agree, if not
you and I shall not agree Sir. --


What means the Fool? -- if she and I agree 'tis no matter what you and I do.


In the mean time I'll fetch a Parson, and find out Sporkish and disabuse him.

You would have me fetch a Parson, would you not, well then -- Now I think I am
rid of her, and shall have no more trouble with her -- Our Sisters and
Daughters like Usurers money, are safest, when put out; but our Wives, like
their writings, never safe, but in our Closets under Lock and Key.


Sir Jaspar Fidget Sir is coming up.


Here's the trouble of a Cuckold, now we are talking of, a pox on him, has he
not enough to do to hinder his Wives sport, but he must other women's too. --
Step in here Madam.


My best and dearest Friend.


The old stile Doctor --

Well be short, for I am busy, what would your impertinent Wife have now?


Well guessed y' faith, for I do come from her.


To invite me to supper, tell her I can't come, go.


Nay, now you are out faith, for my Lady and the whole knot of the virtuous
gang, as they call themselves, are resolved upon a frolic of coming to you to
night in a Masquerade, and are all dressed already.


I shall not be at home.


Lord how churlish he is to women -- nay prithee don't disappoint 'em, they'll
think 'tis my fault, prithee don't, I'll send in the Banquet and the Fiddles,
but make no noise on it, for the poor virtuous Rogues would not have it known
for the world, that they go a Masquerading, and they would come to no mans
Ball, but yours.


Well, well -- get you gone, and tell 'em if they come, 'twill be at the peril
of their honour and yours.


Heh, he, he -- we will trust you for that, farewell --


Doctor anon you too shall be my guest. But now I'm going to a private feast.


But who would have thought a woman could have been false to me, by the world,
I could not have thought it.


You were for giving and taking liberty, she has taken it only Sir, now you
find in that Letter, you are a frank person, and so is the you see there.


Nay if this be her hand -- for I never saw it.


'Tis no matter whether that be her hand or no, I am sure this hand at her
desire lead her to Mr. Horner, with whom I left her just now, to go fetch a
Parson to 'em at their desire too, to deprive you of her for ever, for it seems
yours was but a mock marriage.


Indeed she would needs have it that 'twas Harcourt himself in a Parsons habit,
that married us, but I'm sure he told me 'twas his Brother Ned.


O there 'tis out and you were deceived not she, for you are such a frank
person -- but I must be gone -- you'll find her at Mr. Horners, go and believe
your eyes.


Nay I'll to her, and call her as many Crocodiles, Sirens, Harpies, and other
heathenish names, as a Poet would do a Mistress, who had refused to hear his
suit, nay more his Verses on her.

But stay, is not that she following a Torch at the other end of the Piazza, and
from Horners certainly -- 'tis so --

You are well met Madam though you don't think so; what you have made a short
visit to Mr. Horner, but I suppose you'll return to him presently, by that time
the Parson can be with him.


Mr. Horner, and the Parson Sir --


Come Madam no more dissembling, no more jilting for I am no more a frank
person.


How's this.


So 'twill work I see --


Could you find out no easy Country Fool to abuse? none but me, a Gentleman of
wit and pleasure about the Town, but it was your pride to be too hard for a man
of parts, unworthy false woman, false as a friend that lends a man money to
lose, false as dice, who undo those that trust all they have to 'em.


He has been a great bubble by his similes as they say --


You have been too merry Sir at your wedding dinner sure.


What d'y mock me too?


Or you have been deluded.


By you.


Let me understand you.


Have you the confidence, I should call it something else, since you know your
guilt, to stand my just reproaches? you did not write an impudent Letter to Mr.
Horner, who I find now has clubbed with you in deluding me with his aversion for
women, that I might not forsooth suspect him for my Rival.


D'y think the Gentleman can be jealous now Madam --


I write a Letter to Mr. Horner!


Nay Madam, do not deny it, your Brother showed it me just now, and told me
likewise he left you at Horners lodging to fetch a Parson to marry you to him,
and I wish you joy Madam, joy, joy, and to him too much joy, and to my self
more joy for not marrying you.


So I find my Brother would break off the match, and I can consent to it, since
I see this Gentleman can be made jealous.

O Lucy, by his rude usage and jealousy, he makes me almost afraid I am
married to him, art thousure 'twas Harcourt himself and no Parson that married
us.


No Madam I thank you, I suppose that was a contrivance too of Mr. Horners and
yours, to make Harcourt play the Parson, but I would as little as you have him
one now, no not for the world, for shall I tell you another truth, I never had
any passion for you, 'till now, for now I hate you, 'tis true I might have
married your portion, as other men of parts of the Town do sometimes, and so
your Servant, and to show my unconcernedness, I'll come to your wedding, and
resign you with as much joy as I would a stale wench to a new Cully, nay with
as much joy as I would after the first night, if I had been married to you,
there's for you, and so your Servant, Servant.


How was I deciv'd in a man!


You'll believe then a fool may be made jealous now? for that easiness in him
that suffers him to be led by a Wife, will likewise permit him to be persuaded
against her by others.


But marry Mr. Horner, my brother does not intend it sure; if I thought he did,
I would take thy advice, and Mr. Harcourt for my Husband, and now I wish, that
if there be any over-wise woman of the Town, who like me would marry a fool,
for fortune, liberty, or title, first that her husband may love Play, and be a
Cully to all the Town, but her, and suffer none but fortune to be mistress of
his purse, then if for liberty, that he may send her into the Country under the
conduct of some housewifely mother-in law; and if for title, may the world give
'em none but that of Cuckold.


And for her greater curse Madam, may he not deserve it.


Away impertinent -- is not this my old Lady Lanterlus?


Yes Madam. [and here I hope we shall find Mr. Harcourt --


A Pox they are come too soon -- before I have sent back my new -- Mistress,
all I have now to do, is to lock her in, that they may not see her --


That we may besure of our welcome we have brought our entertainment with us,
and are resolved to treat thee, dear Toad.


And that we may be merry to purpose, have lest Sir Jaspar and my old Lady
Squeamish quarrelling at home at Baggammon.


Therefore let us make use of our time, lest they should chance to interrupt
us.


Let us sit then.


First that you may be private, let me lock this door, and that, and I'll wait
upon you presently.


No Sir, shut 'em only and your lips for ever, for we must trust you as much as
our women.


You know all vanity's killed in me, I have no occasion for talking.


Now Ladies, supposing we had drank each of us our two Bottles, let us speak
the truth of our hearts.


and Squeam. Agreed.


By this brimmer, for truth is no where else to be found, [Not in thy heart
false man.


You have found me a true man I'm sure.


Not every way -- But let us sit and be merry.

Why should our damned Tyrants oblige us to live,
On the pittance of Pleasure which they only give.
We must not rejoice,
With Wine and with noise.
In vain we must wake in a dull bed alone.
Whilst to our warm Rivai the Bottle, they're gone.
Then lay aside charms,
And take up these arms
'Tis Wine only gives 'em their Courage and Wit,
Because we live sober to men we submit.
If for Beauties you'd pass.
Take a lick of the Glass.
Twill mend your complexions, and when they are gone,
The best red we have is the red of the Grape.
Then Sisters lay it on.
And dam a good shape.

Dear Brimmer, well in token of our openness and plain dealing, let us throw
our Masques over our heads.


So 'twill come to the Glasses anon.


Lovely Brimmer, let me enjoy him first.


No, I never part with a Gallant. till I've tried him. Dear Brimmer that make
our Husbands short sighted.


And our bashful gallants bold.


And for want of a Gallant, theButler lovely in our eyes, drink Eunuch.


Drink thou representative of a Husband, damn a Husband.


And as it were a Husband, an old keeper.


And an old Grandmother.


And an English Bawd, and a French Surgeon.


Ay we have all reason to curse 'em.


For my sake Ladies.


No, for our own, for the first spoils all young gallants industry.


And the others art makes 'em bold only with common women.


And rather run the hazard of the vile distemper amongst them, than of a denial
amongst us.


The filthy Toads choose Mistresses now, as they do Stuffs, for having been
fancied and worn by others.


For being common and cheap.


Whilst women of quality, like the richest Stuffs, lye untumbled, and unasked
for.


Ay neat, and cheap, and new often they think best.


No Sir, the Beasts will be known by a Mistress longer than by a suit.


And 'tis not for cheapness neither.


No, for the vain fopps will take up Druggets, and embroider 'em, but I wonder
at the depraved appetites of witty men, they use to be out of the common road,
and hate imitation, pray tell me beast, when you were a man, why you rather
chose to club with a multitude in a common house, for an entertainment, than to
be the only guest at a good Table.


Why faith ceremony and expectation are unsufferable to those that are sharp
bent, people always eat with the best stomach at an ordinary, where every man
is snatching for the best bit.


Though he get a cut over the fingers -- but I have heard people eat most
heartily of another man's meat, that is, what they do not pay for.


When they are sure of their welcome and freedom, for ceremony in love and
eating, is as ridiculous as in fighting, falling on briskly is all should be
done in those occasions.


Well then let me tell you Sir, there is no where more freedom than in our
houses, and we take freedom from a young person as a sign of good breeding, and
a person may be as free as he pleases with us, as frolic, as gamesome, as wild
as he will.


Have not I heard you all declaim against wild men.


Yes, but for all that, we think wildness in a man, as desirable a quality, as
in a Duck, or Rabbit; a tame man, foh.


I know not, but your Reputations frightened me, as much as your Faces invited
me.


Our Reputation, Lord! Why should you not think, that we women make use of our
Reputation, as you men of yours, only to deceive the world with less suspicion;
our virtue is like the State-man's Religion, the Quakers Word, the Gamesters
Oath, and the Great Man's Honour, but to cheat those that trust us.


And that Demureness, Coyness, and Modesty, that you see in our Faces in the
Boxes at Plays, is as much a sign of a kind woman, as a Vizard-mask in the Pit.


For I assure you, women are least masked, when they have the Velvet Vizard on.


You would have found us modest women in our denials only.


Our bashfulness is only the reflection of the Men's.


We blush, when they are shame-fac'd.


I beg your pardon Ladies, I was deceived in you devilishly, but why, that
mighty pretence to Honour?


We have told you; but sometimes 'twas for the same reason you men pretend
business often, to avoid ill company, to enjoy the better, and more privately
those you love.


But why, would you never give a Friend a wink then?


Faith, your Reputation frightened us as much, as ours did you, you were so
notoriously lewd.


And you so seemingly honest.


Was that all that deterred you?


And so expensive -- you allow freedom you say.


Ay, ay.


That I was afraid of losing my little money, as well as my little time, both
which my other pleasures required.


Money, foh -- you talk like a little fellow now, do such as we expect money?


I beg your pardon, Madam, I must confess, I have heard that great Ladies, like
great Merchants, set but the higher prizes upon what they have, because they
are not in necessity of taking the first offer.


Such as we, make sale of our hearts?


We bribed for our Love? Foh.


With your pardon, Ladies, I know, like great men in Offices, you seem to
exact flattery and attendance only from your Followers, but you have receivers
about you, and such fees to pay, a man is afraid to pass your Grants; besides
we must let you win at Cards, or we lose your hearts; and if you make an
assignation, 'tis at a Goldsmiths, Jewellers, or China house, where for your
Honour, you deposit to him, he must pawn his, to the punctual Citt, and so
paying for what you take up, pays for what he takes up.


Would you not have us assured of our Gallants Love?


For Love is better known by Liberality, than by Jealousy.


For one may be dissembled, the other not -- but my Jealousy can be no longer
dissembled, and they are telling ripe:

Come here's to our Gallants in waiting, whom we must name, and I'll begin,
this is my false Rogue.


How!


So all will out now --


Did you not tell me, 'twas for my sake only, you reported your self no man?


Oh Wretch! did you not swear to me, 'twas for my Love, and Honour, you passed
for that thing you do?


So, so.


Come, speak Ladies, this is my false Villain.


And mine too.


And mine.


Well then, you are all three my false Rogues too, and there's an end on it.


Well then, there's no remedy, Sister Sharers, let us not fall out, but have a
care of our Honour; though we get no Presents, no Jewels of him, we are savers
of our Honour, the:Jewel of most value and use, which shines yet to the world
unsuspected, though it be counterfeit.


Nay, and is even as good, as if it were true, provided the world think so; for
Honour, like Beauty now, only depends on the opinion of others.


Well Harry Common, I hope you can be true to three, swear, but 'tis no
purpose, to require your Oath; for you are as often forsworn, as you swear to
new women.


Come, faith Madam, let us even pardon one another, for all the difference I
find betwixt we men, and you women, we forswear our selves at the beginning of
an Amour, you, as long as it lasts.


Oh my Lady Fidget, was this your cunning, to come to Mr. Horner without me;
but you have been no where else I hope.


No, Sir Jaspar.


And you came straight hither Biddy.


Yes indeed, Lady Grandmother.


'Tis well, 'tis well, I knew when once they were thoroughly acquainted with
poor Horner, they'd never be from him; you may let her masquerade it with my
Wife, and Horner, and I warrant her Reputation safe.


O Sir, here's the Gentleman come, whom you bid me not suffer to come up,
without giving you notice, with a Lady too, and other Gentlemen --


Do you all go in there, whilst I send 'em away, and Boy, do you desire 'em to
stay below until I come, which shall be immediately.


Yes Sir.


You would not take my advice to be gone home, before your Husband came back,
he'll now discover all, yet pray my Dearest be persuaded to go home, and leave
the rest to my management, I'll let you down the back way.


I don't know theway home, so I don't.


My man shall wait upon you.


No, don't you believe, that I'll go at all; what are you weary of me already?


No my life, 'tis that I may love you long, 'tis to secure my love, and your
Reputation with your Husband, he'll never receive you again else.


What care I, do ye think to frighten me with that? I don't intend to go to him
again; you shall be my Husband now.


I cannot be your Husband, Dearest, since you are married to him.


O would you make me believe that -- don't I see every day at London here,
women leave their first Husbands, and go, and live with other men as their
Wives, pish, pshaw, you'd make me angry, but that I love you so mainly.


So, they are coming up -- In again, in, I hear'em:

Well, a silly Mistress, is like a weak place, soon got, soon lost, a man has
scarce time for plunder; she betrays her Husband, first to her Gallant, and
then her Gallant, to her Husband.


Come Madam, 'tis not the sudden change of your dress, the confidence of your
asseverations, and your false witness there, shall persuade me, I did not bring
you hither, just now; here's my witness, who cannot deny it, since you must be
confronted -- Mr. Horner, did not I bring this Lady to you just now?


Now must I wrong one woman for another sake, but that's no new thing with me;
for in these cases I am still on the criminal's side, against the innocent.


Pray, speak Sir.


It must be so -- I must be impudent, and try my luck, impudence uses to be too
hard for truth.


What, you are studying an evasion, or excuse for her, speak Sir.


No faith, I am something backward only, to speak in women's affairs or
disputes.


She bids you speak.


Ay, pray Sir do, pray satisfy him,


Then truly, you did bring that Lady to me just now,


O ho --


How Sir --


How, Horner!


What mean you Sir, I always took you for a man of Honour?


Ay, so much a man of Honour, that I must save my Mistress, I thank you, come
what will on it.


So if I had had her, she'd have made me believe, the Moon had been made of a
Christmas pie.


Now could I speak, if I durst, and 'solve the Riddle, who am the Author of it.


O unfortunate Woman! a combination against my Honour, which most concerns me
now, because you share in my disgrace, Sir, and it is your censure which I must
now suffer, that troubles me, not theirs.


Madam, then have no trouble, you shall now see 'tis possible for me to love
too, without being jealous, Iwill not only believe your innocence my self, but
make all the world believe it --

Horner I must now be concerned for this Ladies Honour.


And I must be concerned for a Ladies Honour too.


This Lady has her Honour, and I will protect it.


My Lady has not her Honour, but has given it me to keep, and I will preserve
it.


I understand younot


I would not have you.


What's the matter with 'em all.


Come, come, Mr. Horner, no more disputing, here's the Parson, I brought him
not in vain.


No Sir, I'll employ him, if this Lady please.


How, what do ye mean?


Ay, what does he mean?


Why, I have resigned your Sister to him, he has my consent.


But he has not mine Sir, a woman's injured Honour, no more than a man's, can be
repaired or satisfied by any, but him that first wronged it; and you shall
marry her presently, or --


O Lord, they'll kill poor Mr. Horner, besides he shall not marry her, whilst I
stand by, and look on, I'll not lose my second Husband so.


What do I see?


My Sister in my clothes!


Ha!


Nay, pray now don't quarrel about finding work for the Parson, he shall marry
me to Mr. Horner; for now I believe, you have enough of me.


Damned, damned loving Changeling.


Pray Sister, pardon me for telling so many lies of you.


I suppose the Riddle is plain now.


No, that must be my work, good Sir, hear me.


I will never hear woman again, but make 'em all silent, thus --


No, that must not be.


You then shall go first, 'tis all one to me.


Hold --


What's the matter, what's the matter, pray what's the matter Sir, I beseech
you communicate Sir.


Why my Wife has communicated Sir, as your Wife may have done too Sir, if she
knows him Sir --


Pshaw, with him, ha, ha, he.


Do ye mock me Sir, a Cuckold is a kind of a wild Beast, have a care Sir --


No sure, you mock me Sir -- he cuckold you! it can't be, ha, ha, he, why, I'll
tell you Sir.


I tell you again, he has whored my Wife, and yours too, if he knows her, and
all the women he comes near; 'tis not his dissembling, his hypocrisy can
wheedle me.


How does he dissemble, is he a Hypocrite? nay then -- how -- Wife -- Sister is
he an Hypocrite?


An Hypocrite, a dissembler, speak young Harlotry, speak how?


Nay then -- O my head too -- O thou libinous Lady!


O thou Harloting, Harlotry, hast thou don't then?


Speak good Horner, art thou a dissembler, a Rogue? hast thou --


Soh --


I'll fetch you off, and her too, if she will but hold her tongue.


Can thou? I'll give thee --


Pray have but patience to hear me Sir, who am the unfortunate cause of all
this confusion, your Wife is innocent, I only culpable; for I put her upon
telling you all these lies, concerning my Mistress, in order to the breaking
off the match, between Mr. Sparkish and her, to make way for Mr. Harcourt.


Did you so eternal Rotten-tooth, then it seems my Mistress was not false to
me, I was only deceived by you, brother that should have been, now man of
conduct, who is a frank person now, to bring your Wife to her Lover -- ha --


I assure you Sir, she came not to Mr. Horner out of love, for she loves him no
more --


Hold, I told lies for you, but you shall tell none for me, for I do love Mr.
Horner with all my soul, and no body shall say me nay; pray don't you go to
make poor Mr. Horner believe to the contrary, 'tis spitefully done of you, I'm
sure.


Peace, Dear Idiot.


Nay, I will not peace.


Not until I make you.


Horner, your Servant, I am the Doctors Guest, he must excuse our intrusion.


But what's the matter Gentlemen, for Heavens sake, what's the matter?


Oh 'tis well you are come -- 'tis a censorious world we live in, you may have
brought me a reprieve, or else I had died for a crime, I never committed, and
these innocent Ladies had suffered with me, therefore pray satisfy these
worthy, honourable, jealous Gentlemen -- that --


O I understand you, is that all -- Sir Jasper, by heavens and upon the word of
a Physician Sir, --


Nay I do believe you truly -- pardon me my virtuous Lady, and dear of honour.


What then all's right again.


Ay, ay, and now let us satisfy him too.


An Eunuch! pray no fooling with me.


I'll bring half the Chirurgions in Town to swear it.


They -- they'll swear a man that bled to death through his wounds died of an
Apoplexy.


Pray hear me Sir -- why all the Town has heard the report of him.


But does all the Town believe it.


Pray inquire a little, and first of all these.


I'm sure when I left the Town he was the lewdest fellow in it.


I tell you Sir he has been in France since, pray ask but these Ladies and
Gentlemen, your friend Mr. Dorilant, Gentlemen and Ladies, have not you all heard
the late sad report of poor Mr. Horner.


Ay, ay, ay.


Why thou jealous Fool dost thou doubt it, he's an errant French Capon.


'Tis false Sir, you shall not disparage poor Mr. Horner, for to my certain
knowledge --


O hold --


Stop her mouth --


Upon my honour Sir, 'tis as true.


D'y think we would have been seen in his company --


Trust our unspotted reputations with him!


This you get, and we too, by trusting your secret to a fool --


Peace Madam, -- well Doctor is not this a good design that carries a man on
unsuspected, and brings him off safe. --


Well, if this were true, but my Wife --


Come Brother your Wife is yet innocent you see, but have a care of too strong
an imagination, least like an overconcern'd timorous Gamester by fancying an
unlucky cast it should come, Women and Fortune are truest still to those that
trust 'em.


And any wild thing grows but the more fierce and hungry for being kept up, and
more dangerous to the Keeper.


There's doctrine for all Husbands Mr. Harcourt.


I edify Madam so much, that I am impatient till I am one.


And I edify so much by example I will never be one.


And because I will not disparage my parts I'll ne'er be one.


And I alas can't be one.


But I must be one -- against my will to a Country-Wife, with a Country-murrain
to me.


And I must be a Country Wife still too I find, for I can't like a City one, be
rid of my musty Husband and do what I list.


Now Sir I must pronounce your Wife Innocent, though I blush whilst I do it,
and I am the only man by her now exposed to shame, which I will straight drown
in Wine, as you shall your suspicion, and the Ladies troubles we will divert with
a Ballet, Doctor where are your Maskers.


Indeed she's Innocent Sir, I am her witness, and her end of coming out was but
to see her Sisters Wedding, and what she has said to your face of her love to
Mr. Horner was but the usual innocent revenge on a Husbands jealousy, was it
not Madam speak --


Since you'll have me tell more lies -- Yes indeed Bud.


For my own sake fain I would all believe.
Cuckolds like Lovers should themselves deceive.
But --

His honour is least safe, (too late I find)
Who trusts it with a foolish Wife or Friend.

Vain Fopps, but court, and dress, and keep a puther,
To pass for Women's men, with one another.
But he who aims by women to be prized,
First by the men you see must be despised.

Now you the Vigorous, who daily here
Over Vizard Mask, in public domineer,
And what you'd do to her if in Place where;
Nay have the confidence, to cry come out,
Yet when she says lead on, you are not stout;
But to your well-drest Brother straight turn round
And cry, Pox on her Ned, she can't be sound:
Then slink away, a fresh one to engage,
With so much seeming heat and loving Rage,
You'd frighten listening Actress on the Stage:
Till she at last has seen you huffing come,
And talk of keeping in the Tyreing-Room,
Yet cannot be provoked to lead her home:
Next you Fallstaffs of fifty, who beset
Your Buckram Maidenheads, which your friends get;
And whilst to them, you of Achievements boast,
They share the booty, and laugh at your cost,
In fine, you Essens't Boys, both Old and Young,
Who would be thought so eager, brisk, and strong,
Yet do the Ladies, not their Husbands, wrong:
Whose Purses for your manhood make excuse,
And keep your Flanders Mares for show, not use;
Encouraged by our Woman's Man to day,
A Horners part may vainly think to Play;
And may Intrigues so bashfully disown
That they may doubted be by few or none,
May kiss the Cards at Picquet, Hombre, -- Lu,
And so be thought to kiss the Lady too;
But Gallants, have a care faith, what you do.
The World, which to no man his due will give,
You by experience know you can deceive,
And men may still believe you Vigorous,
But then we Women, -- there's no cous'ning us.

