OUR Author (like us) finding 'twould scarce do,
At the other end of the Town, is come to you:
And since 'tis his last Trial, has that Wit
To throw himself on a substantial Pit.
Where needy Wit, or Critic dare not come,
Lest Neighbour in the Cloak, with looks so grum,
Should prove a Dunne;
Where Punk in visor dare not rant and tear
To put us out, since Bridewell is so near;
In short, we shall be heard, be understood,
If not, shall be admired and that's as good;
For you to senseless Plays have still been kind,
Nay, where no sense was, you a Jest would find:
And never was it heard of, that the City
Did ever take occasion to be witty
Upon dull Poet, or stiff Players Action,
But still with claps opposed the hissing Faction.
But if you hissed, 'twas at the Pit, not Stage,
So, with the Poet, damned the damning Age,
And still we know are ready to engage
Against the flouting, ticking Gentry who
Citizen, Player, Poet, would undo,
The Poet, no; unless by commendation;
For on the Change, Wits have no reputation;
And rather than be branded for a Wit,
He with you, able men, would credit get.

TO confine a Woman just in her rambling Age! take away her liberty at the very
time she should use it! O barbarous Aunt! O unnatural Father! to shut up a poor
Girl at fourteen, and hinder her budding; all things are ripened by the Sun;
to shut up a poor Girl at fourteen! --


'Tis true, Miss, two poor young Creatures as we are!


Not suffered to see a play in a twelve month! --


Nor to go to Ponchinello nor Paradise! --


Nor to take a Ramble to the Park nor Mulberry-garden! --


Nor to Tatnam-Court nor Islington! --


Nor to eat a Sillybub in new Spring-garden with a Cousin! --


Nor to drink a Pint of Wine with a Friend at the Prince in the Sun! --


Nor to hear a Fiddle in good Company!


Nor to hear the Organs and Tongs at the Gun in Moorfields! --


Nay, not suffered to go to Church, because the men are sometimes there! little
did I think I should ever have longed to go to Church!


Or I either, but between two Maids! --


Not see a man! --


Nor come near a man! --


Nor hear of a man! --


No, Miss, but to be denied a man! and to have no use at all of a man! --


Hold, hold -- your resentment is as much greater than mine, as your experience
has been greater; but all this while, what do we make of my Cousin, my Husband
elect (as my Aunt says) we have had his Company these three days. Is he no man?


No, faith, he's but a Monsieur, but you'll resolve your self that question
within these three days: for by that time, he'll be your Husband, if your
Father come to night? --


Or if I provide not my self with another in the mean time! For Fathers seldom
choose well, and I will no more take my Father's choice in a Husband, than I
would in a Gown or a Suit of Knots: so that if that Cousin of mine were not an
ill contrived ugly Freekish-fool, in being my Father's choice, I should hate
him; besides he has almost made me out of love with mirth and good humour, for
he debases it as much as a Jack-pudding; and Civility and good Breeding more
than a City Dancing-Master. --


What, won't you marry him then, Madam?


Would thou have me marry a Fool! an Idiot?


Lord! 'tis a sign you have been kept up indeed! and know little of the World,
to refuse a man for a Husband, only because he's a Fool. Methinks he's a pretty
apish kind of a Gentleman, like other Gentlemen, and handsome enough to lye
with in the dark, when Husbands take their privileges, and for the day-times
you may take the privilege of a Wife.


Excellent Governess, you do understand the World, I see.


Then you should be guided by me.


Art thou in earnest then, damned Jade? would thou have me marry him? well --
there are more poor young Women undone and married to filthy Fellows, by the
treachery and evil Counsel of Chamber-maids, than by the obstinacy and
covetousness of Parents.


Does not your Father come on purpose out of Spain to marry you to him? Can you
release your self from your Aunt or Father any other way? Have you a mind to be
shut up as long as you live? For my part (though you can hold out upon the Lime
from the Walls here, Salt, old Shoes, and Oat-meal) I cannot live so, I must
confess my patience is worn out --


Alas! alas! poor Prue! your stomach lies another way, I will take pity of you,
and get me a Husband very suddenly, who may have a Servant at your Service; but
rather than marry my Cousin, I will be a Nun in the new Protestant Nunnery they
talk of, (where they say) there will be no hopes of coming near a man.


But you can marry no body but your Cousin, Miss, your Father you expect to
night, and be certain his Spanish policy and wariness, which has kept you up so
close ever since you came from Hackney-School, will make sure of you within a
day or two at farthest --


Then 'tis time to think how to prevent him -- stay --


In vain, vain Miss!


If we knew but any man, any man, though he were but a little handsomer than
the Devil, so that he were a Gentleman.


What if you did know any man, if you had an opportunity; could you have
confidence to speak to a man first? But if you could, how could you come to
him, or he to you? nay how could you send to him? for though you could write,
which your Father in his Spanish prudence would never permit you to learn, who
should carry the Letter? but we need not be concerned for that, since we know
not to whom to send it.


Stay! -- it must be so -- I'll try however --


Serviteur, Serviteur, la Cousin, I come to give the bon Soir, as the French
say.


O Cousin, you know him, the fine Gentleman they talk of so much in Town.


What! will you talk to him of any man else?


I know all the beaux monde Cousin.


Mister --


Monsieur Taileur! Monsieur Esmit, Monsieur --


These are French-men --


Non, non, vou'd you have me say Mr. Taylor, Mr. Smith, fie, fie, teste non --


But don't you know the brave Gentleman they talk of so much in Town?


Who, Monsieur Gerrard?


What kind of man is that Mr. Gerrard? and then I'll tell you.


Why -- he is truly a pretty man, a pretty man -- a pretty so so -- kind of
man, for an English-man.


How! a pretty man?


Why, he is conveniently tall -- but --


But, what?


And not ill-shap'd -- but --


But what?


And handsome, as 'tis thought -- but --


But, what are your Exceptions to him?


I can't tell you, because they are innumerable, innumerable mon foy.


Has he Wit?


Ay, ay, they say he's witty, brave and de bell humeur and well-bred with all
that -- but --


But what? does he want Judgment?


Non, non, they say he has good sense and judgment, but it is according to the
account Englis' -- for --


For what?


For Jarnie -- if I think it --


Why?


Why -- why his Taylor lives within Ludgate -- his Valet de Chambre is no
French-man -- and he has been seen at noon-day to go into an English
Eating-house --


Say you so, Cousin?


Then for being well-bred you shall judge -- first he can't dance a step, nor
sing a French Song, nor swear a French Oate, nor use the polite French word in
his Conversation; and in fine, can't play at Hombre -- but speaks base good
Englis' with the commune homebred pronunciation, and in fine, to say no more,
he never carries a Snuff-box about with him.


Indeed --


And yet this man has been abroad as much as any man, and does not make the
least show of it, but a little in his Men, not at all in his discour Jernie;
he never talks so much as of St. Peter's Church, and Rome, the Escurial, or
Madrid, nay not so much as of Henry IV. of Pont-Neuf, Paris, and the new
Louvre, nor of the Grand Roy.


'Tis for his commendation, if he does not talk of his Travels.


Auh, auh -- Cousin -- he is conscious himself of his wants, because he is
very envious, for he cannot endure me --


He shall be my man then for that.

Ay, ay, 'tis the same,


No I know he can't endure you, Cousin --


How do you know it -- who never stir out. Teste non --


Well -- dear Cousin -- if you will promise me never to tell my Aunt, I'll tell
you --


I won't, I won't, Jarnie --


Nor to be concerned your self so as to make a quarrel of it.


Non, non --


Upon the word of a Gentleman.


Foy de Chevalier, I will not quarrel.


Lord, Miss! I wonder you won't believe him without more ado?


Then he has the hatred of a Rival for you.


Mal a peste


You know my Chamber is backward, and has a door into the Gallery, which looks
into the back-yard of a Tavern, whence Mr. Gerrard once spying me at the
Window, has often since attempted to come in at that Window by the help of the
Leads of a low Building adjoining, and indeed 'twas as much as my Maid and I
could do to keep him out --


Aule-Coquin! --


But nothing is stronger than aversion; for I hate him perfectly, even as much
as I love you --


I believe so faith -- but what design have we now on foot?


This discovery is an Argument sure of my love to you --


Ay, ay; say no more, Cousin, I doubt not your amoure for me, because I doubt
not your judgment. But what's to be done with this Fanfaron -- I know where he
eats to night -- I'll go find him out ventre bleu --


Oh my dear Cousin, you will not make a quarrel of it? I thought what your
promise would come to!


Would you have a man of Honour --


Keep his promise?


And lose his Mistress, that were not for my honour, may foy --


Cousin, though you do me the injury to think I could be false -- do not do
your self the injury to think any one could be false to you -- will you be
afraid of losing your Mistress; to show such a fear to your Rival, were for his
honour, and not for yours sure.


Nay, Cousin, I'd have you know I was never afraid of losing my Mistress in
earnest -- Let me see, the man can get my Mistress from me, Jarnie -- but he
that loves must seem a little jealous.


Not to his Rival, those that have Jealousy, hide it from their Rivals.


But there are some who say Jealousy is no more to be hid than a Cough; but it
should never be discovered in me, if I had it, because it is not French, it is
not French at all -- ventre -- bleu --


No, you should railly your Rival, and rather make a Jest of your Quarrel to
him, and that I suppose is French too --


'Tis so, 'tis so, Cousin, 'tis the veritable French Method; for your Englis,
for want of Wit, drive every thing to a serious grum quarrel, and then would
make a Jest on it, when 'tis too late, when they can't laugh, Jarnie! --


Yes, yes, I would have you railly him soundly, do not spare him a jot -- but
shall you see him to night?


Ay, ay --


Yes! pray be sure to see him for the Jest's sake --


I will -- for I love a Jeste as well as any bell Esprit of 'em all -- da.


Ay, and railly him soundly; be sure you railly him soundly, and tell him, just
thus -- that the Lady he has so long courted, from the great Window of the
Ship-Tavern, is to be your Wife tomorrow, unless he come at his wonted hour of
six in the morning to her Window to forbid the Banes; for 'tis the first and
last time of asking: and if he come not, let him for ever hereafter stay away
and hold his Tongue.


Hah, ha ha, a ver good Jeste, teste bleu.


And if the Fool should come again, I would tell him his own, I warrant you,
Cousin; my Gentleman should be satisfied for good and all, I'd secure him.


Bon, Bon.


Well, well! young Mistress, you were not at Hackney-School for nothing I see;
nor taken away for nothing: a Woman may soon be too old, but is never too young
to shift for her self?


Hah, ah, ah, Cousin, dou art a merry Grigg -- ma foy -- I long to be with
Gerrard, and I am the best at improving a Jeste -- I shall have such
divertisement to night teste bleu.


He'll deny, may be at first, that he ever courted any such Lady.


Nay, I am sure he'll be ashamed of it: I shall make him look so sillily, teste
non -- I long to find him out, adieu, adieu, la Cousin.


Shall you be sure to find him?


Indubitablement I'll search the Town over, but I'll find him, hah, ha, ha --

But I'm afraid, Cousin, if I should tell him you are to be my Wife to morrow,
he would not come, now I am for having him come for the Jest's sake -- ventre
--


So am I, Cousin, for having him come too for the Jest's sake.


Well, well! leave it to me! ha, ha, ha.


What's all this giggling here?


Hay, do you tinke we'll tell you, no fait, I warrant you teste non, ha, ha, ha
--


My Cousin is over joyed, I suppose, that my Father is to come to night.


I am afraid he will not come to night -- but you'll stay and see, Nephew.


Non, non: I am to sup at the other end of the Town to night -- la, la, la -- ra,
ra, ra --


I wish the French Levity of this Young-man may agree with your Father's
Spanish Gravity.


Just as your crabbed old age and my youth agree.


Well, Malapert! I know you hate me, because I have been the Guardian of your
Reputation. But your Husband may thank me one day.


If he be not a Fool, he would rather be obliged to me for my virtue, than to
you, since, at long run he must whether he will or no.


So, so! --


Nay, now I think on it; I'd have you to know the poor man, whosoever he is,
will have little cause to thank you.


No --


No; for I never lived so wicked a life, as I have done this twelve month,
since I have not seen a man.


How! how! If you have not seen a man, how could you be wicked? how could you
do any ill?


No, I have done no ill, but I have paid it with thinking.


O that's no hurt; to think is no hurt; the ancient, grave, and godly cannot
help thoughts.


I warrant, you have had 'em your self, Aunt.


Yes, yes! when I cannot sleep.


Ha, ha -- I believe it, but know I have had those thoughs sleeping and waking:
for I have dream't of a man.


No matter, no matter, so that it was but a dream, I have dream't my self; for
you must know Widows are mightily given to dream, insomuch that a dream is
waggishly called the Widows Comfort.


But I did not only dream in --


How, how! did you more than dream! speak, young Harlotry; confess, did you
more than dream? how could you do more than dream in this house? speak!
confess.


Well! I will then. Indeed, Aunt, I did not only dream, but I was pleased with
my dream when I awaked.


Oh, is that all? nay, if a dream only will please you, you are a modest young
Woman still, but have a care of a Vision.


I; but to be delighted when we wake with a naughty dream, is a sin, Aunt; and
I am so very scrupulous, that I would as soon consent to a naughty man, as to a
naughty dream.


I do believe you.


I am for going into the Throng of Temptations.


There I believe you again.


And making my self so familiar with them, that I would not be concerned for
'em a whit.


There I do not believe you.


And would take all the innocent liberty of the Town, to tattle to your men
under a Vizard in the Play-houses, and meet 'em at night in Masquerade.


There I do believe you again, I know you would be masquerading; but worse
would come on it, as it has done to others, who have been in a Masquerade, and
are now Virgins but in Masquerade, and will not be their own Women again as long
as they live. The Children of this Age must be wise Children indeed, if they
know their Fathers, since their Mothers themselves cannot inform 'em! O the
fatal Liberty of this masquerading Age when I was a young Woman.


Come, come, do not blaspheme this masquerading Age, like an illbred City-Dame,
whose Husband is half broke by living in Covent-Garden, or who has been turned
out of the Temple or Lincolns-Inn upon a masquerading Night: by what I've heard
'tis a pleasant-well-bred-complacent-free-frolick good-natur'd-pretty-Age; and
if you do not like it, leave it to us that do.


Lord! how impudently you talk, Niece, I'm sure I remember when I was a Maid.


Can you remember it, reverent Aunt?


Yes, modest Niece, that a raw young thing though almost at Woman's estate, that
was then at 30 or 35 years of age, would not so much as have looked upon a Man.


Above her Fathers Butler or Coach-man.


Still taking me up! well thou art a mad Girl, and so good night. We may go to
Bed, for I suppose now your Father will not come to night.


I am sorry for it, for I long to see him. But I lye; I had rather see Gerrard
here, and yet I know not how I shall like him: if he has wit he will come, and
if he has none he would not be welcome.


'Tis ver veritable, Jarnie, what the French say of you English, you use the
debauch so much, it cannot have with you the French operation, you are never
enjoyee; but come, let us for once be enfinement galliard, and sing a French
Sonnet, sings la boutelle, la boutelle, glou, glou.


What a melodious Fop it is?


Auh -- you have no Complaisance.


No, we can't sing, but we'll drink to you the Ladies health, whom (you say) I
have so long courted at her Window.


Ay, there is your Complaisance; all your English Complaisance is pledging
Complaisance, ventre -- but if I do you reason here, will you do me reason to a
little French Chanson aboire -- I shall begin to you -- La boutelle, la
boutelle -- sings.


I had rather keep Company with a Set of wide-mouth'd drunken Cathedral
Choristers.


Come, Sir, drink, and he shall do you reason to your French Song since you
stand upon it sing him Arthur of Bradely, or, I am the Duke of Norfolk.


Auh, Teste bleu, an English Catch, fie, fie, ventre --


He can sing no damned French Song.


Nor can I drink the damned Englis' Wine.


Yes, to that Ladies health, who has commanded me to wait upon her to morrow at
her Window, which looks (you say) into the inward Yard of the Ship-Tavern, near
the end of what dee call it street.


Ay, ay, do you not know her, not you (vert bleu.)


But 'pray repeat again what she said.


Why, she said, she is to be married to morrow to a person of Honour, a brave
Gentleman, that shall be nameless, and so, and so forth (little does he think
who 'tis.)


And what else?


That if you make not your appearance before her Window to morrow at your
wonted hour of six in the morning to forbid the Banes, you must for ever
hereafter stay away and hold your tongue, for 'tis the first and last time of
asking, ha, ha, ha!


'Tis all a Riddle to me; I should be unwilling to be fooled by this Coxcomb.


I won't tell him all she said, lest he should not go, I would fain have him go
for the Jest's sake -- ha, ha, ha.


Her name is, you say, Hippolita Daughter to a rich Spanish Merchant.


Ay, ay, you don't know her, not you a d'autre a d'autre ma foy -- ha, ha, ha.


Well! I will be an easy Fool for once.


By all means go.


Ay, ay, by all means go -- hah, ha, ha,


To be caught in a Fools Trap -- I'll venture it. Come, 'tis her health.


And to your good reception -- teste bleu -- ha, ha, ha.


Well, Monsieur! I'll say this for thee, thou hast made the best use of three
months at Paris as ever English Squire did.


Considering I was in a dam' Englis' Pension too.


(...) you have conversed with some French, I see; Foot-men I suppose at the
Fencing-School, I judge it by your Oaths.


French Foot-men I well, well, I had rather have the conversation of a French
Footman than of an English Esquire, there's for you da --


I beg your pardon, Monsieur: I did not think the French Foot-men had been so
much your Friends.


Yes, yes, I warrant they have obliged him at Paris much more than any of their
Masters did. Well, there shall be no more said against the French Foot-men.


Non de Grace -- you are always turning the Nation Francez into ridicule, dat
Nation so accomplie, dat Nation which you imitate, so, dat in the conclusion
you butte turn your self into ridicule ma foy: if you are for de raillery,
abuse the Duch, why not abuse the Duch? les gross Villains, Pandars,
Insolents; but here in your England may foy, you have more honeur, respect,
and estimation for the Dushe Swabber, who come to cheat your Nation, den for de
Franch-Foot-man, who come to oblige your Nation.


Our Nation! then you disown it for yours, it seems.


Well! wat of dat; are you the disobligee by date?


No, Monsieur, far from it; you could not oblige us, nor your Country any other
way than by disowning it.


It is de Brutale Country, which abuse de France, and reverence de Dushe: I
will maintain, sustain, and justify dat one little Franch-Foot-man have more
honeur, courage, and generosity, more good blood in his vainee, an mush more
good manners and civility den all de State General together, Jarnie -- they are
only wise and valiant wen they are drunkee.


That is always.


But they are never honest wen they are drunkee; they are de only Rogue in de
Varlde, who are not honest wen they are drunk -- ma foy.


I find you are well acquainted with them, Monsieur.


Ay, ay, I have made the tour of Holland, but it was en post, dere was no
staying for me, teste non -- for de Gentleman can no more live dere den de Toad
in Ir'land, ma foy; for I did not see on' Chevalier in de whole Cuntree: always,
you know de Rebel hate de gens de quality; besides, I had make sufficient
observation of the Canaile barbare de first nightee of my arrival at
Amsterdamme. I did visit you must know one of de Principal of de Stat General,
to whom I had recommendation from England, and did find his Excellence weighing
Soap, Jarnie -- ha, ha, ha.


Weighing Soap!


Weighing Soap, ma foy, for he was a whole Sale Chandeleer, and his Lady was
taking the Tale of Chandels wid her own witer hands, ma foy, and de young Lady,
his Excellence Daughters stringing Harring, stringing Harring, Jarnie --


So -- h -- and what were his Sons doing?


Auh -- his Son (for he had but one) was making de Tour of France, Espaigne,
Italy, and Germany in a Coach and six, or rader now I think on it, gone of an
Embassy hider to dere Master Cromwell, whom they did love and fear, because he
was some-tinge de greater Rebel, bute now I talk of de Rebelle, none but de
Rebel can love de Rebelle, and so mush for you and your Friend the Dushe, I'll
say no more, and pray do you say no more of my Friend de Franch, not so much as
of my Friend the Franch-Footman- da *


No, no; but, Monsieur, now give me leave to admire thee, that in three mouths
at Paris you could renounce your Language, Drinking and your Country (for which
we are not angry with you) as I said, and come home so perfect a French-man,
that the Drey-men of your Fathers own Brew-house would be ready to knock thee
in the head.


Vel, vel, my Father was a Merchant of his own Beer, as the Noblesse of France
of their own Wine: but I can forgive you that Raillery, that Bob, since you say
I have the Eyre Francez. But have I the Eyre Francez?


As much as any French-Footman of 'em all.


And do I speak agreeable ill Englis' enough?


Very ill.


Veritablement!


Veritablement.


For you must know, 'tis as ill breeding now to speak good Englis', as to write
good Englis', good sense, or a good hand.


But indeed, methinks, you are not slovenly enough for a French-man.


Slovenly! you mean negligent?


No, I mean slovenly.


Then I will be more slovenly.


You know, to be a perfect French-man, you must never be silent, never sit
still, and never be clean.


But you have forgot one main qualification of a true French-man, he* should
never be sound, that is, be very pocky too.


Oh! if dat be all, I am very pocky; pocky enough Jarnie, that is the only
French qualification may be had without going to Paris, mon foy.


Here are a couple of Ladies coming up to you, Sir.


To us! did you appoint any to come hither, Martin?


Not I.


Nor you, Monsieur!


Nor I.


Sirrah, tell your Master, if he cannot protect us from the Constable, and
these midnight-Coursers, 'tis not a House for us.


Tell 'em you have no body in the house, and shut the doors.


They'll not be satisfied with that, they'll break open the door, they searched
last night all over the House for my Lord Fisk, and Sir Jeffery Jaunty, who
were fain to hide themselves in the Bar under my Mistresses Chair and
Petticoats


Wat do the Women hunt out the men so now?


Ay, ay, things are altered since you went to Paris, there's hardly a young Man
in Town dares be known of his Lodging for 'em.


Bailiffs, Pursuivants, or a City-Constable are modest people in comparison of
them.


And we are not so much afraid to be taken up by the Watch, as by the taring
midnight Ramblers, or Houza-Women.


Jarnie -- ha, ha, ha.


Where are they? I hope they are gone again?


No, Sir, they are below at the Stair-foot, only swearing at their Coach-man.


Come, you Rogue! they are in Fee with you Waiters, and no Gentleman can come
hither, but they have the intelligence straight.


Intelligence from us, Sir, they should never come here if we could help it. I
am sure we wish 'em choked when we see them come in; for they bring such good
stomachs from St. James's Park, or rambling about in the streets, that we poor
Waiters have not a bit left; 'tis well if we can keep our money in our Pockets
for 'em; I am sure I have paid seventeen and six pence in half Crowns for Coach
hire at several times for a little damned taring Lady, and when I asked her for
it again one morning in her Chamber, she bid me pay my self, for she had no
money: but I wanted the Courage of a Gentleman; besides the Lord that kept her,
was a good Customer to our House, and my Friend, and I made a Conscience of
wronging him.


A man of Honour!


Vert and bleu, pleasent, pleasent, mon foy.


Go, go, Sirrah, shut the door, I hear 'em coming up.


Indeed, I dare not; they'll kick me down stairs, if I should.


Go you, Rascal, I say.


Flounce and Flirte upon my life.

Ladies, I am sorry you have no Volunteers in your Service; this is mere
pressing, and argues a great necessity you have for men.


You need not be afraid, Sir, we will use no violence to you, you are not fit
for our Service; we know you --


The hot Service you have been in formerly, makes you unfit for ours now;
besides, you begin to be something too old for us, we are for the brisk Hoaza's
of seventeen or eighteen.


Nay, faith, I am not too old yet, but an old acquaintance will make any man
old; besides, to tell you the truth, you are come a little too early for me,
for I am not drunk yet; but there are your brisk young men who are always
drunk, and perhaps have the happiness not to know you.


The happiness not to know us!


The happiness not to know us!


Be not angry, Ladies; 'tis rather happiness to have pleasure to come, than to
have it past, and therefore these Gentlemen are happy in not knowing you.


I'd have you to know, I do know the Ladies too, and I will not lose the
honour of the Ladies acquaintance for any thing.


Not for the pleasure of beginning an acquaintance with us, as Mr. Gerrard
says: but it is the general vanity of you Town-Fops to lay claim to all good
acquaintance and persons of Honour; you cannot let a Woman pass in the Mall at
midnight, but dam you, you know her strait, you know her; but you would be
damned before you would say so much for one in a Mercers Shop.


He has spoken it in a French-house, where he has very good credit, and I dare
swear you may make him eat his words.


She does want a Gown indeet: she is in her dishabiliee, this dishabiliee is a
great Mode in England; the Women love the dishabiliee as well as the men, ma
foy.


Well: if we should stay and sup with you, I warrant you would be bragging of
it to morrow amongst your Comrades that you had the Company of two Women of
Quality at the French-house, and name us.


Pleasant Jilts.


No upon our Honours, we should not brag of your Company.


Upon your Honours?


No faith.


Come, we will venture to sit down then: yet I know the vanity of you men; you
could not contain your selves from bragging.


No, no! you Women now adays have found out the pleasure of bragging, and will
allow it the men no longer.


Therefore indeed we dare not stay to sup with you; for you would be sure to
tell on it.


And we are young-men who stand upon our Reputations.


You are very pleasant, Gentlemen.


And for my part I am to be married shortly, and know 'twould quickly come to
my mistresses's ear.


And for my part I must go visit to morrow morning be-times a new
City-Mistress, and you know they are as inquisitive as precise in the City.


Come, come! pray leave this fooling; sit down again, and let us bespeak Supper.


No faith, I dare not.


Besides, we have supped.


No matter, we only desire you should look on, while we eat, and put the glass
about, or so.


Pray, stay.


Upon my life I dare not.


Upon our Honours we will not tell, if you are in earnest.


P'shaw, p'shaw -- I know the vanity* of you Women, you could not contain your
selves from bragging.


Ma foy! is it certain! ha, ha, ha! hark you, Madam! can't you fare well, but
you must cry Roast-meat?

You'll spoil your Trade by bragging of your gains,

The silent Sow (Madam) does eat most Grains.

-- da --


Your Servant, Monsieur Fop.


Nay, faith, do not go, we will no more tell --


Then you would of a Clape, if you had it, dat's the only secret you can keep*
Jarnie.


I am glad we are rid of these Jilts.


And we have taken a very ridiculous occasion.


Wat! must we leave the Lady then, dis is dam Civility Englis' mon foy.


Nay, Sir, you have too much of the French Eyre to have so little honour and
good breeding.


Dee you tinke so then, sweet Madam, I have mush of de French Eyre?


More than any French-man breathing.


Auh, you are the curtoise Dame, mort-bleu, I shall stay then, if you think so.
Monsieur Gerrard, you will be certain to see the Lady to morrow, pray not
forget, ha, ha, ha.


No, no, Sir.


You will go then?


I will go on a Fools Errand for once.


What will you eat, Sir?


Wat you please, Madame.


De hear, Waiter, then some young Partridge.


What else, Madam?


Some Russes.


What else, Madam?


Some young Pheasants.


What else, Madam?


Some young Rabbits, I love Rabbits.


What else, Madam?


Stay --


Dis Englis' Waiter wit his wat else, Madam, will ruin me, teste non.


What else, Madam?


Wat else, Madam, again! call up the French Waiter.


What else, Madam?


Again, call up the French Waiter or Quesinier, mortteste-ventre, vite, vite --
Auh, Madam, the stupidity of the Englis' Waiter, I hate the Englis' Waiter, mon
foy.


Be not in passion, dear Monsieur.


I kiss your hand obligeant, Madam.

Chere Pierot, Serviteur, Serviteur, or ca a manger.


En voulez vous de Cram Schiquin.


Yes.


De Partrish, de Faysan, de Quailles.


This Bougre will ruin me too, but he speak wit dat bell Eyre and grace. I
cannot bid him hold his tongue, ventre, c'est assey, Pierot, vat-en.


And de little plate de --


Jarnie, vat-en.


And de little plate de --


De grace go die way.


And de little de --


De Fourmage, de Brie, vat-en, go, go.


What's that Cheese that stinks?


Ay, ay, be sure it stink extremente, Pierot vat-en; but stay till I drink die
health, here's to dat pretty Fellow's health, Madam.


Must we drink the Scullion's health?


Auh, you will not be disobligeant, Madam, he is the Quisinier for a Cardinal
or French* Abbot.


But how shall we divertise our selves till Supper be ready?


Can we have better Divertisement than this Gentleman?


But I think we had better carry the Gentleman home with us and because it is
already late, sup at home, and divertise the Gentleman at Cards, till it be
ready, de hear, Waiter, let it be brought when 'tis ready to my Lodging hard
by, in Mustard-Alley, at the Sign of the Crooked-Billet!


At the Crooked-Billet!


Come, Sir, come.


Mort-bleu, I have take the Vow (since my last Clap) never to go again to the
Bourdel.


What is the Bourdel?


How call you the name of your House?


The Crooked-Billet.


No, no, the -- Bawdy-house, vert and bleu.


How, our Lodging! we'd have you know --


Auh, mort-bleu, I would not know it, de Crooke-Billet, hah, ha.


Come, Sir.


Besides, if I go wit you to the Bourdel, you will tell, mort-bleu.


Fie, fie, come along.


Beside, I am to be married within these two days, if you should tell now.


Come, come along, we will not tell.


But will you promise then to have the care of my honour, pray, good Madam,
have de care of my honeur, pray have de care of my honeur. Will you have care
of my honeur? pray have de care of my honeur, and do not tell, if you can help
it; pray, dear Madam, do not tell.


I would not tell for fear of losing you, my Love for you will make me secret.


Why, do you love me?


Indeed I cannot help telling you now what my modesty ought to conceal, but my
eyes would disclose it too. I have a passion for you, Sir.


A passion for me!


An extreme passion, dear Sir, you are so French, so mightily French, so
agreeable French; but I'll tell you more of my heart at home: come along.


But is your patron sincere?


The truest in the World.


Well then, I'll venture my body wit thee for one night.


For one night, don't you believe that, and so you would leave me to morrow;
but I love you so, I cannot part with you, you must keep me for good and all,
if you will have me. I can't leave you for my heart.


How, keep, Jarnie, de Whore Englis' have noting but keep, keep in dere
mouths now a* days, teste non: formerly 'twas enough to keep de shild, ma foy.


Nay, I will be kept else -- but come we'll talk on it at home.


Umh -- so, so, ver vel de Amoure of de Whore does always end in keep, ha, keep,
ma foy, keep, ha --

The Punck that entertains you wit'her passion,
Is like kind Host who makes the Invitation,
At your own cost, to his fort bon Collation.

HAve you had a Spanish care of the Honour of my Family, that is to say, have
you kept up my Daughter close in my absence, as I directed.


I have, Sir; but it was as much as I could do.


I knew that; for 'twas as much as I could do to keep up her Mother. I that
have been in Spain, look you.


Nay, 'tis a hard task to keep up an English Woman.


As hard as it is for those who are not kept up to be honest, look you con
Licentia Sister.


How now, Brother! I am sure my Husband never kept me up.


I knew that, therefore I cried con Licentia Sister, as the Spaniards have it.


But you Spaniards are too censorious, Brother.


You English Women, Sister, give us too much cause (look you) but you are sure
my Daughter has not seen a man since my departure.


No, not so much as a Church-man.


As a Church-man ( Voto) I thank you for that, not a Church-man! not a
Church-man!


No, not so much as a Church-man; but of any, one would think one might trust a
Church-man.


No, we are bold enough in trusting them with our Souls, I'll never trust 'em
with the body of my Daughter, look you, Guarda, you see what comes of trusting
Church-men here in England; and 'tis because the Women govern the Families,
that Chaplains are so much in fashion. Trust a Church-man -- trust a Coward
with your honour, a Fool with your secret, a Gamester with your purse, as soon
as a Priest with your Wife or Daughter, look you, Guarda, I am no Fool, look
you.


Nay, I know you are a wise man, Brother.


Why, Sister, I have been fifteen years in Spain for it, at several times, lo^k
you: Now, in Spain, he is wise enough that is grave; politic enough, that ^ays
little; and honourable enough that is jealous; and though I say it, that should
not say it, I as as grave, grum, and jealous, as any Spaniard breathing.


I know you are, Brother.


And I will be a Spaniard in every thing still, and will not conform, not I, to
their ill-favour'd English Customs, for I will wear my Spanish Habit still, I
will stroke my Spanish Whiskers still, and I will eat my Spanish Olio still;
and my Daughter shall go a Maid to her Husbands Bed, let the English Custom be
what 'twill: I would fain see any finical cunning, insinuating Monsieur, of the
age, debauch, or steal away my Daughter; but well, has she seen my Cousin? How
long has he been in England?


These three days.


And she has seen him, has she? I was contented he should see her, intending
him for her Husband: but she has seen no body else upon your certain knowledge?


No, no, alas! how should she? 'tis impossible she should.


Where is her Chamber? pray let me see her.


You'll find her, poor Creature, asleep, I warrant you; or if awake, thinking
no hurt, nor of your coming this morning.


Let us go to her, I long to see her, poor innocent Wretch.


Am I not come upon your own Summons, Madam? and yet receive me so?


My Summons, Sir, no I assure you; and if you do not like your reception, I
cannot help it; for I am not used to receive men, I'd have you to know.


She is beautiful beyond all things I ever saw.


I like him extremely.


Come, fairest, why do you frown?


Because I am angry.


I am come on purpose to please you then, do not receive me so unkindly.


I tell you, I do not use to receive men; there has not been a man in the House
before, but my Cousin, this twelve month, I'd have you to know.


Then you ought to bid me the more welcome, I'd have you to know.


What do you mock me too? I know I am but a home-bred-simple Girl; but I
thought you Gallants of the Town had been better bred, than to mock a poor Girl
in her Fathers own House. I have heard indeed 'tis a part of good breeding to
mock people behind their backs, but not to their faces.


Pretty Creature! she has not only the Beauty but the Innocence of an Angel.
Mock you, dear Miss! no, I only repeated the words, because they were yours,
sweet Miss, what we like we imitate.


Dear Miss! sweet Miss! how came you and I so well acquainted? This is one of
your confident Tricks too, as I have been told, you'll be acquainted with a
Woman in the time you can help her over a Bench in the Play-house, or to her
Coach: but I need not wonder at your confidence, since you could come in at the
great Gallery-window just now. But pray who shall pay for the glass you have
broken?


Pretty Creature! your Father might have made the Window bigger then, since he
has so fine a Daughter, and will not allow people to come in at the door to
her.


A pleasant Man! well, 'tis harder playing the Hypocrite with him, I see, than
with my Aunt or Father; and if dissimulation were not very natural to a Woman,
I'm sure I could not use it at this time; but the mask of simplicity and
innocence is as useful to an intriguing Woman, as the mask of Religion to a
States-man, they say.


Why do you look away, dearest Miss?


Because you quarrelled with me just now for frowning* upon you, and I cannot
help it, if I look upon you.


O let me see that Face at any rate.


Would you have me frown upon you? for I shall be sure to do it.


Come, I'll stand fair: you have done your worst to my heart already.


Now I dare not look upon him, lest I should not be able to keep my word.


Come, I am ready, and yet I am afraid of her frowns:

Come, look, Ih -- am ready, Ih -- am ready.


But I am not ready.


Turn, dear Miss, Come, Ih -- am ready.


Are you ready then, I'll look?

No faith, I can't frown upon him, if I should be hanged.


Dear Miss, I thank you, that look has no terror in it.


No, I cannot frown for my heart; for blushing, I don't use to look upon men,
you must know.


If it were possible any thing could, those blushes would add to her Beauty:
well, bashfulness is the only out-of-fashion-thing that is agreeable.


Ih -- h -- like this man strangely, I was going to say loved him. Courage
then, Hippolita, make use of the only opportunity thou can have to
enfranchize thy self: Women formerly (they say) never knew how to make use of
their time till it was past, but let it not be said so of a young Woman of this
Age; my damned Aunt will be stirring presently: well then, courage, I say,
Hippolita, thou art full fourteen years old, shift for thy self.


So, I have looked upon her so long, till I am grown bashful too; Love and
Modesty come together like Money and Covetousness, and the more we have, the
less we can show it. I dare not look her in the face now, nor speak a word.


What, Sir, methinks you look away now.


Because you would not look upon me, Miss.


Nay, I hope you can't look me in the face, since you have done so rude a thing
as to come in at the Window upon me; come, come, when once we Women find the
men bashful, then we take heart; now I can look upon you as long as you will;
let's see if you can frown upon me now!


Lovely Innocence! No, you may swear I can't frown upon you, Miss.


So I knew you were ashamed of what you have done; well, since you are ashamed,
and because you did not come of your own head, but were sent by my Cousin, you
say.


Which I wonder at.


For all these reasons I do forgive you.


In token of your forgiveness then (dearest Miss) let me have the honour to
kiss your hand.


Nay, there 'tis you men are like our little Shock-dogs, if we don't keep you
off from us, but use you a little kindly, you grow so fiddling, and so
troublesome, there is no enduring you.


O dear Miss, if I am like your Shock-dog, let it be in his Privileges.


Why, I'd have you know he does not lye with me.


'Tis was well guessed, Miss, for one so innocent.


No, I always kick him off from the Bed, and never will let him come near it;
for of late indeed (I do not know what's the reason) I don't much care for my
Shock-dog nor my Babies.


O then, Miss, I may have hopes; for after the Shock-dog and the Babies, 'tis
the mans turn to be beloved.


Why could you be so good-natur'd as to come after my Shock-dog in my Love? it
may be indeed, rather than after one of your Brother-men.


Hah, ha, ha -- poor Creature, a Wonder of Innocence.


But I see you are humble, because you would kiss my hand.


No, I am ambitious therefore.


Well, all this fooling but loses time, I must make better use of it. I could
let you kiss my hand, but then I'm afraid you would take hold of me and carry
me away.


Indeed I would not.


Come! I know you would.


Truly I would not.


You would, you would, I know you would.


I'll swear I wo' not -- by --


Nay, don't swear, for you'll be the apter to do it then, I would not have him
forswear it neither; he does not like me sure well enough to carry me away.


Dear Miss, let me kiss your hand.


I am sure you would carry me away, if I should.


Be not afraid of it.


Nay! I am afraid of the contrary; either he dislikes me, and therefore will
not be troubled with me, or what is as bad, he loves me, and is dull, or
fearful to displease me.


Trust me, sweetest; I can use no violence to you.


Nay, I am sure you would carry me away, what should you come in at the Window
for, if you did not mean to steal me?


If I should endeavour it, you might cry out, and I should be prevented.


Dull, dull man of the Town, are all like thee. He is as dull as a Country
Squire at Questions and Commands. No, if I should cry out never so loud; this
is quite at the further end of the House, and there no body could hear me.


I will not give you the occasion, Dearest.


Well! I will quicken thy sense, if it be possible. Nay, I know you come to
steal me away; because I am an Heiress, and have twelve hundred pound a year,
lately left me by my Mothers Brother, which my Father cannot meddle with, and
which is the chiefest reason (I suppose) why he keeps me up so close.


Ha!


So -- this has made him consider, O money, powerful money! how the ugly, old,
crooked, straight, handsome young Women are beholding to thee?


Twelve hundred pound a year --


Besides, I have been told my Fortune, and the Woman said I should be stolen
away, because she says 'tis the Fate of Heiresses to be stolen away.


Twelve hundred pound a year --


Nay more, she described the man to me, that was to do it, and he was as like
you as could be! have you any Brothers?


Not any! 'twas I, I warrant you, Sweetest.


So he understands himself now.


Well, Madam, since 'twas foretold you, what do you think on it? 'tis in vain,
you know, to resist Fate.


I do know indeed they say, 'tis to no purpose: besides, the Woman that told me
my Fortune, or you have bewitched me. Ih -- think.


My Soul, my Life, 'tis you have Charms powerful as numberless, especially
those of your innocence irresistible, and do surprise the wary'st Heart; such
mine was, while I could call it mine, but now 'tis yours for ever.


Well, well, get you gone then, I'll keep it safe for your sake.


Nay, you must go with me, sweetest.


Well, I see you will part with the Jewel; but you'll have the keeping of the
Cabinet to which you commit it.


Come, come, my Dearest, let us be gone: Fortune as well as Women must be taken
in the humour.


O Miss, Miss! your Father, it seems, is just now arrived, and here is coming
in upon you.


My Father!


My Daughter! and a Man!


A Man! a Man in the House!


Ha! -- what mean these! a Spaniard.


What shall I do? stay -- nay, pray stir not from me; but lead me about, as if
you lead me about, as if you lead me a Corant.


Is this your Government, Sister, and this your innocent Charge, that has not
seen the face of a man this twelve-month, En hora mala.


O sure it is not a man, it cannot be a Man!


It cannot be a Man! if he be not a Man he's a Devil; he has her lovingly by
the hand too, Valga me el Cielo.


Do not seem to mind them, but dance on, or lead me about still.


What de'e mean by it?


Hey! they are frolic, a dancing.


Indeed they are dancing, I think, why Niece.


Nay, hold a little: I'll make 'em dance in the Devils name, but it shall not
be la Gailliarda!


O Niece! why Niece!


Do you hear her? what do you mean?


Take no notice of them; but walk about still, and sing a little, sing a
Corant.


I can't sing; but I'll hum, if you will.


Are you so merry? Well, I'll be with you, En hora mala.


Oh Niece, Niece, why Niece, Oh --


Why, Daughter, my dainty Daughter, my shame, my ruin, my plague.


Mind him not, but dance and sing on.


A pretty time to dance and sing indeed, when I have a Spaniard with naked
Toledo at my tail: no, pray excuse me, Miss, from fooling any longer.


O my Father! my Father! poor Father! you are welcome, pray give me your
blessing.


My blessing, En hora mala.


What, am I not your Daughter, Sir?


My Daughter, mi mal, mi muerte.


My name's Hippolita, Sir, I don't own your Spanish names; but pray, Father,
why do you frighten one so! you know I don't love to see a Sword: what do you
mean to do with that ugly thing out?


I'll show you, Trayidor Ladron, demi houra, thou dy'st.


Not if I can help it, good Don; but by the names you give me, I find you
mistake your man, I suppose some Spaniard has affronted you.


None but thee, Ladron, and thou dy'st for it.


Oh, oh, oh -- help, help, help.


Oh -- what will you kill my poor Dancing-master?


A Dancing-master, he's a Fencing-master rather, I think. But is he your
Dancing-master? Umph --


So much Wit and Innocence were never together before.


Is he a Dancing-master?


Is he a Dancing-master? He does not look like a Dancing-master.


Pish -- you don't know a Dancing-master, you have not seen one these
threescore years, I warrant.


No matter; but he does not look like a Dancing-master.


Nay, nay, Dancing-masters look like Gentlemen, enough, Sister; but he's no
Dancing-master by drawing his Sword so briskly: those tripping outsides of
Gentlemen are like Gentlemen enough in every thing but in drawing a Sword, and
since he is a Gentleman, he shall dye by mine.


Oh, hold, hold.


Hold, hold! pray, Brother, let's talk with him a little first, I warrant you I
shall trap him, and if he confesses, you may kill him; for those that confess,
they say, ought to be hanged -- let's see --


Poor Hippolita, I wish I had not had this occasion of admiring thy Wit; I have
increased my Love, whilst I have lost my hopes, the common Fate of poor Lovers.


Come, you are guilty by that hanging down o^ your head. Speak, are you a
Dancing-master? Speak, speak, a Dancing-master?


Yes, forsooth, I am a Dancing-master, ay, ay --


How does it appear?


Why there is his Fiddle, there upon the Table, Father.


No busie-body, but it is not -- that is my Nephews Fiddle.


Why, he lent it to my Cousin; I tell you it is his.


Nay, it may be indeed, he might lend it him, for ought I know.


I, I, but ask him, Sister, if he be a Dancing-master, where?


Pray, Brother, let me alone with him, I know what to ask him, sure!


What will you be wiser than I? nay, then stand away. Come, if you are a
Dancing-master; where's your School? adonde, adonde.


Why, he'll say, may be he has never a one.


Who asked you, nimble Chaps? So you have put an Excuse in his head.


Indeed, Sir, 'tis no Excuse, I have no School.


Well! but who sent you, how came you hither?


There I am puzl'd indeed.


How came you hither, I say? how --


Why, how, how, how should I come hither?


Ay, how should he come hither? upon his Legs.


So, so, now you have put an Excuse in his head too, that you have, so you
have, but stay --


Nay, with your favour, Mistress, I'll ask him now.


I'facks; but you shall not, I'll ask him, and ask you no favour that I will.


I'fackins; but you shall not ask him, if you go there to, look you, you
Prattle-box you, I'll ask him.


I will ask him, I say, come.


Where.


What.


Mine's a shrewd question.


Mine's as shrewd as yours.


Nay then we shall have it, come, answer me, where's your Lodging? come, come,
Sir.


A shrewd question indeed, at the Surgeons Arms I warrant in -- for 'tis
Spring-time, you know.


Must you make lies for him?


But come, Sir, what's your Name? answer me to that, come.


His Name, why 'tis an easy matter to tell you a false Name, I hope.


So, must you teach him to cheat us?


Why did you say my questions were not shrewd questions then?


And why would you not let me ask him the question then? Brother, Brother, ever
while you live for all your Spanish wisdom, let an old Woman make discoveries,
the young Fellows cannot cheat us in any thing, I'd have you to know; set your
old Woman still to grope out an Intrigue, because you know the Mother found her
Daughter in the Oven: a word to the wise, Brother.


Come, come, leave this tattling; he has dishonoured my Family, debauched my
Daughter, and what if he could excuse himself? the Spanish Proverb says,
Excuses neither satisfy Creditors nor the injured; the wounds of Honour must
have blood and wounds, St. Jago para mi.


Oh hold! dear Father, and I'll confess all.


She will not, sure, after all.


My Cousin sent him, because, as he said, he would have me recover my Dancing a
little before our Wedding, having made a Vow he would never marry a Wife who
could not dance a Corant. I am sure I was unwilling, but he would have him
come, saying, I was to be his Wife, as soon as you came, and therefore expected
obedience from me.


Indeed the venture is most his, and the shame would be most his; for I know
here in England 'tis not the custom for the Father to be much concerned what
the Daughter does, but I will be a Spaniard still.


Did not you hear him say last night he would send me one this morning?


No not I sure. If I had, he had never come here.


Indeed, Aunt, you grow old, I see, your memory fails you very much. Did not
you hear him, Prue, say he would send him to me?


Yes I'll be sworn did I.


Look you there, Aunt.


I wonder I should not remember it.


Come, come, you are a doting old Fool.


So, so, the fault will be mine now. But pray, Mistress, how did he come in: I
am sure I had the Keys of the Doors, which till your Father came in, were not
opened to day.


He came in just after my Father, I suppose.


It might be indeed while the Porters brought in the things, and I was talking
with you.


O might he so, forsooth; you are a brave Governante, look you, you a Duenna
voto -- and not know who comes in and out.


So, 'twas my fault, I know.


Your Maid was in the Room with you! was she not, Child?


Yes indeed, and indeed, Father, all the while.


Well, Child, I am satisfied then; but I hope he does not use the
Dancing-masters tricks of squeezing your hands, setting your Legs and Feet, by
handling your Thighs, and seeing your Legs.


No indeed, Father; I'd give him a Box on the Ear, if he should.


Poor Innocent! Well I am contented you should learn to dance; since, for ought
I know, you shall be married to morrow, or the next day at farthest, by that
time you may recover a Corant, a Sarabrand I would say; and since your Cousin
too will have a dancing Wife, it shall be so, and I'll see you dance my self,
you shall be my Charge these two days, and then I dare venture you in the hand
of any Dancing-master, even a saucy French Dancing-master, look you.


Well, have a care though; for this man is not dressed like a Dancing-master.


Go, go, you dote, are they not (for the most part) better dressed and prouder
than many a good Gentleman? you would be wiser than I, would you? Querno --


Well, I say only look to it, look to it.


Hey, hey! come, Friend, to your business, teach her her Lesson over again,
let's see.


Come, Master.


Come, come, let's see your English Method, I understand something of Dancing
my self -- come.


Come, Master.


I shall betray you yet, dearest Miss, for I know not a step, I could never
dance.


No!


Come, come, Child.


Indeed I'm ashamed, Father.


You must not be ashamed, Child, you'll never dance well, if you are ashamed.


Indeed I can't help it, Father.


Come, come, I say, go to it.


Indeed I can't, Father, before you; 'tis my first Lesson, and I shall do it so
ill: pray, good Father, go into the next Room for this once, and the next time
my Master comes, you shall see I shall be confident enough.


Poor-foolish-innocent Creature; well, well, I will, Child, who but a Spanish
kind of a Father could have so innocent a Daughter, in England? well I would
fain see any one steal or debauch my Daughter from me.


Nay, won't you go, Father!


Yes, yes, I go, Child, we will all go but your Maid; you can dance before your
Maid.


Yes, yes, Father, a Maid at most times with her Mistress is no body.


He peeps yet at the door.


Nay, Father, you peep, indeed you must not see me, when we have done you shall
come in.


Indeed, little Mistress, like the young Kitten, you see, you played with our
prey, till you had almost lost it!


'Tis true, a good old Mouser like you, had taken it up, and run away with it
presently.


Let me adore you, dearest Miss, and give you --


No, no embracing good Master, that ought to be the last Lesson you are to
teach me, I have heard.


Though an after-Game be the more tedious and dangerous, 'tis won, Miss, with
the more honour and pleasure; for all that I repent we were put to it; the
coming in of your Father as he did, was the most unlucky thing that ever befell
me.


What, then you think I would have gone with you.


Yes, and will go with me yet, I hope, courage, Miss, we have yet an
opportunity, and the Gallery-window is yet open.


No, no, if I went, I would go for good and all; but now my Father will soon
come in again, and may quickly overtake us; besides, now I think on it, you are
a Stranger to me. I know not where you live, nor whither you might carry me;
for ought I know, you might be a Spirit, and carry me to Barbadoes.


No, dear Miss, I would carry you to Court, the Play-houses, and Hide-Park --


Nay, I know 'tis the trick of all you that spirit Women away to speak 'em
mighty fair at first; but when you have got 'em in your Clutches, you carry 'em
into Yorkshire, Wales, or Cornwall, which is as bad as to Barbadoes, and rather
than be served so, I would be a Prisoner in London still as I am.


I see the Air of this Town without the pleasures of it, is enough to infect
Women with an aversion for the Country. Well, Miss, since it seems you have
some diffidence in me, give me leave to visit you as your Dancing-master, now
you have honoured me with the Character, and under that, I may have your
Fathers permission to see you, till you may better know me and my heart, and
have a better opportunity to reward it.


I am afraid, to know your heart, would require a great deal of time, and my
Father intends to marry me very suddenly to my Cousin who sent you hither.


Pray, sweet Miss, then let us make the better use of our time, if it be short:
but how shall we do with that Cousin of yours in the mean time, we must needs
charm him?


Leave that to me!


But what's worse! how shall I be able to act a Dancing-master? who ever wanted
inclination and patience to learn my self.


A Dancing-School in half an hour will furnish you with terms of the Art
Besides, Love (as I have heard say) supplies his Scholars with all sorts of
Capacities they have need of in spite of Nature, but what has Love to do with
you?


Love indeed has made a grave Gouty States-man fight Duels; the Soldier fly
from his Colours, a Pedant asine Gentleman; nay, and the very Lawyer a Poet,
and therefore may make me a Dancing-master.


If he were your Master.


I'm sure, dearest Miss, there is nothing else which I cannot do for you
already, and therefore may hope to succeed in that.


Come, have you done?


O! my Father again.


Come, now let us see you dance.


Indeed I am not perfect yet, pray excuse me till the next time my Master
comes: but when must he come again Father?


Let me see, Friend, you must needs come after Dinner again, and then at night
again, and so three times to morrow too. If she be not married to morrow (which
I am to consider of) she will dance a Corant in twice or thrice teaching more,
will she not? for 'tis but a twelve-month since she came from Hackney-School.


We will lose no time I warrant you, Sir, if she be to be married to morrow.


Truly, I think she may be married to morrow, therefore I would not have you
lose any time, look you.


You need not caution me I warrant you, Sir, sweet Scholar, your humble
Servant, I will not fail you immediately after Dinner.


No, no, pray do not, and I will not fail to satisfy you very well, look you.


He does not doubt his reward, Father, for his pains. If you should not, I
would make that good to him.


Come, let us go in to your Aunt, I must talk with you both together, Child.


I follow you, Sir.


Here's the Gentlewoman o'th'next House come to see you, Mistress.


She's come, as if she came expressly to sing the new Song the sung last night,
I must hear it, for 'tis to my purpose now.

Madam, your Servant, I dream't all night of the Song you sung last; the new
Song against delays in Love: pray let's hear it again.

Since we poor slavish Women know
Our men we cannot pick and choose,
To him we like, why say we no?
And both our time and Lover lose.
With feigned repulses and delays
A Lover's appetite we pall;
And if too long the Gallant stays,
His stomach's gone for good and all.
Or our impatient amorous Guest,
Unknown to us, away may steal,
And rather than stay for a Feast,
Take up with some coarse, ready meal.
When opportunity is kind,
Let prudent Woman be so too;
And if the man be to your mind,
Till needs you must, never let him go*
The Match soon made is happy still,
^or only Love has there to do;
Let no one marry against her will,
But stand off, when her Parents woo.
And only to their Suits be coy,
For she whom Jointure can obtain
To let a Fop her Bed enjoy,
Is but a lawful Wench for gain.

Your Father calls for you, Miss.


I come, I come. I must be obedient as long as I am with him.

Our Parents who restrain our liberty,
But take the course to make us sooner free,
Though all we gain be but new slavery;
We leave our Fathers, and to Husbands fly.

SErviteur, Serviteur, la Cousin, your Maid told me she watched at the
stair-foot for my coming, because you had a mind to speak wit me before I saw
your Fader, it seem.


I would so indeed, Cousin.


Or ca, Or ca, I know your affair, it is to tell me wat recreation you ade with
Monsieur Gerrard; but did he come, I was afrait he would not come.


Yes, yes, he did come.


Ha, ha, ha -- and were you not infiniment divertisee and please, confess.


I was indeed, Cousin, I was very well pleased.


I do tinke so. I did tinke to come and be divertisee my self this morning with
the sight of his reception; but I did ran'counter last night wit dam Company
dat keep me up so late I could not rise in de morning. Mala-peste de Puteins --



Indeed we wanted you here mightily, Cousin.


To elpe you to laugh; for if I add been here, I had made such recreation wid
dat Coxcomb Gerrard.


Indeed, Cousin! you need not have any subject or property to make one laugh,
you are so pleasant your self, and when you are but alone, you would make one
burst.


Am I so happy, Cousin? then in the bon quality of making people laugh.


Mighty happy, Cousin.


De grace.


Indeed!


Nay, sans vanity I observe wheresoever I come I make every body merry, sans
vanity -- da --


I do believe you do.


Nay, as I marche in de street I can make de dull Apprenty laugh and sneer.


This Fool, I see, is as apt as an ill Poet to mistake the contempt and scorn
of people for applause and admiration.


Ah, Cousin, you see wat it is to have been in France; before I went into
France I could get no body to laugh at me, ma foy.


No! truly Cousin, I think you deserved it before, but you are improved indeed
by going into France.


Ay, as, the Franch Education make us propre a tout; beside, Cousin, you must
know to play the Fool is the Science in France, and I did go to the Italian
Academy at Paris thrice a week to learn to play de Fool of Signior Scaramouche
who is the most excellent Personage in the World for dat Noble Science. Angel
is a dam English Fool to him.


Methinks now Angel is a very good Fool.


Nauh, nauh, Nokes is a better Fool, but indeed the Englis' are not fit to be
Fools; here are ver few good Fools. 'Tis true, you have many a young Cavalier,
who go over into France to learn to be the Buffoon; but for all dat, they return
but mauvais Buffoon. Jarnie.


I'm sure, Cousin, you have lost no time there.


Auh le brave Scaramouche.


But is it a Science in France, Cousin? and is there an Academy for Fooling:
sure none go to it but Players.


They are Comedians dat are de Matres, but all the beaux monde go to learn, as
they do here of Angel and Nokes; for if you did go abroad into Company, you
would find the best almost of de Nation conning in all places the Lessons which
they have learnt of the Fools, dere Matres, Nokes and Angel.


Indeed!


Yes, yes, they are the Gens de quality that practise dat Science most, and the
most ambitieux; for Fools and Buffoons have been always most welcome to Courts,
and desired in all Companies. Auh to be de Fool, de Buffoon, is to be de great
Personage.


Fools have Fortune, they say indeed.


So say old Seneque.


Well, Cousin (not to make you proud) you are the greatest Fool in England, I
am sure.


Non, non, de grace, non, Nokes de Comedian is a pretty man, a pretty man for a
Comedian, da --


You are modest, Cousin; but least my Father should come in presently (which he
will do as soon as he knows you are here) I must give you a Caution, which 'tis
fit you should have before you see him.


Vel, vel, Cousin, vat is dat?


You must know then (as commonly the conclusion of all mirth is sad) after I
had a good while pleased my self in jesting and leading the poor Gentleman you
sent into a Fools Paradise, and almost made him believe I would go away with
him, my Father coming home this morning, came in upon us, and caught him with
me.


Mala-pes^e.


And drew his Sword upon him, and would have killed him; for you know my
Father's Spanish fierceness and jealousy.


But, how did he come off then? teste non.


In short, I was fain to bring him off by saying he was my Dancingmaster.


Hah, ha, ha, ver good Jeste.


I was unwilling to have the poor man killed you know for our foolish Frolic
with him; but then upon my Aunts and Fathers inquiry, how he came in, and who
sent him; I was forced to say you did, desiring I should be able to dance a
Corant before our Wedding.


A ver good Jest -- da -- still better as better.


Now all that I am to desire of you, is to own you sent him, that I may not be
caught in a lye.


Yes, yes, a ver good Jest, Gerrard, a Mastre de Dance, hah, ha, ha.


Nay, the Jest is like to be better yet; for my Father himself has obliged him
now to come and teach me: So that now he must take the Dancingmaster upon him,
and come three or four times come before our Wedding, lest my Father, if he
should come no more, should be suspicious I had told him a lye: and (for ought
I know) if he should know o^ but guess he were not a Dancingmaster, in his
Spanish strictness and Punctillioes of Honour he might kill me as the shame and
stain of his Honour and Family* which he talks of so much. Now you know the
jealous cruel Fathers in Spain serve their poor innocent Daughters often so,
and he is more than a Spaniard.


Non, non, fear noting, I warrant you he shall come as often as you will to the
House, and your Father shall never know who he is till we are married; but then
I'll tell him all for the Jests sake.


But will you keep my Counsel, dear Cousin, till we are married?


Poor* dear Fool, I warrant thee, mon soy.


Nay, what a Fool am I indeed, for you would not have me killed: you love me
too well sure, to be an Instrument of my death;

But here comes my Father, remember.


I would no more tell him of it, than I would tell you if I had been with a
Weach, Jarnie -- she's afraid to be killed, poor Wretch, and he's a capricious
jealous Fop enough to do it, but here he comes.

I'll keep thy Counsel I warrant thee, my dear Soul, mon petit Coeur.


Peace, peace, my Father's coming this way.


I, but by his march he won't be near enough to hear us this half hour, hah,
ha, ha.


Is that thing my* Cousin, Sister?


'Tis he, Sir.


Cousin, I am sorry to see you.


Is that a Spanish Complement?


So much disguised, Cousin.


Oh! is it out at last, ventre?

Serviteur, Serviteur, a Monseur mon Oncle, and I am glad to see you here
within doors, most Spanish Oncle, ha, ha, ha. But I should be sorry to see you
in the streets, teste non.


Why soh -- would you be ashamed of me, hah -- (voto a St. Jago) would you?
hauh --


I it may be you would be ashamed your self, Monseur mon Oncle, of the great
Train you would get to wait upon your Spanish Hose, puh -- the Boys would
follow you, and hoot at you (vert and bleu) pardon my Franch Franchise,
Monsieur mon Oncle.


We shall have sport anon, betwixt these two Contraries.


Dost thou call me Monseur (voto a St. Jago*)


No, I did not call you Monseur voto a St. Jago, Sir, I know you are my Uncle
Mr. James Formal -- da --


But I can hardly know you are my Cousin, Mr. Nathaniel Paris; but call me Sir
Don Diego henceforward, look you, and no Monsieur, call me Monsieur Guarda.


I confess my error, Sir; for none but a blind man would call you Monsieur,
ha, ha, ha - But pray do not call me neder Paris, but de Paris, de Paris (si
vou plai'st) Monseur de Paris! Call me Monseur and welcome, da --


Monsieur de Pantaloons then voto --


Monsieur de Pantalloons! a pretty name, a pretty name, ma foy, da -- bein
trove de Pantalloons; how much betre den your de la Fountains, de la Rivieres,
de la Roches, and all the De's in France -- da -- well; but have you not the
admiration for my Pantalloon, Don Diego mon Oncle?


I am astonished at them verde deramente, they are wonderfully ridiculous.


Ridicule, ridicule! ah -- 'tis well you are my Uncle, da -- Ridicule, ah -- is
dere any ting in de Universe so jenti as de Pantalloons? any ting so ravisaunt
as de Pantalloons? Auh -- I could kneel down and varship a pair of jenti
Pantalloons? vat, vat, you would have me have de admiration for dis outward
skin of your Thigh, which you call Spanish Hose, fie, fie, fie -- ha, ha, ha*


Dost thou deride my Spanish Hose? young Man, hauh.


In comparison of Pantalloon I do undervalue 'em indeet, Don Diegue mon Oncle,
ha, ha, ha.


Thou art then a gavanho de malo gusto, look you.


You may call me vat you will, Oncle Don Diegue; but I must needs say, your
Spanish Hose are scurvy Hose, ugly Hose, lousy Hose, and stinking Hose.


Do not provoke me, Boracho.


Indeet for lousy I recant dat Epithet, for dere is scarce room in 'em for
dat little Animal, ha, ha, ha. But for stinking Hose, dat Epithet may stand;
for how can they choose but stink, since they are so furieusmente close to your
Spanish Tail, da*


Ha, ha, ridiculous.


Do not provoke me, I say, En hora mala.


Nay, Oncle, I am sorry you are in de patron; but I must live and dye for de
Pantalloon against de Spanish Hose, da.


You are a rash young Man, and while you wear Pantalloons, you are beneath my
passion, voto -- Auh -- they make thee look and waddle (with all those gew-gaw
Ribbons) like a great old Fat, slovenly Water-dog.


And your Spanish Hose, and your Nose in the Air, make you look like a great
grisled-long- Irish-Grey-hound, reaching a Crust off from a high Shelf, ha, ha,
ha.


Bueno, Bueno.


What have you a mind to ruin your self, and break off the Match?


Pshaw -- wat do you tell me of the Match? dee tinke I will not vindicate
Pantalloons, Morbleu?


Well! he is a lost young Man, I see, and desperately far gone in the Epidemic
Malady of our Nation, the affectation of the worst of French Vanities: but I
must be wiser than him, as I am a Spaniard look you Don Diego, and endeavour to
reclaim him by Art and fair means (look you, Don Diego) if not, he shall never
marry my Daughter look you, Don Diego, though he be my own Sister's Son, and
has two thousand five hundred seventy three pound Starling twelve shillings and
two pence a year Penny-rent, Segouaramente.

Come, Young-man, since you are so obstinate, we will refer our difference to
Arbitration, your Mistress my Daughter shall be Umpire betwixt us, concerning
Spanish Hose and Pantalloons.


Pantalloons and Spanish Hose (si vous plaist.)


Your Mistress is the fittest Judge of your Dress, sure?


I know ver vel, dat most of the Jeunesse of England will not change the
Ribbon upon de Cravat widout the consultation of dere Mattress, but I am no
Anglois da -- nor shall I make de reference of my Dress to any in the Universe,
da -- I judged by any in England, teste non* I would not be judged by an
English Looking-glass, Jarnie.


Be not positivo, Young-man.


Nay, pray refer it, Cousin, pray do.


Non, non, your Servant, your Servant, Aunt.


But pray be not so positive, come hither, Daughter, tell me which is best.


Indeed, Father, you have kept me in universal ignorance, I know nothing.


And do you think I shall refer an Affair of dat consequence to a poor young
ting who have not see the World, da, I am wiser than so voto?


Well, in short, if you will not be wiser, and leave off your French Dress,
Stammering, and Tricks, look you, you shall be a Fool and go without my
Daughter, voto.


How, must I leave off my Janti Franch Accoutrements, and speak base Englis
too, or not marry my Cousin! mon Oncle Don Diego* Do not break off the Match,
do not; for know I will not leave off my Pantalloon and Franch Pronunciation
for never a Cousin in England't, da.


I tell you again, he that marry's my Daughter shall at least look like a wise
Man, for he shall wear the Spanish Habit, I am a Spanish Positivo.


Ver vel, ver vel! and I am a Franch Positivo.


Then I am Definitivo; and if you do not go immediately into your Chamber, and
put on a Spanish Habit, I have brought over on purpose for your Wedding
Clothes, and put off all these French Fopperies and Vanidades, with all your
Grimaces, Agreeables, Adorables, ma Foys, and Jernies. I swear you shall never
marry my Daughter (and by an Oath by Spaniard never broken) by my Whiskers and
Snuff-box.


O hold, do not swear, Uncle, for I love your Daughter furieusment.


If you love her, you'll obey me.


Auh, wat will become of me! but have the consideration, must I leave off all
the Franch Beautes, Graces, and Embellisements, boat of my Person and Language.


I will have it so.


I am ruinne den undonne, have some consideration for me, for dere is not the
least Ribbon of my Garniture, but is as dear to me as your Daughter, Jernie --


Then you do not deserve her, and for that reason I will be satisfied you love
her better, or you shall not have her, for I am positivo.


Will you break mine Art! pray have de consideration for me.


I say again, you shall be dressed before night from Top to Toe in the Spanish
Habit, or you shall never marry my Daughter, look you.


If you will not have de consideration for me, have de consideration for your
Daughter; for she have de passionate Amour for me, and like me in dis Habit
betre den in yours, da --


What I have said I have said, and I am uno Positivo.


Will you not so mush as allow me one little Franch Oate?


No, you shall look like a Spaniard, but speak and swear like an English man,
look you.


Helas, helas, den I shall take my leave, mort, teste, ventre, Jernie,
teste-bleu, ventre-bleu, ma foy, certes.


Pedro, Sanchez, wait upon this Cavaliero into his Chamber with those things I
ordered you to take out of the Trunks, I would have you a little accustomed to
your Clothes before your Wedding; for if you comply with me, you shall marry my
Daughter to morrow, look you.


Adieu then, dear Pantalloon! dear Belte! dear Sword! dear Perruque! and dear
Chappeaux, Retrousee, and dear Shoe, Jernie; adieu, adieu, adieu, helas, helas,
helas, will you have yet no pity.


I am a Spanish Positivo, look you.


And more cruel than de Spanish Inquisitiono, to compel a Man to a Habit
against his Conscience, helas, helas, helas.


Here is the Dancing-master, shall I call my Mistress, Sir?


Yes. O you are as punctual as a Spaniard: I love your punctual Men, nay, I
think 'tis before your time something.


Nay, I am resolved your Daughter, Sir, shall lose no time by my fault.


So, so, 'tis well.


I were a very unworthy Man, if I should not be punctual with her, Sir.


You speak honestly, very honestly, Friend; and I believe a very honest man,
though a Dancing-master.


I am very glad you think me so, Sir.


What you are but a Young-man, are you married yet?


No, Sir, but I hope I shall, Sir, very suddenly, if things hit right.


What the old Folks her Friends are wary, and cannot agree with you so soon as
the Daughter can?


Yes, Sir, the Father hinders it a little at present; but the Daughter I hope
is resolved, and then we shall do well enough.


What! you do not steal her, according to the laudable Custom of some of your
Brother Dancing-masters?


No, no, Sir, steal her, Sir, steal her, you are pleased to be merry, Sir, ha,
ha, ha. I cannot but laugh at that question.


No, Sir, methinks you are pleased to be merry; but you say the Father does not
consent.


Not yet, Sir; but 'twill be no matter whether he does or no.


Was she one of your Scholars? if she were, 'tis a hundred to ten but you steal
her.


I shall not be able to hold laughing.


Nay, nay, I find by your laughing you steal her, she was your Scholar, was she
not?


Yes, Sir, she was the first I ever had, and may be the last too; for she has a
Fortune (if I can get her) will keep me from teaching to dance any more.


So, so, then she is your Scholar still it seems, and she has a good Portion, I
am glad on it, nay, I knew you stole her.


My laughing may give him suspicions, yet I cannot hold.


What, you laugh I warrant to think how the young Baggage and you will mump the
poor old Father; but if all her dependence for a Fortune be upon the Father, he
may chance to mump you both, and spoil the Jest.


I hope it will not be in his power, Sir, ha, ha, ha.

I shall laugh too much anon.

Pray, Sir, be pleased to call for your Daughter, I am impatient till she
comes; for time was never more precious with me and with her too, it ought to
be so, sure, since you say she is to be married to morrow.


She ought to bestir her, as you say indeed, wuh, Daughter, Daughter, Prue,
Hippolita: Come away, Child, why do you stay so long?


Your Servant, Master! indeed I am ashamed you have stayed for me.


O good Madam, 'tis my Duty, I know you came as soon as you could.


I knew my Father was with you, therefore I did not make altogether so much
haste as I might; but if you had been alone, nothing should have kept me from
you, I would not have been so rude as to have made you stay a minute for me, I
warrant you.


Come, fidle, faddle, what a deal of Ceremony there is betwixt your
Dancing-master and you, Querno --


Lord, Sir, I hope you'll allow me to show my respect to my Master, for I have
a great respect for my Master.


And I am very proud of my Scholar, and am a very great Honourer of my Scholar.


Come, come, Friend, about your business, and honour the King. Your
Dancing-masters and Barbers are such finical smooth-tongu'd, tattling Fellows,
and if you set 'em once a talking, they'll never a done, no more than when you
set 'em a fiddling: indeed all that deal with Fiddles are given to impertinency.


Well! well! this is an impertinent Fellow, without being a Dancingmaster: he's
no more a Dancing-master than I am a Maid.


What! will you still be wiser than I? voto.

Come, come about with my Daughter, Man.


So he would, I warrant you, if your Worship would let him alone.


How now Mrs. Nimble-Chaps?


Well, though I have got a little Canting at the Dancing-School since I was
here, yet I do all so bunglingly, he'll discover me.


Try, come take my hand, Master.


Look you, Brother, the impudent Harletry gives him her hand.


Can he dance with her without holding her by the hand?


Here, take my hand, Master.


I wish it were for good and all.


You Dancing-masters are always so hasty, so nimble.


Voto a St. Jago, not that I can see, about, about with her, Man.


Indeed, Sir, I cannot about with her as I would do, unless you will please to
go out a little, Sir; for I see she is bashful still before you, Sir.


Hey, hey, more fooling yet, come, come, about with her.


Nay, indeed, Father, I am ashamed and cannot help it.


But you shall help it, for I will not stir: move her, I say begin Hussy, move
when he'll have you.


I cannot but laugh at that, ha, ha, ha,


Come then, Madam, since it must be so let us try, but I shall discover all,
One, two, and Coupee.


Nay de' see how he squeezes her hand, Brother, O the lewd Villain!


Come, move, I say, and mind her not.


One, two, three, four, and turn round.


De' see again he took her by the bare Arm.


Come, move on, she's mad.


One, two, and a Coupee.


Come, one, two, turn out your Toes.


There, there, he pinched her by the Thigh, will you suffer it?


One, two, three, and fall back.


Fall back, fall back, back, some of you are forward enough to fall back.


Back, Madam.


Fall back when he bids you, Hussy.


How! how! fall back, fall back, marry, but she shall not fall back when he
bids her.


I say she shall, Huswife, come.


She will, she will, I warrant you, Sir, if you won' be angry with her.


Do you know what he means by that now, you a Spaniard?


How's that, I not a Spaniard? say such a word again.


Come forward, Madam, three steps again.


See, see, she squeezes his hand now, O the debauched Harletry!


So, so, mind her not, she moves forward pretty well; but you must move as well
backward as forward, or you'll never do any thing to purpose.


Do you know what you say, Brother, your self now? are you at your beastliness
before your young Daughter?


Ha, ha, ha.


How now, Mistress, are you so merry? is this your staid Maid as you call her,
Sister impertinent?


I have not much to say to you, Miss; but I shall not have an opportunity to do
it, unless we can get your Father out.


Come about again with her.


Look you, there she squeezes his hand hard again.


Indeed and indeed, Father, my Aunt puts me quite out, I cannot dance while she
looks on for my heart, she makes me ashamed and afraid together.


Indeed if you would please to take her out, Sir, I am sure I should make my
Scholar do better, than when you are present, Sir, pray, Sir, be pleased for
this time to take her away; for the next time I hope I shall order it so, we
shall trouble neither of you.


No, no, Brother, stir not, they have a mind to be left alone. Come, there's a
beastly Trick in it: he's no Dancing-master I tell you.


Damned Jade, she'll discover us.


What will you teach me? nay then I will go out, and you shall go out too, look
you.


I will not go out, look you.


Come, come, thou art a censorious wicked Woman, and you shall disturb them no
longer.


What will you bawd for your Daughter?


Ay, ay, come go out, out, out.


I will not go out, I will not go out, my Conscience will not suffer me; for I
know by experience what will follow.


I warrant you, Sir, we'll make good use of our time when you are gone.


Do you hear him again, don't you know what he means?


'Tis very well, you are a fine Gentleman to abuse my poor Father so.


'Tis but by your Example, Miss.


Well I am his Daughter, and may m^ the bolder with him, I hope.


And I am his Son-in-law, that shall ^nd therefore may claim my Privilege too
of making bold with him, I hope.


Methinks you should be contented in making bold with his Daughter; for you
have made very bold with her, sure.


I hope I shall make bolder with her yet.


I do not doubt your confidence, for you are a Dancing-master.


Why, Miss? I hope you would not have me a fine senseless Whining, modest
Lover; for modesty in a Man is as ill as the want of it in a Woman.


I thank you for that, Sir, how you have made bold with me indeed; but if I am
such a confident Piece, I am sure you made me so; if you had not had the
confidence to come in at the Window, I had not had the confidence to look upon
a Man: I am sure I could not look upon a Man before.


But that I humbly conceive, sweet Miss, was your Fathers fault, because you
had not a Man to look upon. But, dearest Miss, I do not think you confident,
you are only innocent; for that which would be called confidence, nay impudence
in a Woman of years, is called innocence in one of your age; and the more
impudent you appear, the more innocent you are thought.


Say you so! has Youth such Privileges? I do not wonder then most Women seem
impudent, since it is to be thought younger than they are it seems; but indeed,
Master you are as great an Encourager of impudence I see, as if you were a
Dancing master in good earnest.


Yes, yes, a young thing may do anything, may leap out of the Window, and go
away with her Dancing-master, if she please.


So, so, the use follows the Doctrine very suddenly.


Well, Dearest, pray let us make the use we should of it, lest your Father
should make too bold with us, and come in before we would have him.


Indeed old Relations are apt to take that ill bred freedom of pressing into
young Company at unseasonable hours.


Come, dear Miss, let me tell you how I have designed matters; for in talking
of anything else we lose time and opportunity: people abroad indeed say the
English Women are the worst in the World in using an opportunity, they love
tittle tattle and Ceremony.


'Tis because I warrant opportunities are not so scarce here as abroad, they
have more here than they can use; but let people abroad say what they will of
English Women, because they do not know 'em, but what say people at home?


Pretty Innocent, ha, ha, ha. Well I say you will not make use of your
opportunity.


I say you have no reason to say so yet.


Well, then anon at nine of the Clock at night I'll try you; for I have already
bespoke a Parson, and have taken up the three back Rooms of the Tavern, which
front upon the Gallery-window, that nobody may see us escape, and I have
appointed (precisely betwixt eight and nine of the Clock when it is dark) a
Coach and Six to wait at the Tavern-door for us.


A Coach and Six, a Coach and Six, do you say? nay then I see you are resolved
to carry me away* for a Coach and Six, though there were not a Man but the
Coach-man with it, would carry*away any young Girl of my Age in England, a
Coach and Six!


Then you will be sure to be ready to go with me.


What young Woman of the Town could ever say no to a Coach and Six, unless it
were going into the Country: a Coach and Six, 'tis not in the power of fourteen
years old to resist it.


You will be sure to be ready?


You are sure 'tis a Coach and Six?


I warrant you, Miss.


I warrant you then they'll carry us merrily away* a Coach and Six?


But have you charmed your Cousin the Monsieur (as you said you would) that he
in the mean time say nothing to prevent us?


I warrant you.


I will come in.


Well, I hope by this time you have given her full instructions, you have told
her what and how to do, you have done all.


We have just done indeed, Sir.


Ay, Sir, we have just done, Sir.


And I fear just undone, Sir.


De' hear that damned Witch.


Come leave your censorious prating, thou hast been a false right Woman thy
self in thy Youth, I warrant you.


I right! I right! I scorn your words, I'd have you to know, and 'tis well
known. I right! no 'tis your dainty Minx, that Jillflirt your Daughter here
that is right, do you see how her Handkerchief is ruffled, and what a heat
she's in?


She has been dancing.


Ay, ay, Adam and Eve's Dance, or the beginning of the World, de' see how she
pants?


She has not been used to motion.


Motion, motion, motion de' call it? no indeed, I kept her from motion till
now, motion with a vengeance.


You put the poor bashful Girl to the blush, you see, hold your peace.


'Tis her guilt, not her modesty, marry.


Come, come, mind her not, Child, come, Master, let me see her dance now the
whole Dance roundly together, come sing to her.


Faith, we shall be discovered after all, you know I cannot sing a Note, Miss.


Come, come, Man.


Indeed, Father, my Master's In haste now, pray let it alone till anon at
night, when you say he is to come again, and then you shall se me dance it to
the Violin, pray stay till then, Father.


I will not be put off so, come begin.


Pray* Father.


Come, sing to her, come begin.


Pray, Sir, excuse me till anon, I am in some haste.


I say begin, I will not excuse you, come take her by the hand, and about with
her.


I say he shall not take her by the hand* he shall touch her no more; while I
am here there shall be no more squeezing and tickling her palm, good Mr.
Dancing-master, stand off.


Get you out, Mrs. Impertinence, take her by the hand, I say.


Stand off, I say, he shall not touch her, he has touched her too much already.


If patience were not a Spanish Virtue, I would lay it aside now. I say let 'em
dance.


I say they shall not dance.


Pray, Father, since you see my Aunts obstinacy, let us alone till anon, when
you may keep her out.


Well then, Friend, do not fail to come.


Nay, if he fail me at last.


Be sure you come, for she's to be married to morrow, do you know it?


Yes, yes, Sir, sweet Scholar, your humble Servant, till night, and think in
the mean time of the instructions I have given you, that you may be the readier
when I come.


I, Girl, be sure you do, and do you be sure to come.


You need not be so concerned, he'll be sure to come, I warrant you; but if I
could help it, he should never set foot again in the House.


You would frighten the poor Dancing-master from the House; but be sure you
come for all her.


Yes, Sir.

But this Jade will pay me when I am gone.


Hold, hold, Sir, I must let you out, and I wish I could keep you out. He a
Dancing-master, he's a Chouce, a Cheat, a mere Cheat, and that you'll find.


I find any Man a Cheat! I cheated by any Man! I scorn your words, I that have
so much Spanish Care, Circumspection, and Prudence, cheated by a Man: do you
think I who have been in Spain, look you, and have kept up my Daughter a
twelve-month, for fear of being cheated of her, look you? I cheated of her!


Well, say no more.


Well, old Formality, if you had not kept up your Daughter, I am sure I had
never cheated you of her.

The wary Fool is by his care betrayed,
As Cuckolds by their Jealousy are made.

TO see wat a Fool Love do make of one, Jernie. It do metamorphose de brave Man
into de Beast, de Sotte, de Animal.


Ha, ha, ha.


Nay, you may laugh, 'tis ver vel, I am become as ridicule for you as can be,
mort-blue. I have deform my self into an ugly Spaniard.


Why, do you call this disguising your self like a Spaniard while you wear
Pantalloons still and the Cravat.


But is here not the double Doublet and the Spanish Dagger aussy.


But 'tis as long as the French Sword, and worn like it. But where's your
Spanish Beard, the thing of most consequence?


Jernie, do you think Beards are as easy to be had as in de Play-houses, non;
but if here be no the ugly-long- Spanish Beard, here are, I am certain, the
ugly* long- Spanish Ear.


That's very true, ha, ha, ha.


Auh de ingrate! dat de Woman is, when we poor men are your Gallants you laugh
at us your selves, and wen we are your Husbands, you make all the World laugh
at us, Jernie. Love, dam Love, it make the man more ridicule than Poverty,
Poetry, or a new Title of Honeur, Jernie.


What at your Jernies still? voto.


Why, Oncle, you are at your voto's still.


Nay, I'll allow you to be at your voto's too, but not to make the incongruous
Match of Spanish Doublet and French Pantalloons.


Nay, pray dear Oncle, let me unite France and Spain, 'tis the Mode of France
now, Jarnie, voto.


Well, I see I must pronounce, I told you, if you were not dressed in the Spanish
Habit to night, you should not marry my Daughter to morrow, look you.


Well, am I not habiliee in de Spanish Habit, my Doublet, Ear, and Hat, Leg and
Feet are Spanish, that they are.


I told you I was a Spanish Positivo, voto.


Will you not spare my Pantalloon (begar) I will give you one little finger to
excuse my Pantalloon, da --


I have said, look you.


Auch chere Pantalloons, speak for my Pantalloons, Cousin, my poor Pantalloons
are as dear to me as de Scarff to de Country Captain, or de new made
Officer; therefore have de compassion for my Pantalloons, Don Diego, mon Oncle,
helas, helas, helas.


I have said, look you, your Dress must be Spanish, and your Language English,
I am uno Positivo.


And must speak base good English too, ah la pitiee, helas.


It must be done, and I will see this great change ever it be dark, voto --
your time is not long, look to it, look you.


Helas, helas, helas, dat Espaigne should conquer la France in England, helas,
helas, helas.


You see what pains I take to make him the more agreeable to you, Daughter.


But indeed and indeed, Father, you wash the Black-a-more white, in
endeavouring to make a Spaniard of a Monsieur, nay an English Monsieur too,
consider that, Father; for when once they have taken the French ply (as they
call it) they are never to be made so much as English men again, I have heard
say.


What, I warrant, you are like the rest of the young silly Baggages of England,
that like nothing but what is French. You would not have him reformed, you
would have a Monsieur to your Husband, would you, Querno?


No indeed, Father, I would not have a Monsieur to my Husband, not I indeed,
and I am sure you'll never make my Cousin otherwise.


I warrant you.


You can't, you can't, indeed, Father: and you have sworn, you know, he shall
never have me, if he does not leave off his Monsieurship. Now as I told you,
'tis as hard for him to cease being a Monsieur, as 'tis for you to break a
Spanish Oath, so that I am not in any great danger of having a Monsieur to my
Husband.


Well; but you shall have him for your Husband, look you.


Then you will break your Spanish Oath.


No, I will break him of his French Tricks, and you shall have him for your
Husband, Querno.


Indeed and indeed, Father, I shall not have him.


Indeed you shall, Daughter.


Well, you shall see, Father.


No I warrant you, she will not have him, she'll have her Dancingmaster rather:
I know her meaning, I understand her.


Thou malicious foolish Woman, you understand her! but I do understand her, she
says I will not break my Oath, nor he his French Customs, so through our
difference she thinks she shall not have him, but she shall.


But I shall not.


I know she will not have him, because she hates him.


I tell you, if she does hate him, 'tis a sign she will have him for her
Husband; for 'tis not one of a thousand that marries the man she loves, look
you. Besides, 'tis all one whether she loves him now or not; for as soon as
she's married, she'd be sure to hate him: that's the reason we wise Spaniards
are jealous and only expect, nay will be sure our Wives shall fear us, look
you.


Pray, good Father and Aunt, do not dispute about nothing, for I am sure he
will never be my Husband to hate.


I am of your opinion indeed, I understand you, I can see as far as another.


You, you cannot see so much as through your Spectacles, but I understand her,
'tis her mere desire to Marriage makes her say she shall not have him; for your
poor young things, when they are once in the teens, think they shall never be
married.


Well, Father, think you what you will, but I know what I think.


Come, did not I tell you, you should have him, look you there, he has complied
with me, and is a perfect Spaniard.


Ay, ay, I am ugly Rogue enough, now sure, for my Cousin; but 'tis your
Father's fault, Cousin, that you have not the handsomest best dressed man in the
Nation, a man be in mise.


Yet again at your French? and a Cravat on still (voto a St. Jago) off, off
with*


Nay I will ever hereafter speak clownish good English, do but spare me my
Cravat*


I am uno Positivo, look you.


Let me not put on that Spanish Yoke, but spare me my Cravat; for I love Cravat
furiesment.


Again at your Furiesments!


Indeed I have forgot my self, but have some mercy.


Off, off, off with it I say, come refuse the Ornamento principal of the
Spanish Habit.


Will you have no mercy, no pity, alas, alas, alas, Oh I had rather put on the
English Pillory than this Spanish Golilia, for 'twill be all a case I'm sure;
for when I go abroad, I shall soon have a Crowd of Boys about me, peppering me
with rotten Eggs and Turnips, helas, helas.


Helas again?


Alas, alas, alas.


I shall dye; ha, ha, ha.


I shall burst, ha, ha, ha.


Ay, ay, you see what I am come to for your sake; Cousin and Uncle, pray take
notice how ridiculous I am grown to my Cousin that loves me above all the
World? she can no more forbear laughing at me, I vow and swear, than if I were
as arrant a Spaniard as your self.


Be a Spaniard like me, and never think people laugh at you: there was never a
Spaniard that thought any one laughed at him; but what do you laugh at a
Golilia, Baggage? Come, Sirrah-Black, now do you teach him to walk with the
verdadero gesto, gracia, and Gravidad of a true Castilian.


Must I have my Dancing-master too? come little Master then, lead on.


Malo, malo, with your Hat on your Pole, as if it hung upon a Pin; the French
and English wear their Hats, as if their Horns would not suffer 'em to come
over their Foreheads, voto --


'Tis true, there are some well-bred Gentlemen have so much Reverence for their
Perruque, that they would refuse to be Grandees of your Spain, for fear of
putting on their Hats, I vow and swear.


Come, Black, teach him now to make a Spanish Leg.


Ha, ha, ha, your Spanish Leg is an English Curtsy, I vow and swear, hah,
hah, ha.


Well, the Hood does not make the Monk, the Ass was an Ass still, though he had
the Lyons Skin on; this will be a light French Fool, in spite of the grave
Spanis. Habit, look you. But, Black, do what you can, make the most of him,
walk him about.


Here are the people, Sir, you sent to speak with about Provisions for the
Wedding, and here are your Clothes brought home too, Mistress.


Well, I come: Black, do what you can with him, walk him about.


Indeed, Uncle, if I were as you, I would not have the grave Spanish Habit so
travesty'd, I shall disgrace it and my little Black Master too, I vow and
swear.


Learn, learn of him, improve your self by him, and do you walk him, walk him
about soundly. Come, Sister and Daughter, I must have your Judgments, though I
shall not need 'em, look you, walk him, see you walk him.


Jernie, he does not only make a Spaniard of me, but a Spanish Jennit, in
giving me to his Lackey to walk; but come a long, little Master.


O the unfortunate condition of us poor Chamber-maids, who have all the carking
and caring, the watching and sitting up, the trouble and danger of our
Mistresses Intrigues! whilst they go away with all the pleasure; and if they
can get their Man in a corner, 'tis well enough, they never think of the poor
watchful Chamber-maid, who sits knocking her heels in the cold, for want of
better exercise in some melancholy Lobby or Entry, when she could employ her
time every whit as well as her Mistress for all her Quality, if she were but
put to it.


Hold up your head, hold up your head, Sir, a stooping Spaniard, Malo.


True, a Spaniard scorns to look upon the ground.


We can shift for our Mistresses, and not for our selves, mine has got a
handsome proper Young-man, and is just going to make the most of him, whilst I
must be left in the Lurch here with a Couple of ugly little Black-a-more Boys
in Bonnets, and an old withered Spanish Eunuch, not a Servant else in the
House, nor have I hopes of any comfortable Society at all.


Now let me see you make your Visit-Leg thus.


Auh, teste non, ha, ha, ha.


What, a Spaniard, and laugh aloud! no; if you laugh thus only so -- now your
Salutation in the street as you pass by your Acquaintance, look you, thus -- if
to a Woman, thus, putting your Hat upon your heart; if to a man, thus with a
nod, so -- but frown a little more, frown. But if to a Woman you would be very
ceremonious too, thus -- so -- your Neck nearer your shoulder, so -- Now if you
wou'd-speak contemptibly of any man or thing, do thus with your hand -- so --
and shrug up your shoulders, till they hide your Ears. Now walk again.


All my hopes are in that Coxcomb there; I must take up with my Mistresses
leavings, though we Chamber-maids are wont to be before-hand with them: but he
is the dullest, modestest Fool, for a Frenchisi'd Fool, as ever I saw; for no
body could be more coming to him than I have been (though I say it) and yet I
am never the nearer. I have stolen away his Handkerchief, and told him of it,
and yet he would never so much as struggle with me to get it again. I have
pulled off his Perruque, untied his Ribbons, and have been very bold with him,
yet he would never be so with me; nay, I have pinched him, punched him, and
tickled him, and yet he would never do the like for me.


Nay, thus, thus, Sir.


And to make my person more acceptable to him, I have used Art, as they say;
for every night since he came, I have worn the Forehead-piece of Bees wax and
Hogs-grease, and every morning washed with Butter-milk and wild Tansie, and
have put on every day for his only sake my Sunday's Bow-dy-Stockins, and have
new chalked my Shoes, and's constantly as the morning came; nay, I have taken
an occasion to garter my Stockings before him, as if unawares of him; for a
good Leg and Foot, with good Shoes and Stockings, are very provoking, as they
say, but the Devil a bit would he be provoked; but I must think of a way.


Thus, thus.


What so -- well, well, I have Lessons enough for this time. Little Master, I
will have no more, lest the multiplicity of'em make me forget'em, da -- Prue,
art thou there, and so pensive? what art thou thinking of?


Indeed I am ashamed to tell your Worship.


What ashamed! were it thou thinking then of my beastliness? ha, ha, ha.


Nay, then I am forced to tell your Worship in my own vindication.


Come then.


But indeed your Worship -- I'm ashamed that I am, though it was nothing but a
dream I had of your sweet Worship last night.


Of my sweet Worship! I warrant it was a sweet dream then, what was it? ha, ha,
ha.


Nay, indeed I have told your Worship enough already, you may guess the rest.


I cannot guess, ha, ha, ha, what should it be? prithee let's know the rest.


Would you have me so impudent?


Impudent! ha, ha, ha, nay prithee tell me, for I can't guess, da --


Nay, tis always so; for want of the men's guessing, the poor Women are forced
to be impudent, but I am still ashamed.


I will know it, speak.


Why then methoughts last night you came up into my Chamber in your Shirt, when
I was in Bed, and that you might easily do; for I have never a Lock to my door:
now I warrant I am red as my Petticoat.


No, you're as yellow as ever thou were.


Yellow, Sir!


Ay, ay; but let's hear the Dream out.


Why, can't you guess the rest now?


No not I, I vow and swear, come let's hear.


But can't you guess in earnest?


Not I, the Devil eat me.


Not guess yet! why then methoughts you came to bed to me? Now am I as red as
my Petticoat again.


Ha, ha, ha, well, and what then? ha, ha, ha.


Nay, now I know by your Worship's laughing, you guess what you did: I'm sure I
cried out, and waked all in tears, with these words in my mouth, You have
undone me, you have undone me! your Worship has undone me.


Hah, ha, ha; but you waked and found it was but a Dream.


Indeed it was so lively, I know not whether 'twas a Dream or no: but if you
were not there, I'll undertake you may come when you will, and do any thing to
me you will, I sleep so fast.


No, no, I don't believe that.


Indeed you may, your Worship --


It cannot be.


Insensible Beast! he will not understand me yet, and one would think I speak
plain enough.


Well, but Prue, what art thou thinking of?


Of the Dream, whether it were a Dream or no.


'Twas a Dream I warrant thee.


Was it? I am hugeous glad it was a Dream.


Ay, ay, it was a Dream; and I am hugeous glad it was a Dream too.


But now I have told your Worship, my door hath neither Lock nor Latch to it:
if you should be so naughty as to come one night, and prove the dream true -- I
am so afraid on it.


Never fear it, dreams go by the contraries.


Then by that I should come into your Worship's Chamber, and come to bed to
your Worship. Now am I as red as my Petticoat again, I warrant.


No, thou art no redder than a Brick unburnt, Prue.


But if I should do such a trick in my sleep, your Worship would not censure a
poor harmless Maid, I hope; for I am apt to walk in my sleep.


Well then, Prue, because thou shalt not shame thy self (poor Wench) I'll be
sure to lock my door every night fast.


So, so, this way I find will not do, I must come roundly and down-right to the
business, like other Women, or --


O the Dancing-master!


Dear Sir, I have something to say to you in your Ear, which I am ashamed to
speak aloud.


Another time, another time, Prue, but now go call your Mistress to her
Dancing-master, go, go.


Nay, pray hear me, Sir, first.


Another time, another time, Prue, prithee be gone.


Nay, I beseech your Worship hear me.


No, prithee be gone.


Nay, I am even well enough served for not speaking my mind when I had an
opportunity. Well, I must be playing the modest Woman, forsooth; a Woman's
hypocrisy in this case does only deceive her self.


O the brave Dancing-master, the fine Dancing-master, your Servant, your
Servant.


Your Servant, Sir, I protest I did not know you at first. I am afraid this
Fool should spoil all, notwithstanding Hippolita's care and management, yet I
ought to trust her; but a Secret is more safe with a treacherous Knave than a
talkative Fool.


Come, Sir, you must know a little Brother Dancing-master of yours,
Walking-master I should have said; for he teaches me to walk and make Legs by
the bye: Pray know him, Sir, salute him, Sir; you Christian Dancing-masters are
so proud.


But, Monsieur, what strange Metamorphosis is this? you look like a Spaniard,
and talk like an English-man again, which I thought had been impossible.


Nothing impossible to Love, I must do it, or lose my Mistress your pretty
Scholar, for 'tis I am to have her; you may remember I told you she was to be
married to a great man, a man of Honour and Quality.


But does she enjoin you to this severe penance, such I am sure it is to you.


No, no, 'tis by the compulsion of the starched Fop her Father, who is so
arrant a Spaniard, he would kill you and his Daughter, if he knew who you were;
therefore have a special care to dissemble well.


I warrant you.


Dear Gerrard, go little Master and call my Cousin, tell her, her
Dancing-master is here.

I say, Dear Gerrard, Faith I'm obliged to you for the trouble you have had:
when I sent you, I intended a Jest indeed, but did not think it would have been
so dangerous a Jest; therefore pray forgive me.


I do, do heartily forgive you


But can you forgive me, for sending you at first, like a Fool as I was, 'twas
ill done of me; can you forgive me?


Yes, yes, I do forgive you.


Well, thou art a generous man, I vow and swear, to come and take upon you this
trouble, danger, and shame, to be thought a paltry Dancingmaster, and all this
to preserve a Ladies honour and life, who intended to abuse you; but I take the
obligation upon me.


Pish, pish, you are not obliged to me at all.


Faith but I am strangely obliged to you.


Faith but you are not.


I vow and swear but I am.


I swear you are not.


Nay, thou art so generous a Dancing-master -- ha, ha, ha.


You shall not come in, Sister.


I will come in.


You will not be civil.


I'm sure they will not be civil, if I do not come in, I must, I will.


Well, honest Friend, you are very punctual, which is a rare Virtue in a
Dancing-master, I take notice of it, and will remember it, I will, look you.


So silly-damn'd-politick Spanish Uncle, ha, ha, ha.


My fine Scholar, Sir, there, shall never have reason (as I told you) Sir, to
say I am not a punctual man, for I am more her Servant than to any Scholar I
ever had.


Well said, ^'faith, thou dost make a pretty Fool of him, I vow and swear; but
I wonder people can be made such Fools of, ha, ha, ha.


Well, Master, I thank you, and I hope I shall be a grateful kind Scholar to
you.


Ha, ha, ha, cunning little Jilt, what a Fool she makes of him too: I wonder
people can be made such Fools of, I vow and swear, ha, ha, ha.


Indeed it shall go hard but I'll be a grateful kind Scholar to you.


As kind as ever your Mother was to your Father, I warrant.


How; again with your senseless suspicions.


Pish, pish, Aunt, ha, ha, ha, she's a Fool another way; she thinks she loves
him, ha, ha, ha. Lord, that people should be such Fools!


Come, come, I cannot but speak, I tell you beware in time; for he is no
Dancing-master, but some debauched person who will mump you of your Daughter.


Will you be wiser than I still? Mump me of my Daughter! I would I could see
any one mump me of my Daughter.


And mump you of your Mistress too, young Spaniard.


Ha, ha, ha, will you be wiser than I too, voto. Mump me of my Mistress! I
would I could see any one mump me of my Mistress.

I am afraid this damned old Aunt should discover us, I vow and swear; be
careful therefore and resolute.


He, he does not go about his business like a Dancing-master, he'll never teach
her to dance, but he'll teach her no goodness soon enough I warrant: he a
Dancing-master!


I, the Devil eat me, if he be not the best Dancing-master in England now. Was
not that well said, Cousin? was it not? for he's a Gentleman Dancing-master,
you know.


You know him, Cousin, very well, Cousin, you sent him to my Daughter?


Yes, yes, Uncle, know him!

We'll never be discovered, I warrant, ha, ha, ha.


But will you be made a Fool of too?


Ay, ay, Aunt, never trouble your self.


Come, Friend, about your business, about with my Daughter.


Nay, pray, Father, be pleased to go out a little, and let us but practise a
while, and then you shall see me dance the whole Dance to the Violin.


Tittle, tattle, more fooling still! did not you say when your Master was here
last, I should see you dance to the Violin when he came again.


So I did, Father; but let me practise a little first before, that I may be
perfect. Besides, my Aunt is here, and she will put me out, you know I cannot
dance before her.


Fiddle, faddle.


They're afraid to be discovered by Gerard's bungling, I see. Come, come,
Uncle, turn out, let 'em practise.


I won't (voto a St. Jago) what a fooling's here?


Come, come, let 'em practise, turn out, turn out, Uncle.


Why, can't she practise it before me?


Come, Dancers and Singers are sometimes humorsom; besides, 'twill be more
grateful to you, to see it danced all at once to the Violin. Come, turn out,
turn out, I say.


What a fooling's here still amongst you, voto?


So there he is with you, voto, turn out, turn out, I vow and swear you shall
turn out.


Well, shall I see her dance it to the Violin at last?


Yes, yes, Sir, what do you think I teach her for?


Go, go, turn out, and you too, Aunt.


Seriously, Nephew, I shall not budge, royally I shall not.


Royally you must, Aunt, come.


Pray hear me, Nephew.


I will not hear you.


'Tis for your sake I stay, I must not suffer you to be wronged.


Come, no wheedling, Aunt, come away.


That slippery Fellow will do it.


Let him do it.


Indeed he will do it, royally he will.


Well let him do it, royally.


He will wrong you.


Well, let him, I say, I have a mind to be wronged, what's that to you, I will
be wronged, if you go thereto, I vow and swear.


You shall not be wronged.


I will.


You shall not.


What's the matter? won't she be ruled? come, come away, you shall not disturb
'em.


De' see how they laugh at you both, well go to, the Troth telling Trojan
Gentlewoman of old was never believed, till the Town was taken, rummaged, and
ransak'd, even even so --


Hah, hah, ha, turn out. Lord, that people should be such arrant Cuddens, ha,
ha, ha; But I may stay, may I not?


No, no, I'd have you go out and hold the door, Cousin, or else my Father will
come in again before his time.


I will, I will then, sweet Cousin, 'twas well thought on, that was well
thought on indeed for me to hold the door.


But be sure you keep him out, Cousin, till we knock.


I warrant you, Cousin, Lord, that people should be made such Fools of, ha, ha,
ha.


So, so, to make him hold the door, while I steal his Mistress is not
unpleasant.


Ay, but would you do so ill a thing, so treacherous a thing? Faith 'tis not
well.


Faith I can't help it. Since 'tis for your sake, come, Sweetest, is not this
our way into the Gallery?


Yes, but it goes against my Conscience to be accessory to so ill a thing; you
say you do it for my sake?


Alas, poor Miss! 'tis not against your Conscience, but against your modesty,
you think to do it frankly.


Nay, if it be against my modesty too, I can't do it indeed.


Come, come, Miss, let us make haste, all's ready.


Nay, Faith, I can't satisfy my scruple.


Come, Dearest, this is not a time for scruples nor modesty; modesty between
Lovers is as impertinent as Ceremony between Friends, and modesty is now as
unseasonable as on the Wedding night: come away, my Dearest.


Whither?


Nay sure, we have lost too much time already: Is that a proper Question now?
if you would know, come along, for I have all ready.


But I am not ready.


Truly, Miss, we shall have your Father come in upon us, and prevent us again,
as he did in the morning.


'Twas well for me he did; for on my Conscience if he had not come in, I had
gone clear away with you when I was in the humour.


Come, Dearest, you would frighten me as if you were not yet in the same
humour. Come, come away, the Coach and Six is ready.


'Tis too late to take the Air, and I am not ready.


You were ready in the morning.


I, so I was.


Come, come, Miss, indeed the Jest begins to be none.


What, I warrant you think me in jest then?


In jest, certainly, but it begins to be troublesome


But, Sir, you could believe I was in earnest in the morning, when I but seemed
to be ready to go with you; and why won't you believe me now, when I declare to
the contrary? I take it unkindly, that the longer I am acquainted with you, you
should have the less confidence in me.


For Heaven's sake, Miss, lose no more time thus, your Father will come in upon
us, as he did --


Let him, if he will.


He'll hinder our design.


No, he will not, for mine is to stay here now.


Are you in earnest?


You'll find it so.


How! why you confessed but now you would have gone with me in the morning.


I was in the humour then.


And I hope you are in the same still, you cannot change so soon.


Why, is it not a whole day ago?


What, are you not a day in the same humour?


Lord! that you who know the Town (they say) should think any Woman could be a
whole day together in an humour, ha, ha, ha.


Hey! this begins to be pleasant: What, won't you go with me then after all?


No indeed, Sir, I desire to be excused.


Then you have abused me all this while?


It may be so.


Could all that so natural Innocence be dissembled? Faith it could not, dearest
Miss.


Faith it was, dear Master.


Was it, faith?


Methinks you might believe me without an Oath: you saw I could dissemble with
my Father, why should you think I could not with you?


So young a Wheadle?


Ay, a mere damned Jade I am.


And I have been abused, you say?


'Tis well you can believe it at last.


And I must never hope for you?


Would you have me abuse you again?


Then you will not go with me?


No; but for your comfort your loss will not be great, and that you may not
resent it, for once I'll be ingenuous and disabuse you; I am no Heiress, as I
told you to twelve hundred pound a year. I was only a lying Jade then, now you
will part with me willingly I doubt not.


I wish I could.


Come, now I find 'tis your turn to dissemble; but men use to dissemble for
money, will you dissemble for nothing?


'Tis too late for me to dissemble.


Don't you dissemble, faith?


Nay, this is too cruel.


What, would you take me without the twelve hundred pound a year? would you be
such a Fool as to steal a Woman with nothing?


I'll convince you, for you shall go with me; and since you are twelve hundred
pound a year the lighter, you'll be the easier carried away.


What, he takes her away against her will, I find I must knock for my Master
then.


My Father, my Father is here.


Prevented again!


What, you have done I hope now, Friend, for good and all?


Yes, yes, we have done for good and all indeed.


How now! you seem to be out of humour, Friend.


Yes, so I am, I can't help it.


He's a Dissembler in his very Throat, Brother.


Pray do not carry things so as to discover your self, if it be but for my
sake, good Master.


She is grown impudent.


See, see, they whisper, Brother, to steal a Kiss under a Whisper, O the
Harletry!


What's the matter, Friend?


I say for my sake be in humour, and do not discover your self, but be as
patient as a Dancing-master still.


What, she is whispering to him indeed! what's the matter? I will know it,
Friend, look you.


Will you know it?


Yes, I will know it.


Why, if you will know it, then she would not do as I would have her, and
whispered me to desire me not to discover it to you.


What, Hussy, would you not do as he'd have you! I'll make you do as he'd have
you.


I wish you would.


'Tis a lye, she'll do all he'll have her do, and more too, to my knowledge.


Come, tell me what 'twas then she would not do, come do it, Hussy, or -- Come,
take her by the hand, Friend, come, begin, let's see if she will not do any
thing now I am here.


Come, pray be in humour, Master.


I cannot dissemble like you.


What, she can't dissemble already, can she?


Yes but she can, but 'tis with you she dissembles; for they are not fallen
out, as we think, for I'll be sworn I saw her just now give him the languishing
Eye, as they call it, that is, the Whitings Eye, of old called the Sheeps Eye.
I'll be sworn I saw it with these two Eyes, that I did.


You'll betray us, have a care, good Master.


Hold your peace, I say, silly Woman.


But does she dissemble already? how do you mean?


She pretends she can't do what she should do, and that she is not in humour,
the common Excuse of Women for not doing what they should do.


Come, I'll put her in humour; dance; I say, come, about with her, Master.


I am in a pretty humour to dance.

I cannot fool any longer, since you have fooled me.


You would not be so ungenerous, as to betray the Woman that hated you, I do
not do that yet; for Heaven's sake for this once be more obedient to my desires
than your passion.


What is she humoursom still? But methinks you look your self as if you were in
an ill humour; but about with her.


I am in no good Dancing humour indeed.


Well, how goes the Dancing forward? what my Aunt here to disturb 'em again?


Come, come.


I say stand off, thou shalt not come near, avoid, Satan, as they say.


Nay then we shall have it, Nephew, hold her a little, that she may not disturb
'em, come, now away with her.


One, two, and a Coupee.

Fooled and abused.


Wilt thou lay violent hands upon thy own natural Aunt, Wretch?


Come, about with her.


One, two, three, four, and turn round.

By such a piece of Innocence.


Dost thou see, Fool, how he squeezes her hand?


That won't do, Aunt.


Pray, Master, have patience, and let's mind our business.


Why did you anger him then, Hussy, look you?


Do you see how she smiles in his face, and squeezes his hand now?


Your Servant, Aunt, that won't do, I say.


Have patience, Master.


I am become her sport, one, two, three, Death, Hell, and the Devil.


Ay, they are three indeed; but pray have patience.


Do you see how she leers upon him and clings to him, can you suffer it?


Ay, ay.


One, two, and a slur; can you be so unconcerned after all?


What, is she unconcerned! Hussy, mind your business.


One, two, three, and turn round, one, two, fall back, Hell and Damnation.


Ay, people fall back indeed into Hell and Damnation, Heaven knows.


One, two, three, and your Honour: I can fool no longer.


Nor will I be withheld any longer like a poor Hen in her Pen, while the Kite
is carrying away her Chicken before her face.


What have you done? Well then let's see her dance it now to the Violin.


Ay, ay, let's see her dance it to the Violin.


Another time, another time.


Don't you believe that, Friend; these Dancing-masters make no bones of
breaking their words. Did not you promise just now I should see her dance it to
the Violin, and that I will too, before I stir.


Let Monsieur play then while I dance with her, she can't dance alone.


I can't play at all, I'm but a Learner; but if you'll play, I'll dance with
her.


I can't play neither.


What a Dancing-master, and not play!


Ay, you see what a Dancing-master he is. 'Tis as I told you, I warrant: A
Dancing-master, and not play upon the Fiddle!


How!


O you have betrayed us all! if you confess that, you undo us for ever.


I cannot play, what would you have me say?


I vow and swear we are all undone, if you cannot play.


What, are you a Dancing-master, and cannot play! umph --


He is only out of humour, Sir; here, Master, I know you will play for me yet,
for he has an excellent hand.


Ay, that he has.

At giving a box on the Ear.


Why does he not play then?


Here, Master, pray play for my sake.


What would you have me do with it? I cannot play a stroke.


No, stay then, seem to tune it, and break the strings.


Come then.

Next to the Devil's the Invention of Women, they'll no more want an excuse to
cheat a Father with, than an opportunity to abuse a Husband.

But what do you give me such a damned Fiddle with rotten strings for?


Hey-day, the Dancing-master is frantic.


Ha, ha, ha, that people should be made such Fools of.


He broke the strings on purpose, because he could not play, you are blind,
Brother.


What, will you see further than I? look you.


But pray, Master, why in such haste?


Because you have done with me.


But don't you intend to come to morrow again?


Your Daughter does not desire it.


No matter, I do, I must be your pay Master I'm sure, I would have you come
betimes too, not only to make her perfect; but since you have so good a hand
upon the Violin to play your part with half a dozen of Musicians more, whom I
would have you bring with you; for we will have a very merry Wedding, though a
very private one; you'll be sure to come?


Your Daughter does not desire it.


Come, come, Baggage, you shall desire it of him, he is your Master.


My Father will have me desire it of you, it seems.


But you'll make a Fool of me again: if I should come, would you not?


If I should tell you so, you'd be sure not to come.


Come, come, she shall not make a Fool of you, upon my word: I'll secure you,
she shall do what you'll have her.


Ha, ha, ha, so, so, silly Don.


But, Madam, will you have me come?


I'd have you to know for my part, I care not whether you come or no; there are
other Dancing-masters to be had, it is my Fathers request to you: all that I
have to say to you, is a little good advice, which (because I will not shame
you) I'll give you in private.


What, will you let her whisper with him too?


Nay, if you find fault with it, they shall whisper; though I did not like it
before, I'll have no body wiser than my self; but do you think if 'twere any
hurt, she would whisper it to him before us?


If it be no hurt, why does she not speak aloud?


Because she says she will not put the man out of Countenance.


Hey-day, put a Dancing-master out of countenance!


You say he is no Dancing-master.


Yes, for his impudence, he may be a Dancing-master.


Well, well, let her whisper before me as much as she will to night, since she
is to be married to morrow, especially since her Husband that shall be stands
by consenting too.


Ay, ay, let 'em whisper (as you say) as much as they will before we marry.
She's making more sport with him, I warrant; but I wonder how people can be
fooled so, ha, ha, ha.


Well, a Penny for the secret, Daughter.


Indeed, Father, you shall have it for nothing to morrow.


Well, Friend, you will not fail to come.


No, no, Sir.

Yet I am a Fool, if I do.


And be sure you bring the Fiddlers with you, as I bid you.


Yes, be sure you bring the Fiddlers with you, as I bid you.


So, so, He'll fiddle your Daughter out of the House, must you have Fiddles,
with a fiddle, faddle.


Lord! that people should be made such Fools of, hah, hah.


Fortune we sooner may than Woman trust
To her considering Gallant she is just;
But falser Woman only him deceives,
Who to her Tongue and Eyes most credit gives.

GOod morrow to thee, noble Dancing-master, ha, ha, ha, your little black
Brother here, my Master, I see, is the more diligent man of the two; but why do
you come so late? what you begin to neglect your Scholar, do you? Little black
Master ( con Licentia) pray get you out of the Room.

What, out of humour, Man! a Dancing-master should be like his Fiddle, always
in Tune. Come, my Cousin has made an Ass of thee, what then, I know it.


Does he know it?


But prithee don't be angry, 'twas agreed upon betwixt us, before I sent you,
to make a Fool of thee, ha, ha, ha.


Was it so?


I knew you would be apt to entertain vain hopes from the Summons of a Lady;
but faith the design was but to make a Fool of thee, as you find.


'Tis very well.


But indeed I did not think the Jest would have lasted so long, and that my
Cousin would have made a Dancing-master of you, ha, ha, ha.


The Fool has reason, I find, and I am the Coxcomb while I thought him so.


Come, I see you are uneasy, and the Jest of being a Dancing-master grows
tedious to you; but have a little patience, the Parson is sent for, and when
once my Cousin and I are married, my Uncle may know who you are.


I am certainly abused.


What do you say?


Merely fooled.


Why do you doubt it? ha, ha, ha.


Can it be?


Pish, pish, she told me yesterday as soon as you were gone, that she had led
you into a Fools Paradise, and made you believe she would go away with you, ha,
ha, ha.


Did she so? I am no longer to doubt it then?


Ay, ay, she makes a mere Fool of thee, I vow and swear; but don't be
concerned, there's hardly a man of a thousand but has been made a Fool of by
some Woman or other: I have been made a Fool of my self, man, by the Women, I
have, I vow and swear, I have.


Well, you have, I believe it, for you are a Coxcomb.


Lord! you need not be so touchy with one, I tell you but the truth for your
good, for though she does, I would not fool you any longer; but prithee don't
be troubled at what can't be helped. Women are made on purpose to fool men;
when they are Children, they fool their Fathers; and when they have taken their
leaves of their Hanging-sleeves, they fool their Gallants or Dancing-masters,
ha, ha, ha.


Hark you, Sir, to be fooled by a Woman you say is not to be helped; but I will
not be fooled by a Fool.


You show your English breeding now, an English Rival is so dull and brutish as
not to understand raillery, but what is spoken in your passion, I'll take no
notice of, for I am your Friend, and would not have you my Rival to make your
self ridiculous. Come, prithee, prithee, don't be so concerned; for as I was
saying, Women first fool their Fathers, then their Gallants, and then their
Husbands; so that it will be my turn to be fooled too; (for your comfort) and
when they come to be Widows, they would fool the Devil I vow and swear. Come,
come, dear Gerard, prithee don't be out of humour and look so sillily.


Prithee do not talk so sillily.


Nay, faith I am resolved to beat you out of this ill humour.


Faith, I am afraid I shall first beat you into an ill humour.


Ha, ha, ha, that thou should be gulled so by a little Gypsy, who left off
her Bib but yesterday; faith I can't but laugh at thee.


Faith then I shall make your mirth (as being too violent) conclude in some
little mis-fortune to you. The Fool begins to be tyrannical.


Ha, ha, ha, poor angry Dancing-Master; prithee match my Spanish pumps and legs
with one of your best and newest Sarabands; ha, ha, ha, come --


I will match your Spanish Ear, thus, Sir, and make you Dance thus.


How! sa, sa, sa, then I'll make you Dance thus.

Hold, hold a little: A desperate disappointed Lover will cut his own throat,
then sure he will make nothing of cutting his Rivals throat.


Consideration is an Enemy to fighting; if you have a mind to revenge your
self, your Sword's in your hand.


Pray, Sir, hold your peace; I'll never take my Rivals counsel be it what
'twill, I know what you would be at; you are disappointed of your Mistress, and
could hang yourself, and therefore will not fear hanging; but I am a successful
Lover, and need neither hang for you nor my Mistress; nay, if I should kill
you, I know I should do you a kindness; therefore even live to die daily with
envy of my happiness; but if you will needs die, kill your self and be damned
for me I vow and swear.


But won't you sight for your Mistress?


I tell you, you shall not have the honour to be killed for her; besides, I
will not be hit in the teeth by her as long as I live with the great love you
had for her. Women speak well of their dead Husbands, what will they do of
their dead Gallants?


But if you will not fight for her, you shall Dance for her, since you desired
me to teach you to Dance too; I'll teach you to Dance thus --


Nay, if it be for the sake of my Mistress, there's nothing I will refuse to
do.


Nay, you must Dance on.


Ay, ay, for my Mistress and Sing too, la, la, la, ra, la.


What Swords drawn betwixt you two? what's the matter?


Is she here?

Come put up your Sword; you see this is no place for us; but the Devil eat me,
if you shall not eat my Sword, but --


What's the matter, Cousin?


Nothing, nothing, Cousin; but your presence is a Sanctuary for my greatest
Enemy, or else, teste non.


What, you have not hurt my Cousin, Sir, I hope?


How she's concerned for him; nay, then I need not doubt, my fears are true.


What was that you said, Cousin! hurt me, ha, ha, ha, hurt me! if any man hurt
me, he must do it basely; he shall never do it when my Sword's drawn, sa, sa,
sa.


Because you will never draw your Sword perhaps.


Scurvily guessed.

You Ladies may say any thing; but, Cousin, pray do not you talk of Swords and
fighting, meddle with your Guitar, and talk of dancing with your Dancingmaster
there, ha, ha, ha.


But I am afraid you have hurt my Master, Cousin, he says nothing; can he draw
his breath?


No, 'tis you have hurt your Master, Cousin, in the very heart, Cousin, and
therefore he would hurt me; for Love is a disease makes people as malicious as
the Plague does.


Indeed, poor Master, something does all you.


Nay, nay, Cousin, faith don't abuse him any longer, he's an honest Gentleman,
and has been long of my acquaintance, and a man of tolerable sense to take him
out of his Love; but prithee, Cousin, don't drive the Jest too far for my sake.


He counsels you well, pleasant-cunning-jilting-Miss for his sake; for if I am
your divertisement, it shall be at his cost, since he's your Galiant in favour.


I don't understand you.


But I do, a pox take him, and the Custom that so orders it, forsooth; that if
a Lady abuse or affront a man, presently the Gallant must be beaten, nay,
what's more unreasonable, if a Woman abuse her Husband, the poor Cuckold must
bear the shame as well as the injury.


But what's the matter, Master? what was it you said?


I say pleasant, cunning, jilting Lady, though you make him a Cuckold, it will
not be revenge enough for me upon him for marrying you.


How, my surly, huffing, jealous, senseless saucy Master?


Nay, nay, faith give losers leave to speak, losers of Mistresses especially,
ha, ha, ha. Besides, your anger is too great a favour for him, I scorn to
honour him with mine, you see.


I tell you, my sawey Master, my Cousin shall never be made that monstrous
thing (you mention) by me.


Thank you, I vow and swear, Cousin, no, no, I never thought I should.


Sure you marry him by the sage Maxim of your Sex, which is, Wittals make the
best Husbands, that is, Cuckolds.


Indeed, Master, whatsoever you think, I would sooner choose you for that
purpose than him.


Ha, ha, ha, there she was with him, i'faith, I thank you for that, Cousin, I
vow and swear.


Nay, he shall thank me for that too; but how came you two to quarrel? I
thought, Cousin, you had had more wit than to quarrel, or more kindness for me
than to quarrel here: what if my Father hearing the Bustle should have come in,
he would soon have discovered our false Dancing-master (for passion un-masks
every man) and then the result of your quarrel had been my ruin.


Nay, you had both felt his desperate, deadly, daunting Dagger; there are your
des for you.


Go, go, presently therefore, and hinder my Father from coming in, whilst I put
my Master into a better humour, that we may not be discovered, to the
prevention of our Wedding, or worse, when he comes, go, go.


Well, well, I will, Cousin.


Be sure you let him not come in this good while.


No, no, I warrant you.

But if he should come before I would have him, I'll come before him and cough
and hawk soundly, that you may not be susprised. Won't that do well, Cousin?


Very well, pray be gone.

Well, Master, since I find you are quarrelsome and melancholy, and would have
taken me away without a Portion, three infallible signs of a true Lover, Faith
here's my hand now in earnest, to lead me a Dance as long as I live.


How's this? you surprise me as much as when first I found so much Beauty and
Wit in Company with so much Innocence. But, Dearest, I would be assured of what
you say, and yet dare not ask the question. You h -- do not abuse me again, you
h -- will fool me no more sure.


Yes but I will sure.


How! nay, I was afraid on it.


For I say you are to be my Husband, and you say Husbands must be Wittals, and
some strange things to boot.


Well, I will take my Fortune.


But have a care, rash man.


I will venture.


At your peril, remember I wished you to have a care, fore-warn'd, forearm'd.


Indeed now that's fair; for most men are fore-arm'd before they are warned.


Plain dealing is some kind of honesty however, and few Women would have said
so much.


None but those who would delight in a Husbands jealousy, as the proof of his
love and her honour.


Hold, Sir, let us have a good understanding betwixt one another at first, that
we may be long Friends; I differ from you in the point, for a Husbands
jealousy, which cunning men would pass upon their Wives for a Complement, is
the worst can be made 'em, for indeed it is a Complement to their Beauty, but
an affront to their Honour.


But, Madam --


So that upon the whole matter I conclude, jealousy in a Gallant is humble
true Love, and the height of respect, and only an undervaluing of himself to
overvalue her; but in a Husband 'tis arrant sauciness, cowardice, and ill
breeding, and not to be suffered.


I stand corrected, gracious Miss.


Well! but have you brought the Gentlemen Fiddlers with you as I desired?


They are below.


Are they armed well?


Yes, they have Instruments too that are not of wood; but what will you do with
them?


What did you think I intended to do with them? when I whispered you to bring
Gentlemen of your acquaintance instead of Fiddlers, as my Father desired you to
bring pray what did you think I intended?


Faith, even to make fools of the Gentlemen-Fidlers, as you had done of your
Gentleman Dancing-Master.


I intended 'em for our guard and defence against my Fathers Spanish and Guiney
force, when we were to make our retreat from hence, and to help us to take the
Keys from my Aunt, who has been the watchful Porter of this House this
twelve-month; and this design (if your heart do not fail you) we will put in
execution, as soon as you have given your friends below instructions.


Are you sure your heart will stand right still? you flinch'd last night, when
I little expected it, I am sure.


The time last night was not so proper for us as now, for reasons I willgive
you; but besides that, I confess, I had a mind to try whether your interest did
not sway you more than your love; whether the twelve hundred pounds a year I
told you of, had not made a greater impression in your heart than Hippolita;
but finding it otherwise -- yet hold, perhaps upon consideration you are grown
wiser; can you yet, as I said, be so desperate, so out of fashion, as to steal
a Woman with nothing?


With you I can want nothing, nor can be made by any thing more rich or happy.


Think well again; can you take me without the twelve hundred pounds a year;
the twelve hundred pounds a year?


Indeed, Miss, now you begin to be unkind again, and use me worse than ever you
did.


Well, though you are so modest a Gentleman as to suffer a Wife to be put upon
you with nothing, I have more Conscience than to do it: I have the twelve
hundred pounds a year out of my Father's power, which is yours, and I am sorry
it is not the Indies to mend your bargain.


Dear Miss, you but increase my fears, and not my wealth: pray let us make
haste away, I desire but to be secure of you; come, what are you thinking of?


I am thinking if some little filching inquisitive Poet should get my story,
and represent it on the Stage; what those Ladies, who are never precise but at
a Play, would say of me now; that I were a confident coming piece, I warrant,
and they would damn the poor Poet for libelling the Sex; but sure though I give
my self and fortune away frankly, without the consent of my Friends, my
confidence is less than theirs, who stand off only for separate maintenance.


They would be Widows before their time, have a Husband and no Husband: but let
us be gone, lest fortune should recant my happiness. Now you are fixed, my
dearest Miss.


Oh here's my Father!


How now, Sir! what kissing her hand? what means that, Friend, ha! Daughter,
ha! do you permit this insolence, ha! ( voto a mi honra.)


We are prevented again.


Ha, ha, ha, you are so full of your Spanish Jealousy, Father, why you must
know he's a City Dancing-master, and they, forsooth, think it fine to kiss the
hand at the Honour before the Corant.


Ay, ay, ay, Uncle, don't you know that?


Go to, go to, you are an easy French Fool, there's more in it than so, look
you.


I vow and swear there's nothing more in it, if you'll believe one. Did not I
cough and hawk? a jealous prudent Husband could not cough and hawk louder at
the approach of his Wives Chamber in visiting-time, and yet you would not hear
me, he'll make now ado about nothing, and you'll be discovered both.


Umph, umph, no, no, I see it plain, he is no Dancing-master, now I have found
it out, and I think I can see as far into matters as another: I have found it
now, look you.


My fear was prophetical.


What shall we do? nay, pray, Sir, do not stir yet.


What's the matter, Brother? what's the matter?


I have found it out, Sister, I have found it out, Sister, this Villain here is
no Dancing-master, but a dishonourer of my House and Daughter, I caught him
kissing her hand.


Pish, pish, you are a strange Spanish kind of an Uncle, that you are, a
dishonourer of your Daughter, because he kissed her hand; pray how could he
honour her more? he kiss't her hand, you see, while he was making his Honour to
her.


You are an unthinking, shallow, French Fop, voto -- But I tell you, Sister, I
have thought of it, and have found it out, he is no Dancing-master, Sister. Do
you remember the whispering last night? I have found out the meaning of that
too, and I tell you, Sister, he's no Dancing-master, I have found it out.


You found it out, marry come up, did not I tell you always he was no
Dancing-master?


You tell me, you silly Woman, what then? what of that? you tell me, de' think
I heeded what you told me? but I tell you now I have found it out.


I say I found it out.


I say 'tis false, Gossip, I found him out.


I say I found him out first, say you what you will.


Sister Mum, not such a word again, guarda -- you found him out.


Nay, I must submit, or dissemble like other prudent Women, or --


Come, come, Sister, take it from me, he is no Dancing-master.


O yes, he is a Dancing-master.


What will you be wiser than I every way? remember the whispering, I say.


So, he thinks I speak in earnest, then I'll fit him still.

But what do you talk of their whispering, they would not whisper any ill
before us sure.


Will you still be an Idoit, a Dolt, and see nothing.


Lord! you'll be wiser than all the World, will you? are we not all against
you? pshaw, pshaw, I never saw such a Donissimo as you are, I vow and swear.


No, Sister, he's no Dancing-master; for now I think on it too, he could not
play upon the Fiddle.


Pish, pish, what Dancing-master can play upon a Fiddle without strings?


Again, I tell you he broke 'em on purpose, because he could not play; I have
found it out now, Sister.


Nay, you see farther than I, Brother.


For Heaven's sake stir not yet.


Besides, if you remember they were perpetually putting me out of the Room,
that was, Sister, because they had a mind to be alone, I have found that out
too: Now, Sister, look you, he is no Dancing-master.


But has he not given her a Lesson often before you.


I but, Sister, he did not go about his business like a Dancing-master; but go,
go down to the door, some body rings.


I vow and swear Uncle he is a Dancing-master; pray be appeased, Lord d'e think
I'd tell you a lye?


If it prove to be a lye, and you do not confess it, though you are my next
Heir after my Daughter, I will disown thee as much as I do her, for thy folly
and treachery to thy self, as well as me; you may have her, but never my estate
look you


How! I must look to my hits then.


Look to it.


Then I had best confess all, before he discover all, which he will soon do.

O here's the Parson too! he won't be in choler nor brandish Toledo before the
Parson sure?

Well, Uncle, I must confess, rather than lose your favour, he is no
Dancingmaster.


No.


What has the Fool betrayed us then at last? nay, then 'tis time to be gone;
come away, Miss.


Nay, Sir, if you pass this way, my Toledo will pass that way, look you.


O hold, Mr. Gerrard, hold, Father!


I tell you Uncle he's an honest Gentleman, means no hurt, and came hither but
upon a frolic of mine and your Daughters.


Ladron, Traidor.


I tell you all's but a jest, a mere jest I vow and swear.


A jest, jest with my honour voto, ha! no Family to dishonour but the Grave,
Wise, Noble, Honourable, Illustrious, Puissant, and right Worshipful Family of
the Formals; nay, I am contented to reprieve you, till you know who you have
dishonoured, and convict you of the greatness of your crime before you die, we
are descended, look you --


Nay, pray Uncle hear me.


I say, we are descended.


'Tis no matter for that.


And my great, great, Grandfather was.


Well, well, I have something to say more to the purpose.


My great, great, great Grandfather, I say, was --


Well, a Pin-maker in --


But he was a Gentleman for all that, Fop, for he was a Sergeant to a Company
of the Train-bands, and my great, great, great Grandfather was.


Was his Son, what then? won't you let me clear this Gentleman?


He was, he was --


He was a Felt-maker, his Son a Wine cooper, your Father a Vintner, and so you
came to be a Canary-Merchant.


But we were still Gentlemen, for our Coat was as the Heralds say -- was --


Was, your sign was the Three Tuns, and the Field Canary; now let me tell you
this honest Gentleman --


Now that you should dare to dishonour this Family; by the Graves of my
Ancestors in Great Saint Ellen's Church --


Yard.


Thou shalt dye for it, ladron.


Hold, hold, Uncle, are you mad?


Oh, oh.


Nay then, by your own Spanish rules of honour (though he be my Rival) I must
help him, since I brought him into danger.

Sure he will not show his valour upon his Nephew and Son-in-Law, otherwise I
should be afraid of showing mine.

Here Mr. Gerrard, go in here, nay, you shall go in, Mr. Gerrard, I'll secure
you all; and Parson do you go in too with 'em; for I see you are afraid of a
Sword and the other World, though you talk of it so familiarly, and make it so
fine a place.


Tu quoque, Brute.


Nay, now Uncle you must understand reason; what, you are not only a Don, but
you are a Don Quixote too, I vow and swear.


Thou spot, sploach of my Family and blood; I will have his blood, look you.


Pray good Spanish Uncle, have but patience to hear me; suppose -- I say,
suppose he had done, done, done the feat to your Daughter.


How, done the feat, done the feat, done the feat, En hora mala.


I say, suppose, suppose --


Suppose --


I say, suppose he had, for I do but suppose it; well, I am ready to marry her
however; now Marriage is as good a Solder for cracked Female-honour, as blood,
and can't you suffer the shame but for a quarter of an-hour, till the Parson
has married us, and then if there be any shame, it becomes mine; for here in
England, the Father has nothing to do with the Daughters business, honour, what
de'e call it, when once she's married, de'e see.


England! what d'e tell me of England? I'll be a Spaniard still, voto a mi
hora, and I will be revenged, Pedro, Juan, Sanches.


What's the matter, Brother?


Pedro, Sanchez, Juan, but who are these, Sister? are they not men in Women's
Clothes? what make they here?


They are relations, they say, of my Cousins, who pressed in when I let in the
Parson, they say my Cousin invited 'em to his Wedding.


Two of my relations, ha -- they are my Cousins indeed of the other night; a
Pox take 'em, but that's no Curse for 'em; a Plague take 'em then, but how came
they here?


Now must I have witnesses too of the dishonour of my Family; it were Spanish
Prudence to dispatch 'em away out of the House, before I begin my revenge.

What are you? what make you here? who would you speak with?


With Monsieur.


Here he is.


Now will these Jades discredit me, and spoil my match just in the coupling
minute.


Do you know 'em?


Yes, Sir, sure, I know 'em. Pray, Ladies, say as I say, or you will spoil my
Wedding, for I am just going to be married, and if my Uncle, or Mistress should
know who you are, it might break off the match.


We come on purpose to break the match.


How!


Why, de'e think to marry and leave us so in the lurch?


What do the Jades mean?


Come, who are they? what would they have? if they come to the Wedding, Ladies,
I assure you there will be none to day here.


They won't trouble you, Sir, they are going again. Ladies, you hear what my
Uncle says; I know you won't trouble him. I wish I were well rid of 'em.


You shall not think to put us off so.


Who are they? what are their names?


We are, Sir --


Nay, for Heaven's sake don't tell who you are, for you will undo me, and spoil
my match infallibly.


We care not, 'tis our business to spoil matches.


You need not, for, I believe, married men are your best customers, for greedy
Batchellors take up with their Wives.


Come, pray Ladies, if you have no business here, be pleased to retire, for few
of us are in humour to be so civil to you, as you may deserve.


Ay, prithee dear Jades get you gone.


We will not stir.


Who are they, I say, Fool, and why don't they go?


We are, Sir --


Hold, hold.

They are persons of honour and quality, and --


We are no persons of honour and quality, Sir, we are --


They are modest Ladies, and being in a kind of disguise, will not own their
quality.


We modest Ladies!


Why? sometimes you are in the humour to pass for Women of honour and quality;
prithee, dear Jades, let your modesty and greatness come upon you now.


Come, Sir, not to delude you, as he would have us, we are --


Hold, hold --


The other night at the French House --


Hold, I say, 'tis even true as Gerrard says, the Women will tell, I see.


If you would have her silent, stop her mouth with that ring.


Will that do it, here, here --

'Tis worth one hundred and fifty pounds;

But I must not lose my match, I must not lose a Trout for a Fly.

That Men should live to hire Women to silence.


Oh, are you come again!


Oh, hold, hold, Uncle!

What are you mad, Gerrard, to expose your self to a new danger? why would you
come out yet?


Because our danger now is over, I thank the Parson there. And now we must beg
--


Nay, Faith, Uncle, forgive him now, since he asks you forgiveness upon his
knees, and my poor Cousin too.


You are mistaken, Cousin; we ask him blessing, and you forgiveness.


How, how, how! what do you talk of blessing? what do you ask your Father
blessing, and he asks me forgiveness? But why should he ask me forgiveness?


Because he asks my Father blessing.


Pish, pish, I don't understand you, I vow and swear.


The Parson will expound to you, Cousin.


Hey! what say you to it, Parson?


They are married, Sir.


Married!


Married! so, I told you what it would come to.


You told us --


Nay, she is setting up for the reputation of a Witch.


Married, Juan, Sanchez, Petro, arm, arm, arm.


A Witch, a Witch!


Nay, indeed Father, now we are married, you had better call the Fiddles: Call
'em Prue quickly.


Who do you say married, Man?


Was I not sent for on purpose to marry 'em? why should you wonder at it?


No, no, you were to marry me, Man, to her; I knew there was a mistake in it
some how; you were merely mistaken, therefore you must do your business over
again for me now: The Parson was mistaken, Uncle, it seems, ha, ha, ha.


I suppose five or six Guinies made him make the mistake, which will not be
rectified now, Nephew; they'll marry all that come near 'em, and for a Guiney
or two, care not what mischief they do, Nephew.


Married, Pedro, Sanchez?


How, and must she be his Wife then for ever and ever? have I held the door
then for this, like a Fool as I was?


Yes, indeed.


Have I worn Golillia here for this? little Breeches for this?


Yes, truly.


And put on the Spanish honour with the habit, in defending my Rival; nay, then
I'll have another turn of honour in revenge. Come, Uncle, I'm of your side now,
sa, sa, sa, but let's stay for our force, Sanchez, Juan, Petro, arm, arm, arm.


Murder the Villain, kill him.


Hold, hold, Sir.


How now, who sent for you, Friends?


We Fiddlers, Sir, often come unsent for.


And you are often kicked down stairs for it too.


No, Sir, our Company was never kicked I think.


Fiddlers, and not kicked? then to preserve your Virgin-honour, get you down
stairs quickly; for we are not at present disposed much for mirth, voto.


peeping. A pox, is it you, Martyn? nay, Uncle, then 'tis in vain; for they
won't be kicked down stairs, to my knowledge. They are Gentlemen Fiddlers,
forsooth, a pox on all Gentlemen Fiddlers and Gentlemen Dancingmasters say I.


How! ha.


Well, Flirt, now I am a Match for thee, now I may keep you, and there's little
difference betwixt keeping a Wench and Marriage, only Marriage is a little the
cheaper; but the other is the more honourable now, vert bleu, nay now I may
swear a French Oath too. Come, come, I am thine, let us strike up the Bargain,
thine according to the honourable Institution of Keeping, come.


Nay hold, Sir, two words to the Bargain, first I have never a Lawyer here to
draw Articles and Settlements.


How! is the World come to that? a Man cannot keep a Wench without Articles and
Settlements, nay then 'tis even as bad as Marriage indeed, and there's no
difference betwixt a Wife and a Wench.


Only in Cohabitation, for the first Article shall be against Cohabitation; we
Mistresses suffer no Cohabitation.


Nor Wives neither now.


Then separate Maintenance, in case you should take a Wife, or I a new Friend.


How! that too? then you are every whit as bad as a Wife.


Then my House in Town, and yours in the Country, if you will.


A mere Wife.


Then my Coach apart, as well as my Bed apart.


As bad as a Wife still.


But take notice I will have no little, dirty, second-hand Chariot new
forbish'd, but a large, sociable, well painted Coach, nor will I keep it till
it be as well known as my self, and it come to be called Flirt-Coach; nor will
I have such pitiful Horses as cannot carry me every night to the Park; for I
will not miss a night in the Park, I'd have you to know.


'Tis very well, you must have your great, gilt, fine, painted Coaches, I'm
sure they are grown so common already amongst you, that Ladies of Quality begin
to take up with Hackneys again, Jarnie; but what else?


Then, that you do not think I will be served by a little dirty Boy in a
Bonnet, but a couple of handsome, lusty, cleanly Footmen, sit to serve Ladies of
Quality, and do their business as they should do.


What then?


Then, that you never grow jealous of them.


Why will you make so much of them?


I delight to be kind to my Servants.


Well, is this all?


No then, that when you come to my House, you never presume to touch a Key,
lift up a Latch, or thrust a Door, without knocking before hand; and that you
ask no questions, if you see a stray Piece of Plate, Cabinet, or Looking-glass
in my House.


Just a Wife in every thing; but what else?


Then, that you take no acquaintance with me abroad, nor bring me home any when
you are drunk, whom you will not be willing to see there, when you are sober.


But what allowance? let's come to the main business, the money.


Stay, let me think, first for advance-money five hundred pounds for Pins.


A very Wife.


Then you must take the Lease of my House, and furnish it as becomes one of my
Quality; for don't you think we'll take up with your old Queen Elizabeth
Furniture, as your Wives do.


Indeed there she is least like a Wife, as she says.


Then, for House-keeping, Servant-wages, Clothes, and the rest, I'll be
contented with a thousand pound a year present maintenance, and but three
hundred pound a year separate maintenance for my life, when our Love grows
cold; but I am contented with a thousand pound a year, because for Pendants,
Neck-laces, and all sorts of Jewels, and such Trifles, nay and some Plate, I
will shift my self as I can, make shifts, which you shall not take any notice
of.


A thousand pound a year! what will Wenching come to? Time was, a Man might
have fared as well at a much cheaper rate; and a Lady of ones affections,
instead of a House would have been contented with a little Chamber three pair
of Stairs backward, with a little Closet or Larder to it; and instead of variety
of new Gowns and rich Petticoats, with her Dishabiliee or Flamecolour Gown
called Indian, and Slippers of the same, would have been contented for a
twelve-month; and instead of Visits and gadding to Plays, would have
entertained her self at home with St. George for England, the Knight of the
Sun, or the Practice of Piety; and instead of sending her Wine and Meat from
the French-houses, would have been contented, if you had given her (poor
Wretch) but credit at the next Chandlers and Checkered Cellar; and then instead
of a Coach, would have been well satisfied to have gone out and taken the Air
for three or four hours in the Evening in the Balcony, poor Soul. Well, Flirt,
however we'll agree; 'tis but three hundred pound a year separate maintenance,
you say, when I am weary of thee and the Charge.


Robbed of my Honour, my Daughter, and my Revenge too! Oh my dear Honour!
nothing vexes me but that the World should say, I had not Spanish Policy enough
to keep my Daughter from being debauched from me; but methinks my Spanish
Policy might help me yet: I have it so -- I will cheat 'em all; for I will
declare I understood the whole Plot and Contrivance, and connived at it,
finding my Cousin a Fool, and not answering my expectation. Well; but then if I
approve of the Match, I must give this Mock-Dancingmaster my Estate, especially
since half he would have in right of my Daughter, and in spite of me. Well, I
am resolved to turn the Cheat upon themselves, and give them my Consent and
Estate.


Come, come, never be troubled, Uncle, 'twas a Combination, you see, of all
these Heads and your Daughters; you know what I mean, Uncle, not to be thwarted
or governed by all the Spanish Policy in Christendom. I'm sure my French Policy
would not have governed her; so, since I have escaped her, I am glad I have
escaped her, Jernie.


Come, Brother, you are wiser than I, you see, ay, ay.


No, you think you are wiser than I now, in earnest; but know, while I was
thought a Gull, I gulled you all, and made them and you think I knew nothing of
the Contrivance. Confess, did not you think verily, that I knew nothing of it,
and that I was a Gull?


Yes indeed, Brother, I did think verily you were a Gull.


How's this?


Alas, alas, all the sputter I made was but to make this Young man, my Cousin,
believe, when the thing should be effected, that it was not with my connivence
or consent; but since he is so well satisfied, I own it. For do you think I
would ever have suffered her to marry a Monsieur, a Monsieur Guarda. Besides,
it had been but a beastly incestuous kind of a Match, voto --


Nay, then I see, Brother, you were wiser than I indeed.


So, so.


Nay, Young-man, you have danced a fair Dance for your self royally, and now
you may go jig it together till you are both weary; and though you were so
eager to have him, Mrs. Minx, you'll soon have your belly-full of him, let me
tell you, Mistress.


Hah, ha.


How, Uncle! what was't you said? Nay if I had your Spanish Policy against me,
it was no wonder I missed of my aim, mon foy.


I was resolved too, my Daughter should not marry a Coward, therefore made the
more ado to try you, Sir, but I find you are a brisk Man of Honour, firm,
stiff, Spanish Honour; and that you may see I deceived you all a long, and you
not me; ay, and am able to deceive you still; for, I know, now you think that I
will give you little or nothing with my Daughter (like other Fathers) since you
have married her without my consent; but, I say, I'll deceive you now, for you
shall have the most part of my Estate in present, and the rest at my death;
there's for you, I think I have deceived you now, look you.


No, indeed, Sir, you have not deceived me, for I never suspected your love to
your Daughter, nor your Generosity.


How, Sir! have a care of saying I have not deceived you, lest I deceive you
another way; guarda -- pray, Gentlemen, do not think any Man could deceive me,
look you; that any Man could steal my Daughter, look you, without my
connivence.

The less we speak, the more we think,
And he sees most, that seems to wink.

So, so, now I could give you my blessing, Father, now you are a good
complaisant Father, indeed.

When Children marry, Parents should obey,
Since Love claims more Obedience far than they.

THE Ladies first I am to Compliment,
Whom (if he could) the Poet would content,
But to their pleasure then they must consent.
Most spoil their sport still by their modesty,
And when they should be pleased, cry out, O fie,
And the least smooty jest will never pass by.
But City damsel never had confidence,
At smooty Play to take the least offence,
But Mercy shows, to show her innocence.
Yet lest the Merchants Daughters should to day
Be scandalised, not at our harmless Play;
But our Hippolita, since she's like one
Of us bold Flirts, of the other end of the Town;
Our Poet sending to you (though unknown)
His best respects by me, does frankly own
The character to be unnatural;
Hippolita is not like you at all;
You, while your Lovers court you, still look grum,
And far from wooing, when they woo, cry mum;
And if some of you ever were stolen away,
Your Portion's fault 'twas only I dare say:
Thus much for him the Poet bid me speak,
Now to the men, I my own mind will break;
You good men of the Exchange, on whom alone
We must depend, when Sparks to Sea are gone;
Into the Pit already you are come,
'Tis but a step more to our Tyring room;
Where none of us but will be wondrous sweet
Upon an able Love of Lumber-street:
You we had rather see between our Scenes,
Than spend-thrift Fops with better Clothes and meens;
Instead of Lac'd-coats, Belts, and Pantalloons,
Your Velvet Jumps, Gold Chains, and grave Fur Gowns,
Instead of Periwigs, and broad cocked Hats,
Your Satin Caps, smalls Cuffs, and vast Crevats;
For you are fair and square in all your dealings,
You never cheat your Doxies with gilt Shillings;
You never will break our Windows, then you are
Fit to make love, while our Houzaas make War;
And since all Gentlemen must pack to Sea,
Our Gallants, and our Judges you must be;
We therefore, and our Poet, do submit
To all the Chamlet Cloaks now in the Pit.

