I The PLAIN-DEALER am to Act to Day:
And my rough Part begins before the Play.
First, you who Scrible, yet hate all that Write,
And keep each other Company in Spite,
As Rivals in your common Mistress, Fame,
And, with faint Praises, one another Damn;
'Tis a good Play (we know) you can't forgive,
But grudge your selves, the pleasure you receive:
Our Scribler therefore bluntly bid me say,
He would not have the Wits pleased here to Day.
Next, you, the fine, loud Gentlemen, of the Pit,
Who Damn all Plays; yet, if you've any Wit,
'Tis but what here you sponge, and daily get;
Poets, like Friends to whom you are in Debt,
You hate: and so Rooks laugh, to see undone
Those Pushing Gamesters whom they live upon
Well, you are Sparks; and still will be in the fashion:
Rail then, at Plays, to hide your Obligation.
Now, you shrewd Judges who the Boxes sway,
Leading the Ladies hearts, and sense astray,
And, for their sakes, see all, and hear no Play;
Correct your Cravats, Foretops, Lock behind;
The Dress and Breeding of the Play ne'er mind:
Plain-dealing is, you'll say, quite out of fashion;
You'll hale it here, as in a Dedication.
And your fair Neighbours, in a Limning Poet,
No more than in a Painter will allow it.
Pictures too like, the Ladies will not please:
They must be drawn too here, like Goddesses.
You, as at Lely's too, would Truncheon wield,
And look like Heroes, in a painted Field;
But the course Dauber of the coming Scenes,
To follow Life, and Nature only means;
Displays you, as you are: makes his fine Woman
A mercenary Iilt, and true to no Man;
His Men of Wit, and Pleasure of the Age,
Are as dull Rogues, as ever encumbered Stage:
He draws a Friend, only to Custom just;
And makes him naturally break his trust.
I, only, Act a Part like none of you;
And yet, you'll say, it is a Fool's Part too:
An honest Man; who, like you, never winks
At faults; but, unlike you, speaks what he thinks:
The only Fool who ne'er found Patron yet;
For Truth is now a fault, as well as Wit.
And where else, but on Stages, do we see
Truth pleasing; or rewarded Honesty?
Which our bold Poet does this day in me.
If not to the Honest, be to the Prosperous kind:
Some Friends at Court let the PLAIN-DEALER find.

TEll not me (my good Lord Plausible) of your Decorums, supercilious Forms, and
slavish Ceremonies; your little Tricks, which you the Spaniels of the World, do
daily over and over, for, and to one another; not out of love or duty, but your
servile fear.


Nay, i'faith, i'faith, you are too passionate, and I must humbly beg your
pardon and leave to tell you, they are the Arts, and Rules, the prudent of the
World walk by.


Let 'em. But I'll have no Leading-strings, I can walk alone; I hate a Harness,
and will not tug on in a Faction, kissing my Leader behind, that another Slave
may do the like to me.


What, will you be singular then, like no Body? follow Love, and esteem no
Body?


Rather then be general, like you; follow every Body, Court and kiss every
Body; though, perhaps at the same time, you hate every Body.


Why, seriously with your pardon, my dear Friend --


With your pardon, my no Friend, I will not, as you do whisper my hatred, or my
scorn, call a man Fool or Knave, by signs, or mouths over his shoulder, whilst
you have him in your arms: for such as you, like common Whores and Pickpockets,
are only dangerous to those you embrace.


Such as I! Heavens defend me -- upon my Honour --


Upon your Title, my Lord, if you'd have me believe you.


Well then, as I am a Person of Honour, I never attempted to abuse, or lessen
any person, in my life.


What, you were afraid?


No; but seriously, I hate to do a rude thing: no, faith, I speak well of all
Mankind.


I thought so; but know that speaking well of all Mankind, is the worst kind of
Detraction; for it takes away the Reputation of the few good men in the World,
by making all alike: now I speak ill of most men, because they deserve it; I
that can do a rude thing, rather than an unjust thing.


Well, tell not me, my dear Friend, what people deserve, I ne'er mind that; I,
like an Author in a Dedication, never speak well of a man for his sake, but my
own; I will not disparage any man, to disparage my self; for to speak ill of
people behind their backs, is not like a Person of Honour; and truly to speak
ill of 'em to their faces, is not like a complaisant person: But if I did say,
or do an ill thing to any Body, it should be sure to be behind their backs, out
of pure good manners.


Very well; but I, that am an unmannerly Sea-fellow, if I ever speak well of
people, (which is very seldom indeed) it should be sure to be behind their
backs; and if I would say, or do ill to any, it should be to their faces: I
would justle a proud, strutting, over-looking Coxcomb, at the head of his
Sycophants, rather than put out my tongue at him, when he were past me; would
frown in the arrogant, big, dull face of an overgrown Knave of business, rather
than vent my spleen against him, when his back were turned; would give fawning
Slaves the Lye, whilst they embrace or commend me; Cowards, whilst they brag;
call a Rascal by no other title, though his Father had left him a Duke's; laugh
at Fools aloud, before their Mistresses: And must desire people to leave me,
when their visits grow at last as troublesome, as they were at first
impertinent.


I would not have my visits troublesome.


The only way to be sure not to have 'em troublesome, is to make 'em when
people are not at home; for your visits, like other good turns, are most
obliging, when made, or done to a man, in his absence. A pox why should any
one, because he has nothing to do go and disturb another mans business?


I beg your pardon, my dear Friend. What, you have business?


If you have any, I would not detain your Lordship.


Detain me, dear Sir! I can never have enough of your company.


I'm afraid I should be tiresome: I know not what you think.


Well, dear Sir, I see you would have me gone.


But I see you won't.


Your most faithful --


God be w'ye, my Lord.


Your most humble --


Farewell.


And eternally --


And eternally Ceremony -- then the Devil take thee eternally.


You shall use no Ceremony, by my life.


I do not intend it.


Why do you stir then?


Only to see you out of doors, that I may shut 'em, against more welcomes.


Nay, faith that shall not pass upon your most faithful, humble Servant.


Nor this any more upon me.


Well, you are too strong for me.


I'd sooner be visited by the Plague; for that only would keep a man from
visits, and his doors shut.


Here's a finical Fellow Jack! What a brave fair weather Captain of a Ship he
would make!


He a Captain of a Ship! it must be when she's in the Dock then; for he looks
like one of those that get the King's Commissions for Hulls to sell a Kings
Ship, when a brave Fellow has fought her almost to a Long-boat.


On my conscience then, Jack, that's the reason our Bully Tar. sunk our Ship:
not only that the Dutch might not have her, but that the Courtiers, who laugh
at wooden Legs, might not make her Prize.


A pox of his sinking, Tom, we have made a base, broken, short Voyage of it.


Ay, your brisk dealers in Honour, always make quick returns with their Ship
to the Dock, and their Men to the Hospitals; 'tis, let me see, just a Month
since we set out of the River, and the Wind was almost as cross to us, as the
Dutch.


Well, I forgive him sinking my own poor Truck, if he would but have given me
time and leave to have saved black Kate of Wapping's small Venture.


Faith I forgive him, since, as the Purser told me, he sunk the value of five
or six thousand pound of his own, with which he was to settle himself somewhere
in the Indies, for our merry Lieutenant was to succeed him in his Commission
for the Ship back, for he was resolved never to return again for England.


So it seemed, by his Fighting.


No, but he was a weary of this side of the World here, they say.


Ay, or else he would not have bid so fair for a passage into the other.


Jack, thou think thy self in the Forecastle, you're so waggish; but I tell
you then, he had a mind to go live and bask himself on the sunny side of the
Globe.


What, out of any discontent? for he's always as dogged, as an old Tarpaulin
when hindered of a Voyage by a young Pantaloon Captain.


'Tis true, I never saw him pleased but in the Fight, and then he looked like
one of us, coming from the Pay-table, with a new Lining to our Hats under our
Arms,


A pox he's like the Bay of Biscay, rough and angry, let the Wind blow where
'twill.


Nay, there's no more dealing with him, than with the Land in a Storm, No-near
--


'Tis a hurry-durry Blade; dost thou remember after we had tugged hard the old
leaky Long-boat, to save his Life, when I welcomed him ashore, he gave me a box
on the ear, and called me fawning Water-dog?


Hold thy peace, Jack, and stand by, the foul weather's coming.


You Rascals, Dogs, how could this tame thing get through you?


Faith, to tell your Honour the truth, we were at Hob in the Hall, and whilst
my Brother and I were quarrelling about a Cast, he slunk by us.


He's a sneaking Fellow I warrant for it.


Have more care for the future, you Slaves; go, and with drawn Cutlaces, stand
at the Stair foot, and keep all that ask for me from coming up; suppose you
were guarding the Scuttle to the Powder room: let none enter here, at your and
their peril.


No, for the danger would be the same; you would blow them and us up, if we
should.


Must no one come to you, Sir?


No man, Sir.


No man, Sir; but a Woman then, an't like your Honour --


No Woman neither, you impertinent Dog. Would you be Pimping? A Sea Pimp is the
strangest Monster she has.


Indeed, an't like your Honour, 'twill be hard for us to deny a Woman any
thing, since we are so newly come on shore.


We'll let no old Woman come up, though it were our Trusting Landlady at
Wapping.


Would you be witty, you Brandy Casks you? you become a jest as ill, as you do
a Horse. Be gone, you Dogs, I hear a noise on the Stairs.


Faith, I am sorry you would let the Fop go, I intended to have had some sport
with him.


Sport with him! A pox then why did you not stay? you should have enjoyed your
Coxcomb, and had him to your self for me.


No, I should not have cared for him, without you neither; for the pleasure
which Fops afford, is like that of Drinking, only good when 'tis shared; and a
Fool, like a Bottle, which would make you merry in company, will make you dull
alone. But how the Devil cou^d you turn a man of his Quality down Stairs? You
use a Lord with very little Ceremony, it seems.


A Lord! What thou art one of those who esteem men only by the marks and value
Fortune has set upon 'em, and never consider intrinsic worth; but counterfeit
Honour will not be current with me, I weigh the man, not his title; 'tis not
the King's stamp can make the Metal better, or heavier: your Lord is a Leaden
shilling, which you may bend every way; and debases the stamp he bears, instead
of being raised by it: Here again, you Slaves?


Only to receive farther instructions, an't like your Honour: What if a man
should bring you money, should we turn him back?


All men, I say; must I be pestered with you too? you Dogs, away.


Nay, I know one man your Honour would not have us hinder coming to you, I'm
sure.


Who's that? speak quickly, Slaves.


Why a man that should bring you a Challenge; for though you refuse Money, I^m
sure you love Fighting too well to refuse that.


Rogue, Rascal, Dog.


Nay, let the poor Rogues have their Forecastle jests; they cannot help 'em in
a Fight, scarce when a Ship's sinking.


Dam their untimely jests; a Servant's jest is more sauciness than his counsel.


But what, will you see no Body? not your Friends?


Friends -- I have but one, and he, I hear, is not in Town; nay, can have but
one Friend, for a true heart admits b^t of one friendship, as of one love; but
in having that Friend, I have a thousand, for he has the courage of men in
despair, yet the diffidency and caution of Cowards; the secrecy of the
Revengeful, and the constancy of Martyrs: one fit to advise, to keep a secret:
to fight and dye for his Friend. Such I think him; for I have trusted him with
my Mistress in my absence: and the trust of Beauty, is sure the greatest we can
show.


Well, but all your good thoughts are not for him alone? (I hope:) pray, what
do ye think of me, for a Friend?


Of thee! Why, thou art a Latitudinarian in Friendship, that is, no Friend;
thou dost side with all Mankind, but wilt suffer for none. Thou art indeed like
your Lord Plausible, the Pink of Courtesy, therefore hast no Friendship; for
Ceremony, and great Professing, renders Friendship as much suspected, as it
does Religion.


And no Professing, no Ceremony at all in Friendship, were as unnatural and as
undecent as in Religion; and there is hardly such a thing as an honest
Hypocrite, who professes himself to be worse than he is, unless it be your
self; for, though I could never get you to say you were my Friend, I know
you'll prove so.


I must confess, I am so much your Friend, I would not deceive you, therefore
must tell you (not only because my heart is taken up) but according to your
rules of Friendship, I cannot be your Friend.


Why pray?


Because he that is (you'll say) a true Friend to a man, is a Friend to all his
Friends; but you must pardon me, I cannot wish well to Pimps, Flatterers,
Detractors, and Cowards, stiff nodding Knaves, and supple pliant kissing Fools:
now, all these I have seen you use, like the dearest Friends in the World.


Hah, hah, hah -- What, you observed me, I warrant, in the Galleries at
Whitehall, doing the business of the place! Pshaw Court Professions, like Court
Promises, go for nothing, man. But, faith, could you think I was a Friend to
all those I hugged, kissed, flattered, bowed too? Hah, ha --


You told 'em so, and swore it too; I heard you.


Ay, but, when their backs were turned, did I not tell you they were Rogues,
Villains, Rascals, whom I despised, and hated?


Very fine! But what reason had I to believe you spoke your heart to me, since
you professed deceiving so many?


Why, don't you know, good Captain, that telling truth is a quality as
prejudicial, to a man that would thrive in the World, as square Play to a
Cheat, or true Love to a Whore! Would you have a man speak truth to his ruin?
You are severer than the Law, which requires no man to swear against himself;
you would have me speak truth against my self, I warrant, and tell my promising
Friend, the Courtier, he has a bad memory?


Yes.


And so make him remember to forget my business; and I should tell the great
Lawyer too, that he takes oftner Fees to hold his tongue, than to speak!


No doubt on it.


Ay, and have him hang, or ruin me, when he should come to be a Judge, and I
before him. And you would have me tell the new Officer, who bought his
Employment lately, that he is a Coward.


Ay.


And so get my self cashiered, not him, he having the better Friends, though I
the better Sword. And I should tell the Scribler of Honour, that Heraldry were
a prettier and fitter Study, for so fine a Gentleman, than Poetry!


Certainly.


And so find my self mauled in his next hired Lampoon. And you would have me
tell the holy Lady too, she lies with her Chaplain.


No doubt on it.


And so draw the Clergy upon my back, and want a good Table to Dine at
sometimes. And by the same reason too, I should tell you, that the World thinks
you a Mad-man, a Brutal and have you cut my throat, or worse, hate me! What
other good success of all my Plain-dealing could I have, than what I've
mentioned?


Why, first your promising Courtier would keep his word, out of fear of more
reproaches; or at least would give you no more vain hopes: your Lawyer would
serve you more faithfully; for he, having no Honour but his Interest, is truest
still to him he knows suspects him: The new Officer would provoke thee to make
him a Coward, and so be cashiered, that thou, or some other honest Fellow, who
had more courage than money, might get his place: the Noble Sonneteer would
trouble thee no more with his Madrigals: the praying Lady would leave off
railing at Wenching before thee, and not turn away her Chambermaid, for her own
known frailty with thee: and I, instead of hating thee, sheu'd love thee, for
thy Plain-dealing; and in lieu of being mortifi'd, am proud that the World and
I think not well of one another.


Well, Doctors differ. You are for Plain-dealing, I find; but against your
particular Notions, I have the practice of the whole World. Observe but any
Morning what people do when they get together on the Exchange, in
Westminster-hall, or the Galleries in Whitehall.


I must confess, there they seem to rehearse Bays's grand Dance: here you see a
Bishop bowing low to a gaudy Atheist; a Judge, to a Doorkeeper; a great Lord,
to a Fishmonger, or a Scrivener with a Jack-chain about his neck; a Lawyer, to
a Sergeant at Arms; a velvet Physician, to a threadbare Chemist: and a supple
Gentleman Usher, to a surly Beef-eater; and so tread round in a preposterous
huddle of Ceremony to each other, whilst they can hardly hold their solemn
false countenances.


Well, they understand the World.


Which I do not, I confess.


But, Sir, pray believe the Friendship I promise you, real, whatsoever I have
professed to others: try me, at least.


Why, what would you do for me?


I would fight for you.


That you would do for your own Honour: but what else?


I would lend you money, if I had it.


To borrow more of me another time. That were but putting your money to
Interest, a Usurer would be as good a Friend. But what other piece of
Friendship?


I would speak well of you to your Enemies.


To encourage others to be your Friends, by a show of gratitude: but what else?


Nay, I would not hear you ill spoken of behind your back, by my Friend.


Nay, then you're a Friend indeed; but it were unreasonable to expect it from
thee, as the World goes now: when new Friends, like new Mistresses, are got by
disparaging old ones.


Better than any man can love you, my dear Captain.


Look you there, I told you so.


As well as you do Truth, or Honour, Sir; as well.


Nay, good young Gentleman, enough, for shame; thou hast been a Page, by thy
Flattering and Lying, to one of those praying Ladies, who love Flattery so
well, they are jealous of it, and were turned away for saying the same things
to the old Housekeeper for Sweetmeats, as you did to your Lady; for thou
flatter every thing, and every Body alike


You, dear Sir, should not suspect the truth of what I say of you, though to
you; Fame, the old Liar, is believed, when she speaks Wonders of you; you
cannot be flattered, Sir, your Merit is unspeakable.


Hold, hold, Sir, or I shall suspect worse of you, that you have been a
Cushion-bearer to some State Hypocrite, and turned away by the Chaplains, for
out flattering their Probation Sermons for a Benefice.


Suspect me for any thing, Sir, but the want of Love, Faith, and Duty to you,
the bravest, worthiest of Mankind; believe me, I could dye for you, Sir.


Nay, there you lye, Sir; did I not see thee more afraid in the Fight, than the
Chaplain of the Ship, or the Purser that bought his place?


Can he be said to be afraid, that ventures to Sea with you?


Fie, fie, no more, I shall hate thy Flattery worse than thy Cowardice, my,
than thy Bragging.


Well, I own then I was afraid, mightily afraid; yet for you I would be afraid
again, an hundred times afraid: dying is ceasing to be afraid; and that I could
do sure for you, and you'll believe me one day.


Poor Youth! believe his eyes, if not his tongue: he seems to speak truth with
them.


What, does he cry? A pox on it, a Maudlin Flatterer is as nauseously
troublesome, as a Maudlin Drunkard; no more, you little Milksop, do not cry,
I'll never make thee afraid again; for of all men, if I had occasion, thou
should not be my Second; and, when I go to Sea again, thou shalt venture thy
life no more with me.


Why, will you leave me behind then? (If you would preserve my life, I'm sure
you should not.)


Leave thee behind! Ay, ay, thou art a hopeful Youth for the shore only; here
thou wilt live to be cherished by Fortune, and the great ones; for thou may
easily come to out-flatter a dull Poet, out-lye a Coffee-house, or
Gazet-writer, out-swear a Knight of the Post, out-watch a Pimp, out-fawn a
Rook, out-promise a Lover, out-rail a Wit, and outbrag a Sea-Captain: All this
thou can do, because you're a Coward, a thing I hate, therefore thou'lt do
better with the World than with me; and these are the good courses you must
take in the World. There's good advice, at least, at parting; go, and be happy
with it.


Parting, Sir! O let me not hear that dismal word.


If my words frighten thee, be gone the sooner; for, to be plain with thee,
Cowardice and I cannot dwell together.


And Cruelty and Courage never dwelt together sure, Sir. Do not turn me off to
shame and misery; for I am helpless, and friendless.


Friendless! there are half a score Friends for thee then;


If you would be cruelly pitiful, Sir, let it be with your Sword, not Gold.


We have, with much ado, turned away two Gentlemen, who told us forty times
over, their names were Mr Novel, and Major Oldfox.


Well, to your Post again.


O, the Coxcombs keep each other company, to show each other, as Novel calls
it; or, as Oldfox says, like two Knives, to whet one another.


And set other peoples teeth an edge.


Here is a Woman, an't like your Honour, scolds and bustles with us, to come
in, as much as a Seamans Widow at the Navy-Office: her name is Mrs Blackacre.


That Fiend too!


The Widow Blackacre, is it not? that Litigious She-Pettyfogger, who is at Law
and difference with all the World; but I wish I could make her agree with me in
the Church: they say she has Fifteen hundred pounds a Year Jointure, and the
care of her Son, that is, the destruction of his Estate.


Her Lawyers, Attorneys and Solicitors have Fifteen hundred pound a Year,
whil^st she is contented to be poor, to make other people so; for she is as
vexatious as her Father was, the great Attorney, nay, as a dozen Norfolk
Attorneys, and as implacable an Adversary, as a Wife suing for Alimony, or a
Parson for his Tithes; and she loves an Easter Term, or any Term, not as other
Country Ladies do, to come up to be fine, Cuckold their Husbands, and take
their pleasure; for she has no pleasure, but in vexing others, and is usually
clothed and daggle like a Baud in disguise, pursued through Alleys by
Sergeants. When she is in Town, she lodges in one of the Inns of Chancery,
where she breeds her Son, and is her self his Tutoress in Law-French; and for
her Country abode, though she has no Estate there, she chooses Norfolk. But, bid
her come in, with a pox to her, she is Olivia's Kinswoman, and may make me
amends for her visit, by some discourse of that dear Woman.


I never had so much to do with a Judges Door keeper, as with yours; but --


But the incomparable Olivia, how does she since I went?


Since you went, my Suit --


Olivia, I say, is she well?


My Suit, if you had not returned --


Dam your Suit, how does your Cousin Olivia?


My Suit, I say, had been quite lost; but now --


But now, where is Olivia? in Town? For --


For to morrow we are to have a Hearing.


Would you'd let me have a Hearing to day.


But why won't you hear me?


I am no Judge, and you talk of nothing but Suits; but, pray tell me, when did
you see Olivia?


I am no Visitor, but a Woman of Business; or, if I ever visit, 'tis only the
Chancery-lane Ladies, Ladies towards the Law; and not any of your lazy,
good-for-nothing Flirts, who cannot read Law-French, though a Gallant writ it.
But, as I was telling you, my Suit --


Dam these impertinent, vexatious people of Business, of all Sexes; they are
still troubling the World with the tedious recitals of their Law-Suits: and one
can no more stop their mouths, than a Wit's, when he talks of himself; or an
Intelligencer's, when he talks of other people.


And a pox of all vexatious, impertinent Lovers; they are still perplexing the
World with the tedious Narrations of their Love-Suits, and Discourses of their
Mistresses: You are as troublesome to a poor Widow of Business, as a young
Coxcombly Rithming Lover.


And thou art as troublesome to me, as a Rook to a losing Gamester, or a young
putter of Cases to his Mistress and Sempstress, who has Love in her head for
another.


Nay, since you talk of putting of Cases, and will not hear me speak, hear our
Ierry a little; let him put our Case to you, for the Tryal's to morrow; and
since you are my chief Witness, I would have your memory refreshed, and your
judgment informed, that you may not give your evidence improperly. Speak out,
Child.


Yes, forsooth. Hemh! Hemh! Iohn-a-Stiles --


You may talk, young Lawyer, but I shall no more mind you, than a hungry Judge
does a Cause, after the Clock has struck One.


Nay, you'll find him as peevish too.


No matter. Ierry, go on. Do you observe it then, Sir, for I think I have seen
you in a Gown once. Lord, I could hear our Ierry put Cases all day long! Mark
him, Sir.


Iohn-a-Stiles -- no -- There are first, Fitz, Pere, and Aisle; -- No, no, Aisle,
Pere, and Fitz; Aisle is seized in Fee of Blackacre; Iohn-a-Stiles disseises
Aisle; Aisle makes Claim, and the Disseisor dyes; then the Aisle -- no the Fitz.


No, the Pere, Sirrah.


O, the Pere: ay, the Pere, Sir, and the Fitz -- no the Aisle; no, the Pere and
the Fitz, Sir, and --


Dam Pere, Mere and Fitz, Sir.


No, you are out, Child; hear me, Captain then; there are Aisle, Pere and Fitz,
Aisle is seized in Fee of Blackacre; and being so seized, Iohn-a-Stiles
disseises the Aisle, Aisle makes Claim, and the Disseisor dyes; and then the Pere
re-enters, the Pere Sirrah, the Pere -- Fitz enters upon the Pere, and the Aisle
brings his Writ of Disseizen, in the Post; and the Pere brings his Writ of
Disseizen, in the Pere, and --


Can thou hear this stuff, Freeman? I could as soon suffer a whole noise of
Flatterers at a great man's Levy in a morning; but thou hast servile
complacency enough to listen to a Quibling Statesman, in disgrace, nay, and be
before hand with him, in laughing at his dull No-jest; but I --


Nay, Sir, hold. Where's the Sub-poena, Ierry? I must serve you, Sir. You are
required, by this, to give your testimony --


I'll be forsworn, to be revenged on thee.


Get you gone, for a Lawless companion. Come, Ierry, I had almost forgot we
were to meet at the Masters at three: let us mind our business still, Child.


I, forsooth, even so let's.


Nay, Madam, now I would beg you to hear me a little, a little of my business.


I have business of my own calls me away, Sir.


My business would prove yours too, dear Madam.


Yours would be some sweet business, I warrant: What, 'tis no Westminster-Hall
business? Would you have my advice?


No, faith, 'tis a little Westminster-Abby business: I would have your consent.


O fie, fie, Sir; to me such discourse, before my dear Minor there!


Ay, ay, Mother, he would be taking Livery and Seizen of your Jointure, by
digging the Turf; but I'll watch your waters, Bully, ifac. Come away, Mother.


Dear Sir, you have pity; beget but some in our Captain for me.


Where is he?


Within; swearing, as much as he did in the great storm, and cursing you, and
sometimes sinks into calms and sighs, and talks of his Olivia.


He would never trust me to see her: is she handsome?


No, if you'll take my word; but I am not a proper Judge.


What is she?


A Gentlewoman, I suppose, but of as mean a Fortune as Beauty; but her
Relations would not suffer her to go with him to the Indies: and his aversion
to this side of the World, together with the late opportunity of commanding the
Convoy, would not let him stay here longer, though to enjoy her.


He loves her mightily then.


Yes, so well, that the remainder of his Fortune (I hear about five or six
thousand pounds) he has left her, in case he had died by the way, or before she
could prevail with her Friends to follow him, which he expected she should do;
and has left behind him his great bosom Friend to be her Convoy to him.


What Charms has she for him, if she be not handsome?


He fancies her, I suppose, the only Woman of Truth and Sincerity in the
World.


No common Beauty, I confess.


Or else sure he would not have trusted her with so great a share of his
Fortune, in his absence; I suppose (since his late loss) all he has.


Why, has he left it in her own custody?


I am told so.


Then he has showed Love to her indeed, in leaving her, like an old Husband
that dyes as soon as he has made his Wife a good Jointure; but I'll go in to
him, and speak for you, and know more from him of his Olivia.


His Olivia indeed, his happy Olivia,
Yet she was left behind, when I was with him;
But she was ne'er out of his mind or heart.
She has told him she loved him; I have showed it,
And durst not tell him so, till I had done,
Under this habit, such convincing Acts
Of loving Friendship for him, that through it
He first might find out both my Sex and Love;
And, when I'd had him from his fair Olivia,
And this bright World of artful Beauties here,
Might then have hoped, he would have looked on me
Amongst the sooty Indians; and I could
To choose there live his Wife, where Wives are forced
To live no longer, when their Husbands dye:
Nay, what's yet worse, to share 'em whilst they live
With many Rival Wives. But here he comes,
And I must yet keep out of his sight, not
To lose it for ever.

But pray what strange Charms has she that could make you love?


Strange Charms indeed! She has Beauty enough to call in question her Wit or
Virtue, and her Form would make a starved Hermit a Ravisher; yet her Virtue,
and Conduct, would preserve her from the subtle Lust of a pampered Prelate. She
is so perfect a Beauty, that Art could not better it, nor Affectation deform
it; yet all this is nothing. Her tongue as well as face, ne'er knew artifice;
nor ever did her words or looks contradict her heart: She is all truth, and
hates the lying, masking, daubing World, as I do; for which I love her, and for
which I think she dislikes not me: for she has often shut out of her
conversation for mine, the gaudy fluttering Parrots of the Town, Apes, and
Echoes of men only, and refused their common place pert chat, flattery, and
submissions, to be entertained with my sullen bluntness, and honest love. And,
last of all, swore to me, since her Parents would not suffer her to go with me,
she would stay behind for no other man; but follow me, without their leave, if
not to be obtained. Which Oath --


Did you think she would keep?


Yes; for she is not (I tell you) like other Women, but can keep her promise,
though she has sworn to keep it; but, that she might the better keep it, I left
her the value of five or six thousand pound: for Women's wants are generally
their most importunate Solicitors to Love, or Marriage.


And Money summons Lovers, more than Beauty, and augments but their
importunity, and their number; so makes it the harder for a Woman to deny 'em.
For my part, I am for the French Maxim, if you would have your Female Subjects
Loyal, keep 'em poor: but, in short, that your Mistress may not marry, you have
given her a Portion.


She had given me her heart first, and I am satisfied with the security; I can
never doubt her truth and constancy.


It seems you do, since you are fain to bribe it with Money. But how come you
to be so diffident of the Man that says he loves you, and not doubt the Woman
that says it?


I should (I confess) doubt the Love of any other Woman but her, as I do the
friendship of any other Man but him I have trusted; but I have such proofs of
their faith, as cannot deceive me.


Cannot!


No but I know, that generally, no Man can be a great Enemy, but under the name
of Friend; and if you are a Cuckold, it is your Friend only that makes you so;
for your Enemy is not admitted to your house: if you are cheated in your
Fortune, 'tis your Friend that does it; for your Enemy is not made your
Trustee: if your Honour, or Good Name be injured, 'tis your Friend that does it
still, because your Enemy is not believed against you. Therefore I rather
choose to go where honest, downright Barbarity is professed; where men devour one
another like generous hungry Lyons and Tigers, not like Crocodiles; where they
think the Devil white, of our complexion, and I am already so far an Indian:
but, if your weak faith doubts this miracle of a Woman, come along with me, and
believe, and thou wilt find her so handsome, that thou, who art so much my
Friend, wilt have a mind to lie with her, and so will not fail to discover what
her faith and thine is to me.


When we're in Love, the great Adversity,
Our Friends and Mistresses at once we try.
AH, Cousin, what a World 'tis we live in! I am so weary of it.


Truly, Cousin, I can find no fault with it, but that we cannot always live
in it; for I can never be weary of it.


O hideous! you cannot be in earnest sure, when you say you like the filthy
World.


You cannot be in earnest sure, when you say you dislike it.


You are a very censorious Creature, I find.


I must confess I think we Women as often discover where we love, by railing;
as men when they lye, by their swearing; and the World is but a constant
Keeping Gallant, whom we fail not to quarrel with, when any thing crosses us,
yet cannot part with it for our hearts.


A Gallant indeed, Madam, whom Ladies first make jealous, and then quarrel with
it for being so, for if, by her indiscretion, a Lady be talked of for a Man,
she cries presently, 'Tis a Censorious World; if, by her vanity, the Intrigue
be found out, 'Tis a prying, malicious World; if, by her over-fondness, the
Gallant proves unconstant, 'Tis a false World; and if, by her nigardliness, the
Chambermaid tells, 'Tis a perfidious World: but that, I'm sure, your Ladyship
cannot say of the World yet, as bad as 'tis.


But I may say, 'Tis a very impertinent World. Hold your peace. And, Cousin, if
the World be a Gallant, 'tis such as one as is my aversion. Pray name it no
more.


But is it possible the World, which has such variety of Charms for other
Women, can have none for you? Let's see -- first, what do ye think of Dressing,
and fine Clothes?


Dressing! Fie, fie, 'tis my aversion. But, come hither, you Dowdy, methinks
you might have opened this Tour better: O hideous! I cannot suffer it! do ye
see how't sits?


Well enough, Cousin, if Dressing be your aversion.


'Tis so: and for variety of rich Clothes, they are more my aversion.


Ay, 'tis because your Ladyship wears 'em too long; for indeed a Gown, like a
Gallant, grows one's aversion, by having too much of it.


Insatiable Creature! I'll be sworn I have had this not above three days,
Cousin, and within this month have made some six more.


Then your aversion to 'em is not altogether so great.


Alas! 'tis for my Woman only I wear 'em, Cousin.


If it be for me only, Madam pray do not wear 'em.


But what do ye think of Visits -- Balls --


O, I detest 'em.


Of Plays?


I abominate 'em: filthy, obscene, hideous things?


What say you to Masquerading in the Winter, and Hide-park in the Summer?


Insipid pleasures I taste not.


Nay, if you are for more solid pleasure, what think you of a rich, young
Husband?


O horrid! Marriage! what a pleasure you have found out! I nauseate it of all
things.


But what does your Ladyship think then of a liberal, handsome, young Lover?


A handsome, young Fellow, you Impudent! Be gone, out of my sight; name a
handsome young Fellow to me! Foh, a hideous handsome young Fellow I abominate.


Indeed! But let's see -- will nothing please you? what do ye thing of the
Court?


How? the Court! the Court, Cousin! my aversion, my aversion, my aversion of
all aversions.


How? the Court! where --


Where Sincerity is a quality as out of fashion, and as unprosperous, as
Bashfulness; I could not laugh at a Quibble, though it were a fat Privy
Counsellor's; nor praise a Lord's ill Verses, though I were my self the Subject;
nor an old Lady's young looks, though I were her Woman; nor sit to a vain young
Simile-maker, though he flattered me: In short, I could not glote upon a man when
he comes into a Room, and laugh at him when he goes out; I cannot rail at the
absent, to flatter the standers by, I --


Well, but Railing now is so common, that 'tis no more Malice, but the fashion;
and the absent think they are no more the worse for being railed at, than the
present think they are the better for being flattered: and for the Court --


Nay, do not defend the Court; for you'll make me rail at it, like a trusting
Citizen's Widow.


Or like a Holborn Lady, who could not get into the last Ball, or was out of
countenance in the Drawing-room the last Sunday of her appearance there; for
none rail at the Court, but those who cannot get into it, or else who are
ridiculous when they are there: and I shall suspect you were laughed at, when
you were last there, or would be a Maid of Honour.


I a Maid of Honour! To be a Maid of Honour were yet of all things my aversion.


In what sense am I to understand you? But, in fine, by the word Aversion, I'm
sure you dissemble; for I never knew Woman yet that used it, who did not. Come,
our tongues belie our hearts, more than our Pocket-glasses do our faces; but
methinks we ought to leave off dissembling, since 'tis grown of no use to us;
for all wise observers understand us now adays, as they do Dreams, Almanacs,
and Dutch Gazets, by the contrary: And a Man no more believes a Woman, when she
says she has an Aversion for him, than when she says she'll Cry out.


O filthy, hidous! Peace, Cousin, or your discourse will be my Aversion; and
you may believe me.


Yes; for, if any thing be a Woman's Aversion, 'tis Plain-dealing from another
Woman: and perhaps that's your quarrel to the World; for that will talk, as
your Woman says.


Talk not of me sure; for what Men do I converse with? what Visits do I admit?


Here's the Gentleman to wait upon you, Madam.


On me! you little, unthinking Fop, do ye know what you say?


Yes, Madam, 'tis the Gentleman that comes every day to you, who --


Hold your peace, you heedless little Animal, and get you gone. This Country
Boy, Cousin, takes my Dancing-master, Taylor, or the spruce Milliner, for
Visitors.


No, Madam 'tis Mr. Novel, I'm sure, by his talking so loud: I know his voice
too, Madam.


You know nothing, you Buffle-headed, stupid Creature you; you would make my
Cousin believe I receive Visits: but if it be Mr. -- what did you call him?


Mr. Novel, Madam, he that --


Hold your peace, I'll hear no more of him; but if it be your Mr. -- (I can't
think of his name again) I suppose he has follow'd my Cousin hither.


No, Cousin, I will not rob you of the Honour of the Visit: 'tis to you,
Cousin, for I know him not.


Nor did I ever hear of him before, upon my Honour, Cousin; besides, ha'nt I
told you, that Visits, and the business of Visits, Flattery, and Detraction,
are my Aversion? Do ye think then I would admit such a Coxcomb as he is? who,
rather than not rail, will rail at the dead, whom none speak ill of; and,
rather than not flatter, will flatter the Poets of the Age, whom none will
flatter; who affects Novelty as much as the Fashion, and is as fantastical as
changeable, and as well known as the Fashion; who likes nothing, but what is
new; nay, would choose to have his Friend, or his Title, a new one. In fine, he
is my Aversion.


I find you do know him, Cousin; at least, have heard of him.


Yes, now I remember, I have heard of him.


Well; but, since he is such a Coxcomb, for Heavens sake, let him not come up:
tell him, Mrs. Lattice, your Lady is not within.


No, Lattice, tell him, my Cousin is here, and that he may come up; for,
notwithstanding I detest the fight of him, you may like his conversation; and
though I would use him scurvily, I will not be rude to you, in my own Lodging;
since he has follow'd you hither, let him come up, I say.


Very fine! Pray let him go to the Devil, I say, for me: I know him not, nor
desire it. Send him away, Mrs. Lattice.


Upon my word, she sha'nt: I must disobey your commands, to comply with your
desires. Call him up, Lattice.


Nay, I'll swear she shall not stir no that Errand.


Well then, I'll call him my self for you, since you will have it so. Mr.
Novel,


Madam, I beg your pardon, perhaps you were busy: I did not think you had
company with you.


Yet he comes to me, Cousin!


-- Chairs there.


Well, but Madam, do ye know whence I come now?


From some melancholy place I warrant, Sir, since they have lost your good
company.


So.


From a place, where they have treated me, at dinner, with so much civility and
kindness, a pox on 'em, that I could hardly get away to you, dear Madam.


You have a way with you so new, and obliging, Sir.


You hate Flattery, Cousin!


Nay faith, Madam, do ye think my way new? then you are obliging, Madam. I must
confess, I hate imitation, to do any thing like other people: all that know me,
do me the Honour to say, I am an Original Faith; but as I was saying, Madam, I
have been treated to day, with all the ceremony and kindness imaginable, at my
Lady Autums; but the nauseous old Woman at the upper end of her Table --


Revives the old Grecian custom, of serving in a Deaths head with their
Banquets.


Hah, ha! fine, justifaith; nay, and new: 'tis like eating with the Ghost in
the Libertine; she would frighten a Man from her dinner, with her hollow
invitations, and spoil one's stomach --


To Meat, or Women. I detest her hollow cherry cheeks; she looks like an old
Coach new painted: affecting an unseemly smugness, whilst she is ready to drop
in pieces.


You hate Detraction I see, Cousin!


But the filly old Fury, whilst she affects to look like a Woman of this Age,
talks --


Like one of the last; and as passionately as an old Courtier, who has
out-liv'd his Office.


Yes, Madam, but pray let me give you her character. Then, she never counts her
age by the years, but --


By the Masques she has lived to see.


Nay then, Madam, I see you think a little harmless railing too great a
pleasure for any but your self, and therefore I've done.


Nay, faith, you shall tell me who you had there at dinner.


If you would hear me, Madam.


Most patiently: speak, Sir.


Then, we had her daughter --


Ay, her daughter, the very disgrace to good clothes, which she always wears,
but to heighten her deformity, not mend it; for she is still most splendidly,
gallantly, ugly, and looks like an ill piece of daubing in a rich Frame.


So! But have you done with her, Madam? And can you spare her to me a little
now?


Ay, ay, Sir.


Then, she is like --


She is, you'd say, like a City Bride, the greater Fortune, but not the greater
Beauty, for her dress.


Well: yet have you done, Madam? Then, she --


Then she bestows as unfortunately on her face all the graces in fashion, as
the languishing eye, the hanging or pouting lip; but as the Fool is never more
provoking than when he aims at Wit, the ill-favor^d of our Sex are never more
nauseous than when they would be Beauties, adding to their natural deformity,
the artificial ugliness of affectation.


So, Cousin, I find one may have a collection of all ones acquaintances
Pictures as well at your house, as at Mr. Lely's; only the difference is, there
we find 'em much handsomer than they are, and like; here, much uglier, and
like: and you are the first of the profession of Picture-drawing I ever knew
without flattery.


I draw after the Life; do no Body wrong, Cousin.


No, you hate flattery and detraction!


But, Mr. Novel, who had you besides at dinner?


Nay, the Devil take me if I tell you, unless you will allow me the privilege
of railing in my turn; but, now I think on it, the Women ought to be your
Province, as the Men are mine: and you must know, we had him whom --


Him, whom --


What? Invading me already? And giving the character, before you know the Man?


No, that is not fair, though it be usual.


I beg your pardon, Mr. Novel, pray, go on.


Then, I say, we had that familiar Coxcomb, who is at home wheresoever he
comes.


Ay, that Fool --


Nay then, Madam, your Servant: I'm gone. Taking a Fool out of ones mouth, is
worse than taking the Bread out of ones mouth.


I've done, your pardon, Mr Novel, pray proceed.


I say, the Rogue, that he may be the only Wit in company, will let no Body
else talk, and --


Ay, those Fops who love to talk all themselves, are of all things my Aversion.


Then you'll let me speak, Madam, sure. The Rogue, I say, will force his Jest
upon you; and I hate a Jest that's forced upon a Man, as much as a Glass.


Why, I hope, Sir, he does not expect a Man of your temperance in jesting
should do him reason?


What, interruption from this side too! I must then --


No, Sir -- You must know, Cousin, that Fop he means, though he talks only to be
commended, will not give you leave to do it.


But, Madam --


He a Wit! hang him, he's only an Adopter of straggling Jests, and fatherless
Lampoons; by the credit of which, he eats at good Tables, and so, like the
barren Beggar-woman, lives by borrowed Children.


Madam --


And never was Author of any thing, but his News; but that is still all his
own.


Madam, pray --


An eternal Babbler; and makes no more use of his ears, than a Man that sits at
a Play by his Mistress, or in Fop-corner: he's, in fine, a base detracting
Fellow, and is my Aversion. But who else prithee, Mr. Novel, was there with
you? Nay, you sha'nt stir.


I beg your pardon, Madam, I cannot stay in any place, where I'm not allow'd a
little Christian liberty of railing.


Nay, prithee, Mr. Novel, stay; and, though you should rail at me, I would hear
you with patience: prithee who else was there with you?


Your Servant, Madam.


Nay, prithee tell us, Mr. Novel, prithee do.


We had no Body else.


Nay, faith I know you had. Come, my Lord Plausible was there too, who is
Cousin, a --


You need not tell me what he is, Cousin; for I know him to be a civil,
good-natur'd, harmless Gentleman, that speaks well of all the World, and is
always in good humour, and --


Hold, Cousin, hold, I hate Detraction; but I must tell you, Cousin, his
civility, is cowardice; his good nature, want of wit; and has neither courage,
or sense to rail: And for his being always in humour, 'tis because he is never
dissatisfi'd with himself. In fine, he is my Aversion; and I never admit his
Visits beyond my Hall.


No, he visit you! Dam him, cringing, grinning Rogue; if I should see him
coming up to you, I would make bold to kick him down again. Ha! --


So! I find kissing and railing succeed each other with the angry Men, as well
as with the angry Women; and their quarrels are like Love-quarrels, since
absence is the only cause of them; for, as soon as the Man appears again, they
are over.


Your most faithful, humble Servant, generous Mr. Novel; and, Madam, I am your
eternal Slave, and kiss your fair hands; which I had done sooner, according to
your commands, but --


No excuses, my Lord.


What, you sent for him then, Cousin?


Ha! invited!


I know you must divide your self; for your good company is too general a good,
to be engrossed by any particular Friend.


O Lord, Madam, my company! your most obliged, faithful, humble Servant; but I
could have brought you good company indeed, for I parted at your door with two
of the worthiest, bravest Men --


Who were they, my Lord?


Who do you call the worthiest, braviest men, pray?


O the wisest, bravest Gentlemen! Men of such Honour, and Virtue! of such good
qualities! ah --


This is a Coxcomb, that speaks ill of all people a different way, and Libels
every body with dull praise, and commonly in the wrong place, so makes his
Panegyrics abusive Lampoons.


But pray let me know who they were.


Ah! such patterns of Heroic Virtue! such --


Well, but who the Devil were they?


The honour of our Nation, the glory of our Age, ah! I could dwell a Twelve
month on their praise; which indeed I might spare by telling their names: Sir
Iohn Current, and Sir Richard Court-Title.


Court-Title! Hah, ha.


And Sir Iohn Current! Why will you keep such a Wretch company, my Lord?


Oh, Madam, seriously you are a little too severe; for he is a Man of
unquestioned reputation in every thing.


Yes, because he endeavours only with the Women, to pass for a Man of Courage;
and with the Bullies, for a Wit; with the Wits, for a Man of Business; and with
the Men of Business, for a Favourite at Court; and at Court, for good City
security.


And, for Sir Richard, he --


He loves your choice, picked company; persons that --


He loves a Lord indeed; but --


Pray, dear Madam, let me have but a bold stroke or two at his Picture. He
loves a Lord, as you say, though --


Though he borrowed his Money, and ne'er paid him again.


And would bespeak a place three days before at the back-end of a Lords Coach,
to Hide-Park.


Nay, i'faith, i'faith, you are both too severe.


Then, to show yet more his passion for quality, he makes Love to that fulsome
Coach-load of Honour, my Lady Goodly; for he is always at her Lodging.


Because it is the Conventickle-Gallant, the Meeting-house of all the fair
Ladies, and glorious Superfine Beauties of the Town.


Very fine Ladies! there's first --


Her Honour, as fat as an Hostess.


She is something plump indeed, a goodly, comely, graceful person.


Then there's my Lady Frances, what do ye call'er? as ugly --


As a Citizens lawfully begotten daughter.


She has wit in abundance; and the handsomest heel, elbow, and tip of an ear,
you ever saw.


Heel, and elbow! hah, ha! And there's my Lady Betty you know --


As sluttish, and flatternly, as an Irish Woman bred in France.


Ah, all she has hangs with a loose Air indeed, and becoming negligence.


You see all faults with Lovers eyes, I find, my Lord.


Ah, Madam, your most obliged, faithful, humble Servant to command! But you can
say nothing sure against the Superfine Mistress --


I know who you mean. She is as censorious and detracting a Jade, as a
superannuated Sinner.


She has a smart way of Raillery, 'tis confessed.


And then, for Mrs. Grideline.


She I'm sure is --


One that never spoke ill of any body, 'tis confessed; for she is as silent in
conversation as a Country Lover, and no better company than a Clock, or a
Weather-glass; for if she sounds, 'tis but once an hour, to put you in mind of
the time of day, or to tell you 'twill be cold or hot, rain or snow.


Ah, poor creature! she's extremely good and modest.


And for Mrs. Bridlechin, she's --


As proud, as a Churchman's Wife.


She's a Woman of great spirit and honour, and will not make her self cheap,
'tis true.


Then Mrs. Hoyden, that calls all people by their Surnames, and is --


As familiar a Duck --


As an Actress in the Tyring-room. There I was once before-hand with you,
Madam.


Mrs. Hoyden! A poor, affable, good-natur'd Soul! But the Divine Mrs. Trifle
comes thither too: sure her beauty, virtue and conduct, you can say nothing
too.


No!


No! -- pray let me speak, Madam.


First, can any one be called beautiful that squints?


Her eyes languish a little, I own.


Languish! hah, ha.


Languish! Then, for her conduct, she was seen at the Country Wife, after the
first day. There's for you, my Lord.


But, Madam, she was not seen to use her Fan all the Play long, turn aside her
head, or by a conscious blush, discover more guilt than modesty.


Very fine! then you think a Woman modest, that sees the hideous Country Wife,
without blushing, or publishing her detestation of it? Do ye hear him, Cousin?


Yes; and am, I must confess, something of his opinion, and think that as an
over-conscious Fool at a Play, by endeavouring to show the Author's want of
Wit, exposes his own to more censure: so may a Lady call her own modesty in
question, by publicly cavilling with the Poets; for all those grimaces of
honour, and artificial modesty, disparage a Woman's real Virtue, as much as the
use of white and red does the natural complexion; and you must use very, very
little, if you would have it thought your own.


Then you would have a Woman of Honour with passive looks, ears, and tongue,
undergo all the hideous obscenity she hears at nasty Plays?


Truly I think a Woman betrays her want of modesty, by showing it publicly in
a Play-house, as much as a Man does his want of courage by a quarrel there; for
the truly modest and stout say least, and are least exceptio^s, especially in
public.


O hideous! Cousin, this cannot be your opinion; but you are one of those who
have the confidence to pardon the filthy Play.


Why, what is there of ill in it, say you?


O fie, fie, fie, would you put me to the blush anew? call all the blood into
my face again? But, to satisfy you then, first, the clandestine obscenity in
the very name of Horner.


Truly, 'tis so hidden, I cannot find it out, I confess.


O horrid! does it not give you the rank conception, or image of a Goat, a
Town-bull, or a Satyr? nay, what is yet a filthier image than all the rest,
that of an Eunuch?


What then? I can think of a Goat, a Bull, or Satyr, without any hurt.


I, but, Cousin, one cannot stop there.


I can, Cousin.


O no; for when you have those filthy creatures in your head once, the next
thing you think, is what they do; as their defiling of honest Men's Beds and
Couches, Rapes upon sleeping and waking Country Virgins, under Hedges, and on
Haycocks: nay, farther --


Nay, no farther, Cousin, we have enough of your Comment on the Play, which will
make me more ashamed than the Play it self.


O, believe me, 'tis a filthy Play, and you may take my word for a filthy Play,
as soon as another; but the filthiest thing in that Play, or any other Play,
is --


Pray keep it to your self, if it be so.


No, faith, you shall know it, I'm resolved to make you out of love with the
Play: I say, the lewdest, filthiest thing, is his China; nay, I will never
forgive the beastly Author his China: he has quite taken away the reputation of
poor China it self, and sullied the most innocent and pretty Furniture of a
Ladies Chamber; insomuch, that I was fain to break all my defiled Vessels. You
see I have none left; nor you, I hope.


You'll pardon me, I cannot think the worse of my China, for that of the
Play-house.


Why, you will not keep any now sure! 'tis now as unfit an ornament for a
Ladies Chamber, as the Pictures that come from Italy, and other hot Countries,
as appears by their nudities, which I always cover, or scratch out,
wheresoever I find 'em. But China! out upon it, filthy China, nasty, debauched
China!


All this will not put me out of conceit with China, nor the Play, which is
Acted to day, or another of the same beastly Author's, as you call him, which
I'll go see.


You will not sure! nay, you sha'not venture your reputation by going, and mine
by leaving me alone with two Men here: nay, you'll disoblige me for ever, if --



I stay! -- your Servant.


Well -- but my Lord, though you justify every body, you cannot in earnest
uphold so beastly a Writer, whose Ink is so smutty, as one may say.


Faith, I dare swear the poor Man did not think to disoblige the Ladies, by any
amorous, soft, passionate, luscious saying in his Play.


Foy, my Lord; but what think you, Mr. Novel, of the Play? though I know you are
a Friend to all that are new.


Faith, Madam, I must confess, the new Plays would not be the worse for my
advice, but I could never get the silly Rogues, the Poets, to mind what I say;
but I'll tell you what counsel I gave the surly Fool you speak of.


What was't?


Faith, to put his Play into Rithme; for Rithme, you know, often makes mystical
Nonsense pass with the Critics for Wit, and a double meaning saying with the
Ladies, for soft, tender, and moving passion. But, now I talk of passion, I saw
your old Lover this morning -- Captain --


Whom? -- nay, you need not whisper.


We are luckily got hither unobserved: -- How! in a close conversation with
these supple Rascals, the Out-casts of Sempstresses shops?


Faith, pardon her, Captain, that, since she could no longer be entertained
with your manly bluntness, and honest love, she takes up with the pert chat and
common place flattery of these fluttering Parrots of the Town, Apes and Echoes
of Men only.


Do not you, Sir, play the Echo too, mock me, dally with my own words, and show
your self as impertinent as they are.


Nay, Captain --


Nay, Lieutenant, do not excuse her, methinks she looks very kindly upon 'em
both, and seems to be pleased with what that Fool there says to her.


You lye, Sir, and hold your peace, that I may not be provoked to give you a
worse reply.


Manly returned, do ye say! And is he safe?


My Lord saw him too. Hark you, my Lord.


She yet seems concerned for my safety, and perhaps they are admitted now here
but for their news of me; for Intelligence indeed is the common Passport of
nauseous Fools, when they go their round of good Tables and Houses.


I heard of his fighting only, without particulars, and confess I always loved
his Brutal courage, because it made me hope it might rid me of his more Brutal
love.


What's that?


But is he at last returned, do ye say, unhurt?


Ay faith, without doing his business; for the Rogue has been these two years
pretending to a wooden Leg, which he would take from Fortune, as kindly, as the
Staff of a Marshal of France, and rather read his name in a Gazet --


Than in the Entail of a good Estate.


So! --


I have an Ambition, I must confess, of losing my heart, before such a fair
Enemy as your self, Madam; but that silly Rogues should be ambitious of losing
their Arms, and --


Looking like a pair of Compasses.


But he has no use of his Arms, but to set 'em on Kimbow, for he never pulls
off his Hat, at least not to me, I'm sure; for you must know, Madam, he has a
fanatical hatred to good company: he can't abide me.


O, be not so severe to him, as to say he hates good company; for I assure you
he has a great respect, esteem and kindness for me.


That kind, civil Rogue has spoken yet ten thousand times worse of me, than
the other.


Well, if he be returned, Mr. Novel, then shall I be pestered again with his
boisterous Sea-love; have my Alcove smell like a Cabin, my Chamber perfumed with
his Tarpaulin Brandenburgh, and hear volleys of Brandy sighs, enough to make a
Fog in ones Room. Eoh! I hate a Lover that smells like Thames-street!


I can bear no longer, and need hear no more.


Overheard us then?


I hope he heard me not.


Most noble and heroic Captain, your most obliged, faithful, humble Servant.


Dear Tar, thy humble Servant.


Away -- Madam


Nay, I think I have fitted you for listening.


You have fitted me, for believing you could not be fickle, though you were
young; could not dissemble Love, tho'twas your interest; nor be in vain, though
you were handsome; nor break your promise, though to a parting Lover; nor abuse
your best Friend, though you had Wit: but I take not your contempt of me worse,
than your esteem, or civility for these things here, though you know 'em.


Things!


Let the Captain Railly a little.


Yes, things: can thou be angry, thou thing?


No, since my Lord says you speak in Raillery; for, though your Sea-raillery be
something rough, yet I confess we use one another to as bad every day, at
Lockets, and never quarrel for the matter.


Nay, noble Captain, be not angry with him: A word with you, I beseech you. --


Well, we Women, like the rest of the Cheats of the World, when our Cullies or
Creditors have found us out, and will, or can trust no longer; pay Debts, and
satisfy Obligations, with a quarrel, the kindest Present a Man can make to his
Mistress, when he can make no more Presents: for oftentimes in Love, as at
Cards, we are forced to play foul, only to give over the game; and use our
Lovers, like the Cards, when we can get no more by 'em, throw 'em up in a pet,
upon the first dispute.


My Lord, all that you have made me know by your whispering, which I knew not
before, is, that you have a stinking breath: there's a secret, for your secret.


Pshaw! pshaw!


But, Madam, tell me, pray, what was't, about this spark, could take you? was
it the merit of his fashionable impudence, the briskness of his noise, the wit
of his laugh, his judgment, or fancy in his garniture? or was it a well-trim'd
Glove, or the scent of it that charmed you?


Very well, Sir, 'gad^ these Sea-Captains make nothing of dressing: but let me
tell you, Sir, a man by his dress, as much as by any thing, shows his wit and
judgment, nay, and his courage too.


How his courage, Mr. Novel?


Why, for example, by red Breeches, tucked up Hair or Peruke, a greasy broad
Belt, and now adays a short Sword.


Thy courage will appear more by thy Belt than thy Sword, I dare swear. Then,
Madam, for this gentle piece of courtesy, this Man of tame honour, what could
you find in him? was it his languishing affected tone? his mannerly look? his
second-hand flattery, the refuse of the Play house tiring-rooms? or his slavish
obsequiousness, in watching at the door of your Box at the Play-house, for your
hand to your Chair? or his jaunty way of playing with your Fan? or was it the
Gunpowder spot on his hand, or the Jewel in his ear, that purchased your heart?


Good jealous Captain, no more of your --


No, let him go on, Madam, for perhaps he may make you laugh: and I would
contribute to your pleasure any way.


Gentle Rogue!


No, noble Captain, you cannot sure think any thing could take me more than
that heroic Title of yours, Captain; for you know we Women love honour
inordinately.


Hah, ha, faith she is with thee, Bully, for thy Raillery.


Faith so shall I be with you, no Bully, for your grinning.


Then, that noble Lyon-like men of yours, that Soldier-like weather beaten
complexion, and that manly roughness of your voice; how can they otherwise than
charm us Women, who hate Effeminacy!


Hah, ha! faith I can't hold from laughing.


Nor shall I from kicking anon.


And then, that Captain-like carelessness in your dress, but especially your
Scarf; 'twas just such another, only a little higher tied, made me in love with
my Taylor, as he past by my Window the last Training day; for we Women adore a
Martial Man, and you have nothing wanting to make you more one, or more
agreeable, but a wooden Leg.


Nay, i'faith there your Ladyship was a Wag, and it was fine, just, and well
Raillied.


Ay, ay, Madam, with you Ladies too, Martial Men must needs be very killing.


Peace, you Bartholomew-Fair Buffoons; and be not you vain that these laugh on
your side, for they will laugh at their own dull jests: but no more of 'em, for
I will only suffer now this Lady to be witty and merry.


You would not have your Panegyric interrupted. I go on then to your humour. Is
there any thing more agreeable, than the pretty sullenness of that? than the
greatness of your courage? which most of all appears in your spirit of
contradiction, for you dare give all Mankind the Lye; and your Opinion is your
only Mistress, for you renounce that too, when it becomes another Mans.


Hah, ha! I cannot hold, I must laugh at thee Tar, faith!


And i'faith, dear Captain, I beg your pardon, and leave to laugh at you too,
though I protest I mean you no hurt; but, when a Lady Raillies, a stander by must
be complaisant, and do her reason in laughing: Hah, ha.


Why, you impudent, p^tiful Wretches, you presume sure upon your Effeminacy to
urge me; for you are in all things so like Women, that you may think it in me a
kind of Cowardice to beat you.


No Hectoring, good Captain.


Or, perhaps, you think this Ladies presence secures you; but have a care, she
has talked her self out of all the respect I had for her; and by using me ill
before you, has given me a privilege of using you so before her: but if you
would preserve your respect to her, and not be beaten before her, go, be gone
immediately.


Be gone! what?


Nay, worthy, noble, generous Captain.


Be gone, I say.


Be gone again! to us be gone!


No chattering, Baboons, instantly be gone. Or --


Well, Madam, we'll go make the Cards ready in your Bed-chamber; sure you will
not stay long with him.


Turn hither your rage, good Captain Swagger-huff, and be saucy with your
Mistress, like a true Captain; but be civil to your Rivals and Betters, and do
not threaten any thing but me here; no, not so much as my Windows, nor do not
think your self in the Lodgings of one of your Suburb Mistresses beyond the
Tower.


Do not give me cause to think so, for those less infamous Women part with
their Lovers, just as you did from me, with unforc'd vows of constancy, and
floods of willing tears; but the same winds bear away their Lovers, and their
vows: And for their grief, if the credulous unexpected Fools return, they find
new Comforters, fresh Cullies, such as I found here. The mercenary love of
those Women too suffer shipwreck, with their Gallants fortunes; now you have
heard Chance has used me scurvily, therefore you do too. Well, persevere in
your ingratitude, falsehood, and disdain; have constancy in something, and I
promise you to be as just to your real scorn, as I was to your feigned love:
And henceforward will despise, contemn, hate, loath, and detest you, most
faithfully.


Get the Hombre Cards ready in the next Room, Lattice, and --


Bravely resolved, Captain.


And you'll be sure to, keep your word, I hope, Sir.


I hope so too.


Do you but hope it, Sir? if you are not as good as your word, 'twill be the
first time you ever bragged sure.


She has restored my reason with my heart.


But, now you talk of restoring Captain, there are other things which, next to
one's heart, one would not part with; I mean your Jewels and Money, which it
seems she has, Sir.


What's that to you, Sir?


Pardon me, whatsoever is yours, I have a share in it, I'm sure, which I will
not lose for asking, though you may be too generous, or too angry now to do it
your self.


Nay, then I'll make bold to make my claim too.


Hold, you impertinent, officious Fops -- How have I been deceived!


Madam, there are certain Appurtenances to a Lover's heart, called Jewels,
which always go along with it.


And which, with Lovers, have no value in themselves, but from the heart they
come with; our Captain's, Madam, it seems you scorn to keep, and much more will
those worthless things without it, I am confident.


A Gentleman, so well made as you are, may be confident -- us easy Women could
not deny you any thing you ask, if 'twere for your self; but, since 'tis for
another, I beg your leave to give him my Answer. (An agreeable young Fellow
this! -- And would not be my Aversion!)


Whom?


My Husband.


Your Husband!


Ay, my Husband; for, since you could leave me, I am lately, and privately
married to one, who is a Man of so much Honour and Experience in the World,
that I dare not ask him for your Jewels again, to restore 'em to you; lest he
should conclude you never would have parted with 'em to me, on any other score,
but the exchange of my Honour: which rather than you'd let me lose, you'd lose
I'm sure you self, those Trifles of yours.


Triumphant Impudence! but married too!


O, speak not so loud, my Servants know it not: I am married; there's no
resisting one's Destiny, or Love, you know.


Why, did you love him too?


Most passionately; nay, love him now, though I have married him, and he me:
which mutual love, I hope you are too good, too generous a Man to disturb, by
any future claim, or visits to me. 'Tis true, he is now absent in the Country,
but returns shortly; therefore I beg of you, for your own ease and quiet, and
my Honour, you will never see me more.


I wish I never had seen you.


But if you should ever have any thing to say to me hereafter, let that young
Gentleman there, be your Messenger.


You would be kinder to him: I find he should be welcome.


Alas, his Youth would keep my Husband from suspicions, and his visits from
scandal; for we Women may have pity for such as he, but no love: And I already
think you do not well to spirit him away to Sea; and the Sea is already but too
rich with the spoils of the shore.


True perfect Woman! -- If I could say any thing more injurious to her now, I
would; for I could out-rail a bilked Whore, or a kicked Coward: but, now I
think on it, that were rather to discover my love, than hatred; and I must not
talk, for something I must do.


I think I have given him enough of me now, never to be troubled with him
again. -- Lattice, are the Cards and all ready within? I come then Captain, I
beg your pardon: You will not make one at Hombre?


No, Madam, but I'll wish you a little good luck before you go.


No, if you would have me thrive, Curse me; for that you'll do heartily, I
suppose.


Then, if you will have it so, May all the Curses light upon you, Women ought
to fear, and you deserve; first may the Curse of loving Play attend your sordid
Covetousness, and Fortune cheat you, by trusting to her, as you have cheated
me; the Curse of Pride, or a good Reputation, fall on your Lust; the Curse of
Affectation on your Beauty; the Curse of your Husbands company on your
Pleasures; and the Curse of your Gallant's disappointments in his absence; and
the Curse of scorn, jealousy, or despair, on your love: and then the Curse of
loving on.


And, to requite all your Curses, I will only return you your last; May the
Curse of loving me still, fall upon your proud hard heart, that could be so
cruel to me in these horrid Curses: but Heaven forgive you.


Hell, and the Devil, reward thee.


Well, you see now, Mistresses, like Friends, are lost, by letting 'em handle
your Money; and most Women are such kind of Witches, who can have no power over
a Man, unless you give 'em Money; but when once they have got any from you,
they never leave you, till they have all: therefore I never dare give a Woman a
farthing.


Well, there is yet this comfort by losing one's Money with one's Mistress, a
Man is out of danger of getting another; of being made prize again by love;
who, like a Pirate, takes ^ou by spreading false Colours: but when once you have
run your Ship aground, the treacherous Picaroon looss, so by your ruin you
save your self from slavery at least.


Mrs. Lattice, here's Madam Blackacre come to wait upon her Honour.


Do ye hear that? let us be gone, before she comes; for hence forward I'll avoid
the whole damned Sex for ever, and Woman as a sinking Ship.


And I'll stay, to revenge on her your quarrel to the Sex; for out of love to
her Jointure, and hatred to business, I would marry her, to make an end of her
thousand Suits, and my thousand engagements, to the comfort of two unfortunate
sorts of people; my Plaintiffs, and her Defendants; my Creditors, and her
Adversaries.


'Tis an arrant Sea-Ruffian, but I am glad I met with him at last, to serve him
again, Major, for the last service was not good in Law. Boy, Duck, Ierry, where
is my Paper of Memorandums? give me Child: so. Where is my Cousin Olivia, now,
my kind Relation?


Here is one that would be your kind Relation, Madam.


What mean you, Sir?


Why, faith (to be short) to marry you, Widow.


Is not this the wild rude person we saw at Captain Manly's?


Ay, forsooth, an't please.


What would you? what are you? Marry me!


Ay faith, for I am a younger Brother, and you are a Widow.


You are an impertinent person, and go about your business.


I have none, but to marry thee, Widow.


But I have other business, I'd have you to know.


But you have no business anights, Widow; and I'll make you pleasanter business
than any you have: for anights, I assure you, I am a Man of great business; for
the business --


Go, I'm sure you're an idle Fellow.


Try me but, Widow, and employ me as you find my abilities, and industry.


Pray be civil to the Lady, Mr. -- she's a person of quality, a person that is
no person --


Yes, but she's a person that is a Widow: be you mannerly to her, because you
are to pretend only to be her Squire, to arm her to her Lawyers Chambers; but I
will be impudent and bawdy, for she must love and marry me.


Marry come up, you saucy familiar Jack! You think with us Widows, 'tis no more
than up, and ride. Gad forgive me, now adays, every idle, young, hectoring,
roaring Companion, with a pair of turned red Breeches, and a broad Back, thinks
to carry away any Widow, of the best degree; but I'd have you to know, Sir, all
Widows are not got, like places at Court, by Impudence and Importunity only.


No, no, soft, soft, you are a young Man, and not fit --


For a Widow? Yes sure, old Man, the fitter.


Go to, go to, if others had not laid in their claims before you --


Not you, I hope.


Why not I, Sir? Sure I am a much more proportionable match for her, than you,
Sir; I, who am an elder Brother, of a comfortable Fortune, and of equal Years
with her.


How's that? You unmannerly person, I^d have you to know, I was born but in
Ann' undec' Caroli prim'.


Your pardon, Lady, your pardon; be not offended with your very Servant. -- But
I say, Sir, you are a beggarly younger Brother, twenty Years younger than her;
without any Land or Stock, but your great stock of Impudence: therefore what
pretension can you have to her?


You have made it for me; first, because I am a younger Brother.


Why, is that a sufficient Plea to a Relic? How appears it, Sir? by what
foolish custom?


By custom, time out of mind only. Then, Sir, because I have nothing to keep me
after her death, I am the likelier to take care of her life. And, for my being
twenty Years younger than her, and having a sufficient stock of Impudence, I
leave it to her whether they will be valid exceptions to me, in her Widow's Law
or Equity.


Well, she has been so long in Chancery, that I'll stand to her Equity and
Decree between us. Come, Lady, pray snap up this young Snap at first, or we
shall be troubled with him; give him a City Widow's Answer: (that is, with all
the ill breeding imaginable.)


Well then, to make an end of this foolish Wooing, for nothing interrupts
business more; first, for you, Major --


You declare in my favour then?


What direct the Court? (Come, young Lawyer, thou shall it be a Counsel for me.)


Gad, I shall betray your Cause then, as well as an older Lawyer, never stir


First, I say, for you Major, my walking Hospital of an ancient Foundation,
thou Bag of Mummy, that would fall asunder, if 'twere not for thy
Cere-cloaths --


How, Lady?


Hah, ha --


Hey, brave Mother! use all Suitors thus, for my sake.


Thou withered, hobbling, distorted Cripple; nay, thou art Cripple all over;
would thou make me the Staff of thy Age, the Crutch of thy Decrepidness? Me
--


Well said Widow! faith, thou would make a Man love thee now, without
dissembling.


Thou senseless, impertinent, quibling, drivelling, feeble, paralytic, impotent,
sumbling, frigid Nincompoop.


Hey, brave Mother, for calling of names, ifac!


Would thou make a Caudlemaker, a Nurse of me? Can't you be Bed-rid, without
a Bed-fellow? Won't your Swan-skins Furs, Flannels, and the scorched Trencher
keep you warm there? Would you have me your Scotch-warming Pan, with a Pox to
you? Me! --


O Heavens!


I told you I should be thought the fitter Man, Major.


Ay, you old Fobus, and you would have been my Guardian, would you? to have
taken care of my Estate, that half of't should never come to me, by letting
long Leases at Pepper-corn Rents.


If I would have married an old Man, 'tis well known I might have married an
Earl; nay, what's more, a Judge, and been covered the Winter-nights with the
Lamb-skins, which I prefer to the Ermins of Nobles: And dost thou think I would
wrong my poor Minor there, for you?


Your Minor is a chopping Minor, God bless him.


Your Minor may be a Major of Horse or Foot, for his bigness; and, it seems,
you will have the cheating of your Minor to your self.


Pray, Sir, bear Witness; Cheat my Minor! I'll bring my Action of the Case for
the slander.


Nay, I would bear false Witness for thee now, Widow, since you have done me
justice, and have thought me the fitter Man for you.


Fair, and softly Sir, 'tis my Minor's Case, more than my own: And I must do
him justice now on you.


How?


So then.


You are first, (I warrant) some Renegade from the Inns of Court, and the Law;
and thou'lt come to suffer for it, by the Law: that is, be hanged.


Not about your neck, forsooth, I hope.


But, Madam --


Hear the Court.


Thou art some debauched, drunken, lewd, hectoring, gaming Companion, and
want some Widow's old Gold to nick upon; but, I thank you, Sir, that's for
my Lawyers.


Faith, we should ne'er quarrel about that; for Guineys would serve my turn:
but, Widow --


Thou art a foul-mouth'd Boaster of thy Lust, a mere Bragadochio of thy
strength for Wine and Women, and wilt belie thy self more than thou dost Women,
and art every way a base deceiver of Women: And would deceive me too, would
you?


Nay faith, Widow, this is Judging without seeing the Evidence.


I say, you are a worn-out Whoremaster, at five and twenty both in Body and
Fortune: And cannot be trusted by the common Wenches of the Town, lest you
should not pay 'em; nor by the Wives of the Town, lest you should pay 'em: so
you want Women, and would have me your Baud, to procure 'em for you.


Faith, if you had any good Acquaintance, Widow, it would be civilly done of
thee; for I am just come from Sea.


I mean, you would have me keep you, that you might turn Keeper; for poor
Widows are only used like Bawds by you; you go to Church with us, but to get
other Women to lie with. In fine, you are a cheating, chousing Spendthrift:
And, having sold your own Annuity, would waste my Jointure.


And make havoc of our Estate personal, and all our old gilt Plate; I should
soon be picking up all our mortgaged Apostle-Spoons, Bowls and Beakers, out of
most of the Ale-houses, betwixt Hercules Pillars and the Boatswain in Wapping:
nay, and you'd be scouring amongst my Trees, and make 'em knock down one
another, like routed reeling Watchmen at midnight. Would you so, Bully?


Nay, prithee, Widow, hear me.


No, Sir, I'd have you to know, thou pitiful, paltry, lath-back'd Fellow, if I
would have married a young Man, 'tis well known, I could have had any young
Heir in Norfolk; nay, the hopeful young Man this day at the Kings-Bench
Bar; I that am a Relic and Executrix of known plentiful Assits and Parts, who
understand my self and the Law: And would you have me under Covert Baron again?
No, Sir, no Covert Baron for me.


But, dear Widow, hear me. I value you only, not your Jointure.


Nay, Sir, hold there, I know your love to a Widow, is covetousness of her
Jointure: And a Widow, a little stricken in Years, with a good Jointure, is
like an old Mansion-house in a good Purchase, never valued; but take one, take
the other: And perhaps, when you are in possession, you'd neglect it, let it drop
to the ground, for want of necessary repairs, or expenses upon it.


No, Widow, one would be sure to keep all tight, when one is to forfeit one's
Lease by dilapidation.


Fie, fie, I neglect my Business, with this foolish discourse of love. Ierry,
Child, let me see the List of the Jury: I'm sure my Cousin Olivia has some
Relations amongst 'em. But where is she?


Nay, Widow, but hear me one word only.


Nay, Sir, no more, pray; I will no more hearken again to your foolish Love
motions, than to offers of Arbitration.


Well, I'll follow thee yet; for he that has a pretension at Court, or to a
Widow, must never give over for a little ill usage.


Therefore I'll get her by Assiduity, Patience, and Long-sufferings, which you
will not undergo; for you idle young Fellows leave off Love, when it comes to
be Business; and Industry gets more Women, than Love.


Ay, Industry, the Fool's and old Man's merit; but I'll be industrious too, and
make a business on it, and get her by Law, Wrangling, and Contests, and not by
Sufferings: And, because you are no dangerous Rival, I'll give thee counsel,
Major.


If you Litigious Widow ever would gain,
Sigh not to her; but by the Law complain:
To her, as to a Baud, Defendant Sue
With Statutes, and make Justice Pimp for you.
I Hate this place, worse than a Man that has inherited a Chancery Suit: I wish
I were well out on it again.


Why, you need not be afraid of this place: for a Man without Money, needs no
more fear a crowd of Lawyers, than a crowd of Pickpockets.


This, the Reverend of the Law would have thought the Palace or Residence of
Justice; but, if it be, she lives here with the State of a Turkish Emperor,
rarely seen; and besieged, rather than defended, by her numerous black Guard
here.


Methinks, 'tis like one of their own Halls, in Christmas time, whither, from
all parts, Fools bring their Money, to try, by the Dice, (not the worst Judges)
whether it shall be their own, or no: but, after a tedious fretting and
wrangling, they drop away all their Money, on both sides; and finding neither
the better, at last, go emptily and lovingly away together, to the Tavern,
joining their Curses against the young Lawyers Box, that sweeps all, like the
old ones.


Spoken, like a Revelling Christmas Lawyer.


Yes, I was one, I confess; but was fain to leave the Law, out of Conscience,
and fall to making false Musters; rather chose to Cheat the King, than his
Subjects; Plunder, rather than take Fees.


Well, a Plague, and a Purse Famine, light on the Law; and that Female limb of
it, who dragged me hither to day: but prithee go see if, in that crowd of
daggle Gowns there, thou can find her.

How hard it is to be an Hypocrite!
At least to me, who am but newly so.
I thought it once a kind of Knavery,
Nay, Cowardice, to hide ones faults; but now
The common frailty, Love, becomes my shame.
He must not know I love the ungrateful still,
Lest he contemn me, more than she: for I,
It seems, can undergo a Woman's scorn,
But not a Mans --

Sir, good Sir, generous Captain.


Prithee, kind Impertinence, leave me. Why should thou follow me, flatter my
Generosity now, since thou know I have no Money left? if I had it, I'd give
it thee, to buy my quiet.


I never follow'd yet, Sir, Reward or Fame, but you alone; nor do I now beg any
thing, but leave to share your miseries: You should not be a Niggard of 'em,
since, methinks, you have enough to spare. Let me follow you now, because you
hate me, as you have often said.


I ever hated a Coward's company, I must confess.


Let me follow you, till I am none then; for you, I'm sure, will through such
Worlds of dangers, that I shall be inur'd to 'em; nay, I shall be afraid of
your anger more than danger, and so turn valiant out of fear. Dear Captain, do
not cast me off, till you have tried me once more: do not, do not go to Sea
again without me.


Thou to Sea! to Court, thou Fool; remember the advice I gave thee: thou art a
handsome Spaniel, and can faun naturally; go, busk about, and run thy self
into the next great Man's Lobby: first faun upon the Slaves without, and then
run into the Ladies Bed-chamber; thou may be admitted, at last, to tumble
her Bed: go, seek, I say, and lose me; for I am not able to keep thee: I have
not Bread for my self.


Therefore I will not go, because then I may help and serve you.


Thou!


I warrant you, Sir; for, at worst, I could beg or steal for you.


Nay, more bragging! dost thou not know there's venturing your life, in
stealing? Go, prithee, away: thou art as hard to shake off, as that flattering
effeminating mischief, Love.


Love, did you name? Why, you are not so miserable as to be yet in Love, sure!


No^ no, prithee away, be gone, or -- I had almost discovered my Love and
Shame; well, if I had? that thing could not think the worse of me: -- or if he
did? -- no -- yes, he shall know it -- he shall -- but then I must never leave
him, for they are such secrets, that make Parasites and Pimps Lords of their
Masters; for any slavery or tyranny is easier than Love's.


I would keep it as safe, as if your dear precious life depended on it.


Dam your dearness. It concerns more than my life, my honour.


Doubt it not, Sir.


And do not discover it, by too much fear of discovering it; but have a great
care you let not Freeman find it out.


I warrant you, Sir. I am already all joy, with the hopes of your commands; and
shall be all wings, in the execution of 'em: speak quickly, Sir.


You said you would beg for me.


I did, Sir.


Then you shall beg for me.


With all my heart, Sir.


That is, Pimp for me.


How, Sir?


Do ye start! think thou, thou could do me any other service? Come, no
dissembling honour: I know you can do it handsomely, thou were made for it: You
have lost your time with me at Sea, you must recover it.


Do not, Sir, beget your self more Reasons for your Aversion to me, and make my
obedience to you a fault: I am the unfittest in the World, to do you such a
service.


Your cunning arguing against it, shows but how sit you are for it. No more
dissembling: here, (I say) you must go use it for me, to Olivia.


To her, Sir?


Go flatter, lie, kneel, promise, any thing to get her for me: I cannot live,
unless I have her. Did thou not say thou would do any thing, to save my
life? And she said you had a persuading face.


But, did not you say, Sir, your honour was dearer to you, than your life? And
would you have me contribute to the loss of that, and carry love from you, to
the most infamous, most false, and --


And most beautiful --


Most ungrateful Woman, that ever lived; for sure she must be so, that could
desert you so soon, use you so basely, and so lately too: do not, do not forget
it, Sir, and think --


No, I will not forget it, but think of revenge: I will lie with her, out of
revenge. Go, be gone, and prevail for me, or never see me more.


You scorned her last night.


I know not what I did last night; I dissembled last night.


Heavens!


Be gone, I say, and bring me love or compliance back, or hopes at least, or
I'll never see thy face again: by --


O do not swear, Sir, first hear me.


I am impatient, away, you'll find me here till twelve.


Sir --


Not one word, no insinuating Argument more, or soothing persuasion; you'll
have need of all your Rhetoric with her: go, strive to alter her, not me; be
gone.


Should I discover to him now my Sex,
And lay before him his strange cruelty,
Twou'd but incense it more. -- No, 'tis not time.
For his Love, must I then betray my own?
Were ever Love or Chance, till now, severe?
Or shifting Woman pos'd with such a task?
Forced to beg that which kills her, if obtained;
And give away her Lover not to lose him.

Offer me a Reference, you saucy Companion you! do ye know who you speak to? Art
thou a Solicitor in Chancery, and offer a Reference? A pretty Fellow! Mr.
Sergeant Ploddon, here's a Fellow has the impudence to offer me a Reference.


Who's that has the impudence to offer a Reference within these Walls?


Nay, for a Splitter of Causes to do it!


No, Madam, to a Lady learned in the Law, as you are, the offer of a Reference
were to impose upon you.


No, no, never fear me for a Reference, Mr. Sergeant. But, come, have you not
forgot your Brief? Are you sure you shall not make the mistake of -- Hark you --
Common-Pleas, and say one thing over and over again: You do it so naturally,
you'll never be suspected for protracting time.


Come, I know the course of the Court, and your business.


Let's see, Ierry, where are my Minutes? Come, Mr. Quaint, pray go talk a great
deal for me in Chancery; let your words be easy, and your Sense hard, my Cause
requires it: Branch it bravely, and deck my Cause with flowers, that the Snake
may lie hidden Go, go, and be sure you remember the Decree of my Lord
Chancellor Tricesimo quart' of the Queen.


I will, as I see cause, extenuate, or examplifie Matter of Fact; baffle Truth,
with Impudence; answer Exceptions, with Questions, though never so impertinent;
for Reasons, give 'em Words; for Law and Equity, Tropes and Figures: And so
relax and enervate the sinews of their Argument, with the oil of my Eloquence.
But when my Lungs can reason no longer, and not being able to say any thing
more for our Cause, say every thing of our Adversary; whose Reputation, though
never so clear and evident in the eye of the World, yet with sharp Invectives
--


(Alias Belin'sgate.)


With poignant and sour Invectives, I say, I will deface, wipe out, and
obliterate his fair Reputation, even as a Record with the juice of Lemons; and
tell such a Story, (for, the truth on it is, all that we can do for our Client,
in Chancery, is telling a Story) a fine Story, a long Story, such a Story.


Go, save thy breath for the Cause; talk at the Bar, Mr. Quaint: You are so
copiously fluent, you can weary any ones ears, sooner than your own tongue. Go,
weary our Adversaries Counsel, and the Court: Go, thou art a fine-spoken
person: Adad, I shall make thy Wife jealous of me: if you can but court the
Court into a Decree for us. Go, get you gone, and remember -- Blunder, pray
baul foundly for me, at the Kings-Bench; bluster, sputter, question, cavil; but
be sure your Argument be intricate enough, to confound the Court: And then you
do my business. Talk what you will, but be sure your tongue never stand still;
for your own noise will secure your Sense from Censure: 'tis like coughing or
heming when one has got the Belly-ake, which stifles the unmannerly noise. Go,
dear Rogue, and succeed; and I'll invite thee, ere it be long, to more souz'd
Venison.


I'll warrant you, after your Verdict, your Judgment shall not be Arrested,
upon if's and and's.


Come, Mr. Petulant, let me give you some new instructions, for our Cause in
the Exchequer: Are the Barons sate?


Yes, no; may be they are, may be they are not: what know I? what care I?


Hey day! I wish you would but snap up the Counsel on the other side anon, at the
Bar, as much; and have a little more patience with me, that I might instruct
you a little better.


You instruct me! What is my Brief for, Mistress?


Ay, but you seldom read your Brief, but at the Bar, if you do it then.


Perhaps I do, perhaps I don't, and perhaps 'tis time enough: pray hold your
self contented, Mistress.


Nay, if you go there too, I will not be contented, Sir, though you, I see, will
lose my Cause for want of speaking, I wo'not: You shall hear me, and shall be
instructed. Let's see your Brief.


Send your Solicitor to me, instructed by a Woman! I'd have you to know, I do
not wear a Bar-gown --


By a Woman! And I'd have you to know, I am no common Woman; but a Woman
conversant in the Laws of the Land, as well as your self, though I have no
Bar-gown.


Go to, go to, Mistress, you are impertinent, and there's your Brief for you:
instruct me!


Impertinent to me, you saucy Jack you! You return my Breviate, but where's my
Fee? You'll be sure to keep that, and scan that so well, that if there chance
to be but a brass Half-crown in it, one's sure to hear on it again: would you
would but look on your Breviate half so narrowly. But pray give me my Fee too,
as well as my Brief.


Mistress, that's without Precedent. When did a Counsel ever return his Fee,
pray? And you are impertinent, and ignorant, to demand it.


Impertinent again, and ignorant to me! Gadsbodikins, you puny Upstart in the
Law, to use me so, you Green Bag Carrier, you Murderer of unfortunate Causes,
the Clerks Ink is scarce off of your fingers, you that newly come from
Lamblacking the Judges shoes, and are not fit to wipe mine; you call me
impertinent and ignorant! I would give thee a Cuff on the ear, sitting the
Courts, if I were ignorant. Marry gep, if it had not been for me, thou had
been yet but a hearing Counsel at the Bar. Buttongown, Mr. Buttongown, whither
so fast? what, won't you stay till we are heard?


I cannot, Mrs. Blackacre, I must be at the Council, my Lord's Cause stays
there for me.


And mine suffers here.


I cannot help it.


I'm undone.


What's that to me?


Consider the five pound Fee, if not my Cause: that was something to you.


Away, away, pray be not so troublesome, Mistress, I must be gone.


Nay, but consider a little, I am your old Client, my Lord but a new one; or,
let him be what he will, he will hardly be a better Client to you, than my
self: I hope you believe I shall be in Law as long as I live? therefore am no
despicable Client. Well, but go to your Lord, I know you expect he should make
you a Judge one day; but I hope his promise to you will prove a true Lord's
promise: But, that he might be sure to fail you, I wish you had his Bond for it.


But what will you yet be thus impertinent, Mistress?


Nay, I beseech you, Sir, stay; if it be but to tell me my Lord's Case: come,
in short.


Nay, then --


Well, Ierry, observe Child, and lay it up for hereafter: These are those
Lawyers who, by being in all Causes, are in none; therefore if you would have
'em for you, let your Adversary fee 'em; for he may chance to depend upon 'em:
and so, in being against thee, they'll be for thee.


Ay, Mother, they put me in mind of the unconscionable Wooers of Widows, who
undertake briskly their Matrimonial business for their money; but when they
have got it once, let who's will drudge for them; therefore have a care of 'em,
forsooth: there's Advice for your Advice.


Well said, Boy, come, Mr. Splitcause, pray go see when my Cause in Chancery
comes on; and go speak with Mr. Quillet in the Kings-Bench, and Mr. Quirk in
the Common-Pleas, and see how our matters go there.


Lady, a good and propitious morning to you; and may all your Causes go as
well, as if I my self were Judge of 'em.


Sir, excuse me, I am busy, and cannot answer Complements in Westminster-hall.
Go, Mr. Splitcause, and come to me again, to that Booksellers, there I'll stay
for you, that you may be sure to find me.


No, Sir, come to the other Booksellers, I'll attend your Ladyship thither.


Why to the other?


Because he is my Bookseller, Lady.


What, to sell you Lozenges for your Catarrh? or Medicines for your Corns? what
else can a Major deal with a Bookseller for?


Lady, he Prints for me.


Why, are you an Author?


Of some few Essays; deign you, Lady, to peruse 'em. (She is a Woman of parts,
and I must win her by showing mine.)


Will you see Culpepper, Mistress? Aristotle's Problems? The Complete Midwife?


No, let's see Dalton, Hughs, Shepherd, Wingate.


We have no Law-books.


No? You are a pretty Bookseller then.


Come, have you e're a one of my Essays left?


Yes, Sir, we have enough, and shall always have 'em.


How so?


Why, they are good, steady, lasting Ware.


Nay, I hope they will live, let's see. Be pleased, Madam, to peruse the poor
endeavours of my Pen; for I have a Pen, though I say it, that --


Pray let me see St. George for Christendom, or, The Seven Champions of
England.


No, no, give him, The Young Clerk's Guide. What, we shall have you read your
self into a humour of Rambling, and Fighting, and studying Military Discipline,
and wearing red Breeches!


Nay, if you talk of Military Discipline, show him my Treatise of The Art
Military.


Hold, I would as willingly he should read a Play.


O pray, forsooth Mother, let me have a Play.


No, Sirrah, there are young Students of the Law enough spoiled already, by
Plays; they would make you in love with your Laundress, or what's worse, some
Queen of the Stage, that was a Laundress; and so turn Keeper before you are of
age. Ierry, is not that Mr. what-d' y' call-him, that goes there: he that
offered to sell me a Suit in Chancery for five hundred pound, for a hundred
down, and only paying the Clerks Fees?


Ay, forsooth, 'tis he.


Then stay here, and have a care of the Bags, whilst I follow him: have a care
of the Bags, I say.


And do you have a care, forsooth, of the Statute against Champer^ee, I say.


So, there's a limb of my Widow, which was wont to be inseparable from her: she
can't be far.


My Mother, but not your Widow, will be forthcoming presently.


Your Servant, Major; what, are you buying Furniture for a little sleeping
Closet, which you miscall a Study? For you do only by your Books, as by your
Wenches, bind 'em up neatly, and make 'em fine, for other people to use 'em:
And your Bookseller is properly your Upholster; for he furnishes your Room,
rather than your Head.


Well, well, good Sea-Lieutenant, study you your Compass, that's more than your
head can deal with. (I will go find out the Widow, to keep her out of his
sight, or he'll board her, whilst I am treating a Peace.)


Nay prithee, Friend, now, let me have but the Seven Champipions, you shall
trust me no longer than till my Mothers Mr. Splitcause comes; for I hope he'll
lend me wherewithal to pay for it.


Lend thee! here, I'll pay him. Do you want Money, Squire? I'm sorry a Man of
your Estate should want Money.


Nay, my Mother will ne'er let me be at Age: And till then, she says --


At Age! Why, you are at Age already, to have spent an Estate, Man; there are
younger than you, have kept their Women these three Years, have had half a
dozen Claps, and lost as many thousand pounds at Play.


Ay, they are happy Sparks! nay, I know some of my School-Fellows, who, when we
were at School, were two Years younger than me; but now, I know not how, are
grown Men before me, and go where they will, and look to themselves: but my
Curmudgeonly Mother wo'nt allow me where withal to be a Man of my self with.


Why there 'tis, I knew your Mother was in the fault: Ask but your
School-Fellows what they did, to be Men of themselves.


Why, I know they went to Law with their Mothers; for they say, there's no good
to be done upon a Widow Mother, till one goes to Law with her: but mine is as
plaguy a Lawyer, as any's of our Inn. Then would she marry too, and cut down my
Trees: Now I should hate, Man, to have my Father's^ Wife kissed, and slap'd,
and the other thing too, (you know what I mean) by another Man; and our Trees are
the purest, tall, even, shady twigs by my fa --


Come, Squire, let your Mother and your Trees fall as she pleases' rather than
wear this Gown, and carry green Bags all thy life; and be pointed at for a
Tony: But you shall be able to deal with her yet the common way; thou shalt
make false Love to some Lawyer's daughter, whose Father, upon the hopes of thy
marrying her, shall lend thee Money, and Law, to preserve thy Estate and Trees;
and thy Mother is so ugly, no Body will have her, if she cannot cut down thy
Trees.


Nay, if I had but any Body to stand by me, I am as stomachful as another


That will I, I'll not see any hopeful young Gentleman abused.


By any but your self.


The truth on it is, mine's as arrant a Widow-Mother, to her poor Child, as
any's in England: She wo'nt so much as let one have six-pence in one's Pocket,
to see a Motion, or the Dancing of the Ropes, or --


Come, you sha'nt want Money, there's Gold for you.


O Lurd, Sir, two Guineys! do ye lend me this? is there no trick in^t? Well,
Sir, I'll give you my Bond, for security.


No, no, thou hast given me thy face for security: Any Body would swear, thou
dost not look like a Cheat. You shall have what you will of me; and, if your
Mother will not be kinder to you, come to me, who will.


By my fa -- he's a curious fine Gentleman! --


If you can be resolute.


Can be resolved! Gad, if she gives me but a cross word, I'll leave her to
night, and come to you. But, now I have got Money, I'll go to Jack of All
Trades, at the other end of the Hall, and buy the neatest, purest things --


And I'll follow the great Boy, and my blow at his Mother: steal way the Calf,
and the Cow will follow you.


Dam your Cause; can't you lose it without me? which you are like enough to do,
if it be as you say, an honest one: I will suffer no longer for it.


Nay, Captain, I tell you, you are my prime Witness, and the Cause is just now
coming on, Mr. Splitcause tells me. Lord, methinks you should take a pleasure
in walking here, as half you see now do; for they have no business here, I
assure you.


Yes, but I'll assure you then, their business is to persecute me; but do ye
think I'll stay any longer, to have a Rogue, because he knows my name, pluck me
aside, and whisper a Newsbook-secret to me, with a stinking breath? A second
come piping angry from the Court, and sputter in my face his tedious complaints
against it? A third Law-Coxcomb, because he saw me once at a Reader's dinner,
come and put me a long Law-Case, to make a discovery of his indefatigable
dullness, and my weari'd patience? A fourth, a most barbarous civil Rogue, who
will keep a Man half an hour in the crowd with a bowed body, and a hat off,
acting the reformed Sign of the Salutation Tavern, to hear his bountiful
professions of service and friendship; whilst he cares not if I were damned,
and I am wishing him hanged out of my way? I'd as soon run the Gantlet, as walk
the other turn.


O, are you come, Sir? But where have you been, you Ass? And how come you thus
laden?


Look here, forsooth Mother, now here's a Duck, here's a Boar-cat, and here's an
Owl.


Yes, there is an Owl, Sir.


He's an ungracious Bird, indeed.


But go, thou Trangame, and carry back those Trangames, which thou hast stolen
or purloined; for no Body would trust a Minor in Westminster-hall sure.


Hold your self contented, forsooth, I have these Commodities by a fair Bargain
and Sale; and there stands my Witness, and Creditor.


How's that! What, Sir, do ye think to get the Mother, by giving the Child a
Rattle? But where are my Bags, my Writings, you Rascal?


O Law! Where are they indeed?


How, Sirrah? speak, come --


You can tell her, Freeman, I suppose?


'Tis true, I made one of your Salt-water Sharks steal 'em, whilst he was
eagerly choosing his Commodities, as he calls 'em, in order to my design upon
his Mother.


Wo'nt you speak? Where were you, I say, you Son of a -- an unfortunate Woman?
O, Major, I'm undone; they are all that concern my Estate, my Jointure, my
Husband's Deed of Gift, my Evidences for all my Suits now depending! What will
become of them?


I'm glad to hear this.


O where? where? Come, you Villain, along with me, and show me where.


Thou hast taken the right way to get a Widow, by making her great Boy Rebel;
for, when nothing will make a Widow marry, she'll do it to cross her Children.
But can thou in earnest marry this Harpy, this Volume of shrivelled blurred
Parchments and Law, this Attorneys Desk?


Ay, ay, I'll marry, and live honestly: that is, give my Creditors, not her,
due Benevolence, pay my Debts.


Thy Creditors, you see, are not so barbarous, as to put thee in Prison, and
wilt thou commit thy self to a noisome Dungeon for thy life? which is the only
satisfaction thou can give thy Creditors, by this match.


Why, is not she rich?


Ay, but he that marries a Widow, for her Money, will find himself as much
mistaken, as the Widow, that marries a young Fellow for due Benevolence, as you
call it.


Why, do ye think I sha'nt deserve Wages? I'll drudge faithfully.


I tell thee again, he that is the Slave in the Mine, has the least propriety
in the Ore: You may dig, and dig; but, if thou would have her Money, rather
get to be her Trustee, than her Husband, for a true Widow will make over her
Estate to any Body, and cheat her self, rather than be cheated by her Children,
or a second Husband.


O Law! I'm undone, I'm undone, my Mother will kill me: You said you'd stand by
one.


So I will, my brave Squire, I warrant thee.


Ay, but I dare not stay till she comes; for she's as furious, now she has lost
her Writings, as a Bitch when she has lost her Puppies.


The comparison's handsome!


O, she's here!


Jack, and make haste with him, to your Master's Lodging; and be sure you keep
him up, till I come.


O my dear Writings! Where's this Heathen Rogue, my Minor?


Gone to drown, or hang himself.


No, I know him too well, he'll ne'er be Felo de se that way, but he may go and
choose a Guardian of his own head, and so be Felo de ses beins: for he has not
yet chosen one.


Say you so? And he sha'nt want one.


But, now I think on it, 'tis you, Sir, have put this Cheat upon me; for there
is a saying, Take hold of a Maid by her Smock, and a Widow by her Writings, and
they cannot get from you: But I'll play fast and loose with you yet, if there
be Law; and my Minor and Writings are not forthcoming, I'll bring my Action of
Detinue or Trover. But first, I'll try to find out this Guardianless, graceless
Villain. Will you jog, Major?


If you have lost your Evidence, I hope your Causes cannot go on, and I may be
gone?


O no, stay but a making Water while, (as one may say) and I'll be with you
again.


Well, sure I am the first Man that ever began a Love Intrigue, in
Westminster-hall.


No, sure; for the Love to a Widow generally begins here: And as the Widow's
Cause goes against the Heir or Executors, the Jointure Rivals commence their
Suit to the Widow.


Well, but how, pray, have you past your time here, since I was forced to leave
you alone? You have had a great deal of patience.


Is this a place to be alone, or have patience in? But I have had patience
indeed; for I have drawn upon me, since I came, but three Quarrels, and two
Law-Suits.


Nay, faith, you are too cursed to be let loose in the World; you should be tied
up again, in your Sea-kennel, called a Ship. But how could you quarrel here?


How could I refrain? A Lawyer talked peremptorily and saucily to me, and as
good as gave me the Lye


They do it so often to one another at the Bar, that they make no Bones on it
elsewhere.


However, I gave him a Cuff on the Ear; whereupon he jogs two Men, whose Backs
were turned to us, (for they were reading at a Booksellers) to Witness I struck
him sitting the Courts; which office they so readily promised that I called 'em
Rascals and Knights of the Post: one of 'em presently calls two other absent
Witnesses, who were coming towards us at a distance; whilst the other, with a
Whisper, desires to know my name, that he might have satisfaction by way of
Challenge, as the other by way of Writ; but if it were not rather to direct his
Brother's Writ, than his own Challenge: there you see is one of my Quarrels,
and two of my Law-Suits.


So: -- and the other two?


For advising a Poet to leave off Writing, and turn Lawyer, because he is dull,
and impudent, and says or writes nothing now, but by Precedent.


And the third Quarrel?


For giving more sincere Advice, to a handsome, well-drest, young Fellow (who
asked it too) not to marry a Wench, that he loved, and I had lain with.


Nay, if you will be giving your sincere advice to Lovers, and Poets, you will
not fail of Quarrels.


Or, if I stay in this place; for I see more Quarrels crowding upon me: let's
be gone, and avoid 'em.


Dear Bully, don't look so grum upon me; you told me just now, you had forgiven
me a little harmless Raillery upon wooden legs last night.


Yes, yes, pray be gone, I am talking of business.


Can't I hear it? I love thee, and will be faithful, and always --


Impertinent! 'Tis Business that concerns Freeman only.


Well, I love Freeman too, and would not divulge his secret: prithee speak,
prithee, I must --


Prithee let me be rid of thee, I must be rid of thee.


Faith, thou can hardly, I love thee so. Come, I must know the business.


So, I have it now.


A Pox, there goes a Fellow owes me an Hundred pound, and goes out of Town to
morrow: I'll speak with him, and come to you preesently.


No but you wo' not.


You are dexterously rid of him.


To what purpose, since here comes another, as impertinent? I know, by his
grin, he is bound hither.


Your Servant, worthy, noble Captain: Well, I have left the Widow, because she
carried me from your company; for, faith Captain, I must needs tell thee, thou
art the only Officer in England, who was not an Edg-hill Officer, that I care
for.


I'm sorry for it.


Why, would thou have me love them?


Any body, rather than me.


What, you are modest I see! therefore too, I love thee.


No, I am not modest, but love to brag my self, and can't patiently hear you
fight over the last Civil War; therefore go look out the Fellow I saw just now
here, that walks with his Stockings and his Sword out at heels, and let him
tell you the History of that scar on his check, to give you occasion to show
yours, got in the field at Bloomsbury, not that of Edg-hill: go to him, poor
Fellow, he is fasting, and has not yet the happiness this morning to stink of
Brandy and Tobacco; go, give him some to hear you, I am busy.


Well, ygad, I love thee now, Boy, for thy surliness: thou art no tame Captain,
I see, that will suffer --


An old Fox.


All that sha'nt make me angry: I consider thou art peevish, and fretting at
some ill success at Law. Prithee tell me what ill luck you have met with here.


You.


Do I look like the Picture of ill Luck? Gadsnouns, I love thee more and more;
and shall I tell thee what made me love thee first?


Do: that I may be rid of that damned quality, and thee.


'Twas thy wearing that broad Sword there.


Here, Freeman, let's change: I'll never wear it more.


How! You wo' not sure. Prithee don't look like one of our Holiday Captains
now adays, with a Bodkin by your side, your Martinet Rogues.


(O, then there's hopes.)


Nay, nay, Sir, no more, Sir, your Servant, if you praise Martinet once, I have
done with you, Sir. Martinet! Martinet!


Nay, you have made him leave you as willingly, as ever he did an Enemy; for he
was truly for the King and Parliament: for the Parliament, in their List; and
for the King, in cheating 'em of their Pay, and never hurting the King's party
in the Field.


A Pox! this way; here's a Lawyer I know threatening us with another greeting.


Sir, Sir, your very Servant; I was afraid you had forgotten me.


I was not afraid you had forgotten me.


No, Sir, we Lawyers have pretty good memories.


You ought to have, by your Wits.


O, you are a merry Gentleman, Sir; I remember you were merry, when I was last
in your company.


I was never merry in thy company, Mr. Lawyer, sure.


Why, I'm sure you joked upon me, and shamm'd me all night long.


Shamm'd! prithee what barbarous Law-term is that?


Shamming! Why, don't you know that? 'tis all our way of Wit Sir.


I am glad I do not know it then: Shamming! What does he mean by it, Freeman?


Shamming, is telling you an insipid, dull Lye^ with a dull Face, which the
sly Wag the Author only laughs at himself; and making himself believe 'tis a
good Jest, puts the Sham only upon himself.


So, your Lawyers Jest, I find, like his Practice, has more Knavery than Wit
in it. I should make the worst Shammer in England; I must always deal
ingeniously, as I will with you, Mr. Lawyer, and advise you to be seen rather
with Attorneys and Solicitors, than such Fellows as I am; they will credit your
practice more.


No, Sir, your company's an honour to me.


No, faith, go this way, there goes an Attorney, leave me for him: let it be
never said, a Lawyers Civility did him hurt.


No, worthy honoured Sir, I'll not leave you for any Attorney sure.


Unless he had a Fee in his hand.


Have you any business here, Sir? try me: I'd serve you sooner than any
Attorney breathing.


Business! -- So, I have thought of a sure way.


Have you so, Sir? in what Court, Sir? what is't, Sir? tell me but how I may
serve you, and I'll do it, Sir; and take it for as great an honour --


Faith, 'tis for a poor Orphan of a Sea-Officer of mine, that has no Money; but
if it could be follow'd in Forma Pauperis; and when the Legacy's recovered --


Forma Pauperis, Sir!


Ay, Sir.


Mr. Bumblecase, Mr. Bumblecase, a word with you; Sir, I beg your pardon at
present, I have a little business. --


Which is not in Forma Pauperis.


So, you have now found a way to be rid of people without quarrelling.


But here's a City Rogue will stick as hard upon us, as if I owed him Money.


Captain, noble Sir, I am yours heartily do ye see: Why should you avoid your
old Friends?


And why should you follow me? I owe you nothing.


Out of my hearty respects to you; for there is not a Man in England.


Thou would save from hanging, with the expense of a shilling only.


Nay, nay, but Captain, you are like enough to tell me --


Truth, which you wo'nt care to hear; therefore you had better go talk with
some body else.


No, I know no body can inform me better, of some young Wit, or Spendthrift,
that has a good dipped Seat and Estate in Middlesex, Hartfordshire, Essex, or
Kent, any of these would serve my turn: now, if you knew of such an one, and
would but help --


You to finish his ruin.


I faith, you should have a snip --


Of your Nose; you thirty in the hundred Rascal, would you make me your Squire
Setter, your Baud for Manors?


Oh!


Hold, or here will be your third Law-Suit.


Gads precious, you hectoring person you, are you wild? I meant you no hurt,
Sir; I begin to think (as things go) Land security best, and have, for a
convenient Mortgage, some ten, fifteen, or twenty thousand pound by me.


Then go lay it out upon an Hospital, and take a Mortgage of Heaven, according
to your City custom; for you think, by laying out a little Money, to hook in
that too hereafter: do, I say, and keep the Poor you've made, by taking
forfeitures, that Heaven may not take yours


No, to keep the Cripples you make this War; this War spoils our Trade.


Dam your Trade, 'tis the better for it.


What, will you speak against our Trade?


And dare you speak against the War, our Trade?


Well, he may be a Convoy of ships I am concerned in. Come, Captain, I will
have a fair correspondency with you, say what you will.


Then prithee be gone.


No, faith; prithee, Captain, let's go drink a Dish of Laced Coffee, and talk
of the Times: Come, I'll treat you; nay, you shall go, for I have no business
here.


But I have.


To pick up a Man to give thee a Dinner? Come, I'll do thy business for thee.


Faith, now I think on it, so you may, as well as any Man; for 'tis to pick up a
Man, to be bound with me, to one who expects City security, for --


Nay, then your Servant, Captain; business must be done.


Ay, if it can; but hark you, Alderman, without you --


Business Sir, I say, must be done; and there's an Officer of the Treasury I
have an Affair with --


You see now what the mighty friendship of the World is; what all Ceremony,
Embraces, and plentiful Professions come to: You are no more to believe a
professing Friend, than a threatening Enemy; and as no Man hurts you, that tells
you he'll do you a mischief, no man, you see, is your Servant, who says he is
so. Why, the Devil, then should a Man be troubled with the flattery of Knaves,
if he be not a Fool, or Cully; or with the fondness of Fools, if he be not a
Knave, or Cheat?


Only for his pleasure; for there is some in laughing at Fools, and
disappointing Knaves.


That's a pleasure, I think, would cost you too dear, as well as marrying your
Widow to disappoint her; but, for my part, I have no pleasure by 'em, but in
despising 'em, wheresoe'r I meet 'em; and then, the pleasure of hoping so to be
rid of 'em. But now my comfort is, I am not worth a shilling in the World,
which all the World shall know; and then I'm sure I shall have none of 'em come
near me.


A very pretty comfort, which I think you pay too dear for: But is the twenty
pound gone since the morning?


To my Boats Crew: Would you have the poor, honest, brave Fellows want?


Rather than you, or I.


Why, art thou without Money? thou who art a Friend to every Body?


I ventured my last stake upon the Squire, to nick him of his Mother; and
cannot help you to a dinner, unless you will go dine with my Lord --


No, no, the Ordinary is too dear for me, where flattery must pay for my
dinner: I am no Herald, or Poet.


We'll go then to the Bishops --


There you must flatter the old Philosophy: I cannot renounce my reason for a
dinner.


Why, then let's go to your Aldermans.


Hang him, Rogue! that were not to dine; for he makes you drunk with Lees of
Sack before dinner, to take away your stomach: and there you must call Usury
and Extortion, Gods blessings, or the honest turning of the Penny; hear him
brag of the leather Breeches in which he trotted first to Town; and make a
greater noise with his Money in his Parlour, than his Casheers do in his
Counting house, without hopes of borrowing a shilling.


Ay, a pox on it, 'tis like dining with the great Gamesters; and, when they fall
to their common Dessert, see the heaps of Gold drawn on all hands, without
going to twelve. Let us go to my Lady Goodly's.


There, to slatter her looks, you must mistake her Grandchildren for her own;
praise her Cook, that she may rail at him: and feed her Dogs, not your self.


What do ye think of eating with your Lawyer then?


Eat with him! Dam him; to hear him employ his barbarous eloquence in a Reading
upon the two and thirty good Bits in a shoulder of Veal; and be forced your
self to praise the cold Bribe pie, that stinks; and drink Law-French Wine, as
rough and harsh, as his Law-French. A pox on him, I'd rather dine in the Temple
Rounds, or Walks, with the Knights without Noses, or the Knights of the Post;
who are honester Fellows, and better company. But let us home, and try our
Fortune; for I'll stay no longer here, for your damned Widow.


Well, let us go home then; for I must go for my damned Widow, and look after
my new damned Charge; three or four hundred Year ago, a Man might have dined in
this Hall.


But now, the Lawyer only here is fed:
And, Bully-like, by Quarrels gets his Bread.

WEll, there's success in thy face; hast thou prevailed? say.


As I could wish, Sir.


So, I told thee what thou were fit for, and thou would not believe me. Come,
thank me for bringing thee acquainted with thy Genius. Well, thou hast
mollified her heart for me?


No, Sir, not so; but what's better.


How? what's better!


I shall harden your heart against her.


Have a care, Sir, my heart is too much in earnest to be fooled with, and my
desire at height, and needs no delays to incite it; what, you are too good a
Pimp already, and know how to endear pleasure, by with-holding it? but leave
off your Pages, Baudy-house tricks, Sir, and tell me, will she be kind?


Kinder than you could wish, Sir.


So then: well, prithee what said she?


She said --


What? you're so tedious; speak comfort to me: what?


That, of all things, you were her aversion.


How?


That she would sooner take a Bedfellow out of an Hospital, and Diseases, into
her Arms, than you.


What?


That she would rather trust her Honour with a dissolute, debauched Hector; nay
worse, with a finical baffled Coward, all over loathsome with affectation of the
fine Gentleman;


What's all this you say?


Nay, that my offers of your Love to her, were more offensive, than when
Parents woo their Virgin Daughters, to the enjoyment of Riches only; and that
you were, in all circumstances, as nauseous to her, as a Husband on compulsion.


Hold; I understand you not.


So, 'twill work I see.


Did not you tell me --


She called you ten thousand Ruffians.


Hold, I say.


Brutes --


Hold.


Sea-Monsters --


Dam your intelligence: hear me a little now.


Nay, surly Coward she called you too.


Won't you hold yet? hold, or --


Nay, Sir, pardon me; I could not but tell you she had the baseness, the
injustice, to call you Coward, Sir, Coward, Coward, Sir.


Not yet? --


I've done. Coward, Sir.


Did not you say she was kinder than I could wish her?


Yes, Sir.


How then? -- O -- I understand you now. At first, she appeared in rage, and
disdain, the truest sign of a coming Woman; but, at last, you prevailed it
seems: did you not?


Yes, Sir.


So then, let's know that only; come, prithee, without delays: I'll kiss thee
for that News before hand.


So; the Kiss, I'm sure, is welcome to me, whatsoever the News will be to you.


Come, speak, my dear Volunteer.


How welcome were that kind word too, if it were not for another Woman's sake!


What, won't you speak? You prevailed for me, at last, you say?


No, Sir.


No more of your fooling, Sir; it will not agree with my impatience, or temper.


Then, not to fool you, Sir, I spoke to her for you, but prevailed for my self;
she would not hear me when I spoke in your behalf; but bid me say what I would
in my own, though she gave me no occasion, she was so coming: and so was kinder,
Sir, than you could wish; which I was only afraid to let you know, without some
warning.


How's this? Young man, you are of a lying age; but I must hear you out, and if
--


I would not abuse you, and cannot wrong her by any report of her, she is so
wicked.


How, wicked! had she the impudence, at the second sight of you only --


Impudence, Sir! Oh, she has impudence enough to put a Court out of
countenance, and debauch a Stews.


Why, what said she?


Her tongue, I confess, was silent; but her speaking Eyes gloted such things,
more immodest, and lascivious, than Ravishers can act, or Women under a
confinement think.


I know there are whose Eyes reflect more Obscenity, than the Glasses in
Alcoves; but there are others too who use a little Art with their looks, to
make 'em seem more beautiful, not more loving: which vain young Fellows, like
you, are apt to interpret in their own favour, and to the Lady's wrong.


Seldom, Sir; pray have you a care of gloting Eyes; for he that loves to gaze
upon 'em, will find, at last, a thousand Fools and Cuckolds in 'em, instead of
Cupids.


Very well, Sir: but, what, you had only eye-kindness from Olivia?


I tell you again, Sir, no Woman sticks there: Eye-promises of Love they only
keep; nay, they are Contracts which make you sure of 'em. In short, Sir, she,
seeing me, with shame and amazement dumb, unactive, and resistless, threw her
twisting arms about my neck, and smothered me with a thousand tasteless Kisses:
believe me, Sir, they were so to me.


Why did you not avoid 'em then?


I fenced with her eager Arms, as you did with the grapples of the Enemy's
Fireship; and nothing but cutting 'em off, could have freed me.


Damned, damned Woman, that could be so false and infamous! And damned, damned
heart of mine, that cannot yet be false, though so infamous! What easy, tame,
suffering, trampled things does that little God of talking Cowards make of us!
but --


So! it works I find as I expected.


But she was false to me before, she told me so her self, and yet I could not
quite believe it; but she was, so that her second falseness is a favour to me,
not an injury, in revenging me upon the Man that wronged me first of her Love.
Her Love! -- a Whores, a Witches Love! -- But, what, did she not kiss well,
Sir? I'm sure I thought her Lips -- but I must not think of 'em more -- but yet
they are such I could still kiss, -- grow to and then tear off with my teeth,
grind 'em into mammocks, and spit 'em into her Cuckolds face.


Poor man, how uneasy he is! I have hardly the heart to give him so much pain,
though withal I give him a cure; and to my self new life.


But, what, her Kisses sure could not but warm you into desire at last, or a
compliance with hers at least?


Nay more, I confess --


What more? speak.


All you could fear had passed between us, if I could have been made to wrong
you; Sir, in that nature.


Could have been made! you lie, you did.


Indeed, Sir, 'twas impossible for me; besides, we were interrupted by a visit;
but, I confess, she would not let me stir, till I promised to return to her
again, within this hour, as soon as it should be dark; by which time, she would
dispose of her visit, and her servants, and her self, for my reception: which I
was fain to promise to get from her.


Ha!


But if ever I go near her again, may you, Sir, think me as false to you, as
she is; hate, and renounce me; as you ought to do her, and I hope will do now.


Well, but now I think on it, you shall keep your word with your Lady. What, a
young Fellow, and fail the first, nay, so tempting an assignation!


How, Sir?


I say you shall go to her when 'tis dark, and shall not disappoint her.


I, Sir! I should disappoint her more by going; for --


How so?


Her impudence, and injustice to you, will make me disappoint her Love; loath
her.


Come, you have my leave; and if you disgust her, I'll go with you, and act
Love, whilst you shall talk it only.


You, Sir! nay, then I'll never go near her. You act Love, Sir! You must but
act it indeed, after all I have said to you. Think of your Honour, Sir, Love --



Well, call it Revenge, and that is Honourable: I'll be revenged on her; and
thou shalt be my second.


Not in a base action, Sir, when you are your own Enemy: O go not near her,
Sir, for Heavens sake, for your own, think not of it.


How concerned you are! I thought I should catch you. What, you are my Rival at
last, and are in Love with her your self; and have spoken ill of her, out of
your Love to her, not me; and therefore would not have me go to her!


Heaven witness for me, 'tis because I love you only, I would not have you go
to her.


Come, come, the more I think on it, the more I'm satisfied you do love her:
those Kisses, young Man, I knew were irresistible; tis certain.


There is nothing certain in the World, Sir, but my Truth, and your Courage.


Your Servant, Sir. Besides false, and ungrateful, as she has been to me; and
though I may believe her hatred to me, great as you report it; yet I cannot think
you are so soon, and at that rate, beloved by her, though you may endeavour it.


Nay, if that be all, and you doubt it still, Sir, I will conduct you to her;
and, unseen, your Ears shall judge of her falseness, and my Truth to you: if
that will satisfy you.


Yes, there is some satisfaction in being quite out of doubt: because 'tis that
alone with-holds us from the pleasure of Revenge.


Revenge! What Revenge can you have, Sir? Disdain is best revenged by scorn;
and faithless Love, by loving another, and making her happy with the others
losings: which, if I might advise --


Not a word more.


What are you talking of Love yet, Captain? I thought you had done with it.


Why, what did you hear me say?


Something imperfectly of Love, I think.


I was only wondering why Fools, Rascals, and desertless Wretches, should still
have the better of Men of Merit, with all Women; as much as with their own
common Mistress, Fortune!


Because most Women, like Fortune, are blind, seem to do all things in jest,
and take pleasure in extravagant actions; their love deserves neither thanks,
or blame, for they cannot help it: 'tis all sympathy; therefore the noise, the
finical, the talkative, the cowardly and effeminate, have the better of the
brave, the reasonable, and Man of Honour; for they have no more reason in their
love, or kindness, than Fortune her self.


Yes, they have their reason. First, Honour in a Man they fear too much to
love; and Sense in a Lover, upbraids their want of it; and they hate any thing
that disturbs their admiration of themselves; but they are of that vain number,
who had rather show their false generosity, in giving away profusely to
worthless Flatterers, than in paying just Debts: And, in short, all Women, like
Fortune, (as you say) and Rewards, are lost, by too much meriting.


All Women, Sir! sure there are some, who have no other quarrel to a Lovers
merit, but that it begets their despair of him.


Thou art young enough to be credulous; but we --


Here are now below, the scolding, daggled Gentlewoman, and that Major Old --
old -- Fop, I think you call him.


Oldfox: prithee bid 'em come up, with your leave, Captain, for now I can talk
with her upon the square; if I shall not disturb you.


No; for I^ll be gone. Come, Volunteer,


Nay, pray stay; the Scene between us will not be so tedious to you, as you
think: besides, you shall see, how I have rigged my Squire out, with the
remains of my shipwrecked Wardrobe; he is under your Sea-Valet de Chambre's
hands, and by this time dressed, and will be worth your seeing. Stay, and I'll
fetch my Fool.


No; you know I cannot easily laugh: besides, my Volunteer and I have business
abroad.


What, no body here! Did not the Fellow say he was within?


Yes, Lady; and he may be perhaps a little busy at present; but, if you think
the time long till he comes,


No, no; I have reading work enough of my own, in my Bag, I thank you.


I, Law, Madam; but here is a Poem, in blank Verse, which I think a handsome
Declaration of one's Passion.


O! if you talk of Declarations, I'll show you one of the prettiest penned
things, which I mended too my self you must know;


Nay, Lady, if you have used your self so much to the reading of harsh Law,
that you hate smooth Poetry; here is a Character for you, of --


A Character! Nay, then I'll show you my Bill in Chancery here, that gives you
such a Character of my Adversary, makes him as black --


Pshaw; away, away, Lady. But if you think the Character too long, here is an
Epigram not above 20 Lines, upon a cruel Lady; who Decreed her Servant should
hang himself, to demonstrate his Passion.


Decreed! if you talk of Decreeing, I have such a Decree here, drawn by the
finest Clerk --


O Lady, Lady, all interruption, and no sense between us, as if we were ^awyers
at the Bar! But I had forgot, Apollo and Littleton never lodge in a head
together. If you hate Verses, I'll give you a cast of my Politics in Prose:
'tis a Letter to a Friend in the Country; which is now the way of all such
sober, solid persons as my self, when they have a mind to publish their disgust
to the Times; though perhaps, between you and I, they have no Friend in the
Country. And sure a Politic, serious person may as well have a feigned Friend
in the Country to write to, as well as an idle Poet a feigned Mistress to
write to. And so here is my Letter to a Friend, or no Friend, in the Country,
concerning the late conjuncture of Affairs, in relation to Coffee-houses: or
the Coffee-man's Case.


Nay, if your Letter have a Case in it, 'tis something; but first I'll read you
a Letter of mine, to a Friend in the Country, called a Letter of Attorney.


What, Interruption still? O the plague of Interruption! worse to an Author,
than the plague of Critics!


What's this I see, Ierry Blackacre, my Minor, in Red Breeches! What, hast thou
left the modest seemly Garb of Gown and Cap, for this? And have I lost all my
good Inns of Chancery breeding upon thee then? And thou wilt go a breeding thy
self, from our Inn of Chancery and Westminster-hall, at Coffee-houses and
Ordinaries, Play-houses, Tennis-courts, and Baudy-houses.


Ay, ay, what then? perhaps I will; but what's that to you? here's my Guardian
and Tutor now forsooth, that I am out of your Hucksters hands.


How? thou hast not chosen him for thy Guardian yet?


No, but he has chosen me for his Charge, and that's all one; and I'll do any
thing he'll have me, and go all the World over with him; to Ordinaries, and
Baudy-houses, or any where else.


To Ordinaries and Baudy-houses I have a care, Minor, thou wilt infeeble there
thy Estate, and Body: do not go to Ordinaries and Baudy-houses, good Ierry.


Why, how come you to know any ill by Baudy-houses? You never had any hurt by
'em, had you, forsooth? Pray hold your self contented; if I do go where Money
and Wenches are to be had, you may thank your self; for you used me so
unnaturally, you would never let me have a Penny to go abroad with; nor so much
as come near the Garret, where your Maidens lay; nay, you would not so much as
let me play at Hotcockles with 'em, nor have any Recreation with 'em, though one
should have kissed you behind, you were so unnatural a Mother, so you were.


Ay, a very unnatural Mother, faith, Squire.


But, Ierry, consider thou art yet but a Minor; however, if thou wilt go home
with me again, and be a good Child, thou shalt see --


Madam, I must have a better care of my Heir under age, than so; I would sooner
trust him alone with a stale Waiting-woman and a Parson, than with his Widow
Mother and her Lover or Lawyer.


Why, thou Villain, part Mother and Minor! Rob me of my Child and my Writings!
but thou shalt find there's Law; and as in the Case of Ravishment, of Guard --
Westminster the Second.


Young Gentleman, Squire, pray be ruled by your Mother, and your Friends.


Yes, I'll be ruled by my Friends, therefore not by my Mother, so I won't: I'll
choose him for my Guardian till I am of age; nay, may be for as long as I live.


Wilt thou so, thou Wretch? And when you're of age, thou wilt Sign, Seal, and
Deliver too, wilt thou?


Yes marry will I, if you go there too.


O do not squeeze Wax, Son; rather go to Ordinaries, and Baudy-houses, than
squeeze Wax: if thou dost that, farewell the goodly Manor of Blackacre, with
all its Woods, Underwoods, and Appurtenances whatever. Oh, oh!


Come, Madam, in short, you see I am resolved to have a share in the Estate,
yours or your Sons; if I cannot get you, I'll keep him, who is less coy you
find; but, if you would have your Son again, you must take me too. Peace, or
War? Love, or Law? You see my Hostage is in my hand: I'm in possession.


Nay, if one of us must be ruined, even let it be him. By my Body, a good one!
Did you ever know yet a Widow marry or not marry for the sake of her Child? I'd
have you to know, Sir, I shall be hard enough for you both yet, without
marrying you: if Ierry won't be ruled by me, what say you, Booby, will you be
ruled? speak.


Let one alone, can't you?


Wilt thou choose him for Guardian, whom I refuse for Husband?


Ay, to choose, I thank you.


And are all my hopes frustrated? Shall I never hear thee put Cases again to
Iohn the Butler, or our Vicar? Never see thee amble the Circuit with the
Judges; and hear thee, in our Town-Hall, louder than the Crier?


No; for I have taken my leave of Lawyering, and Pettifogging.


Pettifogging! thou profane Villain, hast thou so? Pettifogging! -- then you
shall take your leave of me, and your Estate too; thou shalt be an Alien to me
and it for ever. Pettifogging!


O, but if you go there too, Mother, we have the Deeds, and Settlements, I
thank you: Would you cheat me of my Estate, isac?


No, no, I will not cheat your little Brother Bob; for thou were not born in
Wedlock.


How's that?


How? What Quirk has she got in her head now?


I say thou can not, shalt not inherit the Blackacres Estate.


Why? Why, forsooth? What do ye mean, if you go there to?


Thou art but my base Child; and, according to the Law, can not inherit it:
nay, thou art not so much as Bastard eigne.


What, what? Am I then the Son of a Whore, Mother?


The Law says --


Madam, we know what the Law says; but have a care what you say: do not let
your Passion, to ruin your Son, ruin your Reputation.


Hang Reputation, Sir, am not I a Widow? Have no Husband, nor intend to have
any? Nor would you, I suppose, now have me for a Wife. So, I think now I'm
revenged on my Son and you, without marrying, as I told you.


But, consider, Madam.


What, have you no shame left in you Mother?


Wonder not at it, Major, 'tis often the poor pressed Widows case, to give up her
Honour to save her Jointure; and seem to be a light Woman, rather than marry:
as some young men, they say, pretend to have the filthy Disease, and lose their
credit with most Women, to avoid the importunities of some.


But one word with you, Madam.


No, no, Sir. Come, Major, let us make haste, now to the Prerogative Court.


But, Lady, if what you say be true, will you stigmatize your Reputation on
Record? And, if it be not true, how will you prove it?


Pshaw! I can prove any thing; and for my Reputation, know, Major, a wise Woman
will no more value her Reputation in disinheriting a Rebellious Son, of a good
Estate; than she would in getting him, to inherit an Estate.


Madam -- We must not let her go so, Squire.


Nay, the Devil can't stop her though if she has a mind to it. But come, Bully
Guardian, we'll go and advise with three Attorneys, two Proctors, two
Solicitors, and a shrewd man of White Friars, neither Attorney, Proctor, or
Solicitor, but as pure a Pimp to the Law as any of 'em; and sure all they will
be hard enough for her: for I fear, Bully Guardian, you are too good a Joker,
to have any Law in your head.


You're in the right on it, Squire; I understand no Law: especially that
against Bastards, since I'm sure the Custom is against that Law; and more
people get Estates by being so, than lose 'em.


Little Gentleman, your most obedient, faithful, humble Servant: where, I
beseech you, is that Divine person your Noble Lady?


Gone out, my Lord; but commanded me to give you this Letter.


Which he must not observe


Hey, Boy, where is thy Lady?


Gone out, Sir; but I must beg a word with you.


For me? So.


Sir, I humbly beseech you not to censure the Lady's good breeding: she has
reason to use more liberty with me, than with any other man.


How, Vicount, how?


Nay, I humbly beseech you, be not in choler; where there is most love, there
may be most freedom.


Nay, then 'tis time to come to an eclercisment with you, and to tell you, you
must think no more of this Lady's love.


Why, under correction, dear Sir?


There are Reasons, Reasons, Vicount.


What, I beseech you, Noble Sir?


Prithee, prithee be not impertinent, my Lord; some of you Lords are such
conceited, well-assur'd, impertinent Rogues;


And you noble Wits, are so full of shamming, and droling, one knows not where
to have you, seriously.


Well, you shall find me in Bed, with this Lady, one of these days.


Nay, I beseech you, spare the Lady's Honour; for her's and mine will be all
one shortly.


Prithee, my Lord, be not an Ass: dost thou think to get her from me? I have
had such encouragements --


^ve not been thought unworthy of 'em.


W^t not like mine! Come to an eclercisment, as I said.


Why, seriously then, she has told me, Vicountess founded prettily.


And me, that Novel was a name she would sooner change her's for, than for any
Title in England.


She has commended the softness, and respectfulness of my behaviour.


She has praised the briskness of my Raillery of all things, Man.


The sleepiness of my Eyes she liked.


Sleepiness! dullness, dullness. But the fierceness of mine she adored.


The brightness of my hair she liked.


The brightness! No, the greasiness, I warrant. But the blackness, and lustre
of mine, she admires.


The gentleness of my smile.


The subtilty of my leer.


The clearness of my complexion.


The redness of my lips.


The whiteness of my teeth.


My jaunty way of picking them.


The sweetness of my breath.


Hah ha! -- Nay then she abused you, 'tis plain; for you know what Manly said:
the sweetness of your Pulvillio she might mean; but for your breath! ha, ha,
ha. Your breath is such, Man, that nothing but Tobacco can perfume: and your
Complexion nothing could mend, but the Small Pox.


Well, Sir, you may please to be merry; but, to put you out of all doubt, Sir,
she has received some Jewels from me, of value.


And Presents from me; besides what I presented her jantily, by way of 'Ombre,
of three or four hundred pound value, which I'm, sure are the earnest Pence for
our Love bargain.


Nay then, Sir, with your favour, and to make an end of all your hopes, look you
there, Sir, she has writ to me. --


How! how! Well, well, and so she has to me look you there. --


What's here!


How's this?

My dear Lord, YOu'll excuse me, for breaking my word with you, since 'twas to
oblige, not offend you; for I am only gone abroad but to disappoint Novel, and
meet you in the Drawing-room; where I expect you, with as much impatience, as
when I used to suffer Novel's Visits, the most impertinent Fop, that ever
affected the name of a Wit, therefore not capable, I hope, to give you
jealousy; for, for your sake alone, you saw, I renounced an old Lover, and
will do all the World. Burn the Letter, but lay up the kindness of it in your
heart, with your

OLIVIA.



Very fine! but pray let's see mine.


I understand it not; but sure she cannot think so of me.


HVmh! ha! -- meet -- for your sake -- umh -- quitted an old Lover -- World --
Burn -- in your heart, with your

OLIVIA.



Just the same, the names only altered


Surely there must be some mistake; or some body has abused her, and us.


Yes, you are abused, no doubt on it, my Lord; but I'll to White-hall, and see.


And I, where I shall find you are abused.


Where, if it be so, for our comfort, we cannot fail of meeting with
Fellow-sufferers enough; for, as Freeman said of another, she stands in the
Drawing-room, like the Glass, ready for all Comers to set their Gallantry by
her: and, like the Glass too, lets no man go from her, unsatisfied with
himself.


Both here, and just gone?


Yes, Madam.


But are you sure neither saw you deliver the other a Letter?


Yes, yes, Madam, I am very sure.


Go then to the Old Exchange, to Westminster, Holbourn, and all the other
places I told you of; I shall not need you these two hours: Be gone, and take
the Candle with you, and be sure you leave word again below, I am gone out, to
all that ask.


Yes, Madam.


And my new Lover will not ask I'm sure; he has his Lesson, and cannot miss me
here, though in the dark: which I have purposely designed, as a remedy against my
blushing Gallant's modesty; for young Lovers, like game Cocks, are made bolder,
by being kept without light.


Where is she? Darkness everywhere!


What, come before your time? my Soul! my Life! your haste has augmented your
kindness; and let me thank you for it thus, and thus --


How! who's that you expected after seven?


Ha! my Husband returned! and have I been throwing away so many kind Kisses on
my Husband, and wronged my Lover already?


Speak, I say, who was't you expected after seven?


What shall I say? -- oh --


No, sure, 'tis but five days since I left you.


Pardon my impatience, dearest, I thought 'em seven at least.


Nay then --


But, my life, you shall never stay half so long from me again; you shall not,
indeed, by this kiss, you shall not.


No, no; but why alone in the dark?


Blame not my melancholy in your absence -- But, my Soul, since you went, I
have strange News to tell you: Manly is returned.


Manly returned! Fortune forbid.


Met with the Dutch in the Channel, fought, sunk his ship, and all he carried
with him: he was here with me yesterday.


And did you own our Marriage to him?


I told him I was married, to put an end to his love, and my trouble; but to
whom, is yet a secret kept from him, and all the World: And I have used him so
scurvily, his great spirit will ne'er return, to reason it farther with me; I
have sent him to Sea again, I warrant.


'Twas bravely done. And sure he will now hate the shore more than ever, after
so great a disappointment. Be you sure only to keep awhile our great secret,
till he be gone: in the mean time, I'll lead the easy honest Fool by the Nose,
as I used to do; and, whilst he stays, rail with him at thee; and, when he's
gone, laugh with thee at him. But have you his Cabinet of Jewels safe? Part not
with a Seed Pearl to him, to keep him from starving.


Nor from hanging.


He cannot recover 'em, and, I think, will scorn to beg 'em again.


But, my life, have you taken the thousand Guineys he left in my name, out of
the Goldsmiths hands?


Ay, ay, they are removed to another Goldsmiths.


Ay but, my Soul, you had best have a care he find not where the money is; for
his present wants (as I'm informed) are such, as will make him inquisitive
enough.


You say true, and he knows the man too: but I'll remove it to morrow.


To morrow! O do not stay till to morrow: go to night, immediately.


Now I think on it, you advise well, and I will go presently.


Presently! instantly: I will not let you stay a jot.


I will then, though I return not home till twelve.


Nay, though not till morning, with all my heart: go, dearest, I am impatient
till you are gone --


My life --


Right, right: where are thy lips? here, take the dumb, and best Welcomes,
Kisses and Embraces; 'tis not a time for idle words. In a a Duel of Love, as in
others, Parleying shows basely. Come, we are alone; and now the Word is only
Satisfaction, and defend not thy self.


How's this? Wuh, she makes Love like a Devil in a Play; and in this darkness,
which conceals her Angels face; if I were apt to be afraid, I shou^d think her
a Devil.


What, you traverse ground, young Gentleman.


I take breath only.


Good Heavens! how was I deceived!


Nay, you are a Coward; what are you afraid of the fierceness of my Love?


Yes, Madam, lest its violence might presage its change; and I must needs be
afraid you would leave me quickly, who could desert so brave a Gentleman as
Manly.


O! name not his Name; for in a time of stolen joys, as this is, the filthy
name of Husband were not a more alaying sound.


There's some comfort yet.


But did you not love him?


Never. How could you think it?


Because he thought it, who is a Man of that sense, nice discerning, and
diffidency, that I should think it hard to deceive him.


No; he that distrusts most the World, trusts most to himself, and is but the
more easily deceived, because he thinks he can't be deceived: his cunning is
like the Coward's Sword, by which he is oftner worsted, than defended.


Yet, sure, you used no common Art, to deceive him.


I knew he loved his own singular moroseness so well, as to dote upon any Copy
of it; wherefore I feigned an hatred to the World too, that he might love me in
earnest: but, if it had been hard to deceive him, I'm sure 'twere much harder
to love him. A dogged, ill-manner'd --


Do ye hear her, Sir? pray hear her.


Surly, untractable, snarling Brute! he! a Masty Dog were as fit a thing to
make a Gallant of.


Ay, a Goat, or Monky were fitter for thee.


I must confess, for my part, (though my Rival) I cannot but say, he has a Manly
handsomeness in's face and men.


So has a Saracen in the sign.


Is proper, and well made,


As a Drayman.


Has Wit,


He rails at all Mankind.


And undoubted Courage,


Like the Hangman's, can murder a Man when his hands are tied. He has Cruelty
indeed; which is no more Courage, than his Railing is Wit.


Thus Women, and Men like Women, are too hard for us, when they think we do not
hear 'em; and Reputation, like other Mistresses, is never true to a Man in his
absence.


He is --


Prithee no more of him; I thought I had satisfied you enough before, that he
could never be a Rival for you to apprehend; and you need not be more assured
of my aversion to him, but by the last testimony of my love to you: which I am
ready to give you. Come, my Soul, this way --


But, Madam, what could make you dissemble Love to him, when 'twas so hard a
thing for you, and flatter his Love to you?


That which makes all the World flatter and dissemble, 'twas his Money: I had a
real passion for that. Yet I loved not that so well, as for it to take him;
for, as soon as I had his Money, I hastened his departure: like a Wife, who,
when she has made the most of a dying Husband's breath, pulls away the Pillow.


Damned Money! it's Master's potent Rival still; and, like a fancy Pimp,
corrupts, it self, the Mistress it procures for us.


But I did not think with you, my life, to pass my time in talking. Come
hither, come; yet stay, till I have locked a door in the other Room, that might
chance to let us in some interruption; which reciting Poets, or losing
Gamesters, fear not more than I at this time do.


Well, I hope you are now satisfied, Sir, and will be gone, to think of your
Revenge.


No, I am not satisfied, and must stay to be Revenged.


How, Sir? You'll use no violence to her, I hope, and forfeit your own life, to
take away hers? That were no Revenge.


No, no, you need not fear: my Revenge shall only be upon her honour, not her
life.


How, Sir? her honour? O Heavens! Consider, Sir, she has no honour. Do ye call
that Revenge? Can you think of such a thing? But reflect, Sir, how she hates
and loathes you.


Yes, so much she hates me, that it would be a Revenge sufficient, to make her
accessory to my pleasure, and then let her know it.


No, Sir, no; to be Revenged on her now, were to disappoint her. Pray, Sir, let
us be gone.


Hold off. What, you are my Rival then; and therefore you shall stay, and keep
the door for me, whilst I go in for you: but, when I'm gone, if you dare to
stir off from this very Board, or breathe the least murmuring Accent, I'll cut
her Throat first, and if you love her, you will not venture her life; nay, then
I'll cut your Throat too; and I know you love your own life at least.


But, Sir, good Sir.


Not a word more, lest I begin my Revenge on her, by killing you.


But are you sure 'tis Revenge, that makes you do this? how can it be?


Whist.


'Tis a strange Revenge indeed.


If you make me stay, I shall keep my word, and begin with you: no more.


O Heavens! is there not punishment enough
In loving well, if you will have it a Crime;
But you must add fresh Torments daily to it,
And punish us like peevish Rivals still,
Because we fain would find a Heaven here?
But did there never any love like me,
That, untried Tortures, you must find me out?
Others, at worst, you force to kill themselves;
But I must be Self-murd'ress of my love,
Yet will not grant me power to end my life,
My cruel life; for when a Lover's hopes
Are dead, and gone, life is unmerciful.

I have thought better on it, I must not discover my self now, I am without
Witnesses; for if I barely should publish it, she would deny it with as much
impudence, as she would act it again with this young Fellow here. Where are
you?


Here -- oh -- now I suppose we may be gone.


I will, but not you; you must stay, and act the second part of a Lover: that
is, talk kindness to her.


Not I, Sir.


No disputing, Sir, you must: 'tis necessary to my design, of coming again to
morrow night.


What, can you come again then hither?


Yes, and you must make the appointment, and an Apology for your leaving her so
soon; for I have said not a word to her, but have kept your counsel, as I
expect you should do mine: do this faithfully, and I promise you here, you
shall run my Fortune still, and we will never part as long as we live; but, if
you do not do it, expect not to live.


'Tis hard, Sir; but such a consideration will make it easier: you won't forget
your promise, Sir?


No, by Heavens. But I hear her coming.


Where is my life? run from me already! you do not love me, dearest; nay, you
are angry with me; for you would not so much as speak a kind word to me within:
What was the reason?


I was transported too much.


That's kind; but come, my Soul, what make you here? let us go in again; we may
be surprised in this Room, 'tis so near the stairs.


No, we shall hear the better here, if any body should come up.


Nay, I assure you, we shall be secure enough within: Come, come --


I am sick, and troubled with a sudden diziness; cannot stir yet.


Come, I have spirits within.


Oh! -- don't you hear a noise, Madam?


No, no, there is none: Come, come.


Indeed there is; and I love you so much, I must have a care of your Honour, if
you wo' not, and go; but to come to you to morrow night, if you please.


With all my Soul; but you must not go yet: Come, prithee.


Oh! -- I am now sicker, and am afraid of one of my Fits.


What Fits?


Of the Falling-sickness: and I lie generally an hour in a trance; therefore
pray consider your honour, for the sake of my love, and let me go, that I may
return to you often.


But will you be sure then to come to morrow night?


Yes.


Swear.


By our past kindness.


Well, go your ways then, if you will, you naughty Creature you.


O, Madam, we're undone! there was a Gentleman upon the stairs, coming up, with
a Candle; which made me retire. Look you, here he comes!


How! my Husband! Oh, undone indeed! This way.


Ha! You shall not escape me so, Sir.


O Heavens! more fears, plagues and torments yet in store!


Come, Sir, I guess what your business was here; but this must be your business
now. Draw.


Sir --


No Expostulations: I shall not care to hear of't. Draw.


Good Sir.


How, you Rascal! not Courage to draw, yet durst do me the greatest injury in
the World? Thy Cowardice shall not save thy life.


O hold, Sir, and send but your Servant down, and I'll satisfy you, Sir, I
could not injure you, as you imagine.


Leave the light, and be gone.


I am a Woman, Sir, a very unfortunate Woman.


How! A very handsome Woman I'm sure then: here are Witnesses of't too, I
confess --


Now, Sir, I hope you are so much a Man of Honour, as to let me go, now I have
satisfied you, Sir.


When you have satisfied me, Madam, I will.


I hope, Sir, you are too much a Gentleman, to urge those secrets from a Woman,
which concern her Honour: You may guess my misfortune to be Love, by my
disguise; but a pair of Breeches could not wrong you, Sir.


I may believe Love has changed your outside, which could not wrong me; but why
did my Wife run away?


I know not, Sir; perhaps because she would not be forced to discover me to
you, or to guide me from your suspicions, that you might not discover me your
self: which ungentleman-like curiosity I hope you will cease to have, and let
me go.


Well, Madam, if I must not know who you are, 'twill suffice for me only to
know certainly what you are: which you must not deny me. Come, there is a Bed
within, the proper Rack for Lovers; and if you are a Woman, there you can keep
no secrets, you'll tell me there all unasked. Come.


Oh! what do ye mean? Help, oh --


I'll show you; but 'tis in vain to cry out: no one dares help you, for I am
Lord here.


Tyrant here; but if you are Master of this House, which I have taken for a
Sanctuary, do not violate it your self.


No, I'll preserve you here, and nothing shall hurt you, and will be as true to
you, as your disguise; but you must trust me then. Come, come.


Oh^ oh! rather than you shall drag me to a death so horrid, and so shameful, I
ll die here a thousand deaths: but you do not look like a Ravisher, Sir.


Nor you like one would put me to it, but if you will --


Oh! oh! help, help --


You saucy Rascal, how durst you come in, when you heard a Woman squeak? that
should have been your Cue to shut the door.


I come, Sir, to let you know, the Alderman coming home immediately after you
were at his house, has sent his Cashier with the money, according to your Note.


Dam his money! money never came to any sure unseasonably, till now. Bid him
stay.


He says, he cannot a moment.


Receive it you then.


He says, he must have your Receipt for it: he is in haste, for I hear him
coming up, Sir.


Dam him. Help me in here then with this dishonorer of my Family.


Oh! oh!


You say she is a Woman, Sir.


No matter, Sir: must you prate?


Oh Heavens! is there --


Stay there, my Prisoner; you have a short Reprieve.


I'll fetch the Gold, and that she can't resist;
For with a full hand 'tis we Ravish best.
AH, Cousin, nothing troubles me, but that I have given the malicious World its
Revenge, and Reason now to talk as freely of me, as I used to do of it.


Faith, then, let not that trouble you; for, to be plain, Cousin, the World
cannot talk worse of you, than it did before.


How, Cousin? I'd have you to know, before this faux pas, this trip of mine,
the World could not talk of me.


Only, that you mind other peoples actions so much, that you take no care of
your own, but to hide 'em; that, like a Thief, because you know your self most
guilty, you impeach your Fellow Criminals first, to clear your self.


O wicked World!


That you pretend an aversion to all Mankind, in public, only that their Wives
and Mistresses may not be jealous, and hinder you of their conversation, in
private.


Base World!


That, abroad, you fasten quarrels upon innocent men, for talking of you, only
to bring 'em to ask you pardon at home, and to become dear Friends with 'em,
who were hardly your acquaintance before.


Abominable World!


That you condemn the obscenity of modern Plays, only that you may not be
censured for never missing the most obscene of the old ones.


Damned World!


That you deface the nudities of Pictures, and little Statues, only because
they are not real.


O fie, fie, fie; hideous, hideous, Cousin! the obscenity of their Censures
makes me blush.


The truth of 'em, the naughty World would say now.


O! Madam, here is that Gentleman coming up, who now you say is my Master.


O! Cousin, whither shall I run? protect me, or --


Nay, nay, come --


O, Sir, forgive me.


Yes, yes, I can forgive you being alone in the dark with a Woman in Mans
clothes; but have a care of a Man in Woman's clothes.


What does he mean? he dissembles, only to get me into his power: Or has my
dear Friend made him believe he was a Woman? My Husband may be deceived by him,
but I'm sure I was not.


Come, come, you need not have lain out of your House for this; but perhaps
you were afraid, when I was warm with suspicions, you must have discovered who
she was: And prithee, may I not know it?


She was -- (I hope he has been deceived: and, since my Lover has played the
Card, I must not renounce.)


Come, what's the matter with thee? If I must not know who she is, I'm
satisfied without. Come hither.


Sure you do know her; she has told you her self, I suppose.


No, I might have known her better, but that I was interrupted, by the
Goldsmith you know, and was forced to lock her into your Chamber, to keep her
from his sight; but, when I returned, I found she was got away, by tying the
Window-curtains to the Balcony, by which she slid down into the street: for,
you must know, I jested with her, and made her believe I'd ravish her; which
she apprehended, it seems, in earnest.


Then she got from you?


Yes.


And is quite gone?


Yes.


I'm glad on it -- otherwise you had ravished her, Sir? but how dare you go so
far, as to make her believe you would ravish her? let me understand that, Sir.
What! there's guilt in your face, you blush too: nay, then you did ravish her,
you did, you base Fellow. What, ravish a Woman in the first Month of our
Marriage! 'Tis a double injury to me, thou base ungrateful Man; wrong my Bed
already, Villain! I could tear out those false Eyes, barbarous unworthy Wretch.


So, so! --


Pr^ythee hear, my Dear.


I will never hear you, my plague, my torment.


I swear -- pr^ythee hear me.


I have heard already too many of your false Oaths and Vows, especially your
last in the Church. O wicked Man! And wretched Woman that I was! I wish I had
then sunk down into a Grave, rather than to have given you my hand, to be led
to your loathsome Bed. Oh-oh-


So, very fine! just a Marriage quarrel! which, though it generally begins by the
Wives fault, yet, in the conclusion, it becomes the Husbands; and whosoever
offends at first, he only is sure to ask pardon at last. My Dear --


My Devil --


Come, prithee be appeased, and go home; I have bespoken our Supper betimes:
for I could not eat, till I found you. Go, I'll give you all kind of
satisfactions; and one, which uses to be a reconciling one, Two hundred of
those Guineys I received last Night, to do what you will with.


What, would you pay me for being your Baud?


Nay, prithee no more; go, and I'll thoroughly satisfy you, when I come home;
and then, too, we will have a fit of laughter, at Manly, whom I am going to
find at the Cock in Bow-street, where, I hear, he dined. Go, dearest, go home.


A very pretty turn, indeed, this!


Now, Cousin, since by my Wife I have that honour, and privilege of calling
you so, I have something to beg of you too; which is, not to take notice of our
Marriage, to any whatever, yet awhile, for some reasons very important to me:
and next; that you will do my Wife the honour to go home with her, and me the
favour, to use that power you have with her, in our reconcilement.


That, I dare promise, Sir, will be no hard matter. Your Servant.


What hypocrisy?


Why, this last deceit of your Husband was lawful, since in your own defence.


What deceit? I'd have you to know, I never deceived my Husband.


You do not understand me, sure; I say, this was an honest come-off, and a good
one: but 'twas a sign your Gallant had had enough of your conversation, since
he could so dexterously cheat your Husband, in passing for a Woman?


What do ye mean, once more, with my Gallant, and passing for a Woman?


What do you mean? You see your Husband took him for a Woman.


Whom?


Hey-day! Why, the Man he found you with, for whom last Night you were so much
afraid; and who you told me --


Lord, you rave sure!


Why, did not you tell me last night --


I know not what I might tell you last night, in a fright.


Ay, what was that fright for? for a Woman? besides, were you not afraid to see
your Husband just now? I warrant, only for having been found with a Woman! nay,
did you not just now too own your false step, or trip, as you called it? which
was with a Woman too! Fie, this fooling is so insipid, 'tis offensive.


And fooling with my Honour will be more offensive. Did you not hear my Husband
say, he found me with a Woman, in Mans clothes? And do ye think he does not know
a Man from a Woman?


Not so well, I'm sure, as you do; therefore I'd rather take your word.


What, you grow scurrilous, and are I find more censorious, than the World! I
must have a care of you, I see.


No, you need not fear yet, I'll keep your secret.


My secret! I'd have you to know, I have no need of Confidents, though you value
your self upon being a good one.


O admirable confidence! You show more in denying your wickedness, than other
people in glorying in it.


Confidence, to me! to me such language! nay, then I'll never see your face
again. (I'll quarrel with her, that people may never believe I was in her
power; but take for malice all the truth she may speak against me. Lattice,
where are you? let us be gone from this censorious, ill Woman.


Nay, thou shalt stay a little, to damn thy self quite.


Swear! ay, that whosoever 'twas that stole up, unknown, into my Room, when
'twas dark, I know not whether Man or Woman, by Heavens, by all that's good;
or, may I never more have joys here, or in the other World: nay, may I
eternally --


Be damned. So, so, you are damned enough already, by your Oaths; and I enough
confirmed: and now you may please to be gone. Yet take this advice with you, in
this Plain-dealing Age, to leave off forswearing your self; for when people
hardly think the better of a Woman for her real modesty, why should you put
that great constraint upon your self to feign it?


O hideous! hideous advice! Let us go out of the hearing of it: She will spoil
us, Lattice.


How! saved her Honour, by making her Husband believe you were a Woman! 'twas
well, but hard enough to do sure.


We were interrupted, before he could contradict me.


But can't you tell me, do ye say, what kind of man he was?


I was so frightened, I confess, I can give no other account of him, but that he
was pretty tall, round faced, and one I'm sure I ne'er had seen before.


But she, you say, made you swear to return to night?


But I have since sworn, never to go near her again; for the Husband would
murder me, or worse, if he caught me again.


No, I'll go with you, and defend you to night, and then I'll swear too, never
to go near her again.


Nay, indeed Sir, I will not go, to be accessory to your death too: besides,
what should you go again, Sir, for?


No disputing, or advice, Sir; you have reason to know I am unalterable. Go,
therefore, presently, and write her a Note to enquire if her assignation with
you holds; and if not to be at her own house, where else? and be importunate to
gain admittance to her to night: let your Messenger, ere he deliver your
Letter, enquire first, if her Husband be gone out. Go, 'tis now almost six of
the clock; I expect you back here before seven, with leave to see her then. Go,
do this dexterously, and expect the performance of my last nights promise,
never to part with you.


Ay, Sir: but will you be sure to remember that?


Did I ever break my word? go, no more replies, or doubts.


In the next Room, with my Lord Plausible and Novel.


Ay, we came hither, because 'twas a private house; but with thee indeed no
house can be private, for thou hast that pretty quality of the familiar Fops of
the Town, who, in an eating house, always keep company with all people in it,
but those they came with.


I went into their Room, but to keep them, and my own Fool the Squire, out of
your Room; but you shall be peevish now, because you have no Money: but why the
Devil won't you write to those we were speaking of? since your modesty, or your
spirit, will not suffer you to speak to 'em, to lend you Money, why won't you
try 'em at last, that way?


Because I know 'em already, and can bear Want, better than Denials; nay, than
Obligations.


Deny you! they cannot: all of 'em have been your intimate Friends.


No, they have been people only I have obliged particularly.


Very well; therefore you ought to go to 'em the rather sure.


No, no: those you have obliged most, most certainly avoid you, when you can
oblige 'em no longer; and they take your Visits like so many Duns: Friends,
like Mistresses, are avoided, for Obligations past.


Pshaw! but most of 'em are your Relations; Men of great Fortune, and Honour.


Yes; but Relations have so much Honour, as to think Poverty taints the blood;
and disown their wanting Kindred: believing, I suppose, that, as Riches at
first makes a Gentleman, the want of 'em degrades him. But, damn 'em, now I'm
poor, I'll anticipate their contempt, and disown them.


But you have many a Female acquaintance, whom you have been liberal to, who
may have a heart to refund to you a little, if you would ask it: they are not
all Olivia's.


Dam thee! how could thou think of such a thing? I would as soon rob my
Footman of his Wages: Besides, 'twere in vain too; for a Wench is like a Box in
an Ordinary, receives all peoples Money easily; but there's no getting, nay
shaking any out again: and he that fills it, is sure never to keep the Key.


Well, but noble Captain, would you make me believe that you, who know half the
Town, have so many Friends, and have obliged so many, can't borrow fifty or an
hundred pound?


Why noble Lieutenant, you who know all the Town, and call all you know
Friends, methinks should not wonder at it; since you find Ingratitude too: for
how many Lords Families (though descended from Blacksmiths, or Tinkers) hast thou
called Great, and Illustrious? how many ill Tables call good eating? how many
noisy Coxcombs, Wits? how many pert Coaching Cowards, stout? how many tawdry
affected Rogues, well dressed? how many Perukes admired? and how many ill Verses
applauded? and yet can not borrow a shilling; dost thou expect I, who always
spoke truth, should?


Nay, now you think you have paid me; but hark you, Captain, I have heard of a
thing called grinning Honour, but never of starving Honour.


Well, but it has been the fate of some brave Men: and if they wo' not give me
a Ship again, I can go starve any where, with a Musket on my shoulder.


Give you a Ship! why, you will not solicit it.


If I have not solicited it by my services, I know no other way.


Your Servant, Sir: nay then I'm satisfied, I must solicit my Widow the closer,
and run the desperate fortune of Matrimony on shore.


How! -- Nay, here is a Friend indeed; and he that has him in his arms, can
know no wants.


Dear Sir! and he that is in your arms, is secure from all fears whatever; nay,
our Nation is secure by your defeat at Sea, and the Dutch that fought against
you, have proved enemies to themselves only, in bringing you back to us.


Fie, fie; this from a Friend? and yet from any other 'twere unsufferable: I
thought I should never have taken any thing ill from you.


A Friends privilege is to speak his mind, though it be taken ill.


But your tongue need not tell me you think too well of me; I have found it
from your heart, which spoke in actions, your unalterable heart: but Olivia is
false, my Friend, which I suppose is no News to you.


He's in the right on it.


But could thou not keep her true to me?


Not for my heart, Sir.


But could you not perceive it at all, before I went? could she so deceive us
both?


I must confess, the first time I knew it, was three days after your
departure, when she received the Money you had left in Lombard-street, in her
name; and her tears did not hinder her it seems from counting that. You would
trust her with all, like a true generous Lover!


And she, like a mean Jilting --


Traytrous --


Base --


Damned --


Covetous --


Mercenary Whore -- (I can hardly hold from laughing)


Ay, a Mercenary Whore indeed; for she made me pay her, before I lay with her.


How! -- Why, have you lain with her?


Ay, ay.


Nay, she deserves you should report it at least, though you have not.


Report it! by Heaven, 'tis true.


How! sure not.


I do not use to lie, nor you to doubt me.


When?


Last night, about seven or eight of the clock.


Ha! -- Now I remember, I thought she spake as if she expected some other,
rather than me: a confounded Whore indeed!


But, what, thou wonder'st at it! nay, you seem to be angry too.


I cannot but be enraged against her, for her usage of you: damned, infamous,
common Jade.


Nay, her Cuckold, who first Cuckolded me in my Money, shall not laugh all
himself; we will do him reason, shall not we?


Ay, ay.


But thou dost not, for so great a Friend, take pleasure enough in your Friends
Revenge, methinks.


Yes, yes; I'm glad to know it, since you have lain with her.


Thou can not tell me who that Rascal, her Cuckold, is?


No


She would keep it from you, I suppose.


Yes, yes --


Thou would laugh, if thou knew but all the circumstances of my having her.
Come, I ll tell thee.


Dam her; I care not to hear any more of her.


Faith, thou shalt. You must know --


I tell you, he has a Wench with him, and would be private.


Dam 'em! a Man can't open a Bottle, in these eating houses, but presently you
have these impudent, intruding, buzzing Flies and Insects, in your Glass. --
Well, I ll tell thee all anon. In the mean time, prithee go to her, but not
from me, and try if you can get her to lend me but an hundred pound of my
Money, to supply my present wants; for I suppose there is no recovering any of
it by Law.


Not any; think not of it: nor by this way neither.


Go, try, at least.


I'll go; but I can satisfy you before hand, 'twill be to no purpose: You'll
no more find a refunding Wench --


Than a refunding Lawyer; indeed their Fees alike scarce ever return: however,
try her, put it to her.


Ay, ay, I ll try her, put it to her home, with a vengeance.


Nay, you shall be our Judge, Manly. Come, Major, I'll speak it to your teeth:
if people provoke me to say bitter things, to their faces, they must take what
follows; though, like my Lord Plausible, I'd rather do it civilly behind their
backs.


Nay, thou art a dangerous Rogue, I've heard, behind a Mans back.


You wrong him sure, noble Captain; he would do a Man no more harm behind his
back, than to his face.


I am of my Lord's mind.


Yes, a Fool, like a Coward, is the more to be feared behind a Man's back, more
than a witty Man: for, as a Coward is more bloody than a brave Man, a Fool is
more malicious than a Man of Wit.


A Fool, Tar -- a Fool! nay, thou art a brave Sea-judge of Wit! a Fool!
prithee when did you ever find me want something to say, as you do often?


Nay, I confess, thou art always talking, roaring, or making a noise; that
I'll say for thee.


Well, and is talking sign of a Fool?


Yes, always talking; especially too if it be loud and fast, is the sign of a
Fool.


Pshaw! Talking is like Fencing, the quicker the better; run 'em down, run 'em
down; no matter for parrying; push on still, sa, sa, sa: no matter whether you
argue in form, push in guard, or no.


Or hit, or no; I think thou always talk without thinking; Novel.


Ay, ay; studied Play's the worse, to follow the Allegory, as the old Pedant
says.


A young Fop!


I ever thought the Man of most Wit, had been, like him of most Money, who has
no vanity in showing it everywhere; whilst the beggarly pusher of his Fortune,
has all he has about him still, only to show.


Well, Sir, and makes a very pretty show in the World, let me tell you; nay, a
better than your close Hunks: A Pox, give me ready Money in Play; what care I
for a Mans reputation? what are we the better for your substantial thrifty
Curmudgeon in Wit, Sir?


Thou art a profuse young Rogue indeed.


So much for talking; which I think I have proved a mark of Wit; and so is
Railing, Roaring, and making a noise: for, Railing is Satyr, you know; and
Roaring, and making a noise, Humour.


The hour is betwixt seven and eight exactly: 'tis now half an hour after six.


Well, go then to the Piazza, and wait for me; as soon as it is quite dark,
I'll be with you: I must stay here yet a while, for my Friend. But is Railing
Satyr, Novel?


And Roaring, and making a noise, Humour?


What, won't you confess there's Humour in Roaring, and making a noise?


No.


Nor in cutting Napkins, and Hangings?


No, sure.


Dull Fops!


O Rogue, Rogue, insipid Rogue! Nay, Gentlemen, allow him those things for Wit;
for his parts lie only that way.


Peace, old Fool, I wonder not at thee; but that young Fellows should be so
dull, as to say, there's no Humour in making a noise, and breaking Windows! I
tell you, there's Wit and Humour too, in both: And a Wit is as well known by his
Frolic, as by his Simile.


Pure Rogue! there's your modern Wit for you! Wit, and Humour, in breaking of
Windows! There's Mischief, if you will; but no Wit, or Humour.


Prithee, prithee peace, old Fool. I tell you, where there is Mischief,
there's Wit. Don't we esteem the Monky a Wit amongst Beasts, only because he's
mischievous? And let me tell you, as good Nature is a sign of a Fool, being
Mischievous is a sign of Wit.


O Rogue, Rogue! pretend to be a Wit, by doing Mischief and Railing!


Why, thou, old Fool, hast no other pretence to the name of a Wit, but by
Railing at new Plays.


Thou, by Railing at that facetious, noble way of Wit, quibling.


Thou call thy dullness, gravity; and thy dozing, thinking.


You, Sir, your dullness, spleen: And you talk much, and say nothing.


Thou read much, and understand nothing, Sir.


You laugh loud, and break no Jest.


You rail, and no body hangs himself: And thou hast nothing of the Satyr, but
in thy face.


And you have no jest, but your face, Sir.


Thou art an illiterate Pedant.


Thou art a Fool, with a bad Memory.


Come, a Pox on you both, you have done like Wits now; for you Wits, when you
quarrel, never give over, till you prove one another Fools.


And you Fools have never any occasion of laughing at us Wits, but when we
quarrel: therefore, let us be Friends, Oldfox.


They are such Wits as thou art, who make the name of a Wit as scandalous, as
that of Bully; and signify a loud-laughing, talking, incorrigible Coxcomb; as
Bully, a roaring, hardened Coward.


And would have his noise and laughter pass for Wit; as the other his huffing and
blustering, for Courage.


Gentlemen, with your leave, here is one I would speak with, and I have nothing
to say to you.


I told you 'twas in vain, to think of getting Money out of her: she says, if
a shilling would do it, she would not save you from starving, or hanging, or
what you would think worse, begging or flattering; and rails so at you, one
would not think you had lain with her,


O, Friend, never trust, for that matter, a Woman's railing; for she is no less
a dissembler in her hatred, than her love: And as her fondness of her Husband
is a sign he's a Cuckold, her railing at another Man is a sign she lies with
him.


He's in the right on it: I know not what to trust to.


But you did not take any notice of it to her, I hope?


So! -- Sure he is afraid I should have disprov'd him, by an enquiry of her:
all may be well yet.


What hast thou in thy head, that makes thee seem so unquiet?


Only this base, impudent Woman's falsness: I cannot put her out of my head.


O my dear Friend, be not you too sensible of my wrongs, for then I shall feel
'em too, with more pain, and think 'em unsufferable. Dam her, her Money, and
that ill-natur'd Whore too, Fortune her self; but if thou would ease a little
my present trouble, prithee go borrow me somewhere else, some Money: I can
trouble thee.


You trouble me indeed, most sensibly, when you command me any thing I cannot
do: I have lately lost a great deal of Money at Play, more than I can yet pay;
so that not only my Money, but my Credit too is gone, and know not where to
borrow; but could rob a Church for you. (Yet would rather end your wants, by
cutting your throat.)


Nay, then I doubly feel my poverty, since I'm incapable of supplying thee.


But, methinks, she that granted you the last favour, (as they call it) should
not deny you any thing --


Hey, Tarpaulin, have you done?


I understand not that point of kindness, I confess.


No, thou dost not understand it, and I have not time to let you know all now,
for these Fools, you see, will interrupt us; but anon, at Supper, we'll laugh
at leisure together, at Olivia's Cuckold; who took a young Fellow, that goes
between his Wife and me, for a Woman.


Ha!


Senseless, easy Rascal! 'twas no wonder she chose him for a Husband; but she
thought him, I thank her, fittter than me, for that blind, bearing Office.


I could not be deceived in that long Woman's hair tied up behind; nor those
infallible proofs, her pouting, swelling breasts: I have handled too many sure
not to know 'em.


What, you wonder the Fellow could be such a blind Coxcomb!


Yes, yes --


Nay, prithee come to us, Manly; Gad, all the fine things one says, in their
company, are lost, without thee.


Away, Fop; I'm busy yet. You see we cannot talk here at our ease; besides, I
must be gone immediately, in order to meeting with Olivia again to night.


To night! it cannot be sure --


I had an appointment just now from her.


For what time?


At half an hour after seven precisely.


Don't you apprehend the Husband?


He! snivelling Gull! he a thing to be feared! a Husband, the tamest of
creatures!


Very fine!


But, prithee, in the mean time, go try to get me some Money. Though thou art
too modest to borrow for thy self, thou can do any thing for me I know. Go;
for I must be gone to Olivia: go, and meet me here anon. -- Freeman, where are
you!


Ay, I'll meet with you, I warrant; but it shall be at Olivia's. Sure it cannot
be; she denies it so calmly, and with that honest, modest assurance, it can't
be true -- and he does not use to lye -- but belying a Woman, when she won't be
kind, is the only lye a brave Man will least scruple. But then the Woman in
Mans clothes, whom he calls a Man! - Well, but, by her Breasts, I know her to
be a Woman: -- But then, again, his appointment from her, to meet with him to
night! I am distracted more with doubt, than jealousy. Well, I have no way to
disabuse or revenge my self, but by going home immediately, putting on a riding
Suit, and pretending to my Wife the same business which carry^d me out of Town
last, requires me again to go Post to Oxford to night; then, if the appointment
he boasts of be true, it's sure to hold; and I shall have an opportunity either
of clearing her, or revenging my self on both. Perhaps, she is his Wench, of an
old date, and I am his Cully, whilst I think him mine; and he has seemed to
make his Wench rich, only that I might take her off of his hands: or if he has
but lately lain with her, he must needs discover, by her, my treachery to him;
which I'm sure he will revenge with my death, and which I must prevent with
his, if it were only but for fear of his too just reproaches; for, I must
confess, I never had till now any excuse, but that of interest, for doing ill
to him.


Come hither, only I say be sure you mistake not the time; you know the house
exactly where Olivia lodges: 'tis just hard by.


Yes, yes.


Well then, bring 'em all, I say, thither, and all you know that may be then in
the house; for the more Witnesses I have of her infamy, the greater will be my
revenge: and be sure you come strait up to her Chamber, without more ado. Here,
take the Watch: you see 'tis above a quarter past seven; be there in half an
hour exactly.


You need not doubt my diligence, or dexterity; I am an old Scourer, and can
naturally beat up a Wenches quarters that won't be civil. Sha'nt we break her
Windows too?


No, no: be punctual only.


Sweetheart, are you sure the door was shut close, that none of those Roysters
saw us come in?


Yes, Mistress; and you shall have a privater Room above, instantly.


You are safe enough, Gentlemen, for I have been private in this house ere now,
upon other occasions, when I was something younger. Come, Gentlemen, in short,
I leave my business to your care and fidelity: and so, here's to you.


We were ungrateful Rogues, if we should not be honest to you; for we have had
a great deal of your Money.


And you have done me many a good job for it: and so, here's to you again.


Why, we have been perjured, but six times for you.


Forged but four Deeds, with your Husband's last Deed of Gift.


And but three Wills.


And counterfeited Hands and Seals to some six Bonds; I think that's all,
Brother.


Ay, that's all, Gentlemen; and so, here's to you again.


Nay, it would do one's heart good to be forsworn for you: you have a conscience
in your ways, and pay us well.


You are in the right on it, Brother; one would be damned for her, with all ones
heart.


But there are Rogues, who make us forsworn for 'em; and when we come to be
paid, they'll be forsworn too, and not pay us our wages which they promised
with Oaths sufficient.


Ay, a great Lawyer, that shall be nameless Bilkt me too.


That was hard, methinks, that a Lawyer should use Gentlemen Witnesses no
better.


A Lawyer! do ye wonder a Lawyer should do it? I was Bilked by a Reverend Divine,
that preaches twice on Sundays, and prays half an hour still before dinner.


How? a Conscientious Divine, and not pay people for damning themselves! Sure
then, for all his talking, he does not believe damnation. But come, to our
business: pray be sure to imitate exactly the flourish at the end of this name.


O he's the best in England at untangling a flourish, Madam.


And let not the Seal be a jot bigger: observe well the dash too, at the end of
this name.


I warrant you, Madam.


Well, these, and many other shifts, poor Widows are put to sometimes; for
every body would be riding a Widow, as they say, and breaking into her
Jointure: they think marrying a Widow an easy business, like leaping the
Hedge, where another has gone over before; a Widow is a mere gap, a gap with
them.


Come, Madam, to be plain with you, I'll be fob'd off no longer. I'll bind her
and gag her, but she shall hear me. what you promised me: here are my Garters,
and here's a Gag: you shall be acquainted with my parts, Lady, you shall.


Acquainted with your parts! A Rape, a Rape -- What, will you ravish me?


Yes, Lady, I will ravish you; but it shall be through the ear, Lady, the ear
only, with my well-pen'd Acrostics.


O Law! my Mother bound hand and foot, and gaping, as if she rose before her
time to day!


What means this, Oldfox? But I'll release you from him: you shall be no Mans
Prisoner, but mine. Bailiffs, execute your Writ.


Nay, then I'll be gone, for fear of being Bayl, and paying her Debts, without
being her Husband.


We Arrest you, in the King's Name, at the Suit of Mr. Freeman, Guardian to
Ieremiah Blackacre Esq in an Action of Ten thousand pounds.


How! how! in a Choak-Bayl Action! What, and the Pen and Ink Gentlemen taken
too! Have you confessed, you Rogues?


We needed not to confess; for the Bailiffs dogged us hither to the very door,
and overheard all that you and we said


Undone, undone then! no Man was ever too hard for me, till now. O, Ierry,
Child, wilt thou vex again the womb that bore thee?


Ay, for bearing me before Wedlock, as you say: But I'll teach you to call a
Blackacre a Bastard, though you were never so much my Mother.


Well, I'm undone: not one trick left? no Law-Meush imaginable?


In vain, Madam; for you have no other way to release your self, but by the
Londs of Matrimony.


How, Sir, how! that were but to sue out an Habeas Corpus, for a removal from
one Prison to another. Matrimony!


Well, Bailiffs, away with her.


O stay, Sir, can you be so cruel as to bring me under Covert Baron again? and
put it out of my power to sue in my own name. Matrimony, to a Woman, worse than
Excommunication, in depriving her of the benefit of the Law: and I would rather
be deprived of life. But hark you, Sir, I am contented you should hold and
enjoy my person by Lease or Patent; but not by the spiritual Patent, called a
Licence; that is, to have the privileges of a Husband without the dominion;
that is, Durante beneplacito: in confideration of which, I will, out of my
Jointure, secure you an Annuity of Three hundred pounds a Year, and pay your
debts; and that's all you younger Brothers desire to marry a Widow for, I'm
sure.


Well, Widow, if --


What, I hope, Bully Guardian, you are not making Agreements, without me?


No, no. First, Widow, you must say no more that he is the Son of a Whore; have
a care of that: And then, he must have a settled Exhibition of Forty pounds a
Year, and a Nag of Assizes, kept by you, but not upon the Common; and have free
ingress, egress, and regress to and from your Maids Garret.


Well, I can grant all that too.


Ay, ay, fair words butter no Cabage; but, Guardian, make her Sign, Sign and
Seal: for, otherwise, if you knew her as well as I, you would not trust her
word for a farthing.


I warrant thee, Squire. Well, Widow, since thou art so generous, I will be
generous too; and if you'll secure me Four hundred pound a Year, but during
your life, and pay my debts, not above a thousand pound; I'll bate you your
person, to dispose of as you please


Have a care, Sir, a Settlement without a Consideration, is void in Law: you
must do something for it.


Prithee then let the Settlement on me be called Alimony; and the
Consideration our Separation: Come, my Lawyer, with Writings ready drawn, is
within, and in haste. Come.


But, what, no other kind of Consideration, Mr. Freeman? Well, a Widow, I see,
is a kind of a sine cure, by custom of which the unconscionable Incumbent
enjoys the profits, without any duty, but does that ^ull (...) where.


So, I am now prepared once more for my timorous young Lover's reception: my
Husband is gone; and go thou out too, thou next interrupter of Love: -- thou
hast Beauty and Youth to please a Wife; Address and Wit, to amuse and fool a
Husband; nay, thou hast all things to be wished in a Lover, but your Fits: I
hope, my Dear, you won't have one to night; and, that you may not, I^ll lock
the door, though there be no need of it, but to lock out your Fits; for my
Husband is just gone out of Town again. Come, where are you?


Well, thou hast impudence enough to give me Fits too, and make Revenge it self
impotent, hinder me from making thee yet more infamous, if it can be.


Come, come, my Soul, come.


Presently, my Dear: we have time enough sure.


How! time enough! True Lovers can no more think they ever have time enough,
than love enough: You shall stay with me all night; but that is but a Lover's
moment. Come.


But won't you let me give you and my self the satisfaction of telling you, how
I abused your Husband last night?


Not when you can give me, and your self too, the satisfaction of abusing him
again, to night. Come.


Let me but tell you how your Husband --


O name not his, or Manly's more loathsome name, if you love me; I forbid 'em
last night: and you know I mentioned my Husband but once, and he came. No
talking pray; 'twas ominous to us. You make me fancy a noise at the door
already, but I'm resolved not to be interrupted. Manly here in the room, with
all his awful insolence; I would give my self to this dear hand, to be led
away, to Heavens of joys, which none but thou can give. But, what's this
noise at the door? So, I told you what talking would come to.


Freeman is come too soon.


O 'tis he! -- Then here is the happiest minute lost, that ever bashful Boy, or
trifling Woman fooled away! I'm undone! my Husbands reconcilement too was
false, as my joy, all delusion: but, come this way, here's a Back-door.


Stir not, yet fear nothing.


Nothing, but your life, Sir.


We shall now know this happy Man she calls Husband.


Oh, where are you? What, idle with fear? Come, I ll tie the Curtains, if you
will hold. Here, take this Cabinet and Purse, for it is thine, if we escape;


'Tis mine indeed now again, and it shall never escape more from me: to you at
least.


So, there I'm right sure --


Softly. Sword and dark Lanthorn, Villain, are some odds; but --


Odds! I'm sure I find more odds than I expected: What, has my insatiable two
Seconds at once? but --


Where are you now? -- What, is he entered then, and are they fighting! O do
not kill one that can make no defence. -- Manly! And have I been thus concerned
for him, embracing him? And has he his Jewels again too? What means this? O
'tis too sure, as well as my shame! which I ll go hide for ever.


No, my dearest, after so much kindness as has past between us, I cannot part
with you yet. Freeman, let no body stir out of the Room; for, notwithstanding
your lights, we are yet in the dark, till this Gentleman please to turn his
face. -- Varnish! Art thou the happy Man then? Thou! Thou! Speak, I say; but
thy guilty silence tells me all. -- Well, I shall not upbraid thee; for my
wonder is striking me as dumb, as thy shame has made thee. But, what? my little
Volunteer hurt, and fainting!


My wound, Sir, is but a slight one, in my Arm: 'tis only my fear of your
danger, Sir, not yet well over.


But what's here? more strange things! you have not deceived me too, my little
Volunteer?


Me she has I'm sure.


Speak.


What, Cousin, I am brought hither by your Woman, I suppose, to be a witness of
the second vindication of your Honour?


Insulting is not generous: You might spare me, I have you.


Have a care, Cousin, you'll confess anon too much; and I would not have your
secrets.


Come, your blushes answer me sufficiently, and you have been my Volunteer in
love.


I must confess I needed no compulsion to follow you all the world over; which
I attempted in this habit, partly out of shame to own my love to you, and fear
of a greater shame, your refusal of it: for I knew of your engagement to this
Lady, and the constancy of your nature; which nothing could have altered, but
her self.


Dear Madam, I desired you to bring me out of confusion, and you have given me
more: I know not what to speak to you, or how to look upon you; the sense of my
rough, hard, and ill usage of you, (though chiefly your own fault) gives me more
pain now 'tis over, than you had, when you suffered it: and if my heart, the
refusal of such a Woman,


Then it has had punishment sufficient from her already, and needs no more from
me; and, I must confess, I would not be the only cause of making you break
your last nights Oath to me, of never parting with me: if you do not forget, or
repent it.


Then, take for ever my heart, and this with it;


So it seems, by giving her the Cabinet.


These Pendents appertain to your most faithful humble Servant.


And this Locket is mine; my earnest for love, which she never paid: therefore
my own again.


By what Law, Sir, pray? Cousin Olivia, a word: What, do they make a seizure on
your Goods and Chattels, vi armis? Make your demand, I say, and bring your
Trover, bring your Trover: I'll follow the Law for you.


And I my revenge.


But 'tis, my Friend, in your consideration most, that I would have returned
part of your Wives portion; for 'twere hard to take all from thee, since thou
hast paid so dear for it, in being such a Rascal: yet thy Wife is a Fortune
without a Portion; and thou art a man of that extraordinary merit in Villainy,
the World and Fortune can never desert thee, though I do; therefore be not
melancholy. Fare you well, Sir. Indian World; and I would now go thither out of
covetousness for your sake only.


Your heart, Sir, is a Present of that value. I can never make any return to it;
Grey; my other, Fidelia: the rest of my Story you shall know, when I have fewer
Auditors.


Nay, now, Madam, you have taken from me all power of making you any Complement
on my part; for I was going to tell you, that for your sake only, I would quit
the unknown pleasure of a retirement; and rather stay in this ill World of ours
still, tho odious to me, than give you more frights again at Sea, and make
again too great a venture there, in you alone. But if I should tell you now all
this, and that your virtue (since greater than I thought any was in the World)
had now reconciled me to it, my Friend here would say, 'tis your Estate that has
made me Friends with the World.


I must confefs I should; for I think most of our quarrels to the World, are
just such as we have to a handsome Woman: only because we cannot enjoy her, as
we would do.


Nay, if thou art a Plain-dealer too, give me thy hand; for now I'll say I am
thy Friend indeed: And, for your two sakes, though I have been so lately deceived
in Friends of both Sexes;

I will believe, there are now in the World
Good-natur'd Friends, who are not Prostitutes,
And handsome Women worthy to be Friends:
Yet, for my sake, let no one e're confide
In Tears, or Oaths, in Love, or Friend untried.


