Leave me my Lords until I ^all you soorth,
For I am heavy and disconsolate.
So Baiazet, now thou remainst alone,
Unrip the thoughts that harbour in thy br^st,
And eat thee up, for arbiter here's none,
That may descry the cause of thy unrest,
Unless these walls thy secret thoughts declare,
And Princes walls they say, unfaithful are^
Why that's the profit of great regiment,
That all of us are subject unto fea^es,
And this vain show and glorious intent,
Privy suspicion on each scruple reares,
I, though on all the world we make extent,
From the South-pole unto the North^en bears,
And stretch our reign from ^as^ to Western shore,
Yet doubt and care are with us ^u^rmore.
Look how the earth clad in her summers pride,
Embroydereth her mantle gorgio^sly,
With fragrant herbs, and ^owers gaily did,
Spreadi^g abroad her spangled Tapestry:
Yet under all a loathsome snake doth hide.
Such is our life, under Crowns, cares do lie,
And fear the sceptre still attends upon,
Oh who can take delight in kingly throne^
Public disorders joined with private cark,
Care of our friends, and of our children dear,
Do toss our lives, as waives a silly bark.
Though we be ^earelesse, tis not without ^eare,
For hidden mischief lurks in the dark:
And storms may fall, be the day ne'er so clear.
He knows not what it is to be a King,
That thinks a sceptre is a pleasant thing.
Twice fifteen times hath fair Latonaes son
Walked about the world with his great light:
Since I began, would I had ne'er begun
To sway this sceptre. Many a careful night
When Cynthia in hast to bed did run.
Have I with watching vexed my aged spright?
Since when what dangers I have ouerpa^t,
Would make a heart of adamant aghast.
The Persian ^ophi mighty Ismaell,
Took the Le^an^e clean away from me,
And Caraguis Bassa sent his force to quell,
Was killed hims^lfe the while his men did flee.
Poor Hali Bassa having once sped well,
And gained of him a bloody victory,
Was at the last slain fighting in the field,
Charactering honour in his battered sh^eld.
Ramirchan the Tartarian Emperor,
Gathering to him a number numberless,
Of bigbond Tartars in a haplesse hou^e
Encountered me, and there my chiefest bless
Good Alemsh^ (ah this remembrance sour)
Was slain the more t'augment my sad distress,
In leasing Alemsha^ poor, I lost mo^e
Then ever I had gained theretofore.
Well may thy soul rest in her latest grave,
Sweet Alemshae the comfort of my days,
That thou might live, how often did I crave?
How often did I bootless prayers raise
To that high power that life first to thee gave?
Trusty wast thou to me at all assays,
And dearest child thy father oft hath cried,
That thou had lived, so he himself had did.
The Christian Armies, oftentimes defeated
By my victorious fathers valiance,
Have all my Captains famously confronted,
And cracked in two our uncontrolled lance.
My strongest garrisons th^y have supplanted,
And overwhelmed me in sad mischance:
And my decrease so long wrought their increase,
Till I was forced conclude a friendly peace.
Now all these are but foreign damages,
Taken in war whose die uncertain is,
But I shall have more home-borne outrages,
Unless my divination aims amiss:
I have three sons all of unequal ages,
And all in diverse studies set their bliss.
Corcut my eldest a Philosopher,
Acomat pompous, Selm^ a warrior.
Corcut in fair Magn^si^ leads his life,
In learning Arts^ and Mahounds dreaded laws:
Acomat loves to court it with his wife,
And in a pleasant quiet ^yes to pause:
But Selmi follows wa^res in dismal strife,
And snatches at my Crown with greedy claws:
But he shall miss of that he aims at,
For I reserve it for my Acomat.
For Acomat? Alas it cannot be,
St^arne Selimus hath won my peoples hart,
The Janissaries love him more then me:
And for his cause will suff^r any smart.
They see he is a friend to chiua^rie,
And sooner will they from my faith depart,
And by strong hand Baiazet pull thee down,
Then let their Selmi hop without the Crown.
Ah, if the soldiers oue^ule thy s^ate,
And nothing must be done wit^out their will,
If every base and upstart runagate
Shall cross^ a Prince and overthwart him still.
If Corcut, Selimus, and Acomat,
With crowns and kingdoms shall their hungers fill?
Poor Baiazet what then remains to thee?
But the bare title of thy dignity.
I, and unless thou do dissemble all,
And wink at Selimu^ aspiring thought:
The Bassaes cruelly shall work thy fall,
And then thy Empire is but dearly bought.
Ah that our sons thus to ambition thrall,
Should set the law of Nature all at nought.
But what must be, cannot choose but be done,
Come Bassaes enter, Baiazet hath done.

Dread Emperor, long may you happy live,
Loved of your subjects, and feared of your ^oes:
We wonder much what doth your highness grieve,
That you will not unto your Lords disclose.
Perhaps you fear least we your loyal Peers,
Would prove disloyal to your Majesty,
And be rebellious in your dying years.
But mighty Prince the heavens can testifi^,
How dearly we esteem your safety.

Perhaps you think Mustaffa will (...)
And leave your grace, and cleave to Selimus,
But sooner shall th'almighties thunderbolt
Strike me down to the cau^ tenebrious
The lowest land, and damned sp^ts ho^t
Then true Mustaffa prove so treacherous:
Your Majesty then needs not much to fear,
Since you are loved of subject, Prince, and Peer.
First shall the Sun rise from the occident,
And loose his s^eeds benighted in the East,
First shall the sea become the continent,
Ere we forsake our sovereigns beheast:
We fought not for you against Persians Tent,
Breaking our Lances on his sturdy creast.
We fought not for you gain^t the Christian host,
To become traitors after all our cost.

Hear me Mustafla and Cherseol^,
I am a father of a headstrong brood,
Which if I look not closely to my self,
Will seek to ruinate their fathers state,
Even as the vipers in great Neroes fen,
Eat up the belly that first nourished them.
You see the harvest of my life is past,
And aged winter hath besprent my head,
With a hoar frost of silver coloured hairs,
The haruingers of honourable eld,
The^e br^nchl^ke va^nes which once did guide my arms
To toss the spear in battellous array,
Now withered vp^ have lost their former strength:
My sons whom now ambition gins to pric^e,
May take occasion of my weakened age,
And rise in rebel arms against my state.
But stay, here comes a Messenger to us.

Health and good hap to Baiazet,
The great commander of all Asia,
Se^m^ the Sold^ne of great Trebis^nd,
Sends me unto your grace, to signify
His alliance with the King of T^rtary.

Said I not Lords as much to you before,
That mine own ^onnes would seek my overthrow?
And see here comes a luckless me^enger^
To prove th^t t^ue which my (...) did foretell.
Does S^l^m m^ke so small account of us,
Th^t he d^re m^try without ou^ consent,
An^ to that d^uell too of ^arta^e?
And could he then unkind, so soon forget
T^e miuries th^t ^amir did to me,
Thus to con^ort himself with him against me?

Your m^iestie misconsters Selimu^,
It cannot be, that he in whose high thoughts
A m^p of many valures is enshrin'd,
Should seek his fathers ruin and decay.
Selimus is a Prince of forward hope,
Whose only name affrights your enemies,
It cannot be he should prove false to you.

Can it not be? Oh yes Cher^eoli,
For Selimus hands do itch to have the Crown,
And he will have it, or else pull me down.
Is he a Prince? ah no he is a sea,
Into which run nought but ambitious reaches,
Seditiou^ compl^ts, murder, fraud and hate.
Could he not let his father know his mind,
But match himself when I least thought on it^

Perhaps my Lord Selimu^ loved the dame,
And feared to ce^tifie you of his love,
Because her father was your enemy.

In love Mustaff^, Selimus in love?
If he be, Lording tis not Ladies l^ue,
But love of rule^ and kingly sovereignty.
^or wherefore should he fear t^aske my consent^
Ti^ ^ie Mustaff^, if he had feared me,
He never would have lou^d mine enemy.
But t^is his marriage with the Tartars daughter,
Is but the prologue to his cruelty,
And quickly shall we have the Tragedy.
Which though he act with meditated bravery,
The world will never give him plauditie.
What yet more news?

Dread Emperor, S^limu^ is at hand.
Two hundredth thousand strong Tartarians
Armed at all points dooes he lead with him,
Besides his followers from Trebisond.

I thought so much of wicked Selimus,
Oh forlorn hopes and haplesse Baiazet.
Is duty then exiled from his breast,
Which nature hath inscribed with golden pen,
Deep in the hearts of honourable men?
Ah Selim, S limb, were thou not my son,
But some strange vnacqu^inted forreiner,
Whom I should honour as I honoured thee:
Yet would it grieve me even unto the death,
If he should deal as thou ha^t dealt with me,
And thou my son to whom I freely gave
The mighty Empire of great Trebisond,
Art too vnn^turall to requite me thus,
Good Ale^shae had thou liu^d till this day,
Thou would have blushed at thy brothers mind^
Come sweet Mustaffa, come Ch^rseoli^
And with some good advice recom^ort me.

Now ^el^mu^ consider who thou art,
Long ha^t thou marched in disguised attire^
But now unmask thy self and play thy part,
And manifest the heate of thy desire:
Nourish the coals of thine ambitious fire^
And think th^t then thy Empi^e ^s most sure,
When men for fear thy tyranny endure^
Think th^t to thee there is no vvor^e reproach,
Then filial duty in so high a place,
Thou oughtst to set barrels of blood abroach,
And seek with sword whole kingdoms to displace,
Let Mahounds laws be locked up in their case.
And meaner men and of a base^ spiri^,
In virtuous actions se^ke for glorious merit.
I count it sacriledge^ for to be holy^
Or reverence this thred-bare name of good,
Leave to old men and babes that kind of folly,
Count it of equal value with the mud:
Make thou a passage for thy gushing flood,
By slaughter, treason, or what else thou can,
And scorn religion, it disgraces man.
My father Ba^azet is weak and old,
And hath not much above two years to live,
The Turkish Crown of Pearl and Ophi^ gold,
He means to his dear Acomat to give.
But ere his ship can to her haven drive,
I'll send abroad my tempes^s in such sort,
That she shall sink before she get the port.
Alas, alas, his highness aged head
Is not sufficient to support a Crown,
Then Selimus take thou it in his ^eed,
And if at this thy boldness he dare frown,
Or but re^i^t thy will, then pull him down:
For since he hath so short a time t'enioy it,
I'll make it shorter, or I will destroy him.
Nor pass I what our holy votaries
Shall here object ag^nst my forward mind,
I wreak not of their foolish ceremonies,
But mean to take my fortune as I find,
Wisdom commands to follow tide and wind:
And catch the ^ront of swift occasion,
Before she be too quickly oue^gone:
Some man will say I am too impious,
Thus to l^ie siege against my fathers life,
And that I ought to follow ve^tuous
And godly sonnes^ that ve^tue is a glass
Wherein I may my errant life behold,
And frame my self by it in ancient mould.
Good sir, your ^isedomes overflowing wit,
Digs d^epe with learnings wonder-working spade^
P^rhaps you think that now forsooth you sit
With some grave wisard in a prattling shade.
Avaunt such glasses: let them view in me,
The perfect picture of right tyranny.
I like a Lion^ look no^ worth a^leeke,
When every dog dep^iues him of his pray:
These honest terms are far enough to seek.
When angry Fortune menaces decay,
My resolution treads a nearer way.
Give me the heart consp^ring with the hand,
In such a cause my father to withstand.
Is he my father? why I am his sonne^
I owe no more to him then h^ to me,
I^ he proceed as he hath now begun,
And pas^e from me the Turkish Seigniory,
To Acomat, then Selimus is free:
And if h^ injure me that am his son,
Faith all the l^ue twixt him and me is done.
But for I see the schoolmen are prepared,
To plant against me their bookish ordinance,
I mean to stand on a sententious guard:
And without any far fetched circumstance,
Quickly unfold mine own opinion,
To arm my heart with irreligion.
When first this circled round^ this building fair,
Some God took out of the con^used ma^e,
(What God I do not know, nor greatly care)
Then every man of his own dition was,
And every one his li^e in p^ace did pass.
War was not then, and ric^es we^e not known,
And no man said^ this^ or this is mine own,
The plough-man with a ^urrow did not mark
How far his great possessions did reach:
The earth knew not the share, nor seas the bark.
The soldiers entered not the battered breach,
Nor Trumpets the tan^ra loud did teach^
There needed them no iudge^ nor yet no law,
Nor any King of whom to stand in awe.
But after Ninus, warlike ^lus son,
The earth with unknown armour did warray,
Then first the ^acred name of King begun:
And things that were as common as the day,
Did then to set possessors first obey.
Then they established laws and holy rites^
To maintain peace, and govern bloody fights.
Then some sage man, above the vulgar wise,
Knowing th^t laws could not in quiet dwell,
V^lesse they were observed did fir^t devise
The na^es of Gods, religion heaven and hell,
And began of pains, and faind rewards to tell.
Pains for those men which did negl^c^ the law,
Rewards, for those that lived in quiet awe.
Whereas indeed they were mere fictions,
And if they were no^ ^lim thinks they were:
And these religions obse^uations,
O^ely bug-beares to keep the world in fear,
And make men quietly a yoke to beare^
So that religion of it self a babble,
Was only found to make us peaceable^
Hence in especial come the foolish names^
Of f^ther, mother, brother^ ^nd such like:
For who so well his c^git^tion frames,
Shall find they serve but only for to strike
I^to our minds a certain kind of love.
For these names too ^ policy,
To keep^ the qu^ of societie^
Indeed I must confess they are not bad,
Because they keep the baser sort in ^eare?
But we, whose mind in heavenly thoughts is clad,
Whose body doth a glorious spirit bear,
That hath no bounds, but flies every where.
Why should we seek to make that soul a slave,
To which dame Nature so large freedom gave.
Amongst us men, there is some difference,
Of actions ^earmed by us good or ill:
As he that doth his father recompense,
Differs from him that doth his father kill.
And yet I think think other what they will,
That Parricides, when death hath given them rest,
Shall have as good a part as the rest.
And that's just nothing, for as I suppose
In deaths void kingdom reigns eternal night:
Secure of evil, and secure of foes,
Where nothing doth the wicked man affright,
No more then him that dies in doing right.
Then s^nce in death nothing shall to us fall,
Here while I live, I'll have a snatch at all.
And that can never, never be attained,
Unless old Ba^aze^ do die the death:
For long enough the gray-beard now hath reigned,
And lived at ease, while others lived vneath.
And now its time he should resign his breath.
'twere good for him if he were pres^ed out,
'twould bring him rest, and rid him of his gout.
Resolved to do it, cast to compas^e it
Without delay or long procra^tination:
It argues an unmannered wit,
When all is ready for so s^rong invasion,
To draw out time, an unlooked for mutation
May soon prevent us if we do delay,
Quick speed is good, where wisdom leads the way.

My Lord.

Lo fly boy to my father Ba^azet^
And tell him Selim his obedient son,
Desires to speak with him and kiss his hands,
Tell him I long to see his gracious face,
And that I come with all my chivalry,
To chase the Christians from his Seigniorie^
In any wise say I must speak with him.

Now Sinam if I speed.

What then my Lord?

What then? why Si^am thou art nothing worth,
I will endeavour to persuade him man,
To give the Empire over unto me,
Perhaps I shall attain it at his hands:
If I cannot, this right hand is resolved,
To end the period with a fatal stab.

My gracious Lord give Sinam leave to speak,
If you resolve to work your fathers death,
You venture life: think you the Janissaries
Will suffer you to kill him in their sight,
And let you pass f^ee without punishment?

If I resolve? as sure as he^uen is heaven,
I mean to see him dead, or my self King:
As for the Bassaes they are all my friends,
And I am sure would pawn their dearest blood,
That Selim might be Emperor of Turks.

Yet Acomat and Corcut both survive,
To be revenged for their fathers death.

Sinam if they or twenty such as they,
Had twenty several Armies in the field,
If Selimus were once your Emperour^
I'd dart abroad the thunderbolts of war,
And mow their hartlesse squadrons to the ground.

Oh yet my Lord after your highne^e death,
There is a hell and a revenging God.

Tush Sinam these are school conditions,
To fear the devil or his cursed damme:
^hinkst thou I care for apparitions,
Of Sisiphus and of his backward stone,
And poor Ixions lamentable moan?
Now I think the cave of damned ghoasts,
Is but a tale to terrify young babes:
Like devils faces scored on painted posts,
Or fained circles in our astrolabes.
Why theirs no difference when we are dead,
And death once come, then all alike are sped.
Or if there were, as I can scarce believe,
A heaven of joy, and hell of endless pain:
Yet by my soul it never should me greeu^:
So I might on the Turkish Empire reign,
To enter hell, and lean on fair heavens gain.
An Empire Sinam, is so sweet a thing,
As I could be a devil to be a King.
But go we Lords and solace in our camp,
Till the return of young Occhiali,
And if his answer be to thy desire,
Selim thy mind in kingly thoughts attire.

Even as the great Egyptian Crocodile,
Wanting his pra^e, with artificial tears,
And ^ained plaints his subtle tongue doth file,
T'entrap the ^illy wandering traveller,
And move him to advance his footing near,
That when he is in danger of his claws,
He may deuou^ him with his famished ^awes,
So plays crafty Selimus with me,
H^ h^ugh^e thoughts ^ll wait on Diadeins,
And not a step but treads to maie^ie.
The Phoenix gazes on the Suns bright beams,
The Echinae is swims against the streams.
Nought but the Turkish ^cepter can him p^e^se,
And there I know lies his chief disease.
He sends his messenger to crave access,
And says he longs to kiss my aged hands^
But howsoever he in show profess,
His meaning with his word^ but weakly stands.
And sooner will the Syrteis boiling sands,
Become a quiet road for ^leeting ships,
Then Selimus heart agree with Scl^ms lippes^
Too well I know the Crocodiles ^ai^ed tears,
Are but nets wherein to catch his pray:
Which who so moved with foolish pity hears,
Will be the author of his own decay^
Then hie thee Baiazet from hence away:
A fawning monster is false Selimus,
Whose fairest words are most pernicious.
Young man, would Selim come and speak wi^h vs^
What is his message to us, can thou tell?

He craves my Lord, another seigniory,
Nearer to you and to the Christians,
That he may make them know, that Selimus
Is borne to be a scourge unto them all.

He's born to be a scourge to me mine,
He never would have come with such an host,
Unless he meant my state to undermine,
What though in word he bravely seem to boast,
The foraging of all the Christian coast?
Yet we have cause to fear when burning brands,
Are vainly given into a mad mans hands.
Well I must seem to wink at his desire,
Although I see it plainer then the light,
My lenity adds fuel to his fire,
Which now begins to break in flashing bright^
Then Baiazet chastise his stubborn spright.
Least these small sparkles grow to such a flame,
As shall consume thee and thy houses name.
A lass I spare when all my store is gone,
And thrust my sickle where the corn is reaped,
In vain I send for the physician,
When on the patient is his grave dust heaped.
In vain, now all his veins in venom sleept
Break out in blisters that will poison us,
We seek to give him an Antidotus.
He that will stop the brooke, must then begin
When summers heate hath dried up his spring,
And when his pittering streams are low thin^
For let the winter aide unto him bring,
He grows to be of watery flo^ds the King.
And though you dam him up with lostie ranks,
Yet will he quickly overflow his banks.
Messenger, go and tell young Selimus,
We give to him all great S^mand^ia,
Bordring on Bulgrade of Hungaria,
Where he may plague those Christian runnages,
And salve the wounds that they have given our states,

Go and provide a gi^t,
A royal present for my Selimus,
And tell him messenger another time
He shall have talk enough with Baiazet.

And now what counsel gives Mustaffa to us?
I fear this hasty reckoning will undo us.

Make haste my Lord from Andrinople walls,
And let us fly to fair Bizantium,
Least if your son before you take the town,
He may with little labour win the crown.

Then do so good Mustaffa, call our guard,
And gather all our warlike Janissaries,
Our chiefest aid is swift celerity,
Then let our winged coursers tread the wind,
And leave rebellious S^limus behind.

And is his answer so Occhiali?
Is Selim such a cursive to his heart,
That he cannot endure the sight of him?
Forsooth he gives thee all Samandria,
From whence our mighty Emperor Mahomet,
Was driven to his country back with shame.
No doubt thy father loves thee Selimus,
To make thee Regent of so great a land,
Which is not yet his own: or if it were,
What dangers wait on him that should it stere.
Here the Polonian he comes hurtling in,
Under the conduct of some foreign prince,
To fight in honour of his crucifix!
Here the Hungarian with his bloody cross,
Deals blows about to win Belgrade again.
And after all, forsooth Basilius
The mighty Emperor of Russia,
Sends in his troupes of slaue-borne Muscouites,
And he will share with us, or else take all.
In giving such a land so full of strife,
His meaning is to rid me of my life.
Now by the dreaded name of Termagant,
And by the blackest brooke in loathsome hell,
Since he is so unnatural to me,
I will prove as unnatural as he.
Thinks he to stop my mouth with gold or pearl?
Or rusty jade ^et from Barbaria?
No let his minion his philosopher,
Corcut and Acomat be entich'd with them.
I will not take my rest, till this right hand
Hath pulled the Crown from off his cowards head,
And on the ground his bastards gore-blood shed:
Nor shall his flight to old Bizantium,
Dismay my thoughts which never learned to stoup.
March Sinam, march in order after him:
Were his light steeds as swift as Pegasus,
And trod the airy pavement with their heals,
Yet Selimus would overtake them soon.
And though the heavens do ne'er so crosly frown,
In spite of heaven shall Selim wear the crown.

Is this thy duty son unto thy father,
So impiously to level at his life?
Can thy soul wallowing in ambitious mire,
Seek for to reeve that breast with bloody knife,
From whence thou had thy being Selimus?
Was this the end for which thou ioyndst thy self,
With that mischievous traitor Ramirchan?
Was this thy drist to speak with Baiazet?
Well hoped I (but hope I see is vain)
Thou would^t have been a comfo^t to mine age,
A scourge and terror to mine enemies,
That this thy coming with so great an host,
Was for no other purpose and intent,
Then for to chastise those base Christians
Which spoil my subjects wealth with fire sword
Well hoped I the rule of Trebisond,
Would have increasde the valour of thy mind,
To turn thy strength upon thy Persians.
But thou like to a crafty Polipus,
Doest turn thy hungry jaws upon thy self,
For what am I Selimus but thy self?
When courage first crept in thy manly breast,
Hnd thou began to rule the martial sword,
How o^t said thou the sun should change his course,
Water should turn to ^arth, earth ^o heaue^
Ere thou would prove disloyal to thy father.
O Tita^ turn thy breathless coursers back,
And enterprise thy journey from the East^
Blush S^l^m that the world should say of thee,
That by my death thou gaindst the Empery.

Now let my cause be pleaded Ba^azet,
For father I disdain to call thee now:
I took not Arms to seize upon thy c^owne,
For that if once thou had been laid in grave,
Should sit upon the head of Selimus
In spite of Corcut and Acomat.
I took not Arms to take away thy life,
The remnant of thy days is but a span,
And foolish had I been to enterprise
That which the gout and death would do for me.
I took not arms to shed my brother^ blood,
Because they stop my pass^ge to the crown.
For while thou liu'st Selimu^ is content
That they should live, but when thou once art dead
Which of them both d^res S^limus withstand?
I soon should hew thei^ bodies in peecemeale,
As easy as a man wou^d kill a gnat.
But I took arms vnki^d to honour th^e,
And win again the fame th^t thou h^st ^ost.
And thou thoughtst scorn S^lim should speak with thee.
But had it been your d^rling Acomat,
You would have met him half the way your se^fe.
I am a Prince, and though your yoonger son,
Yet are my merits better then both theirs:
But you do seek to disinherit me,
And mean t'inuest Acomat with your crown.
So he shall have a princes due reward,
That cannot show a scarre received in field,
We that have fought with mighty Prester Iohn,
And stripped the Aegyhtian sultan of his camp,
Venturing life and living to lionour thee,
For that same cause shall now dishonoured be.
Art thou a father? Nay ^al^e Ba^azet
Disclaim the title which thou doest not merit.
A father would not thus flee from his son,
As thou doest fly from loyal Selimus.
A father wo^ld not injure thus his son,
As thou doest injure loyal Selimus.
Then B^azet prepare thee to the fight,
Se^imus once thy son, but now thy foe,
Will make his fortunes by the sword,
And since thou fear as long as I do live,
I'll also fear, as long as thou doest live.

My heart is overwhelmed with fear grief,
What dismal Comet blazed at my birth,
VVho^e influence makes my strong unbridled sons
In steed of love to render hate to me?
Ah Bassaies if that ever heretofore
Your Emperor ought his safety unto you,
Defend me now against my unnatural son:
Non timeo mortem: mortis mihi displicet author.

Yield thee Tartarian or thou shalt die,
Vpo^ my swords sharpe point stands pale death
Ready to rive in two thy caitiue breast.

Art thou that knight ^hat like a lion fierce,
Tiring his stomach on a flock of lambs,
Hast broke our ranks put them clean to flight?

I and unless thou look unto thy self,
This sword ne'er drunk in the Tartarian blood,
Shall make thy carcass as the outcast dung.

Nay I have matched a braver knight then you,
Strong Alemshae thy masters eldest son,
Leaving his body naked on the plains,
And Turk, the selfsame end for thee remains.
They fight. He kills Cherseoli, and flies.

Shall Selims hope be buried in the dust?
And Ba^azet triumph over his fall?
Then oh thou blindfull mistress of mishap,
Chief pratronesse of Rhamus golden gates,
I will advance my strong revenging hand,
And pluck thee from thy euerturning wheel.
Mars, or Minerua, Mahound, Termagant,
Or who so ere you are that fight against me,
Come and but show your selves before my face,
And I will rend you all like trembling reeds.
Well Baiazet though Fortune smile on thee,
And deck thy camp with glorious victory,
Though Selimus now conquered by thee,
Is fain to put his safety in swift flight:
Yet so he flies, that like an angry ram,
Heel turn more fiercely then before he came.

Thus have we gained a bloodi^ victory,
And though we are the masters of the field,
Yet have we ^o^t more then our enemies:
Ah luckless fault of my Chers^oli,
As dear and dearer were thou unto me,
Then any of my sons, the^ mine own self.
When I was glad, thy heart was full of ^oy,
And bravely hast thou died for Baiazet.
And though thy bloodless body here do lie,
Yet thy sweet soul in heaven for ever blessed,
Among the stars enjoys eternal rest.
What art thou warlike man of Tartarie,
Whose hap it is to be our prisoner?

I am a prince, Ottrant^ is my name,
Chief captain of the Tartars mighty host.

Ottrante? Wast not thou that ^lue my son?

I, and if fortune h^d but favoured me,
Had sent the ^ire to keep him company.

Off with his head and spoyl^ him of his Arms,
And leave his body for the airy birds.

The unrevenged ghost of Alemshae,
Shall now no more wander on Stygian bank^s,
But rest in quiet in the Ely^ian fields.
Mustaffa, and you worthy men at Arms,
That left not Baiazet in greatest need,
When we arrive at Co^stantine^ great Tour,
You shall be honoured of your Emperor.

Perhaps you wonder why prince Acomat,
Delighting heretofore in foolish love,
Hath changed his quiet to a soldiers state:
And turned the dulcet tunes of Him^ns song,
Into B^llonas horrible out^ies,
You think it st^ange, that whereas I have lived,
Almost a votary to wantonness,
To see me low lay off effeminate rob^s,
And arm my bod^e in ^n iron wall.
I have enjoyed qu^e^ long ^nough,
And surfeited w^th pl^asures suq^d^e
A field of dainties I have passed through,
And been a champion to fair Cytheree.
Now since this idle peace hath weeried me,
I'll follow Mars and war another while,
And die my shield in dolorous vermeil.
My brother Selim through his manly deeds,
Hath lifted up his fame unto the skies,
While we like earth worms lurking in the weeds,
Do live inglorious in all men's eyes.
What lets me then from this vain slumber rise,
And by strong ha^d achieve eternal glory,
That may be talked of in all memory?
And see how fortune favours mine intent,
Heard you not Lordings, how prince Selimu^
Against our royal father armed went,
And how the Janissaries made him flee
To Ramir Emperor of Tartarie?
This his rebellion greatly profits me,
For I shall sooner win my fathers mind,
To yield me up the Turkish Empire,
Which if I have, I am sure I shall find
Strong enemies to pull me down again,
That fain would have prince Selimus to reign.
Then civil discord, and contentious war,
Will follow Acomats coronation.
Selim no doubt will broach seditious jar,
And Corcut too will seek for alteration,
Now to prevent all sudden perturbation,
We thought it good to muster up our power^
That danger may not take it unprovided.

I like your highness resolution well,
For these should be the chief arts of a king,
To punish those that furiously rebel,
And honour those that sacred coun^ell bring,
To make good laws, ill customs to expel:
To nourish peace from whence your riches spring,
And when good quarrels call you to the field,
T'excell your men in handling spear shield.
Thus shall the glory of your matchless name,
Be registered up in immortal lines:
Whereas that prince that follows lustful game^
And to fond toys his captive mind enclines,
Shall never pass the temple of true fame,
Whose worth is greater then the Indian mines.
But is your grace assured certainly
That Baiazet doth favour your request?
Perhaps you may make him your enemy,
You know how much your father doth detest,
Stout obedience and obstinacy.
I speak not this as if I thought it best:
Your highness should your right in it neglect,
But that you might be close and circumspect.

We thank thee Visir for thy loving care,
As for my father Baaizets affection,
Unless his holy vows forgotten are,
I shall be sure of it by his election.
By after Acomats erection,
We must forecast what things be necessary,
Least that our kingdom be too momentary.

First let my Lord be seated in his throne,
Enstalled by great Baiazets consent,
As yet your harvest is not fully grown,
But in the green and unripe blade is pent:
But when you once have got the regiment,
Then may your Lords more easily provide,
Against all accidents that may betide.

Then set we forward to Bizantium,
That we may know what Baiazet intends.
A duise thee Acomat, whats best to do,
The Janissaries favour Selimus,
And they are strong undaunted enemies,
Which will in Arms against thy election rise.
Then will them to thy will with precious gifts^
And store of gold: timely largition
The s^edfast persons from their purpose lifts:
But then beware least Baiazets affection
Change into hatred by such premunition.
For then he think that I am factious,
And imitate my brother Selimus.
Besides, a prince his honour doth debase,
That begs the common soldiers suffrages,
And if the Bassaes knew I ^ought their grace,
It would the more increase their insolen^nesse.
To resist them were oue^hardinesse,
And worse it were to leave my enterprise.
Well how so ere, resolve to venture it,
Fortun^ doth favour every bold assay,
And 'twere a trick of an unsettled wit
Because the bees have stings with them always,
To fare our mouths in honey to embay.
Then resolution for me leads the dance,
And thus resolved, I mean to try my chance.

What prince so ere, trus^s to his mighty power,
Ruling the reins of many nations,
And ^eareth not least fickle fortune lour,
Are thinks his kingdom free from alterations,
If he were in the place of Baiazet,
He would but little by his sceptre set.
For what hath rule that makes it acceptable,
Rather what hath it not worthy of hate:
First of all is our state still mutable,
And our continuance at the peoples rate,
So th^t it is a slender thread, whereon
Depends the honour of a princes throne.
Then do we fear, more then the child new borne,
Our friends, our Lords, our subjects, our sons.
Thus is our mind in sundry pieces torn
By care, by fear, suspicion, and distrust,
In wine, in meat we fear pernicious poison,
At home, abroad, we fear seditious treason.
Too true that tyrant Dionysius
Did picture out the image of a King,
When Daniocles was placed in his throne,
And ore his head a threatening sword did hang,
Fastened up only by a horses hair.
Our chiefest trust is secretly distrust,
For whom have we whom we may safely trust,
If our own sons, neglecting awful duty,
Rise up in Arms against their loving fathers.
Their heart is all of hardest marble wrought,
That can lay wait to take away their breath,
From whom they first sucked this vital air.
My heart is heavy, and I needs must sleep.
Bassaes withdraw your selves from me awhile,
That I may rest my ou^rburdned soul.
Eunuchs play me some music while I sleep.

Good Baiazet, who would not pity thee,
Whom thine own son so wildly persecutes.
More mildly do th'vnreasonables beasts
Deal with their dams, then Selimus with thee.

Mustaffa we are princes of the land,
And love our Emperor as well as thou:
Yet will we not for pitying his estate,
Suffer our foes our wealth to ruinate.
If Selim have played false with Baiazet,
And ouerslipt the duty of a son,
Why he was moved by just occasion.
Did he not humbly send his messenger
To crave access unto his majesty?
And yet he could not get permission
To kiss his hands, and speak his mind to him.
Perhaps he thought his aged fathers love
Was clean estranged from him: and Acomat
Should reap the fruit that he had laboured for.
Tis lawful for the father to take Arms,
I and by death chastise his rebel son.
Why should it be unlawful for the son,
To levy Arms against his ini^rious ^ire?

You reason Hali like a sophister.
As if 'twere lawful for a subject prince
To rise in Arms against his sovereign,
Because he will not let him have his will:
Much less is't lawful for a mans own son.
If Baiazet had injured Selimus,
Or sought his death, or done him some abuse,
Then Selimus cause had been more tolerable.
But Baiazet did never injure him,
Nor sought his death, nor once abused him,
Unless because he gives him not the crown,
Being the youngest of his highness sons.
Gave he not him an Empire for his part,
The mighty Empire of great Trebisond?
So that if all things rightly be observed,
Selim had more then ever he deserved.
I speak not this because I hate the prince,
For by the heavens I love young Selimus,
Better then either of his brethren.
But for I owe allegiance to my king,
And love him much that favours me so much.
Mustaffa, while old Baiazet doth live,
Will be as true to him as to himself.

Why brave Mustaffa, Hali and my self
Were never false unto his maiesti^
Our father Hali died in the field,
Against the Sophi, in his highness wars.
And we will never be degenerate.
Nor do we take part with prince Selimus,
Because we would depose old Baiazet,
But for because we would not Acomat
That leads his life still in lascivious pomp,
Nor Corcut, though he be a man of worth,
Should be commander of our Empire.
For he that never saw his foe mans face,
But always slept upon a Ladies lap,
Will scant endure to lead a soldiers life.
And he that never handled but his pen,
Will be unskilful at the warlike lance.
Indeed his wisdom well may guide the crown,
And keep that safe his predecessors got^
But being given to peace as Corcut is,
He never will enlarge the Empire:
So that the rule and power over us,
Is only fit for valiant Selimus.

Princes, you know how mighty Baiazet
Hath honoured Mustaffa with his love.
He gave his daughter beauteous Solima,
To be the sovereign mistress of my thoughts.
He made me captain of the Janissaries,
And too unnatural should Mustaffa be,
To rise against him in his dying age.
Yet know, you warlike peer, Mustaffa is
A loyal friend unto prince Selimu^,
And ere his other brethren get the crown,
For his sake, I my self will pull them down.
I love, I love them dearly, but the love
Which I do bear unto my countries good,
Makes me a friend to noble Selimus,
Only let Baiazet while he doth live,
Enjoy in peace the Turkish Diadem.
When he is dead, and la^d in quiet grave,
Then none but Selimu^ our help shall have.

How now Mustaffa, what news have we there^
Is Selim up in Arms against me again?
Or is the Sophi entered our confines?
Hath the Egyptian snatched his crown again?
Or have the uncontrolled Christians
Vnsheath'd their swords to make more war on us?
Such news, or none will come to Baiazet.

My gracious Lord, here's an Ambassador
Come from your son the Sultan Acomat.

From Acomat? oh let him enter in.

Ambassador, how fares our loving son?
Mighty commander of the warlike Turks,
Acomat Souldane of Amasia;
Greets your grace by me his messenger.
He gives him a Letter.
And gratulates your highness good success,
Wishing good fortune may be^all you still.

Mustaffa read.
He gives the letter to Mustaffa, and speaks the rest to himselfe^
Acomat craves thy promise Baiazet,
To give the Empire up into his hands,
And make it sure to him in thy life time.
And thou shalt have it lovely Acomat,
For I have been encombred long enough,
And vexed with the cares of kingly rule,
Now let the trouble of the Empirie
Be buried in the bosom of thy son.
Ah Acomat, if thou have su^h a reign
So full of sorrow as thy fathers was,
Thou wilt accurse the time, the day and hour,
In which thou was established Emperor.
Sound. A Messenger from Corcut.
Yet more news?

Long live the mighty Emperor B^iazet,
Corcut the Sultan of Magnesia,
Hearing of S^lims worthy overthrow,
And of the coming of young Acomat,
Doth certify your majesty by me,
How joyful he is of your victory.
And there withal he humbly doth require
Your grace would do him justice in his cause^
His brethren both, unworthy such a father,
Do seek the Empire while your grace doth live,
And that by vndirect (...) means.
But Corcuts mind free from ambitious thoughts,
And trusting to the goodness of his cause,
Joined unto your^ h^ghnesse tender lou^
Only desires your grace should not inu st
Selim nor Acomat, in the Diadem,
Which appertains unto him by right,
But keep it to your self the while you live:
And when it shall the great creator please,
Who hath the spirits of all men in his hands,
Shall call your highness to your latest home,
Then will he also sue to have his right.

Like to a ship sailing without stars,
Whom waives do toss one way and winds another,
Both without ceasing: even so my poor heart
Endure^ a combat betwixt love and right.
The love I bear to my dear Acomat,
Commands me give my suffrage unto him,
But Corcuts title, being my eldest son,
Bids me recall my hand, and give it him.
Acomat, he would have it in my life,
But gentle Corcut like a loving son,
Desires me live and die an Emperor,
And at my death bequeath my crown to him.
Ah Corcut thou I see love me indeed,
Selimus sought to thrust me down by force,
And Acomat seeks the kingdom in my life,
And both of them are grieved thou liu'st so long.
But Corcut numbreth not my days as they,
O how much dearer loves he me then they.
Bassaes, how counsel you your Emperor?

My gracious Lord, my self will speak for al,
For all I know are minded as I am.
Your highness knows the Janissaries love,
How firm they mean to cleave to your behest,
As well you might perceive in that sad fight,
When Selim set upon you in your flight.
Then we do all desire you on our knees,
To keep the crown and sceptre to your self.
How grievous will it be unto your thoughts,
If you should give the crown to Acomat,
To see the brethren disinherited,
To flesh their anger one upon another,
And rend the bowels of this mighty reign.
Suppose that Corcut would be well content,
Yet thinks your grace if Acomat were king,
That Selim ere long would join league with him?
Nay he would break from forth his Trebisond,
And waste the Empire all with fire and sword.
Ah then too weak would be poor Acomat,
To stand against his brothers puissance,
Or save himself from his enhanced hand.
While Ismael and the cruel Persians,
And the great Soldane of the Egyptians,
Would smile to see our force dismembered so,
I and perchance the neighbour Christians
Would take occasion to thrust out their heads.
All this may be prevented by your grace,
If you will yield to Corcuts just request,
And keep the kingdom to you while you live,
Mean time we that your graces subjects are,
May make us strong, to fortisie the man,
Who at your death your grace shall choose as king.

O how thou speak ever like thy self,
Loyal Mustaffa: well were Baiazet
If all his sons, did bear such love to him.
Though loath I am longer to wear the crown,
Yet for I see it is my subjects will,
Once more will Baiazet be Emperor.
But we must send to pacific our son,
Or he will storm, as erst did Selimus.
Come let us go unto our council Lord,
And there consider what is to be done.

Thus will I rend the crown from off thy head,
False hearted and injurious Baiazet,
To mock thy son that loved thee so dear.
What? for because the head-strong Janissaries
Would ^ot consent to honour Acomat,
And their base Bassaes vowed to Selimus,
Thought me unworthy of the Turkish crown,
Should he be ruled and overruled by them,
Under pretence of keeping it himself,
To wipe me clean for ever being king?
Doth he e^eeme so much the Bassaes words,
And prize their favour at so high a rate,
That for to gratify their stubborn minds,
He casts away all care, and all respects
Of duty, promise, and religious oaths?
Now by the holy Prophet Mahomet,
Chief president and patron of the Turks,
I mean to challenge now my right by Arms,
And win by sword that glorious dignity
Which he injuriously detains from me.
Happily he thinks because that ^elimu^
Rebutted by his warlike Janissaries,
Was ^ine to she in ha^ ^om whence he came:
That Acomat by his example moved,
Will fear to manage Arms against his sire.
Or that my life forepassed in p^easures court,
Promises weak resi^tance in the fight^
But he shall know that I can use my sword,
And like a lyon seize upon my pray.
If ever Selim moved him heretofore,
Acomat means to move him ten times more^

'twere good your grace would to Amasia,
And there increase your camp with fresh supply.

Visir, I am impatient of delay,
And since my father hath incensed me thus,
I'll quech those kindled flames with his hart blood.
Not like a son, but a most cruel foe,
Will Acomat henceforth be unto him.
March to Natolia, there we will begin
And make a preface ^o our massacres.
My nephew Mahomet son to Alemshae,
Departed lately from Iconium,
Is lodged there, and he shall be the first
Whom I will sacrifice unto my wrath.

Lord Governor, what think you best to do?
If we receive the Souldaine Acomat,
Who knows not but his bloodthirsty sword
Shall be embowell'd in our country-men.
You know he is displeased with Baiazet,
And will rebel, as Selim did to fore,
And would to God with Selims overthrow.
You know his angry heart hath vowed revenge
On all the subjects of his fathers land.

Young prince, thy uncle seeks to have thy life,
Because by right the Turkish crown is thine,
Save thou thy self by flight or otherwise,
And we will make resistance as we can.
Like an Armenian tiger, that hath lost
Her loved whelps, so raves Acomat:
And we must be subject to his rage,
But you may live to avenge your citizens.
Then fly good prince before your uncle come.

Nay good my Lord, never shall it be said
That Mahomet the son of Alemshae,
Fled from his citizens for fear of death,
But I will stay, and help to fight for you,
And if you needs must die, i'll die with you.
And I among the rest with forward hand,
Will help to kill a common enemy.

Now fair Natolia, shall thy stately walls
Be overthrown and beaten to the ground.
My heart within me for revenge still calls.
Why Baiazet, though thou that Acomat
Would put up such a monstrous injury?
Then had I brought my chivalry in vaine^
And to no purpose drawn my conquering blade,
Which now vnsheath'd, shall not be sheathed again,
Till it a world of bleeding souls hath made.
Poor Mahomet, thou though thy self too sure,
In thy strong city of Iconium,
To plant thy Forces in Natolia,
VVeakned so much before by Selims sword.
Summon a parley to the citizens,
That they may hear the dreadful words I speak,
And die in thought before they come to blows.
All. A parley Mahomet, Belierbey, and soldiers on the walls.

What craves our uncle Acomat of us?

That thou all the city yield themselves,
Or by the holy rites of Mahomet
His wondrous tomb, and sacred Alcoran,
You all shall die: and not a common death,
But even as monstrous as I can devise.

Uncle, if I may call you by that name,
Which cruelly hunt for your nephews blood,
You do us wrong thus to besiege our town,
That ne'er deserved such hatred at your hands,
Being your friends and kinsmen as we are.

In that thou wrongst me that thou art my kinsman.

Why for I am thy nephew doest thou frown?

I that thou art so near unto the crown.

Why uncle I resign ^y right to thee,
And all my title were it ne'er so good.

Wilt thou? then know assuredly from me,
I'll seal the resignation with thy blood:
Though Alemshae thy father loved me well,
Yet Mahomet thy son shall down to hell.

Why uncle doth my life put you in fear?

It shall not nephew, since I have you here.

When I am dead mote hindrers sh^lt thou find.

When ones cut off, the fewer are behind.

Yet think the gods do bear an equal eye.

Faith if they all were squint-ey'd, what care I.

Then Mahomet know we will rather die,
Then yield us up into a tyrants hand.

Beshrew me but you be the wiser Mahomet,
For if I do but catch you boy alive,
Twere better for you run through Phlegiton.
Sirs scale the walls, and pull the caitiues down,
I give to you the spoil of all the town.
Alarm. Scale the walls.

Now yoongster, you that brau'dst us on the walls,
And shook your plumed crest against our shield,
What would thou give, or what would thou not give,
That thou were far enough from Acomat?
How like the villain is to Baiazet?
Well nephew for thy father loved me well,
I will not deal extreemly with his son:
Then hear a brief compendium of thy death.
Regan go cause a grove of steelehead spears,
Be pitched thick under the castle wall,
And on them let this youthful captain fall.

Thou shalt not fear me Acomat with death^
Nor will I beg my pardon at thy hands.
But as thou giu'st me such a monstrous death,
So do I freely leave to thee my curse:

O, that will serve to fill my fathers purse.
Alarm. Enter a soldier with Zonara, sister to Mahomet.

Ah pardon me dear uncle, pardon me.

No minion, you are too near a kin to me.

If ever pity entered thy breast,
Or ever thou wast touched with woman's love,
Sweet uncle spare wretched Zonaras life.
Thou once wast noted for a quiet prince,
Soft-hearted, mild, and gentle as a lamb,
Ah do not prove a lyon unto me.

Why would thou live, when Mahomet is dead?

Ah who slew Mahomet? Uncle did you?

He that's prepared to do as much for you.

Doest thou not pity Alemshae in me?

Yes that he wants so long thy company.

Thou art not false groom son to Baiazet,
He would relent to hear a woman weep,
But thou wast borne in de^art Caueasus,
And the Hircanian tigers gave thee suck,
Knowing thou were a monster like themselves.

Let you her thus to rate us? Strangle her.
They strangle her.
Now scour the streets, and leave not one alive
To carry these sad news to Baiazet.
That all the citizens may dearly say,
This day was fatal to Natolia.

Mustaffa, if my mind deceive me not,
Some strange misfortune is not far from me.
I was not wont to tremble in this sort.
Me thinks I feel a cold run through my bones,
As if it hastened to surprise my heart,
Me thinks some voice still whispers in my ears
And bids me to take heed of A^omat.

Tis but your highness overcharged mind
Which fears most the things it least desires.

Ah sweet Mustaffa, thou art much deceived,
My mind presages me some future harm,
And lo what doleful exequie is here.
Our chief commander of Natolia?
What caitiue hand is it hath wounded thee?
And who are these covered in tomblack hearse?

These are thy nephews mighty Baiazet,
The son and daughter of good Alemshae,
Whom cruel A^omat hath murdered thus.
These eyes beheld, when from an airy tour,
They hurled the body of young Mahomet,
Whereas a band of armed soldiers,
Received him falling on their spears sharp points.
His sister poor Zonara,
Entreating life and not obtaining it,
Was strangled by his barbarous soldiers.
Baiazet falls in a sownd, and being recovered say^

Oh you dispencers of our haplesse breath,
Why do you glut your eyes, and take delight
To see sad pageants of men's miseries?
Wherefore have you prolonged my wretched life,
To see my son my dearest Acomat,
To lift his hands against his fathers life?
Ah Selimus, now do I pardon thee,
For thou did set upon me manfully,
And moved by an occasion, though unjust.
But Acomat, injurious Acomat,
Is tentimes more unnatural to me.
Haplesse Zonara, haplesse Mahomet,
The poor remainder of my Alemshae,
Which of you both shall Baiazet most wail?
Ah both of you are wo^thie to be wailde.
Happily dealt the froward ^ates with thee,
Good Alemshae, for thou did die in field,
And so preuentedst this sad spectacle,
Pitiful spectacle of sad dreeriment,
Pitiful spectacle of dismal death.
But I have lived to see thee Alemshae,
By Tartar Pirates all in pieces torn.
To see young Selims disobedience.
To see the death of Alemshaes poor seed.
And last of all to see my Acoma^
Prove a rebellious enemy to me.

Ah cease your tears unhappy Emperor,
And shed not all for your poor nephews death.
Six thousand of true-hearted citizens
In fair Natolia, Acomat hath slain:
The channels run like riuerets of blood,
And I escaped with this poor compande,
Bemangled and dismembered as you see,
To be the messenger of ^hese sad news.
And now mine eyes fast swimming in pale death,
Bids me resign my breath unto the heavens,
Death stands before ready for to strike.
Farewell dear Emperor and revenge our loss,
As ever thou doest hope for happiness. He dies.

Auernus jaws and loathsome Taenarus,
From whence the damned ghoasts do often creep,
Back to the world to punish wicked men.
Black Demogorgon, grandfather of night,
Send out thy furies from thy fiery hall,
The pitiless Erymnies armed with whips,
And all the damned monsters of black hell,
To power their plagues on cursed Acomat.
How shall I morn, or which way shall I tu^ne
To power my tears upon my dearest friends?
Could thou endue false-hearted Acomat,
To kill thy nephew and thy sister thus,
And wound to death so valiant a Lord?
And will you not you albeholding heavens,
Dart down on him your piercing lightning brand,
Enrold in sulphur, and consuming flames?
Ah do not Jove, Acomat is my son,
And may perhaps by counsel be reclaimed,
And brought to filial obedience.
Aga thou art a man of peirsant wit,
Go thou and talk with my son Acomat,
And see if he will any way relent
Speak him fair Aga, least he kill thee too.
And we my Lords will in, and morn a while,
Over these princes lamentable tombs.

As Tityus in the country of the dead,
With restless cries doth call, upon high Ioue^
The while the vulture tireth on his heart,
So Acomat, re^nge s^ill gn^we^ thy soul.
In shedding blood, and murthring innocents.
I think my wrath hath been too patient,
Since civil blood quenches not out the flames
Which Baiazet hath kindled in my heart.

My gracious Lord, here is a messenger
Sent from your father the Emperor.

Let him come in: Aga what news with you?

Great Prince, thy father mighty Baiazet,
Wonders your grace whom he did love so much,
And thought to leave possessor of the crown,
Would thus requite his love with mortal hate,
To kill thy nephews with revenging sword,
And massacre his subjects in such sort.

Aga, my father traitrous Baiazet,
Detains the crown injuriously from me,
Which I will have if all the world say nay.
I am not like the unmannered land,
Which answers not his honours greedy mind:
I sow not seeds upon the barren sand,
A thousand ways can Acomat soon find,
To gain my will, which if I cannot gain,
Then purple blood my angry hands shall stain.

Acomat, yet learn by Selimus,
That hasty purposes have hated ends.

Tush Aga, Selim was not wise enough
To set upon the head at the first brunt:
He should have done as I do mean to do,
Fill all the confines, with fire, sword, and blood*
Burn up the fields, and overthrow whole towns,
And when he had endammaged that way,
The tear the old man peecemeale with my teeth,
And colour my strong hands with his gore-blood.

O see my Lord, how fell ambition
Deceives your senses and bewitcyes you,
Could you unkind perform so foul a deed*
^ the (...) that first gave life to you?
Do you not f^re the peoples adverse fame?

It is the greatest glory of a king
When, though his subjects hate his wicked deeds
Yet are they forced to bear them all with praise.

Whom fear constrains to praise their princes deeds,
That fear, eternal hatred in them feeds.

He knows not how to sway the kingly mace,
That loves to be great in his peoples grace:
The ^urest ground for kings to build upon,
Is to be feared and cursed of every one.
What though the world of nations me hate?
Hate is peculiar to a princes state.

Where there's no shame, no care of holy law,
No faith, no justice, no integrity,
That flate is full of mutability.

Bare faith, pure virtue, poor integrity,
Are ornaments fit for a private man,
Beseems a prince for to do all he can.

Yet know it is a ^acrilegious will,
To slay thy father were he ne'er so ill.

Tis lawful gray-beard for to do to him,
What ought not to be done unto a father.
Hath he not wiped me from the Turkis^ crown?
Preferred he not the ^ubborne Ianizaries,
And heard the Bassaes stout petitions,
Before he would give ear to my request?
As sure as day, mine eyes shall ne'er taste sleep,
Before my sword have riuen his per^d breast.

Ah let me never live to see that day^

Yes thou shalt live, but never see that day,
Wanting the tapers that should give thee light:
Pulls out his eye^.
Thou shalt not see so great felicity,
When I shall rend out Baiazets dim eyes,
And by his death install my ^elfe a king.

Ah cruel tyrant and unmerciful,
More bloody then the Anthropomphagi,
That fill their hungry stomachs with mans fle^h.
Thou should have slain me barbarous Acomat,
Not leave me in so comfortless a life
To live on earth, and never see the sun.

Nay let him die that lives at his ease,
Death would a wretched caitiue greatly please.

And think thou then to escape vnpuished,
No Acomat, though both mine eyes be gone,
Yet are my hands left on to murder thee.

T'was well remembered: Regan cut them off.
They cur of his hands and give them Acomat.
Now in that sort go tell thy Fmperour
That if himself had but been in thy place,
I would have used him crueller then thee:
Here take thy hands: I know thou love them well.
Opens his bosom, and puts them in.
Which hand is this? right? or left? can thou tell?

I know not which it is, but tis my hand.
But oh thou supreme architect of all,
First mover of those tenfold crystal orbs,
Where all those moving, and vnmouing eyes
Behold thy goodness everlastingly:
See, unto thee I lift these bloody arms,
For hands I have not for to lift to thee,
And in thy justice dart thy smouldring flame
Upon the head of cursed Acomat.
Oh cruel heavens and injurious fates,
Even the last refuge of a wretched man,
Is took from me: for how can Aga weep?
Or ruin a brinish shew'r of pearled tears?
Wanting the watery cesternes of his eyes?
Come lead me back again to Baiazet,
The woefullest, and sadd'st Ambassador
That ever was dispatch'd to any King.

Why so, this music pleases Acomat.
And would I had my doting father here,
I would rip up his breast, and rend his heart,
Into his bowels thrust my angry hands,
As willingly, and with as good a mind,
As I could be the Turki^h Emperor.
And by the clear declining vault of heaven,
Whither the souls of dying men do ^lee,
Either I mean to dye the death my self,
Or make that old false faitour bleed his last.
For death no sorrow could unto me bring,
So Acomot might die the Turkish king.

Is this the body of my sovereign?
Are these the sacred pilla^s that support
The image of true magnanimity?
Ah Baiazet, thy son false Acomat
Is full resolved to take thy life from thee:
Tis true, tis true, witness these handless arms,
Witness these empty lodges of mine eyes,
Witness the gods that from the highest hea^en
Beheld the tyrant with remorcelesse heart,
Pulled out mine eyes, and cut off my weak hands.
Witness that sun whose golden coloured beams
Your eyes do see, but mine can ne'er behold:
Witness the earth that sucked up my blood,
Streaming in ^iuers from my tronked arms.
Witness the present that he sends to thee,
Open my bosom, there you shall it see.
Mustaffa opens his bosom and takes out his hands.
Those are the hands, which Aga once did use,
To ^osse the spear, and in a warlike gyre
To hurtle my sharpe sword about my head,
Those sends he to the woeful Emperor,
With purpose so cut thy hands from thee.
Why is my sovereign silent all this while?

Ah Aga, Baiazet fain would speak to thee,
But sudden sorrow eats up my words.
Baiazet Aga, fain would weep for thee^
But cruel sorrow dries up my tears.
Baiazet Aga, fain would die for thee,
But grief hath weakened my poor aged hands.
How can he speak, whose tongue sorrow hath tide?
How can he morn, that cannot shed a tear?
How shall he live, that full of misery
Calls for death, which will not let him die?

Let women weep, let children power ^oo^
And cowards spend the t^me in bootless moan.
We'll load the earth with such a mighty host
Of Ianizaries, sterne-borne sons of Mars,
That Phaeb shall fly and hide him in the clouds
For fear our javelins thrust him from his wane.
Old Aga was a Prince among your Lords,
His Councels always were true oracles,
And shall he thus unmanly be misus'd,
And he unpunished that did the deed?
Shall Mahomet and poor Zonaras ghoa^s^
And the good governor of Natalia
Wander in Stygian meadows vnreueng'^
Good Emperor stir up thy manly heart^
And send forth all thy warlike I^nizaries
To chastise that rebellious Acomat^
Thou know we cannot fight without a guide,
And he must be one of the royal blood^
Sprung from the loins of mighty Ottoman,
And who remains now, but young Selimu^
So please your grace to pardon his offence,
And ^

I good Mustaffa, send for Selimus,
So I may be revenged I care not how,
The worst that can befall me is but death,
That would end my woeful misery.
Selimus he must work me this good turn,
I cannot kill my self, he will do it for me.
Come Aga, thou and I will weep the while:
Thou for thy eyes and loss of both thy hands,
I for th'vnkindnesse of my Acomat.

Will fortune favour me yet once again?
And will she thrust the cards into my hands?
Well if I chance but once to get the deck,
To deal about and shuffle as I would:
Let Selim never see the day-light spring,
Unless I shuffle out my self a king.
Friend let me see thy letter once again,
That I may read these reconciling lines.
Reads the letter.
Thou hast a pardon Selim granted thee.
Mustaffa and the forward Ianizaries
Have sued to thy father Baiazet,
That thou may be their captain general
Against th'attempts of Souldane Acomat.
Why that's the thing that I requested most,
That I might once th'imperiall army lead:
And since its offred me so willingly,
Beshrew me but i'll take their courtesy.
Soft let me see is there no policy
T'entrap poor Selimus in this device?
It may be that my father fears me yet,
Least I should once again rise up in arms,
And like Antaeus queld by Hercules,
Gather new forces by my overthrow:
And therefore sends for me vn^er ^etence
Of this, and that: but when he hath me there^
Hee'll make me sure (...) putting him i^ ^eare^
Distrust is good, when theirs cau^e o^ d^strust^
Read it again, perehance thou doest mi^take.

O, here's Mustaffa^ (...) ^et there^o^
Then Selim cast all fooli^h ^eare aside,
For he's a Prince (...) fa^ours thy e^tate,
And hates treason worse then death it ^el^e.
And hardly can I think he could be brought
If there were treason, to subscribe his name^
Come friend, the cause requires we ^huld be gone,
Now once again have ^t the Turkish throne^

Come mou^nfull Aga, come and ^it by me,
Thou hast been sorely grieved for Baiazet,
Good reason then that he should grie^e for thee.
Give me thy arm, though thou ha^t lost thy hands,
And liu^st as a poor exile in this light,
Yet hast thou won the heart of Baiazet,

Your graces words are very comfortable,
And well can Aga bear his grievous loss,
Since it was for so good a Princes sake.

Father, if I may call thee by that name,
Whose life I aimed at with rebellious sword:
In all humility thy reformed son,
Offers himself into your graces hands,
And at your ^eete lays his bloody sword,
Which he advanced against your maie^ie.
If my offence do seem so odious
That I deserve not longer time to live,
Behold I open unto you my breast,
Ready prepared to die at your command.
But if repentance in vn^ained h^ar^
And sorrow for my gri^uous cr^me forepast,
May merit pardon at your princely hands^
Behold where poor inglorious Selimus^
Upon his knees begs pardon of your grade.

Stand up my son, I joy to hear thee speak,
But more^ to hear thou art so well reclaimed.
Thy crime was ne'er so odious unto me^
But thy reformed life and humble thoughts^
Are thrice as pleasing to my aged spirit.
Selim we here pronounce thee by our will,
Chief general of the warlike Ianizaries^
Go lead them out against false Acomat,
Which hath so grievously rebelled against me^
Spare him not Selim, though he be my sonne^
Yet do I now clean disinherit him^
As common enemy to me and ^ine.

May^ Selim live to show how dutiful
And loving he will be to Baiaz^t.
So now doth fortune smile on me (...)
And in regard of fo^mer in^uries^
Offer me millions of Diad^ms:
I smile to see how that the good old man,
Thinks Selims thoughts are brought to such an obb^
As he hath cast off all ambitiou^ hope^
But soon shall that opinion be remou^d,
For if I once get amongst the Ianiz^s^
Then on my head the golden c^owne shall sit^
Well Baiazet, I fear me thou wilt grieve,
That ere thou did thy ^aining sonne^ boleeue,

Now Aga, all the thoughts that troubled me^
Do rest within the center of my heart,
And thou shalt shortly joy a^ much with me,
Then Acomat by Sel^ms consuming sword,
Shall leese that ghost which made thee loose thy sight.

Ah Baiazet, Aga looks not for revenge,
But will power out his prayers to the heavens,
That Acomat may learn by Selimus,
To yield himself up to his fathers grace.
Sound within, long live Selimus Emperor of Turks.

How now, what sudden triumph have we here?

Ah gracious Lord, the captains of the hos^e,
With one assent have crowned Prince Selimus,
And here he comes with all the ^anizaries,
To crave his confirmation at thy hands.

Baiazet, we the captains of thy host,
Knowing thy weak and too unwildy age,
Unable is longer to govern vs^
Have chosen Selimu^ thy yoonger son
That he may be our leader and our guide,
Against the Sophi and h^s Per^iahs,
Against the victorious Sold^e Tonumbey.
Their wants but thy consent, which we will have,
Or hew thy body peece-meale with our swords.

Needs must I give, what is ^lreadie gone.

Here Selimus, thy father Baiaze^
Weeried with cares that wa^t upon a king^
Resignes the crown as willingly to thee,
As ere my father gave it unto me.


Long live Selimus Emperor of Tu^kes.

Live thou a long and a victorious reign,
And be triumpher of thine enemies^
Aga and I will to (...)
And live in peace the remnant of our days.

Now ^it I (...) ^he (...) strong son of lou^,
When after he had all his (...)
He was recein'd in h^uen amongst the gods,
And had fair Hebe for his lovely bride.
As many labours Selimus hath had,
And now at length (...) to the crown,
This is my Hebe, and this is my (...)
Baiaz^t goet^ to D^m^ ^cum,
And there he ^urposes to live at ea^e,
But Selimus, as long as he is on earth,
Thou shalt not ^leep in rest without some broyle^
For Baiazet i^ inconstant as the winde^
To make that sure I have a platform laid.
Baiazet hath with him a cunning Jew,
Professing physic, and so skilled therein,
As if he had power over life and death.
Withal, a man so stout and resolute,
That he will venture any thing for (...)
This Jew with some intoxicated drink,
Shall poison Baiazet and that bl^d Lord,
Then one of Hydraes heads is clean ^ut off.
Go some and ^etch ^braham the Iew^

Corcut, thy pageant next is to be plaid.
For though he be a grave Philosopher,
Given to read Mahomets dread l^wes,
And Razins toys, and Auice^es drugged^
Yet he may have a longing for the crown.
Besides, he may by devilish Necromancy
Procure my death or wo^ke my overthrow,
The devil still is ready to do h^rme.
Hali, you and your brother presently.
Shall with an army to Magnesia,
There you shall find the scholar at his book,
And hear thou Hali? strangle him.

Corcut once dead, then Acomat remains,
Whose death will make me certain of the crown.
These heads of Hydra are the principal,
When these are off, some other will arise,
As Amurath and Aladin, sons to Acomat,
My sister Solyma, Mustaffaes wife,
All these shall suffer shipwreck on a shelf,
Rather then Selim will be drowned himself.

Jew thou art welcome unto Selimus,
I have a piece of service for you sir,
But on your life be secret in the deed.
Get a strong poison, whose enuenoin'd taste
May take away the life of Baiazet,
Before he pass forth of Biz^ntiu^.

I warrant you my gracious sovereign,
He shall be quickly sent unto his graue^
For I have potions of so strong a force^
That whosoever touches the^ shall die^

And wold your grace would once but taste of them
I could as willingly a^foord them you,
As your aged father Baiazet.
My Lord, I am resolved to ^o the deed.

So this is well^ for I am none of those
That make a conscience for to kill a man.
For nothing is more hurtful to a Prince,
Then to be scrupulous and religious.
I like Lysanders counsel passing well,
If that I cannot speed with lyons force,
To cloth my complots in a foxes skin.
For th'onely things that wrought our Empir^e,
Were open wrongs, and hidden treachery.
Oh, they are two wings wherewith I use to flie^
And soar above the common ^or^
If any seek our wrong^ ^o remedy,
With these I take his ^
And one of these shall still maintain in^ cause,
Or foxes skin, or lions r^nding paws.

Come Aga (...) and morn a while,
For fortune never showed her self so cross,
To any Prince as to poor Baiazet.
That woeful Emperor first of my n^me,
Whom the Tartarians locked (...) ^age,
To be a spectacle to all the world,
Was ten times happier then I am.
For Tamberlaine the scourge of nations,
Was he that pulled him from his kingdom so.
But mine own sons, expel me from the throne,
Ah where shall I begin to make my moan.
Or what shall I first reckon in my plaint,
From my youth up I have been drowned in woe,
And to my latest hour I shall be so.
You swelling seas of never ceasing care,
Whose waives my weather-beaten ship do toss,
Your boisterous billows too (...) are
And threaten still my ruin and my loss:
Like huge (...) do your waters rear,
Their lofty tops, and ^y weak vessel crosle.
Alas at length allay your stormy strife,
And cruel wrath within me rages ri^e.
Or else my feeble bark cannot (...)
Your slashing buffets and (...) blows,
But while thy foamie flood dot^ i^ im^ure,
Shall soon be wr^kt upon the s^ndi^ shallows
Grief my leaud boatswain stirs nothing sure,
But without stars against tide and wind he rows,
And cares not though upon so^e rock we (...)
A restless pilot for the ^arge v^r.
But out alas, the god that vales the sea,
And can alone this raging tempest slent,
Will never blow a gentle gale of case,
But suffer my poor vessel to be rent.
Then o thou blind procurer of ^schance,
That staist thy self upon ^turning wheel,
Thy cruel handieuen when thou wilt enhance,
And pierce my poor^ hart with thy ch^llant steele^

Cease Baiazet, now it is Agas turn,
Rest thou a while and gather up more tears,
The while poor Ag^ tell his Tragedy.
When first my mot^er brought me to the world,
Some blazing Gomet ruled in the sky,
Portending miserable ch^nce to me.
My parents were but men of poor estate,
And happy yet had wretched Aga been,
If Baiazet had not exalted him.
Poor Aga, had it ^ot been ^ch more fair,
T'haue died among the cruel P^rsi^ns^
Then thus at home by barbarous ty^anni^
To live and never see the cheerful day,
And to want hands wherewith to feel the way.

Leave wee^ing Aga, we (...) wept enough,
Now Baiazet will b^n another while^
And utter curses to the con^aueskie,
Which may infect the regions of the air,
And bring a general plague on all the world^
Night thou most ancient grand-mother of all,
First made by Jove, for rest and quiet sleep,
When cheerful day is gon from th'earths wide hall.
Henceforth thy mantle (...) blak Lethe sleep,
And cloth the world in da^knesse inf^r^ll^
Suffer not o^e the ^oy full dailight peep,
But let thy pitchy steeds aye draw thy wane,
And coaleblack silence in the world s^ill raigne^
Cu^e on my parents that f^st brought me v^
And on the cradle wherein I was rocked,
Cu^e on the day when ^st I was ^reated^
The chief commander of all A^ia.
Curse on my sons that d^i^e ^ne to this g^efe,
Curse on my self that can find no relief.
A^d curse on him, an e^erlasting c^rse,
T^t quenched those lamps of euerburn^g light,
And took a^y my Agas warlike hands^
A^d curse on all things under the wide sky,
Ah Aga, I have cursed my stomach dry.

I have a drink my Lords of noble worth,
Which soon will ^lme your stormi^ passions,
And glad your hearts if^o you please to taste it.

^or who art thou that thus do^st pity v^?

Your highness humble servant Abraha.

Abraham ^it down and drink to Baiazet.

Faith I am old as well as Baiazet,
And have not many months to ^ue on earth,
I care not much to end my life with him.
Here's to you Lordings with a full carouse.

Here Aga, woeful Baiazet drinks to thee.
Abraham, hold the cup to him while he drinks.

Now know old Lords, that you have drunk your last:
This was a potion which I did prepare
To poy^on you, by (...) instigation,
And now it is dispersed through my bones,
And glad I am that such companions
Shall go with me down to Pr^serpina.

Ah wicked Jew, ah cursed Selimus,
How have the destins de^t with Baiazet,
That none should cause my death but mine own son?
Had Is^ael and his warlike Persians
^ier^ed my body with their iron spears,
Or had the strong vnconquer'd Tonumbey
With his Egyptians took me prisoner,
And sent me with his valiant Mammalukes,
To be pray unto the Crocodilus.
It never would have grieved me half so much.
But welcome death into whose calmie port,
My sorrow-beaten soul joys to arrive.
And now farewell my disobedient sons,
Unnatural sons unworthy of that name.
Farewell sweet life, and Aga now farewell,
Till we shall meet in the Elysian fields.

What greater grief had mournful Priamus,
Then that he lived to see his Hector die,
His city burnt down by revenging flames,
And poor Polites slain before his face?
Aga, thy grief is matchable to his,
For I have lived to see my sovereigns death,
Yet glad that I must breath my last with him.
And now farewell sweet light, which my poor eyes
These twice six months never did behold:
Aga will follow noble Baiazet,
And beg a boon of lovely Proserpine,
That he and I may in the mournfu fields,
Still weep and wail our strange calamities.

Ha, ha, ha, married quoth you? Marry and Bullithrumble were to begin the world
again, I would set a tap abroach, and not live in daily fear of the breach of
my wives ten-commandemens. I'll tell you what, I thought my self as proper a
fellow at wasters, as any in all our village, and yet when my wife begins to
play clubs trump with me, I am fain to sing:

What hap had I to marry a shrew,
For she hath given me many a blow,
And how to please her alas I do not know.
From morn to even her tongue ne'er lies,
Sometime she laughs, sometime she cries:
And I can scarce keep her talets fro my eyes.
When from abroad I do come in,
Sir knave she cries, where have you bin?
Thus please, or displease, she lays it on my skin^
Then do I crouch, then do I kneel,
And wish my cap were furred with steel,
To bear the blows that my poor head doth feel.
But our sir Iohn beshrew thy hart,
For thou hast joined us we cannot part,
And I poor fool, must ever bear the smart.
I'll tell you what, this morning while I was making me ready, she came with a
holly wand, and so blessed my shoulders that I was fain to run through a whole
Alphabet of faces: now at the last seeing she was so cramuk with me, I began to
swear all the crisse cross row over, beginning at great A, li^le a, till I cam
to w, x, y. And snatching up my sheephooke, my bottle and my bag, like a
desper^te fellow ran away, and here now i'll sit down and eat my meat.


O hateful hellish snake of Tartary,
That feed on the soul of noblest men,
Damned ambition, cause of all misery,
Why doest thou creep from out thy loathsome fen,
And with thy poison animatest friends,
And gape and long one for the others ends.
Selimus, could thou not content thy mind,
With the possession of the sacred throne,
Which thou did get by fathers death unkind:
Whose poisoned ghost before high God doth groan.
But thou must seek poor Corcu^s overthrow,
That never iniu^ed thee, so, nor so?
Old Halies sons with two great company
Of barded horse, were sent from Sel^mus,
To take me prisoner in Ma^nesia,
And death I am sure should have befell to me,
If they had once but set their eyes on me.
So thus disguised my poor Page and ^,
Fled fast to Smirna, where in a dark cave
We meant t'await th'arr^uall of some ship
That might trans^eit us safely unto Rhodes.
But see how fortune crossed my enterprise.
Bostang^ Bassa, Selim^ son in law,
Kept all the sea co^sts with his Br^gandines,
That if we had but ventured on the sea,
I presently had been his prisoner.
These two days have we kept us in the cave,
Eating such he^rbes as the ground did affoord:
And now through hunger are we both constrained
Like fearful snakes to creep out step by step,
And see if we may get us any food.
And in good time, see yonder sits a man,
Spreading a hungry dinner on the grass.
Bul^ithrumble spies them, and puts up his meat.

These are some felonians, th^t ^eeke to rob me, well, i'll make my self a good
deal more valiant then I am indeed, and if they will needs creep into kindred
with me, i'll betake me to my old occupation, and ^unne away.


Hail groom.

Good Lord sir, you are deceived, my names master Bullithrumble: this is some
cousoning conicatching crosbiter, that would fain persuade me he knows me,
and so under a tence of familiarity and acquaintance, uncle me of victuals.


Then Bulli^hrumble, if that be thy name:

My name sir o Lord yes, and if you will not believe me, I will bring my
godfathers and godmothers, and they shall swear it upon the ^ont-stone, and upon
the church book too, where it is written.


Mass, I think he be some Justice of peace, ad quorum, and omnium populorum,
how he samines me: a christian, yes marry am I sir, yes verily and do believe:
and it please you i'll go forward in my catechism.


Then Bullithrumble, by that blessed Christ,
And by the tomb where he was buried,
By sovereign hope which thou conceiu'st in him,
Whom dead, as euerliuing thou adore.

O Lord help me, I shall be torn in pieces with devils and goblins.


By all the joys thou hop'st to have in heaven,
Give some meat to poor hunger-starued men.

Oh, these are as a man should say beggars: Now will I be as stately to them as
if I were master Pigwiggen our constable: well sirs come before me, tell me if
I should entertain you, would you not steal?


If we did mean so sir, we would not make your worship acquainted with it.


A good well nutrimented lad: well if you will keep my sheep truly and
honestly, keeping your hands from lying and slandering, and your tongues from
picking and stealing, you shall be master Bullithrumbles seruitures.


With all our hearts.

Then come on and follow me, we will have a hogs cheek, and a dish of tripes,
and a society of puddings, to field: a society of puddings, did you mark
that well used metaphor? Another would have said, a company of puddings: if you
dwell with me long sirs, I shall make you as eloquent as our parson himself.


Now is the time when I may be enriched.
The brethren that were sent by Selimus
To take my Lord, Prince Corcut prisoner,
Finding him fled, proposed large rewards
To them that could declare where he remains.
Faith i'll to them and get the portagues,
Though by the bargain Corcut loose his head.

Why thus must Selim blind his subject eyes,
And strain his own to weep for Baiazet.
They will not dream I made him away,
When thus they see me with religious pomp,
To celebrate his tomb-blacke mortarie.

And though my heart cast in an iron mould,
Cannot admit the smallest dram of grief.
Yet that I may be thought to love him well,
I'll morn in show, though I rejoice indeed.

Thus after he hath five long ages lived,
The sacred Phoenix of Arabia,
Loads his wings with precious perfumes^
And on the altar of the golden sun,
Offers himself a grateful sacrifice.
Long did thou live triumphant Baiazer,
A fear unto thy greatest enemies,
And now that death the conqueror of Kings,
Dislodged hath thy never dying soul,
To flee unto the heavens from whence she came^
And leave her frail, earth pavilion,
Thy body in this ancient monument,
Where our great predecessors sleep in rest:

Thy woeful son Selimus thus doth place.
Thou were the Phoenix of this age of ours,
And died wrapped in the sweet perfumes,
Of thy magnifick deeds, whose lasting praise
Mounts to highest heaven with golden wings.
Princes come bear your Emperor company
In, till the days of mourning be ore past,
And then we mean to rouse false Acomat,
And cast him forth of Macedonia.

My Lords, if I bring you not where Corcut is, then let me be hanged, but if I
deliver him up into your hands, then let me have the reward due to so good a
deed.


Page, if thou show us where thy master is,
Be sure thou shalt be honoured for the deed,
And high exalted above other men.

That same is he, that in disguised robes,
Accompanies yon shepherd to the fields.

The sweet content that country life affords,
Passes the royal pleasures of a King:
For there our joys are interlaced with fears:
But here no fear nor care is harboured,
But a sweet calm of a most quiet state.
Ah Corcut, would thy brother Selimus
But let thee liue^ here should thou spend thy life,
Feeding thy sheep among these grassy lands.
But sure I wonder where my Page is gone.

Corcut.

A y-me, who names me?

H^l^, the governor of Magnesia.
Poor prince, thou thoght^t in these disguised weeds,
To mask unseen: and happily thou might,
But that thy Page betrayed thee to us.
And be not wrath with us unhappy prince,
If we do what our sovereign commands.
Tis for thy death that Selim sends for thee.

Thus I like poor Ampharaus, sought
By hiding my estate in shepherds coat,
T e^cape the angry w^ath of Selimus.
But as his wife false Er^phyle did
Betray his safeti^ for a ch^ine of gold,
So my false Page hath vilely dealt with me,
Pray God that thou may prospet so as she.
Hali, I know thou sorrow for my case,
But it is bootless, come and let us go,
Corcut is ready, since it is must be so.

Shepherd.

That's my profession sir.

Come, you must go with us.

Who I? Alas sir, I have a wife and s^uenteene cradles rocking, two ploughs
going, two barnes filling, and a great heard of beasts feeding, and you should
utterly undo me to take me to such a great charge.


Well there is no remedy.

The mores the pity Go with you quoth he, marry that had been the way to
preferment, down Holburne up Tibur^e: well i'll keep my best joint from the
strappado as well as I can hereafter, I'll have no more servants.


Sinam, we hear our brother Acomat
Is fled away from Macedonia,
To ask for aide of Persian Ismael,
And the Egyptian Soldane our chief foes.

Herein my Lord I like his enterprise,
For if they give him aide as sure they will,
Being your highness vowed enemies,
You shall have just cause for to war on them,
For giving succour against you, to your foe.
You know they are two mighty Potentates,
And may be hurtful neighbours to your grace,
And to enrich the Turkish Diad^me.
With two so worthy kingdoms as they are,
Would be eternal glory to your name.

By heavens S^nam, you are a warrior,
And worthy counceller unto a King.
Sound within.
How now, what news?

My gracious Lord, we here present to you
Your brother Cor^ut, whom in Smirna coasts
Feeding a flock of sheep upon a down,
His traitrous Page betrayed to our hands.

Thanks ye bold brethren, but for that false part,
Let the vile Page be fa^ished to death.

Selim, in this I see thou art a Prince,
To punish treason with condign reward.

O sir, I love the fruit that treason brings,
But those that are the traitors, them I hate.
But Corcut, could not your Philosophie
Keep you safe from my Ianizaries hands.
We thought you had old^ Gyges wondrous ring,
That so you were invisible to us.

Sel^m, thou dealst unkindly with thy brother,
To seek my death, and make a jest of me.
Vpbraid^st thou me with my philosophie?
Why this I learned by studying learned arts,
That I can bear my fortune as it falls,
And that I fear no whit thy cruelty,
Since thou wilt deal no otherwise with me,
Then thou hast dealt wi^h aged Baiazet.

By heavens Corcut, thou shalt surely die,
For slandring Selim with my fathers death.

The let me freely speak my mind this once,
For thou shalt never hear me speak again.

Nay we can give such losers leave to speak.

Then Se^m, hear thy brothers dying words,
And mark them well, for er^ thou die thy self,
Thou shalt perceive all things will come to pass,
That Coreut doth divine before his death.
Since my vain flight from fair Magnesia,
Selim I have conversed with Christians,
And learned of them the way to save my soul,
And please the anger of the highest God.
Tis he that made this pure Christalline vault
Which hangs over our unhappy heads,
From thence he doth behold each sinners fault:
And though our sins under our feet he treads,
And for a while seem for to wink at us,
But is to recall us from o^ ways.
But if we do like head-strong sons neglect
To hearken to our loving fathers voice,
Then in his anger will he us reject,
And give us over to our wicked choice.
Selim before his dreadful majesty,
There lies a book written with bloody lines,
Where our offences all are registered.
Which if we do not hastily repent,
We are reserved to lasting punishment.
Thou wretched Selimus hast greatest need
To ponder these things in thy secret thoughts,
If thou consider what strange massacres
And cruel murders thou hast caused be done.
Think on the death of woeful Baiazet.
Doth not his ghost still haunt thee for revenge?
Selim in Chiurlu did thou set upon
Our aged father in his sudden flight:
In Chiurlu shalt thou die a grievous death.
And if thou wilt not change thy greedy mind,
Thy soul shall be tormented in dark hell,
Where woe, and woe, and never ce^sing woe,
Shall sound about thy euer-damned soul.
Now Sel^m I have spoken, let me die:
I never will entreat thee for my life.
Selim farewell: thou God of Christians,
Receive my dying soul into thy hands.

What is he dead? then S^limus is safe,
And hath no more corrivals in the crown.
For as for Ac^mat he soon shall see,
His Persian aide cannot save him from me.
Now S^nam march to fair Amasia walls,
Where Acoma^s ^out Queen immures her self,
And gir^ the city with a warlike ^iege,
For ^ince her hu^band i^ my enemy,
I see no cau^e why she should be my friend.
They say young Amura^h and Alad^,
Her bastard brood, are come to succour her.
But ^e prevent this their officiousness,
And ^end their soul down to their grandfather.
Mustaff^ you shall keep Biza^tium,
While I and S^nam girt Am^si^.

It grieve my soul th^t Baiaze^s fair line,
Should be eclipsed thus by Sel^mus,
Whose cruel soul will ne^er be at rest
Till none remain of Ottomans fair race
But he himself: yet for old Ba^azer
Loved Mustaffa de^e unto his death,
I will ^hew mercy to his family.
Go sir, post to Acoma^s young sons,
And bid them as they mean to save their lives,
To fly in ha^e from fair Amasia,
Least cruel Selim put them to the sword.

And now Must^ffa, prepare thou thy neck,
For thou a^t next to d^e by Selims hands.
Stern S^am Bassa g^udgeth sti^l at thee,
And crabbed Hal^ storms at thy life,
Al repine that thou art honoured so,
To be the brother of their Emperor.

But wherefore comes my lovely Solyma?

Mustaffa I am come to se^ke thee out,
If ever thy distressed Solyma,
Found grace and favour in thy manly heart:
Fly hence with me unto some dese^t land,
For if we tarry here we are but dead.
This night when fair Lucinaes shining wane,
Was past the chair of bright Cassiopey,
A fearful vision appeared to me.
Me thought Mustaffa, I beheld thy neck
So often ^olded in my loving arms,
In foul disgrace of Bassaes fair degree,
With a vile haltar basely compassed.
And while I powered my tears on thy dead corpse,
A greed^e lyon with wide gaping throat,
Seized on my t^embling body with his feet,
And in a moment r^nt me all to nought.
Fly sweet Mustaffa, or we be but dead.

Why should we fly beauteous Solyma,
Moved by a vain and a fant^stique dream?
Or if we did fly whither should we fly?
I^ to the farthest part of Asia,
Know'^t thou not Solyma, kings ha^e long hands?
Come, come, my joy, return again with me,
And banish hence these melancholy thoughts.

Messenger is it true that Selimus
Is not far hence encamped with his host?
And means he to disioyne the haplesse sons
From helping our distressed mothers town?

Tis true my Lord, and if you love your lives
Fly from the bounds of his dominions,
For he you know is most v^merci^ull.

Here messenger take this for thy reward.

But we sweet Aladin, let us depa^t,
Now in the quiet silence of the night
That ere the windows of the morn be open,
We may be far enough from Selimus.
I'll to Aegyptus.

I to Persia.

But is it certain Hali they are gone?
And that Mustaffa moved them to fly?

Certain my Lord, I met the messenger
As he returned from young Alinda:
And learned of them, Mustaffa, was the man
That certified the Princes of your will.

It is enough: Mustaffa shall aby
At a dear price his pitiful intent.
Hali go fetch Mustaffa and his wife.

For though she be sister to Selimus,
Yet loves she him better then Selimus.
So that if he do die at our command,
And she should live: soon wold she work a mean
To work revenge for her Mustaffas death.

False of thy faith, and traitor to thy king,
Did we so highly always honour thee,
And doest thou thus requite our love with treason,
For why should thou send to young Alinda,
And Amurath, the sons of Acomat,
To give them notice of our secrecies,
Knowing they were my vowed enemies?

I do not seek to lesson my offence
Great Selimu^, but truly do protest
I did it not for hat^ed of your grace,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.
But for I grieved to see the famous stock
Of worthy Baiazet fall to decay,
Therefore I sent the Princes both away.
Your highness knows Mustaffa was the man
That saved you in the battle of Churlu,
When I and all the warlike Ianizaries
Had hedged your person in a dangerous ring.
Yet I took pity on your danger there,
And made a way for you to escape by flight.
But those your Bassaes have incensed you,
Repining at Mustaffas dignity.
Stern Sinam grindes his angry teeth at me.
Old Halies sons do bend their brows at me^
And are aggrieved that Mustaffa hath
Showed himself a better man then they.
And yet the Ianizars morn for me,
They know Mustaffa never proved false.
I, I have been as true to Selimus,
As ever subject to his sovereign,
So help me God and holy Mahomet.

You did it not because you hated us,
But for you loved the sons of Acomat.
Sinam, I charge thee quickly strangle him,
He loves not me that loves mine enemies.
As for your holy protestation,
It cannot enter into Selims ears:
For why Mustaffa? every merchant man
Will praise his own ware be it ne'er so bad.

For Solimas sake mighty Selimus,
Spare my Mustaffas life, and let me die:
Or if thou wilt not be so gracious,
Yet let me die before I see his death.

Nay S^lima, your self shall also die,
Because you may be in the selfsame fault.
Why stai'st thou Sinam? strangle him I say.
Sinam

Ah Selimus, he made thee Emperor,
And wilt thou thus requite his benefits?
Thou art a cruel tiger and no man,
That coul'st endure to see before thy face,
So brave a man as my Mustaffa was,
Cruelly strangled for so small a fault.

Thou shalt not after live him Solima.
Twere pity thou should st want the company
Of thy dear husband: Sinam strangle her.
And now to fair Amasi^ let us march.
Acomats wife, and her unmanly host,
Will not be able to endure our sight,
Much less make strong resistance in hard fight.

Welcome my Lords into my native soil,
The crown whereof by right is due to me:
Though Selim by the Ianizaries choice,
Through usurpation keep the same from me.
You know contrary to my fathers mind,
He was enthronized by the Bassaes will,
And after his enstalling, wickedly
By poison made good Baiazet to die.
And strangled Corcut, and exiled me.
These injuries we come for to revenge,
And raise his s^ege from fair Amasia walls.

Prince of Amasia, and the rightful heir
Unto the mighty Turkish Diadem:
With willing heart great Tonombey hath left
Egyptian N^lus and my fathers court,
To aide thee in thy undertaken war,
And by the great V^ancassanos ghost,
Companion unto mighty Tamberlaine,
From whom my father lineally descends,
Fortune shall show her self too cross to me,
But we will thrust Selimus from his throne,
And reue^ Acomat in the Empirie.

Thinks to the uncontrolled Tonombey.
But let us haste us to Amasia,
To succoar my besieged citizens.
None but my Queen is overseer there,
And too too weak is all her policy,
Against so great a foe as Selimus.

Summon a parley sirs that we may know
Whether these Mushroms here will yield or no.
A parley: Queen of Amasi^, and her soldiers on the walls.

What craves thou bloud-thirstie parricide?
Is't not enough that thou hast foully slain,
Thy loving father noble Baiazet,
And ^rangled Corcut thine unhappy brother
Slain brave Mustaffa, and fair S^lima?
Because they fauou^ed my unhappy sons,
But thou must yet seek for more massacres*
Go, wash thy gui^tie hands in luke-warme blood.
En^ch thy soldiers with robberies:
Yet do the heavens still bear an equal eye,
And vengeance follows thee even at the heals.

Queen of Amasia, wilt thou yield thy self?

First shall the ouer-flowing Euripus
Of swi^t ^ub^ea stop his restles^e course
And Ph^ebs bright globe bring the day fro the west,
And quench his hot flames in the E^terne sea.
Thy bloody sword ungracious Selimus
Sheathed in the bowels of thy dearest friends:
Thy wicked guard which still attends on th^e,
Fleshing themselves in murder, lust, and rape:
What hope of favour* what security?
Rather what death do they not promise me?
Then think not Selimus that we will yield,
But look for strong resi^stance at our hands.

Why then you never daunted lanizaries,
Advance your shields and uncontrolled spears,
Your conquering hands in foe-mens blood embay,
For Selimus himself will lead the way.
Allarum, beats them off the walls. Allarum.

Now sturdy dame, where are your men of war
To guard your person from my angry sword?
What? though brau'd us on your city walls,
Like to that Amanonian Menalip,
Leaving the banks of swift-stream'd Thermodon
To challenge combat with great Hercules:
Yet Selimus hath plucked your haughty plumes,
Nor can your spouse rebellious Acomat,
Nor Alinda, or Amurath your sons,
Deliver you from our victorious hands.

Selim I scorn thy threatenings as thy self.
And though ill hap hath given me to thy hands,
Yet will I never beg my life of thee.
Fortune may chance to frown as much on thee.
And Acomat whom thou doest scorn so much,
May take thy base Tartarian concubine,
As well as thou hast took his loyal Queen.
Thou hast not fortune tied in a chain,
Nor doest thou like a wary pilot sit,
And wisely stir this all containing barge.
Thou art a man as those whom thou hast slain,
And some of them were better far then thou.

Strangle her Hali, let her scold no more.
Now let us march to meet with Acomat,
He brings with him that great Egyptian bug,
Strong Tonombey, Vsan-Cassanos son.
But we shall soon with our fine tempered swords,
Engrave our prowess on their bugane^s,
Were they as mighty and as fell of force,
As those old earth-bred brethren, which once
Heap hill on hill to s^ale the starry sky,
When Briareus armed with a hundredth hands,
Flung forth a hundredth mountains at great Jove,
And when the monstrous giant Monichus
Hu^ld mount Olimpus at great Mars his targe,
And darted cedars at Mineruas shield.

What are the urchins crept out of their dens,
Under the conduct of this porcupine?
Doest thou not tremble Acomat at us,
To see how courage masks in our looks,
And white-wing'd victory sits on our swords?
Captain of Egypt, thou that vant'st thy self
Sprung from great Tamberlaine the Scythia thief,
Who bad the enterprise this bold attempt,
To set thy fee^e within the Turkish confines^
Or lift thy hands against our majesty?

Brother of Treb^sond, your squared words,
And broad-mouth'd terms, can never conquer us.
We come resolved to pull the Turkish crown,
Which thou doest wrongfully detain^ ^rom me,
By conquering sword from of thy coward crest.

Acomat, since the quarrel touches none
But thee and me: I dare, and challenge thee.

Should he accept the combat of a boy?
Whose unripe years and far vnriper wit
Like to the bold foole-hardie Phaetun
That sought to rule the chariot of the sun,
Hath moved thee t'vndertake an Empirie.

Thou that resoluest in peremptory terms,
To call him boy that scorns to cope with thee:
But thou can better use thy bragging blade,
Then ^ou ca^st rule thy oue^flowing tongue,
Soon shalt thou know that Selims mighty arm
Is able to overthrow poor Tonombey.

The field is lost, and Acomat is taken.
Ah Tonombey, how can thou show thy face
To thy victorious sire, thus conquered.
A matchless knight is warlike Selimus.
And like a shepherd amongst a swarm of gnats,
Dings down the ^lying Persians with their swords.
Twice I encountered with him hand to hand,
And twice returned foiled and ashamed.
For never yet since I could manage Arms,
Could any match with mighty Tonombey,
But this heroic Emperor Selimus.
Why stand I still, and rather do not fly
The great occision which the victors make?

Thus when the coward Greeks fled to their ships,
The noble Hector all besinear'd in blood,
Returned in triumph to the walls of Troy.
A gallant trophy, Bassaes have we won,
Beating the neuer-foyled Tonombey,
And hewing passage through the Persians.
As when a lyon raving for his pray,
Falls upon a droaue of horned balls,
And rends them strongly in his kingly paws.
Or Mars armed in his adamantiue coat,
Mounted upon his firie-shining wane,
Scatters the troupes of warlike Thracians,
And warmes cold Hebras with hot streams of blood.
Brave Sinam, for thy noble prisoner,
Thou shalt be general of my Ianizaries.
And Belierbey of fair Natalia.
Now Acomat, thou monster of the world,
Why stoup'st thou not with reverence to thy king?

Selim if thou have gotten victory,
Then use it to thy contentation.
If I had conquered, know assuredly
I would have said as much and more to thee.
Know I disdain them as I do thy self,
And scorn to stoup or bend my Lordly knee,
To such a tyrant as is Selimus.
Thou slew my Queen without regard or care,
Of love or duty, or thine own good name.
Then Selim take that which thy hap doth give,
Disgra'st, displai'st, I longer loath to live.

Then Sinam strangle him: now he is dead,
Who doth remain to trouble Selimus?
Now am I King alone and none but I.
For since my fathers death until this time,
I never wanted some competitors.
Now as the weary wandering traveller
That hath his steppes guided through many lands,
Through boiling soil of Africa and Ind,
When he returns unto his native home:
Si^s down among his friends, and with delight
Declares the travels he hath overpassed.
So may thou Selimus, for thou hast trod
The monster-garden paths, that lead to crowns.
Ha, ha, I smile to think how Selimus
Like the Egyptian Ibis hath expelled
Those swarming armies of swift-winged snakes,
That sought to overrun my territories,
When soultring heat the earths green children spoils
From forth the fens of venomous Africa,
The generation of those flying snakes,
Do band themselves in troupes, and take their way
To Nilus bounds: but those industrious birds,
Those Ibides meet them in set array,
And eat them up like to a swarm of gnats,
Preventing such a mischief from the land.
But see how unkind nature deals with them:
From out their eggs rises the basilisk,
Whose only sight kills millions of men.
When Acomat lifted his ungracious hands
Against my aged father Baiazet.
They sent for me, and I like Aegipts bird
Have rid that monster, and his fellow mates.
But as from Ibis springs the Basilisk.
Whose only touch burns up stones and trees.
So Selimus hath proved a Cocatrice,
And clean consumed all the family
Of noble Ottoman, except himself.
And now to you my neighbour Emperors,
That durst lend aid to Selims enemies,
Sinam those Soldanes of the Orient,
Aegipt and Persia, Selimus will quell,
Or he himself will sink to lowest hell.
This winter will we rest and breath our selves:
But soon as Zephyrus sweet smelling blast
Shall greatly creep over the flourie meads,
We'll have a fling at the Egyptian crown,
And join it unto ours, or loose our own.

Thus have we brought victorious Selimus,
Unto the Crown of great Arabia:
Next shall you see him with trinmphant sword^
Dividing kingdoms into equal shares,
And give them to their warlike followers.
If this first part Gentles, do like you well,
The second part, shall greater murders tell.

