Duke Rodorick, and my noble cozen Flaunders:
Are your Battalions ready for the charge?
Ten thousand men of Orleance I command,
And those are bravely marshald on the plain,
Ready to be commanded by your Highness.

As many of the warlike brood of Mars
Do call me General: those, my gracious Lord,
Together with my self I recommend,
To be commanded by your Majesty.

Thanks, Earl of Flaunders, Duke of Orleance, thanks,
What lets us that we charge not on the Foe?

My Lord of Pembrooke, are your Englishmen
Squadrond with ours, and ready for the charge?

The French and English make one warlike body,
Whereof your Highness is the moving head:
Or peace or war, as pleases you direct.

Then war, and give the signal through the Host.

Nauar, Nauar, submission were more meet,
Then to add blood to wrong.

What wrong, King Lewes?
The Kingdom of Nauar we will acknowledge
To hold of none but of the King of Kings.

Three hundred years prescriptions on our sides,
So long thy Ancestors by fealty
Have held thy Kingdom of the Crown of France.

Talk not of years, years limit not a Crown,
There's no prescriptions to enthrall a King:
He finds it written in the Rowles of time,
Nauar's a Kingdom solely absolute,
And by collusion of the Kings of France,
Because it lies so fitly upon France,
The people speaking all one mother tongue,
It hath bin wrested for a Royalty,
Untruly due unto the Crown of France.
That Pembrook speaks the truth, behold my sword,
Which shall approve my words substantial.

Pembrooke, you are too plain in your discourse.

I tell thee, Rodoricke, Pembrooke soldier-like
Hath truly opened, what ten thousand lives
Will hardly do, if war be made the Judge.

If war be Judge? why, shallow-witted Burbon,
Who shall decide this difference, but war?
Hath not the Judge put on his Scarlet Robe?
Is not the field prepared? our men in armour?
The Trumpets ready for the sound of death?
And nothing hinders us but our own words?
Leave idle parley, my dread sovereign Lord,
And soon resolve the Duke in fire and smoke,
That he maintains a title false and forged,
And that Nauar is a usurping Lord.

On that i'll hazard all these valiant lives.
Sound Drums and Trumpets, make King Lewes know,
He makes his best friend prove his greatest Foe.

Why pause our drums? our trupets, speak as loud,
Till the bright air be made a purple cloud.

Pause, gracious father.

Noble father, pause.
Let Ferdinand thy son so far prevail,
That peace, not war may end this difference.

For Bellamiraes sake abstain from war.

Philip thy son humbly desires a peace.
Let not my father sheathe his warlike sword
Within the bowels of his Countrymen.

Thy daughter Katharina prays the like.

From whence proceeds this sudden sound of peace?
Comes it from me? what, from my Ferdinand?
From Bellamira my sweet second self?

Or rather comes it ( Lewes) from thy soul?
Thy Philip, the true Image of thy self?
Thy Katharina, thy hearts chiefest joy?

Princes, you ask, you know not what your selves.

Rodorick, they ask a sweet and pleasing boon.

Why, they ask peace, and we are set for war.

Tis a bad peace exceeds not a just war.

We will not rise from this submissive ground,
Till we obtain, if not a peace, a truce.

Nor shall our feet be guilty of new steps,
Till I obtain a truce from murdering war.

Show me some reason (son) for this demand.

Show me some reason (children) for this prayer.

I love the daughter of thine enemy.
Fair Katharina hath inthrald my heart.

I love the daughter of thine enemy,
Fair Bellamira hath inthrald my heart.

Is love the cause? then wherefore wage we war?
What matter is't who wears both Diadems,
When the Succession lives in eythers heir?
If Ferdinand be crowned King of Nauar,
Fair Katharina shall be crowned his Queen:
If Philip wear the Diadem of France,
Fair Bellamira made his lovely Queen,
Sways half the Sceptre. See what heaven can do,
Provide for peace, even in the jaws of war!

How sweetly doth the Earl of Pembrooke speak!
Now trust me I am ravished with his voice.

What says Nauar? what, is't war or peace?

A truce for three months, so it please your Highness,
During which time our children shall have leave,
With Drum and Trumpet to surueigh the Camp,
To Court our daughters, and to feast themselves,
As fits the sons of honourable foes:
And if it prove a match between them both,
There end all difference, I'll bequeath my Crown,
As a rich offering to their nuptial Rites.

Here, strike the truce upon my kingly hand,
Which is as surely ratified in this,
As by the testimonial of a world.
So now, for three months space all wars surcease,
Our thoughts are wholly fixed on love and peace.

Zounds, here's a truce made up by miracle.

I'll cross it by a wily stratagem.

What stratagem?

By love to Bellamira.
Oh could I dive into the Princes heart,
By any insinuation ne'er so base,
How easily might I effect my plot,
To make the Kingdom of Navarre mine own.
'Twere but a dram or so unto the son,
And a small thing would send the old man hence.
What, noble Rodorick, to gain a Crown,
A Duke would do much.

More then poison two:
But you, my Lord, forget your self too far,
Know you to whom you have disclosed your heart?

Why, to the Duke of Orleance.

The dear friend of Lewes the French King.

King me no Kings,
Although we seem to be of several sides,
Rodorick, we love together like true friends.
This Truce gives aim to our intention:
Assist me (worthy Orleance) to effect,
First, my desired love, and next the Crown.

Peter de Lions is your Lordships servant,
A boon companion, and a lusty Knave:
He is in love with Bellamiraes maid,
And by that love he may bestead your Highness,
More then your best friends in your best designs.
Call him forth.

What Peter.

Here, my Lord.

Why dost thou look so wildly?

Not with drink, nor yet with rage.

His looks are wild with love.

With love surreuerence? can there be a face
In all the world patched up with eyes and lips,
A forehead, and a pair of Crimson cheeks,
To make me do at on, to make me look wild?

Come, come, tis known that you love Thomasin.

Zounds, they that know that, know my heart all,
I have not the power to deny it, tis most true.

And tis most true that I love Bellamira:
Now if thou art in favour of thy wench,
Many a meeting thou may help me to,
And learn besides what suitors seek her love,
And whom she most affects. These things once known,
Twere worth a Dukedom, Peter.

Sbloud, give me a Dukedom, and i'll warrant you
The knowledge of these things ten times over.

There's Angels for thee, Peter, think on them,
And do thy best to help thy masters love.
Well, howsoever I smooth it to the Duke,
My thoughts are bent on his destruction.

You have my heart in your purse, i'll do any thing for you.

And thou shalt want no gold, so farewell.

I cannot choose but farewell, and have the good Angels to comfort me; yet I am
melancholy. Here's gold to make me merry: O but (hey ho) here's love to make me
sad. To avoid prolixity, I am crossed with a Suitor, that wants a piece of his
tongue, and that makes him come lisping home: they call him Caualiero Bowyer, he
will have no nay, but the wench. By these hilts, such another swash-Buckler
lives not in the nyne quarters of the world: why, he came over with the Earl
of Pembrooke; and he limps, and he limps, he devours more French ground at two
paces, the will serve Thomasin at nineteen. If ever he speak French, to avoid
prolixity, he will murder the tongue. I'll provide for him, there's but small
choice, either he shall renounce the wech, or forsake his lame legs, his
lisping tongue, and his life to: for by S. Denis, I had rather dye in a ditch,
then be bobbed of my fair Thomasin.


Whither goes royal Philip thus prepared?

On what adventure goes Prince Ferdinand?

To conquer all the world, fair Katharine,
Whose beauty in mine eye surmounts it far.
Virtue and love conducts me to your sister.

On the like voyage are my fortunes bound,
I go to win thy sister.

Some fair Star,
On our great hopes shine fair and debonair.

Amen, saith Pembrocke.

Amen, saith Rodoricke.

This way my Love dwells.

In this air breathes mine.

Farewell.

Prince Ferdinand, if these cross loves
Enjoy a wished success, peace here shall dwell.

And we be friendly Brothers.

True.

Farewell.

Pity such true love, which like blessed seed,
Sown in such fertile soil, his princely breast,
By the rough stormy brow and winters hate
Of adverse parents should be timeless nipped,
And dye e're it attain maturity:
For I have heard, the Princess whom he serves,
Is hotly courted by the Duke of Burbon,
Who to effect his choice, hath in these wars
Furnished your father with a gallant power:
His love may happily then disable Philips.

O no, my father doth affect the Prince:
Besides, my sisters heart is so combined
To his in perfect love, that Burbons hate,
Nor all the world that knot can separate.
Then sorrow not for him, but turn the stream
Of gentle pity on thy wretched friend,
Within whose bosom love hath kindled fire,
So ardent, that the flames will bury me.
Philip is throned in my sisters eyes:
But in my love disdain and hatred lies.

Doth she not pay true kindness with the like?

As stepdames, orphans, night, the cleer-fac't day,
So doth she hate me, and return my woes,
Like a steeld Anuill backward on my self.
She is all hate, yet such a lovely foe,
That I must kiss the sword that wounds me so.

Inter these thoughts, this is her fathers tent.
Drum, give a friendly summons to the King.

Forbear a while (dear Pembrooke:) by our vows,
Which in the book of heaven are registered,
By all the rights of friendship, by that love
Thou bear thy native Country, I conjure thee,
This day to be the Trumpet of my worth,
To speak the passions of thy grieved friend,
To Katharines ears, till those pure Ivory gates,
Appears with the volley of thy battring words,
Give way to my laments to touch her heart:
For this have I extracted thee from many,
Made thee my fellow Pilgrim to her shrine,
Knowing thy thoughts from loves Religion free*
When my prayers fail, thy tongue may plead for me.

Must I be spokesman? Pembrooke plead for love?
Whose tongue tunde to the Instruments of war,
Never knew strain of fancy on my breath:
Affection never dwelt, but war and death.
But if thou lou'dst to have thy soldiers fight,
Or hearten the spent courages of men,
Pembrooke could use a stile invincible.
Lou'dst thou a town, I de teach thee how to woo her*
With words of thunder-bullets wrapped in fire,
Till with thy Cannon battery she relent,
And humble her proud heart to stoop to thee.
Or if not this, then mount thee on a Steed,
Whose courage never awde an iron Bit,
And thou shalt hear me hollow to the beast,
And with commanding accents master him:
This Courtship Pembrooke knows; but idle love,
The slicke-fac't object of an amorous brain,
Did never clothe mine eye-balls, never taught
This tongue inurde to broils and stratagems,
The passionate language of a troubled heart:
I am too blunt and rude for such nice service.
Yet since my friend inioynes me to this task,
Take courage, i'll both speak, plead, woo for thee,
And when I want fit words to move her mind,
I'll draw my sword, and swear she must be kind.
Drummer report our presence to the King.

Prince Ferdinand, and honoured English Pembrooke,
Now by S. Denis, welcome. One run straight,
And give our daughter notice of these guests.
What man, we know you come prepared to woo:
To woo, to win; now by our sacred life,
We wish in soul our daughter were your wife.
Our son is with your sister, fair hap wait:
For peace or war lives in your love or hate.
Welcome once more, first, we'll go see your love,
After, to banquet, and from thence to woo.
Be merry, then we'll share a friendly part,
But you shall triumph in our daughters heart.

See that the Tent be ready furnished.
By this, my father and those Lords are met,
Amongst whom, the noble Pembrooke, like the Sun,
Out-shines the borrowed glory of the rest:
And well I may compare him to the Sun,
That but once looked upon with his fair shape,
Hath dazzled my poor senses, and left me blind.
But sir, where's the man I bade you bring?

If you can judge of colours (Madam) this is he.
Painter, stand forth.

An earnest cause (my friend) importunes me,
Wherein I am to crave thy cunningest Art.

Such as it is, you may command, fair Princess.

But are thy colours fresh? thy pencil smooth?
Thy hand vnwauering? and thy head dislodged
Of all unquiet harsh encumbrances?
For thou must draw proportion of those parts,
Whose worth to tell, my tongue wants utterance.

Fear you not (Madam) I am well prepared.

Then hither strait with youthful Ferdinand,
Nauars stout son, there comes an English Knight,
Pembrooke they call him, honourably borne:
Him (whilst we are in conference) thou shalt mark,
And to the life set down his counterfeit.
Nor is it needful I should show him thee,
The goodliest person in the train, that's he.

Let me alone to give the Painter destruction, I know him as well as the Beggar
knows his dish: he wears a white Scarf in his hat, and an Orange tawny
feather upon his arm.


Fool, indirectly thou describ'st another:
That's Prince Nauar, Pembrooke his plume is Azure,
A little intermixed with spotless white,
Prefiguring the temper of the Sky,
With whose hye motion his great mind doth move.

Orange tawny and Azure, all's one, all is but feather, there is no difference
I am sure but in colour.


Why, that's as much as may be, is it not?

Not so, i'll prove the contrary: You are fair, and I am foul, is that all the
difference between you and I? there's another thing in it, if you mark it
well.


I prithee peace, and with thy ignorance
Draw not the Painter likewise into error.
Here take thy stand, thou know him by these marks
I lately spake of: seem to excel thine Art,
And I will study to requite thy pains.

Thus did the Greeks, when they begirt the walls
Of strong built Troy, sometimes with friendly check
Entertain peace, and spend their frolic hours,
In courtly feasting of each other foe.
Welcome (young Ferdinand) I promise you,
It cheers my spirit we do embrace you here,
And welcome too (brave Lord) we cannot say,
As if we were in Paris; we might say,
Your viands shall be costly: but presume,
Such as the Camp affords, we'll have the best.
Daughter, I prithee bid them welcome.

My Lord, I do
That with the Congy of a bended knee:
But this with my true hearts loyalty.
Lords, you are welcome, by my fathers leave.

Why, now thou dost content thy father, Kate,
When wholly unto merriment inclined,
Thou answerst with like sympathy of mind.

But yet her looks are haggard and obscure,
Which makes me doubtful sheele not stoop to lure.

Princes, let's enter: come, I'll lead the way:
The feast is mine, you are my guests this day.

Now Pembrooke, show thy friendships true effect,
Obfayne her love, my life thou shalt protect.

He stays behind the rest, O happy hour!
Work on (sweet Painter) to enrich mine eye
With that, which else procures my tragedy.

Fair Madam, in this confluence of sweet joy,
When every one resorts unto the feast,
Me thinks you should not thus retire alone,
As seeming, your best fare were heavy moan.

I am not (Sir) alone, nor do I starve
My appetite with any wil-full fast,
I have a banquet of sweet pleasing thoughts;
That is more precious then the costliest feast.

But at your fathers board there sits a guest,
To whom the cup of Ganimede will seem
But juice of Hemlock, and the daintiest dish,
As much unsavoury as the Pomice stone,
Unless your presence season his delight.

I am sorry I want skill to serve his diet.
I have not bin instructed to such end.

But I will teach you (Madam) if you please.

Rather the party grieved first should show
Wherein we err, else how can we discern
What is our fault, or how we may amend?

That office he commits unto my tongue.

Is he not able then to speak himself?

Yes, Madam, I have heard when Ferdinand,
With whom in Padua I was conversant,
So spake in the assembly of the learned,
With such a grace and well composed phrase,
As many thought grave Tullies eloquence
Flowed like a honey River from his lips.

He wants then belike sufficient courage.

Never lived Knight less preiudic'd in that,
Then valiant Ferdinand, whom I have seen,
Couch his staff Lance with such dexterity,
As if the god of battle had himself
Entered the Lists, and preassing to the midst
Of steele-composed troops, like lightning fly,
Till he had made a passage with his sword.

So puissant in his fortitude with men,
And daunted with a silly woman's looks?
How can that be?

Yes, when you weygh the force
Of your resistless and controwling beauty,
It is your beauty: were his power and spirit
Ten times more hauty venturous then it is,
Compels it stoop in homage to your foot,
As trembling Lambs, when they to Lions couch.

'Twas well he chose so good an Orator,
To plead the imperfection of his cause.

I should have that opinion of my self,
If for my sake your Grace would favour him.

Yes, for your sake we have endured his name;
And for your sake we tolerate his suite:
But when you cease to speak, then all that praise
You have attributed to his desert,
Seems borrowed from your self, you are the man
Whose eloquence compares with Cceroes.
You are the man, whose knightly fortitude
Lives in the world vnpreiudic'd of any.
You vanquish beauty, and enthrall the mind
Of female weakness, with no lesser awe,
Then Indian vassayles stoop unto their Lords.
The name of Ferdinand you have mista'ne:
Say tis your self, and then your whole discourse
Observes the perfect method that it should.

Should I be false and treacherous to my friend?
I am entreated but to speak for him.

But for your self would be more acceptable.
Oh pardon me, nor let immodest strain
Cleave to my brow, my love is chastely bred,
Other then Pembrooke, Katharine never vows,
Shall be inthroniz'd in her maiden thoughts.

Mistake me not, I say tis Ferdinand
Dyes in affection to your Deity.

But in affection I survive to none,
But only Pembrooke.

Will you be esteemed
A cruel murdresse of a loyal friend?

Will Pembrooke triumph in a woman's fall?

You anger me, respect young Ferdinand.

You please me not, to speak of Ferdinand.

Nay, then tis time to go, or wrong my friend.
Since, Madam, what I would I cannot do,
Mine honour here bids me leave off to woo.

Stay, Pembrooke, Katharine will sue to thee,
So shalt thou keep thy faith and loyalty.

Tarry, sir, tarry, we want the length of your nose: nay, if you will not hear,
i'll be so bold as follow your nose. Sir, tarry, tarry.


He will not hear, nor (too unkind) look back.

But, Madam, spite his heart you shall see this.

Give me his picture: Image far more kind,
Then is the substance, whence thou art derived!
Which way soever I divert my self,
Thou seem to follow with a loving eye.
Thee will I therefore hold within mine arms,
As some small comfort to increasing harms.

What means my second self by this long stay?
I cannot rest till I be certified,
What good or bad success my suite returns:
But he is gone, and in fair Katharines hand
I see his picture. What may this pretend?

Thou hast done well indeed, in every part
Thou show complete cunning workmanship:
His eye, his lip, his cheek are rightly framed;
But one thing thou hast grossly ouer-slipt.
Where is his stubborn unrelenting heart,
That lurks in secret as his master doth,
Disdaining to regard or pity me?

Madam, his heart must be imagined
By the description of the outward parts.

O no; for then it would be tractable,
Mild and applausiue as the others be.

No Prince, but Pembrooke dwells in Katharines eye,
Whose that disturbs our pleasing solitude.

Know you not me? my name is Ferdinand,
Whose faithful love Lord Pembrooke late commenced?

Speak then for Pembrooke as he did for you,
Or else your bootless suite will soon be cold.

Why, he was Orator in my behalf:
If I should speak for him, as he for me,
Then should I breathe forth his passions, not mine own.
I, I, tis so, the villain, in my name,
Hath purchasd her affection for himself,
And therefore was he absent from the feast:
And therefore shuns my sight, and leaves behind
This counterfeit, to keep him still in mind.
Tis so, tis so, base Traitor, for this wrong
My sword shall cut out thy perfidious tongue.

I have run till I sweat, sweat till my shirt cleaves to my back, cried till
I am hoarse, and am hoarse till I cannot cry, and yet he will not come back.


No matter, fellow, I have here a pledge,
Which I will zealously devote me to.
There's thy reward, withdraw, my father comes.

Where are these Lords? the one hath sate with me,
And suddenly is risen from the board:
The other came not at all. Daughter, saw you
The Prince or Pembrooke, which way they are gone?

Back to their Tents, my Lord, as I suppose.

Back to their Tents, and take no leave of us?
Nay, then I fear their meaning was too smooth,
And some black Treason covered in their smiles,
Which we will seek immediately to prevent.

Stand, give the word along, stand.

Stand there.

Lieutenant.

Captain.

Is the watch set in the Kings quarter yet?

An howre ago.

Zounds, what foolish Canaanits were they, to run in debt to their eyes for an
hours sleep, sooner then they needed? Sergeant.


Anon sir.

Anon sir! s'hart, the Rogue answers like a Drawer: but tis the trick of most
of these Sergeants, all clincum, clancum. Gods dynes, I am an Onion, if I had
not rather serve foremost in the forlorn hoop of a battle, or run point
blancke against the mouth of a double charged Cannon, then come under the
arrests of some of their pewter pessels: zounds, tis hotter a great deal then
hell mouth, Dives burning in Sulphur: but thou art none of the genealogy of
them. Where must we watch to night?


In the furthest Trenches that confront the enemies Camp.


That's the next way to have all our throats cut.


That cannot be, you know, Captain, there's a peace toward.


A pox a peace, it keeps our Ancient whole; but s'hart our gaberdines go to
wrack: but futra: tis well known, since Dick Bowyer came to France, he hath
showed himself a gentleman a Caualiero, and sets fear at's heals: and I
could escape (a pox on it) the other thing, I might haps return safe sound to
England; but what remedy? al flesh is grass, and some of us must needs be
scorched in this hot Country. Lieutenant Core, prithee lead my Band to their
quarter, and the Rogues do not as they should, cram thy self, good Core, down
their throats, and choke them. Who stand Sentronell to night, sir?


That must I, Captain.


You, Raf Nod? zounds, soldiers, follow my discipline, say your prayers, you
are all dead men, all dust and ashes, all worms meat.


How so, Captain?


Do you make him Sentronell? s'hart, heel nod presently: and he do not sleep
sitting upon the point of a Spanish needle, Dicke Bowyer's a very shittlecocke.
Nod! zounds, he is one of the nine sleepers, a very Dormouse: I had a Pageant
to present, of the seven deadly sins, he should play Sloth: and he did not
sleep when he should speak his part, I am a Badger.


That's true, you have half the nature of a Badger, for one leg is shorter
then another.


Zounds, you Rogue, do not you know that? I'll tell you: s'hart, and I lye,
call me Iebuzite. Once as I was fighting in S. Georges fields, and blind Cupid
seeing me, and taking me for some valiant A chilles, he took his shaft, and
shot me right into the left heel, and ever since, Dick Bowyer hath been lame:
but my heart is as sound as a bell, heart of Oak, spirit, spirit. Lieutenant,
discharge Nod, and let Cricket stand Sentronell, till I come.


He shall, Captain.


On before, strike Drum, march soldiers, keep your place, Nod: lusty my harts,
for the honour of England, our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke. So, I
have discharged my self of these.

Hot shot! now to my love: some may say, the tale of Venus loving Mars, is a
fable: but he that is a true soldier, and a Gent. as Dick Bowyer is, he do not
love some varlet or other, zounds, he is worse then a gaping Oyster without
liquor. There's a pretty sweet faced mother that waits on the princess, that I
have some mind to; but a whorso Achitophel, a parasite, a rogue, one whose face
looks worse the a Tailors cushen, of old shreds colours; zounds, like a weavers
leg, in an old ditch feeding horseleaches, this trotter is my ryual, loves
Thomasin: his name is Peter de Lions; but s'hart (I will not swear neither) if
I do not turn Rich. Cor de Lion with him, if I do not tear out his heart and
eat it with mustard,


Thomasin, you know me, I hate prolixity: in a word, my humour is thus, I love
you.


And I do not spoil that humour, so --


Your answer compendiously, avoid prolixity.


Mary muffe! by Iesu, I scorn to humble the least part about me, to give
answer to such a trotting question: as I live, it ioults mine ears worse in
hearing, then the princes coach on a broken cawsey.


Thomasin, leave this pace, take me with you: my Lord loves your Lady, yet I
hear say, she is this night betrothed to the Prince of France: so I love you,
and shall I lose you? No, I hate prolixity: in a word, the end is, i'll mary
you.


Pretty, as God save me! what will Captain Bowyer say to that, if he should
know it?


A good Rogue, by Iesu.


Bowyer a Captain? a Capon, a button mould, a lame gaberdine, a red beard
Sprat, a Yellow hammer, a bow case, a very Jackdaw with his tongue slit.


Zounds, what a Philistine is this? what a dictionary of proper names hath the
Rogue got together? heart, his tongue crawles as fast as the Cheese doth in
Germany. I'll pearce you for this, you Lobster.


Bowyer, mordu futra for him; and that sour crab do but leer at thee, I shall
squeeze him to vargis.


And you squeeze me, I may haps grow saucy with you, you whoreson burned Pudding
pie, you dry Parsnip: kiss me, Thomasin: so, dare you stand to your word now,
and squeeze me?


Stumps, I challenge thee for this indignity. Bowyer, I will gyrd my self with
thy guts, I am a Soldier and a Captain.


Captain? s'hart, and thou hast under thy charge, any other then Pigmies, I am
Gogmagog. Dost thou hear (sowgelder?) and I do not with six Cranes (well
marshald) overrun thee and thy hundred and fifty, say Dick Bowyer's a coward.


For that word, draw.


Hold, Gentlemen.


Peace (good Thomasin) silence, sweet socket. Peter, dost see this sword? this
sword killed Sarlaboys, that was one Rogue: now it shall kill thee, that's two
Rogues. Whoreson puttock, no garbage serve you but this? have at you.


Who's this at enmity within our Camps?
What, Bowyer, and the servant to great Burbon?
Both sheathe your weapons: by our martial law,
This act is death.

I'll be hanged then. Doest thou hear, noble General? Dick Bowyer knows what
belongs to service: we did not draw of any malice, by this element of iron
steel, but to measure which of our swords were longest. I'll save you for once,
you Saracen, because I see you'll hang scurvily: but the next time --


Good Captain Bowyer, let our English troops
Keep a strong watch to night: my throbbing heart,
Like to a Scritchowle in the midnight hour,
Bodes some black scene of mischief imminent.

Never fear (General) if Iulius Caesar rise up against us, e're he do my Lord
any wrong, zounds, i'll be cut smaller then pot-hearbs. I'll to the trenches,
come Thomasin. Leer not, Lobster, lest I thum that russeting face of yours
with my sword hilt, till that it look as pyde coloured as the Rainbow. By Iesu
i'll do it, and therefore follow me not.


Why should this load of grief lye on my heart
With such a ponderous weight? I know no cause,
Unless it be by thinking on the wrong
My friend receyues in the unmatched love,
Which Katharine bears me: yet my faith is sound,
And like a solid Rock shall check her tears.
Katharine loves me; yet for my friends delight,
Pembrooke will hate her love, and fly her sight.

Nauar, you sprinckle me with foul reproach,
And dim the lustre of our royal name,
With colours of dishonour.

Hear me, Burbon.

What words can satisfy so great a wrong?
Have you not with consent of all your Lords,
Promised your daughter to this generous prince?

Their true love forced us to it.

True love? tis fayn'd.

Ha, Burbon.

Gentle Philip.

With my sword,
I'll prove my love unfeigned, thee a false Lord.

This like a Sanctuary frees thy tongue,
And gives thee childish liberty of speech,
Which else would fawn and crouch at Burbons frown.

Now by S. Denis --

I'll not chat with boys.
Nauar, to thee I speak: thy daughters looks,
Like the North Star to the Sea-tost Mariners,
Hath brought me through all dangers, made me turn
Our royal Palace, to this stage of death,
Our state and pleasures, to a bloody Camp,
And with the strength and puissance of our force,
To lift thy falling and decayed state,
Even to her pristine glory, in thy quarrel
Burbon hath set himself against his King,
And soiled his greatness with a Traitors name.
Now when our worth expected rich reward,
Fair Bellamira, wonder of her time,
Must Philip have her?

Burbon, she is mine.

i'll be revenged, by heaven I will,
Or I will pave these plains with the dead bodies
Of our dear subjects: we have sworn thy fall,
That oaths thy death, our rage thy funeral.

Hear our excuse.

We will not credit air.
Peter, watch Rodorick, when the prince is gone,
Tell him, I'd speak with him.

Enough, tis done.

Nauar, this setting Sun, which sees our wrong,
Shall e're his morrows beams guide the proud East,
View Himens rites turned to a tragic feast

His anger bears him hence, young prince of France,
Since to reduce our enmity to love,
And thereby like a fair and lovely Bryde,
To mary peace to France, we are content,
To bring the sea-tost bark of your affects,
Half shipwrecked with the tempest of these wars,
To their desired port, as we agreed:
Go to your father, and inform him thus:
If personally heel view our friendly Tents,
And seal these Articles of peace proposde,
This night you shall be troth-plight to our child.

Were it to search the furthest Northern clime,
Where frosty Hymns with an icy Mace,
Strikes dead all living things, I'd find it out,
And borrowing fire from those fair sunny eyne,
Thaw Winters frost, and warm that dead cold clime:
But this impose is nothing, honoured King,
I'll to my father, and conduct him hither:
For whilst my soul is parted from her sight,
This earth is hell, this day a tedious night.
Come Rodorick, you shall bear me company.

He shall not, for i'll stay him instantly.

'Twere pity to keep two such loves asunder.
Daughter, you your Ladies to your tent,
And deck you richly to receive the prince.
My Lord of Pembrooke, happily returned:
How doth our soon? See where he comes himself.
Speak, boy, how spedst thou with fair Katharine?

I know not how: Is trothlesse Pembrooke there?

Be not dismayed, at length sheele pity thee.
Son, bid our Officers adorn our Court
In her chief glory: for this happy night
Shall (...) a period to this smarting war.
Your sister shall be troth-plight to Prince Philip,
And France and we made friends about it then.
Pembrooke, have you the charge to see our Captains
Prepare a martial welcome to the King.
I'll not be idle: since Nauar was crowned,
Our heart with so much joy did ne'er abound.

Nor mine with so much hate. Pembrooke, a word.

What wills your Grace?

That Pembrooke is a villain.
Look not so strange, I speak it not your friend,
But he that in his soul hath sworn thine end.

A villain? and my death? I am amazed.
Art thou awake? or is all this a dream?

A dream of death: meet me to morrow morning,
As thou art Pembrooke and a Gentleman,
By yon fair River side, which parts our Camps.
You know the place, come armed, and so farewell.

Dear friend.

Push, meet me.

Ferdinand, I will.

Revenge, smile on, thou shalt drink blood thy fill.

This is my weighting night, tis for no good,
That I stand Sentronell. Well, good or ill,
I care not greatly, so I get the gold:
Therefore to avoid prolixity, here walk I.
Here comes the men that must reward my pain.

Have you the poison?

And a strong one too.
Here's a preservative to save your hand.
When Rodoricke fails your Lordship, heaven shall fail,
To illuminate the world with cheerful light.

Then here about should Peter wait for me:
For this is the Pavilion of the Princess.

My Lord.

Peter.

Here is the key that opens to the Tent,
I stole it from my sweet heart Thomasin.
Enter without prolixity, woo and win the Lady:
But give me gold (my Lord) and I'll to Dice.

Hold, take thy fill.

And it shall go as fast.

Now gentle Peter, get thee unto rest:
My business craves the absence of the world*
None but my felt and Rodoricke shall behold
The secret complot that I do intend.

I go, my Lord.

Now blessed key, open unto my love,
Do more then loving lines or words can do:
My letters have bin answered with disdain:
Her father I have moved to gain my love,
But he is frosty in my fervent suite,
And now perforce I will obtain my love,
Or ease her puling hatred by revenge.

You stay too long, i'll help to turn the key.

What do I see? the majesty of heaven,
Sit in a maiden slumber on the earth?
What, is my Bellamira turned a goddess,
Within the table of her glorious face!
Me thinks, the pure extraction of all beauty
Flows in abundance to my loue-sicke eye.
O, Rodoricke, she is admirably fair:
And sleeping, if her beauty be so rare,
How will her eyes enchant me if she wake!
Here, take the poison, i'll not stain that face,
For all the treasure of the Western Island.

I see no such admired perfection.
Waken her, Burbon, and this loving charm,
Which now hath led your senses prisoner,
Will vanish, and her speech full of reproof,
Beget a new phantasma all of hate:
Thou wilt detest her when she shall deny thee.

Wake her, Rodorick, for I want the power.

I hope I am disguised sufficiently,
That Bellamira cannot know my face.
Madam, fair Bellamira.

Here I am, who calls on Bellamira?

I, fair love,
The Duke of Burbon that doth honour thee.

The Duke of Burbon in my Tent so late?
Where is my Guard? what Peter, Thomasin.

Step to her, and restrain her, lest she call:
I'll be a looker on, and be unknown.

What needs your Highness call for any guard,
Since you are guarded with a faithful friend?
Behold me, Madam, humbly on my knee,
Come to renew my suite, vouchsafe me love,
Or with this weapon take away my life:
Much better 'twere a thousand times to dye,
Then live in torment of your scorching eye.
You have inflamed my heart, oh quench that flame,
Or into cinders turn my haplesse trunk:
Haplesse, in being vnbelou'd of you.

My Lord of Burbon, you presume too much
On th'extremity of passion.
Have I not answered many an idle letter,
With full assurance that I cannot love?
Have I not often, viva voce checked
Your courtly kindness? frowned upon your smiles?
Used you unkindly, all to wean your love?
And do you still persevere in your suite?
I tell thee, Burbon, this bold part of thine,
To break into my Tent at dead of night,
Deserves severe correction, and the more,
Because it brings mine honour into question.
I charge thee, as thou art a Gentleman,
Betake thee to thine own Pavilion,
And let this answer satisfy for all:
Burbon, I cannot, nor I will not love thee.

Cannot, nor will not? zouds, Madam, but you must.

Must I?

And shall.

You will not force me to it?

Or force that sparkling beauty from your face.
Look not so fiercely, nor cry out for help:
For if you do, this makes you cry your last.
Seeing neither words, kind letters, hearty sighs,
Humble entreaty, nor a world of payne,
Can move you to take pity of my love:
But Tyrant-like, your beauty seeks my life,
I will blot out that beauty with this juice.
Thus, thus I wipe away my passions:
Thus do I heal the torments of my love*
Thus do I ransom my enthralled eye,
And by depriving of the cause of life,
Kill the effect, which was a world of sorrow.
Farewell, foul Bellamira, I am pleased
In this revenge, that no way could be eased.

Zounds, he has don't: now, Rodorick, joy thy fill.
Burbon is thine, the Dukedom is thine own:
For only he in the Inheritance
Stood as an obstacle, to let my claim.
This deed of his will take away his life:
And then let me alone to enjoy his land.
I'll steal away unseen, cause unsuspected:
I would not for the world be once detected.

Poison my face! oh most inhumane wretch!
Revenge more vile, then to abbridge my life.
What, Thomasin, what, brother Ferdinand:
My kingly father: is there none that hears?
Then Treason, treason, let that waken you:
For capital is this offence to me.

O Iesu, mistress, what ails your face!

Her face!

Tis spotted like a Panthers skin.

O, were those spots as kindly beautiful,
Then were fair Bellamira vndeform'd.

O, what divine power hath sent this Leprosy?

Say, beauteous sister.

Speak, fair Bellamira.

Speak, my good mistress.

My sweet daughter, speak.

Her silence argues a tormented spirit.

Thy countenance argues a deceitful soul.

Where is Nauar?

Where is fair Bellamira?

My Philip, oh give leave to fly his sight.

Stay, gentle daughter, heel not injure thee.

Here are the Articles concluded on,
I could not rest, till I had signed them,
And brought them to your Highness. A month hence
The marriage shall be fully solemnised,
So please your Majesty and your fair daughter:
Are you content?

To live in discontent.

Me thinks, this royal presence hath dim looks:
Is it because they are in the arms of night,
Which sets a leaden lustre on the eye?
Or hath some accident occoasted them,
That troubles their aspect with melancholy?
Is Nauar well? is Ferdinando well?
Is Pembrooke well? Is Bellamira well?
O, where is Bellamira? tell me, Princes,
For now my tongue hath struck upon her name.
I feel a kind of killing ecstasy.
Where is she? in her Tent?

Deny me, father,
I would not see Prince Philip with this face.

Why speak you not? what, have I touched the string,
Whereon the burden of your sorrow lies?
Father, look round about, see you my love?
Rodoricke, look round about, see you my love?

I see her not.

Nor I.

I say not so.
The garments that she wears, mine eye should know.
What Lady's this that hides her heavenly face?
Here are no Basilisks with killing eyes:
You need not hide your beauty: sweet, look up,
Me thinks I have an interest in these looks.
What's here, a Leper amongst Noble men?
What creatures this? why stays she in this place?
Oh, tis no marvel though she hide her face:
For tis infectuous: let her leave the presence,
Or Leprosy will cleave unto us all.

O let me leave the presence, gentle father,
When Philip bids his Bellamira go.

My Bellamira!

How? my sons beloved!

Is this my love? was this your beauteous child?

My child.

My sister.

Beauteous Bellamira.

Spotted.

Disfigured.

Made a loathsome Leper.

How came this sudden alteration?
For she was comely, lovely, beautiful,
When the day left his Chariot to the night.

That heaven doth know, and only Bellamira.
Daughter, I charge thee, tell me how it came.

Burbon, oh Burbon.

Did he do the deed?

He came into my Tent at dead of night,
And rubbed my face with an infectuous herb,
Because I would not grant unto his love.
I cried for help, but none did succour me.

I know he did, and laugh to think on it.

And he shall rue his treason.

Threaten not,
Leave the revenge to me whom it concerns,
Tis I am robbed of a delicious look,
A heavenly sparkling brow, a starry eye,
A countenance fairer then Auroraes looks,
When all the East is gilded with her blush.
Tis I will be revenged: but not before
I have espousde my lovely Bellamira.

Espoused her!

How! marry a face deformed!

A leprous creature!

An infectuous maid!

One, whose sores are perchance incurable!

Be they incurable, it is my Love,
And for my sake she hath endured this wrong*
And, should I now forsake her thus distressed,
I could not merit a true Lovers name.
To show I love her, I will marry her,
Before the month expire: nay in the morn:
Delays, perchance, may make her think I scorn.

Marry with me? fetch me a looking glass,
That I may see how sweet a Bride I am.
Oh, I detest my self: Dear, hate me too:
I am not to be married but to death.
Though I were Empress of the spacious world,
I de lay my self and Kingdom at thy feet.
Live, noble Philip, joy some happier match:
Tis my unworthiness makes me deny thee.

Think thou, because thy face is spotted so,
Thou art not worthy of thy Philips love?
Thy face to me was but a Marshall,
To lodge thy sacred person in my mind,
Which long ago is surely chambred there:
And now what needs an outward Harbinger?
I do affect, not superficially:
My love extends further then the skin.
The inward Bellamira tis I seek,
And unto her will Philip be epousde.

Oh admirable love!

Oh, my dear son,
Thou make me famous by thy loyalty.

I never heard the like.

Pen never writ.
A worthier Story to posterity.

Pen never writ of a more treacherous friend,
Then, Pembrooke, thou hast proved to Ferdinand.

Sweet Love, prepare thee to be Philips Bryde:
For here I swear, as I am royal borne,
I'll marry thee, before the mornings Sun
Hath run the third part of his glorious course.
Father, good night: dear friends, dear Love, good night:
Marriage, I hope, will make my spirits more light.

Good night, sweet son. King Lewes, stay with me,
Be thou my comforter, i'll comfort thee.

Pembrook, remember that thou fail me not.

O God, what may these moody looks intend?
Me thinks, I should have better from my friend.

Now, Bellamira, thou hast time to think
Upon these troublous matters: should I suffer
So brave a Gentleman as Philip is,
To wed himself to my unworthy self,
It would be counted virtue in the Prince;
But I were worthy of a world of blame.
No, Philip, no, thou shalt not wrong thine honour,
Nor be impeacht by Bellamiraes spots.
In some disguise i'll steal away to night,
And ne'er appear more in my Philips sight.

There is no toil to this walking of the Round: S'hart, I have been stumbling
up and down all this night, like a Brewers horse, that has ne'er a good eye in
his head: Tis as dark as Pitch. I can resemble our Camp to nothing better
then hell, save that in hell they are always waking, and here the villains
are as drowsy as swyne. Lieutenant Nod! why, you might have shot a double
Cannon in his ear, and never have wakte him: I jogged, and I jogged; I shouted,
and I shouted; and yet the mongrel snorted, you might hear him to Dover: at
last, I dragd him by the heals into a ditch of water, and there left the
Lobster crawling. A the the other side, Core being appointed to stand Sentynell
upon the Wallounes quarter, s'hart, the Loach gets me into a Sutlers bath, and
there sits me drinking for Ioanes best cap: but by this hand, and as Dicke
Bowyer is a Soldier, and a Caualiero, he shall sit in the bolts for it to
morrow. My comfort is in these extremities, that I brought Thomasin to her
Ladies Tent, leaving her new-come Lover to pick straws: but soft, qui vou la?


My name is Ferdinand.


Stand.


Why, Captain, thou dost know me wellinough.


Know, or not know, without the word you pass not.


Soliman.


So, allie, allie, Monseur.


First, tell me, saw thou Pembrooke come this way?


I saw him not.


Farewell.


As much to you. Zounds, these Frenchmen think to out-face us with a card of
ten: but, and his beard were made of brass, Dicke Bowyer will make him know
the discipline of war. Here comes another.


Who's there? Dick Bowyer?


Some call me so, what then?


Pembrooke salutes thee.


Oh, good morrow, my Lord, good morrow.


I prithee, Captain, saw thou Ferdinand, Son to Nauar, as thou did walk
the round?


Even now, my Lord, he past along this way.


Himself alone? or had he company?


Nay questionless, he was alone, my Lord.


Could thou discern his face? how did he look?


Faith, scurvily, my Lord, like a green cheese, or the inside of a rotten
Pumpian.


There is Crowns for thee to drink.


I thank your Lordship. To see the difference between these French Cures,
and our English Cavaliers: there's as much bounty in them, as there's Marchpane
in a dish of Almond butter. I might have stood here till my teeth chatter in
my head, e're the the other Launceprisado would have said, Here, Captain Bowyer,
there's a Cardicue, to wash down melancholy. But had I known as much, I would
have basted him, till his bones had rattled in his skin.


Come, sir, you shall answer your walking before our Captain.


Well, sirs, take heed what you do, I am a Princes man, if you stay me upon
the Kings hye way, I can lay fellowship to your charge.


But sir, we can lay Treason to thine, for being without the word.


Without the word! O pernicious Frenchman! without the word! why, I have called
thee Villain, him Rascal; this, Slave; that, Rogue; and am I still without
the word?


I, sir, the word that must serve your turn, the Watch-word.


Faith, you're like to watch this twelvemonth, ere you have any other words at
my hands.


How now masters, what calfe are you dragging to the slaughter-house there? ha?


A straggler, and a spy: Captain, I pray examine him.


So, Lieutenant Core, you are crept from your cups at last, I'll talk with you
anon: but, sir, to you: From whence come you?


I came, sir, from the King of France camp.


So, what's your name?


My name, sir, is Bow wow.


S'hart, what a name's that! the Hedge-hog mocks us: Bow wow, quotha? whatkin
art thou to the generation of Dogs?


No dog, sir, would you should know it, though I be encompast with cures.


Zounds, he calls us cures, hang the hotch-potch up in a fathom or two of
match.


Not you, sir, I call not you so: I know you to be a very insufficient
ill-spoken Gentleman.


Well, sir, whom do you serve?


My master, sir, is the Lady Katharine, the French Kings daughter: I have bin
abroad about some business of hers, and am now going back again.


An honourable Lady, sir: let him go: tis against the law of arms to stay him.


Stand of: but soft, I do not know your name, sir, that my Lady may give you
thanks.


My name's Dick Bowyer.


Then, master Dicke Bowyer, after my hearty commendations, ^due: but as for
the rest, I shall, I say no more, I shall --


How now, Core? how can you answer your being a tippling, when you should stand
Sentinel?


Believe me, Captain, I had but a whiffe or two: for I was passing dry.


Thou art always dry: the whoreson Mault-worm has a throat like the burning
Climb, or a Glasse-makers Furnace: But your remove from thence has saved you
from the bolts. How now, what Water-Spanyell have we here?


Tis Lieutenant Nod.


Captain, deride me not: I protest, I came by this mischance by good service,
by following a spy, that came to discover our army.


O notable Rogue! did not I find thee asleep, and threw thee into a ditch?


Was't you? by this light, I took you for a spy.


Yet saw me not, no more then a Molewarp: this is an egregious Rogue.


Yes, I saw you well enough, and I did but try how you would use me.


By this flesh and blood, many one that lies in his grave, was not half so
senseless: but the Watch breaks up, every one to his quarter, away.


Tis true, they are gone together, and I am sent to watch Prince Ferdinand, and
the Earl of Pembrooke: this way they went; but they are got out of sight. I
were very bad to be a Hound, that have no better a sent: if they were hares, as
they are men, I should think them squatted: but husht, here comes one of them.


The morn look red: red mornes do threat a storm,
That storm shall light on Pembrooke or my self.
This is our meeting place: here runs the stream
That parts our camps: the time consorts the place;
And (Pembrooke) it thy reputation hold,
It is thy q. to enter.

Here comes the the other, this is luck upon luck: now will I run and fetch my
mistress, the Lady Katharine, to part their fray.


Good end succeed my early heaviness:
Three times my feet, as loath to guide me hither,
Have stumbled in a plain and even way,
My sword forsook his scabberd once or twice,
Blood from my nostrilles thrice hath spowted forth,
And such a dymnesse ouerrunnes my sight,
That I have taken a tree to be a man,
And questioned with it about serious things.
This is the place where I must meet my friend.
Yonder he stands. Good morrow, Ferdinand.

Good morrow to thy death: draw, Pebrook, draw, The ground thou treadst upon,
must be thy grave.


Draw upon Ferdinand?


I, upon me.

Dally not, Pembrooke, I am bent to fight,
And that with thee for the best blood thou bear.

You have some reason for this resolution.


My will.

A sorry argument to kill your friend.
I must have better reason then your will,
Or i'll not draw upon my Ferdinand:
Our love is older then of one days growth,
A years continuance hath united us.
Have we not made an interchange of oaths,
Sworn love to one another twenty times,
Confirmed that friendship by society,
Encreasde it with the sympathy of mind,
Making one pleasure, pleasure unto both?
And shall this bond be broken upon will?

Then you'll not draw?

Yes, nearer to thy person,
In friendly sort to embrace thee, Ferdinand.

Thou art a coward, and thou dare not fight.

Thou know the contrary: for we have fought
At every weapon, to approve our skill.

Go to, you are a villain and a coward,
And by the royal blood that gave me life,
I'll kill thee, Pembrooke, though thou do not draw.

Kill me? thou wilt not wrong thine honour so?

Zounds, but I will: traitor, take thou that.

Wound me so desperately? nay then i'll draw,
Not to offend, but to defend my self.
Now I perceive it is my blood thou seekst:
Witness you heavens, and all you gracious powers,
That stand auspicious to this enterprise,
That Pembrooke draws forth an unwilling sword.

Why so, now manfully defend thy self.

Another would? then Pembrook, rouse thy spirit,
And bear no longer with this haire-braynd man.
Yet (Ferdinand) resolve me of the cause,
That moves thee to this unkind enterprise:
And if I satisfy thee not in words,
This double wound shall please thee with my blood.
Nay, with my sword I'll make a score of wounds,
Rather then want of blood divorce thy love.

I hate thee deadly, and I seek thy life:
What other reason, Pembrook, would thou have?
Prepare, prepare, in this conflict to show,
Thou art a Knight, and can overcome thy foe.

And if I spare thee not, impute the cause
To thine own rashness, and mine aching wounds.

I hope I have slain thee.

Oh, I fear thy life: how fares my Ferdinand?

What, liu'st thou yet? then my fare is ill.

I am marked for death,
I feel a general faintness through my lymmes:
Expense of blood will soon expend my life.

The like debility my joints do feel.

Then we must both dye in the latest of death.
Tell me, oh tell me, whence proceeds this hate?

I fear not (Pembrooke) to discover now.
Thou were my Spokes-man unto Katharine,
And treacherously thou stol'st away her heart.
Oh, I can say no more, my spirits do faint.
Pembrooke, farewell, I have revenged my wrong.

Oh* yet a little longer, gracious time,
Detain his princely spirit in his breast,
That I may tell him he is misse-inform'd,
And purge my self unto my dying friend:
But death hath laid his num-cold hand upon me:
I am arrested to depart this life.
Dear Ferdinand, although thou be my death,

How full of pleasure is this Forest life!
My Park I liken to a Common wealth,
In which, my Bucks and Does are Citizens:
The Hunters Lodge, the Court, from whence is sent
Sentence of life or death, as please the King:
Only our gouernment's a tyranny,
In that we kill our subjects upon sport.
But stay, what Gentlemen do here lye slain?
If any spark of life do yet remain,
I'll help to fan it with a nymble hands
The Organ of his arm doth play apace,
He is not so far spent, but that with help,
He may recover to his former state.
How is the other? I do feel soft-breath
Break from between his lips. Oh, for some aid,
To bear them to the Forest, to my Lodge:
But as I am, i'll try my utmost strength,
To save their lives: firit seen, shall be the first:
Patience, and i'll return and fetch the other.

My angle-rod is broke, my sport is done;
But I will fetch my net, to catch some fish:
To lose both fish and pleasure, is too much.
Oh what contentment lives there in the brooke!
What pretty trames are made by cunning hands,
To entrap the wily watery Citizens!
But what art thou that lie upon the ground?
Sleepst thou? or art thou slain? hath breath his last?
No spark of life appears: yet from his eye,
Me thinks I see a glimmering light breakeforth,
Which wanting strength, is like a twilight glimpse.
If there be any hope to save his life,
I'll try my utmost cunning, To my house,
Poor Gentleman, I'll bear thee as a guest,
And either cure thy wounds, or make thy grave.

Just in this circle I left the two Princes ready to draw; for I read the whole
discourse of the Combat in their red eyes.


Here lye their weapons, and here flows their blood.


Have they not slain one another, and buried themselves?


Peace, fool* tis too sure, that they are slain.


O Lord, then let me turn my self into a Ballad, and morn for them.


Thou angrest me, with jesting at my sorrow:
Hence from my sight, my heart is full of grief,
And it will break, the burden is so great.

Go from your sight? then let me go out of your company: for I had as leeue
leave your sight as your company. Is this my reward for watching and watching?
Oh Mistress, do not kill me with unkindness: I shall, I shall --


What shall you?


Weep out mine eyes, and fill the holes with salt water.

I prithee leave me, I am not displeased,
But fain would vent my sorrow from my heart.
Hold, take my purse, spend that, and leave my presence:
Go every where, enquire my Pembrooke out:
And if thou bring meto his breathless trunk.
I will reward thee with a treble gift.

Well, I were best be going, now I am so fairly offred. Mistress, your reward
hath stopped my tears, and entic'de my legs to be walking. Farewell, I will
go, God knows whither, to seek and to find both, and neither. Farewell,
sweet Mistress.


O Pembrooke, let me kneel unto thy blood:
And yet I know not whether't be thy blood,
Save that my soul by a divine instinct,
Tells me it is the treasure of thy veins.
If thou be dead, thou mirror of all men,
I vow to dye with thee: this field, this grove
Shall be my receptacle till my last:
Content with that that feeds the airy souls,
My pillow shall be made a bank of moss,
And what I drink, the silver brooke shall yield.
No other camp nor Court will Katharine have,
Till fates do limit her a common grave.

Our daughter fled! when? whither? which way? how?

I know not.

Bellamira, my lives joy,
Upon those pinnyons that support her flight,
Hovers my heart, you bear away my soul.
Turn, turn again, and give this earthly frame
Essential power, which for thine absence dyes:
Thou art the sweet of sweets, the joy of joys:
For thee was Philip borne. O turn again,
And Philip is the blessedest of men.

We are glad she's gone, though we dissemble it.
Son, bridle this affection, cease these laments,
She did not value them.

Lewes, she did,
Till savage hate that shape disfigured.

O, she was worthy to be Queen of heaven.
Her beauty, e're it suffered violence,
Was like the Sun in his Meridian Throne,
Too splendent for weak eyes to gaze upon.
She was too bright before, till being hid
Under that envious cloud, it took the place
Of a dark ground, to show a louelyer face.
That Leprosy in her seemd perfect beauty:
And she did ^.
With virtue, which no (...) calumnious breath
Could ever soil, true virtues dye is such,
That malice cannot stain, nor envy such.
Then say not but her worth surmouts these woes.

She grieved to tie you to a hated bed,
And therefore followed Burbon for revenge.

Burbon? who names him? that same verbal sound
Is like a thunder clap to Philips ears,
Frighting my very soul. Sure, you said, Burbon,
And to that prodegie you joined revenge:
Revenge, that like a shadow follows him.
'Twas he that made me bankrupt of all bliss,
Sud the divorce of that pure white and red,
Which decked my Bellamiraes lovely cheeks:
And shall he escape vnpunisht?

Join your hands,
And all with us swear vengeance on the Duke.

Not for the world: who prosecutes his hare
On Burbon, iniures me: I am his foe,
And none but I will work his overthrow.

What means our son?

To hunt him for revenge.
The darkest angle of this vniuerse,
Shall not contain him through the bounded world:
I'll prosecute his flight with ceaslesse steps:
And when long travel makes them dull or faint,
Baiting them fresh with Bellamiraes wrongs,
Like Eagles they shall cut the flaxen air,
And in an instant bring me where he is.

Where goes our son?

To hell, so that in that kingdom,
Fate would assertayne me to meet with Burbon.
Where ever I confront him, this shall kill him.

Thou shalt have aid to compass thy revenge*

No aid, but this strong arm. Farewell, farewell.
Since Bellamira hath for sooke her friend,
I seek destruction (Burbon) and (...)

Stay him: this fury will betray thy life.

Poor king made wretched by thy daughters loss.

Poor king made wretched by thy desperate son.

Sped not your woes too fast, but save some tears
To dew the obsequies of your dead son.

What, Ferdinand?

He's slain by Pembrokes hands,
And Pembroke left breathless by Ferdinand.
Their quarrel is uncertain, and their bodies
By some uncivil hands contrayed away,
And no inquiry can discover them.

Our son slain* Bellamira poisoned*
Navarre, tear off these hairs, and raging die.

More Tragedies at hand, what news bring^ Rodoricke?

Such as will make the hearers, senseless trunks.
Why do thy our highness in your foe-mens tents
Revel away the time, and yield your person,
To the known malice of your enemies,
Whilst in your own tents, rapine and foul lust,
Graspes your fair daughter to dishonour her?

Our daughter?

She is slily stolen from thence,
Yet none knows whither, save one Sentinel,
Who doth report he heard a wretched Lady
Exclaim, false Ferdinand would ravish her.

That was my child dishonoured by thy son.

You wrong him, France.

Thou hast betrayed us, king,
And trained us to a loathed festival,
The marriage of thy stained and leprous child,
Whilst in our absence, Ferdinand unjust,
Hath stained our daughters beauty with wild lust.

If you remember, he English Pembroke
Last day forsook your Camp, as discontent.

That proved their loves were faynd, and of set malice,
He came to view our Camp, how he might act
That deed of obloquy, and escape with life.

Tis France hath done the wrong: you have comenst
This deed of death on Pembrook our son;
And now to cover it, suggest and fain
Our guiltless son a guilty ravisher:
But render me their bodies.

Where's our Child?

Seek her.

Seek Ferdinand.

France.

Petty king,
For this our wrong, look to be vnderling.

What Drum is this?

Are we entrapped, Nauar?

Fear not, on yonder hill, whose lofty head
Orelookes the vnder-valleyes, Royal Burbon,
Attended by ten thousand Soldiers,
Craves peace and fair accord with mighty France.

Burbon, that was the ruin of my Child?
Summon our forces straight and charge the slave,

In Burbons rescue draw our forces up.

What means the king of France?

To join with him.

What? with a Traitor and a murderer

He did a deed of merit and of fame,
Poisoned the Sister of a ravisher,
A Tarquin, an incestuous Tereus,
And our poor Child the wronged Philomell:
Arayne our Battles straight, and join with Burbon.

Hear what wee'le urge.

Speak then in war and death:
In other terms, out rage will spend no breath.

And we will speak so loud, that heaven it self
Shall echo with the clangor: both our children
We'll race from our remembrance, and advance
No other thought, but how to plague proud France.
Conjoin with Burbon, e're three Suns shall set,
In the vast Kingdom of Oreanus:
In a pitched field we'll meet the King of France,
And that false Traitor Duke.

Nauar, thou dare not.

Now by Saint Denis, and our Grandsires tomb,
We'll meet thee.

Welcome. O, bring valiant men.
Weel think on nought but graves tobs till then.

Ha, ha: I laugh to see these Kings at jar.
Now civil discord like a raging flood,
Swelling above her banks, shall drown this land,
Whilst Rodorick on her ruins builds his hopes.
The King of France through my suggestion,
Thinks Katharine his daughter ravished,
Who only winged with love, is fled the Camp:
Pembrooke and Ferdinand, in mutual strife,
Slain by each other, doth confirm my words*
And for revenge whets keen the two Kings swords.

I thak thee, Forester, whose rough grown walks,
Wild in aspect, afford more courtesy,
Then places (...) or for civility.
My life redeemd by thy industrious hand,
Remaynes in love and duty bound to thee.

Fair Knight, prevention of sad death, by health,
More joys my soul, then thanks or rich reward.
But is your armour easy? sits it well?

I never in my life was better sitted.
This should be that unlucky fatal place,
Where causeless hate drew blood from Ferdinand.
Behold the grass, a purple register,
Still blushes in remembrance of our fight.
Why wither not these trees? those her be and plants?
And every neighbour branch droup out their grief?
Poor souls, they do, and have wept out their sap,
Yet I have paid no duty to my friend.
Where is the Tomb I wild you to erect?

See, valiant knight, proportiond and set up,
As well as my poor skill would suffer me:
And here his picture hangs.

You have done well:
Your hand I see's a perfect Architect
In sorrows building: once more let suffice
I quite your painful travel but with thanks:
Now leave me to my self, for here I vow
To spend the remnant of my hapless days:
No knight nor Prince shall ever pass this way,
Before his tongue acknowledge Ferdinand
The faythfullest lover and the louingst friend
The world contains: I'll have his Sepulcher
As yet but naked and vngarnished,
E're many days hang richer with the spoils
And vanquished Trophies of proud passengers,
Then was the Romanes wealthy Capital:
So, gentle Forester, bequeath thy prayers
In my assistance; that is all I crave.

The God of power give power unto your arm,
That you may prove victorious fortunate.

Farewell, kind Host: now let me embrace
This empty Monument of my lost friend.
Oh! were it so happy to enshrine his bones,
How blessed should Pembrooke be? but they are torn
By the fierce savage Wolf, whose filthy maw
Is made an unfit grave to bury him.
But if (without offence) I may desire it,
I wish his soul from Paradise may see,
How well his name is kept in memory:
These eyes that saw him bleed, have wept for him:
This heart devised his harm, hath sighed for him:
And now, this hand, that with ungentle force
Depryu'd his life, shall with repentant service,
Make treble satisfaction to his soul*
Fortune, thou dost me wrong, to suffer me
So long vncombatted: I prithee send
Some stubborn Knight, some passenger,
Whose stout controlling stomach will refuse
To yield to my prescription, but by force*
I hate this idle rest of precious time.
How now! derid'st thou my devotion, goddess?
Thou sendst a woman to encounter me.
Henceforth i'll hold thee for a feigned name,
And no disposer of my Christian hopes:
But soft, I know that face: oh! I, tis she
Was unjust cause of all this misery.

Long have I wandered with unquiet mind,
To find my Pembrook: that they fought, I hear:
That they were wounded both to death, I hear:
But whether cur'de or dead, I cannot hear*
Nor lives there any (if deceasde) can tell,
Within what place their bodies are interred.
Since therefore all my travel is in vain,
Here will I take a truce with former care.
This cursed nook was that unlucky plot,
Where cursed Ferdinand did kill my Love.
What Knight is this? i'll question him, perhaps
He can resolve me where my Pembroke is:
Joy and good fortune, sir, attend your state.

Your wishes come too late.
What seek you, Madam?

Tel me, sir knight, for so you seem to be:
Know you this dismal place you do frequent?
Or have you heard of that unhappy fight,
Was here performed by Pembrook and his foe?

Yes, Madam, I have heard of it long since,
And, to my grief, knew both the Gentlemen.

But can you tell me if they live or no?
Or dead, what hand hath given them burial*

Rest you assured, Madam, they are dead:
The one of them to whom I was allied,
And nearly kint in friendship from my youth,
By me lies buried here: a braver Knight,
And truer Lover never breathed in France.

O tell me, is it Pembrooke? if for him
You have erected this fair monument,
Perpetual honour I will do your state:

Not only, Madam, have I built this tomb
In his memorial: but my self have sworn
Continual residence within this Wood:
And for the love I bare him, wear these arms,
That whatsoever Knight, aduenturer or other,
Making his journey this way, and refusing
To do Knights homage to my breathless friend,
By this assailing steel may be compelled.

Oh, let me know your name, so kindly moved,
To dignify my Pembrookes high deserts.

You did not hear me say 'twas Pebrook, Madam*
What is become of him, I do not know,
Nor greatly care, since he did wrong my friend,
And first kindled this dissensious brawl.
This buried here, is noble Ferdinand,
His fathers comfort, and his Countries hope.
Oh Madam! had you seen him as I did,
Begirt with wounds, that like so many months,
Seemed to complain his timeless overthrow:
And had before bin inward with his virtues,
To think that nature should endure such wrack,
And at one time so many precious gifts
Perish by death, would have dissolved your heart.
He was the very pride of fortitude,
The house of virtue, and true frendships mirror:
Look on his picture, in the arms of death,
When he was ready to give up the ghost,
I caused it to be drawn: if at that time,
In that extremity of bitter pangs,
He looked so lovely, had so fresh a colour,
So quick a moving eye, so red a lip,
What was his beauty when he was in health?
See with what courage he endured the combat,
Smiling at death for all his tyranny.
Had death bin ought but what he was, sterne death,
He would have bin enamoured with his look.

A certain soft remorse
Creeps to my heart, persuades me he was true,
Loving, and virtuous: but my self unkind,
Coyly to scorn the proffer of his mind.

O that in Justice of her former hate,
She now would hopeless do ate on Ferdinand*
I'll do the best I can to bring her on:
Despair and madness, fetch her off again,
Madam, how say you? wast not a grievous thing,
So rich a Gem, should lye raked up in dust?
So sweet a flower, be withered in his prime?

Death was a villain for attempting it,
And so was Pembrooke for effecting it.
No bloody Scythian, or inhumane Turk,
But would ha trembled to ha touched his skin,
Or spilt one drop of his Heroic blood.

Had not that Lady then an iron heart?
A rude ungrateful mind? a savage spirit?
That knew this virtuous honourable Knight,
This gracious shape, and vnmatcht excellence,
To be entangled with her ferment love,
To serve her in all loyalty of heart,
To reverence and adore her very name,
To be content to kiss the lowly earth,
Where she did set her foot: and when he sued
For grace, to scorn him, to deride his sighs*
And hold his tears and torment in contempt*
Of all that ever lived, deserved she not,
The worlds reproach, and times perpetual blot?

Heard you him ever speak of such a one?

Oft times: but chiefly then, when he perceyu'd,
His hurt was mortal, and no way but death.
At every groan, he called upon her name,
As if that sound were present remedy?
And when insulting death drew short his breath,
And now was ready to close up his eyes:
Farewell, quoth he, where e're I find a shrine,
My soul fly thou to beauteous Katharine.

That ruthless mind, that iron savage heart,
So greatly loved, and so little loving,
Breathes in this breast, 'twas I returned disdain,
For deep affection; scorn for loyalty:
And now compassionlesse shall pine my self.
Oh Ferdinand, forgive me, Ferdinand:
Enjoin me any penance for that wrong;
Say I shall tread a tedious pilgrimage
To furthest Palestine, and I will do it.
But peace, fond woman, these exclaims are vain?
Thy Ferdinand is dead and cannot hear,
As thou wast sometimes deaf, and would not hear.

A just reward. Come, Madam, have you done?
Give me the picture I may hang it up.

Oh take it not away: since I have lost
The substance, suffer me to keep the shadow:
Me thinks, so long as this is in my hand,
I clasp my Ferdinand between mine arms:
So long as I behold this lively form,
So long as I refreshed by his smiles:
So long, me thinks, I hear him speak to me.
Knew I the Painter drew this counterfeit,
I would reward him with a mynt of gold.

If such a pleasure you receive by this,
I tell you, Madam, I shall shortly have
His whole proportion cut in Alabaster,
Armed as he was when he encountered here,
Which kneeling, shall be set upon his tomb.

On that condition I will gather flowers,
And once a day come straw them at his feet:
And once a day pay tribute of choice thanks*
To you the furtherer of my happiness:
Till then, I place the picture where it was.

Come on, Madam, me thinks now a mask would do well: but I perceive your
drift, I smell your policy, you think a bald face hath no need of a black mask.
Shall I tel you what you look like? A broyld herring, or a tortur'de Image
made of plaster work.


So, sir, you may scoff my misery.

Still haunted with these women? are men vanished?
Or what occasion leaves the Realm of France,
So void and empty of adventurous Knights?

Out of peradventure, Madam, the ghost of Saint
George is come out of England, to see what hospitality S.
Denis keeps in France.

Poor Bellamira, I lament thy state;
But I must still suppress my discontent.
What are you so deformd with loathsome spots?
And what that Antique keeps you company?

Antique! thou lie, and thou were a Knight of ginger-bread: I am no Antique,
the whole parish where I was borne will swear, that since the reign of
Charlemain there was not a better face bred or brought up amongst them.


Have patience, Knight, how ever thus deformed,
This Lady is the daughter of Nauar.
Madam, it joys me I have met you here,
Though much laments me of your heavy plight.
There needs no repetition of your wrong:
I know, the villain Burbon did the dead,
Whom my incensed brother will revenge.

For Philips sake I have bin martyrd thus,
And for his sake left King and Courtly life,
To entertain a Pilgrims painful habit.
But on what strange adventure stays this Knight,
Within this desolate forsaken wood?

For love of Ferdinand your princely brother,
Whose Hearse he guards in honourable Arms.

Is this my brothers Hearse? is this the place,
Where I was shipwrecked of a brothers name?
Oh, let me spend a loving sigh for him,
And sacrifice a sisters holy rites:
For ever rest, sweet Ferdinand, in peace,
Until thy body glorified from heaven,
Become immortal by thy souls return.

Poor Bellamira, how I pity thee*
Yet must forbear to comfort thy distress.

Is my young Lord buried here? I say no more, but
I pray God send him a joyful insurrection.

Enough, sweet Bellamire,
These leprous spots, tis time they were removed.
Come, go with me. Since I left Aquitayne,
And came acquainted with these private walks,
It was my happy chance to meet an Hermit,
Whose skill in Phisike warrants present cure,
And pure refining of your poisoned blood:
I'll bring you thither: afterward select
Delicious sweets, to deck your brothers tomb.
Come, sir, follow us.

Do not think, Madam, that i'll forsake you. And so, sir, you that walk in
pewter vessayle, like one of the worthyes, will you be ruled by me?


Wherein?

To set a gyn for Woodcocks, catch your self first.

Hence, beetle-head. And Pembrook, now bethink
How great a tide of miseries breaks in.
First, thou art taxed with the loss of him,
Whom equal with thy self thou hold dear:
Next, Bellamira is become a Leper,
Whose absence Philip carefully laments:
Then treacherous Burbon joins himself with France,
And both the Kings are angrily incensed:
But last, which is some comfort to the rest,
Disdainful Katharine wastes with fruitless love.
Would all so minded like mishap might prove.
But by this signal there are Knights at hand,
I must provide their valours to withstand.

Stay your intended march.

What Peer of France,
Or in the world so haughty resolute,
Dare breathe the word of stay to mighty France?

Or what art thou presum'st to stay my course?

A Knight I am, and to adventures bound:
This monument erected for my friend,
By me is guarded: If you mean to pass,
You must do homage, or else fight with me.

Homage of me! Know I am King of France, And in subjection to no earthly power.


Thou know not what thou say, to challenge us, Of any such inferior
privilege.

What homage is it thou requir'st of us?

First, to acknowledge him lies buried here,
The faythfulst Lover, and most valiant Knight,
That in this time drew sword, or managed horse.

And what was he? A scapart, oryour Countryman Gargantua, that stuffed every
button of his coat with a load of hay? 'Shart, we have me a fellow; here's
all mouth, he speaks nothing but Monarch. Doest thou hear, King? give me
leave to encounter this puckfist: and if I do not make him cry Peccaui, say
Dicke Bowyer's a powdered Mackrel.


My blood begins to boyle, I could be pleased,
To have this fellow by the ears, but that
There's many of my betters here in place.

King of Navarre, let Flanders cope with him.

Imperial France, give Burbon leave to try
The hazard of a combat with this Boaster.

Dispatch, Navarre, one of you come forth,
To interchange a warlike blow or two.

First let us know what penalty thou set
Upon thy self, if thou be vanquished.

A recantation of my former words,
A servitude to him that conquers me:
But who so ever is by me subdued,
Must leave his Shield to beautify this shrine.

Let not Nauar, my Lord, rob us of honour:
Say, Burbon first shall break a Lance with him.

A scribe that privilege, my Lord, to me:
And Rodorick will have death, or victory.

No, noble Rodorick, Burbon shall begin,
And as he speeds, we will employ your power.

Provide thee, Burbon, I'll not favour thee.

Be sure He show thee like hostility.

Hold, the advantage is on thy side,
The Duke of Burbon shall hang up his shield.

I'd rather have his life, then al your shelds:
Who is next?

Zounds, I think he has a patten to take up all the Shields ith Country, hang
me if thou want work, here's for Nauar, the earl of Pembrok Caualiero
Bowier:


Now Rodorick, betake you to your task.

My fortune's answerable to the rest.

Since all miscarry, France will put his chance
Upon the hazard of the Dice for once.

You are an Honourable foe, my Lord:
By law of Arms, you must hang up your shield.

I yield to law and thy approved valour.
King of Nauar, will only you sit out?

No, King of France, my bloud's as hot as thine,
And this my weapon shall confirm my words.

Nauar down too! 'Shart, this fellow hath the trick of it:
If he be not a witch or some Devil, let me be
stickt into a Carbonado.

Thou son of Chivalry, let me now entreat,
To know his name, for whom thou reapst this honour:
Or what he was, whose bodie's here interde?

A valiant Knight, his name, young Ferdinand,
Slain by misfortune of a friendly hand.

Is it my son thou make thy valours prise,
And striu'st so to enternize with thy sword?
Let me embrace thee. Not alone my shield,
But I will leave my heart upon his shrine.
My dearest Ferdinand, I would my sighs,
Or sad lamenting tears might have the power,
Like Balm to quicken thy benumbed joints,
Then would I drown this marble e're I went,
And heat it hot with vapour of my breath.

Nauar, this now may testify thy wrong,
In false accusing me for his remove.

Thou may be guilty still for ought I know:
For though I find him dead, I find not yet
The Tragic manner of his hapless end.
Thou may as well have murdered Ferdinand,
As favour him hath poisoned Bellamira.

Injurious king, it was base Ferdinand,
On whom just heavens have shown just vengeance here,
Ravished my Katharine and conveyed her hence,
Where I shall never more behold her face.

Tis false, and wee'le mayntain it with our swords*

Tis true, and wee'le mayntain it with our swords.

By heaven, the tongue prophanes the sacred name
of Ferdinand with any villainy,
I'll cut it out, or stop his throat with blood,
And so dam in his blasphemous vpbraydes.

Content thee, knight, I'll case thee of that labour.
To morrow is expired the time of truce.
France, on with thy Battalions to the plain
Thou wast prepared before to pitch upon,
I'll meet thee there.

And I will meet with thee.
Sound Drums and Trumpets: honoured knight, farewell:
Who shall survive next morn, strange news shall tel.

Thus heady rage, blind in her rash resolve
Drew Ferdinand and me into the field,
As now it doth these hot incensed kings.
Were it not my vows prohibit my desire,
To stay the inconvenience of this fight,
I would discover where their Daughters are,
To show the error they are shrouded in:
But Time hath run a desperate course with me,
And desperate let them run to misery:
Here comes a Straggler of their Army* Stand.

What voice is that presumes to bid me stand?

His that can force thee, if thou wilt not stand.

By this bright air reflects on my sword,
If the whole Army of Nauar had said
As much to Philip, yet he would not stand.
And thou but one, how dare thou profer it,
Knowing how sharp a Spur doth prick me on,
The death of Burbon for my Bellamire?

Hang up thy shield, as other knights have done,
Upon the Hearse of noble Ferdinand,
And thou may freely pass without control.

The Hearse of Ferdinand! I honour him,
He was the brother of my dearest Love,
What's this I see? my fathers batterd shield!
The shield of France! of Flaunders! Burbons too!
It can not then impeach or prejudice
The name of Philip, to consort with such,
Especially being done for Ferdinand.
There is my shield: and Knight, but for my haste,
I would expostulate of other things:
But after traytrous Burbon I have slain,
Knight, look for me, i'll visit thee again.
Now Rodorick, keep thy word, and I am blessed:
But if thou fail, i'll forward with the rest.

Successful action sit upon thy sword:
This net of sorrows, I perceive, entangles
Not only Pembrooke, but the Court of France.
Nauar and his associates are all touched.
Time look upon us, and at last determine,
This heart-disseuering tumults with a peace.

Since, Ferdinand, by gracious providence,
Thou art recovered of thy mortal wounds;
With the new life thy body is reuiude,
Revive the ancient passions of thy mind,
Think on thy friend, on Pembrook take remorse,
Whose honoured life, thy hasty hand cut off:
This is the place, as I remember me.
Whats here? a Tomb? who hath prevented me
In my religious duty to my friend?
You, Knight, I doubt not, can resolve me.

What art thou? stand.

A Knight, and fain would know,
What sacred monument and Tomb this is?

His, whilst he lived, that of the worlds increase,
Was the most loyal friend, and valiant Knight:
Which thou must likewise ratify with me,
And hang thy shield up to adorn his Hearse,
Or venture Combat for denying it.

His name, I pray thee.

Ferdinand.

What's he acquainted with my name? belike some one
Loved Pembroke, and supposing (wrongfully)
Me slain by him, to satisfy for that,
Observes this honour in my memory:
Be not thou Ferdinand ungrateful then,
But stand for Pembroke, as this knight for thee.

What answer gives thou? shall I homage have?

Not for his sake thou nam'st, not for Ferdinand:
There lived a knight exceld his petty fame,
As far as costly Pearl the coursest Pebble:
An English knight called Pembroke, were his bones
Interred here, I would confess of him
Much more then thou requir'st, and be content
To hang both shield and sword upon his Hearse.

How comes this stranger by my name? Belike
He was affected unto Ferdinand:
And for his sake (hearing he did me wrong)
Covets to make amends, or means to prove
If I embrace him with unfeigned love.
He shall not doubt of that, once more I say,
'Twas Ferdinand was the renowned Knight
Of all the world.

But I deny that saying,
Giving to Pembroke that preeminence.

For Ferdinand my valour will I try.

In Pembrooks valour I will fight and die.

Either I dream, or this is Ferdinand.

My sight deludes me, or stout Pembroke lives.

Thrice happy honoured, I do embrace my friend.

Welcome, oh welcome Pembrok, to mine arms,
Whom I imagined, death had taken from me.

The like did I by Princely Ferdinand:
But that he lives, my soul confounds with joy.

Tell me, dear friend, since our unlucky fight,
Have you heard ought of my disdainful Love?

Of her and all the rest: Her father lives:
This is his shield, and this is great Nauars:
This Rodoricks, the Duke of Orleance,
And this malicious Burbons: all the which
I forced from them, to beautify thy shrine.
But tis of Katharine thou desire to hear:
She likewise hath bin here; her flinty heart,
So much before inclind to cruelty,
Now waxes tender: she no sooner saw
Thy picture here; but by heavens providence,
Or how I know not, she so dotes on it,
As I supposed she would a dyed for love.

Has then my shadow and supposed death
Brought that to pass my living substance could not?

It hath, and never Lady more enamoured,
Then now is Katharine of her Ferdinand.
I told her, and no more then truth I told,
A cunning Carver had cut out thy shape
And whole proportion in white Alabaster,
Which I intended here should be set up.
She earnestly entreated she might have
A sight of it, and daily be permitted
To deck thy tomb and statue with sweet flowers.
She's but even now departed to that end,
And will (I know) be quickly here again.
Now for assurance I dissemble not,
Instead of thy resemblance cut in stone,
Kneel here thy self, and hear her piteous moan.

Content, I hold your counsel for the best:
We'll once conclude our sorrows with a jest.

Soft, there's a cushe: nay, you must be bare,
And hold your hands up, as the manner is.

What if I held a book, as if I prayed?

'Twere best of all; and now I think upon it,
Here is a book: so, keep your countenance,
You must imagine now you are transformed.
Yonder she comes, in any case stir not.

I fear I have detracted time too long,
In my determinde service to my Love:
But I'll redeem my fault with double care.
See where his statue is set up: kind Knight,
For ever Katharine will record thy truth.

How say you, Madam, is't not very like him?

As like, as if it were himself indeed.
And would to God my prayers might be heard,
That as the Image of Pigmalion once,
Life might descend into this senseless stone:
But that was faynd, as my desire is fond,
Relentless death withholds my Ferdinand;
And no entreaty may recover him.
In token then I do repent my scorn,
That I was cruel to so kind a friend,
Thou the presenter of his absent person,
Receive these sweets, thy temples be adorned
With this fresh garland; thy white Ivory hand
Boast of this Ring, which if thou were alive,
Should bind our faiths up in a nuptial knot:
But for thou can not be reuiu'd again,
I'll dwell with thee in death: and as my spirit
Mounts to the happy mansion of thy spirit:
So to accompany thy shadow here,
I'll turn my body to a shadow too;
And kneeling thus, confront thy silent looks,
With my sad looks: this is the Instrument.
Now Ferdinand, behold thy Katharine comes.

And she is welcome unto Ferdinand.

I'll play the clark for both, and say Amen.
Nay, muse not, Madam, tis no senseless Image,
But the true essence of your wished Love.

I am ashamed to look him in the face.

Hide not those splendat lights, hereafter be
A constant wife, it shall suffice for me.

Heaven cast her off, if Katharine prove not so.

Of that no more: now let us haste from hence,
To quiet the dissension lately sprung
Between your parents, Philip likewise gone,
To be revenged on Burbons treachery,
Perhaps may stand in need of friendly aid:
To him and them our vows must next be paid.

What Pembrook counsels, we consent unto.

Now whilst our Armies wearied with the heat
That the bright sun casts from his midday throne,
Abstain from bloody intercourse of war,
I'll lead thee Philip unto Burbons Tent.

Rodoricke, thou highly fauourest me in this,
And doubt not, if my complot take effect,
I'll make thee Duke of Burbon.

Stay your speech, here comes king Lewis.

They can not know me, I am so disguised.

Follow my counsel, and immediately begin the Battle.

Why, the heat's great,
It burns in our Armour as we march.

It burns the enemy as well as we.

It warmes our Soldiers spirits makes them fire:
I had rather dye, then when my blood is hot,
Be awde by counsel, till it freeze like Ice:
He is no Soldier, that for fear of heat,
Will suffer victory to fly the field.

My Lord of Burbon, ye are more hot then wise.

Rodorick, me thinks you are very peremptory.

It is in zeal of the general good:
Go to your Tent, refresh your vnscorcht lymmes:
There draw your battles model: and as soon
As the cool winds have fand the burning Sun,
And made it tractable for travailers:
Arm you, and mount upon your barbed Steed,
Lead forth your Soldiers, and in good array,
Charge bravely on the Army of our foe.

The Duke of Orleance hath counseld well,
I'll in and recreate me in my Tent.
Farewell, my Lord, when you resolve to fight,
Proclaim your meaning by a Canons mouth,
And with a volley I will answer you.

If you will needs retire, farewell my Lord.
Ha Rodoricke, are not we fine Polyticians,
That have so quaintly wrought the King of France
Unto our faction, that he threatens war,
Against the almost reconcilde Nauar?

But this is nothing to the acts we'll do:
Come, come, my Lord, you trifle time with words:
Sit down, sit down, and make your warlike plot:
But wherefore stand these murdrous Glaues so ny?

Touch them not, Rodorick, prithee let them stand.

Some paper, pen, and ink.

My Lord.

Post to the Master Gunner,
And bid him plant his demi culuerings
Against the kings pavilion.

Presently.

But first, bring pen and ink and paper straight.
Rodoricke, thou shalt assist me in this plot.

Do it your self, my Lord, I have a charge
Of Soldiers, that are very mutinous,
And long I dare not stay, for fear my absence
Be cause of their revolt unto Nauar.

Then to your Soldiers: I will to my plot.

Away my Lord, leave me unto the Duke.

Kill you the Duke, and after I'll kill thee.

This pen is stabbed, and it will not write,
The Ink that's in the Standage doth look black,
This in my pen is turned as red as blood.

The reason that the platform you would make,
Must by this hand be written with thy blood.

Zounds, what art thou that threatens Burbon so?

One that's as desperat-carelesse of his life,
As thou art timorous, and fear to dye.

Come thou to kill me?

If I should say no,
This weapon would condemn me, which I seyz'd
Of purpose, Burbon, to bereave thy life.

Why, fond man, mad man, know thou what thou doest?

I know it, Burbon, and I know besides,
What thou would say, to daunt my resolution.

What would I say?

Why, that this place is death,
As being thy Tent, enuiron'd with thy slaves;
Where if I kill thee, tis impossible
To escape with life: this, Burbon, thou would say:
But Philip is not to be moved with words.

Philip!

I Philip, Bellamiraes Love,
Whose beauty, villain, thou hast poisoned:
For which I have vowed thy death, and thou shalt dye.
Therefore betake you to what fence you will,
Amongst this bundle choose one weapon forth,
And like a worthy Duke prepare thy self,
In knightly manner to defend thy life:
For I will fight with thee, and kill thee too,
Or thou shalt give an end unto my life.
But if thou call unto thy slaves for help,
Burbon, my sword shall nail thee to the wall*
And think Prince Philip is a Prince indeed,
To give thee this advantage for thy life.

Boy, I will scourge your insolence with death.

Come on.

Oh, I am slain.

Murder, murder, Burbon the Duke is slain.

Peace, Rodorick, I am Philip thy dear friend.

Thou art a counterfeit, I know thee not.

Did not thou guide me unto Burbons Tent?

I guide thee to the Tent? I know thee not.
What, murder, ho: will no man hear my voice?

Yes, here are those can hear well enough.
Where is the murdered, and the murderer?

Peter, behold thy masters breathless trunk,
And there's Prince Philip that hath murdered him.

To avoid prolixity, I'll kill him:
Yet first give me leave to weep for my master.

First, seyze the murderer, and after weep.

He that first ventures to attach my life,
Let him be sure he hath a life to spare:
For I will send one breathless to the grave.

You that have nyne lives, assault the gentleman.

What peasants, dare you not attach the slave?
I'll raise the whole Camp, but i'll apprehend him.
Alarm drums: Soldiers, incircle him,
And either apprehend or slay the wretch.

Tis princely Philip, help to rescue him.

What slaves are these that dare oppose themselves,
In rescue of a murderer against an Host?

Such as will make thee, Rodorick, fly for life.

Zounds, men are mortal; to avoid prolixity, my
Lord of Orleance, your best course is flying, and therein I will be your
follower.

Fly before three, and be thus strong?
'Twere madness.

We trifle time, let's drive them from the Tent.

Live, worthy Philip, Pembrooke bids thee live,
That did suspect this complot at the tomb,
When in the honour of Prince Ferdinand,
You did resign your shield.

Th'Earle of Pembrooke!

And Ferdinand that loves thee as his soul.

Two lives I owe my stars, beside mine own,
In sending me two friends of such import.
Durst you adventure thorough the enemies Camp,
And put your lives in danger to save mine?

The rumour of the Duke of Burbons death,
Hath so possessed the Camp with admiration,
That they regardless suffer all to pass:
Only this, Rodorick wakens them a little;
But cannot wean them from their wondering minds.

That Rodorick is a perfect villain turned:
For though he guided me unto his Tent,
And gave his liking that the Duke should dye;
Yet how the villain cried to murder me.
But come, in this confusion let's be gone,
Tis dangerous to abide in Burbons Tent.
Rodoricke, thou art the next must taste of death:
That task once done, we shall with little payne,
Our angry fathers reconcile again.

The Alarm sounded in the enemies Camp.
Now for Nauar and Fame, stand to it, sirs.

Hart, stand to it? here's some of us knows how to run away, and they be
put to it: Though we have lost our brave General, the Earl of Pembrooke, ye
here's Caualiero Bowyer, Core and Nod, by Iesu, sound Cards; and Mahound and
Termagant come against us, we'll fight with them. Couragio, my hearts, S.
George for the honour of England.


The adverse part comes on, fight gallantly.


Is false Nauar so thirsty to drink blood,
That he must join the Squadron of his troops,
Before the signal of the battel's given.
Belike you thought to take us vnpreparde.
No, king, our wrong hangs like a watch before us,
And makes us number every short-lynd minute,
Till your lives answer for our Daughters death;
Charge, brave spirits: Saint Denis now for France.

Saint Denis for Nauar: Alarm Drums.

Nauar and his weak forces make retire:
Pursue them, Sirs, the victory is ours.

Be like starved Lions amongst a heard of Beasts,
Ruthelesse and bloody slaughters all you meet,
Till proud Nauar be slain, or kiss your feet:
Saint Denis, and cry murder through the host.

He that steps forward with a murdering thought,
Marries him self to death. France, cease the fight:
They are Frenchmen you pursue, French men you should save.
Dig not for Traitors love your subjects grave.

What frantic knights are those that dare oppose
Their single force against our multitudes?

Those that wish you and France bright fames increase.
So you would chase hence war, and welcome peace.

That was the Traitor, that slew royal Burbon.

Down with the villains.

Soldiers, seyze on him,
And then pursue Nauar with sudden death.

E're the least hair fall from his kingly head,
Rodorick, thy base trunk shall be butchered.

Will you accept of peace?

Follow Nauar.

Down with that murderer.

Zounds, then in spite,
We'll save Nauar, and chase you hence in fight.
All. Ha, ha.

Nay, smile not, though our number's few,
Our great hearts tell us, we shall conquer you.
Alarm. and S. George.

France and his daunted forces gives us ground:
Charge, charge again, and we are Conquerours.

Stand, or ne'er stir again.

What mean these Knights?

To stop your passage this way, great Nauar.
I charge thee, by the duty of a King,
Thy love to Justice, and thy subjects lives,
You sound retreat, and make a peace with France.

A peace, and have the vantage of the day?

That's a trick, by Iesu, to mock an Ape: wee'le none of that.


Wee'le have no peace, but what our swords can make.
Follow the chase.

Are you grown insolent?
For one light puff of fortune proves it so*
Nay, then our swords turn to your overthrow.

That was my father that you fought against.

You did as much to mine.

Princes, agree: force cannot end this war, but policy.
Therefore dispearse your selves, and let our Squires,
With Trumpets in their mouths sound loud retreat,
Where you perceive the fight most violent.
The strangeness of which act will straight amaze,
When they shall hear both peace and war denounced,
And one self instant, they will soon retire.
To know the issue, Princes, fall to work:
Tis work of charity, 'twould do me good,
If we could end this battle without blood.

I hope we shall: farewell, i'll to my charge.

The like will Pembrooke.

Philip is not last.
Yet though I seek the safety of my friends,
Rodorick shall lose his blood, e're this fight ends.

Struggle not, strive not, your sweet heart Bowyer cannot save you. Without
prolixity, you must go with me.


Help, help.

And the God of war come in thy defence, my humour is to kill him. Come away.


By Iesu, you go this way, you must pay custom. Zounds, you pickt-hatch
Caualiero petticote-monger, can you find time now to be catching Thomasin?
come, deliver, or by Zenacrib, the life of king Charlemain, i'll thrash your
coxcomb, as they do hens at Shrouetyde: no, will you not do, you Tan-fat?
zounds, then have at you.


Are the Kings severed? will they bow to peace?

Peace is a welcome guest unto their hearts:
But Rodoricke, like a greedy envious churl,
Fearing to spend his wealth, still keeps them back,
Tis he exasperates the Princes hate:
And when our Trumpets call them to retire,
He with wars clangor sets them on again.
Unless he be remoou'd, our labour's lost.

It shall not; for i'll seek him through the Host,
And with this sword pare off the Traitors head.

Do, and i'll scour these ranks: if Pembroks eye Encounters his, he meets his
Tragedy.


Stay, warlike friends, and aid me in revenge.

That is Rodoricke.

Here's the Traitor, strike him down.

Who lifts his arm at him, strikes at my breast.

Why have you thus ring'd me about with swords

To show thee thou must dye.

What have I done,
That thus you labour my destruction?

Thou were it a party in all Burbons wrongs.

Falsely termed Ferdinand a Ravisher.

Set discord 'twixt these Kings,

Practised my death.

Villain, for this, our swords shall stop thy breath.

Stand not to argue, let's all run at him.

Now as you love my love, or prize mine honour.
Touch not the Traitor, he is Philips foe;
And none but I must work his overthrow.
Thrice in the battle he was rescued from me:
But now he's fallen into the Lyons paw,
From whence the whole world cannot ransom him.
Preservers of my life, heroic friends,
Be you my safety, keep the Soldiers off,
Whilst in the midst by fair and equal fight,
I send this Traitor to eternal night.

By heaven agreed.

Here Pembrooke takes his stand:
Come France and all the world, I will not start,
Till Philips knightly sword pearce Rodoricks hart.

Accursed, I am betrayed, encompassed round:
Now life and hope and state must kiss the ground.

Rodorick, thou see, all ways are stopped to fly,
Be desperate then, fight-brauely, and so die.

Now are his trecheries repaid with death:
Philip and Pembrooke, sound your retreats
With better hope; in him all hatred ends:
The kings will now love peace, soon be friends.

Zounds, never run for the matter, a scratched face can not serve your turn,
we must have bloody noses: stad on your guard: I do not make haggasse puddings
of your guts, I'll never dominier in the long Alleyes again.


Cymnell, I'll crack you for this, I'll teach you to deal with Peter de Lions,
and that without prolixity.


Do: have at you in earnest: S. George, you rogue.

So, there's for your prolixities: there's for Thomasin: the Thornbackly slave,
and he were made of any thing but gristles, I am a pumpian: 'Shart, he had no
mettle in him: yet how the villain crak't and dominierd when he was living:
ah, sir, never g^yn for the matter, tis Captain Bowyer that speaks it. When
thou meetst the great Devil, commend me to him, and say, I sent him thee for a
new years gift: and there's one Sarlaboys to, as arrant a bloud-sucker, and as
notable a coward, as ever drew weapon in a bawdy house: he carries my mark
about him: if Dicke Bowyer be not writ a bountiful benefactor in hell for my
good deeds, in sending thither such Cannibals, I am a Rabbit-sucker: yet I
scorn to vaunt of my deeds too. They sound a retreat: farewell, Peter, and
learn hereafter what it is to be rival to an English gentleman, Caualiero
Bowyer, one of the nyne worthyes.


Nauar, why have you sounded a retreyt?
Will your proud heart decline and call us Lord?

We thought by the faint laguage of your drums,
France would have known his error, and begged peace.

France beg a peace!

Nauar call you his Lord!

Why did you cease the fight, and sound retreat?

Not we, by this beard: not we, by the life of Pharo.

Your Trumpets guided by your fainting breath,
Dehorted us from war, and sounded peace.

Nauar derides us.

France, tis you that do it.

Sound war, and bravely let us once more too't.

Kings of Nauar and France, why do you thus
With civil butchery wound this blessed land,
Which like a mother, from her melting eyes,
Sheds crimson tears, to see you enemies?
Lewes of France, wherein hath great Nauar
Dangerd your state, that you should prosecute
War with her largest ruin? how hath France
Sowed such inveterate hate within your breast,
That to confound him, you will undergo
The orphants curse, the widows tears cries,
Whose husbands in these wars have lost their lives?
E're you contend, discourse your grievances.

False Ferdinand his son, ravished our child.

Now by my Knighthood, honour, and this gage,
France, i'll approve you wrong that Ferdinand.

Who can accuse him?

That did Rodorick.

That Traitor, for a deed so false, so foul,
Hath answered it by this, even with his soul.

Our son, and valours bloom, th'English Pembrooke,
By Lewes treachery were butchered.

Were the whole world joined in so false a thing,
Alone I'd combat all, and clear the King.

France never had dessigne in their two deaths.

He leagued with Burbon, that destroyed my child.

He poisoned her deservedly.

That deed of shame
Cut off his life, and raced out Burbons name.

His death shall be thy death; for thy hand slue him.

This other in the battle twice to day,
Made us retire, France, shall we join in league,
Till we have veng'd our malice on these knights?

Nauar, agreed. Soldiers, this kyld your Lords.

And this our fame: let's mangle them with swords.

Take truce a while with rage: hear what wee'le urge*
This knight flew Burbon, this enforced you fly;
Therefore you hate them, and for hate they die.
Since then true virtue is disfigured,
Desert trod down, and their heroic worth,
In justice doomed on Traitors merits, Death:
Behold these two, which thousands could not daunt,
But your ingratitude, on bended knee,
Yield up their swoords to bide your tyranny.
'Twas he killed Burbon: if you love him dead,
Show it by paring off this valiant head:
Do you the like: to this revenge apace.
They fear not threats, and scorn to beg for grace.

And they shall find none.

Knights, triumph in death,
We are your headsmen, Kings shall stop your breath.

Philip, my son!

Young Ferdinand my joy!

Call them not sons, whom you would fain destroy.

Hold not our age too long in deep suspect.
Art thou Ferdinand?

And thou Philip?

We are the friendly sons of adverse parents,
Your long lost children, though supposed slain,
We live, and come to joy your age again.

Welcome all earthly bliss.

Welcome, dear child,
Thy presence half our sorrow hath exiled.

How soon this Scene is chag'd! those that eve now
Were sworn wars servants, now to peace do bow:
Then Pembrooke, strive to make their joys more full,
See, kingly father, to that princely son.
Pembrooke, the hated murderer of his friend:
Pembroke, that did divide thee from his sight,
And cut so many passages of death,
In his endeared bosom, humbly thus
Forgets his honour, and from your hye hand,
Invokes revenge for wounding Ferdinand.

Still he surmounts me in an honoured love,
Rise, friend; or if thou striu'st to have the world,
In me, as in a glass, see a false friend.
Behold, I kneel, and here proclaim to all,
My friendship's broke, but thine substantial.

Model of virtue, honoured Pembroks Earl,
Rise in as dear regard as Ferdinand.
Oh, had I Bellamira once in hold,
Age would turn youth, I should ne'er be old.

Had I my Katharina once again,
Our joy were then stretched to the highest strain:
But she was ravished, and then murdered.

Bear not that hard opinion: Rodoricks tongue
Slandered that Prince, and did his virtue wrong.

Lewis of France, hear what an English Earl
Speaks in the front and view of all thy Host:
If ever Ferdinand stained Katharines honour,
I was a party: yet in all your Camp,
Who dares step forth and call me ravisher?
No, France, know Pembroke is an Englishman,
Highly derived, yet higher in my thoughts;
And for to register mine acts in brass,
Which all-deuouring time shall ne'er race out,
Have I through all the Courts of Christendom,
In knightly trial proved my virtue sound,
Raised Englands fame aloft; and shall I now,
In her next continent, her neighbour Realm.
France, on whose bosom I may stand and see
That blessed soil, that bred and fostered me,
Soil all my late got honour, to consent
Unto a royal Princes ravishment?
I'd sooner from a mountain cast my self,
Or from a hungry Lyon tear his pray,
Then dare to act a deed so infamous:
But words are air: Lewis, behold this face;
This proves our honour clear from all disgrace.

My Katharine!

My dear sister!

My fair Love!

See, Princes, loves effect: she flies your hand,
To live embraced with her dear Ferdinand.

And heaven forbid that we should sunder them.
Nauar, reach me thy hand: grym war is fled,
And peace shall end the same in a nuptial bed.
Son Philip, ratify your sisters choice.

Even with my soul: for ever live you blessed.
Oh Bellamira, had not cursed Burbon,
For beauty robbed thy cheeks with Leprosy:
Had thou but stayed with me, as is their state,
So had bin mine, happy and fortunate.

By your leave, sweet bloods: may a Gentleman or so, deceive two or three
ounces of words in this assembly?


You may.


Is there not a young Kings son amongst you, who treading the steps of his
father, is called Philip?


I am the man thou seekst.


Then the old saying is verified, He that seeks, shall find. Here is a poor
kinswoman of mine would desire some private conference with you, or so.


With me? whom see I? Bellamira!

Daughter!

Do not deride my woes, speak, speak, I pray.

Look not so strange, it is thy lovely Love,
Thus managed, to approve thy constancy.
Embrace her then: and now Nauar and France,
Here end your strife, and let all hatred fall,
And turn this war to Hymens festival.

This Pembrooks counsel we subscribe unto.

The like doth France: Lovers embrace your Loves;
And Captains, join your Bands, mix power with power,
And let those swords, which late were drawn for death,
Sleep in their sheathes. You, worthy Pembrooke,
And all your followers, shall receive our favours,
In plenteous largess: so, set on to Court;
Sound Drums and Trumpets, deaf the air with cries,
And fill each subjects heart with joys increase,
T'applaud our childrens love, and this days peace.


