IS your pawn good and sound sir?


I'll pawn my life for that sir;


Place your self there then, I will seek to prefer it presently: my Master
is very jealous of the pestilence; marry the po^ sits at meat and meal with
him.


Lent the fifth day of September to mistress Onset upon her gown, Taffeta
petticoat with three broad silver Laces, three pound fifteen shillings.

Lent to Justice Cropshin upon both his Velvet Jackets, five pound ten
shillings.

Lent privately to my Lady New-cut, upon her gilt Castingbottle, and her silver
Lye-pot, fifty five shillings.


Sir.


Lent to Sir Oliuer Needy upon his Taffeta cloak, Beaver hat, and perfumd
lether-Ierkin, 6. pound 5. shillings.


May it please your worship --


Lent to master Andrew Lucifer, upon his flame-colourd doublet, and blew
Taffity-hose -- top the candle firrah, me thinks the light burns blew-when
came that suite in.


Tas lain above the year now?


Fire and brimstone, cut it out into matches, the white linings will serve for
tinder.


And with little help sir, they are almost black enough already? -- Sir
here's an other come with a pawn;


Keep him aside awhile* and reach me hither the Bill of the last week;


T^ere at hand sir?


Now sir what's your pawn?


The second part of a Gentlewoman's gown sir, the lower half I mean;


I apprehend you easily, the breeches of the gown!


Very proper, for she wears the doublet at home, a ghuest that lies in my
house sir; she looks every hour: for her cousin out at'h country.


Oh her cousin lies here a may mistake in that? my firend of what parish is
your pawn?


Parish why? Saint Clements sir, -Ile come to you presently,


What parish is your pawn my friend. Saint Brides 5. Saint Dunst^s none; Saint
Clements 3. 3. at Clements, away with your pawn sir, your parish is infected,
I will neither purchase the plague for six pence in the pound, and a groat Bill
money, nor venture my small stock into contagious parishes: you have your answer
fare-you-well, as fast as you can sir.


The pox arrest you sir at the suite of the Suburbs.


I welcome, welcome.


For I think plague scorns your company.


I rank with chief Gallants, I love to smell safely: lent in the vacation to
master Proctor upon his Spiritual gown, 5. angels; and upon his Corporal
doublet, 15. shillings. sum 3. pound 5. shillings.


Sir.


Now sir.


Here's one come in with a trunk of apparel.


Whence comes it?


From Saint Martins in the field.


Saint Martins in the field, -- Saint Mary Maudlin 2. Saint Martins none, her's
an Honest fellow, let him appear sir.


You may come near sir,


Oh welcome, welcome what's your pawn sir?


Faith a Gentlewoman's whole suite sir.


Whole suite? tis well.


A poor kind soul, troubled with a bad husband; one that puts her to her
shifts here.


He puts her from her shifts me thinks when she is fain to pawn her
clothes?


Look you sir, a fair Satin gown; new Taffeta petticoat.


Stay, this petticoat has been turned?


Often turned up and down you will, but never turned sir.


Cry you mercy indeed:


A fine white Beaver, pearle-band; 3. falls, Iha known her have more in her
days.


Alas and she be but a Gentlewoman of any count or charge, 3. faules are
nothing, in these daies-Know that; tut the worlds changed, gentlewoman's faules
stand upright now, no sin but has a Bolster, that it may lye at ease: Well
what do you borrow of these sir?


Twelve pound and you will sir.


How?


They were not hers for twenty.


Why so: our pawn is ever thrice the value of our money unless in plate and
Jewels, how should the months be restored and the use else? we must cast it
for the twelve month, so many pounds, so many months, so many eighteen
pence, then the use of these eighteen pence, then the want of the return of
those pounds, all these must be laid together, which well considered, the
valuation of the pawn had need to sound treble: Can six pound pleasure the
Gentlewoman.


It may please her, but like a man of threescore in the Limbrest degree.


I have but one word more to say in it, twenty nobles is all and the utmost that
I will haxard vppon't.


she must be content with it, the less borrowed the better paid, come.


Arthur?


At hand sir.


Tell out twenty nobles, and take her name in a Bill?


Im e satisfied sir?


Welcome: good Saint Martins in the field, welcome, welcome, I know no other
name?


What so hard at your prayers?


A little sir, summing up my pawnes here: what Master Primero? is it you sir
Gallant; and how does all the pretty sweet Ladies, those plump, kind,
delicate blisses; ha? whom I kiss in my very thoughts: how do they Gallant?


Why Gallant? if they should not do well in my house, where should it be done
boy, have I not a glorious Sc^tuation?


Oh a Gallant Receipt, Violet air, curious garden, quaint walks, fantastical
Arbors, three back-doores and a Coachgate, nay tha'rt admirably seated, little
furniture will serve thee, tha'rt never without movables.


I praise my Stars; ah the goodly virginities that have been cut up in my
house, and the goodly patrimonies that have lain like sops in the grauie, and
when those sops were eaten, yet the meat was kept whole for another, and
another, and another, for as in one pie twenty may dip their sippits, so upon
one woman forty may consume their patrimonies.


Excellent, master Primero?


Well, i'll pray for women while I live, the're the profitablest fools, i'll say
that for em, a ma can keep about his house the pretiest kind foul, so tame,
so gentle e en to strangers, hands, So soon familiar, suffer to be touched, Of
those they ne'er saw twice: the Doves not like em.


Most certain, for that's honest; but I have a suite to you?


And so have I to you.


That happens well,
Grant mine and i'll grant yours?

A match.


Make me perfect in that trick that got you so much at Primero.


Oh for the thread tied at your partners leg: the twich?


I that twich and you calt so.


That secret twich got me five hundred pound,
Ere twas first known and since I ha sold it well
Five hundred pound laid down shall not yet buy,
The f;thee simple of my twitch I would be here with it,
Twas a blessed invention, I had been a beggar many alowsie year
But for my twitch. It was the prettiest twitch?
Many ouer-cheated gulls, have fatted
Me with the bottom of their patrimonies
Ee'n to the last Soap, gapte while I fed em;
who now live by that Art that first undid em.
But I must swear you to be secret, close,

As a maid, at Ten.


Had you sworn but two years higher I would here h'a believed you.


Nay I let twelve alone,
For after twelve has struck, mades look for one.

I look for one too and a maid I think.


What, to come hither?


Sure she follows me? a pretty fat eyed wench, with a Venus in her cheek, did
but Raiment smile upon her, she were Nectar for great Dons, boy and that's my
suite to thee.


And that's granted already: of what volume is this book, that I may fit a
cover too't?


Faith neither in folio, nor in Decimo sexto, but in Octauo between both, a
pretty middle fizde trug.


Then I have fitted her already: in my eye in faith: here came a pawn in even
now will make shift to serve her as fit, look you sir Gallants, Satin,
Taffeta, Beaver, fall and all.


Is it new.


New? you see it bears her youth as freshly, --


A pretty suite of clothes in faith; -- but put case the party should come to
redeem em of a sudden?


Puh then your wits sickly, have not I the policy think you to seem ^treame
bufie and defer em till the morrow, against which time that pawn shall be
secretly fetched home, and another carried out to supply the place.


I like thy craft well there.


A general course, oh Frippery is an unknown benefit sir Gallant!


And what must I give you for the hire now in faith.


Of the whole suite, for the month?


I for the month.


Go to, you shall give me but twelve pence a day, Master Primero your a
friend, and I'll use you so, tis got up at your house in an afternoon in faith,
the hire of the whole month: yea must think I can distinguish spirits and put
a difference between you and others: you pay no more in faith.


I could have offred you no less, my self.


Tut, a man must use a friend, as a friend may use him; your house has been a
sweet house to me, both for pleasure and profit: i'll give you your due, omne
tulit punctum, you have always kept fine puncks in your house, that's for
pleasure, qui miscuit vtile dulci, and I have had sweet pawnes from em, that's
for profit now?


You flatter, you flatter sir Gallant? but whist, here she enters; I prethe
question her? oh you're welcome.


Is this you new scholar Master Primero?


Marry is she sir.


I'll commend your judgment in a wench while I live, that face will get money
in faith, twill be a get penny I warrant you? got to? your fortune was choice
pretty Bliss to fall into the regard of so kind a Gentleman.


I hope so sir.


See, what his care has provided already for you, you'll be simply set out to
the world: if you'll have that care now to deserve his pains oh that will be
acceptable: and these be the Rudiments you must chiefly point at: to counterfit
cunningly, to wind in gentlemen with pourefull attraction, to keep his house
in name and custom, to dissemble with your own brother, never to betray your
followed imperfections, nor lay open the state of their bodies to strangers, to
believe those that give you, to gul those that believe you, to laugh at all
under Taffeta, and these be your rudiments.


There's even al i faith, we'll trouble you with no more, nay you shall live at
ease enough: for nimming away jewels and favours from Gentlemen (which are
your chief veils) hope that will come naturally enough to you, I need not
instruct you, you'll have that with, I trust to make the most of your pleasure.


I hope ones mother-wit will serve for that sir.


Oh proprest of all wench: it must be a she wit that does those things, thy
mother was quick enough at it in her days.


Give me leave sister to examine you upon 2. or 3. particulers: and you make
you ready be no ashamed, hers none but friends -- are you a maid.


Yes, in the last quarter sir.


Very proper, that even going out, a maid in the last quarter, that's a whore
in the first; -- let me see, new moon on Thursday, sheele be chande by that
time too; are you willing to pleasure gentlemen?


We are all borne to pleasure our country forsooth.


Excellent, can you carry your self cunningly, and seem often holy.


Oh fear not that sir, my friends were all puritanes.


I'll ne'er try her further.


She's done well in faith, I fear not now to turn her loose to any gentleman in
Europe.


You need not sir of her own accord, I think she'll be loose enough without
turning -- Arthur.


Here sir.


Go make hast, shift her into that suite presently.


It shall be done.


Arthur do it neatly Arthur?


Fear't not sir.


Follow him wench.


With all my heart sir --.


But master
In what are we forgetful al this while?

In what?


The wooing business man.


Heart that's true.


The Gallants will prevent us.


Are you certain.


I can avouch it there's a general meeting,
at the deceasde knights house this afternoon
there's riualship enough.

No doubt in that?
Would either thou or I might bear her from em.

My hopes are not yet faint.

Nor mine.

Tut man?
nothing in women's hearts sooner win place,
than a brave out side and an impudent face?

And for both those we'll fit it.


I if the devil be not int, make halt:


I follow straight, vanish thou Fog, and Sink beneath our brightness,
Abashed at the splendar of such beams:
We scorn thee, basse eclipser of our glories,
That would have hid our shine from nortalls eyes,
Now Gallants, I am for you, I and perhaps before you*
You can appearce but glorious from your selves,
And have your beams but drawn from your own light,
But mine from many, many make me bright.
Here's a dimond that sometimes gracst the finger of a countess, here sits a
Ruby that near lines blushing for the Party that pawnde it: here a Sapphire, O
providence and fortune! my beginning was so poor, I would fain forget it, and
I take the only course, for I scorn to think ont. Sl^ue to a trencher:
observer of a saltseller, privy to nothing, but a close-stoole, or such
unsavoury secret: but as I strive to forget the da^es of my serving, so I shall
once remember the first step of my raising, for having hardly rakte five mark
together, I reioyst so in that small stock, which most providently I ventured
by water to Blackwall, among fishwives, and in small time, what by weekly
return, and gainful restitution it rize to a great body, beside a dish of
fish for a present, that stately preserude me a seauen-night: nor ceased it
there but drew on greater profit, for I was held religious by those that do
profess like abstinence, and was full often secretly supplied, by charitable
Catholickes, Who censurd me sincerely abstinate, when merely I for hunger nor
^or zeal, eat up the fish, put their alms to vselha, ha ha; but those times
are run out, and for my sake, zealous dissemblance has since fared the worse;
-- let me see now, whose cloak shall I wear to day to continue change,

Oh -- Arthur.


Here sir.


B^ing down sir Oliuer Needies Taffeta cloak. Beaver hat, I am sure he is fast
enough? Andrew ^cifers Rapier and dagger, in the knights ^ard, with the emb^st
gitdle and hangers, for he's in his third sweat by this time, sipping of the
docto^s bottle, or picking the ninth part of a Rack of mutton dry roasted,
with a leash of night-caps on his head like the popes triple crown, and as
many pillows c^usht to his back, with oh the needles, for he got the pox of a
Se^ster, and it pricked so much more naturally, -- quick Arthur quick, now,

To the deceased knights daughter
Whom many Gallants sue to, I amongst many: fo^
Since impudence gains more respect then virtue,
And come them blood which few can now deny,
who're your chief Gallants, then but such as I.

You do your Beauties injury, sweet virgin,
To loose the time they must rejoice in youth:
There's no perfection in a woman placed
But wastes it self tho it be never wasted,
Then judge your wrongs your self.

Good Master Fitsgraue?
Through sorrow ^or the knight my fathers death,
(Whose being was the perfections of myioye:
And crown of my desires,) I cannot yet,
But forcedly, on marriage fi^e my heart,
Yet heaven forbid I should deject your hopes
Conceive not ofn eso uncharitably,
I should belie my soul if I should say,
You are the man I never should affect:
I understand you thus far, you're a Gentleman
Whom your estate and virtues may command
To a far worthier breast, then this of mine,

O cease, I dare not hear such blasphemy,
What is without you worthy, I neglect,
In you is placst the worth that I respect:
Vouchsase vnequalld Virgin whereon I justly kept,
Accept this worthless favour from your servants arm, the hallowed beads,
The true and perfect number of my fighs.

Mine cannot equal yours, yet in exchange, accept and wear it for my sake.


Even as my i'll ra^e it?


Heart? Fitsgraue in such bosom single-loues?


So close, and private with her?


Observe hem, he grows proud and bold?


Why was not this a general meeting?


By her own consent, Death how I could taste his blood?


See, the gentlemen, at my request do all present them-selues?


Manifold blisses wait on her desire,
whose beauty and whose mind so many honour?

I take your wishes thankfully? -- kind gentlemen!
all here assembled, over whose long suites,
I near insulted,
Not like that common sickness of our sex,
Grew proud in the abundance of my suitors,
Or number of the days they sued unto me.
Dutiful sorrow for my fathers death,
Not wilful coyness hath my hours detaind
So long in silence:
Im'e left to mine own ehoyce, so much the more
My care calls on me If I err through love,
Tis I must chide my self, I cannot shift
The fault unto my parents, they're at rest,
And I shall sooner err through love, then wealth.

Good.


Excellent.


That likes me well?


Hope still.


And my affections do pronounce you all*
Worthy their pure and most entire deserts,
Yet they can choose but one,
Nor do I dissuade any of his hopes,
(Because my heart is not yet thoroughly fixed,
On marriage, or the man,)
But crave the quiet respite of one month,
The month unto this night, against which tim^,
I do inuit you all to that election,
Which on my unstained faith, and Virgin promise,
Shall light amongst no strangers, but your selves:
May this content you?

Glad, and content.


'Tis a good time to leave,
Till then, commend us to your gentlest thoughts.

Enough.


Ough.


Hist, master Hist.


Boy? how now?


Look you sir.


Her Chain of Pearl.


I s^eckt it away fi^ely.


Active boy, thy masters best reuenew, his life soul
Thou keepst 'em both together? whip, away,
Fall back, fall belly, I must be maintained,
Hope is no purchase, nor care I if I miss her, why I rank
In this desiegne with gallants, there's fu'l cause
Policy enuites me to it, 'tis not for love, or for her sake alone:
It keeps my state suspect^e^le and unknown.

Their looks run through, through me, the st^gs
Of their Snake-hissing whispers pierced my hearing:
They're mad she graced me with one private minute,
Above their fortunes, I have obserud em often,
Most spitefully aspected toward my happiness,
Beyond all others: but the ^ use I know not,
A quiet month the Virgin has enclosed
Unto her self: suitors stand without till then,
In which space cunningly lle wind my self,
Into their Bosoms. I have be-thought the shape,
Some credulous Scholar, easily infected
With fashion* time, and humour. unto such
Their deepest thoughts, will like to wanton fishe^,
Play above water, and be all parts seen:
F^r since* ^me their envy pi^es i'll see
Whether their lives from touch of blame sit free.

Mistress New-cut, welcome, here will be choice of Gallants for you anon.


Is all clear, may I venture? am I not seen of the wicked?


Strange absurdity, that you should come into my house and ask if you be not
seen of the wicked, push, I takt unkindly in faith, what think you of my house,
'tis no such common receptacle.


Forgive me sweet master Primero, I can be content to have my pleasure as
much as another, but I must have a care of my credit, I would not be seen;
any thing else; my husbands at Sea, and a woman shall have an ill report in
this world let her carry her self never so secretly: you know it master
Primero: and what choice of Gallants be they? will they be proper Gentlemen
think you?


Nay sure they are as proper as they will be already.


I must have choice you know, I come for no gain, but for sheer pleasure and
affection.


You see your old spy-hole yonder, take you stand, please your own eye, I'll
work it so, the Gallants shall present themselves before you and in the most
conspicuous fashion.


That's all I can desire -- till better come? look you.


What mean you Lady?


A trifle sir, to buy you silver Spurs: good sir accept it.


Silver Spurs, a pretty emblem, mark it, all her gifts are about riding
still; the other day she sent me Boote-hose wrought in silk and gold, now
silver spurs; well, go the ways, you're as profitable a spirit as ere
lighted into my house; come Ladies come, 'tis late, to Music, when?


You're best command us: sir, our pimp's grown proud.


To fools, and strangers these are Gentlewomen
of sort, and worship: Knights heirs, great in portions,
Boarded here for their Music,
And often time 'tas been so cunningly carried,
That I have had two stolen away at once,
And married at Sauoy and proved honest shop-keepers;
And I may safely swear they practised Music:
Their natural at prick-song, a small mist
Will dazzle a fools eye, and that's the world,
So I can thump my hand upon the table,
With an Austere grace and cry 1 2 and 3,
Fret, stamp and curse, foh twill pass well for me?
How now sirrah?

They are coming in sir, strangers in their company,


Tune apace Ladies, be ready for the Song sirrah?


Nay I beseech you gallants be more inward with this,


Gentleman his parts deserve it,
Whence come he sir?

Piping hot from the University, he smells of buttered loaves yet, an
excellent scholar, but the arrantest Ass, for this our Solicitor, he's a
rare fellow five and forty mile hence, believe that: his friends are of the
old fashion, all in their graves, and now has he the leisure to follow all
fashions, ply the Brothels, Practise salutes and Cringes.


Oh!


Now dear acquaintance,
I'll bring you to see fashions.

What house is this sir?


Oh of great name here music is professed,
Here some-times Ladies practise, and the meanest,
Daughters to men of worship,
Whom Gentlemen, such as our selves may visit,
Court, clip and exercise our wits upon,
It is a professed courtesy.

A pretty recreation in faith.

I seldom saw so few here, you shall haue'em sometimes in every corner of the
house, with their Violls betwixt their legs, and play the sweetest strokes
'twould even filch your soul almost out of your bosom.


Pax on it: we spoil our selves for want of these things at University?


You have no such natural happiness, let's draw near,


Gentlemen you are all most respectively welcome:


We are bold and insatiate Suitors sir to the breath of your music, the dear
sight of those Ladies.


And what our poor skill can inuit you to,
You are kindly welcome: you must pardon 'em Gentlemen,
Virgins and bashful, besides new beginners,
Tis not a whole month since they were first entered.

Seven year in my knowledge*


They blush at their very lessons, they will not endure,
To hear of a Stop, a Prick, or a Semy-quauer,

O out upon you:


La I tell you, you'll bear me witness Gentlemen,
If their complaints come to their parents ears,
Their words of Art, I teach 'em nought but Art.

Why tis most certain.


For all Schollers know, that Musica est Ars.


O beastly word?


Look to the Ladies, Gentlemen;


Kiss again?


Come an other?


this a good Interim?


what have you done sir?


why? what have I done,


Saw you their stomachs queasy, and come with such gross meat!


Why is't not latin sir,


Latin? ^hy then let the next too't be latin too:


So enough?


Nay I can assure you thus far, I that never knew the language ha^e heard so
much that Ars, is latin for Art, and it may well be too, ^or there's more art
int now a days the ever was:


is't possible? I am sorry then I have follow'd it so far.


A Scholar call you him,


Music must not jar; the offence is satisfied, come to the Song, beg^n sir.


Not a whole month since you were entered Ladies?


None that shall see their cunning will believe it,


It is no affliction Gentlemen?


I care not much in faith, if I write down to my father presently, to send up my
sister in all haste, that I may place her here at this Music school.


Slid tis the fool my cousin, I would not for the value of three recreations
he had seen me here?


How like you your new prize;


Pray give me leave, I have not yet sufficiently admire*d her


My wits must not stand idle, Slife he's in a sick trance?


A cheat or two among these mistresses,
Would not be ill bestowed, I affect none,
But for my pray such are their affections,
I know it, how could drabs and cheaters live else,
Then since the world rowles on dissimulation,
I'll be the first dissembler.

Prethy love, comfort, choice, my only wish in thee
I am confined, deny me any thing a slight chain of pearl,

Nay an't be but slight --


Being denied,
I prize it slight; but given me by my love,
Light shall not be so dear unto my eye;
Mine eye unto the body as the gift,

How have I power to deny this to you,
That commandall my fortunes are thy servants,
And thou the Mistress both of them and me.

The truest that ere breathed.


To a Gentleman,
That thus so long and has so sincerely lou'de you,
As I my self, ne'er was less pity shown.

Why I never was held cruel.


But to me.


Nor to you.


Go too, 'tas scared you much,


I'm sorry your conce^t is so unkind,
To think me so.

When had I other argument,
I'ue often tendered you my love and service,
And that in no mean fashion:
Yet were you ne'er that requ^tefull Mistress,
That grac*st me with one favour,
Slight, not so much as such a pretty ring, pax on it,
T'as almost broke my heart.

Has took it off, Sfoot master Bouser,


Nay where a man loves most, there to be scanted.


My Ring, come, come.


What reckon I a Satin gown or two,
If she were wise.

Life my Ring sir, come.


Have you the face in faith.


Give me my Ring.


Prithee hence, by this light you get none on it.


How?


I hold your favours of more pure esteem,
Then to part from 'em, ^aith I do,
How ere you think of me.

Push, pray sir,


Hark you, go too, you have lost much by unkindness, go your ways.


Sfoot.


But yet there's no time past, you may redeem it.


Come, I cannot miss it in faith; beside the Gentleman that bestowed it on me*
swore to me it cost him twenty nobles.


Twenty nobles* pox of twenty nobles,
But you must cost me more, you pretty villain,
Ah you little rogue.

Come come, I know you're but in jest,


In jest no you shall see.


No way will get it.
As good give it him now, and hope for some-what.

I ru^ love made jest.


I did but try thy faith, how fast you would hold it,
Now I see a woman may venture worthy favours to thy trust,
and have 'em truly kept, and I protest, had I drawn't from thee,
I should ne'er ha lou'de thee, I know that.

Sfoote I was ne'er so wronged in my life,
Think you I am in jest with you, what with my love?
I could find ^ghter subjects you shall see,
And time will show, how much you injure me.

The Ring were it thrice worth I freely give,
For I know you will requite it.

Will I live.


Enough.


Why this was well come off now,
Wheres my old Serving-man? not yet returned,
Oh here he peepes: now sirrah?

May it please your worship -- they're done artificiallyyfaith boy.


Both the great Beakers.


Both Lad.


Just the same size.


I and the marks as just.


So fall off respectively now.


My Lord desires your worship of all love.


His Lordship must hold me excusd till morning,
I'll not break company to night,
Where sup w^e Gallants?

At Ma^-maide.


S^p there who list, I have forsworn the house.


Serving. For the truth is this plot must take effect ^t Mitre.


Faith Ime indifferent.


So are we Gentlemen.


Name the place master Goldstone.


Why the Mitre in my mind,
For neat attendance, diligent boys and, push, excels it fair.

Agreed, the Mitre then: Boy, some goodness toward, the Boys whipped away.


The Jewel, heart the Jewel.


How now sir? what mou'de you?


Nothing sir, a spice of poetry, a kind a fury,
A disease runs among Schollers.

Mass it made you stamp.


Whoo, till make some stamp and stare, make a strange noise,
Curse swear, beat Tire-men, and kick players boys,
The effects are very fearful.

Bless me from it.


Oh you need not fear it sir -- hell of this luck.


Hark, he's at it again.


Some pageant plot, or some device for the Tilt-yeard:
Disturb him not.

How can I gain her love, when I have lost her favour.


What money hast about thee?


Look you sir, I must be fain to pawn a fair Stone here, for ordinary
expenses: a pox of my tennants, I give 'em twenty days after the quarter, and
they cut out forty.


Why you might take the forfeiture of their leases then.


I know I might, but whats their course? the rogues comes me up all together,
with Geese and Capons, and petitions in pigs shouts, which would move any man
in faith, were his stomach ne'er so great, and to see how pitifully the pullen
will look, it makes me after relent, and turn my anger into a quick fire to
roast 'em -- nay touched and spare it not.


Tis right, well, what does your worship borrow of this sir?


The Stone's twenty nobles.


Nay hardly.


As I am a right Gentleman.


It comes near it indeed: well here's five pound in gold upon it.


Twill serve, and the Ring safe and secret,


As a Virgins.


I wish no hyer: what Gallants* are you constant,
Does the place hold?

The Mitre.


Sir, in regard of our continued boldness, trouble, (which love to your Music
hath made us guilty of) shall we entreat your worships company, with these
sweet Ladies, your professed Schollers, to take part of a poor Supper with my
self and these Gentlemen at the Mitre.


Pray master Primere.


I beseech you sir let it be so.


Oh pardon me sweet Gentlemen, the worlds apt to censure, I have the charge of
them, they are left in trust, they are Virgins, and I dare not hazard their fames,
the least touch mars 'em, and what would their right worshipful parents
think, if the report should fly to them, that they were seen with Gentlemen
in a Tavern.


All this may be prevented, what serves your coach for,
They may come coached and maskt.

You put me too't sir,
Yet I must say again, I fear the Drawers,
And Vintners boys will be familiar with them,
And think 'em Mistresses.

There are those places where respect seems slighter,
More censure is belonging to the Mitre, you know that sir?

Gentlemen you preuaile.


Weel all expect you there.


And we'll not fail.


The diuil will ne'er dissemble with them so, as you for the.


Come sir.


What else, lets go,


How cheer you sir?


Faith like the Moon, more bright,
Decreased in body* but re-made in light,
Here thou shalt share some of my brightness with me.

By my faith they are comfortable beams sir.


Come, where have you spent the time now from my sight,
Ime jealous of thy action.

Push I did but walk, a turn or two in the garden.


What made you there?


Nothing but cropped a flower.


Some woman's honour I believe.


Foh, is this a woman's honour.


Much about one?
When both are plucked their sweetness is soon gon.

Prethe be true to me.


When did I fail.


Yet I am ever doubtful, that your sin.


I do account the world but as my spoil, to adorn thee,
My love is artificial to all others,
But purity to thee, -- dost thou want gold?
Here take this chain of pearl, supply thy self,
Be thou but constant, firm and just to me,
Rich heirs shall want, ere want come near to thee.

Upon thy lip I seal sincerity.


Was this your vow to me?


Pox, whats a kiss to be quite rid of her, she's sued so long I was ashamed
of her, twas but her cheek I kissed neither, to save her longing.


Tis not a kiss I weigh.


Had you weighed this,
T'ad lacked above five ounces of a true one:
No kiss that ere weighed lighter.

Tis thy love that I suspect.


My love, why by this, -- what shall I swear by?


Swear by this jewel, keep thy oath, keep that*


By this jewel then, no creature can be perfect in my love, but thy* dear
self.


I rest.


Ha, ha, ha, lets laugh at em sweet soul.


I, they may laugh at me, I was a novice, and beleiude your oths,


Why what do you think of me, make I no difference,
Turn seven years prostitution, and seven days,
Why you're but in the wane of a maid yet:
You wrong my health in thinking I love them,
Do not I know their populous imperfections.
Why they cannot live till Easter, let em show
The fairest side to'th world like hundreds more, whose clothes
Even stand upright in silver, when their body,
Are ready to drop through em, such there be,
They may deceive the world, they ne'er shall me.

Forgive my doubts, and for some satisfaction were this ^ing,
From which I vow de ne'er, but to the, to part.

With which thou ever bindst me to thy heart.


My pocket picked, this was no bro^he^-house,
A music school; damnation has fine shapes,
I paid inoug for'th song, I have lost a jewel
To me more precious then their souls to them,
That gave consent to filch it, i'll hunt hard:
Wast time and money, trace and wheel about,
But I will find these secret mischiefs out-how now, whats he:
Oh a servant to my love, being thus disguizde,
I'll learn some news, now sir; you belong to me.

I Do sir, but I cannot stay to say, so, nay good sir detain me not I am going
in al hast to enquire or lay wait for a chain of pearl nimd out of her pocket
the fifth of November, a dismal day.


Ha a chain of pearl say thou.


A chain of pearl sir, which one Master Fitsgraue a gentleman and a suitor
fastened upon her as a pleadge of his love.


Ha?


Urge me no more I have no more to say,
Your friend Ieroni^o Bedlam.

Thou 'rt a mad fellow indeed, some comfort yet,
That's hers is missing too, I feel my soul at much more ease: both stolen.
When griefs have partners they are better borne.

Oh the parting of us twain,
Hath caused me mickle pain, and I shall ne'er be married,
Until I see my muggle again.

Hist?


Ha.


The nimble gentleman, in the clestiall stockings.


Has the best smock fortune, to be beloved of women?
Valle loo lo lille lo lilo, vallee loo lee lo lillo.

Vallee loo lo lillee lilo, Vallee loo le lo lil'o.


Ah sweet gentleman, he keeps it up stately.


Well held in faith sir -- mass and now I remember too, I think you ne'er saw my
little banquiting, box above, since I altered it.


Why have you altered that?


Oh divinely sir: the pictuers are all new run over again.


Fie.


For what had the painter done think you, drew me, Venus naked, which is the
grace of a mans Room you know, when he had done, drew a number of Oken-leaues
before her, had not lawn been a hundred times softer, made a better show, and
been more gentlewoman like?


More ladie-like, a great dea'e.


Come, you shall see how tis altered now? I do not think but you'll like her.


Where be your liveries?


They attend without.


Go, call the Coach! Gentlemen, you have exceld in kindness as we in
boldness.


So you think amiss sir?


Kind Ladies we commit you to sweet dreams,
Our selves unto the fortune of the dice, dice ho?

You rest firm mine.


Even al my soul to thee.


You keep your vows.


Why do I breathe, or see?


Is your love constant.


I to none but thes^ now gon, I, now I love nor them nor thee, slife, I should
be cloide, should I love one in three.


Oh here's master Bowser now.


Save you sweet Gentlemen.


Sweet master Bowser? welcome?


When come these dice.


Yet anon, anon sir.


Hast thou shown art in em.


You shall be judge sir, here be the Tavern Beakers, And here peep out the
fine Alchemy knaves, looking like, well sir, most of our Gallants, that seem
what they are not.


Peace villain, am not I in presence.


Why that puts me in mind of the jest sir.


Again, you quarter her.


Nay, compare 'em, and spare 'em not.


The bigness of the bore, just the same size, The marks, no difference: away,
put money in thy pocket, and offer to draw in upon the least occasion.


I am no babe sir.


Hist.


Whats the matter now?


Give me a pair of false Dice, ere you go.


Pax on it, you're so troublesome too, you cannot remember a thing before, if I
stay a little longer, I shall be staid anon.


Here be Dice for your worships.


Oh come, come.


The Vintner himself,
Ilo shift away these beakets by a slight.

Master Goldstone?


How now you conjuring rascal?


Bless your good worship, you're in humours me thinks.


Humours: say that again.


I said no such wond sir, -- would I had my beakers out on's fingers.


Whats thy name Vintner?


Jack and please your worship.


Turn Knight like thy companions, scoundrell, live upon usury, wear thy gilt
spurs at thy girdle for fear of slubbering.


O no, I hope I shall have more grace then so sir:
Pray let me help your worship.

Cannot I push 'em together without your help?


O I beseech your worship, they're the two standards of my house.


Standards, there lie your Standards.


Good your worship; I am glad they are out of his fingers, my wife shall lock
'em up presently, they shall see no sun this twelue-months day for this
trick.


Let me come to the sight of your Standards again.


Your worship shall pardon me, now you shall not see em in hast I warrant ye.


I do not desire't; ha, ha.


Why master Goldstone?


I am for you Gallants -- Master Boxeer cry you mercy sir, why supped you from
us?


Faith sir, I met with a couple of my fellow pupils at University, so we
renewed our acquaintance supped together.


Fie, that's none of the newest fashion, I must tell you that master Bouser,
you must never take acquaintance of any ath' University, when you are at
London, nor any of London when you're at University you must be more forgetful
in faith, every place ministers his acquaintance abundantly.


He tells you true sir.


I warrant you here's a Gentleman will ne'er commit such an absurdity.


Who I, no, 'tis well known, if I be disposed, I'll forget any man in a
seauen-night, and yet look him in the face: nay let him ride but ten mile from
me, and come home again, it shall be at my choice whether I'll remember him or
no, I have tried that.


This is strange sir.


'Tis as a man gives his mind too 't sir: and now you bring me in; I remember
'twas once my fortune to be coozned of all my clothes, and with my clothes my
money; a poor Shepherd pitting me, took me in, and relieu de me.


'Twas kindly done of him in faith,


Nay you shall see now, 'twas his fortune likewise not long after, to come to
me in much distress in faith, and with weeping eyes, and do you think I
remembered him.


You could not choose.


By my troth not ^, I sorgot him quite, and never remembered him to this hour.


And yet knew who he was.


As well as I know you in faith --
'Tis a gift given to some above others.

To fools and knaves they never miss on it.


Does any make such a wonder at this; why alas tis nothing to forget others;
what say you to those that forget themselves?


Nay then to Dice: come set me Gallants, set.


I, fall too 't Gentlemen. I shall here some news from some of you anon: I
have you are to know which loose and ne'er look on; I'll be ready with all the
worst money I can find about me, Arthur!


Here sir.


Stand ready.


Fear not me sir.


These are mine sir.


Here's a washed Angel, it shall away: Here's Mistress Rose-noble has lost her
maiden-head, cracked in the Ring, shoe's good enough for gaimsters, and to pass
from man to man: for gold presents at Dice your harlot, in one hour won and
lost thrice, every man has a fling at her.


Again pax of these dice


Tis ill to curse the dead sir.


Mew, where should I wish the pox, but among bones.


He tells you right sir.


I ne'er have any luck at these odd hands,
None here to make us fix -- why Master Frip.

I am very well here I thank you sir, I had rather be telling my money my
self, then have others count it for me; tis the scuruiest music in the world
me thinks, to hear my money gingle in other men's pockets, I never had any mind
toot in faith.


Slud play six or play four, I'll play no more.


Sfoot you see, there's none here to draw in.


Rather then you should be destitute gentlemen, i'll play my ten pound, if my
masters worship will give me leave.


Come.


He shall, he shall.


Pray excuse me Gentlemen: ^soot how now goodma Rascal, what? because you
served my Grand-father when he went Ambassador, got some ten pound by the hand,
has that put such spirit in you, to offer to draw in among Gentlemen of
worship, knave.


Pray sir, lets entreat so much for once.


'Tis a usual grace in faith sir,
Yo'ue many gentlemen will play with their men.

I and with their Maids to in faith.


Good sir give him leave.


Yes, come, and you be weary on it, I pray draw ne'er sir.


Not so sir.


Come fool, fear nothing, I warrant toe, he has given thee leave, stand here by
me, come now, set round Gentlemen, set,


How the poor fellow shakes: throw lustily man.


At all gentlemen.


Well said in faith.


The're all mine.


By my troth I am glad the fellow has such luck, ^t will encourage him well.


At my masters worship alone.


Now sit slave?


At my masters worship alone.


So, saucy rascal.


At my masters worship alone.


You're a rogue and will be ever be one?


By my troth Gentlemen at all again for once.


Take em to the^ boy, take em to thee, you're worthy of em in faith.


Gentlemen faith I am angry with you, go and suborn my knave again me here;
to make him proud peremptory.


Troth that's but your conceit sir, the fellows an honest fellow and knows
his duty, I dare swear for him.


Heart, I am sick already.


Whether goes Master --


Play on, i'll take my turn si^? -- boy?


Master.


Pissed? -- a supply, cary't closely my little fooker, -- how much --


Three pound sir.


Good boy, -- take out another lesson? how now gentlemen?


Devils int did you ere see such a hand?


I set you these three angels.


My master may set hie? -- for all his stakes are drawn out of other men's
pockets.


As I said gentlemen?


Dues Ace.


At all your right worshipful worships.


Death and vengeance!


Hell, darkness,


Hold sir.


Master Goldstone.


Hinder me not sweet gentlemen -- you rascal -- I banish thee the board.


In faith but you shall not sir?


Touch a Die and thou dare, come you in with your lowzie ten pound, you slave
among gentlemen of worship, and win thirty at a hand.


Why will you kick again luck sir?


As long as the poor fellow ventures the loss of his own money, who can be
offended at his fortunes.


I have a Master here? many a Gentleman would be glad to see his man come
forward aha.


Prey be persuaded sir:


'Slife, here's none cuts my throat in play but he I have obserude it, an
vnluckly slave tis.


Me thinks his lucks good enough sir.


Upon condition Gentlemen that I may ever bar him fro the board hereafter I am
content to winck at him.


Faith, use your own pleasure hereafter, has won our money now! come to'th
table sir your master's friends with you.


Pray Gentlemen.


The fiends int I think, I left a fair chain of pearl at my lodging too,
like an ass and ne'er remembered it; that would ha bin a good pawn now, speak
what do you lend upon these Master Frip? I care not much if you take my Beaver
hat too, for I perceive tis dark enough already, it dos but troble me here.


Very well sir why now I can lend you 3. pound sir --


Prethe do it quickly then?*


There tis in six angels.


Very compendiously.


Here Arthur, run away with these presently, i'll enter em into'th shop-booke
to morrow. Item one gilt hatched rapier and dagger, with a fair embroidered
girdle, and hangers, with which came also a Beaver hat, with a correspondent
band.


Push, in faith sir your to blame, you have snibd the poor fellow too much, he
can scarce speak, he cleaves his words with sobbing.


Haff haff, haff, haff at al Gentlemen.


Ah rogue, i'll make you know your self.


At the fairest.


Out in faith -- two Aces.


I am glad of that, come pay me al these good-man cloakebag:


Why are you the fairest sir?


You need not doubt of that sir -- five. angels you Scoundrell.

Fie ath these Dice, not one hand to night, -- there they go Gentlemen at al
in faith.


Pay all with 2. treas and a quater.


Al curses follow em, pay your selves withal, i'll pawn my self to it, but i'll
see a hand to night, not once hold in? here Master Frip, lend me your hand,
quick, quick, So.


What do you borrow of this doublet now?


Ne'er saw the world three days.


Go too, in regard your a continual customer, i'll use you well, and pleasure
you with five angels upon it.


Let me not stand too long ith cold for them:


Had ever country gentleman such fortune?
All swoopt away i'd, need repair to'th Brokers,

If you be in that mind sir there sits a Gentleman will furnish you upon any
pawn, as well as the publickst broker of em all:


Say you so sir, there's comfort in that in faith.


Item, upon his orange tawny satin doublet, five angels,


But by your leave sir? next comes the breeches, --.


Oh I have tongue fit for any thing --


Saving your tail sir? tis given me to understand that you are a Gentleman ith
hundred, and deal in the premises aforesaid.


Master Bungler, Master Bungler, you're mightily mistook, I am content to do
a gentleman a pleasure for once, so his pawn be neat and sufficient.


Why what say you to my Grandfathers seal ring here


I marry sir, this is somewhat like.


Nay view it well, an ancient arms, I can tell you.


Whats this sir?


The great codpeice with nothing int.


How?


The word about it, partur iunt montes.


Whats that I pray sir?


You promise to mount us.


And belike he was not so good as his word.


So it should seem by the Story, for so our names came to be Bunglers*


A lamentable hearing that so great a house should shrink and fall to ruin.


Two quaters and yet loose it heart, boy? *in faith? what is't?


Five pound sir.


By my troth this boy goes forward well, ye shall ^ee him come to his
preferment in the end!


Why how now, whose that gentlemen, a barge-man?


I never have any luck Gallants, till my doublets off, Ime not half nimble
enough, at this old finquanter driuelbeard:


Your worship must pay me al these sir?


There, and feast the devil with em.


Hell gnaw these dice.


What do you give over Gallants.


Is't not time.


I protest, I have but one angel left to guide me home to my lodging.


How much think?


Some fourscore angels, sir.


Peace, we'll join powers anon, and see how strong w^ are in the whole number,
mass, yon guilt Goblet stands so full in mine eye, the whoreson tempts me, it
comes like cheese after a great feast, to digest the rest, he will hardly escape
me in faith I see that by him already; back for a parting blow now,*boy?


Anon anon sir:


Fetch a penneworth of soft wax to seal letters.


I will sir?


Nay had not I strange casting, thrice together, 2. quaters and a dews.


Why was not I as often haunted with two treas, and a quater:


There's wax for your worship -- anon, anon, sir.


Screen me a little you whoreson old cross biter.


Why whats the business? fill chiton h^b Goblet.


And what has master Bowser lost?


Faith not very deeply sir, enough for a scholar, some half a score royals.


Sfoot I have lost as many with spurs at their heals.


Come Gallants shall we stumble:


Whats a clock.


Here's none ont Dick, the Goblets carried down.


Nay tis upon the point of three, boy, Drawer, whats to be done sirs?


All's paid, and your worships are welcome, Only there's a Goblet missing
Gentlemen, and cannot be found about house.


How a Goblet:


What manner a one*


A guilt Goblet sir, of an indifferent size.


Sfoote I saw such a one lately.


It cannot be found now sir.


Came there no strangers here?


No sir.


This a marvelous matter, that a Goblet should be gone, and none but we in
the room, the loss is mere all, here as we are; keep the door Vintner.


No I beseech your worship.


By my troth Vintner we'll have a privy search for this; What? we are not all
one woman's children.


I beseech ye Gentlemen, have not that conceit of me, that I suspect your
worships.


Tut, you are an Ass; do you know every mans nature: There's a Broker in the
company.


Slife you have not stole the Goblet, boy, have you?


Not I sir.


I was afraid, -- tis a good cause in faith, let each man search his fellow,
we'll begin with you.


I shall save some body a labour Gentlemen, for Ime half searched already.


I thought the Goblet had hung here in faith -- none here, nor here.


Seek about flower, -- What was the Goblet worth Vintne.


Three pound ten sh^lings sir no more.


Pox on it Gentlemen, tis but Angels a piece, it shall be a brace of mine,
rather then I would have our reputations breathed upon by all comers, for you
must think theile talk ont in all companies; such a night, in such a company,
such a Goblet, Sfoote it may grow to a gangrene in our credits and be
incurable.


Faith I am content.


So am I.


There's my Angel too.


So, and mine, I'll tell thee what, the missing of this goblet has dismayed the
Gentlemen much.


I am sorry for that sir.


Yet they send thee this comfort by me, if they see thee but rest satisfied,
and depart away contented, which will appear in thy countenance; not three
times thrice the worth of the Goblet shall hang between them and thee, both in
their continual custom, and all their acquaintances.


I thank their worships all*I am satisfied.


Say it again: do you hear Gentlemen?


I thank your worships all I am satisfied.


Why la, was not this better then hazarding our reputations upon trifles, and
in such public as a Tavern, such a questionable place.


True.


Faith it was well thought on. Nay keep your way Gentlemen: I have sworn
master Bowcer, I will be last in faith* Rascal the goblet.


Where sir?


Peep yon sir under.


Here sir.


My husband is rode from home, make us delay', I know if your will be as free
as your horse, you will see '^ee yet ^re dinner: From Kingston this eleventh of
Nouvember* Ha? these women are such creatures such importunate sweet souls:
theile sca^se give a ma leave to be ready, that's their only fault in faith, if
they be once set upon a thing, why there's no remoouing of em, till their
pretty wills be fulfild -- O pity thy poor oppressed client here sweet Cupid,
that has scarce six hours vacation in a month, his causes hang in so many
Courts, yet never suffer my French adversary, nor his big swollen confederates
to overthrow me,*Who without mercy would my blood carouse, And lay me in prison
in a Doctors house:

Thy clemency great Cupid: peace, who comes here?


Sir Gallant, well encountered.


I both salute, and take my leave together.


Why whether so fast sir*


Excuse me pray, lme in a little hast,
My horse waits for me.

What some journey toward?


A light one in faith sir.


I am sorry that my business so commands me,
I cannot ride with you; but I make no question,
You have company enough.

Alas not any -- nor do I desire it,
Why 'tis but to Kingston yonder.

O cry you mercy sir,


Escape but one reach, there's little danger thither.


True a little of Come-parke.


You'ue named the place sir, that's all I fear in faith,


Farewell sweere master Taylebee,
This fell out happily; I'll call this purchase mine, before I greet him,
Even where his fear lies most, there will I meet him: Boy.

Sir.


Walk my horse behind yon thicket, give a word, if you descry.


I have all perfect sir.


So, he cannot now belong: What with my boys dexterity at Ordinaries, and my
Geldings celerity over hedge and ditch, but we make pretty shift to rub out, a
Gallant, for I have learnt these principles.

Stoop thou to the world, 'twill on thy bosom tread,
It stoops to thee, if thou advance thy head:
The mind being far more excellent then fate,
Tis fit our mind then be above our state;
Why should I write my catremitics in my brow,
To make them loath me, that respect me now,
If every man were in his courses known;
Legs that now honour him, might spurn him down.
To conclude, nothing seems as it is but honesty, that makes it so little
regarded amongst us.

Eela, ha, ho.


The Boy: he's hard at hand, I'll cross him suddenly: and here he comes;
stand.


Ha!


Deliver your purse sir.


I feared none but this place in faith, nay when my mind gives me a thing once.


Quick, quick sir, quick.
I must dispatch three robberies yet ere night.

I'm glad you have such good doings by my troth sir.


You'll fare never a whit the better for your flattery I warrant you sir.


I speak sincearly, 'tis pity such a proper-parted gentleman should want; nor
shall you, as long as I haue't about me, nay search and spare not: there's a
purse in my left pocket as I take it, with fifteen pound in gold in it, and
there's a fair chain of pearl in the other: nay I'e deal truly with you; it
grieves me in faith when I see such goodly men in distress, I'll rather want it
my self then they should go with-out it.


And that shows a good nature sir.


Nay tho I say it, I have been always accounted a man of a good nature, I
might have hanged my self ere this time else* Pray use me like a gentleman, take
all, but injury not my body.


You must pardon me sir, I must a little play the Usurer, and bind you, for
mine own security.


Alas there's no conscience in that sir, shall I enter into bond, and pay
money too.


Tut, I must not be betrayed.


Here me but what I say sir, I do protest I would not be he that should betray
a man, to be Prince of the world.


Mass that's the devil, I thank you heartily, for he's called prince ath'
world.


You take me still at worst.


Swear on this sword then, to set spurs to your horse, not to look back, to
give no marks to any passenger.


Marks, why I think you have left me ne'er a penny sir.


I mean no marks of any.


I understand you sir.


Swear then.


In faith I do sir:


Away.


Ime gon sir, by my troth of a fierce thief he seems to be a very honest
Gentleman.


Why this was well adventured, trim a Gallant:
Now with a courteous and long thusting eye,
Let me behold my purchase, try the soundues of my bones with laughter, how? is
n^t this the chain o^ pearl I gave to that periurde ha^lat, tis, Sfoot tis,
the very chain, oh damned mistress, ha; and this the purse, which not five
days before I scene* her filled with fair spur-royalls -- heart; the very gold?
-- slife is this no robbery, how many oaths flew toward heaven,

Which ne'er came half way thither; but like fire drakes,
Mounted a little, gave a crack, and fell;
Fainde oaths bound up to sink more deep to hell.
What folded papers this? death -- tis her hand.
Master Taylbee, you know with what affection I love you, You do:

I count the world but as my pray to maintain you, The more dissembling queen
you I must tell you,

I have sent you an embroderd purse here with fifty fair spurroyalls int -- A
pox on you for your labour wench: And I desire you of all loves to keep that
chain of pearl from Master Pursnets sight --

He cannot strumpet, I behold it now, unto thy secret torture:

So fare thee well, but be constant and want nothing.

As long as I have it ifayth? me thinks it should have gon so, -- well; what a
horrible age do we live in, that a man cannot have a queen to himself let him
but turn his back the best of her is chipt away like a Court loaf, that when a
man comes himself, has nothing but bombast; these are 2. simple chippings here,
does my boy pick, I steal, to enrich my self, to keep her, to maintain him:
why this is right the sequence of the world, -- A. L. maintains her, she
maintains a Knight, he maintains a Whore, she maintains a captain. So in
like manner, the pocket keeps my boy, he keeps me, I keep her, she keeps
him, it runs like quick-siluer, from one to another; Sfoote I perceive I have
been the chief upholder of this Gallant all this while; it appears true, we
that pay dearest for our pasture are ever likely worse-usde, Sfoot he has a Nag
can run for nothing, has his choice, nay and gets by the running of him; -- oh
fine world strange devils, and pretty damnable affections.


Lela ha, ho?


There boy, again, what news there?


Master, pissed, master?


How now boy.


I have discride a prize.


Another lad?


The gull, the scholar?


Master Bowser:


I, comes a long this way:


Without company.


As sure, as he is your own.


Back to thy place boy,
I have the luck to day, to rob in safety:
Two precious cowards, whist: I hear him -- stand

You lie, I came forth to go.


Deliver your purse.


Tis better in my pocket.


How now, at disputations, signior fool.


I'ue so much logic to con^ute a knave, a thief, a rogue-


Hold, hold, sir, and you be a gentleman hold, let me rise.


Heart tis the curtizy of his scarf vn^askt him to me,
Above the lip by chance, i'll counterfit,
Light, because I am a scholar, you think belike that schollers have no
mettle in em, but you shall find, -- I have not don with you cousin.

As you're a Gentleman:


As you're a rogue?


Keep on upon your way sir:


You bad me stand?


I have been once down for that:


And then deliver?


Deliver me from you sir -- oh pax on it, has wounded me Eela, ha, ho my horse,
my horse boy:


Have you your boy so ready: oh thou world,
How art thou muffled in deceitful fonnes:
There's such a mist of these, and still hath been,
The brightness of true Gentry is scarce seen:
This journey was most happily assigned,
I have found him dross both in his means and mind: what
papers this he dropped? i'll look on it as I go.

A gull call you him, let me always set upon wisemen, they'll be afread of
their lives, they have a feeling of their inniquities, and knows what tis to
die with fighting* sfoote this gull lays on without fear, or wit, how deepe's
it say thou boy?


By my faith three inches sir.


La, this was long of you, you rogue:


Of me sir.


Forgive me dear boy, my wound akte, and I grew angry, there's hope of life
boy, is there not?


Puh, my life for yours.


A comfortable boy in mans extremes! I was ne'er so afread in my life but the
fool would have seen my face, he had me at such advantage, he might have
commanded my Sca^f^, Iscapt well there tad choked me; my reputation had been
past recovery, yet live I unsuspected, and still fit for Gallants choice
societies -- but here I vow, if ere I see this Bowser when he cannot see me,
either in by-lane, privilege place, Court, Alley, or come bekinde him when
hes standing, or take him when heereeles from a Tavern late, pissing again a
Cundit, Wall, or Gate, when he's in such a plight and clear from me, i'll do
that I am ashamed to speak till then.


Nay read forward, I have found 3. of your Gallants, like your bewitching
shame merely sophistical, there's your Bawde-Gallant, your pocket-Gallant,
your Whore-Gallant.


Master Taylbee.


That's he


I count the world but as my prey, to maintain you?


That's just the phraze and still of em all, to him: they meet altogether in one
effect, and it may well hold too, for they all jump upon one cause, subands
lechery.


What shapes can flattery take, let me entreat you,
Both in the virgins right, and our good hopes
Since your hours are so fortunate, to proceed.

Why he's base that fairs, until he crown his deed.


See that dissembling devil, that periurde strumpet.


Welcome my souls best wish, -- oh out alasle* thy arm bound in a scarf, I
shall sown instantly,


Heart and i'll fetch you again in the same tune,
O my unmatched love, if any spark of life remain,
Look up, my comfort, my delight, my --

O good, o good?


The organ of her voice is tunde again,
There's hope in women, when their speech returns*
See like the Moon after a black eclipse,
She by degrees recovers her pure light:
How cheers my love?

As one new wah't out of a deadly trance,
The fit scarce quiet.

Twas terrible for the time, I'd much ado to fetch you.


Shrew your fingers,
How came my comfort wounded, speak?

Faith in a fray last night.


In a fray? will you loose your blood so vainly,
Many a poor creature lacks it, tell me how?
What was the quarrel?

Loath to tell you that.


Loath to tell me.


Yet twas my cause of coming.


Why then, must not I know it:


Since you urge it, you shall,
You're a strumpet.

O news abroad sir?


Say you so.


Why you knew that the first night you lay with me.


Nay not to me, only but to the world.


Speak within compass man.


Faith you know none, you sail without.


I have the better skill then.


At my first step into a Tauerne-roome, to spy that chain of pearl wound on
a strangers arm you begged of me.


How, you mislooke it sure.


By heaven the very self same chain*


O cry you mercy, tis true, i'd forgot it, tis S. Georges day to morrow, I lent
it to my couzin only to grace his arm before his m^s^is.


Notable cunning.


And is this all now in faith.


Not, I durst go further.


Why, let me never possess your love, if you see not that again a Thursday
morning, I tak't unkindly in faith you should fall out with me for such atrifle.


Better and better.


Come, a kiss and friends.


Away.


By this hand I'll spoil your atme and you will not.


More for this then the Devil.


Ye, at your book so hard.


Against my will, are you there Signior Logic,
A pox of you sir.

Why how now, what has fate sent us here, in the name of Venus goddess of
Cypress.


A Freebooters pink sir, three or four inches deep.


No more, that's conscionable in faith.


Troth Ime sorry for it, pray how came ir sir?


Faith by a paltry fray, in Colman-streete.


Coome-parke he would say.


No less then three at once sir, made a Triangle with their Swords and
Daggers, and all opposing me.


And amongst those three, only one hurt you sir.


Ex for ex.


Troth and I'll tell you what luck I had too, since I parted from you last.


What I pray?


The day you offered to ride with me, I wish now I'd had your company, Sfoote
I was set upon in Coome-parke by three too.


Bah.


Robbed by this light of as much gold and Jewels, as I valued at forty pound,


Sure Saturne is in the fifth house.


I know not that, he may be in the sixth and he will for me, I am sure they
were in my pocket wheresoever they were: but I'll ne'er refuse a Gentleman's
company again when 'tis offered me, I warrant you.


I must remember you, 'tis Miter-night Ladies.


Mass 'tis indeed, Friday to day, I'd quite forgot, when a woman's busy, how
the time runs away.


Oh y'aue betrayed us both.


I understand you not.


Y'aue let him see, the chain of Pearl I gave you.


Who him: will you believe me,
By this hand he never saw it.

Upon a strangers arm he swore to me,


Mass that may be, for the truh is in faith,
I was robbed on it `at Coome-parke.

Twas that betrayed it,


I would had staide him,
He was no stranger, he was a thief in faith,
For thieves will be no strangers.

How shall I excuse it?


Nay I have you fast enough boy, you rogue.


Good sir, I beseech you sir, let me go.


A pick-pocket, nay you shall to Newgate luck you: is this your Boy sir.


How now boy? a monster? thy arm lined fast in an others pocket, where learnt
you that manners; what company have you kept alate, that you are so transformed
into a roage, that shape I know n^t, believe me sir I much wonder at the
alteration of this boy, where he should get this nature: as good a child to
see to, and as virtuous, he has his Creed by heart, reads me his chapter duly
every night; he will not miss you one tittle in the nine commandments.


There's ten of em.


I fear he skips ore one; thou shalt not steal.


Mass like enough.


Else grace and memory, would quite abash the boy. Thou graceless imp, ah
thou prodigious child, begot at some ec ipse, degenerate rogue. Shame to thy
friends, and to thy master eke: how far digressing from the noble mind of thy
brave Ancesters that lie in Marble, with their coat a^ors ore em.


Had he such friends?


The boy is well descend, though he be a rogue and has no feeling ont, yet
for my sake, for my reputations seek not the blood of the boy, his near
allied to many men of worship now yet living, a fine old man to his father, it
would kill his heart in faith, heed away like a Crysom.


Alas good gentleman?


Ah shameless villain, complainst thou? dost thou want?


No, no, no, no.


Art not well clad, thy hunger well resisted.


Yes, yes, yes, yes,


But thou shalt straight to Bridewell.


Sweet master.


Live upon bread and water, and chap choke.


I beseech your worship.


Come I'll be his suerty for once:


You shall excuse me indeed sir?


He will mend, a may prove an honest man for all this, I know gallant Gentlemen
now, that have done as much as this comes too in their youth.


Say you so sir?


And as for Bridewell, that will but make him worse, a will learn more knavery
there in one week, then will furnish him and his heirs for a hundredth year.


Deliver the boy.


Nay I tell you true Sir, there's none goes in there a queen, but she comes out
an arrant whore I warrant you.


The boy comes not there for a million.


No you had better forgive him by ten parts.


True, but a must not know it comes from me, down a your knees you rogue, and
thank this gentleman has got your pardon.


O I thank your worship:


A pox on you for a rogue, you put me to my set speech onee a quarter:


Nay gentlemen you quite forget your hour, ^ead master Bowser


Let me go you're a dissembler


How.


Did not you promise me a new gown?


Did I not? yes faith did I, and thou shalt have it, go firrah run for a
Tailor presently.

Let me see for the colour now; Orange tawny, Peach colour, what say to a
Watchet Satin?


O tis the only colour I affect.


A very orient colour, ant please your worships, I made a gown ont for a
Gentlewoman the other day, and it does passing well upon her.


A Watchet Satin gown.


There your worship left sir.


Laid about Tailor.


Very good Sir.


With four fair Laces.


That will be costly sir.


How you rogue costly, out ath'house, you slip-shood, shamlegd, browne-thred,
penny-skeand rascal.


Nay my sweet love.


Hang him rogue, he's but a Botcher neither, come I'll send thee a fellow worth
a hundred of this, if the slave were clean enough.


Who knocks.


A Christian: pray is not this master Taylbees lodging, I was directed het
her.


Yes, this is my masters lodging.


Cry you mercy sir. Is he yet stirring.


He's awake, but not yet stirring, for he plaide away half his clothes last
night


My mistress commends her secrets unto him, and presents him by me with a new
Satin suite here.


Mass that comes happily.


And she hopes the fashion will content him.


There's no doubt to be had of that sir -- your mistress name I pray? you're
much pretiously welcome.


I thank you vncommonly sir.


The suite shall be accepted I warrant you sir.


That's all my Mistress desires sir.


Fare you well sir.


Fare you well sir.


This will make my master leap out of the bed for joy, and dance Wigmois
galliard in his shift about the chamber?


Came this suit from mistress Cle^ueland?


She sent it secretly sir.


A pretty requitefull squall, I like that woman, that can remember a good turn
3 months a'er the date, it shows both a good memory, and a very feeling
spirit.


This came fortunately sir, after all your ill luck last night.


I'd beastly casting Jack.


Oh abom nable sir, you had the scuruiest hand -- the old Serving-man swoopt up
all;


I am glad the fortune lighted upon the poor fellow by my troth, tmade his
master had?


Did you mark that sir, ^ warrant he has the doggedst master of any poor
fellow under the dog-signe, I'd rather serve your worship, I'll say that behind
four back ^ir, for nothing, as indeed I have no standing wages at all, your
worship knows.


Oh but your veils Jack your veils considered, when you run too and fro
between me and mistresses.


I must confess my veils are able to keep an honest man go I where I lift.


go to then Jack.


But those veils stand with the state of your body sir as long as you hold up
your head, if that droop once, farewell you, farewell I, farewell all, and
droop it will, though all the caudles in Europe should put to their helping
hands toot; tis ee'n as uncertain as playing now vu now down, for if the Bill
rise to above thirty, here's no place for players, so if your years rise to
above ^ty, there's no room for old lechers.


and that's the rea on all rooms are taken up for young Temp'ers?


you're in the right sir?


pize ont I pawnd a good beaver hat to master Frip last night Jack,

I feel the want of it now, -- hark whose that knocks;


I^ master Taylbee stirring?


Whats your pleasure with him, he walks hereith hall.


Give ^our worship good morrow,


Welcome honest lad;


A letter from my mistr^sse.


Whose th^ mistress?


Mistress ^ block.


Mistress new-blocke my sincere love how does she?


Faith only ^n the wait of your sight.


A^asse ^eere sweet, Iu'e had such buisines, I protest I ne'er stood still since
I saw her.


She has sent your worship a Beaver hat here, with a band best in fashion.


How shall I requite this dear soul?


Tit not a thing fit for me to tell you sir, for I have three years to serve
yet: your worship knows how I warrant you;


I know the drift of her letter, and for the Beaver, say, I accept it highly.


O^ she will be a proud woman of that sir.


And hark thee tell thy mistress as lm'e a Gentleman, I'll dispatch her out of
hand, the first thing I do a my credit, can thou remember these words now?


Yes siras you are a Gentleman you'll dispatch her out of hand the first thing
you do


In my credit.


Oh of your credit, I thought not of that fir.


Remember that good boy?


Fear it not now fir.


I dreamt to nigh Jack, I should have a secret supply out a'th City


Your dream craules out partly well sir, -- what news there now?


I have an arrant no master Taylbee --


Yonder walks my maist^r;


Mistres Tiffany commends her to your worship and he has sent you your ten pound
in gold back gain, and says she cannot furnish you of the same Lawn you
desire, till after all hollantide --


Thank her she would let me understand so much? ha, ha, -- this wench will
live, why this was sent like a work woman now, the rest are borchers to her,
faith I commend her cunning, she's a fool, that makes her servant fellow to
her heart, it robs her of respect, dams up all duty, keeps her in awe even of
the slave she keeps.

This takes a wise course I commend her more,
Sends back the gold, I never saw before:
Well women are my best friends in faith,
Takes lands give me good legs:
Firm back white hand black eye, browne hair,
And ad but to these five a comely stature,
Let others live by art and I by nature.

Master Bowser Maistr Bowser, ha, ha, ho, master Bowser.


Holla:


What not out of thy kennel, Master Bowser.


Master Goldstone, your an early Gallant sir?


A fair cloak yonder in faith, -- by my troth a bed Master Bowser, you
remember your promise well ore night.


Why whats a clock sir?


Do you ask that now, why the chimes are spent at Saint Brides.


Tis a Gentleman's hour, saith Master Goldstone i'll be ready in a trice.


Away there's no trust to you:


Faith i'll come instantly?


Nay choose whether you will or no, by my troth your cloak shall go before you
--


Nay Master Goldstore I ha sworke -- do you hear sir:


Away, away, faith Ime angry with you, pox, a bed now Ime ashamed of it.


Foot my cloak, my cloak Master Goldstone, slife what meant you by this sir
you'll bring it back again, I hope, no not yet, by my troth I care very little
for such kind of jesting, me thinks this familiarity now extends a little too
far, unless it be a new fashion come forth this morning* secretly yesterday
'twould have shown unmannerly, and saucily; I scarce know yet what to think
on it, well there's no great profit in standing in my shirt, i'll on with my
clothes, has bound me to follow the suite, my cloaks a stranger he was made
but yesterday, I do not love to trust him alone in company.


What may I conjecture of this Goldstone? he has not only pawnde to me this
cloak, but the very Diamond and Sapphire, which I bestowed upon my new love at
Master Primeroes house; the cloaks new and comes fitly, to do me great grace
at a wedding this morning, to which I was solemnly enuited. I can continue
change more the the proudest Gallant of em all; yet never bestow penny of my
self, my pawnes do so kindly furnish me: but the sight of these jewels is
able to cloy me, di^ I nor preserve my stomach the better for the wedding
dinner, a gift could never have come in a more patient h^ure, nor to be better
digested; is she proved false, -- but i'll not fiet to day no* chafe my blood.


Ha, yonder goes Bowser, the place is fit: -- boy stand with my horse at
Corner, I owe you for a Pink 3. inches deep sir?


On -- o -- o;


Take that in part of payment; for Coome-parke:


On -- o -- o?


How now, whose this? sfoote one of our Gallants, knocked down like a Calfe, is
there such a plauge of em here at London, they begun to knock em ath head
already:


Oh Master Bowser, prayrend me your hand sir; I am slain:


Slain and alive? oh cruel execution?
What man so sauage-spirited durst presume,
To strike down ^attin on two taffeties cut:
O^ li^e his hand against a Beaver hat.

Some rogue that owes me money, and had no other means
To a wedding dinner: I must be dressed myself me thinks.

How why this my cloak, life how came my cloak hither?


Is it yours sir,? Master Goldstone pawnde it to me this morning fresh and
^a^ing* and borrowed five pound upon it.


How, pawnde i^? pray let me near out this story, come, and i'll lend you to
the next barbers-surgeons; -- pawnde my cloak?


How now Mar^aduke whats the wager;


Nay my care is at end sir, now I am come to the sight of you? my mistress your
couzin entreats you to take part of a dinner with her at home at her house,
and bring what Gentleman you please to accompany you.


Thank my sweet couze, i'll munch with her say.


I'll tell her so.


Marmaduke --


Sir?


Will there be any stock-fish think thou?


How sir?


Tell my couze I'ue a great appetite to stock-fish in faith -- Master Goldstone
i'll entreat you to be the gentleman that shall accompany me.


No^? me sir?


You sir.


By my troth concluded, what state bears thy couze ^irrah?


Oh a fine Merchants wife, --


Or rather a Merchants fine wife --


Trust me and that's the ^roperer phraze here at London, and tis as absurd too,
to call him ^ine Merchant, for being at sea, a man knows not what pickle he is
in.


Why true --


Yet my couze will be serude in plate I can tell you, she has her silver lug^
and her guilt Tankards.


Fie.


Nay you shall see a house dressed v^ in faith, you must not think ^o tread ath
ground when you come there. --


No, how ther^?


Why upon paths made of fig-frailes, white blankets cut out in steakes.


Away -- I have thought of a device, where shall we meet an hour hence.


In Powles.


Agreed.


The Broker-Gallant, and the Cheating-Gallant,
Now I have found 'em all, I so rejoice,
That the redeeming of my cloak I wey not:
I have spied him.

Pax here's Boucer.


Master Goldstone, my cloak, come wher's my cloak sir?


Oh you're a sure Gentleman; especially if a man stand in need of you, he may
be slain in a morning to breakfast, ere you vouchsafe to peep out of your
lodging.


How?


No less then four Gallants, as Ime a gentleman, drew all upon me at once,
and opposde me so spitefully, that I not only lost your cloak in the fray.


C^mes it in there?


But my tic^e Hangers, sirrah, I think thou hast seen e^.


Never i^a^h sir.


Those with the two Unicorns, all wrought in Pearl and gold pex on it it frets
me ten times more then the loss of the platty cloak; prithee and thou love
me speak no more on^t, it brings the Unicorns into my mind, and thou would
not think how the conceit grieves me: I will not do thee that disgrace in faith,
to offer thee any satisfaction, for in my soul I think thou scornst it thou
bear that mind in my conscience* I have always said so of thee; fare thee
well, when shall I see thee at my chamber, when?


Every day shortly.


I have ^ine toys to show thee.


You win my heart then:

The Devil scarce knew what a portion he gave his children, when he allowde
'em large impudence to live upon, so turned em into th'world, surely he gave
away the third part of the riches of his kingdom, revenues are but fools
too't; the filed tongue and the undaunted fore-head,

Are mighty patrimonies, wealthier then those
The Citty- Sire, or the Court-father leaves,
In these behold it, riches oft like flaues
Revolt, they bear their fore-heads to their graves,
What soonest grasps advancement, me ^ great suites
Trips down rich widows, gains repute and name,
Makes way where ere it comes, bewitches all
Thou impudence, the minion of our days
On whose pale cheeks favour and fortune plays!
Call you these your five Gallants, trust me they are rare fellows
They live on nothing; many cannot live on something,
Here they may take example; -- Suspectlesse virgin!
How easy had thy Goodness been beguiled
Now only rests, that as to me they are known,
So to the world their base Arts may be shown.

Art sure thou saw him receiu't boy?


Forty pound in gold as Im'e a gentleman borne,


Thy father gave the Rams-head boy?


No you're deceived my mother gave that sir.


whats thy mothers, is thy fathers;


Im'e sorry it holds in the Rams-head, see here he walks, I was sure he came
into Powles, the gold had been yours master long ere this, but that he wears
both his hands in his pockets:


How unfortunately is my purpose seated, what the devil should come in his
mind to keep in his hands so long, the biting but of a paltry louse would do
me great kindness now, I knew not how to requite ^t, will no rascal creature
assist me, stay, what i^ I did impudently salute 'em out, good, boy be ready
boy.


upon the least advantage sir?


You're most devoutly met in Powles sir?


So are you, but I scarce remember you sir.


Oh I cry you mercy sir, I pray pardon me I fear I have tendered an offence sir,
troth I took you at the first for one master Dumpling a Norfolke gentleman.


There's no harm done yet sir?


I hope he is there by this time, how now boy, hast it?


No by troth have I not, this labours lost, 'tis in the right pocket, and he
kept that hand in sure enough.


Vnpractizd Gallant, salute me but with one hand, like a counterfeit soldier,
O times and manners? are we grown beasts, do we salute by halfes, are not
our limbs at leisure, wheres comely nurture, the Italian kiss, or the French
cringe, with the Polonian waste: are all forgot, then misery follows -- Surely
fate forbad it, had he imploide but his right hand, I'd had it: -- It must be
an everlasting devise I think, that procures both his hands out at once: do
you walk sir.


No I stay a little for a Gentleman's coming too.


Farewell then sir, I have forty pound in gold about me, which I must presently
send down into the country.


Fare you well sir: I wonder Master Goldstone spares my company so long, 'tis
now about the nauill of the day, upon the belly of noone.


See where he walks, be sure you let off at a twinkling now.


When did I miss you, -- your worship has forgot, you promised Mistress Newcut
your cozen, to dine with her this day.


Mass that was well remembered.


I am bold to salute you sir.


Sir.


Is Mistress New-cut your coozen sir.


Yes, she's a coozen of mine sir.


Then I am a coozen of yours, by the Sisters side.


Let me salute you then, I shall be glad of your farther acquaintance.


I am a bidden guest here too.


Indeed sir?


Faith invited this morning.


Your good company, s^all be kindly embraced sir.


I walk a turn or two here for a Gentleman, but I think heel either
ouer-take me, or be before me.


Tis very likely sir; there sirrah, go to dinner, about two wait for me?


Nay let him come between two and three coozen, for we love to sit long at
dinner in the City.


Come sweet coozen.


Nay coozen, keep your way coozen,
Good coozen I will not in faith coozen.

Why how now sirtah, upon twelve of the clock, not the cloth laid yet -- must
we needs keep Exchange time still.


I am about it forsooth.


You're about it forsooth; you're still about many things, but you ne'er do one
well, I am an Ass to keep thee inth' house now my husbands at sea, thou hast
no audacity with thee, a foolish dreaming lad, fitter to be in the garret, the
in any place else, no grace, nor manly behaviour; when did thou ever come to
me, but with thy head hanging down, oh decheerefull prentize, uncomfortable
servant: pray heaven the Gull my coozen has so much wit left, as to bring
master Taylbee along with him; my comfort, my delight, for that was the
chiefest cause I did inuit him, I bad him bring what Gentlemen he pleazd to
accompany him, as far as I durst go, why may he not then make choice of
master Taylbee, had he my wit or feeling he would do it.


Wher's my sweet coozen here, dos she lack any guess?


Ever such guess as you, you're welcome coozen.


I am rude Lady.


You're most welcome sir.


There will be a gallant here anon cousin,
He promised faithfully.

Who is't master Taylbee?


Master Taylbee, no master Goldstone.


May. Goldstone; I could think well of that Goldstone, were not for one
wild trick he has.


Whats that Lady?


In jest, he will pawn his punc es for suppers.


That's a wild part in him in faith, he were my brother.


Pray gentlemen sit a while, your dinner shall come presently.


Ye mistress New-cut, at first give me a trip,
A close bite always asks a secret nip.

My coozen here is a very kind natured soul in faith, in her humour.


Puh you know her not so well as I cousin, I have observed her in all her humours
you ne'er saw her a little waspish I think.


I have In faith.


Puh, then yea ne'er saw pretty humour in your life, I ca^ bring her into it when
I list.


Would you could in faith.


Would I could? by my troth and I were sure thou could keep thy countenance
couze, what a pretty jest have I thought upon already to entertain time before
dinner.


Preche couze what is't, I love a jest a life in faith.


Ah but I am jealous you will not keep your countenance in faith.


Why yea shall see a pretty story of a humour.


Faith i'll try you for once, you know my couzin will wonder when she comes in
to see the cloth laid and ne'er a salt upon the board.


That's true in faith.


Now will I stand a while out of sight with it, and give her humour play a
little.


Couze dost thou love me, and thou wilt ever do any thing for me, do it.


Marry I build upon you countenance.


Why dost thou think Ime an ass couze?


I would be loath to undertake it else, for if you should burst out presently,
couze the jest would be spoiled.


Why do not I know that, away, stand close, so, so mum cousin? a merry
companion in faith, here will be good sport anon, -- whist she comes?


I make you stray long for a bad dinner, here cousin, if Master Goldstone were
come, the meates even ready.


Some great business detains him couzin, but heel not be long now?


Why how now, cuds my life, --


Why?


Was ever mistress so plaugd with a shetle-headed servant -- why Marmaduke.


I come forsooth:


Able to shame me from generation to generation.


Did you call forsooth?


Come hither forsooth -- did you lay this cloth?


Yes forsooth:


Do you use to lay a cloth without a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a salt, a
salt.


How many salts would you have, Ime sure I set the best ith house upon the
boor.


How? cousin: -- sings -- cousin, cousin, did call couze.


Did you see a salt upon the board when you came in.


Puh.


Come, come, I thought as much, beshrew your singers, where is't now?


Your cousin yonder.


Why the mans mad.


Cousin, hist cousin.


What say you.


Puh, I call not you, I call my cousin, come forth with the salt cousin: ha,
how, nobody: why wa^ not he that came in even now your cousin?


My cousin: O my bell salt, O my great bell salt.


The tenor bell salt; oh here comes Master Goldstone now cousin, he may tell
us some news on him. Did you not meet a fellow about door, with a great
silver salt under his arm.


No sure, I met none such.


Pardon me sir, I forgot all this while to bid you welcome. I shall loath this
room for ever. Take hence the cloth you unlucky maple-fac'd rascal, come you
shall dine in my chamber sir.


No better place lady.


No less then forty pound in fair gold at one lift, the next shall sown, and
sown again till the devil fetch him ere I set hand to him, heart, nothing
vexes me so much* but that I paid the Goldsmith for the change too not an
hour before, had I let it alone in the chain of silver as it was at first, it
might have given me some notice at his departure, sfoote I could fight with a
win-mill now, sure twas some unlucky villain, why should he come and salute
me wrongfully too mistake me at noone day, now I think ont in cold blood? it
could not be but an induction to some villainous purpose, well, I shall meet him
--


This forty pound came fortunately to redeem my chain of pearl from mortgage,
I would not care how often I sowned to have such a good caudle to comfort me,
gold and pearl is very restorative. --


See yonders the rogue I suspect for foul play, i'll walk muffled by him,
offer some offence or cause of a quarrel, only to try his temper, if he be a
coward, he's the likelier to be a rogue, an infallible note.


What a pox ail you sir, would I had been aware of you.


Sir, speak you to me?


Not I sir, pray keep on your way I have nothing to say to you.


You're a rascal.


You may, say your pleasure sir, -- but I hope I go not like a rascal.


Are you* fain to fly to your clothes, because ya^e Gallant, why there's no
rascal, like your Calla^t rascal believe that.


You have took me at such an hour, faith you may call me even what you
please, nothing will move me.


No, i'll make somewhat n ooue you? draw? I suspected you were a rogue, you
have purst it up well with a coward?


Who my Patron.


Keep out you rascal.


The gest that did me the kindness in Powles,
Hold as you are a gentleman, you'll give me breath sir.

Are you there with me, a vengeance stop you, you have found breath enough to
run away from me I will never meet this slave hereafter in a morning but I
will breath my self upon him, since I can have no other satisfaction, he
shail save me that forty pound in fence-schoole.


When things are clenly carried, sign of judgment,
I was the welcomst Gallant to her alive,
After the salt was stolen; then a good dinner,
A fine provoking meal which drew on apace,
The pleasure of a day-bed, and I had it:
This here one ring can witness, when I parted,
Who but seewte Master Goldstone, I left her in that trance.
What cannot wit so it be impudent
Devise and compass? I would fain know that fellow now,
That would suspect me but for what I am.
He lives not,; 'Tis all in the conveyance, what? Thou look not like a
beggar, what makst thou on the ground, I have a hand to help thee up, a fair
chain of pearl, surely a merchants wife gives lucky bandsell; they that find
pearl may wear't at a cheap rate, mary my Lady dropped it from her arm for a
device to toale me to her bed, Iu'e seen as great a matter -- who be these?
I'll be to crafty for you, oh monsieur Primero, Signior Fr^, is it you gallants.


Sweet master Goldstone?


every bawd exceeds me in fortune: master Primero was robbed of a Carkanet
upon monday last* laid the goldsmiths and found it. I h'a laid goldsmits
Jeweller, Burnisher Broker, and the devil and all I think, yet could never so
much as here of that chain of pearl, he was a notable thief, he works
close; peace, who be these, ha^let me see, by this light there it 'tis back
least they see thee; a happy minute, Goldstone what an age do we breath in,
who, that saw him now would think he were maintained by purses: so, who, that
meets me, would th^nke I were maintained by wenches, as far as I can see tis all
one case, and holds both in one Court, we are both maintained by the common
road way? Keep thou thine own heart, thou liu'st unsuspected, I leese you
again now.


But I pray you tell me,
met you no Gentlewomen by the way you came?

Not any what should they be?


Nay I do but ask,
Because a Gentlewoman's glove was found,
Near to the place I met you?

Faith we saw none sir.


good officers, upon suspicion of felony.


Very good sir


What call you the theefs name you do suspect?


Master Iustinian Goldstone.


Remember, master Justice Goldstone, a terrible world the whilst, my Masters.


Look you that's he; upon him officers.


I see him not yet, which is he sir.


Why that.


He a thief sir, who that Gentleman in the Sat in?


Even he.


Farewell sir, you're a merry Gentleman.


As you will answer it officers, I'll bear you out, I'll be your warrant.


Nay and you say so, what's his name then.


Iustinian Goldstone.


Master Iustinian Goldstone, we apprehend you sir upon suspicion of felony.


Me.


You sir.


I charge you in the Kings name gentlemen to assist us.


Master Taylbee?


The same man sir.


Life whats the news?


Ha you forgot Come-parke?


Come-parke? no, tis in Kingstone way.


I believe you'll find it so.


I not deny it.


Bear witness has confessed.


What have I confessed, pair of cockscombes indubitable?


I was robbed finely of this chain of Pearl there,
And forty fair Spur-Royals.

Did I rob you?


There where I find my goods I may suspect sir.


I dreamt this would be his end.


See how I am wronged Gentlemen:
As I have a soul, I found this chain of pearl,
Not three yards from this place, just when I met you.

Ha, ha!


Yet the law's such, if he but swear 'tis you, you're gon.


Pox ont, that ere I saw't.


Can you but swear 'tis he, do but that, and you tickle him in faith?


Nay and it come once to swearing let me alone:


Say and hold, he called my Jewels counterfeit, and so cheated the poor wench
of 'em:


Come bring him away, come?


T will call my state in question!


I think what's got by theft doth never prosper, Now lost my chain of pearl
-- come master Goldstone, lets go this mine in faith,


The chain of pearl?


By my trothit's mine;


By my troth much good do it you sir?


Im'e glad in my soul sie -- Gnawes,


Deliver your weapons,


How?


You're apprehended upon supition of felony?


Felony? whats that'


Was it you in faith, sir all this while, that did me that kindness to ease both
my pockets at Coom-parke:


I si^? pray gentlemen draw near, lets talk among our selves, stand a part
Scoundrell; -- must every gentleman be up braided in public that flies out now
and then upon necessity, to be Theames for peddlers and weavers? this shou^d not
be, twas never seen among the Romaines; nor read we of it in the time of
Brute* are we more Brutish now? did I list to blab, do not I know your course
of lise master Taylbee to be as base as the basest, maintained by me, by him
by all of us, and a second hand from mistresses, Iu'e their letters here to
show?

Why should you be so violent to strip naked

Another Reputation, to the world knowing your own so leprous, Beside this
^nai^ie of pearl and those spur-royals came to you fa se y for she broke her
faith, and made her soul a strumpet with her body, when she sent those; they
were ever justly mine? Pray what moves you sir, why should yo^ shake your head,
you're clear, sure I should know you sir, pray are not you sometimes a pandar,
oftner a bawd sir, have I never Sinned in your ban-quetting boxes, your bowers
and towers? you slave, that keeps fornication upon the tops of trees, the very
Birds cannot in gender in quiet for you, why rogue, that goes in good clothes
made out of wenches cast gowns.


Nothing goes so near my heart as that?


Do you shake your slaves nodle?


And here's a rascal looked asway too, (saving the pre, seace of master
Goldstone;) a filthy-slymy-lousie-nitticall broker, pricked up in pawnes from
the hat-band to the shoostringa necessary hooke to hang gentlemen's suites ont
it'h Air, least they should grow musty with long lying? which his pawnes
seldom are guilty off, a fellow of several scents and Seeamea; French, Duch,
Italian, English, and therefore his lice must needs be mungrells. why Bill
money?


I am sorry to here this among you, y'aue all deceived me, truly I took you
for other Spirits, you must pardon me hence-forward, I have a reputation to
look to, I must be no more seen in your companies;


Nay, nay, nay, nay, master Golstone, you must not escape so in faith, one word
before you go sir,


Pray dispatch then, I would not for half my revenues in faith now, that any
gallants should pass by in the mean time, and find me in your companies, nay
as quick as you can sir.


You did not take away master Bowcers cloak ^other morning, pawnd it to me
and borrowed five pound vppon't;


Ha?


'Twas not you neither that finely cheated my little Novice at master
Primeroes house, of a Diamond and Sapphire, and swore they were counterfeit, both
glass, mere glass as you were a right gentleman;


Slife, why were we strangers all this while? s^oot I perceicue we are all
natural Brothers? a pox on^s all are we found in faith?


A cheater?


A these, a lecher, a bawd and a Broker?


What mean they to be so merry, Im'e afraid they laugh at us and make fools
on's.


Push, leave it to me -- how now: who would you speak withal?


Speak withal? have we waited all this while, for a suspected theefe^


How? your'r scarce awake yet I think, look well, does any appear like a
thief in this company* away you slaves, you stand loitering, when you should
look to the common wealth? you catch knaves apace now, do you not? they may
walk by your nose, your as kalls?


Sweet Master Goldstone.


You lacked spirit in your company, till I came among you* here ^ee ^iue on's,
lets but glue together, why now the world shall not come between us.


If we be true among our selves.


Why true; we cannot lack to be rich; for we cannot lack riches, nor can our
wenches want, nor we want wenches.


Let me alone to furnish you with them.


And me.


There's one care past: and as for the Knights daughter,
Our chiefest business, and least thought upon.

That's true in faith.


How shall we agree for her.


With as much ease as for the rest: to morrow brings the night, lets all
appear in the best shape we may; troth is, we have need on it, and when amongst
us five she makes election, as one she shall choose.


True, she cannot choose.


That one so fortunate amongst us five,
Shall bear himself more portly, live regarded,
Keep house, and be a countenance to the rest.

Admiral.


For instance, put case your self after some robbery done
Were pursu'de hardly; why there were your shelter,
You know your Sanctuary: nay say you were taken,
His letter to the Justice will strik't dead,
'Tis policy to receive one for the head.

Lets hug thee Goldstone.


What have I begot?


What Sir?


I must plot for you all, it likes me rarely.


Prithee what is't sir?


'Twould strike Fitsgraue pale,
And make the other Suitors appear blanckes.

For our united mysteries.


What if we fiu: presented our full shapes
In a Strange-gallant, and conceited mask?

In a mask, your thoughts and mine w^te^ wins.


So the device were subtle nothing like it.


Some Post must (...)*


Poet? you'll take the direct l^ne to have us sta'gde? why what lacks Bowser,
are you too well, too safe, an absolute scholar, easy to be wrought, ^o
danger in the operation.


But have you so much interest*


What in Bowser? why my least woo^ com^ ^ him:


Then no man fitte^.


And there's Master Frip too, ^sh us of ma^king s^i^e^ ^ow.


Upon sufficient pawn I think I can sir^


Pawn? I^we, here take my ^aine^pa w^es among brothers? we shall thrive? but
we must still expect one ^ongue in five, and think us happy too.


Last man we spoke on, Master Bowser.


Little master Bowser, sweet master Bowser welcome in faith?


Are your fathers dead* gentlemen, you're so m^rry.


By my troth a good jest, did not I co^nd his wit to you gentlemen, hark ^rm
Raf Bowser, co^ Bowser in faith? theirs a kind of portion in town, a girl of 15
hundred, whom we al powrefully affect, and determine to present our parts to
her in a Mask.


In a Mask!


Right sir, now a little of thy brain for a device to present us firm, which
we shall never be able to do our selves thou know that; and with a kind of
speech wherein thou may express what gallants are* bravely;


Puh, how can I express em otherwise but bravely: now for a Mercury and al
were fitted.


Could not a boy supply it?


Why none better.


I have a boy shall put down al the Mercuries ith town,
A will play a Mercury naturally, at his fingers end in faith.

Why then we are suited; for torch-bearers and sheeldboies, these are always
the writers properties; you're not troubled with them.


Come my little Bowser; do it finely now, to the life.


I warrant you gentlemen.


Hist; give me a little touch above the (...) and you can possible, for I mean
to present this chain of pearl to her.


Now I know that let me a^o^e to fit you.


Come forth you ^ry private -- why spring strumpet have we found your close.
haunts, your private watchtowers, and your ^till means.


How then?


You can steal secretly hither, you mystical queen you, at twilight, ^ you
have a privilege from your hat forsooth, to walk without a man, and no
suspicion, But ^ gentlewomen that go in Ti^es Have no such liberty we cannot
do thus* Custom grants that to you that's shame in us.


Have you donne yet?


You broke the back of one husband already nowth' others dead with grief at
sea, with your secret expenses, close ^elths cunning filches, and continued
banquets in corners; then forsooth you must have your milke-baths to white you,
your ^ose-leaues to sweeten you, your beane-floure bags, to sleek you, and
make you soft, smooth, delicate, for lascivious entertainment.


So, and you think all this while you dance like a these in a ^st you're safe,
no body can find you; pray were not you a P^lmo^gers daughter at first, that
run away with a new Courtiar for the love of Gentlewomens clothes, and bought
the fashion at a dear rate, with the loss of your name credit, why what are
all of you, but rustical insides, and city flesh, the blood of yeom^n, and
the b^m of gentlewomen --


What shall we suffer a changeable fore-part to outtongue us, take that.


Murder, murder --


How now? why Ladies, a retreat, come, you have shown your spirits
sufficiently, y are all land captains, and so they shall find that come in
your quarters, but have you the law free now to fight and scrath among your
selves and let your Gallants run away with us.


How?


Good.


Sweet master Bowser.


Another?


Why then I perceive you know nothing: why they are in the way of marriage:

A knights daughter here in town makes her election among em this night.


This night?


This very night, and they all present themselves in a mask before her, know
you not this?


O traitor Master Goldstone.


Periurde Master Tayl^eer


Without soul?


She will chase him.


You have more cause to join, and play the grounds of friendship amongst your
selves, then rashly run diuisional could tell you a means to pleasure you:


Good master Bowser.


But that you're women and are hardly secret.


We vow it seriously?


You should be all there in presence*
See all, hear all, and yet not they percieue you.

So that --


Sweet master Bowser, -- I


I can stand you in stead,
For I frame the device, --

If ever --


Will you do it -- hark you --


Content.


And i'll make one.


And I another,
We'll mar the match,
When that good news came of my husbands death,
Goldstone promised me marriage.
and Swear to me.

I'll bring his oths in question*


So will^:


Agree among your selves, for shame.


Are we resolude?


In this who would not fain,


Friends all for my part,


Here's my lip for thine*


Round let it go,


All wrath thus quenched,


And I conclude it so.


How all events strike even with my wishes, Their own invention damnes them,
-- now Gentlemen? stands your assistance firm?


Why 'tis our own case,
Ime sorry you should doubt.

We'll furnish you?


Are these our Gallants?


Are our Gallants these?


Here be five shields sir?


Finished already, that's well? I'll see thy master shortly*


Ime satisfied.


Prithee lets see master Fitsgraue,


I have blazed them,


Whats this;
Fooh, you should be a gallant too, for you're no university Scholar?

Look this is Pursuit:, the device, a purse wide open, and the mouth
downward. The wood, Alienis ^ee^ ^r^nis.


Whats that?


One that lives out of other men's pockets,


That's right?


Here's Goldstones three silver dice,


They run hye, two sincks and a quater?


They are hye men fit for his purposes -- The word,


Nay he will cheat his own brother, nay his own father in faith?


So much the word imports -- Master Primero,


Pox what says he now?


The device, an vnuallued pearl, hid in a cave. The word, Occulos vendit
honores,


Whats that*


One that sells maidenheads by whole-sale;


Excellently proper?


Master Frip?


That pythagoricall rascal, in a gentleman's suite to day, in a knights to
morrow:


The devise for him; a Cuckoo sitting on a tree? The word, Enauis ex a^ib^s;
one bird made of many; for you know as the Sparrow hatches the Cuckoo, so the
Gentleman feathers the Broker?


Let me admire thee, master Fitsgraue?


They will scorn gentlemen: and to assist them the better, Pursnets boy that
little precious pick-pocket, has a compendium ous speech in latin, and like a
Mercury presents their their dispositions more liberally:


Never were poor gallants so abused?


Hang 'em, their counterfeits, no honest spirit will pity 'em*
This is my Crown,
So good men smile I dread no raskalls frown.
Away, bestow your selves secretly, ore'head, this is the place appointed for
the rehearsal, to practise their behaviours.


We are vanished.


Master Bowcer,


Welsaid in faith, off with your cloaks gallants, let's fall roundly to our
business:


Is the boy perfect?


That's my credit sir, I warrant you?


If our little Mercury should be out, we should scarce be known what we are*


I have took a course for that, fear it not sir; look you first here be
your Shields:


I Where be our Shields?


which is mine?


Which is mine master Bowcer? this?


I pray be contained a little gentlemen, they'll come all time enough to you, I
warrant:


This Frip is grown so violent;


Yours to begin withal sir?


welsaid master Bowcer, first the Device, a fair purse wide open, the mouth
downward, the word Alli^nis ecce crumenis?


Whats that prithee?


Your bounty powers it self forth to all men.


And so it does in faith? that's all my fault, bountiful?


Master Goldstone heers yours sir, 3. silver Dice, the word, Fratrem{que}
Patrem{que}?


And whats that?


Fortune of my side?


Welsaid little Bowcer in faith?


What say you to me sir?


For the device A Candle in a corner; the word, Consumptio, Victus:


The meaning of that sir?


My light is yet in darkness, till ^in^oy her, right sir?


Now mine sir?


The Device an vnuallued pearl hid in a Cave.


Ah ha sirs?


The word, Occultes vendit honores;


Very-good I warrant,


A black mans a pearl in a fair Ladies eye,


I said twas some such thing;


My turn must needs come now; am I fitted Master Bowcer?


Trust to me, your device here is a Cuckoo sitting on a tree,


The Welsh Lidger, good.


The word, En Anis ex A^ib^s.


I marry sir.


Why do you know what 'tis sir.


No by my troth not yet sir*


Oh, I keep one tune, I ^ecant not.


I me like the Cuckoo in that indeed, where I love I hold.


Did I not promise you I would fit you.


They re all very well done in faith, and very Schollerlike, tho I say it before
thy face little Bowcer, but I would not have thee proud ont now: come if this
be performed well.


Who the Boy, he has performed deeper matters then this.


I a pox on him, I think was in my pocket now, and truth were known.


I caught him once in mine.


Suppose the shields are presented, then you begin boy.


I representing Mercury, am a Pick-pocket, and have his part at my fingers
ends, Page I am to that great and secret thief, magno illo et Secret^ Latroni.


There you make your honour sir*


At Latroni.


You have it sir.


Latroni, that's mine.


He confesles the Theefe's his.


Remember boy, you point Latroni to me.


To you Master, proceed*


These four are his companions, the one a notable cheater, that will cousin
his own father.


Master Goldstone.


Let me alone master Boucer, I can take mine own turn.


Why.


Peace.


The second an notorious lecher maintained by harlots cuius virtus consumptio
corpus.


That's I master Bowcer.


There you remember your honour sir.


Ille leno pretiosissi^s, Virgineos ob lucrum vendens honores.


It sounds very well in faith.


Postremus ill^, quamuis apparatusplendidus, is no otherwise but a Broker,
these feathers are not his own, sed anis ex Auibus; all which to be nothing
but truth, will appear by the event.


In faith here's all now Gentlemen.


Short and pithy.


A good boy in faith and a pregnant.


I dare put trust in the Boy sir; forget not firrah at any *hand to point that
same Latroni to me.


I warrant you master.


Come Gentlemen the time beckons us away.


I, furnish Gentlemen, furnish.


Hark one word master Boucer, what's the same Latroni, I have a good mind to
that word in faith.


Latroni? why Sheerfe of the Sheer.


In faith? and I have sh^uen some shears in my days.


Now gentlemen are you satsfied and pleased?


Never: more amply*


Amongst us now falls that desired lot,
For we shall blast five rivals with one plot.

Grave gentlemen, in whose approved bosoms,
My deceased father did repose much faith
Your dearly welcome: pray sit, command music,
See nothing want to beautify this night,
That holds my election in her peaceful arms,
Feasts, Music, Hymns, those sweet celestial swarms.

May you be blessed in this election.


That content, may meet perfection.


Sound Lute. Band^ra, Gitterne,
Viol, Virginalls and Sithron!
Voices spring and lift aloud,
Her name that makes the Music proud:
this night perfection,
makes her election:
Follow, follow follow, follow round,
Look you to that, nay you to that, nay you to that:
Anon, you will be found, anon you will be found, anon you will be found.
Alienis ecce crumenis.


Bows to her.


Fratremque, Patremque.


Bows to her.


Consumptio victus.


Bows to her.


Occultos vendit honores.


Bows to her.


A Cuckoo: en anis ex a^ibus.


Bows to her.


Are you all as the speech and shields display you?


We shall prove so.


The very chain of Pearl was filcht from me.


Hold stop th^ boy there.


Will none lay hands on him.


How now.


Alas Ime but a broker, 'twas pawnd to me in my shop.


Ha, Fitsgraue?


Peamo^t and the rest.


Where's Boucer?


Here.


We are all betrayed.


Betrayed* ^ ^e new forth to betrayed, you have not so much worth: nay struggle
not with the net, you are caught for this world.


Would we were out.


'Twas I framed your devise: do you see 'twas I;
The whole assembly has took notice of it,
That you are a gallant cheator,
So much the pawning of my cloak contains*
You a base thief, think of Coome-parke and tell me that your a hired
Smokster, here's her letter. In which we are certified that you are a Bawd.


The broker has confessed it.


So has the boy.


That boy will be hanged, he stole the chain at first and has thus long
maintained his masters Gallantry.


All which we here present like captive slaves,
Waiting that doom which their presumption craves.

How easily may our suspectlesse sex,
With fair appeering shadows be deluded:
Dear sir, you have the work so well begun,
That took from you small glory would be won.

Since tis your pleasure to refer to me,
The doom of these; I have provided so:
They shall not altogether loose their cost;
See I have brought wives for em.

Heart, the strumpets -- out, out*


Having assumed out of their impudence,
The shape of sheeld-boyes.

To heapefull confusion.


Rather confine us to strikt chastity*
A mere impossible task then to wed these:
Whom we loath worse then the f^ul'st desease.

O grant em their requests.


The doom is past,
So since your aim was marriage:
Either embrace it in these Courtesans,
Or have your base acts, and fello^ous liue^
Proclaimed to the indignation of the law,
Which will provide a public punishment:
As for the boy, and that infectious Bawd,
We put forth those to whipping.

Whipping? you find not that in the statute to whip satin.


Away with him.


Since all our shifts are discovered, as far as I can see tis our best course
to marry em: we'll make them get our livings.


He says true.


You see how we are threatened, by my troth wenches be ruled by me, lets many
em and it be but to plauge em; for when we have husbands we are under
couert-baron, and may lie with whom we list; I have tried that in my the other
husbands days.


A match.


I'll be no more de^erd* come, when do you join:


These forced marriages do never come to good.


How can they, when the come to such as you?


The often prove the ruin of great houses,
Nor Virgin do I in this seek to entice:
All glory to my self; these Gentlemen,
To whom I am bound to love for kind assistance,
Had great affinity in the plot with me.

To them I give my thanks: my self to thee,
Thrice worthy Fitsgraue.

I ha^ ^ll my wishes.


And I presume there's none but those can frown,
Whose ^nu^s like the rushes we tread down.


