I Find it faithfully recorded in Authors of reverend Antiquity, that when
Godfrey, Duke of Boloigne (being chosen General of the Christian Army, for
the freedom and deliverance of Jerusalem from Saladine, and al his other
heathen miscreants;) Every Christian Kingdom did aid him with their best
assistance: because it was a business to Gods high honour, and general
comfort of poor distressed Christians. As from all other Kingdoms, so from
England (among other bands of worthy men) went the Merchants (trading in fish,
oil, flax, silks and other commodities) most frequently then termed
Fishmongers, and the Goldsmiths, then in a late begun league of love and
amity, by many friendly helps and furtherances each to other, in diverse
dangerous adventures, as well on the Seas, as the land, no men being more
forward in those affairs, and in those times then they.

After the most glorious victory obtained against the Pagans, Jerusalem
regained, they joined together in as glorious an action, of helping to build
the ruined Wall again, from the Water-gate of comfort, to the Sheepe-gate of
innocence, or holiness. And so much the rather, because there was then much
necessity of their pains and endeavour, not only (by Fishing and Shipping) to
supply the daily wants of the Soldiers: but also for bringing Gold and Silver
thither, for beautifying Gods City and Temple.

And as this league of love and fellowship began upon so good an occasion: So
they continued, and declared it in Englands Jerusalem, our famous Metropolis
London, building the Wall and two North Gates therein, Moore-gate, and
Criples-gate, as yet their Arms and Memories on them do sufficiently testify.
The one performed by Thomas Falconer, Fishmonger, and the other by William
Shaw Goldsmith.

Moreover, Fish and Oil, as well as Gold, Spices, Silks, c. were first
brought in by those forenamed Merchants: That the golden Lamp might not want
holy and precious oil, nor rich and orient Pearls (first found in shells by
painful and industrious Fishermen) fail to be set in Jewels Rings of Gold, as
being the purest mettle that the earth can affoord. And hereupon, honourable
Antiquity thought meet, to bestow such armoury on them, as (for ever) might
continue their brotherly affection. First, Peters keys, he being called from
the condition of a poor Fisherman, to be the prime Apostle: and those supposed
keys, the Fishmongers bear in their Ensigns of Arms, not superstitiously
any way, but to declare an earnest zeal, of entering into heavens Kingdom.
Next, Dauids Cup of saving health, which the Gold-Smiths also bear in their
Banners. So much briefly, in approving their long continued love and amity.

TIme having turned his yearly Glass, for election of a Magistrate, a Brother
of the Fishmougers Society, coming (by right of place, and general Sufferages
of the Citizens) to the high dignity of Lord Mayor of this City for the year
ensuing: our devices for that solemn and Jovial day, were and are accordingly
proportioned, by the discreet and well advised judgment of the Gentlemen,
thereto chosen and deputed, in manner and form as follows.

First therefore, because Fishing is the absolute Emblem of our present
intendement, and Fishmongers, having been such worthy Merchants in those
reverend and authentic times: leaving their matter of Commerce and
Merchandise, and aiming at their true Hierogliphical impress for the days
intended honour, thus we marshall the order of proceeding.

Our first device that ushers and leads the way, is a very goodly and
beautiful fishing Bus, called; the Fishmongers Esperanza, or Hope of London:
being in her true old shape, form and proportion, yet dispensed withal in
some beauty, for the days honour. It may pass (by general sufferance) for
the same fishing Bus, wherein S. Peter sate mending his Nets, when his best
Master called him from that humble and lowly condition, and made him a Fisher
of men. If not so; take her for one of those fishing Busses, which not only
enriches our kingdom with all variety of fish the Sea can yield: but helps
also (in that kind) all other lands. Fishermen, in this fishing Bus are
seriously at labour, drawing up their Nets, laden with living fish, and
bestowing them bountifully among the people.

Next follows a crowned Dolphin, alluding some way to the Lord Majors coat of
Arms, but more properly to the Companies, and therefore may serve
indifferently for both. But because it is a Fish inclined much (by nature) to
Musique: Arion, a famous Musicion and Poet, rides on his back, being saved so
from death, when Robbers and Pirates on the Seas, would maliciously have
drowned him.

Then comes the King of Moors, gallantly mounted on a golden Leopard, he
hurling gold and silver every way about him. Before, on either side, and
behind him, ride fix other his tributary Kings on horse-backe, gorgeously
attired in fair guilt Armours, and apt furniutre thereto belonging. They carry
Ingots of gold and silver, and each one his dart, and in this order they
attend on him: showing thereby, that the Fishmongers are not unmindful of
their combined brethren, the worthy Company of Golde-Smithes, in this solemn
day of triumph.

We next present a singular Emblem, corresponding with the Creast and
Cognisance of the Lord Mayor, and bearing an especial Morality beside. A Leman
tree, in full and ample form, richly laden with the fruit and flowers it
bears. Near to the stock or root thereof, a goodly Pellicane hath built
her nest, with all her tender brood about her. And because her love and care
(according to the opinion of Aristotle, Plinie, Gesner, and diverse other good
writers) makes her extraordinarily jealous of them, as never daring to be
absent from them (the sustenance she receives from the male Bird, being
insufficient for their nourishing:) with her beak she launceth her breast, and
so supplies that want with her own blood. Our cited Authors variously
affirm, that this love and cherishing of them lasts the space of a whole
year, by which time, they become strong, and able for flight; and then, though
they survive, the Damme dies. An excellent type of government in a Magistrate,
who, at his mere entrance into his years Office, becomes a nursing father
of the Family: which, though he bred not, yet, by his best endeavour, he must
labour to bring up.

If his love and delight be such to the Commonwealth, as that of the Pelican
to her young ones, by broken sleeps, daily and nightly cares, that the very
lest harm should not hap to his charge: then doth he justly answer to our
Emblem; and, as of her, so of him, it may well be said, his breast and bowels
of true zeal and affection, are always open, to feed and cherish them (even
with his best endeavour and diligence) to the expiration of his year. And then,
though the maine Authority of Government (in him) may be said to dye: yet it
suruiueth in other Pellicans of the same brood, and so it reaches to them in
the same manner. And because the Leman Tree (by the affirmation of Iulius
Solinus Polyhistor, Dioscorides, Pomponius Mela, Petrus Mexius and Antonius
Verdierus) both in fruit, flowers, rind, pith, and juice, are admirable
preservers of the senses in man, restoring, comforting and relieving any the
least decay in them: we seated the five Senses about the Tree, in their best
and liveliest representations, as fitly jumping with our Moral methode.

Our next device, before it be marshalled in due rank and order, is a goodly
Bower, shaped in form of a flowery Arbour, and adorned with all the Scutchions
of Arms of so many worthy men, as have been Lord Majors of the Fishmongers
Company, and each mans name truly set down on them. It is appointed first to
stand in Paules Church-yard: And at such a place as is thought most convenient.
In this Bower is a fair Tomb, whereon, in Armour lies the imaginary body of
Sir William Walworth, sometime twice Lord Mayor of London, and a famous Brother
of the Fishmongers Company. The reason of this conceit, aims at that
tempestuous and troublesome time of King Richard the Second, and the fourth
year of his Reign, whose life, Crown and Dignity (next under Gods
omnipotent power) were manfully defended and preserved, by that worthy man
Walworth.

Suppose his Marble Statue (after the manner of Knightly burial) to lye upon
the Tomb, and both it and the Bower to be worthily attended, by those five
Knights in Armour, and mounted on Horseback, that were Knighted with Sir
William in the field, after he had slain the proud insulting Rebel, Captain
and ring-leader to all the rest. Six Trumpetters well mounted and appointed,
with Trumpet banners of the Companies Arms, and a gallant guard of
Halberdiers, being 24. in number, with watchet silk Coats, having the
Fishmongers Arms on the breast, Sir William Walworths on the back, and the
Cities on the left arm, white Hats and Feathers, and goodly Halberds in their
hands: these likewise have their rank and place near to the Tomb and Bower.
Londons Genius, a comely Youth, attired in the shape of an Angel, with a
golden Crown on his head, golden Wings at his back, bearing a golden Wand in
his hand, sits mounted on Horseback by the Bower; with an Officer at Arms,
bearing the Rebels head on Walworths Dagger. So soon as the Lord Mayor is come
near, and way made for his better attention: the Genius speaks, the Trumpets
sound their several Surden flourishes, Walworth arises, and is conveyed on
Horseback from the Bower, as you may better perceive by the speeches apted for
the purpose. The Bower and Tomb are likewise borne along before him, for his
more convenient return to rest again.

We come now to our last invention in this our Triumphal Progress,
memorizing Londons great day of deliverance, and the Fishmongers Fame for ever,
in Anno 1381. and on Corpus Christi day in West Smithfield, where the like
number of Rebels (as then) were never assembled. Leaving the matter, a case of
desperate Rebellion; the manner, a most base and barbarous kind of proceeding,
to the great disturbance of the King and State, and unavoidable ruin of this
City, but for the good Angel of defence then guarding it, and the worthy
Lord Mayor made the second instrument: let us imagine (though not in the
magnificent form as then it was done, yet according to our compass of
performance) that whatsoever hath formerly been said concerning Walworths
reviving at the Tomb, his Royal attending, and the beautiful Monument
following, is all but a shadow of that triumphant victory in our aptest
allusion.

Our Pageant Chariot, is drawn by two Maremen, two Mare-mayds, as being the
supporters to the Companies coat of Arms. In the highest seat of eminence,
sits the triumphing Angel, who that day smote the enemy by Walworths hand, and
laid all his proud presuming in the dust. With one hand (King Richard sitting
in a degree beneath her) she holds his Crown on fast, that neither foreign
Hostility, nor home-bred Treachery should ever more shake it. In the other
hand he holds his striking Rod, inferring thus much thereby: By me Kings
reign, and their enemies are scattered. All the forefront is beautified with
Royal Virtues, as Truth, Virtue, Honour, Temperance, Fortitude, Zeal, Equity,
Conscience, beating down Treason and Mutiny. Behind, and on the sides, sits
Justice, Authority, Law, Vigilance, Peace, Plenty and Discipline, as best
props and pillars to any Kingly estate. These, as all the rest, are best
observed by their several Emblems and properties, borne by each one, and their
adornments answerable to them in like manner.

Having thus briefly described the order of the days service, insomuch as
appertains to my charge and place, (not omitting the Fishing-Busse, Dolphin,
Mer-man and Mer-mayd upon the water first, and afterward marshalled in such
form as you have heard on land:) we come to set down the Speeches, according
as they are appointed to be spoken, beginning first at the Bower and Tomb in
Paules-Church-yard, after my Lords return from Westminster, where the Cities
Genius thus begins.

BY virtue of this powerful wand,
Which in a minute can command
Graves, Vaults, and deeps yield up their dead,
How late or long time buried:
Thou Image of that worthy man,
That Londons Knight-hood first began,
In Office of the Mayraltie,
(A high and graceful dignity,)
Though yet thou sleep in shade of death;
By me take power of life and breath.
Londons Genius gives thee leave,
An airy substance to receive.
Speech like to Spirits raysde from rest,
Triumphs and pleasures to digest
By power of sacred Poesy.
And seeing this days solemnity
Honours thine own Society
Of Fishmongers, a worthy band,
Famed both to City, and the Land,
By thy rare deed of loyalty,
Upon the Kings proud enemy:
Sir William Walworth, do what may
Remain in thee, to crown this day*
With general fullness of content:
For thereto all our hopes are bent.
HE that above two hundred years,
(Free from disturbance cares and fears,)
Hath silent slept, and raysd this day,
To do what graceful help I may
Unto that band of worthy men,
That were, and are my Brethren;
And you grave Fathers of this State,
Which I my self did propagate
Twice, as L. Mayor: Oh, yet to see,
This ancient famous dignity
Flourish so fairly: And (as then)
Blessed with as wise and worthy men;
Moves tears of joy, and bids me call
Gods benison light on you all.
Your Character, Office and place,
Well wot I by that Sword Mace,
With such a difference, as before
This day, once happened, and no more.
The Genius speaks you in mine ear,
A Mayden-man, a Bachelor.
You being the second, let me say,
This is a blessed marriage day
Of you to that great dignity
Of your dread Sovereigns Dep^tie,
No doubt, but your chaste thoughts and life,
Will be as chaste to such a Wife.
All happy blessings crown (I pray,)
Londons and Lemans wedding day.
Observing that fair Livery,
You are of mine own Company.
How can I then, but joy to see
Such eminence and high degree:
Grace still our grave Society?
And see (my Lord) this Bower relates,
How many famous Magistrates,
From the Fishmongers ancient name,
Successively to honour came
In Londons Maioraltie. These fair Coats.
Their sever all Arms and titles notes.
Turk, Louekin, Wroth, Pechie, Mordon,
These before me were every one:
Then I. Next, Exton, Ascham, Falconer.
Michel, Parneis, Reinwall, Foster,
Hulin, Hampton, Ostridge, Remington,
Kneisworth, Coppinger. These being gon
Succeeded Amcotes, Curtois, Allot,
And now Iohn Leman, who well I wot,
Welcome as any to this place,
With our kind Brethrens love and grace.
Aldermen we had many more
That never this high Office bore,
And therefore are not ranked here;
But only such as Lord Majors were.
WAlworth, here stay: we may do wrong,
And hold this worthy man too long
From those great States, that at this ^east
Are every one a welcome Guest.
Those Aldermen, that on the day,
(When the proud Rebel thou did slay,)
Were Knighted with thee in the field:
Are raysde by me their love to yield
With this fair Guard, and tend on thee,
In honouring this Solemnity.
Mount then thy Courser, that we may
(In the remainder of this day,)
Do more then time will now afford,
Set on then, Honourable Lord.
NOw worthy Lord, there is imposed on me,
A brief narration of each several show
Provided for this Triumph, as you see,
In order to describe them as they go.
The Fishing Bus instructs you first to know
The toilsome travel of poor Fisher-men,
Subjected to all weathers, where and when.
In stormy tempests they omit no pain,
To bless all lands with the Seas bounteous store:
Their labour doth return rich golden gain,
Whereof themselves taste least by Sea or shore,
But (like good souls) contented evermore
With any benefit their toil can bring;
The Fisher well is termed Contents true King.
This Emblem of the Dolphin, is the Armoury
Belonging to our brethren, and beside
Speaks somewhat of that creatures quality,
By nature Musical, as hath been tried:
Poesy and Musique therefore thus do ride
Upon his back, in sweet Arions shape,
Who, by a Dolphin, thus did death escape:
The King of Moors thus mounted, and his train,
Shows your affection to that Company,
Which league with you in love, and doth contain
The aptnes of your correspondency
On either side, to hold inseperably.
His Indian treasure liberally is thrown:
To make his bounteous heart the better known.
This Leman Tree, your Honour may conceit
More, then I speak, because mysteriously
Some hidden secret thereon doth await
Known to your self. It speaks ingeniously
The Character of your authority:
Figured in that fair Bird, fostring her brood:
Though with the dear expense of her own blood.
Continual cares, and many broken sleeps,
Heart-killing fears, which wait on Eminence
Hard at the heals, and (tortringly) still keeps
Within the soul imperious residence,
As whips t'afflict both hope and patience;
These in the Pellicane are figured here:
And these you hardly will avoid this year.
But as the Senses sit about the Tree,
And show you how their virtues are supplied
Still with fresh vigour: So (no doubt) will be
Your busiest troubles sweetly qualified,
By those five helps that hold up dignity,
Discretion, Policy, and Providence,
Courage, Correction, these bar all offence.
Lastly, look on a figure of that day,
When by Heavens help, and Walworths happy hand,
That swarm of Rebels, who fought all to sway,
And have both King and Country at command:
Even in their height of pride, I made them stand,
And, in my Sovereigns sight, there I struck dead
Their chiefest Captain and commanding head.
The rest of that base rout, dismayed thereby,
And all tumultuous troubles calmly ceased,
King Richard, to requite true loyalty,
His gracious favour presently expressed
In Royal manner, Knighting me and the rest
Of Aldermen, that were in field with me.
London till then had not that dignity.
As I,
Knighted in field, on Corpus Christi day.
And as my Dagger slew the Rebel then,
So to renown the deed; And I dare say,
To honour London more (if more it may)
The Red-Crosse, in a Siluer-field before,
Had Walworths Dagger added to it more.
And now my Lord, this goodly Monument
Or* Chariot of Triumphal Victory
Some shape of that days honour doth present,
By Heavens protection of True Majesty,
And beating down Treason and Mutiny.
Adorning all the Throne with those fair Graces:
That ought about a King to have best places.
Truth, Virtue, Honour, sober Temperance,
Fortitude, Zeal, Equity, Conscience,
Justice, Authority, careful Vigilance,
Peace, Plenty, Law, Council, Obedience,
And Discipline, that whips all Errors hence,
These (as best Pillars) do support this State:
And every Kingdom else doth propagate.
A blessed Bachelor are you my Lord,
By being your sacred Sovereigns Deputy
In such a State, where all these do concord,
And truly do protect his Majesty
Figured in Richards great Authority.
As Walworth then, so Leman now may say*
Never had Man a happier Wedding day.
PHoebus hath hid his golden head
In Thetis lap. And now are spread
The sable Curtains of the night,
Our Evenings purpose to delight.
The twinkling Tapers of the Sky
Are turned to Torches; and apply
Their clearest radiance, to convey
Our Maiden Bridegroom on his way
Home to his own abiding place.
Our Triumphs pomp shortens apace,
That could affoord more time to spend,
But gladly would no way offend.
You marriage Rites solemnised
Bequeathes you to the Bridal bed:
Where you and your chastewife must rest.
London (it seems) did like you best,
(Although you are a Bachelor,)
To be her Husband for a year;
Love her, delight her. She's a Bride,
Ne'er slept by such a Husbands side
But once before. She hath had many,
And you may prove as good as any
Have gone before you in this place.
Twill be your Brethrens joy and grace,
That Fishmongers live still in fame,
And still renowned by your name.
Their hearty love by me they send ye,
And pray the hand of heaven defend ye
In all your actions. May your Fame,
Crown still their ancient worthy name
To all posterity. So, Londons Lord
And Virgin Husband, in a word:
Old Walworth must to rest again,
Good-night to you, and all your train,

