TO write a Tragedy is no such ease
As some may think, amongst whom there's a disease
Still of dislike, censuring what ere is writ
With ignorance; only to be thought a wit.
Plays are like several meates, their strange effects
So different prove, some carelessly neglect
^hat others long for, that which surfeits thee,
Another says tis good, give^ life to me.
What's to be done? the way to please you all
Requires a^ Art, past Magic natural.
Our best endeavours still with Comic fare
Have strived to please; now all our cost and care,
Soars on the wings of laboured industry;
To feast your senses with the Tragedy
Of Roman Messallina, the Play is new,
And by Romes famed Historians confirmed true.
We hope you'll not distaste it, nor us blame,
Where spots of life are acted to sins shame.
Tell me I pray? can there be no content?
To see high towering sins just punishment
And Virtues praise; insatiate lust to ^e,
And chaste Dames stared unto Eternity,
Will not this please? if any answer no,
I, let that soul and all the world to know,
Your loves the mark we aim at, all our might,
Shoots at your love, labours to hit that white.

SOla virtus vera nobilitas.
Virtue is only true nobility,
So speaks our times best Tutor Seneca,
And 'tis divinely spoken, like himself.
True Philosopher, for what is't to man
For to be borne noble, and yet detain
The ignoble mind of vice, licentious will,
Such no way are alide to nobleness.
Times hellbred, base, ignoble noble blood,
Runs through his veins, tha^s only great not good*
Far better live a private life with thee,
Thou sweet companion to Well-minded man.
Here's no seducing Pomp, no clouds of vice,
Nor fogs of vanity obscures mans sight
From the direct to ways directly ill.
This seal confirm the sequel of my life
To imitate the good that thou presents.

Still plodding at your Book, shall we ne'er find
You otherwise; Pox of this sad mutt'ring
To your self; hanged up, 'tis a disease to
Sweet alacrity, of all true jovial
Minds to be abhord, come. --

Prethe disist.


How scurvily this shows, how ill in you,
That Should be framed just of the times fashion.

That's learning, and valour; or should be so
At least; and not in outsides fond delight,
Whereon Times Puffe-paste costly coxcomb, all
His great little wit, and wealth, thinks best bestowed
To please his Mistri's Eye; when all mans mind
Should bend his course to follow virtues steps.

Out upon it; drink me and whore; those are
The virtues best, and best accepted among
Gallants of this age.

They are gallant sots,
Silly and senseless; what's all the delight,
That seems so pleasing to the itchie whorer?
But like the Itch, scratch't raw, 'tis still the sorer
'Twill smart to purpose; make you to find out
An obscure grave, cold as the snowy Alps,
There, in a hollow circle of the night
Lust breeds more cause of terror then delight.

Fie Cajus fie, turned Satire against your friends,

Alas you're blind my friends, and I am sorry.


Pish; were it not for sparkling beauty, precious woman,
Woman I say, that fair and winning creature,
Whose ne'er to be resisted delicate touch,
Divides us into all the sweets of sense,
Were it not for her, (glorious sweet faced woman,)
Man makes no use of his Creation,
What says our Roman phrase,
Si non letaris vivens laetabere nanquam.
Leave then this puling study and be ruled.
Hang up Philosophy that Scene of sorrow,
Come go with me to beauties fair abode,
There, if you'll make true trial of your strength,
Let it be there employed; do but withstand
The catching beauties there, and spite of all
Their povverfull charms and incantations
Come freely off, untainted with the Act.
For ever I'll abjure to be seduced
By the worlds quainte enticements; betake me
Wholly to Philosophy, and practise
The same in life.

So shall Proculus.


O were I sure that sworn you'd keep, not
Infringe your vows (though noble wisdom bids,
To shun the glorious strumpets licorish snares,)
You soon should find me sudden, dare to stand,
The baits of whoorish fortitude unmoov'd.

Talk not but do it.


Therein consists the Test
Of complete man.

Then on this book take Oath,
Swear that by all the good therein contained,
And all that's good the virtues of true Man,
At my return free from adult^'ate sin
To live true friends to virtue ever after
You shall prevail.

We swear.


So deeply swear
That may loves thunder strike when we forsake
Our vows.

Tis well, lead on; And if I ever prove
False to Syllana punish me great Jove.

Hey ho, what Hem, Hem, Hem, what Hem I say.


Here Mistress.


Stitch, oh Stitch.


In your side Madam.


No Stitch, orethwart my heart, O I shall die;
The bottle, the bottle, the bottle knave the bottle.

Do do drink and be fatter still up with it,
Why so my brave bundle of guts and garbish.

I you may well say drink, well may I drink
All sorrow from my heart, for I thank you
Ten thousand sesterces, this day is lost
To our victorious Empress Messallina;

All in the circuit of a day and night,
And yet she's ready for a new delight.

She may, for who but she dares do the like,
For a poor subject, ^alse the number serves,
On greatest Queenes most servants still attends.

Had not provocations to enable thee,
Confection of Cantharides, Diasaterion Eringoes,
Snails, Oysters, Elegant, and could not these
Make thee hold out with five and twenty;
'Twas but a Forenoones work, a forenoones work
You paltry puling.

I, in your young days.


In my young days, I tell thee small Flounder,
Old as I am and fat, I durst yet wager,
To lay twice the number of such shrimpes as thee,
That they should ne'er rise more.

Yes with a Pox.
I have not the Court art to kill my lovers,
Nor draw them on with witchcraft, Circean charms,
Nor is it lust, but want makes me a trader,
And those I clip with, I must like at least,
Let Romes brave Empress do her liking,

I she's a brave Roman dame indeed.


And those Mad-dames are the best doers Stitch.


Calphurnia loathes variety of men,
Times big bone Animals so apt to please,
Th'Empresse will whets not my appetite,
Besides you know I'm not for durance,
Wanting the daily visits of best Doctors,
To make me broths of dissolved Pearl and Amber,
Which well considered will not quit the cost,
She won the wager, I am glad I lost.

Glad I have lost,
Let me come to her, I'll claw you Minkes, glad
I have lost, and which goes nearest my heart;
To rail, and none to rail against but tall
Proper and goodly able men, calling
Them big-bond Animals, O blasphemy.
Why Phisgig; must I keep thee rich in clothes,
To want that ever pleasing sweet,
Honey, and Sugar candy delight; which the
Bravest high spirited glistering Ladies,
(Such as make Punies of their petty Lords)
Account their heaven, their only happiness,
Never but discontented when they are
Out of Action* and are you defective now;
Fallen out (forsooth) with the felicity
You shu'd take in men; O most absurd,
Not to be suffered, uttered, nor endured,
It is intolerable; it is, it is* it is,
Thou muddy minded piece of mischief it is.

Hem, Mistress, here comes our fellow Pander
The Lord Saufellus.

All of a house, but not all fellows Stitch,
And yet we hope to be Sir Panders; nay since
Great-ones be of that profession, and thrive so by it,
It cannot choose but be a brave profession.

Oh, tis a good,
A goodly brave profession; 'tis the best,
Best stream to fish in, be ne'er so impious,
Gold stiles the royal villain virtuous.

Here, here my most precious procurers
Down, and adore our royal Empress,
And me the messenger of these glad tidings;
Proud is her highness of the wager won,
Yet scorning the advantage of the loss
Trebly returns your own, with a reward,
And sign of her high favour ever after.

I hope her mightiness received content,
And will make bold with my poor house hereafter.

Yes, with your house a little bold her yet,
Silius comes hither straight brought by his friends
Valens and Proculus, your best wills work,
To make him serve her pleasure.

Pleasure her,
What? Silius a private gentleman of Rome
And be so gross as not to pleasure her.
Which of you gallants wu'd not pleasure an
Emp'resse; that a man should be so very a sot
As not do, Oh 'twere abominable.

But he's a man of precise abstinence,
And hardly will be drawn by any woman.

Hoy day; not drawn by woman said you,
If he come here, he shall be hanged and drawn,
And dry drawn to; not drawn by a woman!
Gogs nigs that's fine in faith.

See, here they come prepared; I must withdraw
For a more apt employment, show your skills,
Women through lust and Hell will work their wills.

Come Sir, we'll enter you.


Most certain
Into the devils vaulting school; where lust
In triumph rides over shame and innocence,
Am I not in Hell.

O silly Silius.
Cannot a sweet shaped gallant like my self,
Enter the house where Ve^us vestalls live
But it must needs be Hell, ha, ha, ha.

Welcome Princely Spirits,
Sweet faces, rich clothes, and exquisite bodies,
Make you for ever (my most curious clients)
Pru^iently, pleasing to the blood of beauty,
Hem and Stitch some stools and cushions quick.

What have you brought me to your Sempsters house.


These are no idle persons.


Is this your lusty kindred, sweet pleasure
Which angles souls to hell, as men hooke fish;
I, this is she the bane of all devotion,
She whose enticements turns weak men aside
From the right way of virtue, throwing em down
Into the gulf of all confusion;
From whence me thinks those dreadful souls I hear
Now at this instant cursing of your Sex;
Your sin affected trimings to entice
Which implicates the wretched mind of man
Crying with horror against your impudence.
O woman, woman, thy bewitching motion,
Fools wisdom, reason, and blinds all devotion.

What is the man detracted from his wits trow.


Out thou devourer up of maiden heads

Hoy day, I a devourer of maiden heads,
That (with joy be it spoken) I have not had
A maidenhead these fifty years.

Prithee be not thus bitter unto 'em,
Poor necessary evils they pleasure us.

Out on your beastly, your most senseless pleasures,
That makes you reasonless, esteeming best
Those things delight you most.

O I could stand,
My lifetime here to hear this Silius rail.

Note but the end of all your lustful pleasures,
All breed diseases, griefs, reproaches foul,
Consumption of the body, and the soul,
Engender sorrows and sotishnesse,
Forgets all prudence, grows most insolent,
Breeds the Ep^leps^e that falling evil*
Begets murder, makes a man a devil,
O'rethrowes whole families, confounds the just,
Foisteth in children illigitimate,
Corrupts all humane sweet society.
The various paths of lust are all uneven,
Her pleasures dreadful plagues the scourge of heaven.

Our sovereign good is pleasure unto which
None can attain but valiant men and wise.

Oh.

Silius thou shalt not fall unless I fall,
Nor rise without me, we love thee Cajus
Thou soul of music breath, breath and enchant.
With thy delicious Tones while thus we bend,
And health our love mirror of men to thee.

Fool that I am, thou hast undone thy self,
Keep in my virtue or this fie^y trial
Flames thee to Cindars.

Fill for him, ^st prepared?


With deepest Art.


Here pledge, and pledge freely, a hearty draught
(As I began) up witht; so tis well, this,
This failing, pure, precise one now is silenced,
Conveigh him to our bed, Natures delight
Where when he wakes he may admire and burn
Be mad in love to pleasure free in us.
Thanks Valens, and Proculus, Caesar dispatcht
To Ostia, we'll find fit time to make you
Shine in glory, all shall find rich rewards.

May you for ever glister like the Sun.


Silius you're snar'd; and we our wager won.


Swift nimble time the season of the year
(To offer sacrifice unto the Gods)
Calls us with speed from Rome to Hostia, in
Which our absence, sweet, dear then my life,
We do implore, use all the careful means
That may preserve that life and happiness
Thy love assures us* which if want of health
Should ^ate thee joy; Caesar were not himself
Disaster, griefs, diseases pale and wan
Wu'd make me marble, such is the affiance,
The strong persuasion of that love I bear
To thee thou star on earth my only bliss
Bear record heaven, bless thou this parting kiss.

Farewell my life, my love, my royal, Fool
Shallow brain fop, dull ignorance adieu,
The kindest Cuckold woman ever knew.
Saufellus draw nigh,
Now is the wis^t for time to crown delight
Turn night to day and day into the night,
Prepare for stirring, Masque, midnight revels
All rare variety to provoke desire;
Then haste and fetch those envide Adamants
Rome most admires for foolish chastity,
When we have grasped them here, surfeits riot
Shall squeese their spungie virtue into vice.
If they deny to come, let vengeance fall
Like to that all devouring thunders flame
Which fierd the world, be merciless and kill.
Rome shall take notice, our incensed blood,
Like to Medusa's shall to Serpents turn,
Poys'ning the Air, where local chastity
Claims least pre-eminence.

Spoke like your self beyond thought excellent
O it becomes you rarely; think what you are
All glory dross is, in comparison
Of that all rare inestimable worth,
You truly owe; all admired beauty past,
And that to come with full attractive force
Have fixed their lively characters in you.
Divinest fair; earth breathes not such another,
Twere madness longer your delights to smother:
I'm fierd with joy to see your high blood free.
Continue with increase, add flame to flames.
Burn high bright glorious wonder of thy Sex,
Act what your thoughts shall prompt too, I in all
Am only yours at whose commanding will
I'll death and horror wade to save or kill.

Stay ever you go resolve us; what is that
Stagerites Name, he that last night in the play
Did personate the Part of Troylus.

Menester (glorious Empress) that's his name.


Menester how that name works on my blood
And like a violent Tide, swells me with full
Desire to know the man; it must be so
Command him to attend our will tonight.

Know mighty Queen I by your looks perceived
^he graceful Actor pleasing to your eyes,
And therefore already here in court, I
Have prepared him.

Diligent Saufellus, I'll to my chamber,
Admit him thither; be swift in return,
We long for change to feed on various fruit;
Up Messallina let thy mountain will
Too long kept down, fly to thy full desire,
I'll live in pleasure though I burn in fire.

Come, come, come, this way, f^o how I sweat,
This venery is a stirring business,
Remain you here, I'll instantly return.

My heart that ne'er yet shr^nk begins to throb,
And my good Genius whispers in mine care
A fair retreat; I am fair warned, and yet
I waver doubtful.

Fortunate Actor,
Now let thy best of action to the life
Court Romes rare Emp'resse to the height of pleasure,
Muster up all the powers of man in thee
To an united strength, prepare a part
To ravish, pleasure win an Empress heart,
Look to it, prove active to yield full content,
Or else ^ou die, die a most shameful death,
So speed as you shall please.

That's certain death,
I, I that in Pompeys, spacious Theater
Acted the noble virtues of true man,
When the fair piercing lines so much prevailed,
I felt a sacred flame run through my brains,
And in this Orb of mans circumference,
My self at furious war within my self,
That in my lifes sweet sequel, I still strived
Wrestled with flesh and blood to imitate
The good I then presented, but now, a
Coward plague, or else some F^end raised from the
Pit of fear, hath all my goodness to a
Period dropped; and I like chafe, blown on this
Wide worlds stage, am now to act my own part,
Which must be vicious now, lust stung vicious
With Romes majestic Empress, whose command
Strikes dead in the refusal, dead; a word
That quakes even the most valiant He, though least
Expressed, if by escape I think my self
Secure in some remote soil, her revenge
Will with the self same stroke there strike me dead,
Among petty emminent persons now tis
Common; then Princes cannot fail, their Arms
Are long and large, compulsion bids me on
Who ere shall read my story then shall say
'Tis forced compulsion, and not rich reward,
No high Court favourers made Menester sin.

He basely, basely sins that sins for gain.
If not for gain, shall I commit for fear,
For fear to die, I must, I will not, keep
There my mind, and with chaste fortitude
O be my bar to this lascivious act,
And cleave me to the Center ever I yield,
Your pardon glorious Empress,
There's something in me works so powerful,
I dare not, dare not yield to your content.

How's this, dare not, is that answer for us
Why fool, poor scum of the Earth dost know
What tis to stop an Empress lofty will:
Saufellus, within there, a Guard, we'll learn
You better manners, hoist him on the Rack,
To the Rack with him, tear limb from limb, dare not
We will enforce thee wretch.

O dog; not do;
Up with the Snow ball, melt him, so, so, so.

Shall our high favours, (equal to base and
Mercinare Trulls) prove common put offs,
What say you now Sir.

That I am truly miserable, weak,
And vile, not being able to endure
This torment, O let me down; my pain, but
Not my mind yields to your bed, I do
Consent, consent.

Ha, ha, do you so, Sir;
Let him down, and let him find sudden cure
Command our Docters, feed him hot and high,
Pleasur's a Princess full felicity.

Mans a weak Bulrush; all his fortitude
Brittle at best; witness these tenter'd, limbs,
Witness the Rack, which tears me from the sight
Of sacred virtue; whose just anger now,
Like a d^nyed wooer puts me off,
Blushing and despairing; ^eaven out of sight
Mans out of heart, all virtues lose their light.

MY servants all are fast 'tis dead of night,
And yet my restless senses want their rest;
This was no wont to be, tis wondrous strange
I fear (nor is't unlike) my daughter, my
Most ambitious, irreverent daughter,
Dead to good counsel, now in great Caesars
Absence, most apt for ill; takes her full flight
To the loose life of all licentiousness,
Now at this instant wrongs him, and that the
Gods, whole eyes see blackest deeds, do see and
Abhor; and therefore caused me thus to wake
From dead resembling sleep, to pray
T'oppose her ill with good, heaven I obey.

Open the door, O noble Lepida
Open the door.

What ill includes this noise.


Open the door, O save us from the gripes
Of Rape and Ruin.

That was a woman's voice most certain 'twas,
I will no longer stay you.

O save us from the Rape, death dogs us
At the heals.

Our parents and husbands slain
In their beds this night, have paid lifes forfeit
For our escape.

For whom there is no hope
If sheltered not under your wings of safety*

She is your daughter that commands this ill.

Woe is me wretch, accursed be the time
That brought her forth; O may it ever be,
For ever bard the rank of blessed hours.

Hark, hark, they come, that fatal bell rings their,
Approach; turn us to Air some whirlwind, ever
We perish through spotted whoredom.

O are you here.


And have we found you out.
O you abominable pictures of
^eevish virtue, ye thread bare thin cheeked chastity,
Ye Puppets.

I am amazed, if from my daughter sent,
Tell me ye frightful villains her demand.

Them there, whose paltery puling honesty,
Merits no favour but a world of mischief,
They must live at Court.

There to live, and brave.


To shine in pearl, and gold flow in treasure.


Fed with delicious Cates, to swim in pleasure. breath.


Tossed on the downy beds of dalliance.


Peace hell bred hag, stop thy unhallowed throat.


Dispatch, resolve to go or die.


Then die,
Arm you brave Roman Dames, Tertestriall stars,
Armed with fair fortitude resolve to die,
That when you're gone I may look up and see
Your chaste thought stars in the Celestial spheres*
Is it not better die then live at court?
Racked, torn and tossed on proud dishonours wheel,
There to be whoor'd, your excellence defiled,
Rather be free, be free rare spirits for
Succeeding times to wonder at; spurn, spurn
In contempt of death, at deaths base strife,
To die for virtue is a glorious life.

O blessed encouragement.


All are so willing, there's not one of us
Wu'd wish to live, so fairest mind farewell,
Behold we link in love, thus armed to die,
Strike slaves, mount souls, fly to eternity.

Mischievous Monsters, O what have you don.


Take this, this, and this for me, ye Puppets
Of purity.

Wu'd you be gone!
Nay you damb'd hell-hagge I'll preserve you safe
Manutius Folio wake, wake from drowsy sleep.

How's this, locked in, what the great devil
Will become of me.

Murder murder, what ho, Manutius awake.


How she bawles, vengeance stop your throat.


O see where murdered chastity lies slain,
Under my tragic roof this fatal night.

Sad dismal accident.


Here take this Baud.
She hath a large hand in this impious act
Take, hang her by the heals then let my dogs,
Compelled through hunger tear, eat her alive,
I must to Court there prosecute the rest.

Remove those bodies I'll take charge of this,
O thou insufferable Bitch Whore, Bawd,
Have you been actor in this bloody Scene?
You shall be gnawn with dogs for it, tottered
And peecemeale torn, you shall you rotten
Stinking tun of decayed Lechery you shall.
Yet, I will set thee free, grease me now finely,
Finely in the Fist, you know the Art, money
Will corrupt, 'tis beggary to be honest.

Hold there's my purse, the better part is gold
Perform thy promise, I'll advance thy sta^e
At Court promote thee.

To wear brave clothes.


Rich, wondrous rich.


And shall I have a wench.


A very dainty device, a Springer*
One that shall make thy constitution curvet
And wind about thee like a Skein of Silk
Titckle, tickle, tickle thee my brave bully:

Say thou so, my old motions procurer,
Go thy ways -- stay -- O wonderful whats that
There betwixt thy teeth, gape.

Au, au, au.


We must be honest here, nay you shall go
Not to be tickle, tickle, tickled, but
To be tottered with your heals aloft
To be totter, totter, tottered my brave Bawd,
To be tottered.

Menester, Valens, Proculus, not all
No, not a world of favorites can yield
To us that free delight in dalliance which
Silius gives, he must not live at Forum,
Though it be near at hand 'tis too far off
Calphurnia.

Your highness pleasure.


Cause Cajus, Silius to be sent for straight,
And let Harmonius Musics ravishing Airs,
Breath our delight.

To your accomplished wish.


Circle me round you Furies of the night,
Dart all your fiery lust-stung Arrows here.
Here, here, let Circe and the Sirens charms,
Pour their enchantments; Monarch of flames,
Fill with aluring poison these mine eyes
That I may with the misty souls of m^n,
And send them tumbling to the Acharusian Fen:
'Twere an all pleasing object unto thee,
Thou great Arck-Ruler of the lowe Abyss,
Like to Cadmaean Semele I wu'd burn
Rather then want this my implored desire*
And be consumed in thunder, smoke, and fire;
Let petty Queenes dull appetite dread fear,
I'll be my self sole pleasures Queen in all.
Ha, whats this? cease that Music there,
A sudden strange and drowsy heaviness
Enchants my tender eyes to close their lights*

From those blew flames burning dim,
Where black souls in sulphur swim.
Dark infernal Den below,
Lakes of horror, pain and woe.

From dread Thunder smoking fire,
We come* we fly at thy desire.

To fire thy mind, lewdly inclind.


To deeds unjust, murder and lust.


Dreaming see, at thee, at thee.


Furies dart sins potent night.


Sable shafts of endless night.


Furies enough, I'm fully satisfied,
A Plurifie of lust runs through my veins
I could grasp with any.

Me above all.


O the unsounded sea of my delight
In thee my Silius, tis miraculous,
Ineffable, never to be expressed
By learnings deepest Art.

Glory of Queenes*
Cease to enchant with words that can so charm.

And Scarf about thy neck, my Ivory Arm
Practise upon thy lips the Energy
Of sweet allurements, shoot into thine eyes
Amorous glances stirring dalliance,
Embraces, passions, such as shall beget
Perpetual appetite, that all the gods
May in beholding emulate our joy,
Enveloped with pleasures sweetest sweets,
Ambrosiack kisses thus.

Delicate Nectar.


Redoubled thus and thus.

O I am all Flame,
A scorched enchanted flame and I shall burn
To Cinders with delight, debarred to quench
Fervour with fervour, violent flame with flames.

Thou art too noble a substance to embrace
Thy wife Syllana, be sudden, kill her,
She must not live.

How?


Be not ignorant,

The freedom of thy body undebard
Least let to pleasure, by this I charm thee.

O that delicious melting kiss prevails;
Sucks dry the sweetness of a soul distressed,
Poisons my blood and brain, and makes me apt
To do an outrage* I should loathe to name:
O if I ever was gracious in your sight,
Desist fair beauties abstract, I implore;
Spur me not on to murders horrid act
Which I shall ever rue; let it su^hse,
I'm only yours, never Syllana's more;
Sworn a perpetual exile from her bed,
Vanished so soon, how wondrous strange seems this.

Death and destruction satisfy my will
Or take it in thy bosom, I'm intemperate
Briefly resolve.

Hold, be not so respectless
Of him that loves you dearer then his life*
Dreadlesse of death I speak it, what is death?
A bug to scarre th'ignoble cowards mind
The valiant never; did the Fates conspire
And terrible death in the most horrid shape
It ever put on threat, despair, and ruin,
Yet it should ne'er affright the soul of Silius;
Th'impatient sudden cause of discontent
In your rare worth, only torments me more
Then were I rack't upon Ixions wheel
To perpetuity; be gracious then
To him that does repent, confess his error,
Seal't with this kiss.

Did Lucius Cataline
Spare wife nor child, for Orestillas love,
And must our high borne savours be slighted
Put off with bare perswasives.

Oh be pleased.


Let mighty Queenes, majestic emminence
In the high pitch of their ambition learn
Of us to hate corivalls in their love
Trampling the Torch of Hymeneal rites
Under their se^te.

The attractive force
Of those amazing eyes those glorious lights
Fixed in the Firmament of your sweet f^ce
Shall make me undergo the worst of ill,
Though with the forfeiture of life I ^azard
A death more terrible then Alcides was.

I love thee now, like to a burning glass
You have fier'd a fresh th'affection of my mind
More violent then ever* be gone, be gone,
Hasten Syllanas death then come to Court,
There the Imperial Diadem of Rome
Dreadlesse of Caesar shall impale thy Front
Jove and Iuno in a nuptial knot,
We'll knit the bands of Hymen, and out shine
The glorious Tapers of the golden Sun,
Whirl through the stately streets of spacious Rome
Like glistering Phaeton in an Orient chair.
That with the bare report, swift fame shall strike
Amazement through the world Monarchal state
All-gazing eyes fixed on our rich attire
Languish in dreams our stately state admire.

Ravished in thought panting amazed I stand
At your Harmonious speech Emphaticall.
Ambitious blood, like to the Banks of Nyle
Ore flows this Orb of mans circumference,
And points my actions thus their way to ill
Aspiring Arms Lavolto when they kill.
Go the influence of whose power stars,
Mounts thy imperial lot to set aloft
On the high Orb of our affection,
Like the bright rising oriental Sun,
When it salutes Aurora; 'bove the choice
Of five and twenty Iove-like Ganimends,
Who charmed, and wrapped in wanton dalliance,
Live fired with admiration; O pleasing,
More pleasing sweet to my insate desire,
Then was to Synon Illions lofty fire.

Shall Messallina in her flourishing youth
Like dull and tame, Nobility live cooped,
Confined and mewed up singular to one;
No Caesar no, 'twere fools Philosophy,
And I abjure't; there is no music in it,
Those of our Sex the minds of sots contain
And are of no brave spirits that deny
Pleasure, the heaven of my Idolatry.

Plagues yet unfelt light on thee mischievous
Slave, villane, dog, murderer rot as thou livest.

Mother the cause of your distemprature.


Murder in thee, in thee thou wicked Imp
And that thy substitute by the ordained
Against the most noble minds of chastity,
Whose innocent blood like the Atlantic sea
Looks red with murder, and cries out to heaven
For justice and revenge; O had thou first
Then been the Author of so foul a fact
Made thy own passage, happy woman I.

Beldam give over, or I'll disclaim all smoothness,
There's nothing done that's wished undone by us.

1st even so, then too too ill farewell
Truths story shall relate to after times
My love to thee; hate to thy desperate crimes.

Pish to your chamber dotard be advised.


Go and a mischief dambe you, and all your
Pitiful Sex.

We do commend thy care,
Joy 'ith performance of our strict command,
Which shall from hence forth stile thee favourite
To us, that will command thy fortunes rise.

And all those fortunes, favours, life and all,
Shall like an Atlas undergo the weight
Of your imperious will, be it to the death
Of Parents, massacre of all my kin,
To exceed the devil, act any sin.

For which we thus enseame thee,

O Dulce,
Divinest goddess whom my soul adores,
Multiply that sweet touch of rare delight,
And from the Garden of Hesperides,
Those delicate delicious ruby lips,
Make me immortal, quench, quench the burning heat
Which like th'immoderate thirst of Tantalus,
(Scorching the meadows of my solid flesh)
Dries up the Rivers of my crimson blood,
And as the gaping tongue tide earth for rain
Opens her grief, so in my looks behold,
View my distress; make me to live or die.

Grasp me Saufellus; lets have a sprightly dance,
Swift footing apts my blood for dalliance.

Music, rich music there; O that my skill
Could transcend mortal.

Tush: we'll accept thy will.


What devil sends her back,

Pish mind her not.


Nature constrains me back, what though dismayed
Shall I desist, O then she's lost for ever,
No; I will bend with fairest fair demean.
To save her soul I'll make my foot my head,
Mothers were Monsters else not truly bred,
Give my speech once more freedom.

You'll force us through unmannerly exclaims
To rest the strictness of our dread command

I come not bent with wrath, but to implore
On bended knees, with penitential tears,
T'appease the Gods for thy full Sea of sin,
Such is a mothers love, and such is mine;
Prove thou m^ like, thy soul shall never fall
Into those damned sins it nourishes;
Which like a ponderous Argosey full fraught,
Cuft on the mountain top of some big wave,
In the descent, falls on the fearful Rock
And splits in pieces irrecoverable.
So fatal death upon the wings of night
Whirls the black soul in her triumphant Car
To the Tartarian vales; where crowned in flames,
Tumbling descend to dreadful Or^us Cell,
That merciless pit of bottomless despair,
To fry in those blew fl^mes of fear for ever,
In never ending endless pain for ever.
If mothers tears were e're of force to move,
Let th^se of mine take place; strive to repent,
Think what a horrid thing it is to see
There is fear above us; fear still beneath us,
Fear round about, and yet no fear within us.

I do begin to melt.


Heavens blessings on thee.


And hells curse on thee; tis high time to speak,
O be your self divinest fair on earth,
This idle superstitious lecturing
Proceeds of malice; what? to make you child
And slave to her desires.

O impious devil.


No more, live and be thankful.


Ha, howes that?
Live and be thankful; am I then contemned
Is all my labour in a moment lost.
Live and be thankful; sure I do but dream,
It cannot be, na^ure against it self
Should so rebel; O fool, fool that I am
With vain hope thus to play the flatterer.
Mors e^umna^um quies; mors omnibus finis.
Dissolve the glassy pearls of mine eyes,
That N^obe-like I may consume in tears,
And nevermore behold da^ light again.
Pish, all this is but talk; and talk I must,
Fly from me soul and turn my earth to dust.
Must I then live to see my daughters shame,
Crack, crack poor heart; sterne death let fly thy dart,
Send my sad soul to the El^zium shades
That there it might drink Lethe, and forget
It ever lived in this mortality.
Parcae dispatch; when, when I say; no, no,
Then will I act Medeas murd'ring part
Upon my stain of blood* that gods and men
May sit and laugh, and plaudit my revenge.
Ye dismal sisters of the fatal night,
Rise, rise, and dance hells round lays for joy,
Rhamn^sia finds employment for you all.
Follow, follow, follow, follow, follow.
Note with your grim aspects the courts of Kings,
See how the politic statesman for his ends,
Sits hammering mischief; and how Toad-like swells
Bombast with treasons riches; see there's lust,
Brave Madam, lust temptations painted whore
Divinely worshipped by the bastard brood
Of knaves and fools.
Ye dread and ireful furies i'ft not true.
Why then employ your burning whips of steel,
Lash with eternal lashes, there, there, there,
Excellent Furies how you do excel,
So, so, so, so, tis holy day in hell.

O what a fiery combat feels my soul,
The Genius good and bad that weights on man,
Shakes natures frame, trembles this Microcosm,
There virtue pleads for sleeping innocence,
For love, true love, chaste thoughts, and virtuous acts
Which entertained within a constant breast
Makes man triumphant crowned immortal blessed.
But O the ponderous plummets of black vice,
Suppress those pure imaginations,
Which break like lightning only for a flash,
Wanting the true material to impell,
And to continue this false clock of life
From its exorbitant course; such like are
Majestic title, and the Empress,
That unpeer'd excellence, bewitching dalliance*
Soul of temptation sweet, so charms all sense,
Virtue I loath, like politic states whose good
Depends on ill, work their attempts in blood.

O my affrighted soul art thou there sweet^
Then am I safe; t'was but a dream I see,
A waking walking in my sleep wherein,
Me thought I saw near to a River side,
Two lovely Turtles sit, like morn in May,
Adorned with all the glories of the Spring,
Their loves to either seemed to sympathize,
And with such sober chastity connex,
That their two hearts (as true loves ever should,
Like fire and heate inseperate a like)
Showed like the splendour of a heart that lived
In sacred flames; in unextinguisht flames
Of chaste desires, free from the tainted spot
Of pe^ulent dalliance, till temptations snare
Appeared Parthenope like; that with her charms
Worked so effectual on the Turtle Male,
He (like Troy, firebrand, falsely that forsook
Unpitied Oenon) not alone content,
Alone forlorn, t'abjure his lovely mate,
But back returned his black intents to further,
And to the height of lust he added murder
The very thought seemed daggers to my breast,
That with the fear I waked.

To sleep thy last.


Light of my life how's that?


Briefly this;
I'll be your dreams expositor thou must die;
Die by this hand, this fatal instrument
Nor must I seem to yield a slave to pity.

Sure, sure I dream, dream still, if not tell, O
Tell me my better self, whose killing words,
Wounds crueller then death; what cause, what offen^
What ill desert in me, that wronged you never,
The Gods me witness bear.

Tis for no fault sustained on thy behalf,
N^; tis the Empress Doom.

She; nay then.


'Tis thee; that model of creation,
Must through thy death participate alone
All that is man in me; And to that end
With sweetest concord of discording parts,
Out sings the Sirens, fierce this mansion
With haut, Ambition, Romes imperial crown,
And therefore I must kill; or else forgo
All those bright shining glories, which what fool
Would be so nice.

Is there then no hope,
No comfort, no remorse; must I depart
Where I shall never see thy face again,
Never behold those joys, which Hymens Rites
Were wont to crown with true loves flames,
Is there no remedy.
Farewell vain world, my life is such a toy,
I will not with to live, t'abate thee joy.
Yet ever I go, grant this one courtesy,
'Tis the last kindness you shall ever give,
Place against my heart thy deadly pointed steel,
So, now farewell; death is for me most meet,
Strike sure and home, I do forgive thee sweet.

Bravely resolved, and I'll perform thy will
As bravely thus,
Not to be Emp'rour of the spacious earth,
Live, live Syllana free.

Is't possible,
Twixt fear and hope struck through with deep amaze
I waver doubtful.

Cease admiration
And be sure of this, though I must confess
I hither came Armed with a full intent
To take thy life, yet Silius ne'er shall add
To his libidinous life, a murderers name.
Of ill^, 'tis ever best, the worst to sh^nne,
By murders murderers souls are oft undone;
I wish I were far better then I am.

It cannot be; being so far engaged
Into the Empress favour, I must on
Make use of some devise cloakt with deceit,
That far beyond persuasion may enforce
Thy deaths b^eefe.

Kill, O kill me rather.
Be not far crueller to thy self then death
To put to hazard on so slight a ground
Thy life for mine; I know the Emp'resse
That if least notice of my life she hear,
Not ireful Nemesis in swift revenge
Could be more speedy.

Pish, I will so work
You shall not need to fear, therefore as I,
At court with my continuance must make way
To clear suspect; use you the matter so
Among your noble Family whereby
Argos eyed Envy descry me not; I
Shall securely live dreadlesse of danger.

Though you had struck my body f^ll of wounnds
And I survive, m^ fierce revenge should he
Good against ill, how to preserve your life.

You are the true Emblem of a perfect wife,
For whose rare virtue, from my soul I wish
All husbands were the same, in that right way
A perfect husband truly ought to be.
Which since in me (ordained by powerful Fate)
Never to be avoided backward runs,
Let my recursion from thy mind expel,
That Serpent foe to life; sad griefs extreme.
As grossely vain in being remediless, and
Therefore shun it, patient conjuence
Is the calm of trouble, best cure against care,
Gives greatness best content in mean estate.
Why do I then (like Godlesse villains) tell,
The way t'heaven, yet lead the path to hell.
Minds that will mount into superior state,
Climb mischiefs Ladder; virtuous actions hate.
Yet is't not so with Silius; I do love
Those virtues in another, though I want
The like performance; nor shall my high aim,
Raised on advancements top do me more good,
Then th'injoyning free from the act of blood.
But I protract delay, there's danger in it;
Video meliora, proboque, deteriora Sequor.
Never was man so infinitely
Bewitched; charmed, and enchanted as is Caiu^
Silius, to leave a constant wife; farewell,
We must part.

Must, must, O wretched word o^
Mischievous command; must we part.

We must; nay prithee weep not sweet,

Blessings like drops of rain shower on thy soul,
O that I might part dying in thine arms.

Farewell.


Farewell.


Tears want their remedy,
There is no striving, against our destiny*

MY brother gone to exile and I here,
So near the Empress Court, the Court of shame,
Where mischiefs hourly breed; how strange seems this,
I have a will to follow, yet I want
My wills performance; not that I am sick,
Wanting, or limbs, or liberty; which begets
More strange imaginations, yet all I can,
Comes short to guess th'inscrutable meaning
That thus deteines me here, in vain, in vaine^
The more I strive my senses I confound,
Then give it over, salute thy mother earth,
And rest, rest while thy poor distracted mind
Upon the wings of thought takes flight and fly
Fly to the Island of Cor^yra there,
Learn the souls comfort sweet Philosophy,
What infinite good 'tis to contemplate heaven,
For to that end the life of man is given.

Prove prosperous my design upon this
Brother to the banished Seneca,
Are you caught Sir?

Ha, villain what art thou.


A murderer and villain, O Sir,
'Tis the best thriving trade and best employed
Against such malevolent Satirists ^s you.
You that are all for virtue, a mere word,
When indeed there's no such thing; say there be
None truly loves it but dies beggarly.

Slave, rather dispatch me then torment m^ sou^
With thy envenomed scoffs against that that is
Most rare, most excellent.

A little more,
And then I'll speed you, excellent Ladies
Cannot disable with a charming spell,
(A trick of wit, a humour that they have)
Husbands they not affect; making free way
For Atlas backs to leap their lovely laps,
But your Satirical censure straight must pa^e,
Th'ones pride's scab^-hammd Rascals, and the (...)
Mischiefs veneriall Trulls; these are fine terms,
Pray who made you a censurer of manners.

O slave,

T'upbraid such emminent persons
What madness durst the like, deserve not death,
Yes, yet your life is safe, pass but your vow
T'embrace a beauty I shall bring you to,
(More delicate then was the Spartan Queen)
One that shall pay large tribute night by night,
Give thee thy weight in gold for each delight.

Not I, I yield my body mercenary slave
To lust and lucre, no, though mines of gold
She could give oftner then those who^ish looks
Women take pride in, to bewitch men's souls;
First partch't to Cinders, against the burning Zone,
Be buried quick* all torments possible,
(Stretched on the Tenters of invention)
I gladly would (most willingly) endure
E're thy soul killing proffers enters here.

No?


Pish, for my death, there's too much man in me
To fear so slight a scratch; let it come,
I will no budg a foot; strike fair and home,
Tis better die then live to live unjust,
Slave to th'unsounded Sea of woman's lust.

Are you so confident, have at you Sir,
Your love, your love, 'tis only that I seek
I am no villain, though I seemed in show
But one that fearful in these dangerous times
For to retain a friend; led on by hope
Of your fair life, whom envy in your foes
Reports no less of; caused me through disguise,
To put to trial your unvalued worth,
Which beyond man I find of such pure mold,
Sun-like your virtues outshine purest gold.

Believe me Sir there's no such thing in me
Worthy your least Encomium.

But there is
A miracle, which but in me in part,
Through friendships dear respect incorporate.
And you shall bind me everlastingly
To bless the hou^e we met.

As I am slow,
To friendships confidence (as tis requisite
For every one, and yet once entered in
Affect stability, judge you the same,
A man that truly sensative well knows,
Virtue to be but merely adjective;
Wanting that sovereign sweetness which directs
The mind to honest Actions; and therefore,
As friendship joins with virtue; truly is,
The lover of love; each true friends property,
By that true blessing, sundry, wills connexion
Our h^arts as hands unite, dilate affection,
That th'enlarge length, orbicular may spread
And ne'er find end.

So am I yours.


You mine.


Unparalleled is that love where friends combine*
Here comes the top top gallants of the time.

The fools of the time; how are we bound to heaven
Exempt the bondage of these Palace Rats,
These, whose delights are last provocatives.

Let us withdraw, and seem to mind them not.


Was men ever blessed with that excess of joy
Equal to ours; to us that feel no want
Of high court favours lifes licentiousness;
Kings have their cares, and in their highest state,
Want those free pleasures crowns us fortunate.

O happy state.

Glorious slave. --

Thrice happy,
I'd not change Earth for Ioves felicity.

Nor I, who wu'd, what inconsiderate he
For such a Mistress as the Emp'resse
Wu'd be so dull, as not make use of Art,
Forcing the bodies jovial able might,
To yield her expectation full delight.

Libidnious Goat. --

I'd do it, though Phaeton like,
The hot receipt should fire this Fabric.

When I commemorate her excellence,
How lavish lovely dalliance free proceeds
From that rarity of perfection, O
How I'm ravished; ravished in thought as well,
As with the Act; which breeds no wonder though
High Jove transhap't him to Amphitrio
To taste the pleasure of Alemenas bed;
Needs must such prodigal sweets mad thoughts of
Men; when power t'atract the Gods*

Impious Lechers. --

Silence, mark the event. --

I that know none more worthy then my self
Of true regard and worth; would be resolved
What's he, that bears the valiant mind of man
Dares for his mighty sovereign Mistress more
Then Vrctius Valens.

That dare I, I dare;
Pond that thou art to question such a toy,
Were thy power equal to thy daring pride,
Proculus dares do more.

Nor thou, nor he,
Not Valens nor Proculus though you both,
Both durst as much as he durst cuckold Jove
Menester would transcend you.

That our bloods decide.


A Spirit of valour.


Let it come.


What killing objects, this presents our eyes,
Our Favorites turned fighters must not be,
Descend Saufellus, know the cause, we'll follow.

Stand all so firm, this Seal express my rage.


Mine this,

This mine

Hold, hold, y're wounded all;
As you'll incur our Emp'resse deep displeasure
Hold, and resolve why thus you have exposed
Your lives to danger.

Whence proceeds this fray.


From that concerns the credits of best men
Which of us three in our affections prized
Your excellence most.

And was that the cause?
We do embrace and pretiously account
The vigour of your loves; so you no more
So full of spite, let prosecute your hate.
With the like hardy daring, twill not please.
We should esteem your jarres ridiculous
Issuing from brainelesse wit discerned in others.
And as 'tis common to our emminent Sex,
Triumph instate, and glory in your falls;
Yet th'operation of your loves so works,
That it scruze ours to judge the contrary.
Dry up your wounds with care; then come to court
Love shall entrance your souls; prepare for sport.

I'll study Art in love for recompense.


My love shall mount.


Mine yield profuse expense.


Here was a storm of mischief soon blown over,

'Twas to preserve them for a wicked life,
But since these accomplices are gon that are
Not worth least memory; behold this book,
Set my dear friend, and I will read to thee
Of that high Majesty puissant Ens,
From whom we have our being, life, and soul,
Which should dull flinty inconsiderate man,
When with black deeds 'ith miry bog of sin,
Beast like he wallowes; considers right,
Thinks on his present state (whence came and must)
Then on that terrible Thunderer that sees,
His actions kick at heaven; he then no more
Would dare t'offend his Maker, but with teare^,
Lament his souls polution, which doth give
Matter, by which men's souls immortal live,
But through an unfrequented heaviness
I am prevented.

Repose a while I'll read.


Make us celestial happy with thy news,
Art thou sure 'tis he.

'Tis, 'tis Montanus,
Sure as I live, I took full view of him
Before and after the fight; then with drawn
Within you grove of Oaks.

My hearts on fire
To clip him; fly swift as thought Saufellus
Conduct him to our Paradise of joy,
If he escape desire then confound us,
We only viewed him once, but then the time
Crossed our desires; blessed opportunity
That makes our happiness a very heaven
We'll build an Altar, and erect a shrine
That shall eternize thee for this; were it my brother
Resembled him we so entirely love,
Weed force him ravish pleasure if not kill
Be a S^i^amis to sate our will.

Hail to Montanus.


Sir the like to you.


'Tis th'Emp'resse pleasure you attend her will.


Know you the cause.


Delay not with demands they are frivilous
Will you along.

Your favour sir a while;
I'll but awake my friend, (So-ho) sleepy still,
Pray heaven this heaviness imports no harm.

How's this, my friend departed, I alone,
I know not what to think, 'tis very strange,
He thus unwak'd would leave me; sure he strived,
Yet I so fast, that he no doubt was loath
To break my rest; 'tis so, and some chief cause
Which I might well dispense with drew him hence.
I'll to his fathers house, there certain find
Or hear of him.

O Potent lust, thou that hast power to make
The valiant and the wise, coward, and fool,
I'm not so dull, but that I know thee now.
Now comprehend why Music breathes delight,
And why this banquet; why both presents themselves
To be my slaves; 'Tis to make me a slave
To lust; that deadly potion of the soul,

That's the maine end of these harmonious strains,
These stirring meates, which unto me appear,
Like those blew flames the damned taste in hell.
Celestial Angels guard me, now she comes,
And I so ill prepared, I, know not what,
A sudden earthquake trembles natures frame,
Which like a falling Pine tree to and fro,
Uncertain where to fall, it tottering stands.
She's most bewitching sweet, I fear, I fear,
She will ore come; now I begin to burn,
To scorch, like to the coals of Etna; strike
Me eternal winter with thy frosts; quench
Quench this hot combustion in my blood,
And if I needs must fall, O sacred powers
Benumbe my senses so, that I may taste
No sweetness in the Act, yield no delight.

Thus long with admiration we have stood
To gaze on thy perfections, precious shape
Why dost thou shake? why stare? as rapt in wonder
Why dumb? or think thy happiness a dream
This kiss confirm thee ours; entrance thy soul
To stir loves-panting appetite while thus
We clip thee in our Arms, embrace thee thus.

O --

That's loves Alarm, to bed, to bed,
To Venus field, there combat for loves treasure
Swim in excess of joy, there ravish pleasure.
To thee fair fortune in divinest sense,
In w^om all excellence inclusive is,
To that high power, I invoke impore.
If pleased, direct where I may find my friend,
Fi^l when, I fitly may assimulate
The restless acquiessence of my mind,
To the perpetual motion of a wheel.
That by the force of water restless turns
The vigour of the torrent left unstopt.
So the strange absence of my noble friend,
Suffers th'insulting tortent of sad grief,
(Tyranicke-like upon the wheel of sense)
To rack my restless rest, which I must bear,
'Tis vain to strive against sorrows stream to swim,
Man hath no power on grief, grief power on him;
What's he declines his visage to the ground,
Is't not my friend? tis he, happily met.

Hell-cat no more, no more of thy embrace,
Find thou my body enemy to lust
And yet again attempts me.

How's this?


Keep off insatiate Empress, I'll no more,
Poison of Monsters, the blood of Nessas
Damme up thy Curtian-gulph-like appetite;
May furies fright thy whorish fortitude
Dancing Lavolto's in the very act
And dambe you.

Save him divine assistance,
For he's lost; mistake not I'm thy friend

Tis so, and I am happily mistook,
Thy pardon worthy friend, it was my fear
Of further ill; made me forget my self
Distracted sense, as well it might, Other's
A strange deed past.

I fully comprehend,
By that distemper lately in your blood.
'Twas musics sweetest concord to my soul,
To hear with what a cold performance
Th'act was wrested from you, happy prevention,
How like a doubtful battle it hath made
The victory more joyful; which had else,
Had you replenished those soule-killing sweets,
No means for safety then, but fall you must,
A prey to slaughter, or a slave to lust.
But since with heavens prevention you are free,
Fly Rome; the impious maladies she breeds,
Experience tells, are hooks to catch at souls.
Therefore to be avoided, there's no trust
To trust to stay, where such infection reigns.
Who is at all times one; in that right way
Man ought to be, being circumvolv'd mong those,
That by the Plummets of licentious will
Measure their virtues; 'tis impossible.
The scholar, He, in whom there doth consist
Honest conditions, and within whose heart
There's many virtues make their residence,
Though with night watchings at his study site,
Wasting his vital spirits (not unlike
His burning Tapor) to illuminate
Others the way that leads to the direct,
From superficial to essential joy,
Even he, ill company corrupts, directs
To the indirect; so that some one vice
Robs him of all his virtue: The Soldier
That magnanimous resolution,
He that leaves nothing unattempted
May tend to the honour of his country,
Ill company poisons with self conceit,
Cankers with envy; till on the rack of
Haute ambition stretched, like stubble set
On fire he prove a flame.
And therefore to prevent us, against all ill against
Wisdom commands our absence, truly knows,
Man at the best, his power to do is little
His state obnoxious, at the best most brittle.

Your counsel points my actions their true way
To immortality, forewarnes to fly,
The dire event of future Tragedy
Which as the flame, the fire of force must follow
By th'Emp'resse bloody project; that Monster
In nature, in this the Emperors absence,
Mounts on the highest Spyre of infamy,
Resolves to join in Hymeneal bands
With Cajus which Silius quaint vallanie,
To put in speedy practise, he last night
Ariv'd at Court.

There let their impudence,
For glassy glories of Monorcall state
Engender sin with sin, flatter their hopes,
While our souls fixed on contemplation
Make for the I'll of Corce, (come my dear
Friend there on the Tyrhen shore we'll practise
Mans sole perfection to be heavenly wise.

YOur Excellence that too, too gloriously
Resembles your rare Sex; succeeding times
Shall to the end of time, gaze and admire,
Wonder at your high prudence, which to the
Combination of our Nuptials, hath charmed
Casar to a free consent, behold;
There you whose loves do ever bind me yours
May view my fortunes like a valley rise
Above those hills that will admit no clouds,
There's a full grant wherein you may discern
My glories in this admirable lemme.

'Tis a fit bound unto your boundless glory.


Not Ninus,
Was e're more dull, more easily entrap
Then Romes ridiculous Em'prour Claudius.

Ridiculous indeed here 'tis comfirm'd.


Read it Virgilianus.


The marriage of our Emp'resse with Cajus
Silius we fairly like; and to that end,
(For approbation of our Copious Grant)
With our imperial signet willingly
Have sealed this assurance, granting a Dower
Out of our Treasury to be exhaust,
And of our royal pleasure to be given
With her our only happiness on earth.
By whose persuasions we are confident
The sa^d Nuptials, to be but colorably,
Only of purpose t'avert the danger
Of certain prodigies, aimed at our loss
Of life and Empire.

This credulity in Caesar, was by
Her highness excellently managed.

Sure
Ioves high love to his loved Gaenymed
Descends in triumph on the Noble Silius.

Else, how should the means to his high ay^e,
Free from the plots of blood thus fairly greet
Without least flaw in safety.

True, true, nor
Can it enter in my thoughts to think,
What obstacle should bar his excellence
From writing Emp'rour.

None, not the least let;
The people that are the Nerves of Empire
All for the virtues of your noble Sire,
Dearly affect you; boldly rely on it
At publication of this copious grant
They'll add all majesty to your high fame.

Their love to you and fear of prodigies
Pretended for to dim dull Caesars glory
Will work constraint.

Refresh to memory
The Acts of blood that reigned in Scylla's days*

Busy their brains, and put them (...) mind
That the black thoughts of Cataline survive
For this prodigious Age to perpetrate.

Besides the Auspices, among whom this grant
Was signed, they by the Entrails of their beasts
Firmly affirm (past contradiction)
Your reign to be most safe and popular.

Which with the rest are piercing motives, that
Of necessity (as food and raiment
To the bodies health) will force the people
Constant; they in their love and fear must make
Your more then royal spirit most endeared
That state best rules, rul^s to be loved and feared

Noble Romans, dear country men and friends
These solid certainties you here pronounce
In my behalf, which argues your firm friendship,
The vengeful Gods must in their justice grant.
Make me the Minister of Fate, dig up
The dignities of Caesars Race, and in
The stead, plant monumental ruin, make
The name wretched draw dishonoured breath,
All the dire torments Furies can invent,
Were all too little for my Fathers loss,
That memorable (...)* he that hath stood
The fiery fervour of so many fights,
Come bravely off, and saved this Empire.
Gave unto Caesar Rome and servile senate
Gave all their strength and being, and for all
(Grown too too great examples for the times,)
Plots were devised in recompense to kill,
And that their machivillian darkness, he
No sooner scented, but in open senate
Scorning Tiberius, and deaths base censure
Exposed his life a sacrifice to valour.
And for that fact, upon the blood and name,
That caused so brave and famous an example
For all free spirits, I'll be revenged after
No common sort.

Brave Silius go on, and
Prosper, and command me ever
And all.

The thanks among Princes of ignoble brain
That shines like rotten wood, serves petty use,
The mind of Silius much much more then scorns,
The grave V^rg^l a^os, during the
Life of Silius shall ne'er speak but with the
Voice of Co^sull; he, Calphurnianus
Vectius Valens, Proculus, Menester,
And Saus^llus Trogus, to all renown
Command and wealth of Provinces shall flow,
T'expresse the gratitude of Sil^s, and
Though last named, yet your bright excellence (the
Which for gratitude ever remembered)
Best in esteem and first; not unlike, to
That rare Gem reserved last to view for
Worth and glory, to you all the delight
This world of man affords I freely give.

Thy temper melts me my magnanimous Mate.


The Rites of Hymen, with next morrows Sun
Shall apt my blood unto the perfect height
Of pleasure, love and emminence, lead on.
Pompey nor Caesar, could endure a Mate,
Nor Silius Claudius in superior state.

Emp'rour of empty brains z'heart I could curse,
His soul to the depth of Barathrum O --

Who but Claudius, unworthy of Empire,
Drunk with the dreggs of overlight belief
Would be so gross^ly gul'd.

Scared with the Bugs
Of Babies.

A whoores invention, a drab
Of state, a cloth of Silver slut, the tricks
Of a tempting Tissue Troll, to push his
Horns upon the Pikes of ruin, where he
Should rot; rot; were it not to serve our own ends,
Maintain that habit of perfection sure,
Which till this sudden unexpected change
Like Paste has worked him to what mould we pleased.

And must do still, or certainly we perish.


'Tis the prime policy, the heart of state,
Which if with vigilance we not pursue,

Silius grows popular, and the people
As 'tis their nature, ever covet change,
They are as easy ^o be filled with errors,
As for a lust-stung strumpet to take up
To her dishonour; therefore as Sailors,
That have for guide the South and North, sometimes
To traverse and to cross their way, and yet
Not lose their guide; so in the deep affairs
Of such high consequence of state (as now
The time concerns) we must for guide, detain

We most maligne.

Thereby indeed man rarely
Rests deceived, which for to put in speedy
Practise, and stop the marriage, you and I
My Lord (under the veil of friendship) will
To Rome; persuade the Empr'esse Caesar is
Himself; perceives that all her plots to his
Destruction tends; the loss of Empire and
The abuse of 'his bed, dissuaded her from the
Love of Silius, which (in the refusal)
Blood and fire must quench.

This put home
With low submission, making her believe
By cringes, creepings, and a Synons face,
That all our care is only for her good,
May work persuasion.

But not in her.
There is no trust to such uncertainty,
'twere deadly Stibium to our vital blood,
Like that dire poison that's resistative
Against the most wholesome Antidotes of life.
Weak minds of men they are, fit to be fooled,
Slighted, add scorned, whose dull ignorance
Knows not that women in their height of ill,
Who bars them their delight, delight to kill.
What will Valeria, Messallina, the
Emp'resse then; ^hinke you she will be slow,
Whose hot Alarms in the very Act
Within the circuit of a day and night
Endured the test of five and twenty, came
Off unwearied: A deed to quake the hearts
Of virtuous Dames, think you she will be bared
Dissuaded from the love of Silius, no,
We cannot therefore (knowing that credit and
Authority is far more safely for
To be maintained with circumspect, then with
Rash counsel) cannot I say be too too
Wary, least by any notice taken
She take least knowledge of our discontent
Whose rugged thoughts unseen, must be smoothed ore
And with a pleasing veil, appear in show
To like, and give full approbation
Of the approbrious marriage, so to
Secure us from suspect and peril,
Undoubted death.

I fully apprehend,
That so Ro^es Siren in the height of pride;
Silius and all the factious Accomplices
Through wicked wedlocks jollity made drunk
Drunk with the dregs of blind security.
Then, then my pyoning policies aloft
(Of which my brain deteines the Theorick)
Shall apt a Time for vengeance unwithstood
The thirst of their Ambition qu^nche in blood.
Till when sleep on, sleep on ye fools of fate,
"Plots best-encounter plots, free from suspect,
"Fly like the bolts of jove, firm in effect.

Blessed be that sacred power which restored
My senses lost, and in that perfect being
Gives me the noble patience for to see,
And suffers not mine eye-balls to drop out
At sight of this my daughters impudence,
Shame that attends this wicked Nuptial Rites
Now in the name of goodness, what means this
Whispering? what new mischief lies hatching
In yonder bloody villains busy brain?
In the discovery, counterf^it sleep,
And madness be my Moske.

At the Bachanalian feast which now
Draws nigh, then a rich stirring Mask will best
Express it self in greatest glory; the
Tunes for song I'll take that charge on me.

For changes in each dance my brain shall work.


What says Menester, he that has borne the
Prize; leapt Madam Venus in her height of pride
For graceful action and sweet Poesy.

Now,
Does he claw like a decayed Tradesman* when
To maintain the wagging of his chappes
His wives Veneriall Firk-in must to Sale.

Why? did you ne'er hear of a fellow, that
By the scratching of his nimble pate,
Worked your best pleasing project for a mask,
Was well rewarded for it, when such as you
For pains in song and dances laughed to scorn
Poor simple sots* their payment was the horne.

O nimble Satirical vein.


That's slow enough and dull at this time.


What think you
Of a wooden Cupid brought in, in
An antic amble making it wag like
The Apish head of a French Fiddler, when he
Firkes with his Fingers.

'Twill never take
Unless you bring in the dapper dancer,
With his la ta tat a teero tat a tant
Ta ra rat a ta too rant tat a ta teero tat a too,
Flinging away his legs, and skrewing his face
Into the fury of a thousand fools.
Whose this? Mad-madam Lepida a sleep.

Tis well; else she would rail faster then any
City Pupper.

That's a horrid hearing.


O a hell, none like it, let Scorpios itch
Reign in her middle sphere, phy how she'll
Play the devil with Cuckold simplicity
Her hu^band for want of performance, it
Passes all admiration, and that with
No little wonder, yet demand the Act,
And then you shall have my nice o'recurious dame,
Upon the Tiptoes of her apish pride,
Protest, with O no -- I will not wrong my
Husband for earths treasure, stand upon her
Honesty, then smile, change in a moment,
And then wantonize, mop, mew, bite lip and
Wriggle with the bumbe to put a man in mind,
Then touch, she'll gripe, and clip with a kiss,
Melt into all the forms of Venery
Thought can devise, and there's her honesty.

O petulant pureness of defiled pitch,
But you forget what actors are prepared
In readiness for practise against the Masque.

The vestal Virgins from the Temple hailed
They shall supply that want 'tis so decreed
By the Empress strict command.

O horrible.


All from the age of ten, to twenty five
Must suffer Rape, and shall, stood hell in fight.

Spoke like thy self my metropolitan
Cut throat of chastity.

'Twill be excellent,
Rare, I fat with laughter at the rich conceit,
We'll play at Tennis with their maiden heads,
Fifty at a breakfast, shall not give me
Content.

I say, virtues a Cyphar in
The hearts of great ones, and stands for nothing.
What says your most approved judgements, your
Single sole conceits I am sure will stand
For bawdy Comedies, and ribald jests.
Insinuate thou and so wax knavish wise,
Thou a stamped villain, learn to temporise,
Plot thou, and set friends hourly at debate,
Cling to the surer side, the weaker hate,
Turn Bavvd at midnight, Dander to a Whore
While lust in 'ith act (ye knaves) look to the door.
Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha.

Laughs thou mad mawde
Go with a burning mischief, Z'heart I could cut
Her throat, but something in her looks there is
That shakes me; what a gen.

Be thou,
One that knows how to mix with perilous (...).
The deadly poison with the amorous dart,
Drunk with conceit, that greatness bears the sway,
Safely to act what villainy it may.
Godge godden I'll come again anon.

But we'll prevent you, come Lords to Court,
She shall be silenced or her tongue cut out.

Gon, O happy blessed blessed prevention
That to mine ears unlocked the horrid sound
The black intention of so foul a rape*
A hundred vestal virgins to be whored,
First let the world dissolve and disipate;
To its first Chaos; O thou all seeing power
Prostrate on bended knees, I here implore,
Beg at thy mighty hands to inspire my soul,
Make me the substitute and holy means*
The sweet prevention of so horrid a
Fact; O heaven tis granted, thanks Majesty
Divine; work on my mind; thought happily
Thought upon; a spacious vault I have, which
Near adjo^nes unto the Vestalls Temple;
Thither this night by a back secret way
I'll draw the holy maide^ (none will suspect
Because all deem me mad) there by this hand
Succour, relief, and safety shall attend
Your noble souls; chaste maids live long and blessed,
"Free from the bondage of black mischiefe^ hands,
"To virtuous Actions, heaven propitious stands.

ARe we not Caesar?
Is not Romes Empire servile unto us?
You mad me with your news.

Mad a Dog, a
Cat, a Rat, you're to tame, want spirit
To be mad, I am mad, mad to the depth
Of madness; O I could tear my hair, to
See you thus, thus senseless of your wrongs, but
Do, do; be the grand Cuckold of this universe,
Let Cajus Silius reign Romes Emp'rour.

Loved of the people.


Honoured of the Senate


Hurrid in triumph through the streets of Rome*

In Caesars Chariot glistering like the Sun,

While Caesar, unlike Caesar calmly suffers.


Out of his Empire finely to be worked,
Finely, betwixt the two hot Palms of lust.

Abused (forsooth) for fear of Prodigies.


That, that, O infinite shame in stately
Majesty, to make your self a never
Dying scoff for ages yet unknown
To point at you, for the most famous Cuckold.

The renowned Cuckold.


The high and mighty Cuckold.


Cuckold by five and twenty, all in the
Short space of a day and night, O insati^te
Bawdy villainy.

Damnation seize her,
I will hear no more; misery of miseries,
Impatience cramps my vital veine^; that swell
With fiery boiling rage, O I am a lump
Of true vexation, tortured with torments
Worse then those in hell, in hell, very hell;
This body sure is not substantial, no
I am all air, pierced through and through with storms,
Incessant storms, that strike a terror to
My panting soul, misery of marriage,
Horned, and abused by every vastaile Groom
Vessels of baseness, they shall buy it dear
The high Sea of their daring pride must down
All topsy turvie to confusion turn:
I will uncharme and never more be fooled
Slave to those wonder darting eyes that strike
Amazement through the world, those bewitching
Lamps her eyes, fed with the oil of whorish
Fortitude, (that like the Centaure'^ blood)
^ive^s the poison of ^ell furies rage
Into my blood and brain, those false false eyes,
Shall never more entice, because that I
Will never see them more, they shall put out
Their glory for a grave, there forgot.
Scorned, and contemned of Caesar, lye and rot.

Now are you Caesar.


What you ought you are.


The high and mighty Roman Emperor.


But am I so indeed (for I'm amazed
At my dull follies past) is't not too late
To call back errors darkness, O tell me
Narcissus, is not Silius Emperor,
Vsurpes he not that name past reach to quell.

Confe^re on me that absolute command,
Which Geta Captain of your guard now holds
Over your soldiers here at Hostia,
And ever the next Sun set his circular course
The daring pride of all the faction,
Caesar shall sit in senate, and their doom.

Sweetest revenge, honoured Narcissus draw
Out the soldiers at thy free dispose
Here's thy command Geta we do mistrust
Thee only trust, accelerate revenge,
That I may ebb the high swollen tide of wrongs,
Which beyond limits tears my restless brain,
Knits and then tears with infinite unrests
If there be Hell, the devil and damnation
'Tis mans delight in woman, insatiate
Woman; that will do with the devil, O
'Tis a fearful thing to be a Cuckold,
Rolled up in wrinkles of fool patience,
We hear they have a Masque, but rather, then
Any of the lustful route, make their escape
Fire me the Palace, burn 'em in that Masque,
It will be brave to see 'em dance in fire,
Skip letch'rous Antiques in a boiling flame,
That thus with raging passion, boiling, flames
My most distracted brain; tortures no less,
Then if on Caucasus we were exposed,
A never dying prey to the Eagles beak.
Such is the misery of marriage, where
The besotted husband most affects, there
To be most abused, Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold, O.

After Calistus, t'appease his fury.
My Lord, I'll post to Rome, the people groan
Beneath the Emp'rsse weight; tis mischievous
Roman dames
Murdered for hate to lust, affords plentle
Of friends, to force the City gates open
To our free entrance.

In si^ne whereof,
From the high top, the temple of god Mars
Let a bright burning Torch in the dead of night
Waft our approach.

Like Synons unto Troy;
Talk trifles time.

Farewell my noble Lord.


Till next we meet farewell, it is decreed
In the height of pride murder and lust must bleed.

Now good Vibidia, thou virtuous Matron
Of Romes Vestal maids, say, are they all safe,
Can they endure the vault, that wretched shift
This wretched Age enforces,

Best, best Lady,
Thou Angel mother, of a Fiend-like child,
All earthly similes are too too base
To express thy admirable virtues,
By you Romes Vestal Virgins all are safe,
Only by you preserved and kept from rape
From being hurrid in sad silence, unto
The gate Colina, there in a deep pit
To be put into, there buried alive,
From that dire death which was at first ordained
For unchaste vestalls; by thee chaste vestalls
Live all preserved, to them their darksome vault
Is far more glorious then the courts of Kings,
For which upon my knees in blessed time,
Wonder of women let me kiss thy feet.

What means Vibidia?


To reverence your steps,
The earth, the very ground whereon you tread,
For that's made holy by your sacred steps.

Not unto me Vibidia but to heaven,
To that lets kneel, to that omnipotence
Which made this earth, lets both with holy zeal
Salute our mother earth in ardent love,
To heavens great Master.

Now the good Gods preserve us.


Fly to the vault, I fear we are betrayed.


Search, search about,
My Genius whispered in mine ears last night
The vestalls lodg^d within this mad Mawdes house
She dies for it, while the chaste puppets we will
Drag to court, there ravish and there kill,
'I will prove an excellent closing to the Masque.

How if we find them no* (my Lord)

Find or find not, for that I'm sure they are here
We'll fire the house and flame it into Air.

The ground shakes, I sink,
Zownes Hems hemmed to the earth
I cannot stir.

Nor I I sink, Stitch sinks
Had we our names for this, a vengeance of
All false Stitches, they have stirc^t me, O horror.

How's this.


Hell and confusion

Devils and Furies

Horror of darkness, what dread sight is this
What black Red-raw-eyd witch hath charmed this ground*
Sink'st thou my limbs supporter; must I yield,
Dost thou then faint proud flesh, mount mount my blood,
And like Enc^ladus out dare thy fate,
O that my wish were suited to my will
Now would I cuckold all the world, leave not
A man unhorn'd, a maid unrap't, beget
A b^ood of Centaure's to supply, and work
The worlds confusion; ha more horror yet,
Why silly dames, I confess your murders,
But to repent the fact, know that my heart.
Is like the Corsick Rock, more hard; far more
Unpassable then Chymera mount, whats
That in white there, what so e're it be; the
Majesty it bears, trembles my sinews,
O how it shakes me; came Furies clad in
Flames, not all hells totturts, th'affrights horrors
Equals the thousand part the pains I feel
Through sight of that, that flaming Crystal, sink
Me O -- earth; Pindus and Ossa cover
Me with Snow, hide me Cimerian darkness
Let me not see it, my Eye sight fails
Ingeniosi sumus ad salendum nosmet ipsos,
Farewell Romes Emp'resse
To all ambitious vermin,
Puncks, Pimpes, and Panders, Whores and Bawds farewell.
Confound the world, the worst of death is hell.

Make way there for shame; clear the stairs,
You of the guard, force all intruders back,

Back, back, back there, keep back,

For shame make hast, way for my Lords the Senate.


Burn beards and faces, burn em in the face.
That offer to press in*

Abstract of rare perfection my Iuno,
Glorious Emp'resse all admiration.

Excellent Silius all perfection.


Amazing rarity, beauties treasure.


Natures wonder, my delight my pleasure.


Let me suck Nectar, kiss, kiss, O kiss me.


Soul to my lips, embrace, hug, hug me.


Leap heart.


Mount blood.


Thus relish all my bliss.


Again the pressure of that melting kiss.


Descend my Venus all composed of love.


Locked in thy Arms my Mars.


Down, down we come
Like glistering Phoebus mounted in his Car,
When in the height of the celestial signs
He sails along the Circuit of the Sky.

Black is the night; a Canopy of cloud^,
Hides the bright Silver spangles of the sky,
All is secure, revenge proportion keeps
To my full wish; no thought of blood and death
Writes on the Index of black deeds at Court
The least suspect; mad lust and wine, revels
And pleasures, muffle their understanding.
O Lust, lust, lust, were it thou not what thou art,
A thick black cloud only composed of ill
For to tempt judgement, had thou the relish
Of sweet good, as thou art badly bitter,
Thee above all the Gods I would adore,
Thee, thee adore, that unresisted thus,
Snares the besot^ed Faction to their fall.
Load them with Lethe still, while thus I waft
Revenge from Hostia; like the sad flames
Of Ilion burn, burn bright Torch; let thy fair view
Tune to the dance of death, the amorous
Measures of full vengeance; blaze prodigy,
When the bad bleed give me that Tragedy.

Music, distill new sweetness, vary thy
Nectar Notes, while Loves bright eyes, court lips to
The height of dalliance, each sacrifice a kiss,
To all th'inchantments of loves luscious bliss.

O liquid life of live.


Here's a full bole, a health to the height of pleasure.


Brave health again, another, and a third.


That deep carouse, makes Vectius Valens see.


See, what dost see?


In my minds eye me thinks,
A moving Army coming from Hostia.

O likelihood, an Army from Claudius.


Senseless Cornuto, he's to confident,
He ha's too great affiance in my love.

His Cornucopia skull fears prodigies,

Alas, his horns fork'd like an aged Oak,
Are grown too great, to huge to enter Rome.

O mighty horns.


O monstrous Majesty.


Scoff of glory.


My scorn,
Come, come lets dance, Music proceed,
Claudius my hate shall with the next sun bleed.

Hast, hast to save your selves, we are betrayed,
The armed Troops of Caesar enter Rome,
Fly or their brandished ste^le will guirt the Court
Past all escape.

Deaf, deaf me O thuunder,
B^trayd, O black affright, fly Silius fly.

What to out live my Fate, no, you of
The Senate fly, fly all, stand not amazed, my
mighty Mistress, endanger not your self,
Excellent Empress, Sulpitius be your guard.
But why you sad copartners in my fall,
Why stand you thus plunged in the panting depth
Of deep amaze, collect your spirits and
Pursue your safety.

What? fly?
And leave you here; first with this hand
I'll tear my bowels out, and sacrifice
My heart's last leave to life.

To fly from you,
O 'twere the loathsom'st scum coward e're lapped:

Black blots of infamy to endless fame
Wu'd write our Epitaphs, if basely fly.
Where were the noble minds of Brutus then,
Brave Cassius, and Tytinnius hate to life,

Our deaths shall be more glorious, far less ill;
Yet will we die, armed with a world of valour.
Not like those desperate fools, which by their
Own swords fall; we are too deep in lust* to
Suck such back damnation, that were horrid.
The soul, the all that is the best in man,
Tells of two opposites, life and death in death.
True sorrow for lifes death misselead in life,
That's perfect valour, makes men bravely die
That lived not so, when the self violent death
Is but a bastard volour.

Now you luxurious traitor, Emperor
Silius; your highness gates at length are forced
To bow; wher's your top gallant strumpet, that
Strumpet, witch, hell-Cat; most insatiate whore
That ever cleaved to the loins of Lechers.
Tell me ye impious villens, Traytrous slaves,
That I may execute my burning hate,
And send ye swimming in her blood to hell.

Claudius, let it suffice, she is not here,
Spit all thy venom; be it a Sea of
Poison let it fall, here's none will shrink; ou^
Bloods are all too much ennobled, into
The eminent temper of true Monarchs,
To dread respectless death.

None here but scorns
To plead with humble baseness, low submission
For miserable mercy.

None here complains upon the enticements
Of your Emp'resse, that were too basely vile.

We win no glory in our deaths by that,
Our selves against our selves give guilty,
Only beg mercy from the Gods.

Of you our quick dispatch* tart lifes exchange
For a delicious death; which if I thought
Should feed upon delay* by all that's sacred
Thus weaponless, we all would force
And cut our way to death through some of you.

I fret with sufferance, upon 'em soldiers*

O ravishing content.


Fullness of joy,
My lustful blood flows from me, man's ne'er blessed,
Till freed by death; locked from the worlds unrest.

Man is to man a monster hearted stone,
With heaven there's mercy, but with man there's none.

This Tragic end is the most welcome part
I ever graced with action; 'tis the best,
O homo fragilis, specta volupta^es abeuntes.
Man is an Actor, and the world the Stage*
Where some do laugh, some weep, some sing, some rage,
All in their Parts* during the Scene of breath
Act follies, scourged by the Tragedian death.
My Sun is set in blood; fly soul and catch
"At a more glorious being, farewell breath,
"Man's never in the way to joy till death.

Why like a worm crawling twixt life death
Am I thus forced; I must, I will not die
So like a beast, the lofty Cedar and the aged Oak,
Cuft with incessant storms shall represent
The fall of Silius; what? will it not do? no?
Shall my death then prevail above my mind*
O sad condition, misery of life.
Expense of blood faints me, and yet I stand,
Stagger in spite of death; lifes threads uncur,
What means this Riddle? are the Fates asleep?
So drunk at sight of this sad spectacle,
I must awake their waking; I'm abused,
Where art thou, thou invisible threefe; lean
Rogue I dare thee to this comb^te, why slave,
Dog, coward, dastard Death, no no; why then
O kind best loving death; if valiant, if
Thou be that sole conqueror of Kings time
Speaks thee for? prithee, but for one bout,
I'll not resist, scarce able to stand; open
Breasted, take all advantage, disjoint the
Chain of inauspicious stars, fettering
My over wearied flesh with life, one thrust
Put home will end me.

Sink him Evodius.


Thrust home and sure,
Why so; desire now follows my blood,
Farewell world picture of painted folly,
Frame of woe; paltry life, I gladly shake thee off.

Hold, hold, for pity hold.


It is too late.
Too late Syllana my most virtuous wife.

O my dear husband, ^lint hearted Caesar,
Was not this husband wrought by the Circean
Charms of thy she devil; she, she hath bin,
The fatal Engine of my husbands sin,
She from my heart hath torn away this pearl
More precious then the world, O my dear love,
I do beseech thee to bear up in death,
Shoot thy pale looks through my afflicted soul,
Whose sighs and tears prayers knit up in groans
Ascend you starry globe unto the Gods.
The good good Gods to pardon thee my love.

Like a spent Taper only for a flash,
I do recover to embrace thee sweet:
Forgive me injured excellence; constant wife.
Take from my lips (dear heart) a parting kiss
Cold as the dead mans Skull; nay weep not sweet
There is div^nity in that weeping eye,
Prayer on thy lip, and holiness in thy heart.
The Devils cannot say I flatter thee,
Nor this abusive, scornful, dull dark Age,
Tax me to say it never, never can*
Not out of all the Catalogue of women,
Pick such a Phaenix Saint forth as thy self.
In thee, bright heavens majestic emminence,
Lives my supporting prop against all ill
To take me up to mercy.

Stay, O stay,
And take me with thee up to mercies seat,
For when we are there I know, we shall not
Part thus; O he is gone; the strings of life
Are cracked; I'll not outlive thee, no; thy loss
Most noble husband, wa^s my soul the way
To her eternal rest, break heart, swell grief,
And mount me to my love; I need not I,
The burning coals of Portia, Lucrece knife,
One kiss wilt do it, thus ends Syllana's life.

Live royal Emp'rour long and happy live,
To add to your revenge behold I bring
The approbrious Faction unto Silius.

More blood unto this banquet welcome, what
Virgillianus so grave a Senator
So trech'rous, served you as Bawds to sooth the
Minds of Lechers, Calphurnianus and
Sulpitius too: off with their heads, away
With them, be sudden, the tun of vengeance
Now begins to stoop broached with the blood of
These; vain inconsiderate fools.

My Lord,
The Core of lust still lives, time was Rome bragged
Of these dead corpse for the most virtuous youths
It e're brought forth, till your le^d Empress
Poisoned their bloods with her bewitching lust.

Where is that wretch?


Prisoner my Lord, safe in Lucullu's garden

Remove these bodies, her bloods the period
To my full revenge.

Mercy great Emp'rour, mercy for the love
You bear unto your hopeful royal issue,
Lovely Britanicus, sweet Octavia,
And for that admiration of her sex.
Their mothers mother virtuous Lepida
She that hath saved a hundred virgins from
The rack of rape, for that true piercing motive
Mighty Lord; O be in your great mercy
Pleased; to give your Emp'resse audience.

My Emp'resse,
She is no more my Emp'resse, her black life
Lost in lust, hath changed that name into an
Aethiops blackness, yet for those Infants sake
For Lepida, and for the love we bear
Your holy order we will hear her speak,
Narcissus, against to morrow let her
Have warning to appear in Senate.

I but such warning as she shall ne'er come there.
I'll give no trust to those her whorish eyes.
Caesar, mollify
Th^ flint heart; if they e're piece again
Off goes my head; I'll not abide the Test.
The reconcilement of a drab of state,
Tripped, in the height of pride when topt-with pleasure,
O'twere fine fool state policy to trust
Raise that declining tempest to her height,
But I'll be no such president, it smacks
Too much of the great dish of fool for me,
And if I do, may thunder sink me.

Prevented with a storm in Sunshine,
Frost in the hear of all our happiness,
O fire and Ice, O how between these two
Sad smarting strange extremes I madly live
Tortured in mind and blood.

To this, if ruled by me you ne'er had plunged
But that's too late now; O strive to repent.

Repent, redivell,
Tell not me mother of repentance,
Earths pleasures are to full of high content,
To be forgot by such a bitter Pill.
Pray give some better solace, what return
Makes Romes grave Matron your friend Vibidi^,
Can she with all her holiness of life,
Procure our pardon; is that possible.

Only a day of hearing that's all, which
You must arm your self for against to morrow.

O what a lightnings this to my sad heart
My heavy heart, will Caesar hear me speak,
Nay then I am sure of reconcilement.
My quick-Ey'd sense, and Sirens tongue shall work it
Charming like Lethe make him to forget
My Crymenall life, then my rich Revenge
Like to the Plots of thundering Iupiter
Shall -- ha, what horrid sound is this,
What dreadful sight thus quakes me.

O 'Tis a gailty conscience.

Help'esse wretch despair, despair,

Fool to live, why draw thou Air.

Friends all are dread,
Friends all are dead, thou hast none*

Th^se that seemed like Chafe are blown.

Then die, O -- die,
Die -- O die.

'Tis better die then live disgraced,
Joys and glories all defaced.

Thy pride of eyes,
Thy pride of eyes,
Which world of hearts have fier'd
Gon is their glory now no more desired.

Then die -- O -- die

Die -- O -- die,
Die be free live exempt
And scorn the base worlds base contempt.

Come live with us, live with (...),
Live with us, with Spirits dwell,
Life is a lake of woe continual hell.

Swallow me earth, gape gape and swallow
Hide me from sight of this sad spectacle,
No? why then do sta^e till you burst again
'Tis true, I was your deaths chief Actor
Mischiefs chief Engine, ruin of you all
Quid faciam? ubi fugiam, hi^, illi^,
Vbinam nescio, O dira Fata.
Close eyes and never open, all's vanished now.
T'was but the perturbation of my mind
So let it pass -- what again.

Tis a guard,
I fear the Emp'rour in his mind is changed
And this some sudden plot to take your life.

Within this hour my Lord.


Let it be so,
By that time hither I will conduct th'Emp'rour
In th'interim cut her off, when she is dead
Narcissus with his own saves many a head.

A Headsman and a scaffold are these for me*

For thee thou woman all composed of lust
^loudy insatiate Monster of thy Sex
See here thy stage of death, be sure to die,
If thou haste respite given thee for to pray
And ask the Gods forgiveness, think it
A world of favour and he sudden, least
Unprepared we force you to the block.


If thou respect the womb that brought thee forth,
Let thy faults ripe in Act, be blown to Air.
Through fair repentance.

How can that be?
Am not I only Author of all ill,
Is it not I that have prepared the paths
To the loose life of all licentiousness,
Black murder, lust, and rapes unspeakable
Why do I live? I that have lived too long,
Worthy a thousand deaths; I fear not death
But O the journey I know not whether,
Torments me more then twenty thousand deaths
But how so e're it must not be denied,
Fall then my earthly substance; thus low humbled

To take an everlasting leave of life.
Hold, our bloud's to precious we will not die
So like a Calfe, nor by the hand of any
But our own, thus and thus, O this cold steel
How it offends my flesh, I want full strength
To put it home; if thou be valiant and a soldier
Help to dispatch me; that was bravely done
O my mad lust whither wilt thou bear me
A dim black fog raised from the Lernean Fen
Obscures my sight; farewell dear, dear Mother.
Had I been ruled by you, I had been happy
Now justly scourged for disobedience.
A Caitiff most accursed she is no other
That scorns the virtuous counsels of a Mother;
So farewell light of eyes, ne'er to entice,
Horror invades my blood, I am all Ice.

Is she then dead.


And that desperately by her own hands.


O Caesar grant this Corps to my dispose.


'Tis at your free dispose convey her hence,
And now since we are free by fair revenge,
Never shall marriage yoke the mind of Caesar
To trust the hollow faith of woman more,
And if we do; may Heaven by treason foul
Shorten our days; the sequel of our reign,
Shall to the good of Rome suppress black vice.
Kingdoms are swallowing gulphes by careless rule,
Justice makes Kings the Gods to imitate,
Virtue in Princes, is the prop of state.

Our Play is done, now what your censures a^e,
If with, or against Arts i^dustrie, the care
Took by the Author (and our pains to p^ease)
We know not yet, 'till judgement give us ^ase.
Why should we doubt? this Theater does appear
The Music Rome of concord; you being here.
Let no harsh jarring sound of discord then,
Echo dislike; claps crown the Tragic Pen.



