Convey your carriage to my brother in Laws,
Th'Earle of Saint Anne, to whom and to my Sister,
Commend my humble service, tell them both
Of my arrival, and intent t'attend them:
When in my way, I have performed fit duties,
To Count Vaumont, and his most honoured Countess.

We will Sir, this way, follow honest Sailors.


Our first observance, after any absence
Must be presented ever to our Mistress:
As at our parting she should still be last,
Hinc Amor vt circulus, from hence tis said
That love is like a circle, being th'efficient
And end of all our actions; which excited
By no worse abject then my matchless mistress
Were worthy to employ us to that likeness;
And be the only Ring our powers should beat,
Noble she is by birth, made good by virtue,
Exceeding fair, and her behaviour to it,
Is like a singular Musician
To a sweet Instrument, or else as doctrine
Is to the soul, that puts it into Act,
And prints it full of admirable forms
Without which twere an empty, idle flame
Her eminent judgment to dispose these parts,
Sits on her brow and holds a silver Sceptre,
with which she keeps time to the several musiques,
Placed in the sacred consort of her beauties:
Loves complete armoury is manadgd in her.
To stir affection, and the discipline
To check and to affright it from attempting
Any attaint might disproportion her
Or make her graces less then circular;
Yet her even carriage, is as far from coyness
As from Immodesty, in play, in dancing
In suffering court-ship: in requiting kindness.
In use of places, hours, and companies
Free as the Sun, and nothing more corrupted,
As circumspect as Cynthia, in her vows,
And constant as the Center to observe them,
Ruthful, and bountious never fierce nor dull,
In all her courses ever at the full
These three years, I have trauaild, and so long
Have been in travail with her dearest sight,
Which now shall beautify the enamoured light.
This is her house, what? the gates shut and clear
Of all attendants? Why, the house was wont
To hold the usual concourse of a Court,
And see, me thinks through the encourtaind windows
(In this high time of day) I see light Tapers,
This is exceeding strange. Behold the Farle
Walking in as strange sort before the door,
I'll know this wonder sure: My honoured Lord?

Keep of Sir and beware whom you embrace,


Why flies your Lordship back?


You should be sure
To know a man your friend ere you embraced him.

I hope my knowledge cannot be more sure
Then of your Lordships friendship.

No mans knowledge,
Can make him sure of any thing without him
Or not within his power to keep, or order.

I comprehend not this; and wonder much
To see my most loved Lord so much estranged.

The truth is, I have done your known deserts
More wrong, then with your right should let you greet me
And in your absence, which makes worse the wrong,
And in your honour, which still makes it worse.

If this be all my Lord, the discontent
You seem to entertain, is merely causeless:
Your free confession, and the manner of it,
Doth liberally excuse what wrong soever,
Your mis-conceit could make you lay on me,
And therefore, good my Lord discover it,
That we may take the spleen, and corsey from it.

Then hear a strange report and reason, why
I did you this repented injury.
You know my wife is by the rights of courtship,
Your chosen Mistress, and she not disposed
(As other Ladies are) to entertain
Peculiar terms, with common acts of kindness:
But (knowing in her, more then women's judgment,
That she should nothing wrong her husbands right,
To use a friend only for virtue, chosen
With all the right; of friendship) took such care
After the solemn parting to your travail,
And spake of you with such exceeding passion,
That I grew jealous, and with rage excepted
Against her kindness, utterly forgetting
I should have weighed so rare a woman's words,
As duties of a free and friendly justice:
Not as the head-strong and incontinent vapors
Of other Ladies bloods, inflamed with lust,
Wherein I injured both your innocencies,
Which I approve, not out of flexible dotage,
By any cunning flatteries of my wife,
But in impartial equity, made apparent
Both by mine own well-waid comparison
Of all her other manifest perfections,
With this one only doubtful levity,
And likewise by her violent apprehension
Of her deep wrong and yours, for she hath vowed,
Never to let the common Pandresse light,
(Or any doom as vulgar) censure her
In any action she leaves subject to them,
Never to fit the day with her attire,
Nor grace it with her presence; Nourish in it,
(Unless with sleep) nor stir out of her chamber:
And so hath muffled and mewd up her beauties
In neuer-ceasing darkness, Never sleeping,
But in the day transformed by her to night:
With all Sun banished from her smootherd graces:
And thus my dear and most unmatched wife,
That was a comfort and a grace to me,
In every judgment, every company,
I, by false Jealousy, have no less then lost,
Murdered her living, and emtoomd her quick.

Conceit it not so deeply, good my Lord,
Your wrong to me or her, was no fit ground
To bear so weighty and resolved a vow,
From her incensed and abused virtues.

There could not be a more important cause,
To fill her with a ceaslesse hate of light,
To see it grace gross lightness with full beams,
And frown on continence with her oblique glances.
As nothing equals, right to virtue done,
So is her wrong past all comparison.

Virtue is not malicious, wrong done her
Is righted ever when men grant they Err,
But doth my princely mistress so contemn
The glory of her beauties, and the applause
Given to the worth of her society,
To let a voluntary vow obscure them;

See all her windows, and her doors made fast,
And in her Chamber lights for night inflamed,
Now others rise, she takes her to her bed.

This news is strange, heaven grant I be encountered
With better tyding; of my other friends,
Let me be bold my Lord t'enquire the state
Of my dear sister, in whose self and me,
Surviues the whole hope of our family,
Together with her dear and princely husband
Th'Earle of Saint Anne.

Unhappy that I am,
I would to heaven your most welcome steppes
Had brought you first upon some other friend,
To be the sad Relator of the changes
Chance it your three years most lamented absence,
Your worthy sister, worthier far of heaven
Then this unworthy hell of passionate Earth,
Is taken up amongst her fellow Stars.

Unhappy man that ever I returned
And perished not ere these news pierced mine ears.

Nay be not you that teach men comfort, grieved;
I know your judgment will set willing shoulders
To the known burdens of necessity:
And teach your wilful brother patience,
Who strives with death, and from his caves of rest
Retains his wives dead Corse amongst the living,
For with the rich sweets of restoring Balms,
He keeps her looks as fresh as if she lived,
And in his chamber (as in life attired)
She in a Chair sits leaning on her arm,
As if she only slept: and at her feet
He like a mortified hermit clad,
Sits weeping out his life, as having lost
All his lifes comfort: And that she being dead
(Who was his greatest part) he must consume,
As in an Apop^exy struck with death.
Nor can the Duke nor Duchess comfort him,
Nor messagers with consolatory letters,
From the kind King of France, who is allied
To her and you. But to lift all his thoughts
Up to another world, where she expects him,
He feeds his ears with soule-exciting music.
Solemn and Tragical, and so Resolves
In those sad accents to exhale his soul,

O what a second, Ruthless Sea of woes
Wracks me within my Haven; and on the Shore?
What shall I do? morn, morn, with them that morn,
And make my greater woes their less expel,
This day I'll consecrate to sighs and tears
And this Next Even, which is my mistress morning
I'll greet her, wondering at her wilful humours,
And with rebukes, breaking out of my Love,
And duty to her honour, make her see
How much her too much curious virtue wrongs her

Said like the man the world hath ever held you,
Welcome, as new lines to us, our good Now
Shall wholly be ascrib'de and trust to you.

See, see, the virtuous Countess hath bidden our day Good night, her stars
are now visible: when was any Lady seen to be so constant in her vow, and able
to forbear the society of men so sinceerely?


Never in this world, at least exceeding seldom. What shame it is for men to
see women so far surpass them: for when was any man known (out of
judgment) to perform so stayed an abstinece, from the society of women.


Never in this world.


What an excellent Creature an honest woman is? I warrant you the Countess,
and her Virgin sister, spend all their times in Contemplation, watching to see
the sacred Spectacles of the night, when other Ladies lye drowned in sleep or
sensuality, Is't not so think?


No question.


Come, come, lets forget we are Courtiers, and talk like honestmen, tell
truth, and shame all travailers and tradesmen: Thou believe alls natural
beauty that shows fair, though the Painter enforce it, and sufferst in soul
I know for the honourable Lady.


Can any heart of Adamant not yield in compassion to see spotless Innocence
suffer such bitter penance?


A very fit stock to graffe on: Tush man think what she is, think where
she lives, think on the villainous cunning of these times, Indeed did we live
now in old Saturnes time: when women had no other art, than what Nature taught
am (and yet there needs little Art I wisse to teach a woman to dissemble) when
Luxury was unborn, at least untaught, the art to steal from a forbidden
tree: when Coaches, when Perwigges, and painting, when Masks, and Masking: in
a word when Court and Courting was unknown, an easy mist might then perhaps
have wrought upon my sense as it does now on the poor Countess and thine.


O world!


O flesh!


O Devil!


I tell thee Mugeron, the Flesh is grown so great with the Devil, as there's
but a little Honesty left ^th world. That, that is, is in Lawyers, they
engross all: S'foote what gave the first fire to the Counts Jealousy?


What but his misconstruction of her honourable affection to Uandome.


Honourable affection? first she's an ill huswife of her honour, that puts it
upon construction: but the presumption was violent against her, no speech but
of Vandome, no thought but of his memory, no mirth but in his company,
besides the free intercourse of Letters, Favours, and other entertainments, too
too manifest signs that her heart went hand in hand with her tongue.


Why, was she not his mistress?


I, I, a Court term, for I wot what, slight Vandome the Stallion of the
Court, her devoted Servant, and forsooth loves her honourably: Tush, hes a
fool that believes it: for my part I love to offend in the better part still,
and that is, to judge charitablie: But now forsooth to redeem her Honour,
she must by a laborious and violent kind of Purgation, Rub off the Skin,
to wash out the spot, Turn her Chamber to a Cell, the Sun into a Taper,
And (as if she lived in another world amongst the Antipodes,) make our night
her day, and our day her night, that under this curtain, she may lay his
jealousy a sleep, whiles she turns poor Argus to Acteon, and makes his
Sheets common to her Seruaunt Vandome.


Uandome? Why he was met in the street but even now, newly arrived after
three years travail.


Newly arrived? he has been arrived this twelue-month, and has ever since
lyne close in his mistress cunning darkness, at her service.


^ye a the Devil, who will not envy slander? O the miserable condition of
her Sex: borne to live under all construction. If she be courteous, she's
thought to be wanton: if she be kind, she's too willing* if coy, too
wilful: if she be modest: she's a clown, if she be honest, she's a fool:
And so is he.


What Monsieur D'oliue, the only admirer of wit and good words.


Morrow wits, morrow good wits: my little parcel of wit, I have Rods in
peace for you; how doest Jack, may I call thee Sir Jack yet?


You may Sir: Sirs as commendable an addition as Jack, for ought I know.


I know it Jack, and as common too.


Go too, you may cover; we have taken notice of your embroidered Beaver:


Look you: by Heaven tha'art one of the maddest bitter slaves in Europe, I do
but wonder how I made shift to love thee all this while.


Go too what might such a parcel guilt cover be worth?


Perhaps more then the whole piece besides.


Good in faith, but bitter, O you mad slaves, I think you had Satyrs, to your
syres, yet I must love you, I must take pleasure in you, and in faith tell me,
how is't? live I see you do, but how? but how? wits?


Faith as you see, like poor younger Brothers.


By your wits?


Nay not turned Poets neither.


Good soothe: but indeed to say truth, Time was when the sons of the Muses
had the privilege to live only by their wits, but times are altered,
Monopolies are now called in, wits become a free trade for all sorts to live
by, Lawyers live by wit and they live worshipfully: Soldiers live by wit, and
they live honourably: Panders live by wit, and they live honestly. In a word
there are few trades but live by wit, only bawds and Midwifes live by Women's
labours, as Fools and Fiddlers do by making mirth, Pages and Parasits by making
legs: Painters and Players by making mouths and faces: ^a doest well wits?


Faith thou follow a figure in thyiests, as counttey Gentlemen follow
fashions when they be worn threed-bare.


Well, well, lets leave these wit skirmishes, and say when shall we meet?


How think you, are we not met now?


Tush man, I mean at my chamber, where we may take free use of our selves,
that is, drink Sack, and talk Satire, and let our wits run the wild Goose
chase over Court and Country; I will have my chamber the Rende-vo^s of all
good wits, the shop of good words, the Mint of good lestes, an Ordinary of
fine discourse, Critickes, Essayists, Linguists, Poets, and other professors of
that faculty of wit, shall at certain hours ^th day resort thither, it shall
be a second Sorbonne, where all doubts or differences of Learning, Honour,
Duellisme, Criticism, and Poetry shall be disputed: and how wits, do ye
follow the Court still?


Close at heals sir, and I can tell you, you have much to answer for your
stars, that you do not so too.


As why wits? as why?


Why sir, the Court's as twere the stage: and they that have a good suite of
parts and qualities, ought to press thither to grace them, and receive their
due merit.


Tush, let the Court follow me: he that soars too near the sun, me^ts his
wings many times: as I am, I possess my self, I enjoy my liberty, my
learning, my wit, as for wealth and honour let am go, I'll not loose my learning
to be a Lord, nor my wit to be an Alderman.


Admirable D'oliue.


And what! you stand gazing at this Comet here, and admire it, I dare say.


And do not you?


Not I, I admire nothing but wit.


But I wonder how she entertains time in that solitary Cell: does she not
take Tobacco think you?


She does, she does: others make it their Physic, she makes it her food: her
sister and she take it my turn, first one, then the other, and Vandome
ministers to them both.


How say thou by that Helene of Greece, the Countesses sister, there were a
Paragon Monsieur D'oliue, to admire and marry too.


Not for me.


No, what acceptions lies against the choice.


Tush, tell me not of choice, if I stood affected that way, I would choose my
wife as men do Valentines, blindfold, or draw cuts for them, for so I shall be
sure not to be deceived in choosing: for take this of me, there's ten times
more deceit in women then in Horse-flesh: and I say still, that a pretty well
paced Chambermaid is the only fashion, if she grow full or full some, give her
but six pence to buy her a handbasket, and send her the way of all flesh,
there's no more but so.


Indeed that's the sauingst way.


O me! what a hell tis for a man to be tied to the continual charge of a
Coach, with the appurtenances, horse, men, and so forth; and then to have a
mans house pestered with a whole country of Guests, Grooms, Panders, weighting
maids? c. I careful to please my wife, she careless to displease me,
shrewish if she be honest, intolerable if she be wise, imperious as an
Empress, all she does must be law, all she says Gospel: O what a penance
tis to endure her, I glad to forbear still, all to keep her loyal, and yet
perhaps when all's done, my heir shall be like my Horse-keeper: Fie on it*,
the very thought of marriage were able to cool the hottest liver in France.


Well, I durst venture twice the price of your guilt Connies wool, we shall
have you change your copy ^re a twelve months day.


We must have you dubbed ath order theirs no remedy, you that have unmarried,
done such honourable service in the common-wealth, must needs receive the
honour due ^oot in marriage.


That he may do, and never marry.


As how wits, in faith as how?


For if he can prove his father was free ath order, and that he was his
fathers son, then by the laudable custom of the City, he may be a
cuckold by his fathers copy, and never serve fort.


Ever good in faith:


Nay howe can he plead that, when ^*is as well known his father dyed a
bachelor.


Bitter, in verity, bitter. But good still in it kind.


Go too, we must have you follow the lantern of your forefathers.


His forefathers? S*body had he more fathers then one.


Why this is right: heers wit canuast out ans coat, into's Jacket: the string
sounds ever well, that rubs not too much ath frets: I must love your Wits* I
must take pleasure in you. Farewell good wits, you know my lodging, make an
Errand thither now and than, and save your ordinary, do wits, do.


We shall be troublesome t^.


O God Sir* you wrong me^, to think I can, be troubled with wit, I love a
good wit, as I love my self, if you need a brace or two of Crowns at any
time Address but your Sonnet, it shall be as sufficient as your bond at all
times, I carry half a score birds in a ^age, shall ever remain at your
call: Farewell wits, farewell good wits.


Farewell the true map of a gull: by Heaven he shall too'th Court: it is the
perfect model of an impudent upstart: the compound of a Poet, and a Lawyer, he
shall sure too'th Court.


Nay for Gods sake, letts have no fools at Court.


He shall too't that's certain, the Duke had a purpose to dispatch some one or
other to the French King, to entreat him to send for the body of his Niece,
which the melancholy Earl of Saint Anne, her husband hath kept so long
unburied, as meaning one grave should entomb himself and her together.


A very worthy subject for an Embassage, as D'oliue is for an Ambassador Agent,
and it is as suitable to his brain, as his parcel guilt Beaver to his fools
head.


Well it shall go hard but he shall be employed, O tis a most accomplish^
ass, the mugrill of a Gull, and a villain, the very essence of his soul is
pure villainy: The substance of his braine-foolery: one that believes nothing
from the stars upward. A Pagan in belief, an Epicure beyond belief,
Prodigious in lust, Prodigal in wasteful expense, in necessary most penurious,
his wit is to admire and imitate, his grace is to censure, and detract* he
shall to'th Court, in faith he shall thither, I will shape such employement for
him, as that he himself shall have no less contentment, in making mirth to
the whole Court, then the Duke and the whole Court shall have pleasure in
enjoying his presence. A knave if he be rich, is fit to make an Officer, As a
Fool if he be a knave is fit to make an Intelligencer.


What an order is this? Eleven a clooke at night is our Ladies morning, and her
hour to rise at, as in the morning it is other Ladies hour: these Tapers are
our Suns, with which we call her from her bed. But I pray thee Licette what
makes the virgin Lady, my Ladies s^ter, break wind so continually, and sigh
so tempestuously, I believe she's in love?


With whom, can you tell?


Not very well, but certes that's her disease, a man may cast her water in her
face: The truth is, it is no matter what she is, for there is little goodness
in her, I could never yet finger one Cardicue of her bounty: And indeed all
bounty now adays is dead amongst Ladies. This same Bonitas is quite put down
amongst am. But see, Now we shall discover the heaviness of this virgin
Lady, I'll cauesdroppe, and if it be possible, hear who is her Lover: For when
this same amorous spirit possesses these young people, they have no other
subject to talk of.


O sister, would that matchless Earl ever have wronged his wife with
jealousy?


Never.


Good Lord what difference is in men? but such a man as this was ever seen to
love his wife, even after death so dearly, to live with her in death? To leave
the world and all his pleasures: all his friends and honours, as all were
nothing, now his wife is gone, is it not strange?


Exceeding strange.


But sister should not the noble man ^e Chronicled if he had right, I pray you
sister, should ^ not?


Yes, yes he should.


But did you ever hear of such a Noble gentleman: did you sister?


I tell you no:


And do not you delight to hear him spoken of? and pra^'d, and honoured?

Do you not Madame?


What should I say? I do;


Why very well and should not every woman that loves the Sovereign honour of
her Sex, delight to hear him pr^isd as well as we?

Good Madam answer heartily?


Yet again who eu^r heard one talk so?


Talk so? Why should not every Lady talk so?
You think belike I love the Noble man:
Heaven is my judge is l^ indeed^ his love
And honour to his Wife so after death:
Would make a Fayry love him, yet nor love.
But think the better of him, and sometimes*
Talk of his love or so; But you know Madam:
I called her sister, and if I love him,
It is but as my Brother I protest.

Let me come in; Sir you mist not enter:


What rude disordered none is that within?


I know not Madam,


How now;


Whers my Lady?


What hast with you?


Maddame theirs one at door that asks to speak with you, admittes no answer
but will enforce his passage to your honour.


what insolent guest is that?


Who should he be;
That is so ignorant of your worth and custom:

Madam her soon hath drawn his rapier on us and will come in he says.


Tis is strange Rudeness,
What is his name, do you not know the man?

No Madam, tis too dark.


Then take a light,
See if you know him, if not raise the streets

And keep the dooresafe: what nightwalker' this, that hath not light enough to
see his rudeness.


O Maddame tis the Noble gentleman,
Monsieur VANDOME your Servant.

Is it he? is he returned?


Hast commend me to him tel him I may not no^ will not see him: for I have vowed
the contrary to all.


Madam, we told him so a hundred times yet he will enter:

Within: Hold, hold, keep him back there:


What rudeness what strange insolence is this:


What hour is this? what fashion? what sad life:
What superstition of vnholy vow?
What place is this? O shall it ere be said
Such perfect Judgment should be drowned in Humour?
Such beauty consecrate to Bat^s and Owle^:
Here lies the weapon that enforst my passage,
Sought in my love, sought in regard of you:
For whom I will endure a thousand deaths,
Rather then suffer you to perish thus
And be the fable of the scornful world;
^ I offend you Lady kill me now,

What shall I say? Alas my worthy Servant,
I would to God I had not ^u'd to be
A fable to the world, a shame to thee.

Dear mistress heareme forbear these humours.


Forbear your vain dissuasions


shall your judgment?


I will not hear a word.


Strange will in women;
What says my honourable virgin sister?
How is it you can brooke, this Batt-like life?
And sit as one withovt life?

Would I were,
If any man would kill me, I'd forgive him,

O true fit of a maiden Melancholy?
Whence comes it, lovely sister?

In my mind:
Yourself hath small occasion to be meny:
That are arriud on such a hapless Shore:
As bears the dead weight of so dear a Sister:
For whose decease being my dear Sister vowed.
I shall for ever lead this desolate life.

Now heaven forbid; women in Love with women;
Loves fire shines with too mutual a refraction,
And both ways weakens his cold beams too much:
To pierce so deeply tis not for her I know that you are thus impassiond.

For her I would be sworn and for her husband,


I mary Sir, a quick man may do much,
In theise kind of impressions.

See how Id^ly.
You understand me? theise same travail^rs,
That can live any where, make jests of any thing:
And cast so far from home, for nothing else:
But to learn how they may cast of their friends,
She had a husband does not cast her o^ so:
O tis a rare, a Noble gentleman.
Well well, there is some other Humb^ stirring,
In your young blood then a dead woman's Love:

No, i'll be swome


Why is it possible?
That you, whose frolic breast was ever filed,
With all the spirits of a mirthful Lady:
Shovld be with such a sorrow so t^ans^o^
Your most sweet hand in touch of Instruments:
Turned to pick straws, and f^le upon Rushes;
Your heavenly voice, turned into heavy sighs,
And your rare wit to in a manner ^ainted.
This cannot be, I know some other cause,
Fashions this strange effect, and that my f^lse:
Am borne to find it out and be your cure:
In any wound it forces what o^er,
But if you will not, tell me at your pe^ill.

Brother*


Did you call*


No 'tis no matter*


So then:


Do you hear?
Assured you are my kind and honoured Brother,
I'll tell you al^ ^

O will you d^e so then*


you will be secret?


Secret? is't a secret?


No tis a trifle that torments one thus:
Did ever man ask ^ch a question*
When he had brought a woman to this pass?

What tis no Treason is it?


Treason quorh he?


Well if it be I will engage my quarters:
With a fair Ladies oven, tell the secret.

Attending oftentimes the Duke Duchess*
To visit the most passionate Earl your Brother:
That Noble Gentleman.

Well said put in that,


Put it in? why* y saith you're such a man,
I'll tell no further, you are changed indeed.
A travail quoth you?

Why what means this?
Come Lady fourth, I would not loose the thanks
The credit and the honour I shall have*
For that most happy Good I know in Fate,
I am to furnish thy desires withal:
For all this house in Gold,

Thank you good Brother:
Attending (as I say) the Duke and Duchess
To the sad Earl.

That noble gentleman?


Why ^s he not?


Be shrew my hart else,
The Earl quoth you, he cast not of his Wife.

Nay look you now,


Why does he pray?


Why no:


Forth then I pray, you lovers are so captious


When I obser^d his constan^ in Love:
His honour of his dear wives memory,
His woe sor her, his life with her in death:
I grew in love, even with his very mind.

O with his mind?


I by my soul no more,


A good mind certainly is a good thing:
And a good thing you know.

That is the chief:
The body without that, Alas is nothing:
And this his mind cast such a fire into me:
That it hath half consumed me, s^ ^ lo^'d
His Wife so dearly that was dear to me
And ever I am saying to my self:
(...) then happy should that woman be:
That had her honoured place in his true love
But as for me I know I have no reason.
To hope for such a honour at his hands.

What at the Earles hands: I think so indeed,
Heaven I beseech thee was your love so simple:
T'n flame itself with him? why he's a husband:
For any Princess any Queen or Empress:
The Ladies of this land would tear him peece-meale:
(As did the drunken Froes, the THRATIAN HARPER)
To mary but alymbe, a look of him,
Heavens my sweet comfort: Set your thoughts on him?

O cruel man, dissembling travailer,
Even now you took upon you to be sure
It was in you to satisfy my longings,
And whatsoever 'twere, you would procure it,
O you were borne to do me good, you know.
You would not loose the credit and the honour.
You should have by my satistaction?
For all this house in Gold the very Fates,
And you were all one in your power to help me.
And now to come and wonder at my folly.
Mock me? and make my Love impossible
Wretch that I was, I did not keep it in,

Alas poor sister; when a grief is grown.
Full home, and to the deepest then it breaks.
And joy (Sun like] out of a black cloud shines.
But could thou think in faith I was in earnest:
To esteem any man without the reach
Of thy far-shooting beauties any name?
Too Good to subscube to EVRIONE:
Here is my hand, if ever I were thought
A gentleman or would be still esteemed so
I will sovertu^sly solicit for thee:
And withsuch cunning wind into his heart,
That I sustain no doubt I shall dissolve
His settled Melancholy be it ne'er so grounded.
On rational love, and grave Philosophy,
I know my sight will cheer him at the heart:
In whom a quick form of my dear dead Sister
Will fire his heavy spirits. And all this
May work that change in him, that nothing else
Hath hope to joy in, and so farewell Sister
Some few days hence, i'll tell thee how I speed.

Thanks honoured Brother: but you shall not go before you dine with your best
loved Mistress.
Come in sweet Brother:

In to dinner now?
Midnight would blush, at that farewell, farewell:

Dear Brother do but drink or taste a Banquet
y-faith I have most excellent conserves
You shall come in, in earnest, stay a little
Or will you drink some Cordial stilld waters,
After your travel, pray thee worthy brother
Upon my love you shall stay? sweet now enter.

Not for the world, commend my humble service,
And use all means to bring abroad my Mistress.

I will in sadness; farewell happy brother.


Come MVGERON, where is this worthy states man,
That you and Rhoderique would persuade:
To be our worthy Agent into France,
The couller we shall lay on it t'inter,
The body of the long deceased Countess,
The French Kings niece, whom her kind husband keeps
With such great cost, and care from burial:
Will show as probable as can be thought.
Think you he can be gotten to perform it
MVG: Fear not my Lo: The wizard is as forward,
To usurp greatness, as all greatness is:
To abuse virtue, or as riches honour.
You cannot load the Ass with too much honour.
He shall be yours my Lord Rhoderique and I,
Will give him to your highness for your foote-cloth:

How happens it, he liud concealed so long,


It is his humour sir, for he says still,
His jocund mind loves pleasure above honour,
His swindge of liberty above his life,
It is not safe (says he] to build his nest
So near the Eagle, his mind is his Kingdom
His chamber is a Court of all good wits,
And many such rare sparks of Resolution,
He blesses his most loved self withal,
As presently, your excellence shall hear.
But this is one thing I had half forgotten.
With which your highness needs must be prepared,
I have discoursed with him about the office:
Of an Ambassador, and he stands on this.
That when he once hath hist your Highness hand,
And taken his dispatch he then presents:
Your Highness parson hath your place and power,
Must put his hat on, use you, as you him:
That you may see before he goes how well,
He can assume your presence and your greatness

And will he practise his new state before us?


I and upon you too, and kiss your Duchess,
As you use at your parting.

Out upon him, she will not let him kiss her


He will kiss her to do your parson ^ight,


It will be excellent:
She shall not know this till he offer it:

See see, he comes,


Here is the gentleman
Your highness doth desire to do you honour
In the presenting of your princely parson
And going Lord Ambassador to'th French King,

Is this the gentleman whose worth so highly
You recommend to our election?

This is the man my Lord


We understand Sir:
We have been wronged, by being kept so long
From notice of your honourable parts
Wherein your country claims a deeper interest
Then your mere private self; what makes wise Nature
Fashion in men thiese excellent perfections
Of haughty courage, great wit, wisdom incredible,

It pleases your good excellence to say so


But that she ay^es therein at public good
And you in duty thereto of your self
Ought to have made us ^ender of your parts
And nor entomb them tirant-like alive

We for our parts, my Lord are not in fault,
For we have spnrnd him forward evermore
Letting him know how fit an instrument
He was to play upon in stately Musique,

And if he had bin ought else but an Ass
Your Grace er^ his time long had made him great
Did not we tell you this?

Often times,
But sure my honoured Lord the times before
Were not as now they be thanks to our fortune
That we enjoy so sweet and wise a prince
As is your gracious self; for the^ it was policy
To keep all with of hope still under hatches
Far from the Court least their exceeding parts
Should over shine those that were then in place
And t'was our happiness, that we might live so
For in that freely chose obscurity
We found our (...), which ^ most of Note
Many times lost, and I alas for my part,
Shrunk my despised head in my poor shell
For your ^ear^ excellence, I ^o^ow know well
Qui been (...), been vixit, still.

Twas much you could contain your self, that had
So great means to have ^ in greater place:

Faith Sir I had a poor ^ or a paint house
To shade me from the Sun, and three or four tiles
To shrow'd me from the Rain, and thought my self
As private as I had King G^ils Ring
And could have gone invisible, yet saw all
That past our states rough be a born near and far,
There saw I our great Ga^asses tossed
Upon the wallowing waives, up with one billow
And then down with another: Our great men
Like to a Mass of clouds that now seem like
An Elephant, and straight ways like an Ox
And then a Mouse, or like those changeable creatures
That live in the Burdello, now in Satin
Tomorrow next in Stammel.
When I sate all this while in my poor cell
Secure of lightning, or the sudden Thunder
Conversed with the poor Muses gave a scholar
Forty or fifty crowns a year to teach me
And prate to me about the predicables
When indeed my thoughts flew a higher pitch
Then Genus and Species as by this taste
I hope your highness happily perceives
And shall hereafter more at large approve
If any worthy opportunity
Make but her fore top subject to my hold
And so I leave your Grace to the tuition
Of him that made you.

Soft good Sir I pray:
What says your Excellence to this gentleman?
Have I not made my word good to your highness?

Well Sir, how ever Envious policy
Hath robbed? my predecessors of your service
You must not escape my hands, that have defign'd
present employment for you; and tis this
It is not unknown unto you; with what grief
We take the sorrow of the Earl Saint Anne
For his deceased wife; with whose dead sight
He feeds his passion, keeping her from right
Of christian burial, to make his eyes
Do penance by their everlasting tears
For loosing the dear sight of her quick bew^ies

Well spoke y-saith, your grace must give me leave
To praise your wit, for faith tis rarely spoken

The better for your good commendation
But Sir your Embassy to the French King
Shall be to this effect; thus you shall say

Not so your Excellence shall pardon me
I will not have my tale put in my mouth
If you'll deliver me your mind in gross
Why so I shall express it as I can
I warrant you t'wilbe sufficient.

It is very good, then Sir my will in gross
Is that in pity of the sad Counts case
The King would ask the body of his Niece
To give it Funeral fitting her high blood,
Which (as your self requires and reason wills)
I leave to be enforst and amplified
With all the Ornaments of Art and Nature
Which flows I see in your sharp intellect

Alas you cannot see it in this short time
Bur there be, some not far hence that have seen
And heard me too ere now: I could have wished
Your highness presence in a private Conventicle
At what time the high point of state was handled?

What was the point?


It was my hap to make a number there
My self (as every other Gentleman)
Being interested in that grave affair
Where I deliner'd my opinion: how well?

What was the matter pray
The matter, Sir.
Was of an ancient subject, and yet newly
Called into question; And t'was this in brief
We sate as I remember all in ^ow^,
All sorts of men together,
A Squire and a Carpenter, ^ I awiet and a Sawier.
A Merchant and a Broker, a Justice and a peasant
and so forth without all difference

But what was the matter?


Faith a stale argument though newly handled
And I am fearful I shall shame my self
The subject is so thread bare

Tis no matter be as it will go to y point I pray,


Then thus it is* the question of estate
(Or the state of the question) was in brief
whether in an Aristocratie
Or in a Democriticall estate
Tobacco might be brought to lawful use
But had you heard the excellent speeches there
Touching this part*

Pray thee to the point


First to the point then,
Upstart a weaver, blown up b'inspiration
That had borne office in the congregation
A little fellow and yet great in spirit
I never shall forget him; for he was
A most hot liuer'd enemy to Tobacco
His face was like the ten of Diamonds
Pointed each where with pushes, and his Nose
Was like the As^ of clubs (which I must tell you
Was it that set him, and Tobacco first at such hot Enmitle for that nose of
his (according to the Puritannick ^ut] having a narrow bridge, and this
Tobacco: being in drink durst not pass by and finding stopped his narrow passage
fled back as it came and went away in Pett.


Just cause of quarrel


But pray thee briefly say what said the weaver


The weaver Sir much like a virginalliack
Start nimbly up; the culler of his beard
I scarce remember; but purblind he was
With the GENEVA print, and wore one ear
Shorter then to ^her for a difference

A man of very open note it seems


He was so Sir, and ho^ly he envaid
Against Tobacco (with a most strong breath
For he had eaten garlic the same morning
As t'was his use partly against ill airs
Partly to make his speeches savoury
Said t'was a paga^ plant, a profane weed
And a most sinful smoke, that had no warrant
Out of the word; invented sure by Satan
In theise our latter days, to cast a mist
Before men's eyes, that they might not behold
The gro^enes of old superstition
Which is as 'twere derived into the church
From the foul sin^ke of Romish popery
And that it was a judgment on our land
That the svbstantiall commodities.
And mighty blessings of this Realm of France
Bells, Rattles, hobby horses and such like
Which had brought so much wealth into the Land
Should now be changed into the smoke of vanity
The smoke of superstition; for his own part
He held a Garlic clo^e being sanctified
Did edify more the body of a man
Then a whole t^n of this profane Tobacco
Being t^ne without thankes-giuing; in a word
He said it was a rag of Popery?
And none that were truly regenerate would
Profane his Nostrils with the smoke thereof
And speaking of your grace behind your back,
He charged and conjured you to see the use,
Of vain Tobacco banished from the land
For fear least for the gre^ abuse thereof
Or candle were put out; and there with all
Taking his handker-chiefe to wipe his mouth
As he had told a lie, he tuned his noise
To the old strain as if he were preparing
For a new exercise, But I my self
[Angry to hear this generous Tobacco
The Gentleman's Saint and the soldiers idol
So ignorantly polluted] stood me up
Took some Tobacco for a complement
Brake fleam some twice or thrice, then shook mine ears
And li^kt my lips, as if I begged attention
and so directing me to your sweet Grace
Thus I replied,

MVG: Rome for a speech there. Silence


I am amused, or I am in a qua^dari^ gentlemen [for in good faith I remember
not well whether of them was my words]


Tis no matter either of them will serve the turn


Whether I should (as the Poet says) eloquar, an siliam? whether by answering
a fool I should my self seem no less; or by giving way to his wind (for
words are but wind) I might betray the cause; to the maintenance whereof, all
true Troya^s (from whose race we claim our decent] owe all their patrimonies;
and if need be their dearest blood, and their sweetest breath. I would not be
tedious to your highness:


You are not Sir: Proceed:


TOBACCO that excellent plant, the use whereof [as of fifth Element] the world
cannot want, is that little shop of Nature, wherein her whole workeman-ship is
abridged, where you may see Earth-kindled into fire, the fire breath out an
exhalation, which entering in at the mouth walks through the Regions of a mans
brain, drives out all ill Vapours but it selfe^owne all bad Humours by the the
mouth which in (...) might breed a Scabbe over the whole body if already they
have not; a plant of singular use, f^r* on the one side* Nature being an Enemy
to Va^uitie and emp^es, and on the other, there being so many empty brains in
the World as there are, how shall Natures course be continued? How shall thiese
empty brains b^ filled, but with ay^ Natures immediate instrument to that
purpose? If with ^yre, what so proper as your sum* what sum so healthful as
your perfume? what perfume so sovereign as Tobacco? Besides the excellent edge
it gives a mans wit, [as they can best judge that have been present at a feast
of Tobacco where commonly all good wits are consorted] what variety of
discourse it begetts? What sparks of wit it yields, it is a world to heare^ as
likewise to the courage of a man, for if it be true, that Iohannes de sauo et
sauo et writes, that he that drinks Veri^ice pisseth vinegere, Then it must
needs follow to be as true, that hoe that eats smoke, farts fire; for Garlic
I will not say because it is a plant of our own country? but it may cure the
diseases of the country, but for the diseases of the Court, they are out of the
Element of Garlic to medicine* to conclude as there is no enemy to Tobacco but
Garlic, so there is no friend to Garlic, but a sheeps head and so I conclude.


Well Sir, If this be but your Natural vain
I must confess I knew you not indeed
When I made offer to instruct your brain
For the Embassage, and will trust you now
I^ 'twere to send you forth to the great Turk
With an Embassage

But Sir in conclusion
T'was ordered for my speech, that since Tobacco
Had so long ^i^ in use, it should thence forth
Be brought to lawful use; but limited thus
That none should dare to take it but a gentleman
Or he that had some gentlemanly humour
The Murr, the Head-ach, the Ca^tar, the bone ach
Or other branches of the sharpe salt Rhew^e
Fitting a gentleman.

Your grace has made choice
Of a most simple Lo: Ambassador

Well Sir you need not look for a commission
My hand shall well dispatch you for this business
Take now the place and state of an Anbassador
Present our parson and perform our charge
And so farewell good Lord Ambassador

Farewell good Duke and GVEA^VIN to thee


How now you fool? out you presumptuous ^ull


How now you baggage? ^foote are you so ^oy
To the Dukes parson, to his second self?
are you to good dame to enlarge yourself
Unto your proper object? slight twere a good deed

What means your grace to suffer me abused thus


Sweet Love be pleased; you do not know this Lord
Give me thy hand my Lord:

And give me thine


Farewell again


Farewell again to thee


Now go thy ways for an ambassador


Now go thy ways for a Duke


Most excellent Lord,


Why this was well performed and like a Duke
Whose parson you most naturally present

I told you I would doo^t, now i'll begin
To make the world take notice I am noble
The first thing I will do i'll swear to pay
No debts upon my honour.

A good cheap proof of your Nobility


But if I knew where I might pawn mine honour,
For some odd thousand Crowns, it shall be laid:
I'll pay'^ again when I have done withal:
Then twill be expected I shall be of some Religion,
I must think of some for fashion, or for faction sake,
As it becomes great personages to do*
I'll think upon it betwixt this and the day.

Well said my Lord; this Lordship of yours will work a mighty alteration in
you: do you not feel it begins to work already?


Faith only in this; it makes me think, how they that were my Companions
before, shall now be my favourites: They that were my Friends before, shall now
be my followers: They that were my Servants before, shall now be my knau^s: But
they that were my Creditors before, shall remain my Creditors still.


Excellent Lord: Come, will you show your Lordship in the Presence now?


Faith I do not care, if I go and make a face or two there, or a few graceful
legs; speak a little Italian, and away; there's all a Presence doth require.


YOu have inclined me more to leave this life,
Then I supposed it possible for an Angel;
Nor is your judgment to suppress your passion*
For so dear loved a Sister (being as well
Your blood and flesh, as mine) the least enforcement
Of your disswasi^e arguments* And besides,
Your true resemblance of her, much supplies
Her want in my affections; with all which,
I feel in these deep griefs, to which I yield
A kind of ^alce sluggish (and rotting sweetness,)
Mixed with an humour where all things in life,
Lie drowned in sower, wretched, and horrid thoughts:
The way to cowardly desperation opened,
And whatsoever urges souls accursed*
To their destruction, and sometimes their plague,
So violently gripes me, that I lie
Whole days and nights bound at his tirranous feet*
So that my days are not like life or light,
But bitterest death, and a continual night.

The ground of all is vnsuffised Love,
Which would be best casd with some other object:
The general rule of Naso being autentique
For the affections of the mind drawn forth
In many currents, are not so impulsiue
In any one; And so the Persian King
Made the great River Ganges run distinctly
In an innumerable sort of Channels;
By which means, of a fierce and dangerous Flood,
He turned it into many pleasing Rivers:
So likewise is an Army disarayd,
Made penetrable for the assaulting foe:
So huge Fierce being deffused, grow asswadgd:
Lastly, as all force being unite, increases;
So being dispearst, it grows less sharpe, and cease.

Alas, I know I cannot love another,
My hart accustomd to love only her,
My eyes accustomd to view only her,
Will tell me whatsoever is not her, is foul and hateful.

Yet forbear to keep her
Still in your sight* force not her breathless body
Thus against Nature to survive, being dead:
Let it consume, that it may reassume
A form incorruptible; and refrain
The places where you used to joy in her:
For how can you be ever sound or safe,
Where in so many red steps of your wounds,
Gasp in your eyes? with change of place be sure,
Like sick men mending, you shall find recure.

Faith Madam, my company may well be spared at so mournful a visitation: For,
by my soul, to see Pigmalion dote upon a Marble Picture, a senseless Statue, I
should laugh and spoil the Tragedy.


Oh, tis an object full of pity my Lord.


Tis pity in deed, that any man should love a woman so constantly.


Bitterly turned my Lord: we must still admire you.


Tush my Lord, true Manhood can neither morn nor admire: It's fit for Women,
they can weep at pleasure, even to admiration.


But men use to admire rare things, my Lord,


But this is nothing rare; Tis a virtue common for men to love their Wives
after death: The value of a good Wife (as all good things else) are better
known by their want, then by their fruition: for no man loves his Wife so well
while she lines, but he loves her ten times better when she's dead.


This is sound Philosophie, my Lord.


Faith, my Lord, I speak my thoughts; and for mine own part, I should so ill
endure the loss of a Wife (always provided, I loved her) that if I lost her
this week, I'd have another by the beginning a'th next: And thus resolved, I
leave your Highness to deal with Atropos, for cutting my Ladies thread: I am
for France; all my care is for Followers to Imp out my Train: I fear I must
come to your Grace for a Press; for I will be followed as becomes an honourable
Lord: and that is, like an honest Squire: for with our great Lords, followers
abrod, and Hospitality at home, are out of date: The world's now grown
thrifty: He that fills a whole Page in folio, with his Stile; thinks it
veriest Noble, to be mand with one bare Page and a Pandare; and yet Pandare in
ancient time, was the name of an honest Courtier* what tis now, Viderit
vtilitas: Come Wits, let's to my Chamber.


Well now my Lord, remember all the reasons
And arguments I used at first to you,
To draw you from your hurtful passions:
And there withal, admit one further cause,
Drawn from my love, and all the powers I have;
Euryone, vowed sister to my sister,
Whose virtues, beauties, and perfections,
Adorn our Country, and do nearest match
With her rich graces, that your love adores,
Hath wounded my affections; and to her
I would entreat your Lordships graceful word:

But is it true? Loves my dear brother now?
It much delights me, for your choice is Noble:
Yet need you not urge me to come abroad,
Your own worth will suffize for your wished speed.

I know my Lord, no man alive can win
Her resolved judgment from virginity,
Unless you speak for him, whose word of all Dames
Is held most sweet, and worthy to persuade them.

The world will think me too fantastical,
To open so suddenly my vowed obscurenes.

My Lord, my love is sudden, and requires
A sudden remedy: If I be delayed,
Consider Loves delay breeds desperation,
By weighing how strongly Love works in your self.

Dear Brother, nothing underneath the Stars,
Makes me so willing to partake the air,
And undergo the burden of the world,
As your most worthy self, and your wished good:
And glad I am that by this means I may
See your descent continued, and therein
Behold some new borne Image of my wife:
Dear life, take knowledge that thy Brothers love,
Makes me despair with my true zeal to thee:
And if for his sake I admit the Earth
To hide this treasure of thy precious beauties*
And that thy part surviving, be not pleased,
Let it appear to me ye just assisters
Of all intentions bent to sovereign justice;
And I will follow it into the Grave,
Or dying with it; or preserve it thus,
As long as any life is left betwixt us.

But did note what a presence I came of with-all?


Sfoot, you drew the eyes of the whole presence upon you*
There was one Lady a man might see her har^
Ready to start out of her eyes to follow you.

But Monseuer Mustapha there kept state,
When I accosted him; s'light the Brazen head looked to be
Worshipped I think: No I'll commit no Idolatry for the proudest Image of'am
all, I.

Your Lordship has the right garb of an excellent Courtier, respects a Clown,
supple jointed, courtesies a very peagoose; tis stiff ham'd audacity that
carries it; get once within their distance, and you are in their bosoms
instantly.


S'hart do they look? I should stand aloof, like a Scholares, make legs at
their greatness: No I'll none of that; come up close to him, give him a clap a'th
shoulder shall make him cry oh again: it's a tender place to deal withal,
and say, Well encountered noble Brutus.


That's the only way indeed to be familiar.


S'foot I'll make legs to none, unless it be to a Justice of peace when he
speaks in's Chair, or to a Cunstable when he leanes on's Staff, that's ^at:
softness and modesty savours of the Cart, tis boldness boldness does the deed in
the Court: and as your Camelion varries all colours a'th Rainbow both white
and red, so must your true Courtier be able to very his countenance through
all humours; State, Strangnes, Scorn, Mirth, Melancholy, Flattery, and so
forth: some colours likewise his face may change upon occasion, Black or
Blew it may, Tawny it may; but Red and White at no hand, avoid that like a
Sergeant: keep your colour stiff, unguilty of passion or disgrace, not
changing White at sight of your Mercer, nor Red at sight of your Surgeon: above
all sins, heaven shield me from the sin of blushing; it does ill in a
young Waighting-woman, but monstrous monstrous, in an old Courtier.


Well, all this while your Lordship forgets your Embassage; you have given out,
you will be gone within this month, and yet nothing is ready.


Its no matter, let the Moon keep her course: and yet to say truth, 'twere
more then time I were gone, for by heaven I am so haunted with Followers,
every day new offers of Followers: But heaven shield me from any more
Followers.

How now, whats the news?


My Lord, here's two of my special Friends, whom I would gladly commend to
follow you in the honourable action.


S'foote, my ears are double locked against Followers, you know my number's
full, all places under me are bestowed: I'll out of town this night tha'ts
infallible; I'll no more Followers, a mine honour.


S'light Lord, you must entertain them, they have paid me their income, and I
have undertaken your Lordship shall grace them.


Well my Masters, you might have come at a time when your entertainment would
have proved better then now it is like: but such as it is, upon the
commendation of my Steward here


A pox a your Lor. Steward?


You're welcome in a word: deserne and spy out.


We humbly thank your Lordship.


Mugeron, let'am be entered.


In what rank my Lord, Gentlemen or Yomen?


Gentlemen, Their bearing berayes no less, it goes not always by apparel: I
do allow you to suite your selves anew in my Colours at your own charges.


Thank your good Lordship.


Thy name first, I pray thee?


Cornelius, My Lord.


What profession?


A Surgeon an't please your Lordship.


I had rather th'hadst been a Barber, for I think there will be little
blood-shed amongst my Followers, unless it be of thy letting: I'll see their
nailes pard before they go. And yet now I bethink my self, our Embassage is
into France, there may be employment for thee: hast thou a Tubbe?


I would be loath, my Lord, to be dislocated or vnfurnisht of any of my
properties.


Thou speak like thy self Corneliur: book him down Gentleman.


Very well Sir.


Now your profession, I pray?


Frippery, my Lord, or as some term it, Petty Prokery.


An honest man I'll warrant thee, I never knew other of thy trade.


Truly a richer your Lordship might have,
An honester I hope not.

I believe thee Petty Broker: can burn Gold-lace?


I can do any thing, my Lord, belonging to my trade.


Book him down Gentleman, heel do good upon the voyage I warrant him:
provide thee a Nag Petty Broker, thou'l find employment for him doubt not:
keep thy self an honest man, and by our return I do not doubt but to see
thee a rich Knave: Farewell Petty Broker, prepare your selves against the day;
this Gentleman shall acquaint you with my Colours: Farewell Fripper, Farewell
Petty Broker: Deserve and spy out is my Motto.


God continue your Lordship.


A very seasonable prayer,
For unknown to him, it lies now upon his death-bedd.

And how like you my Chamber good Wits?


Excellent well Sir.


Nay believe it, it shall do well (as you will say) when you see it set forth
suitable to my project:

Here shall stand my Court Cupbord, with it furniture of Plate: Here shall
run a Wind Instrument: Here shall hang my base Vi^ll: Here my Theorbo: and
here will I hang my self.


Twill do admirable well.


But how will I hang my self good wits?
Not in person, but in Picture; I will be drawn.

What hanged and drawn too?


Good again: I say I will be drawn, all in complete Satin of some Gourtly
colour, like a Knight of Cupids band; On this side shall be ranckt Chairs and
Stools, and other such complements of a Chamber: This corner will be a
convenient room for my Close stool: I acquaint you with all my privities, you
see.


I Sir, we smell your meaning.


Here shall be a Peartch for my Parrot, while I remain unmarried, I shall have
the less miss of my Wife: Here a Hoop for my Munckie when I am married, my
wife will have the less miss of me: Here will I have the statue of some
excellent Poet, and I will have his Nose go with a Vice (as I have seen the
experience) And that (as if it had taken cold in the head,)


For want of a guilt Nightcap.


Bitter still, shall like a Spout run pure Wit all day long; and it shall be
fed with a Pipe brought at my charge, from Hel^con, over the Alps, and under
the Sea by the brain of some great Enginer; and I think twill do excellent.


No question of that, my Lord.


Well, now Wits about your several charges touching my Embassage: Rhoderique,
is my Speech put out to making?


Its almost done.


Tis well, tell him he shall have forty Crowns; promise, promise; want for
no promising: And well remembered, have I ere a Gentleman Usher yet; a strange
thing, amongst all my followers, not one has wit enough to be a Gentleman
Usher, I must have one there's no remedy; Fare-well: have a care of my
Followers, all but my petty Broker, heel shift for him self.


Well, let us alone for your followers.


Well said, deserne and spy out


Methanke your Lordship.


Heaven I beseech thee, what an abhorninable sort of Followers have I put upon
me: These Courtiers feed on'am with my countenance: I can not look into the
City, but one or other makes tender of his good parts to me, either his
Language, his Travail, his Intelligence, or something: Gentlemen send me their
younger Sons furnished in complete, to learn fashions for-sooth; as if the
riding of five hundred miles, spending 1000. Crowns would make'am wiser then
God meant to make'am. Others with-child with the travailing humour, as if an
Ass for going to Paris, could come home a Courser of Naples: Others are
possessed with the humour of Gallantry, fancy it to be the only happiness in
this world, to be enabled by such a coolor to carry a Feather in his Crest,
wear Goldlace, guilt Spurs, so sets his fortunes ont: Turns two or three
Tenements into Trunckes, and creeps home again with less then a Snail, not
a House to hide his head in: Three hundred of these Gold-finches I have
entertained for my Followers; I can go in no corner, but I meet with some of
my Wifflers in their accoutraments; you may heare'am half a mile ere they come
at you, and smell'am half an hour after they are past you; six or seven
make a perfect Morrice-daunce; they need no Bells, their Spurs serve their
turn: I am ashamed to traine'am abroad, they'll say I carry a whole Forest of
Feathers with me, and I should plod afore'am in plain stuff, like a writing
Schole-maister before his Boys when they go a feasting: I am afraid of
nothing but I shall be Ballated, I and all my Wifflers: But its no matter, I^e
fashion'am, I'll shew'am fashions: By heaven I'll give three parts of'am the
slip, let'am look sort: and yet to say truth, I shall not need, for if I can
but linger my Journey another month, I am sure I shall mute half my Feathers;
I feele'am begin to wear thin already: There's not ten Crowns in twenty
a their purses: And by this light, I was told at Court, that my greasy Host of
the Porcupine last Holiday, was got up to the ^ares in one of my Followers
Satin suites; And Uandome went so far, that he swore he saw two of them
hanged: My self indeed passing yesterday by the Frippery, spied two of them
hang out at a stall with a gambrell thrust from shoulder to shoulder, like a
Sheep that were new flayed: Tis not for nothing that this Petty Broker
follows me; The Vulture smells a pray; not the Carcases, but the Cases of some
of my deceased Followers; S'light, I think it were my wisest course, to put
ten pounds in stock with him, and turn petty Broker; certainly there's
good to be done vpon'^; if we be but a day or two out of town heel be able to
load every day a fresh Horse with Satin suites, and send them back hither:
indeed tis like to be hot travail, and therefore t'wilbe an case to my
Followers to have their clothes at home afore'am; They'll on, get off how they
can: Little know they what Pikes their Feathers must pass: Before they go the
Sergeants, when they come home the Surgeons: but choose them, I'll wash my hands
on'am.


MY Sisters Exequies are now performed
With such pomp as expressed the excellence
Of her Lords love to her: And fired the envy
Of our great Duke, who would have no man equal
The honour he does t'his adored wife:
And now the Earl (as he hath promised me)
Is in this sad Cell of my honoured Mistress,
Urging my love to fair Euryone,
Which I framed, only to bring him abroad,
And (if it might succeed) make his affects
With change of objects, change his helples sorrow
To helpful love. I stood where I obserud
Their words and looks, and all that past betwixt them:
And she hath with such cunning borne her self,
In fitting his affection, with pretending
Her mo^ified desires: her only love
To Virtue and her lovers: and, in brief,
Hath figurd with such life my dear dead Sister,
Enchasing all this, with her heightened Beauty,
That I believe she hath entangld him,
And won success to our industrious plot.
If he be touched, I know it greiues his soul,
That having vndertane to speak for me,
(Imagining my love was as I fainde)
His own love to her, should enforce his tongue
To court her for himself, and deceive me:
By this time, we have tried his passionate blood:
If he be caught (as heaven vouchsafe he be)
I'll play a little with his Fantasy.

Am I alone? Is there no Eye nor Ear
That doth observe me? Heaven how have I grasped,
My Spirits in my hart, that would have burst
To give wished is^ue to any violent love?
Dead Wife excuse me, since I love thee still,
That liu'st in her, whom I must love for thee:
For he that is not moved with strongest passion
In viewing her; that man did ne'er know thee:
She's thy surviving Image: But woo's me;
Why am I thus transported past my self?

Oh, are your dull vxorious spirits raised?
One madness doth be get another still.

But stay, Advise me Soul; why did thou light me over this threshold? was't
to wrong my Brother?
To wrong my Wife, in wronging of my Brother?
I'll die a miserable man: No villane:
Yet in this case of love, who is my Brother?
Who is my Father? Who is any kinn?
I care not, I am nearest to my self:
I will pursue my Passion; I will have her.

Traitor, I here arrest thee in the names
Of Heaven, and Earth, and deepest Acheron:
Loves traitor, Brothers; traitor to thy Wife.

O Brother, stood you so near my dishonour*
Had you forborne awhile, all had been changed:
You know the variable thoughts of Love,
You know the use of Honour, that will ever
Retire into it self; and my just blood
Shall rather flow with Honour then with Love:
Be you a happy Lover, I a friend,
For I will die for love of her and thee.

My Lord and brother, I'll not challenge more,
In love and kindness then my love desernes,
That you have found one whom your hart can like:
And that One, whom we all sought to prefer,
To make you happy in a life renewde:
It is a heaven to me, by how much more
My hart embraced you for my Sisters love:
Tis true, I did dissemble love to Euryone.
To make you happy in her dear affection,
Who more dotes on you, then you can on her:
Enjoy Euryone, she is your own,
The same that ever my dear Sister was:
And heaven bless both your loves as I release
All my faind love, and interest to you.

How Nobly hath your love deluded me?
How justly have you been unjust to me?
Let me embrace the Oracle of my good,
The Author and the Patron of my life.

Tush, betwixt us my Lord, what need these terms?
As if we knew not one another yet?
Make speed my Lord, and make your Nuptials short,
As they are sudden blessed in your desires.

Oh I wish nothing more then lightning hast.


Stay, one word first my Lord; You are a sweet brother
To put in trust, and woo love for another?

Pray thee no more of that.


Well then be gone, my Lord, her brother comes.


Most happy Friend,
How hath our plot succeeded?

He's our own.
His blood was framed for every shade of virtue,
To ravish into true inamourate fire:
The Funeral of my Sister must be held
With all solemnity, and then his Nuptials,
With no less speed and pomp be celebrate.

What wonders hath your fortunate spirrite virtues
Wrought to our comforts? Could you crown th'enchantments
Of your divine Wit with another Spell,
Of power to bring my Wife out of her Cell,
You should be our quick Hermes, our Alcides.

That's my next lobour: come my Lord, your self
Shall stand unseen, and see by next morns light
(Which is her Beddtime) how my Braines-bould valour
Will rouse her from her vows severity:
No Will, nor Power, can withstand Policy.

Welcome little Wits, are you he my Page Pacque here
Makes choice of, to be his fellow Coch-horse?

I am my Lord.


What Country man?


Borne in the City.


But begot in the Court: I can tell your Lordship, he hath had as good Court
breeding, as any Imp in a Country: If your Lordship please to examine him in
any part of the Court Accidence, from a Noune to an Interiection, I'll
undertake you shall find him sufficient.


Say thou so little Wit: Why then Sir, How many Pronounes be there?


Faith my Lord there are more, but I have learned but three sorts; the Goad,
the Fulham, and the Stop-kater-tre; which are all demonstratiues, for here
they be: There are Relatives too, but they are nothing without their
Antecedents.


Well said, little Wit I'faith, How many Antecedents are there?


Faith my Lord, their number is uncertain; but they that are, are either
Squires, or Gentlemen ushers.


Very well said: when all is done, the Court is the only School of good
education; especially for Pages and Weighting women; Paris, or Padua, or the
famous School of England called Winchester, famous (I mean) for the Goose,
Where Schollers wear Petticoats so long, till their Penn and Inckhorns k^cke
against their knees: All these I say, are but Belfries to the Body or School
of the Court: He that would have his Son proceed Doctor in three days, let
him send him thither; there's the Porge to fashion all the parts of them:
There they shall learn the true use of their good Parts indeed.


Well my Lord, you have said well for the Court, What says your Lordship now
to us Courtiers, Shall we go the voyage?


My little Hermophrodites, I entertain you here into my Chamber; and if need
be, nearer: your service you know. I will not promise Mountains, nor assure
you Annuities of forty or fifty Crowns; in a word, I will promise nothing:
but I will be your good Lord, do you not doubt.


We do not my Lord, but are sure you will show your self Noble: and as you
promise us nothing, so you will Honourably keep promise with us, and give us
nothing.


Pretty little Wit, y'faith, Can he verse?


I and set too, my Lord; He's both a Setter and a Verser.


Pretty in faith; but I mean, has he a vain Natural?


O my Lord, it comes from him as easelie,


As Suites from a Courtier, without money: or money from a Citizen without
security, my Lord.


Well, I perceive nature has suited your Wits; I'll suite you in Guarded c^ates,
answerable to your Wits: for Witt's as suitable to guarded Goats, as Wisdom
is to welted Gowns* My other Followers Horse themselves* my self will horse
you. And now tell me (for I will take you into my ^oson^e) What's the opinion
of the many headed Best touching my new adition of Honour?


Some think, my Lord, it hath given you adition of pride, and outer euidance.


They are deceived that think so: I must confess, it would make a Fool
proud; but for me, I am semper idem.


We believe your Lordship.


I find no alteration in my self in the world, for I am sure I am no wiser
then I was, when I was no Lord, nor no more bountiful, nor no more honest;
only in respect of my state, I assume a kind of State; to receive Suitors now,
with the Nod of Nobility; not (as before) with the Cap of courtesy; the
knee of Knighthood: And why knee of Knighthood, little Wit? there's another
Question for your Court Accidence.


Because Gentlemen, or Yoemen, or Pessantes, or so, receive Knighthood on their
knees.


The signification of the Knee of Knighthood in Heraldie an't please your
Lordship, is, that Knights are tied in honour to fight up to the knees in
blood, for the defence of fair Ladies.


Very good: but if it be so, what honour do they deserve, that purchase their
Knighthood?


Purchase their Knighthood my Lord? Mary I think they come truly by it, for
they pay well for it.


You cut me off by the knees, little Wit: but I say, (if you will hear me)
that if they deserve to be Knighted, that purchase their Knighthood with
fighting up to the knee, What do they deserve, that purchase their Knighthood
with fighting above the knee?


Mary my Lord, I say the purchase is good, if the conveyance will hold water.


Why this is excellent: by heaven twenty pounds annuitie shall not purchase
you from my heals. But forth now: What is the opinion of the world touching
this new Honour of mine? Do not Fools envy it?


No my Lord, but wise men wonder at it: you having so buried your wisdom
heretofore in Taverns, and Vaultinghouses, that the world could never discover
you to be capable of Honour.


As though Achilles could hide himself under a Woman's clothes: was he not
discovered at first? This Honour is like a Woman, or a Crocodile (choose you
whether) it flies them that follow it; and follows them that fly it: For my
self, how ever my worth, for the time kept his bed; yet did I ever prophecy
to my self that it would rise, before the Sun-set of my days: I did ever
dream, that this head was borne to bear a breadth, this shoulder to support a
State, this face to look big, this body to bear a presence, these feet
were borne to be revellers, and these Calves were borne to be Courtiers: In a
word, I was borne Noble, and I will die Nobly: neither shall my Nobility
perish with death; after ages shall re^ounde the memory thereof, while the
Sun sets in the East, or the Moon in the West.


Or the Seven Stars in the North.


The Siege of Bullaine shall be no more a landmarke for Times: Agencourt
Battle, S. Iames his Field, the loss of Calice, the winning of Cales, shall
grow out of use: Men shall reckon their years, Women their marriages, from the
day of our Embassage: As, I was borne, or married two, three, or four years
before the great Embassage. Farmers shall count their Leases from this day,
Gentlemen their Mortgages from this day: Saint Dennis shall be rac't out of the
Kallender, and the day of our Enstalment entered in red letters: And as St.
Ualentines day is fortunate to choose Lovers, St. Lukes to choose Husbands; So
shall this day be to the choosing of Lords: It shall be a Critticall day, a
day of Note: In that day it shall be good to quarrel, but not to sight: They
that Marry on that day, shall not repent; marie the morrow after perhaps
they may: It shall be wholesome to beat a Sergeant on that day: He that eats
Garlic on that morning, shall be a rank Knave till night.


What a day will this be, if it hold?


Hold* S'foote it shall hold, and shall be held sacred to immortality: let
all the Chroniclers, Ballet makers, and Almanackmunger^, do what they dare.


S'foote (my Lord) al's dashed, your voyage is overthrown.


What ails the frantic Trow?


The Lady is entoombde, that was the Subject of your Embassage: and your
Embassage is beraid.


Dido is dead, and wrapped in lead.


O heavy hearse!


Your Lordships honour must wait upon her.


O scur^y verse! Your Lordship's welcome home: pray let's walk your horse my
Lord.


A pretty gullery. Why my little wits, do you believe this to be true?


For my part my Lord, I am of opinion you are gulled.


And I am of opinion that I am partly guilty of the same.


Where's this Lord fool here? S'light you have made a pretty piece of service
an't: raised up all the country in gold lace and feathers; and now with your
long stay, there's no employment for them.


Good still.


S'light I ever took thee to be a hammer of the right feather: but I durst
have laid my life, no man could ever have cramd such a Gudgeon as this down
the throat of thee: To create thee a Christmas Lord, and make thee laughter
for the whole Court: I am ashamed of my self that ever I chusde such a
Grosseblocke to whet my wits on.


Good wityfaith.

I know all this is but a gullery now: But since you have presumde to go thus
far with me, come what can come to the State, sink or swim, I'll be no
more a father to it, nor the Duke; nor for the world wade one half steppe
further in the action.


But now your Lordship is gone, what shall become of your followers?


Followers? let them follow the Court as I have done: there let them raise
their fortunes: if not, they know the way to the petty Brokers, there let them
shift and hang. Exit cum sui^.


Here we may strike the Plaudit to our Play, my Lord foole's gone: all our
audience will forsake us.


Page, after, and call him again.


Let him go: I'll take up some other fool for the Duke to employ: every
Ordinary affords fools enough: and did not see a pair of Gallants sit not
far hence like a couple of Boughpots to make the room smell?


Yes, they are gone: But what of them?


I'll press them to the Court: or if need ^e, our Muse is not so barren, but
she is able to devise one trick or other to retire D'oliue to Court again.


Indeed thou toldst me how gloriously he apprehended the favour of a great Lady
i^h Presence, whose hart (he said) stood a tipto in her eye to look at him.


Tis well remembered.


O, a Loue-letter from that Lady would retriue him as sure as death.


It would of mine honour: We'll fain one from her instantly: Page, fetch pen
and ink here.


Now do you your Muse engender: my barren skonce shall prompt something.


Soft then: The Lady I^ronime, who I said viewed him so in the Presence, is the
Venus that must enamour him: We'll go no further for that. But in what
likeness must he come to the Court to her now? As a Lord he may not: in any
other shape he will not.


Then let him come in his own shape like a gull.


Well, disguised he shall be: That shall be his mistresses direction: this
shall be my Helicon: and from this quiver will I draw the shaft that shall
wound him.


Come on: how wilt thou begin?


Faith thus: Dearly Beloved.


Ware ho, that's profane.


Go to then: Divine D'oliue: I am sure that's not profane.


Well, forward:


I see in the power of thy beauties.


Break of your period, and say, Twas with a sigh.


Content: here's a full prick stands for a tear too.


So, now take my brain.


Pour it on.


I talk like a fool, but alas thou art wise and silent.


Excellent: And the more wise, the more silent.


That's something common.


So should his mistress be.


That's true indeed: Who breaks way next?


That will I sir: But alas, why art not thou noble, that thou might match me
in Blood?


I'll answer that for her.


Come on.


But thou art noble, though not by birth, yet by creation.


That's not amiss: forth now: Thy wit proves thee to be a Lord, thy presence
shows it: O that word Presence, has cost me dear.


Well said, because she saw him ith Presence.


O do but say thou love me.


Soft, there's too many OOs.


Not a whit: O's but the next door to P. And his mistress may use her O with
with modesty: or if thou wilt, I'll stop it with another brachish tear.


No, no, let it run on.


O do but say thou love me, and yet do not neither, and yet do.


Well said, let that last stand, let him do in any case: now say thus, do not
appear at Court.


So.


At least in my company.


Well.


At lest before folks.


Why so?


For the flame will break forth.


Go on: thou doest well.


Where there is fire ith harth:


What then?


There will be smoke ith chimn^y.


Forth.


Warm, but burn* me not: there's reason in all things.


Well said, now do^ I vie it: Come to my chamber betwixt two and three.


A very good number.


But walk not under my window: if thou doest, come disguised: in any case we
are not thy tu^t taffe^a ^loke: if thou doest, thou kill me.


Well said, now to the L'envoy.


Thine, if I were worth ought; and yet such, as it skils not whose I am if I be
thine; Ieronime: Now for a fit Pandar to transport i^, and have at him.


COme my good Lord, now will I try my Brain,
If it can forge another golden chain,
To draw the poor Recluse, my honoured mistress
From her dark Cell, and superstitious vow.
Loft have heard there is a kind of ^re
To fright a lingering Fever from a man
By an imaginous fear, which may be true,
For one heate (all know) doth drive out another,
One passion doth expel another still,
And therefore I will use a fainde deui^e
To kindle ^urie in her frozen Breast,
That rage may fire out grief, and so restore her
To her most sociable self again.

Iuno Lucina fer opem,
And ease my labouring house of such a care.

Mark but my Midwifery: the day is now
Some three hours old, and now her night begins:
Stand close my Lord, if she and her sad meany
Be toward sleep, or sleeping, I will wake them
With orderly alarms; Page? Boy? sister?
All toong-tied? all asleep? page? sister?

Alas Vandome, do not disturb their rest
For pity sake, tis young night yet with them.

My Lord, your only way to deal with women
And Parrets, is to keep them waking still.
Page? who's above? are you all dead here?

S'light is hell broke loose? who's there?


A friend.


Then know this Castle is the house of wo,
Here harbour none but two distressed Ladies
Condemned to darkness, and this is their jail,
And I the Giant set to guard the same:
My name is Dildo.

Sir leave your rogerie, and hearken to me: what Page, I say.


Tempt not disasters: take thy life: Be gone.


An excellent villani^.


Sir? I have business of weight to impart to your Lady.


If your business be of weight, let it wait till the after noone, for by that
time my Lady will be delivered of her first sleep: Be gone, for fear of
watery meteors.


Go to sir, leave your villainy, and dispatch this news to your Lady.


Is your business from your self, or from some body besides?


From no body besides my self.


Very good; then I'll tel her, here's one besides himself has business to her
from no body.


A perfect young hempstring.


Peace least he over hear you.


You are not the Constable sir, are you?


Will you dispatch sir? you know me well enough, I am Vandome.


Whats the matter? who's there? Brother Vandome.


Sister?


What tempest drives you hither at such an hour?


Why I hope you are not going to bed, I see you are not yet unready: if ever
you will deserve my love, let it be now, by calling forth my mistress, I have
news for her, that touch her nearly.


What is^ good brother?


The worst ofils: would any tongue but mine had been the messenger.


VVhats that servant?


O Mistress come down with all speed possible, and leave that mournfu cell of
yours, I'll show you another place worthy of your mourning.


Speak man, my heart is armed with a mourning habit of such proof, that there
is none greater without it, to pierce it.


If you please to come down, I'll impart what I know: if not, I'll leave you.


Why stand you so at gaze sister? go down to him.
Stay bother, she comes to you.

Twill take I doubt not, though her selse be ice,
There's one with her all fire, and to her spirit
I must apply my counterfeit device:
Stand close my Lord.

I warrant you, proceed.


Come silly mistress, where's your worthy Lord?
I know you know not, but too well I know.

Now heaven grant all be well.


How can it be?
While you poor Turtle sit and morn at home,
Mewd in your cage, your mate he ^lies abroad,
O heavens who would have thought him such a man?

Why what man brother? I believe my speeches will prove true of him.


To wrong such a beautle, to profane such virtue, and to prove disloyal.


Disloyal? nay nero gilde him ore with fine terms, Brother, he is a filthy
Lord, and ever was, I did ever say so, I never knew any good ath hair, I do
but wonder how you made shift to love him, or what you saw in him to entertain
but so much as a piece of a good thought on him.


Good sister forbear.


Tush sister, b^d me not forbear: a woman may bear, and bear, and be never
the better thought on neither: I would you had never seen the eyes of him, for
I know he never loved you in's life.


You wrong him sister, I am sure he loved me
As I loved him, and happy I had been
Had I then did, and shunned this haplesse life.

Nay let him die, and all such as as he is, he lay a caterwauling not long
since: O if it had been the will of heaven, what a dear blessing had the world
had in his ridda^ce?


But had the lecher none to single out
Forobiect of his light lascivious blood,
But my poor cousin that attends the Duchess, Lady Ieronime?

What, that blaberlipt blouse?


Nay no blouse, sister, though I must confess
She comes far short of your perfection.

Yes by my troth, if she were your cousin a thousand times, she's but a sallow
freckld face piece when she is at the best.


Yet spare my cousin, sister, for my sake,
She merits milder censure at your hands.
And ever held your worth in noblest terms.

Faith the Gentlewoman is a sweet Gentlewoman of her self, I must needs give
her her due.


But for my Lord your husband, honoured mistress,
He made your beauties and your virtues too,
But foils to grace my cousins, had you seen
His amorous letters,
But my cousin presently will tell you all, for she reiects his suit, yet I
advised her to make a show she did not. But point to meet him when you might
surprise him, and this is just the hour.


Gods my life sister, loose not this advantage, it will be a good Trump to lay
in his way upon any quarrel: Come, you shall got S'bodie will you suffer him
to disgrace you in this sort? dispraise your beauty? And I do not think too,
but he has bin as bold with your Honour, which above all earthly things should
be dearest to a woman.


Next to her Beauty.


True, next to her beauty: and I do not think sister, but he devises
slanders against you, even in that high kind.


Infinite, infinite.


And I believe I take part with her too: would I knew that in faith.


Make your account, your share's as deep as hers: when you see my cousin,
sheele tell you all: we'll to her presently.


Has she told you, she would tell us?


Assured me, on her oath.


S'light I would but know what he can say I pray you brother tell me.


To what end? twill but stir your patience.


No I protest: when I know my carriage to be such, as no stain can obscure, his
slanders shall never move me, yet would I fain know what he faines.


It fits not me to play the gossips part^ w^l to my cousin, sheele relate all.


S'light what can she say? pray let's have a taste an't onward.


What can he not say, who being drunk with lust, and surfeiting with desire of
change, regards not what he says: and briefly I will tell you thus much now;
Let my melancholy Lady (says he) hold on this course till she waste her self,
and consume my reuenew in Tapers, yet this is certain, that as long as she has
that sister of hers at her elbow.


Me? why me? I bid defiance to his foul throat.


Hold there Vandome, now it begins to take.


What can his yellow jealousy surmise against me? if you love me, let me hear
it: I protest it shall not move me.


Marry forsooth, you are the shooing horne, he says, to draw on, to draw on
sister.


The shooing horne with a vengeance? what's his meaning in that?


Nay I have done, my cousin shall tell the rest: come shall we go?


Go? by heaven you bid me to a banquet: sister, resolve your self, for you
shall go; loose no more time, for you shall abroad on my life: his licorice
chaps are walking by this time: but for heavens sweet hope what means he by
that shooing horne? As I live it shall not move me.


Tell me but this, did you ever break betwixt my mistress and your sister here,
and a certain Lord ith Court?


How? break?


Go to, you understand me: have not you a Petrarch in Italian?


Petrarch? yes, what of that?


Well, he says you can your good, you may be waiting woman to any dame in
Europe: that Petrarch does good offices.


Marry hang him, good offices? S foot how understands he that?


As when any Lady is in private courtship with this or that gallant, your
Petrarch helps to entertain time: you understand his meaning?


Sister if you resolve to go, so it is: for by heaven your stay shall be no
bar to me, I'll go, that's infallible; it had been as good he had slandered
the devil: shooing horne? O that I were a man for's sake.


But to abuse your person and your beauty too: a grace wherein this part of
the world is happy: but I shall offend too much.


Not me, it shall never move me.


But to say, ye had a dull eye, a sharpe nose (the visible marks of a shrow) a
dry hand, which is a sign of a bad liver, as he said you were* being toward a
husband too: this was intolerable.


This strikes it up to the head.


Indeed he said you dressed your head in a pretty strange fashion^ but you would
dress your husbands head in a far stranger; meaning the Count of saint Anne I
think.


Gods precious, did he touch mine honour with him?


Faith nothing but that he wears black, and says tis his mistress colours:
and yet he protests that in his eye your face shows well enough by candle
light, for the Count never saw it otherwise, unless twere under a mask, which
indeed he says becomes you above all things.


Come Page, go along with me, I'll stay for no body:
Tis at your cousins chamber, is it not?

Marry is it, there you shall find him at it.


That's enough: let my sister go waste his reuenew in tapers, twill be her own
another day.


Good sister, servant, if ever there were any love or respect to me in you
both.


Sister? there is no love, nor respect, nor any conjuration, shall stay me: and
yet by my part in heaven, I'll not be moved a whit with him: you may retire your
self to your old coll, and there waste your eyes in tears, your heart in
sighs, I'll away certain.


But soft, let's agree first what course we shall take when we take him.


Marry even raise the streets on him, and bring him forth with a flock of
boys about him, to whoote at him.


No, that were too great a dishonour: I'll put him out on's pain presently.


Nay good sir spare his life, cut of the offending part, and save the Count.


Is there no remedy? must I break my vow?
Stay I'll abroad, though with another aim
Not to procure, but to prevent his shame.

Go Page, march on, you know my cousins chamber,
My company may wrong you, I will cross
The nearer way, and set the house before you:
But sister see you be not moved for Gods sake.

Not I by heaven: Come sister, be not moved,
But if you spare him, may heaven ne'er spare you.

So now the solemn votary is reuin'd.


Pray heaven you have not gone a step too far,
And raised more sprites, then you can conjure down.

No my Lord, no, t'Herculean labor's past,
The vow is broke, which was the end we sweat for,
The reconcilement will meet of it self:
Come lets to Court, and watch the Ladies chamber,
Where they are gone with hopeful spleen to see you.

See Mugeron, our counterfeit letter hath taken: who's yonder think?


Tis not Doliue:


Ift be not he, I am sure he's not far off:
Those be his trestles that support the motion.

Tis he by heaven, wrapped in his careless cloak: See the Duke enters* Let him
enjoy the benefit of the enchanted Ring, and stand a while invisible: at our
best opportunity we'll discover him to the Duke.


Monsieur Vandome, yonders no Lord to be found: my Lady stays at hand and
craves your speech.


Tell her she mistook the place, and conduct her hither: How will she look
when she finds her expectation mocked now?


What's that, Uandome?


Your wife and sister are coming hither, hoping to take you and my cousin
together.


Alas, how shall we appease them, when they see themselves so deluded?


Let me alone, and stand you off my Lord:

Madame, you're welcome to the Court: do you see your Lord yonder? I have made
him happy by training you forth: In a word, all I said was but a train to
draw you from your vow: Nay, there's no going back: Come forward and keep
your temper. Sister, cloud not you your forehead: yonder's a Sun will clear
your beauties I am sure. Now you see the shooing-horne is expounded: all was
but a shooing-horne to draw you hither: now show your selves women, and say
nothing.


Let him alone awhile Uandome: who's there? what whisper you?


Y'aue done? come forward:
See here my Lord, my honourable mistress,
And her fair sister, whom your Highness knows
Could never be importunde from their vows
By prayer, or th'earnest ^utes of any friends,
Now hearing false report that your fair Duchess
Was dangerously sick, to visit her
Did that which no friend else could win her to,
And brake her long kept vow with her repair.

Madam you do me an exceeding honour,
In showing this true kindness to my Duchess,
Which she with all her kindness will require.

Now my good Lord, the motion you have made,
With such kind importunity by your self,
And seconded with all persuasions
On my poor part, for marriage of this Lady,
Her self now comes to tell you she embraces,
And (with that promise made me) I present her.

Sister, we must forgive him.


Matchless Lady,
Your beauties and your virtues have archieu'd
An action that I thought impossible,
For all the sweet attractions of your sex,
In your conditions, so to life resembling
The grace and fashion of my other wife:
You have re^'d her to my loving thoughts,
And all the honours I have done to her,
Shall be continude (with increase) to you.

Now let's discover our Ambassador, my Lord.


Do so.


My Lord? my Lord Ambassador?


My Lord fool, am I not?


Go to, you are he: you cannot ^loke your Lordship from our knowledge.


Come come: could Achilles hide himself under a woman's clothes? Greatness
will shine through clouds of any disguise.


Who's that Rhoderique?


Monsieur D'oliue, my Lord, st^lne hither disguised, with what mind we know
not.


Never strive to be gone sir: my Lord, his habit expounds his heart: twere
good he were searched.


Well rooks well, I'll be no longer a block to whet your dull wits on: My Lord,
my Lord, you wrong not your self only, but your whole state, to suffer such
v^cers as these to gather head in your Court* never look to have any action
sort to your honour, when you suffer such earewigs to creep into your ears
thus.


What's the matter Rhoderique?


Alas my Lord, only the lightness of his brain, because his hopes are lost.


For our parts, we have been trusty and secret to him in the whole manage of
his embassage.


Trusty? a plague on you both, there's as much trust in a common whore as in
one of you* and as for secrecy, there's no more in you then in a professed
Scrivener.


Why a Scrivener, Monsiour D'oliue?


Marry sir a man cannot trust him with borrowing so much as poor sortie
shillings, but he will have it Known to all men by these presents.


That's true indeed, but you employed these gentlemen very safely.


Employed? I mary sir, they were the men that first kindled this humour of
employment in me: a pox of employment I say: it has cost me, but what it has
cost me, it skils not: they have thrust upon me a crew of threadbare, vnbutton'd
fellows, to be my followers: Tailors, Frippers, Brokers, cashiered Clarks,
Petrifoggers, and I know not who I: S'light I think they have swept all the
bowling allies ith city for them: and a crew of these, ra^t like old rags
out of dunghills by candle light, have they presented to me in very good
fashion, to be gentlemen of my train, and sold them hope of raising their
fortunes by me: A plague on that phrase, Raising of fortunes, it has undone
more men when ten dicing houses? Raise their fortunes with a vengeance? And a
man will play the fool and be a Lord, or be a fool and play the Lord, he
shall be sure to want no followers, so there be hope to raise their fortunes. A
burning fever light on you, and all such followers. S'foote they say followers*
are but shadows, that follow their Lords no longer then the sunshines on them:
but I find it not so: the sun is set upon my employment, and yet I cannot
shake off my shadows; my followers grow to my heals like kibes, I cannot stir
out of doors for am. And your grace have any employment for followers, pray
entertain my company: they'll spend their blood in your service, for they have
little else to spend, you may soon raise their fortunes.


Well Monsieur D'oliue, your forwardness
In this intended service, shall well know
What acceptance it hath won it self
In our kind thoughts: nor let this sudden change
Discourage the designments you have laid
For our States good: reserve your self I pray,
Till fitter times: mean time will I secure you
From all your followers: follow us to Court.
And good my Lords, and you my honoured Ladies,
Be all made happy in the worthy knowledge
Of this our worthy friend Monsieur D'oliue.

Good Monsieur D'oliue.



