THe misery that waytes upon the pen
Of the best Writers, judge it Gentlemen,
Let them express the very soul of wit,
And want Opinions voice to countenance it,
Tis like the idle buzzing of a Fly,
Heard, not regarded: wretched Poetry!
If he write mirth, tis ribaldry, and mean,
Scorned of chaste ears: If he compose a Scene
Of high writ Poesy, fitting a true stage,
Tis counted sustian: If Poetickerage
Strike at abuse, or op^ the vein of sin,
He's straight informed against for libelling.
Neither quick mirth, invective, nor high state
Can content all, such is the boundless hate
Of a confused Audience: Then we
That scarcely know the rules of Poesy
Cannot escape check. Yet this our comfort is,
The wise will smile to hear th'impartiall hiss.
We neither brag, nor tremble, faint nor entreat,
Our merits nothing, yet our hopes are great,
Yet this our Author bad me boldly speak,
His play shall pass, let Envy swell and break,
Detraction he scorns, honours the best,
Tanti for hate; thus low to all the rest.

welcome gallants, welcome honoured bloods; the reason that we have uncloth'd
us of our princely government in Arcadia, and have to do with this private
retirement here in this desert I'll, you shall find in that shedule, only thus
much for public satisfaction: Tis not strange to you, that the choicest
treasure Nature endowed us with, is mined up in the veins of my two daughters:
how much their quiet, and the smooth stream of our government in Arcadia, was
troubled by the impetuous concourse of untruely suitors, is familiar with your
knowledge; this to avoid, I have for my Image there in my absence appointed my
brother, and undertook this private retirement.


Why my Lord, are you so covetous of your daughters beauties, that their
perfections shall be a means to hinder their preferment?


Rather to further it fair Queen: they are the only pearls of our age, and
to see them well set in honourable and well-befitting Marriage, is our wishes
happiness.

To which effect we have sent a general challenge
To all the youthful bloods of Africa,
That whosoever (borne of princely stem)
Dares foot the bosom of this desert I'll,
(The stage where I'll perform this lovers prize)
And by his wit and active policy,
Woo, win, entice, or any way defeat
Me of my charge, my daughters of their hearts,
Shall with their loves wear my imperial crown
Wreath of their conquest.

A prize, a prize, rare work for Fencers.


What coward would not venture a cracked crown for such a booty?


To that intent our Island is fenc't in
By sea and land, and at each corner built
A Castle for defence, which like great men,
Do over-looke Arcadia: over which,
We have appointed Captains. More to desire,
Is more then we are willing to discover.

Well then sister, I see we must to hap-hazard for husbands.


God send me one with a good face and I care not.


Love an't be thy will, send me one with a fair table in his forehead, like
Time.


Nay, and his face be good, let me alone to trick his forehead, a
countrey-gentlewoman taught me how: But father I wonder how you dare undertake
such a peremptory challenge against all comers, considering you have been so
long troubled with ^ Ague.


An ague? what ague?


Why your quotidian, Dametas the Court surfeit, he that dwells in your eye, like
a disease in your blood.


And the Presence were not exceeding empty-stomackt, it would never digest
such Almes-basket-scraps, the very fall and garbidge of gentry; fie upon him,
he becomes the great chamber worse then a Gentleman-usher with wry legs.


He is the most misshapen suit of gentility that ever the Court wore.


Had he not been of my fathers own making, I should have condemned his
taylor for an exceeding botcher.


If you retain the love of children, or the duty of subjects, express it in
your obedience, we know Dametas loves us*


As Captains and Courtiers do old widows, for profit and preferment.


In sign whereof we make him.


Nay, you have bestowed too much of the making of him up already.


The very making of him up, has stood you in more then the whole outside's
worth.


In my free thoughts you wrong him, therefore to express our love, and to give
the world public note of his loyalty, we create him your Guardian.


How father, my Guardian?


I minion, yours.


Do you hear father, bid him bespeak spectacles, for my fingers have vowed
to have a blind match with his eyes.


Well said Haggart, I'll make your proud heart stoop to the lure of obedience.
But come, by this time our challenge is published, and our gallants wits
sweating in the field of Invention, and it behooves us not to rest unexercised.

So to our lodge, in the mean time be it known,
Our breath has power to raise, or cast men down.

Now Captain Observation, times bawd, thou that hast kept the Ages door,
whilst up-start baseness crept into the bed of greatness, what doest thou
think of this change?


That it pleased the Duke, and becomes not subjects to examine his actions.


That's no part of my meaning, yet would I gladly be better instructed why the
Duke broke up his Court in Arcadia, and removed it into this Island.


I am not Secretary to his thoughts, but the general rumour is, that out of
the freeness of his spirit, he hath sent a challenge to all his neighbour
Princes, that whosoever (within a twelve month) can defeat him of his
daughters, shall with their loves enjoy his Dukedom, the garland proposed for
the victors.


Your words throw sense into me, and that's the cause the Island is so surely
guarded with Watch-towers, over which our selves and other Captains have the
charge.


And to the end that not affection, but desert may prove victor, are the two
Ladies so narrowly observed, the one never out a the eye of her Father, the
other continually in the lodge of Dametas, the Dukes chief director.


If inquisitiveness be not too bold a guest, what do you think of Dametas?


As of a little hillock, made great with others ruins.


Your comparison holds, for by report, his avarice has unmade many to make him
up.


How did he first stumble on the Princes favour?


As some do upon offices, by fortune and flattery, or as truth says, the
Prince having one day lost his way, wandering in the woods, found this Dametas,
affected his discourse, took him along to the Court, and like great men in
love with their own doings, countenanc't his defects, gave him offices,
titles, and all the additions that go to the making up of a man worshipful.


I cannot commend the Duke for raising him, nor yet praise him, that he
proportions not his carriage answerable to his fortunes.


Your thoughts and mine are twins in that: but I hear the warning bell, some
strangers are arrived.


Lets to our office then, and conduct them to Dametas, whose custom is to spit
and hem, whilst his Scribe Major takes their Examinations.


Manasses, how doest like my play at Tennis?


You play well, but you lose still.


Policy Manasses, policy; for when any man upbraides me with my gettings at
Court, I may swear truly, I have lost more then I have got by it.


By the Tennis-court I think you have.


If by any Court, tis enough to save mine oath. But what do our spruce-witted
gallants say of my bounty?


Faith sir, according to the proportion of it, little or nothing, they say tis
a banckrout, and dares not show his head.


Then let em leave jesting at me, though it please the Duke for some few good
parts that he sees in me, to make me his familiar, I scorn to be public, or
every Courtiers companion: but who comes here?


The Captains of the watch-towers? what news with you?

A couple of petitioners, ant like your worship.


Had I best take their Petitions, Manasses?


O in any case, though you never peruse em, tis the only course in request.


Fellows, deliver your petitions to my Scribe Major, and dost hear? put em up
Manasses, they may be wrongs to us.


And they be, I hope they be not the first wrongs I have put up for your
worship.


That fellows pocket is like a Tailors hell, it eats up part of every mans
due: tis an Executioner, and makes away more innocent petitions in one year,
then a red-headed hangman cuts ropes in an age.


Now, what are you sir?


A poor soldier, ant like your Worship.


Poor soldiers do not like my worship, they are bad members.


Then if they had a woman to their Judge, they should be sure to be cut off,
for they cannot endure bad members in a Common-wealth.


What are you?


A poor scholar, ant like your Worship.


Poor schollers do not like our worship neither, they rail against rich
Cormorants, they are bad members too.


Cut them off both sir, and make the land an Eunuch.


I'll take order with em I warrant thee; and I may have my will, i'll neither ha
poor scholar nor soldier about the Court.


The next way to make it the I'll of fools.


Whats he talks of fools there? why how now sir, know you to whom you speak?


Cry your worship mercy, I had forgot your authority.


But I remember well enough I warrant you; I command you in my name and the
Dukes, to attend your guard, and you regard me no more then a careless Lawyer
doth an undone client, but i'll inform: the Duke shall know, out, pack.


Command your slaves sir, we are gentlemen.


Why so I hope are we sir, and of the best and last edition, of the Dukes own
making.


Cry your authority mercy, will you discharge us of these passengers?


You are discharged, about your business.


Bad fate, that wrong should set his foot on right, And true borne Eagles
stoop to this base Kite.


What an excellent trade it is to be an officer maker, i'll have more officers,
and one shall be to keep schollers and soldiers out of the Court, for they dare
not come in the great Chamber already, for want of good clothes. But gods me
Manasses, go tell the Duke I must speak with him.


Presently sir, I'll go fetch the head to give the foot a posset: and my master
had wit to his villainy, he would make an excellent dish for the hang-man.


Right vvorshipfull.


I sir, I know my place is vvorshipfull; I tell thee Knave, I could hang thee
by my patent, if it were granted once, i'll tell thee how it runs, it allows
me 24. knaves, 6 knights, 10. fools, 13. felons, and 14. traitors by the
year, take them how, why, when, and where I please.


I do not think the Duke will ever grant it.


Why not grant it? why should you think he will not grant it? Such another
word and i'll send you to Limbo instantly.


We thank you good Dametas. Discover themselves.


I hope you'll take reasonable bail for our forth coming.


The case is altered with you since you came out of Arcadia.


My honourable friends, Iulio and Aminter, my self and the best ability of my
power, lies at your service.


You see how confidently we presume upon your Letters promise, in furthering
us to attain the lovers prize.


The Dukes daughters are your own, and in a word thus shall you attain them,
some 3 days hence I will appoint a hunting, to which I will invite the Duke
both his daughters: in this hunt will I upon some sudden occasion divide the
train, and having singled out the two Does, I hope you have wit enough to
strike.


To strike, how mean you?


As headsmen do, off with their maiden-heads, or if the Duke offer resistance,
off with his crown too.


That were violence, and clean opposite to the intent of the challenge.


Come ye are shallow, to it vi armis, to it, I'll be your second, think of the
Crown, have my Letters travaild for you, my wit wrought for you, and my
invention sweat for you, to possess you of your loves, and seat you in the
Dukedom, and come you now with tis violence, and against the intent of the
challenge? I am ashamed to hear you.


Nay Dametas, and your resolution be so forward, ours shall over-take you, we
doubted least the preferments your Lord hath heaped upon you, had smothered your
affection to usward.


That was the father that begot the doubt in us, you will appoint the hunt.


Sever the Duke, divide the train, and then --


We have your meaning.


Put it in execution then, but first entertain some new disguise, as at our
next meeting I'll inform you. Adieu, I shall think long till I see you again.


As a Lawyer doth for his Client for a second fee. Here's no Iudas?


Yes, and a damned one too, for he would betray and sell his Master.


Tis common in such base fellows, such Court-spiders, that weave their webs of
flattery in the ears of greatness, if they can once entangle them in their
quaint-treachery, they poison them straight.


They are like unnecessary worms, whom the sun of greatness creates of the
gross and slimy multitude, as soon as they recover strength, they eat into
the credit of true borne gentry, undermine and work out the true nobility,
to inroote and establish themselves.


And in the end, like Esops starved snake, having lapped the sweet milk of
greatness, made themselves strong in authority and friends, they turn their
stings of envy into their preservers bosom.


The example lives in this Dametas, who notwithstanding the Duke hath raised him
to that height that he looks equal with himself, yet for the base hope of
uncertain government, he offers him to sale; but let his treason live to the
last minute.


For my part I'll make that use of him that Physicians do of poison, use as
much of him as serves for mine honest intent, and cast down the rest, as unfit
for any necessary employment.


Let our carriage in this attempt put on no show of violence, either to the
Duke, or his daughters.


And let our discourse go so smoothly apparelled, that it move not the
patience of the most tender ear.


About it then, though his intent be base,
Our enterprise shall wear a noble face.

Arcadia, thou heaven, within whose sphere

The star that guides my motion is fixed,
I court thy gracious bosom with a kiss
For this admittance: in thine amorous arms,
Fair Violetta, fairer then the flower
That christened her, and graced her with that name,
Does play the wanton:
Only her Father like a covetous churl,
Owner of that vnvalewed Diamond,
Hath made this desert I'll th'unwilling chest
In which he locks her. But the fair advantage
Of this large Challenge, and my stars to friend,
Aided by this disguise, I shall break open
His iron Casket, and enlarge my hope.

This way she went sir, this way.


But I say this way, I would thou should know, we old Courtiers can hunt a
Cony, and put her to the squeak, and make her cry out like a young married wife
of the first night.


For more help, as some of them have done: But there she is.


I'll upon her presently: dost hear me sir? thou vessel of infirmity,
woman, and by thy out-side little better then one of the wicked, come hither
and show thy self before us, show thy self before Dametas.


Dametas? Lisander then dissemble,

For he's the man must work thy entrance.


What art thou? speak.


My mother is the Queen of Amazons,
My self a Virgin, married unto Arms,
And bold achievements, who have paced the world
In quest of fair Antioste my sister:
And turning homeward, the unconstant winds,
And wrathful Neptune cast me on this shore.

And what's your business now you are landed?


My business is in private with the Duke.


The Duke is busy, and shall speak with no body.


I beseech you sir.


Tis no beseeching matter I assure you.


No, never beseech for the matter, for except you could beseech with the tongue
of Angels, tis to no purpose with him.


Tis strange, I have heard thy master is a very good man where he takes.


True, where he takes he is, but he takes nothing of you, and therefore look
for no kindness from him.


Good, and dost thou take after thy Master?


No Madam, I take commonly before my Master, for where he takes, he takes all,
and leaves nothing for me to take.


Oh, I feel your meaning.


Let my master have some feeling of yours, and heel prefer your suit.


Tis not the Dukes pleasure Petitioners should buy their access.


All's one, tis my masters pleasure, and usual fashion.


And I must maintain the fashion. Worshipful Dametas, my late shipwreck as
you see, hath made a defeat both of my friends and treasure; notwithstanding,
Fortune hath referv'd me one jewell, which if I might request your Worship in
love to accept, and be a means to work my admittance to the Duke, I should
become a true debtor to your love.


Well Madam, tho I hate nothing more then a man that takes bribes, yet pressed by
your importunity, and that you tender it in love, lest I might seem too nice
to withstand a Ladies favour, I'll wear it for your sake, and if the Duke be
not too busily employed, work your access.


So doing, you shall perform the office of a deare-bought friend.


How quickly the tide's turned! but do you hear Madam? though I take neither
before nor after my Master, yet take my counsel, and do not trust my master: if
you have a suit to the Duke, keep it to your self, for if you trust my master
with it, heel prefer it for you, but heel beg't for himself.


That's plain cozenage.


Fie no, tis cunning in him, marry 'twould be thought little better then
cozenage in a country gentleman: but he returns.


Madam, I have been earnest, very earnest with the Duke for your admittance.


And have you wrought it?


I have, marry you must think I bestowd much labour in it.


'Tmay be you did.


'Tmay be you did: and look a scance like a Apothecaries wife pounding
Colliquintida; have my brains sweat for this?


Why the jewell is right Dametas, had I but an Ass that would sweat me such
pearl.


An Ass? and sweat such pearl? I'll bar her admittance, here take your jewell,
the Duke will allow no admittance, and I will keep you back.


Keep me back? thou could do no more and I were a poor mans petitioner.


And I'll do so much being a rich petitioner.


You cannot sit, you Court spaniel, you unnecessary mushrump, that in one
night art sprung out of the root of greatness, I have bought my admittance,
and I'll have it in despetto del fato.


I must admit her, these Ladies are so inward with our tricks, there's no good
to be done upon them: well Madam, your admittance is open, will you follow?


With all my heart sir, I'll be the blind man and poor petitioner, and thou
shalt play the Court-spaniell with the silver bell, and lead me into the
Presence.


Court-spaniell? mum: I'll bosom what I think, Old Gib's not blind, I see,
although I wink.


BOy, how dost like me in this attire?


As the Audience doth a bad play, scurvily.


Is it not strange a Prince should be thus metamorphosed?


Not so strange as the Metamorphosis of Ajax, an't like your Grace.


Grace you Aggot, hast not forgot that yet?


No, and yet tis a wonder I ha not, grace being so seldom used, I'm sure they
say none at some Ordinaries, for at sitting down they cannot intend it for
hunger, and at rising up, they are either drunk, or have such mind a dice,
they never remember, my Lord then.


No more Lord, sirrah.


Indeed there are too many already, but is not this strange, that rich men
should forsake their titles? master then.


Your will sir.


You have left many Countries behind you in seeking your friend Lisander, and
yet you cannot find him.


True sir.


I have seen much gold lying upon Lombards stals, and could never finger penny
of it.


Very well.


Nay, twas not well sir.


What conclude you then?


That you were best sit down, and see what you have got by your journey.


I have seen a face as beautiful as heaven.


That's nothing, a prisoner sees the face of heaven it self, when he looks
but out at the prison-gate, i'll stand to it, a man were as good be hanged, so a
meet a handsome hangman, a strong rope, as be in love.


Your reason for that.


Mary this sir, hanging is end of all troubles, and love the beginning: Nay
further, I think a Lover cannot be saved, for he is of all religions.


Your proof for that.


This; he thinks with the Atheist there's no God but his Mistress, with the
Infidel no heaven but her smiles, with the Papist no Purgatory but her
frowns, and with the family of love, holds it lawful to lie with her, though
she be another mans wife.


So sir, what follows?


Serving-men sir, the Master goes in before his wife, and the Serving-man
follows his master.


Sir forbear, I must meditate.


As the Usurer before he parts with money, meditates upon the assurance.


If Violettaes presence haven't quenched
The memory of all things but her self,
I should be more familiar with that face.

I have left my country to seek my friend.


And I my country and my friend for love.


And in the search of him have lost my self
In the strange Region of a woman's eye.

In love, and in Arcadia.


As much as heaven transcends the humble earth,
So towers her praise her face differs as far
From others, as a glo-worme from a star.
She is a Princess that my soul affects.

And rich.


Half heir unto this Dukedom.


And she were whole heir to the four moral virtues, twere nothing: when
shall I see the time that men will love for virtue, or a rich heir marry a
poor wench without a portion? never I think.


Had not my friend Lisander.


What of me?


Left me in Thrace.


We had never met in love,
His syllables betray him. I arrest you.

At whose suit?


Not at his Tailors in any case, for there's no greater stitch to a younger
brothers conscience, then to pay for a suit of apparel when tis worn out.


Lisander or his ghost?


Demetrius,
Or some illusiue tenant in his shape?

Unkind, why did thou lean my company?


For that which made the amorous Gods leave heaven, ^or love: but why is
Demetrius thus disguised?


For that which would make a Iackanapes a Monkey, and he could get it: a tail.


Peace rogue.


Why wag, is thy master in love?


Faith sit he hath entered his action in Cutids Court, and mean^ to proceed in
the suit it should seem.


Why did not take my counsel in thy choice?


Because I feared a chiding, for doubting their honourable thoughts would not
have not have consented to my effeminate attempts, I stole this secret course,
and manner of disguise, as best helping to access, which it hath begot, now
what access will bring forth, I commit to unborn industry.


It cannot but be prosperous: only the strict observance of our loves hinders
the passage of our hopes.


Indeed that's not the least hinderance, yet the Duke himself, and my quaint
disguise hath removed it out of my way, who not only takes me for a woman, but
hath allowed me for my loves companion.


Fortune deals kindly with thee, I am as far from access to my love, as
when I was in Thrace.


Dametas is the oystershell that holds thy pearl, our wits must fish for him.


Will the Cods head bite?


Like an old Usurer at a young heirs inheritance, and I have it ready hookt
for him: and here he comes, my plot is to prefer thee to his service.


Prithee do, and i'll serve him in his right kind.


Dametas, my love is yours.


Which madam I am as proud of --


As a malecontent of a change, or an old Lady of a new fashion.


To be round, I have a suit to you in the behalf of this woodman


To me sweet blossom, though I be somewhat strict in mine office, I cannot be
stony to Ladies. Fellow is thy petition drawn?


Petition?


Your only way to move a fut by: Humbly complaining to your good worship, O
tis most patheticke, indeed, without money, can do just nothing with
authority.


Come hither stripling, whose son were thou?


I am not so wise a child as you take me for, I never knew my father.


Did not know thy father?


A common fault, his betters forget themselves when they grow rich, then blame
not him to forget his father.


What was his name?


If I may give credit to my mother, they called him Menalchas, who on his
death-bed made me his heir, with this charge, to seek your worships service,
and gave me this gold as a remembrance to purchase your favour.


Gold? hem.


Now doth my Master long more to singer there gold, then a young girl, married
to an old man, doth to run her husband ashore at Cuckolds haven.


Well, I could do for this fatherless youth.


As many Executors and Overseers have done, cheat him of his portion, and then
turn him out of doors a begging.


But for I have the Gardian-ship of the Princess, I dare do nothing without
the consent of the Duke.


Come, come sir, your worship shall not refuse him.


Well then I woo not, but tis for your sake I assure you.


Meaning the gold.


What shall I call thy name?


Dorus an't like your worship.


Ah, good Dorus, be an honest youth Dorus, reverence your Master, and love your
self: be sure to get under me, and you shall loose nothing in my service.
Madam, the Duke and Duchess expect you at the hunt, and await your coming at
Dianaes oak.


^e attend them presently, be a good servant Dorus.


Twill be his own another day Madam.


In the mean time let it be yours to lead the way.


My service doth attend you.


As the Pursevant doth the prisoner for a double fee.


Welcome slave to a slave, a fair presage,
The hope of love sweetens loves vass lage.

Now and Dametas be the mettle he was stamped for, a right villain.


And he be not, hang him.


Nay he deserves hanging too if he be: but will you trust him?


Yes as far as I see him, and he that trusts him further, my trust is he will
be deceived.


Indeed, he that will prove false to his maker, will be true to no man.


Yes, for the present time, like a bawd to him that gives most


That's not for love.


Yes of the money: he that looks for other love in this age -- This is the
place his Letter speaks of, and here he comes himself.


Why so lo: now is the web of my hopes upon the Loombe of perfection, and in
this quech of lashes Aminter Iulio,

See and see not, all mum, you know your cue,
The game's your own, if you can hunt it true.

Dametas, were thine cares ever at a more musical banquet? how the hounds
mouths like bells are tuned one under another like a slothfulnesse, the speed of
the cry out-ran my sense of hearing.


Cross over the Forest to Dianaes oak my liege, there your grace advantaged
by the height of the ground, shall not only at pleasure hear, but be
eye-witnesse of their musical contention.


Thanks good Dametas, be thy directions our wives convoy.


Where is his highness Dametas?


At Adonis bower Madam, where he expects your presence, to see the fleshing of
a couple of Spartane hounds, in the wasting blood of the spent Dear.


Thanks good Dametas, mine eyes would not be good friends with my feet, should
they not bring 'em to that kingly sport.


Sweet Ladies, to save you the expense of much breath, which must be laid out
in the purchase of the game, I have provided you this stand, from whence your
eyes may be commanders of the sport: such sport as you little dream of.


We are your loves debtors kind Dametas.
As I love virtue I pity these poor beasts,
These Syl^ane commoners, to see what tasks
Our covetous Foresters impose upon them,
Who not content with impost of their breath,
(Poor hearts) pursue them smiling to their death.

Twas the end of their creation Madam.


So was the end of ours to live in peace,
And not to tyrannise on harmless beasts,
But Foresters, like Images set forth
The tyranny of greatness without pity,
As they the Dear, so covetous wealth pursues
The trembling state of their inferiors,
And to clasp up the volume of their sins,
They drink their blood, and cloth them with their skins:
Then cease to press poor beasts with tyranny,
You love your lives, think they are loath to dye.

You are too tender-hearted to be a good huntswoman Lady.


And some of you too hard-hearted, but leaving this discourse of hunting, have
all our gallantry of Lacedemon and Greece, spent the vigour of their wits, that
not one dares venture.


For our loves sister, you may see, the properer women, the worse luck.


Tush you shall have suitors, fear not Madam.


No at any hand sister, for with a fear it comes.


Then i'll fear of purpose, because I would have 'em come.


And they do not, they are notable cowards.


Then let them keep away still, for I have vowed my maidenhead shall never do
homage to the bed of a coward.


Sweet Ladies, will you beguile a minute or two with this discourse, till I
step up to the top of the hill* and make discovery of the game.


Let your return be speedy good Dametas.


I'll put on wings and fly.


Out of the Court, and the whole Country shall have a good riddance.


So, he hath put'em fair to the stand, lets issue surprise them.


Be resolute and sudden.
Aminter and Iulio issue out, and bear them away.

Murder, treason, rescue, help.


Yes much reskue, much help, much Dametas: why so, this jest was drawn home
close to the head, it cannot choose but cleave the very white of our hopes, the
Dukes wit: to thy tackle good wit, some sudden sea room, or our stratagem is
run a ground.


Tell me Dametas, was not the Dear a prodigal? did he not spend his breath
freely amongst us?


And his blood too my liege, but did you observe how the hounds like
politicians nosed out the game?


True: and coming to the loss, Melampus, but where are our daughters?


Did you observe that my liege, that Melampus as a true hound is ever horce
cheerd or hollow, yet he kept time too.


Certain Dametas, but where are our daughters man?


Busy my Lord under a brake bush, disputing of the virtue of sweet water, and
ground Ivy.


What cry of treason's that Dametas?
Pray God no danger sets upon my daughters,
Seek out our wife, i'll haste unto their reskue.

And my sword un-employd? allegiance says nay to that my ^i^ge, I am for the
adventure my self, if they be surprised (I am a mad man) your grace shall
hear more: if not (I am the more sorry) your grace shall hear more too: make
peace with your thoughts till my return, and doubt not their recovery.


Speak, where's the Duke?


Here my Gynetia. What mean these weapons, are our daughters ^afe?


As a thief in a mill father, we thank our redeemers*


The more my grief, were you surprised then madam?


Yes faith Dametas.


And how sweet Ladies, and how were you rescued?


Being surprised, this gallant Amazon
Pressed to their re^cue, had you seen what worth
She and this woodman spent in our defence,
Wonder would have bereft you of all sense,
She rai*'d her sword with such a manly grace,
As had not her mild sex contrould my thoughts,
I could have fallen in love with her high worth.

You over-prise us madam, not our desert,
But the weak spirits of our opposites,
Gave luster to the dimness of our worth.

It pleases your modesty to lesson it,
But it shall still live great in our regard. What woodman's that?

My follower, my liege.


What ere he be, he hath deserved our love,
Fellow be near us, and for this desert,
Performed against those Traitors to our blood,
Under thy master we give thee an attendant,
To guard the life and safety of our daughter.

Thank you good father, who ever loose by the bargain,
I have got me a servant by the match: woo't serve me fellow?

In the best I can.
In heart your fellow, though in show your man.

I'll try your duteous service: I command
Your knee to ki^e the ground, your lip my hand.

Pardon me Madam.


Here's hot love no doubt,
I may command my man, and go without.

Truce to this airy war, these paper bullets
Better become a Closet then a Park,
The Forest music is to hear the hounds
Rend the thin air, and with a lusty cry
Awake the drowsy Echo, and confound
Their perfect language in a mingled sound,
Then to the Court, our Forest sport being done,
A second chase of lovelier sports begun.

If fortune cross not what our hopes pursue,
Our fears have met their deaths, our loves their due.

Crossed in my hopes, the Ladies rescued, and the Princes like ^ravens beat out
of the game-place, my invention must turn traveller for more stratagems: what
I should discover their plot to the Duke, attach em for traitors, and beg their
lands for my labour, though they be my friends, twere a pretty parcel of
policy.

All things are lawful that do profit bring,
A wise mans bow goes with a two-fold string.

Did ever two Princes meet such strange changes in their loves? now we have
wrought our admittance, and in a manner got em into our possessions, our hopes
like false fires having brought us within ken, vanish, and leave us out of all
comfort.


That the Duke should dote upon thee for a woman, makes for our purpose, but
that the Duchess should be enamourd on thee for a man, is preposterous.


Whether my valour shown in the reskue of the Ladies, or the ardent glances her
daughters beauty steals from my eyes, give her thoughts encouragement, I know
not, but her hopes stand confident I am a man, and for that cause am I barred
from access.


I weigh thy combrances by my own, for though by the dukes allowance I am her
privileged attendant, yet such is the devilishnes of Dametas, that I cannot
joy so much access as to confer with her.


I can compare my lord his friend to nothing in the world so fitly, as to a
couple of water buckets, for whilst hope winds the one up, despair plunges
the other down, whilst I, like a Harlakene in an Italian Comoedy, stand making
faces at both their follies.


Well, since the shape of our proceeding grows so monstrous, lets cast our
inventions in a new mold, and having so firm a foundation as this disguise to
build upon, lets draw the model, and raise the whole frame of our attempts
anew.


Indeed, lovers should be conditioned like tyrants, who having the aim of a
crown in their eye once, run violently over all lets that intervent their
course, and so must we.


And so will we, my resolution is already bent, and if I shoot not, the next
levell I take, Love I beseech thee break thy bow about mine ears, and strike
thy horns in my forehead, for married men to hang their cap^ on.


I have met a means fit for my purpose already: Mopsa Dametas only daughter
is overshooes in love with me, to her ^le feign extreme ardor of affection,
and make her the shadow under which I'll court the true substance of my divine
Hippolita.


About it then, I'll sweat my invention to death but I'll overtake thee; but
here comes one of my Burs* I must bear his importunity, for no reasonable
denial will brush him off.


Zelmane.


My Liege.


My thoughts come like a sail before the wind, swollen big with news, and thine
ears the midwife must deliver me of this burden: my Duchess is sick,
heart-sicke for thee Zelmane.


For me? why my Lord, I am no Rosa solis, nor Aqua mirabilis to recover sick
folks.


Shall I be short with thee? My Lady's in love with thee.


With me my Lord?


With thee my Lady: her amorous glances are her accusers, her very looks write
Sonnets in thy commendations, she carves thee at board, and cannot sleep for
dreaming on thee in bed, she's turned sunne-riser, haunts private walks, and
like a disgraced Courtier, studies the Art of melancholy.


Now alas good Lady.


Nay never pity her, she deserves none, rather lets bend our endeavours to
entangle her more. To see the kindness of fortune, who fearing we should be
acquainted with solitude in this our 12 month retirement, hath begot a
domestic merriment, and made our own thoughts Actors in it, and as bad a Poet
as I am, I'll ha one scene in it of my own invention.


Dametas will storm at that, for he cannot abide Poetry should be
countenanced; but how is't my Liege?


Tis ready plotted already, and that the Duchess may not find thee unprovided
when she comes to court thee.


Court me, court a woman my Liege?


Why that's the very happiness of the jest, but in any case confess thy self
a man.


A man my Liege? I ha no colour for it.


Tush, I'll furnish thee, say thou art a Prince, no matter who, and hast to do
with this disguise of purpose to court my daughter Violetta.


Is this scene of your own inventing my Liege?


Mine own in faith, and to confirm't the rather, use more oft and private
conference with my daughter, interchange discourse amorous dalliance, oh twill
set my Duchess affections afire, to think her rivalld by her daughter, and
give us smooth passage to our love.


How occasion plays the wanton with me. Well my liege, do but you work my
admittance to your daughter, and ^le bestow al the art I am worth in courting
her; and see, as if Fortune had a hand in our Comoedy, she hath entered the
Duchess just at her cue, shadow your self in your Arc, and leave me to
give her entertainment.


Forget not to personate some Prince in any case.


I warrant you, I'll play the Prince with much art.


This way he went, on this sweet violet bed
Still dwells the print of his enamoured tread,
The depressed flowers have strengthened their sweet
By stealing amorous kisses from his feet.

Absolute Poet. Penelope was a ballad-maker to her.


Oh do not fly my presence, gentle wanton stay,
What have I found you, faith you run-away
I'll tie a chain about your wast for this,
And make you buy your freedom with a kiss.

Fie Madam, this courtesy is more then needs.


Be not so coy, let not a loving Dame
Find thee less kind then senseless elements,
Thou never walk, but the enamoured air
Like an officious lover bears thy train,
Whilst the cool wind doth with his velvet wing
Fan the thin air upon thy sweaty cheek,
Stealing sweet kisses from thy silken lip.

Shield this vain breath, beat at some Ladies ear.


But you are none, you are not, come you are not.
Your valour, looks, and gesture show you are not,
Your manly brow, and your commanding eye,
Where war and fortune dwell in majesty,
Your private walks, and varied passions,
Your glances to my daughter, sure you are not,
And my firm love is confident you are not.

There's a lover of a right temper, she'll out-face the name of her sex
instantly.


Well Madam, since your observation hath discovered me, upon promise of your
secrecy, I confess my self a man.


Good, excellent, how truly she takes my directions.


I knew my judgement could not be deceived,
Nor durst proud love have done me so much wrong
To cast my thoughts unto a woman's eye.

Love durst not, good, good, excellent, what next?


But Madam, now I am known to you, what further request you?


Exchange of looks, and freedom of thy bed,
Thy presence, thy embraces, thy kind love,
For which my amorous thoughts have long lain sick.

Thank you good wife; nay, and a Duchess long to give her husband the
horning, let it never grieve Butchers to do homage at Cuckolds haven.


Well Madam, to give content to your affections, and in a strong hope you will
mediate my suit to your daughter, sort out but fit time and opportunity, and
master your desires.


And he were a man now I might be rarely tupt.


Give me thy hand then, with this amorous kiss I seal thee mine.


And I confirm't with this.


Rare, rare, rare, she's his, sealed and delivered in the presence of her
husband.


Now lest my husband should suspect our love.


Now, what for that now?


Hear a good jest, persuade him thou art a woman.


That's not to do now Madam, for he as confidently believes and ardently
courts me for a woman as you for a man.


Good, excellent, maintain that humour still,
Seem coy, look nice, and as we women use,
Be mild, and proud, embrace, and yet refuse.

Excellent virtues in a woman.


I prithee do, twill be a scene of mirth
For me to quote his passions and his smiles,
His amorous haviour, and how his eye
Will beget strange variety of looks,
And shoot em into thine; but the chief sport's this,
To see an old man with a young man kiss.

To see an old Duchess a young Lady kiss.
Now the plot packs, the scene's all comical,
I cannot speak for laughter, to see these women,
That would be counted wonders for their wit,
Lay plots to gull themselves, silly conceit.

To take me for a man.


And arm her self
To laugh at me, make jests and scoffs at me,
But sooth her humour, the revenge she would throw
Upon my head, shall fall on her own brow.

Upon you both, so, so, so, how greedily their inventions like bugles follow
the sent of their own gullery, yet these are no fools, God forbid, not they:
but to the drift, mirth in my warm blood sits Laughing at this division of
their wits.


Woo't believe me sister? I never eat a cherry, but it puts me in mind of a
husband, it kisses my lips with such a harmless prettinesse.


Now in good deed lo I love em a lise too, I think I shall never ha my belly
full on em.


Of what, not of husbands Violetta?


No, of cherries Hippolita, but take heed of em, they be a very filling meat,
and dangerous things for us Maids I can tell you, we may surfeit after em
presently.


Surfeit after what, a husband?


I, and after cherries too Hippolita.


I warrant you sister, an old Lady in Lacedemon taught me a preservative
against that.


For the love of cherries what?


Marry this it was, still said she, betwixt every cherry said she, be sure to
crack a stone said she.


Then let me alone, I'll crack a couple of stones betwixt every cherry, rather
then surfeit on them.


You must take heed you crack not too many too, for you may surfeit of the
stone as well as of the cherry.


Nay and they be such dangerous things, I ha done with em.


So have I too for this time, but sister, is it not a strange kind of servile
liberty that we live in here in Arcadia?


For all the world as Englishmen keep their felons, and Italians their wives,
we never stir abroad without our laylors.


And for what cause forsooth? only to keep us from marriage.


Sure it is either some high content, or extreme discommodity, that our
father debarres us of it.


By this stone, me thinks I long like a woman with child, till I know the
difference betwixt a Maid and a wife.


Well, god a mercy of all cursen souls, I was near the knowledge on it last
night I can tell you.


O that I had bin with thee I might ha been so too: for the love of marriage
how?


Why thus: As I lay slumbering in my bed,
No creature with me but my mayden-head.

Is that a creature?


Some maintain it is,
Got in the eye, conceived in a kiss;
Others, whose speech seems near akin to truth,
Say tis a passion, bred in the heat of youth,
Some call it a sigh, and some an amorous groan,
All differ in the definition:
But in th'allow'd opinion of most,
Tis never truly had till it be lost.
But lying thus alone, as Maids do use,
Me thought I dreamt, as Maids can hardly choose,
And in my dream me thought twas too much wrong
A pretty Maid should lye alone so long;
With that a gallant comes, gallants can do
Much with young Maids.

And with old women too.


He courted me once, and again, and thrice,
Tis virtue to say nay, to be too nice
Agrees not with my humour, yet some say,
We Maids wish things, to which we answer nay;
Briefly, me thought he stood so long a wooing,
I rather could ha wished he had been doing
Some other business, yet at last we'greed,
Twere strange if earnest futers should not speed.

In what agreed you?


In our Wedding-ring,
Time, place, and hour, indeed in every thing;
The day appointed, and each thing in frame,
I thought each hour an age until it came,
Well, come it is, the morning once in sight,
I thought it ten times longer till twas night.
At dinner time me thought I swelled with pride
To be drunk to by name of Mistress bride,
Music spake loud, no delicates were scant,
Yet still me thought another thing did want,
For sure thought I, there's something in a man
That wives love well, hope brides may wish it than.
Long looked for comes at last, to bed we go.

Would I had dreamt I might have done so too.


My bed-mate turned, and as he would have spoke,
I sweat with fear, and in that fear I woke,
But seeing my kind bed-fellow was gone,
Lord how it chaft me that I waked so soon,
One minutes dreaming longer, I had tried,
The difference twixt a virgin and a bride.

Otwould have vexed a Saint, my blood would burn
To be so near, and miss so good a turn.

And so did mine too I warrant you, nay though I be but a little pot, I shall
be as soon hot as another.


You should not be my sister else.


Nor my mothers daughter neither.


And in good earnest we are not fath^r^ ^ amiss.


Are you avis'd of that, and In faith tell^ what think you of your servant
Dorus.


As of a sweet Almond in a rugged shell, the Sun in a cloud, or a wealthy
Diamond in a rock, indeed clean contrary to the world, he wears the worst
side outward, and is much better then he seems: but what think you of your
manly Amazon??


Nay the sport is I know not what to think, Zelmanes humour would afford
project for a pretty Court Comoedy, my father courts her for a woman, and as I
fear she is, my mother dotes upon her for a man, and as I wish he were, and
that with such an ardor of affection, that I could find in my heart to turn my
mother out of the company, and play the lovers part my self.


How ever man or woman, the jest holds currant in one.


I know not what knavish motion hath had to do with my thought, but my mind
tells me that your servant Dorus and my Amazon, are other then they seem: and
here he comes.


Why how now madam, Ladies gadding, is this the obedience of your fathers
charge.


Pardon Mistress Miso, 'twas my doing and the Dukes.


But the Duchess will like neither the Dukes doings nor yours, neither in
this case I can tell you. The Duke stays your coming, and yet the Duchess
is very desirous on it, my husband is in the next Arbour to man you. For you
Lady, my presence be your privilege.


Miso should be either a hang man or a Herald, for she never comes amongst us,
but she quarters our company and arms.


Excellent beauty, therefore more excellent, because situate in so fair a
creature.


You are a merry man Dorus, but all this cannot make me love me, how say you
mother doth he?


Mary let him choose daughter, when I was as thou art --


You were as she is? but faith madam Mopsa, I perceive my servant Dorus bears
a months mind to you, be not so straight laced to him.


Straight laced? sgod mend me I am not laced at all, am I Dorus? no in sooth, I
go wide open wensday, I never lace my self but on sundays, that for fear I
should burst with cating of plum-porridge.


I mean let fall some comfortable looks on your suitor.


Sgod mend me, i'll let fall or take up any thing I have to do him good.


Why that's kindly said, and Dorus your love is very ambitious, to climb so
high as the beautiful Mopsa.


O are you avis'd of that, 'twould make a horse break his bridle to hear how
the youth of the village will commend me, oh the pretty little pincking nies of
Mopsa says one, oh the fine flat lips of Mopsa says another, and then do I
bridle my head like a malt-horse thus, set mine arms a kembo thus, wreath my
neck and my body thus, wink with one eye thus, and spread my peacocks tay le
as broad as the proudest minxe of em all.


These extraordinary graces must not want admiration, but where's your mother?


Speak softly in the Lobby there, for waking my Ladies foisting hound.


Godsme, my mother's stealing of a nap.


Nay, she cannot be said to steal a nap, for the noise she makes herself
would discover her theft: but Dorus since your fortunes are poor, you should
study to ennoble your deserts, and beget effects worthy to court and win your
Ladies acceptance.


Lass madam, I choose no better moderater then your self, betwixt me my
unworthy services, suppose your self though but a Cucko compared with this
sweet singing Nitingale, should be sued to by a Prince like me, I mean like me
in love, for love in Princes peasants admits comparison: suppose Demetrius
should in like disguise court you as I do, Mopsa, sigh for you, as I do, for
Mopsa, kneel to you thus, as I do, to Mopsa, lay down his life to you, as I
do, to Mopsa, prefer your good before his own, as I protest I do, Mopsaes,
suppose he should show you the known mark of his neck, to assure you he were
Demetrius, as I do this to Mopsa, to witness I am the son of Menalchas,
could your disdain stand out like Mopsaes?


What a keenes necessity sets upon the edge of invention, trust me Mopsa your
servant speaks well, and if he can prove himself the man he speaks of, and
my wishes well hope, Demetrius, you have no reason to think scorn of him.


Why what should I do Madam? my mother tells me I must not say as I think.


I am no counseller, but should Demetrius in like disguise court me, thus would
I embrace him, thus seal my affections with a kiss, and thus argue: think
not Demetrius that the clouds of baseness could so musfle thee, but that the
Sun of valour shined through them long since, and in regard of thy serviceable
duty in concealing, and unprevented policy in thus making known thy love,
sort but out fit opportunity, and in despite of al guardians strict
observance, go where thou wilt, the worth of Demetrius shall draw Hippolita,
this would I vow, and this will I perform.


And were I Demetrius and you Hippolita, I would deceive Dametas, outreach
Miso, forswear Mopsa, and forsake Arcadia, to share the fortunes of divine
Hippolita.


And what should I do then?


I do but speak in the person of Demetrius, and under Hippolita shadow what I
intend to the rare, and never enough wondered at Mopsa, the black swan of
beauty, and madg-howlet of admiration.


Do not you flout me Dorus? and you do not, provide a Priest and i'll marry
you, and my father and mother shall never know on it.


Manasses is the man.


And i'll be the woman, whosoever say nay to it, little dreams my mother of
what we have done.


T'may be she did, for she sighed groaned much in her sleep.


Tis well she was so quiet, for she eat pease-poridge to breakfast, and
they'll make mebreake wind in my sleep like a horse, and see as the devil will
have it she wakes, and here comes my father, no words and ye love me.


Why God a mercy Dorus, this diligence becomes the servant of Dametas, and i'll
prefer thee for it.


You were worse then the devil else, for they say he helps his servants, then
you may do little and you cannot help yours.


Will you break your jests against the bars of your chamber window, and clear
the green? the Duke is coming to bowles, and I would not for half mine
office you should be a rub in the way of his patience: daughter and wife,
conduct her to the Lodge, Exit. And Dorus, make you haste about your business.


I warrant you Sir: be my hopes rightly placed, You will condemn me for my too
much haste.


Why so: this tis to be in authority: Inferior persons, I and the Princes
themselves, fly from my presence, like the chirping Birds from the sight of the
Falcon: my very breath like a mighty wind blows away inferior Officers (the
Court rubbish) out of my way, and gives me a smooth passage: I am the morning
star, I am seldom seen but about the rising of the Sun: indeed I am never
out of the Dukes eye; and here he comes.


Doth our match hold?


Yes, whose part will you take?


Zelmanes.


Soft, that match is yet to make.


Lets cast a choice, the nearest two take one.


My choice is cast, help sweet occasion.


Come, here's agood.


Well, bettered.


Best of all.


The Duke and I.


The weakest go to the wall.


I'll lead.


I'll follow.


We have both one mind.


In what?


In leaving the old folk behind.


Well jested daughter, and you lead not fair,
The hindmost hound, though old, may catch the hare.

Your last bowl, come.


By the faith a me, well lead.


Would I might lead you.


Whither?


To my bed.


I am sure you would not.


By this air I would.


I hope you would not hurt me, and you should.


I'd love you sweet.


Sour, so I heard you say.


A cept it then.


Of what acquaintance pray?


Of loves and mine.


Daughter, your bowl wins one.


None of my Maidenhead father, I am gone,
The Amazon hath won one.

Yield to that.


The cast I do.


Your self?


Nay scrape out that.


Whose is it yet?


The Dukes: play smooth and fine.
The smallest help that is will make you mine.

Me yours?


You mine, for though the cast I lose,
I ha won your love.

Much: in my the other hose.


Come, the last mark; this cast is worth all the rest,


The leader as the follower.


Bad's the best.
I win her for ten Crowns, and there they be.

I take your lay.


A match twixt you and me.


I'll be your half.


That were unkindly done.


Pardon me mother, I'll bear all or none.


I ha won you Madam.


Me?


I mean your bet.


Then take your winnings, I'll not die in debt.


Madam believe me, I am, as I protest, a Prince, my name Lisander.


Look to the Dukes standing Madam.


So I will I warrant you, and to your falling.


Thus clouded as you see for your love, my soul speaks in my tongue; I
appointed this match at Bowles a purpose to acquaint you with it.


Bar stealing Father; yet and all hit right,
Here's one would steal a piece of flesh to night.

Dear Madam.


No more words, I have perceived as much in your eye, as you can express with
your tongue, and as far as my mothers jealousy would give me leave, answered
it with kind looks: your bias stands wrong mother.


Why? it stands toward Zelmanes.


Hath it stood so long?


All the game through.


Then all your game's bowld wrong: furnish you with necessaries befitting an
escape, and my will shall be as ready to take wing as yours: put in a cast now
mother, or the game is gone indeed.


Whose is the throw?


Ours, till the last bowl came;
But that hath wonn't em clear, both cast and game.

Our winnings, come, a kiss and bate the rest.


What, do you kiss in eanest or in jest?


In earnest in good truth.


Troth kindly sed,
Take heed you kiss not out your Mayden-head.

In jest?


In earnest.


Tis the fashion,
Much in request among our nation.

To kiss away their Maiden-heads?


Now and then,
And being gone, to kiss it back again:
For lovers indentures ne'er are fairly drawn,
Until the Maiden-head be left in pawn,
As earnest of the match, so mothers sed,
And so will daughters do when mams be dead.

What pawn their Maydenheads?


Yes, and lose em too.


And you'^ maintain that fashion?


Signeor No.


Lay by this home-bred mirth, and prepare your ears to entertain strangers.


Strangers? why father strangers are as welcome to me, as mine own
Country-men, if they bring good manners and civil humanity in their company;
otherwise, they are like foul weather, come before they be sent for.


Dametas? nay then we shall have news enough, for he never comes into the
presence, but he brings a whole sack full of lies, of news I should say.


Welcome Dametas: what officious fellow is that?


A pure well willer of your Majesties, and a follower of mine.


O tis Manasses, and he could make arms as well as he ma^res legs, he would
grow in great request for Heraldry: What's your news?


These Lacedaemonians, subjects to your Majesty, having a message to deliver to
your Majesties instruments of hearing, commonly eclip'd ears.


How, hath any one here clipped ears?


Sweet Feminine, clip off the tail of thy discourse with the Scissors of
attention, as I say, these Lacedaemonians have chosen me their tongue.


Of a long tongue thou speak very little.


That proves me no woman, for they speak over much.


What grievances oppress them? briefly speak.


Merchandise (my Liege) through the avarice of purchasing Officers, is wracked
with such unmerciful impost, that the very name of Traffic grows odious
even to the professor.


Towns so oppressed for want of wonted and natural liberty, as that the native
Inhabitanus feeme Slaves, and the Foreigners free Denizens.


Offices so bought and sold, that before the purchaser can be said to be placed
in his office, he is again by his covetous Patron displaced.


Common Riots, Rapes, and wilful Homicide in great men's followers, not only
not punished, but in a manner countenanced and applauded.


Indeed since your Majesty left the Land, the whole body of the Common-wealth
runs clean against the bias of true and pristine government.


And your honourable Brother, like a ship tossed upon the violent billows of
this insurrection, by us entreats your Majesties Letters of speedy reformation,
for fear the whole Kingdom suffer inevitable shipwreck.


Which after short deliberation with our Council, your self shall return.
Dametas reward their travels with two hundred Crowns: in the mean time, let
them taste the best entertainment of our Court.

Proud Rebels, they shall see that a Dukes frown,
Can at his pleasure, turn Rebellion down:
See them rewarded.

Manasses, see the fellows entertained; I must attend of the Duke.


Boy, see the fellows entertained; I must wait of my Lord.


Fellows, be as merry as you may, I must follow my M.


So, here's Petitioners attendance right; good words, and short Commons: But
tis not their entertainment we come for. I made a simple shift to get
entertainment into the Court.


Well Cupid, pray for our lives, for and we were gone, I know not where thou
would have two such states-men again.


His Common-wealth could not stand without us; and that his Mother knows well
enough: and he sends no better success then we had at our hunting, he looses
a friend of me.


'Twill not sink in my thought yet, but that old musty slave Dametas played
the slave with us.


Would I could prove it once: but since we are again admitted our Realm,
shall we be idle? somewhat we'll do, though they'll give us but small thanks
for our labour.


The Duke shall not say his Daughters are so ill beloved, but vveele change a
thrust or two with his intent for'em.


T'vvould put the poor Wenches out of conceit with themselves, and there
should not be some contending for them.


We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim ^.


We are in faith: Invention could not weave, ^, Suspicion to deceive.


Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers ^ must be ambitious, and
like the Eagle, scorning the base ^ where Kites and Crows lie flagging: mount
the clear sky of ^, and overpeere all hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.


Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Let me alone to work it then* But here comes my Boy.


'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and
war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.


I am of thy belief in that Boy.


Would my Lord were so too sir.


Suppose I were Sir, what then?


I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would make
me your heir.


Is that part of your belief?


A principal point sir.


Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by it.


I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and some
Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Of whose then, wag?


I'll tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes
Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


And what do Ladies?


They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.


Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Far better then any Taylor: they'll make you an end of a suite, especially a
Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Country know not how to set a stitch
in it*


I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.


I had no faith, should I say you were not?


Well, what a Knave?


In a Knaves belief sir.


Because in yours?


Do you say it, and i'll swear it, my Lord.


No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.


That confirms them to be good sir.


Your reason for that, sir?


Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumstance; I sent you for
Manasses.


The learned Scribe attends you.


Will you fall off sir?


Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking.


Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow
--


Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and
pawnes.


'Tis not money ( Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Good counsel is worth good money Madam.


Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.


Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you
be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if
your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put
me in trust to execute it.


Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopsa,
are man and wife.


Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a
will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to be a
wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


Overy much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation, the
chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that
you have ^ane orders.


That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in
my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles,
Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you
would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.


We are in the way to catch the old one, and then our aim deceives not.


We are in faith: Invention could not weave,
A quainter web, Suspicion to deceive.

Come, pass off this grovelling imitation; a Lovers thoughts must be
ambitious, and like the Eagle, scorning the base air where Kites and Crows
lie flagging: mount the clear sky of Invention, and overpeere all hindrances:

The Ladies themselves are willing.


Ready to embark upon the next tide of occasion whatsoever.


Let me alone to work it then, But here comes my Boy.


'Twere more for your credit Sir, and you could say your man: but men and
war were worn out of fashion both in a Summer.


I am of thy belief in that Boy.


Would my Lord were so too sir.


Suppose I were Sir, what then?


I should (as many upstarts have done) prove rich: for I believe you would make
me your heir.


Is that part of your belief?


A principal point sir.


Renounce it then, for I believe you'll never be saved by it.


I am sure I cannot loose by it. I believe further, that many Knights, and some
Ladies, were never of Gods making.


Of whose then, wag?


I'll tell you: the Minters coin Gold, Gold makes Heralds, Heralds makes
Knights, and Knights stamp Ladies.


And what do Ladies?


They live not idle neither; they make some Knights, and mar many Gentlemen.


Ladies are good worke-women too, then?


Far better then any Taylor: they'll make you an end of a suite, especially a
Court suite, when all the Taylors in a Country know not how to set a stitch
in it.


I am of the belief you are a knave, sir.


I had no faith, should I say you were not?


Well, what a Knave?


In a Knaves belief sir.


Because in yours?


Do you say it, and i'll swear it, my Lord.


No more Boy, I am weary of your jests.


That confirms them to be good sir.


Your reason for that, sir?


Because travellers and lovers, are soon weary of goodness.


Goodly ones indeed: but leaving this high-way of circumstance; I sent you for
Manasses.


The learned Scribe attends you.


Will you fall off sir?


Like an Apple at Michaelmas, without shaking. Exit.


Welcome Manasses: I have present employment for thee, in which I must borrow
--


Pardon me Madam, I learned of my Lord, to lend nothing without security and
pawnes.


'Tis not money ( Manasses) but counsel and furtherance that we desire.


Good counsel is worth good money Madam.


Thou shalt be well considered; there's twenty Crowns in earnest.


Nay Madam, this hand is like a fellow that takes every thing in jest; if you
be in earnest, let me feel it here: So Lady, now betwixt earnest and jest, if
your Will be ready drawn, before your friend delivered as your deed, and put
me in trust to execute it.


Take it this, in a word honest Shepherd, and thy Lords daughter Madam Mopsa,
are man and wife.


Man, and woman perhaps, but not man and wife: for though most women have a
will to be Ladies, like my Lords wife; yet every Lady hath not wit to be a
wife, as my Lords Daughter. But what good can I do in this?


O very much: for though they be man and wife by oath and protestation, the
chiefest ceremony of all; namely Marriage is yet unperformed, and hearing that
you have ^ane orders.


That I have: I have taken order for the making away of a hundred Maidenheads in
my time, and not so few: but I am in the mind of you now, these two beagles,
Dorus and Mopsa, have run themselves breathless in the chase of love, you
would have me couple them up in the leases of Matrimony.


You are in the right.


And you in the wrong, i'll keep your jest, but in any case take back again
your earnest: i'll not purchase my Lords displeasure with your gold.


Thy Lord shall never know it.


Oh sir! though my M^hath but bad eyes, he hath exceeding long ears: and
though a Forrayner may play with a Citizens wooden Dagger, I would not wish any
to jest with a Courtiers steeld Sword; tis seldom drawn but it draws blood.


Tush man, be not so timorous, my credit shall countenance thee: be not an
Ass, make use of thy time: thy masters service is no heritage; the world
knows he gets under the Duke, thou art a fool, and thou wilt loose under
him: there's a hundred Crowns for thee; tush man, thy betters will strain
courtesy with aleagence for a bribe


Madam, could you to every one of these Crowns give me a Kingdom?


What then?


I should have more ground then half the Kings in Christendom: here's my
hand, i'll do it: my M. is my M. and I love him; but my gold's my God, and I
honour it: i'll do it; the time and place?


Soon in the evening at Adonis Chapel. Art resolute?


As your Adamant: think you 'twas fear made me keep out? no twas hope of
these flattering sweet lipped d^abs. I fear to marry my Ladies daughter? no nor
to go to bed with her neither, Why, I have counterfeited his hand and seal.
He has been content with me, to come nearer to him, at his entertainment of
the last Ambassador, when he was heate with drinking of healths. As I led him
to his Chamber, I nimd^his Chain, and drew his Purse, and next morning
persuaded him he lo^t it in the great Chamber at the Revels. He puts me in
trust with his whole estate: he buys Manners, I purchase Farms: he builds
houses, I pluck down Churches: he gets of the Duke, and I of the Commons: he
beggars the Court, and I beggar the whole Country.


These are notable knavish courses. What breeding hast had?


Very good breeding sir: My great Grandfather was a Rat-catcher, my Grandsier a
Hangman, my father a Promooter, and my self an Informer.


Thou were a knave by inheritance.


And by education too: but bawdy Informations growing stale, I gave up my
cloak to a Broker, and crept into credit for a Gown, and of Manasses a
penurious Informer, I turned Copy, and became Manasses, a most precise and
illiterate expositor.


Were you a Reader then?


And a Writer too Bullie, I set some of my Parishioners wives such copies, as
their husbands might cast their caps at it, but could never come near.


But and you used such a high and elevate stile, your auditories low and humble
understandings should never crall over't.


Tush, I could fashion the body of my discourse fit to the ear of my auditory:
for to cast Eloquence amongst a company of Stinkards, is all one as if a man
should scatter pearl amongst the hoggish animals ecliped Swine: no, I had
paraphrasticall admonitions of all sorts; Some against covetous Land-lords, and
that would I squirt amongst beggarly Tennants; Some against Usurers, and that
would I throw in at Prison Grates amongst prodigal Bankroutes; Some against
the pride of the Court, and that honies the ear of the Citizen; Some against
the fraud of the city, and that's cake and cheese to the Country; Some against
Protestants, and that plumps the lasy Catholic; against Papist and Protestant,
and that fattens the ranke-witted Puritan; against Papist, Puritan, and
Protestant, and that tickles the ear of the luxurious Atheist.


Why you never light upon any Athiests, do you?


Oh very many.


In the country perhaps, and the out-skirts of the City.


In the very bosom of the City, and by your leave, here and there one in the
Court too: But we fit em all; for indeed we wandering Lights have (as other
Trades-men have) Commodities of all sorts and prices.


How do they come by them?


As many do by Offices, steal into them ere the Duke be aware of em. Some buy
em at Booke-sellers stalls, but the best they bespeak of Poets.


Me thinks Poets of all men should not edify, they are so envious.


One to another, to nobody else: a Proud Poet is for all the world like a
Puncke in request, covetous of many Clients, when she hath more then she can
handsomely play off: You shall have some Poet ( Apolloes Vicar especially)
write you a Comical, Pastoral, Tragical, Musical history in Prose, will
make the Auditors eyes run a water like so many water-spouts; I had one of
them my self, and your ears be in case, I'll give you a taste on it; his
argument was fet out of the Poem called, The lost sheep, and thus it is.


Prithee be brief.


Nay peace, and it were in place where you might wake the best men in the
parish, for commonly they sleep the beginning, because they love not division:
but to the lost Sheep. Beloved, you must imagine this Sheep was a Sheep, a
lost Sheep, a Sheep out a the way; but my dear Flock and loving Sheep,
whom like a careful Shepherd I have gathered together, with the whistle or
pipe, as it were of mine Eloquence, into this Fold of peaceful Community, do
not you stray, do not you fly out, do not you wander, do not you loose your
selves; but like kind Sheep and valiant Rams, I speak to you the better part
and head of my Flock: As I say, you shall see the valiant Rams turn all
their horns together, and oppose themselves against the Wolf, the hungry
Wolf, the greedy Wolf, the Lambes-devouring Wolf, the Wolf of all Wolfes,
to defend their Eawes and young ones. Durst you lay all your heads together,
and with the horns of your Manhood defend your Families, your own Wives, and
your neighbours children: Was not this stinging geere?


A good Sheepish admonition.


The fitter for my audience; while you live have a care to fit your audience.


Thou speak like a Christian, prithee what Religion art of?


How many soever I make use of, I'll answer with Piavano Orlotto the Italian; I
profess the Dukes only.


What's his reason for that?


A very sound reason: for says he, I came raw into the world, and I would not
willingly go roasted out: so close up the stomach of your discourse with that
dry answer, and every man about his business.


You'll be mindful of tomorrow night?


As your Lawyer of the Term, or your Landlord of the Quarter-day.


Why so: the mettle I must forge my plot on, lies a warming in the furnace of
my brain; and I must fashion it instantly, for fear it burst with heat. Give
my conceit way, for here comes one must help to proportion it.


How now Demetrius, what wind hath blown up this storm of melancholy? thy
countenance was not wont to be thus cloudy; Whence proceeds this sudden
alteration?


From mine own hard fortune my Lord, that my ill-stard nativity should
continue thus opposite.


Art crossed in a suit at Court? or what's the matter? speak.


I'll acquaint your Honour: I hope no other ear overheares us. Under Dianaes
Oak I found an inscription upon a stone, which told me, that wealthy
Aristomones sometimes brought into Arcadia, had there under hid a massy sum
of treasure.


Under Dianaes Oak? Dorus shall have my daughter Mopsa: no more words on it,
and thou love me Dorus: smother thy golden hopes a day or two; thou shalt
have Mopsa, but ^le have all the Gold, then marry my daughter to some great
man, though he be poor, tis the fashion: I'll be nobly allied what ere it cost
me: shalt be my Son in law Dorus. have an eye to the Princess, fall close
to my daughter Mopsa,

Court her and spare not: now begins the sport,
Kiss her, do, kiss her; thou shalt pay sweetly for it:
I can gull you, know what fair words can do,
I'm an old Knave, and a young Courtier too.

So, so; how violently he devours his bane, and steals himself into the
order of Gullerie: me thinks I see how betwixt hope and fear he sweats in his
practice, and like a foolish dreamer, casts how to lay out his wealth before it
comes in* So much for him: Now to my Lady Beauty his wife; and as the Devil
would ha^t, here she comes.


Dorus, how now Dorus? What time a day is't with you?


What time a day soever it be with me, tis sleeping time with my Lord, I am
sure of that.


Sleeping time Dorus, what dost thou mean by that?


Nay nothing, he is troubled with a kind of malady called Insurrectio carnis.


How, a dish of Crevices? nay and that be the worst, good enough; I am glad a
falls to Fish, for he was given to Flesh a late too too bad.


Mass I thought as much, for I saw him go a angling.


I hold my Ladyship, to some stru^et.


Life a jealousy, I think you are a witch, twas so indeed.


Nay I thought as much; he was wont to kiss me, and do all ^indnesse a man
could do, till he came to the Court, and now he will not lye with me for
sooth, and why? tis the Court fashion: he will not love me, and why? tis the
Court fashion: I must not come near him at his downe-^ing, nor his up-rising,
c. And this be the Court fashion, would I were an honest woman of the Country
again, be Courtiers who list: I, I, Dorus, I tell thee in tears, he hath not
dealt by me as a husband should do.


Tis nothing to me, I cannot do withal Madam, would I could.


Yes marry may thou Dorus; thou may, and shalt do withal too and thou
wilt: but as thou look to enjoy my daughter Mopsa, acquaint me with the old
Foxes starting hole.


That's past my cunning, the old Fox has more holes then one to hide's head
in: But not to go long about the bush with you.


No good Dorus, I do not love a man should go long about my Bush: what is she
for a woman?


I know not what she is for a wom^n, marry I fear she's little better then a
whore for your husband; hark in your ear, she's Manasses wife.


Manasses wife? marry fire master gunner, a Puritan turned Punk: Gods my
precious. I'll slit her nose, as I am a Lady will I; is she the party you wot
on?


Yes faith Madam, she is the Mare the man rid on.


I'll spoil their sport, saddle my Mule there, have an eye to the Princess;
shaltha my daughter, an't be but to spite him withal, faith Fox I'll ha you out
of your hole, or I'll fire you out.


Nay that will do no good, but for your own good Madam, take heed you do not
scold.


Why, may not a Lady scold Dorus?


Scold? O in no case, twill mar a Ladies beauty clean, and make her look as
hard-favoured as any ordinary woman.


Godamercy for that Dorus, I'll not lose my beauty for twenty on em: saddle my
Mule, bring me my chopping-knife, I'll geld the lecherous Goat, and mince his
Trull as small as herbs to the pot. This is not scolding Dorus, is't?


No this is tolerable.


Nay then I care not, saddle my Mule I say, let her pray God her feeling be
good, for as I am a Lady, I'll not leave her an eye to see withal, and yet I
will not scold neither.


Oh take heed of that at any hand. So, so, so; now it begins to quicken, me
thinks I see already how she runs atilt at the wenches eyes, calls the Maid
Bawd, the woman whore, and her husband Lecher; and when all comes to all, like
an Irish wolf, she barks at her own shadow; but committing her and her Ass
to their wild-goose chase, now to my sweet-heart Mopsa, for she's all the
blocke's last in my eye to stumble on; and God bless my wits, for the fool
haunts me.


Dorus, where's my Father Dorus?


Your father? O my dear Mopsa.


Nay now you flowt me.


Flout you? Oh the fair heavens! but this 'tis for a man to cast away himself
in violence of passion, and extremity of sighs, on a piece of beauty that cares
not for him, but it is the tricks of you all.


Tricks? no as God mend me; and I should not have a husband till I got him
with tricks, I should lead Apes in hell: but faith tell me, dost thou love me
Dorus?


Do I love you quoth ye? It cuts my very heart-strings, do I love you? why
tis the only mark my endeavours shoot at.


If thou dost not hit the mark then, thou art a very bungler: but where is my
father?


Why I have sent him and your mother out of the way of purpose, and appointed
Manasses to meet us this evening at Adonis Chapel, in the Amazons aparrell,
to marry us; I think these are signs I love you.


I but you jest, I doubt you will not marry me.


Will you meet me there?


As I am a virgin I will.


And come with an intent to marry me?


As I hope to be a wife I will.


You must take heed you keep our purpose close.


As I did the loss of my Maidenhead.


Why have you lost it then?


Many a dear day ago, yet I told no body on it but my Mother and our
Horse-keeper, and they say I am ne'er the worse maid for that, and I can keep
my own counsel, as I hope I shall; but will you meet me soon?


Just in the mid-way, as Tilters do.


I'll go before and stay, but do not deceive me, and you do, i'll show my
Fathers Horse-keeper all as God mend me.


So tria sequuntur tria, now am I rid of a triumuirie of fools, and by their
absence have won a free access to an escape.

If my Lisanders hope prove like to this,
This night shall crown us Monarchs of our bliss.

No more of these delays sweet Madam, your love hath broken day oft with my
expectance, I dare give it trust no longer.


I confess it my Liege, and like a spent Dear, not able to maintain longer
flight, I cast my self down breathless at your loves mercy: yet I beseech
your Majesty, let not your eager desires practise any present violence upon my
yielding chastity: 'twas only possession of my love you had in chase, which
with convenient time and place purchased, I put your grace in full possession
of.


Although thy breath be never but musical, yet it never raught the string of
true happiness till now: and to approve thy heart sets hand to thy word,
appoint the time.


Then this present evening (and yet my Virgin blood is ashamed to consent to
the betraying of my modesty) meet me at Adonis bower, where i'll make tender of
subdued chastity to your high Majesty, as my first and most victorious
conqueror.


By my Imperial Globe, and hope of those joys, thy presence shall bring to
enrich me with, I'll meet thee, and make thee Queen over the most submiss
Captive that ever love took prisoner.


If you deceive me --


Not except warm life,
Deceive my veins of their innatiue heat.
Then haste slow time, exchange thy leaden feet
For Hermes wings till I my fair hopes meet.
But locked once in the arms of my delight,
Cloth all the world in an eternal night.
And steed of morning when the Sun should rise,
They shall see two in my Zelmanes eyes.

So farewell thought I, I have prepared you a Zelmanes answerable to your
expectation.

Then triumph in thy will, and let thy thoughts
Proclaim a Jubilee: my teeming hopes
Are now delivered of a gracious birth,
Which I have christened, opportunity,
Unto whose shrine in honour of this day,
My thoughts shall hold a monthly sacrifice.
Love grant Demetrius meet the like success,
Our pains are crowned with double happiness.

Only our disguises hold firm, but all other attempts meet untimely deaths,
even in their cradles.


What and we should acquaint the Ladies with our intents?


'Twould argue a kind of cowardice in our wits, that have such suspectles
admittance to their presence, as this disguise hath purchased us, we should
not have that ability of inventure to entangle them in their own security.


Well howsoever, we must not dwell long determining for the liberty of stay
with Dametas, who out of his covetous disposition in detaining our reward
allowed us, the eldest day of our licenc't abode at Court, is run out.


Tis very true, and for my part, I'll rather go home with a private repulse,
then managing any unlikely attempt, become sufferer under a public disgrace.


That's my very thought, yet that our second arrival be not altogether empty
of employment, lets practise something upon Dametas, and acquaint the world
with his coward baseness; in which, he not only detracts from his masters
bounty, but look how as a Conduit head or master-spring that is poisoned,
doth his best, to infect the whole body of the Court, with the leaprosie of his
covetousness.


There's no action of his begetting can be said to be truly honourable.


How can they when their Father is a mongrel? the Duke out of his honourable
bounty commanded him to reward our travels with ^00. Crowns: and now after two
months attendance, and enforced delays, In which time an ordinary Petitioner
might have spent the value of the reward, he packs us off with fifty Crowns,
his excuse being that his master hath forgot us, and what he doth, is of his
own bounty, as if the Moon should brag she gave the world light, when all
the luster she hath, comes from the heat of the Sun.


Should his villainies be suffered to prosper, they would grow to such height,
as the Dukes authority should have much trouble to prune them.


To prevent which, his Majesty shall have private note of it, knew we in whose
trust to conduct it.


Tis an office very few dare undertake, he is so riveted to the Dukes good
opinion.


Lies there no jar twixt none of the Nobility and him, what say you of
Zelmane?


The gallant Amazon: you could not have cast your choice fitter, for her
honourable mind maintains deadly feud against his base proceedings; and here
she comes, attended by Dameta's servant, lets wait on opportunity.


Lisander.


Demetrius.


Lisander and Demetrius? stand close, of my life we are come to the birth of
some notable knavery.


How blows the winds of our hopes?


Fair to the point of our expectation, I have made away the Duke and the
Duchess.


How made away them? poisoned them?


With a confection of love, which I have so tempered with fair promises, as
their minds are in loves haven already, Videlicet in Adonis bower, where this
evening I have given them my word to meet them; but I have so cast it, that
Manasses shall meet them in my steed.


'Twill be a rare Scene of mirth, to hear what costly discourse they'll bestow
upon the fool in thy outside.


Do you hear that?


Yes, thank love and my ears, but list the conclusion.


I have cleared the way to Violetta, but what order hast thou ^ane with thy
burbolts, Dametas, Miso, and amorous Mopsa?


Shot them away, at three several marks, yet so conveyed it, that in the end
they shall all meet at Adonis Chapel.


This project cannot but bring forth some notable deceit.


My hopes should want of their will, and it do not --


Now we have made a smooth passage to our escape, how shall we convey our loves
out of the Island?


I have determined of that sir, and better to effect, my boy this time hath
cast such a bait of knavery to the two Captains, Kalander and Philanax, as we
may pass without suspicion.


But how for transportation.


I am furnished of that too, you remember the two Lacedemon intelligencers.


Now what of us?


Hold my life, we shall be put in this Scene of Gullery.


Oh in any case.


For the love of Cupid do, inquiry is past, lets take our entrance, and pass
over the stage like mutes, to furnish out a show.


And see occasion like a kind wench presents them in the very instant, my
honest friend welcome, have you not your dispatch with a letter to Lacedemon.


Madam we have, and stay only to take our leaves of your Ladyship, and know
what service your honour will command.


You have my thanks, for the truth is, I must commit business of much import
unto your trust, and to prevent much circumstances take my word, your are not
ignorant of the Kings general challenge.


About his daughters.


You understand me, with these few crowns receive my mind, which is to convey
the two Ladies, whom we in these disguises have won to Lacedemon.


Were we but confirmed of your estates.


We'll give you sufficient assurance of that, and the Princesses themselves
shall confirm it.


We crave no better Madam, but shall we not have your honours company?


No: having brought them aboard, we'll make return to the Duke, to let him
understand we stole not our prizes but won them manfully at the point of wit.


A noble resolution.


His foil will appear the more palpable, and your conquest the more
applausible, where shall we receive the Ladies?


Be that our care, but on your lives be heedful of their* safeties.


More then of our own my Lord.


Enough, whilst you attend we'll to the Duke, and play all Gulls or none.


All Gulls indeed since you had follies vvhip,
No Gulls, to all Gulls, fools love fellowship.

Look well to mine Ass there, Lord how I sweat with anger; this sames the
house sure, and now like a wise Lady let me count my hurts, and see how I shall
be revenged: it shall be so, i'll have them both carted, and Manasses shall go
before like a whif^er, and make way with his horns: where be these whores? open
the door, where be these panders? O that I were not a Lady, I could scold
like a butter-vvhore.


Whose there a Gods name? Lord for his mercy is the woman mad?


Yes I thank ye fo^'t* horne mad, vvhere's your companion, vvhere's the old
lecherous Goat my husband? open the door I say.


Iesus for thy mercy sake, Madam what do you want?


What do I want? the chief implement a woman should have; I want that as a
woman cannot be without, I mean my husband I want.


Your husband? I saw him not as I am an honest woman.


Not as you are an honest, so I think, but as you are an arrant vvhore you
did, you must have your Crevishes with a pox, cannot City Maunchet and fresh
God serve your turn, but you must have Court Cake-bread and Crevishes with a
vengeance? but come give me my husband, or I'll have him ou^ of the flesh on
thee, and yet I will not scold neither.


Pray madam have patience: what should your husband do here?


That which he should do at home with his wife, and he were worth his
ears.


Lady I protect I do not know him.


Not know him? thou lie in every ve^e in the heart, thou lie thou know
him, and as Adam knew Eve thou know him, he hath been as in ward with thee,
as ever he was with me, he hath, by his own confession he hath, and thou
deny it, thou lie in thy throat like a Puritanicall whore as thou art, O
that I were a butter who^e for an hour I might scold a little.


Madam they are no honest men that bring these tales to you.


Men bring tales to me? I de^ie thee in thy guts, I defy thee. men bring tales
to me? thou take me to be one of thine own Church dost? they are no honest
men that bring tales to thee and have wives of their own, my husbands one of
them, go thy ways now.


I beseech you Madam do but hear me.


Hear thee? I have heard too much of thee, too too much, too much, where's my
husband? bring forth my husband, i'll teach him to put a difference betwixt Ioan
and my Lady I hold him ten pound on it, and yet I will not scold neither, and I
had been an old hag past teaming, as his whore is a puritan, it had bin
somewhat, but being a woman of Gods making, a Lady of his own, and wearing mine
own hair which is much in a Lady of my standing I can tell you, to use me
thus, flesh and blood cannot endure it, let me come in, open the door let me
come in, O that I were any vile thing in the world but a Lady that I might
scold a little.


So, so, so, take your places, for this same bald pated oak is the stage,
where ye shall see the part of a doting fool performed by an old man and a
young wench.


Who worshipful Dametas?


The same man.


Hath he no fellow Acters in his most lamentable, comical, historical,
tragical, musical, pasto^a'l?


None that require any mouthing but his Ass and himself, marry then he has
Signior Mattock, a very sharpe satirical humorist, and Monsieur le spade, but
he goes somewhat more bluntly to his business, yet heel serve for mutes, and as
good as the best to furnish out the stage.


But dares Dorus being but Dametas servant so abuse his mad master thus grossly.


O Lord Sir, there have been serving men have done their Masters far greater
abuse, yet had their wives concealed it, their ears should never have been
acquainted with it.


Is that a fashion in request?


Altogether i'll assure you, but obedience, Gentlemen the Scene begins.


Pray God it be good he stays so long, Ridiculous enough, and good enough.


So, stand Ass, stand gentle Ass.


What Countrey-man is his Ass, he speaks so familiarly to him?


A'th City breed, marry he picks up his living ath burs and nettles that grow
about the Court gate.


Be in readiness good mattock, play thy part sweet spade, let me see;
Dianaes oak? I held Dianaes oak divine, true pure gold, honest Dorus,
fortunate Dametas.


An excellent comoedian, what life he puts into his part.


So, by thy leave stone, by thy patience honest stone, the very gravel savours
of treasure, this same's the bed-chamber of my Lady Pecu^ia, and see, see some
of her golden hairs, more, more, more yet divine tree, pure gold, honest
Dorus, fortunate Demetrius, softly, softly, not too fast, let me not devour my
content too greedily, lest like a cormorant I take a surfeit on it.


Oh take heed of that master in any case.


Pure mettle, excellent gold: but let me see now, I shall by computation have
some three millions of 'em, ^ some three or four mi^lions, how shall I employ
them to make the most profit of them


That would be known indeed.


I'll put out one million to use, after the rate of seven score to the hundredth:
and yet I wont, no fie, for then you will have my humour brought ath stage for
a usurer; to prevent with scandalous report, i'll put it into my Scribe-majors
hand, he shall dea^e for me.


There's a simple cloak* to cover his villainy.


Tis a very short one: and passing sl^te to hide his knavery.


It cannot choose but be seen through.


An other million i'll lay to beslow in Offices. I will have wealth, or i'll rake
it out ath kennels else, chimneys have smoked for it already, and now i'll deal
upon sea-cole and salt, now, now, now, it comes, sweet gold, honest Dorus,
fortunate Demetrius, divine gold, how, how shall I adore thee? O let me do the
homage of my knees: now, now, for the tongue of a Poet, though I hate poetry
worse then ^ny of the seven deadly sins, I could wish my self a Poet for some
hour, to write a Poem in the praise of my divine mistress; and see he very
bed wherein her divinity is lodged: happy, happy, thrice happy Dametas, now
like an over joyd lover, let me open the sheets of my heavenly mistress with
reverence, so with humble reverence, and like a blushing lover that puts out
the light ere he presumes to touch the bed of his love, so let me darken the
candles of my body, mine eyes, and first bless my hands with touching, next
enrich mine ears with hearing, and lastly make happy my eyes with seeing, and
let them convey the joy down into the bosom of my thoughts by degrees, softly
by degrees.


Did you ever see Ass make such a ceremonious preparation?


Be not offended sweet mi^tresse that I presume to touch.


A fools head of your own.


Has a been at any cost of all this invoke for a coxcomb and a bell.


Beshrow my judgement but he deserves it.


And his desert were ne'er so much, he could but bear away the bell, and so you
say he doth.


A coxcomb and a bell, oh indignity: damnable oak, vile and evil accursed
Dorus, unfortunate Dametas; Diana I tell thee thou art no honest goddess to
use a Gentleman thus. Whats here a writing, your help good spectacles, lend me
your help good spectacles, some comfortable news good spectacles:

Who hath his hire, hath well his labours placed,
Earth thou did seek, and store of earth thou hast.
He that vain hopes pursues for love of pelf,
Shall loose his vvits and likely find himself.
Then think thy pains rewarded well,
Thou broughst the fool, bear back the bell:
Of other matters what ensues,
Adonis bovver shall tell thee news,
Villainous poetry, I am made a flat fool by poetry; But though I can do them
no* further disgrace, my fatal curse, A wronged gentleman's fatal curse
dwell ever upon them: Diana here me, and let my words find gracious
acceptance.


Hide your heads, the terrible curse comes like a stone upon you.


Rancor, spite, malice, hate, and all disasters,
Strengthen my faith against all poetastors.
May their intents though pure as crystal glasses,
Be counted falte and capital Trespasses,
O may their lines and laboured industry,
Though worthy of Apollo's plaudit,
The clearest thought in loyalty excelling,
Be by some Dor presented for libelling;
When they have writ a Scene, in which their brains
Have dropped their dearest sweets, and their swollen veins
Emptied the Conduit of their purest spirit,
As they stand gaping to receive their merit,
In stead of Plaudities, their chiefest blisses,
Let their deserts be crowned with mews and hisses:
Behind each post, and at the Gallery corners,
Sit empty gulls, slight fools, and false Informers;
Let some sly Fox out of discretions embers,
Term them the Lands unnecessary members;
And like the Dear, when they have spent their breath
To make Kings sport, let them be torn to death,
Even by their friends; 'twould set my thoughts a twanging,
Might I but ^e one of them go to hanging.

A passing strange curse, and no question he has travelled far for some of
the times.


He must travel further that finds any reason in it.


No matter for reason, there's rime enough if that be good.


Some of it is no better then it should be, or my judgement deceives me.


Sure he had some reason to make this rime, and a man could pick it out.


Rather then I'll be counted inquisitive, mine ears shall content themselves
with the rimes only, and leave the reason to the scanning of Poets, whom it
more nearly concerns.


But where's the wag that invited us to this banquet of mirth, shrunk in the
wetting?


I were a rare jest now, if whilst the Boy keeps us here in expectation of
Dametas gullery, his Master has made an escape with the Dukes daughters.


That, or some knavery else upon my life: I had the boy in shrewd suspicion at
the first.


And this his sudden and stolen departure confirms it currant.


Then we are sped, for in suspicions face
I see some subtle stratagem in chase.

Will your Ladyship believe me now? nay and I say it your worship may swear it,
though I have but a (poor as to say) hole of mine own, I hope the spirits
have more denomination over me, then to make it a common Slaughter-house of
carnallity, where every Jack may command flesh for his money.


No more words sweet woman, I confess I was in the wrong, this is not the
hole the Fox hides his head in, and therefore for the love of woman-hood
conceal mine errors; for howsoever I complained, tis thy forehead aches, thy
temples have the terrible blow as they say, thy husband is a bad man.


My husband?


I, I, good woman, thy husband; he is, as I say, a fleshly member, and I fear
he has overcome the foolish thing my daughter.


Your daughter? I'll slit her nose by this light, and she were ten Ladies, twas
not for nothing my husband said he should meet her this Evening at Adonis
Chapel: but and I come to the Godspeed on it, I'll tell em on it soundly.


I do good woman, tell em on it and spare not, but in any case do not scold.


Why, may not a Gentlewoman scold in a good case?


I know not what a Gentlewoman may do in a good case, but a Lady must not in
any case.


Though I may not scold, I may tell em roundly on it I hope.


That you may do law.


And I'll not be mealely mouthed I warrant em: will you bear me company to the
Chapel Madam?


With all my heart Mistress: What Dorus hath given me, I'll give my friend, No
fool to company.


FArewell bright Sun, thou lightener of all eyes,
Thou fall to give a brighter beam to rise.
Each tree and shrub wear trammells of thy hair,
But these are wiers for none but Kings to wear,
And my rude tongue, striving to blaze her forth,
Like a bad Arts-man, does disgrace her worth:
But here's the place, upon this Crystal stream,
Where Citharea did unyoake her team
Of silver Doves to interchange a kiss
With young Adonis, shall I meet my bliss?
The gentle minutes crowned with crystal flowers,
Losing their youths, are grown up perfect hours,
To hasten my delight: The bashful Moon,
That since her dalliance with Endymion
Durst never walk by day, is under sail,
In stead of sheets has spread her silver veil,
Each gliding Brooke and every bushy tree,
Being tipped with silver, wear her livery;
And the dim night, to grace our amorous wars,
Hath stuck nine Spheres full of immortal stars,
In stead of pearls; the way on which she treads
Is strewed with crystal dew and silver beads:
She comes, her feet make music with the ground,
And the chaste air is ravished with the sound,
My soul flies forth to meet her: hell, my wife,
Her presence like a murderer drives the life
Out of my pleasures breast, her jealous eye
Envies the heaven of my felicity.

Zelmane, or my husband? life, or hate?


What makes old Autumn out a bed so late?
That snow should go a wooing to the Sun,
When one warm kiss works her confusion!

I have the jest, suspicion that keeps
Court in my husbands thoughts, seeing my Love
Elect this walk, hath brought him after him.

She dogs her sure, and she to shake her off
Hath taken some other walk, I'll place mine care
In distance of her will.

Could I but hear the innocent delivery of his breath,
'Twould be a second Iubile of mirth.

Here comes my Love.


Your Love? Alas poor Duke,
Your forward hopes will meet a barren spring,
My Sun appears.

Fie, your love speaks too loud,
Your Sunne's eclipsed, you dote upon a cloud.

See how his arms, like precious Phoenix wings, Spread to embrace me.


Now the Cuckoo sings;
Those amorous arms do make a golden space
To hug a Duke.

But I'll fill up the place.


Those fingers tipped with curious Porphery,
Staining Pigmalions matchless imag'ry,
Like amorcus twins all of one mother ^urst,
Contend in courtesy who should touch me first.

Should touch me first; their strife is undertook,
To twine a young Bay, not a stooping Oak.

Young Bay? stale jest, that a dry sapless rind
Should hold young thoughts, and a licentious mind:
Were she but gone now.

Were the Duke away,
My hopes had got the better of the day.

This is Adonis Chapel, I wonder they come not; though I bear but a little
learning about me, and a few good clothes, I would not wish em to make Balams
Ass of me: for though many fools take no felicity but in wearing good clothes
(though they be none of their own) I have a further reach in me.


I could ban my stars.


^ my fate.


That cross me thus.


Makes me unfortunate.


Alas good Lady, how her pretty feet
Labour to find me.
Such black events.
Darken her self.
That in the bosom of some foggy cloud
I might embrace my love.

That my hopes should meet


O would the friendly night


Would the Moon lose her light,


But night is purblind,
To make a Duke a slave.

To make e Duchess
Wrestle with amorous passions.

Life a spleen,
Could my rough breath like a temptstuous wind,
Blow out heavens candles, leave the world stark blind,
That it might either have no eyes to see,
Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me.

Or use those eyes it hath to pleasure me?


Who would have thought the cold had been so good a musician? how it plays
upon my chaps? and makes my teeth skip up and down my mouth like a company of
virginall Jacks, but I find small music in it, and Mopsa should come now I
could do her little good, yet and she were here, she and I would have about at
cob-nut or at chery-pit, or some what to keep our selves from idleness,
though she be but a fool, the bable's good enough to make sport withal in the
dark, and that very word hath started her.


Whose there Manasses?


Yes Mopsa.


Plain Mopsa, I might be Madam Mopsa in your mouth, goodman -- where's Dorus?


Why? because he will not be said to make too much haste to a bad bargain, he
is not come yet.


Not come? a peascod on him, but al's one, I thought at first he would make but
a fool on me.


Would you have him mend Gods workmanship?


But choose him, since he hath build me with an vrchin, i'll go fetch Raph our
Horse-keeper; let him that got the calfe keep the cow in a knaves name and he
will, have you your book here?


No matter wench, I can do it well enough without book.


Nay and ye can do it well enough your self, I care for neither of them both,
but indeed I love to have a thing well done, for says my mother, a thing once
well done, is twice done, and I am in her mind for that up and down.


Whose with my Lord the Duke? it cannot be,
Mine eye would not conceal such treachery.

Tis not the Duchess sure, no it is amorous Jove,
That seeing Zelmane passionate for love,
Descends to comfort her; Jove if there be
A powerful Phoebus God of poetry,
In dear remembrance of fair Daphnes rape,
To win my love, lend me some stranger shape,
Such as your selves have worn, that when your same
Is sung by Poets, they may quote my name.

Sure tis my daughter.


Daughter? how her eye
Cut out new forms, new shapes of jealousy?

As sure as death tis she, for see they stand
Like amorous twins, in twisted hand in hand,
Breast against breast, and that no joy be missing,
To hear discourse, their lips keep time with kissing,
I'll not endure't, impatience grow strong,
And though a Prince, tell him he doth thee wrong.

Do, prithee do, this sweetens all the rest,
But here would be the elixar of the jest,
If whilst we keep each other at a bay,
A third should come, and bear the hare away.

Villainous poetry, unchristian-like poetry, I am cozend of my gold by poetry,
robbed of my charge by poetry, made an apparent fool by poetry, villainous Oak,
accursed Dorus, unfortunate Dametas: whose there my daughter and with Zelmane? a
wel-willer to Dorus, a favourite to poetry, and therefore enemy to Dametas, come
hither Mopsa, a thy fathers blessing come not near her: what Mopsa.


Yes, whose there? Dorus.


Confusion a Dorus, I am thy miserable father, did not see Hippolita?


No by my troth not. Did ye not see Dorus?


Pox of Dorus, I am undone Madam and thou telft me not of Hippolita.


Pox a Hippolita, I am a dumb woman and you can tell me news of Dorus.


I had rather see ten Dorusses hanged, then loose Hippolita.


I had rather see ten fathers damned, then loose my sweet Dorus.


I shall run mad and I find not Hippolita.


I shall run frantic and I find not Dorus.


Whats here? I shall run mad for Hippolita.


And I shall run frantic and I find not Doras, I hold my life we have some
Comoedy in hand, we shall have a full Scene, for here comes more Actors.


As sure as I am a sinner to God Madam, that sames he.


What with a brace of wenches, in faith old broke, have I ^ne you in the manner,
is this the fruits of your lying alone, is this your Court custom with a
wannion? lend me thy knife, though I had neither house nor land to give em, I'll
bestow a whores mark betwixt you, and yet I will not scold neither.


What a goodyer ail you mother, are you frampall, know you not your own
daughter?


Mopsa? O insufferable wrong, make thine own natural child thy Bawd?


Here's an excellent pattern for wives to learn to scold by.


What Mistress Amazon? ha you such a cocking spirit, honest women cannot keep
their husbands at home for you? tis not for nothing now I see, that the
Duchess looks yellow on you, but I'll tear that painted whores face of
yours, (by this light) and yet I will not scold neither.


Madam.


I'll mad you with a vengeance.


Touch not the Prince.


On your allegiance forbear, what means this outrage, cannot our private
walks be privileged from your wild contentions?


How fares the Prince?


How cheers my good Zelmane?


Zelmane? No Gods my judge my ^iege ^ am Manasses, miserable Manasses* your
husbands Scribe-major Madam.


Manasses?


A fool.


My m^n.


And my dear h^d^a^ sweet love, what make th^ here?


M^y work for the Hang-man, and the Duke be not the more merciful.


There's some deceit in this: Dametas, where's Hippolita?


I, I, there's some knavery in this: Mopsa, where's Hippolita?


Doubtless ther^ some villainy in this: Mopsa, wher's Hipolita?


There's no plain dealing in this, Manasses, where's Dorus?


Answer directly, where's Hippolita?


Alas Madam I know not, whilst I almost mel^ed my self with digging of gold
in Diana's Oak, I left her in my wives charge.


And whilst I ran to Manasses, thinking to take my husband and his wife in the
manner, I left Hippolita in my daughters chamber.


And whilst ^ came to Adonis chapel, to be tossed in my marriage blankets with
Dorus, I left my little dog Pearl picking daisies.


Who sent you to Diana's Oak to dig gold?


Who sent you to take your husband in Manasses house?


Dorus.


Who sent you to Adonis Chapel?


Dorus.


And who turned you into this shape?


They that I fear have made Gulls of us all, Zelmane and Dorus.


We are all simply gulld, and see where the S^n scarce half ready, skips from
his Eastern bed, smiling at our gullery.


Come where's this lusty wit-master?


The Keeper of this Love-lotterie.


This gallant Iuventus of fourscore, that like my Lady of the Lake, displays
against all comers.


May a couple of plaine-witted Princes have a sight of your prizes?


Where be these Ladies, ha? ha your wits had such a skir mishing, that the two
Maids have lost their heads in the conflict?


Heads? I and bodies too my Lord, and all at one shot, and which is worse, our
wits are so scattered with the terrible blow, that, to be plain, we are scarce
our own men again.


Then you had some knocking.


So it appears by the story my Lord.


How say you my Lady, what Oule sings out of that Ivy-bush?


Was your wit Knighted in this last action?


I am not such a fool, I love my Lord, I am no Knight, I am Manasses, they
made a plain fool.


The only wear, for the guarded fool is out of request: but faith my Liege,
how did your opposites behave themselves, did they win the wenches fair at
the point?


At the very push of invention, and went off clear untouched.


And could you draw no blood of their wits?


Not a drop.


Nor Dametas neither, nor Manasses?


Neither, to our disgrace be it spoken, the carriage of this stratagem deserves
applause, and I hold it a credit to rest captive to such valiant conquerours.


Why so be, I like a man that will confess his error.


It merits commiseration Madam and my Liege, not to detract from our worth:
your ear, we two are the parties you wot on.


Were you the man?


No he was the man, marry I was the woman in the Moon, that made you walk all
this last night like the man in the mist, I could say somewhat to you Madam, as
for Dametas and his man, let them stand like fools as they are.


Can it be possible?


No, no, we are Gulls, innocent sots, but lante tanta, the girls are ours we
have won them away to Dargison.


Come we have won the conquest, and that's sufficient.


You are a Manasses tis not sufficient: aha not Hercules for Iole, Jove for
Danae, Apollo for Daphne, Pan for Sirne; nay the whole pack of their piperly
godheads could a discharged a stratagem with more spirit of all merit; an
ambling nag and a down a down we have borne her away to Dargison.


'Twas the most rarest, divinest, Metaphysicalst piece of invention, that --
what say you my liege?


I give your deserts their full merit, you have gotten equality.


All the wenches gave you.


Alas ^hat spirits under the Moon could have detaind her, but know that her
cherry red lip, a down, a down.


Trust me but you have deserved high commendation.


Your merit stood of the upper stair of admiration.


Why thou hast a pretty relish of wit now, that can see the broad eye of my
desert at a little hole of demonstration.


Your desert save me free, you have done a most (to use your own phrase)
Metaphysicall piece of service, but you had some help in it questionless.


I do not think but the Ladies had some handin't.


A finger, I confess a finger by the hope of perseverance, a very little
finger.


I thought as much by making of the jest.


I cannot detract from the Ladies worth, for I know them for excellent
worke-women.


Worke-women fit to make Taylors men.


I by my faith do I, nay your best taylors are arrant botchers to them, you
shall have a Lady make an end of a suit, a Court suit, especially when all the
Taylors in a country know not how to set a stitch in it.


Some ordinary suit perhaps.


Your best Court suits that are, are finished by Ladies, I have known a suite
my self lien a making and m^ring ^, ^, and five year together, and then a
Lady hath dispatcht it in a month with a wet finger, such a finger might the
Ladies have in your plot.


Never wet a finger by this Sun.


Then she helped you with one dry jest or another, but and we may be so bold:
faith whereare the Ladies?


Sure enough I warrant you, some fools now would have kept them here, and have
bin gulled on them again, and laughed at age, but to prevent all danger, we have
shipped them home for Lacedemon.


To Lacedemon? your sun of wit shines but dimly in that me thinks, to whose
charge have you trusted them?


To them we durst, nay you must think we are no fools,


Fools? nay deep wit, and policy forbid.


We had no sooner their surprise, but we had disguise ready, a ship ready, a
couple of lusty friends ready, the Lacedemon Intelligencers.


Durst you trust such precious jewels in such rusty caskets?


Durst? our health, our lives, why they were my tenants; nay you must think we
sifted them, we are no fools in that neither.


If in any thing your wits deserve the babble tis in that.


None but fools would have committed such inestimable peers to a couple of
strangers.


And in a ship too.


And under sail too.


And unfurnish of friends too.


And without shipping to follow them too.


You were no fools in any thing but that, and in that not to flatter, you
express the true shape of folly, and merely merit the name of fools.


What will you say now when these fellows surrender us our loves?


We'll discharge you and set their names down for Gulls in your steed.


You know the Proverb, when the sky sals we shall have Larks.


And when you can bring proof that we are consend of our Wenches vveele be
the Woodcocks.


Why then we have once spring'd a couple of woodcocks.


Do you know these? who are the fools now?


Hippolita?


My Violetta?


What a strange change is here*


Yes saith Gallants, you have very strange carding and you knew all, but I hope
you'll offer up your cards, and yield the set lost.


Gulls?


And abused? I'll lose my life before I'll lose my honour.


Honour and life before I'll lose my love.


Nay Gentlemen, we bar all violence; the liberty of our challenge was to all
alike equally free, and since these by fair play have won em, it stands with
our honour to see them peaceably possessed of em, then surely take em, for though
you wear the breeches, give us leave to stand a little.


Why father, is't not time that we were sped?
Tis a great charge to keep a Mayd^-head,
Lose it we must, and to prevent ill course,
Better to gived, then have it taken perforce,
If you be pleased let envy do her worst,
Spit out her poison, or contain it and burst.
Welcome to all, to all a kind good-night,
They truly live, that live in scorn of spite.

IT is David, Right Worsh: Men, Fathers, Brethren, beloved in our Lord Saviour,
that when he sate in his own house, and the Lord had given him rest fro all
his enemies round about him, how he desired as S. Stephen speaks Acts the
seventh, at the six fortith verse, that he might find a tabernacle for the God
of Iacob. I will relate it to you in Davids words, Lord saith David, or
whosoever else was the author of that Psalme, Lord saith he, remember David, and
all his trouble: how he swear unto the Lord and vowed a vow unto the Almighty
God of Iacob, I will not come within the tabernacle of my house, nor climb up
into my bed, I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, no^ mine eye lids to
sluber, nether the temples of my head to take any rest, until I find out a
place for the temple of the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Iacob.
All this in the second of Samuel the seventh chapter and second verse, is thus
epitomised: The king said unto Nathan the Prophet, Behold now, I dwell in a
house of Cedar trees, and the Arc of God remains within the curtains. His
meaning was that since al fell out so favourably, with such correspondence to
his desires, since he had so much rest from al his enemies, God was the author
of all this, he would now be grateful again to that God, not so much in words
which are but wind, as in very truth and real deeds, such as might be
testimonies thereof both to the time then present, and to after ages that were
to come. Behold now, I dwell in a house of Cedar trees and the Arc of God
remains within the curtains. It was as if he had said, God hath bestowed a
house on me, I will bestow a house on him too, he hath given me rest from all
mine enemies, I will give him a kind of rest too, he shall not be from tent to
tent, and from habitation to habitation as he hath been hitherto. A princely
mind and meditation, a resolution fit for him who was to be the man after Gods
own heart* as Samuel the Prophet

The former part of this day now newly spent and gon, hath by the silver tongue
of one of the chiefest Israel put us in mind of like benefits received on our
parts from God above: of setting at home here in our own houses, every of us
under our own vine: of a singular rest given unto us from all our enemies
round about us. This day* this very day, it was more then miraculous that God
did for us, it was in truth a heap of miracles, as first the preserving of our
bodies and goods, secondly the prolonging of our lives, thirdly the saving of
our whole Realm, fourthly the protection of true Religion, and all these then
and at that time when safety it self might safely have sworn that she for her
part could not have saved us. David on a time near to danger spake most
significantly when speaking of it unto Ionathan, As the Lord lives, as thy
soul lives there is but a step between me and death. Anacharsis the Scithian
speaking of those that sailed by sea, and hearing that a ship was but four
fingers thick at the most, then are there but four fingers, between them and
death. At another time being demanded who were more in number the living or
the dead: tell me first, among whether of them you reckon those that travel by
sea: his meaning was that howsoever they seem to live, to move, and have a
being, yet they might with good congruity be accounted even for dead, for
nothing so full of casualties as the sea and that in the turning of a hand.

Upon how ticklish terms we stood this very day when time step of that
wretched miscreant might irrecoverably have laid all our honour in the dust, a
very finger of his might have done it. Our adversaries abroad that saw the case
wherein we stood, how did they newse it to one another that we might be now
accounted dead. A Terrible Blow was now at hand, we had all and every of us but
one neck, and that neck of ours was now on the block. The horror whereof if we
would conceive let us but imagine another Fauks in some one of the vaults here
abouts, as many barrels, as much powder, and that which then matched both
barrels and powder. Doubtless we are never better affected unto God the when we
pray: we are now in the house of prayer, prayer you know was the last, the
very last thing we did, yet should we all of us now miscarry and in this very
in stant of time be snatched out of the world and have the sudden death of those
of who El^hu in Iob momento moriuntur, they are gone in a trice, or as speaks
the S. Paule, In momento, inictu oculi, in a moment in the twinkling of an
^i^, how vnpreparedly might we all go to appear before that throne where this
day we should receive every of us our last doom. And yet we are but a
handful to the they though well affected no doubt as men in civil affairs
might be, yet somewhat perhaps behind our selves in respect of the souls
business we are about.

But it is not now of this point I point now to speak, my intent and purpose
is to speak of the Thankfulness and Gratitude we are to perform to God for
this, not so much in words which are but wind, as in very truth and real
deeds, such as may be testimonies thereof both to these times now present, and
to after ages that are to come. What hath the Lord preserved our honour? We will
also preserve his. Hath he made our households like

To the producing of which effect in every of us here present, be we of the
one Corporation or of the other, of the one or other sex, I have at this time
brought unto you a certain passage of Davids Psalmes, that as David is the man
who puts us in mind of this gratitude, so he might instruct us in the manner
to how this gratitude should be performed, not in finding out new places for
the Temple of the Lord, new habitations for the God of Iacob (there is no such
necessity now a days) but in maintaining the old places, the old habitations
of the God of Iacob, and that by tendering there our continual presence at the
usual times of Divine Service.

The words I have chosen to this purpose are in the fourth verse of the seven
and twenty Psalme, and parcel of the words this very night to be read at
Evening Prayer: which will cause me also in reading them to follow the
traslatio we the use, not that which is usual in our Bibles though the
difference in this verse be but small. The words are these:

One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord al the days of my life, to behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.

IN which words without curiosity of giving every hen her own egg, as Plinie
First a Petition of the Prophet David's, Secondly the Reason of that petition.
The Prophets Petitio in these words One thing have I desired of the Lord which
I will require, even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life: the Reason of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord,
and to visit his Temple. The Petition we shall best consider of, if so be we
consider therein the Matter of it, and the Manner of making it. The Manner of
making it in these words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will
require: the Matter of it in these. Even that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of my life. But it is with this Matter Manner here as it was
with Thamars Matter, Even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the
days of my life. Wherein for our better proceeding I shall observe unto you
three points, first, what kind of house this was, secondly, what it was to
dwell in it, thirdly, the convenience of dwelling there. And of every of these
in their order, every of these in these words, Even that I may dwell in the
house of the Lord all the days of my life. First therefore of the house, Even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord.

As the Lord God out of the whole mass of mankind hath reserved to himself
some whom he calls his Elect, of times and seasons some his Saboths, and
solemn Feasts, of servats and attendants some his Ministers, Priests, of goods
and wealth that men enjoy, some his Tithes Oblations, so out of the habitations
of the sons of men some he hath reserved which he calls his House Temple. Now
what kind of house this was, what better instructio may be had then from the
owner of it himself. The owner of it was the Lord, who though he Heaven is my
throne, and the earth is my foot stool, where is that house that you will
build unto me, and where is the place of my rest? that is, as St Steven what
house will ye build for me, or what place is it that I should rest in? Yet a
house he had, a place there was, not so much to rest himself in, as where his
people might rest there hopes to hear daily and duly from him. The very first
metio of this house is made in the book of Exodus, where he calls it a
Sanctuary, when speaking unto Moses, They shall make me, saith he, a Sactuary
that I may dwell among the. True it is that long before some speech there was
of Gods house, as in the book of Genesis, how fearful Iacob is this place?
This is no other but the house of God: and This stone which I have set ^p as a
pillar shall be Gods house: but where metion was first made that it should
immediately be gone in hand withal, a special name given unto it whereby
perpetually it should be called, that as I said was first in Exodus where the
Lord himself calls it by the name of a Sanctuary. It is called in the same
place an Arc besides, and a Tabernacle, which three names howsoever severally
distinguished among them selves, are but the diverse appellations names of this
house, as first for the Sanctuary, Psalme the seaventy third at the fifteenth
verse, Then thought I saith the Prophet to understand this, but it was to hard
for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God: secondly for the Arc, Psalme
the hundred thirty second at the eight verse, Arise O Lord into thy resting
place, thou, and the Arc of thy strength: thirdly for the Tabernacle, in the
He shall hide me in his Tabernacle, yea in the secret of his dwelling shall he
hide me. Now as in a material and worldly building we then know it best when
we know the several rooms of it, and to what use each room serves, so let us
see in the sacred Scriptures and other writers besides what is said of these
three rooms, in regard whereof this house of God was called by these names.

First then concerning the Tabernacle we shall find it recorded that it was
the Lords own invention, and how he showed a pattern of it in the mount; that
after it was once reared it saved Moses his long journeys up to mount Sinay,
the Lord as it were taking the pains to come down to him: lastly, that the
cloud of the Lord was fire was in it by night in the sight of al the house of
Israel throughout al their journeys, whereupon an ancient Father, this cloud,
saith he, waited on the Hebrewes like a handmaid, and as for the fire it was,
saith the same Father, a token of grace and fear too, if so be they would obey
then was it light to lead them, if not but they would be waiward, then was it
fire to consume them.

Secondly concerning the Arc we shall find it recorded in holy scripture that
it was stiled and called by Gods own peculiar that when it was borne on the
Priests shoulders, the feet of them that bare the Arc were no sooner dipped in
Iordans water but Iordan was driven the mountains skipped like rams, the
little hills like young sheep: that it was the cause of the falling down of
Iericoes walls: that when it was brought into Dagons house, Dagon was
overthrown: that Gath, it made havoc of Gods enemies, it smote them on the
hinder parts and out them to a perpetual shame: that when it came to Ekron, it
did as much unto the Ekronites: that when the milch kine brought it home it that
when the men of Bethshemeth pried into it over boldly, it slew above fifty
thousand at one time, so exasperated was the Lord against them. All that
afterwards happened by it, as the slaying of Vzzah but for touching it, the
blessing of Obed Edom for entertaining it, and some other things besides, I now
omit at this time as being done by all likelihood after the composing of this
Psalme and therefore not likely that the Prophet here had any relation to these
events.

Thirdly concerning the Sanctuary we shall find it recorded there, what
precious Jewels that had in it being the cabinet as it were and casket of them,
as first, this aforesaid Arc and all the sacred things therein contained, the
golden pot wherein was Manna. and Aronsrod that had budded, and the Tables of
the Testament: secondly, the golden Censer: thirdly, the mercy seat of
fourthly, the Cherubins of gold too: fifthly, the there that the Lord from
thence gave forth his Oracles, and told all things unto Moses concerning the
children of Israel. We shall find it recorded there that the high Priest went
into it that it was Sanctum Sanctorum, that is, The holiest of all, for so is
the Hebrew phrase in stead of the superlative, like as our Saviour is Rex Regum
Dominus Dominantium, that is, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, according to
that dialect.

And these are the excellent things recorded of that house, whereunto as this
our Prophet no doubt had special reference here in these words, so they may
serve us as a draught in some sort to know what manner of house this was.
There are that this house to this great world wherein we live, for it being
divided say they into three parts the Outward Court, the Inward, and the
Sanctuary: two of them signify the Earth, the Sea, wherein al kind of
creatures are, and such were the Outward and Inward Court: the third part which
was the Sanctuary signifies Heaven say they which was reserved for God alone
in like sort as the Heaven is not to be come unto by men. In my conceit it may
more fitly be compared to the little world of man, as man in holy Body, a
Soul, and a Spirit: the Soul being taken as Spirit for the understanding.
First then concerning the Tabernacle, that J resemble to the Body, my reason
is, for that so oftetimes in holy Body of ours resembled to a Tabernacle. In
this Body is a Soul, and in that Tabernacle an Arc, which Arc containing
principally the Two Tables of stone the ten Commandemets, what may we better
resemble them unto then to the will and affections over which they bear the
sway. The Sanctuary I may well resemble unto the Understanding, though as the
chiefest room in this house it passed indeed all understanding. Nor may it
seem strange that the Temple here should thus be compared unto man, seeing man
so often times in holy Scripture is called the Temple of God. Know ye not that
ye are the Temple of God, and that the spirit of God dwells in you? If any
man destroy the Temple of God him shall God destroy, for the Temple of God is
holy which ye are. And again in another ye are the Temple of the leving God:
where upon Tertullian very elegantly, Being all of us, the Temple of God, the
Parson Prelate of that Church is Chastity, which will not suffer any unclean
or profane thing to be brought into it, least that God that doth inhabit it
should utterly leave the place by reason of such pollution. But thus much of
his house. Now let us see what it is to dwell in it, Even that I may dwell in
the house of the Lord.

Hannah the mother of Samuel when she had been long barren, it was often cast
her in the teeth* she vowed a vow O Lord of hosts, if thou wile look on the
trouble of thy handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thy handmaid, but
give unto thy handmaid a man child, the will I give him unto the Lord all the
days of his life, there shall no raiser come upon his head. Her meaning was
that he should be brought up in the house of the Lord in Shil^h, there to do
the Lord* that service that Eli the Governor should enioin him. Al things
happening to her desires, that is, the Lord looking on her trouble, remembering,
and not forgetting her, giving unto her a man child indeed, she gave him
indeed unto the Lord, he became a Nazarite, and a Levite, and dwelt in the
house of the Lord al the days of his life. But this is not the dwelling here
meant in this place. This kind of dwelling was for Prophets indeed, and for
the Children of the Prophets, howbeit Dauid though he were a Prophet, yet had
he besides an other calling, and by reason of that calling could not thus
dwell in this house. The dwelling then that David meant was in all public
assemblies both at Morning and Evening Sacrifice to tender his presence to the
Lord, to sort himself with those who we will go into the house of the Lord, to
be always praising of the Lord in those Assemblies according unto that in an
other of his Psalmes, Blessed are they that* dwell in thy house they will be
always praising thee. And this because he could not now perform by reason of
his banishment how dry was his soul within him, what bitter moan doth he make,
My soul saith he is a thirst for God, yea even for the living God, when shall
I come to appear before the presence of God? I, for his banishmet had berest
him of the exceeding solace he there took, ^e prefers before himself those very
fowls of the heaven, before which our The Sparrow hath found her a house, and
the swallow a nest where she may lay her young, even thy altars O Lord of
hostess, my king, and my God. I know there are of the

To approach continually then unto the Temple, and thither continually to
repair was the dwelling no doubt here meant; to dwell, to reside continually
there, not to come for a spurt, or a fit, as you heard this word Dwelling
descanted upon by Anna here the daughter of Phanuel, who is said in the second
of Luke for the space of fourscore and four years not to have gone out of
the Temple; not that she was there always, but often saith Lyra, and venerable
Bed to the same purpose, not that she was never absent no not an howre, but
for that she was often in the Temple. And the same S. Luke speaking of our
Saviours disciples after they had seen him ascended into heaven, They returned
to Jerusalem with great joy were continually in the Temple praising and lauding
God. Thus S. Austens mother in her time to might be said to dwell in Gods
house, whereunto she came so duly and truly twice a day, that she in thy
Scriptures S. Austen, might hear O God what thou said to her, and thou in
her prayers what she said to thee. In a word, such were the Christians the
same S. Austen speaks of in another place whom he calls the Emmets of God,
Behold the Emmet of God it rises early every day, it runs to Gods Church,
it there prays, it hears the Lesson read, it sings a Psalme, it
ruminateth what it hears, it meditateth thereupon, and hourdeth up within it
self the precious corn gathered from that barn flower. And thus much for the
dwelling here, now concerning the convenience of dwelling in this place in as
much as he desired it for term of life. All the days of my life.

Many and manifold are the cares that are taken by mortal men concerning
their habitations if so be they have purse-opportunity either to purchase, or
to rent them. Some like the City best, some the when they are weary of one
house they may presently walk unto another. Even Princes themselves have this
variety how well accommodated soever their Palaces be, and no house of theirs
so gorgeous, so glorious whatsoever, but should they be tied unto it
continually, it would seem a Prison rather then a Palace. It seems it was
not so with the Lords house in this place, for a Prince here is so desirous to
live therein continually, as that he wished there to dwell all the days of his
life: and therefore in one of his Psalmes, I will dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever, and again in another I will dwell for ever in thy Tabernacle,
He could have been contented it seems to have set up his rest there, like as
the Lord This shall be my rest for ever here will I dwell for I have a delight
therein. This it was in effect that Zacharias Iohn Baptists father did aim at
long after when speaking of the effect of our redemption by our Saviour, that we
being delivered out of the ^ad^ of our enemies might serve him without fear in
holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life. And here
Beloved let us admire the great goodness of our God and his exceeding mercy
towards us, who speaking to us when time was in so great anger and indignation,
Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorrow shalt thou ^ate of it all the days
of thy life (for in that he spake it to our first father Adam he spake it to us
to) doth sweeten as it were this curse again by taking us into his own
service, and in that service to remain with him all the days of our life.
Wherein what do we else but even set at his own table, either as David did at
Sauls, or Mephibosheth at Davids. It was a vain hope of Lamech therefore who
upon the birth of Noah his son, this son shall comfort us at touching the
earth which the Lord hath cursed: it is the son of God only that so can do,
and so shall it be done unto us if so be we endeavour to serve him all the days
of our life. I end this point with the words of Peter which he spake unto our
Saviour, somewhat vnadvisedlie I confess in the case he then spake them but
for our purpose very fitly, Master Peter it is good for us to be here, right so
say I, it is good indeed for us to be here, and therefore let us here be all
the days of our life. And thus much of the Matter of the Prophets Petition
here, now as touching the Manner of making it which I told you was in these
words, On thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, wherein I
consider these points: first that he made it his Chief Desire and that in
these words, One thing have I desired: secondly, his Constancy in it that in
these, I desired of the Lord: not I desired of thee o Lord as if he had spoken
it in private, but I desired of the Lord in the third person, and therefore
speaking no doubt to others, even to all who should ever have the perusing of
this Psalme. And of each of these in their order, and first of making it his
Chief Desire, One thing have I desired.

Davids desire for it was One thing here, is not so to be understood as if it
therefore were but One, or the only thing he did desire. This very Psalme
dispelleth that conceit for there are even in this Psalme diverse and sundry
desires besides: as first to have secoudly, not to thirdly, to fourthly, to
Psalmes, in the book of Sam^ and else where. It is nor therefore to be said of
this One as speaks the Apostle to the Ephesians, of one body, one spirit, one
hope of our vocation; or in the words immediately following, ^ one Lord, one
Faith, one Baptism; or as it was said of our Saviours coat that it could not
have bin Tun^a unless it had been Vni^a, that is, one or else none; or, as
Ruff^ cannot be another, or a third to bear Maries One thing is needful: Mary
hath chosen the good part, and yet was Martha her sister to have a child's part
to: For if so be a cup of cold water only give to one of our Saviours little
ones in the name of a Disciple should not loose a Lazaru^ had now been quod
petij ^ spo^nit, was the wind afterwards in another quarter? No, in no wise,
therefore to the preterperfectence he adds the future here, which I will
require: Men's immota manet, his mind was steadfast, it was like Queen
Elizabeths Semper eadem, Ever and never but the same. Which I will require.

It was our Saviours question concerning the what went ye out into the
wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? And what S. Gregorie is
understood by this reed, but only a carnal mind which accordingly or as it
is hoised up by favour, or by slander depressed down, yields presently it
self or to the one or to the other. The author of the imperfect work upon
Matthew gives the reason, A reed is a void and empty thing, having in it nor
strength, nor vigour, therefore is it driven with every wind, right so a
carnal man saith he that hath no pith of faith within him, no strength nor
virtue of truth whatsoever temptation comes upon him, it not only bruises, but
breaks him to. The Baptist by our Saviours testimony was no vegitable of this
nature, he was a huge high oak rather as Iohn the Baptist so was it before with
this our Prophet, whom no adversity could drive from the love he bare to this
house. He was affected it seems to this desire as was Demosthenes to Action,
or S. Austen to Humility, he gives it the first and second, and third place
too, he hath and will desire it. For as the learned Iohn the Baptist, This is
he of whom I spake, that he had before made many Sermons concerning Iesus, so
in that the Prophet here saith, One thing have I desired, it may probably be
gathered that he had desired it often times before, so that he is nothing like
the inconstant man. The inconstant man, treads upon a moving earth and keeps
no ^ate. It is a wonder if his love or hatred last so many days as a wonder.
His heart is the Inn of all good motions, wherein if they lodge for a night it
is well, by morning they are gone, and take no leave, and if they come that way
again they are entertained as Guests not as Friends. It was not thus with this
our Prophet, He was like the round world rather even so sure that he could not
not be He was like those heavenly Orbs above that keep an He was like unto his
Pattern whose image he was, the eternal God, o^ whom it is said in Malachy, I
am the Lord* I change not, Malachy the third, at the sixth verse. And this was
the Prophets Constancy, a virtue so verious, that as it was said of the Stoics
that they were Mares Philosophorum, the Male Philosophers of all the rest (but
it was said but by a Stoicke) so no virtue without this virtue but is as it
were a Widow.

Viduata Philemone Baucis, one that hath lost her true Philemon indeed.
Witness the three Theologicall Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, and what
are they without this Constancy? Witness the four Virtues Cardinal, Justice,
Prudence, Temperance, and Fortitude* without Constancy what are they? The
Intellectual and Moral Virtues are as Thomas Aquinas tells us reduced to these
seven* therefore if these without Constancy are no more, no more are they. Nay
are they not harmful rather, sure I am St Peter saith that better it were not
to have known the wai^ of righteousness, then after we have known it to
turn from the Commandment given unto us. Howbeit here we must have special
care that we take not Quid pro Quo, one for another as many do. It is easily
done, and often, never more oft then now a days. The Pastor of souls,
Gregory, is to know ( so is the Flock to) that vices a many times do bear
themselves as virtues, Thus Covetousness cloaks it self under the name of
Thrift and Parsimony, and contrariwise riotous spending under the name of
Liberality. To much pity a many times is thought to be Piety, and unbridled
Anger the virtue of Zeal. A headlong Action is accounted quick dispatch, and
to be to too tardy in performing ought a high point of singular wisdom. The
vice that bears it self as the virtue of Constancy, no vice any virtue more,
is the vice of Self will and Obstina^ie, a sour and a sullen vice, that which
hath blasted so many hundreds of our age both on the right hand of us, and on
the left, Schismatics and Papists. But utterly to avoid this mock virtue,
this Alecto in deed in another likeness, the safest and surest way, is to
have good ground for what we do, not a particular spirit with the one, or the
Religion of our Fathers, and Mothers, and Forefathers with the other. It is a
good thing, to love earnestly always in a good thing. And this good ground the
Prophet had, the Law of the Lord was his direction, and for he was so stable
and s^edfast in the same, the virtue which he had was not vice in virtues
robes, it was virtues own self the virtue of Constancy. And thus much of his
Constancy in this his desire, come we now to the Manifestation of this his
desire to the world which ^ told you was in these words, I desired of the Lord.

There is a piece of a verse in Ovid more canonical with a many, ^ I am more
powerful then all the verses or chapters either concerning the contrary
throughout the whole Bible*

Been qui latuit, been vixit.
He that lurks well, lives well, as if the Lord had sent us into the world to
play all hid. I grant the times may be such, as may cause us to betake our
selves to such a kind of retired life, or to play least in the worlds sight,
even as those Christians of old time, of whom the Apostle to the Hebrews, They
wandered in wildernesses, mountains, and dens, and caves of the earth: but to
do it now in these days, or to keep our Consciences to our selves, or not at
al to employ the Talets that God hath committed to our charge, is ungratefully
to liken these times to the ticklish times of Nero, wherein sloth Tacitus was a
virtue and to do^ nothing the greatest wisdom of all. Such wyzards in the end
will play but wyly beguily with themselves, who while they proceed in silence as
from young men to aged, from aged to the grave, are like to make the next step
from thence to hell if so be they be not there before. Cast that unprofitable
servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping gnashing of teeth. True it
is, it is the Hart that God requires for his service, but he requires withal
the Tongue to, if we think this tongue of ours is not to be employed in
public Assemblies as well as at hoame, let us remember what was said to
Meroz by the Angel of the Lord, Curse ye Meroz the Angel, curse the inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the
mighty. Our Prophet you see in this place was far from this sin, he
proclaimed to all the world of what religion he was. He stuck not to tel it
unto others, to acquaint all men living with the desire of his heart,
especially al such as should have or the hearing, or seeing, or singing, or
saying this Psalme. He doth Aperto vivere voto, he regards not who hears him,
he believed, Matter of it, as also the Manner of making it. We are now to come
to the second point to wit the Reason of this Petition, which I told you was in
these words, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple.
Wherein I thought to have observed to you these points: First, his
Contemplation, and that in these words, To behold the fair beauty of the
Lord: Secondly, his Action, that in these, To visit his Temple: Thirdly, the
joining of both together that in the particle [ And] To behold the fair
beauty of the Lord, and, to visit ^i^ Temple. His Contemplation in respect of
the Soul, his Action in respect of the Body, the Joining of both together in
respect of both combind together, Body and Soul. But this were to enter a new
Ocean, a word of exhortation therefore and so God willing an end, One thing
have I desired of the Lord c.

OF all the days in the week there is special notice taken of one day as
very dismal to the Irish, and in a manner fatal to the. This day Tuesday, for
upon a Tuesday they lost Limmirick, upon a Tuesday they lost Wexford, upon a
Tuesday they lost Waterford, and upon a Tuesday again they lost Divelin. I and
at a fifth time too upon a Tuesday it was, that they had a great overthrow the
Earl of Tumond that the was being chief of all their troops* But whatsoever
may be said of that day concerning the Irish, sure I am that of this day a
Tuesday too when another day in this Month, it may be said of us English, that
we have received two as great Blessings from the immediate hand of God, as ever
did natio in this world or ever is like to do to the worlds end. I mean the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeths Reign of happy memory, the Seauententh of fifth
day we have celebrated, the Cotinuing of King Iames his. Which two days the
Seauententh and Fifth might they parley with one another as Plutarch Holy day
and the Worky day once did, and the Seauententh should say as did the Holy
day, unless I had been so happy, thou had never been* how might this Fifth
reply agai^, but if so be I had not been, thou had never been so happy.
For indeed had not this day been, what should it have profited us to have
lived in prosperity some forty years there abouts, and at the last to have
been a by-word to all the natios of the world. Would it not have been said of
our Land as was sometimes of Jerusalem, but of Jerusalem overthrown, Is this
the Country that men call the perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth?
Might not our Mother this little Island have said, The Lord hath trodden under
foot al my valiant men in the midst of me, he hath called an Assembly against
me to destroy my young men, the Lord hath trodden the wine-presse upon the
Virgin the daughter of England. Might not the Survivers of us have said, but
alas who should have survived? but yet if any should, might they not have said
with the The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord was taken in the
nets, of whom we said under his shadow we shall be preserved? But thanks be
to our God, there are eve in that Prophet other words which better fit us, and
may be said and spoken of us; which this our Island may also speak, and we the
Inhabitants may speak also, It is the Lords mercies that we are not consumed,
because his copassions fail not. I will speak it Beloved again,

Et repetens, iterum{que}, iterum{que} monebo and It is the Lords mercies that
we are not consumed because his compassions fail not.

Such the mercies of the Lord towards us his compassions so great, what greater
recompense to be made him then to perform that very thing which the Prophet in
this place doth desire, Even to dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
our life. What will ye say in these Churches? or in such as are inferior unto
these? I, even in these Churches, or in such as are inferior unto these, even
where* soever the Lord shall place us, the lot of this world shall hereafter
fall upon us, the meanest of which and respect their beauty with the right eye
of understanding in deed, and not Salomons Temple in all its glory, much less
this Tabernacle here, arrayed like one of them. For what was all they had but
shadows of what we do, that House in truth, and in the eye of faith, was but
a Cottage unto ours. Wherefore as Ierom in another case, Si tanti vitrum quati
margaritu, If so be glass, saith he, be so much to be esteemed, of what
estimation is a Pearl to be, so say I in this case, if this our Prophet were
so enamoured with so very a Glass as that was (I speak it by way of
comparison) how should we be with our Pearls, and that so orient as ours are.
Nor let me now seem contrary to my self for that I cal that Tabernacle a
Temple of glass in respect of our Churches, seeing it is in that respect that
I only call it so, as a candle in respect of a lamp, saith St Ierom, is
nothing to be decouted of, a lamp in respect of a star why it gives no light
at all, compare the star, with the Moon and the star is obscure, set the
Moon, again by the Sun, and the Moon shines never a whit, lastly compare the
Sun and Christ together, saith he, and what is the Sun but mere darkness:
and so was the candle of this Tabernacle in respect of our Lamp, the lamp of
this Tabernacle in respect of our Star, the star of this Tabernacle in
respect of our Moon, the Moon of this Tabernacle in respect of our Sun, in a
word the Sun of this Tabernacle in respect of our Christ, or which is all one
in effect our Christian Congregations. And do we yet doubt to make them our
chief desire* In making them our chief desire we may happily get more by it
then indeed we do desire. You know what was said to Salomon when he asked
wisdom of the Lord* Because, thou hast asked this thing and hast not asked for
thy self long life, nor riches, nor the life of thy enemies, behold I have
done according to thy words, and I have also given thee that which thou hast
not asked, both Riches, and Honours, and so forth. Thus fell it out with St
Austens mother too, she desired that she might but see her Son a Christian
Catholic before her death (mark I pray you the phrase of those times, a
Christian Catholic, whereupon Pacianus, Christian is my name, saith he,
Catholic my surname, and St Austen elsewhere, by the goodness of Christ, we
for our pares are Christian Catholickes, not the only stile now adays a
Catholic Roman, or no Catholic) but she but desired to see him a Christian
Catholic before her death, and my God, S. Austen* hath given me more
abundantly then I desired, even to see thee his servant, and to contemn all
the felicity of this world besides. God indeed is no niggard he gives sometimes
before we ask, sometime more then we ask, always as much, and that or in the
same kind that we ask it, or else in some other much more behoofull and
necessary for us.

But we must be Constant in this desire. But alas when he that wrote of
Constancy became What will ye also go away? Why but whether? Or to whom? Here
are the words of life eternal: -- Quod quar it is hic est,
Est Vlubris animas si vos non defi^t aquus.
not the meanest Church in this our Land but will afford you much more comfort
in the service of our God, then the goodliest Synagogue this day or at S.
Omets, or at Rome. Nor would I have you think I speak altogether
unexperienced in this comparison.

Vidimus o Gives Dio^dem; Argua{que} castra,

I have seen Beloved; seen I have, though not the Popish Mufftie him self,
yet his Pavillions and his Tents, I mean a many Assemblies and Congregations
of his, where I am sure but as few words as Porpheries Pradicables with
understanding* if the Apostle S. P^ule were not mistaken* would to those
Assemblies hauedone more good; then those many thousands ^at then were uttered
by so many Black Birds there, so many Parrets, so many Crows, and Pies, not
understanding what they said or sung, the similitudes are Austens. And now I
have said thus much let me go a little further* and speak unto you a little
more concerning those our Adversaries, upon whom had I look with a carnal
eye, I should say I confess, as did those Spies we be not able to hold out
against them for they are stronger then we all the people that we saw there are
men of great stature. Giants they are, the sons of Anak, and we to them but
Grasshoppers. But the Lord that gave me at that time an others gates eye to
behold them with, puts another message into my mouth, as a learned Divine Caleb
that he had not asheepes cye as the other Spies, but the eye of a Lyon, and how
he passed by that people with an honourable scorn: right so say I with Caleb,
Rebel not you against the Lord, neither fear ye the people of that Land for
they are but bread for us, their shield is departed from them, and the Lord is
with us fear them not.

The greater cause have we to proclaim this desire of ours unto the world
maugre all the banded Forces of all the Romanists whatsoever, who what have
they Pamphlet^ed against our Public Service, or our Religion therein
contained which hath not been fully answered, or at least wise may be, and
that in the turning of a hand. Their Proofs are Disproofes confuted, their
Rocks undermined, their Fortresses overthrown, their Parlaments repealed,
Chalenges answered, their Replies reioined unto, their Reioinders disiointed.
True it is they rest not satisfied, nor is it likely they Rana, saith St*
Austen, est l^quaciss^ma vanites, nothing so full of tattle as Folly, and that,
saith he, was signified by the Frogs of Egypt.

But happy it were with us had we in this point of Church Service the Romanists
only our only Adversaries. Cassius and his Accomplices we could deal withal
well enough, but what shall we do when our own Mothers Children lift up the
heel against us, and so vilify our Church Service especially in their
practise, that unless there be a Sermon with it, we shall seldom or never
have their company. Shall I smite them Fathers Brethren? shall I smite them?
They are flesh I confess, of our flesh, and bone of our bones: Why, but shall
I let them go then, and die in their error? that were a cruel kind of
compassion, let their error die in them rather, Moriatur error, vivat homo,
saith St Austen, slay the error, save the man. And will you the behold their
error? O, say they, unless there be Sermons, what beauty is there in our
Churches? why should we take so much pains to go so often unto them? The
Scriptures that there are read we can read our selves at home, we can pray
those Prayers at home too, have we but the Psalter Bible in our houses, what
beauty have we not that there is to be had? So say they indeed that little
know or what is Beauty, or what is Service, or what are Sermons, or the
Minister of God, or in truth these Churches. For if fo be they did, would they
thus speak? would they huddle up together so many Soleci^mes? would they first
compare their Houses to the proper peculiar House of God? themselves unto his
Ministers? their private prayer to the Public? and debase Public Prayer so
much as to make it so much inferior unto Sermons? why what other Gospel
preach our Sermons then that which our Service delivers to them? If in their
own house where the Lord (it may be) is in the midst, how much more when we are
such troops multitudes in Church Assemblies? when we there set by Prince in
this our Israel, but every ma doing that which is best in his own eyes, when
there shall be no Priest, but every man of a Religion that he hath forged in
his own brain, and which is the consequence of both these when we shall be no
People neither, but Relliquiae Danaum, the Relics, and Remnant of a People,
when a man shall be more precious then fine Gold, and above the wedge of the
gold of Ophir, I mean in respect of the rarity of them as speaks the Prophet
Essay in another case.

But I am persuaded better things of you Beloved though I now thus speak, the
rather for that a many of you (I may say it of my own experience) visit so
well the Lords house at the usual times of Divine Service, so that I may now
say as said the Apostle in his Thessalonians, We are persuaded of you through
the Lord that you both do, and will do the things which we warn you of. He
that is righteous let him be righteous still, he that is holy let him be holy
still. Let us not be weary of welldoing for in due season we shall reap if we
faint not. And that shall be, and it shall be then; when we shall not hereafter on
our deathbeds depart as one out of this life, but out of one house into
another, that is, when upon the parting of Body and Soul we shall be sped fro
this House of Prayer here on earth, to that higher house above, the House of
Praises in Heaven, where Cherubins Seraphins continually crying Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Saboth, we shall all of us be satisfied with the
plenteousnesse of that house. I will end with that of Austen who ending a Tract
of his with the words of this my Text doth thus descant thervpo, Let thy Soul
S. Austen say, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the ^se of the Lord al the dates of my life to behold the
fair beauty of the Lord. Fear not saith S. Austen, that thy continuance
there, will br^d a fulsomnes in thee. Such a pleasure of beauty shall it be
that it shall be^ always in thy ^ie and ye^ shalt thou never be satisfied with
it. Or rather to speak the Truth saith he, thou shalt ever be satisfied and
never to. For if I should only sar thou sh^l^ never be satisfied, then mights
thou fear some hunger to ensue, if I should say only thou shalt be satisfied,
then might thou on the contrary fear there should be some fulsomenes, where
nor fulsomnes shall be, nor hunger, I faith he for my part a^ ignorant what to
call it. But howsoever I am ignorant, yet hath the Lord sufficient to give and
to bestow on vt, which we are ignorant how to call, and yet believe that we
shall receive it.

The same Lord so bless us, and the seed that hath been sown, that with you
of the poorer sort the you of the wealthier, the deceitfulnes of your riches,
with either of you of ether sort the lusts of other things

Page. 28. lin. 10. amend it thus: Secondly, his Constancy in it that in these,
which I will require: Thirdly, his Manifestation of it to the world, and that
in these, I desired of the Lord: not I desired of thee O Lord.

IT is not long since Right worcester and dearly beloved in our Savior Christ, that
my course coming in order to execute the Priests Office before the Lord in
this kind, I made my choice of these few words to be entreated of at that time.
When by the assistance of the same Lord having multiplied the self-same words
into as many more words as took up the space of a whole hour, there was yet
behind some overplus, such as at that time could not be disposed of, and
therefore reserved by me till some fitter opportunity. Which opportunity now
come by reason of the Solemnity of this Day which requires at our hands a more
then ordinary respect, I am now come with that overplus as it were the
fragments that were left, that nothing be lost as speaks our Saviour, Iohn the
sixth at the twelfe verse.

When first I handled then these words, you that were present may remember, you
that were not are now to know, that I the divided the same into two especial
points. First into a Petition, secondly, into the Reason of it. The Petition in
these words, One thing have I desired of the Lord which I will require, even
that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. The Reason
of it in these, To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple:
Entreating of the Petitio, I observed the Matter of it, and the Manner of
making it. The Manner of making it in these words, One thing have I desired of
the Lord which I will require: the Matter of it in these, Even that I may dwell
in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. In the Matter of the
Petition I handled these points, First, what kind of house this was; Secondly,
what it was to dwell in it: Thirdly, the convenience of dwelling there. In the
Manner of making it, these; First, that it was his Chief Desire: Secondly, his
Constancy in it: Thirdly, th^ Manifestation of it to the world: and thus far
I then proceeded.

That which remained then behind, and with the which I am now come, and of the
which you are now to hear, is the Reason of the Petition, and it is as I said
in these words, To be hold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his
Temple. In which words may it please you to observe with me these two points:
First, what this Fair Beauty was: Secondly, the Power and Force that this
Fair Beauty had. What this Fair Beauty was we shall thoroughly observe if so
be we do observe howe it consisted in two points. First, in regard of the
Parties that were present in that house: Secondly, in regard of the Things
performed by those Parties. The Parties present in that house was first the
Lord himself: Secondly, the Priests: Thirdly, the People. The Things
performed was the public solemnity of the worship of God, both in the Word
and Sacraments, Sacrifices, Prayer, and Praises. And of every of these in their
several order, first of the Presence of the Lord.

Anaxagor as being demanded to what end and purpose he was borne, his answer
Lactantius was, to behold the Heavens and Sun in the firmament. Which answer
of his saith Lactantius is of all men much admired, and accounted to be a
speech well befitting a Philosopher^l, saith he, for my partam quite of an other
mind, and persuade my self that the party not knowing in that case what to
say, thought good to say somewhat yet least he should have been thought by his
Opponet to have been put to a non plus. For indeed to say the truth saith
Lactantius, in so few words then uttered, how many solecismes shall we find,
those no, mean ones neither? As first in that he referred the whole duty of
man only to the eye of man, to the mind of man nothing at all, and how if
Anaxagor as had bin blind saith he, should he thereupon have had in this
world nothing to do? Again saith Lactantius the other parts of the Body had
they no offices to perform? Besides that the chief Sovereignty seems rather
in the ears saith he then in the eyes, because Learning Wisdom may be
obtained by the ears only, by the only eye they cannot be. That which
Lactantius there aims at, namely that the Creator of Heaven should have been
respected not the Creature which was Heaven, at least wile before the Creature,
is respected no doubt by our Prophet here, in regard of whom it principally is
that he acknowledges here so fair a beauty. For what is it that makes the
Court more glorious then all places and assemblies in the Land besides, Is it
not the presence of the King? Doublesse where the King is, there is the Court,
as it was told Commodus the Emperor there was Rome where the Emperor was.
Now that the King of Kings here was, witness that of the Book of Numbers wherein
it is that when Moses went into the Tabernacle to speak with God, he hard the
voice of one speaking unto him from the mercy seat that was upon the Arc
between the two Cherubins. Hence that of this our Prophet in another of his
Here oh thou shepherd of Israel, thou that lead Ioseph like a sheep, show
thyself also thou that set upon the Cherubins. And again in another The
Lord is King be the people never so impatient, he sets between the
Cherubins be the earth never so unquiet. And as in these two Psalms he is said
to set, so in other places of holy Scriptures he is said to dwell between the
Cherubins, both these terms Setting Dwelling signifying unto the his presence
there. Not that he sate or dwelt there in truth and in very deed, as we in our
tongue understand or Setting or Dwelling, yet that he was as really there
present in that place, as themselves were in the seats they sate on, or in the
houses where they dwelt. Concerning the Priests that here were present though
the beauty they had was nothing comparable to this beauty, yet considered in
it self it was a Beauty no doubt exceeding gracious glorious too. They were
the Moses saith the Vrim and Thummim, that is, Light and Perfection, the one
signifying their Knowledge, the other their Life and Conversation. Of Priests
were two sorts the High Priest and the Rest that were inferior unto him.
Concerning the glory of the High Priest we shall the better conceive what it
was, if so be we call to mind what the son of Syrac said cocerning one of
them namely Simon the soon of Onias. He was, Syrac, as the morning star in
the midst of a cloud, and as the Moon when it is full, and as the Sun
shining upon the Temple of the most High, as the Rainbow that is bright in the
fair clouds, and as the flower of the Roses in the spring of the year, and as
Lillies by the spring^ of waters, and as the branches of the Frankincense tree
in the time of Summer, as a fi^e and incense in the Conser, and as a vessel of
massy gold set with all manner of precious stones, and as afaire Olive tree
that is fruitful, and as a Cypress tree which grows up to the clouds When
he put on the garment of honour and was clothed with all beauty he went up to
the holy Altar made the garment of holiness honourable. Conceruing the glory
of the other Priests which were inferior unto him we may make an estimat by
that which there follows. When he look the portions out of the Priests h^nds
he himself stood by the hearth of the Altar compassed with hi^ Brethren round
about as the branches do the Cedar tree in L^nus, and they compassed him as
the branches of the Palm tree. So were all the sons of Ar^n in their glory
the oblations of the Lord in their hands before all the Congregation of Israel.
In a word, the Iewes they were Iewes.

Concerning the presence of the People, if so be in civil Societies whereas they
are orderly pyld together and they are not a tabble or a rout, it is no small
beauty which in such Societies is to be seen, how much more was the beauty
in those Assemblies in so peculiar a People as that was. One Tim^the^ a
Captain^ of Athe^s being demanded by Themistooles what was the greatest joy
that ever he had in all his life, It was, when in the Olympian games beginning
to play my Prize, the whole Theater there present behold me with their eyes.
And famous is that of the Senators of Rome, who when the Gaules had taken their
City, and now were entered into the Senate, They seemed unto them at the first
like the Images of the Gods, of such a goodly presence they were. The order
observed in these Assemblies as it was far beyond those, so was the Beauty
no doubt far faierer, a wortheir object to the eye. It is well seen o God,
David, how thou go, how thou my God and King go in the Sanctuary. The
Singers go before, the Minstrels follow after, in the midst were the Da^sels
playing with the Timbrels. Nor was it prejudicial to this beauty that there
was perhaps in those Assemblies much cockle among the wheat, the bad among the
good, all as speaks the Paule, not being Israel that were of Israel, nor all
of them Children because they were the seed of Abraham: seeing it was in
respect of the better part that this beauty here was thus accounted of. Like
as we say in our Creed, The holy Cathalike Church, notwithstanding there are
too many neither Catholic therein, nor Holy. But thus much of the Persons, the
Parties here present.

The Thing^ performed in these Assembles wherein this Beauty did consist, was
as I said the Public Solemnity of the honour and service of God, both in his
word, Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises: and indeed admirable
was the beauty in every of these particulars being beheld with spiritual eyes*
As first foremost in the word, to consider how the eternal God at sundry times
^ in divers manners spake unto them by the Prophets. Secondly, in the
Sacraments, to consider how the same God did bind himself unto them, even as
the Debtor binds himself by bond unto his Creditor, or man to man by way of
Indenture. Thirdly in the Sacrifices to consider what was due unto the sins
themselves committed: I say themselves committed, and yet Placidum pecus,
in{que} tuendos
Natum homines,
the mild and gentle Sheep, Animal sine fraud, dolis{que},
the innocent harmless Ox, they forsooth must die the death. Fourthly in
their Prayers, how they needed not now make such Apologies as Abraha did unto
the Lord, Behold now I have begun to speak unto my Lord, and I am but dust and
ashes: and again, Let not my Lord now be angry that I speak: and yet again,
Let not my Lord now be angry and I will speak but this once: no they might
now talk their fill with him, every Morning, every Evening, both at their
Morning and Evening Sacrifice. Lastly in their Praises to consider how they
praised God in his holiness, praised him in the firmament of his power, praised
him in his noble acts, praised him according to his excellent greatness, praised
him in the sound of the trupet, praised him upon the Lute harp, praised him in
the Cymbals Dances, praised him upon the strings and Pipe, praised him upon the
well tuned Cymbals, praised him upon the loud Cymbals. Indeed it was a good
thing as to sing praise unto their God, yea a joyful and pleasant thing it was
to be thankful. And thus much of the Fair Beauty in respect of the Things
performed in those Assemblies: now as touching the Power and Force this Fair
Beauty had, which was as you may remember the second point to be observed.

Concerning the Power Force of this Fair Beauty here specified, we shall take
a scantling thereof, if so be we do consider howe it ravished this our Prophet,
Body, and Soul. First his Soul, and that by way of Contemplation, To behold
the Fair Beauty of the Lord: Secondly his Body, that by way of Action, To
visit his Temple: Thirdly in that it caused him to join them both together,
that in the particle, And To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit
his Temple. And of every of these in their order, first that his Soul was
ravished by way of Contemplation. To behold the fair beauty of the Lord.

Great is the Power of Beauty though it be but worldly beauty such as is the
beauty of women, Is not the king Zorobabel great in his power? Do not all
regions fear to touch him? Yet I saw him and Apame the kings concubine, the
daughter of the famous Bartacus, sitting on the right hand of the king. And
she took the crown of the kings bead, and put it upon her own, and stroke
the king with her left hand, Yet in the mean season the king gaped and gazed
on her, and if she laughed at him, he laughed, and if she were angry with him
he did ^latten her that he might he reconciled with her. The sons of God saw
the daughters of men that they were fair and they took them wives of al that
they liked. Behold Abraham to Sara I know that thou art a fair woman to look
upon, therefore it will come to pass that when the Egiptians see thee they
will say she is his wife, so they will kill me but they will keep thee alive.
Now if so be in worldly beauty which is but a superficial colour only covering
the blood, skin, bones, things most hideous to be beheld, that which Diseases
some times, always Age Beauty which was ever the self same, as fresh in
Davids times as it was in the time of Moses, and in the times of the Prophets
after, as in Davids long before, nay much more fresh glorious, having a most
beautiful Temple to adorn it, the Temple of Jerusalem. Howbeit here we are to
note that the beauty here specified was not outward so much as within, and
therefore needed an inward eye, the eye of Contemplation. The Kings daughter is
all glorious within, quite contrary to worldly beauty. Worldly beauty as you
hard even now reaches no further then to the skin, to the outward
Superficies, It may be fair without and foul within, much like to the
Egiptian Temples which were marvellous beautiful without, but within instead
of a God, they had a Crocodile, or a Cat, or some strange serpent more me^ for
a cave, or a den, I for adunghill saith an ancient then for a place so
gorgeous. It was not so with this Temple. There was beauty without in deed, but
more, much more within, and therefore not to beseene with corporal eyes so
much, such as are common to us with Flies, G^ts, as with the eye of
understanding, even with those ^s as speaks Theodoret, which faith hath put
into our heads. And thus much for the Prophets eye, the Eye of Contemplation:
not the eye he beheld when time was the beauty of Bathsheba with, no he was
now blind on that side, but the eye of the mind, and of the soul, To behold
the fair beauty of the Lord. The thing I noted here was that it ravished his
Body to, and that by way of Action, that in causing him to take the pains to
go himself in person thither, and therefore now concerning his body: To visit
his Temple.

The word Temple in this place doth not argue that this Psalme was made after
the building of the Temple, that consequently it was none of Davids, the Temple
in Davids time not being built, for even long before this time it was i said of
Eli the Priest, that he fate upon a stool by one of the posts of the Temple.
It is by a kind of figure then that it is ^earmed here the Temple, like as S.
Ierome upon Ezechiel, we in steed of the city No have translated it
Alexandria; for that it was afterward so called; and S. Austin to this purpose,
we hear that Christs disciples were bidden to the marriage at Ca^a in Galylie,
not that they were his disciples then and that at that time, but that they were
afterwards so to be. But now concerning the Action of visiting the Temple.

The verb To visit being a frequetatiue intimates unto us the frequency of the
Prophet Davids going to that Temple, his frequency of going thither the
fervency of his desire. Concerning his frequecy of going thither it was well
observed by the a habit is not gotten ^ only action, no more then one fair he
speaks* in an other case, or one fair day makes a summer. It ^as well observed
by him in that it it not the multiplicity of actions neither that doth
denominate the party virtuous but if he do them virtuously: as aiust man if he
do just things justly, a temperate man if he do temperate things temperatly. In
regard whereof the Canonists were wont to say that God was the rewarder of
Adverbs, not of Nouns, and our Saviour to this purpose, If thy eye be single,
thy whole body shall be light, but if thine eye be wicked the all thy body shall be
dark: that is as S. Austen such shall be thy deeds as thy intention is to do
them. These two points the one of Multiplicity the other of Quality are both
of them intimated here in this single sole word of Visiting: To Visit implyeth
both; First it implies a Frequency of going to the Temple, as if the P^ophet
had meant his feet should even wear out the very steps of the door. Secondly,
it implies his Feruenty of spirit which manifestly shows that what was done
was done religiously. And this it is that must be done, and it must be done
thus, that must be held to be such an action as the Prophet protests here he
would perform. If either of these two want, or Frequency, or Ferven^ie, it
makes us like a bird that hath but one only wing, well we may hop to Church, but
fly thither we cannot, we shall never be able as speaks the to fly thither like
a cloud, and as the Doves to their windoes.

The joining of both these puts me in mind of the third point, namely how
this our Prophet ioin^th likewise together, Contemplation and Action both, that
in the pa^ticle^ [ And] To behold the fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit
his Temple: so that he seems not to say as Macha^l in another case, Divide
Imper^, divide them and master them both: but as it was Si dividis, per d^: If
^ once divide it, you ma^re all. And there fore what the Apostle Defraud not
one another except it be with consent for a time that you may give your selves
to fasting and prayer, and again come together that Satan tempt you not for
your incontinency, may not ^fitly be applied as to the two lives the
Contemplatiur and Active in general, so to this Contempletion and Action of
the Prophet here in particular. Our Souls and Bodies are Man and Wife as it
were, so loueli^ linc^t together that till death it self depart them, no
Divorce betwixt the both. With consent indeed they often times defraud one
another, that so they may give themselves to fasting and prayer, and what is
this but the Life Contemplative? But afterwards they come together again, and
are careful for things convensent for them, and this is the Life Active. These
two several lives the Active and Contemplative have had their several
welwillers from the beginning of the world to this day, while some preferring
the one Life, some the other, have wholly addicted themselves or to the one, or
to the other. Much I confess may be spoken in the behalf of either of the,
but when all comes to all, the Life that joins them both together and vnites
these two Roses, the White as it were and the Red, is the Life in my opinion
best accepted with God and man. I appeal in this case to Antiquity it self,
which took such strict order that very Monks who had be^aken themselves to
Contemplation, should not be Action here meant by the Prophet in this place, is
not an Action of this nature, it was to use his feet not his hands, especially
his hands in a Mechanical kind of sort. It was indeed to use those feet of his
to the often coming to the Temple, and not upon the wagging of a straw, or to
absent himself from thence, or to make of his own house a Chapel of ease.
Hence it is that he so often Congregation, that he so Courts, in his Sanctuary,
before the Memorial of his Holiness, and so much complains of his own
uncomfortable exile, Public Assemblies, and the happiness of such as had free
access thereunto. And as the Prophet here in this place thus ioineth them
together, so doubt less no good Professor that lived in those times but also
did the like, joining and coupling both together, least with idle Contemplation
without coming at all to Church Assemblies he might vanish away in his
speculation, or coming to Church Assemblies without the benefit of
Contemplation he should be like to those who came near to the Lord with their
mouths, and honoured them with their lips, but their hart was far from him.
And thus much of the Reason of the Prophets Petition in this place, the Beauty
of the Church that so much moved him to be so desirous to go to Church. Now to
apply what hath been spoken, and to make such use of it as is fit, to come to
the mark it self whereat I first aimed when I first made choice of this Text.
To behold the fair beauty of the Lord and to visit his Temple.

Little wrong was done to Saul by the woman of Israel when they made it the
burden of their song, Saul hath slain his thousand, and David his ten
thousand. The unlike deserts of these two Princes, might justly admit an unlike
commendation. Our Saviour in the Gospel indeed New Testament before the old.
There is no greater Prophet then Iohn, among them that are begotten of women,
nevertheless he that is least in the kingdom of God is greater then he, the
kingdom of God being there taken as the kingdom of heaven, Matthew the third
at the second verse, and the Gospel of the kingdom, Matthew the fourth at the
three twenty verse, and the word of the kingdom, Matthew the thirteenth at
the nineteenth verse, in a word, as our Savior meant when he said, The kingdom
of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a Nation which shall
bring forth the fruits thereof, Matthew the one and twentieth at the three and
fortieth verse.

These things thus, Beloved, it shall be no disparagement to the Temple here in
this place, if so be we prefer before it the Beauty of our Temples. The
Beauty I told you of this Temple consisted in two points, First in regard of
the Parties that there were present: Secondly in regard of the Things performed
in those Assemblies. The Parties present were first the Lord himself, then the
Priests, the the People. The Things performed in those Assemblies was the
Public Solemnity of Gods worship both in the Word, and Sacraments, and
Sacrifices, and Prayer, and Praises: and doth not the Church of God whereof our
Assemblies are every of them parts and parcels, of the self same nature the
Church is, eve the meanest Assembly that is (so it be a Congregation) doth not
the Church I say so far *excel that Synagogue as the Sun in his brightness
the meanest star? Begin we first of all with Gods presence, and is it not
more in Christian Assemblies the it was to the Israelits in that Temple: At
sundry times and in diverse manners God spake in the old time to our Fathers by
the Prophets, in these last dais he hath spoken to us b^ S^nne: never spake
Prophet ^e the Son, Iohn the seventh ^e six and fortith verse. O but you ^ay
God him self spake to Moses, ^es hard his first upon the baptism of our
Savior, Matthew the third at the seaveteenth verse, secondly, at another time
Iohn the 12 at the eight and twenty verse? True it is, it was at those times,
it was then, it is not now, howbeit as S. Austen in the matter of the Tongues,
To one that should say if thou hast received the Holy Ghost why then speak
thou not as did the Apostles with diversity of tongues, thou may answer him
again, yes, I speak with diversity of tongues, for I am in the body of Christ
that is the Church, which speaks with such diversity: right so may we say in
this case, no particular Church whatsoever but in regard this was spoken to our
Savior Christ the head thereof, but hath the benefit of those words, and may
be said to have hard the voice of God.

Now as we have God the father here, the first Person in Trinity, so have we
here God the son to, even as he testified of himself, where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of the. Not as he was in
the midst between the two thieves, giving influence to the one, and none at
all to the other, Luke the three twetith at the three and fortith verse, but as
he was in the midst of the Doctors, or in the midst of the eleaven Apostles, or
if not so personally for he is now at the right hand of God, there sets as
speak the candleslickes Revelation the first at the thirteenth verse.

Over and besides the Son of God, we have God the holy Ghost to, of who our
Saviour himself said, that he should abide with us for ever, and is therefore
called by Tertullian, The Vicar of Christ upon earth. True it is they had in
their Temple this Trinity as well as we, the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost,
for they were but one God both then, now, ever; but come to the manner of their
being there, being with us in our Assemblies, and it was a ridle to the Iewes,
we that have ploughed with Sampsons heifer, that is, with the holy Scriptures,
have easily found it out. You shall hear Dichers Delvers saith Theodoret of
the Christians in his time, and he spake it not in scorn neither, reasoning
about the Trinity.

Over and besides the Holy Trinity, we have the Angels to, here present, in
regard of whom the Apostle in his Epistle to the Corinthians, The woman ought
to have power on her head, that is, to have her head covered, because of the
Angels. Nor are they present only as Spectators, but they assist us after a
sort, I they solace themselves in the beauty of this house according to that of
St Peter, The which things the Angels desire to behold: speaking of the
mysteries published in the Gospel. The word Beholding there used, being the
same that was used of himself when he looked so diligently into the Cherubins
that were so fashioned by the hand of the work man, as if they had

Concerning the other Parties that were present, namely the Priests and
People, how infinitely in each of them do we Christians out strip the Iewes?
First concerning our Priests they are not in deed so gorgeous in attire as
they were, but being Ministers of better things, how are they more beautiful
notwithstanding? How beautiful are the feet of them wh^ch bring glad tidings
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? And St Chrysostome, he
compares the in one Angels, in another To them saith he that inhabit the earth
and are conversant therein, is committed the dispensing of those things which
are in h^ave. They have that power given unto them which he never gave to
Angels, no not Archangels themselves.

Concerning the People, they indeed were a Natio, but they were but one Nation,
we the whole world. And therefore as our Saviour Go and teach all Nations, so
they went and taught them severally; S. Iohn the Asians, S. Andrew the
Achaians, S. Matthew the Ethiopians, S. Philip the Phrygians, S. Bartholomew the
Indians, S. Thomas the Parthians, and so forth, their soud went out through all
the earth, and their words into the end of the world. Or if so be they went not
to all places in their own proper persons, as S. Austen Temple of God, I every
of them in particular in regard of their bodies to be the Temple of the holy
Ghost. But thus much of outstripping them in regard of the Parties present:
that we no less outstrip them to, in regard of the Pub like Solemnity of Gods
worship, namely in the Word, and Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer, and
Praises, remains now to be declared, first concerning the Word.

First then concerning the Word, they had Moses I grant, and they had the
Prophets. Moses as speaks Theodoret, who was the Ocean of Divinity, and
instructed mouth to mouth as it were by God himself; the Prophets, who were
the floods and so many rivers as it were derived from him. Moses he delivered
them the Law, the Prophets they were the Interpreters of that Law. Both Moses
and Prophets so complete at that time for the salvatio of the Iews, that that
of Abraham unto Dives concerning the salvation of his Brethren then living,
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, was an argument that
would not admit of any reply that Dives made. For when he answered thereupon,
Nay Father Abraham, but if one come unto them from the dead, they will amend
their lives, the Patriarch holds himself to his first resolution, If they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rise from
the dead again. Now if they were then taught so wholly and perfectly by Moses
the Prophets alone, howe much better is our case who have the Apostles, and
Evangelists annexed unto them? Moses and the Prophets indeed being a light as
S. Peter shines in a dark place, but the Apostles, and Euangelists as the day
star arising in our hearts. And thus much of the Word.

How far we outstrip them in the Sacraments S. Austen will bear us witness, who
speaking of theirs, and ours; we, saith he, are not pressed with the heavy
burden they were, but our Lord his Apostles have delivered unto us a few
Sacraments in steed of many, and the same in performing most easy, in
signification most excellent, in observation most reverend, and he names in
that place Ba^tisme and the Sup^er. True it is the Apostle they were all under
the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were baptised unto Moses in the
cloud, and in the sea; and again, they did all eat the same spiritual meat,
and did all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the spiritual
rock that followed them and the rock was Christ, howbeit this which the
Apostle saith is in regard of the substance effect of the Sacraments, the
signification of our Sacraments is much more clear the theirs was.

In our Sacrifices we are farther before the then in our Sacraments, having had
in our church the self same Sacrifice really acted, whereof al their
Sacrifices were but shadows. For if the blood of Bulls, and of Goats, and the
ashes of an Haifer sprinckling them that are unclean, sanctifieth as touching
the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ which
through the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purg your
conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And again a little after,
The law, having the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offer year by year
continually sanctify the comers thereunto. For it is impossible that the
blood of Balls and Goats should take away sins. Now if so be we would know the
virtue of our Sacrifice, though it were but one, their Sacrifices being many,
with one offering, hath he consecrated for ever the that are sanctified. And he
had said a little As it is appointed unto men that they shall once die after
that comes the judgment, so Christ was once offered to take away the sins
of many. And comparing his Priesthood with theirs, Among them, many were made
Priests, because they were not suffered to endure by the reason of death, but
this man because he endures ever, hath an everlasting Priesthood. And again a
little after, Such a High Priest it became us to have which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens,
which needed not daily as those High Priests, to offer up Sacrifice, first for
his own sins, and then for the Peoples, for that did he once when he offered
up himself. Comparing then those Sacrifices with this of ours, I may say of
them as did Theodoret of the like offered by the Gentiles, they were such kind
of Sacrifices as were fit for Hucks^ers and Butchers to make.

Lastly concerning Prayer, wherein I comprehend with the asking of things
needful for us, and deprecation of things hurtful, but the confession of our
sins, the praises of God, and giving thanks for benefits received at his hands,
how far we outstrip the Iewes, witness that of the Prophet Malachie, who
comparing both together theirs ours, From the rising of the Sun, unto the going
down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, in every place Incense
shall be offered unto my name, a pure offering. Now what is this Incense but
Prayers, for so the Holy Ghost himself interprets Incese, Revelation the fifth
at the eight verse. And that this Pure Offering is the same, witness that of
Tertullian a Pure Offering, that is, a Pure Prayer fro a conscience that is
pure, for it so be, as speaks the same Father in another the Conscience blush,
Prayer it self will blush too. I but you will say, since these our Prayers
must needs taste of the cask from whence they come, and the cask is very
impure be it the Conscience, or the Heart of man, how can they be the Pure
Offering here spoken of in this place? I answer according to Scripture that
there is in heaven a certain Angel, it is indeed our Saviour Christ, that goes
and stands before the Altar having a golden Censer and much odours given unto
him that he should offer with our prayers. Howsoever then as proceeding from
our selue, sthey are tainted and corrupt, yet are they sweetened by our Saviour,
provided that they be infirmities only that taint the not loud crying sins,
for if they once come to that pass, then farewell all approaching and appearing
in Gods sight. When you shall stretch out your hands, I, saith the will hide
mine eyes from you, and though you make many prayers I will not hear: the
reason he gives immediately, for your hands are full of blood; and yet
immediately after that too, as if he were loath to give even such an utter
repulse, Wash you, make you clean, take away the Evil of your works from
before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, and so forth, Come
now and let us reason together, saith the Lord, though your sins were as
crimsen they shall be made white as snow, though they were red like scarlet
they shall be as wool. And to this end and purpose hath the Church of God for
this sixteen hundred years and upward been in her several Congregations
continually on her knees. We come by troops, Tertullian, that being banded as
it were together, we may be supplicants enough, not so much to beseech, as to
beseige God with our prayers. This force to God is most acceptable. The sound
of men, women, children, infants, Basil, praying in the Church together, seems
like the sound of the waives beating against the sea shore. Ierom, he likens it
to the noise of Thunder, and in another place discoursing of the Funerals of
Fabiola, The Psalmes, did sound a loud, and the Haleluiah that was sung did
shake at that instant the golden feelings of the Temple with the noise it made.

But of all the Beauties in our Church nothing so beautiful indeed as the
Beauty of our Saviour. He was, saith Austen, a beautiful God, he was the word
that was with God, he was beautiful in his mothers womb, where he lost not
his Divinity, and yet he took Humanity on him. He was beautiful being borne
an Infant, because when he was an Infant, when as he sucked the dug, and was
carried in his mothers arms, the heavens spake, the Angels praised him, the
stars directed the wise men to him, he was adored in the manger being to be
meat convenient for the mouths of gentle Beasts. And this is that fair
beauty which we celebrate this day. This day it was that having made for
himself a Tabernacle, as speaks Theodoret, in the womb of the Virgin, he
issued forth from thence both a visible man, and a God to be adored. Borne of
the substance of the Father before all worlds, but assuming that of the Virgin
Mary which did appear to the world. Borne, saith the same Father, as it were
this day, and yet from all eternity. Borne of his Father, Austen, without a
mother he created every day, borne of his mother without a Father he hath
cosecrated this day, so that where as, saith he, in the worlds beginning man
was made to the likeness of God, the case is altered now at this time, for
this day God is made to the likeness of man. Nor let it seem incredible,
saith the same that he should be borne of a Virgin, who out of the Virgin earth
made the first man that ever was.

These the Beauties of our Church, and of every our several Congregations,
what remains but our desires in respect of them be such as was the Prophets
concerning the Temple, namely to behold there these fair beauties, and to
visit these places, that if so be that Beauty were so powerful with the
Prophet which was so far inferior unto ours, ours with us should be more
powerful as being far more beautiful and so far superior unto theirs.
Let it ravish then our Souls by way of Contemplation, and like a load stone
draw our Bodies to by way of Action to these places, and let us join here Body
and Soul by Contemplation and Action both. Let us not take as Gods name, so
not his beauty in vain, if so be the Lord will not hold him guiltles that takes
his name in vain, how will he judge those another day that so much contemn
this his Beauty?

And to the better effecting hereof let us come often to this House, and as the
word used here is a frequentatiue, so let our deeds be frequent to. To come
not at all with the Popish Recusant, or but monthly with the false hearted
Protestant, or in the forenoon or afternoon only with the half Christian, or
when Service is half done with the careless Gospeller, or when there is a
Sermon only with the Precisian, are vices all of a quality, though not al of
the self same quantity, all able to drown us though not all after one sort.
The Precisian he is drowned as it were in rose water, Moses and the Prophets
are nothing with him here, unless forsooth they be interpreted: The careless
Gospeller in a bole of water, a little serves his turn: The half Christian in
mud water: The false hearted Protestant in a river of water, but the Recusant
he that will never be here, and that utterly shuns these Assemblies, he is
drowned in a sea of water, drowned in deed as are the rest, but the manner of
his drowning more dreadful, so much the farther from all hope as he will needs
be far thest from all help. If now you demand of me how often you should come
hither. I answer even as often as this Beauty here is to be seen in the
Public Service of our God. Whether on the Saboth day, or on Holy days, or
even on the week days to, specially Masters Mistresses of families, unless
as Zachius well states the question, our sickness is such as that we cannot come,
or our affairs of such importance that we may not defer them till an other
time. He that at every time else comes when ever opportunity is offered, it is
a sign he is enamoured with this Beauty of the Lord, and he that with this
Beauty is so enamoured in this world, shall an other day behold his fairer
Beauty, and visit his other Temple in the world to come. Of which Beauty, which
Temple to speak in S. Austens whatsoever a man shall say it is as it were but
a drop in comparison of the Sea, a spark in respect of a fire. For how, saith
the same should it possibly come into the tongue of man, that could never come
as yet into the hart of man. It being an invincible truth which the Apostle
Paule delivers, The things which eye hath not seen* neither ear hath hard,
neither came into mans hart, are, which God hath prepared for them that love
him.

God
