THE POLITIC WHORE: OR, THE CONCEITED CUCKOLD

ACTED AT NEUU-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Browne at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple-Bar, Dan. Major at the Hand and Sceptre over against S. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1680.

I Have given all the slip on purpose, to get home at unawares, to try what
Jack Fido does with my Wife; I know no reason why I should trust him more than
all the world, I do remember he told her I bought the Bucks Head, and therefore
deserved to have the Horns: though I bid him try her, I did not bid him, bid
her with one eye love, and with the other wink at a Friend: What pains we
Husbands take to be miserable, and as many words do aptly hold concordance to
make one sentence: Just so many causes seem to agree, when conceit makes us
Cuckolds, and here comes apparent proof;


By your white hand, I swear 'twas only so.


Poison of Toads between you.


Fido you have well satisfied me.


Insatiate Whore, could not I satisfy you? I shall commit a murder if I stay:
I'll go forge Thunder for you; what Plague can transcend a whorish Wife, and a
persidious Friend, Traitor to Truth and Friendship, I could rip out that
blushing Hypocrite, thy Heart.


What means this Fury?


Can you spell Stag, Sir? 'tis four letters with two Horns: get you from my
fury, for fear of greater mischief.


Thou yellow Fool.


I would you would instruct me, Sir, but how to understand all this.


Did ever mortal see so foul a guilt stand underneath a look so innocent.


My Lord.


You Whore.


Were it not for looking to the Lady, I'd call you to strict account.


Look to her, hang her: let me now send her to the Devil, with the scarlet Robe
of Sin she's lapped in, that men should ever marry, and when we lay our Heads in
women's laps, rise up with Horns.


With patience hear me, good Sir.


Yes, and go make Potgims.


'Tis late, and sleep will do good, Sir.


Why do you think I'm mad?


I hope not, Sir Isaac.


Then you lye, I am made Horn-mad; I shall be acted at both the Theaters: Oh he
that can believe a sleep's secure

In a false Friends Oaths or a bad Wives Arms,
Trusts Circes Witchcrafts, or Calipsos Charms.

Oh Sir Isaac, how far am I in love with affliction, because it calls thee
Father:

Oh Jealousy, Loves Eclipse, thou art in thy Disease,
A wild mad Patient, wondrous hard to please.

My negligence deserves just blame, and how my Policia will take it I cannot
tell.


As Snuff does you, by the Nose.


Sir Credelus your Servant; I hope your fair Lady's well.


See, see she and her zealous School-master: I'll put you all upon her anon.


Then I shall have my turn.


You are a wondrous happy man in one so virtuous.


Nay, you shall have no Sir Isaacs of me, I warrant ye.


Nor no Inocentia of your wife, I warrant ye.


Sweet Chick I come to take leave of thee, for I am going to see a Ship
launched, you may walk and see Sir Isaac Jealousie's Lady.


Alas she's too merry for my company.


Too merry; I have seen her sad, but very seldom merry.


I mean Sir, that she can walk to the Change, tell Tales, run in the Garden.


Why then your Ladyship may hold your tongue, say nothing, and walk in the
Orchard.


She can drink a glass of Wine not alayd with Water.


Then you may drink a cup of Water without Wine.


Nay if a Gentleman comes to her House she'll let him kiss her, though a
stranger.


Why a modest Woman may be kissed by accident, yet not give the least touch to
her Reputation.


Well said, touch her home.


Nay, but they may not; she that will kiss, they say, will do worse I warrant
you.


Why Madam I have seen you kissed, may be against your will.


You may be sure 'twas against my will, though I have been kissed indeed.


There's nothing in that can be against a Woman's will, and I dare be sworn, if
my Lady kissed but one man, 'tis because we can't do with all.


Nay that I know to be true, therefore she shall only kiss you Fido at this
time; nay, come kiss her, and we are gone.


Nay pray Sir Cornelious, 'tis against my customs.


I care not; let naturals love customs, my humour's my humour: look ye she
spits, kiss her close.


The nearer the bone, the sweeter the flesh, Lady.


How now sawce-box.


Why Madam, I had but my turn, are you angry at that?


Sirah, go and call a pair of Oars, Muchcraft, prithee stay thou at home with
thy Lady, make her merry, get your Instrument ready, this melancholy will
spoil her; make her laugh but heartily before I come home, and I'll give you a
Lease of forty Crowns per annum.


Can you tell whether she be ticklish or no Sir?


Oh infinitely ticklish.


I'll deserve your Lease before you come home again I warrant you.


And thou shalt have it I faith boy.


Sir, there is a boat ready for you.


Oh that's well, farewell my dear Policia.


Adieu Madam, and when so e're I marry, Fortune turn no worse Card to me than
you are.


And when so e're I marry, Venus send me a Card may save Fortune a labour, and
turn up her self.


What made him leave you behind.


To lye with your Ladyship.


How!


How: Why in the Bed, or on the Bed, or without the Bed.


Why how now Muchcraft.


Why, the plain truth on it is, I must lye with you.


Why, Muchcraft?


And I know too, that you will lye with me.


Nay, but Muchcraft.


A Pox of Muchcraft; I am neither Much Craft, nor Little Craft, but a Barkshire
Gentleman, that has heard of your Beauty; assumed this Name and Fortune, saught
this Service, and tell you truly what I guess you.


You will not Ravish me, Muchcraft?


No; but unravel you, in two lines Experience writ lately.

Extremes in Virtue, are but Clouds to Vice;
She'll do in the dark, who is in the day too nice.

Indeed you do not well to belie me thus.


Come, I'll lye with thee Wench, and make all well again: your Husband swears
no Woman can deceive him, and 'twere well done to cozen his confidence.


Truly, Muchcraft, some Women would do it.


Who can you choose more convenient to practice with than me, whom he dotes on?
Where shall a man find a Friend but at home? so break one Proverbs Pate, and
give the other a Plaster. Is't a Match, ha?


Well, for once it is; but and you do any more, indeed I'll tell my Husband.


But when shall this once be, now?


Now! no indeed, Muchcraft, it shall be soon, at Night my Knight comes home.


Then, how is't possible?


Possible; Women can make any of these things possible, Muchcraft: many
casualties may cross us, but soon at night my Cornelius I'm sure will be sleepy
after his hard drinking; and when well drenched in Wine, he sleeps in his
Clothes on the Bed so sound, Bells would not wake him were they rung in the
Chamber.


Then he'll never dream of our Intrigue.


Now Mocko that makes him merry in his Chamber, shall, when the Candle's out,
and he asleep, bring you into the Chamber.


But will he be secret?


Will he, good Soul! I am not to try him now.


'Uds-foot, this is brave,
My Knights kind Fool is my cunning Ladies Knave.
But pray, how then?


When Mocko has brought you to the Bed, give me but softly a touch, I'll rise,
and follow you into the next Chamber: But truly and you do not use me kindly, I
shall cry out, and spoil all.


Use you kindly; was ever Lady used cruelly in the dark? do you but prepare
Mocko and your Maid, let me alone with her Mistress; about Eleven I desire to
be expected.


And till the Clock strike Twelve I lye alone.


Now you dare kiss.


Once with a Friend, or so; yet you may take two, Muchcraft.


My Cast is Ames-Ace then.


Deuce-Ace had got the Game.


Well, if you'll set, I'll throw at all.


If you throw out, then down you fall.


Here, miserable Innocentia, let thy sorrows take breath; unto this House where
Gentlemen lodge I was directed, but I here discover strange actions carried on
in this House: Great Persons, but not good, here nightly Revel in Surfeits, and
in Riots; and yet the next day the place appears a Sanctuary, rather than Sins
foul Receptacle: these ways have to me still been strangers.


Yonder she walks mumbling to her self, my Lord Generous has cast an eye of
liking on her, and you win her but for him, your House bears the Bell away;
acost her quaintly.


I warrant thee Drudgeo, I can effect wonders of more weight than a
Maiden-head: Have I ruined so many Cities, Citadels, to let in
Court-Martialists, and shall this Country-Cottage hold out? I were more fit for
a Cart than Coach then 'lfaith. How now Philice, how do you this morning?


Well, I thank so good a Landlady.


But hark you Philice, is the Door close Drudgeo?


As an Usurers Conscience: Madge was coming in, till she saw the Door shut upon
her.


I'll set Madge about her business, and I come to her: Is here any work for
her, with a mischief to her? We shall have Eves-droppers, shall we?


Honour guard me, how I tremble.


Come hither Mistress Philice: Fie, how you let your hair hang about your Ears
too: How do you like my House, Phil.


Well, exceeding well.


Nay, I know a Woman may rise here in a Month, if she will her self: but
truth's truth, I know you see something, as they say, and so forth. Did you see
the Gallant was here last night till Twelve?


Which of them mean you? here was many.


Which; he in the white Feather, that skipp'd in the Gallery: Was it white,
Drudgeo?


As a Ladies hond, by this five fingers.


White; no, no, 'twas a Tawny; now I remember.


As a Gypsy; by this Hand it looked white by Candle-light though.


That fine Lord is called my Lord Generous, Phil. a great man, I'll assure you
Phil.


His Excellent Carriage spoke him of Noble Birth.


And this Lord loves you Phillis.


Now Heaven defend me!


What, from a Lord? marry come up with a Murrian; from whence came you troth,
ha?


Thus nice Madge was at first, if you remember.


I would have you know Huswife, I could have taken my Coach, and fetched him
one of the best Pieces in London, and her Husband should have looked after me,
that his Neighbours might have noted, and cried, Farewell Naunt, commend me to
my Uncle.


And yet from these perfumed fortunes, Heaven defend me.


Perfumed indeed.


Perfumed; I am a Pander, a Rogue, that hangs together like a Beggars Rags by
Geometry, if there was not three Ladies fwore yesterday that my Mistress
perfumed the Coach; so they were fain to unbrace the Side-parts to take in
fresh Air.


He tells you true, I keep no company, I warrant you.


But have you so many several Women to answer so many men that come?


I'll answer that by Demonstration: Have you not observed the variation of a
Cloud, sometimes 'twill be like a Lyon, sometimes like a Horse, sometimes a
Castle, and yet still a Cloud.


True.


Why so can we make one Wench one day look like a Country Weneh, another day
like a Citizens Wife, another day like a Lady, and yet still be a Crack.


What shall become of me? Oh the sad Curse
Of goodness, to leave one woe for a worse.

Come Phil. let's in, and be merry.


SOftly sweet Mocko; are we in the Chamber yet?


Within a yard of my Lady, and ye can be quiet.


Art sure Sir Cornelius is asleep?


I know not, I'll go and ask him.


No, no, no, do not awake him, we are undone then, man.


Ha, ha, ha, now I see Cuckold-making is as ticklish a profession as
Cunney-catching: my Lord was so paid with Healths, he's fast enough.


But still I pursue wonder, why my Lady should prescribe this strange, nay
wondrous desperate way to her desires.


Is that a question to ask now? would you would grope out the Bed, for I sleep
in my talk I am sure of that.


We are lost for ever: did he not cough?


'Tis nothing but the last Cup comes up in stewed broth; if ever you make true
Whoremaster burn me: sea-sick before you come in the salt-water; let me go in
your stead.


No I'll venture, stood a Gulf between belching up a Tempest. O valiant Lust!
how resolute thou go to Acts unjust. Mocko good night: desire drowns fear in
presuppos'd delight.


Turn of your left hand, 'twill lead you to the Devil, to my Lady, I should say
presently.


Let me see: Four steps on the left hand. I have the Bed, and on this side she
lies: Ud's foot there's a beard; but all's well yet; she lies on this side
sure: I have her; 'tis her Hand, I know the touch, it melts me into passion: I
have much ado to contain my wild desires: as the wind strains in caverns
locked, so through my big swoln vains my blood cuts capers.


Who's there?


'Tis I.


Muchcraft.


Fortunate Muchcraft, that was wrapped in his Mothers Smock.


Give me your hand.


There 'tis: I melt already.


Sir, Husband; Sir Cornelius, awake.


I am lost for ever, Madam.


Sir Cornelius, Husband.


If I pull too hard, I shall pull her out of the bed too.


Why Knight, will you not awake.


What's the matter, what's the matter?


How I dwindle.


Pray hear me Sir; I cannot sleep till you have resolved me one thing.


What is that Sweetheart?


Of all men which do you love best?


That's a strange question to ask at midnight; why Muchcraft.


And that same false Muchcraft in your absence most lewdly tempted me to wrong
your bed.


Was ever woodcock cateh'd thus.


Oh Rogue, Ple cut his throat sleeping.


Nay I have fitted him finely.


Now, now, now, now I am splted.


I seemed Sweetheart to consent to him.


A pox of shammings: I were best confess and beg pardon.


And to make him sure for your revenge, I appointed about this hour, the door
left open on purpose


Ah.


To meet me in the Garden.


All's well again.


Now Sweetheart, if you would but steal down, you might catch him, and snap the
Fool very finely.


Oh Heavens what a wench have I of thee! I'll take my Rapier, and the night
being dark, I'll speak like thee, as if thou had kept thy word: O Villain, I
shall have you; do you lie still, and I'll bring thee his Heart for thy Monkeys
breakfast.


And would you part unkindly and not kiss me?


I have no more manners than a Goose: Farewell

My chaste delicious Girl: what may his life
Be compared to, that meets with such a Wife!

Hist Mocko.


Hear Boy.


Go meet him in the Garden -- and hark.


Excellent: I'll play my Lady I warrant you. Well, I may hope for a Squires
Place, my Father was a Costermonger.


Well now I see, he who would know Hells Crafts in her may read it, in brief
put him to School

(Would cheat the Devil of's right,)
To a dainty smooth-fac'd Hypocrite.

Why here's a Wife Mocko!


Ay Sir, to discover upon the pinch to you.


Oh what Fortunes we loving Husbands meet with!


Ay Sir, Fortune's in the fashion of Hay Forks.


Mocko, thou shalt hardly see a harsh Fellow have such a Wife, such a fortunate
Wedding.


He'll go to hanging as soon.


No, no; we loving souls have all the luck: There's Sir Isaac Jealous, what ado
there is about his Wife; and now she's fled: and what has brought her to it, but
his dogged usage of her.


Nay she never lived a good day with him.


Therefore the whole Town rings of the winding of his Horns. Had he such a wife
as I: what a Villain did I entertain, to teach her Music; he had done her no
good since he came, that I see.


Hang him: he has made her a little perfect in Prick-Song, that's all; and it
may be she had skill in that before you married her.


She could sing at first sight by this hand, Mocko: but hark, I hear somebody.


'Tis he sure: he has a dreaming Whoremasters pace. Pray let me practise my
Ladies Part, and counterfeit for her.


Can thou imitate to the life?


Can I? Oh wicked Muchcraft.


Admirable thou shalt do it.


Pray be you ready with your Rapier to spit him then; and Ple watch him a good
turn, I warrant you.


Here they are: If Mocko now comes off with his Part neatly, the Comedy passes
bravely. Who's there -- Madam?


Muchcraft?


The same.


I think this place lies open to the Air, Muchcraft.


Delicate Mocko.


And truly there's a great Dew fallen to night, the Grass is very wet.


Sweet-tongu'd Rogue.


Come Muchcraft,

And let us sport our selves in yonder Rushes;
And being set, I'll sinother thee with bushes.

Oh Villain.


Here my Lady; it is enough my Master has now a Friend in these days that dares
be honest.


How's this?


Nay for thy Master, he's a mere Coxcomb, Muchcraft.


Out Rogue.


'Tis but your bad desires that tell you so: can I contain a Heart, or can that
Heart harbour a thought of injury against him, under whose Wing I safely
stretch my Pinions: has he not nobly entertained me? Stand I not next
neighbour, save your self, unto his Heart?


Ay, by this Hand dost thou.


And shall I requite him thus? No Lady, no.


Brave Muchcraft.


I am too wise to fall in love with Wo, much less with Woman: I but took
advantage of my Masters absence for your Trial, Madam, for fear some Fellow,
far hotter-rein'd then I, might have sought and sped; and I should be loath a
Master so loving,


Shalt have five Leases, by these Fingers.


Should have a Lady false.
Back Lady to your yet unblemished Bed;
Preserve your Honour, and your Lords Calves Head.

Well Muchcraft you had been better: if I do not tell your Master of this.


He has put him to it now.


Then I am lost for ever: You'll turn it all on me I know; but ere I'll live to
wrong so good a man, or stand the mark unto your malice, I will first fall on
my Sword, and perish.


Hold, hold man.


Ha; who are you?


One that has more humanity in him than to see a proper Fellow cast himself
away, I warrant thee: 'tis I, 'tis I man; I have heard all.


And 'twas I have played my Lady, to have snapped you.


Has she then been so good to tell you? Now I am worse afflicted than before,
that she should thus out-run me in this race of honesty.


Nay, she has hobb'd thee bravely: She has a thousand of these tricks, I faith
man; but howsoever, what I have found thee, I have found thee: Hark in thy ear:
Thou shalt have five Leases, and my own Nag, when thou hast a mind to ride.


Let me deserve it first.


Thou shalt have them, I know what I do, I warrant thee.


I joy in such a Lady.


Nay, there's a couple of you, for a Wife and a Friend: thou shalt be no more
my Servant; I had thought to have made thee my Steward, but thou art too honest
for the place that's the truth on it.


His superfluity is my necessity; pray let me have it Sir.


I will talk with thee to morrow: Mocko, thou shalt have something too, but
I'll to Bed: honest Muchcraft, the dearest must part, I see; I will so hug the
sweet Rascal that thinks every hour ten, till I come yonder: Good-night
Muchcraft; to Bed Mocko:

What delight in life,
Can equal such a Friend, and such a Wife.

Go; and a Cartload of Horns go with thee. But shall I not be thought on for my
nights Service?


Why look you: pray forget not you had something.


Well: and pray do you remember I had nothing.


Nothing; what's that?


Nothing before I had something I mean; so you are welcome from Utopia.


You are very nimble; Sir, good morrow.


Did ever Chronicle match this couple?


You make me wonder, that both should meet in one resolved goodness unknown to
one another.


There lies the Jest on it: Sirrah Mocko, come hither.

I do but think, had she met him in the Garden, how she would have rattled him.


Ay, and ruffled him too Sir; the Camomile would have been better for it many a
day after.


Such an honest-minded Servant, where shall one find?


Servant; my sworn brother, man: he's too honest for an Office, he will ne'er
thrive in it.


A Wife; why she's a Saint, one that bears a good sound Soul about her.


Yes, when she wears her new Shoes.


Where is she Mocko?


Walking a turn or two in the Garden with Muchcraft, shall, I go call, Sir?


No, no, no; 'tis pity to part them, they are so well matched: What are they
doing?


Why Sir, she was weeping to him; she heard this morning that her Confessor
Father Joseph was dead.


Why now shall not we have her eat a bit these five days.


She'll Munch the more in a Corner, that's her Fasts.


Nay, do but judge Fido: Whereas most Dames go but once a month, some twice a
quarter, and once a year to Confession, and that upon constraint too; she never
misses twice a week.


'Tis a sign she keeps all well at home; they are even with the World, that so
keep touch with Heaven.


See where she comes! Why how now Chick, weeping so fast, this is the fault of
most of our Ladies; Painting, weeping for their sins, I should say, spoils
their Faces.


Sweet Madam.


Look, look, loving Soul, he weeps for company.


And I shall laugh out-right by and by.


Oh that good man!


Why, Bird.


Be patient.


And would he go to Heaven without me?


It may be he knew not your mind, Madam.


He knew my mind well enough.


Why then, it may be, he knew you could not hold out for the Journey; pray do
not set us all a crying.


Prithee, sweet Birds-n'ye, be content.


Yes, yes, be content; when you two leave my company, no one comes near me, so
that were not for simple modest Muchcraft here.


As modest as a Gib-Cat at Mid-night.


That sometimes reads to me some virtuous Treatise; were it not for him, I
might go look content: but 'tis no matter, no body cares for me.


Good Fido, help to comfort her.


Now is the Devil a writing an Encomium upon cunning Cuckoldmakers.


You have been harsh to her of late, I fear Sir.


By this hand I turned not from her all last-night; what should a man do?


Come, this is but a sweet obedient Shower, to bedew the lamented Grave of her
old Father.


He thinks the Devil's dead too.


Prithee Muchcraft walk a turn in the Garden, to get her a Stomach to her
Dinner; we'll be with you presently.


Nay, when you please; but why should I go from you?


Loving Soul, prithee take her away.


Pray let me kiss you first: come, Muchcraft, no body cares for us.


Well, she's a precious Creature.


'Uds death, he kissed her at the door: Have I found you Lady? But mum.


Hark you Mocko, you must go and invite my Lady Meriday to Sup with us; tell
her my Lady is never well but in her company.


What if you invited Sir Isaac Jealous, he's so melancholy since his Wife and
he are parted.


Do as you are bid, let him alone: I'll have no Cuckold sup in my House to
Night.


'Tis a very hot Evening, your Worship will sup in the Garden.


Why, yes marry, I will Sir; what of that?


Why, your Worship was ever as good as your word, keep the Cuckolds out of
doors, and lay a Cloth for my Lord in the Arbour.


I have been about a Project these three months, Fido.


What is't, Sir?


To compose a Book of my Wives Virtues; a Pattern for all that marry.


That will do well, Sir: I have another too for you; but that we'll discourse
as we go.

Conceit and Confidence are Jugglers born;
One grafts in Air, the other hides the real Horn.

AM I fitted Fido, am I fitted?


To the life, Sir; and able to cheat suspicion: and so like Father Anthony the
Confessor, that I protest there's not more semblance in a pair of Eggs; an
Apple cut in half, is not so like.


Well, you have counselled me to this, and I in this habit shall know the Core
of her Heart.


By this time she may be coming; I'll step aside: You'll tell what's done.


What, reveal confession? But go your ways; as much as may lawfully be revealed
we will laugh at next meeting.


Well, much good may you find:

I have raised the storm, let who can lay the wind.

Yonder she comes, I can hardly forbear blushing; but I must have a care of
discovery.


Hail Father.


Welcome my chaste Daughter.


Death having taken my Father Joseph, to you I fall for absolution.


Empty then my Daughter that Vessel of thy Flesh of all the Dregs.


Since last I confessed my first Sin was, That my Taylor, not making my Now Gown
to my mind, in an unchristian Passon I bid the Devil take him.


That was something harsh, yet the more pardonable, because, may be, your
Taylor lies in Hell night by night: Pray to your second.


Next, in a most savage rage, my Chambermaid putting too much Blew in her
Starch, I most unmercifully broke her Head.


That was rashly done indeed Daughter: but are you sure the Maids Head was not
broke before?


No, no: she came to me with ne'er a crack about her.


These are trivial and light: Have you greater?


Yes Sir, one.


One: what should that be, I wonder!


One yet remains behind of weight and consequence.


She has trod some Chicken to death, I warrant you.


Hear me, and let a blush make you look red;
Unseemly I've abused my Husbands Bed.

You did ill to drink so hard that Night.


Alas, you are mistaken; I have lai'n with another Man besides my Husband.


How!


Nay the same way I use to lye with him, but not altogether so often.


Death and the Devil: You're somewhat broad, but I have a Penance for your
Whoreship. Are you not with Child, Daughter?


Yes, yes: sure 'twas that Nights work.


How know you that?


Alas, by experience, Sir: The kind Fool my Husband wishes all well; but like
a light piece of Gold, he's taken for more than he weighs.


With Child that charges too: there should follow a zealous Exhortation, but
great Affairs brooks no stay: You are ingeniously sorrow.


Yes indeed, Sir.


And resolve to fall no more so?


No in truth, Sir.


Then I pronounce you here absolved. Now for your Penance.


Anything.


As the Fact seems strange, so blame me not if your Penance be as strange,
though 'tis easy performed: 'Tis neither East, Prayer, nor Pilgrimage.


Let it be what 'twill, I vow the performance.


Soon at Night, when you are with your Husband at Supper, or any other way in
Public, you shall say aloud to him, You are not this Child's Father, but such a
Man is; naming the right Father as you think was Partner in your Sin.


Good Sir.


This is it I expect to have done you know the danger of breaking it; 'tis
nothing.


Nothing: Is this your Penance so wondrous easy in performance?


'Tis irrevokable.


I am silent: Your new Penance may meet a new Performance: Farewell, Sir.

You are the cruellest e're confessed me before:

And this is a trick to catch a canting Whore.


Come Phillis, be not so melancholy, the Sparks are in view.


Good morrow sweet Madam: Oh look how like the Sun behind a Cloud she beams to
give intelligence how 'tis there.


You are reciprocally welcome, Sir.


What, have you brought this young wild Haggard to the Lure.


Faith Sir, she's a little irregular yet, but time may bring the wonder about.


Bless you, sweet Mistress.


'Uds foot, here's another Fleshmonger; I smell a Storm.


Sir, you are methodically welcome; you must pardon my variety of phrase, the
Courtiers even clog us with good words.


What's he?


Why Sir, 'tis a German Prince, but a speaks English.


Did not I charge you to keep her for me? how dare you set her out to fail?


Indeed Sir.


Indeed Sir; Pox of your indeeds Sir.


Oh my Sciatica!


You Sir, she says, you're a German Prince: I can't help it.


Nay, good my Lord.


Good Sir, 'tis one of the Dukes Chamber.


Let him be of the Devils Chamber.


Sirrah, leave the House, or I'll thunder you out.


Sir, 'tis madness to stand him.


Kicked; pray that we meet no more again Sir; still keep Heaven about you.


What e're thou art, a good man still go with thee.


Will you bestow a Cast of your Profession?


We are vanished, Sir.


Oh! what shall become of me? in his eye murder and lust contends.


Nay, fly not sweet, I am not angry with you; do you know me?


Yes Sir, report has given you to be the Lord Generous, but I fear Fame's a
liar.


Why so, Madam?


Were you that Lord, you will not sure be a slave to your Bloods passion, to
haunt such houses as these: I crave your pardon for my language, Truth has a
Forehead free, and in the Tower of her Integrity fits an unvanquished Virgin.


If you rail upon the place; prithee, how came you hither?


By treacherous intelligence, honest men so Ignorant of the way, through
Thieves perils go. This is a Cave of Scorpions and Dragons: Oh turn back!

Toads here engender, 'tis the Steam of Death,
The very Air poisons a good mans breath.

Within there.


Sir, did you call? I hope you found her pliant: Your Coach waits you, Sir.


You are a rotten Hospital hung with greasy Satin.


Ah! ah me!


Came this nice piece from France, with a Pox to her?


If she has not warmed his Stomach, I'll be stead for it.


I have more to say, will you meet me at Sir Cornelius Credulous house? my
intents are virtuous, there I'll discover.

Let me borrow goodness from thy lip, farewell:
Here's a new wonder, I have met Heaven in Hell.

I know that voice, I dare not think of ill, and I will meet at Sir Cornelius's
house: No, Sir Isaac,

Had Law to this new Love made no denial,
A Chaste Wives truth shines through the greatest trial.

Let it be carried with a silent Reputation, for the credit of the Conclusion:
I do not desire to be laughed at, till my designs are ripe, and she has
performed her Penance.


Is this your Chaste Religious Wife? you see now 'tis possible for a cunning
Wife to make an Ass of her Husband.


An Ass; I will prove a contented Cuckold the wisest man in his company.


How? Prove you that, Sir.


Because he knows himself. Mocko, Are all things ready to entertain our Guess?


Yes Sir, and by the way I met the Knight Sir Jealousy, and he and a strange
Lady do intend to invite themselves to Supper to you.


A shall be welcome, he will be fit company.


No, I fear he wrongs his Wife with idle suspicion; I dare, and will avow it
with my life, Muchcraft keeps before Sir.

Why don't you, Mocko, keep all well behind?


I, and then there will be devout Lechery, between Hawk and Buzzard: Mocko,
draw out the Table with the Banquet.


Now fie upon this variety, 'tis profane; Chastity defend me srom such a
Meeting.


Why Madam, what's the matter?


There was a Lady invited to such a Treat, and going home in the dark, though
as Chaste as Night, yet the poor Fellow, her Husband, lost her in a throng, and
the good Soul came home so crushed in the morning.


Sir Isaac, welcome.


Fido, I am thoroughly sensible of my Ladies Loyalty, and thy true Honourable
Friendship; I beg your pardon for what has past in my folly and rage, and now
could wish my Lady was here, that I might reconcile my self to her, and obtain
her forgiveness for my wronging the Innocent.


Have a care what you say, Sir Isaac: Pray sit; come, all sit.


I'll give you a fair occasion to produce the performance of her Penance.


Go forward, I'll catch occasion by the Forelock.


Here's a Health to you, it shall go round.


'Tis a general Health, and leads the rest into the Field.


Your Worship breaks Jests, as Serving-men do Glasses, by chance.


As I was drinking, I was thinking, trust me, how fortunate our kind Host was
to meet with so Chaste a Wife: Good Sir Cornelius, admit Heaven had her.


Oh, good Sir, do not wound me! Admit Heaven had her! Alas Sir, what should
Heaven do with her?


Your love makes you passionate; but admit so, what Wife would you choose?


Were I to choose then, as I would I were; so this were in Barbados, I would
wish Sir, a Wife so like my Lady, that once a Week she should go to Confession,
and to perform the Penance she should run; nay, do nought but dream on it till
it was done.


There's a delicate Momento, to put her in mind of her Penance.


Now you talk of Dreams, Sweet-heart, I'll tell you a very unhappy one; I was
a-dream 't last night of Muchcraft.


Of Muchcraft.


Nay, I have done with him.


Now you shall see the Devil out-done.


Pray on with your Dream, 'twill be good diversion.


Bless me, I am even ashamed Chick; but 'tis no matter, a Dream's a Dream, and
thus it was; methought, Husband, Muchcraft lay with me.


The best friend at home still, Muchcraft; Could the Devil, Sir, perform a
Penance neater, and save his Credit better? On Wife, a Dream's a Dream I know.


Methought I proved with Child, Sweetheart.


Ay, Bird.


A pox of these Dreams.


Methought I was brought to bed; and one day sitting in the Gallery, who should
come there to play at Foils, but thee and Muchcraft.


Muchcraft and I; do you mark that?


Ay; and wonder at her neat conveyance on it.


Playing, methought he hit you a blow on the Forehead; it swelled so, thou
could not see: at which the child cried.


Excellent Woman at a shift: but I'll have a trick for her.


And my thought at last you came thinking to quiet it, and it cried the more;
whereat pointing to you, away naughty Man, you are not this Child's Father.


Meaning the Child Muchcraft got?


The same: And then I waked and kissed you.


A pretty Dream, and a merry one.


Sir, I am told there's one Father Anthony, a holy man, stays without to speak
with you.


With me, or my Lady.


Nay, with you, and a business of importance.


I'll go send him in, and he shall interpret my Ladies dream.


Husband, Sir Cornelius, stay a little.


I smell Wormwood and Vinegar.


She changes colour, I must out again.


He will not sure reveal Confession.


We many times make modest mirth a necessity to produce a Ladies dream.


Would I were in France; how they shoot at us?


I am a bold intruder to this house, and am come in Quest of one my Lord
Generous.


He will be here instantly: 'tis she, I can hardly forbear discovery; but I
will bridle till Sir Cornelius returns.


Here's brave juggling; this Friar has confessed, that you Lady in your last
Confession owned, that Muchcraft had lain with you; at which your Husband runs
mad about the Garden.


Art mad? deny it, I am undone else.


Father Tony, what a Devil do you mean to do?


I confess it, I deny it; I do any thing, I do every thing, I do nothing.


The Friars frantic, and so has wronged the Lady.


'Tis my misfortune still to suffer Sir.


Did you not see one slip out of a Cloak-bag, in the fashion of a Gammon of
Bacon, and run under the Table among the Hogs?


He's mad, he's mad.


I, I, a Tyth-Pig was overlaid last night, and he spoke nonsense all the day
after.


Shall I suffer this in my own house?


I'd scratch out his eyes first.


Faith Madam, the best way is to disrobe this irregular Friar, and lay him open
to all the world: Tear off his holy Weeds.


Now my frantic Brother, had you not better spared your breath?


And do you keep counsel no better? we'll ease you of your Orders.


Nay, let me have a hand in it; I'll tear with more zeal than a Puritan would a
Surplice.


See what it is to accuse when you're mad; I confess again to you, this man did
lye with me.


And I brought him to her Chamber.


A ha house! this Sir Cornelius!


How Dreams do fall out true, Wife?


Oh, good Sir, I crave you pardon.


What say you, Muchcraft?


You have run best Sir, vain 'tis to defend,
Craft sets forth swift, but still fails in the end.

You brought him to her Chamber, Sir.


Oh Sir, I was merely inveagl'd.


Lust is still like a midnight Meal, after our violent drinkings:

'Tis swallowed greedily, but the Course being kept,
We are sicker when we wake, than e're we slept.

You shall to Flanders to a Monastery, and spend your days reclusive.


Your Doom is just; no Sentence can be given
Too hard for her, plays fast and loose with Heaven.

I will buss thee, and bid fair weather after thec. But for you, Sirrah.


Sir, I brought but flest to flesh, and you do as much when you bring your Meat
to your Mouth.


You Sirrah, at a Carts Tail shall be whipe thorough the City: I am a Justice of
Peace, and will see it done.


There's my dream out already; but since there's no remedy but the Whipping
cheer must close up my stomach: I will request a Note from your Hand to the
Carman, to entreat him to drive apace, I shall never endure it else.


'Twas a sine Penance; but Oh the Art of Woman in the performance!


'Tis nothing, had she bin in her great Grannums place:

Had not the Devil first began the Sin,
And cheated her, she would have cheated him.

Now if my Innocentia was but here to clear my grief, then all our Joys were
complete.


Then here she stands spotless and innocent Heaven can testify, and all good
men cannot deny.


I'll add my Life and Sword to justify she's a matchless piece of virtue, and
so receive her.


I am easily persuaded to it, for I have made a trial on it my self, and found
her all Excellence: Oh pardon me.


I do; and pray Heaven may: And now,
Receive me just, both in my Life and Vow.

Vice for a time may shine and Virtue sigh;
But truth like Heavens seen, plainly doest reveal,
And scourge or crown, what darkness did conceal.

JUst so a Crack, first vent'ring on the Sin,
Does with reluctance and fear begin.
As we Gallants (when such as you are here)
Produce our homely Cate's plain country Cheer.
But yet we scorn to do like some that write
Make use of Art, to raise your Appetite:
And make you think they have prepared a Feast,
When 'tis but Husks and Element at best.
No; we acknowledge we have nothing here
Worthy your least acceptance can appear.
Yet such as our poor Fate hath kept in store,
We freely give, and wish we could give more.
And as the Persian Monarch when distressed,
Swore filthy Puddle-Water was the best
Pleasantest Drink he ever tasted: So,
Since ripe Town-Wit does not in the Country grow:
We humbly hope for once these Green Fruits may,
If not suffice, your Appetite allay;
And be accepted of.
But if our Fate you otherwise decree,
We must submit without reluctance.
And in our Ruin we shall still rejoice,
That such as You, 'twas, gave the Casting Voice.
WEll, Gentlemen, you've heard my Dreadful Doom,
In a dull Nunnery I must now consume
My Blooming Youth; and watch, and fast, and pray,
To take the Guilt of my past sins away.
But faith, Gallants, I'll even appeal to you,
'Tis damnably unjust, and cruel too:
Because I once obliged a Friend, or so;
Must I to Eternal Penance therefore go?
Must I, because I have to some been kind,
For ever be secluded from Mankind,
And those sweet dear delights we reap in Love,
And pine my self away? -- Not I by Jove.
Thanks to my Stars, our Sex as yet is free,
Kind England grants us Christian Liberty;
And some of you, no doubt, would be so good,
To pity and relieve poor Flesh and Blood:
Nay, 'tis but a just Tribute due to Beauty,
For you did first debauch us from our duty;
You subtly teach us first to go astray,
And, would ye, would ye, cast us then away?
No Faith, I'm sure ye dare not *
For if you once begin to sham us so,
'I'would make us Wives, even down-right honest grow;
And then, alas, what would become of you?
You'd find but little amorous work to do:
Then faith reverse my Sentence; if you don't,
When e're you'd do the Feat, be sure we wont.

