THE Merry Milkmaid OF ISLINGTON; OR, THE Rambling Gallants DEFEATED.

ACTED AT NEW-MARKET.

LONDON:

Printed for Dan. Browne at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple-Bar, Dan.
Major at the Hand and Sceptre over against S. Dunstan's Church in Fleetstreet,
and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's Church in
Fleetstreet. 1680.

The Scene ISLINGTON, or thereabouts.

YOu that call your sins your duty, obey your Ladies Riots, preserve her
spittle to cure your salt Itch, and thread in Bracelets the Pearls that drop
from her Authentic Nose.


Cuds heart Sir, what do you mean?


To cleave you from the Scull to the Twist, make nine Skittles of thy bones,
and wind thy Heart-strings about my Thumb.


Sir, have a care what you do; so rotten are my limbs, that if you blow on me
too hard, I am straight scattered into sand.


Coward, creep into my Hour-glass then, and there eternally distinguish fatal
time.


What Slave disturbs my quiet?


Ne'er look Sir, I serve my Lady, and scorn to yield.


Dost bristle Pork pine?


Take heed Sir, I have the Malady of France.


Withdraw your violence; if you disorder but a hair that belongs to my meanest
Groom, I will proclaim my superiority and rule in the streets.


Hell cannot miss thee long.


Insult in thy own Pigs sty, this Apartment calls me Sovereign: Tony, send in
one that waits there.


What will she do at last?


A slow device Sir, but of my own brain.


What art thou?


A kind Guest invited here.


To what?


To taste your Wives Gammons.


Bold Sir, be in your speech more plain.


I come to get Children for you.


Do you want plainer Paraphrase; he is my servant Sir, my Stallion if I please,
a Courtly complement, and much in use among Ladies of my growth and blood.


O my cold blood, this Woman will distract me.


You see I'm furnished, now your Concubine may share you and the house in
peace.


I step my ears to thy bold clamours: But for you Sir, the minutes you must
waste on Earth are few.


This I consider Sir, and therefore make such hast to mingle with your Wife,
that the kind World may have some Issue from my Loins.


If this prove true, may Cats piss out my eyes.


Hold weak Jeff. or else I'll wound thy heart.


If you advance one inch beyond that Chink, Ple through the streets blow your
Dirge, with the great Horn that grows upon your Brow.


A whole shower of Gall is fallen at once.


'Uds life Sir, I come to ease the labour of your body, and you want courtesy
to return thanks.


Hang him ungrateful.


But what hereafter I perform, shall be for your Ladies sake, not yours.


For all this, I know you will not wrong my Bed.


Who told you so?


I read it in your Noble Feature, and your shape.


The better shaped I am Sir, the more cause you'll have to love the Issue I shall
get upon your Wife.


I know thou scorns to do it.


Not I, believ't Sir, I must do it; is your Lady fruitful, I would be loath to
loose my labour on her.


Death and the Devil.


I'll have a Trumpet and a Drum, and sound to the world thy living shame.


O fie Sir! what own your disgrace aloud, as if you were proud on it.


Nay it becomes you finely.


You think because you're eurst we'll allow you short Horns; no, I'll grast upon
your head a pair so tall, they shall go near to prick the very Planet that
ruled at your Nativity.


He sleeps.


Take down a Cushion and pray Sir, you cannot choose but know the frailty of the
times, the surfeits of the Womb, and how great Ladies use to relieve their
appetites; your own confession of my parts commends your Wife in her choice;
there be them that fin with feeble Ushers, and withered Dwarss.


He wants judgment to consider this.


I merit better looks Sir, that must thrash all night for you, and without
wages too Sir.


Dead as a Monument let us leave him.


Hadhe chose the Devil for h^s Physiclan, he could ne'er come by the like
Cordial,


I follow you.


The day begins to break; and trembling light, as if affrighted with the nights
disaster, steals through the farthest air, and by degrees salutes my weary
longings: new fears assault me; 'tis a Woman's voice, and cheerfully expresses
her freedom: Be propitious thou Regent of my Fate, and guide her hither to my
comfort.


What a pleasant life the Milkmaids lead,
She trips and dances over the Mead;
She dabbles in Dew, and sings to her Cow,
And cries fond love, I defy thee now;
She sleeps in the night, though she toils in the day,
And merrily passes her time away.

Ha! what silken Butterflies yonder; she looks not like one that had kept her
self warm at the Brick-kills; yet silk Petticoats many times are glad of worse
lodging.


Goodmorrow Maid.


Should I salute you so, 't would bring my wit in question: pray what are you?


A distressed Maid.


A Maid at your years, and so near London! where the sale of a Maidenhead at
fifteen is as rare as a light Wenches Conversion.


Good Maid, Wise, or Widow, for sure you are a woman, do me a courteous
office, and guide me to some house.


It seems you are a kind Country Gentlewoman, that has bestowed your Maidenhead
on your Fathers man, and are come up to have a Citizen salder your broken ware;
the policy is grown stale, 't would hardly take, ever since the Ballet cursed
the Carrier that brought her to Town.


Do you from the abundance of your own ills suspect mine?


The Toy is angry, it would fain counterfeit something to make me her Agent but
you are deceived my pretty morsel of wantonness, my self and my Pale are both
honest; I am not the Blades Intelligencer, whether Doll and M^ll remove their
lodgings to escape the Constable, and Bridewell: I will to my Cows, and leave
you to the fate of the morning; despair not of a Customer, but be sure I catch
you not napping, for if I do, expect no mercy, for I hate Hedge-coupling worse
than sasting at Christmas.


If you are good, stay and comfort me, the sense of my distress stops further
speech.


Ha! she sounds poor Gentlewoman; should she miscarry, I were in danger of
being thought her Murdercss; alas she's dead: why Tony, Tony, help me, a
Gentlewoman is fallen dead.


Why, what is she dead?


Nay, that's as hard to tell as the success of my danger.


Is she quite dead?


I, I, quite dead.


And are not you in a pickle Margery? she is not dead, she moves.


Pull her by the Nose.


I, I, pull it off; no matter for spoiling her face, if she be dead.


Wring her by the little finger.


Her little finger is ring'd, and l'de wring it off if I could.


No robbing of the dead Tony.


Why, what a Devil should the Dead do with living movables?


Cast water in her face.


Blow wind in her Arse; can water make one alive that's dead, unless it be hot
water?


She surs, give her more air.


E're you return me to my angry Uncle, my soul shall fly, and meet with my
dearest embraces.


Why, what a Devil do you mean, Mistress Gentlewoman.


You are murderers of all my content, you serve the world for base reward, and
that shall render you base to opinion.


Prithee Margery let me conjure down this Devil in her tongue, 't will raise a
Tempest else, murdere^s and base? pray Gentlewoman, who do you speak all this
to?


To you, the injurers of my love.


Hey day! she's mad; love with a vengeance; come, come, I must take her aside,
and give her satisfaction.


I pity your feeling sorrows, would I could comfort you.


Since my distress has made me an object of your pity, pray lead me to some
house, for I am wondrous saint.


That I will, what e're comes on it,


But pray Margery forget not my Breaksast; rising early, and rambling about,
has got me a good stomach; yet I could be content to fast with such laced
Mutton, and a good Callice, more than half a morning.


The blind that Lovechange and I cast upon our actions, must be withdrawn with
discretion, lest my Reputation fall in the Encounter.


Here's my Lady; now for a trick to put upon her to revenge my Masters wrongs:
Madam, as I was in the Market to fetch sweet Bryar, I met a Maid; she told me
she was in danger of losing a piece of ground which was her own by Inheritance,
and left her by her Mother, now there's a Knight would fain enclose it, and lay
it to part of his Manor.


Where lies this Land?


Not far off; she would be content to let him enjoy it after her decease, if
that would serve his turn.


Has she given you any writing to make me better understand the matter?


This is the Survey, not only of the Manor it self, but the Meadow, Pasture,
P^ow land, Coney-borrow, Fish-pond, Hedge, Ditch and Bush that ^ds in it,


My Husbands hand to it, and a Love-letter; where had it you?


From the aforesaid party, that would fain keep the foresaid Land from the
foresaid Knights fingers.


Sir Jeffery turned Ranger?


Madam, you are a good Hunteress; though she love now and then to have a
private Borrow ferrited for her own pleasure, yet she won't allow him to run
down a Deer: Sir Jeffery would fain be a Ranger, hut she requests you to let
him run a Course in your own Park; if you'll not do it for love, then do it for
money; she has no Silver, but there's Gold; or else she prays you to Ring him
by this Token, and so you shall be sure his Nose will not be routing in other
folks Pastures.


This Purse and Ring was mine, I know them; to requite your pains, take thou
the Gold.


No not I, so I may be called in question if I came honestly by it.


These lines are even, the Arrows love let fly,
The very Ink dropped out of Venus Eye:
To me he ne'er thus writ;
But Lust can set a double edge on Wit.

Nay, that's true Madam, a Wench can whet anything, if it be not too dull.


What is the Creature?


One of those Creatures that are contrary to Man, a Woman.


What manner of Woman?


A tiny Woman, lower than your Ladyship by the head and shoulders, but as mad a
Wench as ever entire a Petticoat.


Why should she send back these, and by you?


Ware, ware, there's knavery in the wind.


Did not he send them by you?


Never, never, I hope you won't put that upon me.


Are you so close you Baud, you Pandering Slave?


Why how now Wife, what's your quarrel?


Out of my sight base Varlet, get thee gone.


Away you Rogue; what grown a fighter; prithee what's the matter, how you
change, surely you are not well.


All is not well indeed.


Why dost kneel?


Earth is sins Cushion, Sir Jeffery, Husband I dare not call thee; I have stolen
that Jewel of my chaste Honour, which was only thine, and given it to a slave.


Ha!


On thy Pillow Adultery and Lust have slept, thy Groom has climbed the unlawful
Tree, and plucked the sweets, a Villain has, usurped the Husbands Sheets.


Did I out of a sound faith in you forget the Go^tish Monster you entertained,
thinking not to fret my soul by your seeming ludeness, and now to act the fault
indeed; 'uds death, who wast made me a Cuckold, who wast?


Your man Tony.


Worse than damnation, bold Strumpet, hang not on me, think I'll be a Baud
to a Whore, and my Wife too?


All I beg is, use me how you will, but darken the Clouds of my shame.


How, conceal my Horns, they cannot be hid, nor shall my revenge; could not I
feed your appetite?

O women, you were created Angels pure and fair,
But since the Fall you tempting Devils are:
You should be mans bliss, but you prove our Rods,
Was there no women, men might live like Gods:
Get from my sight henceforth, and from my Bed,
I'll with no Strumpets breath be poisoned.
But how drew you him in, or could he bewitch you, how was the manner?


Why thus: First he assaulted me with this Battery of beaten Gold, yet I held
out; but at last, when this was shot, it charmed me: what, do you change? who
sent this Diamond to your Wench? could not I feed your appetite?

O men, you were created Angels pure and fair,
But since the Fall you worse than Devils are:
You should our Shields be, but you prove our Rods,
Were there no men women might live like Gods.
Guilty Sir Jeffery?


Yes guilty, my Lady.


Nay, you may laugh but henceforth shun my Bed,
With no Whores leavings I'll be poisoned.

O'rereach'd so finely; 'tis the very Diamond and Letter which I sent; this
Villain has discovered all: well, this is the second trick she has put upon me;
she varies more in mind than e're the wind had points, still I the fool must
be; but if I break her, who is she or me.


I Hope you are satisfied; but to what end this change is, I would fain be
instructed.


I'll tell you, when I left my Uncles house, in a few minutes I was pursued;
now this disguise shall help me escape the search.


Now out upon it, had I no better opinion of your honesty than of your wit, both
which smell altogether of the Country, I'd leave you to seek your own
Adventures: you have gentilifi'd me with your Clothes, and you are handsome
enough in mine; for though I am but a Milk-wench, I ever loved neatness: now
you shall be my Maid, and wait on me to the City, if I find not out your Sweet
heart, let me ne'er be accounted a Prophetess; and I'm sure I have foretold
weather from the turning up of my Cows Tail.


Dispose of me as you will now, love has armed me with resolution.


In this disguise I'll meet the Blade that Courts me every morning when I go a
Milking to Islington, my condition is too low to win upon his desires to marry
me, and the other thing without it he shall never have, for I conceive it will
not be for my honour.


Why Margery, Margery, I say, my Breakfast; a quick supply of meat, drink, and
sleep, or I ragepresently.


Bless me, what's that!


Why 'tis Tony, my Masters Rogue, and my Ladies Knave.


He'll spoil all again.


Where's this clean-wash'd Chitterline, come give me my Breakfast: Hay day!
Margery gentlefi'd, and this Mistress that was ready to die for love
Margerifi'd! Now I swear hy Hunger, and that's a strong Oath, I think women
have more Vagaries, than the Devil would have Clients, if he were a Lawyer, and
pleaded without Fees.


Keep counsel Sirrah, you had best; and if my Lady ask for me, say I wont be
lost long: so farewell Tony.


You will not be lost long, he's likely to have a sweet match of it that finds
you, yet I could be content my seven yearsservice were no worse rewarded, but
the Baggage is as coy as an Aldermans eldest Daughter; she has beaten me a
hundred time (Coward that I was for suffering it) for attempting to kiss her:
if my hand had slipped going over a Stile or so, 'twould not have vexed me to have
kissed her hand so, though thrown in my face; but now I will revenge it upon her
Cream Bowls, over whose sweets I will triumph.

New mischief, I am again delayed, if I forbear my Breakfast but two minutes
longer, my Guts will shrink to Minikin, which I'll bequeath to the poor Fiddlers
at Islington for a May^day Legacy.


Mr. Wenchlove, such a kind of woman my Maid met withal, but as how I am
ignorant: Sirrah, call Margery forth.


Which, your Margery Gentlewoman, or your Gentlewoman Margery?


Your trifling's unseasonable, Sirrah.


Why Madam, Margery is no more plain Margery, but Margery in silks, the
Gentlewoman and she are run out of themselves one into another.


But where are they?


For ought I know run away one with another.


Do you run after, and call'um back.


'Tis impossible, who knows which way they are gone? besides 'tis a mist would
choke a Brewers Horse, I can't see one hand from the other.


Madam, my sufpition prompts me you are treacherous, and these fair seeming
undertakings traps to catch me.


Nay then what Mr. Lovechange has told me is true: Sirrah, do you try to
overtake them, and we'll follow.


Oh killing Command! the best is it break my Heart, no matter then for my
Belly; Hunger I defy thee, Revenge I hug thee, I will lead a Wild-goose Chase
till I come to Islington, where I will score two dozen, and reckon with my
Hostesses Maid, whose Belly I have filled with Mary-bones and Pudding.


Now Madam, why do you look so wistly on me?


I, I, 'tis so, now the love of mans society defend me from this abuser of
Creation; come not near me thou man of Cloats, thou Mauking of Virility, thou
half woman, and all beast, or with these Nails I will tear out thy eyes, and
all the double things about thee.


Be milder Madam, there's nothing in me appears to my self so full of guilt,
that it should deserve a reproach from you a stranger.


There's nothing in you indeed Sir, your friend has given me your Character;
you pretend to hate women, because women have reason to hate you.


I hate women by my love of pleasure, no delight has any relish on the wanton
palate of my desires, unless seasoned with what's derived from them.


Yes Sir, you may take delight in them, but they little in you; come not near
me, there's infection in it; my blood desires no freezing, the Summer of my
Youth is not yet half spent, or if it were Winter with me, high feeding and
ease requires something.


She takes me for an Eunuch sure, Lovechange has overdone his part; she has
foiled him, and now he hopes my downfall: sweet Madam hear me, I love you, and
my desires are thoroughly fired, and burn my blood, which nothing can squench
but your free enjoying.


Say you so, why I am a Woman Sir.


I think you are, and one made up for pleasure more than the dull converse of
what's defective.


You say true Sir, I hear it with a heavy heart, but I hope Sir you would not
have me make my Husband a Cuckold; I'll lead him by the Nose till I put a trick
upon him.


Fie, that's a gross construction, only shame and common knowledge does it, not
the act of a Wives wantonness.


I need no instructions for secrecy, trust me a handsome Gentlewoman, dare you
kiss me Sir?


Now it may come about a Pledge for what shall follow,


Pray Sir, is this a fit place to make ones Husband a Cuckold in?


Oh the fittest place in the world, let not any weak excuse rob my hopes of
enjoying you.


Sir, I defy weakness, should some of my servants come.


Ha Wenchlove! all the Race of mankind is false, I'e watch this eager pursuit
he has put upon my Lady, and find a way for revenge; I do love, but 'tis
honourably: and that's a Crime now a days.


Come, come, we loose the time that might make the pleasure fruitful.


Indeed I durst even venture to make him a Cuckold, if I were sure you would
get a Boy.


Oh! that's doubly sweet.


And shall he be like the Father?


As ever Citizens Son was.


I mean my Husband.


I am a Courtier.


Kind Sir, you deserve it for your policy; but I am so afraid.


Mischief on these delays.


Artezhim, where are you?


O me! what shall I do? my Honour, my Honour!


Vexation racks me, prevented at the very point of happiness.


Pray hide your self, Sir Jeffery will bolt out this way I fear.


Pox on it where, where?


Happy fortune; here's an empty Tub, get in as nimbly Sir, as if you were a
leaping your Neighbours Pale to have a run at his Deer.


O Artezhim l I have got a sound Bottle in my head, it o're-charges me.


You make no scruple of pressing upon Women's Retirements.


Would he was drunk as the Devil with Wine mixed with Opium, that he might sleep
for a fortnight.


Hum, what's that Wife? O my stomack's sick as a Cat after eating Candles ends.


Would there was nine Kitlings in it.


Step into the Yard, let not the servants see your debaucheries.


O I am taken quick! why not in this Tub?


Fie Beast, defile a necessary implement of Housewifery; you have been drinking of
Healths to Cuckolds, your old frolic.


He might have been one himself had not the Devil brought him home an hour too
soon.


O Madam! where's Sir Jeffery? Fie, fie, what flinch us, and run home.


O my head, Mr. Lovechange, my head; what shall I do Wife?


You have received a blow of the forehead, it looks as if 'twere swelled.


No Sir, you nor no man else has given him a bloW there yet, I can't tell when
it may be done, there's no more than what has been ever since I was his Wife,
three years and more, a long time of barrenness.


O Lord, Madam! why stay you here? we are a coming to wash.


Oh! Oh! I am sick, I am sick.


Hold, hold, 'eds will you drowned me.


How now Tom, what makes you here?


Oh mischief on you Sir, you have spoiled a good Vomit; I'll lay my life he hid
himself from my Wife; you told me he was a woman hater: alas poor Gentleman, to
see how things will happen.


Hell take your Wife, and you too; accursed woman that in your curse made man
so; Pox of your delays, and fearful denials.


What, scold so quickly after you Cucking?


Good heart, but that he can't endure a woman, he should kiss my Wife for
amends.


I came hither Sir, for something else than to be scolded at.


Come, come, vex him no more, I'll go sleep a little.


There will be a safe opportunity for me, I love this Cuckold-making.


Though you intended a Reformation for your self, you might for-bear me, this
was your plot.


Mine! I never resolved staidness, but I could alter for my pleasure, nor can I
hate or envy it in others, I am only sorry Tom that you should drink water
after your sweet Meats.


O Tony, have you made any discovery?


Have you been in search of the two Wenches I saw cross the Fields towards
Islington.


O then you took notice of them; she in the Silk-Gown you shall have Mr.
Lovechange, and the Milk-wench you shall have Mr. Wenchlove, I have been
condogging with her about it.


Thanks honest Tony, there's something for thee.


So Sirs, now here, now there, and now here.


But Tony, what is the Milk-wenches condition?


Oh womanish, Sir; she'll cry when she's angry, laugh when she's tickled, and
be sick when she can't have her will.


I mean her Calling.


She is called Margery.


Her Profession then.


Not very honest, and yet very honest; she cheats all the world that thinks she
is wanton; but you will find that neither your Aunts, nor your Cousins, can keep
their Legs so close.


There's more money for thee, I will try that.


You are as bountiful as a new-made Knight that's in hope of preferment.


But what say thou to that I must have; how was she born?


Why that you had best ask the Midwife.


Is she a Gentlewoman, or not?


She is, and she is not; she is a Gentlewoman, because she loves pride, which
makes Gentlewomen apt to fall, especially waiting Gentlewomen; then she is no
Gentlewoman, because, because, because.


Prithee no more.


'Tis well he interrupted me, for egad I had no more Reason than a Horse: But
Sir, I will bring her to the bar of your presence, where she may answer for
herself, whilst I convert your bounty into wholesome nourishment, from a Bottle
of Canary, and have about with my own Turnip.


By your leave, fair Maid.


What would you have Sir?


A little pleasure Sweet; come, come, what's your price?


You mistake me, I assure you Sir.


As if I had not practised Wenching sufficiently to understand a seeming
modesty, I'll come to your Lodging when I know where it is: but say your price,
a Guiney, or half a Crown.


Have I found you Gallant, 'tis he who I too fondly do affect: but mum, the
truth is Sir, I have a Maiden-head yet, though it be agreed for, therefore I am
dearer Sir.


Nay Sweetheart, thou shalt serve, thy Mistress is too dear, I am loath to pay
too dear for Repentance; 'tis but changing Offices, let her hold the door for
thee.


Pray speak, and mean civilly, you'll not be welcome else.


Good Lady light heels, give your servant leave to practise the Trade you have
taught her, that such perfection as appears in this woman should be sold to
every base desire: come Wench, I like thy brown complexion, thou dost not
paint, and art the likelier to be the wholesomer.


Good Gentleman, he's jealous, and would circumvent her.


Here's half a Crown Girl, methinks 'tis a fair rate.


What's in me to grant you shall command.


I take your word, the pleasure of your Bed I must have, I will reward it with
a new Gown; come dally not with coy denials.


I marry Sir, but not in this place; but if you please.


Now Jealousy instruct me, I fear this woman's nought.


'Tis a motion I like, the pains will make the pleasure more sweet in the
enjoying.


Mr. Lovechange, I'll in a word inform you.


How Fate conspires to make me miserable?


I thank thee, and approve of thy advice; what say you Tom to the Fiddlers?


With all my heart, send in the Minstrils.


I, I, we will be merry, and in the gallant fashion: Gentlemen, Music is
common, no man shall stop my ears, nor my throat, we must put in amongst you.


By all means Tony, 'twill complete the Medley.


Nay, we know what belongs to that.

Come away.


O The effects of drinking! I could even curse my own kindness, that am ready
still to make more of him, than he does of me.


Why don't you then?


What Sir, I warrant you'd make him a Cuckold.


'Tis only giving a friend leave to do you a pleasure in earnest, which you
made me make him believe I would do: the truth is, I do now love you heartily,
and have dallied my self into a flame.


Nay, Mr. Lovechange, you were ever kind, but are you as well armed as you used
to go if he should prove subborn: now 'twill work.


No faith, I must trust to my single valour; come, demur not, let me enjoy
those forbidden sweets, be assured my secrecy is as firm as Night and Locks.


Secrecy, Mr. Lovechange, no, I'll be open to all the world, nor will I
distinguish places, dark or light, 'tis all one to me, were it before my
Husbands face.


Hear then, he sleeps securely, never dreaming of any Foreheads arming.


Fie Sir, you are such a tempter, pray forbear, many a woman would not hold out
so long.


Consent then sweet Lady, and we'll to it straight.


( Snores) Ware Horns there.


O mischief! what noise has waked him?


An infirmity he has got to talk in his sleep: nay, I assure you, he will rise
sometimes, and do the office of a waking man in his dream, and not know of it
in the morning.


Room for a Head man of the Parish, a Monster of his Wives making.


O wicked man! he dreams now that I would make him a Cuckold.


Pray Jove it be no counterfeit.


And have I taken you Sir Lancelot? would you be billing with my Guinivere?


Help to pull him off, Madam.


For this attempt King Arthur does degrade thee, from a Knight of his Round
Table, to be a Squire of his VVives Body; so conduct me to my Bed, where I will
beget a Race of VVarriours shall Cage the Great Turk again! and restore
Constantinople to the Emperor.


You mistake: Oh! 'uds death, my Periwig is not a Turban.


Peace follows Victory, now let me rest.


Pray Sir forgive him, I dare undertake he'll be sorry when he wakes, if any
thing I can do can make amends.


Prove his dream true, when the smart's over I shall forget.


Madam, some Ladies in the house are not well, and desire your assistance.


Who wants assistance? who breaks the Kings Peace? fetch me a Constables
Staff.


He'll dream again, had I best stay?


Now Drunkard, are you recovered yet?


What. Mr. Lovechange, and my Wife, where's the rest of your Company?


Gone, being weary of such a Sot as you are, to be drunk so early: I had done
well to have served you in your own kind; here was Company enough to have
brought me home, and some not far off that used me kindly, whilst you snorted
to fright the Fleas, and dream perhaps some wickedness of me.


Come, come, I'll buy my pardon with a new Gown, and a journey into the Country
for a Month.


You know I am easy to be wrought upon.


Will you discharge Mr. Lovechange?


Not so willingly, though I value it not; no revenge of this dreaming Fox: what
is the Reckoning?


Nine and eleven pence.


How's that? let's have the particulars, Mr. Lovechange shall know how he parts
with his money.


Shall he so, kind Sir?


Why Sir, Cakes two shillings, Ale as much, a quart of mortified Claret
eighteen pence, stewed Pruens a shilling.


That's too dear.


Truly they cost a penny a pound of the one-handed Costermonger, out of his
Wives Fish Basket; a quart of Cream half a Crown.


That's excessive.


Not if you consider how many Carriers Eggs miscarried in the making of it, and
the charge of Isinglass, and other ingredients, to make Cream of the sour milk.


All this does not amount to what you demand.


I can make more, two three penny Papers of Sugar a shilling, than you had bread
Sir.


Yes, and drink too Sir, my head takes notice of that.


'Tis granted Sir, a pound of Sausages, and forty other things, make it right,
our Bar never errs.


This can't be, I'll talk with your Mistress my self.


I, do Sir, know what you do, put it to her Conscience.


Owl, when do you think he'll find that, she's too deep for you or him either;
prithee talk sense.


No matter, he'll pay all; where is he Tapster?


Gone Sir.


How, gone! give me my Sword and Belt.


I must have the Reckoning first.


Must I pay, must I?


This revenge he took for your beating him in your sleep, I warrant you never
dreamt of all this now,


Has he such tricks? well, 'tis no matter, 'tis but a large Groat for ebng
drunk. Here Sirrah.


You're welcome Sir, some profit comes from hence,
I have o're-reckon'd nine and twenty pence.

My Master must have a fair Course with you; and so he bid me tell you, besides
what other kindnesses he will do for you: but stuff your Pannier, he's resolved
to do.


Ah Anthony! why should his lustful thoughts be bent at me? some timely
Guardian Angel rescue me from his foul intent.


A Pox of this whining; what an unreasonable thing you are? there's hardly a
quarter in the house that you may not rest your limbs in; and because he has a
mind to tire himself in one quarter of yours, you count your self ill used.


When time gives me a more fair way of opening my self to the world, I'll
gratify thee, if you will but contrive or help to avoid this snare designed
for my ruin.


Why, is not this pretty? she refuses the thoughts of my Masters singly opening
of her; yet in a breath, she says she'll do it to all the world.


I must confess I am a stranger, and have stragled to this house, and have
received my Lady Jolts protection, but yet in return of their bounty I would
not shipwreck my Fame: where's Margery? I'll straight consult with her about
it.


I know what she'll say, Pox on him for a Bawdy Knight; nay, and very likely
call him Cuckold too, for she is pretty well acquainted with the Constitution
of my Ladies longings; but since I find thou hast that out-of-fashion quality
in thee, Honesty, I'll assist thee, and save thy Mouse-trap from being baited
with Sir Jefferies dry Cheese.


O how shall I give thee thanks fast enough!


Isabella, I'll not forget you, adieu.


You are informed how I have designed the matter; that is, I must be brought to
your Lodging in a Basket, as some Moveable Commodity for your special use; my
Master is coming this way, therefore about your occasions, I'll be at your
Chamber instantly.


Well, pretty Maid, I will not doubt your performing your promise: to say any
more, were but to retard my joys; I'll fly to my Lodging, where in the dear
expectation of your coming I'll languish, not to be revived but by your sweet
sight: so sweet Mistress adieu.


Oh unkind Wench! hast thou forgot thy Isabella, and all thy Vows and desperate
Protestations?

I must try the event, Despair may bring
A good success to an indifferent thing.

Since we have agreed no way but that can be safe, therefore in that great
Basket within be you packed up, and directed to me, I'll find out an excuse for
my not showing you, I need not say any more.


Ha, my Brother with Margery too! what can this whispering mean?


Pox on it, I do love this Wench; but if I can eat a Meal gratis, 'tis better
than to have that Bug-bear Marriage for an everlasting standing Dish: I'll try
all ways, if this fail, then I'll take her for better or for worse: Well, into
the Basket I go, be as speedy as you can.


I'll be there straight.


O Margery! thy instant help, or I am most miserable.


Hold, I know your grief, Sir Jeffery, is the cause, I heard him a dealing with
Anthony about it, but I can blow that off with ease; make him an appointment,
the time, place, and dress, and then let me alone to complete the Comedy.


Thou hast mitigated my passion with thy promised assistance; but what said my
Brother to thee?


Your Brother, who's your Brother?


Virtuous Maid, I'll rely on thy secrecy, Mr. Lovechange is the man, but
conceal it till your Plot has had its scope, then I'll discover more.


Ha! you Mistress Isabella Lovechange, and I not peep into you till now; 'tis
she: well, since you have told me one thing, then I'll tell you another to
requite you, I love Mr. Lovechange your Brother.


Love my Brother, O beware!


If my Beauty, which has been flattered for a taking one, can win upon his
desires, I'll soon work him to what I please; nay, rather than the Project
fail, he shall enjoy; but fairly, I have another discovery, but that's for the
closing pin.


Well, as to your love of my Brother, I'll join with you when things are ripe,
I have but one doubt.


What may be that I am not a Gentlewoman, you shall know that there's many a
Gentlewoman has stroked the Dug: Hark, I hear Wenchlove I must retire, call for
the Basket, all shall be well.


I'll force my passion for once, here's the Gentleman: hold Heart, can he be so
near, and I not reproach him?


Now Wench, is all ready?


I have packed her up like a Dormouse in a Box, I warrant you for hurting her.


'Tis a good Wench, I'll give thee a fine Petticoat for this.


I thank you Sir; when you are a weary of my Mistress, and cast her off, as I
know you must have change, you shall have my Maidenhead at the same rate; if
you please, I'll keep it for you.


With all my heart.


Pray use her ne'er the worse for my promise.


The better I'll turn her off within this fortnight, and send for thee.


O Sir! 'tis not fit a Servant should shift her Mistresses Plate before the
Bones are clean picked; you have Flesh enough to hold out a Month.


It shall be a Month then.


Pray Sir let me ask you one question.


Quickly then.


How many Maidenheads have you bought thus?


Some nineteen with thy Mistress.


Pray let me make up the score an even reckoning.


It shall, it shall; go away with your burthen-fellows, farewell Wench.


Now Mistress, what think you of it? have not I taken a course to let the
Blades find their error?


Now I am instructed wholly to commend your Virtue, and steer my course by your
example; 'tis time to be gone, Lust is a gilded Pill,

It mocks the Sense with pleasure, but at last,
The shining out-side leaves a bitter taste.

And is she resolved? shall I enter the Port securely?


The Harbour is deep, yet the water flows but seldom, the passage free from
drownding: But should my Lady know this.


Oh, ne'er fear that, she has had her fling, and still she bobs me with it,
only devises to try me.


She has tried you too much her own way, I believe therefore I think she need
not doubt you now with any other: but the Plot is thus; the Young Sinner that
must be, if you can make her so, will come like Mother Red Cap to buy Malt of
you; then take her into the Counting House, and try what Figure you can bring
her to; a Cipher you need not fear, and the round O is the completing of your
sum.


Anthony, I'll give thee Margery for this exploit, but you must be very careful
my Wife take not the sent.


I'll set a naked man in her way Sir, that will employ her longer than you will
be playing the blunt Prize of dried Mary-bones, and young Coney-skins.


I'll vow 'tis heavy.


That's strange, and she a light Wench.


You say true Sir, 'tis enough to break ones back.


His mistake hits upon truth, rest you a while then, O witty Luxury! how it
accutes invention, makes barren faculties beget new issues of rare conceits:
Pox on it, here's Sir Jeffery Jolt, he'll certainly stop me: Oh how I long to
see how she looks after this close confinement! she thinks to have me closer
anon, and so she shall.


O Tony! so there's VVenchlove, what must we do with him?


Well enough, he's upon the like design, see what's in the Basket.


O Mr. VVenchlove, what's here? let's see, I can't open it; what's in it? what's
in it?


Would 'twere his Wife, I'd be revenged for this rudeness: let it alone, Sir
Jeffery, 'tis only a thing that I have a great mind to experiment.


Look Tony, what shall I do now?


To her, ne'er mind him, ne'er mind him: now 'ware a Storm.


'Tis needless to trifle time, I love, and must enjoy thee.


Oh fie Sir! what will your Lady say to this, if we be caught?


Fear not that, good Cuckquean, she'll ne'er think of such a thing.


What, Mother Red Cap? how goes Cakes and Maidenheads? This is not Mother Red
Cap: what, my Lady Jolt?


Let him ne'er see my face more. O indignity to my Beauty! die you weak
Villain: O me! how shall I vent my passion?


I can hold out no longer, let me out.


Whence came this voice? what, have you got an Humble Be in your Basket, or a
Flesh Fly?


'Uds death, I have been sufficiently mortifi'd.


How came all this?


I'll tell you, bargaining for a little pleasure with a young Gentlewoman, whom
I thought to be a Wanton, she engaged me in this Adventure to come to her.


Pox on it, I am baffled in the same Noose, I expected her to be in the Basket:
Oh! where is this witty Contriver?


Here Sirs, and am come to laugh at all your follies; for I know Sir Jeffery is
in the same Labyrinth: but we must make all well again, for he was set on by
Tony, and me; but he and she thought it true, Madam Jolt is privy to all this.


'Tis truth, Jeff. this I'll forgive, but no more, if you do, I go to work: Now
Girls, if you were well fitted, a Husband is the least you can expect; and now
Margery I'll discover, you was my Brothers Daughter, put to me to conceal for a
time, the reasons best known to my self.


To avoid prolixity, see Isabella, who ever had a Chaste Flame for this wild
Wenchlove, and Margery for you.


Then by joint consent we'll end the day with mirth: to Pancras, and be marri'd
straight; Sister, I am glad I have found you in no worse Company.


Then virtuous Isabella, do you forget what Heats of Youth has made me guilty
of, and I'll remember to be ever just to you.


And thou, Margery, deserve more than I can ever repay or express.


Let me have but all you can do, and I'll never complain.


No, 'tis I must complain, that thought to have had Margery instead of my
wages: but for this trick, the next Maid that comes, down she goes, after once
she has dropped a Duck to my Lady.


You see, Gallants, what success attends your Enterprise.
Henceforth account not every lively Wife
Wanton, because she lives a merry life.

So here's a double comfort, being wedded,
She's neither false, nor am I jealous headed.

You're not to expect from hence the Modish sport,
Abusing either City, or the Court:
The Poet's mannerly, and cautious too
And neither will affront himself, nor you.
Faith, both are needless, since 'tis done each day,
By you who judge, and him who writes a Play:
Nor does he Controversies set afoot,
But thinks it better if none else would do it;
Nor tells you what Religion he is on;
May be, like some of you, he is of none:
You're easily pleased, and please the Poets too,
Now that the Critics have no more to do:
The Devil's in them that censure Farce and Show;
Who'd be a Poet then, at least to you?
Who, when he writes, is fool and Coward too.
How do you murder men of that Profession?
There's hardly one that ever scapes a Session:
For once be courteous to a Country Muse
Untaught, such Tricks the Wits of London use;
And in short time, he may find out the way
To write fine Poppet Plays as well as they.
ANd how? and how? Gallants, what is't but so?
Our Female Sex Abhors short things, we know.
But tell me, Faith, is it not better far
To ride in Flying Coach, than Dronish Car?
Great Theaters, like Husbands cloyed, move on,
Without long preparation nothing's done;
We finish thrice, e're they have once begun.
One bout for Broths and Jelly cost you there
More than would buy six merry Pushes here;
Nay, to oblige you, we'll truck Ware for Ware.
Tell me, good Houswifes, is not the pleasure more, when Butter quickly comes,
Than to be three long hours a jogging of your Bums.
To you, Gallants, our sport no trouble brings,
All your delight we know's in little things:
Likewise we so unconscionable are,
We covet to enjoy you only h^re:
Yet for variety, try all the rest,
That will convince you our things are the best.
See us again when you have roamed your fill,
And, like good Wives, we'll make you welcome still.

