LOVE LOST IN THE DARK; OR, THE Drunken Couple.

ACTED AT NEW-MARKET.

LONDON: Printed for Dan. Browne at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple-Bar, Dan. Major at the Hand and Sceptre over against S. Dunstan's Church
in Fleetstreet, and James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf near S. Dunstan's
Church in Fleetstreet. 1680.

MAdam Muggulla, you most joyfully are met to pleasure me.


It may be so; I used to pleasure many: here lies my way; I do beseech you,
Sir, keep your own Voyage.


Nay, be not so short, I must with you.


With me! I pray Sir; what, what Sir, do you see in me?


Do not mistake me, dear Beauty, nothing but honesty i'faith.


Hang honesty, Trump not me up with honesty: do you mark Sir, I have a charge,
and a special charge Sir, and 'tis not honesty can win on me Sir.


Prithee conceive me rightly.


I conceive you.


But understand.


I will not understand, I cannot, nor I do not understand.


But prithee Muggulla, let my young Master Camillo see thy Mistress; but look
upon her, and do you stand by.


How's this? shall I stand by? what do you think of me? Now by the virtue of
the place I hold, you are a paltry Squire to tempt my trust thus; I am no Helen
to be deflowered of my Loyalty, by your fair language.


You mistake me still.


It may be my place will bear me out in it, and will mistake you still, make
your best on it. Cal. A Pox upon you, let him but have a glance at her.


The Devil's in you, he shall never see her.


This is a Croan in grain; thou art so testy, prithee take breath, and know thy
friends.


I will not: I have no friends, nor will I have any this way: but now I call to
mind, why will he see her?


Because she loves him woundily, and he loves her totally.


She hates him damnably, most wickedly, take that upon my word, and swears her
eyes are sick when they see him: how fearfully have I heard her rail against
him, and cast, and rail again? call for hot waters, and then rail again?


I'll believe a Witch that has been nine years dead, before this.


I have heard her swear, that he is the beastliest man: what a grief must this
be? Sir-reverence of the Company, a rank Whoremaster, ten Livery Whores, she
assured me on her Credit, with weeping eyes she spoke it, and seven Citizens
Wives, besides all Volunteers that serve under him, and of all Countries.


The Devil never fathered such a Lye.


Besides, he is so careless of his body, which is a foul fault in him.


Come, leave fooling, 'tis a mere Fable drawn from thy Ancient Virtues; may be
'tis her Maid is angry with him, because he wooed her with his Honour; and you
mistake.


She hates him very well too, but her Mistress hates him heartily: Look upon
him! on my Conscience she would see the Devil first, with eyes as big as
Saucers; when I but named him, she leapt back thirty foot.


That's a lye by five and twenty.


If once she smell him, (for certainly he is rank, she says extreme rank, and
the wind stands with him so) she's gone for ever.


For all this he shall see her, and give her such a heat, that the Hoegoe of
her Constitution shall perfume his Chamber for two long hours after.


Has he any new eyes when those are scratched out, or a Nose to clap on warm? Is
he proof against a Piss-pot? which if they bid me, I must throw upon him.


Well then, a Devil take you, he shall not see her.


His Dam coddle you for his Supper, if he do.


Then be so far his friend, good parch'd-handed Muggulla, as to give her this
Letter, and leave thy pleasant lying, or leave it in her Pocket, there's no
harm in it, do it, and I'll take thee up a Petticoat.


Take up my Petticoat, I scorn the motion, I scorn it with my heels, take up my
Petticoat.


And so hot, Reverent Muggull.


Sir, you shall find me hotter, if you take up my Petticoat.


I'll give you a new Petticoat.


I scorn your gift, give your Masters old Boots, you give a Petticoat: Alas,
you're too young Sir, you are too young to circumcize me that way; take up my
Petticoat, I am a woman, a Gentlewoman, a woman of another way; he that takes
up my Petticoat, shall have enough to do I warrant him; I would sain see the
proudest of you all dare to do it.


Still mistakes: what a Pox do you look at the wrong end of the Prospective
Glass.


Petticoat! you show now what you are; but do your worst Sir.


A Wild-fire take thee, what ails thee?


I ask no favour of you, and so I leave you; and withal, I charge you in my
own name; for I would have you know, that in this place I represent my Ladies
Person.


The Devil could not have picked out such a Representative.


Upon your life do not dare to follow me; for if you do, I know you have a
standing that way: but if you do, look to it, look to it.


Go, and the Pox go with thee, if thou hast so much moisture as to receive it;
for thou wilt have them, though a Horse bestow'um; I must devise a way, for he
must see her, and very suddenly; and Madam Petticoat, it all the wit I have,
and this can do, I'll make you sell your charge and your place. But here they
come.


I know I wrong my modesty.


And wrong me in being so importunate, for that I neither can nor must grant.


A hard sentence from him, I have chosen my Judge: Alas Sir, did I approach you
with unchaste Desires, a sullied Reputation, or were deformed, as it may be I
am, though many affirm I am something more than handsome.


I dare swear it.


Or if I were no Gentlewoman, and breed courtesy, you might with some pretence
of reason slight what you should sue for.


I'm sure I should; the Fleas are cursed troublesome: Hey day! there's a Legion
of young Cupids in my Breeches.


Pray Sir, name my defects; when once convinced, I trouble you no further.


Then I will bluntly and truly tell you, you are too honest (a noted Libertine
I profess my self) and talk too soon of Marriage: Can I part with my uncurbed
liberty, and on my Neck wear such a heavy Yoke? No, let crooked Hams, declining
Shoulders, furrowed Cheeks, be awed by Ceremonies; if you love me in the way
young people should, I'll fly to meet you, and we'll meet merrily.


'Tis strange such a man can use such language.


My tongue speaks my heart freely: Fair one, think on it, a close or private
Mistress is Court Rhetoric; a Wife is a mere rustic device; and so good
morrow.


How like you this, Caland ino?


A well-bred Gentleman, I am now thinking whether or no in the dark, or drunk,
I formerly might not have met his Mother; he must have some drops of my blood
in him, for at his years I was much of his Religion.


You may perceive I seek not to displant you, where you desire to grow; for
further thanks, 'tis needless complement.


Only your patience one moment.


Sir, be brief then.


Pray, observe.


How he looks like a School-boy that has plaid the Truant, and went to be
Breeched.


Madam.


A new affliction; after all this preparation, I am obliged to hear you,


Madam -- while I at all parts (without boast) his Equal, in vain pursue you,
you follow one that with winged feet flies from you, and attempts to undermine
the Fortress of your Honour; nay, and more, your Virgin Honour.


My friend Camillo here's an Ass; what a Devil has he to do with Virgin Honour?
when he should speak to the purpose, of the delight to meet in the old Dance
between a pair of sheets, my Granam calls it the peopling of the World.


To vindicate my Honour, is needless; I don't fear the worst aspersion malice
can throw upon it.


Can you undergo the scorn of being refused, for which I deeply suffer? I must
confess it makes for my ends; but his ills shall not make way for my good intents.


You take that Sir, which yet I never granted.


Calandrino, stand to me, I'll force more, Sir; was she, this excellent she,
mad to be a slave to your lusts, and used as Physic after drunken Surfeits?
mankind must rise against thee, must we not, Callandrino?


I, I, come, come, mankind must rise about it.


Murder!


Help!


Nay, nay, stand still, or you're disabled for ever.


'Uds death.


After a whining Prologue, who would look for such a rough Catastrophe? nay,
come Sir, fear nothing; and do you hear Sir, yet I love you too; if you take
the Wench now, I'll post it first, then Chronicle you were beaten to it.


A memorable piece of valour this between you; it may perhaps deserve her
Shooe-string for a Favour; wear it without my envy, but expect for this
affront, when time serves, I shall call you to a strict account.


Nay, let him go to thy Mistress Boy; if I were in thy shirt, how I could nick
it?


Madam, I fear my passion has offended; 'twas my excess of love to do you
right.


You have sought my favours Nobly, and I am justly punished in wild Adorio's
contempt and scorn: more I cannot say, but that I truly pity you, and wish you
a better choice, which in my prayers, Camillo, I ever will remember.


'Tis a sweet Rogue, what Thunder-struck!


I am not so happy: O that I were but Master of my self, you should soon find
me nothing.


What would you do?


With one stab give a fatal period to my woes and life together.


For a Woman, better the Kind were lost, and Generation maintained a new way.


Yet all this is nothing to Calista.


Down into the Country amongst your Tenants, there you shall command twenty
Calista's, for every night a fresh and lusty one, Nut-brown wholesome Girls, I
have bred them to it; should their Fathers murmure, straight his Lease is void.


Hang thee, and thy folly, come away.


Censured, Madam! what Lord or Lady lives worthy to sit a competent Judge on
you?


Yet black detraction will find faults, when there are none.


Her foul mouth is stopped; you being the Object, rest secure of this, all the
Braveries of the City run mad for you: Come, come, 'tis nothing for you, being
a simple Maid, that never had a hand in the Honey-pot of Pleasure, to sorbear
it: but such as have licked there, and licked there often, and felt the
sweetness, will.


How her mouth runs over with the rank imagination?


If such can, as I named before, the Kickshaw being offered, refuse to take it,
they may be Sainted, though for my part I don't think it possible to be denied.


Not stir abroad, the use and pleasure of my eyes denied me?


Insufferable!


Nor write, nor yet receive an amorous Letter?


Not to be endured.


Nor look upon a man?


Flat tyranny, insupportoble tyranuy to a Lady of young blood.


She is my Mother that commands it, how shall I decline it?


Run away, take any course.


But without means, how shall we live?


What a question's that? as if a Buxom Lady could want maintenance in any
place in the world where there are men, wine, meat or money stirring.


Rather than in a thought or dream, I'll consent to ought that may take from my
Honour, I'll endure more than my Mother can impose upon me.


I grant your Honour is a glorious dressing, but without conversation of men a
kind of nothing; she may as well command you when you are a hungry not to eat,
or drink, or sleep; and yet all these are easy, compared to the not seeing of
a man: I will not urge Camillo's love, but make trial of Adorio.


And give my Honour to his lust.


There's no such thing intended, Madam; yet now I think on it, write to'um both,
catch one fast, and then throw the other in Mirtilla's mouth.


'Tis a business to be considered on.


When the satisfaction of your love's in question, to talk of consideration is
of no moment; if your Mother would allow you a Dancer in the morning to
well-breath you, a Songster in the afternoon to open your Pipes, a Servant to
air you in the evening, you might bear it; but not to see, or talk, or touch a
man, O abominable!


Do not my blushes speak how willingly I would assent?


Do something, Madam, to deserve'um, and blush after.


I, I, do something as Mirtilla.


SIr, Sir, are you ready?


To do what? I am sure 'tis not yet Dinner time.


True; but I asher such a dainty bit for Breakfast, as yet I never cooked; 'tis
not Potargo, sri'd Frogs, Potato's marrow'd, Cavier, Carps Tongues, the Pith of
an English Chine of Beef, nor the Italian oiled Mushroom, and yet a drawer on
too; and if you show not an appetite, and a strong one, I'll not say to eat,
but devour it, without Grace too, for it will not stay a Preface: I am shamed,
and all my provocatives will be jeered at.


Art thou in thy wits? what new-found Rarity hast thou discovered?


No such matter Sir, it grows in our own Country Sir.


Leave prating, and serve it up Sirrah, bring in your dainty.


'Twill bring in it self, it has life and spirit in it, and for proof: Behold
now, fall to boldly, my life on it it comes to be tasted.


Ha! Calista's Maid; you're welcome fair one, aims your designs at me?


I am trusted with a business of consequence, which I would to your private ear
deliver.


I told you so, give her Audience on your Couch, 'tis a fit State for such an
Ambassadress; dispatch first for your Honour, you know what follows.


Come Sir, will you please to vanish, or I'll --


O Sir! pray don't; O Sir! pray don't forget how you used your Taylors Daughter
when she brought you home a Stomacher to keep your Breast warm.


Now, pretty one, your pleasure, you shall find me ready to serve you; if you'll
put me to my Oath, I'll take it upon this Book.


O Sir, the favour is too great, and far above my poor ambition; I must kiss
your hand in sign of humble thankfulness.


So modest.


It well becomes us Maids Sir, spare those blessings for my Noble Mistress,
this speaks her chaste desires with this Ring.


Oh the powerful Charms by that fair hand set down, Heaven be pleased to
qualify this excess of happiness, or I shall expire with a Surfeit of
felicity! with what art the cunning Lapidary has here expressed the Rape of
Proserpine; I apprehend her purpose, and oblige it, yet not as a helping
friend, but a Husband; I will meet her Virtues flame with a lawful heat, and
warm our Hymenical Sheets with such delights as leave no Sting behind'um.


You speak well, and I believe you.


Would you ought else?


I would carry some Love-sign to her, and now I think on it, the kind salute you
offered me at your entrance, hold it not impudence that I desire it, I'll
faithfully deliver it.


A kiss; you must excuse me, I was then my own, now wholly hers; but there's
Gold to bind thee still my Advocate, I'll not fail the appointed time.


Not a kiss; I was coy when it was offered; and now justly, when I begged one,
am denied.

If I catch either still my game's well plaid,
But if I miss I'm with repentance paid.

You are mistaken, I cannot be the man you are sent to.


Not you the man, you are the man of men, and such another in my Ladies eye
never to be discovered.


I am a mere stranger to thee, -- or will at least seem so.


Still the more probable, since Ladies as you know affect strange dainties:
this is not an Age in which Saints live, but women, knowing women.


As most are at a coupling age.


Why Sir do you Gallants travel, but at their returns to discourse the
difference in foreign Females; as the lusty Girl of France, the sober German,
the plump Dutch Fr^, the stately Dame of Spain, the Roman and sprightly Tuscan,
the merry Venetian Courtesan, the English fair Companion, that learns something
from every Nation, and will fly at all.


But may I ask without offence your gravity, what Title your Lady bears in this
City?


If you were true Town-bred, you would do the business first, and ask that
after: Sir, she's no Half-crown Trader, nor no Beldam so frozen up, a Fever
can't thaw her.


Leave this impertinence, and come to the matter.


Impertinence! what my Granams Cat left in the Malt in Impertinence teeth; if
it be impertinent to say her Name's Calista, God buy to you, and your
impertinence too.


Oh I have heard of her, for Chastity and Beauty the wonder of the age!


Pray not too much of that Sir, fair and free, I'll subscribe too, and you'll
find her so.


This can't be Calista, your covering your foul ends with a fair name, gives me
just reason to suspect you have a plot upon my life.


A Plot! very fine; nay 'tis a dangerous one, beware on it: I plot to bring you
in a minutes space to those a man of Snow would ride a thousand miles for; you
shall be received by one whose touch would make old Nestor young: a terrible
plot, a kiss then ravished from you by such lips as flow with Nectar, a juicy
palm to guide you safe to a private room; but I almost forget, to make the plot
more horrid, the retiring Bout, the silver bathing Tub, the Cambric Rubbers,
the embroidered Quilt, a Bed of Jessemine and Damask Roses, a mere Powder-plot
to blow you up: and last of all, a Bedfellow, to whose rare entertainment all
these are but fools.


No more, her breath would warm an Eunuch.


I knew I should heat him.


I am flesh and blood, your motion I approve, I'll come.


My plot's on your life, a base and dangerous woman, farewell Sir.


I will along too, come pardon my suspicion; hear, hear, you shall.


I am good-natur'd, you may do what you will with me, at twelve I'll be your
Convoy.


I desire not better.


How do you like my Gown?


'Tis rich, and Court-like.


My Mother little dreams of my intended flight, and that these are my Nuptial
Ornaments.


I hope so.


How dully thou answered? dost thou envy Adori,'s noble change?


No Madam, I am a little daunted; how to bear your absence, that very thought
confounds me; to be devorc'd from all my comfort, can this be born with
patience?


The necessity of my fate commands it; but I vow by my Adorio's love, I pity
thee.


Pity me Madam! a cold charity, you must do more, and help me.


Ha! what said you, I must; is this fit language for a servant?


One that would continue your poor servant: Can Mirtilla fit mourning alone,
imagining those pleasures which you this blessed night enjoy in the embraces of
your Lord, and mine too, in being yours? shall a stranger sow you up in a sheet
to guard that Maidenhead you must pretend to keep, and 'twill become you? shall
another do this, and I pine with envy? Pardon me, either let me go with you, or
by my life I will discover all.


Thou can not be so treacherous and cruel.


Pray don't tempt me, for 'tis resolved.


Prithee Mirtilla be not so violent, I am so taken with thy affection. to me, I
will send for thee.


When?


This very night, by Adorio I will.


Forgive my boldness past, 'twas iny zeal to serve you.


I thank thee for it.


You'll keep your word.


Still doubtful.


Now Fortune play thy game,
It shall be hard but I will hit my aim.

'Tis eleven by my Watch, the hour appointed, I hear none stirring, some cursed
business keeps her Mother up; I'll walk a little circle, this short delay
asflicts me, and I presume to her it is no pleasure.


What's now to be done? would I were a Bed, I am so sleepy: by this hand I'll
break the house for you tomorrow, and she shall be yours by fair or foul means.


This is the time, I take it, I was ordered by Mirtilla to come; she may
perhaps, to take the air, open the Casement.


Would you were in her Cellar, so I were a Bed.


And looking out, will be a new Star to be gazed on by me with adoration.


Is not here fine fooling? Pox of gazing, and sighing, and peeping, and prying;
if you must go to it, put her to the squeak at first sight, and there's an end.


Mirtilla.


'Tis her voice.


You heard some footing.


Most certainly.


Speak low, my love Adorio.


The darkness befriends me now, most honoured Madam: Alorio, your servant.


If you are so, I do commend your silence, and this kiss assures you I am
wholly yours.


Now miss, and may you be gelt.


Madam, think on Mirtilla.


I am the fortunatest man in these night works.


This slowness amazes me; but here comes some-body.


Whether shall I fly for succour?


These arms shall be a Castle of defence; how her heart beats; take comfort,
dear Calista, Adorio loves you, loves you in a Noble ways silence becomes you
till we are in safety.


O blessed error!


They have cast me, and say I must wait; but I have found some of their
Cordials may be a provocative that was prepared to enable me to perform the
Marriage night-duties, up it goes, be it what it will. I cannot dread any
danger where she is: 'tis pleasant, some restorative to animate their spirits;
this nights ramble, with other encumbrances of business, has almost tired me; I
feel sleep apprehending me for my neglect of nature, it is too powerful, I must
obey.


'Uds death, I can't find the sleepy portion that's prepared for my Ladies
Mother: What Dormouse asleep a ready? much good may women expect from you! what
a Devil do you mean to do? my old Lady's coming this way; here's a lump of
Sluggard: you lie with a Lady, you lie with a drunken Sow, so you will be taken
napping; thy Nose shall pay for this.


What's the matter you stay so long? is he fallen asleep? how Camillo, who I
took for Adorio! wake him, and bid him be gone.


I must carry him on my back then, for any way else he is not fit to go: is he
not dead? cold by this hand.


O, O! call in his man, let him remove him; he has got some hurt in his night
rambles, and comes here to die, to have the shame fall upon me.


Stark dead! are you sure? you have held him at hard service; I'll be hanged if
Muggulla has not thrown him on his back, for she's an old Swinger at these
sports.


Leave your idle discourse, and convey him away.


Out of the house you can't carry him, your Mother must see it done.


Search him Calandrino, if he be not wounded any where.


O here's large wound! how it is swelled! this must, this must be cunningly
drawn out, should it break, 'twould strangle him: O what a deal of foul
matter's here! this has been a long time of gathering: here's a gash too in the
Rimb of his Belly, it may have matter in it; he was a choleric man I see; what
comes from him is as yellow as Gold: how, troubled with the Stone? I'll cut you
for this.


It must be so, he has drank the sleepy portion which was designed. for your
Mother, so that we'll lay him in the great Chest in the next Room, may be when
he awakes we may have a more fit opportunity to let him out.


I had rather bury him quick than part with my purchase; let his Ghost walk, I
care not: who's that? where's the Chest? I am afraid her calling should wake
him.


A shrill voice, it comes with the wind.


Then I'll take this way.


Why, Sir?


Because I'll trust my heels before all the winds in the Sky; we are far wiser
than our Gransi^s were; and thus I'll prove it, they say, haste to the
beginning of a feast, there I am with'um; but to the end of a fray, that's
Apocryphal, 'tis Canonical, not to come there at all: after a Storm, there are
still some drops behind.


Pure fear has made the fool a Philosopher; come, help away with him.


He's wondrous heavy, but the Porter's paid, there's the comfort.


Away, my Mother will come out.


Now if he wakes not, I am made for ever;
And if he does, 'twas but a fools endeavour.

WAs ever man thus crossed?


So blessed I hoped to have been; this is the finest wild Chase.


What's that you mutter?


A short prayer, that you may find my Lady, your wished-for love, though I am
lost for ever.


Calandrino, light a Candle, 'tis horrible dark.


O me! what's that? from whence could that come?


I don't know, may be the old Lady has discovered our coming.


Draw the Curtains, I say, you Rascal; what a Devil do you mean to do? Adorio
will get there before I shall come.


If it be a Spirit, it made use of my name; 'tis somewhere in the room.


I am afraid, yet dare not stir, for fear you should be found here.


Sirrah, I say Calista made the appointment, and would you have me fail her,
Rogue, Dog, Devil?


It must be some Imp, it has the Devil so frequently in's mouth.


I tremble to think on it.


'Zounds, I'll stay for this damned Dog no longer.


My courage fails me, doubting 'tis not mortal.


Oh the Devil! the Devil!


What can this mean? that seemed to be Adorio going out; how came I to have
this wooden Tenement? this room they left me in; now dare not I call Muggulla,
because I am ignorant how matters go in the house.


What noise was that I heard?


Madam, I know not, nor what caused it; but I am in as much doubt as they could
be in fear, how by what means I was laid in this Chest; Providence I must ever
bless that it proves so well, since you allow on it.


What's this? 'twas necessity made me so careful of your proceedings; now you're
at liberty, I desire your absence.


Madam, 'tis strange, but for once I'll withdraw, and render you my hearty
thanks for the care you have used to preserve me safe, and your own Honour.


My loved Adorio, though disastrous chance has made me lament thy absence, it
pays me ample satisfaction that I am now possessed of thee.


Away: have you plaid your game with him, and now come to me to retrieve your
appetite? I must reassume my ancient Faith, all Woman-kind is false.


False man, but more treacherous woman, 'tis apparent you jointly have
conspired against my weakness, for which expect my just anger; reply not.


She commands both, one is enough for me,
If I be false, Love is a treachery.

Good speed on all sides, 'tis main strong Wine: O the yauns that Muggulla will
make! look to your Stern, dear Mistress, and steer right: Stay, let me see,
I'll try her by thy Nose first, for if she be a right Sow, sure she'll find it:
yonder she comes; O how she holds up her Nose like a Jennet in the wind of a
grass Mare!


'Tis Wine, I'm sure 'tis Wine, excellent strong Wine, very good Wine; this way
too.


How true she hunts, I'll make the Train a little stronger.


Stronger and stronger still, still blessed Wine.


Now she hunts hot.


This way it went sure.


Now she's at a cold sent: O well hunted! that's she! that's she!


O if I could but see it! O what a precious sent it has! but handle it, and
then but taste it.


Now I'll come in view.


Still 'tis stronger: Calandrino, what hast thou got there? answer to the point
man.


'Tis Wine, Madam Muggulla, sweet Sweet-wine.


Is this a drink for Slaves to tipple on? dear sweet Sweet-wine come hither;
give me a Bottle thou most debauched Drudge.


With no small pains I purchased this on purpose for you, to show how willing I
am to give you all my service.


I will give thee more: there, kiss my hand on it.


I thank you cleanlily for your dirty favour; how rank it smells?


By your leave sweet Bottle, and sweet Sweet-wine, I now come to thee, hold
your Cap under.


She sucks off her sweet Sweet-wine, sweet, sweet, sweetly: how do you like it?


Hold up your Cap again Sir, and now come kiss me: I'll be your friend at a
word Sir; come, drink to me.


I must not be too bold with this liquor.


Here's to thee then; 'tis for thy good, 'tis confessed; nay, 'tis nought for
thee, and may chance to make you break out, and spoil thy complexion: 'tis
excellent for me, I have a cold Stomach, and the Wine*


Blows out at both ends.


Kiss me again, thou shalt kiss Calista too: again cherish thy lips, I'll show
thee all.


Bless my eyes!


Enter all the secrets in my Country Commands, and thou shalt be my Heir, and
I'll leave thee Heaven knows what.


I believe so; but I shall never know.


Then you shall have my Daughters two sweet Wenches, but you must commit with
me first, and show yourself a Gentleman.


Excellent Mistress Muggulla, I thank you heartily.


And prithee, Calandrino, take heed of being overtaken with too much drink,
'tis a lamentable fin: O 'tis a damnable thing to be drunk, Heaven can't endure
it! And hark you, one thing I would have you do, knock my Husband on the Head,
for he's an errant Puppy, and cannot perform; why, where the Devil is this
foolish Bottle?


O how her Husband would cry, did he know how drunk she will be with this Wine!


Who's that talks of Wine there?


I think 'tis your Husband at the door.


Bring him before me, I'll beat him damnably; nay, break the Bottle about his
Pate, then tie it to his Tail, and all the Dogs in the Town shall follow him:
Come, sit down, and let us propound a modest question, to see who is drunkest,
you or I.


The very sent has disabled me; what's the question?


Whether Whitehall or Cheapside be nearest Whetstones Park? or what's the
natural reason, why a woman should long to make her Husband a Cuckold? Bring
the Curate, that learned Philosopher, that found out a Pudding had two ends, let
him with his Jacob's Staff discover what is the third part of three farthings,
three half-pence being the half, and I am satisfied.


You blow me down with your Learning.


Too much for that Bull-head, my Husband: Hang him, he's but the shadow of a
man of action, a debauched Puppy, let him sleep, and thou shalt sleep with me.


You are a very loving worthy woman, I had as live she had said I should have
lain in the Hog-sty.


Not a word of Wine Callandrino, or any thing like Wine, or any thing
concerning Wine, or by, or from, or with Wine: Come, lead me like a Countess.


Then it seems you ever have affected me.


Should my Lady stand by and hear't, and in her sudden fury kill me for it, I
durst not Sir deny it; nor is it me alone, but all our Sex, I think, stand
bound to be enamoured of you.


O my Fate! I am justly punished for my defended wantonness: I that scorned the
Mistress when she sought me, now I would upon my knees receive her, am become a
Prey unto her Bond-woman: thou art one of those aim to be the wrong way
Ladifi'd: Was there no forward Page or Footboy in the Town to do the feat, but
I must be chosen for the Executioner? how durst you hope it?


Kings sometimes leave Calveare, Salmon, and eat Sprats; in modesty I dare
speak no more.


How came thou to my hands?


My Lady being slipped aside in the dark, fearing her Mother should find out the
appointment, and, as I thought, quitted the house, thanks to the darkness of
the night, running after her, I run into your arms; and I had wronged my
breeding near the Court, had I refused it.


You expect to reap the Harvest of your Flattery but your hopes will be
blasted: I assure you I am tired, I must sleep; you could lie down too.


Willingly, so you please to use me.


Use thee?


As your Pillow Sir, I dare presume no farther.


Well, sit down.


I am ready Sir.


So nimble.


Love is active, nor would be a slow thing, rest securely; Sir, on my
Maidenhead, I'll not ravish you.


For one so fair, I'll trust you.


Let all the joys of rest dwell on his Eye-lids; let no dream disturb your soft
and gentle slumbers: I cannot sing, but I'll talk you asleep she snores
already: I am all fire, I can no longer forbear, I'll touch his lips, I am
entranced; our Fancy, some say, in sleep works stronger, I will prove how far
mine will work.


My Bones ache with sleeping on the Bench, and I am exceeding cold after my
heat, I must seek out a mere convenient Truckle-Bed: Ha! do I dream? No, no, I
wake; as I live Adorio in a handsome Wenches Lap: O Whoreson! you are better
accommodated than I have been with my old drunken She-goat; I'll call my Master
and his Mistress to this Pageant, this may work more upon her than all he can
say: Master, Madam, come forth.


Well, what's your hasty business? what have you seen the Devil? or how?


No Boy, no; but here are some that you thought not of.


Adorio.


The Idol you used to worship.


Is this Mirtilla? I was but a Cloak to his intended Villainy.


I knew 'twould take.


I'll not kill him sleeping, but if you please, I'll wake him, and then make
him fall a Sacrifice to your just anger.


No, reserve your blood for a better use.


My fond love is turned to extreme hatred, his very sight is odious.


I have thought of a punishment for them, and then leave him to his Harlotry; if
she prove not torture enough, hold me an Ass: I saw their Horses not far off,
I'll cut their Girts and Bridles, and turn them out to the Road.


In his Hat he wears a Jewel, which this faithless Strumpet, as a Salary of her
Lust, deceived me of; he shall not keep it to my disgrace, nor will I stir till
I have it.


I am not a professed nimmer, yet l'le make a shift: by your leave Sir, 'tis
restitution; pray bear witness I do not steal it; here 'tis.


Take it not as a Mistress's favour, but a strong assurance I am your Wise.


O Heaven!


Pray in the Church: let's away: have you not been billing in the Hay, and so
deserved this unexpected favour?


You're pleasant Sir, come, will you walk.


As thou art a Gentleman kill me not basely, give me leave to draw my Sword.


What's the matter? do you dream?


A fearful one I dream't, methought Camillo's Sword was at my Throat, Calista
frowning by, commanding him, as he desired my favour her favour to strike off
my head.


Mere imagination; here's your Hat.


But where's my Jewel?


I looked upon when you slept.


What's come on it then? Restore it; thou hast it; force me not to search thee


Search me.


You was before your Ladies entertainment a Night-walker, traded in picking of
Pockets, when tame Cully's charmed with your prostitute fluttery, vouchsafed to
embrace you.


Love, give place to anger; were it thou an Emperor, 'twas false; in thy teeth
l'le tell it thee, steal what I present.


This will not do, though thou hast swallowed it, I'll rip thee up, but I'll
recover it.


Help, help, help, murder!


What, a new plot; let me have it, I say.


Hey day! at it before folks! fie for shame; you are a hot Cock of the Game.


O me wretched Maid!


Hold her up, she'll fall again before her time else: Come, come, Mistress, the
man's a well-timber'd man, he's whole Chested, and may be a little forward with
his work, in time you will make him ride more moderate; then if he prove not of
the right strain, Cuckold him first, and after make a Capon of him, never fear
a Rape, fear him not.


Methought I heard some Women's shrieks; what, was it Calandrino?


Nothing, only Master Adorio would force her to say one Lesson too often over,
which is a fault I seldom heard a woman complain on, to refuse that sort of
exercise.


My too fond Love Adorio, I have for ever banished from my heart, and in lieu,
the Holy man has given me to Camillo, in whose worthy love Calista must be
safe.


Calista, you are all goodness.


Nay then Adorio be a man, I see the Diamond; Mirtilla forgive me, thy honest
virtuous love I will repay; take me, and dispose of me as you think fit.


Chain him up; and when you feel the loving hour coming on you, let him
recreate you, and then to his Cell again, in a short time you'll find him a
sober Companion.


My heart can't let me give a denial; take me your faithful Handmaid.


O who shall take me! for something has taken my Husband, the Fates be blessed:
but whether above or below he's gone, that matters not.


O! to Heaven he must go; you have been always a careful woman in that kind:
Well, you and I will never marry; for now we may drink and sleep together
without control, since that Ram-headed Block is removed.


Lord, I am so troubled with the Teago, I believe it is because I drink but
little Wine.


'Tis a raw humour blows up in your head, you don't take it often enough.


'T may be so: truly Sir, I don't drink above a Bottle in an hour.


How many's that a day? Mrs. Muggnlla, l'le be your Doctor, and administer
effectually, I warrant you.


But are your Dancers ready?


All things ready: pray seat your selves, that I may have room to perform
matters of admiration: let your eye be riveted to my heels, and miss not a
hair, breadth of my footing: our Dance has a most melodious note, and I command
you to have Ears like Hares this night for our Masters Honour, and something of
my Worship; your reward is to be drunk blind, like Moles, in the Wine-cellar,
and though you never see after, 'tis the better: and do you hear wire-string
Cats guts men, and strong-breath'd Hoe boys, for the credit of your Calling;
twang it perfectly, as you would read your N^ck verse; marshal your selves in
the Rear, the Van is ours: Come, Mrs. Muggulla, imagine it our wedding day.


Adorio, Let us forget all but honourable friendship, and let that last till
Time shall be no more.

Now may all here, that love, as they are Friends,
To our good fortunes find like prosperous ends,

OUr Habits and our Acting such appears,
Like weather-beaten weary Travellers:
Who have endured more then may here be told,
From Eastern blasts and sharper Northern cold.
Which keeps our sadded Hearts in deep suspense,
Wanting a place to fix our Residence.
Yet if these Radiant Beauties will but please
To smile on our Endeavours, 'twill much ease
Our Cares, abate our Fears: well knowing then,
Their Influence creates Favours in those Men:
Whose noble Bounty and Compassion may,
Transform our sable Night to cheerful Day.
So by your Goodness with your mercy mixed,
We wandering Planets may in time be fixed.
AS timorous Crack with Bailiffs close beset,
Knowing her Rigging cannot discharge her Debt;
Scrues up invention to the highest pin,
To make a Trap to catch the Devil in.
Melting in tears with looks half lust half love,
Hoping the hot-rein'd ravenous Foe to move;
Sighs in his Bosom, Sir, if you'll be kind,
I would do, you know what, you know my mind.
The goatish hell-hound boiling in a Fever,
Cry's damn the Plantiff, swears he will never leave her.
Imagine now the feat is done, and she
Is gone and clapped him for his Courtesy.
I just like her, have ventured out to you;
Could I but wheedle and over come you too:
Then like a loving and a fearful Elf,
I'd send you sound away, be clapped my self.

