NATURE never contrived so fit a place for the Retreat of Rogues as this, where
we have found a Cave the Sun never saw, where we have our Lodging and
Tyring-room; for your complete Rogue must shift as often as your Player: I hate
a Fool that will set up upon single stealing, any Block-head may do it.


Well said, Noble Captain Footpad, you are a brave Rogue Commander both of
Courage and Conduct.


And truly we have robbed as comfortably under you, as ever we did under any
man.


We were once sixteen of a Company, but this vile staple Commodity of Hemp has
snatched away a dozen of the Number.


But, Captain, this place is better than you think, for hard by here lives a
wealthy Widow, young and handsome, she keeps a noble House, and has many
Suitors, and a vast Resort of Gentry coming daily to her House, there will be
prey enough for us.


I know it, good Sir, I did not choose this place for nothing: well the Trade of
Rogues, a noble Trade, and thrives with many Professions; sometimes Rogue
appears like a Gentleman, then Rogue walks like a great Man; but is indeed very
like a Lawyer; sometimes he is like a Scholar, but indeed they are most like
Fools.


Oh! but Rogue is very like a Politician Captain.


And like a Courtier too i'faith.


But is indeed the same with a Citizen.


Indeed it fits all Trades, and Country-men; the Souldier's poor without it;
the Gamester cannot live without it.


Seamen may escape it; for I have heard they are very conscientious.


O yes, especially Pirates.


Oh! but Rogue sits an Attorney admirably, it sticks to him like his green Wax,
the Attorney is married to it till death them depart: in short, Mankind is one
great, very great Rogue.


Ah, brave Captain.


Well said, noble Captain.


But Roguing will not last long in one shape, I must shift like a Chameleon upon
every occasion; for my Charter of Rogue allows me the freedom of using of all
Trades and Callings.


Truly, Captain, you can appear in any Profession, 'tis a great mercy you were
well bred; for none but a man of good Breeding could have made so good a Rogue.


I am beholden to my Parents for that, truly they did breed me very well, rest
their Souls, they were both slain at Tyburn, I heard 'em there at Good people
take warning, but I had more Grace than to take it, but for my first
transformation, I mean to turn Peddler, for I have left a Peddler fast asleep
under a Hedge, I have stolen his Pack, and bound him, and now I am set up.


How will you dispose of us?


Be gone to your retreat, when craft is to be used I'll do it my self, when
violence you shall assist me.


But, good Captain, let us comfort and confirm our selves with the Catch you
made upon our Vocation of Thieving, before we go.


Come on.

Since every Profession's become a lewd Cheat,
And the little, like fish, are devoured by the great;
Since all Mankind use to rob one another;
Since the Son robs the Father, the Brother the Brother;
Since all sorts of men such Villains will be,
When all the World plays the Rogue, why should not we?

Ah brave Captain.

Ah noble Captain.

Ah brave Captain.


Let's away, I'll to my Pack, here come Customers, that young Wench will be
overjoyed at the sight of a Peddler.


Sweet Cicely, how long have you intosticated me? I never was good Market man
since I had honestly a mind to your body, that's the truth on it.


How can I help that? I never did any thing to you in my life, not I.


You look so sweetly upon me, you make my mouth water extremely, therefore if
you like me so, if not, tell me; for would I might ne'er stir, I'll not be so
mudled again for all your Dairy, with all the product of Cream, Custard, and
Sullibubs, not I.


Truly, Gervas, I cannot love.


Love, why thou art a lusty Wench, and that will provoke thee, Love is nothing
but being lusty, the rest is twittle twattle: they say Love is a Boy, by the
Mass I think Love is a Girl by that: it may be you young Wenches think Love is
a Boy, you love Boys too well to the disgrace of Beards. Ah consider, you know
not what a man is, I would fain have you know me, there is pith, there is pith
in a man, and that thou shalt find to thy cost, if thou it but marry me, by the
Mass.


Why, Gervas, I must think of it.


Nay if you think of it, or I either, we shall never do it; let us marry first,
and think of it afterwards, as most do: why, Cicely, I will give you a white
Fustian Waistcoat, and a brave Stamel Petticoat, regarded with black Velvet.


Guarded sure you mean, Gervas.


Guarded, pish that's but one Guard, and regarded is two, at the least, you
have no Language or Expression. You are no Scholar, Cicely, one is the Singular
Number, and two is the Plural, Oh a Grammarian is a fine thing, I will give you
three, that's the Plural Number indeed.


I thank you, Gervas; but what must I give you again?


A little thing that shall cost thee nothing, Cicely, Oh for a blessed Peddler,
if it be thy will; for there are more Wenches won, with their Trinkets, than
with any we have about us; mass wish and have. Look where he is, peace.

Come, Maids, what is it that you lack?
I have many a fine knack
For you in my Pedler's Pack.
Your Sweet hearts then kindly smack,
If they freely will present you,
And with Trinkets will content you.

Oh rare, how rarely he sings!

Brushes, Combs of Tortoise shell
For your money I will sell,
Cambric, Lawn as white as milk,
Taffeta as soft as silk,
Garters rich, with silver Roses,
Rings with moral divine Posies.

Oh what brave things he has got!


Peace, peace, let him troll it away, he sings curiously.

Rainbow-Ribbands of each colour,
No walking Shop yet e're was fuller,
Various Points and several Laces
For your Boddies straight embraces,
Silver Bodkins for your hair,
Bobs, which Maidens love to wear.

Oh this is a rare Fellow, I warrant he's pure Company.


I warrant you he is very ingenious, peace.

Here are various Pick-tooth Cases,
And the finest Flanders Laces,
Cabinets for your fine Doxies,
Stoppers and Tobacco Boxes,
Crystal Cupids Looking glasses,
Will enamour all your Lasses.

Sure, Gervas, this is the Kings Peddler, he has such rare things about him, and
he sings like a Nightingal.


I believe he's the Kings Peddler indeed.

Fine gilt Prayer Books, Catechisms,
What is Orthodox, or Schisms,
Or for loyal Faith defendant
Presbyter, or Independent;
Ballads fresh, all singing new,
And all those Ballets too are true.

That's rare, come let's see 'em.


Let me see.


Stand away, let me come.


You come! stand away, you Puppy, you have no judgment.


Oh pray let Gervas see, he has a notable vein this way.


Ay, pray let Gervas see.


Oh Ballets, fine Ballets, Oh I love a Ballet but even too well, Heaven forgive
me, for being so given to the love of Poetry. What are the Contents of this,
for I scorn to read.


Marry, Sir, a most lamentable business.


Oh it's no matter, so it be a fine Ditty.


Oh I love a melancholy Ditty, I can weep at a Ballet so sweetly --


Why it is of a Virgin of thirteen or fourteen that died a Maid, that's the
truth on it.


Nay I'll be hanged then, thirteen or fourteen, and die a Maid? it cannot be
now a days.


What a scandalous World this is, to abuse a poor Girl so.


Ay, and after her death too.


Methinks they should have more conscience, than to speak ill of the dead.


First and foremost, I hope she had more Grace than to die so, I speak like a
Christian.


If she did die so, mercy of her say I, that's charitable I'm sure.


If she did die so, let it be a warning to you Maids, to shun such abominable
ways.


I hope it will, Gervas, be a warning, and we had but Grace.


Yes we should lay it to heart, and take warning.


Look here, what fine Ballet's this?


This is a very strange Ballet, of a lusty Widow.


A lusty Widow is no strange thing.


Yes a lusty Widow, that lives and dies chastely.


Is't possible a lusty Widow live and die chaste?


Lord, Lord, what lying things these Ballets are, and to be in print too!


All the Parish Hands are to the Certificate to confirm it.


Puh, 'twas plain malice in 'em, to asperse a lusty Widow so.


The Parish should have had a lusty young Vicar, and he'd have converted her
i'faith. Maids have a care; for you hope to be Widows, have a care I say of
dying chaste.


Well, we will think on it; but pray let's see his Ware.


How now, Cicely, you are a Wag, have patience, and he will show you all. Oh
vile Flesh and Blood! Oh corrupt Nature, to despise the edification of Ballets:
but what's this?


A Ballet of a Courtier that died rich.


That's a miracle indeed, I warrant he cozened many a poor body for it.


No, Sir, he scorned to meddle with the poor.


That showed he had some conscience; but Oh Cicely, here's the brave Ballet you
and I use to sing, I know it by the Picture.


Oh pray let's sing it.


To Fayrs and Markets I did go,


And I did follow you, you know.


As I returned, I threw you down


Upon the Grass,


My sweetest Lass; And so did give you a green Gown.


But if it chance my Belly swell,


Then will Marriage hide it well.


Your Son and Heir, or Daughter fair, If you'll not stay,


But run away, Is left unto the Parish care.


Oh, Sirs, my Lady wants ye, there are a great sort of strangers that are to
come to dine here, and none of ye in the way to receive Orders, come away.


Come, honest Peddler, up with your Pack, and follow us, we will make you welcome
i'faith.


We will buy all his Trinkets to the last Jet Ring, or inch of Incle, we will hamper
him i'faith, we will leave him nothing.


Bless you, bless you till I complain.


Nay, Gervas, you shall go with us, and these Maids too come along.


Ay, good Gervas, let's follow the Peddler.


Well, Nan, have you given order to all the Servants to be ready, and to mind
their business?


I have, Madam.


And whom shall I be troubled with to day, what Suitors, what Guests?


Sir John Noddy, Madam, has sent word he'll wait on you. Oh he's the finest
merry Gentleman.


Oh do you name him first? my Woman is my Rival, Cousin, there, she is a
well-wisher to that Knight; therefore we must speak well of that Coxcomb before
her: but who else dines here?


Justice Spoilwit, then Colonel Bounce.


Worthy men indeed, we have a Coxcomb that lies in the house too, Mr. Codshead,
I think he will not be answered with his Friend and Governor Mr. Crambo, a
Heroic Poet.


Your Ladyships House I think is the Exchange for Suitors, the Dining-room is
always full of Lovers of you, and the Hall always full of eating Parsons, and
other Lovers of lusty Dinners; but, Madam, every body wonders, that your
Ladyship keeps open House to all Suitors, and yet denies 'em every one their
Suit of Love.


I have answered most of the men of sense, but the turbulent Fools will still
pester me: how I despise the little follies of Mankind, the little subtilties
they think to entrap a Woman with, too cheap to cozen Babies with! I will
triumph over all the overweening Fools, and still preserve the freedom of a
Widow.


Your Ladyship is in the right; for Marriage now enslaves the Wife, but sets
the Husband free.


But methinks solitary Widowhood is but an uncomfortable condition: can no man
be fit for your choice?


None.


What says your Ladyship to a Soldier?


Oh he's too boisterous, I shall have no conversation from him, I shall hear of
nothing but Naseby, Edgehill the first, and second Newbery, Marston-Moor, and
the rest, nothing but of roaring Cannon, Battle, Murder, and sudden death; all
his Discourse disordered and confused like a routed Army, one had as good
converse with a Drum: besides they are debauched in drink, which is a great
enemy to the civility that's due to a Wife.


What says your Ladyship to a Lawyer then?


A Lawyer! there's a Husband, what with his Terms, and his Circuits, a Wife may
go hang her self for his company.


Right, Cousin, there's no enduring on it, unless it were lawful to make a
Letter of Attorney to a Gallant; what should one do, there are so many Geofails,
a Lawyer only makes his Entry to hold his Claim, that's all, I'll none of him.


What says your Ladyship to a Bishop?


A Bishop! why he cannot confer Honour upon his Wife; should I marry a Bishop,
it would be your Lordship to him, and to me how do you, Mistress: no, I would
draw in an equal yoke, when I do draw.


Besides he'll not be governed, he'd not let a Woman be Head of the Church; this
makes a Wife show like a Concubine, which shows Marriage is unlawful to the
Priesthood; then he entertains his Wife, as if he were teaching a Boy Greek, as
if we had no capacities but accidental.


You had best marry him, Nan, and let some Gentleman have good luck to
Horse-flesh by you.


But, Madam, a rich Citizen is a brave thing.


I hate to see a Husband walk the length of his Shop as a Fox, or a Civet-Cat
does the length of his Chain, backward and forward, backward and forward.


And then his House is so dark, as if he were mad, and put there to recover his
Wits.


And a Garden scarce big enough to lye at length, and be buried in.


'Tis a fine sight to see him strut ten yards before one on a Sunday to Church.


And if he be Sheriff or Lord Mayor, 'tis a comely sight to see him on a grey
Gelding, with golden Trappings, sit in Judgment over penny Loaves and pounds of
Butter.


Or to see him sleep over Malefactors at the Old-Baily.


Out on 'em, from their Custards, Fox-furrs, gold Chains, sealed Rings, gold
fringed Gloves, little Cuffs, Chamolet Cloaks, and little plain Bands, Heaven
deliver me.


You are very hard to please, but a Country Gentleman is --


Not to be endured, his head's full of nothing but Dogs and Hawks, and the
House pestered with here a Marrow-bone, there the excrement of a Dog, there the
muting of a Hawk.


Out on 'em, Country Gentlemen take more delight in Beasts than in Women.


And he's no company, yet talks as confidently, as if he talked well, and as
loud always, as if he were at a Horse-Race, a Bowling green, or a Cock-pit: I
like him not.


Well, I'm sure a young Heir newly of Age, whose Father died young will fit
you.


No, no, they are all Fools, caudled up by their Mothers.


Why there's it, Madam, are not some Wives twenty, nay some thirty years before
they can make their Husbands Fools, and you shall have him so the first day, is
not that to your advantage?


Well said, Nan, that was home.


Oh but, Nan, your Squire Fool is a stubborn Animal, your dandled Fool made my
young Master, by the flattery of old Serving-men and Country Neighbours, a wise
man is more easily governed.


Ay, Madam, but I do not mean such a young Heir, I mean one that's a Scholar,
and has been at the University.


Nay, Nan, there you are out, such a Fool will be so peremptory, because he can
construe and perse a little Greek or Latin, to think himself a wise man.


That's true, Cousin, such Fools as value themselves upon Languages, never
consider Language is but a Trunk to convey our meanings by; for ought I know
Welch is as good as Hebrew; a Dictionary is no wise book, nor a walking
Dictionary a wise man.


Suppose he has three words, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin for that Tree, he
understands no more of it, than I do by the word Tree, nor the use of it more.


Right, Cousin, only his head is pestered with three words more than I have,
which is to his disadvantage; for men whose heads are full of words, are always
empty of sense.


Madam, your Ladyship is so hasty; I'd have him after he has been at the
University, to be bred well at the Inns of Court.


Now you have hit it, one must needs be a dull Fellow, who eats nothing but dry
Loins of Mutton, and pores all day upon huge Volumes of Reports, and
Year-books, and Presidents, or trots to Westminster, and fills his Note-books
with the Opinions of old Gentlemen in Coiffs, and when they have got Law, they
think they have got the very guts of knowledge; but their Worships are
mistaken, Wisdom and Knowledge cannot be lost: but where was their Law in the
Rebellion? The Conqueror always makes Law, and alters Divinity as he pleases.


And upon such an alteration, where would be the wisdom or usefulness of
Lawyers and Parsons?


Your Ladyship is very nice, I rather than have no Husband, would have all the
ill qualities of all these put into one man, and take him for a Husband, and
without so much as a shirt too, or hopes of ever getting one.


Indeed, Nan, you are in a very desperate condition.


Yonder's Codshead and Crambo, good Madam, let's in and dress our selves.


Let's avoid 'em.

Come on.


Lord, what ail you, Mr. Codshead, this morning? I never saw you in such a dump
before.


Faith I am as dull as a Dog, the Devil take me, and as lazy as a Dog i'faith.


Why what's the matter, man?


Why I was drunk as a Dog last night with the Butler i'faith, and I am sleepy
as a Dog this morning, and cold as a Dog i'faith; but the Devil take me, I made
the Butler spew like a Dog, and when I had done, I even left him; for he stunk
like a Dog, and I warrant him he is as sick as a Dog; but for all that I am as
hungry as a Dog, i'faith, for my stomach never fails me.


Will you never leave off your Similes of a Dog? I have told you of this, why
the Widow is a witty Woman, and will laugh at you extremely, and she'll never
marry one she laughs at.


Faith they lye so readily at one's tongue's end, I cannot avoid them, I hate
to pump for a Simile; but the dear Dog serves one upon all occasions, as lean
as a Dog, as ill-natur'd as a Dog, as dry as a Dog, as hot as a Dog, as
choleric as a Dog, as lame as a Dog, as deaf as a Dog, and a matter of a
hundred and fifty more; but since you say the Widow will laugh, I will bite my
tongue, but I'll avoid it.


Practise before hand, and see if you can talk without it.


Faith I must have some other Phrase then, now don't I know what to say, I am
as heavy and as dull as a Devil, what a Devil shall I say to this Widow? Gad
take me, she is as coy as a Devil, that is, she seems to be, but she'll
dissemble like the Devil; Pox on it I am as sick as a Devil, I am in no humour
to make Love, and this scurvy Widow is as proud as the Devil, the Devil take
her.


Lord, what a stir is here with the Devil! this is as bad as a Dog.


No, the Devil's fitter for a Gentleman than a Dog, I hope; but I may use such
Similes as these, as brown as a Berry, red as a Rose, black as Jet, soft as
Silk, round as a Ball, sweet as Honey, drunk as an Owl, as strong as a Horse,
as dull as an Ox, c. Faith these are fine smart things in discourse, and fill
up finely.


Out on 'em common and dull, fit for Fellows of no sense, the Widow will never
endure them, I can assure you, if you mean to get her, leave 'em.


Pox on her for me, I don't know what I shall do with her, I must have
something to fill up the chinks of my discourse. If you forbid me these
excellent Similes, I must swear and curse bloodily, the Devil take me.


And be damned will you?


So one be damned like a Gentleman, with a good grace, especially when 'tis the
fashion to be damned too, I think he's a strange ridiculous Fellow, that will
take exceptions at it (for my part) I'm sure no Man of Honour will, they know
better what belongs to a Gentleman than so.


There's not so foolish and impertinent a sin as Swearing, not natural, no
pleasure, though the rest of the deadly sins are pleasant, very pleasant.


I never saw such a man in my life, may not one swear by Heavens?


Why, that was an Oath in Kings James his time, and exploded long since.


I have heard it was used in those days, when holy Auchorites called roaring
Boys, dwelt in Milford-lane; but what say you to by my truly?


'Tis a childish Oath.


Believe me 'tis pretty methinks.


Believe me! why there's another, who will believe one another? now are not
these foolish and unnecessary words?


What say you to Faith and Troth? for I must have some word or other.


Faith and Troth! why there's no Faith nor Troth amongst men now a days.


Oh Lord, I have found out the finest, prettiest, innocent word, I'm sure will
please you, Adaid, ah adaid, no adad, that's fine, very fine Adad.


That's a silly word fit only for Fanatics to cheat with.


What shall I do? What shall I do? I have found it now I'm sure, as I am an
honest man, as I am an honest man, so it be spoke loud and heartily, with your
hand at your breast, and repeated often.


Men may use that Phrase, and never be forsworn in this Age, but I'll not allow
you that, nor by this light, they're Milliners Oaths, and Haberdashers of small
Wares to cozen with.


Mercy upon me, what will become of me? but I will use one word in despite of
the Devil, as she is deadly handsome, deadly pretty, her complexion is deadly
lovely.


If you do use it, you will lose a friend of me, and I'm sure my Lady will
laugh at you immoderately, 'tis ridiculous, deadly lively.


Will you give me leave then to curse? as a Plague on you, Jack, a Pox take you
for an arch Rogue, or so?


By no means, men are apt enough to the Pox, without your cursing, if you mean
the great Pox.


Great Pox! what should I mean, the small Pox? take you; that's not worth the
cursing; but to a proud Lady's face 'tis a foolish snivelling curse, I would as
soon say the measels take you.


But none of these will I allow you, they are foolish affectations not to be
endured.


You are very rigid, what will become of me? neither as hungry as a Dog, nor as
proud as a Devil, nor as drunk as an Owl, nor no full-mouth'd Oaths, nor
middling Oaths, nor your pretty little, little Oaths, nor Curses neither; why a
fashionable Gentleman should not speak at all by these Laws; if these were
strictly observed, our Gallants would be dumb, for they cannot speak without
them. Would you have a Gentleman to make signs, or say nothing but ah, ah, ah,
like a Turkish Mute?


Better than to talk affectedly or nonsensically; why should men be so foolish
to use unnecessary words?


Oh lamentable! unnecessary do you call 'em? Swearing is very necessary in many
cases, as in an Army for an Officer; if he says, Truly I will break your head,
or, Truly I will hang you, the Soldier will not believe it; but if he lifts up
his Cane, and cry Zounds, I'll pay you, he'll crouch and obey.


This is a senseless error, no man is thought honester, more valiant, or truer of
his word for swearing, they swear on purpose to cozen, these foolish by-words
are nothing but custom, try and break your self on it, or you will certainly be
laughed at, and lose this Widow.


Well for your sake I will try, but I shall ne'er do it, at least I shall no joy
in discourse, it will be so dull and heavy.


You are mistaken, try in private.


I will; but 'tis very hard, I'll to my Chamber and practise.


Do so, and let's meet at dinner.


IS my Lady at home?


She is, Sir, but she's in her Chamber dressing.


Prithee Friend call the Butler, that I may have a Cup of Sack before Dinner.


I will, and please your Worship.


Whom have we here? Coll. Bounce? Gad save you.


How dost thou honest Justice Spoilwit?


Thank ye Coll. but what wind brings you hither?


Why faith there is here a rich, and they say, a merry good humor'd Widow; and
if she thinks fit, I'll venture my body with her in lawful Wedlock.


But I will forbid the Banes, good Colonel Bounce.


Fa, la, la, la, Oh honest Justice, how is it?


Sir John Noddy! in good faith I am heartily glad to see you, now we are
complete, we shall be as merry as the Maids; Coll. this is a Friend of mine,
pray know him.


Noble Coll. I kiss your hands.


Your Servant, Sir: prithee Justice what Butterfly is this?


Oh he is a very witty merry Knight, he's of the Noddy's of the North, an arch
Wag indeed, la.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, ha, brave Justice, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, well go thy ways, thou art an arch one, you would make one die
with laughing, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, ha, i'faith, Sir, you would make one die with laughing, Pox on
him: is this a merry, witty Knight, with his Monkey tricks?


Faith I love to be merry, my Lord, my Neighbour is so pleased with me, he'll
never be without me.


Indeed, Colonel, he's excellent company, he would make one burst with
laughing.


I remember yesterday at my Lords, ha, ha, ha, ha.


What Sir John! ha, ha, ha.


I laid a hot stone in the Window, and his Man Tom came, and ha, ha, ha, did so
horribly, ha, ha.


What burn him?


Ay, ay, and he threw it away, and ran for Sallet-oil, ha, ha, ha, it had like
to have killed my Lord.


Ha, ha, ha, very good, nay you are the best at these things in the world,
i'faith he is Colonel.


As God save me, but if he should use me so, I would beat him exceedingly.


Another time one of my Lords Men stood very soberly, I held my finger thus,
and called him Jack of a sudden, and he turned suddenly, and hit his Nose such
a bump, ha, ha, ha, I had almost died with laughing, and all that were by
laughed so it was wonderful: my Lord hearing it asked what was the matter,
which they told him, then says he, I thought it could be no body but my
Neighbour Jack Noddy; for there is not such a witty Fellow in the whole Country
again.


No more there is not i'faith, Sir John.


The Devil take me, if I see any such thing, he is for ought I see a most
gross, absurd Coxcomb.


But says my Lord, these are gifts that Nature bestows on men, on some more, on
some less, as she pleases: his Lordship is in the right, they are gifts, that's
the truth on it, but ha, ha, ha. I remember another was standing by the fire, I
heated the great end of my Riding-rod, and put it in his hand, he flew such a
way, ha, ha, ha, from the fire, oh, oh, oh, oh: Men, Women, and Children laughed
so horribly, swearing that Sir John Noddy was the best company in the Earth,
and the wittiest Gentleman.


Look you there, Colonel, he is a very merry, brisk, facetious person indeed.


He is a very witty person indeed.


Alas, Sir, no not I, not I by no means, Sir, yet I swear my Lord will seldom
be without me, especially at christmas, if I be but away a fortnight at any
time, he sends post for me, he cannot be without me.


Does no body ever take you on the pate for these things?


No, no, sometimes they I say Leave your fooling, or I'll knock you, I vow I'd
teach you better manners, were it not for my Lord, or so; then I laugh and
protest I meant 'em no harm, and drink drunk with 'em, and all's well again.


Ay, ay, why who can take such pretty innocent mirth ill?


And then I entertain them well at my house, and my Sister makes much of them,
they love me the best of any Gentleman in the Shire of any Quality.


I find you have a very good Sister, that will make much of people.


I, Sir, she's as good a Sister as any man has, I thank God.


Justice, one word with you, does he come to make Love to the Widow?


I believe he does.


Ha, ho, oh, oh, hum.


Ha, ha, ha, oh, oh, them, get you gone, you Wag.


This is a Trick I have made my Lord laugh with, till he has been ready to fall
down.


For ought I hear he is the merriest Lord in Europe.


Oh how now, James, art thou come?


I am glad to see your Worship well, Sir John I am your Worship's humble
Servant.


Ha, ha, your Worship will never leave these things, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha, well you are the very'st arch one; but dear Sir John forbear, you
will kill me with laughing, I shall break a vein i'faith.


Come, Gentlemen, will you please to take a cast of my Office, and take a Cup
of lusty Canary or Maroh Beer, that will make a Cat speak.


Well said, James; but where's my Lady?


Not dressed yet: come, Gentlemen, be pleased to walk in the while, her
Ladiship's a dressing.


Come, Gentlemen, I am for a Cup of Sack before Dinner clearly.


Ha, ha, oh, oh, forbear, good Sir John, or I must leave you, I am not able to
endure it, ha, ha, oh, oh, them,


Faith I cannot help it, I love to be merry, ha, ha, ha.


Nay I know your Worship will never leave, till your mouth be cold, as the
saying is, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, you are all my Rivals, but there's ne'er a handsome Fellow amongst them,
the Devil take me; I am cursing again like a Devil; look there again, like a
Devil, what shall I do to speak? I see the Justice is going with the Butler, he
will be as drunk as an Owl -- drunk as an Owl, why there 'tis again! I will
bite my tongue like a Devil, but that I'll remember it, again like a Devil! I
shall be undone, what will become of me? I am in a desperate condition, Gad
take me I shall lose the Widow: now am I swearing again, I will bite my tongue
enough to remember it; let me see your eyes, Madam, your bright eyes; ah it was
a coming; your bright eyes have so enslaved me, that the De -- (ah it was just
a coming there) that I can no longer, as I ho -- there it was again; that,
Madam, I can no longer call my heart my own; that was pretty well -- You are
the pretty Thief that stole it, and go -- O Lord it was even out, this is a
cruel pain; but, Madam, think me not rude, if I apprehend your Ladyship for
this Love-felony: for if you do not restore my heart, or -- give me some
comfort, the -- oh I shall be as dull as a -- oh hold, hold, it must be
overcome with great labour and industry. Well before I marry her, I will do
what I can to abstain; but when I have her, I am resolved to take my full
swing: ha, there was a whole sentence without oaths or curses.


Oh Mr. Codshead, I am glad to see you alone, you have been practising.


I have a little I'm sure, I sweat for it.


Come pray let me hear how you have profited.


I shall never do it; yet just now when I was a practising, methought I did it
pretty well, I see I must take great pains for it.


Try I'll help you, begin some discourse.


Just now I met Blunderbus, my Neighbour, coming to the house.


Did you?


I vow 'tis true.


I vow!


The Devil take me else.


What swear and curse!


Oh I beg your pardon with all my heart.


What said he to you?


Why he said he was as lean as a Dog, and fallen away like a Devil.


Dog and Devil again!


He said I would not say it for a thousand pound, he said too I looked as thin
as a Shrimp.


Thin as a Shrimp! pish you forget.


No, I tell you he said, What no difference of persons! take me with such a
trick, and hang me.


Hang ye! that's fine.


Lord, I never saw such a man in my life, why that was not in my Lesson; but to
go on, I am sure if I look lean, this restraint must cause it, for want of due
swearing and cursing, and some graceful expressions, I'm very much heart-burnt
for want of 'em I'll swear.


You swear.


No, I said I would swear, but I did not.


Why then you did lie.


Why shall a Gentleman have no liberty, neither swear nor lie, nor any thing?
this is to give over being a Cavalier, I had rather be a Cobbler, he may swear
and lie, and do what he will.


So this was well, you begin to mend, try once again; what would you say, if
you were with my Lady?


Thus, Madam, I never saw so pretty a white Devil.


Again at the Devil!


Ay, a white Devil, why 'twas a black one you forbid; there are Devils of all
colours, like Conies, black, blue, white, gray, what d'e lack, but you put me
out; I will tell her she's a pretty Thief, and has stolen my heart.


Ay, that's well, I would make use of that thought my self, shall I borrow it
of you for my next work?


With all my heart, and I am glad I have it to serve you I protest.


Out on it protest!


Lord, what shall I do?


Not swear.


Faith and Troth I do not swear.


Are Faith and Troth no Oaths?


Oh none at all to those Rappers I have.


But you must not swear at all.


Then I doubt I must not speak.


But pray go on.


I have forgot, you have put me out, I must go again and practise by my self.


Do them to your Chamber*


Well adieu then.


How splenetic, how dull am I! when I would compose a Sonnet to the fair
Isabella, I am clouded with fogs and fumes, and such a Theme would inspire any
man but me, I fear my days of ballating draw near, I am impotent, bewitched in
Poetry, awake my drowsy Fancy, will my Muse show me a Jades trick at last?
rouse up.

Hum --

Thou joy of my heart,
Thou wonder of Nature,
Thou,
Hum -- I can go no further.

It will not do, I fear I am lost, I thought to have won her heart by Poetry,
and now it fails me.


Is he here my Rimer? -- methinks he is a very dull Fellow, I have heard some
of these Heroic men are very foolish; if they be all like him, they are better
Subjects of a Play than Authors: 'twould be a great ease to Comical Poets to be
supplied with Heroic Fools.


Here she is: Madam, I knew you were here before I saw you.


I warrant you heard me.


No* Madam, the Garden smiled, and put on a fresh Verdure.


It seems the Garden is merrily disposed.


Your presence would turn a Winter into a Spring, since you arrived the Flowers
became more fragrant, the blushing Tulips raised their drowsy heads, and
started at the sight of your bright Beauty.


You are very Poetical this morning.


Love, Madam, is the Fountain of all Poetry.


I did not observe the Tulips to do that you speak of.


Poets and Lovers are quick-sighted, Madam; Lilies look pale to see their white
outvied in your fair Face, and Roses blush for shame, seeing the fresher
Crimson of your Cheek.


They are too modest of all conscience, I had thought the Lilies and Roses had
had more discretion; but, Sir, I am glad to find you so Poetical, for my Cousin
my Lady Haughty would beg the favour of you to make some pretty rustic
entertainment in Poetry, she has Servants enough to study it, and Music we
have within our selves, here will be much Company, and it will much increase
our mirth.


She honours me with her Commands; if you would join yours, it would inspire
me.


If that will do you good, I do: Any way, so we have it done.


The Honour is infinite, I kiss your fair hands, it shall be done in a moment.


How now, Mall, whither in such haste?


My Lady has sent me to the Cook, Madam, to bid him make haste with Dinner.


'Tis well.


Look to the Boiler there, keep gentle fires, see that the Olio be taken care
of.


It shall be done, Master.


Be very careful and diligent there in the Scaldinghouse.


They shall.


You for the Range, look you spend as much Butter as you can for Fees, that we
may not want another day.


I'll warrant you, let us alone for that.


Arm the Roast-meat with Paper, my Lady's Bills, Answers and Depositions in
Chancery, with all her Ladiship's Attorney's Letters, these are ordained for
the Roast.


It shall be done, Master: then for the Pastry Prins Works with Coriats,
Crudities, and the long Presbyterian Expositions upon the Psalms, with the old
Ordinances of both Houses.


All these we have already.


Oh, if we had but some correspondence with the two Play-houses, they would
furnish us rarely, they say they have hundreds of Plays brought to them in a
year, that are good for nothing else, we might buy 'em at two Shillings a
Stone; these are those they refuse, and they might throw us several of those
they Act in to the bargain.


Master Cook, my Lady has sent me to you, to desire you of all loves, that you
will take very great care, that the Meat may be well ordered, lest she should
be thought an ill House-keeper, and you disgraced.


My Sweet heart, first give me a Kiss, and then I will answer my Lady.


Stand away, you are the strangest. man.


In a word, we want all things we should have, but I'll do what I can, and a
man can do no more; but prithee sit upon my knee, my Dear, here fill some
Plum-porridge for this Gentlewoman, bring some of the Tarts and Custards too,
and you shall pay nothing, but now and then a Kiss.


Nay pish, Mr. Cook, my Lady will be an angered.


Ounds, I love thee Sweet, and have done ever since I came to the House, and so
thou shalt find. James, prithee sing the Song I made of Mrs. Mary to the single
Cittern: come bring out the Tarts and Custards.


Come on.

Fie, fie, this Love keeps such a coil,
So high't does boil.
Love's heat does make so great a fire
Of hot desire,
That all my fancy it does trouble,
Love so doth bubble.
My loving Pot can hold no more,
But does run over.

How do you like it, my Dear?


I doubt you mean naughtiness, forsooth, or else it is very pretty.


Thou should skim Love upon the top,
Or with a Sop
To soak it, or else to dip it,
Many a Sippet
Would keep't within Love's circle, then
Stir it again;
And if it rise, 'twill down, you know,
If that you blow.

This is scurrility, as my Lady's Chaplain says.


Nothing but similizing, as Poets must do; but here's a Cup of Wine, my Heart
and Soul to thee, Ounds no man loves you better than I do.


But I cannot stay, forsooth, my Lady will miss me.


But a little, go on James.


Then dish it up unto your wish
In Love's sweet Dish:
When Love's sweet morsels we have tasted,
None shall be wasted;
What's left we will set up cold to eat
For buttered meat.
An ill Cook now is he that lingers
To lick his fingers.

Oh gemini, what Songs you make me here! well I don't mind 'em, I don't
understand 'em: come will you let me go, my Lady will chide me grievously.


Good Sweet-heart, stay but one Song more, and I have done.


I'll stay no more Songs, not I: if you don't let me go, I protest I'll never
come again.

Look now, now Fiddles, you are the strangest man.


But one Copy of Verses, dear Sweet-heart.

I will invite thee to Love's back-house,
There bolt our Love; for Love will make us
Not mealy-mouth'd, but in Love's Oven,
The heat that's there will make us loving.

Nay get you gone, I am a young Maiden, and not fit for these kinded things.


Nay good Sweet-heart; if thou say no,
Then out, alas! my Cake is dow.
Look you there that's extempory, Mrs. Mary; how do you like it?


Farewell, I will not stay, that's once.

Nay pish, fie, get you gone.


Farewell my Heart and Soul with thee: here where's the Clerk of the Kitchen?


Here, what do you want?


Want I quoth he, we want every thing in the World, a Pox on it.


Be patient and you shall have all.


Patience! Pox on patience, Sounds my Lady is dishonoured for ever, you will
never be able to repair it.


Prithee what's the matter man?


Blood, there wants a wooden Candlestick in the Pastry. Cook, quoth he! the
Devil would not be a Cook at this rate.


Is that the matter? that will be a great dishonour indeed, come there shall be
one.


And then we have none but Rush-candles in the Kitchen, when we should have
Torches, it is so dark.


Come be patient, and you shall want nothing, Mr. Cook, here is a Friend of
mine, pray make him welcome.


You're welcome, Sir, cut off a piece of the Chine of Beef presently, some
Anchoves, and Westphalia, here's a Boule of Sack to you, here give me the Can
that measures Ale by the Yard, Derby measure, Sir, here's this Can of Sack to
you, Sir, I cannot stay, Sir, you see I must be gone Sir. Come, where are ye,
ye lazy Rogues? fall to your work, open the Oven there, and see how the Pies
colour.


Master Cook, you do not know the good qualities of this Gentleman.


Truly I do believe he is a very civil Person, pray eat heartily, Sir: well,
Boys, how are the Pies?


All very well, Master.


Look to the Boiler, it does not boil too fast; but what were you saying, Sir?
Mich'y good dit ye.


This Gentleman plays rarely on the Music.


Faith, Sir, since I have given you a cast of my Office, pray give me one of
yours, and i'faith here's the other Can of Sack to your health.


With all my heart.


Come out you Myrmydons, and shake your heels, i'faith I'll have a Dance,
though my Lady has no Dinner.


Come out, Boys.


Come out, Lads.


Very well done, Boys, well danced.


Thank you, good Sir, here's the other Can to you, Sir: come, my Boys, take up
your Drum-sticks, your Chopping knives, let the Dresser be your Drum, and upon
the Butter-meats and Sallets beat a Call then, sound your Trumpet, your Yard of
Can for a Charge, and dish up quickly.


Why you have Military Terms for all these things.


Sir, I have been a General's Cook, after Dinner I'll give a full description
of all, but now I cannot stay, farewell, Sir.


Your Servant, Sir.


Come you Rogues, take off your Cans, and be nimble to it, Boys.


This was a brave business, and well laid.


We unbound the Peddler, who roared out for help and inquired after you.


We pitied his condition mightily, and told him we had seen you, and directed
him a wrong way, whither he is gone in great haste to pursue you.


That was bravely done, with my Pedler's Pack I made 'em all cut their Purses
willingly, never Indian King parted with his Gold at easier rates for Hatchets
and Knives, than my Coxcombs have parted with their Money for my Trinkets.


What is the Purchase, Captain?


Fourteen pounds and a Noble.


Ah, brave Captain.


They picked their own Pockets, but now I hope we shall pick 'em for 'em: they
love Gypsies mainly, and methinks we look as like the Race of Ptolomy.


As Hogs grease, and the Rind of Walnuts can make us.


There are Strangers there, brave Gentry, an we could light o'them.


Luck if it be thy will, that we thrive in our Profession.


Have at thee Fortune, they say thou art a Whore I will have about with, though
thou art grown so common, thou favourest every Blockhead.


Would some of the Strangers would come out to us, be sure they're full of
Money.


Come, let's roar out our Song of the Gypsies with laudable voices, and that
may train 'em out of the house.


Come on, let's be merry by our selves.


Come -- I love singing mightily.


So well, that as thou livest singing, thou wilt diesinging, a Psalm I mean.


Oh the brave jolly Gypsy,
Who often in tipsy,
And has strong Ale good store.
With a little black Whore.
When credit does fail
With fat Hostess for Ale,
He grows dogged and sullen,
Steals her Geese and her Pullen.
And Linen that's bleaching,
If it be within reaching,
'Tis juggled away
By night or by day.
Then Fortunes we tell,
But stealing does well
To help out the Trade,
Which is somewhat decayed.
When Maids are a kissing,
Their things never missing,
Then we take our time,
And think it no crime,
And then the next morning,
Their Hue and Cry scorning,
We care not a straw
For their Statute Law.

Here come some of 'em.


We will take a Turn here before Dinner, bring us word when her Ladyship comes
down.


I will, Sir, I must go look after my Mistress Margery: here are so many
Gentlemen's Men, I shall have one or other shap her up.


I'faith was it you that made this Music? you are brave Gypsies, melodious
Gypsies.


Where are the rest of your Company?


They are behind, an please your Worship, but I am chief.


This is our Captain.


What, I warrant you can tell Fortunes, prithee look in my hand, and tell me
mine.


Prithee, Justice, why wilt thou be such an Ass? dost thou think they can tell?


Colonel, I do assure you I have known notable understanding men, men of
excellent parts Gypsies.


Sir, I'll warrant you, I'll tell you yours.


I'm sure I'll give you nothing.


'Tis no matter.


Sir, let me see your hand.


-- By your Venus Trench
You should love a Wench.

Should? why I do you Puppy, and so does all the World.


I see plainly that you will be Knighted, and marry a rich Widow.


Ounds ye lying Rogues, to flatter him so.


Good Sir, have patience, i'faith they are men of skill, I know 'em.


How Fools will lie, and help to cozen themselves!


So God save me, I have known some Gypsies predict as well as Lilly or Gadbury.


-- Sir, it has been your mishap
In your time to get a Clap.

What dull Rogues these are! why you Rascals, is there a Gentleman that has not
had a Clap?


Faith and Troth I have had six, little and great, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, ha; but i'faith shall I be Knighted, and marry the Lady, hah?


Pray, Sir, let me see.
By your hand and this line
You love a Glass of Wine.

Why you abominable dull Rascal, does not every body love Wine and Women?
there's a Secret indeed; why thou stupid blockheaded Puppy, I could beat thy
brains out, if thou had any: come, a Pox on it, let's be gone.


Nay, good Colonel, have patience, alas! you do not understand these things,
these are gifts.


Gifts! I'm sure, I'll give them nothing.


Alas, Sir, I am ingram man, I desire no money, I'll pray for your Worship.


Ay, I think you may have wit enough for that.


By this Line of Honour, Sir, I find you'll be made a Lord before you die.


Come away, you blockheaded Justice.


Well I come; a Lord! Oh brave, a Lord! well stay here, and I'll get my Lady to
send for ye, and pray let her know that she is to marry me.


Come away, poor witless Cheats, poor Fools.


Ha, ha, ha, look you there, Justice.


Ha, ha, ha, I thought we should have ye i'faith, hah, ha, ho, ho.


Ha, ha, ha, have I caught you, Justice?


Ha, ha, ha, you will never leave i'faith, you are the pleasantest man, ha, ha,
ha.


Come, these are the silliest cheats.


Go your ways, you'll find your selves Fools by and by.

'Tis true you are witty, but my judgment's righter,
Since my Pocket's full, and your Pocket's lighter.
Come my brave Rogues, let's be gone, this was a brave booty, let's away, and
shift and divide, lest if we should stay, we may be taken and hanged about this
business.


Come away, noble Captain.


Where are my doughty Lovers? I have stayed a pair of minutes for 'em at least.


Some Ladies would be as proud of such a Train of Lovers, as Lawyers are of
many Clients, or Divines of heaps of Parishes to follow them.


Some Lady would struck and take upon her, like a new upstart Favourite to a
Prince, that flies above the Gentry of his Country, and uses 'em scurvily.
Indeed I have not much reason to triumph to day, for I have none but Coxcombs.


But you have every day variety, as a Favourite has.


And I use 'em scurvily too, but yet they come and dissemble, fawn, flatter,
worship, and fall down before me, as if they took me for the golden Calf, and I
all the while look upon them with the same scorn, that a new-raised Favourite
does upon his Betters.


Did your Ladyship find such great affliction in Matrimony, that you are such a
violent enemy to it?


So much, as I am resolved never to be so constrained again, I'll continue as
free as Nature made me; why should we submit to that foolish Animal Man? Let
him be head! I'll keep the Fools at a distance, and make them crouch.


But I hear of one Courtier too, that is coming down, that will win you, the
finest nice, perfumed, periwigged, feathered Person in the World.


I know who 'tis; what shall I marry an outside of a man, a Fellow put together
by a Milliner, Perfumer, Feather-man, and French Taylor?


When Women fall much in love with men for their fine Clothes, I wonder they
are not more in love with the Taylors that made 'em.


A rich Suit out of an old Wardrobe would make as good a Husband, I'll give a
Receipt of him: Take fine rich Clothes, and do not pay for 'em, take a Barber
for a Counsellor, rail at all but the present, scorn and endeavour to depress
all Arts and Sciences, which he knows nothing of, whisper Proclamations in your
ears for Secrets; tell you what the King said to him once upon a time that
shall be nameless, when he scarce takes notice of him once a year, perhaps
speaks to him near.


Oh, but they are rare men for making Love, Madam.


Faith they have but one Receipt of making Love, which is like an Almanac for
the Meridian of the Court, and generally serves 'em for all England,
Quack-salvers, Empiricks in Love, that have but one Receipt for every thing.
The common High-way of Love, flatter you, and condemn others, extol your Wit,
and yet think to make you a Fool, praise your Virtue, and yet strive to lie
with you.


And at such easy rates too, swear he is your Vassal, and lie at your feet,
nothing but lie, cog, flatter, and dissemble, which can cozen none but
overweening self Lovers.


Right, Cousin, they can deceive none but those that contribute to deceive
themselves.


Lord, should one suspect honest Gentlemen, when they give one so good words
too?


They that do not suspect, will be more than suspected.


For what, Madam?


For Fools.


But here come the Gentlemen now, Madam Isabella observe Sir John Noddy, 'tis
the merriest pretty Gentleman.


Gentlemen you are welcome, Sir John how do all our Friends in your Country?
how does my Lord your Neighbour?


Very well, Madam, I was a hunting with my dear Lord the other day, and he
lighted, and we all lighted, and I sneaked behind one of his Gentlemen, and
thrust him into a plash of water, ha, ha, ha.


Very good i'faith, ha, ha, ha.


But had you seen my Lord how he laughed, the tears ran trickling down his
Honour's cheeks, he desired me to forbear, or I should kill him, then charged
every body not to speak of it, that he might tell it first when he came home.


Madam, did not I tell you, what a pretty, witty, wild Gentleman Sir John was?


Madam, yonder are Gypsies without have told us our Fortunes: if your Ladyship
please to hear yours, i'faith they are rare men, men of excellent skill,

ha, hum, what a Devil, Oh Pox where's my money? O Devil.


What's the matter? have the Gypsies bewitched you?


O Lord, Oh they or some body have picked my Pocket of five pound in Silver,
and forty pound in old Gold.


Truly, Justice, they are men of skill, excellent skill.


Ha, ha, ha, oh, oh, hum, what have your Pocket picked, Justice? that a man
should be such an Ass!


Ha oh, Devil, where is it? Ounds, they have done the same for me, I have lost
every cross.


Oh, have you so, Colonel?


I am the Son of a Strumpet, if they have not got all mine too.


Ha, ha, ha, Knight, your Pocket picked! that a man should be such an Ass,
Knight!


Come, Gentlemen, let's in, the Cook summons us to Dinner with that knocking;
comfort your selves after your losses, here is money in the house, you may make
use of it, Gentlemen, if you please; but let's to dinner.


Come, Madam, we wait on you, I shall have a hundred pound paid me by a Fellow
that lives hard by; you shall have what you will, as far as that goes,
Gentlemen.


Thank you, good Sir, there ha, ha, ha, oh, good Justice, now I am even with
you, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, oh, oh, well go thy ways, I never saw such a merry man in my life.


What a strange Coxcomb is this Knight! Cousin, come.


He is so, but methinks the other is a handsome Gentleman, there is a noble
roughness in his countenance, that speaks an honest plainness, and a wise
contempt of those Fools he is in company with; his Mine and Air pleases me
strangely.


Allons, Gentlemen.


We wait on you, Madam.


COme, Madam Isabella, are you for some Plaice? here is a great Plaice, Ladies
love to take place, ha, ha, ha.


Very good, ha, ha, ha.


You are the pleasantest company, Sir John, where do you learn these things,
amongst the Wits?


No, Madam, Pox the Wits are dull Fellows, they call themselves Wits, but they
are dull, very dull; I keep company with the Clinchers, they are the rare
company.


Did ever man light into the company of such Fools?


What are these Clinchers?


What are they? why they are the gravest of Divines and Lawyers, Judges will
do it upon the Bench at an Arraignment, and sometimes your States-men are good
at it, they cannot forget when they were Sophisters.


Faith, Madam, these Clinchers are the wittiest people in the World.


Pray, Mr. Spoilwit, cut me a piece of that Rabit.


Madam, it is a raw bit, and not a Rabit, for it is not half roasted, ha, ha.


Ha, ha.


Very good, ha, ha, ha.


'Tis very good, the Devil take me.


Again at the Devil!


Peace, I hope my Lady took no notice on it.


I never knew any great Lady keep above one Fool, and my Lady has four or five,
Madam.


I think she had best put 'em in Livery, Sir.


Here is a very good Fowl, will you prove a Goose, Sir John? ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha; no; no, but there's a very good Woodcock, Justice, ha, ha, I love a
Woodcock Justice, ha, ha.


Very good on both sides.


That Poet, Madam, is a very dull Fellow.


As dull a Poet as one shall see in a Summers day; this man has sense, and
looks like a Gentleman.


What are you for a Gull Justice? ha, ha, ha.


No, no, I had as live's eat of an Owl Sir John, I love not a Gull Sir John,
ha, ha, ha, there I gave it him i'faith, Colonel.


Ha, ha, ha, very good i'faith; well there is nothing like this Wit at Dinner.


Wit is never so good as at Meals, it makes one digest the meat so rarely.


Wit is indeed a fine thing; but do grave Men, Divines, and Lawyers, and Men of
great business use this kind of Wit?


Oh ever while you live, they are the wittiest people, they are so full of
Jests, and will so laugh, especially at Meals.


I'faith Sir John's in the right, your Wits, your flashy Wits are nothing to
them, when they please to be merry.


Oh there was a Judge that use to come our Circuit, the purest company: a
Gentleman asked a Lady, whether she would have any Custard, says the Judge
Cus-turd, you may be ashamed to name so uncivil a thing to so fine a
Gentlewoman; ha, ha, ha.


Passing good, ha, ha, ha.


There was such laughing, the Ladies did so tihie under their Napkins, and
could not eat a bit after it i'faith; but when they looked most demurely, out
went the Tihie again under the Napkin, ha, ha. I am a Villain, if the Tihie did
not take a reverend old Gentlewoman when she was a drinking, and she did squirt
the Beer out of her Nose, as an Indian does Tobacco, ha, ha.


This was very good, Gad take me, this would have made one laugh like a Devil.


Why, are you mad? will you ruin your self?


Lord bless me, I did quite forget, I was so transported at the Jest.


A Pox on it, I am so dull, I cannot make a Quibble, and yet all the bawdy Jests
in my Plays are nothing else.


Pray, Sir John, give me some of that Custard for all your Jest, I were a Fool,
if I should refuse that Custard, ha, ha, ha, that's very good, is not that very
good, Ladies, ha, ha, ha.


Ay faith is it Cousin? ha, ha, ha.


Excellent! we are rare company, talk of your Wits, and your Wits, and this and
that, i'faith, they are dull Fools to us.


Gentlemen, if you have leisure for your immoderate and most incomprehensible
Wit, which if you do not leave it, it will kill you, pray drink my Lady's
Health. Madam, your Ladyships Health; Justice to you.


Top, as the French say.


Nay on my conscience, as the Colonel says, Wit will be the death of me, 'twill
kill me at last.


Ay, and me too, the Devil -- Oh it was just a coming.


Come here's my Lady's Health, about with her, I would I could have about with
her, Justice, ha, ha.


Very good, very good.


Are you not cloyed with these fulsome, nauseous Fools, Madam?


No, your gross Fool is good company enough for variety, I do not mean your
Fool of God's making, he is to be pitied; but your Fool of his own making, that
pretends to be witty, one that takes great pains to make himself a Fool.


Not your natural, but artificial Fool.


Right, Cousin: Sir John, pray cut me a piece of that Cheshire Cheese.


Cheshire Cheese! 'tis Windsor Cheese, Madam.


Im' sure it was sent me by a Friend out of Cheshire.


What makes you call it Windsor Cheese?


Because it is near Eaton, ha, ha, ha.


Ha, ha, this is the best that ever was, I shall die with laughing.


Admirable, most incomparable.


I am so dull, I cannot make one for the blood of me.


Sir John is the merriest Gentleman, I'll swear he would kill me to keep him
company.


Ha, ha, I'll tell you the best Jest in the World, Madam: a Doctor of Divinity,
that shall be nameless, said that his Wife always gave him three Dishes,
Bitter, Powt, and Tart; was it not very good, Madam?


Oh very good.


Admirable, these Joques are excellent things, this harmless playing upon
words, your scurvy Wits they are all upon things, and men full of Satyr, as
they call it.


Madam, here's your Grange-man Gervas, and your Dairy-maid Cicely have
committed Matrimony this day, and desire your Ladyship will give 'em joy, and
will present you with a Dance.


With all my heart, where are they? how now, Gervas, are you married?


Yes, Madam, Cicely and I are gone the way of all flesh.


He has overcome me, Madam, he has such a way with him.


Joy to ye, I'll give you your first piece of Household stuff.


And I the next.


Thank your Worships.


But where's our Dance?


Strike up, Musicians.


Very well; farewell, much joy to you. Gentlemen, let us retire, and about half
an hour hence I'll meet ye all in the Garden.


Madam, will you give me leave to wait upon you for a moment?


I hope, Mr. Crambo, you are pleased to remember your promise of a little
Poetry.


I do, Madam; Pox on that Colonel, he's going with my Cloris: I am troubled
with dullness, I have such vapours in my head, I am not able to write, I fear.


Ah, Margery, have you the face to look on me, after what I saw just now before
Dinner?


Why, what did you see, good Mr. Butler and Taylor? for those are your two
Titles of Honour.


Did not I see you in a corner laughing and playing with Sir John Noddy's Man?


Would not you have one civil to a Stranger? you ill-bred Taylor.


Civil with a Pox d'e call it?


What you are jealous, are you? I defy your Yard and your Spanish Needle, and
your middle finger, with your Corslet Thimble.


Marry come up, Mrs. Caudle-maker, you Keeper of my Lady's secrets! you would
hold the door for a need, if my Lady were such a one; 'tis well her Ladyship is
not lewdly given, I know what you would be else.


Why what would I be, thou Goose?


A Bawd, a Bawd, a Bawd Margery.


A Thief, a Thief, a Thief James, I'm sure one cannot be a Taylor without it.


You scurvy tittle tattle, Tell-tale of the house, that makes lies, and are
believed, flatters my Lady, and says the Crow's white, if she says so, all this
for a little Money and Clothes, and then you mince and trip and amble to
Church, not for Religion, but to show my Lady's old Wardrobe furbisht up upon
thy scurvy body.


Scurvy body! out you Prick-louse, 'tis as good a body -- and that most young
Men of the house will say, thou unconscionable Item of searing Candle, Bombast,
and Canvas.


There's stiffening too, good Mrs. Wasp, with a sting in your tail.


Not so much as you should have put in, you cheating Rogue, you cozened me in
that too.


Come you are rank, you are rank, every Dog-bolt in the house follows you, with
a Pox to you, that will be the end of it, to thy shame, thou lascivious Woman.


Oh you base Taylor and Butler made up of shreds and chippings, ne'er a one of
the house will say so much of me.


'Tis their goodness more than your desert.


I am sure never a Fellow of mine, since I came, if they speak truly, but will
say I have been ready to do 'em courtesies early and late, I am sure of that.


Her tears do mollify me, I am tender-hearted.

And you to lay these things in my dish, that have not deserved 'em at your
hands.


Well I'll say no more at present then.


But 'tis no matter, I am even served well enough, to love such a one; I
thought ne'er to have said so much, but truth's truth and shame the Devil.


Come, peace then Margery, I believe thou dost love me.


Do I? Ay that I do, even but too well, God knows.


Nay good dear Margery, peace, thou wilt break my heart to see thee cry so.


Your unkindness will be the death of me some time or other; but yet, James, I
would not have you cry, it is not manly for a Taylor to cry, therefore quiet
your self, 'tis no matter what becomes of me.


Oh Margery, thou hast --


What have I done?


Why thou hast drawn womanish tears from the Flood-gates of my manly Taylors
eyes.

Prithee forgive me.


Well I do with all my heart.


I know thou art virtuous and religious.


Ay, James, I should be sorry else; for every Holiday when I put on my best
Clothes, I read my Psalter, many a leaf do I turn over with a wet thumb, I have
a new Bible too, and when my Lady left her Practice of Piety, she gave it me,
and you shall have it; therefore pray think well of me, I am no Papisht I thank
God.


Sweet Margery, forgive me all my faults, and let's kiss upon that.


With all my heart.


-- The best of Love with quarrels is possessed,
Amantium irae amoris redintegratio est.

Look ye, Madam, the case is this, I'll go upon the square with my Lady, I have
a thousand pounds a year, but 'tis mortgaged very deep, for I was hatter'd and
sequestered, as many brave Fellows were for serving the King; but no more to be
said.


I have heard you were a great Sufferer; he looks like a brave Fellow, his
roughness and honest bluntness pleases me strangely.


I say nothing of that; but I had as like to have had the honour of being
hanged for the King as any man, and 'tis true many undeserving persons were
brought to the Scaffold, that did not merit the honour like my self; and if I
had not had palpable in justice, I'm sure I had had the honour; but no more to
be said.


A loyal Man.


But Merit was not looked upon, they preferred Fellows to be hanged, that Gad
were no more fit for it, than your Ladyships Chamber-maid.


Do not repent, Sir, methinks 'tis well as 'tis.


No, Madam, nothing shall trouble me, what cannot be cured must be endured, but
I served in all the War, I say nothing, but the business is, thus was my Estate
engaged, and I hearing of this Widow, faith was content to mortgage my body to
her to redeem my Land, and so, Madam, I beg you will-please to let her know
from me. You are her Kinswoman, and I thought the fittest person to break the
Ice to her, I see she is pestered with Fools, I could not do it my self.


Do you love her by hearsay only?


I thought it convenient for her and me too, and for Love Widows seldom trouble
themselves with that.


Then you are not much in Love.


Faith, Madam, I am a Soldier, and hate lying, I am not dangerously.


I know not what's the reason, but methinks I am glad to hear that.


Faith, Lady, I could love you a great deal better, if it were as convenient
for me.


Say you so?


Yes faith; but I like my Lady, and I know what belongs to a Gentleman, and am
honest, I'll make a kind Husband to her, and Gad I'll deal like a Gentleman
with her, and that she shall find as soon as she pleases, and that's the short
and the long on it.


These Soldiers are all a word and a blow; but methinks this honest bluntness
is better than the fawning flattery of your perfumed feathered hufty tufty
Fools: yonder comes my Lady, let us retire, and consult what I shall say to
her.


Come, I see she's persecuted damnably with Coxcombs, let her but say one word,
and I'll beat 'em every one out of the house.


Allons.


Your Servant, Madam, I have been meditating for your Ladyships Service.


Peace, Crambo, do not interrupt me, I am very busy.


Come let's hear no swearing.


These Fools begin to be troublesome, I can enjoy no privacy for 'em.


As I was saying, Madam, you are a pretty Thief, and steal every bodies heart,
no man can keep a heart in quiet for you.


Did not you steal that out of the Academy of Complements, Mr. Codshead?


No, as I hope to be saved.


How now, Mr. Codshead!


Why, would not you have me hope to be saved, when I have left off swearing? I
never saw such a man in my life, i'faith, you'll put me quite out. Madam, your
Eyes hum -- your bright Eyes hum -- have so enslaved me; that, hum, hum -- I
can no longer call my heart my own.


Good lack a day, but are you serious?


Ay the De -- hum -- could you but see your self, you would not doubt it, hum
--


That was very well.


And then that stately and majestic Forehead adorned by, or rather adorning
those curls -- hum -- those snares for hearts.


This Fool has been bred up to nothing but Questions and Commands and cross
purposes.


That Arch upon your Brow is Cupids Bow, as I, hum --


These commendations come not from your heart, you hum and pause, and seem to
be in pain.


I am a Son of a Whore, Madam, if they be not from my heart, and that's an
excellent word, and no swearing.


For shame, don't you see her laugh at you for it?


Peace, I have a thousand commendations more for you, as that your breath is a
heavenly dew, sweeter than Eastern Winds -- hum -- that over the flowery Gardens
blow -- hum, ha -- or than the choicest of Arabian Gums.


Very fine! I'll set it down, I'll use it. Lord, to see some ordinary men light
of things now and then, as good as one of us!


Your teeth like -- hum -- Oriental Pearls, or Twin Lambs newly shorn.


How came those Lambs and Pearls together? they never met before.


Pardon me, Madam, 'tis a fine Trope, and I'll steal that too: Lord, to see how
Wits are beholding sometimes to Fools!


Your Eyes, Madam, are two clear resplendent Fountains, two --


Two, what not other things I hope too!


Two Helicons, when you weep, and your snowy Breasts are --


What I beseech you, Sir?


Two Parnassus Hills covered with Snow -- hum -- ha -- and then your --


Hold, hold, Sir, go no further, you'll be uncivil by and by: do you intend to
read a Lecture over me, as they do upon a body at the Physic Schools? I'll
have no more on it.


I desire a word with your Ladyship in private.


Your Servant, I must leave you.


Your Servant, Madam.


This was well for a beginning; but why did you hum and ha so, and make such
long pauses in your Discourse?


Why, if you will have the truth on it, when I paused I was swearing and cursing
to my self, or else I never could have gone through with it.


What, mental swearing and cursing!


Ounds I'll no more of it, the Devil take mem, if it had not almost like to
have killed me, blood, it was such a pain to me, as if I was gyved and fettered.
I was so sick all the while, God take me, and in such pain, I had no joy in my
life; God, now methinks I am so free, so lightsom, Ounds, methinks I could leap
over the house, the Devil take me, if ever you shall shackle me again, Sir, nor
she neither; if there be no getting of her but upon these hard terms, there's
an end on it, I'll go home and swear and curse and lye, and do what I will in my
own ground.


Come, I'll put you in a way to do it without pain.


Away, 'tis impossible, I'll never think on it.


I'll make you confess your self in the wrong, I have written a Scene of Love
for you, which you shall get by heart.


Thank you for that, how shall I know her answers?


Why, I have writ them too.


Can you know before hand what she'll answer?


Ay, ay, she can make no other answers to what I write, I were no Poet else,
there's the Art on it, Man.


There's the Art on it indeed, I think I could make a shift to get a thing by
heart, without putting in my Oaths and wonted Phrases, but the Devil take me,
that will be hard.


I warrant you, try.


But if she should make cross answers, I should be damnably disappointed, God
take me.


My life for yours, pray let's into the Chamber, I am much indisposed, and on
the sudden taken very ill, methinks.


Prithee don't be sick before thou give me the Scene, for shame come on.


I am very dull and stupid, I am as dull --


As a Dog, I know you were always so, God take me, for you'll never keep good
Company, nor drink a Glass, and a man must be as dull as a Devil that lives so.


Well, you will have your own way, but I grow worse, let's go.


Faith, Sir, you play the best upon the Fiddle, and are the finest Musicioner
that can be, and such a melodious Pipe you have for singing.


You are pleased to say so.


Come, good Sir, sans Ceremony, let's go in and take off two or three Derby
Cans.


You have plied me so hard, I must take a little fresh air, and breathe a
while, for I can swallow no more yet.


Faith you are not so good a Fellow, as I took you for.


By and by, there's no time lost; but now after you drew up your Dinner in
Battle array, with all your military words of Command, go on, as you promised
me, with the rest.


With all my heart, 'tis very tragical, 'tis a most dismal relation.


It will bring tears out of your Eyes, though you resolve against it.


Come, Sir, go on, I love Tragedy, especially Heroic, Oh, it does chime, and
make the finest noise, 'tis no matter whether it be sense or no; so it be
Heroic.


Well then --.


Oh, oh, oh, all's lost, we are defeated quite:
There are no further hopes of a Relief,
The Battel's gone, the day is lost.

How, good Mr. Cook?


You shall hear.


The powdered Beef stone dead in Cabbage lay,
On slaughts upon the Custards and the Pies
Broke in with fierce assaults upon the crust;
Then Gravy all upon the board did run,
The wings of Fowl cut off from all retreat,
A Leg of Pork lying here slashed and cut,
The Loins of Veal shot through with Orange shot,
A Breast of Mutton broken were the bones.

Passion on me, 'tis wondrous sad.


Gammons of Bacon shot all full of Cloves,
Saw Rabbits lying there without their legs.
A cloven Calves head with the brains dashed out,
A sad Pigs head close from the body cut.

Oh my heart!


A Chine of Beef slashed mangled to the bones,
Shoulders of Venson in their own blood wallowing,
Our Ordnance Marrow-bones dismounted quite,
The wriggled Brawn so massacred with wounds,
Tripes hanging out most hideous to see,
With excrement of Mustard dropping down.
There Oysters now gaping for their last breath,
Lobsters and Crevices all bloody red.

I can hold no longer, my heart melts.


None made retreats but Crabs, that I could see,
The Forlorn hope of Porrige all was spilt,
And the Reserve of Fruit and Cheese thrown done,
Some few were rallied, for the fight 'ith' Hall;
But being charged, they could not stand at all.
So the dead bodies, scattered bones, and crusts,
Were in the Alms Tub buried first, and then
Raked up by rav'nous Crows and Kites called Beggars,
Wherewith their hungry maws and scrips they filled.
This is the sad relation of that day,
The fatal day of our so great defeat.

'Tis the most tragical story e're was heard, the expression forced a tear from
me, e're I was aware on it; I see moving passion is a great matter, though in
Kitchen Poetry.


See what number is, so Music moves with Number.


It does so; but if this had been in Rime! Oh Rime, if it be but spoke
violently, and well mouthed, it touches mightily.


By your leave, will it please you to hear a fit of Music? we are Fiddlers, and
we can smell out Feasts and good Company.


Ay, pray let's have 'em.


Ay, with all my heart.


Come, Gentlemen, follow me, I'll give you a lusty Derby Can.


I'faith we will follow, Sir: come Comrade in danger and in spoil, if we had mist
this Habit of Fiddler, all had been spoiled.


Oh Rogue agrees with Fiddler extremely, Fiddler is a Rogue according to Law.


Oh yes, one Fiddler is one Rogue, two Fiddlers two Rogues, three a noise of
Rogues, and five a company of Rogues, fine Statute legal Rogues.


Well, would I had a Monopoly of Roguery, that none might play the Rogue but by
my Patent.


Why, thou would have money enough to overcome the Grand Signior, thou
unconscionable Fellow.


Faith I love to wish to the purpose, but let's in.


Come on, but remember still that thieving is a more profitable Roguery than
fiddling, and therefore be sure to keep thy hand in ur.


Shall I ever live to have it said of me, that my right hand forgot to steal?
no, no, never may I live to see that day.


Nobly spoke, and like a Roman -- Thief I mean; but here come the Ladies, let's
in.


Ha, Cousin, I am afraid this victorious Colonel has overcome you.


Not so, Madam, but he appears the better for being amongst the Fools here.


That's true; but prithee dissemble not with me, for I find this blustering
Soldier has stormed your heart.


My heart, Madam! why should you imagine it?


'Tis so; no more: I'll endeavour to mollify this Dub a Dub, this tempestuous
Colonel for you.


I beseech you, Madam, don't believe this of me.

And yet to say truth, I begin to believe it of my self, I would I had not seen
him.


He seems to be a good honest rough Fellow, and may make a good Husband: here's
Nan, is such an arrant Lover of Sir John Noddy, she's mawdlin for him.


Madam, I neither can nor will dissemble, he's is so fine a witty facetious
person, no body needs be ashamed of him, and the handsomest Gentleman upon
earth.


Come, I'll endeavour to oblige ye both: come on, Gentlemen, you are come to
take the Air.


No, Madam, I am come to take something else.


What's that, Sir, John?


Your heart, Madam, ha, ha, ha, that was well.


You won't rob me, will you?


Prithee stand by, you take her heart!

My bucksom Lady, I am come to you,
An ancient Justice, that in Love does sue
To draw with you in that most happy yoke
Of Wedlock, and you'll find him heart of Oak.
I know your humor's pleasant, gay, and merry.
And so is mine you'll find with a hey down derry.

You're a very merry Justice, though not in your prime.

You have been a Spark I warrant you in your time.
And, Sir, you're heartily welcome in Rime.
There's Poetry for your Poetry.


Ha, ha, very good, i'faith, was a Spark! I am still so, and as merry a Fellow
as any of the Quorum, i'faith.


If mirth will please you, if I make you not merry, I'll lose my Knighthood,
that cost me five hundred pound. Why, I make every body die with laughing, that
I keep company withal, ask my Lord my Neighbour; on my conscience and soul, I
shall be the death of him for one.


Then 'twill be dangerous venturing upon you, I shall be in fear of my life for
you.


Stand by, who is it that dares pretend to this Lady, while I am present? hah.


The Colonel's mad, he looks as if he would eat one.


Fair Lady, I'll withdraw, my Suit must cease,
When War appears, no Justice of the Peace.

No, stay, what will you quit me so? what are you, Sir? what would you have?


I am a Soldier, and to speak plain English, I am for you which way you will,
any way in the world.


As how, good boisterous Sir? you mean to make Love, as they make War, with
Fire and Sword.


Faith, Madam, I would lie with you, and not marry you, or marry you, and not
lie with you, or lie with you and then marry you, or marry you and then lie
with you, or neither marry you, nor lie with you: choose which, and take your
course.


Why, you are all Gun-powder, would you blow up a poor Widow at first?


Did not I tell you he was a pleasant man, Madam?


I see you love War, Cousin, and have a mind to follow the Camp.


Why look you? in short, you are a very merry Widow, and I am a merry Soldier,
if you like me so, faith, make no more words on it, here's my hand, Lady, and
there's an end on it.


But what if I do not like you, Noble Colonel?


Why then so, I hope a man may keep a poor little thing of his own, as the
world goes, when the worst comes to the worst, and that will offend no body.


Good Colonel, let me be a little free with you.


Take your course.


Have not you been advised by some experienced frail Matron, that a Widow is to
be won with huffing and blustering?


I am my own Counsellor, God ye are most of you too cunning to be won by
Stratagem, and you must be carried by storm.


You are a mad Colonel, and I like you the better for it, I hate the common
Road of Wooing in the Dunstable High-way of Matrimony. I love to be woed
fantastically; but let's see what you can do for me now. Do you show your
parts, and these Gentlemen shall show theirs, that I may choose discreetly.


What a Pox, Madam, do you take me for your Dog, your Spaniel, to fetch and
carry, and show tricks for you?


Good Mr. Mars, be not so passionate.


Ounds, Madam, do you think to rank me with Coxcombs?


Who the Devil does he call Coxcomb? a Knight a Coxcomb! that's impossible.


I'faith, if I thought he meant me, I'd bind him to the good. Behavior: a
Justice a Coxcomb! that were a good one, i'faith.


Death, Madam, I am not to be used thus.


Then, good Sir, leave me to those that will be used so, I will divert my self
here; pray take you a Walk with my Cousin in the mean time, and see if she will
use you better.


With all my heart, Madam, give me leave to wait upon you, since she's no
better company.


Come, let me see what good qualities you have, give me leave to sit, and judge
betwixt you, that I may choose discreetly, a Chair in the first place, he that I
marry must sing well, that's certain.


Oh Pox, if singing will do, I'll fit you to a hair, i'faith.


If I ever fail you in that, Madam --


Come on, Justice, and begin.


Hem, will you hear how a Spanish Lady wooed an English Man?

Garments gay, as rich as may be,
Decked with Jewels had she on.

Good Justice some other, I like not that so well.


Ha, ha, ha, I thought how he'd please her.


Now I shall fit you.

When as King Henry governed the Land,
The second of that Name,
Besides his Queen he dearly loved
A fair and Princely Dame.
Most parlous was her Beauty found,
Her favour and her face;
A sweeter Creature in this World
Did never Prince embrace.
Her crisped Locks, like Threads of Gold,
Appear to each mans sight:
Her comely Eyes, like Orient Pearls,
Did cast a heavenly light.

Well done, Justice, there's enough at once, now, Sir John, try you.


His is a foolish old fashioned Song, Madam, but mine's of the new cast.

I dote, I dote, but am a Sot to show it,
I was a very Fool to let her know it;
For now she doth so cunning grow,
She proves a friend worse than a foe.
She'll neither hold me fast, nor let me go;
She tells me I cannot forsake her.
When straight I endeavour to leave her,
She to make me stay
Throws a kiss in my way:
Oh then I could tarry for ever.

Very well on both sides.


But you shall hear what he says to her, 'tis fine, fine, very fine.

But good Madam Fickle be faithful,
And leave off your damnable dodging.
Either love me, or leave me,
And do not deceive me,
But let me go home to my Lodging.
De' see, Madam, God, that was smart.


That smart! fie, your old Songs are better by half, they are more passionate.

There was a rich Merchant man
That was both grave and wise,
He killed a man in Athens Town,
Great quarrels there did arise,
Oh a sweet thing is Love!
It rules both heart and mind,
There is no comfort in this World
To Women that are kind.

I think that was a good Trillo, Madam.


Very good.


Madam, hear but one Song of mine, and if I do not put him down.

Oh my dear pretty Soul,
How thy black Eyes do roll,
And rule without control
My poor Heart.
How can my dear Jewel
Be to it so cruel,
When she can see well
His great smart?

Oh Madam, he's the finest Gentleman in the World, I shall die with looking on
him.


'Tis very passionate and fine, Madam.


'Tis very well indeed; but the next thing I must make trial of, must be of
your Dancing, for I must have a Husband courtly and well bred.


If I do not fit you for that, may I never examine Malefactor more; why, I was
a Reveller at Grayes-Inn in my youth, Madam.


Begin, I fear you not.


Here's no Music, but I'll sing to my Dancing.


Very well, admirable well.


Come, I'll dance the Mi^outes, you do not know what that is, Justice, ha, ha,
ha.


Pox on your French kickshaw Dances, I love your true Derby-shire Horn-pipe.


Come, bring him hither for fresh Air, this is a shrewd Fit, pray Heaven it
does not carry him away.


Oh, oh, Spleen, I am sick, sick.


What's the matter?


Oh Madam, here's the Poet so sick, the Dev -- Oh -- he was in his Chamber
writing, he fell into Raptures, Ecstasies, Furies, heated, and swelled, and big
with Muse, and cannot be delivered.


Fetch a Midwife for him, ha, ha, ha.


Nan, fetch down some Cordial-water: can he not speak? Mr. Crambo!


Oh, oh, Fumes, Fumes.


Death, he'll sound, tweak him by the Nose, box him on the Ears, let me come.


Hold, Cousin, forbear.


Oh here's Mr. Crambo in a Fit of Poetry, as bad as a Fit of the Mother.


Here's the Cordial, Madam, burn some Partridgefeathers under his Nose.


Pox, is this all? nothing but a Poet sick?


I see blockheaded Soldiers make nothing of a Poet.


Will it please you to have any Music?


Ounds, you Rogue, is this a time for Music?


Sir, I heard your Poet was sick, and perhaps Music may do him good, I have an
excellent Song, how the nine Muses invited a Poet to Dinner.


Death, you Rascal, get you gone.


Hold, Mr. Codshead, it may do him good, and please me, prithee Fellow sing it.


'Tis to the Tune of Cook Laurel.

The Nine Lady Muses would make me their Guest,
And invited me to Parnassus to dine,
And promised me there a Poetical Feast,
And vowed that their Helicon should turn to Wine.
The very first Dish was Heroical Verse
Baked in a Pasty with smelling puffed Paste;
No Gravy there was for me to rebearse,
'Twas dull to the appetite, dry to the taste.
Love-Sonnets in Lovers tears then were dressed,
Stewed in Love-sighs, and set by to cool,
With excellent Cream and Eggs of the best,
And then this Loves Dish all said was a Fool.
Then Epigrams dressed and cooked with pains,
With Vinegar, Limon, the Sauce full of Art,
And added unto it old Mortials Brains,
So this all the Muses said was their Tart.
Sad Epitaphs, Elegies, if not mistaken,
Came to the Board, and so were set down;
They looked like a Westphalia Gammon of Bacon,
In his long Cloak or black Mourning-gown.
Then like a Shoulder of Venison in blood,
A Tragedy dished with Mustard, because
It drew down a Deluge of Tears like a Flood,
With bitter Herbs added to heighten the Sauce.
A Comedy sweet and poignant then came
By Natures Cook dressed so finely and fit
With all the sweet Herbs that any can name:
For spice, strewed with Satyr, with Humour and Wit.
A Bisk or an Olio, then one in brings
With French Railleries and French Lampoons,
With Riddles in Rimes, and Posies for Rings:
For the Meat they used Knives, for the thin Broth their Spoons.
Raw Fruit, great Dishes of School boys Themes,
Then sharp and quick Jests, which all were preserved;
This slow'd like a stood of witty sweet streams,
And thus their Desert and Banquet was served.
The Thespian Spring all the Poets told me,
Ravished the Palate, it was so divine,
Since Water and Wit can never agree,
They all concluded it was Spanish Wine.
The Muses then tuned their Fiddles each string,
And vowed for a while with them I should stay
To hear a merry Song, which they would sing:
When ended, I kissed their hands, and came away.

'Tis very well, there's money.


Sir John, give him some money.


Pox on you, was not my Pocket picked?


I shall have a hundred pound to be paid me, it lies at the Town within half a
mile, I'll walk over for it presently.


Do you hear that, Sir?


Ay, and am glad to hear it, we will be with him, i'faith.


Carry him up to Bed.


Peace, peace.


Ha, ha, ha.


Ounds, you Rascal, I reward you for your Monkey-tricks!


How now, what's the matter?


Nay, I know not, Madam, In 're saw the like in my life; he's the strangest
choleric person in the whole World, I vow to God, to box and kick a man for a
Jest.


Pray, Sir, be civil.


Madam, I must be civil to my Honour.


Honour with a Pox! I never saw such a choleric uncivil man, since I was born,
as I hope to be saved.


Swear the Peace against him, I'll give you my Warrant.


Do you hear, Cousin? if you do not fight with him, you are a shame to your
Family, the Devil take me.


Not I, why he's mad, I do not know what mischief he would do, if one should
fight with him.


Gentlemen, I must leave you; Justice, do you keep the Peace here.


Do you hear angry Colonel? God take me you shall give satisfaction for this.


Why, he'll ne'er fight.


'Tis no matter, bring your Friend, and if he will not, I and another will, the
Devil take me, in the Corn-field by the Gallows an hour hence,


'Tis a dreadful place; but I'll meet you, I'll seek a Friend.


Come away.


Well, I wish I may never stir, if ever I saw such a peevish Fellow.


I Have at length got my Scene by heart; but if the Colonel should kill me by
and by, 'twould quite spoil my Scene.

You'are like the new-sprung Eilies of the field,
Whose native colour, hum --
Darkening the milky way, hum --
Then says she,

Your Phrases make my modesty to blush.

Then I again,

Then you appear like the new-budded Rose,
With modest blushes of Vermilion, hum --
Vegetables -- hum -- hum -- odoriferous lustre.
Then says she,

My ignorance pleads my excuse.

Then I,

Lady 'tis love, your heart may feel that flame.

Then she,

I never knew yet what it was to love.

Then I,

I'll teach you, Virgin.

Pox, she's a Widow, I shall forget to alter that word; besides I am plaguily
afraid of putting Oaths and Curses into the blank Verse.

Then says she,

Oh, if this Love were constant.

Then I,

Constant as Rocks, that stand great Neptunes floods, c.

Oh, Doctor, you are welcome, here's Poet Crambo is in a desperate condition.


I am come to try my skill upon him.


I will have him brought out to you.


Come, Doctor, are you come to work a Wonder, and make a dull Poet write?


I cannot do Miracles, but I'll do my best.


Good Doctor do, and you shall be well rewarded, besides the honour of the
Cure. [They bring in Crambo. Without your skill he is lost, 'tis a shrewd Fit.


Come, Sir speak, he cannot: here, take this Pen, can you write? No, he is far
gone, his Muse is weak, he must have some Poetical Remedies. This it is to take
impossibilities in hand, to think that Wit can go beyond the limits of Wit,
they strain it into fustian and nonsense: well this fustian will be the death
of some Heroic Poet or other; if they take not care, the very speaking on it is
enough to bring the Actors into consumptions.


'Tis true, Doctor; besides, that constant noise of Riming, when every two
Verses sound alike, like the Larum of a Clock, disturbs me, it makes my head
ache to hear it.


What say you to him?


Why, I think fit to apply a Cataplasm of Homer.


By no means, Doctor, it would raise such vapours in his head with Aeacus,
Minos, and Radamanthus, 'twould make him ten times worse.


What do you think of Anacreon or Pindar for his Distemper?


Oh, all Greek Poets, with the strange Characters of Crows feet in his head,
would make him worse; besides he has made use of 'em all, and stole from every
one of 'em, which he understands already.


Why then some Pills of Virgil.


I have heard he did but imitate Homer.


Such losty Lines are not sit for his weak stomach.


Oh, strong Lines would stick in his Throat, and choke him.


What think you of a Cordial of Horace?


Oh, it will not work upon your Heroics at all, he has too much sense in him
for them: what if I should try Ovid?


That will make him metamorphose himself into Trees, and Beasts, and Birds.


Perhaps so, and his false Astronomy may do him harm, and then Lucan with his
Swords, Darts, and Piles is too strong for him.


Good Sir, try some English Poets, as Shakespeare.


You had as good give him preserved Apricots, he has too much Wit for him, and
then Fletcher and Beaumont have so much of the Spanish Perfume of Romances and
Novels.


That's true; besides they may put him into a whining Fit of Love, with Oh and
Ah, with folded arms.


You had as good apply Liquorish and Sugar-candy to him, with Pastor fido.

By serpent Rivulets under shady Trees,
With Scrip of Cordovant and gaudy Hook.

The last Remedy, like Pigeons to the soles of the feet, must be to apply my
dear Friend Mr. Johnson's Works, but they must be applied to his head.


Oh, have a care, Doctor, he hates Ben. Johnson, he has an Antipathy to him.


Oh, I hate Johnson, oh oh, dull dull, oh oh no Wit.


'Tis you are dull; he speaks now, but I have less hopes of him for this; dull!
he was the Honour of his Nation, and the Poet of Poets, if any thing will do it,
he will bring your Poet into his Wits again, and make him write Sense and
Reason, and purify his Language, and make him leave his foolish fantastical
heroic Fustian.


Oh, have a care what you do, he hates him mortally.


Oh, oh, oh.


Well, Sir, he must be forced to take Johnson's Works, his Disease is
desperate, and he must have this Cure: come, remove him in, I'll order him.


Oh, oh, no Johnson.


Come in with him, sick men still nauseate their Remedies.


Cousin, prithee take the Key of my Cabinet, and take the Net-purse with Gold
in it, and put it in his Pocket, 'tis a better Cordial than all the Doctor has
named.


I will, Madam; if money does not recover his senses, nothing will.


This is a Judgment upon him for stealing so, they say he never writ any thing
that was his own.


He was indeed a little given to filching; but now for my Scene, how shall I
bring it in?

Lady your look is more victorious than I have ever seen it.


No sure, you're mistaken.


Now, now.

Y' are like the new sprung Lily of the field,
Whose native colour, when it does appear,
Darkens what's light, it's self the tender flower,
So innocent it trembles to be touched. The Devil -- Oh, oh, I was cursing.
Fearing a spot from the serener Air,
Darkening the milky way of Stars so fair.
Now answer right, if it be thy will.


Methinks I do not look so very pale as a Lily, though I confess I am very
pale.


Pox on it, she should have said,

Your Phrases make my modesty to blush. But I'll go on, come what will, the
Devil take me.

Then you appear like the new budded Rose,
With modest blushes of Vermilion die,
In your fair sight no Vegetable dare
Sprout out, and be so impudent t'appear
In the high presence of Apollo 's Court
Without your sweet and odoriferous lustre.

Odoriferous lustre! what's that?


'Sdeath, she should have said,

My ignorance pleads my excuse.

'Tis damned cross.

Lady 'tis Love, your heart may feel that flame.


This Fellow's mad sure; sure, Sir, you are troubled with Fumes like Poet
Crambo.


Why, there was another cross answer: she should have said,

I never yet knew what it was to love. I will on.

I'll teach you, Virgin, Oh I forgot that
I'll teach you, Virgin Widow, what it is,
Love is to one, and does possess him all,
The rest of Females seem not Womankind -- God take me.
Ounds, I was swearing and spoiling the Verse.

Contented sorrow and delightful trouble,
His sadness eased with sighs, on which he lives,
And melancholy thoughts his harmony;
Her looks his day, and soft perfumed speech
Is Music to his Soul, and this is Love.

Either this Fellow is running mad, and has nonsense by inspiration, or has got
some foolish Fustian of Crambo's by heart, and thinks to palm it upon me. You
speak most eloquently.


'Sounds the Devil is in it: she should have said, Oh, if this Love were
constant, Sir.

Oh misfortune!


What troubles you, Mr. Codshead, will it not out?


Constant as Rocks, that stand great Neptunes floods,

Or as the fixed Earth, which never moves,
Or like the Gods Decrees, which are unalterable.

Indeed, Mr. Codshead, this was a fine penned Scene, and spoken with skill; but
I cannot now stay to hear you act any longer -- adieu.


I am undone beyond redemption, a Pox on this Poet Crambo and his Scene, what
shall I do? But I must now about another business, I must make War instead of
Love, and for the honour of our Family, but I must cheat Sir John unto it, he'll
ne'er fight, if he knows it; for my part I am so angry, I shall fight like a
Devil.


But do you think you can bring about a Marriage with my Lady?


I warrant you, never doubt it, Sir, do you make good your promise, and I'll
perform mine.


Upon my Honour I will give you 500 Guinnies upon the nail.


I'll do it, but Codshead observes us, leave me.


Your humble Servant, sweet Mrs. Anne.


Your humble Servant, sweet Sir John; but I intend, good Sir, to supply my
Lady's place, if it be possible: he is the finest, pretty, wild, merry
Gentleman my eyes e're saw.


With all my heart, Cousin, we will take a Walk together: which way shall we go?


Towards the Gallows field.


Come on, 'tis a fine Walk.


I am sure he shall fight now, or have his Throat cut.


Ay, you will be showing your self, with a Pox to you, where the Gentlemen are
still? thou salacious Chambermaid.


Marry come up, go Snuff, take Pepper in the Nose, and have no Box to put it
in.


Oh you Lolpot, you Scanderbag, you Slolop.


You Ragamuffin, you Drawlatch, you Scurff, you Nit.


Go you Carriers Pack, you Make-bate, you Spittle.


Are you grown so malapert, you Jail bird, you Mongrel, you Widgeon?


Oh you Face of ill Luck, you Drable-tail, you Drill.


Oh you lick-trencherly Scab, you Weasel, you Hang-panni^r.


Marry Gip with a pestilence, you Jilflert, ^ Wriggle-tail.


I never wriggled to displease you, you scurvy Stinkard.


Go you Beggars Brat.


Indeed you are of an ancient Family, that which belongs to your no House, is
an ^ld Coat powdered with Vermin; I had a Brother was a ^ for a Merchant far
beyond the Sea, and ^ never thou Todpool.


You are of a Royal stock indeed, have I not seen your Mother with a Petticoat
of more patches than one can number, indented at the bottom, and so short, I
saw up to her old cruel Garters, with her Stockings of three colours, three
stories high, with Incle about her Hat, knitting at the Gate for an Alms?


My Mother was an honest Woman, I thank God, and that's more than you can say
of yours.


She was so ugly, no body would touch her.


That's false, you Nit, there's not a body so ill favoured, but some good body
now and then will have a charity for them. You were Son to the Gold-finder of
the house, and were advanced, forsooth, by the Nursery-woman, because they
found you a bold Boy always putting forward: Oh thou Epicrot, thou would
dissemble with thy own Father.


I'm sure thou art an Epigram, a great Epigram, thou eatest more than all the
house.


Oh thou art as arrant a Taylor, that is, a whole Thief, and but the ninth part
of a man.


Oh you proud Slattern, you have a fine place with your Vails and Nimming too;
how many ends of Cambric, Lawn, Holland-lace, Ribbands, Hoods, Scarfes,
Gloves, Masks hast thou stolen?


Oh thou Camelion Rogue, thou never made any thing in the house, but thou
stole something.


I am sure I am an honest man, and serve my Lady without ends, good Mrs.
Tawdry.


You lie you Tiger, you have all the Candles ends.


That's a clinch, you Quean you.


It is not a lie, it is true; what do you give me the lie in Greek, which you
learnt of our Chaplain?


By my Troth, Margery, thou hast made me desperate, I will do that which shall
make your heart ache.


My heart ache! why what will you do?


What will I do? why I will marry you.


Do your worst, I am ready to marry you, when e're you dare, I think we shall
ne'er be quiet till we do.


Why, we quarrel and live like Man and Wife already, we had as good marry, our
quarrelling then will be more Canonical.


'Tis all one, you shall find me as desperate as you can marry when you durst.


There's no more to be said, it must be so, I'll marry her to have lawful
authority over her body.

If after that the saucy Quean dares quarrel,
I'll use strict discipline, and hoop her Barrel.

This hundred pound will do well, all my Rivals will be obliged to me.


Honest Justice, I am glad I have met you.


Why, what's the matter, Colonel?


I am to fight a Duel just by with Sir John Noddy, and Mr. Codshead is his
Second, and I wanted one, but now you I supply the place.


Why, I am a Justice of Peace, Sir.


But you have Honour, have you not, Sir?


Faith ye^, a kind of Country honour, a Pox of this French honour of Duels and
Seconds fighting; but they have left it off, and we like Fools must continue
it, but I'll not deny it, I was as good a Back-sword man in my time, as any at
Grays-Inn, I tell you that I have had there many a Venue.


You are a Man of Honour, and I am obliged to you.


Faith I will mow 'em, I will have a Leg or an Arm of 'em at least; but what
shall I do with my hundred pound?


Let the Conqueror take it, 'twill be the spoil of the field by right of War.


I less you, sweet Masters, one penny to a poor Lazer for charity sake, which
will gain you Heaven, thousands of blessed Acres for the cheap Purchase of a
poor earthly transitory Penny.


Get you gone, one cannot talk together for this Rascal.


Good Gentlemen if not for charity, to be rid of me; Pox on these lazy Rogues,
will they never come? Sweetfaced Gentlemen, Right Worshipful, Right Honourable,
and well-beloved Gentlemen, spare a penny for the poor, vanquish with your
bounty my numerous and horrid enemies, hunger, thirst, cold, and saving your
presence lousiness, that makes me itch and scratch for your money: bless ye,
sweet Masters, remember the poor.


There, a Pox go with ye, one can never be quiet for those Beggars.


A thousand blessings fall on you for your curses, when they come thus
attended, bless you, Masters, bless you: a plague on those Rogues, will they
never come? what an opportunity shall we lose?


Yonder I think I see 'em coming.


Let 'em come, I fear 'em not, i'faith, I'll slash 'em, have at a Leg or an
Arm, I say.


Ah brave Justice; but what will you do with your money?


There's no body near, I think I had best make this poor Cripple hold it, he
looks as if he were honest.


If he were not honest, he's alone, and a Snail would out-run him.


Come hither, poor Fellow.


Bless you, sweet Master.


You must do me a courtesy.


I can do nothing, but pray for your sweet Worship.


Take this hundred pound, and hold it till I go into the next Close, and
dispatch a little business.


Alas, Sir, I am a poor man, a wretched poor Cripple, that walks on wooden
Legs, a Snail pace, with great agony and pain; alas, any body may take it from
me.


No, I'll trust thee with it.


'Tis a sign your Worship is weary of your money for the present, but I'll be
faithful to your Worships Bag.

Now I shall do it without those Rogues.


Come take it, man.


Oh I shall never hold it, wanting my Limbs, both Legs and Arms, Sir.


Come try.


Oh, I shall never hold it.

Oh, oh, that ever I was born! Oh the pain I suffer! Oh the heavy burden of
Riches!


I never saw such a weak Fellow in my life, help him up, come give him his
Crutches, tie it upon his back like a Knapsack.


Oh, good your Worship, make haste, for I am not able to sustain this heavy
burden long.


They are come.


Pray hear me, Gentlemen, though I am a poor man, I will do nothing behind your
backs: Oh, oh, I am faint, oh, I am weak, oh, oh, I am ready to depart.


Stop Thief, Rogue, Dog.


This is a rare Cripple.


Holloa, what do you run from us? you mighty Colonel, oh Cowards, hey Cowards.


Ay, ay, they run, they yield, come let's be going, we have the Victory without
fighting, prithee let's go, what should we stay for?


Hold, I think I see them coming back again.


The Devil you do! a plague on 'em, they do come, let's be going, they ran from
us, and that's enough for our honour.


You are my Cousin German, and you shall not put up a box on the Ear and a
Kick; if you do, Sir, I will cut your throat my self, for the honour of my
Family.


Pox on the honour of my Family for me, would I were of another Family.


Come bear up, and fight well, 'tis nothing; but God take me, if you offer to
flinch, or fight scurvily, I will be in the body of you my self.


Oh, Sir, let me tell you under the Rose, you have done very ill to train a man
out, under pretence to walk, and then bring him to fight, that has no
disposition to it, let me tell you that I love to live in peace and quietness
with all men, well Beati pacifici I say: Cousin, you are a bloody minded man.


Come bear up, thou shalt get Honour.


A Pox of Honour, if it cannot be had without venturing ones life for it, I
ventured nothing but my money for my Knighthood.


I'll send a Hue and Cry after him, there's no overtaking him.


Come, Gentlemen, did you think we ran from ye?


Run, quoth he! I'll have a Leg or an Arm, I assure you, before I part with
you; run! with a washing blow I will cut off his left Ear.


Oh Lord bless me, Cousin, a Raven flew over my head and croaked, besides the
Salt was spilt towards me at dinner to day, what shall I do? Let's put it off
till a more lucky day.


No putting off I tell you.


Come, Gentlemen, make ready, you shall find we are no Cowards.


Come dispatch, I long to be at it; come, Mr. Codshead, I must wait upon you.


What a Pox if I must die, I had as good die fighting, a Devil take 'em for
provoking me to this, I'll be the death of one of 'em, if I can.


Let's wait here for the spoil of the field, now is the time, run in and
plunder.


Lye still all of ye, or we will stick you to the ground.


How now, Rogues, what's the matter?


Such another word, and I will cut your throat.


Ha, I see fighting's nothing, but 'tis a scurvy thing to be robbed often it.


Come faggot them quickly.


Oh Rogues, ha this was the Beggar.


Your upper Garments we have, but now off with your Breeches, we must ease you
of the vanity of fine Clothes.


These must into our Wardrobe.


Oh you Rogues, if I were loose --


Who are the greatest Rogues ye or we? You were committing Murder contrary to
Law, and we steal contrary to Law.


Shall we strip off their Shirts too? they are of very good Holland.


No hanged we will leave them decently: farewell, Gentlemen, the next that comes
will unloose you.


Your Servant, Gentlemen.


Your Servant, your Servant, ha, ha.


This is fine Honour, i'faith, but I see fighting's nothing, any Blockhead may
do it.


Oh good Woman help us, help us.


What, are you not well?


Not very well, that's the truth on it.


For ought I know, you may have the Plague.


No, no, nothing, but some sprinklings of the Pox, as Gentlemen should have.


Mercy on me, what a pickle you are in, almost as naked as you were born; who
bound you thus?


Thieves, Thieves, prithee no questions, but unbind us.


Marry, here's Cord enough to hang them all, if you could catch them -- poor
hearts, why you have hardly enough left to hide, hum -- your hum, what de call
'em?


A small matter will do that now.


The more'^ the pity, I would have 'em hid better, now first undone help his
Fellows, pray give me the Lines to hang my Linen on; they shall hang something,
till they can light on the right owners.


Come on, Gentlemen, we have fought, and since we have satisfied our Honours,
let's be friends.


Come with all our hearts.


Faith, Cousin, if I had my Sword, I have a great mind to have the other ^ it.


Come, Sweet-heart, come to my house, and I'll get you such things as I have to
warm ye.


Thou art a good Woman; come, Gentlemen, we will cover our nakedness a little, and
then to the Widows where we have Clothes.

Enter Doctor and Crambo, and a Servant or two waiting.


Come on, Johnson has wrought very well, I shall recover you again.


Do you think so, Doctor? this Spleen is a cruel thing.


You have a spice of the Pox too, you will never be perfectly well till you
flux; but I'll patch you up to write well enough for the present.


Ha, here's Gold in my Pocket, how came this here? this is the Cordial, this
will make me write better, by your favour, than Quick-silver: what good Angel
has done this?


How now, Doctor, how does your Patient?


Your Ladyship is come to see the last operation give me the Bottle of Burgundy
Wine; drink justly; give the some more Wine to anoine his Temples; so, so, now
for my Charms.

Doctor.

Ye Gods this Poet now restore,
Or else he never will write more;
Him with Poetic flames inspire*
And give him a Celestial fire,
Give him fresh Fancies, new, unknown,
Ne'er let him write but what's his own.
A Poet is not made, but born,
All helps of reading he should scorn,
Ne'er vexes Authors, but will look
On the whole World, that ^ his Book.
Let him not here languishing lye,
Restore him now, or let him dye.
Crambo.

How's this! I find my self renewed,
And all obstructions that were crude,
Quite banished from my head and heart,
My ^ealth I find in every part,
My blood flows high, and swells each vein,
I'm brought to common sense again;
All fames are dissipated clear,
My Fancies flame does now appear*
To Isab.

In it's full lustre. This power lies
In the radiant beams of your bright Eyes.

Oh, Madam, we are undone, undone.


What's the matter?


Oh your Ladiship's Closet-lock has been picked, and your little Casket with
Jewels is stolen.


My Jewels stolen! Oh misfortune, whom should we suspect?


It seems the two Fiddlers that sung and played, when Mr. Crambo was sick, stole
out of the house of a sudden, and took no leave, besides they were lurking
hereabouts.


Send one immediately for Gervas my Grange-man, he is Constable, let him make
speedy search for 'em.


I will, Madam.


Oh, Madam, your gilt Caudle-cup is stolen, what shall I do?


Madam, I beg upon my knees, you'll pardon me.


For what?


There's forty pounds worth of Plate stolen out of the Buttery.


Unconscionable Rogues to steal so much!


Let's to my Closet, perhaps they have stolen more. Cousin, send out my
Servants every way in search for 'em.


Whom have we here?


What's this, an Interlude? Mr. Codshead, what's the matter?


Oh, are you recovered?


Robbed?


Ay robbed, stripped just as you see.


Ha, ha, ha.


I took you for Highlanders, ha, ha.


De' you hear? If you laugh I will sight with you both* Gentlemen, let me tell
you that.


Be not angry, Sir, the House is robbed of Plate and Jewels, and Lord knows
what: my Lady has sent to search.


I have sent a Hue and Cry by Gervas the Constable; but I am plaguily cold,
let's in to dress us a little, and drink a Bottle to comfort us.


I am damnably cold, come let's in.


Come on. Robbed, quoth he! ha, ha, ha.


So, I have sent my fellow Rogues away to dispose of the Clothes and some
transitory Movables, and have appointed 'em to meet elsewhere, for this place
will be too hot for us. Here has been a brave harvest, but I have sunk and
cheated my Comrades of all the Jewels and Plate, Omnia mea mecuns porto. These
Riches make me ambitious; if I live six months longer, I shall do my business,
for ought I know be able to buy a place, for any Rogue may have a place that
will give money enough; let me see, a place in the Custom-house to take Bribes,
and cheat the King there, or an Office in some Court in Westminster-Hall, where
the formality and noise may hide my Roguery.

But hark, what noise is that? by Heaven it is a Hue and Cry, my ambition is
nipped in the bud. What shall I do for my life?


Honest Fellow, what art thou?


A poor Fisher, I came to see if the fish will bite in this part of the Brook.


Death, what shall I do? Good honest Fisherman change Coats and Hats with me,
and give me thy tackling, and here's three pieces for thee quickly.


With all my heart, and thank you too.


Quick and be gone, say nothing, there's the money.


Thank you, Sir.


I will sit unconcerned, and throw in my Line, I will sing too, fa, la la la,
fa la.


How now, Fisherman, did you see no body here?


Alas, Sir, how can a body see no body?


No Thieves I mean, thou Sot.


Bless me from Thieves, Sir, I saw no Thieves.


What dost thou fish for?


I am hired for six pence a day, Sir, and meat and drink.


But for what fish I mean?


Why, for Gudgeons, Sir.


Fie, Mr. Constable, a man of your beard and Authority neglect your Hue and Cry
thus!


Cry you mercy, good Sir, Information makes me wiser than my Billmen: fare thee
well simple Fellow.


Are you gone?

Counter you Puppies, you hunt Counter: well how did I dwindle before lawful
Authority? like Holland Veal before the fire: Oh, guilt's a strange thing, and
conscience, but nothing troubles my conscience but hanging, that raises many
scruples.

Oh Heaven! they return, methinks, I smell Hemp already.


Why, will you go back again?


You shall instruct me in my Office, shall you! I know what I do, I ne'er saw
that Fellow before, apprehend that Fellow.


Oh fie, what do you do? he's a poor silly Fellow.


Peace, I say; first and foremost, Sir, I ask you, are not you a Rogue?


I a Rogue, Sir! alas I am a poor man.


Poor man! God forbid, but a poor man may be a Rogue sometimes as well as a
rich man, Heaven makes no difference of persons. Were not you a Peddler once, a
singing Peddler? hah, I have seen that face: besides, Neighbours, I have skill
in Physiognomy, I served one Mr. Matthew Mattical, that lived at a Town called
Euclid, and taught a petty School of A, B, C, there. Well answer me, were not
you a singing Peddler?


A plague on the Rascal.

I, Sir! I have no voice, not so much as for Ballets.


I warrant you you'll have singing enough to make a shift to be hanged with.


Sir, I cannot read.


Nor write? I shall come home to him.


I can write but one letter for my Name, which is T. for Thomas.


I shall come up to you by and by; Neighbours, this is an equiblicating Rascal,
for T. stands for Rogue, as well as Thomas, or else my Learning fails me.


By'r Lady, Mr. Constable, that may be very well.


Then, Sir, you were a Gypsy afterwards, I have heard of your tricks.


A Gypsy!


What is a Gypsy? why a Gypsy is, a -- a -- a -- Gypsy. Do you think to
stumble Authority? you'll examine me, will you?


A Gypsy steals Poultry and Linen, and is born in a far Country, where it
rains Bacon and Walnuts upon their faces, which makes 'em so tawny.


Filly, fally, will you teach me Geogrecum, Mr. Viccar showed me the place in
the Map, a place with a little green about it, and hard by it the Sea, where,
Heaven bless us, a fish spouts out water out of its head; but you hinder the
proceedings of Justice.


It was Nilus and Crockadils, bless us all.


I know not those foolish words, but do not interrupt Authority; but then, Sir,
you were a Beggar, I can hear of your Rogueries.


Death, I shall shrink to skin and bones before this Fellow.


Were not you a Beggar? answer to that.


I was never a rich man, not I.


Ay, how cunningly the Rogue answers! I shall be with you by and by. Then, Sir,
you came like a Soldier.


A Souldier's a very honourable Profession, they say.


But I would be loath to be alone with your Honour in a narrow Lane for all
that; and now, Sir, last of all, Sir, you are a Fisherman, Sir, and think that
will carry it off.


Why, Sir? there have been very good men Fishermen.


I marry, Sir, better than you, or I would pull off all the heads of my Wife's
Apostle-Spoons, I tell you that.


Pray, Mr. Constable, let him go, he's a poor silly Fellow.


Have patience, Neighbours, I will apprehend some body, that's certain, they'll
say I am idle else in my Office, therefore I will apprehend him.


Death, I shall be hanged, the Assizes too are here now, I shall be hanged
presently.


Good Mr. Constable let him go, the next Justice will but laugh at you.


Will he? then I'll laugh at the Justice, and so we I be merry in our Offices,
and there's an end on it, search him, I say search him.


Hah, here's a little Box, hah, 'tis full of Jewels I think.


Oh is it so! you are wise.


Here's Plate too in his Trouses, come out with it, out with it.


Well, I'm not a man of this world: Oh murderous Villain that invented
Gallows's!


Now, Neighbours, who is wise, you or I? I thought I should hamper him: now you
see these things are taken about him, Ipsum factum, we will carry him to the
Assizes which now sit, this is the last day, he shall be last condemned, and
hanged forthwith: who is wise now, Neighbours?


Nay, Mr. Constable, you are even the luckiest at being wise that ever I knew.


Oh damned misfortune! Oh Rogues! I hope you will be hanged shortly, some of ye
at least.


Are you angry, Sir? the Hangman will anger you worse: look to the stolen
Goods, and carry 'em to my Lady some of you, go and search for his Comerogues,
while I with the rest of ye convey him.


Oh my cursed Stars! must this be the end of me? Well I have had a merry life,
though a short one.


MAdam, since your Jewels and Plate is all restored, 'tis pity the poor Rogue
should be hanged.


I hope he will not, for the Court is not far off here in the Country this
Vacation, and I have sent to my Lord my Brother, to get a Reprieve for him of
the King.


If it come not soon he will be hanged, this is Execution day.


I gave my Man a strict charge to make haste, he rides Post: how now, what
would you have?


Margery and I have a Petition to your Ladyship.


What's that?


I beseech your Ladyship you would please to let me have our James in lawful
Wedlock.


Is that it? are you contented, James?


Yes, Madam, I would fain be at I James take thee Margery.


Why, Marriage is honourable.


Yes, Madam, right honourable, and please you.


I have heard strange things of you, did you never abuse my House?


I'm sure your Ladyships House has often abused us, for they speak their
pleasures of us.


To you James I speak, have you behaved your self well and honestly with
Margery?


I must refer my self to her for that, she knows my Behaviour.


Truly, Madam, he has done what he could, and no man can do more than he can, I
must justify him so far, or else I were no good Christian.


Hold your peace: James, I ask you, Did you never naughtily together?


I swear we did always well together, as I thought, speak Margery.


Truly, James, I find no fault, neither could my Lady, if she knew all.


You are so full of your prattle; did you use no uncleanness in my house?


I rubbed every place as clean as I could, Madam.


You Blockhead, I mean was there no fornication betwixt you?


I'll swear by all the Books in England, I know not what fornication is, 'tis
too fine a word for us poor folks to understand.


Fornication is fit for your Ladyship, God bless us, what should we meddle with
such things? I have heard the Chaplain speak of it, indeed he could instruct
one, if he would.


Come Huswife, I hear you are with child by him.


With child, Madam! I'm sure no body can say black's mine eye, and they speak
true.


No, your eye's gray; but they say you are with child by him, Huswife.


Well, Heaven forgive my enemies; if I be with child it will come out, that's
certain, in spite of all my adversaries.


Well, 'tis time enough to marry these two or three months.


Oh 'tis not, if your Ladyship knew all.


Pray let it be now, Madam, we have been made fast, Madam, ask James else.


Ay, fast and loose again often, we were betrothed for the honour of your
Ladiship's house.


Good Madam, think of a poor frail Woman by your self.


Go, go together, the sooner the better.


Thank your Ladyship.


What's here another Couple?


How now, John Cook, what would you have?


Why, Madam, I have served your Ladyship these seven years honestly, without
thinking of Matrimony, or of any kind of concupiscence, to the dishonour of
your House.


And what then?


I have a violent inclination, if your Ladyship please, to fall aboard on this
young Maiden by the way of Wedlock.


And are you agreed to it, Mall?


Yes, Madam, I think so, if your Ladyship will not be an angered, he does keep
much a coil with one, one can ne'er be quiet for him, unless one marries him, I
think.


The Chaplain will be here within this hour.


Stay two or three months, and consider.


Not I by the faith of my body, I have held out already as long as I can, the
fire makes us choleric and very amorous, and my passion is so violent, I
cannot stay; if you love the honour of your House, let us marry, for we are now
roasting in love, and we shall burn else.


Well take your course, hanging and marrying day comes together I see now.


Thank your Ladyship.


'Tis Execution day here, Madam, now.


If 'twere your Execution-day, you'd not desire a Reprieve; but where are my
Guests?


They were robbed and stripped, and are drinking and comforting themselves with
the Bottle, and have drunk pretty deep already. Now, Madam, will be my time for
Sir John Noddy, he has promised me 500 pounds to marry him to your Ladyship, I
intend to save him that money, and marry him to my self for nothing.


This Footpad's a brave Rogue, I would not have him hanged. But how can thou
bring the Marriage about?


Let me alone for that, if your Ladyship be pleased to lend me your Diamond
Ring and Bracelets, and one of your Gowns, I do not doubt it.


With all my heart: come, Cousin, be not disconsolate, here's my hand, thou
shalt have the Colonel.


I think not of him, Madam.


Allons, let's go.


Come, we have drunk long enough in the Buttery, let's to it here now.


Get some Champinions, Caviary, and Potargo.


In the Name of Heaven do you conjure? why, they are three Devils Names, are
they not?


And do you hear, bring some Westphalia Bacon.


There was one Mr. Francis Bacon, a very pretty hopeful man of our house, that
did write Essays; he would have made a pretty man, if he had lived till now.


Oh eternal Blockhead, did you never write Essays?


I did essay to write Essays, but cannot say I writ Essays. Oh this Wit is such
a thing, 'twill never leave one.


Very good, very good.


How prettily it clinches upon the word!


Come, let us sit.

Ha, ha, very good.


Ah, Sir John, you are the merriest man, ha, ha, ha.


Ounds, I'll reward you.


God forgive me, their Swords out, what shall I do?


Ay, come I am as ready to fight as your Worship, and you be for fighting,
i'faith I'll fit you.


Prithee, Cousin, be quiet.


I'faith, I cannot help it, I do so love to be merry, and the Colonel is so
peevish.


Come i'faith, Colonel, there was no harm meant.


Well, sit, I'll endure it for once.


Come, give me some Wine.

Oh this Wine
Is most divine,
Give me the Cup,
I'll drink't all up,
Here's every sup.

Justice, tie up your Poetic fury.


I have done.


Prithee Poet, let's have some conceit of yours.


Ay, prithee Mr. Crambo break a Jest.


I cannot break a Jest, I am best at Translation, I'll tell you one.

Mittitur in disco mihi piscis ab Archiepisco
Po non ponatur, quia potus non mihi datur.

Very pretty, po non ponatur, alluding to potus, because he gave him no drink,
being part of Arohiepiscopo, excellent.


Quiet your Exposition.


I rendered it thus,

Here in a Dish
Is sent me some fish
By the Archbish,
Hop was not there,
Because he sent me no Beer.

A Pox on this Poet, he has stolen this, 'tis old, but they make nothing of
that.


The most happy Translation in the world, never any thing so fine.


Oh, that I could have made such a one, 'tis a very happy one.


By your leave, I see no such great happiness, all the happiness is in Hop.


Why, Colonel, Hop makes Beer, there's the conceit, and the Hop joining to
Bish, puts down the Original po for potus most egregiously, i'faith.


Again your Explanation.


I profess it is as good as Damon languebat, or the Devil was sick: or, Cum
socio mingas, aut saltem mingere fingas.


But, good Mr. Crambo, let's hear something of your own.


I write very little of my own, I borrow most.


That's a civil word for stealing, for such borrowers never pay again.


I'll try if I can remember.

Where is the Man? -- Ah hum.
Where is the Man? -- Pish.
I protest I have such a treacherous memory, Oh I have it.

Where is the Man that never heard
Of Dido Carthage Queen.

Where is the man, strange!


Admirable! Where is the man, oh lofty, very lofty.


Let me see.

Where is the Man that never heard
Of Dido Carthage Queen, whose Castle Walls
Did loudly echo to her amorous sighs.

Oh admirable, The Walls echo to her sighs!


Then the loud Echo to a sigh, strong, pithy!


Fine, fine, very fine, the Devil take me.


Why, an Echo to a sigh is nonsense, Gentlemen, a loud Echo is worse.


Oh fie, it is Poetical.


Very Poetical.


Ay, ay, 'tis Poetical.


That which you mean by Poetical is nonsensical I find; but come hither,
Waiter, did you ever hear of Dido Carthage Queen?


No by my Troth, Sir, not I never in my life, I hope your Worship does not
think so ill of me, for, i'faith, some body has done me some ill office, I
never was acquainted with her in my life.


Oh 'tis very fine! the Colonel's Genius does not lie this way: Oh very fine!
Pray let's hear some more on it.

Where is the man that never heard
Of Dido Carthage Queen.

Here is the man that never heard
Of Dido Carthage Queen.

Is't possible?


What an unlucky Fellow's this!


Oh Heaven! there's the best line that ever was, spoiled by a Footman.


Lord, how ignorance will overthrow Learning sometimes! who would write in this
Age?


Come, Justice, I find you are very forward, let's hear you recite some of your
Works.


Come on, Colonel, I'd have you know when I was at the University, I was as
arch a Scab, as notable a Wag, as any was in the College.


Come on, Justice, i'faith; but put about a Glass, I begin to be almost
tipsied, i'faith.


So am I too, a little overjoyed.


Now you shall hear my University Verses, the heat of my Youth, I made an Elegy
upon one Mr. Murrials Horse that died there.

Oh cruel Mors
That killed the Horse
Of Mr. Murial!
Oh Scholars all
Of Pembrook -Hall
Come to his Burial.

Very good, i'faith.


Nay; when I was a young man, nothing could escape me, nothing, i'faith.


Ha, ha, very witty, to it again, Justice.


Well then, there was a Man, his Wife, Son, and Daughter that died, I writ this
on 'em.

Here lies John Sanderson, and here lies his Wife.
Here lies his Dagger, and here lies his Knife.
Here lies his Daughter, and here lies his Son.
And oh, oh, oh, oh, for John Sanderson.
Ha, ha, what say you? -- hum.


Excellent at Epitaphs both of Man and Beast.


Then some Rogues stole Sheep from one Mr. Prat, I made these upon good Mr.
Prat.

Your Weathers were fat,
We thank you for that.
We left the Skins
To buy your Wife Pins,
Thank her for that.
We left the Horns
Upon the Thorns,
Look you to that.
Ha, ha, there was not such a Rakehel in the Town again. They saw I could not
be a Divine, and so I was sent to the Inns of Court, i'faith.


I will steal away, and go to my Lady.


Then at London I had such a fancy at Rebuses, Libels, and Lampoons, this
whoreson riming would not leave me, I made this upon one Rawly.

What's indigested with the word of disgrace
Is the Gentleman's name that hath a bad face.
Raw is indigested, and lie the word of disgrace, Rawly: had I been caught I had
been firkt i'faith. Then upon one Noel.

The word of denial, and the Letter of fifty
Is the Gentleman's name, that will never be thristy.
No, the word of denial, and L. the Letter of fifty, Noel. Had I been known I
had been paid, i'faith; but Wit will have its fling in spite of the Privy
Council, i'faith it will.


I must beg leave to be gone, I dare not drink more.


Ay, prithee go, thou art a damned dull Fellow.


What a pox is this, one of your Wits? Go they are dull Fellows, the Clinchers
are rare men indeed, give me your harmless Joques. You shall hear a Clincher
run from Dioper Napkin, Nipkin to King Pippin, i'faith in Wit; I have heard a
Dean do it.


Did you ever keep company with a Dean?


Yes, yes, and with Privy Councellors too; but they are too grave for me, they
will be asking what navigable Rivers, what Commodities our Country abounds in,
what Market-Towns, how they are inclined, who governs the Country best; but you
little think what manner of man, I think, the wittiest man I ever met with in
my life.


No, i'faith, Sir John: fore God, Colonel, I begin to be as drunk as a Drum.


I'll tell you now you talk of a Drum, the Devil take me, 'twas a Drummer I
spoke of.


A Drummer a witty man!


Ay, the wittiest Rogue, my intimate friend, I call him Tom, and he calls me
Jack, for all I am a Knight; he can break a jest upon his Drum, would make you
split your sides.


How so?


He will purr upon the Velum, and then rap upon the wood, makes all the people
laugh, and forty other excellent qualities, he is the best company in the
world, he will act any thing in the world, he will act a stubble Goose flying
over a Gutter, he will act a company of Hogs justling in straw for room, but he
was old Dog at a Parrot and a Turkeycock.


This is a rare man indeed.


On this is nothing, why as well as living Creatures, he would act any thing
that had not life in it, as a Pig upon the Spit, nay I have seen him act a
Windmil.


A Windmil!


A Windmil, any thing in the world, a Weathercock, a Cart-wheel ungreas'd, a
door off the Hinges; but he has the finest Songs in the world, he sings this
rarely.

And then he did as he was wont,
For he took her fast by the ha, ha, ha.
So Gentleman-like, so civil it comes off, without any scurrility in the world.


Methinks 'tis rude.


Oh by your favour, Sir, he means nothing; if wicked interpretation wrest it,
who can help it?


In troth it is very pretty.


Oh 'tis pity that the Author is forgot, he was certainly the best Lyrick Poet
in the world, and deserves a Statue of Brass.

And then he did as he was wont,
For he took her fast by the ha, ha, ha.
But drink about a brimmer to my friends health: here, Justice, to you.


Come on, Sir John.


Doctor, wake, what's the matter?


Drunk, drunk, double, double drunk.


Come let's have one Catch, i'faith, I have the rarest one in the world, the
wittiest and the merriest.


Come on i'faith, Justice.


Oh the merry time I have had with this Catch!

What if I turn this over my Thumb,
Then thou art no boon,
Then thou art no boon Companion,
Companion, Companion,
Oh then thou art no boon Companion.
But now you shall hear.

But what if I turn this over my Tongue,
Oh then thou art a boon,
Oh then thou art a boon Companion,
Companion, Companion,
Oh then thou art a boon Companion.

Very fine; but, Colonel, you want the Drummer's health.


I'll drink ne'er a Drummer's health in Christendom.


You had not best refuse my friends health, I say do not provoke me.


Provoke you! why, what will you do?


What will I do? why I will beat you as long as I am able to beat you, or as
long as you are able to be beaten.


Death, you Rascal, beat me! take that.


Come, Sir, have at you, I'll tickle your sides.


Hold, hold, Colonel: why, Sir John, are you mad?


Ay, ah, Sir John, are you mad?


Let me go, Oh my Honour, my Honour! I'll cut his throat, Oh let me go, my
Honour, my Honour!


Ne'er trouble your self, I shall find a time to answer you.


Oh but my Honour, my Honour, Gentlemen, that's the thing.


How now, what's the matter here?


Nothing, but I have been fighting a little for my Honour, nothing else.


I will steal out, I am something too drunk, and will repose a while. A pox on
this Sir John for hanging this Chair at my Breech, it must be he.


Don't talk of Honour, now this is the time to look after your Love.


Alas, you cannot blame me, my Honour's dear to me; but what progress have you
made in my Love?


So much, that she will marry you presently, and that she says after a while
will stop every body's mouth, and free her from all trouble of Suitors that
persecute her daily.


A thousand thanks, good Mrs. Anne; but how shall I do to be married? under the
Rose I am damnably drunk.


That's nothing, you are sober enough to speak after a Parson.


le make a shift.


But I must tell you, my Lady will be married privately, and with her Vail on,
that it may not be proved, though suspected; for she has some Suits at Law in
her name, which are near ended: and if her Marriage be known, or can be proved,
they must be begun again in yours.


My Lady has reason; but how shall I know that it is she? I may marry another
instead of her.


You'll know her by her rich Clothes, her Diamond Ring, and her Bracelet,
besides you shall see her face just before.


That's well, sweet Mrs Anne, thou shalt have thy 500 Guinnies.


Go you, and wait you in your own Chamber, I'll bring her and the Parson to
you.


Adieu, dear Soul, if I should fall asleep, being drunk, prithee dear Rogue,
wake me.


I will, but be gone quickly.


Adieu, dear, dear Love.


Dear Madam, believe me, adad, no man can love your Ladyship better, adad, they
cannot, no adad.


Adad, Sir, no body loves you less than I do, adad they do not, no adad. I have
private business with the Colonel, pray leave us, Sir, a while.


Well, no more to be said, private business with the Colonel, says she? is it
thereabout? I will cut the throat of this Colonel; but I am now as drunk as an
Owl: I'll go sleep first, Madam, I leave you to your private business: Farewell.


Colonel, you are a Gentleman of Quality and Worth, and I will undeceive you,
the rest are Coxcombs, and will not be answered.


What do you mean, Madam?


I will never marry any man, I am resolved to live in freedom.


Why then it cannot be helped, there's an end on it.


But if you will marry my Cousin, I will add so much to her Fortune, as shall
redeem your Estate.


Da God, Madam, and thank you too; this is that I would have chosen, she's a
very pretty Gentlewoman.


Go find her, and make your application to her presently.


I will, Madam: your Servant.


Oh, Madam, if your Ladyship does not stand my friend I am undone, now is the
time.


How so?


I have planted Sir John Noddy, be pleased to lend me your Diamond Ring and
Bracelet.


There; but what then?


If your Ladyship would be pleased now to step up with me into his Chamber, and
only say to him you will come presently, and then go out, and put off that
Petticoat, and lend it me, I were sure of him.


With all my heart, and much good may it do you with him. Here comes the
Colonel and my Cousin, I'll withdraw.


Faith, Madam, I think my Lady's proposition is very reasonable, and da God,
Madam, if you can like me, let's make as few words as can be about it.


You are the hastiest Colonel that ever was.


Faith, Madam, I am in haste, and that's a sign of great Love; I love you ten
times better than the Widow; I am an honest blunt Fellow, but da God you shall
find me a Man of Honour.


I do not doubt your Honour, but I must be careful of my own.


The best way for your Honour is to marry quickly; if marrying be a good thing,
why then the sooner the better: I am honest, you shall find I will love you
very well, and use you as a Gentleman should do, and that's the short and long
on it: never stand, Shall I, Shall I, but take my Lady in the humour.


Good Colonel, you'll over-set me, give me leave to retire and consider a while:
your Servant.


Nay I'll not leave her, I am resolved on it, till I get her in the humour.


Room for the Prisoner there, room for the Prisoner.


Make room there, 'tis a strange thing, a man cannot get to be hanged without
crowding for it.


Pray, Sir, were not you akin to one Hind?


No, I had run away faster then.


Pray Prisoner before your death clear your conscience, and tell me truly, Had
you not a Gingerline Cloth-Cloke of mine with an Olive Plush Cape, bound about
with a little Silver Galoon Lace.


I scorn your thread-bare lousy Cloak, you had best send to London to search
Long-Lane, and hang some Broker for it.


Pray answer me, as you have a Christian Soul, did not you steal all my
head-gear once?


Pox on your gear, I never meddled with it.


I am sure you had my Lady's gilt Caudle-cup.


Yes, and would have kept it, but she has it again, has she not?


And the Plate out of my Buttery.


Well, and had she it not again? what a pox would you have? You examine me as
if you would hang me, after I am hanged: pray Officers rid me of these
impertinent people, and let me die in quiet.


Oh Lord how angry he is! that shows he is a right Reprobate, I'll warrant you.


I believe if all you were to be hanged (which I hope may be in good time)
you'd not be very merry.


No, we will see you hanged first: Lord, what a down look he has!


Ay, and what a Cloud in his Forehead! Goody Twattle mark that.


Ay, and such frowning wrinkles too, I warrant you, not so much as a smile from
him.


Smile, quoth she? though 'tis sport for you, 'tis none for me I assure you.


Ay, but 'tis so long before you're hanged.


I wish it longer, good Woman.


Prithee Mr. Thief, let this be a warning to you for ever doing the like again.


I promise you it shall.


That's well, thank you with all my heart, Law, that was spoken like a precious
godly man, now.


By my truly, methinks now he is a very proper man, as one shall see in a
Summers day.


Ay, so are all that are hanged, the Gallows adds a great deal of grace to ones
person.


I vow he is a lovely man, 'tis pity he should be taken away, as they say, in
the flower of his age.


Happy are we that die in our beds, my Masters.


We that are hanged go a nearer way by twenty or thirty years: pray try, my
Masters, and I'll follow, I had rather be Epilogue than Prologue to this
Tragi-Comedy; I see you have no mind to go to Heaven yet for all your pretended
zeal, you would still live in this vale of misery and transitory
peregrinations; but if any be ambitious to be exalted, I'll render him my
place.


No, no, thank you, Sir, 'tis well as 'tis.


To see the villainy of man, to joy in one another miseries more than in their
seven deadly sins.


Come dispatch, what a pox shall we stay all day, and neglect our business to
hang one Thief?


Pray be hanged quickly, Sir, for I am to go to a Fair just by.


And I am to meet some friends to drink out a stand of Ale by and by, I must
have you hanged quickly, my friends will stay on me.


Nay, pray let him speak and die like a Christian.


Oh I have heard brave Speeches at this place before.


Ay, and I have heard 'em sing melodiously here, like Nightingales I vow.


Well, good people, if I may be bold to call you so, this Pulpit was not of my
choosing, I shall shortly preach mortality to you without speaking; therefore
pray take example by me, and then I know what will become of ye, shortly I will
set a Death's head before ye, to put you in mind of your ends, Memento mori.


Oh he speaks rarely.


Ay, and he's a Scholard; and does Latin it.


I will be, I say, your memento mori, hoping you will all follow me: I have
been too covetous, and at last taken for it, and am very sorry for it; I have
been a great sinner, and condemned for it, which grieves me not a little, that
I made not my escape, and so I heartily repent it, and so I die with this true
Confession.


Mercy on him, for a better man was never hanged.


So true and hearty repentance, and so pious!


Help him up higher on the Ladder: now you are above us all.


Truly I desire you were all equal with me, I have no pride in this world.


Will not you sing, Sir, before you're hanged?


No I thank you, I am not so merrily disposed, Sir.


Come, are you ready?


Yes, I have been preparing for you these many years.


Mercy on him, and save his better part.


Oh to stop so sweet a Pipe!


You see what we must all come to.


I, that's certain.


Hold, hold.


What's the matter?


Here's a Reprieve from his Majesty.


A Reprieve! how came that?


My Lady Haughty procured it by her Brothers means, and he shall have his
Pardon.


Say you so, Sir? Thank you with all my heart, it came in the nick, Sir, thank
my Lady, for truly, Sir, she has obliged me very much in it.


Pish, what must he not be hanged now?


What did we come all this way for this?


Take all this pains to see nothing!


Very pious good people, I shall show you no sport to day.


My Lady desires he may be brought to her house hard by.


I will always say while I live, that her Ladiship's a civil person.


Come along.


Come, Mr. Crambo, have you thought of any pretty Entertainment for us?


I have done the main part of it.


What is that?


Why, Madam, the Dance and the Show, that's the first thing we Heroics think
on when we write.


Pray let's have that in the mean time.


That you shall, Madam, they have been practising now, and are just ready,
strike up Music.


Thank you, Mr. Crambo. This Dance is very well written indeed, as fine a penned
Dance as can be: I'll go see what's become of my Cousin and the Colonel; I'll
wait upon you presently.


Come faith, Madam, discover your self now you are my Wife, that we may be rid
of these Coxcombs, poor sneaking Fools.


How now, Sir John, what Lady is that?


You may go home again, you may go, Gentle men.


Why, what's the matter?


What's the matter? my Lady has engaged her self to me, we will make them
welcome now and then at our house, though, Madam, they are good honest
Gentlemen, fa, la, fa, la.


What do you mean? what Lady do you speak of?


None but the Lady of the House, Sir, that's all.


She the Lady of the House!


What a Devil do I see my Lady's Ghost there? I have got my Lady.


No, Sir, you have not, I will not counterfeit her person any longer.


Hah, hah, what's this?


Even so, Sir.


Death and Hell, Furies, Devil, Damnation, Murder.


Well, Sir, we will come and visit you at your House.


Death, I'll cut all your throats, you Rascals.


Hold, Sir John, let me speak with you, be not so passionate, she whom you have
married, is a better Gentlewoman than you are a Gentleman; her Father was a
Gentleman, yours an Ironmonger at London; her's was ruined by Loyalty, as
yours was raised by Rebellion.


Is she such a Gentlewoman?


Besides, to my knowledge she was extremely in Love with you: this, with the
consideration that it cannot be undone, may appease your choler.


Ay, but now I have lost all hopes of your Ladyship.


There's nothing lost, for I will never marry any man, you shall presently hear
my solemn resolutions.


Nay then I am contented, I never had a Woman in love with me before.


Now, Colonel, I wish you Joy with my Cousin, the money shall be paid when you
will for the redemption of your Estate.


Death, have I lost my Cloris? I am undone, I shall have my Spleen again.


You're a noble Lady, and I have a Sword and Arm at your service; always and
Madam Isabella, who are my lawful Wife, you shall find I will behave my self
like a Gentleman, and like a Man of Honour.


I do not doubt it, I had heard that Character of you, or I had not ventured on
you.


Da God, Madam, I love and honour you, and will do as long as I live, and
there's an end on it.


Call all my Servants and the new-married Couples in.


Now, Madam, since you have disposed of those Gentlemen, I hope you have
reserved your self for me.


I assure you I have not, nor will I ever marry you; examine your age, and you
will find you are not in such great need of a Wife, as you think.


Operam oleum perdidi, as the Latines have it.


I find, Madam, you have disposed of you two, and denied the Justice, which
makes me apt to believe you intend me the honour of being your Husband.


Never, Sir, upon my word; since I have refused Gentlemen of the best Fortunes,
the best bred men, and the wittiest men of England, why should you imagine I
would marry you?


Nay, God take me I can't tell, Madam.


Nor I, Sir, I assure you.


Then there's an end on it, there no more to be said.


Madam, here's the Prisoner that was to be hanged.


So, Sir, I hope this warning will make you leave off stealing, and live
honest.


If it be possible to break an ill habit, I will, Madam, I give your Ladyship a
thousand thanks; for as the case stood, you could not have done me a greater
courtesy.


Is your Ladyship resolved never to marry?


No, because this Age affords not such a man as I would have.


What man would you have?


I am resolved never to marry,

Till I can find a man of noble blood,
With Virtues greater than his Pedigree,
One that fears nothing but to do a wrong,
Remembering every thing but injuries;
Who has courage beyond the Lion in his pride,
Yet hides that courage in his gentle breast:
That's just for Justice sake, and one that weighs
All things in Judgment's balance with clear sight,
Can hit the mark of men and business:
That prudently foresees from what is past
With Wit equal to all the Roman Poets,
With Fancy quick and sharp, yet not offensive:
His Discourse clear and short, and what's his own,
Easy and natural on all occasions:
Of Nature excellent, a melting Soul,
Ready still to oblige all Mankind, were it in his power.
This is the Man I would enjoy.


When do you think to find such a man? God take me, I'd not be such a man for
such a Widow.


Nor I neither, I desire to be a Politician and a States-man, for nothing but
that I may have power to do wrong, there is such pleasure in it.

Till such a man I find I'll sit alone,
And triumph in the liberty I own:
I ne'er will wear a matrimonial Chain,
But safe and quiet in this Throne remain,
And absolute Monarch over my self will reign

WOrthy Spectators, though I was a Rogue,
I here presume to speak the Epilogue.
For my offences I was doomed to day,
But in the nick found mercy in our Play.
Now I am clear, no punishment is due
To me, except fresh Crimes I act anew.
If you are pleased, let me by you be freed,
Oh I shall wish that I were hanged indeed.
TIs not the Poet with celestial fire,
Nor all the Muses that can him inspire
To write well, 'tis in you the power is had,
'Tis as you make it either good or bad;
But he in hopes of your kind Judgment stands,
Which he would have confirmed by all your hands.

