MOre blessed than Day, be this auspicious Night!
W'hen with Your Presence we indulge our Sight.
Our solitary Stage no longer rieves:
The Sight of Princes still from Fate reprieves.
So, when the glorious Ev'ning-Star does rise,
Her glittering Train attends, and fills the circling Skies.
Thus we at need on Heaven and You depend:
Our Wishes rise, and the kind Beams descend.
Oh! that we here could oft 'ner thus be blessed!
But mighty Joys too seldom are possessed.
With gloomy Looks we did your Absence mourn,
And only lived in hopes of your Return.
In pity grant our Sports one kindly Ray!
We by your Presence live, and by your Smiles the Play.
This fears no Censure; for, while you're in View,
What can Spectators see or like but You?
Seem but to like, and their Applause we'll boast,
For sure to see You pleased is what will please them most.

To day expect no Pageant Decoration,
This Lord May'rs Show began the Reformation:
Yet is our Entertainment odd and new;
We've in our Show the First of Cuckolds too:
And what we call a Masque some will allow
To be an Op'ra, as the World goes now.
So is your poisoning Quack miscalled a Doctor,
And your worst Mimic calls himself an Actor.
So your dull Scribbler (to our Cost we know it)
Writes a damned Play, and is misnam'd a Poet.
Once Song and Dance could buoy up want of Thinking,
But now those Bladders can't prevent its Sinking:
Plays grow so heavy, that those helps are vain;
Three times they sink, and never rise again.
Well, if our Neighbours the Precedence claim,
For good dull Stuff we'll not dispute with them.
Our Medley is perhaps as much too light,
But let it pass -- We don't take Money yet by weight.
By Sympathy, 't should please the Beaux, I know,
For in all things an Op'ra's like a Beau.
Both Beau and Op'ra on the Stage are seen;
Both odd in Dress, and shifting still the Scene;
Each dances, sings, and moves like a Machine.
To be admired, 'tis at a vast Expense;
It loves soft words, but cares not much for sense;
For by its Nature 'twas design'd' for show;
Why, 'tis an Op'ra but to dress a Beau.
But one unlucky difference stands between;
Op'ra's are paid, but Beaux pay to be seen,
(Those who don't come to sharp an Act I mean.)
For your own sakes, we beg Applause of you;
Since 'twill revenge, you on the Scribbling Crew.
For, if this takes, strait cries each senseless Elf,
Dem-me, I'd write as well as this my self.
With that, he writes a things which we refuse,
Then, wondering how we durst affront his Muse,
Strait in a huff he gives it to other House;
Who either slight it, or 'twill be its Lot
To get as much as their last Op'ra got,

IS my Mother ready, is she coming to hear the Music?


Yes Madam, and is extremely pleased; she loves Music wonderfully.


So do I Beatrice; we are much beholden to my singing Master.


Yes Madam! But you are more beholden to your Lover, young Mr. Gerald.


How so!


You know he has left the University for your sake, and has been this month in
Town, waiting opportunities to see you: He brought with him some words of his
own composing to entertain you* they are set by your own Master: By this means
he hopes to get admittance to discourse you, and breath his Love Ejaculations
in your Ear.


How can that be? He is known both by my Father and Mother.


No matter for that; he is in disguise, and sits amongst the Instrumental
Music as one of them.


How shall I know him?


By his Eye, as you do a Pheasant, he'll be looking on you all the while.


But how will he come to speak to me?


Trust that to chance, at least it will be a pleasure to see one another: It is
a delight to Lovers to steal looks, tho it be at Church.


Sure Love and Devotion are near a kin, they are each bred in the Soul, and
Music is the food of both.


Here comes your Father and Mother.


Come Husband, stay and hear the Music, my Daughter's Master will take it ill
else, it was provided for the Play-house, and he has brought 'em all here to
practice it over in form: You'll have time enough to visit your Patients.


Let 'em begin presently then, for time is precious to men of business.


The Music strikes up already. Sit down, Husband, Daughter, and Beatrice, take
you your places over against us.


Well, now my time is out, I must be gone.


This is not all: This is but the Prologue to what follows; you must hear the
rest.


I must go visit a Nobleman that is my Patient just now, but I'll return anon:
In the mean time take all the performers in to Breakfast, and treat 'em with
some bottles of Wine.


By that time you'll come again.


Ay, my dear Wife, farewell.


Gentlemen, pray all walk into the next Room, and take part of a small
Entertainment. Come Daughter.


Beatrice, tell Mrs. Angelica my Master would fain come too, but dares not, for
fear he should be known to be in Town, Besides, he and I have some business,
but we'll be here again anon.


Well, well, get you gone Crispin. I am called.


You are resolved Sir, to Marry you say?


I am; and to that end, I have sent my Son to the University, to mind his
Study, and be out of the way.


May I, Sir, be so bold, to ask the Ladies name, you intend to make your Wife?


Madam Angelica the Doctor's Daughter.


Sure, Sir, you're not in earnest, she's not above fifteen; that Match Sir,
would be sitter for your Son


My Son? I don't intend that he shall Marry yet, these seven years.


But Sir, consider well before you Marry.


I have thought enough, she's handsome, young, and sprightly.


But these are qualities will not agree with an old mans constitution.


Old Coxcomb: I an't so old.


No Sir, if you had been contemporary with the Patriarchs, you had been counted
now a very youth, but in this short-liv'd age we live in, Sir, you are, as one
may say, worn to the stumps.


Hold your prating; Threescore is mans ripe Age.


Yes, and his rotten Age too; but you, if I mistake not, are threescore and
ten.


No more of Age: 'Tis a thing never to be inquired into, but when you are
buying Horses.


How? Not in Marriage Sir.


Not if a man be very rich.


Can you believe Sir, the old Doctor her Father, and the Gentlewoman her
Mother, who is a notable wise governing Woman, will bestow their Daughter, and
their only Heir, upon a man so old, where there 's no hope of Grand Children to
inherit what they have, without an Act of Parliament to enable him.


Hold your tongue I say; you are my Servant, not my Councellor I take it Sir;
this is my own concern; when I am Married, I doubt not but I shall behave my
self, as a married man ought.


But if the Doctor won't consent to it.


That I am sure of, he has promised me, and he's a man of his word.


That indeed is something: but Sir, you know the Wife there wears the Breeches;
and if the grey Mare be the better Horse, you'll find it difficult to bestride
the Filly.


I know she is a little domineering; and I know too that Mr. Doctor is a Wise
Man; his gravity and prudence, will manage her well enough; he who can our mad
folks, scorns to be Wife-ridden.


Many have tried in vain; a man sometimes may sooner break his own heart, than
his Wife's will. But see Sir, here's the Doctor.


Mr. Gerald, good morrow to you Sir.


Mr. Doctor, I was coming to speak to you.


Come; let me feel your pulse.


It needs not Sir.


The other hand.


That's not my business.


No, but 'tis mine, your Pulse Sir is disordered.


You mistake me, my --


Put out your tongue, your tongue.


No matter for my tongue.


Do you sleep well?


Yes, very well. But Sir --


How is your Stomach? have you a good Appetite.


Yes Mr. Doctor, but I come --


And do you digest well what you eat?


Yes very well, but will you hear me Sir?


And all those other benefits of nature.


I have 'em regularly. But Mr. Doctor --


Nay if you eat well, drink well, sleep well, digest well, and after all this
should not be well, it would be wonderful. But I lose time, I must visit my
other Patients. Your Servant Sir.


Stay, good Sir, stay, I have had patience to hear you talk, and to no purpose
neither; now 'tis my turn to speak, and to some purpose.


Dispatch then; I'm in haste.


'Tis not about my health I came to you, no 'tis another affair.


What affair?


That, that you know of.


What I say?


The business that I spoke of.


When?


When? more than once.


Where?


At several places; at your house and mine.


What was it then?


About your Daughter.


What about my Daughter?


About my marrying her.


O, was it nothing else? I thought 't had been something of consequence. As to
that matter I have given my promise; choose your own time, Marry her when you
please.


And have you broke it to your Wife?


No, but my will is hers, she submits to what I think fit. I am and will be
master. I thank Heaven, I have discretion, and can rule a Wife, as a wise
Husband ought.


I doubt it not.


If once my Wife should contradict my will, she should soon find what metal I
am made of. I thank my Stars we have no domestic broils, my Wife submits to me
in all things.


If you think fit then, let's acquaint her with it, 'tis a formality all
Mothers may expect.


You say well; stay here, I'll call her!


Well Martin, what say you now?


I see the Doctor is your friend; so far all's well; but mark the end I say
still.


My dearest, here's our good friend Mr. Gerald come purposely to see you.


Sir, you Servant. Tho my Husband's a Physician, I am glad to see you're in
good health.


Speak to her Mr. Doctor, tell her the business.


Do you speak first.


'Tis properer for you.


No, no, you'll explain your self much better. Lovers are eloquent.


But you have the Authority of a Husband, and may without ceremony open the
matter to her.


No, you must break the Ice, you shall see my power if she resists.


Pray Gentlemen, what's this contest about, and why was I called hither?


A foolish punctilio of honour; and something Mr. Doctor has to acquaint you
with.


Our kind friend, Mr. Gerald here, has a mind to marry our Daughter, Love.


Yes Madam; and upon such terms as few Parents are displeased with. You may
scruple my age, but when you know, I will take her without a Portion, and mean
to settle a good jointure on her, allow her handsomely for Pin-Money, keep her
a Coach, a Chariot, and two Footmen; and give her every New-years-day, a
hundred Guineas in an Embroidered Purse, to fool away; I hope, that scruple
will be removed. Besides, Mr. Doctor has given his consent already, and I doubt
not, but yours will come as easily.


Hold there, good Mr. Gerald; these things require consideration; your Ages are
most unsuitable. Many young Women have been ruined by such unequal Matches.
Youth and Age cannot agree: An old Man may be fond of a young Woman, but a
young Woman of an old Man never. But to avoid all inconveniences, and fatal
accidents, that may happen to our Family, by such a disproportioned Marriage, I
must tell you plainly, you shall not have my consent; and I hope you will not take
it ill of me.


But your Husband, Madam, has given me his word.


What if he has? He gave it then without consideration. When he comes to weigh
all circumstances as he ought, he must* and will be of my mind too.


Speak Mr Doctor, did not you absolutely promise me?


He who indiscrectly promises, may with good reason call it back. He did it
without my knowledge or consent therefore 'twas but a half promise, Sir.


But, Mr Dr, a Man of Honour ought to keep his word, and stand to what he says.
Speak then, have you not promised me your Daughter?


'Tis true, I cannot deny it.


How! can you not? we'll talk of that hereafter. Well Mr Gerald, promise, or
not promise, all's one for that, I deny my consent, and that's enough.


But Wife, dear Wife --


Wife me no Wife's, but hold your foolish prating; sure I know better than you
What's fitting for our Daughter.


But my dear, we ought --


I know we ought to be wiser than to make foolish promises; or if you were so
childish not to keep em. Come Mr Gerald, set your Heart at rest, you shall
never marry my Daughter; there's my resolution. I will not be the jest of the
whole Town. Who would not split their sides to hear a couple of old fools call
one another, Father and Son? away, away for shame.


Sir, Sir, Mr Dr.


Well, what say you?


If once my Wife should contradict my will! She should soon find what metal I
am made of. I thank my Stars we have no domestic broils, my Wife submits to me
in all things.


Martin says true; this lesson you read to us, before you called your Wife,
good Mr Doctor.


'Tis very true; and 'tis as true, this was no proper place to show my
authority; our Passion must be governed by our Reason; my Moderation must cool
her Intemperance: Had I presently flown to the top of the house, we had made
fine work on it: I'll take a more convenient opportunity to discourse this
matter with her; in the mean time, leave it to me: I have given my word, and I
will -- I will -- come trust to me: I warrant you.


Yes Sir, leave it to Mr. Doctor, he'll do wonders; he is a Lyon in private,
but you saw he was a Lamb in public: But I fear you had better take the Wife's
word, than the Husband's, 'tis plain she rules the Roast.


You are a fool, and know not what you say.


But I know, Sir, you had a furious repulse at the Half-Moon, you were beaten
out of your Trenches too; you'll have no better luck at the Conterscarp: If you
dare venture to storm, I fear you will be beaten off, with such a shameful
loss, you will be forced to raise the Siege, and glad you escape unwounded.


Hold your tongue, you are a saucy Knave.


I have done; I won't dispute Titles with Mr Doctor.


Well Mr Gerald, once more leave all to me: I tell you I will do it; that's
sufficient.


Now, Sir, have you the same hopes you had of Marrying Mrs. Angelica? You see
her Mother's an imperious Woman, and will never give her consent to it: The
Doctor I confess is an able Physician, an excellent man in his way, but yet he
has the fortune to be Henpecked, and must submit, as many wise and learned men
have done; therefore you must not build upon his promises: Besides, I do not
find you have got the Daughter's consent yet; and that's the main point of all.


You say true, Martin; I must think of that. Stay, is not that Crispin yonder?


O Sir, your Servant; I am glad I have found you. Good morrow Martin.


Good morrow Crispin.


What cause brings you to Town?


Your Son, my Master, sent me in all haste.


For what?


That Letter will inform you.


Honoured Father, Hoping you are in good health, as I am, thanks be to God, at
the present writing hereof: This is to let you understand that all my Money's
gone, and my Clothes worn so bare, that you may, as the saying is, see my
Breech through my Pocket-holes.


A fine Epistle.


This is not my Sons stile, nor is't his hand: This is some Roguery of yours
Sirrah.


To tell you the plain truth, Sir, I lost I know not how, my Masters Letter on
the Road; and baiting at a little Village, it happened to be the Sextons house,
who sold a Cup of notable good Ale: There I got him to write this Letter for
me. I know my Master sent for Money, and Clothes, pray read the rest.


No, I have read enough.


You dictated this Letter to the Sexton, Crispin.


I did so? what of that?


Nothing, but that the stile is very eloquent.


I think so: I have not been at the University with my Master 4 months, for
nothing.


Has my Son spent all his Money in so short a time? he has been prodigal.


He could not help it, he was forced to treat at his first coming, Sir: I shall
be his Steward for the future, and manage matters better.


Look you do. I have some business now, about an hour hence come home to me.
Follow me Martin.


So far all's well: If I can screw a good sum out of him, I do my Masters
business; the old Gentleman must not know he is in Town, nor must my Master
know I lost his Letter. O, here he comes.


I sent you with my Letter to my Father; why are you loitering here?


'Tis done, Sir.


What is done, Sir?


Your business, Sir, is done effectually: I met your Father here, just in this
place; gave him your Letter; he read it over and over, and said the stile was
admirable; was overjoyed to see how the University had improved you; then I
made him an eloquent Oration, to let him see how I had profited: This melted
his hard heart, made his old Eyes twinkle like flames in the bottom of two
Sockets: At last he bid me come home to him some half an hour hence; by that
time, Sir, the Money will be ready.


Did he ask no questions? how I had spent my Money? what company I kept? or how
I behaved my self in the University?


He had no time for that; when I come home to him, perhaps he may.


Be careful Crispin; should he suspect --


He shall pump nothing out of me, I warrant you.


But Martin is a notable fly youth.


You think, because I cannot write and read as he can, that I have less wit
than Martin; I warrant you I'll be upon my Guard, I'll deal well enough with
him. But now, Sir, let me question you a little; how durst you venture abroad
by day light? Should your Father --


I know it Crispin, but as soon as you were gone, Angelica sent her Maid to me,
bid me meet her here; something of consequence has happened to her, and I'm in
pain to know the meaning of it. See, she is here.


My clear Angelica!


Mr Gerald! I am glad my Maid found you, you have made haste.


Can you blame me for that? My love was too impatient to wait; I have a
thousand doubts and fears: why did you send for me? what has happened, Madam?
tell me my Angelica, and ease my loaded heart.


I could not prevail upon my self to stay till you came. O. Gerald! 'twill
surprise you when I tell you, your Father is in love.


You mock me Madam.


No, 'tis too true; he has asked me of my Father and my Mother, offers to settle
a large Jointure on me, and Marry me without a Portion too. These are proposals
few Parents will refuse.


The Laws of Nature, tho not of Nations, forbid such unequal Matches.


But Money, Gerald! what will not Money do?


'Tis true; for Money Mothers sell their Daughters?


Yes, and for Money, most Daughters sell themselves.


A Beau for money, will Marry an old withered Witch, with rotten Lungs, no
Teeth, one Eye, and half a Nose.


For Money, Soldiers sell their lives.


And Priests their consciences.

-- But my Angelica; your Father is a wise and learned Man, he is not
mercenary, he won't sell you.


You are mistaken, Sir, he has given his promise to your Father.


Then all my hope is vanished.


Not so; you have no reason to despair. You say my Father's wise, and learned
too; now I say, my Mother has no learning, but more wisdom, for she has
positively refused to give him her consent.


O you revive me! my drooping Soul drinks up your words, as the parched Earth
does a refreshing shower! what's to be done, Crispin?


I told you my Mother loved Music most immoderately: She is much pleased with
it. I will let her know that it was your contrivance, and acquaint her with our
love, and try to make her of our party. Stay here abouts, if I succeed,
Beatrice shall give you notice.


Do, my dear Loved, Angelica: Good luck attend you?


Has the Devil Lechery got possession of my old Master's head? I am sure he
left his Breeches long ago. Let me see; he has to my knowledge, been bewitched
about some 15 years.


This was the cause I was removed, and sent to the University.


He shall quickly find we lost no time there; we have studied hard, studied
Fortification, we can Entrench; if he can Mine, Sir, we can Countermine.


Now go, fetch the money from my Father instantly, you shall find me hereabouts
at your return


Well, of all your Father's follies, this is the worst. When old men fall in
Love, they're surely, cursed.


Is the Room in order, Beatrice, for the Music to go on with the
entertainment?


Yes, Madam.


'Tis very well. Go see how long it will be to dinner.
Come, my Angelica, be free and merry,
Trust to thy Mother's conduct, and her kindness;
Thy Father shall not sell thee while I live.
While you remain obedient and discreet,
It shall be all the study of my life,
To make you happy, Child.

Oh my dear Mother!
Let me receive this blessing on my Knees.
If ever I am disobedient to you?
Or e're abuse this mighty goodness to you,
May I become the out-cast of your Family;
Disowned by you, despised by all good Women,
And hated by young Gerald.

Here he comes.
You're welcome, Sir; if mine is not sufficient,
You shall have her welcome too,
And that, I hope will please you.

Please me! I more Than wealth to Misers, freedom to a Slave, Or a Reprieve to
one condemned to die.


Oh, Mr Gerald!
I have the most indulgent Mother living.
Your Father's liberal. offers to the Doctor
Cannot prevail on her.

How shall I thank you, Madam, as I ought?
How pay the mighty debt due to you both?
Due to your wisdom, and her matchless love?
If all the duty, the profound respect
That ever pious Son paid his own Mother
Can merit so much Happiness, if deserve it,
The business of my life shall be to please her.
My truth, my constancy, and perfect love,
No time shall alter, nor no chance remove.

Do this, my Son, and Heaven will bless you both.


My Master, Madam, has sent word, he can't be at home till dinner-time, but
would have you go on with the Music.


Then we'll loose no more time; come let us seat our selves; I long to hear
more.

Here comes in the second Musical Entertainment: After which they rise and
speak.


We'll hear the rest after Dinner.


Desire the Gentlemen all to walk in.


I must not be seen by your Husband; therefore I'll take my leave.


I know it, Mr Gerald. Your Servant Sir.


Sir your Servant.


Adieu my Life, my Dear, Angelica.


Two things, and only two, Angelica; I always loved, and loved em passionately.


What were those, Madam?


My Husband, and good Music:


And in that Madam, I follow your Example?


Yes Child, but take this rule along with you;
Discretion is a Woman's safest guard.
She shuns Vain Glory, Malice, Strife, and Pride,
When Reason and good Nature is her Guide.

BEatrice, I say; where are you?


Here, Sir, here.


See all things are in order here in my Laboratory. Many Virtuosi will be here,
to see my curious Dissection, and hear the lecture I intend to read on a dead
Body, which every moment I expect to be sent in from the place of Execution.


Why do you choose this back Apartment at the end of the Garden? You used to do
it in the Great Hall formerly.


My Wife will have it so, and that's enough; the body may be brought in
privately, at that back door, for so I ordered it: Besides, the wrangling
disputations of selfconceited, obstinate Physicians, who come to see my
operation, will at this distance less disturb the Neighbourhood: they will
maintain their notions with more noise, than Betters in a Cock-pit.


'Tis observed you Doctors rarely agree in your opinions, Sir, which makes some
affirm, Physic itself is a very uncertain Science.


That's true; bur yet the fault's not in the Art.


It most be in the Professors then.


And so it is; but this is not your business.


I only speak my simple judgment sir.


The Body will be here immediately: let 'em carry it into the Vault, 'tis
cooler there: in the mean time I'll make some visits to my Patients who are
near. Ha! Beatrice, let me see, what have you there?


Where, Sir, What do you mean?


There, Sirrah, there. Let's see those pretty Bubbies.


Eye Sir, you make me blush.


Faith I will see 'em; I and feel 'em too.


You old men have such odd fancies in you.


I am a Cock 'o'th' Game, you little Rogue.


You strut, and crow, and clap your Wings indeed, but all to little purpose.


Ah you unlucky Chitt! I could, I could --


But you forget your Patients Sir.


That's true indeed: 'well when I come again. Ex. Dr.


I find all Husbands, old, and young, are still for variety; which is a certain
sign of an ill stomach: well, if ever it be my fortune to Marry one who serves
me so, I'll say no more, but that which is sauce for a Goose, shall be sauce
for a Gander too.


What brings you hither now?


I have been almost half an hour hankering about the back door: I saw the
Doctor come forth just now, and then I ventured to slip in.


Secure that door then, while I fasten this; we will not'be surprised: now
what's the business?


My Master, poor man's at his wits end, he walks and starts, then stops and
muses, then he walks again: What Madam Angelica told him about his Father has
distracted him. I have a Letter for her.


Give it me.


Stay Beatrice, let me look on you a little: what hast thou been doing to thy
self? I never saw thee so handsome in my life.


Indeed?


No indeed: thou hast stolen some of thy Lady's Wash; it can't be natural; come,
let me try.


Stand off, you fool.


Now I think on it, I have not had one kiss since I came from the University.


Keep your distance, you had best: I will not make you so familiar with me.


Say you so: Harkee, Gentlewoman, what made you here alone with Mr Doctor? This
place is very private, at a convenient distance from the house too.


One who was hanged this morning is to be Dissected here: I must set every
thing in order for it; the Body will be sent in presently.


We have prepared another Entertainment for your Lady. Here, let me out
quickly. Knocking.


Open the door.


What shall I do? it is my Master.


Let me out I say.


Here, come to the other door. Knocking at the other door.


Where are you? Beatrice?


O Heaven! 'tis my Mistress, she's at the other door.


The Devil she is.


If she were not there, I would let you down into the Vault.


Ho Beatrice! open the door I say.


What will become or me?


Here, here, lay your self at length upon this Table: I'll say you are the dead
Body sent from the Gallows.


Oh Beatrice --


No more; do as I bid you. Crispin lies at his full length on the Table.
Beatrice open the door.


You made me wait sufficiently. I had forgot some Medicines I prepared; I must
go up and fetch 'em.


Now I'll let in my Mistress.


How were you employed, you could open the door no sooner?


I was busy in taking in this Executed Body, I made all the haste I could.


How now, my dearest Love, what make you here?


I came to see if all things' were in order as they should be.


'Tis very well. Adieu, I am in haste.


Beatrice, set all his Instruments in order: my Daughter and I will make a
visit: I do not love such sights, they make me melancholy.


I'll be careful in your absence.

Now, Crispins, is my invention good?


You've brought me bravely off; but I'll be gone for fear of an after-clap.


Beatrice, Beatrice, open the door again.


'Tis my Master, to the same postu^e quickly.


The Devil take him.


I think I am bewitched to day; I have taken the wrong Medicines. What's that
there?


The Body from the G^ows, Sir; the fellows that brought it would not carry it
into the Vault.


How came they to send him with his Clothes on?


They'll call for 'em to morrow.


'Tis very well. Ha! the Body's warm: I have a mind to make an experiment
immediately. Go, Beatrice, fetch me my Incision Knives, Amputation Knife,
Dismembering Saw, with the Threads, Pins, and all the other Instruments I laid
ready in my Closet.


But Sir, your Patients expect you now.


An hour or two hence will serve.


Should any of 'em dye in the mean time?


That's not my fault; if any of 'em are in so much danger, my visit will do 'em
no good now.


I have heard you say, Sir, a proper dose given at a lucky time --


Go, bring me only my Incision Knife; for while the natural heat remains, I
shall more easily come at the Lacteal Veins, which convey the Chyle to the
Heart, for Sanguification, or increase of Blood.


But, Sir, you won't begin the Anatomy before the Doctors come.


Fetch it, I say.


Well Sir, since I must.


He's not ill shaped, nor is he very ill featured; and yet his visage still
retains much discontent and trouble. Well, all the Rules of Metoposcopy and
Physiognomy are false, if this was not a Rogue that very well deserved hanging.
This Incision pleases me extremely; I'll open his Besly from the Xiphoid
Cartilage, quite along to the Os ^ubis. I feel his Heart pant yet: If any of my
fellow Physicians were here now, especially those who doubt the Harveyan
Doctrine, I'd let 'em plainly see the Circulation of the Blood through the Systole
and Diastole.


O Doctor! I am glad I have found you: My Lord is much worse since yesterday;
you must visit him immediately.


I'll come anon; I am very busy now.


My Lords so very ill, you must go with all speed to him.


Go you before I say, and let him blood, I'll be with him in an hour.


Sure Bleeding can't be proper in his circumstances.


I say let him blood: Sure I know what I do.


His case is altered much, Sir, since you saw him.


Once more, I say, go bleed him.


But Sir --


Bleed him, I say: 'Tis fine indeed when Surgeons shall teach Physicians.


I will not Bleed him, I am sure it will be his death: Let who will do it for
me; and so farewell.


Farewell, Sir, if you won't, another shall.


I have been looking all about Sir, and cannot find your Incision Knife:
Besides, Sir, a fine Lady called at the door just now, in a great Gilt Coach,
and charged me to send you to my Lord's immediately.


Ha!


In haste Sir, in all haste.


Say thou --


He's dying Sir, he's dying.


What should I go for then? --


You must go Sir, you shall go -- you are sent for.


The Devil's in the Wench --


They are in haste, in haste Sir.


Well I go then: Let the Body be carried into the Vault.


It shall, Sir; but lose no more time: be gone. So, joy go with you.


And I, without more words, will be gone presently.


Whither in such haste?


Whither, with a vengeance! Let me out I say: you must fetch the Incision
Knife, with a pox to ye, and all the other damnable Instruments, to rip me up
alive, and make minced meat of me! A curse on his Systol and Dyastole.


You are mistaken, Crispin: when I went out I did not go to fetch the
Instruments, I went to hide 'em, where I was sure he could never find 'em.


I thought indeed, you could not have the heart to see a man who loves you as I
do, so barbarously dismembered; and therefore I lay still.


Well, stay here a while; I'll run and give Angelica the Letter, and return
instantly.


I beg your pardon, I'll stay no longer in this room.


Why so?


The very thought of that damned Incision Knife puts me into a cold sweat? I'll
stay for you in the street.


Away, you sot.


I had rather be a Sot than an Anatomy, I will not have my Flesh scraped from
my Bones. I will not be hung up for a Skeleton in Barber-Surgeons-Hall*


Stay but a little.


Yes in the street. There I shall not be in danger of your damned Amputation
Knife, and your Dismembering Saw, with a pox to him.


Alas! poor Crispin.


Fear makes me think every thing I see an Instrument to rip me up, from the
Systole to the Dyastole.


He had a mind to be acquainted with your inside, Crispin.


The Devil pick his Bones for it. I shall never recover my self till I get out
of this cursed place.


Have a care, or you'll spoil all.


If the Dr catches me here, he will spoil all. Amputation and Incision will
spoil all.


Come, lay your self upon the Table quickly; he has no Instruments.


Not I; for ought I know, he may have some about him, his Pockets may be filled
with Knifes, Pins, Threads, Saws, and the Devil and all.


Well thought on: Here hangs my Master's Gown and Cap, you shall strait put 'em
on, and tell him you are a Physician, just come from the University, and
understanding a dead Body was to be dissected by him, came to hear his Lecture.


Where is the dead Body, fool?


I'll tell him, 'tis carried into the Vault, as he commanded.


Give me the Robes then: I'd rather act he Dr than the dead Body. So, now I
hope I need not fear his peeping into my Os Pubis, with a pox to him. Puts on
the Gown.


But if he should find out your ignorance!


I'll venture that; the World bely's 'em, or there are many great Physicians,
as great Fools as my self. I have good natural Parts, Beatrice, if they escape
but Incision and Amputation.


So; now I'll let him in.


Is Mr Dr within?


No.


Why do you deny him to me? There he is.


Well, what's your business with me, Mistress! Speak.


My Lady has lost her little Lap-dog, which she loved better than any Relation
in the World. She lays the fault on me, and grieves and takes on as if 'twere
her only Child. I fear she'll grow Distracted if we find it not. Now, Sir,
knowing that you are not only a learned Physician, but that you understand
Astrology and the like --


Ay, ay, I understand one, as well as the other.


Therefore, Sir, I bring you a Fee, and desire you to tell me some tidings of
him.


Have you brought the Dogs Water with you?


His Water? the Dog's lost, Sir.


Lost -- why -- ay, what then?


The Rascal stumbles confoundedly -- You do not mind, Sir, the Dog is not sick,
he is lost.


O ho -- lost? how long since was he lost?


Two days ago.


At what hour?


At eleven in the morning.


What colour?


Black and White.


Enough, enough.


Well, he's a rare Man, if he can tell me where to find the Dog.


Never doubt him; he will do it certainly*


You say 'tis two days since?


Yes, Sir.


About eleven a clock?


Yes.


Black and White?


Very right, Sir.


Beatrice, what's in that Box there in your hand?


Some Pills my Master gave me to lay up.


O ho! Some Pills? Give me the Box.


To what purpose?


Hold your peace; here, take these Pill.


For what, an't please your Worship?


Your Lady's Dog is lost.


Yes, Sir.


And you would find him again?


With all my heart.


Take these Pills then.


Will these Pills make me find the Dog again?


Yes, they will make you find him; for they're of a very searching nature.
There I was witty, Beatrice.


But, Sir --


Go, do as I bid you.


Here are just five, Sir, must I take 'em all?


Yes, all five, and all at once.


There is your Fee, Sir, if these Pills help us to the Dog again, you'll have
my Lady, and the whole Family for your Patients* and so your Servant, Sir.


Ha Crispin! Is not this better than being a dead Body. You no sooner Commenced
Doctor, but you got a Doctor's Fee.


Two new Crown-pieces; 'tis a brave Trade indeed: Here a man gets his Money
easily.


I could not choose but smile to hear your ignorance O sily! The Dog's Water?
And what would you have done, but for my Box of Pills? Give Pills to find a
Dog? Ha, Ha!


What would you have a man do, who can neither write nor read? Come let me
disrobe my self; I'll wait for you in the street.


Hark, some body knocks again.


O Lord! If this should be the Dr?


There's no remedy? You must brazen it out.


Is Mr Doctor within?


What's your business?


I'd speak with him.


From whom?


Why from my zelf.


Why do you know him, friend?


I come to ask him one Question, and you ask me a score.


He's not at home to every Body; therefore I must know.


Then I neither know him, nor he me, I pray is he at home to receive Money? I
bring a Fee.


Who are you Friend?


Why they call me at our Town, Simon the infant; but my name is Simon Burly.


Well, what's your business? quick.


I am told you re an Astrologer, as well as Dr.


What then?


Why then, I question you, an't please ye, whether Ailce Draper, a young Maid
in our Town, that I love, has that love for me again as she pretends to have.
Because there is an arch Attorney's Clark, that is often in her Company, and I
don't know --


Hold, what kind of Woman is she?


Why, she is a sprightly, cleaver, well built Wench, with a fine featly Face,
brown Hair, and a ruddy Complexion; a good crummy Lass, and treads well on her
Pastons.


Sprightly, proper, well built, featly Face, brown Hair, ruddy Complectioned; a
crummy Lass, and treads well on her Pastons.


Ay marry does she.


Here, take these Pills.


Pills?


Yes, take'em.


How, Pills?


Yes of Pills. You must take the number Ten, because of your great Bulk.


I have taken Pills to purge with-all; but, Wounds can they --


Go to I say; they'll purge the Head, and clear the understanding wonderfully.
Ours is a Science you know nothing of.


Tell him they are Cephalic Pills. Bea* whispers him.


Ay, ay; These are Cephalic Pills. But that is Heathen Greek to you: If you
understood Latin, I could talk to the purpose to ye.


I am a piece of a Scollard I must tell you. Intelligo, Domine, Linguam
Latinam.


Poh, poh, I know that; but that's Out-Landish Latin. There's several sorts of
Latin: There's Law- Latin, Priests Latin, and Doctor's- Latin; as for example:
Olo Purgatum, Physicum, Vomit -- um -- guts -- out -- um -- and so forth. Our
Latin is quite another thing from School Latin.


I think it may be so?


Go, do as I bid ye.


I had best give you your Fee first.


I, I, that's well considered.


Pills* --.


Ay. Pills.


Ten Pills.


Just ten: Dispatch -- away,


If these should do the business --


I understand you; I shall have more of your custom then; go, go, farewell --


These knowing Men, your Lawyers, and Physicians, when they have once fingered
the Money, are so hasty to be rid of a man, they'll not give one word into the
bargain: Good day to ye, Sir.


The like to to you, Friend.

Two Crowns and half a Guinea got already; this is a gainful and no painful
Trade.


Learned Mr Dr, I must have snacks.


And so thou shalt; there's my last Fee for thee, you cannot say but I deal
nobly by you.


-- Thank you; this will buy Pins.


-- Hark!


There's more Fees coming.


My heart misgives me. Ah, what will become of me! it is the Devil himself.


Have you done every thing as I ordered, Beatrice?


Yes, Sir, the Body's carried into the Vault. Just before you came in this
Gentleman, some Dr, I suppose of your acquaintance; I presume he intends to be
present at your Anatomy Lecture.


Sir. tho I have not the honour yet to know you, you are very welcome, Sir: I
shall not begin my dissecton till to morrow morning; then if you please to
honour me with your presence, you may, perhaps, hear something that is curious,
and out of the common Road.


I have heard much, Sir, of your great Abilities, and shall not fail you; for
your reputation, Mr Dr, is a reputation -- that -- as I may say -- or as -- in
fine, Sir, I will not fail to wait on you --


Sir, if you please to retire out of this Room --


By and by -- I have not done with the Dr yet.


Pray, Sir, let me consult with you a little, about the case of a sick person,
who is my Patient now.


Do me the honour to excuse me now; I have business of mighty consequence, that
requires my departure instantly, -- but to morrow, Mr Dr --


Stay a little, I'll give you his Case in two words. You must know, my Patient,
Sir, has laboured many months first under a Tertian, then under a Quart, and
now 'tis turned to a Quotidian: The Fever we have pretty well abated, yet after
all, -- besides a great disposition he has to sleep, which very much fatigues
him, -- that which he spits from him, is very white -- now, Sir, in my judgment
that's an ill symptom, for a Pituita alba aqua inter cutem supervenit, says
Hipocrates and this you know well enough, the Greeks call Leucophelgmateia --
so then according to Hipocrates, this white spitting, or Pituita alha is an
evident sign, that the Hydropsie, or Dropsy will succeed. Now, Sir, what say
you is the most sovereign Remedy to be given in this Case to hinder this evil
consequence?


Why, Sir, I must tell you -- but to what purpose? you have no need of my
opinion, you are a man famous for understanding -- so that -- and as it were --
in fine, I will not speak one word more to this purpose.


Pray, Sir, speak freely; I shall be proud to have your opinion of this case*


No matter, Sir, for my opinion; for tho I know enough and all that -- yet I
had rather --


I act openly, Sir, I am not like some Physicians that I know, so fond of my
own opinion, Sir, that rather than consult with other Doctors, they'll let a
Patient dye under their hands; therefore speak freely, I am prepared to give
you my attention.


Why then, Sir, in this sort of Malady, I do not know but that -- or when -- or
as it may be very near this Case -- or so, Sir --


Humh --


What think you of -- a -- dose of Pills?


How! Pills, Sir? that would ruin all we have done.


O you mistake me, Sir, I don't advise you, Sir, to give him Pills. I only
mentioned, Sir, a dose of Pills which I had took my self this morning, Sir,
which have not yet done working, and force me to leave you something abruptly,
Sir.


Pray let me know your. Lodging e're you go. I shall be glad of the honour of
your acquaintance -- and --


I am grip'd most damnably --


Quickly, Madam, or he'll be discovered.


Enough -- O Husband -- Husband, come away, have a care -- have a care --


Of what Wife? --


Turn that ill looked fellow out of Doors -- away with him -- let him not speak
a word.


Madam --


Away with him --


Madam -- Madam --


Away with him* away with him. away with him --


Madam -- Madam -- Madam -- Madam -- Madam --


Ah, dear Husband, you must excuse me for intruding so hastily --


What was the matter, Wife?


Did you know this Gentleman.


I suppose him to be some young Callow Dr just wandered from his Nest, the
University.


No, no, he's a High German Doctor -- a Great Necromancer, a Conjurer, one that
deals in the black Art, and raises Spirits --


How do you know? --


Some of our Neighbours that saw him come in at the back Door -- came privately
and told me so -- and bid me have a care of him. -- I was frighted almost out
of my Wits -- and shall not come to my self agood while --


Oh Wife, fear nothing, 'tis but silly peoples talk.


Indeed I am much frighted --


Come, come, divert your self, and think no more on it.


Ay, well thought on -- Beatrice are the performers ready to go on with their
Musical Entertainment.


Yes, Madam, they stay but for your coming.


Come then we'll go in, Husband you shall stay and sit with me -- Music has a
strange influence over me, that will bring me to my self again.


I will Wife? --


Daughter, come you along with us.


Beatrice are they gone --


What makes you here -- I thought I had thrust you out of doors.


You did so -- but wondering what you all meant, I slip in again -- to listen --



It was my contrivance to bring you off, you Blockhead, you had been discovered
else --


This was better however, than Incision, Dissection, and Amputation. Therefore
now I'll be gone in earnest. I fairly have escaped all these disasters,

And would not run the Risque again for twenty Masters,


Faint hearted, Crispin!
In spite of all ill luck in Love's Hist'ries,
I'd venture Limb and Life to serve my Mistress.

I Am resolved to bribe Beatrice, and make her of my party; she is a notable
young witty Wench, and governs her young Mistress as she pleases; the Devil's
in her if she's Money proof. I see her coming forth.


To me, Sir, do you speak?


Yes, yes, to you, my pretty, little, witty, smiling Rogue; hold up your head,
here's Money for you; ha!


Two pieces of Broad Gold? What is this for, Sir?


One for thy good Will, and one for thy good Word.


As how, Sir, I beseech you?


Promise me one thing, I will make 'em ten, make 'em ten presently; and if you
succeed afterward, a hundred.


I marry, Sir, you speak now to the purpose?


You know I have obtained the Doctor's promise, to marry his Daughter, fair
Angelica.


You have, Sir.


Her Mother refuses her consent to it.


She does so.


Now Child, if you could get for me the young Lady's consent --


To marry, Sir?


Ay, ay, to marry her.


Is that all? Come, Sir, she may look further, and fare worse --


That's well said; there's another piece for that.


I thank you, Sir.


I know you rule her as you please.


Some times she hearkens to me.


Now if you will commend me to her often --


As how, Sir?


As thus. By telling her how rich I am, and that I love her so, I can deny her
nothing. 'Tis true, I have a Son, an only Son, but him I have removed, on
purpose to make way for her.


That was wisely done, Sir.


Ay, was it not? Tell her all Happiness consists in wealth, that she may make
me settle almost all I have on her, and the Children I shall have by her.


And do you think you shall have Children by her?


Why not? I am hale, and very lusty, Beatrice. Well, if thou dost this for me,
besides a hundred pounds I'll give thee on the day I Marry her, I'll get thee
with Child too, give the a good Portion, and Marry thee to an honest
Shop-keeper.


Fie, fie; you offer me too much in conscience, Sir* but for my young Mistress,
Sir --


Ay; am I sure of thy assistance there?


Yes, Sir, I'll do my weak endeavour for you; I'll begin presently; I'll set
you forth with commendations, Sir.


How, how my pretty Rogue?


Why thus, Sir -- if I may be so bold to advise you, Madam, take Mr Gerald, let
him be your Husband -- says she presently, which Mr Gerald meanest thou? O
Madam, say I, the Father certainly; the Son's a young extravagant, idle fellow;
his Father means to disinherit him, unless he mends his manners.


And so I do; that of my Son was well put in. Go on.


O but he's old, she cries -- true Madam, say I, but then he's rich too, very
rich; when e're he dies, he'll leave you wealth enough to make you a Lady.


That she may be before, if she pleases me.


I'll tell her so. But she may say, old men are cross and peevish -- no, say I,
he's mild, and humble, a fine, sweet tempered Gentleman, he'll dote upon you,
he'll never make you jealous, he will not run after other Women, as all young
fellows do.


That was well thought on.


O Madam, you know not what a fine thing it is to be an old Man's darling.


Good again.


Says she, his Teeth are nought -- O but his Breath is sweet -- his Eyes, says
sh^ are sunk -- O but, say I, he sees without Spectacles -- says the -- he's an
old musty fusty stinking --


Enough, enough. When shall I see her, Beatrice?


This very afternoon, you cannot have a sitter opportunity, you know the Dr, is
much abroad, my old Mistress will be absent too. If you'll be walking about
four a clock, near our back Door, I'll let you privately into the Anatomy Room,
there she shall meet you, Sir.


Hold up thy hand, I'll make the three broad pieces ten. There, will these
encourage thee?


You are a wise Client, Sir, you will not starve a good Cause, I see.


I scorn it, Beatrice.


One thing I must advise you, Sir; be vigorous, press your suit home to her:
for I must tell you, there's a young, debauched lewd fellow, just such another
as your own Son is, who haunts her every where, makes violent love to her,
watches all opportunities to speak to her, is always making Presents, sending
Letters to her: I'll watch him narrowly, I'll spoil his sport; I'll manage Mr
Gerald's Cause so well, if I get not my young Mistress for him, I'll forfeit my
Maidenhead.


Come hither; I must kiss thee; I will kiss thee, thou art a pretty, witty,
merry Rogue, and I'll -- provide for thee.


Farewell, Sir, remember four a clock, if you brought some Jewels, with you,
Necklaces, Rings, and Bracelets. only to show her, Sir, young Girls, you know
are mightily taken with such fine things.


I'll do it, my Girl; I'll do it. I'll home and pick out of my Cabinet the best
of all my Pawns, and bring 'em to her. But first I'll be spruced up; I will be
shaved and washed, and perfumed too; put on a clean Band, and my best Bob-wig,
my new Hat, and put a clean Handkerchief in my Pocket, and then -- at four a
clock -- ay that's the hour.


Madam, come forth -- he's gone.


Now, Madam, let us laugh while our sides ache: What would this old, stinking,
fumbling fool, do with a sweet young Wife? When once love gets into an old
man's head, it teaches him as many tricks, as a dancing Dog.


They say he's very covetous: How did you get that money out of him?


I tickled the old Trout in the right place; see, Madam, here are the merry
Spankers, I'll warrant you, I'll do his business for him.


You have engaged me, Beatrice; instruct me how I shall come off with ^ime.


Trouble not your self about it, leave that to my management: I must go and
find young Mr. Gerald out, and Crispin too, they must help to carry on the
work. You shall have nothing to do, but to laugh at his folly, and applaud our
contrivance.


I'll in, and expect the event.


Well, Sir, what think you now of my Adventures?


Why truly, they were extraordinary.


A dead man -- a Doctor -- an Astrologer.


You made your way through many difficulties, but for my sake, you must once more
go to the Doctor's House.


Who, I, Sir?


Yes.


I beg your pardon. What to be dissected, carved artificially Limb after Limb.
No, Sir, I'll have no more Dissection, Amputation, nor Incision. You may go,
and venture your self, Sir, if you please.


Should I go, and be seen there by the Doctor, I ruin our design, and lose my
Mistress; he'll tell my Father that I am in Town. You run no hazard, for he
knows not you.


No hazard! call you it, I hazard my Legs, Arms, Veins, Arteries, and Muscles;
and in the Doctor's gibberish, I hazard Incision, Dissection, Amputation, and
Circulation, through the Systole and Diastole. Why, Sir, in such a case, a
Physician cuts up a man with as little remorse, as a Hangman carves a Traitor.


For all that, you must venture your precious self once more. When I get my
Mistress, I'll make thee ample satisfaction.


Well, if I must, I must. I saw a Physicians Gown and Cap, hang up at a
Brokers Shop, hard by, to be sold. Buy 'em, or hire 'em for me: I had rather
appear before him, in the shape of a Doctor, than a dead Man. That habit,
Pills, and impudence brought me off then, I'll think of some other remedy now.


While I secure the Habit, step to my Father's and secure the Money.


I will, but first, Sir, tell me what is Latin, for I am a Doctor.


Medicus Sum.


Medicus sum, Medicus sum.


You have it right.


Very well, Medicus sum. Go about your business, I'll about mine. Medicus sum,
Medicus sum.

Well, 'tis a fine thing to understand Latin; I must be sure not to forget
Medicus sum. Now I'll to the old man: Ho! talk of the Devil and his Horns
appear.


O Crispin! where's your Master? tell me true.


Where should he be? at the University.


Ay, he should be at the University -- but where is he, ha?


I warrant in his Chamber, hard at study: or else in the Schools chopping
Logic. Please you to give me the Money, Sir, that I may return to him with
speed.


Give you the Money? ha, ha, ha.


What do you sneer at? ha.


Money! who's the fool then?


Meddle with your own business, Sirrah, or I'll give you a douce of the chaps
--


Be quiet, Knave.


A Jack -- an Apes -- to interrupt me --


Have done, I say -- how does you Master spend his time there?


He studies all the morning. After dinner studies again, after Supper, he walks
out and talks with the Students, and then they jabber Latin like the Devil. The
best on it Sir, they'll dispute and wrangle so long, till they are almost
choked with hard words. Then they go very lovingly together, and drink a
chirping Cup, or two, and then to their Chambers in good time.


'Tis very well: But several of my acquaintance tell me, they have seen him
here, here in this Town.


O abominable!


Sirrah, confess the truth, is he in Town?


Medicus sum -- he is not here indeed, Sir.


Deny it not, I know it.


He is not here indeed, Sir.


He equivocates -- here? No, he is not here.


But, Slave, he is Town.


No.


I lye then, do I?


Medicus sum.


What's that you mutter, Rascal?


A word I learned at the University. Medicus sum; that is, I am a Doctor.


Yes, of the lying faculty.


Sirrah, if I had you in another place, I would --


What would you do?


I would dissect you, Rascal, run my Fist through your Systole, and Diastole.


What gibberish is this?


You Thin-Gut.


Yes, impudence, If I had you under my clutches, I would make you feel
Dissection, Incision, Amputation, ay and Circulation too.


Come and you dare, let's see what you can do.


Saucy Knaves, forbear.


Sirrah, I'll rip up your Belly, from the Cartilage Ziphode, to the Os pubis,
you dog.


The fellow's mad -- be quiet or I'll cudgel both of you: Well, Crispin, since
your Master's not in Town, return you to the University, tell him, next week
I'll send the Money to him by the Carrier.


But, Sir --


One word more, and my Cane shall fly about your Ears.


Well, I know what I know.


What do you know?


That I'll be revenged of that audacious Villain.


For what you, Rascal?


Pray, Sir, what will you beat me for?


For a lying Rogue.


And I would maul him because he's a Fac-totum, and sets you against my young
Master and me.


Sirrah, Sirrah, I could find in my heart --


Ay, strike if you think good.


Say you so; there's for you then.


strikes at Cris. he ducks: Ger. misses his blow, and falls. Cris. gives Mar. a
Cuff and a Trip, throws him down, and runs off saying, Medicus sum.


Son of a Whore, he has lamed me.


Help me up, good Martin.


Oh! oh! I want help my self, Sir. The Rogue has broke my Crupper.


The Villain has rumbled my clean Band too.


If ever I light on him --


Be patient, Martin.


I must, whether I will or no.


Go home, Martin; I have business another way.


So, now your Worship's fitted.


Then you met, Beatrice, Sir.


I did; there's work enough cut out for you, rub up your memory, you'll have
occasion to make use of all the Jargon you can think on.


Those damned heathenish names will never out of my memory.


I see my Father coming; he's running like a Wood-cock into the snare.


I care not if he meet me now; I'll outface him. Medicus sum, non sum Dogus,
non sum Rogus, Medicus sum.


Come this way, that I may inform you fully of our design; the time is short.


Hold, Sir, degrade me not, the Gown must have precedence, and take the upper
hand too.


This is the hour, 'tis just 4 by my Watch; if Beatrice prevails, I am made for
ever.


O, Sir, are you come? I have been peeping for you at the Window, a whole half
hour.


Is the Coast clear? Where's my Angelica.


No questions, but come in.


So, so, he's caught, run to the fore door, when you hear me Thunder at this --



I'll beat an alarm at that -- I have my cue.


I chose this Room on purpose for your meeting. Here are two doors you see; if
my Master or Mistress come to one, I can slip you out at the other.


'Twas wisely done.


I see her coming; make good use of your time.


I warrant you. I have brought something to show her, will sparkle like her
Eyes.


O Beatrice! What shall we do? The Door unluckily is locked, the Key is on the
other side too.


That's the mischief of all Spring Locks: There's no remedy now. Look here,
Madam, here's Mr Gerald come to kiss your hands.


With your favour, Madam -- Salutes her.


I vow I am ashamed to see you, Sir.


Young Maids, I know are bashful; but when you are married, a loving Husband
will teach you confidence.


O Beatrice! if my Mother should find me here --


Fear nothing, Madam; this door is fast; I'll lock the fore door presently.


Well, Mr Gerald, you see my Maid has prevailed with me: She gives you great
commendations too.


Ay, my sweet; I'll make 'em all good, I warrant you.


I am young, and some say I am handsome too; I doubt not you'll love me: But, Mr
Gerald, what reason is there for me to love a man in years, as you are?


I have many reasons for your Ear, more for your Eyes. Look here, my Queen,
look here, my Cleopatra? Here's a Necklace of Pearl worth above 500 pounds; it
will become that soft white Neck most rarely. Then here's a set of Bodkins for
your hair, cost fourscore pounds: Ah how they sparkle like your pretty Eyes:
Then here's a Croceat of Diamonds cost 300, an Ambrosie, worth above 400 more.
How like an Angel you will look, when this is set under those white panting
Bubbies!


Indeed they're very fine, and very large.


Here are two Diamond Rings, one with 3 Stones besides the Sparks; and this has
5, one cost 50 pounds, the other above fourscore. Then here are Diamond
Bracelets for your Arms. But here, my Jewel, here's the rarety, the Phoenix of
'em all. This Ring here with one Stone, 'tis a Diamond of the old first Water.
I have refused, my Child, above four hundred pounds for this one single stone.


'Tis beautiful indeed!


Did not I tell you, Madam --


And then for Plate, old, and new fashioned too, plain, gilt, and wrought; I
have a Cedar Chest full.


What young man could make you such fine Presents?


All, all shall be yours, my little Mouse, my Pigeon.


O Heaven! some body knocks*


I'll peep through the Key-hole: O Madam, 'tis my Master and my Mistress.


Let me out at this door quickly.


Ah, the Key's broke in the Lock! undone, undone for ever.


I am ruined if my Mother finds me here.


Ah, Madam! What will become of me.


For Heaven's sake hide your self, do Mr Gerald, I'll love you dearly for it.


How? Where? I'll do any thing my dear will have me.


Here's the Coffin the dead body was sent in from the Gallows, you may hide
your self in that.


Ay do, Mr Gerald, do.


How! Coffin me before I am dead, I beg your pardon; I can't endure the thought
on it.


Thou strip your self to your Waistcoat, and your Drawers, and lye at your
length, here on this Table, I'll tell my Master you're the dead body, sent in
to be dissected.


Quickly, Mr Gerald; if you love me deny me not Knocking all this while.


Come then, I'll do any thing my, Dear Commands me.


Hark how they knock; I fear they'll break the door down.


Ho! Beatrice, Beatrice.


Make haste, or we're undone. They strip him.


Open the door! Why Beatrice, where are


So, so; what e're they say or do, be sure you stir not for your life.


Where will you hide my Clothes?


Here, here, I^le put them and my young Mistress into the Coffin.


So, so; I am dead as a Herring.


What ever happens, Sir, be not afraid. Come in.


They come here presently; but where, where be the dead Carcass for dissection?


Here, Sir.


Ver -- good -- Mr Doctor, send me to begind manuel operation upon de exterior,
an den he will come hear me read upon de interior --


Are you the German Doctor; that wase her this morning with my Master?


Yes, de-ver -- same, me am de German Doctor, de Medicine, de Physitien, de
Operateur, de Anatomist, de Chemist, de --


Very well, Sir, have you any service for me?


Stay one little time. Dis be de Body, let me make de observation of the Visage
-- here be de ver ill aspect -- dis was one person of de fair Speech, but de
falls Heart; covetous, designing, lecherous; a Robber, a Thief, a Cut-throat --
Sacrament, hanging was too good for him, a Rogue, a Villain -- ah vat pleasure
will dis be to make de Dissection, de Incision, and de Amputation, upon dis
Body, and rip open his Belly from de Cartilage Ziphode, quite along to his
Os-pubis. Ah! vat be dis? his Heart pant still -- dis was the stubborn old
Thief, was but Mr Doctor here, just a now, I would show him de Circulation of
de Blood, through de Systole, and Diastole. Come I'll begin de Dissection while de
body be warm.


What before my Master comes?


Yes indeed, dis be only de Manuel Operation, me will read de Lecture ven he be
here: var be my man, var be de Instruments? Y. G. Here, Sir, here.


Bless me! what's that great Knife for?


Dis be to cut de Troat, from Jugular to Jugular; as thus.


Hold Sir, I beseech you. Fear nothing, Mr Gerald.


You shall see presently.


'Tis just like one of our Butchers Knives: and then what is that Ax for?


Dis be de decolation Ax, to cut off de head at one Chop; as thus --


Not yet Sir: What's that there like a Wimble?


Dat be to bore a hole in de Scull; when any part of de Scull be broke, and
depressed upon de Brain, with dis we bore hole hard by de fracture, as you
shall see just-a-now.


No Sir, not now; I'll see it anon.


Den we put in de proper Instrument, and raise de depressure up to de proper
place, and so make de cure.


But what is this terrible Saw for?


Dat be de dismembering Saw, to Saw off de Leg, or de Arm: You see me presentale
Saw off de Bone of dis Leg, and --


Stay Sir; What's that sharp crooked Knife for?


Dis be de Amputation Knife, to cut off de Leg or de Hand, just-a in de Joint.
Ha! where be de Leg and be Arm? --


De Devil! me lay one Arm here, and one Leg here, to Saw off just in the
middle, and cut off just in de Joint, for de fine experiment; and de Arm, and
de Leg, be gone home to de Body.


Mr Dr. we come for the Coffin we brought the dead Body in.


Dere be de Coffin; be gone; and give me no interruption; now I open all de
Breast.


Oh! Sir, I have seen whole Bodies, after they have lain here a day or two, get
up, and run away.


And so will I! I'll not stay to be butchered here.


Ah, ah, ah.


Lose my Clothes, my Life, and Jewels all at once! -- Your Servant, Mr Doctor.


Stop Thief, stop Thief. As old Gerald is running out, and Crispin after him,
the Doctor and his Wife enter. O. Gerald runs against the Doctor, beats the
Doctor and his Wife down, and Exit.


O murder, murder!


Ay, murder, murder!


Wounds! Where's this Dog of a Doctor? I'll knock the old Cheat's Brains out.


And if I can reach him, I'll claw his Eyes out.


O am bruise d all over!


And I am lamed too.


O are you there?


Wounds, Doctor, you have scoured my Guts out, with a murrain to ye --


And I can hardly draw my Legs after me, for your Physic. But I'll claw you
for it.


Hold, Mistress, or I shall pluck a Crow with you.


Be patient Wife -- you are both mad. I never saw either of you before.


O damned lying Doctor! did you not give me Pills? and I gave you a whole half
Guinea?


And had not I some of your Rot-gut Pills too, and gave you 2 new Crown-pieces?


You rave both, and must be sent to Bedlam.


'Sbud I'll have my money again --


And so will I, -- or tear his Eyes out --


Hold friends! pray moderate your angers, and don't affront a person of our
faculty.


Ah, ha! I was mistaken, this is the Doctor --


I this is he gave us the Pills. I beg your pardon, Sir.


Beatrice, you must refund.


There --


Look you friends, 'twas a mistake. There's your Half Guinea, and your
Crown-pieces too.


O pox! this is something.


What is the meaning of all this*


Beatrice, what is the matter here?


What strange out-cry was that we heard?


I, and who threw us down?


And what strange thing was that ran over us?


Why, Sir, as I was showing Mr Doctor here the dead Body that was sent you from
the Gallows, he felt his pulse, and laying his hand on his Breast, he found his
Heart panted; then he took his Incision Knife, and before he could touch his
naked skin, up started the dead Body, and ran away, just as you saw --


All this is true, Sir, as I am a Member of the learned Faculty.


I am amazed*


Nay Husband, I have heard of such strange things: I warrant the poor man was
hanged wrongfully.


O undone! undone!


Ah, ah, ah!


He's come again, Husband, ha!


In the name of goodness! What art thou?


Undone I say, undone.


Art thou a Spirit? or Flesh and Blood? answer.


Give me my Clothes, my Jewels, Huswife --


Avaunt, avaunt!


Where are they? Gipsy, speak.


In the Coffin, in the Coffin.


I overtook the Coffin, and there's none of 'em. Where are they, and the Jilt
too your young Mistress?


Sure 'tis our Neighbour, Mr Gerald.


I am the same.


You tell me wonders, Crispin.


Step to your Daughter's Chamber, Madam; there the Riddle will easily be
unfolded*


What is the matter, Sir? why in this posture? and why this out-cry too?


That Baggage there, and the young Witch your Daughter, have contrived to abuse
and cheat me, of two thousand pounds worth of Jewels, that were pawnd to me.


Here they come then, who must give you satisfaction.


How! my Son here!


Yes, Sir, and my Wife.


I found 'em shut up together in my Daughter's Chamber.


Married say you?


Yes, Sir, contracted long since; and now confirmed in private, as far as
modesty would permit.


And Married too! then all is at an end.


Here are your Clothes, Sir, Doctor Crispin can tell you how I came by 'em.


Crispin!


My Rogue.


Non Rogus; Medicus sum; that is, I am a German, or a Polish Doctor.


The Jewels, Sir, so well become my Wife, I think you cannot in conscience
demand 'em back.


They were his own free gift; he scorns to take what he has given me.


Well. I am glad the Son has married my Daughter, and wish Joy to you both.


Bless you together. Come Brother Gerald, 'tis your Son's Wedding Night; you
must forgive 'em and be sociable: Let me prevail with you to give order for a
good Supper, and we'll be very merry, Brother.


I had as good, I shall be laughed at else.

Sirrah* here has been fine practice, and my Son's marriage was your
contrivance.


I do confess it, Sir, and glory in the success.


Come then, sit down, and listen to the Music, and after Supper we'll hear at
large the adventures of Doctor Crispin in this Affair.


Beatrice and I will tell you he whole Story,
And as we snack'd the Fees, we'll share the Glory.


