PRithee, Frank, give me leave to retire, I have a mind to Read this Afternoon.


Indeed, Jack, you shall read men then -- I wanted company and came to look for
you, or any honest fellow, to spend it comfortably.


A good design, but hard to be compassed, my friend, this Season, when the best
part of both Sexes having taken the Field, a Man of Sense, or a Woman of
Fashion, are as hard to be met here, as a Soldier in time of Action, or a
Country Attorney out of Term time.


But yet I hope the Spring hath not swept the Town so clean of good Company,
but the Gleanings may serve you and I that are sharp set.


Faith, that's to be doubted of, except like Platonic, the pleasures of the
Mind make the whole Feast; for at this present hour I cannot tell what may make
up the Regalio -- therefore I must center my happiness in my Closet.


What think you of a Bottle -- for I'm resolved not to part with you.


As I think of Company, that which is good is hard to be met with, for I had
rather sit with half a score Shop-keepers smoking and talking of Trade; or as
many Country Petty foggers putting of Cases, than be condemned to drink my
Bottle of most of the Stum'd mixtures which your Blue-Apron'd Retailers sell us
so dear -- besides two as they say's no company.


Let's to the Coffee-House then, we may meet a third man, or hear the News.


That is to say, Lies in abundance; be plagued with the foolish Reflections and
Inferences, which Grave Block-heads make about this or that; hear them take a
Town, or relieve it in their Cockle-brains; or descant two hours upon the
Wagers, have been won or lost lately about Mons: Or what's worse, by Herding
among them, be taken for one of our (would be) Politicians; that Medley of
Folly, Laziness and Knavery, who are continually in a ferment.


Ay, those whose Pregnant Heads seem like the Mountains, so very big of great
Notions, when after the pangs they and their foolish Hearers labour under, a
poor silly Mouse is the Delivery.


No, I had rather sit out a whole long dull Tragedy, or a second part of the
Three Dukes of Dunstable.


And that were a torment not to be endured -- but now you talk of Plays, what
thing you of going there now?


They do not Act to day; besides if they did, 'tis odds but 'tis some silly new
one doomed to death, like a monstrous Birth, as soon as it hath seen the light,
and which, tho shouldered and propped up by a powerful party, to get the Author a
third day, must fall of it self after, to live in the Booksellers Shop, at the
mercy of the Worms, for want of other Critics, to gnaw it


I wonder those fooleries dare appear in print.


Oh Sir! as long as Scribblers can find Booksellers to buy them, and they Fools
to read 'em, they need not care, what the wiser part will say, they are
Case-harden'd, and you need not expect them to leave Writing, till they leave
dull Flattery, Whores their Jilting, Lawyers refuse bribes, or the House to act
their Plays, as I believe they will for the future, lest all others, tho good,
fall into disrepute; and the House be as empty at a new good Play in Winter, as
it is at a bad one in the Long Vacation.


But there are good old Plays, which like Stock-Horses, must bear the dead
weight and charge of the others.


Ay, and there is need they should; but the Town of late, have like true
Libertines, shunned Faces and Plays once seen, whether good or bad, and served
them all alike; but there's hopes they'll Recant, and after their roving fit,
they may be more constant; for to be tired with change, is the first step
towards the settling our affections; and since when we have been but one Week
in the Country, we find so much the want of the Play-House, that the very
Strollers are then welcome to us. I dare say, the Town can no more be without
Plays, than a brisk young Widow without a Husband or a Gallant.


Let's go to the Booksellers, and see what new Books are sprung up since last
Night.


With all my heart: but methinks thou make Mushrooms of them: If some
Reverend Author, or Waspish Satyrist heard thee, thou would be in danger of a
lash in his next Weeks Pamphlet.


Authors and Satirists do you call them? Scribblers, Libellers, and Lampooners,
are more suitable Epithets for many of them; and for my part, I oftner take up
their Papers to pick out their Nonsense, and laugh at it, than to find any
thing worthy observation.


Oh, I have found out another use for them; formerly I could not sleep, tho I
desired it; but having bought a Book called The Moralist, I began to read it
one Night, having no other by my Bed side, when even Opium could not purchase
me sleep, and before I had read two Pages, I slept so fast, that I found the
next Morning my Candle in the Socket, and the Book in the Chamber-pot.


And a very fit place for it, and all such dull, insipid, heavy, unwieldy
sustain.


I am not of your mind, when it may save a Man Half a-Crown in Opium. I want to
buy another.


You need not have that again, 'tis but getting the Weesil Trap'd, the Triannal
Mayor, Collin's Walk, Butlers Ghost; (and a very Ghost indeed it is) alias: The
fourth part of Hudibras, and half a score Plays, by the same hand, cum multis
aliis, of others, and they will have the same effect to a Miracle; Experto
cred Roberto.


Why, how came you to remember what all the World hath forgot? --


But the Booksellers you should have added -- for I believe there is not Ten
Men in the Nation, besides the Author, Bookseller, Printer and Corrector, e're
read them through. To tell you the truth, as Mr. Dryden sacrifices a Bussy d'
Ambois to the memory of Ben Johnson, I sacrifice one of these yearly to the
memory of Shakespeare, Butler, and Oldham; but this is a Booksellers -- go in --



Where is the last Momus Ridens?


Here it is -- the Author hath left off, and when the Bookseller is as weary of
Printing, as the Town of buying a Penny Lampoon, 'tis high time for the Author,
after the recruit of a third day, to leave you, without taking leave, and like
the Fox, to cry the Grapes are sour, when his Pegasus a tip Toes, cannot reach
at the sweet Copy Money.


We want but an Union to make them all Fools,
And bid the starved Armies to Baise nos Culs.
Like the Kings of Brentford, the Author makes his Momus speak French, but with
this difference, that it does not much show his breeding.


Oh! yes, 'tis very pretty: Why, to bid the French kiss his A -- se must needs
be very taking. For fear they should forget it, he hath bid them do it three or
four times -- But is not this very pretty, speaking of the French King -- His
Wars have already exhausted such Charge,
Their Gentry for Dinner scarce get a brown George.



As for their Gentry doubtless some of them are poor enough; but as for
exhausted such Charge, I cannot tell how to make sense of it.


Nor he, nor any Man I'm sure; do you think he minds Grammar? He forgot it, or
ne'er learnt it at School. And as for Exhausted such charge, he has been at
such a charge of Wit, that his stock is Exhausted; and that's the reason he has
left off -- and let's leave him off too --


Prithee who's the Author of it?


Poet Stutter.


Then I don't wonder 'tis such -- Why, he can't Write --


What do you mean? He was Prentice to a Scriviner.


I mean, he can't write sense.


Therefore he's the fitter to Write such things; they only seem calculated for
the Meridian of the City Coffee-Houses, where sense is as great a stranger as
amongst the true bred Teagues, or the Bethlemitish Collegians; who yet
sometimes will drop you a Witticism by chance. One while he rails at the
Priests, another at the French, laughs at the Irish; and in the whole, banters
all, and the work's done. They are all alike, from the first to the last; I
would confine him to Scotch Songs, I mean such of them as our Gay People of
both Sexes call Scotch, though they want as much the Dialect, as the sense of
some of that Country.


Prithee why?


Because, as I said, he much wanting sense, is the fitter to write them, it
being an essential part of them to have none; and the more, since his faculty
of Singing renders him the more capable to fit a Horse to a Saddle; that is,
words to a Tune.


Oh, yes, he's not a little proud of that: I believe that in the Elizian
Fields, he'll hardly give the Wall to Horace, or any of the Lyrick Poets. He
contradicts his Notion of Musicians, and gives his noted Omnibus hoc vitium the
Lye, tho no man verifies it more than himself. Indeed, he is a Tolerable Echo,
his only quality is a Voice.


That made a Modern Wit say of him, in a late Preface, That a Man of sense
would not do Penance in his Company, without the amends of his Singing.


I have read it -- But what's here, the very book you spoke of -- The Moralist?


I'll buy it -- I see 'tis a continuation of the Weesils, tho the Author hath
left the style of Reynard the Fox; to whose humour, and the malice and
dangerous Notions of his first Libel, he ought, I think, to attribute its
Reception with some people, as much as his Under-Brothers of the Scribbling
Herd, the Sale of their Parabolizing Bears, Puppies and Magpies.


Gentlemen, your most humble Servant.


Oh! your Servant, Mr. Stutter, I was just a going to buy a piece of Poetry
here, 'tis the Moralist, is it worth reading?


As much as any thing you have seen since Sir William Davenant's Rational
Sceptic, it overthrows all the Doctor's Vindications, and levels all the
Parson's Arguments; the Hind and Panther talked like Parrots to this. Let me
see -- There are more Notions than the case does need.

Unless he'll sit six hours to doze and pore,
And be as wise just as he was before:
For, in opinion almost all the Nation
Agree, it never was writ for confutation;
But, for the profit, as the sale begins,
To make your Court --



Ay, Ay, Let me tell you this passage falls very heavy upon some body that
shall be nameless -- to him again -- 'Tis the very quintessence of Hobbs and
Seneca, and beyond Waller for smoothness. No scrutinous Casuist ever solved a
knotty point more clearly, nor wheedling Town Jilt use more flowing words to
her amorous Cully.


Ay, considering the subject, I think 'tis well enough: The Now-Laureat never
writ such a thing in his Life.


No, I dare swear he never did -- Fleet-street plyer does Sack and Biscuit. --
Prithee dear Poetry who writ it? --


An honest Moralist, I faith, that shall be nameless; you or I, for ought I
know.


Then you pretend to Morality; but how does it agree with it, to come on a Man
that hath a thousand Aggressors already, and never meddled with you; and what
is more, is guilty of no other fault than you, that is, to have altered his
principle -- Morality teaches us to use others, as we would be used our selves:
What now if some one or other should stick to your skirts and expose you as
much?


I fear it little, my Emblem is the Thistle, Nemo me impune lacesset, 'twould
do me and my books a kindness, and like the Sun after an Eclipse, I should
appear the more glorious.


A very pretty Simile, and much to the purpose, for Phoebus the God of Poetry,
is the Sun.


Ay -- but there is this difference, that the Sun has 12 Houses, but our little
Phoebus here has not one. But my friend, how came you to write the Weesil
Trap'd after the Weesils? And if I am not mistaken, the Tryennial Mayor, as
well as the Moralist. Methinks their principles differ as much as a Lay-Elder
and a Lawn Sleeve, or Poet Stutter in the two last Reigns, and Poet Stutter in
this.


Oh! you wrong me, I never changed my Religion.


That may well be, because perhaps you never had any; but for your principles,
I am sure you have altered them more in two years, than the Taylors have the
fashions since the Restoration -- but that's no newer thing to some of your
profession, than to a true Courtier in times of change --


Prithee don't be too severe, but remember all Trades must live. Why should not
a Writer sell to both parties his Wit for Money, as well as a Vintner his
Claret, or a Town Woman her favours? What if a man will exalt a Weesil, and
Trap him afterwards, rail at the Clergy in one place, and commend them in
another, side with the Grumblers in one thing, then lash them in the next,
Write Trimming Songs and Panegyrics on the City Magistrates in this Reign, and
wish them Shamm'd, Kicked and Damned, in the last: Blame Doctors for Writing
Pro and Con, yet do it one Week after another. It doth not signify a farthing
(from whence it comes,) 'tis like Music, the different and thwarting parts set
one another off. Do you think Rats and Weesils, Moralizing Atheists, dull
Panegyrics, worse than Lampoons and Lampoons, more glorious to those they are
meant to, than Panegyrics by those hands? Songs, Ballads, Drolls and Farces,
signify a pin on either side? No, to mind those things, is the business of
those that have none; and tho the Authors of those mighty trifles strut it like
Turky-cocks, and think themselves wronged for want of a Laurel to rear their
Blockheads, dignify their Nonsense, and hide their Ignorance; the wiser part
let them go on, and write on still as the worst of punishments, and the best of
rewards, for their teeming Noddles, while like Aesop's fly on the Camels head,
they think themselves men of mighty weight, as if they were the Primum Mobile
of State Affairs, and every Revolution the Influence of their Verse, tho, like
Town Jilts, 'tis Money they Respect, and every Party may be served alike, and
laughed at in their hearts; this I mean of our Ambidexters only.


Pray Mr. -- a -- spare your self the pains to be my Advocate; on my word, tho
you plead briskly, you will not deserve a Fee at my hands; do but hear my Lord
Roscommon, he mitigates the matter much more. I pity, from my Soul, unhappy
Men,
Compelled by need to prostitute their Pen;
Who, Lawyer like, must either starve or plead,
And follow right or wrong, where Guinea's lead.
But because you are Men of Honour and Sense, I shall not think an hour ill
bestowed to argue the matter a little farther with you; this place is too
public, nor has it been without some sweat I have heard you and refrained my
self: If you please, we will adjourn to the Tavern, and with a sober Bottle
renew the Argument, Wine is a Friend to the Muses.


I believe so, and wonder why Poets are said to drink of the Fountain
Hippocrene.


Oh! Sir, 'tis to show that all their thoughts must be clear as Crystal, their
words flow easy, their design be natural, their matter innocent, not able to
intoxicate our Reason as Wine, Wine you know alters men, it makes the old
young, the sad merry, the poor rich, the coward stout, the weak strong,
enlivens the face, advises the wise -- and also makes him mad; I believe many
of our Plays have been written in Claret --


Come, let's go -- and take a Dose of it, since as you say 'tis a Pannacea, a
cure for all Evils, and the Gentleman U^her to Mirth and Happiness. On my word,
your Notion is not amiss (and by the way I'll not forget it) I will only give
this Sheet to the Bookseller, and wait on you if you'll tell me where.


Don't go, we shall be Tongue-kill'd with his stuff.


Prithee come, 'twill be variety for once; besides we'll make him Sing -- Let
it be quickly then at the Cross-keys.


There's such a noise there always, the Pit on my first day, or Billings-gate
it self, might pass for quiet places to it. --


Nay, one of your Similes will serve, for I think the Play-House was a
Billings-gate then.


Name your Tavern then.


Let it be the Rose, I am sure of a Glass of the best there. --


Agreed -- you'll follow.


Presently.


I wonder how he ventures to the Tavern with us, seeing how we have used him
already; I should as soon have believed he would have come at a Lords Mayors
Feast to Sing his Joy to Great Caesar, or, London's Loyalty.


He is a better Courtier than you imagine, and will endeavour to make you
Neuter if he cannot win you to his Party; not unlike the Jesuits, who purchase
all the Books are writ against them, that they may not be read by other people;
or like those, who Fee some Lawyers not so much to use them, as to hinder them
from Pleading for their Adversaries.


It can be no easy matter to reconcile me to the Pro's and Cons of such
Mercenary Pens, they bring the whole Body Politic of Poetry into disgrace and
contempt, like Drawcansir, they spare neither Friend nor Foe, provided there be
something to be got by it; and as the Whores give Love for Money, they as
meanly expose Wit for Money, till Punk and Scribbler grow as loathed and common
one as the other. The Law hath provided a House of Correction for the one, and
since Satyr is too mild to lash the others, 'tis pity there is not some other
means used to silence them, that the better Pens, and the Men of honester
Principles, may no longer suffer for the faults of those; and when these
Torrents and Inundations of the spurious, muddy, mingled stuff of those
Dabblers, which now drowns the Town, is drained, Wit and Merit need not be
ashamed to appear abroad, but flow in their Natural Channel.


Faith you're in the right.


Well, I am sorry we have engaged our selves with this fellow, it were better
to hear another Rehearsal of Bays, or another reading of his City Mouse and
Country Mouse.


Prithee do not be disheartened, we will have rare sport.


It will be dear bought if you have any; it were a better bargain to hear Merry
Andrew's Insipid Jokes, in hopes of a Jest every half hour, Court an affected
senseless Musician for a Song, or humour an old peevish Relation on the
prospect of a Legacy.


Why, thou art more Splenetic than a Mathematician disturbed in his
Calculations, or a Poet whose Play hath been Damned before his third Day. Thou
art a mere Usurer of thy Conversation, thou wilt not lend thine without a large
Interest of Wit. Come, Jack, your stock is large, be a little more lavish on it,
to him 'tis Charity, he lives upon the scraps of such as you, and you need not
grudge to see the Brats of your Brains fathered by another.


Nor those of my Body, Frank, tho I should hate to see them ill dressed or
distorted, and such I guess his Education will make any ones, when the best
fancy or plot Midwifd by him into the World, will either be crippled, or at the
best look like a Child half starved at Nurse.


Do you take him for such an ill Taylor that he cannot dress any Wit as it
ought to be?


Even so, witness his laying violent hands on Shakespeare and Fletcher, whose
Plays he hath altered so much for the worse, like the Persecutors of Old,
killing their living Beauties by joining them to his dead lameless Deformities.


Oh! if there be Poetical Justice to be had in the Elezian Fields, how he'll be
mauled, and if in this World, he were served like Aesops Jay, and every Bird
should claim their feathers, how Naked he would be.


Not so naked neither, he is Voluminous enough with the Leaves of his Books;
like another Adam to cover his nakedness, and tho most of our Authors might
well call their Books picked Sentences, select Lines, Collections of fine
things, and Miscellanies of other men's thoughts, should one, Chemist like,
separate the different Metals of which their compound is made up, there would
remain of their own a great deal of substantial, weighty, solid --


Lead, you mean.


Matter.


Then pray no more of that matter, we have discanted but too much on it
already, let's talk of something else till our Poet after come, you'll be sure
of a belly full of it then.


Let's talk of what you will; though, let me tell you, I would have my friend,
like an Ingenious Preacher, extract a good Doctrine out of a barren Text. But
here he comes.


Gentlemen, I hope I have made my word good; I love to be as punctual to my
friends, as --


An Author to his Bookseller, when he is to pay him his Copy Money; a
passionate Lover to his first assignation, or a moneyless Parasite to my Lords
Hour of setting down to Dinner, or --


The Sun to his appointed setting -- and there I was before you. But what News
do you hear, Gentlemen? --


They say the Armies --


Oh! I did not ask about Warlike News: But News from Wits Commonwealth. What
new Lampoon hath the Vogue? What Songs now fill the Air? What Satyr bites the
Town? Or, to speak more largely, What new Play puts the Critics to their old
Talent of finding fault? Or Jacobite like, biting their Fingers for want of
power to bite others.


Why, Tom, I should have expected such questions from thee, as little as from a
Court Lady what's the fashion, a Seaman how's the Wind, or a Watchman what's a
Clock -- What Song, What Lampoon, What Satyr, Or what Play, in short, can
please the Town, but what is Coined in your Mint? I can go no where, but like
Air, you are still to be found. From Wapping to Tuttlefields, from Southwark to
Shoreditch, you fill the Nations mouth. The trudging Carman whistles your
harmonious Poetry to his Horse, the Glass Coach Beau whispers them to his as
senseless Nymph, the grumbling Jacobite mutters them in Corners to his
Abdicated Brethren, the Coffee-house Bard, his Nose Saddled with Spectacles,
pores over your Comical Remarks, as much as on the no less divertive
Observator. Your Ballads, when half asleep, from the Street, in a high Base and
a low Treble, wish me a good rest when I can catch it. The Cookmaid and
Scullion listen to them, and the very Coachmen ingratiates himself to the
antiquated Chamber-maid with them. They will not escape the quiet Nursery, for
there they Rock Baby asleep. In Guild-Hall, some of the Anti-New Raparees exalt
them up to the very Hustins, and from the Philistine Goliath, now make you their
third Giant. I see them on every Post, and shoals of them at every Booksellers,
and must for a while have abdicated the Play-house, had I not as much
Complaisance for them as I have had for some of the foregoing Comical
Entertainments.


Sir, I hope you make that difference between their Plays and mine, which the
success of the one and the other claim: My Play may live to bear the charge of
theirs, and clear a brace of 1000 l. to the House.


Oh, Sir, I never judge of things by their success, The Emperor of the Moon,
and other trifles, could brag of that if it were allowable.


What, Sir, compare my Play to The Emperor of the Moon, when it makes the
Laurel shake on one's head, and another despair of it again --


If one of the two you mean despairs of the Laurel, 'tis what can't be helped,
but if it shake on the others Head, I believe 'tis when he laughs at some men's
presumptions, though I'm no Mans Champion, win it and wear it, Tom, when you have
writ as many good Plays as they, and your Tory ones are forgot; perhaps you may
be in a better way -- though by the way I'd advise you to write no more --


How, Sir, write no more! What ca -- ca -- can you mean by this? -- speak --
Zoons --


Oh, Sir, if you are so furious, speak by your self.


Prithee, Tom, hear him, he's no Foe to you, and to my knowledge brought a good
party to clap swingingly on your first day; which, by the way, was no small
advantage to the Play.


Oh, Sir, I had a powerful party against me, though I would not give a farthing
for a Play that cannot stem the tide of a Faction; but what can be your
reasons, Mr. Smith, for my leaving off Writing? --


Why, Sir, in the first place; like the Sun, to which you compared your self
just now, this must be your Meridian, and when things are at their highest, the
next step is to decline. To deal more plainly with you, the Town deserves not
to be obliged by you, though you could soar higher than Mr. Phoebus himself. I
remember that in your Dedication to the Fond Husband, you assure your Patron it
is your Own, though some are pleased to doubt the contrary; and it grieves me to
tell you, Mr. Stutter, they cannot think this last yours neither, but rather
that it was given you by some Person of Quality, who more modest yet than
Virgil, let's you enjoy the Honour and Profit of it, without issuing out a Sic
nos non Vobis.


Not mine! Then, Sir, let me tell you, I have friends that know better, and I
challenge any of the Critics, though my constant and inveterate Enemies, to tell
me of one single thing in the Plot, or Conversation of it, but what is Genuine,
my own, and no Mans else. As for Plot, Sir, I'll not yield it to any Poet or
Politician; and there's my Plotting Sisters for one, which I'll match with any
Play in Europe: Either She would if she could, Squire of Alsatia, Soldiers
Fortune; or any other --


So you may indeed, the putting out of Candles, changing of Gowns; Tables and
Traps are well enough imagined.


Well enough -- ay, and so they are; but pray what do they say besides? -- Let
me know all.


I will -- They say that most of what takes in your new Play, is gay Farce, the
rest is sad, whining, heavy Love; the one too brisk, the other too dull, and
both in Extremes. Some say, that like the Italian Painter, who killed his
friend the better to draw the Agonies of a dying Man, you have sacrificed your
Hospitable Acquaintance at the Boarding-Schools, to the improving the
Characters of your Play.


Indeed, I have some Acquaintance there, but they may rather than complain,
thank me for not exposing them more -- I could have made the thing look with a
worse face.


That is -- those whom you have lamed, of a Leg or an Arm, may thank you for
not killing them quite; but to go on, they say the best of the Plot is stolen.


I steal a Plot -- give me patience --


Out of a Play of Mrs. Behns, called The City Heiress; that the humour and
discourse between Iilt-all and Amorous, are much the same as between Wilding,
and Diana his kept Mistress, whom he tells his Uncle is an Heiress, to get
Money of him, when afterwards she, like your Iilt, proving false to Wilding,
marries his Uncle, who finds himself at last cheated with a Whore instead of an
Heiress.


Pray, Mr. Stutter, is not this something like your Plot?


Zoones, 'tis much like it, I must confess, but Wits jump -- I vow I had forgot
it, but it doth not signify a rush, the Town has forgot that long ago.


No more than your Royalist, Sir Barnaby Whigg, and the rest of your Court
Plays, where Passive Obedience and Ius Divinum, are asserted as Infallible
Doctrines, and all Sins venial but desire of Liberty.


Oh don't blame the Royalist, if it were but for the sake of that Devout
Gentleman, who duly every morning came to Worship the Royal Oak, with as much
Devotion as the Pilgrims at Loretto.


For Gods sake, Gentlemen, no more of it, they were little things writ, and
suitable with the times, which I and my Brothers may be somewhat ashamed of in
these --


I believe 'tis that throws you as much upon the extremes, as if nothing could
atone but the Counterpart, witness the Lady Addleplot, which tho her part is
so short that it is hardly worth the dressing him that acts it, claws it off so
smartly, that it put some in mind of your Renegades, who ever prove severer
Task-masters, than your natural Musselmen, and the worse Turks of the two --


Well, let 'em take it among them that think themselves concerned; as for my
new Play, I'm sure 'tis good, and bar this thing in the City Heiress, which by
the by, I would pray you to keep to your selves, 'tis all my own, and like the
File, it may defy the Teeth of the Criticizing Snakes; they may hiss and bite,
but like true Steel, 'twill wear out their Tongues and Teeth: I am sure they
cannot have the Impudence to say otherwise.


Oh but they have, Mr. Stutter, they are even so impudent as to say --


Wh -- wh -- why what the Devil can they say?


They say that the Kid-napping of the Heiress to the East-Indies in your Play,
looks very much like some such thing in Sir Hercules Buffoon, that your Sir
Rowland Rakehell hath the Knavery of Selden, with the humour and profaneness of
Sir Hercules; and your Ramps are like Innocentia, one of the Heiresses there.
And that the List which the Lady Addleplot reads of their party, is the same
thing almost with that which the Irish Priest reads in the Amorous Bigott, and
though the words are somewhat different, the humour is the same.


What! more discoveries: What say you to this, little Stutter, Guilty or not
Guilty?


Why, Sir, in the first place, I say I never took a hint from any man; in the
next, that those Characters you mentioned are like mine, I utterly deny --


Irish Evidence.


Faces you know may be alike, but for all that they are not the same; what has
Sir Rowland to do with Sir Hercules? Or my Ramps with his Ramps? -- Besides
their Dress, and the main drift of the Action, is quite another thing.


That may be, and yet the Character may be borrowed, for in Humours and
Characters, it happens as with those German Pictures, where a Man or a Woman
are drawn so, that a dozen different dresses painted on Izing-glass may suit to
the same face; and so it may be said the humour is still the same, tho you
dress it another way; it hath the same looks though it be disguised; as your
French man is, for though you have made him a Jacobite French man, yet he is
but a French man still, and such a French man as no Beau will ever be fond of
aping; so that after so many excellent Masters from whom you've drawn your
Copy, and who have tired their Pens, and then the Town on that subject, 'tis to
be admired you have not drawn him better; and as for crying up his King, we had
enough of that in Bury-Fair. Indeed the merry (not to say the unthinking) part
of the Audience were well pleased with him, and always will; the enmity between
the Nations giving a relish to the Part, even in Bartholomew-Fair, tho had he,
who acted the part like a good Fiddle, been well tuned, he would have made
better Music.


Sure the Town will not be so barbarous as to deny me the drawing a French man
right --


'Twere hard they should; I have heard you say your Father was one. Though I've
heard a friend of mine say, you speak French worse than your French-man
English.


French Face, lean and dun: all the true Cast. Hark you, little Stutter, did
not you draw it for your self? Come, confess amongst friends --


Zoons -- ca -- ca -- ca -- can any man have patience to hear all this?
Gentlemen, here's my Club --


Pox, don't be angry Tom, he's but in jest. Come, here's t'ye, some of you
Writers are as high after your third days, as your Whores with settlements, as
you said. Dear Stutter, prithee let's be merry; put up your Money, we know you
have some -- Why! there's no arguing with you, your Wit runs out in a passion
like Bottle Ale in the Dog days.


'Sblood! 'twould make even patience mad. But come, Sir, you that are so
critical; can you make any more objections?


Not a word, Sir; I hate a noise, and regard your health and mine: though let me
tell you, that those who refuse to hear of their faults, will remain in them,
and be Company only for fools and flatterers; If they be real to know them is a
means to mend, and if they* be not, our sober arguing may undeceive those who
before thought us in an Error.


There you are right, but to have the honour of inventing my Characters and
Humours taken from me, is such a thing, as I am sure no author can bear; the
name of Plagiary is more odious to me than that of Whore to a virtuous Woman,
or the imputation of Cowardice to a Man of Honour.


Ay, and the taking your Plots and Humours from you, a greater grief than the
ravishing from a kind Mother her dear beloved Daughter; though I confess, some
people said that your Nincompoop is just the very Image of Biscuit in
Epsom-Wells, who is a quiet humble civil City Cuckold, governed and beaten by
his Wife, whom he very much fears, loves, and is proud of: She too calls him
Nincompoop and fumbler; he courts her Gallant to go to her, begs leave to go
play at Bowls, gets fuddled, and is alike reprimanded; so that they said, you
may well brag in your Epilogue that your Cuckolds Character is not ill drawn,
when you had so good an Original to copy after. But I believe 'tis not so.


Some Critics have no mercy; because they cannot take from me the humours
between my dear Granadeer and his Son, What does one of them behind the Scenes
the other day, but say 'tis Foreign from the main action, and hath no more
dependence on it, than the Scene between Prince Prettiman and Tom Thimble in
the Rehearsal hath to the Two Kings of Brentford. And in short that I might as
well have given him a Mother and have a dozen Children, and a Father to the
French-man, and to Amorous, and to every one of them, and have made as many
more Walks, or Plays in a Play, as there are Acts and Scenes in this. --


Why faith that was unkind, they had as good say that Topknots and
Cravat-strings are not necessary garniture. --


For my part I judge them to be no more necessary than Shoulder-knots and
Feathers, of which Fantastic mode, Heaven be praised, the Town is reformed;
and I wish those unuseful digressions on our Stage, like overgrown branches,
were lopped off too.


Then you may cut off half the Plays of some of our Authors, much fuller of
digressions, indeed, then some of our modern Rhetorical Sermons* Come, Bays was
not so much out when he said, What's your Plot but to bring in fine things. Let
your lean, envious Student, who like the Architect will have a rule to work by,
and go by the Compass and Plummet, show us a better Play of his own if he can;
here, my little Friend, here's to thee, and a good success to thy next.


Now I vow you're obliging.


And so you'll be, dear Stutter, if you'll give us a Song.


I vow to gad I can't sing; your Friend here, Mr. What-d'ye-call-him, hath put
me so out of order. --


'Prithee, Mr. Stutter, take what I told you the right way, you would not be
flattered, would you? but prithee a Song. --


Oh Sir, Incense is odious to me; besides I deserve none.


Come, come, we know what you deserve, now you are unjust and wrong your self,
but pray take no notice of what I said, 'twas only a lusus verborum. I love
arguing to my heart.


Ay, sometimes he and I will argue it for an hour or two.


Wits disputing, like knives, grind and sharpen one another edge.


A very quaint simile. -- Smith, for my part I don't overload my Plays with
Wit: Plot and Humour are my Provinces. Tho I think they have been worse used by
ill Pens, than Hungary by the Tartars.


'Tis pity they have been so depopulated: But prithee give us a Song.


Indeed I cannot now: a Man cannot sing at all times. Horace's omnibus hoc
vitium, And that which Tunes the Cobbler Tunes us all.


What tunes the Cobbler? --


Why, a merry Heart.


Well, prithee let the Cobbler alone, and give us a Song.


Stay, I'll begin it all, there is not above 100 verses, I have it by Heart,
'tis my darling, -- If this strange Vice in all good Singers were.


For God's sake a Song. --


Well, I'll skip some -- I soon perceived when I his version met,
'Twas more from prejudice than judgment writ.



Gad I will side to your Brother Horace if you don't sing presently.


Well, but hear my verses first.


We have read them, and will have a Song first.


But my Verses --


We'll hear 50 of your Verses for every Song you'll Sing us; that's very fair.


No -- that's too little; I have a new Poem to desire your advice in, you are
men of Wit; but I'll have 150 Verses for every Song.


I vow that's too hard, you have no conscience; but pass for threescore.


Have you seen an Ode I translated from the Greek of Anacreon in my last
collection?


No; but pray let us have a Scotch Song, dear Tom, I know thou art a Devil at
them.


Oh, Sir, I will not thank the Town for giving me the pre-eminence over all my
Contempo -- po -- po -- raries in Lyricks; envy it self will give me that, though
'tis a Talent even Horace the great Lyrick Poet wanted, or I am mistaken.


Pray Mr. Stutter, seeing you understand Greek, which by the way I am glad of,
for your sake, the unkind Town saying you do not understand Latin, oblige me to
explain this passage in Euripides: (...)
(...) --



Let me see the Book Sir -- Pox of this Heathen Greek, it hath not the Latin on
the other side, though if it had 'twould be much one to me.


Well, how do you render that in English?


Why? I thought you were for a Scotch Song -- and I have -- fa la la la.


But the Greek Verse first.


What do you make of it, let's see?


I do not understand it very well, it talks of Lethe, Oblivion.


Gad, so it may, and I believe I have drank of Lethe's Lake, for I have quite
forgot it. Pox of this Greek, 'tis only fit for Pedants, and as unbecoming a
Gentleman as Peddlers French.


You mistake sure, Mr. Stutter: Euripides, Sophocles, Aristophanes, and the
other Greek Authors, were ever esteemed the Fountains of Dramatic Poetry.


For my part, I neither mind them nor Aristotle, or Longinus, my dear Horace
doth my business.





Tho understand him and his Rules, and follow them never so strict, you may
miss the way to please the Town, and your Play be hissed off by the Critics,
for all your Rules, I'faith. For my part, I am of Terence's mind, since 'tis
our business to please the Court and Town, and have a large Audience. Let's
write so as to please them and the Major party. That hath been my Rule, and I
have found it successful, and I'll not leave it for all the Musty Ancients,
till I find one more profitable: But you shall have a Song.


Had it not been to be rid of this Greek, he would not have Sung this hour.


I reckon I have made some 7953 Songs, 2250 Ballads, and 1956 Catches, besides
Madrigals, Odes, and other Lyrick Copies of Verses ad infinitum. Are you for a
new one? I seldom am a day without making one or two.


What you like best your self, Tom, good Songs are ever new to me.


Abroad as I was walking upon a Summers day,
There I met with a Beggar Woman clothed all in Gray:
Her Clothes they were so torn, you might have seen her skin,
She was the first that taught me to see the Golin,
Ah! see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.

And then she takes a Golin and stick between her Toes,
And ever as the Lurden cried or made any din,
She shook her foot and cried my Jo, see the Golin;
Ah! see the Golin my Jo, see the Golin.

A very pretty Tune indeed.


But how do you like the words? To praise the Tune only, is commending a frame,
and saying nothing of the picture.


Oh the words are singular; odd -- odd, mighty pretty odd words.


Ay, that see the Golin, my Jo, see the Golin: Gad, I wonder how I come by all
these pretty things: I have a world of them.


Who but your self would have had such a pretty thought, my Jo, see the Golin?


Ay, that Golin, it seems there's nothing in it.


Oh, but you are mistaken, 'tis worth a whole Epic Poem.


That Golin -- Sir, you do me honour; tho let me tell you, I had rather be the
Author of that Golin than of Absalom and Achitophel.


So had I, tho I look upon it as the best Poem we have had these 20 years.


Oh: I perceive you have not read mine on a late Duke's going to America; I'll
read it to you, 'tis not above 300 lines.


'Sdeath, he is at again --


Bias, one of the Sages of Greece, to say upon occasion, Omnia Mecum Porto.








Prithee let him display his Jewels and be fine. 'twill make him the more
ridiculous; what if like Monsieur Ragou, he hath a mind to lay out his whole
stock in Ribbons? Indeed, 'tis a lovely Ring, dear Stutter, let me see it.


A Tribute to the Muses; the grateful Offering of a kind admirer of my Works.


I'll say that for Tom, that tho some of the Men look upon him by the wrong end
of the prospect, and the Critics for his Satyrs would use him worse than his
Eldest Brother Orpheus was by the Women, yet the kinder Sex take a truer view
of his merits. And tho Dragon grows old, yet he keeps up among them, a Song for
Cynthia, another for Cloe, are worth Jewels and Gold, and many times better
things.


That's a pretty Trade, I must confess, and much like the Barters with the
Indians, an exchange of Toys for precious Stones.


By your leave, I reckon my Toys as good as theirs, and if I receive their
precious Stones, I seldom fail to return the gratitude in the same kind.


Ah, Wag! there you're before Bays for a dry Bob, and I can but admire how
ingeniously they are spread in thy Play; some of them are Master-strokes of
that kind, for that and good honest Atheistical Songs, andabusing the
Black-coat as thou call it, thou bear away the Laurel.


Oh, I am for things that are out of the way, and you shall no more see any
thing of mine without something in it, that's stinging or odd; than a Sermon
without Quotations, a Tragedy without Bombast, and an Almanac without Lies.


Nay, I'll say that for thee, that tho some envious Wits say you're a Drone,
thou art as Waspish as the best of them, and if they cannot perceive thy Wit,
'tis because 'tis so very fine, that 'tis very hard to be seen, tho I should
esteem it as much the more for being so, as a Machine in an Opera for moving
with a subtle Wire.


Now you talk of Ladies, let's have their Health; the little Rogues are so fond
of me.


Why do you not secure some one of them, though it were but a Lady Dowager, her
Jointure would be better than a Patrimony on Parnassus.


Oh, I love to live at large, and the pleasure of the Chase many times exceeds
that of the Quarry; besides, I vow, I can never talk of for better for worse,
but they desire me to Sing the other Song. Gad, I believe they are afraid
'twould spoil my Voice, and that the Town should lose the benefit of my
Writing; and they use me as your Lords do their old Servants, whom they never
prefer, for fear of losing their good Service. Besides, I have always kept too
many Irons at work, and like a Greyhound coursing two Hares at once, I have had
always the ill luck to miss both -- but I intend to pursue close some one of
them, I have half a dozen in my eye, and one of them will do, fa la la fa la.


I'll say that for him, he is as fond of talking of them, --


Make your Honours Miss, Tholl -- loll -- loll.
Now to me Child --

Oh, prithee Tom, let's have another, I heard the Ballad-singers at it in the
Streets already.


A Man would almost forswear making any thing public, that Rascally Tribe
Invades it presently, and murders it as much as a bad Irish Actor a good part.
I think my Songs are like my Mistresses, fated when they go from me to be
common, but I'll have an Action against him who Printed that without my leave.


Thy leave Tom? Why, I have heard the Tune, and most of the Words, these two
years; my Dancing Master told me who first made them, but I have forgot it.


Well, who ever made that Whim first, if he can Dance no better than he Writes,
he shall never cut a good Caper: I am sure I added and altered much, besides
the relish at the end of each Stanza, and then few people know it. But how did
you like my Letter with the Loaf and Butter, was not that pretty? Ah ah ah.


Ay, very pretty, 'thas made me laugh twenty years ago at School, tho I must
confess, you have improved it as much as Bussy Dambois by your late alterations
and amendments.


Ay, what a wretched thing it was before I mended it; 'tis pity Tragedy doth
nor take in this Age, or else 'twould overtop your All for Love, Oedipus, c.
But how did you like the humour of the Dance of Spirits?


Oh, 'twas very necessary to inform the Audience of the Pistolling Bussy; I
perceive you are not in that of Mr. Bays's Opinion, tho you love to elevate,
you hate to surprise.


What think you of the Comical part of the Play? That was all my own I assure
you.


I believe so; 'tis as diverting and natural as any thing you ever writ,
principally the Fencing Masters with the Bedstaffs: All that's good in the Play
must be yours, and what's bad Chapmans.


Ay, I think the Comical part is very well brought in, and much to the purpose,
tho I asked one his Opinion of it, and the ignorant fool told me 'twas pretty
Farce: Ah ah ah.


But pray, what did you bring the Fencing Master and the Steward upon the Stage
for?


Why to talk together and Fence, what should I bring them there for else?


I do not perceive your drift in it, for they never appear afterwards; and I
think a Scene between Monsieur and Dambois, about the killing the King his
brother, well wrought, and some others to prepare the events (which are brought
in abruptly) and to avoid dull Narrations had been more to the purpose; it
makes those that are Judges say, that were it not for Mr. M -- fords excellent
acting, which is the Soul of the Play, it would have been still-born. And to
speak in your style, it now hath a World of spots, and could have been a World
without spots, and have had nothing to do with Heavens strait Axle-tree, and
the World of Fustian you have either made or left in it. I have heard of the
World turned into a withdrawing Room, but never till now of Heaven made a Coach
with its Axle-tree. Some Critics are as angry with you for that, as the
Dissenters with Queen Bess, for the Relics of Ceremonies.


Being in haste, I overlooked some of the old stuff, and could not well avoid
it, for had I taken it all out, there had remained nothing old in the Play but
the Name, and I had done like the fellow who bought him a new outside to his
Lining, and a new Lining to his outside; tho I as much hate to wear an Authors
old Socks, as to sing another words, a fault you'll seldom find me guilty of.
There is a great deal of Art in altering a Play for the better, and you may
almost as soon make an old face look young again; but I think no old Author
ever suffered much under my hands.


But the Audience did -- Paris, and so Rhetorical, that in a series of
Complemental Phrases, Verborum Ambagibus, we are lost in amazement, before we
can reach the middle of your Periods; you have found out the Transfusion of Wit
and Style, I think, better than the Physicians have done that of the blood.


Oh! those things cost me nothing, my Genius lies that way, but the Toil lies
in Teaching the Actors, in Martialling them right, and bringing them on; 'tis a
sad drudgery, one must as it were clap them on the back, and spit in their
mouths, to encourage them, tho they are marring a good thing, and murthering a
Part: I Teach them like Parrots, tho to deal plainly with you, I am afraid
some of them most ungratefully, laugh at me behind my back, and are so used to
counterfeit upon the Stage, that they can no more leave it off when they are
from it, than an Irish-man his Accent, a thorough-pac'd swearer his Oaths, and
your Yea and Nay Quaking Friend, his Cant and Formality. I believe 'tis they
have possessed the Town with the Report of my want of Wit; they Interlope in
our Trade as you know. Now should I speak any witty thing to them, it may be;
as they have good memories, they would at Night set it down to deck their
Plays, or treat every company they come into with it, and so make any fine
thing common presently, and unfit to be used by me when I have company that
deserves it; for, like a hidden store, I reserve them for my friends, and
always one finer than all the rest at parting, like a Grace-cup, to leave a
good relish of my sense when I am gone, as I observe that a good round Jest at
the end of a Scene, commands a Clap. Indeed, those things, like Coronation
Robes, are more for state than use, and must not be worn threadbare --


So that sometimes, my friend, you take as much pains to hide your Wit, as you
do at others to show it.


And with good reason too, when I am with the Players. Gad, tho it were but
before the Candle-snuffer, I dare not utter one good word -- who can tell but
he hath a Play upon the stocks, and ready to be Launched next Term.


Come, say no more of it, I am sure they have done you a great deal of Justice,
and I know some of them that deserve your esteem; you must do like that King
who would not remember the wrongs done him when a Duke. And so the Author of
Love for Money, must forget the dejected and wronged Duke of Dunstable.


But pray, by the by, why from one Gentleman of Fletcher's, did you make three
Dukes? Methinks it seemed too great an Imposition on the sense of the Audience.


Why? Bays gave you two Kings of Brentford, and three Dukes, I think, was more
surprising.


I thank you, Mr. Johnson, for hitting my true meaning; that was a good Play!
but those Scenes of Basset, which gave offence to a very great Lady, were the
Ruin of it, tho nothing could be prettier. And that with a great deal more, is
my own: but now that Lady is gone, I will have it revived before I oblige the
Stage with another Play.


So you may, as well as Bussy Dambois, and with as much Justice have the
Bandits too; I believe the one will take as much as the other.


Now you make me sigh when you speak of the Bandits, that poor Play fell a
sacrifice to the Critics, they envy me because I think my self as good as
they, as in reason I am, and perhaps better too. They Martyrized my Play to
pull down my Reputation, which began to eclipse that of the most Celebrated
Dramatic Authors; but I think I fitted them in my Epistle Dedicatory to the
Foreman of my Partial Jury, Sir Critic Cat-call; you have read it without
doubt.


Ay, ay, you puzzled them I'm sure, with your Visible and Invisible Patrons,
and gave them three or four sheets of Complements and VVitticisms they could
not understand, nor have the the patience to read, without taking Snuff.


They had better ne'er have meddled with me, I stung them to the quick, and had
I had no more Wit than they, I had had more Duels to fight than any desperate
Bravo, or quarrelsome Gamester, e're fought or bragged of in their Lives.


How did you put them off then?


Very easily I'saith: I told them that if Fighting was their Province, Writing
was mine. That I invaded no men's proprieties, but if they would attack me at my
own Weapon, I was ready to give them the satisfaction of an Author, draw my Pen
in the Quarrel, and give them dash for dash, but that I had too great a
veneration for the Ladies, to endanger any thing they were pleased to set a
value on. And in short, at any thing else I begged their pardon, and was their
humble servant -- And this, with abdicating the Coffee-house, and exchanging
their Company, for the Society of the more sober and tractable Gentlemen of the
Country and City, quasht the business. Tho now I dare appear; and tho a Star of
the first magnitude shines so bright among you, that even in its eclipse I
feared, before, 'twould shine brighter than I. Now I think my Boarding-School
may make as great a blaze as his Spanish Friar.


Have a care young Phaeton, Comets may blaze a while, as you, after a Famous
Author have observed, but the unctious matter being spent, they must return to
their first obscurity.


My stock will blaze when others snuffs are out; a Rising Star is worth two
setting Suns: And now that in the style of my Siege of Memphis, opportunity
reaches forth her silver hairs and bids me hold. By dint of merit, I'll the
Laurel snatch;
I'll not for it's reversion tamely Watch,
It's fading green I'll instantly revive,
Drones shall not eat the Honey of the Hive:
To Court I'll hye, and claim it as my due,
Outdo them all; nay, even my self outdo:
I'll Write and Sing, and Write, till it will do.
Nay, rather than I'll leave my Cause in the Lurch, I'll -- I'll -- I'll --


Fast, seem Godly, Pray, and go to Church -- the Rhyme will be left in the
lurch else. This was a smart fit of Rhyming if it had but held out; I see you
have your Poetical Concordance in your head pretty ready. Prithee what Rhymes
to Jehovah, Chimney, Month, or to Scurvy?


Scurvy -- humph -- Scurvy -- Stay -- Pox, that's a Scurvy Rhyme, and a Scurvy
question now: The nearest to it, is a very good friend of mines Name, that
begins with a D --


Who is a Scurvy Rhymer. --


But waving that; I'll not be afraid of old worn-out Rivals, Impavidum ferient
ruinae, as I remember Monsieur Lavardin said of his Holiness Pope Innocent XI.
in whose praise I writ a Poem -- A pox on it, you have put me out, and spoiled
my Rapture.


He hath his bits of Latin as ready as a Spanish Monk his Breviary, tho neither
of them understand a word on it but by Translations.


Well, go on and prosper, Tom, you would be sure of success, were we ruled by
Laws such as those of the Kingdom of the Moon; which, by the way, I think as
well imagined as those of Sir Tho. Moore's Utopia. They say that there old men
honour and serve the young, as being in body and mind fitter for the service of
their Country. 'Gad, I believe you had fared very well in that World, their
Language being all Music, and their Money all Verse.


But the Music must be good, and the Verse bear the Hall-mark, for like the
late Brass Irish Coin, it does not go for what Fools may take it, but for its
real value; and one Stanza of Spencer's there, may outweigh a whole Quarles, or
a Verse of Hudibras, a Cart-load of his Ghosts.


Sir, I have grafted of twig upon him, which I have called his Ghost, and for
all your opinion, I believe that if any man hath come to his height, 'tis I
have done it; no Author ever exploded my Works, nor writ against them so as to
come to particulars, which is no small pride and comfort to me, since the most
celebrated Pens have been often carp'd at, and examined, even in the best of
their Works; and Indictments of Poetical Thefts, Murders and Treasons drawn
against them. No man was ever yet so bold as to answer me, so that sometimes I
have been forced to answer my self, when my hand was in. I believe they have
looked on my Poetry, as Armies on those Towns they dare not Besiege; I have had
now and then a Bomb thrown at me, but tho surrounded with Enemies, none of them
ever presumed beyond a Blocade, for had they made a formal attack, they had
certainly lost by it, and been repulsed worse than the Turks were at Vienna.


Without doubt it would have been a longer Siege than that of Troy, Candia, or
Ostend, and their only way to reduce you would have been by famine; for then
being starved for want of sense, you could not have held out. The flying
squadrons of your Songs formed into bodies of light Horse, your Ballads into
Dragoons, your Lampoons into Horse Granadeers, and Catches into Volonteers,
would have made work with them: Your Libertine and smutty Copies of Verses, had
been your Enfans perdus, the Burlesque Poems led the Van, your Comedies had
made your main body of Foot joined with the book you writ in praise of Archers,
to darken the Sky with its Arrows, and all those Plays you have altered had
been Auxiliaries, whilst you at the head of your Boarding-School, mounted on a
Weesil, with an Owl for your Emblem displayed in your Standard, a Life Guard of
Scotch Songs, your Satyrs for your Artillery, the Siege of Memphis bringing up
the rear, and your Odes and other Poems in the body of Reserve, would have made
altogether so bold, spruce, and numerous an Army, that Xerxes, Darius, or the
Madianites, never mustered the like, and he must have been more than a
Leonidas, an Alexander, or a Gideon, that dared encounter you.


Very prettily applied, Mr. Johnson; I protest had you been General of an Army,
you could not have done it better. What think you of it, Mr. Smith; you say
nothing? People may talk now of Sir Iohn Suckling, Waller and Denham, for
Writing well, 'twas easy for them, who never writ above an Eighteen penny
book; but had they writ as much as I, 'ga^ it had been worth speaking of. Ah!
Mr. Smith, do you think now, any Author dare encounter me, and take my Works to
pieces?


No, faith Sir: De nihilo nihil la, I think it would be as needless as Sir
Nicholas Gimcracks dissection of a Cock Lobster, or the answering all the
impertinent questions sent to the Athenian Mercury* and now, Sir, I have
answered yours


You have Sir -- But what's to pay, Boy, call my man -- Ga -- ga -- gad -- Damn
ye, run you Dog*


A pretty Boy this; how long have you kept him Tom*


Kept him Sir: Zoons, is that a proper question to a Gentleman


'Tis since his last Play; he has been invisible since the three Dukes of
Dunstable.


Hell and Furies! What's to pay? Here's money; farewell*


Prithee stay and put up your money, there's nothing to pay. Smith, thou hast
as little Complaisance as Manly in the Plain-dealer, or Stamford in the
Impertinents; thou art a mere Heraclitus, what diverts others puts thee out of
humour.


Who can be otherwise, and hear the insipid sayings, vain thoughts, and
ridiculous boasts of a conceited, touchy, illiterate, pragmatical Nothing, who
seldom writes a line, but either dullness, false thought, or something amiss,
appears in it, and scarce says one thing but may be better said; to hear
another stutter half an hour for a good word, were a pleasure to this, but to
hear him stutter Nonsense is unsufferable.


For my part, I cannot repent the having thrown away a little idle time in so
facetious and odd a Conversation, a daily course of this would soon bring a
surfeit, but a small touch E^passant, may be as much indulged as a meal of
Roots and fruit, when either we want better Dainties, or their constant use
hath rendered them unpallatable; and when time is as heavy on my hands as it was
when we met, I so little repent the expense of it now, that I may lay out as
much more in chewing the Cud, and committing to Paper what we have said. And
tho what hath been already Printed, between us and Bays, be indeed as much
above this as he is above Stutter, yet this may, perhaps, give as much
satisfaction to the Reader, since a Spanish Frior, (...) an All for Love, have
nor always had as good an Audience as a Love for Money.



