MOst sacred Majesties, if ye do wonder,
To be saluted by an aged Prologue,
Know that upon these temples I do wea^e
An Emblem of our Mothers fate, who since
She has in expectation of your presence
Numb^ed the tedious moments, is grown old:
For each expecting minute that has passed
Has seemed an hour, and every hour a year.
But will ye see what power ye retain?
We by your presence are made young again.

FOrtune as yet is kind, well done my boy,
Hold up your head, a little higher, yet,
And can you weep?

I can, have some cause,
O Lucius!

And sigh?

I would I could not.
Most wretched Isabella.

Constantina.

When shall mine eyes feed on that blessed sight?
Or when wilt thou with one kind look dissolve
This cloud which now obscures me? and makes me seem
Another from my self?

She stirs not yet
Why Constantina.

O my Lucius!
Might I but once more see thee, I could go
Unto the grave me thinks with such a look
As should make death enamoured on me.

Ha?
Not yet? O what a sleepy girl is this?

But in this house I'ue learned Pandora lives,
Who now does reap my harvest: here I hope
I may enjoy at least a sight of him,
And that is all that ever I must hope for.
But I shall be observed.

O now she comes.

Placenta.

Not so loud (take heed) for fear
The Dragon should be waking; have you yet
Got on your masculine habit?

Long ago.

Descend then, if your mind be still the same,
Before the Sun rise to betray your flight.

But have you dressed the Boy in my apparel?

Tis done, and not a creature but my self
And the dumb night are guilty of it.

Well,
I come.

In truth I do confess I wonder
What should induce this peevish girl to take
This strange disguised habit, and forsake
Her uncles house, but it is love forsooth:
Well, be it what it will, I have procured,
By her entreaty, and the gold she gave me,
A boy as near her stature as I could,
Whom I have clothed in her own apparel,
And veiled in her scarf. Come on my boy.
You have not yet forgot, I hope, the instructions
I read to you within. Come, let me see
You vent a sigh now. Excellent: but be sure
You speak not very often.

Doubt not that:
They are shallow griefs that make a noise.

Well said.
But tell me you, sir boy, what wast that made
You leave the London Players?

Indeed forsooth
I was abused there; besides, that trade
Begins to fail of late, most of your Gallants
Are grown so wise and frugal, that they choose
Rather to spend their money on a whore
(Which they call necessary) then on such toys.

Go to, you are a wagg. See now she comes.
But o the Father! what pismire is this?
Ah, I shall swooned to look upon her legs:
Surely one blast of wind will break them quite.
Now out upon her! mine are mill-posts to them.

Placenta, you do see how much I trust you,
That put mine honour thus into your hands.
Lead you this picture of mine into my chamber,
And there instruct him how he should behave
Himself, that no suspicion of my flight
Be nourished by my Uncle, till I be
Past his recalling. So farewell good midwife.

How my left eye-brow beats? I do not like it,
It does presage no good. My Constantina,
Go back again I pray you, in good sooth
Tis very dangerous thus discompanied
To undertake a journey.

All in vain:
I am resolved either to find my Cleopes,
Or else to sleep with death closed in mine arms.

If it must needs be so, why then farewell.
I cannot choose but weep: sweet Constantina --
Well, twas the goodest Gentlewoman -- but sh 's gone --
Many a dear morsel has she helped me to --
But we must all depart -- I do remember
When she was but a little one, she ever
Was fond of me -- but I must be content.
Come on my boy, let not your face so much
Be seen -- when I have shown her lodging to you,
And left you there -- I cannot yet forbear,
It will not from my heart -- I'll go and visit
The fair Pandora, that kind Gentlewoman,
And see if that her closet can afford
Any good thing to hold the heart. Come boy.

I knew there was a woman in the wind.
I smelt her. Stay. -- but now she's gone -- I'll forward.
Why I am not at leisure now to take
An ounce of Tobacco in a week, they do
So haunt me up and down. And this forsooth
Is our Saint Valentine, wherein our lovers
Do use to imitate Iack-dawes, and Rooks,
Do bill and couple. But (my starre's be thanked)
I'm now delivered from those petulant females.
But stay, and let me recollect my self.
What part about me is't (I wonder) can
Be guilty of their sin of loving me?
In truth me thinks I am not very fair;
A pretty winter countenance I wear
After a cup: and I have often seen
A better nose dwell better eyes between.
As for my legs (not for to flatter them)
Surely I think under a boot they might
Become the Court, so I refrained to play
At Goff -- but oh the traytor's apprehended,
I have him fast. Oh thou pernicious nose,
Rebellious member, have I so often raised
Thy dull complexion with the spirits of sack
Unto that height that thou hast dared to ourface
The Sun in Cancer, and have I this reward?
But if I do not humble thee again,
Reduce thee to thy former state of paleness
With rot-gut, and cuds-nigs -- let me be married.
But whom have we here?
Tis Lucius one of our loving fools:
O ho? why then I must be tortured,
That's all that I can say, I must be tortured.

Ah my Endymion, see thou yond rising Sun?

I do, but what of that?

Why nothing boy
But at his presence why do those lesser-fires
Pluck in their shamefaced heads? doest thou not mark
Dull heavy Page? I can but meditate
Upon the wit of Nature, who by objects
Low and inanimate, as is that Sun --

Now heavens be good unto me, this is called
Lovers philosophy.

does read unto us
A lecture of her higher mysteries.
What doest thou think is meant by that same Sun?
And those extinguished tapers? -- he alas
Poor aged wretch but coldly imitates
That which Pandora does unto the life.
Whilst she is absent thousands of petty beauties
Do twinkle in the night, let her appear,
And they all vanish.

Ha brave, is not this dainty? for all this,
Surely the man would take it unkindly now
If I should go and tell him he was mad.

Endymion, lend me thine eyes a little;
Doest thou desire to see a Mapp, a Model
Of all the world in brief and in one word?
View this -- why readst thou not? thy happy lips
Should thirst me thinks to have that blessed air
Divorce them. read.

Pandora.

Ah Pandora.
Look here's the Sun, this place does Iupiter
Possess, here Venus, and there Phoebe; mark --
Here is the Earth, but in her bravery,
And smiling as when Sol does sleep betwixt
The twining Gemini.

Thou daring mortal:
But where in this your Idol of the world
Is Styx, Cocytus, or the blessed place
Of the dear Furies? or the three chapt Dog?
Are they without the verges of the World?

Fortune! how happy were I was this face
Of thine not counterfeit. Speak Endymion:
But art thou sure that my Neander drew
The fair Constantina for his Valentine?

I never said it Sir.

How never said it?

Only her name, so was Pandora yours.

O too too true presage of both our fortunes.
But let it be. When I do violate
That love, that more then mortal bond, wherewith
My soul is tied unto Neander, may
I fall unpitied, may no gentle sigh
Be spent at my last obsequies, may I want
A man to wish me again, would that preuaile.

Without all question this is Magic -- oh
How I do fear a Metamorphosis.

But I do feel a poverty of words
Begin to cease me. Good Endimyon,
Where is my boy Luscinio? Call him in,
That he may touch a string which may dissolve me
Into a flood of tears -- come on my boy,
Oh teach that hollow pensive Instrument
To give a true relation of my woes
Whilst I lye here, and with my sighs keep time.

O how I sweat. 300000 feauers
Are now upon me. O --
Have pity (Grief) I can not pay
The tribute which I owe thee, tears;
Alas those Fountains are grown dry,
And tis in vain to hope supyly
From others eyes, for each man boars
Enough about him of his own
To spend his stock of tears upon:

O O O. Will it be ever done?
Woo then the heavens (gentle Love)
To melt a Cloud for my relief
Or woo the Deep or woo the Grave,
Woo what thou wilt so I may have
Wherewith to pay my debt, for Grief
Has vowed, unless I quickly pay
To take both life and love away.

Gods, and the World! you everlasting Twanger --
Avoid.

What means the Gentleman?

I'll tell you.
The Gentleman does mean for to consult
With the entrails of your breeches, boy; the Gentleman
Does mean to whip you boy, unless you straight
Avoid the place with that seducing Fiddle.
And you his Squire his Pandar that procures
This bandy Cockatrice Music for him. fly.

How fares it with our Lucius?

As with one
That is of all men the most miserable.
Ah my Pandora, when I record thy name,
(Thy name that's bounded with that sacred number
As showing all Perfection bides in thee)
Me thinks the numerous Orbs dwell in mine ear,
After which sound all others seem unpleasing,
Harsh, void of Harmony -- Pandora -- oh
How sweet a life had the Camelion
Might he but ever feed upon such aires!

Am I not yet transformed? me thinks I feel
My self becoming Wolf -- I am half Bear already.

Live happy still, and when thine aged head
Laden with years Shall be enveloped
Within this earth, may a perpetual spring
Be on thy Grave.

Shall I put forth my Paw,
And so command him silence?

But when I
Forget to love thee or thy memory,
May my white name be stained with the blot
Of baseness, and I dye without one tear
To wash it out.

Forget to love her? -- oh
Not for a world. And er't be long we shall
Have some decayed piece of Arras, that
Is brought to his last suit, and has no more
Lands for to sell or mortgage for new plush
Will beg you for your fair revenues Sir
-- Death Sir I cannot flatter,
Let me not live a minute if I can.
You look not like your self in that same passion;
It is not man-like; ere I'd loose a sigh,
Or set my soul one scruple of a note
The lower for these scarcrowes in clean linen
These chippings of nature: I'd dam my self
To a thatched Alehouse, and St. Kitts Tobacco,
And dabble there eternally:

Ah Anteros, thou art too rough a Surgeon
To handle my wounds.

Pandora, ah Pandora.
Does not this sound deliciously from a man?

Do not blaspheme good Anteros; she is
The model of the world.

Why so am I,
And you, and every man besides, we all
Are little worlds.

But my Pandora is
The abstract of them all; when she was borne,
The whole house of heaven did meet, and there decreed
Only in her mortality should reach
Perfection.

And for heavens cause why in her?
Are we not all made of the self same clay?
And of the same ingredients? by the same workman?
'Tis madness Lucius this, it is not love.

Sir I must leave you.

Nay but stay a while,
I have not finished yet. Besides all this,
If you do love her so, what hinders then
But you might marry her, since (as I hear)
The Girl is not composed of adamant
Or flint, but of a supple and kind nature,
And loves you too?

O my dear friend Neander,
Shall I do this to thee? to such a friend?

Oh I am undone. Farewell.

But see Pandora.
Oh how amazed and sudden is the flight
Of all the spirits of darkness, when the day
But shows her face!

What if I take this way?
It may be I shall find them in the grove,
Whither they oft resort -- but stay, perchance
They may be in the arbour that doth look
Into the forest.

Oh ye immortal Gods!
Why did ye suffer those vain Lunatic Poets
So much to antedate the works of nature,
Who living many ages since did write
I know not what of many Nymphs and Graces,
Muses and Sirens? they are mere fables all;
With my Pandora they had all their births,
And when she dyes they'll perish with her.

Ah?
How like unto this Daisy was I once
Whilst I did live recluse! my innocent heart
Like to this little Globe of gold, enclosed
Within the whiteness of my thoughts, was safe
From all the violence that Love, or shame
His child could do: but when his warmer beams
Displai'd that Ivory guard, and laid me open
Unto the tyranny of his assaults,
I was -- but I will sigh out all the rest.
Ah Lucius.

Oh happy name!

Why Lucius?
Neander is as dear to me as he.
Dost thou not blush to speakt * thou shame of woman?
But here he comes, I will address my self.
With all the winning Graces that I have
To entertain him.

Tis my friend Neander.

Fair Nymph, God save you.

Dearest love Neander.
The welcom'st man alive.

Nay but sweet Lady
Forbear the encounter.

Whether dost thou turn
So cruelly from her that loves thee more
Then her own soul? are you not well good Sir?

You see I walk, look fresh, and laugh. (ha, ha, he)
Symptoms of one that is not very sick.

But am I thus despised?

You're troublesome.
Ha, ha, he, tis pretty, very pretty
* How scurvily doth sorrow laugh? (ha, ha, he)
Most excellent, beyond compare (ha ha, he)
Why do you follow me?
I do not fell complexion Lady, nor
Have I the art to cure the tympany,
I have no great devotion to the tub
Nor the hot house, as yet, what are you rampant?

But pray thee speak Neander, am I so
Deformed grown of late, for to deserve
All this neglect?

What shall I answer? Madam,
If you have spoke all that you mean to speak
And have no greater business, I desire
I may crave pardon, I must take my leave,
I have affairs expect me. O misery!
That which I long for most, I fly from farthest.
Where shall I find my Lucius?

What is he gone?

Lucius, were you so nigh, and not discovered?
All hail, but whither in such haste my love?
If thou doest love me stay a little.

Love you?
Now all the God's forbid it. I love you?
My better Angel guard me from such a sin.
Should I love you, a Thief?

A theife?

A theife
I and the worst of Thieves -- * Villain thou lie.

But why a Thief? Speak.

My divining soul
Tells me that Lucius is not far from hence.
Ha! it is he, I will observe a little

Lady, I'll tell you, since you do so long
To hear your praises trumpeted to the world,
First, thou hast robbed thy Father, thine own Father,
Of all that little stock of virtue and goodness
Which nature gave him, and (most covetous)
Hast powered it to thy greater heap; besides
Thou hast undone thy Sister, stolen from her
All that was beautiful and lovely in her;
That fair maiestick straightness which attracts
The eyes of thousands to admire, Was hers;
Those rosie buds that open on your cheeks
Were cropped out of her garden; upon her ruins
Is that fair Aedifice of thine erected:
Last, thou hast stolen from me and from Neander
(Which are not two that have deserved the worst
Of thee in all the world) our happiness
All our content, our joy, our very selves.
You see how amiable a creature you are,
How well deserving love. Should I love you?
I'd first embrace a Succubus, court the plague,
Or kiss a cloud that's big with lightning -- (heavens,
Have ye no thunderbolts in store to strike
This sacrilegious head that thus blaspheames
One of your dearest pieces? --) I love you?
Whose face dressed up in that same innocent lawn
Shows like a dunghill set about with Lillies.
* (Thou art a perjured wretch) -- should I love you!
Whose eyes are like two fired barrels set
Upon a Beacon only to astonish
And fright the neighbouring people -- * (oh my heart!
It is a hundred thousand miles betwixt
Thee and my tongue) -- what do you meditate on?

The nearest way unto the grave.

The grave?
If thou would have the shortest cut to hell,
To that same receptacle of black souls,
(Where such as dye for love do walk in shades
As dark as were their thoughts, whilst they lived here)
Lend me thy hand and I will show it thee.

Let it be speedy then good Lucius.

Why thou art at thy journeys end already.

Where's that?

Amongst the departed souls,
Where the dire furies have their habitation,
'Tis in this breast.

Why doest not open then
And let me in? -- Oh if they live so here,
Farewell for ever to the upper world.

Ha? does he embrace her? sure it cannot be.

Away thou prostitute, immodest, go.

Who is't dares say I must not love this man?

Or you, or I must leave this place.

Stay Lucius.
'Tis I that will be gone, the most unhappy
Of all, on whom nature hath written woman;
Forsaken Constantina, thou and I
Will have a Dialogue in tears anon.

Neander!

Lucius!

I, I, love on, ha, ha, he, and see what ye will get
By that at last, I'll love my sefe, my self, ha, ha, he,
This day old Lively thou art just fourscore,
Quickly some Sack, I have not yet baptised
Mine eyes this morning as I use to do.
Why boy? ha, ha. I am as lusty now,
As full of active spirits, as when I wore
But twenty on my back, ha ha, he, this laughing
Surely's restorative above your gold,
Or all your dearer drugs. The very thought
How quaintly I shall gull my expecting Schollers
My Neophytes that gape to hear the news
When I shall nod into the grave, does add
Such vigour to me, that I do not feel
Not feel the ground I stand upon.
More Suitors still --

Sir if I may advise you wade no farther
Into this business, but desist; I have
A promise (I'll assure you) from the Justice.

Sir I may use the same words unto you
I have a promise too, but yesterday
My Father did present him with a horse
Of Robin-red-breast's getting --

Nay Sir come on, if you be good at that. --

You have a promise. God-a-mercy horse. ha, ha, he.
These and some dozen more do daily haunt
This Cormorants house, and all (good men) pretend
It is pure love unto his crooked daughter
That draws them thither, when there's not one of 'em
That would vouchsafe her a look, nay hardly a thought
Unless it were for to contemn her; but
There is a thing they call a Parsonage
An impropriate Parsonage which the well given Matrons
Have rescued from the Laity, and returns
After my death unto the Church, which living
The Justice here has sold them, but reserving
The first donation for himself, with which
He intends to put his foolish daughter off.
'Twas once my brothers land, but this same Hooke
By a golden bait did pluck it from him: well,
It is no matter, I have my life in it. Ha, ha, he.
But I will cheat them all, will cozen them.
Why Boy.

Here Sir.

Well said my honey, well said.
Oh how it smiles upon me! (hum hum) give it me
This is mine Antidote against the Sith of time.
He that desires to live, let him do thus --
Drink Sack in the morning. Boy, another cup.
How now? another? see how he prunes himself.

Boy, there's a teston for you, see you look
Well to my Nag -- I must be generous now.
But let me see, I will accost him thus.
Sir if it please your worship -- (it must be so)
These Country Justices do love a life
For to be worshipped at every word,
I come now from my Lady.

(And you may
Return again unto her Ladyship
And tell her that old Lively is not yet
Intended for to dye.

And do desire
That as you shall approve of my good parts --
Well 't will do -- now I will knock --
But I will open and enter, 'tis a Solaecismo
For to be modest in such businesses.

Well done my Squire o'th bottles, stand you there.
Sir I do come now from my Lady, ha, ha, he,
And do desire, that as you shall approve
Of my good parts -- ha, ha, he --
Well take the glass, and get you home, hum, hum, hum.

If I can win the Girl, I'll find a trick
For to dispatch old Lively presently
And with much ease; a peace of bread and a pin
Will do the cure, or else an honest bur
Lapped up in butter.

Here's a precious rogue,
Oh it is Hugo Obligation
The precise Scrivener, that these three years space
Has laboured for orders, this same villain
Sure is the likeliest man to carry her --

But see where Lively stands, I'll not be seen.

Being one whom he does use in all his Covenants.
But I'll out live them all, the Knaves. I'll now
Go taste a bowl of pure refined air
Upon yond hill.

Yet stay a little, who is this? he's gone.
Once more the coast is clear, now I'll adventure
Towards the Shepherds door: not far from hence
Hid in a thicket I have provided for me
A Shepherds robes, these, if I can preuaile
With this same Stipes for to undertake
A Servant of my commendation,
Will I straight leap into, and so remain
Disguised with him, for (as I understand)
The family doth consist of himself and's dog,
As for his wife she seldom is at home
Being a famous Midwife. Blessed house!
Surely in such a place Hippolytus
Did hunt away his solitary hours.
But I forget (tick took) why Shepherd, Stipes. How?
Not yet awake?

Is not this Anteros?

How I was dealt withal by nature when
She molded this same lump of clay together,
And seasoned it with soul, I know not, but
Let me get out o'th world with obloquy
If ever I could find in all the herd
Of woman-kind yet so much excellence
As could procure a sigh, or kindle in me
The least spark of a desire.

Tis he, his phrase
Betrays him.

I confess like Whelps or Kitlings
Whilst they are young, and suck, and do not know
The use of tongue, they're pretty creatures, and
They may be looked upon without the danger
Of either stool or vomit -- but --

But -- Well Sir Ruffian, I hope to see this Blasphemy of yours against that
feathered Deity sent home with a shaft in your bosom for interest ere long.


What my little ubiquitary Loueall? my Page of the Smock? my commodity above
stairs? my Court Shittlecocke? tossed from one Lady to an other? The Kernel of
thy glove sweet lack.


Take shell and all.


Why here's a Parcel of mans flesh of another temper now, that has the art of
placing his affections wisely, can love one because she's fair, a second
because she's modest, and has his packets of reasons in readiness too; if he
meets with a wanton Girl, that property takes him, there is hope of activity,
she will not fill a bed like Pygmalions Image before he sacrificed to Venus:
if she be rude, and ignorant, her harmless simplicity catches him; he loves
this for the graceful writhing of her neck; another because she can veil her
borrowed teeth neatly with her Fan when she venters at laughter: nothing can
escape him, every part of woman is full of limetwigs to him: which though it be
an humour contrary to mine, who care for none, yet I like it far above your
whining constancy as sauouring more of the Man.


True. For why should I confine my love to one Circle? we see that laborious
creature the Be, which is often set before us for a Copy of industry, not
always droaning upon one flower, but as soon as she has sucked the sweetness
from one, throws her little airy body upon a second, and so to a third, till
at last she comes home with her thighs laden with that pretty spoil.


Well said my Loueall, I perceive thou wilt never dye for love then.


No, If I do, let me lye when I am dead by that Cynic Philosopher with a
staff in my hand, to fright the beast sand fowls from my unburied carcass.
--

But is there any news I pray thee grown
Up in this country since I went to court?

O tanto e piu.
First Cleopes your sisters Lover --

What? he is not dead I hope?

I would he were.
Is gone, has forsook her.

How?

And she forsooth
Since his departure has betook her self
Unto a veyle, silence, and tears; in which
Monastic habit she does spend her days.
I do but tell you by tradition Sir,
Not from my self; but this I can assure you,
It is with us the Parenthesis of eating.

There's nothing man within me. After such vows?
Such protestations? but the Gods make Loueall
No creature, if he does not suffer for it,
Buy this disloyalty of his, at a dear rate.

Can you be quiet? next your fair Kinswoman
Sweet Mistress Vrsly (who without all question
Was Kitlin to Nib, o'th Queen of Faries Kitchen,
Sent to your Uncle for a Newyeeres gift
Upon exchange by the Elf) has the Parsonage
Old Lively lives in hung on her crooked back;
With which fair bait, your good and virtuous Uncle
Does angle for some young and hungry Scholar,
And daily expects the taking of the Gudgeon.
This very hour no less then 6 or 7
Are nibbling at it, but the hooke is seen;
Your Uncle is not cunning in his fishing,
And so I pray you tell him --

But stay Anteros.
I have discovered (unless mine eyes deceive me)
A stranger thing then is all this you told me,
What's that in your hat? tis not a Valentine
I hope?

But I have got a counter hope
Against that hope of yours; I hope it is.

But art thou turned a Lover? hast thou got
A Mistress? thou a Mistress? let me see
That I may worship that great name, that has
Begot this miracle in thee.

Away,
Keep back those common eyes, they be profane.

By all the lips of honour I must see it.

Come you have learned such perfumed oaths at Court,
By all their Feather-men and Tire-women,
Boxes of sucus, cabinets for cerusse --
Nay look you now -- not for a million.

For a far lesser sum sweet Sir nay come
I must and will.

Death! what a mad man's this?
Why if you must and will, then see.

What's here?
Rex et regina magnae Britanniae? what's this? what's this?
What are the King and Queen thy Valentines? ha, ha, he.

Yes marry are they; why do you laugh so Loueall?

Who can refrain? ha, ha, he.

For whom should I admire,
Love, or adore more? I tell thee Jack, I care not
For such poor weak Idolaters that lye prostrate
To every little Star that can but twinkle;
Those petty votaries of Egypt, which
Worship this Onion and the Leek -- for me
I will not bend a knee unless it be
Unto the Sun or Moon.

Thou art mad, stark mad,
A citizen of Bedlam.

I am mad,
Yes, Yes, I am. You then that are so wise
Enjoy your wisedomenesse alone -- farewell.

Come back in the name of goodness -- Anteros --

My company may infect you Sir, I am mad.

What is my little boy grown sullen now,
And will not eat its dinner?

Well, what then?

This day my Anteros I will dedicate
To thee and laughter, to morrow I will study
Some deep revenge for my abused sister
Upon that villain; but no more, thy hand.
Shall we be merry and laugh each man his rubber?

I'm for you for a single game or so.

Well, shall I make a motion then? stay you
But here a little.

Call you this a motion?
One word before you travail, whether now?

I will return immediately.

So you shall.
Speak ere you go.

Well, if I must I will.
Last night it was my chance to overtake
Upon the way a brace of fine tame fools,
Which I have brought along with me, these now
Will I go fetch unto thee.

Peradventure.
Surely the man has Quicksiluer in's heals.
I pray thee tell me, what are they for creatures?

We shall loose time.

Rather shall gain it Sir.

The first of them is a fine spiced gallant,
One that has been some three years in codling
At the Innes of the Court, and (as he tells me) intends
To lye, and soak a while to make him relish
In the rose-water of a Knighthood, strewed
Over with the Sugar of a yearly rent
Of some nine hundred -- after the old mans death.
And all this cookery is to please the palate
Of some nice Minion, who to make her weight
Drags peradventure some three thousand after her.
The thing (to do it right) beside the managing of it's rapier, and a pretty
competencie of play parcels, can salute you, and take it's leave of you in
French, but so miserably harsh that any one may conclude, he never trauail'd
for his language further then Littleton -- He --


Is a very ass, no more of him; but what's the other?


His kinsman. What he is now he knows not himself, else he would have told
me, but he has been a Lawyer; Clerk in's days, his prattle is altogether
about the complexions, and he will read you a lecture of simple bawdery for
some two hours in your ear if you'll suffer him, and after all this, he feels
you by the nose, and cries Mark the end on 't.


And is this all? give me thy hand, I have a brace of the like creatures at my
service. I will play with thee from a Stiuer to a Guilder, from a Guilder to a
Doller, from a Doller to a French crown, from a French crown to a pound, from
a pound, to a hundred (mark what I say) in the way of friendship, with those
two grand coxcombs thou hast all to be worded so.


You will, are you so confident?


Yes marry am I. Only I will not cloy you with an inuentory of your dishes
before hand, take this in brief. One of them is a Scholar newly warm in a
lambskin, Nephew to old bully Lively, at whose house they are both now, the
other is an elder brother, and an heir, and he shall tell you so as soon as
he sees you. But stay where shall our Campus Martius be?


No place Better then this, but speak the hour.


Let me see,


To bring your champions with you.


Or else I'll make good the place my self, which I would be loath to do I
tell you.


My first work now is for to see my Uncle,
And as I hear my melancholy sister.
That done through the back door that leads to the Stables
(where they are taking order for their horses.)
I will go visit my two creatures and
Prepare them for the Combat.

Cupid if a God thou art,
Transfix this Monsters stubborn heart.
But if all thy shafts be flown,
And thy quiver empty grown,
Here be Ladies that have eyes
Can furnish thee with new supplies.
Yet winged Archer do not shoot at all,
'Tis pity that he should so nobly fall.
Heigh hoe --
'Tis a fine morning this as I have seen,
And a most early Spring -- but daughter Merda,
Why Merda I say, why daughter Merda, what,
Have not the Fleas yet made a breakfast of you?
You'll rise? or do you mean that Mistress Vrsely
Shall take you in your bed? she'll not be long
Ere she be here -- Oh me! she's here already.
Why Merda, Merda I say, go to,
I, I by'r Lady.

Fa, la, la, la, I have found six Checkstones in my
Father's yard, all in my Father's yard, and now I
Will go see if Merda will play with me --
Oh Stipes, where is your daughter Merda?

Oh sweet Mistress Vrsely, oh that I were a young
Scholar now for your sake; ha, this is she that
The beggars fight for: come on in faith young Mistress,
Which of all the blackcoates do you love best?

Blackcoates? I care not this for any of them,
I ne'er will love any but Anteros;
But pray you Stipes call your daughter Merda,
Is she not up yet?

Merda, will you come? or do you long until
I fetch you out -- At length forsooth: are
You not ashamed of this you great Maukin you?

Oh Merda, will you play at Checkstones with me?

Where is your answer, and your curtsy Maiden?
If it please you forsooth, say.

If it please you forsoothsay.

Say? thou filthy harlotry, thou;
Oh here's a Girl brought up most daintily;
Well was it not for shame I'd take you up --

Father, good Father, forgive me but this once, I'll never
Do so any more.

Stipes, you shall forgive her,
I'll make my Father take his house from you,
And the North close, unless --

Thank your young Mistress; young Mistress I
Do thank you say.

Young Mistress I do thank you say.

Again? but oh the diggers!
What do I see? My Sheep have quite disgrest
Their bounds, and leaped into the several.
Who, who, why Scab, the last, the last, there scab
'Tis the best Cur
That ever mumbled crust.
How daintily he caught that Sherehogge! there,
So, so, au, au: why so; haup, haup, you rogue
But I will follow him.

Come Merda, will you play now?

No, I wo'nt unless you'll give me those bracelets.

Take them.

And your gloves to.

Here, fa, la, la.

Stay while I put them on though.

What shall we play for?

Two pins a game.

Stake then: heigh ho Anteros!

How many shall we make up?

One and thirty.

Will you have Winter, or Summer?

-- Summer -- no Winter.
^i, Winter, Winter, Winter:

But you said Summer first, I wo'nt play.

Au, but I said Winter afterward though.

Begin then.

One --

So, so, you touched the other stone, now I must play.

You lie, I did not touch it.

You lie, you did touch it, and you shall have no pins here.

Sh'ant I so? but I will though; do you scratch hussy?

I that I will scratch, and bite too.

Give me my gloves, and bracelets again.

You may go look 'vm, I wo'nt, as long as you gave
Them me. Give a thing, and take a thing
That's the Devils gold-ring.

Well if I don't tell my Father of this, you Pusse you.

You Munkey.

You Bastard.

Do you abuse one's friends you Jade you?

And you call me Jade you are a Whore.

Do you call Whore?

I that I will call Whore, well, well, the next time
That you eat any Cheesecakes at our house
You shall have better luck shall you.

Your Cheesecakes? we have as good of our own.

Au, hau, you shall ne'er make no dirt pies
With me in our Barn hussy.

Who cares? then you shall gather no more Violets, nor
Primroses in our Close.

Your Close? I'll gather there in spite of your teeth.
It is my Fathers Close, so it is, so it is.
Your Father does but hire it -- Oh here he comes
Here he comes, here comes my Father,
Now you shall see.

Au but I'll run home.

Come on, I am not of that rank of Patrons
Which set to sale the livings of the Church.
(Oh are you here my daughter? wipe your nose;)
I take no bonds in secret, sell no horse
For his price centuple, nor do I send
The eager suitors up unto my Lady,
That she might judge which is the better gifted.
(Sir if your father will be bound to pay
The first years revenues, you are the man shall speed,
A reservation of mine own tithes too
Must be concluded on before you have it)
But as a true lover of virtue, do
Choose rather to confer a double good
Then the least damage on the man I deal with.
Behold my young and tender daughter here;
I do confess she's not the rarest piece
That ever nature drew, nor is it fit
That such as you, who either are, or should be
Wedded unto your Books, should have a loud
And clamorous beauty to disturb your studies.
You need not fear the thought of her perfection.
Will call you from a piece of Greek to read
Miracles in her face. Hold up your head,
And tell me now which of this goodly troupe
You have most mind to, for on him will I
Bestow old Liuely's Parsonage, and thee
In Marriage.

Excellent, excellent good, ha, ha, ha.

I will have Anteros, Terpanders son.

Let me not hear another syllable,
You peevish girl, you; you have Anteros?
What do you weep? no more: come on your ways,
And sit you down here by me, while your Suitors
Explain themselves and their good parts before you.

Father, huff, huff, I will none of those two men
With the short hair, do what you can I will not.

Why so my daughter? peace.

Huff, huff, -- because I know
As well as can be by their looks, that they
Cannot contain themselves within an hour,
And you do know I cannot hold my wa --

Peace thou most arrant fool, before your wooers
Thus to proclaim your imperfections?

Ha, ha, he: another bout with my conserves for that;
This box shall add three months unto my life,
And this same slice of Quinces seven. I, I,
Begin to plead, do, do.

My sweetest Mistress,
I will divide this my Oration
Just into three and thirty parts, all which
With your vouchsafed patience at this time
I will run through.

The candle of the day
Will burn within the socket, ere thou'st done;
I pray thee leave.

No sir, I will not leave,
I am not yet arrived at the point.

And he doth use to tyre all his hearers.

Oh; he hath don't already, don't already

Besides all this --

Now out upon his lungs,
My dinner will be spoiled, the capon burnt,
The beef as black as mummy; this mans breath
Will blast them all.

Ha, ha, he.

Hast thou taken Orders fellow?

If it please you, no.

Did e're preach?

Only one Sermon sir
For approbation to a female Audience.
But I have here letters of commendation
From seventeen honest men of good report
Amongst their neighbours.

Spare your pains good sir.

As for my self, fair Gentlewoman,
I cannot but inveigh against these times
Wherein --

What says he?

If it please your Worship,
Ha's lost his voice with railing against Bishops,
And the fair discipline of the Church.

Oh villain,
Command him silence.

'Tis a courtesy sir
You inflict upon him, tis not a punishment.

The holy Matrons now will rob their husbands
To contribute to the afflicted Saint.

And think they merit in it. But no more;
I will go gull them all, and presently. --
o -- o -- o -- o -- oo -- ooo --
The longest day I see will have his evening,
o -- o -- o -- oo -- o -- ooo --

But see old Lively; stand close and observe.

O! now the wished for minute does approach
Which I so long have waited for, and not I
Alone -- but let them now enjoy their wishes.
o -- o -- oo -- ooo --
I feel my heart-strings crack, and the whole lump
Groans for a speedy dissolution.

How's this? but yesterday he was in's sack,
Told me he hoped to live to eat a Goose
Which grazed upon my grave: so suddenly?

Have I no friends about me? must I go
Out of the world in private thus? from home?
Without one friend to take his leave of me?
Kind Justice Hooke, O that good man Mr. Hooke.

Peace, not a word: what does he name me for?

Would thou wast here, but to participate
Of my last dying breath, I would pronounce thee
Mine heir in total.

Bear witness Gentlemen --
Good Mr. Lively, 'lasse how fares it with you?

Whoe's that names me?

He whom you asked for,
Sacrilege Hooke.

Sacrilege Hooke's mine heir,
And so farewell thou false and flattering world.

Alas he 's dead.

Peace, not so loud for fear you call him back.
Ye all can bear me record I'm his heir.

We can.

Why Robert, Oliver,
Run to the Church immediately, and cause
The bell be told with speed: old Mr. Lively
Is newly dead -- Alas, I can but weep
To view this spectacle of mortality,
And I have cause to spend some tears for him -- ha ha he.

I doubt he is not fully dead yet Patron,
Shall I make sure work with him? give him a knock?

Offer no violence unto the dead
I charge you, 'tis as bad as sacrilege,
Which I have always hated.

So has the Devil.

Sweet Mistress Vrsely.

Fairest Lady.

Stay,
No haste good sir.

But by your leave sweet sir.

Tis I have right unto her, she's a creature,
And you are one o'th wicked.

Out thou rascal that liv'st upon thy railing;
Good Mistress Vrsely, --
I have a share therein.

Why father, father,
O me, me, me, they will pull me into pieces;
O my hand, O my arm, my arm, O my back.

Ha, ha, he.

Forbear this rudeness gentlemen, my daughter
Shall have her choice; these are not ways to gain her,
They must be gentle, soft behaviours
That win a woman, not such boisterous Rhetoric. --
But hark, the bell doth toll: I'll presently
Go seize upon his goods and chattell,

Ha?
And will you so? but I do know a trick
Worth twenty of that. -- I pray good M. Hooke,
Whom toll's this bell for?

Oh! for my hopes,
What does he live again?

And lives to laugh at thee, and at thy baseness,
Covetous wretch. Ha, ha, he.
Sir, as I take it I may change my will. Ha, ha, he.

Oh what a knave is this? a rank old knave?
A stinking knave? a knave in grain? fie, fie,
That I should thus be gulld? follow me daughter,
And you Gentlemen.

Ha, ha, ha, Away you Ravens,
I'll make ye all go barefoot ye young villains.

But let me now muster my wits together
Call all my fancies into rank, and place
Each several quirk of this my working brain
In its true file. -- 'Tis an unheard of love,
A miracle of Friendship this, for two young men,
In the exaltation of their bloods, both Rivals
In such a beauty, for to plot and sweat
How to be miserable, that's how to place
His friend in the fruition of his Love;
'Tis not within the compass of a faith.
This morning each of them entreated me
In private, that I would invent some way
To win the whole affection of Pandora
Not for himself, but for his friend: which is
(Though in another Idiom) as if
They should have said, get me a comely rope
My Bully Lively, and hang me up, or else
Provide me an ounce or two of Mercury,
Which I will take in posset drink and dye.
But Lucius is the man whom I desire
To pleasure most, therefore I now have counsaild
Neander for to counterfeit a wedding,
Which being fancied true by Lucius
And the indifferent Gentlewoman, might cause
A speedy marriage 'twixt his friend and her.
This does he swallow, and now there nothing wants
But -- ha? what's here to do? what Boy is this
That Stipes thus drags after him?
Why quickly Merda, bring me a chair out quickly. --
O O you villain. -- Why when? -- So, so, go to, go to,
Tarry you still my daughter,
That you may hear some of your Fathers wisdom. --
Come on you Crack-rope, what is your business, 'pray you,
To lurk thus in my Masters grounds? you are
A scout? one that discovers are you not?

It is a pretty Lad, and being dressed
May easily pass for Woman. Well I'll mark

O you're a stubborn gallows, you will answer?

O me unfortunate; what shall I say?

Heigh!
An ill year on you, you great Maukin you,
Making of Puppets? one of your age and breeding?
You have an Husband Minion? you a rod. --
But to return again unto the purpose,
Where dwell you sirrah? will you not answer me?
Come on your ways, I'll have you to my Master. --

Unhappy wretch! what shall I answer him?
Nay good Sir stay, I'll tell you: oh how I tremble --

Then quickly Sirrah.

Lest this robustious Clown
Should hale me before my Uncle in this habit.

What's that you mutter on? you have a trick
To say your prayers backwards? have you not?

This Lad is mine, I'll take him from the Shepherd.

Not far from hence I had both friends and parents.
(Howsoever how I want) but cruel Fates
Have envied them their lives, and me my friends.

It shall be so, I'll make a contract straight
Betwixt Neander and this Boy. Now Stipes,
God save you.

Salve Domine. But why put you your Sickle
Into my Harvest thus? go to, go to,
You're troublesome -- well Sirrah.

Well Sirrah? Slave,
Thou vnpollish'd piece of clay, how dare thou thus
Vncivilly use a young Gentleman
Whose friends and kindred I have known to be
Worthy of more respect then thou of scorn,
Which both come near to infinite?

Very good.
And do you know his friends and kindred then?

Would thou did know thy betters half so well,
Vntutourd dunghill. -- In what state you sit?
Stand up, or else I'll make thee lye for ever.

Are you in earnest or in jest?

How think you?

You great Rigs-norton you, do you stand still
And see your only Father wronged thus? ha? --
Well, if I do not fit your cap for this
(If it be made of wool) when you tithe Lambs,
I'll never go to Church more, if th'whole flock
Has any worse then other t'shall go hard
But some of them shall fall unto your lot.

Alas I doubt he knows me
His eyes so dwell upon me.

Come my boy,
What will you go with me?

Thanks to my stars;
He knows me not.

Boy will you dwell with me?
Thou shalt have dumpling Boy, enough, and Bacon
Shall be so deep in fat, that thou may wade
Up to the chin in lard: Salute your Master.

And kiss your masters daughter that's the next
Thing you must practise.

You his Master, Hempseed?

Truly me thinks I could even love this Boy
'Tis such a pretty thing; Father, I pray you
Good Father, let him dwell with us.

No more,
Peace, so he shall.

Hands off you lease of Sheepe-skinnes.

No, I will dwell with this old Gentleman.

Well said, sweet youth.

But on this condition,
That you will use me like a Gentleman
Of quality and worth, for I must tell you
With tears, how e're my fortunes are dejected
Now, I do come of no mean house nor blood.

Fear not my boy, thou shalt have cause to thank me:
Follow; my maids shall presently vnpage him,
And hang woman on his back.

But I do hope
That some kind God or other will find out
Some means for my escape; if not (I'ue said it)
This hand shall make a passage for my soul
To leave this body.

Boy, do you come?

I come.

What is he gone? -- hi-day! what again?
Let me be hanged, my dog and my whole Family,
My Wife and all, I'll put her in, if I
Do not so 'flict your buttocks Minion;
I'll break you of this trade of making children
Before your time, if I can find a willow
Within a mile of an Oak.

What shall I do? oh what shall I do? what shall I do?
My father's gone to get a rod, what shall I do?
Oh, oh, here comes my mother. --

Placenta, you have heard my cares, my griefs
And which hath caused them all, you know my love,
Now by those tender years, by that first ray
Of blessed light these infant eyes received
Upon those vigilant knees, I do conjure thee
Forsake me not in these my miseries

Mother, Mother, Mother, what shall I do?

What news with you, you fayrie brat? you changeling?
Daughter to Madam Pusse the kitchen maid,
Take that and get you in, or I'll --

Um um, um.

Will you not stir?
Carry that chair in with you Milderkin.

What would you have me do?

Y'aue heard my sickness,
'Tis the physician must prescribe the medicine
And not the patient.

Will it suffice
If ere the Sun does set you do embrace
One of your Lovers?

By all my vows it will;
Nor am I much solicitous in the choice,
So I have one.

But I must have your help,
You must not merely be a patient
In this same plot; can you dissemble think you?

I am a woman, and may learn in time.

Well then 'tis thus: you see your pampered Lovers
(Like two fat Oxen in a Stall) stand blowing
Upon their meat, are nice forsooth, and squeamish,
Will not fall to, because they're cloyed with dainties,
The only way for to procure them stomachs,
Is to withdraw their fodder; take your love
Before their eyes, and give it to another,
Or seem to do at least, 'twill fetch them back;
And make them lick their lips at you, scratch for you:
I know not by what Fate, but true it is,
We never prize ought right till the departure,
And then our longing's multiplied. Can you fain
A love unto some other Gentleman?
And seem quite to neglect them and their service?

I fear I cannot, 'tis too hard a Province:
But what will this advantage me I pray you?

So much, as nothing you can do, will more.
A Louer's like a Hunter, if the game
Be got with too much ease he cares not for it;
She that is wise in this our wayward age
Will keep her Lovers sharpe, make them to ceize
Upon a firebrand for meat. -- What say you?

Why I will try I say.

Try? Oh that I
Had but that beauty in my managing,
In-faith I would not part with a good look
Under a brace of Tens.

Indeed Placenta
As you are now, you'd need to sell them dear,
It is a rare commodity, your Shop
Affords not many of them.

For a kiss
I'd have a Lordship; a whole Patrimony
For a nights lodging; Come, you Maidens now
Are grown too kind, too easy in your favours,
A few smooth, oily, verses now adays
Bought of some Poet, and so justly called
The Gallants own that sends them, where your tresses
Are termed Sunbeams, and your ruby lips
Congealed Nectar, have more power to win you,
Then in my days two velvet Petticoats,
Or an hundred acres turned into Taffaties.
Speak, can you do it?

Sure I think I can,
If need require.

It is enough, but see,
What Strip^ing's this comes here? Ha? 'tis most happily
This is Endymion Lucius his Page.

There's not a solitary walk, nor Grove
Wherein a Lover may retire himself
Free from the eyes of the profaner people,
But I have trauers'd over to find my Master;
I have not left a Spring unquestioned,
Or any spreading Oak, whole quavering top
Is but half Phoebus proof, nor can I hear
Ought of Neander his companion.

Pandora, this same Boy was sent on purpose
Unto this place by some kind Nymph or other
Inhabiting these Woods in mere compassion
Of thee and of thy miseries; we could not
Have studied for a better Stale then this:
Prepare your self to fain a love unto him.

But see Placenta, and my Masters Love,
I will enquire of them.

Endymion
All happiness.

As much to you Placenta.

And what to me?

What you deserve fair Lady,
Which is above my wishes.

But Endymion,
Prithee sweet Lad, let me entreat a courtesy,
What Country-man are you?

What Country-man?
An English man I take it.

An English man?
I rather think thou art a Russian
Thou carryest such a Winter in thy breast.
How can thou suffer such a winning beauty
To stand neglected? without a salutation?
Go to, you shame-fac'd fool, go kiss her, go.

How kiss her? it does not become a servant
To be so saucy with his Masters Love.

It rather not becomes Endymion,
A Youth of that same mould and symmetry
To be so bashful before a Gentlewoman:
As for thy Master I disclaim his love
As one unworthy.

How? disclaim his love?

And with his love, all the whole world of men,
Except 'be thee my soul: why fly thou me?

Come on, Come on you little frozen-nothing,
I think we must be fain to make you take
Your love potion in a horne, you are so skittish.

Nay but Placenta. --

O most redolent!
Aurora's spiced bed is not more sweet,
Not all the odours of the early East.

You do but mock me.

How? but mock thee sweet?
By all the Cupids in thy face, I love thee
Beyond the expression of a woman's tongue.

This was that simple one that could not counterfeit.

By this same nest of kisses I protest --
What would thou more?

More of your protestations.

But can thou love me then?

Indeed fair Lady
I do not know, I am but newly entered
Into this loving trade.

You are a Wag:
Take her by the hand and strain it gently, so. --
Now kiss her fan and sigh. -- Good, excellent.
(Well I have seen some Gallants in my days,
Though 'twas my fortune to be married,
To that same lob my husband, but no matter;)
Fie on this modesty, 'tis out of fashion,
Give her a green gown quickly, she will thank you.

Will not as much satin of the same colour
To make her one do as well?

Come, you're a fool;
Down with her, she will discard you else,
As bashful, and unfit for Ladies service. --

Ay me! what mean you Sir?

Why there, why so; --
Oh for Neander now and Lucius
To view this spectacle, this would crack that great
That strong and mighty bond of friendship, and
Make them both quarrel for her: nay Endymion,
As she did pluck you down, so 'tis your office
To take her up, else she'll forget her self
Good soul, and slumber there eternally. --

Now fie upon you Sir, you've spoiled my linen.
Pray Heavens no body saw us: good Placenta
Reedify what is amiss.

All's well,
All's well, save only here does want a pin.
But stay I'll furnish you. --
Yes, here's a knot molested too. --

Fair Sir,
This may seem lightness in me.

Rather gravity
Who naturally tend downward thus.

But Sir,
Let me entreat you for to entertain
A better faith of her that is your servant,
Give it the right name Sir, and call it Love.

I'll call it what you please fair Gentlewoman.

He never thinks of's Master: well this Boy,
Must we train farther with us till we meet
With our two icy Lovers. Come Pandora
Will you entreat your fairest Paramour
T'accompany us into the Grove? vvee may
Perchance there meet his Master, whom he seeks.

Sweet shall I crave?

Not where you may command

So, so, I'll now go plant this billing couple
Under some pleasant tree, which done I'll go
And range the fields for Lucius and Neander,
And bring them to behold their close embraces,
This certainly will make them hungry, and bite,
Waken their dull and sleepy appetite,
VVee never prize ought truly, think it dear,
Until the time of parting does draw near. --

To the Ladies, Joy, delight,
And a servant that dares fight;
No need of painting, but a face
With perpetuity of grace.
To the Lords a gracious eye
If they have a Mistress by.
To them both, more then all this,
Their Princes happiness, and bliss.
The day's our own, we have the Sun, the wind,
And all that can be called advantages, bear up.

As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother --

St, not a word.

You wrong me Sir, I will swear out my swear, as
I am a Gentleman I must, and will swear.

Nay sweet Master Mongrel
Mistake me not, I do not go about,
For to deprive you of that ornament,
That fashionable quality: I but entreat you,
For to be frugal in your language, and,
To husband your lungs; you have an enemy
That will require them all, had you more oaths.

How? Do you think I have no more? by my --

Oh, hold, hold, hold.

Nay, you shall hear me, by --

O, O, O.

By my -- by -- my indad law.

By my indad law, you'll spoil all, why you'll spend
all before the time. But see your adversaries are at hand.
This is their Captain, their Conductor. Love. Stay.
I'ue hit the very punto, this same minute,
Does cut the hour into two equal portions.

You that are grown a Time-obseruer, you
With that fine pocket Saturne in your hand;
Look this way.

But are these your Champions?

They are my Conqerours, if you please: but where are your employments?


They will be here immediately.


No more. Loueall, please you to take notice
Of these Gentlemen, they are of rank, and my friends.

Sweet Sir, my only wish is that my fortunes were but of growth, to show in
what degree of honour, I hold any whom you shall vouchsafe to call a friend. --
I thirst to know you Sir.


Do not swear yet.

Why so?

Nay as you please.

Sir I desire you to pardon me, I must not swear yet, my General will give
the word when I must vent.


'Tis no great matter, if you throw away Cudnig^,
Or beswiggers, or some such innocent oath upon him.

Say you so?

When will he come towards me?

Sir may I know your name?


My name Sir? why Sir? I am not ashamed of my name Sir. My name is Sir M. Mung.
Sir. A poor elder brother Sir. And yet not very poor neither Sir. Heir to
six, or seven hundred a year Sir. My father is a Gentleman Sir. I have an
Uncle that is a Justice of Peace Sir. I can borrow his white Mare when I please
sir. She stood him in thirty pieces sir.


A Mongrel Sir?


Only be sure you be not dashed.


Ashamed of your name, say you? You come of a very great house, I'll assure
you; I know many of the Mungrels that are able to dispend, yearly, more then I
am willing to speak of at this ^ime; and which keep their Sons as
Gentlemanlike, at the Innes o'th Court wi^h as good clothes on their backs, as
rich belts, and as fair guilt rapiers, as the best Gentlemen of the Land Sir --
O well said, come lift up bravely now.


Tis a hundred to nothing, but these are they, look to your standing, and be
sure you suffer him to offer first; you have the more advantage.


Let me alone, if I do not utterly confound him, let me never wear good
suite of clothes more, I have not read the Arcadia for nothing.


Anteros, a co^pie of friends of mine.


Sir I shall count my self fortunate in their acquaintance; Sweet Sir --
worthy Sir.


Sans complement Mounsieur, Ie suis, vostre treshumble varlet.


There's one of his parcels gone, he has but three more in all the world.


Signior mio molto honorifico, per testa del mio padre, io non he altro,
advffirirui, che me stesso, pero fate capitale di me, e splendetemi per quel
chio vaglio.


Does he speak French Sir?


How think you Sir?


Nay but well I mean?


O admirably, take heed what you do, he's a great Travailer I tell you.


Gods me! is he so? I'll not meddle with him then, I would have tickled him
else.


Signior, io mi terrei ricco s' io hanessi solamente le decime de i vostri
favori.


Nay Sir I am not so well skilled in the language, as I could wish I were, for
your sake, I can speak a little Sir, Un peu, Monseur, tellement quellement.


May I be so bo^ as to bear your name Sir?


My name is Nodale Empty Sir.


An Inns other Court man Sir?


I have pissed in some green pots in my days Sir.


Wis. My name is William Wiseacres Sir. I am of a Sanguine complexion.


In good time Sir.


Very melancholy sometimes Sir.


Like enough Sir


Ha, he, he, he --


Ha, ha, ha, he, -- O my sides --


Gods my life! I should loose it all were my patrimony laid on it. Come on Sir,
brace me your invention to the height, you see your Antagonist.


To him, ferret him, ferret him.


Noble Sir may I be so ambitious, as to desire my name, to be enrolled in the
Catalogue of your well wishers.


I do honour the very shadow of your shoe strings.


Your mocked Sir, he wears boots.


And am wholly yours cap a pea.


Pox on 't, I made full account, to have had that next my self, how came he
by it trow?


What say you Sir?


I say Sir, that it is your best course, to take heed how you make a deed of
gift of your self, for fear some of your friends suffer for it, for the
Physiognomy of your boot, tells me, it was never made for you, I do not think
but you borrowed them.


And I say Sir, that it is better to borrow then to take upon trust, and never
pay, as many such gallants as you do.


Loueall, this heat is done, lets rub, and walk.


Agreed, Master Empty, take some pity on the Scholar, let him breath a
little, wilt please you walk?


I am your Servant.


Well done, 'twas smartly followed; but lets walk;


Ha, I don't think ne'er go Law, but I have seen you some where.


You're beholding to your eyes for that.


It may be so.


Loueall, look, look, look, another heate.


Don't you use sometimes about Stamford side?


Yes Sir, I have hunted, and hawked, there abouts Sir in my days, and been in
Sara's he^e too Sir, I was at the last horse race, Sir, when Veluet-heeles, and
Currants run Sir, I have some reason to remember it, I am sure, I was cheated
of twenty pieces there, I'll swear unto you Sir as I'm a Gentleman, and an
elder Brother, I'm a very fool --


Out you Nullifidian, don't let the Gentleman swear, tak't upon his bare word.


Nay Sir, I'll believe you without swearing.


Nay but conceive me Sir. I was a very fool (as I said before) to be drawn
in after that manner, I would fain see the best cheater of them all, gull me
of so much now.


Well sir, I desire your better acquaintance. I have the best wine in Town for
you, please you to accept.


Thank you sir.


I think you I are much upon a complexion. He, he, he, you have lost your
mayden-head. If it please you Sir to come to my lodging Sir, when you come to
London, I shall think my self very much bound to you, I have some pretty
books there to lend you, I have Aristotle's Problems in English, and Albertus
magnus de secretis, I, as I am a living soul.


Let's take 'em off.


Troth Sir you have a very neat suit there, I am much taken with the proportion
of your hose, 'tis a deep French Sir. I have a Satin suit to make shortly,
and I would bestow, some twenty dozen of gold lace upon it, if I could but
purchase the knowledge of such a Taylor as yours, I should think my self
beholding to my Stars for it.


O your walking faculty, it is the only thing, now adays your Gentlemen
practise.


Indeed Sir, I think it be time for you to seek out for a new one, for I
think your old one will trust you no longer.


Should you but see them walk in Paules, or in the Temple, with what a
ravishing garb -- you would admire.


He, he, you are such a merry man, but indeed I hold that Tobacco is very good
for Phlegmatic complexions.


Your hilt a little forwarder; very good, your very rapier speaks French; I
protest he shows in the graceful carriage of his leg, as though he had
been a man of forty plays, fifteen moutings.


Nay, I shall do well in time.


Gods me! you have stained your cloak sir, how will you do? I doubt the
Gentleman that lent you it will be angry.


Think you so sir?


Well, there's no remedy, I must go and relieve my Scholar. -- Sir, a word in
private, do you know that gentleman?


Yes sir, I have read Overburies Characters; he is a silly fellow in black, I
take it.


Well sir, how ever you dis-esteeme him, I could wish you would take heed of
him; I wonder he did not strike you all this while. Go to, I say no more, I
hold him to be the stoutest man of his hands in all this side o'th country.


Is he so?


Why he is sent for far and near by the valiant of the Parishes, to play
matches at football: I tell you he is the only Hammershin this Shire can
boast of; not a Serving-man can keep a leg or an arm whole for him, he ha's a
pension from all the Surgeons within the compass of forty miles, for breaking
of bones.


Nay for my part sir, let him be as tall a man as he will, I do not care a
(...) for him, (do you see) for I do not mean to quarrel with him, only I
make account to jeer him a little.


Well, take heed, say I.


Nay sir, I'll take your counsel, I'll go and fetch my rapier I left within,
and then let him do his worst.


Follow him, follow him, the exalted mushroome -- a whoreson butterfly, he ha's
nothing to jeer you for but your borrowed cloak and boots; and I don't
think but they be your own for all his talking.


No indeed, to tell you the truth, I borrowed them of a Bachelor of our
house, mine own lye in limbo at a Barbers shop for Tobacco.


But why dost not beat him man? Gods me! beat him.


Nay, I would have bin at him, but that I was afraid -- They say many of 'em
are very desperate fellows.


Faith, to do them right, there be many of' um that have run through the
discipline of a Bawdy-house, learnt to quarrel there, and have seen the
entrails of a Fence-schoole too, and in one word are sufficiently valiant; but
that proves not a generality. There are of them (I'll warrant you) as there
are of your schollers, some that wear swords, only to scare fools.


Nay sir, I would have you to know, that I am neither afraid of him, nor his
sword: but I would not willingly die yet, if I could help it.


Fear 't not man, thou shalt live I warrant thee, to see thy good name buried
before thee. Have you nothing about you to strike him with?


Yes, I have the key of my study door in my pocket.


O nothing better then that, follow him, to him, to him.


Shall I, in faith? shall I?


Never stand, shall I? shall I? but do 't.


Ne'er go, and so I will: I'll teach him to abuse any of our cloth again.


St, Mr Mongrel.


As I'm a Gentleman, and an elder brother --


But how now Anteros? what business is this?


Can you but hold your peace, and follow them
With your sweet William? nay, but will you go?
You'll loose the banquet if not presently.

O, O. --
Would I could loose my self, become a Mouse,
Or fly, that I might find a cabin here,
To hide my self from these same women. O, --
But I will climb this tree --

I wonder much
Where our two loving friends should lye so close;
There's not a place where they do use, but we
Have visited this morning. I do long
To give them this most pleasing spectacle:
But I will now search the Justice his house,
Perchance they may be there.

Endymion,
Another kiss; lo thus I will revenge
My self on those two frozen Lovers; thus,
And thus, and thus -- Revenge, how sweet thou art
Unto a woman!

O -- I am afraid
They will offend, commit, commit before me.

And can thou love me, sweet Endymion?

Behold a taste what I can do.

These kisses
Have not that masculine relish yet me thinks,
Which I enjoyed in the manly embraces
Of Lucius, or Neander.

It is strange,
Not one about this house that can instruct me
What should become of them, I wonder at it;
But I am glad that Constantina's flight
Is not suspected yet, so well that Boy
Does personate her.

Are they not there Placenta?

St; No. O yes your Uncle is at home.
It will not yet be dinner time this hour;
You may embrace another walk.

Content;
Endymion, will it please you to accompany us?

Why so then -- What again?

You'll leave your blubbering, Minion, come your ways.
You set your mind on such a man? yet more?
You might as well be in love with that same Sun,
And should as soon enjoy it.

He speaks high,
Pray heavens he does not look so high, for fear
He should descry me.

Father, I cannot last
Out two days longer without Anteros.

How's that? now all my stars be merciful!
It is a vision sure, this cannot be.

Come, you're a foolish girl, he marry you?
That day that he does marry you, will I
Bring back to life all that were dead before
The universal Deluge.

Nay, I'll help
You with a far better expression, sir,
That day that he does marry her, shall you
Become an honest man; a harder Province
Then to bring all the dead, to life again.

There are a hundred reasons (daughter) why
You should not hope it, first he hates all women,
Next if he did not, you that are deformed,
Lame, and misshapen, black, besides, ill mannered. --

(He does not see the wallet on her back.)
Have the lest cause to hope.

But there are (father)
Six hundred reasons, why I should love him.
His manly carriage, his full breasts, his hair,
And his fine clothes, his golden breeches, and --

His traitorous nose: I, I, 'tis that I know,
'Tis like the Ivy-bush unto a Tavern,
Which tells us there is Wine within; but I
Will take an order with you Sir e're long,
And have you par'd.

Well I will never leave
My crying (that's resolved) until I see him.

O! Could I commit a crime e're I was made,
Against nature worthy such a punishment?
It is decreed, I will unman my self, immediately.

What shall I do? tis strange --
Well, 't must be so: I will go seek Terpander,
And move him to this match: most of his lands
I have in mortgage, nay indeed they are
Forfeited to me, for the day is past
Wherein he was bound to pay in the money,
The advantage of this forfeiture, will I
Threaten to take, unless he does compel,
His son to take my daughter, to his wife.
Nay, rather then I will be disappointed,
He for a portion, shall have in his bonds,
Come daughter, be of comfort, we will go
Directly to Terpander, where I'll use
Such arguments, as shall enforce him make
His son both love, and marry you.

Like enough.
'Tis very likely Sir, but that this tree
Does not afford any such fruit, I'd throw
An old shoe after you, -- such arguments
As shall enforce him make his son, both love,
And marry you -- well how his pills may work
Which the old man, I know not: for my self
I will provide a quick deliverance.
Why shepherd? Stipes?
Go forward in this plot, of my disguise.

What make you there?


Why nothing Jack.


Come on, you are a fine fellow, to go and set them together by the ears thus,
are you not?


But have they done it finely?


Finely do you call it? why your Scholar ha's so mauld Mr. Noddle with the
key of his study door, made such a breach in his Pericranium, that without
question all his French ends have taken their flight, through that passage; as
for my cousin Mr. William, he's crept into an old hole, behind the hangings,
that in the days of old, he has been the Asylum, for decayed boots, and shoes
out of date, and there lies he, all alone, very melancholy.


Ha, ha, he, but how was my Gentleman, and my elder brother employed all this
while?


As Gentlemen use now adays, in swearing; when he saw that he could not draw
his sword, he ran up and down the room, and measured out the time of the
combat with oaths.


Death! that I had but seen this.


Would thou had: for I have e'ene taken a surfer of them. I pray thee let's
invent some way, or other
For to be rid of them, can thou not think?
Think, think, man -- think -- which I'll effect, unless
All that is called Fortune, doth forsake me.
See thou that brace of Cabins, on each side
My Vncle's house?

They are Dog-kennels I take it.


They are, no more, but see they come, I'll slip
Aside lest I be seen.

I wonder what
His brain is now so hot in travail with.

How now?


Lend me your hankercher, if you have one about you Cousin, mine ha's not a dry
place in it.


What do you bleed Mr. Noddle?


Yes Sir a little wild blood, hold that Cousin, un peu Mounsieur.


Did not you tell me, all his French ends were gone? un peu will not forsake
him.


Not a word.


A whoreson cowardly slave, to strike a man e're one was aware of him, and to
give one no time, to draw his rapier --


S'me, 'tis somewhat deep I doubt.


Nothing by Hercules Sir, a scratch, a scratch, well I'll say nothing, but by
this good blood, that runs --


Faith if you had done as that good blood does, Mr. Noddle, it had been better
for you.


No Sir, I scorn it, I am not of that strain i'faith, and that he shall
know, the sempiternall rascal.


Come on Mr. Wiseacres, I believe you and your Kinseman are much of a
complexion.


I am very melancholy at this time.


I but you must take heed of these fits, they'll spoil you, I heard say, that
you crept into a private, retired room even now, and there conversed with
spiders and crickets, fie upon it, you must labour against that humour; but
indeed me thinks your Cousin is of a very deep sanguine.


Ha, he, you are such a witty man.


Cousin? Yes I am much beholding to my Cousin; I might have been killed for him.


Come, come, I like him well for it, the Gentleman does weigh how much the
Republ. might be impeached, by the loss of a man.


Republi{que}? Repuddingpy. By this light, a man is little better then mad,
that will keep company with such snow-heapes, such white-liverd, counterfied
lackdawes -- but all's one.


I, I betwixt friends, and kinsemen; ye two are all one I know. Your Cousin is
very choleric now.


I but I am very seldom so, for Albertus Magnus faith --


Now the good Gods! where shall I find these most unfortunate Gentlemen?


Why how now Jack? what inauspicious wind
Ha's raised this cloudy weather in thy face?

O Anteros, we are undone, undone;
I'll have this day wear black in the Calender,
That after ages may beware of it,
It is so full of Omen --

Whats the matter? I pray thee speak.


O they be here, -- who's there?

Pray heavens it be not the Constables officious industry: how will you do
Sir? You have slain the Scholar.


I would I had else.


Nay Sir, this is neither time nor place for such idle wishes, here ha's been
a Surgeon already, that lives hard by, and his sentence is, that he cannot
live above two hours, he sounded six times since you left him, it seems you
bruised him so with falling on him, with the hilt of your rapier, that he
bleeds inward -- I know not what to say to it -- I was bewitched I think, nay
think, think, think what course you will take, you must be sudden, the
officers are sent for to apprehend you.


Is this in jest (I wonder) or in earnest?


Is he so indeed? I pray you tell me true Sir.


Why, what do you take me to be Sir? have I this for my love, and care of
your safety? as you sowed, so reap for me; I hope you will believe your own
senses, I think I see the officers coming.


'Sme! what shall I do? Mr. Loveall, nay good Sir, I do believe you, I know
not which way to take.


Nay there's no stirring that way, you'll meet them in the teeth.


What if I go through the back door, and take horse?


They'll meet you that way too.


Any thing, good Sir, I beseech you, look the door goes, I protest twenty
Sergeants could not have struck such a fear into me.


Well, will you trust your fortunes into my hands?


And lives sweet Sir.


Quickly then enter here, I'll shut you in until the search be past: nay
will you in? who's there? immediately, good Master William.


Nay sir, I'll go to my horse if there were twenty Constables, they have
nothing to do with me, for I am sure I did not strike a blow, no as I'm a
living soul. --


Gods me, what will you do? were not you in the company with him? that makes
you accessory; have you read so much law, and know not that? nay, will you in?
-- Ha, ha, he.


What sai'st thou now my Anteros?

What say I?
I say thou art an arch-dissembler,
A workman in the trade: By all that's good,
I should have been thus gulled my self, thou did
So smoothely act it, with such passion,
And anger at their incredulity.
I was afraid thou would have beat the fool,
Because he would not let himself be gulled
So soon as thou would have him, but stay now --
How shall we dress our other brace?

That province
Is yours; as for mine own, you see I have
Provided for them, and conveniently:
Yet if you will embrace my counsel, write
After the copy I have set you, do,
Behold a pattern, and see (happily)
A chest where Stipes in the days of old
Ha's kept tame Conies, now uninhabited.

Right, but I fear, 'tis not capacious
Enough for both.

'Tis nothing, look you here,
See you that fine spruce new erected hogsty
On the other side of Stipes house?

I do.

And do you see it may be pinned without?
Hist, easily, softly, I'll fill up the time
With some discourse, till you have framed your countenance.

Wu'd I might ne'er stir Mr. Mongrel, if I care a pin for a hundred such, an
Inns of the Court man quoth a? ne'er go, I think they learn nothing there, but
how to swagger, and be proud.


Nay Sir, now I must chide you, will you accuse all, for the default of some
particulars? by the same reason, I'll conclude, that all ye Schollers, are
coxecombes, because I see one that is so.


Meaning me Sir?


Meaning you Sir? pardon me 'tis mere injustice in you, I'll assure you Sir,
this whole realm, yields not better qualified Gentlemen, and more gently
parted, then many of them are, and to whom, the common weal is more indebted.


Because he has got a good suit of clothes upon his back (I'll be hanged if
they be paid for yet) and a ring in 's band string, to play withal when he
wants discourse, he thinks he may carry the ball on 's toe before him, and
that no man must dare to meet him.


No more Scholar, you have met with him sufficiently, why Anteros, when? and
here's a brave Pylades too, that would not see his Orestes oppressed by
multitude.


Arrest me Sir? soft, and easily Sir, more words to a bargain; s'duds! I
think my sword be mortil'd into a snail, shell. Arrest me Sir? As I'm a
Gentleman, and an elder brother, I owe no man a farthing that I mean to pay
him. Nay come Sir, I am fleshed now i'saith.


You will not quarrel with your friends Sir, will you?


Friends Sir? I know not whether you be my friend, or no; I am sure you use no
friendly language.


Prithee Scholar, tail off Mr. Mongrel a little, he will never leave now he
has drawn blood once.


Come, you're a fool; the Gentleman's of worth, and our friend.


Nay I have done now, I did but try how I could quarrel a little.


Faith Sir, this would have made a fair show in a Country Ale-house.


Nay Sir, as soon as my father dyes, (which will not be long I hope, for he
lies sick now) I'll go to Londorn, and learn to quarrel there, for a year
or two, and then come down again, and practise amongst my Tenants.


Why Anteros; pray thee releiue me.


St, not a word, for a million of worlds. Hark you Scholar.


I hope you are not angry?


Angry old Bully? he had a hard heart, that would be angry with thee.


'Tis as I tell you, his wound ha's been searched by a very skilful Surgeon,
and his Pia matter is found to be perished, and when that's gone, you know there
is small hope.


None at all Sir, I've read it in Magirus, Cozen Mongrel, come hither quickly
--


Now, now, how greedily the Scholar sucks it in.


What's the matter? but is this true?


As true as you're a Gentleman.


He never emptied a buttry pot after a match at footeball, with greater
appetite, then he devours this gullery.


Take heed what you do, the least protraction is full of danger.


O the Lord! what will become of us?


Loveall stir the door a little -- passion O me! there's some body at the
door, look, look, creep into this chest, I'll shut you in.


Any where good Sir.


Where will you hide me sir? I'll go into the chest too.


Here's hardly room enough for my self.


Stay, stay, stay. In good sooth Mr. Constable here's no such men this way --
what say you, you three-penny crack crown? I tell you, they have already
taken horse. Here, here, here, creep in, stoop man, stoop.


Ha, ha, he.
Why so, wee'r now at Liberty, farewell.
My sisters wrongs, and sorrows call for me,
And shall be answered.

Well adieu sweet Sir.
I must be sudden, or l'me lost for ever.
By this time sure my father melts (why shepherd.)
The ample benefit, that shall acrew
Unto him by this worthy match, this instant
Arrives at 's weather-beaten apprehension;
(I do but know it, am but sure of it)
O, what a dainty pleasant thing it is
For to be free from care! to sleep a night,
Without the dreaming of a Creditor,
Or the disturbance of that gobbling Forfeit!
It cannot but be so, upon my soul,
He trades in this same cogitation,
This very minute -- Stipes. che ti venga l' cancro.
Well, if he be above ground, I will find him,
Or loose my self, I'll seek him in the pastures.

But why
Do the winged minutes fly
so fast away?
Stop your course ye hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay.
For the earth could ne'er show forth
An object of a greater worth.

But why
Do the winged minutes fly
so fast away?

It is because that they which follow,
Crowd on to have a sight as well as they;

Hark how the ghosts of passed moments groan,
because they are gone:
And rail at Fate,
And curse the date
Of their short lives expired so soon.

Then stop your course, you hasty hours,
And solicit all the powers
to let you stay,
For the earth could ne'er show forth
An object of a greater worth.

Ha, ha, he,
I have discovered more then e're Columbus,
Or our own water-fowle, Drake: my pretty stripling,
Which I did take away from Stipes even now,
Is proved a woman, proved an errant Lady,
That is in quest after her errant Knight,
Who is enchanted. 'Tis the Niece (forsooth)
Of our good virtuous Justice, Mr Hooke,
Who has put on this habit for to follow
Her lover Cleopes, who has forsook her.
All this did she confess to me in private,
'Soone as she saw I had descried her sex
And name; but I have stayed her pilgrimage,
She's fast enough, I warrant her, in the noose
Of wedlock now, to stir in haste. No sooner
Did I read woman in her looks, but straight
I did command my maids for to unpage her,
And cooke her in her kind, in her own sauce;
She's pickeld now in some three yards of lawn:
Here she has it, and there she has it, fie, fie.
Was I a young man now again, and should
Venture on such a dish to carve, by'r Lady,
I should not know which side for to begin on:
Hardly distinguish breast from back. Well, well, --
Beshrew my heart the queens, where e're they had them,
Have hung good rags about her; sure they borrowed them.
This being done, I went unto Neander,
Told him, that I had got a Boy, and dressed him
Fit for his palate: he rejoiced, made haste
Unto the contract, and (as kind Fortune would)
That very time a good old merry Vicar
Of my acquaintance came to visit me.
I craved his aid, and (in one word) I brought her
Veiled, but first softened by a thousand threatenings,
If she but moved towards a discovery.
The good kind Gentleman thinking her boy,
And therefore in his power when ever he please
For to untie the knot, is before witness,
Contracted to her by the Vicar. -- Oh for Lucius now.
See where he comes; but yet how heavily!
How full of earth me thinks his paces be!
He looks as though his teeth had played this fortnight,
Kept Holiday. But I'll accost him. -- Lucius.

The Gods befriend thee, whosoe're thou art,
That I am thought worth naming yet, not lost
Unto all mankind quite, though to my self!

These words do savour of too much distractio'n.
You must take comfort sir.

Who 's that dares talk
Of comfort to me? But once name the word
That is exiled whole Nature? good Mr Lively
Wast you that spoke?

It was, and I must have you
Remove this same December from your looks:
I come to make you happy.

Thou art come
To loose thy labour then; I am below
Both all the love, and all the spite of Fortune,
She will not make me happy, and she cannot
Make me more wretched then I am. I lye,
She may do both. But speak thou reverend head,
Has ought that 's good befallen my Neander,
That thou dare venture out that name of happy
So confidently upon me? -- say.

There has,
But more to you.

What's that?

Good, happiness.

How? happiness to me? thou should have put
The space of fifteen ages 'twixt those words,
They are so far from reconciliation;
Thou hast no Grammar in thee, know no concord.

But I have Music in me, and that's better.
I'll make thee dance my solitary one.
Pandora shall be thine to day.

How? mine to day?

Thy wife, thy self, but in another character.

Vnspeak't again, it must not be.

It must.

Doest thou intend to buy me to thee? and
To break me and my fortunes with a courtesy,
Which I shall ne'er be able to repay?
Employ thy art then, all thy quicker plots
To further my Neander in his love:
Who by how much the more his virtues be
Greater then mine (who hardly have so much
As will redeem me from the name of vicious)
So much the more will apprehend the benefit,
So much the more reward thee.

Speak no further,
Pandora's thine, she's thine, thine own, believe.
He is already married to another.

I do confess that I am something fallen
Oft from that height of reason which before,
While I had liberty, I did enjoy:
But thou dost wrong me much, if thou dost think
That Love has eaten up all man in me.
I tell you, I do know your plots, your drifts,
And all your consultations, as well
As if I had had a cabin in your bosom,
And had from thence betrayed them; did not I
Hear when Neander did solicit thee
For to procure a Masculine Bride for him?
Did not I hear thee promise him to do it?
Hast thou not now performed it? are not they
By thy procurement now contracted? speak;
'Tis not so easy to deceive the eyes
Of Love, how e're our frantic Poets say
He feeds on nought but Lolium.

Lucius,
As I do hope to live, as I do prize
My lungs, my breath, laughter, and sack, (believe me)
I have Neander fast, he 's married
To one that is as truly woman, as
Was she that did produce thee, and because
You shall be certain of 't, 'tis Constantina.

But can thou utter this (without a blush?)
Or hath thy many years
Blocked up those channels of thy blood, that now
They are not able to afford that face,
(That starved face of thine, bankrupt of virtue)
The least relief? but I'll undo your plots.
Since you do force me, I'll confess a secret,
Which hitherto I'ue hardly whispered
Unto my privat'st thoughts. I am no husband,
No husband (mark you) for Pandora, nor
For any woman living; for kind Nature
Has stamped Eunuch on me from my cradle.

What do I hear?

That which is true.

An Eunuch!

But see Neander comes with his new Bride.

Why do you weep and sigh so boy? no more.

Do you hear that?

But see my Lucius.
I must quite alter my discourse, my garb,
And all my actions. Hence dull melancholy,
I now must find a face that must out-smile
A morn in June. Lucius, a thousand hails.

Unhappy Constantina! to whom Fate
Neither permits to live, nor yet to die.

Break off those sighs you peevish girl, or i'll -- not yet?

What means this strange and ponderous eye?
As though you were to take our Altitudes
Lucius? what? and do you smile? faith speak.
How doest thou like my Choice? perhaps you wonder
At this so sudden match; but (Friend) you see
What Love and a fair Gentlewoman can do.

I am the boldest wretch alive. It cannot,
Cannot be long before he needs must know her.
What will become of thee then Lively? ha?
You must be sure not to unvaile him Sir,
The boy would not be known.

What muse you on
So deeply Lucius? does your first sons name
You shall beget on the most fair Pandora
Perplex you now? come on, I'll answer for you,
He shall be called Fortunate.

Not so,
Rather that name belongs to you Neander,
That shall have no such care to trouble you:
For if my art deceives me not (fair creature
Your hand) this wife of yours is never likely
For to bear children, but on her back, or arms.

Why pray thee sweet?

Because in this little vale
That lies at the foot of Venus mountain, here,
I do discover something too much for mother.
Come, come, Neander, these are poor devices,
Tricks of the Scene, and stale, they will not take.
And you gray hairs, me thinks that thou should owe
A greater and more filial reverence
To the fair Ceremonies of the Church, then thus
To stalk with them, to make them stales unto
Such base ridiculous --

Lucius, do but hear.

I will not hear thee.

Here's a benefit
Placed most deservingly! I do not like it.

I do not apprehend him.

A fair gown
Indeed, and soap, and starch enough, to dazzle
The eyes of some young country heir, that has
Never been drilled through Drury lane, or Bloomsbury.
But 'pray thee (friend) whose daughter hast thou married?
What may she have to name?

What shall I answer?
I am in the briars.

Tell him 'tis Constantina
Our Justices Niece.

Most excellent dissembler!
As though you know not Constantina sir.

But is this Constantina?

True.

'Tis truer;
Somewhat then you do believe it is.

Is this
Jack Loveall's sister?

'Tis.

But is this she
Whom Cleopes once loved, and has forsaken?

O me! why do I live and hear that name?

Did you not mark that sigh? how smartly't came?
No, no, I have not fitted you, I have not.
'Tis a young Roscius I tell you. No sooner
Was Cleopes named, but the arch-villain sighed,
As if it had been truly Constantina.
I do not like this business yet.

Is this
That cried up wonder? that Fidelia?
A sudden change.

Yet at the last? 'tis well, I'll give the word
Unto Pandora: but with special care
That the boy knows not of his Masters presence.

What business is't that this same Midwifes face
Does fetch and carry thus about I wonder?
Hy, she appears again.

All health old man.

Old? and how old? but what's the news that you
Are rigged with now? and whither bound I pray you?

Next to that loving pair of friends, whose sorrows
I have lamented oft, and amongst which
I judge it not the least, that while ye two
Discourse in sighs, and tears, that wanton maid
That is the cause of all your heaviness,
Lasciviously does sport herself, and melts
In the embraces of an other.

How?

Regardles of your woes, or her own honour.

Now all the Gods! where is he?

Woman speak,
What is he for a man?

I know him not,
So far as to his name; but this mine eyes
Dare witness, tis a composition
Of blood and spirits not to be despised.
A feature able enough to tempt; besides --

Neander, whilst we strive about the shadow
We have the substance ravished from us.

Ha?
It cannot be, 'tas no affinity
With truth; It must not be belieu'd good Lucius.

Can ye retire your selves under this tree
A little, and expect? but e're I go,
Ye shall both promise as yee'r Gentlemen
To endure the sight with patience.

We will.

It is enough.

But does this woman gull us?
Or is it real think thou?

Hark.

No more.

Can ye believe it yet? are your eyes yet
Instructed?

Tis my boy Endymion,
Now hell and tortures!

Were all odours lost,
And beggared Nature had not sweets enough
To embalm the dying Phoenix left, from hence
From this same lip, She might restore her self.

Ah Lucius! must he not dye?

Neander,
It is a sacrilege unpardonable
To pluck him from that Altar.

Once more sweet --
Two pendant Cherryes when some gentle gale
Makes them to kiss, meet not with such a touch!

Villain, and Traitor dye.

O me! my Master. --

What do you mean? ah.

Alas. -- Sweet Gentlemen. --

Did all mankind inhabit in that breast,
I'd put the Gods unto a second trouble
For to create that species a new.

Woman forbear.

I do not like these tumults.
I'll get me home and drink a cup of Sack.

Neander, --
Lucius, --
Ah by that Monster of my love, your friendship,
Lucius, by these eyes of mine, which thou
A thousand times and more hast dared to liken
Unto the brighter star of Venus, which
Is both the Prologue and the Epilogue
Unto the glorious Sun: By thine own eyes
Which are two clearer stars, I do conjure thee
Forbear to prosecute such a revenge
Upon this innocent Boy: for here I swear
By all those blessed powers, which know our thoughts,
I never loved him.

Most impudent woman,
Did not our eyes behold it?

O Neander,
Why do we stand thus coldly here? and not
How out a passage through this prostitute
To travail to the just destruction
Of her base Lover, and my baser vassal?

Rather let all your fury end in me,
See here my naked breast employ your valours:
Why do you stand and gaze one on another?
What is the naked bosom of a Virgin
A spectacle of such terror? if it be,
And that the fight of it hath cooled your bloods,
Then hear me speak: you Lucius may remember
That ancient stock of love, those many vows,
Those many tears, those many longings, which
Have past betwixt us: nor can you justly stile it
A fault of mine, that Time is now so old
And yet does see us two; but partly yours
Partly my ^athers nearness (for I must not
Give it the name it merits, Covetousness)
Who seeing your so fervent love unto me,
Did strive to thrust me out with nothing, or
At least with such a portion, as you liked not;
Whilst thus I wavered, betwixt hope, and fear,
It fortuned, that this Gentleman Neander
Became your Rival* who had not long been here,
Not long solicited, but I (shame of women)
Began to love ye both, and which is more
I loved ye with an equal flame, (but see
What Pageants Cupid can play!) it chanced
(Contrary to all men's expectations)
That by degrees such a strong tie of friendship
Did grow betwixt ye, that each of ye refused
(For his friends sake) what then was proffered you,
My love; whilst I bewayl'd my miseries
Unto this Midwife here, my friend, and grieved
At this my harder fortune -- Good Placenta
Give them the rest.

Then take it in a word.
Supposing it the only way to win
One of you to her, I counsail'd her to fain
A love unto some other Gentleman.
Whilst we were busy in these Consultations,
As fortune would, your Page Endymion
Came hither (Lucius) to seek his Master.
We lay the train for him, she courts the Boy,
And he (poor Lad) thinking her serious
Was caught immediately.

But is this true?

Would I could call it false -- But otherwise
Then was expected hath it prospered.

Placenta, ah Placenta.

Who's that calls me?

Shall I disclose my self? I am ashamed.

If it be so, Pandora, we crave pardon.
And do restore him life; but now
If thou dost aim to reach a life so happy
So full of all content, that thou may fit
Within thy Sphere (like Venus) and look down
On all thy Sex, and pity them; love this man.

Love this man. For as for my self I am
Already furnished with a Mistress, see
My wife here -- Sweetest wife.

Is this your wife?
I judge her happy who so e're she is,

Believe him not, this is Boy, a villain
(Whom I, but that --)

Lucius forbear.

Dressed up
In woman's Clothes by that same dotard Lively.
Sweetest Neander leave.

It is a woman.

By all the gods, it is a boy, 'tis false.
But for to rob you of all hope of me
Give me but care, I am an Eunuch, if
You can endure to have a frozen statue,
Sleep by your side, whilst you awake, recount
The tedious minutes of your widowed nights
And sigh, and think, and think, and sigh again,
Behold an husband for you, I am he.

O me! an Eunuch?

Hold the Gentlewoman
Ay me! she swonnes, sweetest Pandora, ah.

What is the matter?

Ah good Lucius help,
She's gone -- alas good heart. What shall I do?

But see she breathes again.

Ah honey sweet
Pandora speak.

Ah!
Hands off thou out-side of a man; and thou
Vxorious creature, I do crave no aid
From you, forbear.

How does my sweetest honey?

I am not well Placenta, let us go
Into your house a while.

Please you fair Lady
To use my service?

How? Your service sir?
You can do nothing, nor do I expect it.
But if your love towards me be worthy, lend me
Your Page, but for an hour.

He is yours.

Then sir adieu.

Shall I be vanquished thus
In friendship? But I will once more to Lively.
And see what further counsel he will give me,
Fair wife let's go -- Rise up you villain boy;
Lucius farewell.

What is he gone? so soon?
To's Engineer I know, to his contriver;
But I will follow them so fast, that not
A syllable shall pass without my Knowledge.


In as a good a headpeece as yours, I warrant you that, for all your fine
clothes, Sands, I think my penny as good silver as yours, every day in the
week, I'll tell you but so.

A Maid of eighteen, to play with babes-clouts, well, 'tis no matter, Let
that pass though, go to, go to, 'tis an ill wind that blows no body good,
cry I, sure ^rose o'th right side to day, I shall have a servant by and by, and
a lusty Knave too, and here's the chincke, the chincke; as I was getting this
rod even now, for my wise daughter, comes me Terpanders son, the angry boy,
the smoaker of Tobacco, the whoreson which could not endure his mother, S^nds I
was afraid at first to see my self alone with him, he did so stare with'is
rolling eyes, and 'twas no force by'r Lady, for I had five good shillings in my
purse; But he to put me out of doubt salutes me most lovingly, as thus, Stipes
God save you, Save you Stipes -- no, Stipes God save you -- Stipes be hanged --
a blockhead, Sd^nds J doubt I should make but a scurvy Gentleman, I want the
trick ont. -- But let that pass though, I have the money here, and presently,
my man will come, which Anteros will send me, whom, if I have not paid me
every morning my forty brace of legs and caps -- no more.


Why so, I me fairly accoutred, as becomes a Shepherds servant -- But swig
for see my Master. Here must I quite disrobe my self of all my former manners,
garb, behaviour, and put the plod o'th Cou^try on. --


How now?
What jolly whistler have we got here trow?
Hi, hi, a dancer too? I, I, by'r Lady
For ought I know, this is the man I spoke of,
Or else if not, here's one could wish he were.
A sturdy knave, a lusty proper knave.
I like him well, he ha's a back for burdens.
You Sirrah, you;

What say you, you?


I say whom do you seek here you?


I seek a Shepherd you.


I am a Shepherd.


But I seek a Shepherd, whose name is Stipes.


I am the man you knave, you come from Anteros?


Yeas.


To serve me?


Yeas.


In good time, how now saucy Jack? how now proud, prodigal knave? where are
your twenty legs unto your Master? Go to, Go to, to work, begin, well said.
Anteros makes legs. 1.2.3.4 5 6. So, so, enough, I do forgive the rest. Turn
you about, um, um, a good squat fellow, a well quarterd man, By'r Lady, and if
he had but moans would make a pretty husband for my daughter Merda.


Has he a daughter? and are there women here? o o o -- O I am fallen from
heaven into a Colepit!


Why Merda, I say, my daughter Merda I say, the foolish girle's afraid I know,
go to, go to, I will forgive her. Merda I say. But you Sir Squire'oth' dog,
what is your name? Hy, which way look you?


My name is Ieoffry.


I, I, how now? how Ieoffry? a hard name by'r Lady. why when?


O I could creep into a catskin purse,
Endure the sent of a Court-fardingall
For a concealment now.

Good-hony-sweet-sugercandy Father, forgive me but this time, and if ever I
do so any more, I'll never be seen neither bide, or hair again.


Ho, ho, oho, ho a great lob, stand up.

I do forgive you, but on this condition, that for your penance you shall
wear this rod, stuck at your back till night.


With all my heart good Father stick it on.


So: how doest thou like my man Chuckin? go to, look on him well.


Does he come a wooing Father? if he does, I'll run away, and make him
believe I'm ^oy. --


Whither now you great baggage? You'll come again? But stay am not I an old
fool? an old dotardly fool, that have not enquired what my man can do yet?
Ieoffry. --


Is his name Ieoffry? Father, good father do, pray you father let him dwell
with us, you know you promised me, that you would hire a man, and buy him a
Cloak, that he might go before me as they do before Gentlefolkes daughters,
when my new gown was made, I that you did, so marry did you.


What have we now to do?


Peace and catch a mouse.


There's claglocks ^now 'ith house to make him a cloak Sweet -- honey -- sugar
-- comfit father let him.


No more. Ieoffry, how now you sloutch? how do you stand? Come hither, go to,
go to, did you ever wear a cloak in your life? answer me roundly.


No not I, I can't tell how.


Ah beggars brat! how now? but I must have you learn, that you may man your
young Mistress there sometimes. Come on let me see how finely you can do the
feat, walk before her, follow him daughter.


Here's a sweet office!


You great lobcocke you.

I'll teach you to look behind you, to see whether your charge follows, or no,
what? would you be gadding without your charge?


I, am I arrived at this? -- whoffer did you strike one?


Do you prate too? look you here, mark but me, I have seen the day, when I
could have stinged it before my sweet heart. -- short and thick citizen like,
you mankin, what? two acres breadth at a stride? I, I by'r Lady; I'll cut you
short in smock-timber, for this minion; is your smock so wide, with a murren to
you? short and thick citizen like: how now?


Hy, strike up brave boys, hy, for our town.


Hy, for your town say you? you are a company of lazy, lubberly knaves,
there's the short and the long on it, ho, ho, boys, ho, ho boys? what drabs
too? girls too? doxyes too? ye are a company of slowbackly Queens, there's
sauce for your eels.


Come Kate, croude on.


O, O, the whole torrent of all woman kind is broke in upon me, what shall I
do?


Cuds, cuds, these are Mr. Livelyes men and maids, that are come to dance upon
the green. Pray you Father let me dance with them.


^ou dance with them? you are a great princockly puplady; there's mustard for
your beef too, since you will needs have it; 's^nds I have been a wit in my
days, there's some relics left yet, go to, go to.


Oh Stipes! I pray you let your daughter dance with us a little.


Dance with you? pray you vpsolue me this question, what holy day is this?
Latter Lammas? or St. Ginnyes Even?


Come on brave Shepherd, our Master ha^ given us leave to trip it for an
hour, or two, I'faith we have had a wedding at our house to day.


A wedding? a wedding? what wedding? vpsolue me that question.


Between a gentleman and a gentlewoman, but what care we what they be.


Come on old Grummelseedes, what must we stand thrumming of caps all day,
vvaiting on your grave ignorance? by the faith of my body, either let your
daughter dance with us, or I'll make your old bones rattle in your skin, I'll
lead you a Coranto I'faith.


An Amazon, by heavens an Amazon, a Penthiseleia.


I, I by'r Lady? are you avis'd of that?


Pray you forsooth, good-hony-sweete-plumpudding father, vvee'l have but one
spirt I'faith law; Sellengers round in sippits, or put on thy smock on
monday.


But what flap-mouth'd fellow's that behind the tree there?


Now comes my Cue.


Who he? another gates fellow then you take him for, go to, go to, it is my
man I tell you.


But can be dance?


Oh in print, he trips it like a fayry.


Hy, hy, how now? what? tricks? how now?


How now young man? what so modest? come on, take me by the hand.


Take me Ieoffry. I'll dance with our Ieoffry, or else I won't dance at all,
no I won't, law you now.


I can't dance.


He's a lying knave, I saw him my self; to him, to to him, frolic it nimbly
whilst I come back; because 'tis his first day he shall have leave, my daughter
too, for half an hour, no more. Go to, go to.


But strike it out, we burn day-light.


Ah the Lord! but where's our Ieoffrey?


Cuds me! I doubt the great clowne's run away.


Whoo! he's got up into the tree there.


Where? where? oh cuds wowkers swowkers, I have him by the leg: Robin, help
here Robin.


What a murren ails you? can't you let one alone?


Come, come, you must needs dance, we want one.


Can't dance.


Can't you dance, my little shamefaced one?
Can you kiss a pretty wench in a corner?

Let one alone, I can't I tell you, I won't dance.


I but you shall sirrah, in spite of your teeth.


Pish, 'won't dance.


Come Merda, you must entreat him, he will dance with you I know.


Prithee now Ieoffrey do, prithee now good Ieoffrey do, wu'd I might ne'er
stir law, if I don't make you a bisning posset, with a great lump of honey
in it, when my father and mother be gone to bed, if you will.


Pish I can't dance.


Come let the great fool alone, we'll dance our selves.


Prithee now Ieoffrey.


What shall I say? you'll laugh at one.


Wu'd I was whipped if I do.


Besworn I won't.


Nor I on my mayden-head.


Come on then, since there is no remedy.


Hi, now every one kiss his marrow.


I ne'er was miserable 'till now


Ieoffrey, Ieoffrey.


Why don't you kiss your marrow?


I won't, I can't kiss.


No can't? we'll try that: Robin, hold his the other arm fast: so, so, now
Merda, now, well said, again, again; why so then.


They live in Paradise that thrash.


Tihy.


Tihy, Robin, come hither.


Those happy Paracelsians are in heaven,
That trade by night in the minerals of the city.

What do you mean to fight Merda?


Ay-me -- I forgot the rod.


Fie, why do you blush so Merda?


I don't blush, you are a liar.


Fie upon you Merda, a great maiden, and blush.


Awe, but you lye though, I did not blush, I won't dance no more with you.


O by any means do not forsake us yet, one dance more; who was it that said
she blushed? she did not blush, I know she scorns to blush; come take your
Ieoffrey by the hand again.


I'm weary, I can't dance no more.


Weary? faith I'd squiffe it; weary? about with it I say.


O lazy varlets! is this a time to dance? you idle persons; What will you
leave I say? look here I pray; does this same spectacle agree with turning
on the toe, or capering? go to, go to, fie, fie, ah my sweet lambs, I dare be
sworn for you, ye think no body hurt at this instant. Come hither you my
nimble skipper, upsolue me this question, what's your 'pinion must be done with
these?


Pish lets away, strike up, Stipes adieu.


Farewell Merda.


And you my ninny pease-straw-wispe that cannot kiss.


Stipes farewell, hey.


Stipes farewell? but Stipes cannot farewell, if his affairs go thus quite
arsy varsy; you whoreson crab-fac'd lyzard, you left-leg'd rogue, what is there
nothing else belongs unto this gear, think you, but only to stare on them
with your two sawcers of mustard? s'duds, either take them up quickly, and to
work about them, or I'll --


This is the second time; this once I'll suffer:
But by yon palace of the Gods I swear,
Let him but once more touch me with the top
Of his least finger, and I'll ram his trunk
Into the center: I have said it.

Are you muttering? you'll in with them, and dispatch them; go you home too, my
daughter Merda.


Um, um, um, you might have let one dance a little longer, so you might, so
you might; I am not yet hot in my geares.


Are you mumbling too? what my whole family turned rebels? s'duds -- I promise
you, I promise you, 'tis not my best course I see to beat my man thus often; a
surly knave by'r Lady, a surly knave, a strong knave too, I do not like his
looks, he has a vinegar countenance: but peace and catch a mouse, cry I.


But see, I will enquire; honest man, a word.


Honest man in your face, whosoe're owes you; 'sduds, have I nothing to do,
but to prittle, prattle, with every one I meet, think you?


What an unheard of rudeness have we here?
Are these the manners of the country? well.
This is the place, as I am told, wherein
That Lucius lives, who not long since prevayl'd
With his fair flattering speeches, for to have
My son Endymion to be his Page.
But oh ye awful powers!
I had no father in me should I suffer
Mine only son to lead a servile life
With one that is mine enemy, nay more,
The ruin and subversion of my family.
O daughter Isabella!
Whilst thy false Lover melts within the arms
Of his new purchased Mistress, thou (poor girl)
Embracest scorn and poverty, or else
(Which I do rather wish were true) cold death.
But I do hear,
Since my arrival, of some Country people,
That they have seen, some fortnight since or more,
A pretty boy, lingering about this village
Much about her stature, and complexion,
Which did enquire for a Gentleman
That was without a Page; this may be she,
Who for the love of Lucius, has put on
Some strange disguise. Whom cannot love transform?

Ha, ha, he.
Whilst the poor fly does sport her self too long
About the amorous flame, she burns her wings.
Her counterfeiting of a Love, is now
Turned into earnest. Endymion's now the man
She swears she loves; as for the other two
She has forgot their very names already.

Does not this woman name my son?
Let me see, is not this Endymion? it is he,
And with him a fair gentlewoman. Ha?

But tell me dearest, did thy Master Lucius.
Once love thy sister Isabella so,
Whom now he has forsaken?

Yes.

Behold
That treachery repayd him.

See, they kiss.

But what old Gentleman is this?

I'll show my self.
All health to this fair loving couple.

O, --

Why dost thou fly me?

'Tis my father, -- father
God save you.

Dearest son, my best of blessings.

How have you done sir, since I saw you last?

As well as one can do that has departed
With's only daughter.

Why, is my sister dead?

I know not that. But I am sure her credit,
The candor of her name is perished.

Good sir, as how? Instruct me.

Ah Endymion,
Since that most treacherous Lucius left the City
I have not seen her, only I hear of her,
But little to my comfort. -- But no more,
I have forgot her, and her folly both.
Prepare thy self (my son) immediately,
To leave this place and service; for thy fortunes
(How e're they were before, slender and poor)
Must not now see thee hold a trencher for
A better man then Lucius. Thy old uncle
As he lived well, in a seasonable age
Is gone into the grave, and by his will
Hath given to thee eight thousand pound, and three
Unto thy sister, (though unworthy) what
Else he was worth in lands and goods, is mine.

Pandora, kiss me girl, kiss me I say,
I have deserved it, 'twas my invention,
My plot this (girl) you are happy wench, you are happy.

Is this your father sweet?

It is fair Mistress.
Sir, I congratulate our fortunes with you;
But if you do desire to have my joys
Full and o'reflow their banks, grant me your leave
To marry this fair Gentlewoman.

Alas,
This is not in my power Endymion:
But if thou can procure her friends consent --

Sir fear not that, I will entreat my father.

As for a portion, 'tis not thought upon
My son, if you be pleased.

Sir, I am pleased,
She is to me most dear.

Placenta, run,
See if my father be within, -- I know
(Most worthy sir) that I shall win him to it.

But can thou tell no news of Isabella,
Sweet son?

No, none at all sir.

Ah poor heart!
But 'tis no matter, I'll forget her quite.
Where is thy Mr Lucius?

I know not.

Your father's walked abroad with Mis. Vrsely
Your sister, but whither, there's none can tell me.
As yet the plot concerning Constantina
Is not descried.

Most reverend sir, wilt please you
To walk into the pastures, peradventure
There we shall meet my father.

But I had rather
That I could compass that same villain Lucius,
That he might hear what he deserves.

Villain.

I am undone.

Ah me! Neander with his naked sword!
Ple run in here.

Ah!

Let's away good father,

O that thou had
As many lives as hairs, that I might be
An age in killing thee, that I might score up
Each passing minute with a life: -- But speak,
How durst thou thus abuse me?

I did not know
She was a woman.

No, did thou not know it?
But thou shalt know thy self to be a man,
One that can dye.

-- O -- O --

How poor is this revenge? hast thou any children,
Or kinsfolks (speak) that I may kill them too?
Ha? wilt thou not answer? how durst thou offer this?

Because I loved your friend Lucius
Better then you.

Better then I? that word
Does merit death though thou had been preserved
White from thy cradle to this hour. --
Doest thou love Lucius? ha?

Yes.

Live; no, no thou must not;
Thou might have killed my father, broke the urn
Wherein my mothers ashes sleep, far cheaper.
But for his sake, thus much I'll grant thee, choose
The manner of thy death -- shall I take off thy head?
Or had thou rather dye upon the point?
Think quickly, nay be instant.

Worthy Sir:
Let me entreat some little space to pause
I have not yet determined.

Well thou hast it. But see that it be speedy.

Most perfidious. Contemner of all goodness. --

Excellent.
Nay forward, on, we know you have a tongue.

Ha? is this Lucius?

Where is my Isabella,
Whom thou hast laden with disgrace? restore me
Her honour (villain) her good name.

I must
Defer my just revenge I see a little.
He must not know that I am angry, not
How I am gulld.

Thou base unworthy man.

Would you could raise your voice a little sir,
You are not heard.

Thou stain of all mankind.

Thou owe thy life unto my Lucius.
I am not now at leisure for to kill thee.

Nor I for to be killed for a trick I know.

Are you drawn dry so quickly, Mr Lickthumbe?
Have you no more good names in pickle for me?
Nay come in faith, let's have an other bout.

But is he gone? he must not so escape me.

Where is my daughter? where is my daughter, rascal?
Ah Isabella.

So: but Sir resolve me,
Have ye no Empericks? no Physicians
In the City, that you thus do send your mad men
Into the country to be cured? but Sir
I'll leave you.

But I will not so leave you.

You will not?

No, I'll be a torment to thee.

You will? but yet take heed that your ill language
Procures not me to turn Physician.
This sword of mine opens a vein but harshly,
Do you hear.

Have you a desire to see
The glorious heavens Epitome?
Or an abstract of the Spring?
Adonis garden? or a thing
Fuller of wonder, Natures shop displayed,
Hung with the choicest pieces she has made?
Here behold it open laid.
Or else would you bless your eyes
With a type of paradise?
Or behold how Poets fain
Jove to sit amidst his train?
Or see (what made Acteon rue)
Diana amongst her Virgin crew?
Lift up your eyes and view.
Why so then, now we are all alone. We? you great near,
What have you pig's in your belly? by'r Lady, If I wist
I had, I would not unkennel this secret yet, well if there
Were hog's in my belly too, I see that it will out;
This mouth of mine was not cut out for secret's --
O wicked servant! lewd daughter!
O Merda, Merda, thou hast lost thy self
For ever, thou hast defiled my house, my good name, my family. As I even now
came from my sheep, I found my daughter, at her nooning forsooth, fast a sleep
upon her bed, and there was she (as she uses often) campring to her self
alone in her sleep, 'scoursing to her self, but what was her 'scourse think
you? Not about her huswifery; not how many hens were with egg, but fie upon
you Ieoffry are you not ashamed? O! Ah! fie upon you Ieoffry are you not
ashamed to touch one by the skin? I'll tell my father (ne'er move) if you will
not be quiet. I, I by'r Lady, worse then this, worse stuff then this, what
shall I say? without all doubt this left legd-rascall has dubbed me Gran-father
without Matrimony. But peace and catch a mouse cry I, some wiser then some, old
birds will not be caught wi^h shaffe. I have a trick in store if it will take,
to be revenged sufficiently -- no more. Ieoffry, Why Ieoffry.

What gaping knave is that?


How now Ieoffry? know you not me Ieoffry? know you not me? But let that
pass though -- I'll be with you anon i'faith for all this geere. Come hither
Left-legs, come hither. Peace and catch a mouse cry I. Did you ever when you
were at your old Masters, learn to set a trap, Ieoffry?


Yes a mouse trap.


O sirrah, sirrah; but we must have to do with other gates kind of cattle, I
mean a fox trap Left-legs, come hither, come hither, look you here, and
learn, for this same night must I send you into the Pastures to inuit my fine
Reynold to morrow to breake-fast, go too, go too, he is something too
familiar with my Lambs, mark you that left-legs? A little nigher I pray you.
Help me to twist this Corde -- Well said, be a faithful servant Ieoffry. You
know I have a daughter Ieofry. Peace and catch a Mouse Ieoffry. You great
dunder nose -- Souds -- You'^e lay both hands to work -- A bots on you; you
hang on my back to see you. Your the other hand in, and draw behind thus, thus
look you here. Mutton well, that dips his bread in'th wool.
No less then your Masters daughter Left-legs?
Come on in troth, vpsolue me this question is she not tender?
is she not delicate? a pretty morsel? does she not relish well? a pretty
morsel? but I'll teach you sirrah to play the Mason, and lay your chips o'th
rock where you're desired Left-legs, where you're desired. But I am something
feeble through my age, And cannot longer hold out 'scourse with you,
Without my staff, without my supporter, sir,
I pray you do not stir till my return,
But let me find yeu here, I have some business,
Go to, go to, I have some business with you.



Nay 'tis no matter I deserve it all,
Troth I do hope that he will bast me soundly.
Beshrow his fingers if he does not, soundly.
I must be in my tricks, forsooth, my tricks:
Have my devices, and my turns, my changes.
But torment of all torments! here comes Loueall.
Why this is worse then five and twenty beatings;
O that some greedy vndertaker of lives
Would give me but a double Stiuer now
For mine, that I might cozen him. As sure
As Death, or Justice Hooks devouring paws,
I shall be ieer'd to death, immediately.

It is a strange dark melancholy this
That thus torments my Sister, I have been
An hour with her, and in all that time
Cannot persuade her troubled soul to form
The least air she breathes, into articulate language.
But stay what have we here?

Now it begin's.

A man tied to a tree?

I would your tongue
Was tied as fast; then there was hope I might
Escape with life.

What are you fellow, speak?

You may go look, go meddle with your own.

So angry 'pray thee? how came thy hands in mortgage?
Shall I redeem them?

Redeem your own land's I pray you,
Let me alone or else I'll spurn yo u -- yet
He knows me not.

Sure I have seen that face.

O, O, O --

Is 't he or not, ha? Anteros.

No more.
Death not a word.

But heaven and earth man! how
Comes this to pass? What has begot this change?

Wilt thou untie me? I will tell thee all.

But pray thee Anteros. --

But pray thee Jack
Thou wilt undo me quite by thy delays,
Wilt thou undo me?

'Tis not a friendly part.

Pox of that ieast, as common as a woman,
Or her Synonomy; wilt thou untie me?

'Tis done.

Thou art my Patron Loueall, So.
But stay a while, I must desire your aid
A little further.

What has he now in hand?

Can you become a peaceable man?

How now?
A Snake, a Snake; he's young again, ha, ha, he.
What? Pinks and Roses too? Why so, he plucks
June out of 's pocket.

Can you be quiet yet?

And Garters too?

That slipper* tongue of yours
I doubt will spoil all.

What? and a band? so, so;
The veil of Tempe's not so fresh, the picture,
The very picture of the Spring, when the earth
Lays by her freeze-coate, and turns Forester.

Thus far it prospers, once more your help sweet Jack,
Nay come, and take me that same rope again,
And bind me as I was before, directly
In the same garb you found me -- Do not stand
Gazing, but do 't.

Thou art not mad I hope?

If I be mad, I will not trouble you
For counsel, nor for Physic; nay wilt thou come?
But hold a little, I must first borrow of you
Your Hat, and Sword.

Which way this plot will look
I know not -- there -- come let me see your hand's
Since you will needs.

Why now you're right, you're right,

What will you have me do besides? come on,
Your legs too if you will.

No more, St. hark.
The Shepherds door. Trouble us not good Loueall.
Only stand close and hear.

What should this mean?

Fie Ieoffry, are yeu not ashamed, to touch one by the skin? My daughter
denies all this most stiffly but I will Ferret-claw my Lobcock i'faith. So, now
I am armed. Go to, go to, come you knave, where are you?


Ha, ha, he.


Ha? ha? ha? How now by'r Lady? How now? I, I by'r Lady? what's this? What's
this? gaudy? gaudy? Fine clothes? fine clothes? Ha? has no body stole my
eyes? let me be sure of that in the first place. Am I Stipes or not? ha? ha?
ha? Is this our Ieoffry or not?


Stipes, Stipes I say.


This is another voice an other face
Without all question this is Fayrie Ground;
My man is changed.

ha, ha, he.


St. Stip. hi, hi, hi. A swore too? a swore too? a whiniard too?


Stipes.


Well I will venture to speak what ere come on 't, but stay, I'll first say
over the charm my Mother learnt me.

Be thou devil gentle, or be thou devil cursed,
In the name of Saint Swithin do thy worst.
There's sauce for your Ecles what e're you are. Now see if I cannot shape you
an answer.


Come nearer to me.


Are you auis'd of that? older and wiser, Soft fire makes sweet Malt, No hast
to hang true men; come nearer quoth you? I am near enough already for the good
you'll do me I doubt, Come nearer say you? No good M. Devil I am very well I
thank you, go to, come nearer when you have a Swore, a Twybill?


My hands are bound man.


What will become of this?


St'. Stip. If your feet were bound too, I'll not trust you As long as you have
a Swore by your side, a Whiniard.


Do but hear me. Had not you a man to day called Ieoffry?


Yes marry had I; what say you to that now? Nay I'll keep my self out of your
clouches I warrant you.


But what's become of that same Ieoffry?


Become? become? 'spose I spurred you an answer, and said I know not, what can
you make of that now? make me a horsenaile of that.


Do you desire to know?


Yes marry do I. Crack me that nut now if you be a Gentleman Devil. --


I am that Ieoffry, but no servant now
Of yours, but mine own man: and am become
Since your departure, noble, rich, valiant,
Am formed a new out of the Mint, -- behold me.
And this great miracle Obron the Fayry King
Has wrought upon me.

Oberum? Oberum? you tell me strange things.


But shall I tel thee stranger things the these?


'Spose you did.


And such as shall be for thy benefit? --


Would you would else. Nay stare on with your gogles till Barley comes to six
pence a bushel. You know your wages, some wiser then some, cry I: I'll keep
far enough off you: I'll tell you but so. Go to, go to, I am a crafty colt.


You know I was your servant to day.


Well put the case.


Poor, ill apparelled.


Put the case the second time.


But now you see how strangely altered.


Well put the case again.


What will you say now to the man that shall
Pet you into the same condition?
Recover you from rag's and Russet, and
Dye you in scarlet: lick that rude lump your body
Into the shape, and garb o'th court? or (once)
Make you a gentleman as I am now?
Would you not thank him Stipes? ha? would you not thank him?

Thank him Mr. Ieoffry? I, with all my heart.


Set him at liberty then that will perform it. Quickly unloose me?


I, I by'r Lady? will you so Mr. Ieoffry? will you so? go to, go to, a
gentleman? said you me so? I con you thank Mr. Ieoffry.


So, now will I unfold the mystery.
But first you here shall promise me that you
Will take no prentices to learn your trade,
When I have taught you the art; you will impoverish
The herald's office, and forestall his market.

No truly Mr. Ieoffry.


I am satisfied;
See thou that tree? 'twas made for thy advancement.
Give me thy hands that I may tie them quickly.

Are you avis'd of that?


What do you mean?
You'll be prevented by another -- death!
Yonder comes one will be before you -- quickly
There's such a virtue (man) in this same tree,
That who-soere is bound unto it, shall
Be turned immediately to a gentleman.
Nay come.

but is this true?


believe your eyes.
Heart of my father, man! you'll be prevented.

A gentleman? said you me so? go to, go to, Ieoffry quickly -- so but stay.
When I'm a gentleman may I not use, my old trade of shepherd still? I would
not leave it.


O, and enclose; 'tis all in fashion.


I, I, by'r Lady? that's well, but stay again.


Nay you are like to stay now, I have you fast enough

'Sduds, if thou be a good conjurer make me a knight to. I have a pestilent
itch after a knighthood.


You must take gentleman first 'ith way.


Let me skip gentleman good Mr. Ieoffry, 'duds
I know knights in this country that never were
Gentlemen -- but vpsolue me this question? can you make
My daughter Merda a gentleman too?

A gentlewoman
Stipes I can.

I, I, so I meant it -- Merda, Merda,
A bots on you, Merda, are you dreaming again?

O for some nimble pated fellow now
To make an Ob'ron of.

I'll furnish thee.
There is a notable witty bedlam begging
At our back gate just now. I'll fetch him to thee.

If thou dost love me, do. --


Why Merda, you'll come when your nowne father calls?


What do you say Father forsooth?


That 's a good girl. Nay she 's towardly enough, shee'^ quickly learn. Why
do you stare so on Mr. Ieoffry?


What man is this Father?


Come you're a fool, let that man alone. We shall be gentlefolkes ourselves
my chucken, give him your hands to tie I say, be obedient.

Thou presently shalt see thine own sweet father,
As fine as he, and thou my little Sweet-lipp's
Shalt be a gentlewoman too, go to, good Ieoffry tie her hands.

How Ieoffry?


Good Mr. Ieoffry.


That's another thing.


Father forsooth shall I have as fine cloth's on as Mistress V^sly forsooth?


O! she's half turned already: forsooth and a curtsy at every word; Mrs.
Vrsely? thou shalt put Mrs. Vrsly into a pint pot.


O the Lord! pray you forsooth Sir who so ever you are do me quickly forsooth.


But here 's not rope enough.


Take off your garter quickly you Maukin you.


Here forsooth. And father, must I take place of my mother when I'm a
Gentlewoman?


Good.


Marry shalt thou goldy locks, and be a Lady, and contemn her.

Call her the good old country woman too.


Stipes, but one word more and then I'll leave you
Unto your new creation -- have you nothing
Within your house to cover you? the crows
Perhaps may be too impudent and saucy
With you, and now you can not help your self you know.

I, I by'r Lady? 'twas well thought upon,
Good Mr. Ieoffry step into my house,
You there shall find my cloak, use that.

'Tis of a swooping cut, but new be sure
You do not speak a word what noise so ere
You chance to hear, perhaps the fairy King
Will take some pause, study a while, consult
With his Queen Mab about you how to polish
And frame you of a purer shape then ordinary.
Do you mark that? St, not a word good Stipes.

Ah sweet Mr. Ieoffry.


Peace and catch a mouse cry I.


Come on brave Tom, come on brave Tom, Remember your instructions Tom.


Let brave Tom alone. Let brave Tome alone.


A most authentic rogue, how he does stretch it? paratragoediate?


Newly from a poach'd Trade, and
A broil a Viper, King of Fayry land
I Ob'ron do arise, to see
What mortal Fortune here hath tied unto my sacred Tree.

O Mr. Ieoffry, is that Ob'rum? Pray you let me see him. Obrum? 'sduds, he is
but poorly parrelled himself me thinks.


St. Stip. Peace and catch a mouse cry I, but once more good Mr. Ieoffry. Let
me have but Ieoffry does he use to give away his clothes when he makes
gentlefolkes? 'sduds I doubt he has none left for me.


What do you mean?


Peace and catch a mouse cry I.


Good father let me see Obrum too ^ah, he has a horne like a Tom of Bedlam.


Peace, I wu'd not for the best cow in my yard that he should hear thee.


Be thou ruder then was e're
The half excrement of a Bear,
Or rougher then the Northern wind
Came thou of a Satyrs kind.
Be whatsoever thou can be
So thou shalt remain for me.

Did you hear that Stipes?


I, good Master Ieoffry, stand farther you great baggage and make room for
your rathers' proaching greatness.


But see my father,

'Pray thee convey away the Bedlam any whether, carry him into your house
again and shoot him out at the back door.


Anteros, I'll leave you to your business. I'll in and fetch an other hat. Come
bra^e Tom. 'Bed, Let brave Tom alone.


The Justice too, 'tis so. Now am I hunted for about a wedding.


Terpander, you have heard how much this match
May both concern you and your Son, your fortunes:
The greater part of your inheritance
You know is mortgaged to me, nay
If I would use that rigour of the law
'Tis forfeited and past recovery;
Think therefore quickly, if you would be free
From all those cares and troubles which afflict
Such as do live in debt, compel your Son
To marry this my daughter.

I am a witch,
A witch, a witch a rank, stark stinking witch.

It is an ample dowry I confess,
And little 'tis agreeing to my nature
To buy a husband at so dear a rate,
But I have something that sounds father in me;
And must not loose a daughter, if there be
A remedy in nature. True it is,
That (by what angry Deity I know not)
She has so fixed her love upon your Son,
That I do think nought but a quick fruition
Can rescue her from a death.

Good Justice Hooke,
I do confess your offer's fair, and would
Accept it willingly, but that --

But what?

I fear my Son will not agree unto 't.

Sir had you taken an oath upon the same
I would have borne your sin, had you been perjured.

You know he hates all women.

very good.
Is he not yours, and under your command?
We fathers make our children refractory,
By being too indulgent over them;
Besides, I am persuaded that his virtues
Will not permit him for to contradict
The authority of a father.

O ye Gods!
Can ye permit this Villain to profane
The sacred name of Virtue thus, who himself
Is nothing elss but a mere heap of vices?

I ever yet found him obedient,
Nor do I doubt to win him now: how ever,
I am resolved if he in this shall cross me,
I'll disinherit him immediately.

I? is it come to that already? well
Prepare thy self now Anteros for the encounter.

But see your son. Tis your best course at first
To accost him gently.

How now my son? how fare you?

I am not well sir.

How not well? your colour
Does not proclaim you very sick, but say.

There's something in my eyes that troubles me.

What's that?

A mote, a woman.

After the old fashio still?
Come on my son, I have bin seeking of you,
And peradventure you may guess the cause.

I would I could not.

Hold up your head my daughter
And summon your best looks into your face.

As I did walk even now into my pasture,
I did begin to think.

That I was old,
That must be next.

That now I'm struck in years.

Good, struck in years;
And could he not as frugally have dispatcht it
In that one word of old?

And --

That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before I dye.

That it will be a comfortable sight
To see you married before my death.

I told you so, it is the common road
Which they all use when they would pin a wife
Upon the son. I wonder all this while
The staff of's age, propp of his family
Did not come in.

Whilst I was thinking thus,
Old justice Hooke, a Gentleman of rank,
And of a family not to be despised,
Came to me with his daughter, and desired
Our friendship and affinity; and to be brief,
We have concluded 'twixt ye two a marriage,
Which must be present; as for the portion,
He has promised in the wedding fire to sacrifice
The Bonds wherein our Lands stand forfeited.
A thing beyond my hopes, or your deserts.

A pox upon that thumb under the girdle,
There 's mischief ever toward's: I never knew
One of that garb that proved an honest man.
'Tis the grave cheating posture of the city.

What's that you mutter to your self? come speak.

I am contented sir.

Well said my son.

But upon this condition, that it shall
Be lawful too for me to sacrifice
Unto the aforesaid fire a certain trifle
Of mine.

Whats that?

My wife, your fair daughter.

Out on you traitor.

Sir, by yea and nay
It cannot be afforded cheaper.

Wretch
And profane person.

Sai'st thou so thou villain?
Hast thou no more regard into thy father,
Nor to his shipwrecked fortun, that thou thus*
Doest study his undoing plot his (...)?

But father, if I marry her to day,
When must the wooing be? to morrow sir?

Thou shalt not need to woo her Anteros,
She is thine own already.

Is she so?
Would you was hanged sir for the nowes.

Pish, dome,
I will not spend an article of air
Upon him more -- good Mr Hooke lets go,
The following hour shall see him no son of mine.

O, mildly sir.

It is determined
By all the stars, they have consulted, plotted
To make me miserable.

Come Terpander,
You are too harsh with him, I know your son
Does more esteem of Virtue and Religion --

Good Master Sucriledge, a word in private:
(A little farther, yet a little farther)
How came you by that strange exotic word
You used but now? had you're on interest?
Or was it lent you gra^ of a friend?

What word good Anteros?

Religion,
For I am sure yet thou never had,
Nor ever wilt have any of thine own.

O profane person!

This once I speak it.
Wilt have his daughter?

What shall I answer him?
I shall be dis-inherited that's certain.

He melts, Mr Hooke, he melts, I feel him coming.
He is our own.

But why so suddenly?
Good sir, at least give me some time to think.

Never hope it.

But why sir to day?

Because it pleases him it most concerns.

Do but defer it till to morrow sir,
(Could I obtain but this request, I was happy,
I'd keep to morrow in another world)

Until to morrow? not for an hour: I know
Your disposition son too well for that.
I have you now, but where you'll be next day,
He 's wiser then your father that does know.

But father, I beseech you hear.

But son
I will not hear, I tell you. Master Hooke,
You here do give your daughter?

Willingly.
Anteros, receive thy loving wife.

How now?
You will not urge me? -- go too, do not do it.

O that mine arms are now at liberty!
O Stipes, happiest man alive, thou hast
No hands to make a contract, -- is there never
A Mouse-hole hereabouts to creep into?
But stay a while, my paper portion.
The writings.

Take them.

You're an honest man.
Tis right.

Now take your wife.

I wish you a Barber sir.
Is that fair Edifice yours?

It is my son.

Gooder and gooder still; my son? then take
My counsel sir, go to your house and purge,
You will be mad else presently; prevent
The current of the humour, for I see
(With that poor little reading which I have
In the volume of man) by your distempered looks,
That some strange deep, and conquering Melancholy
E're long will seize you: why do you follow me
Thus with your braided ware? nay never frown,
Good Mr Justice, let's have no Warrants made,
Nor Mittimusses with your distorted looks;
We have a forehead too, and can look grim,
And make as ugly and prodigious faces,
As the most ignorant Justice of you all.
But shall I tell you (sweet Mr Velvet-hose)
What I will do, because you were so kind,
For to deliver in the Bonds for nothing?
Nay sir, I must transplant these thumbs, before
I can resolve you: so. -- Thou 'rt a damned rascal,
And I will cut that throat of thine (do you mark?)
And when I'ue done, will fillip that morsel, woman,
On an embassage to my Hawks, no more;
By heavens I'll do 't.

Oh Traitor, Miscreant,
Daughter take heed; Terpander, O Terpander,
He threatens me to cut my throat.

How's that?

Sir, you must pardon him, the man is mad.

He swears he will make hawkesmeat of my daughter.

On my virginity sir, he does me wrong;
I did not charge a syllable upon him,
But fell as coolely from me as a dew.
Upon a drooping field; each word I vented
Was steeped in an hony-combe. I did but bid him
In a plain, civil dialect to provide
An other husband for his daughter: for
I doubted that I should not be at leisure
This brace or two of years to marry her.
And I may tell you sir, indeed I cannot.

O, O, am undone, cheated and gulled, undone,
Villain I'll bind thee to thy good behaviour.

I would you could sir, I would thank you for it:
But fie M. Hooke, a head of that silver dye,
A beard of such an honourable length,
For to be gulled? and so egregiously?
By a young man with ne'er a hair o'ns face?

Come son, I do not like these courses, nor
Do they become a Gentleman, I'll not have
That contumely dwell on our family,
That we should use such indirect proceedings
For to reedify our tottering fortunes.
By all the Magic in the name of Father
I do conjure thee; by this aged head,
And these gray hairs, by thy dead Mothers Urn,
By all her cares and fears, by what is dearest
Unto thy soul, I charge thee, take his daughter.

Without all question I am the first, the first
That ever piety has made miserable.
Well Master Hooke, you see what may be done,
What angry spirits a man may lay, while he
Does stand secure within the circle of father.
Your daughter I will have; only know this,
There is another thing which belongs to her,
Which I must have too, that's the Parsonage;
'Twas ever yet allotted for her portion,
And I expect my right.

How? woe is me,
I am undone.

Before I stretch forth a paw
Towards her, i'll have it.

Father, good father let him,
He will go back from his word else.

Well, he shall have it.
Hold: by the virtue of this writing, it
Is lawful for you (after old Liuelyes death)
For to present the first Fie, fie, fie, fie.
I had this drawn (alas) for another end.

My law does tell me it will do. Come on,
Since there's no remedy, let's even to it.
Yes hangman, I forgive thee heartily,
'Tis but thy office.

Come Terpander, we
Will keep the wedding, at my house, but hear you?
The cost and charges shall be yours.

Agreed,
Most willingly. Follow me son and daughter.

Come husband Anteros, will you play at chackstones
With me?

Follow, follow, follow, follow,
I will be there immediately: nay go.

So, I have made a fine days work of this: --
Well, there's no remedy, it must be so.
But I must take my leave in form: Farewell
Ye chimney gods, protectours of our family;
Stipes.

A bott's upon you, that same tongue
Of yours must needs be wagging.

Indeed Father
I did not speak a word, no that I did not.

We must begin again now for your tattling,
Did not the Gentleman command us silence?

Stipes adieu, I am exceeding sorry
I cannot stay to see you a Gentleman.
Spruce M. Noddle, even adieu to you.
Good M. Mongrel, kind Sir Hammershin.
Sweet M. William, I am Melancholy
To part with you as I am a living saule.

Why whether in such hast?

To banishment.
My name is written in the oyster shell;
I am too happy in a wife Jack Loueall,
My fellow Citizens do envy me.
Farewell.

In troth I thank you heartily,
I hope you'll first deliver back again
My Sword and Hat.

By my best wishes Jack
I thought not of them; 'pray thee take them to thee.

I will take thee my little Cupid-whipper.
You must not go.

Let me alone good Loueall,
Doest thou not hear how with an even gale
That Southwest wind murmers amongst the trees?
Within these four and twenty hours I may
Touch on the Belgic shore.

The Belgic shore?
What wilt thou do there man?

I'll trail a pike,
Turn Lanceprezado, or Bedee, or any thing
To patch up a wretched life.

You'll turn a coxcomb.

I never shall endure to live a husband
The very name of wife will turn my stomach.
I shall have threescore vomits in a day.

What wilt thou say now Anteros if I set thee
As free from this same marriage, as the child
Which ten months since was but an Embryo?

Thou can not.

I can do it, fear it not.

Thou can nor man, 'tis past recovery.

What wilt thou give me if I do effect it?

Give thee? I'll sacrifice my self unto thee
My Iupiter, build up a Temple for thee
Shall take the heavens from Atlas shoulders, and
Give him a Iubile for ever -- Speak.
He shall be at leisure all the rest of's life,
For to catch Butterflies -- But you do mock me,
Farewell.

But stay.

Do but effect it Jack.
And I will straight make war upon the Turk,
Give thee his Diadem and Sceptre -- Speak.
The Persian shall be the Master of thy Horse,
The Germane I will make thy cup-bearer.

Ha, ha, he. And so I shall have all my drink drunk up,
Thank you for that.

Nay wilt thou speak, or else
Let me be gone. -- The Dukes of Italy
Shall be thy footboyes.

Here's a brave promiser!
Why this out does the Court; but dost thou hear?
How wilt thou do all this?

Nay 'troth I know not,
But I will do it, and let that suffice.

Well then be silent. -- Placenta the Shepherds wife
Soon as she heard a marriage was in motion
Betwixt my Kinswoman and your self, came running
To me in hast, and cried what do they mean?
It is not fit, nor can it be (unless
That they will violate the laws of Nature)
That Anteros should have this Gentlewoman;
I ask the cause, the Midwife answers
Because she is his Sister.

How? my Sister?

And is it possible that this is true?

True.

Stay.

Nay will you hear with patience?
Or else --

as silent as a midnight minute,
Or else a Counsellour without a fee,
I'll stand and hear, and suck it in, and --

Yet?

I'ue done.

Then hear; it seem's that Dorothaea
My Uncles wife, some seventeen years ago
Supposing she had been with child, provided
Such necessaries for her, as a woman
That is in her estate might stand in need of;
'Twas famed about the Country: but at last
She found her self deluded by a tympany,
But fearing lest she should prove the table talk o'th country,
Takes counsel with Placenta for to feign
A birth, and to that end employs her
(Being a Midwife) to procure for money,
The Child of some poor woman new delivered.
At the same time it fortuned Anteros
That your mother cried for Innos help,
Which she obtained, and was delivered
Of this your Sister, whom when she perceived
To be deformed, and distort; at length
She was or'ecome by the Midwife for to part
With her new purchased Infant, t'was agreed,
And the birth straight given out to be abortive,
And which is more, believed, and for to colour
The matter over the better, they did bury
An empty coffin. In the mean time your sister
Was secretly conveyed unto my Aunt,
Who presently did feign to be in travail,
And was delivered in conceit of Her,
Who but a while ago was called your wife.
T'was not long after, but the brace of mothers
Did travail both together to the dead,
And left my uncle a supposed daughter.
You have the history.

And with it heaven,
And immortality: O Loveall, Loveall;
By all the Deityes I could embrace thee
For this thy happy news, were it thou a woman.

But whats become of all your promises?

O tis a taste, a spice of greatness, Jack,
To promise.

And to perform just nothing.

You do not hear me say so. What's the matter?

But see the wooers are discarded quite
My uncle beats them out of doors.

You villains --
Out of my house ye brood of caterpillars. --
Son of a hedge and Moone-shine; go -- fie, fie, fie.
O misery beyond -- come out you rascal,
And bring your piping nose along with you; --
A fire upon this hollow ruff of yours,
'Tis like your heart -- out rogues, and ruffians --
O I am undone. --

Ha, ha, he. Loveall, these men are mine;
I am the Patron of the living now,
Dost thou see this?

I heard as much within.

I will behave myself most scurvily,
Like to some surly crabbed Patron now,
That has some 6, or 7 tired horses tied
At ^ door. How now?

Patron.

What says my Client?
Loveall, I pray thee catechize this box,
There's good stuff in 't I warrant thee.

Good Patron.

Hear me Sir, I'll dispatch it in three words,
This is a tedious Ass, and reads nought
But English Treatises.

Sir, will it please you
To take particular notice? --

Sir.

But Patron --

Patron.

Who! now the sent grows hot, 'tis rank,
The game's in view. Haup, -- rate them there -- no more
You Sir, that are the ring-leader of this rout. --

Kings be profane.

'Sdeath! what a pack of rogues
Are got together here? what is your name?

Zealous Knowlittle:

Zealous Knowlittle? good;
Of which University?

Of both the Universities.

A very likely thing: good Mr Knowlittle
Separate your self a little from the people.

With all my heart, I'll separate.

Your name?

My name is Tempest Allmouth sir.

How? Tempest Almouth? where are thy brains man?

He has not any.

Bear him company.

What have we here? Item, to send forth tickets
To all the Brethren that do inhabit
Within this Shire, to give them intimation,
That M. Mother-tongue stands the first of June.

You that are next him?

Arthur Armestrong sir.

You there Collosse?

My name is Stutchell Leg.

Troth, and thou art well underlay'd indeed,
A couple of foot-ball players I warrant them.

Item: -- a pox upon it, here's bawdery,
I'll rake no deeper in this puddle. -- so.

And what must we call you?

Ganimede Filpot*

Thou should be a good fellow by thy name.
Come on; what glorious title I beseech you
Has bounteous Nature fixed on you: nay open.

My name is Hugo obligation.

How? Hugo obligation? 'pray thee Loveall
Is not this shorn beard villain the precise Scriveneur,
Would fain turn Priest?

The very same I take it.

Meddle not with me

Nay do not hold me.
A whoreson Inkebottle, and two skins of parchment,
Dares he hope for my sister, and a living?
You slave, are Parsonages in this age so cheap?

'Pray thee Anteros.

Do not entreat me Loveall,
He dyes: this hat is not more mortified.

'Pray thee be quiet.

Hang him, a death's too good
For such a rascal. -- Sirrah, 'le cut indentur's
Upon your skin. And here's another Villain,
Whose very countenance speaks Serving-man,
Filpot come hither.

Nay but Anteros.

Death man! our Universities do swarm,
They have more Schollers then they know to spend
While they are Sweet: and must such Rogues as these,
Whose height of knowledge, is to spit and snuffle,
And talk some 3. hours non-sense, shoulder them
Out of their places? what is 't that makes so many
Of our quick witt's turn Iesuits, and forsake
Both their Religion, and their Country think you?
Sirrah no more then thus, lye and thou die.
Have not you been a Serving man sometimes?

Yes truly sir, I'll not deny it, I was
A gentleman's butler once.

I told you so.
The very chipping's hang in's eye-brow's still.
His face unto this instant minute shines
With broken beer that was his fees, stand by,
And do not hope so large a benefit
From me as to be killed, live, live, unhappy.
You M. know little know you whose box is this?

Truly 'tis mine, verily.

Away you stinkards,
I will be visited no more to day.
Avoid I say. Have I not done it well?

Oh no, you want the pawles, and the hums,
And the grave thumb under the girdle too.

Oh, that's for old living brokers, I'm a young one.

You must indent then with them, for to keep you
Some hounds or cocks, and get a handsome wife
To entertain you.

A wife? a thunderbolt
Is entered me, 'pray thee no more.

How now?

And get you packing too, thou old impostor,
With your distorted puppet here; and you
That make the custardes quake where ere you come,
Thou enemy to sweet meats.

Mr. Hooke
'Twould relish more of wisdom if you did
Bear out this matter coolely. Come my daughter.

O me! the very boy's will laugh at me.

Anteros salute your sister, and embrace her.

I am undone again! what shall I do
Loveall?

What shall you do? why kiss her man.

Sister god save you, -- and as much to you
My never-to-be-hereafter father in law.

Woe's me! what shall I say? what shall I do?
I have given in the mortgage, and without money.
But what new spectacle is this?

Whats here?
How? the dead body of a gentle-woman?

Is this Neandur?

Hold the cut throat fiddlers
Whilst we do bring this gentlewoman before the justice.

A kind and loving husband sure, that has.
Made a fair hand on's wife thus the first day.

Ha? what is this I see? O traitorous eyes:
Can I believe ye any more? my sister?
Constantina?

How's that?

It cannot be.

'Tis she. O partial heavens! but yet it is not,
'Tis not long since I left my sister safe
With in her chamber, and in another habit --
By all the powers 'tis she -- I do profane
The god's; it is not she, it is not. -- once more.
The twins of Leda were not half so like.
I'll be resolved immediately.

Good M. justice,
I pray you hear me. As we did dance even now
In your North field, we found this gentlewoman,
Lying all along (as to say) even quite dead,
And this her husband with his naked sword
Standing hard by her.

Another riddle yet.
Her husband? ha? Why is not this Neander
One of the rivall's in my daughters love?

Ander, or Pander, we know not that,
But 'tis her husband, that wee'r sure of
Is he not Robbin?

I that he is our Edward,
We both were present when they were detracted.

Subtracted you fool. But as I said before
Seeing him stand so desperately with his sword
We stole behind him, and so caught him.

A valiant act believ't. Good sir, let's go.

Ah Constantina, ah good heart! was this
The journey you intended?

Sir, I beseech you --
We shall be poisoned with these women's sighs
'Tis worse then a Germayne hot-house.

Anteros
Stay, we will see the end of this.

Fie, fie, Hell is broke loose upon me: all her furies
Are come at once t'assault me.

Ah Cleopes!

She lives again, O miracle of women!

Where art thou Cleopes?

Oh hated name,
Enough t'infect the world, but that it comes
Out of those lips.

Speak Constantina.

What have I to do
With light or heaven? I will not live.

O me!
She swounds again.

Why do you rub her head
And face so much, you foolish woman you?
Let me alone, I'll find her wound I warrant you.

Forbear, or I'll find that swines face of yours.

I am too bad for hell, they'll not receive me,
They are afraid I should infect those souls,
Those virtuous souls which do inhabit there.

Art thou not softened yet Neander? Ha?
Had thou an heart cut out 'oth Diamond rock,
Sure this would melt it.

O my Cleopes!

What will you give sir, and I will let you
Shift for your self?

What thou deserve villain.

Half part, or else she shall not go.

Take half.
I will divide my gifts betwixt ye -- there.
Thou Temple of Virtue, fairest Constantina. --

Oh I shall die again if I see him.

But will you live if I do presently
Make a divorce betwixt you and Neander?
And place you in the arms of him you so
Love, and adore, your Cleopes?

You cannot.

You're all divinity, indeed I cannot.
See where Pandora comes; but now I can.
Behold my Lucius.

Nay, I will still persist to follow thee
Basest of men.

Good father.

Suffer him;
His tongue has learned the palsy from his hands;
Alas he's old, and must be pardoned for it.
But what imports this multitude? and see Neander
With his Boy-bride. Pandora, sweetest Lady --

An other tempest! where shall I shelter me?

By all the joys in Love, by all the sorrows,
By all his Roses, and his Wormwood, take
Thy thoughts from me, and let them doubled fall
Upon my friend Neander. -- Fairest foul,
Do but contemplate that most curious frame
Of man, in what a pleasing harmony
Nature has married all those provinces
His limbs together: view but his sparkling eye,
And read divinity there; look on his hair,
Survey his face, and fee how Majesty
And sweetness there do strive for victory,
And still the issue's doubtful.

Lucius,
Thou shalt not overcome; disguise farewell.
O thou that art the shame of all thy sex,
Fair Constantina, yet not half so fair
As virtuous, here behold thy Cleopes;
Neander's vanished; why do you wonder so?
I do confess I loved that Gentlewoman,
And for her love I took on this disguise,
And here for thine I put it off again,
And on my bended knee do beg my pardon
For all the wrong I'ue done thee

Cleopes!

It is a miracle: but the bonds, the living.

O heavens! 'tis he, most happy Constantina!

My Cleopes? grant me some respite joy
Before thou kilst me -- Oh my Cleopes!
Whom do I embrace? into whose arms am I fallen?

O constant virgin!

But how shall I hereafter
Give any credit to my senses? O
Placenta, courteous Midwife, pray thee tell me,
Where am I now? in heaven?

Bridle your passion.

Am I my self? or do I dream all this?

Lucius, take truce with wonder, I am Cleopes,
And I do hope though now I wear that name,
As dear to thee as when I heard Neander.
You may remember when as first the beauty
Of fair Pandora did attract your eyes
To wonder, and to love, that I was then
A busy wooer unto Constantina:
But so it pleased Cupid, that while I
Drew out a languishing and luke-warme suit
To her, the vigour of Pandora's beams,
(As doth the Sun unto our culinar fire)
Did quite extinguish that same petty flame.
Thinking it vain t'attempt her in that shape,
I presently did take some discontent,
And feigned a journey into Belgia,
And not long after took on this disguise,
And returned hither; where I have remained
Your Rival, and capital friend together:
And (which I wonder at the most) unknown:
You have my Metamorphosis. But sweet,
How came thou 'pray thee, unto Mr Lively?
And by what tricks did he inveagle thee
Unto this contract, since thou did not know
That Cleopes was there invisible?

My better Genius, you shall hear within
The story whole, it is too tedious
To be told here.

But now Pandora, why
Stand you so dully here, and do not fly
Into his strict embraces, who alone
Loves you, and who alone deserves your love?

Do I love her? do I deserve her love?
Hast thou (sweet friend) for me forsaken her,
Whom thou did prize above thine own proper soul?
And now hast married her whom thou did fly?
And all for my sake, and shall I thus repay thee?
But for her love thou ne'er had been Neander;
And but for mine had been Neander still;
Friend Cleopes, or if thou wilt Neander,
(Under both titles most beloved of me)
Was she all Venus; did each hair of hers
Fetter a Love, were there as many Cupids
That hovered o'e her head, as there be lights
Which guild yon Marble roof, by them I swear,
By all that's Sacred, by what ever flies
The touch of mortal eye, I swear again,
I would disclaim her and her love for ever.

Troth Lucius, I do pity you, that do^
Spend so much breath unto so little end,
What need all these deep protestations?
I care not this for all your love, nor yet
For your friend Ianus there with the two faces;
Nor do I think ye men.

So quickly?

Yes.
I do confess I am a woman; see,
Here is the man has won what ye have lost;
Stout soldiers sure, that when the City gates
Were open to ye, durst not enter in.

O Isabella, 'tis for thy sake I know
That all these miseries do happen me.
(Forgive me good Laurentio) Isabella,
At length I have experience what it is
To love an outside, the mere bark of woman,
And to forsake an inward virtue: but
If once I have thee in possession more --

Follow me Witch, devil, strumpet, prostitute.

Ah whither will he drag me? oh my heart!

What have ye done with my dead sisters body?

Thy sisters body now has got a soul.
(O my sweet Cleopes!) most welcome brother.

But doth she live then?

And so happily,
As I have called it impudence to wish
What I do now enjoy.

Whom do I see?
My daughter Isabella?

But is this Cleopes?

I dare not look upon that wronged face.

It is, and now thy sisters husband.

Brother,
All health, all happiness.

More then all to you,
Good Cleopes. -- But dost thou live, my sister?
Why wast thou dead but now?

Thou shalt hear that
Some other time.

See thou that virgin?

Yes, it is my sister Isabella.

Peace.

I am undone! my father, and my brother.
Sir, I beseech you pardon what my love,
And younger years have trespas'd.

Rise my daughter;
Joy will not suffer me for to be angry.
See thou that face?

It is Endymion
My brother. -- Brother, God save you.

Sister!

Thy Brother? 'tis thy traitor that I mean,
That has undone thee and thy name.

'Tis Lucius.

Sir I beseech you do not hearken to him.

No more.

A pox upon this honesty,
It will undo us all: 'tis ten to one
But that his tender Conscience will persuade him
To pay in the money for all this.

Fair soul
Can thou forgive thy Lucius?

Can thou love
Thy Isabella?

Give me a man dares ask
That question? Good Laurentio let me crave
Your liking and consent.

Consent? to what?

To marry this your daughter.

Marry my daughter?
No perjured wretch.

Sir I beseech you grant it.
O Lucius! O happy hour!

Thou hast her,
And with her such a portion as shall please thee.

I will not hear of Portion, she her self
Is dowry enough to me. -- O Isabella!

What? Is the Players boy proved woman too?

Father.

I say trouble me not -- the mortgage.

Sir I beseech you hear me.

Fie, fie, fie.

And let me have your approbation*
In this young Gentleman for my husband.

O.

Perhaps sir you may doubt of his estate,
But if you'll credit me, I can instruct you,
I am his Father, he mine only Son,
And (I do thank my stars) our fortun's are
None of the meanest. Speak Sir, will you give
Your daughter here, without a portion?

Without a Portion? take her what ever thou art
So, So, that care is past yet, this a little
Help's out with the other losses.

Master Hooke,
You shall not frown, since all things here do smile;
To morrow I will pay you half your money,
So you will grant me a general acquittance;
'Tis in my power (you know) and I may choose
Whether I'll pay a farthing, but no more,
(There is a thing called conscience within me;
And) you shall have it: therefore be frolic Sir.

Thou art an honest man. Ye are all honest, ye are all honest.

All this while have I
Employed mine cares about this business.
Now show thy self, and of what house thou come.
All health to this fair company -- much joy --
Much happiness -- and a young Son to you;
Are you at leisure for to kill me yet?
You see I'm come again.

Let me embrace thee
Thou instrument of all our good.

Yes, yes,
I was a fool, knew nothing, knew just nothing,
Could not divine a whit, not tell, not tell,
How this same gear would come to pass, not I;
How do you like your Lively now? your Lively?

We will discourse of that within. Terpander,
Sir will it please you follow? you my Son,
Gentl'men you're all my guests to night. Me
Think's I am grown Pestilent kind upon the sudden,
The Music too, we will be merry, come,
Nay come, come, take me while the homours hot.

Loueall, a word: nay troupe on, let them troupe.

The news?

Faith nothing but to take my leave,
Bid you far well.

Why so? I pray thee stay,
You'll in I hope.

What among such a kennel
Of women? no, adieu.

Nay preethee go.

Not for the Fay'ry Kingdom.

Mr. Loveall,
Sweet Mr. Loveall.

Anteros.

How now?

As I am a gentleman, and an elder brother, I am almost choked.

Sweet Mr. Loveall, O Mr. Loveall. 'Tis utterly against my complexion,
To lye here any longer.

Death! our fools,
Our dish of buffles: as I hope to prosper
My thoughts had lost them quite.

I thought not of them.

Good Mr. Loveall are the officers gone?

Anteros, Anteros, is the coast clear yet?

But how shall we dispose of them?

Weed best
Barrel them up and send them for new England.

A pox there's fools enough already there.
Let's pickle them for winter Salads.

No;
They are not capable of Salt, man; rather
Let's get some broken trumpet, or old drum,
And show them to the people from some strange
Beasts out of Africa

Father, my gown is not silk yet.

A bots on you.

Hark, there's another egg sprung, my shepherd and his fair daughter.


Loveall, Mr. Loveall, I am of a sanguine complexion.

Anteros.

Now all the world! what shall we do with them?
But stay, a word, -- perform it, I'll take order
To uncase vm' to your hands. --
Now quickly Nodle, all is quiet now, --
Come Mr. William -- Not a mouse is stirring --
Safe, safe, all 's safe. Ha, he, he.

I'ue spoiled my clothes quite, would I had a brush;
How now? wee're gulled.

I, as I am a living saule. -- mark the end on it.

Who have we here? does his ghost walk?

We are all gee^'d I perceive it plain now.

Who's that? Mr. Mongrel? is the Scholar alive again? I should have been
very melancholy to have been hanged as I am a living saule.


If I could get my raepier and a brush,
I'd steal away.

Would you have a brush? I'll brush ye ye villains,
Nay, Mr. Loueall told me what dusty companions ye were,
And that ye wanted brushing, and how ye bad
Abused my husband, and my daughter, tied them
To a tree, come one your ways, want ye brushing?
Ye rascals, I'll brush you, would ye be brushed*
Come on, lets see what covered dish ^'haue here now?
Hy day! you lubberly knave; what Madame Gillian too?

What? is she come now to trouble us!
My daughter, I do charge you on my blessing
Look scurvily upon her.

Yes forsooth Father.

Call her not Mother darling, but disclaim her,
She is no wife of mine, she does conspire
Against our gentility daughter, and she lies;
Call her the plain old woman, sweet-lips, do;
I'll bear you cut in it, do as your father bids you.

How now?


But forsooth father, my neckercher is not turned into Gold yet.


They are both mad of a certain.


I am a gentleman, and I will be a gentleman, I will enclose, and I will raise
rents -- I will be a lower-house man, and I will be --


An old cox-combe, and you shall be beaten.


But does this stand good in law?


Fear not that; I'll find an old statute for it, doubt it not. You are a
gentleman? and you will be a gentleman? I'll make you gentle enough e're I have
done with you.


O, O, O.


And you my sweet lips that will not call me mother, but look scurvily,

Come on your ways I have the common law on my side too for this.


Oh mother, I'll never be a gentlewoman more while I live, nor never talk of
gold neckerchers, no that I won't truly.


Yes, you shall be a Lower-house man, you shall; I'll take you down a Pin,
you're too high now.


O, O, good wife -- O, O, honey wife.


You'll in?


Buzz, peace and catch a mouse cry I.


What is my Scholar returned? prithee go in Jack Loveall, I'll change but
two words with him


You have abused me Sir, and go to the fence School with me if you dare, or
else wr^stle a fall with me.


He give thee satisfaction my rowser
My Hit-her better, nay put off these frowns;
What say thou to my sister, and the Living?
I know you have heard the news from out the Cabin,
And you was once a Suitour to her; speak,
Will that content thee? come you are not the first
Has got a Parsonage with fooling Sir,
I will procure it for thee, fear it not:
Nay spare your Hat, it will be tedious,
My thanks shall be in Oats.

But Master Ieoffry.


Follow Jack Loveall in.


You know I was your Master to day.


Well put the case.


Poor, and ill parell'd.


Put the case again.


But now you see how strangely altered.


Put the case the third time.


Are you avis'd of that? I'll ne'er trust winking beast again for your sake,
I'll tell you but so. Did you not tell me that Obrum would make me a
gentleman? Obrum? Obrum? if Obrum has no better tricks then these, let Obrum
keep his tricks to cool his porridge, 'sduds I looked every minute when Obrum
would have put a green scarlet suite upon my back like yours, all to be
dawb'd with spingle spangles; and in the mean time comes my wife with a black
and blew home spun of her own making. Well that same Obrum is a sembling cony
catching knave, and I know what I could call you too, but for your whiniard,
and your staring goggles.


Stipes, no more, advaunce thy duller eye,
Know thou what all those blazing stars portend?

I, I, by'r Lady? how now? 'sduds I think forty Obrums have been here,
(Master Ieoffry is that Obrum that makes gentlefolkes, a Taylor?) one Obrum
could never have painted them thus.


PEace profane rudeness; what alteration's this?
What mean these bended Knees? but are these women?
Am ^a Convert then? so suddenly?
Surely some Power greater then all that Sex
Is interposed, veiled in a female outside,
Else how come I so supple jointed, that
Before was stiffer then the Rhodian Statue?
There is an Homage due, and I must pay't
Spite of my proudest nerues. Most Sacred Goddess,
Behold a Penitent, that falls thus lowe
Before your feet: as you have shown your self
More then a Mortal, in converting me,
Confirm it by your Pardon; 'tis a Virtue
No less deserving, and as near to miracle.
And You great Monarch, that the world may know
How nigh a Kin to heaven and all the Gods
You are in blood and power, confute that bold
Erroneous tenent, prove the Age of Wonders
Still to endure. What I have promised
Unto this Shepherd (as a miracle)
To be performed by Obron and this tree,
Do you effect; make us all gentlemen.
Which one Kind ray sent from Your gracious eyes
Will do, and in that confidence we rise.

