THE NOVELLA, A COMEDY.

Acted at the Black-Friers, by his MAJESTIES Servants, Anno 1632.

WRITTEN By RICHARD BROM.

Hic totus volo rideat Libellus.
LONDON.

Printed for RICHARD MARRIOT, and THO. DRING, and are to be sold at their Shops
in Fleet-street, 1653.

The Scene Venice.

SHould I not speak a Prologue, and appear
In a starched formal Beard and Cloak, I fear,
Some of this Auditory would be vexed,
And say this is a Sermon without a Text.
Some think it so essential, that they say
Nor fool, nor Prologue, there can be no Play.
Our Author's unprovided, and doth vow,
What e're I say must stand for Prologue now;
Then have at wit for once, why may not I be
Inspired with wit, and sense extempore?
But first I'll tell you, that I bad commission
From him to tell you that he will not petition
To be dubbed Poet, for he holds it fit,
That nought should make a man a wit, but wit,
Hee'll 'bide his trial, and submits his cause
To you the Jury, so you'll judge by Laws.
If Pride or Ignorance should rule, he fears
An unfaire trial, because not tried by's Peers.
Faith be your selves a while, and pass your vote
On what you understand, and do not dote
On things 'bove nature or intelligence;
All we pretend to is but Mirth and Sense.
And he that looks for more, must ee'ne go seek
Those Poet-Bownces that write English Greek.
Our Author aims only to gain you laughter,
Which if you won't, he will laugh ^ you hereafter.
COme, I protest i'll have you home again,
And tell all to your Father, if you go not
More cheerfully on about this business.

O Piso I dearest (dearest?) only Friend,
That Name of Father tis, that checks my blood,
And strikes a filial Reverence through my Soul;
Lays load upon my loins, clogging my steps,
And like an armed Angel warnes me back.

So, so, he runs away to proper purpose
That bears his Hue and Cry in's conscience.

It is not yet day-light: night will conceal
My secret purposes. I will return.

Do so; and damn thee blacker then the night,
Thee and thy Father too for company
Express your filial Reverence so, do so.

Dear Piso peace.


Peace fond Fabritio.
Dost thou not fly from him to save his Soul?
His and thine own to boot? will not thy stay
(Stay not to answer me) ruin your Family;
Cut off all hope of Blessing, if not Being
Of your Posterity? and all this by obeying
A wilful Father in a lawless Marriage;
More fatal (I foresee't) then ere our State
Of Venice yet produced example for.

O now thou tear'st my very bowels Piso,
Should I consent (as I dare not deny
My over-hasty Father) to this match,
I should submit my self the most perfidious,
That ever shadowed Treachery with Love.
No, my Victoria, sooner shall this steel
Remove thy hindrance from a second choice,
Then I give word or thought, but to be thine.

Why fly we not to Rome then, where you left her,
And shun the danger of your Fathers Plot,
Which would not only force you break your Faith
With chaste Victoria, but to wed another,
Whose faith is given already to another?
Double damnation! 'Twere a way indeed
To make your children bastards of both fides.

Can there no way be found to shun the danger
Of this so hastily intended Marriage,
But by my flight, and the most certain loss
Of mine inheritance?

That would be thought on.


Stay; who comes here?


Some Night-walkers, that throw
Balls at their Mistresses, well of all Cities
Under the universal reign of venery,
This is the civill'st! in what sweet tranquillity,
The subjects pass by and salute each other!
Stay, what grave beast, what reverend Gib is that?
(In the name of darkness) dropped out of a gutter?
O age what art thou come to!

Pray forbear.


Look there Fabritio, Venus can it be?


Come you're deceav'd.


Nay now I know I am not,
For by that little loving glimpse of light
That leads him on, Fabritio, tis thy Father.

I pray thee peace.


What will this City come to?
A young man shall not shortly venture to
A vaulting School for fear he jumpe in the
Same saddle with his Father, to the danger
Of his old bones.
Stay here comes more. This is
Some special haunt! sure tis the habitation
Of the Novella lately come to Town,
Which draws the admiration of all
The Rampant Gallantry about the City!

They say she's yet a Virgin.


And is like
So to continue, still she prove stale fish,
At the rate she's stamped for: for she has set
Such a large price upon her new nothing,
That Venery and Prodigality are at ods
About her, it seems thy Father could not bargain.

Fie! 'twas not he.


Not he! peace and stand close.


Is she so rare a Creature, this Novella?


Rare? above excellent (man) it is unpossible
For a Painter to flatter her, or a Poet to belly her
In aiming to augment her beauty: For
I saw her that can judge.

Now if a man
Were to unkennell the handsomest she Fox
In Venice, let him follow these dogs. Sure
She is earth'd hereabouts. They have the sent.

You have not seen her often?


Only thrice
At Church, That's once for every day, that she
Has beautified this City.

What rare help
May this be to devotion, that he speaks of!

And all this Beauty, and this seeming virtue Offered to sale?


I thought 'twas such a piece.


Thence only springs the knowledge of her worth
Mark but the price she's cried at: two thousand Duccats
For her Maidenhead, and one months society.

What a way, now, would that money reach
In Buttock-beefe.

She is indeed for beauty,
Person, and Price, fit only for a Prince:
I cannot think a less man then the Duke
Himself must bear her; and indeed 'twere pity
That she should sin at less advantage.

Why do we then make way to visit her
By our expense in Music?

A wary whore-master: I like him well:
A penneyworth for a penny would be looked for.

Why Francisco? Why?


Francisco! is it he?


Although her price be such to be sold for
In ready money, she is yet allow'd
To give herself for love if she be pleased.
Who knows how well she may affect a man
(As here and there a Woman may by chance)
Only for virtue? That's worth our adventure,
But I wish rather we could purchase her
At the set price betwixt us for a twelvemonth
Our friendship should not suffer us to grudge
At one another good turns.

There's love in couples,
What whelps are these? sure this Francisco is
The late forsaken lover, betrothed to Flavia
Whom now thy Father would so violently
Force thee to marry.

Would he had her Piso.


O here they pitch, stand close, we'll hear their Music.


Come sad Francisco, we'll to morrow see
This Miracle of nature, whose mere sight
Will wipe away the injury thou sufferd'st
In Flavia; and make thee quite forget her.

Tis he, and I will speak to him.


Good forbear.


Francisco must not so forget his Flavia.


What are you?


Men, that would have you be so,
And not to wanton out your holy vows
Dancing your selfes to th'Devill.

What do you mean?


I mean, Francisco, you too much forget
The love you bore to Flavia, she to you,

She has forsaken him, and is bestowed
(Forced by the torrent of her fathers will)
On young Fabritio, Pantalonies Son.

Here stands the man denies it, speak Fabritio.


Not that I undervalue Flavius worth,
But not to violate her faith by breach
Of mine, were all this signiory her dowry
(Here is my hand Francisco,) i'll not wed her.

I must embrace you sir.


And Gentlemen,
My Lodging is not far, please you retire,
And there repose your selfes until the light
That now is near at hand, shall point you forth
A way to future comfort; you shall find
Good wine and welcome, please you to accept it

Your offer sir is large: yet let me ask
If we may rest securely for a day;
Lurk close and private, till the appointed hour
For this forced Marriage be over-slipp'd,
In case that our necessity may require it?

I understand you, Take mine honour of it.


Be cheard Fabritio, thou shalt not to Rome,
We may prevent thy danger nearer home.
Now night we thank, and follow thee away
(As being thy servants) from the approach day.

You conclude well, lovers and sprights are
Night-walkers, warned away by th'morning Star.

Whilst yet the Leaden fingered god of sleep
Keeps close the eye-lids of fantastic youth,
Feeding their acry fancies with light dreams,
Of wanton pleasures; giddy, vain delights,
The ever watchful cares of aged Parents
Throw open the gates and windows of soft rest,
Making our midnight noone, to guard and order
The wholesome fruits of our continual labour.
VVholsome and happy off-springs of my pains
Thus I salute you and implore your safety,
And thus that you may rest, grow and increase
Mine eyes prevent the breakers of your peace.
But see the morning hastens to relieve me!
Day spreads apace, and warmes the provident hand
Do out the useless taper. Hoe! what hoe!
Nanulo! Astutta! is it midnight with you?

Your servants are all here and ready sir.


About about, you drowsy headed drones,
Where is my Daughter?

Up and ready too sir.


Sirrah haste you to Pantalonies house.


The rich Magnifico?


Who else, you Rat?
Tell him I do attend his coming hither,
To expedite the work we have in hand.

It shall be done sir, please you give me passage.


Here take the Keys; lock the door after him
Then call my Daughter to me.

See she's here sir.


Flavia my Girl, see how my early ^r^
Provides for thee, The toil of many years
By daily travail, and my nightly watches
Lies here in readiness to build thy for^une.
And take it willingly, since thou consentst
To match unto my will; whereby this Coin,
Thy self, and both our joys may find increase.
I can no less then thank thee Flavia,
Although I must confess, my suit was long,
And grievous to me, ere thy childish will
Yielded to my appointment of a husband:
For whom (with no small joy I speak't) thou did
Cast off (indeed) the off-^cum of his blood
The poor, degenerate in fortune, fellow,
I scorn to name him.

Alas my Francisco --


By which thou gain'st the Nonpareil of heirs
In all this wealthy City.

Sir tis not
The Riddance of the one, to gain the other,
Both which are equal blessings unto me
Can ad unto my present happiness
More, then the thought of your paternal wisdom,
Whose provident care was author of this good:
Chiefly to you I therefore wish the comfort.

It will be so: I find it my dear child
For though thy joy I know will be abundant
Mine must exceed, that includes thine with it.
Why smile thou Flavia? to think how dear
Thy Hymeneal day, to morrow is?

No I could weep for that.


How! ha! whats that?
This money's mine again, and thou art not
If thou dost wish one days procrastination,
Degenerate brat, changeling --

Dear Father -- Father --


You have seen thy last of happiness: all content
From this black minute, and thy self are strangers.

Sir, I beseech you hear me --


Get you in
I'll mew you up where never Sun shall show
Into what endless misery i'll cast thee;
Nor any sound bring succour to thine Ear.
To call thee back from torment.

Sir, -- dear sir --


My self will be your Keeper, Cook, and Carver.


Indeed you will be sorry.


Sorry! for what?


For the mistake you run away withal.


Did thou not say thou wept'st, because to morrow was come so nigh?


So nigh and yet not come sir,
Fearing how many dangerous hours are thither.

Ha! I begin to be now sorry indeed.


Loves Minutes, sir, are days, and hours are years,
When each protracted, multiplies our fears.

Now I am sorry with all my heart; and here's a
Thousand checqines to expiate my trespass.
But do not let thy husband know of them
Till he redeem a fault to their full value,
Oh mine own Gi^le, my honey, honey Girl?

Was not I si^ applauding of your wisdom,
And giving you the glory of my comfort
In this approved match?

Thou did, thou did,
With tears of joy I must confess thou did.

Had you but heard me out, I had magnified
My fortune, sprung out of your providence.

Speak yet, and I will hear attentively.


First then, how first your admirable wisdom
Weighing how I had settled my affection
Upon Francisco excellent in parts,
Of noble blood, how ever low in fortune,
You gave your free consent (knowing your estate
To be a portion fitter to restore him
Unto the dignity of his Ancestors,
Then to be added to another Mu^k-hill)
That I should be his wife --

What's this you say?


Nay dear sir fly not off.


Well, on then, on.


I say you gave consent, that I should be
Wife to that noble Gentleman (pray sit still sir)
As you had foreseen my future happiness
Only in him consisted -- sir until
This wealthy heir, young Fabritio,
You Neighbour Trades-mans Son, of great estate,
Was by his father tendered unto you
For me a husband, then unseen by me:
But since I must confess a proper man,
Worthy a fitter Wife --

Sweet Modesty.


But that your wisdom needs will have it so,
By reason that his heaps may purchase honour,
Which to'thers wants can never wash away,
But farewell him: I must look this way now;
And crown your wisdom with this closing point,
That whereas I betrothed was to Francisco,
And Pantalonies Son unto another,
(A Lady as tis justified at Rome)
You force me on this man, the fittest husband
On whom to make my party good hereafter,
Who shall not dare to upbraide my breach of faith.

And is't not a sound policy my Flavia?
But now no more; old Pantaloni comes,
I take it. How now! dos he not come?

Signor Pantaloni, sir, entreats you
Meet him on the Rialto instantly,
That you may go to the Advocates together.

It is my Flavia interchangeably
To seal your Marriage covenants; make thee happy,
Look to my house and havings; keep all safe,
I shall be absent most part of this day,
Be careful Girl, thine own special good
Requires thee to it: and therefore I dare trust thee.

Happy success attend you sir, whilst I Rest here in prayers for you.


Thanks my child,
Come sirrah lock the door. But first (dee hear)
Beware that none have entrance in my absence
Except Fabritio, Pantalonie's Son;
Or such as I have warranted, look to it.

With due respect.


Come lock the door I say.


I, I, be sure of that, and I could wish
My thoughts were prisoners too: that they might fly
No further then the casement, or the wicket;
Where they (loose things) get out, and nothing bring
Back to this heart, but cold and sad returns.
O my Astutta --

Now or never help me!


As thou did ever dream what true love was,
Fancy some way to quit me of this bondage;
Or else contrive this hour to be my last.

What! would you disobey your Father? what!
So good, so careful, and so wise a Parent?

O do not vex me into longer life.
Either speak help, or let me die in silence.

Yes, at sixteen; you would die at sixteen?


Else let thy pity of my youth preserve me.


O Cupid what a Termagant tyrant art thou
Over poor subjects of sixteen! There is not one
Among a hundred of those ticklish Trifles
But is more taken with a Toy at sixteen
Then six and twenty: because by that time
The edges of most maydenheads are allayd.

Nay dear Astutta hast thou thought a course?


What to prevent your Father, my good Master?
Think you I can turn traitor to his trust,
And cross his purpose for your Marriage?

If Knife, or Poison, Fire, or Water may
Remove this wretched cause, i'll do it else.

Yes, you were best leap from the top o'th'house
Into the Cavail grande: and there perhaps
Some courteous Gondaliar may catch you up,
And waft you to some house of dear delight.

Thou tortur'st me.


You see the door is shut,
And Go-by-ground your fathers Giant here
More sterne then Cerberus holds fast the Key,
You can make no ex^u^sion; nor let in
Any attempt for your redemption:
No Letter or a Message can approach you,
But by this Gyant-dwarfe your Fathers Agent,
Though I my self were wicked to assist you.

O could thou be so virtuous! Then I know
Some quaint devise would issue from thy brain*
To conjure and controwle his weaker spirits.
Thou know I have command of Gold and Jewels
Enough to buy a Senators large conscience:
Do thou command it all to win him to us,
That petty thing. Dos he appear bribe-free?
Is he the only officer uncorrupted?

Madonna Flavia* news.


What I beseech you?


From your elected Bridegroom, brave Fabritio.


Dissemble patience as you are a woman,
Or hope to be; and hear him handsomely.

How dos he Nanulo?


That was well said.


Well and respectful towards you it seems,
For he desires you not to stir abroad,
As I could wish you would not --

Insolent slave!
You know I may not stir beyond the Key
You keep, and yet you wish me stay within.

Will you mar all? the reason?


The reason is, he means to send anon
A Mercadante from the Merceria,
The famous Peddler woman of this City
With her most precious wares; for you to choose
What you shall like, and take them as his presents,
(A ceremony used on wedding Eves)
Such Rings, such Things, such Knacks, such Knots Bobs;
Such Curls, such Purles, such Tricks and Trilly bubkins
As Maids would turn no Maids almost to see them!
And can you yet be angry at such news
With me the gladsome bringer?

Very good!
I have heard of this rare Pedler-woman;
And that she is much used in close affairs
Twixt parties He and She; and do not doubt
Since you make golden offers (gentle Mistress)
To work her to your ends, as near (dee mark?)
As woman's wit may reach at such a pinch,
Pray let her come.

Well sir, you know I shall not stir abroad;
When she is come she's welcome with my thanks.
Return so by the messenger.

Most readily.


Now M^stris if I chance to set the saddle
On the right horse; that is, to place your Mayden-head
Where you would fain bestow it, I trust you will
Out of your store reward me with a dowry
Fit to convey me to a Tradesmans* Bed.

Yes, and wish there a second Maidenhead,

On the condition.


Well, be cheerful then,
And clear those cloudy looks, awake your senses,
Refresh your temples, rouse invention up.
I have found ground to build on; but there lacks
Much rewing, squaring, joynting, to make sure,
Against all storms, our lofty Archi'ture,
Come up to council?

Now thou comforts me.


IS this Checquino's house, your Advocate?


It is, and Prospero your learned Council
Is with him here, attending too, our coming.

Tis well, Give me my writings Nicolo,
Please you to enter: I'll dispatch my man,
And follow instantly. Now Nicolo,
About the serious business Nicolo,
In which this morning I instructed you.

For your revenge sir.


Right my Apprehension
On that discourteous, cursed Courtesan,
Twill breed me more delight, then all the dalliances
I could have found in her most free ambraces;
I hug my quick and sweet invention for it;
Here take this gold; this bright refulgent gold,
Twenty Checquines, and promise twenty more
On the performance of the brave exploy't
Twill take unto my wish, I do foresee't.

Twill be sir, such a notable Revenge
That the report of it in after-ages
Will either mortify concupiscence
In young lascivious Harlots; or, at least,
Fright out of'em their itch of wronging age:
They shall no more dare to put youthful tricks
On years, and gravity.

Right my Nicolo.


Sli'd sir, and if you should not be revengd,
An old man should not step in the Bordello
Without the taunts of Boys and Gondelie^s,
Crying take heed, old man, you be not served
As the Movella fitted Pantaloni.
So, in short time, the City were well served
When age shall be ashamed to crawl to lechery.

Right, witty Knave. Go heartily about it,
Think what a Master tis thou dost it for,
That has no slender tie upon thy duty;
One that has bred thee from a youngling up
To this maturity.

I must acknowledge it.


And Nicolo, it was no petty kindness
To manumize your Father from the Galley
Which you cannot forget.

Yet must I hear it --?


But i'll urge thee no further. Boy be careful;
Work but this for me with effect and speed,
And bind me as a Father to thy need.

You have even spoiled all now. I had as good a mind
And thought to have gone as heartily about
This piece of villainy as the Devil, that
Is in my Master could devise, or wish
Till that ore-doing spirit put me out;
Could he not see 'twas well; and mischievous
Enough in conscience, but himself must cross it?
Dos he think by redeeming of my Father
To slave me with his boasts, and foul upbraydings?
Had he still rowed in the gally, I not knowing,
The toil, the smart and grief had been his own:
Now I inherit what was then his pain,
Hearing continually the clash of's care,
And his f^ll stripes, out of this Bablers mouth,
Which more then kills my thanks; it wreaks my Spleen.
To br^g of benefits one hath bestowne
Doth make the best seem less, and most seem none:
So often times the greatest courtesy
Is by the doer made an injury.

Nicolo well met. I saw you house my Father,
And waited for you. Come you shall draw near.
This is a near friends Lodging Gentlemen,
My fathers special man I told you of;
Pray bid him welcome.

Most entirely,
Please you to sit sir: Here's a short potation.

But good Lyatico I assure you si^
I'll be your taster to quit fear of danger,
And now i'll let you know we have made oath
Upon this nimble master of invention
This sprightly liquor to be firm, and faithful
To one another in a present project.
Take you the ^ame, and grow in one with us.

May I not ask what end your project aims at?


Nor what, nor unto whose --


Let it suffice,
We carry that about us shall end you,
And presently, if you comply not with us.

Nay, nay, by fair means Gentlemen I pray.
I am apt enough to mischief of my self.
Look ye. I swear with you.

Tis well. Now know
Tis for the good of your young Master here.

Then you would use me in some treachery Against my old one.


Thou art a Soothsayer.


Look you, i'll swear again, I like your oath,
Your deep Lyatick oath here, wondrous well.

Tis well done Nicolo: try the bottom of't -- thrice


I will comply now and complot with you,
And was indifferently prepared before.
Provided always that it tend not to
Danger of's Life.

Could think me such a Villain?


Nay, if it were, 'twere no disparagement
To stake my head with yours. But Gentlemen,
Please ye fall roundly now upon the business,
I have now sworn enough.

Then you must answer
To these intergatories. First do you know
If the old men Guadagni and Pantaloni
Do hold their purpose for their match to morrow
Betwixt Fabritio here, and Flavid?

They are marrying of 'em now at their Lawyers,
By Deed and Covenant, under Hand and Seal.
I left them, and their Books there now together,
And for the Priest to morrow is the day.

Is not Fabritio mist at home this morning?


No, not at all, the old man's mind's so carried
Upon the wings of this new marriage f^rtune --
I cry you mercy sir, you are the Gentleman
I think, that should have had her.

In good time sir.


In good time may you I'll do something for you*


Honest, deserving Nic.


Sir thus it is:
My Master sent in my young Masters name,
(The more to indear his service and his care
To the young Lady) that the Merchantesse,
The rich She peddler of the Merceria
Should visit her to day with all her wares,
For her to take her choice to deck her Brideship;
If you know how to plough now with that Heyfar
You may herhaps convey a message to her.

I know her, and will fit you with directions.


Thou hast given a hint, for which I will renown thee.


But Nicolo, where was your reverend Master
Attended by your self before day-light?

Prithee inquire not further, 'twas not he*


The doubtful light deceav'd you sir.


No more then Noon in faith, a man may spy
An old whore-master in the darkest night
Like an old Cat, by the gloring of his eyes.
Will his old Mutton-mongership ne'er leave?
He is already known sufficiently
Thorough the City for his gift that way;
And yet he will deny his son free choice,
And force him marry one he not affects.

That is his drift, whereby he may inherit
From him the same licenciousnesse; and make
The World acknowledge him the more his Son.

But has he made the purchase? has he bought
The famous piece of flesh, the rare Novella?

I could unshale a plot.


Ne'er doubt but do it then,


My noble Nicolo out with it I say.


I would entreat the favour of this Senate
I might unfold it only unto one.

Take your free choice.


To you young Master then,
Take heed we render not ridiculous
Your Father to the wildness of their youth:
But to your self I will disclose a secret
That may be wrought to your advantage.

On.


Tis true, my Master was with the Novella
Drawn by the loose desires of wanton flesh;
But such a foul affront he did receave
As justly doth provoke his dire revenge,
Which he hath trusted me to execute.

How Nicolo? but first what was the affront?


He bargained with her; and for some large price
She yielded to be his. But in the night
In the conditioned bed was laid a Moore;
A hideous and detested Blackamoor,
Which he (demanding light to please his eye,
As old men use all motives)
Discovered and enraged, forsook the house;
Affrighted and ashamed to ask his coin again.

But seeks Revenge How, how, good Nicolo?


Thus sir, you know what common disrepute
Falls upon Man or Woman that is found
Conversing with the common City-hangman,
That nearest Kindred after such converse,
Shun their society, as they would do him
(The Hangmans self) so odious are they held
Except it be those officers allowed
By the State-publick to negotiate with him.

I know it Nicolo. But what can follow?


Tis plotted that the Hangman shall go to her,
And be discovered with her in such sort,
As her disgrace shall force her fly the City,
And I have undertaken to effect it.

It must be then by bribing of the Hangman:
And how can thou do that with thine own safety?
Thou may be so discovered and so hated.

For that observe the politic invention
Of my old Master! the habit of a Zaffi,
One of th'inferiour Ministers of Justice,
That walks between the Senate, and their Friend
The Executioner of their commands.

But what disguise shall shroud the Hangman thither, whose own shape is as
horrid as the Plague?


The habit of some stranger in the City,
Which here is gold to purchase.

Thou hast informed,
Nay more thou hast inspired me Nicolo!
I shall find way by this, to break the contract
My Father would enforce; preserve his credit,
And save the poor Novella from the same
My father threatens by his own disgrace
Be then but true to me.

Sir, if I fail --


Enough: I'll trust thee. Keep the gold thy self:
Give me this Habit. Get thy self another
In all points like it, and in that return
Unto my Father, confidently tell him
The Hangman undertakes it, and at five,
Soon in the Evening, in strangers habit,
He will accost her.

Sir --


I'll see it performed,
Trust to my word and care, and thy reward.

I leave all to you sir. And crave my dismission.


What! Has he done?


Most friendly. Farewell Nicolo.
He has given me plot enough, if I but work it;
And it produce not Comic sport in the end
I must subscribe my Wit is not my Friend,
I must crave your assistance Gentlemen.

We have been plotting too.


And though our proj^ct run not the same way,
It may conclude with yours to crown the day.

So to your several ways.


I am for the Novella.


SO I am ready: And trust me Jacconetta
My pretty Moore, (for so I still must call thee
For thy dear Masters sake that gave thee to me)
Thou art grown skilful in these quaint attires,
So lately unacquainted with my wearing:
Thou hast plaid the good beginner at this dressing,
And by thine industy and further practise,
I doubt not but my Knowledge will grow ripe.

And by that Knowledge, you your self soon rotten.
O! could these Creatures grow still towards ripeness;
O^, being ^ipe, abide so, and no further,
What excellent fruit they were!

What say you Borgio?


I say among the twenty thousand Curtezans
In and about this City, none becomes
The dressing, or the habit like your self;
Your most unparalleled* self! But, noblest Lady,
Think tis your person beautifies the Dress,
Not it, your person.

Why not it my person?


Yes, as the flame the fuel;
To work it into coals, and so to ashes.

Still Borgio in your old morality!


These Tires, these Chains, these Paintings, and these Gawds
Are but the sprigs and leaves, the butchers use
To set out flesh to sale with; or, at best,
But the gay Garlands which adorn the Beast
Prepared for Sacrifice --

Peace Borgio, peace.


And as those Beasts, so senseless are you women
Of the most certain danger you put on,
With your vain glorious gaiety; chips and straws,
To kindle fire of lust, in whose lewd flame
Sinks (with Troyes Buildings) Natures choicest
Flame.

I would I understood this misery!
Deal freely with me Borgio, what new art
Hast thou in practise, that thou set a face
Shiningly varnish'd with Divinity
On a profession, that makes Nature vile
In her own shame? Lust's instrument!
Nay case of instruments, holding all means
For propagation and maintaining of it;
To make thy Gain out of its dregs and fragments.
Tell me, dost think by preaching modesty
To quit thee of the baseness of thy trade;
A poor necessitous Bravo? or hast hope
To live upon my honesty, and yet be still
Thy self a Ruffiano?

I would give over, would you; and change my Function.


Ha, ha, ha, --


What mean you Borgio, would you now spoil all?
Did you instruct her in this way of profit,
And no less pleasant too, then profitable
(As most of my Books titles are) whereby
She was so well resolved to go on --

Hold thy peace fool: she will run on the faster.
Thou know not how much harm, preaching has done
Amongst women. She will prove the only Sweep-stake
In all the City.

O are you there Devil?


Sir, leave this grumbling, or i'll turn you off
Amongst your Brothers, and your Sons Ruffianos,
To lurch in the night betwixt eleaven and two
To rob and drown for prey; till being taken
Imediate Hanging follows.

I'm now your Creature;
My noble resolute Mistress; now I adore you:
Now you shine bright; your bravery now becomes you,
Yet (let me tell you under fair correction)
I have some cause to hinder your desires,
And theyrs that seek you more, yet, for a time.

Your reason sir?


You know I was preferrd to you for a Bravo
Of long and dear experience: I have served
Six, the most famous Dames, this City bred
These sixty years; none scorning my advise,
By which, and their endeavours they grew up
To purse the price of Providence; which bestowd
The most in public, some in pious uses
Purchased them fame, almost Canonization.
The last and least of them, Margarita Emiliana
Founded the Augustinian Monastery
I showd you late; where she has daily prayers.
These women, whom successively I served,
Fell not by rash adventure unto all
Great Fortunes offers; but by sound advise
(Which kept their Bodies sound and 'rich'd their coffers)
Were long e're they embraced; by which their price
And beauty grew of greater estimation,
My profit in this too is unneglected:
For long suspense, and tedious Expectation
Bring me more certain fees; where, if you fell
Immediately to work, my work were done,
And your own too, perhaps too soon: witness the falls
That Pox and Poverty have brought on many!
When their youths flame was spent and they rejected,
When others of their Sisterhood were embraced
Into a wholesome Nunnery.

This fellow speaks my thoughts. Borgio, I thought
You had respect to your particular profit
In all this winding wariness for my good.

You may conceive, 'twould grieve me, that (where now
You have continual new, and bounteous suitors,
That yield me fees for the bare sight of you)
You should in yielding to their common use
Send one man cloyed away, t'affright another
From his approach.

Borgio, no more of this,
A dear friend put you to me, for whose sake
I hitherto have follow'd your advise,
In hoisting up the price of my virginity.

To such a rate no common purse dares venture,
Nor common folks presume to approach the house.

And such as did attempt, by offering less,
I have sent back with shame; as the old youth
Last night, for which I thank thee Jacconetta*

I think I coold his grave concupiscence.


And therefore, doubt not, careful Borgio,
Unless I meet a husband by the way
I will not stoop this month at a less rate,
Then the proposed sum and your consent.

I thank you more then if you had possessed
Me of the value of that sum proposed.

He means her Maidenhead! I faith good sir,
The mark's grown out of your old chaps, or else
Hang me if I believed you, by that little
I know of man.

So now about our business.
Some of my visitants I know are near,
Wait circumspectly Borgio.

You need not doubt me.


There is some hidden virtue in this fellow,
Or dangerous ill: but whether let it be;
As was my Birth my purpose shall be free.
Make fit my Chamber Jaconet. But first
Give me my Lute; and set me for the sign
O what I mean to be, the famed Novella.

Now Borgio, how speaks your muster roll?
What? are you full?

I have an army royal
Of Princely spirits, ready for encounter.

But one at once good Borgio.


I have encamped them each in several quarter.
Here lies the no less politic then stout
Italian force, and there your sprightly French;
Here the brave Spaniard, there the German bold;
Here the Polonian, and Sclavonian there;
Persian and Grecian --

Pray thee hold. No more.


'Tis not your house can hold, (would I admit'em)
One of each several nation would throng in
To make his battery on your virgin Fort.
The rich Piazza, on her greatest Mart
Boasts not more Nations; nor St. Mark himself
The understanding of more Languages
Then I (could I find house-roome) could receave,
To be made one by your interpretation
O what a Daring glass is sparkling beauty;
Fetching ambition from above the p^tch
Of towering Eagles, or Sky-touching La^ks
Down with a glance into the Nets of Love!

Praythee speak nearer home, who hast thou housed?


I have culled from the pack a special prince;
Four glittering Gallants; one of Italy,
For our dear Countries sake; But then a Monsieur,
A jovial French-man, all of flame and spirit.

I shall not dare to meddle with his glory
For fear I fall with Semele, who next?

A Spaniard next, that, to adorn his pride,
Wears an Ep^tome of both the Indies.

I saw his punctuality pass by.


And did you note his stiff reservednesse?
He dares not cough for breaking of his chain,
But then there is a Dutchman, (Cargo lustick!)
A jolly strong chind German, princely borne;
A Landsgrave at the least; whose very bluntness
Promises more then the sharp-set Italian,
The fiery Frenchman, or the doughty Diego
In all their eager pursuit.

That man Burgio!
You have bestowd them all in several Rooms?

O like fierce Beasts, from sent of one another.


Then first, in fair requital of the Music,
I do imagine some of them bestowd
On me, this morning e're my Love appears
To feed their eyes, let Music feast their ears.

WHy not me, Lady? stand not I as fair,
And fit for your embrace as any man?

Yes sir, tis granted; and as acceptable
I yield to none.

Tis but to try my Courtship, I presume,
That you put on this coyness, and to draw
More ample testimony of affection,
By Protestation, Prayers, Compliments;
The weakest ceremonies due to love;
Mere noise and Lip-labour, with loss of time.
I think with scorn upon such poor expressions,
And am above the art of Amorists,
That cringe and creep by weak degrees of Love;
To Kiss the hand, the Cheek, the Lip, then cry
O Divine touch! then smirk, and then embrace,
Then nuzzle in the Elizium of your bosom,
And be entranced! means fit for duller spirits,
To gather heat and strength of appetite.
My desire speaks in Loves true dialect;
And, from my heart inflamed, you may perceive
Loves fire rage in mine eyes, enough
To melt to yeildingnes a frozen breast.
In this I talk too much. I find you yielding.

And I my self too blame --


Let us retire then.


Mistake me not good Signior. Keep your distance:
I blame my self to let you overweene
By my long silence, that immodesty
To be in me, that might embolden you
To your and my dishonour. Pray desist,
And let the friendly welcome you have found
Persuade your fair construction.

Is this earnest?


Yes in sooth is it.


I'll be playner then,
What make you here in the Smock-Faire, precious Mistress?
Or why these dressings, these perfumes and paintings?
Do you wear the habit of our Curtezans,
And, by their art, call Gazers to your beauty,
Full of high hopes and flames of ardent Love,
Thus to delude, and make them witnesses
Of a cold seeming Chastity? what n^w Art
Is this? it cannot be to get a husband!

Nor a child neither sir, that's less.


That's soon believed, yet, no disparagement
To your expert sufficiency in the trade:
For the best Carpenters make fewest chips,
There's very few of all your function fruitful:
Yet some there be approved men at arms
Famous in public service; and a many
Good handy craftsmen in the Arsenal
Bred by this bounteous City from such mothers
That ne'er could boast their fathers; and as many
Daughters (if they prove worthy in their feature)
Succeed their active Mothers in their fortunes.

You are better read then I sir.


Tis common knowledge Lady. Nor do I
Read this t'informe your self, who were instructed
(I make no doubt) before your price was set,
By all examples to your present practise.

Sir, I must tell you now, you grow too lavish;
So, as I fear foul language; to'avoyd which
Let me entreat a fair departure hence.

Lady, this overacted State might fit
The wife of a Clarissimo, or the bashful
Daughter of some Patrician: but in you,
A pi^ce set out to sale, it but appears
Affected singularity, more unsuitable
To the temptations you wear about you
Then th'holy seeming pictures in your Chamber.

Why should it trouble you sir?


It dos, to think what new and secret aim
You may intend by this; in taking on you
The habit, and the name of Courtesan:
And, first, to set a price so far beyond
The strength of any ordinary means;
And then to show a carriage that may strike
Lust out of countenance! O the Knot's dissolved!
O Oedipus! O Sphynx! I now have found it
You fish for Fishermen (tis pregnant truth)
She claps a Cardinal aboard at least:
Tis not a Lay-mans purse, or Learning can,
Or purchase, or confute you, is't not so?

Now you are foul indeed, and I must plead
My privilege against you sir, you know
I have a freedom grounded upon custom
Here in this City, for a month to make
Choice of my Lodging, set what price I please
Upon my self; admit what visitants
I shall think fit; no other, nor no more;
And this without control, or least exception
Of you or any man; secured by the City,
So safe from out-rages, that least abuse
May, on my just complaint, be punishable
In whomsoever by affront dares grive me.

I fear she'll prove another creature then
The Beast I took her for: she knows her strength*

Yet thus much (for you are a Gentleman)
I'll yield for satisfaction unexacted:
If in this Months space, in that honoured way
(For I despair not of a husband sir)
Of holy Marriage, I be not promov'd;
Nor, by that time prefixed, the great Son tendered
(Great as you terme'^) for my virginity;
And that I stoop for less, here is my hand,
I will be yours as freely as mine own
At your own price.

Said like a noble Wench,
Only a word by way of friendly advise,
And so farewell. This Maidenhead of yours,
By you so highly prised; now being ripe
(And therein only merchantable ware)
Will, if you oversl^p the season, grow
Suddenly fulsome, straight way stale, then Rotten:
Think upon choicest Fruit, or Foul, or Fish,
Rich Wines, or any Rarity; how soon
Their vertue's lost.

I am enough instructed.


O^ce more farewell -- pray ponder on these things.


Fear not I shall.


Could you consider how 'twould grieve a soul
Endued with Reason, Knowing, the true use
Of Nature's delicates, to see them lost,
O^ spoiled for want of seasonable ta^ng,
I know you would, and thank me for my counsel.

Indeed and so I do.


Indeed farewell then.


He's gone, at last the tedious storm is over.
I shall want day, as well as patience
T'indure and answer all the rest so largely,
See my sprightly Frenchman! I must look
For a hot O ^s^t now, though a short Skirmish.

Let me in my approach admire that Object
That vindicates the voice of Fame, in proving
She^ was no Liar in the loud reports,
That blazed it for the Beauty of the World!

Good sit beware idolatry.


The Egiptians,
Would they forbear their wonted heathenish worship,
And fall in adoration of this face --

Indeed i'll hear no more.


Lady you must,
You are so far above the pitch of flattery
That highest courtship in our best of Language
Wants due expression of your supreme graces:
And not to tender you the height of praise
Were mere Rusticity, rather profanation.

Yet. Let me stay you there, and let me tell you
You have worded well your high conceit of me,
But in a way so low, so undeserving
A courtiers art, that I have found you none.

No Courtier Lady?


No, no Courtier sir,
How can it fall in courtly understanding*
That beauty can be conquered by it's praise?
It breeds but less respect, and oft times scorn
From those that are ambitious of praise
On such praise-givers. And if you came only
Thus to pronounce my praise, you have said enough.

Nay dearest Lady, saving your displeasure --
I must come closer to her, she'll forget
She is a whore else.

Sir, your further pleasure


To tell you, Lady, now I like your wit
Equally with your beauty; briefly of which
A word or two, and so unto our business.
(You tax me with the loss of time already)
You do consider fitly, that to praise
What we would purchase makes the value higher:
It is the chapmans rule to discommend.

Right sir, were you to buy a Horse or Jewell,
You would not praise it past the price propounded.

Yes, where I find the worth exceed the price.


(I am betrayed. He brings the Money sure)


And, that you know I do esteem your worth
Above all Salary, I yield my self,
Fraught with unvaluable Love and Honour
To be the due reward of your embraces.

What's this si^, to a thousand double Duccatts?


You cannot think so poorly, or if so,
Perceive them in a taste of my endowments.
First see my late composure; where the flame
Of the soule-ravishing art of Poesy
May light your judgement 'bove the love of money.

You'll say my soul is noble, then if I
(As I protest I do) complain the wants
Of even the best professors of that art.
The words are set.

To notes my voice can master?


Please you to read them sir, and in requital
Of such a debt, my maid shall sing them for you.

He Reads the Song.

Let not the corrupted steam
Of invective breach blaspheme,
Ladies for those artful graces
Which they lay upon their Faces:
Ceruse and Vermillion there
As aptly may be laid.
As (to cover Nature bare)
All other parts be clad.
Be we sick in any part,
Pained, or Lame, we seek to Art,
(Nature's Rector) to restore
Us, the strength we had before.
Who can say a Ladies Face
Less merits the cost,
Or the privilege, or grace
Her other parts may boast?
Ladies no, since Time may steal
Natures bounty, learn to heal;
And with nimble hand repair
Teeth and Lips, Cheeks, Eyes and Hair;
Filling wrinkles, purling veins:
That unperceav'd may be
Upon your looks, the strokes and pains
Of Age and Casualty.
Now try your voice, Maid.


However 'twas well Sung, you seem to slight
In such requital, my esteem of you:
But yet there rests in me a quality,
I may suppose not so to be requited.
Please you command your Music, I will Dance,
To what you first shall name of latest practise.

Your skill hath made you confident; and I
Do so much honour these endowments in you,
That I my self will answer you in this.
Name you the Dance sir.

To come the closer to you, the Novella.


I am but weakly practised yet in that.


Some other then.


No let it be the same.
Go play it Jacconetta, the Novella.

I do begin to doubt my qualities
Will not pass here in payment at the rate
My schooling cost me, when she repayes all
I can bestow, in the same coin again:
But since I'm in, i'll on, and make the best
Both Face and Legs I can in it.

How like you it Lady?


For so much sir as you have excelled me
I crave your kind acceptance of my thanks.

I still had rather you were pleased to accept
Me and my whole deservings. I come to you.
If you esteem of Courtship, Language, Quality,
Sorting a Gentleman of best degree,
The Mixture of whose knowledge with his practise
Cost thrice your golden Son; let me and those
Be made the meed of your most sweet enjoying.

I will not make you such a loser sir,
But rather wish you had your money again
Those excellencies cost.

You do not flout me Lady?


No, i'll speak plainly sir, these qualities
Might on some thriving Stage, and lucky legs
Bring you your money again, winning, perhaps,
The love of some old Lady, by stirring up
The embers of affection, rather lust.

Did ever woman talk so?


But certes here
They will not pass for ready money sir.

I dreamt as much. She has a devilish wit.


My courtesy si^ forbids me bid you hence;
But having private business of my own
I must crave leave to leave you to the thought
Of what two thousand Duccats are.

Be handed.


Is it performed sir? have you done the feat?


Pox of your Fates.


Just as the Music played I warrant you
Sir, 'twas a moving Lesson; played to th'life.
We struck it home, that you might do so too.

The Rogue, too, jeeres me! sir I should do well
To strike, or beat your undeserved Fee
Out of your bawdy Pocket.

As if you had not done the do you came for!
What pretty ways can Gentlemen find out
To save their moneys! 'Tis worth praise in some,
That have but little, or come hardly by it,
By travail, study, or laborious toil,
Dear shifts sometimes, and dangerous ways with hazard --

Very good!


But for you Gallants, that have, as it were
Wealth above with borne with you, and still growing
Up with you, past the reach of your expenses;
And never sweat, but for your exercise,
Or what your exercises bring you to!
For you to think your pleasures costly; fain
Excuse for petty fees, now the great charge
Is paid, and your desire satisfied --

No more.


Alas sir, what is a poor Duccatoun
After a thousand Duccats? --

Have you done?


Would you had not; 'lesse my reward were better.
See, see, the bed made smooth again and all!
(O precious craft!) as here had nothing been!
Well would ye were all as wise in greater matters.

Tis the Rogues humour: I will give him something
For abusing me. There's your Duccatoun
To work more affability in your Mistress
Against my next approach.

It seems then yet
You are not cloyed with her deliciousness.

Nor had one taste (I swear by life and honour)
Of all my hopes, more then her Hand and Lips.

Have you not in that a double meaning sir?


I vow, for ought I know she is a virgin.


Y'have satisfied me, and perhaps my art
May in your absence work a little for you.

Think of me then.


My profit pricks me to it.


Respect it then, Adieu.


Serviteur Monsieur.
The fear of thee is past. I was almost
In a cold sweat: but all the danger now,
Lies on the the other side of the house; my Don
My hot Goat-^ver'd Diego, should he now
Discharge his Pistols on her, they would prove
More forcible then Cannon-shot on me.
Faith quit me of suspect. How big he looks!
As if he scorned repulse. If he grow violent
I'll bring the Duchman in to cool his pride,
And set them by the ears for our Low Countries.

I have not in all Spain (where Majesty
Enthroned sits upon the brow of beauty,
And crown the Ladies with prerogative
'Bove all the women of the Earth) encountered
With such a scorn, as here. Discourteous woman,
Worthless and ignorant of the weighty trust
Was tendered to thee in my blood and honour.

Your blood and honour, will not feed or cloth me.


I will not change a word more with a mouth
So full of rudeness, and mechanic baseness.

Not upon my submission sir?


It must be great and sudden if it move me.


He looks that I should kneel and beg a Kiss.


Why seek you not to expiate your trespass
By tender of your self to my embraces?

I cannot do it: My virgin Modesty
Denies that freedom.

I'll no more delay,
I see tis only force must conquer you.

You will not ravish me! within there! help!


What! is the great some tendered?
Do you want hands to tell your money Mistress?

No, to take off the hands of Rape and Outrage
This proud imperious Spaniard grip'd me with.

Signior you must not gripe nor grope here
Under the sum prefixed; two thousand Duccats.
We have arithmetique to receave them by
In your own Pistolets, or pieces of Eight
In Rialls, if you please; but not one single one
To be abated, my most thrifty Don;
Whom I cannot abuse enough me thinks,
I have seen one in your shape so well presented.

Villain, i'll have thee whipped for this affront,
Thy fault is punishable by the Law.

Not in defence of honour dear Don Tarquin.
Preventing Rape and Murder.

Villain die.


Not at this distance sir,
Besides here's aid.

Hence you Muskitta. Give a look more this way
I'll force thee take thy wings out at the window.

Borne down by Bravoes! let the place protect ye,
By my few minutes patience. My revenge
Shall shortly speak in thunder.

Hold your peace;
And vent not here your loud Rodomontadoes
Lest I spit lightning.

Well si^ I am silent.


Be so my politic Don. This Hans has snapped her;
The Dutch man carries her from your great claim:
And this may be an ominous portent
Against your title to the Netherlands,
It may hold in the great work sir, as well
As in this small assay.

Abused and Jeered!


Nor they hear me not my noble Signior,
I'll tell you for your satisfaction
This Alinanie is a you^ker that would marry her,
And she nor I durst bear it otherwise,
(Knowing by chance he slipped into the house,
And overheard us) when you come again
I will inform you further, you shall find
My information worthy of a fee.

Take from my hand a piece of four Gazetts.


That's three pence sterling, you are bounteous sir,
So, now, look big and vanish.

I have not sir, in my short story strayd
In the least syllable from truth, and were
The eyes of all the world fixed upon
My seeming Levity, my mind should be
Still constant as the center to that end
Reserved in my free thoughts.

Why was the sum, then, of two thousand duccats
Proclaimed the price of your virginity?

To keep the fl^sh flies off, you know my aim sir.


I find the noble Lady; nor can I
Further attempt a breach upon your honour.

Upon those terms I pray sir be my Guest,
I have by this time a sl^ght Dinner staying.

You favours make me bold.


See all in readiness Jacconet.


I'll drink a frolic Lady;
M^th and good wine take me: My loose desire
Is to chaste love refined by Vesta's fire.

Am I a prophet? sure the Dutchman's taken
In a chaste snare indeed. I did but forge it
For an excuse to calm and rid the Spaniard,
And he seems to prevent my fiction: yet
Presumption shall not sway me. Women's wiles
Are oft times past prevention, and men catch
Sense of the wrongs, which to prevent they watch.

IF this move him not, nay prevail not with him
To the accomplishment of your desire,
Would I were a man, both for your sake and his.

What would thou do?


First take away the cause
Of your Greene-sicknesse by killing him; then
Cure you my self.

What wonders thou would do!


I, if I were a Man and able to do what I
Now desire (for I would have mine own desire still)
I would do wonders indeed. Believe it Mistress,
An able man that has but a weak woman's desire
Has an unknown thing; and may do any unknown thing, for ought I know --

I pray thee leave thy idle prattle, and let
Me hear thy moving Letter.

Hear it then,
As your own Act and Deed, and quickly sign it.

MY dear Francisco, If you intend not my death, help me to break Prison this
Night: Else though my Execution be appointed to morrow morning by a forced
Marriage, I will prevent it by a speedier way, and by my own hand die,

Yours and Love's Martyr.
Here, write your Name.


But thou hast set him down no means*


That's in the Postscript, mark,

The last minute that I will expect you shall be three in the morning, when
from the back Window I will either fall into your Arms, or on my Death.


I thank thee good Astutta. O that the messenger Would be as true to me!


If we cannot win her to it, tis but a Letter lost,
How do they* that have whole pockets ^u^l of *h^m
In readiness to borrow money?

I pray thee peace.


Why I do not think there's any of them within hearing.


Thou dalliest with my fears.


Fear it not M^stris, she is as sure at such a lift --
And so she's come already.

Look you Lady, I told you true, here is the
Party, that has the Knacks and things; come
Open, open, and sh^w all.

Not before you good sit.


Are you so coy of your toys?


Your diligence were better somewhere else:
This prying into women's businesses
Is ill sir for your eye-sight, and perhaps
May spoil your growth, Good Sir, I crave your absence.

I must give way. She has a devilish tongue. Exit


Mistress, she's for our turn I warrant you
I find it by her aptnes to abuse him.

Come Mistress Bride, -- Nay blush not, pretty one,
To take the name one day before your time.

I hate the Name, on those accursed terms,
That have prefixed the time. Good Astutta,
Break with her by your selfes; I cannot speak:
My tears forbid me.

I hope you will not offer it.


Come Mistress, see. What weep you, pretty one?
What! and the great good turn so near you? ha!
What will she do to morrow night?

Even cry out right perhaps.


Perhaps so too; and laugh as fast e're morning,
Come Lady, come, hear me, and see my ware:
Tis from Fabritio, he, that noble Gentleman,
Dos not your heart leap now? Now but suppose
French chains here of five hundred crowns a piece;
A rich Pearl Neck-lace, Sapphire and Ruby Bracelets;
Variety of Jewels, and a Diamond work --

I hate their price and them, the Sender more.


Pray peace.


I cannot: let me go.


Pray stay sweet Lady,
I do not say Frabritio sent such things,
I said I came from him, that noble Gentleman.

He is not noble.


Judge him by his presents,
And see the things he sends.

I would not hear
A mention of him; much less would I see
The least relation from his hated hands.

Pray Mistress see them! Open your Box I pray.


Had she there Lucrece' Knife, or Portias coals,
Or Cleopatra's ashes I could embrace 'em.

Look you how near I fit you. See what's here
What a choyc^ chain is this! and here's a Knife,
As sharpe as that of Lucrece. And, for coals,
Here is a poisonous juice, whose every drop
Would eat through Iron. These Fabritio sends you.

I do accept them.


Stay; conditionally
If you refuse another present here.

I must reject any from him but these.


What a scorne's this! This Bawd ne'er scapes alive
Out of these doors. Pray whats' your other pesent?

Here Lady, look on it pray; examine't well.
And take or this or those.

Ha! look here Astutta;
The lively image of my love Francisco!

It is exceeding like him! what's the plot troe?


A thousand kisses shall thy welcome be,
Happy resemblance of my hopeless love;
As many thanks to you, good, virtuous Woman,
O let me fall and bless the ground that bears thee,
And ask forgiveness for my late rude trespass.

Recall your self, sweet Lady* tender heart!


And could Fabritio (I can name him now)
Show me such Kindness, and himself so noble,
To send me this?

On this condition (as I was to say)
That you embrace it in the memory
Of him your Love, namely his friend Francisco,
And that you ever love, and only him.

Ever and only (though I thank him for it)
He need not have urged that.

Nor threatened these;
(Your Rope, here, and the rest) had she refused,
And to express their needlesses the better
I pray return them to him with great thanks.

'Twas his great care to work me to this Message,


Let then the charge be mine. Here's forty duccats*
And could you but convey a Letter for me
To my Francisco, take a hundred more.

Knew you but my desire to further Lovers
You need not bid so much. Give me the Letter.

Seal it Astutta.


Then you know me not
I must be privy unto all I carry,
Where I meet doubts, I never undertook.

Nay I dare trust you (Read it if you please)*


Indeed you may. To wrong an innocence
So sweet as yours were sin inexpiable.

But will you gi't him Faith? I never swore
Nor urged a body to an oath before.

Tis given already Flavia. Hence disguise,
More yet? nay all shall off. Do you know me yet?

O my Francisco!


Cursed be this* idle habit
In which my impious curiosity,
To make a trial of her constancy
Hath wounded her so deep with jealousy
Of a mistrust in me, that now she faints
Under the passion; and herhaps may die so,
Flavia! my Love! O --

Slight what mean you si^?


By all the bliss that a true Lover wishes --


Will you hold your peace?


By all the oaths and practises of Lovers --


Will you undo all now?


I was not jealous of thy constancy,
Flavia! my Love, my Life! my Flavia*

Will you lose all you came for with your clamour?


Help me; for Love's sake help to make her speak,
Or but look up*

Would you could old your peace;
Whilst I look down to escape discovery,
She'll come to her self again, and you too; fear not
Tis but a qualm of kindness, this.

Francisco --


She comes already.


Speak my Flavia.


Pray do you peace. Handle her handsomely,
And then all shall be well I warrant you,
You do not know the danger, noise and nakedness
May pull upon you, should the Rogue
Dwarf overheare you, we were all blown up,
Which to prevent, all husht while I go down.

Be cheard my Love, I came to rescue thee;
And hired this habit and the Peddlers craft;
Prayed for her absence, and her silence too,
And caused a Gondalo wait at the back door
In case I might surprise thee* Pray take comfort.

You need not bid, nor wish it in these arms,
Who ever praye's for those in Paradise?
Ay me! How soon my fears control my bliss?
I have blasphemed in my security,
And terror threats my downfall into torment.

Out, out alas my Master in all hast --


What shall we do?


It is too late to ask,
Or now to d'on your Peddlers weeds again:
Gather 'em up and fly into your closet,
Dress him up there* Stay not to look about ye.
I'll do my best to keep him back a little.

None else to speak with me?


None but the merchantesse to fit my Mistress,
Signior Fabritio sent.

I thank his care.
I see that all goes well. No cross but one,
That I forgot a writing, which in ^
I am constrained to fetch. Now where's my ^l^?

Above sir, busy with the daintiest things,
That ever allured a virgin into wedlock*
Out with your purse sir, for you cannot see them,
But they will ravish you to large expense:
Besides sir, 'twill be fit you give her something,
Coming so jumpe as 'twere into the Market.

I will not see 'em. Put the woman by
Into the Gallery, or somewhere remote,
Quick, quick, dispatch.

You shall not need to urge it.


No, no: my cost is amply shown already:
And will be more, before the Wedding's over.
Without a needless wast in Gawds and Trifles,
See who's at door.
A fathers care consists not in expense
That is not qualified with providence.

Signior Pantaloni, sir sends after you
He and your advocates expect you in hast
To bring away the Writing.

Say I am coming.


What have you done with him?


Our hast and fears could not find time to dress him
But I have locked him up into that press.

Your Father's coming up to seek a writing,
Pray Love it be not there.

I am undone then.


Well hold your peace, look bold and cheerfully,
And be you silent, youth: nor cough, nor stink;
Nor let your fear run forth in streams of urine
To make him think his Aqua vitae spilt.

Where are you Flavia?


O me he comes!


Why speak you not?


Flavia.


You were best betray all with your silliness.


Why Flavia I say?


Here father, here sir,
You will not I shall answer for you when he's here?
Come, look as nothing were, all will be nought else.
Bear up he comes.

Tis here that I would have thee Flavia.
Give me the Key of this press here.

O Father, Father --


What's the matter? ha!


Alas poor heart! you know sir, in her infancy,
You beat her once for losing of a Key:
For which she trembles still, being asked in hast.
Are you a child still in your fears, and must
Bewed to morrow? Fie, fie upon you,
She thinks she has lost it, but I saw her look it
Together with a writing which you dropped
Out of this press this morning, safe enough
Here in her Cabinet.

Tis like I let it fall.


Where is your Key of this? Give mee't, give mee't.
How hast and fear perplexes her! I could
Have picked it open.

Do, or break it open.


Ay me the fruits of rashness? See, tis fallen
With all her Jewels and your writing too
Into the street. O my unlucky hand!

Peace giddy headed harlot, watch that none Take it away, while I run to
recover't, Nanulo, Nanulo.


Will you be nimble yet to find a way
By the backdoor into the Gondalo.
While I lock him and's man into the street?
I know their hast will leave the Keys i'th'dore.
Quickly unpresse him; and take as much gold
As you can carry, i'll along w'ye too.
Stay not to think, or thank me for my wit.

What shall we say?


Do as you are bidden, and say nothing.


Lovers shall saint thee; and this day shall be
For ever callenderd to Love and thee.

Nanulo! The Key to let me forth.


St. Mark and fortune make it a good prize.


Hands off Sir, that's not yours.


Nor yours I am sure.


Half part then brother Zaffi.


The Key I saw.


Sir you are none of the Zaffi.


Villain slave! come open the door.


How came you by this habit?


Perhaps to try sit how it will become me
When I have a mind to be as very a Knave
^ffice as your self, But shall we sl^p
^, and share, before the dog that owes it
^e the bone from us both?

I fear you can be quicker in my absence.


The fault was in your hast sir.


Took you not up a Cabinet, friends?


Zaff N^t we sir, we saw none.


O you watch well above there.


This fellow has it under his coat sir.


But who shall know it for yours sir?


May we be bold to ask what marks it has,
Or what's within it?

I'll have you ear-mark'd Villains for your theft,
Know you not me?

I cry your worship mercy, and am glad
I was your instrument to preserve this treasure
From this false counterfeit.

Fortune has sent my master to relieve me.


Signior Guadagni our Council have thought fit,
For better confirmation of our act,
That it be past here in your Daughters presence
Together with my Son, whom I have sent for,
Why do you seem thus moved?

An accident hath crossed me. Look you sir,
You have authority; Here's a Counterfeit
(Deserves examination) would have robbed me.

I saved you sir from being robbed. Hear me aside
Sir -- Nicolo whispers Pant.

Carry this in; and send away the woman


Now do you know me I have done the feat.


Hast treated with the Hangman Nicolo?


The Carnifex is fitted for your service,
In a most gorgeous hab^t of a Dutchman,
And about five in the evening will be with her.

Astutta! Madonna Flavia! Astutta!


What's the matter there?


The best jest, ha, ha, ha.


You'll open the door?


What's that?


It will be mirth to morrow at our feast
To laugh our bellies full.

I am sure you hear me
Fool me, but not my master: he is here.

Why stay you there sirrah?


I let him go^: a merry harmless fellow
I'll answer for him. Hence, away, and shit you.
And quickly send my Son.

The door is fast sir, and they will not hear me.


I fear I am undone. Flavia, Astutta, ko^!
T^s so, tis so, some Robbers are slipped in,
And now make havoc^ of my goods and Daughter.

It is no dallying Run and fetch a Smith
To force the Lock.

Astutta, Flavia! O this cursed chance
I fear will ruin me and all my hopes.
How came you hither?

Sir by good appointment
To bring Bride-laces, Gloves, and curious Dressings
To deck your Daughter on her Brideale-day,
To morrow as I wean, holds it I pray?

Were you not here before, and in the house?


If you could put it off sir one day longer
I could so fit her with new fashioned tires
That she should thank me.

I fear a new, and further secret mischief.


Hence let me fall to earth; I may not see
My Masters fury rise out of his ruin.

How gotst thou thither?


By the backdoor which I found widely open.
O sir your Daughter --

Ravished or murderd is she?


Worse, worse, by far sir, she is conveyed hence
The Neighbours from the windows over the way
Saw her, the Maid, and a young Man take boat.
They guess it was Francisco.

How, how, how!


Laden with Caskets sir. Here's his Deceptio visus,
The ^ed cl^ak, that charmed my honest care; N^* show*
And here's his juggling Bo^. What toys are these!

O me accursed wretch.


O sir, your Son!


Where is he? speak.


Sir, no where to be found
In private let me tell you, he slipped forth
At four in the Morning; sir, when you and I
Were you know where. He cast forth doubtful words
Of a vagary he would fetch at Rome.

We both are wrought upon by hellish Magic.


Devils are in this plot.


Think you of Devils?


Though you sirs, being Lawyers, think there's none
We may both think there are, and fear 'em.

Forbear such talk; and think upon the ^irth,
The jest you have in hand against to morrow.

Sir, use your jerks and quillets at the bar.


Cast there your petulant wit on misery.


Sir, you mistake, my counsel is to comfort,
Be not dejected, but seek speedy way
To circumvent the wit has wrought upon you.

Good sir, your best advise.


First charge this officer
Here, with this woman; who by'examination
May make discovery --

I can discover nothing but my ware sir,
Nor part with that for less then ready money.

Take her to custody.


Mistress come with me.


Whither? for what?


You shall know that hereafter.


What can I discover?


Away with her.


What can I discover?


Into your house sir now, and secure that;
Come, recollect your selfes, call home the strength
Of your approved judgements, we'll assist you.

You must be sudden too in this your pursuit;
Advise and do at once, use no delay;
The speediest course is now the safest way.

FOund you the Fort, then, so impregnable?


Against all force of arms, or brains.


No way but by the down-right composition
Of the two thousand Duccats to be entered.

Sure tis some noble wench then you imagine,
But my disguise shall put her to the test.

I'm sure she jeerd me out of my Monsieurship.


Did she, and all thy fine french qualities?


And is as like to make a skitter brooke
Of you in your Dutch slops. For if she be not,
After all this, a cunning whore, i'm cozened.

She lives at a good rate how ere maintained.


The secret way, man, by her comings in
Too common among women for their livings,
I'll not believe her wit and feature are
Allied to honesty.

Thou art no worshipper of fair women Piso.


No, If I worship any of them more
Then in the Knee-trick, that is necessary
In their true use let me be ^unuchiz'd.
Look here's your fathers Pimp again.

Now Nicolo?


S^w you my young Master Gentlemen?


Yes there he stands, transl^ted out of sober
Italian into high Dutch.

I swear he was past my reading,
Slight, he appears as like the noted Almaine
Late come to town, if he had but his beard --

How like you this for a beard?


Most excellent!
But pray take heed your stay spoil not the purpose
Of your disguise.

Why what news Nicolo?


Your Father is in busy quest of you.


Then he dos miss me?


Pray Phoebus he miss as much of Madness,
He and his virtuous brother old Guadagni,
Who misses too his Daughter. Francisco has her.

Has he got her off?


And she has got him on by this time: they
Are silly fools else.

Hymen be their speed.


But how I pray thee escaped they?


First, sir, know
There's a strange fellow without desires to speak w'yee
I guess he is some Bravo.

A Bravo speak with me?


Yes, and inquires here for my Master too,
And Signior Piso, you are all known it seems.

Come leave your fooling.


By mine Ears tis true.


Go call him in, I fear no Knavery.


Your lodging protects me.


My disguise me.


This is the Gentleman.


Tis the proud Bra^es whisk!


I cry you mercy si^, are you Signior Horatio?
I took you sir this morning for a Monsieur.
I thank you for my Duccatoun.

What! Is she come about? Has she sent for me?


Good sir! are you here too? I thank you sir,
You paid me your entrance, but no pa^ing fo^.

Prithee deserve no be^ing ^ill thou hast done
Thy errand. What dost come for?

Sir, to entreat this Gentleman to bring
With him one Signior ^is^, and F^britio --
Beyond my hopes! Good ^ir, are you here too?

This is a Devil! could he know me else
That ne'er saw him before; in this disguise?

Cry mercy ^ir: you would not these should know
Nor shall they (I fear it not) but h^k you sir.

What Familiar these ^awd^ are. They'll talk yet
Thus to Lords in private.

Sure he takes him for the Dutch loggerhead
We saw to day in the Piazz^.

So would any man: He has hit his shape so right.


I am sure I rejoice in these Dollors, that you
Give me to day, and are as ^ine, that
My Mistress wished a better dinner for you
For frighting of the Spaniard with your fireworks.
But, by your strangers it seems you repent
The Marriage offer that you made my Mistres.
Fortune direct you to no worse a wife,
And so I leave you to your choice.

I have found the error, and will make good use ^'t.


Your business then is to that strangers sir --


Only your self, and briefly from Francisco.


Francisco! where?


Where but at our house sir? he and his Bride
Craving your company and those Gentlemen
I named unto you.

For no disparagement unto their worths, sir,
But private reasons yet unknown to me
Wherein you shall be satisfied at your coming,

But are they Married?


I brought the Priest to 'em:
And saw them lawfully coupled, and before
Sufficient witnesses, that saw 'em chamberd,
She was his own Church-sure before I left '^m,
And he has made her Cock-sure, sir by this time,
Or else he is a Bungler.

Go i'll follow thee.
Piso is here.

But where is that Fabritio?


We'll find him too. J^g you sir on before:
You are no street companion for us.

I am gone sir --


You have heard all Fabritio; what d^ think on it?


Nothing; nor nothing will till I arrive
There at the full knowledge of all together.

But prithe^ hang thy Ha^gman^ project now,
And bear us company in thine own shape.

Not for the price of the Novella Piso.
I'll try her to the quick. You'll give me leave
To make prize of her if I can, I crossed not you.

We wish you safe aboard sir.


On before then.
Now Nicolo; your disguise again oath Zaffi.

O, it is ready; and I know my quue.


Who see me, in this strain, seem to outstrip
The bounds of filial duty, let (withal)
Their observation, by my just ends, gather,
Tis not to lose, but to recall a father.

NOw Lady, has your entertainment pleased you
In the Novella's house? is all well yet?

So well, that now come Father Friends, and all
The friendly Foes that did oppose my bliss
I can maintain my cause in these safe arms
Against all their Frowns and Furies.

And your Mistress is over, too* I hope sir
The place is not so dangerous as it was.

Lady your nobleness shown in this great bounty,
Hath not alone wiped off my foul suspicion:
But scored upon my breast an endless sum
Of thanks; which I, unable to discharge,
Must not presume to live, but as your Creature;
Nor will I further dare to tempt your goodness
In deeper search of what your reason was
(Past all my hopes and wishes) to provide
For me; I will not sum in such a scruple*
For sure, I hold you for a power Divine
(Past all the fictions of the fabulous times
Fashioning out the Gods in earthly forms)
Sent by the highest providence to help me.

You take too deep a sense of courtesy!
But see, are these your friends?

And let me beg
Your suffrage Lady, I may bid them welcome.

Your Bride and I will both supply you in it.
Neither of these is he they call Fabritio?

No, but he's sent for; and comes instantly.


This is the Lady I am bound to serve.


And I to honour.


Setting aside your suit sir.


I cannot promise that.


And I do wish
I had her double price in ready Duccats,
For what she has done, and the other do besides.

You still stand in your good conceit of me.


Yes, and I would so stand to'^, ha --


You are a merry Gentleman.


I will not whisper it, Horatio,
The woman that I dealt with for disguise
Was wrought before by this most matchless Lady
To cross the Match twixt Flavia and Fabritio;
And had undone it though I had done nothing,
And ere she would condition with me,
Obliged me, by an oath, (in case we escaped)
To bring her hither to this Ladies house.
I kept that oath, and here you find us welcomed.

Then thou hast done it, would I had still the Duccats
To pledge thee here.

We'll talk of that hereafter.


What acted you, Tit, in this Comedy?


The Chambermaid, a kind of putter forwards,
Sir, to the business.

She has done so well,
That, if a Match in Venice may be found
By my best care, i'll help her to a Husband,
For she deserves a good one.

And if he prove not so, I am like to prove
A good one my self, and make him something.

Thou wilt, I find it in a villainous cast
Of that eye there.

And what think you of this?


Even such another, of another hue,
She has a devilish gloat too.

Gallants, I find you merry, you're more welcome:
My man acquaints me with a present business
Requiring privacy. Please you, with your friends
Go up to the Bride-chamber. There is music.
Wait you respectively.

We'll all observe you Lady.


But Lady, if you receive the Duccats
Before you come to us, pray bring our shares,
We all connive you know.

Pray be not jealous,
Follow your Friends, i'll follow you straight way.
How dreams he of this money? he knows nothing,
An English Factor, say you Borgio?

Yes Mistress, a brave fellow.


And is he so well moneyed as to spare
Out of his Masters trust, so great a sum?

Oh he's a master here himself. They are
Abroad, the royalist Nation of the World.
What rich Venetian Rarity has not
The English Money-masters purchased from
Princes and States, to bear home as their triumphs?
And for their pleasures -- but i'll say no more;
He thinks I stay too long for him to wait
Without, with so much money.

Did thou see'^?


Most brightly shining! He's now telling it
In the next room! He comes not to tender
The value of it in fine qualities
Like your supposed Monsieur: but in cash!
Cash! cash of Gold! Oh tis a tempting sight;
Able to damn a Noble woman's honour.
What's your descent? But poor I make no question;
Why, this will set you up and make you noble.

This way of his might serve to turn the blood
That has but any tincture of good in it
From touching such a bait, yet he thinks now
He spurs me to it. But Bravo I will fit you.
Go call him in, go.

Now my Blood and Brain,
Be strong and sudden, stay.

Why stop you Borgio?


To see him weigh his gold. Oh dainty sight!
He brought his weights in's pocket: just Gentleman
He will be sure you shall not want a grain
Of your full price of sweet damnation.

He's doing no such thing.


No, no, I have it now.


I pray thee go, thou know not how the thought
Of so much gold, and the conceit of the Maidenhead
Lost in the house to day sets my virginity
On edge now to be going.

Are you so ready? then I fly.


What ails the fellow troe!


I must yet have an eye upon this female
To quit my jealousy, or catch her in the nick.

Here we may see, and hear all undiscovered.


Watch close, he comes.


By your leave Lady, I come not a pure Suitor
(With studied Oratory; nor address a Sonnet,
Or trifling Love-toyes to persuade admittance
By slow degrees into your inmost favour)
But a rich purchacer, that brings, at once,
The golden Sum, and Price of your enjoying.
Here precious Beauty, made by this more precious!
Take your full due, and render readily
The full tuition of my wealthy purchase.

Now virtue guard me.


What's that?


She invokes virtue.


Ha! why this delay?
Let not the glorious sight of this amaze you,
Though it be granted, sudden apprehension
Of such bright blessings may transport a soul
Into high raptures, when it is considerd,
The Ornament of youth, the strength of age,
Lifes great maintainer, Lady, let not this
At all transmute you. For i'll bring supplies
That shall so frequently acquaint you with
Such sights as these, that you shall grow regardless
Even of the care to keep them, in respect
Of the delicious pleasure brings them in:
Delay not therefore that high purchased pleasure,
That brings this to you, by a Minutes loss
To make it fully yours.

Sir I have heard you:
And now must let you know, tis not the sight
Of that your glorious sum can take my wonder;
Much less my love or person: my amazement
Is, that a man, that bears his Makers shape,
Endued with reason, to direct and govern
That goodly fortune; and has such treasure given him
(Besides his greater blessings of the mind
By well desposing of it) to advance
This worth in deeds of virtue, should descend
Below the sense of Beasts, to part with that,
Allotted for his livelihood and honour
To wast it, and himself in bestial Lust.

How's this?


I know not what to make o'this wench.
She preaches me thinks:

Besides sir, were it well examined,
The golden sum you tender is, perhaps,
None of your proper own: I understand
You are another Factor, I presume
In all your Catalogue of Merchandise
You find no warrant to buy Maydenheads.
Is such a thing in all your bills of Lading?
They are no way transportable* though you allow
For fraught and leakage half the worth; and less
Returnable by way of exchange. How can
You take up a virginity in Venice,
And make a London payment of it, on
Sight of your bill, or six or ten days after?

Good!


Nay then you dally with me, and I must
Deal plain and briefly with you. Here's the price,
And either render me my just demand,
Or I shall take for your disgrace an order
Shall spue you forth the City.

Now I fear
I am insnar'd. I have but one way left
To fly from shame, or fall to utter Ruin.

I begin to suspect her honest.


Your answer Gentlewoman.


Gentle sir,
The Law hath made me yours. And I have now
No Court but Conscience to relieve me in.

What may this mean?


If the strong passion of a Virgin soul,
Expressed in bitterst tears, move not your pity,
This shall prevent your cruelty.

She'll prove honest of my life.


What mean you Lady?


Keep at that distance sir, and you shall know:
Come nearer, and I will not live to tell you.

Pray rise and speak your story: yet I tell you,
I hold it very strange, that so much money
And such a one as I (none of th'unhandsomst)
Should not go down with a young wench, and one
Of the profession you pretend to be of
Before cold Iron! Me thinks most unnatural.
Think better yet before you utter further.

Indeed I may not.


Well, well, on then.


Tis true, I am indeed a mere pretender
To the profession you supposed me of;
A spotless Virgin (by my utmost hopes)
And will remain so till I am a Bride.

Too honest to be a woman!


Why took you this deceiving habit then?


I am about to tell you for your pity,
I am a Roman borne, of good descent;
My father noble (of the Candiani)
How ere decayed in fortune, ere he dyed;
Which drew on my Misfortune: For, being betrothed
Unto a wealthy heir, here, of this City,
Who so journ'd then in Rome, his covetous Father
Rav^shd his faith from me, to give it another;
And called him hastily from Rome to Venice.
I followed him, in hope to cross the Match.
And so regain him; towards which already,
I have done something.

Fabritio's wench my life on it.


What in this habit, as a Courtesan?


Not without good advise: For, by this means
I draw the eyes of all the youthful Gentry,
Not without hope to gain a sight of him.
My price and port keep back inferior persons.
Nor lose I honour by it: For the strictnes
Of our Italian censure gives a virgin,
That held familiarity with any Man,
By way of Marriage treaty, and then forsaken,
Lost in repute; she is no honest woman
Until that man do vindicate her honour.

But should he find you here, what were his censure?


Here he should find what his disloyalty
Had wrought me to; and should restore me firm
On my first basis, or exchange a life
For mine ere we would part.

This sounds yet well.


I'll trust thee now. Thou art a noble wench,
Thou had kissed Death by this else. Now i'll trust thee.

If he were lost by Marriage of another,
I would remove with such a testimony
Of my reserved honour (in despite
Of this my outward carriage, for my ends;
Maugre the sterne construction of my country)
That strangers should receive me; and some one
More noble then himself --

Take you to wife?


I should not doubt.


Tis done, and I am he that does it.


I cannot sir, but kindly take your offer:
But, if my first love fail me, there is one,
A noble German, that commenced his suit
To me this day.

I am he too Lady -- Look well upon me
That in this shift, reducing of my beard,
With this supply of money came to try you,
I find you noble, and above it, honest.

This is the German that Fabritio apes.


And he should come now.


Gentlemen forbear;
Indeed it is not civil in you to pry beyond
Your hospitable usage, pray forbear.

Tis timely chidden wench, we will obey thee.


Besides the Bridegroom, and the Bride expect you.


O ha they done we come, we come.


This jealous trial now of yours (how ere
You have expressed strong arguments of love)
Has not augmented you in my affection.

O say not so sweet Lady, i'll redeem it.


I cannot yet believe you are the Man,
You are so changed from what you seemed to day,
Must the mind alter with the outward habit?

Mistress the German --


Here he is man, he says.


I say he is without, and craves to see you.


How can this be? or who can I believe?


Good sir depart and make room for your self
Your proper self to enter the Dutch Prince.

I tell thee I am he, and here already,
I am Swatzenberg.

Yes in your the other beard sir.
Hans Snortanfart, are you not? well I can but warn you,
If you will needs stand to the taking off
A mans good name from him before his face,
Then take what follows, I will fetch him in
Mistress, you were best be out of sight a while:
Your presence with this stranger may whet up his fury
To cut all our throats else.

I'll take your council.


For sir i'll tell you, if you had but seen
How he worried a Spaniard to day, you would
Have been able at your return to make
As many of your Countrymen, as thrive
By serving of the States to laugh in faith.

I tell thee I am he; 'twas I that chased
The Spaniard hence.

I tell you yet again
You were best be gone before the He indeed
Come in to chase you after him.

I'll stand the hazard.


See his impatience pulls him in already.


Where is this Lady? Dos her beauty fly me?


She is at hand, but first here is a stranger,
A most strange stranger that says he is you sir.

Was oder were bistu? Bistu ein Deutscher? Sag mihr in was ort Du gelebst hast?


Who's this?


Ich denke du bist ein heuchler; bistu aber ein Deutscher so anwort mihr in
deutscher sprach.


Good sir speak in the proper language of
The Nation we are in, though it come brokenly
From you that this good fellow here may understand us.

Thou son of impudence, and imposture, speak;
What is thy end in this?

Think what thine own must be, thou son of slander.


Precious counterfeit!
But I am weaponless, and must fetch strength
Of officers to right me.

What dos your shame remove you sir?


What can this Rascal mean?


I care not honest fellow, where's thy Mistress?
Good Angels guard me.

Dos she fright you sir?


I ask thee for thy Mistress, the Novella.


What appears she to you?


Thou powerful man in Magic, I will tell thee.
Th'hast raised an apparition, that has damned thee
Blacker, then thy black art; nay hell it self.

Bless us! more madness yet!


The heavenly spirit, that inspired this form,
(When the unworthy world enjoyd her being,
Which thou hast conjured into this lewd habit)
Has, at this instant won the powers above
To sink thee and thy for^erers.

What may you mean? Here is no forcery,
This woman's Flesh and Blood.

I would not dare to try to be the Duke.


You may depart, pray hinder not the house.


Had thou but seen, as I have, one like her,
And noted the divinity in her looks
(Although in those adulterate incitements
She seems to wear) she would have struck thy soul
With fervent adoration, not base lust.

I know not what to say to 'him.


See who rings.
What divine creature, sir, was that you mentioned?

I dare to name her to thee, though thou be
Her incensed Ghost, to work me to despair,
It was Victoria.

This sounds most strangely! Have you been at Rome sir?


'Twas there I saw and loved her.


Answer me pray sir, why could not this fall
In your discourse to day, when I rel^ted
My Life and Fortune to you? why do you start?
I am no shadow; but suspect you rather,
To be not as you seem, the noble German
That vowed me love, dos that too startle you?
See sir, to prove I am no aerie spirit,
I'll trust your hand (if you be mortal substance)
With so much flesh and blood as may resolve you.

I find tis she, and having found her thus
She's lost for ever, and my self no l^sse,
That was the cause of this her desperate fortune.

What's that you say? what ail you sir? how is't?
And what moves thy distraction? Borgio, speak.

Horror and shame invades us, all the house
Is round beset with officers. The Magistrates,
Are entering now, for what, or whom they search
I cannot guess, unless this be some Murderer
Slipped in, to draw our lives in question.

Deal plainly sir, what are you? he's stupefied!


The Spanyard's with them too that took th'affront
By the supposed Dutchman here to day;
And he that feigned himself to be that Dutchman
Desires their aid against this unknown person.

This is the house you say.


And this is the Gentlewoman.


Give me my Daughter, Harlot.


Here's no such creature, here sir, if she be
Your Daughter, this woman directed hither,
She is no Harlot, but an honest Bride;
Lawfully wed and bedded; as may appear
By the strong testimony of divers friends:
Call them all down.

Unheard-of impudence! Are Bawds, and VVhores
Fit Matchmakers for Magnificoe's Daughters?

Speak lower, or at home sir, you know not
What we are: Hark you sir -- your last nights trial
Did not enough inform you.

We shall know more anon;
In the mean time what are you?

A stranger sir.


We shall know more of that anon too.


This is the stranger, that affronted me;
Against whom I crave your Justice.

You shall know more anon too.


And this is my Abuser.


You also shall know more anon.


You are well met Gentle-woman -- I gave you lost.


What will you whimper now? will not marriage
Make you bold, that makes so many impudent?
She was not lost sir; nor in danger of losing,
She was but mislayd a little, as your Writing was to day.

Well said my chattering Magpie. I will side thee.


Audacious strumpet that seduces my Daughter.


You are Mistaken, she did but wait upon her.


Right sir, and did but duty i'll be sworn.


Nor I, I will be sworn.


Not, in consenting to the stealth?


It was my duty sir for the reward,
VVee all would live you know.

Will you be gone?


I hope I am discharged: for look you sir,
I brought you where you find your Daughter safe.

Begone I say.


No whit the worse for wearing, as they say.


Go thrust her out of doors.


At my own liberty I hope.


How thou wilt to be rid of thee.


May you see your Childrens, Childrens, Childrens, Children.


And thou misledst my Son, I ask him of thee.


You shall know more of that anon sir.


Out-brav'd and scorned by Strumpets, Bawds, and Bravoes!
Call in the Officers.

And call the common Hangman if you please,
And end all among your selfes, if your grave wisdoms,
And Lawyers, here, can find one guilty person
VVee'l all submit our necks to you.

Tis boldly spoken.


I will speak but truth.
And you, opposing it, shall wrong the dignity
You bear in the City, to your utter shames.
This Gentleman and your Daughter were contracted,
Your self a willing witness; your Son likewise
Unto a noble virgin (Sir of whom
You shall know more anon)
It pleased diviner providence to take
From eithers chosen mate their earthly fortunes;
Yet each had person, blood, and virtue left
Above the value of a Princes dowry.
Would you so Kick at heaven then, in despite
Of its great Ordinance, as to force your children,
To forfeit both their faiths, thereby to lose
The never-fayling hope of future blessings,
To pull withal a curse on your own heads,
That could no less then ruin your estates,
And render you most wretched in your dotage,
Past help or hope how to relieve your selfes:
Your consciences still groaning underneath
The lashes that your Childrens bastard issue
Should lay upon you? more, you may consider --

We do consider sir, this place and people
No fit receipt for warrantable business.

This was no bawdy talk sir, nor have I
Heard worse from any mouth in this free place
Till your arrival here.

I cannot be so happy.


Let her see your face.


O my Fabritio --


You see the worst of us, I should be loath
Any unwarrantable act should pass among us.

Thou look like one indeed of upright Conscience!


And for the Marriage sir, it is as lawful
As if your self had given her in St. Marks.
I'll fetch the Priest t'avouch it.

Fetch that Priest.


But i'll be so revenged
Upon this instrument, this unknown Trull here --

Our Ears and Eyes, Fabritio, witness for her.


You have told me wonders,
Yet with such faith as I shall ever wish
Locked in this heavenly Cabinet I take all.

You may Fabritio, for as I prize Life;
Honour 'bove that; and above both thy friendship,
My soul is not assured of firmer truth,
Let thy Dutch habit drink off jealousy,
And take her to thee.

'Tis done my Piso.


And I made happy past my height of hopes.


Good, you shall see how I shall cool those Kisses.


May I say boldly you are man and wife?


We are most faithfully till death;
I'll fetch a Priest shall straight pronounce ye^ so.

You say that is a Dutchman sir, that wronged you.


Right, worthy Signior, that's the man I Challenge.


You say you are the man confronted Don here.


Yes, and will still mayntain't, for violence
He offered to that noble virtuous Lady.

Good! virtuous Lady! Let me join your Friendships.


You have done it sir.


That is the man I challenge.


The same man I. He has not left the house
Since my abuse; I fear to her much wrong:
For he is some disguised Knave on my life.

Now you are in the right.


He could not wear those Clothes and speak no Dutch else.


Still in the right; i'll show you what he is,
And out of him, what she is, whom you call
So virtuous and so noble! and you sir,
That mentioned the Hangman, come all and see
The commendable port this Lady bears.
It seems, sir, you affect this Gentlewoman.

The best of any living.


And you him Lady?


Yes, he is my husband.


Would that were true in faith. The rogue your man
Said he would fetch a Priest --

No verier Rogue then my self sir.


Thou art a mad fellow for a Priest indeed;
But such a Priest, such a Marriage,
Put 'em together.

I do pronounce them lawful man and wife.


The Bridegroom thanks you, but you Mistress Bride
For the fine trick you put on me last night,
Look now upon your husband,
Who would you speak with fellow?

With Signior Rastrofico here, the Hangman,
I come to call him to State-businesse sir.

Can this be he? (you said he was a counterfeit)
I saw him ride the Wooden-horse, last day
With less then half this beard, unbeard him sirrah.
I'll bear you out. So rest you Gentlemen
With your so virtuous Lady, and her husband.

Pi. c. Fabritio!


Sir I must crave your pardon, This is he,
My first love that I told you of.

You have it freely Lady.


I am abused and couzend.


I thank you sir for all the harm you did me
In your Revenge -- And hark you, be at peace,
And i'll be silent for your last nights work.

Forbear me, I am off again.


Good sir,
Stop not the blessing you were about to give us.

I am off again. The pandare was the Priest,
The Match is no Match, you no more my Children,
But Knave and strumpet.

I'll not be so couzend.
This is no Priest; and all that's past unlawful

You will know more anon.


Then cast your eyes on me, who dare maintain
My Priest-hood lawful; it being derived
From th'holy Order of St. Augustine?

Let me not surfeit with excess of joy?
My brother Paulo!

Thy brother and thy father, virtuous sister.
Be ever subject of my dearest care;
And pardon me, who (jealous of thine honour
Inflamed by the same heart, of the same blood:
For we are all the Relicts of our Parents)
Watched nearly, and pursued thy escape from Rome.
For which I had good warrant, Gentlemen
See there my dispensation with the allowance
Of all the holy brotherhood of my Covent.
My ends were fair, though in this uncouth way
Though (heaven I beg thy pardon) as my care
Was to preserve her life and more her honour;
Fearing her violent and abused spirit,
Might have made wrack of either, or of both,
I once had secret purpose to have taken
Her Life, in case she had forsook her honour;
And with her cut off Candianies Line,
Which now branched here, may touch the worlds end
With fair succession! Be you blessed for ever.
And now, grave sirs, let me entreat your likings,
And cheerful reconcilement to your Children:
That so you may your Childrens, Children see,
Crowned by the prayers of your prosperity.

I am content.


And I, but for one scruple
Clear me this point, how had you saved your honour
If the old youth, last night (who shall be nameless)
Had but mis* spent his time upon your moore here?

'Tis easily done sir, see my loved Fabritio
The Eunuch moore you gave me.

My boy Jacomo, turned Chambermaid!
Has thy Mistress used thee well?

Not without much desert.


She means for your dear sake sir.


I see, sweet Heart, you have an honest Family.


Here you see all, and all that came in the house;
(Since it was made mine) in this Convention,
I dare them not; but give them freest leave
To speak the worst they found in the Novella.

We all conclude you're noble.


All's well accorded then. We all are Friends,
And may Priests travail never to worse ends.

CAuse 'tis the Custom, By the Poet, Sirs,
I'm sent to crave a Plaudit, and the Spurs
That prick him on to it, is, his promised Pay
May chance to fail, if you dislike the Play,
But don't if you be wise; for he has vowed
To write far worse if this be not allow'd.

