THE Love-sick Court OR THE Ambitious Politic.

A COMEDY

Written by Richard Brom:

Nil mea, ceu mos est, commends carmina curo Se nisi comendent carmina
dispereant.

LONDON, Printed by J. T. for A. C. and are to be sold by Henry Broom, at the
Gun in Ivie-lane, 1658.

A little wit, less learning, no Poetry
This Play-maker dares boast: Tis his modesty.
For though his labours have not found least grace,
It puffs not him up or in mind or face,
Which makes him rather in the Art disclame
Bold License, then to arrogate a Name;
Yet to the wit, the scholar, and the Poet,
Such as the Play is, we must dare to show it
Our judgements to but too: And without fear
Of giving least offence to any ear.
If you find pleasure in it, we boasting none,
Nor you nor we lose by' expectation.
Sometimes at poor men's boards the curious find
Amongst homely fare, some unexpected dish,
Which at great Tables they may want and wish:
If in this slight Collation you will bind
Us to believe you' have pleased your palates here,
Pray bring your friends w'you next, you know your cheor.
The Scene THESSALY.

Good morrow my good Lord. How fares the King?

More sick in mind then body, by th'opinion,
(Not only of the skilful Doctors, but) of all
That come about him.

I that have not seen him
Since he was sick, can guess, then at the cause
Of his distemper. He is sick o'th'subject;
Th'unquiet Commons fill his head and breast
With their impertinent discontents and strife.
The peace that his good care has kept'hem in
For many years, still feeding them with plenty,
Hath, like ore pampered steeds that throw their Masters,
Set them at war with him. O misery of kings!
His virtue breeds their vices; and his goodness
Pulls all their ills upon him. He has been
Too long too lenetive: A thousand heads
(Or say a hundred, or but ten) cut off
Of the most gross ones, the prime, leading heads
Of theirs a month since, had preserved him better
Then all his doctors pills can purge him now.

You are too sharp Disanius. There's a means,
As mild as other of the Kings clear Acts,
In agitation now, shall reconcile
All to a common peace no doubt.

What's that Justinius?

Stay: Here comes Stratocles.

I fear, in that
Ambitious pate lies the combustable stuff
Of all this late commotion.

Why is man
Prescribed on earth to imitate the Gods,
But to come nearest them in power and action?
That is to be a King! That only thought
Fills this capacious breast. A King or nothing!

He's deep in meditation.

On no good.
It is some divellish waking dream affects him.
I'll put him out -- And as I was about
To say my Lord.

What? when Disanius?

About a month since,
It stick still in my jaws. Be not ambitious,
Affect not popularity. 'Tis the most
Notable break-neck in a kingdom.

In whom?

I know to whom I speak; would Stratocles
As well knew who he is, and what he does:
It would be better for him. Thank me not,
I wish it for the king and kingdoms good,
Not yours I do assure you, my great Lord;
Yet mine own Peer, if you forget me not.

You take your time Sir to make me your mirth.
A time may come --

When you may be my King,
And then up goes Disanius. Is't not so?

Yes, upto Court, to be king Stratocles fool.

The Court now privileges thee, or I would change
A cuffe with your great Souldier-ship and popular greatness
With clowns and Citizens, and Gentry, sprung
By their late peaceful wealth, out of their dongue.
But let'em thank our pious King, not you
That claim (as merit for your service done)
Their loves and voices.

Cease my Lords this strife.
The King may hear on it, whose perplexities
Already are too grievous. Pray be silent,
The king approaches.

We'll attend his entrance.


Four of the chief in the commotion,
Upon the engagement of my faith, that you
Had past your kingly word for their return
In safety, I have brought to Court, who wait
Your present will and pleasure.

Bring'em in.
Disanius, welcome. I thought well to send for you
To take a Councellors part of my late cares
Into your consideration.

I attend
Your Highness pleasure.

Nearer good Disanius.

Do you deal in secret king? The Commons sent for
To their examination, and this old
Antagonist of mine called to confront me,
And I prepared by no intelligence
To fit me for th'incounter? Let'em come.
I must not be denied to stand as fair
In competition for the Crown as any man
The King himself elects for his successor;
The people are mine own through all his parts:
He may command their knees, but I their hearts.

Stratocles, Justinius, Disanius sit.
My lords, altho'our Laws of Thessaly
To you, as well as to our self, are known,
And all our customs, yet for orders sake
I shall lay open one to you. That is, when
A king deceaseth without issue male
(As I unfortunately must) the Commons
Are to elect their King, provided that
He be of noble blood, a sculdier, and one
That has done public service for the Crown --

That makes for me.

Or else the son of some
Great General slain in battle for his country
(As my Adrastus was.)

O my brave brother!

Twenty years sorrow for that Soldiers loss
Has not worn out his memory.

Your grace
Forgets not then Soldiers of fresher fame.

Some other time to boast good Stratocles.

Twere good youl'd hear the king -- A general,
Or a Generals son may be elected. There
Your Majesty left.

Or if the sonless King
Yet has a daughter, and he match her in
His life time to a husband that is noble,
He stands immediate heir unto the Crown
Against all contradiction.

Now think upon my service, Royal Sir.

Now think upon my Nephews, Royal Master,
The sons of brave Adrastus, who was slain
Twenty years since in fighting of your battle.

Twere good you would hear the king. The husband of
Your daughter must be elected. There you left, sir.

It rests now that a speedy choice be made
Of a fit husband, one that may acquire
Eudynas love, and peoples approbation,
The people, (for whose noise I must not rest
Till my successor be appointed to them)
Are wild till this election be made:
They have, in arms, made their demand, and wait
My present answer.

O here they come. These be the principals 4 Rustiks.
The heads, the heads, forsooth they call themselves.
Head-carpenter, head-smith, head-plowman, head-shepherd.

Nay, pray approach; seem no more abashed
Here then amongst your giddy-headed rowts,
Where every man's a King, and wage your powers
Against mine in soul defiance. Freely speak
Your grievance, and your full demand.

Tis humbly all expressed in this petition.

By all means have a care that, to any question, we give the King good words to
his face; He is another manner of man here then we took him for at home.


I sweat for it. I am sure I have scarce a dry thread in my leather lynings.


They made us heads in the country: But if our head-ships now, with all our
country care should be hanged up at court for displeasing of this good King,
for the next Kings good our necks will not be set right a-again in the next
Kings reign I take it.


My head itches to be at home again.

My head itches to be at home again.

My head and heart both aches for fear. Would
I were honestly hanged out of the way to be rid on it.

There you may read my Lords what we before
Found would be their demand. Tis for a King
That must succeed me.

And because you have
Governed them long in peace, by which they thrive
Their wisdom would have you entail that piece
On them for after times; and so they nominate
Ambitious Stratocles to be your heir.

Envious Disanius, my merit is
Their Motive.

Cease your strife. -- You have stood, more inclined
To lay your choice on Philocles, or Philargus
The Twin-born sons of long since slain Adrastus.

May it please your Majesty we are informed
That in their travails unto Delphos, both
Of them are dead.

That information
Was merely by suggestion (I dare speak it)
Insinuated by Stratocles. They both live
And are upon return.

Would we knew that.
Lord Stratocles then should pardon us. He's a man
Gracious amongst us. But --

Philargus! O --
Philargus, be he living.

I say Philocles.
Brave Philocles is the man.

False, empty weathercocks.

I say Lord Stratocles is the man we know
And ought to honour.

There lives yet some hope.

What strange confusions this? Or whither will
You run by several ways? Philargus one,
Another Philocles; a third cries Stratocles.
In this you say you'll have no king at all.
This must be reconciled, or you pull ruin
Upon your selves. He, whom the king is pleased
To give his daughter to must be your King.

All that we crave (and that upon our knees)
Is, that the king will graciously be pleased
To make a speedy choice, and give us leave
With pardon to depart, and signify
His Royal pleasure to the doubtful countries.

Tell'em they shall expect, then, but a month,
In which short time my daughters marriage
Shall be consummate.

The Gods protect your Majesty.

And now, my Lords, the commons being at peace,
Let me prevail your private jars to cease.

Madam, the cause is mine; tis mine to mourn
In chief, if they be dead. They were your sons,
Tis true, and though they were your only comforts
Upon this earth, you but resign to heaven
The blessings that it lent you. But to me
They were a pair of equal lovers; and
By me so equally beloved; and by
The king my father so 'bove all men respected
That I by either had been made a Queen,
Which title I for ever will disclaim
If they be dead.

O my Philargus. O my Philocles!
Ye Gods I know they did not seek your Counsels
Nor dare to approach your altars, but with all
Due reverence and required ceremony.
And could your Delphian Oracle, when they
Were friendly competitioners for love,
Answer them but with death?

The rumour, Madam,
Carries so little show of truth, that you
Do ill to take so deep a sense of it;
Much worse t'expostulate, as if you had
An injury done you by the Gods. Have you
Been from mine infancy my governess,
And careful councel-giver; and must I
Find cause to chide you now? come dry these tears.

Where's my sweet princess?
Where's my Lady governess?

O Garrula, welcome. I could never wish
Thy company more usefully: For thou bring
Some recreation on thy countenance always.

I am glad my countenance pleases you. It may:
For I have on it now (could you discern'em)
A thousand joys dancing within these wrinkles
More then my feeble failing tongue can utter.
And that's a grief to me among all my joys;
The failing of the tongue, the tongue, the tongue
Is a great grief to any woman. But
To one in years, and well in years, as I am,
It is a grief indeed, more then the loss
Of any other member.

But I pray thee
Let not that grief deprive us of the hearing
Of, at least, one of thy whole thousand joys.

Tis a report of joy and wonder, princess;
Enough to make not only you, and you,
But King and kingdom glad, could I but utter't.

Thou dost speak well enough, and enough too,
I pray thee tell it.

Tis some feigned stuff
She hopes to palliate our sorrows with.

'Tis a report, worth more then all the stories
That I my self have told in child-bed chambers,
To restore spirit to the pallid flesh.
And I have been a woman as good at it
(Without vain boast be it spoke) as any she
In Thessaly, that ere durst undertake
The office of a Midwise: And that the queen
Your Mother knew, when I delivered her
Of the sweet babe (your self.) She is in bliss
Now in Elisium. But you, Madam Governess,
Can yet remember good old Garrula,
That took into the light your twin-born sons,
And thereby hangs a tale --

What means this woman?

Good Garrula, thy news? thy present story?

'Tis such a story, that could I but utter't
With volubility of tongue! -- But O
This tongue, that fails me now; for all the helps
Of Syrups, and sweet sippings. I still go
Provided, as you see, to cherish it.
And yet it falters with me.

We shall have it
Anon I hope. Placilla, whats your news?

'Tis excellent Madam. And I was ambitious
To bring you the first taste of it. But if
Garrula has in that prevented me,
I can with no less joy relate it yet.
My brothers are returned, and safe, from Delphos.

Be thou as true as th'Oracle.

Now, Madam.

Mother, tis true.

'Tis that I would ha'told you
Had not my tongue failed me in the utterance.

Thy tongue ran fast enough, but lost its way.

Three minutes, Madam, brings'em to your presence.

How is it with you, Madam? Let not joy
Beget a worse effect then did your fears.
Help, Garrula.

Ods pity, what dee mean.
Madam, look up, and speak up too you were best,
Do you know who talks to you? Speak; and speak well too.
I shall speak that will be worse for you else.
Madam, you know, that I know what I know.

I am well I thank you, Garrula.

O are you so?

I have observed that often in her language,
This chattering Midwife glanceth at the knowledge
Of some strange hidden thing, which like as with
A Charm, she keeps my Governess in awe with.
I guess it but some trifle: For I know
The Lady is right virtuous; yet it may
Be worth my inquisition at fit time.

You have felt the comforts of my friendship Garrula,
And had you common charity, you'd forbear me.

I -- done Madam. Be secure. But yet,
Though I forbear to speak, I not forget.

You have not yet, Placilla, told the means
Of your rich knowledge.

Nor shall I need now Madam
These shouts of joy that follow'd them to Court
Attend them to your presence.

O let us meet'em. Madam, come away.

O ye Gods, I thank ye.

I have a son there too, as dear to me
As any Mothers only born can be,
Whose name's not voiced with theirs. Yet by your favour
Great Madam Governess, he has discharged
The office of a Governor ore your sons,
As well as you have over the Kings daughter.
And they have sucked more of his Helycon
Then she has of your doctrine: which their breeding
Together with their Travels through his care
Will testify (I doubt not) to my honour,
That have brought forth a son of such performance.

Did not I say, 'twas Stratocles that raised
That hideous rumour of their deaths, among
His wild idolators, in hope to gain
Election by their ignorance and rudeness?

'Twas well those factious heads were wrought to come
Before the King to find his clemency,
And probabilily that these were living.

And how they then shrunk in their necks from Stratocles!
It has so laid the flames of his ambition,
That these may safely now tread out the fire.

Welcome again my princely Nephews, welcome.

Thanks, courteous Uncle.

You interrupt me, brother.

Good woman, cry thee mercy. Mothers are such things!

Why, what things are we mothers?

O the old night-piece with her dark lantern by her.

You'll give us leave to take
The comforts due unto us in our age,
For which we suffered sorrow in our youth!
Our children are our children young or old.

So is my horse my horse.

You have replied,
As Meanwhile did a Councellor at Law,
Who said his adverse Advocate had pleaded
To as much purpose as a hen i'th'forehead.

Geron. you are welcome. Thou still keepst thy humour,
Thy travels haven't changed thee. Thou came home
As wise as thou went out.

So Meanwhile said,
A miser, having much increased his store,
He had as much still as he had before.

Enough, I'll give thee over.

O my dear off-spring; every sight of you
Is a new recompense, and satisfaction
For all the pain and travel of your birth.
In you your fathers memory shall live
Beyond the malice of the grave and death:
And I, when my rejoicing shall be full,
And cannot take addition, freely yielding
My flesh to dust, shall yet be blessed by those
Who shall give testimony to your virtue.

Twere a sufficient spur to noble actions
To be rewarded but with your content,
Which to procure we make our business.

Philocles,
Your brow is clouded. Has the Oracle
Adjudged against you. Pray let us partake
The knowledge of the Delphian decree;
And which of you stands highest in the favour
Of wise Apollo, to be husband to
Princess Eudyna here the Kingdoms heir.
What speaks the Oracle?

Such a Verdict, Madam,
Requires an O Edipus to construe it.
I neither know it, nor am solicitous
After the meaning.

Wisely spoken, Pupil.
So Meanwhile answered an Egyptian Porter
To one demanding what he bore concealed?
Tis therefore covered that thou should not know*
The cases are alike.

Pray let us hear it.
Cannot your Tutor Geron play the Hermes
T'interpret it?

I am not Enigmatical:
But all for Apothegmes. Besides, I say
(As Meanwhile Aristippus of a Riddle)
It is not safe to loose what being bound
Doth trouble us so much.

Let me come to it.

Yes by all means: For as one Meanwhile said
The blind are best in the dark.

My Lord, your trumps
Are ever shot at me. Blind as I am,
I perceive that. And make much of your Riddle,
I know both what it can and will come to,
Better without the sight of it, then all
You can, with all your wise constructions.
And so I leave you.

Not in anger, Garrula.

Madam, you know I know. I must take leave
To take a Nap*

And Governor Geron, wait upon your mother,
Trust our cares with your charge.

So Meanwhile said
A School boy, when another raised his top,
Let me alone, my self can keep it up.

And now let me entreat that we may hear
The hidden sentence. Happily so many
May guess at the intent.

She longs to hear
Which of the two is pricked to be her husband.

Here it is. If there be any thing.

Let me be Clerk. I hope at least to read it.
Contend not for the Jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.
Pursue your Fortune: For tis she
Shall make you what you seem to be.
Apollo, thy great wisdom hath quite fooled mine.

Nothing but contradictions.

As how, Philocles.

He commands here.
Contend not for the Jewel -- we agree,
Eudyna is the Jewel. -- which shall both of you enrich.
How shall she enrichus both? Can she be wife to us both?
Then here he bids
Pursue your Fortune. -- And we both agree
Eudyna is that Fortune too: she's both
The Jewel we must not contend for; and
The Fortune we must both pursue. Then here
He says tis she shall make us what we seem to be.
What do we seem? we are no Hypocrites
In flesh or spirit; no fantastic bodies
Or shadows of humanity.

No, Delphos is but a den of jugglers, which profanely
Abuse divinity, and pretend a God
Their Patron to authorize their delusions.

Nephews, the Gods had need be cautilous
For what they speak if you may be their Judges.

What thinks good Justinius?

My Lords, here's two commands;
One, that you not contend to gain the jewel;
The other, that you both pursue your fortune.
Both these commands are thus to be obeyed;
Contend not for her as to violate
Your unexampled friendship, which you are
Renowned for ore all Greece; And both pursue
Your fortune in her without eithers grudge,
At tothers happiness in her choice.

Noble Justinius, thanks.

This we can do.

And for the happiness which we both aspire to
We here confirm the friendship long since plighted,
Which never shall be broken by Philargus.

Noble Philargus.

So vows Philocles,
'Tis not the cloudy language of the Gods
Shall make our breasts tempestuous or stormy:
But with the same serenity and quiet,
As heretofore our hearts shall mingle still,
And fortify their truce. Let the event
Expound their Ridle. If good, it is our merit;
If bad, we know our virtue can correct it.
Mean time Philargus take the word of Philocles,
That though there be no happiness on earth
I can esteem above Philargus friendship,
But fair Eudyna's love, which only is
The treasure I can covet from Philargus;
And cannot look to live but to enjoy it
Rather then justle with his friendship, I
Will die to lose it.

Noble Philocles.

You have made my vow, my brother Philocles,
And friend, which is above it. I will seek
And rather die then fail to gain her love:
But that, and the whole kingdom in addition
Must divide our friendship or affection.
As we are Twins in birth, we will be in mind
Unto our latest breath. Let Greece hereafter
Forget to mention the Tyndarides
With their alternate Deities, and tell
Of two Thessalian brothers could refuse
A happiness (which only is not Heaven)
In detestation of priority;
Would not be happy, because they might not share
An individual, both Time and Thing.

Love, and ambition (I have heard men say)
Admit no fellowship; It holds not here.
These will have neither wife nor crown alone.
They each desire my love; but neither can
Enjoy't unless he were the other man.
My love is doubly taken, yet must gain neither,
Unless I could enjoy them both together. O, ye Gods!
Why made ye them two persons, and assigned
To both but one inseparable mind?
Or, why was I marked out to be that one,
That loves and must embrace, or two, or none;
O my perplexity.

Look to the Princess.

Madam. How fares the life of goodness.

She sinks. Dear Mother, Sister; bring your aids.

To keep the world alive give your assistance.

Ye Gods be now auspicious.

A love-qualm.
To bed with her and call for Cupids aid,
He best can cure the wound that he has made.

My Lesbia, my Cynthia, my Licoris
Or (which is best of names) my lovely Doris -- that^. I.
I still am thine and cannot commutate,
I am as certain to thee as thy fate.
Tis not my study, or my travails can
Make me to thee appear another man:
Thou may affirm of me as Meanwhile did
Xantippe of her husband whom she chid,
Grave Socrates regardless of his worth
He still returned the same that he went forth.
Before I visit thee, thus may thou hear on
Thine in the tribulation of love -- Geron.
Ha, ha, ha. Old Meanwhile Geron,! art thou come again?
Could Delphos not detain, nor the Sea swallow thee
But I must be in danger to be punished
With the porcupine bristles? Fate deliver me.

Doris, you must be vigilant in attendance,
And see that no man pass this lobby, towards
Her graces lodging. Tis your charge: look to it.

Mistress you know your Mother laid that charge
On me before, and I am ready here
To answer every commer in his kind
Had you forgot it?

Pardon me, I had;
But my care hurts not. One thing more good Doris.
If my dear brother Philocles come to visit,
Prithe call me. Speak, wilt thou.

-- help your head.
I must not stir from hence, yet I must come
To call you forth. Away, some body comes.

I trust unto thee Doris.

What a sick Court is here? She's love-struck too.
I can with half a sense find her disease;
But cannot guess the object of her love.
She keeps the fire so close up in her bosom,
That she will sooner perish by it, then suffer
A spark of it fly out to make discovery.
The Princess she's love-sick for two; and her
Despair of gaining either's her consumption.
But what think I of their loves, when mine own
Is trouble enough? Now the visitants;
My great Lords Howdies are upon the entry,
And the unwelcom'st first.

Good morrow Lady.
May I crave admittance to the Lady Governess?

Yes, you may crave it Sir, But not obtain it:
Her nearness to the Princess at this time
Is by so strict necessity required.

May I prevail then, to impart the duty
I have in charge, unto the Ladies daughter?

That is the Mistress whom I wait upon,
Though now at remote distance: She attends
Her Mother at this instant, and her Mother
The Princess in much privacy. If I
May be thought worthy to receive the knowledge
Of what you have in trust unto the Princess,
It shall be orderly conveyed unto her Grace.

Lord Stratoeles, solicitous for glad tidings,
(Beseeching that her Grace be pleased to take
The tender of his service; and affirming
Upon his honour that no rest affects him
Until he shall receive a perfect knowledge
Of her recovery) prays to be advertised
In what condition of health she fares;
Or to gain leave to visit her himself.

Sir, you have lost much time: you might have said
How does the Princess? And I answer thus,
She is most dangerously sick; not to be seen
By him or any man.

Yet let her know
My Lords obsequious care for her recovery.

I'll tell my Mistress, who shall certify
Unto my Lady, who shall intimate
Unto the Princess what you have left in trust
With me, her Graces hand-maid thrice removed.

I will acquaint my Lord; who for your care
Shall upon his advancement to the Crown
Give me command, who will give present order
Unto my man for your promotion.
Your diligence deserves it.

My great Lords especially parasite. I am beholden to you.
Here comes another; an importunate,
Though impertinent suitor of mine own.

My beauteous Doris, first my love presented
Unto your self, my Lord Philargus craves
To know how fares the Princess.

This comes nearer
To my regard then the other; and deserves
A comfortabler answer. She's not well Sir,
But much amended in her health. 'Tis like,
Your Lord (would he approach to visit her)
Shall find a fair admission to her Grace.

I dare not (to delay my Lord a minute
Of these glad tidings.) Stay to prosecute
My love-suit to your self.

No, no; away.
Away good Tersulus; and hazard not
Your Lords, for your own fortunes.

Yet my Doris --

Yet again man.

Be pleased to think of me.

I shall, and better of you when you are gone.

Winged with that hope, I fly.

A pretty nimble fellow and a Taylor.
I could almost affect him, did not this
More supple handed Barber put him by.

Sweet Doris! thus, by me Lord Philocles
Salutes the Princess.

This requires an answer
Of health indeed.

How fares her highness?

Well. Exce^ding well, and longs to see your Lord.

I'll hast to tell him so

Nay, good Varillus,
I have not gained a conference with you
Since your return from Delphos.

At more leisure
I'll tell thee wonders, Doris.

Something now.

Ha'you seen your lover Geron, the old tutor,
Since our arival?

Here is an Epistle
Came from him to my hands this morning. Hang him.

Well: he has been the whole mirth of our journey
In the discovery of his love to you.
His meat, his drink, his talk, his sleep, has all
Been Doris, Doris, nothing but your remembrance
Has been the trouble of his company;
I'll tell thee at large hereafter. The fair Princess
Is well you say.

She was well when I left her,
But subject to much passion: She is well
And ill, and well again all in three minutes.
Great Ladies may be so. But if I should
B^ sick and well, and sick again and well
Again as oft as she; the world would say
I had it -- And had been a courtier, to some purpose.

They would say the Handmaid had been handled so.
Would they?

Like enough, but great ones must not be talked on

You have detained me to my undoing.
See, my Lord!

I'll send his sister to appease him.

You have done ill Varillus to neglect
A duty of that consequence, that I
Expected in your quick return, was this
A time to loiter?

My good Lord, the princess
Is well again; restored to absolute health.

Tis happy news. But why was I delayed
In this account? was it too precious for me?
Redeem your fault by some ensuing service,
Or you may lose a master, that has loved you.
I must proceed to gain Eudinas love
From my Philargus or l loose my self.
And gaining it, I must sorgo Philargus,
And equally be lost. O sister, welcome.
I must request your aid.

In any thing
Wherein I may be useful, best of brothers.

I would entreat you be my advocate
In love unto Eudina. -- O, but hold,
Shall I be treacherous unto my brother?
A brother! What's a brother? A mere name;
A title which we give to those that lodged
In the same womb; so bedfellows are brothers;
So men, inhabiting one town, or country
Are brothers too: for though the place containing
Be greater, the relation is the same.
A friend! I that's the thing I violate,
Then which, nor earth nor heaven hath ought more sacred*
Tis my Philargus, nay my self I injure,
If I content my self.

Why, brother Philocles --
Did I say brother? How my tongue conspires
To torture me! If Brother be a naked
Title or name (as he suggests) I would
It had nor being, name, nor title. Philocles
You're passionate.

Fond reason I disclaim thee,
Love is a strain beyond thee, and approaches
The Gods estate: Friendship's a moral virtue
Fitter ^r disputation, then observance.
Eudina. O Eudina! In what price
Art thou with me, for whom I cast away
The Souls whole treasury Reason and Virtue?
Placilla, you must wo Eudina for me.
Do you startle at it? Pray do it, as you love me.

If I were she you should not need an advocate.

I charge you by this kiss. --

Your wages
Corrupts your agent to be false. O whither;
Into what Sands will the rash Pilot, Love?
Drive this weak vessel? did I call it Love?
Tis sooty, hellish fire; unlawful flame:
Yet such as we may easier tax, then tame.

What troubles you Placilla? O you are
Already entertained to mediate
For him you better love, Philargus, do:
He best deserves her; I'll wo for him too.

Madam, my Lady calls for you? My Lord
The Princess has taken notice of your visit
And wishes you draw nearer if you please.

I meet that wish with swift, but fearful feet.
My joys are bitter, and my woes are sweet.

I have heard men say when they on gamesters look
(Though equally affected to both parties,
Or both were strangers to'em yet) they'll yield
A secret inclination which should win.
I am for Philocles, now, against Philargus,
Who is as noble, and as free to me,
As ever Philocles was. But tarry Doris;
You have a bett upon the game I take it,
Your love unto Varillus. If his Lord
Rise to a Kingdom, you may hope to climb
The ladder of a Ladyship by the man.
But not too fast: Here's one pursues the game
That is as like to win. Why if he does?
His follower Tersulus loves me past Varillus,
And may as much advance me. But I love not
Him, And the love of honour above husbands
Has been so common among Ladies, that
The fashions stale and ugly.

So't must be.
And so by transposition of my love
I shall be quiet, and Philocles doubly happy.
Doris, go seek my mother, and perceive
If I may see the Princess.

Yes my Lord.

Love, thou art well compared to fire, which where
It doth obey and serve being commanded
By higher powers of the soul, it fares
Like to the stone or jewel of a ring,
Which joins the orb, and gives it price and luster:
So glorious is that love, so necessary.
But, where it rules and is predominant,
It tiranizeth; Reason is imprisoned;
The will confined; and the memory
(The treasury of notions) clean exhausted;
And all the senses slavishly chained up
To act th'injunctions of insulting love,
Pearch'd on the beauty of a woman. Thou
Masculine love, known by the name of friendship
Art peaceful and morigerous: But that
Of woman, is imperious and cruel.
Why should I then lose Philocles for Eudina?
Why? Can I look on her and ask a Reason?
O the divinity of woman! sure
There is no heaven without'em. If the Gods
Should thrust out Jove as he depos'*l his Father
And elect me to be their thonderer
I'd not drink Nectar to forgo Eudina.

Fie, fie Philargus, you're a ssugish Lover.
I have been careful for you, yea and partial
Against your brother Philocles, to prefer
Your love to his: And you to suffer him
A whole hour opportunity before you!

Has he been here?

And is. Only for you
I have beguiled him of her presence, that
Till you have made first presentation
Of love to her he shall have no access.

Now Philocles, I suffer in thy injury;
And to proceed in it were treachery.
I would retire -- But that magnetique beauty
To which are chained thousands of hearts and eyes
Has captived mine: nor must I seem to slight
A mothers care. She's not the first (tis known)
That of two sons hath best affected one.

Why move you not Philargus towards the Princess.

Madam, you see she's busy.

Stratocles --
May thy ambition hoist thee into air;
And thy loose wings, like thy licentious paper,
There failing thee, let fall thy vicious body
To earth, as here thy name lies to be trod on.
Philargus, you are welcome.

Princely Madam,
That language from your gracious lips is powerful
To save him from the grave, that only lives
By your free favours.

Nay, my dear Philargus,
I thought me nearer to you, then that you
Should rove at me with Courtship. Stratocles
(The emblem of whose pride lies there in paper)
Shot from afar indeed; yet, like a Jove
(A self-conceited one) presumed to strike
Love by command into me by his Letters.

I cannot flatter pride, nor undervalue
Abilities. 'Tis true that Siratocles
Has been a useful servant to the State;
But, doubtless, he would make as ill a Master.

No more of him.

Nor more be thought of him.
And therefore Madam, by your fair command,
To avoid all Court-circumlocutions,
I tender thus my service, and crave hearing.

You have it freely.

To avoid all lets,
I will withdraw my self.

The King has graciously been pleased, in lieu
Of my slain fathers services; and for love
To us his sons, (by us much undeserved)
To recommend unto your noble choice
My brother and my self. You standing doubtful
Whether to choose, we to avoid dispute
Of violating friendship, did implore
The Council of the Oracle to direct
You in th'election. But the hidden sense
In the dark sentence hath perplexed both you
And us with more anxiety.

It is too true.

Yet you are not prescribed; your choice is free.
To take your lot in Philocles or me.
We both, by strong injunction must pursue
Your sacred Love, yet keep our friendship true.
Then thus illustrious Madam.

Not so low.

As low as future duty must compel me,
When you shall be my Queen, let me beseech
The favour that I seek and would obtain,
Equal with heavenly bliss, to shine on Philocles.

That he may be your King?

May he prove so.

Be all example lost.

Friendship, with favour, may
Hold between King and Subject: But one throne
Cannot estate two Kings; Love's number's one.

O my Philargus, you have opened now
The meaning of the Oracle. I have the sense
Most perfectly. You have beyond example
Preserved your friendship with your brother; and
In wooing for him have won me to your self.
I am your own.

I am amidst the Gods.
The wealth o'th'world, the beauty of the Heavens,
And powers of both shall not redeem my interest.
-- Provided that I lose not Philocles.

In that your constancy you win me more.

Your importunity hath prevailed. See Philocles,
The Princeis, and Philargus.

O, you are partial.

O help, my brother; speak, dear Philocles.

Ye Gods, how comes this? Let me raise him up,
Brother, and friend; speak, 'tis Philargus calls thee.

Philargus, let me go. 'Tis your advantage.

Let me request the cause of your disturbance,
Good Philocles.

No other but my self.
Honoured Eudyna: For, who feeds to danger
Upon a dish he loves, ought not to blame
The meat, but his unbridled appetite.

How do you now? What a cold moisture
Spreads ore his temples here.

Let me come to him:

I can read his grief.

What's that to the redress?

The Delphian God, medcines inventor knows
That and not I.

His grief's a jealous passion
Upon my supposed favour to Philargus.
Shake it off Philocles, I am thine, as much
As ere I was, or his.

It is no jealousy
Only a fear Philargus had broke friendship:
So, my souls better part exited, left
The other languishing.

Had you expired
In that belief, and I had understood it,
My shadow should have posted after yours
Unto the Elisian fields to vindicate
So causeless imputation.

And because
You charged my son with partiallity
Let us remove, Philargus, come Placilla.

You will not take him from me. Stay Philargus.

What would you do with both?

I may not stir,
When she, whose power above me countermands
The precepts of the Gods requires my stay.

What not to give you brother Philocles
An opportunity for equal hearing?
Your grace will not deney't him.

True, I may not.

That spell convinces all. Friendships above,
And must control obedience, and love.
Tis not to injure thee my dear Philargus,
That here I linger, to oppose thy love;
But to prefer it.

What says Philocles?

To say I love you, Madam, with a zeal
That dares to meet the trial of Martyrdom,
And suffer't for your sake, might get a name,
A glorious one, and an immortal Crown:
Yet so I should forgo (in leaving you
On earth, a heaven on it) the bliss,
Which, grieving, I should in Elisium miss.
No, I will love you better then to die,
And be mine own chief mourner; yet must crave,
Under your gracious favour, leave to suffer
More then a thousand deaths, that is, to live
And part with my fair hopes in you for ever.

What means my Philocles?

Princely Madam,
Consider the necessity, which now
By further search I gather from the hidden
Oraculous perduit; by which I am tied
Not to contend for you, that is, I must not
Wound friendship in Philargus: B^t pursue
My fortune, which is to gain love from you.
For whom it says not, but the meanings plain,
I for Philargus should your love obtain.
The Gods deal after as they please with me,
My suit is that you take Philargus.

O --
Philocles you have made a double conquest
For you have got the victory of me
Which was before assigned unto Philargus.
Your fortune thus embraces you

This now,
And with Philargus friendship were to me
A fortune 'bove the envy of the Gods.

He cannot disallow't. He wooed me for you,
And won me to himself, as you have now
Suing for him.

I must not hold you then.
His title, as his friendship precedes mine.

Yet still the choice is mine. I may take you
Without offence to him. But now he comes,
And has again an equal interest,
Strange love! In others absence I took either
And loved each best; Now both at once appear,
Neither is mine. Fate, let me die to one
Rather then live in this confusion.

Now Madam, whethers love do you approve.

Confound me not with question. They are each
Wedded to others friendship: Either is
More studious for the other then himself.

And ever must.

And will be.

So will I
For both of you then for my self.

Alas.

Then let's continue thus with Maiden love,
With modest freedom, unsuspected joys,
As we had all been formed in one womb,
Till Heaven determine of us.

To determine
Of you Eudyna, is by heaven committed
In present unto me. On you depends
The future glory and prosperity,
Both of my house and Kingdom. Tis besides,
Exacted of me by my near Allies,
And by my Subjects (whom I must secure)
To constitute a Successor: And no longer
Will I expect your answer, then five days.
By then you must declare who is your husband;
Or else expect one from my self; the man
Whose name I am as loath to mention
As you to hear, even Stratocles.

Nay, death first.

Be you obedient; and by the way,
Take my approvement of Lord Philocles,
Not that I slight Philargus.

Here's a mystery too,
As dark as that from Delphos. He approves
My choice of Philocles, slighting not Philargus.

Come both you equal brothers; leave her to
Her thoughts a while.

In all obedience.

What strange amazement hath surprised you Madam?
No study, nor no strife can alter fate
Or the decrees, the Gods determinate.
A husband you shall have, be confident.
Be, as you were; secure of the event,
Till time produce it.

Madam, be your self.

Yet five days for love's war. Jove grant I have
By then, to end the strife, a peaceful grave.

Would you thus offer, by your own disease
To shorten your Mothers days? Or can you pine
And I not grieve? or cannot grief kill me
Do you think?

A wise Philosopher Meanwhile did affirm,
That women who have past the fire of love
Have hearts, which grief can neither pierce, no move.

Son, your Philosophy fails you, as your love
Blinds you: For Cupids fire I know may be
Quenched by old age: But grief's unquenchable.
My tongue still falters with me (there's my grief)
And there are not so many fadoms 'twixt
A woman's tongue and heart, but grief may find
The bottom, but for care to keep it up
By sending down an Antidote before it.

But Meanwhile did the love-sick Poet prove,
No antidote against the power of Love.

Forbear your Whiloms, and your old said saws,
And since you are in love, and by that love
Grown sick with the concealment.

As Meanwhile
The Athenian boy who stole a fox did hide
Under his coat his theft from being descried
Until it tore his Gentals -- his entrails
I should have said.

No more I say
Of your disease, but to the cure, which is
The love of Doris. How ha'you tried her, son.

By oratory, Epistles, and by gifts
Which Meanwhile Ovid said were best of shifts.

Yes, such a gift it might be, and so fastened.

But she, as Meanwhile said Anominus
Retorteth all with scorn injurious.

Yet will you leave your Whiloms? And go seek
My Lady Governess? say I would speak with her.

But Meanwhile said Diogenes (tis true)
To one that would, I will not speak with you.

Will you say as I say; and do as you're bidden?
It is not her great Lady-ships daughters hand-maid
Shall scorn my son while I know what I know.
If you love Doris, run and tell her so.

For Doris love, as Meanwhile Daedalus.
I will take wing. But see I am prevented.

O Garrula! well found, I was in quest of you.

And I was even a sending for you, Madam.

What an imperious beldam's this. But I
Must humour her. Sending for me do you say?
For what, good Garrula.

Sending for you? Yes Madam, so I said,
And sai't again. What, what, I know what I know.
You know I do; and that there is no such
Distinction 'twixt the honours of your birth
And place; and mine of age and knowledge, but
You might vouchsafe the summons when I send.

What needs this Garrula? I am here you see.

You know I know, and have deserved some favours,
I do not bost for what. You know.

O me!
Who trust those secrets whereon honour rests
To custody in Mercenary breasts
Do slave nobility; and though they pay
A daily ransom, ne'er redem't away.
Pray let us be more private, though indeed
I love your son for his great care of mine.

O, do you so? Go forth son Geron, till
I call. All shall go well I'll warrant thee.

Meanwhile, so
Said a Physician, meaning to restore,
And killed the Patient was but sick before.

Why Garrula do you maintain a strife
Still in my grieved mind 'twixt hope and fear?
Cannot so many years of my known kindness
Win yet a confidence of secrefie.
You are as deeply bound by oath too as my self.

I do confess my oath, and would not break it;
Yet, Madam, as you are a woman, you
May know a broken oath is no such burden
As a great secret is; besides the tickling
A woman has to in and out with it. Oh
The tongue itch is intolerable! And were I
A woman of tongue, as most are of my calling
(Though Midwives ha'been held the best at secret
Co^ncel keeping) it had been out I fear.

But still take heed dear Garrula.

Yes Madam.
Yet there are kindnesses required on your part.

Have I not still been kind?

My memory serves me; and but that my tongue
Now falters with me -- I could recount
All the rewards I have had from time to time,
Since you translated me from a Country housewife,
Into the Midwife Royal; what in Gowns,
In Gold, in Jewels, Chains and Rings; and (which
I prize'bove all) my syrrops and my sippings.

Your place of honour in the Court --

What, what?
I hope I had that before i'che Kings favour,
As his Queens Midwife. She is in Elisium.

Then Garrula your learned sons preferment,
Tutor and Governor to my Sons.

Thereby
Hangs a tale, Madam. Now I come to th'point;
My son affects your daughters hand-maid Doris,
Who slights his love. I must now by your power
Obtain her for my Son.

Be confident,
Though I confess I hold her worthless of him.

I tell him so: But love has blinded him.
Ho Geron, I say Geron, come and hear.

So Meanwhile prisoners have been called to come
From dungeon deep to hear a blacker doom.

Geron, be comforted. By all my power,
Doris shall be your own.

Then Meanwhile, as
Ovid his Corynna sweet, said o --
She comes, she comes. My joys do overflow.

Now Doris, what portends your hast? Speak Maid,
Is it to Geron, or to me, your business?

His ill looks, had almost made me miscarry'c.
Madam, the Princess instantly desires
Your company.

But by her Graces favour,
And your leave, Doris, I will trench so far
On both your patiences, and for your good,
As to be witness of an interchange
Of some few words twixt Geron and your self.
Why look you from him so? he loves you, Doris.

That's more then I ere knew, or read, by all
He speaks or writes to me. He clothes his words
In furs and hoods, so, that I cannot find
The naked meaning of his business, Madam.

Speak plainly to her, Geron.

To her Son.

My business is the same, that Meanwhile drew
Demosthenes to Corinth, some repentance,
So I pay not too dear.

Lo you there, Madam.

You must speak plainer, Son.

And be you kinder, Doris.

But not so kind, good Madam, as to grant
I know not what.

O forfeit not the praise
That Meanwhile Aristotle gave your Sex,
To be enriched with piety and pity.

I know not what to pity, but your want
Of utterance. It is some horrid thing
That you desire, and are ashamed to speak it.

No, gentle Doris, nothing but the thing,
Whereby great Alexander Meanwhile said,
He knew himself a mortal, and no God,
Coition --

Be it what it will; I cannot
Give what I understand not. You're too aloof.

There's comfort, Son. And I'll give thee instructions
To come more close to her.

I'll ease your care,
And be my self his Agent. He's too learned,
Geron, you speak too learnedly, as if
You wooed a Muse: And Doris understands not,
But by your posture, what you'd have. I'll put
Your meaning into woman's words; and such
As shall be sure to speed. But first I'll wait
Upon the Princess. Garrula, will you go?

And thank you for my Son: But still -- I know.

Nay, I will do it Geron, be confident.

I thank your Ladyship as much as they
Who Meanwhile -- Meanwhile --

Knew not what to say.

He's overjoyed.

Go Geron, lead the way.

Pray trouble me no further. I have said,
That if in five days space she make not choice
Of one of those whom (I must tell you Stratocles)
She loves, and I prefer before you, then
I'll weigh your suit, and reasons; and till then
I say it again, you are a trouble to me.

A trouble Sir? That were a time that knew me,
A trouble to your enemies, not you,
When this same lump of earth (which now's a trouble)
Stood a sole Bulwark of your Realm; repelling
Arms of foes; shrouding your fearful Subjects
Under my shield; guarding your fields and Vineyards
From desolation; your Palaces from ruin;
And am I now a trouble?

Stratocles,
You lose the glory of your deeds by blazing
Your own renown. He that commends himself,
Speaks upon trust, and is his hearers slave.

Peace, envy, and be thankful for thy life
Which thy tongue forfeits.

Let my mildness tell you,
You are irreverent before the King,
Who has not been forgetful of your worth,
Nor slow in your reward. Then moderate
Your heat with counsel; and be first assistant
Unto the public good: So shall you merit
The first regard in honours and affairs
Of private nature.

So.

This Oracle
Troubles me not a little. I had thought
Thereby to have declined this weighty care
From my declining shoulders, and have given
My country satisfaction, and my self,
In choosing of a son and successor.
But I am prisoner in the Labyrinth
Of the Gods verdict.

Their sublimity
In matters of the future seldom stoops
To humane apprehension; yet vouchsafes
To answer our demands: but chides withal
Our too much incenss with obscurity.
Your grace however may presume, where they
Shall deign to spend a word, and take an offering,
It is a certain augury of good.

Thou hast allayed my fear. Justinus come,
Lead me thy brains assistance. For in thee
I find a temper that accords with me.

Souldler, I dare yet tell thee thou art rash;
Foolish as valiant; and as easily may
For all thy lostiness be undermined
As the base bramble: Boasting weakness, thee
And promising Ambition leads thee up
An earthly exhalation into th'air;
Where with a little borrowed light, one moment,
Thou shin'st the mark and wonder of all eyes;
But soon consumed and darted to the Center,
Become the scorn of men and sport of Children.

You are oath sect of Cinicks, and have learned
To bark Philosophy.

Then shall you hear
Your now adorning multitude upbraid
Your insolence and pride, and gain the name
Of Prophets by your downfall, while one swears
He had foretold it long; Another dreamt it;
All jointly cry we never could endure him;
See what a look he has; what brawny lips;
What poisonous eyes; and what an impudent front!

You will out-run your privilege of prating
And suffer for it.

I am too prodigal
Of seed upon so flinty soil as thou.
Be as thou art, and perish.

Ignorant wretch,
That out of all thy bookish Theory
Knows not the soul to be Aerial
And of a soaring nature; not unlike
The noble Falcon that will never cease
To work 'bove all that tops her. The supreme
Estate on earth, and next unto the Gods
Is majesty; and that's my present gain,
Though I have all but that, yet wanting that
All is as none to me: And since my way
Must be upon the Ruins (sour Disanius)
Of thee, and of thy glories in thy Nephews
The Kings dear darlings, for whose precious sakes
I must attend five days (yet be a trouble)
I'll travail through your bloods: Thy self has gi'n me
The quicker motion by thy timely envy.
Thou hast set spurs to the pale horse of death,
That into dust shall trample all those lets
Which stand twixt me and the Thessalian Crown,
Upon whose back I'll set this Rider.

My sovereign Lord.

I like that compellation:
Thou stil'st me as thou wish me, on whom
Depends thy consequent advancement, Matho.
But we but dream of sovereignty and sleep
To the Achievement: something must be done
With waekful eyes and ready hands my Matho.

Now my King speaks himself. Let but your eye
Find out the way these ready hands shall act
The strength of your designs. I can perceive
That now the labour of your Jove-like brain
Is bringing forth the Pallas, shall inspire
Me, to perform the work of my advancement.

Tis not yet ripe for the delivery,
But thou shalt quickly have it. Follow me.

Good Madam, let me be excused. The mirth
You offered to allay or quench my sorrows
Might have been well received at former times:
But now it is unseasonable.

Yet think on it, Madam,
How gravely Geron goes, and with what scorn
The wanton Girl recoyles.

Good, speak no more on it.

Then Beldam Garrula's reasons urging Doris*
Showing how either of his pupils grace
In your electing Philocles or Philargus,
Though to them doubtful, is a sure advancement
To her by Geron.

Still you move like those
That do in merry tales mis-spend their breath
To those that are that day marked out for death.

You may not say so (Madam) tis in you
By taking one, to give new life to two;
Your self, and if you'll give me leave to name
The other, be it Philargus: or, if chance
Shall favour better, Philocles or him,
Let it be him that gives you the first visit.

That were to fancy in our selves an Oracle;
Or to give fortune power, to execute
The judgement of the Delphian God.

Who knows
But that his Oracle would have it so.

Was it for that you now sent for Philargus.

Say, shall it be so Madam; or suppose so?

This pleases better yet then Gerons wooing.
Praythee Placilla sing. And may thy voice
Attract him that may prove the happier choice.

I'll try my best in notes, and what they want
I'll strive to make effectual in my wishes.

Thanks kind Placilla. -- But the leaden weights
Of sleep oppress mine eye-lids, and I shall not hear thee.

Yet sit, and let her sing: you'll sleep the better.

Stay Philocles, stay Philargus. Let not fury
Lead you to end that difference with your swords,
Which only fits my life to satisfy.

What means your Grace.

Pursu'em, with prevention,
Before they meet again, or one or both
Must perish; did you not observe their challenge,
And eithers daring other to the field?

Who Madam, where? and when?

Now; here; your sons.
How can you ask?

Because we were awake
And saw nothing.

Collect your spirits Madam: you slept.

It was an omenous dream then.

And of good,
I dare divine it Madam. And now see
Whom fortune first hath sent to be your choice.
Philargus, you have won the glorious prize.

But dos the glory of the world, Eudina, grant it.

My affrightment shakes me still --
O my Philargus, I am now inspired
Sure by a vision from the Gods, with knowledge,
That, in my choice of you, or Philocles,
I shall become the ruin of you both.

Tis not in fate to wound our common friendship.

Tis better in my self to kill the danger.

The Gods avert such purposes. If you
Deprive the world of your fair self, then we
Both fall by necessary consequence.
But what are we? This Thessaly must suffer.
The King must yield, to see a new and strange
Successon appointed to his Crown;
And by his subjects, not himself.

Tis that
Deters me: yet let me prevail Philargus
(To quit me of my fears) that ere I pass
My faith unto a husband, your and Philocles,
Before the Gods, your Mother, and my self,
Once more, do celebrate your vow of Friendship.
And let me be excused in this: for I
Must tell you, dear Philargus, that though now
My love be fixed on one of you (albeit
I name not which) I will not take him with
Least scruple of a fear of losing him
Again by th'others spite; nor leave that other
Less loved by me, then now he is, for ever;
And tho but one can be possessed of me
One friendship, yet, must marry us all three.

The Gods have spoke it in you; it is their
Divine injunction; Madam, I obey it,
And dare engage as much for Philocles.

This is most fair: now, till you meet, tis fit
You fall on lighter purposes for your health.
Son, here was mirth to day; although the Princess
Relished it not.

I heard of Gerons love
To his fair Doris. We are now become
His Tutors, Madam, to be amorous.

Placilla, come you hither. I observe
A change in you of late; and do suspect
The Reason. What! Do you blush at my suspicion?
Nay then you mak'^ my knowledge. You are in Love.
I'll yet come nearer you. I guess with whom:
And at fit time I'll school you for'^.

Come Madam;
Now if you please we'll take some air.
Craves leave to seek his brother.

Yes Madam.

I wait o'your Grace. Nay, do not look displeased:
I tell you Girl, there is danger in it.

Stay Placilla.
What! has my Mother chid you. I'll not question
Her Reason, nor your fault; but pray thee sister
If Philocles approach to see the Princess
Ere my return, tell him I stay at's lodging,
First, to confer with him.

I will my brother.

In truth thou weepst. Therefore to comfort you,
Because I know by some infallible signs,
You are more tender of his Love then mine.
He stands in equal competition yet
With me for fair Eudina. And if Fortune
Allots her me, I'll be as kind a brother
And still the same to you as Philocles.
I pray thee dry thine eyes.

If a disguised face and a counterfeit hand
Ever prevailed, may these in this plot speed.
My Lord, I had this in charge to render to you.

I am discovered in my lawless love.
Remember, Cupid, whom thou make thy Anvil;
A poor weak virgin. If thou art a God,
Be just and reasonable: It savours not
Of justice, to provoke incestuous flames,
Nor Reason to enforce an Ardency
Of things impossible. Let me not burn
With neighbouring fire, which, to enjoy, I must
Therefore despair because it is so near.

Ha! where's this fellow? is he gone?

Yes, brother.

Tis Philocles his hand! An eager challenge!
A challenge, and to me, his friend and Brother.
Now Oracle, where's your Riddle? Answer me,
Apollo's fiddle-stick. O ye Delphian Priests,
You hang religion up, like painted clothes
Before unseemly walls, to cloak their filth
And palliate their wicked mysteries.

How do you brother?

Sick in Philocles.
You'll hear more of his kindness to you shortly.

He suspects too, with much displeasure, my
Unreasonable Love to Philocles.
But why should we be Reasons followers
With loss of liberty? which of the Creatures
Allayes his heat toward any of his kind,
Because the same belly gave them being? They
Observe no difference of Sire, or Dam,
Brother, or Sister, being mature for love.
Ah, whither am I going? Bestial thoughts
Forth of my bosom; Leave me not my Soul,
Or my souls better part, my reason. Oh
It was returning but a flaming shaft
Of love has set it's Mansion afire
And frights it back again.

Sister.

That name of Sister, like a violent cold
Upon an extreme heat, fevers my blood
To death.

Me thinks you are sad and troubled sister.
Why thus alone? Or have you entertained
That troublesome companion, Love? Come tell me
I can advise you very learnedly:
For Cupids Scholars are more exquisite
In giving council then in using it.

How shall I answer him? I dare not look on.

Why are you sad.

Out of conformity
Unto the present garb: I have assumed
Only a veil of sadness.

Thou art only happy,
Whose sorrow is but outward, as a stranger
Called to be present at a funeral
Clads himself like the rest, is serious,
And silent with a countenance dejected,
And Testudineous pace; but has not tears,
No groanings for a loss to him unknown:
The Obsequies performed uncloaths himself
Of grief and weeds together. But my sister,
You are not pleased to talk upon this subject.
Where is the Princess?

He'has given me now a Colour for my sadness.
The Princess is retired; She has been troubled
With a most fearful dream of a Duello
Betwixt you and Philargus to be fought.

With friendly Courtesies?

Nay, with swords she said.

Ha, ha, ha.

Philargus hath been with her, and to him
She told her fears, enjoining him, that both
Of you should come, and jointly before her
Declare your constant friendship.

That's soon done.

But trust me Sir, I fear Philargus took not
All as she meant it; for at his departing,
He looked displeasedly; and, when I demanded
His healths condition, he said he was sick
In Philocles.

In Philocles his absence,
As I am in his. That was his meaning sister.

Pardon my fear; which is, that he's not friends w'ye.

Away, your fear has made you idle.

No.
It is my love, in that black horror clad,
Which will, before it leaves me, make me mad.

I'll seek him out.

My Lord, I was commanded
To convey these into your Lordships hands.

By whom were you employed?

My Lord 'twas not
The man that moved me. For I know him not;
But the reward. I humbly take my leave.

My brother write. Ha! Are we at such distance?
Thou art no Prophetess, Placilla, art thou?
O Gods and men! where shall we go to find
Friendship and truth? Be it so: For in th'event
We may be happy both: But with this ods;
One with Eudina, the other with the Gods.

We should love one another, brother Tersulus,
More inwardly, and be in friendship true
As our Lords are. Prithee let their example
Piece up all difference betwixt us.

Piece up,
I know your meaning and your jear Varillus,
In your piece up.

Fie on thy jealousy. Because thou art a Taylor,
How ere a Gentleman by place, thou think
I jear thy quality.

You should not. For
Look back unto the worlds beginning; there
Youl' find a Taylor was before a Barber.

Nay if you go to rip up old Antiquity.

Rip! there he is again.

You may as well
Collect, that the first man (who you suggest
Was his own Taylor) was his own Barber first.

As how?

Do you think he did not scratch his head
In casting how to fashion out his breeches?
And that's in part, you know, the Barbers office.

The scratching of the head.

And still
In use amongst Taylors on themselves. But note
The foul corruptions brought in by Time;
Of old they did but rub invention up,
How to contrive their work: But now their heads
Wrists, fingers, all have got an itch by it, which
Nothing but stealing can allay; though that
Can never cure it.

Lying and stealing went
Of old together: now they are shared it seems
Between the Barber and the Taylor.

Sharp.

Your instruments are sharp as mine, Sir Barber,
And you can pick more out of your Lords ears
Then I take from his Garments with my sheers.

Agree good brother, or would we had Doris
To stickle twixt us.
There you're before me too.

But come, Lords followers are their Apes in most things,
Why should not we be as friendly Rivals, now
In Doris Love, as are our Lords in the
Princess Eudinas. We will take up a fashion.

Varillus, where's your Lord?

I know not Doris.

Tersulus, where's yours?

I know not Doris.

You Echo one another. You're commanded
Both by the Princess and the Governess
To seek'em out.

Your love commands our stay.

Coupled together? Go yet one of you.
You I can spare best.

Why him?

You then.

Why him?

Do you conspire? I will return your care.

Nay gentle Doris stay. For, tis in vain
To seek our Lords. They are both rod singly forth
To take the Air. Mine an hour since.

Mine even now. I came but since to call
My brother Tersulus.

Your brother Tersulus?

As deeply vowed in friendship as our Lords are.

It is with us as tis with them: we both
Are brothers, friends; yet Rivals in your love.
Can you now, as the Princess is to them,
Be equally affected to us both?

Do you stay me to abuse me.

Nay, dear Doris.
We love our Lords? and as you love the Princess,
Who loves them, love you us. You are Eudina,
I Philocles, and he Philargus is.

Are the men mad.

Suppose so Gentle Doris.

The King commands you to make present choice
Of one of us, or else ambitious Stratocles
(That's Geron) must enjoy you. Now sweet Princess
Be speedy in your choice. The kingdoms good
Depends upon it. And in your Election,
O make Philargus blessed: He best deserves you.

Admired friend, and brother Philocles,
Your courtesy ore-comes me: I must sue,
Though my heart aches the while as much for you.

This is fine sooling --
Good Barber Philocles, and Taylor Philargus,
You shall not need to trim up his Affection,
Nor you to stich up his with your forced courtesies.
I know, in this, each woos but for himself,
And my Affection runs as even betwixt you,
As nothing but your sizors, or your shears
Had parted.

See Stratocles, alias Geron.

So Meanwhile did contend two warlike Princes
For a fair ^and, till a powerful King
Subdued them both and it. Doris, take heed,
Be wary in your conversation
(As Meanwhile Tully warned his tender son)
With such Pl^beians, least their vulgar breeding
Corrupt your education.

Must she be
Your pupil learned Geron.

And my self
Her only study; such as Meanwhile was;
Vlysses to Penelope.

Take heed Doris
How you become his wife: For he will love you
So by the book, as he will never lie with you
Without an Author for it.

Sir, she shall be
More precious to me then Homers Iliads,
Meanwhile to Alexander, which he made
His mighty bed-fellow: But why stand I
To render this account? The Princess sent you,
Doris, to call their Lords to walk with her,
And take the air of Tempe.

They are gone to take the air already, sir.

Come you with me then, Doris.

And why with you
Antiquity? I have heard you all this while,
And though you boast you have an interest in me,
We are not yet one volume, both bound up
And clasped together.

She speaks in his Element.

No, I am yet loose paper; and 'twere good
To keep me so; for when I'm bound I must
Obey, be searched, examined and corrected.
Yet this I'll do, and now be serious,
If you will all obey my rule; and try
Your fortunes who shall have me.

We agree.

Their merits bear no aequability
With mine.

A very Stratocles.

You boast your worth, and stand on confidence
In powerful advocates: But what are all
Unto my Love, and (which is more) my will?
If you will hear my proposition, hear it.

We are agreed. Pray hear't.

Lets hear it then.
The Gods, in Love, Meanwhile have stooped with men.

That you all love me, I believe; and am
Content that every one of you do think
Himself prime man in my Affection:
And one of you I'll take. But yet my choice
Must wait upon Eudina's. Therefore mark
If your Lord wins the Princess, and becomes
The Kings immediate Heir, I will be yours;
If your Lord, yours.

Therein the odds is mine,
For they are both my Lords.

Then if both have her, I'll be yours: not else.

As Meanwhile said, None of the wisest Clerks,
When the Sky falls we shall have store

Of Whilomes: Ha, ha, ha.

Ha, ha, ha.

Your Mistress, Lady, Princess, and my Mother
Shall know your.

Away, old Meanwhile.

Ha, ha, ha.

Your Lords too I'll acquaint.

Away, old child,
Go tell it Mother, do.
If you had spent, in the Philosophers school
Your time no better, then in Cupids Lectures,
What a strange dunce you had been. Tell her, Love shows
In you, as Meanwhile -- she knows what she knows.

Your Love I will forget; your scorn remember
In black revenge, and so --

Farewell December.

He will to his Mother now. But tell me, Doris,
What means that Beldam in she knows, she knows:
She's often up with it to the Governess.

It has relation to some uncouth passage
Betwixt them, in my Ladies youth I guess,

Tis some smock-secret I believe. But Gentlemen,
You know how I have laid my self out to you.

That, as the Princess shall bestow her self
On eithers Lord; you will embrace his man.

Right.

And to that you'll hold?

Yes
This for a Creed, That heaven must make its choice and hold you
Of one of them, before she take the other.
You understand me; and now cease your strife:
When th'ones Lord's dead, I'll be the others wife.
So farewell Gentlemen. I have staid too long.

She has given us both a hint now, would we take it.

You did not hear me say, Kill you his Lord,
Nor you kill his.

But she has laid a ground
To end a strife, that I should ne'er ha 'found.

Varillus, come, our Lords may be returned:
And we be shent for loitering.

I must think on it.

Now for my Combatants. Th'appointed ground
Is here; the time draws on; and the event
Foreseen in my imaginary light
Of every pass projected in their fight.
In the first passage, each shall wound the other;
Then shall they give, lend, pay, change wound for wound,
Till both of them lie fainting on the ground.
Holding between their teeth their doubtful lives:
When I, to end the question, friendly come in,
And with an equal hand dispatcht'em both.
And so into my ambush. One approaches.

This is the place. What is't that urges me
So promptly to deed, which being acted,
Will be th'astonishment of Heaven and earth?
Applauded no where but in Hell. Fair Tempe,
Let it not be derived to after Ages,
By any uncouth mark upon thy face,
Let not thy grassy locks, that shall receive
The drops of blood, wither and die, condemning
The place that bore them to continual baldness;
Let not the impress of our labouring feet
Hold it's proportion; nor that part of earth,
Whereon the slain shall measure out his length,
Reserve the stamp, and make it monumental,
By a perpetual spring of more procere
And bigger bladed grass: And, when my soul
Hath found an Exit (which my purpose is
My Brothers sword shall open) let the valley
(When he's departed) sink and undermine
The bordering hills that they may cover me.

He hath prevented me in hast: In death
I shall prevent his happily expected
Labour and toy'l, who for no other end
Am here arrived but to be sacrificed
For expiation of his discontent.

Let all the eyes of heaven be hooded, only
One star to guide his point unto my heart,
Which instantly shall fall, and be extinct
In my distilled blood; that so the Gods
May not behold him. May some magic spell
Instruct his arm and weapon how to slay
My name and memory, that of me, there be not
Any desire; on him no Imputation.

My cure is only how my breast may swallow
His point, without revealing mine intent.

I so't shall be: a violent assay
For provocation; and then spit my self
Upon his steel.

Philargus. What! so quick,

What's meant by this?

That should be my demand

Are you so changeable?

Not I Philargus.

This was my resolution;
Will you stain
The reputation raised of your high valour.

I came to make experiment of none
But what consists in suffering.

That's my part.

My self
If you deny me that last friendly office.

Brother you dally with me. Therefore I conjure you
By fair Eudina let your anger loose;
Break up this cask of blood, and give the earth
A draught unto her health.

By the same Beauty
(Then which no greater subject of an oath)
I swear to be your nuptials sacrifice,
Be you the Priest. I'll suffer without noise
In my displayed bowels you shall read
An augury of bliss unto you both.

This is hard measure, Philocles, to mock
Ere you destroy.

I'll mock no more. Adieu.

Hold, hold, and be not prodigal of that blood,
More precious then Pactolus golden streams.

Was then your challenge but totry me only?

Yours was, it seems; but none went out from me.

Then are we both ensnared by treachery.

This I foresaw 'twould come to. 'Save ye lordings.
And whither travail ye? Do you not want a guide
To help ye on your way?

This is the villane
That summoned me.

And me. Villane, what art thou?

Unhappily gues'd. I pray inquire no further.

What monster art thou?

Unworthy on thy face to bear mans ensign.
Who has suborned thee? See tis Stratocles man.

Die villane, die. And were thy master in thee,
The thirst of whose ambition sought our bloods;
His flesh with thine should here become a prey
Unto the Ravens.

O, be pitiful
And spare my life, my Lords, and I'll reveal
Matters of weight and wonder; which, concealed,
Will yet cost both your lives, and make the Princess,
If she not answer my Lords fierce desires,
Subject to rape and murder.

How can she
So fall into his power.

We shall abuse
The trust the Gods have put into our hands
If we neglect to execute justice on thee.

Let me but warn ye of Eudina's danger,
Whereby her virgin Innocence may not suffer,
And then inflict your furies on me.

That charms our ready hands and steel. Speak quickly.

This very hour she's to be surprised
By my Lord Stratocles, here, on Tempe plains,
Where she is come to walk, slenderly guarded
To take the air. He with a strength will seize her
And hurry her hence unto his Mansion house,
To yield to his desire, or death, if suddenly
Prevention be not made.

Tis worth our care.

Preserve me from his vengeance, and I'll bring you
Unto his enterprise.

We must not trust him,
He may have laid an Ambuscado for us.

See brother, stand upon our guard.

Help, help, aid me good people, help.

What means the villan now.

What's the complaint?

What is your grievance, speak?

I am a servant to Lord Stratocles
Who has preserved your Countey and your lives.

We are the more beholding to him; on.

'Twas more his gentleness then our deserving; on.

These two are his malignant enemies;
And finding that my Lord is in these parts
Together with the Princess, fair Eudina
(Who has made him her choice) they lie in wait
To murder him, as they had me, had not
The Gods sent you to rescue me.

'Twas more their Gentleness, then your deserving, on.

I have no more to say, but that you take'em
On your allegiance to safe custody,
And let me pass.

Un'ch, That would be more
Our gentleness then your deserving too. on, on.

Dear friends --

Good, interrupt us not we'll hear ye in order.
On you, Sir, ere you go; and come not back
For any thing unspoke you left behind.

I thank you, Sir, I had like to ha'lest my sword deserving,
Behind, which they disarmed me of.

That was their Gentleness more then your
(They having three swords, and you none to guard you)
They killed you not indeed, yet on again.
W^t further do you charge'em with.

No more, nor you, less you detain me longer.

Now you grow bold, and saucy I must tell you.

Now you're a knave, a villane and a Traitor,
Lest you no more behind you but a sword?
I saw a scabberd on your face of late,
A false one: Seek it out.

O here it is.

Put it him on again. On with it, on.
Resist and we will hang thee. Now my Lords,
My Princess I may say: For one of you
Must be our King. We know you though you know
Not us; you may perhaps hereafter know us
More by your Gentleness then our deserving.

O worthy Country men.

We are the heads of Tempe; and the chief
Swain heads of Thessaly (the King has known us)
And here we came to lay our heads together
For good of common wealth. Here at the verge
Of this adjoining Thicket is our Bower
Of consultation; and from thence (regardful
Ever with eye and ear for common good)
We saw a beard pulled off; and heard that mouth,
(Which now is dumb) open a plot, unlike
The pitiful compl^int he made to us.

But saw you not some passages before?
Of his attempt upon our lives?

Good Gods.

No we came in but then. Those are enough
To hang the man, and turn his Lord out of
Our Country favour: If we find he has
That plot upon the body of the Princess
Of Rape and Murder. He can be no King
For us: for, sirrah, we have wives and daughters.

Stand close. See who comes here.

So, now go back my friends. There's some reward.

Thanks to the noble bounteous Stratocles.

Lady your tears are bootless.

Help ye Gods.

Your cries as unavailable. The Gods
(To whom your friendly foolish lovers
Have sacrificed each other) have given you up
To me the only worthy of you.

No they are both sublimed into one star,
Yet of a double influence, that shall
Strike death into thy purposes, and give
Me light by which t'ascend with them to live
After my present death.

Your hast to death shall not prevent my lust.

She must outlive thy Lust and the false Traitor

Hold, hold, disarm, but kill him not.

We'll keep him tame.

You have ods o'me.

I am in heaven already.

Live wonder of the heavens, a star on earth
Out shining theirs.

What a short journey 'tis
For heavenly minds to reach unto the Gods!

B^tray'd!

No not betrayed. You're but well meet my Lord,
But that's our Gentlen ess more then your deserving.

Am I become the shame and scorn of peasants.

Or if you'll have it betrayed, then blame your own
Overmuch policy and want of Beasts
To carry it to Market. We ne'er lay
More burden on a Ass, then he can bear
Here in the country: what is done at court
We know not. Here perhaps is one can tell,
Know you this bearded Satire?

Coward, slave,
Thy faintness hath betrayed me.

No, 'twas ods,
Such as men meet that sight against the Gods.

The fellow has some Grace; he weeps: But come
Princess and Princes, what is now your pleasure
We do unto these men?

For me, I have learned
By mine own sufferings in my afflictions
To be compassionate. I wish their pardon.

That mercy wounds me deeper with remorse
Then all my lost designs, and their derision
Have done with indignation.

There is some hope these yet may prove new men.

Lord Stratocles,
Those wounds that pierce the heart with true contrition
Do bring the precious balm in'em that cures it.

We wish yours may be such.

And that this shame
May guard you innocent of future blame.

Here's sweetness upon sweetness.

Now it remains, that we advise our selves,
Brethren of Tempe, that since these delinquents
Are fallen into our hands, that we discharge
Our Country loyalty with discretion,
And not release him from our power, but by
The power above us. (that's the kings) we'll wait
On you to court. On you for your new loves,
And you for old acquaintance.

I'll acquaint my father with your care,
He shall be witness of our bringing in
The ambitious Politic trapt in his own gin.

Bereft of all my joys and hopes at once!
Is there no com^ort, nor no counsel left me?
Why stand you gazing thus with sealed lips?
Where is your counsel now, which you are wont
In trifling matters to pour out in plenty?
Now, in the peril of my life and state
I cannot get a word. Give me my daughter,
Or take my Kingdom too. Where is she? Tell me.

All we can say or hear is, she was taken
Out of her private walks by violent hands,
Only we guess the master of the plot
Was Stratocles, who now is missing in the Court.

He asked my leave to leave the Court, and had it.

Twas a fit gloss for his fowl treachery.

But what have you said for her recovery.

We have dispatch't a hundred several posts
To every coast and angle of your Kingdom:
No way of finding her is left unsought.

Could we find Stratocles, she might be found.

Still upon him? Where's Philocles? where's Philargus?
They are missing too.

Hell has not in it a thought
That can detract their honours.

Yet a Rumour
Is spread about the Court; they are gone to fight.

Against whom?

Against themselves. Nay more, that they
Have fought, and both are slain.

You may as soon
Believe the Arctic and Antarctic poles
Can meet it opposition, amidst
The firmament, and jointly in a fall
Extinguish both their lights in Neptunes bosom.

Whence springs this Rumour.

Stratocles is the head
We may be confident; and his men the pipes
That have dispers't it.

Still you judge Stratocles.
What purpose can he have in it.

O my sister
Has heard the news too. Weep not tender sister,
Your sons are safe.

Yes they are with the Gods.

And, had they taken Eudina with them too,
My doubts and fears were over, well as yours.

Here's one that makes a face, an ugly one,
And would weep too, had she but moisture in her.
How now! Whose Mare's dead, Garrula? Take thy bottle
And turn that into tears. Or dost thou wring
Thy face because that's dry? Gi'mee't, I'll fill it.

My son, oh, oh my son is at deaths door.

And is death so unkind to keep it shut
Against him? Out upon him churl.

My liege
And Madam (it shall out) you might have saved
My sons life in your servants love, whose scorn
Will be his death, except the King divert it,
And I shall tell him what you know I know --

O me undone.

And open such a secret
Unto his majesty --

Yet forbear me now.

Do you slight me in the care of my sons life?
Do you scorn my secret too, that may be worth
More then your kingdom to you?

Away old fool.

Now you shall never know it.

For thy good will
The king would thank thee, in offering at some mirth
To cool his grief, but that it is too hot
Yet to be touched.

Indeed you do not well
To move the King, or to perplex the Lady
Now in their sorrows fulness.

What's their sorrow
To mine? My sons a dying.

Her sons are dead,
And the Kings daughter lost.

But I pray, say,
Is my Lord Philocles and Philargus dead?

'Tis said so.

Then I say my son shall live.

And so wilt thou while thou can lift thy bottle
To that old Mazer.

Hem! A hem! a ha!

Do you rejoice, and show the rotten half tooth
You have left that they are dead.

No I rejoice
That the advancement that the giglet gaped for
In one of their fine followers is lost,
In hope of which she scorned my son. But now
He shall scorn her and live.

Out envious trot

I'll comfort him with the news.

away you Hag,
Here comes one merry look.

Joy to the king.

Well said, speak up and home good

Your daughter's safe returned so is your son, Madam,
For which you are to thank the Gods: This is
Their true relation.

Where is Stratocles?

Caught in the snares of his foul treachery.

Bravely and honestly spoken Eupathus.

And by their hands whose voices he had once
For his election.

What his country heads?

They all turn head upon him now.

Brave heads
Observe my judgement now, my king: Those heads
I will so souse in our best Greekish Wines,
That they shall be such heads! O heads, heads, heads!

I do approve your judgment good Disanius,
But wish you not insult ore mans dejection.
We find that Stracocles is much Penitent
And troubled at his trespass.

A halter still him
For an ambitious hypocritical Traitor.

The time for my Eudina's match draws near,
And I no longer will attend on fortune,
I have decreed it past recall, regardless
Whether against the oracle, or with it.

Yet am I consident in your assertion
You priests of Delphos.

He will bestow her yet
On Stratocles, if she stand longer doubtful
In a fair choice.

Fear not my Lord. That doubt
Your Country heads will clear. He has lost them
For ever.

O brave heads! I will so ring
Their ears with jewels of praises and preferment
That they shall glare like direful comets at him.

One she shall choose of them: If not, I'll put
A third upon her.

With your pardon Sir,
Why are you (for I find it is so) stronger
For Philocles?

No reason urges me;
And yet I find an inclination in me
That pleads for him. I can perceive you too,
Are partial towards Philargus. Can you yield
A reason for it?

Yes, Sir, he is my eldest.

Alas, But not an hour. Well, I'll remit
My power propounding, and accept
Her choice of either, made within the time.

I, there my hopes do anchor; else they were
Certain of Ship-wrack: yet the perilous waves
My vessel rides on seems so many graves.

Brother, and friend, I'm deaf to all deswasion.
I charge you by Eudina's love, our friendship,
And (if there be) ought that you hold more sacred,
Move not to alter my fixed resolution.

That resolution's mine; And I conjure you
By the self-same respects, and all that are
Or may be hollowed, to let me depart.
I will remove but for some few days journey
Whence you shall duly hear from me. But rather
I'll travail to the Antipodes, then here
Linger the vain impediment of your joys
In your Eudina.

Travel's my design.
Eudina must be yours. She is a bliss
Which heaven created for you.

Can a bliss
Be purchased with your absence? No: 'Twil torture
Equally in fruition as in want.
Were it a Kingdom only, we could part it
Without the quarrel of the Thebean brothers;
Or, were it heaven it self, Castor and Pollux
Should have our imitation. But Eudina
Is only indivisible.

Add to it this,
Their sentence is erroneous, that deny
Partition to the soul: For ours do witness,
Friendship can give her a division,
And make reciprocal community
Of all her faculties. But still Eudyna
Is indivisible. Why name I her,
Whom to forget must be my only tasque?
Brother adieu.

'Tis I that must take leave.

Is it even so?

I fear we are prevented.

Nephews, why left you so the presence? I
May justly fear you were ill advised in it.
The King expects your quick return, and will not
Let pass this peremptory day, set down
For matching of his daughter; to preserve
Life, State, or Kingdom. Have you a purpose,
First having begged that villain Stratocles pardon,
To give him up your interest in the Princess?
The Kingdom too, to boot? will you compel
The King to give him all?

Not so good Uncle.

What do you less in flying from the presence,
When that affair is now in agitation?

Uncle, you saw withal the great distraction
We left the Princess in. How when she looked
Upon Philargus, she inclined to him;
And when on me to me; when on us both
How extasied she fell!

A strong necessity
There is that one of us absent.

Therefore
You both fly off to travel several ways!
Come, let me tell you your courtesy is foolish,
And you unworthy to have such a fortune
Hang like a pregnant cloud over your heads
Ready to be dissolved in showers upon you,
While your own madness conjures up a wind
To blow't away.

Uncle, you are unjust,
I would remove to let that golden shower
Light upon Philocles.

I upon Philargus.

I could even swadle'em both for a brace of Babies.
Your folly makes me mad: will you return
Yet to the presence, both of you?

Uncle, you know
To be both there, is neither to be there,
But to breed more perplexity in Eudyna.
Pray take Philargus.

Nephew, come, be wise:
It is a crown that Courts you; and the name
Of friend, or Brother ought to stand aloof,
And know a distance, where such dignity
Is tendered. Take your opportunity,
I find you coming, come.

I pray take Philocles.

I'll take him for the wiser man then. Nephew,
Come, and embrace your fortune, and forget not
To thank the Gods your Brother has no more wit.
A Kingdom and a beauteous bed*fellow
(There Nephew, there!) Do not those bare a sound
'Bove friend and Brother, ha?

not in mine ears.

What frost has ceiz'd their blood, brains, which neither
Beauty nor dignity can thaw? Go travel.
What stay you for? young Gentlemen sometimes
Wait for a gale of gold to blow'em out
O'th'harbour; Stratocles will furnish you,
And thank you more then for his forfeit life.

Stratocles can gain nothing by my absence,
While her Philargus stays.

No, nor by mine,
While Philocles remains.

Shall I make a motion,
Will one of you remain?

One must and shall.

Then yield to take your lots for it. (I will make'em)
As you respect my love; your mothers life;
The kingdoms good; Eudynas love and life,
Let it be so. Pause not upon it, but do it.
See, here's ink and paper. I am inspired,
Apollo, with thy wisdom. Love. -- and friendship.
See, here's a pass for one, and a plantation
For the other. Love and friendship Gentlemen.
Love shall abide at home, and friendship walk,
According to the custom of the world.
Let it be so. *Come study not, but draw,
I'll draw upon ye both else.

Friendship for me then.

See here I have it brother. And yours is love.
My love be prosperous to you. My horse, my horse.

All's ready, Sir.

In the first place then bring
A parting cup, that by the grapes Elizar
As Jove by Acheron, I may protest
My constancy and zeal unto my purpose.

And now's my time to act thy purpose, Doris.

Kick not your heels against the Gods, Philargus,
It is most evidently their decree
That you abide and Philocles remove.

I do obey my Lot. And noblest brother.
Be you as free in love, as I from envy.

But how can you forgo that equal interest
You have with me in Thessaly, and Eudina?

Why should that trouble you? you see he does
Forgo't; and is a going. Would he were gone once.

Can love allow't?

Variety of objects
Like Nails abandon one a another. So
May I, by novelties of Travail, lose
The thought of Love; and cheerfully return
Both hers and yours in a more just relation.
Give me the bowl. Now brother to that love
You owe the fair Eudina, unto which
I give th'addition of mine own, and all
The joves that ere I wished my self and her,
And to that friendship, which nor Time, nor absence
Shall ever end or alter.

Now the service that may redeem my faults
Is to be done.

Give it me full, Varillus.

I'll give you more then you expect by this.

You have the victory in friendship, brother,
Who, by your resolute absence will enforce
And drive me to a happiness; wherein
I must not cease, in all the strength of prayers
Of sacrifice, and vows; in all my goods
Of fortune, mind and body to be yours:
Which that you may return to repossess
With the more speed, this health to auspicate
And expedite your travails.

They are done
Already if my Apothecaries skill fail not.

With this embrace my brother, and my last
Of present ceremony, I now wish you
In th'arms of your Eudina --
And may my better part of soul, which now
I leave in trust with you, by you be breathed
Into her breast; that she may lively find
She has my love in yours; and that in you
She has us both.

So, so, enough. Ha'ye done yet?

How is it with you brother?

As it is
With souls that leave the world in peace.

For shame
Leave womanish ceremony. Will you part
Before it be too late?

Too soon I fear.
Philargus! Brother! Friend! Ye Gods, how comes this?

What is he dead? I see then how it comes.
You or your man, or both ha'poyson'd him.

No, 'twas my self.

Thou wilt not go out o'th'world
With a lie i'thy mouth? Speak yet again,

He has said well for me already,

Gone, past recovery, but he shall not pass
Without my company.

Wilt thou die mad too?
Come, Sir, let go your whiblin. He has yet
Some breath. Run for Physicians -- No, Sir, stay.
I will not quit you so. I can read guilty lines
Palpably on this villans visnomy.
Is there no more i'th'house? some help here! ho!
Nephew forbear. As you will have me think
You guiltless of your brothers blood, forbear.
How am I tortured! Ho! Philargus; rub him,
Rub him, he may live yet.

O that the world
Might be so happy!

So, well said: A box
Or two in kindness will not do amiss.
Stir not you sirrah. O, Sir, you lay hold
On that same traitor.

I'll not stir my Lord.

I'll hold you to your word, Sir, run, Sir, you
And fetch Physicians.

O my Lord, fallen dead!

Stay but to look upon him, and I'll swear
Thou art his murderer. Fetch the Kings Physicians,
If not to cure him; yet to rip the cause
Out of his sudden death. I guess they'll find
Your handy-work in's maw.

You heard him say
It was himself that did it. I am cleared.

My Lord, the King, impatient of your stay,
Has sent ^.

What has he sent. Has he sent means
To call this man from death, or that from falling
After him into th'grave?

O heavy spectacle!

But, come I will not cry though. Pray assist me,
In with this body, Charity commands
When grieved necessity entreats your hands.

My Rustici amici, your Council and
Your virtue have restored me. And tis true
As Wholom said the good Antisthenes
Virtue is armour against the very fates.

We told you for your good, good Mr. Geron,
Fond love became you not.

It sat upon your coat like burs or briars
Stuck in the hindlocks of our fleecy sheep;
Who shake their heads; figgle, and writh their tails,
And bleat for woe; sprinkle the ground behind'em
Sometimes I wisse: 'twould make one laugh and pitty'em
And all at once, but all remediless.
Till we with helping wit and hands release'em

A wise man then in love is like a sheep
l'th' briars. As Meanwhile said

But (by the way)
What was that Meanwhile, Sir, you speak much of him,
But what was he pray.

An ancient Britain, whom I have affected
As idly as my love. But I'll forget it
And use that word no more. The clowns have found me.

But will you now proceed upon your plot
For th'honour of Tempe plains, and Tempe swains.

You can all dance.

After our country guise.

Like so many light horses.

So can our wives
Who have follow'd us up to Court we thank'em
Pray Juno we get them honestly home again.

There is no doubt. However fear you nothing
As why -- Tis hard to leave off an old custom.

The why was out, but loom stuck in your teeth.

Tis well it did so. You can dance you say.
A dance I have projected for the Princess
Who ever marries her it shall serve. As why --

Again 'twas even a coming.

You are as quick as why --

And there again.

Nay we are heads, I tell you Master Geron,
And should have wit; and shew't we can in th'countrey,
In the head vein, though hear at Court, like courtiers
We'll show it in our heels. Pray therefore on.

On, let us then to practise. King and court
Shall see, to crown their joys, some country sport.

No answer, no return? Must I entreat,
Yet have my undeserved favours slighted?

Yet, Sir, your Kingly patience.

Stupid folly
'Twere longer to attend. My vow is past
And registered in heaven; the minute is
Athand, that calls down thonder on me, which
No tear, or prayers can mollify or aver'^,
If I upon so long deliheration
Shall falsify. So, call in Stratocles.

O my dread father. Yet one hours patience
Till Eupathus or Disanius return.
One short, short hour: I may not live so long.
His wife you named; though you may force me take him.

I'll leave that to the Gods.

They will forgive. Give them your imitation
In mercy, as in power on earth. I know Disanius
Went not in vain to call'em to your presence.
And him that he brings first into this room
O Philocles or Philargus I will take,
Though he precede the other but one foot,
I have it by inspiration from the Gods.

You are full of dreams.

This cannot, Sir, be long
In trial. King Yet I am not bound to wait
On those ungrateful men. O Stratocles,
You have from your late Errors, which your then
Head-strong ambition hurried and cast you in
With that humility purged your self, that I
Conceive you now a temperate Man; and am
Instructed by the clemency of the Gods
To cherish and reward your virtue. Therefore
From their divine appointment, as my hands --

(O mighty, Sir --

Dare not to disobey me)
Receive Eudina.

Royal King and Master,
Mistake not so the pleasure of the Gods.
My forfeit life you have forgiven me:
Your Kingly power and grace might do it. You
Have given it freely: but I took't with caution,
By future service to make good your gift:
But for my forfeit love to fair Eudina,
And my lost honour to the twin-born brothers,
There can be no redemption, if I add
By acceptance of your bounteous offer
A second trespass, greater then the former.

Do you refuse her then.

In hope she'll plead
My pardon to your grace.

The Gods have wrought
Effectually for me.

Strangely, unexpected
Are you become a suppliant Placilla?

In the behalf, Sir, of your loyal subjects,
The Swains of Tempe.

I expected, rather,
News from your unkind brothers. See Justinius,
The Commons, rather then I shall bestow
My daughter upon Stratocles, do beseech me
To take a further time.

You're happy, Sir,
In his refusal and in their request.
They are fair predictions of ensuing joys
To you, your daughter, and the Kingdom, If
I may be worthy to divine so much.

How ere thy divination proves, thy wish
Is worth our thanks. And we may have
Glad tidings presently. Now Eupathus
Where is Disanius, Philocles, and Philargus?
Why come they not?

They are all at hand my liege.
This paper may excuse their stay.

O do
They plead excuse then?

I am full of fears.

And I of sudden joy.

Pray all be well.
The King has struck his breast, and seems perplexed.

Justinius, Stratocles, read here this Paper.
Go Eupathus, and let them enter. Stay.
Yet go, bring them in their prescribed manner.
I'll send the woman off, whose sudden grief
May be a bar to our proceedings. Madam --

I fear that Garrula has detected me.

I must entreat a while your absence, Lady.

May I presume to ask your reason, Sir.

My will has been above your question. Pray,
Let me request you go.

I know obedience.

And go Placilla, send old Garrula to me.

Now tis most evident. O mighty, Sir,
Conceive not worse of me then Garrula.
Let us appear together.

What means this?

You may be pleased to hear me first.

Pray pull not
More weight upon your breast then you can bear,
By your impertinent stay. Go I command you.

I must obey. However tis too late
To change the resolution of my fate.

I have not known her thus. I fear distraction
Fore-runs the voice of grief, as to prevent it.
Heaven knows I called for Garrula, but to send her
With best directions to prepare and arm
Her tender soul against the sting of sorrow
Before it should approach her. But Eudina
You must be valiant; and not let the sight
Of death in others shake your confidence.

How means your majesty?

Suppose that both
Your fatal lovers, Philocles and Philargus
Slept in the caves of death.

I should not live then;

Suppose his destiny had cut off one,
And, in him, all the impediments, that crossed
You in the enjoying of the other, say
Which could you wish survivor? But you have
Declared your constant purpose to possess
The first Disanius brings into this presence.
Come; one is dead. There is a strict necessity
You know it. Now collect your Reason: For 'tis not
Your passion for the dead; nor your dislike
Of Stratocles; no though my subjects yield you
A longer time, shall make me tempt the Gods
By breaking of my vow. Be steadfast then,
As you respect a father; and take courage.
See Philocles lives.

Philargus then
Is brought in dead be^ore him by Disanius;
And unto him the first to be brought in
My faith was vowed; and he is now my choice.

What being dead? Could you affect'em so
Equally, both alive, that you forbore
To choose, because you could not have'em both;
And now seek only him cannot be had?
What Love, what madness call you this? good Gods,
Throw not your wrath upon me in destruction on the other

Nor let your passion Master you great, sir, side,
As sudden grief does her. But give a little
Scope to her sorrow. She will soon return
And meet her Reason in obedience
To your desires.

I thank thee good Justinius.

Your virgin tears and vows ore your lost love
I did attend with pardon, my Eudina,
I^ hope you are now compliant to my will.

Grieve not your father Madam.

I ha'done;
And as the Gods direct him to command me,
I must and will obey.

So that's well said.

The Gods have pleased Eudina to determine
Your doubtful choice, reserving Philocles
Unto your love without competitor:
Therefore it now remains that he be taken
Into your liking; whom I have decreed
My successor.

His merits are above
Me and this land; In which what interest
My birth hath given me I resign to him.
Only let me beseech a further respite.

For what? the celebration? I consent;
But for the contract, this imediate hour
Shall see it knit beyond all dissolution.

I that I thirst to see.

Give me your hands.
Yours Philocles.

Why give you not your hand,
Dare you not trust the King with it? should he now
Show a jades trick and fly back.

I beseech
Under your highness Pardon, yet, a respite.

More respits yet? Was ever hopeful match
Driven so round about?

Why this delay?

My brothers blood cries in me for your justice
Which must be executed on his murderer
Before I safely can, or dare possess
His interest in the faith of fair Eudina.

O, is that all? that may be soon dispatch'd.
Come forwards Poysoner. Good your Majesty,
For expedition, make me his judge,
And hangman too (I care not) rather then
Suffer this match hang of the tenters thus.

Has he confes'd the fact?

Yes, yes to me.
I beat it out of him. Quickly good King.

Your patience good Disanius Sirrah speak.

It was my act. But may your mercy look
Upon my love in it unto my Lord.

Your Lord shall be your j^dge then.

I adjudge him
To sharp but lingering tortures (for his death
Alone can yield no satisfaction)
Tortures that may draw in, by his confession,
As accessaries with him, all the homicides
That are in the Kingdom.

A hard matter that.

Nor can I think his only brain and hands
Composed the poison.

Hang him, he's a Barber,
And uses Aqua fortis, oil of Vitriol,
Mercury, and such like, to cleanse his Rasors.

'Tis good that you Varillus clear your conscience
And, if you had confederates in the fact,
Give up their names.

Varillus, I suspect
Doris joined hand with you in my Lords death.

What's that you mutter?

It shall out my Lord;
The handmaid Doris put him on it; I know it
By what she said to us both we being her lovers.

The Taylor proves an honest man: because
He cannot have the wench himself, he'll hang her.

Of her I had the poison, tis confessed.

O that whore. King. Find her and drag her hither.

Where's my Philargus? Give me yet his body,
That with a mothers tears I may embalm it.

You have heard the wosul news then; but my sister
Could grief recall Philargus, we would weep
A second deluge for his reparation;
Renew his breath by sighing, and awake him,
With groans out of his Sepulchre.

Already
Have you interred him then? you made strange hast.
Was it your subtlety to send me hence,
Fearing my cries might have revived him, king?
And so again delayed your daughters marriage?
I have enough to cross it yet Philargus

What's that?

Distraction sure.

My fear foresaw't.

You are deceived, for from my depth of so^row,
Through this thick film o^ tears, I can perceive
You are about to join the hands and faiths
Of Philocles and Eudina,

Is not that
Enough to dry your tears, and show, you that
The Gods were rather merciful in leaving
This son, then rigorous in taking ^other?

Or would you now, cause you have lost Philargus,
Kill Philocles too by crossing of this contract?

It is the pleasure of the Gods I cross it.

Of devils it is. What can she mean? Go sleep.

King by your leave.

What says old suckbottle now?

Nay I am here before you Garrula,
And now will tell the long hid secret for you.
And if I err in it, disprove me.

Tell't then.
My faltering tongue will fail me. I can hear though.

This contract must not be.

You then must yield
More reason then I find you have.

Your self
Can never make it. You will sooner join
The Wolf and Lamb. Falcon and Dove together.

No trifling I command you Thymele.

If you be serious, Mother, hold us not
In this suspense.

Let not the royal blood
Of Thessaly be stained with an incestuous match.

How!

She says right. They are both your lawful children
By your own virtuous Queen now in -- Elisium.

What dreams are these of your distempered heads,

This is no dream or fable. But unfain'd
As truth it self: Which with your gracious leave
I shall demonstrate, humbly craving pardon
For my so long concealment, as I'll yield
Due reason for it.

Freely speak, you have it.

You may remember in your civil wars,
(Those cruel wars, as I may justly stile' em)
In which my husband fell --

O my brave brother!

When open Rebels and domestic Traitors
Pursued your Crown and life; your gracious Queen
To have been brought to bed; and was believed
To have miscarried by an abortive birth.

True: In her flight she was constrained to take
A neighbouring cottage; and use the help
Of the Swains wife.

That swain-ess was my self,
Though my deserts have glorified me since:
And by my help (and somewhat of the Gods)
She then made you the Father of that Prince.

Take up thy bottle -- Sister, speak you on.

Th'affrighted queen (yet wise in that extremity)
Suspecting that the innocence of her babe
Born to a Kingdom, could not be secured
In those combustions from apparent danger,
Sent him to me in private, then in travel
Of my Philargus -- Charging me to fain
A second labour, with the Midwifes aid,
For Philocles: I did, and was reputed
Mother of both.

I cannot think our Queen
Would keep us ignorant of so good a Fortune.

I moved her oft to tell you. But she answered,
All is not sound, There's danger, yet; And when
After Eudyna's birth she felt her self
At point of death, she strictly did enjoin
Me and this woman, only conscious with her,
By oath of which she had prepared this copy
In her own hand, to keep it silent, till
Philocles should be able to secure
Himself from treachery; or that your term
Of life expiring, or some accident
Of no less consequence required detection.
For further proof --

My joy forbids more questioning
Give me my ^lesh and blood into my bosom.
Thrice happy Fathers if your Children were
Borne to you thus of perfect Age. But where
Is now a Match for my Eudina. I
Have here a successor.

Hah! Voices in the Air that cry Philargus?

Voices that do tell me, I must follow him
Up to the heavens, and there be married to him.

Here's the She-Devil now.

You need not pull me
For that mans love, I laid thy Lord to sleep:
Had I loved thee best, then his Lord had slept.

How does he sleep? speak impudent baggage, how?

How? With a powder, Sir, which my own father
A skilful pothecary prepared; who, if
Philargus dye, shall hang with us for Company.

Your father?

Yes, But now the perils past.
See, if he sleep, tis walking.

Ha! Philargus.
Or but the shade; the spirit of my friend.

Be not amazed, as at an apparition.

Doth my son live? O then I have enough.

Come hither. come hither you three. I will discharge
The scene of you* Thy love unto thy Lord
(Though somewhat unadvisedly employed)
Deserves reward; I'll see it given thee,
Thy Lord and King shall thank thee: take thy wench,
She has love in her wit, and wit in her anger.
I like the luck of things; that ill intents
Should bring forth good events. Thy faithfulness
To thy Lord too was happy. Go, I*le see you
All royally rewarded. How now Geron?

My Lord I see here's joy towards, as why --

'Slife, stand not Whiloming now man:but be brief.

Cry mercy. I had left it. But my Lord
To celebrate the flowing joys in Court,
I and my Country heads have framed a Masque,
Rather an antic dance, rather a country toy,
Rather a Rustic round; rather a --

Hoy day!
Thy Rather's worse then thy Meanwhile. Dost know
What time o'day 'tis.

Tis a rural thing
To be presented at the Princess wedding
And, if you think it meet, I will induce
The practise of it presently. As why --

Go fetch the heads and heels, I'll stay the King,
To see and laugh at'em. That's grace enough.

Philargus you have much to know; the which
We will Eudina tell you, now she's yours.
Receive her and our blessing.

Were I dead
(As I was thought to be) your name pronounced
Over my grave, beyond all Necromancy,
Would call fresh blood into my veins again;
Strengthen my nerves, to break the Iron gates
Of death; and force my joyful spirit from
The Elisian Paradise to live with you.

You shall not be a looser Thymele:
Philocles shall be yours, and in exchange
Placilla mine.

To me my beauteous spouse
Thou art as Juno to her Jupiter,
Sister and wife.

Your highness may be pleased
Now at so happy leisure to perpend
The Oracle; which truly hath effected
Each word of the prediction.

Who can repeat the answer, I ha'lost it.

I have it.
Contend not for the jewel, which
Ere long shall both of you enrich.

Eudina does so: me in a dear sister.

Me in a Peerless wife.

Pursue your fortune: for 'tis she
Shall make ye what you seem to be.

She has done that too: For now indeed we're brothers

Apollo thou hast filled us all with joy,
But has our joy already filled our Court
With Music?

Will your Majesty yet sit
And see the practise of a presentation,
Against the Marriages by your Swains of Tempe
With thanks; and give it all the grace we may?

From Tempe plains, the Tempe Swains
With mirth and Melody,
With Dance and Song do hither throng
To greet your Majesty.

O there, look there, Madam my Son, and all
My old Temperian Neighbours.

We cannot hope in all our scope,
To gain much praise for skill,
But it shall be enough, if ye
Accept of our good will.

My thanks to all.

Heaven bless your Majesty.

Thanks to Apollo. Let his temple be
The place of our solemnity. His Altars
Let them be laden with Arabian spices;
Let his Priests lead, in a devout procession,
The horned Sacrifice, mantled with Ghirlonds
And we (our Temples crowned with Laurel) follow
With Music, sounding Hymen and Apollo.

Tis not the Poets art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present unt'ye
Can justly make us to presume a Play
Is good till you approv't: which that you may
It cannot mis-become us, since our gains
Come by your favour more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands
And humbly ask that favour at your hands.

