THE CITY WIT, OR, The Woman wears the BREECHES.

A COMEDY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Richard Marriot, and Thomas Dring, and are to be
sold at their Shops in Fleet-street, 1653.

Quot quot adestis, salvete, salvetote Gentlemen, YOu see I come unarmed among
you, sine Virga aut Ferula, without Rod or Ferular, which are the Pedants
weapons. Id est, that is to say, I come not hither to be an Instructor to any
of you, that were Aquilam volare docere, aut Delphinum natare, to teach the
Ape, well learned as my self. Nor came I to instruct the Comedians. That were
for me to be Asinus inter simias, the fool of the Company: I dare not undertake
them. I am no Paedagogus nor Hypodidascalus here. I approach not hither ad
erudiendum, nec ad Corrigendum. Nay I have given my Scholars leave to play, to
get a Vacuum for my self to day, to Act a particle here in a Play; an Actor
being wanting that could bear it with port and state enough. A Pedant is not
easily imitated. Therefore in person, I for your delight have left my School
to tread the Stage. Pray Jove the terror of my brow spoil not your mirth, for
you cannot forget the fury of a Tutor, when you have lain under the blazing
Comet of his wrath, with quaeso Praeceptor te precor da -- c. But, let fear
pass, nothing but mirth's intended.

But I had forgot my self, A Prologue should be in Ryhme, c. therefore I will
begin again.

Kind Gentlemen, and men of gentle kind,
There is in that a figure, as you'll find,
Because weeltake your ears as 'twere in Ropes,
I'll nothing speak but figures, strayns tropes.
Quot quot adestis Salvete salvetote.
The Schoolmaster that never yet besought ye,
Is now become a suitor, that you'll sit,
And exercise your Judgement with your wit,
On this our Comedy, which in bold Phrase,
The Author says has past with good applause
In former times. For it was written, when
It bore just Judgement, and the seal of Ben.
Some in this round may have both seen't, and heard,
Ere I, that bear its title, wore a Beard.
My suit is therefore that you will not look,
To find more in the Title then the Book.
My part the Pedant, though it seem a Column
Is but a Page, compared to the whole volume.
What bulk have I to bear a Scene to pass,
But by your favours multiplying Glass.
In nova fert Animus, then I'll do my best
To gain your Plaudit among the rest.
So with the salutation I first brought ye,
Quot quot adestis, salvete salvetote.
SEt forth that Table Jer.

Will you not go in and dine, Sir?


No: I am of other diet to day.


The whole company expects you.


May they sit merry with their cheer,
while I feed on this hard meat. And wait
you within: I shall not change a trencher.

Alas my good Master.


Here are the nests, but all the
Birds are flown.
How easy a thing it is to be undone,
When credulous Man will trust his 'state to others!
Am I drawn dry? Not so much as the Lees left?
Nothing but empty Cask? have I no refuge
To fly to now? Yes, here, about a groats worth
Of paper it was once. Would I had now
Greens groats-worth of wit for it. But 'twill serve
To light tobacco-pipes. Here (let me see)
Here is three hundred pound, two hundred here.
And here one hundred, and two hundred here;
Fifty; fifty; fifty; and one hundred here,
And here one hundred and fifty. Besides
A many parcels of small debts, which make
Two hundred more. I shall not live to tell it,
But put it up, and take it by the weight.
O me! how heavy 'tis! And, doubtless, so 'twould be
At some mans heart. It troubles me a little.
Now what news?

My mistress, and your Mother Sir,
Entreats you to come to dinner.

These they are; My debts,
That strike me through. This bag will never pay
Any of these.

Sir, shall I say you'll come?


How well it were, if any of my Creditors
Could once but dream that this were current money!

What shall I say?


Even what thou wilt, good Jeremy.


Alas you know, this dinner was appointed
A friendly meeting for most of your Creditors,
And many of your Debtors.

But I hope
Few of the last appear.

None but some privileged Courtiers, that dare
Put in at all men's Tables. They're all set,
Your Creditors on one side, and your Debtors
On the other; and do only stay for you.

To feed on; do they? Go. I will not come.


I fear, Sir, you will overthrow the good
That was intended you. You know this meeting
Was for the Creditors to give longer day,
As they should find your Debtors to acknowledge
The sums they owe you. Sir I should be sorry
To see you sink, or forced to hide your head,
That looked as high, as any in the City.

Prithee go in. And if they seem to stay,
Pray 'em fall too; tell 'em I take this time
Only to order my Accounts, and that as soon
As they are full, and fit to talk, I'll come:
Good Jeremie go.

In truth I pity him --


A right good Boy thou art. I think on thee:
What must I do now? All I have is lost,
And what I have not, sought to be forced from me,
I must take nimble hold upon Occasion,
Or lie for ever in the Bankrupt ditch,
Where no man lends a hand to draw one out*
I will leap over it, or fall bravely in it,
Scorning the Bridge of Baseness, Composition,
Which doth infect a City like the Plague,
And teach men Knavery, that were never born to it:
Whereby the Rope-deserving Rascal gains
Purple and Furs, Trappings and golden Chains.
Base Composition, baser far then Want,
Then Beggary, Imprisonment, Slavery:
I scorn thee, though thou love a Trades-man dearly
And make a Chandler Lord of thousands yearly.
I will have other aid. How now! Again?

O, Sir, you are undone.


Hast thou no news, Jeremie?


Alas your Mother Sir --


Why what of her?
Is there a Plate lost, or a 'Postle-spoon
A China Dish broke, or an ancient Glass,
And stained with Wine her Damasque table-cloath?
Or is the Salt fallen towards her? What's the matter?

Her mischievous tongue has over-thrown the good
Was meant to you.

What Good, good Jeremie?


Your Creditors were on a resolution
To do you good, and madly she opposed it,
And with a vehement voice proclaims you a Beggar;
Says, you have undone her Daughter; that no good
Is fit to be done for you: And such a storm
Of wicked breath --

She's drunk; Is she not, Jeremie?


No Sir, 'tis nothing but her old disease,
The Tongue-ague, whose fit is now got up
To such a height, the Devil cannot lay it.
The learned School-master, Mr. Sarpego
Has conjured it by all his parts of speech,
His Tropes and Figures; and cannot be heard
In the furious Tempest. All your Creditors
Are gone in Rage; will take their course, they say.
Some of your Debtors stay, I think, to laugh at her.

Now deafeness seize me. I disclaim my hearing. I defy my audituall part. I
renounce mine ears. Mistress Pyannet, a desperate Palsy is on thy lips, and an
everlasting Fever on thy Tongue?


What raging Rout hath rent thy rest;
What Scold hath scutch'd thy skonce:

I'll breath it to thy bolder breast,
That ask me for the nonce.
You understand or know, that here hath been a Feast made, to take up a
ponderous difference between Master Sneakup your Father in Law, and your self
Mr. Crazy; and between most of your Creditors and Debitors. Food hath been
eaten; Wine drunk; Talk past; Breath spent; Labour lost: For why? Mistress
Pyannet your Mother in Law, Mr. Sneakups Wife (though she will be called by
none but her own name) that woman of an eternal Tongue; that Creature of an
everlasting noise; whose perpetual talk is able to deafen a Miller; whose
discourse is more tedious then a Justices Charge; She, that will out-scold ten
carted Bawds, even when she is sober; and out-chat fifteen Midwives, though
fourteen of them be half drunk: this Shee-thing hath burst all. Demosthenes
himself would give her over. Therefore hopeless Sarpego is silent.


O, are you here Sir! You have spun a fair thread. Here's much ado, and little
help. We can make bolt nor shaft, find neither head nor foot in your business.
My daughter and I may both curse the time, that ever we saw the eyes of thee.


Sir, you have the civil virtue of Patience in you. Dear Sir hear me.


He says he hears thee, and is ashamed to see thee. Hast not undone our
Daughter* spent her Portion; deceived our hopes; wasted thy fortunes; undone
thy credit; proved Bankrupt?


All was but my kind heart in trusting, in trusting, Father.


Kind heart! What should Citizens do with kind hearts; or trusting in any thing
but God, and ready money?


What would you, dear Father, that I should do now?


Marry depart in peace Sir. Vanish in silence Sir. I'll take my Daughter home
Sir. She shall not beg with you Sir. No marry shalt thou not; no, 'deed Duck
shalt thou not.


Be yet but pleased to answer me, good Sir. May not an honest man --


Honest man! Who the Devil wished thee to be an honest man? Here's my
worshipful Husband, Mr. Sneakup, that from a Grasier is come to be a Justice
of Peace: And, what, as an honest man? He grew to be able to give nine hundred
pound with my daughter; and, what, by honesty? Mr. Sneakup and I are come up
to live in the City, and here we have lain these three years; and what? for
honesty? Honesty! What should the City do with honesty; when 'tis enough to
undo a whole Corporation? Why are your Wares gumm'd; your Shops dark; your
Prizes writ in strange Characters? what, for honesty? Honesty? why is hard wax
called Merchants wax; and is said seldom or never to be rip'd off, but it
plucks the skin of a Lordship with it? what! for honesty? Now (mortified my
Concupiscence!) Dost thou think, that our Neighbour, Master Linsy-Wolsie here,
from the son of a Tripe-wife, and a Rope-maker, could aspire to be an
Aldermans Deputy; to be Worshipful Mr. Linsie-Wolsie; Venerable Mr.
Linsie-wolsie; to wear Satin sleeves, whip Beggars? And, what? By honesty?
Have we bought an Office, here, for our towardly and gracious son and heir
here, young Mr. Sneakup --


Yes forsooth Mother.


And made him a Courtier, in hope of his honesty? Nay, (once for all) Did we
marry our Daughter, here, to thee; racked our Purses to pay Portion; left
Country house-keeping to save charges, in hope either of thine, or her honesty?
No, we looked, that thy Ware-house should have eaten up Castles, and that for
thy narrow Walk in a Jewellers shop, a whole Country should not have sufficed
thee.


If my uncunning Disposition be my only vice, then Father --


Nay, and thou hast been married three years to my Daughter, and hast not got
her with Child yet! How dost answer that? For a woman to be married to a
fruitful Fool, there is some bearing with him yet. (I know it by my self) but
a dry barren Fool! How dost thou satisfy that?


It may be defect in your Daughter, as probable as in me.


O impudent varlet! Defect in my Daughter? O horrible indignity! Defect in my
Daughter? Nay, 'tis well known, before ever thou saw her, there was no
defect in my Daughter.


Well: If to be honest, be to be a fool, my utmost Ambition is a Coxcomb. Sir,
I crave your farewell.


Marry Sir, and have it with all his heart. My Husband is a man of few words,
and hath committed his tongue to me: And I hope I shall use it to his Worship.
Fare you well Sir.


Thanks for your cheer and full bounty of Entertainment, good Mr. Sneakup.


He rather thanks you for your patience, and kind visitation, good Sir Andrew
Ticket. Yes indeed forsooth does he.


I take my leave Sir, too.


Good Madame --


Uds so! there's a trick! you must talk, must you? And your Wife in presence,
must you? As if I could not have said, good Madame. Good Madame! Do you see how
it becomes you?


Good Mistress Sneakup*


Good Madame, I beseech your Ladyship to excuse our deficiency of
Entertainment. Though ou^ power be not to our wish, yet we wish that our Power
were to your Worth, which merits better service --


Pardon me.


Then our rudeness --


You wrong your self.


Can tender, or possibly express by --


I beseech you forsooth --


Our best labour, or utmost devoire. Yes I protest sweet Madame. I beseech you,
as you pass by in Coach sometimes, vouchsafe to see me; and, if I come to
Court, I will presume to visit your Ladyship, and your worthy Knight, Good Sir
Andrew! And I pray you Madame, how does your Monckey, your Parrot, and
Parraquitoes? I pray commend me to 'em, and to all your little ones. Fare you
well, sweet Creature.


We'll leave you to take private farewell of your Wife, Mr. Crazy.


We'll meet you at your Horse, brother.


Loved, my dear heart, my sweetest, my very being, will you needs take your
journey? I shall fall before your return into a Consumption. If you die but
conceive what your departure will bring upon me, I know (my sweet) nay I do
know -- but go your ways; strike my finger into mine eye: 'Tis not the first
true tear a married woman has shed.


Why you hear the noise of that woman of Sound, your Mother. I must travel
down, or not keep up. Yet --


Nay, go I beseech you; you shall never say, I undid you. Go I pray: But
never look to see me my own woman again. How long will you stay forth?


A fortnight at the least; and a month at the most.


Well, a fortnight at the least. Never woman took a more heavy departure. Kiss
me. Farewell. Kiss me again. I pray does your Horse amble, or trot? Do not ride
post as you come home, I pray. Kiss me once more. Farewell.

Hay hoe! How I do gape.


What's a clock Bridget.


Past three forsooth.


Tis past sleeping time then, Bridget.


Nothing is past to those, that have a mind and means.


That's true and tried. Go lay my Pillow Bridget.
Lord, what a thing a woman is in her Husbands absence!
Wast thou ever in love, Jeremy?

Who I forsooth? No forsooth.


I forsooth, and no forsooth? then I perceive you are forsooth. But I advise
you to take head, how you levell your Affection towards me: I am your Mistress;
And I hope you never heard of any Apprentice was so bold with his Mistress.


No indeed forsooth. I should be sorry there should be any such.


Nay, be not sorry neither Jeremy. Is thy Master gone? Look. A pretty youth,
this same Jeremy! And is come of a good Race. I have heard my Mother say, his
Father was a Ferretter --


He is gone forsooth.


Come hither Jeremy. Dost thou see this Handkerchief?


Yes forsooth.


I vowed this Handkerchief should never touch any bodies face, but such a one,
as I would entreat to lie with me.


Indeed forsooth!


Come hither Jeremy. There's a spot o'thy Cheek, let me wipe it off.


O Lord forsooth. I'll go wash it.


Heaven made this Boy of a very honest Appetite, sober Ignorance, and modest
Understanding. My old Grandmothers Latin is verified upon him; Ars non habet
Inimicum praeter Ignorantem. Ignorance is woman's greatest Enemy. Who's within?
Bridget.


Here forsooth.


Go your ways to Mistress Parmisan, the Cheesmongers Wife in old Fishstreet,
and commend me to her; and entreat her to pray Mistress Collifloore the
Hearb-woman in the Old Change, that she will desire Mistress Piccadell in
Bow-lane, in any hand to beseech the good old dry Nurse mother, Et cetera, she
knows where, to provide me an honest, handsome, secret young man; that can
write, and read written hand. Take your errand with you; that can write and
read written hand.


I warrant you forsooth.


So, now will I meditate, take a nap, and dream out a few fancies.


WE take our leaves Mr. Crazy, and wish good Journey to you.


Farewell good Mr. Crazy.


Adiue Brother.


Iterum iterumque vale.


Heartily Godbuy, good Mr. Crazy.


Nay but Gentlemen: A little of your patience you all know your own Debts, and
my almost impudent necessiries, satisfy me, that J may discharge others. Will
you suffer me to sink under my Freenes? shall my goodness, and ready Piety
undo me? Sir Andrew Ticket, you are a professed Courtier, and should have a
^ender sense of honour. This is your day of payment for two hundred pound.


Blood of Bacchus, tis true, tis my day, what then? Dost take me for a
Citizen, that thou think I'll keep my day? No, thou'st find that I am a
Courtier, let my day keep me and 'twill. But dost hear? Come to the Court. J
will not say what I will do for thee. But come to the Court. I ow the two
hundred pounds: I'll not deny it, if thou ask seven years hence for it, farewell.
I say no more, but come to the Court, and see if I will know thee.


O, Sir, now you are in favour, you will know no body.


True: tis just. Why should we, when we are in favour know any body; when, if
we be in disgrace, no body will know us? Farewell honest Tradesman.


That is Synonima for a fool. An ironical Epithet, upon my Facunditie.


O Master Sarpego! I know you will satisfy your own driblet of ten pound, I
lent you out of my Purse.


Diogenes Laertius on a certain time, demanding of Cornelius Tacitus an
Areopagit of Syracusa; what was the most Commodious and expeditest method to
kill the Itch, answered --


Answer me my monies I beseech you.


Peremptorily, Careo Supinis; I want money. I confess, some driblets are in
the Debet. But, me thinks, that you being a Man of Wit, Brain, Forecast and
Forehead, should not be so easy, (I will not say foolish, for that were a
figure) as to lend a Philosopher money, that cries, when he is naked, Omnia mea
mecum porto. Well Sir, J shall ever live to wish, that your own Lantern may
be your direction; and that, where ever you travel, the Cornu copia of
Abundance may accompany you. Yes sure shall I. Vive valeque.


Why look you Brother, It was thought, that I had a tender Pericranion; or, in
direct Phrase, that I was an unthristy fool. Signior no: you shall now find,
that I cannot only keep mine own, but other men's. It is rightly said, He that
is poor in Appetite, may quickly be rich in Purse. Desire little; covet little;
no not your own: And you shall have enough.


Enough?


Yes Brother, little enough. I confess I am your Debtor for the loan of some
hundred Marks. Now you have need: who has not? you have need to have it. I have
need to pay it. Here's need of all hands. But Brother, you shall be no looser
by me. Purchase Wit; Get wit (look you) wit. And Brother, if you come to the
Court, now my Mother and my Father have bought me an Office there, so you will
bring my Sister with you, I will make the best show of you that I can. It may
chance to set you up again, Brother; tis many an honest mans fortune, to rise
by a good Wife. Farewell sweet Brother. Prithee grow rich again; and wear
good Clothes, that we may keep our Acquaintance still. Farewell, dear Brother.
Exit.


Mr. Rufflit --


What, does thy fist gape for money from me?


I hope it is not the fashion, for a Gallant of fashion, to break for so small
a Portion as the sum of an hundred Angels.


For a Gallant of fashion to break, for a Gallant of fashion? Dost thou know
what a Gallant of fashion is? I'll tell thee. It is a thing that but once in
three Months has money in his Purse; A creature made up of Promise and
Protestation: A thing that fowls other men's Napkins: towseth other Men's
Sheets, flatters all he fears, contemns all he needs not, sterves all that
serve him, and undoes all that trust him. Dost ask me money, as I am a Gallant
of fashion, I do thee Courtesy, I beat thee not.


I lent it you on your single word.


Tis pity but thou shouldest loose thy Freedom for it: you Tradesmen have a
good Order in your City, Not to lend a Gentleman money without a Citizen
bound with him: But you forsooth scorn Orders! By this light, tis pity thou
loosest not thy Freedom for it. Well, when I am flush, thou shalt feel from
me, Farewell. Prithee learn to have some wit. A handsome straight young
fellow, grown into a pretty Bear, with a proper bodied Woman to his Wife, and
cannot bear a Brain! Farewell. Dost hear? Be ruled by me, Get money, do, Get
money and keep it; would thrive? Be rather a knave then a Fool. How much dost
say I ow thee?


Fifty pound.


Thou art in my Debt. I have given the Counsel worth threeskore, Dog-cheap,
well I'll rent the odd money.


Strange mad fellows these same, Mr. Crazy, me thinks to deal withal.


You are right Mr. Linsie wolsie* I would my Genius had directed me, to deal
always with such honest neighbourly men as your self. I hope you will not
deny me a Courtesy.


Not I, I protest, what is it?


You took once a Jewell of me, which you sold for thirty pound, for which I
have your Bond for sixty, at your day of marriage. If you will now, because I
want present money, give me but twenty pound, I'll acquit you.


My good friend Mr. Crazy, I have no tricks and Jerks to come over you, as the
witty Gentleman had ere while: But I know a plain bargain is a plain
bargain: and wit is never good till it be bought. If twenty pound will
pleasure you, upon good security I will procure it you. A hundred if you
please, do you mark Mr. Crazy? On good security. Otherwise you must pardon me,
Mr. Crazy. I am a poor Tradesman Mr. Crazy, keep both a Linen and a VVollen
Drapers shop, Mr. Crazy, according to my name, Mr. Crazy, and would be loath
to lend my money, Mr. Crazy, to be laughed at among my Neighbours, Mr. Crazy,
as you are Mr. Crazy. And so fare you well, Mr. Crazy.


Is this the end of unsuspicious Freeness?
Are open hands of Cheerful Piety,
A helpful bounty, and most easy Goodness,
Re^arded thus?
Is, to be honest, termed to be a fool?
Respect it Heaven. Bear up still merry heart.
Droop not: But scorn the worlds unjust despising.
Who through Goodness sinks, his fall's his Rising.
O Master, Master, upon my knowledge, my Mistres is forced since your departure
to be


What Jeremy?


Honest Sir. Get up your Debts as fast as you can abroad: For on my
understanding (which great Jove knows is but little) she will take up more
then your due at home easily.


Boy. Did never observe at the Court gate, that the Lord was no sooner off
from his Horse-back but the Lackey got up into the Saddle and rode home?


Yes Sir, tis common.


I scorn not my Betters Fortune. And what is not my sin, shall never be my
shame.


In truth I was fain to make my self an Ass, or else I had been tempted to
have been a knave.


Boy, thou art now my Prentice. From hence be free. Poverty shall serve it
self. Yet do one thing for me.


If it be in the power of my poor Sconce.


If ever it be in thy possible ability, wrong all Men, use thy wit, to abuse
all things, that have but sense of wrong: For without mercy, all men have
injured thy mistrustles Master, Milked my thoughts from my heart, and money
from my Purse, and, last, laughed at my Credulity. Cheat, chosen, live by thy
Wits: Tis most manly, therefore most noble. Horses get their living by their
Backs, Oxen by their necks, Swine and Women by their Flesh, Only man by his
Brain. In brief be a knave and prosper: For honesty has beggerd me.


Farewell Master. And if I put tricks upon some of them, let the end of the
Comedy demonstrate.


I am resolved I will revenge. I never provoked my brain yet. But now if I
clap not fire in the tails of some of these Samsons Foxes -- seems my defect
of Fortune want of wit? No.

The sense of our slight sports confessed shall have,
That any may be rich, will be a knave.

EGregious and most great of Expectation, my right dignified and truly
Cice^onian Pupil, now that I have brought you into the Amoene fields with my
ready thankfullnesse for the loan of this ten pound, I commit you to the grace
of Court.


I shall expect that money shortly. Care to send it; For I purchased my place
at a racked recompense.


Your Sarpego is no slippery Companion. You know I am to marry, and this money
shall provide me Complements.

Sis bonus o faelixque tuis. I pede fausto.
Beloved of Phoebus, Minion of the Muses, dear Water Bailey of Helicon, let it
not be distasteful to thy Divine ears, to receive the humble Petition of a
poor Creature, made miserable by the policy of Providence. That thy rare and
absolute Mu^ficence might supply what fortune had l^st defective: I kiss thy
learned toes.


I tell thee, by the Axioms of the Peripateticall Aristotle, thou art a
Monster. My reward shall be therefore like thy self, monstrously lame. This is
a figure in Eloquution called Apoxegesis.


I am not fed with Figures Sir.


You are an idle vagabond, and lye in wait for the blood of the learned.
Labour, and live.


Right eloquent and well-phrased Sir, my education has been liberal. I
sometimes fed my flock on horned Parnassus: But my wants forced me to my Sword.


You did peradventure sip on the top of Science, Primoribus labijs, or so, but
did not convert it in Succum sanguinem.


That I may ever remain a true man -- Extend.

The Sun, Moon and the seven Planets are my invoked witnesses, I should be
grieved, that necessity should make me grow violent on so adored, adorned
Grammatical Disciplinary -- Be gracious in Contribution -- Sir --


J will give thee an infinite treasure. Sis integer vitae, scelerisque purus.
Vale poor Rogue.


Sir, this Sword can bite -- But, J know you had rather give it freely out of
your own Proclivitie.


Yes I protest, as I am Erudite. Here dreadful Mavortian, the poor price of a
Dinner.


If I might in modesty importune the poor price of a Supper too.


I do speak it in the Optative Mood, I do wish it lay in the model of my
Fortune to give harbour to your shaken state, yet receive this with appeased
clutch.


If I might not seem audacious even to impudence, I poor Freshman in
Literature, would implore of your well-salted, best seasoned virtue, some
larger allowance to supply my defects of Raiment, Books, and other necessaries:
which magnificence shall ever entitle you, my most bounteous Macaenas. Be
induced to it Sir.


Yes, yes, yes, that you may know how dear you are to me; Know this is more
then usual largess -- for non omnibus dormio -- There's a Figure too.


O yes Sir, I understand this Figure too very well. Now dear Mecenas, let me
implore a Purse to enclose these Monies in -- Nay if you impart not with a
cheerful forehead, Sir


Vae misero mihi! sweet Purse adieu. Iterum iterumque vale.


May you be importuned to do it, Sir.


You shall have it instantly. I will only deprome, or take out a little
stuffing first.


Tis no matter. As it is, As it is, good Sir, as it is. Jle accept it as it is.
Most fragrant-phrased Master, suffer thy self ^o be entreated. Do --


You have most powerfully persuaded: Take it.


Most exorbitantly bounteous Mecenas, you have given me all this, have you not?


Yes, yes, and you have taken all that, have you not?


Yes, yes, but as your gift. Jove bless thy brows, and make clear thy
Physiognomy. Vale. Your learned Worship stincks.


Now Barbarism, Incongruity, and false Orthography shame thee; The curse of
Priscian take thee. All the parts of speech defy thee. All the Interjections
of sorrow, as Heu hei* of Shunning, as Apage; of Disdaining, as Hem vah; of
Scorning, as Hui; of Exclaiming, as Proh Deum atque hominum fidem take thee. My
dear Pupils lendings hast thou lewdly licked away: And sorrowful Sarpego is
licked dry. There's a figure left yet! But o thou Castalion Traitor, Pick-purse
of Parnassus, and Hang-man of Helicon: Dives thirst in thy Throat; Ixions wheel
on thy back; Tantalus hunger in thy guts; and Sisyphus stone in thy Bladder.


O fearful curse! Well; I hay given my first pinch, and a little scratched my
Goat-bearded Grammarian, that Broke jests on my uncunning easiness. But he with
the rest shall feel, that modest Simplicity is not always a defect of wit,
but will: What my willing honesty hath seemed to loose, my affected deceits
shall recover. I'll rid 'em one after another, like Guts, till they shall stink
worse then Jewes.

And they shall find with most ashamed eyes,
The honest Breast lives only rich and wise.

Bridget.


Here forsooth.


Bridget, I say.


Here, Lady.


That's comfortably spoken! Nay blush not:
We women can never have too much given us. And
Madame* Josina would sound well.

Yes indeed, Madame Josina Crazy.


No; not Crazy; hang Crazy: Crazy is my Husbands name. I wonder why Women
must be called by their Husbands names, I.


O, they must forsooth.


And why not men by their Wives?


Marry forsooth, because that Men, when they marry, become but half men: And
the other half goes to their Wives. And therefore she is called Woman; where
before she was called but Maid.


Is a married Man but half a Man? what is his other half then?


Truly, oftentimes, Beast. Which part the wife gives to boot, in exchange of
her name. One knocks.


Hark, some body knocks; go see. What should any body knock at my Garden door
for? I do not use to be visited in my Garden.


Yonders a Gentleman craves admittance to converse with you.


I'll converse with no Gentleman. What have I to do with Gentlemen?


A fair-spoken, comely, modest Gentleman he is.


Is he so? I'll speak with no modest Gentleman* You were best be his Bawd. But
are you sure he is a true Gentleman? does he wear clean Linen, and lack
Money?


Here he comes forsooth.


He is very confident, and forward, me thinks.


Exquisite; very Elixir of Beauty, vouchsafe to receive the tender of my Faith
to you; which I protest is zealously devoted to your particular service.


You may speak louder Sir: for I assure you, my Maid is very thick of hearing,
and exceeding weak sighted.


Then, Lady, let it be spoken in bold phrase, I love you.


I thank you Sir. How should I stile you, pray?


My name is Pulse-feel: A poor Doctor of Physic, that wears three-pile velvet
in his Cap; has paid a quarters rent of his house afore-hand; and as meanly as
he stands here, was made Doctor beyond the Seas. I vow (as I am right
Worshipful) the taking of my Degree cost me twelve French crowns, and five and
thirty pound of salt Butter in upper Germany. I can make your beauty, and
preserve it; Rectify your Body, and maintain it; perfume your skin; tinct your
hair; enliven your Eye; Heighten your Appetite. As for Gellies, Dentifrices,
Diets, Mineral Fucusses, Pomatums, Fumes, Italian Masks to sleep in, either to
moysten, or dry the Superficies of your face; paugh, Gallen was a Goose, and
Paracelsus a Patch to Doctor Pulse-feel* Make me then happy, dear sweeting, in
your private ^avours: The which I vow with as much secrefie, constancy and
Resolution, to preserve, as you, with Bounty, sweetness and Freenes shall
impart.


I protest you speak very far within me; I respect you most affectionately.


Then I'll attend you at your Chamber: where the best pleasure, youth, Cupid can
minister shall entertain you.


Entertain me with pleasure? what pleasure I pray you?


Nothing but kiss you Lady, and so forth.


Well, for kissing and so forth, I care not; But look for no dishonesty at my
hands, I charge you.


I will be provident.


And honest, I beseech you: And secret, and resolute, I advise you.


Good.


And very chaste I command you. But a kiss, and so forth.


I understand you. This be my pledge of faith.


And this of mine. -- The thought of me rest with you. And hear you Doctor; I
prithee procure me some young Fellow, that can write: For I am so troubled with
Letters, that I neither read nor answer --


Rely upon me. I can fit you rarely. I know a well qualified fellow, that
dances rarely, plays on divers Instruments, and withal is close.


I marry, Close! Pray let me have him. Kiss and adieu.


I will maintain it. He only, that knows it, permits, and procures it, is truly
a Cuckold. Some fellow would be divorced now. Crazy, speak; wilt be divorced?
why, what and I were? why then thou art an Ass, Crazy. Why Sir? why Sir! why
prithee tell me, what would thy Divorce hurt her? It would but give her more
liberty. She should have bounteous Customers; Gallants, that would hoist her
tires, bestow deep on her. And she should be paid for it. You speak somewhat to
the matter Sir. Nay Crazy, believe it, though she be not a very modest woman
for a Wife, thou may force her to be a reasonable private wench for a Whore.
Say you so? Byr'lady, and I'll take your Counsel. 'Tis a pretty Drabb. I know
not where to compass such another? troth Sir, I'll follow your advice.

And, if my hopes prove not extremely ill,
I'll keep her flesh chaste, though against her will.

He took her by the middle so small
And laid her on the Plain:
And when he had his will on her,
He took her up again.
And what was she then the worse for wearing?
Can you tell Mr. Doctor?

What art thou?


One Sir (I dare tell you in private) that can conduct you to a more lovely
Creature, then her you last courted.


A young Pimp, a very sucking-pig Pimp! What an Age is this, when children
play at such great game! So young, so forward!


The young and the old mun too't, mun too't,
The young and the old mun to it;
The young ones will learn to do it, to do it,
And the Oldforget not to do it.

This Infant piece of Impudence ama^es me. Prithee what art thou? or whom dost
thou serve, or broke for.


As delicate a piece of Woman-flesh as ever Mortal laid lip to. O she is all
Venus! And, to come close to you, she wants a Physician. You are one I take
it: I am a fool else.


I am caught? This habit will betray me. What is she, I say.


O she is, she is a matchless piece,
Though all the world may woo her;
Nor golden shower, nor golden fleece,
Is price enough to do her.

For what wants she a Physician?


For what you please, when you come to her. Sir, upon my life, she's free from
any Disease, but the Counterfeits. Will you know all Sir? she wants a wi^e mans
counsel to assist her in getting a Husband. I take hold of you for that wise
man, she relies upon my Election. Will you go Sir? Tis in an exceeding civil
house; a precise one, indeed. Know you not Mr. Linsey Woolsey?


Not at his house?


Pardon me Sir. At his very house. All the wise wenches in the Town will thwack
to such Sanctuaries, when the times are troublesome, and Troopers trace the
streets in terror.


Prithee, what call thy Mistres?


There she lies Sir, by the name of Mistress Tryman; a rich young Cornish
Widow; though she was borne in Clearken-well; and was never half a days
Journey from Bride well in her life. Her Father was a Pinn-maker -- Sings.

Along along, where the Gallants throng
By twenties, away the Widow to carry:
But let them tarry: For she will carry
Twenty, before that one she will Marry.
Will you along Sir?


Tis but a weak engagement: yet I'll go;
Needless are fears, where Fortunes are so low.

A Widow! what is she? or of whence?


A lusty young wench, they say: A Cornish Girl; able to wrestle down
stronger Chines then any of ours.


But how is she pursed, Jack? Is she strong that way?


Pretty well for a younger Brother; worth 7 or 8 thousand pound.


How man!


You are a married man, and cannot Rival me* I would not else be so open to
you.


I swear I'll help thee all I can. How did find her out?


I have intelligence, that never fails me, she came to town neither but very
lately; and lodged at Mr. Wolseys.


Who, Linsey wolsie, the Hermaphroditicall Draper! That's a precious No^t-headed
Rascal. Hee'll go near to aim at her himself.


Like enough. He may aim at her: But she will be hit by none but a Gentleman,
that I hear ^ Oh she has a fierce Ambition to a Ladyship, though her late
Husband was a Tanner.


A Tanner, well Jack, cake heed how thou ventur^st on her to make her a
Gentlewoman: She will kill ^hee at her Husbands occupation before thou wile be
able to make her Hide gentle. Thou w^ find a tough piece of Curriers work on
her. Look who here is.


Truly* Mr. Toby Sneakup, me thinks I find an alteration in my self already.


Nay, I told you; would you but give your Mind to it, you would be a Gentleman
quickly.


How's this? let's stand aside a^tle.


Sure, he's about to turn himself into a Gentleman to win to the Widow!


And what a Tutor he has picked out to instruct him!


Me thinks I love the name of a Gentleman a great deal better then I did.


But could you find in your heart to lend a Gentleman a score of Angels, Mr.
Wolsey, on his word?


Uhm -- I is not gone so far upon me yet.


Oh, but it m^st though, I know it. A Citizen can never be a Gentleman, till he
has lent all, or almost all his money to Gentlemen. What a while it was ere the
rich Joiners son was a Gentleman? when I my self was a Gentleman first, my
money did so burn in my Pockets, that it cost me all that ever I had, or could
borrow, or steal from my Mother.


But Mr. Toby, a man may be a Country Gentleman, and keep his money, may he
not?


You see Sir, This Widow is removed from the Country into the City, to avoid
the multiplicity of Country Gentlemen that were here ^uitors. Nay you must be a
City Gallant; or a Courtier.


I see no Courtiers, but are more apt to borrow, then to ^end.


I, those that were born, or bred Courtiers I grant you, But to come to it at
your years --


I can the sooner learn. Your Courtier Sir, I pray.


I'll tell you in a brief character was taught me. Speak nothing that you
mean, perform nothing that you promise, pay nothing that you owe, flatter all
above you, scorn all beneath you, deprave all in private, praise all in
public; keep no truth in your mouth, no faith in your heart; no health in
your bones, no friendship in your mind, no modesty in your eyes, no Religion in
your conscience; but especially, no Money in your Purse.


O that Article spoils all.


If you do, take heed of spending it on any thing but Panders, Puncks, and
Fiddlers; for that were most unfashionable.


I thank you Sir, for your Courtly and Gentlemanlike instructions, and wish you
grace to follow them: I have seen too fearful an example lately in my
neighbour Crazy, whose steps I list not trace; nor lend my Money to be laughed
at among my Neighbours. Fare you well Sir. --


Ha ha ha.


Mr. Wolsie! Well met. How does your fair Guest at home, Mrs. Tryman?


How should he come to the knowledge of her? Some of these Gallants will snatch
her up, if I prevent not speedily.


Why speak you not Mr. Wolsie? How does the Widow?


Truly not well Sir. Whether it be weariness of her journey, change of air,
or diet, or what I know not; something has distempered her.


Or Love, perhaps of you Mr. Wolsie.


Me? Alas, I look like no such Gentleman.


You may in a short time.

Hark hither Mr. Wolsie.


We overheard you man: And I guest as much before.


Tis very true Sir, she is worth nine thousand pound: But marry she will
not'but a Gentleman: And I think I have beat him off o'th condition, I have put
him off of that scent for ever, with a false character, Heaven and the Court
forgive me.


Thou hast in truth Boy: And on purpose to have her thy self, I perceive it.


He does not. He's an Ass.


Well, if I were a Bachelor, I should envy thy wit, and thy fortune. Is she
very handsome?


So so: You shall see we'll make a shift with her.


Mr. Wolsie, I would you had her with all my heart; you shall not want my good
word and best wishes.


Do you speak this in earnest Sir, or as you are a Courtier:


In earnest I, and as I am a Gentleman.


Then in earnest, and as I am an honest man, I do not believe you. Mr. Toby
Sneakup has told me what Gentlemen and Courtiers are, too lately.


Mr. Sneakup* well met.


Good Mr. Rufflit.


Now fair Maids lay down my B^d,
And draw the Curtains round:
Tell the World that I am dead,
And who hath given the wound,
Ah me poor Soul!
Alack for love I dye,
Then to the Sexton hie,
And cause the Bell to towel.
O here he is! Mr. Wolsie, indeed my Master Wolsie, if ever you will see my
Mistres your Sweetheart alive, you must go home presently.


My Sweetheart!


I think she is; and that in death she will be so. I speak by what she says,
and others think.


Tis the Widows Boy,


Is she sicker then she was.


O she is even speechless, and calls for you exceedingly. I fetched a Doctor
to her, and he can do her no good. Master Sarpego has made her Will and all.


Has she given me any thing?


Quickly go and see Sir, you will come too late else, I am going to get the
Bell to towel for her.


Fare ye well Gentlemen.


Tic. Ruff. Nay, we'll along with you.


Sing.

Did never truer heart
Out of the World depart,
Or cause the Bell to towel.

LOok up Mistres.

Jo. Take a good heart, the worst is past, fear not.


Ah, ah, ah.


Reach the Bottle again of Doctor Stephens water.


No no, apply more warm clothes to her stomach, there the matter lies which
sends this distemperature into her brain. Be of good cheer Gentlewoman.


Is Mr Wolsie there?


Nothing but Mr. Wolsie ever in her mouth.


Pray Sir, how do you like her? I am much afraid of her.


Let me see, to night it will be full Moon. And she escape the turning of the
next Tide, I will give her a gentle Vomit in the morning, that shall ease her
stomach of this conflux of venomous humours, and make her able to sit a hunting
Nag within this seven-night.


A rare man sure. And, I warrant, well seen in a Woman*


Uh, uh, uh, uh.


Well said, spit out gently, strain not your self too hard.


Agh -- fagh.


Tis very well done. La'you. Her colour begins to come. I'll lay all my skill to
a mess of Tewksbury Mustard, she sneezes thrice within these three hours --


Good Sir want nothing, that your skill shall approve necessary in this time of
need. Good Wives and kind Neighbours, I thank you for your cares.


Is Mr. Wolsie there?


She does nothing but call for you Sir, pray speak to her.


Where's Mr. Wolsie.


Here Lady. How do you?


Then I am even well me thinks -- agh -- agh --


She's very far gone I fear, how do you find her disease Sir?


Dangerous enough Sir. For she is sicker in mind then in body. For I find
most plainly the effects of a deep melancholy, fallen through her
distemperature of passion upon her Liver; much disordering, and withal wasting
the vitals, leaving scarce matter for Physic to work on. So that her mind
receiving the first hurt, must receive the first cure.


Agh agh ah -- pagh fagh --


So so: Strain not your self too hard. No hurt; so so.

Here's melancholy and choler both in plenty.


He speaks with great reason, me thinks, and to the purpose, I would I
understood him.


Do you not know* Sir, any that has offended her by open injury, or
unkindness?


Alas Sir, no such thing could happen since her coming hither.


Then, on my life, tis Love that afflicts her.


Oh oh uh oh --


I have touched her to the quick. I have found her disease, and that you may
prove the abler Doctor in this extremity.


Who I? Alas I believe no such matter.


Mr. Wolsie, Mr. Wolsie.


Here he is Lady. Pray speak your mind to him. Must I pull you to her? Here he
is. What do you say to him? Pray speak.


Oh no, no no no --


She hath something troubles her that concerns only you. Pray take her by the
hand, do as I entreat you. Lady we will go, and leave you in private awhile, if
you please.


Pray do. O but do not, pray do not.


Do you perceive nothing in this passion of hers?

How does she feel your hand?


O, she does so quiddle it, shake it, and gripe it!


You are then the man Sir, the happy man. For she shall recover suddenly.


Who I? Alack a day.


What will you have me dye intestate. Is not my Will made, as I directed?


Where are you Mr. Sarpego, with the Will.


Ad manum. Sweet Buds of Generosity, forbear you may Admirare, at the
abundance here specified: But not find a Legacy bequeathed among you


We expect nothing.


I only wish your health, Lady; and that it may, or might have been my
happiness to sue to you for Love; as I do now to the highest power for Life.


Would I were married to her, as she is; and twere but for an hour, I cared
not. Had my mother been but acquainted with her, before she fell sick, here
had been a match!


O Dij immortales! A rich Widow shall have Suitors on her Death-bed.


Good Sir, It is too late to speak of these things. I only crave and wish your
prayers in your absence: This place can yield no pleasure to you I know. Mr.
Wolsey, pray your hand again: I could be even content to live me thinks, if I
had but such a man as you to my Huh, uh, uh, uh. --


By your leave. Pray by your leave. Help Women. Bear up her Body a little. Bow
it forwards. So, speak to her, Sr. Good Lady drink of this Cordyal.


How do you now forsooth?


What now she is drinking -- Now speak Sir, you or no man must do her good.


How do you forsooth?


Well said Sir, speak cheerfully to her.


How dee do? how dee do, Mistress Tryman How is't now, ha?


Very comfortably spoken!


I, was it not?


Alas she cannot speak. I'll call my Neighbour Mistres Sneakup. If any body
can make her speak, 'tis she.


I'll call my Mother for you. She will make her speak, if she have but a word
left in her belly -- Mass here she comes.


How comes it Mr. Wolsey, that you have a Gentlewoman sick in your house, and
not send for me? Let me feel her hand. Alas she is shrewdly distempered. When
had she a stool Sir, Prithee Daughter step home to my Closet, and bring the
Vial of -- my own Water, which stands next to my blew Velvet Cabinet.


That's my Doctor was with me to day


She's a young Gentlewoman; may have many Children yet, let me note her eyes:
I find nothing there. When did you see her water Mr. Doctor?


What Devil sent this fury among us?


In troth I beshrew you, Mr. Wolsey, you sent not for me, but I hope I come not
too late. Pluck up a Women's heart, you shall find a good Neighbour of me.


I will thank you in my Will. I shall not live to thank you otherwise.


Alas talk not of your will. You shall have time enough to think of that many
years hence.


I tell her so, Lady, yet she calls for it still.


Pray let me see it, that I may sign it. Vh Vh --


Lord how my Daughter stays. Good Sir Andrew Ticket! worthy Mr. Rufflit! My
Son Tobias is highly honoured in your noble Acquaintance, and Courtly
conversation.


We rather hold our selves dignified, in being his endeared Companions.


I assure you Mother, we are the three of the Court.


I most entirely thank you for him. And I do beseech you make your selves no
strangers to my poor house. We are alone; can give but light entertainment,
my Daughter and I; since my Son Crasies misfortune drave him from us --

O welcome Daughter -- I beseech you noble Sirs estrange not your selves to us,
your Servants.


Pox o'your Complement.


Give me the Vial Daughter. Take up the Lady. Taste of this. It is a
Composition of mine own distilling.


Uh, uh, uh, umh --


Well done. Nay it will make you break wind, I tell you.


By the service I owe you sweet Mistres, tis unfeigned. My Wife desires to see
you.


As I can best witness; And fears you enjoy not the liberty of a Woman,
since your Husbands departure. Your Brother having promised too, to conduct you
to Court.


It is confessed, and I will do it.


Where the best entertainment a poor Ladies chamber can afford, shall expect
you.


I shall embrace it.


Sfoot, tis time to part you -- Mistres, I beseech your help, joined with your
virtuous Mothers.


You forget the young man, that can Dance Write, and keep Counsel.


I forget you not Lady. But I wish you to beware of these Courtiers, till I
tell you what they are:


I'll be hanged if this Doctor be not of her smock Counsel.


How is it now, good heart?


Much enlightened, I thank Heaven and you. Now, pray, read Sir my Will.


In Dei nomine. Amen.


O let us hear the Will.


I Iane Tryman of Knockers hole, in the County of Cornwall, Widow, Sick in
Body, but whole in Mind, and of perfect memory, do make my last Will and
Testament, in Manner and Form following.


As for the Manner and Form tis no matter. To the Legacies, briefly.


Hum hum. Imprimis, A Dole of Bread to be given to the Poor of this Parish --
five pound.


Stay. This I entreat of you Mr. Wolsey, that whether I live or dye, this Dole
may be given to morrow. It was the Charge of my Mother to see it done; Saying,
it was better to take the Prayers of the Poor with me, then leave them to be
sent after.


It shall be done: and you, I hope, shall see it.


To Mr. Sarpego, the Writer hereof, A Mourning Gown, and forty pound, to Preach
at the Funeral.


How! forty pound?


Di boni! No. Tis forty shillings. Item to my Nephew, Sir Marmaduke Trevaugh an
of St. Minever, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my Nephew Mr. Francis
Trepton, one thousand pound in Gold. Item to my Kinsman, Sir Stephen Leggleden,
I do forgive two thousand pound, for which his Lands are Mortgaged to me. Item
to his Daughter, my God-daughter Iane Leggleden, five hundred pound in money;
my best Basin and Ewer; two silver Flagon Pots, and three silver and gilt
standing Cups. Item to the poor of the Parish of Knockers-hole, ten pound, and
forty pound towards the reparation of their Church. Item to Mr. Linsey wolsey
the Ring, which was my Wedding Ring, and fifty other Rings, with several
stones in my Trunk, in his house, valued at two hundred and fifty pounds. Item
to all his servants, and to the Women that attended me in my sickness, five
pound a piece.


Now the Lord receive her to his mercy.


My Legacy will save her life; for never any body dyed yet, that bequeathed me
any thing.


Item, to my Page Jeffery Crack forty pound. And all my other Servants ten
pound a peace. Item to my Niece Barbara Tredrite five hundred pound; my second
Basin and Ewer, a dozen of silver Dishes, and four dozen of silver Spoons.
Lastly, all the rest of my Lands, Jewels, Plate, Money, Debts, Movables and
Unmoveables, to my dear and loving Brother, Sir Gregory Flamsted, whom I make
my full Executor. In cujus rei testimonium, c. This is the brief of it.


Tis well. Only add to it -- Vh -- A Gold Chain also in my Trunk to this
virtuous Gentlewoman. And another Chain, that is there of Pearl, to her
Daughter. To this learned Doctor twenty pound. And to the Gentlemen which have
visited me, for them and their friends an hundred pound to be spent in a
Banckquet.


Hoc nihil refert. I must write all over again then.


Do so then. And make your forty shillings five pound.


Gratias vel ingentes ago. It shall be done --


Now Mr. Wolsie, and your virtuous Neighbour here, I entreat, that when I have
signed this Will, that you keep it till my Brother comes to Town. This Doctor
shall direct you in all. And that he may be the better able so to do, I desire
you all that I may a while be private with him.


With all our hearts.


Are they all gone?

Now Mr. Doctor, what think you of the sick Widow?

Has she done her part hitherto?


Beyond my expectation! Better then I for a Doctor.


You are right. And I am even the same for a Widow as you for a Doctor. Do not
I know you? Yes good Mr. Crazy. I dare trust you, because you must trust me.
Therefore know, that I the rich Widow am no better, then a Lady that must live
by what I bear about me. The vulgar translation you know, but let them speak
their pleasure, I have no Lands, and since I am borne, must be kept, I may make
the best of my own, and if one member maintain the whole body, what's that to
any one?


I collected as much by your young Whiskin that brought me hither.


It was by my direction that he did so. And, by my Instructions, he has had an
Eye upon you in all your disguises ever since your pretended ^ourney out of
Town. Nay startle not, nor muse at my acquaintance with you: I have had you in
my Purlews, before you were a Freeman: And will hereafter give you certain
tokens of it. In the mean time, if you comply with me, you can be no loofer by
it. I am grown weary of my old course; and would fain, by wiser, do my self
good, before Age or Diseases make it too late.


I will work close and friendly with thee. Therefore say, this rich Cockscombe
is thine own. O here comes your Pigg-wiggen.


He is of Counsel, and one of us. He is indeed my Brother, and has been one of
the true blew Boys of the Hospital; one of the sweet singers to the City
Funerals with a two penny loaf under his arm.


Well: He never sung to the wheel in Saint Brides Nunnery yonder.


Nay Jeff, be not angry; thou hast sung to the Organs I know, till fearing
their downfall, thou betookst thy self into my more certain service. All
friends, good Jeff.


Yes, yes, we must all agree, and be linked in Covenant together.


By Indenture Tripartite, and't please you, like Subtle, Doll, and Face.


Witty Jeff. I cannot see which can be spared from the rest, least the whole
trade break.


Then let us be friends, and most friendly agree.
The Pimp and the Punck and the Doctor are three,
That cannot but thrive, when united they be.
The Pimp brings in custom, the Punck she gets treasure,
Of which the Physician is sure of his measure,
For work that she makes him in sale of her pleasure.
For which, when she fails by diseases or pain,
The Doctor new Vamps and upsets her again.
Thou art a brave Lad, and in the high way of preferment.


Not the high Holborn way, I hope Sir.


And for you Damsel, as I said before, say to your self, the Match is yours.


I mean to say, and know it shortly. Some three days hence all may be
completed. Now draw the Curtains; and follow your affairs, while I put on my
sick Face again. Vh, uh, uh.


NOw could I Accost that Catlinarian Traitor, that defeated me of my ten pound,
I have a precogitated Oration should make him suspend himself. But Abiit,
evasit, erupit. Or if the rich Widow would have dyed, there had been a supply.
But she is nearer a Nuptial, then a Funeral: And hopeless Sarpego, that
should wed, has not to furnish him to his intent, Vae mihi misero nec Aurum,
nec Argent -- tum! Here comes my Beatitude.


O, are you here Sir? I was to seek you. My old Mistress would speak with you
instantly.


My Legitimate Spouse, when is our day of conjunction?


Our day of conjunction? Mary faugh Goodman Fist. Our day of conjunction?


Did you not once vow you did love me?


Did not you once swear you had money?


Hic jacet, I am now but a dead man.


O where's Mr. Sarpego? Fortunate Mr. Sarpego? Venerable Mr. Sarpego? O Sir,
you are made. Never think under right worshipful. Imagine nothing beneath
Damasque Gowns, Velvet Jackets, Satin Sleeves, Silk Nightcaps, two Pages and
a Footcloth.


The Son of Phoebus rectify your Brain-pan.


Indeed, and't shall please your Worship, it is --


It is! What is it? You will be speaking, will you? And your Wife in presence,
will you? you show your bringing up. Master Sarpego, bless the time that ever
you knew the Progeny of the Sneakups: my worshipful Son and Heir apparent
hath preferred you to be the young Prince his Tutor. Here's Mr. Holywater, a
Gentleman; of place, a Courtier; of Office, is sent for you.


Right fortunately-learned Sir. So passionately doth his Grace approve the
Language, Literature, and Haviour of your sometimes Pupil, Master Tobias
Sneakup.


Umh.


That I was, with all expedition, commanded to entreat your instant Attendance.


Umh Umh --


'Tis even so Sir; You are like to possess a Princes ear; you may be in place,
where you may scorn your foes; countenance your friends; cherish virtue,
control vice, and despise fortune: Yes sure shall you Sir. And (which I had
almost forgot) your old Pupil entreats you to send him by me the ten pound he
lent you: An od ten pound, that he may be furnished with the more seemly
Complements to conduct you to his Grace.


Quid nunc?


Whist Mr. Sarpego. Let not your poverty be read in your face. Here's ten
pieces. Bear it as your own payment: You talk of ten pound for my Son, Sir.


O, an od driblet. Here, Friend, I use not to carry Silver: Convey it in Gold.


I hope, dear Love, you will not forget your affection to me now.


Poor Maid, I will prefer thee to scratch my head; make my Bed; wash my Shirt,
pick my toes, and evacuate my Chamber-pot. I will instantly procure me attire,
fitting my fortune, and attend the Grace of Court --


Now am I but a dead woman.


I am much grieved for it. It was your sons much labouring, that Mr. Crazy
was sent for, to sell his Grace some Jewels: But since his fortunes are so
sunk that he hides his head, I can but lament his loss.


Shall I tell you Sir, (pray you husband stand aside;) My Son-in-Law Crazy is
not now worth -- his very wife. We hoped he would have proved a crafty
Merchant, and he proved an honest man, a Beggar (if I chance to speak above
your capacity, I pray tell me of it) And as I said, when I perceived he began
to melt, and that every stranger abused him; I, having some wit, fell too, and
most cozened him my self. I looked for my daughters good: And so betwixt us,
found the trick to get, or steal from him two Jewels of good deep value,
being indeed the main of his rest of Fortune. Now Sir, I come to you.


I, now you come to the point.


Right Sir: For there is no woman, though she use never so many by-words, but
yet in the end she will come to the point. Now Sir, I having these Jewels,
will send them by my husband. A poor easy weak man, as you see; but very
obedient in truth --


By your husband.


Yes, do you mark? By my husband. But now note my wit: His Grace knows not
Crazy: My husband, habited like a Citizen, shall take the name of Crazy upon
him; offer his Jewels to the Prince; you shall present them; praise them and
raise them: His Grace pays; my husband returns; and we will share. Do you
approve?


Nay admire.


Away then. No Complement among good wits; but away. Come your ways hither,
good man; Put off your hat; Make a leg; Look simply. Why so! Pish, ne'er tell
me: He will make a rare Citizen. I have Jewels for you to carry to the Prince.


Yes forsooth, I'll carry them.


La! you are so quick! I have charged you not to shoot your bolt, before you
understand your mark. And you shall carry them like a Citizen; call your self
Crazy; sell them at my price; and now cast no further. You see the limits of
your understanding. Now Sir, how will you bear your self to his Grace? How
behave your self at Court?


I hope I am not too wise to learn.


Why, that was well spoken. Modest mistrust is the first step to knowledge.
Remember that sentence. Now mark. I will instruct you: When you come at the
Court gate, you may neither knock nor peace. Do you mark? You go through the
Hall covered; through the great Chamber covered; through the Presence bare;
through the Lobby covered; through the Privy Chamber bare; through the Privy
Lobby covered; to the Prince bare.


I'll do it I warrant you. Let me see. At the Court gate neither knock nor make
water. May not a man break wind?


Umh, yes: but (like the Exchequer payment) somewhat abated.


Through the great Chamber bare.


Covered.


Covered? Well: Through the Presence covered.


Bare.


Bare? I will put all dow in my Table-book, and con it by the way.


Well thought on. Something he has in him like my husband! But now you come
before the brow of Royalty. Now for your carriage there Sir: Suppose me the
Prince. Come in, and present. Here sits the Prince. There enters the Jeweller.
Make your honours. Let me see you do it handsomely.


Yes, now I come in; make my three legs -- And then --


Kneel.


Yes; and say --


What?


Nay, that I know not.


An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.


An't please your Grace, I have certain Jewels to present to your liking.


Is this Crazy, that had wont to serve me with Jewels? It is that honest man,
so please your Highness. That's for M. Holywater, the by-flatterer to speak.
You are a Cuekoldly Knave, Sirrah, and have often abused me with false and
deceitful stones.


My stones are right, so please your Excellence.


Why that was well, Very well. I perceive there is a certain infection taken
with lying with a woman that hath a good wit. I find it by my husband. Come,
I'll disguise you, and away to Court instantly.


Truly wife, I fear J shall be discovered among the Gallants presently.


No, no, A fool is never discovered among madmen.


WEll Dol, (that thou say is thy name) though J had forgotten thee, J
protest. About London-wall was it (say thou?) Well, J cannot but highly
commend thy wisdom in this, that so well hast mended thy election; from being a
fountain of aches, bald brows, and broad plasters, thus to remember thy
Creation.


I did consider, and I think rightly, what I was; and that men that loved my
use, loved it but to loath me: Therefore I changed my self into this shape of a
demure, innocent Country Widow, that had scarce beauty enough to be tempted,
but not wit enough to be nought; and quite forsook the path I trod in, and
betook me to this private course of cozenage.


But all my wonder is at the means, how thou gott'st into this house and
reputation. And to be held a woman of such an estate.


That shall be made plain to you hereafter.

Now Brother Geffrey, where left you M Wolsie?


Among the Mercers, so troubled, as if all the Satin in Cheapside were not
enough to make you a wedding Gown. He is over-joy'd that his happy day is at
hand; and I over-heard him invite one special friend to his Nuptials. He
cannot contain himself. On a sudden he fell a singing, O she's a dainty
Widow. O are you come Sir, in your new shape? Dos not that beard fit you
handsomely? Thank my acquaintance with the Players.


I think thou art acquainted any way, to set out knavery.


If you can perform your part as well, 'tis well. Hark, I hear him coming.


Where are you sweet Widow? Look you, Look you: How do you like these
patterns?


Sir, here's a Gentleman has a Letter to you: He tells me it imports the
making, or the undoing of his dearest friend.


From whom, I pray you?


Your sometimes neighbor Sir, M: Crazy.


It shall take effect, doubt not.


He scratches his head, though.


He had as lief part with his blood as his money.


M. Crazy writes to me for thirty pound; the value of a Ring I had of him. I
grant I am to pay threescore at my day of Marriage. But we are all mortal. And
who knows whether I shall live till to morrow.


If not, Sir, your Bond is due to night: For it is equally payable at your hour
of death.


O, but such payments never trouble a man. What the eye sees not --


Are you in Bonds, M. Woolsie, for your day of Marriage?


Only for this sixty pound. 'Tis for that Ring you wear, and I gave you upon
our Contract. 'Tis worth thirty pound ready money.


Then when you are married, you may say you paid the rest for your wife. Pray
Sir make even such reckonings before you wed. It will show nobly in you towards
your poor Creditor, and be a special argument of your love to me, your wife.
Pray discharge it, I shall not think you love me else.

Hark you Sir, if you will take thirty pound in full payment, and give me in
my Bond, here is your money. 'Tis your best course. Alas, I am an unlikely
fellow for wedlock. What woman, think you, would bestow her self upon me, a
stale Bachelor, unhandsome and poor -- not worth above six or seven thousand
pound? Do; take thirty pound.


If you please to be friend Mr. Crazy but which thirty pound, I'll set it
received upon the Bond. Here it is. And he shall demand no more till it be due.


Pray Sir pay it all, and take in your Bond. You shall be married within these
two days; to morrow, if you please: What use will your money yield you for a
night? Pray pay it. In truth I'll pay it else. 'Tis but threescore pound.


Say thou so, Sweetheart. Come Sir. Come in and tell your money --


And thank you too, good M. Linsie VVolsie, that knew so well, a bargain was a
bargain, and would not part with your money to be laughed at among your
neighbours. I would heartily now, if I could intend it. But I must purse your
money, and then about my Court affairs. This wench I am infinitely beholden to.
She remembers some old courtesy that I have forgotten. Perhaps I pidled with
her when I was Prentice.


THis is the Presence. I am much amazed, or stupefied, that Mr. Tobias Sneakup,
my quondam Pupil, attends not my Conduct! Ha! So instant was his Grace, his
importunity to enjoy me, that although I purchased the loan of Clothes, yet I
had not vacation, nor indeed variety to shift my shirt. And now I come to
Court, I feel certain little Cattle of infamous generation about me, that do
most inseparably haunt me. Now if (when the Prince surveyes me) any of them
being strangers here, should peep to behold strange sights, and his Grace
perceive them, what should I answer? --


O, my glorified Pedant in his most natural strut!


I will say it was by influence of the heavens; or, to appear the more perfect
Courtier at the first dash, I will say, that though my outside were glorious,
yet of purpose I left my inside lousy.

Sed, O Dii! Quem video? nonne Mr. Sneakup?


See my worshipful Father-in-Law! Now the Woodcocks shoot into the glade.


Pray ye peace, you must not know me.


O monstrum horrendum! May not you and I know one another?


Pray go home, and ask my wife.


Mr. Crazy. Is not one Mr. Crazy here?


Yes Sir. Here is Mr. Crazy for a need Sir.


Well done: Be bold Sir. Let not your dissimulation be read in your eyes. You
know me; give me the Jewels.


Yes Sir.


Let me alone to present them to his Grace, and praise them, before you are
called.


Will you do so Sir?


Yes; For you know I must not seem to indear them before your face: For that
would smell rank of correspondency.


You say right Sir.


But betwixt us both we'll make a shift to cheat him. Stay you here. I will
return instantly. O Mr. Sarpego! Your Pupil will come and conduct you
presently.

Thus sometimes, by deceit, deceit is known:
'Tis honest craft, by wit to get ones own. --

My Quondam Pedagogue!


My Nuper Alumnus! Come, present me to the Grace of Greatness. I am ready;
behold I am approached according to thy entreats, to approve thy praise, and
mine own perfection. Set on: His Grace shall see that we can speak true Latin,
and construe L^dovicus vives: Go, set on.


I cry you mercy Sir. Upon my troth, I took you for Mr. Sarpego, my learned
Tutor. He is very like him; Is he not Gentlemen? But now I come to my self
again, I remember this was never his walk, nor these his clothes.


Sent you not a Nuntius, or a Messenger for me, intimating, that it was his
Grace his instant desire, to entertain me as his Instructor?


Alas, he has over-studied himself! You were best let blood in time Sir.


Sent I not you, by the same messenger, your ten pound?


My ten pound? Ha, ha ha: I would laugh i faith, if you could bob me off with
such payment.


Sure Sir, you use some Dormitaries. Best shave your head, and anoint it with
Oil of Roses.


Father! Father!


Pray peace son. The plot will be discovered else.


The plot? what plot?


The Jewels are sent in, What, I am Mr. Crazy now, you know. I shall be sent
for in to his Grace instantly.


Midsummer Moon! Midsummer Moon!


In very truth son, hit as 'twill, I say we are beholding to Mr. Holywater.


Heaven not bless me, if I understand not the Baboons mumpings better then
your speech. You are more dark then Delphos. What Holywater?


Why the Gentleman, you know, you sent to bring M. Crazy to serve his Grace
with Jewels.


Father, Heaven pardon me: For sure I have a great desire to call you
Cockscomb. I sent no man; nor is there any so stiled as Holywater about the
Court.


Do you not want sleep sir?


Or have you not seen a spirit sir?


Or have you not over-mus'd, or over-thought your self, as we doubt Mr.
Sarpego, here, has done?


Or has not my mother over-beaten you, father? You may tell me.


Son, I am not so very a fool, but I perceive I am made a stark Ass. Oh
son, thy father is cozened; and thy mother will beat me indeed, unless your
charity conceal me in the Court here, till her fury be over.


He shall stay at my Wives Chamber.


And there instruct us in the passages of this cozenage.


Do not weep father. My Lady Ticket will appease all.


Adieu Mr. Sarpego. Lure your brains back again.


Sic transit gloria Mundi. The learned is Cony-caught; and the lover of Helicon
is laughed at. The last six-pence of my fortune is spent; and I will go cry in
private.


NOw, whilst my politic Mother-in-Law is in expectation of her great
adventure, and my worshipful Father-in-Law stinks at Court for fear of her; I
in this last disguise will pursue my new affairs. Me-thinks these Jewels smile
on me now more cheerfully then when they were mine own before. First to my
honest Punk.


Who would you speak with Sir?


With thy sister. Dost thou not know me Jeffrey. Where is she? Look better on
me.


O, is it you Sir? Hang me if I knew you in this habit; though I was set here
on purpose to watch for you.


What's the matter Jeffrey?


Sir she is fallen into a new fit of Melancholy. Some new project she has in
her noddle. But she desires you to work upon this, [ he gives him a paper.] I
dare not be seen to talk with any body. -- Exit.


What new device is this? [ he reads.] Since I last saw you, your
Mother-in-Law, Mrs. Sneakup, has earnestly dealt with me to make me a Bride for
her son Tobias. If there may be any thing wrought out of it to benefit you, I
will suddenly take occasion to break with the Fool Wolsie; of whom I am
heartily weary; and after, be wholly disposed by you. Sure this wench studies
nothing but my profit. Well: I have thought already to make the best of her.
Now to my new Mistress. This is the house, and here's her maid.


Would you speak with any here Sir?


With your Mistress, (I take it) Mristresse Crazy.


May not I deliver your mind unto her Sir?


My business is of weight and secrecy: yet you may tell her, here is the
Gentleman that her Doctor sent her.


O she expects him most impatiently -- Pray enter Sir. She's ready for you,
there before you Sir --

A business of mine own makes me wait here.
I think I saw my learned Love make this way.
But he (alas) though small in fleshly growth,
By reason of his high preferment is
Now grown too great for me.
'Tis he; I know his stature,
Though not his clothes, the Ensigns of his greatness,
In which how big he seems, though but a sprawler!
So clothes can make men greater, but not taller.
He's deep in study; I dare not interrupt him.

I have adventured, though with trembling feet,
Unto this Mansion, to exonerate,
At least extenuate my suspirations
For my dear loss. The Lady of this place.
Who had an equal venture, and hath suffered
In the same Fate with me, may ease my sorrow.
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
I of my wrongs, and she of hers shall clamour.
But ecce noster ubi esset Amor.

Most worshipful Sir, welcome from Court, If your poor Handmaid may presume to
say so.


Where is your Mistress? I mean your grand Matrona, Mrs. Sneakup.


In the first place let me beseech you Sir,

Vouchsafe your answer to a longing Maid,

That can be comforted in nothing more,

Then the good news of your prosperity;

Of which I hope a part at least to be,

Preferred by your late promise to your service.


I will now breath a most strong and Poetical execration

Against the Universe. [ Bri.] Sir I beseech you --


From henceforth Erit Fluvius Deucalionis
The world shall flow with dunces; Regnabitque, and it shall rain
Dogma Polla Sophon, Dogs and Polecats, and so forth.

His Court advancement makes him mad, I fear.


From hence let learning be abomination
Among the Plebeians, till their ignorance
Shall lead them blind into the Lake of Lethe.

What pity 'tis that honour and high places
Should make men lose their wits, sometimes their heads!

May Peasantry and Idiotism trample
Upon the heads of Art and Knowledge, till
The world be shuffled in the pristine Chaos.

Dear Sir, though you are highly dignified,
Forget not the preferment, that you promised me,
To scratch your head; to make your bed; to wash
Your shirt; to pick your toes, and to evacuate
Your Chamber-pot.

Elephantem ex Musca facit. She takes me for a Mountain, that am but a
Mole-hill.
But when she reads my poverty again,
And that these Garments must return to th'Gambrels,
Her scorn will be impetuous.

Go find another room maid for your talk,
Mr. Sarpego, my mother calls for you.

Has she received Aliquid novi, news from Court?


She has now received a Letter. Pray be gone,
I have more serious business of mine own.
You are the Creature then that my dear
Doctor has sent me, that can dance, read, write, and be secret. I shall use
you all in all. And I prithee how fa^es my Physician?

I can confirm that he is yours protestedly. And to morrow night --


Peace: Here comes my mother.

I can my Cinquepace friend. But I prithee teach me some tricks. Who would care
for a female, that moves after the plain pace? No: Give me the woman of tricks.
Teach me some tricks I prithee.


Ha! Tricks of twenty: Your Traverses, Slidings, Falling back, Jumps, Closings,
Openings, Shorts, Turns, Pacings, Gracings -- As for -- Corantoes, Levoltoes,
Jigs, Measures, Pavins, Brawls, Galliards, or Ca^aries* I speak it not
swellingly, but I subscribe to no man.


Tis a rare fellow!


Am I then cheated? my wit begins to be out of countenance. O the Plague that
hangs over her head that has a fool to her husband, as thou and I have
daughter.


How now sweet mother? What ill news changes your face thus?


O dear daughter, my Lady Ticket writes here, that the fool, thy father, is
cheated of two rich Jewels, that thou and I stole from the Idiot thy husband
Crazy.


O that Crazy was ever a silly fellow.


A very Citizen, a very Citizen. How should I call you Sir?.


One Mr. Footwell, Mother; who teaches Gentlewomen to do all things Courtly,
to dance Courtly, to love their husbands Courtly --


Your name is Mrs. Pyannet, I take it.


Pyannet Sneakup, Sir.


Your husband is cozened at Court, I take it.


So my Lady Ticket writes, Sir.


That Lady Ticket is a cunning creature. I have been inward with her; And such
are my private Intelligences, that if equal courtesy might recompense, I could
unshale a plot is upon you.


Recompense? Sir command me, command my daughter, my maid, my house, only tell
it I beseech you.


I pray see wherein we may be grateful. I pray speak.


So it is, I am a decayed Gentleman, quite out of repair; fallen for want of
means to the use of my feet: Nor have I hope to see better light, but only
that Love and Fortune have put upon me a right wealthy widow. She lies at a
near neighbours house here; and here I hover about her: but for want of some
good friends countenance, some means for clothes and fit housing, she holds
off from consummating our Marriage. Now Lady --


I apprehend you Sir. Bring her to me; lodge her with me; I'll call you Cousin
I. Is she very rich? At a near neighbours, said you, -- Not she at Mr. Wolsies,
is it?


The very same.


(By'r Lady a match for my Esquir'd son and heir. Bear a brain dancer, or I
may chance to show you a cross caper.) Sir, bring your Widow. Swear to your
self my house is yours. Now the plot, or I burst.


Why then will I disclose who cozened you; by what means you are injured, and
how you may be revenged, only you shall vow to conceal the secret-revealer,
else you lose the benefit of further Intelligence.


Stand off daughter: I will not trust mine own flesh with a secret; for in
truth I have found it frail. Now speak, I beseech you.


Sure, precious Mistress, very absolute creatures have had Cockscombs to their
husbands.


Nay that's indubitable, I know it by my self.


Marry to be made Cuckqueane by such a Cockscombe, to have her Jewels prig'd
away, to bestow on a Court Mistress; to have a trick put upon her, as you
have, 'twould move (I must confess) a woman that were not part a Philosopher,
and had a strong wit as you have. Why did you not feel the deceit? your
husbands unworthiness, having no means to enjoy this Court-Lady but by gifts;
and having no course for gifts, but from you, procures some Pander to perform
a famed message. Your hope of game puts the weighty trust upon the counterfeit
fool your husband; his simplicity seems cozened, whilst this Lady excuses all,
and keeps all: So that your own Jewels purchase your own horns; nay, and you
were not withal laughed at for your purchase, 'twere scarce enough to run mad
for.


'Tis most plain: I will have such a revenge, as never woman had.


Good Mrs. Pyannet, bear't as well as you may: Your loss is heavy, yet under
the strength of your constant wisdom -- I faith my wife was so careful lest
you should take too deep sense of it, that she importuned my own presence to
comfort you: For sure I know --


You are a Wittally Cuckold I know. I commend thy wives modesty yet: She will
not do it before thy face, but will send thee out of an errand yet.


What mean you? you amaze me.


Nay, I look you should seem ignorant: What, to take sense or notice of your
horne, as long as it winds you into profit, were most uncourtly. Well, you
hear not me rage nor rave: marry I will slit the Drabs nose, crop off her
ears, scratch out her eyes --


Bless us!


Tear off her hair, pluck out her throat, that's all. Come along Sir.


Now they are gone, I prithee M. Footwell stay a little, I will fetch thee some
Letters to read for me, which I have not opened yet, because I durst trust no
body. --


These Letters must necessarily come from my Brace of Courtiers, Sir Ticket,
and Monsieur Rufflit, which I will read clean contrary, as if they slighted
her, and answer them across from her meaning, as if she slighted them: And so
letting my self down into their inwards on both sides, what they can get, or
what my wife has, will I pump into mine own purse.


Now dear M. Footwell, as ever you pitied the use of a poor Gentlewoman, that
would fain use her ^eauty, whilst there is some pleasure in it, read and
an^wer these Letters with commanding eloquence; force them to affect me.


Ha, ha, ha: Will you not be offended, if I read them truly?


No: I prithee what is't?


Stay, it seems you have written to them.


Yes: but I cannot read the answer. Prithee ^hat is't?


Faith you'll be angry.


Nay, and you love me, what is't?


Sir Andrew here, he says, tis not your broad ^im'd hat, your tiffeny dress,
Spanish ruff, and sil^er bodkin can make him disloyal to his wives bed.
Rufflit here, he writes that you have a gross body, a ^ll eye, a lowe
forehead, a black tooth, a fat hand, ^d a most lean purse. I there's it: And
you could but ^ve, and you had but to send --


A lean purse!


I, the lean purse. There's the Devil: Were ^u as bald as Time, as stiffly
wrinkled as frozen ^w'd Lands, more dry then a Fever, more lean then death;
had you engrossed deformity, yet if you had but to give --


Why Footwell, though my husband be but a Bankrupt Knave --


Nay faith, rather a fool, Mistress.


Well, fool let him be then; yet I have a Mother will not see me want for
necessary ends: And I hope I had the wit to cozen my husband of somewhat
against a rainy day. Look you Sir, I kept these for a friend in a corner.


Nay, but I would not wish you to send them now: What, relieve the base wants
of prating Skipjacks to pay for your damnation?


Nay that's sure, I will not give them:


And yet, i faith, what can a Gentlewoman give too much for her pleasure? Can
there be a more heavy disgrace blown abroad upon any Lady, then that she has
not at the least two servants, since many Lovers are the only noble
approvement of beauty?


I'll send them both, that's sure.


But both of them to Mr. Rufflit: Oh, he's an absolute spirit! He has an
English face, a French tongue, a Spanish heart, an Irish hand, a Welch Leg, a
Scotch beard, and a Dutch buttock.


O J: J am wholly his, J will send all to him.


O but Sir Andrew, he is a Courtly Lover: He can kiss you courtly, handle you
Courtly, lye with you Courtly.


O yes: he shall have one. J prithee praise me to them both, and commend to
each of them one of these Jewels, not that I do so much care for the use of
them, yet because I would not be wondered at like an Owl among my neighbours,
for living honest in my husbands absence. I prithee work effectually for me,
sweet M. Footwell.


Mrs. Crazy: Hist Mrs. Crazy.


Peace Sir, forbear: As you would hope, do not pursue a woman when she is out
of the humour. O, untimely importunity is most distasteful. There are certain
seasons to take the coldest Appetite, when she is pinning a Ruff, playing with
a Monkey, hearing a wanton Song, or half drunk.


O hat are you Sir?


A private Messenger to you Sir, from the Gentlewoman you pursue. This is your
hand, is it not?


Yes:


You may keep your Letter.


But what says my utmost hope, the end of my ambition?


Only that you are poor, a Gallant of a very wanting fortune.


The more honour for her to redeem me.


Alas, I think her means are but weak, her husbands sinking hath brought her
low.


Her husband! Alas poor fly; only made to be sucked and forsaken. His wife has
the life-blood of her fortunes in her, and I'll be her cupping-glasse.


I wonder his wife could nourish so unbelieving a conscience!


Conscience! All things rob one another: Churches poule the People, Princes
pill the Church; Minions draw from Princes, Mistresses suck Minions; and the
Pox undoes Mistresses; Physicians plague their Patients; Orators their Clients;
Courtiers their Suitors, and the Devil all. The water robs the earth, earth
choakes the water: fire burns air, air still consumes the fire.

Since Elements themselves do rob each other,
And Phoebe for her light doth rob her Brother,
What is't in man, one man to rob another?

You have spoken most edifyingly sir, but for you, of whom I understand Crazy
merits the best Offices; for you to corrupt his Wife, and with a covetous
sinning expect use for the loan of your Loins!


Death man, they are my Exchecquer, my Rent: Why I have no possession but my
Estate tail. And at for Crazy, he has no wit; he was created a fool, to have
Knaves work upon him: a fellow made to have some pity, and all wrong; he had
ever an open Purse, and now an empty. He made it a common hole, every Gallant
had his fingers in it. Every man loved his Fortune, squeezed it, and when it
was unjuic'd, farewell kind heart. I confess I owe him a good turn: I'll pay't
his Wife. He kept her always exquisitely neat; temptingly gallant, and as a
protested Cuckold should do, about his degree and means sumptuously proud. Her
Eye artificially spirited, her Cheek surphuled, her Teeth blanched, her Lip
painted, her Neck carkanetted, and her Breast bared almost to her Belly. And
shall a piece, thus put out to sale, stand unattempted, as not worth the
purchase.


Yes Sir, if you could compass her; as sure she may be corrupted: for she is
very covetous.


If I could but make show of a Gift, or present one --


Only not to appear of so needy a Fortune -- Why if you chance to possess her.


Pish, tweare all mine again, and all that she had besides. And troth, I think
she is wealthy.


Wealthy! look you Sir, Here are two of her Jewels, I fetched from an Ant of
hers, where they lay hid from her Husband. These are not worth the pursuit.


Nay, tis an easy Female: He, that has her, has all. What should I send? A
Gift would do it. Let me think. Tis but a gross-bodyed Wench, with a blackish
hair neither.


Oh the better. Your lean No-bodies with yellow Manes have most commonly rotten
teeth and wicked breaths. No, your full plump Woman is your only Venus.


A hundred golden pieces I am entrusted withal by my elder Brother, to
purchase a piece of Injustice. If I should send them --


Oh Sir, these both were yours, and they too. She pretends this strain, but
only to explore your strength of means, and to try how far you dare engage
them for her enjoying.


I will send them, win her, use her, suck her Purse, recover my own, gain hers,
and laugh at the poor Cuckhold her Husband. Commend with th^se my lifes blood,
and Souls service to my Mistress* Farewell --


Sir Andrew Ticket, I take it.


The same, Sir. Is Mrs. Crazy within? I cannot keep pace with her Mother. O,
when jealousy is once set a going, it runs on high speed. But let her make
hast to arrive at Court, while I land on her Daughter in the City. Is she
privately idle?

What dost thou mean by that?


My Vow's discharged, and her Revenge is done. I am no Pandar, Sir, and yet I
am of Counsel with Smock secrets, Buttock business Sir.

Are you so stale a Courtier, and know not the necessity of Gifts?


Is that the matter I am rejected by her?


Why? would it not provoke any Woman to be called fool, and foule-face?


I never called her so, by the Soul of my Affection, not I.


No; Do you not intimate she is a fool, when you hope to enjoy her without a
Gift? And foul, when your neglect of cost says she deserves none.


Before Heaven I was a silly Ass, now I think on it, to send a Sonnet without
some rich present.


Why Sir? A man must do as he would be done to. Do you, or any man use to be
made Cuckhold for nothing?


I should have sent a Gift. What, if I enjoy her, she may requite it.


May; Nay can; nay will. Look you Sir, here's Gold. Here are Jewels. They are
hers; they may be yours. I would not seem a Pandar to you though; for you have
a Wife Sir.


Pish, who cares to drink out of a River? What I can command out of duty hath
but a dull relish. Had not Danae been kept in her brass Tower, she had never
tempted a Gods piercing. I must send, though it be but to show the ability of
my Fortune, and the desert of her Beauty.


And then to send but a trifle would disgrace both.


Hold, convey this Carckanet unto her; tis of value, and let her read by this,
how much I seek her.


And how dear you hold her. Sir, I can speak; but I use to take nothing for my
pains.


Yes, receive this little -- Nay, I prithee.


Only not to appear Uncourtly, or uncivil. I protest I abhor Pandarisme; only
as a second, or so. As you have beheld two Horses knubbing one another; Call me,
Call thee, an old kind of Courtship.


I prithee return instantly my success: You shall find me at the Ordinary; come
and Dine with me.


I have procured a private Stable for my Horse: And therefore I my self would
be loath to stand at Livery.


Dost compare common Stables for Horses, and public Ordinaries for Gallants
together.


Troth yes sir, for as in Stables, here a goodly Gelding of twenty Pounds
price, there a raw-backd Jade of four Nobles by him. So at Ordinaries, here a
worthy Fellow of means and virtue, and there a Cheating Shifter of wants and
cosenage. Here a Knight, there a Beggar; Here a Gallant, there a Gull: Here a
Courtier, there a Coxcomb; Here a Justice of Peace, and there an Esquire of low
Degree. Or, in direct Phrase, a Pandar.


Such a one as thou art.


Umh, Virtue goes often wetshod, and is forced to be cobbled up with base means,
to hold out water and cold necessity. You command me no further sir.


No honest Knave, farewell --

Now Mr. Crazy, will I button up your Cap with a Court-brooch.

You demand Debts, do you? I'll pay you none. Oh twas a notable dull Flat-Cap.
He would invite Courtiers; stand bare, say grace, make legs, kiss his hand,
serve us in perfumed linen, and lend us money upon our words, or bare words.
Were it not a sin to let such a fool pass unsuckt? No, Fortune dressed him only
for us to feed on, and I'll fall to.


BE comforted Mr. Sneakup; Remember you are in my Chamber. Bear the heart of
a Husband, who scorns to tremble at the face of his Wife? Do not fear sir.


Stand firm Father, do not sink before the face of a Lady.


I have sent my own Husband to satisfy her, and I hope he will do it
thoroughly. Be your self therefore; all the Pleasures the Palace can afford,
shall strive to mitigate your fears.


Have you any Pleasures in the Court, can make a man forget he has a Wife?


Sir we have pleasures will make a man forget any thing, even himself;
therefore necessarily his wife, who is but part of himself.


Boy, sing your song of the Court delights.


Are you lulled in your delights? No pillow for your Goatish, head, but her
Ladyships lap?


O dear! O wife! I did not know you were so nigh truly.


You are ignorant still, I know: But I will make thy bones suffer as well as my
brows. Thou Cullion* could not thine own Cellar serve thee, but thou must be
sneaking into Court Butteries?


Oh, oh, oh --


Vae misero.


Hold dear mother.


Sweet Mrs. Pyannet hold.


Art thou there, daughter of an Intelligencer, and strumpet to a Bearward?


Now Beauty bless me, was not thy mother a notorious Tripe-wife, and thy
father a professed Harefinder? Gip you Flirt.


How now Madam Tiffany! Will none but my Cock serve to tread you? Give me my
Jewels thou Harlot.


Mother -- Pray Mother --


Bestow steeping thy skin in perfumes to kill the stink of thy paintings, and
rotten inwards to catch Cockscombs.


Dear mother.


But thou shalt not cozen, and Cucquean me*


Sweet mother --


Lupus in fabula. The Devill's in the woman's tongue.


A whip on her; rotten eggs and kennel dirt on her silken Whoreship.


Nil tam difficile. Nothing can lay her.


Nay, let the Country Gentlewoman be mad and rave on; she knows I know my
Country Gentlewoman had a Bastard before she was married.


Did um so? The Country Gentlewoman was more chaste in a Bastard, then the
Court Madam in her barrenness. You understand me; you have no Green-sicknesse
there, yet (I hope) you have few Christ'nings; you have tricks for that, have
you?


Nay mother --


You have your Kickshaws, your Players Marchpaines; all show and no meat.


Nulli penetrabilis Astro. She'll hear no reason.


Go to; you know how in private you commended your Horse-keeper to me.


Well: And did not thou in as much privacy counsel me to contemn my husband,
and use an Italian trick that thou would teach me?


Quid faciendum? Best stop their mouths?


Out you bauble; you trifle; you burden smock'd sweaty sluttery, that could
love a fellow that wore worsted stockings footed, and fed in Cooks shops.


Jaculis Arcu. Thunder and Lightning.


Ods my precious -- *


Nay dear, sweet wife --


How's this --


Honey Mother --


Take this, and take all. Why goody Complexion, thou Rammy Nastinesse, thou
know wherefore thy Gentlewoman left thee; did she not swear that she --


For modesties sake --


Had rather be at the opening of a dead old man, then stand dressing thy head
in a morning. Remember the Page that wore thy picture, and the song which thou
had in the praise of the male Baboon.


Tacete parvuli: You have said too much.


Indeed mother you will be sorry, when you know how much you mistake; some
crafty fellow has put a trick upon you.


Me-thinkes sweet wife you should rather condole our loss with me.


Hold you your peace; do not you prate.


Red te Harpocratem: The man is wise enough.


'Tis true; misfortune hath wrought the Jewels from my father.


Indeed wife, truly, truly, I am Conycatch'd --


But for my father, or this Ladies wronging you, as I am your son, I assure you
I have been an eye-witness of all fair respect towards you.


Is it even so?


Mother, as I respect your blessing it is perfect truth.


I humbly beseech you sweet Madam, that my earnest and hearty sorrow may
procure remission for my inconsiderate and causeless Invectives. Let my
confession seem satisfactory, and my contrition win indulgency to my forgetful
delinquency. I pray you let us kiss and be friends.


Alas sweet friend, you and I have been inward a great while, and for us to
fall out, and bare one another secrets --


Well, 'twas mine error, not malice; but as for the procurer of it, if I pay
not him in his own Coin -- Mr. Footwell! I'll show you a trick of twenty. Come
son, I have a wife for thee.


A Wife! a Wife, Mother! O where is she?


I, my boy, a Wife --


O ho.


And such a one as thou shalt bless me for procuring. Courteously farewell,
sweet Madam: Where's my Fool? Come, leave the Court sirrah, and man your own
wife into the City --


BUt I prithee satisfy me: What return they? Received they my Jewels?


Yes, they proved acceptive,


And what said they? Can they affect?


Can they be damned? Before I will undergo again such a business -- fore
Heaven I do as little differ from a Pander! only I have nothing for my pains,
or else --


Thou shalt have. Are thy news happy?


Are your own wishes happy?


Hold, spend this ten pound for me, Footwel.


Will you make me a Bawd. What a Bawd? And yet in truth, what would not a man
be for your sake, that have such wit and such bounty!

I cannot refuse, but suffer your Virtue to be exercised upon me.


Now, prithee speak; what's their answer?


Why, I'll tell you, they are both your own.


Both Footwell: I prithee how?


Why, no more but this; they are both yours; only you know, but one hand in a
Glove at once. But I had so much to do with one of them; such a coil to draw
him to it --


Which, I prithee? Sir Andrew?


Even he: He says, he understands that you affect a Mountebanck. Sure, your
Doctor is but some base bragging Rascal.


Do you think so?


How should Sir Andrew know else that he is come to embrace you to night?


Does he know that too?


Yes marry does he, which the worthy Knight takes so contemptuously, suffering
so base a Rival, that he vows, unless you beat him, bastinado him soundly
when he comes, he will loath you most constantly.


Enough, if I do not make him an Example to all the bawdy Quacks in the
Kingdom; say there is no virtue in Cudgels, and Bed^aves. I'll charm him for
opening any more secrets of mine, I'll warrant him. And so write to Sir Andrew.


Welsaid Mistress, be resolute. I mean to help you my self.


I'll cast about for weapons ^ --


Yes, I will write to Sir Andr^w ^ that, which he shall have small cause to
thank me for. I will write for him to come in the habit of this Doctor. My^


She's gone, she's gone: Was ever man so cheated? Threescore pound for a
Ring; and the Ring gone too, for which I paid it: A months diet and lodging,
besides the charge of Physic and attendance. Five pound in dole bread, would
have served my house a twelve month. I am undone; broke, Bankrupt: But thou
Rogue shalt smart for all, now I have caught thee,


Mercy, dear Sir, mercy.


Were you making up your pack to be gone too?


Nothing but my own Sir, my Lute, and a few Musick-books.


You and your Mistress have made sweet Music of me: Therefore sirrah quickly
-- Are the Beadles gone for?


Therefore quickly, I say, as you were an Acter in the Cosenage, bring her to
light, or --


She's light enough her self: But a very Innocent I, Sir. She has cozened me
of half a years service, wrought me off o'my legs, strained my back, cracked
my voice, done me to my utter undoing; and can you think I knew of her running
away?


I'll make you sing another song sirrah: Are the Beadles come?


Any song Sir, or as many as you please.


Pretty I confess. But that's not the song must do it; nor can any song please
me at this time. Are the Beadles come?


Dear Sir, let 'em forbear a little. And if I cannot please you with a song,
commit me to their fury.


'Tis but to trifle time: yet sing before you suffer. Worse then the other this;
you shall sing in another place, to the whip, to the whip, Sir? Bring in the
Beadles, and away with him to Bridewell.


Yet once more, good Sir, try me this last time, and but promise me, if I can
sing a song that you shall like, to forgive and free me.


Sing a song that I shall like, and I will free thee.


Then shall a present course be found
For M. Wolsies threescore pound;
And his Ring,
And the thing
That has given him the slip --
I marry, that I like well.


Then I have escaped the whip.


Think you so Sir?


Yes: For you like the song well, you say, and I am free; I hope you will make
good your noble City word, Sir.


City words use not to pass for songs Sir* Make you good the words of your
song, Sir, and I shall make my word good Sir: Come away Beadles.


O stay Sir, I beseech you, and let your Justice fall on the right shoulders.
I'll confess all.


O will you so Sir?


'Tis most true Sir, that the Gentlewoman; whom I called Mistress, is a most
cunning whore, and a notorious cheat.


These are good words indeed!


She came to your house with four men in Liveries; they were all but hired
Pandars.


Yes, and divers Trunks of supposed Treasure, which I find to be Bags of
Nailes, and other old Iron, and all the Rings and Stones she boasted in her
Will are but Curtain Rings, and Brickebats.


Your own covetousness cozened you Sir: But if I now bring you not where you
shall see how she is since bestowed, and that you find not hearty cause to
rejoice that you were cozened of her, let me be whipped to death, Sir.


Well, come along Sir: But I will have a Guard upon you.


What Guard you please Sir, so my poor skin may escape the Lash-guards. --


O thou Varlet, thou unconscionable Unbeliever, ungodly Miscreant! Hast thou
cozened my easy Credulity? And would have undone and married me, like a
Cony-catching companion, as thou art? Did not thou tell me, thou had
moderate means of life, friends of fashion, and civil^ reputation? And now this
virtuous, religious Gentlewoman tells me, thou art an arrant Skipjack.


Nay, and has not a hole to put thy head in, but upon my courtesy.


But I thank this Matrons worship, her pity will not permit my easy Nature to
suffer under thy Cosenage: But bestows her generous Son and Heir here upon
me. --


A Gentleman of another sphere, another ^anck then you are Sirrah; that shall
have three hundred year in Esse, and five in Posse.


That is acquainted with young Lords; has had the honour to make a Hunting
match.


I, and a challenge to ride the wild Goose ^hase.


That hath made Ladies Posies for Cheese trenchers.


And played with Countesses at Shuttle-cock.


And to this Elegant Spirit and choice hope am I, and my Fortunes contracted.


How! contracted.


Yes Sir, contracted. Look you, I dare seal it before your face.


Are you so.


She is mine sir, mine sir. Do you mark, I dare likewise seal it sir.


Is there honesty in this dealing?


Yes sir, Is there not profit in this dealing?


Tis very well. If there be no Law upon words, Oaths and Pre-contracts, and
Witness. If a man may spend a hundred Angels upon a Widow; have her affied
before Witness, and then have his Nose wiped of her. Why, Tis very well.


In truth dear heart, and sweet Mother in expectation, to speak equally, there
have some words of course past betwixt us, which may seem to impart some
Engagement. Surely I have been too liberal of some speech of advantage. Truly
it would not be amiss, (considering his Expense and Interest) to fall to some
slight Composition. Some hundred Pounds would make the poor Knave do any thing.


Mother, let's be wise. Let's be wise Mother; fetch a hundred pieces presently:
That even upon his first consent, he may be satisfied and silenced.


For if he chance but to be delayed till he ask Counsel, then --


Mum. A word to the wise. --


Nay, I hope as long as I am a Subject, I shall have Law: I doubt not but I
shall have Law.


Come Sir, you shall not deservedly exclaim of my neglecting you.

For our sometimes Love, I have procured you a hundred Pounds.


To disclaim my right in you, I'll take it. Here's my hand, I'll take it.


Pox, how my Mother stays.


Scorn my Poverty! Come, where is't? Because I have not the Muck of the World.
Come, the money.


Here sir, upon this consideration, that you disclaim and renounce all interest
--


Yes most freely.


In this Gentlewoman; and do vow, never to pretend future claim to her.


I do, marry. --


Nay, no marries sir, you have received the money. You shall make no more
marries here. Come my betrothed Spouse, bid a Fice for him, Say black's thine
Eye who dares. Mother I'll be married to night, and to bed presently.


This night, Son; tis very late.


never to late to be wise. I hope I am your Son; and must bear a Brain.


Indeed, he that deals with Woman, must take occasion by the fore Lock. Away
--


Why! I am weary of money now: I have gotten more in a weeks Cosenage, then in
all my days of Honesty. What an easy cool thing it is to be a rich Knave!
Gramercy Punck. A witty Wench is an excellent help at a dead lift. But in
despite of the Justice that provoked me, my Conscience a little turns at these
brain-tricks. But they have all been ungrateful; ungrateful! Tis a sin that
should have no mercy: tis the Plague-spot; who has it should not live.

If holy wisdom from the thundering Cloud
Had given more Laws then ten, this had ensued:
Avoid, O man, mans Shame, Ingratitude.
For my poor Lot, I could have sweetly slept
In quiet want, with resolute content,
Had not defect of wit, uncurteous scorn
Been thrust upon me. Now they all shall feel,
When honest men revenge, their whips are steel.
My Courtiers are the next that I must exercise upon. This night my wife
expects the embraces of one of them at least, if this hasty Marriage call her
not from her Chamber. But she being a right woman may prevent that with a
fained sickness, or so. Let me remember, J wrote to Rufflit to come like her
Doctor Pulsefeele, to minister to her. This will jump right with a counterfeit
sickness: It may, perhaps, break a Urinal about his Coxcomb.

How now! O perceive this great Wedding goes forward.


Then enter Rufflit like a Doctor.

So, this falls out pat. She is no sooner gone Sick to her Chamber, but here
comes her Physician, to cover and recover her in a trice.


Hist, Footwell, Footwell.


Seignor Rufflit; J am a fool if J took you not for a Physician.


She wrote to me, that J should come in this habit.


Right Sir, to avoid suspect: For which cause she has counterfeited herself
sick, and lies longing and languishing till you minister to her.


And am J come pat? am J come in the nick?


Your Fortune sings in the right Cliff, sir, a wench as tender as a City
Pullet.


But not so rotten.


Oh sir, health it self; a very Restorative. Will you in? The way lies open
before you.


Hold Footwell, tel that till J return -- from branching the most merited
Cuckold Crazy. Poor Snake, that I must force thee to cast thy Skin. And he were
not a Citizen J could pity him: He is undone for ever. Methinks J see him all
ready make earnest suite, to wear a red Cap, and a blew Gown; comely to carry
a Staff-torch before my Lord Mayor upon Alhalloune night. Watch Footwell, J
mount. --


But now, if the agitation of my Brains should work through my Brows. If my
Wives pitiful hand should fall to composition with my Doctors Pate, and my
deceit be discovered before the Bastinado had given charge to his Shoulders,
were not my Forehead in apparent danger. Tis done in three minutes. Death, my
Courtier has a sanguine Complexion: He is like a Cock sparrow, Chit, Chit, and
away. Heart of man! And I should be blown up in mine own Mine now! Ha.


within* Hold Mrs. Crazy. Dear Bridget. Help Footwell.


Ho the hubbub's raised, and my feare's vanished.


Out you Pispot-caster.


You Suppository.


You Glister-pipe, think to dishonest me?


Hold, dear Lady -- I am --


A stinking saucy Rascal thou art, take this remembrance.


Hold, sweet Mistress.


Oh I thank you good Mr. Footwell.


Oh, it is not so much worth verily.


Oh, but tis sir.

Rogue. Rogue.

Nay prithee sweet Rascal, Pox on you, I did not mean to hurt you, my honest
Vagabond, tell me, tell me: Come, who was't put this Trick upon me. Thou art a
precious Villain: Come, whose devise was it? Whose plot. At whose Suit was I
Cudgeled? Who made me feign my self a Physician, till I must be forced to go
to the Surgeon? And dare'st tell me?


Nay, then I will tell you. Dare! why twas your Friend and Rival, Sir Andrew
Ticket.


Ticket.


Even he sir. His Gold hired me to gull you. And this brain procured your
beating. Yes faith sir, Envy, bribes, and wit have wrong upon you.


Well, if I revenge not --


But how sir.


I, before Heaven, that's well thought on. Give me but the means, and I will
not only forgive, but reward thee richly.


Come faith, because I would have both your Shoulders, go in one Livery, I must
disclose. Why sir, Knavery is restorative to me, as Spiders to Monkeys. The
poison of wit ^eeds me.

Look you sir, he's come. Stand close, take this Cudgel, grasp it strongly,
stretch your Sinews lustily; And when you see him hang by the middle in a
Rope, let your Fist fall thick, and your Cudgel nimbly.


And soundly. My ambitious blows shall strive which shall go foremost.


Good sir.


draw him up but half way.


So sir, I must up to receive. --


Do so: I shall be so revenged now! He had been better have been taken in Bed
with another mans Wife, then have prevented me thus.


Vanish Sirrah with the Light. This I am sure is the Window which her Letters
called me to.


I would you would begin once, that I might be at work. I do not love to stand
idle in the Cold thus.


Hist, Footwell, Footwell.


above: Here sir, here. O I watched to do you a good turn. Will you mount sir?


I will mount, remount, and surmount. I wonder that there is not a solemn
Statute made, that no Citizen should marry a handsome Woman; Or if he did, not
to lye with her. For and twere not for Gallants help, they would beget nothing
but Fools.


Right sir, right sir. Take the Rope, and fasten it about your middle sir.


Why, that's Crazy; a very Coxcomb.


An Ass, an Ass.


A mere Citizen. Were it not a shame his wife should be honest? Or is't not pity
that my own man should wholly enjoy a rare excellent proper woman* when a whole
Corporation scarce affords two of them.


Most true sir. Now mount sir. I pluck courageously. Pray Hercules my strength
fail me not.


Up sir, up sir.


Pox, and pain! Hold Doctor.


Save you sir.


I am most sensible of your Salutation. Pluck Footwell.


Alas the Cord sticks-sir; I'll call some help sir.


Death and Devils!


Fists and Cudgels.


Heart, Lungs, Lights.


Arms, Shoulders, Sides.


Help, help, help.


Passion of Heaven Doctor: I'll Doctor you away.


Redeem me dear Footwell


Yes sir I come for the same purpose. Alas sir, me thinks I even feel your
blows. Are you not sore ^ie?


Sore? Could thou not pluck?


Sure I was Planet-struck; the rope stuck in a slit Sir.


A Pox of the ^lit, say I.


Know you this mad Doctor? Or do you owe any Doctor any thing?


I know him not; nor do I owe any Doctor any thing; I only owe my
Barber-Surgeon for a dyetdrink.


Speedily make up your face Sir, here comes company: M. Rufflit!


Honest Footwel* how dost? Sir Andrew! Heartily how is't? --


As heartily as thou wilt; but not so hard I prithee.


Why what's the matter?


I bruised my side even now against a forms edge.


Parma^ty, Sir, is very good, or the fresh skin of a flayed Cat?


Flayed Cat?


The fly-blows of a dead dog, made into oil, and spread upon the kell of a
meazell hog.


Hark Gentlemen, the Wedding comes, forget old bruises, and put on sense of the
lightest colour: for this house to night vows to run giddy with mirth and
laughter.


Joy, health, love and children to this happy union.


Unbruis'd bones, and smooth foreheads to you both.


What shall no device, no mirth solemnize my sons match? Go Sneakup, call down
our daughter.

In despite of sickness, mirth and joy shall make this night healthful.


O mother, cold sobriety and modest melancholy becomes the face of the Matron;
unedifying gawdes are Profane vanities. Mirth is the fat of fools, only
virtue is the nourishment of purity and unsinning sincerity.


By the leave of your wisdom daughter, we'll take the wall of your
preciseness: for Mr. Sarpego has told me of a learned subject for a Ballet,
which we shall see acted presently.


What is it, some Heathenish Play?


No certes, but a very religious Dialogue, full of nothing, but moral conceits
betwixt Lady Luxury, a Prodigal and a Fool.


But who should act and personate these?


Why in that lies the nobility of the device; it should be done after the
fashion of Italy by our selves, only the plot premeditated to what our aim must
tend: Marry the Speeches must be extempore. Mrs. Bride would I have to play
Dame Luxury, and Mr. Footwell here the Prodigal.


And my husband the Fool.


I, and't please you wife.


I'll play the Inductor, and then we are all fitted.


I pray you what is Lady Luxury? A woman regenerative.


A Whore, wife:


In sincerity not much better then a Courtesan; a kind of open Creature.


And do you think me fit to represent an open Creature? Saving your modesties,
a Whore. Can I play the Strumpet, think ye?


Trust me Sister, as long as it is done in private, in ones own House, and for
some few selected Gentlemen's pleasure; Me-thinks the part is not altogether the
displeasingst.


Modesty defend me! you think tis nothing to play the Strumpet.


Why surely religious Lady, it can be no disgrace to you to figure out the
part: For she that cannot play the Strumpet if she would, can claim no great
honour to be chaste.


How gravely and sententiously he speaks.


Wife, it shall be so: It is my first Injunction; you shall do it, or disobey
me. You must play it.


What, the Whore sir?


I, in jest: What hurt is't? And Mother, you shall excuse my Father for this
once: For since my wife plays the Whore, I'll play the Fool my self. Though,
I know, you had rather see him do it, you shall see for a need, I can make
shift to perform it as well as he; as naturally, and to the Life.


Exceeding well thought on, I pray you, Lady, approve of it.


Let learning direct, I am not to prescribe to the Muses.


Come sweet heart, let's in and tire us, and be ready to enter presently.


I fausto pede --
Now for the Prodigal.

O doubt not, Mr. Sarpego: For know Sir, I am but a poor serving creature, that
lives upon expectation; Oh Sir my end must be husks. Fear not my discharge of
the Prodigal --


Nil nisi Carmina desunt.
To entertain ye, while we attire our selves.
We want but now some Music, or a Song,
But think you have it. Sit: we'll not be long. --

Seat you Gallants* Sit, sweet Sir Andrew, Madam* and the rest, and wee'le
imagine Music, as M. Sarpego bids us.

How now! By what misrule comes he to trouble us?


By your leave, Gallants, I have brought you Music.


You Sir, I know your purpose, and it is prevented; you come after the Marriage
to forbid the banes. Ha ha ha -- you are short, M. Wolsie, you are short.


Good Mrs. Sneakup you are wide. I come to wish joy to the match, and to tell
you I rejoice, that I mist a Bridegrooms part.


How's that?


You see I wear no Willow, and am merry* All's true you told me, boy?


Yes by my detestation to Bridewell Sir.


Sing boy that song, If I have any grief, it shall be all vented in a
Hymeneal Song.


I have not known him in this humour.


Sure 'tis a merry madness for the loss of the widow,


Since you come friendly, you are welcome, M. Wolsie. Pray sit with us, and
hear your Hymeneal Song.


Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen, Jo Hymen
Was wont to be still the old song
At high Nuptial Feasts
Where the merry merry guests
With joy and good wishes did throng:
But to this new Wedding new notes do I bring,
To rail at thee Hymen, while sadly I sing.
Fie o Hymen, fie o Hymen, fie o Hymen,
What hands, and what hearts dost thou knit?
A Widow that's pr^re,
And a very very Whore,
To an Heir that wants nothing but wit*
Yet thus far, O Hymen, thy answer is made,
When his ^ns are spent, they may live by her trade.
He sings Hymen and Hymen; but me-thinkes the song is scandalous to the
Marriage.


Excuse me Lady, though I was cozened of the Bride, I have no such malice; 'tis
a song that the boy could sing by chance, and made by a couple that were lately
married in Crooked-Lane.


O, is it so Sir? I knew not what to make of it.


Let us attend I pray; the Prologue enters.


Right Country Dame, and Courtly Lady,
Look for sense as s^all as may be;
But, if wit deceive your thinkings,
Know our Muse disdains base shrinkings.
Hold a while your Verdicts bridle,
Judge not yet our Project idle,
Till at length the close may show it,
If we act the part of Poet.
Speak Lechery and Folly, Luxury I would say;
I need not prompt them, they know what they should say.

Out you base Rascal, you muddy Slave; thou hast married me, and I will drink
a health to thy Cuckoldmaker. --


Sfoot I am afraid she'll play the whore better then I shall act the fool.


Thou under-hearted, dull-blooded Pantaloon* thou whose utmost honour is to be
made so good ^ thing as a Cuckold; thou son of a Copy-holder* and the
Pudding-pye woman's daughter, dost tho^ think, dare thou but imagine, that I
shall ever vouchsafe to love to do any thing, but laugh at thee? Hence you
Poultroon; thy voice sounds not so far as thy breath stinks -- Kicks him*


Nay but, nay but do you hear wife? I do not very well like this; me-thinks
you play too much in earnest.


In earnest? Why Goodman Fool, you Cock^* comb, you Ninnihammer, you Clotpold
Country Gentleman, thou dirty greediness. --


Why how now daughter? Are you well? Me* thinks you over-do it too much.


Thou dream my good husband, that thou hast married the rich widow, ha ha
ha --


Now enters Prodigality.


When the troth is, dear brother, you have married the rank whore. Ha ha ha.


Sir! -- who, brother Crazy?


Sweet husband!


Dear son!


Precious friend!


Neighbour Crazy!


Dij boni! Domine Crazy!


And how do you wife? When comes your Doctor Pulsfeel? But a kiss and so
forth? And would not one of these free Gallants, these proper youths have
served the turn? I pray pardon mine incivility, Mother; I was bold to retain
mine own Jewels. Have you not forgot your singles and your doubles, your
fallings back, and your turnings up wife?


Why in faith, dear heart, dost think me so simple, that I did not know thee all
the while? Alas man, I did but counterfeit, as you did, to maintain the jest;
kiss me sweet duck -- only to maintain the jest in faith.


Yes, yes, yes, we are Friends. I heartily thank these kind Gentlemen for their
loves to you, yes saith, heartily: I am better by it five hundred at least. Be
not you jealous Madame, they had nothing for it; not a bit by this Light.


Death o'my Fortune! that was my Gold.


Plague of a Villain, that was my Jewell.


True Gentlemen; and your bounty likewise lies in this Bag.


Sir, we sent these things to your Wife.


I thank you for it; we have but one Capacity in the Law, you know: What's hers
must be mine. I know thou would have it so sweet-heart. I am only sorry
Gentlemen, that you were so well favourdly beaten. That the Fool Citizen, the
Ass Citizen, the Cuckold Citizen should procure such a sound swaddling to your
wise, valiant and substantial Shoulders. Is't not a sore matter? But rest,
Salves and warm Oils may in time recover it.

How do you kind Mother? Gentlemen, if any of you want Money Gentlemen, here
stands a City-wit that has it. I have it, if you want any; speak, I have it,
and will keep it. How does your Costard Sir? A Pox o'th Slit, Sir. Beloved of
Phoebus, Minion of the Muses; dear water bailey of Helicon, be not proud of
your Preferment, though you are his Highness tutor. Mother, J take the
restoring of my rich Jewels very kindly. O my kind Brother, you have got the
rich Widow; and you have borne a brain Mother. Your hundred pound, brother,
was most thristily and opportunely bestowed. J could have procured her to you at
an easier rate, Mother. J am only sorry for you Mr. Wolsy, that you had her
not: Because you very honourably releast me of your Bond before it was due; and
are in shrewd danger to be laughed at among your Neighbours.

How does good Mr. Crazy, the Princes Jeweller? Mother, did not my Father look
too wise for a Citizen? How dost honest Punck? I am as much beholden to thee,
as to the rest of them.


My son and my heir is utterly undone.


O! I am quite cast away.


O no, you shall be no loser by me; you shall be a gainer by me Brother: Get
wit Brother (mark you) wit. Good faith I pity the poor Citizen, he has no
wit; a handsome young fellow, with a pretty beard, and a proper bodied woman to
his wife, and cannot bear a brain!


Why dost hear, modestly mumping Motherin-Law, with thy French-hood,
gold-chain, and flaggon-bracelets, advance thy snout. If the fool thy son, the
Idiot my husband here, have but as much brains as a Battledore, he may make a
fair revenue of me: Has he not a place at Court? Can he not lodge me there,
and prove weak-sighted, thick of hearing, sleepy after dinner, and snort when
others entertain and Court me? Can he not survey the hangings, read Cupids
Conybery, the Park of pleasure, Christian Love-Letters, or some other Pamphlet,
or fain some errand into the Town, whilst his brows are turning into gold?


O impudence beyond woman's apprehension! Son Crazy, we have all wronged
thee, thou know it; thou hast revenged it, we feel it; only do not undo my
heir, save him, bring him but off o'this match with any loss.


Why mother, is your son grown such a saucy Knave, as he thinks scorn to be a
Cuckold? I cannot clear him; in truth I cannot: He has paid for her deeply,
and 'tis pity they should be parted, yes faith is't.


Woman, we do pray thee, we do beseech thee, even upon our knees -- have pity
on the house of the Sneakups: quit my son, relinquish thy right, make frustrate
this marriage, and look thee, before these able witnesses, we heartily forgive
all, and forget: And withal, freely bestow this chain upon thee --


I do receive it.


She does receive it, bear witness all, she does receive it.


Marry on this condition --


No I'll no more marries nor conditions, you have received it.


I, you must make frustrate the Marriage; for look you, you have received it.


I will, and freely do; only the condition I would have made, is this, That if
you intend longer to be Master of your husband, now that you have seen how well
it became me, you will henceforward do as I do -- Look you, wear breeches.


O horrible!


How! do you wear breeches?


Yes Sir, breeches; and as good lining and stuffing in them, I hope, as yours
have, though they be of Satin.


I'll feel that: Sfoot mother this is a man. Come and feel else.


A young one Sir.

See Master your poor servant Jeremy, if he has performed his part, desires to
be admitted into the Livery of wit, and to wear this chain as his ensign of
Freedom.

Omnes Jeremy!


Jeremy! O Jeremy! thou were it ever too hard for --


Except at spoonmeat, Sir.


Ieremy!


Yes, Mistress: Indeed forsooth.


Well, give me thy hand: I will love thee as long as there is swiftness in
meditation, smoothness in flattery, or constancy in malice.


And for the cure that he has wrought on me,
I will applaud his wit; and bless the light
It gave me to discover my foul error:
Which by his demonstration showed so monstrous,
That I must loath my self, till I be purged.
Sir, by your fair forgiveness, which I kneel for --

Heaven make me thankful: Wife I have no words
To show how I rejoice: Rise, let me kiss thee --

Tempora mutantur. The towne's ours again.
Only, to fill the Scene with joy, may we
Conjoin sweet maid, in the Catastrophe.

Would you that have taught Greek, and whip't great boys, come back to your
Horn-book, and let down your Gascoines to me, that would, if I had you, be
more tyrannous then any Pedant that ever reigned since the days of Dionysius:
Besides here is my choice, with my Master and Mistresses leave, Jeremies
brother.


But is he seriously thy brother?


Yes, and no more a Pimp Sir, then I am a Wench.


Well, Mr. Sarpego, I'll help you to a fitter match, and Crack I will give thee
something with her: Take the security of my hand.


I only desire to be secure from this mans fury, and so consequently from
Bridewell.


He shall have nothing to say to thee.


I will have nothing to say to man, woman, or child, while I live again.


Fortuna nihil aufert sapienti: Fools and Fiddlers are her Favourites.


Let us make this a merry night.

Think of no losses. Sirs, you shall have none;
My honest care being but to keep mine own.
What, by my slights, I got more then my due,
I timely will restore again to you.
Omnes, Thanks kind Mr. Crazy, thanks.


Gratias vel ingentes Domine Crazy.


NOw let me Scholastikewise
For us all Epiloguise:
If these slender Scenes of Wit
Are received, as they were writ,
For your mirth, and no offence;
Let your Grace quit our suspense
With applaus'd Catastrophe.
I am short, w'yee (as you see)
There a Figure, which pray note ye,
Sic valet valetote.
Gratias Reddo Cuicunque.
Valetote ^terumque.

