THE WEEDING OF THE COVENT-GARDEN.

Or the Middlesex-JVSTICE OF Peace.

A Facetious COMEDY.

A POSTHUME of RICHARD BROM, An Ingenious Servant, and Imitator of his Master,
that famously Renowned Poet Ben. Johnson.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare Poetae.

LONDON, Printed for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at the Green Dragon in
St. Paul's Church-yard: And Henry Broom at the Gun in Ivy-lane. 1658.

Br this large Margent did the Poet mean
To have a Comment writ upon his Scene?
Or is it that the Ladies, who ne'er look
On any but a Poem or Play-book,
May, in each page, have space to scribble down
When such a Lord, or Fashion comes to Town.
As Swains in Almanacs account do keep,
When their Cow calv'd, and when they bought their sheep?
Ink is the life of Paper: 'tis meet then,
That this which escaped the Press should feel the Pen.
A Room with one side furnished, or a face
Painted half-way, is but a fair disgrace.
This great voluminous Pamphlet may be said
To be like one that hath more hair then head;
More excrement then body. Trees, which sprout
With broadest leaves, have still the smallest fruit.
When I saw so much white, I did begin
To think Aglaura either did lie in,
Or else took Penance. Never did I see
(unless in Bills dashed In the Chancerie).
So little in so much; as if the feet
Of Poetry, like Law, were sold by th'sheet.
If this new fashion should but last one year,
Poets, as Clerks, would make our paper dear.
Doth not the Artist err, and blast his fame
That sets out pictures lesser then the frame?
Was ever Chamberlaine so mad, to dare
To lodge a child in the great Bed at Ware?
Aglaura wo^ld please better, did she lie
In the narrow bounds of an Epitomie.
Pieces that are weaved of the finest twist,
(As Silk and Plush) have still more stuff then list.
She, that in Persian habit made great brags,
Degenerates in this excess of rags;
Who, by her Giant-bulk this only gains,
Perchance in Libraries to hang in chains.
Tis not in Book, as Cloth; we never say
Make London-measure, when we buy a Play:
But rather have them paired: Those leaves be fair
To the judicious, which more spotted are.
Give me the sociable Pocket-books.
These empty Folio's only please the Cooks.
R. B.
A Way with all grief and give us more sack.
'Tis that which we love, let love have no lack.
Nor sorrow, nor care can cross our delights,
Nor witches, nor goblins, nor Buttery sprights,
Though the candles burn dim while we can do thus,
We'll scorn to fly them: but we'll make them fly us.
Old Sack, and old Songs, and a merry old crew
Will fright away Sprights, when the ground looks blew.
HE that could never boast, nor seek the way,
To prepare friends to magnify his Play,
Nor rail at's Auditory for unjust,
If they not liked it nor was so mistrust.
Full ever in himself, that he besought
Preapprobation though they liked it not.
Nor ever had the luck to have his name
Clapped up above this merit. Nor the shame
To be cried down below it. He this night
Your fair and free Attention does invite.
Only he prays no prejudice be brought
By any that before-hand wish it nought.
And that ye all be pleased to hear and see,
With Candor suiting his Integrity.
That for the Writer. Something we must say,
Now in defence of us, and of the Play
We shall present no Scandal or Abuse,
To virtue or to honour. Nor traduce
Person of worth. Nor point at the disgrace
Of any one residing in the Place,
On which our Scene is laid, nor any Action show,
Of thing has there been done, for ought we know.
Though it be probable that such have been.
But if some vicious persons be brought in.
As no new Buildings, nor the strongest hold
Can keep ou^ Rats and Vermin bad and bold.
Let not the sight of such be ill endured;
All sores are seen and searched before the are cured.
As Ruffian, Bawd, and the licentious crew,
Too apt to pester Scituations new.
'Tis not amiss ere we begin our Play,
To entreat you, that you take the same surveigh
Into your fancy, as our Poet took,
Of Covent-Garden, when he wrote his Book.
Some ten years since, when it was grown with weeds.
Not set, as now it is, with Noble Seeds.
Which make the Garden glorious. And much
Our Poet craves and hopes you will not grutch
It him, that since so happily his Pen
Foretold its fair emprovement, and that men
Of worth and honour should renown the place.
The Play may still retain its former grace.
My Lord, I Could not think these seven years, but that I
In part a Poet was, and so might lie,
By the Poetic Licence. But I find
Now I am none, and strictly am confined
To truth, if therefore I subpaena'd were
Before the Court of Chancerie to swear.
Or if from thence I should be higher sent,
And on my life unto a Parliament
Of wit and judgement, there to certify
What I could say of your VARIETY:
I would depose each Scene appeared to me
An Act of wit, each Act a Comedy,
And all was such, to all that understood,
As knowing Johnson, swore By God 'twas good.
R. B.
I Marry Sir! This is something like! These appear like Buildings! Here's
Architecture expressed indeed! It is a most sightly situation, and fit for
Gentry and Nobility.


When it is all finished, doubtless it will be handsome.


It will be glorious: and yond magnificent Piece, the Piazzo, will excel that
at Venice, by hearsay, (I ne'er travelled). A hearty blessing on their brains,
honours, and wealths, that are Projectors, Furtherers, and Performers of such
great works. And now I come to you Mr. Rookesbill: I like your Row of houses
most incomparably. Your money never shone so on your Counting-boards, as in
those Structures.


I have piled up a Leash of thousand pounds in walls and windows there.


It will all come again with large increase.

And better is your money thus let out on red and white, then upon black and
white, I say. You cannot think how I am taken with that Row! How even and
straight they are! And so are all indeed. The Surveyor (what e're he was) has
manifested himself the Master of his great Art. How he has wedded strength to
beauty; state to uniformity; commodiousnesse with perspicuity! All, all as't
should be!


If all were as well tenanted and inhabited by worthy persons.


Phew; that will follow. What new Plantation was ever peopled with the better
sort at first; nay, commonly, the lewdest blades, and naughtypacks are either
necessitated to them, or else do prove the most forward venturers. Is not lime
and hair the first in all your foundations? do we not soil or dung our lands,
before we sow or plant any thing that's good in them? And do not weeds creep
up first in all Gardens? and why not then in this? which never was a Garden
until now; and which will be the Garden of Gardens, I foresee't. And for the
weeds in it, let me alone for the weeding of them out. And so as my Reverend
Ancestor Justice Adam Overdoe, was wont to say, In Heavens name and the Kings,
and for the good of the Common-wealth I will go about it.


I would a few more of the Worshipful hereabouts, (whether they be in
Commission or not) were as well minded that way as you are Sir; we should then
have all sweet and clean, and that quickly too.


I have thought upon a way for it, Mr. Rooksbill: and I will pursue it, viz. to
find out all the enormities, yet be my self unspied: whereby I will tread out
the spark of impiety, whilst it is yet a spark and not a flame; and break the
egg of a mischief, whilst it is yet an egg and not a Cockatrice. Then doubt
not of worthy tenants for your houses Mr. Rooksbill.


I hope, Sir, your best furtherance.


I had a letter bur last night from a worthy friend, a West-countrey Gentleman,
that is, now coming up with his family to live in Town here; and desire is to
inhabit in these buildings. He was to lie at Hammersmith last night, and
requested an early meeting of me this morning here, to assist him in the taking
of a house. It is my business hither; for he could never do it himself. He has
the oldest touchy, wrangling humour. -- But in a harmless way; for he hurts no
body, and pleases himself in it. His children have all the trouble of it, that
do anger him in obeying him sometimes. You will know him anon. I mean, he shall
be your Tenant. And luckily he comes.


It is not enough you tell me of obedience. Or that you are obedient. But I
will be obeyed in my own way. Do you see --


My noble friend Mr. Croswill, right happily met.


Your troublesome friend Mr. Cockbrayne.


No trouble at all, Sir, though I have prevented yours in finding a fit house
for you.


You have not have you, ha?


Actum est Mr. Croswill. But Civility pardon me, Is not this your daughter?


All the Shee-things I have: and would I were well rid of her too.


Sweet Mrs. Katherine, Welcome -- Mr. Gabriel, I take it.


Gabriel Croswill is my name.


But where's your younger son Mihill? There's a spark!


A Spark! A dunce I fear by this time like his brother Sheepshead there.


Gabriel is my proper name.


I have not seen him this Twelve-moneth, since I chambered him a Student here
in Town.


In town, and I not know it?


He knows not yet of my coming neither, nor shall not, till I steal upon him;
and if I find him mopish like his brother, I know what I will do.


Have you not heard from him lately?


Yes, often by his letters, less I could read more comfort in them. I fear
he's turned Precisian, for all his Epistles end with Amen; and the-matter of
them is such as if he could teach me to ask him blessing.


A comfortable hearing of a young man.


Is it so Sir? but I'll new mould him if it be so. -- I'll tell you Mr.
Cockbrayne; never was such a father so crossed in his children. They will not
obey me in my way. I grant, they do things that other fathers would rejoice at.
But I will be obeyed in my own way, dee see. Here's my eldest son. Mark how
he stands, as if he had learned a posture at Knights-bridge spittle as we came
aloug while-eare. He was not only borne without wit, but with an obstinate
resolution, never to have any. I mean, such wit as might become a Gentleman.


Was that resolution borne in him think you.


It could never grow up in him still as it does else. When I would have him
take his horse, and follow the dogs, and associate Gentlemen, in hawking,
hunting, or such like exercises, he'll run you a foot five mile another way, to
meet the brethren of the separation, at such exercises as I never sent him to
(I am sure) on worky days. And whereas most Gentlemen run into other men's
books, in hands that they care not who reads, he has a book of his own
Short-writing in his pocket, of such stuff as is fit for no mans reading
indeed but his own.


Surely Sir. --


Sure you are an Ass. Hold your tongue.


You are my father.


What comfort should I have, were my son such.


And he has nothing but hanged the head, as you see now, ever since Holiday
sports were cried up in the Country. And but for that, and to talk with some
of the silenced Pastors here in town about it, I should not have drawn him up.


I would I could change a son w' you Sir.


What kind of thing is thy son? ha! dost thou look like one that could have
a son fit for me to father, ha? And yet the best take both, and to please you
at all adventures, ha?


I am sure there cannot be a worse, or more debauched reprobate then mine is
living.


And is the devil too good a Master for him, think thou, ha? Wherein can I
deserve so ill at thy hands, fellow, whatever thou art, that thou should
wish me comber'd with a worse burden, when thou hear me complain of this,
ha? What is this fellow that you dare know him, Friend Cockbrayn? I will not
dwell within three parishes of him.


My tenant! Bless me from him. I had rather all my Rents were Bawdy houses.


Think nothing of his words, he'll forget all instantly. The best natured man
living.


Dost thou stand like a son now that hears his father abused, ha?


I am praying for the conversion of the young man he speaks of.


Well said, Mr. Gabriel.


But by the way, where's your son Anthony? have you not heard of him yet?


Never since he forsook me, on the discontent he took, in that he might not
marry your daughret there. And where he lives, or whether he lives or not, I
know not. I hope your davghter is a comfort to you.


Yes, in keeping her chamber whole weeks together, fullenning upon her Samplery
breech-work, when I was in hope she would have made me a Grandfather ere now.
But she has a humour, forsooth, since we put your son by her, to make me a
match-broker, her marriage-Maker; when I tell you friend, there has been so
many untoward matches of Parents making, that I have sworn she shall make her
own choice, though it be of one I hate. Make me her match-maker! Must I obey
her, or she me, ha?


I wish, with tears, my son had had her now.


Wherein Sir, (under correction do I disobey you?


In that very word, under correction, thou disobey'st me. Are you to be under
correction at these years? ha! If I have not already taught you manners beyond
the help of correction, go, seek a wiser father to mend them.


Yet give me leave, dear Sir, in my excuse. --


Leave out correction then.


If I were forward as many Maidens are,
To wish a husband, must I not be sought?
I never was a Gadder: and my Mother,
Before she died, adjured me to be none.
I hope you'll give me leave to keep your house.

La there again! How subtly she seeks dominion over me! No, huswife, No; you
keep no house of mine. I'll nestle you no longer under my wing. Are you not
fledge; I'll have you fly out I, as other men's daughters do; and keep a house
of your own if you can find it.


We had a kinswoman flew out too lately, I take it.


What tell thou me of her; wise-acres? Can they not fly out a little, but
they must turn arrant vvhores, ha? Tell me of your kinswoman? 'Tis true, she
was my Niece; she went to it a little before her time? some two years since,
and so fled from Religion; and is turned Turk, we fear. And what of that in
your precisiancial wisdom? I have such children as no man has. But (as I was
saying,) would ye top me husvvife, ha! Look you, now I chide her, she says
nothing. Is this obedience, ha?


Perhaps, I might unfortunately cast my affection on a man that would refuse
me.


That man I would desire to know; show me that man; see if I svvinge him not
dares slight my daughter.


Still the old humour, self-vvill'd, cross, and touchie; but suddenly
reconciled. Come, Mr. Croswil, to the business.


Oh, you told me of a house you had found for me.


Yes Sir. And here's the Landlord.


Does he look, or go like one could let a house worthy of me.


Sir, we have able Builders here, that will not carry least show of their
buildings on their backs. This is a rich sufficient man, I assure you, and my
friend.


I cry him heartily mercy, and embrace him. And now I note you better, you
look like Thrift it self.

I cannot think you will throw away your houses at a cast. You have a son,
perhaps, that may, by the commendations you gave of him. Lets see your house.


Come away Mr. Gabriel.


Come Sir, what do you gape a^d shake the head at there? I'll lay my life he
has spied the little Cross upon the new Church yond, and is at defiance with
it. Sirrah, I will make you honour the first syllable of my name. My name is
Will. Croswill, and I will have my humour. Let those that talk of me for it,
speak their pleasure, I will do mine.


I shall obey you, Sir.


Now you are in the right. You shall indeed. I'll make your heart ache else,
dee see.


But truly I was looking at that Image; that painted idolatrous image yonder,
as I take it.


O heresy! It is some Lady, or Gentlewoman standing upon her Bellconey.


Her Bellconey? Where is it? I can spy from her foot to her face, yet I can see
no Bellconey she has.


What a Knave's this: That's the Bellconey she stands on, that which jets out
so on the fore-part of the house; every house here has one of them.


'Tis very good; I like the jetting out of the fore-part very well; it is a
gallant fashion indeed.


I guess what she is, what ere I have said. O Justice look to thine office.


Come now to this house, and then to my son Mihil, the Spark you spoke of. And
if I find him cross too, I'll cross him: Let him look to it* Dee see.


I'll see you housed; and then about my project, which is for weeding of this
hopeful Garden.


Why should not we in England use that freedom
The famous Curtezans have in Italy:
We have the art, and know the Theory
To allure and catch the wandering eyes of Lovers;
Yea, and their hearts too: but our stricter Laws
Forbids the public practise, our desires
Are high as theirs; our wills as apt and forward;
Our wits as ripe, our beauties more attractive;
Or Travellers are shrewd liars. Where's the let?
Only in bashful coward custom, that
Stoops in the shoulders, and submits the neck
To bondage of Authority; to these Laws,
That men of feeble age and weaker eye-sight
Have framed to bar their sons from youthful pleasures.
Possets and Cawdels on their queasy stomachs,
Whilst I fly out in brave rebellion;
And offer, at the least, to break these shackles
That holds our legs together: And begin
A fashion, which pursued by Cyprian Dames,
May persuade Justice to allow our Games.
Who knows? I'll try. Francisca bring my Lute.

Troth I have a great mind to be one of the Philoblathici, a Brother of the
Blade and Baton, as you translate it; now ye have beat it into my head: But I
fear I shall never come on and off handsomely. I have mettle enough methinks,
but I know not how methinks to put it out.


We will help you out with it, and set it flying for you never doubt it.


Obotts, you mean my money mettle, I mean my valour mettle I.


Peace, hark.


The other flies fast enough already.


Pox on ye peace.


O most melodious.


Most odious, Did you say? It is methinks most odoriferous.


What new devise can this be? Look!


She is vanished. Is't not the Mountebanks Wife that was here; and now come
again to play some new merry tricks by herself.


A botts on it, I never saw that Mountebank; they say, he brought the first
resort into this new plantation, and sowed so much seed of Knavery and Cozenage
here, that 'tis feared 'twill never out.


Nay but this creature: What can she be?


And then again, he drew such flocks of idle people to him, that the Players,
they say, cursed him abhominably.


Thou ever talk of the wrong matter.


Cry mercy Brothers of the Blade and Battoune: Do you think if I give my
endeavour to it, I shall ever learn to roar and carry it as you do, that have
it naturally, as you say.


Yes, as we'll beat it into you. But this woman, this musical woman, that set
her self out to show so, I would be satisfied in her.


And she be as able as she seems, she has in her to satisfy you, and you were
a Brother of ten Blades, and ten Battounes.


I vow -- Peace. I'll battoune thy teeth into thy tongue else; she bears a
stately presence. Thou never saw her before: Did thou Toney?


No; but I heard an inkling at the Paris Tavern last night of a
She-Gallant-that had travelled France and Italy; and that she would --


Battoun thy teeth into thy tongue.)


Plant some of her foreign collections, the fruits of her travels, in this
Garden here, to try how they would grow or thrive on English earth.


Young Pig was speaking of such a one to me, and that she was a Mumper.


What's that a Sister of the Scabberd, brother of the Blade?


Come, come; we will in, we will in; 'tis one of our fathers buildings; I'll see the
Inhabitants. Some money Clot. furnish I say, and quickly. -- I vow --


You shall, you shall.


What shall I?


Vow twice before you have it.


I vow, and I vow again, I'll coin thy brains. --


Hold, hold, take your powl money; I thought I would have my will; and the word
I look-for, I'll coin thy brains. --

I do not love to give my money for nothing, I have a volume of words here, the
worst of them is as good as a blow; and then I save my Crown whole half a dozen
times a day, by half a crown a time, there's half in half saved by that.


Come let's appear civil, till we have our entrance, and then as occasion
serves --

Who would you speak withal?


Your Mistress, little one.


Do you know her Sir?


No; but I would know her, that's the business: I mean the musical Gentlewoman
that was fiddling, and so many in the What-doe-call't even now.


What-doe-call her Sir, I pray?


What-doe-call her; 'tis not come to that yet, prithee let me see and speak
with her first.


You are disposed I think.


What should we do here else?


You wont thrust in upon a body whether one will or no.


Away you Monkey.


O me, What do you mean?


O my brave Philoblathici. --


What's the matter the Girl cries out so?


I know not: I fear some rude company, some of the wild crew are broke into the
house.


Within. Whether would you go, you wont rob the house will ye?


Will ye be quiet Whiskin?


O me 'tis so: Hell's broke loose; this comes of your new fingle-fangle
fashion, your prepostrous Italian way forsooth: would I could have kept my old
way of pots and pipes, and my Strong-water course for customers: The very first
twang of your fiddle guts has broke all, and conjured a legion of devils among
us.


Nay, there's but a Leash of us. How now?
Who have we here? Are these the far travelled Ladies?
O thou party perpale, or rather parboild Bawd.

What shall I do? Dam. Out alas; sure they are devils indeed.


Art thou travelled cross the Seas from the Bankside hither, old Countess of
Codpiece-row?


Party perpale and parboild Bawd. --


And is this the Damsel that has been in France and Italy? Clot. Codpiece-row.


Peace ye roaring Scabs: I'll besworn she supped at Paris Tavern last night, and
lay not long ago at the Venice by Whitefryers Dock.


Prithee what is she Madge?


A civil Gentlewoman you see she is.


She has none of the best faces: but is she warrantable; I have not had a civil
night these three months.


Nor none are like to have here, I assure you.


O Madge how I do long thy thing to ding didle ding.


O Nick, I am not in the humour, no more is she to be of the merry pin now; I am
sure her case is too lamentable. But if you will all sit down, I'll give you a
bottle of wine, and we will relate her story to you, so you will be civil. Nic.
Well for once, I care not if we be.

Let us set to it then; sit down brother Toney, sit down Gentlewoman, we shall
know your name anon, I hope it will fall in your story; sit down Clotpoll.


You will call me brother Clotpoll too when I have taken my oath, and paid my
entrance into the faternity of the Blade and the Battoun.


'Tis like we shall. Now Lady of the Stygian Lake, thou black infernal Madge,
begin the dismal story, whilst I begin the bottle.


This Gentlewoman whose name is Damyris.


Damyris stay. Her nick-name then is Dammy, so we may call her when we grow
familiar: and to begin that familiarity, Dammy here's to you. -- drink.


And what's your nick-name I pray Sir?


Nick: only Nick, Madge there knows it.


Then I believe your name is Nicholas.


I vow-witty. Yes Dammy, and my Surname is Rookesbill, and so is my Fathers
too: and what do you make o'that?


Nothing not I Sir: sure this is he.


And I would he were nothing, so I had all he has: I must have the other glass to
wash him out of my mouth, he furs it worse then Mondongas Tobacco. Here old
Madge, and to all the birds that shall wonder at thy howletship, when thou
rid'st in an Ivy-bush, called a Cart.


Well mad Nick, I'll pledge thee in hope to see as many flutter about the tree,
that thou shalt clime backwards.


A pox thou wilt be stifled with Offal and Carret leaves before that day.


Fie, fie, what talk's this? 'tis he I am consident.


These are our ordinary complements, we wish no harm.


No Dammy I vow, not I to any breathing.


But your Father Nick. -- Is he that Rookesbill. --


But my Fathet; Pox rot ye, why do ye put me in mind of him again, he sticks
i'my throat, now I'll wash him a little further. -- Here Brother Toney


Gramercy Brother Nick.


And to all the brothers that are, and are to be of the Blade and the Battoun.


There said you well Clotpoll: Here 'tis --


I would but have asked you whether your Father were that Rookesbill that is
called the great Builder.


Yes marry is it he forsooth; he has built I know not how many houses
hereabout, though he goes Dammy as if he were not worth a groat; and all his
clothes I vow are not worth this hilt, except those he wears, and prays for
fair weather in, on my Lord Mayors Day; and you are his Tenant, though perhaps
you know it not, and may be mine; therefore use me well: for this house and the
rest I hope will be mine, as well as I can hope he is mortal, of which I must
confess I have been in some doubt, though now I hope again, he will be the
first shall lay his bones in the new Church, though the Church-yard be too good
for him before 'tis consecrated. So give me the to-the cup, for now he offends
my stomach. Here's to thee now Clotpoll.


And to all the Sisters of the Scabberd Brother in Election. Dee hear, Pray
talk of his father no more, for the next brings him to the belly-work, and then
he'll drink him quite through him.


And so we shall have a foul house.


No he shall stick there. Now to the story Gentlewoman, 'twas that we sate for.


I to the story, I vow I had almost forgot it; and I am the worst at Sack in a
morning: Dear Dammy to the story.


Good Sir my heart's too full to utter't.


Troth and my head's too full to hear it: But I'll go out and quarrel with some
body to settle my brains, then go down to Mich. Crossewill to put him in mind
of our meeting to day; then if you will meet me at the Goat at Dinner, we'll
have it all at large.


Will you be there indeed Sir, I would speak with you seriously.


Dammy if I be not, may my father out live me.


We both here promise you he shall be there by noon.


'Lady, 'tis sworn by Blade and by Battoun.


This will be the bravest discovery for Mihill, the new Italian Bona Roba
Catsoe.


Why so sad on the sudden Niece.


But do you think hee'll come as he has promised.


He never breaks a promise with any of us' though he fail all the honest part
of the world: But I trust you are not taken with the Ruffian, you'll ne'er get
penny by him.


I prithee peace, I care not.


But Mystris, rhere is a Gallant now below, a Gingle boy indeed, that has his
pockets full of, crowns that chide for vent. Shall I call him up to you.


I will see no man.


How's that? I hope you jest.


Indeed, I hope you jest.


You will not hinder the house, I hope. Marry heigh. This were a humour and
'twould last. Go fetch him up.


I'll fly then out at window. Nay, by this steel 'tis true.


What's the matter? have I got a mad woman into the house. What do you go about
to break me the first day of your coming, before you have hassled a Couch or
a Bedside in it. Were you but now all o'th heigh to set your self out for a
sign with your fiddle cum twang, and promise such wonders, forsooth, and will
not now be seen. Pray what's the Riddle.


I'll tell thee all anon. Prithie excuse me. I know thy share of his sins
bounty would not come to thus much, take it, I give it thee. And prithee let me
be honest till I have a mince to be otherwise, and I'll hinder thee nothing.


Well, I'll dismiss the Gallant, and send you, Sirrah, for another wench. I'll
have Bess Bufflehead again. This kicksy wincy Giddibrain will spoil all I'll
no more Italian tricks. --

Thus some have by the frenzy of despair
Fumously run into the sea to throw
Their wretched bodies, but when come near
They saw the billows rise, heard Boreas blow,
And horrid death appearing on the Maine,
A sudden fear hath sent them back again.

NAy, but honest Shoemaker; thy honest price.


I tell you in truth, Sir, 'tis as good a boot as ever you pulled on in your
life.


A little too straight, I doubt. What do you think of my boots honest Tailor.


They do exceeding handsomely, never trust me Sir.


Never fear it Tailor, you shall trust me, and please you.


You are pleasant Sir.


And what do you think of my suite Shoemaker? can you say as much for the
Tailor as he for you.


A very neat suite, Sir, and becomes you excellent.


Honest men both, and hold together; one would little think you were so near
neighbours. Well, you, have fitted me both, I must confess. But how I shall
fit you, now there's the point.


There's but one way for than and please you.


With paying us our money Sit.


Still both in a tale, I can not but commend your neighbourhood, I muse my
Laundress stays, I sent her three or four ways for moneys. But do not you
stay for that. I have ways enough to pay you. I have ploughs a going that you
dream not of.


No indeed, Sir, we dream of nothing but ready money, sleeping or waking.


I shall be rich enough ne'er fear't. I have a venture in the new soap business
man.


We are but servants, Sir. And our Masters themselves have no faith, in
flippery projects.


Besides, the women begin to grumble against that slippery project shrewdly,
and, 'tis feared, will mutiny sho tly.


Burlakin, and they may prove more troublesome then a commotion of Sailors.

O welcome, Laundress, where's the money.


Not a penny of money, Sir, can I get. But here's one come to town has brought
you enough, and you can have grace to finger it.


Who's that I prithee.


Your father, your father Sir. I met his man by great chance, who told me his
Master means to steal upon you presently, and take you as he finds you.


Is he come up with his cross tricks. I hea^d he was to come. And that he
means to live here altogether. He has had an aim these dozen years to live in
town here, but never was fully bent on it until the Proclamation of restraint
spurred him up. 'Tis such a Crossewill. Well, he is my father, and I am utterly
undone if thou help me not now at a pinch, at a pinch, dear Laundress. Go
borrow me a Gown, and some four or five Law-books? for, I protest, mine are in
Duck-lane. Nay, trudge, sweet Laundress, trudge. -- Tailor and Shoemaker
convey your selves away quietly, and I'll pay you to morrow, as I am a
Gentleman:


As I am a Shoemaker, and that's a kind of a Centleman, you know, I'll not
stir till I have my money, I am not an Ass Sir.


No body says thou art.


I have had too many such tricks put upon me in my days.


A trick! as I hope for money it is no trick.


Well Sir, trick or no trick. I must have my money or my boots, and that's
plain dealing.


A pox of the boots, so my legs were out of them. Would they were i'thy throat,
spurs and all, you will not out.


No marry will we not.


Well-said Shoemaker, I commend thee, thou hast a better heart then I, though
my stomack's good.


O well said, my good Laundress. How am I bound to thee; yet all this wo'not
do it Laundress. Thou must bestir thy stumps a little further, and borrow me a
couple of Gowns more for these Rascals here that will not away.


How! wo'not away? And they were well served, they would be thrust out of doors
for saucy companions. Your Masters would not put a Gentleman to his trumps
thus.


Nay, sweet Laundress, restrain thy tongue, and stretch thy feet. A couple of
Govvns, good Laundress, and forget not caps. I do now furnish you like Civil
Lavvyers, and you do not keep your countenances; if ever you do but peep in at
the Hall-door at Christmas to see the revels, I'll have you set in the stocks
for this believe it.


If you do, Sir, I may hap be even with you before the year comes about, and
set you in our stocks for it.


But will you make Lawyers of us.


Have you a mind to have your money you unbelieving Rascals.


I see your drift, and hope you'll prove an honest Gentleman.


Thou hast some hope, though no faith nor trust in any man.


Alas, Sir, our Masters sit at grear rents, and keep great families.


I cry you mercy, they are removed into the new plantation here, where, they
say, are a tribe of Infidel-tradesmen, that have made a Law within your selves
to put no trust in Gentlemen. But bear your selves handsomely here you were
best. I am acquainted with a crevv that haunts about your habitations, with
whom I will join, and so batter your windows one of these nights else. -- O
welcome, Laundress, how doest thou toil for me.


Your fathers talking, as I am a woman, below. -- As thou art a woman below,
well-said. Come on with these Gowns, and lets see how yow'll look. If we had
time, the Shoemaker should wash his face; but seeing there is no remedy; pull
the cap in your eyes, and good enough. Now Laundress, set us stools, and
leave us.


I hear him coming up.


Now let him come, we are ready for him. Shoemaker, keep your hand underneath
the book, that the pitch do not discover you.


I warrant you, Sir.


And Taylor, be sure you have no Needle on your sleeve, nor thread about your
neck.


I warrant you too for me, Sir.


He's enrred.


Remitter, I say, is where a man hath two titles, that is to say, one of an
elder, the other of a later. And he comes to the land by the later title; yet
the Law adjudges him to be in by the force of the elder title. If the tenant
in the tail discontinee the tail, and after he diseaseth his discontinue, and
so dies seized, whereby the tenants descend to their issue, as to his Cousin
inheritable by force of the tail. In this case the tenants descend, who have
right by force of the tail, a Remitter in the tail taken for that in the Law,
shall put and adjudge him to be in by force of descent. Pox on ye, speak
something good or bad, somewhat.


The Remitter, you say, is seized in the tail.


Excellent Shoemaker, I say so, and again, I say, that if the tenant in the
tail in feoffe his son, or his Cousin, inheritable by force of the tail, the
which son or cousin at the time of the feoffment is within age, and after the
tenant in the tail dierh, this is a Remitter to the heir in the tail to whom
the feoffment is made, now Taylor.


Think you so, Sir.


Look either Fitzherbert, Perkins, or Dier, and you shall find it in the
second part of Richard Cordelyon. So much for Remitter. Now I'll put a plain
home-spun case, as a man may say, which we call a moot-case.


I pray do Sir.


Some father might take joy of such a son now. This takes not me. No, this
is not my way.


The case is this

pull up your grounds closer and behanged, you are a Tailor, and you: a
Shoemaker.


And you owe us money.


I put the case, I do, to you for a suit of clothes.


Well.


And to you for a pair of boots.


True.


I have broke my day with you both. Suppose so.


Very well, we do.


You clap a Sergeant of my back. I put in bail, remove it, and carry it up into
the upper Court, with habeas-Corpus; bring it down again into the lower Court
with procedendo; then take it from thence, and bring it into the Chancery with
a Certiorari; I; and if you look not to ^t, bring it out of the Chancery again,
and thus will I keep you from your money till your suite and your boots be
worn out before you recover penny of me.


S^ly'd but you shall not, your father shall know all first.


S'foot Shoemaker wilt thou be an Ass. I do but put a case, Have you not feen
it tried.


Yes, very often.


Away with books. Away with Law. Away with madness. I, God bless thee, and
make thee his servant, and defend thee from Law, I say. Take up these books,
sarrah, and carry them presently into Paul's Church-yard dee see, and change
them all for Histories, as pleasant as profitable; Arthur of Britain, Primalion
of Greece, Amadis of Gaul, and such like de see.


I hope he does but jest.


And do you hear, Sirrah.


I Sir.


Get Bells work, and you can, into the bargain.


Which Bell, Sir? Adam Bell, with Clim ^'th' Clough, and William of Cloudesley.


Adam Bell you Ass? Valiant Bell that killed the Dragon.


You mean St. George.


Sir Jolthead, do I not. I'll teach you to chop logic, with me.


Sfoot, how shall I answer my borrowed books? Stay Belt. Pray Sir, do not
change my books.


Sir, Sir, I will change them and you too: Did I leave thee here to learn
fashions and manners, that thou might carry thy self like a Gentleman, and
dost thou wast thy brains in learning a language that I understand not a word
of? ha! I had been as good have brought thee up among the wild Irish.


Why alas Sir, Had I not better keep my self within my Chamber, at my Study,
then be rioting abroad, wasting both money and time, which is more precious
then money? if you did know the inconvenience of company, you would rather
encourage and commend my retired life, then any ways dehort me from it.


Why Sir did not I keep company think you when I was young? Ha!


Yes Sir; but the times are much altered, and youth more corrupted now, they
did not drink and wench in those days, but nay, o 'tis abominable in these.


Why this is that I feared, the boys turning meacock too, after his elder
brother, 'twas time to look to him.


Why Croswill Mich. What, not up yet and behanged. Or ha ye a wench a bed wye.
Is this keeping your home. Mihil runs to the door and holds it.


Sfoot the Rogue Rooksbil and his crew, I feared as much.


Break open the door, let me come to it.


Forbear, or behanged, you will undo me, my father's here. I'll meet you anon
as I am honest.


Your father's a Clowterdepouch. Nay, I will come then, what Mademoiselle do
you call father.


You would not believe me. Pray be civil.


'Tis so, we will Cry mercy, you are busy, we will not moote to day then?


I hope you may excuse me, I'll be w'ye anon.


Come to the Goat Capricorne. We have the bravest new discovery.


How now! what are these?


They are Gentlemen of my standing, Sir, that have a little over-studied
themselves, and are somewhat --.


Mad; are they not? And so will you be shortly, if you follow these courses.
Mooting do they call it? you shall moote nor mute here no longer. Therefore on
with your cloak and sword, follow me to the Tavern and leave me such
long-tail'd company as these are, for I do not like them.


No more do I, Sir, if I knew how to be rid of them.


I think thou hast ne'er a sword, hast thou, ha?


Yes Sir.


Where is it, Sir, let me se't Sir.


'Tis here, under mybed, Sir. -- Reach it.


Why there's a Lawyers trick right, make his weapon companion with his
Pisse-pot. Fie, fie, here's a tool indeed. There's money, Sir, buy you a good
one, one with the Mathematical hilt as they term it.


It would do better in Mathematical books* Sir, offer me no money, pray Sir,
but for books.


Go to, you are a peevish Jack, do not provoke me: do not you owe me obedience?
ha!


Yes Sir, I acknowledge it.


'Tis good you do. Well, take that money; and put your self into clothes
befitting your rank, Do so. And let me see you, squirting about without a
weapon, like an Attorneys Clerk in Tearm-time, and I'll weapon you, What, shall
I have a Noddy of you. This frets him to the liver. Go to, never hang the head
for the matter. For I tell thee I will have it so, and herein be known what I
am.


You are known sufficiently for your cross humour already; in which I'll try
you if I can make you double this money, for this will not serve my turn.


What have you told it after me, you had best weigh it too.


No Sir, but I have computed that for my present use, here is too much by
half, pray Sir, take half back.


Body of me, what a perverse knave is this, to cross me thus! Is there too
much, say you? ha^


Yes truly, sir.


Let me see it. Go thy ways, take thy musty books, and rhy rusty whittle here
again. And take your foolish plodding dunci-coxcomely course, till I look after
you again. Come away sirrah.


Sfoot, who's the Gull now? Taylor, Shoemaker, you may go pawn your Gowns for
any money I am like to have.


We have all played the Lavvyers to pretty purpose, in pleading all this while
for nothing. Well sir, to avoid further trouble, I am content to withdravv my
action, that is, pull off your boots again, and be jogging.


And for my part, sir, I can do no less then take you by default and non-suit
you.


Very good Lavvyers both, Is my father quite gone Belt?


Gone in a tempest of high displeasure, sir: And has sent you here all the
money he had about him; and bids you refuse it if you dare, 'tis above tvvice
the sum he offered you before; but good sir, do not refuse it. He svvears he
will try whether you or he shall have his will. Take heed you cross him not
too much.


Well at thy request, because thou shalt not have anger for carrying it back
again, I will accept.


I thank you Sir. Consider, he's your father, sir.


I do most Reverend Belt. and would be loath to cross him, although I may as
much in taking his money as refusing it, for ought I know, for thou knovv'st
'tis his custom to cross me, and the rest of his children in all we do, to
try and urge his obedience; 'tis an odd way: therefore to help my self I seem
to covet the things that I hate, and he pulls them from me; and makes show of
loathing the things I covet, and he hurles them doubly at me, as now in this
money.


Are you so crafty?


Yes, but do thou put it in his head, and I'll pick out thy brains.


You never knew an old Serving-man treacherous to his young Master: what? to
the hopes of the house; you will be heir, that's questionless: for to your
comfort, your elder brother grows every day more fool then the other. But now
the rest of the message is, that you make haste, and come to my Master to the
Goat in Covent-Garden, where he dines with his new Landlord to day.


He has taken a house then.


O, a most delicate one, with a curious Belconee and all belonging to it most
stately.


At the Goat does he dine, say thou.


Yes sir.


My crevv are gone thither too. Pray Mars we fall not foul of one another.
Well, go thy way, present my duty to him, I'll follow presently. Tell him I
took his money with much unvvillingnesse.


As Lavvyers do their fees. Let me alone sir.


Well Tailor and Shoemaker; you have put me to it, but here's your money.


'Twas for that we did put you to it Sir.


Let's see your biil Tailor


Here 'tis, sir, as ready as a Watchmans.


Then good words will pass it, 7 li. 4. sh. tell your money; yours is 14 sh.
boots and Galloshes. There 'tis and 12. d. to drink.


I thank your worship.


Are you right Tailor.


Yes and please you Sir.


There's a shilling for you too, to spend in bread.


He knows both our diets. We'll make bold to take leave of your worship.


Not so bold as I'm glad I'm too well rid of you, most courteous Gentlemen.

To see what money can do; that can change men's manners, alter their
conditions: how tempestuous the slaves were without it. O thou powerful metal!
what authority is in thee! Thou art the Key to all men's mouths. With thee a
man may lock up the jaws of an informer, and without thee he cannot the lips
of a Lawyer.


Down boy, and bid the Cook hasten dinner.


What will you please to drink in the mean time, sir.


I will not drink in the mean time, sir, Get you gone.


A fine old humorous Gentleman.


Hold up your head, Sirrah, and leave your precise folly. I'll leave you to the
wild world else, dee see. Is the name of a Tavern so odious to you? Ha. Your
brother has vexed me sufficiently already, and perhaps he'll refuse to come
too! If he dares let him. Welcome Mr. Rooksbil, welcome Landlord, and your fair
daughter, welcome pretty one. Trust me a pretty one indeed, pray be acquainted
with my daughter there. In your Maiden-company, I hope she will not think the
Tavern such a bugs nest as she did. I had much ado to draw my rebellious
children to the Tavern after me.


And truly, sir, 'tis the first to my knowledge that e're my daughter came
into.


All in good time, she may increase in virtue. But if it be a fault, (as in my
conscience in his thought it is a great transgression) my unsetlednesse, and
unprovidednesse else, where or how to entertain a friend, or feed my self, may
well excuse us all, dee see.


O Sir, I cannot enough admire that virtue in your son.


It is a vice, as much a vice or more, as is your sons, your cast-aways as
you call him, that sucks no other ai^e, then that of Taverns, Taphouses,
Brothels, and such like. I would their extreme qualities could meet each other
at half-way, and so mingle their superfluities of humour unto a mean betwixt
them. It might render them both allowable subjects, where now the one's a
firedrake in the air, and the other a mandrake in the earth, both mischievous,
see how he stands like a mole-catcher. What dirty dogged humour was I in when
I got him troe?


Hovve're his carriage seems distasteful unto you, I could afford (with your
allovvance, to make conditions of estate agreeable) to give all that is mine to
him with my daughter.


What a mechanic slave is this, to thank a son of mine, hovve're I
under-rate him, a fit mate to mingle blood with his moore-ditch breed. True,
his estate is great, I understand it, but of all foul I love not Moor-hens.
Such another motion would stir me to roar him down the tavernstairs.


What do you think on it sirs.


Heaven grant me patience.


Will you consider of it Master Crossewill.


I was never so put to it. I wish we had a stickler. I muse that Master
Cockbrayne stays thus.


You do not mind my motion sir.


Uds precious I mind nothing, I am so crossed in mind there I can mind nothing,
nor I will mind nothing, dee see. Why comes not Mr. Cockbrayue, Ha!


Yet you mind him it seems. But he, sir, cannot come, and desires you to hold
him excused. He's gone about some special undertaking, for the good of the
Common-wealth, he says.


Fart for his undertaking; all the world is bent to cross me. What is my young
Master come? ha!


My young Master Mr. Mihil will be here presently, he said he would follow me
at heals, sir.


And why not come before you, sir. Does he not think that I have waited long
enough, sir? sure I'll cross some body under that knaves pate of yours,
d'y'fee.


Thus when any body angers him, I am sure to hear on it.


So now my spleen is a little palliated, let me speak with you Mr. Rooksbill.
Get you down, Sirrah; and bring me word, dinner is not ready, and I'll give you
as much more, do ye see.


That's his way to his stomach.


And is your brother that your father says is so ungracious, so well
acquainted with my brother Mihil, say you.


Oh all in all, he's not so familiar with any man, if Mihil Croswill be your
brother, as 'tis manifest.


I would not that my father knew it, for all I can expect from him but his
blessing, but does your father know it?


No, I would not he should mistrust it for all he has, blessing and all; and
now that I have found you love your brother fo well, I will make over my reason
and my counsel in trust with you, hoping you will not wrong that trust.


If I do, may the due price of treachery be my reward.


I love your brother, Lady, and he loves me. The only good act that ever my
brother did, was to bring us acquainted, and is indeed all that he has to live
on. For I do succour him with many a stolen piece for the felicity he brought
me in your brothers love. Now, my father, whose irreconcilable hate has for
ever discarded my brother, should he but dream of their acquaintance, would
poison all my hopes.


But let me ask you, is there an hope betwixt you and my brother ever to come
together?


Yes, and a way he has for^t, which I understand not yet.


Trust me, I pity you both, your case is very dangerous.


Love's above all adventures, the more hard the achievement is, the sweeter
the reward.


I like her spirit well.


You Sir, come hither, what is hammering in your head now?

Is't not some Synodical question to put unto the brethren, concerning
Whitsonales and Maygames? ha!


Surely sir, I was premeditating a fit thanksgiving to be rendered before meat
in. Taverns, according to the present occasion which the time and place
administers, and that as the spirit shall enable me, shall be delivered before
you in due season.


I am glad I know your mind; for that trick, my zealous son, you shall come
in at half-dinner, like a Chafing-dish of coals, when the sauce is cold, to
make use of the heat of your spirit; d ye see. I love not meat twice dressed.


Good sir, put the Proposition to him, that I made my affection to him, urges
it more and more, I never was so taken with a man.


But what's that to your daughter? ha!


The same affection governs her, she is not mine else.


Well, hold your peace, and was that your spiritual meditation?


Yes, verily.


Come Sir, at this Gentleman's request I will now put a question to you
concerning the flesh. What, think you of yond Virgin there his daughter? can
you affect her so well as to wish her to be your wedded wife?


You mean, elpoused in holy Matrimony.


Yes, I mean so.


hum hum hum Psalm tune. How happy.


But do thou say, yes verily to that, and as I hope to have peace in my grave.
I'll break the Kings peace on thy pate presently.


It is a weighty question, and requires due premeditation in a religious
answer, pray give me leave to take advice --


What says he, Sir?


He says he will talk with a cunning man about her.


Sure you mistake him, sir.


You are welcome, Gentlemen. Will. Harry, Zachary.


Zachary is a good name.


Where are you? he (rings the bell) show up into the Phoenix. Is the Check
empty?


Hoyday, here's a din.


A pottle of Canary to the Dolphin, score.


Y' are welcome, Gentlemen, take up the lillie-pot.


Half a dozen of clean pipes and a candle for the Elcphant. They take their own
Tobaccho.


Whose room do they foul Sirrah, Harry, Harry?


Do Elephants take Tobaccho?


Carry up a Jordan for the Maidenhead, and a quart of white muskadine for the
blew Bore.


Now me thinks, the muskadine for that Maidenhead, and the Jordan for the Bore
were better.

Knock above, and a pot thrown. Why boys, drawer, rogues, take up, (below) By
and by, by and by, (above) Wine, Tobaccho.


What variety of noises is here? and all excellent ill sounds. (Above) Call up
the Fiddlers, Sirrah.


Such cries as these went forth before the desolation of the great City.

O profane tinkling the cymbals of Satan; that tickle the care with vanity, to
lift up the mind to lewdness. Mine ears shall be that of the Adder against
the Song of the Serpent.


O rare, in a young man!


I will roar out aloud to drown your Incantations. Yea, I will set out a
throat even as the beast that belloweth.


Most happy youth!


Hold your peace, Sirrah, or I'll make you bellow for something.


Sfoot-back, Nick to your own room. Thy father's here too, as I breath.


I vow?


My Lucie too, as I live. How the devil got they acquainted? Sure he's his
Landlord 'Tis so.


Dare you come, sir, you should have stayed now till you had been sent for.


Verily, sir.


Are you at your Verilies too? ha!


But for di^pleasing you, I had rather have grazed on Littletons Commons, or
have fasted this fourtnight, then come for my repast into this Wilderness; but
you will have it so


You are in the right Sir, I'll have it so indeed, I'll know why I shall not
else. What do you know no body here?


I cry them mercy, my good brother, -- and my loving sister.


But what virtuous men has this man to his sons, and how they thrive in grace
against his will, it seems.


What Gentlewoman is this of your acquaintance, Sister?


'Tis well dissembled brother, but I know your cunning.


Have you betrayed me?


Mum Mr. Mihil, mum.


Harry, Harry.


By and by.


What devil art thou that roarest in mine ear so.


Hold, I beseech you, I come to wait upon you.


What, with a By and by, that strikes into my head as sharp as a Stellatto.


I come to tell you, sir, that your table's covered in a fairer Room, and more
private, your meat is ready to go up, and all in a readiness.


Now thou art an honest fellow, there's a couple of shillings for thee. Have us
out of thy windmil here, I prithee, and thy By and by's.


GO Sirrah, make your reckoning for our dinner. Leave us this wine, and come
when we call you. We have business.

I shall, sir, by and by.


Well, sir, you will be of both you say, the Blade and the Baton?


Of both, sir, by all means, both Philoblathicus and Philobatticus, I. I'll
now have all that belongs to your order, or all my money again, that's for a
certain.


Your money again? lo you there. You bring me a fit man, Gentlemen to be
sworn, do you not? that talks of money again, when 'tis a main Article in the
Oath, never to look for money again, once disfinger'd.


You will not spoil all now 'tis come so far? will you?


Well sir, when I have my Oath, and that I am sworn one of you. I'll do as you
do, and care as little for money as he that has least.


Well, to the Oath then, for both the Bsade and the Baton you say?


I by all means, Captain, for both. S'lid the Baton may stick to me, when
the Blade may fly out of the Hilts.


Yes, to the Brokers.


Lay your hands on these Hilts, sir. The Articles that you depose unto are
these, To be true and faithful unto the whole Fraternity of the Blade and the
Baton, and to every member thereof.


As ever faithful member was.


That at no time, wittingly or ignorantly, drunk or sober, you reveal or make
discovery of the Brother, or a member of the Brotherhood, of his lodging,
haunts, or by-walks, to any Creditor, Officer, Sutler, or such like dangerous
or suspicious person.


I defy them all.


That if any of the Brotherhood be in restraint or distress by imprisonment,
sickness, or whatsoever engagement, you make his case your own, and your purse
and your travel his; and that if a brother die or finish his days, by end
timely or untimelie, by Surfeit, Sword, or Law. You wear the sable order of the
Ribbon in remembrance of him.


A convenient cheap way of mourning.


That your purse and weapon to the utmost of your strength, be on all occasions
drawn to the assistance or defence of a Brother or Brothers friend, be it he,
be it she.


I understand you, and shall be as forward to fight for a She-friend, as ever
the best man in the mirror of Knighthood was for an honest woman.


That you be ever at deadly defiance with all such people, as Protections are
directed to in Parliament, and that you watch all occasions to prevent or
rescue Gentlemen from the gripes of the Law brissons. That you may thereby
endear your self into noble society, and drink the juice of the Varlets
labours for your officious intrusions.


And that will go down bravely.


You must rank your self so much the better man, by how much the more drink you
are able to purchase at others costs.


Excellent.


You are to let no man take wall of you, but such as you suppose will either
beat you or lend you money.


Better and better still.


The rest of your duties for brevity sake you shall find specified in that
copy of your Order. Kiss the book.


I'll swear to them whatsoever they be.

So, now I am a Blade, and of a better Row then those of Tytere tu, or Oatmeal
hoe, and so an health to our Fraternity, and in chief to our Noble Captain
Driblow.


Agreed, Agreed.


Now are you to practise or exercise your quality on the next you meet that is
not of the Brotherhood.


Are you one of the Brotherhood sir, of the Philoblathici.


I had else lost much sir, I have paid all dues belonging to it.


So have I as I hope to gain honour by it 40 li. thick at least; yet I have this
left, please you command the half sir.


Another time, your reckoning is not yet paid perhaps.


'Tis the first money of mine that was refused since my coming to Town. I shall
save infinitely.

I see now that I am sworn. How would I swear to get by it.


Take heed of that, Come hither son.


How have you screwed this youth up into this humour, that was such a dry
miserable Clown but two days since.


The old way, by watching of him, and keeping him high-flown a mattet of forty
eight hours together.


Men are apt to believe strange fancies in their liquour, and to entertain new
opinions.


I have fastened three or four cups upon my precise brother. I would 'twere as
many pottles, so it would convert him into the right way of good fellowship.


I would we could see him, to try what good we could do upon him.


Perhaps we might convert him.


He's above still with the old men. I stole from him, but to see if your
Italick Mistress were come yet. Your Madam.


No, she comes anon; but is my affliction above still.


Thy father? yes


Ptithee do not call him my father less he took better courses.


And so is thy Sister; the little Rogue looks so squeamishly on me, and I on
her, as we had never seen before; but the foolish Ape out of a present
affection she has taken to my Sister, has discovered to her the whole discourse
of our love, and my familiarity with thee, which were enough to spoil all, if
it were discovered to the old folks, befote my cards were played.


Well, remember Mr. Mihil, you have promised me half, if the old dogged fellow
give her all, and you marry her.


Thou can not doubt me.


You know I can spoil all when I list, but to show my countenance in your
cause.


Such is your virtue, Sir. Well, I'll up to 'em again before I be mist; and
when they part, I am for you again.


I have given you all the rudimenrs, and my most fatherly advices withal.


And the last is that I should not swear, how make you that good? I thought now
I was sworn into this Brotherhood, I might have sworn what, and as much as I
would.


That's most unnecessary, for look you son, the best, and even the leudest of
my sons do forbear it, not out of conscience, but for very good ends; and in
stead of an Oath furnish the mouth with some affected Protestation. As I am
honest, it is so. I am no honest man if it be not. Ud take me, if I lie to you.
Nev'rgo, nev'rstirre, l vow, and such like.


Or never credit me or let me never be trusted.


O take heed of that, that may be spoken in so ill an hour, that you may run
out of reputation, and never be trusted indeed; the other will gain you
credit, and bring you into good and civil estimation with your Hostesses; and
make 'em term you a fair conditioned Gentleman if he had it; and truly I
never heard worse word come out of his mouth.


Nev'r-go, nev'r-stir, I vow. l'le have, I vow then.


I vow, but you shall not, that's mine.


Cannot you lend it me now and then brother? I'll have, I swear then, and come
as nigh swearing as I can.


I swear but you must not, that's mine you know.


I protest then, I'll have I protest, that's a City-word, and best to cozen
with.


Come boys, fall to some practice, Let me see about at the new French balls,
sprung out of the old English vapours


I protest come on. I'll make a third man.


Whose man are you?


Whose man is not to be asked, nor scarce whose subject, now he is of our
Brotherhood.


Yes, by your favour he may ask.


I ask no favour, sir.


That may be granted.


You can grant nothing in this kind.


I vow he may grant any thing of any kind.


I swear, I neither can, nor will grant that.


That, I protest, may bear exception indeed.


Exceptions amongst us? nay, then I vow. --


I swear.


And I protest --


Part fair my boys; 'tis very well performed; now drink a round to qualify
this bout.


Agreed on all parts.


Look upon me ye Commonwealths men now, like a State-Surgeon, while I search
and try

The ulcerous coare of foul enormity.
These are a parcel of those venomous weeds,
That ranklie pester this fair Garden-plot.
Whose boisterous growth is such, that I must use
More policy then strength to reach their root,
And hoist them up at once.
This is my way to get within 'em.

So, 'tis gone round.


I muse these Mumpers come not.


Best send a boy.


Drawer, ha! where be those Rascals? (Within) By and by.


Are you one of 'em, sir?


I am one that has the favour of the house, sir?


To intrude into Gentlemen's privacies? ha!


To seek a poor living and 't please you, by picking up the crumbs of your
liberality, for the use of my rare qualities.


And what's your quality?


It is to speak or sing ex tempore upon any Theme, that your fancy or the
present occasion shall administer.


Can you drink before you lay your lips to it


O my weak eye-sight.


Or can you eat a crust without chawing, made of the Flower of Baton.


O good Gentlemen, forbear, I beseech you.


The flower of Baton. I protest a good jest, and 'twas mine own before I was
aware, for he had the Maidenhead or first-blow of my Baton. Nay, it shall
down.


I will not yet desist; but suffer private affliction with a Roman resolution
for the public welfare, with full assurance that my fortitude shall at last
get within 'em.


You are not satisfied, i^ seems, you Rascal, get you gone.


Phew! beat not the poor fellow so.


Let me come to him again, and flesh my self upon him. I will not only flesh my
self, but tire upon him.


Enough, enough, good Gentlemen, you have beaten me enough of conscience. Was
ever good Patriot so rudely handled? but the end crowns all.


Forbear him sons. What can thou be, that can not be satisfied with
beating? speak, art a man or a Ghost?


I have been, Sir, a man, and of my hands, however misfortune humbles me under
your manhoods. But I have seen the face of war, and served in the
Low-countreys, though I say it, on both sides.


Then 'tis impossible this fellow can be beat out of countenance.


We'll leave him in his qualiry for that constant virtue.


Sure, 'tis Fenner or his Ghost. He was a riming soldier. Look, do his eyes
stand right?


They had a dish even now, sir.


Of sack, 'tis true here, take another, and wash the inside of your Throat. And
let us hear your pipes in their right tune.


Give me a Theme Gentlemen.


The praise of sack. Sing the praise of sack.


Let it be of the Blade.


And the Baton, I beseech you.


Do you call, Gentlemen?


I vow, I will have sack.


The other quart of Canary? you shall.


Are your ears so quick? I vow, I'll dull 'em.


Anon, anon.


I say, a song of Sack.


I, let it be of Sack.


Now you pump, do you?


No, sir, but think of a tune.


If he can pump us up a spring of Sack, we'll keep him, and break half the
Vintners in Town.


I vow, well-said.


I swear, 'twas well.


I protest the best that I have heard in this kind. I wonder at his ability. I
prithee, art not acquainted with my two Poetical Drury-lane Writers? the Cobbler
and the Tapster.


No sir, not I, I work not their way. What I do is ex tempore after the Theme
given.


But they run quite before you. Their Works are in print sometimes* and ready
to be sung about streets, of men that are hanged before they come to the
Gallows.


But did not Mihil say he would come again.


I marvel at his stay.


I, and the Mumpers, when come they? I long to see the Sisters, now I am a
brother sworn and entered.


O here comes news. How now pig?


You must all presently to the Paris Tavern.


Must? at whose suit!


Mr. Mihil bade me tell you so.


Is he gone from hence?


He is, and all his gone and dispersed.


Then the old Jew my father's gone.


Only there's one delicate demure Gentleman with Mr. Mihil. travelled along
with him towards Paris. I believe he means to make a mouth of him.


O, 'tis his precise brother. But vvhere's thy Mistress, and Madama Damaris?
that they come not.


They desire to meet you there too, 'tis more private.


Away vve'll follow thee.


Pig, how does thy father Hog, the Turkie Merchant?


I am in haste, Sir.


Why Turkie Merchant?


Because he trades in nothing but Turkie commodities; Eggs and Concubines;
'tvvere well to geld him, and send him to the Grand Seignior, to wait in his
Seraglio.


Thou hast such a wit in this Clotpoll of thine. The Reckoning Drawer.


Here, here, Sir; here's your bill.


Let see the sum. What is't Drawer? 40. sh. and 3. d. Si, your dinner, and
what you had since, in all, sir.


'Tis very reasonable, Commend me to thy Master. Son Clotpoll pay't. It is your
duty.


Yes, for my Brothership.


Boys, I must leave you.


40. sh. for four men's dinners, note that, yet he says 'tis reasonable.


Good Captain, He was ever the fairest Reckoner, though he has never the luck
to pay any thing.


Fare you well, father.


When we have further occasion, we'll repair to your lodging.


At Bloomesbury. Father, I know.


Bloomsbury? good, I note it.


Sirrah, look to the second Article of your Oath.


Against discovery of lodgings, haunts, or by-walks, I am warned.


Look that you be so.


40. sh. and 3. d. you'll bate the 3. d. will you not?


We'll not much stand for that Sir, though our Master sits at dear rent.


Give me your two pieces.


Pray let me see the bill before you pay it.


Well, I can hold it then.


Bread and beer, 1. sh. 4. d. I do not think we four could eat 3. d. of bread,
and for my part, I drank but two glasses of beer.


And I but one, Ivow.


And my father and I but one betwixt us, I protest.


Have you no men below?


Below the earth doest mean? I am sure we have none above-ground.


I know not, Gentlemen, there's so much reckoned at the bar, and you please you
may see it.


Nay, an't be at the bar, it stands for Law. Well, wine 5 sh. 9. d. I think we
had no less. A Shoulder of Mutton stuff't with Oysters 8. sh. that cost your
Master very near ten groats, a brace of Partridge 5. sh. a couple of Cocks 4.
sh. 6. d. a dozen of Larks 20. d. Anchovies 6. sh. I swear but a Saucer full.


I'll be sworn they are so much reckoned in the Kitch^n.


All's law, I tell you, all's law in Taverns. But I hope there will be a law
for you one o'these days. Then is their Fruit and Cheese, Tobaccho, Fire, and
I know not what, is't right cast.


There is more hope of that young man, then of all the rest, indeed it is a
sore abuse, another very weed in the city. I do note that also.


Sirrah, before you have your money, fetch me a glass of Beer. But can thou
sing this upon any subject.


Any sir, any, an't be till midnight.


But you have strange helps to your invention. I did note the rolling of the
eye, and rubbing your Brows sometimes.


So did I, I protest, and therefore, I tell you what. If he can sing such
another Song, and look steadfastly the while upon any thing, and hold his hands
behind him. I'll give him half a crown; if not, he shall have nothing for
the other.


Agreed Gentlemen, give me your Theme.


You shall give it him.


And withal, watch him if he stir hand or eye, especially the eye.


I will I protest, and set mine eye against his, that he shall not twink, but
I'll perceive it, and lay him over the pare.


Well Sir, your Theme.


In praise of the Baton, and if you miss it you shall be sure on it.


You'll help me with the burden, Gentlemen.


Yes, yes, for the more grace of the Song.


Take you no care for that. Set your eyes and begin.

To prove the Baton the most noble to be.
Of all other weapons observe his degree,
In Field to be Leader of all other Arms,
To conquest and honour, through hazard and harms.
The Gallant and Peasant, the Lord and the Lowne.
Must move by the motion of the Leaders Baton.
O give me the Baton.
The Pike and the Halberd are subject to it.
The Ensign, the Partisan, all must submit,
To advance, or retire, fall back, or come on.
As they are directed by the Leaders Baton.
Then it is to the Soldier the greatest Renown,
To purchase by service to bear the Baton.
O give me the Baton.

Marry, and take it Sir, why do you stare about? though you have broke
Covenant, I have not.


Where be the Gentlemen?


Ha! they are not gone, I hope, where be my brothers Drawer.


Gone sir, and have sent me to you for the reckoning.


I protest you jest, do you not? I gave 'em the full sum, and all the money I
had, I protest, I swear, I vow, now they are not here, I may make bold with
their words. They have my money, I am sure.


If you have no money, pray leave a pawn, sir.


Take him there, put him in a cage, and let him sing it out.


We know him not, sir.


No? he said he had the favour of the house to sing to Gentlemen.


I fear I shall be discovered, sir, I can give your worship credit for a piece
till you come to your lodging.


Protest, thou art generous; nay, I know where to finde'em; and thou shalt go
with me to 'em, we will not part now, we'll shoune 'em. I vow, (the words out)
here, I'll leave my sword for the other piece.


Your sword will not serve, sir, I doubt.


Take my coat too, a friend and a Baton is better then a coat and a sword at
all times.


I am glad my fear is over. And after all my sufferings, if at last
Cock brain crow not these roaring Lions down,
Let him be balladed about the Town.

Let me now bid you welcome to my fathers house, where till your own be fitted,
though my father keep too private a family to express large entertainment, yet
I hope at worst you shall have convenient lodging.


Indeed, I am glad that my father yielded to your fathers friendly request in
it; and the more, in regard he is so hard to be entreated to any thing; but
especially for your societies sake, sweet Sister. Indeed I'll call you Sister
always, and I hope you shall be shortly in my brother Mihils right.


I have laid open my heart to you, which indeed is his, but your father, I
fear, will never be won.


Why you would not have him too, Sister, would you?


His consent I would, and my fathers, I hope, would easily be wrought. You saw
he was willing your other brother should have me at the first sight, merely for
his reservednesse, and Mihil methought carried himself as civil to day as he; I
mean, as civilly for a Gentleman, that should not look like one fathers of the
Dutch Church at five and twenty.


He was put to it to day. The noise of the Tavern had almost wrought his zeal
in^o fury, it is scarce out of my head yet.


But you were about to tell me how he first fell into this vein, this vanity
indeed.


I'll tell you now, and in that something worth your observation.


I will observe you.


My father has an humour, not to like any thing at first, nor accept best
courtesies of friends, though presently he finds 'em most commodious to him;
things that he knows not how to be without, and oftentimes desires with the
same breath the things he vilisied, and scorned them the last syllable he spake
before. You saw when your father offered him the use of his house here, till
his own be furnished, he cried, hah ^ are all the houses in the Town yours Sir;
and yet presently entreated for it, and thanked him.


That shows the best nature, they say.


But that is seldom attended by the best fortune. Nay, in us, I mean, his
children, he will like nothing, no, not those actions which he himself cannot
deny are virtuous; he will cross us in all we do, as if there were no other
way to show his power over our obedience.


'Tis a strange fatherly care.


Now, note the punishment that follows it. There's not a chil^e he has, ^hough
we all know what we do, that make any conscience of crossing him, we have so
much of his good nature in us.


And that's as odd a duty in children.


I must confess it is a stubbornness.

Yet for the most part we do nothing, but that which most Parents would allow
in their children: and now for my brother Gabriel, with whom I must bring in
the story of another Kinswoman of ours, my father had at home with us.


So.


Nay, mark, I pray you, as I would entreat an Auditory, if I now were a Poet
to mark the Plot, and several points of my play, that they might not say when
'tis done, they understood not this or that, or how such a part came in or went
out, because they did not observe the passages.


Well on, I pray.


My brother Gabriel, when he was a boy, nay, till within these two years, was
the wildest untamed thing that the country could possibly hold.


So he is still for ought I know, for I think no man of his Religion in his
wits.


I mean in outward conversation, he was the Ring-leader of all the youthful
Fry, to Fairs, to Wakes, to May-games, footbal-matches, any thing that had
but noise and tumult in it; then he was Captain of the young train-band, and
exercised the youth of tvventy parishes in martial discipline. O he did love to
imitate a soldier the best, -- and so in every thing, that there was not an
handsome maid in an whole County could be quiet for him.


He may be good at that sport still, for there is almost none of his sect holds
any other game lawful.


Yet did he bear the civillest and the best ordered affection to our Kinsvvoman
I spake of.


Yes, I remember.


So loving to her person, so tender of her honour that nothing but too near
affinity of blood could have kept them asunder.


And she did love him as well!


O dearly, virtuously well; but my father fearing what youth in heat of blood
might do, removes my brother Gabriel from home into the service of a Reverend
Bishop to follow good examples.


But he learned not to be a Puritan there I hope.


You shall hear, Sister, soon after came a Gallant into the country from
London here, and as we after found, a Citizens son, though he showed like a
Lord there. Briefly, he grew acquainted with my brother Mihil. Then vvoo'd
and won my Cousin so secretly, my father never suspected, nor he nor I e're
knew whose son he was, nor of what occupation my old lord his father was;
but he promised her marriage, clapped her, you may guess where, and so like
the slippery Trojan left her.


O divellish Rascal!


And foolish creature, she who soon repented it, and with her shame is fled
to what part of the world we know not.


In truth 'tis pitiful, that villain would be hanged.


Now upon this, my poor brother that loved her so, fell into discontent,
forsook his lord, and would have left the Land, but that he was prevented and
brought home.


And ever since he has been thus religious.


Thus obstinate, for I think verily he does it but to cross my father, for
sending him out of the way when the mischief was done.


I will not then believe 'tis Religion in any of the gang of 'em, but mere
vvilful affectation. But why, or wherein do you or Mihil. cross your father.


I tell you Sister we must. He is so cross himself, that we shall never get
any thing of him that we desire, but by desiring the contrary.


Why then do you desire him to get you an husband?


Because he should get me none. O Sister, both he and Mr. Cockbrayne, can wish
now that I had had his son.


There's another youth now gone on love's pilgrimage, e're since your father
crosthim in your love not to be heard of.


Hush! the old men.


In good truth sir, I am taken with your conversation. I like it now exceeding
well.


I'm glad it pleases you.


'Tis very fair and friendly, I find we shall accord.


I am glad I have it for you Sir, I pray, make bold with it.


Then pray sir, let me urge my motion a little further to you.


What is't? you cannot utter it so easily as I shall grant it, out with it man.


That you will be pleased to accept my daughter for either of your sons, your
youngest if you please, now I have seen him, I'll give him with her presently,
either in hand a thousand pound, and five hundred pound a child as fast as he
can get 'em. And all I shall die seized of.


What a Dogbolt is this to think that I should get a child for him.


I hope you do think well on it.


Pray love he does. I hope so too.


I mark his Answer.


I could find in my heart to ask his good-will my self.


And that were a sure way to go without it.


How say you, sir, is't a match?


I will not stay a minute in thy house, though I lie in the street for^t.

Huswife, I'll sort you with f^tter companions, Come, follow me quickly.


H^aven bless me and my child too from matching with such a disposition.


Truly, sir, I longed to be out o the house before.


Before you came in it did you not? ha!


These new walls do so stink of the lime methinks.


Marry fough, Gooddie Foist.


There can be no healthy dwelling in 'em this twelve-moneth yet.


Are you so tender bodied?


Even please your selves then where you can like better, and you shall please
me.


Why you will not thrust me out of your house, will you? ha!


There's no such haste, sir.


Indeed there is not, nor will I out for all your haste neither. I'll have look
to my bargain.


With all my heart, sir.


But no more of your idle motions, if you love your ease in your house, your ^n
here.

Here's a letter, sir, from Mr. Cockbrayne.


Is the earer paid, or give him that an't please you.


Some body has angered him, and I must suffer.


I sent you to seek my sons, good sir, have you found 'em? ha!


I cannot find 'em sir. They went out of the Tavern together, they say, and I
have been at Mr. Mihils chamber, and there they are not. I went to the Tavern
again, and there they were not. ^hen I beat all the rest of the bushes, in this
four est of foo es and mad men, and cannot find em I, where e're they be.


Sirrah, go find em me where e're they be, any where, or no where, find 'em,
and find 'em quickly; I'll find 'em in your Cockscombe else, d' ye see! and
bring my sons Sanctity home before it be dark, lest he take up his lodging in a
Church-porch; and charge Mr. Mihil that he come not to me till I send for him.
Here's danger in the house. There was a match-motion indeed.


Good sir, either like my house well, or be pleased to please your self with
some better.


Pray Sir, be quiet in your house, lest I send you out of it to seek another.
Let me see my chamber.


He must have his way, I see.


NAy, you perpetual Pusse, I'll fetch him out of the very bowels of thee.

He never came so deep himself yet with all that he could do, and I scorn the
threatening of a She Marmaset.


(Within) why Bettie, Frank, you mankind Carions you. I vow, open the door,
will you both kill one another, and cozen the Hangman of his fees?


Thou had been better have bit off the dugs of thy Damme, thou pin-buttock
Jade thou, than have snapped a bit of mine from me.


Here's that shall stay your stomach better then the bit you snarle for. Thou
greedy Brach thou.


(Within) why wenches, are ye wild? break open the doors.


That I could split that divellish tongue of thine!


I have as good a spite at as ill a member about thee.


Hold, what's the devil in ye.


Are ye so sharp-set ye Amazonian Trulls?


Let me but make one pass at her.


Pray let me go, and let her come.


Can no blunter tools then these serve to take down your furies?


Let me come but within nailes reach of het.


Let me but try the strength of my teeth upon her.


As Hector 'twixt the hosts of Greece and Troy,
When Paris and the Spartane King should end
Their nine years wars, held up his brazen lance.
In signal, that both Armies should surcease,
And hear him speak. So let me crave your audience.
Dear Bettie be advised, and Frank, forbear
Thy thirst of Sisters blood. Whilst I rip up
The folly of your strife. Your cases both
Have been laid open to me. You contend
For love of a lewd Citizen, that sleights,
Nay more, disdains, nay more, desies you both.
Tony can tell, Mun Clotpoll also knows
The words he spake, that you were both poor whores,
Not poor alone, but foul infectious harlots.
And that he wears your mark with pain and sorrow,
Hopeless to claw them off. With constant purpose
Never to see you more, unless to greet.
Your bumpin buttocks with revengeful feet.

Did he say so?


And must we two fall out for such a slanderous Villain?


No, agree, agree.


Bus and be friends. Bus, or I'll baste ye both, I vow.


Come Sister we'll be in for ever now.


For my part, Sister, sure I was not out with you.


But did he say he would kick us?


Lo here, the man that dares it not deny.


But do ye hear, Gentlemen. I hope you will use me kindlier then so.


Than how, Sir?


Then to win all my money, and leave me at stake for the reckoning. Pray do you
pay the Drawer for me, though I pay it you again.


What is it Drawer?


The Gentlewomen and he had 14. sh. in before you came.


'Tis a plain case, your cloak must answer it at the bar, Sir. Drawer, away
with it.


Nay, but Gentlemen.


I vow, do but look after it, till we be gone, and these shall claw thine eyes
out.


Well sir, I hope this quarter will not be always lawless.


Do you grumble? Mr. C^ffelesse.


I vow you shall have cu^es.


Yes, that you shall.


Cuts and slashes too before we part, Sir.


You will not murder me, will you?


Damsels forbear; and you, forbear your noise. I vow, I'll slit your wistle
else. You shall give him due correction civilly, and we will make him take it
civilly. Sit you down Sir.


What will you do with me?


I vow, mum.


O, are ye here! was it a brotherly trick do ye think, to leave me to pay one
reckoning twice? or did I think never to be made a mouth more, after I had paid
my swearing dinner, and am I now a greater mouth then e're I was?


Mum, hold your tongue still in your mouth, lest I halifax it with your teeth.


Halifax my tongue. And listen to a business.


Do yon know this man?


Yes, the City mouth we had the other night.


These are the Sisters that his lavish tongue so lewdly did deprave.


I cry them heartily mercy Are you of the sweet Sisterhood? I hope to know you
all, all the pretty Mumpers in the berry here, before I have done. 'Tis true,
I protest, he spake words of you, that such flesh and blood could not bear. He
could not have spoken worse of mutton of a groat a quarter.


And were we so fond to fight for him?


But now we'll both be revenged upon the flesh of him.


Pray let me speak with you.


No, they shall beat you first. And mark me well. Do thou but stir an hand or
foot, or raise a voice that may be heard to the next room, well cut thy
weasand. Now wenches take your course.


Nay, you slave, we'll mark you for a Sheepbiter.


We'll teach you how to scandalize.


Have I given you that you cannot claw off, you Mongrel.


Rare, I protest.


-- oh -- oh -- oh.


There, there.


We'll claw thine ears off rather.


-- oh -- oh -- oh.


O brave.


O out-rage, most insufferable, all this goes into my black book.


To him Bettie, at him Frank; there whores, there.


Fie, fie, forbear, enough, too much in conscience.


That young man has some pity yet.


I swear you shall no more.


Alas, good Gentlemen, it is enough.


I vow, do you prate? you shall have as much. Come, take the Chair, Sir, the
breeches shall bait him too.


O good Gentlemen.


I vow, they shall. To him and claw him, I'll clapperclaw your sides else


O me! what mean you?


Heyday! his beard comes off.


And his head too What rotten scab is this?


I protest, they have pulled my pieced brother in pieces here.


I vow, some disguiz'd villain, and but for doing the State so good service, we
would hang him presently without examination.


I know him. And you shall not touch him. Best is, he knows nor me. Good
Heaven, what Braintrick has possessed him.


I vow, what can thou be?


Come, 'tis an honest fellow, that is only ashamed to run so base a course for
his living in his own face. Poor man, I warrant his fear threatens his
breeches shrewdly. But let's away, and quickly, our stay is dangerous. Come, we
forgot Mich. Croswil and the wenches.


Come all away then, Sirrah, thank this Gentleman, and pray for him at the end
of your Songs hereafter.


Farewell, friend Piece. I'll know you better now, before you have it again.


What monsters in mankind? what hell-hounds are they? only as Ovid feigned
among the Getes. A friend at need, I with a friend was blessed, Whom I may
gratify, and plague the rest. How is it with you, Sir?


O, I am very sore.


Indeed you are sorely handled. This may warn you out of such caterwaling
company. You look like one more civil. And in hope you will be so, I'll bring
you to a Barber.


Alas, my Cloak.


I'll help you to that too, so you with me, Will in an honest plot Assistant
be.


O Sir, in any thing, and thank you too, Sir.


A Paris ill ya ben veni- Here's no bush at this door, but good wine rides post
upon it, I mean, the sign-post. Boy, get you down, and if Nick Rooksbill, or any
of his company ask for me, bring 'em up, do ye hear.


I will, I will, Sir.


You are welcome to Paris brother Gabriel.


It is nevertheless a Tavern, brother Mihil, and you promised and covenanted
with me at the last house of noise and noisomnesse, that you would not lead me
to any more Taverns.


Lead you brother? men use to be led from Taverns sometimes. You saw I did not
lead you nor bring you to any that was more a Tavern then the last, nor so much
neither; for here is no Bush you saw.


'Twas that betrayed and entrapped me: but let us yet forsake it.


Pray let us drink first brother. By your leave here's to you.


One glasse-full more is the most that I can bear. My head is very full, and
labours with that I have had already.


There Sir, I'll undertake one good fellow, that has but just as much Religion
as will serve an honest mans turn, will bear more wine then ten of these
giddy-braind Puritanes, their heads are so full of whimsies.


'Tis mighty heady, mighty heady, and truly I cannot but think that the over
much abuse of these out-landish liquors, have bred so many errors in the
Romish Church.


Indeed brother, there is too much abuse made of such good creatures. Wine in
it self is good, you will grant, though the excess be nought; and Taverns are
not contemptible, so the company be good.


It is most true, we find that holy men have gone to Taverns, and made good
use of 'em upon their Peregrinations.


And cannot men be content to take now and then a cup, and discourse of good
things by the way. As thus. Brother, here's a remembrance (if she be living,
and have not lost her honour) to our Cousin Door as.


O that kinswoman of ours. She was the dearest loss that e're fell from our
house.


Pledge her, good brother.


I do --


I hope 'twill maudlenize him.


But have you never seen that miscreant that wronged her, since he did that
same, they say you knew him.


Alas, suppose I had, what could be done? she's lost we see. What good could
she receive by any course against him.


It had been good to have humbled him, though into the knowledge of his
Trans^ression. And of himself for his souls good, either by course of Law, or
else in case of necessity, where the Law promises no relief, by your own
right hand you might have smote him, smote him with great force, yea, smote him
unto the earth, until he had prayed that the evil might be taken from him.


This is their way of loving enemies, to bear 'em into goodness. Well,
brother, I may meet with him again, and then I know what to do. If he knew him
as I do now, what a religious combat were here like to be at Nicks coming.

Sir, here's a Gentlewoman asks for Mr. Rooksbill.


The travelled Gallant, is't not.


Yes sir, and the old black party, her Land lady with her. But they ask for no
body but him, sir.


Say he is here by all means, and bring 'em up.


Women! pray brother lets avoid the place, let us fly it. What should we do
with women in a Tavern?


No harm assure your self, cannot we govern ourselves?


Lady, stay, he will be here presently, that you look for.


I will not glance an eye toward temptation.


I am amazed sure, I have seen this face, however your habit and the course of
time may give it another seeming.


Good Angels, help my thoughts and memory. It is my Kinsman Mihil. What's the
other that hides his face, so?


Do you turn away?


It is my Cousin Gabriel, strangely altered.


Come hither you. I^le make a little bold with you. Thou that hast been a
concealer of more sins in women's actions, then thou hast grizled hairs.


Sure I will speak to him, he always loved me.


Reveal a truth to me on my demand, now instanrly, without premeditation. I'll
cut thy tongue out else.


What's here to do? do you think I am a devil? that you make such conjurations
over me.


I think thou art as true a servant of his as any Bawd can be. But he now if
thou dare. How long have you known that Gentlewoman? and what do you know by
her?


Sir.


Here's a stir about nothing. I know nothing by her, not ^. Nor whether she
has any thing or nothing, that a woman should have by the report of knowledge
of man, woman or beast, not I. She came to me but this morning, with a purpose
to set me up in my new house as I hoped. But she has taken a course to make it
honestly spoken of already, to my utter undoing, but she never comes within my
doors again, as I hope to thrive by my Trade hereafter.


Pray look upon me, sir.


Was she so resolutely bent, and so soon altered?


Upon the very first fight of the very first man that came into my house, the
very first hour of my setting up in it.


What man was that?


A shame take him, your roaring friend, Nick. I think she is enamoured of him,
or of something she guesses he has; and would fain play the honest woman with
him, that never played honest man with woman in his life.


'Tis she, and 'tis most wonderful.


If you knew who I were, you would not be so strange to me.


And here she comes me a hunting after him, like a fondling, whilst half a
dozen pieces might have been gotten at home by this time, and she have had the
halfes of it in her purse by this time; if she would have done, as I thought,
she would have done by this time.


Alas, poor Howlet.


I sent whooping after the best guest that haunt my house, to have taken the
first fruits of her conversation, and she would not see a man of 'em, to my
undoing.


Well leave thy hooting, Madge, and hold thy peace. thou shalt get by it.


Yes, I shall get a good name shortly, and this gear hold, and turn beggar, I
shall.


Pray sir, but one word.


Speak to her, brother, 'tis our Cousin Dorcas.


Will you abuse me too? is she not lost?


And will not you give her leave to be found again? his wine and her sudden
apprehension works on him at once. Cousin, I'll speak to you, though I confess
the miracle of our meeting thus amazes me.


O Cousins both. As ye are Gentlemen, and of that noble stock, whose mere
remembrance, when he was given up, and at the brink of desperate folly, stroke
that reverend fear into my soul, that hath preserved my honour from further
falling. Lend me now your aide, to vindicate that honour by that man, that
threw me in the way of loss and ruin.


All shall be well, good Cousin, you shall have both hands and hearts to
re-estate you in him. So that in fact you have not wronged that honour, since
he forsook you.


On my soul I have not.


Infants then shall be pardoned. Brother speak.


You were wont still to be my loving'st Cousin.


What a strange dream has wine wrought in my head.


I hope it will work out his superfluous zeal.
And render him civil Christian again.

It is no dream, good Cousin, you are awake,
And I, that Dorcas, for whom you have wished
Affinity of blood might be dispen^'d with. And you to be my choice. So well
you loved me.

And will above my life affect you still. But you must leave these gauds and
profane dressings.


Bawds did he say? how comes he to know me troe?


How came my Cousin Gabriel thus translated.
Out of gay clothes long hair, and lofty spirit,
Stout and brave action, manly carriage;
Into so strict a Reformation?
Where is the martial humour he was wont so to affect.

His purity and your disgrace fell on you both about a time, I faith.


Do you swear by your FAITH?


He's falling back again.


Some more wine. You will drink with our
Cousin, brother, will you not?

What wine is't, Gentlemen?


Yes, in a cup of sincere love.


What other wine you please, Gentlemen, we have none such i^th' house.


Of the same we had, sir.


Call not for wine for us, Cousin.


Assuredly, we are no profane wine-bibbers, not we.


Modest, and well-spoken verily, she should be a Sister or a Matron.


Yes, yes, we'll all drink for the good of the house.

'Tis upon putting down, they say, and more o'th neighbours. But Cousin, he
knew you not to day.


No, nor dreams of me.


And the old one knows nothing, does she.


No, by no means.


She can bewray nothing then. My brother knows not him. I only do for his fair
Sisters fake, of which you may hear more hereafter; in the mean, bear your
self fair and free, as if you knew him not, and I'll work him to your end,
never fear it.


You are a noble Spokesman.


Truly, you speak most edifyingly.


Well-said, give it to my brother. Drink to our Cousin, Brother.


I will, and to that virtuous Matron, whose care of her, I hope, tends unto
good edification. -- Truly the wine is good, and I was something thirsty.


Best drink again then, Sir.


I will follow your motherly advice.


'Twill work, anon, I hope.


And you have travelled Cousin. I may suppose you brought this well-disposed
Gentlewoman from Amsterdam with you. And this unto your welcome, hoping I shall
be informed by you how the two zealous brethren thrive there? that broke in St.
Hellens.


Of that or any thing sir, pray drink again, sir.


You Jade you, hold your tongue.


O, are ye here Gallants! I made all the haste I co^, but was stayed, I vow, by
the bravest sport, baiting of a fellow or two with our Pusse-cats here. I could
even sind in my heart to marry 'em both for their valours.


Those words are daggers.


I pray dissemble your passion.


What? are you acquainted already?


Did not I tell thee she was a brave Madonna?


How long have you had acquaintance with her, Nick?


Never saw her before this morning, I, standing upon her Belconee.


Truly Cousin, I think 'twas you that I saw to day too, standing upon a
Bellconee.


You spell very modestly, sir. Your brother
I take it. But did you call her Cousin, sir.

Yes sir, she is my Cousin.


'Twill out too soon. Why Nick, thou know these kind of creatures call and
are called Cousins commonly.


Yes, in their tribe. But I thought he had been too holy for them. But Dammy --



O fearfully profane!


You said you had a story to relate, of dire misfortune. and of unquoth
hearing. I come to hear your story, what stop you your ears at? sir.


I dare not speak it but in thy reproof. Thou swearest Gee o Dee, Dee a^m thee,
as I take it.


I vow thou lie, I called her Dammy, because her name is Damyris,


I say thou lie, her name is Dorcas, which was the name of an holy woman.


Shall we have things and things? I vow.


And I protest.


This will spoil all. Brother, I pray forbear.


I may not forbear, I am moved for to smite him; yea, with often stripes to
smite him; my zealous wrath is kindled, and he shall fly before me.


Let me entreat you, sir.


What furie's this?


Great Damboys shrink, and give a little ground.


I will pursue him in mine indignation.


O me!


And beat him into Potsheards.


Now he has banged the Pitcher, he may do any thing.


Pray, brother, be persuaded.


A brother to be so controlled?


You sir, put up your Steel-stick.


I desire but to know first, if he be a brother.


Yes marry is he, sir.


Sir, I am satisfied. So let him live.


Pray give me leave to ask you, do these men take part with the brethren?


Yes, and are brothers a little disguiz'd, but for some ends.


Some State-occasions.


Mere Intelligencers, to collect up such and such observations, for a great
Separatist that is now writing a book against playing at Barlibreak, moulding
of Cocklebread, and such like profane exercises.


Truly such exercises are profane exercises, that bear the denomination of
good things ordained for mans use, as Barley, Cockles, and Bread are such
things to be made sports and play-games? I pray you let me see these brethren
again, to make my atonement with them. And are those Sisters too, that were
wi^h them?


O, most notorious ones, and are as equally disguiz'd to be as rank Spies as
the other. S'lid man, and they should be taken for such as they are, they would
be cut off presently. They came in this mad humour to be merry with you for my
sake.


Pray let 'em come again, I shall not be well until I have rendered
satisfaction.


You must do as they do then, or they will think you are a Spy upon them.


I will be as merry as they, let wine be given unto us.


More wine, Boy, and bid 'em all come in.


Alas, Cousin, let him drink no more.


Fear nothing, Cousin, it shall be for his good and yours, as I will order it.


All welcome, not any repetition, but begin a new


I will begin it, two glasses: it shall be a faithful Salutation to all the
Brothers and Sisters of --


The Blade and the Scabberd.


It shall go round.


I'll swear you do not well to let him drink so.


Well said civil Roarer.


Let it go round, go to, you are a wag. I know what you mean by the Blade and
the Scabberd.


Who could have thought this had been such a brother.


Nay, who could have thought you had been of the brethren.


Brethren sir, we are the Brothers.


Yea, the disguiz'd ones.


How? disguiz'd ones?


Do not cross him again. If thou doest, and I do not maul thee. Yes, brother,
these are virtuous men however they seeeme.


I vow, I have so much virtue as to rebuke thee for lying. But we are brethren,
sir, and as factious as you, though we differ in the Grounds; for you, sir,
defy Orders, and so do we; you of the Church, we of the Civil Magistrate; many
of us speak in the nose, as you do; you out of humility of spirit, we by the
wantonness of the flesh; now in devotion we go beyond you, for you will not
kneel to a ghostly father, and we do to a carnal Mistress.


I'll stop your mouth, you said you came to be merry.


Yes, I vow, and brought Fiddlers along, but they must play in the next room, for
here's one breaks all the Fiddles that come in his reach. Come fir, will you
drink, dance, and do as we do?


I'll drink, I'll dance, I'll kiss, or do any thing, any living thing with any
of you that is Brother or Sister. Sweet-heart let me feel thy Coney.


I now he's in. Play Fiddlers. Dance.
All bravely performed, admirably well done, c.

I vow, thou art a brother after my own heart.


We cannot commend you enough, sir.


This done in civil fort among our selves, I hope, will prove no scandal to a
brother.


'Twill prove an honour to our faction.


I thirst to do it honour.


Give him some wine, he thirsts.


Thou little dapper thing, thou, hold thy peace.


Thou see he can scarce stand.


No, my religious brethren, no more wine.
Enough's a feast, and little doth suffice.
I thirst to do some honour to our cause. To lead forth legions to fight a
battle against our. malignant adversaries.


Brave.


Such an employment now would make me famous, for my sufficiency of Att in
Arms.


I vow, this man has hidden things in him.


He has as brave a warlike spirit, man, before his precise humour tainted it,
as ever breathed in Hector.


I vow then, a good orderly diet of nothing but sack for a week together, would
revive it in him, and bring it to good again.


I hope, 'tis done already.


How do you, sit?


I fear some Jesuitical fumes have invaded my Brain pan. All me thinks goes
whirley, whirley, whirley.


Best lie down upon a bed. Drawer!


Soldiers must not be curious. A Bench or any thing.


The Gentleman may have a bed here, an't please you. But sir, there's an old
angry Gentleman below, that asks for you, and by all description for that
mortified Gentleman. And will by all means press into your room here.


It is my father.


O me! What shall I do?


We shall be all clapped up.


Fear nothing, veil your face a little; Who is with him?


No body but his old Serving-man, that it seems discovered you. You may put this
Gentleman into this inner room, and keep the Key your self. I know not what
charge he has about him.


Admirable honest fellow.


And you may tell your father he is gone, for he is gone you see.


I vow. a wit.


Now if you'll be civil, I may bring him up to you, if not, because he is your
father, we'll thrust him out of doors, an't please you.


Notable rascal, well sir, let him up. I know how to fit him.


But this delays my business, Cousin, and will, I fear, frustrate my hopes.


Nor hinder any thing, I'll warrant thee, he's thine. Play Fiddlers, the other
dance.


I vow.


Will you! protest.


You are not wild?


Come Wenches, if he venture in his fathers sight, shame take us and we blush.


And I had not sold all my land to live upon my money in Town here, out of
danger or the Statute, I would give thee a Copihold for this discovery.


I thank your worship, and truly 'tis a goodly sight, me thinks, an't please
your worship.


I'm glad it likes you. Heigh, excellent good again. Heigh, Heigh, what an
happiness may fathers boast, that can bring their children up to this. I cry
ye mercy, Gentlemen all. Ha! I am sorry I interrupted your serious private
occasions.


Would you speak with any here, sir?


It is my father, Gentlemen?


Tny father? hold thy peace; dare thou use thy father thus? to spend thy time
thus! ha! Is this place fit for the son of a Geatleman of quality? ha! why
doest not answer me, does this company sort with thy reputation? ha!


Sir, the company. --


Hold thy peace, I say, or are these exercises allowable for a Gentleman, that
ever said or heard Grace at his fathers Table? answer me that.


An't please you, Sir.


Hold thy peace when I bid thee.


The company, sir, offends not you, I hope; you see the worst of us.


In good time, sir, you are the distracted Gentlemen, I take it, that asked him
if he would moot to night? Is this your mooting? do you put cases to your
VVenches, or they to you?


I vow thy father talks too much.


Which are the better Lawyers? ha!


But that you are his father, sit, and an old man, and he an honest young
Gentleman, and our friend, we would tell you.


I thank you for him, yes truly, heartily; and for your good opinion of him,
heartily. Pray keep him amongst you while ye have him, for I'^e ha^ no more to
say to him, I. Is your Invectives against drinking, wenching, and the
abomination of the times come to this? is this your spending of time more
precious then money? is it you that knows not what to do with money but to buy
books; and were drawn with such unwillingness to a Tavern? ha! you shall graze
upon Littletons Commons, or eat nothing but books, an't please you, for any
exhibition thou ever get'st from me -- And in that faith thou hast lost a
father. Come sir, you have brought me to a goodly sight here; would any Villain
but thy self have showed his Master light to see so much woe! Thy Coxscombe
shall yet pay fot't.


O sir, O.


This was your trim sight, was it?


O.


But well remembered. Pray where's your brother? my son I would say; for I know
no brother or father thou hast. Where is Gabriel?


He is not here, sir.


Did you not tell me, Sirrah, he was here?


I told you then too much. I feel it here.


He was here, sir, but he is gone, sir.


So, so, he's lost. He must be cried, or we shall never find him.


I'll warrant you, I'll find him yet to night, sir. Pray Gentlemen pay you the
Reckoning, I'll wait upon my father home.


Was that spoke like a son of mine? must others pay your reckoning, and I in
place; take that, and do not make me mad. And why should you home with me? I
pray, sir.


Because sir, it grows dark, and 'tis the worst way as it is about the town; so
many odd holes a man may slip into; pray take me with you, sir.


Pray take no care for me, sir, and let the way be as it is. Do not think me
worse at it in the dark then your self, I beseech you. But you talked of the
Reckoning, pray let not the want of money for that hinder the search of your
brother. There's towards your pains for that; and so for a farewell to you and
your friends here, till I hear thou keep better company, let me hear no more
of thee.


There was no way to get this money, and be rid of him, but to offer him my
service He would have driven me out before him else. But come, let's see my
brother that went to sleep in so warlike a Passion. I hope he'll wake in a
better.


Mun Clotpoll, thou art dull.


No, I protest, but struck with admiration at the old Blades humour.


Come, Dammy and the rest, be merry. I vow, we'll sup together, and so at last
hear all thy dismal story.


I mean he shall, and such an Audit make,
As shall restore her honour from the stake.

WHat has this Coxscombe Cockbrayne writ me here? That he desires his absence
be excused. What have I to do with him? when I send for him, let him come to
me. That he is upon a point of discovery in a most excellent project for the
weeding of this Garden? what Garden? what project? A project he says here for
the good of the Republike, Repudding. This fellow has in stead of brains, a
Cob-web in his Noddle, with little straws, feathers, and wings of dead
Butterflies hanging in it, that having motion by his aerie fancy, there dance
and keep a Racket; 'tis to teach women silence, or some such foolish
impossibility. He is ambitious to be called into authority by notice taken of
some special service he is able to do the tate aforehand. But what great
service he is able to do it, or which way to undertake it, falls not in the
reach of my imagination. But good Mr. Croswill, by your favour now, what reason
have you to slight or wrangle at this man? this honest Cockbrayne? that has
always been a constant friend to you, and officious in many good ways, and is
a Gentleman, not only of good descent and estate, but of a good disposition.
And you two, Mr. Crossewill, by your leave, have always agreed like neighbours
children. I, the divel was in it, and now he vexes me again; we agreed in one
point so well, that we have undone a couple of our children by it, and hindered
the getting of I know not how many more. His son and my daughter should have
married. And on a sndden he and I both consented to a dislike of the match and
broke it, and have both repented it an hundred times since. We agree very well
in that point; and now is his son irrecoverably lost, and my daughter
resolutely bent to be an Ape-leader in Limbo. But whats all this to the
affliction I suffer in my sons now? that one of them from a riotous boy. should
grow into a Puritanical Woodcock; and the the other from a civil well-qualified
fellow, turned absolute Ruffian. There, there, I there's the devil in it. I
could beat my self for getting such children.

See, see, my Master for want of other company fallen out with himself, and it
please you, sir.


It does not please me, nor thou please me, nor any thing pleases me. The
world's bent to cross me, and thou shalt feel it.


O good sir.


Is it not so, sir, was not that dunce Gabriel, a most notorious wild thing

Before he steered a Religious course? but then he run so full a sail, that he
passed and was beyond the line of Religion before he was aware; and as he
passed it under the torrid Zone of Zeal, the Calenture took him of the pate,
that he is mad with it, and as far beyond Religion now as it is to it.


Sir, there's hope that he may he fetched half way back again, by your
fatherly advicement, and become a sound man.


And then was not Mihil so civil, that he made me even sick to see him. And now
is he flown out as far into rior the other way.


But he, sir, will appear a present comfort to you, he is reclaimed already;
you shall never see such a Reformation in a Gentleman.


What's this you tell me? ha!


He has cast off his long-curl'd hair and all.


He had been better have cut his head off.
Where is he!

Below sir, and a Gentlewoman with him, but very much afraid to appear to you.
I never saw a man so timoursome.


Do you think it fit I should go down to him, or he come up to me, fir, ha!


I'll fetch him, here's a life!


I charged he should not come at this house too, for fear he might be caught
with this mechanic fellows daughter, though her portion be around one. And let
him take heed he look not at her.

Bless me! what changeling is this? he's in his Brothers cut.


Sir, -- Sir. --


Would you speak with any here, sir, do you know me. I know not you, I assure
you.


The sense of your late displeasure, sir, has so humbled me into the knowledge
of my self, that on the wings of true obedience, I flew after you to make a
childes submission at your feet, to crave your pardon for my riotous
transgression, and to ask your blessing.


A delicate speech, pray take it for fashion-sake. But if I know how to look
towards thee.


Pray sir, bestow it really upon me.


God bless thee, I say, and so much many honest men bestow daily on sons that
are none of their own, if thou be mine, how came thou thus like a fellow
that had narrowly escaped the Pillory, and bragged in the publication of his
ears? not an hair left to hide them.


To show my readiness to reform my life, sir. And yet a willingness withal to
live, as well, as civilly, in which I am in all humility to prefer a suit to
you. You know, sir, I am but a younger brother.


What will this come to?


Here is a widow, sir, a Gentlewoman of great estate, and of a well-known life.
Ancient she is, and has had husbands. How many?


Four truly, sir.


Four sir, I would not lie. Of which the worst spoke well of her on's
death-bed.


What's that to me or thee? come to the point.


I have all wo'd and won her, sir, and crave but your good-will to marry her.
I have brought a Church-man and a Kinsman to give her.


Why so, what needs two words then? do you think I can deny you?


If he does grant it, 'tis the first request that e're he granted in his life.
Sure the old Match-maker the devil thinks I am in earnest to marry this beast.
And puts a readiness in his hand to forward it.


Widow, you are welcome. Why call you not your Priest? or tarry sir, let me
question you but a little, Do you think seriously you love this widow?


Better then many men love their wives, I am persuaded.


'Tis very well, what children have you widow?


Never had any, Sir.


Very well still.


Nor ever like to have any, fir, that's the comfort. We shall live at the less
charge.


Thou art a covetous and a preposterous Knave. Would thou bury up thy youth
in barren ground? doest seek after wealth, and not after issue? doest love to
feed on other men's leavings? or travel only in a beaten path? ha!


A man goes certainest on his journey so, sir, and less trouble it is you know
to go in at a great gate, then a narrow wicket.


You have said enough, sir, and delight to cross me; but I'll cross you for
once, and lay a cross upon you, shall perhaps carry you to your grave. Go,
fetch your Priest.


I'll face it as far as I dare. I hope I shall have the grace to pull my hand
from the book when it comes so far.


Widow, you are resolved to have him too.


Before all men in the world by your fair leave, 1.


You shall not have him.


Without your free consent, I will not.


I am resolved I'll do it. And 'twill be the best cross trick that e're I did
in my life. Pray let me speak in some more private with you.


If I but escape Bridewell, I care not.


Now Tonie, she 's thine own, Now Sister Kate; he's thine. The Priest has
pronounced it. I say, Amen to it. And heaven give you joy.


Now you have done the best brotherly office that ever made a Sister happy.


And the friendliest to a friend. We have been casting for it, Sweet, this
Twelve-moneth, and Heaven pardon me. I vowed never to take acquaintance of my
Father, till 'twere effected. Although I know of late he has been willing.


And so is mine, I know, but yet he swore, that I should match my self before
he knew't, or I should never marry.


You'll find him of another mind towards me, and force me into wedlock
presently.


You have taken the likeliest course that could be. But what is your disguiz'd
woman, Brother.


What you shall never know, Sister, I hope.


Come sir, I have broken off the match with your widow; and she's content to
leave you as she found you. And now take me this pretty, simpering, plump-lip't,
ruddie-cheek't, white-neck't, long-finger'd Virgin in hand, or I will swindge
you, Sirrah, look to it. If you cannot live civilly with a young wife, you
cannot but be mad with an old, I think. Besides, she's a friends daughter of
mine, and prepared by her discreet father here to love you. Come, and kiss
her, quickly, Sirrah.


I cannot do it for all the wealth in the world.


How's that?


Kiss a Maid I never saw above twice in my life.


He will have me think him a bastard, do I what I can. Can thou see a Maid
twice, and not kiss her?


Yes, twenty times, sir, and not kiss her, or if once, not above, sir.


But you shall kiss her above and below, sir, and in every room of the house,
sir, before you part. Stand fair pretty one.


I know not how to do it.


You were not best let me instruct you. I can be angry too.


His back side's towards me.


Turn your self, Sirrah, or I'll turn you. Go to, bend your body a little and
be hanged. So, now come your way, and say after your little Sir John here, I
Mihil take thee, Lucie, c. As learning shall enable him to proceed without
book.


Pray let'em do it in the next chamber, they are too bashful before us. There
are witnesses enough. Go all in, I pray you.


Widow, will you give me leave to obey my father?


With all my heart, and say Amen to the marriage.


I think I shall have my will at last upon one of my rebellious off-spring.


And now, pray give me leave sir, to let you know how happy I do hold my self
in this marriage. I did like this Son better then the other before. And now I
like him better then I did at my former view of him, by some Reformation that I
do observe in him. And I do not a little rejoice in the honour I may have to
call you brother.


That very word brother out of his mouth, has turned my stomach. I must pull
all in pieces again. And yet let me see these young bloods when they are set
on it; if they do not marry, they will do worse. Let em even go on now.


You may easily conceive, sir, what a comfort it will be unto me, that I now
growing old, and having (I give praise for it,) wealth enough, and no child
that I make account of but this one daughter, may, before I die, see
Grandchildren that I may have by her sufficiently provided for, be they more or
less in number, they may have enough.


There he is again, he calls my Grand-children that shall be, his
Grand-children. Am I a Gentleman, and can hear this? if it be not too late,
I'll spoil the getting of your Grand-children.


Heaven give you joy. Heaven give you joy.


What, are you married?


I do pronounce them man and wife.


Mad. Kat. And we are witnesses.


What remedy?


We are, and crave your blessings.


All blessings be upon you, (all salute).


But you, sir, Mr. Bridegroom.


I'll only gratify the Minister.


Do so, and pay him well, it is, perhaps, for the dearest fault that e're thou
did.


There's for your pains, sir. Madge, there's for you. Enough to purchase thee
a Licence to sell Ale, Tobaccho, and Strong-water again in Godpiece-Rowe, for
here will be no dwelling for thee, I see that.

Now, brother Anthonie, go you all back to the company we left, and see that my
Instructions be followed concerning my brother Gabriel, Nick, and his Dammie,


All, all.


Shall he go from me?


Yes, but you shall follow him presently, trust to me Sister. Go, take no leave
of 'em. I'll bring 'em upon you presently.


Are you at leisure now, sir, to tell me of your brother.


Yes, to my grief, sir, praying you may have patience.


To your grief, sir, he is not dead then? Younger brothers seldom grieve for
their Elders death.


Pray bear it as you may, sir I left him in an heavy plight. And let me speak
it with sorrow, he lay speechless.


Alack-a day, good Gentleman, my son in-law, perhaps, is heir already.


And hast thou been here all this while fooling or wiving (all's a matter) left
thy brother in danger? ha!


He's well attended, sir, and looked unto. Nor would I wish you see his weak
estate.

It can but grieve you, sir, my wife and sister, together with my self, will
go. Or if

It please my father Rooksbill here, because his power in this quarter is
available.


Co, show the way. I'll go in person, I. My son's my son.


Nay, pray sir.


Yes, because you have a wife, you shall control me. Will you go on, sir.


Well, I'll bring you to him, sir.


What was your widow, sir, she stunk of Aquavitae, fearfully.


I'll tell thee as we go. Kiss.


What a drunken sot was I, that knew thee not all this while? I vow, thy story
pities me. I'll marry thee, and turn thee to thy friends, for I am sure I have
none that will keep thee for my sake.


I ask no further satisfaction of you, then to be honested by marriage. I'll
work for a poor living.


Prithee Mun seek me a Priest.


I have no acquaintance in their function, I.


My Cousin Mihil said he would bring or send one.


There's no starting, that Mihil has a fist over me. I vow, and thou were not
his Kinswoman, thou should to the Common yet.


Father, how come you hither?


Did not the company send for me?


I vow, not we.


The City-mouth, that peck't us at my lodging last night, came to me with an
abominable scratch't face, and warned me on a business hither.


I smell some trick.


Some treachery upon the brotherhood, perhaps.


Timorous thing! what in our own Quarter?


If you doubt any thing, 'tis best remove.
The fellow was sorely handled.

I would but see the carcass of authority prance in our Quarter, and we not cut
his legs off. Welcome Tonie, what hast thou brought the word here to pass for
the Reckoning.


Come, you must make a wedding-night on it Nick, Mihil will go no less.


My Vow is passed, and before you, sir, I confirm it. This is my wife. Anon,
you shall perform the holy Ceremony,


'Tis well, pray sir, retire your self to the next room there a while, and stay
you with him, Lady.

But what do you with Gabriel? Is it not time to wake him yet?


'Tis now upon the point, he has slept two hours.


Father, you'll see a brave experiment upon a Gentleman that has been a youth.


And of the Philoblathici, as we are now.


And since was grown one of the reformed, and we are now in practice to
retrive, and bring him back to his first condition.


Have you followed all Mihils directions?


Hitherto we have. First, you saw he was laid defunct in Sack, next in his
sleep, we have accoutred him in martial ab liments, and now we mean to wake him
with alarms shall affright the silly humour out of him, and render him his
warlike faculty, or our Art fails.


Where be the Wenches?


The Sisters of the Scabberd, there's the sport on it. They have their parts to
play upon him too. But for his drink now when he wakes, you said you would have
a bottle of the woman's what do you call it yonder? the Medea.


What? the charmed liquor that Medea brewed to make old father Aeson young
again?

Must that renew his youthful spirit in him?


No, Sack will do bette^. When he wakes he will be very dry, then a
quart-draught of good Canary will so screw him up. 'Tis time 'twere now in
practice. So, softly, softly. We must but half wake him at first.


O some small drink.


Here, drink it off, sir,


Surprised by the enemy, whilst we have plaid the Sluggard in our Tents.


Hold Captain, hold, we are your soldiers.


You're Mutineers, and have disturbed my rest. And I'll do Martial Justice on
you all.


I vow, hold, are you mad?


Know you not discipline? or are you grown rebellious in the Camp. I'll teach
you warfare.


You have conjured a fury into him to beat us into fitters.


My pate bleeds for it; I protest.


I'll make you know command.


Noble Commander, hold thy furious hand, and hear thy soldiers speak.


What have we women for our Martial Music?


None but the She-Trumpet, a neighbour here, and her Sister, that was
Drum-ma^or to my Countrey-Amazons, that pulled up the Enclosures to lie all in
Common.


Is the enemy in the field?


Upon their march, Captain, and we your officers: But rows'd you up to be in
readiness.


You are my Lieutenant, you my Ancient, and you two my Sergeants; and you must
know the Commander you serve under, to be none of those Letter-carriers that
know not so much as the terms of discipline, what a Flanker is, Nor a Raveling
is. Nor a Petarre is. Nor a Curtain is. Nor a Bulwark is. Nor a Bastile is. Nor
a Counterscarp is. Nor a Casemate is. A Gabion is: Nor any left word of
fortification. How can such fresh-water Captains command?


Right noble Colonel. He shall be our Colonel.


One soldier made up of Sack, is worth as many as would drink a fresh water
river dry.


I knew, men of abilities should at last be put in action.

Valiant men and wise,
Are only fit for weighty enterprise.

O noble Colonel.


What would an upstart Militaster now, That knew no rudiments of discipline,
nor Art of war, do in a sudden service? or say, when I know how to have my
Ordnance planted here, my Cavalry mounted here, my Battery-discove^er on such
a point, my Trenches cut thus, my Mine carried thus, my Gabions raised thus.
Here my Parapet, there my Pallisadoe o'th'top of that. The enemy made saltable
six hundred paces there. And I draw out my Musketeers to flank 'em in their
Trenches here, while my Pikes and Targeteers advance to the breach there. What
would Captain, my Lords man, or Sergeant-major, my Ladies Kinsman, sent in by
honourable favour, do or say in such an expedition?


Braver and braver still.


This goes beyond the Blade and the Baton.


Or how would their brains lie in their breeches, when the able Captain leads
up his men in the Head of a Troop bravely, charges with his shot, makes a stand
with his Pikes, does execution with his Sword, the Cannon playing, the Drum
beating, the Shot thumping, the Ensigns waving, the Arms clashing, the Air
rending, Dust and Smoke clouding, Blood raining. And then to bring up such a
Division to fight, make good such a Ground, relieve such a Squadron, fetch off
such a loss, r'enforce the Ranks that are broken. March on, Come off. Beat the
Bessognes that lie hid in the Carriages. O the renowned life of a worthy
Commander.


Sound Drum and Trumpet.


A Colonel, a Colonel.


Whither hast thou brought me? does thy brother lie speechless in this house?
ha! what in the name of tumult can these be?


Pray sit, attend, you will be pleased anon.


A still march now. So, I have lost a great many of my men. But courage yet,
you poor remainder of my scattered Troops. Stand. Qni vala. An Ambuscado of the
enemy. Alarm. Lieutenant, charge in with your Shot. Now Gentlemen, for the
honour of Covent-Garden, make a stand with your Pikes; in to the short sword;
well fought, take Prisoners. Sound a Retreat now. Fair, fair in the coming
off. So, 'twas bravely performed.


Must we not fall to rifling now, Colonel.


Part fair on all sides, Gentlemen.


What's this, a vision, sure I do ail something.


Is't possible it is thou? art thou run mad as far as hell the the other way now.


My wicked, caitiff, reprobate son is here too.
Pray let me flee, I am but a dead man else.

You shall receive no harm, sir Lay by your Arms my Masters. I bring none but
friends.


I thou can not make that good, my father's there.


I'll make him friends with thee. Go and di patch within.


I'll see it done, and take our new made Brides with us for witnesses.


Has his shame yet taught him to shun my sight.


And shall return him instantly your comfort.


Unpossible, unpossible.


Attend the event.


I rather thought I should have found you, sir, disputing with the Pastors, and
the Elders; yet to say truth, this is the better madness. What can this mean?
how came he thus translated? what Charms, or what Enchantments are upon him?


What Babel was a building in my brains?
But now it turns, and I can recollect
The knowledge of a father, brother, Sister.
And that a thousand vain imaginations,
Like scatterings of light things upon the earth,
Rushes, loose leaves, sprigs, straws, and dust
Contracted by a whirlwind, were blown up,
And lodged in the rich Seat of Contemplation,
Usurping there the room of virtuous thoughts.
Honour awake me from this Lethargy.

What can those women that appear like furies be in this action?


They were but used as properties to give new motion to his mortified
condition.


I know not what to say to any thing; there is some Spell upon me too. My anger
has forsook me. What are those men that bear a countenance. As if they stood
indifferently affected to Bedlam and Bride-well.


Meaning by us, sir. If our sight offend you,
Know we are men that dare forbear the place.

I son, let's go, our stay is dangerous.
They look like Peace-maintainers, we^ll fall off.

O tarry, Gentlemen, we are all undone else. If you make not your peace before
you stir, both you and I must suffer.


What's the matter?


The Magistrates and Officers with their Bill-men have taken us by surprise.
They are in the house.


O me! the blew Gown College.


Wheels and whips. I feel what we must go to. Did not I say our stay was
dangerous?


Did not I say there was some subtle practice upon the Philoblatici? and that
we were betrayed hither?


There's no escaping forth. And Gentlemen, It will but breed more scandal on my
house, and the whole plantation here, if now you make rebellious uproar. Yield
your weapons, and welcome Justice but like subjects new, and peace will follow.


But where's Nick? where's Tonie?


They shall yield up their weapons. So do you.


Yes yes, 'tis best.


Shall we, sir, shall we?


Yes sir, you shall.


So, sir, I will then, not the Blade alone. But for your more security, the
Baton, There see my Arms forth coming.


Say they shall have fair welcome, What are they married?


Yes, as fast as troth and holy words can bind 'em.


'Tis well. Now sir, let me entreat your favour.
'Tis my first suit to you since I was your son,
That before others entrances distract our troubled
Scoene, these may be reconciled.

Even unto the earth, sir, and humbled with as true a penitence, as son can be
for wronging of a father, I beg your pardon and blessing.


Give it him, Brother Rooksbill, I dare say 'twill make him a good man.


Heaven make him so. My blessing and my prayers shall not be wanting.


What? my Niece Dorcas made an honest woman?


Was that the man that wronged my Cousin Dorcas?


Yes, and has now made ample recompense.


Here they are altogether, sir.


Lay hands on all. First, on that old Ruffian, the Incendiarie, that sets the
youthful bloods on fire here with his Infernal discipline. Next, take his sons,
there's one, that young Blade there, Have I now got within ye, Gentlemen? will
you have Songs ex temporc? know ye me now? a ha! I'll be caned the Weeder of
this Garden. Take up those She weeds there. I have the rank one here. I took
her straggling in my Round even now.


My Tenant, I take it, Mrs. Margerie Howlet.


Your widow sir, I think.


But for a shift sir, now you know my aim.


O good your worship, as you came of a woman.


Peace Circes, cease thy charms. What cluster have we here now. O here's
another of the sons of noise.


That's my son now, sir, by your leave, and I'll bail him.


What Mr. Rooksbil, are you here? what woman's this?


My Niece, sir, his sons wife. And I'll bail her.


What Mr. Croswill, you among this Ging too?

How will you escape commitment?


Why, Mr. Cockbrayne? how his brains crow now?


Who's here? your daughters too? but what are these?


I hope they'll prove my sons, and be indifferent men in time, sir, by that time
their hair may grow, or be reduced to an indifferent length.


That's done on me already, sir.


Now he looks as like a Rogue as e're he did again.


And sir, for me, now that my Cousin is restored, and the wild fury of my wine
abated.

I do you the obedience of a son, acknowledging my former formal habit was more
of stubbornness then true devotion. For which I beg your pardon.


There's more deceit under these half Footballs, then in whole Pudding-bags.
Well boys, be you indifferent sons, neither too hot nor too cold. I have found
a fault in myself, I confess. I will reform it, and be an indifferent father.


O here's the man I sought, whom, I confess, I am half sorry to commit with the
rest, because I found him civiller.


Hoping you will not stake that good opinion, I'll now come nearer to you. And
since here is such a convention of love and joy. I hope my offering of a sons
true duty may sinde I dulgencie.


What? my son Antonie?


How? how? your son that should have had my daughter? Come hither Kate, now if
thou love him, take him. Are you content, friend Cockbrayne.


O sir, most happily.


Why run you not together?


It is too late, or needless now for me to marry her.


Is't come to that? and if I do not swindge him --.Are you too good, sir, for
my daughter?


I do not say so, sir.


Huswife, do you like him?


No more then he does me, sir.


Get you together, or I'll swaddle you both into one, you perverse fools.


Sir, the truth is, we are married already.


'Tis so, indeed, sir.


Heyday! who am I trow? how durst you do it without my consent?


I had your consent, sir, you commanded me to take my choice in whom I
pleased, before you would take notice.


I cannot abide this vvrangling. Give you joy.


Joy and my blessing on you. Why I know not whom to commit now.


You have done the Common-wealth a special piece of service the while with
your State-braines. But let us make a night of this, I pray.


Sir, the parties have given me satisfaction, and I am content they be
released.


There's an honest fellow now, and looks like one that would be beaten every
day for ready money. Go now, while ye are well, and be seen no more in this
Precinct.


Never and't please your vvorships, never.


'Tvvas built for no such vermin. Hence away.
And may the place be purged so every day.
'Tis no unworthy member may be found,
To pester or to vilify this ground.
That as it was intended, it may be
A Scoene for Virtue and Nobility.

TIs not the Poets Art, nor all that we
By life of Action can present on it, ye
Can or ought make us to presume a Play
Is good, 'tis you approve't. Which that you may
It cannot misbecome us, since our gains
Come by your favour, more then all our pains.
Thus to submit us unto your commands.
And humbly ask the favour at your hands.
'Tis done. And now that Poets can divine,
Observe with what Nobility doth shine
Fair Covent-Garden. And as that improves,
May we find like Improvement in your Loves.

